==PAGE:1==
Technical University of Denmark
Department of Management Engineering
Large scale production planning with
demands and technician constraints
Master thesis
Mathias Nikolaj Linderod Albrechtsen
s174311
16/01-2023
==PAGE:2==
DTU Management
Preface
Title: Large scale production planning with demands and technician constraints
Author: Mathias Nikolaj Linderod Albrechtsen
Supervisor: David Pisinger
Period of the project: 1st of August 2022 to 16th of January 2023
ECTS Points: 32.5
Education: Msc. Transport and Logistics
Signature:
Mathias Nikolaj Linderod Albrechtsen
Page i of 67
==PAGE:3==
DTU Management
Abstract
This thesis attempted to provide new solution approaches for the single-stage sequence-dependent
simultaneous lot sizing and scheduling problem. The solution approaches were based on a real-
world production line from the plastic injection molding industry. The assignment of diﬀerent
products to parallel machines and molds in a ﬁnite time horizon was considered.
Speciﬁc
constraints were deﬁned for limitations on the number of setups, a minimum production run
time, and mold, product, and machine combinations. Furthermore, changeovers were deﬁned
to lead to reductions in production capacity. A mixed integer formulation was presented, and a
multi-objective function was deﬁned to minimize backlog, inventory, and changeover costs. The
mathematical formulation was used to deﬁne an adaptive large neighborhood search (ALNS)
metaheuristic based on greedy repair and destroy methods.
Multiple instances based on real-world data were created for time horizons between 30 and
180 days and between 19 and 2265 products to test the performance of the mathematical
formulation and ALNS. A computational study and sensitivity analysis based on these was
performed to investigate the eﬀectiveness of the ALNS and possible bottlenecks. This analysis
showed the eﬃcacy of the ALNS implementation at ﬁnding feasible solutions, and comparison
with an industrial schedule showed promise of considerable savings across most cost measures.
Mathias Nikolaj Linderod Albrechtsen
Page ii of 67
==PAGE:4==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
i
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
1
Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.1
Hypothesis and Objectives . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2
Theoretical Background
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
3
Literature Review . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
3.1
Scheduling Problems . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
3.2
Planning Problems . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
3.3
Simultaneous Lot-sizing and Scheduling Problems . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3.4
Solution Approaches
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
3.5
Adaptive Large Neighborhood Search . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
4
Methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
4.1
Mixed Integer Programming . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
4.2
Adaptive Large Neighborhood Search . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
4.3
Implementation of ALNS for SLSP
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
5
Computational experiments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
5.1
Instances . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
5.2
Parameter Tunning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
5.3
Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
5.4
Comparison to Real-world Instances . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
5.5
Sensitivity Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
5.6
Sensitivity Analysis on Real-world Instance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
6
Limitations and Future recommendations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
7
Conclusion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
8
Acknowledgments
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
56
A Appendix
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
58
A.1 Parameter tuning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
58
A.2 Sensitivity analysis on change to molds and machines . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
61
A.3 Sensitivity analysis on changes to manpower . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
62
A.4 Results from real-world instances
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
63
iii
==PAGE:5==
DTU Management
1
Introduction
The production industry has undergone signiﬁcant changes since the industrial revolution, with
a move from hand-based manufacturing to machines and large factories. This evolution has
continued towards more automated processes with high interdependencies [45]. Production
lines have thus become more complicated, and their size has increased dramatically.
In a
well-running manufacturing system, detailed plans and schedules of upcoming production are,
therefore, more important than ever. The need for plans and schedules to handle complexity
became even more evident with the introduction of the computer, and thereby the possibility of
automated planning and scheduling. This change has led to many studies concerning optimal
and feasible production planning and scheduling solutions.
Therefore, planning and scheduling of production plays a vital role in any production company’s
operations. This is, of course, also true for the injection molding industry, as a production line
is often huge. In 2017 the plastic injection molding industry alone had revenues of 237.4 USD
billion and molded more than 111.000-kilo tons. Therefore, an optimized production line is
critical to ensure deliveries and minimize costs. Injection molding is the process of heating
a material, for example, plastic, and inserting it into a mold before cooling it to create a
ﬁnished part [52]. Injection molding is used in many industries, such as automotive, toy, and
packaging. Companies using injection molding often have many diﬀerent products that should
be produced on diﬀerent machines, molds, and with distinct color combinations, making it a
complex problem to plan. The diﬀerent combinations lead to diﬀerences in setup, depending on
the planned sequence. The detailed planning of these combinations is vital to the production
line’s performance, generating multiple questions about how production lines are planned most
eﬃciently.
This master thesis has been performed in collaboration with The LEGO Group, which has
provided data and insights into an injection molding production line and which aspects are
the most important. The LEGO Group is one of the most famous companies using injection
molding, as their main product, the LEGO brick, is a perfect example of an injection molding
product. The LEGO Group’s production line had a total cost of nearly 17 DKK billion in 2021,
indicating that an eﬀective production line is an essential aspect of their company [60].
Mathias Nikolaj Linderod Albrechtsen
Page 1 of 67
==PAGE:6==
DTU Management
1.1
Hypothesis and Objectives
As the described environment indicates, planning a production line can be complex and time-
consuming as instances are substantial. Rules for such plans can often become immeasurable
or based on rule-of-thumb decisions. Furthermore, production problems with a similar setup
are NP-hard, making optimal solutions hard to ﬁnd, as shown by Bitran and Yanasse[5]. The
following hypothesis will be explored to examine diﬀerent ways of generating plans for a pro-
duction line.
• The use of operations research can provide feasible and even improved production plans
and schedules compared to current semi-manual methods.
The project will aim to determine the feasibility of achieving an optimal solution and examine
methods to ﬁnd a well-performing and feasible solution in a limited time frame. The following
sub-questions will be used as guidelines for the research and the explored solution.
• Is optimality achievable for large production planning instances under the circumstances
seen by LEGO?
• Are reasonably tight lower bounds achievable for the problem? Moreover, can they give
indications of the overall performance gain of the given implementation compared to
existing methods?
• Can feasible schedules be created, and are they comparable to best-found lower and upper
bounds or known real-world solutions?
The injection molding production planning has been explored in multiple diﬀerent settings,
e.g., in the article by Dastidar and Nagi[18], showing great relevance for the industry to ﬁnd
better solutions. The ﬁeld still has diﬀerent areas that need to be explored further, e.g., the
solution type, allowing for a deeper examination. One method yet to be studied in depth for
the sequence-dependent problem is the metaheuristic of adaptive large neighborhood search
(ALNS), which will be explored in this thesis. A sensitivity analysis will also be performed on
some of the essential parameters to expand on the model’s eﬀectiveness. Twenty-one instances
are created, consisting of many products (between 19 and 439), molds, and machines for three
diﬀerent time horizons. Finally, a real-world instance is used to compare the solution to LEGO’s
implementation, which consists of 2665 products.
Mathias Nikolaj Linderod Albrechtsen
Page 2 of 67
==PAGE:7==
DTU Management
The rest of this thesis is organized as follows. In section 2, the production facility seen at LEGO
is described. Section 3 provides a literature review and deﬁnition of the general production
planning and scheduling model. The two solution approaches are presented in Section 4. First,
the mathematical formulation is introduced in Section 4.1. The theoretical background of the
ALNS is introduced in Section 4.2, and ﬁnally, the implementation of ALNS is speciﬁed in 4.3.
The computational results are presented in section 5. Section 6 presents the limitations of this
thesis, together with suggestions for future work, and ﬁnally, in Section 7, the results found are
summarized.
Mathias Nikolaj Linderod Albrechtsen
Page 3 of 67
==PAGE:8==
DTU Management
2
Theoretical Background
This section presents the general layout of a plastic injection molding process based on descrip-
tions from LEGO. The process is highly automated and only requires a few manual processes
for large-scale operations. The manual steps are mainly around changeover and quality assur-
ance checks, but even these have a high degree of automation. While quality insurance can run
parallel to the actual production line and have minimal eﬀect on its output, the changeover is
expensive and time-consuming if not planned correctly. As the production facility will often
be near maximum capacity, prioritizing these is essential.
An example of the denseness of
production can be seen in ﬁgure 1, where most machines are running simultaneously, with the
same product produced on multiple machines. A product is throughout this thesis deﬁned as
a unique LEGO brick with regards to shape and color.
Figure 1: Densly packed area of production schedule
A machine is initialized by inserting a mold, color, and granulate.
The mold needs to be
changed manually, while the color and granulate are changed using a computer. As a mold
change demands an extensive skill set, the setup times are signiﬁcant and take up a large part
of a period. The time needed to change granulate and the color is lower than a mold change.
The machine must be emptied of all the previous color and granulate before a new product
can be produced unless the following product uses the same color. While this is performed, the
machine cannot produce anything, but a mold change can be executed.
Mathias Nikolaj Linderod Albrechtsen
Page 4 of 67
==PAGE:9==
DTU Management
Therefore, the downtime and cost of performing a changeover if both changing the mold and
color is shorter than it would be if having to perform the changeovers one after the other. As
there is only a limited amount of staﬀavailable to perform manual labor in each period, the
amount of changeover in each period should be precisely deﬁned. Once the mold, color, and
granulate are changed, production can begin again.
Production is performed by heating the granulate and color until it is melted and mixing
the two. The colored granulate is then inserted into the mold and compressed to create the
desired shape. Once the granulate is shaped, the mold decompresses, and the molded product
is dropped onto a conveyor belt. Here it is cooled down to ensure it keeps its shape before
exiting the machine. Some granulate will be left in the mold as a residual product. Depending
on the product, machine, and mold, parts of the residual product are reused. If it is not reused,
it is removed from the mold. The production of a batch is performed very quickly, and the
mold, therefore, needs high pressure to perform it. Not all molds can be used with as high a
pressure as a machine can provide; therefore, they are not all interchangeable. This constraint
is because molds have a maximum pressure rate, which helps avoid breakdowns and ensures
the product is of the right quality.
On the other hand, a mold that can take a higher pressure level can usually be used in machines
providing a lower pressure. Assigning molds to machines with a lower pressure can be ineﬃcient
as the maximum speed of the mold is not used, and hence the molds should preferably be used
in machines with similar pressure. Once the product has exited the machine, it is transported
to a storage unit, waiting for it to be sent to a packaging facility. These two ﬁnal steps in the
production line are not considered here, and neither is the deﬁnitive collection of products to
an item sold in stores.
An injection molding factory layout is set up with multiple machines coupled to an infeed
system, where color and granulate are transported. An example of the layout of an injection
molding factory can be seen in Figure 2. The performance of the production schedule can be
measured using multiple diﬀerent parameters, such as the total span of the production plan
(the makespan), the cost of missing a deadline, the holding cost, and the cost of performing
changeovers. All have diﬀerent pros and cons and situations for which they are ideally used.
For instance, a combination of backlog and holding cost and changeover time is studied here.
This combination allows for observing the monetary cost of the production schedule while
also ensuring that manual labor and the risk of breakdowns in changeovers are quantiﬁed.
Minimizing the changeover cost can beneﬁt workers on the production ﬂoor and cost eﬃciency
beneﬁts. This approach is chosen as it works well with the studied problem.
Mathias Nikolaj Linderod Albrechtsen
Page 5 of 67
==PAGE:10==
DTU Management
Figure 2: Production layout of injection molding plant
The facilities used by LEGO is producing close to their maximum capacity at all time. Conse-
quently, only parts of the demand can be delivered at times, and a backlog might occur. This
scenario is especially true for products with very high demand and new products. This also
means that a product can and often will be produced simultaneously at multiple machines with
diﬀerent molds to ensure enough production. A holding cost must also be considered to avoid
unnecessarily producing and keeping large amounts of products in stock. The holding cost
helps prevent products from becoming outdated while in stock or taking up too much space,
limiting the capacity for new products. The changeover cost is essential because the precision of
a mold needs to be very high, and changeovers are one of the most common reasons for errors.
Combined with the downtime during a changeover and the needed labor usage, it becomes very
relevant.
Mathias Nikolaj Linderod Albrechtsen
Page 6 of 67
==PAGE:11==
DTU Management
3
Literature Review
Production planning and scheduling describe a wide range of problems concerning production
lines, both on large and small scales. The diﬀerentiation between planning and scheduling is
not always clear in the literature. Therefore, the formulation by Muller [27] will be used to
ensure clarity. These are deﬁned as:
• Scheduling: The goal is to plan the sequencing of a group of predeﬁned jobs on a
predeﬁned set of resources. Scheduling focuses on the duration of a job and the resources
needed to perform it rather than the product itself. The standard measure of performance
is the minimization of total makespan or tardiness. A period is usually relatively short
in scheduling problems, and the exact production on a resource, such as a machine, is
deﬁned.
• Planning: For planning problems, the main goal is to satisfy demand at the lowest
possible cost. Here, the amount of the product to plan should be determined and in
which general period to produce it. The goal is usually to reduce the cost of over- and
understocking. Therefore, the focus in planning problems is on determining job size and
general periods to place them in rather than in which sequence they are produced. Periods
are often long for planning problems allowing for several products to be produced in each
period on the same resource.
This view is similar to that of Pochet and Wolsey [19] and Demeulemeester and Herroelen
[15]. A brief overview of the most general scheduling and planning problems is now presented,
whereafter, a more detailed description will be stated for the most relevant problem types.
3.1
Scheduling Problems
Scheduling problems can be divided into two groups, disjunctive and cumulative. A disjunctive
problem is deﬁned by its resources only being able to perform one task in each period. In
contrast, a cumulative problem allows for multiple activities on the same resource simultane-
ously. The job-shop scheduling problem (JSSP) and the multi-skill project scheduling problem
(MSPSP) are two of the most known problems for disjunctive problems. The JSSP is deﬁned
as having a set of machines and a set of jobs. These jobs must all be processed once on each
machine. For each job, a speciﬁc order of the machines is speciﬁed that must be followed. The
scheduling should be accomplished in a way that minimizes the makespan of the production.
Multiple variants of the JSSP exist, the most proliﬁc of which is the open shop scheduling prob-
lem, where there is no necessary sequence for the jobs, and the ﬂow shop scheduling problem,
where the sequence of the jobs on the machines is always the same.
Mathias Nikolaj Linderod Albrechtsen
Page 7 of 67
==PAGE:12==
DTU Management
The MSPSP is a project-based problem, meaning the goal is to schedule a project containing
several tasks with the smallest possible makespan. This scheduling should be performed by
a set of resources with diﬀering skill sets. In the MSPSP, precedence constraints may exist,
meaning that a task should be completed before a new task can be started.
The resource-constrained project scheduling problem (RCPSP) is one of the most used mod-
els for cumulative problems. The RCPSP is a generalization of the JSSP, and the goal is to
schedule a project with the smallest possible makespan. Each part of the project can be sched-
uled on diﬀerent modes with constraints on time-speciﬁc and general resources with maximum
availability for the whole period. For a more detailed deﬁnition of scheduling problems, see the
Pd.D. thesis by Muller [27].
3.2
Planning Problems
Planning problems are often referred to as lot sizing problems (LSP). Multiple diﬀerent problems
exist in the lot-sizing problem category. It is important to note the diﬀerence between big and
small bucket problems, which can complicate the clarity between scheduling and planning
problems. Big bucket problems are deﬁned by the possibility of multiple items being produced
on a resource in a given period. In contrast, only one type of item can be produced on a resource
in a small bucket problem [24]. One of the most famous lot-sizing models is the Capacitated Lot
Sizing Problem (CLSP) as deﬁned by Drexl and Kimms [8]. The CLSP focuses on planning the
lot sizes in an environment with capacitated resources. The objective is to minimize holding and
inventory costs. Constraints on inventory balance, setup of machines, and production capacities
are introduced to do this. The traditional CLSP is a big bucket model where scheduling is not
considered. For other LSP deﬁnitions, see Pochet and Wolsey [19]. Multiple extensions exist
for the traditional CLSP, Gicquel, Minoux, and Dallery [24] describes these diﬀerent extension,
where multiple small bucket problems are also deﬁned.
The diﬀerentiation between big and small bucket problems can lead to diﬀerent formulations
and, to some extent, overlaps with the deﬁnition of scheduling problems. By deﬁnition, the
injection molding problem is most suited as a small bucket problem, as the sequence-dependent
setup costs raise the need for exact scheduling of the found lot sizes. As mentioned Gicquel,
Minoux, and Dallery [24] brieﬂy introduces some small-bucket problems which try to incor-
porate scheduling into planning problems. The Discrete Lot Sizing and Scheduling Problem
(DLSP) is particularly interesting. The DLSP allows for production in discrete periods with an
exact scheduling plan, which is required for sequence-dependent setup times. The CLSP and
DLSP are generally single-stage and single-resource problems, though, meaning the production
of a product is done in one step, and only one resource is available to perform the production.
The single-stage assumption is valid and transferable to the injection molding problem studied
here, but the single-resource assumption is too restrictive.
Mathias Nikolaj Linderod Albrechtsen
Page 8 of 67
==PAGE:13==
DTU Management
The LSP was demonstrated to be NP-hard by Florian, Lenstra, and Rinnooy Kan [4], and so was
the CLSP by Bitran and Yanasse [5]. As the problem considered in this thesis is an extended
version of these, it follows that this is also an NP-hard problem.
The diﬃculty of solving
can also be seen in the solution approaches suggested in the literature, as decompositions and
metaheuristics are the prevalent solvers. Furthermore, Maes, McClain, and Van Wassenhove
[35] showed that even ﬁnding feasible solutions to the CLSP with setup times is NP-hard. This
fact underlines the importance of heuristic methods to create feasible solutions for the CLSP
and its extensions.
The traditional CLSP and DLSP can also be extended to incorporate multiple resources, al-
lowing simultaneous production on diﬀerent resources. Multiple resources mean the decision
needs to be performed with regard to which resource should produce a given item and in which
period it should happen. Multiple resource problems are also parallel machine problems. V.
Smith-Daniels and D. Smith-Daniels [6] were the ﬁrst to describe the multiple resource CLSP
as a small bucket problem. They also identiﬁed problems with translating the model to large
problems. A general review of lot-sizing problems has been performed by Glock, Grosse. and
Ries [30], where they give a detailed overview.
3.3
Simultaneous Lot-sizing and Scheduling Problems
As the CLSP does not consider the scheduling of the designated jobs in the diﬀerent periods, the
general lot sizing and scheduling problem (GLSP) was introduced by Fleischmann and Meyr [9].
It is a generalization of the CLSP and includes scheduling decisions. The GLSP is, therefore, a
general formulation of the DLSP. Extensions to this model were made by Meyr in [14] and [16]
with the introduction of sequence-dependent times and parallel machines. A. Clark and S. Clark
[13] provided another noteworthy addition with the assumption of "all or nothing" production.
This assumption ensures that a machine is either producing at its maximum capacity or not
producing at all. A general term for problems of this type is Simultaneous Lot Sizing and
Scheduling Problem (SLSP), and Copil et al. [34] deﬁne the diﬀerence between small and large
bucket problems. Stefansdottir, Grunow, and Akkerman [36] provides another review focusing
on the SLSP in the ﬂow-shop environment. The latest review appears to have been done by
Wörbelauer, Meyr, and Almada-Lobo [44], which extends on the classiﬁcation of problems given
by Copil et al. [34].
The ﬁrst study of production planning and scheduling with setup times/cost was performed in
the 1960s by Wilbrecht and Prescott [1]. Here, it was proven that setup times play a signiﬁcant
role in the performance of production facilities. Some of the earliest applications of parallel
machine problems with consideration of setup times can be seen in the articles by Prabhakar
[2], and Geoﬀrion and Graves [3].
Mathias Nikolaj Linderod Albrechtsen
Page 9 of 67
==PAGE:14==
DTU Management
Allahverdi, Gupta, and Aldowaisan [12] summarizes the research from the 1970s until 1999,
focusing on four diﬀerent setup-dependent problem types. The four classes were deﬁned in
two layers, ﬁrst by batching and non-batching problems and second by sequence-dependent
and independent problems. A batch is deﬁned as multiple products being grouped in batches
or families, with signiﬁcant setup costs paid for changes between diﬀerent batches and smaller
setup costs paid for changes in batches. A problem is deﬁned as sequence-dependent if the setup
cost/time is dependent on the product produced before the following product. Furthermore,
the type of problem is also diﬀerentiated based on single or parallel machines, ﬂow shop, and
job shop problems. A general notation for problems involving setup considerations was also
deﬁned. This was followed by further reviews by Allahverdi, Ng, et al. [23], and Allahverdi [31].
The reader is referred to these three articles for a more general review of problems considering
setups.
The problems of parallel machines are particularly interesting, especially for unrelated parallel
machines. Unrelated parallel machines indicate that the machines used can have diﬀerent pro-
duction speeds and quality. Dastidar and Nagi [18] formulated the unrelated parallel machine
SLSP. Their deﬁnition allowed a limited number of machines and molds to be scheduled while
minimizing the setup, holding, and backlogging costs. They present a Mixed Integer Program-
ming (MIP) model and use a two-phase decomposition to solve the problem. This model is the
ﬁrst to attempt to incorporate all of these objectives in a single-stage model. The presented
results showed promise, though the instances considered were still small compared to large-scale
production layouts. A part of their solution method was based on creating groups of products
where changeover cost would be minimal, drawing on the deﬁnition of batches. Koch et al.
[48] introduced labor usage constraints by directly limiting the number of setups per period.
This addition corresponds to the limited staﬃng constraint of LEGO’s production line, which
is part of the studied problem.
3.4
Solution Approaches
The problem of SLSP has been attempted to be solved using diﬀerent approaches, but in general,
a limited range has been proposed. Therefore both approaches to solving the single and multi-
stage SLSP will be considered. Most attempts have been conducted using decomposition or
metaheuristics. First, the decomposition approaches will be introduced. One of the most similar
problems was solved by Dastidar and Nagi [18] using a two-phase decomposition, as mentioned
above, with good results for limited instances. Sarac, Sipahioglu, and Ozer [55] tackled the
injection molding problem using a two-stage approach, planning the production orders ﬁrst
and then scheduling the diﬀerent machines. This approach removes the diﬃculties of giving an
exact plan in the ﬁrst iteration. It then plans the exact time and order of the diﬀerent jobs but
simpliﬁes the allocation.
Mathias Nikolaj Linderod Albrechtsen
Page 10 of 67
==PAGE:15==
DTU Management
Decomposition is also used by Cawley et al. [57], where they give a robust problem formula-
tion of the SLSP. Koch et al. [48] uses a two-stage decomposition to achieve good solutions.
Toscano, Ferreira, and Morabito [50] recently suggested a time-based Fix-and-Optimize de-
composition for the fruit-based beverage production. Other recent approaches are given by
Cervantes-Sanmiguel, Vargas-Flores, and Ibarra-Rojas [51], Ríos-Solís et al. [49] and Gharaei,
Karimi, and Shekarabi [46]. The decomposition approach has shown promising results in all
papers, indicating a symmetry in the SLSP and similar problems, allowing for decomposition
applications. Rifai, Norcahyo, and Mara [59] attempts to solve a similar problem of the Job
Scheduling and Tool Switching Problem by using a two-stage heuristic, thereby separating the
sequencing of jobs from the tool switching problem. This strategy bears some of the same
characteristics as the decomposition approaches but also uses a metaheuristic in the form of
simulated annealing (SA) as acceptance criteria.
The most commonly used metaheuristic approach for the SLSP seems to be genetic algorithms
(GA) which relies on natural selection to improve a group of solutions. One of the ﬁrst uses
was by Sikora [7], which demonstrated promising results.
A GA was also used by Toledo,
França, et al.
[26] and later by Toledo, Oliveira, et al.
[25].
Other uses of GA for the
SLSP can be seen in articles by Palaniappan and Jawahar [28] and Schemeleva, Delorme, and
Dolgui [32]. The GA metaheuristic has also been used to solve the CLSP with setup times but
without scheduling by Duda [41]. Schemeleva, Delorme, and Dolgui [39] gives an evaluation of
the GA and decomposition approaches for the SLSP with uncertainties. GA generally seems
to ﬁt well with the researched problems, as the above articles all show promising results.
Another metaheuristic approach used is the variable neighborhood search (VNS), which is used
by Figueira, Santos, and Almada-Lobo [29]. Three speciﬁc approaches were formulated by
Ghirardi and Amerio [43], of which their feasibility pump (ﬁnding feasible solutions from the
LP relaxation) shows the best performance.
A review of metaheuristics used for lot-sizing
problems, in general, can be seen by Jans and Degraeve [21], which also shows the prevalence
of GA in the literature.
Finally, MIP and cutting-plane-based approaches have also been used. See, for example, the
article by Martínez, Morabito, and Toso [37], where a relax-and-ﬁx and a ﬁx-and-optimize
scheme is proposed, and by Toscano, Ferreira, and Morabito [50], which uses relax-and-ﬁx
heuristics. The MIP-based approach seems to give good initial solutions within a reasonable
time limit. For a cutting-plane-based approach, see the article by Karimi-Nasab and Seyed-
Hoseini [47], which also showed promising results. Most applications have been performed on
instances with less than 50 machines and products, considerably less than the large instances
that will be considered in this thesis, though, and can be seen in real-world instances. Their
transferability is, therefore, not clear.
However, the general results point in the direction
of metaheuristics being the most promising solution, indicating that new solutions for larger
instance sizes could be found in this area.
Mathias Nikolaj Linderod Albrechtsen
Page 11 of 67
==PAGE:16==
DTU Management
3.5
Adaptive Large Neighborhood Search
A metaheuristic was originally a method where local improvements and strategies on a higher
level combined to ﬁnd suitable solutions not limited by local optima. The current deﬁnition is
more general and includes methods and procedures to overcome local optima in complex solution
spaces. Kochenberger and Glover [17] gives a general description of diﬀerent metaheuristics
and the history of these. This solution approach is assumed to be very relevant for the given
problem, where the high number of possible combinations leads to a vast search space and is
NP-hard.
The speciﬁc metaheuristic studied here is an ALNS. ALNS builds on the large neighborhood
search metaheuristic formulated by Shaw [11] and was deﬁned explicitly by Ropke and Pisinger
[20]. It has since been used in diﬀerent areas, such as vehicle routing, scheduling, and assignment
problems, as mentioned by Pisinger and Ropke [22]. A survey of the application of ALNS can
be found in the article by Mara et al. [58]. The ALNS framework has existed for more than 15
years and has yet to be applied to a simultaneous lot-sizing and scheduling problem.
The ALNS algorithm uses the so-called destroy and repair functions, where a given solution is
destroyed by removing part of the solution and then put together in new ways. A local search
can then be used for the new solution to ﬁnd a local minimum before comparing the model
with the initial solution. In the ALNS framework, multiple destroy and repair functions are
deﬁned, which are chosen randomly but with a higher probability for those showing promise
for the given instance. This probability is deﬁned based on their ability to provide better or
good solutions.
Diﬀerent destroy and repair functions work well to avoid getting stuck in suboptimal solutions
and maneuver the solution space. The ALNS framework often implements acceptance criteria
to help navigate the solution space. Acceptance criteria could be in the form of SA, which is,
for example, discussed by Pisinger and Ropke [22]. The SA approach allows for the acceptance
of sub-optimal solutions within a given probability and will always accept better solutions.
For application to the CLSP and similar, see Muller [27], Rifai, Mara, and Sudiarso [54], Nan-
thapodej et al. [53] and Wang, Reinelt, and Tan [56]. Muller solves a big bucket lot-sizing
with setup times problem. Rifai, Mara, and Sudiarso look into a multi-objective distributed
re-entrant permutation ﬂow shop scheduling with sequence-dependent setup times problem.
Nanthapodej et al. solve a parallel machine scheduling problem to minimize energy consump-
tion, and Wang, Reinelt, and Tan solve a parallel machine scheduling problem with multiple
time windows.
Mathias Nikolaj Linderod Albrechtsen
Page 12 of 67
==PAGE:17==
DTU Management
All of these have similarities to the SLSP, and their ALNS algorithms greatly interest the
studied problem. Their results are promising, indicating that the ALNS framework can be
used on the injection molding problem. As mentioned, the exact ALNS formulation has not yet
been used on an SLSP problem, but performance on similar problems indicates the algorithm
should perform well. Furthermore, the hybrid VNS approach suggested by Figueira, Santos,
and Almada-Lobo [29] for a short-term multi-stage SLSP has similar traits. Their approach
also showed promising results compared to exact methods and MIP-based heuristics. .
Mathias Nikolaj Linderod Albrechtsen
Page 13 of 67
==PAGE:18==
DTU Management
4
Methods
Two distinct methods are explored to solve the studied SLSP. An exact method and a heuristic
method. The exact method is a mixed integer programming (MIP) model solved with CPLEX,
while the heuristic is based on the ALNS framework. As noted in the litterateur study, the
problem is NP-hard, meaning the optimal solution will be tough to ﬁnd for most instances.
Combining this with the size of the instances considered, it is not likely that a MIP model
can solve the problem optimally for realistic instance sizes. It is instead used as a guideline to
deﬁne and describe the constraints and goals of the model. The MIP model will also be used
to understand the instances’ lower bounds and better measure the performance of the heuristic
provided.
4.1
Mixed Integer Programming
The problem can be described as an optimization problem to minimize the changeover cost
between producing diﬀerent sequence-dependent products and the cost of not reaching the due
date of demand. The following constraints must be adhered to reach this point:
• A machine can only be used to produce one product in each period.
• A mold can only be used in one machine in any given period.
• A mold can only be used on a subset of machines and can only be used to produce speciﬁc
products.
• All demand must be planned in the production or assumed backlogged.
• Once a product is produced, it is transferred to the inventory, where it is kept until it is
delivered. It will incur a cost for every period in inventory.
• If a product is not delivered in time, it will be counted as backlog until it is delivered.
For every period a product is in backlog, a price is paid.
• Supply of products from other factories is provided during production and is available
after the speciﬁed time.
• A product has one speciﬁc color which must be used to produce it.
• Only a limited number of changeovers can be performed in a given period.
• Already running production must be produced in the ﬁrst period and will not incur a
changeover cost, as it is assumed to have been paid earlier.
• The factory has periods of total shutdown, e.g., holidays. In these periods, no production
can be performed at all.
• The speed of production is determined by the machine and mold used together.
Mathias Nikolaj Linderod Albrechtsen
Page 14 of 67
==PAGE:19==
DTU Management
All of these constraints must be implemented to ensure an accurate production setup. The given
problem description indicates that the main problems in the implementation will be balancing
backlog and changeover costs. This problem arises as the setting only allows a limited number
of changeovers in each period. Therefore, using the proper molds for the right products is of
the utmost importance.
Notation
Multiple diﬀerent sets and a speciﬁc notation are introduced to model the given constraints
and objective. First, the sets are presented. The sets contain information on which product
should be planned, which machines, molds, and colors are available and which periods should
be planned.
• T: Set of periods.
• M: Set of machines.
• S: Set of molds.
• C: Set of colors.
• K: Set of products.
• Q: Set of time periods where factory is closed.
Based on each set, the data input is given, for which a walkthrough can be seen below.
• Wt is the number of points available to perform changeovers in period t.
• psk,s is a matrix indicating if mold s can produce product k.
• msm,s a matrix indicating if machine m can contain mold s.
• hm,s is the number of bricks produced an hour on machine m when mold s is inserted.
• dk,t is the amount of product k demanded in time period t.
• pm,i is the price of changing either mold, color, or both on machine m, where i indicates
the change type.
• bpk is the price of backlogging product k in any given period.
• hpk is the price of holding one piece of product k in stock.
• pl indicates if production is already running on a machine, for how long it is planned, and
which mold and product are used.
• l is the number of hours in each period.
• CMc: contains a list for each color of which products uses color c.
• u is the number of period per 24 hours.
Mathias Nikolaj Linderod Albrechtsen
Page 15 of 67
==PAGE:20==
DTU Management
Finally, the decision variables are deﬁned. For the model, seven diﬀerent decision variables are
considered. The ﬁrst variable is xk,m,s,t, which is set to 1 if product k is produced on machine
m, using mold s in period t. This variable tracks precisely what is produced in a period and
which machine and mold are used. The next variables are ÷m,t, ◊m,t, and ’m,t, which all are
used to check changes happening on machines. If a mold is changed on a machine, ÷m,t is set
to one, and if a color is changed, ◊m,t is set to one. If both changes, ’m,t is set to 1, indicating
that the discounted changeover cost is paid. If no change happens, the variables are set to 0.
It is considered a change when a machine goes from being idle to producing or from producing
one product to another.
Ik,t and bk,t are balancing constraint for the inventory and backlog. As it is costly to have stock
lying around, a price is paid for every unit in stock in a given period, Ik,t is therefore deﬁned
as the total amount of product k in stock at time t. On the other hand, bk,t is used to keep
track of what could not be produced in time and is, therefore, yet to be delivered. bk,t therefore
becomes equal to the amount of product k that has not yet been delivered in period t. The
ﬁnal variable is zk,m,t, which is used to penalize a speciﬁc machine’s production capacity in a
given period. zk,m,t is therefore set to the total downtime of machine m while producing item
k in period t.
• xk,m,s,t indicates product k is produced at machine m using mold s in period t.
• ÷m,t indicates if a mold change has happened at machine m in period t.
• ◊m,t indicates if a color change has happened at machine m in period t.
• ’m,t indicates if a color and mold change has happened at machine m in period t.
• Ik,t is the inventory level of product k in period t.
• bk,t is the number of product k is the backlog in period t.
• zk,m,s,t where z is the production penalty for product k, on machine m, with mold s if a
changeover has happened in period t.
Mathias Nikolaj Linderod Albrechtsen
Page 16 of 67
==PAGE:21==
DTU Management
Formulation
With the diﬀerent sets, variables, and data input deﬁned, the MIP model is now formulated.
min
ÿ
kœK
tœT
(
ÿ
mœM
(pm,1÷m,t + pm,2◊m,t ≠pm,3’m,t) ≠bpkbk,t + hpkIk,t)
subject to:
ÿ
kœK
sœS
xk,m,s,t Æ 1
’m œ M, t œ T
(1)
ÿ
kœK
mœM
xk,m,s,t Æ 1
’s œ S, t œ T
(2)
ÿ
mœM
xk,m,s,t Æ psk,s
’k œ K, s œ S, t œ T
(3)
ÿ
kœK
xk,m,s,t Æ msm,s
’m œ M, s œ S, t œ T
(4)
ÿ
mœM
ÿ
sœS
hm,s(l·xk,m,s,t-zk,m,s,t)-dk,t+Ik,t-1|t>1+bk,t-bk,t-1|t>1 = Ik,t
’t œ T, k œ K
(5)
ÿ
kœK
xk,m,s,t ≠xk,m,s,t≠1|t>1 Æ ÷m,t
’k œ K, m œ M, s œ S, t œ T
(6)
ÿ
kœCMc
sœS
xk,m,s,t ≠xk,m,s,t≠1|t>1 Æ ◊m,t
’c œ |CM|, m œ M, t œ T
(7)
0.5(÷m,t + ◊m,t) ≠’m,t Ø 0
’k œ K, m œ M, t œ T
(8)
ÿ
kœK
mœM
(pm,1÷m,t + pm,2◊m,t ≠pm,3’m,t) Æ Wt
t œ T
(9)
pm,2÷m,t + pm,3◊m,t ≠pm,1’m,t =
ÿ
kœK
sœS
zk,m,s,t
’m œ M, t œ T
(10)
zk,m,s,t Æ
ÿ
iœ{1,2,3}
pm,ixk,m,s,t
’k œ K, m œ M, t œ T
(11)
xk,m,s,t = 1
’k, m, s, t œ pl
(12)
ÿ
kœK,mœM
sœS
xk,m,s,t Æ 0
’t œ Q
(13)
u · xk,m,s,t Æ
min(T,t+(u≠1))
ÿ
i=max(1,t≠(u≠1))
xk,m,s,i
’t œ T, k œ K, m œ M, s œ S
(14)
xk,m,s,t œ {0, 1}
’k œ K, m œ M, s œ S, t œ T
(15)
÷m,t, ◊m,t, ’m,t œ {0, 1}
’k œ K, m œ M, t œ T
(16)
bk,t, Ik,t Ø 0
’k œ K, t œ T
(17)
zk,m,s,t Ø 0
’k œ K, m œ M, t œ T
(18)
Mathias Nikolaj Linderod Albrechtsen
Page 17 of 67
==PAGE:22==
DTU Management
The objective function minimizes the solution’s changeover, backlog, and inventory costs, mak-
ing it a multi-objective problem. This means the optimal solution is the best trade-oﬀbetween
keeping as little inventory as possible, minimizing the demand not met, and limiting the need
for manual labor by reducing changeover costs. Constraint 1 ensures a machine is at most used
once for every period, and constraint 2 ensures a mold is at most used once for every period.
Constraints 3 and 4 are used to make sure a product-mold, or machine-mold combination is
only employed if it is allowed by the given data. This is necessary, as not all machines can use
all molds, and a mold can only produce a speciﬁc range of products. Constraint 5 balances the
model’s production, backlog, inventory, and demand, ensuring that demand is either serviced
by the production and supply or is counted as part of the backlog. The amount produced every
period is penalized if a changeover happens in the current period. This penalty is executed by
lowering the production time by the time the changeover is expected to take. The total pro-
duced is also scaled to the period length in the current iteration. A product produced before
its supposed delivery period is kept in inventory until delivery. While in the inventory, it will
incur a cost.
Constraint 6 ensures that a price is paid if a mold is changed on machine m in period t, and
constraint 7 ensures a price is paid if the color used on machine m is changed in period t.
Constraint 8 ensures the discount in changeover cost is achieved if both color and mold are
changed simultaneously on a machine. Constraint 9 ensures that no more new production lots
are initiated than allowed by the staﬃng level, and thereby the available points Wt, produced
in any period. Constraint 10 and 11 ensures that production in a start-up period i is penalized
for the time it is expected to be unusable. The penalty is determined by ensuring zk,m,s,t is
higher than the penalty to be paid while only being active if something of the given product is
produced on the speciﬁc machine. Constraint 12 sets up already running production to ensure
this is performed as planned and the new plan minimizes disruptions. Constraint 13 ensure
no production is happening in periods where the factory is closed down due to, e.g., holidays.
Constraint 14 ensure production is running for at least 24 consecutive hours, by the use of the
constant u. Finally, constraint 15-18 deﬁnes the domain of the diﬀerent variables in the model.
Mathias Nikolaj Linderod Albrechtsen
Page 18 of 67
==PAGE:23==
DTU Management
4.2
Adaptive Large Neighborhood Search
As mentioned, a heuristic method is implemented to achieve feasible schedules. This imple-
mentation will be based on the metaheuristic ALNS, which diﬀers from most previous imple-
mentations in the literature. A metaheuristic is originally a method where local improvements
and strategies on a higher level combine to ﬁnd suitable solutions not limited by local optima.
Its current deﬁnition can be stated as methods and procedures to overcome local optima in
complex solution spaces. A general description of diﬀerent metaheuristics and their history is
given by Kochenberger and Glover in [17]. This approach is assumed to be very relevant for
the given problem, where the high number of possible combinations leads to a vast search space
and is NP-hard.
The ALNS metaheuristic was developed by Ropke and Pisinger in [20], and a general deﬁnition
was given by Pisinger and Ropke in [22]. Though the ALNS framework has existed for more
than 15 years, and before that the LNS framework, it has yet to be applied to an SLSP. However,
the ALNS framework has been used for the CLSP. These applications have shown the ALNS’s
capabilities at planning and scheduling problems, indicating it as a possible solution framework
for the SLSP. It was used initially for vehicle routing problems by Ropke and Pisinger [20]
and has since been used for many diﬀerent purposes. Amongst these are scheduling mobile
robots in a ﬂexible manufacturing system done by Dang, Rudová, and Nguyen [40] and for
the integrated berth allocation and quay crane assignment problem in Çağatay, Pacino, and
Ropke [33]. These diﬀerent applications show great ﬂexibility, which is also found in the review
performed by Mara et al. [58]. This ﬂexibility indicates that the ALNS should be able to
provide competitive solutions compared to other metaheuristics and more traditional planning
and scheduling methods.
The ALNS works by repeatedly destroying and repairing a feasible solution using destroy and
repair methods. The general idea builds on the ﬁndings by Schrimpf et al. [10], which deﬁned it
as the ruin and recreate principle. The idea behind this was that solutions to complex problems
could often be highly inﬂuenced by minor changes, leading to rough neighborhoods. Ruining a
large part of the solution and then recreating it again using the problem’s constraints ensure
that any new solution is still feasible. The hope is that the changes in the solution will lead to
a better overall result. These deﬁnitions were formulated into the general framework of LNS by
Shaw [11]. Shaw deﬁnes the combination of destroy and repair methods to be the examination
of a neighborhood move.
Using this method iteratively to search the solution space, thus,
allows for an extensive search of diﬀerent neighborhoods.
A destroy method is deﬁned as
destroying a part of the current solution, usually with a stochastic element, so diﬀerent parts of
the solution are destroyed in diﬀerent iterations. This stochasticity can be used with regard to
whole structures being removed or to remove a number of speciﬁc elements. A repair method
rebuilds the destroyed solution based on speciﬁc decision rules, which, e.g., could be based on
a greedy heuristic.
Mathias Nikolaj Linderod Albrechtsen
Page 19 of 67
==PAGE:24==
DTU Management
The ALNS method expands on the original LNS method on several diﬀerent parameters. First,
the ALNS framework has multiple destroy and repair methods to allow for varying neighbor-
hoods. Second, the ALNS framework introduces an adaptive element for choosing the destroy
and repair methods. The idea is that diﬀerent destroy and repair methods work well for dif-
ferent instances. One destroy method might work very well when exploring smaller instances,
but another could be better for larger instances.
The ALNS methods, therefore, updates the assigned weights to a destroy or repair method
based on their performance. Another parameter often associated with the ALNS method is
the use of an acceptance criterion. An acceptance criterion is used to explore a greater part of
the solution space by accepting a solution within a given threshold instead of only improving
solutions. It can therefore help avoid getting stuck in local optima by diversifying the solution.
These diﬀerent parameters are essential to the ALNS framework and help it perform well on
multiple diﬀerent problem types. A general pseudo-code for the ALNS method can be seen in
Algorithm 1, which follows the same procedure applied by Pisinger and Ropke [22].
Algorithm 1 Adaptive Large Neighborhood Search
1: input: a feasible solution x
2: xb = x; ﬂ≠= (1, ..., 1); ﬂ+ = (1, ..., 1);
3: repeat
4:
select destroy and repair methods d œ Ω≠and r œ Ω+ using ﬂ≠and ﬂ+;
5:
xt = r(d(x))
6:
if accept(xt, x) then
7:
x = xt
8:
end if
9:
if c(xt) < c(xb) then
10:
xb = xt
11:
end if
12:
update ﬂ≠and ﬂ+;
13: until stop criterion is met
14: return xb
The ALNS framework needs an initial feasible solution as its input, which is done in line 1. In
line 2, the initial solution is set as the current overall best solution, and the probability weights
of the destroy and repair methods are initialized. A loop is then initiated, which continues until
a stop criterion is met. This criterion could be an overall time limit or a number of iterations.
Each iteration chooses a destroy and repair method in the loop.
In line 5, the repair and
destroy operations are performed to generate a new solution. This solution is then accepted if
it performs better than the acceptance level.
Mathias Nikolaj Linderod Albrechtsen
Page 20 of 67
==PAGE:25==
DTU Management
This acceptance level can be set using, e.g., SA or record-to-record travel (RRT). If the solution
is better than the best-known solution, it is assigned as the new best solution in line 10. Finally,
the ﬂ≠and ﬂ+ weights used to select the destroy and repair methods are updated. Once the
stop criterion is met, the loop stops and returns the best-found solution.
Selection of Destroy and Repair Methods
One of the main aspects of the ALNS is the use of a learning method to decide which destroy
and repair methods to use. The choice is made using a roulette wheel principle, where the
probability of choosing each of the destroy and repair methods is generated using Equation 1.
Φi =
ﬂi
q|Ω|
k=1 ﬂk
(1)
Φ is the probability of choosing method i, calculated as the weight, ﬂ, of method i divided
by the weight of all methods. This formula is used after a certain number of iterations ﬁtting
with the expected overall number of iterations. Updating the weights more often makes it
more ﬂexible and changes the initialized weights faster. The starting weights are usually equal,
meaning the probability will be the same. As more iterations pass, the assigned weights will
inﬂuence the value of ﬂi, leading to diﬀerent probabilities. The weights are assigned based on
the method’s performance, with the weight increasing if it performs well and decreasing if it
does not. The weights are adjusted by updating their weights using Equation 2.
Ψ =
Y
_
_
_
_
_
_
_
_
]
_
_
_
_
_
_
_
_
[
Ê1
if c(xt) < c(xb)
Ê2
if c(xt) < c(x)
Ê3
if accept(xt, x)
Ê4
if xt is rejected
(2)
Where Ê1, Ê2, Ê3 and Ê4 are constants, that in general follow Ê1 Ø Ê2 Ø Ê3 Ø Ê4, meaning
a higher score means a better performance. Ψ is the weight assigned to a given method after
it has been used. The Ê1 weight is assigned if the provided solution improves the currently
best-found solution, while Ê2 is assigned to solutions improving the current solution.
The
last two weight assignments are for solutions not improving either the current or best solution
and will, therefore, usually be assigned considerably lower weights.
Here Ê3 is assigned to
solutions that are still accepted as the new current solution and Ê4 is assigned to solutions not
accepted. Usually, these can be done on a scale from 0 to 10, where 0 is the Ê4. Accepted
but not improving solutions are assigned a weight because diversifying the solution is desired.
Diversifying is needed to search new areas of the solution space.
Mathias Nikolaj Linderod Albrechtsen
Page 21 of 67
==PAGE:26==
DTU Management
The assigned weight, Ψ, is then used to update ﬂi, which is the total weight of method i, using
Equation 3. Here ⁄ œ [0, 1] is a predeﬁned decay parameter, indicating how much weight should
be assigned to recent performance and how much should be allocated to historical performance.
A ⁄ value close to one means the implementation will be less adaptive and rely on historical
information. In contrast, a ⁄ value close to zero means it will be very adaptive and almost solely
rely on recent iterations. The optimal value of ⁄ can depend on the problem and implementation
researched; therefore, it is often tuned before it is used in practice. The ⁄ value is not the only
part inﬂuencing the choice of destroy and repair methods, though, as the connection between
the assigned weights is also important.
ﬂi = ⁄ﬂi + (1 ≠⁄)Ψ
(3)
It is important to choose weights that reward good performances and punish bad performances
while not being overly reactive to a few iterations. Besides their performance regarding the
total cost, the time spent on diﬀerent methods can signiﬁcantly impact the overall performance.
If one repair method takes a long time to achieve a slight increase, while another might be very
fast but only sometimes improve the solution, the ﬁrst will be favored after a couple of iterations.
However, this might not be desired, as the second repair method could lead to a better solution
through incremental improvements. Punishing the performance of the diﬀerent methods based
on their time consumption helps avoid spending too much time on ineﬃcient repair methods.
One way of doing this is to normalize the assigned weight based on the time spent on the
method.
Acceptance Criteria
To not immediately discard solutions with worse performances, an acceptance criterion is im-
plemented in the ALNS method. An acceptance criterion is used to control the intensiﬁcation
and diversiﬁcation of the implementation. Diversiﬁcation means incorporating other elements
into the solution even though they do not improve the solution. Intensiﬁcation, on the other
hand, means limiting the randomness in the solution and focusing the search on a promising
area.
There are multiple ways of doing this, one of the most common being the SA method. The
method of SA can be used as a metaheuristic of itself, as it is an implementation of acceptance
criteria to local search methods. SA works by imitating the process of physical annealing,
which brings a solid to a low-energy state after raising its temperature. For a more detailed
explanation, see the article by Gendreau and Potvin [42].
Mathias Nikolaj Linderod Albrechtsen
Page 22 of 67
==PAGE:27==
DTU Management
Another way of doing this is the RRT method. The RRT accepts a new solution if it is better
than the best solution or if the new solution is within a given threshold. This threshold is
updated every iteration, decreasing from a starting threshold to a predeﬁned end threshold,
usually zero. These two thresholds can be subject to parameter tuning. Pseudo code for the
RRT is presented in Algorithm 3. The RRT is a more straightforward acceptance criterion
than SA, and it was shown to have empirically the same performance as SA by Santini, Ropke,
and Hvattum [38], where the performance of multiple acceptance criteria were analyzed.
4.3
Implementation of ALNS for SLSP
The general framework for ALNS described above will work as the base for implementing the
ALNS to the simultaneous lot-sizing and scheduling problem. As mentioned, there are several
vital components, and the most important is the destroy and repair methods used to deﬁne
the neighborhoods. Other aspects speciﬁc to this implementation are the acceptance criteria
and weight assignment. Furthermore, local search mechanisms are implemented to improve the
solution by ensuring a more cohesive assignment of molds. First, the constructive heuristic is
introduced, which is used to create the initial solution and works as the underlying assignment
algorithm for the diﬀerent repair methods.
Constructive Heuristic
The constructive heuristic can be described as a greedy insertion strategy. It functions by
iteratively inserting the demands that need to be delivered next into the production plan until
all demand has been satisﬁed. Once a demand is found, it is grouped with demand for the same
product for the following days to create larger job sizes. The initial solution always groups the
following ten days to establish longer production runs.
The collected demand is then attempted to be placed before the ﬁrst demand date. Initially,
a suitable machine is found by checking if any machine already produces the given product. If
this is not the case, a machine is chosen amongst the remaining possible machines based on
the total demand for the given product and the production speed of the machines. If the total
number of bricks to produce is high (above the median), the product is assigned to the fastest
available machine. If, instead, fewer than the median bricks are demanded of the given product,
it is assigned to the slowest available machine. Before deciding on a speciﬁc machine, checking
for capacity in the desired period (start date to demand date) is also checked to ensure the
machine has enough capacity. Once it has been assigned, the exact placement of the production
and the mold to be used is decided.
Mathias Nikolaj Linderod Albrechtsen
Page 23 of 67
==PAGE:28==
DTU Management
The heuristic starts from period one and attempts to ﬁnd a good mold and a range of production
periods. The ﬁrst period is consistently chosen as this corresponds to LEGO’s general desire
to keep stock in inventory for multiple days rather than backlog. Generally, a safety stock of a
shorter period is desirable, which minimizes the penalty assigned to inventory cost. The new
mold is chosen by ﬁrst checking if one of the possible molds is used on the machine. If not, a
mold is chosen randomly from all possible molds. The probability of each mold is calculated by
the number of products it can produce. Molds usable for many diﬀerent products are given a
lower probability, while molds that produce only a few products are assigned a high probability.
With a chosen mold, the following periods are then checked. This is done by ﬁrst checking if the
current start date is a reasonable start period and not either already known to be infeasible or
a period where the factory is closed down during the next 24 hours. It can be deemed infeasible
if it is known that the machine will already be running another production or if the mold is
not available in this period. If this is the case, a new possible mold is chosen.
Now a feasibility check is performed for the mold and production period.
Once a mold is
chosen, each period from the current start date until and periods corresponding to 24 hours
are checked. If more demand than can be fulﬁlled by the 24 hours is needed, it continues until
enough capacity is achieved. A new mold is found and checked for the given periods if the
chosen mold is unavailable. If a mold is incompatible with the product or a diﬀerent color is
used, the heuristic skips all periods until after this period.
The heuristic then returns to the feasibility check. If a continuous range of periods satisﬁes
the constraints, it is checked if enough points are available in the start period to perform the
changeover. This check is performed to ensure the current changeover price is either lower or the
same as the actual changeover used, or enough points are still available to make the changeover
in this period. If this is the case, the points used are updated. The demand of interest is
now inserted into the plan. The heuristic then ﬁrst ensures the points used in each period are
updated before it continues to ﬁnd the subsequent demand of interest and its corresponding
product. The point usage needs to be updated because if the inserted production is followed
directly by another production, the changeover cost could be lowered.
Suppose it turns out that no molds, insuﬃcient staﬃng, or insuﬃcient production capacity
are available on the current machine. In that case, it is checked if it is possible to produce
on another machine. If it is impossible to produce the demand before the deadline on any
machines, it is attempted to place before the last production period. Only the last few days
before the original demand deadline are searched again. This delayed start day is used to avoid
too signiﬁcant overlaps in the search space. If it is impossible to place in the total time span and
multiple demands are grouped, an attempt is made to place them one by one. This assignment
follows the same framework as just described.
Mathias Nikolaj Linderod Albrechtsen
Page 24 of 67
==PAGE:29==
DTU Management
Afterwards, if it has not been placed, the demand is discarded and will be handled as backlog
by the model. Once having placed or discarded the attempted demand, the search continues
to the following demand of interest and attempts to place it. After accessing all demands, a
feasible production schedule is created, which can be used as the initial input for the ALNS
metaheuristic. The way of choosing molds and machines will be used in the repair methods,
which will diﬀerentiate the solution by using diﬀerent greedy choices of demands to insert. The
greedy insertion heuristic can be seen in Algorithm 2.
Algorithm 2 Greedy Insertion
1: input: list of demands D ordered by date
2: input: number of days to group, g
3: input: empty solution S
4: insert preplanned production in S
5: repeat
6:
pick ﬁrst demand in D as d
7:
designate p as the product for d
8:
designate t as the period for d
9:
td = qt+g
i=t Dp,i
10:
delete Dp,t:t+g
11:
insert td of p into S
12: until d = ÿ
13: calculate the cost of S
14: return xb
Parameter Tuning
Multiple parameters must be set for this speciﬁc implementation of ALNS to perform the best
it can, so a method of choosing these is needed. The parameter tuning checks the solution
quality of a few instances and considers a range of diﬀerent values for each parameter. Here
three diﬀerent instances are chosen to test a range of values for the parameters. Below the
parameters are deﬁned for the diﬀerent parts of the implementation. The parameter tuning is
performed in Section 5.2.
The strategy chosen for the parameter tuning is an all-at-once strategy. This strategy means
all parameters are tuned at once to ﬁnd a set that functions well together and does not just
work separately. Suppose a strategy based on one-by-one tuning was chosen. In that case,
the ﬁrst parameter chosen might work well with the given parameters. However, if these are
changed later, this value might not be the best possible for the parameter. This strategy can
be a problem as the most optimal parameter values are often highly dependent on the other
parameters. The trade-oﬀpaid by the all-in-one tuning is that it will likely take considerably
more time.
Mathias Nikolaj Linderod Albrechtsen
Page 25 of 67
==PAGE:30==
DTU Management
% Gap = Objective - Best objective
Best objective
· 100
(4)
The average gap is calculated as seen in Equation 4 to measure the performance of the dif-
ferent parameters across the diﬀerent instances. As the optimal solution is not known for the
instances, the best known objective is set to the best objective found for each instance during
the parameter tuning.
Destroy Methods
The destroy methods used in this implementation of ALNS focus mainly on removing diﬀerent
machines. Three of the implemented destroy methods focus solely on removing machines and
one focuses on removing production lots with a high changeover cost.
Before initiating a destroy method, the amount of the solution to destroy is determined. The
amount of production to destroy is randomly chosen in an interval, which is given as a prede-
ﬁned input. To keep it relative to the instance sizes, the minimum and maximum number to
destroy is given a percentage of the planned production to destroy. Both the minimum and
maximum percentage of the solution to destroy are explicitly chosen for this implementation,
and the exact destroy percentage is randomly chosen from a uniform distribution. This choice
is made to ensure it corresponds to the repair and destroy methods employed here. The per-
centage inﬂuences how fast especially the repair methods are in the implementation. Fast repair
methods allow the rebuilding of a solution quickly and can therefore handle a large maximum
destroy percentage. At the same time, slow repair methods will limit the number of possible
iterations if a too-high percentage is chosen.
On the other hand, it is also important not to destroy too much of the solution, as this can
remove well-performing parts. The minimum destroy percentage, therefore, needs to be a value
that still allows for diﬀerences in the solution compared to the current solution, but also opens
up for small changes. As the minimum destroy method should be kept reasonably low to allow
for short iterations, it is set to 5% of the planned production. The upper destroy limit is likely
to have a larger impact on the overall results and is therefore deﬁned for the problem using
parameter tuning.
The three methods focused on removing machines use three diﬀerent approaches. Two of them
are based on the changeover cost of the machines, and the last one removes the machines
randomly. The ﬁrst ﬁnds the machine with the highest cost and removes it from the plan. This
destroy method thereby tries to remove machines with a poor setup of molds and products. It
continues until it has removed at least production equal to the destroy percentage.
Mathias Nikolaj Linderod Albrechtsen
Page 26 of 67
==PAGE:31==
DTU Management
The second destroy method removes the machine with the lowest changeover cost. This removal
is performed to ensure a machine is not locked to a single product if it can be used more
eﬀectively with other products. Therefore, this destruction method targets products with few
machines or molds.
The last destroy method that removes machines from the production plan is a random destroy
method, which randomly chooses a machine and destroys it. This method is expected to create
diversiﬁcation in the model and does not focus on machines that fulﬁll a speciﬁc criterion. These
three methods all consider if production is planned on the given machine and skips over the
pre-planned periods as these need to be kept in production to ensure continuity. The destroy
methods then deletes everything planned on the machine after the already-running production.
The ﬁnal destroy method does not remove whole machines from the production schedule. In-
stead, it attempts to ﬁnd expensive changeovers on the diﬀerent machines and remove these. It
works by checking a random machine for expensive changeovers and removing the production
lot with an expensive changeover. It then keeps the next production order in place and searches
for a new expensive changeover at its end. This method helps remove ineﬃcient placements as
the greedy insertion strategy will attempt to insert a product already planned on the machine
with a mold already in use. An example of an instance where this destroy method would remove
part of the production can be seen in Figure 3. Here mold 14 is exchanged for mold 19, and
the color is changed from grey to purple, which is considered an ineﬃcient changeover.
Figure 3: Changeover of both color and mold on a machine.
Repair Methods
The repair methods used are mainly based on the constructive heuristic search method. How-
ever, they use diﬀerent greedy strategies for choosing a product, demand date, and how much
demand should be grouped into an order. The number of days grouped is changed to an interval
to ensure diﬀerent demand sizes and groupings are attempted. A maximum and a minimum
number of days to group together is deﬁned as an input to each repair method. Before a repair
method is initialized, the exact number of periods to group together is randomly chosen from
a uniform distribution.
Mathias Nikolaj Linderod Albrechtsen
Page 27 of 67
==PAGE:32==
DTU Management
Four diﬀerent repair methods are used to achieve diﬀerent insertion strategies. The ﬁrst is
based on the same strategy used for the constructive heuristic. Here the next demand to insert
into the production plan is chosen based on which period it is in, thereby emphasizing planning
what will be needed next.
The second repair method focuses on the number of molds available for each product. It decides
what to insert by ﬁnding the product with the fewest possible molds and still unfulﬁlled demand.
It then ﬁnds the ﬁrst unfulﬁlled demand of this product and groups demand for the coming
days together before inserting it into the plan. This insertion is repeated until all demand for
this product has been inserted or discarded. Then a new product is found and inserted. This
is repeated until all products with unfulﬁlled demand have been investigated.
The third repair method focuses on products with high demand. Here the product with the
highest demand is found, and it attempts to insert all its unfulﬁlled demand. Once a product
is chose the next unfulﬁlled demand is found, grouping the following periods, and attempting
to insert it into the plan. Once all demand has been attempted, the repair method terminates.
The fourth and ﬁnal repair method attempts to insert similar products after each other. This
insertion is accomplished by ﬁrst ﬁnding the product with the least available molds and inserting
this. This follows the strategy described in the second repair method. Once that product has
been inserted, it ﬁnds a product that can use the same molds and machines. If such a product
is found, it is inserted into the plan. If no product like that exists, the repair method checks if a
product using the same color and machine exists and inserts it into the plan. If no product with
unfulﬁlled demand uses the same color or the same machines, the repair method defaults back
to choosing the following product with the least available molds. These four repair methods
help ﬁnd diﬀerent ways of inserting the products into the production plan, thereby attempting
to search the neighborhood.
Local Search Improvements
Several local searches are implemented to improve on the solution provided by the repair and
destroy methods. These all aim to improve the solution by removing speciﬁc changeovers. When
a machine is closed down for short periods or molds are changed quickly between machines.
These improvements are made by, for example, ensuring a mold is not used on other machines
for small time steps between two uses on one machine. Three diﬀerent search methods have
been implemented.
The ﬁrst local search focuses on ﬁnding and closing gaps in the solution. This is done by ﬁrst
identifying gaps where no mold is assigned on a machine. A change is made if the same mold is
assigned before and after the gap and the mold in question is not used on any other machines
in the gap.
Mathias Nikolaj Linderod Albrechtsen
Page 28 of 67
==PAGE:33==
DTU Management
The mold and product produced before the gap is assigned to the periods where nothing was
previously produced. As this will only reduce the number of points used, by reducing the point
usage in the last period, the solution will still be valid. It can lead to increased cost, as more
bricks will be placed in inventory, thereby increasing holding costs. If this is the case, the new
solution will not be accepted, and the gap will still exist. Figure 4 shows an example of this
before the gap is closed. Here a mold is used on the same machine for two diﬀerent jobs. The
changeover is decreased by closing the period between these jobs, and the production capacity
increases.
Figure 4: Example of a gap in the use of the same mold on the same machine.
The second local search ﬁnds gaps where no mold is assigned to a given machine, and the mold
before and after are the same. Here, the mold of interest is allowed on another machine. If
such a case is identiﬁed, it is checked if a change is possible. For a change to be possible, the
production speed on the two machines must be the same or higher on the machine of interest.
Now the mold and product are assigned to all periods in the identiﬁed gap on the machine of
interest. Figure 5 shows an example of this with the mold being changed to another machine
for a single day. The search would identify this and keep production on one machine instead
of two. As production will be at least the same and the changeover will, at worst, be the same
but often lower, the found solution will always be feasible and usually cheaper.
Figure 5: Example of a mold being changed from one machine to another and back again.
The ﬁnal local search attempts to remove changeovers by exchanging two molds and their
related product. First, a region where a mold is removed from a machine and replaced by one
or more molds before changing back to the original mold is identiﬁed. Figure 6 illustrates an
example of this. Here mold 39 is removed from the machine for six days and inserted again.
In the periods in between, it is replaced by two diﬀerent molds creating three relatively quick
changeovers which is undesirable.
Mathias Nikolaj Linderod Albrechtsen
Page 29 of 67
==PAGE:34==
DTU Management
The search then checks if the original mold is used on one other machine in the periods in
between.
If this is the case, the periods identiﬁed are then investigated further.
For each
period, an exchange is performed if the mold currently used can be used on the other machine
and the production speed is the same. If this is the case an exchange is made, inserting the mold
of interest to the original machine and the other mold into the other machine. This changeover
makes the plan more cohesive, thereby freeing more points for changeovers.
Figure 6: Overview of diﬀerent molds used on the same machine, with large changeovers.
These local search methods are used after the repair methods have generated a solution. To
minimize time usage, they are not employed after each iteration. Instead, each is employed
with a probability of 0.5. They are chosen separately to ensure they can all be applied in each
iteration. Once a local search has investigated a plan, the cost of the entire plan is recalculated.
As the point usage will not increase in any period by the suggested local searches, point usage
is also only updated at the end of each local search algorithm.
Other Parameters
As described, the general framework of ALNS incorporates acceptance criteria to diversify the
search space. The ALNS framework described by Ropke and Pisinger [20] used the SA method,
which is also the most used in literature. Other methods have also been used, though, and as
shown by Santini, Ropke, and Hvattum [38], some show comparable performance across the
investigated problems. Amongst these, the RRT method showed the best performance and will
therefore be implemented here, following the recommendations of Santini, Ropke, and Hvattum.
This is due to its simplicity and empirical performance compared to the SA method and other
acceptance criteria. The RRT acceptance criteria is presented in Algorithm 3.
Two parameters usually have to be chosen for the RRT: the start and end threshold.
As
the experiments performed by Santini, Ropke, and Hvattum showed that accepting the best
solution early in the solution search led to the overall best solution, the end threshold is set
very low. The low end threshold ensures a high level of intensiﬁcation. It is here set to 0 to
minimize the number of parameters to adjust. This threshold means only better solutions are
accepted in the end. The start threshold is set to 0.02, meaning that solutions up to 2% worse
than the overall best solution are initially accepted. This threshold allows for changes in the
solution space without accepting solutions that are too far oﬀ.
Mathias Nikolaj Linderod Albrechtsen
Page 30 of 67
==PAGE:35==
DTU Management
Algorithm 3 Record-to-Record Travel
1: input: initial solution x
2: input: initial threshold T
3: xb = x; i = 1;
4: repeat
5:
pick xt œ N(x);
6:
if c(xt)≠c(xb)
c(xt)
< T then;
7:
x = xt
8:
end if
9:
if c(xt) < c(xb) then
10:
xb = xt
11:
end if
12:
update T;
13:
i=i+1;
14: until i>K
15: return xb
Another important aspect is the assignment of weights to the diﬀerent repair and destroy
methods. These are given based on the performance of each incumbent solution found and
update the probability of choosing the given destroy or repair method. The weights are given
based on Equation 2 and are deﬁned as seen in Equation 5.
Ψ =
Y
_
_
_
_
_
_
_
_
]
_
_
_
_
_
_
_
_
[
10
if c(xt) < c(xb)
5
if c(xt < c(x)
2
if accept(xt, x)
0
if xt is rejected
(5)
These weights ensure that a method creating better solutions is valued much higher than a
rejected solution. The performance of diﬀerent repair and destroy methods might change from
the beginning to the end of an implementation run; their weights are therefore reset after a
segment of the run time. A segment is here deﬁned as 100 iterations.
Table 1: Values of predeﬁned parameters
“
Start
threshold
End
threshold
Start
group
Minimum
destroy
0.7
2%
0
10 days
5%
Mathias Nikolaj Linderod Albrechtsen
Page 31 of 67
==PAGE:36==
DTU Management
Furthermore, the relationship between the current and previous performance is important to
ensure how quickly the probability of choosing diﬀerent methods updates. The value is set to
“ = 0.7 to ensure this relationship does not change too fast, but recent iterations still receive a
signiﬁcant focus. The preset parameters are summarized in Table 1, where the “, RRT start,
and end threshold, periods to group in the constructive heuristic and minimum destroy are
deﬁned.
Mathias Nikolaj Linderod Albrechtsen
Page 32 of 67
==PAGE:37==
DTU Management
5
Computational experiments
The computational experiments were conducted on a 2.30 GHz AMD Ryzen 7 3700U machine
with 16 GB ram. A CPLEX solver was used to solve the proposed MIP model.
5.1
Instances
A wide range of diﬀerent instances was generated from data provided by LEGO. The instances
consist of diﬀerent sets of machines, molds, products, and time frames to test the performance
of the two suggested models. Each product has some demand in all three diﬀerent time frames,
except one, and therefore needs to be planned in all instances.
The only exception is the
instance with 273 products within the 30-day time frame. The various instances were created
over two general production periods, covering a peak and an oﬀperiod. In total, 21 instances
were made with diﬀerent periods, between 30 and 180 days. In most instances, the demand was
concentrated in the ﬁrst 50 days. This distribution was deemed the most likely distribution of
demand and supply. The longer the time horizon, the more uncertainty is present, as many
demand orders still need to be conﬁrmed or placed. For example, this means that the instance
of 180 days leaves some time in the end with no demand.
Generally, the production ﬂoor studied was characterized by having more products than ma-
chines, as seen in the data. The number of molds was usually around the number of products.
Seven diﬀerent sets of molds, machines and products were created, and each set had demand
forecasts for three distinct periods, which were 30, 90, and 180 days. An estimated number
of points available per period (or staﬃng per period) was also given, which increased with the
number of products. These points are based on estimates provided by LEGO but are associated
with a signiﬁcant degree of uncertainty.
All cost data were artiﬁcially generated and designed to describe the relationship between
backlog, holding, and changeover costs. The artiﬁcial data used was created to ﬁt the described
production ﬂoor of LEGO. It was assumed to be the same across the diﬀerent instances, meaning
the overall price was always on the same scale. Speciﬁc information on the various instances
can be seen in table 2.
The presented instances were divided into two subgroups. The ﬁrst subgroup was the small
instances, as they should all be possible to solve within a shorter time frame. In this subgroup
were all instances with 19, 35, 39, and 86 products, and the 30 days instance with 180 products.
The second subgroup contained large instances. In this subgroup, the time allowed was higher,
mainly due to the increased number of products, machines, and molds. For the instances with
180 products, the increase in the number of days was expected to lead to signiﬁcant increases
in needed run time. Therefore they were split between the two groups.
Mathias Nikolaj Linderod Albrechtsen
Page 33 of 67
==PAGE:38==
DTU Management
Table 2: Information on instances
Instances
Products
Machine
Molds
Days
Points
Subgroup
Inst19_30
19
14
32
30
4
Small
Inst19_90
19
14
32
90
4
Small
Inst19_180
19
14
32
180
4
Small
Inst35_30
35
106
99
30
4.8
Small
Inst35_90
35
106
99
90
4.8
Small
Inst35_180
35
106
99
180
4.8
Small
Inst39_30
39
27
80
30
4.8
Small
Inst39_90
39
27
80
90
4.8
Small
Inst39_180
39
27
80
180
4.8
Small
Inst86_30
86
59
189
30
7
Small
Inst86_90
86
59
189
90
7
Small
Inst86_180
86
59
189
180
7
Small
Inst180_30
180
100
340
30
9
Small
Inst180_90
180
100
340
90
9
Large
Inst180_180
180
100
340
180
9
Large
Inst273_30
273
116
516
30
10
Large
Inst273_90
273
116
516
90
10
Large
Inst273_180
273
116
516
180
10
Large
Inst439_30
439
235
623
30
11
Large
Inst439_90
439
235
623
90
11
Large
Inst439_180
439
235
623
180
11
Large
The length of the periods should be deﬁned to ﬁt the desire of the production planner. This
size decides how long a period is and, thereby, the detail degree of the model. Each period was
set to six hours to model the changes in shifts on the production ﬂoor. Increases and decreases
in the period length allow the generation of production plans with a diﬀerent detail degree. A
six-hour period has the advantage of not creating too many periods for the instances with 90
and 180 days while still having a relatively high degree of solution on the production ﬂoor.
5.2
Parameter Tunning
As described in Section 4.3, multiple parameters needed to be tuned to ﬁt the problem. These
were the maximum percentage of total demand to delete in each iteration and the minimum
and the maximum number of days to group in each repair iteration. As mentioned, the strategy
for this tuning was an all-in-one strategy, where all parameters are tuned simultaneously. The
parameter tuning was performed on three general instances. These were instances Inst39_180,
Inst86_90 and Inst180_30, which were chosen to both describe diﬀerent planning horizons and
instant sizes. The three instances were all in the category of small instances.
Mathias Nikolaj Linderod Albrechtsen
Page 34 of 67
==PAGE:39==
DTU Management
Still, as they were all close to the large instance sizes, they were deemed comparable and
valuable for parameter tuning. In Table 3, the diﬀerent parameter values tested can be seen.
The default values are marked in bold and chosen as they showed promising results in initial
trial runs.
Table 3: Parameter values tested in tuning.
Parameter
Test values
Minimum grouping
4
12
20
-
Maximum grouping
48
56
64
-
Maximum delete
10%
15%
20%
25%
For each parameter combination, each instance was solved ﬁve times for eight minutes. The
average gap from the best-found solution was then calculated for each instance. Based on these
gaps, the value for the parameters was chosen. As results had yet to be found, the best-known
objective value was set to the lowest found during the parameter tuning. Furthermore, the
standard deviation of the test was kept in mind and can be seen in Appendix A.1, where the
results of each test can also be seen. A lower standard deviation can indicate a more stable set
of parameters, thereby giving more stable results. Below the average percentage gap for the
diﬀerent instances can be seen.
Table 4: Average pct. gap from best known solution for Inst180_30.
Maximum Delete
10 %
15 %
20 %
25 %
Minimum Grouping
4
12
20
4
12
20
4
12
20
4
12
20
Maximum
Grouping
48
6.4
6.2
5.1
6.7
5.8
6.2
8.0
6.6
5.5
6.7
9.8
9.1
56
3.1
3.9
3.8
4.8
8.6
5.1
6.4
5.5
5.7
6.1
8.5
5.2
64
2.6
3.2
2.9
3.4
3.1
4.5
4.5
6.8
4.6
4.6
5.0
3.8
From Table 4, it is seen that the gap for Inst180_30 was generally relatively low, no matter
the parameters chosen. For all parameter values, it was below ten percent. Two other aspects
were clear from the results. First, a higher grouping value seemed to lead to a smaller gap.
Secondly, a lower delete percentage tended to give better results too. The diﬀerence between
the delete percentages was more prominent when the maximum grouping was higher. The
most signiﬁcant diﬀerence in the maximum grouping value came from 48 to 56. In contrast,
the diﬀerence was not very large, from 56 to 64, especially for a maximum delete percentage
of ten percent. The minimum grouping seemed to have a less clear impact on the gap and was
entirely dependent on the maximum grouping and delete combinations.
Mathias Nikolaj Linderod Albrechtsen
Page 35 of 67
==PAGE:40==
DTU Management
Table 5: Average pct. gap from best known solution for Inst86_90.
Maximum Delete
10 %
15 %
20 %
25 %
Minimum Grouping
4
12
20
4
12
20
4
12
20
4
12
20
Maximum
Grouping
48
23.8
22.1
24.4
30.8
31.4
43.0
44.2
32.9
29.43
32.3
53.8
48.6
56
16.9
25.1
33.1
18.7
30.7
33.6
51.1
42.2
34.5
51.2
45.4
34.1
64
18.8
16.4
20.2
25.3
14.6
23.5
35.2
32.8
27.0
53.8
45.1
47.9
For instance Inst86_90, the overall performance of the parameters was similar to those of
instance Inst180_30. As seen from Table 5, the gap was quite a lot higher, though, and they
were not as consistent.
This diﬀerence indicates that the solution approach had diﬃculty
generating consistently good solutions for this instance. The diﬃculty was also evident when
examining the standard deviations in Appendix A.1. A maximum delete of 10 % coupled with
a maximum grouping of 56 or 64 days seemed to produce the best results.
One deviation
from this example seemed to be the instance with a maximum delete of 15 % and a maximum
grouping of 64 periods, which produced the lowest gap. For instance, Inst86_90, the value of
the minimum grouping tended to be more critical, as it seemed 20 periods, in general, gave a
worse gap than 4 and 12 periods.
Table 6: Average pct. gap from best known solution for Inst39_180.
Maximum Delete
10 %
15 %
20 %
25 %
Minimum Grouping
4
12
20
4
12
20
4
12
20
4
12
20
Maximum
Grouping
48
5.6
9.0
13.8
8.2
13.1
12.7
17.3
14.9
14.4
19.9
9.1
16.2
56
6.7
10.9
6.6
11.8
10.8
12.3
14.1
21.0
18.9
10.1
20.8
15.7
64
8.8
8.0
9.9
13.4
12.9
17.1
12.3
10.4
20.3
12.3
18.1
18.9
The results for the last instance used in parameter tuning can be seen in Table 6. Assessing
the average gap showed it was again relatively low and closer to that of instance Inst180_30
than Inst86_90. The diﬀerence between the parameters was relatively clear, as a low maximum
delete percentage gave better results than the high value of 20 and 25 %. The eﬀect of the
minimum grouping parameter was the same as observed for instance Inst86_90, where the
best results came when groping at a minimum of 4 to 12 periods compared to 20. Here four
periods even seemed to be performing better than 12 periods. Finally, the maximum number
of periods to group together showed a diﬀerent result than the two previous instances. Here a
lower number of periods tended to be performing the best. The inﬂuence was lower for a small
delete percentage, however.
From these results, it was clear that a maximum delete percentage of 10 % should be preferred of
the tested values. The maximum number of periods to cluster together showed results pointing
in diﬀerent directions. Its inﬂuence seemed clear; a high maximum grouping was preferable for
the two instances with the most products. Because of this, 56 and 64 were preferable, as they
produced the lowest gaps across the three instances.
Mathias Nikolaj Linderod Albrechtsen
Page 36 of 67
==PAGE:41==
DTU Management
Examining the standard deviations of the parameter combinations with the lowest scores showed
that the instances with a maximum grouping of 64 resulted in a very high standard deviation, for
instance, Inst39_180. Therefore a maximum grouping of 56 was the most appropriate. Finally,
the minimum grouping showed the weakest inﬂuence on the overall results. Its importance
increased when fewer products and more days were available, however. Here the smallest value
of 4 periods performed the best, but it was very close to that of 12.
Table 7: Percentage gaps from extra parameter tuning for best performing areas.
Parameters
Instances
Max
Delete
Min
Grouping
Max
Grouping
Inst180_30
Inst86_90
Inst39_180
7.5 %
4
56
8.4
28.1
25.5
10 %
0
56
4.1
26.6
15.7
10 %
4
68
2.6
44.9
7.8
An extra tuning was performed as the edge values of 10 %, 64 periods, and four periods showed
excellent results. However, this extra tuning was only performed for the areas with the best
performance. Three new tests were performed, for which the results are displayed in Table 7.
Table 8: Final parameter values
Maximum Delete
Minimum Grouping
Maximum Grouping
10 %
4
56
As can be seen, the results did not improve for the inspected areas, though their performance
was still among the best. The new values generally resulted in relatively high diﬀerentiation
between the instances.
This would increase uncertainty for the results, which was deemed
undesirable. Therefore the combination of 10 %, 56, and 4 periods was preferred and used as
the ﬁnal parameter settings for the remaining tests. These are displayed in Table 8.
Mathias Nikolaj Linderod Albrechtsen
Page 37 of 67
==PAGE:42==
DTU Management
5.3
Results
Based on the parameter tuning, a comprehensive test of the performance of the ALNS imple-
mentation and the MIP formulation was performed. For the ALNS implementation, all the
instances were solved ﬁve times with a predeﬁned time limit. The time limit for the small
instances was set to eight minutes, while the time limit for the larger instances was 40 minutes.
This increase was used to help ensure that solution and multiple iterations was performed for
the larger instances. Multiple iterations is needed for the repair and destroy methods to guide
the solution towards improved solution
For the MIP formulation, the runtime also diﬀerent between the small and large instances. The
small instances were given a run time of 40 minutes, while the large instances were given a run
time of 2 hours and 20 minutes. As the MIP formulation is an exact method, only one solution
run was needed, which allowed for higher time usage. This was expected to ensure it could ﬁnd
solutions to more instances.
As the problem is a multi-objective problem, the three diﬀerent parts have been combined and
assigned a weight in the following objective:
ÿ
mœM
tœT
(pm,1÷m,t + pm,2◊m,t + pm,3’m,t) ≠
ÿ
kœK
tœT
(0.000001ckbk,t + 0.00000001hkIk,t)
(6)
The variables ÷, ◊, ’, b, and I, and the sets used were deﬁned as described for the MIP
formulation. pm,: is the expected time usage for a changeover and can take values between
0.6 and 2.1. Its value depends on which type of changeover and which type of machine is in
question. ck is a list of constants resembling the diﬀerence in cost if a product is not completed
in time. hk is a list of constants resembling the cost of holding a product in inventory. Both
ck and hk can take a value between one and ﬁve and are determined based on how many sets
a product is used in, its size, and how speciﬁc it is.
In Table 9, the total cost across the diﬀerent solution approaches is presented.
The ﬁrst
column indicates which instance is accessed. The second indicates the best solution using the
MIP model. The third is the best lower bound found while solving the MIP model. The two
last columns present the results from the ALNS implementation, the ﬁrst as the mean objective
function and the second as the best-found objective function. In Table 11, the average backlog,
inventory, and changeover cost is presented together with the average number of iterations
completed during the run time.
Mathias Nikolaj Linderod Albrechtsen
Page 38 of 67
==PAGE:43==
DTU Management
Table 9: Results for MIP model. lower bound. and ALNS for all instances
Instances
MIP
LB
Mean ALNS
Best ALNS
Inst19_30
30.18
7.94
40.14
40.12
Inst19_90
165.84
44.35
226.47
223.55
Inst19_180
6357.35
68.03
686.12
676.63
Inst35_30
-
-
95.79
95.66
Inst35_90
-
-
539.42
526.92
Inst35_180
-
-
1976.29
1964.42
Inst39_30
348.03
9.90
80.54
79.61
Inst39_90
-
-
2208.26
2172.67
Inst39_180
-
-
8510.69
8020.56
Inst86_30
-
-
240.28
237.46
Inst86_90
-
-
3199.52
2991.99
Inst86_180
-
-
50133.64
48401.63
Inst180_30
-
-
1223.08
1211.81
Inst180_90
-
-
22695.23
22271.54
Inst180_180
-
-
130702.45
126366.54
Inst273_30
-
-
24.14
24.13
Inst273_90
-
-
6697.55
6633.78
Inst273_180
-
-
44756.53
44352.08
Inst439_30
-
-
1871.32
1868.42
Inst439_90
-
-
27738.14
27534.81
Inst439_180
-
-
173444.13
164991.44
As seen from Table 9, the MIP model could not ﬁnd a solution for most instances, and this
conﬁrms the assumption about the weakness of an exact solution for the studied problem. The
SLSP is very complex, and the need to assign an exact mold and machine to each production
period gives a considerable number of decision variables. Herefore it was expected that the
MIP model would struggle. The MIP model could not ﬁnd the optimal solution for any in-
stance either. The ALNS implementation found feasible solutions for all instances, showing the
viability of using a fast heuristic method. The ALNS seemed to perform relatively poorly on
the smallest instance, where its total cost was over 30 % higher than that of the MIP solution.
Looking at Table 11, it is clear that this happens because of a high changeover cost, while the
heuristic was able to avoid backlog in the instance. It is likely that the focus of the ALNS
on minimizing backlog is too speciﬁc, when backlog is not a large problem. Here a focus on
decreasing changeover is likely much more important. The contribution to the total cost of the
MIP solutions can be seen in Table 10, with each column showing the contribution of each cost
type.
Mathias Nikolaj Linderod Albrechtsen
Page 39 of 67
==PAGE:44==
DTU Management
This changed rapidly for the larger instances, as the ALNS delivered better results for the
remaining instances. Both methods’ solutions were much more expensive than the best lower
bound found.
This gap makes it diﬃcult to know precisely how good a performance they
delivered compared to the optimal solution.
Table 10: Contribution of the diﬀerent cost types for the MIP solution.
Instances
Total
Backlog
Inventory
Changeover
Inst19_30
30.18
6.29
3.79
20.10
Inst19_90
165.84
76.09
29.75
60.00
Inst19_180
6.357.35
6.194.72
90.13
72.50
Inst39_30
348.03
321.02
4.22
22.80
In general, the results of the ALNS implementation were relatively stable. This stability was
especially true for the smallest instances and all 30-day instances. The results indicate that the
small instances have a structure that allows the implementation to converge to a solution of a
similar design. For the larger instances, there was more diversity in the solutions obtained. This
was especially clear for instances where a low number of iterations were performed. The low
number of iterations could indicate that the solutions would converge more if more iterations
were performed. From Table 11, it is clear that there is a signiﬁcant drop-oﬀin the number
of iterations performed with increasing instant size. It is also clear that the implementation
performed fewer iterations in the instances with generally high demand compared to those with
an overall lower demand (instances with 273 and 35 products).
Mathias Nikolaj Linderod Albrechtsen
Page 40 of 67
==PAGE:45==
DTU Management
Table 11: Contribution to total cost from diﬀerent cost aspects and avg. number of iterations.
Instance
Backlog
Holding
Changeover
Iterations
Inst19_30
0.00
11.34
28.80
13000.8
Inst19_90
108.46
85.09
32.92
4834.4
Inst19_180
201.85
353.97
130.30
1102.4
Inst35_30
3.73
15.26
76.80
34498.4
Inst35_90
139.38
109.28
290.76
3741.8
Inst35_180
855.88
406.91
713.50
568.2
Inst39_30
0.08
18.85
61.60
20814.8
Inst39_90
1671.55
149.49
387.22
3181.8
Inst39_180
6904.89
628.66
977.14
802.0
Inst86_30
7.83
38.96
193.50
11431.8
Inst86_90
1550.80
397.61
1251.10
1050.4
Inst86_180
45680.46
1633.50
2819.68
124.2
Inst180_30
749.94
80.79
382.76
5592.0
Inst180_90
19311.86
747.71
2626.06
2231.2
Inst180_180
122027.94
2960.19
5704.72
377.4
Inst273_30
0.00
3.14
21.00
32322.4
Inst273_90
4353.04
975.93
1368.58
3783.0
Inst273_180
36674.50
4096.95
3985.08
631.0
Inst439_30
564.58
246.62
990.82
3438.4
Inst439_90
22113.87
1311.85
4243.12
148.4
Inst439_180
165606.37
3858.13
9445.74
16.6
The ALNS implementation led to low backlog costs for small and large 30 days instances. This
generally makes sense as missed demands do not have time to stack over time and lead to high
extra costs. Furthermore, the number of periods also limits the diﬀerent products needing to
be produced. A limited number of demands to meet makes it easier to use the changeovers
speciﬁcally for these. More extended production spans with high demand between days 30 and
50 can complicate this considerably. The holding cost was rarely high, making sense because of
the assigned cost evaluation. The cost evaluation was approximately a factor of 100 lower for
the holding cost compared to the backlog cost that of the backlog cost. The changeover cost
was signiﬁcant for small instances but became less important for larger instances, where the
backlog cost increased. The implementation’s main focus was reducing backlog costs through
repair methods and changeover costs through the use of grouping and local searches.
From these results, it was clear that an optimal solution approach needs to scale better to
the size of instances considered in real-world applications to be relevant. Therefore the MIP
approach was not explored any further. Instead, the remaining part of the thesis will focus on
the ALNS approach’s comparability with real-world situations and a deeper analysis of some
of the more critical components of the studied production line.
Mathias Nikolaj Linderod Albrechtsen
Page 41 of 67
==PAGE:46==
DTU Management
5.4
Comparison to Real-world Instances
The implementation was also compared to two real-world instances of diﬀerent planning lengths
to understand its performance better. Here the overall cost, backlog cost, holding cost, and
changeover costs were calculated for plans provided by LEGO. These instances were generated
to cover all possible machines, products, molds, and colors. The cost structure used was the
same as previously described, and the points available were an educated guess on the availability
provided by LEGO. The speciﬁcs of the real-world instances are presented in Table 12, and as
can be seen, they contain many more products, molds, and machines than the generated test
instances. To ensure comparability, changeover and inventory were only counted for products
with demand in the planning horizon. The increase in size demonstrates the need for a good
and fast heuristic to solve the problem.
Five iterations of the ALNS implementation were
performed, with a time limit of 40 minutes.
Table 12: Information on real-world instances
Products
Machines
Molds
Days
Available points
2665
945
1681
30
37.5
2665
945
1681
45
37.5
In Table 13, the performance of the plan provided by LEGO and the average of the implemen-
tations for the 30-day instance plan can be seen. The percentage diﬀerence is also presented,
which shows quite signiﬁcant diﬀerences. The interesting measure here is the backlog, as it
was considerably more signiﬁcant in the plan provided by LEGO than in the new solutions.
The new solutions were able to avoid much backlog. There is a risk of the signiﬁcant diﬀerence
being misleading, though, as the plan from LEGO is a part of an extended production plan.
Herefore some products were produced and kept in inventory which was not considered in this
production horizon. These products were not counted in the solution but could still impact the
overall results.
Table 13: Comparison between the generated plans and LEGO’s plan for the 30-days instance.
Total
Backlog
Inventory
Changeover
Inst2665_30
1866.24
84.22
1021.34
750.20
Original plan
6375.11
3194.17
2190.58
990.36
Diﬀerence
-70.73%
-97.36%
-53.38%
-24.25%
The change in backlog cost is substantial, though, indicating better production planning and
scheduling was possible under the speciﬁed assumptions. The inventory and changeover also
decreased quite considerably. The changeover was decreased by 24%, and the inventory was
decreased by 53%. Both were quite considerable and led to an overall decrease of 70%.
Mathias Nikolaj Linderod Albrechtsen
Page 42 of 67
==PAGE:47==
DTU Management
This number indicates that either the system at LEGO is far from optimized or the proposed
model does simplify essential aspects of the production line. For the provided model, it could be
constraints not considered or that the planning horizon needs to be more extensive. Too-short
planning horizons could lead to an ineﬃcient prioritization of production capacity.
Table 14: Comparison between the generated plans and LEGO’s plan for the 45-days instance.
Total
Backlog
Inventory
Changeover
Inst2665_30
6654.47
529.17
3184.86
1831.64
Original plan
27350.33
21455.44
4258.79
1636.10
Diﬀerence
-75.67%
-97.53%
-25.22%
11.95%
A 45-day instance was also considered to avoid the planning horizon limiting the comparability
between the solutions. Results for this instance is presented in Table 14. The total cost and
backlog cost were very comparable to those found for the 30-day instance, as the backlog cost
was decreased by 97% and the total cost by 75%. The contributions to the total cost diﬀered
from the 30-day instance, however. For the 45-days instance, most of the diﬀerence in cost
came from the backlog cost, and the two other cost measures were much closer. The inventory
cost was still decreased, but only by 25%. This decrease likely came from more of the original
planned production becoming relevant because of demand in the added periods. The changeover
cost was increased, as the suggested plan, on average, suggested a changeover cost 12% higher
than the original plan.
It is important to remember that the plans were only compared to production already running
or products demanded in the considered period. The original plan from LEGO consisted of
production lots for products without any demand. Reasons for these production orders are
likely to exist but were not apparent in the data; therefore, they were excluded.
Mathias Nikolaj Linderod Albrechtsen
Page 43 of 67
==PAGE:48==
DTU Management
5.5
Sensitivity Analysis
Three diﬀerent sensitivity analyses were conducted to understand better which constraints are
the most important to the overall performance. The main identiﬁed possible bottlenecks were
the number of molds available, the number of machines available, and the available staﬃng.
First, the inﬂuence of increasing the number of available molds and machines was studied.
Availability of Molds and Machines
Clear bottlenecks existed in the instances, leading to high backlog costs, and enough production
capacity was only sometimes available. Therefore increasing the number of machines and molds
was tested to overcome this. For a production line, investing in molds would mean focusing on
increasing the number of current machines able to run at their intended pressure and, thereby
best production speed. Increasing the number of machines, on the other hand, focuses on a
need for more machines to use the available mold package.
Identifying possible weaknesses in a production setup between the machines and the molds
could help guide where new investments should be made. To perform the sensitivity analysis,
ﬁrst, each mold was allowed to be used twice. For the machine scenario, each machine was
allowed to be used twice. This approach was chosen because it was unknown which type of
machine or mold limited the production through the instances. These increases could be used to
indicate which machines and molds created the bottlenecks and for which increased investments
could help avoid product backlog.
Figure 7: Percentage change in objective value for mold and machine scenarios (lower is better).
Mathias Nikolaj Linderod Albrechtsen
Page 44 of 67
==PAGE:49==
DTU Management
In Figure 7, the percentage diﬀerence in objective value can be seen for the two scenarios.
The blue line shows the scenario with increased molds, and the orange line shows the scenario
with extra machines. Each instance is presented on the x-axis. On the y-axis, the percentage
change from the base case is presented. It is clear that adding extra molds does not change
the performance considerably and even increases it in some instances. The studied scenarios
already had many molds compared to the number of products and machines; therefore, it makes
sense that the inﬂuence was not very strong. The inﬂuence of an increased number of machines
was relatively strong in some scenarios. Scenarios with a high amount of backlog in the base
scenario could avoid backlog with an increased production capacity. This scenario is, of course,
also a substantial increase. However, it shows that the machines available might be insuﬃcient
to handle the demand. In some instances, the objective value increases slightly, indicating
that the number of machines does not limit the output. This was, for example, the case for
the instances with 35 and 273 products. A very high number of machines already existed for
these instances compared to other instances. It seemed the backlog happened because of other
bottlenecks in the system. The ability to estimate savings for a production plan with new
investments is a solid argument for implementing a fast-generating metaheuristic.
It is worth noting that the number of iterations decreased considerably, especially in the machine
scenario. For example, a solution was not found, for instance Inst439_180 in the machine
scenario, and less than ten iterations were performed in the mold scenario. The average number
of iterations can be seen in Appendix A.2. The extra amount of molds and machines available
in each scenario meant an increased complexity, which shows the limitations of the scenarios
proposed here. A deeper understanding of which machines and molds created the bottlenecks
would be needed to explore the speciﬁc eﬀects and costs further. Such an analysis would be
possible in a real production setting with the implementation’s relatively low runtime.
Figure 8: Percentage change in cost with all molds available twice (lower is better).
Mathias Nikolaj Linderod Albrechtsen
Page 45 of 67
==PAGE:50==
DTU Management
Figure 9: Percentage change in cost with all machines available twice (lower is better).
The speciﬁc contributions to the overall objective values for each scenario can be seen in Figures
8 and 9 with the instances along the x-axis and the percentage change from the base scenario on
the y-axis. Figure 8 shows the changes for the mold scenario, and Figure 9 shows the changes
in the three objective parts for the machine scenario. Note that in Figure 9 instance Inst19_30
is not presented. This is because the backlog cost increases dramatically but from a very low
start value. From these two graphs, it is clear that the changes in cost are mainly happening
for the backlog. Especially for the mold scenario, it seemed there was nearly no change in
either changeover or holding cost. These changes were diﬀerent for the machine scenario, as
the changeover cost seemed to fall for most instances and increase for some. The diﬀerences
in changeover cost were likely due to it being possible to keep molds in machines for a longer
time. The increased continuity in mold use would lead to fewer exchanges for a new mold.
The general reduction in changeover and backlog indicates that having the right amount of
machines was more important than having many molds able to produce at high pressure. The
balance between molds and machines is therefore vital for the production line, and ensuring
this allows for better prioritization of investments and re-tolling.
Sensitivity of Staﬃng
As the available staﬃng restricts the possibility of changing production in each period, this is
important to access. As increasing the staﬃng can be seen as an easy scale-up, compared to
the signiﬁcant investments in new machines and molds, it is essential to know its impact. Three
diﬀerent scenarios were created to help access the impact. The three were; one deviated from
the baseline by decreasing the number of points and two deviated by increasing the number of
available points.
Mathias Nikolaj Linderod Albrechtsen
Page 46 of 67
==PAGE:51==
DTU Management
The decrease was on 33% of the original amount, while the increased scenarios had increases of
33 and 100%, respectively. The new point distribution can be seen in table 15. As the points
used only have one decimal, the values have also been rounded to one decimal.
Table 15: Points distribution for diﬀerent staﬃng scenarios
Inst19
Inst35
Inst39
Inst86
Inst180
Inst273
Inst439
Base scenario
4
4.8
4.8
7
9
10
11
Scenario 1
2.7
3.2
3.2
4.6
6
6.7
7.3
Scenario 2
5.3
6.4
6.4
9.3
12
13.3
14.8
Scenario 3
8
9.6
9.6
14
18
20
22
Figure 10 presents the percentage deviation from the base results with the instance along the
x-axis and the y-axis representing the percentage change. The three scenarios clearly showed
that the diﬀerentiation in available staﬃng leads to diﬀerent results depending on the instance.
In general, it can be stated that higher staﬃng leads to better results for larger instances, and
the results depend less on the available staﬃng in the smaller instances. The eﬀect on the
smaller instances was mainly seen in instances with 19, 35, and 39 products, while the eﬀect
on larger instances was apparent for instances with 273 and 439 products. Instances with 86
products seemed to be performing worse, with fewer and more available points, which could
indicate that the most suitable number of points was already assigned for this instance. The
signiﬁcant diﬀerences in objective values indicated that changing the number of points to ﬁt
the problem best is essential and can lead to considerable savings.
Figure 10: Percentage change in objective value for staﬃng scenarios (lower is better).
Mathias Nikolaj Linderod Albrechtsen
Page 47 of 67
==PAGE:52==
DTU Management
These tests show that it is essential to test diﬀerent staﬃng plans to better understand the
production plan’s performance. Choosing the right staﬃng plan for the following period seems
highly important. The importance for the larger instances was partly because increasing the
available points made it easier for the heuristic to place the demand. This increase allowed
for a faster generation of a feasible plan and repair and destroy iterations being performed
faster. Therefore it was able to perform more iterations before the time limit. The average
number of iterations performed can be seen in Appendix A.3. The diﬀerence in the number
of iterations performed for the diﬀerent scenarios shows how important it is to test for speciﬁc
staﬃng scenarios. Too few points clearly lead to general problems for the implemented solution
approach.
Assessing the performance concerning the diﬀerent parts of the objective value showed that
the most signiﬁcant change happens in the backlog, both for increases and decreases in cost.
In Figures 11, 12, and 13, the percentage change is presented for each of the three diﬀerent
scenarios across the diﬀerent aspects of the objective value, along the x-axis is the instances and
along the y-axis is the percentage diﬀerence. Clearly, staﬃng changes mainly aﬀected speciﬁc
scenarios and were much more dependent on the situation than the results from the machine
and mold scenarios.
Figure 11: Percentage change in cost with decreased staﬃng by 33 % (lower is better).
Mathias Nikolaj Linderod Albrechtsen
Page 48 of 67
==PAGE:53==
DTU Management
Figure 12: Percentage change in cost with increased staﬃng by 33 % (lower is better).
Figure 13: Percentage change in cost with increased staﬃng by 100 % (lower is better).
For instances Inst439_90 and Inst439_180 it was clear that the overall savings gained in the
scenario with a 100 % increase in staﬃng resulted in a trade-oﬀwith a lower backlog cost
but increased holding and changeover costs. This change was also seen between the holding
and backlog for instance Inst439_180 in the scenario with a 33 % increase in staﬃng. These
trade-oﬀs show the balance of choosing the correct staﬃng level together and thereby adjusting
the number of points available, with an appropriate weighting between the diﬀerent aspects of
the objective function. Increasing staﬃng might decrease the overall cost but increase the cost
of other aspects of the solution.
Mathias Nikolaj Linderod Albrechtsen
Page 49 of 67
==PAGE:54==
DTU Management
5.6
Sensitivity Analysis on Real-world Instance
As the amount of available staﬃng in the real-world instance was associated with a signiﬁcant
degree of uncertainty, the sensitivity analysis on staﬃng was also conducted for the real-world
instances. Sensitivity analyses on machines and molds were not conducted as the instance size
did not allow for constructing feasible plans quickly with more molds and machines. This can
be seen in the problem with iterations described for the general instances.
Table 16: Changes in available points from base to diﬀerent scenarios.
Scenario
Base
-33.3%
33.3%
100%
Points
37.5
25
50
75
The scenarios explained above will be used again here. Therefore three scenarios were consid-
ered; a reduction of 33%, an increase of 33%, and an increase of 100%. The sensitivity analysis
was performed for both real-world instances. The new distribution can be seen in Table 16.
Figure 14: Percentage change for scenarios across cost aspects, 30-day instance (lower is better).
In Figure 14, the results of the scenarios are presented for the 30-day instance.
Here, the
percentage diﬀerence from the base scenario of each cost aspect, and the total cost, is presented.
The y-axis shows the percentage diﬀerence, which was signiﬁcant for the diﬀerent parts of the
objective function. In general, the scenarios seemed to increase backlog cost, keep inventory
relatively stable and decrease the changeover. These changes led to an overall lower total cost
in all scenarios, which indicates the increased changeover allows for a better trade-oﬀbetween
backlog and changeover. This trade-oﬀleads to a lower cost with the used objective function.
Mathias Nikolaj Linderod Albrechtsen
Page 50 of 67
==PAGE:55==
DTU Management
However, it underlines the importance of a well-deﬁned objective function and weighting be-
tween the diﬀerent parts. The overall cost is low for all scenarios compared to the original
plan provided by LEGO, indicating that the changeover is not a restricting factor for achieving
better results in the system.
For the 45-day instance, the results are presented in Figure 15, which follows the same structure
as Figure 14.
The percentage diﬀerences are much lower for this instance, however.
The
scenarios decrease the number of points and the scenario with a 100% increase both lower
changeover cost and increase backlog cost. The decreasing scenario’s total cost was the same
as the base plan, though, and the 100% scenario only decreases the cost by 2%.
Figure 15: Percentage change for scenarios across cost aspects, 45-day instance (lower is better).
The overall performance of the two instances across all scenarios seems consistent. The speciﬁc
values for each scenario can be seen in Appendix A.4. This consistency demonstrates that the
changeover is not necessarily the most critical aspect in the planning, as enough points exist to
create reasonable plans. The increases in backlog show a point usage of 37.5 works ideally for
these scenarios, though, if the objective is to avoid backlogging.
Mathias Nikolaj Linderod Albrechtsen
Page 51 of 67
==PAGE:56==
DTU Management
6
Limitations and Future recommendations
This section presents possible extensions of the proposed solution approaches and general areas
of interest that still need to be discussed. First, the results show an apparent gain from using
a heuristic method for generating solutions for the SLSP. It is also clear that better ways of
generating lower bounds are needed to evaluate the solution approach better. The comparison
with an actual production plan showed that it is possible to reduce the backlog in the system.
As only two instances were compared to LEGO’s schedules, further tests would be needed to
understand the possible improvements better.
For this solution, approach periods of six hours were used, as these were deemed appropriate
for the production ﬂoor studied. The six hours were chosen considering the problem’s overall
complexity, the degree of detail, and the length of staﬀshifts on the production ﬂoor. The size
of the periods could be changed to create a more complex solution concerning exact staﬃng
usage. Such a change could make sense for the 30-day instances, where a more detailed plan
could be necessary. A planner could use smaller periods to plan the tasks more precisely for the
production staﬀ. Further testing of diﬀerent period lengths would make sense if implemented
in an industrial setting.
The proposed model could also be speciﬁed to ﬁt real-world instances better. The proposed
model does not look at raw materials used in the production line. The lack of such constraints
is an apparent weakness if raw materials are scarce or if the diﬀerence between raw material
usage is very diﬀerent. Neither of these was deemed highly relevant to the studied problem
based on the descriptions made by LEGO. Furthermore, data was absent for most mold and
product combinations, so raw materials were not considered in the model.
The point distribution between changeovers is another simpliﬁed part of the model.
The
changeover cost used in this model follows LEGO’s general daily point distribution and is
uniformly distributed across all periods. This point distribution is comparable to what is used
in planning now but is not a perfect ﬁt for the actual time usage and cost of changes. In an ideal
setting, the point system could be changed to reﬂect the time usage and risks better by deﬁning
the time usage separately from the points. The time usage is in the current setup, not depen-
dent on the color diﬀerence but should ideally be diﬀerent between diﬀerent color changes. In a
real-world setting, lighter colors will have a shorter cleaning time than darker colors. Splitting
the point system between points and time usage also allows for clearer considerations of the
risk of breakdowns on molds and machines when performing a changeover.
A more diverse insertion scheme is suggested to improve the implementation, coupled with
more local search methods. The proposed ALNS implementation mainly focuses on diﬀering
the way demand to insert is chosen but does not explore other ways of choosing mold and
machines. Diﬀerent insertion strategies could focus on ﬁnding a possible mold at ﬁrst and then
Mathias Nikolaj Linderod Albrechtsen
Page 52 of 67
==PAGE:57==
DTU Management
generating the desired machine, for example. It could also focus on increasing the number of
machines and spreading the production to as many machines as possible, increasing ﬂexibility
for later demand.
The three suggested local search improvements mainly focus on closing
illogical gaps in production. They only catch some situations where a gap is created, and more
complex changeovers are potentially missed, which could improve the solutions even further.
Improving these aspects could decrease the backlog in the system for the larger instances. As
is evident from the sensitivity analysis on increased machine availability, there is a lot to gain
by maximizing the production capacity of the machines.
The results also showed that smaller instances seemed to converge to a solution, which for at
least "Inst19_30" was not close to the best found MIP solution. This was due to a high focus
on reducing backlog cost, as allowing for some backlog could lead to better solutions because of
reduced changeover cost. It is fair to discuss if this is a viable cost evaluation for a real-world
instance where missed orders would rarely be a desirable outcome.
An area that has not been studied here but is very relevant to consider is starting planning
from another plan. That could be an old plan spanning part of the current period, or it could
be a plan for a shorter time frame. As production is constantly running except for days of
closure, and demand rarely changes dramatically between days, previous plans are expected to
have a signiﬁcant resemblance. This resemblance allows for reusing earlier plans as a basis for
new plans. Reusing plans would likely also allow for shorter run times for the larger instances,
which is vital for real-world settings. The number of iterations was low for the largest instances
in the large and small subgroups.
Finally, it is suggested that the work done in the parameter tuning is expanded. The current
parameter tuning approach follows a straightforward grid approach and sets the parameters
equal for all instances. Considering the signiﬁcant diﬀerences across the instances, this approach
will likely overlook good parameter values for diﬀerent instances. From the parameter tuning, it
was already clear that diﬀerent parameter values were sometimes preferable between instances.
Generating speciﬁc parameters for each instance would be time-consuming and require a more
detailed mapping of the search space, though. Useable approaches include machine learning.
For example, a linear regression would use diﬀerent aspects of the problem, such as the number
of machines, mold, products, and total demand as input, to predict the best parameter settings.
While performing this kind of parameter tuning can be more susceptible to overﬁtting, it is not
deemed a considerable risk for the problem once transferred to an actual production setting.
A more speciﬁc parameter tuning could be relevant for the problem as it usually consists of
a relatively consistent set of products, machines, and molds with reasonably constant total
demand. Thus, this problem type is a good setting for a ﬁrmly ﬁtted set of parameters.
Mathias Nikolaj Linderod Albrechtsen
Page 53 of 67
==PAGE:58==
DTU Management
7
Conclusion
Through this thesis, a production planning and scheduling environment based on the SLSP
has been analyzed to ﬁnd solution methods for large instances.
The SLSP is an NP-hard
problem; therefore, heuristics and decomposition methods are usually used to solve it. This
thesis suggested two approaches: a MIP formulation and an ALNS metaheuristic, which did
not seem to have been used in the literature before. Both of these solution approaches were
formulated as discrete-time models to reduce complexity. The ALNS implemented relied on
greedy insertion methods to avoid backlog and local optimizations to minimize the cost of
changeovers. These methods were combined with a strategy for grouping demands to create
diﬀerent lot sizes.
The results of the two approaches were very diﬀerent, as the MIP formulation quickly proved
ineﬃcient at ﬁnding a feasible solution. It also struggled to provide tight lower bounds making
it diﬃcult to assess how close to optimality the provided solutions were. The ALNS heuris-
tic implementation did, on the other hand, ﬁnd solutions for all of the given instances and,
compared to a real-world instance, showed possible savings of up to 40 %. It was noted that
the assumptions made could result in the proposed solution approach performing better than
possible in the plans provided by LEGO. However, they were deemed reasonable based on the
descriptions provided by LEGO and knowledge of the production line.
The choice of a discrete implementation was made to reduce the complexity compared to a
continuous model. A discrete implementation is also the approach preferred in the literature.
A relatively small time step of six hours was chosen to gain detailed plans. The model was
designed to make this time step changeable if a more detailed or general resolution was desired.
This time step allows decision-makers to use the proposed model to construct a production
plan on a time frame resembling a continuous resolution.
As mentioned, the MIP model did not provide any usable lower bounds. After solving the initial
instances, the MIP model was not considered solved for any sensitivity scenarios. The MIP
results also showed that optimality for the large instances studied would be near impossible,
considering the instance sizes.
Instead, only the ALNS was considered, as it provided feasible schedules within the set time
limits for all instances. Its performance on the initial instances was also better than the MIP
model except for the smallest instance. A sensitivity analysis was performed to better under-
stand how the ALNS implementation could help decision-makers and what limited the studied
production ﬂoor. Here the importance of the available molds, machines, and staﬃng was consid-
ered. This was done by ﬁrst increasing the number of molds and machines available. Secondly,
a test of how diﬀerent staﬃng, and thereby available points for changeovers, would aﬀect the
system. From these tests, it became clear that the number of machines was the limiting factor,
Mathias Nikolaj Linderod Albrechtsen
Page 54 of 67
==PAGE:59==
DTU Management
while an increase in the number of molds and available points lowered costs only for certain
instances. The improvements in speciﬁc instances for the mold and staﬃng scenarios underline
the importance of understanding the studied system to direct new investments and changes.
Furthermore, the implementation was tested on two real-world instances and compared to plans
provided by LEGO. These showed clear beneﬁts of the suggested implementation. A sensitivity
analysis of the number of available points also validated that the implementation performed
well, even after considering the uncertainty of the available points.
The ALNS implemented here is quite diﬀerent from many of the previously reported solution
approaches, but the results reported indicate it could also have merit for general cases of the
SLSP. A direct comparison has not been performed, though; therefore, the ALNS approach’s
performance compared to, for example, the GA approach cannot be concluded. As one of the
closest previous applications in the hybrid-ALNS suggested in [27] showed excellent results,
the suggested ALNS could likely achieve very competitive results in more general instances.
Another new contribution from this thesis is the size of the instances considered. The literature
review did not point to any studies handling instances of comparable sizes. The ability to
handle large instances adds to the relevance of the suggested solution approach. It is therefore
suggested that the results of the ALNS metaheuristic are compared to GA and decomposition
approaches seen in the literature.
Even though the ALNS showed promising results, it had certain limitations. First of all, only
one period length was tested, while the implementation would be able to handle diﬀerent period
lengths. More focus on how this aﬀects the solutions would be desired. Secondly, the proposed
model had certain limitations concerning raw materials and the point structure used. While the
raw materials were excluded based on the system’s features and data quality, the point system
used is relatively simple. A more complex point system would be desired, which separates the
time usage from the penalty assigned to avoid breakdowns. Finally, it is suggested that the
implementation is tested with regard to its ability to plan using previous plans as a starting
solution. This approach is expected to speed up the creation of an initial solution. Furthermore,
it is considered a likely usage in a real-world setting.
It can therefore be concluded that the studied ALNS implementation provided feasible solu-
tions, which performed well when compared to a real-world instance. The results showed a
considerable gap between the ALNS solution and the best-found MIP solution for the smaller
instances. This gap was caused by the ALNS formulation not allowing backlog, if possible. In
contrast, the MIP formulation allowed for some backlogging at a reasonable cost as a trade-oﬀ
to an overall lower cost. The results were comparable to or better than the best-found upper
bounds and solutions provided by LEGO for all larger instances. Unfortunately, the lower
bounds found were not very tight, and no conclusive statement can be made about how close
the ALNS implementation was to optimality.
Mathias Nikolaj Linderod Albrechtsen
Page 55 of 67
==PAGE:60==
DTU Management
8
Acknowledgments
I want to thank my supervisor David Pisinger for his support, feedback, and great insights into
the project’s direction and diﬀerent approaches. I would also like to thank Kristian Edlund,
Rasmus Tange Præstegaard, Tibor Szabó, and Daniel Koh from LEGO for providing guidance,
data, and answers to my many questions regarding the structure of the production environment.
Finally, I would like to thank my friends, family, and girlfriend for their help with proofreading
and support throughout the project.
- Mathias
Mathias Nikolaj Linderod Albrechtsen
Page 56 of 67
==PAGE:61==
DTU Management
Mathias Nikolaj Linderod Albrechtsen
Page 57 of 67
==PAGE:62==
DTU Management
A
Appendix
A.1
Parameter tuning
Inst180_30
Grouping
Max
Destroy
Min
Max
1
2
3
4
5
Mean
object
Std.
dev.
10 %
4
48
1259.50
1316.14
1310.72
1271.77
1295.95
1290.82
21.94
10 %
4
56
1244.92
1239.04
1237.78
1257.98
1277.53
1251.45
14.88
10 %
4
64
1222.72
1221.72
1262.49
1283.10
1236.20
1245.25
23.97
10 %
12
48
1284.50
1308.06
1282.63
1305.08
1263.19
1288.69
16.42
10 %
12
56
1272.42
1259.26
1254.42
1276.91
1243.42
1261.29
12.15
10 %
12
64
1274.67
1284.40
1248.76
1213.57
1237.44
1251.77
25.55
10 %
20
48
1292.80
1281.52
1255.66
1276.11
1273.79
1275.98
12.10
10 %
20
56
1268.79
1241.45
1269.12
1227.41
1292.14
1259.78
22.80
10 %
20
64
1238.81
1223.45
1261.27
1265.26
1257.68
1249.29
15.79
15 %
4
48
1320.08
1284.48
1304.22
1259.70
1308.23
1295.34
21.19
15 %
4
56
1280.86
1294.54
1272.39
1261.97
1249.78
1271.91
15.37
15 %
4
64
1244.77
1238.41
1278.26
1244.80
1266.35
1254.52
15.18
15 %
12
48
1267.44
1260.63
1283.64
1363.31
1242.85
1283.57
41.96
15 %
12
56
1237.07
1247.12
1281.32
1535.50
1288.97
1318.00
110.51
15 %
12
64
1228.17
1273.46
1261.89
1265.95
1228.44
1251.58
19.36
15 %
20
48
1287.13
1305.95
1299.76
1267.82
1280.69
1288.27
13.58
15 %
20
56
1279.31
1282.63
1249.17
1273.58
1291.94
1275.32
14.37
15 %
20
64
1266.16
1252.69
1269.28
1301.74
1252.71
1268.52
17.94
20 %
4
48
1295.33
1309.33
1318.60
1289.96
1340.45
1310.73
17.98
20 %
4
56
1328.14
1337.03
1247.86
1254.20
1290.64
1291.57
36.64
20 %
4
64
1255.73
1268.03
1268.54
1311.74
1239.11
1268.63
24.07
20 %
12
48
1266.55
1305.00
1262.15
1304.16
1331.58
1293.89
26.09
20 %
12
56
1242.32
1270.62
1281.94
1310.53
1293.60
1279.80
22.93
20 %
12
64
1259.42
1245.50
1235.31
1250.17
1490.51
1296.18
97.47
20 %
20
48
1260.88
1275.67
1268.09
1297.61
1298.52
1280.15
15.36
20 %
20
56
1282.18
1301.51
1265.72
1287.91
1277.08
1282.88
11.84
20 %
20
64
1280.75
1280.81
1246.89
1247.39
1288.77
1268.92
18.03
25 %
4
48
1305.16
1284.96
1289.73
1283.50
1313.25
1295.32
11.81
25 %
4
56
1296.21
1268.17
1275.68
1310.05
1285.12
1287.05
14.85
25 %
4
64
1252.89
1275.29
1272.09
1270.97
1277.77
1269.80
8.79
25 %
12
48
1371.88
1279.79
1277.81
1351.71
1379.95
1332.23
44.59
25 %
12
56
1350.99
1303.68
1303.04
1302.17
1323.31
1316.64
18.90
25 %
12
64
1268.35
1236.12
1277.80
1333.85
1252.93
1273.81
33.19
25 %
20
48
1339.25
1339.91
1359.68
1303.66
1274.57
1323.41
30.38
25 %
20
56
1257.84
1284.88
1287.38
1304.24
1246.69
1276.21
20.95
25 %
20
64
1263.16
1237.79
1241.58
1285.85
1271.03
1259.88
18.07
7.5 %
4
56
1353.62
1278.37
1338.45
1349.73
1259.21
1315.87
39.24
10 %
0
56
1246.49
1279.41
1258.49
1291.48
1241.15
1263.40
19.24
10 %
4
68
1247.38
1226.67
1258.19
1215.68
1279.48
1245.48
22.64
Mathias Nikolaj Linderod Albrechtsen
Page 58 of 67
==PAGE:63==
DTU Management
Inst86_90
Grouping
Max
Destroy
Min
Max
1
2
3
4
5
Mean
object
Std.
dev.
10 %
4
48
3999.60
3715.41
3050.35
3538.57
3393.89
3539.56
354.65
10 %
4
56
3345.64
3095.08
3331.44
3832.19
3114.09
3343.69
297.20
10 %
4
64
3367.31
4133.03
3351.16
2860.01
3276.46
3397.59
460.33
10 %
12
48
3189.95
3477.65
3401.07
3679.04
3710.97
3491.74
213.68
10 %
12
56
3337.11
3096.24
3405.48
3951.58
4093.13
3576.71
425.67
10 %
12
64
3185.48
3036.91
3654.61
3220.08
3541.39
3327.69
259.28
10 %
20
48
3527.29
3746.12
3432.53
3375.71
3707.20
3557.77
163.98
10 %
20
56
3690.59
4967.37
3789.14
3331.62
3247.76
3805.29
689.03
10 %
20
64
3696.35
3533.41
3142.89
3442.46
3366.12
3436.25
205.01
15 %
4
48
3759.28
3824.71
3622.13
4233.76
3265.60
3741.10
350.10
15 %
4
56
3092.21
3372.52
3616.35
3524.95
3374.12
3396.03
199.06
15 %
4
64
3314.65
3385.05
3794.34
4335.56
3090.32
3583.98
491.16
15 %
12
48
3707.10
3576.84
3851.40
3977.62
3673.34
3757.26
157.74
15 %
12
56
3709.63
3819.58
3237.55
4632.17
3290.50
3737.89
560.74
15 %
12
64
3714.04
3119.62
3580.10
3059.16
2921.35
3278.85
346.97
15 %
20
48
3578.32
4918.96
4121.37
3548.05
4281.09
4089.56
565.73
15 %
20
56
4355.56
3578.15
3563.98
4115.61
3487.42
3820.14
390.15
15 %
20
64
3420.87
3226.78
4116.79
3552.23
3342.31
3531.79
347.81
20 %
4
48
4310.77
3790.68
4162.29
4102.21
4249.57
4123.10
202.29
20 %
4
56
4950.02
3888.94
4493.22
3999.84
4268.62
4320.13
423.64
20 %
4
64
4178.06
3743.29
3741.72
3569.45
4146.29
3875.76
271.07
20 %
12
48
4423.91
3543.89
4091.65
3736.20
3214.90
3802.11
470.72
20 %
12
56
4258.60
3796.80
4412.21
3607.50
4258.48
4066.72
345.21
20 %
12
64
3905.42
3449.89
3745.01
3708.13
4186.19
3798.93
271.24
20 %
20
48
3160.38
3468.24
4365.33
4221.93
3292.28
3701.63
553.67
20 %
20
56
3734.69
4252.08
3220.09
4434.01
3589.93
3846.16
495.07
20 %
20
64
3745.20
3900.73
3986.69
3468.02
3065.93
3633.31
373.55
25 %
4
48
3905.34
4206.53
3496.18
3311.48
3992.78
3782.46
368.42
25 %
4
56
4125.32
4500.99
4226.35
4828.26
3946.02
4325.39
345.50
25 %
4
64
4839.54
4499.59
4214.46
4204.53
4237.01
4399.03
274.91
25 %
12
48
5261.03
3534.61
4143.17
4574.01
4486.11
4399.79
631.25
25 %
12
56
4160.04
4435.95
3.933
4285.07
3980.72
4158.90
209.52
25 %
12
64
4625.33
4138.55
4233.79
3927.07
3825.00
4149.95
311.61
25 %
20
48
4406.27
4292.12
4391.68
3888.91
4265.02
4248.80
210.28
25 %
20
56
3675.50
4176.87
3840.15
3720.86
3763.77
3835.43
200.28
25 %
20
64
4347.35
4193.68
4549.91
4018.33
4043.03
4230.46
222.03
7.5 %
4
56
3092.93
3726.19
3521.08
3977.20
4001.34
3663.75
374.93
10 %
0
56
3121.03
3561.20
3378.23
4341.23
3701.30
3620.62
457.67
10 %
4
68
3357.02
4217.85
4560.74
4458.60
4130.81
4145.00
473.71
Mathias Nikolaj Linderod Albrechtsen
Page 59 of 67
==PAGE:64==
DTU Management
Inst39_180
Grouping
Max
Destroy
Min
Max
1
2
3
4
5
Mean
object
Std.
dev.
10 %
4
48
8033.90
7771.86
8267.82
8453.06
7998.77
8105.08
234.51
10 %
4
56
8509.44
8132.44
8143.18
8110.83
8054.16
8190.01
162.65
10 %
4
64
8312.04
8241.85
8692.97
8105.54
8403.27
8351.13
196.65
10 %
12
48
8034.39
8348.02
8112.90
8242.38
9072.48
8362.03
371.12
10 %
12
56
9160.31
8002.31
7829.10
8809.30
8749.00
8510.01
508.13
10 %
12
64
7674.51
8296.41
9060.01
7806.21
8591.63
8285.75
509.26
10 %
20
48
8284.49
9176.43
9147.01
8402.70
8653.65
8732.86
370.02
10 %
20
56
8112.42
7951.84
7938.77
8358.23
8530.44
8178.34
232.11
10 %
20
64
7603.94
8910.34
8405.03
8525.84
8328.33
8354.69
425.42
15 %
4
48
7974.32
8575.06
8369.28
8358.10
8257.26
8306.80
195.70
15 %
4
56
8364.48
9034.55
8168.58
9241.66
8104.68
8582.79
466.05
15 %
4
64
8820.03
9155.86
7845.57
9520.30
8165.71
8701.49
618.16
15 %
12
48
9943.20
8216.20
8502.21
8775.09
7962.17
8679.77
688.00
15 %
12
56
8036.42
8217.70
9628.89
8333.00
8298.82
8502.97
572.24
15 %
12
64
9975.11
8305.63
7966.87
8454.97
8615.10
8663.53
689.86
15 %
20
48
9300.30
8239.77
8347.93
9305.92
8054.39
8649.66
541.74
15 %
20
56
9212.97
8426.23
9205.25
8518.74
7716.95
8616.03
558.10
15 %
20
64
8554.35
8949.52
10203.47
8035.56
9205.61
8989.70
724.07
20 %
4
48
9431.56
9254.79
7944.24
9520.05
8863.86
9002.90
575.28
20 %
4
56
8706.71
9295.31
8614.72
8900.68
8248.09
8753.10
344.13
20 %
4
64
8206.12
7985.18
9568.96
8050.72
9277.83
8617.76
668.07
20 %
12
48
9423.11
8862.18
8955.35
8038.81
8803.95
8816.68
445.94
20 %
12
56
8910.10
8432.50
9417.70
8880.96
10793.33
9286.92
815.25
20 %
12
64
8939.46
8246.05
8993.54
8253.34
7928.01
8472.08
420.79
20 %
20
48
8156.02
8255.36
9584.71
9420.33
8492.17
8781.72
600.84
20 %
20
56
8822.81
9093.47
9311.95
9492.57
8900.58
9124.28
250.09
20 %
20
64
9826.57
8900.22
9393.85
9304.11
8749.53
9234.86
381.50
25 %
4
48
9153.35
9569.49
9326.48
9183.14
8759.48
9198.39
264.21 -’
25 %
4
56
8294.81
7880.00
8547.40
8930.72
8591.20
8448.83
349.14
25 %
4
64
8599.83
8215.96
8368.18
8513.06
9380.30
8615.47
404.09
25 %
12
48
8350.75
7866.10
8578.16
8936.28
8125.82
8371.42
368.21
25 %
12
56
8798.73
9715.93
8770.29
9868.79
9190.29
9268.81
455.10
25 %
12
64
8989.86
9840.98
7914.05
9311.22
9276.68
9066.56
638.42
25 %
20
48
8261.54
9361.23
8843.87
8893.96
9215.62
8915.24
380.00
25 %
20
56
9307.52
8733.36
9536.07
7988.52
8811.49
8875.39
535.54
25 %
20
64
9514.61
8537.53
10045.54
9161.78
8353.56
9122.60
623.02
7.5 %
4
56
8239.28
10029.37
13505.94
9803.10
11582.47
10623.03
1785.40
10 %
0
56
9201.95
8721.40
8731.43
8584.25
8752.22
8798.25
210.36
10 %
4
68
8492.03
7855.44
8448.49
8428.81
7752.89
8195.53
321.53
Mathias Nikolaj Linderod Albrechtsen
Page 60 of 67
==PAGE:65==
DTU Management
A.2
Sensitivity analysis on change to molds and machines
Extra molds
Extra Machines
Instances
Average obj.
Average
iterations
Average obj.
Average
iterations
Inst19_30
40.1
44007.2
39.85
42856.4
Inst19_90
235.99
4953.6
129.14
7142.6
Inst19_180
682.18
1714.4
469.25
2249.6
Inst35_30
95.84
30971.6
95.81
36725.6
Inst35_90
546.83
3516.2
553.10
3867.0
Inst35_180
1930.16
619.2
1939.64
749.4
Inst39_30
80.19
26591.0
80.37
27579.0
Inst39_90
2167.36
3087.2
604.80
3942.6
Inst39_180
7886.85
724.8
1578.55
941.4
Inst86_30
248.06
12473.8
246.04
12187.0
Inst86_90
3334.86
1098.4
1380.62
1684.6
Inst86_180
52828.00
123.2
3936.20
508.4
Inst180_30
1224.31
4817.2
914.78
4621.4
Inst180_90
22801.03
1942.6
17424.02
2159.4
Inst180_180
12886.43
428.2
98428.64
393.8
Inst273_30
24.14
31132.6
24.13
33916.0
Inst273_90
6640.09
2590.6
6559.54
3635.4
Inst273_180
44679.37
592.8
45080.01
656.4
Inst439_30
1881.43
4007.0
1696.71
3312.2
Inst439_90
26234.58
150.6
13788.80
26.0
Inst439_180
174818.37
17.8
-
-
Mathias Nikolaj Linderod Albrechtsen
Page 61 of 67
==PAGE:66==
DTU Management
A.3
Sensitivity analysis on changes to manpower
33% Decrease
33% Increase
100% Increase
Instances
Avg. obj
Avg. Iter.
Avg. obj
Avg. Iter.
Avg. obj
Avg. Iter.
Inst19_30
39.29
48580.4
40.25
43235.0
40.31
46116.2
Inst19_90
237.94
5295.0
230.23
7258.8
237.54
5281.6
Inst19_180
679.04
1855.0
658.17
1949.2
654.43
1725.2
Inst35_30
95.71
34959.2
95.75
35415.0
95.74
28699.8
Inst35_90
549.99
4104.0
553.16
4028.8
546.15
2759.4
Inst35_180
1947.80
755.6
1945.50
698.0
1962.59
639.2
Inst39_30
79.48
28743.0
80.22
29935.2
80.74
28391.0
Inst39_90
2190.77
3194.6
2152.99
3082.4
2180.38
2967.8
Inst39_180
8382.27
785.8
8643.85
786.2
8365.75
760.8
Inst86_30
243.60
11347.8
242.37
11955.2
242.88
11451.4
Inst86_90
3630.86
1031.2
3483.98
1105.8
3388.51
1130.8
Inst86_180
50571.94
116.0
60524.42
120.8
52252.85
138.4
Inst180_30
1237.02
4717.0
1235.62
4877.2
1216.92
4589.2
Inst180_90
24734.63
931.4
22876.85
1939.2
22553.78
2158.6
Inst180_180
132024.76
288.2
127912.63
430.0
127066.13
521.2
Inst273_30
24.12
25043.6
18.11
35491.0
24.15
33813.4
Inst273_90
6664.04
3007.8
5185.10
4054.0
6293.54
4111.0
Inst273_180
45054.90
181.0
42737.25
787.2
44763.94
833.8
Inst439_30
2028.75
345.2
1518.78
1518.78
1858.61
4795.2
Inst439_90
60108.22
5.4
26495.58
260.0
25864.13
321.8
Inst439_180
-
-
152471.61
68.4
156202.44
63.6
Mathias Nikolaj Linderod Albrechtsen
Page 62 of 67
==PAGE:67==
DTU Management
A.4
Results from real-world instances
Instance
Scenario
Total
Cost
Backlog
Cost
Inventory
Cost
Holding
Cost
33.3% Decrease
2615.07
105.49
999.62
401.16
Base
2975.04
84.22
1021.34
760.68
33.3% Increase
2975.35
111.35
1018.72
736.48
Inst2665_30
100% Increase
2497.33
75.74
1017.33
295.46
33.3% Decrease
6634.56
576.81
3160.67
1788.28
Base
6654.47
529.17
3184.86
1831.64
33.3% Increase
6584.43
476.42
3137.16
1862.06
Inst2665_45
100% Increase
6575.07
552.42
3183.51
1730.34
Mathias Nikolaj Linderod Albrechtsen
Page 63 of 67
==PAGE:68==
DTU Management
References
[1]
Jon K. Wilbrecht and William B. Prescott. “The Inﬂuence of Setup Time on Job Shop
Performance”. In: (1969).
[2]
T. Prabhakar. “A Production Scheduling Problem with Sequencing Considerations”. In:
(1974).
[3]
A. M. Geoﬀrion and G. W. Graves. “Scheduling Parallel Production Lines with Changeover
Costs: Practical Application of a Quadratic Assignment/LP Approach”. In: (1976).
[4]
M. Florian, J. K. Lenstra, and A. H. G. Rinnooy Kan. “Deterministic Production Plan-
ning: Algorithms and Complexity”. In: (1980).
[5]
Gabriel R. Bitran and Horacio Hideki Yanasse. “Computational Complexity of the Ca-
pacitated Lot Size Problem”. In: (1981).
[6]
Vicki L. Smith-Daniels and Dwight E. Smith-Daniels. “A Mixed Integer Programming
Model for Lot Sizing and Sequencing Packaging Lines in the Process Industries”. In:
(1987).
[7]
Riyaz Sikora. “A genetic algorithm for integrating lot-sizing and sequencing in scheduling
a capacitated ﬂow line.” In: (1996).
[8]
Andreas Drexl and Alf Kimms. “Lot sizing and scheduling - Survey and extensions”. In:
(1997).
[9]
Bernhard Fleischmann and Herbert Meyr. “The general lotsizing and scheduling prob-
lem”. In: (1997).
[10]
Gerhard Schrimpf et al. “Record Breaking Optimization Results Using the Ruin and
Recreate Principle”. In: (1998).
[11]
Paul Shaw. “Using Constraint Programming and Local Search Methods to Solve Vehicle
Routing Problems”. In: (1998).
[12]
Ali Allahverdi, Jatinder N. D. Gupta, and Tariq Aldowaisan. “A review of scheduling
research involving setup considerations”. In: (1999).
[13]
Alistair R. Clark and Simon J. Clark. “Rolling-horizon lot-sizing when set-up times are
sequence-dependent”. In: (2000).
[14]
Herbert Meyr. “Simultaneous lotsizing and scheduling by combining local search with
dual reoptimization”. In: (2000).
[15]
Erik L. Demeulemeester and Willy S. Herroelen. Project Scheduling. Springer, 2002.
[16]
Herbert Meyr. “Simultaneous lotsizing and scheduling on parallel machines”. In: (2002).
[17]
Gary A. Kochenberger and Fred Glover. Handbook of metaheuristics. Kluwer Acad. Publ.,
2003.
Mathias Nikolaj Linderod Albrechtsen
Page 64 of 67
==PAGE:69==
DTU Management
[18]
Satyaki Ghosh Dastidar and Rakesh Nagi. “Scheduling injection molding operations with
multiple resource constraints and sequence dependent setup times and costs”. In: (2005).
[19]
Yves Pochet and Laurence A. Wolsey. Production Planning by Mixed Integer Program-
ming. Springer, 2006.
[20]
Stefan Ropke and David Pisinger. “An Adaptive Large Neighborhood Search Heuristic
for the Pickup and Delivery Problem with Time Windows”. In: (2006).
[21]
Raf Jans and Zeger Degraeve. “Meta-heuristics for dynamic lot sizing: A review and
comparison of solution approaches”. In: (2007).
[22]
David Pisinger and Stefan Ropke. “Large Neighborhood Search”. In: (2007).
[23]
Ali Allahverdi et al. “A survey of scheduling problems with setup times or costs”. In:
(2008).
[24]
Céline Gicquel, Michel Minoux, and Yves Dallery. “Capacitated Lot Sizing models: a
literature review”. In: (2008).
[25]
Claudio Fabiano Motta Toledo et al. “A genetic algorithm/mathematical programming
approach to solve a two-level soft drink production problem”. In: (2009).
[26]
Claudio Fabiano Motta Toledo et al. “Multi-Population Genetic Algorithm to Solve the
Synchronized and Integrated Two-Level Lot Sizing and Scheduling Problem”. In: (2009).
[27]
Laurent Flindt Muller. “Robust long-term production planning”. In: (2011).
[28]
PL. K. Palaniappan and N. Jawahar. “A genetic algorithm for simultaneous optimisation
of lot sizing and scheduling in a ﬂow line assembly”. In: (2011).
[29]
Gonçalo Figueira, Maristela Oliveira Santos, and Bernardo Almada-Lobo. “A hybrid VNS
approach for the short-term production planning and scheduling: A case study in the pulp
and paper industry”. In: (2013).
[30]
Christoph H. Glock, Eric H. Grosse, and Jörg M. Ries. “The lot sizing problem: A tertiary
study”. In: (2014).
[31]
Ali Allahverdi. “The third comprehensive survey on scheduling problems with setup
times/costs”. In: (2015).
[32]
Kseniya Schemeleva, Xavier Delorme, and Alexandre Dolgui. “A memetic algorithm for
a stochastic lot-sizing and sequencing problem”. In: (2015).
[33]
Iris Çağatay, Dario Pacino, and Stefan Ropke. “Improved formulations and an Adaptive
Large Neighborhood Search heuristic for the integrated berth allocation and quay crane
assignment problem”. In: (2017).
[34]
Karina Copil et al. “Simultaneous lotsizing and scheduling problems: a classiﬁcation and
review of models”. In: (2017).
[35]
Johan Maes, John O. McClain, and Luk N. Van Wassenhove. “Multilevel capacitated
lotsizing complexity and LP-based heuristics”. In: (2017).
Mathias Nikolaj Linderod Albrechtsen
Page 65 of 67
==PAGE:70==
DTU Management
[36]
Bryndis Stefansdottir, Martin Grunow, and Renzo Akkerman. “Classifying and modeling
setups and cleanings in lot sizing and scheduling”. In: (2017).
[37]
Karim Pérez Martínez, Reinaldo Morabito, and Eli Angela Vitor Toso. “A coupled process
conﬁguration, lot-sizing and scheduling model for production planning in the molded pulp
industry”. In: (2018).
[38]
Alberto Santini, Stefan Ropke, and Lars Magnus Hvattum. “A comparison of acceptance
criteria for the adaptive large neighbourhood search metaheuristic”. In: (2018).
[39]
Kseniya Schemeleva, Xavier Delorme, and Alexandre Dolgui. “Evaluation of solution
approaches for a stochastic lot-sizing and sequencing problem”. In: (2018).
[40]
Quang-Vinh Dang, Hana Rudová, and Cong Thanh Nguyen. “Adaptive large neighbor-
hood search for scheduling of mobile robots”. In: (2019).
[41]
Jerzy Duda. “A hybrid genetic algorithm and variable neighborhood search for multi-
family capacitated lot-sizing problem”. In: (2019).
[42]
Michel Gendreau and Jean-Yves Potvin. Handbook of Metaheuristics. Springer, 2019.
[43]
Marco Ghirardi and Andrea Amerio. “Metheuristics for the lot sizing problem with back-
ordering, setup carry-overs, and non-identical machines”. In: (2019).
[44]
Martin Wörbelauer, Herbert Meyr, and Bernardo Almada-Lobo. “Simultaneous lotsizing
and scheduling considering secondary resources: a general model, literature review and
classiﬁcation”. In: (2019).
[45]
CFI. Manufacturing. 2020.
[46]
Abolfazl Gharaei, Mostafa Karimi, and Seyed Ashkan Hoseini Shekarabi. “Joint economic
lot-sizing in multi-product multi-level integrated supply chains: Generalized benders de-
composition”. In: (2020).
[47]
M. Karimi-Nasab and S. M. Seyedhoseini. “Multi-level lot sizing and job shop scheduling
with compressible process times: A cutting plane approach”. In: (2020).
[48]
Cyril Koch et al. “A matheuristic approach for solving a simultaneous lot sizing and
scheduling problem with client prioritization in tire industry”. In: (2020).
[49]
Yasmín Á Ríos-Solís et al. “A heuristic based on mathematical programming for a lot-
sizing and scheduling problem in mold-injection production”. In: (2020).
[50]
Alyne Toscano, Deisemara Ferreira, and Reinaldo Morabito. “Formulation and MIP-
heuristics for the lot sizing and scheduling problem with temporal cleanings”. In: (2020).
[51]
K. I. Cervantes-Sanmiguel, M. J. Vargas-Flores, and O. J. Ibarra-Rojas. “A two-stage
sequential approach for scheduling with lot-sizing decisions in the context of plastic in-
jection systems”. In: (2021).
Mathias Nikolaj Linderod Albrechtsen
Page 66 of 67
==PAGE:71==
DTU Management
[52]
Global Market Insights. Injection Molded Plastics Market Size By Raw Material (Polystyrene,
HDPE, ABS, Polypropylene), By Application (Building & Construction, Automotive,
Consumables & Electronics, Packaging), Industry Analysis Report, Application Poten-
tial, Price Trends, Competitive Market Share & Forecast, 2021 – 2027. 2021.
[53]
Rujapa Nanthapodej et al. “Hybrid Diﬀerential Evolution Algorithm and Adaptive Large
Neighborhood Search to Solve Parallel Machine Scheduling to Minimize Energy Con-
sumption in Consideration of Machine-Load Balance”. In: (2021).
[54]
Achmad Pratama Rifai, Setyo Tri Windras Mara, and Andi Sudiarso. “Multi-objective
distributed reentrant permutation ﬂow shop scheduling with sequence-dependent setup
time”. In: (2021).
[55]
Tugba Sarac, Aydin Sipahioglu, and Emine Akyol Ozer. “A TWO-STAGE SOLUTION
APPROACH FOR PLASTIC INJECTION MACHINES SCHEDULING PROBLEM”.
In: (2021).
[56]
Pei Wang, Gerhard Reinelt, and Yuejin Tan. “Self-adaptive large neighborhood search
algorithm for parallel machine scheduling problems”. In: (2021).
[57]
Alejandro Mac Cawley et al. “Scheduling wine bottling operations with multiple lines
and sequence-dependent set-up times: Robust formulation and a decomposition solution
approach”. In: (2022).
[58]
Setyo Tri Windras Mara et al. “A survey of adaptive large neighborhood search algorithms
and applications”. In: (2022).
[59]
Achmad Pratama Rifai, Rachmadi Norcahyo, and Setyo Tri Windras Mara. “A two-stage
heuristic for the sequence-dependent job sequencing and tool switching problem”. In:
(2022).
[60]
The LEGO Group. Annual Report 2021. 2022.
Mathias Nikolaj Linderod Albrechtsen
Page 67 of 67
