==PAGE:1==
 
 
 
Speech and natural language 
processing for clinical in-the-wild 
data. 
 
 
 
 
Maria Garofalaki, s202378 
 
Supervisor: Line Katrine Harder Clemmensen 
Co-supervisor: Sneha Das 
 
 
 
 
Kgs.Lyngby, December 2022 
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
 
 
DTU Compute 
Department of Applied Mathematics 
and Computer Science 
Richard Petersens Plads 
Building 324 
2800 Kongens Lyngby 
Denmark 
Tel. +45 45 25 30 31
www.compute.dtu.dk
 
REG-no. DK 30 06 09 46  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Technical University of Denmark 
Department of DTU Compute 
Richard Petersens Plads, building 324 
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark 
Phone +45 45253031 
www.compute.dtu.dk 
 
==PAGE:4==
Preface
Kgs. Lyngby, December 27th, 2022.
Maria Garofalaki, s202378
M.Sc. student
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
In this thesis project I implement an Automatic Speech Recognition
(ASR) system in order to transcribe children voices in danish. More
specifically my test dataset consists of children in Denmark with
OCD and the recordings have been taken during their sessions with
their psychologist.
The whole implementation was based on the fine-tuning of "chcaa/xls-
r-300m-danish-nst-cv9"1 which is a Wav2Vec 2.0 model fine-tuned
for adults speaking in danish. Therefore,the main goal of this project
is to improve this particular model to transcribe children’s voices in
addition to adults.
The whole pipeline process can be described in summary with the
following steps. Firstly data pre-processing is implemented in or-
der to convert the data into a form that is acceptable as input to
the baseline model. If the input data contained adult voices a data
augmentation schema is performed to make adult voices sound like
children. I experiment with two basic dataset throughout this the-
sis Danpass dataset which contains only adult voices and Plunkett
corpus which contains children of very young age.
The second part and the most important is fine-tuning of the base-
1https://huggingface.co/chcaa/xls-r-300m-danish-nst-cv9
==PAGE:6==
iii
model. Initially, a data augmentation scheme is performed in each
input batch in order to avoid the phenomenon of overfitting.
In
addition I experimented with two different methods to overcome
the issue of Catastrophic forgetting during continual-learning, the
Weight freezing and the Elastic weight consolidation.
Finally for the decoding process I boost my Wav2Vec 2.0 model
with a Language model. The final results I was able to achieve is a
20% improvement of my model in transcribing the model children’s
voices compared to the baseline model.
==PAGE:7==
Acknowledgements
I would like to express my deepest gratitude to my Supervisor Line
Katrine Harder Clemmensen and my Co-supervisor Sneha Das, who
helped me throughout the implementation of this thesis project.
Their guidance and advice carried me through all the stages of writ-
ing my project and I would not be able to get my work done without
their continual support.
A special thanks to Nicole Nadine Lønfeldt for giving me access to
my test data and Nina Grønnum for giving me access to Danpass
corpus. Thanks should also go to people who proof-read my thesis
and helped me with the final corrections.
==PAGE:8==
Contents
Preface
i
Abstract
ii
Acknowledgements
iv
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Automatic Speech Recognition Systems . . . . . . . .
2
1.2
Wav2Vec 2.0 models
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.3
Transfer learning from adults to children . . . . . . .
5
1.4
Data Augmentation in ASR Systems
. . . . . . . . .
6
1.5
Catastrophic Forgetting
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
1.6
Language Models in ASR Systems . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2
Theory
10
2.1
Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.2
Wav2Vec2 models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.3
Connectionist Temporal Classification . . . . . . . . .
17
2.4
Language Models (LM) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
2.4.1
N-gram models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
2.5
Decoding . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
2.6
Catastrophic Forgetting
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
2.6.1
Weight Freezing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
==PAGE:9==
vi
CONTENTS
2.6.2
Elastic weight consolidation . . . . . . . . . .
33
3
Method
37
3.1
Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
3.2
Pre-trained Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
3.3
Datasets . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
3.3.1
Danpass dataset . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
3.3.2
CHILDES Danish Plunkett Corpus . . . . . .
42
3.3.3
Danish Children clinical Dataset . . . . . . . .
43
3.3.4
Common Voice dataset . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
3.3.5
alvenir_asr_da_eval Dataset . . . . . . . . .
44
3.4
Data Augmentations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
3.4.1
Data Augmentations for child speech . . . . .
45
3.4.2
Data Augmentations for real life recording con-
ditions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
3.5
Catastrophic Forgetting and continual learning . . . .
50
3.5.1
Weight freezing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
3.5.2
Elastic Weight Consolidation
. . . . . . . . .
52
3.6
Language Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
3.6.1
Dataset for the Language Model . . . . . . . .
53
3.6.2
Building of the 5-gram with KenLM
. . . . .
54
3.7
Model Interpretability
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
4
Experiment results
60
4.1
Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
60
4.2
Summary of the results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
64
4.3
Evaluating on Danish Children clinical Dataset[3.3.3]
70
4.4
Compare models with and without data-augmentation 71
4.4.1
Data Augmentations for child speech . . . . .
71
4.4.2
Data Augmentations for real life recording con-
ditions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
72
4.4.3
Combine both type of augmentations . . . . .
75
4.4.4
Evaluating for Catastrophic Forgetting . . . .
76
4.5
Resolving Catastrophic Forgetting . . . . . . . . . . .
77
4.5.1
Continual learining with weight freezing . .
79
==PAGE:10==
CONTENTS
vii
4.5.2
Continual learning with Elastic Weight con-
solidation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
81
4.6
Fine-tuning with Plunkett dataset (using EWC) . . .
84
4.7
Continue fine-tuning of [4.5.2] using Plunkett dataset
86
4.8
Boosting Wav2Vec2 with 5-grams . . . . . . . . . . .
88
4.9
Interpreting Best-result model (model vol. 3) . . . . .
89
4.9.1
Visualizing Feature Extraction . . . . . . . . .
89
4.9.2
Visualizing Positional Convolutions Embedding 90
4.9.3
Visualizing Attention Matrices . . . . . . . . .
92
5
Conclusion
94
5.1
Overall conclusions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
94
5.2
Future research . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
95
Bibliography
97
Appendix
100
==PAGE:11==
Chapter 1
Introduction
Automatic speech recognition (ASR) is the technology that enables
the automatic conversion of human speech (speech signals) into text.
In recent years the field of speech recognition (SR) has received more
and more attention from researchers and great progress has been
made in this area. Nevertheless, most studies on this topic focus
on the creation of ASR models based exclusively on adult voice
transcription. Therefore, the field of children’s voice recognition by
those specific systems is an open research area as it has just started
to receive the attention it deserves.
Performing automatic speech recognition on children’s voices is a
particularly difficult task due to the great diversity of children voices
from adults. These differences lie in the different physiology of chil-
dren compared to adults, as well as the fact that young children have
not yet developed all their linguistic abilities. In addition there is a
problem in finding child data suitable for training these systems in
a language like Danish, which is not that universally used.
==PAGE:12==
2
Introduction
In this particular thesis I tried to solve the above problems and in-
vestigate the possibilities of ASR systems to transcribe the voices of
children from a clinical population (children with OCD), who speak
Danish while they are in a session with a psychologist. Therefore, as
can be seen from the above, my project has the following difficulties.
Firstly the big issue of transcribing children’s voices as this is an
open research task. In addition, finding the appropriate data for
the training of the specific systems.
In order to train an Auto-
matic speech recognition system on children’s voices, both audio
files containing children’s voices and also their one-to-one transcrip-
tion has to be used. Unfortunately in small languages like Danish
such data is very hard to find. Finally, the fact that I am trying
to transcribe children’s voices from a clinical population (children
with OCD) shows a measure of difficulty in this particular project
as during the sessions with the psychologists medical terminologies
are used in which the model has not been trained on, especially con-
sidering that the data was obtained in an uncontrolled in-the-wild
environment.
In this specific chapter I will outline the basic elements that were
necessary for the implementation of this master thesis project. By
continuing the reading of the next chapters the reader will be able to
understand, these concepts as they will be studied both theoretically
and practically, on the specific test case that I am examining.
1.1
Automatic Speech Recognition Sys-
tems
In recent years, Speech recognition technology has radically emerged
into people’s everyday life through applications such as virtual as-
sistants (Siri) and voice recognition. These applications are used
both on personal devices such as mobile phones and computers, as
==PAGE:13==
1.1 Automatic Speech Recognition Systems
3
well as in contact centers, cars, hospitals, and restaurants . In ad-
dition, it significantly contributes to the productivity of companies
by offering, application efficiency, and even digital accessibility.
As mentioned above the technology of speech recognition is the abil-
ity of AI machines to automatically transcribe human speech (audio
signal) into written text. This technique can be implemented either
by using traditional statistical algorithms such as Hidden Markov
models (HMM) and dynamic time warping (DTW) or through deep
neural networks which have revolutionized those systems.
Traditionally an ASR pipeline consists of the following steps: a)Data
pre-processing and feature extraction, b) The acoustic model, c) De-
coding usually by using a Language model. The Data pre-processing
part is like a spectogram generator converting the signal to frequency
domain and extracting all the important acoustic features which are
going to be passed as inputs to the following acoustic model. This
model outputs a matrix of probabilities of characters over time-steps.
Those probabilities are then used as input to the language model (or
any other possible decoder) for the generation of possible sentences.
Although the specific pipeline has changed with the evolution of
these systems, its basic structure remains the same.
Nowadays, this technology is implemented exclusively with neural
networks, the reason why this implementation prevailed over more
traditional algorithms is due to improvements in performance and
accuracy. Modern automatic speech recognition systems are way
more accurate in understanding different voices, dialects and con-
tent, and are much more robust in noisy environments. However,
such good performances do not come without a cost, as for it’s train-
ing it requires a large amount of transcribed audio data and many
hours of training.
==PAGE:14==
4
Introduction
1.2
Wav2Vec 2.0 models
As mentioned above most state of the art ASR models need huge
amount of data in order to have a decent performance. In addition,
training with such a huge data load requires the use of very powerful
GPUs which are not widely available to every user. Unfortunately
in this particular project, finding sufficient transcribed audio data
for such a sophisticated population as children and in such a small
language as Danish is a really hard task.
For the above reasons, we can understand why the use of Wav2vec2
models and unsupervised learning in general, had gained ground in
recent years compared to the traditional supervised neural networks
for automatic speech recognition.
Wav2vec 2.0 is a pretrained model for Automatic Speech Recogni-
tion (ASR) which learns contextualized speech representations by
randomly masking feature vectors before passing them to a trans-
former network during self-supervised pre-training (like BERT’s masked
language modeling objective). In other words the model is trained
to predict the correct speech unit for masked parts of the audio,
while at the same time is learning what the speech units should be.
The pre-training part requires a large computational cost as several
hours of raw audio are required in order for the system to learn gen-
eral data representations. However, this process requires un-labeled
data, i.e. raw audio without transcription, which is relatively easy
to find.
For the fine-tuning process a single linear layer is added on top of the
pre-trained network. The training of the model is continued using
labeled data. A Connectionist Temporal Classification (CTC) loss
is used for the downstream of speech recognition tasks.
During pre-training this model acquires the ability to make con-
textualized speech representations. In addition, the process of fine-
==PAGE:15==
1.3 Transfer learning from adults to children
5
tuning does not require a large amount of transcribed data, for the
model to become capable of solving a more specific task, for that
reason, it is the best case model for this task where the data is hard
to be found. More specifically in this project we use a pre-trained
model in order to exploit the already acquired knowledge of speech
units in danish, which are going to be common between adult and
children’s speech.
1.3
Transfer learning from adults to chil-
dren
The process of transfer learning is a machine learning method that
makes it possible to use the information that was retrieved by an old
task in a new target task. In other words during transfer learning,
the knowledge acquired from the source task is used in order to
develop and improve the learning of the new target task through
fine-tuning (transfer learning).
As mentioned in the previous unit, the great advantage of the wav2vec2
model is that it has the ability to learn information about a lan-
guage through pre-training on unlabeled data and then to deepen
its knowledge on a specific task, having as a starting point the al-
ready acquired knowledge.
In this thesis project I am trying to explore the effectiveness of
transfer learning in the case of adult to children speech and exploit
the similarities between adult and children voices.
As I mention
in the beginning of this section, most state-of-the-art ASR mod-
els are trained on adult voices, and therefore perform very poorly
when asked to transcribe children’s voices. This is due to spectral
and temporal variability, due to the physiological and developmental
differences of children. Secondly, there is variability in kids pronun-
ciation patterns, due to differing and partial linguistic knowledge
==PAGE:16==
6
Introduction
[16].
In other words to fill in the performance gap between adult and
children voices, the method of transfer-learning is the most promis-
ing one, because apart from the basic differences there are certainly
many similarities between those two voices groups. In addition, due
to the lack of children’s transcribed audio data in Danish, it is really
useful to recover as much common information as possible from the
adult data, which will help as a basis for solving the target task.
1.4
Data Augmentation in ASR Systems
The data augmentation technique is a method that processes copies
of a dataset in order to construct variations from it, to reduce the
problem of overfitting. In other words this method gives the abil-
ity to artificially increase the dataset by generating new audio files
from existing ones. More specifically data augmentation uses dif-
ferent transformation methods to add small changes to the audio
file. The objective of augmented data can vary between use cases.
This particular technique is more a choice of the developer mak-
ing the model rather than a well-established process, and choosing
the wrong augmentations can cause irreparable damage to the final
result.
In the case that I am considering in the specific project (transcribe
audio of children’s voices in Danish) the data I have available is very
little, therefore this makes the need for data augmentation imper-
ative. More specifically, I am study the use of data augmentation
in order to achieve two different goals. First, I use data augmenta-
tion methods in order to bring the voices of adults (since we have
a larger amount of data of this type available) closer to children’s
voices. More specifically, I implemented formants, pitch and dura-
tion modifications on adult voices in order to study whether fine-
==PAGE:17==
1.5 Catastrophic Forgetting
7
tuning with this augmented data can increase the performance of the
final model in transcribing children’s voices. For the second type of
data augmentation I try to make the dataset more generic. More
specifically, I use techniques like simulating room reverbration and
adding background noise to the audio file in order to simulate real
audio file recording conditions. Moreover due to the lack of different
speakers in the dataset it is very important to change some audio
files in order to simulate the voice of many different speakers. The
augmentations that I had used to archive that is a combination of
pitch shifting, audio duration changing and apply different gain to
the audio. All of the above have been shown in previous studies
to increase the performance of ASR models and protect the models
from overfitting.
1.5
Catastrophic Forgetting
As I have already mention, in this specific thesis project I am trying
to study the effectiveness of fine-tuning an ASR model pre-trained
on adults with children voices (or with adult voices modified to
sound like children’s).
However, these two sets of data (children
to adult audio files) are quite different from each other, children
voices have higher fundamental and formant frequencies, greater
spectral variability, slower average speaking rate, higher variability
in speaking rate and higher degree of spontaneity.
Due to these large differences between the data of the source task
and the target task, during the implementation of the fine-tuning
of the baseline model, the problem of catastrophic forgetting was
observed. Catastrophic forgetting or Catastrophic inference is a well
known problem of neural networks which is encountered during fine-
tuning.
More specifically, the neural networks during continuous
learning tend to forget the previous acquired information (from pre-
training) in order to gain new one. During the implementation of my
==PAGE:18==
8
Introduction
experiments I noticed that when I was preforming fine-tuning of the
model, it started to forget how to transcribe adult voices (previous
acquired information) in order to learn how to transcribe children’s
voices (new knowledge).
To solve this particular problem I tried two different techniques.
Firstly I tried the method of Weight Freezing. With this method
specific layers of the model are frozen, so that their parameters to
remain unchanged during the fine-tuning process. It is very impor-
tant to freeze the correct layers of the neural network, which are
the layers that contain important information for the pre-training
task. In that way the parameters of those layers do not get modified
during fine-tuning but retain their initial values. For this reason
I carried out several experiments by freezing different parts of the
model, perform fine-tuning and checking the performance of the new
models on the previous task.
The second method that I tried is called Elastic Weight Consoli-
dation (EWC), which is a regularization technique that is designed
to prevent the model from forgetting important parameters learned
during initial training while acquiring new knowledge during fine-
tuning. More specifically it adds a regularization term to the loss
function of the ASR model to make the parameters of the new task
(transcribe of children voices) closer to the important parameters
of the pre-trained model trained on the old task (transcription of
adult voices). Firstly the Fisher Information matrix of the model’s
parameters is calculated and then it’s diagonal elements are used
to get information about the parameters that are important to the
previous task (task A) in order to apply higher weights on them.
For this reason during fine-tuning, the weights that have smaller
values in the diagonal Fisher information matrix where basically get
changed as these do not affect the prior knowledge that much.
==PAGE:19==
1.6 Language Models in ASR Systems
9
1.6
Language Models in ASR Systems
Language models have always been an important part of an ASR
pipeline. In recent years with the development of Transformers this
part is usually omitted from the ASR pipeline as the transform-
ers are able to understand the representation context of the audio
files. However, it has been proven that the language model offers a
lot to the performance of ASR systems even if it is an end-to-end
ASR system like Wav2Vec 2.0, therefore, omitting it reduces models
performance.
Decoding an audio file without using a Language model is very likely
to result in spelling errors in the transcription. This is because most
end-to-end ASR models base their prediction solely on the decoding
of the audio input. So they do not pay attention to the previous
and next characters of the output during decoding in order to form
a sentence that makes linguistic sense.
Therefore, due to the above, it is very useful to use a Language
model in order to support the acoustic model (Wav2vec 2.0). The
basic function of a good language model is to be able to successfully
predict the next letter of the output of the acoustic model given all
previously transcribed words regardless of the audio input given to
the speech recognition system. One of the language models that is
used a lot in modern ASR systems is the N-gram language model.
The basic idea behind n-gram models is very simple, in short it
accepts n −1 words as input and it predicts the probability of the
n-th word.
==PAGE:20==
Chapter 2
Theory
2.1
Introduction
In the previous chapter, all the main parts that are going to be
studied in this thesis project were introduced in a few words. In
this chapter, more importance will be given to the theoretical back-
ground of these elements, in order to make those concepts easier to
understand during the practical part of the project which are going
to be introduced to the following chapters.
More specifically the specific chapter begun by describing in detail
the model that it is going to be used throughout the specific the-
sis project. Basically, the individual pieces of the Wav2Vec2 model
are analyzed as well as their functionality. In addition an extensive
reference is made to the loss function for the implementation of the
fine-tuning of the specific model as well as to the final decoding pro-
cess. Therefore, different decoding methods are listed, with special
emphasis on beam search and the Language model.
==PAGE:21==
2.2 Wav2Vec2 models
11
Finally, reference is made to the problem of Catastrophic forgetting
and two methods of resolving this issue are analyzed theoretically,
the method of Weight Freezing and the method of Elastic Weight
Consolidation.
2.2
Wav2Vec2 models
In order to achieve the desired results, most state of the art speech
recognition systems require thousands of hours of transcribed audio.
Unfortunately, in the case that I am examining, i.e.
transcribed
audio of children’s voices in Danish, this task is almost impossible
as the data available for free of children speaking danish is very
little.
In order to solve the big issue of missing transcribed audio data I
chose to use the Wav2Vec 2.0 architecture. The specific architec-
ture is based on self-supervised learning in order for the model to
learn to recognize general data representations. More specifically
Wav2Vec 2.0 gets pre-trained on a large amount of untranscribed
audio, and then fine-tuned with a smaller amount of transcribed
audio. This particular architecture uses Transformer’s encoder and
a similar training objective to BERT’s masked language model but
adapted to accept audio as input.
In this chapter I will describe the architecture of the model as well
as its main parts. I will mainly focus on the fine-tuning part as it is
what I am implementing in this particular thesis project. The figure
bellow [11] gives a good intuition of the architecture and how the
different parts of the model are connected together.
==PAGE:22==
12
Theory
Figure 2.1: wav2vec2.0 Architecture [11]
In the above architecture we can identify four semantic blocks which
are: the feature encoder, context network, quantization mod-
ule, and the contrastive loss (pre-training objective) and will be
analyzed more thoroughly later in this chapter.
Feature encoder:
This is the first block of the specific model and therefore accepts
an input of raw unprocessed audio file. Its main job is therefore to
reduce the dimensions of the specific file as the audio signals con-
sist of a very large number of time steps. The specific architecture
consists of 7 temporal convolutional layers which convert the
audio signal into a sequence of feature vectors 20 milliseconds each
[4]. The total stride of the encoder determines the number of time-
steps T which are input to the Transformer [2] . In addition, the
kernel width and the strides of the temporal convolutional layers
decreases successively in the deepest layers of Feature encoder.
I present a figure [4] which illustrates the whole part of the model
explained above.
==PAGE:23==
2.2 Wav2Vec2 models
13
Figure 2.2: wav2vec2.0 Feature encoder [4]
Contextualized representations with Transformers:
In order for the model to understand relative positional informa-
tion and how the different timesteps of the entire sequence relate to
each other, the output of the Feature encoder is fed as input to a
system with a transformers architecture. According to [4] it is the
core block Wav2Vec 2.0 model which takes as an input the latten
feature vectors mentioned above and process it through a block of
Transformers.
More specifically, the output of the feature encoder, the latent repre-
sentations is fed to the Transformer network to build contextualized
representations for the entire sequence z1...zT−> c1...cT. The first
part of the encoder block is a Positional Convolutional Embed-
ding which consists of a convolutional layer which functions as a
relative positional embedding [2]. It’s purpose is to create a relative
==PAGE:24==
14
Theory
positional embedding for each projected representation.
I present the architecture of the transformer block of my model as
it was presented in the paper [3].
Figure 2.3: The transformer model architecture [3]
The Transformer is an architecture that offers great computational
efficiency through parallelization and replaces the classic recurrent
neural network in order to draw global dependencies between the en-
tire sequence. It uses an attention mechanism which relates different
positions of a single sequence in order to compute a representation
of the sequence [3]. The encoding component stacks 24 encoders on
top of each other which have exactly the same structure but different
weights.
Therefore the input initially enters from a self-attention layer
which enables the encoder to look for other time steps of the input
==PAGE:25==
2.2 Wav2Vec2 models
15
sequence as it performs encoding during a specific time-step. Then
the output of the self-attention layer enters a feed-forward neural
network.The time step in each position flows through its own path
in the encoder.
I give in details the information of multi-head self attention mecha-
nism [3]:
Figure 2.4: Scaled Dot-Product Attention (right). Multi-head Attention
[3]
The main components of the attention mechanism are:
• The matrices Q,K and V that pack together sets of queries,
keys, and values, respectively.
• W Q, W K, W V which are projection matrices to generate sub-
space for Q,K and V.
• W O which is the projection matrix of the multi-head output.
==PAGE:26==
16
Theory
As we see in picture 2.5, for the Scaled Dot-Product Attention (left),
first the dot product of Q and K is calculated and the result is
divided by the square root of their dimension. Finally, the softmax
of the result of the above operation is calculated in order to receive
the weights which will then scale the values V.
In other words, the matrix of the outputs of the attention mechanism
is computed as:
Attention(Q, K, V ) = softmax(QKT
√dk
)V
(2.1)
This score determines how much focus to place on other parts of the
input sentence as it encodes a token at a certain position.
Wav2vec 2.0 model uses a Multi-Head attention mechanism which
allows the model to receive information from different temporal sub
spaces in parallel, and then concatenate the information of differ-
ent sub spaces to one in order to get the relationship of the whole
sequence. More specifically Multi-Head attention mechanism per-
forms attention function in parallel for linearly projected queries,
keys and values h times with different, learned linear projections
[3]. As it is clear from the figure [2.5], for the Multi-head Attention
(right) case, the multi-head attention function can be calculated as
follows:
MultiHead(Q, K, V ) = Concat(head1, ..., headh)W o
(2.2)
where:
headi = Attention(QW Q
i , KW K
i , V W V
i )
(2.3)
Where the projections are parameter matrices W Q
i ∈Rdmodelxdk, W K
i
∈
Rdmodelxdk, W V
i
∈Rdmodelxdv [3] where each headi for i = 0, ..., h im-
plements a single attention function 2.1 characterized by its own
==PAGE:27==
2.3 Connectionist Temporal Classification
17
learned projection matrices. In my model I have h = 16 heads /
parallel attention layers.
In other words firstly the linearly projected versions of the queries,
keys, and values are computed for each head by multiplying their
values with weights matrices W Q
i , W K
i
and W V
i
respectively. Then
the Scaled Dot-Product Attention is computed, using equation 2.1.
Finally the output for each head are concatenated and multiplied
with the weight matrix W O to get the final results.
Quantization module:
I will not analyze this specific part of the model as extensively as the
previous two as it is only used for the pre-training of the wav2vec 2.0
model, which I did not carry out. In other words I use a pre-trained
model to directly proceed to the fine-tuning process. This part of the
model helps Wav2vec 2.0 during pre-training to learn the individual
speech units self-supervised by sampling from the Gumbel-Softmax
distribution. First the codewords sampled from codebooks (groups).
Then these codewords constitute the possible units which are then
concatenated to form the final speech unit.
2.3
Connectionist Temporal Classification
Fine-tuning an ASR model is a relatively difficult process due to the
fact that an aligment of the audio file to it’s corresponding transcript
has to be made. The input sequence (audio) has different size from
the sequence of the output transcript and it depends on the rate of
the speaker’s speech, therefore it is not something fixed.
The Connectionist Temporal Classification (CTC) [9, 1] gives a so-
lution to this hard task. It provides a mapping between the input
sequences X and the corresponding output sequences Y . In other
==PAGE:28==
18
Theory
words CTC is an algorithm that is used to train neural networks for
sequence-to-sequence problems.
More specifically the model maximizes the probability p(Y |X). So
for a given input, the model is train to maximize the probability
that assigns the correct token to the output, that means solving:
Y ∗= argmaxY p(Y |X)
(2.4)
The CTC loss approximates the solution to this problem by taking
the sum of all probabilities of all possible alignments between the
input and the output.
The basic alignment issues are:
• The different length between the input and the output.
• The audio file usually has intervals of silence where no speaker
speaks so there is no corresponding output.
• Many words contain repeated characters such as the word hello
To solve the above issues, CTC loss has introduced the blank token
’<pad>’ which does not corresponds to any label and it is simply
removed from the output. With this trick both the input and the
output have exactly the same length.
For the algorithm to realise repeated characters a blank token is
inserted between them.
Another important property is that the
alignment of X and Y is many-to-one. This implies that the input
sequence X cannot be grater than the output sequence Y .
With all this in mind CTC provide the possibility to go from prob-
abilities at each time step to the probability of an output sequence.
==PAGE:29==
2.3 Connectionist Temporal Classification
19
Therefore the final alignment is obtained after the characters that
are repeated without a’ <pad>’ between them were merged and of
course by removing the ’<pad>’ tokens in the end.
To sum up all the above, the steps of CTC algorithms are the fol-
lowing [9]:
1. The ASR model gets the input sequence (audio file) and out-
puts a distribution over the outputs for each input
time step pt(α|X)
2. The probabilities of different sequences are computed us-
ing this output distribution for each time step.
3. The final distribution over the output is computed by marginal-
izing over a set of valid alignments
More specifically the objective function is computed as:
p(Y |X) =
X
A∈AX,Y
TY
t=1
pt(αt|X)
(2.5)
Where pt(αt|X) is the probability of a single time-step in the se-
quence. QT
t=1 pt(αt|X) is the probability for a single alignment (the
product of the probabilities of all time-steps in the sequence), and by
summing over all possible alignments the marginalization over a set
of valid alignments is computed. At this point, it is assumed that the
probabilities of each time-step are independent of each other (which
is not the case in reality as the tokens of a word are directly related
to each other) and for this reason the alignment can be calculated
as the product of the above possibilities. An example for possible
alliments could be: hello, ello, helo.
==PAGE:30==
20
Theory
The CTC score of the subsequence Z1:s after t input steps is denoted
as αs,t, so α is the score of the merged alignments at a given node.
From the α in the last time step the final CTC score P(Y |X) is
computed.
Those steps above have an important issue, the number of the align-
ments can be too big. CTC avoids this problem by using a dynamic
programming algorithm, in that way when two alignments have
the same output at the same time step they could be merged to-
gether. Moving on I am going to describe the dynamic program-
ming algorithm as they described in paper [1].
More specifically
for a labelling l they define the forward variable αt(s) to be a total
probability of l1:s at time t.
αt(s) =
X
π∈NT :B(π1:t)=l1:s
tY
t′=1
yt′
πt′
(2.6)
Where αt(s) can be computed recursively from αt−1(s) and αt−1(s−
1) . In addition in order to allow blanks in the output they con-
sidered a modified label sequence l′ with new length 2|l| + 1 where
blanks were added in the beginning, the end of the sequence and in
between every pair of labels. All prefixes have to begin with either
a blank ’<pad>’ or the first symbol in l, l1. All the above provide
the following rules for initialization:
α1(1) = y1
<pad>
α1(2) = y1
l1
α1(s) = 0
and the recursion:
==PAGE:31==
2.3 Connectionist Temporal Classification
21
αt(s) =
(
ˆαt(s)yt
l′s
if
l′
s =< pad >
or
l′
s−2 = l′
s
( ˆαt(s) + αt−1(s −2))yt
l′s
otherwise
(2.7)
where ˆαt(s) = αt−1(s) + αt−1(s −1)
I provide an example of the computation performed by a dynamic
programming algorithm [9]. Every path in the graph is a valid align-
ment.
Figure 2.5: Example of dynamic programming.Every valid alignment has
a path in this graph.There are two valid starting nodes and two valid final
nodes. [9]
The gradient of the loss function can be computed analytically with
respect to the output probabilities and perform back-propagation,
since CTC loss is a sum and product of per time-step output prob-
abilities ,so it is differentiable over them.
ASR model’s parameters are tuned in order to minimize:
X
(X,Y )∈D
−logp(Y |X)
(2.8)
==PAGE:32==
22
Theory
2.4
Language Models (LM)
Before the Wec2Vec2 model, the traditional (ARS) models needed
an additional language model (LM) in order to convert the audio
files into coherent transcriptions. The reason the Wav2Vec2 model
does not necessarily need a language model is that its architecture
includes transformers, so it is able to understand the representation
context of the audio files. In addition, during fine-tuning, the CTC
algorithm is used, which solves the additional problem of different
lengths between the input sequence and the output sequence.
In [2] they have proven that Wav2Vec2 gives impressive performance
without the use of language model.
However, additional results
make it clear that in the case that the number of data is low, the
combination of the two models (Wav2Vec 2.0 and LM) can prove to
be particularly beneficial in terms of performance.
When a Wav2Vec2 model decodes without an additional Language
model it is possible that the output transcriptions have more spelling
errors. This is because the specific model makes its predictions not
based on the previous and next letter sequences but on the input
audio.
A good language model should be able to find the next word based
on all previous words regardless of the input audio. For that reason
it is really importand to find the right dataset to train the LM. More
specifically a LM that supports a Wav2Vec 2.0 model should be able
to predict the distribution:
P(wn|wt−1
0
)
(2.9)
Where wn is the next word and wt−1
0
is the sequence of all previous
words. More specifically with LM it is calculated how often a string
occurs in a language.
==PAGE:33==
2.4 Language Models (LM)
23
2.4.1
N-gram models
N-gram is a Language model that implements the request above, in
other words it assigns probabilities to sequences of words.
In [14] they provide the following example to make those concepts
easier. They begin by computing the probability of a word w given
some history of proceeding words h. The history is the sequence
"its water is so transparent that" and the next word is "the".
In other words they are calculating the probability:
P(the|its water is so transparent that)
(2.10)
The way to calculate the specific probability is roughly by taking
a very long text and counting the times the history sequence "its
water is so transparent that" is found in this as well as the times the
history sequence is followed by the word "the". More specifically:
P(the|its water is so transparent that) =
C(its water is so transparent that the)
C(its water is so transparent that)
(2.11)
Where C denotes the number of occurrences of the sequence inside
the parenthesis in the big corpus. The above example can be repre-
sented in mathematical notation as:
P(w1:n) = P(w1)P(w2|w1)P(w3|w1:2)...P(wn|w1:n−1)
=
n
Y
k=1
P(wk|w1:k−1)
(2.12)
==PAGE:34==
24
Theory
Where wi denotes each specific word of the sequence and w1:n−1
represents the string w1, w2, ..., wn. Using the conditional probability
the probability of a word given previous words is calculated.
Unfortunately the calculation of the specific probability has the fol-
lowing drawbacks. Firstly, no matter how big the chosen corpus it
might be, many times it will not include the desirable combination
of the words, showing zero probability in these values. In addition,
this specific process requires a large computational effort. For those
reasons it is common to use a simpler and faster way to approximate
it, the N-gram models. The N-gram models are used to estimate
the probability of the last word of an n-gram given the previous
n-1 words, and also to assign probabilities to entire sequences. In
other words, instead of computing the probability of a word given its
entire history, the history is approximated from the last N-1 words.
For example for the bigram model the approximation of the prob-
ably P(wn|w1:n) is done using only the conditional probability of the
preceding word P(wn|wn−1). Consider estimating:
P(the|its water is so transparent that)
(2.13)
as:
P(the|that)
(2.14)
So the following approximation is considered for the bigram model:
P(wn|w1:n−1) ≈P(wn|wn−1)
(2.15)
The assumption that the probability of a word depends only on
the previous word is called a Markov assumption [14] which is also
followed in this case. For the general case of n-gram approximation
the model looks back n −1 words into the past the approximation
of a word given it’s entire context is:
==PAGE:35==
2.4 Language Models (LM)
25
P(wn|w1:n−1) ≈P(wn|wn−N+1:n−1)
(2.16)
So given the above assumption and equation 2.12 the probability of
a complete word sequence for the bigram model can be computed
as:
P(w1:n) ≈
n
Y
k=1
P(wk|wk−1)
(2.17)
2.4.1.1
Maximum Likelihood Estimation
The calculation of the parameters of the n-gram model is done by
measuring the frequency of finding the specific word combination
in the corpus and then performing normalization so that they lie
between 0 to 1.
P(wn|wn−N+1:n−1) = C(wn−N+1:n−1wn)
C(wn−N+1:n−1)
(2.18)
Where as I mention above C denotes the number of occurrences of
the sequence inside the parenthesis in a big corpus. The estimation
of the above equation is simply a maximum likelihood estimation of
P(wn|wn−N+1:n−1) because it assigns the highest probability of word
P(wn) given the previous n-1 words of the sequence.
Many times some combination of words may not exist in the training
corpus, and this will result in taking into account the formula above
to get zero probability. This is not a desirable outcome and has to
be addressed with the smoothing technique.
==PAGE:36==
26
Theory
2.4.1.2
Kneser-Ney Smoothing
There are many smoothing techniques, however one that is used
more frequently is Kneser-Ney Smoothing. In general what it does
is to save some probability mass for the smoothing algorithm to dis-
tribute to the unseen n-grams. The intuition is to find a way to
calculate how likely is a new un-seen word to appear as a novel con-
tinuation or how likely is a new word to appear in different contexts.
A way to calculate this is by counting all the different bigrams as
" Every bigram type was a novel continuation the first time it was
seen" [14] normalized by the total number of word bigram types,
according to this it is calculated as:
PCONTINUATION(w) =
|v : C(vw) > 0|
|(u′, w′) : C(u′w′) > 0|
(2.19)
Which is the number w appears after any other word on the corpus
divided by all the different pairs of words in the corpus, essentially
PCONTINUATION(w) shows how often the word w is found in a rare
sentence.
So the final equation for Interpolated Kneser-Ney smoothing for
bigrams is [14]:
PKN(wi|wi−1) = max(C(wi−1wi) −d, 0)
C(wi−1)
+λ(wi−1)PCONTINUATION(wi)
(2.20)
Where c(wi, wi−1) denotes the number of occurrences that the word
wi is followed by the word wi−1 in the corpus. The λ is a normal-
izing constant that is used to distribute the probability mass, it is
calculated as:
==PAGE:37==
2.5 Decoding
27
λ(wi−1) =
d
P
v C(w1v)|w : C(wi−1w) > 0|
(2.21)
The recursive general equation for Kneser-Ney, smoothig is:
PKN(wi|wi−n+1:i) = max(CKN(wi−n+1:i) −d, 0)
P
v CKN(wi−n+1:i−1v)
+λ(|wi−n+1:i−1)PKN(wi|wi−n+2:i−1)
(2.22)
Where:
CKN(.) =
(
count(.)
for the highest order n-gram
continuationcount(.)
for the lower orders n-gram
(2.23)
Finally the modification of this method that performs the best is
Modified Kneser–Ney smoothing where three different discounts d
where used instead of one.
2.5
Decoding
As thoroughly analyzed in section 2.3 in order to fine-tune our
Wav2vec 2.0 model we used the CTC loss function. More specif-
ically the model accepts as input a raw audio file which breaks it
into time-stamps of the same duration and provides the output per-
timestamp probabilities matrix. The specific probabilities matrix
is character probabilities for each time slice. Therefore, decoding is
the process by which the specific per-timestamp probabilities matrix
==PAGE:38==
28
Theory
that is the output of the model, is converted into human-readable
text.
Naive Decoding
This is the simplest way to decode the probabilities matrix above.
More specifically for each audio slice the most probable character is
chosen using Argmax function.
A∗= argmaxA(
TY
t=1
pT(αt|X))
(2.24)
In addition the repeated characters are collapsed and the blank to-
kens were removed to get Y. This particular method may be easy
to implement and sometimes works well, however in most cases it
presents the following problems:
• it does not take into consideration the fact that a single output
can have many alignments.
• Due to the fact that the output depends only on the acoustic
model, it is possible after decoding, the output sequence to
contain misspelled words or words that are pronounced the
same way but written differently and have a different meaning
depending on the context in which they were found.
Beam-Search
In order to solve the first problem above, modified beam search can
be used, which is a (breadth-first) heuristic search algorithm. This
algorithm calculates a set of hypotheses at each input step. Then
the new set of hypotheses is generated from the previous set by
extending each hypothesis with all possible output characters and
keeping only the top candidates.
==PAGE:39==
2.5 Decoding
29
At each time step the algorithm calculates the scores for a given pre-
fix based on all the alignments which map to it. The output prefixes
are stored after collapsing repeats and removing blank token.
The steps of the beam search algorithm are summarized here and
are repeated for each time step:
1. The initial n beams are taken from the characters with the
highest probability for the first time step.
2. In the next time step a new character is added to each beam
in the same way as above and it’s score is calculated by mul-
tiplying the probabilities of those characters.
3. If two or more character sequences result in the same result
they collapsed together and their score is added.
4. Beams are pruned according to their score in order to keep
them at the original number n.
In the figure 2.6 I present the whole procedure of the beam search
algorithm:
==PAGE:40==
30
Theory
Figure 2.6: The CTC beam search algorithm with an output alphabet
ϵ, a, b and a beam size of three [9]
Decoding with Language model
In order to resolve the second issue of naive decoding a Language
model is also used. The language model was described extensively in
section [2.4]. In that way while decoding and performing the beam
search described above, the score for each path takes into account
both the acoustic model output (output of the Wav2vec2 model)
and the language models score.
2.6
Catastrophic Forgetting
In recent years end-to-end ASR systems are gaining more and more
importance.
These systems need a very large volume of data in
order to produce the corresponding results. But often those data
==PAGE:41==
2.6 Catastrophic Forgetting
31
is difficult to be found and requires enormous computational power
in order to be used by the model. For this reason, the technique
of transfer learning revolutionized these systems as it provides the
possibility to extend the already acquired knowledge from a pre-
trained model to a smaller target dataset.
Unfortunately, this amazing technique has its drawbacks, as very
often when it is applied to a pre-trained model without planning and
care, the phenomenon of Catastrophic Forgetting or Catastrophic
Inference occurs. Catastrophic forgetting is a tendency for neural
networks to forget old acquired knowledge as they are trained on
new data [7].
In recent years, extensive research has been done in order to solve
this problem. I give two of the methods that were used to cope with
this issue:
1. Weight freezing: With this particular method, some weights
of the model are frozen in order to further control the way the
model is being trained. When some weights of the model get
frozen, they keep their values (thus the knowledge they had
already acquired) and do not change during fine-tuning.
2. Elastic weight consolidation: This is a regularization tech-
nique. With this method it is considered that some weights
are more important for keeping the previous acquired knowl-
edge than other, in other words they are very important for
the model to understand the pre-train task. For that reason
during fine-tuning on the new task those weights do not change
as much as the rest.
==PAGE:42==
32
Theory
2.6.1
Weight Freezing
In [18] they proposed that updating only the linear layers of the
encoder can prevent catastrophic forgetting. This also contributes
positively on improving the performance on the target domain. On
the contrary, they have concluded after conducted many experi-
ments, that performing fine-tuning in the last layer is responsible
for severe catastrophic forgetting, even though it contains a small
amount of parameters compared to the overall model.
In [16], an extensive study has been carried out in order to to solve
the problem of catastrophic forgetting, specifically for the children
case. In addition, they investigated the type of information con-
tained in each layer of the neural network, more specifically they in-
vestigate how the transfer learning technique between children and
adults affects the neural network from two perspectives.
• Acoustic variability: They stated that acoustic variability
affects the lower layers of the network, which are closer to the
signal. For this reason, by changing those weights, the model is
able to understand the differentiation of children’s voices from
adults’. So, while most transfer learning techniques change
the head layer, in this paper they suggested that in order to
perform fine-tuning from adults to children voices it is more
beneficial to change the bottom layers of the model.
• Pronunciation variability: The variation in children’s pro-
nunciation affects the higher levels of the model and they sug-
gest to train those with the technique of fine-tuning.
Finally, for better performance they suggest taking into account
both acoustics and pronunciation variability, so that both upper and
lower layers are updated and the remaining layers are kept constant.
==PAGE:43==
2.6 Catastrophic Forgetting
33
They observed as hypothesized that accounting for acoustic vari-
ability is more beneficial to models performance than pronunciation
variability, but accounting for both forms of variability gives the
greatest benefit to model performance.
In addition the paper comes to the following conclusions:
1. All the variability that exists in voices between adults and
children appears at the highest and lowest levels of the model.
And therefore freezing the middle layers of the NN the
basic human speech structure can be maintained from the pre-
train model.
2. For children between 6 and 14 years old when the available
data is not much it is more profitable to change 2 layers. The
number of layer to get changed increases with the increment
of data
3. In the case of small children (between 6 and 11 years old) there
is increased variability which affects the overall performance
of the system. For this reason, changing a large number of
parameters of the network is not a good idea as a decrease
in the performance of the model is observed due to the noise
introduced during fine-tuning by the large variation of the data
distribution.
2.6.2
Elastic weight consolidation
As mentioned in previous sections, the whole point of transfer learn-
ing is to take the previously acquired knowledge of the NN and
evolve it into a new distribution (in our case children’s voices from
adults ones). The above procedure is called Continual learning, and
’is, the ability to learn consecutive tasks without forgetting how to
perform previously trained tasks’ [10]. Unfortunately this is very
==PAGE:44==
34
Theory
difficult due to the phenomenon of catastrophic forgetting which ’is
an inevitable feature of connectionist models’ [10].
More specifically when a network is trained on a new task B it
forgets the information that had gotten during training on the old
task A as the weights in the network that are important for task A
are changed to meet the objectives of task B.
The technique of Elastic Weight Consolidation (EWC) is delving
into solving this big problem. In particular, this method was de-
signed to prevent the model from forgetting important parameters
learned during initial training while acquiring new knowledge during
fine-tuning [17].
EWC adds a regularization term to the loss function of the ASR
model to make the parameters of the new task (in my case tran-
scribe children voices) closer to the important parameters of the
pre-trained model trained on the old task (transcription of adult
voices). This particular method belongs to the family of continuous
learning. Those methods as I have mentioned above are helping the
models to learn continuously from the new data.
I present a figure taken from [10] which represents graphically all
the above.
==PAGE:45==
2.6 Catastrophic Forgetting
35
Figure 2.7: Representation of EWC method [10]
As we can see from the image 2.7, θA are the weights of the pre-
trained model. The circular regions are schematic parameter spaces
where the orange leads to good performance for task B and grey for
task A accordingly. The blue arrow represends the case that the
gradients were taken with respect to the task B, that minimizes the
loss of task B but destroy what it has learnt for task A. The green
arrow represents the case where each weight was constrained with
the same coefficient and it can only remember task A at the expense
of not learning task B. The blue arrow represents EWC methods
find a relatively good solution for B you can introduce a very large
loss to A
More specifically, as EWC is a regularization technique, the new
ASR loss function takes the form:
L ( θ ) = LB ( θ ) +
X
i
λ
2Fi
 θi −θ∗
A,i
2
(2.25)
Where LB is the loss function of the fine-tuned ASR, L(θ) is the to-
tal loss after regularization, θi are the parameters of the fine-tuned
==PAGE:46==
36
Theory
model while θ∗
A,i are the parameters of the pre-trained model. Fi-
nally Fi is an estimation of the diagonal part of Fisher information
matrix. The reason that the diagonal elements of the Fisher infor-
mation matrix are used is because they provide information about
the parameters that are important to the previous task (tak A) in
order to apply higher weights to them. For this reason during fine-
tuning the weights that have small values in the diagonal Fisher
information matrix were mainly changed as these do not affect the
prior knowledge so much.
According to [10] ’Fisher information matrix : (a) it is equivalent
to the second derivative of the loss near a minimum, (b) it can
be computed from first-order derivatives alone and is thus easy to
calculate even for large models, and (c) it is guaranteed to be positive
semi-definite’.
For the calculation of the empirical Fisher Information Matrix some
data from the original task were sampled and used for the calculation
of the equation:
Iθ∗
A = 1
N
N
X
i=1
∇θlogp(y|xA,i, θ∗
A)∇θlogp(y|xA,i, θ∗
A)T
(2.26)
In other words the Fisher information matrix at ij is :
I(θ)ij = E
 ∂
∂θi
log f(y; X, θ)
  ∂
∂θj
log f(y; X, θ)

| θ

(2.27)
As we can see from the above equation the Fisher Information Ma-
trix is w.r.t the log probability of the NN prediction p(y|x, θ) and
describes the covariance of the gradient of the log-likelihood func-
tion. According to [10] this log probability of the data is simply the
negative of the loss function for the problem at hand.
==PAGE:47==
Chapter 3
Method
3.1
Introduction
In the previous section, all the important pieces that were used
for the implementation of the specific thesis project were examined
from a more theoretical perspective. This chapter is a continuation
of the previous one, and it is going to focus more on the practical
implementation of those methods.
More specifically, the entire pipeline for the construction of the final
model is studied. Firstly all datasets that were used for both fine-
tuning and evaluation of the model were given, as well as the basic
information about their content and their final processing. In ad-
dition the necessary data augmentation that must be implemented
on those datasets is described in order to either bring them closer
to the test case scenario (children audio), or to make them more
generic to avoid overfitting. Moving on the implementation of the
two methods to avoid catastrophic forgetting are described. Finally
==PAGE:48==
38
Method
the steps for the implementation of the Language model which will
boost the Wav2vec 2.0 model was provided.
3.2
Pre-trained Model
The baseline model that I am using throughout the whole thesis
project is the "chcaa/xls-r-300m-danish-nst-cv9"1 which is a
Wav2Vec 2.0 model finetuned for Danish ASR on the training set
of the public NST dataset and the Danish part of Common Voice
9. This model is fine-tuned using Connectionist Temporal Classifi-
cation (CTC).
I use the platform Hugging Facel2 for the whole process of model
loading and fine-tuning. On the folder of the baseline model3 there
are also information in order to prepare the Tokenizer and Feature
Extractor. More specifically the use of feature extractor is to pro-
cesses the speech signal to the model’s input format.
The Tokenizer is used in order to decode the predicted output classes
to the output transcription. The output size of the final linear layer
corresponds to the number of tokens in the vocabulary. As a vo-
cabulary I used exactly the same that is used for the baseline model
which is:
1https://huggingface.co/chcaa/xls-r-300m-danish-nst-cv9
2https://huggingface.co/
3https://huggingface.co/chcaa/xls-r-300m-danish-nst-cv9/tree/
main
==PAGE:49==
3.3 Datasets
39
</s>
<pad>
<s>
<unk>
a
b
c
d
e
f
g
h
i
j
k
l
m
n
o
p
q
r
s
t
u
v
w
x
y
z
|
å
æ
é
ø
ü
Table 3.1: Vocabulary (the labels) that are used during fine-tuning .
The special symbols <s> and </s> denotes the beginning and the
end of the sentence accordingly, the <pad> symbol is the one used
by the CTC classifier as I explained in details in section [2.3] and it is
used in order to make the input sequence and the output sequence of
the model about the same size. The symbol ’|’ is used to distinguish
different words in the sentence and <unk> is the unkown token.
3.3
Datasets
For fine-tuning an ASR model in danish we need to obtain both
audio data and their transcriptions.
In the continuation of this
chapter, I provide information about all the datasets that were used
for the implementation of this specific thesis project. Despite all the
differences of these datasets, I followed some common steps in order
to bring them into a format that my model can accept as input.
More specifically I convert all the audio files in ".wav" format and
I re-sample them in order to bring them to 16kHz which is the
sampling rate at which the baseline model is pre-trained on. It is
really important to always have the same sampling rate as the one
==PAGE:50==
40
Method
that the pre-trained model was trained on since it defines how many
data points of the speech signal are measured per second.
In addition to the ".wav" sound files, in order to build the dataset,
two ".csv" files are also needed, one for training and one for eval-
uation, both with a similar format. More specifically they contain
three column names: the "path", the "audio" which both state the
absolute path of the audio file and the "sentence" which contains
the specific audio transcription.
In the case of transcription, every time I create the dataset, I make
sure that all letters are lower case, as well as remove the special
characters that may be in the transcription which are: [, ?.!−; : ”].
Finally for each dataset I also create a python script file which checks
if all the above are covered, i.e. if I provide the two csv files with
the necessary fields. It’s basic funtionallity is to split the dataset
into train and test dataset according to the given .csv files.
3.3.1
Danpass dataset
The Danpass4 corpus consists of monologues and dialogues were
the speakers were given specific tasks to talk about and it is the
main dataset that I have been using during fine tuning.
The monologues were recorded in 1996 in a recording room. In
other words, the monologues were recorded in one-way communica-
tion with an unseen partner who offered no feedback, neither in the
form of questions nor confirmation.
The dialogues were recorded in 2004. The exercise involved the
cooperation of two participants. They were seated in separate loca-
tions, one the department’s recording studio, the other a recording
4https://danpass.hum.ku.dk/
==PAGE:51==
3.3 Datasets
41
facility established for the purpose in the main control room. The
speakers communicated via headsets.
3.3.1.1
Reforming the Dataset
The dataset consists of audio files combined with it’s transcribed
words in form of textgrids. In order to make sentences out of the
words and cut the audio file accordingly, I had to write a python
script which receives the start and end time of each word on the
audio file and finish the sentence when the symbol \+ is found on
the textgrid which denotes the end of speakers speech. For each
setence a seperate audio file (’.wav’) was created.
The final dataset for training is pretty clean but really constructive
in terms of the amount of speakers talking, this is way data augmen-
tation was really important to make the final model more generic.
It consists of the .wav audio files and the .csv files with the audio
paths and the transcribed sentences. The training dataset is 1 hour
and 21 minutes of transcribed audio data.
There were 27 speakers, all of them students or former students
or colleagues in the Department of General and Applied Linguistics,
and all of them except one are originated in the greater Copenhagen
area.
18 speakers recorded the monologues, 13 men and 5 women.
22
speakers recorded the dialogues, 13 of whom also recorded the mono-
logues.
==PAGE:52==
42
Method
3.3.2
CHILDES Danish Plunkett Corpus
This particular datasett5 contains recordings of two children from
Denmark, Anne and Jens studied by Kim Plunkett of Århus Univer-
sity from 1982 to 1987. Data collection continued until both children
were 6. The study began when Jens was 11 months and Anne was 8
months years old. Each audio session consisted of an interview, test-
ing procedures, and a free play session. The entirety of each visit,
which lasted approximately 90 minutes, was recorded on videotape.
Transmitting microphones were used to collect the vocal data from
child and parent and a transcription was made of the videotape.
3.3.2.1
Reforming the Dataset
In this case as in the case of the previous datasets the audio come
together with audio transcriptions, however unfortunately this time
there were no timestamps. This made matching the audio speeches
with the corresponding text very time-consuming and difficult as
many times either the child’s mother or the person conducting the
interview interfered with the child’s speech.
The total duration
of the dataset after manually catting the audio when children was
speaking is about 26 minutes.
Unfortunately the dataset does not contain sufficient duration as
either in most of the video recordings the child was very young (less
than a year old) or the transcription was very confusing so I could
not understand which part of the audio corresponded to the specific
text. Furthermore, the fact that the data set consists of only two
children makes the need for data augmentation imperative in order
to make our model more general.
5https://sla.talkbank.org/TBB/childes/Scandinavian/Danish/
Plunkett
==PAGE:53==
3.3 Datasets
43
3.3.3
Danish Children clinical Dataset
This particular dataset is the basic evaluation dataset. Essentially it
represents the test case scenario, i.e. it consists of audio recordings
of children in Denmark with OCD while they were in sessions with
their psychologist.
Unfortunately, due to the fact that the data
is protected I am not allowed to give more information about this
particular dataset.
3.3.4
Common Voice dataset
The multilingual Common Voice dataset 6 is already the world’s
largest open source collection of voice data of its kind. Both this
and the next dataset [3.3.5] are used for evaluation purposes only.
I am using the Common Voice Corpus 11.0 in Danish. Each record in
the dataset consists of a unique MP3 file and an associated text file.
Many of the recorded hours in the dataset also include demographic
metadata such as age, gender and accent. Moreover it consists of
9 hours of total validated data and 10 hours in total where the age
of the speakers is 29% between 30 and 39, 20% between 19 and 29
,13% between 40 and 49 and 3% between 50 and 59, 59% are males
and only 8% are females.
I am using 2 hours and 20 minutes of transcribed audio from this
dataset for evaluation purposes in order to investigate my models
on the phenomenon of catastrophic forgetting.
6https://commonvoice.mozilla.org/da/datasets
==PAGE:54==
44
Method
3.3.5
alvenir_asr_da_eval Dataset
For evaluating the performance of my fine-tuned models I used the
dataset alvenir_asr_da_eval7 in order to find which model can
perform well on the pre-trained task (transcribe adult vices) with
respect to WER. This result is giving us a good intuition for which
model avoids catastrophic forgetting.
3.3.5.1
Dataset information
Dataset alvenir_asr_da_eval was created by Alvenir8 for eval-
uating ASR models in Danish. The dataset consists of 5 hours of
audio .wav files spread across 50 different speakers of ages between
20-60 years old combined with the audio transcriptions.
3.4
Data Augmentations
Data augmentation methods have been widely used in recent years
as they succeed to produce artificial data from existing ones in or-
der to solve the problem of small datasets as well as to make data
more generic. Automatic speech recognition (ASR) has proven to
be particularly successful, however these models appear to be quite
vulnerable in overfiting since deep neural networks require a large
amount of data for training.
Moreover, collecting new audio transcribed data is quite time-consuming
and difficult work. For the above reasons this method is necessary
to increase the amount of data as well as to change speakers voices
to achieve a better trained non-biased model.
7https://huggingface.co/datasets/Alvenir/alvenir_asr_da_eval
8https://huggingface.co/Alvenir
==PAGE:55==
3.4 Data Augmentations
45
I used data augmentation in order to make my model more generic in
case of background noise and different speakers. My dataset consists
of limited number of speakers and the external conditions of the
recording do not change (usually it consists of recordings which are
taken inside a clean audio recording room). If I had used my data
without any augmentation, that would have resulted in a final model
which wouldn’t be able to understanding different voices and would
struggle to function properly in different noisy environments.
As a result during fine-tuning I had to face two serious issues:
• The voice of a grown man differs a lot from the voices of young
children.
• A very limited number of different voices. In the real world
the voices are noticeably different from each other.
• The recordings were made in a recording room so the audio is
really clean. This is a huge problem because most of the real
life scenario the audio is recorded in different types of rooms
with back ground noise and bad recording conditions.
In the next sections I am going to present two different type of meth-
ods of audio augmentation in order to resolve the issues mentioned
above.
3.4.1
Data Augmentations for child speech
The majority of studies on ASR systems have been done on adult.This
is why this particular task is so difficult, due to the lack of data for
children and the great differentiation of children’s voices from adult
voices.
==PAGE:56==
46
Method
To make the audio of my dataset closer to the test case (children
voices) I had to perform some audio manipulation to change the
pitch and the formands of the adult speakers to sound more like
children. This in general is a hard task which can not implemented
perfectly. Thankfully the praat-parselmouth9 provide a complete
and Pythonic interface to the internal Praat code which preforms
this tasks pretty satisfactory.
More specifically, there is the command Change gender10 to create
a new Sound with those manipulated characteristics. The shifting
of frequencies is done via manipulation of the sampling frequency.
Pitch and duration changes are generated with overlap-add synthe-
sis. This method was realized by Moulines Charpentier (1990), who
called it Time-Domain Pitch-Synchronous Overlap-and-Add (TD-
PSOLA)[6]. It is based on decomposing the signal into a series of
elementary waveform so that each represents a successive pitch pe-
riod of the signal and their summation reconstructs the signal[15].
PSOLA works directly on the signal waveform and therefore does
not lose any detail of the signal.
I had implemented this specific data augmentation before the fine-
tuning process as a separate process and then introduced them to
the model pipeline. The reason I chose to use this process as pre-
processing and not as part of the pipeline is because it is quite com-
putationally intensive and therefore would require too much time
to execute during fine-tuning. Bellow I list all the transformations
that I implemented in order to make the adult voices sound more
like children.
9https://github.com/YannickJadoul/Parselmouth
10https://www.fon.hum.uva.nl/praat/manual/Sound__Change_gender_
__.html
==PAGE:57==
3.4 Data Augmentations
47
3.4.1.1
Pitch and duration changes:
Changes are generated with overlap-add synthesis which is a method
for manipulating the pitch and duration of an acoustic speech signal.
More specifically the step of this method are:
1. Finds the pitch point of the signal using Boersma[5] algorithm.
2. Divide the audio signal into individual pitch periods.
3. Manipulate the signal by moving pitch period closer together
or further apart.
It deals with individual pitch periods each of which is essentially the
impulse response of the vocal tract. The pitch periods themselves
they are not modified as they contain information abut the formands
etc.
3.4.1.2
Shifting of formants:
The shifting of formant frequencies is done via manipulation of the
sampling frequency. For example to multiply all formants by a fac-
tor of 1.10 of a signal with sampling rate 44100Hz, the sampling
frequency is first raised to 48510Hz(without changing samples). Af-
ter this the sound is lengthen by a factor of 1.10 and the pitch is
lowered by the same factor so that the original duration and pitch
is restored. After this the sound is re-sampled to 44100Hz (by sinc
interpolation)
The median pitch for children voices is typically ranges from 250 Hz
to 300 Hz and higher. For that reason I set the New pitch median
(Hz) argument of Change gender11 around 265 Hz to 290 Hz by
11https://www.fon.hum.uva.nl/praat/manual/Sound__Change_gender_
__.html
==PAGE:58==
48
Method
randomly sampling between those values. In addition the Duration
factor ranges between 1.2 and 1.3, I choose to increase the duration
of the signal as children usually speak slower than adults. Finally I
increase the formants frequencies by setting the Formant shift ratio
between 1.3 and 1.5. The last two arguments were chosen out of
test and trial in order the new augmented audio to match children
voices. As it mentioned above all three arguments receive random
values out of sampling for each audio file, this is really important
as in that way I manage to generate different speakers voices and
avoid the model to be biased to a specific speaker’s voice.
3.4.2
Data Augmentations for real life recording
conditions
In order to simulate the conditions of a real space environment I
used the library torch_audiomentations12 which is a library that
performs audio data augmentation in PyTorch. The reason that I
prefer it over other libraries that do the same job is due to it’s
efficiency in the performance as it supports both CPU and GPU.
For every batch of data I preformed either no augmentation or a
combination of a list of available augmentations which are going to
be listed above (3 augmentation at each time). I chose the specific
threshold limits for each augmentation by listening to the resulting
audio as there are not any specified limits through literature. Each
threshold is sampled randomly from some specified limits.
In addition during fine-tuning, the specific augmentations are per-
formed on the entire batch and not all together, but 3 augmentations
are randomly selected each time. The probability that no augmen-
tation will occur for each batch is 0.2. Additionally I set an extra
probability to each augmentation depending on how often I want
12https://github.com/asteroid-team/torch-audiomentations
==PAGE:59==
3.4 Data Augmentations
49
each augmentation to occur. All augmentations have a probability
of 0.5 to occur if selected as possible augmentations for the batch
except for Pitch Shifting which I gave a probability of 0.9 and the
Time Stretch which happens in each batch because I think they are
very important for the generalization of the audio dataset.
3.4.2.1
Pitch Shifting
The pitch of the sound is raised or lowered without changing the
tempo. It is really important to perform this kind of augmentation
when there is a limited amount of speakers in the dataset, since each
person’s voice has a different pitch.
3.4.2.2
Time Stretch
The duration of the audio signal is changing without affecting it’s
pitch. The specific transformation is done by re-sampling the input
signal which has the effect of slowing down or speeding up the speech
rhythm. This is a really important augmentation for the generality
of the dataset since speakers tent to speak in different rates.
3.4.2.3
Apply Gain
With this transformation the audio is multiplied by a random ampli-
tude factor in order to decrease or increase it’s volume. This method
can help a model to become more unaffected by the overall gain of
the input audio. The gain limits in db are between -1 to 10dB.
==PAGE:60==
50
Method
3.4.2.4
Simulating room reverbration
Convolution reverb is a technique used to make a clean audio data
sound like it was recorded in a different environments. Room Im-
pulse Response (RIR) transformation is able to make a clean speech
sound like uttered in a conference room.
For this process RIR
data are needed. The following data are from MIT IR13 Survey
dataset. With this augmentation I convolved the given audio with
the impulse responses mentioned above, and I can simulate that any
recording was received at any space.
3.4.2.5
Add background noise to the Audio file
I real noises and sounds were added on the background (by using
MUSAN14 ) in order to increase the robustness of the models. This
transform will pick a random noise file from the noise folder (Musan
files) and will apply it to the original audio file. For added diversity,
it will also choose a random signal-to noise ratio (from a given range)
to apply noises at a different volume compared to the original signal.
The range of signal-to-noise ratio was chosen between (7dB to 15db).
3.5
Catastrophic Forgetting and contin-
ual learning
In section [1.5] I extensively explain why catastrophic forgetting
occurs during fine-tuning and the importance of receiving drastic
measures to address this issue. More specifically I analyzed from
a more theoretical point of view the reasons why this phenomenon
13https://mcdermottlab.mit.edu/Reverb/IR_Survey.html
14http://www.openslr.org/17/
==PAGE:61==
3.5 Catastrophic Forgetting and continual learning
51
is observed in neural networks as well as the two techniques with
which I tried to deal with this problem in this particular project.
In the following two sub-sections I present the practical steps that I
hed followed in order to implement those two methods.
3.5.1
Weight freezing
One of methods which resolves this issue is weight freezing. In order
to investigate the effectiveness of this method I performed many test
by freezing different part of the model. More specifically by freezing
different layers of my model I am going to investigate which of them
are making the biggest contribution in increasing the efficiency while
at the same time reducing the effect of catastrophic forgetting.
Bellow I present the parts of the model in which I froze its weights
in order to determine which is the most efficient one:
1. Freezing type 1: Freezing all weights of feature_extractor
(conv. layers). A feature extractor is in charge of preparing in-
put features for a multi-modal model, the pre-processing audio
files.
2. Freezing type 2: Freezing both feature_extractor (conv.
layers) and the lm_head (final linear layer)
3. Freezing type 3: Freezing the middle layers, the encoder
and fine-tune the bottom most layer (account for acoustic vari-
ability) and the top most (account for pronunciation variabil-
ity).
4. Freezing type 4: Freeze both the encoder and the lm-head.
5. Freezing type 5: Freeze only the attention layers of the
encoder.
==PAGE:62==
52
Method
6. Freezing type 6: Freeze only the attention layers of the
encoder and lm_head.
7. Freezing type 7: Freeze Feed Forward layers of the En-
coder.
8. Freezing type 8: Freeze Feed Forward layers of the En-
coder and lm_head.
3.5.2
Elastic Weight Consolidation
In the section [2.6.2] I described the method of Elastic Weight Con-
solidation in order to solve the problem of Catastrophic Forgetting
which is observed during the continuous learning of NNs.
The way I implemented this particular method is by making an
approximation of the Fisher Information Matrix. More specifically I
used the common voice dataset [3.3.4] on which it is known that my
baseline model is trained on in order to calculate both the Fisher
Information Matrix and the initial parameters of the baseline model.
The equation for the empirical Fisher suggests I am calculating the
full Fisher Matrix however I only calculated its diagonal terms [[13]].
In addition, as I mentioned in section [2.6.2] from equation [2.26],
it can be observed that to calculate the diagonal elements of the
specific table the only thing we need to do is to take the square of
the gradient of the loss function of the original model with respect
to it’s weights while we pass common voice as input to the model.
Moving on I had averaged (calculate the expectation) all the fisher
diagonal element by taking the summation over all the N examples
of the common voice dataset and divide them by N and I got the
results of the equation [2.26].
Finally in order to calculate the overall loss during the process of
==PAGE:63==
3.6 Language Model
53
fine-tuning of the original model on the new dataset, I used equa-
tion [2.25]. More specifically I added to the LB which is the loss
function of the fine-tuned ASR, a regularization term based on the
above calculated expectation of fisher information matrix times the
squared distance of the new models parameters from the parameters
of the original model. The λ term is how much importance is given
to the old models parameters, the higher it gets the less previous
information the model forgets.
3.6
Language Model
Although transformer models have become the standard architec-
ture in ASR systems, it is very common to use n-gram LM to boost
speech recognition systems. The reason that these models are pre-
ferred over Transformer-based LMs is that they offer a much lower
computational cost. ’For an n-gram, retrieving the probability of a
word given previous words is almost only as computationally expen-
sive as querying a look-up table or tree-like data storage - i.e. it’s
very fast compared to modern Transformer-based language models
that would require a full forward pass to retrieve the next word
probabilities.’ 15
3.6.1
Dataset for the Language Model
The choice of the right dataset is the most important step for the
efficient training of a Language Model which has the ability to work
well in combination with a Wav2Vec 2.0 model for a specific problem.
For that reason, I consulted this githup page16 in order to find the
15https://huggingface.co/blog/wav2vec2-with-ngram
16https://github.com/fnielsen/awesome-danish
==PAGE:64==
54
Method
appropriate dataset that suits the test case scenario. For training
dataset I used a combination of the bellow datasets:
1. europarl_bilingual: A collection githup page17 of data
extracted from the European Parliament web site by Philipp
Koehn (University of Edinburgh).
2. XED18,the specific dataset consists of a set of subtitles (around
1838 lines). I considered that the subtitles are a close to test
case scenario as it contains a lot of dialogues.
3. OffensEval 2020 - Danish 19, offensive Language Identi-
fication in Social Media competition. This DKhate dataset
contains 3600 comments from the web annotated for offensive
language.
The data is quite big (8754893 words in total and 120122 unigrams),
however because it is only text it’s process is not that slow. Firstly
I had to clean the text and remove special characters. In the case
of internet comment I have done a more deep cleaning (remove http
etc.)
3.6.2
Building of the 5-gram with KenLM
I build the 5-gram by using the KenLM library 20 which is Language
model inference code by Kenneth Heafield (kenlm at kheafield.com)
for creating n-grams models with modified Kneser-Ney smoothing.
KenLM has many advantages, like has an excellent performance it
is fast but also memory efficient. KenLM by default computes an
17https://huggingface.co/datasets/europarl_bilingual
18https://github.com/Helsinki-NLP/XED
19https://sites.google.com/site/offensevalsharedtask/home
20https://github.com/kpu/kenlm
==PAGE:65==
3.7 Model Interpretability
55
n-gram with Kneser-Ney smooting.
All text data used to create
the n-gram is expected to be stored in a text file which I made by
combining all the above datasets.
I run KenLM’s lmplz command to build our n-gram, called "5gram.arpa".
Finally I wrapped the 5-gram into Wav2Vec2ProcessorWithLM
object to make the 5-gram boosted decoding.
3.7
Model Interpretability
With the increasing complexity of NN as well as the difficulty of
understanding those models, as most people are perceiving them as
black boxes, the method of model interpretability becomes impera-
tive.
The understanding of NN models is a large area of scientific interest,
on which much research has been done and receiving more and more
attention nowadays. The implementation of these methods helps
both the stakeholders to understand the results of the models as well
as the engineers of those models to better understand their structure.
This results in model’s improved performance, as researchers have
the chance to identify possible flaws on them and correct them.
In order to implement the above method, I used the Captum
21library, which provides the ability to understand how much the
features of the model contribute to its final result. Captum calcu-
lates the models attributions, which show how much effect a feature
of the model has on the final extracted result, in three ways:
1. Feature Attribution: This type of attribution describes the
output basis of the input features that gave the particular
output.
21https://captum.ai/
==PAGE:66==
56
Method
2. Layer Attribution: This type of attribution describes the
activity of NN models hidden layers after some input has been
introduced into it.
3. Neuron Attribution: Has similar functionality to the previ-
ous method (Layer Attribution) except that in this particular
case focus is made on a specific neuron of the layer.
The attribution algorithm that I had been using are Gradient-based
algorithms, with which calculate the backward gradients of a model
output, layer output, or neuron activation with respect to the input.
More specifically:
1. Layer Integrated Gradients:
22
Layer Integrated Gra-
dients is a variant of Integrated Gradients and it is an ax-
iomatic model interpretability algorithm that assigns an im-
portance score to each input feature by approximating
the integral of gradients of the model’s output with re-
spect to the inputs along the path (straight line) from
given baselines inputs. According to [12] Integrated Gra-
dients is calculating the sum of gradients (output prediction
with respect to the input) over a series of carefully chosen
variants of the input. The integrated gradient of the ith base
feature of the input x and the baseline x′ is:
IGi(x) ::= (xi −x′
i)
Z 1
a=0
∂F(x′ + α(x −x′))
∂xi
da
(3.1)
where
∂F(x)
∂xi
is the gradient of F along the ith dimension at
x. The Integrated Gradients produces attributions for
base features [12].
22https://captum.ai/api/layer.html
==PAGE:67==
3.7 Model Interpretability
57
2. Layer Conductance:23 Computes conductance with respect
to the given layer, provides the total conductance of each neu-
ron in the layer’s output. The key idea is to decompose the
computation of Integrated Gradients via the chain rule. More
specifically the gradients of all points along the straight line
from the baseline x′ to input x are computed. The sum over
the gradients accounts for the net difference between the base-
line prediction score and the prediction value at the input.
As I mentioned above the method of Integrated Gradients cal-
culates attributions for the base features. However according
to [12] there is a way to lift these attributions to a neuron in
a hidden layer. In other words the conductance (importance)
for a neuron(y) in a hidden layer can be calculated as:
Condy(x) ::=
X
i
(xi −x′
i)
Z 1
a=0
∂F(x′ + α(x −x′))
∂y
∂y
∂xi
da
(3.2)
From the above equation we can conclude that the conduc-
tance is proportional to how much a particular hidden unit
changes the output of the model for a given input. So, if by
changing the input of the unit the output of the neuron does
not change, it means that there is zero conductance and this
is confirmed by the fact that
∂y
∂xi is going to be zero.
Interpret Attention mechanism:
As was extensively analyzed in the section [2.2] ’The attention mech-
anism computes an output vector by accumulating relevant informa-
tion from a sequence of input vectors’[8]. Each input gets attention
weights (relevance information) and those inputs are then summed
based on their weights. More specifically each attention head gets
from those inputs vectors all the relevant information that it needs.
23https://captum.ai/api/layer.html
==PAGE:68==
58
Method
Unfortunately the gradient based methods mentioned above do not
provide efficient information for the attention case since the trans-
formed vector in this analysis is ignored.
This has the following
negative results:
1. The attention mechanism gives high attention to special tokens
like ’<pad>’ .
2. It does not provide reasonable time-stamps alignment from
source-target attention.
For those reasons in [8] they suggested a norm-based analysis which
resolves the above issues. More specifically the equations [2.2] can
be written as:
yi = (
n
X
j=1
αi,jv(xj))W o
(3.3)
and according to [8] can be re-written as:
yi =
n
X
j=1
αi,jf(xj)
(3.4)
where
f(x) := (xW V + bV )W O
(3.5)
’The attention mechanism first transforms each input vector x to
generate f(x) it then computes attention weights α and then com-
pute the sum αf(x)’ [8]. In other words in [8] they proposed the
==PAGE:69==
3.7 Model Interpretability
59
measurement of the norm of the weighted transformed vector |αf(x)|
given from equation [3.4] to analyze the attention mechanism behav-
ior and it is called norm-based analysis.
Moreover they proposed the following alignment extraction from
attention:
• A norm-based alignment extraction method that extracts word
alignments(in my case sequence alignments) based on |αf(x)|.
argmaxSj||αi,jf(xj)||
(3.6)
Where sj is the source time-step.
• The word alignments that are obtained from each layer by
integrating H heads within the same layer:
argmaxSj||
H
X
h=1
αh
i,jf h(xj)||
(3.7)
Using the method above a more detailed interpretation of the inner
workings of the Transformers is extracted, compared to the gradient
based methods mentioned above.
==PAGE:70==
Chapter 4
Experiment results
4.1
Introduction
In the previous chapter [3], I extensively talked about the different
dataset that were used for the fine-tuning and the evaluation of the
model and how to train the language models. In addition I described
the methods that I used in order to fine-tune and evaluate all those
models. In this chapter, I have been experimented with different
hyperparameters and methods in order to find the best model with
respect to validation WER.
As I will present more briefly in the tables below [4.1, 4.2], and in
more detail later in this chapter, I first experimented with differ-
ent types of data augmentation in order to make my dataset more
generic and closer to my test case scenario.
Moving on, I tried to get rid of the problem of Catastrophic forget-
==PAGE:71==
4.1 Introduction
61
ting during the fine-tuning of my model by checking two methods,
the Weight freezing method and the Elastic weight consolidation
(EWC). Finally I trained a 5-gram language model in order to boost
my ASR model.
In table [4.1] we see schematically all the datasets that were used
both during the fine-tuning of my model as well as for its evaluation.
The models in this table are actually a set of models that were fine-
tuned for each separate method described in section [3], therefore
constitute a reference to a set of models that will be described in
more detail later in this section.
Datasets
Models
Danpass [3.3.1]
Base line with Data augmentations [4.4]
alvenir_asr_da_eval [3.3.5]
Weight Freezing (different layers) [4.5.1]
Plunkett [3.3.2]
EWC [4.5.2]
Common voice [3.3.4]
Baseline fine-tuned with Plunket [4.6]
Augm. Danpass to much
Baseline fine-tuned both with EWC and Plunket
children [3.4.1]
[4.7]
Table 4.1: An overview of the Datasets which are used throughout the
implementation of the experimental results, and a summary of the types
of models which are extracted through fine-tuning.
In table 4.2 I outline the main fine-tuning methods that will be
described in more detail later in the chapter. Some methods result in
more than one model which I then perform evaluation on. As shown
in this specific table, following the path of the arrows, the pipeline
always start from the baseline model and then perform fine-tuning
with an augmented dataset.
Finally, in the second column I present the datasets which were
used for the evaluation of my models, while under each model I
show exactly which datasets were used for it’s evaluation.
==PAGE:72==
62
Experiment results
Fine-tuning
Evaluation Dataset
Baseline model -> pre-augm. Danpass[3.4.1] ->
alvenir_asr_da_eval
Data Augm.[3.4.2]
3.3.5
evaluated on:
alvenir_asr_da_eval, Plunkett
Baseline model -> pre-augm. Danpass[3.4.1] ->
Data Augm.[3.4.2] ->
Weight Freezing (different layers) 4.5.1
evaluated on:
alvenir_asr_da_eval, Plunkett , Common voice
Baseline model -> pre-augm. Danpass[3.4.1] ->
Data Augm.[3.4.2] ->
EWC 4.5.2
Plunkett
evaluated on:
3.3.2
alvenir_asr_da_eval, Plunkett , Common voice
Baseline model -> Plunkett -> Data Augm.->
EWC 4.6
evaluated on:
alvenir_asr_da_eval, Plunkett
Baseline model -> pre-augm. Danpass[3.4.1] ->
Data Augm.[3.4.2] ->
Common voice
Plunkett -> Data Augm.-> EWC 4.7
3.3.4
evaluated on:
alvenir_asr_da_eval, Plunkett
Table 4.2: An overview of all the fine-tuning pipelines and the evaluation
datasets that where used.
Most of the times as an evaluation datasets of my models I have
been using one of the datasets mentioned bellow:
==PAGE:73==
4.1 Introduction
63
1. alvenir_asr_da_eval dataset [3.3.5] which contains adult
voices that haven’t been used neither during training nor fine-
tuning. For that reason when I evaluate my new models on
this specific dataset and get low WER it means that those
models were not affected by catastrophic forgetting, since they
perform good on the old task.
2. Plunkett (Annie’s) dataset [3.3.2] containes Annie’s voice
when she was 1-2 year old. Therefore, the lower the evaluation
WER on the specific dataset, the better the models transcribe
voices of very young children.
In the image below I present the entire pipeline for models fine-
tuning. Of course, this may slightly vary for each different case, as
we saw in the table [4.2].
Figure 4.1: The overview of the fine-tuning process
==PAGE:74==
64
Experiment results
4.2
Summary of the results
In this particular section I have collected all the results of the meth-
ods that were briefly described in the previous section, for easier
comparison. By continuing reading this specific chapter, these re-
sults would be analyzed in more detail as well as various figures are
provided for a better understanding of the different process which
were taken place during fine-tuning. Below I give a table with the re-
sults of the base-line model evaluated on the two evaluation datasets
(alvenir_asr_da_eval dataset and Plunkett). Those dataset were
also used for the evaluation of the resulting fine-tuned models.
WER
alvenir_asr_da_eval dataset
Plunkett
Base model
0.082
0.98
Table 4.3:
Evaluation WER with alvenir_asr_da_eval and Plunkett
datasets on the base model (no fine-tuning).
Compare fine-tuned models with and without data-augmentation
[4.4]
The following table lists the evaluation WER of all the data augmen-
tation methods implemented in this master thesis. The evaluation is
performed on the alvenir_asr_da_eval dataset in order to examine
the effect that the phenomenon of Catastrophic forgetting had on
those models. The section [4.4] provides more information on those
particular methods and their positive effect during the implementa-
tion of fine-tuning of the base-line model. Bellow I present a list of
all the fine-tuned models that I am going to evaluate on the table
[4.4]:
• no aug: This model was fine-tuned using Danpass dataset
without any data augmentation.
==PAGE:75==
4.2 Summary of the results
65
• augm.
type 1: This model was fine-tuned using Danpass
dataset pre-augmented to make the speakers voices sound like
children’s voices (pitch shifting, duration changes, shifting of
formants). We do this specific augmentation as a pre-processing
sep on the data before the beginning of the fine-tuning process.
• augm.
type 2: This model was fine-tuned using Danpass
dataset and data augmentation to increase it’s generality (pitch
shifting, duration changes, applying gain, simulating room re-
verberation and adding background noise). The specific aug-
mentations are always taking place during fine-tuning, on each
batch of input data . Data belonging to the same batch un-
dergoes the exact same augmentations (same parameters and
transformations).
In different batches, different augmenta-
tions were performed (or no augmentation at all).
• both augm.: This model was fine-tuned using Danpass dataset
and combining augm. type 1 and augm. type 2.
alvenir_asr_da_eval dataset
WER
no aug.
augm. type 1
augm. type 2
both augm.
train with Danpass
0.267
0.211
0.15
0.152
Table 4.4: Evaluation WER with alvenir_asr_da_eval dataset on the
models fine-tuned using Danpass dataset in order to compare the effi-
ciency of different types of augmentations. augm. type 1 (pitch shifting
, duration changes and shifting of formants), augm type 2 (pitch shifting
, duration changes, apply Gain, add noise and simulating room revebra-
tion)
==PAGE:76==
66
Experiment results
(a) Evaluation WER using
alvenir_asr_da_eval dataset.
(b) WER using Plunkett dataset.
Figure 4.2: Evaluation WER using both alvenir_asr_da_eval and Plun-
kett datasets on the base model fine-tuned using different types of data
augmentations on Danpass dataset.
Continual learning with weight freezing[4.5.1]
In the table [4.5] I present the results I got by implementing the
method of Weight Freezing [3.5.1] using the datasets described just
above (alvenir_asr_da_eval dataset and Plunkett)[3.3.5, 3.3.2] for
models evaluation. As described in detail in 3.5.1 I froze different
layers of the model in order to check the effect of Catastrophic for-
getting on those models, as well as whether they have the ability to
receive new knowledge.
==PAGE:77==
4.2 Summary of the results
67
Models
WER
alvenir
Plunkett
Freeze Feature Extractor [1]
0.447
0.983
Freeze Feature Extractor and lm_head [2]
0.43
1.02
Freeze Encoder [3]
0.127
0.928
Freeze Encoder and lm_head [4]
0.379
0.950
Freeze Attention Layer of Encoder [5]
0.333
0.98
Freeze Attention Layer of Encoder and lm_head [6]
0.558
0.98
Freeze Feed Forward Layer of Encoder [7]
0.365
1.01
Freeze Feed Forward Layer of Encoder and lm_head [8]
0.57
0.949
Table 4.5: Evaluation WER using both alvenir_asr_da_eval and Plun-
kett datasets on the base model fine-tuned freezing different layers of the
network. The dataset which was used for fine-tuning is Danpass with
data-augmentation.
(a) Evaluation WER using
alvenir_asr_da_eval dataset.
(b) WER using Plunkett dataset.
Figure 4.3: Evaluation WER using both alvenir_asr_da_eval and Plun-
kett datasets on the base model fine-tuned by freezing different layers of
the network. The dataset which was used for fine-tuning is Danpass with
data-augmentation.
Continual learning with Elastic Weight consolidation[4.5.2]
Bellow I present a table containing the results after evaluating the
models which were fine-tuned using the augmented Danpass dataset
==PAGE:78==
68
Experiment results
and the method of Elastic Weight consolidation (EWC) with differ-
ent importance’s (λ).
Models
WER
alvenir
Plunkett
Elastic Weight consolidation with λ = 500
0.101
0.98
Elastic Weight consolidation with λ = 1000
0.092
0.95
Elastic Weight consolidation with λ = 2000
0.091
0.93
Table 4.6: Evaluation WER with using alvenir_asr_da_eval and Plun-
kett datasets on the base model fine-tuned with Danpass dataset. All
fine-tuning happen with the same model architecture, preforming EWC
with different λ values and data augmentation.
(a) Evaluation WER using
alvenir_asr_da_eval dataset.
(b) WER using Plunkett dataset.
Figure 4.4: Evaluation WER using both alvenir_asr_da_eval and Plun-
kett datasets on the base model fine-tuned with EWC with different im-
portance.
The most notable models:
Below I have gathered the results after evaluating the most notable
models for this thesis. The reason that I have chosen those specific
models is, both because some of them give the best results but also
because they are characteristic of the methods that I have been using
during the implementation of this thesis project:
==PAGE:79==
4.2 Summary of the results
69
1. model vol.
1: From section [4.5.2] where I perform fine-
tuning of the baseline-model using Danpass dataset for 100
epochs and implementing the method of EWC with λ =
1000.
2. model vol.
2: From section [4.5.2] where I perform fine-
tuning of the baseline-model using Danpass dataset for 100
epochs and implementing the method of EWC with λ =
2000.
3. model vol. 3: From section [4.6] where I perform fine-tuning
of the baseline-model using Plumket dataset for 100 epochs
and implementing the method of EWC with λ = 1000.
4. model vol. 4: From section [4.7] where I initially fine-tuned
the base model with EWC and λ = 2000 epochs using the
Danpass dataset changing the formants of the voices and the
median pitch to receive values around 288 Hz first 100 epochs,
256 Hz next 100 epochs and finally with Plunkett dataset
for the last 100 epochs.
Models
alvenir_asr_da_eval
Plunkett
no LM
LM
no LM
LM
baseline model
0.082
0.98
model vol. 1
0.092
0.082
0.955
0.889
model vol. 2
0.093
0.082
0.934
0.897
model vol. 3
0.078
0.072
0.825
0.76
model vol. 4
0.09
0.084
0.852
0.78
Table 4.7: Evaluation WER using alvenir_asr_da_eval and Plun-
kett (Annie’s) dataset on the most efficient models with or without
the use of Language Model boosting.
==PAGE:80==
70
Experiment results
(a) Evaluation WER using
alvenir_asr_da_eval dataset.
(b) WER using Plunkett dataset.
Figure 4.5: Evaluation WER using both alvenir_asr_da_eval and Plun-
kett datasets on the most efficient models.
4.3
Evaluating on Danish Children clini-
cal Dataset[3.3.3]
Table [4.8] presents the results from the evaluation of my most effi-
cient fine-tuned model [3] on the test dataset. Unfortunately, due to
time constraints, I did not had time to evaluate this in conjunction
with the language model boosting, which based on the above results,
it is estimated that it would have reduced the WER about 10%. In
addition for comparison purposes, I also quote the evaluation of the
baseline model, in order to make the level of contribution of the
fine-tuning porcess more obvious.
WER
Test dataset (children with OCD)
Base model
0.52
Fine-tuned model
0.39
Table 4.8:
Evaluation WER with alvenir_asr_da_eval and Plunkett
datasets on the base model (no fine-tuning).
==PAGE:81==
4.4 Compare models with and without data-augmentation 71
4.4
Compare models with and without data-
augmentation
In section [3] I extensively analysed the datasets that I used for fine-
tuning and the importance of data-augmentation in order to perform
my task with success. Below I will present more descriptively the
results of this particular method and its benefits into solving the
main problem of transcribing children voices in Danish.
4.4.1
Data Augmentations for child speech
My main task on this thesis is, as I mentioned above, to build an
ASR model that is able to transcribe children’s voices in Danish.
However, the basic problem that I had to resolve was the lack of
audio data from children (with corresponding transcription) in such
a small language as Danish. Moreover the existing data available
with children’s voices in danish were not sufficient enough to achieve
the expected efficiency.
For this very reason, as I have already mentioned on the above sec-
tion [3.4.1], it was necessary to artificially change the audio data in
order to make the adult voices sound like children and then perform
fine-tuning on the augmented data. More specifically the augmen-
tations that I have preformed in the original (Danpass) dataset are:
• Pitch shifting.
• Duration changes.
• Shifting of formants.
In the figure bellow [4.6] I presend the results after performing fine-
tuning of the base-model for 100 epochs with and without data
==PAGE:82==
72
Experiment results
Augmentations to make adult voices sound more like children’s.
It is clear that in the case of the augmented data the training starts
with a much higher WER around 20%. In addition, the training
WER of the simple model after 60 epochs starts to increase while
the evaluation WER remains in about the same level which might
be a sign of over-fitting.
In the evaluation case, the model fine-tuned with data augmentation
starts with a higher WER, which steadily decreases during training
but always remains higher from the one fine-tuned with no data
augmentation.
Figure 4.6: Evaluation and training error from fine-tuning the base model
with Danpass dataset with and without data augmentation (pitch shifting
, duration changes and shifting of formants)
4.4.2
Data Augmentations for real life recording
conditions
Most of the dataset that I am using to fine-tune the models in order
to transcribe children’s voices into Danish has all it’s recordings
==PAGE:83==
4.4 Compare models with and without data-augmentation 73
taken inside an audio recording room. For that reason all audio files
are really clear and far from the real life situation where there is
noise in the environment and the recordings are taken in different
rooms.
This lack of generality of my datasets is really dangerous for the
model, since after fine-tuning with such a clean audio data , it would
be abple to only transcribe really clean sound, which is not the usual
case.
Data augmentation is able to generate synthetic data from an ex-
isting dataset so that the generality of the model can be improved.
In this case I performed the data-augmentation which is extensively
explained in sub-section [3.4.2].
More specifically all the augmentations that I had performed in order
to make the dataset more generic are:
• Pitch sifting (to address the issue of limited speakers).
• Duration changes. (to address the issue that different speakers
speaks with different rates)
• Apply Gain.
• Simulating room reverberation.
• Add background noise.
The figure [4.7] presents graphically the results after performing fine-
tuning on the base-model for 100 epochs with and without data
Augmentations to match real life recording conditions.
In this particular case there are somewhat better results than the
previous one. Firstly, the model trained with data-augmentation
==PAGE:84==
74
Experiment results
does not seem to overfit that much, since the training WER is con-
tinuously decreasing until the eightieth epoch, moreover, the valida-
tion WER decreases throughout the whole fine-tuned process and
towards the end it becomes even smaller than the one with no aug-
mentation.
Therefore I can conclude that this specific combination of data-
augmentation that was implemented during the process of fine-tuning
is really important in order to combat overfitting, especially in the
case of the Plunkett dataset which does not have that much data.
In addition, It significantly helps making the audio more generic
so that the model is able to transcribe different types of voice and
adapt better to different external conditions (noise).
Figure 4.7: Evaluation and training error from fine-tuning the base model
with Danpass dataset with and without data augmentation (pitch shift,
duration changes, apply Gain, add noise, simulating room reverberation,
pitch shift and duration changes)
==PAGE:85==
4.4 Compare models with and without data-augmentation 75
4.4.3
Combine both type of augmentations
After studying the above two cases of data augmentation and the
results they have brought to the model, it makes sense to also in-
vestigate how their combination affects the base model. For that
reason I performed fine-tuning with both sets of augmentations and
recorded the results which are visible in the image below[4.8]
In this case, is pretty obvious how the two sets of augmentations
have affected the model in different ways. Firstly the slope of the
combined augmentation curve has for a longest period of time a
downward trend which is visible also, in the case of the model aug-
mented to match real life recording conditions (2nd type of augmen-
tation). In addition, the WER evaluation of the augmented model
gets higher error values. This was an expected behaviour since by
combining the two augmentation, the data are quite far from the
previous data with which the original model was trained on.
Figure 4.8: Evaluation and training error from fine-tuning the base model
with Danpass dataset with and without data augmentation (apply Gain,
add noise and simulating room revebration and pitch shifting , duration
changes and shifting of formants)
==PAGE:86==
76
Experiment results
4.4.4
Evaluating for Catastrophic Forgetting
As mentioned in subsection [3.3.5] I have been using alvenir_asr_da_eval
in order to evaluate my models. Those data is suitable for evalu-
ation as it has not been used neither for training the base model
nor during the fine-tuning process. In addition, it is really useful for
checking if catastrophic forgetting had occurred during fine-tuning.
More specifically, if the new models manage to have good results on
a dataset with adults, that means that they have not lost the prop-
erties of the baseline model and have also acquired new properties
during fine-tuning.
On the table [4.4] all the results of the fine-tuned models mentioned
above evaluated on alvenir_asr_da_eval dataset are given. From
there many usefull information can be extracted. First of all for the
cases of the models which were fine-tuned with the plane dataset
and augmentation type 1 (pitch and formant shifting and duration
changing) there is a really high WER, more than 0.20 while the base-
line model had just 0.094. This is a huge drop in performance and
it is really obvious that for those two models catastrophic forgetting
had happened.
That observation is more visible on the figure [4.7] were the evalua-
tion WER (evaluated on Danpass dataset with data which haven’t
been used during fine-tuning) is around 0.1 for the augmented model
and less that 0.1 for the plane model. From the above observations
it makes sense that those two models learn how to transcribe the
new data (Danpass) but they forget about the general knowledge
they had obtained from the base model before fine-tuning.
Moving on, the performance of the models improved a lot when fine-
tuning with data augmentation on Danpass dataset was performed.
This is more obvious in the case of second type of augmentation
(augmentation to match real life recording conditions). That might
be the result of the fact that the model becomes more general as
==PAGE:87==
4.5 Resolving Catastrophic Forgetting
77
the dataset increases, it also gets to know other cases and so it
did not overfit. After those result it is clear, how important data
augmentation is for the fine-tuning of the model.
4.5
Resolving Catastrophic Forgetting
As it was described extensively in section [2.6], the phenomenon
of catastrophic forgetting in NNs is a well known problem that is
observed during the process of continuous learning.
In order to understand how big the extend of this problem is, and
how much it affects my models, I performed fine-tuning of the base-
line model with the Plunkett dataset which includes voices of very
young children. The data of this particular dataset has really dif-
ferent distribution from the data that the pre-trained model was
trained on. Due to this large differentiation it is expected that the
phenomenon of Catastrophic forgetting would have a big effect on
the new model.
Below I provide the figure from the fine-tuning of the base-line model
with the Plunkett dataset. For evaluation dataset I chose the com-
mon voice dataset as it consists only of adult voices and has also
been used during the pre-training process of my model. For that
reason, if the evaluation WER values are big, it is an important
sign that the new model starts to forget the previous knowledge it
had acquired during pre-training.
The image [4.9] makes it clear, that resolving the problem of catas-
trophic forgetting is more than necessary for the correct fine-tuning
of the model. More specifically, the training WER decreases over
the epochs, while after 100 epochs it stabilizes at a fairly low value.
On the other hand, the evaluation WER increases at a very fast
rate. The value at which it stabilizes is extremely large considering
==PAGE:88==
78
Experiment results
that the baseline-model has the ability to transcribe adult voices
with an average WER less than 0.1.
Those particular results makes it really clear that the phenomenon
of catastrophic forgetting had occurred on my model. For this rea-
son, since this phenomenon had such drastic negative effects on my
model, the need to resolve it is more than necessary.
Figure 4.9: Evaluation error using common voice dataset and training
error from fine-tuning the base model with Plunkett dataset with data
augmentation (apply Gain, add noise and simulating room revebration
and pitch shifting , duration changes and shifting of formants)
In this particular unit I present the results from all the experiments
I did in order to resolve this big issue during the fine-tuning of my
model.The techniques I used and described in the section [3.5] are:
1. The method of weight freezing [3.5.1].
2. The method of Elastic Weight Consolidation [3.5.2].
==PAGE:89==
4.5 Resolving Catastrophic Forgetting
79
4.5.1
Continual learining with weight freezing
In this particular experiment I performed the weight freezing tech-
nique in order to solve the problem of catastrophic forgetting which
is a well-known characteristic of NNs during the implementation of
continuous learning. By using the technique of weight freezing, some
specific layers of the model got frozen in order for them to retain
the previous acquired information of the pre-trained model.
As mentioned on the unit [3.5.1], freezing different layers of the
NN, gives different results and affect the model in different ways.
In this particular section I had performed different experiments by
freezing different parts of the model, to investigate the effect that
this method had on my model during it’s fine tuning, and if it is
able to actively deal with the problem of catastrophic forgetting.
In order to study the effect this method had on the base model
by freezing different layers, I performed the above experiments for
reasons explained on [3.5.1]:
1. Freezing type 1: Freezing all weights of feature_extractor
(conv. layers).
2. Freezing type 2: Freezing both feature_extractor (conv.
layers) and the lm_head (final linear layer)
3. Freezing type 3: Freezing the middle layers, the encoder
and fine-tune the bottom most layer.
4. Freezing type 4: Freeze both the encoder and the lm-head.
5. Freezing type 5: Freeze only the attention layers of the
encoder.
6. Freezing type 6: Freeze only the attention layers of the
encoder and lm_head.
==PAGE:90==
80
Experiment results
7. Freezing type 7: Freeze Feed Forward layers of the En-
coder.
8. Freezing type 8: Freeze Feed Forward layers of the En-
coder and lm_head.
Figure 4.10: Evaluation WER using common voice dataset and training
WER from fine-tuning the base model with Danpass dataset with data
augmentation (apply Gain, add noise and simulating room revebration
and pitch shifting , duration changes and shifting of formants) and freez-
ing different layers of the NN
In the figures above [4.10], I present the results that I obtained by
performing fine-tuning while I had frozen one of the above parts of
the NN each time. For the fine-tuning I used the Danpass dataset
[3.3.1]. In addition I performed data augmentations to the audio
files in order for the adult voices to sound similar to children’s and
data augmentations in each batch during fine-tuning to simulate
real life recording conditions. Because the essence of this unit is to
study the phenomenon of catastrophic forgetting, I used the common
voice dataset [3.3.4] as an evaluation dataset, which, as I mentioned
previously, was used together with other datasets for the pre-training
==PAGE:91==
4.5 Resolving Catastrophic Forgetting
81
of the model. In that way (through the validation WER) it is more
clear if my model forgets the previously acquired knowledge during
fine-tuning, since when the validation WER is high it means that
the model has lost the property it had acquired during pre-training,
to transcribe adult voices.
Combining the information from both the table [4.5] and the fig-
ures [4.10] above it is obvious that whenever there is a big WER in
the dataset which containes adult voices it means that the target
model have almost completely forgotten about the previous knowl-
edge (pre-trained) model. This can be verified by looking at the
plots of the models that have greater than 0.5 WER in the common
voice dataset, where the training error of the target model is almost
tangent to the training error of the original model. Both of these
results are indisputable evidence that catastrophic forgetting had
occurred.
4.5.2
Continual learning with Elastic Weight con-
solidation
In this section I present the results from the implementation of the
Elastic Weight Consolidation method.
As described in detail at
[2.6.2] , this method is a regularization technique in which the model
remembers the previous task by choosing to slow down the learning
in the weights that were important during the pre-training. In order
to implement this technique I followed the steps that are extensively
described in section [3.5.2].
More specifically I fine-tuned the original model using as a new
dataset, the Danpass dataset [3.3.1]. Like I did in the previous ex-
periments I performed the well known data augmentations in order
to bring the audio closer to children’s voices by changing the for-
mant frequencies and perform augmentation to make the data more
generic.
==PAGE:92==
82
Experiment results
Moreover I used the common voice dataset [3.3.4] which is used for
the training of the original pre-trained model to approximate the
Fisher Information matrix . In the figures below [4.11] I present the
plots from the implementation of this specific method by changing
the λ parameter which indicates how much importance is given to
the old model parameters. The higher the values of this parameter,
the more important it is for my model to retain the old acquired
information.
Figure 4.11: Evaluation error using common voice dataset and training
error from fine-tuning the base model implementing Elastic Weight Con-
solidation technique with the Danpass dataset with data augmentation
(apply Gain, add noise and simulating room revebration and pitch shift-
ing , duration changes and shifting of formants) and using different λ
values
From the above figures [4.11] it is clear that the elastic weight consol-
idation method works as expected, since the higher the values of the
parameter λ, the more weight is given to the old significant weights.
That can be seen by looking at the validation loss which is getting
smaller and smaller as λ gets increased. For the case of the valida-
tion dataset I decided to use the Common voice [3.3.4] dataset which
includes adult voices, in order to evaluate the tendency of models
==PAGE:93==
4.5 Resolving Catastrophic Forgetting
83
to lose the ability to transcribe adult voices.
In contrast, the training loss decreased as λ decreased, thus giving
the model the margin to learn more information about the new
dataset, but forgetting more of the previous information. So the
whole point is to find the value of λ that suits my case the most, since
whichever value I choose, there is always a trade off of forgetting the
old information to learn the new one.
Moving on it is clear that the method of EWC preforms better than
the weight freezing method [4.10]. Firstly the new model has the
ability to learn the new dataset better as the training loss stabilizes
at very low values while at the same time the validation loss (on
common voice dataset) almost maintains the value of the original
model.
This is a huge improvement from the case of Weight freezing where
there were either very low values in the training loss and very high
values in the validation loss which signals the existence of catas-
trophic forgetting.
Or the validation loss was kept at fairly low
values forcing my model not to learn new information during fine-
tuning , as the training loss was high ass well.
As is logical due to the large differentiation between the children’s
dataset and the dataset with which the model was pre-trained on,
the implementation of the EWC method is more than necessary in
order to avoid the phenomenon of Catastrophic Forgetting, so that
the new model would also be able to transcribe adult voices too.
Then, as in the previous cases, in order to have a better understand-
ing of how well the specific models manage to address the problem of
catastrophic forgetting, I evaluated them using alvenir_asr_da_eval
dataset. Those results are available on the table [4.6].
==PAGE:94==
84
Experiment results
4.6
Fine-tuning with Plunkett dataset (us-
ing EWC)
Figure 4.12: Fine-tuning using Plunkett dataset (Jens) and data augmen-
tation .The evaluation data was taken from Plunkett dataset (Annies).
EWC is used with importance λ = 1000.
The Plunkett dataset [3.3.2] is the only Danish children’s dataset
that I have found to be available online. Unfortunately, as I de-
scribed in section [3.3.2.1], this particular dataset is very small and
limited to speakers. In this section I present the results from the
fine-tuning of the baseline model with this specific dataset. In order
to check if the fine-tuned model over-fits the data and because this
particular dataset has only two speakers (children), I used one child
(Jens) to perform the fine-tuning and the other child (Annie) for the
validation.
In addition, due to the lack of different speakers, (I performed fine-
tuning with only one child) I performed data augmentations which
are described in section [3.4]. The most important augmentation
in this particular case, beyond changing the recording conditions, is
==PAGE:95==
4.6 Fine-tuning with Plunkett dataset (using EWC)
85
changing the pitch of the voice so that we can fine-tune the model
as if there were different speakers.
In order to check if the model has forgotten the knowledge it had re-
ceived during pre-training, the dataset alvenir_asr_da_eval dataset
was used for evaluation, which as I have mentioned previously con-
tains adult voices. This specific model is model vol. 3 from the
table [4.7].
From the table [4.7] is clear that the Elastic weight consolidation
method works exactly as it should. The new model not only does not
forget the previous knowledge it received during pre-training, but it
seems to become even more effective in transcribing adult voices, as
it has a lower WER when evaluated in alvenir_asr_da_eval dataset
than the base-line model [4.3].
In addition, from the same table it is observed that the specific model
offers the best results in the case of the evaluation with Plunkett
dataset. Therefore it is the most efficient in transcribing not only
adult voices but also voices of young children (1 to 3 years old).
This particular result is an important indication that the model has
started to improve in transcribing children’s voices in Danish. It
may be that the specific WER (evaluation on Plunkett dataset) is
quite high, but the fact that it has the ability to transcribe adult
voices better than the baseline and that it also improved in chil-
dren’s voices, is a good indication that it might be able to improve
transcriptions of children of older ages (test dataset).
This assumption is based on the fact that as children grow older
their voices began to converge more and more towards the voice of
adults. Looking at table [4.8] our hypothesis is confirmed as the
specific model has more than 10% lower WER than the base-line
model. In this table I performed evaluation of the models with the
test dataset which consists of recorded sessions with a psychologist
of children with OCD in danish. These children are considerably
==PAGE:96==
86
Experiment results
older than the children in the Plunkett dataset as they are close to
their teenage years.
4.7
Continue fine-tuning of [4.5.2] using
Plunkett dataset
In this section I will investigate the scenario of fine-tuning my base-
line model using a combination of the methods of the above units
[4.5.2 and 4.6]. In short, I will initially perform fine-tuning with the
augmented Danpass dataset (adult voices modified to sound like
children’s), and then I will continue fine-tuning the model using the
Plunkett dataset for another 100 epochs.
More specifically, initially I had performed fine-tuning of the base
model with EWC and importance 2000 for 100 epochs using the
augmented Danpass dataset where I have modified the median pitch
ot the voices in order to take values around 288 Hz (first figure to the
left). Moving on I continue the fine tuning process of the resulting
model but using augmented data with median pitch values around
256 Hz (middle figure). Finally I have used the fine-tuned model to
continue fine-tuning but with Plunkett dataset this time.
As I had previously mentioned, the particular dataset has limited
data (I used Jens dataset for training and Annie’s for evaluation)
and for this reason I performed the fine-tuning only for 50 epochs in
order not to observe any over-fitting of the model on the particular
dataset (figure to the right).
In order to evaluate all models in
unseen children’s data I used Jens dataset for evaluation.
The reason I chose to perform fine-tuning of this particular model is
because I believed that by using both datasets (Danpass augmented
in order to be closer to children case and Plunkett) I would be able to
introduce information from both data into my model and therefore
==PAGE:97==
4.7 Continue fine-tuning of [4.5.2] using Plunkett dataset 87
to get a better performance in the test-case where we evaluate with
the children dataset with OCD population.
Bellow I present the figures of the above procedure. The reason I
chose to present the plots in different sub-plots and not in one plot
is because I wanted to make it clear that each fine-tuning process
started by continuing the previous process and changing the data
set each time. Secondly as it is obvious from the last image from the
right because the Plunkett dataset is very different from danpass, it
transfers the training error to very high values, which made the plot
less understandable. Nevertheless, on the x-axis I have taken the
values for the epochs from 0 to 300, which makes it more obvious to
the reader that the fine-tuning continues but with a different dataset
each time.
Figure 4.13: Fine-tuning using augmented Danpass dataset (first two
figures) and then Jens dataset for the final one. All fine-tuning happen
sequential.
Comparing both images [4.12] and [4.13] and the results from the
table [4.7] where this model was referred as model vol.4 and the
previous one as model vol. 3 [4.6] the following conclusions could
be drawn:
==PAGE:98==
88
Experiment results
1. From table [4.7] it is clear that the evaluation error on the
alvenir_asr_da_eval dataset of this specific model (model vol.
4) is greater than model vol. 3. This is an indication that
the phenomenon of catastrophic forgetting is more intense in
this case. The reason for that result might be that for this
model fine-tuning was performed for more epochs on different
datasets from the pre-trained one (300 epochs).
2. The evaluation error on the Plunkett dataset (Annies) is lower
in the first case image [4.12] compared to the second image
[4.13] (the right most sub-plot). Therefore, it seems that the
first model preforms better in transcribing children’s voices
between 3 to 1 years old. This is also obvious by looking the
evaluation WER of those two models (model vol. 3 and 4) for
the case of Plunkett dataset at the table [4.7].
4.8
Boosting Wav2Vec2 with 5-grams
In section [2.4] I described the benefits of using the Language Model
for boosting an ASR model. All of the above can be confirmed by
the results in [2] in the section of the appendix, where the use of the
Language model is very effective in reducing the WER.
From Table 9, in the appendix section of [2], they conclude that
by using 10 min labeled data there is a decrease of 32% of the
WER by using a 4-gram Language model, while in the case of 100h
labeled it is just 1.2% since the WER of the fine-tuned model with
no language model is already really low.
For the case of the Danish models by observing the results on the
models’ page1 it is clear that there is a reduction of 7% in the case
of alvenir-asr-da-eval. By taking those results into consideration,
1https://huggingface.co/Alvenir/wav2vec2-base-da-ft-nst
==PAGE:99==
4.9 Interpreting Best-result model (model vol. 3)
89
I used and train a language model as described in section [3.6] in
order to increase the efficiency of my models.
In table [4.7] I have included all the results from some of the most
important models that we extracted during the implementation of
this master thesis. There I provide the WER evaluation both with
the use of the Language model and without. This is done for the
sake of comparison, and it is obvious that in almost every cases the
use of the Language model resulted in a drop of the WER of all
models of the order of 10%.
4.9
Interpreting Best-result model (model
vol. 3)
In this section I give the results from interpreting a model through
visualizing the model’s attribution on a samples, in order to inves-
tigate the dependencies over the entire sequence of latent represen-
tations end-to-end for T steps.
4.9.1
Visualizing Feature Extraction
The first block of the Wav2Vec 2.0 model consists of the Feature En-
coder which job is to reduce the dimensionality of the audio data,
by encoding the raw audio into representations with discrete time
unit as I have extensively describe in section [2.2] . More specif-
ically it takes as input a raw audio X and outputs latent speech
representations z1, ..., zT for T time-steps [2]. The specific part of
the model contains a number of temporal convolutional layers (7
consecutive temporal convolutional layers). In other words this part
of the model processes the raw waveform of the speech audio with
a multilayer convolutional neural network to get latent audio repre-
==PAGE:100==
90
Experiment results
sentations. The total stride of the encoder determines the number
of time-steps T which are input to the Transformer.
In the Appendix section figure [1] I present the total conductance
of each neuron in the layer’s output of all 7 consecutive temporal
convolutional neural layers. To get the total conductance of all layers
I used Captums Layer Conductance.2
As it is clear from the specific figure:
1. The number of temporal features decreases in deeper temporal
convolutional layers.
2. Successive temporal convolutional layers encode all features
into representation vectors with increase in density and infor-
mation.
More specifically they learn low-level to high-level
features in the subsequent layers.
4.9.2
Visualizing Positional Convolutions Embed-
ding
The output of the feature encoder, the latent representations, are
fed to the Transformer network to build contextualized representa-
tions for the entire sequence z1...zT−> c1...cT. The first part of the
encoder block is Positional Convolutional Embedding which consists
of a convolutional layer which functions as relative positional em-
bedding [2]. It’s purpose is to create a relative positional embedding
for each projected representation
In order to get the attributes of the specific block of our model I used
Captums LayerIntegratedGradients3 which outputs attribution
2https://captum.ai/api/layer.html
3https://captum.ai/api/layer.html
==PAGE:101==
4.9 Interpreting Best-result model (model vol. 3)
91
in tensor form with dimensions (T time-steps x 1024). I compute
the attribution with respect to the layer output (1024 neurons).
Moving on, I present the results of the attribution score of the spe-
cific part of my model. In order to make more clear the way that
scores change in the output of Positional Convolutional Embedding
I used an audio example, and visualize a heat map of the attribution
scores of its output against time steps. In addition, I matched the
time-steps with the tokens that I got at the output of my model
during decoding, in order to have an intuition of which time step
corresponds to which letter in the output of my model and how
much the specific part of the model contributes to finding the spe-
cific result.
The audio that I used for this purpose is an example from the eval-
uation dataset of the Plunkett [3.3.2] dataset (Annie) with tran-
scription: "kan jeg også lave den der hov". First I have ploted the
heatmap of the attribution of all neurons for all time stamps. For
better visualization instead of the ’<pad>’ symbol on the x-axis I
used the ’-’.
As it can perceived from the figure [2] on the Appendix subplot
(a),the highest scores existed in the time-steps that corresponds to
tokens, while the time-steps that do not correspond to a token (’-’)
received much lower scores. In addition it is noticeable that only
one set of neurons played the main role in this specific part of the
model, and received the highest scores. These are neurons 580 to
640, while the rest of the neurons received way much lower scores
and thus contribute less to the final output of my model. In order to
make this more obvious, I present a second subplot (b) of the figure
[2] of the Appendix that I have focused on the specific neurons.
==PAGE:102==
92
Experiment results
4.9.3
Visualizing Attention Matrices
Essentially the entire operation of the Attention Mechanism can be
summarized as a mapping of a query and a set of key-value pairs to
an output (all of them are vectors). In order to calculate the output
of the relevant part of the model, a weighted sum is obtained of the
values (V of dimension dv), where the weight assigned to each value
is computed by a compatibility function of the query (Q of dimension
dimension dk) with the corresponding key (K of dimension dk) [3].
Moving on I am using the method described in [3.7] in order to
interpret in the best possible way the attention mechanism. More
specifically I compute the normalized activation’s ||αf(x)|| by doing
the following steps:
• I use Captum’s LayerActivation4 algorithm to access the out-
puts of value layer of the attention mechanism.
• Then I get the weights of the Dense Features .
• I compute f(x) score by multiplying the value vector with the
weights of the dense vector for all layers.
In the figure [3] of the appendix I am presenting ||f(x)|| scores for
all layers(24) for example audio with transcription: "kan jeg også
lave den der hov" from the evaluation dataset of the Plunkett [3.3.2]
dataset (Annie). In addition for better understanding of the values
I matched the time-steps with the tokens that I get at the output of
my model during decoding (instead of the ’<pad>’ symbol on the
x-axis I use the ”).
From this particular image the following observation can be taken
into consideration. Firstly, the specific scores seems to work cor-
4https://captum.ai/api/layer.html
==PAGE:103==
4.9 Interpreting Best-result model (model vol. 3)
93
rectly as we see that the highest scores are concentrated in the time-
steps that correspond to a specific token. In addition it is clear that
different heads focus on different time-steps, parts of the sequence,
as well as different layers pay more attention to different parts of
the audio. For example, layer 14 seems to focus in the middle of
the audio, while layer 1 shows higher scores at the beginning of the
audio.
Moving on in figure [4] I present the scores ||αf(x)|| for the final layer
of the attention mechanism. The way those scores were calculated
is by multiplying the previous score f(x) with the attention weight
matrix α.
If the figures with diagonal patterns are not taken into consideration
since they are a classic artifact when attention scores are presented,
and do not offer any particular information, the rest of the figures
offer very useful information on how the different time-steps are
interrelated.
The consecutive tokens have high interaction with each other which
makes sense in order for the model to form words. For example the
6th head there is a big relationship between ’hå’and ’h’, as well as
the letters of consecutive words seems to have big correlation. For
example the 14th head relates ’der’ with ’hå’.
==PAGE:104==
Chapter 5
Conclusion
5.1
Overall conclusions
I created a fine-tuned Wav2vec 2.0 model [3] for the speech recog-
nition system for children in danish, and archive to improve the
performance form the baseline model by 10%.
To achieve these results, I started with the base model [3.2] and
started adding pieces to the pipeline [4.1] to increase its performance.
Firstly I experimented by applying various data augmentation tech-
niques and explore different methods in order to overcome the issue
of Catastrophic forgetting.
I implemented two different data augmentation schema for two dif-
ferent reasons. The first one is applied in the case where I performed
fine-tunning of the model with data containing audio files of adult
voices in order for the voices of adults to sound closer to the voices
==PAGE:105==
5.2 Future research
95
of children. The second method was performed in order to make the
dataset more generic and less prone to overfitting. This improved
the WER by 5% in the case of Plunkett dataset (table [4.7] baseline
model =0.98 while model vol. 2 [2]=0.934 ).
In addition I tried two different methods to resolve the problem of
catastrophic forgetting, the weight Freezing and the Elastic weight
consolidation.
The second one gave impressive results for avoid-
ing the issue of catastrophic forgetting for the model [3] which was
fine-tuned on Plunkett dataset. The final model (0.078 WER) had
even better WER on the alvenir_asr_da_eval dataset (adult voices)
from the baseline one (0.082).
Finally I implemented an n-gram language model to boost my lan-
guage model. This has also improved the efficiency of my model as
it can be seen on the table [4.7], when the language model is used
there is an improvement of the results more than 5%.
In conclusion, my most efficient model [3] with language model
boosting produces better results in the case we are considering, i.e.
transcribing children’s voices in Danish.
When children are very
young 1-3 years old there is an improvement of 20%. In the case
of the test dataset, children in their teenage years, there is an im-
provement of 10% but without having used the language model. It
is estimated that if I had performed evaluation using my language
model the WER will dropped by 20%.
5.2
Future research
The initial aim of this thesis was to improve the effectiveness of
ASR system into transcribing children voices in danish from clinical
population (OCD). This was partially implemented as I managed
to improve the WER of the baseline model when it is evaluated on
==PAGE:106==
96
Conclusion
children’s voices by 20%.
However, my final model needs to undergo a lot of improvements to
be able to show a satisfactory WER (less than 20%). Some ideas
that I have and I believe they will significantly improve the perfor-
mance of the model are, firstly to extract data from the test dataset
(children with OCD) in order to use it for training. As I have pre-
viously mentioned, the main problem of this thesis was the lack of
data. Unfortunately, I didn’t had any data available on children of
the age groups I am examining to fine-tune my model. I strongly
believe that fine-tuning even with a few minutes of data from the
test dataset will significantly improve the performance of the model.
I can base this idea on the fact that the model’s performance im-
proved even when I fine-tuned the Plunkett dataset which had data
from much younger children.
An additional idea which, however, needs a lot of time for its im-
plementation but I believe would improve the performance of the
model significantly, is to carry out pre-training of a Wav2Vec 2.0
model using untranscribed children’s voices which are much easier
to obtain (youtube etc.) and then fine-tuning the above model in
order to specialize it in children’s voices.
==PAGE:107==
Bibliography
[1] Faustino Gomez J¨urgen Schmidhuber Alex Graves, Santi-
ago Fern´andez.
Connectionist temporal classification:
La-
belling unsegmented sequence data with recurrent neural net-
works. URL: https://www.cs.toronto.edu/~graves/icml_
2006.pdf.
[2] Abdelrahman
Mohamed
Michael
Auli
Alexei
Baevski,
Henry
Zhou.
wav2vec
2.0:
A
framework
for
self-
supervised learning of speech representations.
2020.
URL:
https://arxiv.org/pdf/2006.11477.pdf.
[3] Niki Parmar Jakob Uszkoreit Llion Jones Aidan N. Gomez
Łukasz Kaiser Illia Polosukhin Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer.
Attention is all you need. 2017. URL: https://arxiv.org/
pdf/1706.03762.pdf.
[4] Jonathan
Bgn.
An
illustrated
tour
of
wav2vec
2.0.
URL:
https://jonathanbgn.com/2021/09/30/
illustrated-wav2vec-2.html.
[5] Paul Boersma. Accurate short-term analysis of the fundamen-
tal frequency and the harmonics-to-noise ratio of a sampled
==PAGE:108==
98
BIBLIOGRAPHY
sound.
URL: https://www.fon.hum.uva.nl/paul/papers/
Proceedings_1993.pdf.
[6] Francis CHARPENTIER Eric MOULINES. Pitch-synchronous
waveform processing techniques for text-to-speech synthesis us-
ing diphones. 1990. URL: https://courses.engr.illinois.
edu/ece420/sp2017/PSOLA.pdf.
[7] Estimation lemma. Catastrophic interference — Wikipedia, the
free encyclopedia, 2022. URL: https://en.wikipedia.org/
wiki/Catastrophic_interference.
[8] Sho Yokoi Kentaro Inui Goro Kobayashi, Tatsuki Kuribayashi.
Attention is not only a weight: Analyzing transformers with
vector norms.
2020.
URL: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2004.
10102.pdf.
[9] Awni Hannun. Sequence modeling with ctc. URL: https://
distill.pub/2017/ctc/.
[10] Neil Rabinowitza Joel Venessa Guillaume Desjardinsa Andrei
A. Rusua Kieran Milana John Quana Tiago Ramalhoa Ag-
nieszka Grabska-Bar James Kirkpatricka, Razvan Pascanua.
Overcoming catastrophic forgetting in neural networks. URL:
https://arxiv.org/abs/1612.00796.
[11] Changyou Chen3 Rajiv Ratn Shah Jui Shah, Yaman Ku-
mar Singla. What all do audio transformer models hear? prob-
ing acoustic representations for language delivery and its struc-
ture. 2021. URL: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2101.00387.pdf.
[12] Qiqi Yan Kedar Dhamdhere, Mukund Sundararajan. How im-
portant is a neuron?
2018. URL: https://arxiv.org/pdf/
1805.12233.pdf.
[13] Carson Lam.
intro_continual_learning.
URL: https:
//github.com/clam004/intro_continual_learning/blob/
main/START_HERE.ipynb.
==PAGE:109==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
99
[14] Daniel Jurafsky James H. Martin. N-gram Language Models.
2021. URL: https://web.stanford.edu/~jurafsky/slp3/3.
pdf.
[15] Allam Mousa.
Voice conversion using pitch shifting al-
gorithm by time stretching with psola and re–sampling.
2010. URL: http://iris.elf.stuba.sk/JEEEC/data/pdf/1_
110-08.pdf.
[16] Panayiotis Georgiou Prashanth Gurunath Shivakumar. Trans-
fer learning from adult to children for speech recognition: Eval-
uation, analysis and recommendations.
2018.
URL: https:
//arxiv.org/pdf/1805.03322.pdf.
[17] Brian King Jasha Droppo Andreas Stolcke Viet Anh Trinh,
Pegah Ghahremani and Roland Maas.
Reducing geographic
disparities in automatic speech recognition via elastic weight
consolidation. URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2207.07850.
[18] Shinji
Watanabe
Paola
Garc´ıa
Yohei
Kawaguchi
Yuki Takashima, Shota Horiguchi.
Updating only encoders
prevents catastrophic forgetting of end-to-end asr models.
2022. URL: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2207.00216.pdf.
==PAGE:110==
Appendix
==PAGE:111==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
101
Link to my thesis code
Interpreting Best-result model (model vol. 3)
Figure 1: Heat map of the total conductance of each temporal convolu-
tional layer of the Feature Encoder for the example audio with transcrip-
tion: "kan jeg også lave den der hov".
==PAGE:112==
102
BIBLIOGRAPHY
(a) Heat map of the attributions of the output layer of
Positional Convolutional Embedding .
(b) Heat map of the attributions of the output layer of
Positional Convolutional Embedding focusing on the
neurons with the highest scores.
Figure 2: Attributes of the output layer of Positional Convolutional Em-
bedding of the The example audio with transcription: "kan jeg også lave
den der hov"
==PAGE:113==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
103
Figure 3: ||f(x)|| scores for all layers(24) for example audio with tran-
scription: "kan jeg også lave den der hov"
==PAGE:114==
104
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Figure 4: ||αf(x)|| scores for the last layer(24th) for example audio with
transcription: "kan jeg også lave den der hov".
