==PAGE:1==
DTU Wind and Energy Systems
Interactive design of wind farm layout using 
hand-held devices
Khalid Khyjman
DTU Wind-M-0503 
January 2023
==PAGE:2==
DTU Wind-M-0503 
January 2023
ECTS: 30
Education: Master of Science
Supervisors:
Suguang Dou
Ju Feng
DTU Wind and Energy Systems
Remarks:
This report is submitted as partial 
fulfillment of the requirements for 
graduation in the above education at the 
Technical University of Denmark.
Technical University of Denmark 
Department of Wind and Energy Systems 
Frederiksborgvej 399
DK-4000 Roskilde
www.vindenergi.dtu.dk
Author: Khalid Khyjman
Title: Interactive design of wind farm layout 
using hand-held devices
DTU Wind and Energy Systems is a department of the 
Technical University of Denmark with a unique 
integration of research, education, innovation and 
public/private sector consulting in the field of wind and 
energy. Our activities develop new opportunities and 
technology for the global and Danish exploitation of 
wind and energy. Research focuses on key technical-
scientific fields, which are central for the development, 
innovation and use of wind energy and provides the 
basis for advanced education.
==PAGE:3==
Acknowledgements
As I started off with this master thesis project, my mind was loaded with quite
amount of doubt and uncertainty about whether I’ll be able to successfully accomplish
this thesis project, due to the lack of preliminary knowledge and insight in wind
energy science. Coming from a background with Computer Science, I had to start
from very basics in the domain of wind energy. Fortunately I was lucky to have been
assigned to very competent, helpful and caring supervisors Suguang Dou and Ju
Feng whom helped me with their guidance and support, to get through the complex
challenges I was facing in times during the process. Working as a part of the research
group, combining different technologies to facilitate wind farm planning, has boosted
my motivation. I am special grateful for the understanding, empathy and support I
received from my main supervisor Suguang, whom was invested in my success when
my health condition failed me mid project period, which put me through a tough
situation. Also grateful for the assistance provided by Marianne H. Arbirk in the
administrative paper work in regard to project extension and leave of absence.
I also like to express my deepest appreciation to Mikkel Friis-Møller whom has
been an essential asset in gaining understanding of PyWake, and the support he
has provided for me in short notices to overcome the challenges. Nevertheless I
would also like to thank my brother-alike best friend Hakim Lund for being there for
me, providing me with moral and social support with his delightful company and
encouragements in times when the project pressure was getting tense. Despite many
unforeseeable challenges I am content with the accomplishment of this thesis, and
this achievement would not have been possible without the significant roles of these
wonderful supportive people.
page 1 of 50
==PAGE:4==
Abstract
The objective of this master thesis is to investigate, how to transfer the basic function-
alities of wind farm simulation tool PyWake, into handheld mobile devices such as
tablet or mobile phones. This facilitates a user with non-technical qualifications to be
able to design and configure a wind farm and retrieve the annual energy production
(AEP) of the constructed wind farm layout. In this version the simulation allow the
user to design and construct only one wind farm layout per session. The argument
later in the report reasons, that in the later versions for future developments, it is
significant that the prototype supports the design of several wind farms layouts per
session for the sake of comparison of AEP results form different wind farms. The
user has no geographical constraints on GIS map, which means any location can be
chosen by the user on the global map. In order to achieve this objective a prototype
has been developed that combines handheld mobile technology with PyWake.
This work demonstrates the benefits of combining the power of computational tools,
the GIS system. and user-friendly interaction. GIS system is also increasingly used
in the digitisation of wind energy, for example, recycling of end-of-life blades, digital
twins of wind farms. All these topics benefits from the mapping on a GIS system.
This combination of two technologies implies that the design efforts of wind farm
is performed on the mobile device and the heavy computation is performed on a
computer, connected through a client-server connection.
page 2 of 50
==PAGE:5==
CONTENTS
CONTENTS
Contents
Acknowledgement
1
Abstract
2
1
Introduction
5
1.1
Motivation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
1.2
Project goal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
1.3
Cross domain feasibility study . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
1.4
Organisation of research . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2
Wind farm planning
11
2.1
Wind farm Site . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.2
Wind turbine wake effect . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2.3
Paywake . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
2.4
Annual Energy Production AEP
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3
Design
15
3.1
Design requirements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3.2
Design choices . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
3.3
Functional requirements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3.4
Server-client architecture . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
4
Results
20
4.1
Design architecture . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
4.2
GIS Mapbox . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
4.2.1
Floating buttons
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
4.2.2
Mapbox implementation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
4.3
Site boundary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
4.4
Turbine placement
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
4.4.1
Point in Polygon algorithm PIP . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
4.5
Combining App with PyWake . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
4.6
Prototype testing and survey . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
4.6.1
Preparation - testing - questionnaire
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
4.6.2
Survey analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
5
Future work
32
6
Conclusion
34
6.1
Strengths and weaknesses
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
6.2
Reflection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
7
References
38
List of Appendices
40
A Appendix: Instructions
40
page 3 of 50
==PAGE:6==
CONTENTS
CONTENTS
B Appendix: Participant backgrounds
42
C Appendix: Knowledge and opinion
43
D Appendix: Educational or Professional
45
E Appendix: Intuitive or Complex
46
F Appendix: Liked Features
47
G Appendix: Learned topics
48
H Appendix: Improvement suggestions
49
page 4 of 50
==PAGE:7==
1
INTRODUCTION
1
Introduction
The increasing automation of the industrial production in world economy, and
the growing electricity consumption by consumers in average household, creates a
vast demand for energy production. The world is shifting towards abolishing energy
production on fossil fuels to sustainable green energy production, to reduce greenhouse
gas emissions. This has created a vacuum of energy crisis, which has become a
challenge for diverting energy supply to more sustainable green energy production.
Therefor there is a rapid growth of demand for extension of green energy production
world wide. One of the promising alternatives of clean, sustainable and economic
feasible energy sources is wind energy [14]. With wind farms on land and on-shore
has lead to a range of disadvantages such as negative visual disruption of landscape,
negative impact on wild life, operation noise to the surrounding environment. The
raise of onshore and on land wind farms with these disadvantages has induced a social
opposition with not-in-my-backyard NIMBY sentiments. These challenges creates
delays on realisation and expansion of wind farm projects on land and onshore areas
[22].
The relatively recent discoveries suggest a range of advantages of offshore and floating
wind farms. The most important is less disruption of wind flow and wind speed on
off-shore sites for wind farms due to flat and open terrains, has created the need for
exploring the potentials for moving wind energy production further into the ocean
[4].
The growth of wind farm projects has created a demand for sophisticated computation
tools and applications for planning future wind farm projects and optimising existing
wind farms. Such computational tools provide approximate assessments of wind
energy production and efficiency.
Applications for planning wind farms also called decision support tools DST which is
software applications, serve several objectives. DST provide assistance to planners,
decision-makers, industrial stakeholders and investors in the processes of development
and implementation of wind farms. Assistance to achieve authorization and endow-
ment, prediction for AEP in order to attract investment, which requires evidence as
accurate assessments of yield [16].
A wind farm project comprises a complex contemplation substantiated with measure-
ment data of historical average wind resources, mapped with geographical locations
data, ground elevation data if it is onshore, water depth data if it is offshore, in order
to select suitable location for a wind farm [17].
1.1
Motivation
As wind energy is rapidly increasing, it has also attracted more attention in public
society and education sector. While increasingly advanced computational tools are
developed in the industrial and academic environments, there is not an easy-to-use
or intuitive to play tool available for the ordinary public society. Such a tool can
help to increase the public knowledge and acceptance of wind energy. In contrast to
the videos and animations that explain the wind energy without interaction, creates
a demand for interactive simulation tools that allow the users to interact with the
page 5 of 50
==PAGE:8==
1.2
Project goal
1
INTRODUCTION
wind farm layout design. For example, moving turbine around, determining the
site location on a map and drawing a boundary for the wind farm, which provides
instant feedback on the interaction. The interaction and instant feedback help the
users to intuitively understand the physics underlying the wind farm layout design.
In case the interaction is a useful operation, such an interactive tool can also be
a prototyping of a more advanced interactive software for academic and industrial
applications. Such interactive tools have been proven useful in other modern fields.
The prototype this thesis managed to achieve, has been simplified for proof of concept.
Most of significant technical elements has been whittled down for the purpose of
simplification, to keep the focus on previously mentioned main objectives, which
aims to maintain high level abstraction level on technicalities in the simulation.
Due to the reduced level of technical complexity, the prototype at this stage can
not be applied in the industry of wind energy as a planning tool for wind farms or
accurate assessment of AEP output. However the prototype lays a ground for further
development to implement more complexity into the prototype, which demonstrates
promising perspectives for industrial applications.
However the prototype provides an educational value for increasing the public
awareness in regard to basic concepts of wind energy. In later and more advanced
versions of the prototype, it is also able to insert significant value to high school
educations in rising awareness and understanding of wind energy, as well as in the
fields of wind energy studies in academic educations.
1.2
Project goal
The main objective of this thesis is to investigate a new, alternative approach for a
planning and energy production estimation tool for establishing onshore, offshore and
floating wind farms. The contribution of this study aims on simplification of technical
complexity, easy to use, intuitiveness of wind farm layout planning. Secondary this
project aims to propagate and provide training in scientific knowledge of wind energy.
The economic analysis, feasibility of such wind farms were considered beyond the
scope of this study.
The project goal is:
1. Implementation of an app prototype on android platform for designing wind
farm layouts, for two purposes:
• Enable users with less or no prior coding skills to use the prototype
design tool for professional designing, planning, configuring, optimising,
evaluating wind farm layouts, estimating power production.
• Disseminate scientific knowledge of wind energy and wind farms for the
public society, in the education sector, to rise awareness about wind energy
knowledge components.
2. Measure the prototype effectiveness and usability in terms of professional
application in wind farm layout design and educational value.
page 6 of 50
==PAGE:9==
1.3
Cross domain feasibility study
1
INTRODUCTION
The professional usability and educational dissemination purpose of the prototype are
different for the two project objectives. Table [1] presents the desired achievements,
and what each desire requires.
Desired Achievements for users, requirements for prototype
Desired
Requirement
Description
Easy to use
No coding skills
Users with no prior coding skills should
be enabled to use the prototype to plan
and design wind farms.
Interactive user
interface
Handheld mobile device
Mobile device technologies enable users
to interact with the design of farm lay-
outs with minimal efforts.
Configurable
Optional menu choices
Users are enabled to change configu-
rations of components with multiple
choice menu options, buttons or finger
gestures.
Intuitive
functions
Graphical representation
Users are enabled with geographical ori-
entation on the site and interact with
components with finger gestures.
Estimate energy
production
couple
with
computa-
tional unite
The prototype is enabled to utilise com-
putational component in order to pro-
duce energy production corresponding
to the designed wind farm layout.
Table 1: Goal objectives
1.3
Cross domain feasibility study
This thesis can fairly be recognised as a pilot project in feasibility study. A feasibility
study have a investigative nature. The distinctive features of a feasibility study, is
to identify the main objectives and loosely formulated requirements or achievement
desires, where there is an expectation for a technological solution, that can be a
means of remedying the situation and where specific system requirements cannot be
specified in advance. In this regard the purpose of the feasibility study will be to
identify what type of technological solution can support a workflow and needs in an
organization or in a target group, by illustrating the use of these objectives.
This section describes the three topics this thesis implicates. In initial phase a great
deal of investigation has been conducted in wind energy science, to narrow down
and identify the the key elements of offshore wind energy production. Next was to
identify how these key elements of wind energy can be represented in mobile app
development to enable users interaction with these key elements in order to produce
different results.
This study combines three different domain studies that are explored in conjunction
with each other to accomplish the project goals. The three domains studies include:
• Wind energy production
page 7 of 50
==PAGE:10==
1.4
Organisation of research
1
INTRODUCTION
– Wind farm layout design.
– Computation of energy production.
– Wind Turbine wake effect
– Wind resources
• Software design and architecture
– User interface design implementation.
– Implementation of coupling user interface and computational component.
– Usability testing.
• Evaluating the educational and professional value of the prototype.
– Conducting a survey to assess the educational and professional value of
the prototype.
The framework conditions of this study are:
• Essential topics and a suitable degree of simplification are identified in this
study. The simulation behind the prototype includes simplified methods of
wind farm layout design in a user interactive manner, with emphasis on future
improvements.
• The amount of functional requirements to be implemented has been estimated
proportionally to the time frame of this study. The most essential functional
requirements for wind farm layout use case has been identified and prioritised
to fit the time frame.
• The prototype interactive user interface is implemented in Kotlin which is the
primary programming language for Android platform.
• The prototype has been user-tested to evaluate the effectiveness of educational
value and properties.
This project combines the computation of the power generation of wind farm and
an interactive user interface on hand-held devices. The computation of the power
generation of wind farm is based on computationally efficient physics-based models
and/or data-driven machine learning models. The interactive environment is based
on mobile device app development on Android development platform in Kotlin
framework.
1.4
Organisation of research
This thesis incorporates three domain topics that are investigated in conjunction
with each other to complete the project objectives. One of them is wind energy wind
farm planning optimisation, wind effect calculations. Next is graphical representation
and implementation of a prototype with pertaining functional requirements. Last
and not least, the feasibility study for professional and educational application. The
page 8 of 50
==PAGE:11==
1.4
Organisation of research
1
INTRODUCTION
organisation of this project was constructed in a way to emphasise the justification
for every decision made to produce the resulting prototype as clearly as possible.
The organisation of methodologies for this project is illustrated as a flowchart in
figure:[1].
Figure 1: Organisation of research
Following the investigation phase, investigative research has been employed in existing
wind energy interactive application and tools. Investigated how already existing
PyWake computational component operates. Conducted interview meetings with
wind energy researchers and developers to clarify the main practices in wind farm
planning and optimisation. Investigated mobile device platform android to assess
the possibilities and limitations for implementation of the objectives. The design
framework, dynamics and elements are then outlined and used to determine objectives
page 9 of 50
==PAGE:12==
1.4
Organisation of research
1
INTRODUCTION
for the prototype. From design objectives to test of implementation describes a
iterative phase, where a list of essential use cases are determined, from which
functional requirements are prioritised. After every implementation iteration the
prototype tested, evaluated and design objectives adapted and final prototype refined.
Finally testing and a survey conducted to evaluate the prototype, by designating
a target group as test users and their feed data collected and analysed, to draw a
conclusion.
page 10 of 50
==PAGE:13==
2
WIND FARM PLANNING
2
Wind farm planning
In order to integrate wind power into the power grid and support schemes are both
important aspects for wind power deployment, apart from physical planning. Those
topics are addressed in separate energy policies. Location of wind power and the
physical wind turbine planning today is regulated by different authorities depending
on whether it is on- or offshore. The location of new wind turbines is carried out
on the basis of an overall balancing of various factors such as wind speed, distance
to nearest neighbours, turbulence and wake effects, other technical installations,
cultural heritage, agricultural interests, sailing, fishing and regard for the landscape
and nature. All new wind turbines must comply with the Danish Wind Turbine
Certification Scheme in order to make sure that they are safe and can be incorporated
without further into the power system.
2.1
Wind farm Site
In this section the processes of site selection elements are described on abstract level
and emphasized its relevance to the site designation functional requirement of the
prototype. Site selection processes and evaluations for offshore and onshore and land
wind farms varies on many levels due to the diversity of environment conditions.
Countries with green energy plans have governmental body which is responsible for
issuing tenders and certificates for wind farm sites. In case of Denmark it is Danish
Energy Agency and Energinet. The table [2] presents the successive list of licenses
that danish legislation requires. Licenses are granted when results of preliminary
investigations satisfy the standards and conditions licenses put forward.
• License to carry out preliminary investigations.
• License to establish offshore wind farm (only issued if preliminary investigations
results satisfy and are compatible with the relevant interests conditions at sea).
• License to exploit wind power for a certain number of years, and an approval
for electricity production (only if conditions in license to establish project are
satisfied.
Table 2: List of licenses required for site selection [1]
The preliminary investigation takes into account a wide range of conditions that need
to be satisfied, in order to achieve construction and energy production permit for a
designated site. Careful siting, continued research, and thoughtful public engagement
with an emphasis on optimizing coexistence are elements that support responsible
wind energy development, minimizing or eliminating negative impacts to wildlife
and local communities.
The investigations aim to provide informed decision evaluated on wind resources
maps that aid in the critical project planning step of site selection for a wind farm.
page 11 of 50
==PAGE:14==
2.1
Wind farm Site
2
WIND FARM PLANNING
The investigations also need to ensure compliance with state, federal, and local
policies and regulations.
Wind farms on land require large land areas. Selection of wind farm sites evaluation
is based on annual average wind speed, topographical and geological conditions, soil
stability, foundation requirements, drainage and erosion problems must be assessed
by conducting geotechnical study. For offshore sites maritime route traffic, ocean
depth and seabed density is important considerations factors which is analysed.
Feasible onshore wind farm sites can be located on public or private owned lands.
This requires acquisition of legal rights for construction of a wind farm through site
selection procedures. Conditions for lease payment to the state needs to be estimated
for sites on public land and waters. If a large farm site stretches over several private
owned lands, it includes negotiation with all the land owners to obtain the legal
rights for leasing the land. Leasing is a significant factor. It is in every wind farm
project interests to be involved in negotiations with fewer landowners as possible,
because it eases the process of obtaining exclusive right for the site. All offshore
wind farms projects have to satisfy legal negative impact conditions and the rights
to exploit offshore wind energy [19].
The tender procedures involve preliminary screening and investigation of site selection.
In this procedure geometric software tools are applied to produce a visual geographic
representation of selected site in various estimated geometric shapes, supplemented
with respective geolocation coordinates.
It is these procedures this project aims to replicate and translate to functional
requirements for the prototype. The user is enabled to create such geometric shapes
with free-hand finger gestures functioning as boundary for the wind farm, and retrieve
respective coordinates of the designated site boundary.
Figure 2: Geolocation of selected site for Thor wind farm [2].
page 12 of 50
==PAGE:15==
2.2
Wind turbine wake effect
2
WIND FARM PLANNING
Figure 3: Coordinates for 440 km2 currently under site-investigation for Thor wind
farm [2].
2.2
Wind turbine wake effect
In this section it is described the relevance of wake in this project, produced by the
upstream turbines in a wind farm. With the growing development of offshore wind
energy, the financial incentives encourages to minimize the cost of wind energy, which
has led to the clustering of offshore wind farms in coastal regions. This provides cost
savings in the power cables from wind turbine towers to the substations [9].
A wind turbine obtains its power input by converting the force of the wind into a
torque (turning force) acting on the rotor blades and accelerating it to rotation. The
amount of energy which the wind transfers to the rotor depends on the density of
the air, the rotor area, and the wind speed.
A typical 1,000 kW wind turbine has a rotor diameter of 54 metres, i.e. a rotor area
of around 2,300 square metres. The rotor area determines how much energy a wind
turbine is able to harvest from the wind. As the rotor area increases with the square
of the rotor diameter, a turbine which is twice as large will receive 22 = 2∗2 = four
times as much energy [7].
The wind turbine rotor must obviously slow down the wind speed as it captures its
kinetic energy and converts it into rotational energy. This means that the speed
and force of the wind will be decreased to the right of the turbine rotor than to
the left of the turbine rotor, as can be seen in figure [4]. Since the amount of air
entering through the swept rotor area from the left (every second) must be the same
as the amount of air leaving the rotor area to the right, the air will have to occupy a
larger cross section (diameter) behind the rotor plane. In the figure[4] below it is
illustrated this by showing the creation of a turbulence tube, a so called wake effect
of downstream wake tube around the wind turbine rotor.
The downstream wake tube shows the slower wind speed to the right in the 4 will
occupy a large volume behind the rotor. The wind will not be slowed down to its
final speed immediately behind the rotor plane. The slowdown will happen gradually
behind the rotor, until the speed becomes almost constant. This causes decrease of
wind speed for downstream turbines. Below can be seen different wake effect cases,
where case (a) has the most wind speed decrease for downstream turbine.
page 13 of 50
==PAGE:16==
2.3
Paywake
2
WIND FARM PLANNING
Figure 4: Wake effect
Different cases of merging wakes: (a) aligned wakes, (b) wake-turbine interaction
and (c) wake-wake interaction.[20]
2.3
Paywake
PyWake is an open-source wind farm simulation tool implemented in Python and
developed by DTU wind energy which provides integrated scientific methods to
calculate estimations and predictions of wind farm wind effects and energy output
of wind farm models. It has a fairly high accuracy, capable of calculating wind
farm flow fields, power production and annual energy production. Pywake provides
validated wake effect models among others Jensen and Gaussian algorithms applied
to calculate wake effects. This project has chosen to apply Jensen wake model.
2.4
Annual Energy Production AEP
It is crucial for investments in wind energy projects to estimate the Annual Energy
Production (AEP) as accurately as possible. The AEP is a key factor in the calculation
of investment returns. Small deviations in AEP can lead to large negative financial
impacts. Furthermore, it is important to be able to quantify the uncertainties in the
AEP estimation in order to understand the associated investment risks.
AEP of a wind turbine is the total amount of electrical power it produces over a
year, measured in kilowatt hours or megawatt hours (kWh or MWh). This can be
estimated by multiplying the power for each wind speed from the power curve with
the wind speed frequency distribution experienced by the wind turbine, and the
number of hours in a year. The total AEP of a wind farm can then be estimated by
adding the individual AEPs of each wind turbine.
page 14 of 50
==PAGE:17==
3
DESIGN
3
Design
This section describes the processes of the decision making for design choices, their
background and reasoning for design architecture and design components, presented
in a structured manner.
The results from the pertinent literature reviews and conducted interviews with
researchers and developers in the wind energy field, yielded a more structured frame
to specify a design framework for implementation phase.
3.1
Design requirements
The design framework for prototype has been identified and categorized into two
requirement compounds as can be seen in figure: [5]. A functional requirement com-
pound which describes in abstract terms the functions that is required as minimum.
These requirements have in general well defined satisfaction criteria. Non-functional
requirements conversely refer to a system’s non-functional properties, such as usabil-
ity, adaptability, intuitivity, interoperability etc. These qualities don’t necessarily
have to do with the system. Unlike functional requirements, non-functional require-
ments do not always have clear satisfaction criteria and are unverifiable, therefore it
is required further specifications [3]. For instance for refinement of a non-functional
requirement such as the prototype should run On mobile device, it needs to be
specified to e.g. Android platform.
Funtional requirements:
Site selection, enables the user to be able to navigate
to a desired geographical GIS (geographic information system) location on a global
map representation. Get GIS coordinates enables the user to retrieve the exact GIS
longitude and latitude coordinates for wind turbine positions. Wind farm boundary
enables the user to draw a visual boundary for the whole wind farm which provides
constraints for turbine positions within the farm, and disables the user to place a
turbine icon outside the constraint. Reshape boundary enables the user to adjust
the polygon boundary shape in order to achieve the desired shape, within which
turbines are enabled to be positioned. Add turbine enables the user to insert one
or multiple turbine icons inside the drawn farm boundary. Undo turbine enables
the user to undo and remove the last inserted turbine icon from the farm. These
functional requirements are classified in the right side of the diagram in figure [5].
Non-funtional requirements:
On the non-functional compound, see left side of
the diagram in figure [5], are listed requirements of the technological platforms which
the prototype requires to be implemented on, to achieve the functional requirements.
User interactive describes when several data parameter simultaneously change in
the application as reaction to the actions of the user. On mobile device describes
what technological media the prototype is expected to be operating on. Android
platform describes the chosen operating system for mobile devices which qualifies
to the task. Mapbox Android describes the chosen GIS framework with compatible
functions for android operating system, which enables to achieve implementation of
functional requirements. Wind Resources describes the chosen database for wind
page 15 of 50
==PAGE:18==
3.2
Design choices
3
DESIGN
resource data which provides annual mean wind speed for a given geographical
region, here it has been determined to utilize Global Wind Atlas[8]. This is required
for approximate calculation and estimation of annual energy production (AEP).
Intuitive to use describes the non-functional requirement that applies to nontechnical
users of the prototype. This implies that user should not be involved in coding or
any other advanced technical configurations. Coupling android-Pywake is classified
as non-functional requirement that implies to couple the user interface running
on android mobile device together with computational capabilities of the Pywake
running on a different PC unit.
Figure 5: Design objectives
3.2
Design choices
Global Wind Atlas: In the investigation phase there has been established a
conclusion that the nature of the prototype of this thesis should approximately
replicate the user experience and functionality of Global Wind Atlas in order to
transfer the valuable features onto an interactive media.
In this regard, Wind
Resources, Global wind Atlas [8] has been extensively studied and some main key
features has been selected as inspiration and included in the design objectives under
functional requirements in figure: [5]. In the wind farm layout planning it is a
page 16 of 50
==PAGE:19==
3.3
Functional requirements
3
DESIGN
common practice to create a modifiable polygon shape on the selected site to function
as a site constraint for the farm. This is the indicator where the user is allowed
to place a turbine. The implementation of a visual boundary for wind farm layout
satisfies the need for visual supervision for the user, as where a turbine can be placed.
Actual permitted wind farm sites can have various geometric shapes, therefor en-
abling a feature to customise a farm boundary as a virtual enclosure for the farm
design to meet the actual permitted wind farm site.
Mapbox: On the contrast to Google Maps, Mapbox has been chosen due to its free
developer membership for mapping libraries and a certain amount of map requests.
Mapbox has been extensively studied and assessed to be the suitable virtual geo-
mapping service, which provides acceptable graphical quality and a wide range of
features. Mapbox is an open source with a large developer support community that
helps to overcome the implementation challenges. Mapbox Android API provides
libraries with vast range of functions for implementation. The free edition presents
itself to be adequate for experimental app development [15].
Android: The mobile operating system Android has been chosen as the operating
system for mobile devices such as mobile phones and tablets. A major share of mobile
devices are operated on Android platform [18]. Due to pervasiveness of the Android
operating system in the mobile device market, and with no limitation nor special
requirements for mobile operating system, it was an obvious and apparent choice to
apply Android for this project, to target the majority share of existing mobile devices.
PyWake: This study focuses on a AEP calculator simulation tool PyWake, which
has been chosen to utilise its scientific estimation capability for energy output of a
wind farm configuration. The aspiration for Pywake in this thesis project derives
from this project’s initiator’s extensive insight and experience in this tool which
made it a natural choice of case study.
Http-server-client communication: Once the characteristics of the objectives
have been outlined, it was concluded that their are no specific requirements for
communication protocol, such as security and authentication concerns to perform
transactions between Pywake and prototype environments in its initial version. Http
protocols is a stateless communication protocol, this means each request is executed
independently without concerns for what requests were executed previously, the
client make a request and the server responds [6]. This protocols suits the objectives
of the prototype transactions with Pywake through http server. Additional reasoning
is stated in [3.4].
3.3
Functional requirements
Site selection: The selection of the wind farm site is the most important decision
in the development of an offshore and floating wind farms. It is a process that
draws together all known information on the site options, with selection decisions
driven by social impact, feasibility, economic benefits, terrain and eco-environment is
page 17 of 50
==PAGE:20==
3.3
Functional requirements
3
DESIGN
considered, taking account of information on consenting issues, grid connection and
other technical limitations and constraints [23]. For this purpose decision making
tools has been developed to support this activity. One of them which has been
investigated in this project is Global Wind Atlas. The significant feature enables
the user to have a visual geographical orientation correlated with visualisation of
annual mean wind resources data for particular region. This helps to evaluation
and decision regarding where it is more feasible to plan a wind farm with adequate
wind resources for the optimal energy output. This feature has been inspirational
in the design of the prototype. therefor selection of a site on a global GIS map,
with underlying features such as zoom in on and out of a graphical region, has been
determined to be a functional requirement objective.
Get GSI coordinates: Site selection provides a confined geolocation to calculate
and determine annual mean wind resources for that particular geolocation of entire
wind farm, based on available wind data resources. Furthermore, in calculation of
wake effect for each turbine, it is required exact coordinates for locations of each
wind turbine. Therefor it establishes a functional requirement for the prototype to
enable obtaining GIS coordinates both for each turbine as well as for the whole wind
farm.
Wind farm boundary: For planning and simulation of a wind farm, a wind
farm layout has to be constructed within an areal constraint. Therefor it invokes
a functional requirement for the prototype as a tool to enable the user to have a
visual graphical representation of the farm boundary. This provides the user to gain
a visual orientation for permitted placement of the entire layout. The feature should
provide assistance for valid and invalid placement of the turbines. The user should
be enabled to design the shape of the boundary by placing flag points connected
with boundary lines to shape a desired enclosure for the farm.
Reshape boundary: Testing of initial version of the prototype has suggested, that
drawing a farm boundary is performed by finger gestures by the user, which leaves it
prone to mistakes and undesirable polygon shapes. Therefor additional feature of
reshaping of boundary of already completed boundary drawing, has been included
to functional requirements to add additional value to usability of the prototype.
Add turbine: This functional requirement is one of the main requirements and
a key function in the prototype. As the abstract objective was to make creation
of wind turbine representation in the simulation, easy and intuitive for the user in
constructing a wind farm. The user is enabled to place a wind turbine icon within
the farm boundary constraint, just by one finger tap on the screen of the user interface.
Movable turbines: The study has determined that manual optimisation of a wind
farm is one of the key objectives for the user to be able to optimise a constructed
wind farm layout. This implies that once a farm layout with numerous turbines
is completed, the user would be enabled to optimise energy output by editing the
formation of the farm layout. This suggests that user can pick up one turbine at a
page 18 of 50
==PAGE:21==
3.4
Server-client architecture
3
DESIGN
time and move it around the parameter within the farm boundary to reconfigure the
layout. Reconfiguration of the farm layout affects the wake effect calculation with
results in a different energy output. This functional requirement provides the user
with possibility to experiment with various farm layout configurations to improve
the energy output.
Undo turbines: This function is intuitive and indispensable functional requirement
in almost all tools which involves user custom configuration. It enables the user to
undo an unintentional editing, excessive number of turbines or boundary flag points.
3.4
Server-client architecture
Server-client architecture has been chosen, to showcase a proof of concept where
modularity between user interface on android and back-end computational capacity
of Pywake on a PC, can be demonstrated as web-service on a local network.
This architectural choice have been made, to simplify and reduce complexity, as
the first prototype of this kind in its initial stages of development, to make the
implementation of main objectives feasible within the time frame of this project, and
lay ground for future development and extensions.
page 19 of 50
==PAGE:22==
4
RESULTS
4
Results
4.1
Design architecture
This section describes the final conceptual domain architecture design. The process
through Investigation phase to App Design Objectives phase, figure: [1] has culmi-
nated in a suggestion for a conceptual domain architecture for the prototype, which
sets an abstract architectural model for implementation.
Figure 6: Conceptual domain Architecture
The model consists of two modules, figure:[6]. The left module represents the mobile
device such as a tablet on Android operating system. The right module represents
an regular PC on Windows operating system.
The android app component is
implemented in Kotlin programming language, which is an improved version of java,
specialised in mobile app development and has been recognised by Google to be
the android primary development language. Mapbox GIS component is a library
implemented to visualise GIS map for the user interface. Http-client component
implements Http library for establishing the app as http-client.
PyWake is built in Python by DTU wind energy, which is versatile, fast, popular
and open source programming language. Base on the decision to utilise PyWake
for wake effect calculation, it has been determined to adapt the prototype based on
Android, to python to enable the communication between android app and PyWake
estimating tool.
4.2
GIS Mapbox
This section describes Mapbox implementation in the prototype. Following the
iterations of functional requirements [5], the user is required as the first step to select
appropriate site for building a wind farm in the user interface. When the prototype
app is activated by the user, the user is met by first screen frame where the map has
already been loaded. At this point the app is operational and waiting for the user to
apply first actions in the process of building the wind farm [7]. The first actions are
to draw a areal foundation boundary in a desired polygon shape. This is done by
page 20 of 50
==PAGE:23==
4.2
GIS Mapbox
4
RESULTS
user tapping on the designated area to insert the first flag point in a row of polygon
points.
The initial view setting is set and hard coded to focus on Denmark on start up. Once
the map is loaded, the user has the liberty to zoom in and out of the map and move
the view to any other geographical location to find region of interest.
4.2.1
Floating buttons
The work sheet is equipped with four floating buttons, which means they keep their
position if the map view is moved in any direction by the user. The four buttons
are positioned in the bottom of the screen to avoid disturbing the view of work area.
Buttons consist of:
• Affirm button with check symbol (Bottom left). This button functions as
affirmation to indicate completion of drawing the boundary. This deactivates
the state of drawing the boundary and activates the state of placement of
turbines.
• The next button from left with mail icon, is the send button which is applied as
last action after boundary drawing and placement of farm layout is completed
and the user want to send the data package of the configuration to the server
where PyWake can perform calculation for AEP results and return the result.
• The third button in the middle can interchange the type of a selected turbine.
For the proof of concept it illustrates changing type of a placed turbine, between
10MW 15MW 20MW type of turbines.
• The last button on the far right bottom with back arrow symbol, indicates a
undo. When applied, it can remove and undo a placed flag point or a turbine.
Figure 7: Screenshot of initial state of prototype
4.2.2
Mapbox implementation
To implement the mapbox in an android app, it requires to setup the configuration.
First, all the necessary libraries need to be introduced to android build environment
page 21 of 50
==PAGE:24==
4.3
Site boundary
4
RESULTS
Gradle. Bellow shows the source code of the list of all the addresses for libraries to
be downloaded.
1
implementation 'com.mapbox.mapboxsdk:mapbox-android-sdk:9.0.0'
2
implementation
'com.mapbox.mapboxsdk:mapbox-sdk-geojson:5.9.0-alpha.1'
,→
3
implementation
'com.mapbox.mapboxsdk:mapbox-android-plugin-annotation-v9:0.9.0'
,→
4
implementation
'com.mapbox.mapboxsdk:mapbox-android-plugin-markerview-v9:0.4.0'
,→
5
implementation 'androidx.collection:collection-ktx:1.2.0'
6
implementation
"com.mapbox.mapboxsdk:mapbox-sdk-turf:5.9.0-alpha.1"
,→
A developer user of mapbox need to create an account by mapbox service. To be
able to consume API services of mapbox. It requires an access token which can be
acquired for free by subscribing to the mapbox service. The access token is copied
from the mapbox user account and stored in a XML file called mapbox access token
and referred to in the authentication command line, figure:[8]. Without access token
to maxpbox the map will simply won’t work. The prototype app needs only one
access token and supports up to 100 devices that the app can be installed on for the
free version.
Figure 8: Code snippet of source code
4.3
Site boundary
This section dives into the depth of elaborating the construction of boundary visualisa-
tion design. Through out the investigative phase in figure [1], it has been established
that the most popular and applied visualisation techniques for site boundary in the
prototype has been taken inspiration from Wind Atlas [8].
The design requires the user to perform a sequential action in an certain order to
construct a wind farm for simulation. The sequential action order requires from
the user first, to navigate to the region of choice on the map where the wind farm
simulation is to be performed. Next the zoom level needs to be adjusted to an
appropriate level where view distancing give the right notion of where to place the
turbines. Subsequently user has to draw the site boundary by simply tap on the
screen to place the first flag point of the boundary. Once the first flag point is placed,
the user continues to place more flag points in accordance to desired polygon shape.
After the first flag point, the algorithm draws a visual line from the first to the next
flag point and through out all the other subsequent placed flag point as can be seen
in figure [9].
page 22 of 50
==PAGE:25==
4.3
Site boundary
4
RESULTS
Figure 9: Prototype screenshot drawing boundary.
This continues till the user reaches the final shape and numbers of flag points and
has to close the loop of the polygon line drawing, by tapping on the first placed flag
point which completes the site boundary as can be seen in figure [11]. After closing
the loop, the polygon shape can still be adjusted by dragging the existing flag points
to achieve the desired polygon shape. Furthermore the user can still add additional
flag points by tapping anywhere else. The algorithm replaces the last placed flag
point with the newly inserted flag point and re-renders the line drawing.
As it is illustrated in the figure [10], A shows array of flag points containing coordinates
of each flag point. Every flag point the user inserts on the map, it gets inserted
into the array and the check function checks whether coordinates of this new flag
point matches the initial flag point (green flag), if not, it assumes it is a new flag
point and draws a line between the last and the new flag point. If the new flag point
coordinates matches the first flag point, it replaces the array index to the coordinates
of the first placed flag point, and thus the line drawing completes the loop and the
result becomes desired visual polygon shape.
Figure 10: Illustration of the drawing polygon algorithm.
The B in figure [10], illustrates the case where user inserts additional flag point
(black flag) after the polygon line is completed. The check function checks if the
newly flag point doesn’t match the first element in the array, it replaces the index
of the last element in the array with the first element and the polygon drawing
page 23 of 50
==PAGE:26==
4.4
Turbine placement
4
RESULTS
re-renders. The most right-bottom button with Undo symbol is to undo the last
placed flag point.
Figure 11: Prototype screenshot completing boundary.
When the user has achieved the desired polygon shape as shown in figure [11], the
site boundary has to be marked as accomplished. This is done by tapping on the
check mark button most left-bottom side of the screen. Hence the user steps out
of the site boundary sequence and now enters next action sequence where the user
can start placing the turbines of the wind farm. After completing the site boundary,
the polygon gets locked for further editing. This design choice is due to disabling
the user from interacting with the boundary under the process of placing turbines
inside the boundary. The user have all the freedom to edit the site boundary under
the process of shaping the boundary polygon. Once this process is completed, the
user is transferred to the next action sequence to prevent cross interruption between
action sequences.
4.4
Turbine placement
Next sequential action that user has to perform, after completing site boundary
polygon drawing, is to place randomly wind turbine icons inside the site boundary,
to construct the desired wind farm layout. The user is also enabled to drag around
an already placed turbine and adjust the position in respect to other turbines. As
illustrated in the figure [12], the two turbines in top-left area of site boundary has
different label (15MW and 20MW ). This action is performed by selecting a certain
turbine icon by tapping on it and push the change type button, the floating button
to the mid-bottom of the screen, enables the user to change the type and capacity of
a certain turbine.
The algorithm ensures that user is unable to place a turbine icon outside the boundary.
Neither is the user able to drag an existing turbine over the borderline of the site
boundary. In both invalid action cases the user is reminded by an popup alert text.
This constrain technique is elaborated in the next section [4.4.1].
page 24 of 50
==PAGE:27==
4.4
Turbine placement
4
RESULTS
Figure 12: Prototype screenshot placing turbines inside the site boundary.
4.4.1
Point in Polygon algorithm PIP
This section describes the technique applied to add constrains for user activity in the
construction of wind farm layout. As discovered in the investigative phase, it was
determined the necessity to implement constrains PIP for the user, as what actions
are allowed and where it is allowed to place a turbine. As figure [13] illustrates,
a turbine and flag point (turbines: a-f and flag points: f1-f5) represent a location
point on the screen with exact coordinates. The constrain should prevent the user to
either place or drag a turbine outside the site boundary. To accomplish this, the Ray
Casting algorithm [13] has been applied. This technique is a simple way to determine
whether a turbine point is inside or outside a simple polygon shape. As the name of
the algorithm suggests, it is to consider a infinite horizontal ray cast, starting from
the target point, in this case a turbine. The observation determines how many times
the ray crosses the border of the polygon. Two or no crossings indicates that the
target point is located outside the polygon and one crossing indicates that the target
point is inside the polygon. In this example, it can be observed that target points (a,
c, d, f ) are outside the polygon and (b, e) are inside.
Figure 13: Prototype screenshot, algorithm illustration to determine if a turbine
placement is inside site boundary polygon.
page 25 of 50
==PAGE:28==
4.5
Combining App with PyWake
4
RESULTS
4.5
Combining App with PyWake
The main challenge of running the pywake on android, which is implemented in
python, has its limitations for python code to be executed on android platform.
Execution of python source code on android platform is possible only through third
party app installed on android device, to handle python interpreter and compiler.
Additionally the security level on android architecture prevents interoperability
between different apps on the same device.
With the increase of large number of turbines in a wind farm layout, it can cause heavy
load of computational process on mobile device. To shift the heavy computational
processes from mobile device to a more centralised computational capable resource.
Alternatively, it would have required to transfer pywake in its entirety and integrate it
to the android platform, reverse engineer and transform all its functions, vectorization
and use of numerical libraries to fit android architectural design pattern. This
approach was not feasible and would have exceeded the limited time-frame of this
thesis project.
As an ad-hoc solution server-client 3.4 architecture has been chosen to avoid integra-
tion of pywake into android.
Illustration in figure [14], shows the process of producing AEP result through http
network communication. The sequence consists of four components involved in
communication and dispatching wind farm layout data set over to computation
components and receive AEP results as response. The first component from the left
Http-client App activates a dispatch with data set in json format when the user taps
on send button 4.2.1.
The next component Http-server: post handler.py, is responsible to receive the POST
event, return a receipt to the client for reception of the payload, extract the data from
the payload, convert it to json file and store it in the local storage, and finally activate
the calculation process by making a call to next component latlngConverter.py. This
third component is responsible to fetch the json data from predefined storage path
with predefined exact file name windfarmData.json. As next operation it starts to
deserialize the json file and convert the data which are longitude and latitude of
turbine coordinates, into vectors by utilising numerical libraries.
When the data has been processed and vectorized, it is past to wake effect model
component NOJ WF model: AEPcalculator which is part of Pywake computation
software. This component returns the calculated AEP result back to Http-server:
post handler.py which returns the response to the request back to Http-client. The
interface in the app then displays the AEP result.
page 26 of 50
==PAGE:29==
4.6
Prototype testing and survey
4
RESULTS
Figure 14: Sequence diagram, illustrating communication operation to compute AEP.
4.6
Prototype testing and survey
This section describes the work has been done and methods applied to involve test
users outside of the study target group, to test the prototype usability by its potential
users. External test users are necessary to investigate how the prototype performs
on the field in real life with focus on User-Centered-Design (UCD)[5]. Design of
premature prototype is a iterative process which focuses on the empathy for users.
This implies that design process makes great deal of considerations for how the
prototype is perceived and what are the experiences of the prototype by the users.
The testing and survey is conducted to evaluate the usability of the prototype as
well as clarifying the adequacy in achieving the predefined objectives. Testing and
survey contribute as well to exploration of new features and improvements for future
development of the prototype.
To disclose the rating of whether the prototype have the potential to serve educational
or professional purposes, a target group of test users had to be determined. For
professional purpose it was assumed that there had to be selected test users of
advanced knowledge about wind energy, which would provide most relevant feedback
to this stage of development. For educational purpose it was less important for the
test users to have an advanced knowledge of wind energy. For latter test group it
was important to determine what they learned from using the prototype and what
features should have been included to improved their learning process to gain more
knowledge. Further versions of the prototype testing phase should include larger
testing groups to ensure better measuring educational characteristics of dissemination
goals and/or professional application.
4.6.1
Preparation - testing - questionnaire
This section describes the preparations made and methods applied for the survey.
Southern University of Denmark (SDU) has been chosen to conduct the survey
and the testing. The survey duration took a course of two days, where first day
page 27 of 50
==PAGE:30==
4.6
Prototype testing and survey
4
RESULTS
was designated to participants with advanced knowledge and the second day was
designated to participants with non-advanced knowledge of wind energy.
For the first day, due to the geographical vicinity and its wind energy study line,
SDU was the suitable location where concentration of test user groups could be
located. With the help of head of wind power studies at SDU, arrangement has been
made to set up the testing environment which consisted of a PC for the wind energy
students participation after the class hours.
For the second day a spot has been chosen at the main campus corridor and random
by passer students were asked to participate in the survey and testing.
The testing had a supervised and instructive nature. Participants were supported
with discussions and supervised during the testing process with wind farm knowledge
and background information of the design choices and generic knowledge about wind
energy elements. Before starting the testing, participants were asked to follow the
prepared instruction guide with outlined order sequence, in Appendix[A].
After completing the test sessions of the wind farm simulation and complementary
discussions, participants were asked to fill out the anonymous questionnaire and
share their experience. The questionnaire was formulated with the help of Google
Analyse [10]
4.6.2
Survey analysis
Test users’ background:
The educational background of the participants clearly
show there has been a diverse background. Despite the participants with advanced
wind energy knowledge, there has been pervasive moderate knowledge among other
study backgrounds.
To determine their level of knowledge about wind energy
to correlate with their answers and evaluation, their educational background and
academic degree had to be stated. A total 48 participants agreed to take part in the
testing. A list of participants’ background is listed in Appendix[B].
Wind energy knowledge:
The graph statistic in Appendix C figure[17] show
the knowledge of the participants according to their own assessments are quite
informed in the sphere of wind energy production. The answer options are from top
incremental in the level of knowledge. Only a small margin of 8,3% are not confident
about their wind energy in-depth knowledge. Among test users of which 39,6%
have an abstract understanding of wind energy. A lower share 20,6% have a deeper
but moderate general understanding and 31,3% have an advanced knowledge. This
statistic closely reflects the statistic in Appendix C figure[18] of the answers to the
question: (opinion about wind energy). A 43,8% believe wind energy is one of the key
sustainable green solutions. Interestingly 27,1% does not share the acknowledgement
of wind energy by the majority. It is assumed that this portion test users have
deeper and nuanced knowledge and are influenced by the public discourse of negative
ecological impacts on the environment by the wind farms, its life-cycle and non
recyclable parts. According to experts this is because the wind turbine industry is
page 28 of 50
==PAGE:31==
4.6
Prototype testing and survey
4
RESULTS
relatively young, there is only a limited efficient methods and experiences on the
recycling of turbines in the dismantling, separation, recycling, and disposal of wind
power systems [12].
We can assume there is a correlation between the higher knowledge level of wind
energy and the academic degree of participants which in Appendix[C] and figure [19]
indicates that all participants either have a higher degree or study a higher academic
degree.
This distribution might look completely different if the survey were targeting a
different group of test users with non or lower educational degree. The test user group
were specifically chosen due to consideration that they be able to provide relevant
feedback and evaluate the educational and professional value of the prototype which
required some degree of interest in the topic and higher probability of background
knowledge of wind energy.
Prototype value in professional application:
After testing, participants were
suppose to rate the potential educational value for wind energy knowledge dissemi-
nation and potential professional value for wind energy industry application in later
improved versions. It is worth emphasising that participants with non advanced
wind farm knowledge were less confident in their judgement of professional value
application, due to obvious fact that they simply didn’t have the sufficient knowledge
and insight for what is required from such prototype app in professional application.
However wind energy students with advanced knowledge were quite confident that at
this stage the prototype was premature to be considered in professional application.
The graphs in Appendix[D]: figure [21] indicates that value of professional application
scores significantly lower rating 39,6% and 37,5%, due to the fact of complexity
deficiency in features and functionality.
Figure 15: Percentage distribution of 48 answers. Lowest 1 - 5 Highest
Prototype value in educational application:
The value of educational appli-
cation has scored an average rating Appendix[D]: figure [20]. This indicates that
the prototype in its early version is more applicable for educational application
rather than for professional application. However it shows inclination towards lower
ratings bellow the average this is as well due to the fact of deficiency in motivational
factors and instructional features. These conclusions can easily be derived from the
page 29 of 50
==PAGE:32==
4.6
Prototype testing and survey
4
RESULTS
answers in Appendix[H]: table [5]. Furthermore discussions engaged with participants
during testing and survey were clear indicator for what test users were missing in
the prototype.
Figure 16: Percentage distribution of 48 answers. Lowest 1 - 5 Highest
Intuitiveness and interactivity:
One of the main objectives of this thesis was
intuitiveness and interactivity with graphical representation of the components in a
wind farm simulation. In this regard the survey was formulated with the appropriate
questions to determine how the prototype manages these objectives, by collecting
ratings between 1-5 based on test users experiences with the prototype. In Ap-
pendix[E]: figure [22] test users 54,2% rated the prototype as easy and intuitively
with 4 points and 27,1% rated it with 5 points. This indicates that the prototype
tend to achieve intuitiveness by the judgement of majority of the test users. Below 4
points rating is assumed to be due to some users forgot to follow the action order
sequence and the prototype crushed mid-configuration. This happened because
not all the necessary check functions are implemented which supposed to prevent
unintended order sequence of actions happening and causing a system crush.
Summarizing the answers in Appendix[F]: table [4] it becomes clear that the test users
find the interactiveness of the prototype tempting. The interactive configuration of
wind farm boundary, drawing and reshaping polygons, dragging turbines around,
changing turbine type and constraints that doesn’t allow turbines being placed
outside the polygon, were the most popular interactive functions according to the
test users.
Operation complexity:
The next question Appendix[E]: figure [23] focuses on
how complex the prototype appears to be for the test users. This evaluation slightly
differs from intuitiveness evaluation. For instance in intuitiveness evaluation the
AEP button (see button description) 4.2.1 depicts a mail symbol, which according
to how the system works, is a relatively accurate choice of icon for the button due to
fact that after activation the data is being sent electronically to the server through
http network connection to receive the AEP results back. This interface design choice
can occur counter intuitive from the user’s point of view. The user doesn’t need
to know how the system behind the interface works to understand the semantic of
mail symbol on the button and its function. On the contrary the AEP letters with
page 30 of 50
==PAGE:33==
4.6
Prototype testing and survey
4
RESULTS
bold font, small enough to fit inside the button, can appear more intuitive for the
user. Hence complexity evaluation seeks to explore whether user find the prototype
too complex with many parameters to configure and lots of prerequisite knowledge
to consider. This can lead to confusion for non-advanced knowledge users without
proper instructions or guidance and will immediately lose interest. As expected
the user rating for complexity scores high 43,8% on simplicity of the prototype.
At this stage where not many attributes and concepts are implemented into the
prototype, such as advanced configurations of turbines, curved layout configuration
of turbines, hub height of turbine, rotor diameter, multiple farm comparison, wake
effect models, optimization functions, wind direction and wind speed etc., this rating
was to be expected, however it contributes to identify strengths and weaknesses of
the prototype depending intended use in educational or professional application.
Learned topic:
In evaluation of prototype’s value in educational application and
dissemination of wind farm knowledge, it is quite relevant to measure what new
elements test users have learned. Completing several test sessions, test users were
asked to evaluate what they have learned from the simulations. The Appendix[G]:
figure [24] indicates that (Site boundary) with 97,8% and (Wake effect) with 64,4%
scores highest rating. The follow up discussions with test users reveal that even users
with advanced wind energy knowledge weren’t aware of the procedures of planning
and selection of wind farm sites were conducted with site constraints. Furthermore
wake effects of the turbines was a unknown concept for majority of the of test
users. The reason for why (Wake effect) rating is below the (Site boundary), is
assumed that many users were with advanced knowledge of wind energy, whom
were already familiar with the concept. The interesting observation is that (Non of
the above) option has scored 0% rating. This indicates that all the test users have
learned something new from interacting with the prototype. This result of course
was achieved with the supervised testing and complementary discussions and Q&A’s.
Test-users’ suggestions and feedback:
The questionnaire of the survey con-
cludes with a final question about what should be done to improve the value of
educational and/or professional applications. Here the test users where given the
freedom to express their personal experiences, suggestions for future improvements,
critiques, shortcomings or complements. In Appendix[H]: table [5] is listed all 44
responses which serves as a great navigator for future implementations and im-
provements of what users perceive to be important for educational and professional
application.
page 31 of 50
==PAGE:34==
5
FUTURE WORK
5
Future work
The success of a published version of the wind farm simulation app in the future
will depend on the improvements on various aspects of simulation, more advanced
features and interesting interface improvements. This section attempts to list and
describe a range of recommendations for future work.
As mentioned in 4.6.2 (Test-users’ suggestions and feedback), a summery of test user
feedback is a great navigator to determine relevant user focused future improve-
ments to achieve popularity of wind farm simulation and utility in educational and
professional applications.
Input fields and option menu bar for various variables and values that enables the
user to manually insert and configure wind turbine properties would be valuable.
Following the test user’s suggestion list in Appendix[H]: table [5] a range of features
have frequent recurrence as desired features for improvement are summarized and
categorized below:
• Improvements for graphical visualization features which enhances the under-
standing of site selection challenges.
– It is valuable to visualize wake effect of down stream from each turbine
as colored fading shade inspired by Pywake graphic plots [21]
– Visualization of distance indicator between turbines.
– Visualization of most windy sectors and regions in colors and numerically.
– Visualisation of maritime routes is considered useful to avoid blocking the
maritime traffic activities.
• Enabling configuration of turbine properties adds more complexity to the
prototype which encourages user to either have or acquire deeper understanding
of wind turbine elements.
– Manual configuration of hub height, rotor diameter, power thrust coeffi-
cient, power output etc.
– Auto generation of large number of turbines. Managing configurations of
numerous turbines manually can appear tedious activity.
– Selection of turbine types from a catalog of different wind turbines.
• Improvements for educational properties. The feedback from test users clearly
indicates that educational properties of the prototype are insufficient and
appears unclear without supervisor guidance.
– Textual guidance, explanation for objectives and instructions for wind
farm layout for better results and suggestions how to improve results, can
be introduced to the user to improve learning.
– Concepts of competition, score records of AEP, cost reduction and rewards
could be introduced into the prototype to enhance learning motivation.
• Wind farm configurations
page 32 of 50
==PAGE:35==
5
FUTURE WORK
– Enabling the user to create more than one farm at a time for comparison
of different site locations and different layouts.
– Possibility to import predetermined site boundary data set from other
sources.
– Selecting and dragging of turbines in bundles.
– Selecting popular and practical wind farm layout shapes from a catalog
menu to automatically align numerous turbines, for example curved farm
layouts [11].
page 33 of 50
==PAGE:36==
6
CONCLUSION
6
Conclusion
The first goal of this study was to investigate the general practice of wind farms
planning, prediction and estimation processes in the realm of wind energy production.
Secondly the goal was, in the simplified abstraction level for the proof of concept, to
apply these practises in a novel technological solution. It was determined that the
solution was to implement a prototype with a intuitive, easy-to-use user interface
on a mobile device platform, to enable users with no advanced technical and with
no programming skills, to be able to create simulations of wind farms and produce
AEP results. The purpose and characterizing objectives of such prototype was to
investigate educational value for wind energy knowledge dissemination to fulfil the
knowledge gap and misconceptions among the general public, students and engineers
from other professions. Nevertheless to measure its potential to develop to an ade-
quate planning and simulation tool for professional applications.
Sections 1 introduces the thesis problem and derived thesis motivation. Section 1.2
presents the established project objectives. Section 1.3 elaborates the framework
of the research. Section 1.4 outlines the methodology and organisation of the re-
search. Section 2 emphasises the exploration of the general principles applied in the
wind energy production estimations which are relevant for the prototype. Section
3 outlines and describes design requirements, categorization of the requirements,
reasoning and justification for the design choices. Section 4 presents the results of the
implementation, describes the architecture and elaborates on various implementation
components of the prototype. Section 4.5 describes how implementation manages
the combination of android with Pywake by coupling them together through http
server-client network to utilise computational capabilities of the Pywake. The se-
quence diagram illustrates in figure 14 the particular transaction sequence between
server where Pywake is located and android on mobile device. Lastly, in section 4.6
is the description of the survey and user testing to collect data for evaluation of the
prototype to determine on which degree it manages to achieve its proposed objectives
through thorough analysis of the collected feedback data. Section 5 proposes future
work as a reflection of the improvement suggestions by the test users which draws
unambiguous guidelines for future development and improvements of its educational
value.
This thesis project was initiated with the assumption that there was not well known
open-source free to use planning and estimation simulation apps existing for mobile
devices for wind farms, where actual scientific methods and practices of wind energy
production estimation were applied for educational purposes. The existing tools are
highly advanced simulation applications for professionals, which require advanced
programming skills to operate. This limits the usability to only trained and skilled
users such as wind energy researchers and engineers and does not enhance learning
for non advanced users.
This prototype is named Wind Farm Simulation and the implementation has man-
aged successfully to integrate partially the graphical representation of user interface
page 34 of 50
==PAGE:37==
6.1
Strengths and weaknesses
6
CONCLUSION
with user interactive characteristics. Utilising computational capabilities of wind
energy production estimation of the Pywake, which applies actual scientific principals
and practices in the professional industrial applications.
The survey results show the educational value scores 3 from 5 in ratings. This can
be interpreted that the test users acquired some degree of new knowledge from
interacting with the app, but indicating that the prototype is still poor on some
features at this stage. As for professional value, it scored low, indicating that the
prototype is premature but has the to grow to a significant simulation tool.
6.1
Strengths and weaknesses
The frame conditions and methodology of this study has several strengths and
weaknesses. The need for alternative training and knowledge dissemination tools for
simulation of offshore wind farms in wind energy is proposed to be addressed using a
wind farm simulation prototype.
Training tools for engineers and researchers typically exist in the form of simulations
developed with the goal of maximum accuracy. Dissemination of scientific knowl-
edge currently exists in the form of simulations without applying accurate scientific
mythologies.
Simulation applications are a proven concept capable of teaching motivated users
about serious concepts. The innovative nature of this study lies in the dual educa-
tional and professional goals to be used by engineers and researchers as well as by
the general public.
This study was envisioned as a first step towards developing a final deploy-able simu-
lation. The prototype simulation was tested to measure the prototypes effectiveness
in accomplishing the objectives of understanding the concepts of wind farm. All
the participants who volunteered had higher educational background, some in wind
energy studies. Responses to testing revealed that a more advanced GUI with a text
console would have helped to keep track of the concepts and enable users to make
better strategic decisions. This also reveals the drawback of lacking of features in
the prototype for attractive user experiences. Lack of these functions proved to slow
down the prototype to undesirable rate.
There are suggestions in the previous discussion section on how to improve this rate
and maintain usability. The valuable feed backs provide prognoses for expandability
where additional elements and features can be inserted to the simulation.Future
expandability is an important feature of this prototype and has been provided with
a framework of how simplified design of offshore wind farms may be created in the
form of simulation on mobile device.
This study documents the simplification process of offshore wind farm design, out-
lining the fundamental elements necessary with an indication of where additional
page 35 of 50
==PAGE:38==
6.2
Reflection
6
CONCLUSION
detail may be added to improve accuracy in simulation results. In doing so, this
study has provided a starting point to engage the public education and facilitate
professional applications for researchers and engineers to develop a new type of tool
and understanding for offshore wind farms and sustainable energy production.
6.2
Reflection
This research project has presented the author with a number of opportunities and
challenges with respect to offshore wind farm design in the context of a simulation
tool on mobile devices, for estimation and predictions of wind energy production.
Challenges were, achieving a balance between precise engineering in unfamiliar wind
energy scientific methods, as well as learning a new programming language.
The investigation had a cross domain study characteristic, which intended to develop
and integrate wind farm scientific methods, technological solution for graphical
interface representation on mobile devices and pedagogical principles for knowledge
dissemination of wind farms and wind energy, into one product.
More importantly, the main objective of this prototype was to teach new concepts to
non-technical users and students for educational purposes and measure its potential
for professional applications in later versions. Throughout the development process
of wind farm simulation prototype, difficult choices had to be made to balance the
level of details in wind farm engineering principles with available time span of the
project.
Generally, the pursuit of integration of wind farm simulation concepts presented few
barriers; however, the abstract and unfamiliar nature of developing an educational
app proved to be more challenging. The level of detail of each aspect of the prototype
directly influenced whether it would become an oversimplified engineering simulation
tool or a fun yet unsubstantial mobile app.
The input from several project advisors and researchers who were familiar with
offshore wind energy proved to be determinant during this process. Knowledge of
user friendly app development was manageable, but acquiring knowledge and skills
in a whole, new to the author, scientific field and integrating interactions between
these domains, presented the most challenging exercise.
Many hours were spent learning how to program in Kotlin and comprehending
principles of wind energy science, which were partially and entirely new to the author.
Time dedicated to examine and practice components of Pywake was to understand
the mechanisms for integrating with the prototype. The resulting prototype app
consists of approximately 1,000 lines of source code both in Kotlin and python, which
managed to fulfil outlined functional requirements.
Resources and literature on the web, research papers, and the help from supervisors
were indispensable in achieving the thesis objectives. Although the project presented
page 36 of 50
==PAGE:39==
6.2
Reflection
6
CONCLUSION
numerous challenges, it also presented great opportunities to the author. Opportu-
nities to analyse wind farm models and design from an comprehensive view at the
required level of details, as well as working on a short-term project with long-term
potential was quite interesting and rewarding inspiration. I would have sincerely
enjoyed the opportunity to continue exploring these topics in more detail.
This thesis project has provided great motivation to possible collaboration with
wind energy companies and institutions, to make it possible to turn this innovative
technological solution to strong foundation for the future development. To enhance
educational or/and professional user experiences, which may contribute to progression
of wind farm research in the wind energy industry.
page 37 of 50
==PAGE:40==
REFERENCES
7
References
References
[1]
Danish Energy Agency. offshore-procedures-permits. url: https://ens.dk/
en/our-responsibilities/wind-power/offshore-procedures-permits.
(accessed: 01.05.2022).
[2]
Danish Energy Agency. offshore-procedures-permits. url: https : / / ens .
dk/en/our- responsibilities/wind- power/ongoing- offshore- wind-
tenders/thor-offshore-wind-farm. (accessed: 01.05.2022).
[3]
Brian Berenbach and Mark Gall. “Toward a Unified Model for Requirements
Engineering”. In: (2006), pp. 237–238. doi: 10.1109/ICGSE.2006.261238.
[4]
Mehmet Bilgili, Abdulkadir Yasar, and Erdogan Simsek. “Offshore wind
power development in Europe and its comparison with onshore counterpart”.
In: Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews 15 (2011), pp. 905–915. doi:
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.reseneeco.2019.04.004.
[5]
Kate Crane Brian Still. “Fundamentals of User-Centered Design: A Practical
Approach (1st ed.)” In: Feb. 2017, p. 347. isbn: 9781315200927. doi: 10.4324.
[6]
Mozilla developer. An overview of HTTP. url: https://developer.mozilla.
org/en-US/docs/Web/HTTP. (accessed: 20.10.2022).
[7]
S.L. Dixon and C.A. Hall. “Chapter 10 - Wind Turbines”. In: (2010). Ed. by S.L.
Dixon and C.A. Hall, pp. 357–413. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-1-
85617-793-1.00010-9. url: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/
article/pii/B9781856177931000109.
[8]
DTU Wind Energy. Global Wind Atlas. url: https://globalwindatlas.
info/. (accessed: 01.11.2021).
[9]
Xuan Gong, Stefanie Kuenzel, and Bikash C. Pal. “Optimal Wind Farm
Cabling”. In: IEEE Transactions on Sustainable Energy 9.3 (2018), pp. 1126–
1136. doi: 10.1109/TSTE.2017.2771147.
[10]
Google Analyse questionnaire Survey. https://docs.google.com/forms/
d / e / 1FAIpQLSemvFFqhltmjw1v0G _ n6htBa0QzNTSd7gZf7W5J4beH _ 1vRHg /
viewform. Accessed: 2022-11-15.
[11]
I G W Krabben et al. “Why curved wind turbine rows are better than straight
ones”. In: 1256.1 (July 2019), p. 012028. doi: 10.1088/1742-6596/1256/1/
012028. url: https://dx.doi.org/10.1088/1742-6596/1256/1/012028.
[12]
Kari Larsen. “Recycling wind turbine blades”. In: Renewable Energy Focus
9.7 (2009), pp. 70–73. issn: 1755-0084. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/
S1755-0084(09)70045-6. url: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/
article/pii/S1755008409700456.
[13]
Computer Geekery - Phillip Lemons. Ray Cast Algorithm for Point In Polygon.
url: http://www.philliplemons.com/posts/ray-casting-algorithm. (ac-
cessed: 01.05.2022).
page 38 of 50
==PAGE:41==
REFERENCES
REFERENCES
[14]
Yu Ling and Xu Cai. “Exploitation and utilization of the wind power and
its perspective in China”. In: Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews 16
(2012), pp. 2111–2117. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.rser.2012.01.
039.
[15]
Mapbox. Maps SDK for Android. url: https://docs.mapbox.com/android/
maps/guides/. (accessed: 01.02.2022).
[16]
Kemal Pınarba¸sı et al. “A modelling approach for offshore wind farm feasibility
with respect to ecosystem-based marine spatial planning”. In: 667 (2019),
pp. 306–317. issn: 0048-9697. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.scitotenv.
2019.02.268.
[17]
Laura C. Rodman and Ross K. Meentemeyer. “A geographic analysis of wind
turbine placement in Northern California”. In: Energy Policy 34.15 (2006),
pp. 2137–2149. issn: 0301-4215. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.enpol.
2005.03.004.
[18]
V.V. Subrahmanyam and Kailasam Swathi. “A Study on Mobile Operating Sys-
tems and their Recent Advances”. In: Networking and Data Management Technologies
(2011), pp. 5–6. doi: https : / / www . researchgate . net / publication /
315108816_A_Study_on_Mobile_Operating_Systems_and_their_Recent_
Advances.
[19]
˙Ilhan Talinli et al. “A Holistic Approach for Wind Farm Site Selection by Using
FAHP”. In: June 2011. isbn: 978-953-307-483-2. doi: 10.5772/17311.
[20]
Davide Trabucchi, Lukas Vollmer, and Martin K¨uhn. “3-D shear-layer model for
the simulation of multiple wind turbine wakes: description and first assessment”.
In: Wind Energy Science 2 (Nov. 2017), pp. 569–586. doi: 10.5194/wes-2-
569-2017.
[21]
DTU wind. Pywake. url: https://topfarm.pages.windenergy.dtu.dk/
PyWake/notebooks/EngineeringWindFarmModels.html. (accessed: 02.01.2023).
[22]
Kevin J.Boyle Jessica Boatwright Sreeya Brahma Weibin Xu. “NIMBY, not,
in siting community wind farms”. In: Resource and Energy Economics 57.10
(2019), pp. 85–100. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.reseneeco.2019.04.
004.
[23]
Ye Xu et al. “Site selection of wind farms using GIS and multi-criteria decision
making method in Wafangdian, China”. In: Energy 207 (2020), p. 118222. issn:
0360-5442. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.energy.2020.118222. url:
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0360544220313293.
page 39 of 50
==PAGE:42==
A
APPENDIX: INSTRUCTIONS
Appendices
A
Appendix: Instructions
Instructions for Wind farm simulation prototype testing
You volunteered to test the Wind Farm Simulation prototype on a mobile tablet
emulator.
Bellow you find the step-by-step instructions for how to use the
prototype. Your task is to produce AEP by constructing a wind farm layout
with 20 wind turbines with different turbine type of energy output capacities.
Configure the layout in a way to achieve optimal AEP with the same number
of turbines.
The instructor will be supervising you to provide prerequisite
information, knowledge and guidance in the process.If you have questions or
need elaborations or have comments, please feel free to discuss them with the
instructor of the prototype. After prototype testing you will be asked to fill out
a survey questionnaire. Your participation is appreciated.
1. Select a region on the GIS map where you want to construct your wind
farm layout.
2. Zoom in with two fingers gesture, to the level of approx. 1 mile. The ruler
in the top-left of the display is the indicator of zoom level.
3. You start first by designing a boundary on the wind farm site, a polygon
shape of your desire. Start designing by one tap with one finger. The first
boundary flag appears on the display.
4. Continue adding more flags by tapping with a finger, there will be drawn a
line from the first flag to the next flag, and from last flag to the next newly
added flag etc. When you think there is enough number of flags added,
close the loop by tapping on the first added flag. The polygon line closes
and the boundary shape completes.
5. Now you can edit your newly completed boundary by grabbing with a
finger any of flag points and drag it to a new position to adjust the shape.
6. When you are satisfied with the edited shape of the boundary, you need
to finish the process and by tapping on the finish button with check-mark
symbol. It completes the process and locks the polygon from further editing.
This activates the process of adding turbines.
7. Now you can add turbines inside the boundary by tapping with your finger.
For each tap a turbines is being added to the layout.
8. You can keep adding till you reach the desired number of turbines. You
can grab a single turbine and create different formations by dragging each
turbine around to a desired position inside the boundary.
page 40 of 50
==PAGE:43==
A
APPENDIX: INSTRUCTIONS
9. You can select a single turbine by tapping on it. The display will tell you
the identifier number of that particular turbine. When selected, now you
can change the type of each turbine by tapping on change type button with
two circling arrows symbol. You can also delete the selected turbine with
Undo button.
10. When you think you are done, you can complete the process and tap on
Send button to send the data to Pywake AEP calculator for AEP results.
page 41 of 50
==PAGE:44==
B
APPENDIX: PARTICIPANT BACKGROUNDS
B
Appendix: Participant backgrounds
#
field background
#
field background
1
IT diplom engineet
25
Political sciences
2
IT diplom engineet
26
Chemistry
3
Bio informatics
27
Chemistry
4
Product Design Engineering
28
Product innovation
5
Product Design Engineering
29
Product design
6
Mechanical Engineering
30
Applied mathematics
7
Environmental engineering
31
Wind power
8
Electrical engineering
32
Wind energy
9
Political sciences
33
Wind energy
10
Construction engineering
34
Wind energy
11
Marine Technology
35
Wind energy
12
Physics
36
Wind energy
13
Chemistry
37
Wind energy
14
MSc public health
38
Wind energy
15
Mechatronics Engineering
39
Wind energy
16
Operations Management
40
Wind power
17
Robot Systems
41
Wind power
18
Mechanical engineering
42
Wind energy
19
Biotechnology
43
Wind energy
20
Environmental technology
44
Wind energy
21
Software engineering
45
Innovation and Business
22
Software engineering
46
Construction engineer
23
Civil Engineering
47
Construction engineer
24
Game design
48
Learning technology
Table 3: List of 47 answers to the question: Your field of study or profession?
page 42 of 50
==PAGE:45==
C
APPENDIX: KNOWLEDGE AND OPINION
C
Appendix: Knowledge and opinion
Figure 17: Percentage distribution of 48 answers.
Figure 18: Percentage distribution of 48 answers.
(3rd question is shortened, please visit the form to read the full text)
page 43 of 50
==PAGE:46==
C
APPENDIX: KNOWLEDGE AND OPINION
Figure 19: Percentage distribution of 48 answers.
page 44 of 50
==PAGE:47==
D
APPENDIX: EDUCATIONAL OR PROFESSIONAL
D
Appendix: Educational or Professional
Figure 20: Percentage distribution of 48 answers. Lowest 1 - 5 Highest
Figure 21: Percentage distribution of 48 answers. Lowest 1 - 5 Highest
page 45 of 50
==PAGE:48==
E
APPENDIX: INTUITIVE OR COMPLEX
E
Appendix: Intuitive or Complex
Figure 22: Percentage distribution of 48 answers. Confusing 1 - 5 Easy and intuitive
Question elaboration: Were the control buttons, action notifications and the order of
actions intuitive and self-explanatory?
Figure 23: Percentage distribution of 48 answers. Very simple 1 - 5 Very complicated
Question elaboration:Were there too many parameters, too many actions and opera-
tions to consider that requires prerequisite knowledge of wind farms?
page 46 of 50
==PAGE:49==
F
APPENDIX: LIKED FEATURES
F
Appendix: Liked Features
#
Liked features of the prototype
1
Boundary drawing and reshaping the polygon
2
That it applies GIS map as a canvas to position and build wind farm
3
That you can move around the turbines + boundary flags
4
drawing the boundary
5
Interactive icons
6
movable turbines and boundary
7
interactive turbines and boundary
8
That you place wind farm anywhere on the global map.
9
interactive boundary and interactive turbines
10
the interactiveness of the elements
11
drag around the turbines and shape the boundary
12
Black box AEP calculation. Interactive turbines and boundary.
13
Simulation happening on GIS
14
All the features were interesting, specially the constraint that doesn’t allow placing
turbine outside the boundary.
15
It was all fun to operate and construct WF, especially movable turbines.
16
Reshaping the boundary and the constraint feature that doesn’t allow turbine be
placed outside.
17
The boundary feature not allowing turbine be moved outside.
18
Flexible site boundary, draggable turbines.
19
Flexible boundary and draggable turbines.
20
Not allowing place turbines outside the boundary
21
wind farm boundary
22
Not allowing placing turbines outside the boundary.
23
flexibility of the boundary
24
Interactiveness of the simulation
25
Interactive layout was interesting.
26
interactive icons
27
Interactive objects
28
Editable polygon boundary
29
That you can not place turbine outside the boundary
30
boundary and draggable turbines
31
drawing polygons and dragging turbines
32
Drawing boundary and
33
boundary constraints
34
Playfulness
35
All the feature are interesting but limited options
36
Draggable objects
page 47 of 50
==PAGE:50==
G
APPENDIX: LEARNED TOPICS
37
All of it was fun
38
Boundary drawing
39
all of them
40
Cool app but very simple
41
It’s potential to become useful app in education and professional use
42
great app but premature
43
Drawing polygons and dragging turbines
44
Everything
45
interactive components
46
drawing boundary polygons
47
The constrain that doesn”t allow user to place a turbine outside the boundary.
Table 4: List of 47 answers to the question: What features did you like?
G
Appendix: Learned topics
Figure 24: Percentage distribution of 48 answers.
page 48 of 50
==PAGE:51==
H
APPENDIX: IMPROVEMENT SUGGESTIONS
H
Appendix: Improvement suggestions
#
Improvement suggestions by test users
1
Graphical representation of wake effect shadow in colors
2
Better instructions for how to use the app.
3
I am sure there are more details that can be implemented, e.g. visual distance from
current turbine to other turbines, so you get the idea how fare or close relative to
other turbines you can place a new turbine.
4
There need to be better graphical representation and text guidance.
5
The order of the user action is unclear. A action guidance would be nice.
6
Some graphics that shows where it is sufficient to build wind farms
7
I imagine it would be useful to build more than one wind farms simultaneously on
same session.
8
Visual guidance for how far to place turbines from each other to achieve optimal
results.
9
For educational purpose it has to have a lot of guidance built-in.
10
Would be nice to see colors where is mostly windy areas to build a wind farm.
11
There should be a automated creation of the turbines so the user shouldn’t tap 50
times to create each turbine in the farm.
12
There should be a visualization of sea bottom levels for offshore wind farms.
13
Without professional knowledge and instructor assistance it is hard to learn anything
from this early version, because textual user guidance is missing.
14
color windy regions and wake effect visualization.
15
To be able to create more than one farms in one session. More guidance in the app
if it operations are supposed to be performed unsupervised without instructor or
teacher.
16
Without complementary explanation it is hard to learn much about the conditions
that windfarm simulation implies
17
Open map space for deploying simulation can be a disadvantage because the user
have freedom to place it anywhere which could be unsuitable for wind farm.
18
Why the industry not considering the emissions caused by manufacturing of the
wind turbines when talking about ”clean energy”?
19
Many think we will subsidize our way to renewables, but we won’t, for inherently
physical reasons. Sunlight and wind are too energy-dilute. Solar/wind projects need
300x more land, 300% more copper, and 700% more rare earths than fossil fuels,
making them prohibitively expensive.
20
possibility to create more than one wind farm to compare their energy outputs.
21
Implementation of visualization of wind resources
22
Features to import predetermined boundary configurations.
23
Could be interesting to implement maritime traffic routes, so the wind farms doesn’t
disrupt the maritime traffic.
page 49 of 50
==PAGE:52==
H
APPENDIX: IMPROVEMENT SUGGESTIONS
24
This prototype have game characteristics. But this version doesn’t support the
game characteristics because in games the player needs to be challenged with tasks
and objectives, contests against others or missions to make it interesting. Typically
games can also be informative and promote learning of the topic.
25
The AEP results for each layout configurations should be registered/stored so users
can compare results and try to do better or compete to break record scores.
26
Select layouts from a list which has been proven to be efficient. Instead of user
moving single turbine.
27
I like if the boundary still was movable/ editable even after finishing configuration of
it. It should be possible to drag the whole completed layout to a different location
28
Feature to change the hub hight of turbines
29
In order to learn something from the app, users have to complete tasks or missions
like a game app to make it interesting.
30
The AEP results from constructed layouts should be stored to keep track of scores.
Not only results but also information about the layout configurations.
31
I am missing some guidance to learn something
32
Should be able to see where are the offshore locations worldwide with highest benefits?
33
Implementation of more playful interaction is missing.
34
Ability to build more than one wind farm and compare AEP with other WF in
different regions
35
As construction engineer student I am interested to know about the type of founda-
tions actually.
36
It’s a nice app with potential to be very interesting and useful if more details were
implemented.
37
Roughly cost estimation could make it more interesting.
38
More configurable features for turbines of different types
39
Should be able to import site boundary exact coordinates from a file or other sources.
40
informative app if more details and guidance were implemented
41
Automated generation of number of turbines and their types with input fields and
option menus.
42
Including estimation of cables total length from each turbine to substation and to
electrical grid
43
Could be useful and interesting to implement graphical visualization of downstream
wake effect.
44
It becomes tedious performance to configure positions of each and every turbine to
optimize AEP output when dealing with numerous turbines.
Table 5: List of 44 answers to the question: What should be improved in order
to increase the educational or professional potential value??
page 50 of 50
