==PAGE:1==
Characterizing the effect of novel bacteriocins on lactic acid 
bacteria for food and health applications 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Master thesis in Bioinformatic and Systems Biology 
Bacterial Synthetic Biology group at The Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Biosustainability 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Carolina Rocha Arriaga (s203014) 
22nd January 2023 
 
 
 
 
Supervisors: 
Ruben Vazquez Uribe 
Carola Elisa Heesemann Rosenkilde  
Morten Otto Alexander Somme 
==PAGE:2==
Acknowledgments 
The first person I want to thank so much is Ruben for giving me the chance to do my thesis under his 
supervision, he was always there very nice if I was questions, I felt like at home thanks to him. I also want 
to thank Morten because since I came to Denmark it was one of the groups I wanted to join so bad because 
I admire his ability to do science and have an entrepreneurial spirit it always motivated me and inspired 
me. Carola was a very nice mentor very patience and kind, always happy to help me and explain to me a lot 
of things, I love how direct she is and at the same time super sweet. A lot of parts of the project could not 
been done without the help Lachlan and Omkar who were fundamental for the automation and 
Lactobacillus genome collection and analysis, I learnt a lot when in the meetings they help me to 
understand. I had a very nice experience in the lab people was always very kind all the time and I loved the 
collaborative environment they have. Outside the campus I want to thank Jørgen Larseen because he 
provide us some Lactobacillus strains for my experiment. The last group I want to thank is my family that 
even the distance I feel their love and support all the time, they are not with me but they are always in my 
heart.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:3==
Abstract 
Microorganisms are widely present in the world, they are living in different parts of our body, in your pets, 
in the forest, in the water, different parts of our house, in your favorite yogurt, cheese, or beer, basically 
everywhere. Those microorganisms interact with the host and other microorganisms like bacteria, fungi, 
archaea, and viruses. Their presence of them has been widely studied some of them are not harmful, and 
others are commensal but can turn into opportunistic pathogens under different conditions or certain 
circumstances. Currently, there are diverse alternatives to kill undesirable microorganism like disinfectants, 
antiseptics, chemotherapeutic antimicrobial chemicals, antibiotics and bacteriocins. Since the discovery of 
antibiotics, they have been used widely and they have been an effective way to kill microorganisms but also 
their use have produce a huge problem called antimicrobial resistance (AMR). The AMR is an emerging 
problem due the microorganism became immune to different antibiotics available in the market and there 
is a lack of discover of new antibiotics. Different alternatives to kill microorganism have been emerging one 
of them is the use of bacteriocins. Bacteriocins are small peptides produced ribosomally that inhibit the 
growth in close related species and some of them have been described as safe for different uses in food 
technology. In the present study, we tested 22 novel bacteriocins against 174 microorganisms from the  
Lactobacillales order. We observed 5 of the bacteriocins were effective for LAB inhibition in 20 strains and 
7 bacteriocins effective to inhibit Carnobacterium strains. 
 
 
Resumé 
Mikroorganismer er bredt til stede i verden, de lever i forskellige steder i kroppen, i kæledyr, i skoven, i 
vandet, forskellige steder i dit hus, i din yndlingsyoghurt, ost eller øl, stort set overalt. Disse 
mikroorganismer interagerer med værten og andre mikroorganismer som bakterier, svampe, arkæer og 
vira. Deres tilstedeværelse af dem er blevet bredt undersøgt, nogle af dem er ikke skadelige, og andre er 
kommensale, men kan blive til opportunistiske patogener under forskellige forhold eller visse 
omstændigheder. I øjeblikket er der forskellige alternativer til at dræbe uønskede mikroorganismer som 
desinfektionsmidler, 
antiseptika, 
kemoterapeutiske 
antimikrobielle 
kemikalier, 
antibiotika 
og 
bakteriociner. Siden opdagelsen af antibiotika er de blevet brugt i vid udstrækning, og de har været en 
effektiv måde at dræbe mikroorganismer på, men deres brug har også forårsaget et stort problem kaldet 
antimikrobiel resistens (AMR). AMR er et stigende problem, fordi mikroorganismen er blevet immun over 
for de forskellige antibiotika, der er tilgængelige på markedet, og der er mangel på opdagelse af nye 
antibiotika. Forskellige alternativer til at dræbe mikroorganismer er dukket op, en af dem er brugen af 
bakteriociner. Bakteriociner er små peptider produceret ribosomalt, som hæmmer væksten i nært 
beslægtede arter, og nogle af dem er blevet beskrevet som sikre til forskellige anvendelser inden for 
fødevareteknologi. I denne undersøgelse testede vi 22 nye bakteriociner mod 174 mikroorganismer fra 
Lactobacillales-ordenen. Vi observerede, at 5 af bakteriocinerne var effektive til LAB-hæmning i 20 stammer 
og 7 bakteriociner, der var effektive til at hæmme Carnobacterium-stammer. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Content  
==PAGE:4==
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:5==
 
 
Abbreviations  
 
AMR  
WHO 
solid-phase peptide chemical synthesis (SPPS)  
Man Rogosa Sharpe (MRS) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Introduction 
==PAGE:6==
Microorganisms are widely present in the world, they are living in different parts of our body, in your pets, 
in the forest, in the water, different parts of our house, in your favorite yogurt, cheese, or beer, basically 
everywhere. They microorganism can exist alone or co-exist with other species or members from another 
kingdom, and that complex collection of all microorganisms like bacteria, fungi, viruses, and their genes can 
be identified using sequencing methods like metagenomics1. Metagenomics let us study the genetic 
material present in our sample; it can give us compositional information about who is present1.  Knowing 
what microorganisms are present in our sample provides us a better understanding about the system to 
predict some interactions between the members or even who is present and how it can affect or benefit 
the system2. The role of some microorganisms is essential in different processes like fermentation, food 
production, steroid production, enzyme production, treating wastewater, biofuel production2,3. Between 
the diversity of microorganisms, some are not harmful, others are commensal but can turn into 
opportunistic pathogens under different conditions or certain circumstances4. On another hand, there are 
pathogen microorganisms those are harmful to the host because they can produce some diseases or even 
death5. 
 
During decades, human have been fighting against undesirable microorganisms that can affect our health, 
our animals, plants, processed food etc. In order to eradicate, attenuate, or reduce the negative impact 
caused for the presence of those microorganisms humans have used different agents against them. The 
agents could be classified as physical methods like high intensity pulsed electric fields, high-pressure 
systems, ultrasounds, and irradiation while chemical methods such as disinfectants, antiseptics, 
chemotherapeutic antimicrobial chemicals, antibiotics and bacteriocins6. Disinfectants are used to treat 
objects or surfaces to make it safe6. Antiseptics kill or inhibits growth of microbes but it is safe for human 
tissues. Chemotherapeutic antimicrobial chemicals are synthetic products used to inhibit or kill 
microorganisms6. Antibiotics are secondary metabolites produced by bacteria, fungi and yeast, they can 
inhibit or kill microbial growth, they usually have a wider spectrum compared with bacteriocins7.  
Bacteriocins are small polypeptides that have antibacterial activity against species related7,8. In the present 
study we will focused on the use bacteriocins against Lactobacillus strains. 
 
 
 
Bacteriocins 
Bacteriocins were discovered in 1925 by André Gratia, he noticed one E. coli strains producing a toxic 
substance that was killing another E.coli situated closely, he discover Colicins, the first bacteriocins 
identified9. Since then many bacteriocins have been discovered, BACTIBASE contains 219 entries10. Riley 
and colleagues estimate that 99% of bacterial strains are able to produce at least one bacteriocin this 
suggest a great potential to identify novel bacteriocins in the future11. Bacteriocins are small peptides or 
proteins  (30-60aminoacids) synthesized ribosomally , they are produced by Gram-positive and Gram-
negative bacteria8. Those bacteriocins are able to kill or inhibit closely related strains but not harm the 
bacterial themselves (narrow spectrum) due the presence of immunity proteins12. This killing strategy 
evaluatively is consider an strategy for keeping the population and reducing the competitors to obtain more 
resources in the systems11,12. The bacteriocins can be classified according to the size, chemical structures, 
mode of actions, physical properties, stability and molecular size7 .    
 
Bacteriocins from Gram-negative bacteria 
The first bacteriocin inhibited E.coli growth that bacteriocin is called Colicin. Nowadays Colicins, Colicin-like 
bacteriocins and Bacteriocins phage-tail like and Microcins represents the main class of bacteriocins in 
Gram-negative bacteria 7.  Colicins has a molecular weight from 30 to 80kDa, they are sensitive to proteases 
and heat, they are synthesized by E.coli strains that have a copy of colicinogenic plasmid7. Depending on 
==PAGE:7==
the interaction mechanism can classified in three groups: 1) pore forming, 2) nuclease and 3) peptidoglycan 
degrading. Phage tail-like bacteriocins or tailocins are large protein structures from 20 to 100kDa they 
consist of 8-14 different polypeptide subunits, they are divided in two main groups: 1) –R  and 2) F.  R 
tailocins are evolutionary related to phages of the Myoviridae family while F belong to the tails of phages 
in the Siphoviridae family13. The mechanism of action involve the compression of the shell and penetration 
of the nucleus in the cell wall leading the creation of pores14. The microcins are low molecular weight 
<10kDa, they are highly stable peptides, resistant to proteases and extreme temperatures and pH, they are 
found in the members of Entorobacteriaceae family. Microcins has a powerful antibacterial activity, 
siderophode microcins nind receptors involved in iron transport, in general microcins use various structural 
homology mechanism to destroy target cells8. 
 
 
Bacteriocins from Gram-positive bacteria  
The gram positive microorganism produces a diverse type of bacteriocins with different characteristics, 
they are low molecular weight with less than 60 aminoacids. Most bacteriocins in gram-positive bacteria 
belongs to Class I (modified peptides lantibiotics), Class II (small postranslationally unmodify bacteriocins) 
and Class III (large proteins, heat unstable)8 
 
Class I 
The Class I are post-translatonally modified bacteriocins or lantibiotics with <28 amino acids. They are not 
very stable to heat, active at membrane level, which contain some rare amino acids, such as lanthionine, 
b-methyl lanthionine and dehydroalanine that are formed due to modifications subsequent to the process 
of translation.11  
 
Class II 
The bacteriocins in this category are small postranslationally unmodify  peptides from 30-60 amino acids 
(<10 kDA). They have different properties of heat tolerance and positive charge. This class is subdivided in 
3 sub-categories IIa (pediocin), IIb (lactocin G) and IIc (lactocin B).11 
 
Class III 
This group contains heat unstable proteins with a large molecular weight >30 kDa. This class is subdivided 
in two groups A and B. The group A are enzymes that kill the sensitive strains by lysis of the cell wall one 
example of this is the Enterolisin A. Group B are non-lytic proteins for example Caseicin 80 and Helveticin 
J.11 
 
Difference between bacteriocins and antibiotics 
Antibiotics have been widely used basically for the power and broad spectrum, it could have positive and 
negative connotations depending on the case, but it is very well know antibiotics can affect drastically the 
microbial diversity15. On another hand the bacteriocins are very effective killing members from the same 
specie. Another remarkable difference the way they are produce bacteriocins are produced in the 
ribosomes while antibiotics are secondary metabolites7. Also the microorganism that produce the 
bacteriocin are not susceptible to it while the microorganisms that produce the antibiotic can die16.  The 
bacteriocins have been used more in food industry as food preservers while antibiotics have been widely 
use in human and animal health16,17.  Another significant difference is the market availability even when 
the bacteriocins has fascinating properties currently there are less than 10 bacteriocins formulations in the 
market the ones are mainly used in food preservation (Nisin, Pediocin PA-1, Sakacin and Leucocin A) while 
the number of antibiotics it over 10015,18.  
 
 
==PAGE:8==
 
Uses of bacteriocins  
Currently, some bacteriocins are mainly used in food industry and recently in agriculture and human health. 
Bacteriocins synthesized by lactic acid bacteria are currently the only ones used for food preservation, they have many 
advantages over antibiotics or food preservatives obtained by chemical synthesis12 Bacteriocins also have been used 
to treat pathogen-associated diseases, they are reported to inhibit animal and plant pathogens16,19. Bacteriocins has 
a role important role in food and human health. 
 
Food  
The current alternatives to extend the shelf life require the use of food preservatives such as sulfur dioxide and nitrite, 
those are developed by chemical synthesis and the long-term consumption may have a negative impact in the 
health20. Sambu and colleagues in 2022 showed that the use of sodium benzoate, potassium benzoate, aspartame, 
tartrazine and carrageenan in the long term use resulted in teratogenicity and other allergens20. In order to kill 
undesirable microorganism, the use of antibiotics is a fast solution but in the long term it would cause more problems 
and the current regulation prohibit the use of antibiotics in food products20. The preservation of food needs safer 
alternatives for human consumption one alternative used is the addition of bacteriocins or LAB bacteriocin producers 
strains. The pure and mix cultures of LAB and bacteriocins like nisin, acidocin and propionicin are actively used as 
agents against bacteria and pathogens that cause food spoilage, some of them are used to preserve and stabilize 
different types of food like fermented drinks, mayonnaise, cheese products, cream, meat or vegetable 
composition3,8,12,16. The addition of the cultures can improve the quality of the food improving the organoleptic 
properties. Bacteriocins are natural food additives, many bacteriocins strains are already present in different types of 
food already they are also safe after intake by the gastrointestinal system. In 1938 the European regulation and later 
in 1943  the US Food and Drug administration (FDA) approved Nisin for food preservation,  this is produced by 
Lactococcus lactis,  it is in the marked  as Nisaplin8. Since then Nisin, Pediocin and Micocin® are the only bacteriocins 
approved by the FDA, they are approved for food preservation and anti-spoilage processes21. Nisin is used as 
preservative in many foods like kimchi, smashed potatoes, and fresh-cut products12. Pediocin PA-1 (Alta 2341 in the 
market) inhibits the growth of Listeria monocytogenes in meat producst22. Another important group of bacteriocins 
are Enterocins they have been used for suppression of contamination in cider, fruit and vegetable juices, canned 
vegetables, soy milk and zucchini12 . Micocin is a bacteriocion produced by Carnobacteria maltraromaticum that 
inhibit the Lysteria monocytogenes growth, the use is approved in meat products currently is approved in Mexico, 
Costa Richa and Colombia 23. 
 
 
Human health  
The use of bacteriocins in health field have been broadly study in terms of safety, use in oral and skin care, 
treatment of peptic ulcer, spermicidal activity and women care and anticancer activity. Strains like 
Lactobacillus fermentum ACA-DC 179, Lactobacillus plantarun ACA-DC 269 and Streptococcus Macedonicus 
ACA-DC 198 are reported as bacteria that inhibit the growth of oral pathogens. The last one produce 
Macedocin, this bacteriocin is able to kill oral pathogens in the lag phase, there are research go in on to 
incorporate in formulation for toothpaste and mouthwash (29). Streptococcus salivarius K12 produces 
salivaricin A2 and B, those inhibit microorganisms related to halitosis such as Atopobium parvulum 
ATCC33793, Eubacterium sulci ATCC35585, Eubacterium saburreum ATCC33271, Parvimonas micra 
ATCC33270, Solobacterium moorei CCUG39336, Streptococcus anginosus T-29, and Micromonas micros 
(31). The skin has different microorganisms important to maintain the skin homeostasis and the lipid barrier 
against undesirable microorganism that causes inflammatory acne problems like Propionibacterium 
acnes(27;28) . ELS5 is a bacteriocin produced by Enterococcus faecalis SL-5 that inhibit the 
Propionibacterium acnes, it have been tested in lotion and reduces significantly the inflammatory lesions 
and pimples(28).The peptic ulcers are caused by dysbiosis in the gut microbiome, Helicobacter pylory 
associated to gastrointestinal and duodenal ulcers. Some bacteriocins produced by Pediococcus adilactici 
BA28 inhibit H. pylory (18). Fermenticin HV6b is a bacteriocons produced by Lactobacillus fermentum HV6b 
==PAGE:9==
MTCC 10770 that showed inhibition of microorganism related to vaginal infections such as Gardnerella 
vaginalis, Mobiluncus, Staphylococci, and Streptococci but also has sperm immobilization and spermicidal 
activity (20). Currently there is research going in the production of vaginal creams that contain Fermenticin 
HV6b to use to protect the human vagina and as contraception tool (20). The use of bacteriocin in cancer 
have been increasing the last years here we describe in a small subsection.  
 
Anticancer activity  
Cancer is a worldwide problem that affects of the global population dramatically in 2020 19.3 million cases 
were reported24. There are different types of cancer and they have particularities. Currently there are 
different  treatments but those treatments bring side symptoms like nausea and vomiting multiple times 
per day, sings of toxicity, fatigue, diarrhea, nausea/vomiting, febrile neutropenia and rash25,26. In order to 
bring different treatment alternatives into the market different research have been going in, one of those 
alternatives is the use of Bacteriocins. There are different bacteriocins that are able to bind cancer cells, 
they increasing the expression of negatively charged molecules on the superfice of the cells and makes 
them vulnerable to the cytotoxic activity driven by the bacteriocin 27. It is assumed that the membrane is 
the main target for the bacteriocins. The cytotoxicity of the bacteriocins depends on their structural 
properties, there studies that showed  in a few seconds after the interaction of cytotoxic bacteriocin with 
a sensitive eukaryotic cell, its surface is depolarized and its permeability increases, leading to cell death7,28. 
There are different experiments with cell models to study the effect of bacteriocins29. Nisin, induces 
preferential apoptosis and reduces the cell proliferation in neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC)30. The 
nisin ZP in 95% concentration induced the highest level of apoptosis in HNSCC cells compared with low 
concentrated nisin (2.5%) 30. Enterococcus mundtii C4L10 produces bacteriocins that affects the 
proliferation of cancer cell lines such as HSC3 (oral cancer), MCF7 (breast cancer), H1299 (lung cancer and 
HCT116 colon cancer31. Rec-pediocin CP2 has significantly high cytotoxicity and chromosomal DNA damage 
in cell lines32 .There are in vitro studies that shows the anticancer properties of Fermenticin HV6b, it induces 
apoptosis in cancer cells 28.  
 
 
Motivational background 
After the discovery of antibiotics in the modern era after the discovery of penicillin by Sir Alexander Fleming 
in 1928, humans have been using antibiotics to kill microorganisms and mitigate the problem in the 
moment but with the years a combination of different factors such as evolution and inappropriate use of 
antibiotics brings as results the AMR33,34. In 1950 penicillin antimicrobial resistance became a problem, 
some years after in 1962 the first methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRS) was reported in 1962 
and later in the United States in 19686,34. Unfortunately, this phenomenon has been increasing and 
nowadays there are resistance cases reported to nearly all antibiotics available35.  
 
This emerging problem now is recognized as one of the top global public health threats by the WHO in 2019 
has motivated different scientists to find new antibiotics or alternatives to kill microorganismsm. We might 
think due this increasing problem pharmaceuticals will be trying to find or produce new antibiotics, but the 
reality is different, the last entirely original class of antibiotic was discovered in 198018,35. Nowadays the 
discovery of new antibiotics is not considered  attractive to man pharmaceuticals  because many companies 
does not consider them profitable, for example in 2017 the cost of developing an antibiotic oscillated 
around $1.5billion USD while the average revenue generated from an antibiotic sale was around $46million 
USD per year35. The lack of new antibiotics shows a strong need to use antibiotic alternatives and currently 
the research and use of bacteriocins is increasing due their safety. The bacteriocins have been using in the 
last years showing promising results for their use in food technology as preservers, their application to kill 
pathogen microorganisms and other health applications in skin and oral care or spermicidal 
==PAGE:10==
uses9.Bacteriocins have been studied to be able to modify and improve their physicochemical properties, 
pharmacological effects, and biosafety ant it makes it a promising alternative for the emerging needs 9. 
 
Theoretical background  
Bacteriocins production 
In 1925 André Gratia showed that bacteriocins can be produced by microorganisms to kill their neighbors, 
this is a way of bacteriocin production, close to the target microorganism still in use. Even when the bacteria 
contains the genes to produce bacteriocins they are not always produced, they produce them under diverse 
in vivo conditions and different regulation events, modulating the expression of specific genes responsible 
for the synthesis of bacteriocin36. Some require quorum sensing to start producing, usually the production 
of antimicrobial peptides occurs at the end of the growth phase and the beginning of the stationary phase37. 
Some other bacteriocins do not require specific regulations, their promoters react to pH changes at the 
transcriptional level for example promoters like P1 and P3 depend on intracellular acidification to produce 
lacticin 481 by Lactobacillus lactis38.  In order to produce bacteriocins there are different methods, the best 
method of production will depend on the use of the bacteriocin if is for an inhibition assay, food grade, 
medical use etc36. The most common methods include co-culting, starting culture and solid-phase peptide 
chemical synthesis (SPPS).The co-culture is the addition of two or more strains inoculated under aseptic 
conditions36.The co-culture of different microorganisms can be favorable because their presence 
sometimes increases the bacteriocin production of the strain producer, there are different reported cases 
of this phenomenal, for example, the co-culture of Lactobacillus spp can act as an inductor increasing the 
production of bacteriocins in Lactococcus lactis and Lactobacillus plantarum strains39.  Starting cultures that 
produce bacteriocins are used in the dairy industry providing advantages protecting the fermented food 
from the transmission of food pathogens or secondary cultures accelerate the maturation of dairy products 
for example the addition of Lactococcin ABM promotes early maturation of cheese 7.The use of purified  
and concentrated bacteriocins is more preferable than the use of cultures  because of the slow growth of 
bacteria or the production of the bacteriocins in the late stage of the life cycle. 
 
 
LAB bacteriocin production 
Usually, bacteriocins are obtaining by culturing the strains but also they are recombinant compounds are 
produced.  The synthesis is product by the expression of heterologous systems. Another way to produce 
bacteriocin is the use od solid-phase peptide chemical synthesis (SPPS)7 .Bacteriocin production was 
studied in batch culture with Man Rogosa Sharpe (MRS) media for Lactobacilae members. The bacteriocin 
production by Lactic acid bacteria (LAB) is highly affected by culture conditions like temperature and 
media40. Cladera-Olivera showed that temperature (26-37C), initial pH (6.5-7.5) and media has a significant 
effect on the bacteriocin production of Lactobacillus members like Bacillus licheniformis7.The media needs 
to contain carbohydrates, organic nitrogen sources, vitamins, minerals, amino acids and proteins41.The 
most common media used is MRS broth, this media has a high cost and low yield production,  in the last 
years, different research has been done to find alternative media options to produce a  higher amount of 
bacteriocins with minimal cost 42..An alternative to produce food bio preservation bacteriocins implies the 
purification of bacteriocins, there purification represents a challenge due the purification at industrial levels 
does not work well than laboratory scale 42.Several studies shoes that MRS and Elliker broths are the best 
media for the growth of LAB because they promote an abundant growth and high levels of bacteriocins 41,43 
 
The high cost of bacteriocin production and low yield motivated me to look for production alternatives such 
as recombinant microbial systems for the heterologous production of bacteriocins. There are some 
advantages to produce bacteriocins in recombinant systems for example the production could be done in 
safer hosts, increase the bacteriocin production, control of bacteriocin gene expression and the possibility 
==PAGE:11==
to construct multibacteriocinogenics strains with a wider antagonist spectrum. The recombinant 
production of bacteriocins mostly depends on the use of expression vectors, the highest protein production 
levels  are obtained using E.coli as the host strain. E. coli has been used as a heterologous host to produce 
recombinant proteins for decades due the rapid growth and use of non-expensive media, the very well 
know genetic characterization and the availability of versatile cloning tools44.There are different strains and  
an extensive set of expression vectors available, strains like BL21 have been used to produce bacteriocins 
like Bovicin HJ50, Caernobacterocin B2, Divercin AS7, E50-52, Enterocin A, B and P, Epidermicin NI01, 
Haloduracin, Lactococcin G and K, Microsin B, Nisin, Nukacin ISK-1, Plantaricin E, Plantaricin E, Sakacin P 
and  Suicin45.The bacteriocin production in E. coli can be confined to the cytoplasm, secreted into the 
periplasmic space or into the culture media44,45. Most of the bacteriocins use the secretion machinery in 
the host to export the bacteriocin into the media. The bacteriocins are secreted into the medium and there 
are different strategies to concentrate the bacteriocins from the supernatant such as precipitation with 
silicic acid and additional steps to achieve the purification. All these purifications involve centrifugation to 
obtain the supernatant cell-free42.  
 
In order to work the vectors require diverse components: 1) an origin of replication, 2)a selection marker 
(genes encoding resistant to antibiotics), 3)a promoter region for the gene transcription initiation and 4) 
multiple unique restriction enzymes sites arranged in a polylinker region after the promoter to facilitate 
the cloning 45.Different promoter systems for bacteriocins production in E.coli are use like lac-derived 
promoters induced by lactose or its analog  isopropyl β-D-thiogalactopyranoside (IPTG) but T7 and T7lac 
promoters are the most common used 45. In the present study the class II were used they target mainly LAB 
members and they do not have large  post translational modifications 9. The plasmid used to produce the 
heterologous bacteriocins is a plasmid from E. coli Nissle (pMut), it was modified to contain a kanamycin 
resistant gene, a hok-sok toxin-antitoxin system to increase the stability. The OmpA is in front of the 
bacteriocin gene and cleaved when secreted (see Figure 2). The bacteriocin gene is transcribed from a T7 
promoter inducible by arabinose. The bacteriocins were coned into the plasmid using Gibson cloning.The 
copy number is 100-200 copies per cell 46. 
 
 
 
Figure 1- Heterologous system of bacteriocin expression designed by Carola Rosenkilde  
 
==PAGE:12==
Bacteriocin testing   
The effectivity or inhibition of different microorganisms has been tested in different two main types of 
assays: 1) agar and 2)liquid media.  The use of agar for inhibition assays has been used doing different 
experiments, some of their growth the bacteriocin producers strains in agar then are co-culture in the same 
spot where the target strain is placed47,48. Another type of assay uses the bacteriocin supernatant and is 
applied directly in the plates with the target strain, the use of the supernatant has shown the inhibition 
results even when the bacteriocin is just cell-free but not purified47,49. A third method where the target 
microorganism is in the agar and an agar layer with the bacteriocin supernatant is added38,48. Another 
method is called agar well diffusion assay here a hole is created in the agar adding the inhibition compound 
in the hole while the plate contains the microorganism50,51 .In the previous methods the inhibition can be 
observed like a halo around where the target bacteria is inhibited, this inhibition can be measured 51.The 
measurement of the inhibition was standardized by the WHO in 1961, this method is called Kirby-Bauer 
test  or Zone of Inhibition (ZOI)52 . This is a quantitative test that measures the diameter of the zone of 
inhibition and how it correlated to the sensitivity of a bacterium to antibiotic or bacteriocin, the larger the 
diameter the greater the sensitivity of the bacteriocins usually the sone sizes are compared to a standard 
chart to determine if the bacteria is resistant. The liquid media assay uses well plates to inoculate the target 
microorganism and mix with the supernatant bacteriocin, studies like and Vijayakumar and colleagues used 
96 well plates with MRS to grow Lactobacillus and later on they added the bacteriocin into the wells and 
measured the optical density (OD) for 48hrs 47.The most common OD measurements are OD600, OD595, 
OD650 the difference between the controls positive and negative is used to determine if there is or not 
inhibition 47,53,54. 
 
 
 
Robots for automation  
Performing an assay with a big collection of microorganisms could be limited because it could be time-
consuming with the advance of technologies the use of robots in the laboratories is making life easier. 
Currently, there are diverse liquid handling robots used for automation, they reduce the time and also the 
possible errors carried by the hand pipetting. In the market, there are different brands and models, the 
main suppliers of automated liquid-handling systems include Tecan, PerkinElmer, Beckman Coulter, 
Eppendorf, Hamilton Robotics, Agilent Technologies and Thermo Fisher55. Choosing the right robot 
depends on the task and availability of the equipment because they are expensive equipment some 
laboratories have limited resources. In the facilities of The Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for 
Biosustainability, there are different liquid-handling equipment like Tecan and Hamilton liquid handling 
models. Tecan Fluent simplifies cell-based workflows allowing to fill different well plates 96, 384 etc. Tecan 
fluent has a workstation that contains: 1) area for pipette tips, 2)liquid waste reservoir, 3) area to place the 
plates, 4)special compartments for tubes and 4) the robot arms for disposal. All those elements can be 
filled according to the needs of the project55.Tecan provide preprogrammed protocols the ones that can be 
modified, those are opentron robots,  they are fully modular and can be coded into a versatile programming 
interface56 .Different steps like adding or discarding a different number of tips, filling plates with media, 
mixing up, and aspirating to homogenize in the well can be added with strict precision like touching the 
liquid in the well or avoiding the contact completely, this modularity allows adapting the workflow for the 
desired project55.  
 
Tecan and Eppendorf have integrated sensors for free-contact liquid level detection to ensure precision, 
this also helps to avoid mix contamination between the wells 55,57 .Tecan provide fast speed operations 
without compromising the accuracy like Sanchita and colleagues showed in SARS-Cov-2 detection58. The 
last years Tecan Fluent have been used in some workflows to discover antimicrobials of ribosomal origin as 
==PAGE:13==
Ayikpoe and colleagues use the equipment for E.coli transformation and plasmid extraction also was it use 
increased in the last pandemic for the SARS-Cov-2 detection59. In general Tecan have been for in vitro drug 
testing screenings,  cell culture, maintenance culture, plating58,60. 
 
 
Lactobacillales order 
In this project, we mainly focused on Lactobacillaceae members due they are the main target of the 
bacteriocins produced by Carola but also the bacteriocins were tested in a small set of 3 Carnobacterium 
members. Her previous results showed that the bacteriocins mainly target Lactobacillaceae strains (Figure 
2). Lactobacillales order members are commonly called lactic acid bacteria (LAB)61. The order includes the 
Aerococcaceae, 
Carnobacteriaceae, 
Enterococcaceae, 
Streptococcaceae, 
Leuconostocaceae 
and 
Lactobacillaceae families. Each family could have members with different characteristics but in general 
most of the LAB members are gram-positive, they synthesize lactic acid as the main product of sugar 
fermentation, they grow in M 17, LaS (lactobacilli-sorbic acid), BRIGGS,  RCM, LSD, TPPY and MRS media 
described as the most efficient due some media need to add additional components or some media fails 
to make growth some species, for example, LaS media fails to recover enterococci 62. LAB microorganisms 
have an important role in industrial applications due to their properties and safety, they have a “generally 
recognized as safe status (GRAS)” for the Food and Drug Administration Agency (FDA)62. Some of those 
beneficial properties are the high-value compounds that can be produced by LAB metabolism, are able to 
produce ethanol, diacetyl, acetaldehyde, reuterin,  acid lactic, butanol, polysaccharides, polyols, vitamins 
and antimicrobial agents.  Those compounds are so beneficial in different food process for example lactic 
has an important role in the coagulation of milk proteins (caseins) also providing a characteristic flavor and 
modifying the texture of cheese and other fermented milk products38.Some microorganism from the genus 
Lactobacillus are consider probiotic microorganism, some of them have been isolated from ricotta cheese, 
vegetables, fermented milk, meat, bread, wine, yogurt, olives and fish63.Lactococcus lactis, Lactobacillus 
acidophilus, Enterococcu faecium, Bifidobacterium bifidum, Lactobacillus case, Bifidus Actirecularis, 
Lactobacillus plantarum, Lactobacillus reuteri, Lactobacillus casei GG are some of the most widely 
probiotics used64.Species from the genus Leuconostoc have been found in cheese, alcoholic drinks, 
fermented vegetables and sausages63 .Acinetobacter members were isolated from fermented products like 
Kenkey, Koko and Chinkwangue .Weisella members has a facultative metabolism and have been isolated in 
fermented drinks like Pozol(Mexican drink), Togwa (Tanzanian drink), Bushera, Kulenaoto, Sauusac (camel 
milk) and fermented food like Jian-gua(fermented cucumber) and Gari (cassava fermentation) 63. 
Acetobacter members have been seen in fermented products like wine, beer, sake, cider, kombucha and 
Haipao63.Carnobacterium members are isolated from natural environments, fresh bell peppers, seafood 
products, and milk, some species are used to preserve food products63.Besides food LAB members have 
isolated from different sources like the human body in saliva, stool, and vagina, from environments like soil, 
lakes and burn wounds, and animals like cattle, buffalo, camel, sheep, goats, fish, and pigs39,65–69 . Even 
when many of the LAB members are probiotics microorganisms or are classified as GRAS There are some 
Lactobacillus microorganisms that have been reported as causative pathogens in different types of 
infection or associated to bacteremia, endocarditis, peritonitis, abscesses and meningitis many other have 
been associated with spoil process in some foods as Table 1 resume.  
 
==PAGE:14==
 
Figure 2- Bacteriocin target strains heat map 
The present heat map shows the bacteriocins in the X axis and the target bacteriocins and Y represent the strains. 
 
 
 
 
Related to  
Microorganism 
Reference 
Bacteremia  
Lacticaseibacillus rhamnosus GG, Leuconostoc mesenteroides, 
Streptococcus Mucilaginosus, Streptococcus thermophilus, 
Weissella confuse, Weissella viridescens, Weissella cibaria , 
Lactobacillus delbrueckii, Lactobacillus plantarum, Lactobacillus 
paracasei LP10266,Lactobacillus acidphilus, Lactobacillus brevis, 
Lactobacillus casei,, Lactobacillus confuses, Lactobacillus  
curvatus, Lactobacillus fermentum, Lactobacillus gasseri, 
Lactobacillus  jensenii, Lactobacillus  leichmannii, Enterococcus 
fecalis, Enterococcus faecium and Streptococcus Mucilaginosus. 
(franca 
rosi; 
Mayra 
Gonçalves 
Menegueti; A.H. 
Siddiqui; Joanna 
Stephens; 
Marilynn 
R. 
Fairfax; 
Lonvaud-Funel, 
A; 
Vincenzina 
==PAGE:15==
Fusco; 
K. 
A. 
Bourne;franca 
rossi; 
Marta 
Dušková: 
A.H. 
Siddiqui; J. P. 
Cannon 
 
Caries 
 
Ligilactobacillus salivarius, Lactobacillus gasseri, Lactobacillus 
casei, 
Lactobacillus 
paracasei, 
Lactobacillus 
plantarum, 
Lactobacillus oris and Lactobacillus vaginalis. 
 
franca 
rossi; 
Lintu 
Ramachandran; 
P.W. Caufield; 
 
Endocartitis 
 
Limosilactobacillus 
fermentum, 
Lactobacillus 
jensennii,  
Lactobacillus casei, Lactobacillus  curvatus, Lactobacillus 
plantarum, 
Lactobacillusrhamnosus, 
Lactobacillus 
paracasei LP10266 and Lactobacillus acidophilus. 
 
franca 
rossi; 
Muhammet 
Ozer; 
J. 
P. 
Cannon 
 
Periodontitis  
 
Ligilactobacillus salivarius, Lactobacillus  paracasei and 
Lactobacillus gasseri 
 
Franca 
Rossi; 
Lintu 
Ramachandran 
 
Infection 
(urinary,respiratory 
intections 
and 
wounds) 
 
 
Streptococcus pyogenes, Weissella cibaria ,Lactobacillus 
crispatus and Lactobacillus gasseri 
 
Sidrah Kanwal; Ji-
Eun Yeu; Jinshui 
Zheng 
Spoiled beer 
Lactobacillus 
backii, 
Lactobacillus 
paraplantarum, 
Lactiplantibacillus paraplantarum, Furfurilactobacillus curtus, 
Lactobacillus curtus, Secundilactobacillus paracollinoides, 
Lactobacillus paracollinoides, Levilactobacillus cerevisiae 2301, 
Lactobacillus 
cerevisiae 
(TUM 
BP 
140423000-2250T), 
Fructilactobacillus lindneri and  Lactobacillus lindneri. 
 
Jinshui 
Zheng; 
Jennifer 
Koob; 
F.V.M.Silva; 
M. 
du Toit 
Spoiled cider 
 
Liquorilactobacillus 
sicerae, 
Lactobacillus 
sicerae, 
Secundilactobacillus 
paracollinoides 
and 
Lactobacillus 
paracollinoides. 
 
Jinshui Zheng 
Spoiled wine 
Pediococcus damnosus,Pediococcus inopinatus,Pediococcus 
parvulus, Pediococcus pentosaceus, Lactobacillus cellobiosus,  
Lactobacillus hilgardii and Leuconostoc amelibiosum. 
 
M. du Toit; M.E. 
Wade; 
E. 
Gindreau 
Spoiled cheese 
Loigolactobacillus bifermentans, Lactobacillus bifermentans, 
Loigolactobacillus 
rennini, 
Lactobacillus 
rennini, 
Paucilactobacillus 
wasatchensis 
and 
Lactobacillus 
wasatchensis. 
 
Jinshui 
Zheng; 
Taylor S.Oberg 
Spoiled meat 
Companilactobacillus 
alimentarius 
, 
Lacticaseibacillus 
sharpeae, 
Lactobacillus 
sharpeae, 
Dellaglioa 
algida, 
Jinshui 
Zheng; 
Per Johansson 
==PAGE:16==
Lactobacillus algidus, Paucilactobacillus oligofermentans, 
Lactobacillus 
oligofermentans 
and 
Leuconostoc 
gasicomitatum. 
 
Spoiled sausages 
Companilactobacillus halodurans. 
 
Jinshui Zheng 
Fish infections 
Lactococcus garvieae, Carnobacterium maltaromaticum and 
Carnobacterium divergens. 
 
A. I. Mata; Paolo 
Pastorino; 
Jørgen J Leisner 
 
Mastitis 
Weissella cibaria. 
VincenzinaFusco 
 
Table 1- Microorganisms associated to a negative effect in human health and food sources.  
 
 
Related work 
In the literature were found a few studies that use a big collection of microorganisms from Lactobacillus 
order in an automated way, there are a couple of works where use small collection of microorganism to 
see the effect of adding bacteriocins. Here we resume the most relevant points for our study.  Vijayakumar 
and colleagues performed an inhibition assay using a 96-well plate to evaluate the bacteriocin inhibition, 
they used MRS media for L.monocytogenes 39-2  and L. delbrueckii 4797 growth, using a multi-channel 
pipette they added 100µl of MRS and 100ul of the bacteriocin, the plate was sealed with UltraClear film to 
prevent evaporation, then incubate between 33-35°C with shake during 48hrs and measure the OD59547. 
Ayikpoe and colleagues used Tecan Fluent for their work, they growth the E.coli BL21 into LB media 
overnight at 37°C to produce the modified peptides, 20ul of this modified peptides were added into their 
agar inhibition assay (Ayikpoe). Campbell performed an inhibition experiment using different bacteriocins 
against Staphylococcus aureus, using a multichannel pipet 30µl of TSB was added into the wells and 20µl 
of the bacteriocin (erythromycin), the plate were covered with a low evaporation lid and incubate 30°C for 
16-24hrs and measure the OD600 in different intervals53  
 
 
Impact  
With these attempts to evaluate the sensitivity of members from the Lactobacillales order, we pretend to 
generate more basic information about the microorganism’s sensitivity to a collection of novel bacteriocins 
and adapting an automated screening for future assays. The cases of inhibited microorganisms could be 
the base for new studies where people can evaluate different conditions to evaluate the inhibition. Also, 
this information can be the starting point for some preliminary applications in different food industries or 
could be the basis to perform in vitro assays.  
 
Materials and Methods  
In the present project different small experiments were performed to evaluate different things, in this 
section are condensed the methods used for that propose.  
 
Strain collection 
The collection for the present experiments contains members that were isolated from different  sources 
like dairy, milk, blown cheese, comte cheese, meat, fermented fish, prosciutto, Aalbæk sausage, hanegal 
sausage,  fermented cucumber, pickled cabbage, kimchi, cocoa bean heap,  kefir grains, ketchup, pozol, 
fermented taro, beer, chicken intestine, rat intestine, goat feces, dental plaque of baboon, bovine rumen, 
human breask milk, human saliva, human eye, gastric biopsies from human and intestine of an adult. The 
==PAGE:17==
study collection comes from 3 main sources: 1) microorganisms from Lionie food collection, 2) Carola 
Rosenkilde strain collection and 3) microorganisms provided by Jørgen Leisner from Københavns 
Universitet. The microorganism were chosen if they grows in MRS and were previously identified. The 
strains grew in MRS plates and then were placed in glycerol stocks (20%) stored at -80°C. The collection has 
a total of 174 microorganisms (See supplementary material). In order to determine the authenticity 10 
random strains from the collection were sent to 16S rRNA sequencing.  
 
1-Mix a chunk of the glycerol stock with 100ul of MQ water, take 0.5ul of this for the PCR. 
2-Prepare the Master mix for the PCR following the next table  
 
Component 
to 1 reaction (50ul) 
water 
23ul 
fw primer 
1ul (10uM) 
rev primer 
1ul (10uM) 
template (concentration) 
0.5ul 
taq 2x 
25ul 
 
 
 
Sequencing primers: 
 
 
 
16S F AGAGTTTGATCCTGGCTC  
16S R TACGGYTACCTTGTTACGACTT 
3- Amplify using the following program: 
step 
temp 
time 
notes 
Initial denaturation 
98°C 
5 min 
 
Denaturation 
98°C 
30 seg 
30 cycles 
Annealing 
53 (54 --> 51) 
30 seg 
 
Extension 
68°C 
60 seg 
15-20 seg 
Final extension 
68°C 
10 min 
 
Hold 
10°C 
 
 
 
The PCR was verified by band size in agarose gel. After the sequencing for the bacteria identification BLAST 
tool was used online, and the minimum identity score considered was >97%. 
 
 
Inhibition model: solid, liquid 
The different assays were performing changing the conditions in order to test different aspect such as, the 
bacteriocin amount, the media used or the method for bacteriocins production and application. Those 
changes were not related to the E.coli bacteriocins producers, the same bacteriocins were bacteriocins 
different assays the bacteriocins used were: B0=empty plasmid, B6= Hiracin_JM79, B8= Sakacin_A, B10= 
Leucocin_C, B12= Ubericin-A, B13= Actifencin, B18= Mundticin, B22= Acteroidetocin A, B25= 
EJ97enterocin, B31= 
Plantaricin_423, 
B32= 
sakacin_G_skgA2, 
B33= 
garvieacinQ_garQ, 
B35= 
Leucocin_A_(LeucocinA-UAL187), B36= Mesentericin, B38= Penocin_A, B42= Bovicin_255_variant,B46= 
Bovicin_255_peptide, B50= Divercin_V41_(DvnV41), B52= Bacteriocin_31, B53= Enterocin_SE-K4, B58= 
Eenterocin_P-like, B63= EnterocinP, B70= Sakacin_5XSakX. BW= water are used where BW is the control 
with water and B0 is the empty plasmid (see the supplementary material).  
 
Solid: 
==PAGE:18==
Top agar 
The top agar assay was an attempt to test the inhibition of the Lactobacillus using the E.coli bacteriocins 
producers in order to avoid the time-consuming harvesting process. In this small test, 3 lactobacillus (L. 
mali, L.delbrickeii and L.sakeii) and 5 bacteriocins (B0,B6,B10,B13 and B33) were used. The plate was dived 
into 12 sections in order to have room for a duplicate and the negative control (the microorganism in a slot 
without E.coli strain). The materials needed and the procedure is described below. 
 
Materials:  
-Square plates with LB media with 1% arabinose  
-Melted MRS agar  
-Liquid MRS 
-E. coli bacteriocins producer strains  
- Lactobacillus strains  
 
Procedure:  
1- Growing the E.coli strains in the LB square plate and incubate 24hrs at 37°C.The same day they 
grew the Lactobacillus strains were in 1.5ml of liquid MRS and incubate 24hrs at 37°C.  
2- Measure the OD of the lactobacillus 
3- To prepare the top agar, melt MRS agar, dilute the strain (10⁻2) and mix 500ul of the diluted strain 
with 8ml MRS + 4ml MRS agar, mix and distribute all over the plate with the E.coli strains continue 
with the incubation for 24hrs at 37°C. 
 
 
Liquid  
To find the best set for Robot’s final assay 96 and 384 well plates were tested. The bacteriocin method was 
the same for both assays. It is summarized in the following section:  
 
Bacteriocins production 
Bacteriocin production implies different steps is executed in different days and require the 
following material. 
 
 
Material 
 
-E.coli bacteriocins producers 
 
-Lactobacillus strains 
 
-2YT- kanamycin plates 
 
-2YT-kanamycin media 
 
-2YT media  
 
-MRS 1.25X 
 
-15mil tubes 
 
-0.2mm filters 
 
-10ml syringes  
 
-Growth inhibitor  
 
Day1-  
 
1.1-Strick the bacteriocins in  LB-kan plates and let them grow 24hr at 37°C. 
 
1.2-Prepare tubes with 6ml of 2YT-kanamicin for the next day. 
 
 
 
Day2- 
==PAGE:19==
2.2-Transfer colonies of each bacteriocin into each tube (2YT-Kan) and let it grow for 24hrs at 37°C 
with shaking. 
2.3-Prepare tubes with 6ml of 2TY without Kan for the next day and leave it at 37°C. 
 
Day3: 
3.1Transfer 60μl into the tube 2TY without Kan with 6ml and let them grow at 37°C shaking.  
3.2-Measure the OD600 1.5hr after the transfer and induce when the OD600 reaches ~0.4 in most 
of them (pick up some random ~10) 
3.3-For the induction add 240μl from the 25% arabinose stock solution in each tube and leave it 
for 6hrs at 30°C  with shake. 
3.4-Measure the OD600 3hrs after to see how they are growing and 6hrs after extract the 
bacteriocins. 
3.5-For the extraction Spin down the tubes  10min at 13k G and 4°C, add  35ul of growth protease 
inhibitor  from this step the tubes needs to be in ice.   
3.6-Transfer the supernatant into a syringe and filter with the 0.2um filters and placed in a new 
tube. 
3.6-Storage the tubes with the filtered bacteriocin at 4°C until their use.  
 
 
 
 
 
96 well plate 
This experiment had the main goal to test different bacteriocin supernatant concentrations 25ul 
and 50ul of bacteriocins. The lactobacillus used here were L. delbrueckii (L.d), L. sakei (L.s) and L. mali (L.m)  
while the bacteriocins were B0, B6, B12, B13. The pattern distribution in the plate is shown in tigure X.  The 
procedure of the experiment is resumed in: 
 
Procedure 
1-Add 100ul of MRS into the wells 
2- Add 5ul of the strain 
3-Add the amount of bacteriocin (25ul or 50ul) 
4-Add a breath cover and incubate at 37 °C for 24hrs 
 
 
 
Figure X- 96 well plate distribution 
==PAGE:20==
Light blue contains 25ul of bacteriocins while the dark blue 50ul. The column 5 is the positive control the 
microorganism without bacteriocin and the column 1 is another control is the empty plasmid. The G row is the 
negative control the media without microorganism or bacteriocin.  
 
In the 384 well plate 
In order to test the effectiveness of the use of 386 well plates the half proportion of the previous 96 well 
plate experiment was tested. In this case, 50ul was the media volume, 1ul of microorganism and 12.5ul and 
25ul of bacteriocin supernatant. The microorganism used L. delbrueckii (L.d), L. sakei (L.s) and L. mali (L.m)  
and B0, B6, B12, B13 the bacteriocins. As a side note the bacteriocin method was the same as the 96 well 
assay. For this set there were different replicates in the plate, the distribution in the 384 well plate is 
summarized in the Figure X.   
 
Procedure 
1-Add 50ul of MRS into the wells 
2- Add 1ul of the strain 
3-Add the amount of bacteriocin (12.5ul or 25ul) 
4-Add a breath cover and incubate at 37 °C for 24hrs 
 
 
 
Figure X- 384 well distribution 
Light blue represent the 12.5ul of bacteriocins while the dark blue 25ul. The columns 5,12 and 19 are the positive 
control the microorganism without bacteriocin and the columns 1,8 and 15 contain  the empty plasmid with the 
micoorganism. The G and O rows are the negative control, the media without microorganism or bacteriocin.  
 
 
 
Pre-automation assay 
Due to technical problems with the pipeline in the robot, a manual test with 22 bacteriocins (B0, B6, B8, 
B10, B12, B13, B18, B22, B25, B31, B32, B33, B35, B36, B38, B42,B46, B50, B52, B53, B58, B63, B70, BW) 
and 96 lactobacillus was performed in order to see the effectiveness of the method.  The bacteriocin 
production method is the same as the liquid section.  The bacteriocins were placed by column and the 
strains per row. The procedure is described below. 
 
Material 
 
-MRS 1.25X 
Commented [CRA1]: Add symbolic link 
==PAGE:21==
 
-Lactobacillus collection placed in a 96 well 
 
-Supernatant bacteriocins 
 
-Reservoir for the bacteriocins  
 
-384 well plates 
 
-Multichannel pipette 
 
-Breathe-Easy sealing membrane 
 
-Tips 
 
 
 
 
Bacterial growth  
 
The strain growth should start 48hrs before the experiment due to some of the microorganisms 
has a slow growth. In order to produce the microorganism into the well plate the following steps were 
used: 
 
1- Add 200ul of MRS 1.25X into the well plate. 
2-  From the –80°C strain glyceron stock transfer material colony with a loop into the well, 
distribute moving carefully into the well. 
3- Add a breath cover and incubate at 37°C for 24hrs and measure the OD. 
4- Transfer 1ul of the fast growlers into a new well with 200ul of MRS while the slow growlers are 
transferred with all the volume into the new well.  
5- Add a breath cover and incubate at 37°C for 24hrs and measure the OD. 
 
 
 
Procedure  
1-Add 37.5ul of MRS into the well plates, followed by 1ul of the LAB strain and finally 12.5ul of 
bacteriocin.  
2- Add a breath cover, incubate for 48hrs at 37°C and measure the OD every 3 hours.  
 
The distribution of the plates is not show due the number of plates. As a side note this experiment did not 
have replicates, it had 22 bacteriocins and 2 controls the LAB with the B0 empty plasmid and the BW with 
water. The controls for each strain were placed in the same plate in order to have a more precise 
comparison between the groups (see plate distribution) 
 
 
Final robot assay 
The final assay was performed on two different days, both experiments followed the same procedure. The 
bacteriocins production was the same as the liquid section section.  
 
 
Robot assay  
 
Tecan Fluent was used to fill the plates with the media and distribute the Lactobacillus strains and 
the bacteriocins everything in triplicate. The order for the filling was first 37.5ul of MRS 1.25X media in each 
well in the 384 plates, then 1ul of the lactobacillus touching the media, and finally 12.5ul of the bacteriocins 
or water as the negative control. The bacteriocins were placed in the columns and the lactobacillus per row 
(Figure XA). The steps mentioned before are in the protocol called “Carola_bacteriocinsv2” in the Tecan 
Fluent files and the steps are summarized in the Figure XB. The robot has a very user interface that after 
pressing 
it starts running. The first step requires the user to check the availability of tips, the right position 
of the reservoir, the position of the plates with the microorganism, and the tubes with the bacteriocins, a 
step that the robot will ask and show the user in a graphical way. After that, the process starts and after it 
Commented [CRA2]: Write the proper name and brand 
==PAGE:22==
finishes with the last plate a cover breath is added into the plate and id incubated for 24hrs the OD600 is 
taken every 3 hours for each plate. 
 
 
Material 
 
-MRS 1.25X 
 
-Lactobacillus collection placed in a 96 deep well 
 
-Supernatant bacteriocins in 15ml tubes 
 
-Reservoir well plate 
 
-384 well plates 
 
-Beathe-Easy sealling membrane 
 
-Tecan tips 
 
-Tecan Fluent equipment 
 
 
Fugure X – ADD THE TECAN DIAGRAM AND USE THE FOLLOWING LABES IN BIORENDER 
 
 
Carnobacterium assay 
In order to determine the best media and temperature for the assay the strains grew in MRS 1.25X and 
media in liquid and agar also they were evaluated at 25°C and 37°C. The procedure is summarized: 
 
 
Procedure 
 
1-Prepare tubes with the same strain in 1ml of MRS 1.25X and with 1ml of TSBYS media and place 
in different temperatures 25°C and 37°C for 24-48hrs and measure the OD. 
 
2-In MRS and TSBYS  agar plates divided at half streak the strains and place them in different 
temperatures 25°C and 37°C 24-48hrs and evaluate the growth 
 
After testing the media and the temperatures TSBYS media and 25°C were chosen for the final plate assay 
due to the faster growth compared with MRS. 
 
Materials 
 
- TSBYS media 
 
-384 plates 
 
- Supernatant bacteriocin  
 
- Carnobacterium strains 
 
-Cover breath  
 
 
Procedure: 
 
 
Strains growth  
1-Transfer bacterial material from the streak plates or glycerol stock into a 96 plate with 
150ul of TSBYS media, put a cover breath, and incubate for 48hrs at 25°C. 
 
 
 
 
 
Plate assay 
In the present assay, there were 3 Carnobacterium strains, which were used in triplicates 
placed on the same plate. The bacteriocins were placed in columns and the strains in rows.  
1-Fill the wells with 32.5ul media and add 5ul of the strain and 12.5ul of bacteriocin, add a 
breath cover and incubate for 48hrs at 25°C and measure the OD. 
 
 
 
==PAGE:23==
Cancer assay 
The same bacteriocins used in the robot assay were tested against a human colon cancer cell type HT-29 
growth by Troels. The cells were growing in a 96 ultra-low attachment microplates, each well contained 
5000 cells per well and 25ul of bacteriocin was added into the wells slowly to do not disturb the cells. After 
that the 96 well plate were incubated for 2 days. 
 
Data analysis 
The OD630 output files were preprocessed to generate a file that condenses all the plate reads located in 
different sheets into a single file and dataframe for local use in  R. The data generated were processed usin 
R-studio 4.2.2 version. The libraries used to pre-process the data and plot the growth curves were 
readxl,tidyverse, ggplot2 (See the R pipeline in the supplementary material). In order to determine the 
inhibition, a subset was created, this subset with the strains that showed growth in the B0 and BW controls 
but if the strain showed growth in all the wells the strain was discarded from the subset. The inhibition was 
analyzed per strain, the average per well was calculated then compared with the control to determine the 
percentage of growth if the percentage was more than <50% was consider inhibition. 
 
  
 
Bacteriocins genes 
The LAB microorganism collection has 80 members with a whole genome, those genomes were used to 
explore the presence of bacteriocin genes in their genome. The whole bacteriocin collection has 80 
bacteriocins, those bacteriocins sequences were blasted against the genome and, with the values scores if 
the identity was >80% the bacteriocins were considered as present. The output was a matrix presence 
(defined as 1 in the matrix) and absent (0). The data was visualized in a heatmap using R-studio 4.2.2 version 
with the library ggplot (See the R pipeline in the supplementary material). 
 
 
Results 
Strain identification 
The 9 chosen strains showed a ~500pb fragment and the 16s rRNA sequencing shows consistency 7 and 8 
were properly identified. Sample 21 corresponds to Lactobacillus kefiri in the collection but the results 
identified as Companilactobacillus paralimentarius with 99% of blast identity. Another of the samples 
showed a low identity in the blast 91% the one is considered low for 16S rRNA identification but still even 
the microorganism corresponds to the microorganism expected Lactobacillus crispatus. Sample 21 was 
removed from the collection due the inconsistency and it was not used in further analysis.  
  
Sample 
identifier 
Microorganism 
expected  
Sequencing 
ID 
Sequencing result 
Notes 
3 
Enterococcus mundtii 
EF70703395 
Enterococcus mundtii 
 
4 
Leuconostoc 
esenteroides 
EF70703396 
Leuconostoc 
esenteroides 
 
15 
 
EF70703397 
Limosilactobacillus 
fermentum 
This was not defined in the 
original list 
21 
Lactobacillus kefiri 
EF70703398 
Companilactobacillus 
paralimentarius 
note: campanilactobacillus 
is not found in the original 
list  
28 
Lactobacillus composti 
EF70703399 
Lactobacillus composti  
 
262 
Lactobacillus sakei 
EF70703400 
Lactobacillus sakei  
 
Commented [CRA3]: Add the symbolic link and paste the 
cleaned pipeline 
Commented [CRA4]: Add the symbolic link and paste the 
cleaned pipeline 
==PAGE:24==
54 
Lacticaseibacillus 
rhamnosus 
EF70703401 
Lacticaseibacillus 
rhamnosus  
 
80 
Lactobacillus Crispatus 
EF70703402 
Lactobacillus Crispatus 
(identity 91%) 
Too low for 16S rRNA 
identification 
127 
Weissella confusa 
EF70703403 
Weissella confusa  
 
203 
Lactococcus lactis 
EF70703405 
Lactococcus lactis 
 
221 
Enterococcus faecalis 
EF70703406 
Enterococcus faecalis 
 
254 
Pediococcus 
pentosaceus 
EF70703407 
Pediococcus 
pentosaceus  
 
78 
Lactiplantibacillus 
plantarum  
EF70703408 
Lactiplantibacillus 
plantarum  
 
277 
Enterococcus 
gallinarum 
/ 
Enterococcus 
casseliflavus 
EF70703409 
Enterococcus 
gallinarum  
 
 
 
 
 
Solid agar 
After the 24hrs E.coli incubation all the E.coli producers showed growth so we assumed the strains could 
be producing bacteriocins. In the plate with the Lactobac illus added after 24hrs the inhibition for the 
bacteriocin B6 and B10 was very clear, B10 showing a bigger halo (Figure X). The Bacteriocin inhibition was 
very strong and spread outside the area close to the control what makes it not the best method for 
inhibition for bigger sets of bacteriocins.  
==PAGE:25==
 
  
Figure X – Lactobacillus mali inhibition top agar assay 
The numbers represent the bacteriocins, and the small numbers are used to represent the replicate number. (01= B0, 02=B0, 61=B6, 
62=B6, 101=B10, 102=B10, 131=B13, 132=B13, 331=B13, 132=33) 
 
Liquid assays  
 
 
96 well plate  
 
After the overnight incubation, two of the strains showed a lower  OD, L.delbrueckii with 2.05, 
L.sakei with 2.46, and L. Mali with 4.57. The two of those microorganisms did not show a clear growth 
pattern in the two controls compared with L.mali. The use of different bacteriocin concentrations in L.mali 
seems to affect slightly the growth with the 25ul  but there is not inhibition with any bacteriocin(see Figure 
X).  The well plate after the Xhrs showed very visible bacterial material in the C and F well row (Figure X). 
 
 
 
==PAGE:26==
 
Figure X- 96 inhibition with two different concentrations  
A row= L.delbrueckii with 12.5ul of bacteriocins, D row= A row= L.delbrueckii with 25ul of bacteriocins, B= L.sakei with 12.5ul of 
bacteriocins, E= L.sakei with 12.5ul of bacteriocins, C= L.mali with 12.5ul of bacteriocins, F= L.mali with 25ul of bacteriocins. The 
row1= B0, row2=B6, row3=12, row4=13 and row5=strain without bacteriocin. 
 
 
 
Figure X- Strain growth with two bacteriocins concentration  
The first fist and las colum are the positive controls while MRS row is the negative control it just contain me media where the 
lactobacillus grew. 
 
The 96 assay method was discarded in the future analysis because in terms of time and resources (plates) 
was higher than using the 384 plates. 
 
 
 
384 well plate 
The goal to test in the 384 plate was the evaluation of the growth-inbithibion with the smallest volume for 
the robot automation. We wanted to test in the small wells with less than 100ul volume in total if we can 
Commented [CR5]: remember to run spell check on the 
thesis before you hand in. 
==PAGE:27==
observe the strain growth(Figure X). Also if inhibition could be observed with the lowest volume of 
bacteriocin 12.5ul. In the first attempt, the Lactobacillus showed growth in all the strains but not inhibition, 
this could be because the bacteriocin production was not efficient, in the bacteriocins extraction the strains 
were growing slower than the previous times, reaching the ~0.2OD600 in 4.5hrs while they usually reach 
that od in ~2hrs. A second attempt was performed using the same protocol due we observed the strain 
growth, this time adding an additional step to the measure of OD and GFP levels during the bacteriocin 
production.  In the second attempt, all the strains showed growth but L.sakei with inconsistent 
growth(Figure XA). The bacteriocin B12 inhibited the growth of Lactobacillus mali (Figure XC) with both 
concentrations of bacteriocin (12ul and 25ul), a similar phenomenon coul be observe in Lactobacillus sakei 
(Figure XA) but this result should be taken carefully due the inconsistent growth behavior of the strain for 
this assay. Lactobacillus delbrueckii presents a slight growth in presence of the B12 bacteriocin compared 
with the other bacteriocins is significantly smaller(Figure XB). The inhibition was observed adding the 
smallest bacteriocin concentration 12ul for this reason the pre-automation assay was continued with those 
conditions (see methods) 
 
Figure X-  ADD the new plot from R 
Commented [k6]: Add the symblink 
==PAGE:28==
 
==PAGE:29==
Figure X- Bacterial growth curves  
The X axis represents the time while the Y axis the OD630 value.  
 
 
 
Pre-automation assay 
The pre-automation experiment was run with 96 strains distributed in 6 plates, in order to have a reference 
time for the growth one of the plates was for 20hrs while the rest of the plates were measured 4 times 
every 3 hours. The plate monitored for 20hrs showed inhibition in some strains like  L. curvatus (70) was 
inhibited by B10, B12, B18, B35, B36, B38, B63 and B70 (Figure X). In this 20hrs period of time many of the 
microorganisms did show growth it could be because some of the lactobacillus grow slower for example 
L.ruminis (92) for a long period it seems was not growing but at the end started growing the same for the  
L. paracasei (59) (Figure X). With this experiment we concluded the inhibition can be observed in the 384 
plates but we might adjust the measuring points adding the most possible reading points to measure 
considering other factors such as plate readers availability. 
 
 
 
Figure X- Plate #3 overnight growth  
The bacteriocins were distributed per column while the rows contain the microorganism. The first row has the bacteriocins numbers while the first column indicates 
the number in the collection(to see more detail in the collection see supplementary material) 
 
 
Robot assay 
Condensing all the data from the robot and pre-automation assays, 171 microoganism were testes but the 
inhibition were observed in 20 LAB (see supplementary material).The inhibition was produced by 5 
bacteriocins B18= bacteriodetocin A, B25= plantaricin_423, B31= sakacin_G_GskA1, B32= gavieacinQ_garQ 
and B33= Leucoccin_A_(LeucocinA-UAL187). sakacin_G_GskA1(B31) was the bacteriocin that inhibited 15 
strains, followed by  plantaricin_423(B25) and gavieacinQ_garQ (B32) that inhibited 14 strains, 
Leucoccin_A_(LeucocinA-UAL187)(B33) that inhibited 12 and finally bacteriodetocin A that inhibited one 
strain. The strains who show my susceptibility were two strains of Weissella cibaria, Enterococcus 
gallinarum, Lactobacillus composti and Lactobacillus ghanesis those strains were susceptible to 4 
bacteriocins (see supplementary material). 
 
 
Commented [CR7]: I think if you want to show this pic 
you should add the strain names, and comment that most 
of the strains does not grow, and try and explain why they 
dont grow 
==PAGE:30==
 
Presence absence gene 
The original collection has 80 bacteriocins, the whole collection was used to screen in the whole genomes 
available. The initial collection of 80 bacteriocins sequences and 80 genomes was reduced to 27 
bacteriocins and 19 genomes after filtering (removing the no hits) their presence in the strains is 
summarized in Figure X. The strain with more bacteriocins genes was L. casei JRO1 with 12, L. plantarum 
spargentoratensisi 823 and L. sakei M22B with 7, L. sakei M22A with 6. The same 6 genes were observed 
between the L. sakei M22 A nd B. Plantataricins were the most observed between the Lactobacillus, 
Plantaricin N was observed in 9 strains and Plantaricin A observed in 7. 
 
 
Figure x- Bacteriocin gene presence 
 
Carnobacterium assay 
The 3 strains showed inhibition with at least one bacteriocin. Carnobacterium divergens NCFB2855 was 
very sensitive, it was inhibited by 12 bacteriocins in total while Carnobacterium divergens LMG 9199T by 1 
and Carnobacterium viridans DSMA14451T by 1. The bacteriocins B8, B25, B36, B46, inhibited the growth 
of Carnobacterium divergens NCFB2855 and Carnobacterium divergens LMG 9199T(Figure X-X). 
Additionally B13, B22, B33, B35, B53, B63, B70 (Figure X). The only bacteriocin that inhibited  
Carnobacterium viridans DSMA14451T was B33 (Figure X).  
 
 
 
Commented [CR8]: Also write the names of the 
bacteriocins and comment on why these could inhibit this 
bacterium, eg depending on which strain they originate 
from 
==PAGE:31==
 
Figure X- Growth rate in Carnobacterium divergens NCFB2855 in the presence 22 bacteriocins 
Pink= replicate 1, purple = replicate 2, blue= replicate 3 
B0= empty plasmid, BW= negative control 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure X- Inhibition in Carnobacterium divergens NCFB2855 
Figure X- Growth rate in Carnobacterium divergens LMG 9199T in the presence 22 bacteriocins 
Pink= replicate 1, purple = replicate 2, blue= replicate 3 
B0= empty plasmid, BW= negative control 
 
 
 
==PAGE:32==
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure X- Growth rate in Carnobacterium viridans DSMA14451T in the presence 22 bacteriocins 
Pink= replicate 1, purple = replicate 2, blue= replicate 3 
B0= empty plasmid, BW= negative control 
 
 
Cancer assay 
In the cancer assay 5000 cells were added to a well coated, the cells assemble into a 3D aggregated. The 
cells proliferation and spheroid grows in size was expected in the negative controls (A1=B0 and B12=BW 
and from G1-12 and H1-12) since they do not have a bacteriocin but not in the bacteriocins if they have an 
inhibitory effect. The bacteriocin used was 25ul per well, this concentrations did not produce an inhibitory 
effect in the cells Figure X after 6hrs and 1day showed clear proliferation in the whole plate. Figure X D) 
showed the proliferation of cells in response to adding the bacteriocin.  
 
Figure X-  Colon cancer cells (HT-29) and bacteriocins activity 
==PAGE:33==
The following pictures shows the growth at different times after the bacteriocins addition A)1hr after, 
B)6hrs, C)1 day after. D) represent the proliferation of the cells in response to adding the bacteriocins. 
 
 
 
Discussion 
The different experiments executed in this project let us perform an automated assay to study the 
inhibition of 22 bacteriocins against a set of 171 microorganism set of microorganisms isolated from 
different sources mainly food. The bacteriocins have been reported as powerful inhibitors in close species 
but also some the defined as a broad spectrum13. In the present study, we observed that 5 bacteriocins 
inhibited species that were not members of the same species that were isolated for example 
sakacin_G_skgA2 was isolated from Lactobacillus sake 2512 and these strains did not show inhibition in our 
assay but this bacteriocin inhibited species like L. biferments, Enterococcus lactis, Enterococcus faecalis, 
Leuconostoc pseudomesenteroides, Weissella cibaria, Pediococcis pentasaceus, Lactobacillus curvatus, 
Enterococcus gallinarum, Lactobacillus heliogjangensis, Lactobacillus composti, Lactobacillus ghanesis, 
Lactobacillus kimchi and Enterococcus mindtii.  Another interesting was 6 bacteriocins in the collection 
were isolated from Enterococcus strains but none of the Enterococcus strains were inhibited by those 
bacteriocins probably in their genomes contain some of those genes bacteriocins. In the present assay, we 
observed inhibition in microorganism that are implicated in in different problems, for example, Wesella 
cibaria causes mastitis and urinary infections and is inhibited by plantaricin_423, sakacin_GskA2, gavieacin 
and Leucocin_A_(LeucocinA-UAL187). L brevis is associated to bacteremia and is inhibited by 
garvieacinQ_garQ and Leucocin_A_(LeucocinA-UAL187). Lactococcus biferments is related to cheese 
spoilage and we found one bacteriocin that inhibit it, the bacteriocin was bacteroidetocin Ait was the only 
microorganism inhibited by this bacteriocin. This bacteriocin was isolated from Bacteroides vulgatus that is 
a gram-negative microorganism. The cancer assay showed not inhibition assay and we speculate that this 
could be caused by the low concentration, there are different studies that show inhibition using bacteriocin 
at 95%30 
 
Future perspectives  
The present study was an attempt to evaluate the potential inhibition with new class II bacteriocins, the 
concentrations here used  for some do the strain showed inhibition but not in some others.  Some of the 
microorganism are part of the gut microbiome, they are exposed to acidic environments with low pH or 
hypoxic conditions. Using different pH and oxygen condition would be interesting to see if those factors 
have a role in the bacteriocins inhibition due Lactobacillus are able to grow aerobically and anerobically. 
Another interesting step would be testing in Griffith an David Trumper model, this model contains a chanel 
coated with human cells from the mucosal barrier and the oxygen conditions change simulating the human 
colon. Even when the bacteriocins are class II and they mainly target Lactobacillus members would be 
interesting to test in gram negative strais like pathogenic E. coli strains due the increasing reports of 
effectiveness inhibition of new class II bacteriocins against gram negative pathogens. Related to the cancer 
cells would be interesting to increase the bacteriocin concentration to evaluate if it produces cytotoxicity 
in the HT-29 cells. 
 
 
 
==PAGE:34==
 
 
 
 
Supplementary material 
16S rRNA fasta sequences 
>EF70703395_EF70703395 
GAGCTGTCACCGGGAAAAGAGGAGTGGCGAACGGGTGAGTAACACGTGGGTAACCTGCCCATCAGAAGGGGATAACACTTGGAAACAGGTGCTAATACCGTATAACAATCGAAACCGCATGGTTTCGTTTTGAAAGGCGCTTTACGGTGCCGCTGATGGA 
TGGACCCGCGGTGCATTAGCTAGTTGGTGAGGTAACGGCTCACCAAGGCCACGATGCATAGCCGACCTGAGAGGGTGATCGGCCACATTGGGACTGAGACACGGCCCAAACTCCTACGGGAGGCAGCAGTAGGGAATCTTCGGCAATGGACGAAAGTCTG 
ACCGAGCAACGCCGCGTGAGTGAAGAAGGTTTTCGGATCGTAAAACTCTGTTGTTAGAGAAGAACAAGGGTGAGAGTAACTGTTCACCCCTTGACGGTATCTAACCAGAAAGCCACGGCTAACTACGTGCCAGCAGCCGCGGTAATACGTAGGTGGCAAG 
CGTTGTCCGGATTTATTGGGCGTAAAGCGAGCGCAGGCGGTTTCTTAAGTCTGATGTGAAAGCCCCCGGCTCAACCGGGGAGGGTCATTGGAAACTGGGAGACTTGAGTGCAGAAGAGGAGAGTGGAATTCCATGTGTAGCGGTGAAATGCGTAGATATA 
TGGAGGAACACCAGTGGCGAAGGCGGCTCTCTGGTCTGTAACTGACGCTGAGGCTCGAAAGCGTGGGGAGCAAACAGGATTAGATACCCTGGTAGTCCACGCCGTAAACGATGAGTGCTAAGTGTTGGAGGGTTTCCGCCCTTCAGTGCTGCAGCTAACG 
CATTAAGCACTCCGCCTGGGGAGTACGACCGCAAGGTTGAAACTCAAAGGAATTGACGGGGGCCCGCACAAGCGGTGGAGCATGTGGTTTAATTCGAAGCAACGCGAAGAACCTTACCAGGTCTTGACATCCTTTGACCACTCTAGAGATAGAGCTTCCC 
CTTCGGGGGCAAAGTGACAGGTGGTGCATGGTTGTCGTCAGCTCGTGTCGTGAGATGTTGGGTTAAGTCCCGCAACGAGCGCAACCCTTATTGTTAGTTGCCATCATTTAGTTGGGCACTCTAGCAAGACTGCCGGTGACAAACCGGAGGAAGGTGGGGA 
TGACGTCAAATCATCATGCCCCTTATGACTGGGCTACCACGTGCTACATGGGAAGTACAACGAGTCGCGAAGTCGCGAGGCTACCTAAT 
 
>EF70703396_EF70703396 
GGGCTATACTGCAAGTCGAACGCACAGCGAAAGGTGCTTGCATTTCAGTGAGTGGCGAACGGGTGAGTAACACGTGGACAACCTGCCTCAAGGCTGGGGATAACATTTGGAAACAGATGCTAATACCGAATAAAACTTAGTGTCGCATGACACAAAGTTA 
AAAGGCGCTTCGGCGTCACCTAGAGATGGATCCGCGGTGCATTAGTTAGTTGGTGGGGTAAAGGCCTACCAAGACAATGATGCATAGCCGAGTTGAGAGACTGATCGGCCACATTGGGACTGAGACACGGCCCAAACTCCTACGGGAGGCTGCAGTAGGG 
AATCTTCCACAATGGGCGAAAGCCTGATGGAGCAACGCCGCGTGTGTGATGAAGGCTTTCGGGTCGTAAAGCACTGTTGTATGGGAAGAACAGCTAGAATAGGAAATGATTTTAGTTTGACGGTACCATACCAGAAAGGGACGGCTAAATACGTGCCAGC 
AGCCGCGGTAATACGTATGTCCCGAGCGTTATCCGGATTTATTGGGCGTAAAGCGAGCGCAGACGGTTTATTAAGTCTGATGTGAAAGCCCGGAGCTCAACTCCGGAATGGCATTGGAAACTGGTTAACTTGAGTGCAGTAGAGGTAAGTGGAACTCCAT 
GTGTAGCGGTGGAATGCGTAGATATATGGAAGAACACCAGTGGCGAAGGCGGCTTACTGGACTGCAACTGACGTTGAGGCTCGAAAGTGTGGGTAGCAAACAGGATTAGATACCCTGGTAGTCCACACCGTAAACGATGAACACTAGGTGTTAGGAGGTT 
TCCGCCTCTTAGTGCCGAAGCTAACGCATTAAGTGTTCCGCCTGGGGAGTACGACCGCAAGGTTGAAACTCAAAGGAATTGACGGGGACCCGCACAAGCGGTGGAGCATGTGGTTTAATTCGAAGCAACGCGAAGAACCTTACCAGGTCTTGACATCCTT 
TGAAGCTTTTAGAGATAGAAGTGTTCTCTTCGGAGACAAAGTGACAGGTGGTGCATGGTCGTCGTCAGCTCGTGTCGTGAGATGTTGGGTTAAGTCCCGCAACGAGCGCAACCCTTATTGTTAGTTGCCAGCATTCAGATGGGCACTCTAGCGAGACTGC 
CGGTGACAAACCGGAGGAAGGCGGGGACGACGTCAGATCATCATGCCCCTTATGACCTGGGCTACCACGTGCTACAATGGCGTATACAACGAGTTGCCAACC 
 
>EF70703397_EF70703397 
GCTAATACTGCAAGTCGAACGCGTTGGCCCAATTGATTGATGGGCTTGCACCTGATTGATTTTGGTCGCCAACGAGTGGCGGACGGGTGAGTAACACGTAGGTAACCTGCCCAGAAGCGGGGGACAACATTTGGAAACAGATGCTAATACCGCATAACAA 
CGTTGTTCGCATGAACAACGCTTAAAAGATGGCTTCTCGCTATCACTTCTGGATGGACCTGCGGTGCATTAGCTTGTTGGTGGGGTAATGGCCTACCAAGGCGATGATGCATAGCCGAGTTGAGAGACTGATCGGCCACAATGGGACTGAGACACGGCCC 
ATACTCCTACGGGAGGCAGCAGTAGGGAATCTTCCACAATGGGCGCAAGCCTGATGGAGCAACACCGCGTGAGTGAAGAAGGGTTTCGGCTCGTAAAGCTCTGTTGTTAAAGAAGAACACGTATGAGAGTAACTGTTCATACGTTGACGGTATTTAACCA 
GAAAGTCACGGCTAACTACGTGCCAGCAGCCGCGGTAATACGTAGGTGGCAAGCGTTATCCGGATTTATTGGGCGTAAAGAGAGTGCAGGCGGTTTTCTAAGTCTGATGTGAAAGCCTTCGGCTTAACCGGAGAAGTGCATCGGAAACTGGATAACTTGA 
GTGCAGAAGAGGGTAGTGGAACTCCATGTGTAGCGGTGGAATGCGTAGATATATGGAAGAACACCAGTGGCGAAGGCGGCTACCTGGTCTGCAACTGACGCTGAGACTCGAAAGCATGGGTAGCGAACAGGATTAGATACCCTGGTAGTCCATGCCGTAA 
ACGATGAGTGCTAGGTGTTGGAGGGTTTCCGCCCTTCAGTGCCGGAGCTAACGCATTAAGCACTCCGCCTGGGGAGTACGACCGCAAGGTTGAAACTCAAAGGAATTGACGGGGGCCCGCACAAGCGGTGGAGCATGTGGTTTAATTCGAAGCTACGCGA 
AGAACCTTACCAGGTCTTGACATCTTGCGCCAACCCTAGAGATAGGGCGTTTCCTTCGGGAACGCAATGACAGGTGGTGCATGGTCGTCGTCAGCTCGTGTCGTGAGATGTTGGGTTAAGTCCCGCAACGAGCGCAACCCTTGTTACTAGTTGCCAGCAT 
TAAGTTGGGCACTCTAGTGAGACTGCCGGTGACAAACCGGAGGAAGGTGGGGACGACGTCAGATCATCATGCCCCTTATGACCTGGGCTACCACGTGCTACAATGGACGGTACAACGAGTCGCGAACTC 
 
>EF70703398_EF70703398 
GTAAGCTGCTTCATGATTCAGACCTTGGTGAGTGGCGGACGGGTGAGTAACACGTGGGTAACCTGCCCAGAAGTGGGGGATAACATTTGGAAACAAGTGCTAATACCGCATAACAACTTAGATCACATGATCTTTGTTTAAAAGATGGTTTTGCTATCTC 
TTCTGGATGGACCCGCGGCGTATTAGCTAGTTGGTGAGGTAATAGCTCACCAAGGCGATGATACGTAGCCGACCTGAGAGGGTAATCGGCCACATTGGGACTGAGACACGGCCCAAACTCCTACGGGAGGCAGCAGTAGGGAATCTTCCACAATGGACGA 
AAGTCTGATGGAGCAATGCCGCGTGAGTGAAGAAGGTTTTCGGATCGTAAAACTCTGTTGTTGAAGAAGAACATATGTGAGAGTAACTGTTCACGTACTGACGGTATTCAACCAGAAAGCCACGGCTAACTACGTGCCAGCAGCCGCGGTAATACGTAGG 
TGGCAAGCGTTGTCCGGATTTATTGGGCGTAAAGAGAATGTAGGCGGTTTATTAAGTTTGAAGTGAAAGCCCTCGGCTCAACCGAGGAAGTGCTTCGAAAACTGGTAAACTTGAGTGCAGAAGAGGAAAGTGGAACTCCATGTGTAGCGGTGGAATGCGT 
AGATATATGGAAGAACACCAGTGGCGAAGGCGGCTTTCTGGTCTGTAACTGACGCTGAGATTCGAAAGCATGGGTAGCAAACAGGATTAGATACCCTGGTAGTCCATGCCGTAAACGATGAGTGCTAAGTGTTGGAGGGTTTCCGCCCTTCAGTGCTGCA 
GCTAACGCATTAAGCACTCCGCCTGGGGAGTACGATCGCAAGATTGAAACTCAAAGGAATTGACGGGGGCCCGCACAAGCGGTGGAGCATGTGGTTTAATTCGAAGCAACGCGAAGAACCTTACCAGGTCTTGACATACCATGAAAAGCTTAGAGATAAG 
TCTTTCCCTTCGGGGACATGGATACAGGTGGTGCATGGTTGTCGTCAGCTCGTGTCGTGAGATGTTGGGTTAAGTCCCGCAACGAGCGCAACCCTTATTATCAGTTGCCAGCATTCAGTTGGGCACTCTGGTGAGACTGCCGGTGATAAACCGGAAGAAG 
GTGGGGACGACGTCAAATCATCATGCCCCTTATGACCTGGGCTACCACGTGCTACAATGGTCGGTACAACGTGCTGCAA 
 
>EF70703399_EF70703399 
GGCTATAATGCAAGTCGAACGAGCTTTTCCTACCGAGTGCTTGACTCATTTGGAAAGGCGAGTGGCGGACGGGTGAGTAACACGTGGGCAACCTACCCTAGAGCGGGGGATAACATTTGGAAACAGATGCTAATACCGCATAACAATTTGAACCTCATGG 
TTCGAATTTAAAAGATGGTTTCGGCTATCACTTTAGGATGGGCCCGCGGCGTATTAGCCAGTTGGTGGGGTAAAGGCCTACCAAAGCTATGATACGTAGCCGACCTGAGAGGGTGATCGGCCACATTGGGACTGAGACACGGCCCAAACTCCTACGGGAG 
GCAGCAGTAGGGAATCTTCCACAATGGACGAAAGTCTGATGGAGCAACGCCGCGTGAGTGAAGAAGGGTTTCGGCTCGTAAAACTCTGTTATCGGAGAAGAATAGGGGTAAGAGTAACTGTTTACCTCCTGACGGTATCCGACCAGAAAGCCACGGCTAA 
CTACGTGCCAGCAGCCGCGGTAATACGTAGGTGGCAAGCGTTGTCCGGATTTATTGGGCGTAAAGCGAGCGCAGGCGGTTTTTTAAGTCTGATGTGAAAGCCTTCGGCTCAACCGAAGAAGTGCATCGGAAACTGGGAAACTTGAGTGCAGAAGAGGACA 
GTGGAACTCCATGTGTAGCGGTGAAATGCGTAGATATATGGAAGAACACCAGTGGCGAAGGCGGCTGTCTGGTCTGTAACTGACGCTGAGGCTCGAAAGTGTGGGTAGCAAACAGGATTAGATACCCTGGTAGTCCACACCGTAAACGATGAATGCTAAG 
TGTTGGAGGGTTTCCGCCCTTCAGTGCTGCAGCTAACGCATTAAGCATTCCGCCTGGGGAGTACGACCGCAAGGTTGAAACTCAAAGGAATTGACGGGGGCCCGCACAAGCGGTGGAGCATGTGGTTTAATTCGAAGCAACGCGAAGAACCTTACCAGGT 
CTTGACATCTTTTGCCAGCCTAAGAGATTAGGTGTTCCCTTCGGGGACAAAATGACAGGTGGTGCATGGTTGTCGTCAGCTCGTGTCGTGAGATGTTGGGTTAAGTCCCGCAACGAGCGCAACCCTTATAATTAGTTGCCAGCATTCAGTTGGGCACTCT 
AGTTAGACTGCCGGTGACAAACCGGAGGAAGGTGGGGATGACGTCAAATCATCATGCCCCTTATGACCTGGGCTACCACGTGCTACAATGGATGGTACAACGAGTCGCTAGACCGCGAGGTC 
 
 
 
>EF70703400_EF70703400 
ACGGCCCACACTCCTACGGGAGGAAGCAGTAGGGAATCTTCCTCAATGGAGGAAAGTCTGATGGAGCAACGCCGCGTGAGTGAAGAAGGTTTTCGGATCGT 
 
>EF70703401_EF70703401 
GCTATAATGCAAGTCGAACGAGTTCTGATTATTGAAAGGTGTTGCATCTTGATTTAATTTTGAACGAGTGGCGGACGGGTGAGTAACACGTGGGTAACCTGCCCTTAAGTGGGGGATAACATTTGGAAACAGATGCTAATACCGCATAAATCCAAGAACC 
GCATGGTTCTTGGCTGAAAGATGGCGTAAGCTATCGCTTTTGGATGGACCCGCGGCGTATTAGCTAGTTGGTGAGGTAACGGCTCACCAAGGCAATGATACGTAGCCGAACTGAGAGGTTGATCGGCCACATTGGGACTGAGACACGGCCCAAACTCCTA 
CGGGAGGCAGCAGTAGGGAATCTTCCACAATGGACGCAAGTCTGATGGAGCAACGCCGCGTGAGTGAAGAAGGCTTTCGGGTCGTAAAACTCTGTTGTTGGAGAAGAATGGTCGGCAGAGTAACTGTTGTCGGCGTGACGGTATCCAACCAGAAAGCCAC 
GGCTAACTACGTGCCAGCAGCCGCGGTAATACGTAGGTGGCAAGCGTTATCCGGATTTATTGGGCGTAAAGCGAGCGCAGGCGGTTTTTTAAGTCTGATGTGAAAGCCCTCGGCTTAACCGAGGAAGTGCATCGGAAACTGGAAAACTTGAGTGCAGAAG 
AGGACAGTGGAACTCCATGTGTAGCGGTGAAATGCGTAGATATATGGAAGAACACCAGTGGCGAAGGCGGCTGTCTGGTCTGTAACTGACGCTGAGGCTCGAAAGCATGGGTAGCGAACAGGATTAGATACCCTGGTAGTCCATGCCGTAAACGATGAAT 
GCTAGGTGTTGGAGGGTTTCCGCCCTTCAGTGCCGCAGCTAACGCATTAAGCATTCCGCCTGGGGAGTACGACCGCAAGGTTGAAACTCAAAGGAATTGACGGGGGCCCGCACAAGCGGTGGAGCATGTGGTTTAATTCGAAGCAACGCGAAGAACCTTA 
CCAGGTCTTGACATCTTTTGATCACCTGAGAGATCAGGTTTCCCCTTCGGGGGCAAAATGACAGGTGGTGCATGGTTGTCGTCAGCTCGTGTCGTGAGATGTTGGGTTAAGTCCCGCAACGAGCGCAACCCTTATGACTAGTTGCCAGCATTTAGTTGGG 
CACTCTAGTAAGACTGCCGGTGACAAACCGGAGGAAGGTGGGGATGACGTCAAATCATCATGCCCCTTATGACCTGGGCTACCACGTGCTACCATGGATGGTACAACGAGTTGCAAGAC 
 
>EF70703402_EF70703402 
TCGCCGCTAACTACGCGCCAGCAGCCGCGGTAATACGTAGGTGGCCAGCGTTATCCGGATTTATTGGGAGTGCAGACAGTGCAGGCGGTTTGCTAAGTCTGACGTGAACTCCTTCGGATTA 
 
>EF70703403_EF70703403 
GGGCTATACTGCAAGTCGAACGCTTTGTGGTTCAACTGATTTGAAGAGCTTGCTCAGATATGACGATGGACATTGCAAAGAGTGGCGAACGGGTGAGTAACACGTGGGAAACCTACCTCTTAGCAGGGGATAACATTTGGAAACAGATGCTAATACCGTA 
TAACAATGACAACCGCATGGTTGTTATTTAAAAGATGGTTCTGCTATCACTAAGAGATGGTCCCGCGGTGCATTAGCTAGTTGGTAAGGTAATGGCTTACCAAGGCGATGATGCATAGCCGAGTTGAGAGACTGATCGGCCACAATGGGACTGAGACACG 
GCCCATACTCCTACGGGAGGCAGCAGTAGGGAATCTTCCACAATGGGCGAAAGCCTGATGGAGCAACGCCGCGTGTGTGATGAAGGGTTTCGGCTCGTAAAACACTGTTGTAAGAGAAGAATGACATTGAGAGTAACTGTTCAATGTGTGACGGTATCTT 
ACCAGAAAGGAACGGCTAAATACGTGCCAGCAGCCGCGGTAATACGTATGTTCCAAGCGTTATCCGGATTTATTGGGCGTAAAGCGAGCGCAGACGGTTATTTAAGTCTGAAGTGAAAGCCCTCAGCTCAACTGAGGAATTGCTTTGGAAACTGGATGAC 
TTGAGTGCAGTAGAGGAAAGTGGAACTCCATGTGTAGCGGTGAAATGCGTAGATATATGGAAGAACACCAGTGGCGAAGGCGGCTTTCTGGACTGTAACTGACGTTGAGGCTCGAAAGTGTGGGTAGCAAACAGGATTAGATACCCTGGTAGTCCACACC 
GTAAACGATGAGTGCTAGGTGTTTGAGGGTTTCCGCCCTTAAGTGCCGCAGCTAACGCATTAAGCACTCCGCCTGGGGAGTACGACCGCAAGGTTGAAACTCAAAGGAATTGACGGGGACCCGCACAAGCGGTGGAGCATGTGGTTTAATTCGAAGCAAC 
GCGAAGAACCTTACCAGGTCTTGACATCCCTTGACAACTCCAGAGATGGAGTGTTCCCTTCGGGGACAAGGTGACAGGTGGTGCATGGTTGTCGTCAGCTCGTGTCGTGAGATGTTGGGTTAAGTCCCGCAACGAGCGCAACCCTTATTACTAGTTGCCA 
==PAGE:35==
GCATTCAGTTGGGCACTCTAGTGAGACTGCCGGTGACAAACCGGAGGAAGGTGGGGATGACGTCAAATCATCATGCCCCTTATGACCTGGGCTACCACGTGCTACAATGGCGTATACA 
 
>EF70703405_EF70703405 
GGGCTATACTGCAAGTTGAGCGCTGAAGGTTGGTACTTGTACCGACTGGATGAGCAGCGAACGGGTGAGTAACGCGTGGGGAATCTGCCTTTGAGCGGGGGACAACATTTGGAAACGAATGCTAATACCGCATAAAAACTTTAAACACAAGTTTTAAGTT 
TGAAAGATGCAATTGCATCACTCAAAGATGATCCCGCGTTGTATTAGCTAGTTGGTGAGGTAAAGGCTCACCAAGGCGATGATACATAGCCGACCTGAGAGGGTGATCGGCCACATTGGGACTGAGACACGGCCCAAACTCCTACGGGAGGCAGCAGTAG 
GGAATCTTCGGCAATGGACGAAAGTCTGACCGAGCAACGCCGCGTGAGTGAAGAAGGTTTTCGGATCGTAAAACTCTGTTGGTAGAGAAGAACGTTGGTGAGAGTGGAAAGCTCATCAAGTGACGGTAACTACCCAGAAAGGGACGGCTAACTACGTGCC 
AGCAGCCGCGGTAATACGTAGGTCCCGAGCGTTGTCCGGATTTATTGGGCGTAAAGCGAGCGCAGGTGGTTTATTAAGTCTGGTGTAAAAGGCAGTGGCTCAACCATTGTATGCATTGGAAACTGGTAGACTTGAGTGCAGGAGAGGAGAGTGGAATTCC 
ATGTGTAGCGGTGAAATGCGTAGATATATGGAGGAACACCGGTGGCGAAAGCGGCTCTCTGGCCTGTAACTGACACTGAGGCTCGAAAGCGTGGGGAGCAAACAGGATTAGATACCCTGGTAGTCCACGCCGTAAACGATGAGTGCTAGATGTAGGGAGC 
TATAAGTTCTCTGTATCGCAGCTAACGCAATAAGCACTCCGCCTGGGGAGTACGACCGCAAGGTTGAAACTCAAAGGAATTGACGGGGGCCCGCACAAGCGGTGGAGCATGTGGTTTAATTCGAAGCAACGCGAAGAACCTTACCAGGTCTTGACATACT 
CGTGCTATTCCTAGAGATAGGAAGTTCCTTCGGGACACGGGATACAGGTGGTGCATGGTTGTCGTCAGCTCGTGTCGTGAGATGTTGGGTTAAGTCCCGCAACGAGCGCAACCCCTATTGTTAGTTGCCATCATTAAGTTGGGCACTCTAACGAGACTGC 
CGGTGATAAACCGGAGGAAGGTGGGGATGACGTCAAATCATCATGCCCCTTATGACCTGGGCTACCACGTGCTACAATGGATGGTACAACGAGTCGCGAGA 
 
>EF70703406_EF70703406 
TGCTTGCACTCAATTGGAAAGAGGAGTGGCGGACGGGTGAGTAACACGTGGGTAACCTACCCATCAGAGGGGGATAACACTTGGAAACAGGTGCTAATACCGCATAACAGTTTATGCCGCATGGCATAAGAGTGAAAGGCGCTTTCGGGTGTCGCTGATG 
GATGGACCCGCGGTGCATTAGCTAGTTGGTGAGGTAACGGCTCACCAAGGCCACGATGCATAGCCGACCTGAGAGGGTGATCGGCCACACTGGGACTGAGACACGGCCCAGACTCCTACGGGAGGCAGCAGTAGGGAATCTTCGGCAATGGACGAAAGTC 
TGACCGAGCAACGCCGCGTGAGTGAAGAAGGTTTTCGGATCGTAAAACTCTGTTGTTAGAGAAGAACAAGGACGTTAGTAACTGAACGTCCCCTGACGGTATCTAACCAGAAAGCCACGGCTAACTACGTGCCAGCAGCCGCGGTAATACGTAGGTGGCA 
AGCGTTGTCCGGATTTATTGGGCGTAAAGCGAGCGCAGGCGGTTTCTTAAGTCTGATGTGAAAGCCCCCGGCTCAACCGGGGAGGGTCATTGGAAACTGGGAGACTTGAGTGCAGAAGAGGAGAGTGGAATTCCATGTGTAGCGGTGAAATGCGTAGATA 
TATGGAGGAACACCAGTGGCGAAGGCGGCTCTCTGGTCTGTAACTGACGCTGAGGCTCGAAAGCGTGGGGAGCAAACAGGATTAGATACCCTGGTAGTCCACGCCGTAAACGATGAGTGCTAAGTGTTGGAGGGTTTCCGCCCTTCAGTGCTGCAGCAAA 
CGCATTAAGCACTCCGCCTGGGGAGTACGACCGCAAGGTTGAAACTCAAAGGAATTGACGGGGGCCCGCACAAGCGGTGGAGCATGTGGTTTAATTCGAAGCAACGCGAAGAACCTTACCAGGTCTTGACATCCTTTGACCACTCTAGAGATAGAGCTTT 
CCCTTCGGGGACAAAGTGACAGGTGGTGCATGGTTGTCGTCAGCTCGTGTCGTGAGATGTTGGGTTAAGTCCCGCAACGAGCGCAACCCTTATTGTTAGTTGCCATCATTTAGTTGGGCACTCTAGCGAGACTGCCGGTGACAAACCGGAGGAAGGTGGG 
GATGACGTCAAATCATCATGCCCCTTATGACCTGGGCTACCACGTGCTACATGGGAAGTACAACGAGTCGCTAGAC 
 
>EF70703407_EF70703407 
GGCTATCATGCAAGTCGAACGAACTTCCGTTAATTGATTATGACTACTTGTACTGATTGAGATTTTAACACGAAGTGAGTGGCGAACGGGTGAGTAACACGTGGGTAACCTGCCCAGAAGTAGGGGATAACACCTGGAAACAGATGCTAATACCGTATAA 
CAGAGAAAACCGCATGGTTTTCTTTTAAAAGATGGCTCTGCTATCACTTCTGGATGGACCCGCGGCGTATTAGCTAGTTGGTGAGGTAAAGGCTCACCAAGGCAGTGATACGTAGCCGACCTGAGAGGGTAATCGGCCACATTGGGACTGAGACACGGCC 
CAGACTCCTACGGGAGGCAGCAGTAGGGAATCTTCCACAATGGACGCAAGTCTGATGGAGCAACGCCGCGTGAGTGAAGAAGGGTTTCGGCTCGTAAAGCTCTGTTGTTAAAGAAGAACGTGGGTAAGAGTAACTGTTTACCCAGTGACGGTATTTAACC 
AGAAAGCCACGGCTAACTACGTGCCAGCAGCCGCGGTAATACGTAGGTGGCAAGCGTTATCCGGATTTATTGGGCGTAAAGCGAGCGCAGGCGGTCTTTTAAGTCTAATGTGAAAGCCTTCGGCTCAACCGAAGAAGTGCATTGGAAACTGGGAGACTTG 
AGTGCAGAAGAGGACAGTGGAACTCCATGTGTAGCGGTGAAATGCGTAGATATATGGAAGAACACCAGTGGCGAAGGCGGCTGTCTGGTCTGCAACTGACGCTGAGGCTCGAAAGCATGGGTAGCGAACAGGATTAGATACCCTGGTAGTCCATGCCGTA 
AACGATGATTACTAAGTGTTGGAGGGTTTCCGCCCTTCAGTGCTGCAGCTAACGCATTAAGTAATCCGCCTGGGGAGTACGACCGCAAGGTTGAAACTCAAAAGAATTGACGGGGGCCCGCACAAGCGGTGGAGCATGTGGTTTAATTCGAAGCTACGCG 
AAGAACCTTACCAGGTCTTGACATCTTCTGACAGTCTAAGAGATTAGAGGTTCCCTTCGGGGACAGAATGACAGGTGGTGCATGGTTGTCGTCAGCTCGTGTCCTGAGATGTTGGGTTAAGTCCCGCAACGAGCGCAACCCTTATTACTAGTTGCCAGCA 
TTAAGTTGGGCACTCTA 
 
>EF70703408_EF70703408 
GGGCTATACTGCAAGTCGAACGAACTCTGGTATTGATTGGTGTTGCATCATGATTTACATTTGAGTGAGTGGCGAACTGGTGAGTAACACGTGGGAAACCTGCCCAGAAGCGGGGGATAACACCTGGAAACAGATGCTAATACCGCATAACAACTTGGAC 
CGCATGGTCCGAGTTTGAAAGATGGCTTCGGCTATCACTTTTGGATGGTCCCGCGGCGTATTAGCTAGATGGTGGGGTAACGGCTCACCATGGCAATGATACGTAGCCGACCTGAGAGGGTAATCGGCCACATTGGGACTGAGACACGGCCCAAACTCCT 
ACGGGAGGCAGCAGTAGGGAATCTTCCACAATGGACGAAAGTCTGATGGAGCAACGCCGCGTGAGTGAAGAAGGGTTTCGGCTCGTAAAACTCTGTTGTTAAAGAAGAACATATCTGAGAGTAACTGTTCAGGTATTGACGGTATTTAACCAGAAAGCCA 
CGGCTAACTACGTGCCAGCAGCCGCGGTAATACGTAGGTGGCAAGCGTTGTCCGGATTTATTGGGCGTAAAGCGAGCGCAGGCGGTTTTTTAAGTCTGATGTGAAAGCCTTCGGCTCAACCGAAGAAGTGCATCGGAAACTGGGAAACTTGAGTGCAGAA 
GAGGACAGTGGAACTCCATGTGTAGCGGTGAAATGCGTAGATATATGGAAGAACACCAGTGGCGAAGGCGGCTGTCTGGTCTGTAACTGACGCTGAGGCTCGAAAGTATGGGTAGCAAACAGGATTAGATACCCTGGTAGTCCATACCGTAAACGATGAA 
TGCTAAGTGTTGGAGGGTTTCCGCCCTTCAGTGCTGCAGCTAACGCATTAAGCATTCCGCCTGGGGAGTACGGCCGCAAGGCTGAAACTCAAAGGAATTGACGGGGGCCCGCACAAGCGGTGGAGCATGTGGTTTAATTCGAAGCTACGCGAAGAACCTT 
ACCAGGTCTTGACATACTATGCAAATCTAAGAGATTAGACGTTCCCTTCGGGGAAATGGAT 
 
>EF70703409_EF70703409 
GAGCTTCTCCCCGAAAGAAAAGAGTGGCGAACGGGTGAGTAACACGTGGGTAACCTGCCCATCAGAAGGGGATAACACTTGGAAACAGGTGCTAATACCGTATAACACTATTTTCCGCATGGAAGAAAGTTGAAAGGCGCTTTTGCGTCACTGATGGATG 
GACCCGCGGTGCATTAGCTAGTTGGTGAGGTAACGGCTCACCAAGGCAACGATGCATAGCCGACCTGAGAGGGTGATCGGCCACACTGGGACTGAGACACGGCCCAGACTCCTACGGGAGGCAGCAGTAGGGAATCTTCGGCAATGGACGAAAGTCTGAC 
CGAGCAACGCCGCGTGAGTGAAGAAGGTTTTCGGATCGTAAAACTCTGTTGTTAGAGAAGAACAAGGATGAGAGTAGAACGTTCATCCCTTGACGGTATCTAACCAGAAAGCCACGGCTAACTACGTGCCAGCAGCCGCGGTAATACGTAGGTGGCAAGC 
GTTGTCCGGATTTATTGGGCGTAAAGCGAGCGCAGGCGGTTTCTTAAGTCTGATGTGAAAGCCCCCGGCTCAACCGGGGAGGGTCATTGGAAACTGGGAGACTTGAGTGCAGAAGAGGAGAGTGGAATTCCATGTGTAGCGGTGAAATGCGTAGATATAT 
GGAGGAACACCAGTGGCGAAGGCGGCTCTCTGGTCTGTAACTGACGCTGAGGCTCGAAAGCGTGGGGAGCGAACAGGATTAGATACCCTGGTAGTCCACGCCGTAAACGATGAGTGCTAAGTGTTGGAGGGTTTCCGCCCTTCAGTGCTGCAGCAAACGC 
ATTAAGCACTCCGCCTGGGGAGTACGACCGCAAGGTTGAAACTCAAAGGAATTGACGGGGGCCCGCACAAGCGGTGGAGCATGTGGTTTAATTCGAAGCAACGCGAAGAACCTTACCAGGTCTTGACATCCTTTGACCACTCTAGAGATAGAGCTTCCCC 
TTCGGGGGCAAAGTGACAGGTGGTGCATGGTTGTCGTCAGCTCGTGTCGTGAGATGTTGGGTTAAGTCCCGCAACGAGCGCAACCCTTATTGTTAGTTGCCATCATTTAGTTGGGCACTCTAGCGAGACTGCCGGTGACAAACCGGAGGAAGGTGGGGAT 
GACGTCAAATCATCATGCCCCTTATGACCTGGGCTACCACGTGCTACAATGGGAAGTACAACGAGTTGCG 
 
 
 
 
 
Strain collection 
==PAGE:36==
 
Number
Strain
Identifier
Source category
Source
R
3 Enterococcus mundtii
NA
Animal microbiome
Goat Fæces (Lejre)
D
4 Leuconostoc mesenteroides
NA
Animal microbiome
Goat Fæces (Lejre)
D
5 Staphylococcus pasteuri
NA
Human microbiome
Human breast milk
D
6 Lactococus lactis 
MG1363
9 Lactobacillus malefermentans
DSM 5705
Food/Plant material
beer
u
10 Lactobacillus bobalius
DSM 19674
Food/Plant material
Spanish Bobal grape most
S
11 Lactobacillus amylophilus
DSM 20533
Plant material
Swine waste corn fermentation
12 Lactobacillus amylotrophicus
DSM 20534
Plant material
Swine waste corn fermentation
13 Lactobacillus kimchicus
Animal microbiome
Isolated from bumble bee
D
14 Lactobacillus plantarum
12-27B
Food/Plant material
Fura from Millet
O
15 Limosilactobacillus fermentum
NSB2
Food/Plant material
Dolo (beer) from Sorghum
S
16 L. Fermentum
6-1B
Food/Plant material
Fura from Millet
O
17 L. Fermentum
10-8B
Food/Plant material
Fura from Millet
O
18 Lactobacillus coryniformis subsp. torquens
DSM 20004
Animal microbiome
air of cow shed
19 Lactobacillus bifermentans
DSM 20003
Dairy
blown cheese
20 Lactobacillus curvatus
DSM 20019
Dairy
milk
21 Lactobacillus kefiri
DSM 20587
Dairy
kefir grains
22 Lactobacillus plantarum subsp. plantarum
CST 12007
Dairy
dairy products 
F
23 Lactobacillus plantarum subsp. plantarum
NCFB 2171
Dairy
cheese 
N
24 Lactobacillus plantarum subsp. plantarum
NCFB 1204 (NCIMDairy
cheese starter 
U
25 Lactobacillus hammesii
DSM 16381
Food/Plant material
wheat sourdough 
F
26 Lactobacillus plantarum subsp. plantarum
CNRZ 424
Food/Plant material
sourdough 
F
27 Lactobacillus plantarum subsp. plantarum
Agrano 15b
Food/Plant material
sourdough 
F
28 Lactobacillus composti
DSM 18527
Food/Plant material
composting material of distilled J
29 Lactobacillus kunkeei
DSM 12361
Food/Plant material
commercial grape wine undergoU
30 Lactobacillus acidipiscis
DSM 15836
Food/meat
fermented fish 
T
31 Lactobacillus alimentarius
DSM 20249
Food/meat
marinated fish product
32 Lactobacillus johnsonii
ATCC 53672
Animal microbiome
Chicken intestine
33 Lactobacillus cacaonum
DSM 21116
Food/Plant material
cocoa bean heap fermentation G
34 Lactobacillus fabifermentans
DSM 21115
Food/Plant material
cocoa bean heap fermentation G
35 Lactobacillus ghanensis
DSM 18630
Food/Plant material
cocoa fermentation
G
36 Lactobacillus kimchii
DSM 13961
Food/Plant material
fermented vegetable (kimchi) 
S
37 Lactobacillus kisonensis
DSM 19906
Food/Plant material
non-salted pickle solution used i J
38 Lactobacillus plantarum subsp. plantarum
FOEB 8402
Food/Plant material
Bordeaux grapes 
F
39 Lactobacillus plantarum subsp. plantarum
FOEB 9106
Food/Plant material
Porto grapes 
P
40 Lactobacillus plantarum subsp. plantarum
JCL1279
Food/Plant material
fermented cucumber 
S
41 Lactobacillus brevis
LMG 19188
42 Lactobacillus buchneri
Ketchup-3
Food/Plant material
Ketchup
43 Lactobacillus brevis
LMG 19217
44 Lactobacillus oris
DSM 4864
Human microbiome
human saliva
45 Lactobacillus plantarum subsp. plantarum
NCIMB 8826
Human microbiome
human saliva
46 Lactobacillus salivarius subsp. salicinius
DSM 20554
Human microbiome
saliva
47 Lactobacillus manihotivorans
DSM 13343
Food/Plant material
cassava sour starch fermentatioC
48 Lactobacillus pentosus
DSM 20314T
Plant material
sawdust fermentation
49 Lactobacillus plantarum subsp. argentoratensis
NCIMB 12120
Food/Plant material
fermented cereal ogi 
N
50 Lactobacillus plantarum subsp. plantarum
FB 115
Food/Plant material
Hawaiian fermented taro 
U
51 Lactobacillus plantarum subsp. plantarum
NCIMB 6105
Plant material
silage
52 Lactobacillus plantarum subsp. argentoratensis
SF2A35B
Food/Plant material
sour cassava starch fermentatioS
53 Lactobacillus plantarum subsp. plantarum
SF2B37-1
Food/Plant material
sour cassava starch fermentatioS
54 L. rhamnosus
1L-1-MRS
Plant material
Sugar cane fermentation
B
55 L. fermentum
3L-1-TSB
Plant material
Sugar cane fermentation
B
56 L. paracasei
3L-2-TSB = ATCC=2Plant material
Sugar cane fermentation
B
57 L. rhamnosus
1L-1-TSB
Plant material
Sugar cane fermentation
B
58 L. fermentum
1L-2-M17
Plant material
Sugar cane fermentation
B
59 L. amylovorous
Iso 3
Plant material
Sugar cane fermentation
B
60 L. fermentum
1L-4-MRS
Plant material
Sugar cane fermentation
B
61 L. dextrinicus
2L-1-MRS
Plant material
Sugar cane fermentation
B
63 L. Mali
DSM 20444
65 L. paracasei
Dairy
Comte cheese
D
67 Lactobacillus crustorum
Food/plant material
Sourdough
D
69 L. plantarum
Lactobacillus plantFood/meat
Hanegal sausage
D
70 L. Curvatus
Lactobacillus curvaFood/meat
Prosciutto Itally
D
71 Lactobacillus heilongjiangensis 
Food/meat
Aalbæk spegepølse
D
72 L. plantarum
Lactobacillus plantFood/meat
Hanegal sausage
D
73 L. plantarum
Lactobacillus sp. T Food/plant material
Whole grain wheat flower (ølandD
74 L. salivarius
Lactobacillus cory Food/plant material
Whole grain wheat flower (ølandD
75 Lactobacillus curvatus
Food/plant material
Fine wheat flower
D
77 L. fermentum
B5
Plant material
Sugar cane fermentation
B
78 L. plantarum
B1
Plant material
Sugar cane fermentation
B
79 L. sakei
ATCC 15521
Food/plant material
Moto starter for sake
80 L. Crispatus
ATCC-33820
Human microbiome
human eye
81 L. Buchneri
ATCC-11577
Human microbiome
Human saliva
82 L. plantarum
IMAU10117(WZ28Dairy
traditional fermented dairy
83 L. paracasei
1L-4-M17
Plant material
Sugar cane fermentation
B
84 L. paracasei
1L-3_TSB
Plant material
Sugar cane fermentation
B
85 L. brevis
CCUG 36840
Plant material
silage
86 L. plantarum
ATCC 14917
Food/plant material
pickled cabbage
87 Lactobacillus animalis
DSM 20602
Animal microbiome
dental plaque of baboon
91 Lactobacillus murinus
DSM 20452
Animal microbiome
intestine of rat
92 Lactobacillus ruminis
DSM 20403
Animal microbiome
bovine rumen
95 Lactobacillus buchneri
DSM 20057
Food/plant material
tomato pulp
96 Lactobacillus fermentum
DSM 20052
Food/plant material
fermented beets
97 Lactobacillus harbinensis
DSM 16991
Food/plant material
chinese traditional fermented veC
100 Lactobacillus brevis
DSM 20054
Human microbiome
faeces
102 Lactobacillus gasseri
DSM 20243
Human microbiome
human
103 Lactobacillus gastricus
DSM 16045
Human microbiome
gastric biopsies, human stomachS
109 L. reuteri
DSM 20016
Human microbiome
Intestine of an adult
110 Lactobacillus frumenti
DSM 13145
Food/Plant material
rye-bran sourdough (Germany) G
111 L. Reuteri
ATCC PTA 6475
Human microbiome
breast milk of finnish woman
113 L. floricola
DSM23037
116 L.lactis
CZNJM-6
Kefir
D
117 L.lactis
1424
Kefir
D
119 L.lactis
CZNJM-6
Kefir
D
121 Lactococcus lactis strain 
1660
Kefir
D
122 Lactobacillus sp. strain 
LZ-R-12
Kefir
D
125 E.faecium
CAU10417
Pozol
D
126 Leuconostoc mesenteroides
1879
Pozol
D
127 Weissella confusa
isolate F15
Pozol
D
129 Enterococcus faecium
strain MRS1
Pozol
D
130 Leuconostoc sp
KCOM 1452
Pozol
D
179 Lactobacillus rhamnosus
1L-1-M17
181 Lactococcus lactis subsp. lactis
M11.A
182 L. lactis could be supsp. cremoris or lactis
M11.B
183 Acetobacter malorum
M14.2
184 Lactobacillus crustorum/farciminis
M14.3
185 Lactobacillus crustorum
M14.4
200 Acetobacter malorum
M14.5
202 Planomicrobium okeanokoites /Staphylococcus equorum
L10.C
203 Lactococcus lactis
L11.A
204 Staphylococcus haemolyticus /Staphylococcus equorum
L11.B
205 Planomicrobium okeanokoites /Staphylococcus equorum
L12.A
206 Pediococcus lolii /Pediococcus acidilactici
L12.C
207 Galactomyces sp. /Galactomyces sp.
M3.A
216 Lactococcus lactis subsp. cremoris
M4.B
217 Lactococcus lactis subsp. lactis
M5.A
218 Lactococcus lactis subsp. lactis
M5.C
219 Lactococcus lactis could be supsp. Cremoris)
M5.D
220 Lactobacillus paracasei
M6.A
221 Enterococcus faecalis
M6.B
223 Enterococcus faecalis
M6.C
224 Enterococcus faecalis
M6.D
225 Leuconostoc mesenteroides
M7.A
226 Lactococcus lactis subsp. lactis
M8.A
227 Lactococcus lactis could be supsp. hordniae or cremoris or lactis
M8.B
229 Lacticaseibacillus paracasei /Lactobacillus paracasei
M10.A
230 Lactococcus lactis subsp. lactis
M10.B
233 Leuconostoc pseudomesenteroides /Leuconostoc mesenteroides
M2.A
234 Lactococcus lactis subsp. lactis
M4.A
235 Lactococcus lactis
L8.A
238 Lactococcus lactis could be supsp. cremoris or lactis
L4.D
241 Uncultured Lactococcus sp/ Lactococcus lactis subsp. lactis
L7.C
243 Lactococcus lactis
L7.E
247 Planomicrobium okeanokoites /Staphylococcus equorum
L11.C
250 Enterococcus mundtii
M16.a
251 Leuconostoc mesenteroides / subsp. jonggajibkimchii
M16.B
252 Weissella cibaria / Weissella confusa
M17.a
253 Weissella confusa
M17.b
254 Pediococcus pentosaceus
M18.a
255 Lactobacillus curvatus
M18.b
256 Weissella cibaria / Weissella confusa
M20.a
257 Enterococcus gallinarum
M20.b
258 Lactobacillus sp. TN627 / Lactobacillus metriopterae / Lactobacillus plantarum/ LacM21.a
259 Weissella confusa
M20.c
260 Lactobacillus coryniformis /Lactobacillus salivarius
M21.b
261 Pediococcus lolii Pediococcus acidilactici
M22.A
262 Lactobacillus sakei
M22.B
264 Lactobacillus plantarum Lactobacillus pentosus /Lactiplantibacillus plantarum
M23.a
267 Lactobacillus curvatus 
M24.a
270 Leuconostoc citreum/ Leuconostoc holzapfelii
M25.a
272 Leuconostoc mesenteroides / Leuconostoc citreum
M26.a
276 Enterococcus mundtii
M29.a
277 Enterococcus gallinarum / Enterococcus casseliflavus
M29.b
283 Lactobacillus sakei
M32.a
285 Lactobacillus heilongjiangensis /Lactobacillus zhachilii / Lactobacillus nantensis /
M32.c
286 Lactobacillus sakei
M33.a
304 Enterococcus faecium ATCC19434T
305 Enterococcus feacalis 1-103 (LGM17686)
306 Fructobacillus durionis 
307 Lactococcus mesenteroides MC10 (LMG 19203)
308 Enterococcus faecium B1 (LMG 19827)
309 Weissella cibaria II-2-32 (LMG 17704) 
310 Weissella cibaria II-1-42 (LMG 17694)
311 Weissella confusa II-1-43 (LMG 17695)
312 L.pentosus LMG9210
313 Lactobacillus farciminis II-8-50 (LMG17703)
314 L.plantarum LMG9206
318 Paralactobacillus selangorensis 9-22 (LMG 17710T)
320 Lactobacillus fermentum ATCC9338
321 Lactobacillus mali MD11 (LMG 19174)
322 Lactobacillus acidipiscis 13-20(LMG17676)
323 Lactobacillus rhamnosus 11233
315 Carnobacterium divergens LMG 9199T
316 Carnobacterium divergens NCFB2855
319 Carnobacterium viridans DSMA14451T
==PAGE:37==
Bacteriocins  
 
 
Inhibition 
 
 
 
 
Number
Bacteriocin
Isolated from
B6
Hiracin_JM79
Enterococcus hirae
B8
sakacin_A
Lactobacillus sakeLb706
B10
Leucocin_C
Leuconostoc mesenteroides
B12
ubericin-A
Streptococcus uberis
B13
actifencin
Actinomyces ruminicola DPC 7226
B18
Mundticin
Enterococcus mundtii
B22
bacteroidetocin A
Bacteroides vulgatus
B25
EJ97enterocin
Enterococcus faecalis
B31
Plantaricin_423
Lactobacillus plantarum
B32
sakacin_G_skgA2
Lactobacillus sake2512
B33
garvieacinQ_garQ
Lactococcus garvieae
B35
Leucocin_A_(LeucocinA-UAL187)
Leuconostoc gelidum
B36
Mesentericin
Leuconostoc mesenteroides
B38
Penocin_A
Pediococcus pentosaceus ATCC25745
B42
Bovicin_255_variant
Streptococcus bovis
B46
Bovicin_255_peptide
Streptococcus sp. LRC0255
B50
Divercin_V41_(DvnV41)
Carnobacterium divergens
B52
Bacteriocin_31
Enterococcus faecalis
B53
Enterocin_SE-K4
Enterococcus faecalis
B58
Eenterocin_P-like
Enterococcus faecium
B63
EnterocinP
Enterococcus faecium
B70
Sakacin_5XSakX
Lactobacillus sakei
Microorganism
B0 B6 B8 B10 B12 B13 B18 B22 B25B31B32 B33 B35 B36 B38 B42 B46 B50 B52 B53 B58 B63 B70
L19:Lactococcus biferments
1
1
1
1
1
1
0
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
L203man:Enterococcus lactis
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
0
0
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
L221man:Enterococcus feacalis
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
0
0
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
L233man:Leuconostoc pseudomesenteroides
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
0
0
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
L252man:Weissella cibaria
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
0
0
0
0
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
L254man:Pediococcus pentasaceus
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
0
0
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
L255man:Lactobacillus curvatus
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
0
0
0
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
L256man:Weissella cibaria
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
0
0
0
0
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
L257man:Enterococcus gallinarum
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
0
0
0
0
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
L285man:Lactobacillus heliongjangensis
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
0
0
0
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
L28man:Lactobacillus composti
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
0
0
0
0
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
L35man: Lactobacillus ghanesis
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
0
0
0
0
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
L36man: Lactobacillus kimchii
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
0
0
0
0
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
L3man:Enterococcus mundtii
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
0
0
0
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
L42man:Lactobacillus buncheri
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
0
0
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
L43man:Lactobacillus brevis
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
0
0
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
L44man:Lactobacillus oris
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
0
0
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
L48:Lactobacillus pentosus
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
0
0
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
L4man:Leuconostoc mesenteroides
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
0
0
0
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
L58R2: L.fermentum
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
0
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
==PAGE:38==
 
Cell proliferation Day 2: 
 
 
 
 
 
