==PAGE:1==
Online
Streaming
Process
Conformance
Checking Using Deep Learning
Master Thesis
DTU Compute
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Online Streaming Process Conformance Checking Using Deep Learning
Master Thesis
January, 2023
By
Max Thrane Nielsen
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus­
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Published by:
DTU, Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science,
Richard Petersens Plads, Building 324, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
www.compute.dtu.dk
ISSN:
[0000­0000] (electronic version)
ISBN:
[000­00­0000­000­0] (electronic version)
ISSN:
[0000­0000] (printed version)
ISBN:
[000­00­0000­000­0] (printed version)
==PAGE:4==
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
The aim of online conformance checking is to ensure that processes are being carried out
consistently and in accordance with established procedures as they are being executed.
In other words, it is a way to ensure that something is ”conforming” to the established
guidelines or criteria on an ongoing basis, rather than checking for conformance at a
specific point in time. The data are streamed, which refers to data that are generated
continuously and in real­time, rather than being stored and processed at a later time.
However, currently there is no prefix­alignment technique that can handle a warm­starting
scenario in which a case has started before it was observed for the first time in the stream.
This can lead to inaccurate prefix­alignments and degrade the captured information. In
addition, no prefix­alignment technique is able to indicate the proximity of a case to its
termination or signal the stability of conformance.
In this work, we have extended an existing online prefix­alignment approximation tech­
nique to handle warm­starting scenarios. Furthermore, we present a method for distilling
the prefix­alignment output into three metrics, conformance, completeness, and confi­
dence, to give a more detailed view of the status of a case.
A theoretical methodology was employed, which used mathematical formal reasoning to
analyze problems related to handling a warm­start scenario and quantifying Complete­
ness and Confidence. Empirical and experimental methodologies were also used to log­
ically analyze empirical data, validate the new approach, compare it with state­of­the­art
competitor approaches, and evaluate its suitability for streaming data.
The theoretical analysis resulted in the development of two configurations for an algorithm
that allow the user to choose between a higher accuracy at the cost of less efficiency, or
a lower accuracy with reduced memory usage and processing time. The empirical eval­
uation demonstrated that the configuration that minimizes prefix­alignment cost is highly
correlated with a state­of­the­art approach that guarantees optimal prefix­alignments. Ad­
ditionally, a stress test showed that the approach is suitable for processing and analyzing
data in real­time with constant memory usage per event and an average processing time
of 0.038ms per event.
However, the approach is limited by the size of the state space resulting in decreased
efficiency. Despite this limitation, we believe that the approach represents a valuable
contribution to the field of online process mining.
Online Streaming Process Conformance Checking Using Deep Learning
i
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
I want to express my deepest gratitude to all the people who have contributed in various
ways to my writing of this thesis. This project would not have been possible without the
support of them.
Andrea Burattin, Associate Professor, Software and Process Engineering at DTU
I am grateful to my supervisor for the time and resources he has dedicated to my thesis,
as well as his invaluable expert knowledge in Process Mining and guidance throughout
this project.
Kristo Raun, PhD student, University of Tartu
For the opportunity to work on his research and for his ongoing support through critical
feedback on my work. I also appreciate the time and patience that he has generously
given me.
Henrik Naundrup Vester, Cofunder and Principle Consultant, Breakawai
I am grateful to my external supervisor for his commitment to helping me with my thesis
development and for his valuable insights.
Henrique Duarte, Head of R&D and Data Science, Breakawai
I am grateful to my external supervisor for his commitment to helping with data collection
and sharing his experience with writing a thesis.
ii
Online Streaming Process Conformance Checking Using Deep Learning
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
i
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
1
Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
2
Background . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
3
Related Work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
3.1
Research methodology
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
3.2
Results
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
3.3
Trie approach . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
4
Problem Formulation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
4.1
Research Questions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
4.2
Evaluation Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
5
Methodology
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
5.1
Research design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
5.2
Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
5.3
Evaluation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
5.4
Collaboration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
6
Algorithmic Design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
6.1
Completeness
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
6.2
Confidence . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 34
7
Evaluation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 37
7.1
Data sets . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 37
7.2
Experiments
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 38
7.3
Completeness validation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 41
7.4
Comparative evaluation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 47
7.5
Stress test
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 51
7.6
Threats to validity
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 57
7.7
Research questions fulfillment
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 59
8
Conclusion
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 61
9
Future Work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 63
9.1
Multi­perspective OCC . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 63
9.2
Efficient memory utilization
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 63
9.3
Confidence as guiding cost term . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 63
Bibliography
65
A Gantt Chart
67
B Acronyms
68
Online Streaming Process Conformance Checking Using Deep Learning
iii
==PAGE:8==
1
Introduction
Processes play an important role in everyday life and form the structure of organizations
in various domains. A process consists of a set of activities, which are the individual units
of action carried out by participants or actors in the process to achieve specific goals.
The execution of an activity causes a process to move into a new state, and consecutive
changes in state are referred to as an execution, which is represented as a sequence of
activities. An event is a signal that an activity has occurred and is often recorded in an
Information System. Events are typically performed in a specific context, such as applying
for a loan, and by grouping events that belong to the same context, a case is created. A
trace is a sequence of events related to a single case, and a collection of traces is referred
to as an event log
Process models are of value to businesses, as they provide an opportunity to describe,
analyze, and structure processes in an organization [1]. A Process model is an abstraction
that captures some of the behavior of a process in its structure by imposing a specific
order on the relations between the included activities such that their logical dependencies
are clearly defined. A process model can model several types of dependencies, such as
choice which indicate that an execution is divergent by choosing between two mutually
exclusive activities. An example of a process captured with a specific modeling notation
is shown in Figure 1. An example of a trace of events related to a process instance of
Figure 1 is: < A, B, D, E, F, G >.
Figure 1: Running example of a process model used throughout this thesis to exemplify
concepts that are introduced along the way.
Process mining is a research field that intersects the disciplines of data science and pro­
cess science [1]. It encompasses several activities, all backed by data analysis related to
the execution of business processes. Typically, raw event data is turned into meaningful
process models, insights, or actionable decisions. Data can be available offline from an
event log or received online in real time through data streaming [1]. The focus of process
mining is on operational processes, i.e., processes requiring the repeated execution of
activities to deliver products or services. These can be found in all organizations and
industries, including production, logistics, finance, sales, procurement, education, con­
sulting, healthcare, maintenance and government [1].
There are several activities within the taxonomy of process mining that seek to achieve
different sets of goals. Process discovery focuses on describing how a process is carried
out in reality. The output of process discovery is an encoding of the process behavior ex­
tracted from the data from the execution traces. The mined process model captures the
control flow, which is the order of the activities in the process model, but can also focus
on other perspectives such as time, data, and resource allocation in the process. Process
enhancement encompasses two sub fields, process extension and process improvement.
Online Streaming Process Conformance Checking Using Deep Learning
1
==PAGE:9==
It aims to fulfill certain properties for a process model such as increasing the precision of
a model in terms of allowing only legitimate behavior and enriching a model with more
perspectives than just control­flow. Predictive process monitoring tries to accurately pre­
dict future characteristics of an ongoing process at run­time, to allow for counteractions
to undesired situations ahead of their occurrence [1].
Conformance checking aims to quantify the degree to which the execution traces of an
underlying process conform to the predetermined behavior captured in a reference model.
There exist different perspectives to relate modeled and observed behavior: rule check­
ing, token­replay, alignments, and abstractions [1]. The de facto standard today is the
alignment perspective [2]. The approaches for conformance checking generally aim to
compute alignments between a normative reference model and the execution traces ob­
served in an event log. The alignment cost, which is defined in the approach, serves as
an indicator of the deviation or consent between the two, and the computed alignment
can be used to correct a deviating case by providing the closest conforming path through
a process model.
Online Conformance checking builds on the notion of conformance checking. Rather than
analyzing the discrepancies between a process model and a static log a posteriori, the
analysis is applied post mortem to a running case. However, conventional algorithms for
computing alignments suffer from either overestimating alignment costs, as they try to
align an incomplete trace with the reference model, or exceeding the system resources
available for each data point [3]. The setting assumes an event stream which is basically
data that are streamed from an unbounded sequence of events.
The incentive for targeting online streaming is manifold, and below are given some exam­
ples:
• Due to the increase in volumes of data produced by information systems nowadays,
it can be infeasible for companies to store the data for offline processing as the
sheer amount of data makes storage and management of the data a costly expense.
Therefore, the online transmission of data has gained more traction, since it reduces
the operational cost of a company associated with data storage [4].
• As events are consumed from an ongoing execution of a process instance, appro­
priate countermeasures can be taken before the executing process has concluded.
The greatest challenge in online conformance checking is the constraints incurred by
non­functional requirements on the complexity of time and space of data analysis [3]. As
events are generated with high throughput, the memory and computational efficiency of
an algorithm must remain within reasonable limits to be suitable for an online environment
[5].
This thesis aims to extend the approach to online conformance checking presented in
the paper I Will Survive: An Online Conformance Checking Algorithm Using Decay Time
[6] to make it able to handle the warm­start scenario mentioned the first time in the pa­
per [7]. As the approach is intended for online conformance checking and must be suit­
able for streaming data given resource constraints, it must be able to operate efficiently
while minimizing margin of error in terms of approximating the conformance cost of prefix­
alignments.
2
Online Streaming Process Conformance Checking Using Deep Learning
==PAGE:10==
2
Background
This section introduces some formalism regarding key concepts of online conformance
checking. A process can be represented in various modeling language notations, e.g.
Petri nets. Furthermore, there are two types of process specifications, declarative and
normative, with Petri nets belonging to the latter category [3]. To this end, only the defi­
nition of a Petri net will be introduced since all the papers discovered in the survey in the
Section Related Work, assumes it to be described in Petri net notation.
A structural representation of a process model that can be easily studied due to its math­
ematical notation, its ability to capture concurrent behavior, and its representation as a
state­transition system is a Petri net.
Definition 1. A Petri net (N) is a tuple (P,T,F) where
• P is a finite set of places
• T is a finite set of transitions, st T ∩P = ∅
• F ⊆(PXT) ∪(TXP) is a flow relation
• a place p ∈P is an input place of transition t ∈T iff (p, t) ∈F. The set of input
places for a transition t is denoted as •t
• a place p ∈P is an output place of transition t ∈T iff (t, p) ∈F. The set of output
places for a transition t is denoted as t•
• p• and •p denotes the set of transitions that share p as input and output places,
respectively.
A Petri net can be used to model different types of execution behavior, such as sequences,
choices, parallelism, and loops. The sequence of transitions fired in a Petri net, denoted
an execution sequence, is π ∈B where B is defined as the set of behaviors allowed in the
Petri net. B can be infinite if there is a loop, as the unfolding of the Petri net can continue
forever. We use the notation πi (iπ) to denote a suffix (prefix) of a firing sequence π ∈B
and π(i) to denote the element at the index ith of π.
A state of a Petri net is defined by its marking M that is defined as a multiset of places.
Given a Petri net N and a marking M, a marked net is written as (N, M). The reachability
graph of a Petri net is the set of markings M that can be reached from the initial marking
M0 through firing transitions. It represents the state space of a Petri net.
A labelled Petri net is essentially a Petri net with labels on the transitions from a finite set
of activities A∗. The running example process in Figure 1 is a labeled Petri net. The Petri
net also shows τ labelled transitions depicted by a black box. Such transitions does not
represent any activity from the process.
A Work Flow net (WF­net) is a structural subclass of a Petri net, and sound WF­nets
are a subclass of WF­nets with preferred soundness properties such as the absence of
deadlocks, livelocks, and boundness. Since it is often required that the Petri net is a
sound WF­net we introduce its meaning here. The running example process in Figure 1
is a sound WF­net.
An event stream is a stream where each unit of the stream is an observable unit that
contains related information about a process instance that can be extracted [1]. A process
instance is denoted as case and all cases are assigned a unique ID that distinguishes it
from other running process instances.
Online Streaming Process Conformance Checking Using Deep Learning
3
==PAGE:11==
Definition 2. Given a universe of observable units O, an event stream is defined as an
infinite sequence of observable units: S : N≥0 →O.
The recording of a single unit of activity is denoted by event. An event in the stream
signals the occurrence of an atomic execution of an activity by an actor participating in
the undergoing process.
Definition 3. Let C denote the universe of case ids, and let A the universe of activities.
An observable unit o is defined as o = (c, a) ∈C X A describing the case id and an
activity a observed in c. The universe of observable units O ⊆C X A refers to all possible
observable units.
Events also contain a timestamp and can have additional attributes, such as cost and
resource class.
Definition 4. A multiset B over A contains an arbitrary number of each element in A. The
set of all possible multisets over A is denoted B(A). For example, if A = {A, B, C} then
{A, B, B, C} ∈B(A). A∗is the set of all finite sequences in A. A finite sequence over
A of length n is a mapping σ ∈{0, .., n} →A. This sequence is represented by a string,
that is, σ = (a0, a1, ..., an) where ai = σ(i) for 1 ≤i ≤n. |σ| denotes the length of the
sequence, that is, |σ| = n. The concatenation of the sequences σ1 and σ2 is written as
σ1 ⊕σ2. [1]
A trace σ ∈A∗is a finite sequence of events that belong to the context of an execution
process. Traces that represent distinct process executions but induce the same sequence
of events are denoted trace variants. For simplicity, we will use the notation σ(i) to refer
to the ith activity a ∈e = (c, a) in σ and not to the event e. For a suffix σi and a prefix iσ
we refer to the sequence of activities projected from σ.
As introduced in Section 1 an event log L ⊆A∗is the digital footprint of the executions
of a process. An event log consists of cases and cases consists of events. Events for a
given case are represented as a sequence of unique events.
Events observed in the stream is the input for an online conformance checking system
that outputs a metric to signal the measure of discrepancy between the trace of a given
process instance and a hand­made or discovered model. Finally, Figure 2 illustrates how
online conformance checking is carried out on an event stream with the traces related to
two fictive running cases of the process model in Figure 1.
Alignments
Alignment­based conformance checking is unique in that it compares the trace with the
model by finding the most similar alignment between them. This approach avoids the
problems of incompleteness and nondeterminism that plague rule checking and token
replay, respectively. However, alignments are sensitive to missing events or activities, as
these can significantly impact alignment cost and accuracy [3].
By directly connecting the case trace with the behaviour prescribed in a model, an align­
ment, denoted γ, provides a ”closets path” between them such that the order between
the aligned execution sequence of the model π and the trace sequence of activities σ is
preserved. It is represented by a two row matrix where the first row consists of the ac­
tivities signalled by the events executed in σ, denoted ei where 1 ≤i ≤|σ|. The second
row consists of all the activity moves captured in π, denoted aj where j denotes the jth
model move of activity a ∈π. A special symbol >> (”no move”) is used in either row
when a synchronous move (ei, aj)
=⇒
ei = aj in both the trace execution sequence
and the model execution sequence is not possible. A move (>>, ai) is denoted a model
4
Online Streaming Process Conformance Checking Using Deep Learning
==PAGE:12==
Figure 2: Illustrative example of conformance checking on an event stream. Depicted is
the IT­system acting as the source that emits events from ongoing process instances to
an event stream and the conformance checking system (upper half) which is responsible
for detecting deviations in the executions.
move since an activity is expected to have been carried out accordingly to the process
model but there is no corresponding event in the trace execution. A log move (ei, >>)
is conversely when an event in the trace indicates that an activity has been carried out
but the process model is in disagreement. A move (>>, >>) is considered illegal if both
model and trace row contains the special symbol at the same step. A log move and a
model move represent a deviation between the process model and the execution trace.
A standard cost function assigns 0 to synchronous moves, 1 to either log moves or model
moves and ∞to illegal moves.
An alignment provides information about the conformance of a process instance on both
a local and global level. Locally, an alignment indicates the specific activities that were
executed incorrectly or skipped in the trace. The quantification of the alignment gives a
global view of the overall conformance of the process instance [3].
A
C
D
F
H
A
C
D
F
H
Table 1: Example of an alignment be­
tween the process model shown in 1 and
the trace < A, C, D, F, H >. The align­
ment cost is 0 in this case, signalling per­
fect conformance between the trace and
the model.
A
>>
D
F
>>
A
C
D
F
H
Table 2: Example of an alignment be­
tween the process model shown in 1 and
the trace < A, D, F >. The alignment
cost is 2 in this case, indicating non­
conformant behaviour in a process.
Definition 5. Given an alignment γ. The projection of γ on the first row, ignoring >>,
denoted γ ⊥σ, is σ. The projection of γ on the second row, ignoring >>, denoted γ ⊥π,
is π.
Multiple alignments can be computed between a reference model and given trace and it
is striven for to compute alignments that minimizes the cost. The alignments that fit this
criterion are deemed optimal alignments and optimal alignments always exist. Note, it may
be possible to compute multiple optimal alignments [3]. Both alignments in Table 1 and
Table 2 are optimal alignments, as there does not exist any proper subset of alignments
Online Streaming Process Conformance Checking Using Deep Learning
5
==PAGE:13==
where the costs of the alignments are less than the cost for any of the two alignments,
respectively.
In an online streaming setting the knowledge we posses about a case is dynamically
updated as new events related to the context of the case is observed on the stream.
Therefore, conventional alignments overestimate cost, as they require the final state to
be reached in the model execution when an alignment is computed [3]. Instead prefix­
alignments are relaxing the condition by only requiring that the final state is reachable
from the state assumed in the partial execution sequence. Reusing the example of an
event stream that is analyzed by a conformance checking system in Figure 2, for case
100, we have observed the first event as (100, A). Table 3 shows the prefix­alignment
between the trace < A > and the model. Later on, an event (100, D) is observed and our
knowledge about case 100 is updated with its current trace being extended to < A, D >
and a new prefix­alignment is therefor calculated as shown in Table 4.
A
A
Table 3: Example of a prefix­alignment
between the process model shown in
Figure 1 and the trace < A > in an on­
line setting. The alignment cost is 0 in
this case.
A
>>
D
A
C
D
Table 4: Example of a prefix­alignment
between the process model shown in
Figure 1 and the trace < A, D > in an
online setting. The alignment cost is 1
in this case which indicates a deviation
has occurred.
6
Online Streaming Process Conformance Checking Using Deep Learning
==PAGE:14==
3
Related Work
The purpose of this section is to review the state­of­the­art (SOA) contributions in the
research field in terms of providing an overview of several existing approaches applicable
in Online Conformance Checking (OCC). The research papers will be categorized into
concepts that are derived from the retrieved articles to synthesize the various perspectives
on OCC to better understand the topic. This work will then serve as the backbone of the
research of this thesis.
3.1
Research methodology
Guiding questions
The aim of this review of the literature is to gain a complete understanding of the state of
the art in OCC. To further accentuate the focus of this review, two questions are formu­
lated.
Q1 Which properties are used to characterize the current online conformance checking
algorithms?
Q2 What are the challenges that remain largely unsolved in OCC?
Query
In order to systematically retrieve literature, a predefined query string has been con­
structed to narrow down the search space. The query string also ensures reproducible
results in terms of extracting the items.
1
"conformance checking"
2
AND
3
"online"
4
AND
5
year:(2017 OR 2018 OR 2019 OR 2020 OR 2021 OR 2022)
The scientific search engine DTUFindit is queried with the string. The advanced search
function on DTUFindit allows us to construct the search with the clauses in the predefined
search query and, moreover, to specify where the terms should appear in the article. The
first and second terms ”conformance checking” and ”online” were set to appear in the
Abstract.
Filter criteria
The following positive filter criteria are used to filter out any articles without specified prop­
erties:
L : English
T : Article
A : Online
Where L = language, T = type, and A = access. During the data extraction phase, the
abstract and introduction are read to decide whether the paper is relevant to answering
the RQs. As a result, articles that do not primarily deal with online conformance checking
or do not offer a novel conformance checking approach were discarded. Snowballing was
used to retrieve missing articles. The study selection process can be seen in Figure 3.
Online Streaming Process Conformance Checking Using Deep Learning
7
==PAGE:15==
Figure 3: A schematic representation of the study selection process.
3.2
Results
This section provides the key findings in the reviewed literature, structured so that it an­
swers the questions stated in Section 3.1.
Q1
Concepts describing current research streams were derived during the literature review
by collating articles. A concept comprises a set of properties that characterize an ap­
proach. A concept matrix was built with dimensions corresponding to the concepts and
their properties, representing the synthesis of the studies. In Table 5 each cell checks
certain properties for each of the approaches.
8
Online Streaming Process Conformance Checking Using Deep Learning
==PAGE:16==
Concept matrix
Reference
Perspective
Algorithm type
Validity
Efficiency
Control­flow
Multi­perspective
Prefix­alignment
Abstraction
ML
Warm­start
Optimal
Memory
Time
[5]
X
X
Bounded
O(C)
[8]
X
X
X*
Bounded
≤2ms
[9]
X
X
X
Bounded
O(C)*
[10]
X
X
X
X
Unbounded
≤7s*
[11]
X
X
X
Unbounded
≤2ms
[12]
X
X
X
Unbounded
*
[13]
X
X
X*
Unbounded
≤[0.03­35s]
[14]
X
X
X
Unbounded
≤[0.3s­5.56s]
[2]
X
X
X*
Bounded
*
[15]
X
X
X
Unbounded
≤[3ms­992ms]
[7]
X
X
X
Bounded
O(C) / (avg) {0.009ms,0.14ms}
[16]
X
X
X
Bounded
O(C) / (avg) 0.49 ms/event
Table 5: All the approaches taken under review are compared in this table. ∗denotes that
the there is uncertainty about the property e.g. if an approach is parameterized then the
Optimal guarantee depends on the parameters.
Online Streaming Process Conformance Checking Using Deep Learning
9
==PAGE:17==
Perspective
The perspective dimension shows that 4 of the articles take a multi­perspective view of
conformance, whereas 12 of the articles only take the control­flow perspective. However,
[10] argue that other perspectives, such as time, data, and resource allocation in pro­
cesses, are important to check in OCC, as anomalies can occur outside of the incorrect
order of activities.
[12] argues that the standard alignment cost function is unable to differentiate between the
intended (ad hoc repair) and the unintended (tampering) deviations. They therefore pro­
pose an advanced cost function that automatically adjusts the uniform per deviation cost
by incorporating the impact of data­flow deviations into the cost. The authors state that
adjusted deviation costs below a threshold indicate that, that is, a failure to log an event,
and costs above the threshold signal an attempt to alter the execution of the process. The
method is best used when the data elements exhibit a small variation, as otherwise the
range of acceptable values becomes too wide and might include faulty values.
[9] and [10] extend the approaches in [7] and [14] to perform conformance checking in mul­
tiple perspectives, using so­called DPNs (data Petri net) which are a special type of Petri
nets that capture the interactions of the control­flow perspective with data and resource
flows. A DPN stores values in globally defined variables that are updated by transitions
with correctly assigned write operations. Data­dependent guards are evaluated based on
a guard expression assigned to it using relational or logical operators. A conformance
deviation can then be detected on three levels: a violation of the ordering of activities pre­
scribed by the reference model, data values outside the range of a variable that is written
to, or, lastly, when a guard expression is evaluated to false due to the written­to variable
values in the expression. In Section 3.2 the strain on time and memory infused by the
additional calculations associated with this approach is covered.
The approach in [11] incorporates the the data­flow and resource­flow into the confor­
mance checking. They employ machine learning techniques to construct a classifier that
uses contextual dependencies of trace activities, as well as local dependencies in at­
tributes, to determine conformance.
Algorithm type
As stated above, prefix­alignments are receiving most of the traction in current research.
The general approach to computing (prefix) alignments irrespective of the setting (offline,
online) is to build a synchronous product net (SPN), which is the product between the state
space of the reference model and a given trace. The arcs in the state space of the SPN are
then traversed to find a shortest path from the initial state to the final state using an iteration
of the well­known A∗. An incremental shortest­path algorithm is necessary, as otherwise
it would be required to precompute the state space of the SPN explicitly in advance, and
this is not feasible as the state space might not be finite or can be very large due to an
explosion of the state space [3]. Even then, the technique is computationally expensive
and complex. In particular, parallelism in the Petri net may cause many possible execution
sequences with equal cost to increase the search space and, as an integer linear program,
needs to be solved in each state of the search space. Therefore, it is common practice
to apply several optimization tricks to reduce computational time and complexity in the
search.
There are two main categories of conformance checking approaches that do not calcu­
late prefix­alignments: Abstraction and Machine Learning. Abstraction techniques use
established theory in process mining to develop new methods for conformance check­
ing, while machine learning approaches use well­known machine learning algorithms to
solve the conformance checking problem by framing it as a machine learning task. These
approaches trade the approximation of optimal prefix­alignment cost and the information
10
Online Streaming Process Conformance Checking Using Deep Learning
==PAGE:18==
captured in a prefix­alignment for reduced computational resources.
[5] leverage the notion of region theory and state similarity to quantify the conformity of a
running process. They preprocess a data structure denoted Online Conformance Transi­
tion System offline and then perform the online analysis on the augmented model. The
approach does not handle τ transitions or duplicate levels well and is not very informative
in terms of understanding nonconformant behavior at the process level.
[7] extracts a set of weak­order relations, i.e. behavioural patterns through reachability
graphs. The weak order relationship between a pair of activities is induced by the sequen­
tial ordering on the activities in the process model s.t. (≺, A, A1) denotes that activity A
occurs before A1. They address a problem that occurs when a prefix is absent due to
the stream being monitored after the case has already begun. Their solution involves
capturing data on whether a case has been observed from the start using a metric called
Completeness. Confidence is a metric that indicates the reliability of the conformance
metric, as they argue that processes that are nearing their termination are less likely to
diverge. The conceptual interpretation of the two metrics is illustrated in Figure 4. On
the horizontal axis, representing time, the current moment of conformance checking is
marked by a black dot. When looking at Case 2, its tail, marked by the gray area, is un­
observed, as it took place before conformance checking. The missing tail will induce a
lower conformance, as it potentially contains activities expected by the reference model.
Regarding confidence, the two cases Case 1 and Case 3 are of varying length, and the
conformance of Case 3 is more likely to change due to the longer continuance compared
to Case 1. For each observed event in the stream, a conformance, completeness, and
confidence value are outputted on a range between [0, 1] were values going towards 1
signals a higher conformance etc.
[16] proposes a probabilistic framework for online conformance based on Hidden Markov
Figure 4: Illustration of the two concepts completeness and confidence.
Models to alternate between orienting the running case within the process model and com­
puting conformance. They used the observed events to estimate the states in the HMM
and computed the conformance cost after the state with the highest probability was deter­
mined. To achieve this, they have extended the HMM such that the current state depends
on the previous observation. In the model, a state corresponds to a place in a Petri net
Online Streaming Process Conformance Checking Using Deep Learning
11
==PAGE:19==
model, and observations to the transitions. In a similar vein to [7] the authors have in­
cluded the completeness metric and are imposing the same interpretation.
One of the features highlighted in [11], is by using deep learning techniques they are able
to predict conformance measurement in advance of time during process execution. This
allows for proactive interventions rather than reactive responses to deviations.
Validity
There are several challenges associated with online conformance checking, in contrast to
the offline processing of a static event log. In Section 3.2 we focus on the non­functional
implications of receiving data from an unbounded stream with a high throughput. In this
section, the scope is threats to validity, which means circumstances that impact the cor­
rectness of an approach.
Optimal denotes a conformance systems’ ability to produce a prefix­alignment that is op­
timal. As mentioned in Section 3.2 calculating a prefix­alignments using conventional
methods is both memory­intensive and computationally expensive. Consequently, the
ability to preserve an optimality guarantee on the prefix­alignments is therefore a cost­
benefit decision made by the researchers. In the papers that do not rely on calculating
prefix­alignments explicitly they use a prefix­alignment based approach that guarantees
optimal alignments as ground truth data to validate the approximation quality.
Warm­start is the scenario in which a case that has already progressed for some time
before is observed in the stream for the first time by a conformance system. The missing
tail of the corresponding trace will therefore be treated as skipped activities by a confor­
mance checking system and will induce it to overestimate the conformance of the trace
negatively. In [7] and [16] warm­starting is taken into consideration by distilling the output
such that it includes more than a single view on the status of the process instance. As
mentioned in Section 3.2, completeness is an additional metric that is being outputted by
the approaches. The completeness quantity signals whether a running process instance
has been observed since its beginning, thus enabling a more granular view on the current
status by indicating whether the process has warm­started and why the resulting confor­
mance value is higher due to this occurrence.
In [2] the authors are concerned with the occurrences of orphan events which can be
defined as the occurrence of an event that belongs to a case that has been forgotten
accordingly to a strategy to systematically maintain an upper limit on cases in memory.
Orphan events will induce a high conformance cost of a trace, as the history of the trace
is missing, and hence the prefix of the trace up until the observed event is treated as
skipped moves. Their work aims to remedy the effect of orphan events on conformance
estimation through several suggestions, such as prefix imputation, where a shortest pre­
fix is calculated from the marking in the model in which the event is positioned. Whilst
they show that their work is able to remedy prefix­alignments that would else suffer from
orphan events, they are also implicitly diagnosing all missing prefixes as stemming from
orphan events while it could be because of warm­starting. It can be argued that their
treatment of a missing prefix is also a technique to handle warm­starting implicitly.
Efficiency
In an online streaming setting in OCC the availability of limited memory, implying the in­
ability to store the entire stream, is an ongoing research challenge in streaming data in
process mining [14]. One of the frequently addressed causes for unbounded memory
usage is the number of active in parallel running cases that are to be processed by the
OCC system. Due to the fact that elements can be analyzed at most once, it is necessary
to aggregate and keep a summary of the information of all cases in memory to calculate
the conformance. If no actions are taken towards case administration, then theoretically
the solution is not suitable for online streaming [4].
12
Online Streaming Process Conformance Checking Using Deep Learning
==PAGE:20==
[10], [12] relies on [13] to calculate prefix­alignments and henceforth inherits the same
characteristics. In [13], [14] and [15], cases are stored in memory during runtime infinitely
to preserve an optimal guarantee on the prefix­alignment. The authors of both articles
are aware of the consequences and in [13] propose to administer the cases that are for­
gotten based on some characteristics and then keep a record of forgotten cases to avoid
computing the prefix alignment from orphan events. This record­keeping may itself grow
unbounded, but they argue that the number of forgotten cases is orders of magnitude
lesser than the number of events transmitted onto the event stream, and the effect there­
for is negligible. [15] is a follow­up on previous work ([14]) to which they propose several
extensions to reduce computational effort and practical applicability.
In the papers [5], [9] and [7] case administration is performed using a first­in­first­out
strategy whenever a predetermined maximum capacity limit is reached, making the con­
formance metric susceptible to overestimation due to orphan events. The paper [8] is
devoted to research on memory optimising prefix­alignment based algorithms, using [13]
to evaluate their suggestions. They proposed three approaches to limit the memory foot­
print. First, they suggest a limit on the number of states to be retained by any case in
storage. In a first­in­first­out fashion, states in excess of a predefined limit are forgotten,
but they avoid a missing prefix­alignment problem by retaining a summary of the posi­
tion reached by the forgotten prefix states. Secondly they propose to limit the number of
multi­state cases and lastly to limit the number of states retained by the fixed number of
multi­state cases. In the first approach, they concluded that it would not impair the loss in
conformance cost and with tolerable loss in the second and third approaches.
For online conformance algorithms to be viable in operational support, it is required that
data received from the stream are processed in a timely manner. Several factors, in­
cluding the speed at which the underlying process executes and generates new events
for the stream from the source, significantly impact data throughput. There is consensus
on the algorithms for online conformance checking to scale linearly with the number of
processed data points [3]. The papers report differently on the time complexity. Some
papers provide both a theoretical bound and an empirical evaluation, while others present
findings from a different perspective. It can all be summarized in Table 5.
In [14], the authors leverage a modified A∗to incrementally solve a shortest path problem.
They avoid the recalculation of the optimal prefix­alignment from the starting marking to
the newly observed activity from the stream, by caching previously computed results and
restarting the search from the open set of A∗. They also introduce an extension, direct
synchronizing, which can improve the calculation time for each instance of a new event
received by skipping the shortest path search in cases where they can simply extend the
previous prefix with a synchronous move. They compare their solution to [13] which are
recalculating the prefix­alignment each time a new event is observed and show that they
can reduce the average computation time in seconds per trace with a factor of 2.7.
The efforts of [8] to improve the memory efficiency of [13] are empirically evaluated on
a real­life data set using the algorithm without optimizations as a baseline. Their results
show an improvement not only in memory usage but also in terms of computation time per
event. The average processing time per event in all configurations is significantly below
the baseline, indicating the synegeic effect on processing time from optimized memory
usage due to efficient memory allocation.
[7], [16],[5] all argue for a constant analytical time bound in their approaches. They also
stress­test the suitability of the approach in an online setting by simulating an event stream
from a log where the timestamp is used order the events. Each of the experiments shows
a non­increasing trend of memory usage and processing time, which stabilizes after a
certain amount of events have been received from the stream. The performance of the
Online Streaming Process Conformance Checking Using Deep Learning
13
==PAGE:21==
approaches excels in computational time compared to the prefix­alignment­based ap­
proaches, due to computationally demanding aspects that take place offline in advance
of online conformance checking. The eventual conformance checking calculations then
leverage data structures in memory to achieve fast outputs.
The multi­perspective approaches [9] and [10] produce a less efficient time due to addi­
tional computations. Consequently, in [9], the computational time of the method compared
to [7], was in the worst case, approximately 100 times higher than the original method. In
[10] the mean computation time for non­conformant traces would be a magnitude higher
than its counterpart [14].
Q2
The knowledge gained in Section 3.2 is used to highlight the main challenges that require
intervention to support the continuation of online conformance checking and increase its
value to the industry. In Section 3.2 warm­start and optimal prefix­alignments were identi­
fied as two areas that are mentioned in relation to the validity of the approaches in terms of
providing an exact estimation of the conformance. A strategy to assess the relative atten­
tion these two areas are receiving in research is to search for the occurrence of concepts
in the retrieved articles and quantify them by their count. The string ”optimal alignment”
occurs 43 times in total, and the ”warm start” occurs 20 times in total. This gives an indica­
tion towards which of the two areas that have been given the most attention in the current
research. Figure 5 shows the distribution of the counts of each string in all articles.
Figure 5: Distribution of the count of occurrences of the two strings ”warm start” and
”optimal alignment” in all of the retrieved papers.
Noticeably from the graph is that warm starting only receives one mention in an alignment­
based approach [8], in a reference of the work in [7] from which the concept was originally
introduced. This accentuates that currently no prefix­alignment­based approach for online
conformance checking handles warm starting, besides hypothesizing about the approach
in [2] mitigating it.
3.3
Trie approach
In 2021 Awad et al. [17] contributed a new formulation of proxy behavior derived from
a model for approximate conformance checking. Using a trie data structure to repre­
sent proxy behavior, they were able to reduce the computational time on alignments by
two orders of magnitude while conserving a minimal approximation error. The algorithm
that operates on the trie data structure was later modified to a new version suitable for
14
Online Streaming Process Conformance Checking Using Deep Learning
==PAGE:22==
online conformance checking [6], which calculates prefix­alignments, using heuristic cal­
culations to reduce memory footprint and computation time. A brief overview is given of
the essential parts of the approach since this work builds on top of their approach.
Trie
A trie is commonly used for matching strings, as it uses little space and supports queries
efficiently. The authors recognized the conceptual similarity between string pattern match­
ing and computing prefix­alignments in the sense that we try to match an activity in a trace
with the corresponding activity in the reference model.
The behavior prescribed in a process model can also be represented in an execution log
Mlog, as it defines which sequences of executions are valid. A proxy log M′
log can then
be sampled from Mlog by using different strategies for the selection of proxy behavior,
e.g. sampling behavior with constraints on loop executions. Unlike L, Mlog is a set that
contains one example of each trace variant.
Let M′
log = {π1, .., πs}, where o = |M′
log|, be a set of proxy execution sequences of Mlog.
Let Σ be a finite vocabulary of activity labels over the set of activities in M′
log and let
n = ∑o
i=1 |π|. A trie TM′
log of the traces in M′
log is a rooted ordered tree with the following
properties:
• Each node in TM′
log is labeled with an activity label from Σ.
• Each path from root to leaf represents an execution sequence π ∈M′
log.
• Common prefixes of two execution sequences share the same path maximally.
• For a node v ∈TM′
log each child node has different labels.
Since an execution sequence π ∈M′
log can be a prefix of another execution sequence
π′ ∈M′
log, that is, M′
log is not prefix free, a special symbol $ is appended to all execution
sequences ∈M′
log s.t. all execution sequences ∈M′
log comprises a root to leaf path in
TM′
log.
The authors enrich the representation of the trie with additional information, such as the
minimum distance min(v) : v →N and the maximum distance max(v) : v →N to a leaf
node for a given position of a node in the trie and the level l(v) : v →N of a node in the
trie.
Let the traces be
M′ = {(A, B, D, E, F, G), (A, B, D, F, E, G), (A, C, C, D, E, F, G)
(A, C, C, D, E, F, G), (A, C, D, E, F, G), (A, C, D, F, E, G)}
represent the sampled proxy behavior of the process model in Figure 1. An example of a
trie representation of the proxy behavior is shown in Figure 6.
The following are computational complexity properties inferred from the trie:
• The number of nodes in TM′
log is O(n).
• The number of leaves in TM′
log is |M′
log|.
• A node has at most |Σ| children.
• The height of TM′
log is equal to arg max|π| ∀π ∈M′
log.
Online Streaming Process Conformance Checking Using Deep Learning
15
==PAGE:23==
Figure 6: A trie constructed over the set of traces mentioned in this section. Each node
is decorated with additional information. max denotes the maximum path length to a leaf
node, min denotes the minimum path length to a leaf node and l denotes the level of the
given node in the trie.
The proxy trie encodes the search space of the model for the identification of the best­
matching execution sequence for a specific trace in TM′
log [6]. Starting from the root and
following the nodes according to the next activity in σ. If the current node is a leaf node
after having read all activities in σ, then ∃π ∈TM′
log where σ = π. Note that this is the
general query strategy for matching a pattern in a trie constructed over some set of strings
S. In the approach, the trie is queried by different mechanisms, albeit the intuition from
this example is useful for the following explanation.
Conformance checking algorithm
Rather than depending on the conventional technique of incrementally extending a SPN
for each trace variant to compute prefix­alignments, the authors introduce the notion of a
state. A state s holds information to continue to check for conformance when a new event
has been observed in the stream. It is a tuple (η, γ, σi, cγ, δ) where η is a reference to the
current node in the trie, γ is the prefix alignment, σi is the trace suffix, c is the total cost of
the prefix­alignment and δ is decay­time, which will be introduced shortly. ϕ(s) : s →N is
a function that returns the cost cγ of a state s.
The states are kept in a set S of states for each case ID c ∈C and a states buffer B :
C →P(S) is a mapping, where P(S) is the power set of all sets of states. When a
new observable unit e = (c, a) ∈C X A arrives in the stream, the conformance checking
algorithm fetches the record S = B(c) for the case id c. When an event related to a new
case c is observed, a state s0 = (−, ∅, {a}, 0, δ) is added to B(c), as the starting state for
conformance checking of the case c.
16
Online Streaming Process Conformance Checking Using Deep Learning
==PAGE:24==
All trace suffixes σi of the current states s ∈S are updated with the new activity label σi ⊕a,
before the algorithm iterates over the states to create new states. Table 6 illustrates the
continuation of the conformance checking on case 100, from figure Figure 2. The notion
of a move, as explained in Section 2, is used to structure the algorithmic flow. The authors
use the direct synchronization trick when a synchronous move from the current node η ∈s
to any of the children v ≻η, where v = a, is possible. Then a new state, ssync_move, is
created and the algorithm proceeds to the next iteration. In Table 6, as e = (100, A)
is observed, s1, where η = {(A, A)}, is calculated from the starting state s0, since it
was possible to make a synchronous move from the root in the trie, seen in Figure 6. If
there are no synchronous moves, the execution proceeds to create a new log move state
slog_move and model move states smodel_move. A log move state extends the prefix of the
current state with a log move (a, >>). The state s2 in Table 6 is calculated after making a
log move on activity D after receiving the event e = (100, D).
Event
State#
η
γ
σi
c
dt
0
−
∅
{A}
0
2
(100, A)
1
A
{(A, A)}
∅
0
2
0
A
∅
{A, D}
0
1
(100, D)
1
A
{(A, A)}
{D}
0
1
2
D
{(A, A), (D, >>)}
∅
1
2
3
D
{(A, A), (>>, C), (D, D)}
∅
1
2
Table 6: Example of conformance checking with this approach on case 100 seen in Fig­
ure 2. Each time an event related to the case context is observed on the stream the
current states of the case are used to conduct conformance checking with the underlying
trie as the reference model.
Model moves are handled with more complexity because they need to restrict the algo­
rithm from making a costly traversal in the trie to match the activities in the suffix σi ∈s.
Therefore, they introduce a heuristic Look­ahead limit.
lim = |σi| + l(v) + 1
(1)
The limit is imposed on the number of model moves that can be made in the trie before
getting a full substring match on σi ∈s in the paths below the level of η ∈s s.t. The first
matching node is at most at the level lim. The state s3 is the result of making a model
move on B in the trie before matching D, after having observed e = (100, D). s3 is build
from s1, where η = 1, |σi| = 0 and lim = 1 + 0 + 1 = 2 from Section 3.3, allows the
algorithm to make one model move before a synchronous move is required on D.
Furthermore, to avoid being locked into a suboptimal path when a complete match of σi
is tried in the trie, they suggest an optimization for suffix pruning. The idea is to prune σi
by removing the first activity a ∈σi if there is a better path πi where a /∈πi. The removed
activity will then be accounted for as a log move in the prefix­alignment positioned before
the moves computed from the traversal, to preserve the order in the activities. It can be
repeated as long as there are activities remaining in σi. To get a better sense of intuition,
an example is shown in Figure 7.
Online Streaming Process Conformance Checking Using Deep Learning
17
==PAGE:25==
Figure 7: The last synchronous move b is shown in light grey, node c is synchronous but
leads to to a sup­optimal, while nodes x,y,z are more optimal but do not get a sub­string
match if starting on c. [6]
From the resulting states, denoted snew, the algorithm converges on the minimum cost
of the new states and the cost of a new state ϕ(snew) ≤arg maxϕ(s)∈Sc + 1, since a log
move or model move is assigned the standard cost of 1.
Decay­time δ is another heuristic, used to avoid state­space explosions. It is a constant
that decreases in each state s ∈S in every round of conformance checking. When δ ∈s
is equal to 0 then S = S \ s. They present two configurable options. A fixed decay­time,
which is a constant that is the same for all new states, and a discounted decay­time, which
relies on the presumption that deviations near the beginning of a trace are more costly
than deviations near the ending of a trace.
A complete overview of the approach is presented in Figure 8.
Figure 8: An overview of the operationalization of the approach from the initial phase
where a proxy trie is constructed over an proxy log M′
log to the conformance checking on
an event stream. Image source: [6].
18
Online Streaming Process Conformance Checking Using Deep Learning
==PAGE:26==
4
Problem Formulation
In recent years, research on online conformance checking has seen an increased effort to
formulate algorithms suitable for online conformance checking. The buoyancy of the con­
tinued research is that existing approaches still suffer from exceeding the upper bounds
of memory or computational time imposed in the online streaming setting, being too ab­
stract to make sense on a process level, or being too inaccurate in approximating the
conformance of an executing process. In the literature review, properties that describe
the approaches were synthesized from the studies. These properties help to assess an
approach’s suitability for online conformance checking in terms of achieving a condition
on the output of the algorithm. Three critically identified properties that are sought for
when devising an approach are the efficiency of the approach, minimizing the error of ap­
proximation, and being able to relate the conformance of an ongoing executing process
to the behavior prescribed in a process model. The first can be related to the properties
of the Efficiency concept, the second in Validity and the last in Algorithm type as seen in
Table 5.
The aim of this thesis is a collaboration between the authors of the article [6] and the thesis
student to extend their solution to handle a warm­start scenario of an executing process.
Their framework still suffers from not handling warm­starts as the current method for ap­
proximating conformance is based on the prefix­alignment perspective. As mentioned in
Section 3.2 the prefix­alignment technique overestimates the cost of alignments when the
trace observed thus far is not observed from its true beginning. To achieve this goal, one
would make a real contribution in terms of scientific and industrial value.
To communicate a more holistic view on the conformity of an executing process in an
online context, the three aspects: conformance, completeness, and confidence, inspired
by [7], are considered.
4.1
Research Questions
RQ1 What is a meaningful decomposition of conformance of an ongoing execution into
three aspects: conformance, completeness and confidence in terms of approxima­
tion error?
RQ2 What is an efficient and correct algorithm to solve the problem of warm­starting?
RQ3 How does this new approach compare to equivalent approaches presented in the
literature review?
RQ4 Would this new approach be suitable for online streaming conformance checking?
4.2
Evaluation Considerations
An evaluation of the formulated approach will be carried out to prove its suitability. An an­
alytical analysis of formally proving the upper bounds on the time and memory complexity
of the trie data structure and conformance checking algorithm.
An experimental evaluation of the approach using empirical data e.g. event logs and
event stream data. The experiments that will be carried out are as follows:
• Validation of the warm­start logic w.r.t. approximation error and execution time.
• Comparison with the state­of­the­art approaches identified in the literature review
w.r.t. execution time and correlation with alternative metrics.
• Suitability for online streaming in terms of time and memory usage, i.e., stress test.
Online Streaming Process Conformance Checking Using Deep Learning
19
==PAGE:27==
Moreover the conformance decomposition into the three metrics will be evaluated by rea­
soning about its interpretation in relation to conventional conformance metrics and by
stating hypothesis’ that can be verified in experiments.
20
Online Streaming Process Conformance Checking Using Deep Learning
==PAGE:28==
5
Methodology
The thesis work was structured and organized following an incremental practice in which
the stages of the project were defined in a project schedule at the beginning of the project,
which was carried out with the gantt chart design which can be found in the Appendix. New
hypotheses and input from the collaborators resulted in iterative decisions throughout the
investigation. To pursue and validate new hypotheses, a test framework was used to get
immediate feedback in terms of quantitative data that could be analyzed for testing the
hypothesis.
5.1
Research design
The objective of this research was identified in the literature review. Moreover, the litera­
ture review helped to gain insight on protocol and evaluation measures that are previously
defined by the literature s.t. The contribution of this thesis makes for a direct comparison
with other state­of­the­art approaches.
An experimental design was used when we validated the contribution of this thesis and
compared it with equivalent approaches identified in the review. The documentation of
the empirical procedure to which the experiments were carried out is described in the
evaluation chapter.
5.2
Analysis
We have followed the classical theoretical analysis and design of algorithms and datas­
tructures methodology, to reason about the problems and an algorithm that is correct and
can solve the problems. By using formal mathematical reasoning, we achieve knowledge
a priori about an algorithm that satisfies certain properties and its scalability in terms of
memory and time growth.
5.3
Evaluation
We used the quantitative research method to evaluate an implementation of the algorithm
formulated in the theoretical analysis. It was carried out in three different stages, all based
on the design of experiments and the logical analysis of the experimental results to make
inferences. To evaluate the approach with other soa approaches, we used two widely
known datasets that are used in the evaluation throughout many of the retrieved papers.
To ensure reliability, we constructed artificial datasets that are also used in the tests s.t.
The data are representative and for the results to be generalizable.
5.4
Collaboration
Weekly online meetings were held between the thesis student and a research group con­
sisting of a representative from the company Breakawai, the authors of the approach in
[6] and the supervisor of this work. The meetings were structured with a slide presenta­
tion prepared by the thesis student that constituted the agenda of the meeting, and then
discussions would take place as the student went through the slides.
Online Streaming Process Conformance Checking Using Deep Learning
21
==PAGE:29==
22
Online Streaming Process Conformance Checking Using Deep Learning
==PAGE:30==
6
Algorithmic Design
The purpose of this section is to formulate clean and simple statements of the problem
of warm­starting and using the metrics confidence and completeness that can be solved
directly related the specification and design of an algorithm that satisfies the preconditions.
Furthermore, an analysis of the correctness of the algorithm and its efficiency is carried
out.
6.1
Completeness
Analysing the problem
To get to the essence of the warm­starting concept, it helps to make the problem as clean
as possible.
A first observation is that in the approach [7] a case that has been warm­started will induce
a lower score on both the conformance metric and the completeness metric. This indicates
that the two metrics share a positively correlated relationship and that warm­starting is
not negated from the conformance perspective on a running case, but completeness will
indicate if warm­starting has induced the lower conformance quantification.
Another observation is on how they quantify completeness. As mentioned in [7], they
preprocess a matrix by analyzing the state space of the Petri net. At each marking, the
number of patterns is computed and counted, and the number of preceding patterns is
stored. Through this effort, they are able to quantify the completeness of a case observed
in the stream by using two quantities; the minimum and maximum number of patterns pre­
ceding the observed pattern. The takeaway is that when an event e = (c, a) is observed
in the stream, completeness can be quantified by a limit on the number of activities pre­
ceding a in any valid execution sequence π ∈M from the beginning activity π(0) to a,
according to the reference model.
In this approach, the reference model is the proxy trie data structure and we will now look
into the properties of the trie to reason about how to qualify a bound on the preceding
activities in an execution sequence.
As mentioned in 3.3 the trie structure has been decorated with additional information, such
as the level of a given node in the trie. This gives a notion to the following proposition:
Proposition 6.1. Given a trie proxy trie TM′
log constructed over the proxy log M′
log ⊆Mlog
of a reference log Mlog and a node v ∈TM′
log. The length of its prefix |iπ| is exactly l(v)−1.
Proof of proposition 6.1.
Assume the length of the prefix |iπ| ̸= l(v) −1. This means that there is a node v′, where
l(v′) < l(v), on the path from the root to v and v /∈π. This is a contradiction, as each
root­to­leaf path represents an execution sequence π ∈M′
log.
From proposition 6.1 we can deduce the following:
Corollary 6.1 (From proposition 6.1). Let D(v) : v →N be a function that assigns a
completeness value to a node v ∈TM′
log. Where D(v) is the length of the execution
sequence π preceding v. Then D(v) = l(v) −1.
Now we have qualified a bound on the completeness of a node v ∈TM′
log with the function
D(v).
The question that arises is how to decide when a case has warm­started. As explained in
3.3, the algorithmic flow is structured by attempting moves from the current state s ∈S.
Online Streaming Process Conformance Checking Using Deep Learning
23
==PAGE:31==
Unless a synchronous move is available where ϕ(snew) = ϕ(s) from the current state s,
the execution will proceed to make a log move and the model moves from s.
What happens if a case c that has warm­started st. a trace prefix iσ ∈c of length j, where
1 < j < |σ|, has been executed before we observed the first event e = (c, a)?
As events ek ∈c where j < k ≤|σ| are observed on the stream. At some point k, the cost
upper bound arg maxϕ(s)∈Sc + 1 allows the calculation of |σi| + l(η ∈s) + 1 model moves
(also including log moves from suffix pruning) before it matches the activities a ∈σi of a
state s ∈S, according to the Look­ahead limit defined in 3.3.
This assumes that there exists an execution sequence π ∈M′
log where σi ⊂π.
Proposition 6.2. An upper bound on the cost of a prefix­alignment γ ∈s is O(k) where
k = |σ|.
Proof of proposition 6.2.
Assume we have received k activities a ∈σ for a given case c. Let the sequence σk =
(a1, .., ak). The worst­case alignment is k log moves when σk \ π = σk ∀π ∈M′
log.
The cost of the resulting state ϕ(snew) ≤k as otherwise would contradict Proposition 6.2.
We can now start to reason about the impact of the warm­starting scenario. From the ex­
ample, we can deduce that, given a sequence, it is possible to compute a prefix­alignment
γ ∈snew with a cost ϕ(snew) ≤k. But the prefix­alignment, although being more optimal
than making k log moves, is not necessarily the best approximation of an alignment, as the
missing prefix will induce the algorithm to compensate for the warm­starting case. This is
a conjecture that is hard to prove, as it ultimately depends on the behavior captured in the
trace. But it is not hard to be convinced that a missing tail includes some of the transitions
that are necessary in any firing sequence M0 →M∗from the initial marking M0 to any
reachable marking M∗, for a given reference model M.
To further illustrate the impact on the quality of the resulting prefix­alignments made from
warm­starting we show two scenarios that are generalizable.
iσ = (A, B, D)
σi = (E, F, G)
σ = iσ ⊕σi
σi is a trace suffix belonging to a warm­starting case c with a missing prefix iσ. The trace
σ corresponds to a valid execution sequence π ∈M′
log as can be seen in the trie TM′
log
in Figure 6. We assume that we use a fixed decay­time δ = 3 and the walk­through of
the state expansion assumes that events e = (c, a) are observed, where c is the ID of the
warm­starting case.
The continuation of conformance checking on the warm­starting case c in table 7 accentu­
ates the impact of warm­starting. The algorithm can only make log moves on the first two
activities (E, F) ∈σ due to the look­ahead limit on model moves. This results in a linear
increase of the cost, which would raise an alarm as to an execution being non­conformant.
When the last event e = (c, a = G) is observed, the algorithm is able to compensate for
the missing prefix iσ by making 3 model moves and get a full match on the suffix σi. It
24
Online Streaming Process Conformance Checking Using Deep Learning
==PAGE:32==
Event
State#
η
γ
σi
c
dt
0
−
∅
{E}
0
3
(c, E)
1
−
{(E, >>)}
∅
1
3
0
−
∅
{E, F}
0
2
(c, F)
1
−
{(E, >>)}
{F}
1
2
2
−
{(E, >>), (F, >>)}
∅
2
3
0
−
∅
{E, F, G}
0
1
1
−
{(E, >>)}
{F, G}
1
1
(c, G)
2
−
{(E, >>), (F, >>)}
{G}
2
2
3
−
{(E, >>), (F, >>), (G, >>)}
∅
3
3
4
G
{(>>, A), (>>, B), (>>, D), (E, E), (F, F), (G, G)}
∅
3
3
Table 7: Example of the states computed from a warm­starting case c. The conformance
checking system is unaware of the occurrence of warm­starting, and treats the missing
prefix as skipped moves in the reference model.
also makes a log move on the activity, that is, from state3, which accumulates the same
prefix­alignment cost of 3.
In either case, during the processing of the events, the warm­starting case accrues a
conformance cost c > 0 since the prefix is missing. As the example is constructed, we
know that the case is perfectly valid since ∃π ∈M′
log where σ ⊂π.
We now see how to connect the completeness cost D(v) and the conformance cost ϕ(s)
in a meaningful way. In this example, if we have a way to express the warm­starting of
case c with D(v) and also remedy the prefix­alignment st. it does not suffer from warm­
starting, the information would be more accurate. In the last round, the alignment and
completeness cost could be:
γ = {(E, E), (F, F), (G, G)}
D(η = E) = 3
This would perfectly convey the necessary information about the warm­starting of c and
would also mitigate the impact on the resulting alignment γ. In the last round where we
observe the event e = (c, a = G), using the first state s0, we ”jump” to make a synchronous
move on (E), where E = σi(0) ∈s0, skipping the prefix of an execution sequence iπ =
(A, B, C) where iπ ⊆π ∈M′
log and (E) ∈π, followed by synchronous moves on (F, G) ∈
π and taxing this cost by D(η = E). The cost of the resulting state, snew, would be
ϕ(snew) = 0 and the completeness cost 3. The two states s3 and s4 would be removed
from the set after iteration of the states s ∈S as their cost exceeds the cost of snew
calculated in the same round.
Before we move on to another example, we should formalize this idea. The important thing
to note is that, in the approach, the algorithm uses the alignment cost to guide the search
in the trie by minimizing the cost of the newly computed states snew in each iteration. This
is what happens when it converges on a minimum cost by only keeping the states where
ϕ(snew) ≤arg maxϕ(s)∈Sc + 1 . Thus, to fairly tax the ”jump”, where we skip the three
activities iπ = (A, B, C), we need to reason about a limit on the number of activities that
can be skipped in TM′
log to match the first activity in the suffix σi of some state s.
Online Streaming Process Conformance Checking Using Deep Learning
25
==PAGE:33==
Definition 6. Given a state s ∈S where s = (η, γ, σi, c, δ), a proxy trie TM′
log and let
a = σi(0) ∈s. A warm­start jump, denoted WS(a), is a walk in the trie to a node v, where
a matches the label of v and is a synchronous move. The cost of WS(a) is exactly D(v).
As the functions ϕ(snew) and D(v) are two independent functions and we only try to mini­
mize ϕ(snew), we need to ensure that we do not make a warm­start jump to a node v where
D(v) > arg maxϕ(s)∈Sc + 1, as this would violate the rules in the alignment formalism. We
ensure this neatly by minimizing the following function instead:
minimize
a=σi(0)∈snew
ϕ(snew) + D(a)
(2)
Proposition 6.3. Given a state s ∈S and a = σi(0) ∈s. An upper bound on the cost of
making a warm­start WS(a) is O(cmax + 1), where cmax = arg maxϕ(s)∈Sc.
Proof of proposition 6.3.
Let the rounds be enumerated by an index 1 ≤i ≤|σ|, where σ ∈c, st. i denotes the
round in which we are in. Induction on i.
• Base case: i = 1
In the first round, cmax = 0 since γ ∈s0 = ∅. We can make either a synchronous
move from the starting state s0, in which case ϕ(snew) = cmax or a log move on the
first activity, which would result in ϕ(snew) = cmax + 1.
• Inductive hypothesis:
Let i > 1. For any state snew, ϕ(snew) ≤cmax + 1.
• Inductive step:
The proof follows from Proposition 6.2. Let cmax = k −1 be the cost of the previous
round. k is an upper bound on the cost in round i, as we enumerated rounds 1 ≤
i ≤|σ| and k = |σi|. It follows that cmax + 1 = k.
We show another example with a warm­starting case c, where the trace σ ̸⊂π ∀π ∈M′
log.
iσ = (K, B)
σi = (A, D, E, E, G)
σ = iσ ⊕σi
We still assume a fixed decay­time δ = 3 and that events e = (c, a) are observed where c
is the ID of the warm­starting case. A note on the anomalies that are applied to the trace
sequence σ.
• K is an insert anomaly, where a random activity is inserted K /∈π ∀π ∈M′
log.
• A is a late anomaly, which means that the activity was executed too late and there­
fore skipped earlier.
• F is a skipped anomaly, which means the activity has been skipped altogether.
• B is an early anomaly, which means the activity has been executed too early and
therefore skipped later.
26
Online Streaming Process Conformance Checking Using Deep Learning
==PAGE:34==
• E is a rework anomaly, which means the activity is executed a second time.
Event
State#
η
γ
σi
c
dt
0
−
∅
{A}
0
3
(c, A)
1
A
{(A, A)}
∅
0
3
0
−
∅
{A, D}
0
2
1
A
{(A, A)}
{D}
0
2
(c, D)
2
A
{(A, A), (D, >>)}
∅
1
3
2
D
{(A, A), (>>, B), (D, D)}
∅
1
3
0
−
∅
{A, D, E}
0
1
1
A
{(A, A)}
{D, E}
0
1
(c, E)
2
A
{(A, A), (D, >>)}
{E}
1
2
3
C
{(A, A), (>>, B), (D, D)}
{E}
1
2
4
E
{(A, A), (>>, B), (D, D), (E, E)}
∅
1
3
0
−
∅
{A, D, E, E}
0
0
1
A
{(A, A)}
{D, E, E}
0
0
2
A
{(A, A), (D, >>)}
{E, E}
1
1
(c, E)
3
C
{(A, A), (>>, B), (D, D)}
{E, E}
1
1
4
E
{(A, A), (>>, B), (D, D), (E, E)}
{E}
1
2
5
E
{(A, A), (>>, B), (D, D), (E, E), (E, >>)}
∅
2
3
2
A
{(A, A), (D, >>)}
{E, E, G}
1
0
3
D
{(A, A), (>>, B), (D, D)}
{E, E, G}
1
0
4
E
{(A, A), (>>, B), (D, D), (E, E)}
{E, G}
1
1
(c, G)
5
E
{(A, A), (>>, B), (D, D), (E, E), (E, >>)}
{G}
2
2
6
E
{(A, A), (>>, B), (D, D), (E, E), (E, >>), (>>, F), (G, G)}
∅
3
3
7
E
{(A, A), (>>, B), (D, D), (E, E), (E, >>), (G, >>)}
∅
3
3
Table 8: Example of the states computed from a warm­starting case c.
Some observations to note from the example in Table 8. Due to decay­time, both state
s0 and s1 are removed before we observe the last event (c, a = G). Thus, they are not
available to build new states in the last round. Second, both states s6 and s7 convey
information about the anomalies that we artificially applied to the trace. For example, in
state s6 we can see that activity E is a rework, since we have to make a log move on it,
and in state s7 we learn from the alignment that activity F has been skipped. But the two
alignments also refer to the case of not having warm­started, as the control flow is aligned
in the start activity A. Contrary to the other example, warm­starting is ”masked” by the
permutation of the execution order.
We will now try to apply the same logic as we touched upon in the previous example
to see if there is a way to remedy the alignment while also conveying more information
about the warm­starting of case c. At first we can look for a state s ∈S where we could
make a warm­start jump WS(a), where a = σi(0) ∈s. We see that in the first round 0,
the only possible jump is to A ∈π ∈M′
log. This is not useful for two reasons. One is
that we would begin an alignment with a synchronous move on A and that is exactly what
we have already achieved in state s1. Secondly, we are interested in an alignment that
is more informative in terms of the warm­starting of case c. In round 2 we have a state
state1, where we can jump to D, but since D(D) > cmax + 1, according to the proxy trie
in Figure 6, the warm­start cost is exceeding the bound in Proposition 6.3. As the first
activity in s0 remains A = σi(0) ∈s0, we can exclude that state for the rest of the rounds.
A possible alignment build­up from state s1 could be:
Online Streaming Process Conformance Checking Using Deep Learning
27
==PAGE:35==
Round 4
γ = {(A, >>), (D, D), (E, >>), (E, E)}
D(η = D) = 2
Round 5
γ = {(A, >>), (D, D), (E, >>), (E, E), (G, G)}
D(η = D) = 2
Now, a first glimpse shows an alignment that is more informative than, e.g. γ ∈s7,
since this alignment does not allude to having an ordered execution sequence with some
skipped or reworked moves. Instead, we see that activity A could not be executed and
combined with the cost of completeness D(η = D) = 2, we can infer that some activities
a ∈σ have preceded A, indicating that A is an anomaly late since we know from the proxy
trie in Figure 6 that ∀π ∈M′ π(0) = A.
There is a subtle difference from how we calculated this alignment from s1. Instead of
using the starting state s0 where γ ∈s = ∅, we build this alignment from the state s1
in round 4, and γ ∈s1 ̸= ∅. The idea is inspired by prefix pruning, in that we make log
moves on every trace activity a ∈γ ⊥σ∈s, by inserting them in the same order and before
the synchronous move from warm­starting. In this case (A, A) ∈γ ∈c is a synchronous
move, and we therefore cannot ”forget” this activity as it again would be a violation of the
alignment formalism. This leads to two configurations of warm­starting:
Definition 7. Given the starting state s0 = (η, γ, σi, c, δ), where δ ≥0, a proxy trie TM′
and let v = σi(0) ∈s0. Warm­starting from s0 only is denoted WSroot.
Definition 8. Given a state s ∈S where s = (η, γ, σi, c, δ) and δ ≥0, a proxy trie TM′ and
let v = σi(0) ∈s. Warm­starting from all states s ∈S is denoted WSall.
The Definition in 6 and the bound in Proposition 6.3 hold for both examples, but we cannot
rely on D(v) to ensure that we do not exceed the bound for WSall.
Now we have to ensure that if the number of trace activities a ∈γ ⊥σ is greater than the
completeness cost D(v) then we do not tax WS(a) with D(v) as that would mean that we
are not minimizing the actual cost in the function Section 6.1.
Proposition 6.4. Given a state s ∈S where s = (η, γ, σi, c, δ) and δ ≥0, a proxy trie TM′
and let v = σi(0) ∈s. Let n = |a ∈γ ⊥σ∈s|. The cost of making a warm­start from all
states WSall(a) is arg max(D(v),n).
Proof of Proposition 6.4.
It follows from Proposition 6.1 that the completeness cost is D(v). Now assume that we
have a proxy trie TM′
log, where M′
log = {(A, B), (B)} and a case c, where σ = (A, A, A, B).
Let the rounds be enumerated by an index 1 ≤i ≤|σ|, where σ ∈c, st. i denotes the
round in which we are in.
• Round i = 1: Let s be a state in which we make a synchronous move on A st.
γ = {(A, A)} and σi = (∅).
• Round i = 2: γ = {(A, A)} and σi = (A), where γ ∈s and σi ∈s.
• Round i = 3: γ = {(A, A)} and σi = (A, A), where γ ∈s and σi ∈s.
• Round i = 4: γ = {(A, A)} and σi = (A, A, B), where γ ∈s and σi ∈s.
28
Online Streaming Process Conformance Checking Using Deep Learning
==PAGE:36==
– Let sx be a state where we make a synchronous move on B s.t. γ = {(A, A), (A, >>
), ((A, >>), (B, B)} and σi = (∅). The cost ϕ(sx) = 2.
– Let sy be a state where we make a warm­start move on B s.t. γ = {(A, >>
), (A, >>), ((A, >>), (B, B)} and σi = (∅). The cost ϕ(sy) = 3 and D(B) = 1.
sy exceeds the bound stated in Proposition 6.3. Had the cost of warm­starting been
arg max(D(B),n), where n = |(A, A, A)|, we would not have attempted such a state.
Lastly, the function we use to tax WSall jumps can equivalently be applied to tax WSroot
jumps.
Proposition 6.5. The cost of making a warm­start jump with WSroot(v) is arg max(D(v),n).
Proof of proposition 6.5.
From Definition 7 we know that we are only allowed to use the starting state to do warm­
start jumps, s0 where γ ∈s0 = ∅. It follows that arg max(D(v),0) = D(v).
Proposition 6.5 helps us design an algorithm that can be configured to use either WSall
or WSroot(v) jumps, by unifying the cost function.
We now summarize the findings before we move on to designing an algorithm. Through
this section, we have reasoned about the logic in terms of how we can accomplish warm­
starting from an analytical stand point. The analysis brought forward two configurations
for warm­starting that are correct. A comment to that is, the states we can build from
WSall are a superset of the states we can build from WSroot. It is not necessary to prove
this point, since the definitions 7 and 8 are clear in terms of the available states s ∈S. But
the reason why we would keep WSroot is that, from an efficiency perspective, since WSall
probably induces more states in each round, it is necessary to empirically evaluate the
approximation gain from using WSall before we decide on the most suitable configuration.
Another thing is that we started by making observations about the work in [7] and noticed
that the completeness and conformance metric share a positive correlation. From the
examples we have used, the completeness cost and conformance cost have shown an
inversely correlated relationship. When we have warm­started we have also remedied
the alignment γ ∈snew s.t. ϕ(snew) have been less than or equal to some other states
than if we did not warm­start in that round.
Designing the algorithm
Up until now we have assumed that we can warm­starting jump WS(a) to any node in the
trie, but we have not considered how to achieve this algorithmically. Definition 6 states
that a warm­start jump is a walk in the trie to the nodes v, where the label of v matches a.
A walk in the trie would mean that we traverse the trie from the root on a path until we are
at the level D(v)+1 and try to match v. This is an inefficient procedure, as the worst­case
time complexity is dependent on the worst­case branching factor O(|Σ|) and the depth of
the search l.
With the illustration in Figure 9, we can see that we need pointers to all of the nodes
v ∈TM′
log s.t. we can skip the prefix of an execution sequence iπ. Furthermore, we can
preprocess such a datastructure beforehand, thereby gaining two advantages. The first
is that we offload the computation of the datastructure to the offline setting when the trie
is being constructed. Second, since we have pointers to all nodes, we also know the
exact level of the given node and can therefore quantify D(v). The latter makes it trivial
to adhere to the bound in Proposition 6.3, since we can exclude a warm­start node when
Online Streaming Process Conformance Checking Using Deep Learning
29
==PAGE:37==
we observe that arg max(D(v),n) > arg maxϕ(s)∈Sc + 1. To make it even more efficient, we
can maintain the warm­start nodes in a sorted order on D(v) st. We can stop the iteration
as soon as the bound is exceeded for the first time. The issue that remains is that from a
given level l−1 there may be O(|Σ|l+1) nodes on level l. Thus, we would have to examine
all of them before we find the nodes with a matching label to a. To make the query time
more faster, we should therefore build this datastructure separately for each of the activity
labels a ∈Σ. This allows us to obtain the data structure with warm start nodes with the
label of a when we attempt a warm­start jump on the activity a ∈σi(0) ∈s ∈S.
Figure 9: illustration of the warm­start jumps to a node v ∈TM′
log, using Figure 6 as an
example. The greyed out area indicates that we can warm­start to the nodes respectively,
but the pointers (dashed arrows) are missing due to inconvenience.
Definition 9. Let WSwarm_start denote a map s.t. for each a ∈Σ,
WSwarm_start(a) returns a datastructure which contains pointers to all nodes v ∈TM′
log
where the label of v = a. Furthermore, WSwarm_start(a) is ordered by the level l(v).
Proposition 6.6. The space complexity of WSwarm_start is O(n), where n is the size of
the trie TM′
log.
Proof of Proposition 6.6.
Let o = |M′
log|, then n = ∑o
i=1 |π| ∈TM′
log. The worst­case space complexity of TM′
log is
linear in n, when all execution sequences π ∈M′
log are distinct. The size of WSwarm_start
30
Online Streaming Process Conformance Checking Using Deep Learning
==PAGE:38==
is then |Σ| + n since we store a data structure for each activity label a ∈Σ. But since Σ is
constant, the space complexity is O(n).
Now that we have an efficient datastructure that we can query when we are attempting
to build warm­start states, we can turn our attention to an algorithm that operates on this
datastructure. Let us consider some basic ideas that motivate the algorithm.
• Initially, we receive the current state s.
• We retrieve the trace activities of γ ⊥σ, where γ ∈s.
• To ensure that we do not ”forget” any trace activities from γ ⊥σ, we make an align­
ment with log moves on all a ∈γ ⊥σ. This alignment is continued on in the proceed­
ing steps.
• The suffix σi that we are using to build the new states should be σi ∈s \ σi(0) ∈s
as we use a = σi(0) ∈s to warm­start.
• Then we look up the warm­start datastructure and get the pointers to all nodes v
where the label of v = a.
• We can then start to iterate over the pointers one by one. We have to check at each
iteration if we exceed the bound in Proposition 6.3. If we exceed the bound, we
break the loop and return with the states that we were able to compute beforehand.
• We try to create a new state ssync by getting a complete match of the substring for
all activities in σi from the position of v in the trie. If we succeed, then we continue
the loop as this state will induce the lowest cost.
• If we were unable to perform a synchronous state, then we continue to make a log
move state slog with log moves on all activities in σi and model move states smodel,
hereby reusing the logic already defined in the approach.
The pseudo­code in 6.1 is a high­level description of the algorithm.
We will start to analyze the time complexity of Awarm_start_move, by inferring the cost of the
computations in the algorithm. The loop on line 12, is bounded by the space complexity
of Proposition 6.6. WSwarm_start is constant as we build it before conformance checking,
therefore, it does not increase with input s ∈S. Consequently, it can be excluded from
the analysis.
Next, the depth of the search depends on the suffix σi ∈s.
At line 18, the cost of
Async_move(snew,a) is O(|σi|) since we need to make |σi| synchronous moves. In line 23,
Alog_move(snew,a) is also bounded by O(|σi|) since we need to make |σi| log moves.
In line 25, Amodel_moves(snew,a) depends on the branching factor b and the depth of the
search |σi|. As we stated before, the worst­case branching factor is O(|Σ|), thus the
complexity of making model moves is O(|Σ| × |σi|). This would entail that in a process
model we have a behavior that allows any activity to occur as the first activity a ∈TM′
followed by an infinite loop of a single unique activity. As the branching factor depends
on the process behavior, we chose this notation O(by) instead, where y = l(η) ∈snew.
Corollary 6.2. The time complexity of Awarm_start_move is O(by × |σi|).
The first component of the product depends on the proxy behavior captured in M′
log which
we assume is finite. As the component is an exponential function in the size of the trie,
we assume that in some cases, depending on the reference model, the efficiency of the
Online Streaming Process Conformance Checking Using Deep Learning
31
==PAGE:39==
approach would be a problem in operational support. In reality, the bound is the same as
for Amodel_moves(snew,a) which has already been validated by the authors. Therefore, we
expect the average cost of the method to be a more acceptable bound.
To prevent the state record Sc for a given case c from exploding as we build warm­start
states, we reduce the data structures in WSwarm_start by including warm­start nodes that
satisfy the following predicate function p(v) : v →bool:
p(v) = l(v) ≤avg(|π|)
2
Where avg(|π|) is the average execution sequence length in M′
log. Then, for a given label
a we only store the pointers to the warm­start nodes v, where the label of v = a, when l(v)
is less than or equal to avg(|π|)
2
in the proxy trie TM′
log. This will only affect the cases where
the missing prefix of the corresponding trace contains more than avg(|π)
2
activities from an
execution sequence in M′
log. We would warm­start to depth l = avg(|π)
2
and continue an
alignment, but the completeness cost would then be an underestimation.
Algorithm 1 Awarm_start_move
Require: warm­start map WSwarm_start
1: Input:
2: s: state
3: a: activity
4: c: cost
▷proposition 6.3
5:
6: iσ ←⊥γ ∈s
▷trace activities from γ ∈s
7: γnew ←{(a, >>) ∀a ∈iσ}
8: aws ←σi(0) ∈s
9: σi ←σi ∈s \ aws
10:
11: Initialize list W
12: for each vwarm_start ∈WSwarm_start(aws) do
▷nodes v in TM′ where label(v) = label(aws)
13:
WScost = arg max(vwarm_startc ,|iσ|)
14:
if WScost ≤c then
15:
snew ←s s.t. snewη = vwarm_start ∧snewγ = γnew ∧snewσi = σi
16:
∧snewc = vwarm_startc ∧snewdt = δ
17:
18:
ssync ←Async_move(snew,a)
19:
W ←W ∪{ssync}
20:
if W ̸= ∅then
21:
Skip
22:
else
23:
slog ←Alog_move(snew,a)
24:
W ←W ∪{ssync}
25:
smodel ←Amodel_moves(snew,a)
26:
W ←W ∪{smodel}
27:
end if
28:
else
29:
Break
30:
end if
31: end for
32: Return W
To end this section, we present the main algorithm in pseudo­code (in two parts) for com­
pleteness. The area which is the contribution to this algorithm is highlighted with a green
box. We abstract away from the trie preprocessing algorithm as that is not in the scope
32
Online Streaming Process Conformance Checking Using Deep Learning
==PAGE:40==
of this work. We can preprocess the datastructure WS simultaneously when we scan
the execution sequences π ∈M′
log, so the computational effort is bounded by the time it
takes to construct the trie. And since this is carried out offline, it does not affect the online
conformance checking efficiency.
Algorithm 2 Online Conformance Checking P.1
Require: Trie T
1: Input E: stream of events
2:
3: Initialize map B
4: δ ←α
▷Initialize decay time δ to α
5: while True do
6:
i, a ←receive(e)
▷Extract case id i and activity label a from event e
7:
if c ∈B then
8:
S ←B(i)
9:
else
10:
s ←root state of T
11:
S ←{s}
12:
end if
13:
Initialize list Sinterim
14:
for each s ∈S do
▷Compute synchronous moves
15:
ssync ←Async_move(s, a)
16:
Sinterim ←Sinterim ∪{ssync}
17:
end for
18:
if |Sinterim| > 0 then
19:
for each s ∈S do
20:
if sdt < δ then
21:
S ←S \ s
22:
else
23:
sσi ←sσi ⊕(a)
24:
sdt ←sdt −1
25:
end if
26:
end for
Algorithm 3 Online Conformance Checking P.2
27:
else
28:
for each s ∈S do
▷Compute (log/model) moves of ϕ(snew) ≤c
29:
c ←arg max(ϕ(s)∈S) + 1
▷Upper bound on maximum cost in S
30:
slog ←Alog_move(s, a)
31:
Smodel_moves ←Amodel_moves(s, a)
32:
Swarm_start ←Awarm_start_move(s, a, c)
33:
Sinterim ←Sinterim ∪Swarm_start ∪Smodel_moves ∪slog
34:
for each snew ∈Sinterim do
35:
if ϕ(snew) > c then
36:
Sinterim ←Sinterim \ {snew}
37:
end if
38:
end for
39:
if sdt < δ then
40:
S ←S \ s
41:
else
42:
sσ ←sσ ⊕(a)
43:
sdt ←sdt −1
44:
end if
45:
end for
46:
end if
47:
S ←S ∪Sinterim
48:
B ←S
49: end while
Online Streaming Process Conformance Checking Using Deep Learning
33
==PAGE:41==
6.2
Confidence
Analysing the problem
We now present the analysis of quantifying Confidence to indicate the stability of the prefix
alignment cost associated with a state s. We have structured the analysis in the same way
as in 6.1, and we will begin by making some general observations about the quantification
of confidence in [7].
From 3.2 we learned that the authors quantify confidence by computing and counting
the minimum distinct patterns that succeed a behavioral pattern. They achieve this by
reversing the reachability graph and use the same technique as when computing the
statistics for completeness but this time extracting the minimum distinct patterns to reach
a marking in the graph from the final marking.
In our approach, the alignment γ to which we relate the confidence information is a mem­
ber of a state s. Since we use the trie as a reference model, the way we can quantify the
confidence of a state is by a bound on the minimum number of nodes v succeeding η ∈s
in any valid execution sequence π ∈M′
log where π(0) is the label of η.
Although this statistic is used to quantify the confidence metric in their approach, we are
making a different choice in this approach.
We argue that process instances exhibit
stochastic behavior and that quantifying confidence by using the minimum succeeding
activities is biased towards the case length, as we expect it to end with the shortest exe­
cution sequence from the given node.
As the proxy log M′ contains one example of each trace variant, a uniform probability
mass function (PMF) describes the probability of an execution sequence p(X = π ∈
M′
log) =
1
|M′
log|−0. From a given node v ∈TM′
log we could use PMF to calculate the joint
probability of execution sequences π ∈M′
log, which correspond to the paths from node v
to any leaf node $ below v and weigh the lengths of the suffixes |πi| by this probability. But
since we have matched v in the trie the probabilities are conditional p(X = π ∈M′
log|v),
and would be equally likely. Therefore, we propose quantifying it using the mean ¯x of the
length of a node v ∈TM′
log to all its leaf nodes $. It is trivial to argue for the correctness
of the confidence metric, as the procedure is trivial. From a node v ∈TM′
log we can first
perform a Depth­first traversal to all leaf nodes and count the nodes v′ that we visit during
walks and average with the number of leaf nodes reached. Since the Depth­first algorithm
is well known, we abstain from presenting it here.
Definition 10. The confidence of a state s, denoted C(s) : s →N, is a function that returns
the average length from η ∈s to all its leaf nodes $. The labels on the nodes v on a path
from η ∈TM′
log to a leaf node $ is a suffix πi of an execution sequence π ∈TM′
log.
Unlike completeness, we have chosen to leave confidence out as a component of the
function we are minimizing during the alignment calculation. We argue for this choice,
with confidence being related to the future progression of a case that is unknown to us at
the time we observe the case. With completeness being related to the past of the case, we
are making a choice instead to quantify it as the missing prefix of an execution sequence
in the proxy trie. We cannot make a choice to quantify confidence without taking into
account the probability distribution of the activities in the cases. This is an opportunity
that we can investigate at another time. An example in which this has been achieved is
one of the contributions of the review [11], where they take advantage of a probabilistic
framework to predict the conformity of a case in advance.
34
Online Streaming Process Conformance Checking Using Deep Learning
==PAGE:42==
Trie enrichment
We have reasoned about how to use the concept of confidence in our approach and will
now concretize it by redesigning the trie st., the information of confidence is contained
in its structure. The idea is to store in each node v ∈TM′
log the confidence quantity that
we defined in Definition 10. This means that we extract the confidence cost of each node
during the pre­processing phase. And we can do that using the Depth­first algorithm as we
explained already. It will incur a longer preprocessing time, as we do not know in advance
the length of the execution sequence π ∈M′
log we scan during the trie construction. We
therefore have to compute the confidence quantity after the trie has been constructed.
But since it is performed offline, it does not have an impact on the online conformance
efficiency. The time complexity of Depth­first O(n) where n is the size of the trie. The size
of the trie increase to 2 × n, but the bound is still O(n) since we multiply by a constant.
The redesign of the trie in Figure 6 is shown in figure Figure 10.
Figure 10: The trie from figure 6 enriched with the confidence quantity C on the nodes.
Online Streaming Process Conformance Checking Using Deep Learning
35
==PAGE:43==
36
Online Streaming Process Conformance Checking Using Deep Learning
==PAGE:44==
7
Evaluation
In this chapter we will empirically evaluate the algorithm we formulated in Section 6 based
on an implementation of the design. We first validate the extension of the approach in [6]
with the warm­starting logic that we formulated in the previous chapter on the quality of the
computed prefix­alignments in terms of the conformance cost. Moreover, we also validate
the algorithm in terms of execution time, as that is an equally important feature of the
algorithm. Based on these results, we use the algorithm configuration that is quantitatively
the most optimal and compare it to the approaches selected from the survey in Section 3.2
for both the accuracy of the approximation and the time efficiency. As the algorithm is
targeting an online setting, we will stress­test the algorithm where we measure the time
and memory usage of the approach as we simulate an event stream. We conclude this
chapter by evaluating the fulfillment of the research questions stated in Section 4.1.
7.1
Data sets
The datasets that we use in the experiments are event logs. The logs are either synthetic
logs that we have simulated from Petri net models with noise parameters to emulate the
variance in a real event log, or real­life logs where the event data have been recorded in
an Information System and then processed to an event log format. In Table 9, a summary
of the aggregated statistics of the logs is presented in four dimensions. Mean is the mean
events per case in the log.
Events
Cases
Activities
Mean
M1
6555
500
36
13
M2
8809
500
32
18
M3
17980
500
109
36
M4
13421
500
44
27
M5
17028
500
32
34
M6
26719
500
70
53
M7
18803
500
58
38
M8
8246
500
15
16
M9
22163
500
55
44
M10
29118
500
143
58
BPI2012
33509
1000
35
34
BPI2017
32646
1000
50
33
Table 9: Summary statistics of the event logs used in the experiments through the chap­
ter. Mx are synthetic logs that have been simulated from a Petri net model with noise
parameters, that does not describe a real process. BPIxxxx logs are real­life event logs,
where the event data has been recorded in an Information System and then processed
to an event log format. Mean is the mean events per case in the log.
The logs presented in Table 9 are denoted as normal logs. As we are interested in validat­
ing the approach in terms of completeness, we artificially altered the logs to accommodate
the warm­starting handling of the approach. We have removed the first 20% or 50% events
from all traces in the logs st. When a trace is processed, it will be a warm­starting sce­
nario. We abstain from showing the summary statistics log as the trends are unchanged,
i.e. the factor that the mean events per case of M10 is higher than M1 stays the same.
We denote these completeness logs. We omit the introduction to some datasets that only
apply to sections with a specific scope in the evaluation. These will be introduced when
they are meaningful.
Online Streaming Process Conformance Checking Using Deep Learning
37
==PAGE:45==
7.2
Experiments
We present the design of the experiments. Each experiment will be detailed in terms of
its scientific purpose and its procedure.
• Operating system: Windows 11 Home 64­bit
• Processor: AMD Ryzen 7 5800 8­Core Processor (16 CPUs) 3.4 GHz
• Memory: 16384MB RAM
The implementation is made in Java 1.8. It was a natural choice, as the approach in
[6] was implemented with Java and we gained access to the code repository so that we
could use their project as a scaffold for the new implementation. Java is a statically typed
language that is considered fast due to the JVM specification. This also means that we
must take into account implementation bias when we make inductive inferences from the
results throughout this section. We use discounted­decay time as the forgetting criterion
for states s ∈S in the runs with the implementation.
Completeness validation
We are going to validate the new algorithm in different parameter configurations. As the
algorithm is an extension of the approach in [6] we will be using their algorithm to bench­
mark the efficacy of the new approach w.r.t. the metrics conformance cost and execution
time. We denote the old approach WSnone to distinguish between the configurations. Ta­
ble 10 is an overview of the experiments that will test the hypothesis presented in the
following.
Hypothesis 7.1.
WSroot and WSall will have a positive effect on the conformance cost compared to WSnone
when the cases are warm­starting.
Hypothesis 7.2.
WSroot and WSall will have a negative effect on the execution time per trace compared
to WSnone.
Hypothesis 7.3.
WSall will have a positive effect on the conformance cost compared to WSroot.
Hypothesis 7.4.
WSall will have a negative effect on the execution time per trace compared to WSroot.
Hypothesis
Experiment description
1
We use the completeness logs as input to get the conformance cost of
each trace and compare the distributions by reporting on different statis­
tics. Moreover, we will also run the experiment on the normal logs for
further analysis.
2
We will use both of the log types in this experiment and compare the
execution the different configurations using the same statistical methods
as in 1.
3
We can use the results from 1 to test this.
4
We can use the results from 2 to test this.
Table 10: Experiment overview for testing the stated hypothesis of warm­starting efficacy.
Comparative evaluation
We have selected a group of approaches from the literature study based on properties we
also associate with, st. we can compare the results of our approach with those of others
38
Online Streaming Process Conformance Checking Using Deep Learning
==PAGE:46==
on a given property.
• [7]: This is the Behavioural Patterns technique that was the first approach to ex­
plicitly handle the warm­start scenario. They contributed to the completeness and
confidence metrics and their interpretations.
• [16]: The Modified Hidden Markov technique that took inspiration from [7] to use a
completeness metric to indicate the warm­starting of a case.
• [13]: The first contribution that is based on prefix­alignment for online conformance
checking. With a parameterized algorithm, it is possible to guarantee optimal align­
ments depending on the parameter setting. By choosing a value for the parameter
window­size we can decide if we want optimal alignments or an approximation. To
this end, we chose the window size = 1, which is the smallest configurable window
size, and the window size = ∞that guarantees optimal alignments.
Furthermore, we learned from the synthesis of the literature, as seen in Table 5, that [7]
and [16] can be classified as abstractions where they approximate the conformance cost
with a new metric­based technique. We found that these two papers have evaluated the
time and memory efficiency of the solutions and are considered to be fast compared to
alignment­based approaches. We present an overview of the experiments in Table 11.
We use the normal logs to measure the execution time, as the results should be conclusive
of the differences. Correlation is quantified in the context of all logs as we are interested
in comparing the completeness metrics and as we expect the prefix­alignment technique
with window size = ∞to handle warm­starting traces better than window size = 1.
Property
Experiment description
Execution time
We will run all approaches on the normal logs to compare the mean
execution time per event in each log. We run each algorithm on the
datasets 5 times and average the execution times to level out sys­
tem resource interference while running the experiments. We expect
that our approach is in between the execution times of the metric
based and the prefix­alignment approach irrespective of the window­
size configuration.
Optimality
We will compare the approaches individually to draw better con­
clusion from the results as the employed techniques are heteroge­
neous. We use Spearman’s rank correlation coefficient to quantify
the strength of the relationship between the average conformance
value per trace over all logs.
Warm­starting
This is only relevant for the two abstraction techniques. We expect a
positive correlation between the completeness metrics.
Confidence
Similar to warm­starting but only for the Behavioural Patterns tech­
nique.
Table 11: Experiment overview for the comparative evaluation.
Stress test
We will assess the suitability of the online conformance checking approach by simulating
a fast­paced event stream. We use the same data as the approaches [7] and [16] so that
the results are comparable.
Online Streaming Process Conformance Checking Using Deep Learning
39
==PAGE:47==
Stream
Events
Cases
2 × 106
9778
Table 12: Event stream dataset
As mentioned in Section 3.2, case management is used to mitigate the likelihood that
memory usage explodes during online conformance check. Therefore, we will test the
approach with two settings for case administration using a FIFO strategy to remove case
entries based on their insertion timestamp when the size of the case buffer B exceeds a
threshold. We set the first threshold at |B| < ∞of the cases and the second threshold at
|B| < 5000 of the cases, before cleaning up. The motivation is that we want to observe the
memory and time usage under extreme conditions and then compare to an upper bound
of allowed cases. This will also have an indirect effect on the number of states in the state
record S.
Memory usage is measured in two quantities, as the memory usage by the JVM before
an event is observed on the stream and the memory usage per event that has been
processed. We also measure the size of the case buffer B and the state record Sc for a
given case c. This will be used to investigate the impact on execution time and memory
footprint of the approach in terms of case buffer B(S) growth with new cases and the
relationship between state record S growth and alignment maturity.
We will measure the execution time per event as the difference in timestamps before and
after an event has been processed.
40
Online Streaming Process Conformance Checking Using Deep Learning
==PAGE:48==
7.3
Completeness validation
Completeness logs
Figure 11a visualizes the mean conformance cost per trace in all completeness logs
grouped by the three configurations. The first pattern that we notice in the graph is that
in all logs the completeness log with 20% of the beginning of the trace removed, the av­
erage conformance cost is less compared with the logs where 50% is removed. This
is expected as the traces are shorter, although we assume that in some cases deviat­
ing behavior could be concentrated in the last part of the trace that we have observed.
Furthermore, we can see from the graph that in all logs WSall has the lowest average
conformance cost per trace.
0
10
20
30
40
alignment cost
BPI2012_20
BPI2012_50
BPI2017_20
BPI2017_50
M1_20
M1_50
M2_20
M2_50
M3_20
M3_50
M4_20
M4_50
M5_20
M5_50
M6_20
M6_50
M7_20
M7_50
M8_20
M8_50
M9_20
M9_50
M10_20
M10_50
ws_none
ws_root
ws_all
(a) Mean conformance cost per trace of completeness each log.
10
2
10
1
100
101
time (m/s)
BPI2012_20
BPI2012_50
BPI2017_20
BPI2017_50
M1_20
M1_50
M2_20
M2_50
M3_20
M3_50
M4_20
M4_50
M5_20
M5_50
M6_20
M6_50
M7_20
M7_50
M8_20
M8_50
M9_20
M9_50
M10_20
M10_50
ws_none
ws_root
ws_all
(b) Mean execution time per event of each completeness log logarithmically
scaled.
Figure 11: Grouped bar charts of the time and conformance cost data on all logs grouped
by the three configurations.
We show two statistics in Table 13. The lowest mean cost of means is WSall, which
Online Streaming Process Conformance Checking Using Deep Learning
41
==PAGE:49==
indicates that it is more optimal in terms of minimizing the cost function in 6.1. We also
see that the conformance cost is less dispersed than the two other configurations from
the standard deviation in the conformance cost over all logs. The standard deviation for
WSroot is the highest of all configurations, which indicates that the configuration in some
cases can remedy an alignment by warm­starting from the root state, whereas in other
cases the root state is insufficient for making a better alignment, hence causing a higher
spread in the conformance cost.
mean of means
mean std
WSall
14.886
9.114
WSroot
16.641
9.803
WSnone
17.961
9.461
Table 13: Two statistics that are determined from the data. Mean of means conformance
cost per trace and mean standard deviation of the conformance cost.
Figure 11b uses the same visualization technique to show the average execution time
in milliseconds per event on all completeness logs on a logarithmic scale. From this
graph we can discern that the measured execution timer per event is higher on all logs
for WSall. This is what we expected from the analysis, since it uses more computations
as it can warm­start from all states.
From Table 14 we see the same statistics about the execution time data. Interestingly, we
see that the mean standard deviation of WSall is one magnitude higher than the other two
configurations. A possible explanation is the variation in the cases w.r.t. conformance with
the reference model. Nonconforming cases propagates states that we continue warm­
start from in following rounds, whereas conformant traces are inducing warm­starting be­
havior in the beginning due to the missing tail, and then steadies as the algorithm will be
able to continue the alignments with synchronous moves.
mean of means
mean std
WSall
5.523
2.531
WSroot
2.307
0.753
WSnone
2.048
0.557
Table 14: Two statistics that are determined from the data of the completeness logs. Mean
of means execution time per event and mean standard deviation of the execution time per
event.
As a proof of concept we show two alignments calculated by WSnone (Figure 12) and
WSall (Figure 13) between the same trace and proxy trie. The excerpt is from the results
of running the algorithms on the completeness log M1. In agreement with the analysis
in Section 6, the old method traverses the trie on a path by making the 4 model moves
before the first activity in the trace σ = (I, J, K, I, J, C, F, D, B) is matched. By warm­
starting to the first activity a = I, we are able to calculate a more exact alignment and
also convey information about the case warm­started. In Figure 12 from left to right: case
ID, conformance cost, trace execution time, and total cost. In Figure 13 from left to right:
case ID, conformance cost, completeness cost, confidence, trace execution time, and
total cost.
42
Online Streaming Process Conformance Checking Using Deep Learning
==PAGE:50==
1, 6, 0, Total cost: 6
[logMove:>>, modelMove:A, cost:1]
[logMove:>>, modelMove:C, cost:1]
[logMove:>>, modelMove:E, cost:1]
[logMove:>>, modelMove:t4t8, cost:1]
[logMove:I, modelMove:I, cost:0]
[logMove:J, modelMove:J, cost:0]
[logMove:K, modelMove:K, cost:0]
[logMove:I, modelMove:I, cost:0]
[logMove:J, modelMove:J, cost:0]
[logMove:C, modelMove:>>, cost:1]
[logMove:>>, modelMove:t9t5, cost:1]
[logMove:F, modelMove:F, cost:0]
[logMove:D, modelMove:D, cost:0]
[logMove:B, modelMove:B, cost:0]
Trace: IJKIJCFDB
Log: IJKIJCFDB
Model: ACEt4t8IJKIJt9t5FDB
Figure 12:
An alignment computed by
WSnone.
1, 2, 4, 0.0, 6.0, 0, Total cost: 6
[logMove:I, modelMove:I, cost:0]
[logMove:J, modelMove:J, cost:0]
[logMove:K, modelMove:K, cost:0]
[logMove:I, modelMove:I, cost:0]
[logMove:J, modelMove:J, cost:0]
[logMove:C, modelMove:>>, cost:1]
[logMove:>>, modelMove:t9t5, cost:1]
[logMove:F, modelMove:F, cost:0]
[logMove:D, modelMove:D, cost:0]
[logMove:B, modelMove:B, cost:0]
Trace: IJKIJCFDB
Log: IJKIJCFDB
Model: IJKIJt9t5FDB
Figure 13:
An alignment
computed by WSall.
Normal logs
In Figure 14a we see a slight improvement in the conformance cost on some logs, e.g.
M4 with WSall. This shows that warm­starting can be used to remedy alignments with
cases that have been observed from their beginning. We believe this is explained by the
model being locked in on a path in the trie, and when older states are expired due to the
decay time and the approach henceforth loses the opportunity to find a more optimal path
in the trie then warm­starting can be used reset the alignment s.t. we can choose another
more optimal path in the trie to continue on.
Online Streaming Process Conformance Checking Using Deep Learning
43
==PAGE:51==
0
10
20
30
40
50
alignment cost
BPI2012
BPI2017
M1
M2
M3
M4
M5
M6
M7
M8
M9
M10
ws_none
ws_root
ws_all
(a) Mean conformance cost per trace of each normal log.
10
2
10
1
100
101
time (m/s)
BPI2012
BPI2017
M1
M2
M3
M4
M5
M6
M7
M8
M9
M10
ws_none
ws_root
ws_all
(b) Mean execution time per event of each normal log logarithmically scaled.
Figure 14: Grouped bar charts of the time and conformance cost data on all logs grouped
by the three configurations.
44
Online Streaming Process Conformance Checking Using Deep Learning
==PAGE:52==
We see in Table 15 that the distributions are much closer than what we saw in Table 13.
The same trend is apparent, where the spread in the conformance cost with WSall is
less than the two counterparts. We also see that the standard deviations of WSroot and
WSnone are the same.
mean of means
mean std
WSall
21.386
14.571
WSroot
21.626
14.620
WSnone
21.658
14.620
Table 15: Two statistics that are determined from the data. Mean of means conformance
cost per trace and mean standard deviation of the conformance cost.
An interesting pattern in Figure 14b is that WSroot uses less time per event than WSnone
in 2 of the logs and that WSall processes events faster on average in BPI_2017. We
do not have a good explanation for this observation, but it alludes to certain processes
exhibiting behavior where warm­starting can make the algorithm finish alignments faster.
mean of means
mean std
WSall
3.848
1.941
WSroot
1.141
0.398
WSnone
0.936
0.328
Table 16: Two statistics that are determined from the data of the normal logs. Mean of
means execution time per event and mean standard deviation of the execution time per
event.
Inferences from the completeness experiments
We conclude the validation of the configurations for warm­starting by making inferences
from the results. We use Table 17 to summarize the benchmark results of this section.
A noticeable pattern is that WSroot is more efficient than WSall and that WSall is more
optimal in terms of alignment cost. We conclude that both configurations can be justified
according to organizational needs. We also suggest that WSall can be used in a grace
period when the conformance checking system just started to observe the stream, since
the warm­starting scenario is a consequence of the time we start to observe the stream.
WSroot
WSall
Completeness logs
Conformance cost
−7.349%
−17.120%
Execution time
12.646%
169.678%
Normal logs
Conformance cost
−0.148%
−1.256%
Execution time
21.902%
311.111%
Table 17: Difference in percentage between the two configurations and WSnone over all
types of logs in conformance cost per trace and execution time per event.
Online Streaming Process Conformance Checking Using Deep Learning
45
==PAGE:53==
46
Online Streaming Process Conformance Checking Using Deep Learning
==PAGE:54==
7.4
Comparative evaluation
We will now proceed with the comparative evaluation of this approach with the state­
of­the­art approaches we have chosen. As this approach approximates optimal prefix­
alignments, we have decided to use WSall for the evaluation as the approximation is
more accurate than WSroot. Furthermore, the comparison with soa approaches on event
execution time is a stronger argument for the trade­off between optimality and efficiency
with this configuration.
Execution time
The results of the execution times per event are shown in Table 18. An extraneous factor
that we need to mention is that HMM is implemented in Python whereas the other ap­
proaches are implemented in Java. The results are still representative for comparison
between the methods in a streaming setting, as HMM is at least one order of magnitude
outperformed by WSall in all logs. The dashed (­) indicates that we are unable to get re­
sults from the approach within a decided threshold of 30 minutes. An explanation is that,
e.g. all the approaches, excluding ours, depend on building reachability graphs to extract
information. In the worst case, for the M6 data set, the trie generation took 949 ms and the
total execution time was 822 seconds for WSall. BP is the fastest approach in all logs and
WSall is the second fastest. This was not what we expected as HMM is considered very
fast by standards, so we can conclude that even with the overhead on execution time we
saw in Section 7.3 compared to the two other configurations, warm­starting to all states
can be considered a viable option. We are especially interested in comparing with the
prefix­alignment based approach and we can see that in all but one log the difference in
computation time is two orders of magnitude.
WSall
OCC
W­1
OCC
W­inf
HMM
BP
BPI2012
0.19
48.95
95.89
2.94
0.04
BPI2017
0.23
40.32
80.66
3.02
0.04
M1
0.08
8.61
13.48
5.35
0.03
M2
0.38
53.94
85.55
17.67
0.03
M3
0.80
­
­
­
­
M4
0.77
164.96
331.38
2.20
­
M5
32.44
­
­
­
­
M6
1542.70
­
­
­
­
M7
18.23
­
­
­
­
M8
0.10
5.67
8.68
1.10
0.02
M9
0.95
443.58
740.48
4.79
­
M10
818.02
­
­
­
­
Table 18: Average processing time per event (ms).
BP
Table 19 shows the Spearman rank correlation coefficient between the metrics of our
approach and Behavioural Patterns. The p­value is 0 for all correlation coefficients, so
the results are statistically significant.
We see the strongest correlation between the conformance metrics of the two approaches.
The relationship is inversely proportional, which is meaningful as the conformance cost
increases when a case is noncompliant, whereas the conformance metric in BP increases
when the trace behavior is captured in the reference model. The same relationship ex­
plains the confidence and completeness correlations, although the two metrics are less
correlated. A positive association between conformance cost and completeness is mean­
Online Streaming Process Conformance Checking Using Deep Learning
47
==PAGE:55==
spearman rho
p­value
Conformance cost ­ Conformance
−0.517
0.00
Conformance cost ­ Completeness
0.463
0.00
Confidence ­ Confidence
−0.445
0.00
Completeness cost ­ Completeness
−0.345
0.00
Table 19: Spearman’s rank correlation coefficient between combinations of metrics that
are used by our approach and BP.
ingful, as fully observed cases induce longer alignments, and thus the conformance cost
will be greater.
HMM
From Table 20 the same relationships are apparent. The strength of correlation between
the conformance metrics is less than in BP. The authors in HMM compare their approach
to the prefix­alignment­based approach and determine a positive correlation on confor­
mance, which is surprising to the authors. In our case, the negative correlation is con­
ceptually more meaningful. The injected distance refers to the number of states that are
skipped so that a running case can be brought from its last observation to its updated state
throughout its execution. In that sense, the metric is conceptually close to how we com­
pute completeness in our approach, and we see that they are positively correlated. There
is a dissimilarity between the conformance cost and the injected distance quantified by
the low correlation. Injected distance increases proportionally to when a case has warm­
started and when activities are missing due to a conventional skip anomaly. In the first
scenario, our approach could warm­start and the conformance cost would decrease as
a consequence, but in the second scenario the conformance cost would increase as the
missing activity is treated as a log or model model. Thus, we explain the low correlation.
spearman rho
p­value
Conformance cost ­ Final conformance
−0.317
0.00
Conformance cost ­ Injected distance
0.108
0.00
Completeness cost ­ Injected distance
0.496
0.00
Completeness ­ Completeness
−0.668
0.00
Table 20: Spearman’s rank correlation coefficient between combinations of metrics that
are used by our approach and HMM.
OCC W­1
From Table 21 we see that there is a strong positive correlation between the confor­
mance cost in the two approaches, indicating that from a global perspective we are close
to approximating the alignments computed by this parameterized version of the prefix­
alignment technique. Expect a positive correlation between the completeness cost and
the conformance cost, as the conformance cost in W­1 was expected to increase when a
case has warm­started. An explanation is that completeness indicates when the algorithm
has recovered from a sub­optimal alignment by choosing another path in the trie. The re­
sulting alignment cost is then minimized, and considering the strong correlation between
the conformance cost of the two algorithms, the corresponding alignment calculated by
W­1 should be proportionally lower in cost.
As we are interested in evaluating the approximation quality of our approach, we have vi­
sualized the distributions of the conformance cost of our approach and W­1 in Figure 15a.
The lines of the two distributions do not intersect at ∼0.5, which means that the medians
48
Online Streaming Process Conformance Checking Using Deep Learning
==PAGE:56==
spearman rho
p­value
Conformance cost ­ Conformance cost
0.953
0.00
Completeness cost ­ Conformance cost
−0.251
0.00
Table 21: Spearman’s rank correlation coefficient between combinations of metrics that
are used by our approach and W­1.
are not the same. As the cumulative density distribution of our approach is above the W­1
distribution, our approach has a fatter left tail, and we can conclude that we underestimate
the conformance cost compared to W­1.
(a) Cumulative plots of the probability density
function of the conformance cost of each trace
for WSall and W­1.
(b) Confusion matrix with the conformance of
traces in all logs labeled with the function Sec­
tion 7.4 for W­1 (ground truth) and WSall.
In figure 15b we show a confusion matrix analysis where we have labeled the traces with
the following binary function:
f(c) =
{
1,
if c > 0
0,
else
, where c is the alignment cost.
We argue that in a conformance checking context, emphasis is on minimizing the false­
positive rate as we want to detect nonconformant behavior. As shown in the matrix, the
data sets are mostly nonconforming. The balanced accuracy of our approach compared
to the results of W­1 as ground truth data is 0.94%. A note on approximation quality is that
M′
log ⊆Mlog, and therefore we do not expect our approach to be able to classify cases
with accuracy 100%, as the difference in behavior captured in the reference models is a
confounding factor.
OCC W­inf
Stronger positive correlation between conformance cost than W­1, as seen in Table 22.
Slightly more correlation between the completeness cost and the conformance cost than
with W­1. Can be interpreted together with the also slightly higher correlation between
conformance cost, that completeness represents a recovery from a bad prefix­alignment.
We have applied the same methods to investigate the approximation quality as can be
seen in Section 7.4. Lines cross at ∼0.5 in the cumulative distributions, which means
that the median of the two distributions is the same. Both plots exhibit an almost identical
curve. It agrees with the higher value ρ between our approach and W­inf for the confor­
Online Streaming Process Conformance Checking Using Deep Learning
49
==PAGE:57==
spearman rho
p­value
Conformance cost ­ Conformance cost
0.976
0.00
Completeness cost ­ Conformance cost
−0.290
0.00
Table 22: Spearman’s rank correlation coefficient between combinations of metrics that
are used by our approach and W­inf.
(a) Cumulative plots of the probability density
function of the conformance cost of each trace
for WSall and W­inf.
(b) Confusion matrix with the conformance of
traces in all logs labeled with the function Sec­
tion 7.4 for W­inf (ground truth) and WSall.
mance cost. We include the confusion matrix in 16b for completeness, but the information
is the same as in 15b.
We interpret the results as our approach being a closer approximation of the prefix­
alignment version that guarantees optimal alignments.
50
Online Streaming Process Conformance Checking Using Deep Learning
==PAGE:58==
7.5
Stress test
We will now evaluate the approach based on the empirical data obtained from the stress
test experiment. The throughput at which the data was read from the stream data file
is 0.313ms. We computed the throughput by taking the difference between the event
timestamps of the time we observed the the first event and the last event and averaging
with the count of events in the stream data file.
Execution time
Figure 17a shows a graph of the quantities measured during the stress test experiment
with the case capacity set to 10000. As the event stream data set contains 9778 cases,
all cases are retained during conformance checking. The blue curve is a moving average
with a window size 10 of the execution time per event ordered by the event timestamp.
We have also plotted the case buffer size and a moving average with window size 10000
of the alignment length, measured at each observed event.
We observed that the processing time per event increases proportionally with the align­
ment length, reaching a plateau around the event ∼1.95 × 1e6. We believe this is due
to the termination of cases as we approach the end of the data set. The Spearman rank
coefficient between execution time per event and alignment length is 0.931, as shown in
Table 23, indicating a strong positive correlation. The literature on alignment­based ap­
proaches suggests that the computation time increases with the size of alignments due
to the expansion of the state space, which grows with the size of the trace and leads
to longer search times for the pathfinding algorithm. In our approach, the state space
is represented by the state record S, and as S expands, more states are processed for
each event. The maximum execution time per event was 58.88 ms, which corresponds to
2058 states in the state record. The maximum number of recorded states was 2209 with
an execution time of 22.49ms for the related event. The small difference between the two
state spaces shows that our approach has the same scalability issue with expanding state
spaces.
spearman rho
p­value
Execution time per event ­ Alignment length
0.931
0.00
Execution time per event ­ Case buffer size
0.406
0.00
Execution time per event ­ State record size
0.195
0.00
Table 23: Spearman’s rank correlation coefficient between combinations of measured
quantities during the stress test experiment with case capacity set to 10000.
From the graph, it is clear that the case buffer size increases until around ∼0.125 × 1e6
events are processed. There is a positive correlation between the execution time per
event and the size of the case buffer, but it is not strong. We believe this to be a spu­
rious relation because the alignment length variable indirectly influences execution time
through its relationship with states, cases, and the case buffer. There is a weak correla­
tion between the execution time per event and the size of the state record associated with
the current case. This is likely due to the impact of the discounted decay­time. States
at the beginning of conformance checking for a case have a longer duration than those
later in the case’s development. As a case matures, states are removed from the state
record more quickly due to a lower decay­time, leading to a shrinking state space and a
weakening of the relationship.
The graph in Figure 17b shows the same dimensions plotted against the event sequence
with the capacity set to 5000. As we can see in the graph, the case buffer capacity influ­
ences the other measured quantities. The trend in Figure 17a between execution time per
Online Streaming Process Conformance Checking Using Deep Learning
51
==PAGE:59==
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
1.25
1.50
1.75
2.00
Events
1e6
0.00
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
0.10
0.12
Time (m/s)
Execution time per event - SMA (10)
Tracked cases
Alignment length - SMA (10000)
0
2000
4000
6000
8000
10000
No of tracked cases in buffer
0
50
100
150
200
250
Alignment length
(a) Case capacity is set to 10000. As the event stream dataset contains 9778 cases all cases
are kept in memory during conformance checking which is shown by the dashed red curve. The
green curve shows a moving average with window­size 10000 of the alignment length measured
from the case which the current event (ordered by timestamp) on the x­axis is related to. We
see an increasing trend of the processing time per event proportional to the alignment length that
flattens at around event ∼1.95 × 1e6.
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
1.25
1.50
1.75
2.00
Events
1e6
0.004
0.006
0.008
0.010
0.012
Time (m/s)
Execution time per event - SMA (10)
Tracked cases
Alignment length - SMA (10000)
0
1000
2000
3000
4000
5000
No of tracked cases in buffer
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
Alignment length
(b) Case capacity is set to 5000. The FIFO strategy for systematically removing cases c ∈B when
|B| > 5000 results in a non­increasing trend of execution time per event. From the alignment
length dimension we can infer that running cases are removed from the case buffer before they
have terminated as the alignment length moving average is maximum ∼30 whereas it is ∼250
when the case capacity is 10000.
Figure 18: Stress test of approach w.r.t processing time per event with the configuration
for warm­starting to all states.
52
Online Streaming Process Conformance Checking Using Deep Learning
==PAGE:60==
event and alignment length is not visible. We can infer that running cases are removed
from the case buffer before they have terminated as the alignment length moving average
is maximum ∼30, while it is ∼250 when the case capacity is 10000. It is further supported
by the lower correlation between the two variables seen in Table 24. A consequence is
that there will be occurrences of orphan events in which an untracked case reappears to
which we do not have a history for continuing the alignment. Warm­starting can mitigate
the problem to a degree, but as the trace prefix is unknown, we would encounter exam­
ples where a case appears to have warm­started, but in fact, we have observed the case
at an earlier time and the alignment cost is an underestimation. Both the case buffer size
and the state record size are negatively correlated with execution time per event. This
can also be explained by the impact of forgetting cases, which can be seen in the volatility
of the execution time per event curve.
spearman rho
p­value
Execution time per event ­ Alignment length
0.514
0.00
Execution time per event ­ Case buffer size
−0.111
0.00
Execution time per event ­ State record size
−0.037
0.00
Table 24: Spearman’s rank correlation coefficient between combinations of measured
quantities during the stress test experiment with case capacity set to 5000.
We can conclude that the most influential factor on the execution time per event is the
computations expended required to build alignments. We discovered an extraneous factor
that influences the relationship between execution time and alignment length. To maintain
referential integrity between the state record and state, we are using a map to store the
states with the following key scheme in the Java implementation:
alignment.toString() + completeness cost
We performed a profiling analysis on memory and CPU usage during the stress test and
found that the toString() call represented 4.4% of the CPU usage which is 4% less than the
warm­starting method. Therefore, we argue that by excluding implementation bias, it is, in
fact, the size of the state record S that is the biggest growth factor for the efficiency of the
approach. This is also what the analytical bound of the method, stated in Corollary 6.2,
shows.
The mean execution time per event was 0.038ms with a standard deviation of 0.24ms,
when the case capacity was set to 10000. This indicates that the approach is still very
fast. The relation between execution time and state­space size places the approach in
the same bracket of similar alignment­based approaches, but, as we learned in the com­
parative evaluation, it is considerably faster than its peers. We learned that by setting a
threshold for the capacity of tracked cases, we indirectly mitigate the growth of the align­
ments, but the strategy for conserving memory has its own consequences, as forgotten
cases that reappears later in the stream induce invalid alignments due to the orphan event
phenomenon.
Memory
We continue with the memory part of the stress test with the evaluation of the results of
setting the case capacity at 10000 st. All cases are tracked during conformance checking.
We chose to abandon the experiment with the case capacity set to 5000 because the
occurrence of orphan events undermines the results.
We see from the graph in Figure 19, that memory usage is increasing with all events pro­
cessed during conformance checking. This is to be expected when we assume unlimited
Online Streaming Process Conformance Checking Using Deep Learning
53
==PAGE:61==
memory, as all cases are retained in memory. There is a small dip at the end of the
curve, which we assume is related to cases terminating, as we also saw in the execu­
tion time part. More importantly, we can discern from the polynomial fit that the memory
usage per event is constant. The coefficients of the polynomial are 1.11399 × 10−3 and
1110988×10−3. Interestingly, the maximum memory usage per event 102, 23MB coincides
with the maximum number of states 2209 and an alignment length of 119 that is close to
the mean alignment size of 120. At the maximum alignment length 612, the memory usage
for the event that initiates the alignment calculation is 0.53MB. Therefore, we infer that the
worst case for memory usage is when the alignment length is average in size, but the
state recorded for the given case is at its maximum. We see from the correlation matrix
in Table 25 that memory usage and alignment length show the strongest correlation of all
relationships. We assume a causal relationship between the two variables as alignments
occupy space and the size therefor impacts the memory growth. We believe that the al­
most negligible negative correlation between memory usage and state record is due to
the discounted decay time as we reasoned before. We impose the same interpretation
on the small correlation between memory usage and case buffer size as we did on the
execution time part.
spearman rho
p­value
Memory usage ­ Alignment length
0.826
0.00
Memory usage ­ Case buffer size
0.379
0.00
Memory usage ­ State record size
−0.037
0.00
Table 25: Spearman’s rank correlation coefficient between combinations of measured
quantities during the stress test experiment with case capacity set to 10000.
The memory part of the stress test showed the most promising results in terms of memory
usage per event. As mentioned in Section 3.2, the setting of online streaming restricts
memory usage, as it will exceed the available memory if cases are tracked indefinitely. We
have empirical results showing that this exact problem occurs as memory usage increases
with events received during the stress test.
54
Online Streaming Process Conformance Checking Using Deep Learning
==PAGE:62==
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
1.25
1.50
1.75
2.00
Events
1e6
0
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
1400
1600
Space (MB)
Memory usage - SMA (10000)
Memory usage per event - SMA (10000)
Memory usage per event - polynominal fit (deg=1)
0.15
0.10
0.05
0.00
0.05
0.10
Space (MB)
Figure 19: The blue curve shows a moving average with window­size 10000 of memory
usage of the approach. It is measured as the difference in the total memory available to
the JVM and the free memory available to the JVM before an event is processed. The
green crosses is a moving average with window­size 10000 of memory used per event,
measured as the difference between the memory usage before and after an event is
processed. The red slope is a 1­degree polynomial fit of the memory usage per event.
Online Streaming Process Conformance Checking Using Deep Learning
55
==PAGE:63==
56
Online Streaming Process Conformance Checking Using Deep Learning
==PAGE:64==
7.6
Threats to validity
In this section we take a step back to scrutinize the thesis work by discussing limitations
that were found during our analysis, implementation, and evaluation phases that may be
related only to this approach or represent a general challenge in online process mining.
Uncertainty from the worst case time complexity
The complexity of the algorithm proposed in this thesis grows exponentially with the height
of the trie. This is a concern as it may not be efficient for all types of process behavior.
To determine the impact of this on real­life processes, it would be useful to calculate the
average branching factor, or the number of non­root nodes divided by the number of leaf
nodes, to understand how well the algorithm scales with different types of behavior. This
information could then be used to predict whether the approach would be suitable for a
given proxy log. It would be valuable for organizations to have this information to make
informed decisions about using this approach in operational support.
Although we were not certain about the generalizability of our approach, the results of the
execution time experiment in the comparative evaluation showed that our approach was
the only one capable of processing all event logs. This is probably due to the trie proxy
reference model used in our approach, which gives it an advantage.
Online streaming setting and recurring implications
As we learned in the review, there is still much research to be done in the field of online
streaming conformance checking, as indicated by the ongoing challenges in this area and
the limited number of relevant articles identified in the literature review.
In the evaluation section, we observed the impact of using the simple FIFO strategy for
case administration on the validity of the results. The problem with orphan events that we
encountered exemplifies the doubly edge sword in terms of finding a solution where mem­
ory is bounded while preserving the approximation quality of the conformance quantifica­
tion. Although researchers have begun to propose techniques to overcome this challenge
as seen in [8], it is still affecting the output.
We simulated a stream from reading a file with events from one event source s.t. We
would track parallel running cases and handle a high throughput of events. We have not
tested the approach in a production environment where the data flow in the stream might
not behave as expected. A problem that occurs when streaming data is when the sources
that emit the events are independent, distributed systems, and the event data might be
received out of order [18]. In our work, we implicitly assumed that an event stream is
ordered, which means that the arrival of an event to the conformance checking system
coincides with the event generation.
Concept­drift is defined as the change in the characteristics of a process over time in
response to an evolving environment and is based on the assumption that the concepts
of the stream can be stationary or evolving [1]. Changes that occur to the underlying
process can be planned or unexpected and should be considered to allow consistent
process analysis in evolving businesses. If no appropriate actions have been taken to
replace a reference model with a model updated to incorporate the new behavior, it will
induce a higher frequency of discrepancies, which can undermine the value of information
on an operational level.
Warm­starting and completeness
We have imposed the same conceptual interpretation on completeness as the authors
from which the concept originated, but contrary to them, completeness is embedded in
the logic for analyzing conformance. In their approach, completeness is an additional
perspective on the status of a case, whereas the conformance output is independent of
Online Streaming Process Conformance Checking Using Deep Learning
57
==PAGE:65==
the completeness value. Our choice for warm­starting to be reflected in the alignments
directly affects the conformance cost, and that is why completeness cost is a component
in the cost function. It is in fact a breakaway from the formalism of alignments in the sense
that a model execution sequence does not follow the control flow from the root node (initial
marking) in the reference model but instead can skip a prefix of an execution sequence.
The controversy is that since we minimize a cost function, as we have observed in 7.3,
warm­starting is used even when the cases are not affected by a warm­starting scenario.
Although we have argued for the correctness of our algorithm, the deviation from conven­
tional alignment theory poses a new view on alignments.
Implementation efficiency
The overhead of the toString() method adds considerably noise to the stress test data, as
it seems that the time performance of this approach is highly correlated with the alignment
length. An analysis of the problem resulted in an optimization of the implementation that
overall improved the approach both in time and memory performance, but the issue is still
apparent. The choice to use this key scheme is to ensure that we only store one copy of
a given unique state in the states record. During conformance checking, states with the
same attributes are built, resulting in unnecessary growth of the state record. We did not
want to exclude the alignment length variable from the experiment as it is reasonable to
believe that the alignment length indeed impacts the performance of the algorithm e.g.
when we warm­start we make log moves on the trace activities in the prefix­alignment of
the current state.
Proxy log bias
We became aware that the choice of technique for building a proxy model log M′
log was
a significant cause of variation in the results. For the BPI_xxxx event logs, we observed
that, using a simulated log based on a Petri net model, then in the completeness validation
section the results for the normal BPI_xxxx logs would be the same for all configurations.
While using a proxy log based on capturing frequent behavior in the event log gave the
results we have shown in that section. However, in the comparative evaluation, the cor­
relation between competitor approaches was significantly worse with the frequency log,
and it was necessary to revert to using a log simulated from a discovered Petri net model.
We believe that since most of the approaches in OCC explicitly depend on a Petri net
model, simulating the proxy model log from the same Petri net model may produce more
consistent results.
58
Online Streaming Process Conformance Checking Using Deep Learning
==PAGE:66==
7.7
Research questions fulfillment
RQ1 What is a meaningful decomposition of conformance of an ongoing execution into
three aspects: conformance, completeness and confidence in terms of approxima­
tion error?
A1 The analysis in section 6.1 resulted in the formulation of a completeness cost. Based
on the analysis, we reformulated the objective function that we minimized during
alignment calculation to include the completeness cost. We argued with formal
mathematical reasoning for why the completeness cost should be a part of the cost
function and how we could define the logic s.t. that we are not violating the for­
malism of alignments. In 7.6 we reflect on how from a theoretical point of view the
warm­starting logic used to optimize alignments poses a new view on alignments.
With confidence we reasoned that we would have to account for the probability dis­
tribution of activities in the traces in order to approximate it. Instead, we chose to
signal confidence as a purely informative metric similar to how it is used in [7]. We
did choose to quantify confidence differently than they did, as we argued that using
the average length of the paths below a node in the trie is a less biased take on
confidence.
RQ2 What is an efficient and correct algorithm to solve the problem of warm­starting?
A2 From the analysis in 6.1 we had stated and proved propositions about the logic that
we should adhere to in the algorithmic specification. Furthermore, we concretized
the ideas and designed an efficient datastructure that we could query to get the
pointers to nodes, on a depth above a threshold in the proxy trie model, from which
we can warm­start. The analytical time required by the algorithm that operates on
this data structure was ranked as exponential in the size of the trie. We argued that
the worst­case growth was, in fact, the same upper bound as for the previous work
in [6] and that the average upper bound is likely to be more tractable.
RQ3 How does this new approach compare to equivalent approaches presented in the
literature review?
A3 We showed in the evaluation chapter that this new logic improved the approximation
of the conformance cost as expected in the completeness logs and also in the normal
logs compared to the original work in [6]. Warm­starting logic, regardless of the
configuration, did induce a negative effect on execution efficiency.
Furthermore, experiments confirmed that our approach is closer in approximation to
an optimal prefix­alignment technique than other comparable approximation tech­
niques. We also showed that our approach was the second­fastest of all the ap­
proaches we compared, justifying the warm­start logic as a meaningful addition to
the approach in the original work.
RQ4 Would this new approach be suitable for online streaming conformance checking?
A4 We empirically showed that our approach is capable of handling a fast­paced event
stream both in terms of memory and execution time with a mean 0.038ms execution
time per event and constant memory usage per event. We discovered an extrane­
ous variable in the way we store states that we considered noise in the data. We
also observed scalability issues in terms of memory efficiency from handling data
from an unbounded stream of events, which is a current research challenge in the
field of online process mining.
Online Streaming Process Conformance Checking Using Deep Learning
59
==PAGE:67==
60
Online Streaming Process Conformance Checking Using Deep Learning
==PAGE:68==
8
Conclusion
The research in this thesis sought to extend the approach in [6] to handle the warm­start
scenario as the first alignment­based approach identified in the review of the literature.
The work also included incorporating completeness and confidence metrics into the output
of the conformance checking algorithm to provide a more comprehensive view of the
status of a running process instance.
Using a theoretical and empirical methodology, we were able to extend the approach to
include warm­starting logic, resulting in prefix­alignments that do not overestimate the
alignment cost due to the missing tail caused by warm­starting and that offer a more
informative local perspective in terms of control­flow anomalies. We also enriched the
output to include information on the stability of the conformance status of a running case
through the confidence metric.
We derived two configurations for warm­starting that represent a trade­off between time
and memory performance and alignment quality. In the complexity analysis of the algo­
rithm, we argued for a bound that is exponential in the height of the trie. We stated that
the bound is, in fact, the same as the worst­case bound for the original approach and that
the average time is likely more tractable.
In the empirical evaluation, we discovered that even though no warm­starting behavior
was artificially applied to the cases in the event logs we labeled ’normal logs’, the con­
figuration that can warm­start from all states improved some alignments through warm­
starting. This led to an interesting discussion of whether this behavior deviates from con­
ventional alignment theory. We concluded that the most suitable configuration is the one
that can warm­start from all states and chose to use that configuration in the next part of
the quantitative analysis.
We found that the global conformance cost distribution of prefix­alignments computed
with our approach is statistically most similar to one of the competitor approaches that
guarantees optimal prefix­alignments in terms of conformance cost, with a Spearman
rank correlation coefficient of 0.976 between the conformance costs. We also compared
the approaches in terms of execution time per event and found that our approach is the
second fastest on the datasets used in the experiment.
We evaluated the approach in a stress test experiment in which we simulated an event
stream, and the results showed that our approach is capable of processing data from a
fast­paced event stream with constant memory usage per event and an average execu­
tion time per event of 0.038ms. We also observed that the implementation of the approach
had a strong positive correlation with the growth of alignment length and inferred that the
strength of the relationship was caused by an extraneous factor related to the implemen­
tation. Our approach demonstrated a common problem in online streaming conformance
checking and online process mining, in general, in that we must either assume unlimited
memory to maintain approximation accuracy or trade better memory utilization for worse
accuracy.
To the best of our knowledge, our approach is the first online conformance checking prefix­
alignment technique that is able to handle warm­starting and also outputs the three metrics
conformance, completeness, and confidence during conformance checking of a running
case. Therefore, we believe that it is a valuable contribution to the field of Process Mining.
The repository containing all the code from the thesis work is available at GitHub through
this link. The datasets that are used through the evaluation sections is available at GitHub
through this link.
Online Streaming Process Conformance Checking Using Deep Learning
61
==PAGE:69==
62
Online Streaming Process Conformance Checking Using Deep Learning
==PAGE:70==
9
Future Work
9.1
Multi­perspective OCC
There is a high performance cost associated with approaches that analyze multiple di­
mensions in a process, such as the control­flow and data flow perspectives. However,
our proxy trie data structure may be able to handle this additional complexity without suf­
fering from state explosion. Inspired by [12] and taking into account only the data flow
perspective in addition, we could predetermine the intervals of values for associated data
elements and use them to establish business rules that capture data conditions. Another
option is to use integer linear programming to minimize the cost of an objective function,
as in [10]. Further research in these areas could be valuable.
9.2
Efficient memory utilization
Finding a solution to efficiently manage memory usage during operationalization is an
urgent problem. As we learned in the literature review, academia of online process mining
has recently seen proposals for optimizing the memory usage of prefix­alignment­based
approaches. The suggestions in [8] are not directly translatable into our framework, but
we believe that we can adapt their ideas to something for our approach to work in terms
of limiting the memory footprint without trading too much on alignment quality.
9.3
Confidence as guiding cost term
One potential direction for future work is to embed probabilities of a known distribution of
branches in the trie datastructure. Previous research has used probabilistic approaches
and neural networks to predict conformance and determine the likelihood of certain se­
quences occurring [11]. We are envisioning that we could leverage a prediction system to
predict the conditional probability of all nodes in the proxy trie on their prefix. A problem
with their approach is that we will be using the event log to train the model, and therefore
learning to approximate the probability distribution of the sequential order on the activities
in the trace variants. By using the prediction system to predict the conditional probabilities
of the nodes in the trie datastructure, the probabilities reflect the underlying distribution in
the event log, and we are therefore possibly incorporating non­conformant behavior into
the reference model. There are several suggestions for how a prediction system could be
leveraged to be integrated into the cost function. The resulting probability estimates could
be used to modify the confidence cost of each node or to create a new metric representing
the probability of a given node.
We have developed a solution to predict the conditional probability p(X = π ∈M′
log|v) of a
node v ∈TM′
log on its prefix iπ. Our prediction system is based on a deep neural network
similar to the one described in [11]. We do not include details on the architecture and
modeling of the system, but we demonstrate its use with the M1.xes event log. To ensure
the accuracy of the model, we followed best practices for building a machine learning
model and used the hold­out method for validation on the data.
As the sample space is small we cannot generalise from Table 26. The results of using
the prediction system on the M1.xes event log indicate that it may be beneficial in mini­
mizing the conformance cost of alignments. The worst performing configuration was the
approach M1weighted_avg with only the scaled confidence cost, while the configurations
that utilized the prediction system had lower mean conformance costs. Further research
on this topic is therefore justified.
Online Streaming Process Conformance Checking Using Deep Learning
63
==PAGE:71==
mean conformance cost
M1_avg
5.964
M1_prob
5.938
M1_weighted_avg
5.896
M1
5.586
Table 26: We have experimented with using a prediction system in different ways to deter­
mine its impact on minimizing the conformance cost of alignments. We used the config­
uration for warm­starting from all states in all experiments. M1 is the baseline approach
without using a prediction system. In M1avg, the scaled confidence metric is included in
the minimization function. In M1prob, we used the conditional probability as a new metric
in the minimization function. M1weighted_avg used the scaled confidence weighted by the
conditional probability.
64
Online Streaming Process Conformance Checking Using Deep Learning
==PAGE:72==
Bibliography
[1]
Josep Carmona Wil M. P. van der Aalst. Process Mining Handbook. Springer, 2022.
[2]
Rashid Zaman, Marwan Hassani, and Boudewijn F. van Dongen. “Prefix Imputation
of Orphan Events in Event Stream Processing”. In: (2021).
[3]
Josep Carmona et al. Conformance Checking. Spring, 2018.
[4]
Andrea Burattin. Process Mining Techniques in Business Environments. Springer,
2015.
[5]
Andrea Burattin and Josep Carmona. “A Framework for Online Conformance Check­
ing”. In: Business Process Management Workshops. BPM 2017 (2017), pp. 165–
177.
[6]
Ahmed Awad and Kristo Raun. “I Will Survive: An Online Conformance Checking
Algorithm Using Decay Time”. In: (2022).
[7]
Andrea Burattin et al. “Online Conformance Checking Using Behavioural Patterns”.
In: (2018).
[8]
Rashid Zaman, Marwan Hassani, and Boudewijn F. van Dongen. “A Framework for
Efficient Memory Utilization in Online, Conformance Checking”. In: (2021).
[9]
Zsuzsanna Nagy and Ágnes Werner­Stark. “A Multi­perspective Online Confor­
mance Checking Technique”. In: (2020).
[10]
Zsuzsanna Nagy and Ágnes Werner­Stark. “An Alignment­based Multi­Perspective
Online, Conformance Checking Technique”. In: (2022).
[11]
Jiaojiao Wang et al. “Conformance­oriented Predictive Process Monitoring, in BPaaS
Based on Combination of Neural Networks”. In: (2022).
[12]
Florian Stertz, Juergen Mangler, and Stefanie Rinderle­Ma. “Data­driven Improve­
ment of Online Conformance, Checking”. In: (2020).
[13]
Sebastiaan J. van Zelst et al. “Online conformance checking: relating event streams
to process models using prefix­alignments”. In: (2017).
[14]
Daniel Schuster and Sebastiaan J. van Zelst. “Online Process Monitoring Using
Incremental State­Space Expansion: An Exact Algorithm”. In: (2020).
[15]
Daniel Schuster and Gero Joss Kolhof. “Scalable Online Conformance Checking
Using Incremental Prefix­Alignment Computation”. In: (2020).
[16]
Wai Lam Jonathan Lee et al. “Orientation and conformance: A HMM­based ap­
proach to online conformance checking”. In: (2021).
[17]
Ahmed Awad, Kristo Raun, and Matthias Weidlich. “Efficient Approximate Confor­
mance Checking Using Trie Data Structures”. In: (2021).
[18]
Kristo Raun. “Conformance Checking on Out­of­Order Streams (Extended Abstract)”.
In: Acta Polytechnica Hungarica Vol. 19, No. 4 (2021).
Online Streaming Process Conformance Checking Using Deep Learning
65
==PAGE:73==
66
Online Streaming Process Conformance Checking Using Deep Learning
==PAGE:74==
A
Gantt Chart
2022
2023
August
September
October
November
December
January
Week 1
Week 2
Week 3
Week 4
Week 5
Week 6
Week 7
Week 8
Week 9
Week 10
Week 11
Week 12
Week 13
Week 14
Week 15
Week 16
Week 17
Week 18
Week 19
Week 20
Week 21
Week 22
Master thesis project
Analysis of problem domain
Research and studying related literature
Analysis on extending the trie approach
Project Definition Rapport
Writing PDR
Hand­in
Design and Implementation
Trie enrichment
Algorithm for OCC
Implementation done
Analysis and interpretation of hyper­parameters
Evaluation
Streaming suitability
Experimental evaluation
Evaluation done
Streaming suitability extension
Experimental evaluation of extension
Extensions
Constructing trie from reference model
Writing
Correction of rapport
Hand­in
Online Streaming Process Conformance Checking Using Deep Learning
67
==PAGE:75==
B
Acronyms
OCC Onlince Conformance Checking
SPN Synchronous Product Net
SOA state­of­the­art
N Petri net model
WF­net Work­Flow net
68
Online Streaming Process Conformance Checking Using Deep Learning
==PAGE:76==
Online Streaming Process Conformance Checking Using Deep Learning
69
==PAGE:77==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Richard Petersens Plads, Building 324
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.compute.dtu.dk
