==PAGE:1==
Design, manufacture and test of Transpon-
der for Radar Calibration
Kian Vatan
Master Thesis
Department of Electrical Engineering
Electromagnetic Systems
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Design, manufacture and test of Transponder for Radar Calibration
Kian Vatan
Master Thesis
January, 2023
By
Kian Vatan
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus-
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title,
etc.
Cover photo:
Transponder Block-diagram, 2023
Published by:
DTU, Electromagnetic Systems, Ørsteds Plads, Building 348, 2800 Kgs.
Lyngby Denmark
www.elektro.dtu.dk
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over five months at the Section for Electromagnetic systems,
Department of Electrical Engineering, at the Technical University of Denmark, DTU, in
partial fulfilment for the degree Master of Science in Electrical Engineering, MSc Eng.
The project was done in cooperation with Trackman A/S, who provided for a workplace,
the facilities and all the necessary materials such as the hardware and instruments.
It is assumed that the reader has a basic knowledge in the areas of radars, electrical
hardware components and basic programming.
Kian Vatan - s174854
Signature
Date
ii
Design, manufacture and test of Transponder for Radar Calibration
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
For Trackman radars to be calibrated with a high level of accuracy and functionality, an
active calibration target called a transponder can be used. A transponder can simulate an
object in movement by sending out a phase shifted version of a radars original signal. This
report intents to present and implement ideas based on data gathered from testing, radar
theory, a good understanding about the components that make up a transponder and the
process behind radar calibration, to build a high performance horn transponder for the
purpose of indoor Trackman radar calibration. The transponder will be designed based
specifically on the specifications set in this report and will be compared to the current
transponder used in Trackman A/S for radar calibration. The transponder will have to
work with most of the Trackman radars produced at the Trackman facility and so, it is
very important, that the transmitted signal from the transponder to the radar is constant
in all frequency bands, with little to no signal variations. The performance and calibration
results clearly indicates a difference between the horn transponder and old transponder and
that the design of a transponder is an very important part, since unnecessary reflections
and an increase in noise can occur. The horn transponder proved to be very expensive
to produce, but effective in calibrating the platform and Trackman 4 radars. If cost is
not a problem, the good performance that comes with the horn transponder, is worth
considering to invest in and use, for future Trackman radar calibrations.
Design, manufacture and test of Transponder for Radar Calibration
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
Kian Vatan, MSc Electrical Engineering, DTU
Creator of this master thesis.
[Nikolaj Egeskov Østergaard], [Team Leader - Test Systems Engineer - Test Develop-
ment Engineer - (”PTA”)], [Supervisor in Trackman A/s]
[Sten Schmidl Søbjærg], [Associate Professor, Department of Space Research and Tech-
nology, Microwaves and Remote Sensing], [DTU Supervisor]
This project was made possible with the help of numerous people in the Trackman PTA
team, who have set aside time and effort throughout this project, to help with questions
and when in doubt.
I would like to thank my supervisors Nikolaj Egeskov Østergaard and Sten Schmidl Søb-
jærg for making this project possible and for their invaluable advice, continuous support
and patience during my masters study. My gratitude extends to the Faculty of Trackman
A/S for the funding opportunity to undertake my studies there and for the availability
of using the required materials and facility to conduct tests and to build the transpon-
der. I would like to thank all the members in the PTA department at Trackman for their
tremendous support.
iv
Design, manufacture and test of Transponder for Radar Calibration
==PAGE:7==
List of Acronyms
CW radar
Continuous Wave Radar
LO
Local Oscillator
RF Signal
Radio Frequency Signal
IF Signal
Intermediate Frequency signal
TM4
Trackman 4 radar
PF
Platform radar
BB
Baseball practice radar
SNR
Signal-To-Noise ratio
FFT
Fast Fourier Transform
DC
Direct Current
dB
Decibel
dBm
Decibel miliwatts
SSB
Single Sideband
IQ
In-phase/Quadrature
GaAs
gallium-arsenide
dBx
Decibel Unknown
Ch.
Channel
Vpp
Peak-to-Peak Voltage
RF
Radio Frequency
RFI
Radio Frequency Interference
PA
Power Amplifier
SMA
SubMiniature version A
Table 1: List of Acronyms used in the report.
Design, manufacture and test of Transponder for Radar Calibration
v
==PAGE:8==
Contents
Preface
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
List of Acronyms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
v
1
Introduction
1
2
Problem Statement and limitations
3
2.1
Limitations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
3
System Overview
5
4
Methods and Theory
7
4.1
Radar Theory . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
4.2
Transponder Design Theory . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
5
Implementation and results
25
5.1
Software Calibration report code . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
5.2
Radar Calibration - Testing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
5.3
Prototype Transponder Design
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
5.4
Radio link budget
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
5.5
Transponder Calibration (Waveform signal generator script) . . . . . . . . .
57
5.6
LO Spurs
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
65
5.7
Transponder Design optimizations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
67
6
Discussion
73
6.1
Horn transponder vs old Transponder - Performance . . . . . . . . . . . . .
73
6.2
Transponder Prototype Design
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
80
7
Conclusion and Future Work
87
Bibliography
89
A Appendix
91
A.1 Transponder calibration Python script . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
91
A.2 SNR and Noise floor - Old transponder vs Horn transponder (PF)
. . . . .
93
A.3 SNR and Noise floor - Horn transponder (TM4) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
95
vi
Design, manufacture and test of Transponder for Radar Calibration
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction
To optimize the Trackman radars further, is a matter of great interest for the Trackman
company. One way to achieve a better radar accuracy and functionality without having to
re-design a radar, would be to improve the calibration. Radar transponders are a form of
active calibration targets used for radiometric calibration of radars in the radio spectrum.
Due to the transponders ability to simulate a constant back-scattered signal of a moving
object, a radar can be calibrated with utmost accuracy. Transponders make use of the
signal transmitted from the radar to provide a phase shifted version of the received signal,
transmitted back to the radar. To ensure a good radar calibration the transponder must
transmit a constant, low noise signal with a good signal strength. The radars calibrated
at Trackman already makes use of an active calibration target, however improvements
in accuracy, performance and design is desired. Results and tests show that the current
transponder in use, has some small internal signal reflections and outputs signals that
varies by different amounts. In this report a proposal to an optimized transponder will be
presented as a prototype, built with components and hardware available at the Trackman
company. The performance of the transponder will be compared to the performance of
the current transponder that is used for radar calibration, in order to asses the necessity
of investing in a new transponder based of the increase in cost and performance.
This report will have focus on the design and testing of a new transponder for calibrating
the Trackman radars, as well as looking into, how the new transponder can be improved
further. To test the new transponder and to gather radar calibration data, the first part
of the project will have focus on testing conducted in the basement of Trackman. The
other following part will have focus on testing conducted in the anechoic chamber built in
the Trackman facility. It will be seen that there is a big difference in how the data turns
out to be, based on the location used for testing, however this will be covered later in the
report.
Note that for simplicity, the transponder that is being developed in this report will be
referred to as the horn transponder, while the transponder that has been used for calibrat-
ing the commercial radars in the Trackman company the past few years will be refereed
to as the old transponder.
The horn transponder will have to work without tweaking anything in the calibration
software or changing anything in the Trackman radars. The output of the radar calibration
data is what is being calibrated inside the Trackman radars and therefor many tests are
required to be conducted with the use of radar theory, to increase the desired values and
decrease the unwanted values such as noise, spurs and reflections. Multiple tests and plenty
of analysis show that the horn transponder presented in this report, simply is performing
better by having a lower signal variation in e.g., frequency groups, however the size and
the price of the transponder is much higher and must also be accounted for.
This report will start by introducing the problem statement and limitations of the project
followed by a systems overview of the horn transponder. The methods and theory will be
presented, where relevant theory and methods are included to give a good understand-
ing about how everything works. The implementations and results section is where the
methods in the theory section is being implemented and from the methods, the results is
being shown, which also includes some programming of the instruments used. The discus-
sion will have focus on discussion the results further and comparing the horn transponder
Design, manufacture and test of Transponder for Radar Calibration
1
==PAGE:10==
with the old transponder and in addition, the transponder design will also be discussed
regarding improvements and performance, followed by a conclusion of the report.
2
Design, manufacture and test of Transponder for Radar Calibration
==PAGE:11==
2
Problem Statement and limitations
Active calibration targets are commonly used to calibrate radars by using transponders.
For the radar to be calibrated properly and with an increase in accuracy, the transponder
needs to deliver a constant phase-shifted signal with little to no variation in the signal
transmitted. However, due to the exceedingly amount of noise occurring from the sur-
rounding environment and the use of non-optimal hardware and design, the Trackman
radars cannot be calibrated with utmost accuracy.
If the same process continues, the radars made in the Trackman company will not operate
at their optimal level and give less accurate measurements of the moving objects that are
being tracked.
I propose to investigate and design a proper transponder system to increase the accuracy of
the various Trackman radars for indoor calibration in an anechoic chamber of a maximum
distance of 6.8 meters between the transponder of the radar and to compare the function-
ality of the new transponder to the current transponder used for outdoor calibration. The
designed transponder will have to work with the current transponder calibration code,
that had been developed in the Trackman company without making any modification to
the calibration code. The research will be conducted through testing, observations and
radar theory for ideal processes.
The requirements for the transponder design is listed below:
• Calibrate radars with a total power received at the transponder:
- X-band: 13-33 dBm
- K-band: 12-23 dBm
• It should work in frequency-bands of both X-band and K-band.
• It should be possible to calibrate in an anechoic chamber with a maximum distance
of 6.8 meters between the radar and transponder.
• Must be able to calibrate radars based on the software that is currently available at
the Trackman company for calibrating radars.
• Being able to adjust the I -and Q signals from a signal generator automatically.
• Only required to work in a indoor environment
• Should be able to calibrate various different radars made by the Trackman company
(Trackman 4, Platform radar, Baseball practice radar etc.)
• The new transponder should be compared with the transponder currently used for
radar calibration to asses the performance and the necessity of a new transponder.
Design, manufacture and test of Transponder for Radar Calibration
3
==PAGE:12==
2.1
Limitations
At the start of this project, the anechoic chamber at Trackman was not built and available
for use. It was built earliest 2.5 months after the start of the project and made available
after around 3 months time, where it was made available for testing and calibration. Prior
to the anechoic chamber, testing and calibration was conducted down in the basement of
Trackman, but as it will be seen in the report, this was not the optimal environment for
the use of testing a transponder.
Most of the components used for the transponder was ordered prior to the start of the
project. This means, that unfortunately while these components were acceptable for use,
they were not the most optimal on the market. Ordering components is a long process
and as another K-band horn antenna was needed for the prototype design, delivery took
approximately more than one month. Alternative options and improvements will be pre-
sented in this report, but the transponder has been built with the components available at
Trackman and it is believed that the transponder can be improved further with optimal
components.
This report will not go much in dept with the components used in the transponder such
as the mixer, amplifier and horn antenna as this has already been explained in a previous
thesis conducted at Trackman with the focus on the transponder components and testing
of the components also.
Even though Trackman has a few different radars in production, this report will primarily
have focus on the Platform (PF) radar and Trackman 4 (TM4) radar.
4
Design, manufacture and test of Transponder for Radar Calibration
==PAGE:13==
3
System Overview
A high-level block diagram of the prototype horn transponder is shown in fig. 3.1 be-
low. It shares many characteristics with the proven architecture of the current Trackman
transponder, such as the inclusive use of an internal frequency band subsystems. However,
there are several novel features, notably the use of horn antennas, MMIQ IQ mixers and
instruments used in the construction and the overall design. These aspects can be seen in
the system overview below:
Figure 3.1: Top-level block diagram of the prototype calibration transponder
As seen in the figure 3.1 above, the system overview has been presented. The transponder
will receive a electromagnetic wave from a Trackman radar and transmit a phase-shifted
version of the electromagnetic wave back to the radar. Losses in signal power will occur
from the distance propagated by the electromagnetic wave and losses through components
such as the mixer and cables will also be added. Hence, the output signal is required
to be amplified to prevent overloading the mixer input signals. The transponder makes
use of a DC power generator to supply a 15 Volt DC voltage to the amplifiers and signal
generators are being used to supply a constant IQ signal to the mixer.
As noted, there are two sub-figures representing respectively X-band and K-band antennas.
The prototype horn transponder has been designed based on the Trackman radars: TM4,
BB, PF and TMIO and the wavelength types of K-band and X-band. As all the Trackman
radars operate as CW radars, the horn transponder must include two separate receivers
and transmitters to calibrate for two frequency bands simultaneously. Note that some
radars only operate in one frequency bands e.g, PF radar only transmits in X-band and
the TMIO radar only transmits in the K-band. In principle, only one of the receiver and
transmitter parts in the horn transponder needs to be turned ON, if the radar is only
transmitting in one frequency band.
Design, manufacture and test of Transponder for Radar Calibration
5
==PAGE:14==
6
Design, manufacture and test of Transponder for Radar Calibration
==PAGE:15==
4
Methods and Theory
In this section the underlying mathematical and physical methods and assumptions for
building a radar calibration transponder are being presented. This section is primarily
conducted through radar theory and methods. In the following section, the methods and
their relation to each other are being introduced. The following topics are included in this
section:
• Radar Theory - Continuous wave radar, Radar Equation and Friis Transmissions
Equation - an introduction is given in section 4.1 and 4.1.3
• Transponder design Theory - A description of the theory behind the components
used and why it is used in a transponder - See section 4.2
The following subsections introduce relevant theory and methods required to build and
analyze a transponder for calibration purposes.
The subsections will provide relevant
concepts used for the next section - Implementation and results - See section 5.
4.1
Radar Theory
This section will explain and include the most relevant theory about the transponder
and the operation of signals in free space. Including continuous wave radar theory, the
radar equation, Friis transmission equation, the radio spectrum frequency signals and
measurement errors.
4.1.1
Continuous wave radar (CW radar)
Sports that include small round objects, such as baseball, golf and soccer, where the
objects move with a high and non-linear velocity, requires constant measurements to track
the moving objects. For this purpose, Doppler radars can be used. The continuous wave
radar, also called CW radar is a Doppler radar that transmits high frequency signals
continuously and processes the received signals by using the Doppler effect. Since the
radar is transmitting continuously, it requires two antennas. One to receive and one to
transmit, hence the radar can receive a returned signal while transmitting continuously.
A returned signal from a moving target will always contain a Doppler frequency shifted
version of the transmitted signal but with a added phase.
The CW radar or the continuous wave radar assess the phase difference between the
transmitted signal and the received signal. The magnitude of this phase difference, is
the ratio of the distance travelled by the electromagnetic wave to the wavelength of the
transmitted signal, times the degree of division to the full circle (2π) [1].
Design, manufacture and test of Transponder for Radar Calibration
7
==PAGE:16==
Figure 4.1: Block diagram of a simple CW radar and the response characteristic of the
beat-frequency amplifier [2].
As seen in the figure 4.1 above, the block diagram of a simple CW radar is shown. The
CW transmitter generates a continuous fo (frequency oscillation), which is transmitted
by the antenna. The transmitted fo signal is then back-scattered by the target and some
of the radiation is being collected by the receiving antenna of the radar. Since the target
is moving at a velocity vr relative to the radar, the signal received will be shifted in
frequency by +/- fd depending on the distance between the radar and if the target is
increasing or decreasing in distance relative to the radar. The received signal from the
receiver antenna then reaches the input of the mixer in the radar to produce a Doppler
beat note of frequency fd followed by a beat-frequency amplifier, which purpose is to
amplify the Doppler signal to a point where it can be displayed on some form of indicator.
The amplifier can have a response characteristic similar to the one shown in figure 4.1.
The amplifier will pass the Doppler frequency, but due to the low cut off frequency, it will
also be able to reject DC components which occur from stationary targets.
4.1.2
Doppler Effect
The Doppler effect or the Doppler shift is the change in frequency as the wave carrier is
moving away or towards the observer. If a target is moving at a velocity, the frequency
will be shifted due to the Doppler effect.
Consider a radar that transmits a signal set to some frequency and phase expressed as
ft and ϕ. Then the radar would transmit a continuous signal with fc being the carrier
frequency of the form:
st(t) = cos(2πfct))
(4.1)
The transmitted signal would then propagate to the target and back to the radar. If R
is the distance between the radar and the target, a two-way path will occur, meaning
the electromagnetic wave will travel two times the distance, R at the speed of light, c.
The received signal to the radar would then be as follows with a constant (α) added, to
represent the returned fraction of energy transmitted:
8
Design, manufacture and test of Transponder for Radar Calibration
==PAGE:17==
st(t) = αcos(2πfc(t −2R(t)
c
))
(4.2)
Once the frequency is obtained from the received signal by differentiating the phase with
the time [3], the Doppler frequency can be derived as such:
fD(t) = fc
2vr(t)
c
(4.3)
Where vr(t) is the radial velocity, which is the component of velocity in the direction of
the radar.
Measurements of the Doppler shift can be used to discriminate between stationary targets
and moving targets as well as be used for measurements of the radial velocity of a moving
target.
4.1.3
Radar Equation
Radars (Radio Detecting And Ranging) uses electromagnetic waves to determine distance,
position and velocity of an object.
In a radar system, the electromagnetic waves are
transmitted through space from a transmitter antenna (TX) until it hits a target. The
electromagnetic wave is then reflected back to the receiver antenna (RX) of the radar. The
radar equation describes the physical power budget of a signal transmitted by a radar, from
the time the signal is transmitted, to the time the signal is being received by an antenna
[4]. Basically, it describes the characteristics of the radar receiver, transmitter, antenna,
environment and target. The radar equation can be used to determine the maximum range
between a radar and a target or deriving the signal at the target or receiving antenna, but
it is also a means to understanding the basis for a radar design by knowing how a radar
operates.
One of the simple forms of the radar equation to determine the maximum range at which
the radar can detect a target is given by:
Rmax = [ PtGAeσ
(4π)2Smin
]
1
4
(4.4)
Where Pt is the power transmitted (watts), G is the antenna gain, Ae is the antenna effec-
tive aperture (m2), σ is the radar cross section (m2) and Smin is the minimum detectable
signal (watts).
All the different parameters in equation 4.4 can to some extent be changed depending on
the choices the radar designer takes, expect for the target cross section, σ. It can also be
noted from the equation 4.4 above, that the maximum detectable range can be increased
with a higher power transmitted and a better antenna (higher gain and effective antenna
aperture).
The radar equation does not predict the performance of a radar adequately. Compared
to measurements taken in the real world, the radar equation is rather optimistic, since
many factors can influence the radar equation that are not included in the equation, hence
the observed maximum detectable range are usually smaller than what the radar equation
outputs [2].
Design, manufacture and test of Transponder for Radar Calibration
9
==PAGE:18==
4.1.4
Friis Transmission Equation
Two antennas that transmit with a distance or separation, R, having antenna gains, are
part of a free space communication link.
Figure 4.2: Transmitter-receiver configuration [5].
As seen in the figure 4.2 above, a transmitting antenna with a certain gain and input
power, Pt, will radiate an output power towards a receiving antenna with a certain gain.
Using Friis Transmission equation, one can typically solve for the power received or the
power transmitted at the output or input of an radar. This can be used to meet certain
radar design specifications, like knowing that there is a suﬀicient amount of signal power
input at the receiving antenna by transmitting a certain amount of power. The relationship
between the free path loss, antenna gain and wavelength to the received and transmit
powers can be written as:
Pr = PT GT GRλ2
(4πR)2
(4.5)
Where Pr is the power received, PT is the power transmitted, GT is the antenna gain of
the transmitter, GR is the antenna gain of the receiver, λ is the wavelength of which the
RF waves are characterized by and R is the distance between two antennas.
The equation 4.5 described above is also called the Friis Transmission equation [5]. It can
be read from the equation that the bigger the frequency band of the radar, the weaker the
power at the receiving antenna. Note that λ is calculated by taking the speed of light, c,
over the frequency as such:
λ = C
f
(4.6)
From the equation above, it can be seen that an increase in antenna gain or a higher power
transmitted will result in a higher signal power at the receiving antenna.
The difference between the power received and the power transmitted between two anten-
nas is known as the path loss or propagation loss. The propagation loss is an important
factor to know, since the propagation loss over a distance have a very big impact on the
power received, meaning the bigger the distance between the two antennas, the lower the
power received. By taking this factor into account, it can be considered or known, whether
or not the radar would require either attenuation or amplification in a radar system.
10
Design, manufacture and test of Transponder for Radar Calibration
==PAGE:19==
4.1.5
Radar Frequency bands
Most radars typically operate in the microwave region at 0.22-35 GHz frequency range [2].
Not all frequency bands are however allowed for use and can change depending on where
in the world the radar measurements are being taken. The allowed frequency bands and
standards for electronic devices to meet certain set of standards have been established by
the Federal Communications Commission (FCC) in the United States and the European
Commission (EC) in Europe [6]. The Trackman radars can be set to operate at both FCC
and EC frequencies, by accessing the radar settings.
Frequency band
Frequency range (GHz)
Wavelength range (cm)
L band
1-2
15-30
S band
2-4
7.5-15
C band
4-8
3.75-7.5
X band
8-12
2.5-3.75
Ku band
12-18
1.67-2.5
K band
18-27
1.11-1.67
Ka band
27-40
0.75-1.11
V band
40-75
0.4-0.75
W band
75-110
0.27-0.4
Table 4.1: The frequency bands and their corresponding frequency range as well as wave-
length used by radars.
As seen in the table 4.1 above, the frequency bands are shown for the different frequency
ranges and wavelengths. The frequency bands in focus will be X-band and K-band, which
are frequency ranges spanning from 8-12 GHz for X-band and 18-27 GHz for K-band.
4.1.6
Measurement Errors - Noise
One of the very important factors in having a good transponder that can transmit and
receive constant signals, is limiting the amount of noise in the system. There exist various
kinds of noise terms and it is important to understand and determine what kind of noise
is affecting the radio wave signals, in order to limit the impact and eventually suppress
this quantity if possible.
First of all, it is important to understand what noise is in a radar system. Signal noise
can be defined as a non-coherent and unwanted quantity that impact the wanted signal in
some way. A constant signal might be desired in most cases, however noise can interfere
with the signal and possibly corrupt the parameters of the original signal, depending on
the strength and amount of noise present.
There will always be noise present in a signal no matter what, however how one deal with
the presence of noise, can well determine the quality of a signal and how well of a signal
is transmitted from a radar or transponder.
Receiver Noise and Noise figure
Noise produced inside the receiver itself or noise that is entering via the desired signal
into the receiving antenna, is called receiver noise.
Consider a radar system in which
there is no noise coming from the environment and the signals is being transmitted by
the radar itself. In such a system, there would still be noise present, which is generated
by thermal motion. This is also called Thermal noise. Basically, it is noise that is being
generated when current is passing through a resistor in a electrical system. The available
thermal-noise power generated by a receiving antenna can be expressed as such:
Design, manufacture and test of Transponder for Radar Calibration
11
==PAGE:20==
N = kTBn
(4.7)
Where N is the thermal-noise power in watts, K is Boltzmann’s constant (1.38 ∗10−23), T
is the absolute temperature in Kelvin and Bn is the receiver antenna bandwidth in hertz.
Noise figure is also another important term to understand and is a quantity that repre-
sents the quality of a radio frequency system. It is a number that can specify the noise
performance of a radio receiver or e.g., an amplifier. The total noise at the output of a
radar system is considered to be equal to the thermal-noise power from a ”ideal” receiver
times the noise figure as defined in the equation below [2]:
Fn =
No
kToBnGa
(4.8)
Where Fn is the noise figure, No is the noise output from the receiver, k is Boltzmann’s
constant, Bn is the receiver bandwidth and Ga is the available gain. Basically, the section
that is being divided, is the noise out of a practical receiver over the noise of a ideal
receiver at standard temperature.
Equation 4.8 can also be written as a linear portion of the receiving antenna input-output
characteristic as such:
Fn = Si/Ni
So/No
(4.9)
Where Si and Ni is the signal output and input receiver noise and similar to So and No
which is the signal input and output receiver noise.
Noise Floor
In a radar or when analyzing a signal, the term Noise floor is often used to describe the
sum of all noises in the system of measurement. Basically, the Noise floor is a measurement
of all the noise, as well as unwanted signals added together within a measurement system.
Other than that, the noise product can include thermal noise, component noise, cosmic
noise and atmospheric noise.
The Noise floor decides the lowest possible signal level
for which a system can measure. Signals below the noise floor would require different
techniques of spectrum communications to be able to detect those signals. By lowering
the amount of noise present in a system, the noise floor will be lowered as well and a
common way to do this, is to reduce the thermal noise by e.g., cooling the system.
Signal-to-noise ratio (SNR)
SNR is short for ”Signal-to-noise ratio” and is the average signal power to the power of
the average noise level. SNR is a ratio, meaning that the higher the value on one end of
the ratio is in relation to the other value, the lower or greater the overall SNR will be.
A high SNR is usually desirable and means the signal is clear with little to no noise. A
too low SNR will start to introduce Gaussian noise into the system and will most likely
influence the desired signal.
The Signal-to-noise ratio is a good quantity to use, when determining the quality of a
signal and can be expressed as such:
SNR = PSignal
PNoise
(4.10)
12
Design, manufacture and test of Transponder for Radar Calibration
==PAGE:21==
Where PSignal is the signal power and PNoise is respectively the noise power.
When the Signal-to-noise ratio is low, it can mean that the measurements are very much
being disturbed by noise. Data corruption can also be witnessed if the signal level is too
close to the noise floor.
The level at which this noise is introduced to the signal can depend on many factors.
In radar systems these could include receiver noise, antenna noise, radio wave density
and background noise such as moving leafs, rain, snow or wind when measuring Doppler
signals.
The higher the SNR the better the signal. A SNR higher than 0 dB indicates that the
signal level is greater than the noise level. The SNR value depends much of the application
but Ideally, a SNR value of 20 dB or more is recommended in a radar application [7].
There are two apparent ways to improve the Signal-to-noise ratio. The first one would be
to improve the signal power. By improving the signal power the ratio between the signal
power and noise power increases, meaning the SNR will also increase as seen in equation
4.10.
The second way would be to reduce the background noise in the area of measurement.
This would include limiting signal interference, signal reflection and moving objects if
measuring with a Doppler radar.
4.2
Transponder Design Theory
This section and the following subsections will focus on the theory behind the compo-
nents used in the transponder design. These are important to understand and analyze
regarding performance and use, as well as to avoid distortions in a microwave system.
The components include IQ mixer, RF power amplifier and horn antenna.
4.2.1
IQ Mixer Basics
Microwave mixers basically convert the frequency of electromagnetic waves. In principle,
they work by providing both the difference and frequency sum at the output port, when
two frequency signals are being added to the input ports. Mixers are very essential to
many radar applications, ranging from surveillance to radio astronomy to transponders.
One of the primary and most important component in a radar transponder, is the IQ Mixer
and hence it is very important to understand how they operate and what influences the
RF output signal. An IQ-Mixer consists of two balanced mixers and a hybrid. It provides
two IF signals with equal amplitudes which are in phase quadrature and outputs a RF
signal. Hence an IQ mixer is also sometimes called a In-phase and Quadrature mixer. A
mixer also plays an important role in the processing of high frequency signals, especially
in demodulators and modulators [8]. As a modulator they have the ability to take the
base-band signals and modulate a fixed carrier frequency.
An IQ mixer mix two signals with same amplitude and frequency but shifted 90°or a
quarter cycle relative to each other as illustrated in the figure below: (figure 4.3).
Design, manufacture and test of Transponder for Radar Calibration
13
==PAGE:22==
Figure 4.3: Two signals mixed with one another to produce a phase shift of the input
frequency signals [9].
The IQ mixer basically takes in a LO signal and I and Q input signals, and then produces
a frequency offset version of the input signals. An ideal mixer will take the two input
signals and ”mix” them such that the output frequency is either the sum or the difference
frequency of the input signal. This is also what is called double sided conversion. The
expression can be expressed as such:
fout = fin1 + fin2
(4.11)
Where fout is the output frequency, fin1 is the input frequency at the first input port and
fin2 is the input frequency at the second input port.
A standard IQ mixer, is built such a way, that it is a 4-port electronic circuit formed using
two identical 3-port mixers as seen in figure 4.4. The 3-port mixers consists of two input
ports and one output port. The input ports being called the IF (intermediate frequency),
the LO (Local oscillator) and for the output the RF (Radio frequency).
Figure 4.4: This figure shows the design of a standard IQ mixer, formed by two identical
mixers [10].
The LO signal is typically driven by a sinusoidal continuous wave or a square wave signal
as the input port of the mixer. Basically, the LO signal acts as an ”ON” and ”OFF”
switch, where a high voltage will provide an active mixer and a low voltage will provide
14
Design, manufacture and test of Transponder for Radar Calibration
==PAGE:23==
the opposite. The IF port is where the intermediate frequency is set. This is usually a
a more constant lower frequency signal than the RF signal, but can be interchanged as
the second input or the output, depending on the application of the mixer. If a high
frequency is applied to the RF port and it is higher than the second input frequency, then
this process is called up-conversion and if the RF frequency is lower than the second input
frequency, then this process is called down-conversion. A simple illustration is seen in the
figure 4.5 below, that illustrates this process.
Figure 4.5: Illustration and representation in the frequency domain for down-conversion
and up-conversion. The expressions included are showing the relationship between the
RF, LO and IF signals [10].
It is carefully noted, that for the case of up-conversion illustrated in figure 4.5, the cases for
fRF1 and fRF2 in the frequency domain have a very close presence of sum and differences.
This process is known as double sideband conversion.
Another yet known process, is
called single sideband conversion. For this case the difference or sum of the frequency is
designed such a way, that they cancel inside the mixer. The mixer that works with single
sideband conversion are usually more complex in design and is called single sideband (SSB)
up-converters or single sideband modulators [10].
4.2.2
Mixer Performance
There are many ways to create a mixer and there are many mixers available on the
market. When designing a system it is very important to consider which mixer has the
best performance by looking at the performance metrics. These are typically described
in the datasheet and are very important to understand.
These include IQ conversion
loss, LO-RF isolation, amount of image rejection and RF/LO/IF frequency range. These
performance metricises will be explained further in the following sub sections.
IQ conversion loss
The IQ conversion loss in a mixer is an very important metric, that is usually wanted
to be as close to zero as possible. The conversion loss in a mixer is a measure of how
eﬀicient the mixer is.
In passive mixers, conversion loss is described as the difference
between the amplitude of the input signal and the amplitude of the output signal [11].
For down-conversion, the conversion loss would be the difference between the amplitude
of the input RF signal and the amplitude of the output IF signal. For up-conversion, the
Design, manufacture and test of Transponder for Radar Calibration
15
==PAGE:24==
conversion loss would be the difference between the amplitude of the input IF signal and
the amplitude of the RF output signal.
Conversion loss found in mixers usually range from 4.5 to 9 dB depending on the chosen
mixer are are expressed as a positive number with the units of dB.
LO-RF isolation
LO-RF isolation is a performance metric that describe the amount of power that leaks
from one port to another [12]. Basically, a high isolation would give a small difference in
the amplitude of the input signal and the amplitude of the leaked power from the input
signal to another port. LO-RF isolation is one of the forms of isolation found in microwave
mixers, beside LO-IF -and RF-IF isolation. LO-RF isolation is very important to be kept
high as a poor isolation can contaminate the RF line and cause problems in frequency
up-conversion, since the LO and RF output frequencies come very close to each other [12].
Filtering the signal would be useless in this case, since the signals are so close to each
other that it would be pretty much impossible to filter out, hence it is important that the
mixer have a high LO-RF isolation value.
LO-RF isolation is defined as a positive number in the units of dB and is usually defined
in a mixers datasheet. The higher the number, the better the LO-RF isolation is.
Mixer Noise Figure
Noise figure is defined by the added noise generated by the mixer itself and presented at
the IF output. For a passive mixer, the noise figure is almost always equal to the loss and
is a very important quantity to take into account when choosing a mixer.
Mixer types (Balanced/Unbalanced mixers, single-ended mixers,
double-balanced mixers)
Some mixers may be referred to as balanced -or unbalanced mixers.
The unbalanced
crystal mixer is the simplest type of mixer used in radar applications, however there are
some downsides in using such a mixer. The biggest one being the mixers inability to cancel
out local oscillator noise that can appear at the IF frequency. This can create diﬀiculty
in detecting low powered signals due to the noise present in the signal and can lower the
receiver sensitivity. Fortunately, a better choice of mixer exists and is the balanced or
hybrid mixer. The balanced mixer can effectively cancel the local oscillator noise and
thereby maximize the receiver sensitivity.
An alternative method to cancel the local oscillator noise that influences the desired signal
for a unbalanced mixer, would be inserting a tun-able narrow-band RF filter between the
mixer and local oscillator [2]. The bandwidth of the filter must be narrow enough so that
the local oscillator noise as well as the image frequencies do not emerge at the mixer.
However, using a balanced mixer removes the downsides of using a narrow-band RF filter
with a unbalanced mixer.
Sometimes a mixer is also referred to as single-ended. A single-ended mixer will create
all combinations of harmonics of the LO and RF. The output of a single-ended mixer is
usually designed to filter out the difference frequency. A balanced mixer would suppress
the even harmonics of the local oscillator signal. Two single-ended mixers connected in
parallel and out of phase with 180°is called a double-balanced mixer and is designed to
suppress the even harmonics of both the radio frequency and local oscillator signals [2].
16
Design, manufacture and test of Transponder for Radar Calibration
==PAGE:25==
4.2.3
Image Reject mixers
When a mixer converts the radio frequency (RF) to intermediate frequency (IF), two
output frequencies are produced, the sum and difference of the input frequencies as such:
foutput = (fRF + fLO), fRF −fLO)
(4.12)
Of the two frequency response, usually only one is required. The unwanted signal can
sometimes be easily removed if it in some cases fall well outside the required bandwidth.
However, this is not always the case and can require complex filtering. The unwanted
output frequency response is known as the image frequency and can be filtered out or
suppressed by a image reject or single-sideband mixer.
Figure 4.6: Block diagram of a image Reject Mixer [13].
As seen in the figure 4.6 above, the image reject mixer takes in a RF-signal and local
oscillator signal as the input and outputs an IF signal.
The image reject mixer uses
phasing to cancel out the unwanted mixing product. As seen in figure 4.6, the mixer
consists of two balanced mixers and two IF hybrids (90°) as well as an In-Phase power
divider. By adding or subtracting a phase shift of 90°, the IF hybrid can cause the high-
sideband signals (fRF +fLO) to add to one output port, while the other is being subtracted
and thereby suppressed.
Design, manufacture and test of Transponder for Radar Calibration
17
==PAGE:26==
4.2.4
IQ Mixer- Signal
When adding a LO signal to the mixer and measuring the output signal on a spectrum
analyzer, a few signals will be seen. These are the Up-converted - and suppressed sideband,
the LO feed-through (carrier frequency) as well as spurious products (spurs) with different
amplitudes.
Figure 4.7:
Shows how signals received include LO spurs, LO feed-through and the
suppressed/up-converted side band [14].
The signal received looks like figure 4.7 above. The up-converted sideband is the IF signal
from the I/Q signal and the suppressed sideband is the Q/I signal phase shifted with 90
degrees. The ratio between the up-converted sideband and the suppressed sideband is also
called the IQ gain, which is the ratio between these two IF signals. The LO feedthrough
is the signal received in the LO port of the mixer. Another important factor to consider
is the LO spurs, which also are called the spurious products.
This is a quantity that
is caused by intermodulation distortion or by over driving the Mixer and occurs when
the output signal contains the differences and sums of the input signal attended by their
harmonics [14]. The spurious products is something that has to be suppressed as much as
possible, seeing that they can impact the desired sideband by overlapping or influencing
the sidebands.
4.2.5
Mixer diode
In a mixer, mixing of two or more signals are being caused by the switching behavior of
a diode in the Mixer. For an ideal mixer diode, it is assumed that the LO signal is much
stronger than the RF signal as well as that the diode switches instantaneously [12]. This
kind of diode would be called an ideal diode with optimal mixer performance. This kind of
ideal diode is not possible to achieve in the real world, but there are some diodes that are
closer to being an ideal diode such as the Schottky diode found in some mixers, including
the MMIQ-0626H Mixer used in the transponder. The diode not being completely ideal,
means that some additional mixing products will be present in the RF signal such as
spurious products and harmonics as seen in figure 4.8.
As seen in the figure above 4.8 the frequency components can be seen. For the Ideal diode
case, harmonics and spurious products are non-existent and for the realistic diode, more
harmonics and spurious products are present. Basically, a mixers quality to suppress the
spurious products and harmonics is determined by the quality of the diode used. It is
noted that the switching characteristic for the realistic diode case seen in the figure 4.8 is
a Schottky diode.
18
Design, manufacture and test of Transponder for Radar Calibration
==PAGE:27==
Figure 4.8: Graphs that shows the comparison in the frequency and time domain between
an Ideal Diode and a Realistic Diode (Schottky diode) switching characteristic [12].
The mathematical expression for the frequency components of a diode can be expressed
as:
fIF = nfLO ± mfRF
(4.13)
Where nfLO and mfRF are the frequency components and where n and m are integers. It
can be seen that a higher integer value will result in additional unwanted fIF frequency
components on the output. Thus, suppression or removal of the distortion products is the
answer to a good mixer design.
As previously explained, the undesired signals are occurring from the input of the mixer.
This means that in order to minimize the amount of spurs and the level of which the spurs
are being seen, the input signal must be minimized as much as possible. However, the
lower the input signal, the lower the output signal, and for a radar application the output
signal have to have be high enough, that the sidebands and the carrier frequency can be
measured for the received signal. By amplifying the output signal, a clean and constant
signal can be acquired. It is very expensive to be amplifying the output signal of a high
RF system, so other alternatives can be considered such as adding higher gain antennas
or lower loss components.
Design, manufacture and test of Transponder for Radar Calibration
19
==PAGE:28==
4.2.6
Spurious signals (spurs)
The world ”Spur” is short for ”spurious signal”. These are unwanted signals generated
in the IF bandwidth. Harmonics are usually also present and are a subset of spurious
products found at the integer multiples of the fundamental frequency of the signals [15].
Thus, it is important to consider the amplitude of the spurious signals to minimize the
harmonics as well.
It is important to keep the spurious and harmonics levels low to ensure a stable and high
precision output signal, otherwise a number of errors can be caused, such as showing false
targets in Doppler radars.
The unit of which spurious levels are measured are ”dBc”, which is also the ratio between
the the input power signal and the carrier signal power [15].
4.2.7
Radar Antennas
A radar antenna is defined as a metallic structure that transmits or receives electromag-
netic waves. The purpose and focus of a transmitting radar antenna is to concentrate the
radiated power in a small angular sector of space as best as possible. Antenna receivers
purpose is to collect as much of the radiated energy as possible in the echo signal. In the
image 4.9 below a simple block diagram can be seen of an antenna transmitting a signal:
Figure 4.9: Simple block diagram of a antenna. It radiates some power by being fed with
a certain input power.
There exist a wide variety of antennas regarding their shapes and forms, with each of their
own unique uses and applications. A specific form of antenna type is usually chosen based
on the basis of its radiation pattern, impedance, gain, polarization and bandwidth. An
antennas geometry is also important.
One particular form of antenna with a good antenna eﬀiciency is the horn antennas. These
antennas produce a very narrow beam in the direction of propagation as well having a
large radiating aperture [5]. The antenna gain in a horn antenna is usually pretty high.
The antenna gain is an indicator of how well the antenna radiates or receives radiation
in any direction compared to a theoretical antenna. The bigger the antenna gain, the
bigger the power received is, which explains the relationship as seen in Friis transmission
equation 4.5.
20
Design, manufacture and test of Transponder for Radar Calibration
==PAGE:29==
Antenna properties
As explained in the subsection 4.2.7 above, a radar antenna has some specific proper-
ties/characteristics that describes an antenna type and how good it operates for a given
application. These are described below:
• Antenna Directivity - In the real world, antennas are not isotropic, meaning they do
not have the same radiation in all direction. The actual radiation pattern depends
on the antenna size, design and other factors. Antenna directivivity is a factor that
describes the ability of the antenna to focus its energy in a certain direction and
is expressed in dB. The antenna directivity is a ratio between the maximum power
density and its average value over a sphere of observation in the far field of an
antenna described as such [16]:
D = P(θ, ϕ)max
P(θ, ϕ)av
(4.14)
Where P(θ, ϕ)max is the maximum power density and the average value over the
sphere of observation, is denoted as P(θ, ϕ)av.
A high antenna directivity, would correspond to a very focused beam being radiated
by the antenna as well as that the beam also being able to travel further. An antenna
that radiates equally in all directions would have a directivity of 0 dB or 1.
• Antenna eﬀiciency - Is described as the ratio of power radiated to the antenna relative
to the power radiated from the antenna. Antenna eﬀiciency is a ratio that describes
how eﬀicient the antenna is by either transmitting the power fed to it or absorbing
it. By this definition, a antenna with a high eﬀiciency would transmit or radiated all
the power fed to it, and a low eﬀicient antenna would transmit or radiated a small
portion of the power fed to it. Note that the antenna eﬀiciency is a quantity that
is the same for transmitting and receiving. Antenna eﬀiciency can be expressed as
such:
ϵR = PRad
PIn
(4.15)
Where ϵR is the antenna eﬀiciency, PRad is the power radiated by the antenna and
PIn is the input power of the antenna.
The antenna eﬀiciency is a number between 0-1 but quoted in terms of a percentage.
An antenna with 100 % antenna eﬀiciency would be ideal, however most antennas
only have a 50-60 % antenna eﬀiciency, meaning only 50-60 % of the power supplied
will be transmitted by the antenna [17].
Common causes of an antenna not being an ideal antenna, e.g., not having an antenna
eﬀiciency of a 100 % includes: conduction losses, dielectric losses (e.g., loss of energy
due to heat from conductivity of the dielectric) and impedance mismatch losses.
Antenna eﬀiciency is a very important parameter in a radar system as it can dictate
the signal strength on the receiver side. Luckily, some antennas can be very close
to 100 % antenna eﬀiciency, such as horn antennas with no lossy materials around
them [18].
• Antenna Gain/power gain - The antenna power gain or simply antenna gain, denoted
by the letter G, describes for a receiving antenna, how well the antenna converts
Design, manufacture and test of Transponder for Radar Calibration
21
==PAGE:30==
input power into electromagnetic waves transmitted in a certain direction. For a
transmitting antenna power gain describes how well the antenna converts electro-
magnetic waves from a certain direction into electrical power. Note that antenna
gain is part of the radar equation, since it includes the losses produced by an an-
tenna. Power gain can be expressed as the antenna eﬀiciency factor (k) multiplied
by the antenna directivity (D) as such:
G = kD
(4.16)
If k=1 for a lossless antenna then the gain, (G) is almost always less than the antenna
directivity (D)
4.2.8
RF Power amplifier
A power amplifier in a radar system is a very important component in achieving a high
enough output power level and is commonly used in radar/transponder design, where a
need of amplification is typically required due to losses. The RF power amplifier (PA) is
usually the last component of the transmitter chain, where it helps the radar to deliver a
strong enough power level based on the radar specifications and required properties of the
transmitting antenna. A power amplifier usually requires a certain DC power supplied to
the component to be active. A simple blockdiagram of an amplifier is shown in the figure
4.10 below:
Figure 4.10: Block diagram of a basic power amplifier. It produces a output power from
the input power by being supplied with a certain DC voltage.
For every radar/transponder system it is important to choose a RF power amplifier that
meets the specifications of the product. Some of most important requirements for a RF
power amplifier are as follows:
• Gain - It is the amount of gain in the RF power amplifier that determines the
power level of the RF output and its purpose of creating gain. The gain in a PA is
commonly described as the difference between the RF input and the RF output of
the amplifier.
• Power handling capabilities - Is defined as the maximum power the RF power am-
plifier can withstand without causing any major damage to the component. This is
dependent on the cooling system as well as the size and configuration of the transis-
tor’s die inside the PA [19].
22
Design, manufacture and test of Transponder for Radar Calibration
==PAGE:31==
• Linearity - Is the measurement or the ability for the PA to produce an output that
is very similar to the input signal. Basically, linearity is a measurement of distortion
in the RF power amplifier. A highly linear RF power amplifier, usually also equals
a distortion-free amplifier and vise versa. Optimally, the linearity of a RF power
amplifier should be directly related to the gain of the PA, however most power
amplifiers lose gain with an increase in frequency and the loss is even bigger at
higher frequencies.
• Stability - In order to avoid variations or oscillations that can occur from external
conditions, the RF power amplifier has to be stable as not to produce variations in
the RF output signal.
• Eﬀiciency - Is the measurement of how eﬀicient the PA is, by looking at the loss of
DC energy when the power is transformed to RF. The RF power amplifier eﬀiciency
is usually expressed as a percentage and can be expressed as such:
PAE = Pout −Pin
PDC
(4.17)
A Power amplifier with a low level of eﬀiciency would drain the battery or DC source
much faster, as well as creating excessive heat. In this situation the problem could be
dealt with by using a cooling system, but this has a cost and requires more resources.
PA for radar applications and high RF applications usually come with an attached
heat sink, which helps to dissipate the heat from the amplifier.
In any microwave system is it desirable that the RF power amplifier meets the specifications
and requirements eﬀiciently. Reason is, to maximize the gain and minimize the losses such
as managing DC power wastage, noise figure and distortion. However, commonly with
high eﬀicient power amplifiers, it is a problem that they introduce additional distortion
proportional with the increase in eﬀiciency [19].
In order to deal with this problem,
linearization techniques are implemented and hence amplifiers have been categorized in
classes, such as A to C for controlled current sources and D class and higher for switch
mode amplifiers [19]. Note that if linearization techniques are to be used in RF power
amplifiers, all the requirements listed above, have to be much higher in value than the
desired frequency band.
Design, manufacture and test of Transponder for Radar Calibration
23
==PAGE:32==
24
Design, manufacture and test of Transponder for Radar Calibration
==PAGE:33==
5
Implementation and results
Based on the methods and theory presented in the previous section 4, the implementation
and results are presented in this section. This will include test results, calculations and
transponder design improvements with the use of the theory and methods presented prior.
The section consists mainly of a few parts:
• Software Calibration report code - A description about how Trackman radars can
be calibrated, given in section 5.1
• Radar Calibration - Testing - Calibration results are being presented in the basement
and anechoic chamber in section 5.2
• Prototype Transponder Design - The design of the transponder is being presented
including component list and cost - See section 5.3
• Radio link budget - By using Friis Transmission equation, the radio link budget can
be derived given in section 5.4
• Transponder Calibration - The results from the calibration script and how the values
were found, given in section 5.5
• LO Spurs - Possible methods of reducing LO spurs, given in section 5.6
• Transponder Design Optimizations - The results from researching components that
can optimize the transponder further, given in section 5.7
In the first section, the software calibration code is being presented and explained to
understand the process of calibrating the Trackman radars. Next, test result have been
presented from both the testing done down in the basement of the Trackman company
and testing done in the anechoic chamber. The prototype design of the transponder have
then presented as well as the underlying thoughts and observation behind the design
followed by some calculations of the radio link budget. Finally, a method of calibrating
the transponder automatically is presented as well as the results of the implementation.
Some considerations made in the design to minimize noise and unwanted signals are also
included.
5.1
Software Calibration report code
When calibrating a Trackman radar, the end product will be a calibration report that
includes the radars internal values calibrated such as SNR, noise floor, signal level etc..
The calibration report is what the software code outputs by using the phase shifted signal
received from the transponder to the radar as well as a noise file.
The software then
starts calculating a bunch of values and variables such as the noise level, signal level, IQ
gain etc.. The calibration code can then be read and understood relatively, in order to
understand how the calibration process is being done and with what part of the received
signal is being processed.
The Trackman radars have a receiver and a transmitter part, which is represented as chan-
nels in the calibration report. The TM4 for example have 3 receivers and one transmitter
on X-band, with one of the receivers receiving two signals which makes up 5 channels or
10 IQ channels in total. The TM4 also has 3 receivers and one transmitter on K-band,
which makes up 3 channels and a total of 8 channels for the TM4 radar. Basically, the
Design, manufacture and test of Transponder for Radar Calibration
25
==PAGE:34==
calibration code will output a calibration report for every calibration value for 8 channels.
With each of these channels representing the sum of the I and Q adjustment made in the
radar. The sum is usually shown as 8 channels for some values, but sometimes this can
be 16. When there are 16 channels, the I and Q values are shown separately, and when 8
channels are being shown, it is the sum of the I and Q values for a calibration quantity.
Typically, the received signal from a transponder looks like the figure below 5.1:
Figure 5.1:
Shows how signals received include LO spurs, LO feed-through and the
suppressed/up-converted side band [14].
When calibrating the transponder, it is wanted to minimize the LO spurs as much as
possible as well as suppressing the suppressed side band as much as possible to get a good
IQ ratio. Basically, the software code takes the up-converted and suppressed side-band
along with the LO feed through signal and looks at the peak of the signals to try and
calculate a bunch of values from that measurement.
The software code will require a noise file (transponder turned OFF) and a txp file
(transponder turned ON) in order to calibrate.
The txp file is used to achieve most
of the calibration data by giving the phase and gain calibrations, however a noise file is
also needed. The noise file is used to calibrate the noise floor and can be adjusted in the
radar by either increasing or decreasing the gain of the radar to achieve a specific amount
of noise floor.
One primarily execution in the code is the Fast Fourier transform (FFT). The FFT is an
algorithm that transforms a time-domain-samples signal into its frequency components.
By using FFT for signal processing, it allows to measure and analysis signals effectively.
For example, it is possible to effectively acquire the time-domain of a signal, which then
can be used to measure the frequency content and convert the results into real-world units
to be displayed.
5.1.1
Trackman Radar Calibration Process
In simple steps the radar must know that it is being calibrated. By connecting a computer
to the radar with a USB cable or by connecting through an IP address similar to the one
set in the radar, the computer and radar can communicate with each other. By turning
on the waveform generator with the I and Q channels active and applying a constant DC
voltage to the amplifier, the transponder can be turned on. When a signal is received, it
will be phase shifted and then transmitted back to the radar. Basically, the transponder
needs to receive an electromagnetic wave before it can transmit anything. While the radar
is transmitting and receiving continuous wave signals, the software inside the radar will
26
Design, manufacture and test of Transponder for Radar Calibration
==PAGE:35==
adjust some parameters, such as the gain or signal level over a duration of measurement.
With the computer, the radar can then be turned on to acquire data, which is then saved
in a file. The calibration data consists of two tests: One with the transponder ON and
one with the transponder turned OFF. These files are then saved on the chosen radar and
can be transferred by the connection between the radar and the computer. The files are
then ran in a python script made by the Trackman company, that outputs a calibration
report over the signal received from the transponder. The calibration code will compare
the noise and signal file, to detect the signal received from the transponder throughout all
the noise that is present. The presence of noise can occur due to environmental influence,
such as signals being reflected off objects in the room or signal interference. It is possible
with the use of a different program/tool to see the signal received from the transponder
as a spectrogram. By looking at the spectrogram, information about the signal strength,
frequency and noise level can be acquired.
5.1.2
Calibration process - How to calibrate (In detail)
To calibrate a Trackman radar, a computer with the necessary software downloaded and
two cables are required as well as the radar and transponder.
• The first step is to connect the computer to the radar, so the radar can be accessed.
The easiest method is using a cable to access the radars IP address as well as the
radars storage. Once this is done, the transponder needs to be pinpointed so the
radar knows where exactly the received signal is coming from. This is done, using a
python program and the camera of the radar.
• Once the radar knows, where the signal is coming from the transponder, the user
needs to tell the radar to transmit for a certain period of time (usually 8 seconds).
The program used is called PuTTY, which is a free open source serial console and
network file transfer application [20]. When writing a certain command in the console
over a certain period (e.g., 8 seconds), the radar will start transmitting.
The following commands have been used (transmitting in 8 seconds):
– PF Radar command: stream_recorder -e -d 8 /tmp/noise.tsd
– TM4 Radar command: tmd2_recoder 8
A txp (transponder turned ON) and a noise file (transponder turned OFF) is then
acquired over the period of seconds.
• To transfer the txp and noise file from the radar to the users computer, a program
called WinSCP will be used. WinSCP is a program where the user can copy files
between a local computer and remote servers using FTP, FTPS, SCP and etc [21].
The txp and noise file can then be dragged from the radar to the users computer by
using WinSCP.
• Finally, once the txp and noise files are acquired on the users computer, they can be
called in a calibration script in python to finally output the calibration report. In
the calibration script it is important to set the right frequency, the location of the
antenna in a 3D space and adding the saved path to the txp and noise file. Note
that the frequency set, differs from radar to radar so it is important that the right
frequency set or the values given in the calibration report will be wrong.
It is sometimes interesting to look at the spectrogram of the signal received, which can
give information about signal strength, noise and frequency. By using a separate python
program that takes in a .tsd file as input, a spectrogram over a signal can be observed.
Design, manufacture and test of Transponder for Radar Calibration
27
==PAGE:36==
The spectrograms show the signals received from the transponder to the radar and is
a visual representation of the spectrum of frequencies of the signal received over a time
period. It can also be read from the spectrogram, the signal strength over a time of several
frequencies and how the signal strength varies over time. It is hard to tell from only these
images what the actual noise level and signal level is. Therefore the signals acquired will
be ran in the calibrating program as explained and will calibrate the radar to output
values such as the gain, signal level, noise floor, loop gain and gain ratio for the I and Q
signals as a report
5.2
Radar Calibration - Testing
Calibrating a radar is an important step to increasing one of the most important character-
istics of a radar: the accuracy. By using an active calibration method, such as simulating
an object in movement by transmitting a phase shifted electromagnetic wave, the received
signal to the radar can be used to adjust values and thereby calibration can be achieved.
The problem statement states, that the horn transponder have to work with the current
calibration code used in Trackman. Hence, a lot of radar calibration testing is required,
since many different factors determine if the radar is being calibrated correctly. Luckily, the
values for a success full radar calibration can be acquired and thereby compared, until the
right calibration values are set by adjusting the horn transponders design. The calibration
values from the old transponder will be used as a reference for the horn transponder to
respectively achieve successful radar calibrations.
Trackman radars - Platform and Trackman 4
While Trackman produce and sell many different radars, this report will primarily have
focus on the PF and TM4 radar for testing and comparing. The PF radar only runs on
X-band, while the TM4 radar runs on both X-band and K-band. The average signal power
output from the Trackman radars are between 24-32 dBm for X-band and 13-20 dBm for
K-band.
(a) Image of the Trackman 4 (TM4) radar
(b) Image of the Platform (PF) radar
Figure 5.2: Images of the Trackman radars
As seen in the figure 5.2 above, the images of the TM4 and PF radar can be seen. Even
though the TM4 radar has more antennas inside the print since it transmits and receives
in two frequency bands, the PF is much bigger and heavier in size. The platform radar is
a radar that is usually being used for tracking objects over long distances and therefore it
has a higher power input, explaining the size and weight of the radar.
28
Design, manufacture and test of Transponder for Radar Calibration
==PAGE:37==
Basement and anechoic chamber
To calibrate the different radars available at Trackman, the radars as well as the transpon-
der, is required to be measured over a distance of over 6 meters. For frequent calibration
and testing, this would require a place at Trackman at which the test setup would not
have to be moved around a lot. Having a big enough space to calibrate over a few meters
distance and having electrical outlets to a power source for the transponder and radar is
essential. For the first part of the project, available locations included the basement at
Trackman and outside of the Trackman building (outdoor) for calibrating the radars. The
initial idea was to use the basement for prototype testing and calibration and then pro-
ceed to outdoor calibration, due to removing as much as possible transponder and radar
receiver noise coming from the environment. However, for the second part of the project,
a anechoic chamber was built and made available for use. The anechoic chamber proved
very useful in eliminated all the noise coming from the environment and it was clear that
it had an impact on the results. Therefore the primary location for calibration and testing
became the anechoic chamber.
(a) Basement at Trackman
(b) Anechoic Chamber at Trackman
Figure 5.3: Locations at Trackman used to calibrate the radars at.
Figure 5.3 shows both the basement and the anechoic chamber at Trackman used for
calibration and testing. As seen in the figure 5.3 above, the basement consists of many
objects, especially many reflective objects, which can influence the calibration data by
a lot. The anechoic chamber consists of echo absorbing material that stops reflections
of electromagnetic waves and by using non-reflective materials for everything else, the
environmental clutter can be eliminated.
Design, manufacture and test of Transponder for Radar Calibration
29
==PAGE:38==
Basement calibration results
What a successful radar calibration example of a platform and a Trackman 4 radar with
the old transponder in the basement with a 6 meter distance, can be seen in the tables
below (table 5.2 and 5.1) (Note the high noise floor and lower SNR for the basement tests):
Calibration Data
Min.
Max.
Signal Level [dBm]
-13.319
5.109
Gain
0.155
0.325
SNR [dB]
82.29
104.459
Noise floor [dB]
-101.23
-94.810
IQGainRatio
0.110
1.646
PhaseOffset [Rad]
-2.157
2.137
Table 5.1: Successful Trackman 4 (TM4) calibration report (note that the radar is in both
X and K-band and hence the big interval between the minimum and maximum value).
Calibration Data
Min.
Max.
Signal Level [dBm]
-16.763
-3.390
Gain
0.069
0.178
SNR [dB]
78.376
85.892
Noise floor [dB]
-95.139
-87.809
IQGainRatio
0.108
2.498
PhaseOffset [Rad]
-2.034
2.858
Table 5.2: Successful Platform radar (PF) calibration report (X-band only).
To avoid interference with the production of the actual Trackman radars in the production
department by transmitting electromagnetic waves in similar frequency bands, the testing
of the radars were conducted down in the basement. By doing so, the results observed
down in the basement had a lot of unnecessary noise being present in the data. It will be
seen that the SNR value and the noise level is generally very high for all the tests done down
in the basement compared to the calibration data for the old transponder. It is therefore
not a good indicator of how well the horn transponder is functioning when testing in
the basement. These values will for the most part be ignored but are still comparable,
however until the tests are done in a more proper environment, exact measurement cannot
be taken. The most interesting calibration value, will be the signal level received to the
radar, which is also very much influenced by reflections from the environment.
30
Design, manufacture and test of Transponder for Radar Calibration
==PAGE:39==
Anechoic Chamber calibration results
The same tests were done in the anechoic chamber with the old transponder for calibrating
radars. The successful calibration results for a PF radar and a TM4 down in the anechoic
chamber at Trackman of a distance of approximately 6 - 6.8 meters between the radar and
transponder can be seen in the table below:
Calibration Data
Min.
Max.
Signal Level [dBm]
-9.99
7.03
Gain
0.165
0.380
SNR [dB]
99.15
107.18
Noise floor [dB]
-110.77
-98.36
IQGainRatio
0.211
1.666
PhaseOffset [Rad]
-2.197
2.198
Table 5.3: Successful Trackman 4 (TM4) calibration report in the anechoic chamber with
the old transponder (Both X-band and K-band)
Calibration Data
Min.
Max.
Signal Level [dBm]
-19.28
-8.64
Gain
0.94
1.64
SNR [dB]
95.08
101.87
Noise floor [dB]
-114.38
-110.50
IQGainRatio
0.92
1.61
PhaseOffset [Rad]
-1.53
3.09
Table 5.4: Successful Platform radar (PF) calibration report (note that the radar is only
operating in X-band).
Generally, a high SNR and low noise floor would be optimal, since the internal and external
noise would be suppressed. The test done in the anechoic chamber (see figure 5.4 and
5.3) have a relatively low amount of external noise due to the electromagnetic wave echo
absorbers in the anechoic chamber and hence a low noise floor. Since the SNR is dependent
on the noise floor the SNR is also relatively high.
5.2.1
Transponder Basement test (PF and TM4 Radar)
To see and prove the results and theory about what kind of signals are received, testing
has been done down in the basement at the Trackman facility.
The calibration is happening inside the radars, meaning that the values seen in a calibra-
tion report stems from the radar and not the transponder. The transponder however has
a influence on these values to a extent, but it is to be noted, that the radar is also doing
some work, adjusting its values such as gain and adding a offset to the noise floor to get
a constant value.
The first tests, were done with the platform radar and then followed by the Trackman 4
radar. The horn transponder is made to work in a indoor environment for calibrating the
Trackman radars, but since the Trackman platform radar was available for testing and
works in only one frequency band, testing was easier done with the Platform radar. The
calibration process is a little different for the platform radar compared to the Trackman
4 radar, mostly due to the different frequency bands and hence adjustments have to be
made in the calibration setup code by setting different values.
Design, manufacture and test of Transponder for Radar Calibration
31
==PAGE:40==
Transponder Basement test - Receiver noise and environmental clutter
It is important to asses the quality of the environment in which the test setup is being
conducted in. Calibrations made down in the basement would show an abnormal high
noise floor as well as a low SNR level, hence it was important to see if the excess noise
were due to environmental or external noise from other sources in the measured frequency
bands.
Noise is a random and unwanted quantity in a lot of application. Especially, when having
to transmit and receive signals constantly, noise can be very influential. There are many
different noise sources, but when it comes to radar design, internal and external noise
power is important. Internal noise power include semiconductor noise and thermal noise
of ohmic resistance or conductance[22], while external noise can be multi-path noise. There
is a noticeable difference in the noise level between calibration conducted in the basement
of the Trackman company compared to calibrating outside with the same radar setup.
By setting up a spectrum analyzer to a receiver antenna the radio frequency interference
(RFI) can be measured in the area.
(a) Test 1 - Spectrum analyzer with antenna
(b) Test 2 - Spectrum analyzer without an-
tenna
Figure 5.4: Spectrum analyzer test of RFI
As seen in the figure above 5.4, there is little to no difference between the signal level in
the spectrum analyzer, with and without the antenna at 10 GHZ at X-band. Noted that
no interference was also found setting the frequency to 24 GHZ at K-band.
The increase in noise floor is most likely due to multi-path noise. Multi-path noise is when
the signals are propagating in such a way, that the receiver antenna receives the signals in
multiple paths. This can create interference and phase shifting of the signal. The cause
of multi-path noise can include reflections of objects and refraction. A decrease in floor
noise can occur with the change of environment, e.g., calibration in a outside environment
or an anechoic chamber.
It must be noted that another test was done with the spectrum analyzer set to 0 db
attenuation. This did, however not result in any changes of the comparisons of the signals
other than the noise floor were 10 dB lower, since the reference level also changes to -10
dBm by setting the attenuation to 0.
32
Design, manufacture and test of Transponder for Radar Calibration
==PAGE:41==
Old Transponder Basement test (PF Radar)
The platform radar (PF radar) is a product sold by Trackman and is quite different from
the Trackman 4 radar and the other radars. The platform radar has a higher output level
and can therefor be used for tracking objects further away. The platform radar only runs
on X-band and therefore is suitable for testing the transponder on X-band only.
(a) Test 1 - Spectrogram with the transpon-
der turned off (noise)
(b) Test 2 - Spectrogram with the transpon-
der turned on (txp)
Figure 5.5: Spectrogram of the signal received in a PF radar with a transponder turned
on and off at 6666 Hz frequency (X-band)
The image 5.5 above shows the signal received to the radar from the transponder and the
signal recorded with the transponder turned off. From the spectrogram the frequency of
the signal can be read as well as the radial velocity, which is the change of distance between
the radar and transponder over a time period. As expected, the received signal is read
at 6.666 KHz. From 5.5, it can be seen that there is some weak signals present at other
frequencies than the main signal. These could be due to multi path noise or harmonics,
which could occur when testing down in the basement, due to objects reflecting the signals.
Design, manufacture and test of Transponder for Radar Calibration
33
==PAGE:42==
Old Transponder Basement test (TM4)
The TM4 is a radar running on both X-band and K-band and since it is a CW radar, the
transponder needs to receive and transmit in both X-band and K-band.
(a) Test 1 - Spectrogram with the transpon-
der turned off (noise)
(b) Test 2 - Spectrogram with the transpon-
der turned on (txp)
Figure 5.6: Spectrogram of the signal received in a Trackman 4 radar with a transponder
turned on and off at 6666 Hz frequency (K-band)
(a) Test 1 - Spectrogram with the transpon-
der turned off (noise)
(b) Test 2 - Spectrogram with the transpon-
der turned on (txp)
Figure 5.7: Spectrogram of the signal received in a Trackman 4 radar with a transponder
turned on and off at around 5 kHz frequency (X-band)
The spectrograms seen above (figure 5.7 and 5.6) are showing a TM4 calibration done in
the basement of Trackman. The TM4 radar runs on both X-band and K-band. When 8
channels are being recorded in a TM4 radar, the first 5 channels (Channel 0, 1, 2, 3, 4)
34
Design, manufacture and test of Transponder for Radar Calibration
==PAGE:43==
are K-band and the last 3 channels are X-band (Channel 5, 6, 7). Figure 5.7 is showing
channel 5 on X-band and figure 5.6 is showing channel 1 on K-band.
Spectrogram 5.6 looks much different from the signals read from spectrogram 5.6 where
more small signals can be read in different frequencies. This is due to all the harmonic
signals coming from the K-band signal with the strongest being at 5 kHz, which is the
frequency of the IF signals.
Horn Transponder Basement test (PF Radar)
Testing was also conducted with the Horn transponder for the PF radar down in the
basement of Trackman. In order to receive good results for both the spectrogram and
calibration report, the transponder has to be calibrated at around 500 mVpp for not
overloading the mixer.
(a) Test 1 - Spectrogram with the Mixer
turned OFF
(b) Test 2 - Spectrogram with the Mixer
turned ON
Figure 5.8: Spectrogram of the signal received in a Trackman 4 radar for the horn transpon-
der with the waveform signal generator set to 6666 Hz.
Both the TXP and noise file include a bunch of receiver noise as seen in the figure, which
most likely are due to multi path noise as the basement at Trackman is not the optimal
environment for testing. The signal seems strong enough at 6666 Hz and even though the
noise file looks very noisy, the TXP file looks acceptable for the horn transponder for a
calibration.
Design, manufacture and test of Transponder for Radar Calibration
35
==PAGE:44==
Horn Transponder basement test (TM4 (K-band))
Since the problem statement states that the transponder has to work in both X-band and
K-band, since some radars are operating in these frequency bands, it is important to make
sure that the horn transponder also works in K-band at 24 GHz. The test setup is very
similar to testing the transponder in X-band. The difference lies in the values set for the
I and Q signals, which are now set to 5000 Hz. Since K-band requires a bit more signal
strength than the X-band part of the TM4, the waveform signal generator was set to 1
Vpp for both IQ signals.
(a) Test 1 - Spectrogram with the transpon-
der turned off (noise)
(b) Test 2 - Spectrogram with the transpon-
der turned on (txp)
Figure 5.9: Spectrogram of the signal received in a Trackman 4 radar with a transponder
turned on and off at 5000 Hz frequency (K-band)
As seen in the figure above the signals are quite different from the signals received at
X-band. This is due to harmonics being present for K-band frequencies.
36
Design, manufacture and test of Transponder for Radar Calibration
==PAGE:45==
5.2.2
Transponder Anechoic Chamber test (PF Radar)
An anechoic chamber exists at the Trackman company for the purpose of increasing the
accuracy of the radar calibrations by removing all unwanted external noise. A anechoic
chamber is a non-reflective room designed to stop reflections of electromagnetic waves as
well as any interference that comes from outside the area. It works by having radio-wave
absorbing materials built around the walls, floor and ceiling of the room. Recall from
section 4.1.6 that one way to achieve a good SNR level is by removing all background
noise.
Old Transponder Anechoic Chamber test (PF radar)
An interesting test to be made is using the old transponder in the Anechoic Chamber to
asses the improvement in performance.
(a) Test 1 - Spectrogram with the transpon-
der turned OFF (Noise)
(b) Test 2 - Spectrogram with the transpon-
der turned ON (txp)
Figure 5.10: Spectrogram of the signal received for a PF radar in X-band in a Anechoic
Chamber.
The first thing that catches ones eye looking at figure 5.10 above is the low noise level
in the Spectrogram, where the green parts represent the noise in the signal. It can also
be seen that there are some small harmonics present. This could be due to reflections
occurring inside the old transponder, due to the design and materials used.
Design, manufacture and test of Transponder for Radar Calibration
37
==PAGE:46==
Horn Transponder Anechoic Chamber test (PF radar)
Another interesting test to be made is using the horn transponder in the Anechoic Chamber
to asses the improvement in performance.
(a) Test 1 - Spectrogram with the transpon-
der turned OFF (Noise)
(b) Test 2 - Spectrogram with the transpon-
der turned ON (txp)
Figure 5.11: Spectrogram of the signal received for a PF radar in X-band in a Anechoic
Chamber.
As seen in the figure 5.11 above, most of the external noisy part of the signal is gone. The
signal noise is still present at 6666 Hz and is mostly due to the components inside the
transponder such as the mixer.
5.2.3
Transponder performance test
To assess the performance of the transponder e.g., to see if the signal received to the radar
is constant (low signal variations), low noise, do not include additional reflection and do
not have a increased variation in the phase offset. Basically if the transponder can provide
an accurate calibration accuracy to the radar, a couple of performance simulations/tests
were made in the anechoic chamber.
These simulations includes doing a whole lot of
radar calibrations in different frequency groups and take the calibration output values
and plotting them in a graph to get an overview of the different values such as noise floor,
signal level, phase offset and SNR.
To be able to gather the information in an eﬀicient way, a python script have been used,
with the ability to control each instrument such as the signal generator and DC generator
as well as setting/changing the frequency in the radar for each calibration. The script will
set the radar to a specific frequency group and then record a noise (transponder OFF)
and txp (Transponder ON) file. Then the script will set the radar to another frequency
group, adding a few megahertz to the prior frequency and recording a noise and txp file.
This process will repeat itself until around 20-23 measurements have been taken, with
each measurement representing a different frequency group. Once done, the script will
start over from the first frequency group and repeat itself until the 20-23 measurements
are done for around 2-5 cycles. The result can then be plotted in a box plot and shown
for analysis to e.g., show the change or/and variations in the specific calibration values.
Before running the script, it is necessary to let the radar transmit signals over a certain
38
Design, manufacture and test of Transponder for Radar Calibration
==PAGE:47==
period of time to ”warm up”, usually set to 5 minuets. It has been seen, that the first few
plots will have an increase in variation between the prior data, when the radar has not be
warmed up. Giving the radar around 5 minuets of warm up time, will solve this increase
in variations between the initial few measured values. Note that the old transponder will
be referred to as the XK transponder seen in the various graphs.
Performance test - Signal power
Recall that a transponder will receive a signal with a certain signal level and transmit the
same signal but phase shifted. The input signal level will not be the same as the output
signal due to propagation loss and losses in the transponder. However, for an accurate
calibration, it must be made sure that the signal level is relatively linear over all frequency
groups and that variations does not occur. Also, the calibration values seen, is coming
from the radar itself, meaning that the radar also has a big impact on the results seen.
To setup this test, the radar has been removed and replaced with a signal generator and
spectrum analyzer as well as two horn antennas for receiving and transmitting as seen in
the image 5.12 below:
Figure 5.12: Test setup for measuring the signal level with a signal generator, spectrum
analyzer and two horn antennas.
Design, manufacture and test of Transponder for Radar Calibration
39
==PAGE:48==
The Signal generator will transmit a signal with a certain signal power and frequency from
a horn antenna and the receiving antenna will receive the signal from the transponder to
the spectrum analyzer, where the peak of the signal will be measured and saved for different
frequency groups as seen below (figure 5.13):
Figure 5.13: A signal of 8 dBm with a frequency of 10.5 GHz transmitted. A signal of
around 10.5 GHz and -68.83 dBm received.
The testing of the signal level has been automated, meaning that a python script is con-
trolling and giving out commands to every instrument. The script controls the signal
generator to send out a constant signal level, but changes the frequency relative to the
frequency set on the spectrum analyzer. It was later realized that connecting the spectrum
analyzer to the signal generator via a coaxial cable and setting the spectrum analyzer to
external reference, would make the spectrum analyzer control the signal generators fre-
quency to make sure that the frequency of the transmitted signal is exactly the same as
the frequency set on the spectrum analyzer. The script would then take the peak of the
received signal measured from the spectrum analyzer and save the value. This process
would run over a sweep of 200 MHz. The results for both the old transponder and horn
transponder is shown in the figure 5.14 below for X-band from a PF radar:
Figure 5.14: Transponder signal level for the old transponder and the horn transponder
swept from 10.4 GHz to 10.6 GHZ on X-band in the anechoic chamber
40
Design, manufacture and test of Transponder for Radar Calibration
==PAGE:49==
The figure 5.14 above shows the signal level of the old transponder and the signal level
of the horn transponder on the same graph. The horn transponder and old transponder
signal characteristics are relatively linear, expect for some small jumps which can be
seen. This could be due to the spectrum analyzer not exactly measuring the peak of the
signal but being off by a little due to a low delay time between measuring and finding
the peak. The linear characteristic for the horn transponder is seen increasing a little,
while the linear characteristic for the old transponder is decreasing. Ideally, a relative
flat and constant characteristic should be seen for a good transponder, but since the horn
transponder transmits and receives with horn antennas, an increase in frequency would
increase the gain of the transponder, explaining the linear increase in signal level. The
old transponder does the opposite and losses signal power with an increase in frequency,
which could be due to internal noise increasing with the frequency and the array antennas
suffering more attenuation.
The same test setup was used to test in the K-band frequency from a TM4 radar for the
horn transponder and the old transponder. The results can be seen in the figure 5.15
below for two different frequency intervals at K-band:
(a) Transponder signal level for the old
transponder and the horn transponder swept
from 23 GHz to 26 GHZ on X-band in the
anechoic chamber
(b) Transponder signal level for the old transpon-
der and the horn transponder swept from 24 GHz
to 24.5 GHZ on X-band in the anechoic chamber
Figure 5.15: Frequency test for the horn - and old transponder at K-band in the anechoic
chamber.
In figure (a) the old transponder is varying a lot, however radar calibration is normally
done in the 24-24.5 GHz range, which looks rather stable. The horn transponder has a
good characteristic and looks pretty stable.
Design, manufacture and test of Transponder for Radar Calibration
41
==PAGE:50==
Performance test - Noise floor and SNR (PF)
As explained in section 4.1.6, the SNR is the ratio of signal power to noise power or in
other words: the signal level to noise floor. The SNR is desired to be as big as possible,
but also being constant over the different frequency groups. To get a constant SNR, the
noise floor as well as the signal levels needs to be constant as well.
In theory, noise floor is the measure of the signal created from the sum of all noise present.
The results used are from channel 1 in the radar. The other channels have quite different
characteristics and can be seen in the appendix A.2.
(a) Boxplot showing the noise floor of chan-
nel 1, for both the horn transponder and old
transponder
(b) Boxplot showing the SNR of channel
1, for both the horn transponder and old
transponder
Figure 5.16: Boxplot of the SNR and noise floor from channel 1 for both the old transpon-
der and horn transponder. The y-axis is in dB and the x-axis shows the different frequency
groups.
The noise floor measured from a radar channel can be seen in the figure 5.16 above, describ-
ing the noise floor calculated in the radar for the horn transponder and old transponder
from a PF radar. As seen in figure 5.16, the noise floor for the horn transponder is rel-
atively constant until around 10.5 GHz where the values start to increase exponentially.
The same thing can be seen for the old transponder, however the noise floor is higher and
the box plots can be seen to be more random.
As the SNR is the ratio of signal level to noise floor, the SNR can be derived from the
graphs seen in figure 5.16 for respectively the horn transponder and the old transponder.
Again, the SNR for the horn transponder is more horizontal and constant, while the SNR
for the old transponder is decreasing with the increase in frequency, as well as having a
lot of variation in the box plots from frequency group to frequency group.
42
Design, manufacture and test of Transponder for Radar Calibration
==PAGE:51==
Signal noise - With - and without Echo absorber
It was realized that signal variations might occur due to the metal platform the Trackman
radar is placed upon (See the image below):
Figure 5.17: Transponder characteristics over different frequency groups
As seen in the image 5.17 above, the PF radar is placed upon a metal platform with no
echo absorb around it. This metal part can possibly reflect the electromagnetic waves
towards the radar and introduce noise. It has there been tested, if the metal part will
have an effect on the signal with - and without echo absorber.
(a) Box plot showing the noise floor of chan-
nel 3, with - and without echo absorber
(b) Box plot showing the noise floor of chan-
nel 6, with - and without echo absorber
Figure 5.18: Two random noise floor channel out of 6 channels picked, to look at the effect
of having and not having echo absorber on the radar metal platform. The noise floor in
dB is shown on the y-axis and the frequency groups are shown on the x-axis, with the
plots of both the PF radar without echo absorber on the metal platform and with echo
absorber.
As seen in the figure 5.18 above, placing echo absorber on the metal platform clearly has
an effect on the noise floor. The noise floor looks more linear and with a lower amount
Design, manufacture and test of Transponder for Radar Calibration
43
==PAGE:52==
of variation between each plot. Even so, it looks like the noise floor is higher with echo
absorber placed than without echo absorber, however, the difference is very small (1< db).
Performance test - Noise floor and SNR (TM4)
Using the same test setup as shown previously for measuring the SNR and noise floor for
the TM4, would show the characteristic for both K-band and X-band on the TM4 radar.
The metal platform in which the TM4 is mounted on, has been isolated with echo absorber
to minimize unwanted reflections.
(a) Box plot showing the noise floor of chan-
nel 2 for the TM4 with the horn transponder
(b) Box plot showing the SNR of channel 2
for the TM4 with the horn transponder
Figure 5.19: Box plot of the SNR and noise floor of channel 2. The TM4 radar has echo
absorber around it and the transponder used, is the horn transponder.
As seen in the figure 5.19 above, the noise floor and SNR is shown for a TM4 radar
calibration with the horn transponder over different frequency groups. The figure above
shows the noise floor and SNR for channel 2 (see A.3 for the rest of the results.). The
noise floor looks very similar to a sinus wave, where the noise floor falls between (-99.5)
to (-104.5) dB. By having a linear increase in signal level (see figure 5.14) for the horn
transponder and a sinus shaped noise floor, the box plot of the SNR increases and decreases
for each prior plot, while decreasing in overall SNR. The noise floor in particular, has an
interesting form and is varying with around 5 dB peak-peak. To explain this kind of noise
floor, it is important to asses, if the noise floor looks like this due to transponder reflections
or if it is due to the radar itself. By setting up a test setup in the anechoic chamber similar
to the one seen in figure 5.12 with a spectrum analyzer and LO signal generator, the noise
floor of the transponder turned off can be measured.
44
Design, manufacture and test of Transponder for Radar Calibration
==PAGE:53==
Figure 5.20: The noise floor measured in the anechoic chamber with the horn transponder
turned off. The signal transmitted is from an LO signal generator and the signal received
is measured by a spectrum analyzer.
As seen in the figure 5.20 above, the noise floor has been measured by taking the peak
of the noise floor for different frequency groups. The figure also shows the noise floor
measured with echo absorber placed in front of the horn transponder (orange graph) and
without (blue graph), to see the effect of reflections coming from the horn transponder.
As seen in the figure below, the same noise floor and SNR test has been conducted for the
old transponder with a TM4 radar, but at different positions relative to the TM4, since
it was speculated that the print inside the old transponder reflects the electromagnetic
waves from the radar.
(a) Box plot showing the noise floor of chan-
nel 2 for the TM4 with the old transponder
centered and placed to the left relative to the
center.
(b) Box plot showing the SNR of channel 2
for the TM4 with the old transponder cen-
tered and placed to the left relative to the
center.
Figure 5.21: Box plot of the SNR and noise floor of channel 2 for the TM4 radar with the
old transponder at two different positions.
As seen in the figure 5.21 above, there is a clear difference in SNR between the two positions
at which, at old transponder has been placed for calibration. The old transponder placed
at left, shows a lower noise floor and lower SNR. The decrease in SNR is due to the lower
signal strength the radar receives from the old transponder, as the noise floor can be seen
in the figure above.
Design, manufacture and test of Transponder for Radar Calibration
45
==PAGE:54==
5.3
Prototype Transponder Design
The initial idea of a prototype transponder, will be made out of wood. The prototype will
work in both X-band and k-band by having a set of different antennas for transmitting and
receiving in different frequencies. The initial prototype design can be seen in the figure
below 5.22:
Figure 5.22: Initial prototype drawing of the transponder used for calibration.
The K-band antenna will work with one amplifier on the output of the mixer and similarly
the X-band will be working with one also. The X-band antennas and the electronics such
as the amplifier and mixer will be placed on the bottom side of the box, where the K-band
antennas and the following electronics are placed on the top side. The output and input
wires will be connected to the back of the box, where the signal - and power generator
will be connected to. As for the design, the electronics and hardware are placed behind
the antennas, which is done intentionally to prevent damage to the components. High
frequency power signals can potentially damage electronic components and by shielding
the components with antennas, the signal received to the transponder will be reflected
back to the radar and away from the transponder.
46
Design, manufacture and test of Transponder for Radar Calibration
==PAGE:55==
The box of the prototype transponder was made of plywood and fixed together with
screws, in order to prevent the prototype from falling apart. The materials used for the
final prototype can be seen in the table below:
Material
Size (mm)
Quantity
Plywood (Black)
765 x 495
2
Plywood (Antenna mount)
210 x 105
2
Plywood (Antenna base)
555 x 10
1
Metal Screws
4.0 x 50
59
Antenna Screws (X-band)
3.5 x 10
16
Antenna Screws (K-band)
2.5 x 10
16
Table 5.5: Overview of the materials used to build the outer part of the horn transponder.
The prototype is built with functionality in mind, meaning that while DC generators and
waveform signal generators are part of the transponder, they will be placed separately
relative to the transponder. The prototype of different angles and parts can be seen in
the images below:
(a) Front view of the prototype
(b) Back view of the prototype
(c) Top View of the bottom part
(d) Side view of the top part
Figure 5.23: Transponder prototype.
The prototype box has to be made such that changes can be made by e.g,. switching
out electronics and at the same have a stable structure. In order to make the prototype
modular, a two part system was created and implemented. The top half of the prototype
includes the K-band antennas and its electronics (see the figure above 5.23d) and can be
taken off. The bottom part that includes the X-band antenna and its electronics are then
exposed (5.23c).
Design, manufacture and test of Transponder for Radar Calibration
47
==PAGE:56==
5.3.1
Component list
The prototype of the transponder will consist of some components that will make up the
design. The prototype transponder will be made only for the purpose of indoor calibration,
hence big instruments such as a DC power generator and waveform signal generators will
be used. An overview over all the components, as well as the instruments used in the
design, that are a part of the transponder, can be seen in the table 5.6 below:
Instruments / Components
Serial Number
Manufacturer
Quantity
Antenna (18.0 - 26.5 GHz)
LB-42-20-C-KF
AINFO Inc.
2
Antenna (8.2 - 12.4 GHz)
LB-42-20
AINFO Inc.
2
Mixer (6 - 26 GHz)
GaAs MMIQ-0626H
Marki Microwave
2
Amplifier (10 - 25 GHz)
CA1025-241
Ciao Wireless
2
Waveform Signal Gen.
DG1022Z
RIGOL
2
Waveform Signal Gen. (BNC Cable)
012-0482-00
RIGOL
4
DC Power Gen.
DP832A
RIGOL
1
DC Power Gen, (Cable)
-
Hilitand
2
Coaxial wire (24 GHz)
SM-SM-A050-1000
AINFO Inc.
6
Table 5.6: An overview over all the instruments/components used to build the prototype
horn transponder.
A list of the total cost of the whole transponder with the components and instruments,
can be seen in the table below:
Instruments/Components
Serial Number
Quantity
Total Price (DKK)
Mixer (6-26 GHz)
GaAs MMIQ-0626H
2
24.110
Amplifier (10 - 25 GHz)
CA1025-241
2
40.700
Waveform Signal Gen.
DG1022Z
2
6.378
DC Power Gen.
DP832A
1
5.375
Antenna (18.0 - 26.5 GHz)
LB-42-20-C-KF
2
13.640
Antenna (8.2 - 12.4 GHz)
LB-42-20
2
13.640
Antenna metal Mount
-
4
4.920
Wood + metal screws
-
-
950
RF Cables
-
6
4.500
Total Cost
114.212
Table 5.7: An overview over the prices of the components and instruments, as well as the
total cost of the horn transponder.
Some of the prices are hard to find, since they are not clearly indicated on the manufactures
product website and requires to get in contact with them. The list above (figure 5.7) shows
the approximately total cost of the horn transponder, which could differ with a small few
thousands DKK in total cost.
48
Design, manufacture and test of Transponder for Radar Calibration
==PAGE:57==
5.3.2
Horn Antennas - isolation (Receiver and transmitter)
The horn antennas used in the transponder design are two 8.2 - 12.4 GHz X-band antennas
and two 18.0 - 26.5 GHz K-band antennas from AINFO Inc.. The antennas are respectively
20 dBi gain horn antennas at around 22 GHz and 10.2 GHz at both frequency bands read
from the data-sheet. The gain of the antenna is a representation of how well the antenna
can guide the beam into one direction, and hence related to an isotropic antenna in units
of dBi.
To create a prototype of the transponder, it is important to know how close the Horn
antennas can get without interfering too much with each other, where signal interference
can occur. In principle, isolation between the transmitter and receiving antenna is not
required, since the received signal will have a separation in frequency due to the Doppler
effect, however transmitter leakage can occur and in practice, it is not possible to com-
pletely eliminate this quantity [2].
In order to test this, a small setup was made with the old transponder, a signal generator
and spectrum analyzer to observe the signals.
Figure 5.24: Block diagram of the test setup for testing horn antenna isolation between
the receiver and transmitter with a signal generator and spectrum analyzer.
The figure above 5.24 shows the test setup. The old Trackman transponder is set at a
distance of 6 meters relative to the signal generator and spectrum analyzer with horn
antennas attached. The signal generator simulates a radar signal transmitted at X or K -
band. For convenience sake in this particular system, the signal generator will be set at
10 GHz with a maximum power output at 8 dBm.
Design, manufacture and test of Transponder for Radar Calibration
49
==PAGE:58==
Figure 5.25: Image of the test setup in the basement for the receiver and the transmitter
antenna. The signal received for the receiver can be seen in the spectrum analyzer on the
right hand side.
As seen in the figure 5.25 above, the distance between the receiver and transmitter can be
changed, while reading the input signal of the receiver antenna from a signal received by
an LO signal generator. Three images were taken of the spectrum analyser respectively
at a distance of 9.5 cm, 5 cm and 0 cm between the receiver and the transmitter horn
antenna.
The results looks at follows:
(a) Antenna distance of 9.5
cm
(b) Antenna distance of 5
cm
(c) Antenna distance of 0
cm
Figure 5.26: Spectrum analyzer signal output of the transponder with changes in distance
between the receiver and transmitter horn antenna.
As seen in the figure above 5.26, the power received at the LO feed-through from the signal
generator is being lowered as the distance decreases between the receiver and transmitter
antenna. In principle, the higher directivity the antenna beam has and the greater spacing
between the receiver and transmitter antenna is, the greater the isolation will be. Since
the X-band horns are so big in size, this would not be possible for the transponder design,
50
Design, manufacture and test of Transponder for Radar Calibration
==PAGE:59==
however as for the K-band horns, this principle will be taken into account for the design,
since they span over a lower area. The amount of change in signal power is limited and
therefor not a huge problem for when designing the transponder.
The electromagnetic wave propagates outwards and the receiving part inwards for different
frequency bands and therefor the distance between the antennas should not be a problem.
The received signal will also have another frequency than the transmitted signal due to
the mixer, which also should not result in interferes between the two antennas.
5.4
Radio link budget
In this section the radio link budget will be presented and calculated. The radio link budget
is a very detrimental budget to create, especially when working with electromagnetic waves
between a source and a target.
A radio link budget is a summary of communication links in a system that takes into
account all the different factors that contribute and impact the signal level at the radars
receiving side.
It takes into consideration antenna gains, power received/transmitted,
mixer conversion loss, propagation losses and other factors such as power-loss/attenuation
in cables.
Figure 5.27: The system overview of a transmitted signal from a Trackman Radar to the
Transponder and back to the radar.
As seen in the figure 5.27 above, losses will occur in many places of the transponder design,
as well as between the radar and transponder due to the propagation of the electromagnetic
waves. Figure 5.27 is a good illustration to follow, when trying to calculate the link budgets
for the transponder.
5.4.1
Friis transmission equation (Propagation loss)
The Friis transmission equation is used to study the radio link budgets and is a useful tool
in calculating the propagation loss over a certain distance.
The distance between the transponder and the Trackman radars when calibrating is around
6 meters in the basement. The new anechoic chamber built in the basement of Trackman
A/S is maximum 7 meters long, meaning the distance between the transponder and radar
for calibration needs to be of maximum distance 6.2-6.8 meters, leaving some extra space.
When a electromagnetic wave travels through air, a path loss will occur. This path loss can
be calculated via Friis transmission equation. It is important to know the path loss, since
Design, manufacture and test of Transponder for Radar Calibration
51
==PAGE:60==
by knowing this parameter, the power received to the receiving antenna of the transponder
can be calculated. Knowing this value, the right LO signal can be set directly in the
signal generator, when testing the different components in the system without the need
of setting up two antennas or a radar. Knowing this value also prevents the electronics
in the transponder to burn up, since some of the components are limited by how much
power input they can take in any port, without causing damage to the component.
The Friis transmission equation is very similar to the radar equation and gives the ratio of
the received to the transmitted power for any given antenna gain, range and wavelength
under ideal conditions and is given by equation 5.1 below:
Pr = PtGtGrλ2
(4πR)2
(5.1)
or similarly as:
Pr = PtGtGr(
c
4πDrf0
)
(5.2)
Where Pr is the power at the receiving antenna, Pt is the output power of the transmitting
antenna, Gt is the gain of the transmitting antenna, Gr is the gain of the receiving antenna,
f0 is the carrier frequency and Dr is the distance between the receiver and transmitter
radar and transponder [23].
Trackman Radar (RX) →Transponder (TX)
Based on the radar parameters the power at the receiving antenna can be calculated and
thus the path loss can be known. It is known from the datasheet, that the gain of the horn
antennas are approximately 20 db for the transponder and for the transmitting radars the
gain will be set to zero. This is due to knowing that the value of the power transmitted
from the radar, includes the antenna gain and therefor does not need to be accounted for
again. The distance between the transponder and the radar is set to constant 6 meters,
hence the power received can be calculated.
TM4 (X-band)
TM4 (K-band)
PF (X-band)
Units
Power Transmitted (Pt)
32/24
32/24
27
dBm
Power Received (Pr)
-24.51/-32.51
-17.33/-25.33
-22.34
dBm
Antenna Gain Received (Gr)
19.1
19.1
19.1
dBi
Antenna Gain Transmitted (Gt)
0
0
0
dBi
Frequency (f0)
24
10.5
10.51
GHz
Range (R)
6
6
6
m
Table 5.8: Overview of the theoretical power received to the transponder from different
radars using Friis Transmission equation. The power transmitted is the maximum/min-
imum value. Note the cable loss between the antenna and the input of the mixer of the
receiving side is read to be 0.9 dB and will be subtracted from the receiver antenna gain.
52
Design, manufacture and test of Transponder for Radar Calibration
==PAGE:61==
Internal Transponder attenuation
In any electrical system, losses will occur that impact the signal level at the radar output
side. System losses can occur for many different reason. It can be unwanted heating of
resisting components, losses in transformers, dielectric loss, leakage and other effects. It
is always wanted to suppress these losses as much as possible, however they are typically
always present.
Components usually have their losses listed in their data sheet.
Therefore, it is very
straight forward to calculate the losses in the transponder. Here, the focus will be on
the transponder consisting of a MMIQ Mixer, a 20 dB amplifier, as well as coaxial cables
making the right connections as seen in the figure 5.28 below.
Figure 5.28: The transponder components, consisting of a mixer, a cable between the
mixer and a amplifier, the amplifier itself, and another cable.
Quantity
Total Gain
Units
MMIQ-0626H Mixer
1
-9
dB
AMP-4-10000-25000-5 Amplifier
1
+20
dB
Coaxial Cable
2
-2.1
dB
LB-42-20-C-KF Standard Horn Antenna
1
+20
dB
Total Antenna Gain Transmitted (Gt)
28.9
dB
Table 5.9: Total internal transponder gain without the antennas including have been
calculated and can be seen in the table.
As seen in the figure 5.28 and table 5.9 above, the internal transponder attenuation can
be calculated from the losses known in the datasheets of the components and cables.
The I and Q input channels will of course have a big influence on the signal strength since
the signals is being added or subtracted, but the contribution from the IQ signals will be
discussed in another section, explaining how the transponder has to be calibrated based
on the users desired signal level, since this can be a user-defined parameter.
Trackman Radar (RX) ←Transponder (TX)
Once the power received is known and calculated with the Friis transmission equation and
the gain through the system to the transmitter antenna of the transponder is found. Friis
transmission equation will be used once more, to find the final power received to the radar
from the transponder.
It is known that the Trackman radars have a total gain of around 15 dB including the
cable losses in the radars. This information was acquired by asking a hardware engineer at
Design, manufacture and test of Transponder for Radar Calibration
53
==PAGE:62==
Trackman, since the only other way to get to this information would be taking a Trackman
radar apart and testing the components and antennas inside the print.
Calculating the power received by the Trackman radars is very similar to how it was done
in table 5.8 by using Friis transmission equation and adding the losses calculated in the
previous table 5.9.
TM4 (X-band)
TM4 (K-band)
PF (X-band)
Units
Power Transmitted (Pt)
-24.51/-32.51
-17.33/-25.33
-22.34
dBm
Power Received (Pr)
-56.22/-64.22
-41.86/-49.86
-46.88
dBm
Antenna Gain Received (Gr)
15
15
15
dBi
Antenna Gain Transmitted (Gt)
28.9
28.9
28.9
dBi
Frequency (f0)
24
10.5
10.51
GHz
Range (R)
6
6
6
m
Table 5.10: Overview of the theoretical power received to the transponder from different
radars using Friis Transmission equation. Note the cable loss between the antenna and
the input of the mixer of the receiving side is read to be 0.9 dB and will be subtracted
from the receiving antenna gain.
As seen in table 5.10, the theoretical power received to the transponder has been calculated
from different radars. A higher radar power output will also give a higher power received
value, but it is also dependent on the frequency of the radar. The gain is assumed to be
15 dB for every radar, however this can differ with a few dB.
54
Design, manufacture and test of Transponder for Radar Calibration
==PAGE:63==
5.4.2
Friis transmission Equation - Measurement Verification
To verify the theoretical Friis Transmission equation, two measurements methods were
used. The first method included using a spectrum analyzer with an antenna on the input,
receiving the electromagnetic wave from a radar. This verification tests, uses a 20 db
X-band standard horn antenna to receive the signal from a Trackman PF radar. The
PF radar is said to transmit a power of around 27-32 dBm depending on, if the radar is
transmitting at CE frequencies or FCC frequencies.
Figure 5.29: Spectrum analyzer showing the power received from a platform (PF) radar
at X-band.
As seen in the figure 5.29 above and table 5.8, the values does not correspond to the plat-
form radars signal level measured. The measured value is -27.33 dBm and the calculated
value is -21.43 dBm. The loss is slightly higher in figure 5.29 compared to the calculated
value in table 5.8.
To go even further, the signal power transmitted from the antenna can be calculated by
Friis transmission equation when the power received is known from figure 5.29 as seen in
the table below:
PF (X-band)
Units
Power Transmitted (Pt)
22.88
dBm
Power Received (Pr)
-27.33
dBm
Antenna Gain Received (Gr)
18.23
dBi
Antenna Gain Transmitted (Gt)
0
dBi
Frequency (f0)
10.51
GHz
Range (R)
6
m
Table 5.11: The power transmitted from a Trackman platform radar calculated from the
Friis Transmission equation, where the power received is the amplitude of the signal read
in figure 5.29. Note that the cable from the antenna to the spectrum analyzer is a 10.51
GHz coaxial cable with a 1.77 dB loss.
Design, manufacture and test of Transponder for Radar Calibration
55
==PAGE:64==
It is not so simple to measure the power level of a signal on a spectrum analyzer. The
power transmitted from a platform radar should have a value between 27-32 dBm, which
is a few dBm of the result.
The other method used, involves using a power sensor with an antenna attached on the
input of a power sensor. The setup was very similar to the previous method, however the
received signal from the antenna will be measured by a power sensor instead of a spectrum
analyzer and with a different distance. However, the concept is the same.
(a) The test setup for reading the re-
ceived signal from a radar. This includes
an antenna, cable (0.3 dB loss) and RF
power sensor (MY51390006) mounted on
the wall.
(b) The software program Agilent Power
Panel, showing the values reading from the
power sensor.
Figure 5.30: The signal power of a PF radar is read to be 26.15 dBm. Note that a offset
is set to 51.730 dB, which is due to the path loss being calculated beforehand and can be
found in the radar files.
As seen in the figure 5.30 above the signal level for a Trackman platform radar transmitting
at CE frequency is 26.15 dBm. The offset of 51.730 dB is the path loss calculated when
calibrating the Trackman radars and is a value that can be found for each radar. For
allowed frequencies used in the EU (CE verified) the power level is usually around 27
dBm, which the radar was set to when the measurements was taken in figure 5.30. For
allowed frequencies in the US (FCC verified) higher frequencies is allowed and therefore a
higher power level of around 32 dBm was tested.
Basically, the right way to measure signal levels is with a power sensor, since using a
spectrum analyzer gives a result which is not too accurate.
56
Design, manufacture and test of Transponder for Radar Calibration
==PAGE:65==
5.5
Transponder Calibration (Waveform signal generator
script)
The transponder itself can be calibrated by employing correction to the I and Q signals in
a manner, so that sideband suppression is maximized. This is currently a manual process,
but it is wanted to become an automatic process. This requires control of the waveform
signal generators and programming a script. It is also important to know, at what IQ
values the signals are being suppressed the most. This requires testing with a spectrum
analyzer.
The current transponder used in the Trackman company is currently being calibrated
manually, meaning the I and Q signals are adjusted in such a way that the suppressed
sideband is being suppressed to the utmost, relative to the up-converted sideband. This
manual process includes using a spectrum analyzer at the output of the transponder to
see and adjust the signal transmitted. This requires a lot of time to frequently calibrate
the transponder. The same process could be used to calibrate the horn transponder by
adjusting the values on a waveform signals generator, however to make the process quicker,
it is possible to create a script that controls the waveform signal generator and sets the
values accordingly.
The waveform signal generator, which outputs the I and Q signals is a DG1022z waveform
generator made by RIGOL. RIGOL has a programming guide of the signal generator [24]
[25], that have been used to set the right commands to access the instrument. The wave-
form signal generator can be connected and controlled through a computer by downloading
NI-Visa from NI’s website [26], followed by the python library PyVISA.
By using visual studio code, python code has been written to control the DG1022z wave-
form signal generator to set the right calibration values for calibrating the transponder
accordingly to which radar is being used. The script will also include functionality, such as
the user being able to add their own values to channel 1 and 2 on the generator. The end
product is a .exe file that can be setup to any waveform signal generator for controlling
and calibrating. The python code for the script can be seen in the appendix A.1.
5.5.1
Waveform Signal generator - What values to set at
The initial hypothesis would be asking if the I and Q signal calibration would work for
every radar used.
Basically, setting a similar value on the waveform signal generator
that can work for different frequency bands as well as different power levels.
To test
this hypothesis, a test setup was made with a signal generator for simulating a received
radar signal to the LO port of the mixer and a spectrum analyzer to the output of the
transponder for measurement. It was previously tested that keeping the amplitude under
1 Vpp for each channel would yield the best results by lowering the signal noise and by
lowering the amplitude of the spurious products. Keeping in mind, that by lowering the
input level, the signal strength will be lowered also by a lot.
IQ channel optimal settings
To achieve the best results for a calibration, it is important to know the optimal amplitude
values to set the IQ channels on the oscillator, since the amplitude has the most influence
on the output signal. The data gathered was from a PF radar calibrated down in the
anechoic chamber on X-band at CE frequency levels (26-27 dBm).
Design, manufacture and test of Transponder for Radar Calibration
57
==PAGE:66==
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
-60
-40
-20
0
20
OldTransponderAverageV alue
Signal level (dBx)
Ch. 1
Ch. 2
Ch. 3
Ch. 4
Ch. 5
Ch. 6
Ch. 7
Average
Figure 5.31: Graph of the change in signal strength with the IQ amplitude increasing
on the waveform signal generator for X-band on the PF radar (Channel 1-7). On the
x-axis the amplitude in Vpp is shown and on the y-axis the signal level is shown in dBx.
The amplitude is set equally for the IQ channels. The average signal level for the old
transponder in the anechoic Chamber is marked at the graph.
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
60
80
100
120
OldTransponderAverageV alue
SNR
Ch. 1
Ch. 2
Ch. 3
Ch. 4
Ch. 5
Ch. 6
Ch. 7
Average
Figure 5.32: Graph of the change in SNR with the IQ amplitude increasing on the wave-
form signal generator for X-band on the PF radar (Channel 1-7).
On the x-axis the
amplitude in Vpp is shown and on the y-axis the SNR is shown. The amplitude is set
equally for the IQ channels. The average SNR for the old transponder in the anechoic
Chamber is marked at the graph.
As seen in the figure 5.31 above, the change in signal level is most increasing at the lower
amplitude levels. The same can be said for the SNR as seen in figure 5.32, where a much
lower increase is seen after around 1.5 Vpp amplitude. It is important to understand and
recall that the higher the input signal of the mixer is, the more signal noise will be present
and also higher amplitude spurs. Therefore when choosing the right IQ amplitude level,
a high level of SNR and signal level is desirable at a low amplitude.
Based on the two figures above, it can be read that choosing a amplitude of around 0.5
- 1 Vpp will yield the best results, for a high SNR and signal level with a relative low
amplitude. The transponder being calibrated at the 0.5 - 1 Vpp interval level would be
58
Design, manufacture and test of Transponder for Radar Calibration
==PAGE:67==
proven to be best, even considering that a little higher signal noise will be present than
calibrating at lower levels such as at around 0.02 - 0.5 Vpp for X-band.
Transmitting at K-band will have a similar graph, however K-band will require a little
more signal power than X-band. Setting the values to around 1-1.5 from graph 5.31 would
yield the best results without overloading the mixer, which would result in a noisy signal.
Frequency and signal level Test
For testing the change in signal level with different frequencies on respectively X-band
and K-band, different LO signals from a signal generator set at similar values calculated
from Friis formula for the received signal of the radar (see table 5.10) were added to the
input of the transponder. Recall and note that a high input signal would give a high
output signal and thereby spurious and harmonics would be seen. This could be due to
the spectrum analyzer itself and result in inaccurate measurements when trying to analyze
the RF signal, since the spectrum analyzer itself can be overloaded.
(a) Test 1 - 10 GHz and -30 dBm input signal
(b) Test 2 - 24 GHz and -30 dBm input signal
Figure 5.33: Change of frequency with a constant power level
As seen in the figure 5.33 above, there is a change in signal level for 10 GHz and 24 GHz.
By adjusting on the IQ signals, it was also realized that a different IQ calibration was
required for the different frequencies.
However, increasing or decreasing the signal levels would not have an impact on the
calibration as long as the frequency was fixed.
Basically, the transponder needs to be calibrated for respectively X-band and K-band
frequencies, but is not required to be calibrated for the signal levels, at which the different
radars operate at.
5.5.2
X-band and K-band Calibration values
Based on the test seen in figure 5.33 and the information gathered in the previous sub-
section 5.5.1, the waveform generator needs to be set to different calibration levels for
X-band and K-band, but it is not necessary to set different levels for different Trackman
radars signal levels as long as they are in the same frequency bands.
By reading figure 5.31, it was read that the optimal calibration levels would be set between
0.5 - 1 Vpp for X-band and a higher signal level would be required for K-band, so it would
Design, manufacture and test of Transponder for Radar Calibration
59
==PAGE:68==
be optimal to set the calibration levels at around 1 - 1.5 Vpp for K-band as a higher signal
level is desired.
Setting up a spectrum analyzer to the output of the transponder and sending a constant
LO signal similar to those of which was calculated with Friis formula (See table 5.10), the
IQ signals were adjusted to receive the lowest suppressed sideband as possible for X-band
and K-band frequencies. The test setup can be seen in the figure below:
(a) Test setup for calibrating K-band. The
Signal generator is set to 24 GHz and the
waveform signal generator is set to 5 kHz.
(b) Test setup for calibrating X-band. The
Signal generator is set to 10 GHz and the
waveform signal generator is set to 6666 Hz.
Figure 5.34: Test setup for calibrating X-band and K-band frequencies with a spectrum
analyzer on the output of the transponder and a LO signal generator on the input of the
transponder.
As seen in the figure 5.34 above, both X-band and K-band have been calibrated by hav-
ing maximum suppression on the suppressed sideband as well as suppressing the carrier
frequency as much as possible. Reading the measurements from the spectrum analyzer,
the peak difference of the I and Q signals have been taken and at K-band (24 GHz),
the suppressed sideband is being suppressed by 37 dB and at X-band (10 GHz) the sup-
pressed sideband is being suppressed by 46 dB. Having a goal of 30+ dB suppression as
the minimum, the results shown are good transponder calibrations values.
The optimal values for the waveform signal generator can be seen in the table below:
Parameters (Ch.)
K-Band (24 GHz)
X-Band (10-10.1 GHz)
Units
Frequency (I)
5000
6666
Hz
Amplitude (I)
1
0.426
Vpp
Offset (I)
0
0
mVDC
Phase (I)
0
0
Degrees
Frequency (Q)
5000
6666
Hz
Amplitude (Q)
1.23
0.5
Vpp
Offset (Q)
-10
-50
mVDC
Phase (Q)
97
91
Degrees
Table 5.12: Table overview of the settings for the IQ channels for the transponder to
achieve optimal sideband suppression as well as transponder gain without overloading the
mixer with a too high IQ amplitude.
60
Design, manufacture and test of Transponder for Radar Calibration
==PAGE:69==
As noted in the table above 5.12 the DC offset is set low for both IQ channels. In principle,
the DC offset on either ports could be used for sideband suppression. However, increasing
or decreasing the DC offset with around +/- 100mV has actually been proven to worsen
the sideband suppression as well as increasing the amplitude of the spurious products and
harmonics. Due to this information, it was chosen to let the DC offset stay at a relatively
low value, as that would give the best result.
5.5.3
Testing if radar can be calibrated without the amplifier (TM4
(X-band)
Since the amplifier is a very expensive component and requires a DC supply too, it will
be tested if there is actually a need for an amplifier in the transponder.
The following test has been conducted with a TM4 radar with respectively a change of
amplitude for the IQ signals on the waveform signal generator on X-band. There is a big
benefit by using a waveform generator to generate the IQ signals, since the amplitude can
be bumped up with a high amplitude limit and thereby an increase in signal level will be
seen due to the mixer in the transponder.
1
1.2
1.4
1.6
1.8
2
2.2
2.4
2.6
2.8
3
3.2
3.4
3.6
3.8
4
-20
-15
-10
X-band calibrated signal level
dBm
Channel 5
Channel 6
Channel 7
Figure 5.35: The Graph shows the change in signal strength with the amplitude increasing
on the waveform signal generator for X-band (Channel 5-7). On the x-axis the amplitude
in Vpp is shown and on the y-axis the signal level is shown in dBm. The average signal
level which was achieved in the Trackman 4 X-band calibration report is marked on the
graph.
As seen in figure 5.35 above, the biggest increase can be seen between 1 vpp to 2 vpp,
with a less lower increase in signal level from 2 vpp and up after.
Currently, for a successful Trackman 4 calibration test, the signal level is around -16.49
dBm on average (figure 5.1) for X-band, but multiple tests show that an increase in signal
level also outputs a successful report. However, the higher the signal level, the higher
the amplitude and the more LO spurs will occur. Also, a lower suppressed side-band will
be harder to achieve. The ideal signal level is therefor set to -16.5 dBm which equals
an amplitude of 1.54 Vpp for channel 1 and probably a little higher on channel 2 on the
waveform signal generator for a good calibration.
Design, manufacture and test of Transponder for Radar Calibration
61
==PAGE:70==
5.5.4
Testing if radar can be calibrated without the amplifier (PF
radar)
The PF radar is a little stronger regarding signal power on X-band than the TM4, so
another test was conducted for the Trackman PF radar without the amplifier on the
output of the transponder. Since the platform radar only operates on X-band, just the
x-band horn antennas were used for testing, which each has a 20 dB gain.
1
1.2
1.4
1.6
1.8
2
2.2
2.4
2.6
2.8
3
3.2
3.4
3.6
3.8
4
-20
-15
-10
-5
0
CH1
CH2
CH3
CH4
CH5
CH6
CH7
dBm
Ch. 1
Ch. 2
Ch. 3
Ch. 4
Ch. 5
Ch. 6
Ch. 7
Figure 5.36: Graph of the change in signal strength with the amplitude increasing on the
waveform signal generator for X-band on the PF radar (Channel 1-7). On the x-axis the
amplitude in Vpp is shown and on the y-axis the signal level is shown in dBm. The signal
level which was achieved in the PF calibration report is marked on the graph.
As seen in figure 5.36 above, the signal level values for a successful Platform radar cali-
bration with the old transponder has been marked for each channel. The optimal settings
would be setting the IQ amplitude to approximately 1.6 - 2 vpp. It can also be read from
the graph that an further increase of amplitude from 2 vpp and up after, has a much lower
increase of signal level. Even when possible to calibrate radars at high amplitudes, it will
come with some downsides as well.
62
Design, manufacture and test of Transponder for Radar Calibration
==PAGE:71==
5.5.5
Transponder without amplifier (signal analysis)
Since the right signal levels could be achieved without an amplifier for calibrating the
platform radar, it would require another test with the optimal settings for a calibration.
This would require a calibration of the transponder, meaning the amplitude for the I and
Q signals, would be set such that the IQ ratio is at the highest possible value. For this
particular test, the transponder calibration is done manually by looking at the transmitted
signal from the transponder on a spectrum analyzer.
To create a transponder with an as good an accuracy as possible, a constant signal output
is required. Recall from figure 4.7 that the LO spurs has a big influence on the signal
transmitted from the transponder and therefor is required to be suppressed as much as
possible. However, as seen in the images below (Figure 5.37, the tests done without an
amplifier has an increasing amount of spurs compared to the mixer with the amplifier. By
increasing the amplitude on the IF signals, distortion will be introduced and the input
of the mixer will be overloading creating spurs. However, by amplifying the RF output
signal the amount of distortion will be limited as it gets suppressed.
(a) Test 1 - Transponder without amplifier
on X-band for a PF radar
(b) Test 2 - Transponder with amplifier on
X-band for a PF radar
Figure 5.37: Testing with a spectrum analyzer the output signal from the transponder,
with and without an amplifier with a PF radar on X-band.
As seen in the figure 5.37 above, the signal level is the same, but the IF input to the mixer
is different, since the difference in signal power needs to be corrected for by increasing the
IQ signal. It is also seen that figure (a) have a lower carrier frequency than figure (b),
however it is observed that there are many spurs and with higher amplitudes in figure (a)
compared to figure (b).
When conducting the tests, it was realized that by increasing the offset of the IQ signals,
the LO feed-through signal gets suppressed, however the spurs will increase in amplitude.
This is the price one must pay for having suppressed spurs in a signal by having a zero or
very low signal offset from the waveform signal generator.
Design, manufacture and test of Transponder for Radar Calibration
63
==PAGE:72==
5.5.6
Two amplifiers on the output (X-band)
The horn transponder transmits at lower signal levels on K-band compared to X-band. It
has been seen that the old transponder operates with two amplifiers on K-band and one
on X-band, which explains the increase in signal level compared to the horn transponder
on K-band. It is possible to add amplifiers in parallel to achieve a higher output signal,
however this is not advisable as the noise from the first amplifier will also increase, not to
mention the cost of having another amplifier in the horn transponder. It would also be
best to lower the drive to the mixer to achieve a lower signal noise on X-band. A quick
test was done in the anechoic chamber with two amplifiers added on X-band to see the
effect:
(a) Spectrogram of the noise file from adding
two amplifiers on the output of the horn
transponder (X-band)
(b) Spectrogram of the Txp file from
adding two amplifiers on the output of the
horn transponder (X-band)
Figure 5.38: Testing the effect of adding two 20 gain amplifiers on the output of the mixer
in the horn transponder.
This test was conducted in the anechoic chamber and with
setting the horn transponder to 500 mVpp amplitude.
As seen in the figure 5.38 above, the signal becomes very noisy when adding two amplifiers
on the output of the mixer. One amplifier on the output of the mixer should be suﬀicient
to calibrate, when driving the mixer to the levels as shown in the previous subsections.
64
Design, manufacture and test of Transponder for Radar Calibration
==PAGE:73==
5.6
LO Spurs
In designing a transponder it is important to minimize the LO spurs that occur in the
system, as they can lead to issues in the radio design, since pollution in the channels can
occur, as well as loss of sensitivity in the receiver or signal distortion. Spurious products
can occur for various reasons, but are usually a product of undesired signals at integer
multiplies of the input and LO frequencies of the IQ mixer.
Based on the system specifications and requirements, the spurious products can be sup-
pressed and dealt with, with careful design choices. Frequency planning and filtering can
help in dramatically decrease the amount of spurs, however they will always be present in
the system but at lower amplitudes. It is therefore important to accurately measure the
spurious levels at the output of the mixer in order to determine the best way to handle
them. The design and choice of mixer also impact the spurious levels and are therefore
an important factor to consider in the transponder design.
5.6.1
LO Spurs - Spectrum analyzer adjustment
Measuring LO spurs from the mixer is not an easy task, especially on a spectrum analyzer.
A spectrum analyzer can create harmonics and spurious products in itself and will impact
the received signal if the improper test setup is implemented. The internal distortion can
be due to the spectrum analyzer being overdriven by the input signal, causing the spurious
product to appear at a much higher amplitude level and adding multiple harmonics as well.
Spectrum analyzers are commonly designed to work at their optimal level at around -30
dBm to -40 dBm at their input [27]. To meet this power level, attenuation are implemented
internally in the spectrum analyzer to limit the power presented. This level of attenuation
can be increased or decreased on the spectrum analyzer by accessing the settings. To
verify that the spurious products and harmonics are not being generated by the spectrum
analyzer itself, some testing have been done. One way to test this principle is measuring
the power level of the spurious products with an increase of the internal attenuation set
in the spectrum analyzer. If the spur’s level changes with more than 0.5 dB, then it is
possible that the spectrum analyzer is being overdriven.
Design, manufacture and test of Transponder for Radar Calibration
65
==PAGE:74==
(a) Set at 0 dB attenuation
(b) Set at 10 dB attenuation
(c) Set at 20 dB attenuation
(d) Set at 30 dB attenuation
Figure 5.39: Showing how the signal level changes relative to increasing the internal at-
tenuation on the spectrum analyzer.
As seen in figure 5.39 and 5.40, tests show that with an increase in attenuation, the spurs
amplitude level is increasing as well as an increase in the noise floor, indicating that the
spectrum analyzer is being overdriven. For every dB of input attenuation used, the noise
floor will increase with 1 dB, which is seen in figure 5.39 and will hide some of the spurs
that are being measured.
After observing that incorrect measurements can be measured on a spectrum analyzer
if the right setup is not implemented, one may decide to drive the input signal with a
lower power level to avoid overdriving the spectrum analyzer entirely or by adding more
attenuation and filtering to the output signal. Though by adding more attenuation, an
increase in noise floor will occur. AS shown, it is important to have the right consideration
to implement the right test setup by adding small tweaks to the spectrum analyzer, in
order to yield a far more accurate and consistent measurement.
66
Design, manufacture and test of Transponder for Radar Calibration
==PAGE:75==
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
20
22
24
26
28
30
-94
-92
-90
dBm
Spurious Power level
Figure 5.40: Graph showing the increase in power level of a spurious product on the
spectrum analyzer used for testing. The signal input is from a wave generator set to 3
Vpp at a frequency of 6666 Hz.
5.6.2
IF spurs and filtering
IQ mixers are nonlinear components that execute frequency translation. Usually unwanted
signals occur, such as LO leakage (power from the LO port mixed with the RF port and
the other way around) and spurious products that needs to be minimized, since they
can interfere with the band of interest. It is possible to remove the unwanted effects by
using a low-pass filter, since the harmonics lie very far away in frequency compared to the
band of interest [28]. However, IF spurs are not manageable to filtering out, as they are
commonly found close to the band of interest. Instead, IF harmonics can be reduced by
not overloading the input port of the mixer and by reducing the LO leakage. Reduction
of the LO leakage can be achieved by applying a DC voltage bias to the IF ports.
5.7
Transponder Design optimizations
This section will look at how the transponder design can be optimized further. Opti-
mization will include performance improvements of the components that make up the
transponder.
The transponder includes of a lot of well performing and expensive instruments/compo-
nents. However, most of the components that make up the transponder are spanning over
a big frequency band, since the components used for X-band are similar to the ones used
for K-band. By carefully choosing components for the application in use, losses can be
minimized and hence an increase in performance can be achieved.
5.7.1
Coaxial cable
Coaxial cables are primarily used in transmission lines for radio frequency.
A lot of
different parameters have to be considered, when choosing the most optimal cable design.
These include: physical size, cost, frequency performance, power handling capabilities,
attenuation, flexibility and strength [29]. As for the transponder, the physical size, cost,
frequency performance and flexibility is the most important parameters in choosing the
right coaxial cables for the specific design. Note that the coaxial cables that are most
important, are the ones connected from the receiver antenna as well as to the electrical
components and the transmitting antenna. The cables that supply DC voltage and control
each instruments are not relevant, since losses would not matter too much in these cables.
As stated in the component list (table 5.6, 24 GHz coaxial cables were used for all the
Design, manufacture and test of Transponder for Radar Calibration
67
==PAGE:76==
connections between the mixer, amplifier and horn antennas in the transponder, however
this is not really necessary, especially for the X-band part of the transponder. 24 GHz
cables are much more expensive than lower frequency coaxial cables, because they have
to operate in such a high frequency interval with a very low loss and therefore are very
tolerable to high frequency powers.
The length of the cables also play a role for the
insertion loss and are usually higher at a longer length.
The coaxial cables currently used in the horn transponder are of different lengths and
usually have a maximum frequency of 24 GHz made by the company A-INFO, with a
different insertion loss at K-band and X-band. Finding coaxial cables at the right lengths
as well as operating in the right frequency band are very hard to find, since most companies
do not offer so precise specifications. Getting in touch with e.g., A-INFO and putting in
a custom order, would be the most optimal solution for getting the right coaxial cables
made based on the horn transponder design.
5.7.2
DC Power generator
A DC power generator is used to produce a power supply for the amplifiers in the circuit.
In the transponder design, it has been decided to use a DC power generator to provide
the necessary voltage to the amplifiers in the system, instead of using batteries or other
methods of providing power. The benefit of such, is that the specific DC power generator
DP832A from RIGOL has four output channels that each can provide independent DC
supplies, meaning only one DC power generator is required to supply the necessary power
to multiple amplifies. The power generator also does not loss charge over time or needs
to be frequently charged, as a battery would.
The primary downside of using such a
instrument, is the size, weight and the cost.
Different DC power generators have been researched and the one that is currently being
used in the transponder design is suﬀicient and a good choice.
5.7.3
Waveform Signal Generator
The waveform signal generator is used to generate both the I and Q signals into the
mixer. When choosing the right signal generator, it is important to consider what kind
of application it is going to be used for. This could include having a specific frequency
range, resolution, sampling rate, bandwidth, voltage and current drive capacity, waveform
noise/distortion and frequency accuracy/stability. The chosen waveform signal generator
used to generate the IQ signals into the transponder is a DG1022 from RIGOL. It is a
very simple waveform signal generator that only offers a few features. It comes with an
easy to read interface and a high quality display unit. The specifications looks as follows:
Waveform Generator
Analog Ch.
Sampling Rate
Bandwidth
Resolution
Rigol DG1022z
2
100 MS/s
25 mhz
14-bit
Table 5.13: Rigol DG1022z waveform signal generator specifications [30].
Even though there are many waveform signal generators on the market with higher specifi-
cation values, the DG1022 from RIGOL is a reasonable priced and simple waveform signal
generator. For the use of generating IQ signals this product is suﬀicient.
68
Design, manufacture and test of Transponder for Radar Calibration
==PAGE:77==
5.7.4
Amplifier
Amplifying the signals with a very low loss/noise is very important in the transponder
design. There is a huge amount of signal strength loss when the signals are propagating
through space, and therefore it is important to be able to amplify the low RF signal to
a higher RF signal for the purpose of use. As seen in table 5.6 the amplifier used in the
transponder is a AMP-4-10000-25000-5 amplifier. As read in the data sheet, the amplifier
operates in a frequency range of 10-25 GHz, has around 20 dB gain, a noise figure of 4
and requires a DC power input of maximum 15 VDC to activate. As noted, the frequency
range is very broad and hence requires a specific amplifier design. The amount of DC
power input required for the amplifies is not so important, since a DC power generator
is being used to supply the power. The most important factor is the noise figure and a
higher gain would be a bonus. By choosing a amplifier in respectively X-band and K-band
frequencies separately, a higher gain, lower noise figure and cheaper product might be
possible to achieve, compared to the current amplifier used in the transponder.
For both lower RF frequency ranges such as 10 GHZ X-band and higher RF frequency
ranges such as around 20 GHz K-band, a better choice of amplifier with a higher gain and
lower noise figure is possible to find on the market.
An X-band and K-band high gain power amplifier was found from Pasternack. There are
many K-band and X-band that Pasternack has for sale and the ones chosen, are chosen
based on their specifications to yield the best results and not necessary the price. The
specifications of the amplifiers can be found on their website [31] and [32] listed below:
Parameters
Min
Typ
Max
Units
Frequency Range
8
12
GHz
Gain
41
dB
Noise Figure
3.5
dB
Operating DC Voltage
+12
V
Table 5.14: Table describing the power amplifier PE15A4008 specifications from Paster-
nack (X-band).
Parameters
Min
Typ
Max
Units
Frequency Range
18
26.5
GHz
Gain
30-36
dB
Noise Figure
5
dB
Operating DC Voltage
8 - 12
V
Table 5.15: Table describing the power amplifier PE15A4021 specifications from Paster-
nack (K-band).
As seen in the two tables above, the noise figure is rather high for a power amplifier but
the gain of the amplifiers are also very high. The K-band power amplifier is a GaAS
MMIQ-based high gain and high output coaxial amplifier with a very good gain flatness
described in the datasheet [32]. The X-band power amplifier is a high gain amplifier that
achieves good performance by using a hybrid MIC design and advanced GaAs PHEMT
devices and has a good gain flatness as seen in the datasheet [31].
Design, manufacture and test of Transponder for Radar Calibration
69
==PAGE:78==
5.7.5
IQ Mixer
Mixers almost always limit the achievable dynamic range of a system. Therefore it is
important to look and care for the basic specifications of different mixers, in order to
choose the one that is most suitable for the application in use. Some of those ways that a
mixer can limit the achievable dynamic range of a system, include conversion loss, power
compression, Noise figure and LO noise, port to port isolation, single-tone intermodulation
distortion (spurs), multi-tone intermodulation distortion (IP3).
Basically, every single one of these specifications mentioned, can affect the achievable
dynamic range of a system and therefore these specifications must be accounted for when
choosing the right mixer and by achieving the most amount of suppression in spurious
products and harmonics.
There exist many different IQ-Mixers on the market, but the type of mixer used in the
transponder, is the MMIQ mixer from Marki. Marki Microwave has a lot of MMIQ mixers
available to buy, and therefore it is important to look at the specifications of each MMIQ
mixer available and assess if the one used current for the transponder is the right one.
The specifications included are the RF/LO, IF and LO drive signals, as well as conversion
loss and amount of image rejection, which can be found in each mixers datasheet.
The mixer used in the horn antenna is a passive GaAs MMIC IQ mixer and from the
datasheet [33] has the follow specifications:
Parameter
Typical
Unit
RF/LO Frequency Range
6 - 26
GHz
IF Frequency Range
DC - 6
GHz
I+Q Conversion loss
9
dB
Image Rejection
35
dB
LO-RF Isolation
41
dBm
Table 5.16: Electrical Specifications of the MMIQ-0626H IQ Mixer [33].
When looking for a mixer for the transponder, it has to be made sure, that the mixer is
a type of module mixer, meaning that the mixer is an assembly containing several power
components, so basically a module. These are limited, as the most common type of mixer
are surface mount mixers. These type of mixers, are mixers that are made to be mounted
on directly onto the surface of a printed circuit board.
For K-band, the MMIQ-0626H IQ mixer is a good choice of a mixer, but for X-band a
better choice of mixer could be the MMIQ-0218H IQ mixer from Marki microwave which
is very similar to the MMIQ-0626H in type. This is a mixer spanning over a frequency
range of 2-18 GHz and has the following specifications:
Parameter
Typical
Unit
RF/LO Frequency Range
2 - 18
GHz
IF Frequency Range
DC - 3
GHz
I+Q Conversion loss
7.5
dB
Image Rejection
35
dB
LO-RF Isolation
53
dBm
Table 5.17: Electrical Specifications of the MMIQ-0218H IQ Mixer [34].
70
Design, manufacture and test of Transponder for Radar Calibration
==PAGE:79==
As seen in the table above, the IQ conversion loss is lower than the MMIQ-0626H mixer
used, and with a higher LO-RF isolation. By looking at the price of the MMIQ-0218H
mixer, the cost is similar to a 0626H mixer of 1738.80 USD per mixer [35].
Design, manufacture and test of Transponder for Radar Calibration
71
==PAGE:80==
72
Design, manufacture and test of Transponder for Radar Calibration
==PAGE:81==
6
Discussion
The discussion section will include explanations and interpretations of the results in the
context of the report specifications, discussing their implications, acknowledges their lim-
itations, and give recommendations.
As seen in the results section, testing and calibration of Trackman radars have been
conducted in both the basement and the anechoic chamber. Performance tests have also
been conducted in the anechoic chamber to compare the results gathered between the
horn transponder and Old transponder for the TM4 and PF radar. The prototype of the
transponder has been presented, as well as how the prototype could possibly be optimized
further, by choosing the right components for the different frequency bands.
6.1
Horn transponder vs old Transponder - Performance
In order to asses, if the horn transponder is better than the old transponder, the first
thing would be to compare the calibration reports for both transponders, calibrated in the
basement and in the anechoic chamber. It would be most sensible to use the calibration
report from the anechoic transponder calibration, since there will be no environmental
influence on the signal, however comparing the basement calibrations are also interesting to
analyze. Note that it is hard to tell how well a transponder works based on the calibration
data only, yet it is a good tell sign, if the transponder works as intended by comparing the
horn transponder to the old transponder, which has been used for calibrating Trackman
radars for many years. The spectrograms can also be used to look at, for any abnormalities
like increasing noise, high signal level due to increasing reflections, spurious products or
low SNR. Note that the calibration data gathered from a radar setup, will always show
and output the values from the Trackman radar, meaning that the type of radar and the
functionality of the radar also has a big influence on the calibration data.
6.1.1
Old Transponder Design - Internal Reflections
When looking at the spectrogram of the old transponder from e.g., a platform radar,
some unexplained reflections can be seen around different frequencies, which the radar
receives (see figure 5.10).
It is believed that some reflections are occurring inside the
transponder from the antenna print, since the print inside the transponder is made out
of a reflective material. The same reflections are not being seen from the spectrograms of
the horn antenna (see figure 5.11), so most likely this is reflections happening inside the
transponder.
Design, manufacture and test of Transponder for Radar Calibration
73
==PAGE:82==
Figure 6.1: A image of the old transponder used for calibrating Trackman radars
As seen in the figure 6.1 above, an image of the the old transponder is shown above.
Behind the front plastic part, a print with the phase antennas attached is present. This
print is made of a relative reflective material, so it would make sense that, that part of
the print would reflect from the transponder. Possibly, other parts of the old transponder
could also reflect, but it is hard to tell exactly what part.
By running tests for different frequency bands for the old transponder in the anechoic
chamber and by placing the old transponder at a center offset relative to the Trackman
radar as well as an angle (see figure 5.21), it could be seen that better results was achieved,
when the old transponder was not centered exactly, relative to the radar when the results
got compared. Again, this could be due to the print inside the transponder reflecting
the electromagnetic waves, but by placing the transponder at an angle or at a different
position, not all the backscattered signals would reach the Trackman radar. This could
also explain the high amount of signal power seen in the spectrograms and the calibration
reports in the old transponder, since the calibration data will show the total signal power
with reflections included.
74
Design, manufacture and test of Transponder for Radar Calibration
==PAGE:83==
6.1.2
Basement vs Anechoic Chamber
Recall that by doing tests in the basement, a high leveled noise floor and a low leveled
SNR, due to multi-path noise, could be seen.
However, how much this difference is,
compared to the anechoic chamber is interesting to look at. To compare the basement
calibration with the Anechoic chamber calibration, the same exact values have to be set
in the calibration script. This also means that the same calibration methods is needed,
meaning same distance and same transponder have to be used.
(a) Spectrogram of the PF radar being cali-
brated in the Anechoic Chamber
(b) Spectrogram of the PF radar being cali-
brated down in the basement
Figure 6.2: Both the tests have been conducted using the old transponder at X-band with
the IQ amplitude set at 500 - and 380 mVpp and with a phase-offset of -210 mVdc
As seen in the figure 6.2 above, the values gathered are quite similar, with the noise floor
being higher in the basement calibrations than in the anechoic chamber. This is most
likely due to signal reflection coming off objects in the basement. It can also be seen that
the signal strength is higher in the basement. This is due to the radar, taking the sum of
all the signal reflections and adding them together as a single signal input.
Overall, doing radar calibrations and tests in an environment with a lot of reflective objects
is not recommended and will only result in a poor calibration with inconsistent signals
and random values.
The current state of the anechoic chamber, however does not remove all reflections. The
radar stand is made out of metal, which reflects and there are lamps in the room that
reflects as well. Echo absorbing material has been placed in front of the lamps in the
room, but the stand that is carrying the Trackman radars has metal around and behind
it, which could potentially result in additional reflections. This has also been solved for
the most part of the tests conducted, by placing echo absorber on the metal platform,
since a difference can be seen (see figure 5.18).
Design, manufacture and test of Transponder for Radar Calibration
75
==PAGE:84==
6.1.3
Old transponder vs Horn transponder - Basement
A notably comparison to make, is the actual calibration of a Trackman PF radar in the
basement. This requires two data files from the radar, one with the transponder turned
ON and one with the transponder turned OFF. Once these files are acquired, the files are
called in the calibration code, which does a bunch of calculations such as finding the noise
level, the power level and so on.
The test below shows a comparison between the spectrogram of the horn transponder and
the old transponder with a PF radar:
(a) Spectrogram of the horn transponder
(b) Spectrogram of the old transponder
Figure 6.3: The spectrogram of the horn transponder and old transponder set side by side.
The spectrograms have been gathered from calibration tests done in the basement.
Recall that, in the results section (e.g., figure 5.1 and 5.6), the results look much alike
to the spectrograms seen in the image above, regarding the signals being very noisy and
hard to analyze. As seen in the image, there is also a lot of signal noise in the area and is
indicated by the green colored pixels. Again, this is most likely due to the electromagnetic
waves being reflected off objects in the room. In order to get rid of all this noise, the
radar calibration should be done in a environment with no reflective materials such as the
anechoic chamber. The spectrogram for the old transponder seems to have more signals
present at different frequencies than the horn transponder. Yet, the desired signal at 6666
Hz remains the same power level when compared. As previously explained, this could
be another sign that the old transponder itself is reflecting unwanted signals back to the
radar, which would result in random frequency signals or that due to the type of antennas
used in the old transponder, more unwanted signals are being picked up, as phase array
antennas have a lower beam eﬀiciency than horn antennas.
76
Design, manufacture and test of Transponder for Radar Calibration
==PAGE:85==
6.1.4
Old transponder vs Horn transponder - Anechoic (PF Radar and
TM4)
As written in the problem statement, the transponder documented and built, should be
compared with the transponder currently used at the Trackman company to assess, if it
is worth the increase in performance to invest in the production. It is important to adjust
the IQ signals to be similar for both transponders to compared the performance of the
system with each other. However, the IQ signal values such as the amplitude and added
offset will be a little different for each transponder due to the mixers used. The values will
however, be set as close as possible to around 500 mVpp amplitude. The horn transponder
has an amplitude of 500 mVpp for both the I and Q signals. The old transponder is set
to respectively 500 mVpp and 380 mVpp with a small DC offset for the I and Q signals.
(a) Spectrogram of the horn transponder set
at 500 mVpp for both IQ signals.
(b) Spectrogram of the old transponder set
at 500 mVpp and 380 mVpp for the IQ signals
as well as a small DC offset added.
Figure 6.4: Spectrogram of the old transponder and horn transponder tested with a PF
radar on X-band in a anechoic Chamber.
As seen in the figure 6.4 above, the two spectrograms look very similar. However, note that
more noise is present for the old transponder. This is agian most likely due to reflections
occurring from the surface of the transponder, as it has previously seen that having the
transponder at an angle or offset relative to the center will result in a lower noise signal
and thereby a better calibration.
6.1.5
Transponder Frequency Tests
It is desired that the transponder works in all frequency bands. This would require a
stable power signal in all frequencies, since different Trackman radars are set to operate in
different frequency bands. A test setup was made in the anechoic chamber for both the old
transponder and horn transponder for measuring the signal power for different frequency
groups. The results can be seen in section 5.2.3 for respectively X-band and K-band with
the signal power in dB on the y-axis and the frequency in GHz on the x-axis. While
the spectrum analyzer and signal generator was set to synchronize the frequency with a
co-axle cable connecting the two instruments together, the waveform signal generator was
Design, manufacture and test of Transponder for Radar Calibration
77
==PAGE:86==
not. This could mean that the peak of the signal measured could have a frequency offset
by +/- 0.1-0.2 dB, which would result in small jumps when measured.
For the most part, the horn transponder has a linear and flat characteristic expect for
on X-band, where the horn transponder is increasing in signal power with an increase in
frequency. Looking at the datasheet for a X-band horn antenna, similarly to the datasheet
for the K-band horn antenna, it can be read that the gain of the antennas will increase a
little with a higher frequency. The test setup included four X-band horn antennas, which
all could contribute to the increase in gain at higher frequencies, however as it would
be seen, this effect would lessen at higher frequencies. Testing the Horn transponder on
K-band gave a different result. At an interval of 23 - to 26 GHZ the graph is relative
flat expect with some jumps in the graph. This setup also included four K-band horn
antennas.
Figure 6.5: Graph that shows the antenna gain for a K-band Horn antenna (18 - 26.5 GHz)
taken from the datasheet [36]. The gain in dBi is shown on the y-axis and the frequency
in GHz is shown on the x-axis.
It can be seen in the graph 6.5 above, that the gain of the K-band horn antenna increases
with frequency and similarly for X-band. Even though this is not by a lot, it will influence
the result. The horn transponder characteristic for K-band looks relatively flat compared
to X-band. Most likely, this is due to the low signal level measured for K-band and thereby
the effects from the horn antennas are not visible.
As for the old transponder, the frequency characteristics looks quite different from the
horn transponder. At X-band, the signal power is decreasing with the increase in fre-
quency. Note that the old transponder uses phase array antennas for transmitting and
receiving, meaning that the antennas beam width and beam angle is quite different from
horn antennas. The X-band frequency characteristic is very bad for the old transponder,
dropping almost 8 dB in signal power from 10.4-10.6 GHz (see figure 5.14). At K-band
the old transponder is working better, but still with a lot of variations in signal power
with the increase in frequency. The K-band have a relative flat curve at around 24 GHz,
where the old transponder is usually being used for calibrating the TM4 radar.
78
Design, manufacture and test of Transponder for Radar Calibration
==PAGE:87==
6.1.6
Performance comparison - Horn transponder and old transponder
Plenty of tests where conducted in the anechoic chamber to asses the performance of
the horn transponder compared to the old transponder. These tests primarily consists
of measuring the same signals over different frequency groups. It is usually desired that
the signals have a low amount of variations and are relatively constant in their form over
the different frequency groups. Measurements have been done by taking the peak of the
signals with a Python scripts that controls the spectrum analyzer and LO signal generator.
Other tests where the Trackman radars where involve, another script was used to gather
the files from the radar automatically and plot them in graphs. Most of the graphs are
seen as boxplots, which is just a simple representation of the same measurements collected
in a single plot.
Looking at the noise floor and the SNR will give an good indicator about the quality of
the signal transmitted from the transponder and also a good indicator about how well
the horn transponder will work, when having to calibrate radars that operate in other
frequency bands. Recall that the noise floor is the signal constructed from adding up the
sum of all noise sources and unwanted signals and the SNR is the ratio between signal
power and noise power.
From figure 5.14, the signal power for the old transponder and the horn transponder on
X-band can be seen. The increase in signal power for the horn antenna can be due to the
small increase in gain coming from the horn antennas and when there are four of them in
the test setup, a much higher gain will be seen. By negating the gain increase from the
receiver and transmitter horn antenna at the test setup side, the increase in gain should be
cut in half, which would make the graph look more flat. The signal power characteristic
for the old transponder is decreasing with the increase in frequency on X-band. This could
have a number of reasons, such as an increase in frequency would result in a increase in
noise or that the components used in the old transponder would lose eﬀiciency, because
the frequency happens to be to close to - or outside their frequency bands.
From figure 5.15, the signal power for the old transponder and the horn transponder on
K-band can be seen. The horn transponders characteristic looks rather flat with around
2-3 dB variations across the frequencies.
This setup also includes horn antennas, but
with a lower signal power, a smaller increase in signal power would also be seen from the
horn antennas. An increase in frequency would also result in a higher loss in the coaxial
cables and components, which ultimately would level out the graph. The signal power
characteristic for the old transponder increases and decreases until 24.5 GHz, where the
graph starts to decrease by almost 25 dB over 1.25 GHz. The decrease could be due to
reflections and that the frequency falls outside the components frequency bands. The old
transponder usually operates at 24 GHz and is designed for such a purpose.
From figure 5.16 the noise floor and SNR is shown for the old transponder and horn
transponder for the PF radar. Note that SNR compensated referees to just the normal
SNR in this case, because SNR compensated is when the radar adds or subtract a value
to achieve the right results. The noise floor is lower for the horn transponder than the old
transponder and they both start to increase at around 10.51 GHz with the horn transpon-
der having a smaller variation in noise floor compared to the previous measurement than
the old transponder. For the horn transponder the SNR starts to decrease at 10.54 GHz,
which would be expected from the increase in noise floor for the horn transponder, oth-
erwise the graph is rather flat. The SNR for the old transponder is decreasing by around
9 dB over the frequency groups, which is not huge variation. The decrease in SNR is
primarily coming from the decrease is signal power with a higher frequency, so the result
Design, manufacture and test of Transponder for Radar Calibration
79
==PAGE:88==
is very expected.
The same noise floor and SNR data was gathered for the TM4 on X-band and K-band.
As seen from figure 5.19, the characteristic for the horn transponder can be seen. The
SNR is decreasing by a small amount over the frequency groups and the small decrease
is most likely due to the noise floor. The variations of the data gathered for the same
measurements are very small, however the noise floor is decreasing and increasing very
much and the graph looks similar to a sinus wave. As the signal power was measured with
a spectrum analyzer and a LO signal generator, the noise floor was measured also with the
same setup. As seen in figure 5.20, the noise floor was measured in the anechoic chamber.
This graph is very different from the one in figure 5.19 and could explain why the result
looks like a sinus. The noise floor that is being seen in figure 5.19 is the output from the
radar, meaning something in the radar is adding a value or impacting the noise floor in
some way, to output a result as seen in the figure. Possibly the loop gain and radar cross
section needs to be corrected for in the software calibration code, since they do impact
the signal level and noise floor of the radar output calibration.
Figure 5.21 shows the noise floor and SNR for the TM4 radar with the old transponder.
The noise floor does not vary a lot between the different frequency groups, but still a
small decrease and increase and be seen and look a little like the one seen for the horn
transponder but with a lower difference between the box plots.
This shows that the
calibration software used, needs to be changed for the horn transponder to achieve better
results.
6.2
Transponder Prototype Design
In this sections the results will be discussed regarding the prototype transponder design.
This will include a discussion of the transponder optimization (minimize loss and increase
signal power) and the transponders structure.
6.2.1
Transponder design considerations
A lot of considerations went into making the design for the prototype of the transponder.
Even though some components were missing to build a complete transponder at the start
of the project, the initial part of the project included building the transponder. The first
consideration that went into making the design, was what kind of material the prototype
build of the transponder should consist of. The material of the transponder should not be
reflective in any way (e.g., using metal) on the front side as that would be scattered back to
the radar and is unwanted, since it is not part of the signal the transponder is transmitting.
There are some metal screws on the other side of the transponder, however these are aligned
in a away such that reflection will not be back scattered to the radar as to eliminate their
effect. It could be thought of, that the screws inside the transponder would provide some
back-scatter of the radar signal, since the electromagnetic wave would propagate through
the wood and be reflected back, But due to the structure of the screws, this effect should
be limiting. However, this factor should still be considered in an improved version of the
transponder. The prototype transponder is made out of wood and it is recommended to
use either wood or plastic, since they do not reflect and are relatively sustainable for future
production of transponders.
As the results for the final prototype is shown in figure 5.22, the components are being
shielded by the antennas. This is a conscious decision made, in fact, electrical components
can be damaged or temporary upset electrical components or instruments, if the power is
high enough. The signal power at which most Trackman radars transmit are most likely not
going to damage the components, however for convenience sake the electrical components
80
Design, manufacture and test of Transponder for Radar Calibration
==PAGE:89==
and wiring are placed behind the antennas. The input ports of the transponder are located
at the back of the transponder, having four input ports from the waveform signal generator
and eighth input ports for the amplifiers. The initial thought was that the transponder
would require three amplifiers, one for X-band and two for k-band, but adding additional
amplifiers would provide to provide much more noise to the signal and having higher
amplitude spurs as shown in the results. Alternative, choosing the right components for
K-band and X-band, such as less loss cables and a lower conversion loss mixer, could
provide a higher signal power on the output of the transponder.
As there is a frequent change and adjustment of the components and wiring in the
transponder for X-band and K-band separately, it would be required to be able to work on
one frequency band in a simple manner, without having to remove all the wiring. The idea
was to implement a modular system by having the ability to remove the K-band part to
access the X-band antennas and components as well as being able to make modifications
to the K-band part (see figure 5.23).
The horn transponder on K-band works on a lower signal level than on X-band and a
higher signal level would result in a better SNR for the transponder. Also, by minimizing
the amplitude of the IF signal, the noise would also get lowered as well as the spurs.
Different means of amplifications was considered and tested to improve the signal level
without introducing too much noise. Some of these considerations included using higher
gain antennas, higher gain amplifiers or adding two identical amplifiers in parallel on the
output of the mixer. These are all very expensive methods of adding gain to a high RF
system, so it must be considered if it is necessary. It was shown in figure 5.38, that by
adding two amplifiers on the output of the mixer, would result in an introduction of a
lot of unnecessary noise which is not advisable. Having the K-band section of the horn
transponder operate with only one mixer and with the current design, was proven to be
able to calibrate the TM4 radar at low signal levels. Basically, improving the gain of the
horn transponder can be achieved in various ways, however for this application and use of
the horn transponder, it is not necessary to implement, other than limiting the losses in
the system and choosing low loss components.
6.2.2
Transponder optimizations
In this subsection the design considerations will be discussed. Such as, is there any better
signal generators or better mixers on the market that can be used in the design of the
transponder, as well as can the price be reduced for the transponder, as the future idea is
to create multiple transponders.
As shown in the implementations and results section, the transponder can most likely be
optimized further by using the right components. Currently, the electrical components
used such as the cables, amplifiers and mixers have a frequency span that include both X-
band and K-band together. By choosing components that are designed to work in a specific
small frequency band such as using a 8-12 GHz amplifier instead of the current 10-25 GHz
amplifier, the noise figure can be lowered and possibly the gain of the amplifier would
increase. By figuring out the right components to use, the noise figure can be lowered and
the gain of the overall system would increase. This would ultimately result in a lowered
noise and higher powered output signal, which would result in a better overall SNR and
thus a better radar calibration. Choosing components that are designed to operate in
a lower and a more specific frequency interval, would most likely also be cheaper and
thus result in a cheaper and better transponder to produce. From the subsection 5.7,
components that could improve the performance of the horn transponder was found. The
primarily ones being the amplifier and mixer, for alternative components that span over
Design, manufacture and test of Transponder for Radar Calibration
81
==PAGE:90==
a smaller frequency range. It is important to pay attention to what type of component
it is. It is often seen that a good amplifier/mixer can be found with a low noise figure
and better specifications, but these are often surface mounts and are made to be placed
onto the surface of a printed circuit board. For the transponder, the module types of
components are the type used and will be researched. In section 5.7.5, a better mixer
was found for X-band with a better LO-RF isolation and lower IQ conversion loss than
the current IQ mixer. The IQ conversion loss will be lowered by 1.5 dB and the LO-RF
isolation increased by 23 dBm. This does not seem like a lot, but will improve the horn
transponder by increasing the signal output and increase the LO-RF isolation. There does
not seem to be a better IQ mixer on the market, than the 6-26 GHz mixer currently used
for the horn transponder on K-band.
As seen in section 5.7.4, both a better K-band and X-band power amplifier was found from
the company Pasternack. These amplifiers are medium powered, high gain amplifiers with
SMA input and outputs. As seen in table 5.15 and 5.14, the two amplifiers operate in their
own frequency bands as a better performance can be achieved as such, compared to the
power amplifier used in the horn transponder. The amplifier used in the horn transponder
is a 20 dB gain amplifier, that requires a DC supply of 15 V on the secondary input and
has a noise figure of 5. Compared to the X-band power amplifier (see table 5.14), there is
twice as much more gain and with a lower noise figure too. The K-band power amplifier
(see table 5.15) has more than a 50 % increase in gain compared to the amplifier used
in the horn transponder, but has a similar noise figure of 5. The increase in gain from
the amplifiers will increase the overall signal output of the transponder and will improve
the SNR of the signal transmitted from the horn antenna. Another benefit by having a
higher gain power amplifier on the output of the mixer, is that the mixer can be driven
by a lower IF signal as to achieve a suﬀicient signal output from the transponder for a
successful calibration and to prevent high amplitude spurs.
As explained in section 5.3.2 transmitter leakage can occur, if the antennas are located too
close to each other. To minimize this effect, the receiver and transmitter antenna should
be placed as far away to each other as possible. This is not a very impact full effect, since
the radar/transponder receives and transmits in different frequencies, but it is something
that should be kept in mind. The X-band horn antennas are very big in size and thereby
a distance of around 0.5-1 cm should be suﬀicient. The K-band horn antennas are much
smaller in size and can be placed further away than they currently are. By placing the
K-band antennas at a maximum distance relative to the X-band antennas, transmitter
leakage can be minimized.
As seen in figure 5.21, tests conducted in the anechoic chamber also show small signal
variations between tests made repeatedly, but where the transponder is at an offset by
a small amount relative to the prior position of measurement. This is a problem when
having to compare measurements and can be solved by placing the transponder at the
exact same location relative to the Trackman radar. Possibly, building a holder, which
can hold the transponder in place at the same location will result in more consistent
measurements when conducting the same tests frequently or for comparison between the
two transponders.
82
Design, manufacture and test of Transponder for Radar Calibration
==PAGE:91==
Horn transponder production Cost and sustainability
The cost of building a horn transponder as it is now, is rather expensive (see table 5.7).
The cost can be lowered by choosing alternative cheaper options.
The antenna metal
mounts can be replaced with a 3D printed version of the antenna mount. The K-band
and X-band antennas are different sizes and therefore the antenna mounts are too. A 3D
printed version of the antenna mount was made at Trackman and it fits the K-band horn
antenna perfectly.
Figure 6.6: Image of the 3D printed K-band antenna mount made at Trackman.
As seen in the image 6.6 above, it is possible to 3D print an antenna mount. The total cost
of the antenna metal mounts ended up at 4.920 DKK, but a 3D printed version (excluding
the 3D printer) costs around 5 DKK in materials to produce, which would also be better
regarding sustainability.
The cost of the screws and the wood used in building the transponder can be lessened, the
weight too, and the performance improved slightly by using Eco friendly 3D printed plastic.
Most of the 3D printing material is strong and biodegradable, which could eventually
replace all the wood and metal screws as well. In principle, the electromagnetic waves
could possibly propagate through the wood and reach the metal screws, which would
reflect the signals. By replacing all the wood and the metal screws in the transponder,
with a 3D printed version would bring many benefits and would reduce the overall cost
slightly.
As seen in the total cost list for the horn transponder (See Figure 5.7), the 20 dB gain
amplifier is a very expensive component. It was tested in the subsections 5.5.3 and 5.5.4,
if the horn transponder could calibrate without the PA amplifiers added to the output. It
was shown that it was possible, however it would mean that the mixer should be driven
with a much higher input from the waveform signal generator. This would ultimately
introduce a lot of noise to the signal and increase the amplitude of the spurious products,
since the mixer would get overdriven. This is therefore not a worthwhile solution, however
if cost is a major factor, another cheaper options of PA amplifiers should be considered as
that would be a better solution to get the right signal levels from the horn transponder.
The types of components used in the horn transponder are called modules, which are
components that are ready to be used with an input and output port. An alternative
component types are surface mount technology (SMT) types. These are generally cheaper
Design, manufacture and test of Transponder for Radar Calibration
83
==PAGE:92==
and come with better specifications, however they are needed to be placed onto a printed
circuit board. If the horn transponder should be mass produced somewhere in the future,
it would be a good idea to create a print with the amplifiers and mixers on as SMT types.
This would require more work to figure out how the print should be made, but will reduce
the price of the horn transponder by a lot and also increase the overall specifications.
As presented in the previous subsection, the horn transponder can achieve a better output
signal by using different components. A new mixer was found for X-band with a lower
IQ conversion loss and a better LO-RF isolation value. This component has a similar
price to the current IQ mixer used in the horn transponder. A K-band and X-band power
amplifier were also found, with a better gain and lower noise figure. These power amplifiers
are however much more expensive than the current amplifier used in the horn transponder
and the prices can be seen in the table below:
Instruments/Components
Serial Number
Quantity
Total Price (DKK)
Amplifier (8 - 12 GHz)
PE15A4008
1
29.710
Amplifier (18 - 26.5 GHZ)
PE15A4021
1
35.970
Total Cost
65.680
Table 6.1: An overview over the prices of the power amplifiers found in section 5.7.4.
Compared to the price of one power amplifier that is used in the horn transponder (see
table 5.7), this is an 50-75 % increase in cost for the power amplifiers and will increase
the total cost of the horn transponder by around 25.000 DKK.
6.2.3
Transponder Calibration settings
The horn transponder includes two waveform signal generators, that adds an IF signal to
the input of the horn transponder for both X-band and K-band. The frequency, amplitude,
offset and phase of the IF signals can be set, hence it is important to find the right and
optimal values for a calibration. As seen in table 5.12, the values have been found from
calibrating the transponder and finding the optimal amplitude. Since the IF signal also
adds an amount of signal power to the output of the transponder, the amplitude has been
found by calibrating over and over again, to find the value that gives the best result and
by not overloading the mixer, which eventually would result in an increase in spurious
products. The amplitude set for X-band and K-band (see figure 5.12) could be increased
or lowered but at the price of a lower signal power output or an increase in spurs. Since
K-band requires a higher signal power output to calibrate, this value is set much bigger
than on X-band.
It is also important to calibrate the transponder according to the sidebands once the
amplitude is found. By adjusting the offset and phase of the IF signals with a little, the
difference between the two sidebands can be increased. The testing shows, that different
calibration settings are required for different wavelengths, but not so much at different
radar signal levels, even though this can change. The script that was made (see section
5.5) works by setting the correct values for K-band and X-band and gives the user the
ability to set the IF values remotely, however it does not calculate the values. To calibrate
the transponder a LO signal generator is set to the input of the transponder and the
output is being read with a spectrum analyzer. In principle, the signal from the radar
could be used to calibrate the transponder instead of the LO signal generator, however
the signal is usually weaker which could result in a inaccurate calibration.
84
Design, manufacture and test of Transponder for Radar Calibration
==PAGE:93==
RF Filters - Spur and harmonic suppression
To suppress the unwanted spurs and harmonics, it is important not to overload the mixer
with a too high amplitude signal. It was discovered that the lower the IF and RF power,
the better the spurious performance (since the LO will control the diode transconductance
more effectively). This is one way of suppressing unwanted spurs and harmonics.
The other way was to maybe use an analog filter. It was frequently considered to use
an analog filter on either the LO input or the output of the transponder, to attenuate
the spurs that would occur outside the frequency band. It would make sense to use a
bandpass filter, however using a bandpass filter on high RF signals would require many
design considerations and might introduce even more noise in the system. Nonetheless,
filter considerations was made to assess if it was a good idea to use a filter in the system
to create a more accurate output signal from the transponder or if the downsides of
implementing a filter would outweigh the benefits.
RF filters are filter that operates on radio frequencies (20 KHz to 300 GHz) and are
used to remove or suppress noise/unwanted signals as much as possible in certain areas
of the radio spectrum. There exist many kinds of filters, such as low pass filters, high
pass filters and so on. Some of the benefits of having an RF filter includes, unwanted
signal suppression, reduction of noise level and increased LO leakage level. Respectively,
the downsides includes, manual tuning to achieve desired return loss at the output ports,
simulation can be complex, it can be complex to integrate and an increase in noise could
occur.
When looking at the output of the transponder with a spectrum analyzer, the signal
transmitted can be seen. An example can be seen in figure 5.40 with a low input LO
signal. The higher the LO signal, the more spurs can be seen on a spectrum analyzer,
however it is hard to tell, if they are being generated by the spectrum analyzer itself or
by the mixer. These signals would be hard to filter out, even at higher LO signals, since
they are located very close to the suppressed sideband and band of interest.
Basically, there are other ways to improve the output signal of the transponder and adding
a complex filter would not necessary improve the transponder, since the downsides might
out-weight the benefits.
What is more important is what kind of mixer is used.
As
described in the theory section, narrow bandpass filters are not necessary, when the mixer
is a balanced and image reject mixer. Choosing a high performing mixer for the radar
application in use, can improve the accuracy of the transponder by a lot. A better way to
reduce spurs and harmonics is to take a look at the mixers input signal level for both RF
and LO.
A way to suppress spurs and harmonics is to take a look at the mixer chosen for the
application. The choice of mixer also has a big influence of the spurs levels in a mixed
signal. As for spurious products and harmonics, a good mixer would include a close to
ideal diode for mixing and having a high enough tolerant for the RF and LO signals in
the transistor region of the diode. A mixer being of high linearity is also important, since
the input signal will be very much similar to the output signal of the mixer.
The mixer used in the Transponder is a high linearity, passive GaAs MMIC IQ Mixer.
Its applications include being a Single side band and image rejection mixer, IQ Modula-
tion/Demodulation, Vector Amplitude Modulation and Band shifting [33]. This is a kind
of very high performing but costly mixer and is used in applications where cost is of less
importance than getting good performance. The mixer works in a high RF interval and
therefore is designed differently, than lets say a 10-11 GHz X-band mixer. This means
Design, manufacture and test of Transponder for Radar Calibration
85
==PAGE:94==
a higher noise figure and a lower input tolerant. By choosing a good mixer, spur and
harmonic suppressing can be achieved and with a higher output gain and lower IF signals,
a good output signal from the horn transponder can also be achieved.
86
Design, manufacture and test of Transponder for Radar Calibration
==PAGE:95==
7
Conclusion and Future Work
This report has argued and presented throughout the work, that a transponder made
with horn antennas and much better components, though more expensive, can most likely
outperform the old transponder that has been used for calibrating the Trackman Doppler
radars for many years.
By using this newly develop transponder, the performance of
the Trackman radars can possibly increase, by achieving consistent radar calibrations.
In particular, it has been shown and argued for, that the signal output from the old
transponder can be random and with some small signal variations over different calibration
values, which could be another argument for investing in the horn transponder.
The design of a transponder, including the components used, play a huge role in the signal
output as well as the location of calibration. The only signal that the transponder should
transmit, should be the phase shifted version of the received signal from the Trackman
radars, therefore unnecessary reflections should be prevented, such as signal backscatter
occurring due to the materials used for the transponder (as shown in the old transponder)
and objects at the location of calibration that can reflect electromagnetic waves.
The project compares frequently the horn transponder with the old transponder to asses
the necessity of building and investing in a horn transponder. Not only does the horn
transponder perform better, but having horn antennas for receiving and transmitting sig-
nals, are substantially better than using phase array antennas as seen in the old transpon-
der. By having a transponder that can transmit signals with low signal variation over
different frequency groups, the horn transponder will be able to calibrate the different
radars produced by Trackman. As noise level and SNR has been compared and measured
between the two transponders, different graphs can be seen. While the problem statement
states that the horn transponder should be able to work without changing the calibration
software, some changes must be made to the code, such as setting the right values (e.g.
radar cross section) and pinpointing the exact location of the antennas in the transponder.
While the horn transponder seems to be able to calibrate Trackman radars successfully,
some small improvements can be made in the design and choice of components. These
are explained and argued for in the report, and it is believed that by incorporating these
results, the transponder can be improved further if necessary. Basically, the choice of
investing in the horn transponder is a good idea for the Trackman company, if cost is not a
problem, since it will yield positive results in calibration of Trackman radars. Future work
would center around calibrating production ready Trackman radars and try to measure
objects in movement such as a golf ball with the newly calibrated radars. In principle,
the horn transponder should also be able to calibrate the other transponders sold by
Trackman, but due to limited time, this has not been done. Radar calibration with the
other Trackman radars should therefore be conducted as well in the anechoic chamber. The
transponder improvements and recommendation should also be considered to implement
in the horn transponder, as to improve the performance further and making sure the same
exact measurements are being taken, by placing the transponder at the same exact location
relative to the Trackman radars. A lot of work has been done with the horn transponder,
but there are still plenty of room for tests to be conducted and measurements to be taken
for optimal results.
Design, manufacture and test of Transponder for Radar Calibration
87
==PAGE:96==
88
Design, manufacture and test of Transponder for Radar Calibration
==PAGE:97==
Bibliography
[1]
Christian Wolff. Continuous Wave Radar. url: https://www.radartutorial.eu/02.
basics/Continuous%20Wave%20Radar.en.html. (accessed: 03.01.2023).
[2]
Merrill I. Skolnik. INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS. url: https://deebak.
files.wordpress.com/2009/05/skolnik.pdf. (accessed: 22.11.2022).
[3]
Henning Skriver. Basic Radar Principles. url: DTU%20Inside,%2030350%20Remote%
20Sensing,%20Note_E. (accessed: 22.11.2022).
[4]
UnKnown. S1 The Radar Equation. url: https://amt.copernicus.org/preprints/amt-
2019-498/amt-2019-498-supplement.pdf. (accessed: 24.11.2022).
[5]
Fawwaz T. Ulaby and David G. Long. Microwave Radar and Radiometric. The
University of Michigan Press, 2014. url: https://www.ctan.org/pkg/biblatex.
[6]
LLC Compliance Testing. What Is the Difference Between FCC and CE? url: https:
//compliancetesting.com/what- is- the- difference- between- fcc- and- ce/. (accessed:
22.11.2022).
[7]
Meraki Cisco. Signal-to-Noise Ratio (SNR) and Wireless Signal Strength. url: https:
//documentation.meraki.com/MR/Wi-Fi_Basics_and_Best_Practices/Signal-to-
Noise_Ratio_(SNR)_and_Wireless_Signal_Strength#:~:text=Generally%2C%20a%
20signal%20with%20an,Signal%2Dto%2DNoise%20Ratio.. (accessed: 04.11.2022).
[8]
S. Sabah. DESIGN AND CALIBRATION OF IQ-MIXERS. url: https://accelconf.
web.cern.ch/e98/PAPERS/WEP09A.PDF. (accessed: 03.10.2022).
[9]
Jack Schaedler. MakeRadar School - Radar Theory. url: https://www.infineon.com/
cms/en/product/promopages/makeradar/makeradar-school/radar-theory/. (accessed:
06.09.2022).
[10]
Unknown Editor. I-Q Mixers. url: https://www.microwaves101.com/encyclopedias/i-
q-mixers. (accessed: 06.10.2022).
[11]
MicrowavesRF. Understanding Mixers and Their Parameters. url: https://www.
mwrf.com/technologies/components/article/21846332/microwaves-rf-understanding-
mixers-and-their-parameters. (accessed: 26.10.2022).
[12]
Ferenc Marki Christopher Marki. Mixer Basics Primer. url: https://www.markimicrowave.
com/Assets/appnotes/mixer_basics_primer.pdf. (accessed: 17.10.2022).
[13]
Radar Turorial. Mixer Stage. url: https://www.radartutorial.eu/17.bauteile/bt21.en.
html. (accessed: 16.12.2022).
[14]
Doug Jorgesen. 5 Ways to Compensate for Passive IQ Mixer Imbalance. url: https:
//www.markimicrowave.com/blog/5- ways- to- compensate- for- passive- iq- mixer-
imbalance/. (accessed: 04.10.2022).
[15]
Everything RF Editorial Team. What are Spurious and Harmonics? url: https:
//www.everythingrf.com/community/what-are-spurious-and-harmonics-signals#:~:
text=Any%20unwanted%20signal%20generated%20by,fundamental%20frequency%
20of%20the%20signal. (accessed: 06.10.2022).
[16]
Jairam Sankar. Tutorial: Antenna Gain and Directivity. url: https://www.electronicsforu.
com/resources/antenna-gain-directivity. (accessed: 02.12.2022).
[17]
Editorial Team. What is Antenna Eﬀiciency? url: https://www.everythingrf.com/
community/what-is-antenna-efficiency. (accessed: 05.12.2022).
[18]
Peter Joseph Bevelacqua. Antenna Eﬀiciency. url: https://www.antenna-theory.
com/basics/efficiency.php. (accessed: 05.12.2022).
Design, manufacture and test of Transponder for Radar Calibration
89
==PAGE:98==
[19]
Boris Aleiner. Concepts of RF Power Amplification. url: https://www.highfrequencyelectronics.
com/index.php?option=com_content&view=article&id=1883:concepts-of-rf-power-
amplification&catid=149&Itemid=189. (accessed: 30.11.2022).
[20]
Simon Tatham. PuTTY: a free SSH and Telnet client. url: https://www.chiark.
greenend.org.uk/~sgtatham/putty/. (accessed: 06.12.2022).
[21]
WinSCP. WinSCP. url: https://winscp.net/eng/index.php. (accessed: 06.12.2022).
[22]
Christian Wolff. Noise, Noise Figure, Noise temperature - Radartutorial. url: https:
//www.radartutorial.eu/18.explanations/ex08.en.html. (accessed: 27.09.2022).
[23]
PASTERNACK. RF Friis Transmission Calculator Formula. url: https://www.
pasternack.com/t-calculator-friis.aspx. (accessed: 28.09.2022).
[24]
INC. RIGOL TECHNOLOGIES. DG1000Z Series Function/Arbitrary Waveform
Generator. url: https://beyondmeasure.rigoltech.com/acton/attachment/1579/f-
0493/1/-/-/-/-/DG1000Z%20Programming%20Guide.pdf. (accessed: 13.10.2022).
[25]
INC. RIGOL TECHNOLOGIES. DG1022 Function/Arbitrary Waveform Generator.
url: https://uniteng.com/neildocs/facilities/DG1022_ProgrammingGuide_EN.pdf.
(accessed: 13.10.2022).
[26]
NATIONAL INSTRUMENTS. NI-VISA Download - NI. url: https : / / www . ni .
com/da-dk/support/downloads/drivers/download.ni-visa.html#460225. (accessed:
20.09.2022).
[27]
Weston Sapia. Proper Measurement of Mixer Spurious Content. url: https://www.
microwavejournal.com/articles/28317-proper-measurement-of-mixer-spurious-content.
(accessed: 12.10.2022).
[28]
M.O.Tholen S.W. Jolin R.Borgani. Calibration of mixer amplitude and phase im-
balance in superconducting circuits. url: https://aip.scitation.org/doi/10.1063/5.
0025836. (accessed: 24.10.2022).
[29]
CT Newington. UHF/Microwave Experimenter’s Manual. American Radio Relay
League, 1990. url: https://www.ctan.org/pkg/biblatex.
[30]
RIGOL. Rigol DG1022Z 25MHz Function / Arbitrary Waveform Generator. url:
https : / / www . rigol - uk . co . uk / product / rigol - dg1022z - 25mhz - function - arbitrary -
waveform-generator/. (accessed: 10.11.2022).
[31]
Pasternack. 41 dB Gain, 1 Watt Psat, 8 GHz to 12 GHz, Medium Power GaAs
Amplifier, SMA Input, SMA Output, 3.5 dB NF. url: https://www.pasternack.com/
images/ProductPDF/PE15A4008.pdf. (accessed: 17.01.2023).
[32]
Pasternack. 1 Watt P1dB, 18 GHz to 26.5 GHz, Medium Power GaAs Amplifier,
2.92mm Input, 2.92mm Output, 33 dB Gain, 38 dBm IP3, 5 dB NF. url: https:
//www.pasternack.com/images/ProductPDF/PE15A4021.pdf. (accessed: 17.01.2023).
[33]
INC. Marki Microwave. Passive GaAs MMIC IQ Mixer. url: https://www.markimicrowave.
com/Assets/datasheets/MMIQ-0626H.pdf?v=070218. (accessed: 17.10.2022).
[34]
Marki Microwave. Passive GaAs MMIC IQ Mixer. url: https://www.markimicrowave.
com/Assets/datasheets/MMIQ-0218H.pdf?v=061820. (accessed: 06.01.2023).
[35]
Marki Microwave. MMIQ-0218HXPC. url: https : / / shop . markimicrowave . com /
products/detail/mmiq0218hxpc-marki-microwave/685948/. (accessed: 11.01.2023).
[36]
Chengdu AINFO Inc. 18 - 26.5 GHz Standard Horn Antenna. LB-42-20-C-KF. url:
Printed. (accessed: 21.12.2022).
90
Design, manufacture and test of Transponder for Radar Calibration
==PAGE:99==
A
Appendix
A.1
Transponder calibration Python script
1
import pyvisa
2
import sys
3
import time
4
5
#Initialize Generator
6
rm = pyvisa.ResourceManager()
7
rm.list_resources()
8
('ASRL1::INSTR', 'ASRL2::INSTR', 'USB0::0x1AB1::0x0642::DG1ZA241701632::INSTR'
)
9
device = rm.open_resource('USB0::0x1AB1::0x0642::DG1ZA241701632::INSTR')
10
device.read_termination = '\n'
11
device.write_termination = '\n'
12
print(device.query("*IDN?"))
13
14
Input_Message = input("Calibrate transponder for a radar or Set waveform
generator values (Enter: Cal or Set)")
15
16
if Input_Message=="Set":
17
Sig_input1 = input("Channel 1: Enter: Frequency ,Amplitude ,
Offset: ")
18
Phase_input1 = int(input("Channel 1: Enter The Phase: "))
19
20
#Channel 1 adjustments:
21
22
device.write(":SOUR1:APPL:SIN {}".format(Sig_input1))
23
24
device.write(":SOUR1:PHAS {}".format(Phase_input1))
25
device.write("OUTP ON")
26
#device.write("OUTP OFF")
27
time.sleep(1)
28
device.write(":SOUR1:PHAS:INIT")
29
30
print("Channel 1 Set!")
31
time.sleep(2)
32
33
34
35
Sig_input2 = input("Channel 2: Enter: Frequency ,Amplitude ,
Offset: ")
36
Phase_input2 = int(input("Channel 2: Enter The Phase: "))
37
38
#Channel 2 adjustments
39
40
device.write(":SOUR2:APPL:SIN {}".format(Sig_input2))
41
42
device.write(":SOUR2:PHAS {}".format(Phase_input2))
43
device.write("OUTP2 ON")
44
#device.write("OUTP2 OFF")
45
time.sleep(1)
46
device.write(":SOUR2:PHAS:SYNC")
47
48
print("Channel 2 Set!")
49
time.sleep(2)
50
51
elif Input_Message=="Cal":
Design, manufacture and test of Transponder for Radar Calibration
91
==PAGE:100==
52
Input_Cal = input("Enter Radar operating frequency band: (
Xband, Kband)")
53
54
if Input_Cal=="Xband":
55
56
#Channel 1
57
device.write(":SOUR1:APPL:SIN 6666,0.426,0.0")
58
device.write(":SOUR1:PHAS 0")
59
device.write("OUTP ON")
60
#device.write("OUTP OFF")
61
time.sleep(1)
62
device.write(":SOUR1:PHAS:INIT")
63
64
#Channel 2
65
device.write(":SOUR2:APPL:SIN 6666,0.5,-0.05")
66
device.write(":SOUR2:PHAS 91")
67
device.write("OUTP2 ON")
68
#device.write("OUTP2 OFF")
69
time.sleep(1)
70
device.write(":SOUR2:PHAS:SYNC")
71
72
print("Xband calibration set!")
73
time.sleep(2)
74
75
elif Input_Cal=="Kband":
76
#Channel 1
77
device.write(":SOUR1:APPL:SIN 5000,1,0.0")
78
device.write(":SOUR1:PHAS 0")
79
device.write("OUTP ON")
80
#device.write("OUTP OFF")
81
time.sleep(1)
82
device.write(":SOUR1:PHAS:INIT")
83
84
#Channel 2
85
device.write(":SOUR2:APPL:SIN 5000,1.23,-0.01")
86
device.write(":SOUR2:PHAS 97")
87
device.write("OUTP2 ON")
88
#device.write("OUTP2 OFF")
89
time.sleep(1)
90
device.write(":SOUR2:PHAS:SYNC")
91
92
print("Xband calibration set!")
93
time.sleep(2)
94
95
96
else:
97
print("Invalid Command!")
98
time.sleep(2)
99
100
else:
101
print("Invalid Command!")
102
time.sleep(2)
Listing A.1: Transponder Calibration Python script
92
Design, manufacture and test of Transponder for Radar Calibration
==PAGE:101==
A.2
SNR and Noise floor - Old transponder vs Horn
transponder (PF)
(a) Noise Floor 1
(b) SNR 1
(a) Noise Floor 2
(b) SNR 2
(a) Noise Floor 3
(b) SNR 3
Design, manufacture and test of Transponder for Radar Calibration
93
==PAGE:102==
(a) Noise Floor 4
(b) SNR 4
(a) Noise Floor 5
(b) SNR 5
(a) Noise Floor 6
(b) SNR 6
94
Design, manufacture and test of Transponder for Radar Calibration
==PAGE:103==
(a) Noise Floor 7
(b) SNR 7
(a) Noise Floor 8
(b) SNR 8
A.3
SNR and Noise floor - Horn transponder (TM4)
(a) Noise Floor 1
(b) SNR
1
Design, manufacture and test of Transponder for Radar Calibration
95
==PAGE:104==
(a) Noise Floor 2
(b) SNR 2
(a) Noise Floor 3
(b) SNR 3
(a) Noise Floor 4
(b) SNR 4
96
Design, manufacture and test of Transponder for Radar Calibration
==PAGE:105==
(a) Noise Floor 5
(b) SNR 5
(a) Noise Floor 6
(b) SNR 6
Design, manufacture and test of Transponder for Radar Calibration
97
==PAGE:106==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Ørsteds Plads, Building 348
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 91935277
www.dtu.dk
