==PAGE:1==
Life cycle assessment of management op-
tions for post-consumer textile waste
Marwa Salim (s164290)
Kongens Lyngby, 22nd January 2023
M.Sc. Thesis
Master of Science in Environmental Engineering
==PAGE:2==
Supervisor: Assistant Professor Valentina Bisinella
Co-supervisor Professor Thomas Højlund Christensen
DTU Sustain
Department of Environmental and Resource Engineering
Technical University of Denmark
Bygningstorvet
Building 115
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
The aim of this study is to environmentally assess different waste management options
for post-consumer textile waste. This was done by making a material flow analysis
(MFA) of the textile streams in Denmark, quantifying the amount and composition
of textiles. Moreover, a Life-Cycle Assessment (LCA) quantifying the environmental
impacts for different waste management options for post-consumer textiles in Den-
mark was made. The results of the two analyses were discussed and recommendations
based on best practice and future work were given.
The MFA conducted quantifies textile waste streams in Denmark for the year 2021.
Data on the consumption of new textiles were based on national statistics regarding
the import, export and production of textiles in Denmark for the respective year. The
consumer groups investigated included households, private and public sector. Both
product-groups and the textile material composition were determined. For the LCA,
a set of two scenarios were investigated: Scenario 0, a business-as-usual scenario,
where all the post-consumer textile waste are sent to incineration in Denmark; and
Scenario 1, where post-consumer textile waste are sent to closed-loop recycling. Data
for the life-cycle inventory were gathered by critically reviewing literature found from
the literature databases Web of Science and Scopus. In addition, literature in the
form of publications from organisations and environmental product declarations were
also reviewed. The Life-Cycle Impact Assessment method Environmental footprint
3.0 constituting of 16 impact categories was used.
Results from the MFA showed that the consumption of new textiles in Denmark
for the year 2021 was 123,259 tons, which was an increase of 23.1% from year 2019.
The average consumption per inhabitant was 20.9 kg; only 18.9 kg when considering
textiles purchased by the households alone. A part of the increase in the consumption
of textiles was linked to the corona-pandemic, as the use of protective gloves and face-
masks were pronounced. The quantification of the material composition of textiles
showed that the categories Cotton, Other natural fibres, Synthetics, Other fibres and
Unspecified fibres constituted 39.1%, 1.6%, 20.0%, 20.4%, and 18.9% of the total
consumption, respectively. Most of the post-consumer textiles in Denmark, that is
68%, ends getting incinerated in Denmark. The quantified post-consumer textile flows
were used in the LCA. Results from the LCA showed that Scenario 1, the recycling
of post-consumer textiles was better than Scenario 0 for all 16 impact categories.
Especially the categories ’WU - Water Use’ and ’MEP - Eutrophication, marine’,
showed -1378 and -1424 times lower impact than for Scenario 0, respectively. The
==PAGE:4==
ii
Abstract
substitution of the natural fibres, cotton and wool, contributed to large environmental
savings due to the heavy environmental burdens associated to the production of these
fibres.
For Scenario 0, the large share of cotton contributed significantly to the
negative impact score for the impact category ’CC - Climate change’, due to biogenic
carbon content, overall impact score being −9.80E+07 kg CO2−eq. Results from the
sensitivity analysis showed that lowering the substitution ratio of fibres will have a
significant influence on the results, as the environmental savings will be lower. Future
work entails a comprehensive analysis of the different steps in the textile recycling
value-chain highlighting, among others, the material loss across the value chain.
==PAGE:5==
Preface
This report is a master’s thesis written as part of the Master programme ’Environ-
mental Engineering’ at Technical University of Denmark conducted by the student
Marwa Salim (s164290). The master thesis project was conducted in line with the
requirements for obtaining a master degree in Environmental Engineering and is writ-
ten at the Department for Environmental and Resource Engineering. The project was
supervised by Assistant Professor Valentina Bisinella and Professor Thomas Højlund
Christensen. The Master thesis project constituted of 30 ECTS point and took place
in the autumn semester in the period: 22/8/2022-22/1/2023.
The master’s thesis conducted a life-cycle assessment of different management options
for post-consumer textile waste in Denmark. The background for the topic was the
obligation set by the European Union to introduce separate waste collection for tex-
tiles by 2025 every member states.
I want to thank my main supervisor Valentina Bisinella and co-supervisor Thomas
Højlund Christensen for their supervision. My sincerest thanks to my main supervi-
sor Valentina Bisinella for her help, guidance and motivation throughout the process.
I also want to thank my former colleagues at Amager Ressourcecenter, especially Ida
Leisner and Tanja Kofoed, for their insights and knowledge about the waste manage-
ment of post-consumer textile waste in ”the real world” and for their invitation to
accompany them on a company-visit to Siptex sorting plant in Malmö. Thanks to
Lars Persson and Peter Hansson from Siptex sorting plant for answering questions
about the technical workings of the plant. My thanks to PhD student Heather Mar-
garet Logan who provided guidance on literature concerning the recycling of textiles.
Kongens Lyngby, 22nd January 2023
Marwa Salim
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Abbreviations
MFA
Material Flow Analysis
LCA
Life-Cycle Assessment
LCIA
Life-Cycle Impact Assessment
LCI
Life-Cycle Inventory
DST
Statistics Denmark
EoL
End-of-Life
EU
European Union
DK
Denmark
ROW
Rest Of World
EPD
Environmental product declaration
PE
Person equivalents
EF
Environmental footprint
NF
Normalisation factor
WWTP
Wastewater treatment plant
==PAGE:8==
vi
==PAGE:9==
Contents
Abstract
i
Preface
iii
Abbreviations
v
Contents
vii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Aim and objectives . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2
Theoretical background
3
2.1
Textile waste and composition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
Textile waste: reuse and recycling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
3
Methodology
7
3.1
Material flow analysis of textile waste streams in Denmark . . . . . . .
7
3.1.1
Critical Literature review and methodological approach
. . . .
7
3.1.2
Scoping of the MFA . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3.1.3
Consumption of new textiles
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
3.1.4
Determination of the material composition
. . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.1.5
Mapping of the Danish textile flows
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.2
Life-Cycle Assessment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3.2.1
Aim definition
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3.2.2
Scope definition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3.2.3
Life-Cycle Inventory . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
3.2.4
Basis for Sensitivity and Uncertainty analysis . . . . . . . . . .
36
4
Results and discussion
39
4.1
Material flow analysis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
4.1.1
Consumption of textile products
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
4.1.2
Consumption of textile materials . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
4.1.3
MFA system overview . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
4.1.4
Discussion of methodology, assumptions and other studies . . .
49
==PAGE:10==
viii
Contents
4.2
Life-Cycle Impact Assessment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
4.2.1
Environmental impact for each textile fiber . . . . . . . . . . .
51
4.2.2
Environmental impacts for the whole system
. . . . . . . . . .
64
4.2.3
Process contribution analysis: Scenario 0
. . . . . . . . . . . .
65
4.2.4
Process contribution analysis: Scenario 1
. . . . . . . . . . . .
66
4.3
Interpretation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
69
4.3.1
Sensitivity analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
69
4.3.2
Uncertainty analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
74
4.3.3
Completeness and consistency checks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
75
4.4
Future work and perspectives for the waste management of post-consumer
textiles . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
77
Conclusion
79
Appendices
81
Appendix A
Material flow analysis
84
A.1 Productgroups
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
84
A.2 Material groups . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
85
Appendix B
Life-Cycle Inventory
87
B.1 Assumptions used for modelling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
87
B.1.1
Cotton recycling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
87
B.1.2
Wool recycling
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
87
B.1.3
Polyester recycling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
87
B.1.4
Nylon recycling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
87
B.1.5
Blends recycling
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
88
B.2
Data for all post-consumer recycling technologies . . . . . . . . . . . .
88
B.2.1
Dry matter and energy-content . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
88
B.2.2
Modelling of the Cotton recycling technology in Easetech
. . .
89
B.2.3
Modelling of the Wool recycling technology in Easetech
. . . .
93
B.2.4
Modelling of the virgin wool production in Easetech . . . . . .
99
B.2.5
Modelling of the polyester recycling technology in Easetech . .
101
B.2.6
Modelling of the Nylon recycling technology in Easetech . . . .
105
B.2.7
Modelling of the blends recycling technology in Easetech . . . .
109
B.2.8
Modelling of the pre-sorting, fine-sorting, disposal of packaging
113
Appendix C
Life-Cycle Impact Assessment
119
C.1 Normalized LCIA for each textile fiber . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
119
Appendix D
Sensitivity analysis
121
D.1 Sensitivity analysis: Robustness of LCIA-method . . . . . . . . . . . .
121
D.2 Sensitivity analysis: Scenario analysis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
122
==PAGE:11==
Contents
ix
Bibliography
125
==PAGE:12==
x
==PAGE:13==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
Textiles are essential for the many things we use in our everyday life from clothing to
carpets, curtains, furniture etc. In the past two decades, the textile consumption in
Europe has increased substantially, which is attributed to the higher population af-
fluence, more effective production, and the fast fashion industry. The textile industry
is considered one of the largest in the world and an important part of the European
manufacturing industry (Manshoven et al., 2019). The industry is also cause to ma-
jor environmental, climate and social impacts. In Europe, the textile industry is the
fourth worst in terms of consuming primary raw material and water; it is the second
and fifth most for land use and emission of greenhouse gas emissions, respectively.
Most of the impacts related to the production occur outside Europe, as most textiles
are imported. It is estimated that the average European consumes 26 kg textiles per
year and discards 11 kg textiles per year. Currently, only less than 1% of non-reusable
textile waste is getting recycled to new fibres as technologies are still emerging, the
rest is either incinerated or landfilled (Manshoven et al., 2019). In Denmark, where
the textile waste is not collected, the textile waste is sent to incineration and not to
a landfill (Vium, 2014).
To address the problems and challenges related to the production and consumption
of textiles, the EU has launched the project: “EU strategy for sustainable and circu-
lar textiles” (European Union, n.d.). As a part of the strategy, the EU has set an
obligation under the European Waste Directive for every member state to establish
separate waste collection of textiles as by January 1, 2025 (European Union, 2018,
European Commission, 2022). In 2020, the Danish government launched, together
with several other parties, the plan “Climate plan for a greener waste sector and cir-
cular economy”. One of the requirements in this strategy entails the setup of separate
waste collection for 10 waste fractions, including textile waste (Danish Ministry of
Environment, n.d.). In the plan, it is specified that the textile waste to be collected is
from household waste, however, anything that resembles household waste can also be
collected. This includes sectors as governmental institutions, private oﬀices, restau-
rants etc. (Danish Ministry of Environment, 2022). In the original plan, the textile
waste collection was to be established no later than January 1, 2022. However, due
to an yet immature market, it was decided to push the deadline as of earliest 1 July
2023 and no later than 1 January 2025, which is the deadline set by the EU (Danish
Ministry of Environment, n.d.).
==PAGE:14==
2
1 Introduction
1.1
Aim and objectives
The aim of this report is to make an environmental assessment of different waste
management options for post-consumer textile waste in Denmark. For this aim, the
following main objectives are defined:
• To quantify and describe the composition of textile waste streams in Denmark
using the principles of material flow analysis.
• To conduct a Life-cycle Assessment on different waste management options for
post-consumer textile waste in Denmark.
• To discuss and evaluate the most environmentally preferable waste treatment
option for post-consumer textile waste.
==PAGE:15==
CHAPTER 2
Theoretical
background
2.1
Textile waste and composition
Textile waste can be categorised in two categories, namely pre-consumer waste (Post-
industrial waste) or post-consumer waste (Candido, 2021).
Pre-consumer textile
waste are waste stemming from the production of textiles including the spinning
of yarn, fabric manufacturing, the garment making etc. During the production pro-
cess, it is estimated 20-50% of fibres used ends as waste. Post-consumer waste is as
the name suggests clothing or household textiles that consumers such as households,
private and public sector discards. The textiles are discarded for various reasons such
as damage to the material, they are out fashion, worn out etc. (Kamble and Behera,
2021). Post-consumer textile waste varies greatly between countries as an effect of
the different countries’ living standard. Different routes for the textiles exist includ-
ing the exchange of textiles between friends and family, selling the textiles, giving to
charities, the textiles getting landfilled or incinerated (Candido, 2021).
Textile fibres are a raw material that can be spun into yarn, and in which textiles are
manufactured from. There are many different textile fibres. Figure 2.1 provides an
overview and categorisation of different textile fibre-types. Overall, the textile fibres
can be categorised in two categories which are natural fibres and manufactured fibres.
Natural fibres are either produced by plants or animals.
Plant-based fibres, also
cellulose-based fibres, include cotton, flax, hemp, jute, bamboo, linen etc. Animal
based fibres, also called protein-based fibres, are known as wool, silks, mohair, cash-
mere and alpaca fibres. Some categorisations also include leather in their definition
of animal fibres. Manufactured fibres, or man-made fibres, are fibres that include a
vast array of different fibres. Synthetics are fibres that are produced from fossil-based
resources such as polyester, nylon (polyamide), acrylics, polypropylene, elastane etc.
Man-made fibres also encompass regenerated fibres, which are plant-based fibres that
are treated chemically to obtain cellulose fibres and includes viscose (rayon), lyocell,
modal and cupro. Other categories include biobased fibres, inorganics and recycled
fibres (Textille Exchange, 2022, Ellen MacArthur Foundation, 2017).
==PAGE:16==
4
2 Theoretical background
Figure 2.1. Overview and categorisation of different textiles fibres. Figure is from Munas-
inghe et al. (2021).
2.2
Textile waste: reuse and recycling
There are different terms and definitions that are used when talking about the reuse
and recycling of textile waste. The following section will provide a short introduction
and explanation to different recycling methods, types and definitions used in relation
to textile waste. A study by Sandin and Peters (2018), organised and classified dif-
ferent terms concerning the reuse and recycling of pre-consumer and post-consumer
waste; the classification of the terms can be seen in Figure 2.2. First, defining textile
reuse and textile recycling. Textile reuse is the act of prolonging textile life-time. This
can be done either user to user e.g. swapping and inheriting textiles, but also from
user to retailer through renting and trading of textiles. Textile recycling is defined
as textiles getting re-processed and re-manufactured to new products, be textile or
non-textile products. The focus in this report is on textile recycling and not the reuse
of textile. The recycling can be described more detailed, in terms of which products
are recycled and what they are recycled to. The term open-loop recycling (also called
cascade recycling) of post-consumer textiles entails the recycling of post-consumer
textiles to rags, blankets and insulation materials. In addition, it can also include
recycling of re-processed PET-bottles to textiles. In other words, the recycling of ma-
terials is not restricted to one product. Contrary to open-loop recycling, closed-loop
recycling entails the recycling of one product to the same product or similar; in this
case textiles are recycled to textiles.
==PAGE:17==
2.2 Textile waste: reuse and recycling
5
Figure 2.2. The figure gives an overview and classification of different reuse and recycling
routes for textiles. The figure is from Sandin and Peters (2018).
The most common way to categorise the method of recycling is either by mechanical,
chemical or thermal recycling. Mechanical recycling of textiles include shredding and
tearing of the textiles to produce new recycled fibres. Chemical recycling include
the depolymerisation or dissolution of different textile fibres, where they then get re-
polymerised into new fibres. Thermal recycling, which is a less mentioned route, in-
clude the thermal treatment of different fibres e.g. PET-bottles are thermally treated;
the PET-bottles is melted through melt-extrusion and then re-spun into fibres. When
recycling textiles, Sandin and Peters (2018) state that these methods are typically
combined e.g. when recycling synthetic textiles using chemical recycling, they are
shredded prior to the process using a mechanical method. A different categorisation
was proposed, which is based on the level of disassembly of the recycled material. In
total three different ”types” where proposed, that is ’fabric recycling’, ’fibre recycling’
and ’monomer, oligomer, polymer recycling’. Fabric recycling (also called material
reuse) entails the recycling of the actual fabric, that is the fabric is reused to make
new garments. Looking at Figure 2.2, it is seen that it goes back two steps in the
value-chain to the garment producer. Fibre recycling entails a more dissembled state
of the fabric, where only the fibres are preserved. Polymer/oligomer/monomer re-
cycling are subdivided in two. Polymer/oligomer recycling is where the fibres are
dissembled, however, the polymers are kept. The same goes for monomer recycling,
where the polymers/oligomers are dissembled and only monomers are kept intact.
The Life-cycle assessment conducted in this study, only considers fibre recycling and
monomer, oligomer, polymer recycling. In addition, only closed-loop recycling tech-
nologies are considered, that is textile-to-textile recycling, see section 3.2.
==PAGE:18==
6
==PAGE:19==
CHAPTER 3
Methodology
This chapter will give a comprehensive description of the two methods used in the
study, namely Material Flow Analysis (MFA) and Life-cycle Assessment (LCA). Lit-
erature, databases and assumptions will all be listed and described in relation to
answer the goal and scope as described in section 1.1.
3.1
Material flow analysis of textile waste streams in
Denmark
The aim of the Material Flow Analysis (MFA) is to quantify and determine the post-
consumer textile waste flows and composition in Denmark for the year 2021. The
textile flows in Denmark will be assessed based on the principles of MFA. MFA is
a tool that is used to assess material flows and stocks within a system defined in
relation to time and space. The assessment type is based on the principle of mass-
conservation meaning whatever enters a defined system must be equal to what leaves
the system, taking the change in stock into consideration (Brunner and Rechberger,
2016). The principle is summarised in Equation 3.1.
∑
Inputs =
∑
Outputs ± ∆Stock
(3.1)
3.1.1
Critical Literature review and methodological approach
This study will quantify the amount and determine the textile fibre composition of
post-consumer textile waste in Denmark. This will later be used in order to make an
LCA to assess environmental impacts associated with different waste management
options of post-consumer textile waste. Hence, data about the textile fibre composi-
tion is crucial. A literature review was conducted to find the methods that examined
this topic. Literature was gathered through literature search engines, organisations
such as the Nordic council and Danish and Swedish EPA publications. The literature
search was conducted in September-October 2022.
Denmark is currently in the middle of a transition period, working towards a full
adoption of a separate textile waste collection for households in Denmark. Hence,
==PAGE:20==
8
3 Methodology
not all municipalities have implemented separate collection of textile waste, and as
of April 2022 only 23 out of 98 municipalities in Denmark have a separate collection
of textiles (Munk, 2022). As there is almost no separate collection of textile waste,
data for the relevant fraction cannot be obtained from the national waste statistics
database, Affaldsdatasystemet (ADS), operated by the Danish EPA (Miljøstyrelsen,
n.d.a). Additionally, ADS only gives information about the amount of waste, but can-
not give us information about the material composition in the textile waste in terms
of different fibres such as wool and cotton, which is of crucial importance when mak-
ing the LCA. In comparison to other waste fractions, textiles have a longer life-time
than e.g. food waste, packaging waste etc. and is thus not expected to be thrown
out immediately after use. There will be an accumulation over time for the textiles.
Thus, textiles will accumulate over time in consumers’ homes. This means that if
waste amounts is reported in ADS, it can be data on clothes from different years and
not the year in question. Thus, a different approach needs to be taken into account.
Several studies have looked into an approach that can map the textile flows, both
in terms of amount and material composition. An approach was first presented by
Carlsson et al. (2011) for the Swedish Environmental Protection Agency (EPA). The
textile flows was mapped by combining data about the import, export and production
of textiles in Sweden provided by national statistics.
This method allows to get
information about the consumption of specific textile product-groups for a specific
year. In 2018, Watson et al. (2018) published a study for the Danish EPA using
the method from Carlsson et al. (2011) to determine the Danish textile streams.
In addition to the use of national statistics to calculate the total production, the
report included different interviews, surveys, sorting analyses and Physical Supply
and Use tables to estimate End-of-Life (EoL) destinations for textiles in Denmark.
This method has been used later in studies such by Watson et al. (2020) and Dahlbo
et al. (2017).
The method described above only gives information about the distribution of the
amount of textiles across different product-groups. A report made by Schmidt et al.
(2016) for the Nordic Council, presented an LCA on different treatment options for
textile waste.
The authors behind the report used the method first presented by
Carlsson et al. (2011) and determined the type of material within the different product-
categories from the description provided by the Combined nomenclature (CN). A
bachelor project conducted by Madsen (2021) combined the two methods presented
by Carlsson et al. (2011) and Schmidt et al. (2016); the author updated of some of the
methodologies concerning the extraction of data from the national statistics accounts,
which was based on personal personal communications with the author from Watson
et al. (2018). The method used in this report will be based on these studies.
==PAGE:21==
3.1 Material flow analysis of textile waste streams in Denmark
9
3.1.2
Scoping of the MFA
Before making the MFA, it is important to define what is meant with textile waste
in this report. The Danish Ministry of the Environment states in their ”Guidance
for sorting criteria for Household Waste” that textile waste is worn-out garments and
textiles that is full of holes, frayed, speckled or in any other way ruined. It does
not include shoes, belts, bags or textiles suitable for reuse (Danish Ministry of En-
vironment, 2022). As part of their guidance, The Danish Ministry of Environment
has made an non-exhaustive positive and negative list of what can be sorted out as
textile waste. This list has been used as a basis for the textile definition product in
this report. In addition to the lists, the definition presented by Watson et al. (2018)
and Madsen (2021) was used. Here, items such as duvets, furniture upholstery, pil-
lows and rugs are excluded as their weight contributes only a little compared to the
products’ overall weight. To see the full list of textile products used in this report, see
Table A.1 in Appendix A.1. The Danish consumption of textiles will be determined
for the year 2021. The textile waste flows to be determined are from the consumer
groups households, private and public sector. Figure 3.1 gives an overview of the
system at hand.
Figure 3.1. Mapping of the textile waste system in Denmark for the year 2021, for the
three consumer-groups: Households, private and public sector.
==PAGE:22==
10
3 Methodology
3.1.3
Consumption of new textiles
The consumption of new textiles in the form of clothing and household textiles can
be assumed to be equal to the supply. The supply of new textiles in Denmark is
calculated by equation 3.2:
Consumption of textiles (The Supply) =
Production in Denmark + Import −Export
(3.2)
Data on the import, export and production of textiles in Denmark are extracted from
Statistics Denmark (DST), which is the main authority in Denmark to collect, com-
pile and publish statistics in Denmark (Statistics Denmark, n.d.a). Data on import
and export are available on DST’s website expressed both in mass and monetary
values (Statistics Denmark, n.d.c). To be able to download and obtain relevant data
for import and export, the Combined Nomenclature (CN) was used. The CN is an
instrument used to classify goods and a way to keep statistics on the trade in the EU.
It is applicable for intra-EU trade and between EU and non-EU countries (European
Commission, n.d.b). The data on the textile-products obtained was in followed the 4-
digit CN-codes first provided by Watson et al. (2018) and updated by Madsen (2021).
To see the 15 product-groups and their corresponding 4 digit CN codes, please refer
to Appendix A.1 Table A.1.
When obtaining data for the production of goods in EU, a different tool than CN
is used which is called ProdCom. ProdCom is a statistical tool that countries use
to report their industrial production of goods (Statistics Denmark, n.d.d). DST has
matched the ProdCom codes with the CN-codes, however, there might be more Prod-
com codes than CN-codes, which might cause a many-to-many relationship.
The
4-digit CN-codes were used to obtain data on the production, however, prodCom
were only expressed in 10 digits (Madsen, 2021, Watson et al., 2020).
Danish production data are expressed in both monetary values and amount. The
latter can, however, be expressed in different type of amounts as pair, kg, gram,
apiece, liter etc. Thus, the data cannot be directly used as compared to data on
import and export Danmarks Statistik (n.d.). To convert the production data from
monetary values [DKK] to physical unit [kg], a conversion factor was made based on
the export price per kg textile exported. The underlying assumption is that the export
price is equal to the production price. By using this conversion factor, it was possible
to calculate the physical flows for all 526 CN-groups Watson et al. (2018), Madsen
(2021). After calculating the physical flows for the production, the consumption could
then be calculated (see equation 3.2).
==PAGE:23==
3.1 Material flow analysis of textile waste streams in Denmark
11
3.1.4
Determination of the material composition
The procedure described under section 3.1.3 gives information about the amount of
textiles that lies under the 15 product-groups investigated in this report (see Appendix
A.1, Table A.1). To be able to determine the material composition of the fibres in
the supply of new textiles e.g.
in terms of cotton, natural fibres, synthetics etc.
the methodology first presented by Schmidt et al. (2016) will be used. Here, the
authors behind the study categorised the material composition of the textiles by
using the description provided by the CN classification. As an example, the following
description is given for one of the 8-digit CN Code: 61033200 Men’s or boys’ Jackets
and blazers of cotton knitted or crocheted (excl. wind-jackets and similar articles).
The following product can be categorised as cotton material. This categorisation,
based on the 8-digit CN code description, was done for all 526 CN codes used in this
report. A total of 21 micro-categories were identified, as in line with the study Madsen
(2021). The 21 micro-categories was subdivided into 5 macro-categories to give an
overview of the main types. The 5 macro-categories are: Cotton, Other natural fibres,
Synthetics, Other fibres and Unspecified fibres. The first group ”Cotton” covers all
material made from cotton including also denim-material. The second group ”Other
natural fibres” include natural materials such as linen, silk, cashmere etc. The third
group ”Synthetics” covers man-made fossil-based material. The fourth group ”Other
fibres” covers material that are not clearly defined and use umbrella-terms for many
different types e.g. regenerated fibres, man-made fibres. The fifth and last group
is called ”Unspecified fibres” and covers textiles that are not clearly described in
terms of which material is used, but rather described in terms of functionality, type
of production or something else e.g. swimwear, ski clothing, knitwear etc. The full
list can be seen in Appendix A.2, Table A.2.
3.1.5
Mapping of the Danish textile flows
The mapping of textiles in Denmark in terms of consumers, EoL destinations, flows
and stocks is assumed to follow the same pattern as presented by the study from Wat-
son et al. (2018). Figure 3.1 presents a full overview at textile system in Denmark.
The consumption of new textiles, or ”The Supply”, enters the ”Sales-Process”, which
entails retailers and other companies that sell the textiles to the consumers. It is
assumed that there will be a stock here, as some of the textiles will be retained before
being sold to the final consumers.
The Danish NGO ’Forbrugerådet Tænk’ and the Danish waste company ’Econet”
published a report stating that danish retailers threw new clothes to incineration
(Ro Ebbesen and Petersen, 2020). In the report by Ro Ebbesen and Petersen (2020),
”New Clothing” were defined as disposed textiles with the price label and original
packaging still intact. This flow will be estimated and calculated in this study. The
==PAGE:24==
12
3 Methodology
study does not have a clear definition of what textiles they are considering, however,
it is assumed that the textile definition is in line with the definition in this report.
To calculate this flow, data from ADS are (Miljøstyrelsen, n.d.b). However, as these
only consider amount only, the distribution of the textile material is assumed to be
the same as the main flow; these will be subtracted from the rest of the flow that
reached the consumers.
The supply of new textiles will reach the consumers, households, private and public
sector. It is assumed that the textiles consumed by the consumers are constant, thus
following a steady-state condition; the reason for this assumption is that Watson et al.
(2018) showed that the consumption of textiles was more or less the same in a period
of years. Post-consumer textiles are expected to take 5 different routes; Recycling
(DK), Incineration (DK), Reuse (ROW), Recycling (ROW) and Incineration/Landfill
(ROW). These will be the export flows, see Figure 3.1.
Other flows in this system include internal flows, as e.g. some of the clothes in Den-
mark are reused via different routes that can be exchange between family and friends,
from consumer to consumer, donations etc. These flows are taken into account, how-
ever, as these are internal flows, they will be calculated and subtracted from the
overall mass-balance.
==PAGE:25==
3.2 Life-Cycle Assessment
13
3.2
Life-Cycle Assessment
Life-cycle assessment (LCA) will be used to evaluate the environmental impacts for
different treatment options of post-consumer textiles. The following section will pro-
vide a short description of what an LCA is and what it can be used for, how LCA is
used in this study and the questions that the LCA will be used to answer.
LCA is a method that is used to quantify and evaluate environmental impacts of
products or systems. There are different types of LCAs, however, they all follow a
certain structure, which is that an LCA has a 1) Goal definition 2) Scope definition
3) Inventory analysis 4) Impact assessment, see Figure 3.2 (Hauschild, 2018). LCA
is an iterative process where interpretation of each step serves new information and
insight, allowing the ones conducting the LCA to go back and fourth to improve the
study .
Figure 3.2. The figure shows the LCA framework which consists of the four phases: Goal
definition, Scope definition, Inventory analysis and Impact assessment. Notice that inter-
pretation is included in all four phases (ILCD, 2010).
The LCA-study conducted in this report will follow the guidelines presented in the
ISO standards; ”ISO 14040” and ”ISO 14044” (International Organization for Stan-
dardization, 2008, 2006). Additionally also use the ILCD guideline (ILCD, 2010).
3.2.1
Aim definition
The aim of this LCA is to compare different waste management options of post-
consumer textiles in Denmark. The EU has obligated the implementation of separate
==PAGE:26==
14
3 Methodology
textile waste collection for all EU-member states as by January 1st 2025. The fol-
lowing LCA is carried out as part of a Master Thesis conducted by the author of
this report, which is a part of the student’s Master programme ”Environmental En-
gineering” taken at Technical University of Denmark. Hence, the commissioner of
the study is the student Marwa Salim, as this LCA is used for academic purposes
quantifying the environmental impacts associated with different treatment options
of textiles for Denmark, and subsequently be able to give recommendations. The
decision context is therefore Situation B ’Meso/macro-level decision support’ from
the ILCD guideline (ILCD, 2010), as it is expected to have large-scale consequences
on some processes related to the background system.
The results of this LCA is
intended to be communicated to the supervisor and Co-supervisor for this project,
namely associate professor Valentina Bisinella and professor Thomas Højlund Chris-
tensen. The supervisors have great experience with LCA and waste management,
hence a high technical level of reporting is required. Additionally, as this LCA is part
of the student’s education it is required that the report is to be communicated in a
language that is understandable for fellow students. Therefore, fellow students of the
study programme ”Environmental Engineering” at Technical University of Denmark
are also considered a target audience of this LCA.
The study includes a comparative assertion, as it compares the current waste man-
agement of post-consumer textiles with other treatment options. As the LCA-study
is not intended to be disclosed to the public, there is no need for a critical review.
Besides the commissioner of this study, other influential actors are the supervisor
and co-supervisor of the study, associate professor Valentina Bisinella and professor
Thomas Højlund Christensen, as they are to provide feedback and guidance to the
student.
3.2.2
Scope definition
The deliverables of this report is a comparative LCA, which will include a complete
LCI, and characterized and internally normalized LCIA-results. The functional unit
is as follows: The management of the yearly generated amount of post-consumer
textile waste in Denmark complying with the Danish waste legislation. The associated
reference flows were derived form the MFA in this report which is based on data from
2021, see section 4.1. However, some alterations and adjustments where made in order
to match the textile material flows found with the textile recycling technologies found
(see section 3.2.3 under Life-cycle Inventory). It was assumed that the MFA category
for ’Cotton’ is the same for the LCA category, the MFA-category ’Other natural fibres’
is assumed to be a flow for wool-fibres, the MFA categories ’Synthetics’ and ’Other
fibres” are added together assuming 90% are polyester and 10% are nylon following
a report from Textille Exchange (2022) stating that polyester is the most produced
synthetic textiles fibre in the world and nylon is the second, 54% and 5%, respectively.
The last MFA-category ’Unspecified fibres’ are assumed to be a polyester-cotton blend
containing 50% of each material. The categorisation can be seen in Table 3.1. Table
==PAGE:27==
3.2 Life-Cycle Assessment
15
3.2 shows the reference flow for the five different textile material categories Cotton,
wool, polyester, nylon and polyester-cotton blends 50%/50%.
Table 3.1. The table shows the textile material categories that are going to be used in the
LCA-study.
From MFA to LCA
Cotton
Wool
Polyester
Nylon
Blends
Cotton
Linen
90% of the fibers:
•Synthethic fibres
•Of other textile materials
•Regenerated fibres
•Man-made fibres
•Wool, fine animal hair
or man-made fibres
90% of the fibers:
•Synthethic fibres
•Of other textile materials
•Regenerated fibres
•Man-made fibres
•Wool, fine animal hair
or man-made fibres
Made up clothing
Denim
Linen eller ramie
Made up textiles
Cotton corduroy
Wool or fine
animal hair
Impregnated fabric
Real silk
Knitwear
cashmere goat
Single-use gowns/
non-wowen material
Wool (over 50%)
Ski suits
Swimwear
Table 3.2.
The reference flows for the five textile material categories: Cotton, Wool,
Polyester, Nylon and Polyester cotton blends 50%/50%.
Textile material categories
Reference flow [ton]
Cotton
48,248
Wool
1,951
Polyester
44,483
Nylon
4,943
Blends
23,396
==PAGE:28==
16
3 Methodology
System boundaries
The LCA-study will evaluate the environmental impacts of
different waste management options for post-consumer textiles, as described under
section 1.1. From the MFA-results in this report, it was seen that there were five
EoL-routes post-consumer textiles could go, where waste incineration in Denmark
was the EoL route where 68% of the post-consumer textiles went (not considering the
share from system loss). Thus, the first waste management option to be modelled is a
business-as-usual scenario, Scenario 0, reflecting the current practice of treating post-
consumer textiles, which is by waste incineration. As there were some time-limitations
within the setup of the LCA, due to the prioritisation of the data-collection for the
Life-Cycle Inventory, some simplifications were made. Therefore, it was decided to
assume that the only waste management option in Scenario 0 is the waste incineration
of post-consumer textiles. That is all 100% of the post-consumer EoL flows will be
directed to incineration. Figure 3.3 shows the setup of Scenario 0.
Figure 3.3. The figure shows the system boundary for Scenario 0.
Scenario 0 depicts the treatment option in a business-as-usual scenario in Denmark,
where all the EoL textiles are sent to waste incineration in Denmark. By inciner-
ating post-consumer waste, some products are produced which are electricity, heat
and bottom ash. The produced electricity substitutes the production of electricity
elsewhere in Denmark, same goes for the produced heat. The bottom-ash is used to
substitute gravel in roads in Denmark. From the figure, it is seen that the foreground
processes are the incineration of post-consumer textiles, whereas the background pro-
cesses entails the production of electricity, fuels, heat, chemicals etc. that are used
in the foreground system. E.g. some chemicals are used in the air pollution control
system employed by the incineration plant. The emissions produced in within the
foreground will be quantified. The blue arrow out of the system called emissions, are
==PAGE:29==
3.2 Life-Cycle Assessment
17
the emissions produced within the foreground system, in which will be quantified.
The other treatment option, that will be assessed in this LCA-study and in which
Scenario 0 will be compared to, is the recycling of post-consumer textiles. The focus
of this study is to evaluate the closed-loop recycling of textiles, thus only textile-
to-textile recycling is considered in this study. However, there are different textile
products that can be produced out of recycled textile materials as blouses, trousers
etc. and different techniques to do so. However, this is outside the scope of this study.
Thus, the scenario assessing textile recycling of post-consumer textiles, Scenario 1, will
assess the recycling of EoL-textiles to spun yarns. A schematic depiction of Scenario
1 can be seen in Figure 3.4.
Figure 3.4. The figure shows the system boundaries for Scenario 1.
Scenario 1 starts from the pre-sorting of post-consumer textiles, where clothes that
are wet, stained, reusable etc. are removed e.g. some are sent to incineration. After
pre-sorting, the post-consumer textiles are sent to fine-sorting, where textiles are
sorted in categories based on colour and textile material. The fine-sorted textiles
will be sent to a recycling facility afterwards. The type recycling will be determined
based on the type of textile fibre, which in this study is cotton, wool, polyester, nylon
and blends; to see the difference between the difference recycling technologies see
section 3.2.3.
The recycling process will produce yarns, which will substitute the
production of virgin yarn.
The residues from the recycling process will either be
recycled, incinerated or landfilled, which in most cases will be determined based on
the waste management system in the respective country where the recycling is taking
place. In Scenario 1, the treatment of post-consumer textiles is modelled under Danish
conditions, as if the treatment is taking place in Denmark, therefore most if the
residues will be sent to incineration. The choice of modelling Scenario 1 under danish
conditions was taken, as to have a common ground to compare the treatment options,
especially when it comes to comparing the recycling of the different textile fibres.
In addition, Denmark exports a big share of metal, paper, plastic and cardboard to
==PAGE:30==
18
3 Methodology
other countries in the EU, as Denmark has limited facilities/infrastructure to recycle
these material fractions, which also goes for textiles (Bukholt, 2022, Circle Economy,
2022).
Thus, Scenario 1 will examine the environmental impacts if the recycling
takes place in Denmark, in contradiction to the common practice today. The system
described is the foreground process. The production of electricity, chemicals, fuels,
heat etc.
used in the foreground process are all included in the quantification of
the environmental impacts and are part of the background process. Note that the
collection and transportation of EoL textiles is not included in either Scenario 0 or
Scenario 1.
Model representativeness, modelling framework and basis for impact as-
sessment
The following comparative LCA is modelled to take place in the begin-
ning of 2025, when it becomes mandatory for the EU-member states to implement
separate collection of textiles. The LCI inventories for the recycling of cotton and
wool are evaluated to be good quality; several literature studies provide good report-
ing of the process, moreover the recycling technologies are mature and have been
used for several decades which means that the technological and temporal represen-
tativeness is rather good and can be expected to be the same for the next 15-30 years.
In comparison, the LCI for polyester, nylon and blends are based on relatively new
technologies employing chemical recycling, especially polyester. Thus, it is assessed
that the LCI will be valid between 3-10 years. The reference flows are based on data
from 2021, which it is assumed will not change drastically the next 3-5 years.
As the decision context is defined as situation B according to the ILCD handbook, the
consequential modelling approach is applied, hence data for the inventory analysis
are going to be based on this approach. However, as most of the LCA studies found
uses attributional modelling, these will be modified to consequential data. In terms
of handling multifunctional processes, the study will use system expansion, when sub-
division is not possible.
The LCIA-method Environmental footprint 3.0 without long term effect with toxicity
was chosen due to its geographical scope which is Europe and due to the fact that is
from a newer date (European Commission, n.d.a). The LCIA-method encompasses
16 different impact categories which can be seen in Table 3.3. When depicting the
LCIA-results in figures the acronyms will be used, however, the discussing the results
the full name of the impact category will be used. The impact assessment will include
characterised and normalised results. When comparing the scenarios, internal normal-
isation will be used where Scenario 0 will be used as baseline. External normalisation
will be used, when evaluating the individual treatment of the five different textile fi-
bres. The external normalisation will be using the European person equivalent (PE).
PE is the annual quantified environmental impact caused by the average European
from various activities. PE are used to normalise LCIA-results and set them into a
context for better understanding and comprehension of the results (Hauschild and
==PAGE:31==
3.2 Life-Cycle Assessment
19
Wenzel, n.d.); the normalisation factors can be seen in Table 3.3.
Table 3.3. The table lists the names, acronyms, units and european person equavalent for
the 16 impact categories used by the LCIA method Environmental footprint 3.0 (Crenna
et al., 2017). NF=normalisation factor, EF=Environmental footprint.
Impact category
Acronym
Unit
Global NF for
EF per person
Climate change
CC
kg CO2-eq
8.40E+03
Ozone depletion
OD
kg CFC-11 eq
2.34E-02
Human toxicity, cancer
HT-c
CTUh
3.85E-05
Human toxicity, noncancer
HT-nc
CTUh
4.75E-04
Particulate matter
PM
Disease incidences
7.18E-04
Ionising radiation
IOR
kBq U-235 eq.
4.22E+03
Photochemical ozone formation
POF
kg NMVOC eq
4.06E+01
Acidification
AC
mol H+ eq
5.55E+01
Eutrophication, terrestrial
TEP
mol N eq
1.77E+02
Eutrophication, freshwater
FEP
kg P eq.
7.34E-01
Eutrophication, marine
MEP
kg N eq
2.83E+01
Ecotoxicity freshwater
ET
CTUe
1.40E+06
Land use
LU
-
1.18E+04
Water use
WU
m3 water eq
1.15E+04
Resource use, minerals and metals
RU-m
kg SB eq
6.53E+04
Resource use, fossils
RU-f
MJ
6.36E-02
The modilling of the scenarios wille be carried out in EASETECH, and LCA-software
tool designated to model the environmental impacts of waste management system.
The study will use Ecoinvent 3.7.1 when using data for the background processes as
this is the most reliable in terms of usage, as some problems has been reported for
the newer versions.
==PAGE:32==
20
3 Methodology
3.2.3
Life-Cycle Inventory
In the following section the LCI will be presented. The method used for the data-
collection will be described and the literature review conducted will be presented.
The detailed inventory for this study will be presented under system modelling per
Life-Cycle stage.
Data Collection and Critical Literature Review
The LCI for the different recycling technologies of post-consumer textiles materials
was gathered by conducting a critical literature search and review. The literature
databases and search engines Web Of Science and Scopus were used to carry out the
search in finding relevant and new data to use in this report. The focus was to find
LCAs that assessed the environmental impacts of different recycling technologies and
in which clearly state that they have the ability to recycle post-consumer textile waste.
The study by Spadavecchia (2019) examined this topic of assessing the environmental
impacts of textile recycling and so was used as a starting point for this literature
search. The literature search was iterative in the beginning, in order to find out what
the most relevant search words were. To search for relevant literature, the following
Boolean search string was used both in Web Of Science and Scopus:
• textil* OR apparel* OR cloth* OR ”fashion” (All Fields) AND recycl* (All
Fields) AND ”life-cycle assessment” OR ”life cycle assessment” OR lca OR
”carbon footprint” OR ”environmental impact*” (All Fields)
The literature search was conducted in the period November-December 2022. This
search resulted in 308 and 507 hits for Web Of Science and Scopus, respectively. In
order to narrow the amount of literature down and find relevant ones to this study,
the following criteria were used:
• Any form of articles were used (published or not peer-reviewed yet).
• Only closed-loop recycling technologies were considered i.e. technologies that
only consider textile-to-textile recycling.
• Literature from the year 2015 and onwards.
• Technologies which states that they are able to recycle post-consumer textiles
among their input textiles.
In addition to using Web of Science and Scopus, publications from the organisation
Nordic Council were searched as the usually have comprehensive and peer-reeviews
reports. Additionally, reports such as Environmental Product Declarations (EPDs)
were used, as they also require a third-party peer-review before getting published.
The search was broad, as in the early stages it was seen that the amount of literature
==PAGE:33==
3.2 Life-Cycle Assessment
21
were scarce. Therefore, the search words ”carbon footprint” and ”environmental im-
pact*” were added.
From the literature search, it was evident that most of the environmental assess-
ments found were concerning the recycling of cotton.
Most of the literature was
deemed good; several were peer-reviewed, and the level of reporting, both in terms
of the description of technology and the provision of inventory, were good.
The
reviewed studies, assessing the environmental impacts and in which provided good
inventory data, were Esteve-Turrillas and de la Guardia (2017), Liu et al. (2020),
Oelerich et al. (2017), Schmidt et al. (2016) and Fidan et al. (2021). The amount
of studies conducted on cotton should be seen in the light of that this technology
has been around for more than 100 years and is mature (Esteve-Turrillas and de la
Guardia, 2017).
Additionally, cotton textiles are also one of the textile materials
that are most requested by recyclers, reflecting the monetary revenue that can be
gained. It was observed that mechanical recycling was the most dominated recycling
technology used for cotton, however, it was seen that emerging technologies currently
under development applied chemical recycling as seen for the studies Oelerich et al.
(2017), Rosson and Byrne (2020) and Paunonen et al. (2019).
Two LCA studies on the recycling of wool from Bianco et al. (2022) and Wiedemann
et al. (2022), both attributional studies, were found from newer date and showed elab-
orate description of technology, modelling and reporting of inventories. The recycling
of wool were included in Schmidt et al. (2016), however, it covered the down-cycling
to insulation and filling material. As for cotton, recycling of wool has been carried
out for decades (Manteco, n.d.).
LCA-studies for polyester were scarce. Currently, only one data-source on polyester
recycling was found, which is from a study by Schmidt et al. (2016) which is also the
one source other studies cite most when assessing polyester recycling e.g. Moazzem,
Crossin, Daver and Wang (2021) and Moazzem, Wang, Daver and Crossin (2021).
The data are for chemical recycling. Several studies about recycled polyester textiles
were found, though the covered the recycling from bottle-to-textile and not textile-to-
textile; the mentioned studies are Shen et al. (2011), Nakatani et al. (2010) and Gileno
and Turci (2021) to name some. This also showcases that most recycled polyester
used in textiles today stems from PET-bottles and not textiles waste, confirming what
was mentioned by Manshoven et al. (2019). Currently, there is no commercial scale
plant that employs chemical recycling in Europe, only in Japan (Circle Economy,
2022). By contrast there are currently recyclers in Europe that can recycle polyester,
however, this is not shown in the studies review in this literature search (Circle Econ-
omy, 2022). The most cited ones from from Patagonia’s sent their post-consumer
waste to obtain recycled materials for the clothing production, where this factory was
in Japan. Today, most of the textiles that are made from recycled polyester stems
from recycled PET-bottles. This might be due to the fact that polyester recycled
from textiles are 10-20% more costly.
==PAGE:34==
22
3 Methodology
Studies on nylon recycling were scarce, as was seen for polyester. An LCA study by
Sim and Prabhu (2018) assessed the recycling of nylon, however, the input waste was
in this case nylon carpets. An EPD for recycled nylon from the Italian Company
Aquafil was found showcasing the inventory for the recycled product (Bureau Veritas,
2018). The challenge with EPDs, however, is that some of the data used can be
aggregated, and thus diﬀicult to know which processes the data are valid for.
Two studies for recycling of blends were found; (Peters et al., 2019) and Zamani et al.
(2015). Their selection for the report and categorisations relied on that it was clearly
stated that two types of textiles fibres can be recovered.
For the majority of the studies, the authors did not declare whether the attributional
or consequential modelling framework was used. Nonetheless, it was possible to de-
duce from the data used; most studies used Ecoinvent as source for their background
processes and here it was stated which system models were used.
==PAGE:35==
3.2 Life-Cycle Assessment
23
System modelling per Life-Cycle Stage
The following section will present the detailed description of the inventories used in
this study. Where several studies were available, the literature used for the inventories
were chosen on the basis on their completeness. In addition, some of the inventories
consists of more than one data-sources. Detailed descriptions of the modelling in
EASETECH, assumptions list and figures showing the EASETECH-modelling are
found in Appendix B.
Textile-to-Textile recycling:
Cotton
The results from the literature search
showed a lot of relevant LCA-studies when it comes to textile-to-textile recycling
of post-consumer cotton textiles. In this case, it was chosen to model the recycling
of cotton based on the technology that is used by the Spanish company Hilaturas
Ferre (Esteve-Turrillas and de la Guardia, 2017). The schematic representation of
the technology can be seen in Figure 3.5.
Figure 3.5. The figure shows the different processes for the mechanical recycling of cotton
textiles at Hilaturas Ferre in Spain.
The technology employs mechanical recycling of cotton. The first step of recycling
cotton textiles entails sorting the textiles in both colour and quality. After this step,
the now sorted cotton textiles are sent to cutting and shredding. The textiles are
cutted and shredded in order to open the fibres, making sure that the fiber length is
not damaged throughout the process. The last step in the recycling scheme entails the
open-end spinning of cotton, where 90% of the fibres turn to cotton yarn, whereas
the residues of the process are sent to incineration. The inventory for the cotton
recycling can be seen in Table 3.4; to see the data for the modelling in EASETECH
see Appendix B.2.2.
==PAGE:36==
24
3 Methodology
Table 3.4. The table shows the LCI for the mechanical recycling of cotton. Data are from
Esteve-Turrillas and de la Guardia (2017) and Moazzem, Crossin, Daver and Wang (2021).
Phase 1: Cutting and shredding
Input
Output
Description
Value
Unit
Description
Value
Unit
Textile waste
1.042
kg
Cutted/shredded textiles
1
kg
Energy consumption
1.31
MJ
Wastes (to incineration)
0.042
kg
Production yield:
lint
96%
waste
4%
Phase 2: Open end spinning
Input
Output
Description
Value
Unit
Description
Value
Unit
Cutted/shredded waste
1.11
kg
Spun fibres/Yarn
1
kg
Energy
1.40
kWh
Wastes (to incineration)
Yield
90%
==PAGE:37==
3.2 Life-Cycle Assessment
25
Textile-to-textile recycling: Wool
The recycling of wool in this LCA-study has
been modelled using the technology that is employed by the Italian company Manteco
S.p.a.. A schematic overview of the process can be seen in Figure 3.6.
Figure 3.6. The figure shows the different processes associated with the mechanical recy-
cling of wool at Manteco in Italy.
The recycling technology employed by Manteco S.p.a is mechanical and has been
carried out for decades (Manteco, n.d.).
The first step, in the recycling process,
entails the sorting of the wool textiles by colour, but also by which type of treatment
the wool textiles are going to undergo, whether it is fraying or shredding. 73% of
the wool textiles goes to the fraying process, whereas 27% goes to the shredding
process (Picerno et al., 2022). In the shredding process, machinery with sharp teeth
and blades are set to open the textiles.
Water is added to the process to lower
the resistance of the textiles and to retain the natural elasticity of the fibres. The
shredded textiles are dried, before being sent to the next step which is yarn spinning.
The water from the shredding is let out to a Wastewater treatment plant (WWTP).
Fraying, on the other hand, is a dry process. Here, several cylinders with sharp points
rotate in order to open up the fabric. The shredded and frayed fibres can now enter
the spinning process, where the wool-fibres are spun into yarns. For the full inventory
of the process, see Table 3.5; to see the data used for the modelling in EASETECH
see Appendix B.2.3.
==PAGE:38==
26
3 Methodology
Table 3.5. The table lists the inventory for the wool recycling technology. Data for process
1), 2) 3) are from Bianco et al. (2022), Picerno et al. (2022) and data for process 4) is from
Wiedemann et al. (2022).
1) Sorting at plant
Input
Output
Description
Value
Unit
Description
Value
Unit
Total wool waste
1032
kg
Sorted textiles
1000
kg
Electricity
42.11
kWh
Wool to shredding
27
%
Natural gas
42
MJ
Wool to fraying
73
%
Diesel
168
MJ
Waste, textile
32
kg
Water
0.27
m3
2) The shredding process
Input
Output
Description
Value
Unit
Description
Value
Unit
Sorted wool textiles
1028.8
kg
Wool fibres from shredding
1000
kg
Electricity
391
kWh
Waste: textile
25.66
kg
Natural gas
1729
MJ
Waste: iron
3.17
kg
Diesel
141
MJ
Wastewater
1.33
m3
Water
1.33
m3
No foam agent
3.83
kg
3) The fraying process
Input
Output
Description
Value
Unit
Description
Value
Unit
Sorted wool textiles
1029.92
kg
Wool fibres, from fraying process
1000
kg
Electricity
0.19
kWh
Waste: iron
7.09
kg
Waste: textile
22.83
kg
4) Yarn spinning process
Input
Output
Description
Value
Unit
Description
Value
Unit
Total input fibres
1186.2
kg
Spun yarn
1000
kg
Electricity, high voltage
2453.6
kWh
Water, emissions to air
512.6
L
Lubricating/antistatic oil
166.1
kg
Wool fibre, to recovery
111.3
kg
Water
512.6
L
Short wool fibres,
to municipal waste
74.9
kg
Water, steam
430.5
kg
Cardboard cone
40.2
kg
HDPE, film
10.9
kg
As there were no full Ecoinvent process that modelled the production of virgin wool
fibre and yarn, data from literature studies were used. The production of virgin wool
followed the process diagram depicted in Figure 3.7, however, since the this is not
part of the focus of the report, only a brief description will be given. The production
of virgin wool first entails the greasy wool production and the subsequent cleaning
of the wool fibres. The cleaned wool fibres are then dyed and spun into yarn. The
production is modelled to take place in India. The LCI for virgin wool is seen in
Table 3.6 and the full detailed modelling in EASETECH can be seen in Appendix
B.2.4.
==PAGE:39==
3.2 Life-Cycle Assessment
27
Figure 3.7. The virgin wool production has four steps and is modelled in India.
Table 3.6. The tables shows the full inventory for virgin wool production. Data are from
Lidfeldt et al. (2022), Wiedemann et al. (2022).
Greasy wool production
Input
Output
Description
Value
Unit
Description
Value
Unit
sheep fleece in the grease,
sheep production,
for wool,RoW (Ecoinvent)
1
kg
Wool cleaning
Input
Output
Description
Value
Unit
Description
Value
Unit
Inputs
Quantity
Unit
Wastewater (WTTP)
7.08
l
Greasy wool for scouring
1.00
kg
Waste (Landfill)
0.34
kg
Electricity
1.08
MJ
Wool fibre (Dyeing)
1.00
kg
Heat
3.50
MJ
Water
6.00
l
Detergent
0.01
kg
Dyeing
Input
Output
Description
Value
Unit
Description
Value
Unit
Batch dyeing, fibre,
cotton,RoW (Ecoinvent)
1
kg
Yarn spinning
Input
Output
Description
Value
Unit
Description
Value
Unit
Total input fibres
1.00
kg
Spun yarn
1
kg
Electricity
2.07
kWh
Water, emissions to air
0.43
l
Lubricating/antistatic oil
0.14
kg
Wool fibres, to landfill
0.16
kg
Water
0.43
L
Water, steam
0.36
kg
Cardboard cone
0.03
kg
HDPE, film
0.01
kg
==PAGE:40==
28
3 Methodology
Textile-to-textile recycling: Polyester
The recycling of polyester garments is
still not very common, which was concluded from the literature search as most recy-
cled polyester used in clothing today stems from PET-bottle recycling. The following
recycling technology presented is used by the Japanese company Teijin (Schmidt
et al., 2016). Figure 3.8 provides a schematic overview of the process.
Figure 3.8. The figure shows the different processes associated with the chemical recycling
of post-consumer polyester textiles at the Teijin company in Japan.
The technology depicted in Figure 3.8 can be categorised as chemical recycling. The
first step entails that the material is cut and washed, whereas in the second step the
material is dissolved in ethylene glycol. Reaching the boiling point of ethylene glycol
under pressure of 1 bar, the polyester material is depolymerised to bihydroxyethyl
terepthalate. In the third step, the autoclave, ethanol is added to the mixture, pro-
ducing DMT and Ethylene glycol. At step 4, the EG and DMT are purified through
a distillation process. The technological data and description used in this report are
from Schmidt et al. (2016) and Moazzem, Wang, Daver and Crossin (2021). Both
the authors state that the original data was a bit unclear and incomplete, however,
looking at similar chemical processes they managed to make the data ’more’ complete,
highlighting that there are some uncertainties with the data used when modelling re-
cycling of polyester (Schmidt et al., 2016). It is reported that this recycling process is
10-20% more costly than the production of virgin polyester (Moazzem, Wang, Daver
and Crossin, 2021). The full inventory for the polyester recycling process can be seen
in Table 3.7; to see the full modelling in EASETECH see Appendix B.2.5.
==PAGE:41==
3.2 Life-Cycle Assessment
29
Table 3.7.
The tables shows the full inventory for the chemical recycling of polyester
garments. Data for process 1) are from Schmidt et al. (2016) and Moazzem, Wang, Daver
and Crossin (2021). Data for process 2) is from Zamani et al. (2015).
1) Chemical recycling
Input
Output
Description
Value
Unit
Description
Value
Unit
Polyester textile waste
1
kg
Ethylene glycol, for reuse
0.09
kg
Ethylene glycol
0.1
kg
Waste, for incineration
0.21
kg
NaCO3
50
mg
PET fiber
0.9
kg
Methanol
0.1
mg
SbCl3
30
mg
Energy
0.0173
GJ
2) Polyester yarn spinning
Input
Output
Description
Value
Unit
Description
Value
Unit
Input PET fiber
1000
kg
Spun fibers, polyester
980
kg
Electricity
13753
MJ
Polyester waste
20
kg
Heat
1380
MJ
Loss
2%
per wet weight
==PAGE:42==
30
3 Methodology
Textile-to-textile recycling: Nylon
Recycling of nylon is modelled based on the
data provided by the Italian company Aquafil, which operates the recycling facilities
in Slovenia. The company employs chemical recycling; a schematic representation of
the recycling process can be seen in Figure 3.9:
Figure 3.9. The figure shows the different processes for the production of recycled nylon,
employed by the company Aquafil.
The recycling of the nylon fibres consists of several processes (Bureau Veritas, 2018).
In the first process, the pre-treatment, the nylon waste is either cleaned, sorted,
washed, grinded, granulated or pelletized depending on the state of the input waste.
The second step entails the depolymerization of the waste material into caprolactam
which is the building material of nylon. The third step of the process entails the
polymerization of nylon, which is done by a purification process. The fourth and
last step of the recycling process is the spinning of nylon yarns. The full LCI of the
recycling process can be seen in Table 3.8; for the full modelling in EASETECH see
Appendix B.2.6. The amount of waste for this process was not clear by the report,
hence some assumptions were taken, see Appendix B.1.
==PAGE:43==
3.2 Life-Cycle Assessment
31
Table 3.8. The table shows the full inventory for the recycling of nylon waste. Data are
from Bureau Veritas (2018).
Pre-treatment, depolymerization, polymerization and spinning
Input
Output
Description
Value
Unit
Description
Value
Unit
Input nylon waste
1.00
kg
Recycled nylon 6
0.57
kg
Inert rock
2.19
kg
Waste, to incineration/
landfill
0.43
kg
limestone
0.06
kg
Sodium Chloride
0.01
kg
Soil
0.20
kg
Natural aggregate
0.12
kg
Clay
0.03
kg
Others
0.03
kg
Total (calculated)
2.63
kg
Electricity
3.15
kWh
Total water use
16.21
l
Effeciency
0.57
kg recycled nylon/
kg nylon waste
==PAGE:44==
32
3 Methodology
Textile-to-textile recycling: Polyester-cotton blends, 50%/50%
The tech-
nology to recycle 50%/50%-polyester-cotton blends was first evaluated by Zamani
et al. (2015) in an LCA-study quantifying the energy usage and the global warm-
ing potential. A newer study, by one of the same authors Peters et al. (2019), also
investigated the chemical recycling process providing more complete data and exam-
ining more environmental impacts categories. However, due to the time-limitations
of this study it was decided to model the technology proposed in the study by Za-
mani et al. (2015). Figure 3.10 gives a schematic depiction of the recycling process
of polyester-cotton blends, which will be refered to as blends hereafter.
Figure 3.10. The figure shows the different processes in relation to nylon recycling.
In the first step, the post-consumer textiles are shredded to smaller pieces. In step two,
a liquid solution of N-methylmorpholine-N-oxide (NMMO) is mixed together with the
textiles to be able to dissolve and separate the cellulosic material, the cotton, from the
polyester material. The third step entails the actual separation of polyester from the
cellulosic material which is done through a filter; the undissolved polyester remains
and the cellulosic material together with NMMO runs through. The polyester is then
directed through a melt spinning machine where the material is spinned to new yarns.
The cellulose and NMMO is forced through a showerhead spinner, where cellolosic
long strings of fibres are formed. Afterwards, the fibres are washed. The full inventory
for the polyester-cotton blend can be seen in Table 3.9; to see the full modelling in
EASETECH see Appendix B.2.7.
==PAGE:45==
3.2 Life-Cycle Assessment
33
Table 3.9. The table shows the full inventory for recycling of polycotton-blends. Data is
based on a study from Zamani et al. (2015).
1) Dissolving processs
Input
Output
Description
Value
Unit
Description
Value
Unit
Input textile waste:
50/50% polyester cotton
1000
kg
Cotton fibers
500
kg
Electricity
4
MJ
Polyester fibers
500
kg
Heat
5000
MJ
NMMO
0.05
kg/kg cellulose thread
2) Cotton yarn spinning
Input
Output
Description
Value
Unit
Description
Value
Unit
Input fiber: Cotton
1000
kg
Spun fibers, cotton
800
kg
Electricity
12240
MJ
cotton waste
200
kg
Heat
1183
MJ
Loss
20%
per wet weight
3) Polyester yarn spinning
Input
Output
Description
Value
Unit
Description
Value
Unit
Input fiber: polyester
1000
kg
Spun fibers, polyester
980
kg
Electricity
13752
MJ
Polyester waste
20
kg
Heat
1380
MJ
Loss
2%
per wet weight
==PAGE:46==
34
3 Methodology
Sorting of textiles: Pre-sorting
When textile waste are collected, they are first
subjected to an initial sorting called ’pre-sorting’. In this step, anything that cannot
be described as ’Textile waste’ and deemed good enough quality to be recycled will
be removed. This includes textiles that are wet, covered in rust, but also reusable
textiles are removed etc. Textiles that are in bad quality, like wet and rust covered
textiles will be channelised to incineration, while textiles that are deemed reusable
will be channelised to relevant charities and sorting facilities. The LCI for the pre-
sorting of post-consumer textiles are shown in Table 3.10. Note that the eﬀiciency of
the process is 100%, this is also what have been used in this study. The eﬀiciency of
the pre-sorting is something that have been reported to be varying depending on the
collection choice (Miljøstyrelsen, n.d.c), however, this can be added to the LCI.
Table 3.10. The table shows the LCI for the pre-sorting of textiles. Data are from Lidfeldt
et al. (2022).
Pre-sorting
Inputs
Outputs
Description
Value
Unit
Description
Quantity
Unit
Collected clothes
1000
kg
Pre-sorted clothes
1000
kg
Heat
0.7
MJ
Electricity (machinery etc.)
60.8
MJ
It is noted that the collection and pre-sorting of textiles might be different for the
private and public sector (Lidfeldt et al., 2022). However, as was seen in section 4.1.2,
the share of post-consumer textiles from the private and public sector were minor
compared to households. Thus, they are assumed to be modelled in the same way as
households.
==PAGE:47==
3.2 Life-Cycle Assessment
35
Sorting of textiles: Fine-sorting
For textiles that are deemed good to be sent to
a sorting facility, where it will be sorted according to color and fiber. This step is called
’Fine-sorting’. The fine-sorting step will typically be conducted by manual sorting,
however, it is seen that there is a current development in establishing automatic
sorting plants in Europe (Sysav, 2022), Wieland Textiles (n.d.) and SOEX (n.d.). To
reflect this, this study will use data for an automatic sorting plant. For Siptex, an
automatic textile sorting plant placed in Sweden, the sorting works by first loading
post-consumer textiles on a conveyor belt where a NIR scanner coupled to an optical
scanner scans the textiles.
The NIR-scanner scans for textile fibres, whereas the
optical scanners scans out colour. The scanners can sort out 20-30 categories, and be
calibrated to sort for more. However, lighter colours are easy to sort out than dark
colours, resembling plastic waste sorting. After the scanning of the textiles, air valves
are activated to separate the desired textiles. There are 4 scanners in total placed in
different places on the machinery, ensuring a more eﬀicient process of scanning the
textiles. It is highly undesired to re-sort the textiles more than once due to costs,
however, it is not ruled out completely. The loading time is 7-7.2 minutes, from the
textiles are loaded on the machinery till the textiles are sorted. The mass of the bales
are typically of 300-350 kg (personal communication, Persson (2022)). Figure 3.11
shows the automatic sorting facility, from unsorted textiles loaded on the conveyor
belts to the finished sorted textile. The LCI, technological descriptions and sorting
categories for manual sorting was deliberately studied by Nørup et al. (2019), but
will not be used for the LCA-modelling. The inventory data for the fine-sorting can
be seen in Table 3.11.
Table 3.11. The table shows the LCI for the fine-sorting of textiles at the Siptex automatic
sorting facility. Data are from Lidfeldt et al. (2022).
Siptex - Sorting 1
Inputs
Outputs
Description
Value
Unit
Description
Quantity
Unit
Electricity (for heating)
0.000225
MJ
Sorted clothes 1
0.8
kg
Electricity (machinery)
0.136
MJ
Clothes to re-sorting
0.2
kg
Metal wire for packaging
0.003143
kg
Pre-sorted clothes
1
Siptex - Sorting 2
Inputs
Output
Description
Value
Unit
Description
Value
Unit
Clothes to re-sorting
0.2
kg
Sorted clothes 2
0.15
kg
Electricity (for heating)
0.000162
MJ
Waste to incineration
0.05
kg
Electricity (machinery)
0.0979
MJ
Metal wire for packaging
0.000629
kg
==PAGE:48==
36
3 Methodology
(a) The textile waste is loaded on the con-
veyor belt ready to be sorted.
(b) The sorted textiles are baled, packaged
and ready to be sent to textile recyclers.
Figure 3.11. The figure shows the fine-sorting of textile waste from the beginning to the
end for the automatic sorting facility Siptex in Malmö, Sweden. The picture is taken by the
author of this study.
3.2.4
Basis for Sensitivity and Uncertainty analysis
To evaluate the sensitivity and uncertainty of the system different methods were used.
Due to the small scale of this study, the sensitivity analysis consisted of:
• LCIA-method robustness
• Scenario analysis
When analysing for the LCIA-method robustness, it is tested whether the same results
and conclusions are obtained by using a different LCIA-method than what was used
in this LCIA-study. Practically, this is done by using internal normalisation on the
characterised results obtained using a different LCIA-method. In the scenario analysis,
the different assumptions and model choices will be tested out. The evaluation of the
performance of the scenarios will be based on the relative change, which is calculated
as:
Relative change = ISScenario −ISBase case
|ISBase case|
· 100%
(3.3)
==PAGE:49==
3.2 Life-Cycle Assessment
37
The uncertainty analysis will be carried out qualitatively and be based on the con-
tribution analysis, the sensitivity analysis of the LCIA-method, the scenario-analysis
and the data-quality.
==PAGE:50==
38
==PAGE:51==
CHAPTER 4
Results and discussion
4.1
Material flow analysis
The following section will present the findings of the MFA of textiles in Denmark
for the five different fibre categories: Cotton, Other natural fibres, Synthetics, Other
fibres and Unspecified fibres.
4.1.1
Consumption of textile products
The consumption of textile (the supply) was calculated for Denmark for year 2021.
Table 4.1 shows the consumption of the 15 different product types in Denmark.
The total supply was 123,259 tons of new textiles in 2021. It was calculated that
inhabitants in Denmark consumed 20.9 kg new textiles in 2021; 18.9 kg only consider-
ing the households and not the private and public sector (Statistics Denmark, n.d.b).
The product group that consists of suits, ensembles dresses etc. constituted of 24.1%
of the total consumption, whereas bed linen, handkerchiefs and curtains amounted to
10.6, 9.3 and 9.1%, respectively. This seems reasonable as these products use a lot
of material due to their functionality e.g. curtains use lot of material to cover large
window areas, and therefore weigh more. Impregnated garments, blankets and baby
clothing constituted only 0.4, 1.4 and 1.8% of the total consumption. The fact that
impregnated garments only make up such a small share of the total consumption can
be considered positive as the Danish Ministry of Environment (2022) state it can be
diﬀicult to recycle this type of material. The blankets and baby clothing only mak-
ing up a small share of the total consumption in Denmark, adds up as blankets are
of a rather light material and that baby clothes uses much less material than adult
clothes. The data was compared to data from 2019 calculated by Madsen (2021);
the relative change between data for 2021 and 2019 is seen in Table 4.1. What is
really striking is the relative change for the product categories handkerchiefs and
non-woven garments, showing a 382.4% and 431.8% change, respectively. The results
were analysed by looking at the relevant CN-codes for these product categories. It
was seen that one of the 10 digit CN-Codes constituted of 82% of the amount in this
category. The CN-code had the following description: Gloves, knitted or crocheted,
impregnated, coated, covered or laminated with rubber. The amount, description and
the fact that this was under the covid-pandemic in Denmark indicates that this is
==PAGE:52==
40
4 Results and discussion
Table 4.1. The textile supply for Denmark in year 2021 for 15 different product categories,
reported in both amount [ton] and percentage [%]. In addition, the table lists the relative
change [%] of the different products in comparison to data from 2019 reported by Madsen
(2021). Please refer to Table A.1 in Appendix A for full description of the product groups.
Description
Amount [ton]
Percentage [%]
Relative change
compared to 2019 [%]
Outdoor Apparel
6,715
5.4
-9.3
Suits
29,745
24.1
0.7
Shirts
4,821
3.9
-20.1
Underwear
5,988
4.9
13.6
T-shirt
6,227
5.1
-46.5
Sweaters
10,537
8.5
4.8
Babyclothing
2,198
1.8
27.5
Tracksuits
4,408
3.6
8.4
Impregnated garments
541
0.4
31.9
Stockings
4,505
3.7
35.2
Handkerchiefs
11,500
9.3
382.4
Non-woven garments
10,063
8.2
431.8
Blankets
1,712
1.4
17.5
Bedlinen
13,087
10.6
15.6
Curtains
11,212
9.1
31.4
Sum
123,259
100.0
23.1
the rubber gloves used by the healthcare system in Denmark, reflecting the resources
used by the corona test-centres in Denmark. For the category non-woven, it was seen
that the 10 digit CN-number 62101098 contributed 72% of the total amount. The
CN-number 62101098 had the following description: 62101098 Articles of clothing,
excl. shirts and smocks for single use, Of textile material belonging to heading 5603.
The CN-digit 5603 covers materials from non-wovens, felt, impregnated materials,
materials covered in plastics or rubber (European Commission, n.d.b). Again, this
could be tied up to the corona-epidemic; single-use face-masks are made out of non-
woven materials, thus matching with the description provided and explaining this
increase.
==PAGE:53==
4.1 Material flow analysis
41
4.1.2
Consumption of textile materials
It is interesting to see the consumption of different material types as these determine
the recycling options rather than the product types. In the following, MFAs for the
five different materials will be presented.
Cotton
Figure 4.1 shows the MFA for cotton in Denmark in 2021. It was seen that
the natural fiber cotton, was the most consumed fiber in Denmark for 2021 with the
annual import flow of 48,243 tons and a subsequent export flow of 41,964 tons. The
sales stock showed an annual ∆stock of -5 ton, which is approximately -0.01% of the
input flow, making it rather negligible. The MFA highlights that most of the textiles
that consists of cotton ends in waste incineration plant in Denmark. A minor part
is recycled in Denmark, whereas less than 30% is exported to other countries, the
majority of it being reused in other countries. It is noted that a system loss of 6,285
tons was calculated for cotton, which is indicated by the process having no output
flow, thus it cannot be evaluate how to treat this flow, as it is not known where it
goes to.
Figure 4.1. The figure shows the annual consumption of ’Cotton’ in Denmark for the year
2021 in the unit [t/a]. The figure displays all import and export flows, processes, ∆stocks
and system boundary.
==PAGE:54==
42
4 Results and discussion
Other natural fibres
The results from the MFA shows that the category ’Other
natural fibres’ made up 2% of the total textile content in Denmark for the year 2021.
An overview of the MFA system for Other natural fibres can be seen in Figure 4.2. The
annual import of 1,943 tons and export 1,683 tons were calculated for the year 2021,
with a ∆stock +260 tons. The ∆stock within the Sales process was -9 tons, which
is higher than for the cotton category, considering that it was the category of the
highest share of the total consumption. Most of the fibres end up being incinerated
in Denmark or reused in ROW, that is 1,118 tons and 383 tons, respectively. Only
a minor part ends being recycled in Denmark, which is 9 tons. Interestingly, a total
system loss of +288 tons is calculated for the category other natural fibres.
Figure 4.2. The figure shows the annual consumption of ’Other natural fibres’ in Denmark
for the year 2021 in the unit [t/a]. The figure displays all import and export flows, processes,
∆stocks and system boundary.
==PAGE:55==
4.1 Material flow analysis
43
Synthetics
Results from the MFA showed that synthetics were the next most domi-
nated textile material in Denmark, where 20% of the supply constituted of synthetics.
A detailed MFA for the macro-category Synthetics can be seen in Figure 4.3. An
annual import flow of 24,640 tons and export flow of 21,075 tons, with a ∆stock
of +3,565 tons were calculated. The sales process showed a ∆stock of +551 tons,
meaning that the stock of synthetics increased among retailers, shops etc. Most of
the synthetics materials ends up being incinerated in Denmark which from the figure
is seen to be 14,547 tons; this will be of importance when determining the environ-
mental impacts for the waste management of post-consumer textiles as synthetics are
made from fossil-based resources. After incineration, most of the textiles ends up
being reused in other countries in ROW. A system loss of 3,013 tons was calculated,
meaning that this is a flow that it is not known which EoL-destination it will have.
Figure 4.3.
The figure shows the annual consumption of ’Synthetics’ in Denmark for
the year 2021 in the unit [t/a]. The figure displays all import and export flows, processes,
∆stocks and system boundary.
==PAGE:56==
44
4 Results and discussion
Other fibres
The macro-category Other fibres consisted of broad categories of
fibres, such as man-made fibres which can either be made from fossil-based resources
or bioresources. This fiber category constituted 20% of the textile supply in Denmark
for 2021. The full MFA-system of this fiber category can be seen in Figure 4.4. The
total import flow was calculated as 25,116 tons and the total export flow as 21,967
tons. The ∆stock was calculated as -220 tons, meaning that the stock of other fibres
decreased among retailers, resulting in higher output flows from the sales process,
compared to the input flow. Again, most of the textiles ends up being incinerated in
Denmark where a flow from the sales process ’New textiles to incineration’ and flow
form the three consumers constitute 150 tons and 14,811 tons, respectively. A system
loss of 3,370 tons was calculated for Other fibres.
Figure 4.4.
The figure shows the annual consumption of ’Other fibres’ in Denmark for
the year 2021 in the unit [t/a]. The figure displays all import and export flows, processes,
∆stocks and system boundary.
==PAGE:57==
4.1 Material flow analysis
45
Unspecified fibres
The MFA showed that the macro-category Unspecified fibres
constituted 19% of the total supply of textiles in Denmark for 2021. It is rather a
substantial amount of textiles, where it is not know what the material composition
consists of, see definition of textiles under section 3.1. The MFA-system can be seen
in Figure 4.5. The total import-flow was calculated as 23,316 tons, the total export
flows as 20,242 tons, and the ∆stock as +3,074 tons. The Sales process showed a
∆stock of -80 tons, which means that there was a decrease in the stock among retailers,
resulting in a subsequent increase in the output flows from the process compare to
the input flow. Most of the textiles ends being incinerated, that is 144 tons from the
Sales process and 13,578 tons from the incineration. There is a system loss of +3,154
tons, where it is not known which EoL-destination the textiles goes to.
Figure 4.5. The figure shows the annual consumption of ’Unspecified fibres’ in Denmark
for the year 2021 in the unit [t/a]. The figure displays all import and export flows, processes,
∆stocks and system boundary.
==PAGE:58==
46
4 Results and discussion
MFA-Comparison between the textile materials
Figure 4.6 visualises the to-
tal flow of textiles in Denmark in the 5 different macro-categories Cotton, Other
natural fibres, Synthetics, Other fibres and Unspecified fibres.
Figure 4.6. The figure shows a sankey diagram of the five different macro-categories. The
flows are scaled in relation to each other.
The sankey flows are colour-coded: Green =
Cotton, Yellow = Other fibres, Red= Synthetics, Black = Unspecified fibres, Blue = Other
natural fibres.
From ’The supply’ of new materials, the most consumed ones are Cotton, Other
fibres, Synthetics, Unspecified fibres and most least Other natural fibres contributing
to 39.1%, 20.4%, 20.0%, 18.9% and 1.6%, respectively. The flow from the supply
enters the process ’Sales’ which result in a negligible increase of ∆stock (see Figure
4.7, for full details on the amount). The flows split into the consumer categories:
’Households’ and ’Private and public sector’. It is evident that the households are the
largest consumers of textiles in Denmark being that 89.7% is consumed by households.
Thus, the largest potential in recovering post-consumer textiles is from the consumer-
group households and where the focus should be directed. Most of the textiles ends
in waste incineration (DK), consisting mostly of cotton, other fibres, synthetics and
unspecified fibres. This is crucial information when later estimating the environmental
impacts of different management options in the LCA.
4.1.3
MFA system overview
The MFA system for all textiles consumed in Denmark for year 2021 and the different
EoL-flows can be see in Figure 4.7. It can be seen that a total supply of 123,259 tons
new textiles in Denmark are calculated as the import flow for the system.
This
flow covers the total amount of textiles that are imported, exported and produced
in Denmark and which enters the ’Sales-Process’ where retailers sell the textiles to
==PAGE:59==
4.1 Material flow analysis
47
consumers. It was calculated that there is a net increase of the ’Sales ∆stock’ with
+237 tons for year 2021 meaning that an accumulation of textiles is taking place. The
increase in ∆stock amount to 0.19% of the import flow, hence, it is rather negligible.
This also adds up with the idea that retailers only have restricted area to store the
textiles.
Figure 4.7. The figure shows the annual consumption of textiles in Denmark for the year
2021 in the unit [t/a]. The figure displays all import and export flows, processes, ∆stocks
and system boundary.
Interestingly, it was calculated that the flow ’New textiles to incineration’ constituted
of 648 tons textiles, which is more than what is accumulated in the ’Sales-∆stock’,
and constituted of 0.53% of the import flow. This flow sheds light on the consump-
tion of textiles in Denmark and how easy it is to dispose new material rather than
selling or donating it. The reason behind the disposal can be faulty production, but
more important that the retailers simply cannot sell the textiles. The reason behind
this, is that it is compulsory for Danish companies to pay VAT of the textiles if they
want to do anything else to the textiles that they cannot sell (Jensen, 2020). Thus,
if they cannot sell it, then it is cheaper to dispose of textiles by incineration than by
other means. This also highlights how cheap and low value the textile products have.
Even though, the numbers are associated with some degree of uncertainty and also
calculated for the latest ADS-report which is from year 2019, the number is still a
rather good estimate of what is happening among the retailers who dispose of new
==PAGE:60==
48
4 Results and discussion
textiles.
What is not accumulated in the ’Sales-∆stock’ or sent to incineration will go to the
three consumer groups ’Households, private and public sector’. It can be seen from
the figure that most of the consumed textiles are sent to incineration that is 72,607
tons textiles. This is 59.3% of the input flow that goes to the process ’Households,
private and public sector’. Only 591 tons textiles are sent to recycling in Denmark
which is 0.48% of the input flow that goes into the consumer-process. Additionally,
27.0% of the textiles EoL-flows are sent to other countries where 23,433 tons are sent
to reuse (ROW), 6,300 tons are sent to recycling (ROW) and 3,352 tons are sent to
Incineration/Landfilling (ROW).
The EU is planning to implement stricter regulations towards the export of waste in
all EU member states in the near future with a few exceptions (Haahr et al., 2023).
Thus, when the implementation of separate waste collection in Denmark is fully run-
ning, then there will be a larger pressure on the EoL-flows that are directed outside
Denmark, as the Incineration/Landfilling (ROW) and Recycling (ROW) need to stay
within EU-borders. It would also mean that the flow that is sent to recycling ROW
will have to be within EU-borders. Incineration (DK) is the EoL-route where most
of the post-consumer textiles will end be that 73,255 tons or 68% of the EoL-flows
(not considering ’System loss’). This is a considerable amount, which is what needs
to be lowered and redirected to either reuse or recycling.
Lastly, the figure depicts a flow called ’System loss’ which is textile flows that the
system could not account for; this was considered as an end-sink. Since it was as-
sumed that the consumption of new textiles was constant and the stock of textiles
within households were constant, that is steady-state conditions was assumed, then
the input and outputs of the system should be equal over time. This was, however,
not the case as the flow ’System-loss’ was estimated to be 16,090 tons which equals
to about 13.1% of the input flow to the Consumer process. One possible explanation
is that the consumption has increased (and thus has not been constant from year to
year). This increase can mean several things; one being that there is an increased
accumulation of textiles in the system creating a delay of the disposal of materials.
This can explain the lower output of the system.
Another possible explanation lies in the assumption of a constant stock within the
households.
It is possible that the wardrobe-size has increased within households
(e.g. wardrobes getting bigger, using up spaces such as attics, use of storage places
offered by companies). This results in a bigger stock within the households, and thus
a lower output from the consumer process. Lastly, it can be related to uncertainty in
estimating the different EoL-flows. Watson et al. (2018) states that there were large
uncertainties estimating the content of textiles collected from bulky-waste. This is
most likely the main cause to the mass-balance not adding up. As the missing flow
cannot really be attributed to an end-destination or the fact that it does not leave
==PAGE:61==
4.1 Material flow analysis
49
the system, then it stays in the system, and is considered as an sink in this setting.
Internal flows
There are internal flows for households that have been calculated,
but not included in the figures presented in this discussion. These relate to the reuse
of textiles in Denmark via different means such as exchanges of textiles between family
and friends, consumers selling their clothes and households textiles to other consumers
via platforms as the ’Den blå avis’, ’Facebook marketplace’ and the likes. Other reuse
routes include the collection and reselling of textiles through private collectors. Table
4.2 provides an overview of the different internal flows.
Table 4.2. The table provides an overview of the internal flows, amount [ton] and share
[%] of the total consumption of textiles by the households.
Internal flows
[tons]
[%]
Family and friends
8,745
8.0
C2C
2,332
2.1
Reuse in DK
15,449
14.1
Sum
26,525
24.2
In total 10,1% of clothes and household textiles gets reused directly from consumer
to consumers, whereas 14,1% gets reuses by being collected by private collectors first
and then re-sold. In total 24,2% of textiles entering the consumer-group ’Households’
get directly reused in Denmark.
4.1.4
Discussion of methodology, assumptions and other studies
The methodology used in this report to determine the textile consumption and fate
are quite used in the scientific world to determine the EoL fate of textiles, and have
been used by most Nordic countries. However, there are some elements in relation to
the methodology that can be discussed.
First, when calculating the supply of new textiles in Denmark the production data
reported in monetary value [DKK] needed to be converted to physical units [kg] which
was done by making an conversion factor assuming that the export price is equal to
the production price. However, when calculating these flows by using Equation 3.2 it
was seen that in some cases a negative mass was calculated. It is likely that the pro-
duction mass was calculated as too low, which when the export mass is subtracted in
the equations results in a negative value. Another possibility is that textiles produced
at a respective year first is exported next year, resulting in a temporary stock of the
textiles from when they are produced till they are sold. This explains the higher
calculated value for export compared to calculated value for the production (Watson
et al., 2020).
==PAGE:62==
50
4 Results and discussion
In this study a conversion factor for all of the 526 CN 8-digit codes were used to
calculate the physical flow in order to be consistent in the methodology. A different
approach is to go through all of the different ProdCom codes and match where they
have a physical flow given in the unit mass. For the ProdCom codes where this is
simply not applicable, then the conversion factor based on the export price can be
used. This was applied by the study from Dahlbo et al. (2017), where the textile
consumption in Finland was calculated. This is, however, a more time-consuming
process.
Two databases were used as sources in this study, namely data from DST and from
ADS. As mentioned previously, there are some uncertainties within data from ADS
as part of fact that companies report data themselves, but more importantly only
data on the amount is retrieved from the database and not on the composition of
the textile waste. As an assumption, it was stated that what is thrown follows the
same composition of the supply of new textiles, however, in reality it is not known.
Moreover, it is also important to state that the latest ADS data used was from 2019
and hence not from the same year as 2021 which the data from DST was retrieved.
Hence, there is some uncertainty related to this time-frame if one also considers that
the Corona-pandemic has had an influence.
==PAGE:63==
4.2 Life-Cycle Impact Assessment
51
4.2
Life-Cycle Impact Assessment
The following section presents the LCIA-results for the presented system defined in
section 3.2. The results are quantified using the LCA-software EASETECH V.3.4.1
and the LCIA-method ”Environmental footprint 3.0 without long-term effects with
weighting of toxicity”. In order to facilitate better understanding of the LCIA-results,
the results will first be presented for each textile fiber and then presented for the
scenarios. The results for each textile fiber follows the reference ”The treatment of
1 tonne textile fiber”, whereas the results for the scenarios follows the reference flow
fulfilling the functional unit presented in section 3.2.2.
4.2.1
Environmental impact for each textile fiber
The following section will present and compare the computed environmental impacts
for each of the five different textile materials for both Scenario 0 and Scenario 1.
The reference here is ’The treatment of 1 tonne textile material’ to allow for better,
understandable and fair comparison between the different fibres and understand the
drivers for the results. The characterised LCIA-results for treatment of 1 tonne of
textile material for both Scenario 0 and Scenario 1 are listed in Table 4.3 and 4.4.
Table 4.3.
The tables lists the characterized LCIA-results for the treatment of 1 tonne
textiles material in Scenario 0.
IC
unit
Cotton
Wool
Polyester
Nylon
Blends
CC
kg CO2-eq
-2.4E+03
-2.5E+03
9.3E+02
-2.0E+02
-7.9E+02
OD
kg CFC-11 eq
-4.2E-04
-4.5E-04
-4.8E-04
-6.6E-04
-4.5E-04
HT-c
CTUh
2.9E-07
3.1E-07
3.3E-07
4.5E-07
3.1E-07
HT-nc
CTUh
6.1E-06
6.4E-06
6.9E-06
9.4E-06
6.5E-06
PM
Disease incidences
1.4E-05
1.5E-05
1.6E-05
2.2E-05
1.5E-05
IOR
kBq U-235 eq.
5.7E+01
6.1E+01
6.5E+01
9.0E+01
6.1E+01
POF
kg NMVOC eq
-7.6E-01
-8.6E-01
-1.0E+00
-1.7E+00
-8.8E-01
AC
mol H+ eq
-6.4E-01
-7.2E-01
-8.3E-01
-1.4E+00
-7.4E-01
TEP
mol N eq
9.9E-01
8.2E-01
5.9E-01
-5.8E-01
7.9E-01
FEP
kg P eq.
5.0E-03
5.3E-03
5.8E-03
7.9E-03
5.4E-03
MEP
kg N eq
-3.1E-02
-5.3E-02
-8.4E-02
-2.4E-01
-5.7E-02
ET
CTUe
1.2E+04
1.3E+04
1.4E+04
1.9E+04
1.3E+04
LU
-
3.0E+04
3.2E+04
3.5E+04
4.7E+04
3.2E+04
WU
m3 water eq
7.7E+01
7.9E+01
8.1E+01
9.3E+01
7.9E+01
RU-m
kg SB eq
3.0E-02
3.1E-02
3.4E-02
4.6E-02
3.2E-02
RU-f
MJ
-4.0E+04
-4.2E+04
-4.6E+04
-6.3E+04
-4.3E+04
==PAGE:64==
52
4 Results and discussion
Table 4.4.
The tables lists the characterized LCIA-results for the treatment of 1 tonne
textiles material in Scenario 1.
IC
unit
Cotton
Wool
Polyester
Nylon
Blends
CC
kg CO2-eq
-5.2E+03
-9.4E+04
-1.9E+03
-5.3E+03
-2.9E+03
OD
kg CFC-11 eq
-4.3E-04
-1.3E-03
-1.1E-02
-3.1E-04
-7.3E-03
HT-c
CTUh
-1.1E-05
-2.7E-05
-1.3E-06
3.2E-07
-6.5E-06
HT-nc
CTUh
-4.4E-05
-8.9E-04
4.8E-08
9.4E-06
-3.1E-05
PM
Disease incidences
-4.2E-04
-1.4E-02
-3.5E-05
-1.7E-04
-2.4E-04
IOR
kBq U-235 eq.
-6.2E+01
-1.4E+02
-3.7E+01
5.2E+01
-8.0E+01
POF
kg NMVOC eq
-1.8E+01
-8.3E+01
-8.2E+00
-1.4E+01
-1.4E+01
AC
mol H+ eq
-6.6E+01
-2.0E+03
-5.1E+00
-1.8E+01
-3.4E+01
TEP
mol N eq
-2.7E+02
-8.9E+03
3.1E-01
-3.3E+01
-1.3E+02
FEP
kg P eq.
-3.2E+00
-2.9E+01
-1.4E-01
-4.2E-02
-1.6E+00
MEP
kg N eq
-1.8E+02
-3.5E+02
-9.3E-01
-3.8E+00
-8.2E+01
ET
CTUe
-3.3E+05
-1.6E+06
2.0E+04
3.0E+04
-1.6E+05
LU
-
-2.4E+05
-9.5E+06
1.5E+05
9.2E+04
-8.2E+04
WU
m3 water eq
-2.3E+05
-2.3E+04
-1.7E+03
-7.3E+02
-1.1E+05
RU-m
kg SB eq
-7.3E-02
-4.0E-01
1.5E-01
1.1E-02
1.3E-02
RU-f
MJ
-7.7E+04
-1.8E+05
-7.4E+04
-9.5E+04
-6.4E+04
In general, the results for Scenario 1 is lower and even negative for several of the
impact categories compared to Scenario 0 where the post-consumer textiles are in-
cinerated. The results are not straightforward to interpret, hence, they will be nor-
malised externally using the European PE (see Appendix C.1 Table C.1 and C.2 for
the overview of the table-values).
==PAGE:65==
4.2 Life-Cycle Impact Assessment
53
Cotton fiber
The treatment of 1 tonne of cotton for Scenario 0 showed a negative
environmental impact 6 out of the 16 impact categories, see Figure 4.8. What stands
out from the figure are the impact categories ’CC - Climate change’ and ’RU-f - Re-
source use, fossils’ showing a normalised result of -0.3 and -0.6, respectively. The
net negative impact from ’CC - Climate change’ is due to the fact that cotton is a
natural fiber meaning that consists of 100% biogenic carbon and is carbon neutral
when incinerated as part of the natural carbon-cycle. The fact that it substitutes
heat which, among other, is produced from fossil sources explains the avoided im-
pact. The same explanation is applicable for the impact category ’RU-f - Resource
use, fossils’. What is interesting is the results for ’ET - Ecotoxicity freshwater’. The
substitution of electricity has a negative impact on the system of -0.7 PE, whereas the
substitution of heat has a positive impact on the system of 1.8 PE. The substitution
of electricity resulting in a negative impact make intuitively sense, but the cause for
the positive impact from the substitution of heat is not evident. This explanation lies
in the fact that the heat production process, in this case, has some avoided impacts
on the system so when the production of heat altogether is avoided, then there is
no avoided impacts ’ET - Ecotoxicity freshwater’. The same explanation applies for
’RU-m - Resource use, minerals and metals’.
Figure 4.8. The process contribution analysis for the treatment of 1 tonne of cotton in
Scenario 0. The results are normalised in PE for the 16 different impact categories.
The treatment of 1 tonne of cotton for Scenario 1 resulted in negative impacts across
all 16 impact categories, see Figure 4.9. Especially the impact categories ’ET - Eco-
toxicity freshwater’, ’WU - Water use’, ’MEP - Eutrophication, marine’ and ’FEP
- Eutrophication, freshwater’ show an avoided impact of -28, -20, -6.2 and -4.4 PE,
==PAGE:66==
54
4 Results and discussion
respectively. The avoided impacts are due to the substitution of virgin cotton yarn
which is produced through agricultural production of cotton and the subsequent spin-
ning to yarn. The magnitude of the avoided impacts in Scenario 1 is far larger than
Scenario 0, which highlights that recycling is the better option for cotton.
Figure 4.9. The process contribution analysis for the treatment of 1 tonne of cotton in
Scenario 1. The results are normalised in PE for the 16 different impact categories.
==PAGE:67==
4.2 Life-Cycle Impact Assessment
55
Wool fiber
The treatment of 1 tonne of wool in Scenario 0 yielded the PE results
which can be seen in Figure 4.10. The results show negative impacts for 6 out of
the 16 impact categories. Generally, the results show the same tendencies as cotton
which lies in the fact that both are natural fibres that consist of biogenic carbon, thus
the substitution of different processes follow the same explanation.
Figure 4.10. The contribution analysis for the treatment of 1 tonne of wool in Scenario 0.
The results are normalized in PE for the 16 different impact categories.
Figure 4.11 shows the normalised PE results for Scenario 1 by treating wool. All
16 impact categories show a net negative environmental impact. Interestingly, the
avoided impacts for recycling wool in Scenario 1 are of a high magnitude, compared to
Scenario 0. Especially the impact categories ’ET - Ecotoxicity freshwater’, ’TEP - Eu-
trophication, terrestrial’, ’FEP - Eutrophication, freshwater’ and ’AC - Acidification’
which show avoided impacts of -135, -50, -40, and -36 PE, respectively. The results
highlight the high environmental impacts associated with the production of virgin
wool yarn all the way from sheep wool production, cleaning, dyeing and spinning the
yarn. In comparison, the contribution that comes from recycling wool from start to
end is very low. In order to model recycling of wool several sources where used to
have the several source, see section 3.2.3. Also it was assumed that the colour-dyeing
process of virgin wool followed the same one as virgin cotton, which is a simplification
but also could have influenced the results. Therefore, the results in this study were
quality checked with results obtained from similar studies. Using the climate change
impact category as reference, the reported impact from recycling wool was in the
range of 0.627-0.7 kg CO2/kg recycled wool and the impact from virgin wool fibres
was 19.3-103 kg CO2/kg virgin wool when produced in Italy (Bianco et al., 2022). In
==PAGE:68==
56
4 Results and discussion
this study, the impact of recycling was 0.005 and 0.91 kg CO2/kg recycled wool for
production in Denmark and Italy, respectively. The virgin production of wool was
calculated as -97.6 kg CO2/kg virgin wool, which means that both numbers are not
that far from what is found in other studies taking into account that this is only valid
for one impact category out of 16.
Figure 4.11.
The process contribution analysis for the treatment of 1 tonne of wool in
Scenario 1. The results are normalised in PE for the 16 different impact categories.
==PAGE:69==
4.2 Life-Cycle Impact Assessment
57
Polyester fiber
The normalised environmental impacts with respects to the ’Treat-
ment of 1 tonne of polyester’ for Scenario 0 and Scenario 1 can be seen in Figure 4.12
and 4.13, respectively. For Scenario 0, 5 out of 16 impact categories the results show a
net negative environmental impacts. Particularly, the impact category ’CC - Climate
change’ has a positive net environmental impact of 0.1 PE which is due to the fact
that polyester is a man-made, fossil-based resource and thus the carbon is 100% fossil.
This is unlike what was seen for cotton and wool, which result was a net negative
impact. The impact category ’ET - Ecotoxicity freshwater’ is a bit higher than what
was observed for cotton and wool, and which again is due to the substitution of the
heat source.
Figure 4.12. The process contribution analysis for the treatment of 1 tonne of polyester
in Scenario 0. The results are normalised in PE for the 16 different impact categories.
Scenario 1 shows a net negative environmental impact for 11 of the impacts cate-
gories. It is the substitution of virgin polyester yarn that drives the negative impact
score. The impact categories ’ET - Ecotoxicity freshwater’ and ’RU-m - Resource use,
minerals and metals’ are the two categories showing a high impact score of 1.7 and
2.3 PE, respectively. For ’ET - Ecotoxicity freshwater’ the process steps chemical
recycling and polyester yarn substitution show a high, positive contribution to the
impact category, whereas the substitution of virgin polyester yarn, on the other hand,
shows a negative contribution. The high contribution from polyester yarn spinning
is attributed to the usage of electricity to spin the yarn. To see what is behind the
high contribution stemming from the chemical recycling, a contribution analysis of
this particular process was evaluated, see Figure 4.14.
==PAGE:70==
58
4 Results and discussion
Figure 4.13. The process contribution analysis for the treatment of 1 tonne of polyester
in Scenario 1. The results are normalised in PE for the 16 different impact categories.
The large contribution to the ’ET - Ecotoxicity freshwater’ for polyester in Scenario
1 is due to the electricity and the ethylene glycol used in the process. For ’RU-m -
Resource use, minerals and metals’ it is the use of antimony and electricity. The high
energy use for recycling polyester is one of the factors that were flagged by the study
conducted by Schmidt et al. (2016) which data from this report is from.
Figure 4.14. The process contribution analysis for the treatment of 1 tonne of polyester
in Scenario 1, only showing the chemical recycling of polyester. The results are normalised
in PE for the 16 different impact categories.
==PAGE:71==
4.2 Life-Cycle Impact Assessment
59
Nylon fiber
Figure 4.15 and 4.21 shows the normalised environmental impacts in
PE with respects to the treatment of 1 tonne of nylon for Scenario 0 and Scenario
1. For Scenario 0, 7 out of 16 impacts categories show a net negative environmental
impact. It is seen that the impact category ’CC - Climate change’ has a positive
contribution to the impact score stemming from the direct emissions from the incin-
eration plant due to the fact that nylon is a man-made fossil-based material and thus
is constituted of 100% fossil-based carbon. The positive impact is, however, offset by
the avoided impacts stemming from the substitution of heat resulting in an overall net
negative impact of -0.02 PE. Likewise, the tendencies shown for the impact categories
’ET - Ecotoxicity freshwater’, ’RU-m - Resource use, minerals and metals’ and ’RU-f
- Resource use, fossils’ follow the same explanation seen for cotton, wool and polyester.
Figure 4.15. The process contribution analysis for the treatment of 1 tonne of nylon in
Scenario 0. The results are normalized in PE for the 16 different impact categories.
For Scenario 1, it is seen that 11 out of 16 impact categories have net negative im-
pact score. The substitution of virgin nylon fiber is what contributes the most to the
negative impact scores across most of the impact categories. The chemical recycling
of nylon is, however, the most contributing process to the ’ET - Ecotoxicity freshwa-
ter’ impact category compromised of 2.0 PE. Next after the process nylon recycling,
incineration of wastes and the automatic sorting of nylon textiles are the some of the
other processes that contribute to a positive impact score. The positive contribution
for the incineration was analyzed Scenario 0 and was due to the heat substitution and
the impact from the automatic sorting plant is due to the usage of electricity. The
nylon recycling process also has a significant contribution for the ’RU-m - Resource
use, minerals and metals’ impact category. These impacts are analysed further in
Figure 4.17 which is a contribution analysis for the chemical recycling process. The
==PAGE:72==
60
4 Results and discussion
use of electricity, calcium carbonate and the inert filler in the chemical recycling pro-
cess of nylon have a significant contribution to the impact category ’ET - Ecotoxicity
freshwater’ having a contribution of 2.0 PE.
Figure 4.16. The process contribution analysis for the treatment of 1 tonne of nylon in
Scenario 1. The results are normalized in PE for the 16 different impact categories.
Figure 4.17. The process contribution analysis for the treatment of 1 tonne of nylon in
Scenario 1, for the chemical recycling proces. The results are normalized in PE for the 16
different impact categories.
==PAGE:73==
4.2 Life-Cycle Impact Assessment
61
Blends
Figure 4.18 and Figure 4.19 show the normalised PE results for the treat-
ment of 1 tonne of blends for Scenario 0 and Scenario 1, respectively. For 6 out of
16 impact categories, the results are negative meaning there is a net environmental
saving. It is seen that ’CC - Climate change’ has net negative impact, even though
there is a positive impact that is contributed to the direct emissions of the inciner-
ation plant. The blends are constituted of 50% cotton and 50% polyester meaning
that 50% of the material will be carbon neutral, whereas the rest that is fossil-based
will result in a positive impact score. The same normalised results for the impact
categories ’ET - Ecotoxicity freshwater’, ’RU-f - Resource use, fossils’ and ’RU-m -
Resource use, minerals and metals’ are seen for blends which was seen for the other
fibers cotton, wool, polyester and nylon and are attributed to the substitution of the
heat process.
Figure 4.18. The process contribution analysis for the treatment of 1 tonne of blends in
Scenario 0. The results are normalized in PE for the 16 different impact categories.
For 15 out of 16 impact categories the normalised impact scores are negative meaning
that there is a net environmental saving, as seen from Figure 4.18. The substitution
of virgin cotton yarn is what influences the results the most, contributing to a neg-
ative environmental impact. Next to the substitution of virgin polyester yarn, the
substitution of virgin polyester yarn also contributes to the negative environmental
impacts, although, not in the same order of magnitude as the substitution of virgin
cotton yarn. In particular for the ’ET - Ecotoxicity freshwater’, the substitution of
cotton yarn amounts to -13 PE, whereas polyester stands for -2 PE. This indicate that
the recycling of cotton yields higher savings for the different environmental impacts
than polyester. There are also some impacts associated to the spinning of cotton and
polyester which is attributed to the electricity use in the system.
==PAGE:74==
62
4 Results and discussion
Figure 4.19. The process contribution analysis for the treatment of 1 tonne of blends in
Scenario 1. The results are normalised in PE for the 16 different impact categories.
==PAGE:75==
4.2 Life-Cycle Impact Assessment
63
Comparison of the environmental impacts for the different textile fibres
From the results presented in this section, the incineration of the five textiles materials
are more or less similar, only showing a difference when it comes to the impact
category ’CC - Climate change’. Natural fibers, such as cotton and wool, are due to
their biogenic carbon-content carbon-neutral when incinerated following the natural
carbon-cycle. Fossil-based fibers, such as polyester, nylon and blends (which contain
50% fossil carbon), will have a positive environmental impact when incinerated. The
impacts from nylon and blends will, however, be offset of the by the substitution of
heat. The results show that the treatment of the five different textile materials by
recycling is better than incinerating these materials. In particular, the recycling of
cotton and wool contributed to avoided impacts several orders of magnitude higher for
some of the impacts categories, compared to polyester, nylon and blends. This is also
emphasised in Table 4.5, where wool have the best environmental performance across
several impact categories in comparison to the other textile materials. Polyester and
nylon were the textile materials with the lowest environmental savings.
Table 4.5.
The table presents the relative change [%] of treating 1 tonne of textile to
recycling in contrast to incineration. The green color indicates the best performing textile
material for a respective impact category.
The red color indicate the worst performing
textile material for a respective category. A negative sign indicate decrease and a positive
sign indicates an increase.
IC
Cotton
Wool
Polyester
Nylon
Blends
CC
-1.2E+02
-3.6E+03
-3.0E+02
-2.5E+03
-2.7E+02
OD
-1.2E+00
-1.8E+02
-2.2E+03
5.4E+01
-1.5E+03
HT-c
-4.0E+03
-8.8E+03
-5.0E+02
-2.9E+01
-2.2E+03
HT-nc
-8.3E+02
-1.4E+04
-9.9E+01
-6.3E-01
-5.7E+02
PM
-3.1E+03
-9.4E+04
-3.2E+02
-9.0E+02
-1.7E+03
IOR
-2.1E+02
-3.3E+02
-1.6E+02
-4.2E+01
-2.3E+02
POF
-2.3E+03
-9.5E+03
-7.2E+02
-7.1E+02
-1.5E+03
AC
-1.0E+04
-2.8E+05
-5.1E+02
-1.2E+03
-4.5E+03
TEP
-2.8E+04
-1.1E+06
-4.7E+01
-5.6E+03
-1.6E+04
FEP
-6.5E+04
-5.5E+05
-2.5E+03
-6.3E+02
-3.0E+04
MEP
-5.7E+05
-6.6E+05
-1.0E+03
-1.5E+03
-1.4E+05
ET
-2.9E+03
-1.3E+04
4.8E+01
6.1E+01
-1.4E+03
LU
-9.0E+02
-3.0E+04
3.3E+02
9.4E+01
-3.5E+02
WU
-2.9E+05
-3.0E+04
-2.2E+03
-8.9E+02
-1.3E+05
RU-m
-3.5E+02
-1.4E+03
3.4E+02
-7.7E+01
-5.7E+01
RU-f
-9.2E+01
-3.2E+02
-6.3E+01
-5.2E+01
-4.9E+01
==PAGE:76==
64
4 Results and discussion
4.2.2
Environmental impacts for the whole system
The characterised and normalised results for Scenario 0 and Scenario 1 are presented
in Table 4.6.
Table 4.6. The characterised and normalised LCIA-results for Scenario 0 and Scenario 1.
The results are internally normalised; a result of 1 indicates the Scenario with the highest
environmental, whereas a number less than 1 indicates better performing Scenario.
Characterized results
Normalized results
Impact categories
Unit
Scenario 0
Scenario 1
Scenario 0
Scenario 1
CC
kg CO2-eq
-9.80E+07
-6.01E+08
1.00
-6.13
OD
kg CFC-11 eq
-5.67E+01
-6.72E+02
1.00
-11.86
HT-c
CTUh
3.86E-02
-8.03E-01
1.00
-20.81
HT-nc
CTUh
8.12E-01
-4.65E+00
1.00
-5.73
PM
Disease incidences
1.88E+00
-5.59E+01
1.00
-29.74
IOR
kBq U-235 eq.
7.67E+06
-7.55E+06
1.00
-0.98
POF
kg NMVOC eq
-1.12E+05
-1.80E+06
1.00
-16.05
AC
mol H+ eq.
-9.35E+04
-8.21E+06
1.00
-87.80
TEP
mol N eq.
9.12E+04
-3.36E+07
1.00
-368.44
FEP
kg P eq.
6.76E+02
-2.58E+05
1.00
-381.15
MEP
kg N eq
-7.85E+03
-1.12E+07
1.00
-1423.52
ET
CTUe
1.59E+09
-2.19E+10
1.00
-13.80
LU
-
4.04E+09
-2.57E+10
1.00
-6.35
WU
m3 water eq
9.79E+06
-1.35E+10
1.00
-1377.74
RU-m
kg SB eq
3.97E+03
2.18E+03
1.00
0.55
RU-f
MJ
-5.33E+09
-8.58E+09
1.00
-1.61
All of the numbers for Scenario 0 are equal to 1, whereas all the numbers for Scenario
1 are lower than 1. This means that the recycling of textiles has an overall better
environmental performance than incinerating them in Denmark.
For Scenario 0, the only impact categories with a net negative impact on the envi-
ronment are ’CC - Climate Change’, ’OD - Ozone Depletion’, ’POF - Photochemical
ozone formation’, ’AC - Acidification’, ’MEP - Eutrofication, Marine’ and ’RU-f -
Resource use, fossil’. The avoided environmental impacts observed for the impact
category ’CC - Climate Change’ are due to the production of electricity and heat
when incinerating textiles. This allows for the substitution of electricity and heat
produced elsewhere in Denmark, some of which are produced from fossil resources,
thus avoiding environmental impacts. This also explains the negative impact for the
impact category ’Ru-f - Ressource use, fossil’.
For Scenario 1, it is seen that there is a net negative impact to the environment for
15 out of 16 impact categories. The impact category ’WU - Water use’ has a total
impact of −1.35E+10 m3water, which is 1378 times lower than the incineration sce-
nario. Interestingly, the same goes for the impact categories ’MEP - Eutrofication,
Marine’ and ’FEP - Eutrofication, freshwater’ where a total impact of −1.12E+7
kg N eq. and −2.58E+5 kg P eq. were calculated, corresponding to 1424 and 381
==PAGE:77==
4.2 Life-Cycle Impact Assessment
65
times lower impact than Scenario 0, respectively. The impact score for ’TEP - Eu-
trofication, terrestrial’ is also negative showing 368 times lower impact than Scenario
0. These large savings are due to substitution of virgin textile materials which was
seen in section 4.2.1. The only impact category with a positive impact score is ’RU-
m - Resource use, minerals and metals’, being half as much lower compared to the
incineration scenario.
4.2.3
Process contribution analysis: Scenario 0
Scenario 0 presents the treatment of textiles by sending the materials to waste incin-
eration in Denmark. Figure 4.20 shows the contribution analysis for Scenario 0. For
most of the impact categories, the results are positive, meaning there is a net positive
impact on the system.
Figure 4.20. The process contribution analysis for Scenario 0 for the incineration of the
textile fibres Cotton, Wool, Polyester, Nylon and Blends. The results are normalised to PE,
for 16 different impact categories. Notice that the figure is divided in two, and that the
three last impact categories uses the secondary y-axis.
The incineration of cotton shows to have a big contribution for most of the impact
categories. Except for ’CC - Climate change’, ’OD - Ozone depletion’, ’POF - Photo-
chemical ozone formation’, ’AC - Acidification’, ’MEP - Eutrophication, marine’ and
’RU-f - Resource use, fossils’, all other impact categories have a positive impact on the
system. The negative impact score for ’CC - Climate change’ is due to that cotton is
constituted of biogenic carbon, and is thus carbon neutral when incinerated due as
it is part of the natural carbon-cycle. In addition, there are some impacts avoided
with the substitution of electricity and heat. These observations are all in line with
==PAGE:78==
66
4 Results and discussion
what was observed in section 4.2.1. The particular large contribution to the results
is explained by the amount of cotton incinerated being that 39% of the reference flow
consists of cotton.
Polyester has a high contribution to most of the results. The positive impact score
observed for ’CC - Climate change’ is due to the fossil carbon that polyester consists
of, which is in line with the observations that were seen in section 4.2.1. The big
contribution to the system is explained by the fact that 36% of the reference flow
consists of polyester material.
Unlike polyester, nylon does not show a considerable contribution to the results even
though it is a fossil-based material just like polyester. Only for the impact category
’ET - Ecotoxicity freshwater’ does nylon have a somewhat considerable contribution
to the impact score, right after polyester, cotton and the blends. The low contribu-
tion of nylon to the results is explained by the fact that only 4% of the reference flow
consists of nylon.
The blends does show a somewhat considerable contribution right after cotton and
polyester, but especially for ’CC - Climate change’, ’ET - Ecotoxicity freshwater’,
’RU-m - Resource use, minerals and metals’ and ’RU-f - Resource use, fossils’. As
previously mentioned in section 4.2.1, even tough consists of 50% cotton and 50%
polyester the results show that they behave more like cotton albeit a lower contri-
bution to the system. The observed contribution is due to the fact that 19% of the
reference flow consists of blends.
Wool is another material that has a low contribution to the results, as can be seen
from Figure 4.20. Only for the impact category ’CC - Climate change’, a somewhat
larger contribution to the system is seen, which is explained by the biogenic carbon
in wool. The overall low contribution to the system is likely due to the reference flow
only consisting of 4% wool fibres.
In section 4.2.1, it was seen that the incineration of the five fibres gave results that
were more or less in the same order of magnitudes for different impact categories. The
same tendencies were seen for scenario 0, only here the final results were driven by the
distribution of different fibres in the reference flow. Especially cotton influences the
result for the impact category ’CC - Climate change’ contributing to a net negative
impact score.
4.2.4
Process contribution analysis: Scenario 1
In Scenario 1 the implementation of separate textile waste collection in Denmark and
subsequent recycling were evaluated and the environmental impacts were quantified.
==PAGE:79==
4.2 Life-Cycle Impact Assessment
67
The contribution analysis for Scenario 1 can be seen in Figure 4.21.
Figure 4.21.
The process contribution analysis for Scenario 1 for the treatment of the
five different textile materials Cotton, Wool, Polyester, Nylon and Blends. The results are
normalised to PE, for 16 different impact categories. Notice that the figure is divided in two,
and that the four last impact categories uses the secondary y-axis.
In this scenario, 15 out of 16 impact categories show net negative results. The Pre-
sorting and the Automatic sorting of post-consumer textiles have a low contribution
overall and are negligible compared to the other contributions to the system which
comes from recycling the five different textile materials.
The recycling of cotton has a significant contribution to most of the impact categories,
all being negative impacts. This is especially valid for ’CC - Climate change’, ’PM -
Particulate matter’, ’AC - Acidification’, ’TEP - Eutrophication, terrestrial’, ’RU-m
- Resource use, minerals and metals’, ’RU-f - Resource use, fossils’, ’ET - Ecotoxicity
freshwater’ and ’WU - Water use’. The negative scores are due to the avoided pro-
duction of virgin cotton were resources such as fertilisers, pesticides, water etc. are
used in the agricultural production of the crops. In section 4.2.1, negative environ-
mental impacts of higher magnitudes, compared to the textiles polyester, nylon and
blends, were observed for cotton which is why such large savings are seen for cotton.
Moreover, the reference constituting of 39% cotton means that the recycling of this
material will have a large influence on the results.
The recycling of wool in Denmark shows large negative contributions for several of
the impact categories, which is quite substantial, compared with what was seen in
Scenario 0 where the contribution of wool were negligible, see Figure 4.20. Despite
wool only constituting 2% of the reference flow, it is one of the textiles that has a large
==PAGE:80==
68
4 Results and discussion
influence on the results. The explanation lies in the substitution of virgin wool fibres.
The production of wool fibres are quite complex and includes several steps such as
raising sheep that need shelter, food, water, a place to graze etc., thus consuming a
lot of resources. The environmental burden of wool fibres is high, which is why such
large savings are seen when substituting wool fibres. In section 4.2.1, it was seen that
some of the environmental savings obtained by recycling wool were several orders of
magnitude higher than recycling of the other textile materials.
The recycling of polyester shows both negative and positive contributions to the dif-
ferent environmental impacts. In particular, it is seen that polyester has a large con-
tribution to the impact category ’RU-m - Resource use, minerals and metals’ which
is 9.9E+04 PE. The contribution analysis in section 4.2.1, showed that this large
contribution is associated to the chemical recycling of polyester. In particular, the
use of electricity and ethylene glycol in the chemical recycling were the drivers for the
large contributions for this category. Spinning of polyester yarns also showed a posi-
tive contribution, although lower than the chemical recycling. Overall, the recycling
of polyester, the chemical recycling in particular, has a big influence on the results
being the main contributor to the positive impact score. The large contribution is
also associated with polyester being the second most represented textile material as
36% of the reference flow constitutes of polyester.
Nylon has a low contribution to the results in comparison to the other textile mate-
rials. The substitution of virgin nylon does have a negative contribution of −7.0E-03
PE for the impact category ’RU-f - Resource use, fossils’ as fossil resources are avoided
in the production of new nylon. The low contribution is also due to only 4% of the
reference flow being nylon.
For most of the impact categories, blends have a negative contribution to the overall
system. It was seen, that it does behave a bit like cotton for most of the impact
categories.
==PAGE:81==
4.3 Interpretation
69
4.3
Interpretation
4.3.1
Sensitivity analysis
The following section will present the approach and results for the sensitivity analysis
conducted for this LCA-study. It was chosen to test the robustness of the chosen
LCIA-method Environmental Footprint 3.0 to see whether the same conclusion was
obtained if using a different LCIA-method. Additionally, a scenario-analysis testing
out several conditions in the examined LCA was conducted.
Robustness of the Life-Cycle Impact Assessment method
To check the robustness of the LCIA-results obtained from the LCIA-method En-
vironmental footprint 3.0 without long-term effects with weighted toxicity a different
LCIA-method has been chosen to compare the results that is ReCiPe 2016 - Midpoint
without long-term effects Hierarchist. ReCiPe 2016 was chosen due to the fact that
the geographical and temporal scope of the method is similar to Environmental foot-
print 3.0. The results were computed in EASETECH, and the internally normalised
results can be seen from Table 4.7. The characterised results can be seen in Appendix
D.1 Table D.1.
For 17 out of 18 impact categories, it is seen that the impacts are lower for Sce-
nario 1 than for Scenario 0. With the exception of the result for the impact category
’Freshwater eco-toxicity’, Scenario 1 has an overall better environmental performance
than Scenario 0. The mentioned 17 impact categories all show negative impact scores
meaning that there is a net saving of the environmental impacts on the system, in
which is attributed to the savings that comes from recycling textiles fibres and sub-
stituting new virgin fibres. Even though there are some methodological differences in
the calculation of the different impact categories between the two different methods,
some of the large savings obtained for some impact categories are seen both places.
This goes for the water usage, the acidification, and some of the eutrophication impact
categories. For instance ’Freshwater eutrophication’ and ’Water usage’ show -12177
and -1814 times lower impacts when recycling textiles than incinerating them. Ex-
amining the results for ’Freshwater Eco-toxicity’ shows a large positive contribution
from recycling nylon, specifically the chemical recycling. This is a point that needs
further investigations.
==PAGE:82==
70
4 Results and discussion
Table 4.7. The table lists the internally normalised results for 18 different impact categories
using the LCIA method ReCiPe 2016. The results are normalised so that results equal to
1 are the worst performing scenario and have the colour red. Results lower than 1 are the
better performing scenario and coloured green.
Ratio
Name
Unit
Scenario 0
Scenario 1
Climate change
kg CO2-eq
1.00
-8.48
Fine particulate matter formation
kg PM2.5-eq
1.00
-112.74
Terrestrial acidification
kg SO2-eq
1.00
-109.61
Freshwater eutrophication
kg P-eq
1.00
-579.48
Marine eutrophication
kg N-eq
1.00
-12177.22
Mineral resource scarcity
kg Cu-eq
1.00
-3.34
Fossil resource scarcity
kg oil-eq
1.00
-1.84
Ozone depletion
kg CFC-11-eq
1.00
-13.11
Ionizing radiation
kBq Co-60-eq
1.00
-1.23
Photochemical oxidant formation:
ecosystem quality
kg NOx-eq
1.00
-47.80
Photochemical oxidant formation:
human health
kg NOx-eq
1.00
-54.46
Terrestrial eco-toxicity
kg 1,4-DCB-eq
1.00
-3.24
Freshwater eco-toxicity
kg 1,4-DCB-eq
0.58
1.00
Marine eco-toxicity
kg 1,4-DCB-eq
1.00
-64.44
Human toxicity: cancer
kg 1,4-DCB
1.00
-13.02
Human toxicity: non-cancer
kg 1,4-DCB
1.00
-4.02
Land use
m2*yr annual crop land-eq
1.00
-20.65
Water use
m3 water consumed
1.00
-1814.41
Scenario analysis
To examine and evaluate the influence of some choices taken in this LCA-study, a
scenario analysis will be conducted. Here, two scenarios will be examined to see how
the systems will react to these choices, for an overview see Table 4.8.
Table 4.8. Overview of the analysed scenarios
Scenarios
Scenario 1
Scenario 2
Scenario 3
Textile types
Energy system
Substitution ratio
Energy system
Substitution ratio
Energy system
Substitution ratio
Cotton
DK
1
Spain
1
Spain
0.5
Wool
Italy
Italy
Polyester
Belgium
Belgium
Nylon
Slovenia
Slovenia
Blends
Sweden
Sweden
The aim of Scenario 2 is to investigate the environmental impacts when recycling
textiles materials in other EU countries. Currently, textile recyclers are based other
places in the EU and not in Denmark (Only considering textile-to-textile recyclers
and commercial companies) (Circle Economy, 2022). Therefore, by conducting this
scenario, the effect of the energy-system and the management of the residues from
the recycling process will be evaluated. Scenario 3 explores the variation of the sub-
==PAGE:83==
4.3 Interpretation
71
stitution factor of recycled textile materials to virgin materials. It has been reported
that mechanical recycling of textiles have a lower quality compared to virgin fibres
and to improve the quality, the textiles are typically mixed with virgin fibres or other
textile materials in order for it to have the same quality (Wiedemann et al., 2022).
For chemical recycling, on the other hand, the recycled fibres have a quality similar
to virgin fibres and so a substitution ratio of 1:1 is valid. Hence, no mixing of ad-
ditional fibres is needed in order to alter the quality of the product (Schmidt et al.,
2016, Zamani et al., 2015). In Scenario 3, the effect of the substitution ratio will be
examined by setting the ratio to 0.5 : 1 as a conservative estimate to see how the
system reacts.
Scenario analysis: Scenario 2
Scenario 2 examines the recycling of the different
materials in Europe. Table 4.9 shows the relative change [%] for Scenario 2 compared
to Scenario 0, where materials are incinerated in Denmark. To see the characterised
results, see Appendix D.1 Table 4.7.
As can be seen from the table, Scenario 2 performs better than Scenario 0 for all
impact categories. The energy systems of the countries, where the recycling is taking
place, and the subsequent handling of the wastes does not change the conclusion of
the results which is recycling of textiles is better than the incineration of them.
Comparing the results from Scenario 2 to the results for Scenario 1, see Table 4.10,
Table 4.9.
The table lists the relative change [%] for the 16 different impact categories
for the four scenarios. The relative change is calculated relative to Scenario 0. The green
colour indicates a relative change lower than the Scenario 0, whereas a red colour indicates
a relative change higher than Scenario 0.
Impact categories
Scenario 0
Scenario 1
Scenario 2
Scenario 3
CC
0
-513
-402
-72
OD
0
-1,086
-1,051
-461
HT-c
0
-2,181
-2,256
-1,122
HT-nc
0
-673
-789
-393
PM
0
-3,074
-3,215
-1,599
IOR
0
-198
-196
-138
POF
0
-1,505
-1,549
-616
AC
0
-8,680
-8,770
-4,200
TEP
0
-36,944
-37,661
-18,372
FEP
0
-38,215
-38,395
-19,230
MEP
0
-142,252
-142,584
-70,781
ET
0
-1,480
-1,620
-816
LU
0
-735
-944
-498
WU
0
-137,874
-137,885
-68,925
RU-m
0
-45
-54
-17
RU-f
0
-61
-24
56
==PAGE:84==
72
4 Results and discussion
it is seen that for 12 out of 16 impact categories recycling textiles in Europe per-
forms better than recycling textiles in Denmark. Some of the changes are as small
as -0.01% e.g. for ’WU - Water use’ and others are as high as 23.2%. The highest
relative changes are seen for ’LU - Land use’, ’RU-f - Resource use, fossils’, ’HT-c -
Human toxicity’, ’CC - Climate change’ showing a result of -32.9%, 23.2%, -20.2%
and 18.1%, respectively. One would have the hypothesis that since the energy-system
is more ”green” in Denmark that it would perform better, however, the opposite is
seen, though be a small relative change. The reason behind this might be due to the
fact that some of external processes used in modelling Scenario 1, where found for
European averages when danish national data were not available. Therefore, some of
the processes for both of these scenarios are similar and thus not contribute to the
biggest difference between those two, see Appendix B.
A contribution analysis was made for Scenario 2, which can be seen in Figure D.1
in Appendix D.2. The results are more or less the same and there is not much of a
difference between Sc. 1 and Sc. 2 when it comes to recycling the five different textile
materials. In conclusion, Scenario 2 performs better than Scenario 0 i.e. it is still
favourable to recycle textiles than incinerating them. On the other hand, Scenario
2 showed lower impacts than Scenario 1 though some of the changes are low. This
suggests that there might not be the biggest difference between the two, that is, the
Table 4.10. The table lists the relative change [%] for the 16 different impact categories
for the three scenarios. The relative change is calculated relative to Scenario 0. The green
colour indicates a relative change lower than the Scenario 0, whereas a red colour indicates
a relative change higher than Scenario 0.
Impact categories
Scenario 1
Scenario 2
Scenario 3
CC
0.00
18.09
71.97
OD
0.00
2.89
52.67
HT-c
0.00
-3.65
50.85
HT-nc
0.00
-20.18
48.79
PM
0.00
-4.76
49.60
IOR
0.00
2.37
61.65
POF
0.00
-2.74
55.39
AC
0.00
-1.03
51.02
TEP
0.00
-1.95
50.41
FEP
0.00
-0.47
49.81
MEP
0.00
-0.23
50.21
ET
0.00
-10.10
48.10
LU
0.00
-32.90
37.25
WU
0.00
-0.01
50.04
RU-m
0.00
-15.41
51.62
RU-f
0.00
23.15
72.83
==PAGE:85==
4.3 Interpretation
73
energy-system and the way that the different countries chose to recycle their waste
does not result in a major difference.
Scenario analysis: Scenario 3
Scenario 3 is modelled using a substitution ratio
of 0.5. The characterised results are to be found in Appendix D.2 Table D.2. Low-
ering the substitution ratio of recycled fibres from 1 to 0.5, will still result in lower
impact scores than Scenario 0, as can be seen from Table 4.9. For 15 out of 16 impact
categories, the results show a negative relative change compared to the Scenario 0.
Only for one impact category, ’Ru-f - Resource use, energy carrier’, a relative increase
of 58% is seen, which is most likely attributed to the fact that the low substitution
of the virgin fibres does not offset the impacts from the recycling process. Thus, it
is still environmentally better to recycle textile materials and not sending them to
incineration. Table 4.10 shows the relative change of the three scenarios in relation
to Scenario 1. Here, it is evident that the results show much lesser environmental
savings compared to scenario 1 and 2. A relative increase in the range of 37.3%-72.8%
were seen for the impact categories. Especially the impact categories ’RU-f - Resource
use, fossils ’ and ’CC - Climate change’ show some of the highest increases of 72.8%
and 72.0%, respectively.
A contribution analysis was made for Scenario 2, see Figure D.2 in Appendix D.2. For
several of the impact categories, the net negative environmental impacts have become
lower, following the low substitution ratio of virgin fibres. The negative contribution
from recycling wool and cotton, which are the fibres with the highest contribution
to the overall results, has halved for several of the impact categories as e.g. ’CC -
Climate change’, ’AC - Acidification’. The negative contribution to ’RU-f - Resource
use, fossils’ from polyester has decreased considerably with that not being as much
virgin fossil resources to substitute. In addition, the category ’RU-m - Resource use,
minerals and metals’, which already showed a net positive impact in Scenario 1 shows
an increase, which is linked to the material use in the chemical recycling of polyester.
In conclusion, the substitution factor is an important factor to consider in the mod-
elling if textile recycling as it has a great influence on the results. As mentioned in
previous sections, the recycled products from chemical recycling will have a substitu-
tion ratio of 1:1, whereas the product that comes from mechanical recycling will have
a lower substitution ratio. Thus, for future modelling the interaction of this can be
further investigated.
==PAGE:86==
74
4 Results and discussion
4.3.2
Uncertainty analysis
The uncertainty in this study was assessed qualitatively by making a Uncertainty con-
tribution analysis. In an Uncertainty contribution analysis the sources of uncertainty
as input parameters, unit processes, characterisation factors etc. are identified and
ranked. This gives basis to improve the data, and thereby conclusion of the study.
The identified sources of sensitivity and uncertainty can be seen in Figure 4.22.
The reference flows used in this study for the different textile materials were from the
MFA study presented in this study. The MFA used a well-known method that were
previously used by the Danish EPA and Nordic Council to estimate textile flows at
national level. However, the MFA in this study did not estimate the uncertainty of
the different flows, which is why a medium uncertainty were assigned for all shares
of the five fibres. The results from the contribution analysis presented in Section
4.2.3, 4.2.4 and 4.2.1 showed that the share of natural fibres such as cotton and wool
have a great influence on the impact scores, showing that large environmental savings
were obtained by recycling textiles. The share of cotton is identified to have a large
sensitivity on the results. For wool, an even higher sensitivity for the results were
obtained due to the substitution of virgin fibres. The share of polyester and nylon
shows less sensitivity compared to the natural fibres.
Nevertheless, the recycling
of polyester showed to have significant influence on the impact categories ’RU-m -
Resource use, minerals and metals’, due to the chemical recycling of polyester, thus
a medium sensitivity, was assigned. Nylon showed positive impact scores for ’ET -
Ecotoxicity freshwater’, however, due to the lower share of fibres it was assigned a
Figure 4.22. The figure shows the uncertainty contribution analysis where different sources
of sensitivity and uncertainty are identified and ranked in relation to their importance.
==PAGE:87==
4.3 Interpretation
75
lower sensitivity than polyester. Blends were also grouped together with polyester
and nylon, having a medium sensitivity.
The results from Scenario 2, from the Scenario analysis, showed that changing the
energy-system resulted in low relative changes in favour for recycling the technologies
in other EU countries. Thus, the change in energy-system showed to have a low-to-
medium sensitivity. Due to the temporal scope of this study that it will be applied for
next 5 years, the uncertainty is not considered to be as large, as why an uncertainty
of low-medium was assigned.
Lowering the substitution ratio of virgin fibres, which was investigated in Scenario
3, showed to have a considerable influence on the results, which is why the parame-
ter were assigned high sensitivity. The substitution ratio for fibres obtained through
chemical recycling will be 1:1, whereas recycled fibres produced from mechanical recy-
cling will have a lower substitution ratio. Therefore, the variability of the substitution
ratio will only be applied for the natural fibres in this study which will vary depending
on the quality of the input textiles that is received at the recycling facility to some
degree, but also due to the fact that the fibres get shorter. Therefore, a medium
uncertainty of this were applied.
For future modelling, the quantification of the uncertainty of the different textile
flows is something that could be investigated further. In addition, the substitution
ratio should be modelled differently so that it is differentiated for the different textiles
materials as this is a large sensitive parameter.
4.3.3
Completeness and consistency checks
Completeness Check
The LCA-study presented in this report used national spe-
cific data to model the waste management system in Denmark. Data for the back-
ground system were obtained from the Ecoinvent database. However, where national
data for Denmark were not available, European averages were used. The sames goes
for the modelling of the waste management system placed in other European coun-
tries conducted under the sensitivity analysis, see section B. The modelling of the
recycling of cotton were fair and complete. The same goes for the modelling of wool
textile-recycling. However, some challenges were found for the modelling of virgin
wool production, specifically the dyeing process. The modelling of this processes was
complex, therefore counteract this challenge it was assumed that wool followed the
same type of dyeing process as virgin cotton. The data used to model the nylon
recycling scenario were based on an EPD, where the amount of wastes were aggre-
gated and no information about the type of waste were given. An assumption of the
waste distribution were therefore taken, however, this is something that need to be
investigated further. The LCI used to model the recycling of blends was based on
carbon-footprint study, therefore some important input-data might not have been
considered in the study, making it incomplete.
==PAGE:88==
76
4 Results and discussion
Consistency check
The data used to model nylon recycling was based on an EPD
where some of the production processes were aggregated, i.e. that the quantification of
the LCIA-results in this study included some processes that were outside the system
boundary defined in this study. The consequential modelling framework has been
applied consistently for all materials and unit processes in this study. In addition,
the same impact assessment method has been used consistently throughout the study
reporting all 16 impact categories, which was simple due to the modelling taking place
in the software EASETECH, where the calculation process is automated.
==PAGE:89==
4.4 Future work and perspectives for the waste management of post-consumer textiles
77
4.4
Future work and perspectives for the waste
management of post-consumer textiles
The following section will briefly mention and discuss aspects related to the assessment
of post-consumer textile recycling and list suggestions for future work. Moreover, the
section will touch upon challenges of textile recycling and put it into perspective.
Future work on the assessment of the textile waste management in Denmark includes
evaluating the material loss across different steps in the post-consumer textile waste
management value-chain. This includes steps such as the collection, pre-sorting and
the fine sorting. The collection of textiles, which includes how and where the con-
sumers are to discard of the textiles e.g. use of plastic bags, use of bins or containers
etc. In addition, the transportation vehicles have showed to be an important factor
in securing good quality material for further recycling as e.g. trucks with a compres-
sion unit might lower the quality of the textiles (Johnsen et al., 2021). The type of
fine-sorting facility, meaning whether it is automatic or a manual sorting could also
be explored. The LCA in this study employed data for the automatic sorting plant,
SIPTEX, that sorts into colour and fibres only and have some restrictions in regards
to what it can receive of textiles e.g. cannot receive curtains and socks (Sysav, 2022).
However, manual sorting plants have a lot more sorting categories and even sorts
into categories such as fabric-types of woven and knitted material, as reported by a
study from Nørup et al. (2019). Additionally, it was reported by Bianco et al. (2022)
that Manteco, a wool recycler, receives textiles where buttons, zippers etc. have been
removed from the clothing. This means several things; first, that by using an auto-
matic sorting plant, additional sorting steps might be necessary to remove unwanted
things as buttons and zippers if the recyclers requires it. Second, the amount that is
recycled might actually be lower. Finally, transportation both in terms of distance
and mode of transportation is an important factor that was not assessed in this study
and could be investigated.
In recent years, a larger focus on hazardous chemical substances in products has
been observed which also goes for textile products. The concern has mainly been on
exposure of hazardous chemicals to consumers in the use-phase of textiles. Several
reports from from the Danish EPA have in recent years screened textiles for various
chemicals and found that chemicals from the production phase still linger in textiles,
some of which can be washed out and some staying in the textiles (Poulsen et al.,
2011). The studies have found chemicals as phthalates, heavy metals, antibacterial
substances, flame retardants and fluorine substances (Poulsen et al., 2011, Andersen
et al., 2014, Lassen et al., 2015). Newer, grey literature has investigated the pres-
ence of hazardous chemicals in shredded post-consumer textiles destined to recycling.
Overall, three studies were found examining the matter; first a study by IKEA and
H&M Group (IKEA and H&M Group, 2021), second a study by the Swedish research
institute RISE (RISE, 2019) and third a study conducted by Swedish Environmental
==PAGE:90==
78
4 Results and discussion
Research Institute IVL (Bolinius, 2022). The studies found that there were no breach
with REACH requirements. The majority of the analysed samples fulfilled require-
ments for Oeko-tex and AFIRM (Oeko-tex is an Eco-label that certifies products free
from harmful chemicals; AFIRM is an industry organisation that guides companies
to improve their environmental impacts by giving guidance on usage of chemicals in
textiles and footwear (OEKO-TEX, n.d., AFIRM Group, n.d.)). It was, however,
not all analysed samples that fulfilled those requirements. Especially, polyester and
wool garments were likely to contain suspected hazardous chemicals. A report from
the Nordic Council states that current reporting for chemicals in textiles are based
on so-called ”Negative information” where only compounds that are not included in
the production are stated, as opposed to ”Positive information” where information
on all chemicals used in the production itself (Bylund et al., 2022). The report high-
lights the necessity of new methods and indicators to be used in order to ensure
transparency toward the whole textile value-chain, thereby avoiding any risks on the
long-run. These studies and reports show a development towards a higher focus on
the hazardous chemicals that may be recycled into new textile products. As the im-
pact of hazardous chemicals contained in products like textiles cannot be quantified
in LCA-tools, it is an important factor to consider when assessing the environmental
impacts of textile waste management systems, ensuring a holistic view of the system.
==PAGE:91==
Conclusion
The textile waste were characterised and quantified for Denmark for the year 2021
for three consumer groups Households, Private and Public sector by conducting a
MFA. The total consumption of textiles for 2021 was 123,259 tons, an increase of
23.1% compared to the consumption from 2019. The annual consumption per inhab-
itant showed that the average Dane consumed 20.9 kg; 18.9 kg only considering the
amount of textiles purchased by households. The largest contribution came from the
product category ’Suits, ensembles, jackets, blazers, dresses etc.’ which constituted
24.1% of the total result; the lowest contribution was from ’Impregnated garments’
being 0.4%. The product-groups ’Handkerchiefs’ and ’Non-woven garments’ showed
an increase of 382.4% and 431.8%, respectively. This increase was attributed to the
corona-pandemic, where the use of protective gloves and face-masks was pronounced.
The quantification of the material composition of textiles showed that the categories
Cotton, Other natural fibres, Synthetics, Other fibres and Unspecified fibres consti-
tuted 39.1%, 1.6%, 20.0%, 20.4%, and 18.9% of the total consumption, respectively.
Most of the post-consumer textiles in Denmark ends up in Danish incineration plants
that is 73,255 tons, constituting 68% of the EoL flows. The assumption that the
consumption of textiles is constant for the consumers did not hold, and a system loss
of 16,090 tons was calculated and in which could not be accounted for. The results
from the MFA was used in LCA-part on this study.
A comparative LCA was conducted to evaluate different waste management options
for post-consumer textile waste in Denmark. The results showed Scenario 1 had a
better environmental performance compared to Scenario 0; 16 out of 16 impact cat-
egories showed lower impact scores, and 15 out of 16 impact categories showed net
negative results. Especially the categories ’WU - Water Use’ and ’MEP - Eutrophica-
tion, marine’, showed -1377.74 and -1423.52 times lower impact than for Scenario 0,
respectively. For Scenario 0, the contribution analysis showed that the incineration of
the five textiles materials are more or less similar, only showing a difference when it
comes to the impact category ’CC - Climate change’. The natural fibres, cotton and
wool, were carbon neutral when incinerated due to being part of the natural carbon
cycle. This was not the case for the synthetic fibres that were fossil-based. The large
share of cotton in post-consumer waste led to net negative impacts for the impact
category ’CC - Climate change’. For Scenario 2, the contribution analysis showed
that cotton and wool were the textile materials that had a significant contribution to
the negative impacts. This is due to the substitution of virgin materials, which have
==PAGE:92==
80
Conclusion
large environmental impacts attributed to their production.
A sensitivity analysis testing out the LCIA-method robustness was conducted using
ReCiPE 2016. The same conclusion was obtained; Scenario 1 is superior over Scenario
0. The results from two scenario-analyses showed that 1) Conducting the recycling
outside of Denmark in other EU countries will not affect the conclusion, however,
will show low relative improvements for some impact categories 2) Lowering the sub-
stitution ratio of virgin fibres showed significant influence on the impact scores and
should be investigated further in future studies. The uncertainty analysis highlighted
parameters such as the share of wool and cotton in post-consumer textile waste as
highly sensitive with medium uncertainty due to their negative contribution on the
impact scores.
==PAGE:93==
Appendices
==PAGE:94==
==PAGE:95==
APPENDIX A
Material flow analysis
==PAGE:96==
84
Appendix A Material flow analysis
A.1
Productgroups
Table A.1. The tables shows the 15 different product groups matched over the 4-digit CN
Codes
No.
CN-Codes
Description
1
6101,6102,6201,6202
Overcoats, car coats, cloaks,
anoraks, incl. ski jackets, etc.
2
6103,6104,6203,6204
Suits, ensembles, jackets, blazers,
dresses, skirts, trousers, bib and brace overalls
3
6105,6106,6205,6206
Shirts and blouses
4
6107,6108,6207,6208,
6212
Underwear, nightshirts, pyjamas,
bathrobes, dressing gowns, bras, corsets, etc.
5
6109
Tshirts, singlets, and other vests
6
6110
Sweaters, cardigans, waistcoats
7
6111,6209
Baby clothing
8
6112,6211
Tracksuits, ski suits, and swimwear
9
6113
Garments covered or impregnated
with plastics
10
6115
Pantyhose, tights, stockings,
and socks
11
6114,6116,6117,6213,
6214,6215,6216,6217
Handkerchiefs, ties, scarves,
gloves, etc.
12
6210
Nonwoven garments
13
6301
Blankets and travelling rugs
14
6302
Bed linen, towels, and
table clothes
15
6303,6304
Curtains, drapes and other
interior furnishings
==PAGE:97==
Appendix A.2 Material groups
85
A.2
Material groups
Table A.2. The table shows the 21 micro categories divided over the 5 macro-categories
’Cotton’, ’Other natural fibres’, ’Synthetics’ and ’Unspecified fibres’.
Macro-categories
Cotton
Other natural
fibres
Synthetics
Other fibres
Unspecified fibres
Cotton
Linen
Synthethic fibres
Of other
textile materials
Made up clothing
Denim
Linen eller ramie
Regenerated fibres
Made up textiles
Cotton corduroy
Wool or fine animal hair
Man-made fibres
Impregnated fabric
Real silk
Wool, fine animal hair
or man-made fibres
Knitwear
cashmere goat
Single-use gowns
/non-wowen material
Wool (over 50%)
Ski suits
Micro-categories
Swimwear
==PAGE:98==
86
==PAGE:99==
APPENDIX B
Life-Cycle Inventory
B.1
Assumptions used for modelling
The following sections lists the assumptions used for the modelling of the five different
textile recycling technologies.
B.1.1
Cotton recycling
• Wastes from the cutting and shredding process and open-end spinning are di-
rected to waste incineration, for both Denmark and Spain.
B.1.2
Wool recycling
• Textile residues from sorting at plant, fraying, shredding and wool yarn spinning
are expected to be sent to incineration for both Denmark and Italy.
B.1.3
Polyester recycling
• Residues from chemical recycling and polyester yarn spinning are expected to
be sent to incineration for both Denmark and Belgium.
B.1.4
Nylon recycling
• The data for nylon recycling were aggregated for some of the processes. Thus,
it was assumed that these all covered the nylon recycling process. This might
give an overestimation of the environmental impact for nylon recycling.
• The EPD listed the amount of wastes for the whole production reporting it in
three categories: hazardous waste, non hazardous waste and radioactive waste.
Moreover, it reported the amount going to recycling for hazardous and non
hazardous wastes.
It did not specify what kind of waste it was in terms of
material or final treatment of the wastes. As the eﬀiciency of the system is
57% it was assumed that the remaining 43% was waste. For Denmark, it was
==PAGE:100==
88
Appendix B Life-Cycle Inventory
assumed that they were sent to incineration. For Slovenia, it was assumed that
wastes are sent to a landfill as there of 2019 were no waste-to-energy plant
(Gubina, 2019).
B.1.5
Blends recycling
• Residues from chemical recycling and the yarn spinning processes for cotton and
polyester are assumedto be sent to incineration for in Denmark and Sweden.
B.2
Data for all post-consumer recycling technologies
B.2.1
Dry matter and energy-content
Table B.1. The table shows the lower heating value [MJ/kg] and total solids [TS%] (Spa-
davecchia, 2019, Hasan, 2015).
Textile material
Lower heating value [MJ/kg]
Total solids [%]
Cotton
20.2
92.7
Wool
23.2
86.2
Polyester
21.2
100
Nylon
30.1
96.9
Blends
20.7
96.35
==PAGE:101==
Appendix B.2 Data for all post-consumer recycling technologies
89
B.2.2
Modelling of the Cotton recycling technology in Easetech
Table B.2. The table lists the EASETECH modules and the external processes used for
the recycling of Cotton in Denmark.
Module names
Modelling data
Textile waste
Material generation process template.
Input: 1 tonne post-consumer cotton textile waste.
Cutting and shredding
Mass transfer to outputs process template.
96% to Open-end spinning
4% to input to Danish incineration plant.
External process:
electricity, medium voltage, market for electricity,
medium voltage, DK (Data from Ecoinvent):
0.3493 kWh/kg total wet weight.
Open-end spinning
Mass transfer to outputs process template.
90% of to Virgin cotton yarn substitution
10% is sent to ”input to Danish incineration plant”.
External process:
electricity, medium voltage, market for electricity,
medium voltage,DK (Data from Ecoinvent): 1.26 kWh/kg total wet weight.
Virgin cotton yarn
substitution
No output process template.
External process:
yarn, cotton, market for yarn, cotton, GLO (Ecoinvent):
-1 kg/kg total wet weight.
Input to Danish
incineration plant
Multiple inputs process template.
Waste to energy plant,
generic, DK, 2012
[with substitution]
- MASA edit
Easetech process. Only the following external processes are included;
they are edited according to a article from Bisinella et al. (2021):
Sodium hydroxide, 1996, RER, ELCD: 0.001kg/kg total wet weight
Calcium carbonate, limestone, CaCO3 >63 microns, EU-27, 2006,
ELCD: 0.007 kg/kg total wet weight
LIMITED - Activated Carbon: 0.0004kg/kg total wet weight
LIMITED - Ammonia (NH3): 0.004kg/kg total wet weight
Diesel, EU-15, ELCD, 2003 - corrected v2: 0.000118 kg/kg total wet weight
iron (III) chloride, without water, in 40% solution state,iron (III) chloride production,
product in 40% solution state,RoW (Ecoinvent): 0.001kg/kg total wet weight
WtE_Electricity substitution DK
Excternal process:
electricity, medium voltage,market for electricity,
medium voltage,DK - MASAA: -1/3.6 kWh/MJ energy
WtE_Heat substitution DK
External process:
heat, district or industrial, natural gas,market for heat,
district or industrial, natural gas,Europe without
Switzerland - masa: -1 MJ/MJ Energy
Gravel substitution
External process:
gravel, crushed,market for gravel, crushed,RoW: -1kg/kg total wet weight
==PAGE:102==
90
Appendix B Life-Cycle Inventory
Table B.3. The table lists the EASETECH modules and the external processes used for
the recycling of Cotton in Spain. Notice that only the processes that are different than what
presented in B.2 is listed.
Module names
Modelling data
Textile waste
-
Cutting and shredding
External process:
electricity, medium voltage,market for electricity,
medium voltage,ES (Ecoinvent): 0.3493 kWh/kg total wet weight.
Open-end spinning
External process:
electricity, medium voltage,market for electricity,
medium voltage,ES (Ecoinvent): 1.26 kWh/kg total wet weight.
Virgin cotton
yarn substitution
-
Input to Spanish
incineration plant
Waste incineration,
Spain
External process:
waste textile, soiled,treatment of waste textile,
soiled, municipal incineration,RoW (Ecoinvent): 1 kg/kg total wet weight.
==PAGE:103==
Appendix B.2 Data for all post-consumer recycling technologies
91
Figure B.1. The figure shows the EASETECH modules used to model the cotton recycling process in Denmark.
==PAGE:104==
92
Appendix B Life-Cycle Inventory
Figure B.2. The figure shows the EASETECH modules used to model the cotton recycling in Spain.
==PAGE:105==
Appendix B.2 Data for all post-consumer recycling technologies
93
B.2.3
Modelling of the Wool recycling technology in Easetech
Table B.4. The table lists the EASETECH modules and the external processes used for
the recycling of wool in Denmark.
Module names
Modelling data
Textile waste
Material generation process template.
Input is for 1 tonne post-consumer wool textile waste.
Sorting in Italy
Mass transfer to outputs process template.
External processes:
diesel, burned in building machine,market for diesel,
burned in building machine,GLO: 0.163MJ/kg total wet weight
electricity, medium voltage,market for electricity, medium voltage,
DK 0.041 kWh/kg total wet weight
tap water, market group for tap water, RER: 0.000262 kg/kg total wet weight
heat, district or industrial, natural gas, market for heat, district or industrial,
natural gas, Europe without Switzerland: 0.041 MJ/kg total wet weight
Mass transfer
(Fraying or shredding)
Mass transfer to outputs process template.
Fraying: 73%
Shredding: 27%
Shredding, step 1
Water content: 62.55%.
External process:
tap water, market group for tap water, RER: 1.3 kg/kg total wet weight.
Shredding, step 2
Substance transfer - default process template:
Water: 90.4% to wastewater 9.6% to Fiber.
VS: 100% to fiber.
Ash: 100% to fiber.
Shredding, step 3
Mass transfer to outputs process template.
97.2% to Input to wool yarn spinning
0.31% to waste iron recycling
2.49% to Inputs to incineration (DK)
External processes:
diesel, burned in building machine,market for diesel,
burned in building machine,GLO 0.1369 MJ/kg total wet weight
silicone product, market for silicone product, RER 0.0037 kg/kg total wet weight
electricity, medium voltage, market for electricity,
medium voltage, DK 0.3796 kWh/kg total wet weight
heat, district or industrial, natural gas, market for heat, district or industrial, natural gas,
Europe without Switzerland 1.679 MJ/kg total wet weight
WWTP
No output process template.
external process: wastewater treatment facility, capacity 1E9l/year,
market for wastewater treatment facility, capacity 1E9l/year,GLO:
2.13E-11 unit/kg total wet weight
Input to iron recycling
Multiple inputs process template.
Iron recycling
No output process template.
External processes:
iron scrap, sorted, pressed, market for iron scrap,
sorted, pressed, RER: 1 kg/kg wet weight.
pig iron, market for pig iron, RER: -1 kg/kg wet weight.
==PAGE:106==
94
Appendix B Life-Cycle Inventory
Continuation of Table B.4
Module names
Modelling data
Inputs to’
incineration (DK)
Multiple inputs process template.
Waste to energy plant,
generic,DK, 2012
[with substitution]
- MASA edit
Same data and assumptions used for the incineration plant,
as described under Table B.2.
Fraying
Mass transfer to outputs process template.
97.1% inputs to Wool yarn spinning
0.7% to iron waste
2.2% textile waste.
Inputs to wool yarn
spinning
Multiple inputs process template.
Wool yarn spinning,
step 1
Water content process template: 39.81%.
External process:
tap water, market group for tap water, RER: 0.432 kg/kg total wet weight.
Wool yarn spinning,’
step 2
Substance transfer - default process template.
Water: 75.79% to air- unspecified 24.21% to fiber.
TS: 100%
VS: 100% to fiber
Wool yarn spinning,
step 3
Mass transfer to outputs.
84.3% are spun and substitutes virgin wool production in India.
15.7% are sent to incineration.
External processes:
lubricating oil, market for lubricating oil, RER 0.14kg/kg total wet weight
electricity, high voltage, market for electricity, high voltage, DK 2.068 kWh/kg total wet weight
steam, in chemical industry, market for steam, in chemical industry, RER 0.363 kg/kg total wet weight
polyethylene, high density, granulate, polyethylene production, high density,
granulate,RER 0.009kg/kg total wet weight
white lined chipboard carton,white lined chipboard carton production,RER 0.034 kg/kg total wet weight
Substitution of
virgin wool
See table B.6 for detailed information.
Waste to energy plant,
generic, DK, 2012
[with substitution]
- MASA edit
Same data and assumptions used for the incineration plant,
as described under Table B.2.
==PAGE:107==
Appendix B.2 Data for all post-consumer recycling technologies
95
Table B.5. The table lists the EASETECH modules and the external processes used for
the recycling of wool in Italy. Notice that only the processes that are different than what
presented in Table B.4 is listed.
Module names
Modelling data
Textile waste
-
Sorting in Italy
Mass transfer to outputs process template.
External processes:
diesel, burned in building machine,market for diesel,
burned in building machine,GLO: 0.163MJ/kg total wet weight
electricity, medium voltage,market for electricity, medium voltage,IT
0.041 kWh/kg total wet weight
tap water, market group for tap water, RER: 0.000262 kg/kg total wet weight
heat, district or industrial, natural gas, market for heat, district or industrial,
natural gas, Europe without Switzerland: 0.041 MJ/kg total wet weight
Mass transfer
(Fraying or shredding)
-
Shredding, step 1
-
Shredding, step 2
-
Shredding, step 3
Mass transfer to outputs process template.
97.2% to Input to wool yarn spinning
0.31% to waste iron recycling
2.49% to Inputs to incineration (DK)
External processes:
diesel, burned in building machine,market for diesel,
burned in building machine,GLO 0.1369 MJ/kg total wet weight
silicone product, market for silicone product, RER 0.0037 kg/kg total wet weight
electricity, medium voltage,market for electricity, medium voltage,IT:
0.3796 kWh/kg total wet weight
heat, district or industrial, natural gas, market for heat, district or industrial, natural gas,
Europe without Switzerland 1.679 MJ/kg total wet weight
WWTP
-
Input to iron recycling
-
Iron recycling
-
Inputs to’
incineration (DK)
-
Incineration plant, Italy
External process:
waste textile, soiled,treatment of waste textile,
soiled, municipal incineration,RoW: 1 kg/kg wet weight
Fraying
-
Inputs to wool yarn
spinning
-
Wool yarn spinning,
step 1
-
Wool yarn spinning,’
step 2
-
Wool yarn spinning,
step 3
Mass transfer to outputs.
84.3% are spun and substitutes virgin wool production in India.
15.7% are sent to incineration.
External processes:
lubricating oil, market for lubricating oil, RER 0.14kg/kg total wet weight
electricity, high voltage,market for electricity, high voltage,IT:
2.068 kWh/kg total wet weight
steam, in chemical industry, market for steam, in chemical industry, RER:
0.363 kg/kg total wet weight
polyethylene, high density, granulate, polyethylene production, high density,
granulate,RER 0.009kg/kg total wet weight
white lined chipboard carton,white lined chipboard carton production,RER:
0.034 kg/kg total wet weight
Substitution of
virgin wool
See Table B.6 for detailed information.
Incineration plant, Italy
External process:
waste textile, soiled,treatment of waste textile,
soiled, municipal incineration,RoW: 1 kg/kg wet weight
==PAGE:108==
96
Appendix B Life-Cycle Inventory
Figure B.3. The figure shows the EASETECH modules used to model the wool recycling in Denmark.
==PAGE:109==
Appendix B.2 Data for all post-consumer recycling technologies
97
Figure B.4. The figure shows the EASETECH modules used to model the wool recycling in Italy.
==PAGE:110==
98
Appendix B Life-Cycle Inventory
==PAGE:111==
Appendix B.2 Data for all post-consumer recycling technologies
99
B.2.4
Modelling of the virgin wool production in Easetech
Table B.6. The table lists the EASETECH modules and the external processes used for
the modelling of virgin wool production in India.
Module names
Modelling data
Wool production
and farming
Basic process module.
External processes:
sheep fleece in the grease,sheep production, for wool,RoW 1 kg kg Total Wet Weight
Step 1 Scouring
(Cleaning)
Basic process module.
External processes:
electricity, medium voltage,market group for
electricity, medium voltage,IN 0.3 kWh kg Total Wet Weight
heat, district or industrial, natural gas,market for heat, district or industrial,
natural gas,RoW 3.5 MJ kg Total Wet Weight
tap water,market for tap water,IN 6 kg kg Total Wet Weight
non ionic surfactant,non ionic surfactant production, ethylene oxide derivate,GLO
0.013 kg kg Total Wet Weight
Step 2 Scouring
Adding of water
Water content module.
Water content: 87.69% of wet weight
Step 3 Dewatering
Substance transfer default module.
Material property water: 86.89% water, rest for fiber.
Step 4 Scouring
Mass transfer to outputs.
56.75% to wool fibre, 43.25% residues.
WWTP, India
No output process module
External processes:
wastewater treatment facility, capacity 1E9l/year,market for wastewater treatment
facility, capacity 1E9l/year,GLO 2.13E-11 unit kg Total Wet Weight
Landfill
No output process module
External processes: process specific burdens, sanitary landfill,
market for process specific burdens, sanitary landfill,RoW 1 kg kg Total Wet Weight
Dyeing
Mass transfer to outputs. 99.49% dyed wool, 0.51% short wool fibre.
External processes:
batch dyeing, fibre, cotton,RoW 1 kg kg Total Wet Weight
Landfill2
No output process module.
External processes:
process specific burdens, sanitary landfill,market for process specific burdens,
sanitary landfill,RoW 1 kg kg Total Wet Weight
Step 1 Yarn spinning
Water addition
Water content module: 39.81 % wet weight.
External process: tap water,market for tap water,IN
0.432 kg kg Total Wet Weight
Step 2 Dewatering
Virgin yarn spinning
Substance transfer default module.
Material property water: 75.79% to air-unspecified. Rest for fiber.
Step 3
Virgin yarn spinning
Mass transfer to outputs. 83.3% spun yarns, 15.7 short wool fibre.
External process:
electricity, high voltage,market group for electricity, high voltage,IN
2.068 kWh kg Total Wet Weight
lubricating oil,market for lubricating oil,RoW
0.14 kg kg Total Wet Weight
white lined chipboard carton,white lined chipboard carton production,RoW
0.034 kg kg Total Wet Weight
polyethylene, high density, granulate,market for polyethylene, high density, granulate,GLO
0.0094 kg kg Total Wet Weight
steam, in chemical industry,market for steam, in chemical industry,RoW
0.363 kg kg Total Wet Weight
Landfill3
No output process module.
process specific burdens, sanitary landfill,market for process specific burdens,
sanitary landfill,RoW 1 kg kg Total Wet Weight
Spun yarn
No output process module
==PAGE:112==
100
Appendix B Life-Cycle Inventory
Figure B.5. The figure shows the EASETECH modules used to model the virgin wool production in India.
==PAGE:113==
Appendix B.2 Data for all post-consumer recycling technologies
101
B.2.5
Modelling of the polyester recycling technology in Easetech
Table B.7. The table lists the EASETECH modules and the external processes used for
the recycling of polyester in Denmark.
Module names
Modelling data
Textile waste
Material generation process template.
Input is for 1 tonne post-consumer polyester textile waste.
Chemical recycling
Mass transfer to outputs template.
External processes:
ethylene glycol,market for ethylene glycol,GLO: 0.1kg/kg wet weight
neutralising agent, sodium hydroxide-equivalent,soda ash, dense,
to generic market for neutralising agent,GLO: 0.00005kg/kg wet weight
methanol,market for methanol,GLO 0.1kg/kg wet weight
antimony,market for antimony,GLO: 0.00003kg/kg wet weight
electricity, medium voltage,market for electricity, medium voltage,DK: 4.81 kWh/kg wet weight
Polyester yarn spinning
Mass transfer to outpute process template.
External process:
heat, district or industrial, natural gas,market for heat, district or industrial,
natural gas,Europe without Switzerland: 1.38MJ/kg wet weight
electricity, medium voltage,market for electricity, medium voltage,DK: 3.82 kWh/kg wet weight
Virgin polyester
yarn substitution
No output process template.
EG reuse
No output process template.
External process:
ethylene glycol,market for ethylene glycol,GLO: -1 kg/kg wet weight
Inputs to incineration
Multiple inputs process template.
Waste to energy plant
Same data and assumptions used for the incineration plant, as described under table B.2.
==PAGE:114==
102
Appendix B Life-Cycle Inventory
Table B.8. The table lists the EASETECH modules and the external processes used for
the recycling of polyester in Belgium. Notice that only the processes that are different than
what presented in Table B.7 is listed.
Module names
Modelling data
Textile waste
-
Chemical recycling
Mass transfer to outputs template.
External processes:
ethylene glycol,market for ethylene glycol,GLO 0.1kg/kg wet weight
neutralising agent, sodium hydroxide-equivalent,soda ash, dense,
to generic market for neutralising agent,GLO 0.00005kg/kg wet weight
methanol,market for methanol,GLO 0.1kg/kg wet weight
antimony,market for antimony,GLO 0.00003kg/kg wet weight
electricity, medium voltage,market for electricity, medium voltage,BE 4.81kWh/kg wet weight
Polyester yarn spinning
Mass transfer to outpute process template.
External process:
heat, district or industrial, natural gas,market for heat, district or industrial,
natural gas,Europe without Switzerland 1.38MJ/kg wet weight
electricity, medium voltage,market for electricity, medium voltage,BE 3.82 kWh/kg wet weight
Virgin polyester
yarn substitution
-
EG reuse
-
Inputs to incineration
-
Waste to energy plant
-
WtE_Electricity
substitution DK
Excternal process:
electricity, medium voltage,market for electricity, medium voltage,BE: -1/3.6 kWh/MJ energy
WtE_Heat
substitution DK
-
Gravel
substitution
-
==PAGE:115==
Appendix B.2 Data for all post-consumer recycling technologies
103
Figure B.6. The figure shows the EASETECH modules used to model the polyester recycling in Denmark
==PAGE:116==
104
Appendix B Life-Cycle Inventory
Figure B.7. The figure shows the EASETECH modules used to model the polyester recycling in Belgium.
==PAGE:117==
Appendix B.2 Data for all post-consumer recycling technologies
105
B.2.6
Modelling of the Nylon recycling technology in Easetech
Table B.9. The table lists the EASETECH modules and the external processes used for
the recycling of nylon in Denmark.
Module names
Modelling data
Textile waste
Material generation process template.
Input is for 1 tonne post-consumer nylon textile waste.
Nylon recycling
Mass transfer to outputs template.
External processes: electricity, medium voltage,market for electricity, medium voltage,DK:
3.15 kWh/kg total wet weight
inert filler,market for inert filler,GLO 2.194 kg/kg total wet weight
clay,market for clay,RoW 0.03 kg/kg total wet weight
calcium carbonate, precipitated,market for calcium carbonate, precipitated,RoW:
0.58 kg/kg total wet weight
sodium chloride, brine solution,market for sodium chloride, brine solution,GLO:
0.0053 kg/kg total wet weight
gravel, crushed,market for gravel, crushed,RoW 0.117 kg/kg total wet weight
heat, district or industrial, natural gas,market for heat, district or industrial, natural
gas,Europe without Switzerland -1.22 MJ/kg total wet weight
tap water,market group for tap water,RER 16.21 kg/kg total wet weight
Virgin nylon yarn substitution
No outputs process template.
Waste to energy plant
Same data and assumptions used for the incineration plant, as described under table B.2.
Input to Danish
incineration plant
Multiple inputs process template.
Waste to energy plant,
generic, DK, 2012
[with substitution]
- MASA edit
Easetech process. Only the following external processes are included;
they are edited according to a article from Bisinella et al. (2021) :
Sodium hydroxide, 1996, RER, ELCD: 0.001kg/kg total wet weight
Calcium carbonate, limestone, CaCO3 >63 microns, EU-27, 2006,
ELCD: 0.007 kg/kg total wet weight
LIMITED - Activated Carbon: 0.0004kg/kg total wet weight
LIMITED - Ammonia (NH3): 0.004kg/kg total wet weight
Diesel, EU-15, ELCD, 2003 - corrected v2: 0.000118 kg/kg total wet weight
iron (III) chloride, without water, in 40% solution state,iron (III) chloride production,
product in 40% solution state,RoW (Ecoinvent): 0.001kg/kg total wet weight
WtE_Electricity
substitution DK
Excternal process:
electricity, medium voltage,market for electricity,
medium voltage,DK - MASAA: -1/3.6 kWh/MJ energy
WtE_Heat
substitution DK
External process:
heat, district or industrial, natural gas,market for heat,
district or industrial, natural gas,Europe without
Switzerland - masa: -1 MJ/MJ Energy
Gravel
substitution
External process:
gravel, crushed,market for gravel, crushed,RoW: -1kg/kg total wet weight
==PAGE:118==
106
Appendix B Life-Cycle Inventory
Table B.10. The table lists the EASETECH modules and the external processes used for
the recycling of nylon in Slovenia. Notice that only the processes that are different than
what presented in Table B.9 is listed.
Module names
Modelling data
Textile waste
-
Nylon recycling
Mass transfer to outputs template.
External processes:
electricity, medium voltage,market for electricity, medium voltage,SI:
3.15 kWh/kg total wet weight
inert filler,market for inert filler,GLO 2.194 kg/kg total wet weight
clay,market for clay,RoW 0.03 kg/kg total wet weight
calcium carbonate, precipitated,market for calcium carbonate, precipitated,RoW:
0.58 kg/kg total wet weight
sodium chloride, brine solution,market for sodium chloride, brine solution,GLO:
0.0053 kg/kg total wet weight
gravel, crushed,market for gravel, crushed,RoW 0.117 kg/kg total wet weight
heat, district or industrial, natural gas,market for heat, district or industrial,
natural gas,Europe without Switzerland -1.22 MJ/kg total wet weight
tap water,market group for tap water,RER 16.21 kg/kg total wet weight
Virgin nylon yarn substitution
-
Waste to energy plant
No output process template.
External processes: waste yarn and waste textile,treatment of waste yarn and
waste textile, unsanitary landfill,RoW: 1 kg/kg wet weight.
==PAGE:119==
Appendix B.2 Data for all post-consumer recycling technologies
107
Figure B.8. The figure shows the EASETECH modules used to model the nylon recycling in Denmark.
==PAGE:120==
108
Appendix B Life-Cycle Inventory
Figure B.9. The figure shows the EASETECH modules used to model the nylon recycling in Slovenia.
==PAGE:121==
Appendix B.2 Data for all post-consumer recycling technologies
109
B.2.7
Modelling of the blends recycling technology in Easetech
Table B.11. The table lists the EASETECH modules and the external processes used for
the recycling of blends in Denmark.
Module names
Modelling data
Textile waste
Material generation process template.
Input is for 1 tonne post-consumer nylon textile waste.
Dissolving process
Mass transfer to outputs.
External processes:
morpholine,market for morpholine,GLO 0.025 kg/kg total wet weight
heat, district or industrial, natural gas,market for heat, district or industrial,
natural gas,Europe without Switzerland: 5 MJ/kg total wet weight
electricity, medium voltage,market for electricity, medium voltage,DK:
0.0011 kWh/kg total wet weight
Cotton spinning
Mass transfer to outputs.
External processes:
electricity, medium voltage,market for electricity, medium voltage,DK:
3.4kWh/kg total wet weight
heat, district or industrial, natural gas,market for heat, district or industrial, natural gas,Europe without Switzerland:
1.183MJ/kg total wet weight
Polyester spinning
Mass transfer to outputs.
External processes:
heat, district or industrial, natural gas,market for heat, district or industrial, natural gas,
Europe without Switzerland 1.38MJ/kg total wet weight
electricity, medium voltage,market for electricity, medium voltage,DK:
3.82 kWh/kg total wet weight
Virgin cotton
yarn substitution
No output process template.
External process:
yarn, cotton,market for yarn, cotton,GLO: 1 kg/ kg wet weight
Virgin polyester
yarn substitution
No output process template.
External process: fibre, polyester,market for fibre, polyester,GLO:
-1 kg/ kg wet weight
Inputs to incineration
Multiple inputs process template
Waste incineration
Same data and assumptions used for the incineration plant, as described under Table B.2.
==PAGE:122==
110
Appendix B Life-Cycle Inventory
Table B.12. The table lists the EASETECH modules and the external processes used for
the recycling of blends in Sweden.
Module names
Modelling data
Textile waste
-
Dissolving process
Mass transfer to outputs.
External processes:
morpholine,market for morpholine,GLO 0.025 kg/kg total wet weight
heat, district or industrial, natural gas,market for heat, district or industrial,
natural gas,Europe without Switzerland: 5 MJ/kg total wet weight
electricity, medium voltage,market for electricity, medium voltage,SE:
0.0011 kWh/kg total wet weight
Cotton spinning
Mass transfer to outputs.
External processes:
electricity, medium voltage,market for electricity, medium voltage,SE:
3.4kWh/kg total wet weight
heat, district or industrial, natural gas,market for heat, district or industrial,
natural gas,Europe without Switzerland: 1.183MJ/kg total wet weight
Polyester spinning
Mass transfer to outputs.
External processes:
heat, district or industrial, natural gas,market for heat,
district or industrial, natural gas,Europe without Switzerland:
1.38MJ/kg total wet weight
electricity, medium voltage,market for electricity,
medium voltage,SE 3.82 kWh/kg total wet weight
Virgin cotton
yarn substitution
-
Virgin polyester
yarn substitution
-
Inputs to incineration
-
Waste incineration
-
==PAGE:123==
Appendix B.2 Data for all post-consumer recycling technologies
111
Figure B.10. The figure shows the EASETECH modules used to model the blends recycling in Denmark.
==PAGE:124==
112
Appendix B Life-Cycle Inventory
Figure B.11. The figure shows the EASETECH modules used to model the blends recycling in Sweden.
==PAGE:125==
Appendix B.2 Data for all post-consumer recycling technologies
113
B.2.8
Modelling of the pre-sorting, fine-sorting, disposal of
packaging
Table B.13. Table show the data used to model the pre-sorting in EASETECH.
Module names
Modelling data
Textile waste
Waste generation module.
Input 1 tonne textile waste
Pre-sorting
Mass transfer to outputs
External processes:
electricity, medium voltage,market for electricity, medium voltage,DK:
0.0169 kWh kg Total Wet Weight
heat, district or industrial, natural gas,market for heat, district or industrial,
natural gas,Europe without Switzerland - masa: 0.0007 MJ kg Total Wet Weight
Table B.14. Table show the data used to model the fine-sorting in EASETECH.
Module names
Modelling data
Textile waste
Waste generation module.
Input 1 tonne textile waste
Siptex - Sorting 1
Mass transfer to outputs
External processes:
electricity, medium voltage,market for electricity, medium voltage,SE: 0.0000625 kWh kg Total Wet Weight
electricity, medium voltage,market for electricity, medium voltage,SE 0.0378 kWh kg Total Wet Weight
wire drawing, steel,RER 0.00314 kg kg Total Wet Weight
Siptex - Sorting 2
Mass transfer to outputs
External processes:
electricity, medium voltage,market for electricity, medium voltage,SE: 0.000225 kWh kg Total Wet Weight
electricity, medium voltage,market for electricity, medium voltage,SE 0.136 kWh kg Total Wet Weight
wire drawing, steel,RER 0.00314 kg kg Total Wet Weight
Sorted textiles
Input to Danish
incineration plant
Multiple inputs process template.
Waste to energy plant,
generic, DK, 2012
[with substitution]
- MASA edit
Easetech process. Only the following external processes are included;
they are edited according to a article from Bisinella et al. (2021):
Sodium hydroxide, 1996, RER, ELCD: 0.001kg/kg total wet weight
Calcium carbonate, limestone, CaCO3 >63 microns, EU-27, 2006,
ELCD: 0.007 kg/kg total wet weight
LIMITED - Activated Carbon: 0.0004kg/kg total wet weight
LIMITED - Ammonia (NH3): 0.004kg/kg total wet weight
Diesel, EU-15, ELCD, 2003 - corrected v2: 0.000118 kg/kg total wet weight
iron (III) chloride, without water, in 40% solution state,iron (III) chloride production,
product in 40% solution state,RoW (Ecoinvent): 0.001kg/kg total wet weight
WtE_Electricity substitution DK
Excternal process:
electricity, medium voltage,market for electricity,
medium voltage,SE: -1/3.6 kWh/MJ energy
WtE_Heat substitution DK
External process:
heat, district or industrial, natural gas,market for heat,
district or industrial, natural gas,Europe without
Switzerland - masa: -1 MJ/MJ Energy
Gravel substitution
External process:
gravel, crushed,market for gravel, crushed,RoW: -1kg/kg total wet weight
==PAGE:126==
114
Appendix B Life-Cycle Inventory
Table B.15. The table lists the EASETECH modules and the external processes used for
the disposal of packaging at the gate of the plant.
Module names
Modelling data
Textile waste
Waste generation module.
Iron recycling
No output process template.
External processes:
iron scrap, sorted, pressed, market for iron scrap,
sorted, pressed, RER: 1 kg/kg wet weight.
pig iron, market for pig iron, RER: -1 kg/kg wet weight.
==PAGE:127==
Appendix B.2 Data for all post-consumer recycling technologies
115
Figure B.12. The figure shows the EASETECH modules used to model the pre-sorting.
==PAGE:128==
116
Appendix B Life-Cycle Inventory
Figure B.13. The figure shows the EASETECH modules used to model fine-sorting at Siptex.
==PAGE:129==
Appendix B.2 Data for all post-consumer recycling technologies
117
Figure B.14. Removal and recycling of metal wires from packaging. This is the same for
all 5 recycling technologies
==PAGE:130==
118
==PAGE:131==
APPENDIX C
Life-Cycle Impact
Assessment
C.1
Normalized LCIA for each textile fiber
Table C.1. Normalized LCIA results in European PE for Scenario 0.
IC
Cotton
Wool
Polyester
Nylon
Blends
CC
-0.28
-0.30
0.11
-0.02
-0.09
OD
-0.02
-0.02
-0.02
-0.03
-0.02
HT-c
0.01
0.01
0.01
0.01
0.01
HT-nc
0.01
0.01
0.01
0.02
0.01
PM
0.02
0.02
0.02
0.03
0.02
IOR
0.01
0.01
0.02
0.02
0.01
POF
-0.02
-0.02
-0.02
-0.04
-0.02
AC
-0.01
-0.01
-0.01
-0.03
-0.01
TEP
0.01
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
FEP
0.01
0.01
0.01
0.01
0.01
MEP
0.00
0.00
0.00
-0.01
0.00
ET
1.00
1.06
1.15
1.57
1.07
LU
0.02
0.02
0.02
0.03
0.02
WU
0.01
0.01
0.01
0.01
0.01
RU-m
0.47
0.49
0.53
0.73
0.50
RU-f
-0.61
-0.65
-0.70
-0.96
-0.65
==PAGE:132==
120
Appendix C Life-Cycle Impact Assessment
Table C.2. Normalized LCIA results in European PE for Scenario 1.
IC
Cotton
Wool
Polyester
Nylon
Blends
CC
-0.61
-11.15
-0.23
-0.63
-0.34
OD
-0.02
-0.05
-0.47
-0.01
-0.31
HT-c
-0.29
-0.69
-0.03
0.01
-0.17
HT-nc
-0.09
-1.88
0.00
0.02
-0.06
PM
-0.59
-19.52
-0.05
-0.24
-0.33
IOR
-0.01
-0.03
-0.01
0.01
-0.02
POF
-0.45
-2.04
-0.20
-0.34
-0.35
AC
-1.19
-36.29
-0.09
-0.32
-0.61
TEP
-1.53
-50.35
0.00
-0.19
-0.72
FEP
-4.42
-39.93
-0.19
-0.06
-2.17
MEP
-6.22
-12.45
-0.03
-0.13
-2.91
ET
-27.85
-134.99
1.70
2.53
-13.58
LU
-0.17
-6.80
0.11
0.07
-0.06
WU
-19.63
-2.02
-0.15
-0.06
-9.19
RU-m
-1.15
-6.27
2.35
0.17
0.21
RU-f
-1.17
-2.73
-1.13
-1.46
-0.97
==PAGE:133==
APPENDIX D
Sensitivity analysis
D.1
Sensitivity analysis: Robustness of LCIA-method
Table D.1. The table lists the characterized results, for Scenario 0 and Scenario 1, using
ReCiPe 2016 for the 18 impact categories.
Name
Unit
Scenario 0
Scenario 1
Climate change
kg CO2-eq
-9.74E+07
-8.27E+08
Fine particulate matter formation
kg PM2.5-eq
-1.63E+04
-1.84E+06
Terrestrial acidification
kg SO2-eq
-6.62E+04
-7.26E+06
Freshwater eutrophication
kg P-eq
7.14E+02
-4.14E+05
Marine eutrophication
kg N-eq
4.55E+02
-5.54E+06
Mineral resource scarcity
kg Cu-eq
4.60E+05
-1.54E+06
Fossil resource scarcity
kg oil-eq
-1.20E+08
-2.22E+08
Ozone depletion
kg CFC-11-eq
-6.96E+03
-9.13E+04
Ionizing radiation
kBq Co-60-eq
1.58E+06
-1.94E+06
Photochemical oxidant formation:
ecosystem quality
kg NOx-eq
-4.31E+04
-2.06E+06
Photochemical oxidant formation:
human health
kg NOx-eq
-3.71E+04
-2.02E+06
Terrestrial eco-toxicity
kg 1,4-DCB-eq
2.16E+08
-6.99E+08
Freshwater eco-toxicity
kg 1,4-DCB-eq
2.34E+08
4.02E+08
Marine eco-toxicity
kg 1,4-DCB-eq
1.72E+05
-1.11E+07
Human toxicity: cancer
kg 1,4-DCB
3.83E+05
-4.99E+06
Human toxicity: non-cancer
kg 1,4-DCB
-2.85E+08
-1.14E+09
Land use
m2*yr annual crop land-eq
3.34E+07
-6.89E+08
Water use
m3 water consumed
3.13E+05
-5.68E+08
==PAGE:134==
122
Appendix D Sensitivity analysis
D.2
Sensitivity analysis: Scenario analysis
Table D.2. The tables lists the characterized results using the LCIA-method Environmental
footprint 3.0 for the 16 impact categories. Characterized results are shown for Scenario 0,
1, 2 and 3.
Impact categories
Unit
Scenario 0
Scenario 1
Scenario 2
Scenario 4
CC
kg CO2-eq
-9.80E+07
-6.01E+08
-4.92E+08
-1.68E+08
OD
kg CFC-11 eq
-5.67E+01
-6.72E+02
-6.53E+02
-3.18E+02
HT-c
CTUh
3.86E-02
-8.03E-01
-8.33E-01
-3.95E-01
HT-nc
CTUh
8.12E-01
-4.65E+00
-5.59E+00
-2.38E+00
PM
Disease incidences
1.88E+00
-5.59E+01
-5.86E+01
-2.82E+01
IOR
kBq U-235 eq.
7.67E+06
-7.55E+06
-7.37E+06
-2.89E+06
POF
kg NMVOC eq
-1.12E+05
-1.80E+06
-1.84E+06
-8.01E+05
AC
mol H+ eq
-9.35E+04
-8.21E+06
-8.30E+06
-4.02E+06
TEP
mol N eq
9.12E+04
-3.36E+07
-3.43E+07
-1.67E+07
FEP
kg P eq.
6.76E+02
-2.58E+05
-2.59E+05
-1.29E+05
MEP
kg N eq
-7.85E+03
-1.12E+07
-1.12E+07
-5.56E+06
ET
CTUe
1.59E+09
-2.19E+10
-2.41E+10
-1.14E+10
LU
-
4.04E+09
-2.57E+10
-3.41E+10
-1.61E+10
WU
m3 water eq
9.79E+06
-1.35E+10
-1.35E+10
-6.74E+09
RU-m
kg SB eq
3.97E+03
2.18E+03
1.84E+03
3.30E+03
RU-f
MJ
-5.33E+09
-8.58E+09
-6.60E+09
-2.33E+09
Figure D.1. Contribution analysis for Scenario 2. The results are normalized using PE for
all 16 impact categories. Notice that figure is split in two, and the last four impact categories
FEP, MEP, ET and WU follows the secondary y-axis.
==PAGE:135==
Appendix D.2 Sensitivity analysis: Scenario analysis
123
Figure D.2. Contribution analysis for Scenario 2. The results are normalized using PE for
all 16 impact categories. Notice that figure is split in two, and the last four impact categories
FEP, MEP, ET and WU follows the secondary y-axis.
==PAGE:136==
124
==PAGE:137==
Bibliography
AFIRM Group (n.d.), ‘AFIRM Group – Reduce the use of harmful substances’. URL:
https://afirm-group.com/. Accessed: 2023-01-15.
Andersen, D. N., Møller, L., Larsen, P. B. and Poulsen, P. B. (2014), Kortlægn-
ing, sundheds- og miljøvurdering af flammehæmmere i tekstiler, Technical report,
Miljøstyrelsen.
Bianco, I., Gerboni, R., Picerno, G. and Blengini, G. A. (2022), ‘Life Cycle Assess-
ment (LCA) of MWool® Recycled Wool Fibers’, Resources 11(5), 41.
Bisinella, V., Hulgaard, T., Riber, C., Damgaard, A. and Christensen, T. H.
(2021), ‘Environmental assessment of carbon capture and storage (CCS) as a post-
treatment technology in waste incineration’, Waste Management 128, 99–113.
Bolinius, D. J. (2022), Siptex - Quality assurance report, Technical report.
URL: www.ivl.se
Brunner, P. H. and Rechberger, H. (2016), Practical handbook of material flow anal-
ysis, CRC Press.
Bukholt,
N.
(2022),
‘Ressourcechef:
Danmark
eksporterer
millioner
af
ton
affald – og vi må ikke sende problemet med ud i verden -
klimamon-
itor.dk’.
URL:
https://klimamonitor.dk/debat/art8611122/Danmark-
eksporterer-millioner-af-ton-affald-%E2%80%93-og-vi-m%C3%A5-ikke-
sende-problemet-med-ud-i-verden. Accessed: 2023-01-18.
Bureau Veritas (2018),
ENVIRONMENTAL PRODUCT DECLARATION for
ECONYL ® NYLON TEXTILE FILAMENT YARNS, Technical report.
Bylund, A., Stibolt, M. and Gustavsson, N. (2022), Indicators for chemical informa-
tion transfer in the textile value chain, Nordisk Ministerråd.
Candido, R. G. (2021), ‘Recycling of textiles and its economic aspects’, Fundamentals
of Natural Fibres and Textiles pp. 599–624.
Carlsson, A., Hemström, K., Stenmarck, ￿. and Sörme, L. (2011), Kartläggning av
mängder och flöden av textilavfall, Technical report, IVL Swedish Environmental
Research Institute.
URL: www.smed.se
==PAGE:138==
126
Bibliography
Circle
Economy
(2022),
‘Airtable
-
Sorting
for
Circularity
Europe
-
Re-
cyclers
Database’.
URL:
https://airtable.com/shr4HXLP5MoJLQ8Bf/
tbl3ILaQuQqA1Xxha/viwb29qFADWrUpSM3. Accessed: 2023-01-12.
Crenna, E., Pant, R., Sala, S., Secchi, M. and European Commission. Joint Research
Centre. (2017), Global normalisation factors for the environmental footprint and
Life Cycle Assessment.
Dahlbo, H., Aalto, K., Eskelinen, H. and Salmenperä, H. (2017), ‘Increasing tex-
tile circulation—Consequences and requirements’, Sustainable Production and Con-
sumption 9, 44–57.
Danish Ministry of Environment (2022), ‘Vejledning om sorteringskriterier for hush-
oldningsaffald’.
URL: https://www.retsinformation.dk/eli/retsinfo/2022/9793
Danish Ministry of Environment (n.d.), ‘Klimaplan for en grøn affaldssektor og
cirkulær økonomi’.
URL: https://mim.dk/miljoe/klimaplan-for-en-groen-
affaldssektor-og-cirkulaer-oekonomi/. Accessed: 2022-09-09.
Danmarks Statistik (n.d.),
‘Varekoder og mængdeenheder - Danmarks Statis-
tik’.
URL: https://www.dst.dk/da/Indberet/oplysningssider/industri_
varer/industriens-salg-af-varer. Accessed: 2022-11-06.
Ellen MacArthur Foundation (2017), A New Textiles Economy: Redesigning Fash-
ion’s Future, Technical report.
Esteve-Turrillas, F. A. and de la Guardia, M. (2017), ‘Environmental impact of Re-
cover cotton in textile industry’, Resources, Conservation and Recycling 116, 107–
115.
European Commission (2022), ‘COMMUNICATION FROM THE COMMISSION
TO THE EUROPEAN PARLIAMENT, THE COUNCIL, THE EUROPEAN ECO-
NOMIC AND SOCIAL COMMITTEE AND THE COMMITTEE OF THE RE-
GIONS EU Strategy for Sustainable and Circular Textiles’.
URL: https://ec.europa.eu/eurostat
European Commission (n.d.a), ‘European Platform on Life Cycle Assessment’. URL:
https://eplca.jrc.ec.europa.eu/LCDN/EF_archive.xhtml. Accessed: 2023-01-
19.
European
Commission
(n.d.b),
‘The
Combined
Nomenclature’.
URL:
https://taxation-customs.ec.europa.eu/customs-4/calculation-customs-
duties/customs-tariff/combined-nomenclature_en. Accessed: 2022-11-06.
European Union (2018), ‘DIRECTIVE (EU) 2018/851 OF THE EUROPEAN
PARLIAMENT AND OF THE COUNCIL of 30 May 2018 amending Directive
2008/98/EC on waste’.
==PAGE:139==
Bibliography
127
European
Union
(n.d.),
‘EU
strategy
for
sustainable
and
circular
textiles’.
URL:
https://environment.ec.europa.eu/strategy/textiles-strategy_en.
Accessed: 2022-09-09.
Fidan, F., Aydoğan, E. K. and Uzal, N. (2021), ‘An integrated life cycle assessment
approach for denim fabric production using recycled cotton fibers and combined
heat and power plant’, Journal of Cleaner Production 287, 125439.
Gileno, L. A. and Turci, L. F. R. (2021), ‘Life cycle assessment for PET-bottle recy-
cling in Brazil: B2B and B2F routes’, Cleaner Environmental Systems 3, 100057.
Gubina, A. f. (2019), ‘Waste for Energy Experience of Ljubljana’.
Haahr, T., Jørgensen, L. H. and Popp, D. (2023), ‘Affaldstransport:
MEP’erne
presser på for strammere EU-regler’.
URL: https://www.europarl.europa.
eu/news/da/press-room/20230113IPR66627/affaldstransport-mep-erne-
presser-pa-for-strammere-eu-regler. Accessed: 2023-01-20.
Hasan,
M.
(2015),
‘Standard
Moisture
Regain
and
Moisture
Content
of
Fibers’.
URL: https://www.textilecalculations.com/standard-moisture-
regain-and-moisture-content-of-fibers/. Accessed: 2023-01-17.
Hauschild, M. Z. (2018), ‘Introduction to LCA Methodology’, Life Cycle Assessment:
Theory and Practice pp. 59–66.
Hauschild,
M. Z. and Wenzel,
H. (n.d.),
‘The European Person Equivalent:
Measuring the personal environmental space — Welcome to DTU Research
Database’.
URL:
https://orbit.dtu.dk/en/publications/the-european-
person-equivalent-measuring-the-personal-environment. Accessed:
2023-
01-12.
IKEA and H&M Group (2021),
‘Large scale study from IKEA and H&M
Group shows potential to transform the way we use recycled textiles’.
URL:
https://gbl-sc9u2-prd-cdn.azureedge.net/-/media/aboutikea/newsroom/
documents/ikea-press-release-post-consumer-recycled-textiles-2021-
10-06.pdf?rev=5fe42b54ffe4446fa621fc3a3dff5e74.
ILCD (2010), ‘Handbook: General guide for Life Cycle Assessment-Detailed guid-
ance’.
International Organization for Standardization (2006), ‘ISO 14044:2006: Environmen-
tal management — life cycle assessment — requirements and guidelines, geneva’.
International Organization for Standardization (2008), ‘ISO 14040:2006: Environmen-
tal management — life cycle assessment — principles and framework, geneva’.
Jensen,
S.
S.
(2020),
‘Op
mod
700
ton
nyt
tøj
går
op
i
flammer
’.
URL: https://www.tv2ostjylland.dk/oestjylland/op-mod-700-ton-nyt-
toej-gaar-op-i-flammer. Accessed: 2023-01-19.
==PAGE:140==
128
Bibliography
Johnsen, H. ￿., Hallstrøm, M., Kiørboe, N., Katkjær, A. and Nyegaard, R. (2021),
Sortering og indsamling af tekstilaffald fra husholdninger - analyse og forslag til
standarder, Technical report, Miljøstyrelsen.
Kamble, Z. and Behera, B. K. (2021), ‘Upcycling textile wastes: challenges and
innovations’, Textile Progress 53(2), 65–122.
Lassen, C., Kjølholt, J., Mikkelsen, S. H., Warming, M., Jensen, A. A., Bossi, R.
and Nielsen, I. B. (2015), Polyfluoralkylfor-bindelser (PFAS) i tekstiler til børn,
Technical report, Miljøstyrelsen.
URL: www.mst.dk
Lidfeldt, M., Nellström, M., Albertsson, G. S. and Hallberg, L. (2022), Siptex wp5
report:life cycle assessment of textile recycling products, Technical report.
URL: www.ivl.se
Liu, Y., Huang, H., Zhu, L., Zhang, C., Ren, F. and Liu, Z. (2020), ‘Could the recycled
yarns substitute for the virgin cotton yarns: a comparative LCA’, International
Journal of Life Cycle Assessment 25(10), 2050–2062.
Madsen, M. H. (2021), Assessment of potential end of life scenarios for textile waste
in Denmark, PhD thesis, Technical University of Denmark, Kongens Lyngby.
Manshoven, S., Christis, M., Vercalsteren, A., Arnold, M., Nicolau, M. and Lafond,
E. (2019), Textiles and the environment in a circular economy, Technical report,
European Environment Institution.
Manteco (n.d.), ‘About Manteco’.
URL: https://manteco.com/about-manteco/.
Accessed: 2023-01-17.
Miljøstyrelsen (n.d.a),
‘Affaldsdatasystemet (ADS)’.
URL: https://mst.dk/
affald-jord/affald/indsamleruddannelsen/affaldsdatasystemet-ads/. Ac-
cessed: 2023-01-19.
Miljøstyrelsen (n.d.b), ‘Affaldsstatistik 2019 - Rådata’.
URL:
https://mst.dk/affald-jord/affald/affaldsdatasystemet/find-
affaldsdata/affaldsstatistikker/
Miljøstyrelsen (n.d.c), ‘Vidensbank - Tekstilaffald’. URL: https://mst.dk/affald-
jord/affald/affaldsfraktioner/tekstil/vidensbank-tekstilaffald/.
Accessed: 2023-01-17.
Moazzem, S., Crossin, E., Daver, F. and Wang, L. (2021), ‘Assessing environmental
impact reduction opportunities through life cycle assessment of apparel products’,
Sustainable Production and Consumption 28, 663–674.
==PAGE:141==
Bibliography
129
Moazzem, S., Wang, L., Daver, F. and Crossin, E. (2021), ‘Environmental impact of
discarded apparel landfilling and recycling’, Resources, Conservation and Recycling
166, 105338.
URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0921344920306534
Munasinghe, P., Druckman, A. and Dissanayake, D. G. K. (2021), ‘A systematic
review of the life cycle inventory of clothing’, Journal of Cleaner Production
320, 128852.
Munk,
M.
(2022),
‘Få
kommuner
sorterer
tekstilaffald
og
erfaringerne
er
dårlige | Ingeniøren’. URL: https://ing.dk/artikel/faa-kommuner-sorterer-
tekstilaffald-erfaringerne-daarlige-256051. Accessed: 2023-01-19.
Nakatani, J., Fujii, M., Moriguchi, Y. and Hirao, M. (2010), ‘Life-cycle assessment of
domestic and transboundary recycling of post-consumer PET bottles’, The Inter-
national Journal of Life Cycle Assessment 15(6), 590–597.
URL: https://doi.org/10.1007/s11367-010-0189-y
Nørup, N., Pihl, K., Damgaard, A. and Scheutz, C. (2019), ‘Evaluation of a European
textile sorting centre: Material flow analysis and life cycle inventory’, Resources,
Conservation and Recycling 143, 310–319.
OEKO-TEX (n.d.), ‘Om OEKO-TEX®’. URL: https://www.okotex.dk/om-oeko-
tex/. Accessed: 2023-01-15.
Oelerich, J., Bijleveld, M., Bouwhuis, G. H. and Brinks, G. J. (2017), ‘The life cy-
cle assessment of cellulose pulp from waste cotton via the SaXcell™process’, Iop
Conference Series: Materials Science and Engineering 254(19), 192012.
Paunonen, S., Kamppuri, T., Katajainen, L., Hohenthal, C., Heikkilä, P. and Harlin,
A. (2019), ‘Environmental impact of cellulose carbamate fibers from chemically
recycled cotton’, Journal of Cleaner Production 222, 871–881.
Persson, L. (2022), ‘Siptex company presentation’. Personal communication. Com-
pany presentation 2022-11-25.
Peters, G. M., Sandin, G. and Spak, B. (2019), ‘Environmental Prospects for
Mixed Textile Recycling in Sweden’, Acs Sustainable Chemistry and Engineering
7(13), 11682–11690.
Picerno, G., Blengini, G. A., Gerboni, R. and Bianco, I. (2022), MWOOL by MAN-
TECO - LIFE CYCLE ASSESSMENT, Technical report.
Poulsen, P. B., Schmidt, A. and Dammand Nielsen, K. (2011), Kortlaegning af
kemiske stoffer i tekstiler, Technical report, Miljøstyrelsen.
RISE (2019), User Guide Classification and Risk Assessment of Textiles for Material
Recycling, Technical report.
==PAGE:142==
130
Bibliography
Ro Ebbesen, E. and Petersen, C. (2020), Nyt tøj i affaldet, Technical report, Econet
AS.
Rosson, L. and Byrne, N. (2020), ‘Comparative gate-to-gate life cycle assessment for
the alkali and acid pre-treatment step in the chemical recycling of waste cotton’,
Sustainability (switzerland) 12(20), 1–15.
Sandin, G. and Peters, G. M. (2018), ‘Environmental impact of textile reuse and
recycling – A review’, Journal of Cleaner Production 184, 353–365.
Schmidt, A., Watson, D., Roos, S., Askham, C. and Poulsen, P. B. (2016), Gaining
benefits from discarded textiles – LCA of different treatment pathways, Technical
report, Nordic Council of Ministers, Copenhagen.
URL: http://norden.diva-portal.org/smash/get/diva2:957517/FULLTEXT02.pdf
Shen, L., Nieuwlaar, E., Worrell, E. and Patel, M. K. (2011), ‘Life cycle energy and
GHG emissions of PET recycling: Change-oriented effects’, International Journal
of Life Cycle Assessment 16(6), 522–536.
Sim, J. and Prabhu, V. (2018), ‘The life cycle assessment of energy and carbon
emissions on wool and nylon carpets in the United States’, Journal of Cleaner
Production 170, 1231–1243.
SOEX (n.d.), ‘Innovation | SOEX’. URL: https://www.soex.de/en/development/.
Accessed: 2023-01-17.
Spadavecchia, E. (2019), Environmental assessment of factors influencing the sus-
tainability of textiles and their end of life, Miljøvurdering af betydende faktorer
for bæredygtigheden af tekstiler og deres bortskaffelse, Technical report, Technical
University of Denmark, Kongens Lyngby.
Statistics Denmark (n.d.a), ‘About us - Statistics Denmark’. URL: https://www.dst.
dk/en/OmDS. Accessed: 2022-11-06.
Statistics Denmark (n.d.b), ‘Befolkningstal - Danmarks Statistik’. URL: https://www.
dst.dk/da/Statistik/emner/borgere/befolkning/befolkningstal. Accessed:
2023-01-19.
Statistics Denmark (n.d.c), ‘KN8Y: Im- og eksport KN (EU Kombineret nomenklatur)
efter im- og eksport, varer, land og enhed’. URL: https://www.statistikbanken.
dk/KN8Y. Accessed: 2022-09-28.
Statistics Denmark (n.d.d), ‘VARER1: Industriens salg af egne varer efter varegruppe
og enhed ’. URL: https://www.statistikbanken.dk/VARER1. Accessed: 2022-09-
28.
Sysav (2022), ‘Textile waste for sorting’. URL: https://www.sysav.se/en/siptex/
siptex---inbound-material/. Accessed: 2023-01-15.
==PAGE:143==
Bibliography
131
Textille Exchange (2022), Preferred Fiber & Materials Market Report , Technical
report.
URL:
https://textileexchange.org/app/uploads/2021/08/Textile-
Exchange_Preferred-Fiber-and-Materials-Market-Report_2021.pdf
Vium, K. S. R. (2014), ‘Håndtering af dansk tekstilaffald’, Teknologisk Institut p. 18.
URL: http://innosort.teknologisk.dk/media/12447/h_ndtering_af_dansk_
tekstilaffald.pdf.
Watson, D., Hvass, K. K., Moora, H., Martin, K., Nausėdė, V., Gurauskiene, I. and
Akule, D. (2020), Post-consumer textile circularity in the Baltic countries - Current
status and recommendations for the future, Technical report, Nordic Council of
Ministers.
URL: http://norden.diva-portal.org/smash/get/diva2:1466009/FULLTEXT01.pdf
Watson, D., Trzepacz, S. and Pedersen, O. G. (2018), Kortlægning af tekstilflows i
Danmark, Technical report.
Wiedemann, S. G., Biggs, L., Clarke, S. J. and Russell, S. J. (2022), ‘Reducing the
Environmental Impacts of Garments through Industrially Scalable Closed-Loop
Recycling: Life Cycle Assessment of a Recycled Wool Blend Sweater’, Sustainability
(switzerland) 14(3), 1081.
Wieland Textiles (n.d.), ‘Fibersort - Wieland Textiles’. URL: https://www.wieland.
nl/en/innovation-fibersort/. Accessed: 2023-01-17.
Zamani, B., Svanström, M., Peters, G. and Rydberg, T. (2015), ‘A Carbon Foot-
print of Textile Recycling: A Case Study in Sweden’, Journal of Industrial Ecology
19(4), 676–687.
==PAGE:144==
