==PAGE:1==
M.Sc. Thesis
Master of Science in Computer Science and Engineering
Algorithms and Data Structures
for Learned Indexes
Giacomo Cattaneo (s202628)
Kongens Lyngby 2023
==PAGE:2==
DTU Compute
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
Technical University of Denmark
Matematiktorvet
Building 303B
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 3031
compute@compute.dtu.dk
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Preface
This master thesis was prepared at the department of Applied Mathematics and
Computer Science at the Technical University of Denmark in fulfillment of the re-
quirements for acquiring a master’s degree in Computer Science and Engineering.
Kongens Lyngby, January 16, 2023
Giacomo Cattaneo (s202628)
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Acknowledgements
First, I want to thank my supervisors, Philip and Inge, for finding the right topic to
keep my motivation going. You let me take this any direction I wanted. Your calm
attitude and positive feedback helped me carrying on when nothing in the code was
working right. To this project I owe a personal reconciliation with coding.
And now for the personal stuff. This thesis marks the end of a long journey, one that
starts in Italy three years and one pandemic ago. When I finished my bachelor, adult-
hood was scary. As I complete this master’s degree, the future is equally uncertain,
but I face it with excitement.
I can say that thanks to the people that were with me during this journey.
Thank you to my family. What I achieved in this time away from home I still owe
to you. The amount of confidence I gain from knowing you believe in me cannot be
quantified. The peace of mind that comes from knowing you’ll be there for me if I
messed everything up is equally non quantifiable. I think about you every day.
Thank you to my friends in Milan, which I’ve known for more than a decade now. I
am so proud of all of us. You played a huge role in making me the person that I am.
Know that my affection for you extends way beyond my scarce capacity of sharing
my day to day.
Thank you to the old and new friends in Denmark. You made the decision to stay
here so easy. You made a cold foreign country where people speak weird feel like
home. I’m happy to have found you, and excited for what the future holds for us
here.
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface
i
Acknowledgements
iii
Contents
v
1
Introduction
1
2
Problem Description
3
2.1
The indexable dictionary problem . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
Reformulation in terms of learned indexes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
3
Previous Work:
Data Structures
5
3.1
Traditional approaches . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
3.2
Learned index data structures . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
4
Previous Work:
Discussion
21
4.1
Machine learning methodologies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
4.2
Handling updates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
4.3
Segmentation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
4.4
External Memory Performance
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
4.5
Data regularity detection
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
4.6
Empirical evaluation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
4.7
Conclusions and research questions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
5
Benchmarking Existing Dynamic Solutions
35
5.1
Data sets
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
==PAGE:8==
vi
Contents
5.2
Hardware . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
5.3
Implementations and tuning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
5.4
Experiments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
5.5
Limitations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
5.6
Conclusions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
6
A New Solution
49
6.1
The Learned Bε-TREE
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
6.2
Testing the learned Bε-TREE . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
7
Conclusion and Further Work
55
A
Proofs
57
A.1
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
B
Problem Description and Project Plan
59
Bibliography
65
==PAGE:9==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
In recent years, a new perspective on decades-old problems has given the start to
a research area mixing machine learning and data structures design. The aim is to
leverage patterns in the data distribution to provide better solutions.
These new
data structures are called Learned Data Structures. Learned Indexes are a family
of Learned Data Structures, which promises to provide fast solutions for the search
problem with low space overhead. This problem is considered to be of great impor-
tance, as we live in the era of information. Whether it is commercial data bases, the
web, social networks, or the Internet of Things, the amount of information generated
is ever-growing and the demand for fast solutions with low space footprint and low
energy consumption keeps being on the rise.
This work is organized in the following way.
Chapter 2 introduces the indexable
dictionary problem. Chapter 3 presents some of the learned indexes that the current
research is focusing on. Asymptotic worst-case bounds on operations, pre-processing
time and space are provided where they were not by the original authors. Chapter 4
further discusses and compares these solutions. Chapter 5 presents the result of ex-
periments conducted on these data structure, with focus on write operations. Finally,
chapter 6 presents a new solution.
As part of this work, the FITING-TREE from [Gal+21] was implemented, together
with its segmentation algorithm SHRINKINGCONE . The Bε-TREE from [Ben+15] was
also implemented, as well as the learned Bε-TREE , which is presented here.
All
implementations are in c++.
==PAGE:10==
2
==PAGE:11==
CHAPTER 2
Problem Description
Learned Indexes are part of a new area of research called Learned Data Structures;
these data structures aim to reveal and exploit patterns and trends in input data
in order to achieve more eﬀiciency in time and space than previously known data
structures [FV20a]. The learned index problem is nothing but a reformulation of the
decades-old indexable dictionary problem.
2.1
The indexable dictionary problem
The problem asks, given a set S of n keys from a universe U of size u, to store S
while eﬀiciently supporting the following query and update operations:
• member(x) returns true iff x ∈S.
• lookup(x) returns satellite data of x ∈S if any, nil otherwise.
• predecessor(x) returns largest element in S smaller than x.
• range(x, y) returns all elements z in S s.t. z ∈[x, y].
• insert(x) adds element x to S.
• delete(x) removes element x from S.
member(x), lookup(x), predecessor(x), and range(x, y) are referred to as query,
while insert(x) and delete(x) are referred to as update.
==PAGE:12==
4
2 Problem Description
2.2
Reformulation in terms of learned indexes
One observation lays the path for learned index data structures, which is that all
queries come down to rank(x): return the number of elements in S that are smaller
than x. In fact, if we also store S as a sorted array A, the query operations become:
• member(x) asks if A[rank(x)] is x
• lookup(x) returns satellite data for A[rank(x)] if present.
• predecessor(x) returns A[rank(x) −1].
• range(x, y) can be decomposed in two predecessor queries and return a range
from A.
Plotting the points x, rank(x) in the Cartesian plane gives something like the example
in figure 2.1. All a learned index does is approximate the function rank(x), so that a
query operation consists of two parts: getting and approximate position (a prediction)
for x in A; refining the prediction to get the exact position of x. In this sense, indexes
can be seen as models trained to map keys to their location in the sorted order [FV20a].
In some literature, rank(x) is referred to as the cumulative distribution function, or
CDF[Kra+18]. As for the update operations, partial or complete retraining of these
models is necessary.
Figure 2.1: CDF example. The blue dots are the pairs x, rank(x), the black line is
a linear model approximating the function..
==PAGE:13==
CHAPTER 3
Previous Work:
Data Structures
This chapter presents existing solutions to the indexable dictionary problem from the
literature; non-learned approaches are briefly considered, before discussing the new
learned approaches.
3.1
Traditional approaches
Previous work on this decades-old problem has lead to very eﬀicient data structures,
in the following indicated as traditional data structures. The literature contains many
state-of-the-art data structures that accomodate all or some of the operations required
by the problem defined above; clearly, a data structure designed for a subset of
operations can perform these more eﬀiciently than one that supports all of them.
The common trait is that none of these data structures takes advantage of the data
distribution. One could call them, in this sense general purpose, even despite the fact
that they sometimes offer some tunable parameter. The following shortly presents
some state-of-the-art traditional data structures relevant for the indexable dictionary
problem. Tables 3.1 and 3.2 contain the space and time characteristics for these.
3.1.1
Baseline approaches
A simple solution to the indexable dictionary problem would of course be storing
an array of size u, and using the key value as an index for direct access; this yields
constant time for membership, lookups and updates but size linear in u, which is
only acceptable for very small u or when n ≈u. It is also not so great for range
==PAGE:14==
6
3 Previous Work:
Data Structures
or predecessor queries as there is no bound on the number of empty cells that one
would have to examine. Alternatively, elements can be stored in a dynamic array,
with queries performed via binary search. This yields O(log n) for all queries, except
of course for range where an additional k steps are required to report the k elements
of the range.
Updates would be slow, worst-case linear, due to the necessity of
keeping the array sorted, possibly moving all elements to allocate a new one. This
can be overcome with a standard binary search tree (BST), allowing for same query
complexity and updates in O(log n) time.
3.1.2
Hashing
Hashing techniques allow for membership and lookup queries (point queries), in both
static and dynamic contexts. The scheme described in [DHW08], which extends the
classic FKS scheme from [FKS84] is based on perfect hash functions, allows for O(1)
worst-case time for lookup and expected O(1) amortized time for insertion and dele-
tion of an element; space is of course linear. In the external memory model, according
to [JP08] hashing can be used to obtain expected 1 + O(1/
√
B) I/Os for member-
ship or lookup, and expected amortized 1 + O(1/
√
B) I/Os for updates. Wormhole
[WNJ19] extends the set of available operations for hashing approaches by including
range queries. It combines hash tables and tree-based approaches to give a O(log log u)
worst-case lookup time; range queries would then have an overhead linear in the size of
the output. Complexity for space and updates are not explicitly discussed in [WNJ19],
but empirical evaluation on real data sets of up to 1B keys and 8.5 GB of size showed
them to be comparable or better than other approaches including B+-TREE .
3.1.3
Tries and stratified trees
Much effort has gone into implementing fast predecessor queries. The stratified tree,
often referred to as the Van Emde Boas tree, [Emd75] allows for membership, lookup,
predecessor and updates in O(log log u) time and O(u) space. The space can further
be reduced to O(n) with hashing, as described in [MN90]. This makes the time bound
an expected one, because of dynamic hashing. The same results can be achieved with
the y-fast trie presented in [Wil83]. As for the external memory model, as pointed
out in [PT06], the best theoretical performance is still achieved by the B-TREE family.
==PAGE:15==
3.1 Traditional approaches
7
Name
Point
query time
Predecessor
query time
Range
query time
Update time
BST
O(log n)
O(log n)
O(log n + k)
O(log n)
Hashing
O(1)
n.a.
n.a.
O(1) e.a.
Wormhole
O(log log u)
O(log log u)
O(log log u + k)
??
VEB Trees
O(log log u)
O(log log u)
O(log log u + k)
O(log log u)
CSS -TREE
??
??
??
??
ART
??
??
??
??
Table 3.1: Summary of worst-case time bounds for traditional main memory index
data structures; k is the number of results reported for range queries, n.a.
stands for not available, e.a. stands for expected amortized.
3.1.4
Tree-based approaches
The B-TREE supports all the required indexing operations in eﬀicient time. It is a self-
balancing generalization of the binary search tree that allows for nodes with more
than two children, and has largely been employed on database management systems
[Com79], thanks to its external memory eﬀiciency. The degree of each node is be-
tween δ/2 and δ, for δ = θ(B). In the external memory model, queries and updates
take O(logB n) I/Os. Note that for a range query returning k values, in the worst case
a path to a leaf is traversed k times. The B+-TREE is a variation of the B-TREE where
all of the keys reside in the leaves, which are linked together in order, and the inter-
nal nodes contain routing elements for the index. While retaining the same asymp-
totic performance as the B-TREE , range queries are faster, now consisting of a single
lookup and then an overhead of constant time per element. Another variation of the
B-TREE is the Bε-TREE [Ben+15]. This is a state-of-the-art traditional data structure
for write heavy workloads in external memory systems. It replaces the expensive
split and merge algorithms of the B+-TREE with buffers of size Θ(B1−ε). Time for
queries is O(logB n/ε) I/Os (with an additional O(k/B) overhead for range queries),
==PAGE:16==
8
3 Previous Work:
Data Structures
Name
Point
query I/Os
Predecessor
I/Os
Range
query I/Os
Update I/Os
Hashing
1 + O(1/
√
B)
n.a.
n.a.
1 + O(1/
√
B) e.a.
B+-TREE
O(logB n)
O(logB n)
O(logB n + k/B)
O(logB n)
Bε-TREE
O( logB n
ε
)
O( logB n
ε
)
O( logB n
ε
+ k/B)
O( logB n
εB1−ε )
LSM -TREE
O( logB n
ε
)
O( logB n
ε
)
O( log2
B n
ε
+ k/B)
O( logB n
εB1−ε )
Table 3.2: Summary of worst-case time bounds for traditional external-memory in-
dex data structures; k is the number of results reported for range queries,
B is the size of a memory block in the external memory model.
n.a.
stands for not available, e.a. stands for expected amortized.
and updates take O(logB n/εB1−ε) I/Os. Another write-optimized external memory
data structure is the LSM -TREE (Log-Structured Merge-Tree), which predates the
Bε-TREE . It consists of multiple disk-resident tables, indexed with a B-TREE , and
a memory-resident table. Updates are handled in this table which is flushed to disk
when full. Queries require searching the different disk-resident parts, the in-memory
table and merging the results [Pet18]. Asymptotic performance for updates and point
queries is the same as the Bε-TREE for an optimal implementation of the disk-resident
parts; range queries, however, take O(log2
B n/ε + k/B) I/Os [Ben+15], which is a
logB n factor more than for the Bε-TREE . With the increase in availability of cheap
larger RAMs, research moved towards main-memory optimizations. The CSS -TREE
(Cache-Sensitive Search Tree) is a main-memory cache optimized read-only data struc-
ture that practically dominates the B+-TREE in lookup times and memory eﬀiciency
[RR98]. As for supporting updates, the Adaptive Radix Tree (ART) [LKN13], is a
main-memory cache optimized data structure that achieves same asymptotic query
and update performance of B-TREE , with a smaller space footprint. The authors of
ART prove that the space consumption for the index is bound by 52 bytes per key,
for keys of arbitrary length; experimental evaluation showed this to be much lower in
practice, and faster in performance than a B+-TREE . The authors of CSS -TREE and
ART do not discuss theoretical bounds.
==PAGE:17==
3.2 Learned index data structures
9
3.2
Learned index data structures
The following presents some of the known learned index data structures; comparison
of design choices and a general discussion on the state of research are presented in the
next chapter. All learned indexes share the same fundamental strategy for searching
a key that is based on two steps: i) get a range that approximates the position for a
key in the sorted data ii) perform a last-mile binary search in this range. This allows
for all query operations defined in 2.1, as the keys are kept sorted. For this reason,
analysis for query times is limited to point queries; range queries only incur in an
overhead proportional to the number of elements that are returned. For some of these
data structures, the error in the first step can be bound within a user-given parameter,
thus yielding a bound on the query time; this parameter will be referred to as ε. But
those not providing such parameter may not offer any strict bound on search time,
unlike traditional data structures. Depending on the machine learning techniques
used to learn the data distribution, learned indexes can offer many parameters, which
arguably makes the data structure harder to tune than a traditional one.
3.2.1
A Recursive Model Index (RMI): ALEX
The Recursive Model Index (RMI) was first introduced in [Kra+18]. To obtain a
prediction for the rank of a key, RMI uses a hierarchy of regression models organised
in stages, where each model is responsible for picking the next one, until the last stage
returns an approximate position on the sorted data. Differences of RMI , compared
to tree-based approaches are, as pointed out by [FV20a]: (i) constant size for storing
the index, (ii) exploiting advantage of data distribution, (iii) no searches in-between
stages, (iv) worst case performance not bounded beforehand. Shortcomings of RMI
include (i) lack of support for updates, (ii) time-consuming tuning process, (iii) lack
of latency guarantees, (iv) top-down training algorithm which distributes the keys
blindly, ignoring power or workload of nodes. Variations of RMI to address its short-
comings include the Adaptive Single Layer Model (ASLM), Hybrid-O, the Adaptive
LEarned Index (ALEX), and the Adaptive InDEpendent Linear regression models
(AIDEL), respectively described in [LLW19], [Qu+19], [Din+20], [Li+19]; they all
support updates and attempt to reach a more even distribution of keys among nodes.
ALEX is discussed here, as it is presented as an improvement on RMI targeted at
dynamic workloads [Din+20]. Like in RMI, the key space is split in different intervals,
==PAGE:18==
10
3 Previous Work:
Data Structures
and a model is responsible for each interval.
ALEX uses simple linear regression
models, orchestrated in a tree structure where the data models reside in the leafs and
the internal nodes are used for routing; Figure 3.1 provides a visual representation of
the design. Unlike a B-TREE , the tree in ALEX is not height balanced and there is no
bound to how many children a node can have. A leaf node is called a data node, and
stores a linear regression model (consisting of slope and intercept), and two arrays
with gaps (gapped array), one for the keys and one for the values; the index of a key
and its associated value in the respective arrays is the same. The gapped arrays have
fixed size, a lower density limit dl and an upper density limit du. Together with the
gapped arrays, two bitmaps are stored to keep track of the gaps. Leafs are linked
so that data can be traversed in order. The internal nodes store a linear regression
model (slope and intercept) and an array of children pointers. Together, they allow to
find, given a key, a child node which either is a data node indexing a key or is another
internal node on the path to the data node responsible for this key. The model in the
internal nodes is a perfect linear regression model that maps a key to a location in
the children pointers array. Since the model has to be perfect, the children pointers
array is allowed to have more consecutive redundant values pointing at the same child.
The total number of child pointers for an internal node must be a power of two. This
property allows to split a node without retraining the respective sub-trees. Last mile
search at the data nodes is implemented with unbounded exponential search, which
was found experimentally faster than bounded binary search by the authors as the
models are good at predicting a key position. Thus, the time spent in the last mile
search cannot directly be bound by a tuning parameter, and is worst-case the entire
data stored in a node. Rather, the maximum size of a node M and the arrays density
limits can be used to control time-space trade-offs. Furthermore, if the fraction of
read to write operations is previously known, ALEX can use this to achieve a better
partition of keys when it is built. To decide whether a node should be an internal
node or a data node, and how internal nodes behave upon updates, ALEX uses cost
models; the following focuses on the strategies adopted, rather than explaining these
cost models, which are fully described in [Din+20].
Maximal Depth
The theoretical analysis for performance of ALEX done in [Din+20]
uses a bound on the maximal depth. Note that in practice, the authors do not build
the index to minimize its depth but to maximize performance; the bounds below thus
do not reflect worst-case guarantees in practice. Nevertheless, as depth is an input
==PAGE:19==
3.2 Learned index data structures
11
Figure 3.1: From [Din+20]. ALEX design.
to the cost model and depth and performance are correlated, the analysis is still of
interest. ALEX can be built so that the maximal depth is O(logM mp), where mp is
the minimum number of partitions such that when the key space S is divided into
mp partitions of equal width, every partition contains no more than M · du keys. As
a proof, consider the following. The densest subregion of the key space spans |S|/mp
keys; allocate this as a data node. The path from the root to this node is composed
of internal nodes with M pointers, thus it takes O(logM mp) nodes to narrow down
the space from |S| to |S|/mp. Applying the same mechanism recursively to the rest
of the key space maintains maximal depth.
Queries
A point query on ALEX requires traversing the tree, using the model at
each node to find the next, until a data node is reached; the key array is searched
while using the bitmap to ignore the gaps, and if the key is found the values array
is accessed in the same position and the value is returned. The time spent in each
internal node is O(1) because the model is a perfect linear regression. The time spent
in a data node is bounded by exponential search on the node, which is O(log M),
where M is the constant maximum size of the node set during tuning. The number of
==PAGE:20==
12
3 Previous Work:
Data Structures
traversed nodes is a function of the maximal tree depth, which is O(logM mp), where
mp is the minimum number of partitions such that when the key space S is divided
into mp partitions of equal width, every partition contains no more than M · du keys.
Overall point queries require O(logM mp + log M). A predecessor query will find the
element at most one leaf away as leafs are never empty, and only incur in a constant
overhead because the nodes have fixed size.
Updates
To insert a new element in ALEX, the position is located by navigating
the tree to a data node, and then using its model to find the insertion point in the
gapped array. If the array has a gap in the predicted point and the insertion preserves
the sorted order, the insertion is done. If inserting the element would not preserve
the sorted order, exponential search is used to find the correct position. If in any
case there is no gap, the existing elements are shifted towards the closest gap to make
space for the new element; this is called a model-based insert. A data node is said to
be full if the density of its arrays is higher than the threshold du. If inserting a new
element would result in a full node, the node is either 1)expanded, 2)split sideways,
3)split downwards:
1. To expand a node that contains n keys, a new larger gapped arrays with n/dl
slots is allocated. The regression model is either scaled or retrained based on
a linear cost function. Then, all elements are inserted in the new array again
using model-based inserts.
2. When a data node is split sideways, the result is two data nodes, each responsible
for half of the key space of the node being split. The parent internal node could
need to be split as well and this could propagate to the root. Figure 3.2 provides
a visual example.
3. When a data node is split down, it becomes an internal node with two data
nodes as children. The key space is split evenly, and the model in each children
is trained. No action is required on the parent of the node being split.
A linear cost function is used to determine whether to split sideways or downwards.
Finally, there is a specific strategy for out of bounds inserts: inserts that occur outside
the key space that is currently being indexed. This is necessary because the splitting
mechanism of a data node relies on assigning half its key space to each child, thus
many small changes in the key space size lead to ineﬀiciency. Rather, ALEX keeps
==PAGE:21==
3.2 Learned index data structures
13
Figure 3.2: From [Din+20]. The first split (a) is an example of a sideways split
that does not require an expansion of the parent internal node. In (b),
the parent internal node has reached the maximum size, so it is split
sideways. (c) shows how splitting down converts a data node into an
internal node with two child data nodes.
track of the key space beginning and end, and detects an insertion that is out of
this range. When this happens, the root node is expanded, to the left or to the right,
thereby expanding the key space. The child pointers array is also expanded, while the
existing pointers to existing children are not modified; a new data node is created for
every new slot in the expanded pointers array. The root node is split if the expansion
would cause it to exceed the maximum allowed size. As for delete operations, since
the arrays are allowed to have gaps, a delete does not require shifting elements, and
does not degrade the model accuracy. In order to maintain the space use eﬀicient, a
data node is contracted if it reaches the lower density limit dl. Contraction is done
like expansion, except the new array will be smaller. Merging under-exploited nodes
is mentioned as a possibility in [Din+20], but not discussed nor implemented.
Space
Space complexity is not discussed in [Din+20]. The bound can be found
to be O(n + mp). The largest index has: fanout M for each internal node and all
data nodes at maximal depth O(logM mp). This gives O(M logM mp) = O(mp) nodes,
where mp is at most n. On top of that, one adds the n keys stored in the data nodes;
internal nodes have constant overhead and so does the additional data for the cost
models.
Build Time
ALEX is built top down, starting by training the root model on the
entire data, then using the cost models to determine whether a node should be a data
node or an internal node. In the latter case, the build algorithm must determine the
==PAGE:22==
14
3 Previous Work:
Data Structures
fanout and recurse on the children. The fanout of an internal node is determined by
a greedy algorithm that grows a binary tree of possible children costs. According to
[FV20a], the total pre-processing cost is O(n log n).
3.2.2
FITING TREE
FITING-TREE is introduced in [Gal+21]. It uses piece-wise linear functions for the
approximation of rank(x). In order to bound the lookup time, the approximation
must provide some guarantee on the prediction error ε. This means the actual position
of an element in the sorted data is within ±ε from the predicted position. In practice,
each function is a segment responsible for some consecutive keys. For a segment, the
first indexed key start and the slope are stored. The segments are then indexed using
a B+-TREE . Segments can then be seen as a leaf or a page of a B+-TREE , except
for the fact that segments do not cover a fixed number of keys. Figure 3.3 gives a
visual representation. Clearly, the time and space complexity for this data structure
are also dependant on the number of segments, denoted m. Computing a minimum
number of segments would yield the best performance, but is deemed too expansive
by the authors. A much faster and memory-eﬀicient greedy algorithm is introduced
instead; the algorithm is described and discussed in more detail in 4.3.
Figure 3.3: From [Gal+21]. Design of FITING-TREE .
==PAGE:23==
3.2 Learned index data structures
15
Queries
Point queries in FITING-TREE require traversing the B+-TREE to find a seg-
ment, querying the segment to get the approximate position for a key, then searching
within an interval on the portion of sorted data associated to the segment. The last
step takes O(log ε) with binary search. Querying a segment s takes constant time,
as one can compute the predicted position for x as pos(x) = (x −s.start) · s.slope.
Traversing the B+-TREE takes O(logc m), where c is the B+-TREE fan-out. So overall,
queries require O(logc m + log ε) .
Updates
An insert operation on FITING-TREE requires navigating the B+-TREE ,
locating the segment responsible for the new key, locating its position in the corre-
sponding sorted data container, moving the existing elements to keep the data sorted.
In addition to this, the error bound for the segment should still be respected. To
overcome this, an insert budget b is introduced; the user given error bound ε is di-
vided in two parts, ε = e+b, where e is the error that each segment is allowed for the
keys it indexes. Each segment is then responsible for a page of size |s| + 2b, where
|s| is the number of keys initially covered by the segment; the keys are stored in
the middle, leaving two buffers of size b before and after the data respectively. The
result is that all these keys can be moved in any direction while still being within ±ε
from the prediction given by the segment. When an insert is performed in a segment,
some of the current keys are thus moved to the left or to the right to accommodate
for the new element. The segment is retrained once all the empty spaces are filled;
this could produce more than a single new segment, in which case the change propa-
gates to the nodes in the B+-TREE . This strategy is rather time consuming, as every
insert moves an average of |s|/2 keys. The time for an insert as described is thus
O(logc m) + O(|s|) + O(d). The last term comes from when a segment is full and
needs to be retrained, and d represents the total number of keys in the segment when
retraining occurs; this is not better bound in [Gal+21], as there is no bound on the
number of keys covered by a segment. However, an alternative approach discussed in
[Gal+21], called delta inserts, addresses the second term, which can be transformed
into a constant parameter. For this, each segment has a single buffer of fixed size buff.
New elements are inserted here, and the buffer is kept sorted; when the buffer is full,
it’s merged with the other keys in the segment, and the segment is retrained resulting
in one or more new segments. As this strategy also searches the buffer, instead of just
the data, it incurs in a slight overhead. However, this can be made transparent by
incorporating it in the error e, with a choice such that O(log ε) = O(log b) + O(log e).
==PAGE:24==
16
3 Previous Work:
Data Structures
Cost for a delta insert is O(logc m) + O(buff) + O(d).
Space
The space required for the data structure is a function of the number of
segments m that the B+-TREE is indexing. A single segment takes constant space, as
it consists of the first point and the slope. Thus, the space is O(n + m). [Gal+21]
provides the following observation on the number of segments. Let a maximal segment
be a segment for which the addition of a key would violate the specified error. It can
be shown that the minimal number of locations covered by a maximal segment is ε+1.
The proof is reported in the appendix A.1. From this it follows that in the worst case,
where every segment is a maximal segment, FITING-TREE is not larger than an index
that uses fixed-size pages of size ε, thus bounding the space occupied by FITING-TREE
.
Build Time
Building the data structure requires i) building the segments, ii) build-
ing the overlaying B+-TREE . The former is done in O(n) (see 4.3); the latter takes
O(m logc m) where m is the number of segments. Thus, build time is O(n+m logc m).
Note that m is obviously bounded by the number of keys, but also m ≤n/(ε + 1).
3.2.3
The Piecewise Geometric Model Index (PGM-INDEX)
The PGM-INDEX is presented in [FV20b]. Similarly to FITING-TREE , it uses a piece-
wise ε-approximation of rank(x); the minimum number of needed segments is com-
puted with the algorithm described in 4.3. The resulting set of segments is called
a PLA model (Piecewise Linear Approximation model). For a segment, the first in-
dexed key, the slope and the intercept are stored. The twist comes with the way the
segments are organized. Instead of relying on a traditional data structure to index
them, the ε-approximation is applied recursively until a single segment is obtained.
The result is a data structure of multiple levels, each level corresponding to a PLA
model. Figure 3.4 shows the layout of the data structure. In order to support updates,
this data structure is replicated in the following way: pick b = Θ(log n). Define a
series consisting of b indexes built over S0, ..., Sb, that have size 0 or 20, 21, ..., 2b. This
is done as the authors consider buffering and periodic retraining ineﬀicient if i) there
are many keys, leading to slow retraining, or ii) lot of insertions in one space, which
trigger lots of retrainings.
==PAGE:25==
3.2 Learned index data structures
17
Figure 3.4: From [FV20b]. Design of a static PGM-INDEX .
Queries
Query time clearly depends on the number of segments in each PLA, which
is bounded by the number of segments in the lowest PLA – the one built directly on
the data; let this be m∗. The static PGM-INDEX is considered first, then the analysis
moves to the dynamic version consisting of multiple indexes. The minimum number
of keys covered by a segment can be bound to be at least 2ε. Proof is in 4.3. The static
PGM-INDEX recursively applies the segmentation method, thus reducing, at each level,
the number of segments by a factor c ≥2ε. The number of steps to reach the bottom
layer and find the segment responsible for a key is thus O(logc m∗) = O(log m∗). To
this, one adds the time spent on the last mile search, which is O(log ε).
For the
dynamic version of the data structure, a key is searched with this method over at
most Θ(log n) indexes, thus giving O(log n(log m+log ε)). A predecessor query takes
the same time, as the data at each index is sorted, and the query only needs to keep
track of a maximum.
Updates
Each insert operation finds the first empty set Si and builds a new PGM-
INDEX over all of the sets up to this one. This can be computed in time linear with
the size of merged set as the sets are sorted. This new set has size 2i and will now
be set Si. Previous sets are emptied. Each key participates at most in b = Θ(log n)
merges as each merge moves keys to the right. Cost is O(1) amortised per key at
merge, giving O(log n) amortised per insertion overall. Deletion is done by replacing
==PAGE:26==
18
3 Previous Work:
Data Structures
the value associated to a key with a tombstone value, signalling the removal of a key.
Space
For a static PGM-INDEX , the number of levels is L = O(logc m∗), and the
space overhead is thus ∑L
l=0 m∗/(2ε)l = Θ(m∗). The dynamic version stores Θ(log n)
of these, giving as a total bound for the size, including the data, O(n + m∗log n).
Build Time
In [FV20a], build time is reported as O(n) for the static version. The
dynamic version takes the same, as all the data is indexed by a single Si large enough
to contain all of the initial keys.
3.2.4
Radix Spline (RS)
Radix Spline (RS) is presented in [Kip+20] as a ”single pass learned index”. It can
be built with a single pass on the input data and with constant amount of work
per element, unlike PGM-INDEX and FITING-TREE , that have logarithmic work per
element – due to indexing the overlaying data structure. However, Radix Spline itself
does not support individual updates. The authors consider applications where this
is not necessary, and building an index fast is more important. For example, when
using it in combination with LSM -TREE . RS consists of two components: a set of
spline points and a radix table. The set of spline points is a subset of the keys, chosen
so that interpolating two consecutive spline points gives a prediction for the location
of a key within a preset error – let this be ε. The purpose of the radix table is to
restrict the search for the spline points responsible for a key to a subset of points.
The radix table maps a fixed-lentgh prefix of a key that is a spline point to the first
spline point with that prefix. Let r be the prefix length. The table contains the
sorted prefixes, and the base ten decoding of a prefix corresponds to its position in
the table. Operations are explained in [Kip+20], but bounds are not analyzed.
Queries
Figure 3.5 shows the design of the index, and an example of key lookup.
In order to find a key, the radix table is queried first. This is done in constant time,
by extracting the r-length prefix from the key, directly accessing the corresponding
location on the table, and the subsequent one. The two spline points obtained are the
endpoints for a binary search to locate the spline responsible for the key – actually,
the two spline points of which the interpolation gives the spline. In the worst case,
the range contains a spline point for every key indexed, and the index contains all
==PAGE:27==
3.2 Learned index data structures
19
Figure 3.5: From [Kip+20]: Radix Spline index and example lookup process. The
r (here, 3) most significant bits b of the lookup key are used as an index
into the radix table. Then, a binary search is performed on the spline
points between the bth pointer and the b + 1th pointer.
keys from U in that range, giving O(log 2log u−r) = O(log u −r), where log u is the
length of a key. Linear interpolation between the found points takes constant time,
and the approximate range on the sorted data is searched in O(log ε) time. Thus, a
point query takes O(log u−r+log ε); a predecessor query simply accesses the previous
element in the sorted data, a range query finds the first element and scans forward.
Space
The space overhead is a function of the number of spline points and the size
of the radix table. Let the number of spline points be t, with the expectation that
t << n if the data distribution is regular enough, and in no case t > n. The radix
table contains 2r −1 entries. Overall the space is O(n + t + r).
Build Time
The spline model is built with the algorithm from [NM08], which runs
in linear time on the sorted data. As a greedy streaming algorithm, it finds the spline
points in order while iterating over the keys. Thus, the radix table can be built during
the same scan, checking the current prefix and the most recent spline point prefix,
and only a single pass on the sorted data is necessary to build the index. Time is
O(n).
==PAGE:28==
20
==PAGE:29==
CHAPTER 4
Previous Work:
Discussion
The purpose of this chapter is to further discuss the learned indexes presented in
the previous one, and to put them in the context of the current research on learned
indexes.
4.1
Machine learning methodologies
The learned index problem is formulated in such a way that does not enforce the use
of any specific method to learn the data distribution. However, the data structures
presented rely on very simple models: PGM-INDEX , Radix spline, and FITING-TREE
use linear piece-wise approximation or spline interpolation models. The only excep-
tion seem to be RMI, which in principle allows for any model. Despite that, ALEX
uses simple linear models. The reason given for not using higher order models is
build eﬀiciency [Gal+21]. As for more sophisticated machine learning methods, such
as neural networks, they are not being largely employed at the moment.
This is
despite what pushed the research towards learned indexes in the first place was the
availability of faster GPUs and TPUs - as stated in [ABG22] and [Kra+18] – which
dramatically accelerate training for neural networks. In fact, neural networks are a
building block for learned bloom filters, another family of learned data structures.
For the suitability of neural networks on a static dictionary, the results of [ABG22]
are of interest. The authors tested multiple learned indexes based on feed forward
fully-connected neural networks against indexes using a simple linear regression, a
quadratic regression, and a cubic regression, as their respective learned components.
The neural networks tested had respectively 0, 1, and 2 hidden layers. Branchy bi-
==PAGE:30==
22
4 Previous Work:
Discussion
nary search and branchless binary search were also considered as baselines. Neural
networks proved unsuitable for building learned indexes in the three different test sce-
narios considered. Firstly, deploying the neural net with TensorFlow on GPU proved
slow because of the uploading overhead, as already found by [Kra+18]. Secondly, us-
ing a custom implementation for building the neural net index and running it in GPU
did not prove to be better than the baseline: while the GPU allows for one order of
magnitude faster math operations, copying the queries to and from CPU cancels this
advantage. Finally, testing in CPU showed that the neural network based indexes
were not competitive with the very simple index based on linear regression. This
prompts the authors to suggest that, if neural networks are to be used for learned
indexes, specific architectures for these neural networks must be designed. Adapting
these models so that the index can also handle updates is a further challenge.
Figure 4.1: From [HH19]. How updates in learned indexes could affect the index
performance.
4.2
Handling updates
When insertions and deletions are performed on a learned index, this impacts both
parts of the structure: the prediction model and the sorted data. If the index is using
multiple models, whatever data structure is used to index those is also impacted. In
general, for a learned index approach, [HH19] points out three things:
==PAGE:31==
4.2 Handling updates
23
1. The more updates are made, the more the prediction model becomes less good
at approximating rank(x), thus requiring more steps in the last-mile search.
2. It is not necessarily the case that the predictions on the updated set are within
the same error bound as before.
3. If the data structure relies on pointing at the index position in the sorted data,
insertions and deletions result in drifts of these elements, and the prediction
range given by the model may not contain the elements anymore.
These remarks are summarizes by figure 4.1 from [HH19]. Here is how the presented
data structures address these. PGM-INDEX , by adopting a set of indexes, performs a
retraining at every insert but only on a logarithmically increasing fraction of the data
set; this overcomes 2 and 3. 1 is not of much concern, as the models are chosen with
the goal of being a minimum number, and not based on accuracy. ALEX requires
retraining of the models only when splitting down, i.e. when a data node is converted
to an internal node with two children data nodes; this has the effect of degrading
the performance until a node is split, as per 1. Problems 2 and 3 are attenuated by
the gapped arrays and in-place deletes, which reduce the number of shifts the keys
are subject to.
FITING-TREE deals with 2 by allowing an insert budget within the
input error bound and retraining a segment when it becomes full; changes are then
propagated to the overlaying B+-TREE if needed. For FITING-TREE , 1 is not an issue,
as the index doesn’t care about finding the best approximation but rather one that
covers the most keys. 3 also does not matter, as each segment is a model responsible
for its own sorted data container. Generally, it seems like the performance of the
prediction model is not much of concern for learned indexes – as long as its error can
be bound – and more focus is put on using the space wisely, maximizing the number
of keys covered by a model (e.g. PGM-INDEX , FITING-TREE ) or having a balanced
distribution among models (ALEX). As for Radix Spline, authors avoid the problem
of handling individual updates by providing a supposedly fast build which could be
merged with new data from time to time.
Deletion is not always discussed by the authors of these data structures; it can in
principle be seen as an insertion for a ”delete” message which takes the same time
as any insert operation; this forces one, however, to check for this message before
answering any query operation. Deletion messages could be buffered all at once, or
be on the path that leads to the key that needs to be deleted; for appropriate buffer
==PAGE:32==
24
4 Previous Work:
Discussion
sizes, both strategy can allow for query overhead that is asymptotically smaller or
equal to the overall query time complexity. Hence, the update time can be intended
as referring to both insertions and deletions. However, in practice, if the elements
are never erased from the data structure the space could grow out of control and
performance could suffer.
Finally, there are strategies targeted at a special case where the index only handles
inserts, and only with increasingly growing key value. This is useful when the data
indexed is time series, for example for IoT sensors or web logs. Intuitively, and as
suggested in [Kra+18] if the data distribution does not change, and all that is required
is appending data in the end, the model needs no retraining and insertions can be
performed in O(1) time. Even if the data distribution is changing, append inserts
can be faster than in-the-middle inserts. This is discussed for PGM-INDEX in [FV20b].
As appending a key to end of the sorted data maintains the order, the last segment
can be updated in O(1) amortised time. If the key can be covered while preserving
the error guarantee, the insertion stops. Otherwise, the data distribution changed. A
new segment is created, which causes update for all layers, stopping when a segment
covers the key within ε or at the root, which may need to be split. The work at
each level is constant amortised I/Os, and the overall number of I/Os is O(logc m∗)
amortised, where c ≥2ε. In-memory update time is not discussed by the authors; It
is easy to see that only the last segment at each level may be affected by retraining,
and retraining is linear in the number of covered keys, thus the time is O(d · logc m∗),
where d is the number of keys covered by the segment. The same reasoning can be
applied to FITING-TREE and RS, where only the leftmost segment (or spline point) is
affected.
4.3
Segmentation
PGM-INDEX , FITING-TREE , and Radix Spline rely on approximating the entire data
distribution function with segments. ALEX achieves the same, but fits a linear regres-
sion to a set of points after splitting the key space in regions based on how many keys
they contain. When the approximation is such that the maximum error is ε, this is
called a ε-approximation. The strategies adopted differ in two ways: (i) PGM-INDEX
and FITING-TREE use a piece-wise approximation, while RS fits a spline to the func-
tion; (ii) FITING-TREE and RS accept a non-optimal model in favour of a more eﬀicient
==PAGE:33==
4.3 Segmentation
25
index build. Here, non-optimal should be intended as being a model of not necessarily
minimum size, meaning not necessarily of the minimum number of segments. Figure
4.2 presents a visual example of the segmentation produced by the three methods.
Note how for FITING-TREE every segment starts and ends in a point of the CDF
while this is not the case for PGM-INDEX . FITING-TREE is using an algorithm called
SHRINKINGCONE , which runs in time O(n) and takes only a constant space overhead.
Unlike OPT-PLA , the optimal algorithm chose by PGM-INDEX , which still runs in lin-
ear time but requires O(n) space. RS is using GREEDYSPLINECORRIDOR from [NM08].
This section briefly presents the first two algorithms.
Figure 4.2: Different strategies to produce an approximation of the CFD with seg-
ments.
4.3.1
Shrinking Cone
SHRINKINGCONE is presented in [Gal+21] as a highly eﬀicient one pass linear algorithm
with low constant memory usage, that guarantees a maximal error ε in each segment.
==PAGE:34==
26
4 Previous Work:
Discussion
The algorithm trades performance with the quality of the solution, which is not
guaranteed to be optimal, nor can the approximate solution be within some bound
of the optimal.
However, it is still possible to bound the number m of segments
produced in the worst case: since each segment covers at least ε + 1 keys (see A.1),
then m ≤n/(ε + 1). SHRINKINGCONE is a greedy streaming algorithm. It gets a
starting key and tries to maximize the length of the segment from this key to include
the subsequent keys within a given error threshold ε. The resulting segment will be
obtained by interpolation of the starting key and the last key. More specifically, let
a cone be defined by an origin point (x, rank(x)) – corresponding to a key and its
position in the sorted data – , a high slope Slhigh, and a low slope Sllow. Point origin
and Sllow represent the lower bound for the cone, origin and Slhigh the upper bound.
The cone is therefore representing the family of feasible linear functions for a segment
starting at its origin. For every key z added to the cone, its higher and lower slopes
are computed from origin to (z, rank(z)+ ε) and (z, rank(z) −ε) respectively. Then,
the cone is narrowed by updating Slhigh to the lowest of the higher bounds and Sllow
to the highest of the lower bounds. A key is only added to the cone if its position
lies inside the cone. Otherwise, adding the key to the cone would require changing
Slhigh or Sllow which would violate the error constraint. This key is therefore chosen
as the origin point for a new segment. Figure 4.3 gives a visual representation.
4.3.2
Opt-PLA
The piece-wise approximation of PGM-INDEX uses an optimal streaming algorithm
from [Xie+14] to compute the minimum number of segments that approximate the
data distribution, which will be called here OPT-PLA . This guarantees that the index
is the smallest that could be built; while retaining linear time like SHRINKINGCONE ,
OPT-PLA requires O(n) memory overhead when the algorithm is run. The key idea of
OPT-PLA , as explained in [FV20b], is to reduce the piece-wise linear ε-approximation
problem to the one of constructing a convex hull of a set of points. The points are
taken to be the pairs (xi, rank(xi)) where the keys are already in sorted order. The
algorithm iterates over the points and includes them in the convex hull until this
fits in a – possibly rotated - rectangle of height no more than 2ε.
When this is
not possible, a segment covering the keys corresponding to the points included in
the hull is created as the line splitting the rectangle into to equal-sized halves. The
process starts again with a new hull and the next point. Figure 4.4 gives a visual
==PAGE:35==
4.3 Segmentation
27
Figure 4.3: SHRINKINGCONE example. The first point from the left is chosen as a
start point, and the second point, together with the error (red dotted
line), determines the blue lines as the initial low and high slope values.
The third point narrows the cone by acting on both slopes. The fourth
increases the value for the low slope, in cyan. Fifth point cannot be
included and will be the start of a new segment.
representation. The number of keys covered by a single segment can be bound to
be at least 2ε, exploiting the optimality of the algorithm. As a proof, consider any
chunk of 2ε consecutive keys ki, ki + 1, ..., ki+2ε−1. These keys generate the points
(ki, i), (ki+1, i + 1), ..., (ki+2ε−1, i + 2ε1). Take as an approximation the horizontal
segment y = i + ε. Each of these keys have vertical distance at most ε from this
segment, which then gives a ε-approximation for that range of 2ε keys. Hence, any
segment of the optimal PLA-model covers at least 2ε keys [FV20b].
4.3.3
Non-optimal vs optimal segmentation
The difference in memory usage is evident from the fact that SHRINKINGCONE only
needs to keep track of the upper and lower bounds on the slope, whereas OPT-PLA
needs to keep track of a hull potentially growing up to n points. Experimental eval-
uation on SHRINKINGCONE performed in [Gal+21] shows results that are comparable
to the optimal ones computed by a more expensive algorithm. However, according
==PAGE:36==
28
4 Previous Work:
Discussion
Figure 4.4: OPT-PLA example. On top, the points and the convex hull (dashed red
lines) which fits in a rectangle of height 2ε. On the bottom, the hull is
grown to contain one more point. Now it is impossible to rotate, move,
or adjust the width of the rectangle and still include the hull. The point
is discarded and the keys covered are assigned to the blue segment.
to the experiments of the authors of PGM-INDEX , SHRINKINGCONE performs poorly
in practice [FV20b], which prompted them to research an optimal algorithm for seg-
mentation. The reason for such diverging conclusions is these authors use different
metrics. For SHRINKINGCONE , the number of segments computed is compared to the
optimal number of segments, and they are indeed close, as showed in table 4.1. But in
[FV20b], the focus is put on memory footprint of the model, which is arguably more
relevant. Table 4.2 shows the marginal improvement in space taken by the segment
level, as estimated by [FV20b]; they do not state how the space is being estimated.
These improvements are obtained using roughly the same execution time. Memory
==PAGE:37==
4.4 External Memory Performance
29
performance of the algorithms is not benchmarked.
Dataset
ε
SHRINKINGCONE
Optimal
Ratio
Taxi drop lat
10
5358
4996
1.07
Taxi drop lat
100
351
271
1.29
Taxi drop lat
1000
51
48
1.06
Taxi drop lon
10
1198
1138
1.05
Taxi drop lon
100
371
325
1.14
Taxi drop lon
1000
40
37
1.08
Taxi pick time
10
6238
4359
1.43
Taxi pick time
100
165
137
1.2
OSM lon
10
7727
6027
1.28
OSM lon
100
101
63
1.6
Weblogs
10
16961
14179
1.2
Weblogs
100
909
642
1.42
IoT
10
8605
6945
1.24
IoT
100
723
572
1.26
Table 4.1: From [Gal+21]; number of segments computed by SHRINKINGCONE com-
pared to the optimal number of segments, on real world datasets and for
different values of ε.
4.4
External Memory Performance
Table 4.3 reports performance for the presented indexes in the external memory model.
This is only explicitly discussed by the authors of PGM-INDEX . For ALEX, the analysis
is straightforward from the fact that it uses a tree structure with tunable node size
and fanout; Let M = Θ(B). Similarly for FITING-TREE . Once a leaf is found, it is
reasonable to assume that key-value pairs in the last-mile search interval fit in a single
memory block; the buffer for a segment should also be sized to fit in a single memory
block. As for updates, if a segment is to be retrained and the number of keys covered
by a segment does not fit into a block of memory, there are additional O(d/B) I/Os,
where d is the number of keys covered by that segment. As for queries in Radix Spline,
the radix table can be accessed randomly, and under the same assumption that the
last mile search range fits in a single block, I/Os are only spent when searching the
appropriate spline points in the range given by the table. Since this range is 2log u−r,
a query takes O(2log u−r/B) I/Os.
==PAGE:38==
30
4 Previous Work:
Discussion
Dataset
ε
8
16
32
64
128
256
512
1024
2048
4096
8192
16384
Uniform u = 222
33.8
51.0
59.4
64.0
66.5
68.1
68.6
67.4
68.8
75.4
66.7
33.3
Uniform u = 232
65.8
67.5
68.3
68.8
68.9
69.0
69.4
69.4
68.7
68.5
66.7
75.0
Zipf s = 1
47.9
54.7
59.0
61.5
62.8
60.3
44.7
33.7
29.0
28.5
27.9
28.0
Zipf s = 2
45.3
44.7
40.2
31.5
24.2
21.8
20.8
20.5
21.6
19.7
21.3
20.8
Lognormal σ = 0.5
66.1
67.6
68.5
68.8
68.8
68.0
62.1
46.4
35.6
32.5
30.0
29.9
Lognormal σ = 1.0
66.1
67.6
68.4
68.8
69.0
68.1
61.9
43.5
34.5
32.2
30.1
30.3
Weblogs
40.1
45.7
49.8
52.7
54.3
54.3
53.7
51.0
46.1
46.1
44.7
35.1
Longitude
59.3
63.3
62.2
56.2
49.9
45.8
43.4
40.6
38.4
38.8
38.0
39.0
IoT
46.1
48.5
50.7
47.9
46.8
41.0
37.7
44.0
43.4
34.7
30.3
58.3
Table 4.2: From [FV20b]: Space savings of PGM-INDEX with respect to a FITING-
TREE for a varying ε on six synthetic datasets of 1 billion keys (improve-
ments range from 20% to 75% ) and the three real-world datasets (from
30% to 63%). We notice that these improvements are obtained without
impairing the construction time because the asymptotic complexity of
the two approaches is the same in theory (i.e. linear in the number of
keys) and in practice (a couple of seconds, up to hundreds of millions of
keys).
4.5
Data regularity detection
The purpose of learned indexes is to capture trends in the data distribution. This
motivates the occurrence in the theoretical worst-case performance bounds of these
parameters:
• mp the the minimum number of partitions such that when the key space S is
divided into mp partitions of equal width, every partition contains no more than
a set number of keys.
• m∗≤n/2ε an optimal number of segments used to ε-approximate rank.
• m ≤n/(ε + 1) a non optimal number of segments used to ε-approximate rank.
• d the largest number of keys covered by a segment.
In the analysed literature, there is very little attempt to bound these further than
observing the worst case performance of the algorithms that build the data structures.
==PAGE:39==
4.6 Empirical evaluation
31
Name
Point/predecessor
query I/Os
Range query
additional I/Os
Update
I/Os
ALEX
O(logB mp)
+O(K/B)
O(B logB mp)
FITING-TREE
O(logB m)
+O(K/B)
O(logB m) + O(d/B)
PGM-INDEX
(dynamic)
O((logB n)(logcm))
+O(K/B)
O(logB n) a.
Radix Spline
O(2log u−r/B)
+O(K/B)
n.a.
Table 4.3: Complexity for operations in the external memory model for the pre-
sented data structures.
In particular, m and m∗are experimentally proven to be much lower than the the-
oretical bound. The great compression potential offered by these should be further
investigated, if not by providing narrower bounds, at least with heuristics for how to
estimate the number of segments obtainable for certain data distributions. This is
particularly relevant as space-time trade offs depend upon this parameters, which in
turn are the result of the parameters the indexed is tuned with.
4.6
Empirical evaluation
PGM-INDEX was tested by its authors in read-only scenarios against CSS -TREE , a
B+-TREE and two-stage RMI – not ALEX, but the original RMI described in [Kra+18];
other than the recursive PGM-INDEX , tests included implementations where the low-
est level of PGM-INDEX was indexed through binary search as well as with a CSS
-TREE . The conclusion was that PGM-INDEX is fast in construction, space footprint is
up to 75% lower than state-of-the-art FITING-TREE , and it dominates in space and
time both traditional indexes and RMI . Testing for the dynamic scenario was only
done against B+-TREE ; PGM-INDEX was found overall better and taking less space.
However, as pointed out in [Mar+20], this testing had some shortcomings, including
sub-optimal implementation and tuning of the RMI model and relying on synthetics
==PAGE:40==
32
4 Previous Work:
Discussion
data sets. The authors of [Mar+20] stress their work is the first comparing well-tuned
implementation of the indexes by their original authors, and provide an open-source
RMI implementation. Their benchamrk is called SOSD, and evaluates learned indexes
– RMI, PGM-INDEX , RS –, various tree structures, hashing approaches, and uses base-
lines such as binary search and radix binary search. The result of the benchmarking
is that learned indexes do indeed outperform traditional approaches for read-only
in-memory dense arrays. According to its authors, on read-only workloads, ALEX
beats RMI by up to 2.2 times on performance with up to 15 times smaller index size.
Across the spectrum of read-write workloads, ALEX beats the B+-TREE by up to 4.1
times, while never performing worse, and with up to 2000 times smaller index size.
ALEX is also deemed better than ART and robust to data distribution shift [Din+20].
Testing of RS described in [Kip+20] found the index to be almost as fast to build as
traditional approaches like ART and significantly faster to build than RMI. Lookup
latency was found 40% faster than binary search and competitive with RMI.
Parameter
Meaning
Used in
ε
Maximum error for a model in approximating rank(x)
PGM-INDEX , FITING-TREE 1, RS
c
Fanout for a tree data structure
PGM-INDEX (EM), FITING-TREE
buff
Size of buffer at each leaf
FITING-TREE
b
Controls size (si = 20...2b) and maximum number of levels b
PGM-INDEX (dynamic)
M = 2k
Maximum size of a node.
For internal nodes: number of children pointers;
for data nodes, no more than M · du keys allowed (du = 0.8)
ALEX
r
Number of radix bits for a radix table
Radix Spline
Table 4.4: Tuning parameters for the presented learned indexes.
1In the dynamic version with delta-insert, the segments actually have error ε −buff, so that
overall the additional steps when a segment is found are a function of ε
==PAGE:41==
4.7 Conclusions and research questions
33
4.7
Conclusions and research questions
Learned indexes are a new area of research. The time and space worst-case bounds for
the learned indexes reported are illustrated in table 4.5 and 4.3. Table 4.4 contains a
summary of the tuning parameters used across these. As the goal of learned indexes is
to exploit trends in the data distribution, the worst-case bounds contain parameters
that depend on this. These were summarized in section 4.5. The existing literature
suggests that learned indexes can outperform traditional data structures for read-
heavy in-memory workloads.
However, little has been written about write-heavy
workloads. The following research questions are formulated.
1. How do the presented dynamic solutions perform on real data sets and write-
heavy workloads?
2. How do they compare to the state-of-the-art traditional Bε-TREE ?
3. To what extent do these solutions adapt to changes in the data distribution?
4. Can the Bε-TREE be leveraged for write-optimized learned indexes as the read-
optimized learned indexes leverage the B+-TREE ?
Chapter 5 addresses questions 1, 2, and 3. Chapter 6 presents a new solution from a
theoretical and practical perspective, addressing question 4.
Name
Point/predecessor
query time
Update
time
Build time
on sorted set
Space
Parameters
ALEX
O(logM mp + log M)
O(M logM mp) e.
O(n log n)
O(n + mp)
M
FITING-TREE
O(logc m + log ε)
O(logc m) + O(buff) + O(d)
O(n + m logc m)
O(n + m)
c,buff,ε
PGM-INDEX
(dynamic)
O(log n(log m∗+ log ε))
O(log n) a.
O(n)
O(n + m∗log n)
b,ε
Radix Spline
O(log u −r + log ε)
n.a.
O(n)
O(n + t + r)
r, ε
Table 4.5: Summary of bounds and parameters of the presented learned index data
structures. Range queries require an additional O(K) over the time for
a point query time, for all data structures.
==PAGE:42==
34
==PAGE:43==
CHAPTER 5
Benchmarking Existing
Dynamic Solutions
When it comes to evaluating a data structure, theoretical asymptotic worst-case
bounds only offer a partial perspective. In order to show that learned indexes can
be as good as traditional data structures, thorough testing on data with different
distribution is necessary. The data structures introduced previously have been com-
pared to each other on read-only workloads in [Mar+20]. As seen in the previous
chapter, the literature includes only partial comparisons of dynamic learned indexes.
This chapter presents a step forward in that direction, by presenting experiments and
results on the existing data structures for three different real data sets. The data
structures being tested are PGM-INDEX , ALEX, FITING-TREE , and the traditional
Bε-TREE .
5.1
Data sets
Testing is conducted on keys from real data sets, paired with randomly generated
values of 32 bits. Synthetic data sets are excluded, as they give an unrealistic greater
importance to the learned component of an index. Each data set is down-sampled to
contain 200M keys without duplicates. Figure 5.1 shows the key distribution, i.e. the
rank or CDF function that is being learned. The data sets selected – as in [Mar+20]
– are the following:
==PAGE:44==
36
5 Benchmarking Existing Dynamic Solutions
amzn
1 Contains 32-bit keys representing data points for book popularity on Ama-
zon.
face
2 Contains 64-bits keys representing unique Facebook user IDs.
osm
3 Contains 64-bit keys representing embedded locations from Open Street Map.
5.2
Hardware
Tests are conducted on a MacBook Pro with an M1 Pro System On Chip. Clock rate
is 2064 - 3220 MHz, RAM is 16 GB. For a single ”performance” core, level 1 cache is
320 KB, level 2 cache is 12 MB, and level 3 cache is 8 MB. For the tests performed,
the index including the data is always small enough to fit in main memory.
5.3
Implementations and tuning
For PGM-INDEX and ALEX, the implementation given by the authors is used. Theo-
retically, dynamic PGM-INDEX was presented as a collection of static indexes of sizes
0 or 20, 21, ..., 2b for b = Θ(log n). In practice, the base for the indexes size is a pa-
rameter base = 2k – so that the indexes have sizes base0, base1, ..., baseb, and b is
fixed at (floored):
b = ⌈log n⌉+ log base −1
log base
For practical reasons, the smallest index does not have size one, but is fixed at
(floored):
7 + log base −1
log base
1Available at https://www.kaggle.com/datasets/ucffool/amazon-sales-rank-data-for-print-and-
kindle-books
2As per Van Sandt, P., Chronis, Y. and Patel, J.M., 2019, June. Eﬀiciently Searching In-Memory
Sorted Arrays: Revenge of the Interpolation Search?.
In Proceedings of the 2019 International
Conference on Management of Data (pp. 36-53)
3Available at https://s2geometry.io
==PAGE:45==
5.3 Implementations and tuning
37
Figure 5.1: The CDF of the data sets being used. amzn and face are plotted a
second time without the few very large outliers.
The user given ε is applied for the segmentation at the lowest layer of each static
index, and for the internal recursion a value of ε = 4 is used. Different values of both
base and ε have been tested.
ALEX is tuned by choosing the maximum size for a node M. Both values that fit a
node in L1 cache and values that fit a node in L2 cache have been used. No difference
==PAGE:46==
38
5 Benchmarking Existing Dynamic Solutions
in performance was found, so a single data point is reported.
For FITING-TREE , a prototype supporting updates and membership queries has been
implemented as part of this work. Deletions are not discussed by the authors and
are simply implemented as replacing a value in the indexed data with a sentinel
tombstone value; every time the segment is retrained the pairs with this value are
removed permanently. Insertions are implemented with delta inserts as described in
3.2.2. It should be noted that the implementation could be penalized by the simple
choice of std::vector for the sorted buffers, as moving elements at every insertion
to keep it sorted is slower than more elaborates solutions. Other than the fanout and
the buffer size, the leaf size is given as an additional parameter; this was tuned so
that that a leaf fits in L1 cache. Due to the use of pointers, fetching the buffer for a
key gives a cache miss, so does fetching the data to refine a prediction. The maximum
fanout was fixed at 256 children per node; much larger node size values were not tried,
as the number of elements indexed – the segments obtained compressing the data –
is rather small.
As a traditional approach, Bε-TREE has been chosen [Ben+15]. Initially, the imple-
mentation from the authors of Bε-TREE was tweaked to work as an in-memory index.
However, as this did not support initialisation on a bulk of data, but only individual
inserts on an empty tree, it was found very slow, and at an unfair disadvantage com-
pared to other data structures. Thus, a main memory version of the Bε-TREE was
implemented as part of this work. Index was tuned both to fit a node in L1 and
L2 cache. The inner workings of the Bε-TREE are described in more detail in 6; the
implementation is using std::map for the buffers at every level.
5.4
Experiments
5.4.1
Index build
Figure 5.2 reports the build times for the different indexes. PGM-INDEX and FITING-
TREE are built faster than the others, and roughly in the same time, despite the
segmentation algorithm used for the latter being considered faster than the one from
the former in the literature. Building times are slower but within 200 seconds for
ALEX, whereas the Bε-TREE can take more than 10 minutes on the data sets with
64 bits keys. The algorithm used to build the tree structure of FITING-TREE and
==PAGE:47==
5.4 Experiments
39
Figure 5.2: Build time in seconds for the considered data structures.
Bε-TREE is the same, and it builds the tree top-down with initial degree c/2 for each
internal node. The former is built faster than the latter as the number of elements
indexed – the segments – is much lower than the number of original key-value pairs.
The overhead introduced by the training algorithm does not appear to be significant
at all. The bottleneck while building the tree is probably memory allocation, which
of course grows with the number of nodes and thus has a much larger impact on
Bε-TREE .
5.4.2
Operations
In the first experiment, the average performance of the learned indexes for each
operation is performed. The operations tested are: membership, insert, delete. Mem-
berships are averaged on queries for 1M keys. Of these, 80% are for existing keys,
20% for keys not in the dataset, generated at random on the fly from the entire uni-
verse with uniform distribution. Inserts are of 100M new elements, also with keys
from the universe randomly generated on the fly with uniform distribution. In the
unlikely case a key is already present in the index, some indexes will overwrite its
value, some will ignore it. Note that the likelihood of drawing from the universe a key
that is already in the index is extremely small, given the size of the universe is 232-
264, much larger than the size of the data set. Deletes are for 100M elements, chosen
==PAGE:48==
40
5 Benchmarking Existing Dynamic Solutions
uniformly at random from the data the index was initialized with. As for Bε-TREE ,
the query time is measured twice. Once on the empty tree initialized on the data, the
second one after 2M updates – shuffled tree. This is done in order to show the effect
of buffering, and queries for the second version are of 70% newly inserted elements,
20% old elements and 10% elements that are not in the index. Figure 5.3 captures
the space-time trade-offs. Operations for the empty tree on face and osm are not
reported as they are in the order of 6000-7000 ns, much slower than for the other
indexes. On amzn, the tree with empty buffers is surprisingly faster than the buffered
one, unlike in the other data sets; this is probably due to math on 32 bits values
being faster than on 64 bits values. This is also the only data set where insertions
on the empty Bε-TREE are competitive with learned indexes. In general, the poor
performance of Bε-TREE on updates can be attributed to either bad tuning, or very
poor cache performance of std::map, which was used to implement the buffers.
Interestingly, FITING-TREE is slightly faster at lookups the smaller it gets; this hints at
the search in the tree being more of a bottleneck than the last mile search controlled
by ε, which has to consider more elements the smaller the index gets. On the other
hand, forcing ε to be low triggers retrainings with more frequency, and these are
not suﬀiciently amortized over the insertions, as the leftmost data point consistently
shows on each dataset.
When looking at the three versions of PGM-INDEX , the segmentation error does not
seem to impact the membership time that much, but is very effective for controlling
trade-offs between update time and space. Incrementing the base – that controls how
the size of the different indexes grows – positively impacts the query time, but at the
expense of a larger update latency.
PGM-INDEX is the most flexible learned index, ranging from 118 MB to 2 KB on amzn,
262 MB to 27 KB on face, 194 MB to 90 KB on osm. Space eﬀiciency for PGM-INDEX
and FITING-TREE is so good compared to ALEX that obtaining a time comparison
for the same space is impossible. Instead, one can look at the largest PGM-INDEX
that could be built: consistently over the 3 data sets, ALEX is faster than this on
all operations. The ratio by which it is better is different: on amzn, it takes 7x more
space, 10x faster lookups and deletions, 2.6x faster insertions; on face, 3.5x space,
15x faster lookups, 3.7x faster insertions, 2.7x faster deletions; on osm, 3.5x space, 4x
faster lookups, 1.6x faster inserts, 3x faster deletions.
==PAGE:49==
5.4 Experiments
41
Figure 5.3: Trade-offs between space and time. Size of the index is on the x axis in
GB, time on the y axis in nano-seconds.
==PAGE:50==
42
5 Benchmarking Existing Dynamic Solutions
Because deletes in PGM-INDEX simply find and tombstone a value in the index, and
the delete operations are only tested for keys in the index, the delete time can be
considered a proxy for the a membership query with positive answer.
The same
could be said about FITING-TREE , with the additional consideration that deletes are
happening at the beginning with the buffers empty, and are thus demonstrative only
of the time to reach a leaf, find and query a segment. In this sense, the best case for
queries on the latter takes significantly less than for the former.
Figure 5.4: Relative average increase for latency when inserting consecutive keys.
A second aspect considered is when the insertions hammer a specific point of key
space. For this, consider the insertions of 1M elements with consecutive keys starting
at a point in the universe, chosen uniformly at random. Figure 5.4 shows the the
average increase with respect to a regular insert on amzn.
Bε-TREE takes roughly
the same time as a regular insert. ALEX really struggles in this case, and takes 10
times more time than a regular insert; this index was not tested on the other data
sets as the memory usage of program went over 50 GB. The reason for this issue is
likely that, compared to inserting elements spreaded across the index, hammering a
point requires a lot of shifting elements, expanding arrays, splitting nodes. The time
overhead caused by this could be reduced dramatically if the inserts where given as
a bulk, so that new data nodes are allocated at once. While FITING-TREE also has a
==PAGE:51==
5.4 Experiments
43
tree-like structure and splits nodes, queuing the elements in the buffer is faster, and
retraining a segment will most likely not result in more than a split if the keys inserted
are consecutive, as these can be covered by just one segment. In short, ALEX splits a
leaf every time it contains too many keys; FITING-TREE only splits a leaf if it contains
too many segments. PGM-INDEX should theoretically not be sensitive to this issue, as
the position where an element belongs upon insertion is not determined by the the
key value. In practice there is a slight inflection, which could also be attributed to
noise.
5.4.3
Adaptability
The membership query time was measured again after the updates of 100M deletions
and 100M insertions.
It is worth pointing out that this kind of operation, while
plausible in a real scenario, could be easily eﬀiciently targeted with methods taking
the entire bulk instead of a one-by-one insert. The intention is to see how well the
indexes adapt when the key distribution changes dramatically. After these operations,
the indexes are responsible for the same amount of keys as before, of which half were
originally there, and half follow a uniform distribution over the universe. They do,
however, require more space, and queries are slower.
In general, the adaptability
shown by learned indexes is not too bad. Figure 5.5 shows the new time-space trade-
offs. Among learned indexes, PGM-INDEX – which was faster than FITING-TREE on
the initial configuration, is now consistently the slowest one. On amzn, the best PGM-
INDEX is beaten by FITING-TREE at the same size. ALEX proves to be the fastest but
still at larger size than the others.
Figure 5.6 shows the relative increases in query latency and index space after the
100M deletes and 100M inserts – for PGM-INDEX only the best, with base 8 is shown.
The performance of FITING-TREE is the least affected by the updates, and binary
searching a single buffer for a segment proves to be fast.
PGM-INDEX is the most
impacted, as now it has to query more than a single index. As for adaptability in
terms of space. The capability of PGM-INDEX to exploit segments to achieve a very
small space footprint is completely destroyed by the big number of updates in all
three experiments. The poor performance of the index with bases 2 and 4 can be
attributed to the updates never reaching the lowest level where the initial data is
– of which half is to be removed when it is merged. As for base 8, 200M updates
are enough to trigger that merge, but the index still takes 100x - 1000x the space it
==PAGE:52==
44
5 Benchmarking Existing Dynamic Solutions
Figure 5.5: Trade-offs between space and time on the heavily updated learned in-
dexes. Size of the index is on the x axis in GB, time on the y axis in
nano-seconds.
did initially. For FITING-TREE , the poor space performance is explained by the fact
that deletions simply tombstone an element, and the key will effectively disappear
from the index only when – if ever – that segment is retrained; even in this case, the
space would be the same, and only decrease by one segment if all the keys in that
segment are removed, since at no point there is a retraining of multiple keys spread
across segments that could reduce the number of segments if the distribution changed
because of deletions. ALEX is the more robust, as it removes elements on the spot,
but for simplicity of implementation does not merge underfull nodes. So, if all the
elements from a data node are removed, the space of the data node is decreased but
not zero.
5.4.4
Opt-PLA vs ShrinkingCone
As previously discussed, PGM-INDEX and FITING-TREE use two different algorithms to
achieve the same result: compute a set of segments that ε-approximate the CDF; The
former uses the optimal OPT-PLA while the latter the sub-optimal SHRINKINGCONE
. The relation between ε and number of segments is plotted in 5.7. The theoretical
bound on the number of segments is plotted in red. First and foremost, the plots
show that the segmentation algorithms are good at leveraging the data distribution,
==PAGE:53==
5.4 Experiments
45
Figure 5.6: Relative average increase for query latency (left) and index space (right)
after the learned indexes have been updated with 100M insertions and
100M deletions.
as the actual number of segments produced is well below the theoretical bound; for the
very small error of 2, the algorithms, in practice, already almost achieve a factor 10
improvement on these – recall the optimal algorithm is bounded to generate segments
covering at least 2ε keys, the other to generate segments covering at least ε + 1 keys.
For larger errors, this can be up to three orders of magnitude. To further prove the
point, the line for each data set evolves differently. Finally, the plot shows consistency
between the evolution of size of the exact solution and the approximated solution given
by SHRINKINGCONE .
==PAGE:54==
46
5 Benchmarking Existing Dynamic Solutions
Figure 5.7: Log number of segments computed by the algorithms on the three data
sets and log error. The relation evolves in the same way for both algo-
rithms. Red line is the value of the theoretical bound, 2ε for OPT-PLA
and ε + 1 for SHRINKINGCONE .
Table 5.1 contains a comparison of the number of segments computed for different
values of ε on the three data set considered here.
When looked at against each
other, SHRINKINGCONE is worse than OPT-PLA by a factor ranging from 1.65 to 3.30.
Downsampling the data so that it contains only 1M keys does not seem to have a
big impact on the ratio. While SHRINKINGCONE can be theoretically arbitrarily worse
than optimal, the approximation is rather consistent across the three datasets and
different errors. The factor of 3 by which it can be worse may be enough to rule it out
as a viable algorithm for learned indexes, but its theoretically faster run time could
prove worth the extra space as it allows for faster retrainig and thus better index
update time than its optimal counterpart. However, as seen before and as pointed
out in [FV20b], build times are still in the order of seconds.
5.5
Limitations
Predecessor and range queries have not been tested significantly. Performance for
predecessor was also measured – except for FITING-TREE and Bε-TREE which support
it but do not implement it – and showed average time comparable to a membership
query. It is worth pointing out that all the presented learned indexes store the data
as sorted and thus finding the predecessor or navigating through the elements for a
range query takes time proportional to a lookup query. The biggest limitation comes
==PAGE:55==
5.6 Conclusions
47
Dataset
ε
2
4
8
16
32
64
128
256
512
1024
2048
4096
8192
amzn
OPT-PLA
9813742
4394743
1846067
729231
256688
80565
22933
6068
1515
453
188
99
58
SHRINKINGCONE
17875509
9240201
4028990
1681286
652236
223878
68418
19085
5008
1241
393
168
96
ratio
1.82
2.01
2.18
2.30
2.54
2.77
2.98
3.14
3.30
2.73
2.09
1.69
1.65
face
OPT-PLA
15770878
8338494
4235676
2120485
1055308
523006
256255
119891
50445
18495
5887
1687
466
SHRINKINGCONE
26903584
15285643
8017660
4056763
2027332
1008044
499162
243948
112487
45997
16259
4994
1417
ratio
1.70
1.83
1.89
1.91
1.92
1.92
1.94
2.03
2.22
2.48
2.76
2.96
3.04
osm
OPT-PLA
11840381
5786881
2791689
1351170
661115
326932
162512
81392
41164
20925
10664
5495
2844
SHRINKINGCONE
22166846
11222073
5457828
2631611
1275908
626045
310139
154587
77548
39329
19976
10228
5263
ratio
1.87
1.93
1.95
1.94
1.92
1.91
1.90
1.89
1.88
1.87
1.87
1.86
1.85
osm 1M keys
OPT-PLA
46932
24982
13034
6776
3539
1846
967
498
250
131
68
40
24
SHRINKINGCONE
82886
45120
23894
12484
6494
3388
1761
929
477
241
122
65
39
ratio
1.76
1.80
1.83
1.84
1.83
1.83
1.82
1.86
1.90
1.83
1.79
1.62
1.62
Table 5.1: Number
and
ratio
of
segments
obtained
by
OPT-PLA
and
SHRINKINGCONE for different error values on the considered data
sets.
from the small size of the data sets. When the 200M pairs are fed to the segmentation
algorithms, they produce at most ≈20M data points, which are actually ≈2M for more
interesting values of ε. Starting from a larger data sets could provide more accurate
insights about the suitability of the overlaying data structures used to index the
segments. Finally, only average latencies are considered here, with complete disregard
for time-sensitive applications where a worst-case guarantee could be required. This
matter is of interest for learned indexes as the retraining time could be more of a
practical bottleneck than, for example, split and merge algorithms in traditional data
structures.
5.6
Conclusions
Learned indexes largely outperform the traditional Bε-TREE for query operations. As
for updates, they are clearly faster than the version of Bε-TREE that was implemented,
which however does not exploit caching optimally, if at all. ALEX is in general the
==PAGE:56==
48
5 Benchmarking Existing Dynamic Solutions
fastest index for all operations and is also good at adapting to big changes. However,
it is not as flexible as the others and can take several orders of magnitudes more
space. The smallest ALEX built on amzn is seven times the largest PGM-INDEX , and
it achieves significantly better performance. It would be interesting to compare these
when they take same space, but on this data sets it is not possible. Adaptability is not
too bad, with tree-based approaches being better than PGM-INDEX , ALEX being the
best at controlling the space, FITING-TREE at maintaining query consistency. In gen-
eral, the change in performance after the updates strongly suggests that benchmarks
of learned indexes include mixed workloads.
The tests on OPT-PLA and SHRINKINGCONE show how the number of segments nec-
essary to approximate rank can be several orders of magnitude smaller than the
number of keys indexed, and one or two orders of magnitude smaller than its theo-
retical bound. As one segment takes constant – and very small – space and constant
log ε query time, it can be seen as providing a very eﬀicient way to compress the
data that is subject to the index. The two segmentation strategies considered seem
to be practically equivalent in terms of index build, with one providing better results.
However, given that FITING-TREE and PGM-INDEX have a different structure, build
time is not necessarily a good metric to judge the algorithms; more experiments could
look at gains in time when the algorithms are run on a smaller set of data, which is
what could happen if they were deployed in a graph-like dynamic data structure (e.g.
an RMI).
In order to maintain the succint space footprint of a learned index based on segments,
not only individual segments, but also larger portions of the data should be retrained
every once in a while, to fully take advantage of an evolving distribution. In particular,
in situations where updates are given altogether as a bulk. Here, retraining all the
models that cover keys in-between the first and last key of the bulk could prove very
effective in maintaining the properties offered by the models, and be more relevant
for learned indexes than for e.g. a B+-TREE , where savings would be limited to split
and merge time.
==PAGE:57==
CHAPTER 6
A New Solution
Based on the analysis of existing solutions, and the experience with empirical tests,
this chapter introduces a new learned solution to the indexable dictionary problems.
6.1
The Learned Bε-TREE
This data structure consists of a segment e-approximation of the data, where the m∗
segments produced are indexed using a Bε-TREE [Ben+15], shown in figure 6.1. Note
that in the analysis here, e is used to denote the segmentation error, as ε denotes
a parameter for the data structure. A Bε-TREE is essentially a B+-TREE with sorted
buffers for update messages at each non-leaf node. A node has size B, and fanout
Bε, a buffer has size B −Bε; ε is betwen 0 and 1. The buffers are filled starting
from the one at the root. When this is full, some of the messages are flushed to
the buffer of a child – the one responsible for the key space with the most impending
updates. As updates are made, the messages find their way to the leaves. In a normal
Bε-TREE , a flush of messages to a leaf would simply modify the data stored in the
leaf by adding the new key-value pairs and removing the ones that must be deleted.
The leaf could then split or merge, depending on its new size, and the changes could
propagate to the root. In the learned Bε-TREE , a leaf stores segments and a pointer
to the data that they cover, instead of key-value pairs. Unlike the FITING-TREE ,
where each individual segment has its buffer and is retrained when this is full, a flush
to a leaf in the learned Bε-TREE triggers the retraining of all the segments that are in
this leaf. This allows to better exploit the compression offered by the segmentation
algorithm, should the distribution of keys in the space indexed by the leaf change.
The leaf then splits if the new number of segments is above a fixed threshold. As a
segmentation algorithm, OPT-PLA has been chosen. This choice is motivated by the
superior capacity of leveraging the data distribution to achieve a small space footprint.
The slower running time compared to its approximate counterpart is of little interest,
==PAGE:58==
50
6 A New Solution
as buffering updates at each node of the tree could significantly delay the moment
that a retraining is necessary. Analysis is first done in the RAM model, and then
moves to the EM model.
Figure 6.1: from [Ben+15]. Design of a traditional Bε-TREE .
Queries
A point query traverses the tree, checking at each node if there is a message
(insertion or deletion) for the requested key. If a message is found, the query does
not need to reach the leaves; however, in the worst case, all buffers are checked on
the path to a leaf. Each buffer has size B −Bε ≈B; thus the time spent at each
node is O(log B) to search the buffer, and O(log Bε), to find the next child, giving
O(log Bε+1) overall. The depth is O(logB m∗/ε), where m∗is the number of segments
returned by OPT-PLA . When a leaf is reached, the segment responsible for the key
is queried as usual, and the last mile search takes O(log e). Cost for a point query is
thus O(log Bε+1 · logB m∗/ε + log e).
Updates
The update cost must consider the time to flush a full buffer and poten-
tially splitting nodes. Flush time is linear in the node size for internal nodes, which
is constant. A flush happens when the buffer of a node is full, and moves at least
B −Bε/Bε ≈B1−ε messages. The most expensive flush moves all the buffer to a
single child, and consists of ≈B messages. Consider the case where all the updates
concern the same leaf. The first ≈B updates are batched and flushed. After another
≈B updates, there will be two flushes, one from the root to the same child as be-
==PAGE:59==
6.1 The Learned Bε-TREE
51
fore and from that node to one of its children. The number of flushes until a leaf is
reached, for t being the tree depth is:
(1 + 2 + 3 + ... + t −1) = (t −1) · t
2
These many flushes happen after inserting ≈(t −1) · B elements. At this point, the
leaf is retrained, which happens in time O(d) where d is the number of key-values
pairs that the leaf contains. The amortized cost is then:
O
((t −1) · t · B
2(t −1)B
+
d
(t −1) · B
)
= O
(logB m∗
2ε
+
d
B logB m∗/ε −B
)
Split time is assumed constant, as a function of the node size. The additional cost
for splitting is constant if amortized over the number of insertions.
Space
The space required for the data structure is a function of the number of
segments m∗that the Bε-TREE is indexing. A single segment takes constant space, as
it consists of the first indexed key, slope and intercept. Thus, the space is O(n + m∗).
By exploiting the bound on segmentation from OPT-PLA , m∗≤n/2e.
Build Time
Building the data structure requires i) building the segments, ii)
building the overlaying Bε-TREE .
The former is done in O(n).
The latter takes
O(m∗logc m∗). Thus, the build time is O(n + m∗logc m∗). Again, m∗≤n/2e.
External Memory Performance
In the external memory model, for input size
n and memory block of size B, a standard Bε-TREE performs point and predeces-
sor queries in O(logB n/ε).
Range queries in O(logB n/ε + k/B) and updates in
O(logB n/εB1−ε). Assuming the range searched in the last mile fits a single memory
block, the search operations take the same time. For updates, the worst case adds an
additional O(D/B), where D is the total amount of key-value pairs indexed by the
segments of a certain leaf. Note how D cannot be expressed in terms of node or leaf
size, as nodes and leaves index segments, not keys.
==PAGE:60==
52
6 A New Solution
6.2
Testing the learned Bε-TREE
6.2.1
Implementation
In the literature, the degree of the nodes is fixed in between δ/2 and δ, for δ = Θ(Bε),
with 0 < ε < 1. The size of each buffer is Θ(B1−ε). In the considered implemen-
tation, the buffers are one for each internal node – which is actually in accordance
with the version implemented by [Ben+15] – and have fixed size buff. Each node is
allowed a maximum fanout of c, and initially built with c/2 children. The leaves are
allowed a maximum size l before they split. Routing tables at internal node are im-
plemented with std::vector, which in combination with std::upper_bound allows
to find the node responsible for an element in expected logarithmic time. Buffers
are implemented using std::map, which are normally red-black trees and allow for
logarithmic lookup and insertion.
6.2.2
Results
Operation
learned Bε-TREE latency (ns)
PGM-INDEX latency (ns)
Query empty index
961
944
Update
786855
1033
Query updated index
1167
1831
Index size
14 MB
8 MB
Table 6.1: Performance of learned Bε-TREE against PGM-INDEX of same size.
The learned Bε-TREE was tested with the same approach as in 5. Tests proved chal-
lenging and write performance extremely poor. Only the data set amzn is considered.
Table 6.1 includes the average latency for queries on the empty data structure, up-
dates and queries on the data structure after 2M updates. The latency of the slowest
PGM-INDEX of the closest index size is reported as a reference. Both indexes use 16
as an approximation error for the segments. There are a number of reasons that can
justify the poor performance. First, it suffers the same problem as its traditional
counterpart: implementation of the buffers with std::map is not significantly lever-
==PAGE:61==
6.2 Testing the learned Bε-TREE
53
aging the cache. Nevertheless, the main issue is that, when the data is compressed
with segments, it results in much fewer values to build the tree on. This leads to a
situation where the initial tree has extremely limited depth (2-3 levels) and thus it
often flushes to a leaf, and it has to retrain. Furthermore, not just the frequency of
the retraining, but also the time it takes is problematic. In fact, the amount of data
that retraining happens on is inversely proportional to the number of segments. In
short, there are not enough elements to amortize the insertion cost. This was already
captured by the asymptotic theoretical bound, where the cost of retraining d elements
in a leaf, is amortized by a factor that depends on the number of segments produced.
In practice, when d grows, m∗goes down. Testing on much larger data sets where
the tree grows deeper and with large node sizes could give better practical results,
provided that a more cache conscious way to handle the buffers is adopted. This
could be gapped arrays, or arrays with empty slots to shift elements at both ends.
==PAGE:62==
54
==PAGE:63==
CHAPTER 7
Conclusion and
Further Work
There are various learned solutions to the indexable dictionary problem, which share
some design characteristics.
These data structures have been surveyed, analyzed,
compared, and detailed in the first chapters of this work. Focus has been put on
dynamic solutions. The FITING-TREE described in the literature, together with its
segmentation algorithm SHRINKINGCONE , was implemented and benchmarked against
the presented solutions; the benchmarks included the traditional Bε-TREE . A new
solution was proposed, analyzed and tested.
Empirical testing of learned indexes from the literature showed good performance
for learned indexes on write-heavy workloads, as well as on read operations. Com-
parison with the traditional Bε-TREE showed the superiority of learned solutions, as
the implementation used does not provide eﬀicient caching. A more cache conscious
implementation could give different results, if the practical amortized cost of flushing
the buffers is lower than the amortized cost of retraining of models in a learned index.
When faced with numerous updates, learned indexes are able to adapt – to some
extent. As space eﬀiciency is presented as the largest advantage of learned indexes,
research should go towards ensuring the small space footprint is maintained over time,
and that query latency is also resilient to big shifts in the data distribution. Further
work should also consider larger data sets, and many different data distribution.
If the Bε-TREE is to be leveraged for write-optimized learned indexes, it should first
and foremost take advantage of cache. The development of the learned Bε-TREE ,
with its poor performance, shows the need to better understand what determines
the effective number of keys indexed by a linear model. This is crucial to provide
good tuning and eﬀicient amortization of retraining costs in dynamic learned indexes.
==PAGE:64==
56
7 Conclusion and Further Work
Because of how good the models are at compressing the data, dynamic learned indexes
introduce an important trade-off between index space and update performance. The
approach adopted by PGM-INDEX , while providing fast insertions, is defective at
keeping the size of the index under control if it faces many updates. As frequent
retraining is a desired feature in that sense, indexes with theoretically faster retraining
algorithms like Radix Spline should be further explored.
==PAGE:65==
APPENDIX A
Proofs
A.1
Proof that, in a FITING-TREE , the number of keys covered by a maximal linear seg-
ment is ε + 1 (from [Gal+21]). Consider 3 arbitrary points (x1, y1) , (x2, y2) , (x3, y3),
where x1 < x2 < x3 and y1 < y2 < y3. By definition, the linear function starts at
the first point in a segment, and ends at the last point in the segment. The linear
segment is not valid if the distance on the y axis (loc) is larger than the specified error
ε. Therefore, given the 3 points, a linear segment starting at (x1, y1) and ending at
(x3, y3) is not feasible if:
y2 −ε > y3 −y1
x3 −x1
(x2 −x1) + y1
By rearranging the inequality we get:
ε < y2 −y1 −y3 −y1
x3 −x1
(x2 −x1)
= (y3 −y1) ·
(
1 −x2 −x1
x3 −x1
)
−(y3 −y2)
≤(y3 −y1) ·
(
1 −x2 −x1
x3 −x1
)
−1
In (11) y3 was added and subtracted, and in (12) we use the fact that y2 and y3 are
integers (thus y3 −y2 ≥1 ). This provides a lower bound for the distance between
the first point in a segment and the first point in the following segment:
y3 −y1 >
ε + 1
1 −x2−x1
x3−x1
= (ε + 1) · x3 −x1
x3 −x2
> ε + 1
⇒y3 −y1 > ε + 1
Since (x3, y3) is the first point outside of the segment, the number of locations in the
segment is y3 −1 −y1 ≥ε + 1.
==PAGE:66==
58
==PAGE:67==
APPENDIX B
Problem Description
and Project Plan
Problem Description:
Algorithms and Data Structures for Learned Indexes
Giacomo Cattaneo s202628
Introduction
Learned indexes are part of a new area of research called learned
data structures; these data structures aim to reveal and exploit patterns and trends
in input data in order to achieve more eﬀiciency in time and space than previously
known data structures [FV20a].
Problem definition
The learned index problem is nothing but a reformulation of
the decades-old indexable dictionary problem. This problem asks, given a set S of n
keys from a universe U, the task is to store S while eﬀiciently supporting the following
query and update operations:
• member(x) returns true iff x ∈S.
• lookup(x) returns satellite data of x ∈S if any, nil otherwise.
• predecessor(x) returns largest element in S smaller than x.
• range(x, y) returns all elements z in S s.t. z ∈[x, y].
• insert(x) adds element x to S.
• delete(x) removes element x from S.
==PAGE:68==
60
B Problem Description and Project Plan
member(x), lookup(x), predecessor(x), and range(x, y) are referred to as query,
while insert(x) and delete(x) are referred to as update. One observation lays the path
for learned index data structures, which is that all queries come down to rank(x):
return the number of elements in S that are smaller than x. In fact, if we also store
S as a sorted array A, the query operations become:
• member(x) asks if A[rank(x)] is x
• lookup(x) returns satellite data for A[rank(x)] if present.
• predecessor(x) returns A[rank(x) −1].
• range(x, y) can be decomposed in two predecessor queries and return a range
from A.
Plotting the points x, rank(x) in the Cartesian plane gives something like the example
in figure B.1. All a learned index does is approximate the function rank(x), so that a
query operation consists of two parts: getting and approximate position (a prediction)
for x in A; refining the prediction to get the exact position of x. In this sense, indexes
can be seen as models trained to map keys to their location in the sorted order
[FV20a]. As for the update operations, partial or complete retraining of these models
is necessary.
Figure B.1: rank function example from [FV20a].
==PAGE:69==
B Problem Description and Project Plan
61
Previous work
Solutions for the indexable dictionary problem include traditional
data structures such as B+-TREE and Bε-TREE . Solutions exist also for subsets of
the operations such as tries for predecessor or hashing for member, lookup, insert, and
delete. As for learned indexes, figure B.2 from [FV20a] provides a partial overview.
The Recursive Model Index (RMI) was first introduced in [Kra+18]. RMI uses a
hierarchy of regression models organised in stages, where each model is responsible
for picking the next responsible for a key, until the last stage returns an approximate
position on A. Differences of RMI, compared to tree-based approaches are, as pointed
out by [FV20a]: (i) constant size for storing the index, (ii) exploiting advantage of
data distribution, (iii) no searched in-between stages, (iv) worst case performance not
bounded beforehand. Shortcomings of RMI include (i) lack of support for updates,
(ii) time-consuming tuning process, (iii) lack of latency guarantees, (iv) top-down
training algorithm which distributes the keys blindly ignoring power or workload of
nodes. Variations of RMI to adress its shortcomings include the Adaptive Single Layer
Model (ASLM), Hybrid-O, the Adaptive LEarned Index (ALEX), AIDEL; they all
support updates and attempt to reach a more even distribution of keys among nodes.
Approaches other than RMI, with support for updates, include, FITING-TREE and
PGM. FITING-TREE [Gal+21] approximates rank(x) with a sequence of segments,
and uses a B+-TREE to index them; it provides latency guarantees as it makes a
maximum error for the models available as tuning parameter. The Piecewise Geomet-
ric Model index (PGM) [FV20b], improves on fitting tree by: (i) using a linear time
algorithm to find the optimal number of segments approximating rank(x) within a
user given error ϵ; (ii) using recursion to index the segments as well, thus resulting
much more succinct than B+-TREE -trees; (iii) introducing compression techniques
for storing the segments; (iv) having a flexible structure that can adapt not only to
the distribution of the input keys but also to the distribution of the queried keys
[FV20a]. PGM was tested by its authors for read-only scenarios against a CSS-Tree,
a B+-TREE and two-stage RMI; other than the recursive PGM, they tested imple-
mentations where the lowest level of PGM was indexed through binary search as well
as with a CSS-Tree. The conclusion was that PGM is fast in construction, space foot-
print is up to 75% lower than state-of-the-art FITING-TREE , and it dominates in
space and time both traditional indexes and RMI. Testing for the dynamic scenario
was only done against B+-TREE ; PGM was found overall better and taking less
space. However, as pointed out in [Mar+20] the testing in [FV20b] had some short-
comings, including sub-optimal implementation and tuning of the RMI model and
==PAGE:70==
62
B Problem Description and Project Plan
relying on synthetics datasets. The authors of [Mar+20] stress their work is the first
comparing well-tuned implementation of the indexes by their original authors, and
provide an open-source RMI implementation. The result of the benchmarking is that
learned indexes do indeed outperform traditional approaches for read-only in-memory
dense arrays. Their benchamrk evaluates learned indexes(RMI, PGM, Radix Spline
[Kip+20]), various tree structures, hashing approaches, and uses baselines such as
binary search and radix binary search. Radix Spline (RS) has a unique characteristic
according to [Kip+20]: it can be built with a single pass on the input data and with
constant amount of work per element, unlike PGM and FITING-TREE that have
logarithmic work per element. This eﬀicient build strategy prompts the authors to
suggest that updates in RS can be buffered and then the entire structure rebuilt when
needed.
Figure B.2: Comparison among some learned indexes from [FV20a]. The integer
ε ≥1 denotes the bound on the prediction error, ˜m represents the
number of linear models computed by the greedy algorithms used by
the indexes’ authors, while m⋆≤˜m represents the minimum number
of linear models computed by the optimal algorithm used by the PGM
Index..
Aim of project
: The overall aim of the project is to select, compare, and design
learned index data structures capable of handling updates. In particular, understand
==PAGE:71==
B Problem Description and Project Plan
63
how they compare to the state-of-the-art traditional Bε-TREE . Solutions will include
or be based upon the aforementioned Bε-TREE, PGM, AIDEL, RS. Comparison will
be both theoretical and empirical, inspired by the approach of [Mar+20] and [FV20b].
==PAGE:72==
64
B Problem Description and Project Plan
Project Plan:
Algorithms and Data Structures for Learned Indexes
Giacomo Cattaneo s202628
week 1-2
Read and understand [FV20b], [Mar+20],
and relevant chapters from [FV20a].
write project description draft.
week 3
Read and understand [Kip+20], relevant sections from [Kra+18].
finalize project description.
week 4
Get familiar with the existing c++ implementation of PGM
and the way its dynamic version was tested.
week 5-6
Design and implement testing framework.
Complete literature review.
Select existing data structures to test and discuss.
week 7-8
Implement and test existing data structures.
Thesis: write introduction and outline existing solutions.
week 9-10
Implement and test existing data structures.
Thesis: outline testing approach.
week 11-19
Implement and test new data structures.
Thesis: description of data structure and discussion of results.
week 20-21
Thesis: write conclusion, proofread, clean code.
==PAGE:73==
Bibliography
[ABG22]
Domenico Amato, Giosué Lo Bosco, and Raffaele Giancarlo. “On the Suit-
ability of Neural Networks as Building Blocks for the Design of Eﬀicient
Learned Indexes.” In: International Conference on Engineering Applica-
tions of Neural Networks. Springer. 2022, pages 115–127.
[Ben+15]
Michael A Bender et al. “An introduction to B-trees and write-optimization.”
In: login; magazine 40.5 (2015).
[Com79]
Douglas Comer. “Ubiquitous B-tree.” In: ACM Computing Surveys (CSUR)
11.2 (1979), pages 121–137.
[DHW08]
Martin Dietzfelbinger, Martin Hühne, and Christoph Weidling. “A Dic-
tionary Implementation Based on Dynamic Perfect Hashing.” In: ACM
J. Exp. Algorithmics 12 (June 2008). issn: 1084-6654. doi: 10.1145/
1227161.1370602. url: https://doi.org/10.1145/1227161.1370602.
[Din+20]
Jialin Ding et al. “ALEX: an updatable adaptive learned index.” In: Pro-
ceedings of the 2020 ACM SIGMOD International Conference on Man-
agement of Data. 2020, pages 969–984.
[Emd75]
P. van Emde Boas. “Preserving order in a forest in less than logarithmic
time.” eng. In: 16th Annual Symposium on Foundations of Computer Sci-
ence (sfcs 1975) (1975), pages 75–84. issn: 02725428. doi: 10.1109/SFCS.
1975.26.
[FKS84]
Michael L. Fredman, János Komlós, and Endre Szemerédi. “Storing a
Sparse Table with 0(1) Worst Case Access Time.” In: J. ACM 31.3 (June
1984), pages 538–544. issn: 0004-5411. doi: 10.1145/828.1884. url:
https://doi.org/10.1145/828.1884.
==PAGE:74==
66
Bibliography
[FV20a]
Paolo Ferragina and Giorgio Vinciguerra. “Learned Data Structures.” In:
April 2020, pages 5–41. isbn: 978-3-030-43883-8. doi: 10.1007/978-3-
030-43883-8_2.
[FV20b]
Paolo Ferragina and Giorgio Vinciguerra. “The PGM-index.” eng. In: Pro-
ceedings of the Vldb Endowment 13.10 (2020), pages 1162–1175. issn:
21508097. doi: 10.14778/3389133.3389135.
[Gal+21]
Alex Galakatos et al. “FITing-Tree: A Data-aware Index Structure.” eng.
In: (2021).
[HH19]
Ali Hadian and Thomas Heinis. “Considerations for handling updates in
learned index structures.” eng. In: Proceedings of the Acm Sigmod Inter-
national Conference on Management of Data (2019), page 3329874. issn:
07308078. doi: 10.1145/3329859.3329874.
[JP08]
Morten Skaarup Jensen and Rasmus Pagh. “Optimality in external mem-
ory hashing.” eng. In: Algorithmica (new York) 52.3 (2008), pages 403–
411. issn: 14320541, 01784617. doi: 10.1007/s00453-007-9155-x.
[Kip+20]
Andreas Kipf et al. “RadixSpline: a single-pass learned index.” In: Pro-
ceedings of the Third International Workshop on Exploiting Artificial In-
telligence Techniques for Data Management. 2020, pages 1–5.
[Kra+18]
Tim Kraska et al. “The case for learned index structures.” In: Proceed-
ings of the 2018 international conference on management of data. 2018,
pages 489–504.
[Li+19]
Pengfei Li et al. “A scalable learned index scheme in storage systems.” In:
arXiv preprint arXiv:1905.06256 (2019).
[LKN13]
Viktor Leis, Alfons Kemper, and Thomas Neumann. “The adaptive radix
tree: ARTful indexing for main-memory databases.” In: 2013 IEEE 29th
International Conference on Data Engineering (ICDE). IEEE. 2013, pages 38–
49.
[LLW19]
Xin Li, Jingdong Li, and Xiaoling Wang. “ASLM: Adaptive single layer
model for learned index.” In: International Conference on Database Sys-
tems for Advanced Applications. Springer. 2019, pages 80–95.
[Mar+20]
Ryan Marcus et al. “Benchmarking learned indexes.” eng. In: Proceedings
of the Vldb Endowment 14.1 (2020), pages 1–13. issn: 21508097. doi:
10.14778/3421424.3421425.
==PAGE:75==
Bibliography
67
[MN90]
Kurt Mehlhorn and Stefan Näher. “Bounded ordered dictionaries in O
(log log N) time and O (n) space.” In: Information Processing Letters 35.4
(1990), pages 183–189.
[NM08]
Thomas Neumann and Sebastian Michel. “Smooth Interpolating Histograms
with Error Guarantees.” In: Proceedings of the 25th British National Con-
ference on Databases: Sharing Data, Information and Knowledge. BN-
COD ’08. Cardiff, Wales, UK: Springer-Verlag, 2008, pages 126–138. isbn:
9783540705031. doi: 10.1007/978-3-540-70504-8_12. url: https:
//doi.org/10.1007/978-3-540-70504-8_12.
[Pet18]
Alex Petrov. “Algorithms Behind Modern Storage Systems: Different Uses
for Read-Optimized B-Trees and Write-Optimized LSM-Trees.” In: Queue
16.2 (April 2018), pages 31–51. issn: 1542-7730. doi: 10.1145/3212477.
3220266. url: https://doi.org/10.1145/3212477.3220266.
[PT06]
Mihai Pătraşcu and Mikkel Thorup. “Time-space trade-offs for predeces-
sor search.” In: Proceedings of the thirty-eighth annual ACM symposium
on Theory of computing. 2006, pages 232–240.
[Qu+19]
Wenwen Qu et al. “Hybrid indexes by exploring traditional B-tree and lin-
ear regression.” In: International Conference on Web Information Systems
and Applications. Springer. 2019, pages 601–613.
[RR98]
Jun Rao and Kenneth A Ross. “Cache conscious indexing for decision-
support in main memory.” In: (1998).
[Wil83]
D. E. Willard. “Log-logarithmic worst-case range queries are possible in
space Θ(N).” eng. In: Information Processing Letters 17.2 (1983), pages 81–
4. issn: 18726119, 00200190. doi: 10.1016/0020-0190(83)90075-3.
[WNJ19]
Xingbo Wu, Fan Ni, and Song Jiang. “Wormhole: A fast ordered index for
in-memory data management.” In: Proceedings of the Fourteenth EuroSys
Conference 2019. 2019, pages 1–16.
[Xie+14]
Qing Xie et al. “Maximum error-bounded Piecewise Linear Representa-
tion for online stream approximation.” eng. In: Vldb Journal 23.6 (2014),
pages 915–937. issn: 0949877x, 10668888. doi: 10.1007/s00778-014-
0355-0.
==PAGE:76==
