==PAGE:1==
Security of offshore installations
Against the threat of AIS Spoofing
Master Thesis
DTU Compute
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Security of offshore installations
Against the threat of AIS Spoofing
Master Thesis
January, 2023
By
Grzegorz Jacek Kot
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus-
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Nicholas Doherty, 2019, available at Unsplash .
Published by:
DTU, Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science,
Richard Petersens Plads, Building 324, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over six months at the Technical University of Denmark,
DTU, in partial fulfilment for the degree Master of Science in Engineering, MSc Eng.
It is assumed that the reader has a basic knowledge in the areas of security and statistics.
Disclaimer
While reception and use of information collected from radio signals intended for general
use by the public is legal according to the Danish law, as specified in §20 of Bekendt-
gørelse om anvendelse af radiofrekvenser uden tilladelse samt om amatørradioprøver og
kaldesignaler m.v (BEK nr 740 af 25/05/2022), usage of acquired data may be prohibited
elsewhere. Attempting to reproduce the results of this thesis under a different jurisdiction
should only be attempted after consulting the local law.
Grzegorz Jacek Kot - s200358
Signature
Date
ii
Security of offshore installations
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
AIS (Automatic Identification System) is a maritime navigation safety communication sys-
tem that transmits data such as vessel location and identification to other vessels and
coastal-based facilities. However, there is a growing concern about AIS spoofing, where
malicious actors transmit false AIS messages in order to mislead vessel traffic and po-
tentially cause accidents. This dissertation presents a project that analyzes AIS spoofing
in the context of offshore assets. As part of this project, a tool for AIS message validation
was developed and tested. The tool shows promising results in detecting and preventing
AIS spoofing within a limited scope. This dissertation contributes to the understanding of
AIS spoofing and its potential impacts on offshore assets, as well as provides a solution
for addressing this issue.
Security of offshore installations
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
Grzegorz Jacek Kot, MSc Computer Science and Engineering, Technical University of
Denmark
Supervised by: Weizhi Meng, Associate Professor, Department of Applied Mathematics
and Computer Science, Technical University of Denmark
iv
Security of offshore installations
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Context . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Problem statement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.3
Scope . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.4
Research questions
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.5
Goals
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.6
Glossary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.7
Thesis overview
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2
Background
5
2.1
Documented cases . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
Known attack vectors on AIS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.3
Threat to offshore installations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.4
Current research . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3
Theory
17
3.1
Analysis of vessel positioning systems . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
3.2
Protocol messages . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
3.3
Signals
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
3.4
Validation of reported vessel positions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
3.5
Vessel data source . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
3.6
Vessels . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
4
Solution design
27
4.1
Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
4.2
Requirements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
4.3
Integration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
4.4
Design decisions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 28
4.5
Architecture . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30
4.6
Domain modelling
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 33
4.7
Visualization component design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 38
5
Implementation
41
5.1
Data collection setup . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 41
5.2
Data storage
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 44
5.3
Model generation component . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 44
5.4
Microservice backend . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 47
5.5
Validation result frontend
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 48
6
Validation
51
6.1
Cross-validation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 51
6.2
Injection of spoofed messages
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 55
Security of offshore installations
v
==PAGE:8==
7
Discussion
57
7.1
Results
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 57
7.2
Limitations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 58
7.3
Future work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 58
7.4
Conclusion
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 58
Bibliography
61
vi
Security of offshore installations
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction
This chapter provides an introduction to the identified problems motivating the thesis as
well as the the problem statement, together with the goals set to be achieved by the thesis.
1.1
Context
It is safe to say that a lot of systems commonly used today were not built with security at
the forefront. Unfortunately, the same can be said about the Automatic Identification Sys-
tem, or AIS for short. While literature about the threat of AIS spoofing is ever-growing,
there still seems to be no consensus on the approaches that can be taken to combat
and mitigate the problems. While commercial maritime providers do employ some anti-
spoofing measures, operators of their own equipment are potentially left without access
to reliable positioning data.
1.2
Problem statement
AIS spoofing can be a threat to offshore installations. AIS spoofing protection available
from some major commercial actors is not entirely adequate for use in such a setting.
1.3
Scope
While the problem of AIS spoofing is a global phenomenon, the thesis places focus on
protection in the context of offshore installations, specifically. From my own empirical
knowledge, such installations are usually limited in the AIS signal reception range. They
are not part of cross-national agreements for near-shore protection, such as SafeSeaNet,
reserved for port and maritime authorities. Several such installations are also in charge
of their own data, with AIS receivers placed by the companies operating the assets.
1.4
Research questions
The thesis aims to answer the following research questions:
• Is AIS spoofing a real threat to offshore installations?
• What are the possible attacks on the AIS infrastructure?
• How effective can a tool, designed to improve the offshore installation operators’
awareness of possible spoofing, be?
A discussion analyzing the thesis’ answers to the questions is provided in the Discussion
chapter.
1.5
Goals
The goal of the thesis is to produce a framework for a software solution that can be de-
ployed on the offshore asset vessel positioning monitoring infrastructure.
1.6
Glossary
The thesis will make use of the following terms and abbreviations:
• AGC - Automatic Gain Control
Security of offshore installations
1
==PAGE:10==
• AIS - Automatic Identification System, a system deployed to determine positions,
static information of vessels, and more, being the most widely used, SOLAS-enforced
means of determining vessel position from shore
• AIS-SART - Automatic Identification System Search And Rescue Transmitter
• AtoN - Aids to Navigation
• CPA - Closest point of approach
• FPSO - Floating production storage and offloading
• GNSS - Global Navigation Satellite System
• GPS - Global navigation system
• GUI - Graphical user interface
• HMAC - Hashed Message Authentication Code
• HTTP - Hypertext Transfer Protocol
• IALA - International Association of Marine Aids to Navigation and Lighthouse Au-
thorities
• IMO - International Maritime Organization, a United Nations organization in charge
of regulation in the shipping industry
• MMSI - Maritime Mobile Service Identity
• NMEA - National Marine Electronics Association, a worldwide, member-based trade
organization, defining industry standards in the maritime area
• REST - Representational State Transfer
• SAR - Search and Rescue
• SNR - Signal-to-noise ratio
• SOLAS - International Convention for the Safety of Life at Sea - a convention spec-
ifying the minimum safety requirements of adhering vessels
• TDMA - Time-division multiple access
• TTP - Trusted Third Party
• VHF - Very high frequency
• VTS - Vessel Traffic Service
1.7
Thesis overview
The thesis is split into logical chapters and follows the structure below:
• Chapter two describes known cases of AIS Spoofing and provides related work on
the topic of the security of AIS in general, as well as the detection of AIS Spoofing.
• The third chapter includes the theoretical background of the thesis, describing the
AIS system in detail and providing the theoretical background utilized further.
• Chapter four provides an overview of the considerations needed to be taken while
designing a solution as well as the design process itself.
2
Security of offshore installations
==PAGE:11==
• The fifth chapter represents steps taken to create an implementation of the design
of a software solution.
• Chapter six is dedicated to the validation of results achieved by the proposed solu-
tion.
• The last chapter is a discussion over the whole of the thesis. It presents the results
of the thesis and attempts to answer the research questions. It also provides an
outline of known problems and possible means of improvement.
Security of offshore installations
3
==PAGE:12==
4
Security of offshore installations
==PAGE:13==
2
Background
The threat of AIS spoofing has long gone unnoticed, however, with the increasing number
of recorded instances, it has started to become apparent in recent years. A few notable
cases of such malicious behaviour have been documented and analysed, bringing light
to exploits of the system, that are being used in the field. Research into the problem has
not finished, and there seems to exist no universal solution to the problem as of now.
2.1
Documented cases
This section outlines the documented cases investigated by various organizations, with a
summary of their findings.
2.1.1
Yuk Tung
One of the earliest investigated cases, notable for bringing light to the issue, occurred in
2018 when a vessel named ”Yuk Tung”, sailing under the flag of Panama altered its AIS
transmissions to identify as a different vessel, a non-existent ship ”Hika”.
The case has been brought forward by the Security Council of the United Nations, as the
vessel was a part of illegal ship-to-ship transfers. The investigation found, that both the
vessel being spoofed, as well as the one broadcasting the signal were identical twin sis-
ters, built according to the same design. Whilst spoofing the signal, the ”Yuk Tang” vessel
was also physically altered to disguise its appearance; the IMO identification number was
altered, and the name of the actual vessel was removed from the ship’s hull, having been
replaced with the name ”Maika”.
Even though the two vessels were utilising the same IMO number, and broadcasting their
positions at two separate locations, the perpetrators were able to operate for months, with
no authority immediately identifying this as an illegal operation [1].
2.1.2
HMS Defender and HNLMS Evertsen
A military-related spoofing case occurred in 2021 regarding two NATO vessels at the time
of the attack located on the Black Sea. The HMS Defender is a Type-45 serving for the
English Royal Navy destroyer, and HNLMS Evertsen is a Dutch-guided missile frigate
operating for the Dutch Royal Navy [2] [3].
The publicly available AIS data from online AIS aggregator hubs revealed that a British
warship and Dutch naval ship were within a few kilometers of the Russian naval base at
Sevastopol; however, a live Web camera feed confirmed that both vessels were situated
in Odesa, Ukraine, at that moment [4].
Security of offshore installations
5
==PAGE:14==
Figure 2.1: An overview of the falsified AIS tracks [5]
The MarineTraffic online tracker has incorrectly shown the false AIS tracks on the 190superscriptth
of June 2021 [5], indicating that a signal received by one of the base stations attached
to MarineTraffic’s receiver network has been spoofed and continuously edited to send
locations along the path of the route.
2.1.3
Use of fake MMSI by Chinese fishing boats
The MMSI is a common way of identifying a vessel. It is unique for the duration of its
assignment, and unlike the IMO, it changes every time a vessel changes its flag country.
The Danish Maritime Authority lists the requirements for MMSI assignment as it being
every time a vessel is equipped with maritime radio equipment, without having an MMSI
number assigned beforehand [6].
In 2016, an article by GlobalFishingWatch identified, that a number of Chinese fishing
vessels are assigned the same MMSI number, namely 412000000 [7]. The article goes
further, discussing that such a practice has a negative effect on tracking such vessels,
as ship tracking software will attempt to map such vessels as a single one, meaning the
position of the vessel changes every time a broadcast is made by any of such identified
vessels. Currently, the maritime data aggregators are able to distinguish between the
vessels, it is my assumption that by using the name of the vessels. It is still the case,
though, that a lot of vessels identify this way. A search on a provider’s database shows
that this MMSI is currently associated with over 150 active vessels.
While not directly an issue of vessel spoofing, it shows that vessels can, and do transmit
data that is not truthful, and it’s a current problem.
2.1.4
Spoofing event near Elba Island
A AIS spoofing case was observed in the maritime area between the island of Elba and
Corsica in December 2019. A large number of AIS messages were received and recog-
nized as naval units under Dutch flag. AIS streams saturated a circular sea area three
times - at 13:13 UTC (lasted 3 minutes), at 13:28 UTC (lasted 4 minutes) and last one at
6
Security of offshore installations
==PAGE:15==
13:37 UTC, with duration of only few seconds.
During the three AIS bursts, there were 5241 AIS messages received transmitting 3741
different MMSIs. The first broadcast contained an order list of MMSI numbers where the
smallest was 244800009 and the largest was 244803507. In the second transmission
the smallest MMSI was 244803510 and the largest received was 244807010. During
the second burst, there were also Type messages number 5 received, giving information
about the identification, dimensions and type of the ship. All the ships were of AIS type
60, meaning they can be identified as passenger ships. Identifying as having the length
of 90 m and a width of 24 m, not containing draft or destination information. The names
and call signs of the vessels were generic, namely VESS0 and CAL, adding the last three
digits of MMSI (starting from 000 up to 999).
The generator of the signals was difficult to find, due to the transmission not being synchro-
nised with the AIS frame, making it impossible to calculate the distance to the receiving
station using the time of arrival (ToA) information. [8]
2.2
Known attack vectors on AIS
The security of AIS has been investigated by multiple separate researchers, and analysis
and cross-validation of the available knowledge seem to provide us with all of the possible
means of attack on the AIS network and its security. Research suggests that the threats
exploitable in the Automatic Identification System can be divided into 3 macro-categories,
encompassing known attack vectors on AIS [9].
• Spoofing, or message injection.
– Vessel spoofing - Ship spoofing refers to the creation of a legitimate but nonex-
istent ship or the impersonification of a vessel with known information.  It in-
volves assigning static information such as vessel name, identifiers (such as
the MMSI, IMO and vessel’s call sign), ship type, or dimensions in addition to
dynamic information such as ship status, its position, speed, course, and des-
tination to the fictitious ship. Vessel spoofing provides attackers with a diverse
array of malicious attack scenarios. They can make it appear as if a ship is un-
der the control of an enemy nation or carrying nuclear cargo while sailing in a
nuclear-free nation. Ship spoofing may pose problems for automated systems
detecting data and drawing conclusions based on AIS data. These devices
could detect oil spills in the open ocean or predict marine commerce. As iden-
tified in the spoofing examples in the previous part, attackers can fabricate
information to accuse another vessel.
– Aid to Navigation (AtoN) spoofing - Aid to Navigation messages are defined as
a class of AIS transmitted data available to be exchanged between the mar-
itime authorities governing an area and vessels. AtoN spoofing refers to the
process of fabricating false information to deceive enemy ships into perform-
ing improper maneuvers. For example, attackers can put one or more dummy
buoys near a harbor’s entrance to disrupt traffic or deceive ships into traveling
in shallow waters. Given the number of unique AtoNs, attackers can devise a
variety of attack scenarios, comparable to ship spoofing.
– SAR information spoofing - AIS has the potential to assist in search and res-
cue efforts. AIS-SARTs are self-contained, watertight devices that aid in de-
Security of offshore installations
7
==PAGE:16==
tecting and locating vessels and individuals in distress (e.g., men who have
fallen overboard) during emergencies. They use radio-beacon systems that
convey information such as the GPS coordinates of the beacon to locate sur-
vivors. AIS-SART spoofing entails attackers creating bogus distress beacons
for guys who have fallen overboard at specially selected coordinates. When
receiving distress messages, AIS transponders are required to generate alerts.
An attacker can trigger SART alerts to entice victims to navigate into hostile,
attacker-controlled maritime regions.
– Closest point of approach (CPA) spoofing - AIS documentation allows for auto-
matic data exchange when a collision is detected or expected. CPA works by
computing the minimal distance between two ships, at least one of which is in
motion. The data is then provided to the navigation teams of affected vessels
to aid in avoiding a collision.
– Weather forecast spoofing - AIS communicates dynamic data to reflect chang-
ing environmental conditions such as currents and the weather. It uses a pre-
defined binary messaging format to provide the information. While it is not
extensively used - there are other, more popular means of receiving weather
information by vessels [10], such as Single-Side Broadcasts, transmitted over
High Frequency (HF) signals, published by meteorological offices of coastal
countries.
• Hijacking - also known as message modification.
AIS hijacking entails modifying existing AIS transceiver information. For example,
the information provided by AtoNs put at ports by authorities for maritime assistance
and monitoring is susceptible to malicious modification by attackers. Actors can
replace authentic AIS communications with stronger fake signals. In both instances,
recipients receive modified versions of the original AIS signals sent by victims. AIS
hijacking permits unscrupulous users to modify any information pertaining to actual
vessels. As discussed in one of the examples, attackers can virtually transfer military
ships within the authority of hostile states, provoking political issues.
• Availability disruption or denial of service.
– Slot starvation - Utilising the AIS ability to reserve the full AIS transmission time
slot assignment in order to prevent all stations within reach of the attacker from
communicating with one another. These stations include vessels, AtoN, and
AIS base stations, which are used in traffic monitoring. As a result, attackers
can disable AISs on a large scale.
– Frequency hopping - Attackers are able to impersonate maritime authorities to
instruct one or more AIS transponders to change the frequencies of operation.
Ultimately, sending an instruction to change a frequency different than chan-
nels A and B of the AIS range renders the transmitters unusable until manual
configuration, or with the maritime authority being able to transmit the correct
frequency details on the misconfigured false frequency.
– Timing attacks - Attackers can instruct AIS transponders to delay transmis-
sion times by resending AIS maritime authority request commands, thus pre-
venting further communications about vessels’ positions. Adversaries can also
flood marine traffic, including ships and VTSs, by requesting multiple stations
in range to send AIS information and updates very frequently.
8
Security of offshore installations
==PAGE:17==
Research also identifies, that turning off or decreasing the transmission power of AIS
transceivers without a valid reason, can cause a security threat for the safety of navigation
[11]. It can be considered as an insider attack - in such a case the attacker has the right
to use the AIS network for position reporting, but misuses it for commercial gain.
Table 2.1: Findings from the risk assessment performed by Gary Kessler et al. [12]
Attack
Likelihood
Severity
Ease
GPS jamming
4
2
3
AIS device off
4
1
1
AIS bad data
3
3
1
AIS jamming
5
2
3
Vessel spoofing
4
2
2
Eavesdropping
1
4
1
Flooding
4
3
3
Ghost vessel
4
3
3
CPA/AIS-SART spoofing
5
2
3
Disappearance
4
2
3
AtoN spoofing
4
2
3
Data manipulation
3
2
3
Weather spoofing
4
3
3
Likelihood: 1 = Frequent, 2 = Probable, 3 = Occasional, 4 = Remote, 5 = Unlikely
Severity: 1 = Catastrophic, 2 = Critical, 3 = Marginal, 4 = Negligible
Ease of attack: 1 = Trivial, 2 = Simple, 3 = Difficult, 4 = Very difficult
In a risk assessment of maritime systems, conducted in A Taxonomy Framework for Mar-
itime Cybersecurity: A Demonstration Using the Automatic Identification System, the au-
thors analyzed the risks associated with the threats of utilising AIS, in the context of its
impact on the system. The risk assessment results can be seen in Table 2.1. It is impor-
tant to note, that the scope of the paper was on the AIS system itself, meaning that the
severity of e.g. a breach of data may have bigger consequences on the system itself than
the vessels using it [12].
The risk analysis results indicate a relatively high impact on the topics covered by the
thesis. Vessel spoofing is identified as having a critical impact on security, while being
simple to exploit and remotely likely to be exploited. Ghost vessels (or in other words,
insertion of a vessel that does not exist in reality) is given a marginal severity at a remote
likelihood. Data modification is then also listed as having a critical severity at occasional
likelihood. Out of the most relevant analyzed attack risks, only the disabling of an AIS
device can be considered as having a higher impact than spoofing.
2.3
Threat to offshore installations
It is to no surprise that offshore installations, just like other types of (high-value) assets,
are at risk of being the potential target for criminals, terrorists and cybercriminals alike.
Offshore assets are at constant risk of cyberattacks, through, for example, exploitation of
not-yet addressed vulnerabilities in operational technology, as indicated in a report by the
US. Government Accountability Office [13]. To accurately define the possible threats of
offshore installations, it is important to understand what an offshore installation is. Thus,
generally, offshore installations can be defined as:
• Fixed offshore platforms - structures that are fixed to the seabed and are used for
Security of offshore installations
9
==PAGE:18==
drilling and production of oil and natural gas. Fixed offshore platforms can be located
in shallow or deep water and can be connected to the shore by pipelines or can
operate independently.
• Floating production storage and offloading units - ships or barges that are used for
the production, storage, and offloading of oil and natural gas. FPSO units are usually
located in deep water and are equipped with drilling and production facilities.
• Pipeline and cable systems - systems designed for transport over a pipeline or cable
over a body of water. Pipes are typically used to transport oil and natural gas from
offshore installations to the shore. Cables can be utilised to transfer power from
offshore wind farms to the mainland grid or used for telecommunications.
• Offshore wind farms - installations that are used to generate electricity using wind
turbines. Offshore wind farms are typically located in shallow water where they can
be fixed to the seabed or remain floating.
Further categorizing, the offshore assets are typically connected to either fossil fuels pro-
duction and transport, or clean energy production and transport. The risk analysis results
performed on the two types of assets are therefore different for the different types of off-
shore assets. It is important to notice, that both types share the same basic security issues
as the underlying shipping industry as a whole. Offshore installations are almost exclu-
sively serviced by ships and floating vessels, which are inherently susceptible to common
threats such as tampering with the GNSS or AIS systems.
2.3.1
Petroleum offshore installations
While there is no requirement to fit AIS transponders on board offshore petroleum in-
stallations, the AIS may prove a useful security tool for offshore installations to monitor
and track ships navigating in their vicinity thereby increasing the situational awareness
for offshore installation operators. In his Ph.D. thesis, Mikhail Kashubsky argues that the
effective range of AIS transmissions seems to be a sufficient distance for an installation to
receive an early ‘warning’ of vessels approaching the installation, though identifying that
AIS transponders can be switched off at any time and a vessel can move unnoticed by
the AIS. He finds use in the use of AIS monitoring in this context as it allows states oper-
ating the assets to assess possible security threats posed by ships to offshore petroleum
installations and, if necessary, take preemptive measures to deter the threat [14].
It can therefore be assumed that undetected acts of AIS spoofing may, in turn, cause a
reaction from the coast guard, or the company operating the petroleum installation. This
incurs additional cost, and with the ease of AIS spoofing, means that the profitability of
such assets can be decreased by means of cyber warfare.
2.3.2
Wind energy offshore installations
Wind energy installations, such as offshore wind farms are ever more present. While
monitoring offshore operations, especially in the phase of development of a wind farm,
when the traffic is higher, the amount of vessel transfers and wind farm accesses creates
a lot of pressure on the operators. The ability to quickly and reliably localize vessels is
paramount to the safety of operations. Operations on wind farm locations span multiple
square miles and are increasingly conducted from on-shore central locations monitoring
multiple wind farms [15], it is, therefore, important for the operators to have a concise view
to enable operations on a wind farm to be performed in a safe manner.
10
Security of offshore installations
==PAGE:19==
Similarly to petroleum and gas, offshore installations, generally available risk assess-
ments do not assess the risk of AIS spoofing for such an asset. While true, that there
are more damaging threats to a wind farm, both from the physical security as well as cy-
bersecurity point of view, the threat for offshore operations, which almost by definition,
are operations utilising vessels, is shared with the threat that is generally associated with
AIS spoofing.
One potential threat is the risk of collision or other accidents involving vessels in the area.
If an AIS transponder is transmitting false or misleading data about a vessel’s location or
course, it could create confusion or misunderstandings that could lead to a collision or
other accidents. This could be particularly dangerous in the offshore environment, where
the risks of such incidents are already heightened by the inherent hazards of operating in
open water.
Another potential threat is the risk of sabotage or other malicious activity targeting the wind
farm or its infrastructure. If an AIS transponder is used to transmit false or misleading data
about a vessel’s identity or purpose, it could be used to mask the activities of individuals
or groups who may be planning to damage or disrupt the wind farm in some way.
With the field of offshore wind power management accumulating a lot of growth in recent
years, sources find promise in the automation of such operations, in order to improve
the operational efficiency of its maintenance. Currently, there are many studies of au-
tonomous systems applied during offshore wind turbine maintenance, such as dynamic
positioning systems. Automatic systems, while not deployed yet, exhibit potential for un-
manned maintenance in the future [16]. And such automation cannot be achieved without
reliance on correct data.
Overall, AIS spoofing can pose a significant threat to the safety and security of an offshore
wind farm, and it is important for wind farm operators to be aware of this risk and take
appropriate measures to protect against it.
2.4
Current research
There is an increasing number of research articles posted on the topic of AIS Spoofing.
There also exist commercial applications promising detection of AIS spoofing by means of
machine learning, such as windwardAI, defense-domain applications by Systematic and
systems by governmental organizations, or SafeSeaNet, a project within the European
Union’s European Maritime Safety Agency. None of those share detailed public informa-
tion on what approaches are used for detection of AIS spoofing, nor how accurate such
detection is.
The approaches taken by the researchers generally fall into one of the general branches:
• Detection of spoofing via algorithms using statistical analysis and machine learning
on existing data.
• Improvements to the vessel report positioning protocols.
• Introduction of a new detection tool or monitoring framework, and fusing it with the
AIS data.
The following sections provide a summary of key papers on the topics.
2.4.1
Auth-AIS
In ”Auth-AIS: Secure, Flexible, and Backward-Compatible Authentication of Vessels AIS
Broadcasts,” Savio Sciancelepore et al. propose a backward-compatible authentication
Security of offshore installations
11
==PAGE:20==
framework for AIS broadcast messages.
Auth-AIS makes use of established crypto-
graphic tools, inheriting their security properties while contextualizing them within the AIS
technology. The authors propose Auth-AIS as a software-only solution that can be inte-
grated without hardware replacement into existing AIS deployments. AIS users who do
not adopt Auth-AIS can still receive Auth-AIS messages but without security guarantees.
Auth-AIS can operate in either of two configuration modes: Deterministic Security Con-
figuration, which achieves low-delay authentication with a 75 percent message overhead,
or Probabilistic Security Configuration, which reduces the message overhead to 35.71
percent with a slight increase in an authentication delay.
Figure 2.2: Set-up phase of Auth-AIS. © 2022 IEEE [17]
The Auth-AIS security protocol can be divided into two phases, a setup phase where a
vessel, acting as either transmitting or receiving vessel, at the start of the journey, contacts
the relevant Maritime Authority (acting as a Trusted Third Party) to receive cryptography
material (a master key, unique to the vessel, valid for the length of the journey; the size
of the hash chain used for TESLA protocol; a global threshold value for determining the
version of the protocol; the size of the Bloom Filter; the number of hash functions) used
at later stages. This part of the communication occurs over an already defined and im-
plemented standard, utilising Type 8 AIS message 3.1. Once received by the vessel,
both the relevant maritime authority, as well as the vessel, generate and store a Root Key
based on the exchanged material. The Root Key, together with the vessel’s MMSI and
the journey start time are then published to be available publicly.
12
Security of offshore installations
==PAGE:21==
Figure 2.3: Protocol for deterministic message flow using Auth-AIS. © 2022 IEEE [17]
The steps for deterministic validation of a vessel message include:
• At the beginning of the time slot, the transmitting vessel A computes the key for this
time slot, according to the TESLA protocol.
• For each message j transmitted in the time slot, namely mi;j, the transmitting vessel
A pre-computes the Auth-AIS digest, using an HMAC (Hashed Message Authenti-
cation Code).
• At the expiration of the time-slot i, i.e., at the beginning of the time-slot i þ 1, the
transmitting vessels A broadcasts the Auth-AIS broadcast authentication message
(Type 8), containing the key for the previous time slot i, namely Ki, and all the pre-
viously computed HMAC digests.
A receiving vessel may then verify that the received Auth-AIS digests have been created
using the broadcasted key, treating messages where the result of an HMAC function on
the received messages and key is not equal to the broadcasted HMAC as not validated.
If a message passes this check, the receiving vessel can then contact the Maritime Au-
thority (acting as TTP) to receive the publically available root key, published at the time
of the sender vessel’s journey start. The vessel B can verify, upon receiving the root key
from the maritime authority, that the key Ki used to authenticate the preceding messages
was derived from the root key stored by the trusted third party. If it was not, all mes-
sages received proven by key K can be treated as spoofed. The deterministic variant of
the protocol includes an overhead. The digest of each transmitted message needs to be
transmitted as well, effectively doubling the free slots occupancy by a vessel. This can
mean, during times of congestion, the AIS system may be made to fail, as the AIS mes-
sage time-slots are a finite resource.
For this reason, the paper also describes a probabilistic version of the protocol, where
instead transmitting the result of the HMAC function for every message transmitted, the
authors suggest application of HMAC to a bloom filter and transmission of it, validating all
messages sent in the bloom filter as in the deterministic model.
Due to the consistency checks performed by any AIS receiver when the key and digest
Security of offshore installations
13
==PAGE:22==
of the reference time-slots are disclosed, the proposed solution has been demonstrated
to efficiently detect and reject forged AIS information messages. This approach presents
a solution, that if deployed globally, could allow for vessels to verify the truthfulness of
messages coming from AIS. It does, however, require, for all vessels to participate in the
scheme, as only pairs of AIS transmitters and receivers equipped with Auth-AIS could
verify the integrity of each others messages [17].
2.4.2
Radiolocation
In the paper Radiolocation and tracking of automatic identification system signals for mar-
itime situational awareness published in IET Radar, Sonar & Navigation published by
Francesco Papi et al. [18], the authors examine a solution to the problem of AIS data
verification that can be implemented inside generic networks of AIS ground base stations
without the requirement for extra sensors or technology. The suggested method com-
bines a conventional radio-location technique based on time difference of arrival with an
expanded Kalman filter1 designed to track boats in geodetic coordinates.
Figure 2.4: Estimation of signal transmission location based on Time of Arrival differences
[18]
The approach presented by the researchers can be summarized into steps:
• The area monitored for spoofing is covered by at least 3 base stations, keeping the
receivers time synchronized with precision of 1μs.
• The time of arrival is estimated by detecting the position of the start flag in the AIS
message, relative to the start of the AIS broadcasting slot.
1Kalman filter - an algorithm that uses a series of measurements taken over time, including statistical noise
and other inaccuracies, to produce estimates of unknown variables that are generally more accurate than
those based on a single measurement alone. This is achieved by estimating a joint probability distribution of
the variables for each timeframe [19]
14
Security of offshore installations
==PAGE:23==
• Calculation of time of flight for an AIS message is calculated based on the difference
between the time of arrival and the beginning of the time slot.
• Since the transmitter timing error is unknown, upon receival of the same message
across multiple base stations, the timing error needs to be approximated.
• Application of extenden Kalman filter to improve the estimation error, as allowed by
the slow movement and predictability of the manouvers as compared to the rate at
which the AIS messages are transmitted.
Given the steps are performed as prescribed, it is now possible to estimate the position
of a vessel within the area, with more base stations resulting in more precise predictions.
The approach is tested using anonymized AIS data obtained by various networked base
stations, sharing time precision of 1μs, as the authors assert is the time precision of the
Italian Coast Guard’s monitoring.
2.4.3
Satellite based
Using low-orbit receivers
Shanzeng Guo describes a method for estimating the position of an AIS message using a
microsatellite in Low Earth Orbit in Space-based detection of spoofing AIS signals using
Doppler frequency. While on the topic of AIS spoofing, the main goal of the approach
is limited to the idea of position spoofing by sending AIS signals with incorrect position
encoded in the message. The proposed solution bases its theory on the ability of geolo-
cating a signal based on multiple frequency measurements, due to the phenomenon of
Doppler shift.
Figure 2.5: Half Hyperbola Created by Doppler Frequency on the Earth Surface [20]
The author puts forth a set of equations, indicating the possibility of estimating the actual
position of the signal sender, based on at least two separate measurements of the signal
from Low Earth Orbit, with known velocities and travel direction of satellites on the orbit.
It is important to note that this approach is still purely theoretical, and the author does not
include any working prototypes or provide any supporting validation data based on exper-
iments. It is, however, speculated, that this approach may be utilised when designing a
satellite-based monitoring solution in the future.
Using satellite imagery
The paper named Automatic Fusion of Satellite Imagery and AIS data for Vessel Detection
written by Aristides Milios et al. proposes utilising the use of fusion between any maritime
satellite imagery and AIS data to detect attempts at spoofing. The authors implement and
validate a workflow for fusing data automatically, using a deep learning approach, with an
estimated success rate of identifying a vessel placed between 86 percent and 90 percent.
The biggest hurdle to a succesfull implementation that the paper acknowledges is the
Security of offshore installations
15
==PAGE:24==
frequency of satellite imagery updates. The suggested example of approach involves the
use of Sentinel-1 SAR satellite photos, which provide an updated version of the image
only once per 24 hours. This means that the correlation of signals between AIS position
reports and satellite imagery, in the provided example, cannot be ran in real time, and can
only identify potential spoofing retroactively, with at most 24 hours of delay. It presents an
interesting approach that could be used universally across the globe, given the satellite
imaging being available near real-time [21].
2.4.4
Using RADAR
In an article published by Tao Zhang et al., named Detection of AIS Closing Behavior
and MMSI Spoofing Behavior of Ships Based on Spatiotemporal Data, the authors in-
vestigate the RADAR assisted approach to spoofing detection. This paper presents two
algorithms, the AIS Closing Detection Algorithm and the MMSI Spoofing Detection Algo-
rithm, for identifying these two types of behaviors, based on the spatiotemporal data from
AIS and radar. However, the association between radar data and AIS data is difficult to
determine in a multi-ship environment. To address this issue, the authors introduce the
D-TRAP, applied when searching for associated AIS points of radar trajectory points. The
proposed association method is able to perform better when the number of effective AIS
points is reduced due to the two behaviors. The algorithms are validated using both real
and simulated data, showing that when the ship is being monitored by both AIS and radar
for a certain period of time, the AIS Closing Detection Algorithm has good performance
[11]. In the case of MMSI spoofing, when the ship is monitored by both AIS and radar be-
fore and after the spoofing, and both monitoring processes continue for a certain period
of time, the MMSI Spoofing Algorithm has good performance.
16
Security of offshore installations
==PAGE:25==
3
Theory
This chapter outlines the theory needed to be understood in order to approach the problem
of protecting offshore systems against spoofing. While it is not exhaustive, the following
terms and concepts are representative of my analysis and approach to understanding the
problem and attempting to prove the validity of the directions chosen.
3.1
Analysis of vessel positioning systems
Currently, there is one globally enforced vessel positioning system, the Automatic Identi-
fication System, or AIS. As per requirements of the Safety of Life at Sea (SOLAS) con-
vention, enacted by the International Maritime Organization, all cargo vessels exceeding
150 gross tonnage, as well as all commercial passenger ships must be fitted with AIS
transmitting equipment of Class A [22]. Vessels that are not covered by the requirements
are permitted to join the AIS system, utilizing Class B.
AIS-enabled units can be carried on board vessels and aircraft to support maritime safety
and search and rescue operations. While most vessel AIS equipment falls into either
Class A or Class B, there are many different types of AIS units being deployed [23]:
• AIS units carried on board vessels,
• AIS carried on board aircraft to support maritime safety,
• AIS base stations which are non-ship located stations that can relay information
from AtoN and vessels,
• AIS AtoN which can be a physical aid to navigation or a virtual aid that broadcasts
information,
• AIS search and rescue transmitters (SART) which are self-contained radio devices
used to locate a survival craft or vessel in distress by sending updated position
reports,
• AIS man overboard units which are designed to be carried by crew and used in the
event of a man overboard situation or another personal emergency.
Security of offshore installations
17
==PAGE:26==
Figure 3.1: An overview of the path from vessel to the user
The information sent might be categorized as static, dynamic, voyage-related, or safety-
related. Static information includes details such as MMSI, length, and vessel type. Dy-
namic information consists of the vessel’s course, location, speed, rate of turn, and nav-
igational status. Information pertaining to a voyage includes details such as cargo type,
destination, and ETA (Estimated Time of Arrival). Weather bulletins and Search And Res-
cue Transmitter messages show examples of safety-related information. Currently, 27
types of messages are defined, and an exhaustive list follows.
18
Security of offshore installations
==PAGE:27==
Table 3.1: Message types in the AIS protocol
Id
Message Name
Message description
1
Position Report
Scheduled position report (Class A)
2
Position Report
Assigned scheduled position report (Class A)
3
Position Report
Special position report, response to interroga-
tion (Class A)
4
Base station report
Position, date, and current slot number of base
station
5
Static and voyage related data
Scheduled static and voyage related vessel
data report (Class A)
6
Binary addressed message
Binary data for addressed communication
7
Binary acknowledgement
Acknowledgement of received addressed bi-
nary data
8
Binary broadcast message
Binary data for broadcast communication
9
SAR aircraft position report
Position report for airborne stations in SAR op-
erations
10 UTC/date inquiry
Request UTC and date
11
UTC/date response
Current UTC and date if available
12 Addressed safety-related message
Safety related data for addressed communica-
tion
13 Safety related acknowledgement
Acknowledgement
of
received
addressed
safety-related message
14 Safety related broadcast message
Safety related data for broadcast communica-
tion
15 Interrogation
Request for a specific message type (can result
in multiple responses from one or several sta-
tions)
16 Assignment mode command
Assignment of a specific report behavior by
competent authority using a Base station
17 Positioning broadcast binary mes-
sage
Positioning corrections provided by a base sta-
tion
18 Class B equipment position report
Standard position report for mobile equipment
(Class B)
19 Class B equipment position report
Extended position report for mobile equipment
(Class B)
20 Data link management message
Reserve slots for Base station(s)
21 AtoN report
Position and status report for AtoN
22 Channel management
Management
of
channels
and
transceiver
modes by a Base station
23 Group assignment command
Assignment of a specific report behavior by
competent authority using a Base station to a
specific group of mobiles
24 Static data report
Additional data assigned to an MMSI Part A:
Name, Part B: Static Data
25 Single slot binary message
Short unscheduled binary data transmission
(broadcast or addressed)
26 Multiple slot binary message
Scheduled binary data transmission (broadcast
or addressed)
27 Position report for long range appli-
cations
Position report outside base station coverage
Security of offshore installations
19
==PAGE:28==
3.1.1
Terrestrial AIS
AIS operates in the Very High Frequency (VHF) band, employs the Gaussian filtered Mini-
mum Shift Keying (GMSK) scheme, and guarantees a horizontal transmission range of up
to 74 kilometers at a bitrate of 9600 bits per second. AIS employs two channels: 161.975
MHz for ship-to-ship communication and 162.025 MHz for ship-to-land communication
[24]. Standard AIS transceivers installed on vessels consist of the following:
• a VHF transmitter,
• two VHF Time Division Multiple Access (TDMA) receivers,
• a VHF Digital Selective Calling (DSC) receiver,
• a positioning module supporting GNSS capabilities,
• sensors connected via NMEA 0813 standardized electronic communications links.
Periodically broadcasting the AIS data enables all compatible vessels to maintain situ-
ational awareness and avoid collisions. The rate of the updates depends on the ship’s
speed and rate of turn. The update frequency increases with the ship’s speed and rate
of turn, and the maximum update frequency is once every two seconds. The Automatic
Identification System (AIS) is utilized to provide safe navigation by exchanging ship-to-
ship position, speed, course, heading, rate of turn, ship status and voyage data, and
safety-related communications. AIS allocates and shares the available airwaves on the
AIS frequency using TDMA (Time Division Multiple Access) technology. The AIS stan-
dard specifies a predetermined number of these slots for each of the two AIS channels:
2,250 on each channel every 60 seconds for a combined total of 4,500 every 60 seconds,
which determines the maximum throughput of AIS messages for an area.
3.1.2
Space-based AIS
Due to limitations of coverage by land-based base stations, the AIS has been expanded to
a satellite-based version, also known as the space-based AIS. Its global range is achieved
through small low-orbit satellites carrying the AIS transponders to receive the ship’s AIS
information from space and transfer them to receiving ground stations. While the ship’s
information is automatically exchanged between AIS-equipped ships through terrestrial
AIS via a VHF communication link, the satellite on which the AIS transponder is installed
is able to receive the VHF signal transmitted for the ship’s AIS equipment, as the VHF
radio wave with significant signal strength has been shown to reach an altitude of up to
1000km from the earth’s surface [25].
Overall, the satellite-based AIS system provides a global network for tracking ships and
improving maritime safety. By using satellite communication, it can provide coverage in
remote areas and over vast distances, making it an important tool for monitoring ship
traffic and helping to prevent collisions and other maritime accidents.
3.2
Protocol messages
The AIS messages provide a predefined set of information depending on the type of mes-
sage. Types 1, 2 and 3 (AIS position report for Class A) utilise the same format, as it is
only the mode of sending that differs.
1
!AIVDM ,1,1,,B,11mg=5@P000plNHOgHB8T@000000 ,0*13
Listing 3.1: Example of a type 1 AIS message
Within the message, the following information may be encoded:
20
Security of offshore installations
==PAGE:29==
• Ship identificator - MMSI number of the vessel,
• Navigational status - one of 16 predefined statuses,
• Rate of turn - values of +/- 126 to 0, -128 indicating no information available,
• Speed over ground - a value between 0 and 102.3 knots,
• Position accuracy - a flag indicating whether the acurracy of position obtained from
GNSS is above or below 10 meters,
• Longitude - with 1/10000 minutes precision - up to 180, 181 indicating information
not available, negative values indicating being west,
• Latitude - with 1/10000 minutes precision - up to 90, 91 indicating information not
available, negative values indicating south,
• Course over ground - course over ground with 0.1 degree precision, 3600 used for
no information available,
• True heading - heading of 0 to 359 degrees, 360 indicating no data,
• Timestamp - second of UTC for generation of the message by a vessel’s positioning
system,
• Repeat flag - indicating how many times a message has been repeated.
Another message of interest is the type 5 message - Class A Ship Static and Voyage
Related Data, which is due to be broadcasted every 6 minutes by all Class A vessels [26].
1
!AIVDM ,1,1,0,A,51mg=5@0Bm`LEP4m0hDl5=@E9>1@PE<U<000000000000000000
kl1CR0AiC00000000000 ,0*1B
Listing 3.2: Example of a type 5 AIS message
Among others, the data encoded in the message includes:
• Ship identificator - MMSI number of the vessel,
• Vessel’s IMO number - the unique hull number of the vessel, with 0 indicating no
data
• Call sign1 - call sign associated with the vessel, ”@@@@@@@” if unavailable
• Name - maximum 20 characters, filled with @ sign indicates not available, or default
• Type of ship and cargo type - a predefined value as defined in the protocol descrip-
tion
• Dimensions - vessels may indicate their beam (width), draught, and length, if appli-
cable
These are the two message types the thesis utilizes to provide the framework for the
analysis of spoofing. While more messages (such as Class B static data and position
reports) may be utilised for spoofing, the logic behind their validation can be extended
from the findings of this thesis.
1Call sign, in maritime use, is assigned as a unique identifier to ships and boats. All manual VHF radio
transmissions must be individually identified by the call sign. Vessels are assigned call signs by their national
maritime authorities.
Security of offshore installations
21
==PAGE:30==
3.2.1
Synchronization
In order to ensure that AIS transmissions do not interfere with each other, it is critical
for AIS systems to be synchronized with each other. This is particularly important for
the transmit function, as an accurate frame map must be generated that reflects radio
frequency (RF) activity on the network and indicates which slots have been allocated and
which are free for use.
To achieve precise synchronization, AIS systems typically use a local system UTC (Co-
ordinated Universal Time) source, such as a GPS receiver. GPS receivers can provide
access to standard NMEA 0183 GPS sentences and a 1-pulse-per-second (1 PPS) signal,
which can be used to make timing corrections and improve synchronization accuracy. By
combining the GPS NMEA sentences with the 1 PPS signal, AIS systems can accurately
align the TDMA frame and generate accurate slot synchronization [27].
3.3
Signals
The propagation of signals in the AIS frequency range has shown, that there are three
main factors affecting the strength and transmission range:
• Diffraction over the sea, around the curvature of the earth,
• Ducting, caused by variable refractivity of air,
• Multipath, which is the same signal arriving to the receiver through different paths
and hence with different delays or phase shifts. The delay profile of the channel
provides multiple versions of the transmitted signal at the receiver [28].
The topic of analysis of AIS on-off signal anomalies has been investigated by [29]. The
authors propose an RSSI based architecture able to recognize wheter the loss of AIS
signal is caused by communication channel-related effects (such as vessel being out of
Line Of Sight (LOS), fading, shadowing, etc.) or can possibly be an effect of intentionally
ended transmisson by a user. The architecture is based on historical AIS data received
by a Base Station in a certain period of time, considering receiver loss, transmitter loss,
fading effects, shadowing and atmospheric propagation losses. The authors have ana-
lyzed a few Base Stations and proved that their dynamics regarding RSSI are comparable,
making it possible to assume wheter the AIS signal loss was caused by poor reception or
should be considered anomalous.
The VHF radio propagation is frequently characterized by ducting effects, which aid in
extending AIS reception well beyond the line-of-sight but also add to the uncertainty be-
tween the message time of flight and the actual emission location. All of these factors may
render multilateration insufficient to guarantee anti-spoofing operational requirements re-
garding location precision and coverage areas [30].
In the context of positioning using RSSI, there seems to be no consensus on whether
or not it may be accurately used to predict location. Some experiments show that under
fitting conditions it may be a promising approach, but do not agree on its effectiveness
[31]. Other, more recent, research shows that it can be used with success to estimate
positions in the context of wireless networking [32].
3.3.1
Signal strength
In the field of radio frequency signals, the strength of a signal can be defined in multiple
ways. A common way of representing it is the RSSI or Received Signal Strength Indica-
tion. It is defined as a measure of the power of a signal as it is detected by a receiver.
22
Security of offshore installations
==PAGE:31==
Being a measurement of power, it is generally defined in dBm, decibel-milliwatts. dBm is
a measure of the absolute power of a signal, with 0 dBm corresponding to a power level
of 1 milliwatt. It is commonly used to express the strength of a wireless signal in terms of
its power relative to 1 milliwatt. While the measure of absolute power at the receiver is the
most definitive measure of power, it requires all components to be calibrated, and have a
stable and predefined gain, or take the variable gain of the whole receiving installation into
account. The received signal strength indicator can also be defined using relative terms,
in unit-less dB, as a way of comparing the strengths of multiple signals, without a reference
to the power level. Considering the stable gain of receivers under predictable conditions,
a plain measure of signal strength in dB allows for effective comparison between signal
levels.
3.4
Validation of reported vessel positions
The received and decoded AIS messages provide us with a number of values that are
connected to the vessel. For the solution to the validation problem, I have investigated
the connection between the reported vessel position against the received signal strength
at the side of the receiver.
As a receiver continuously collects data, the past AIS position reports, together with the
stored information about the signal may be utilized to build a statistical model for the
estimation of expected signal strength at a transmission position. Due to the fact that
the AIS messages contain the latitude and longitude, it is in theory feasible to validate
a signal/position pair against the historical signal transmissions at neighboring locations.
A mathematical field dealing with problems of value approximation based on input data,
while still within its confounds, is widely known as interpolation [33]. While the field has
found many uses, such as image processing or investing, it is also prominently used in
terms of analyzing geospatial data. Analyzing the research in the area, I have identified
two promising approaches that could be used to statistically predict vessel locations based
on predefined data.
The approaches identified as promising are:
• Inverse Distance Weighting
• Kriging
While experimenting with the two methods, I have come to realize that kriging provides
smoother estimates, and validating the IDW model in a similar fashion, as described in
Chapter 6, leads to elevated error rates as compared to kriging.
3.4.1
Inverse Distance Weighting
Figure 3.2: IDW weighting function [34]
Inverse Distance Weighting was proposed by Donald Shepard in a field-defining paper
named A two-dimensional interpolation function for irregularly-spaced data [35].
Security of offshore installations
23
==PAGE:32==
x denotes an interpolated (arbitrary) point, xi is an interpolating (known) point, d is a given
distance (metric operator) from the known point xi to the unknown point x, N is the total
number of known points used in interpolation and p is a positive real number, called the
power parameter. The interpolation value u of a given point x from a set of samples
uk = u(xk), with k = 1, 2, . . . , N, is given by:
u(x) =
N
∑
k=1
w(x, xk)
N
∑
j=1
w(x, xj)
uk
(3.1)
where, in general, w(x, xi) represents the weighting function:
w(x, xi) = ∥x −xi∥−p
(3.2)
where ∥x −xi∥−p ≥0 is the Euclidean distance between x and data point xi and p is a
power parameter, typically equal to 2. [36]
3.4.2
Kriging
Kriging has been defined as an approach to geostatistics, that is a combination of conven-
tional statistics and geology. Sometimes also called the Gaussian process regression, it
is named after D. G. Krige. Kriging refers to the procedure of constructing the best linear
unbiased estimate of a value at a point or of an average over a volume [37].
Estimates from kriging are smooth. The kriging variance measures the smoothness of the
kriging estimates quantitatively. The variance being 0 indicates that there is no smoothing
while kriging at a data location. When kriging with data remote from the place being
estimated, there is total smoothness; the estimate is equal to the mean and the kriging
variance equals the full variance [37]. Therefore for each interpolated point, kriging allows
us to investigate how uncertain the interpolation is across the entire interpolated grid.
One of the key elements of kriging is the definition of a covariance function, that charac-
terizes the Gaussian process. Its estimation is the initial step of the kriging process, and
the result of the covariance model is utilized to compute the predictions and their vari-
ances with matrix-vector formulas. [38] A covariance model is used to characterize the
semi-variogram, a spatial random field. The semi-variogram is a statistic that assesses
the average decrease in similarity between two random variables as the distance between
the variables increases, leading to some applications in exploratory data analysis. [39] A
non-exhaustive list of used covariance models includes:
• Gaussian
• Exponential
• Linear
• Spherical
• Power
The aim of kriging is to derive the value of a field at some point when there are fixed
observed values at other given points The resulting value is calculated as a weighted
mean. The weights depend on the given covariance model and the location of the target
point. [40] There are multiple methods for kriging, but the two seem to be the most popular,
according to the literature:
24
Security of offshore installations
==PAGE:33==
• Ordinary - providing no methods to account for drift
• Universal - a flexible method, allowing for both the point drift as well as defining
trends in data
3.4.3
Summary
Based on the collected information, it seems that Kriging is the most versatile tool that
enables both interpolation of the values at locations not covered by initial data, as well as
providing the Standard Error for prediction at each point on a grid. The details of imple-
mentation and selection of the appropriate kriging approach are provided in the following
chapters.
3.5
Vessel data source
The International Maritime Organization provides free of charge, publicly available infor-
mation regarding any vessel registered in IMO, and assigned an IMO number. While AIS
is generally mandatory for commercial vessels above 250 gross tonnage [22], a com-
mercial vessel is required to have been assigned an IMO number if it exceeds 100 gross
tonnage. This implies that all AIS Class A transmitting vessels currently operating, should
also be registered in the IMO registry. The IMO number is assigned to a vessel hull and
stays consistent across the lifetime of the ship [41].
To facilitate information exchange International Maritime Organization provides a service,
the Global Integrated Shipping Information System. While some of the modules, or edi-
tion of data is reserved for use by national Maritime Authorities or other relevant parties,
the publicly accessible data provides a sufficient resource for verifying a vessel by their
IMO number, or the MMSI number, which can be referenced back to the IMO number.
Since IMO is the only regulatory body distributing IMO numbers, the information provided
by IMO can be considered as factually correct.
The data is available using a browser only. IMO provides no public access to GISIS using
programmatic means, such as an API. Moreover, the terms of use of the GISIS website
prohibit the programmatic use of the website. There does not seem to exist a publically
available free-of-charge, global registry of vessels provided by the governing bodies. In
absence of such a system, public users needing such vessel data programmatically, are
required to use third-party, commercial vessel databases, such as MarineTraffic or Data-
lastic, or rely on crowd-collected data aggregators such as AISHub; none of these provide
the same level of assurance to the correctness of the data.
3.6
Vessels
While calculating the expected signal strength, it is important to consider both the height of
the receiving station as well as the height of the transmitter. The height of the placement
of a VHF antenna is not one of the data points gathered by any of the data sources.
The collected data involves, however, other measures of a vessel that might be useful
in the investigation. Some of the most promising are: width (or breadth), length, draught
and gross tonnage. The width of the vessel indicates the breadth at the widest point of a
vessel. In a similar manner, the length of the vessel is defined as the length of the ship
from the stern to the most distant point of the hull. While not indicative of the vessel on its
own, they can, together with gross tonnage, prove useful in the rough estimation of the
maximum height of a vessel.
Security of offshore installations
25
==PAGE:34==
Gross tonnage is generally defined as the total carrying capacity of a vessel [42], is unit-
less and volume dependant, and can be calculated using the equation:
GT = V (0.2 + 0.02 × log10(V ))
(3.3)
While the gross tonnage is the sum measure of all enclosed areas of a ship, a naive
approach of treating the vessel as a cuboid allows us to very roughly estimate the height
of a vessel. With current height being H, draught D, breadth of the ship W and L being
the length of the ship:
GT = Hmax × W × L × (0.2 + 0.02 × log10(Hmax × W × L))
(3.4)
H = Hmax −D
(3.5)
However, with such a simple assumption, the margin of error is large. Currently, no lit-
erature exists specifying a more robust approach using such a limited set of data about
a vessel. For the purpose of not introducing additional errors, throughout the thesis, the
estimation of the height of the vessel is skipped, and estimation of line of sight distance
for those vessels is omitted.
26
Security of offshore installations
==PAGE:35==
4
Solution design
This chapter outlines the steps taken to design a solution enabling offshore asset opera-
tors insight into received data.
4.1
Considerations
Access to a reliable AIS source is paramount for maritime operations. While it is possible
to rely on third-party resources for positional awareness needs, offshore assets can, and in
some cases, due to base station coverage must also be monitored by local AIS receivers,
deployed at site, or onshore in close proximity to the protected asset.
While this approach allows the offshore equipment operators to be in control of the data,
they are also placed at a disadvantage of lacking the global awareness that could be em-
ployed with the use of AIS data aggregation services. Services employing a network of
receivers are able to correlate the data from across the globe, and have the means neces-
sary to verify the vessels identification, and, to some extent position, based on historical
data, statistical analysis and machine learning, and identify cases of potential spoofing.
As discussed earlier AIS spoofing can be detrimental to the safety and operations of,
among others, offshore installations, therefore, offshore installation operators should be
able to identify potential spoofing cases based on the data received at sites.
4.2
Requirements
In order to fulfill the needs of protection for an offshore installation, a solution should
utilize the locally sourced feeds and alert operators of suspected cases of spoofing. It is
therefore possible to define a list of requirements for such a system to provide value.
• The system must allow offshore operators to gain insights into possible occurrences
of spoofing.
• The system must be able to be integrated into already existing monitoring solutions.
• The system must be expandable and flexible, designed in a way that enables future
improvements to the solution.
• The system should be able to integrate with other systems, such as vessel tracking
or monitoring systems, to provide a comprehensive view of vessel activity.
• The system should be able to handle a large volume of AIS data.
• The system must be near real-time, allowing operators to take preemptive actions.
4.3
Integration
Due to the requirement for integration with other systems, it is necessary to understand
the usual workflows and designs of applications that are readily available and used in
the field. While most of the commercial applications for offshore asset management are
closed-source and unavailable to the public, it is possible to analyze the requirements for
integrating into online information aggregators and available open-source applications.
Exporting data into AISHub includes pushing a UDP stream of raw received messages
to a predefined port on an external machine over the Internet. Each raw AIS message
represents one received message, without encoding it further.
Security of offshore installations
27
==PAGE:36==
Figure 4.1: An example overview in OpenCPN open-source vessel tracking application
OpenCPN, a vessel tracking application visualising nautical charts and AIS messages to
provide spatial awareness for, among others, recreational ship operators, is a good exam-
ple of field-tested software utilizing vessel information gathered via AIS. While it supports
multiple modes of operations, it also allows for UDP stream integration, acting as a UDP
client and receiving encoded NMEA protocol !AIVDM type messages.
The protocol for official AIS base stations, as used by the maritime authorities of coastal
countries, is standardized, on the other hand [18]. The standard, IEC 62320-1:2015, re-
quires the base stations to produce signal characteristics report of a received signal as
part of the VSI (VDL signal information) sentence on every received digital sentence over
VHF. The report must include the dBm measure of the signal and may include the dB
RSSI measure of the signal [43]. This indicates that a solution developed for the analysis
of AIS messages is not only limited to an open-source solution but could also be adapted
for use with official IEC standardized equipment. For the purpose of the thesis, this is
not investigated, as access to such data is controlled, and I have no such equipment to
integrate or perform tests against.
With these considerations in mind, the system is designed to produce a UDP output of
raw NMEA !AIVDM messages.
4.4
Design decisions
This section describes the problems considered while drafting the architecture of a sys-
tem, and the decisions taken while approaching them.
4.4.1
Separation of concerns
As the processes for creating a flexible system that may be used as a framework for other
components, the leading principle that I have used for the design of the system was the
separation of concerns. This refers to the practice of dividing the functionality of a system
into distinct components or modules, each of which has a specific role and is responsible
for a well-defined set of tasks. The separation of responsibilities is important to consider
28
Security of offshore installations
==PAGE:37==
for a number of reasons. It helps to make the system more modular and easier to under-
stand and maintain. By dividing the functionality into smaller, more focused components,
it becomes easier to isolate and modify specific parts of the system without affecting the
rest, and easier to scale the system horizontally by adding more components as needed.
The separation of responsibilities can also help to improve the flexibility and adaptability
of the system. By designing the components to be independent and loosely coupled, it
becomes easier to completely replace them without affecting the overall functionality of
the system if needed. While not directly required for the use case, it can help improve the
scalability and performance of the system. This can in turn help to handle larger volumes
of data or traffic and improve the performance of the system.
4.4.2
Queue system
In order to provide the desired separation, I have chosen to use a queue messaging
approach to handling communication between the separated components of the system.
This approach involves using a queue messaging infrastructure, such as Apache Kafka or
a locally-deployed instance of RabbitMQ, to facilitate the exchange of messages or tasks
between the components.
The queue messaging approach has several benefits in terms of software design. First,
it allows for a separation of concerns between the components of the system. By using
a queue to facilitate communication, the components are decoupled and can operate
independently, each focusing on a specific set of tasks. This can make the system more
modular and easier to understand and maintain. The queue messaging approach can
improve the flexibility and adaptability of the system. By using a queue to buffer messages
or tasks, the components can operate asynchronously and at different speeds. This can
help to absorb spikes in traffic or temporary failures of individual components, making
the system more resilient. The queue messaging approach can improve the scalability
and performance of the system. By using a distributed queue, it is possible to scale the
system horizontally by adding more components as needed. This can help to handle large
volumes of data or traffic and improve the overall performance of the system.
Overall, I believe that the use of a queue messaging approach in the project is well-suited
to handle the communication between the various components of the system and can
improve the flexibility, scalability, and reliability of the system.
4.4.3
Describing modules
In order to implement a system with a modular design, it is important to clearly define the
modules and their responsibilities, as well as the data required and produced by each
module. Analyzing all steps required to detect a ship being spoofed, I have identified the
following components:
• Data collection - responsible for the collection of data from predefined, specified
sources.
• Message decoding - utilizing collected messages to decode and store, for further
use, information about the vessels’ positions as well as their status.
• Model generation - responsible for creating models of current signal conditions
based on historical data.
• Analysis - performing the bulk of analysis based on the models, as well as integrat-
ing into external services for a source of truth of the vessel details.
• Data publishing - responsible for publishing the analyzed data, both externally,
where the contents of the export may filter out potentially spoofed messages, as
Security of offshore installations
29
==PAGE:38==
well, as within the solution, in a mean to provide the data visualization capability to
the users.
• Data visualization - web component allowing the user to gain insight into the results
of the validation.
4.5
Architecture
The architecture of the system must take into account that multiple components might be
utilizing multiple frameworks while being a part of the same flow of data in the system.
That is why I have decided on an architecture based on polyglot microservices. The use
of multi-architectural patterns and polyglot microservices defines the possibility of mixing
and matching languages and technologies to the needs of each microservice and still have
them communicating with each other [44]. Generally, the validation of AIS messages is
a streamlined process, with different steps performing different actions, triggered by the
AIS message having been received. In order to design the components and map their
responsibilities and outputs, I have started by preparing a data flow chart, as seen in
Figure 4.2.
30
Security of offshore installations
==PAGE:39==
Figure 4.2: Data flow chart for a message in the conceptual design using ANSI notation
It is important to note, that while message analysis is a streamlined, step-by-step process,
data at various points of the processing flow needs to be stored externally, for further
analysis.
Security of offshore installations
31
==PAGE:40==
Figure 4.3: An architectural diagram of the proposed solution
32
Security of offshore installations
==PAGE:41==
4.6
Domain modelling
The system is designed with event-based architecture principles. The event-driven design
is based on the concept of events, defined as messages communicated between different
components of a system over a message broker. An adapted version of the event storming
technique has been applied to identify the necessary events.
The detailed design of specific components is defined in the following sections.
4.6.1
Events
Figure 4.4: UML class diagram for the events package
The events are designed to include all of the information necessary for execution in the
following steps. All events extend on the abstract AISEvent, which requires the MMSI,
timestamp of event creation, and allows for defining chainId of the current chain of events.
Security of offshore installations
33
==PAGE:42==
4.6.2
Shared model
Figure 4.5: UML class diagram for the shared models package
While the solution is split into multiple parts, some of the code is common across them.
In such cases, the code is imported from a library containing all of the classes, as visible
in the model diagram.
34
Security of offshore installations
==PAGE:43==
4.6.3
Data collection
Figure 4.6: UML class diagram for the collector component
The data collection component is responsible for receival of the raw NMEA format mes-
sages from an external source, such as AIS Catcher, an open-source tool for receival
of AIS messages using a VHF receiver, such as a Software Defined Radio, described
further. While working with AIS Validator, we can identify that the utility is capable of ex-
porting raw data over UDP, as well as using an HTTP POST request to send batched
received messages. The current implementation of the tool only allows for export of sig-
nal metadata, such as signal strength over the HTTP or command line. I have chosen to
utilize the HTTP functionality of AISCatcher to decouple the receiver and the collecting
component. The format published by the tool is a plain JSON object.
4.6.4
Message decoding
Figure 4.7: UML class diagram for the decoder component
Security of offshore installations
35
==PAGE:44==
The message decoding part is responsible for acting on the AISMessageReceivedEvent,
which indicates that the Collector microservice has received a new AIS message. As the
decoding of AIS protocol messages is quite a complex problem, the decoding is based on
an open-source project, AISmessages developed by Thomas Borg Salling. The author
claims that the decoding is field-tested. It is provided as a dependency available through
MavenCentral, that can be injected into a project.
A successful message decoding triggers a PositionMessageDecodedEvent with the con-
tents of the decoded message, if the message is either Type 1, 2 or 3 (position messages),
or VesselStaticMessageDecodedEvent, if the message is of Type 5. Before sending an
event, the component also saves the decoded position message into a database, for fu-
ture use in model generation.
4.6.5
Analysing
Figure 4.8: UML class diagram for the analyzer component. Zoomable
The analysis is designed to be driven by two means of validation. Static information of
vessels, as obtained from Type 5 messages, as well as the position messages.
36
Security of offshore installations
==PAGE:45==
Position validation utilizes the results of model generation. A prediction model is defined
as a two-dimensional list of predicted values, a two-dimensional list of prediction con-
fidences relating to the predicted values. The arrays indicate a grid of values, evenly
distributed, between the minimum and maximum longitude, and minimum and maximum
latitude covered by the given model. These values, as generated while creating a model,
are made available to the component, to facilitate determining the correct model bin loca-
tion of each vessel position. With the bins being evenly distributed, and the confidence
grid following the exact same format, the Analysis component is then able to compare the
received signal RSSI value to the predicted value, as indicated by the model. While the
predictions carry a degree of uncertainty, the confidence at the point of the grid can then
be evaluated using statistical analysis tools, namely the standard score at 95% and 99%
confidence intervals. Received vessel signal strength being different than the expected
value indicates a possibility of spoofing, which is indicated in a VesselValidationResult,
and published to the message broker using an AISPositionValidatedEvent event.
Vessel static information is achieved by checking the received report against an external
data source, as indicated in the previous chapter. The acquired data is then compared
with the decoded values present in the static info report, any discrepancies are noted in
the ExternalVerificationResult, and published in the MessagePublishedEvent. The results
of the vessel validation responses are cached locally, in a database, as static vessel data
is unlikely to change. If no vessel information exists in the cache, the data is collected
using a data provider’s API.
4.6.6
Data publishing
Figure 4.9: UML class diagram for the publisher component
The data publishing component’s main responsibility is to make the results of the analysis
by the solution available to the end-users. This can be achieved in multiple ways. The
component is listening to events emitted by the analyzing component, VesselStaticMes-
sageValidatedEvent, and AISPositionValidatedEvent. It is at this point that the messages
are stored in the database.
There are three ways through which the component exposes the validation data, using
Security of offshore installations
37
==PAGE:46==
a REST service - designed specifically for the initialization of data in the visualization
component, using a UDP output stream of raw NMEA messages, and through a Mes-
sagePublishedEvent. Data exposed via a REST GET method includes all of the latest
results of both validations and is collected from the database. This allows the web client
to immediately provide an overview while accessing the website, as opposed to waiting
for the events to be published. The age of the accessed data is configurable. The event
is published on each occasion of a received validation. It includes the static information
details of the vessel, the vessel position, as well as the expected RSSI value in dB, and
the error between the measured RSSI and expected RSSI, and the state of the vessel
statics validation. While publishing the results over UDP to external components, the
service utilises the result of model validation to ”decide” whether the message should be
published or skipped. This behavior is configurable and can be set to include the following
categories - all messages, highly suspected spoofing, or possible spoofing. This means
that for some of the vessel tracks and configurations, the data will be available through
the web component, but not exported out.
4.6.7
Model generation
The model generation is thought to be a self-contained entity, providing newly generated
models when requested from outside of the sources, over the message queue. The model
generation utilises the Kriging algorithms to produce a grid of interpolated, expected, val-
ues and makes use of the grid of Kriging interpolation errors to approximate the certainty
of measurements at these points. While Kriging is a memory-intensive approach to data
analysis, the data needs to be prepared, or limited before a model generation.
The component directly interfaces with the underlying database, pulling the position mes-
sage data saved after the decoding process. The pulled data is to be filtered to only be of
AIS Message Types 1, 2 and 3, which contain the vessel positions. In order to import a
message to the model, it is required for the data to contain the following fields: reported
latitude and longitude, the MMSI of the vessel, the timestamp of the message creation
and the received signal strength indicator for the message. The collected data is then
placed in a number of bins to reduce the memory intensity of the operation. Data falling
into each bin is averaged, and merged into a single record, with an average of both lati-
tude, longitude and signal strength being calculated from the belonging vessel messages.
A variogram is then automatically fitted from the averaged bins, and kriging is applied.
To define what a generated model is, I needed to analyze all of the artifacts generated as
a result of the kriging operation on the data. The key artifacts are the grid of interpolated
values, as well as the grid of interpolation error (or confidence). In order to enable other
components to locate the correct bin for the received data, the bounds of the maximum
and minimum latitudes and longitudes of the model are provided. The only artifact gen-
erated as a result of a run of the component is the InterpolatedModel object, defined as
shown on Figure 4.8
4.7
Visualization component design
The role of the visualization component is to provide insight to the operator on the results
of both models as well as static data validation, in addition to filtering the data published
to external software. At the beginning of the process for the design of the user interface,
an initial draft design sketch has been made. Then, in the process of refining the design,
a prototype wireframe has been constructed, envisioning the design of the final product.
38
Security of offshore installations
==PAGE:47==
Figure 4.10: A prototyping wireframe of the final design of the website
The website displays AIS data on the map and in the table. On the map, a vessel is marked
as a colored dot. The color of the dot depends on the signal strength, validation state and
the status of the external check. If the vessel is validated and there is no external check
failure, the dot will have a color based on the signal strength. The color is chosen from a
color spectrum, where signal strength equal to 0 is given a red color and maximum signal
strength is given a green color. If there is an external check failure or the validation state
is VERY_LIKELY_SPOOFING, the vessel is marked on the map with a red dot and its row
in the table has a red background. If the validation state is POTENTIAL_SPOOFING, the
vessel is marked with a yellow dot and its row in the table has a yellow background. The
table shows all necessary data about vessels - name, MMSI, IMO, call sign, predicted
RSSI, actual RSSI, discrepancy, current position validation state, the reason for external
check failure, and the last updated date for the messages associated with the vessel’s
MMSI. The data is shown in a user-friendly way - the most important information is written
using semi-bold font, all the numbers are fixed to two decimal places to make it easier to
read and the time is shown as x minutes ago.
While employing a simple design, I believe it gives the user a good overview of all the
vessels nearby, both on the map and in the table. By default, the data in the table is
sorted by the validation state so that the potentially spoofing ships are listed on the top,
but the user can sort by any property by clicking on the headers in the table. The purpose
of the website is to display the latest updates of the vessels’ info and positions in a timely
Security of offshore installations
39
==PAGE:48==
manner.
40
Security of offshore installations
==PAGE:49==
5
Implementation
5.1
Data collection setup
While AIS data is generally available on online aggregating services such as VesselFinder
or MarineTraffic, the data does not reflect the actual signal parameters or range availability
of received signals. For this purpose, position data analyzed and verified in this thesis is
collected locally through the use of hardware and software designed for the task.
5.1.1
Hardware
For the purpose of data collection, an off-the-shelf, readily available hardware solution
for signal reception is used. While the findings and solution produced in the thesis are
applicable regardless of the utilized hardware, the models and validation data presented
in the thesis are obtained using a Nooelec NESDR SMArt v4 device, utilizing an R820T2
tuner, capable of signal reception in the 25 Mhz to 1700 Mhz range, allowing antenna
connection using an SMA connector. It is a device commonly used to receive signals with
a software-defined radio (SDR). It can be classified under the RTL-SDR 1 branch of SDR
receivers.
Figure 5.1: Nooelec NESDR SMArt v4 © Nooelec
The antenna setup is a single monopole, telescopic, retractable antenna of the whip type,
located at a height of approximately 60 meters above sea level, with a direct line-of-sight
on the sea in the southern direction. The device itself is connected via USB 2.0 to a laptop
running Windows.
5.1.2
Software
There are multiple tools available for decoding of AIS messages from a radio signal. A
limited number of them include direct communication with the RTL-SDR receiver family,
1RTL-SDR (Realtek Software-Defined Radio) is a type of software-defined radio (SDR) that uses a low-
cost digital television tuner chip as the radio receiver. RTL-SDR allows users to receive radio signals using a
computer and a simple antenna. It has been developed as an open-source project and has become popular
due to its low cost and flexibility. RTL-SDR can be used for a variety of applications, such as receiving
and decoding digital radio signals, receiving and analyzing signals from satellite transponders, or monitoring
aircraft communications.
Security of offshore installations
41
==PAGE:50==
enabling more control over the parameters of the receiver, with a non-exhaustive list of
identified tools being:
• AISdeco2 - no longer in active development
• SDRangel
• rtl-ais
• AIS Catcher
From the list above, the AIS Catcher utility has been chosen for data collection, due to
good documentation, active development, as well as the automatic export of power signal
data for each received message. The software enables gain control on the device, which
is key while attempting to validate the received tracks.
AIS Catcher
AIS Catcher is a multi-platform, open-source package designed specifically for the recep-
tion and decoding of AIS messages on, among others, RTL-SDR-based receivers. Com-
piled, it is a command line program, providing a number of features useful for analyzing
the received AIS messages. While capable of single pass-through of raw NMEA 0183
protocol messages across a UDP connection, it is also possible to configure it to send
HTTP POST requests periodically, containing detailed information about each of the re-
ceived message, as well as interpretation of the messages into human-readable format.
For the purpose of data collection for the thesis, the AIS Catcher has been configured as
showcased in Listing 5.1
1
-o 1 -M DT -gr TUNER 40 RTLAGC off -H http://<hostname >:<port> INTERVAL 3
Listing 5.1: Command line parameters used for data collection
Such a configuration enables metadata about the signal, such as strength and ppm2 cor-
rection to be sent along with the original NMEA 0183 encapsulated messages, using
HTTP POST request to a specified endpoint, at an interval rate of 3 seconds, while spec-
ifying the software gain on the receiver at 40 dB and disabling the receiver’s automatic
gain control.
5.1.3
Coverage
This setup allows me to collect reliable data up to approximately 40 kilometers in the
southwest, south, and southeast directions, with the exception directly obstructed by the
island of Amager to the east.
2ppm in the world of RTL-SDR is a unit used to measure the variance in a crystal oscillator between the
frequency it is meant to operate at and the frequency it actually operates at. [45]
42
Security of offshore installations
==PAGE:51==
Figure 5.2: An overview of the amount received messages using the setup
The approximate amount of messages received and decoded per minute seems to be
within reason, as compared with other, online available stations operating in the same
area. The setup manages to receive, on average, at least 150 messages per minute,
depending on the signal propagation conditions and vessel traffic in the covered area.
Figure 5.3: Signal strength variation using the setup
The average of the received signal across a time frame seems to be consistent enough to
indicate that the receiver is not majorly affected by easily addressable factors, the place-
ment is optimal in terms of base noise levels being stable.
Security of offshore installations
43
==PAGE:52==
5.2
Data storage
The collection of positions and vessel info from AIS signals can involve a large amount
of data. Therefore, a suitable data warehousing strategy had to be defined to allow for
efficient storage and access. While the position report of a vessel itself is compact in its
NMEA 0183 encapsulated version, Message Types 1, 2, and 3 being at maximum 168 bits
long [46], the decoded information from each message contains a lot of data. Coupled
with the fact that Class A units broadcast such information every 2-10 seconds while en
route, the amount of data collected is considerable, and increases linearly with time. It is
important to note that for the purpose of this application, not all decoded data are of value.
While the decoded information about the position and details about the static information
of a vessel are required, some transient values such as rate of turn, or current drought do
not need to be implicitly saved. For the purpose of future analysis, it is however beneficial
to store the encoded AIS message, as all of the data can then still be decoded, on an
ad-hoc basis.
Due to positional data being of the highest importance, and the need to store it obvious
from the purpose of the solution, I have decided on using MongoDB as a database of
choice. Being a NoSQL3 database, it provides flexible storage, without the need of cre-
ating data schemes, which makes it a good fit for storing of decoded AIS information. A
single database instance is proposed, running locally, or accessible via a virtual private
network.
The connection between the microservice applications, running Java, and the database
is facilitated using Spring Framework’s built-in MongoDB connector. As defined in the
documentation, the key functional areas of Spring Data MongoDB are a POJO (plain-
old Java object) centric model for interacting with a MongoDB DBCollection and easily
writing a repository-style data access layer [47]. Meanwhile, the model generation utility,
running Python, utilises the pymongo distribution, which is the MongoDB official driver for
synchronous Python applications [48].
5.3
Model generation component
The model generation is performed by a standalone Python 3 application, connected with
the main architecture via RabbitMQ events and using MongoDB as its repository. The
code is running as a single thread application, constantly listening on a RabbitMQ ex-
change. Receiving an event triggers the generation of a new model. The parameters for
model generation are defined at the start of the receiving program, provided as command
line arguments, shown in Listing 5.2.
1
python modelgenerator.py -dbhost <dbhost> -dbport <dbport > -rabbitmqhost <
rabbitmqhost > -dbname aisvalidator
Listing 5.2: Example command line parameters used for starting the service
The command line parameter handling is performed using the argparse module, a built-in
feature of Python. A listing showing the method of instantiating all of the possible argu-
ments is shown in Listing 5.3. Required parameters are necessary to run the application,
the database host, name, and the RabbitMQ host are required at a minimum. The setup
is set up to use the default values for other cases. If the code is run in top-level code
3NoSQL (Not Only SQL) databases are a type of database management system that are designed to
handle large amounts of data that do not fit the traditional, structured model of a relational database.
44
Security of offshore installations
==PAGE:53==
environment, that is __main__, the parameters will be passed onto the main method of
the module.
1
if __name__ == '__main__':
2
try:
3
argParser = argparse.ArgumentParser()
4
argParser.add_argument("-dbhost", required=True ,help="database host")
5
argParser.add_argument("-dbport", type=int, required=True, help="
database port")
6
argParser.add_argument("-dbusername", help="database username")
7
argParser.add_argument("-dbpassword", help="database password")
8
argParser.add_argument("-dbname", required=True, help="database name")
9
argParser.add_argument("-rabbitmqhost", required=True, help="rabbitmq
host")
10
argParser.add_argument("-rabbitmqusername", help="rabbitmq username")
11
argParser.add_argument("-rabbitmqpassword", help="rabbitmq password")
12
args, unknown = argParser.parse_known_args()
13
main(args)
14
except KeyboardInterrupt:
15
print('Interrupted')
16
try:
17
sys.exit(0)
18
except SystemExit:
19
os._exit(0)
Listing 5.3: Defining command line behavior using argparse module
After instantiation of the main function, the solution creates an instance-specific, uniquely
identifiable, queue, that the messages coming from other components will be received
on. Since my RabbitMQ implementation is based on exchanges, onto which queues are
added, this is also performed during the initialization. The routing key used to route mes-
sages from the exchange to the queue is the exact simple name of the event class that is
sent out from the Analyzer component. This part is visualized in Listing 5.4.
1
queueName = 'ais-validator -model-queue-' + str(uuid.uuid4())
2
connection = pika.BlockingConnection(pika.ConnectionParameters(host=args.
rabbitmqhost , heartbeat=3600))
3
channel = connection.channel()
4
channel.queue_declare(queue=queueName)
5
channel.queue_bind(exchange='ais-validator', queue=queueName , routing_key=
"SignalModelUpdateEvent")
6
channel.basic_consume(queue=queueName , on_message_callback=callback ,
auto_ack=True)
7
channel.start_consuming()
Listing 5.4: Subscribing to the shared RabbitMQ exchange
The heartbeat indicates the amount of time that the RabbitMQ server will wait before re-
ceiving an acknowledgment from the component on each event. The pika basic_consume
implementation is single-threaded, meaning that for the duration of a run of the callback
function, the component will not communicate with the exchange. Due to the model gen-
eration possibly being a time-consuming process, the heartbeat is increased from the
default to 60 minutes.
The callback function, as shown in Listing 5.5, is responsible for all of the logic regarding
data collection, model generation, and model persistence. With the event messages cre-
ated in Java component utilising JSON, it is possible to deserialize it directly from the body
Security of offshore installations
45
==PAGE:54==
of the message into a python object, using the built-in json module. The necessary posi-
tion data, as indicated in the event’s payload is then fetched from the MongoDB using the
PyMongo driver, and prepared for insertion into the model-generating part. A success-
ful model generation then triggers an insertion of the collected model data together with
information about the original data set as well as the variances of the interpolated values.
1
def callback(ch, method, properties , body):
2
eventObject = json.loads(body)
3
print('Model generation event received.')
4
modelLengthDays = eventObject["lengthInDays"]
5
dbConnection = connectToDatabase(args.dbhost , args.dbport , args.
dbusername , args.dbpassword , args.dbname)
6
collectedData = collectData(dbConnection , eventObject["
latitudeMinBound"], eventObject["latitudeMaxBound"], eventObject["
longitudeMinBound"], eventObject["longitudeMaxBound"],
modelLengthDays )
7
preparedData = prepareData(collectedData)
8
ordinaryKrigingResult , ss1 = generateModel(preparedData)
9
modelsCollection = dbConnection["models"]
10
resultdict = { "type": "OrdinaryKriging", "generatedAt": datetime.now
(), "minlon": preparedData["lon"].min(), "maxlon": preparedData["
lon"].max(), "minlat": preparedData["lat"].min(), "maxlat":
preparedData["lat"].max(), "predictionGrid": ordinaryKrigingResult
.data.tolist(), "minVariance": np.sqrt(ss1.data.min()), "
maxVariance": np.sqrt(ss1.data.max()), "varianceGrid": ss1.data.
tolist()}
11
modelsCollection.insert_one(resultdict)
12
print('Model uploaded.')
Listing 5.5: Callback function ran upon receive of event
To generate the kriging model, for the proposed implementation I have decided on us-
ing PyKrige - a python module representing an all-purpose kriging toolkit. It incorporates
the linear, power, spherical, gaussian and exponential variograms, and supports auto-
matic variogram estimation, based on input data. [49] The available kriging algorithms
include the ordinary kriging, universal kriging, regression kriging and classification krig-
ing. The implementation showcased in Listing 5.6 utilises the most basic of models, the
ordinary kriging model, however changing between the different versions of kriging can
be achieved easily.
1
def generateModel(data):
2
binNumber = 100
3
d1 = data.assign(
4
Lon_cut=pd.cut(data.lon, binNumber),
5
Lat_cut=pd.cut(data.lat, binNumber)
6
)
7
d2 = d1.assign(cartesian=pd.Categorical(d1.filter(regex='_cut').apply(
tuple, 1)))
8
df2 = d2.groupby(by='cartesian').agg('mean')
9
lon = df2["lon"].to_numpy()
10
lat = df2["lat"].to_numpy()
11
z = df2["z"].to_numpy()
12
grid_lon = np.linspace(lon.min(), lon.max(), 100)
13
grid_lat = np.linspace(lat.min(), lat.max(), 100)
14
OK = OrdinaryKriging(
15
lon,
16
lat,
17
z,
18
nlags = 16,
46
Security of offshore installations
==PAGE:55==
19
variogram_model="power",
20
verbose=True
21
)
22
ordinaryKrigingResult , ss1 = OK.execute("grid", grid_lon , grid_lat)
23
return ordinaryKrigingResult , ss1
Listing 5.6: Generation of an ordinary kriging interpolation model
The initial part of the model generation involves binning the collected data into a specified
number of bins. Pandas module’s assign function is used to add cut information to each
of the data points, both in latitudinal and longitudinal directions. The resulting enhanced
dataframe is then assigned and aggregated down using a cartesian grouping column.
The aggregation of values falling into each bin involves averaging the values of each of
the longitude, latitude and signal power columns, affecting their placement on the kriging
grid.
A variogram is then automatically fitted using the OrdinaryKriging object, and a power
variogram model is used to fit it. The krigging interpolation is then performed on 2 evenly
spaced vectors in both geographical directions, creating a two-dimensional grid of calcu-
lated values.
5.4
Microservice backend
The backend components of the solution, which are made up of the previously mentioned
components are written in Java 17, utilizing the Spring Framework. Using the Spring
Framework brings value to the project, as I heavily used the Spring Framework’s con-
tainerized approach to inversion of control.
The codebase also relies on Project Lombok. Lombok is a Java library that can be used
to reduce the amount of boilerplate code that is typically required when working with the
Java programming language. It provides a number of annotation-based utility methods
and features that can be used to automate the generation of common code patterns,
such as getters and setters, equals and hashCode methods, and constructors. The de-
pendency management is handled using Maven. Apache Maven is a build automation
tool for Java projects. It is designed to help manage the build process for large, complex
projects by providing a standard way to build the project, a clear definition of the build
process, and a means to manage dependencies on third-party libraries. With the solution
being split into microservices, the Maven project is also configured in a distributed mode.
One, main, package is used as a parent project for all of the microservices, sharing the
common dependencies. Apart from Maven projects for specific components, there is also
a specific package for the common classes and modules, such as the RabbitMQ driver
code, as well as event classes.
The components utilise Spring Boot environment’s externalized configuration to config-
ure the dynamic parameters, such as MongoDB, RabbitMQ, or model generation trigger
params, which is then injected using the @ConfigurationProperties injection. An example
of such a property definition for the Analysis component is shown in Listing 5.7
1
logging.level.root=INFO
2
stations.home.longitude=12.404535
3
stations.home.latitude=55.625091
4
spring.data.mongodb.uri=mongodb://localhost:27017
5
spring.data.mongodb.database=aisvalidator
6
spring.data.mongodb.username=
7
spring.data.mongodb.password=
8
model.generate.cron=0 0 * * * ?
Security of offshore installations
47
==PAGE:56==
9
model.generate.latitude.lowerBound=55.4
10
model.generate.latitude.upperBound=55.44
11
model.generate.longitude.lowerBound=12.3
12
model.generate.longitude.upperBound=12.6
13
model.generate.lengthInDays=7
14
external.source.datalastic.enabled=true
15
external.source.datalastic.url=https://api.datalastic.com/api/v0/vessel_find?
api-key=%s&mmsi=%s
16
external.source.datalastic.apikey=
17
external.source.datalastic.mapperClass=com.aisvalidator.analyzer.service.model
.external.datalastic.DatalasticResponse
18
external.source.marinetraffic.enabled=false
19
external.source.marinetraffic.url=https://services.marinetraffic.com/api/
exportvessel/%s?mmsi=%s&msgtype=extended
20
external.source.marinetraffic.apikey=
21
external.source.marinetraffic.mapperClass=com.aisvalidator.analyzer.service.
model.external.marinetraffic.MarineTrafficVesselResponse
Listing 5.7: Example of configuration properties for the analyzer component
An interesting part of the implementation includes the process of determining the con-
fidence value for the received vessel position, which is triggered every time a position
message within the model bounds is parsed.
1
public static ResultSummary isWithinConfidence(double expectedValue , double
variance , double actualValue) {
2
double standardError = Math.sqrt(variance);
3
double upperLimit = expectedValue + (standardError*PERCENTILE_POINT_95
);
4
double lowerLimit = expectedValue - (standardError*PERCENTILE_POINT_95
);
5
if (actualValue < lowerLimit || actualValue > upperLimit) {
6
upperLimit = expectedValue + (standardError*PERCENTILE_POINT_99);
7
lowerLimit = expectedValue - (standardError*PERCENTILE_POINT_99);
8
if (actualValue < lowerLimit || actualValue > upperLimit) {
9
return ResultSummary.VERY_LIKELY_SPOOFING;
10
} else {
11
return ResultSummary.POTENTIAL_SPOOFING;
12
}
13
}
14
return ResultSummary.VALIDATED;
Listing 5.8: Confidence determination
As indicated in Chapter 3, the result of an interpolation using kriging, is both the interpo-
lated values, as well as the variance at each interpolated location. After finding the correct
bin corresponding to the position of the received message on the interpolated grid, the
expected value, standard error derived from the variance at the location and the actual
value are used to determine the confidence interval the value falls into. Values falling into
the 95th percentile of the distribution are treated as potential spoofing, while values above
the 99th percentile, as very likely spoofed.
5.5
Validation result frontend
The frontend component of the solution is written in React, a JavaScript library developed
by Facebook, being one of the industry standards for building single-page web applica-
tions.
48
Security of offshore installations
==PAGE:57==
Upon the initial loading, the data is fetched from the publisher application and the stomp
client is activated. To ensure that those operations are being run only once, at page load,
they are wrapped into the React useEffect hook.
While the initial part of data is fetched over a simple HTTP GET call to the Publisher
microservice, receiving updates from the model generation is achieved using an extension
to the RabbitMQ exchange, Web STOMP. Web STOMP is defined as a bridge between a
WebSocket implementation, usable by web clients, and the native STOMP (Simple Text
Oriented Messaging Protocol) implementation of RabbitMQ. The client side code utilizes
the @stomp/stompjs library, enabling the usage of stomp via WebSocket, like shown in
Listing 5.9.
1
const stompConfig = {
2
connectHeaders: { ack: "client", login: "web", passcode: "123456" },
3
brokerURL: queueurl ,
4
reconnectDelay: 2000,
5
onConnect: function (frame) {
6
let connectHeaders = { ack: "client" };
7
stompClient.subscribe(
8
"/exchange/ais-validator/MessagePublishedEvent",
9
function (message) {
10
setNewMessage(JSON.parse(message.body));
11
message.ack();
12
},
13
connectHeaders
14
);
15
},
16
onStompError: (frame) => {
17
console.log("Error from RabbitMQ: " + frame.body);
18
},
19
};
20
const stompClient = new Client(stompConfig);
Listing 5.9: Stomp client configuration
Stomp client is listening to the changes in the RabbitMQ queue and each new message
is stored in newMessage variable, that triggers another useEffect hook, responsible for
either updating an existing vessel in the list or append a new one to it.
The vesselList variable is created using React useState hook, meaning that whenever the
state of this variable changes, all the components will update and rerender. So whenever
the useEffect hook triggered by the newMessage variable changes the vesselList, it will
update both the map and the table, since they are both using the vesselList variable to
display their contents.
The map is generated by a React component called Map, which uses a JavaScript library
called Leaflet. To make it compatible with React, I have used an NPM package React-
leaflet. The Leaflet library is providing an interactive map using OpenStreetMap together
with different types of markers that can be shown on the map. The component maps
through vesselList array and for all the vessels that have the information about their lati-
tude and longitude, it creates a marker on the map in a form of a dot. The color of the dot
that represents a vessel is calculated based on its’ validation state, external failure check
and signal strength as it can be seen in Listing 5.10. The calculations in getColorBase-
dOnError function are using a JavaScript library RainbowVis.js.
1
function setColor(vessel) {
Security of offshore installations
49
==PAGE:58==
2
if (vessel.resultSummary === "POTENTIAL_SPOOFING") return "yellow";
3
else if (vessel.resultSummary === "VERY_LIKELY_SPOOFING" || vessel.
failureString) return "red";
4
else return "#" + getColorBasedOnError(vessel.error);
5
}
6
7
function getColorBasedOnError(actualError) {
8
let colorSelector = new Rainbow();
9
colorSelector.setSpectrum("green", "yellow", "red");
10
colorSelector.setNumberRange(
11
0,
12
Math.max.apply(
13
Math,
14
props.vesselList.filter((vessel) => vessel.actualValue).map((vessel)
=> Math.abs(vessel.actualValue))
15
)
16
);
17
return colorSelector.colorAt(actualError);
18
}
Listing 5.10: Functions generating a color of a dot representing a vessel displayed on the
map
The table is generated by a React component called Table. It creates an HTML table
element containing two other React components - TableHeader and TableRow reused
multiple times. The TableHeader component is creating a header element of the table
and also defines an onClick event for it, that triggers the sorting of the table.
The TableRow component is created by mapping through a vesselList array and creating
a new component for each vessel and displaying it in the table. Moreover, it defines an
onClick event for each table row, causing the vessel clicked to be marked with an extra
marker on the map. At the same time, it colors the background of the table row if there
is any external failure check message or spoofing suspected. All the values are fixed to
two decimal places to increase the readability of the table. To make it easier to follow the
updates, I have used JavaScript library Moment.js to display the time of the last update of
the vessel message. It is displayed as x minutes ago making it easier for the user to follow
incoming updates. Vessels with the last update time having happened over an hour in the
past are removed from the table and the map, to keep the showcased information concise.
The table can be sorted by clicking any of the headers in the table that triggers an as-
cending sorting by the property clicked and reset any sorting applied before. The sort is
performed using a JavaScript sort() method using a different sorting function depending
on the property by which the sort is done. The Moment.js library is used to create a sorting
function for sorting by the last update property. Second click on the same header changes
the sorting direction to descending, using the JavaScript native reverse() function.
50
Security of offshore installations
==PAGE:59==
6
Validation
6.1
Cross-validation
The model generation has been validated using the cross-validation technique. Literature
suggests, that it is able to provide an accurate estimate of the performance of a model
prediction [50]. As all of the data I have collected is time-relative, I can further specify the
approach to the use of time-split cross-validation. It has been shown that the time-split
cross-validation gives an R2 coefficient of determination that is more like that of a true
prospective prediction than the coefficient of determination from a random selection [51].
Since the amount of received data is considerable, the data can easily be divided into
a training set, and a test set. For the purpose of the tests, and comparison of different
kriging models and their implementations, the training data to test data will be split in a
ratio of 14 to 1, indicative of two weeks of received position messages used to evaluate
the following day of received messages.
While utilizing real received data, I needed to make an assumption that all of the vessel
positions have been truthful. This means that the performance of the evaluated models
is mostly performed as to the correctness of their interpolation of real vessel signal power
values at given points. To facilitate testing, I have defined an area of interest, located due
south from the location of the receiver, providing an unobstructed view of the vessels, still
within the theoretical line of sight of vessels with minimal height. The area covered by the
validation can be seen on Figure 6.1
Figure 6.1: Area used in the validation process
The result of model generation, representing the estimated values at each point is overlaid
on a 2D plane, with the original vessel positions, used for providing the basis for the
interpolation model with their actual RSSI values dotted on the chart. While enough to
approximate the locations, the actual distances between the vessel positions might be
different, due to a simple projection being used, instead of mapping the coordinates in
three dimensions onto the curvature of the earth.
Security of offshore installations
51
==PAGE:60==
Figure 6.2: Result of ordinary kriging interpolation with learning set positions
The interpolated model seems to follow the expected patterns. Areas closer to the receiver
are interpolated to have a higher value of signal power. The coastal area in the southwest
of the model bounds, where interference may be expected is interpolated to have the
lowest expected signal strength.
Figure 6.3: Result of ordinary kriging interpolation with test set positions
Looking at the test set positions, overlayed over the result we can see that even on data
52
Security of offshore installations
==PAGE:61==
not present in the interpolation model-building process, the general trends are similar.
Figure 7.1 shows the spatial of the absolute value of the measured error, with a color scale
from blue to red. While most of the continuous vessel tracks are estimated correctly, the
highest relative error seems to be connected to vessel positions at major concentrations
of received messages. This may indicate that while the vessel is stationary, or at anchor,
it drifts and turns relative to the ground, hindering the line of sight to the receiver.
Figure 6.4: Visualisation of the absolute error of prediction
The values of absolute error, as plugged into the measurements made by the Analyzer
component of the system indicates, that a total of 44 vessel positions, out of 10591 ana-
lyzed, would trigger a false positive spoofing indication. Analyzing the distribution of the
errors, they seem to follow a distribution pattern, as shown on Figure 6.5.
Security of offshore installations
53
==PAGE:62==
Figure 6.5: Plot of measured error against the normal distribution
The measured errors, when plotted against the normal distribution, indicate that while not
ideally following the normal distribution, it closely resembles one. With the null hypothesis
of normality of the interpolated error rates, I can reject the hypothesis, as the p value
calculated using D’Agostino and Pearson’s method falls below 0.001, which makes us
able to reject the hypothesis of normality.
Figure 6.6: Quantile-quantile plot against the normal distribution
Further analysis, such as with the use of quantile-quantile plot, leads us to the conclusion
that the error data is following a normal distribution only in some of the theoretical quan-
tiles. Measured error values being overrepresented in the highest quantiles of samples,
and underrepresented in the lowest. An important observation needs to be taken into
account here, that the minimum RSSI level for a vessel differs, and can in some cases,
lead to messages being undecodable, which in turn means being left out of the plot. For
the observations made, the minimum dB level predicted by the model falls as low as -30
dB. The approximate minimum threshold at which the messages have been decoded has
been -38 dB. This indicates that at such positions, a vessel with a measurement error of
above -8dB would simply not be received.
54
Security of offshore installations
==PAGE:63==
6.2
Injection of spoofed messages
To validate the usability and results of the complete solution, I have opted to use an em-
pirical approach of inserting fake, randomly generated AIS messages directly at the data-
collecting part of the system.
An operational system has been set up, with an interpolation model obtained using the or-
dinary kriging method. A number of randomly generated vessel position and vessel static
info reports have been generated and inserted via an HTTP POST, in a manner equal to
that of a regular operation of the system. Random values for the vessel’s MMSI, position
and signal strength have been encoded into the messages using a Python pyais package
encoding capabilities.
Figure 6.7: Part of operator’s overview over the injected messages
Table 6.1: Results of message injection
Status
Number of messages
Percentage of whole
Considered valid
167
41.75%
Possible spoofing
49
12.25%
High probabilty of spoofing
184
46 %
Security of offshore installations
55
==PAGE:64==
Out of a random sample of 400 position messages, generated at random locations within
the bounds of the model and a random RSSI value within the maximum and minimum
range from the history of received messages, the system was able to identify 233 mes-
sages as being spoofed, with 49 being identified as spoofing with a high probability and
184 as very high probability. 167 messages have been identified as valid. This suggests
that the system is capable of determining spoofing with some degree of confidence. With
a low rate of false positives and a 58.25% of success in detecting spoofing, I believe the
system is validated in bringing value to the security of an AIS installation.
56
Security of offshore installations
==PAGE:65==
7
Discussion
In this chapter, I would like to present the results of the thesis and provide a discussion
on the findings.
7.1
Results
The key artifact and result of the thesis is a framework of AIS validation that can be applied
at the operations and coordination centers of offshore assets, utilizing already existing
infrastructure. A microservice-centered design of the solution allows for easy replacement
of specific components and tailoring it to the specific needs.
The framework is able to detect spoofing on Class A position messages, as well as Class
A static vessel data AIS sentences, which make up the majority of received reports.
Figure 7.1: Share of total messages for each AIS message type over a time period
With this in mind, a similar approach as the one described in the thesis can be taken to
extend the coverage to include Class B positions as well. These types of messages are
generally sent by smaller, recreational vessels, that are not required to, but are able to,
opt-in for the usage of AIS. The thesis documents the decisions taken behind both the
process of the design and implementation of the framework, as well as the underlying
signal interpolation method, used to model the signal conditions in a defined area.
As indicated in the research, multiple means of verifying position data exist, most notable
of them involving multilateration techniques, for example, using time-of-arrival-difference
techniques to approximate the location of the signal source for an AIS message. How-
ever, within the constraints of an offshore installation, it may not always be possible to
achieve good enough coverage to utilise such techniques. For this reason, in the thesis, I
have investigated means of validation of spoofing using a single receiver only. A promis-
ing approach of utilising the RSSI power of the message has been explored, designed
and implemented. To achieve this, I have used the kriging technique belonging to the
geostatistical toolkit, usually applied to interpolate data on physical phenomena given a
limited set of data.
This solution has been validated against real data using a cross-validation technique,
yielding promising results - across the tested dataset, less than 0.5% of the vessel mes-
sages triggered a false positive for real vessel reports. A validation using randomized
vessel positions at random, but realistic signal levels yielded a detection rate of 58.25%.
Security of offshore installations
57
==PAGE:66==
To verify the correctness of static messages, the possible sources of veritable information.
Research on the topic concluded with the finding, that it is currently impossible to verify
MMSI of a vessel against sources provided by the registration authorities. In light of that,
an approach of validation against popular maritime data aggregators has been taken.
7.2
Limitations
The solution to the problem of AIS spoofing has only partially been provided in the thesis.
While the proposed framework for message validation focuses on Class A AIS equipment
vessels, and their static and position messages, it does not cover the entirety of the AIS
protocol. Spoofing of aids to navigation or the closest point of approach spoofing can still
go undetected. While the approach can be extended to some other messages within the
AIS protocol, messages not tied to a specific vessel, that is, messages with no obvious
point of origin, can not be investigated with the designed framework.
While static information validation is performed on the received messages, the framework
can only attest to their accuracy. Providing a complete, correct data export for a different
vessel, that exists and impersonating as such vessel cannot be detected using the tool.
7.3
Future work
As described in the previous sections, the future work involves addition of Class B mes-
sages, possibly utilising a separately generated model, due to different requirements for
transmitters between vessels of the two classes. Focus can also be placed on fine-tuning
the kriging algorithm, especially when the received data have signal strength measured
in an absolute unit, such as dBm. With that information, the kriging interpolation perfor-
mance could possibly be improved using detrending. An interesting path to take with the
solution would be to investigate the use of multiple receiving setups and comparing the
interpolated models. The use of just one another receiver may improve the detection ratio
for spoofed vessels.
7.4
Conclusion
Throughout the thesis, I have gathered the resources that provided insight into the re-
search questions:
• Is AIS spoofing a real threat to offshore installations?
• What are the possible attacks on the AIS infrastructure?
• How effective can a tool, designed to improve the offshore installation operators’
awareness of possible spoofing, be?
Each topic has been covered at different points in the thesis, and here is a summary of
the findings and answers to the questions.
Is AIS spoofing a real threat to offshore installations? Yes. I believe that the operations
across offshore installations are inherently subjected to the same threats coming from the
vulnerabilities of the AIS, as any other party operating in the maritime domain. Chapter 2
brings into light some known cases where AIS spoofing has taken place, causing concern
within the maritime world; it is not unthinkable that should such an event occur targeting
an offshore asset, the results would be similar. Even though none of the offshore asset
risk analysis frameworks I have researched acknowledge such a threat. And AIS spoofing
can take many forms. The system is vulnerable to vessel position spoofing, impersonifi-
cation of other vessels through spoofed static information, Aid to Navigation spoofing, or
58
Security of offshore installations
==PAGE:67==
closest point of approach spoofing, among others. This decreases the trust put into the
system by vessel navigation crew and offshore asset operators.
The proposed solution in the form of a validation tool is tested to be at least somewhat
effective in aiding the awareness of offshore installation operators, detecting vessel po-
sition spoofing with over 50% accuracy while managing to keep the false positives to a
minimum. Static information messages being validated against an external source and
bringing discrepancies to the attention of the operators, in my opinion, improves the situ-
ational awareness of the operator, allowing them to realize possible cases of spoofing in
near real-time.
Security of offshore installations
59
==PAGE:68==
60
Security of offshore installations
==PAGE:69==
Bibliography
[1]
Panel of Experts of the 1718 DPRK Sanctions Committee. Final report of the Panel
of Experts submitted pursuant to resolution 2407 (2018). 2019. URL: https://www.
undocs.org/S/2019/171.
[2]
Royal Navy. HMS Defender (D36). URL: https : / / www . royalnavy . mod . uk / our -
organisation/the- fighting- arms/surface- fleet/destroyers/hms- defender (visited on
11/04/2022).
[3]
Ministerie van Defense. Zr.Ms. Evertsen. URL: https://www.defensie.nl/organisatie/
marine/eenheden/schepen/zr-ms-evertsen (visited on 11/04/2022).
[4]
David Hambling. “UK ship hit by GPS spoof”. In: New Scientist 250.3341 (2021),
p. 17. ISSN: 0262-4079. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/S0262-4079(21)01131-3.
[5]
H I Sutton. Positions of Two NATO Ships Were Falsified Near Russian Black Sea
Naval Base. 2021. URL: https://news.usni.org/2021/06/21/positions-of-two-nato-
ships-were-falsified-near-russian-black-sea-naval-base.
[6]
Danish Maritime Authority. Guidance for Ship Station License. URL: https://dma.
dk/ship-survey-and-registration/apply-for-a-certificate/guidance-for-ship-station-
license (visited on 10/09/2022).
[7]
Kimbra Cutlip. Spoofing: One Identity Shared by Multiple Vessels. URL: https://
globalfishingwatch.org/data/spoofing-one-identity-shared-by-multiple-vessels/ (visited
on 10/08/2022).
[8]
Andrej Androjna et al. “AIS Data Vulnerability Indicated by a Spoofing Case-Study”.
In: Applied Sciences 11.11 (May 2021), p. 5015. ISSN: 2076-3417. DOI: 10.3390/
app11115015. URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.3390/app11115015.
[9]
Marco Balduzzi, Alessandro Pasta, and Kyle Wilhoit. “A security evaluation of AIS
automated identification system”. In: Dec. 2014, pp. 436–445. DOI: 10.1145/2664243.
2664257.
[10]
Emily Heaslip. Strategy Urgently Needed to Address Cybersecurity Risks to Infras-
tructure. URL: https://www.sofarocean.com/posts/heres-how-we-can-get-weather-
forecasts-while-offshore (visited on 10/06/2022).
[11]
Tao Zhang et al. “Detection of AIS Closing Behavior and MMSI Spoofing Behavior
of Ships Based on Spatiotemporal Data”. In: Remote Sensing 12.4 (2020). ISSN:
2072-4292. DOI: 10.3390/rs12040702. URL: https://www.mdpi.com/2072-4292/12/
4/702.
[12]
Gary Kessler, Philip Craiger, and Jon Haass. “A Taxonomy Framework for Mar-
itime Cybersecurity: A Demonstration Using the Automatic Identification System”.
In: TransNav, the International Journal on Marine Navigation and Safety of Sea
Transportation 12 (Jan. 2018), pp. 429–437. DOI: 10.12716/1001.12.03.01.
[13]
United States Government Accountability Office. Strategy Urgently Needed to Ad-
dress Cybersecurity Risks to Infrastructure. Nov. 2022. URL: https://www.gao.gov/
assets/gao-23-105789.pdf (visited on 11/28/2022).
[14]
Mikhail Kashubsky. “Offshore petroleum security: Analysis of offshore security threats,
target attractiveness, and the international legal framework for the protection and
security of offshore petroleum installations”. In: Faculty of Law, University of Wol-
longong, 2011. URL: https://ro.uow.edu.au/theses/3662.
[15]
Systematic. The SITE software suite. URL: https://systematic.com/en-gb/industries/
renewables-utilities/offshore-wind/site/ (visited on 10/09/2022).
Security of offshore installations
61
==PAGE:70==
[16]
Zhengru Ren et al. “Offshore wind turbine operations and maintenance: A state-
of-the-art review”. In: Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews 144 (2021),
p. 110886. ISSN: 1364-0321. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.rser.2021.110886.
URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1364032121001805.
[17]
Savio Sciancalepore et al. “Auth-AIS: Secure, Flexible, and Backward-Compatible
Authentication of Vessels AIS Broadcasts”. English. In: IEEE Transactions on De-
pendable and Secure Computing 19.4 (July 2022). Publisher Copyright: IEEE, pp. 2709–
2726. ISSN: 1545-5971. DOI: 10.1109/TDSC.2021.3069428.
[18]
Francesco Papi et al. “Radiolocation and tracking of automatic identification system
signals for maritime situational awareness”. In: IET Radar, Sonar & Navigation 9.5
(2015), pp. 568–580. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1049/iet- rsn.2014.0292. eprint:
https://ietresearch.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/pdf/10.1049/iet-rsn.2014.0292. URL:
https://ietresearch.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1049/iet-rsn.2014.0292.
[19]
P. Zarchan and H. Musoff. Fundamentals of Kalman Filtering: A Practical Approach.
Progress in astronautics and aeronautics. American Institute of Aeronautics and As-
tronautics, Incorporated, 2000. ISBN: 9781563472558. URL: https://books.google.
dk/books?id=AQxRAAAAMAAJ.
[20]
Shanzeng Guo. “Space-based detection of spoofing AIS signals using Doppler fre-
quency”. In: Multisensor, Multisource Information Fusion: Architectures, Algorithms,
and Applications 2014. Ed. by Jerome J. Braun. Vol. 9121. International Society for
Optics and Photonics. SPIE, 2014, p. 912108. DOI: 10.1117/12.2050448.
[21]
Aristides Milios et al. “Automatic Fusion of Satellite Imagery and AIS data for Vessel
Detection”. In: 2019 22th International Conference on Information Fusion (FUSION).
2019, pp. 1–5. DOI: 10.23919/FUSION43075.2019.9011339.
[22]
International Maritime Organization (IMO). International Convention for the Safety
of Life At Sea (amended), Regulation V/19. 1974. amended.
[23]
Australian Maritime Safety Authority. Types of automatic identification systems. 2020.
URL: https : / / www . amsa . gov . au / safety - navigation / navigation - systems / types -
automatic-identification-systems.
[24]
Maurantonio Caprolu et al. “Vessels Cybersecurity: Issues, Challenges, and the
Road Ahead”. In: IEEE Communications Magazine 58 (June 2020), pp. 90–96. DOI:
10.1109/MCOM.001.1900632.
[25]
Yuli Chen. “Satellite-based AIS and its Comparison with LRIT”. In: TransNav, the
International Journal on Marine Navigation and Safety of Sea Transportation 8 (June
2014), pp. 183–187. DOI: 10.12716/1001.08.02.02.
[26]
European Maritime Safety Agency. Guidelines : AIS Message 5. URL: https://emsa.
europa.eu/cise-documentation/cise-data-model-1.5.3/model/guidelines/AIS-Message-
5_687507198.html (visited on 11/16/2022).
[27]
Fidus. AIS: A Guide to System Development. 2009. URL: https://fidus.com/wp-
content/uploads/2016/03/Guide_to_System_Development_March_2009.pdf.
[28]
Rajat Acharya. “Chapter 8 - Noise, multipath and interference”. In: Satellite Signal
Propagation, Impairments and Mitigation. Ed. by Rajat Acharya. Academic Press,
2017, pp. 247–278. ISBN: 978-0-12-809732-8. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-
0-12-809732-8.00008-9. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
B9780128097328000089.
[29]
Fabio Mazzarella et al. “AIS reception characterisation for AIS on/off anomaly de-
tection”. In: 2016 19th International Conference on Information Fusion (FUSION).
2016, pp. 1867–1873.
[30]
C. Fowler D. Green J. K. E. Tunaley and D. Power. “VHF propagation study”. In:
DRDC Atlantic CR 2011-152. Defence R&D Canada – Atlantic, Sept. 2012.
62
Security of offshore installations
==PAGE:71==
[31]
Ambili Parameswaran, Mohammad Iftekhar Husain, and Shambhu Upadhyaya. “Is
RSSI a reliable parameter in sensor localization algorithms: an experimental study”.
In: (Jan. 2009).
[32]
Abdullah Alhasanat et al. “Efficient RSS-based collaborative localisation in wire-
less sensor networks”. In: International Journal of Sensor Networks 22 (Jan. 2016),
pp. 27–36. DOI: 10.1504/IJSNET.2016.079335.
[33]
J.F. Steffensen. Interpolation: Second Edition. Dover Books on Mathematics. Dover
Publications, 2013. ISBN: 9780486154831. URL: https://books.google.dk/books?
id=0xV7rO28veQC.
[34]
UN Committee of Experts on Big Data and Data Science for Official Statistics - The
AIS Task Team. AIS Handbook. 2021. URL: https://www.undocs.org/S/2019/171.
[35]
Donald Shepard. “A Two-Dimensional Interpolation Function for Irregularly-Spaced
Data”. In: Proceedings of the 1968 23rd ACM National Conference. ACM ’68. New
York, NY, USA: Association for Computing Machinery, 1968, pp. 517–524. ISBN:
9781450374866. DOI: 10.1145/800186.810616. URL: https://doi.org/10.1145/
800186.810616.
[36]
PyGeM contributors. PyGeM. URL: https://mathlab.github.io/PyGeM/index.html.
[37]
Clayton V. Deutsch. “Geostatistics”. In: Encyclopedia of Physical Science and Tech-
nology (Third Edition). Ed. by Robert A. Meyers. Third Edition. New York: Academic
Press, 2003, pp. 697–707. ISBN: 978-0-12-227410-7. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/
B0-12-227410-5/00869-3. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
B0122274105008693.
[38]
François Bachoc. Kriging models with Gaussian processes - covariance function
estimation and impact of spatial sampling. Apr. 2014. URL: https://www.math.univ-
toulouse.fr/~fbachoc/Bachoc_Forge_les_eaux.pdf.
[39]
Ricardo A. Olea. The Semivariogram. 1999. DOI: 10.1007/978-1-4615-5001-3_5.
URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4615-5001-3_5.
[40]
Sebastian Müller et al. GSTools v1.3: a toolbox for geostatistical modelling in Python.
en. Apr. 2022. DOI: 10.5194/gmd-15-3161-2022. URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.5194/
gmd-15-3161-2022.
[41]
International Maritime Organization. IMO identification number schemes. URL: https:
//www.imo.org/en/OurWork/MSAS/Pages/IMO-identification-number-scheme.aspx
(visited on 11/13/2022).
[42]
Encyclopaedia Britannica. The Editors of Encyclopaedia. tonnage. URL: https://
www.britannica.com/technology/tonnage (visited on 11/30/2022).
[43]
European Committee for Electrotechnical Standardization. “Maritime navigation and
radiocommunication equipment and systems – Automatic identification system (AIS)
– Part 1: AIS Base Stations – Minimum operational and performance requirements,
methods of testing and required test results : DS/EN 62320-1:2015”. In: Interna-
tional Electrotechnical Commission, 2015.
[44]
Cesar de la Torre, Bill Wagner, and Mike Rousos. .NET Microservices: Architecture
for Containerized .NET Applications. Microsoft Developer Division, 2022.
[45]
Rob Salmond. Automatically calibrate ppm for rtl-sdr. URL: http://web.archive.org/
web/20221128004052/https://rob.salmond.ca/automatically-calibrate-ppm-for-rtl-
sdr/ (visited on 12/18/2022).
[46]
U.S. Department of Homeland Security United States Coast Guard. Class A AIS
Position Report (Messages 1, 2, and 3). URL: https://www.navcen.uscg.gov/ais-
class-a-reports (visited on 11/17/2022).
[47]
VMware Tanzu. Spring Data MongoDB. URL: https://spring.io/projects/spring-data-
mongodb (visited on 12/11/2022).
Security of offshore installations
63
==PAGE:72==
[48]
MongoDB. PyMongo. URL: https://www.mongodb.com/docs/drivers/pymongo/
(visited on 12/11/2022).
[49]
Benjamin Murphy, Roman Yurchak, and Sebastian Müller. GeoStat-Framework/PyKrige:
v1.7.0. en. Zenodo, Aug. 2022. DOI: 10.5281/ZENODO.7008206. URL: https://
zenodo.org/record/7008206.
[50]
Giovanni Seni and John F. Elder. Ensemble Methods in Data Mining. Springer In-
ternational Publishing, 2010. DOI: 10.1007/978-3-031-01899-2. URL: http://dx.doi.
org/10.1007/978-3-031-01899-2.
[51]
Robert P. Sheridan. Time-Split Cross-Validation as a Method for Estimating the
Goodness of Prospective Prediction. en. Apr. 2013. DOI: 10.1021/ci400084k. URL:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1021/ci400084k.
64
Security of offshore installations
==PAGE:73==
Security of offshore installations
65
==PAGE:74==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Richard Petersens Plads, Building 324
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.compute.dtu.dk
