==PAGE:1==
Predicting Occupant Comfort using Machine Learning
Master Thesis
Lærke Viuff Petersen
January, 2023
DTU Sustain
Department of Environmental and Resource Engineering
==PAGE:2==
Predicting Occupant Comfort using Machine Learning
Master Thesis
January, 2023
By
Lærke Viuff Petersen
Supervisors:
Jørn Toftum, Professor – DTU Sustain
Emilie Patricia Dam-Krogh, Ph.D. student – DTU Sustain
Study line:
MSc in Architectural Engineering
Credits:
30 ECTS
Project period:
22.08.22–22.01.23
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus-
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Andrea Piacquadio, 2018
Published by:
DTU, Department of Environmental and Resource Engineering, Bygn-
ingstorvet, Building 115, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
www.sustain.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Preface
This thesis has been prepared at the Section for Indoor Climate, Department of Envi-
ronmental and Resource Engineering, at the Technical University of Denmark, DTU, in
partial fulfillment for the degree Master of Science in Engineering, MSc Eng. The thesis
accounts for 30 ETCS credits and was carried out over five months between the 22nd of
August 2022 and the 22nd of January 2023.
I would like to express my gratitude towards my supervisors, Professor Jørn Toftum and
Ph.D. student Emilie Patricia Dam-Krogh, for their time, guidance, and feedback on the
project and for always being available for questions. Furthermore, I would like to thank
Data Scientist Rune Viuff Petersen for his help and feedback on the machine learning
models and for providing recommendations for useful Python libraries. At last, thank you
to Sonja Petersen for proofreading the thesis.
Lærke Viuff Petersen - s163830
Signature
Date
Predicting Occupant Comfort using Machine Learning
ii
21-01-2023
==PAGE:4==
Abstract
Ensuring a comfortable indoor environment is important for occupants’ health, well-being,
and performance. Currently, occupant comfort is estimated using recommended values
from standards, where the indoor climate parameters are evaluated independently. Fur-
thermore, the standards are based on average populations in controlled climate chamber
experiments. Hence, the current method of evaluating occupant comfort only includes
some of the many factors affecting comfort and does not consider their interaction or the
individual occupant.
This project aims to develop occupant-centric machine learning models for the prediction
of overall occupant comfort in terms of indoor environmental quality. Instead of basing
the models on controlled environments, this project makes use of data from buildings in
use. Furthermore, the intention is to develop a tool to make the prediction more useful in
a design process.
The data for the models is provided by a post-occupancy evaluation conducted prior to
this project. The data consists of surveys and measurements conducted in 32 buildings in
Denmark and Greenland. From the data, features are selected to fit into four categories:
Occupant characteristics, building characteristics, indoor climate conditions, and discom-
forts, which form the basis of the models. The models are developed as classification
models using the algorithm Gradient Boosting Machine. Two of the models are used to
develop an online tool that predicts the comfort level from user input. The tool is used to
evaluate the impact of design choices in a case study.
The best-performing model includes the best features from each of the categories and
achieves an accuracy of 65%. It is found that occupant characteristics features have a
large impact on the prediction. The tool is found useful in different design scenarios based
on the case study.
It is concluded that machine learning models show great potential in the prediction of
comfort and that occupant-centric data-driven models are needed. With the models, it
is possible to assess many factors simultaneously and consider the interaction between
them, which has not yet been possible with the traditional methods. However, more data
and more diverse data are necessary to further develop the models.
Predicting Occupant Comfort using Machine Learning
iii
==PAGE:5==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Objectives . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
2
Background
3
2.1
Occupant Comfort . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
Machine Learning
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.3
Machine Learning and Comfort . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
2.4
Collection of Data
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
3
Method
15
3.1
Data Preparation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
3.2
Model Development . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
3.3
Tool
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 28
4
Results
31
4.1
Data Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31
4.2
Model Performance
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 36
4.3
Features . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 37
4.4
National Differences . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 44
4.5
Prediction of Discomfort . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 45
4.6
Tool
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 46
4.7
Case study . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 47
5
Discussion
52
6
Conclusion
56
Bibliography
57
A Literature Study
61
B Features
62
B.1 Model 0 - 120 Features
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 62
B.2 Model 0 - 40 Features . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 63
B.3 Model 1 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 63
B.4 Model 2 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 64
B.5 Model 3 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 64
C Data Analysis
65
D Scripts
68
D.1 Loading of Data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 69
Predicting Occupant Comfort using Machine Learning
iv
==PAGE:6==
D.2 Data cleaning, encoding, and categorization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 76
D.3 Model 0 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 81
D.4 Model 1 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 83
D.5 Model 2 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 85
D.6 Model 3 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 87
D.7 Tool
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 89
Predicting Occupant Comfort using Machine Learning
v
==PAGE:7==
1
Introduction
Occupant comfort is the psychological feeling of contentment with the physical environ-
ment in a building. As average persons spend around 90% of their life indoors, the indoor
environment is important for occupant comfort, health, and well-being, especially at home,
school, or work (Frontczak and Wargocki, 2011). In offices, poor occupant comfort can
lead to loss of revenue, as it negatively affects the productivity and performance of the
employees (Wargocki et al., 2012). Improving occupant comfort can also lead to more so-
cially sustainable buildings. I.e. the DGNB sustainability certificate rewards points when
making buildings more comfortable for the occupants (Green Building Council Denmark,
2022), as it can make the building more desirable for occupants and thereby extend the
longevity of the building.
To ensure a comfortable environment, it is necessary to predict when an occupant feels
comfortable. When a building is constructed, it is often too late or too expensive to change
factors causing discomfort. Therefore, knowing the level of comfort when designing new
buildings or renovating old ones is important. Currently, occupant comfort is predicted
using recommended threshold values and ranges for different indoor climate parameters
obtained from standards (Frontczak and Wargocki, 2011). The recommended values are
based on average populations, controlled experiments in climate chambers, and models
that may not represent how people perceive the indoor environment in buildings. Further-
more, the standards only take a small set of parameters into account and do not consider
the dependencies between these parameters. This is done even though the occupant
experiences indoor environment stimuli simultaneously, as the relationship between the
parameters is not yet well-known (Gauthier and Bourikas, 2020). Hence, an overall com-
fort model that takes the parameters’ interactions into account is needed.
Machine learning (ML) is a widely used method for pattern recognition and prediction. In
everyday life, ML is used for speech recognition in devices such as Google Home and
Siri, in traffic prediction, spam detection, and product recommendation. The technology
has also been applied in many fields such as computer science, finance, biology, and
medicine, and is currently a hot topic in the field of indoor climate. ML models make it
possible to consider multiple factors to predict a specific outcome by utilizing existing data
(Sarkar et al., 2018). As the comfort level of occupants depends on a plethora of different
factors, ML models are a great candidate for comfort predictions. This project explores
the potential of ML to predict occupant comfort.
1.1
Objectives
The aim of the project is to develop machine learning models to predict the overall comfort
of occupants in office buildings, specifically in terms of indoor environment. The models
should be based on existing data about offices and their occupants from a post-occupancy
evaluation. The intention is to investigate which parameters are important in the prediction
and how they impact the outcome of the model, as this could provide insight into the
mechanisms of occupant comfort.
Predicting Occupant Comfort using Machine Learning
1
==PAGE:8==
Secondly, the aim is to develop a tool based on the models. The motivation behind the
tool is to provide more informed decision-making when building or renovating a building
by creating a method to predict occupant comfort. This is useful, as optimizing occupant
comfort can lead to improved satisfaction, and thereby more socially sustainable buildings
and better health and performance of employees.
Predicting Occupant Comfort using Machine Learning
2
==PAGE:9==
2
Background
This chapter provides relevant background information regarding this project. The main
components of the project are occupant comfort and ML, which will be introduced inde-
pendently. Afterward, a literature study on how ML has been applied in the field of indoor
climate and comfort will be presented. Lastly, the collection of the data used in this project
is described.
2.1
Occupant Comfort
Occupant comfort can be defined as satisfaction with different aspects of the occupied
building. This can include indoor environmental quality (IEQ), ergonomics, privacy, space,
cleanliness, and colors. Comfort is detected through our sensory system and processed in
the brain where it is converted into a feeling of satisfaction or dissatisfaction (Jayathissa et
al., 2020), hence it is a highly subjective term. Comfort is often described as the absence
of discomfort, as it can be easier to interpret discomfort rather than comfort (Kent et al.,
2021). Therefore, uncomfortable occupants can be helpful in identifying problem areas
of a building.
Based on a large-scale field study with over 90,000 participants, it was found that around
a third of occupants were dissatisfied with their office (Graham et al., 2021). The highest
level of dissatisfaction was found for sound privacy, temperature, and background noise
level. In contrast, the highest level of satisfaction was found for ease of interaction, amount
of light, and general cleanliness. In this project, the focus will be on occupant satisfaction
with the overall IEQ.
Occupant comfort is affected by many factors. Studies have found that both individual
preferences and demographics, building characteristics, and the indoor and outdoor envi-
ronment can influence occupant comfort (Frontczak and Wargocki, 2011). In this section,
the different factors will be elaborated on.
2.1.1
Individual Differences
Individual differences can be categorized as either physiological or behavioral (Wang et
al., 2018).
Examples of physiological differences can include gender, age, BMI, and
metabolic rate, while behavioral differences can be the type of clothing, mood, the pattern
of smoking, and the amount of time at work.
Due to comfort being a subjective feeling, individual differences have a large say in the
satisfaction of an occupant. The same indoor environment can be perceived differently
depending on the person and the time. I.e. the difference in preferred temperature among
occupants can be up to 3 °C (Wang et al., 2018).
How great of an impact individual differences have on the perception of IEQ is widely
discussed, especially the question of whether gender and age influence comfort, but no
consensus is found as to whether this is true. One study found that male occupants were
more likely to be satisfied with the thermal, acoustic, and lighting conditions as opposed
Predicting Occupant Comfort using Machine Learning
3
==PAGE:10==
to women. It also found that occupants between the age of 35 and 54 were the least sat-
isfied age group (Bae et al., 2020). However, in studies where clothing and physiological
responses are controlled, the differences among the groups are not as apparent. This
could indicate that it is the clothing choices and physiological differences in the gender
groups that influence comfort rather than the gender identity itself (Wang et al., 2018).
In terms of behavioral differences, the country of origin, level of education, type of job,
and time pressure have been found to influence satisfaction with IEQ (Frontczak and
Wargocki, 2011). Furthermore, occupants who had worked in an office for more than two
years, or work for more than 20 hours per week have been found to be less satisfied.
Hence, the more an occupant is exposed to an environment, the more critical they get
(Bae et al., 2020).
2.1.2
Building Characteristics
The design of buildings affects the IEQ. I.e. the choice of building envelope changes
the thermal conductivity and heat capacity of the constructions, which can influence the
thermal comfort of occupants in a building. Furthermore, the orientation of a building and
the size of windows can lead to different illuminance levels and heat gains from the sun,
and thereby influence thermal and visual comfort.
The most influential building characteristic in terms of IEQ is the ability to control lighting,
shading, and HVAC systems (Bortolini and Forcada, 2021) as the occupant can adapt the
environment to their personal preferences. The HVAC system itself has also been shown
to impact comfort. Especially whether the building is naturally ventilated or mechanically
ventilated, as the range of acceptable temperatures is generally wider in naturally venti-
lated buildings, due to the adaptability (Frontczak and Wargocki, 2011). In mechanically
ventilated buildings, occupants are more sensitive to small deviations from the optimal
temperature.
The type and layout of the offices also have an impact on comfort. When sitting in a
private office, occupants were more satisfied than in open-plan offices, due to higher noise
levels and less privacy in open-plan offices (Bae et al., 2020). The satisfaction level also
increases with the amount of space per occupant as well as for occupants seated closer
to the windows. The occupants in the perimeter of the building are therefore usually the
most satisfied.
Windows can affect the indoor air quality (IAQ), thermal, visual, and acoustic environment
as they can let in heat, light, noise, and fresh air. The quality of the window and the
type of shading are therefore important, as poorly insulated windows can lead to radiant
asymmetry and noise coming from the outside, while poor shading can lead to unwanted
heat and glare. However, when looking at the rest of the building envelope, a study found
that it was not associated with thermal comfort, as the heating system will compensate for
a poor building envelope at the expense of energy consumption (Bortolini and Forcada,
2021).
Last but not least, an important factor for the perception of the IEQ is the age of the
building. The age of a building is highly associated with occupant satisfaction as newer
buildings fulfill stricter regulations in terms of comfort (Bortolini and Forcada, 2021).
Predicting Occupant Comfort using Machine Learning
4
==PAGE:11==
2.1.3
Indoor Environmental Quality
The IEQ is traditionally evaluated in silos covering the domains thermal, visual, acous-
tic comfort, and IAQ (Gauthier and Bourikas, 2020). Although evaluated separately, all
indoor environmental parameters are perceived simultaneously, therefore, the overall sat-
isfaction with the indoor environment is a combination of all. Out of the four domains, the
thermal environment is commonly considered the most important for overall satisfaction
(Frontczak and Wargocki, 2011).
Thermal Comfort
Thermal comfort is the feeling of being neither cold nor hot, but instead thermally neutral.
Thermal neutrality is the balance of heat produced and lost. When there is more heat
produced than lost, the body will be warmer and when more heat is lost the body will
be colder. The difference between heat gain and loss is the rate of heat storage in the
body. Heat production consists of heat produced by the metabolism and external work
performed, while heat loss is a combination of respiration, radiation, convection, evapo-
ration, and conduction (Toftum, 2019).
Thermal comfort can also be described as the lack of discomfort. Local thermal discomfort
can be from draught, vertical air temperature difference, too cold or warm floors, and
radiant asymmetry, whereof draught is the most common. When resting or performing
light activities people are more sensitive to local discomforts than when they are more
active. Furthermore, it is often the same people who are sensitive to the different local
discomforts, as they have a tendency to feel either more warm or cold (Danish Standards
Association, 2005).
Thermal comfort can be predicted in different ways. One method is using the thermal
indices Predicted Mean Vote (PMV) and Predicted Percentage Dissatisfied (PPD) which
are calculated based on the metabolic rate, clothing insulation, air temperature, relative
humidity, air velocity, and mean radiant temperature. Another method is using recom-
mended indoor environmental conditions. DS/EN 16798 recommends design values for
the operative temperature and categorizes them into four levels of expectation, I being the
highest and IV being the lowest. A design category is chosen based on the expectations
of the indoor environment or the sensitivity of the occupants. Table 2.1 shows the recom-
mended operative temperatures for both single and open-plan offices (Danish Standards
Association, 2019).
Table 2.1: Recommended operative temperature for single and open-plan offices assum-
ing an activity level of 1.2 MET (Danish Standards Association, 2019)
Operative temperature [°C]
Category
...
Minimum for heating
∼1.0 clo
Maximum for cooling
∼0.5 clo
I
21.0
25.5
II
20.0
26.0
III
19.0
27.0
IV
17.0
28.0
Predicting Occupant Comfort using Machine Learning
5
==PAGE:12==
Acoustic Comfort
Acoustic comfort is perceived through hearing via propagating sound waves that create
vibrations in the ear which are interpreted by the brain as sound. The most common way
of measuring sound is using the sound pressure level (SPL). SPL is measured in decibels
(dB) and calculated as the relation between the current sound pressure and the sound
pressure of the lowest audible sound at 1000 Hz. SPL is measured on a logarithmic
scale, as human hearing is able to cope with many variations of sound pressures. The
sensitivity of hearing varies between frequencies, i.e. the hearing threshold is 25 dB for
100 Hz, while it is 2 dB for 1000 Hz. To counteract this, the SPL is often weighted to
emulate human hearing. The most common weighting is A-weighting (Jacobsen et al.,
2011).
Acoustic comfort can affect the concentration level of an occupant and is therefore im-
portant in offices. Satisfaction with the acoustic environment of a building is linked to a
lack of noise discomfort, as acoustic comfort is strongly correlated with the background
noise level. In offices, this often includes noise from office equipment, HVAC, or conver-
sations in open-plan offices. Consequently, studies have shown that measuring the A-
weighted equivalent SPL is the best method for estimating the occupants’ satisfaction with
the acoustic environment (Park et al., 2022). Table 2.2 indicates the recommended and
maximum SPL from the Danish Working Environment Authority (Arbejdstilsynet, 2007).
Table 2.2: Recommended and maximum sound pressure level (Arbejdstilsynet, 2007)
Recommended
Maximum
Sound pressure level [dB(A)]
50
85
Indoor Air Quality
The IAQ is perceived by occupants based on odor or sensory stimulation. In order to
have good IAQ, two requirements must be met: Health risks due to the air quality must
be negligible and the occupant must be satisfied with the perceived air quality. To obtain
satisfactory air quality, the air must appear fresh and pleasant as opposed to stale, stuffy,
and irritating. IAQ is affected by different contaminants in the air, such as human bioef-
fluents, particles, volatile organic compounds, and humidity (Bienfait et al., 1992). Here,
the focus will be on human bioeffluents and humidity.
Human bioeffluents are compounds emitted from humans due to their metabolism. The
largest emission comes from CO2, which is therefore used as an indicator for other bio-
effluents. CO2 at low levels is not harmful, however, it can have negative health, per-
formance, and attendance effects (Jones and Molina, 2017). Table 2.3, shows the rec-
ommended concentration levels above the outdoor concentration, assumed to be 400
ppm, divided into the different indoor climate categories from the standard DS/EN 16798
(Danish Standards Association, 2019).
Predicting Occupant Comfort using Machine Learning
6
==PAGE:13==
Table 2.3: Recommended CO2 concentration above outdoors (Danish Standards Asso-
ciation, 2019)
Category
Corresponding CO2 concentration above outdoors
[ppm]
I
550
II
800
III
1350
IV
1350
Humidity can both directly and indirectly affect the occupant. Directly, low humidity can
cause dryness and irritation of the skin and mucous membranes while high humidity can
overheat the occupant as it is harder for sweat to evaporate from the skin. Indirectly, high
humidity levels can lead to the growth of mold and house dust mites which may cause
allergies (Bienfait et al., 1992). The recommended relative humidity (RH) levels by the
Danish Working Environment Authority are indicated in Table 2.4 (Arbejdstilsynet, 2008).
Table 2.4: Recommended relative humidity (Arbejdstilsynet, 2008)
Minimum
Maximum
Relative humidity [%]
25
60
Visual Comfort
Humans interpret more than 80% of their surroundings by visual perception, however,
visual comfort is often rated as having the lowest effect on overall comfort (Medved, 2022).
Visual perception happens when light enters the eye and is interpreted by the brain. Using
sight, humans are able to interpret the intensity of light, the distance to observed objects,
and the details and colors of the objects. Daylight can affect the health and well-being of an
occupant, as lack of daylight can lead to tiredness, lack of concentration, and depression.
Visual comfort can also affect the performance of an occupant, as most tasks require
adequate lighting to perform (Medved, 2022).
Visual comfort is achieved by providing enough light while limiting visual discomfort. Light
is provided either from daylight or artificial light and the amount of light is commonly esti-
mated using the illuminance level. This is a measure of luminous flux per m2, which is the
perceived power of the light, also known as Lux (Medved, 2022). Besides the illuminance
level, visual comfort can also be evaluated using the uniformity and distribution of light,
the color temperature, and the color rendering (Frontczak and Wargocki, 2011). Visual
discomforts can consist of glare and flickering whereof the most common is discomfort
with glare. Glare is when a bright spot of light occurs in the central field of vision causing
discomfort (Medved, 2022). Glare comes from bright sources of light, either directly or in-
directly, therefore, providing adjustable shading and appropriate lighting fixtures can help
eliminate the occurrence of glare.
Table 2.5 shows the recommendations for objective visual comfort measures from DS/EN
12464-1 for tasks such as writing, reading, and typing performed in an office (Danish
Standards Association, 2021).
Predicting Occupant Comfort using Machine Learning
7
==PAGE:14==
Table 2.5: Recommended values for lighting in offices (Danish Standards Association,
2021)
Illuminance
Unified Glare rating
Uniformity
Color rendering
[lux]
[-]
[-]
[-]
500
19
0.6
80
2.1.4
Assessment of Comfort
Assessment of comfort can be divided into objective-subjective and objective-criteria (Jay-
athissa et al., 2020). Objective-criteria assessment is the traditional way of estimating
comfort, where objective indoor climate measures are compared to recommended crite-
ria, as described in Section 2.1.3. However, this method has its flaws. As described,
people can perceive the same indoor conditions differently, so basing the comfort level
on IEQ factors alone can be inaccurate.
Objective-subjective assessment is a part of a new paradigm of occupant-centric comfort
assessments (Xie et al., 2020). Here, the comfort is estimated for the individual occupants
instead of the average of a group. This paradigm makes use of data-driven methods of
predicting the comfort level of occupants, i.e. by using smartwatches for the collection of
individual occupant data and using ML models for prediction.
2.2
Machine Learning
Artificial intelligence (AI) is a term for computer systems that perform tasks that normally
require human intelligence. Machine learning (ML) is a branch of AI that uses algorithms
to recognize patterns in data to achieve a certain task with minimal human intervention.
ML can therefore be used to make data-driven decisions at a large scale.
ML consists of three main components: data, model, and performance. These will be
introduced in the following sections.
2.2.1
Data
Data is the most important component of ML, since there is no model without it. Normally,
an ML data set is made up of features (input) and labels (output) in the form of columns (n),
and data points in the form of rows (m), illustrated in Figure 2.1. For certain ML models,
the label can consist of different classes, which are the categories being predicted. The
number of features and data points is crucial for the performance of the model. Statisti-
cally, a larger amount of data points is preferred, as this gives the model more experience
to learn from, however, the number of data points can be limited due to computational
resources (Jung, 2018). Furthermore, not all ML algorithms can handle missing values,
therefore in many cases, they are discarded, limiting the number of data points.
Predicting Occupant Comfort using Machine Learning
8
==PAGE:15==
Figure 2.1: Illustration of data points, features, label, and classes
The number of features needed for a model is more complex. There must be enough
features for the model to have enough information to achieve the objective. However, ir-
relevant features can cause the model to perform worse and come with additional sources
of error (Jung, 2018). Excessive amounts of features can also lead to overfitting. This
means that the model becomes very specialized in the training data, giving it a high per-
formance. However, on new unseen data, the performance will be much poorer (Sarkar
et al., 2018).
A general rule of thumb indicates that: m/n ≫1, for the number of data points to be
sufficiently large and the number of features to be sufficiently small (Jung, 2018). A way
to minimize the number of features is to perform a feature selection. There are many
different methods to do this, one of them is using recursive feature elimination (SciKit-
Learn, 2022). This is an iterative process, where the least important feature is eliminated
in each round. Afterward, the number of features that gave the highest model accuracy
is chosen as the final features.
When trying to predict different classes, some ML data sets can also have the issue of
being imbalanced. This is when the number of data points in the labeled classes is not
balanced, creating minority classes. These cases can be hard to predict, as the training
data has few data points to learn from. A way to solve this issue is to generate synthetic
data points to enlarge the minority classes. This can be done using a sampling algorithm
where randomly chosen data points are added to create a synthetic data set (Jung, 2018).
When pre-processing data, feature engineering is performed. Data comes in many dif-
ferent forms, i.e. as numerical, categorical, text, or image data. The type is important
when choosing the feature engineering method. Categorical data can be either nominal,
meaning that they fit into a finite set of distinct categories, or ordinal, where the cate-
gories are ordered. When pre-processing nominal values, the values are encoded into
binary features, with a feature for each distinct value that can either be 0 (not present)
or 1 (present), also known as dummy variables. Ordinal values are changed to numeric
values in the order that they are in (Sarkar et al., 2018).
The last step of pre-processing is to perform a feature scaling. When a data set is not
scaled, it can create biased models toward the features with higher magnitudes when
using certain algorithms. A way to scale the features is to use standardized scaling, as
seen in Equation (2.1) (Sarkar et al., 2018).
SS(Xi) = Xi −µx
σx
(2.1)
Predicting Occupant Comfort using Machine Learning
9
==PAGE:16==
Here, the mean, µx, is subtracted from each feature value, Xi, and divided by the standard
deviation, σx. This centers the values and scales the variance to be 1.
2.2.2
Model
an ML model consists of an algorithm that helps the machine learn. ML models can be
divided into four different types based on the amount of supervision: supervised learning,
unsupervised learning, semi-supervised learning, and reinforced learning. Here, the focus
will be on supervised and unsupervised learning as these are the main methods. The
main difference between the two is that for supervised learning the output is known in the
training phase, which is not the case for unsupervised learning.
Figure 2.2: Overview of types of ML. The greyed-out boxes are not elaborated on in this
project.
Supervised learning utilizes a training data set including features and corresponding la-
bels. The supervised ML model then finds associations between the features and labels
for every data point in the data set. These associations are used to predict the output for
new input data points.
Supervised learning is generally divided into two different methods: Classification and
regression. The objective of a regression model is to get a continuous numeric output.
This can be achieved with i.e. linear regression where a trend is formed based on input
and output variables. The objective of a classification model is to categorize the output
into discrete classes. The classes can be either:
• Binary: The label can only be classified into one of two classes
• Multi-class: The label can be classified into one of several classes
• Multi-label: Multiple labels can be classified into several classes
The data in unsupervised learning does not consist of labels. Here, the algorithms must
learn patterns in the data without any help or supervision. An example of an unsupervised
learning method is clustering, where similarities between the data points are found and
grouped into clusters (Sarkar et al., 2018).
Predicting Occupant Comfort using Machine Learning
10
==PAGE:17==
The choice of ML algorithm depends on the type of ML problem, i.e. whether it is su-
pervised or unsupervised, the type and amount of data, the processing time, and the
performance of the model (Gupta and Sehgal, 2021). Examples of popular classification
algorithms include Logistic Regression, Decision Trees, Support Vector Machines, Artifi-
cial Neural Networks, Random Forests, and K Nearest Neighbors (Sarkar et al., 2018).
2.2.3
Performance
When choosing the specific model for an ML problem, it is important to look at the model’s
performance.
When evaluating a supervised ML model, the data set is split into two, a training and a test
data set. The data is often split into 70-80% training and 20-30% test data. The training
data is used for creating the model, and the obtained model is then tested on the test data
by letting the model predict the outcome and comparing it to the actual outcome. This
comparison defines the performance of the model.
The data split can also be done using k-cross validation (CV). In this method, the data is
split into a number of different data sets (k). The model is then evaluated the same number
of times (k), where each of the evaluations uses a different test set. The performance is
then the average of the performance on each test set. This method can make the model
more generalizable, as it is evaluated on more data (Sarkar et al., 2018).
It is important that the training and test sets consist of different data. When using the
same data, the model can overfit, meaning that it will be specialized on the specific data,
and not be able to predict new data. The performance is, therefore, not representative of
new data.
In order to measure performance, different metrics have been developed depending on
the ML model. A classification model can be evaluated using the metric accuracy which
defines the proportion of correct predictions. This metric works well with instances where
the classes are equally important and mostly balanced (Sarkar et al., 2018).
The accuracy is calculated using values provided by a confusion matrix. A confusion
matrix is a representation of the predicted class labels and the actual class labels to keep
track of correct- and misclassifications. A confusion matrix consists of true negatives (TN),
false negatives (FN), false positives (FP), and true positives (TP). True/false describes
whether the prediction was correct or not, while positive/negative indicates the class. The
confusion matrix consists of the numbers of TN, FN, FP, and TP found using the test data.
A representation of the confusion matrix is seen in Figure 2.3.
Figure 2.3: Illustration of confusion matrix
Predicting Occupant Comfort using Machine Learning
11
==PAGE:18==
From the confusion matrix, the accuracy of the model can be derived using Equation (2.2)
(Sarkar et al., 2018).
Accuracy =
TP + TN
TP + FP + TN + FN
(2.2)
When the classes are not equally important or balanced, the metric F1-score can be used.
The F1-score is calculated using the metrics precision and recall. The calculation is given
in Equation (2.3) (Sarkar et al., 2018).
Precision =
TP
TP + FP
Recall =
TP
TP + FN
F1score = 2 · Precision · Recall
Precision + Recall
(2.3)
To improve the performance of a model, a hyperparameter optimization can be performed.
Here, algorithm-specific parameters are tuned, this could be the number of trees in a
Decision Tree algorithm or the number of hidden layers in an Artificial Neural Network. By
choosing different possible ranges of parameters, combinations of these are created and
evaluated based on a metric. The best-performing parameter values are then chosen in
the final model.
2.3
Machine Learning and Comfort
A literature study of how ML is used in the field of indoor climate and comfort was con-
ducted in order to obtain background knowledge in the field. The literature was retrieved
from DTU Findit with the applied search terms: ”Machine learning” in combination with
”Indoor climate”, ”Occupant comfort”, and ”Occupant satisfaction”.
Table 2.6: Published articles for the different search terms
Articles in total
Articles published in the past five years
ML and indoor climate
105
103
ML and occupant comfort
269
251
ML and occupant satisfaction
37
36
Table 2.6 shows the number of published articles for each of the search terms in total and
during the past five years. This shows that the combination of ML and comfort predictions
has been a hot topic for the past years as this is when most of them have been published.
Based on the recovered literature, 17 were found relevant for this project based on the
title and abstract. These were screened to identify the type of data, the type of model, and
the predicted output. An overview of the result of the review can be seen in Appendix A.
Based on the initial screening, a few were further examined and used for inspiration in the
method.
Predicting Occupant Comfort using Machine Learning
12
==PAGE:19==
The vast majority of the literature included prediction of thermal comfort and/or sensation
using ML models. Many of these studies included reference to or comparison of PMV,
where the ML models earned a much higher prediction accuracy. Only three studies were
conducted on the prediction of other comfort domains, namely IAQ (Fritz et al., 2022),
visual comfort (Ma and Pan, 2021), and overall comfort (Mao et al., 2019).
All except one study (Su et al., 2020), developed personal comfort models as opposed
to group models, indicating that ML models are more geared towards occupant-centric
prediction rather than group predictions.
The majority of the studies used classification algorithms. Two studies tested both clas-
sification and regression models, one of them concluding that classification models were
a better fit for the prediction of thermal comfort (Luo et al., 2020). Xie et al. (2020) found
that the best-performing and most popular algorithms for thermal prediction were Ran-
dom Forest Classifier (RFC), Artificial Neural Networks (ANN), Support Vector Machine
(SVM), K Nearest Neighbors (KNN), and Gradient Boosting Machine (GBM). In terms of
accuracy, Xie et al. (2020) found that the median accuracy for thermal prediction was 84%
with a standard deviation of 15%.
The most variation among the studies was in the data collection method and input fea-
tures. Both data from experiments with controlled environments and field studies were
used. Wearable sensors were often used to collect data about the occupants. The input
features included physiological parameters, such as skin temperature (Katić et al., 2020)
and heart rate variability (Morresi et al., 2021), personal parameters such as age and
gender (Chaudhuri et al., 2017), building parameters such as HVAC system (Fritz et al.,
2022), and indoor and outdoor environmental conditions (Ma and Pan, 2021).
2.4
Collection of Data
The data applied in this project was the result of a post-occupancy evaluation (POE). A
POE is a method of systematically collecting data on a building and its occupants after
it has been occupied for some time to determine its performance. It commonly includes
a survey distributed to the occupants. POEs can provide insight into the comfort of the
occupants and identify critical aspects of a building’s performance (Bortolini and Forcada,
2021).
In this project, the data was collected in a POE performed in relation to the Ph.D.-project
”Benchmarking the Indoor Environment in Office Buildings - Characterization, Synthesis,
and Practical Application”, by Ph.D. student Emilie Patricia Dam-Krogh. The Ph.D. project
aims to build a database about buildings and their occupants, to create a benchmarking
tool for evaluating the building and company performance. The data was collected by
Emilie Patricia Dam-Krogh as well as Bachelor and Master students at DTU. The data
was collected for a week between fall 2020 and spring 2022.
The data consist of five different data sets: a building-, manager-, and office checklist,
measurements, and a questionnaire. The data comes from evaluations in 18 office build-
ings in Denmark and 22 in Greenland.
The building checklist was filled out by the person conducting the evaluation. It consists
of 23 questions concerning the building. It covers general building characteristics, space
Predicting Occupant Comfort using Machine Learning
13
==PAGE:20==
usage, site information, building equipment information, building envelope characteristics,
and building source information.
The manager checklist was filled out by the building manager and includes 37 different
questions. It covers general building characteristics, building ownership, occupancy, and
cleaning information as well as building source information regarding outdoor contami-
nants, water, and fire damage.
The office checklist was filled out by the person conducting the evaluation, for all the
offices where measurements were performed. It includes questions describing the offices
in terms of orientation, size, windows, type of office, workstations, interior finishes, lighting,
and HVAC components. At last, subjective observations of space usage, indoor climate,
and pollution sources were noted.
The questionnaire consisted of 23 questions that were distributed to all employees in the
offices. The data can therefore consist of occupants both present and not present in the
offices where measurements were performed. Furthermore, the questionnaire consists
of questions regarding their background, working conditions, office, and indoor climate
conditions in terms of comfort, symptoms, work performance, and their overall evaluation
of the building.
At last, indoor climate measurements were performed. The measurements were con-
ducted differently in Denmark and Greenland, due to the lack of stable internet connec-
tion in Greenland. In Denmark, measurements were done using the devices RoomAlyzer
(IoT Fabrikken, 2023) and Flow (PlumeLabs, 2022), which are seen in Figure 2.4a. The
RoomAlyzer measured temperature, RH, CO2 concentration, VOC concentration, SPL,
illuminance level, and color temperature. The flow device measured NO2 concentration,
VOC concentration, and the particles PM1, PM2.5, and PM10. The measurements in
Greenland were conducted using a Hobo logger (HOBO, 2023) that measured tempera-
ture, RH, illuminance level, and CO2 concentration, this device is illustrated in Figure 2.4b.
(a) RoomAlyzer and Flow
(b) HOBO logger (HOBO, 2023)
Figure 2.4: Measuring devices used for collection of indoor climate data
Predicting Occupant Comfort using Machine Learning
14
==PAGE:21==
3
Method
The aim of the project was to develop ML models which could be implemented in a tool to
predict the comfort level of an occupant. Therefore, the method is divided into three main
parts: Data preparation, model development, and creation of tool.
All the coding in the project was done using the language Python with the use of additional
packages. For the data preparation, the data analysis library Pandas was used (Pandas,
2023). For the ML models, the library SciKit Learn was used, which contains a wide
range of state-of-the-art ML algorithms (SciKit-Learn, 2023). The tool was created using
the library Streamlit (Streamlit, 2023) and the model analysis was done using the library
SHAP (SHAP, 2018). All of the developed scripts can be found in Appendix D.
3.1
Data Preparation
The data preparation consisted of data retrieval, data processing, and data integration.
The data was retrieved from a building database created at DTU. It was divided into fold-
ers according to the country and building number. Each building had one file containing all
the questionnaire answers, one building checklist, and several office checklists and mea-
surement files, depending on the number of investigated offices. The manager checklist
was not used as the relevant data from it was already included in the building checklist.
Furthermore, the second half of the office checklist was discarded as it included real-time
subjective observations from the inspectors, making it irrelevant to this study. Some of
the measurement data were also not included due to measurement errors and missing
data. In total, data from 17 buildings in Denmark and 15 in Greenland were used, while
data from 8 buildings were discarded.
The data format, setup, and name of the files were streamlined, to make the loading of
data easier. A Python script was created to load the data and perform the data process-
ing. Here, an initial cleanup of the data was done by removing unwanted features such as
qualitative answers and comments, IDs, submission times, and the name of the inspec-
tors. It was ensured that each data set had a feature for either the building or sensor,
which was later used for the data integration.
As the measurements were time-series data from a week, they had to be condensed into
aggregated values representing the indoor climate of the week. At first, the data was
filtered to only consist of data from the occupied time, assumed to be Monday to Friday
from 8-17. The mean, minimum, and maximum of the time period were then calculated
for each of the measurements. A feature for the season was added to the measurement
data to indicate the time of year the measurements were conducted.
As the objective of the thesis was to investigate occupant-centric comfort, the data set
had to have a data point per occupant. This made it crucial to link the different data sets
to one occupant. In the questionnaire, the occupants were asked to name the closest
measurement station to them. However, as measurements were only conducted in a
couple of offices and the questionnaire was sent out to the entire company, many of the
occupants who answered the questionnaire were not near a measuring station or did not
Predicting Occupant Comfort using Machine Learning
15
==PAGE:22==
answer that question. Because of this, a lot of questionnaire answers were essentially
useless, hence, an assumption had to be made.
Assuming adiabatic conditions in the buildings, the indoor climate was assumed to be
alike for offices on the same floor and with the same approximate orientation. Based on
this, a code was made that compared the floor number and orientation from the question-
naire answers with missing sensor numbers with the floor number and orientation of the
measured offices in the building. If there was a match the corresponding sensor number
for the occupant was changed.
Figure 3.1: Example of data integration method where O indicates an occupant, B is the
building, S is the sensor and NaN is missing values
Then all the data sets were combined based on the building and sensor numbers. Fig-
ure 3.1 shows the data integration process. Here, it is seen that the questionnaire data
set both had a building number(B) and sensor number(S) connected to the occupants
(O). The building checklists were joined onto each occupant in the data set with the same
building number. The same was done for the office checklist and measurements, but with
the sensor number instead. Occupants without a sensor were still included, as they could
contribute to models where the office and measurement data were not included. All the
data sets for the buildings were then appended onto each other to form one big data set.
When the big data set was created, a further cleanup of the data was done. This included
changing yes/no and true/false answers to 1/0, removing duplicate features, features with
all missing values, and features with identical values. Nominal categorical values were
encoded into dummy variables, while ordinal categorical values were changed to integers
in chronological order. Features indicating a number of items or devices were weighted
with either the number of occupants or area, in order to make them more comparable.
Additionally, missing data for the building area were filled out using the Danish Building
Register (BBR) or Google Maps estimations. Afterwards, all features were scaled using
Equation (2.1).
Predicting Occupant Comfort using Machine Learning
16
==PAGE:23==
3.2
Model Development
As the main objective of this project was to predict occupants’ overall comfort, a definition
of overall comfort had to be settled. In the questionnaire, the occupants were asked about
how they thought the building was performing in terms of indoor climate on a 6-point Likert
scale from ”Not at all” to ”Very well”. The exact question is illustrated in Figure 3.2.
Figure 3.2: Question asked in the questionnaire indicating the comfort level of an occupant
The answer to the question would indicate how satisfied the occupant was with the overall
indoor climate of their workspace, and thereby their comfort level. Therefore, this question
laid the foundation for the whole project. As the desired output was already known, the
model was developed as a supervised ML model, where the collected data was used to
train and test the model.
As the predicted output consisted of six distinct categories, a classification model would
be the intuitive choice, although a regression model was also a possibility. A classification
model would calculate the probability of the occupant belonging to the different categories,
and place it in the one with the highest probability. On the other hand, a regression model
would place the occupant on a continuous scale, therefore, to place them in a distinct
category, the output would be rounded to the nearest category.
Based on the literature study it was found that most studies predicting comfort with ML
used classification models, as the correlation between the predicted and actual class was
low for regression models (Luo et al., 2020). Hence, a classification approach was used
in this project.
3.2.1
Features
Feature selection is an important part of an ML model, as the model performance depends
on relevant features. Based on the background, it was found that there are many factors
influencing comfort, and thereby many features to choose from.
As one of the goals was to make a predictive tool where parameters can be adjusted, it
was important that the features in the model were not affected by each other. Therefore,
changing one feature should not necessitate a change or recalculation of another feature.
I.e. changing the size of the window would lead to a change in the illuminance level.
Hence, an influence diagram was developed to determine which parameters influence
occupants’ satisfaction with the indoor environment.
Predicting Occupant Comfort using Machine Learning
17
==PAGE:24==
Figure 3.3: Diagram of the factors influencing satisfaction with the IEQ divided into levels
The diagram was divided into three levels that lead to the satisfaction of the occupant,
as illustrated in Figure 3.3. The first level consists of the building characteristics, the
occupants’ behavior, and the outdoor climate. All these parameters have an effect on
the indoor climate of the building. I.e. the amount of insulation in the building envelope,
together with the temperature outside and the occupant’s adjustment of the thermostat
will affect the indoor climate. Furthermore, whether a ventilation system is installed in the
building or whether there is manually controlled natural ventilation will also change the
indoor climate.
At the second level, the indoor climate and the preferences of the occupants will affect the
discomforts that the occupants perceive. I.e. if an occupant prefers a warmer environment
but the thermal environment is cooler, the occupant will likely perceive more discomfort
than an occupant with a cooler preference. At the third and last level, the discomfort that
an occupant perceives will affect the overall satisfaction with the environment, as the more
discomfort they feel the less satisfied they will be with the environment.
Based on this diagram, a hypothesis was made that the closer to satisfaction you get in
the influence diagram, the easier it is to predict the satisfaction of the occupant, as more
underlying factors are included the higher the level. Features from level 3 would therefore
likely be more precise than levels 1 and 2. Furthermore, it is likely that the occupants
will improve the prediction for levels 1 and 2, but not necessarily level 3 as they did not
influence this level.
Based on the diagram, the data was divided into four categories: Occupant characteris-
tics, building characteristics, indoor climate, and discomforts. As the data did not include
any information about occupant behavior or preferences, it is assumed that their charac-
teristics would give an indication of these factors. A category for the outdoor climate was
not created, as another data source was needed to acquire the data. An overview of what
features were included in each category can be seen in Table 3.1 while the whole list is
included in Appendix B.
Predicting Occupant Comfort using Machine Learning
18
==PAGE:25==
Table 3.1: Categorized features
Occupant Characteristics
Building Characteristics
Indoor Climate
Discomforts
Age
Construction year
Season
Too much/little air movement
Gender
Renovation year
Temperature
Too high/low temperature
Eyewear
Gross floor area
Relative humidity
Too humid/dry air
Smoking status
Site characterization
CO2
Unpleasant odours
Job title
HVAC system
Illuminance level
Too dim/bright lighting
Years in office
Construction materials
Reflections
Days a week in office
Office type
Too noisy
Hours a day in office
Seating
Too dirty or dusty
Number of occupants
Story
Floor area
Ceiling height
Window orientation
Distance to window
Window area
% window area operable
% window area shaded
Type of window shading
Type of artificial lighting
In order to have the most data points, data from both Denmark and Greenland were uti-
lized. This meant that some of the features were discarded if they were not available for
both data sets, i.e. the measurements of VOCs, color temperature, and SPL. The number
of data points for each category also varied due to the removal of missing values.
Figure 3.4: Overview of data, models, and output
Predicting Occupant Comfort using Machine Learning
19
==PAGE:26==
Based on the levels in the influence diagram and the categorization of data, four models
were developed: One for each level and one that did not utilize the levels but instead
included all features. An overview is illustrated in Figure 3.4.
Model 0 was a reference model that included all available features. The purpose of the
model was to find the most optimal features and create a model from those. This model
was not used for the tool due to the dependencies of the features, as described earlier.
Models 1, 2, and 3 were created to include data from levels 1, 2, and 3 respectively. All
these models were developed both with and without occupant characteristics, to investi-
gate the hypothesis of occupant influence. Models 1 and 2 were later used to create the
tool, as the data used for them are easy to collect and adjust in the design phase of a
building.
3.2.2
Performance
Before the creation of the models, it was important to settle on a performance metric.
As the developed models were classification models, the main performance metric was
accuracy, as each of the classes were equally important. This was used throughout the
development, tuning, and evaluation of the models. Furthermore, the F1-score was uti-
lized at the final evaluation of the models, to determine the performance of the model for
each of the classes to investigate which class was the easiest to predict.
Due to the models being supervised ML models, the data had to be split into a training
and test data set to measure the performance of the models. From the literature, it was
found that an 80-20% train-test split was the most common (Luo et al., 2020). Normally
the split is done randomly to minimize bias.
At first, this method of splitting the data randomly was applied. When testing the perfor-
mance of the initial models, the models performed very well with an accuracy of up to 90%.
However, it was found that the accuracy varied considerably when changing the random
split. As the data was made up of occupants, sometimes located in the same building or
even the same office, some of the data recurred. When the split was done randomly, oc-
cupants from the same building or office were divided into both the training and test data.
Therefore, the model had already learned the general consensus among the occupants
in a specific building, making it easier to predict how the occupants in the test data from
the same building or office would feel. Hence, the model had already encountered a large
amount of the data in the test set in advance.
Consequently, the traditional way of splitting up the training and test data was not applied.
Instead, a few buildings were selected with enough occupants to make up 20% of the data.
Three buildings were selected from Denmark and three from Greenland, and the number
of occupants in Denmark and Greenland was relative to the respective number of data
points in the countries. This way of splitting the data made the model performance more
realistic.
Besides the train-test split, the data had to be further split when optimizing the hyperpa-
rameters, which control the behavior of the algorithm. When optimizing based on test
data, the algorithm would specifically be tailored toward the test data, leading to over-
fitting. The extra split was executed using k-fold cross-validation (CV). This was due to
the variance in the accuracy depending on the test data set. When testing the model on
Predicting Occupant Comfort using Machine Learning
20
==PAGE:27==
different test data sets, the average of the accuracies gave a more realistic performance
than choosing one specific scenario.
The data splits are illustrated in Figure 3.5.
Figure 3.5: Illustration of data splits. The blue boxes represent training data, while the
green boxes represent test data. CV was used for the hyperparameter optimization, while
the 20-80% split was used to determine the performance of the models.
3.2.3
Classes
Another important factor in a classification ML problem is the number of classes to predict.
The original question, on which the prediction was based, had six classes: 0, 1, 2, 3, 4,
and 5, where 0 was dissatisfied and 5 was satisfied, making it a multi-class classification
problem.
When choosing to predict six classes, the prediction would be very detailed, although
harder to predict than with fewer classes. It is especially difficult with few data points,
as there is limited data to learn from and test the performance on. Figure 3.6 shows
the distribution of classes in the training and test data for the smallest data set. The
figure shows, that the classes are relatively unbalanced. Furthermore, it can be seen
that class 0 only had nine training data points and two test data points. This could skew
the performance of the model, as the accuracy would vary significantly depending on the
prediction of the two data points. Therefore, the number of classes needed to be reduced,
to increase the number of data points in each class.
Predicting Occupant Comfort using Machine Learning
21
==PAGE:28==
Figure 3.6: Distribution of classes. The numbers in the boxes indicate the number of
occupants in each class.
The six classes could either be reduced to two or three classes. With only two classes,
the very unsatisfied (0), unsatisfied (1), and slightly unsatisfied (2) would be categorized
together, and slightly satisfied (3), satisfied (4), and very satisfied (5) would be categorized
together. However, this would group the very dissatisfied and very satisfied together with
the occupants who were indifferent.
Instead, three classes were created. A class for the dissatisfied (-1), the neutral (0), and
the satisfied (+1) occupants. This is illustrated in Figure 3.6, with the red, blue, and green
classes, respectively. With this division, the distribution became slightly more balanced,
with the majority being the neutral class and the minority the dissatisfied class.
3.2.4
Algorithms
Several algorithms were tested to determine which performed the best for the specific ML
problem and data set. In the literature study, it was found that the algorithms Random
Forest (RFC), Gradient Boosting Machine (GBM), Artificial Neural Network (ANN), Sup-
port Vector Machine (SVM), and K Nearest Neighbour (KNN) were the most frequently
used and best-performing algorithms for thermal comfort predictions (Xie et al., 2020).
What these algorithms have in common is that they can handle large dimensions, which
have been found to be beneficial in comfort predictions. It was assumed that predicting
thermal comfort and predicting overall comfort was similar, as the type of data, features,
and labels are closely related. Hence, these five algorithms were tested in this project.
RFC and GBM are very similar as they are ensemble learning algorithms. This means
that they combine a number of simple algorithms to create a more robust model that is
more generalizable and therefore decreases the chance of overfitting. Both algorithms
use the decision tree algorithm, which is a very simple algorithm that is built like a tree,
where the branches are split into new branches based on the values of the features. The
feature values determine a path through the tree from which a specific outcome is chosen
(Gupta and Sehgal, 2021).
Predicting Occupant Comfort using Machine Learning
22
==PAGE:29==
Whereas RFC uses a number of parallel decision trees where the outcome is the average
of the different trees, GBM uses consecutive trees, where it starts with one tree, identifies
the weakest feature, and tries to fine-tune it in the next tree. The advantages of these
algorithms are the low chance of overfitting, while the disadvantage is that they can be
computationally slow (Gupta and Sehgal, 2021).
An ANN is inspired by how the brain processes information. It is divided into several
layers where different elements work together to find the pattern. The advantage of the
algorithm is that it works well with complex data, such as images and text, however, it also
requires a large amount of data to learn (Gupta and Sehgal, 2021).
The SVM algorithm can be visualized using a coordinate system. Here, the data for each
feature is divided according to the class using hyper-planes, called decision planes. The
location of the data in relation to the decision plane determines the predicted class. This
algorithm works well with small data sets and has less chance of overfitting. However, it
is computationally expensive and does not work well with noisy data (Gupta and Sehgal,
2021).
The KNN algorithm relies on the assumption that similar features have similar classes.
Therefore, it classifies data according to the proximity to other data. Hence, the classifi-
cation of the data closest to the data point determines the class. The advantage of the
algorithm is that it is simple and quick, while the disadvantage is that it can be sensitive
to unbalanced data (Gupta and Sehgal, 2021).
3.2.5
Hyperparameters
Each algorithm has its own set of hyperparameters that control the behavior of the algo-
rithm. Depending on the data and problem, different hyperparameter settings are more
suitable. Therefore, to increase the performance of the models and tailor the behavior, a
hyperparameter optimization was performed. This is also referred to as tuning the model.
The optimization was performed with the exhaustive grid search method. With this method,
a selection of hyperparameter values is chosen and all combinations are tested to find the
most appropriate. The combination of hyperparameter values that achieves the highest
accuracy is chosen.
In this project, the initial hyperparameter values were based on the suggestions given
in Brownlee (2020). The tuning was performed for all tested algorithms to give them all
the best conditions to perform well. The tuning was initially performed on the data set
including all features and was afterward tailored to the other data sets.
The values for the data set with all features are indicated in Table 3.2 under Round 1.
As mentioned, the performance was evaluated using CV. After the first round of tuning,
the search was narrowed in on the best-performing values. Values above and below the
best-performing value were added and tested in round 2. The best-performing hyperpa-
rameters after round 2, were the values used in the project.
Predicting Occupant Comfort using Machine Learning
23
==PAGE:30==
Table 3.2: Hyperparameters used for each algorithm in the different rounds of tuning
Algorithm
Hyperparameters
RFC
Number of trees
Maximum depth of tree
Number of features to consider
Round 1
5, 20, 50, 100, 200
3, 7, 9
sqrt, log2
Round 2
175, 200, 225
7, 9, 11
log2
Best
200
9
log2
ANN
Hidden layer size
Maximum number of iterations
Round 1
5, 20, 50, 75, 100, 125
100, 300, 500
SVM
Kernel
Regularization parameter
Round 1
poly, rbf, sigmoid, linear
0.01, 0.1, 1.0, 10, 50
Round 2
poly, rbf, sigmoid, linear
0.05, 0.1, 0.15
Best
poly
0.05
GBM
Learning rate
Number of trees
Maximum depth of tree
Round 1
0.001, 0.01, 0.1
5, 20, 50, 100
3, 7, 9
Round 2
0.05, 0.1, 0.15
80, 100, 120
5, 7, 9
Best
0.1
80
5
KNN
Number of neighbours
Weights
Metric
Round 1
1, 5, 9, 13, 17, 21
uniform, distance
euclidean, manhattan, minkowski
Round 2
13, 17, 21
distance
euclidean, manhattan, minkowski
Best
17
distance
manhattan
3.2.6
Selection of Model Parameters
Until now, the selection of classes, algorithms, and hyperparameters have been intro-
duced individually, although they were decided on in a collective process. This process is
illustrated in Figure 3.7. The selection of model parameters was based on Model 0, which
consisted of all features, as this model was the most representative of the other models.
At first, the data was divided into training and test data as described previously, as the
selection of model parameters was done on only the training data. Then the process was
divided into three rounds.
In the first round, the number of classes and the different algorithms were tuned and
tested. Table 3.3 shows the results of the first two rounds after the hyperparameter tuning.
Here, it was found that the accuracy was higher for three classes as opposed to six.
Furthermore, it was seen that the models were significantly better than random guessing.
This together with the imbalance of the six classes lead to the choice of predicting only
three classes.
Table 3.3: Performance of the tested algorithms with the best-performing marked in bold.
The values in rounds 1 and 2 are calculated based on CV, while performance indicates
the performance on the test set.
RFC
ANN
SVM
GBM
KNN
Random guess
Round 1
3 Classes
0.55
0.48
0.53
0.63
0.58
0.33
6 Classes
0.42
0.26
0.41
0.52
0.42
0.17
Round 2
3 Classes
0.55
-
0.53
0.64
0.58
0.33
Performance
3 classes
0.51
-
0.41
0.57
0.46
0.33
Predicting Occupant Comfort using Machine Learning
24
==PAGE:31==
Based on the first round, it was also identified that the algorithm ANN was performing
worse than the other algorithms, as this algorithm requires much more data to train from
than provided. For the prediction of six classes, the algorithm was almost as bad as
random guessing. Therefore, the ANN algorithm was not tested in the following rounds.
In the second round, the four remaining algorithms were further tuned, to ensure a better
performance. After this round, the performance of the four remaining algorithms and
the chosen hyperparameters were tested on the test data. This result is indicated under
Performance in Table 3.3. Here, it is seen that the performance was slightly lower for the
performance results as opposed to the CV results in Round 2. In general, GBM performed
best in all rounds, therefore, it was the chosen algorithm for this project.
In the last round, the selected algorithm was applied to the other models, and the hyper-
parameters found for Model 0 were slightly tuned to fit the other models as well.
Figure 3.7: Process for selecting the number of classes, algorithm, and hyperparameters.
The green boxes indicate the selection carried on to the next round
3.2.7
Feature Importance Analysis
An ML model can be great at making predictions, although, how it came to the conclusion
can be hard to interpret. Therefore, to analyze the mechanisms of the model, a tool called
Predicting Occupant Comfort using Machine Learning
25
==PAGE:32==
SHAP (Shapley Additive Explanations) was used to interpret the models. This is a model-
agnostic tool, meaning it can be used with all algorithms.
The purpose of the tool is to increase the interpretability of a model by showing how each
feature affects the output. This is done by creating all combinations of features and finding
the difference between the output from models with a certain feature and without it. This
is done for every feature in the data to determine their impact (Mazzanti, 2022). The
analysis can both be made locally for one single data point or globally for the entire data
set. In this case, a global analysis was done to get a more general picture of the model.
When a lot of features are included in the model, the calculation becomes very com-
plicated, therefore, a Python library called SHAP was used for the calculations (SHAP,
2018). With the SHAP library, a visualization was made for the SHAP values. An example
of the graph is shown in Figure 3.8. The vertical axis shows the features with increasing
importance, while the horizontal axis shows whether the features have a positive or neg-
ative impact on the output and the color of the dots shows the feature value relative to the
data. When looking at Figure 3.8, this would indicate that age, in this example, is the most
important feature, while job is the least important. Furthermore, higher age and gender
values have a negative impact on the output, while no clear conclusion can be drawn from
the impact of the job.
Figure 3.8: Example of SHAP visualization
This graph was therefore used to determine which features were most important and
whether a low or high feature value yielded a positive or negative response. The inter-
pretation of the model was then compared to the literature, to see if the model worked as
expected.
3.2.8
Variations
When the four main models were developed and the model-specific parameters were
decided on, further variations to the models were tested. These variations were used to
study the mechanisms of the models and to find ways of improving the models. Three
variations were developed, which will be elaborated on in the following.
Feature Elimination
To identify the most relevant features and thereby the best model, a feature selection
was performed on model 0, which contained all available features. The feature selection
method used was recursive feature elimination. This method is an iterative process that
starts with all features. Then the performance is measured, and the least important fea-
ture is identified and removed (SciKit-Learn, 2022). The performance is measured using
Predicting Occupant Comfort using Machine Learning
26
==PAGE:33==
CV to increase generalizability. This process is repeated until all features are eliminated.
The features that deliver the best performance, are the most relevant features. The per-
formance of the model was measured and compared to the other models, and a feature
importance analysis was performed.
National Differences
As the data set consists of both data from Denmark and Greenland, it was investigated
how the models performed with only data from each of the countries. This also showed,
how the models would perform with fewer and less balanced data. The same features
were used for both models to make the models comparable.
Prediction of Discomfort
Besides the prediction of the overall comfort of the occupant, knowing what discomforts
the occupant is perceiving can be beneficial, as it can hint at the areas of improvement.
Therefore, 11 binary models were developed. As the labels were discomforts with the
IEQ, the specific conditions that cause the discomforts were used as features. All thermal
comfort related discomforts were predicted using temperature and RH, IAQ was predicted
using RH and VOC, visual comfort was predicted using illuminance level and acoustic
comfort was predicted using the SPL. VOC and SPL were not included in the other models
as few data points included them. However, in these models they were necessary as
whether the room is too noisy is highly correlated with the SPL and the VOC is correlated
with IAQ. The features and labels of the models are indicated in Table 3.4.
Table 3.4: Features and label for prediction of discomfort
Features
Output
Temperature and relative humidity
Too much air movement
Too little air movement
Temperature too high
Temperature too low
Air too humid
Air too dry
Relative humidity and VOC
Unpleasant odours
Illuminance level
Lighting too dim
Lighting too bright
Reflections/glare on your screen
Sound pressure level
Too noisy
In the questionnaire, the occupants answered how often the discomforts occurred. Here,
they could answer one of four options:
• Not in the past 4 weeks
• 1-3 days in the past 4 weeks
• 1-3 days per week in the past 4 weeks
• Every workday in the past 4 weeks
To make the model simpler, these answers were condensed into binary classes: Less than
Predicting Occupant Comfort using Machine Learning
27
==PAGE:34==
once a week (0) or Once a week or more (1). Most of the occupants did not experience
discomfort often, therefore, artificial data was added to balance out the classes. This was
done using the method SMOTE (Synthetic Minority Over-sampling Technique). It works
by adding samples in between feature values for the minority class until the number of
data points in each class is equal.
3.3
Tool
To be able to use the models in practice to improve decision-making when building, a tool
was created to aid in the optimization of occupant satisfaction. The tool was based on
Model 1, which included building parameters, and Model 2, which included indoor environ-
mental conditions. Model 1 was chosen, as it included parameters that are settled during
the design phase. Model 2 was chosen as it can be used to estimate which conditions to
aim for in order for the indoor environment to be satisfactory.
3.3.1
Development
The tool was developed using the Python library Streamlit, which can turn scripts into
shareable apps with a user-friendly interface (Streamlit, 2023). It can display different
types of data and incorporate user input into the code via input widgets.
The aim of the tool was to create a simple user-friendly tool consisting of user input and a
display of results, which would be updated when changing the input. Furthermore, the tool
had to calculate the comfort level separately based on the different models. The intended
flow of the tool is displayed in Figure 3.9.
The intention behind the tool was to get the user to input the needed data into the model.
The user was made to choose a mode of calculation resulting in different features ap-
pearing. The choice to use occupant data in the prediction was also added, to give the
user more flexibility in the features. Input data was added using input boxes, these in-
cluded checkboxes for binary input, drop-down menus for categorical input, and number
input boxes for continuous input. The same types of boxes were used, to make the tool
easier for the user to learn how to use. For Model 1, the input was divided into general
information, HVAC system, devices, materials, office layout, office location and size, and
lighting. Model 2 was divided into location and season, and conditions.
As some of the inputs depended on each other, some of the boxes were first made visible
when a specific input was chosen. I.e. when an exhaust ventilation system was chosen,
an input box became visible for the type of return air device and the number of return
devices. When choosing a balanced ventilation system, both return and supply input
became visible.
The data was added to a hidden data frame consisting of a single data point with the
necessary features for the models. The data was then fed to the models, which meant that
each time an input was changed, the model was updated. Therefore, the input and results
were made visible on the screen simultaneously. The results consisted of the predicted
category based on the input and a graph showing the probability of each category. The
probability was added to make the results more nuanced. A download button was added,
so the user could save the chosen input and corresponding output.
Predicting Occupant Comfort using Machine Learning
28
==PAGE:35==
The ML model was added in the code as a pickled model, meaning that the trained ML
model was saved without the use of the training data. This was beneficial as it minimized
the processing time and made it more shareable, as personal information was thereby
not included in the application code.
Figure 3.9: Diagram of the user flow of the tool. The dashed lines indicate the flow before
any user input is added.
3.3.2
Case Study
In order to test the tool and provide examples of how to use it in practice, a case study
was made. The aim of the study was to optimize an office building to make the occupants
more satisfied with the indoor environment. It was divided into four scenarios based on
the state of construction: refurbishment, renovation, new-build, and in-use. The difference
between the scenarios was the applied model and the parameters that could be adjusted.
The refurbishment scenario was intended to be a lighter renovation that did not require
much work. In this scenario, Model 1 was used for the prediction and the type of lighting,
shading, seating, number of workstations, and distance to the window could be adjusted
to make a more satisfactory indoor environment.
Predicting Occupant Comfort using Machine Learning
29
==PAGE:36==
The renovation scenario was a more extensive renovation requiring more work and money.
In this scenario, Model 1 was used with the same adjustments as the refurbishment sce-
nario with the addition of the HVAC system, materials, ceiling height, and window area.
The new-build scenario was intended for the early design stages where the design is not
decided on yet. This scenario made use of model 1 with all parameters being adjustable.
The in-use scenario was intended for adjustment of set-points when the building is in use,
as it provides insight into whether the conditions are satisfactory. It made use of Model 2
which included indoor environmental parameters as input. Recommended indoor climate
conditions described in Section 2.1.3 were used as a point of reference, and the values
were adjusted up and down based on this.
Figure 3.10: Street view provided by Google and floor plan of case study building
The refurbishment and renovation scenarios were based on an office building located in
Nyborg, Denmark, illustrated in Figure 3.10. The information about the building was col-
lected in a POE conducted in 2006. Further information was required through the Danish
building archive and assumptions were made about the missing information. Table 3.5
shows the information used as input for the scenarios.
Table 3.5: The initial design parameters of the case study building
Building
Office
Occupant
Suburban/commercial area
6 occupants
Woman
Built 1906
50 m2
40-49 years old
Renovated 2006
3.2 m ceiling height
Administrative worker
Gross floor area of 1000 m2
15 m2 window
6 years in the office
First story
66% operable
6 hours a day
Radiators
100% interior shading
No glasses or contacts
Natural ventilation
Fluorescent lighting
Nonsmoker
Brick construction
3 desk lights
<2 m from window
Cavity insulation
Open office
Fixed seating
Northwest
No partitions
Dissatisfied/neutral
Predicting Occupant Comfort using Machine Learning
30
==PAGE:37==
4
Results
This chapter presents the results. At first, a descriptive data analysis is conducted to better
understand the underlying data. Then, the developed models’ performance is presented,
and a feature analysis is performed to investigate how the models work and to identify
the most important features. Additionally, models based on only data from Denmark or
Greenland and models predicting discomforts are evaluated. At last, the developed tool
is presented and tested in conjunction with the case study results.
4.1
Data Analysis
The data was divided into four sets depending on the features. Due to missing values, the
number of occupants included in each data set differs, as seen in Table 4.1. The following
data analysis is based on these four data sets.
Table 4.1: Number of occupants in each model
Model 0
Model 1
Model 2
Model 3
Number of occupants
193
251
257
408
Each of the occupants was located in a building. Figure 4.1 shows the distribution of
occupants in the buildings for Model 0, which is representative of the rest of the data sets.
The data for the other models are included in Appendix C. This shows that the amount of
data from each of the buildings differs significantly, ranging from 1 to 50 occupants. As
the models are occupant-centric, much of the data is repeated for occupants in the same
buildings and offices. This could lead to the models being specialized in the buildings with
more data, giving them a higher chance of predicting a similar output.
Figure 4.1: Number of occupants in each building
The data was divided into 80% training and 20% test data. The training data is marked
with blue, while the test data is green. This shows that the performance is based on
several different buildings in both Denmark and Greenland, making the performance more
realistic.
Predicting Occupant Comfort using Machine Learning
31
==PAGE:38==
4.1.1
Occupants
The occupant features were included in all the models. Figure 4.2 shows the occupant
demographic for Model 0, as the distribution is similar in all models. Both the gender
and age distribution are mostly balanced, except for the <20 years old category, as these
have rarely joined the workforce yet. The rest of the categories are less balanced, with the
majority of the occupants doing administrative work, wearing glasses or contact lenses,
working for more than five hours a day, and having been in the office for 1-5 years.
Figure 4.2: Occupant demographic
4.1.2
Building Characteristics
The building characteristics were used in Model 0 and 1. Figure 4.3 illustrates the con-
struction and renovation year of the buildings the occupants are located in. One building
was constructed in 1983, while the rest were constructed after 1960. Most of the ren-
ovations are during the 2010s. This indicates that most of the buildings are built under
regulations, as the first building regulations in Denmark were published in 1961 (Trafik-,
Bygge- og Boligstyrelsen, 2023).
Figure 4.3: The number of occupants located in the buildings with corresponding con-
struction and renovation year
Predicting Occupant Comfort using Machine Learning
32
==PAGE:39==
Figure 4.4 illustrates the distribution of building materials. When investigating the differ-
ences between the countries it was found that in Denmark 91% of the facade materials
were brick and 75% of the exterior walls were concrete. In Greenland, both 53% of the fa-
cade materials and 86% of the exterior walls were wood. Therefore, both countries have
a favored building material, which differs between the countries. By using data from both
countries the data becomes more diverse.
Figure 4.4: Distribution of materials
There is also a clear trend in the HVAC systems in the buildings. Most are heated with
radiators, do not use cooling, and make use of manually controlled natural ventilation, as
illustrated in Figure 4.5. Although, the use and control of mechanical ventilation differs
between the buildings.
Figure 4.5: Distribution of HVAC system parameters
Predicting Occupant Comfort using Machine Learning
33
==PAGE:40==
In terms of office characteristics, an average office is indicated in Table 4.2.
Table 4.2: Average office characteristics
Story
Floor Area
Ceiling Height
Window Area
Second floor
42.4 m2
2.6 m
9.2 m2
Operable windows
Shaded windows
Workstations per m2
Desklights per workstation
59%
66%
0.1
1.1
Space heaters per m2
Supply devices per m2
Return devices per m2
0.06
0.02
0.02
4.1.3
Indoor Climate
The indoor climate conditions were used in Models 0 and 2. Figure 4.6 shows the data
distribution in a boxplot. The distribution is divided into minimum, mean, and maximum
values, which represent the conditions of the week of measurements. 98% of the mea-
surements were conducted during spring.
(a) Temperature
(b) Relative humidity
(c) CO2 concentration
(d) Illuminance level
Figure 4.6: Indoor climate conditions
Figure 4.6a illustrates the temperature distribution. Here, it can be seen that the minimum
temperature ranged from approximately 18-24°C. Recommended values for temperature
were presented in Section 2.1.3. For a standard level of expectation, the recommended
minimum temperature is 20°C and maximum 26°C. This means that 25% of the occupants
Predicting Occupant Comfort using Machine Learning
34
==PAGE:41==
experienced temperatures below the recommended range. In terms of maximum tem-
perature, they ranged from 22-29°C with approximately 50% experiencing temperatures
above the recommended value. However, for the mean value, all occupants experienced
temperatures within the recommended range.
Figure 4.6b shows the distribution of the RH measurements. The recommended values for
RH were found to be 25-60% in Section 2.1.3. The mean RH was below the recommended
range for over 50% of the occupants. For the most humid conditions, the RH only reached
45%. Therefore, in general, the conditions were dry.
The CO2 concentration is illustrated in Figure 4.6c. The axis starts at 400 ppm, as this
was the assumed outdoor concentration. The figure shows that in some of the buildings,
the CO2 concentration never decreased to the outdoor concentration. The recommended
threshold value is 1200 ppm including outdoor concentration, which was described in
Section 2.1.3. Almost all the mean values were below this threshold. However, for the
maximum value, most of the buildings exceeded this threshold with values up to almost
3000 ppm.
At last, the illuminance level is presented in Figure 4.6d. The recommended illuminance
level for offices is 500 lux, as explained in Section 2.1.3. The average mean value was
around this level. However, in many cases, the illuminance level was much below this
recommendation. I.e. one office had a maximum value of only 160 lux. Although, this
could be the placement of the sensor causing it to have a lower value. On the opposite
spectrum, one sensor measured illuminance levels up to 30,000 lux, which indicates that
it was placed in direct sunlight.
4.1.4
Discomforts
The discomforts were used in Models 0 and 3. From Figure 4.7 it can be identified that
most of the occupants did not feel any discomfort during the most recent four weeks.
Although among those who did, too little air movement, too cold or hot, too much noise,
and too dry air were the issues that were experienced most often.
Figure 4.7: Perceived discomforts
Predicting Occupant Comfort using Machine Learning
35
==PAGE:42==
4.1.5
Satisfaction
The output predicted in all the models was the satisfaction of the occupants. Most of the
occupants were neutral towards the indoor environment, while the minority was dissatis-
fied, as seen in Figure 4.8. When comparing the two countries, in Greenland occupants
were more dissatisfied than in Denmark. This could be due to the buildings being poorly
constructed and the climate being harsher in Greenland.
Figure 4.8: Class distribution
4.2
Model Performance
Four models were developed with two variations each. For Model 0, the number of fea-
tures differed due to a feature selection, while Models 1, 2, and 3 either did or did not
include occupant characteristics as features.
The performance of Model 0 is illustrated in Table 4.3, both with all 120 features and with
only the 40 best features selected. The model with the fewest features had the highest
accuracy, as unnecessary features had been removed. The F1-score indicates that the
models were best at predicting the satisfied category, with a score of 71%.
Table 4.3: Performance of Model 0
All features (120)
With feature selection (40)
F1-Score
Accuracy
F1-Score
Accuracy
Model 0
Dissatisfied
0.55
0.59
0.55
0.65
Neutral
0.59
0.63
Satisfied
0.62
0.71
Previously, a hypothesis was made based on the influence diagram that Model 3 would
perform best and Model 1 perform worst, and that occupant characteristics would improve
the prediction of Model 1 and 2. Table 4.4 indicates the performance of Models 1, 2, and
3 both with and without occupant characteristics.
Predicting Occupant Comfort using Machine Learning
36
==PAGE:43==
Table 4.4: Performance of Models 1, 2, and 3
With occupants
Without occupants
F1-Score
Accuracy
F1-Score
Accuracy
Model 1
Dissatisfied
0.27
0.50
0.29
0.40
Neutral
0.63
0.48
Satisfied
0.36
0.38
Model 2
Dissatisfied
0.10
0.48
0.32
0.50
Neutral
0.58
0.60
Satisfied
0.54
0.36
Model 3
Dissatisfied
0.5
0.54
0.48
0.48
Neutral
0.56
0.55
Satisfied
0.51
0.31
Model 1 did indeed perform better when adding occupant characteristics with an increase
of 0.1 in accuracy. Although the improvement was only in the neutral class, the accuracy
for dissatisfied and satisfied decreased slightly.
Model 2 did not work as expected as removing the occupant characteristics resulted in a
slightly worse accuracy score. However, adding the occupants improved the prediction
of the satisfied class while it worsened the prediction of the dissatisfied class.
As expected, Model 3 was the best-performing out of Models 1, 2, and 3, although this
was with the occupants included, which was not expected. The improvement when adding
occupants could be due to individual preferences affecting how much weight the perceived
discomforts are attributed.
When evaluating the F1-score of all the models collectively, the neutral class was the
easiest to predict. Only Model 0 achieved better predictions of the satisfied class as
opposed to the neutral class. The neutral class being the easiest to predict could be due
to this class having the highest number of data points and thereby more data to learn from.
In general, the dissatisfied class was the hardest to predict. This goes against the theory
that it is easier for occupants to know when they are dissatisfied rather than satisfied.
However, it also had the lowest number of data points making it more difficult to learn the
patterns.
In terms of accuracy, Model 0 with 40 features was the best-performing model out of all.
This was expected, as this model includes all the best features from the rest of the models.
4.3
Features
All the models were developed based on a set of features. In this section, the features,
their importance, and their effect on the predicted output will be presented for each of the
models. The occupant characteristic features recur in all the models and are indicated in
Table 4.5.
Predicting Occupant Comfort using Machine Learning
37
==PAGE:44==
Table 4.5: Occupant characteristics features
Gender
Administrative job
Years in office
Age
Managerial job
Days in office
Smoker
Professional job
Hours at desk
Eyewear
Technical job
4.3.1
Model 0
Model 0 included all 120 available features, which are a combination of categorical and
continuous features. All 120 features are included in Appendix B. By performing a fea-
ture selection, the 40 best features were selected for model 0. These 40 features are a
combination of all data sets, with 8-11 features from each set. The features used in the
model, and thereby the most important out of all the features, are indicated in Table 4.6.
Table 4.6: Features in Model 0 with feature selection
Gender
LED lighting
Max illuminance
Age
Fluorescent lighting
Too much air movement
Eyewear
Number of supply devices
Too little air movement
Years in office
Number of space heaters
Temperature too high
Days in office
Mean temperature
Temperature too low
Managerial job
Min temperature
Air too dry
Professional job
Max temperature
Unpleasant odors
Construction year
Mean relative humidity
Lighting too dim
Gross Floor Area
Max relative humidity
Lighting too bright
Wooden Facade
Mean CO2
Reflections/glare on your
Floor Area
Min CO2
screen
Ceiling height
Max CO2
Too noisy
Number of workstations
Mean illuminance
Too dirty or dusty
Occupants in office
Min illuminance
Figure 4.9 illustrates the 15 most important features and their effect on the predicted out-
put. Seven of the discomfort features are included in top 15, with the three most important
being discomfort with temperature, air movement, and noise. This fits with the theory,
as thermal and acoustic comfort are normally considered the most important factors for
achieving overall satisfaction with IEQ (Frontczak and Wargocki, 2011).
Predicting Occupant Comfort using Machine Learning
38
==PAGE:45==
Figure 4.9: Feature importance for Model 0
The color of the dots indicates the feature value. For the discomfort features, a red dot
indicates that discomfort is perceived often, while a blue dot indicates that discomfort is
not perceived. Most of the red dots are on the negative side of the x-axis, therefore, the
more often the discomfort is perceived, the more negative the output will be. This is what
was expected, as more discomfort leads to more dissatisfaction.
In terms of age, the figure shows that the young and the old in general have a positive
impact on the output, while the middle-aged have a negative impact on the output. The
same is the case for the number of occupants, as offices with few or many occupants are
predicted to be more comfortable than the middle ground.
The gender difference is very apparent in this model, as all the red dots, indicating women,
have a negative impact, while the men have a positive impact. The output based on
whether the occupant is wearing glasses or not is also very clear.
Furthermore, the figure indicates that a newer building, results in a positive output and
that working in the office for a longer period result in a negative output.
The effect of all these features fits with the findings of other studies presented in Sec-
tion 2.1. Although, the feature for the number of days in the office indicates that when an
occupant is in the office many days a week, a positive output is predicted. This is contra-
dictory to the theory, as it is found that the more exposed you are to an environment the
more critical you get.
4.3.2
Model 1
Model 1 included 77 building characteristic features, which are indicated in Table 4.7.
The features are a combination of categorical and continuous features. The categorical
features were converted to dummy variables, the number in the parenthesis, therefore,
indicates the number of features in the category.
Predicting Occupant Comfort using Machine Learning
39
==PAGE:46==
Table 4.7: Model 1 features
Construction year
Central cooling
Window orientation (8)
Renovation year
Type of heating
Window area
Gross floor area
Number of supply devices
Percentage of windows operable
Site (6)
Type of supply device (4)
Percentage of windows shaded
Location
Number of return devices
Type of shading (3)
Facade material (4)
Type of return device (4)
Distance to window
Internal wall construction (4)
Number of space heaters
Type of electrical lighting (3)
External wall construction (3)
Number of humidifiers
Desk lights per occupant
Type of insulation (2)
Number of desk fans
Occupants in office
Type of ventilation (4)
Office floor
Number of workstations
Ventilation control (3)
Floor area
Office type (4)
Heating coil type (2)
Ceiling height
Seating (2)
Figure 4.10 illustrates the effect of the 15 most important features on the predicted output
both for Model 1 with and without the occupant characteristic features.
(a) Without occupants
(b) With occupants
Figure 4.10: Feature importance for Model 1
When examining the model without the occupant features in Figure 4.10a, the most im-
portant features are the number of workstations and the number of occupants in the office.
These features are somewhat related as the number of workstations reflects the number
of occupants. The general trend for these features is that fewer occupants or workstations
have a positive output. This is realistic as more occupants can increase the temperature
and sound level and decrease the air quality.
In most cases, a larger floor area impacts the model positively. This could be due to more
space per occupant. When the occupant is further away from the window the impact on
the model is negative. This seems counterintuitive, as a closer distance to the window is
normally preferred.
Predicting Occupant Comfort using Machine Learning
40
==PAGE:47==
The number of supply devices has high importance as well. The higher the number of
supply devices and thereby the more air supplied, the more likely the model will predict
a positive output. However, the opposite is the case for the number of return devices,
where more devices yield a negative output.
A negative output is especially found when the building has a wooden facade and is
located in an urban/commercial area or an urban/residential area. The reason for this
could be that most of the buildings with these characteristics are located in Greenland
where the level of dissatisfaction is slightly higher.
For the model with the occupant features added, seen in Figure 4.10b, the same effects
can be derived from the building features already presented. Although the ranking has
changed slightly, as some features are more important in this model, i.e. the window area.
Furthermore, seven of the top 15 features are now replaced with occupant characteristics.
This would indicate that individual preferences are a big factor in the satisfaction level of
the occupants. It could also be due to the nature of the data, as the building features
are identical for several occupants. Therefore, the only way to distinguish between the
different satisfaction levels of occupants in the same office is the occupant characteristics.
The effects of the occupant features have slightly changed when using them in Model 1
as opposed to Model 0. Here, the more years and days in the office an occupant spends,
the prediction will result in a positive output, which goes against the literature.
4.3.3
Model 2
Model 2 included 14 features about the indoor climate in the buildings, indicated in Ta-
ble 4.8. 12 of the features are continuous variables, so the data is more varied than the
other models, which include mostly categorical features.
Table 4.8: Model 2 features
Mean temperature
Max relative humidity
Min illuminance
Min temperature
Mean CO2
Max illuminance
Max temperature
Min CO2
Season
Mean relative humidity
Max CO2
Location
Min relative humidity
Mean illuminance
The effect of the features in Model 2 are illustrated in Figure 4.11. Here it can be seen
that the distinction between whether a low or high value is positive or negative is more
unclear.
Predicting Occupant Comfort using Machine Learning
41
==PAGE:48==
(a) Without occupants
(b) With occupants
Figure 4.11: Feature importance for Model 2
The most important condition in the model without the occupants is the CO2 concentration,
as seen in Figure 4.11a. This is not generally thought of as the most defining factor for
comfort, as it can be harder to perceive than i.e. noise and temperature. Although, it has
a great effect on the health and well-being of occupants and can thereby be perceived
indirectly. The results show that a lower minimum and maximum CO2 concentration is
preferred.
The illuminance level is the second most important in this model, which is generally con-
sidered the least important factor for determining comfort. The results show that a high
minimum illuminance, but a low maximum level is preferred. It is therefore a balance
between enough lighting, but not too much as this can cause glare.
In general, a higher RH results in a positive output. Most of the measured offices had
lower humidity levels than recommended, as shown previously in Figure 4.6b. Therefore,
it is understandable that higher levels are preferred.
The figure also shows a preference for a lower maximum and minimum temperature.
When looking at the distribution of the temperature data in Figure 4.6a, the maximum
temperature goes up to 29°C even though most of the measurements are conducted in
the spring. This could be why lower temperatures are preferred.
The same effects as Model 1 are found when adding the occupant features, which again
are important for the prediction, as seen in Figure 4.12b. Furthermore, the order of im-
portance is changed for some of the features, making the illuminance level and RH less
important, when the occupants are considered.
4.3.4
Model 3
Model 3 included 12 features about the perceived discomforts, as shown in Table 4.9. All
the features are categorical and include the same categories, the features are therefore
similar.
Predicting Occupant Comfort using Machine Learning
42
==PAGE:49==
Table 4.9: Model 3 features
Too much air movement
Air too humid
Lighting too bright
Too little air movement
Air too dry
Reflections/glare on your screen
Temperature too high
Unpleasant odours
Too noisy
Temperature too low
Lighting too dim
Too dirty or dusty
From Figure 4.12a a general trend can be derived, although no clear distinction can be
made. When the discomfort is perceived often, illustrated with the red dots, it generally
has a negative impact on the output. This is mostly the case, except for the feature
reflections/glare on the screen and lighting too dim. The reason for this could be that
reflections are only perceived in short periods of time, while the office is well-lit for the rest
of the time. The lighting being too dim can also lead to the absence of reflections and can
thereby be more satisfactory.
(a) Without occupants
(b) With occupants
Figure 4.12: Feature importance for Model 3
Surprisingly, too little air movement is the most important feature, whereas draught is nor-
mally considered the most important thermal local discomfort. However, the data analysis
showed that this is the discomfort that was perceived most often in the evaluated build-
ings. Furthermore, by creating a correlation graph between the discomforts, illustrated in
Figure 4.13, it can be seen that too little air movement is correlated with too high tem-
perature. This could indicate that when answering too little air movement, the occupants
perceive it as a discomfort, as they want to be cooled down from feeling too hot. There-
fore, the four most important features are thermal and acoustic comfort which fit well with
the theory.
The distinction between positive/negative and high/low values becomes more prevalent
when adding the occupant characteristics to the model, as seen in Figure 4.12b. Again,
the occupants have a large impact on the output of the model as several are in the top
15. Especially the jobs of the occupants play a large role in this model. This could be due
to the occupants with the same job working in the same office with similar tasks. The rest
of the features follow the same trends as the other models.
Predicting Occupant Comfort using Machine Learning
43
==PAGE:50==
Figure 4.13: Correlation between discomfort features
4.4
National Differences
To investigate the differences between the countries and the effect of additional data,
the four best models were tested using only data from either Denmark or Greenland.
Table 4.10 indicates the performance of these models.
Table 4.10: Model performance using data from Denmark, Greenland, and both countries
Denmark
Greenland
Total
F1-Score
Accuracy
F1-Score
Accuracy
F1-Score
Accuracy
Model 0
Dissatisfied
0.29
0.39
0.50
0.57
0.55
0.65
Neutral
0.45
0.50
0.63
Satisfied
0.35
1.00
0.71
Model 1
Dissatisfied
0.22
0.46
0.31
0.41
0.27
0.50
Neutral
0.52
0.54
0.63
Satisfied
0.50
0.00
0.36
Model 2
Dissatisfied
0.00
0.54
0.36
0.31
0.32
0.50
Neutral
0.62
0.33
0.60
Satisfied
0.48
0.00
0.36
Model 3
Dissatisfied
0.20
0.49
0.35
0.53
0.50
0.54
Neutral
0.56
0.57
0.56
Satisfied
0.48
0.67
0.51
The results show that in most cases, there is an increase in performance when using all the
data, as opposed to only Denmark or Greenland. Only Model 2 shows better performance
for the data from Denmark than the data from both countries together. Although, the model
is not able to predict the dissatisfied class with only data from Denmark.
Predicting Occupant Comfort using Machine Learning
44
==PAGE:51==
Using the data from Denmark, especially the prediction of discomfort is significantly lower
than for the total model. The data from Denmark had the lowest percentage of dissatis-
fied occupants, as seen previously in Figure 4.8. Therefore, this model is slightly more
unbalanced than the others, making it harder to predict the dissatisfied class.
On the contrary, Models 1 and 2 with Greenland data could not predict the satisfied class.
Because of the low number of data points in Greenland, few data points were available
to train and test the models, which could impact the accuracy. I.e. for Model 0 with
Greenland data, only two test points were available for the satisfied class.
In the data analysis, it was found that the building characteristics were different between
the countries but similar when examining the data for each of the countries. Therefore,
when combining the two data sets, the data becomes more diverse. Furthermore, the
number of data points increases, which can make the patterns more visible to the algo-
rithm, achieving better accuracy.
The F1-score of Models 1 and 2 follows the same trend as the class distribution; the
neutral class with the most data achieves the highest score and the dissatisfied class with
the least amount of data has the lowest score. This could indicate that by adding more
data to the satisfied and dissatisfied categories and thereby making it more balanced, the
performance of the models could increase.
4.5
Prediction of Discomfort
11 models were developed to predict what discomforts the occupant may experience to
find areas of improvement. Here, it is assumed that when discomfort is perceived more
than once a week, it is a recurring problem. Table 4.11 shows the features used in the
models, what is being predicted, and the F1-score for when the discomfort is experienced
more than once a week. The F1-score was used for estimating the performance, as the
intention of this model was to predict when the occupant is perceiving discomfort rather
than when there is less discomfort. Therefore, the classes are not equally important,
which makes the accuracy misleading.
Table 4.11: Features, predicted output, and F1-score for the class where the discomfort
is perceived more than once a week
Features
Output
F1-Score
>Once a week
Temperature and relative humidity
Too much air movement
0.00
Too little air movement
0.35
Temperature too high
0.17
Temperature too low
0.26
Air too humid
0.00
Air too dry
0.53
Relative humidity and VOC
Unpleasant odours
0.00
Illuminance level
Lighting too dim
0.00
Lighting too bright
0.20
Reflections/glare on your screen
0.37
Sound pressure level
Too noisy
0.53
Predicting Occupant Comfort using Machine Learning
45
==PAGE:52==
The results show that many of the discomforts are hard to predict. This is due to the
low number of data points in the predicted class. I.e. the model predicting Too much
air movement did not have any test points where the discomfort had been experienced,
consequently, the F1-score is 0.
Only the models Air too dry and Too noisy received F1-scores above 0.5, which is the
accuracy when random guessing. Too little air movement and Reflections/glare on your
screen showed promising results, although not good enough. These four discomforts
were among the ones that were experienced the most when examining Figure 4.7 in the
data analysis. This again indicates that more balanced data is needed to develop more
accurate models.
4.6
Tool
An online tool was developed based on Models 1 and 2 and the models of discomfort.
The developed tool can be accessed using the URL: https://comfort.streamlit.app/
The interface of the tool can be seen in Figure 4.14 and Figure 4.15. At first, a calculation
method is chosen which determines the input parameters, this can either be using building
characteristics or indoor climate conditions. Input for occupant characteristics is added
by checking Include occupant characteristics.
Figure 4.14 shows the page for building characteristics, which are entered using drop-
down menus and number input boxes. Figure 4.15 shows the page for the indoor climate
conditions, where each condition is entered using number boxes for the minimum and
maximum values, while the average is chosen using a slider between the minimum and
maximum.
Figure 4.14: User interface when choosing building characteristics
Predicting Occupant Comfort using Machine Learning
46
==PAGE:53==
Figure 4.15: User interface when choosing indoor climate
On the left side of the screen, the results are shown. At first, the conclusion of the model is
written, whether the occupant will likely be dissatisfied, neutral or satisfied. The probability
of each class is illustrated using a graph. If the choice of method is using the indoor
climate, the predicted perceived discomforts will appear, which is seen in Figure 4.15.
Currently, only the discomfort of too dry air is added to the tool, as the accuracy of the
other discomfort models was too poor, or the input parameters were not included in the
tool.
At last, the prediction accuracy is written, and a download button is added. By clicking
the download button, a CSV file including the input and results is downloaded.
4.7
Case study
The tool was tested using a case study building located in Nyborg. The purpose of the
case study was to improve the comfort of an occupant in the building in four different
scenarios: refurbishment, renovation, new-build, and in-use. The first 3 scenarios were
optimized using building characteristics and the occupant characteristics of one of the oc-
cupants in the case study building. In the last scenario, the comfort level was predicted
using recommended indoor climate conditions and adjusted up and down to see what ef-
fect it had. Due to Model 2 having a higher accuracy without the occupant characteristics,
the occupant was omitted from this scenario.
The following sections will present the changes made in each scenario to optimize the
comfort of the occupant and the resulting prediction.
Predicting Occupant Comfort using Machine Learning
47
==PAGE:54==
4.7.1
Refurbishment
The satisfaction of the chosen occupant was optimized in the refurbishment scenario by
removing a workstation to allow more space per occupant. Furthermore, the number
of desk lights was changed, so each occupant was provided one. The lighting was also
changed from fluorescent to LED. Table 4.12 shows the result for the baseline building and
the result after making the changes. Both before and after the refurbishment, the predicted
output was neutral as this had the highest probability. When making the refurbishment
changes, the probability of the neutral and satisfied classes increased slightly, while the
probability of the dissatisfied class decreased.
Table 4.12: Probability of each class for baseline and refurbishment scenario
Dissatisfied
Neutral
Satisfied
Baseline
34.2%
63.9%
1.9%
Refurbishment
22%
71.4%
6.6%
Change
-12,2
+7,5
+4,7
4.7.2
Renovation
In the renovation scenario, the same changes as in the refurbishment scenario were made
with the addition of a ventilation system. A balanced ventilation system with heat recovery
was chosen. Four supply devices were added in the form of linear ceiling diffusers, while
two return devices were added as ceiling grills. Consequently, the ceiling was lowered
by 0.4 m. Furthermore, the seating was made flexible instead of fixed and the renovation
year was changed to 2022, as the building had now been renovated.
By making these changes the predicted class changed from neutral to satisfied, derived
from Table 4.13. Here, a large decrease in the probability of the dissatisfied and neutral
classes and almost a 50 percentage point increase in the probability of the satisfied class
is observed.
Table 4.13: Probability of each class for baseline and renovation scenario
Dissatisfied
Neutral
Satisfied
Baseline
34.2%
63.9%
1.9%
Renovation
16.3%
33.1%
50.6%
Change
-17.9
-30.8
+48.7
4.7.3
New-build
In the new-build scenario, a new office building was created for the same occupant work-
ing in the case study building, while all other parameters were changeable. By adjusting
features based on the insights from the feature importance analysis, the parameters indi-
cated in Table 4.14 were chosen to ensure a comfortable building for the occupant.
Predicting Occupant Comfort using Machine Learning
48
==PAGE:55==
Table 4.14: Building characteristics in the new-build scenario
Located in Denmark
Cavity insulation
Suburban/commercial area
Second story
Construction/renovation year 2022
Office facing east
Gross floor area of 1000 m2
25 m2 floor area
Balanced ventilation system with heat recovery
2.8 m ceiling height
Electrical heating coil
Shared office with 2 fixed workstations
Temperature-controlled ventilation
5.7 m2 window area
2 linear ceiling diffusers for supply
0-2 m from the occupant
1 ceiling slot for return
75% operable windows
2 radiators
100% interior shaded
Other facade material
2 desk lights
Gypsum interior wall
LED lighting
Concrete exterior wall
By choosing these parameters the probability that the occupant will be satisfied increases
significantly, as seen in Table 4.15.
Table 4.15: Probability of each class for new-build scenario
Dissatisfied
Neutral
Satisfied
Baseline
34.2%
63.9%
1.9%
New-build
5.7%
11.2%
83.1%
Change
-17.1
-52.7
+81.2
4.7.4
In-use
Different indoor climate conditions were tested in the in-use scenario to see how they
affect the prediction. Here, the baseline scenario was based on the recommended values
described in Section 2.1.3. The ranges were then adjusted up or down for each of the
domains individually while the rest of the domains were kept on the recommended values.
The tested scenarios are indicated in Table 4.16.
Predicting Occupant Comfort using Machine Learning
49
==PAGE:56==
Table 4.16: Indoor climate scenarios
Minimum
Average
Maximum
Temperature [°C]
Colder
19
22
25
Recommended
20
23
26
Warmer
21
24
27
CO2 concentration [ppm]
Better quality
400
600
800
Recommended
400
800
1200
Worse quality
800
1000
1200
Illuminance [lux]
Darker
100
300
500
Recommended
300
500
700
Brighter
500
700
900
Relative humidity [%]
More dry
5
20
35
Recommended
25
40
60
More humid
45
60
75
Figure 4.16 shows the probability of each class for the different scenarios. For the recom-
mended conditions, the probability that the occupant will be satisfied is around 55% and
the neutral class is 45%. The predicted class is therefore satisfied.
Figure 4.16: Probability of each class for in-use scenario
When lowering the temperature, the probability that the occupant will be satisfied de-
creases significantly. On the contrary, by increasing the temperature, the satisfied class
increases. Hence, the occupant prefers a warmer climate.
Predicting Occupant Comfort using Machine Learning
50
==PAGE:57==
When lowering the CO2 concentration and thereby improving the air quality, the satisfied
class increases. When increasing the CO2 concentration, almost no change is observed.
This could be due to few data points with these conditions and thereby not enough data
to learn from.
The predicted class changes to neutral when decreasing the illuminance level. By in-
creasing the illuminance level there is a 100% chance that the occupant will be satisfied.
This fits with what was observed about the feature importance in Model 2, where the
illuminance level was one of the most important features.
At last, when decreasing the humidity, the probability of the satisfied class decreases,
resulting in the prediction being neutral. Almost no change is observed when increasing
the humidity, again due to missing data with these conditions.
The results from this scenario show that the recommended indoor climate conditions may
not always be the most comfortable for an occupant. Hence, adjustments to the conditions
could lead to more satisfied occupants and a decrease in the energy use of a building.
Predicting Occupant Comfort using Machine Learning
51
==PAGE:58==
5
Discussion
The aim of the project was to develop machine learning models capable of predicting
the overall comfort level of occupants. Hence, four main models were developed based
on different data and features. The features included occupant characteristics, building
characteristics, indoor climate conditions, and discomforts. The best model obtained an
accuracy of 65% while the worst obtained an accuracy of 48%. Although this is a better
accuracy than with random guessing (33%), improvements to the models could indeed
be made to achieve better predictions.
There is not one distinct method or number to determine whether an ML model is good
enough, as it depends on what can be achieved with the data, features, and the number of
predicted classes. A general rule is that a model based on a well-balanced data set is good
when the accuracy is above 70%, while models below 60% are poor (Allwright, 2022). In
this case, the data is limited and not well-balanced, which may be one of the reasons
why it is not performing as well. Combining the data sets instead of splitting them up into
Denmark and Greenland, showed that the models improved when the number of data
points increased, and the data became more diverse. Therefore, an increase in accuracy
could be observed if more data is added and the classes become more balanced.
Another way to determine whether the models are useful is to compare them to similar
models. This way the performance is estimated based on the same type of data, which
can give an indication of what is possible to achieve. Only one study on the prediction
of overall comfort was found in the literature study, which applied a regression algorithm
and is therefore difficult to compare with. However, many models on thermal comfort have
been developed, which are somewhat similar to predicting overall comfort. Although, it
is expected that the models in this project perform worse, as thermal comfort is only a
small part of overall comfort and is less complex. A literature study on thermal comfort
predictions found that the accuracies ranged from around 45% to 95% with an average
value of 84% (Xie et al., 2020). Hence, the models developed in this project are in the
lower range in terms of accuracy, which leaves room for improvement.
Besides the limited data and complex nature of the prediction, general sources of error
could be the cause of the inadequate performance. This could be errors in the data,
such as noisy data, outliers, or coincidences in the data. It could also be the choice of
features, as unnecessary or misleading features could impair the prediction. Furthermore,
ML models are stochastic by nature, meaning that there is an element of randomness to
the algorithms. All these errors could also be the reason why some of the features did not
impact the model as expected.
The way the indoor climate measurements were adapted to the model could also have
impacted the model. Both the measurements and the answers from the questionnaire
reflected the week. Consequently, the prediction reflects the general experience, while
the occupant could have been more or less satisfied during specific times of the week. By
aggregating the measurements into three features, detail could have been lost. There-
fore, model 2 is not fully representative of the effect the indoor climate has on comfort. To
Predicting Occupant Comfort using Machine Learning
52
==PAGE:59==
combat this, the occupant could have been asked several times during the week to rate
their comfort level. This would join the comfort level to exact conditions. However, asking
the occupants to report back several times a week would increase the risk of survey fa-
tigue. In other studies (Jayathissa et al., 2020), smartwatches have been used to collect
feedback and data from occupants, which makes it easier and quicker for the occupant.
The indoor climate measured in the offices was mostly in the recommended range. Due
to this, in the in-use case study scenario, increasing the RH and CO2 concentration over
the recommended maximum made almost no change in the predicted class, as the model
had never encountered similar values in the training data. The same applies to Model 1,
where many of the building characteristics were similar, especially the buildings from the
same country. Hence, the data sets the limitations of the models, and more diverse data
is needed to expand the limits of the models and make them more generalizable.
Adding data from controlled environments could be a way to diversify the data. Most
office buildings in Denmark and Greenland are built under regulations and follow stan-
dards of indoor climate. Consequently, some conditions are more represented in the
data. This could reflect on the class balance where the neutral class is in the majority.
A way to get more data on the ends of the spectrum could be to perform experiments
in controlled environments. However, this data collection method ignores the aspect of
time and adaptation, which was found to play a role in the models. I.e. the number of
years and number of hours a day an occupant worked in the office influenced their level
of satisfaction. Therefore, a combination of data collected using the different methods
could help balance and diversify the data.
An assumption on the location of the occupants was made. All employees in the com-
panies were asked to fill out the questionnaire, although measurements and registrations
were only made in a few selected offices in the buildings. Occupants in the same build-
ing, floor, and orientation were linked to a sensor with the same values. However, i.e. the
size, number of occupants, and devices could differ between the offices. Furthermore,
some offices could include other sources of discomfort, making the data misleading for
the model. Without this assumption, much data would be lost in the coupling of occupants
and offices, which made it necessary to include. When collecting more data in the future,
it could be assured that measurements were done in representative offices or more offices
could be measured, although this would require more time and equipment.
As several occupants were coupled to the same offices and buildings, much of the data
was repeated. Consequently, the only features separating dissatisfied and satisfied oc-
cupants were their characteristics. Hence, the characteristics of the occupants was as-
signed significant importance, although it may not be the case. Other information could be
embedded in the features, i.e. the gender could indicate physiological differences, while
the job could indicate different office setups, activity levels, and concentration needed to
perform the tasks. To get more valid predictions, more physiological and psychological
factors, such as BMI, pulse, skin temperature, metabolic rate, clothing insulation, and
temperature preference could be included. Although, this data is harder to collect and
use in a design process.
Other more detailed features could also have been used for Model 1. Values often used
Predicting Occupant Comfort using Machine Learning
53
==PAGE:60==
in building simulations could provide more information to the model and make it more ad-
justable. I.e. U-values, air change rates, the power of the heat sources, and glazing data
would provide more detail to the model rather than materials, number of supply devices,
number of heat sources, and size of windows, respectively. But again, this data would be
harder to collect.
The outdoor climate or season could also improve the model, as the indoor climate is af-
fected by outdoor conditions. However, almost all measurements were conducted during
spring, adding the season as a feature would not contribute much information, without
additional measurements at other times of the year. Furthermore, as data from different
climates were used, the season might reflect different conditions whether the data is from
Denmark or Greenland. Hence, adding features for the outdoor climate can contribute
more information to the models than just the season. Furthermore, due to the harsher cli-
mate, the expectation and evaluation of the indoor climate might be different. Therefore,
using data from different climates could be misleading to the model. If more data were
available, the development of a model for each climate would be preferable.
Model 2 included few conditions, as the measurements from Greenland only consisted
of temperature, RH, CO2 concentration, and illuminance level. This meant that the SPL,
VOC, and color temperature were not included. Especially the SPL has been found to
affect comfort, therefore, adding this feature would be beneficial to the model. Additionally,
features such as air velocity and mean radiant temperature could also add value to the
model.
Only classification models were tested in the development of the models as other studies
had found them to perform better. However, without testing regression algorithms on the
specific data, it cannot be known whether they would perform well. The advantage of
using regression models would be that the prediction is given on a spectrum rather than
in a few distinct categories, which would make the prediction more detailed. Furthermore,
the possibility of the model predicting both satisfied and dissatisfied would be eliminated.
Although, the probability of the classes in the classification models also adds some detail.
The probability could be interpreted as the difference in preferences. If the probability
of a certain class is high, it could indicate that there is a general consensus in the data,
whereas if the probability is distributed among several classes the data could be more
contradictory.
An ML model in itself is hard to use in a practical way. I.e. the data must be entered into a
data frame with the exact features as included in the training data and categorical features
must be entered to fit the specific categories. Therefore, without extensive knowledge of
the development of the models, predicting new cases can be difficult. Hence, the use of
an app to acquire user input for the prediction made the models more practical and made
it possible to use them in a design process. Furthermore, by making the tool publicly
available online, it becomes more accessible and can provide inspiration for others trying
to develop similar models or tools.
However, designing based on ML models is not always intuitive. Traditionally, static mod-
els are used where changing a variable will result in a higher or lower value of a specific
magnitude. However, an ML model is not as black and white. A change in one parame-
Predicting Occupant Comfort using Machine Learning
54
==PAGE:61==
ter may not always affect the output in the same way, depending on what parameters it
is paired with. Although this is one of the strengths of machine learning models, it also
requires more experimenting when designing and optimizing to achieve the desired out-
come.
Although the models were not as good as intended, they still showed great potential.
Traditional comfort models are static, include only a few parameters, are based on the
average of a group, and are developed with climate chamber experiments under specific
conditions. On the contrary, the models in this project are flexible, include a wide range
of parameters, are based on a single occupant, and reflect reality as it relies on field
data. Additionally, as determined in the literature study, ML models have been found to
achieve high accuracy in thermal comfort predictions. They are also versatile, can have
high complexity, and are easy to build on. Traditional models are developed based on
the knowledge at the time, while ML models can be expanded and improved as more
data and knowledge is gained. However, the biggest disadvantage of ML models is the
collection of data. Much data is needed to develop a good model, which can be difficult
to collect, time-consuming, and expensive.
Furthermore, due to the versatility of ML models, the models can be developed in many
different ways. All the studies make use of different techniques and methods. Based on
the data, different features, algorithms, hyperparameters, feature engineering, or feature
selection methods are utilized, making it hard to adapt the knowledge of other studies
to the current ML problem. Therefore, prior knowledge in the field of ML is beneficial to
identify which methods are most useful with the applied data.
Adding more factors to comfort models and investigating their dependencies has long
been discussed, but not yet realized. However, this was done in this project. In the fea-
ture importance analysis, it was established that many factors affect comfort and that
the impact differs based on the combination of features, with the occupant features be-
ing some of the most influential. Hence, this project further substantiates the need for
occupant-centric data-driven models to improve the prediction of comfort.
With this project, buildings can be optimized and designed to ensure more comfortable
and sustainable buildings with happier, healthier, and more productive occupants. The
indoor environment can be adjusted to fit the preference of the occupants, which can lead
to an increase in comfort and a decrease in energy consumption. In a greater context, ML
models can be useful in the prediction of indoor climate parameters, energy use, control
of building systems, and in the development of a digital twin of an occupant. All things
considered, ML models are a valuable tool in the field of indoor climate and comfort.
Based on this discussion, future work would entail adding more data and diversifying
it, experimenting with other combinations of features, and trying regression models to
see how they compare with classification. This could improve the performance of the
models and make them more useful. Further development of the discomfort models is
also needed, to be able to include more of them in the tool. The Python code with an
accompanied guide is included in Appendix D, which makes it possible for others to get
inspiration and further develop the project.
Predicting Occupant Comfort using Machine Learning
55
==PAGE:62==
6
Conclusion
In this project, several machine learning models were developed to predict the comfort of
occupants in office buildings in terms of indoor environmental quality. The models were
occupant-centric and based on different categories of features, namely building charac-
teristics, indoor climate conditions, and discomforts, in combination with occupant char-
acteristics. Additionally, a model combining all features was developed.
The models were developed as classification models using the algorithm Gradient Boost-
ing Machine, as this was found to perform best in this case. The model that obtained
the highest accuracy was a combination of the best features from each category, which
achieved an accuracy of 65%. The discomfort model achieved an accuracy of 54%, while
the models based on building characteristics and indoor climate conditions achieved an
accuracy of 50%. The model accuracy was found acceptable, although further develop-
ment of the models is needed. By using only some of the data, it was found that more
data and more diverse data increased the accuracy.
It was concluded that the occupant characteristics features had a large impact on the
models, as they increased the accuracy of most models and were among the most im-
portant features. Due to the complexity of the models, many other features were also
important, including temperature, noise, lighting, indoor air quality, the layout of the of-
fice, and the number of occupants in the office. These findings substantiated the need for
occupant-centric data-driven models in the field of indoor climate and comfort.
Furthermore, models predicting the perceived discomfort were developed to predict areas
of improvement. Although, as the amount of data was limited, only the prediction of the air
being too dry and the office being too noisy achieved acceptable prediction accuracies.
The models based on building characteristics and indoor climate conditions and the model
predicting the perceived comfort were used to develop a tool for comfort predictions. It was
established that the tool was helpful in a design process both in refurbishment, renovation,
new-build and in-use scenarios based on a case study. Here it was concluded, that the
comfort of the occupant could be optimized using the tool and that the recommended
indoor climate conditions were not necessarily the most comfortable.
At last, it can be concluded that by creating the models and using them in the tool, the
overall comfort level of an occupant could be predicted instead of relying on recommenda-
tions from standards. This project could therefore aid in the improvement of the health and
performance of occupants and make the buildings more socially sustainable by including
optimization of occupant comfort in the design process.
Predicting Occupant Comfort using Machine Learning
56
==PAGE:63==
Bibliography
Allwright, S. (2022). What is a good accuracy score? Simply explained [Accessed 13-01-
23]. https://stephenallwright.com/good-accuracy-score
Arbejdstilsynet. (2008). Indeklima [Accessed 14-01-23]. https://at.dk/regler/at-vejledninger/
indeklima-a-1-2/
Arbejdstilsynet. (2007). Støj [Accessed 14-01-23]. https://at.dk/regler/at-vejledninger/
stoej-d-6-1/
Aryal, A., & Becerik-Gerber, B. (2020). Thermal comfort modeling when personalized
comfort systems are in use: Comparison of sensing and learning methods. Build-
ing and Environment, 185, 107316. https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
buildenv.2020.107316
Bae, S., Asojo, A. O., & Martin, C. S. (2020). Impact of occupants’ demographics on
indoor environmental quality satisfaction in the workplace. Building Research &
Information, 48(3), 301–315. https://doi.org/10.1080/09613218.2019.1627857
Bienfait, D., Fanger, P. O., Fitzner, K., Jantunen, M., Lindvall, T., Skåret, E., Seppänen,
O., Schlatter, J., & Woolliscroft, M. (1992). Report no. 11 guidelines for ventilation
requirements in buildings. In Indoor air quality and its impact on man. Commission
of the European Communities.
Bortolini, R., & Forcada, N. (2021). Association between building characteristics and in-
door environmental quality through post-occupancy evaluation. Energies, 14(6).
https://doi.org/10.3390/en14061659
Brownlee, J. (2020). Tune Hyperparameters for Classification Machine Learning Algo-
rithms [Accessed 05-01-23]. MachineLearningMastery. https://machinelearningmastery.
com/hyperparameters-for-classification-machine-learning-algorithms
Chai, Q., Wang, H., Zhai, Y., & Yang, L. (2020). Using machine learning algorithms to pre-
dict occupants’ thermal comfort in naturally ventilated residential buildings. Energy
and Buildings, 217, 109937. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.enbuild.2020.109937
Chaudhuri, T., Soh, Y. C., Li, H., & Xie, L. (2017). Machine learning based prediction
of thermal comfort in buildings of equatorial singapore. 2017 IEEE International
Conference on Smart Grid and Smart Cities (ICSGSC), 72–77. https://doi.org/
10.1109/ICSGSC.2017.8038552
Chaudhuri, T., Soh, Y. C., Li, H., & Xie, L. (2020). Machine learning driven personal comfort
prediction by wearable sensing of pulse rate and skin temperature. Building and
Environment, 170, 106615. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.buildenv.2019.106615
Danish Standards Association. (2019). Energy performance of buildings – Ventilation for
buildings – Part 2: Interpretation of the requirements in EN 16798-1 – Indoor envi-
ronmental input parameters for design and assessment of energy performance of
buildings addressing indoor air quality, thermal environment, lighting and acous-
tics (Module M1-6) (DS 16798-2).
Danish Standards Association. (2005). Ergonomics of the thermal environment – Ana-
lytical determination and interpretation of thermal comfort using calculation of the
PMV and PPD indices and local thermal comfort criteria (DS 7730).
Predicting Occupant Comfort using Machine Learning
57
==PAGE:64==
Danish Standards Association. (2021). Light and lighting - Lighting of work places - Part
1: Indoor work places (DS 12464-1).
Fritz, H., Tang, M., Kinney, K., & Nagy, Z. (2022). Evaluating machine learning models to
classify occupants’ perceptions of their indoor environment and sleep quality from
indoor air quality. Journal of the Air & Waste Management Association, 72(12),
1381–1397. https://doi.org/10.1080/10962247.2022.2105439
Frontczak, M., & Wargocki, P. (2011). Literature survey on how different factors influence
human comfort in indoor environments. Building and Environment, 46(4), 922–
937. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.buildenv.2010.10.021
Furuhashi, K., Nakaya, T., & Maeda, Y. (2022). Prediction of occupant behavior toward
natural ventilation in japanese dwellings: Machine learning models and feature
selection. Energies, 15(16). https://doi.org/10.3390/en15165993
Gauthier, S., & Bourikas, L. (2020). Investigating dependencies between indoor environ-
mental parameters: Thermal, air quality and acoustic perception. Proceedings of
the 11th Windsor Conference: Resilient Comfort. 16th to 19th April 2020, Windsor,
UK. NCEUB, 323–330. https://eprints.soton.ac.uk/446338/
Graham, L. T., Parkinson, T., & Schiavon, S. (2021). Lessons learned from 20 years of
CBE’s occupant surveys. Buildings and Cities, 2(1). https://doi.org/10.5334/bc.76
Green Building Council Denmark. (2022). Dgnb hjerte – udmærkelse for sundhed of velvære
[Accessed 05-01-23]. https://dk-gbc.dk/publikation/dgnb-hjerte
Gupta, P., & Sehgal, N. K. (2021). Machine learning algorithms. In Introduction to machine
learning in the cloud with python: Concepts and practices (pp. 23–77). Springer
International Publishing. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-71270-9_2
HOBO. (2023). HOBO U12 Temp/RH/Light External Data Logger (U12-012) User’s Man-
ual (CE compliant) - Onset’s HOBO and InTemp Data Loggers [Accessed 20-01-
23]. https://www.onsetcomp.com/resources/documentation/13128-b-man-u12012-
web
IoT Fabrikken. (2023). Enkelt indeklima med IoT Fabrikken - Komplette sensorløsninger til
ejendomsdrift og facilty [Accessed 20-01-23]. https://iot-fabrikken.com/indeklima
Jacobsen, F., Poulsen, T., Rindel, J., Gade, A., & Ohlrich, M. (2011). Fundamentals of
acoustics and noise control.
Jayathissa, P., Quintana, M., Abdelrahman, M., & Miller, C. (2020). Humans-as-a-sensor
for buildings—intensive longitudinal indoor comfort models. Buildings, 10(10). https:
//doi.org/10.3390/buildings10100174
Jones, B., & Molina, C. (2017). Indoor air quality. In M. A. Abraham (Ed.), Encyclopedia of
sustainable technologies (pp. 197–207). Elsevier. https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-
0-12-409548-9.10198-8
Jung, A. (2018). Machine learning - the basics (1st ed.). Springer Nature Singapore.
Katić, K., Li, R., & Zeiler, W. (2020). Machine learning algorithms applied to a prediction of
personal overall thermal comfort using skin temperatures and occupants’ heating
behavior. Applied Ergonomics, 85, 103078. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apergo.2020.
103078
Kent, M., Parkinson, T., Kim, J., & Schiavon, S. (2021). A data-driven analysis of occupant
workspace dissatisfaction. Building and Environment, 205, 108270. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.buildenv.2021.108270
Predicting Occupant Comfort using Machine Learning
58
==PAGE:65==
Kim, J., Zhou, Y., Schiavon, S., Raftery, P., & Brager, G. (2018). Personal comfort mod-
els: Predicting individuals’ thermal preference using occupant heating and cooling
behavior and machine learning. Building and Environment, 129, 96–106. https:
//doi.org/10.1016/j.buildenv.2017.12.011
Luo, M., Xie, J., Yan, Y., Ke, Z., Yu, P., Wang, Z., & Zhang, J. (2020). Comparing machine
learning algorithms in predicting thermal sensation using ashrae comfort database
ii. Energy and Buildings, 210, 109776. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.enbuild.2020.
109776
Ma, G., & Pan, X. (2021). Research on a visual comfort model based on individual pref-
erence in china through machine learning algorithm. Sustainability, 13(14). https:
//doi.org/10.3390/su13147602
Mao, F., Zhou, X., & Song, Y. (2019). Environmental and human data-driven model based
on machine learning for prediction of human comfort. IEEE Access, 7, 132909–
132922. https://doi.org/10.1109/ACCESS.2019.2940910
Mazzanti, S. (2022). SHAP Values Explained Exactly How You Wished Someone Ex-
plained to You [Accessed 05-01-23]. Medium. https://towardsdatascience.com/
shap-explained-the-way-i-wish-someone-explained-it-to-me-ab81cc69ef30
Medved, S. (2022). Visual comfort and architectural lighting. In Building physics: Heat,
ventilation, moisture, light, sound, fire, and urban microclimate (pp. 251–330).
Springer International Publishing. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-74390-1_4
Morresi, N., Casaccia, S., Sorcinelli, M., Arnesano, M., Uriarte, A., Torrens-Galdiz, J. I., &
Revel, G. M. (2021). Sensing physiological and environmental quantities to mea-
sure human thermal comfort through machine learning techniques. IEEE Sensors
Journal, 21(10), 12322–12337. https://doi.org/10.1109/JSEN.2021.3064707
Pandas. (2023). pandas - Python Data Analysis Library [Accessed 20-01-23]. https://
pandas.pydata.org
Park, J., Loftness, V., & Wang, T.-H. (2022). Examining in situ acoustic conditions for
enhanced occupant satisfaction in contemporary offices. Buildings, 12(9). https:
//doi.org/10.3390/buildings12091305
PlumeLabs. (2022). Flow, by Plume Labs: The first smart air quality tracker [Accessed
20-01-23]. https://plumelabs.com/en/flow
Sarkar, D., Bali, R., & Sharma, T. (2018). Practical machine learning with python - a
problem-solver’s guide to building real-world intelligent systems (1st ed.). Apress
Berkeley.
SciKit-Learn. (2022). Feature selection [Accessed 18-11-22]. https://scikit- learn.org/
stable/modules/feature_selection.html#recursive-feature-elimination
SciKit-Learn. (2023). scikit-learn: machine learning in Python [Accessed 20-01-23]. https:
//scikit-learn.org/stable
SHAP. (2018). Welcome to the SHAP documentation [Accessed 20-01-23]. https://shap.
readthedocs.io/en/latest
Song, G., Ai, Z., Zhang, G., Peng, Y., Wang, W., & Yan, Y. (2022). Using machine learning
algorithms to multidimensional analysis of subjective thermal comfort in a library.
Building and Environment, 212, 108790. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.buildenv.2022.
108790
Streamlit. (2023). Streamlit – The fastest way to build and share data apps [Accessed
20-01-23]. https://streamlit.io
Predicting Occupant Comfort using Machine Learning
59
==PAGE:66==
Su, Y., Zhou, Y., Xu, Z., Wu, J., Liu, Y., Guo, Y., & Guan, X. (2020). Group comfort models:
Predicting indoor group thermal comfort by learning preferences of multiple occu-
pants. 2020 IEEE 16th International Conference on Automation Science and En-
gineering (CASE), 1325–1330. https://doi.org/10.1109/CASE48305.2020.9216834
Tardioli, G., Filho, R., Bernaud, P., & Ntimos, D. (2022). An innovative modelling approach
based on building physics and machine learning for the prediction of indoor ther-
mal comfort in an office building. Buildings, 12(4). https : / / doi . org / 10 . 3390 /
buildings12040475
Toftum, J. (2019). 11203 Introduktion til indeklima – Termisk indeklima.
Trafik-, Bygge- og Boligstyrelsen. (2023). Tidligere Bygningsreglementer [Accessed 15-
01-23]. https://historisk.bygningsreglementet.dk/tidligerebygreg/0/40
Wang, Z., de Dear, R., Luo, M., Lin, B., He, Y., Ghahramani, A., & Zhu, Y. (2018). Individual
difference in thermal comfort: A literature review. Building and Environment, 138,
181–193. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.buildenv.2018.04.040
Wargocki, P., Frontczak, M., Goins, J., Arens, E., & Zhang, H. (2012). Satisfaction and
self-estimated performance in relation to indoor environmental parameters and
building features. 10th International Conference on Healthy Buildings 2012, 3,
2062–2067.
Wu, Z., Li, N., Peng, J., Cui, H., Liu, P., Li, H., & Li, X. (2018). Using an ensemble machine
learning methodology-bagging to predict occupants’ thermal comfort in buildings.
Energy and Buildings, 173, 117–127. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.enbuild.2018.05.031
Xie, J., Li, H., Li, C., Zhang, J., & Luo, M. (2020). Review on occupant-centric thermal
comfort sensing, predicting, and controlling. Energy and Buildings, 226, 110392.
https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1016/j.enbuild.2020.110392
Zhou, X., Xu, L., Zhang, J., Niu, B., Luo, M., Zhou, G., & Zhang, X. (2020). Data-driven
thermal comfort model via support vector machine algorithms: Insights from ashrae
rp-884 database. Energy and Buildings, 211, 109795. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
enbuild.2020.109795
Predicting Occupant Comfort using Machine Learning
60
==PAGE:67==
A
Literature Study
An overview of the findings in the literature study is presented in Table A.1.
Table A.1: Literature study overview
Data collection
Algorithm
Type of model
Prediction
Controlled environment
Field
Classification
Regression
Personal
Group
Thermal comfort
Visual Comfort
IAQ
Overall comfort
(Kim et al., 2018)
X
X
X
X
(Chai et al., 2020)
X
X
X
X
(Fritz et al., 2022)
X
X
X
X
(Wu et al., 2018)
X
X
x
X
(Chaudhuri et al., 2017)
X
X
X
X
(Furuhashi et al., 2022)
X
X
X
X
(Luo et al., 2020)
X
X
X
X
X
(Su et al., 2020)
X
X
X
X
(Mao et al., 2019)
X
X
X
X
(Song et al., 2022)
X
X
X
X
X
(Morresi et al., 2021)
X
X
X
X
(Chaudhuri et al., 2020)
X
X
X
X
(Katić et al., 2020)
X
X
X
X
(Ma and Pan, 2021)
X
X
X
X
(Aryal and Becerik-Gerber, 2020)
X
X
X
X
(Tardioli et al., 2022)
X
X
X
X
(Zhou et al., 2020)
X
X
X
X
Predicting Occupant Comfort using Machine Learning
61
==PAGE:68==
B
Features
This chapter includes all the features of each model.
B.1
Model 0 - 120 Features
• sex
• age
• contacts
• smoker
• distToWindow
• personsInOffice
• yearsinoffice
• hoursatdesk
• daysInOffice
• q0
• q1
• q2
• q3
• q4
• q5
• q6
• q7
• q8
• q9
• q10
• q11
• O1-constructionYear
• O1-renovationYear
• O1-grossFloorArea
• O1urb-com
• O1urb-res
• O1urb-indus
• O1suburb-indus
• O1suburb-res
• O1suburb-com
• O1-natVentman
• O1-exhaust
• O1-exhaustSupply
• O1-exhaustSupplyHeat
• O1-tempControl
• O1-manControl
• O1-airHeatEl
• O1-airHeatWater
• O1-centralCooling
• O1-radiators
• O1-facadeBrick
• O1-facadeConcrete
• O1-facadeWood
• O1-facadeAsbest
• O1-intWallConcrete
• O1-intWallBrick
• O1-intWallGypsum
• O1-intWallWood
• O1-extWallConcrete
• O1-extWallBrick
• O1-extWallWood
• O1-interiorInsulation
• O1-cavityInsulation
• O1-officeFloor
• O2-floorArea
• O2-ceilHeight
• O2-noWorkstations
• O2-winArea
• O2-opWin
• O2-winShadePercentage
• O2-paintWallboard
• O2-wallpaper
• O2-suspendedCeiling
• O2-ceilingConcrete
• O2-ceilingBoards
• O2-ceilingWoodPanels
• O2-floorCarpet
• O2-floorPlastic
• O2-floorWood
• O2-lightLED
• O2-lightIncan
• O2-lightFlour
• O2-desklight
• O2-noSupplyDevices
• O2-ventLinCeilDif
• O2-ventSideWallDif
• O2-ventPerfCeiling
• O2-ventRoundDif
• O2-noReturnDevices
• O2-ventReturnCeilGrill
• O2-ventReturnCeilSlot
• O2-ventReturnSlotsLum
• O2-ventReturnSideGrill
• O2-noSpaceHeatersInUse
• O2-noHumidifiersInUse
• O2-noDeskfansInUse
• Temp-mean
• Temp-min
• Temp-max
• RH-mean
• RH-min
• RH-max
• CO2-mean
• CO2-min
• CO2-max
• Lux-mean
• Lux-min
• Lux-max
• Season
• job-Administrative
• job-Managerial
• job-Professional
• job-Technical
• O2-windowOrientation-
east
• O2-windowOrientation-
north
• O2-windowOrientation-
northeast
• O2-windowOrientation-
northwest
• O2-windowOrientation-
south
Predicting Occupant Comfort using Machine Learning
62
==PAGE:69==
• O2-windowOrientation-
southeast
• O2-windowOrientation-
southwest
• O2-windowOrientation-
west
• O2-officeType-
openNoPartitions
• O2-officeType-
openPartitions
• O2-officeType-shared
• O2-officeType-single
• seating-Fixed
• seating-Flexible
• Location-DK
• O2-winShades-Both
• O2-winShades-Exterior
• O2-winShades-Interior
B.2
Model 0 - 40 Features
• sex
• age
• contacts
• personsInOffice
• yearsinoffice
• daysInOffice
• q0
• q1
• q2
• q3
• q5
• q6
• q7
• q8
• q9
• q10
• q11
• O1-constructionYear
• O1-grossFloorArea
• O1-facadeWood
• O2-floorArea
• O2-ceilHeight
• O2-noWorkstations
• O2-lightLED
• O2-lightFlour
• O2-noSupplyDevices
• O2-noSpaceHeatersInUse
• Temp-mean
• Temp-min
• Temp-max
• RH-mean
• RH-max
• CO2-mean
• CO2-min
• CO2-max
• Lux-mean
• Lux-min
• Lux-max
• job-Managerial
• job-Professional
B.3
Model 1
• (sex)
• (age)
• (contacts)
• (smoker)
• (yearsinoffice)
• (hoursatdesk)
• (daysInOffice)
• (job-Administrative)
• (job-Managerial)
• (job-Professional)
• (job-Technical)
• personsInOffice
• distToWindow
• O1-constructionYear
• O1-renovationYear
• O1-grossFloorArea
• O1urb-com
• O1urb-res
• O1urb-indus
• O1suburb-indus
• O1suburb-res
• O1suburb-com
• O1-natVentman
• O1-exhaust
• O1-exhaustSupply
• O1-exhaustSupplyHeat
• O1-tempControl
• O1-CO2control
• O1-manControl
• O1-airHeatEl
• O1-airHeatWater
• O1-centralCooling
• O1-radiators
• O1-facadeBrick
• O1-facadeConcrete
• O1-facadeWood
• O1-facadeAsbest
• O1-intWallConcrete
• O1-intWallBrick
• O1-intWallGypsum
• O1-intWallWood
• O1-extWallConcrete
• O1-extWallBrick
• O1-extWallWood
• O1-interiorInsulation
• O1-cavityInsulation
• O1-officeFloor
• O2-floorArea
• O2-ceilHeight
• O2-noWorkstations
• O2-winArea
• O2-opWin
• O2-winShadePercentage
• O2-lightLED
Predicting Occupant Comfort using Machine Learning
63
==PAGE:70==
• O2-lightIncan
• O2-lightFlour
• O2-desklight
• O2-noSupplyDevices
• O2-ventLinCeilDif
• O2-ventSideWallDif
• O2-ventPerfCeiling
• O2-ventRoundDif
• O2-noReturnDevices
• O2-ventReturnCeilGrill
• O2-ventReturnCeilSlot
• O2-ventReturnSlotsLum
• O2-ventReturnSideGrill
• O2-noSpaceHeatersInUse
• O2-noHumidifiersInUse
• O2-noDeskfansInUse
• O2-windowOrientation-
east
• O2-windowOrientation-
north
• O2-windowOrientation-
northeast
• O2-windowOrientation-
northwest
• O2-windowOrientation-
south
• O2-windowOrientation-
southeast
• O2-windowOrientation-
southwest
• O2-windowOrientation-
west
• O2-officeType-
openNoPartitions
• O2-officeType-
openPartitions
• O2-officeType-shared
• O2-officeType-single
• seating-Fixed
• seating-Flexible
• Location-DK
• O2-winShades-Both
• O2-winShades-Exterior
• O2-winShades-Interior
B.4
Model 2
• (sex)
• (age)
• (contacts)
• (smoker)
• (yearsinoffice)
• (hoursatdesk)
• (daysInOffice)
• (job-Administrative)
• (job-Managerial)
• (job-Professional)
• (job-Technical)
• Temp-mean
• Temp-min
• Temp-max
• RH-mean
• RH-min
• RH-max
• CO2-mean
• CO2-min
• CO2-max
• Lux-mean
• Lux-min
• Lux-max
• Season
• Location-GL
B.5
Model 3
• (sex)
• (age)
• (contacts)
• (smoker)
• (yearsinoffice)
• (hoursatdesk)
• (daysInOffice)
• (job-Administrative)
• (job-Managerial)
• (job-Professional)
• (job-Technical)
• q0
• q1
• q2
• q3
• q4
• q5
• q6
• q7
• q8
• q9
• q10
• q11
• Location-GL
Predicting Occupant Comfort using Machine Learning
64
==PAGE:71==
C
Data Analysis
This chapter includes more data from the data analysis.
Table C.1: Occupant demographic for all models
Model 0
Model 1
Model 2
Model 3
Number of datapoints
193
251
257
408
Gender
Female
47%
49%
49%
48%
Male
53%
51%
51%
52%
Age
<20
0%
0%
0%
0%
20-29
19%
18%
19%
15%
30-39
25%
26%
26%
24%
40-49
20%
20%
21%
23%
50-59
25%
26%
25%
25%
>60
10%
10%
9%
13%
Job
Administrative
54%
53%
54%
50%
Technical
19%
18%
18%
17%
Professional
10%
11%
11%
11%
Managerial
12%
12%
11%
16%
Other
6%
6%
5%
5%
Eyewear
Yes
68%
65%
65%
67%
No
32%
35%
35%
33%
Smoker
Yes
7%
9%
10%
9%
No
93%
91%
90%
91%
Hours at desk
1-2
3%
2%
2%
3%
3-5
17%
20%
18%
17%
>5
80%
78%
80%
80%
Years in office
<1
31%
35%
35%
36%
1-5
55%
50%
51%
49%
6-10
7%
9%
8%
8%
>10
6%
7%
6%
6%
Table C.2: Construction year, renovation year and gross floor area
Construction year
Renovation year
Gross floor area
[-]
[-]
[m2]
Minimum
1893
1963
85
Mean
1991
2005
3504
Maximum
2019
2020
8400
Predicting Occupant Comfort using Machine Learning
65
==PAGE:72==
Table C.3: Building characteristics
Building characteristics
Site
Suburban/industrial
30%
Suburban/commercial
17%
Suburban/Residential
11%
Urban/industrial
16%
Urban/commercial
16%
Urban/Residential
10%
Natural ventilation
Manual
94%
Automatic
0%
No natural ventilation
6%
Mechanical ventilation
Exhaust
25%
Balanced
27%
Balanced w/ heat recovery
29%
No mechanical ventilation
20%
Control
CO2
1%
Temperature
22%
Manual
16%
No control
62%
Heating system
Radiators
88%
Floor heating
0%
Other
12%
Heating coil
Air
12%
Water
16%
No heating coil
72%
Cooling
Central
12%
Individual cooling
0%
No cooling
88%
Facade
Brick
55%
Concrete
6%
Wood
21%
Asbest
0%
Other
18%
Interior wall
Gypsum
96%
Concrete
3%
Brick
0%
Exterior wall
Brick
13%
Concrete
51%
Wood
34%
Other
2%
Insulation
Interior
70%
Exterior
0%
Cavity
30%
Predicting Occupant Comfort using Machine Learning
66
==PAGE:73==
Table C.4: Office characteristics
Office characteristics
Lighting
Fluorescent
35%
LED
28%
Incandescent
37%
Supply
Linear ceiling diffuser
14%
Perforated ceiling
15%
Side wall diffuser
3%
Other
69%
Return
Ceiling grilles
18%
Ceiling slots
2%
Slots around ceiling luminaires
2%
Floor grilles
0%
High sidewall grilles
1%
Other
77%
Orientation
East
21%
North
18%
Northeast
12%
Northwest
3%
South
19%
Southeast
1%
Southwest
3%
West
22%
Office type
Open - No partitions
12%
Open - With partitions
29%
Shared
41%
Single
18%
Other
1%
Shading
Both
8%
Exterior
9%
Interior
73%
Other
10%
Predicting Occupant Comfort using Machine Learning
67
==PAGE:74==
D
Scripts
This chapter includes the seven main scripts used in the project. These can be used for
further development or inspiration.
The first script is for loading the data from Denmark. For the Greenland data, the loading
of the measured data is slightly different. The desired features from each of the data files
are loaded in and the data is combined for all the buildings. The script also includes a
code for adding sensor numbers where they are missing and the calibration of one of the
measurements. To load the data, the following files must be present in the directory:
• ”building ”_”sensor”_Officechecklist1.xlsx
• ”building ”_”sensor”_RoomAlyzer.csv
• ”building”_Buildingchecklist.xlsx
• ”building”_Managercheclist.xlsx
• ”building”_Questionnaire.xlsx
The second script is for cleaning the data, encoding it, and dividing it into files with specific
features. This script cleans the specific errors found in the data, the errors might be
different for new data.
The next scripts are the development of the models. The tuning for Model 0 was done
previously to this script and is therefore not included. The script for Model 0 includes the
feature selection, evaluation of accuracy, and feature importance. Models 1, 2, and 3
include the tuning process, evaluation of accuracy, and feature importance. The scripts
for Models 1, 2, and 3 are very similar, only the loaded data set and the hyperparameters
are different.
The last script is the code behind the tool. It consists of many if-statements used to create
the underlying dataframe based on the user input. The script is also uploaded to GitHub
in order to publish the tool.
Predicting Occupant Comfort using Machine Learning
68
==PAGE:75==
D.1
Loading of Data
1
# -*- coding: utf-8 -*-
2
"""
3
Created on Mon Sep 19 14:29:30 2022
4
5
@author: Lærke Viuff Petersen
6
"""
7
8
import pandas as pd
9
import numpy as np
10
11
#%% --------------------- Measured data ----------------------
12
def measured(building , sensor):
13
14
# Creating path
15
sensor-str=str(sensor)
16
path='./' + building + '/' + building + '_' + sensor_str + '_RoomAlyzer.
csv'
17
18
#Load data
19
MD=pd.read_csv(path ,delimiter=';')
20
#Convert to Datetime
21
MD['Dato']=pd.to_datetime(MD['Dato'],dayfirst=True)
22
#Filter data to only contain occupancy hours
23
MD=MD.loc[(MD['Dato'].dt.dayofweek < 5) & (MD['Dato'].dt.hour > 7) & (MD['
Dato'].dt.hour < 17)]
24
25
# Add column with season
26
MD['Month']=MD['Dato'].dt.month
27
MD['Season'] = MD['Month'].replace({1:1, 2:1, 3:2, 4:2, 5:2, 6:3, 7:3,
8:3, 9:4, 10:4, 11:4, 12:1})
28
MD=MD.drop_duplicates()
29
30
# Remove rows with invalid values
31
MD=MD.drop(MD[(MD['Temperatur']<18) |
32
(MD['Luftfugtighed']<5) |
33
(MD['CO2']<400) |
34
(MD['Lys farve']<1000) |
35
(MD['Lysniveau']<10)].index)
36
37
#Temperature
38
MD['Temp_mean']= MD['Temperatur'].mean()
39
MD['Temp_min']= MD['Temperatur'].min()
40
MD['Temp_max']=MD['Temperatur'].max()
41
#Relative humidity
42
MD['RH_mean']= MD['Luftfugtighed'].mean()
43
MD['RH_min']= MD['Luftfugtighed'].min()
44
MD['RH_max']=MD['Luftfugtighed'].max()
45
#CO2
46
MD['CO2_mean']=MD['CO2'].mean()
47
MD['CO2_min']=MD['CO2'].min()
48
MD['CO2_max']=MD['CO2'].max()
49
#VOC
50
MD['VOC_mean']= MD['VOC'].mean()
51
MD['VOC_min']= MD['VOC'].min()
52
MD['VOC_max']=MD['VOC'].max()
Predicting Occupant Comfort using Machine Learning
69
==PAGE:76==
53
#SPL
54
MD['SPL_mean']= MD['Lydniveau'].mean()
55
MD['SPL_min']= MD['Lydniveau'].min()
56
MD['SPL_max']=MD['Lydniveau'].max()
57
#Lux
58
MD['Lux_mean']= MD['Lysniveau'].mean()
59
MD['Lux_min']= MD['Lysniveau'].min()
60
MD['Lux_max']=MD['Lysniveau'].max()
61
#Color
62
MD['Color_mean']= MD['Lys farve'].mean()
63
MD['Color_min']= MD['Lys farve'].min()
64
MD['Color_max']=MD['Lys farve'].max()
65
66
67
#Choose only the desired columns
68
MD=MD[['Temp_mean','Temp_min','Temp_max','RH_mean','RH_min','RH_max',
69
'CO2_mean','CO2_min','CO2_max','VOC_mean','VOC_min','VOC_max',
70
'SPL_mean','SPL_min','SPL_max','Lux_mean','Lux_min','Lux_max',
71
'Color_mean','Color_min','Color_max', 'Season']]
72
73
#Choose only one row
74
MD=MD.drop_duplicates()
75
76
# Add sensor number to dataset
77
MD['Sensor']=int(sensor)
78
79
return MD
80
81
#%% --------------------- Building checklist -------------------------
82
def buildingcheck(building ,location):
83
#Load data
84
path='./' + building + '/' + building + '_Buildingchecklist.xlsx'
85
BC=pd.read_excel(path)
86
87
#Choosing which information is wanted
88
BC=BC[['OO_buildingTypology','O1_constructionYear','O1_renovationYear',
89
'O1_grossFloorArea','O1rur_nurb','O1urb_com','O1urb_res','O1rur_agr',
90
'O1urb_indus','O1suburb_indus','O1suburb_res','O1suburb_com','O1rur_com
','O1rur_ind',
91
'O1_natVentman','O1_natVentAut','O1_exhaust','O1_exhaustSupply',
92
'O1_exhaustSupplyHeat','O1_tempControl','O1_CO2control','O1_manControl'
,
93
'O1_airHeatEl','O1_airHeatWater',
94
'O1_centralCooling','O1_radiators','O1_floorHeat','O1_individualCooling
','O1_facadeBrick',
95
'O1_facadeConcrete','O1_facadeWood','O1_facadeAsbest','
O1_intWallConcrete','O1_intWallBrick',
96
'O1_intWallGypsum','O1_intWallWood','O1_extWallConcrete','
O1_extWallBrick','O1_extWallWood',
97
'O1_exteriorInsulation','O1_interiorInsulation','O1_cavityInsulation']]
98
99
#Add building number
100
BC['Building']=building
101
# Add location
102
BC['Location']=location
103
#Add renovation year if missing
Predicting Occupant Comfort using Machine Learning
70
==PAGE:77==
104
BC['O1_renovationYear']=BC['O1_renovationYear'].fillna(BC['
O1_constructionYear'])
105
106
return BC
107
108
#%% --------------------- Office checklists ------------------------
109
def officecheck(building , sensor):
110
111
#Load data
112
sensor_str=str(sensor)
113
path='./' + building + '/' + building + '_'+ sensor_str + '
_Officechecklist1.xlsx'
114
115
OC=pd.read_excel(path)
116
117
#Choosing which information is wanted
118
OC=OC[['O1_officeFloor','O2_windowOrientation','O2_floorArea','
O2_ceilHeight',
119
'O2_officeType','O2_noWorkstations','O2_winArea','O2_opWin',
120
'O2_winShades','O2_winShadePercentage','O2_paintWallboard',
121
'O2_fabric','O2_metal','O2_wallpaper','O2_woodPanels',
122
'O2_suspendedCeiling','O2_ceilingFabric','O2_ceilingMetal','
O2_ceilingConcrete','O2_ceilingBoards','O2_ceilingWoodPanels',
123
'O2_floorCarpet','O2_floorPlastic','O2_floorWood','O2_floorConcrete',
'O2_lightLED','O2_lightIncan',
124
'O2_lightFlour','O2_desklight','O2_noSupplyDevices','O2_ventWallGrill
','O2_ventLinCeilDif','O2_ventLowFloorGrill',
125
'O2_ventLuminaires','O2_ventSideWallDif','O2_ventPerfCeiling','
O2_ventFloorReg','O2_ventFloorDif',
126
'O2_ventFancoil','O2_ventRoundDif','O2_noReturnDevices','
O2_ventReturnCeilGrill',
127
'O2_ventReturnCeilSlot','O2_ventReturnSlotsLum','
O2_ventReturnFloorGrill','O2_ventReturnSideGrill',
128
'O2_noSpaceHeatersInUse',
129
'O2_noHumidifiersInUse','O2_noDehumidifiersInUse','O2_noDeskfansInUse
']]
130
131
#Add sensor number
132
OC['Sensor']=int(sensor)
133
134
#Do not capitalize orientation
135
OC['O2_windowOrientation']=OC['O2_windowOrientation'].astype(str)
136
OC['O2_windowOrientation']=OC['O2_windowOrientation'].str.lower()
137
138
#Change from names to numbers
139
OC['O1_officeFloor']=OC['O1_officeFloor'].astype(str)
140
OC['O1_officeFloor']=OC['O1_officeFloor'].str.extract('(\d+)')
141
OC['O1_officeFloor'] = OC['O1_officeFloor'].replace({'Stue': 0, 'ground'
:0})
142
OC['O1_officeFloor']=OC['O1_officeFloor'].astype(float)
143
144
return OC
145
146
147
#%% -------------------- Questionaire ---------------------------
148
def questionnaire(building):
Predicting Occupant Comfort using Machine Learning
71
==PAGE:78==
149
#Load data
150
path='./' + building + '/' + building + '_Questionnaire.xlsx'
151
Qs=pd.read_excel(path)
152
153
#Choosing which information is wanted
154
Qs=Qs[['pizza','sex','age','job','contacts','smoker','floor','distToWindow
','windowOrientation',
155
'personsInOffice','yearsinoffice','hoursatdesk','seating','daysInOffice
','officeHome',
156
'q0','q1','q2','q3','q4','q5','q6','q7','q8','q9','q10','q11','
indoorClimate']]
157
158
#Add row for building number
159
Qs['Building']=building
160
161
# Changing the missing values to ----
162
Qs['pizza']=Qs['pizza'].fillna('----')
163
164
#Change name of column to match the others when combining
165
Qs=Qs.rename(columns={Qs.columns[0]: 'Sensor'})
166
167
# Converting floor level to number
168
Qs.loc[Qs['floor'].astype(str) == 'ground', 'floor'] = 0
169
Qs['floor']=Qs['floor'].astype(float)
170
171
return Qs
172
173
#%%
-------------------- Combination --------------------------
174
def combine_building(building , location , s1, s2, s3=1000, s4=1000, s5=1000, s6
=1000, s7=1000, s8=1000, s9=1000, s10=1000, s11=1000):
175
#Use definitions
176
Qs=questionnaire(building)
177
BC=buildingcheck(building ,location)
178
179
MD_1=measured(building ,s1)
180
MD_2=measured(building ,s2)
181
if s3 != 1000:
182
MD_3=measured(building ,s3)
183
if s4 != 1000:
184
MD_4=measured(building ,s4)
185
if s5 != 1000:
186
MD_5=measured(building ,s5)
187
if s6 != 1000:
188
MD_6=measured(building ,s6)
189
if s7 != 1000:
190
MD_7=measured(building ,s7)
191
if s8 != 1000:
192
MD_8=measured(building ,s8)
193
if s9 != 1000:
194
MD_9=measured(building ,s9)
195
if s10 != 1000:
196
MD_10=measured(building ,s10)
197
if s11 != 1000:
198
MD_11=measured(building ,s11)
199
200
OC_1=officecheck(building , s1)
Predicting Occupant Comfort using Machine Learning
72
==PAGE:79==
201
OC_2=officecheck(building , s2)
202
if s3 != 1000:
203
OC_3=officecheck(building , s3)
204
if s4 != 1000:
205
OC_4=officecheck(building , s4)
206
if s5 != 1000:
207
OC_5=officecheck(building , s5)
208
if s6 != 1000:
209
OC_6=officecheck(building , s6)
210
if s7 != 1000:
211
OC_7=officecheck(building , s7)
212
if s8 != 1000:
213
OC_8=officecheck(building ,s8)
214
if s9 != 1000:
215
OC_9=officecheck(building ,s9)
216
if s10 != 1000:
217
OC_10=officecheck(building ,s10)
218
if s11 != 1000:
219
OC_11=officecheck(building ,s11)
220
221
#Combine sensor results
222
OC=pd.concat([OC_1,OC_2])
223
if s3 != 1000:
224
OC=pd.concat([OC,OC_3])
225
if s4 != 1000:
226
OC=pd.concat([OC,OC_4])
227
if s5 != 1000:
228
OC=pd.concat([OC,OC_5])
229
if s6 != 1000:
230
OC=pd.concat([OC,OC_6])
231
if s7 != 1000:
232
OC=pd.concat([OC,OC_7])
233
if s8 != 1000:
234
OC=pd.concat([OC,OC_8])
235
if s9 != 1000:
236
OC=pd.concat([OC,OC_9])
237
if s10 != 1000:
238
OC=pd.concat([OC,OC_10])
239
if s11 != 1000:
240
OC=pd.concat([OC,OC_11])
241
242
MD=pd.concat([MD_1,MD_2])
243
if s3 != 1000:
244
MD=pd.concat([MD,MD_3])
245
if s4 != 1000:
246
MD=pd.concat([MD,MD_4])
247
if s5 != 1000:
248
MD=pd.concat([MD,MD_5])
249
if s6 != 1000:
250
MD=pd.concat([MD,MD_6])
251
if s7 != 1000:
252
MD=pd.concat([MD,MD_7])
253
if s8 != 1000:
254
MD=pd.concat([MD,MD_8])
255
if s9 != 1000:
256
MD=pd.concat([MD,MD_9])
Predicting Occupant Comfort using Machine Learning
73
==PAGE:80==
257
if s10 != 1000:
258
MD=pd.concat([MD,MD_10])
259
if s11 != 1000:
260
MD=pd.concat([MD,MD_11])
261
262
#Finding matches for sensors based on floor and orientation
263
#Assuming these will have the same conditions
264
old_sensor=Qs['Sensor'].values
265
Qs_array=Qs[['Sensor','floor','windowOrientation']].values
266
OC_array=OC[['Sensor','O1_officeFloor','O2_windowOrientation']].values
267
altered= []
268
269
for i in range (len(Qs_array)):
270
if Qs_array[i,0] == '----' or Qs_array[i,0] != s1 and Qs_array[i,0] !=
s2 and Qs_array[i,0] != s3 and Qs_array[i,0] != s4 and Qs_array[i
,0] != s5 and Qs_array[i,0] != s6 and Qs_array[i,0] != s7 and
Qs_array[i,0] != s8 and Qs_array[i,0] != s9 and Qs_array[i,0] !=
s10 and Qs_array[i,0] != s11:
271
for j in range(len(OC_array)):
272
if Qs_array[i,1] == OC_array[j,1] and OC_array[j,2] in
Qs_array[i,2]:
273
Qs_array[i,0]=OC_array [j,0]
274
275
276
#Create list for the sensor names that has been changed. If =0 then it is
the original sensor otherwise it is new
277
for i in range (len(Qs_array)):
278
if Qs_array[i,0] == old_sensor[i]:
279
altered.append(0)
280
else:
281
altered.append(1)
282
283
Qs['Sensor']=pd.DataFrame(Qs_array[:,0])
284
Qs['Altered']=pd.DataFrame(altered[:])
285
Qs['Sensor']=Qs['Sensor'].replace({'----': 1000})
286
Qs['Sensor']=Qs['Sensor'].astype(int)
287
288
#Join dataframes according to building and sensor
289
df=Qs.join(BC.set_index('Building'), on='Building')
290
df=df.join(OC.set_index('Sensor'), on='Sensor')
291
df=df.join(MD.set_index('Sensor'), on='Sensor')
292
293
# Choose only working sensors
294
df=df.loc[(df['Sensor'] == s1) | (df['Sensor'] == s2) | (df['Sensor'] ==
s3) | (df['Sensor'] == s4) | (df['Sensor'] == s5) | (df['Sensor'] ==
s6) | (df['Sensor'] == s7) | (df['Sensor'] == s8) | (df['Sensor'] ==
s9) | (df['Sensor'] == s10) | (df['Sensor'] == s11)]
295
296
# Unvalid answers
297
df=df.replace('----', np.nan)
298
df=df.replace('---', np.nan)
299
300
return df
301
302
303
#%% Calibration for building 302
Predicting Occupant Comfort using Machine Learning
74
==PAGE:81==
304
MD_02=pd.read_csv('./302/302_2_RoomAlyzer_notcalibrated.csv', delimiter=';')
305
MD_02['CO2']=MD_02['CO2']*1.0082+100.32
306
MD_02.to_csv('./302/302_2_RoomAlyzer.csv',index=False,sep=';')
307
308
MD_05=pd.read_csv('./302/302_5_RoomAlyzer_notcalibrated.csv', delimiter=';')
309
MD_05['CO2']=MD_05['CO2']*0.9665+212.52
310
MD_05.to_csv('./302/302_5_RoomAlyzer.csv',index=False,sep=';')
311
312
MD_08=pd.read_csv('./302/302_8_RoomAlyzer_notcalibrated.csv', delimiter=';')
313
MD_08['CO2']=MD_08['CO2']*0.6696+9.0723
314
MD_08.to_csv('./302/302_8_RoomAlyzer.csv',index=False,sep=';')
315
316
MD_11=pd.read_csv('./302/302_11_RoomAlyzer_notcalibrated.csv', delimiter=';')
317
MD_11['CO2']=MD_11['CO2']*0.9478+112.43
318
MD_11.to_csv('./302/302_11_RoomAlyzer.csv',index=False,sep=';')
319
320
MD_21=pd.read_csv('./302/302_21_RoomAlyzer_notcalibrated.csv', delimiter=';')
321
MD_21['CO2']=MD_21['CO2']*0.8867+158.24
322
MD_21.to_csv('./302/302_21_RoomAlyzer.csv',index=False,sep=';')
323
324
325
#%% Combination
326
df_101=combine_building('101', 'DK', 1,2,3)
327
df_102=combine_building('102', 'DK', 1,2)
328
df_103=combine_building('103', 'DK', 12,22,25)
329
df_103_2=combine_building('103.2', 'DK', 10,11,12,13)
330
df_104=combine_building('104', 'DK', 22,24)
331
df_105=combine_building('105', 'DK', 10,22,24)
332
df_301=combine_building('301', 'DK', 11,13,16,20)
333
df_301_2=combine_building('301.2', 'DK', 8,17,22,23)
334
df_302=combine_building('302', 'DK', 2, 5, 8, 11, 21)
335
df_303=combine_building('303', 'DK', 12,13,14,15,17)
336
df_304=combine_building('304', 'DK', 3,12,13,14,15,16,17)
337
df_306=combine_building('306', 'DK', 10,11,12,13)
338
df_307=combine_building('307', 'DK', 8,17,22,23)
339
df_308=combine_building('308', 'DK', 10,22,24)
340
df_309=combine_building('309', 'DK', 2,4,15)
341
df_310=combine_building('310', 'DK', 14,16,18,19)
342
df_311=combine_building('311', 'DK', 8,11,12)
343
df_312=combine_building('312', 'DK', 20,21,23,25)
344
df_313=combine_building('313', 'DK', 8,11,12,13,14,16,18,19,20,23,25)
345
346
#%% --------------------- Combined --------------------------------
347
combined=pd.concat([df_101, df_102 , df_103 ,df_103_2 ,df_104 ,df_105 ,df_301 ,
df_301_2 ,df_302,df_303,df_304 ,df_304,df_306 ,df_307 ,df_308 ,df_309 ,df_310 ,
df_311 ,df_312,df_313], ignore_index=True)
348
combined.reset_index(drop=True, inplace=True)
349
combined.to_csv('DK_combined.csv',index=False)
Predicting Occupant Comfort using Machine Learning
75
==PAGE:82==
D.2
Data cleaning, encoding, and categorization
1
# -*- coding: utf-8 -*-
2
"""
3
Created on Mon Sep 19 14:38:26 2022
4
5
@author: Lærke Viuff Petersen
6
"""
7
8
import pandas as pd
9
import numpy as np
10
11
#%% Data cleaning
12
df=pd.read_csv('DK_combined.csv')
13
14
# If only in office = 5 days:
15
df.loc[df['officeHome'] == 'Office', 'daysInOffice'] = 5
16
17
# Change yes/no or True/False
18
df = df.replace({'yes': 1, 'no': 0, True: 1, False: 0})
19
20
# Correcting NaN values to 0:
21
df[['O2_paintWallboard','O2_fabric','O2_metal','O2_wallpaper','O2_woodPanels',
22
'O2_suspendedCeiling','O2_ceilingFabric','O2_ceilingMetal','
O2_ceilingConcrete','O2_ceilingBoards','O2_ceilingWoodPanels',
23
'O2_lightLED','O2_lightIncan','O2_lightFlour','O2_ventWallGrill','
O2_ventLinCeilDif','O2_ventLowFloorGrill',
24
'O2_ventLuminaires','O2_ventSideWallDif','O2_ventPerfCeiling','
O2_ventFloorReg','O2_ventFloorDif',
25
'O2_ventFancoil','O2_ventRoundDif','O2_ventReturnCeilGrill','
O2_ventReturnCeilSlot','O2_ventReturnSlotsLum',
26
'O2_ventReturnFloorGrill','O2_ventReturnSideGrill','
O2_noSupplyDevices','O2_noReturnDevices',
27
'O2_noHumidifiersInUse','O2_noDehumidifiersInUse','O2_noDeskfansInUse
','O2_noSpaceHeatersInUse']]=df[[
28
'O2_paintWallboard','O2_fabric','O2_metal','O2_wallpaper','
O2_woodPanels',
29
'O2_suspendedCeiling','O2_ceilingFabric','O2_ceilingMetal','
O2_ceilingConcrete','O2_ceilingBoards','O2_ceilingWoodPanels',
30
'O2_lightLED','O2_lightIncan','O2_lightFlour','O2_ventWallGrill','
O2_ventLinCeilDif','O2_ventLowFloorGrill',
31
'O2_ventLuminaires','O2_ventSideWallDif','O2_ventPerfCeiling','
O2_ventFloorReg','O2_ventFloorDif',
32
'O2_ventFancoil','O2_ventRoundDif','O2_ventReturnCeilGrill','
O2_ventReturnCeilSlot','O2_ventReturnSlotsLum',
33
'O2_ventReturnFloorGrill','O2_ventReturnSideGrill','
O2_noSupplyDevices','O2_noReturnDevices',
34
'O2_noHumidifiersInUse','O2_noDehumidifiersInUse','O2_noDeskfansInUse
','O2_noSpaceHeatersInUse']].fillna(0)
35
36
#Changing -1 to 1
37
df[['O2_paintWallboard','O2_fabric','O2_metal','O2_wallpaper','O2_woodPanels',
38
'O2_suspendedCeiling','O2_ceilingFabric','O2_ceilingMetal','
O2_ceilingConcrete','O2_ceilingBoards','O2_ceilingWoodPanels',
39
'O2_lightLED','O2_lightIncan','O2_lightFlour','O2_ventWallGrill','
O2_ventLinCeilDif','O2_ventLowFloorGrill',
Predicting Occupant Comfort using Machine Learning
76
==PAGE:83==
40
'O2_ventLuminaires','O2_ventSideWallDif','O2_ventPerfCeiling','
O2_ventFloorReg','O2_ventFloorDif',
41
'O2_ventFancoil','O2_ventRoundDif','O2_ventReturnCeilGrill','
O2_ventReturnCeilSlot','O2_ventReturnSlotsLum',
42
'O2_ventReturnFloorGrill','O2_ventReturnSideGrill']]=df[['
O2_paintWallboard','O2_fabric','O2_metal','O2_wallpaper','
O2_woodPanels',
43
'O2_suspendedCeiling','O2_ceilingFabric','O2_ceilingMetal','
O2_ceilingConcrete','O2_ceilingBoards','O2_ceilingWoodPanels',
44
'O2_lightLED','O2_lightIncan','O2_lightFlour','O2_ventWallGrill','
O2_ventLinCeilDif','O2_ventLowFloorGrill',
45
'O2_ventLuminaires','O2_ventSideWallDif','O2_ventPerfCeiling','
O2_ventFloorReg','O2_ventFloorDif',
46
'O2_ventFancoil','O2_ventRoundDif','O2_ventReturnCeilGrill','
O2_ventReturnCeilSlot','O2_ventReturnSlotsLum',
47
'O2_ventReturnFloorGrill','O2_ventReturnSideGrill']].abs()
48
49
# supply or return
50
df[['O2_noSupplyDevices','O2_noReturnDevices']]=df[['O2_noSupplyDevices','
O2_noReturnDevices']].replace({'noSupply': 0, 'noReturn': 0,'None':0})
51
52
# Renovation year
53
df['O1_renovationYear']=df['O1_renovationYear'].replace('None', np.nan)
54
df['O1_renovationYear']=df['O1_renovationYear'].fillna(df['O1_constructionYear
'])
55
df['O1_renovationYear']=df['O1_renovationYear'].astype(float)
56
57
# Remove dates where it should be ranges
58
df['distToWindow']=df['distToWindow'].replace({'2021-04-02 00:00:00': '2-4','
2022-04-02 00:00:00': '2-4','2020-04-02 00:00:00':'2-4'})
59
df['personsInOffice']=df['personsInOffice'].replace({'2021-03-02 00:00:00': '
2-3','2022-03-02 00:00:00': '2-3','2021-05-04 00:00:00': '4-5','2022-05-04
00:00:00': '4-5','2020-03-02 00:00:00':'2-3','2020-05-04 00:00:00':'4-5'
})
60
df['yearsinoffice']=df['yearsinoffice'].replace({'2020-05-01 00:00:00': '1-5',
'2021-05-01 00:00:00': '1-5','2022-05-01 00:00:00': '1-5','2020-10-06
00:00:00': '6-10','2021-10-06 00:00:00': '6-10','2022-10-06 00:00:00': '
6-10'})
61
df['hoursatdesk']=df['hoursatdesk'].replace({'2020-02-01 00:00:00': '1-2','
2021-02-01 00:00:00': '1-2','2022-02-01 00:00:00': '1-2','2020-05-03
00:00:00': '3-5','2021-05-03 00:00:00': '3-5','2022-05-03 00:00:00': '3-5'
})
62
63
# Fill in missing office floor values
64
df['O1_officeFloor']=df['O1_officeFloor'].fillna(df['floor'])
65
66
# Correct wrongly inputted values
67
df['O2_floorArea']=df['O2_floorArea'].replace({'4.971x4.436': 22, '4.440x20
.301':90,'2.921x4.6':13.4, '19.3x9.7':187.2, '5.9x4.7':27.7, '4.8x4.1'
:19.7, '2.8x4.9':13.7})
68
df['O2_winArea']=df['O2_winArea'].str.replace(',', '.')
69
df['O2_ceilHeight']=df['O2_ceilHeight'].str.replace(',', '.')
70
df['O2_winArea']=df['O2_winArea'].replace({'16(1.2x1.103)':21.2,'(1.193x0.541)
2':1.3,'3(1.2x0.47)':1.7,'4(1.2x0.4)':1.9})
71
df['O2_noSpaceHeatersInUse']=df['O2_noSpaceHeatersInUse'].replace({'2.
intelligent house':2})
Predicting Occupant Comfort using Machine Learning
77
==PAGE:84==
72
73
# Changing to interior , exterior , both, no response
74
df['O2_winShades']=df['O2_winShades'].replace({'Film + curtains':'Interior','I
think and ext':'Both','Int + ext':'Both','Interior blinds':'Interior','
Blinds':'Interior','Lamels exterior shading':'Exterior','Lamels and
external shading':'Both','Lamels':'NoResponse','Blinds and overhang':'Both
','Blinds + overhang':'Both','Curtains':'Interior','Manual exterior solar
shadin':'Exterior','Overhang. interior blinds':'Both','Blinds. interior or
exterior':'NoResponse','5':'NoResponse','External blinds':'Exterior','
Exterior blinds':'Exterior'})
75
76
# Unvalid answers
77
df=df.replace({'----': np.nan,'---': np.nan,'NoResponse':np.nan, 'NoReponse':
np.nan})
78
79
# Remove duplicate features
80
df=df.drop(['floor','windowOrientation','officeHome'],axis=1)
81
82
# Reset index
83
df.reset_index(drop=True, inplace=True)
84
85
#%% Encoding
86
# Nominal encoding
87
# Get one hot encoding of columns
88
one_hot=pd.get_dummies(df[['job','O2_windowOrientation','O2_officeType','
seating','Location','O2_winShades']])
89
# Drop column as it is now encoded
90
df=df.drop(['job','O2_windowOrientation','O2_officeType','seating','Location',
'O2_winShades'], axis=1)
91
# Join the encoded df
92
df=df.join(one_hot)
93
94
# Ordinal encoding:
95
df['age'] = df['age'].replace({'_<20':1, '_20-29':2, '_30-39':3, '_40-49':4, '
_50-60':5 ,'_>60':6})
96
df['distToWindow'] = df['distToWindow'].replace({'0-2':1, '2-4':2, '>4':3})
97
df['personsInOffice'] = df['personsInOffice'].replace({'1':1, '2-3':2, '4-5'
:3, '>5':4})
98
df['yearsinoffice'] = df['yearsinoffice'].replace({'<1':1, '1-5':2, '6-10':3,
'>10':4})
99
df['hoursatdesk'] = df['hoursatdesk'].replace({'1-2':1, '3-5':2, '>5':3})
100
df['O2_desklight'] = df['O2_desklight'].replace({'none': 1, '<50%': 2, '0.5'
:3, '>50%': 4, 'all':5})
101
df['contacts']=df['contacts'].replace({'Glasses':1,'Contacts':1, 'None':0})
102
df['smoker']=df['smoker'].replace({'former':0,'never':0,'current':1})
103
df['sex']=df['sex'].replace({'Female':1, 'Male':0})
104
105
# Correct data type
106
df=df.astype(float)
107
108
# Remove help features
109
df=df.drop(['Sensor','Altered','OO_buildingTypology'],axis=1)
110
111
#%% Create files
112
# All data
113
alldata=df.dropna(axis=0,how='any')
Predicting Occupant Comfort using Machine Learning
78
==PAGE:85==
114
#Normalize some of the features:
115
alldata['O2_desklight']=alldata['O2_desklight']/alldata['O2_noWorkstations']
116
alldata['O2_noWorkstations']=alldata['O2_noWorkstations']/alldata['
O2_floorArea']
117
alldata['O2_noSupplyDevices']=alldata['O2_noSupplyDevices']/alldata['
O2_floorArea']
118
alldata['O2_noReturnDevices']=alldata['O2_noReturnDevices']/alldata['
O2_floorArea']
119
alldata['O2_noSpaceHeatersInUse']=alldata['O2_noSpaceHeatersInUse']/alldata['
O2_floorArea']
120
alldata['O2_noHumidifiersInUse']=alldata['O2_noHumidifiersInUse']/alldata['
O2_floorArea']
121
alldata['O2_noDehumidifiersInUse']=alldata['O2_noDehumidifiersInUse']/alldata[
'O2_floorArea']
122
alldata['O2_noDeskfansInUse']=alldata['O2_noDeskfansInUse']/alldata['
O2_floorArea']
123
alldata.to_csv('AllData.csv',index=False)
124
125
# Building + occupant
126
building_occ=df.drop(['Temp_mean','Temp_min','Temp_max','RH_mean','RH_min','
RH_max','CO2_mean','CO2_min','CO2_max','Lux_mean','Lux_min','Lux_max','
Color_mean','Color_min','Color_max','SPL_mean','SPL_min','SPL_max','
VOC_mean','VOC_min','VOC_max','Season','q0','q1','q2','q3','q4','q5','q6',
'q7','q8','q9','q10','q11'],axis=1)
127
building_occ=building_occ.dropna(axis=0,how='any')
128
building_occ['O2_desklight']=building_occ['O2_desklight']/building_occ['
O2_noWorkstations']
129
building_occ['O2_noWorkstations']=building_occ['O2_noWorkstations']/
building_occ['O2_floorArea']
130
building_occ['O2_noSupplyDevices']=building_occ['O2_noSupplyDevices']/
building_occ['O2_floorArea']
131
building_occ['O2_noReturnDevices']=building_occ['O2_noReturnDevices']/
building_occ['O2_floorArea']
132
building_occ['O2_noSpaceHeatersInUse']=building_occ['O2_noSpaceHeatersInUse']/
building_occ['O2_floorArea']
133
building_occ['O2_noHumidifiersInUse']=building_occ['O2_noHumidifiersInUse']/
building_occ['O2_floorArea']
134
building_occ['O2_noDehumidifiersInUse']=building_occ['O2_noDehumidifiersInUse'
]/building_occ['O2_floorArea']
135
building_occ['O2_noDeskfansInUse']=building_occ['O2_noDeskfansInUse']/
building_occ['O2_floorArea']
136
building_occ.to_csv('building_occ.csv',index=False)
137
138
# Building
139
building=building_occ.drop(['sex','smoker','contacts','age','yearsinoffice','
hoursatdesk','daysInOffice','job_Administrative','job_Managerial','
job_Professional','job_Technical'],axis=1)
140
building.to_csv('building.csv',index=False)
141
142
# Conditions + occupant
143
conditions_occ=df[['Building','Location_DK','sex','smoker','contacts','age','
yearsinoffice','hoursatdesk','daysInOffice','job_Administrative','
job_Managerial','job_Professional','job_Technical','Temp_mean','Temp_min',
'Temp_max','RH_mean','RH_min','RH_max','CO2_mean','CO2_min','CO2_max','
Lux_mean','Lux_min','Lux_max','Color_mean','Color_min','Color_max','
SPL_mean','SPL_min','SPL_max','VOC_mean','VOC_min','VOC_max','Season','
Predicting Occupant Comfort using Machine Learning
79
==PAGE:86==
indoorClimate']]
144
conditions_occ=conditions_occ.dropna(axis=0,how='any')
145
conditions_occ.to_csv('conditions_occ.csv',index=False)
146
147
# Conditions
148
conditions=conditions_occ[['Building','Location_DK','Temp_mean','Temp_min','
Temp_max','RH_mean','RH_min','RH_max','CO2_mean','CO2_min','CO2_max','
Lux_mean','Lux_min','Lux_max','Color_mean','Color_min','Color_max','
SPL_mean','SPL_min','SPL_max','VOC_mean','VOC_min','VOC_max','Season','
indoorClimate']]
149
conditions.to_csv('conditions.csv',index=False)
150
151
# Discomfort + occupant
152
discomfort_occ=df[['Building','Location_DK','age','sex','smoker','contacts','
yearsinoffice','hoursatdesk','daysInOffice','job_Administrative','
job_Managerial','job_Professional','job_Technical','q0','q1','q2','q3','q4
','q5','q6','q7','q8','q9','q10','q11','indoorClimate']]
153
discomfort_occ=discomfort_occ.dropna(axis=0,how='any')
154
discomfort_occ.to_csv('discomfort_occ.csv',index=False)
155
156
# Discomfort
157
discomfort=discomfort_occ[['Building','Location_DK','q0','q1','q2','q3','q4','
q5','q6','q7','q8','q9','q10','q11','indoorClimate']]
158
discomfort.to_csv('discomfort.csv',index=False)
159
160
# Occupants
161
occupant=df[['Building','age','sex','smoker','contacts','yearsinoffice','
hoursatdesk','daysInOffice','job_Administrative','job_Managerial','
job_Professional','job_Technical','indoorClimate']]
162
occupant=occupant.dropna(axis=0,how='any')
163
occupant.to_csv('occupant.csv',index=False)
164
165
# Building+Occupant+Discomfort
166
building_occ_dis=df.drop(['Temp_mean','Temp_min','Temp_max','RH_mean','RH_min'
,'RH_max','CO2_mean','CO2_min','CO2_max','Lux_mean','Lux_min','Lux_max','
Color_mean','Color_min','Color_max','SPL_mean','SPL_min','SPL_max','
VOC_mean','VOC_min','VOC_max','Season'],axis=1)
167
building_occ_dis=building_occ_dis.dropna(axis=0,how='any')
168
building_occ_dis['O2_desklight']=building_occ_dis['O2_desklight']/
building_occ_dis['O2_noWorkstations']
169
building_occ_dis['O2_noWorkstations']=building_occ_dis['O2_noWorkstations']/
building_occ_dis['O2_floorArea']
170
building_occ_dis['O2_noSupplyDevices']=building_occ_dis['O2_noSupplyDevices']/
building_occ_dis['O2_floorArea']
171
building_occ_dis['O2_noReturnDevices']=building_occ_dis['O2_noReturnDevices']/
building_occ_dis['O2_floorArea']
172
building_occ_dis['O2_noSpaceHeatersInUse']=building_occ_dis['
O2_noSpaceHeatersInUse']/building_occ_dis['O2_floorArea']
173
building_occ_dis['O2_noHumidifiersInUse']=building_occ_dis['
O2_noHumidifiersInUse']/building_occ_dis['O2_floorArea']
174
building_occ_dis['O2_noDehumidifiersInUse']=building_occ_dis['
O2_noDehumidifiersInUse']/building_occ_dis['O2_floorArea']
175
building_occ_dis['O2_noDeskfansInUse']=building_occ_dis['O2_noDeskfansInUse']/
building_occ_dis['O2_floorArea']
176
building_occ_dis.to_csv('building_occ_dis.csv',index=False)
Predicting Occupant Comfort using Machine Learning
80
==PAGE:87==
D.3
Model 0
1
# -*- coding: utf-8 -*-
2
"""
3
Created on Tue Nov 15 10:27:34 2022
4
5
@author: Lærke Viuff Petersen
6
"""
7
8
from sklearn.feature_selection import RFECV
9
import pandas as pd
10
import shap
11
from sklearn.metrics import classification_report
12
from sklearn.utils import shuffle
13
from sklearn.ensemble import GradientBoostingClassifier
14
from sklearn.metrics import confusion_matrix
15
import pickle
16
17
#%% DATA
18
# Load data
19
DK=pd.read_csv('.\DK\AllData.csv')
20
GL=pd.read_csv('.\GL\AllData.csv')
21
df=pd.concat([DK,GL], axis=0, ignore_index=True)
22
df=df.drop(['VOC_min','VOC_mean','VOC_max','SPL_min','SPL_mean','SPL_max','
Color_min','Color_mean','Color_max'],axis=1)
23
df=df.drop(['Location_GL'],axis=1)
24
df=df.fillna(0)
25
df = shuffle(df,random_state=77)
26
27
#Remove columns with identical values
28
nunique = df.nunique()
29
cols_to_drop = nunique[nunique == 1].index
30
df=df.drop(cols_to_drop , axis=1)
31
32
# Split into training and test data
33
test=df[(df['Building'] == 104) | (df['Building'] == 303) | (df['Building'] ==
308) | (df['Building'] == 404)| (df['Building'] == 405) | (df['Building']
== 407)]
34
train=df[(df['Building'] != 104) & (df['Building'] != 303) & (df['Building']
!= 308) & (df['Building'] != 404)& (df['Building'] != 405) & (df['Building
'] != 407)]
35
test=test.drop(['Building'],axis=1)
36
train=train.drop(['Building'],axis=1)
37
38
# Training data:
39
X_train=train.drop(['indoorClimate'], axis=1)
40
y_train=train['indoorClimate'].astype(int)
41
42
# Test data:
43
X_test=test.drop(['indoorClimate'], axis=1)
44
y_test=test['indoorClimate'].astype(int)
45
46
# Classes:
47
y_train=y_train.replace({0:-1, 1:-1, 2:0, 3:0, 4:1, 5:1})
48
y_test=y_test.replace({0:-1, 1:-1, 2:0, 3:0, 4:1, 5:1})
49
50
#%% Accuracy before FS
Predicting Occupant Comfort using Machine Learning
81
==PAGE:88==
51
52
GBM=GradientBoostingClassifier(learning_rate=0.1, n_estimators=80, max_depth
=5,subsample=1.0, random_state=137)
53
GBM.fit(X_train ,y_train)
54
y_pred=GBM.predict(X_test)
55
print(classification_report(y_test, y_pred, zero_division=0))
56
con=confusion_matrix(y_test, y_pred)
57
print(con)
58
59
#%% Feature selection
60
# Dividing into feature and label
61
selector = RFECV(GBM, step=3, cv=10, scoring="accuracy")
62
selector = selector.fit(X_train , y_train)
63
64
X_train_new=X_train.loc[:, selector.support_]
65
X_test_new=X_test.loc[:, selector.support_]
66
X_train_new.to_csv('model0_featuresSelected_new.csv',index=False)
67
68
#%% Accuracy after feature selection
69
70
X_train_new=pd.read_csv('model0_featuresSelected_new.csv')
71
X_test_new=X_test[X_train_new.columns]
72
73
GBM.fit(X_train_new ,y_train)
74
y_pred=GBM.predict(X_test_new)
75
print(classification_report(y_test, y_pred, zero_division=0))
76
con=confusion_matrix(y_test, y_pred)
77
print(con)
78
79
pickle.dump(GBM, open(".\pickles\Model0.pkl", 'wb'))
80
pickle.dump(X_train_new.columns , open(".\pickles\Model0_columns.pkl", 'wb'))
81
82
83
#%% Feature importance
84
85
# Fits the explainer
86
explainer = shap.Explainer(GBM.predict , X_train_new)
87
# Calculates the SHAP values
88
shap_values = explainer(X_train_new)
89
shap.summary_plot(shap_values , plot_type=("dot"), max_display=15)
Predicting Occupant Comfort using Machine Learning
82
==PAGE:89==
D.4
Model 1
1
# -*- coding: utf-8 -*-
2
"""
3
Created on Tue Nov 15 10:27:34 2022
4
5
@author: Lærke Viuff Petersen
6
"""
7
8
import pandas as pd
9
import shap
10
from sklearn.metrics import classification_report
11
from sklearn.model_selection import GridSearchCV
12
from sklearn.utils import shuffle
13
from sklearn.ensemble import GradientBoostingClassifier
14
from sklearn.metrics import confusion_matrix
15
import pickle
16
17
#%% Data preparation
18
# Load data
19
#With occupants
20
DK=pd.read_csv(r'.\DK\building_occ.csv')
21
GL=pd.read_csv(r'.\GL\building_occ.csv')
22
#Without occupants
23
# DK=pd.read_csv(r'.\DK\building.csv')
24
# GL=pd.read_csv(r'.\GL\building.csv')
25
26
df=pd.concat([DK,GL], axis=0, ignore_index=True)
27
df=df.drop(['Location_GL'],axis=1)
28
df=df.fillna(0)
29
df = shuffle(df,random_state=77)
30
df=df.drop(['O2_paintWallboard','O2_fabric','O2_metal','O2_wallpaper','
O2_woodPanels','O2_suspendedCeiling','O2_ceilingFabric','O2_ceilingFabric'
,'O2_ceilingMetal','O2_ceilingConcrete','O2_ceilingBoards','
O2_ceilingWoodPanels','O2_floorCarpet','O2_floorPlastic','O2_floorWood'],
axis=1)
31
32
#Remove columns with identical values
33
nunique = df.nunique()
34
cols_to_drop = nunique[nunique == 1].index
35
df=df.drop(cols_to_drop , axis=1)
36
37
# Split into training and test data
38
test=df[(df['Building'] == 104) | (df['Building'] == 303) | (df['Building'] ==
308) | (df['Building'] == 404)| (df['Building'] == 405) | (df['Building']
== 407)]
39
train=df[(df['Building'] != 104) & (df['Building'] != 303) & (df['Building']
!= 308) & (df['Building'] != 404)& (df['Building'] != 405) & (df['Building
'] != 407)]
40
test=test.drop(['Building'],axis=1)
41
train=train.drop(['Building'],axis=1)
42
43
# Training data:
44
X_train=train.drop(['indoorClimate'], axis=1)
45
y_train=train['indoorClimate'].astype(int)
46
47
# Test data:
Predicting Occupant Comfort using Machine Learning
83
==PAGE:90==
48
X_test=test.drop(['indoorClimate'], axis=1)
49
y_test=test['indoorClimate'].astype(int)
50
51
# Classes
52
y_train=y_train.replace({0:-1, 1:-1, 2:0, 3:0, 4:1, 5:1})
53
y_test=y_test.replace({0:-1, 1:-1, 2:0, 3:0, 4:1, 5:1})
54
55
#Save columns names for tool
56
columns=X_train.columns
57
pickle.dump(columns , open(".\pickles\Model1A_columns.pkl", 'wb'))
58
59
#%% Accuracy before tuning
60
GBM=GradientBoostingClassifier(learning_rate=0.1, n_estimators=80, max_depth
=5,subsample=1.0, random_state=137)
61
GBM.fit(X_train ,y_train)
62
y_pred=GBM.predict(X_test)
63
print(classification_report(y_test, y_pred, zero_division=0))
64
con=confusion_matrix(y_test, y_pred)
65
print(con)
66
67
#%% Tuning
68
# Gradient boosting machine
69
GBM=GradientBoostingClassifier(random_state=137, subsample=1.0, max_depth=5)
70
param_grid = dict(n_estimators=[30,50,80,100,150,200],learning_rate
=[0.12,0.1,0.08])
71
grid = GridSearchCV(estimator=GBM, param_grid=param_grid , cv=10, scoring="
accuracy")
72
grid_result = grid.fit(X_train , y_train)
73
74
#Results
75
results_GBM3 = pd.DataFrame(grid_result.cv_results_)
76
results_GBM3 = results_GBM3.sort_values(by=["rank_test_score"])
77
results_GBM3 = results_GBM3[["params", "rank_test_score", "mean_test_score", "
std_test_score"]]
78
results_GBM3 = results_GBM3.head(1)
79
print(results_GBM3)
80
81
#%% Accuracy after tuning
82
GBM=GradientBoostingClassifier(learning_rate=0.1, n_estimators=50, max_depth
=5,subsample=1.0, random_state=137)
83
GBM.fit(X_train ,y_train)
84
y_pred=GBM.predict(X_test)
85
print(classification_report(y_test, y_pred, zero_division=0))
86
con=confusion_matrix(y_test, y_pred)
87
print(con)
88
89
#Save model for tool
90
pickle.dump(GBM, open(".\pickles\Model1A.pkl", 'wb'))
91
92
#%% Feature importance
93
# Fits the explainer
94
explainer = shap.Explainer(GBM.predict , X_train)
95
# Calculates the SHAP values
96
shap_values = explainer(X_train)
97
shap.summary_plot(shap_values , plot_type=("dot"), max_display=15)
Predicting Occupant Comfort using Machine Learning
84
==PAGE:91==
D.5
Model 2
1
# -*- coding: utf-8 -*-
2
"""
3
Created on Tue Nov 15 10:27:34 2022
4
5
@author: Lærke Viuff Petersen
6
"""
7
8
import pandas as pd
9
import shap
10
from sklearn.metrics import classification_report
11
from sklearn.model_selection import GridSearchCV
12
from sklearn.utils import shuffle
13
from sklearn.ensemble import GradientBoostingClassifier
14
from sklearn.metrics import confusion_matrix
15
import pickle
16
17
#%% Data preparation
18
# Load data
19
#With occupants
20
DK=pd.read_csv(r'.\DK\conditions_occ.csv')
21
GL=pd.read_csv(r'.\GL\conditions_occ.csv')
22
#Without occupants
23
# DK=pd.read_csv(r'.\DK\conditions.csv')
24
# GL=pd.read_csv(r'.\GL\conditions.csv')
25
26
df=pd.concat([DK,GL], axis=0, ignore_index=True)
27
df=df.drop(['Location_DK','VOC_min','VOC_mean','VOC_max','SPL_min','SPL_mean',
'SPL_max','Color_min','Color_mean','Color_max'],axis=1)
28
df=df.fillna(0)
29
df = shuffle(df,random_state=77)
30
31
#Remove columns with identical values
32
nunique = df.nunique()
33
cols_to_drop = nunique[nunique == 1].index
34
df=df.drop(cols_to_drop , axis=1)
35
36
# Split into training and test data
37
test=df[(df['Building'] == 104) | (df['Building'] == 303) | (df['Building'] ==
308) | (df['Building'] == 404)| (df['Building'] == 405) | (df['Building']
== 407)]
38
train=df[(df['Building'] != 104) & (df['Building'] != 303) & (df['Building']
!= 308) & (df['Building'] != 404)& (df['Building'] != 405) & (df['Building
'] != 407)]
39
test=test.drop(['Building'],axis=1)
40
train=train.drop(['Building'],axis=1)
41
42
# Training data:
43
X_train=train.drop(['indoorClimate'], axis=1)
44
y_train=train['indoorClimate'].astype(int)
45
46
# Test data:
47
X_test=test.drop(['indoorClimate'], axis=1)
48
y_test=test['indoorClimate'].astype(int)
49
50
# Classes
Predicting Occupant Comfort using Machine Learning
85
==PAGE:92==
51
y_train=y_train.replace({0:-1, 1:-1, 2:0, 3:0, 4:1, 5:1})
52
y_test=y_test.replace({0:-1, 1:-1, 2:0, 3:0, 4:1, 5:1})
53
54
#%% Accuracy before tuning
55
GBM=GradientBoostingClassifier(learning_rate=0.1, n_estimators=80, max_depth
=5,subsample=1.0, random_state=137)
56
GBM.fit(X_train ,y_train)
57
y_pred=GBM.predict(X_test)
58
print(classification_report(y_test, y_pred, zero_division=0))
59
con=confusion_matrix(y_test, y_pred)
60
print(con)
61
62
#%% Tuning
63
# Gradient boosting machine
64
GBM=GradientBoostingClassifier(random_state=137, subsample=1.0, learning_rate
=0.15)
65
param_grid = dict(max_depth = [1,3,5,7,9], n_estimators=[100,150,200,250])
66
grid = GridSearchCV(estimator=GBM, param_grid=param_grid , cv=4, scoring="
accuracy")
67
grid_result = grid.fit(X_train , y_train)
68
69
#Results
70
results_GBM3 = pd.DataFrame(grid_result.cv_results_)
71
results_GBM3 = results_GBM3.sort_values(by=["rank_test_score"])
72
results_GBM3 = results_GBM3[["params", "rank_test_score", "mean_test_score", "
std_test_score"]]
73
results_GBM3 = results_GBM3.head(1)
74
print(results_GBM3)
75
76
77
#%% Accuracy after tuning
78
GBM=GradientBoostingClassifier(learning_rate=0.15, n_estimators=200, max_depth
=5,subsample=1.0, random_state=137)
79
GBM.fit(X_train ,y_train)
80
y_pred=GBM.predict(X_test)
81
print(classification_report(y_test, y_pred, zero_division=0))
82
con=confusion_matrix(y_test, y_pred)
83
print(con)
84
85
# Save model for tool
86
pickle.dump(GBM, open(".\pickles\Model2_occ.pkl", 'wb'))
87
pickle.dump(X_train.columns , open(".\pickles\Model2_occ_columns.pkl", 'wb'))
88
89
#%% Feature importance
90
# Fits the explainer
91
explainer = shap.Explainer(GBM.predict , X_train)
92
# Calculates the SHAP values
93
shap_values = explainer(X_train)
94
shap.summary_plot(shap_values , plot_type=("dot"), max_display=15)
Predicting Occupant Comfort using Machine Learning
86
==PAGE:93==
D.6
Model 3
1
# -*- coding: utf-8 -*-
2
"""
3
Created on Tue Nov 15 10:27:34 2022
4
5
@author: Lærke Viuff Petersen
6
"""
7
8
import pandas as pd
9
import shap
10
from sklearn.metrics import classification_report
11
from sklearn.model_selection import GridSearchCV
12
from sklearn.utils import shuffle
13
from sklearn.ensemble import GradientBoostingClassifier
14
from sklearn.metrics import confusion_matrix
15
import pickle
16
17
#%% Data preparation
18
# Load data
19
#With occupants
20
# DK=pd.read_csv(r'.\DK\discomfort_occ.csv')
21
# GL=pd.read_csv(r'.\GL\discomfort_occ.csv')
22
# Without occupants
23
DK=pd.read_csv(r'.\DK\discomfort.csv')
24
GL=pd.read_csv(r'.\GL\discomfort.csv')
25
26
df=pd.concat([DK,GL], axis=0, ignore_index=True)
27
df=df.drop(['Location_DK'],axis=1)
28
df=df.fillna(0)
29
df = shuffle(df,random_state=77)
30
31
#Remove columns with identical values
32
nunique = df.nunique()
33
cols_to_drop = nunique[nunique == 1].index
34
df=df.drop(cols_to_drop , axis=1)
35
36
# Split into training and test data
37
test=df[(df['Building'] == 104) | (df['Building'] == 303) | (df['Building'] ==
308) | (df['Building'] == 404)| (df['Building'] == 405) | (df['Building']
== 407)]
38
train=df[(df['Building'] != 104) & (df['Building'] != 303) & (df['Building']
!= 308) & (df['Building'] != 404)& (df['Building'] != 405) & (df['Building
'] != 407)]
39
test=test.drop(['Building'],axis=1)
40
train=train.drop(['Building'],axis=1)
41
42
# Training data:
43
X_train=train.drop(['indoorClimate'], axis=1)
44
y_train=train['indoorClimate'].astype(int)
45
46
# Test data:
47
X_test=test.drop(['indoorClimate'], axis=1)
48
y_test=test['indoorClimate'].astype(int)
49
50
# 3 classes
51
y_train=y_train.replace({0:-1, 1:-1, 2:0, 3:0, 4:1, 5:1})
Predicting Occupant Comfort using Machine Learning
87
==PAGE:94==
52
y_test=y_test.replace({0:-1, 1:-1, 2:0, 3:0, 4:1, 5:1})
53
54
#%% Accuracy before tuning
55
GBM=GradientBoostingClassifier(learning_rate=0.1, n_estimators=80, max_depth
=5,subsample=1.0, random_state=137)
56
GBM.fit(X_train ,y_train)
57
y_pred=GBM.predict(X_test)
58
print(classification_report(y_test, y_pred, zero_division=0))
59
con=confusion_matrix(y_test, y_pred)
60
print(con)
61
62
#%% Tuning
63
# Gradient boosting machine
64
GBM=GradientBoostingClassifier(random_state=137, subsample=1.0, max_depth=7)
65
param_grid = dict(learning_rate = [0.01,0.05,0.1,0.15,0.2], n_estimators
=[100,150,200,250])
66
grid = GridSearchCV(estimator=GBM, param_grid=param_grid , cv=4, scoring="
accuracy")
67
grid_result = grid.fit(X_train , y_train)
68
69
#Results
70
results_GBM3 = pd.DataFrame(grid_result.cv_results_)
71
results_GBM3 = results_GBM3.sort_values(by=["rank_test_score"])
72
results_GBM3 = results_GBM3[["params", "rank_test_score", "mean_test_score", "
std_test_score"]]
73
results_GBM3 = results_GBM3.head(1)
74
print(results_GBM3)
75
76
#%% Accuracy after tuning
77
GBM=GradientBoostingClassifier(learning_rate=0.15, n_estimators=250, max_depth
=7,subsample=1.0, random_state=137)
78
GBM.fit(X_train ,y_train)
79
y_pred=GBM.predict(X_test)
80
print(classification_report(y_test, y_pred, zero_division=0))
81
con=confusion_matrix(y_test, y_pred)
82
print(con)
83
84
# Save model for tool
85
pickle.dump(GBM, open(".\pickles\Model3.pkl", 'wb'))
86
pickle.dump(X_train , open(".\pickles\Model3_columns.pkl", 'wb'))
87
88
#%% Feature importance
89
# Fits the explainer
90
explainer = shap.Explainer(GBM.predict , X_train)
91
# Calculates the SHAP values
92
shap_values = explainer(X_train)
93
shap.summary_plot(shap_values , plot_type=("dot"), max_display=15)
Predicting Occupant Comfort using Machine Learning
88
==PAGE:95==
D.7
Tool
1
# -*- coding: utf-8 -*-
2
"""
3
Created on Fri Nov
4 12:33:45 2022
4
5
@author: Lærke Viuff Petersen
6
"""
7
8
import pandas as pd
9
import numpy as np
10
import streamlit as st
11
import pickle
12
13
st.title("Comfort Calculator")
14
15
method=st.radio("Calculation method:",["No method","Using building
characteristics","Using indoor climate"])
16
17
pred_q5=0
18
nosupply=0
19
noreturn=0
20
noheaters=0
21
22
#%%
23
if method == "Using building characteristics":
24
column_names = pickle.load(open("./pickles/Model1A_columns.pkl", 'rb'))
25
df = pd.DataFrame(columns=column_names)
26
27
occupants=st.checkbox("Include occupant characteristics",value=False)
28
29
st.markdown("""---""")
30
st.write("**General information**")
31
32
location=st.selectbox("Country", ["Denmark","Greenland"])
33
if location== "Denmark":
34
df.loc[1,'Location_DK']=1
35
36
site=st.selectbox('Site', ["Suburban/Industrial","Suburban/Commercial","
Suburban/Residential","Urban/Industrial","Urban/Commercial","Urban/
Residential"], index=0)
37
if site == "Suburban/Industrial":
38
df.loc[1,'O1suburb_indus']=1
39
elif site == "Suburban/Commercial":
40
df.loc[1,'O1suburb_com']=1
41
elif site == "Suburban/Residential":
42
df.loc[1,'O1suburb_res']=1
43
elif site == "Urban/Industrial":
44
df.loc[1,'O1urb_indus']=1
45
elif site == "Urban/Commercial":
46
df.loc[1,'O1urb_com']=1
47
elif site == "Urban/Residential":
48
df.loc[1,'O1urb_res']=1
49
50
51
df.loc[1,'O1_constructionYear']=st.number_input("Construction year",
min_value=1880, max_value=2022, value=1960, step=1)
Predicting Occupant Comfort using Machine Learning
89
==PAGE:96==
52
df.loc[1,'O1_renovationYear']=st.number_input("Renovation year", min_value
=df.loc[1,'O1_constructionYear'], max_value=2022, value=2022, step=1)
53
df.loc[1,'O1_grossFloorArea']=st.number_input("Gross floor area",
min_value=1, max_value=None, value=1000, step=50)
54
55
st.markdown("""---""")
56
st.write("**HVAC system**")
57
58
ventilation_type=st.selectbox('Mechanical ventilation', ["No mechanical
ventilation","Exhaust","Exhaust and supply","Exhaust and supply with
heat recovery"], index=0)
59
if ventilation_type == "Exhaust":
60
df.loc[1,'O1_exhaust']=1
61
elif ventilation_type == "Exhaust and supply":
62
df.loc[1,'O1_exhaustSupply']=1
63
elif ventilation_type == "Exhaust and supply with heat recovery":
64
df.loc[1,'O1_exhaustSupplyHeat']=1
65
66
if df.loc[1,'O1_exhaustSupply'] == 1 or df.loc[1,'O1_exhaustSupplyHeat'
]==1:
67
control=st.selectbox('Control', ["Temperature","CO2","Manual"], index
=0)
68
if control == "Temperature":
69
df.loc[1,'O1_tempControl']=1
70
elif control == "CO2":
71
df.loc[1,'O1_CO2control']=1
72
elif control == "Manual":
73
df.loc[1,'O1_manControl']=1
74
coil=st.selectbox('Heating coil', ["Electrical","Water"], index=0)
75
if coil == "Electrical":
76
df.loc[1,'O1_airHeatEl']=1
77
elif coil == "Water":
78
df.loc[1,'O1_airHeatWater']=1
79
Cooling=st.checkbox("Central cooling", value=False)
80
if Cooling==True:
81
df.loc[1,'O1_centralCooling']=1
82
supply=st.selectbox("Supply air device",["Linear ceiling diffusers","
Perforated ceiling panels","Sidewall diffusers","Other"])
83
if supply==
"Linear ceiling diffusers":
84
df.loc[1,'O2_ventLinCeilDif']=1
85
elif
supply =="Perforated ceiling panels":
86
df.loc[1,'O2_ventPerfCeiling']=1
87
elif supply == "Sidewall diffusers":
88
df.loc[1,'O2_ventSideWallDif']=1
89
90
if df.loc[1,'O1_exhaust']==1 or df.loc[1,'O1_exhaustSupply'] == 1 or df.
loc[1,'O1_exhaustSupplyHeat']==1:
91
returns=st.selectbox("Return air device",["Ceiling grilles","Ceiling
slots","Slots around ceiling luminaires","High sidewall grilles","
Other"])
92
if returns == "Ceiling grilles":
93
df.loc[1,'O2_ventReturnCeilGrill']=1
94
elif returns == "Ceiling slots":
95
df.loc[1,'O2_ventReturnCeilSlot']=1
96
elif returns == "Slots around ceiling luminaires":
97
df.loc[1,'O2_ventReturnSlotsLum']=1
Predicting Occupant Comfort using Machine Learning
90
==PAGE:97==
98
elif returns == "High sidewall grilles":
99
df.loc[1,'O2_ventReturnSideGrill']=1
100
101
natVent=st.checkbox("Natural ventilation", value=False)
102
if natVent== True:
103
df.loc[1,'O1_natVentman']=1
104
105
heating=st.selectbox('Heating', ["Radiators","Floor heating"], index=0)
106
if heating =="Radiators":
107
df.loc[1,'O1_radiators']=1
108
109
st.markdown("""---""")
110
st.write("**Devices**")
111
112
113
if df.loc[1,'O1_exhaustSupply'] == 1 or df.loc[1,'O1_exhaustSupplyHeat'
]==1:
114
nosupply=st.number_input("Number of supply devices in the office",
min_value=0, max_value=100, value=2, step=1)
115
116
if df.loc[1,'O1_exhaust']==1 or df.loc[1,'O1_exhaustSupply'] == 1 or df.
loc[1,'O1_exhaustSupplyHeat'] == 1:
117
noreturn=st.number_input("Number of return devices in the office",
min_value=0, max_value=100, value=2, step=1)
118
df.loc[1,'O2_noReturnDevices']=noreturn/df.loc[1,'O2_floorArea']
119
120
noheaters=st.number_input("Number of heating devices in the office",
min_value=0, max_value=100, value=2, step=1)
121
df.loc[1,'O2_noSpaceHeatersInUse']=noheaters/df.loc[1,'O2_floorArea']
122
123
124
125
st.markdown("""---""")
126
127
st.write("**Materials**")
128
129
facade=st.selectbox('Facade material', ["Concrete","Brick","Wood","Asbest"
,"Other"], index=0)
130
if facade== "Concrete":
131
df.loc[1,'O1_facadeConcrete']=1
132
elif facade == "Brick":
133
df.loc[1,'O1_facadeBrick']=1
134
elif facade == "Wood":
135
df.loc[1,'O1_facadeWood']=1
136
elif facade == "Asbest":
137
df.loc[1,'O1_facadeAsbest']=1
138
139
int_wall=st.selectbox('Interior wall', ["Gypsum","Brick","Concrete","Other
"], index=0)
140
if int_wall== "Concrete":
141
df.loc[1,'O1_intWallConcrete']=1
142
elif int_wall == "Brick":
143
df.loc[1,'O1_intWallBrick']=1
144
elif int_wall == "Gypsum":
145
df.loc[1,'O1_intWallGypsum']=1
146
Predicting Occupant Comfort using Machine Learning
91
==PAGE:98==
147
ext_wall=st.selectbox('Exterior construction', ["Concrete","Brick","Wood",
"Other"], index=0)
148
if ext_wall== "Concrete":
149
df.loc[1,'O1_extWallConcrete']=1
150
elif ext_wall == "Brick":
151
df.loc[1,'O1_extWallBrick']=1
152
elif ext_wall == "Wood":
153
df.loc[1,'O1_extWallWood']=1
154
155
insulation=st.selectbox('Insulation', ["Exterior","Interior","Cavity"],
index=0)
156
if insulation== "Interior":
157
df.loc[1,'O1_interiorInsulation']=1
158
elif insulation == "Cavity":
159
df.loc[1,'O1_cavityInsulation']=1
160
161
162
st.markdown("""---""")
163
st.write("**Office location and size**")
164
165
df.loc[1,'O1_officeFloor']=st.number_input("Story", min_value=0, max_value
=20, value=2, step=1)
166
167
orientation=st.selectbox('Orientation', ["South", "Southwest","West", "
Northwest","North","Northeast","East","Southeast"])
168
if orientation == "South":
169
df.loc[1,'O2_windowOrientation_south']=1
170
elif orientation == "Southwest":
171
df.loc[1,'O2_windowOrientation_southwest']=1
172
elif orientation == "West":
173
df.loc[1,'O2_windowOrientation_west']=1
174
elif orientation == "Northwest":
175
df.loc[1,'O2_windowOrientation_northwest']=1
176
elif orientation == "North":
177
df.loc[1,'O2_windowOrientation_north']=1
178
elif orientation == "Northeast":
179
df.loc[1,'O2_windowOrientation_northeast']=1
180
elif orientation == "East":
181
df.loc[1,'O2_windowOrientation_east']=1
182
elif orientation == "Southeast":
183
df.loc[1,'O2_windowOrientation_southeast']=1
184
185
df.loc[1,'O2_floorArea']=st.number_input("Area", min_value=10, max_value
=200, value=20, step=5)
186
df.loc[1,'O2_ceilHeight']=st.number_input("Ceiling height", min_value=2.0,
max_value=6.0, value=2.7, step=0.1)
187
# weighting devices
188
df.loc[1,'O2_noSupplyDevices']=nosupply/df.loc[1,'O2_floorArea']
189
df.loc[1,'O2_noReturnDevices']=noreturn/df.loc[1,'O2_floorArea']
190
df.loc[1,'O2_noSpaceHeatersInUse']=noheaters/df.loc[1,'O2_floorArea']
191
192
193
st.markdown("""---""")
194
195
st.write("**Office layout**")
196
Predicting Occupant Comfort using Machine Learning
92
==PAGE:99==
197
officetype=st.selectbox("Office type",["Single","Shared","Open - With
partitions", "Open - No partitions"])
198
if officetype=="Single":
199
df.loc[1,'O2_officeType_single']=1
200
elif officetype=="Shared":
201
df.loc[1,'O2_officeType_shared']=1
202
elif officetype == "Open - With partitions":
203
df.loc[1,'O2_officeType_openPartitions']=1
204
elif officetype =="Open - No partitions":
205
df.loc[1,'O2_officeType_openNoPartitions']=1
206
207
seating=st.selectbox("Seating",["Fixed","Flexible"])
208
if seating=="Fixed":
209
df.loc[1,'seating_Fixed']=1
210
elif seating=="Flexible":
211
df.loc[1,'seating_Flexible']=1
212
213
workstations=st.number_input("Number of workstations", min_value=1,
max_value=100, value=4, step=1)
214
df.loc[1,'O2_noWorkstations']=workstations/df.loc[1,'O2_floorArea']
215
216
if workstations == 1:
217
df.loc[1,'personsInOffice']=1
218
elif workstations == 2 or workstations == 3:
219
df.loc[1,'personsInOffice']=2
220
elif workstations == 4 or workstations == 5:
221
df.loc[1,'personsInOffice']=3
222
elif workstations > 5:
223
df.loc[1,'personsInOffice']=4
224
225
st.markdown("""---""")
226
st.write("**Lighting**")
227
228
229
df.loc[1,'O2_winArea']=st.number_input("Window area", min_value=0.0,
max_value=None, value=5.0, step=0.1)
230
distWin=st.selectbox("Distance to window from occupant",["0-2 m","2-4 m",
">4 m"])
231
if distWin == "0-2 m":
232
df.loc[1,'distToWindow']=1
233
elif distWin == "2-4 m":
234
df.loc[1,'distToWindow']=2
235
elif distWin == ">4 m":
236
df.loc[1,'distToWindow']=3
237
238
df.loc[1,'O2_opWin']=st.number_input("Percentage of windows operable",
min_value=0, max_value=100, value=50, step=10)
239
df.loc[1,'O2_winShadePercentage']=st.number_input("Percentage of windows
shaded", min_value=0, max_value=100, value=50, step=10)
240
241
shading=st.selectbox("Shading type",["Interior","Exterior","Both", "No
shading"])
242
if shading=="Interior":
243
df.loc[1,'O2_winShades_Interior']=1
244
elif shading=="Exterior":
245
df.loc[1,'O2_winShades_Exterior']=1
Predicting Occupant Comfort using Machine Learning
93
==PAGE:100==
246
elif shading == "Both":
247
df.loc[1,'O2_winShades_Both']=1
248
249
lighting=st.selectbox('Lighting', ["LED","Fluorescent","Incandescent"],
index=0)
250
if lighting== "LED":
251
df.loc[1,'O2_lightLED']=1
252
elif lighting == "Fluorescent":
253
df.loc[1,'O2_lightFlour']=1
254
elif lighting == "Incandescent":
255
df.loc[1,'O2_lightIncan']=1
256
257
desklight=st.number_input("Number of desklights in the office", min_value
=0, max_value=100, value=2, step=1)
258
df.loc[1,'O2_desklight']=desklight/workstations
259
260
261
#%% With occupants
262
263
if occupants == True:
264
265
st.markdown("""---""")
266
st.write("**Occupant characteristics**")
267
268
agegroup=st.selectbox("Age group",["<20 years","20-29 years","30-39
years","40-49 years","50-59 years",">60 years"])
269
if agegroup == "<20 years":
270
df.loc[1,'age']=1
271
elif agegroup == "20-29 years":
272
df.loc[1,'age']=2
273
elif agegroup == "30-39 years":
274
df.loc[1,'age']=3
275
elif agegroup == "40-49 years":
276
df.loc[1,'age']=4
277
elif agegroup == "50-59 years":
278
df.loc[1,'age']=5
279
elif agegroup == ">60 years":
280
df.loc[1,'age']=6
281
282
gendergroup=st.selectbox("Gender", ["Female", "Male"])
283
if gendergroup=="Female":
284
df.loc[1,'sex']=1
285
286
jobs=st.selectbox("Jobtitles",["Administrative","Managerial","
Professional","Technical"])
287
if jobs=="Administrative":
288
df.loc[1,'job_Administrative']=1
289
elif jobs == "Managerial":
290
df.loc[1,'job_Managerial']=1
291
elif jobs == "Professional":
292
df.loc[1,'job_Professional']=1
293
elif jobs == "Technical":
294
df.loc[1,'job_Technical']=1
295
296
eyewear=st.checkbox("Do they wear glasses or contacts?")
297
if eyewear==True:
Predicting Occupant Comfort using Machine Learning
94
==PAGE:101==
298
df.loc[1,'contacts']=1
299
300
smoking=st.checkbox("Do they currently smoke?")
301
if smoking == True:
302
df.loc[1,'smoker'] =1
303
304
hours=st.selectbox("Hours at desk per day", ["1-2 hours", "3-5 hours",
">5 hours"])
305
if hours == "1-2 hours":
306
df.loc[1,'hoursatdesk']=1
307
elif hours == "3-5 hours":
308
df.loc[1,'hoursatdesk'] =2
309
elif hours == ">5 hours":
310
df.loc[1,'hoursatdesk']=3
311
312
df.loc[1,'daysInOffice']=st.number_input("Days in office per week",
min_value=0, max_value=5, value=5, step=1)
313
314
years=st.selectbox("Number of years in office",["<1 years","1-5 years"
,"6-10 years",">10 years"])
315
if years=="<1 years":
316
df.loc[1,'yearsinoffice']=1
317
elif years == "1-5 years":
318
df.loc[1,'yearsinoffice']=2
319
elif years == "6-10 years":
320
df.loc[1,'yearsinoffice']=3
321
elif years == ">10 years":
322
df.loc[1,'yearsinoffice']=4
323
324
325
df=df.fillna(0)
326
# st.dataframe(df)
327
328
if occupants == False:
329
df=df.drop(['age','sex','smoker','contacts' ,'yearsinoffice','
hoursatdesk','daysInOffice','job_Administrative','job_Managerial',
'job_Professional','job_Technical'],axis=1)
330
GBM = pickle.load(open("./pickles/Model1A.pkl", 'rb'))
331
332
if occupants == True :
333
GBM = pickle.load(open("./pickles/Model1A_occ.pkl", 'rb'))
334
335
#%% with conditions
336
337
if method == "Using indoor climate":
338
339
occupants2=st.checkbox("Include occupant characteristics",value=False)
340
341
st.markdown("""---""")
342
343
column_names = pickle.load(open("./pickles/Model2.1_columns.pkl", 'rb'))
344
df = pd.DataFrame(columns=column_names)
345
346
st.write("**Location and season**")
347
348
location=st.selectbox("Country", ["Denmark","Greenland"])
Predicting Occupant Comfort using Machine Learning
95
==PAGE:102==
349
if location== "Greenland":
350
df.loc[1,'Location_GL']=1
351
352
season=st.selectbox("Season",["Spring","Summer","Autumn", "Winter"])
353
if season == "Spring":
354
df.loc[1,'Season']=2
355
elif season == "Summer":
356
df.loc[1,'Season'] = 3
357
elif season == "Autumn":
358
df.loc[1,'Season']=4
359
elif season == "Winter":
360
df.loc[1,'Season']=1
361
362
st.markdown("""---""")
363
st.write("**Conditions**")
364
365
df.loc[1,'Temp_min']=st.number_input("Minimum air temperature", min_value
=17.0, max_value=None, value=20.0, step=0.5)
366
df.loc[1,'Temp_max']=st.number_input("Maximum air temperature", min_value=
df.loc[1,'Temp_min'], max_value=35.0, value=26.0, step=0.5)
367
df.loc[1,'Temp_mean']=st.slider("Average air temperature", min_value=df.
loc[1,'Temp_min'], max_value=df.loc[1,'Temp_max'], value=23.0, step
=0.5)
368
369
df.loc[1,'CO2_min']=st.number_input("Minimum CO2 level", min_value=400,
max_value=None, value=400, step=50)
370
df.loc[1,'CO2_max']=st.number_input("Maximum CO2 level", min_value=df.loc
[1,'CO2_min'], max_value=None, value=1000, step=50)
371
df.loc[1,'CO2_mean']=st.slider("Average CO2 level", min_value=df.loc[1,'
CO2_min'], max_value=df.loc[1,'CO2_max'], value=700, step=50)
372
373
374
df.loc[1,'Lux_min']=st.number_input("Minimum illuminance level", min_value
=0, max_value=None, value=100, step=50)
375
df.loc[1,'Lux_max']=st.number_input("Maximum illuminance level", min_value
=df.loc[1,'Lux_min'], max_value=None, value=1000, step=50)
376
df.loc[1,'Lux_mean']=st.slider("Average illuminance level", min_value=df.
loc[1,'Lux_min'], max_value=df.loc[1,'Lux_max'], value=500, step=50)
377
378
df.loc[1,'RH_min']=st.number_input("Minimum relative humidity", min_value
=0, max_value=99, value=40, step=5)
379
df.loc[1,'RH_max']=st.number_input("Maximum relative humidity", min_value=
df.loc[1,'RH_min'], max_value=100, value=60, step=5)
380
df.loc[1,'RH_mean']=st.slider("Average relative humidity", min_value=df.
loc[1,'RH_min'], max_value=df.loc[1,'RH_max'], value=50, step=5)
381
382
if occupants2 == True:
383
384
st.markdown("""---""")
385
st.write("**Occupant characteristics**")
386
387
agegroup=st.selectbox("Age group",["<20 years","20-29 years","30-39
years","40-49 years","50-59 years",">60 years"])
388
if agegroup == "<20 years":
389
df.loc[1,'age']=1
390
elif agegroup == "20-29 years":
Predicting Occupant Comfort using Machine Learning
96
==PAGE:103==
391
df.loc[1,'age']=2
392
elif agegroup == "30-39 years":
393
df.loc[1,'age']=3
394
elif agegroup == "40-49 years":
395
df.loc[1,'age']=4
396
elif agegroup == "50-59 years":
397
df.loc[1,'age']=5
398
elif agegroup == ">60 years":
399
df.loc[1,'age']=6
400
401
gendergroup=st.selectbox("Gender", ["Female", "Male"])
402
if gendergroup=="Female":
403
df.loc[1,'sex']=1
404
405
jobs=st.selectbox("Jobtitles",["Administrative","Managerial","
Professional","Technical"])
406
if jobs=="Administrative":
407
df.loc[1,'job_Administrative']=1
408
elif jobs == "Managerial":
409
df.loc[1,'job_Managerial']=1
410
elif jobs == "Professional":
411
df.loc[1,'job_Professional']=1
412
elif jobs == "Technical":
413
df.loc[1,'job_Technical']=1
414
415
eyewear=st.checkbox("Do they wear glasses or contacts?")
416
if eyewear==True:
417
df.loc[1,'contacts']=1
418
419
smoking=st.checkbox("Do they currently smoke?")
420
if smoking == True:
421
df.loc[1,'smoker'] =1
422
423
hours=st.selectbox("Hours at desk per day", ["1-2 hours", "3-5 hours",
">5 hours"])
424
if hours == "1-2 hours":
425
df.loc[1,'hoursatdesk']=1
426
elif hours == "3-5 hours":
427
df.loc[1,'hoursatdesk'] =2
428
elif hours == ">5 hours":
429
df.loc[1,'hoursatdesk']=3
430
431
df.loc[1,'daysInOffice']=st.number_input("Days in office per week",
min_value=0, max_value=5, value=5, step=1)
432
433
years=st.selectbox("Number of years in office",["<1 years","1-5 years"
,"6-10 years",">10 years"])
434
if years=="<1 years":
435
df.loc[1,'yearsinoffice']=1
436
elif years == "1-5 years":
437
df.loc[1,'yearsinoffice']=2
438
elif years == "6-10 years":
439
df.loc[1,'yearsinoffice']=3
440
elif years == ">10 years":
441
df.loc[1,'yearsinoffice']=4
442
Predicting Occupant Comfort using Machine Learning
97
==PAGE:104==
443
df=df.fillna(0)
444
#st.dataframe(df)
445
446
df_q5=df[['Temp_mean','Temp_min','Temp_max','RH_mean','RH_min','RH_max']]
447
GBM_q5=pickle.load(open("./pickles/Model2C_q5.pkl", 'rb'))
448
pred_q5=GBM_q5.predict(df_q5)
449
450
if occupants2 == False:
451
df=df.drop(['age','sex','smoker','contacts' ,'yearsinoffice','
hoursatdesk','daysInOffice','job_Administrative','job_Managerial',
'job_Professional','job_Technical'],axis=1)
452
GBM = pickle.load(open("./pickles/Model2.1.pkl", 'rb'))
453
454
if occupants2 == True :
455
GBM = pickle.load(open("./pickles/Model2.1_occ.pkl", 'rb'))
456
457
#%% Results
458
459
if method == "Using building characteristics" or method =="Using indoor
climate":
460
461
with st.sidebar:
462
st.header("Results")
463
464
pred=GBM.predict(df)
465
prob=GBM.predict_proba(df)
466
prob=np.round(prob*100,1)
467
468
if pred == [1]:
469
st.write("The occupant will most likely be satisfied")
470
elif pred == [0]:
471
st.write("The occupant will most likely be neutral")
472
elif pred == [-1]:
473
st.write("The occupant will most likely be dissatisfied")
474
475
chart_data = pd.DataFrame(prob,columns=['Dissatisfied', 'Neutral', '
Satisfied'])
476
st.write("The probability of the satisfaction levels are:")
477
st.bar_chart(chart_data)
478
479
if pred_q5 == [1]:
480
st.write("The occupant will likely perceive the air to be too dry"
)
481
482
if method == "Using building characteristics":
483
if occupants == True:
484
st.write("The prediction is 50% accurate")
485
if occupants == False:
486
st.write("The prediction is 40% accurate")
487
if method =="Using indoor climate":
488
if occupants2 == True:
489
st.write("The prediction is 48% accurate")
490
if occupants2 == False:
491
st.write("The prediction is 50% accurate")
492
493
file=df
Predicting Occupant Comfort using Machine Learning
98
==PAGE:105==
494
file['Output']=pred
495
file['Output']=file['Output'].replace({-1:"Dissatisfied", 0:"Neutral",
1:"Satisfied"})
496
file['Dissatisfied']=prob[0,0]
497
file['Neutral']=prob[0,1]
498
file['Satisfied']=prob[0,2]
499
500
csv=file.to_csv()
501
502
st.download_button("Download results", data=csv, file_name="
comfort_data.csv",mime='text/csv')
Predicting Occupant Comfort using Machine Learning
99
==PAGE:106==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Bygningstorvet, Building 115
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.sustain.dtu.dk
