==PAGE:1==
Face Age Progression Based on Generative Adversarial
Networks
Master Thesis
Morten Bjerre, Eric Kastl Jensen
DTU Compute
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Face Age Progression Based on Generative Adversarial Networks
Aging faces by conditioning the EG3D GAN on age
Master Thesis
January, 2023
By
Morten Bjerre and Eric Kastl Jensen
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus-
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title,
etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Published by:
DTU, Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science, Build-
ing 324, 2800 Kongens Lyngby Denmark
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over six months at the Department of Applied Mathematics
and Computer Science at DTU and in collaboration with the Norwegian Biometrics Lab-
oratory at the Norwegian University of Science and Technology (NTNU) in fulfillment of
the requirements for acquiring a degree of Master of Science in Engineering in Mathemati-
cal Modelling and Computation (for Eric Kastl Jensen) and in Human-Centered Artificial
Intelligence (for Morten Bjerre).
It is assumed that the reader has basic knowledge in the areas of machine learning.
Morten Bjerre - s174397
Signature
Date
Eric Kastl Jensen - s174379
Signature
Date
ii
Face Age Progression Based on Generative Adversarial Networks
31/12/2022
31/12/2022
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
It is a complicated endeavor to change an individual’s facial appearance such that their
face image would be an accurate estimate of the individual’s likeness up to decades in
the future or past.
To achieve that, one needs to create a realistic, high-quality face
image of the correct age while also maintaining the person’s identity, all from one image.
Accomplishing this is made even more diﬀicult by aging being a highly individual process,
which varies greatly based on lifestyle and genetics. Current works are limited to creating
face images from the original viewing angle, which is not ideal. This work aims to use
the recent advances in generative adversarial networks (GANs) and their application both
in face aging and generating 3D images from single 2D input images to address all these
problems. This is accomplished by extending the existing EG3D network, one of the most
advanced state-of-the-art works on 3D GANs, and appending the age condition to the
input and augmenting the loss with identity preservation loss. The end product is age-
EG3D, which can create wholly synthetic photorealistic face images with a custom target
age and viewing angle while maintaining the identity of the subject. Age-EG3D achieves
an impressive mean absolute error (MAE) of 4.1 years for synthetic images. It also enables
age simulation on real face images with an MAE of 7.9. The GitHub repository for the
thesis can be found here: https://github.com/johndoe133/eg3d-age.
Face Age Progression Based on Generative Adversarial Networks
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgments
Special thank you to our supervisors for providing the best conditions for writing a thesis,
both with timely helpful advice, expert insight and reviewing the final product.
Christoph Busch, Professor, NTNU and Hochschule Darmstadt
Much gratitude to Christoph, for offering the thesis, helpful monthly meetings to keep us
on track and aiding us with his experience in the field.
Marcel Grimmer, PhD Candidate, NTNU
Enormous appreciation for Marcel for coming up with the original age-EG3D idea, pro-
ductive weekly meetings, and for always giving clear and rapid responses to any doubts
and questions we had.
Acknowledgments from Eric Kastl Jensen
I would like to thank my girlfriend Luna Kanding Fluegel, my family, and my friend Ivan
Vegner for their support and help with reviewing the thesis.
Acknowledgments from Morten Bjerre
I wish to thank my family and girlfriend Rikke Bo Bagge for their support during this
project.
iv
Face Age Progression Based on Generative Adversarial Networks
==PAGE:7==
Abbreviations and Notation
All vectors are written in bold
c: Conditioning vector
cGAN: Conditional generative adversarial network
concat(·): concatenates two items into a single vector
CNN: Convolutional neural network
CUSP: Custom Structure Preservation model [1]
D: Discriminator network
dcos: Cosine distance
E: encoder
E: Expected value
f: feature vector
FAM: Face age manipulation
FAP: Face age progression
FAR: Face age regression
FID: Frenchet Inception Distance
FRS: Feature recognition system
G: Generator network
GAN: Generative adversarial network
G(z): synthetic image generated by G using input z
G(z|c): synthetic image generated by G using input z conditioned on c
HRFAE: High-Resolution Face Age Editing model [2]
M: Mapping network from Z to W
MAE: Mean absolute error
N(µ, σ): normal distribution with mean µ and standard deviation σ
pdata(S): Distribution of synthetic images
pX : Distribution of real images
pS: Distribution of the set of synthetic images S
Rd: The d-dimensional real numbers
S: Set of synthetic images
SAM: Only a Matter of Style: Stylebased Age Manipulation model [3]
SC: Cosine similarity
std: Standard deviation
tr: Trace of a matrix
Face Age Progression Based on Generative Adversarial Networks
v
==PAGE:8==
U(a, b): uniform distribution with minimum value a and max value b
W: intermediate latent space of StyleGAN2 and newer versions
w: latent vector from the intermediate latent space W
X: Image space
x: sampled image from the image space X
Z: latent space
z: latent vector from the latent space Z
vi
Face Age Progression Based on Generative Adversarial Networks
==PAGE:9==
Contents
Preface
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
Abbreviations and Notation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
v
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Research Questions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2
Theory
5
2.1
Generative Adversarial Networks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
GAN Inversion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.3
Face Age Manipulation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.4
Face Age Estimation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.5
Face Recognition Systems . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2.6
Evaluation and Metrics
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
2.7
Pose Intrinsics and Extrinsics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
3
Related Work
17
3.1
StyleGAN2
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3.2
FAM Methods
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3.3
3D GANs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3.4
Inversion Method . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
4
Proposed Model & Implementation
23
4.1
Model Configurations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
4.2
Estimation of Age Labels
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
4.3
Pose and Age Conditioned Loss . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
4.4
Augmented Loss Function . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
4.5
Age-EG3D Truncation Trick . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
4.6
Inversion Method . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
5
Results
33
5.1
Testing Model Configurations of age-EG3D
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
5.2
In-depth Analysis age-EG3D
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
5.3
Comparison to Related Works . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
6
Discussion
65
7
Conclusion
69
7.1
Future work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
70
Face Age Progression Based on Generative Adversarial Networks
vii
==PAGE:10==
Bibliography
73
Appendices
78
A Models
78
A.1 Age Estimation Models
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
78
B Equations
82
B.1
Interpolations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
82
C Images
83
C.1 Original EG3D Output . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
83
C.2 Variety at Different Truncation Factors
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
83
viii
Face Age Progression Based on Generative Adversarial Networks
==PAGE:11==
Chapter 1
Introduction
Being able to predict an individual’s facial appearance at different stages in their life has
been the subject of pop culture fascination since Snapchat first introduced aging filters,
but its importance is far from limited to vanity and amusement. The most glaring use is
to help identify and locate missing persons, as there may not be recent images to match
their current description depending on how long the person has been missing. Especially
in the case of children, whose faces can change drastically over the course of a few years,
a forecast of the individual’s current appearance can be critical.
Face age manipulation (FAM) is the overall term for the simulation of facial aging patterns
used to make individuals appear older or younger. FAM can be further divided into face
age progression (FAP) and face age regression (FAR), whose differences are explained in
Section 2.3. FAM is a diﬀicult task that existing methods struggle to solve for three main
reasons. The first is aging accuracy. The aging process differs significantly from person to
person due to lifestyle, genetics, and other factors, which can cause differences in the rate
and the way individuals age [4]. None of these factors are easily predicted from just an
image of a face. Since aging patterns are individual, they are hard to generalize to a single
FAM model. Second is the issue of identity preservation. Ensuring that the age-edited
output remains identifiable as the same individual and not just another person of the
targeted age is critical. But a person’s identity is not easy to quantify, making it hard to
model accurately. The third issue is the visual quality of the output. The output should
be high-resolution images and, more importantly, display a realistically aged individual.
The face image needs to be altered to simulate the aging patterns, but the changes must
be extremely precise so that the image still perceptually looks like an actual human.
Recent advances in deep generative models and generative adversarial network (GAN)
based approaches to FAM have shown incredible performance and improvement in these
areas compared to traditional works. The greatest advantage of GAN-based approaches is
that it does not require mated samples for training, significantly increasing the number and
size of available datasets. Furthermore, the GAN architecture makes them very well-suited
for creating photorealistic images.
Beyond its application for missing persons, as mentioned above, FAM can serve a multitude
of use cases. For border control, it can be used to make passport photos up to date, or
make a current image younger to match the passport photo for easier face recognition,
whether a computer or a person does it. Another practical application is to help populate
face image datasets with images. If an aging model solves all three main obstacles for
FAM mentioned above, it will become much easier to populate these datasets with images
Face Age Progression Based on Generative Adversarial Networks
1
==PAGE:12==
of the same person at different ages. This addition will help boost the performance of
the face recognition systems (FRS), which train on face image datasets since it introduces
an age difference between input and reference face images.
Because FRSs are pivotal
for surveillance and other biometric applications, a boost in their performance indirectly
benefits many security applications. Populating datasets is also not just for training FRSs,
as it can be used to balance datasets, which will reduce biases of any model that trains
on face image datasets, such as gender predictors, GANs, or super-resolution modules.
There exist two branches of FAM methods: traditional 2D aging and newly emerging 3D
aging. The 2D aging method applies the aging simulation directly to face images. This
means that given an input of a face image taken from a certain angle, the output will
resemble this same viewing angle. This limits a potential use in, e.g., the search of missing
persons where one is limited to visualize the person’s appearance with the viewing angle of
the available images of that person. This factor does not limit 3D aging methods. These
methods use 3D GANs, which create a 3D representation of either a synthetic person or
a real input face image to which the aging patterns are simulated. The 3D representation
can then be rendered to a 2D image from any desired viewing angle. If the representation
is successful, the 3D aging method can be used for the missing person, which can now
be visualized from a frontal view regardless of the available images. The population of
datasets can also be further strengthened since mated samples of any age can be added
from different viewing angles.
The added benefits of 3D aging methods will, in turn,
further complicate the problem of the FAM task. It is now not only necessary to overcome
the three main challenges of FAM, but it has to be performed while accurately making a
3D representation of the input image.
1.1
Research Questions
This work addresses the initial three problems of aging accuracy, identity preservation,
and visual fidelity comparable to or better than state-of-the-art works and removes the
viewing angle limitation of 2D aging methods. This will be accomplished by extending
the Eﬀicient Geometry-aware 3D network (EG3D) [5], which is the most advanced work
in creating 3D views of faces from 2D images - whether in visual fidelity or rendering time.
While the EG3D framework produces stunning results, it requires extreme amounts of
training time. This work seeks to further develop the available pretrained model to leverage
that the training has already been completed. The framework is turned into a 3D aging
method by adding an age condition to control the age of the synthesized output.
The input to EG3D is a latent vector sampled from its latent space, which it synthesizes
to output a synthetic face. It is then possible to invert real face images by projecting the
input face to the latent space of EG3D. This work aims to control the age of the output
image for both synthetic face images and real face images that have been inverted to the
latent space.
This thesis seeks to find a state-of-the-art solution to the 3D FAM problem. This goal is
pursued by answering the following research questions:
1. Is it possible to add an age condition to the EG3D framework and re-train the model
without loss of the high visual fidelity of the original model?
2. After training the new age-conditioned EG3D model, age-EG3D, is it then possible
to generate a face-image and then change the subject’s age only by modifying the
added age condition? And is the identity of the subject retained in this process?
2
Face Age Progression Based on Generative Adversarial Networks
==PAGE:13==
3. Is it possible to use age-EG3D to edit the age of a real face by projecting the image
into the latent space of the GAN?
The necessary theory is presented in the following chapter to allow for an accurate descrip-
tion of this thesis’s findings. Related works to age-EG3D are then presented in Chapter 3
followed by a detailed description of the proposed model and implementation in Chapter 4.
The proposed model is evaluated and benchmarked against other state-of-the-art methods
outlined in Chapter 5. The results are followed by a discussion in Chapter 6, after which
the thesis is concluded with comments on possible future works in Chapter 7.
Face Age Progression Based on Generative Adversarial Networks
3
==PAGE:14==
4
Face Age Progression Based on Generative Adversarial Networks
==PAGE:15==
Chapter 2
Theory
This chapter explains the basic theory behind the various concepts utilized throughout
this thesis. In particular, the theory is explained from the perspective of applying it to
FAM.
2.1
Generative Adversarial Networks
GANs are used to generate synthetic data, with the goal of being indistinguishable from
the real data it was trained on. A GAN can be trained to generate, for example, synthetic
face images indistinguishable from real ones given enough time and the right training data
[6].
At its heart, a GAN works by pitting a generator network G and a discriminator network
D against each other in a two-player mini-max game, each improving the other as they
train separately [7].
The generator takes a latent vector z ∈Z as input.
It outputs
a synthetic image G(z), which should look like the images in the set of real images X
used for training by approximating a sample from the real-world distribution pX . The
generator needs feedback on how plausible its output G(z) is, which is the discriminator’s
job. The discriminator estimates the probability of how real an image appears, as given
by the discriminative score D(r), where r can either be the output of G(z) or any x ∈X.
GANs are frequently used to generate synthetic images but are not limited to that. This
thesis focuses on using GANs to generate synthetic images and, more specifically, synthetic
facial images. The generation of synthetic facial images is from now on the focus, and it
can be assumed that G(z) is a synthetic face, and x is a real face image from a set of real
face images X.
The training of a GAN is separated into two phases where G and D are trained separately.
When D trains, it is fed both real and synthetic face images generated by G. By back-
propagation, it learns to distinguish between real face images and face images generated
by G. When G trains, it tries to minimize log(1 −D(G(z))), which entails that G has suc-
cessfully fooled the discriminator. G(z) will become increasingly realistic as each network
improves.
The training phase can, as mentioned earlier, be seen as a mini-max and is expressed
mathematically in Equation (2.1) with value function V (D, G) [7].
min
G max
D V (D, G) = Ex∼pX
[
log(D(x))] + Ez∼pZ(z)[log(1 −D(G(z)))
]
(2.1)
Face Age Progression Based on Generative Adversarial Networks
5
==PAGE:16==
pX is the distribution describing the real face images X where x ∈X. pZ is the prior
probability distribution describing the latent space which z is drawn from. Equation (2.1)
states how the discriminator tries to maximize the expected log probability of correctly
identifying real and fake images while the generator attempts to minimize the log proba-
bility of D correctly identifying its fake images.
In Figure 2.1, a simple model diagram of a GAN’s training phase can be seen, illustrating
how the generator and discriminator of a GAN compete against each other. The genera-
tor’s training phase is outlined by the green square to symbolize how it generates a batch
of images evaluated by the discriminator. The generator loss is then back-propagated, up-
dating the weights of the generator. Similarly, the discriminator training phase is sketched
by the blue square. Here, the discriminator takes a batch of both real and fake images. By
backpropagation, it also improves the overall system at differentiating between real and
synthetic images.
Figure 2.1: The general structure of a GAN. The green and blue boxes outline the active
parts during the generator and discriminator’s training.
2.1.1
A GAN’s Latent Space
GANs create images by mapping from a simple latent space Z ⊆Rd to a much more
complex distribution pS ∼pX .
d denotes the number of dimensions of Z while X is
defined as the set of training images used to train the GAN, and pX its distribution. S
is then the set of synthetic images generated by G and pS its distribution. This thesis
defines a well-trained GAN as one whose generator can successfully map from Z to S such
that pS ≈pX . In other words, G(z) visually seems as an authentic part of X when G is
well-trained.
The latent space of a GAN is important since z controls the output of G. One randomly
sampled latent vector z1 might result in a woman with glasses while another z2 results
in a man with a beard. It is then possible to edit these synthetic images not only with
photo editing applications but also by manipulating the latent space of the GAN. An
example of simple editing could involve traversing an interpolated curve between z1 and
z2 in the latent space to demonstrate the transition between the two faces. The result of
interpolating would be sampling points on the curve and synthesizing those points. The
interpolation result for a well-trained GAN would be a woman with glasses that turns into
a man with a beard, where the facial semantics gradually change from one face to another
[8]. In this case, the factors of variation would be the noticeable facial semantics changes:
gender, eyewear, and facial hair.
The traversing between z1 and z2 should be a spherical interpolation [9] since it produces
6
Face Age Progression Based on Generative Adversarial Networks
==PAGE:17==
a sharper outcome as opposed to doing a linear interpolation [10].1
This is later used
in Section 5.2.5. The interpolated curve between z1 and z2 constitutes a direction in Z.
From this, it follows that a d-dimensional hyperplane in X which separates z1 from z2 is
also possible. As shown by Shen et al. [8], it turns out that for a specific semantic such
as gender, it is also possible to find a hyperplane in Z, which separates the latent space
such that, e.g., all males are on one side of the hyperplane and all females are on the other
when synthesized. The distance from a latent vector z to the hyperplane will determine
the strength of the specific semantic meaning if z is pushed further from the hyperplane,
the semantic feature increases, and vice versa. The gender of G(z) will then also change
once z is pushed past the hyperplane [8]. Manipulating the latent space of a well-trained
GAN is, therefore, one way to edit the facial attributes of a synthesized face image; that
is, by pushing the latent vector in a specific direction.
It also turns out that a latent space of a GAN where the interpolation between z1 and
z2 exhibits a smooth, gradual change between G(z1) and G(z2) is analogous with a well-
trained GAN [8]. This is the case since the smooth change from the interpolation between
G(z1) and G(z2) corresponds to a disentangled latent space of the GAN [11]. Disentangled
means that the factors of variation are separated in the GAN’s latent space. These factors
are, as mentioned, the semantic facial properties noticeable for human perception, i.e.,
hairstyle, gender, eyewear, etc. A disentangled latent space will be easier to control in the
sense that pushing the latent vector in a specific direction will take it from one factor of
variation (for example, male) to another (for example, female).
It is possible to visually inspect the degree of disentanglement of a GAN’s latent space by
visualizing G(z1) and G(z2) and the images generated from latent vector sampled from
the interpolated curve between two endpoints. A GAN with a heavily entangled latent
space will display factors of variation on the interpolated images that are not present in
either of the endpoints. Conversely, only properties from both endpoints will be visible
on the interpolated images if the latent space is perfectly disentangled [11].
2.1.2
Truncation Trick
In most GAN works, it has become standard to sample z from a normal distribution
N(0, 1) even though z can be drawn from any distribution. Most state-of-the-art GAN
projects sample from N(0, 1), but the generator will, after training, sometimes struggle
to generate photo-realistic images when presented with values far from the mean value as
opposed to values closer to the mean. This is a result of having seen fewer of these values
during training simply due to the lower chance of sampling a value from a low-density
region of N(0, 1).
A way to instantly improve the visual fidelity of the output of a trained generator is to
use the truncation trick [12]. Here, a threshold is predefined, and all absolute values of z
greater than the threshold are re-sampled until all are within the threshold. In this way,
the generator avoids working with lower probability density regions in Z, and the visual
fidelity is improved [12]. This will effectively limit the output variance of the generator,
and there is, therefore, a trade-off between visual fidelity and diversity when using the
truncation trick.
2.2
GAN Inversion
A well-trained GAN’s ability to generate photo-realistic synthetic face images and alter
facial attributes by changing the latent code in a certain direction can be used to, for
example, populate a facial image database. However, none of the desirable properties of
1See Appendix B.1 for details about the interpolation formulas.
Face Age Progression Based on Generative Adversarial Networks
7
==PAGE:18==
GANs can be utilized on real face images. This problem is addressed by a GAN inversion,
which is used to project a real face image to the latent space of a GAN.
The aim of a GAN inversion is to take a real face image x and invert it to a latent vector
z∗so that the reconstruction G(z∗) resembles the input image as much as possible. This
can formally be described by Equation (2.2).
z∗= arg min
z
l(x, G(z))
(2.2)
Here, l(·, ·) is some form of a distance measure between two images, which should be
minimized. The weights of G are frozen throughout the process. The frozen weights mean
that the weights/parameters of the network are not allowed to be further modified. The
result of a GAN inversion for a well-trained GAN should be that x is visually similar, if
not nearly identical, to G(z∗).
l(·, ·) can be based on the ℓ1 or ℓ2 norm, but these distance measures are inadequate for
comparing the perceptual distance between images, i.e., how similar images are based
on human judgment.
The reason is that the ℓ1 or ℓ2 norm compares each individual
pixel in the two images, making the comparison pixel-wise independent. A better option
is instead to use a perceptual distance measure such as the Learned Perceptual Image
Patch Similarity (LPIPS)[13]. LPIPS works by using a deep neural network’s activation
functions to compare the perceptual similarity of two images. Each image is used as input
to the neural network, and the activation functions of the final layer are then compared
using the ℓ2 norm, resulting in a perceptual similarity measure almost as good as human
perception [13].
Finding a good solution to a GAN inversion described in Equation (2.2) is not a trivial task
and can generally be categorized into optimization-, encoder- and hybrid-based methods.
2.2.1
Optimization-based Method
The optimization-based method to solving the problem of GAN inversions is based on
optimizing a latent vector z to minimize the objective function in Equation (2.2). Using
gradient descent, the optimization would start by choosing a latent vector z and running
until the distance measure l(·, ·) is below a predefined threshold, or a specified number of
iterations is reached.
The choice of starting value for the latent vector z can greatly influence the results of the
inversion, as depending on the starting point, the optimization method might end up at a
local minimum. It can therefore be necessary to run the inversion several times from dif-
ferent starting points, which makes an already computationally expensive task even more
expensive. Optimization-based methods have shown essentially perfect reconstruction of
real face images, as shown by Abdal et al. [14], but suffer from a long run-time.
2.2.2
Encoder-based Method
The encoder-based method improves the run-time of the previous method once it has been
trained. The method revolves around training an encoder E : X →Z to map from the
image space to the lower dimensional latent space of the generator. The weights of the
encoder θE should then be trained so G(E(x; θE)) ≈x. This can be formally described
as solving the problem given in Equation (2.3) [15] during a training phase.
θ∗
E = arg min
θE
N
∑
i=1
L(G(E(xi; θE)), xi)
(2.3)
8
Face Age Progression Based on Generative Adversarial Networks
==PAGE:19==
In Equation (2.3), xi would be the i’th image in a training data set of size N and L would
be a fitting loss function to estimate the difference between G(E(xi; θE)) and xi. This
could, for example, be the LPIPS distance measure.
2.2.3
Hybrid Methods
There is still a clear gap in both results and run-time of the optimization- and encoder-
based methods. The optimization-based methods produce higher-quality reconstructions,
while encoder-based methods produce much faster reconstructions but of lower quality.
The hybrid method tries to bridge this gap by using both methods. The idea is first to use
an encoder trained as described above to generate a latent code. This latent code is then
used as the starting point for an optimization-based method. Since the initial latent code
is no longer randomly sampled but a better starting point, the optimization task should
be easier to solve and, thereby, faster.
2.2.4
Alternative Methods
All of the above solutions will keep the weights of G frozen throughout the process while
trying to find a z∗that, when reconstructed, resembles the input image x. This means that
the method assumes that there exists a z∗such that G is able to synthetically generate x.
This assumption is disregarded in a new type of solution to the inversion problem.
There are generally two steps in these solutions. First, G is fixed while an optimization-
based method is used to find a z∗to get the best solution with the current version of
G. In the next phase, the weights of G are then unfrozen while z∗will now remain un-
changed. The goal is then to modify the weights of G so that an updated version of G
now exactly resembles the x when given z∗. Formally, this is to solve the problem given
in Equation (2.4).
θ∗
G = arg min
θG
L(G(z∗; θG), x)
(2.4)
This type of solution to the GAN inversion problem has been shown to produce excellent
results, as shown by Feng et al. [16], and Roich et al. [17].
2.3
Face Age Manipulation
FAM is the process of adjusting the appearances and properties of a synthetic or real
face image while maintaining the subject’s identity, such that it, ideally, mimics how the
subject would age in reality. Traditionally, this process involves forensic artists, who use
old images, images of parents, and knowledge of the aging process and bone structures
in the face to make drawings of what a subject’s face may look like after a number of
years [18]. With the advent of computers, “manual” methods of face-aging came to the
forefront, chief among these being physical models and prototype-based methods. Physical
models work by simulating biomechanical aging patterns of bones, facial muscles, and
skin, but they come at a great computational cost. On the other hand, prototype-based
methods fuse the average face of an age group with a person’s face, which is much faster
at the cost of losing the identity of the subject [19]. However, deep learning models have
been developed to overcome the aforementioned limitations. GANs have been especially
successful, outperforming traditional approaches in visual fidelity, aging accuracy, and
identity preservation [19].
FAM can be divided into two categories. The first category aims to simulate going from a
young to an older age, known as face age progression (FAP). The second category is the
inverse operation of simulating a de-aging effect, known as face age regression (FAR).
There are several methods within FAM of simulating aging/de-aging, which can be divided
into the following categories of deep learning methods:
Face Age Progression Based on Generative Adversarial Networks
9
==PAGE:20==
• Translation-based methods
• Sequence-based methods
• Condition-based methods
2.3.1
Translation-based
Translation-based FAP methods are inspired by the architecture of Cycle-GAN [20]. They
are generally image-to-image translation GANs, meaning that their input is an image
instead of a latent vector.2
They operate by converting the “style” of one age group
to the “style” of another. They do so by having two generators, GX and GY , and two
discriminators, DX and DY . GY will translate the input image x from domain X, which
could be an age group from 10-20 years old, to the domain Y , which could be an age group
from 30-40 years old while GX does the opposite. DX and DY will then be fed synthesized
images from GX and GY , respectively, along with real images from their target domain X
and Y , respectively. The discriminators estimate whether the image is real or synthetic.
Since they only train on images from one age domain, they guide the generators toward
outputting images within that domain.
Because there is no need for mated samples (younger and older images of the same person),
this model has a tremendous advantage over more traditional methods.
2.3.2
Sequence-based
Unlike other FAP methods, sequence-based methods transform faces only from one age
group to adjacent age groups. For aging across several age groups at once, a sequence-
based method sequentially transforms the face to each intermediary age group in sequential
order until it reaches the desired age group. This aims to capture how the effects of aging
often increase in complexity the more time that goes by. The main disadvantage of this
method is the number of networks that must be trained to translate between each adjacent
age group, which is computationally expensive.
2.3.3
Condition-based
Condition-based FAP methods work by injecting an age condition y to the network3, which
is then considered as the target age for the synthesized image. It is possible to inject the
condition to both G and D or only G. The age condition will always have to be injected
to G as it generates the image that resembles the given age label y. G(z|y) will then be
the synthesized image with input z conditioned on y.
When y is only injected to G, the ages of the synthesized face images are estimated, and a
dedicated age loss function ensures that the synthesized images resemble the specified age
group. The face age estimation is explained in the following section. D is then preserved
to only focus on the visual fidelity of the output and not the age.
The loss function
then pushes the network towards synthesizing images where the subject’s age matches a
predefined condition. In contrast to sequence-based methods, this allows for much higher
eﬀiciency, as one network can handle transformations between any age group. A GAN
that is conditioned is known as a conditional generative adversarial network, or cGAN
[21].
When the age condition is both injected to G and D, D is now not only concerned with
the visual fidelity of its input but also if the input fulfills the injected condition y. D
learns whether the input fits with y since it is also conditioned on y. In the discriminator
2The GANs described up until this point has been noise-to-image GANs since they take a latent vector
(resembling noise) as input.
3The age condition is typically (but not necessarily) a vector, which is why y is marked in bold.
10
Face Age Progression Based on Generative Adversarial Networks
==PAGE:21==
training phase, a real input face image x will be linked with a true age condition since
the age of x is known. The synthetic images will also be linked with an age condition,
either randomly generated or sampled from the true ages. Through back-propagation, D
learns to distinguish whether an image is real or fake and if it fits its age condition. This
means D increases its discriminative score if the input appears real and resembles the age
condition. As G tries to fool D, in the generator training phase, it is also forced to generate
synthetic images resembling the age given by y since it increases the discriminative score.
Therefore, the mini-max game between G and D is now described by Equation (2.5).
min
G max
D V (D, G) = Ex∼pX
[
log(D(x|y))] + Ez∼pZ(z)[log(1 −D(G(z|y)| y))
]
(2.5)
Since D learns to discriminate based on the age condition, this also means that the loss
function of G does not have to be explicitly augmented with an age term as for the
prementioned case when y is only injected to G.
The age label can be injected to the network in various ways, but it is generally common
to do it in a one-hot-encoded fashion [19]. In image-to-image translation, the age label can
be added as a one-hot-encoded tensor of size W × H × ncat, which is then concatenated to
the input image in the image channel dimension with W the image width, H the height
of the image and ncat the number of age categories.
The above method is not possible for noise-to-image GANs since there is no input image.
Instead, the age label must be added in other ways. One possibility is to concatenate the
input of G and D with the conditioning information. A one-hot-encoded vector of length
ncat, where the entry with value ‘1’ specifies the target age group, can be concatenated
with z for G(z|y). For D(x|y), the condition can be added as described above for image-
to-image translation. Another method is to feed the age label into some of the network’s
hidden layers.
A vital part of the condition-based method is the accuracy of the age condition. In methods
where y is only injected to G, it is especially important to accurately evaluate the age of
the synthesized face image. The synthesized image will not resemble the target age given
by the condition if the predicted age of the synthesized face image is inaccurate. Accurate
results are, therefore, only viable if the method used to predict the age is accurate. This
is also made possible in recent years with deep learning methods, as explained below in
Section 2.4.
Lastly, note that this work is a condition-based model, partially due to the existing struc-
ture of EG3D, which it extends, but also due to the advantages of a condition-based over
the other methods: there is only one generator network, rather than multiple and it is
automatically capable of aging and de-aging.
2.4
Face Age Estimation
Face age estimation is the process of labeling a face image with an age value or categorizing
it into an age group. It is a complex task as everybody ages differently, whether due to
genetics or external factors such as environment and lifestyle [22]. While the aging process
is unique and differs from person to person, there are still some aging patterns as one grows
older that are general [23], for example, wrinkles as one grows older, which is one of many
patterns that can be learned by an age estimation model.
Aging in the childhood stage is primarily influenced by craniofacial growth, while this is
less significant in adulthood, where aging is carried by textural changes to the skin [24].
This difference in aging patterns from child- to adulthood can affect a face age estimation
Face Age Progression Based on Generative Adversarial Networks
11
==PAGE:22==
model’s ability to predict an accurate age for both children and adults. This is also why
many FAP methods are trained to work exclusively on either children or adults [19].
The vast majority of traditional face estimation models follows the same overall pipeline. A
face image is given as input, aging features are extracted from the image, and an estimation
is made based on the extracted features. How to extract and evaluate the features varies.
A traditional approach is, e.g., anthropometric modeling, which extracts landmarks from
the face (eyes, mouth, etc.) and then estimates the age using the distances between these
landmarks. Deep learning methods have, in recent years, been shown to outperform the
traditional methods [25].
Deep learning face age estimation does not explicitly work by extracting features. Here, the
pipeline is more commonly divided into three steps: detection, alignment, and estimation.
2.4.1
Detection
Face detection is the process of detecting the faces present in a given input image. A
successful output of running a detection model will be bounding boxes that frames all
the faces in the image. State-of-the-art methods use deep convolutional neural networks
(CNNs) [26]. The CNNs will typically be used in a cascading manner where a starting
shallow CNN estimates the bounding boxes followed by a cascade of increasingly complex
CNNs rejecting empty boxes. Fast detections are made possible using cascading since the
more complex CNNs are only used if the faster previous CNN finds a face. The networks
are then typically trained using an ℓ2 loss function comparing the output bounding boxes
to ground truths specified in the training data.
2.4.2
Alignment
A detected face is typically aligned so that it is centered and facial landmarks are approxi-
mately positioned in the same place for all faces. This step is meant to increase estimation
performance since the model can assume consistency in the placement of facial landmarks.
For face alignment, deep learning methods have, in recent years, proved to be the better
choice in terms of speed and precision compared to traditional methods [27]. The deep
learning networks will typically use a CNN-based structure to learn how to predict facial
landmarks, such as the mouth and eyes, in a cascade-like manner. An aﬀine or similarity
transformation can then be made to center the image with knowledge of the placement of
facial landmarks. The image can then be cropped to keep a predefined margin beside the
face.
2.4.3
Estimation
Once the face image has been aligned and cropped, it is common to use deep CNNs such
as VGG-16 [28] to estimate the age given the aligned and cropped image. The problem
can either be a regression task where the output of the CNN is a single age value or a
classification task where the output is a set of age ranges. The network is then trained on
age-labeled face images using a fitting loss function such as mean absolute error.
The three considered estimation methods in this thesis are yu4u [29], FPAge [30], and a
commercial off-the-shelf face recognition system, which also enables age estimation. The
latter will be referred to as cognitec [31] throughout the thesis.
The model buildup of yu4u is inspired by “Deep Expectation of Real and Apparent Age
from a Single Image Without Facial Landmarks”, or DEX [32]. yu4u uses the Squeeze and
Excitation ResNet-50 network [33] as a backbone. The model trains on images that have
all gone through these simple pre-processing steps:
12
Face Age Progression Based on Generative Adversarial Networks
==PAGE:23==
1. A face is detected using Mathias et. al’s face detector [34] at different rotations. The
rotated face with the highest detection probability is used in the next step.
2. A 40% margin is left beside the detected face. The rotated and cropped image is
resized to a 3 × 224 × 224 image, which is used as input to the model.
The network is modified, so the final layer consists of 101 output-neurons o corresponding
to 101 age ranges from 0-1, 1-2, …, 100-101. The predicted age ˆy of a subject is then found
by
ˆy =
100
∑
i=0
i · oi
(2.6)
where oi is the i’th output neuron.
FPAge also uses the ResNet-50 network as a backbone, and generally follow the same
structure of yu4u to obtain a prediction. However, it uses a retina face predictor [35] in
its pre-processing step to detect faces. It then uses RoI Tanh-polar transform [36] to warp
the input image as input for the network.
As previously mentioned, cognitec is a commercial product which has several applications,
such as face recognition and gender estimation, but is only used for age estimation in this
thesis. It is a leader in age estimation, and performs best “in the youth and senior age
groups, leading the next most accurate algorithm in 5-year accuracy by 30% and 16%,
respectively” [37] .
2.5
Face Recognition Systems
Deep CNNs have become essential to many biometric applications, such as age estima-
tion. That is also the case for FRSs that utilize their abilities. A deep FRS generally
follows the pipeline: detection, alignment, feature extraction, and then feature compari-
son. The detection and alignment step are equivalent to the description in Section 2.4.1
and 2.4.2, respectively. Although many other methods exist [38], this section only covers
deep learning face recognition.
Comparison of feature vectors is a key part of a FRS and its performance and includes
the process of extracting a feature vector f ∈Rd. f should be able to embed a person’s
identity in the d-dimensional feature space. It should do so in such a way that when a non-
mated comparison of a feature vector of one subject f 1 is compared to the feature vector
of another subject f 2, the comparison score should be low. Conversely, the comparison
score for a mated comparison between two feature vectors from the same subject should
be high.
Like with age estimation models, a deep CNN is often used as a backbone to extract the
features. The input is typically a cropped and aligned face image, which is fed to the
network. The last fully connected layer in the network is then the output feature vector
f ∈Rd. This means that the number of neurons in the last fully connected layer decides
the size of the d-dimensional embedding space.
It is common to use the cosine similarity given by Equation (2.7) as the comparison score
between two feature vectors, which is also the case in this thesis. The result of SC(f 1, f 2)
is in the range [−1, 1] where 1 means f 1 and f 2 are identical and −1 means f 1 and f 2
are opposite.
SC(A, B) =
A · B
||A|| · ||B||
(2.7)
Face Age Progression Based on Generative Adversarial Networks
13
==PAGE:24==
2.6
Evaluation and Metrics
There are many different ways that a FAM model can be evaluated. These are typically
divided into three categories: age accuracy, visual fidelity, and identity preservation [19],
as these are namely the goals of age manipulation. Note that for each of these categories,
it is possible to use surveys to measure the quality. However, as this can be both resource
and time-consuming, it has been determined as out of scope for this thesis and is not
considered.
2.6.1
Age Accuracy
Age accuracy indicates how well a face carries the characteristics of a typical face at that
age. Typically, this is done with an age estimation model predicting the age of the subject
and comparing it to the intended age of the subject. Although more advanced age estima-
tion models can achieve a mean absolute error as low as two years, being more accurate is
a challenge because the effects of aging can vary greatly from person to person depending
on lifestyle, ethnicity, gender, and so on [4], as explained previously in Section 2.4.
Mean Absolute Error and Standard Deviation
The mean absolute error (MAE) gives, as the name implies, the mean absolute difference
between predicted ages ˆy and target ages y of n synthetic faces as shown in Equation (2.8).
MAE = 1
n
n
∑
i=1
(|yi −ˆyi|)
(2.8)
The spread of the error is also of interest, which is given the standard deviation of the
absolute error, as seen in Equation (2.9), where std refers to the standard deviation of a
list of numbers.
σ = std(|y −ˆy|)
(2.9)
Correlation
Ideally, the perceived age of the subject should increase with the target age. Therefore,
they should be linearly correlated, which can be measured with the Pearson correlation
coeﬀicient. This helps to avoid rare situations where there may be a relatively low MAE,
but the perceived and target age do not correlate very strongly.
For two random variables X and Y with standard deviation σX and σY and mean µX and
µY , respectively, the Pearson correlation coeffecient ρX,Y is given by Equation (2.10).
ρX,Y = E[(X −µX)(Y −µX)]
σXσY
(2.10)
The true mean and variance of a distribution are rarely known, which is why the sample
Pearson correlation coeﬀicient rxy is commonly used. For n paired data points
{(x1, y1), . . . , (xn, yn)},
rxy is given by
rxy =
∑n
i=1(xi −µx)(yi −µy)
√∑n
i=1(xi −µx)2√∑n
i=1(yi −µy)2
(2.11)
where µx and µy are the sample means.
Cumulative Score
The cumulative score (CS) refers to the percentage of data points with an absolute error
above a certain threshold. A CS with a threshold of 5 is denoted as CS5, a threshold of
10 is denoted CS10, and so on.
14
Face Age Progression Based on Generative Adversarial Networks
==PAGE:25==
2.6.2
Visual Fidelity
For FAM, visual fidelity describes how photo-realistic an age-manipulated face image looks
to a human. Because there is no objective, fast way to measure this, several other metrics
have been proposed to approximate such a quality measure. The primary metric used in
this paper is the Frechet Inception Distance (FID) [39].
The FID is typically used to measure the distance between two multivariate normal distri-
butions N(µ, Σ) and N ′(µ′, Σ′), the formula for which is shown in Equation (2.12), where
tr is the trace function.
FID
(
N(µ, Σ), N ′(µ′, Σ′)
)2 = ||µ −µ′||2
2 + tr
(
Σ + Σ′ −2
(√
Σ · Σ′ ·
√
Σ
) 1
2
)
(2.12)
In the case of image generation, high-dimensional feature vectors are extracted from the
generated images, and the training dataset with an Inception-v3 classifier [40]. These two
sets of feature vectors each have a multivariate normal distribution, which is estimated
and compared using Equation (2.12). A low FID score corresponds to high visual fidelity
and vice versa. The Inception-v3 classifier is used as it is trained to classify objects in
images. In other words, it is trained to mimic human perception of objects in images. If
two sets of feature vectors’ distributions are close, it is then likely that the two sets are
images of the same thing, i.e., face images.
The FID score is particularly well suited to evaluate GANs because it measures the dis-
tance between two distributions. As described in Section 2.1, a GAN tries to capture the
statistics of the training set such that pS ≈pX . When this is accomplished, the output of
G will visually appear as an authentic part of X even though it is from S. This will only
be the case when the distance from pS to pX is short. This makes the FID an excellent
measure of visual fidelity as it approximates this distance.
Images generated with different 3D GANs are shown in Figure 2.2 to give the reader an
understanding of what an FID score means in terms of visual fidelity (images from [5]).
The models shown in Figure 2.2 are described in detail in Section 3.3. By closer inspection,
it is clear that the outputs of GIRAFFE [41] and π-GAN [42] exhibit a much lower visual
fidelity than EG3D. The FID score captures this as it is significantly lower for EG3D
compared to the other two. The output of GIRAFFE is blurry, while π-GAN appears
comic-book-like. However, EG3D appears extremely lifelike and could easily fool anyone
into thinking that it is not, in fact, a synthetic image.
Figure 2.2: Visualization of different FIDs for different 3D GANs. The FID scores are
listed in parentheses next to the model name.
MagFace is a face recognition model which embeds images of faces in a latent space. These
embeddings then have a magnitude that correlates with the quality of the face, i.e., how
Face Age Progression Based on Generative Adversarial Networks
15
==PAGE:26==
likely it is to be recognized. This is mathematically and experimentally proven by Meng
et al. [43]. The magnitude of the embedding can then be used to evaluate the quality of a
facial image in the context of biometric recognition. The magnitude of the embedding is in
this thesis labeled as the MagFace score. Although this is not strictly a measure of visual
fidelity, a low MagFace score might indicate occlusion from visual artifacts or low-quality
unrealistic faces. In that way, it is used as an indirect measure of visual fidelity since
artifacts are the main reason a synthetic image looks unrealistic.
Finally, there is also the “3D accuracy” of a model, which in the context of this thesis refers
to how accurately a 3D GAN models views of a face from different angles. Metrics for 3D
accuracy include multi-view identity consistency of the subject, geometrical quality, and
pose accuracy [5]. Because the focus of this thesis is on aging accuracy, these metrics are
not implemented. Instead, FID is used as a proxy for 3D accuracy, as well as exploratory
analysis on age-EG3D’s output.
2.6.3
Identity Preservation
An important goal of FAM is that the fundamental facial properties of an individual,
which make them recognizable and unique, remain as aging is simulated. Two types of
face identity comparison are face verification and face identification [19]. Face verification
deals with one-to-one comparisons, for example, by measuring the distance or similarity
between the embeddings of two face images from a well-trained face recognition model
like ArcFace [19, 44].
On the other hand, face identification deals with one-to-many
comparison, where a generated image’s comparison score with all reference images in the
dataset is ranked. This thesis will only use face verification for reconstructed faces against
themselves for different age parameters.
The metric used in this thesis to measure identity preservation is the comparison score
between feature vectors. The comparison score is found using cosine similarity given by
Equation (2.7). The feature vectors for face images are extracted either via MagFace or
ArcFace, and it will be noted which is used.
2.7
Pose Intrinsics and Extrinsics
Images are a common domain for many deep-learning methods, and among those are
generative models like GANs. Cameras are as known used to capture images and map
from the real-world 3D scene to the 2D plane of images. This section briefly introduces
the pose intrinsic and extrinsic matrices used in this process since it is an essential part
of the proposed model, while a deeper understanding of it is unnecessary.
The information from the viewpoint of a camera taking an image is usually divided into
intrinsic and extrinsic camera parameters. The extrinsic camera parameters involve the
location and orientation of the camera, i.e., yaw, pitch, and roll. These camera parameters
map from the real-world 3D scene to the camera’s 3D coordinate system. This is done
with a 4 × 4 extrinsic matrix.
The intrinsic matrix then maps from the camera coordinate system to an image by project-
ing the 3D point in the camera coordinate system to the image plane. The intrinsic camera
parameters involve information about the camera itself, such as focal length, aperture, etc.
This information is stored in a 3 × 3 intrinsic matrix.
The real-world 3D scene can be translated into a 2D image using these extrinsic and
intrinsic matrices. These two matrices are collectively labeled as the camera parameters
P ∈R25, and so the camera parameters are used to map the 3D to a 2D image.
16
Face Age Progression Based on Generative Adversarial Networks
==PAGE:27==
Chapter 3
Related Work
Although the manner in which this work creates an age and pose-conditioned 3D age
network is unique, the concept itself is not. This thesis is naturally inspired by many
others and has an end goal similar to many other works. This chapter describes some state-
of-the-art works to give the reader a stronger and more specific background knowledge on
the subject now that the foundational concepts have been explained in Chapter 2.
3.1
StyleGAN2
There are several ways to obtain aging effects on face images, but GANs have, in recent
years, produced the most impressive results in terms of visual fidelity. GANs are able to
generate a completely photo-realistic synthetic facial image, even indistinguishable from
real face images by human perception [45]. This is best showcased by StyleGAN2 from
Karras et al. [6], where the generated images at most times are indistinguishable from
a real face with a very high resolution.
StyleGAN2 maps the latent vector z ∈Z to
an intermediate latent space w ∈W before feeding it into its generator. An important
property of W is that it is more disentangled than Z, which makes for a better GAN in
terms of controllability [6].
StyleGAN2 is not a FAM method by design, as its purpose is only to generate synthetic
facial images. But it can be used to create the aging effect of subjects along with the ma-
nipulation of other facial attributes such as gender and pose. One way to use StyleGAN2
for FAM, or any other pre-trained GAN, is shown by Shen et al. [8] with their Inter-
FaceGAN framework. The authors show that by freezing the weights of the pre-trained
GAN, it is possible to analyze the GAN’s latent space to edit a subject’s facial attributes
effectively. This is possible because the GAN encodes the different facial attributes in its
latent space. These can then be separated, and an aging effect can be obtained by moving
the latent code in a specific direction as described in Section 2.1.1. To use this effect on
a real image, one must first invert the image to the latent space of the GAN as described
in Section 2.2.
3.1.1
Architecture
Much of the network architecture of StyleGAN2 is reused in EG3D. Therefore, it makes
sense to describe the architecture of StyleGAN2 in greater detail.
Like StyleGAN2’s
predecessor StyleGAN [11], StyleGAN2 separates itself from traditional GANs by using a
mapping network M to translate z to an intermediate latent vector w ∈W. A constant
learned input is then used at the beginning of the generator, as opposed to the traditional
latent vector. Convolutions are applied to the constant learned input, and w is then, by
Face Age Progression Based on Generative Adversarial Networks
17
==PAGE:28==
an aﬀine transformation, injected to a style block in the generator network and combined
with the output of the convolution. In this way, w is used to style the synthesized image
[6].
The mapping network M : Z →W will map a latent vector z to an intermediate latent
vector w. The StyleGAN2 generator G : W →S then synthesizes an image G(w) with
w as input. For simplicity, G(z) and G(w) will both in this thesis be interpreted as a
synthetic image. For G(z), it is implicit that z has first been mapped to a w and is
equivalent of G(M(z)). However, the mapping notion of M is omitted. G(w) implies
that w has already been found by w = M(z). This simplification is introduced for easier
readability since G(z) often appears throughout the thesis.
There are, as a standard, 18 different style blocks in StyleGAN2 where each takes a
w ∈R512 as input. The extended latent space of StyleGAN2 W+ is the concatenation of
each of the 18 w’s used as input for the style blocks. These w’s can be identical, or styles
from mappings of different z’s can be mixed by, e.g., mapping z1 and z2 to w1 and w2,
respectively, and using w1 as input for a portion of the style blocks and w2 for the rest.
Finally, noise is added after each style block to add random variation to the synthesized
images. This could, for instance, be the placement of freckles as it changes the image but
not noticeably [6].
3.1.2
StyleGAN2 truncation
While StyleGAN2 produces incredibly life-like synthetic face images, the authors further
increase visual fidelity by a variation of the truncation trick described in Section 2.1.2.
Their variation was first described in StyleGAN [11] and reused in their following works.
Their truncation starts by computing ¯
w, the center of mass of W. This is given by
¯
w = Ez∼pZ[M(z)]
(3.1)
¯
w can be seen as a sort of average face [11]. In the implementation of StyleGAN, ¯
w is
continuously updated during training by making a linear interpolation between the current
¯
w and latent vectors w used in training. In that way, ¯
w becomes an average of all w’s
used in training, making it an average face.
A truncation factor ψ is used to control how much any given w is scaled closer to ¯
w. The
truncated latent code w′ is given by
w′ = ¯
w + ψ(w −¯
w)
(3.2)
where ψ < 1. w′ is then pushed closer towards ¯
w as ψ decreases, which is equivalent to
pushing it towards higher probability regions of W. As described in Section 2.1.2, the
truncation factor can balance the trade-off between face image quality and diversity.
3.2
FAM Methods
The GAN approaches dedicated to FAM are generally found to be 2D GANs. This section
will outline some of these approaches, which show state-of-the-art performance.
3.2.1
High-Resolution Face Age Editing (HRFAE)
The High-Resolution Face Age Editing model (HRFAE) by Yao et al.[2] is an image-to-
image condition-based network with an encoder-decoder structure. It decodes a face image
to a latent space, appends the desired age, and then decodes this vector to reconstruct
the face at a certain age. It has several facets which make it novel in its approach. Firstly,
18
Face Age Progression Based on Generative Adversarial Networks
==PAGE:29==
it uses the same network for aging and de-aging. Secondly, it uses a feature modulation
layer that interacts directly with the latent space for continuous age values. Third, the
discriminator is not given the age condition and focuses only on the photo-realism of
the generated image. Fourth, it uses the FFHQ dataset (later described in Section 4.2.2),
which consists of 1024×1024 resolution images, and outputs images in the same resolution.
This is much higher than the output resolutions of previous works, which had resolutions
as low as 128 × 128. This results in a network with not only better age accuracy but also
much better visual fidelity than previous works.
3.2.2
Only a Matter of Style
The Style-based Age Manipulation model (SAM), by Alaluf et al. [3], is another image-to-
image condition-based network that utilizes StyleGAN2 to make an image-to-image age
editing model. It works by training a network to encode the original image to the W+
latent space of StyleGAN2, feeding it through StyleGAN2 to get an output image, and
then returning age loss and identity loss. There are three different identity loss terms,
LL2, LLIPS, and LID, which are calculated using, respectively, the pixel-wise ℓ2 distance,
perceptual LPIPS distance, and ArcFace cosine distance (weighted by age difference). Like
HRFAE, it uses a modification of the FFHQ dataset; the FFHQ-Aging dataset [46]. The
result is a model with very high visual fidelity and age accuracy, even better than HRFAE,
with comparable identity preservation to other, more identity-focused models.
3.2.3
Custom Structure Preservation in Face Aging (CUSP)
The Custom Structure Preservation model (CUSP) from Gomez-Trenado et al. [1] takes
an entirely new approach to face age manipulation by introducing scalable structure preser-
vation of the face. The authors argue that as people age in different, non-deterministic
ways - some having drastic changes in facial structure, while others barely have any - it
justifies allowing the user to determine the degree of structural change themselves. Not
only does this model boast the best age accuracy of all models mentioned above, but the
image quality is also comparable, if slightly worse, than that of HRFAE. Its disadvan-
tages are relatively low identity preservation and resolution, even with a high structural
preservation term. The structural preservation terms are set as global_blur_val = 0.2
and mask_blur_val = 0.8 when used in this thesis, as suggested and used by the oﬀicial
implementation.
3.3
3D GANs
3D GANs have recently been used to synthesize face images from different poses due to
the diﬀiculty of gathering a dataset of controlled images of people from different views.
GANs excel in this area as they do not have such rigid requirements as for the training
images. This section describes three such models.
3.3.1
Eﬀicient Geometry-aware 3D GAN (EG3D)
The main goal of EG3D [5] is to eﬀiciently create a 3D representation of a face given a
latent representation of a 2D image. This is achieved by mapping points in the latent
space to a tri-plane representation with a modified StyleGAN2 network.
Given a camera parameter P consisting of 25 elements, as explained in Section 2.7, the
relevant information is extracted from the tri-plane (shown in the model diagram in Fig-
ure 3.1 and further explained in Section 3.3.1) and rendered into a low-resolution image
with the neural volume renderer. The low-resolution image is then upscaled using a super-
resolution model. The final image is then analyzed by a modified StyleGAN2 discriminator
[5], which is used to compute the generator and discriminator loss, LG and LD, respec-
tively.
A model diagram of EG3D is shown in Figure 3.1.
As EG3D uses a slightly
Face Age Progression Based on Generative Adversarial Networks
19
==PAGE:30==
modified version of the StyleGAN2 generator, the same notation of synthetic images G(z)
will be used as described in Section 3.1.1.
Figure 3.1: A model diagram from the EG3D paper [5].
It is the EG3D model that this thesis extends, as it exhibits by far the highest image
quality and 3D quality. The following sections explain the key parts of the EG3D model.
Tri-plane Hybrid Representation
The tri-plane hybrid representation is a novel approach to representing 3D scenes in a way
that is both eﬀicient and expressive compared to other representations, which are memory-
intensive and slow [5]. At its core, the tri-plane hybrid representation compresses a 3D
scene into three orthogonal multi-channel planes. The location on the plane represents
information about the scene relevant to the corresponding camera angle. To generate the
tri-plane representation of an image, a modified version of StyleGAN2’s generator is used,
which maps a latent vector w to a 256×256×96 feature image, which is split channel-wise
into the 3 planes of dimensionality 256 × 256 × 32. For a given camera parameter P , the
corresponding feature vector (Fxy, Fxz, Fyz) is then extracted with bilinear interpolation,
which can then be used by the neural renderer to create a 32 channel feature image IF [5],
shown in Figure 3.1.
Super-resolution
Although the tri-plane representation is very eﬀicient and lightweight compared to other
3D models, it is still too slow to train and render at high resolutions. Therefore, the neural
renderer produces a feature-image IF with 32 channels, as previously mentioned, but with
a resolution of only 128×128. This is then scaled up to a 512×512×3 RGB image I+
F by
the super-resolution module [5]. Additionally, the model is able to start at a lower neural
rendering resolution of, for example, 64 × 64 and then slowly increase neural rendering
resolution up to 128 × 128 as it trains, which greatly increases training speed.
Dual Discrimination
Because EG3D includes a super-resolution module, which is trained from scratch, it is
important to ensure consistency between the low resolution IF and the higher resolution
image I+
F . This is done by dual discrimination, whereby the first 3 channels of IF are
interpreted as RGB, upscaled and concatenated to I+
F , and compared to a 6-channel real
image, generated by concatenating a blurred real image to itself. Not only does this ensure
consistency between IF and I+
F , but it also encourages the neural rendering to match the
downsampled real images. Lastly, the camera parameters are passed to the discriminator
to better guide the generator in learning 3D information.
Pose Conditioning
The generator and discriminator of EG3D are both designed to handle pose conditions
so that the camera position can be adjusted. This is done by following the conditioning
approach proposed by Miyato et al. [47]; by concatenating the input to the generator and
discriminator with the camera poses P in two separate ways.
20
Face Age Progression Based on Generative Adversarial Networks
==PAGE:31==
For the generator, this is done by first normalizing the input z′ with a normalization
function norm(·), where z′ is a randomly sampled vector from Z.
By an embedding
function embed(·), P is then transformed into the same size as z by a single fully connected
layer with input size equal to the size of P and output size of 512. The extended latent
vector
z = concat(norm(z′), norm(embed(P )))
(3.3)
is then used as input to the standard StyleGAN2 generator described in section 3.1, where
concat(·, ·) concatenates two items into a single vector.
The discriminator works in a similar fashion where P is again embedded and normalized.
The dot product is then computed between norm(embed(P )) and the last layer of the
discriminator, D′(r) ∈R512. Again, r is either a real or synthetic face image. In that way,
the output of the discriminator D(r) becomes a single scalar that is also conditioned on
the camera poses
D(r) = norm(embed(P )) · D′(r)T
(3.4)
An important aspect of 3D GANs is that they must disentangle pose-correlated attributes,
such as subjects smiling when the camera is facing them directly, so that the face will
be consistent from different views. EG3D introduces generator pose conditioning, which
consists of giving the tri-plane generator the pose parameters to model biases correlated
with a pose. Then, the pose conditioning remains constant to prevent the scene from
shifting while adjusting the camera position. Lastly, if the conditioning parameters and
camera parameters are always identical, it can cause some visual artifacts in the form of
2D billboards, which is resolved by randomly swapping the conditioning pose with another
pose with a 50% probability during training [5].
3.3.2
GIRAFFE
The GIRAFFE GAN, introduced by Niemeyer et al. [41], introduces the concept of repre-
senting 3D scenes as compositional neural feature fields, which are then sampled from and
neurally rendered to generate a 2D image from a given camera angle. Although this works
with faces, it is not designed to work only with faces. A disadvantage of this method is
its resolution of 64 × 64, which is very low.
3.3.3
Periodic Implicit Generative Adversarial Networks for 3D-Aware
Image Synthesis (π-GAN)
The π-GAN network utilizes a “SIREN-based [48] neural radiance field representation”
for rendering view-consistent images from a wide range of camera angles [42]. Instead of
conditioning by concatenating, it utilizes Feature-wise Linear Modulation (FiLM), which
is more optimal for networks with periodic activations like SIREN. Lastly, it introduces
a progressive growing strategy, whereby image resolution increases throughout training,
while batch size starts large and decreases with training. This model shows a marked
improvement in resolution, going up to 512 × 512 while maintaining high image quality
and good view consistency.
3.4
Inversion Method
Images will have to be inverted to the latent space of a noise-to-image GAN, as described
in Section 2.2, to edit the facial attributes on the image of a real person. Age-EG3D also
aims to edit the age of a real person, so an inversion needs to take place.
3.4.1
Pivotal Tuning Inversion
Roich et al. [17] propose their method of Pivotal Tuning Inversion (PTI), which is one
of the newer works that fall under the methods described in Section 2.2.4. Their work is
Face Age Progression Based on Generative Adversarial Networks
21
==PAGE:32==
purposely made to invert images to the latent space of StyleGAN but can also be used for
other types of GANs.
PTI works by initially inverting an input face image to the intermediate latent space W
or W+. Roich et al. do so by an optimization task that minimizes the LPIPS distance
between the input image x and G(w), as described in section 2.2.1, to find a pivot latent
vector wp. This is done while the pre-trained weights of the generator θ are frozen and is
formally defined by
wp, n = arg min
w,n
LLPIPS(x, G(w; θ)) + λnLn(n)
(3.5)
where G(w; θ)) is the output of the generator given input w and weights θ. A noise term
n is added since it improves the quality of the inversion [17].
In the next step of the inversion, θ is now unfrozen while wp remains constant.
The
generator is then altered by minimizing the LPIPS distance between x and G(wp). The
generator is updated using the following loss function
LPTI = LLPIPS(x, xp) + λL2LL2(x, xp)
(3.6)
with xp = G(wp; θ∗) where θ∗are the adjustable weights [17].
Roich et al. show that the editability of the generator’s latent space is preserved even
though it is altered.
This is possible since G(wp) already resembles the input image
before the final step of Equation (3.6), so only minor changes have to be made to the
generator.
22
Face Age Progression Based on Generative Adversarial Networks
==PAGE:33==
Chapter 4
Proposed Model &
Implementation
This chapter starts with an overview of the proposed model and later elaborates upon the
specific details of the implementation of the model.
At a high level of abstraction, the original EG3D model works by taking a latent vector
z ∈R512 from the EG3D GAN’s latent space and associating z with given a set of camera
parameters P ∈R25 as described in Section 2.7. The network is conditioned on P and
aims to create a synthetic image of a person G(z|P ) from that camera angle P when
training on a face image dataset.
The proposed age-EG3D model extends EG3D and uses the condition-based approach
described in Section 2.3.3 to perform FAM. To do so, age-EG3D concatenates a target age
y to P to obtain the conditioning parameters
c = concat(P , y)
(4.1)
In this way, G(z|c) is not only from a specific camera angle but also has a specific target
age, which is embedded in c.
Ideally, giving age as a conditioning parameter should
disentangle age from the latent space, allowing the identity to remain the same while the
target age is changed. How the age labels are obtained is later explained in Section 4.2.
4.1
Model Configurations
The proposed age-EG3D is tested in different configurations, but a few things remain the
same throughout all experiments:
• Age-EG3D is trained on the Flickr-Faces HQ (FFHQ) dataset [11] as the original
EG3D, which age-EG3D extends. FFHQ does not contain age labels, which is neces-
sary to train age-EG3D. Instead, the age labels are estimated for the FFHQ dataset
with the age estimation model, yu4u [29].
• Age-EG3D resumes training of the pre-trained EG3D network [49] to preserve its
high visual fidelity while enabling changing the age of G(z|c). This is made possible
by padding the pre-trained weights with zeros whenever the pre-trained weights make
the model expect a P ∈R25 but receives a c ∈R26. The pre-trained weights can be
used for age-EG3D with the new condition given by Equation (4.1) by appropriately
adding this extra weight of zero.
The different methods for adding the age condition are divided into three models.
Face Age Progression Based on Generative Adversarial Networks
23
==PAGE:34==
4.1.1
Model A
This model configuration learns aging patterns purely by adding the estimated age labels
to the FFHQ dataset. This enables the discriminator to also discriminate based on the
age condition, making age-EG3D conditioned on age. The age labels are added as floats,
which means the target age of G(z|c) can be any given floating point value, allowing for
continuous age manipulation.
4.1.2
Model B
This model extends model A by augmenting the generator loss LG with an identity loss
term LID using MagFace embeddings to limit the identity loss when the target age is
changed for G(z|c). The model is visualized in Figure 4.1 where the additions of age-
EG3D are marked in green. For more details on how the identity loss is calculated, refer
to Section 4.4.1.
Figure 4.1: Overview of the proposed age-EG3D model B.
4.1.3
Model C
This model further extends model B by augmenting LG with both LID and an explicit age
loss term Lage, to further emphasize aging accuracy. More details on the age loss term can
be found in Section 4.4.2, while the model is visualized in Figure 4.2. Again, additions to
the original EG3D are marked in green.
Figure 4.2: Overview of the proposed age-EG3D model C.
4.1.4
Categorical Models
The suﬀix ‘/CAT’ is appended to the name of the aforementioned model types when it uses
age categories instead of floating values. This entails that the age condition is contained
in a one-hot-encoded categories list. Each entry in the categories list corresponds to an
age range of one year. For example, a model conditioned on age and augmented with LID
but with the age information given as categories is denoted as model B/CAT. If there is
24
Face Age Progression Based on Generative Adversarial Networks
==PAGE:35==
no /CAT, it is assumed that the age is a floating point value. Further details are described
in Section 4.4.2.
The following sections focus on how specific components of the model were implemented.
However, before any training can commence, the FFHQ face image dataset must be further
annotated with estimated age labels.
4.2
Estimation of Age Labels
As described in Section 2.3.3, age labels are necessary to condition age-EG3D on age.
These labels are, however, not included in the FFHQ dataset. This is solved by estimating
the subjects’ ages in the FFHQ dataset with an age estimation model.
4.2.1
Age Estimation Models
Many age estimation models are freely available, but few are suitable for the age-EG3D
framework. It will need to be accurate for children and adults as FFHQ contains both,
have a pre-trained model age-EG3D can use, and be implemented in PyTorch [50]. The
latter is essential since it enables back-propagation in the augmented loss function in model
C.
The age labels are estimated with yu4u, described in Section 2.4.3. Another independent
age estimation model, FPAge, is also implemented to help evaluate the results as an in-
dependent age estimation model. FPAge is similar to yu4u, a CNN-based age estimation
model with pre-trained weights available. The commercial product cognitec is also used
to evaluate the results (was described earlier in Section 2.4.3).
yu4u was picked over FPAge for the training, as it performs better when predicting the
age of kids where FPAge falls short. See Appendix A.1.1 for a comparison of the two
supporting this claim.
4.2.2
Appending Age Labels to FFHQ Dataset
Due to the importance of various high-quality images of faces, the original EG3D model
used the FFHQ dataset. The dataset consists of 70,000 images of 1024 × 1024 resolution,
aligned and cropped with dlib [51]. The variety of faces and the high image quality are
crucial to the quality of EG3D itself. Although the FFHQ dataset is not age-annotated, the
image quality of other age-annotated datasets is not comparable to FFHQ, and training on
these datasets would not produce the realism desired. Another reason for keeping FFHQ
is that the pre-trained model of EG3D, which age-EG3D seeks to utilize, has learned
to generate images resembling the FFHQ dataset. By changing the training data, the
pre-trained model would need to learn to replicate a new pX .
For FFHQ to be used for EG3D, the camera parameters P of each image are estimated
with Deep3d [52], and the faces re-cropped and aligned with MTCNN [53], as well as being
downscaled to 512 × 512. It is necessary for EG3D to estimate P as it allows the dis-
criminator to learn the relation between the information found in P and the perceived
camera angle of an image. In turn, G can be penalized when G(z|P ) does not comply
with the conditioning pose so that G learns to generate images following the information
in P . Before training age-EG3D, the camera poses were concatenated with each image’s
estimated age ˆy, which results in conditioning vectors as given by Equation (4.1). The
estimated distribution of ages of FFHQ is shown in Figure 4.3.
Face Age Progression Based on Generative Adversarial Networks
25
==PAGE:36==
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
Estimated Age
0
500
1000
1500
2000
2500
3000
3500
4000
Counts
Age distribution of entire FFHQ dataset
Figure 4.3: Age distribution of the FFHQ dataset used for training, as calculated by [29].
The minimum estimated age is 1.0 years, the maximum estimated age is 76.3 years, and
the mean estimated age is 30.7 years.
Figure 4.3 clearly shows how the estimated age distribution of FFHQ is far from uniform,
which would be desired.
It is, however, very challenging to achieve this state due to
underrepresented face images of specific age groups in public datasets.
After estimating the ages and finding the distribution, all age estimates are normalized
from a range of 0-75 to a range of -1 to 1, as neural networks have been shown to perform
better when given a smaller range of values [54].1 Each training image is then assigned a
camera pose and an estimated age.
4.3
Pose and Age Conditioned Loss
The base model A works by adding the changes described in Section 4.2.
The added
integration of age labels allows the model to output images with a specific target age
because the generator and discriminator of age-EG3D now form an extended cGAN. As
described in Section 3.3.1 under Pose Conditioning, EG3D was already conditioned on
the camera pose P , which is now extended with the age condition. The input to the
age-EG3D generator z is described by Equation (4.2).
z = concat(norm(z′), norm(embed(c)))
(4.2)
1The simple normalization function is described in Appendix B.1.1.
26
Face Age Progression Based on Generative Adversarial Networks
==PAGE:37==
Similarly, the output of the discriminator of age-EG3D is now given by
D(r) = norm(embed(c)) · D′(r)T ,
(4.3)
where r is either a real or synthetic face image. Equation (4.2) and (4.3) shows how both
G and D of the age-EG3D network are now conditioned on both camera pose and an age
condition. As model B and C extends model A, Equation (4.2) and (4.3) express the input
to any age-EG3D model and discriminative output, respectively.
In Section 3.3.1, it was denoted how G(z) implicitly meant G(M(z)), i.e., z had been
mapped to a w before the generator synthesizes an image.
In this particular case of
conditioning the network, it is important to make the distinction between the mapping
M : Z →W and the synthesis of an intermediate latent vector using the generator
G : W →S. This is because it is only M that is conditioned on c in age-EG3D. G(w)
is not conditioned on age in age-EG3D and resembles the generator in EG3D with no
change. This is because the EG3D framework explicitly looks at the first 25 parameters
in c to generate a tri-plane representation of an image. This is not extended by an age
condition in age-EG3D. The accurate notation for a synthetic image generated with age-
EG3D conditioned on c is, therefore, G(M(z|c)) as G is not explicitly conditioned on an
age condition. For simplicity, it will still be implicit that the mapping M(z|c) has been
done when writing G(z|c) for age-EG3D. However, the conditioning is only effective in
the mapping network M.
4.4
Augmented Loss Function
By giving the generator and discriminator the camera and age condition embedded in
c, the generator can learn how to accurately model a face given the camera angle and
age. It is also desirable to encourage specific characteristics which cannot be expressed
within the conditions. For this purpose, the generator is augmented with additional loss
terms. Age-EG3D experiments with augmenting the generator loss with identity loss, as
this cannot be expressed in the conditions, and age loss, to force the model to prioritize
age accuracy.
It is necessary to dive into the training loop of age-EG3D to understand and describe
the proposed augmentation of loss functions.
Before the training begins, the camera
poses P are extracted as described in Section 4.2.2. When the training begins, a training
batch of size N consists of an N-dimensional real image tensor X, an N-dimensional Z
tensor of randomly generated latent vectors sampled from N(0, 1), and an N-dimensional
conditioning tensor C. Each element of X is a real image x, each element of Z is a latent
vector z, while each element of C is a conditioning vector c. Each c is associated with a z
so that the synthesis of z should follow the information given by c. The camera parameters
in c are unlike z not randomly generated but sampled from the c’s of the real training
data. Here, age-EG3D embeds a generated target age y in c sampled from a uniform
distribution U(agemin, agemax). Throughout this thesis, agemin = 0 and agemax = 75 but
could be changed to only train to synthesize, e.g., adults.
Unlike P , y was purposely not sampled from the real data but from a uniform distribu-
tion. The reasoning behind this choice is that the distribution of age conditions during
training would follow the distribution shown in Figure 4.3. This would mean that very
few generated images during training would be from the low-density areas in Figure 4.3.
Thus, much less time would be spent training to synthesize face images of teenagers and
subjects above 60 years. The sampling of random ages from U(agemin, agemax) will instead
ensure that each age between agemin and agemin is approximately used equally in training.
Face Age Progression Based on Generative Adversarial Networks
27
==PAGE:38==
However, this will also force the model to train more often in areas where few training
images exist, e.g., for ages above 70 years, as seen in Figure 4.3. The fewer real images
for, e.g., ages above 70 years, might make it diﬀicult for age-EG3D to learn aging patterns
of low-density areas. Therefore, y was sampled from U(agemin, agemax), since it ideally
creates a model able to synthesize images resembling the target age across a life span.
4.4.1
Augmented Loss Function for Identity Preservation
Although the discriminator will ensure the age accuracy of the generated synthetic faces,
there is no guarantee that G(z|c) will retain its identity when varying the target age of the
synthesized image. An identity loss LID is therefore introduced and added to the generator
loss to discourage the model from altering the identity when changing the target age. A
change of identity could, e.g., be by changing the gender or otherwise changing properties
of the facial biometric characteristics in a way that would not occur in the natural aging
process.
LID is computed by taking one latent vector z and the corresponding conditioning vector
c from a batch and holding everything constant but the age condition y embedded in c.2
Four new ages are then given by
y1 ∈[−1, −0.5),
y2 ∈[−0.5, 0),
y3 ∈[0, 0.5),
y4 ∈[0.5, 1]
These ages replace the original age y in the condition vector c to give the four conditions
c1, c2, c3, c4. Each of these is then used to synthesize four faces, which are in turn mapped
to the embedded space of MagFace, as shown below, where MagFace(x) outputs a feature
vector.
fi = MagFace(G(z|ci))
(4.4)
The cosine distance dcos of each pair of embeddings is then taken, as shown in Equa-
tion (4.5), where SC is the cosine similarity function defined in Equation (2.7).
dcos = −SC(fi, fj) + 1
(4.5)
A visualization of how dcos is related to the cosine distance is visualized in Figure 4.4.
−1
0
1
SC(fi, fj)
0.0
0.5
1.0
dcos
Figure 4.4: Plot of dcos as a function of the cosine similarity of two faces feature vectors
f i and f j.
2Only a single latent vector was used when computing LID due to memory constraints.
28
Face Age Progression Based on Generative Adversarial Networks
==PAGE:39==
Finally, the cosine distance is scaled depending on the age difference ∆age = yi −yj, so
that a large identity difference is given less weight if the age difference is similarly high.
This was inspired by the SAM model [3], which uses a similar function. The scaling is
given by Equation (4.6) and shown as a graph in Figure 4.5.
w(∆age) = 0.25 · cos(π
2 ∆age) + 0.75
(4.6)
−2
0
2
∆age
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
w(∆age)
Figure 4.5: Identity loss scale as a function of the age difference.
Thus, the identity loss LID is a weighted cosine distance between every pairwise combina-
tion of feature embeddings and is given by
LID = 1
(4
2
)
∑
i,j
w(yi −yj) · dcos(fi, fj)
(4.7)
where i, j are every unique pair and
(4
2
)
= 6 are the number of possible combinations of
feature vectors. The modification ensures that greater similarity means lower identity loss,
and lower similarity means greater identity loss.
A typical alignment and re-scaling process similar to the one used by the authors of
MagFace is used on images before computing LID. The images are not aligned but only re-
scaled to the optimal image sizes in the case that a face is not detected since the alignment
is based on the detection of a face.
4.4.2
Augmented Loss Function for Age Accuracy
In order to push model C to prioritize age accuracy, the generator loss LG is augmented
with an age loss term Lage. This is done by comparing the predicted age of the generated
face and the age given in c. A schematic of how Lage is computed as shown in Figure 4.6.
As previously stated, yu4u is used for age estimation in training.
When estimating the ages of a batch of images, yu4u will, as default, output a prediction
vector ˆy by running a weighted average over the 101 model logits O for each image. The
predicted age for image i in the batch is given by
ˆyi =
100
∑
m=0
m · Oi,m
(4.8)
where Oi,m is the m’th output neuron for the i’th image in a batch.
The age loss can then be defined by either using the default float value or the logits. The
estimated age becomes a categorical output when using the logits. Below are the age loss
functions used for floating point age values and categorical ages.
Face Age Progression Based on Generative Adversarial Networks
29
==PAGE:40==
Figure 4.6: Visualization of how Lage is computed for every image in a batch during
training. The image is the result of G(z|c) where the target is embedded in c.
Floating Point Age Value
For a floating point age value, the yu4u age estimation model is first used to estimate the
age of each synthesized image in a batch of size N as shown in Figure 4.6. The mean
squared error (MSE) is then calculated between the estimated ages of the synthesized
images in a batch and the generated target ages y associated with the synthesized images.
yi is the target age for image i in a batch. A scaling factor αage is introduced in order to
allow for the age loss to be of comparable magnitude to LG. The loss is thus given by
Lage = αage
(
1
N
N
∑
i=1
(ˆyi −yi)2
)
(4.9)
Age Categories
The idea behind using the logits O of the yu4u model instead of the scalar values y is that
some information might be lost when computing the scalar age value by Equation (4.8).
Another could be that the complex aging problem might be better expressed by a one-hot-
encoded vector instead of a single floating value. A conditioning vector c then becomes
the concatenation of P and y, where the age condition y is now a 101-dimensional vector
corresponding to the number of logits. y is the true class labels where yi is given by
yi =
{
1
if i is the correct class
0
if i is not the correct class
(4.10)
y will be all zeros with a single one at, e.g., index 34 if the randomly generated age
condition is the age from 34-35 years.
The cross-entropy loss is used when age is given as a category. The age loss is then given
by
Lage = αage
(
1
N
N
∑
n=1
ln
)
(4.11)
where ln is given by
ln = −log
exp(On,y=1)
∑M
m=1 exp(On,m)
(4.12)
Here, M is the number of classes and equals the number of logits which is 101. O is the
aforementioned logit tensor of size (N, M). E.g., O1,5 is the 5th logit of the 1st image in a
batch. On,y=1 is the logit where y equals 1 of the n’th image in a batch. Finally, the age
loss can be scaled by a scaling factor αage like for scalar age values. As mentioned, the
labeling ‘/CAT’ is appended to the model name whenever age categories are used.
30
Face Age Progression Based on Generative Adversarial Networks
==PAGE:41==
4.5
Age-EG3D Truncation Trick
The age-EG3D model can, like StyleGAN2 and EG3D, utilize the truncation trick de-
scribed in Section 3.1.2. Lowering the truncation factor, ψ, will increase the visual fidelity
but lower the aging accuracy. The reason for this is that lowering ψ will push G(z|c)
towards the average face, which can be seen as the average of all the training images.
The average face will have an apparent age, and when ψ = 0, G(z|c) equals the average
face regardless of the target age in c. The aging accuracy will, therefore, lower as ψ goes
towards zero since the apparent age of G(z|c) will shift towards the apparent age of the
average face.
When ψ = 0, it could be that G(z|c) would still be affected by the target age embedded
in c, but that is not the case. The reason is found in Section 4.3, which specifies how
it is only the mapping network M of age-EG3D that is conditioned on age and not the
generator G. The average face G( ¯
w|c) is synthesized using the center of mass ¯
w ∈W,
and since M works by mapping from Z to W, it will not be affected by the age condition.
It would only be affected by the age condition if the center of mass was computed in Z
instead of W.
This means output images of age-EG3D can be controlled in terms of visual fidelity and
aging accuracy by changing ψ. A higher or lower ψ can therefore be important depending
on the purpose of the age-EG3D model.
4.6
Inversion Method
Each of the age-EG3D models is designed to generate synthetic face images with a target
camera pose and age. A real image needs to be inverted to the latent space of age-EG3D
to utilize the model to alter the individual’s age in the image as described in Section 2.2.
Age-EG3D uses a modified version of PTI (see Section 3.4.1) to invert real images to its
latent space Z. The first modification is that the inversion is to a latent vector in Z
and not W as the original authors propose. This is due to the structure of EG3D that
age-EG3D builds upon. EG3D’s triplane generator will only look at the first 25 conditions
of c, equivalent to P . The age condition will, therefore, only be effective in the mapping
from Z to W but not in the translation from W and to S. This is also explained in the
previous section.
The second modification comes from including the conditions to the inversion. The camera
pose P x of x is determined before the inversion starts using Deep3D [52], which is similar
to the pre-processing of the training images used to train age-EG3D. Px is kept constant
throughout the inversion process since changing it will make the reconstruction less similar
to the input image. The age is optimized as a variable in the first inversion step. This is
done since a predefined age would constrain G’s ability to synthesize the most resembling
image of x. The estimated age of x using yu4u is used as a starting value for y in the first
inversion step of the modified version of PTI.
The inversion to age-EG3D’s latent space is, therefore, modified to optimize using the
following objective
zp, n, yp = arg min
z,n,y
LLPIPS(x, G(z; θ|c)) + λnLn(n)
(4.13)
where G(z; θ|c) is the output of the generator given input z, θ the pre-trained weights of
age-EG3D, and c = concat(Px, y) the condition vector with y as a variable. θ are frozen
during the optimization. The resulting pivot latent vector zp and pivot age yp will have
G(zp| concat(P x, yp)) result in the image most resembling of x without altering θ.
Face Age Progression Based on Generative Adversarial Networks
31
==PAGE:42==
Once the optimization of Equation (4.13) is completed, θ are unfrozen, and the generator
is updated using the loss function
LPTI = LLPIPS(x, xp) + λL2LL2(x, xp)
(4.14)
with xp = G(zp; θ∗|c) where θ∗are the adjustable weights, and c = concat(Px, yp) where
yp was found in the previous step. θ∗corresponds to a single input image, so the entire
process of the inversion needs to be completed for each image that needs to be inverted.
The inversion of x can then be reconstructed by G(zp; θ∗|c).3 The age of the reconstruction
can then be varied by changing the target age in c. Likewise, the camera pose of the
reconstruction can also be changed after the inversion. Examples of age-EG3D using this
technique are provided in Section 5.2.7 and 5.3.
The method described in Section 2.2.4 was used for age-EG3D as opposed to any of the
other methods listed in Section 2.2. This choice was not only made because the original
authors of EG3D also used PTI to great effect [5] but also because this method currently
exhibits state-of-the-art performance compared to optimization-, encoder- and hybrid-
based methods. These methods would, however, be considered if speed was an issue, as
PTI takes around 2-4 minutes for each image inversion on one Tesla A100-PCIE GPU
with 40GB memory https://www.hpc.dtu.dk/?pageid = 2129.
3We specify that G(zp; θ∗|c) uses the updated weights θ∗found using the modified PTI inversion.
32
Face Age Progression Based on Generative Adversarial Networks
==PAGE:43==
Chapter 5
Results
This chapter will first endeavor to find the best age-EG3D model of the different model
configurations tested by comparing them using the metrics presented in Section 2.6. The
best of these models will be further evaluated and compared to other baseline FAM works
described in Chapter 3 using the age estimation models listed in Section 2.4.3.
5.1
Testing Model Configurations of age-EG3D
In this section, different hyperparameters are tested for various age-EG3D model con-
figurations to find the best one in terms of FID, MAE, and identity preservation. The
hyperparameters and evaluation measures are briefly explained below.
The FID for a model is computed as described in Section 2.6.2 where two sets of Inception-
v3 feature vectors are extracted; one set for the 70,000 training images and another for
50.000 generated synthetic images. The multivariate normal distributions N(µ, Σ) and
N ′(µ′, Σ′) of the two sets are then estimated. The resulting mean µ and µ′, and covariance
matrices Σ and Σ′ are then used to compute the FID using Equation (2.12).
The aging accuracy is evaluated between target ages and the resulting estimated ages
using the MAE (Equation (2.8)). The target age y is the desired estimated age of G(z|c).
To compute the MAE of the aging accuracy, 400 synthetic images are generated from a
frontal view with a random target age y ∼U(agemin, agemax), and the estimated age ˆy
of the resulting images are then predicted using FPAge and yu4u.1 The MAE is labeled
MAEyu4u when yu4u is used to compute the MAE and MAEFPAge when FPAge is used. In
the case of a categorical model configuration, y is rounded to the nearest integer i and
used to one-hot-encode the age condition. The rounded integer is then used to compute
the MAE instead of the floating value. A frontal view is used when generating images in
which age is predicted to provide the age estimation model with the best circumstances
to estimate the age accurately. Additionally, 400 points are used to ensure evaluation can
be performed in a reasonable amount of time, and the images do not require too much
storage space 2.
An identity score IDscore is introduced to evaluate how well a model preserves the identity
of G(z|c) as the target age is varied. This is done by first generating 20 random latent
vectors z. Five synthetic faces are generated for each z, each with a target age linearly
spread between agemin and agemax. These are the ages 0, 18, 37, 56, and 75 since agemin = 0
1The citations [55] and [56] refers to where the pretrained models for FPAge and yu4u can be found,
respectively.
2This is because images had to be transferred to a different server to evaluate with cognitec.
Face Age Progression Based on Generative Adversarial Networks
33
==PAGE:44==
and agemax = 75 for all training runs and subsequent evaluations and experiments. For
a single z, feature vectors are extracted, using ArcFace, from the five synthetic faces
generated by the five linearly spread target ages.
The cosine similarity is then found
using Equation (2.7) between every combination of the five synthetic face images’ feature
vectors. This process is repeated for all 20 latent vectors, and IDscore is the mean of all
cosine distances found. A higher IDscore corresponds to better identity preservation.
There is a trade-off between visual fidelity and aging accuracy, which can be controlled
by varying the truncation factor ψ as described in Section 4.5. Therefore, different values
of ψ are also evaluated to show this effect. It should be noted that the FID is always
computed using ψ = 1, i.e., no truncation.
The age condition will not be effective before a model has trained for a while. In the
period where the age condition is not effective on G(z|c), LID will also have very little
effect. This is because G(z|c) is virtually unaffected by changing the age condition at
the start of training, and so the identity is naturally preserved. Therefore, kimgage is
introduced as the number of images trained on before adding LID, measured in thousands
of images.
In Table 5.1, the evaluation results of the tested model configurations and hyperparameters
can be seen.
‘kimgs’ denotes the number of real images the model has trained on in
measured in thousands. During training, it has generated an equal amount of synthetic
images too. αID and αage are defined in Section 4.4.1 and 4.4.2, respectively. The table
is sorted in ascending order by MAE. A batch size of 8 was used for all training runs.
Table 5.1: Evaluation of tested model configurations sorted by FID and subsequently
MAE.
Index
Model
αage
αID
kimgage
kimgs
ψ
IDscore
FID
MAE ↑
1
A
0.0
0.0
0
1200
1.00
0.3931
5.877
5.783
2
A
0.0
0.0
0
1200
0.90
0.4183
5.877
5.846
3
B
0.0
20.0
450
1440
1.00
0.4938
5.988
6.410
4
B
0.0
15.0
0
1200
1.00
0.4755
6.423
6.682
5
C
8.0
15.0
0
1200
1.00
0.4872
6.282
6.864
6
C
20.0
10.0
300
800
1.00
0.4824
6.149
6.884
7
C
4.0
15.0
400
720
1.00
0.5224
6.852
6.934
8
C
8.0
20.0
450
1440
1.00
0.4877
5.991
6.998
9
A
0.0
0.0
0
1200
0.75
0.4619
5.877
7.159
10
B
0.0
20.0
450
1440
0.75
0.5476
5.988
7.260
11
B
0.0
10.0
0
600
1.00
0.5051
7.107
8.165
12
C/CAT
0.5
15.0
0
600
1.00
0.5190
6.795
8.272
13
A/CAT
0.0
0.0
0
1200
1.00
0.5068
5.514
12.43
14
B/CAT
0.0
15.0
0
600
1.00
0.6219
6.557
12.78
Table 5.1 highlights how the FID of age-EG3D generally lies from around 5.5 to 7. The
original EG3D model, which age-EG3D extends, presented an FID of 4.7.
The visual
fidelity of age-EG3D has been slightly worsened compared to EG3D by the addition of
age conditioning. However, not only is FID an imperfect measure of 3D visual quality,
there is a large difference in FID between EG3D and the next best 3D GAN π-GAN, going
from 4.7 (EG3D) to 29.9 (π-GAN). As displayed in Section 2.6.2, where sample images of
the different 3D GANs are shown, even such large changes in FID give images that are
34
Face Age Progression Based on Generative Adversarial Networks
==PAGE:45==
still easily recognizable as human. As the difference between age-EG3D and EG3D’s FID
scores is only around 1-2 depending on the model, it is considered a very good result.
Another interesting factor to observe is the truncation factor ψ. For models A and B, as ψ
is lowered, the IDscore increases, and the MAE increases, as seen when comparing indices
1 and 2 together and 3 and 10 together. This is a clear effect of what was mentioned
in Section 4.5. The low truncation factor, and the increased MAE that comes with it,
causes index 9 to be the only A configuration not in the top 3 models in terms of MAE.
Thus, as would be expected, the A configuration, with its focus solely on image realism
and age accuracy, performs best in terms of MAE. As is also expected, the IDscore is the
lowest, except when the truncation factor is reduced, simply because configuration A has
no regard for identity preservation.
When observing the MAE, large fluctuations can be seen, ranging from 5.7 to 12.7. No-
tably, the CAT variations at indices 12, 13, and 14 have the worst MAE, the A/CAT
and B/CAT configurations having anomalously large MAE of 50% higher than the next
of C/CAT. However, the CAT models also have some of the highest IDscore. The low age
accuracy combined with high identity preservation, even for A/CAT, which has no iden-
tity loss term, indicates that the CAT models may not transform the facial appearance
as much as other models, thus preserving identity and worsening age accuracy by being a
worse FAM model. This poor performance may be due to having 101 categories, meaning
a large number of added parameters that must be learned, which can lead to diﬀiculty
learning and low performance. Because of this, all three CAT models (A/CAT, B/CAT,
C/CAT) will not be chosen as the best configuration.
Next, as all the different model C configurations have nearly identical MAE, those will
be compared with each other.
In terms of IDscore, the maximum of 0.52 for index 7,
as compared to the rest of the model C configurations, being 0.48 (indices 5, 6, and
8), is negligible. Lastly, the FID, only ranging from 6.2 to 6.8, is another score where
little conclusion can be made. Therefore, all four configuration C models tested as being
equivalent.
Lastly, the different B models are examined. An immediate improvement in IDscore from
configuration A can be seen. Model B at index 4 shows an increase in MAE of approx-
imately one year and FID of 6.423 but a marked improvement in IDscore from 0.3931 to
0.4755. Compared to index 4, index 11 is the same, but with an αID of 10 instead of 15
and less training time. Surprisingly, index 11 has a better IDscore than index 4 but has
a worse FID and MAE. This may be due to index 11 having trained for half the number
of images compared to index 4, and though the configuration for index 11 may warrant
further testing, this is out of scope for this thesis. On the other hand, index 3 is the best
performing configuration for model B in terms of MAE, likely because, despite a higher
αID, it introduces a delay on LID. Because the model has no aging effect at the very start
of training, LID serves no purpose except to discourage any changes in appearance with
changes in target age. Because LID is ignored at the start, the model is able to freely
learn age accuracy without discouragement from LID. Only once the model has learned
to age subjects does it start to learn identity preservation, which is also when it becomes
relevant. Then, for the last model B configuration tested at index 10, it is identical to
index 3 in hyperparameters except that it has a lower truncation factor. As previously
noted, this causes an increase in MAE and an increase in IDscore.
The best model will then be picked based on a mixture of the IDscore, MAE, and FID
since the model needs to have high aging accuracy and visual fidelity while minimizing
identity loss as the target age is changed. As the three measures are all on different scales,
Face Age Progression Based on Generative Adversarial Networks
35
==PAGE:46==
there is no easy way to combine them into one metric, and they will therefore be looked
at holistically. Indices 1 and 2 are thrown out due to low IDscore, as are 12-14, due to high
MAE. All model C configurations are also thrown out because their equivalency shows that
introducing an additional age loss term may have instead muddled the model’s ability to
learn, destroying the ability to fine-tune and perfect the model. The indices left are 3,
4, 9, 10, and 11. The chosen one is then Model B at index 3 in Table 5.1, as it has the
highest MAE of the five by a large margin of 1.4 while still having the second-best IDscore
of the five. As FID was similar for all five, it was not decisive. For simplicity, the model
is denoted as Model B3 in correspondence with its index in Table 5.1.
5.2
In-depth Analysis age-EG3D
An in-depth analysis of Model B3 is provided to give a clear view of the model’s perfor-
mance. This is first done by a few key summary statistics presented in Table 5.2. The table
is based on the 400 generated data points also used to compute the MAE, as described
in the previous section. The table presents two columns computed with both yu4u and
FPAge. yu4u is kept to show that the model has indeed adapted the ability to generate
face images that align with the age estimation model used to train it. FPAge is then the
independent age estimator.
The table presents ryˆy which is the sample Pearson correlation coeﬀicient given in Equa-
tion (2.11) between the target ages y and the estimated ages ˆy. The MAE is computed
with both yu4u and FPAge as the estimator. The standard deviation of the error |y −ˆy|
is also given along with the cumulative scores explained in Section 2.6.1.
Table 5.2: Summary statistics for model B3.
yu4u
FPAge
ryˆy
0.9326
0.9371
MAE
6.682
6.410
std
5.063
4.762
CS5
58%
54%
CS10
24%
24%
CS15
7%
5%
The ryˆy-value fairly close to one tells us there is a high correlation between the target and
estimated age. This means G(z|c) is aged according to the target age. The CS scores show
that 24% has an absolute error between y and ˆy greater than ten years. And only 5% of
the absolute errors are above 15 years. Interestingly, FPAge estimates the smallest MAE
even though age-EG3D uses the age labels estimated by yu4u. This is a great indicator
that model B3 has generalized the aging patterns and is not overfitted to a single age
estimator.
5.2.1
Training Results
Highlights from the training of the optimal model are briefly described. An overview of
LID during training is shown in Figure 5.1. Note that the graph starts at 450k images,
as that is what the kimgage is set to. It can be seen how LID seem to start low and then
immediately spike to over 0.5. This is because LID was activated while averaging the loss
of 4,000 images. The first low value on the line can, therefore, be disregarded. This means
LID starts out high and reaches a lower bound after about 150k images showing that the
network learns to minimize the identity loss described in Section 4.4.1.
36
Face Age Progression Based on Generative Adversarial Networks
==PAGE:47==
0k
200k
400k
600k
800k
1,000k
1,200k
1,400k
Real images trained on
0.0
0.5
1.0
LID
With αID = 20.0
Avg. loss over 4k images
std
Figure 5.1: LID during training of model B3 (index 3 in Table 5.1.
The FID score of the network is also measured during its training. The FID of the model
during training is shown in Figure 5.2. The FID is lowest before training starts, with
an FID resembling the one of the pre-trained model age-EG3D extends. The FID then
increases, which is to be expected since the model has to interpret a new age condition.
As important, the FID score decreases again after 720k images and levels out at around
6. This is interpreted as the model having picked up on most of the aging patterns and
being able to focus more on the visual fidelity of its output. The model trained for a total
0k
240k
480k
720k
960k
1200k
1440k
Real images trained on
0
2
4
6
8
FID Score
Figure 5.2: FID score during training of model B3 (index 3 in Table 5.1.
time of 48 hours on the DTU high-performance cluster with two Tesla A100-PCIE GPUs.
5.2.2
Aging Pattern Analysis
The aging patterns of Model B3 at different ages are investigated using images. This is
done using the average face at different ages, which is shown in Figure 5.3. For each age
given in Figure 5.3, an average face is made by first mapping 2000 randomly generated
latent vectors from Z to W. An average latent vector wavg is then found by averaging all
2000 intermediate latent vectors into a single wavg. The latent vector is then synthesized
to an image G(wavg|c) as shown in Figure 5.3 with different target ages and a frontal view.
The faces are labeled as average since they can be interpreted as the typical face at the
given age. It is similar to the average face described in Section 4.5, but the age condition
is ineffective when ψ = 0, as explained in that section. The average faces are therefore
made this way instead of changing ψ.
Face Age Progression Based on Generative Adversarial Networks
37
==PAGE:48==
Figure 5.3: Average faces generated using the best model configuration, Model B at index
3 in Table 5.1.
In addition to the very high visual fidelity, there are a few noticeable effects in Figure 5.3.
All the images look male except for perhaps age 89 and 100, which would be caused by an
over-representation of males in the training data. The top row synthetic faces look very
childish due to their round head shape and relatively big eyes. As the age increases to
24 years old, the head shape becomes a little less round, which is typical for adults. As
described in Section 2.4, the aging in the childhood stage is primarily craniofacial growth,
which is also what is seen in Figure 5.3. In the adulthood stage, aging is more dominated
by textural change of the skin and not by a changing head shape which is also apparent
for ages 24 and up. As age increases, the skin of the average faces becomes more wrinkly,
and the hair turns grayer. Glasses also start to appear at age 56. Glasses are not a literal
aging pattern, but something age-EG3D learns to associate with certain ages, as older
people tend to wear glasses, which is reflected in the training data.
Interestingly, the image of average faces also shows how the model has learned to generalize
the aging patterns. This can be seen as it is able to extrapolate to ages outside of the
values (between 0 and 75) that were used to train it. The -20-year-old in Figure 5.3 looks
very baby-like with barely visible teeth. The teeth then start to be more visible as the
age increases, which is in line with the actual aging pattern of a toddler. The hair color
will also start to turn grayer as the age increases past 56 years old. The skin also becomes
increasingly wrinkly, and the ear size seems to grow as age increases. All these traits are
in line with actual aging patterns.
Extreme values for age conditioned are tested in Figure 5.4 to see how far the age value
can be used. It is estimated that values between -30 and 130 years old as the target age
38
Face Age Progression Based on Generative Adversarial Networks
==PAGE:49==
still result in an image of high visual fidelity. The babies with a target age below -30
years old look unreal due to their eyes, mouths, and general blurriness. The seniors with a
target age above 130 also get an unrealistic head shape, and the appearance of their skin
are not in line with what a photo-realistic image would show.
Figure 5.4: Extreme age values for average faces generated using the optimal model.
5.2.3
Aging Accuracy Analysis
A crucial component of any aging network is its aging accuracy, i.e., how close the target
age matches the output of the network. This section will give an in-depth analysis of
model B3’s aging accuracy.
In Figure 5.5, a scatter plot shows the predicted ages of
400 randomly generated face images, with a frontal camera angle and random target age
between 0 and 75 years. The ages are predicted with yu4u and FPAge. Each point is also
colored according to its MagFace score to see if there is any relation between it and the
aging accuracy.
Figure 5.5: Predicted ages of 400 synthetic images with random target ages with yu4u
and FPAge.
The dashed black line in Figure 5.5 shows where all the points would lie if the model
generated perfectly age-accurate images of subjects according to the estimation model.
The red best fit line shows that the model does not work perfectly, though the points tend
Face Age Progression Based on Generative Adversarial Networks
39
==PAGE:50==
not to lie far away from the perfect prediction line, with no great outliers, and generally
follow the line. However, the aging accuracy of the model can be improved by calibrating
the target age desired, such that the best fit line lies perfectly along the perfect prediction
line. Instead of injecting a target age directly into the age-EG3D model, a calibrated age
condition is injected by first inputting the target age into the inverse function of the best
fit line. Thus, the target age is adjusted to a different age which is more likely to produce
the desired estimated age. If the best fit line is ˆy = ax + b, then the calibration function
becomes
cal(target age) = target age −b
a
(5.1)
The calibration will inevitably result in inputs of, e.g., negative target ages to the network,
but as was shown in the previous section, that is possible due to the extrapolating abilities
of age-EG3D. This is possible to a certain extent for inputs between -30 and 130 years.
The age is calibrated using yu4u, and not FPAge, to show that the calibration can improve
aging accuracy even with unknown age estimators. Alternatively, it is possible to calibrate
to any known age estimators, even without any training images, simply by using random
synthetic images generated by age-EG3D.
In Figure 5.6, the calibrated scatter plot, along with the new best fit line, is shown. Here
the conditioned age of G(z|c) is first calibrated using Equation (5.1). The red best fit
line in Figure 5.6 shows how the calibration has centered the points around the perfect
prediction line compared to Figure 5.5. Although other works such as SAM [3] are not
able to age faces outside of their training range, age-EG3D is able to, as evidenced by the
average faces in Section 5.2.2.
Figure 5.6: Estimates using yu4u and FPAge using calibration.
The new calibrated errors are now MAEyu4u = 5.229 and MAEFPAge = 6.528. There is an
improvement in yu4u accuracy, compared to the previous MAE of 6.682, but the MAEFPAge
slightly increased from 6.410 to 6.528 years. Because it did not cause a significant change
in aging accuracy for an independent age estimator, this indicates that calibration does
not cause overfitting to a single age estimator, which could lead to significantly lower
performance with other age estimators.
40
Face Age Progression Based on Generative Adversarial Networks
==PAGE:51==
5.2.4
Truncation Factor Analysis
Calibration truly shows its advantages when used on truncated models, i.e., models using
a truncation factor ψ < 1.
Truncated models tend to output images of higher visual
fidelity but also guide the model toward creating the average face, which will cause a
flattened best fit line. Calibrating a truncated model allows the model to gain the visual
advantages of a truncated model while keeping the age accuracy of an untruncated model.
The results of calibrating model B3 with ψ = 0.75 are seen in Figure 5.7. Again, 400
random latent vectors are synthesized with random target ages. The plot shows how the
best fit line is flattened until the age condition is calibrated. On the right of Figure 5.7
are the calibrated image age estimates using the same latent vectors and target ages, but
now the ages are calibrated using Equation (5.1). The MAEyu4u computed using the 400
points in Figure 5.7 on the left is 8.221 years. By calibrating the model, the MAEyu4u
is reduced from 8.221 to 4.204 years. By estimating the age of the same images used in
Figure 5.7 with FPAge, the MAEFPage is reduced from 7.227 to 5.664, which is a drastic
improvement.
Figure 5.7: Target and predicted ages with ψ = 0.75 before (left) and after (right) using
Equation (5.1) to calibrate the target age for 400 generated images. Ages are predicted
with yu4u.
The question becomes what ψ to choose for a calibrated model in order to gain the lowest
MAEFPage. This relation is investigated in Figure 5.8 where the MAEFPage is calculated
using 400 generated images with random target ages for calibrated models at different
values of ψ. The plot indicates a minimum MAEFPage found at ψ ≈0.4, but the low MAE
comes at the price of low variety of the generated face images as discussed in Section 4.5.
A few sample images and the average face are included in Appendix C.2 that shows how
images generated with ψ = 0.4 using the optimal model all bear a resemblance to the
average face when ψ = 0, which is also shown in the appendix. Appendix C.2 also shows
that this is not the case when ψ is increased to 0.75, where the image quality is still very
high, and the output images appear to be different individuals. Here, the MAEFPage is
still significantly lower than for ψ = 1. Therefore, the calibrated model B3 at ψ = 0.75 is
chosen as the optimal model.
The new summary statistics of the optimal model are listed in Table 5.3, and again com-
Face Age Progression Based on Generative Adversarial Networks
41
==PAGE:52==
Figure 5.8: MAEFPAge as a function of the truncation factor ψ.
puted with 400 synthetic images at random target ages between 0 and 75. cognitec is
additionally used to evaluate the ages for the optimal model.3
It can be compared to
the ones found using model B3 in Table 5.2. The significant changes are the correlation
between the target and estimated ages which is now 0.97 as opposed to the previous value
of 0.9371. The MAE is decreased both when using yu4u and FPAge. The CS scores are
also improved overall, all due to lowering ψ and calibrating the model. Additionally, it is
notable that the performance of the optimal model is very similar according to yu4u and
cognitec, which again shows how well age-EG3D is able to generalize.
Table 5.3: Summary statistics for the optimal model.
yu4u
FPAge
cognitec
ryˆy
0.971
0.97
0.970
MAE
4.204
5.664
4.255
std
3.213
4.149
3.471
CS5
34%
48%
33%
CS10
6%
16%
10%
CS15
0%
3%
0%
Un-calibrated
Calibrated
IDscore
0.5474
0.5486
The optimal model is further evaluated using the two independent age estimators: FPAge
and cognitec. The freely available FPAge is included so that others might recreate the
results. Additionally, the IDscore is recalculated, as the ψ value has been adjusted, both
for the un-calibrated and calibrated model.
The IDscore for the un-calibrated model improves from 0.4938 with ψ = 1 (index 3 in
Table 5.1) to 0.5474 with ψ = 0.75 as seen in Table 5.3.
Surprisingly, it has a slight
increase when calibrated, going to 0.5486. Although this is not a large difference, it shows
that calibration does not have a negative effect on identity preservation.
3cognitec is a licensed software for face recognition purposes, including age estimation. It is described
in Section 2.4.3.
42
Face Age Progression Based on Generative Adversarial Networks
==PAGE:53==
Predicted ages of 400 generated images are shown in Figure 5.9 with cognitec on the
left and FPAge on the right. From the data in the plot MAEcognitec = 4.255 years and
MAEFPage = 5.664 years. It can be seen how the predicted ages with cognitec are almost
perfectly centered around the perfect prediction line, as evidenced by the red best fit line.
The same is not the case for FPAge, where the best fit line is shifted upwards from the
perfect prediction line. This suggests that FPAge generally estimates ages a little higher
than both yu4u and cognitec.
Figure 5.9: cognitec (left) and FPAge (right) age estimates of 400 generated images with
the optimal model.
The graphs in Figure 5.9 show how the optimal model generally has a high aging accuracy.
From the graph, it is diﬀicult to see if the model is better for any specific age. To investigate
this, Figure 5.10 is created by generating 20 images for each specific age. The ages of the
images are then estimated with both cognitec and FPAge, and the MAE is then found
for each target age. FPAge shows a high MAE for 0-10 years due to its inaccuracy at that
age (see Appendix A.1.1). At target ages 50-60, FPAge also estimates that the model’s
aging accuracy is poor while its performance is constant for the remaining target ages.
Cognitec is, unlike FPAge, able to accurately estimate the age of children and shows by
its estimate that the optimal model is, in fact, the most accurate for 0-year-olds with an
MAE of 2.5 years. The MAE is at its highest for the target age of 55 years but is generally
close in magnitude for all target ages. Along with Figure 5.9, this further shows how the
optimal model has learned to accurately simulate aging patterns for the entire range of
years it was trained on.
Finally, a part of the aging accuracy analysis is also dedicated to exploring the relation
between ψ and the MAEFPage, which is shown in Figure 5.11. The uncalibrated optimal
model is used to create the plot. This is done to clearly show how ψ will affect the aging
accuracy but also how it, in turn, improves the quality. The plot is made by sampling 96
random latent vectors for each ψ. An image G(z|c) is generated for each z with a random
age y between 0 and 75 embedded in c. The estimated age ˆy using FPAge and MagFace
score is also found for each G(z|c). The mean MagFace score is used to color the dots
according to the color bar in Figure 5.11.
Face Age Progression Based on Generative Adversarial Networks
43
==PAGE:54==
Figure 5.10: MAE of 20 generated images for different ages estimated with cognitec (left)
and FPAge (right). The standard deviation is added by the colored areas.
Figure 5.11: MAEFPAge as a function of ψ.
The plot clearly shows how MAEFPAge increases as ψ decreases, which follows the explana-
tion in Section 4.5. The mean MagFace score of the images also increases as ψ decreases,
which is shown by the color of the dots. The MagFace score is not directly a measure of
visual fidelity but how likely it is for the subject to be recognized by a face recognition
system. This likelihood naturally increases if the face is less occluded, and artifacts might
occlude parts of the face. Therefore, the MagFace score indirectly becomes a measure of
visual fidelity since artifacts are something connected with low visual fidelity. The figure
shows how the mean MagFace score increases as ψ decreases, which is also what is ex-
pected. In applications where aging accuracy is less important, age-EG3D with a lower
ψ is favorable since it results in images with fewer artifacts and a generally higher visual
fidelity.
44
Face Age Progression Based on Generative Adversarial Networks
==PAGE:55==
5.2.5
Exploratory Analysis
The measures listed in Table 5.1, 5.2, and 5.3 are useful for comparing different models,
but it is diﬀicult to quantify what a difference in MAE, FID, and IDscore has on the
output images of a model. Therefore, visual inspection of sample images is also crucial
to help understand what these differences mean and how the optimal model performs
visually. An exploratory analysis is therefore provided, mainly with sample images from
the optimal model and images using other age-EG3D models from Table 5.1 to pinpoint
their differences.
A random latent vector z is used to generate the images in Figure 5.12 with ψ = 0.75.
The target age is labeled for each column, and the camera pose P is varied for each row
from a right face-angle to a frontal view to a left face-angle.
Figure 5.12: Example images from the optimal EG3D model with varying age and camera
pose. Images are generated with ψ = 0.75 and calibrated target ages.
The image shows how age-EG3D effectively outputs an image in accordance with the target
age for most ages except for the 0-year-old, which does not quite look like a newborn. This
is mainly because there were no 0-year-old labels in the dataset (as seen in Figure 4.3). Due
to this fact, even though the model is calibrated, it cannot accurately produce images of
infants. It is generally the case that very few images of infants are available in public face
image datasets, which makes it harder for generative models to portray them accurately.
Except for the 0-year-old, most of the faces in Figure 5.12 seem to correspond to their
target age by a visual inspection.
A frontal view image using Model B at index 11 in Table 5.1 is shown in Figure 5.13 to
display how a higher FID and MAE affect the outcome. The model has an MAE 1.48 years
higher than the optimal model, and the same latent vector is used for both Figure 5.12
and 5.13. Figure 5.13 should only be compared to the middle row of Figure 5.12. The
visual differences in age accuracy between Figure 5.12 and Figure 5.13 are small for the
given synthetic face, as would be expected with a relatively small difference in MAE of
1.48 years. The only obvious difference is that at the target age of 20, the subject looks
younger in Figure 5.13 compared to that in Figure 5.12. The difference in FID of 1.119
shows a little between Figure 5.12 and 5.13. Very little in the middle row of Figure 5.12
hints that the image is synthetic and not real. These few things could be earrings and
Face Age Progression Based on Generative Adversarial Networks
45
==PAGE:56==
ears for ages 0-10 that look slightly unrealistic.
More factors hint that the images in
Figure 5.13 are synthetic, which also includes the ears. Here, it is not the size of the ear
that is unrealistic but the blurred tip of the ears for ages 0 to 10, which is not the case in
Figure 5.12. For all ages in Figure 5.13 there is a feather-like artifact on the individual’s
left shoulder, indicating how the difference in FID can be interpreted.
Figure 5.13: Synthetic images generated for different target ages using Model B at index
11 in Table 5.1 with ψ = 1.0.
The visual fidelity and image quality of Figure 5.12 is very high, and most images in the
grid can easily be perceived as real images of a person. The visual fidelity is visually
highest for the frontal view in the middle row and decreases as the camera angle changes.
This is also generally the case for the original EG3D model.4 The decrease in image quality
is apparent from the side views, especially around the eyes, where there are a few artifacts,
although one has to look closely to see them. The head shape is also not quite as expected
for the younger ages at an angle.
Visually, the identity is also preserved quite well as the target age is varied in Figure 5.12
as it can be perceived as the same person throughout the years. This is not always the case,
especially for models without the identity loss term. For those models, gender switches
often occur, which is a sign of identity loss. An example is provided in Figure 5.14, which is
generated using Model A at the top of Table 5.1 that has a lower IDscore than the optimal
model. Figure 5.14 uses the same latent vector as in Figure 5.12. Here it can be seen how
the gender seems to switch from female to male at a target age of 55 years. This shows
how a higher IDscore is analogous with less identity loss as the target age changes.
For both Figure 5.12 and 5.14, age-EG3D preserves the view consistency. That is, the
columns visually appear to be the same face photographed from different angles at the
same time. There is no change in the smile or other facial characteristics, which is the
desired outcome.
As described in Section 2.1.1, interpolations are a good way to inspect the disentanglement
of a GAN’s latent space. Interpolations are made both in the Z and W space of age-EG3D.
Z Interpolation
The interpolation in the latent space Z is made by sampling two latent vectors z1 and
z2 where z1 is the same as the one used to generate Figure 5.12, 5.13 and 5.14. G(z1|c1)
is shown in the top left corner of Figure 5.15 and G(z2|c2) is in the bottom right corner.
The target age embedded in c1 is 0 years, while it is 75 years in c2, which is equivalent to
the minimum and maximum age used while training the model.
A spherical linear interpolation (slerp) curve is then found between z1 and z2. Each image
in Figure 5.15 is then a G(z|c) where the z’s are linearly spread samples on the curve. The
target age embedded in c also linearly increases from 0 to 75 years old for each G(z|c).
4See an example of the same seed for the original EG3D model in Appendix C.1 that shows the same
limitation.
46
Face Age Progression Based on Generative Adversarial Networks
==PAGE:57==
Figure 5.14: Sample images using Model A at the top of Table 5.1 with ψ = 1.0.
Figure 5.15:
Synthetic images of latent vectors sampled on the spherical linear Z-
interpolation curve.
The endpoints lie in the top left corner and bottom right corner.
As images are sampled along the interpolated curve, ordered left to right, top to bottom,
the target age increases, going from 0 years in the top left corner to 75 years in the bottom
right corner.
Face Age Progression Based on Generative Adversarial Networks
47
==PAGE:58==
The interpolation shows a result of a well-disentangled latent space of the model. It is
seen how the little girl gradually gets older and, in the middle row, turns from female to
male. From each endpoint in the top left and bottom right corner, there seems to be a
gradual change for most facial semantics such as hair, eyewear, and smile. As described
in Section 2.1.1, there should not be any factors of variety between the endpoints. This
is mostly the case except for the earrings. This shows a slight entanglement of the latent
space and should ideally not be the case.
W Interpolation
An interpolation-image in the latent space W is presented in Figure 5.16. The same latent
vectors z1 and z2 are used as in the previous example and mapped to w1 = M(z1|c1)
and w2 = M(z2|c2) where M is the optimal model’s mapping network. The target age
embedded in c1 is 0 and 75 in c2. A linear interpolation curve is computed between w1
and w2 and linearly spread samples of w are synthesized, resulting in Figure 5.16. A linear
interpolation is used instead of a spherical linear interpolation as W is not normalized,
unlike Z [11].
Figure 5.16:
Synthetic images of latent vectors sampled on the spherical linear W-
interpolation curve.
The endpoints lie in the top left corner and bottom right corner.
As images are sampled along the interpolated curve, ordered left to right, top to bottom,
the target age increases, going from 0 years in the top left corner to 75 years in the bottom
right corner.
48
Face Age Progression Based on Generative Adversarial Networks
==PAGE:59==
The interpolation in W shown in Figure 5.16 is very similar to the interpolation in Z shown
in Figure 5.15. However, a few differences show the more disentangled properties of W.
The earrings that were very visible in Figure 5.15 are now much less prominent and only
barely visible in rows 1-3 of Figure 5.16. The hair of the subjects between the endpoints
also appears to be a mix of the hairstyle of the endpoints. In Figure 5.15, individuals in
the second row have more hair than the endpoint, which is not the case in Figure 5.16.
5.2.6
Identity Preservation Analysis
The synthesized image G(z|c) should appear to have the same identity when the age
condition in c is changed. This would mean that identity of G(z|c) is invariant to the age
condition. This is most important for age-EG3D’s application in predicting real humans’
facial appearance at various ages, as it would no longer be useful as a prediction if age-
EG3D generated a completely different face at the target age.
The identity preservation is visualized by use of the data used to compute the IDscore
(described in Section 5.1). Here, a considered age is investigated. A considered age of 0
means that a feature vector f i has been extracted from G(z|c) with 0 as the target age.
Images are then synthesized for each of the remaining ages (in this case, 18, 37, 56, and
75), and a feature vector f j is extracted for each age. This is repeated for the 20 random
latent vectors. For a considered age, the average SC(f i, f j) can then be found for the
remaining ages, which is visualized in Figure 5.17. This makes it possible to see how well
0-year-olds preserve their identity as the target age change, 17-year-olds, etc. The cosine
similarity at the considered age is naturally one, as it compares identical images.
The black dashed line in each plot shows the average SC for 100 non-mated samples from
the APPA-real dataset [57] using ArcFace and MagFace. This is added to signify that
the average ArcFace SC in Figure 5.17 is still generally higher than the standard SC
score for non-mated samples and show how the same MagFace and ArcFace SC values
mean different things. This suggests that the orange curve still expresses that some of the
identity of G(z|c) is preserved as the target age varies. Otherwise, the orange curve would
lie even closer to the orange dashed line if not on it.
In the top row of Figure 5.17, the considered age is 0. The plot then shows how the average
ArcFace cosine similarity score decreases as the age increases while the average MagFace
cosine similarity score virtually remains constant at one. This is the same case for all the
other considered ages, and there are two likely causes, each likely partially contributing
to the differences in the curves.
The first is the difference in scale between the two models.
While the average cosine
similarity between two completely different individuals’ face images is approximately 0.9
with MagFace, for ArcFace, it is approximately 0. This has an impact on both training
and evaluation. For training, this could mean that the MagFace cosine similarity may
get very close to 1 but may not correspond to two face images having the same identity.
Even if a very small gain in cosine similarity, for example, from 0.990 to 0.991, makes a
big difference in identity similarity, it makes a minimal difference in LID. Therefore, the
average non-mated SC being so high for MagFace can cause diﬀiculties for the model to
train on. For evaluation, this means that the MagFace and ArcFace SC values are not
comparable, as they are on different scales.
The second cause could be a degree of overfitting. The model may have learned to “trick”
the MagFace model to a certain extent and thus be overfitted to MagFace while being
unable to generalize very well. Because of the rather large difference in magnitudes between
the two non-mated average SC values, the first cause is given more weight.
Face Age Progression Based on Generative Adversarial Networks
49
==PAGE:60==
Figure 5.17: Illustration of identity preservation for five different considered ages.
5.2.7
Inversion Results and Analysis
To simulate the aging on face images of real people, the inversion technique described
in Section 4.6 is used with the optimal model. Every input image is first preprocessed
with Deep3D like the FFHQ training images, which extracts a camera parameter P . The
inversion of the sample image in Figure 5.18 is used as an example.
Stochastic gradient descent is used to find a solution to the objective function in Equa-
tion (4.13). Figure 5.19 shows reconstructions for the optimized latent vector from the
initial random latent vector (far left) to the final latent vector zp (far right). The latent
vector is optimized for 500 iterations, so the output image resembles the input as much as
possible without altering the weights of the network. The latent vector used to generate
the image on the far right of Figure 5.19 is used as the pivotal latent vector zp in the next
50
Face Age Progression Based on Generative Adversarial Networks
==PAGE:61==
Figure 5.18: Sample image (left) used as input for inversion, which has been cropped with
Deep3D (right). From the APPA-real test set.
and final step of the inversion.
Figure 5.19: Initial optimization results using PTI. The images are reconstructions of the
optimized latent vector from the first iteration (left) to the final iteration (right).
The weights of the optimal model are unfrozen in this final step of the inversion. Here, zp
is used as input to the network, and the weights θ∗are updated using the loss function
described by Equation (4.14). This work uses 1000 iterations, and the gradual improve-
ment of G(zp; θ∗|c) is shown in Figure 5.20 from first to final iteration.
The network
quickly starts to output an image very similar to the input image since its starting point
is close. The final result is the far right image in Figure 5.20. The total inversion time is
typically around 250 seconds, which varies according to iteration steps, but it is generally
a computationally expensive procedure.
Figure 5.20: PTI optimization results.
A number of successful reconstructions are shown in Figure 5.21. The reconstructed images
are all very similar to the input image and of great quality. There are still flaws that hint
that the reconstructed images are not, in fact, real. By looking closely, there is a general
blurriness to the reconstructions, which would ideally not be there. This is especially the
case for input images with a pose away from the camera and bad lighting, evidenced in
the top right. The model does also not capture earrings and other small details too well.
Apart from that, the reconstructions are clearly resembling of the original and could fool
anyone at a distance or at a glance.
It is now possible to simulate age regression or progression by changing the age condition
for the inverted images. This is done using the inversion of a familiar face, Tom Hanks,
at a young age so that identity preservation can be visually inspected. The input image
Face Age Progression Based on Generative Adversarial Networks
51
==PAGE:62==
Figure 5.21: Inversions using the optimal model. All images are from the APPA-real test
set.
is shown in Figure 5.22.
Figure 5.22: Input image for reconstruction [58].
The results of changing the age condition when reconstructing the inversion of Tom Hanks
are shown in Figure 5.23. The image shows how the age condition is still effective after
inverting the image, which includes updating the weights of the optimal model. The aging
also appears realistic, especially for the years close to the apparent age of the input image.
The realism diminishes as the target age goes to very young and old.
Figure 5.23: Aging effect on reconstructed images of Tom Hanks at different ages.
The 0-year-old Tom Hanks looks more like a 10-year-old even though the calibrated target
age is injected as the age condition. This is also an issue for synthetic images from random
latent vectors, as seen in Figure 5.12. The 0-year-old in Figure 5.23 does, however, look
older than in Figure 5.12. This suggests that the changing of the weights in the inversion
has diminished the effect of the age condition. This is further evidenced by how a -25-
year-old is more resembling of a 0-year-old. This suggests that the calibration used for
52
Face Age Progression Based on Generative Adversarial Networks
==PAGE:63==
the optimal model is no longer accurate after the weights have been updated to invert an
image. Therefore, there is an idea of re-calibrating the model whose weights have been
updated after the inversion. This is done and explained in the comparison to related works
in the following section.
Because of the pose conditioning of age-EG3D, the camera angle of the reconstructed image
can also be changed. An example of this is given in Figure 5.24, where the camera angle
for the top right reconstruction in Figure 5.21 has been changed. The original image is of
the actor Emile Hirsch. It is clear how using a camera angle closer to the original camera
angle yields the best results. The image becomes increasingly blurred as the camera angle
changes from the original image. All the images in Figure 5.24 are slightly blurred, worst
for the outer right image. The middle frontal view image is also blurred, but it is still
clearly resembling the same individual as was originally inverted.
Figure 5.24: Changed camera angles for an inversion.
5.3
Comparison to Related Works
This section will compare age-EG3D with the related work, first by comparing aging
performance with state-of-the-art aging models: SAM, HRFAE, and CUSP described in
Section 3.2. Afterward, the 3D performance is compared with state-of-the-art 3D GANs:
EG3D, GIRAFFE, and π-GAN described in Section 3.3.
All of aging accuracy analyses use images from the APPA-REAL [57] test set, as the
training set was used to train yu4u. All images not in the desired age range of 20-30
and 50-60 were thrown out, and then some images were manually filtered out to ensure all
input images had a high resolution and had nothing covering the faces. This resulted in 44
images in the range of 20-30 and 27 images in the range of 50-60, totaling 71 images. This
split was chosen, so input images in the age range 20-30 mainly measure FAP performance,
and input images the age range 50-60 mainly measure FAR performance. The 71 images
are used as input for each model to generate images with target ages from 0-100 in intervals
of 5 years. The models limit the target ages, as SAM can produce images with target ages
5-100, HRFAE from 20-70, and CUSP from 20-65. Although age-EG3D is only trained
on target ages 0-75, it is in this analysis used for generating images between ages 0-100 to
fully utilize its extrapolating abilities.
SAM, HRFAE, and CUSP are image-to-image translation networks, meaning their input
is a real face image, and the output is a face image for a given target age. Age-EG3D is
not an image-to-image translation network. Therefore, all input images are inverted to the
optimal model’s latent space using the technique showcased in the previous section and
then reconstructed for the target ages. As Section 5.2.7 suggests, the target age does not
correspond with the apparent age (as seen in Figure 5.23 where the -25-year-old resembles
a 0-year-old). New parameters for the calibration function (a and b in Equation (5.1)) are
computed to solve this issue. This is done by using all 71 test images and generating four
new images with their corresponding zp with four uncalibrated random ages between 0
and 100. Estimating the ages of the output images with yu4u results in the left graph of
Face Age Progression Based on Generative Adversarial Networks
53
==PAGE:64==
Figure 5.25. The best fit line is found, and the inversion calibration becomes
cal(target age) = target age −24.2
0.336
The same latent vectors and four random calibrated ages are then used to generate new
images. The new estimates with yu4u on the right of Figure 5.25 now show a much higher
correlation between the target and estimated age. For the remainder of this section, age-
EG3D will refer to the optimal model using the inversion calibration function found here.
Figure 5.25: Before (left) and after (right) calibrating target ages for inversions.
In Table 5.4, the MAEs, as evaluated by cognitec, of the different models can be seen,
given for all input images, and split by age ranges 20-30 and 50-60. Notably, age-EG3D
has the best MAE (all) and MAE (20-30). Age-EG3D is only beaten by HRFAE in MAE
(50-60), where HRFAE is surprisingly significantly better than for the age range 20-30,
which is further analyzed in Section 5.3.2. As would be expected, age-EG3D has nearly
identical MAE for 20-30 and 50-60, as it focuses on aging accuracy for all ages equally
during training. From the perspective of the age-EG3D GAN, it generates a face with an
identity (given by zp), and an angle and age (given by c). There is no direct manipulation
or editing of any input images. This is also the case for SAM (after its encoding step),
explaining why these two have the smallest differences in MAE (20-30) and MAE (50-60).
Table 5.4: MAE for age-EG3D and related works for real face images.
Model name
MAE (all) ↑
MAE (20-30)
MAE (50-60)
age-EG3D
7.863
7.990
7.650
HRFAE
9.338
11.61
5.630
CUSP
10.06
10.41
9.476
SAM
11.65
11.80
11.39
In order to compare the age accuracy of the different age networks at specific target
ages, FAM performance plots are introduced. These plots measure the MAE of real age-
manipulated face images at different target ages, as generated by: Age-EG3D, CUSP,
HRFAE, and SAM. The plot has been split into two to minimize any occurrences of MAE
improving due to a high number of input images close to the target age rather than better
54
Face Age Progression Based on Generative Adversarial Networks
==PAGE:65==
model performance. The first plot, the FAP performance plot, only has input images of
ages 20-30 years. The second plot of the FAR performance plot only has input ages 50-60
years. Although the FAP plot may include some age regression depending on the model
and the FAR plot some age progression, these age ranges were chosen to be within the
possible range of all the tested models. Lastly, the ages will be evaluated in separate plots
with FPAge and cognitec.
In addition to the FAM performance plots, a similar plot will be introduced, called the
FAM identity preservation plot, which measures cosine similarity to the input image on the
y-axis instead of MAE. These plots are also split into FAR and FAP identity preservation
plots in the same way as FAP and FAR performance plots.
5.3.1
FAP Performance
Figure 5.26 shows the FAP performance plot for cognitec.
As expected, age-EG3D
performs best within the ranges it trained at, from 0-75, with MAE drastically increasing
up to 25 years at target age 100, likely because it continues to make faces that resemble
75-year-olds more than 100-year-olds. Even with the disadvantage of including target ages
above 75 for age-EG3D, it still has the best MAE (20-30) in Table 5.4. Additionally, from
target age 45 to 100, and target age 10 to 0, it outperforms all other selected models
in age accuracy, which indicates that age-EG3D performs better at extremes than other
models. SAM outperforms age-EG3D only when close to the input age range of 20-30,
which indicates that SAM is better for smaller age changes, but age-EG3D is better for
larger age changes. Lastly, age-EG3D is much better than HRFAE and SAM from target
ages 30 and up, at some points having almost one-third of the MAE of the other two.
Figure 5.26: FAP performance plot, evaluated with cognitec and input face images with
ages 20-30 years.
In Figure 5.27, the FAP performance plot for FPAge is shown. This plot is similar to
Figure 5.26, with two notable exceptions. The first is that the error is much higher for
those under 10, which is simply because FPAge’s minimum age estimation output is around
10 years.5 Secondly, age-EG3D outperforms all other models from target ages 0-15, 40-50,
and 70-100 years. Age-EG3D is still far superior to CUSP and HRFAE at almost all target
5FPAge is implemented to output ages from 0 to 97, but due to the pretrained model used in this thesis,
it does not output anything below 10 as seen in Appendix A.1.1.
Face Age Progression Based on Generative Adversarial Networks
55
==PAGE:66==
ages, as indicated by the cognitec age estimator, and is still very close in performance to
SAM, even when outperformed by it in target age ranges 20-30 and 55-60.
Figure 5.27: Face age progression performance plot, evaluated with FPAge and with input
ages 20-30.
The final analysis for this section will use output images of the models at selected target
ages, given an input image with true age 27, as seen in Figure 5.28. Perhaps the most
interesting is that HRFAE and CUSP have minimal changes to the facial appearance
between target ages 20 and 35, further explaining why they have such high MAE in the
30-50 range.
Target age 65 for HRFAE is subjectively the worst of the four models, as it is simply
the same face with wrinkles, which resemble textural errors more than natural wrinkles,
and may also explain why HRFAE is the worst at older ages in the FAP performance
plots in Figures 5.26 and 5.27. The other models have, at 65, all given the subject more
realistic changes in hair color, beard style, and wrinkles. This is also reflected in the FAP
performance plots, where HRFAE has the worst MAE from 55-70.
Lastly, while it is diﬀicult to subjectively evaluate whether age-EG3D or SAM is more age
accurate at target age 100, it is clear that age-EG3D has better matched the target age
of 5, as SAM’s resembles more a child of approximately 10-12 years old, due to the facial
structure. This subjective comparison of the target age 5 between age-EG3D and SAM is
reflected in the FAP performance plots above.
The conclusions drawn from these figures are that age-EG3D outperforms CUSP and
HRFAE at the vast majority of target ages, at some points being nearly three times better
in terms of MAE. On the other hand, age-EG3D and SAM are much closer in performance,
with SAM being slightly better when making smaller age adjustments and age-EG3D being
better at larger age adjustments, with the advantage growing at the extremes. In terms
of visual quality, HRFAE is likely the worst of the four.
5.3.2
FAR performance
In Figure 5.29, the FAR performance plot is shown as evaluated by cognitec.
The
performance of the models looks closer than with the FAP performance plots, even though
there are some large differences in the total MAE in Table 5.4. Age-EG3D still performs
56
Face Age Progression Based on Generative Adversarial Networks
==PAGE:67==
Figure 5.28: Example outputs of the different models at different target ages, given an
input image with true age 27.
better than the other models at the extremes, where relevant. Additionally, it can be seen
that CUSP has an outlier of especially high MAE at 20 years. This may be because CUSP
fails at 20 (this is later confirmed in Figure 5.31), which is not seen as easily in the FAP
performance plots Section 5.3.1 because the input images all have ages from 20-30. As
mentioned previously, the MAE for SAM and age-EG3D grows quickly at around 60-70,
and age-EG3D’s total MAE would be even lower if target ages above 75 weren’t included.
Figure 5.30 further confirms the previous findings, but evaluates age-EG3D as being worse
than cognitec does. Because of the high MAE, even within the target ages 50-60, a possi-
ble explanation for this underperformance is that FPAge is more sensitive to imperfections
in the inversion than cognitec is.
In Figure 5.31, outputs from the models given an input image with a true age of 56 are
shown. As seen in Figure 5.28, it is again clear that age-EG3D is better than SAM at
target age 5, as SAM’s face image does not have the facial structure of a 5-year-old, while
age-EG3D does. Based on the target age 20 image from CUSP, it is clear that CUSP
fails at 20, as it has reproduced the input image instead. This likely negatively affects
CUSP’s general MAE in Table 5.4, but was included as CUSP claims its range includes 20.
HRFAE has yet again the least changes to the face, mainly smoothing the facial texture,
while everything else, most saliently the hair color, remains constant.
The FAR performance analysis concludes that age-EG3D again outperforms the other
models at the extremes and remains comparable to the other models in the ranges 15-60.
Age-EG3D’s general MAE for input ages 50-60 could also be improved by excluding target
ages above 75, but the fact that it is still second best shows how excellent age-EG3D is
with extrapolation. Lastly, though HRFAE has the best FAR performance, it also has the
Face Age Progression Based on Generative Adversarial Networks
57
==PAGE:68==
Figure 5.29: Face age regression performance plot, evaluated with cognitec, and with
input ages 50-60
Figure 5.30: Face age regression performance plot, evaluated with FPAge, and with input
ages 50-60
worst visual quality.
5.3.3
Identity Preservation Performance
In Figure 5.32, the FAP identity preservation plot is shown. Interestingly, the cosine sim-
ilarity peaks not in the 20-30 range, where the age would be changed the least, but rather
slightly after, for all models, or even at 40, in the case of HRFAE. Another interesting
observation is that the models with the worse aging accuracy, HRFAE, and CUSP, are the
models with the best identity preservation, indicating that their high cosine similarities
are more caused by the face not being changed enough to match the age, rather than
exceptional identity preservation. As written in the previous section, Figure 5.32 and 5.33
indicate that CUSP is unable to edit the age of a face to age 20, instead returning a nearly
58
Face Age Progression Based on Generative Adversarial Networks
==PAGE:69==
Figure 5.31: Example outputs of the different models at different target ages, given an
input image with true age 56.
identical face. This is proven by the anomalously high cosine similarity score in both plots
for CUSP at the target age of 20 years.
Figure 5.32: FAP identity preservation performance plot, as evaluated by ArcFace, with
input images of ages 20-30.
The FAR identity preservation plot is shown in Figure 5.33. Unlike the FAP plot, CUSP
has a cosine similarity peak in target ages 50-60, as would be expected (disregarding the
Face Age Progression Based on Generative Adversarial Networks
59
==PAGE:70==
outlier at 20). However, the others still have peaks left of the 50-60 range, with age-EG3D
having the left-most peak at 40. This may indicate that age editing models, in general,
create more realistic faces when generating faces in the middle of their range, around 40,
thus making it have a greater match to the input image. Additionally, age-EG3D is slightly
worse at inverting images of older people in the range of 50-60 than younger people in the
range of 20-30. This can be seen by looking at the cosine similarities levels at target ages
20-30 in Figure 5.32, and for 50-60 in Figure 5.33.
Because the cosine similarity of age-EG3D is the lowest among all the models, even in
the 20-30 and 50-60 ranges in the respective plots, this indicates that the inversions do
not preserve the identity of the subject very well when changing the target age, despite
looking similar to the subject.
Figure 5.33: FAR identity preservation plot, as evaluated by ArcFace, with input images
of ages 50-60.
Lastly, age-EG3D has the sharpest dropoff in cosine similarity in both plots. This would
indicate that identity preservation is still inferior, even when considering the imperfect
inversions.
Interestingly, SAM is the second worst in identity preservation, despite it
having trained with ArcFace. This also introduces a bias in Figure 5.32 and 5.33 as SAM
would naturally exhibit better identity preservation measured by ArcFace when it was
used to train it.
In conclusion, two main observations are drawn from the graphs.
First, the inversion
quality for age-EG3D is not perfect, which affects identity preservation when editing im-
ages of real faces. Secondly and finally, the high identity preservation of HRFAE and
CUSP is likely caused by their low-quality age editing rather than high-quality identity
preservation.
5.3.4
3D Performance
The visual quality of the 3D aspect of the age-EG3D network subjectively seems to be very
close to that of the original EG3D, as evidenced by the exploratory analysis in Section 5.2.5.
Because of this, combined with time constraints and diﬀiculties in doing depth and pose
analysis, a simple exploratory analysis will be performed. This is done by showing random
synthetic faces from different viewing angles, the limitations of the age-EG3D network, and
finally comparing it to existing works and the original EG3D network by FID.
60
Face Age Progression Based on Generative Adversarial Networks
==PAGE:71==
Exploratory analysis of 3D performance
In this section, an exploratory analysis of the 3D capabilities of the age-EG3D network is
made. In Figure 5.34, the z used throughout Section 5.2.5, with a constant target age, is
displayed at different viewing angles.
Figure 5.34: A grid showing a synthetic face from different angles, corresponding to the
position in the grid.
The inner 3 × 3 grid clearly has the highest visual fidelity, and the outermost layer dete-
riorates, as evidenced by the increased blurriness, visual artifacts, and distortions at the
edges. Despite the drop in visual fidelity for the outermost layer, the face’s depth accuracy
remains high when subjectively examined. Interestingly, a small yellow blur occurs at the
outer edge of the image, corresponding to where the subject is looking, at the outer layer
of the grid. This may be due to a flaw in the training set, where the only images with such
an extreme angle have objects obscuring the camera, or simply due to a lack of images
from those angles leading to lower quality image generation.
A similar figure is made to show the 3D capabilities of an inverted real face image. Again,
the Tom Hanks inversion from earlier is used and shown in Figure 5.35.
There is a
noticeable difference in quality between Figure 5.35 and 5.34. Especially for the outermost
images where the blurriness is increased compared to Figure 5.34. The visual fidelity of
the inner 3×3 grid of Figure 5.35 is still relatively high, but the blurriness already becomes
visible for slight changes to the camera angle. However, it is still clear that it is the same
Face Age Progression Based on Generative Adversarial Networks
61
==PAGE:72==
individual in most of the images.
Figure 5.35: The reconstruction of Tom Hanks from different angles.
Comparison to related works
The FID is compared of π-GAN, GIRAFFE, and the original 5122 resolution EG3D net-
work, as calculated in [5]. They are all calculated by taking the FID “between 50k gener-
ated images and all available real images”[5] and shown in Table 5.5.
Table 5.5: Comparison of FID for state-of-the-art 3D GANs.
Model name
FID
GIRAFFE
31.5
π-GAN
29.9
Optimal age-EG3D model
6.4
EG3D
4.7
As expected, the original EG3D model performs best in terms of FID, with age-EG3D
being a close second.
Ideally, when age-EG3D resumes training from the pre-trained
EG3D model, it would train “orthogonally” relative to its 3D capability, such that 3D
performance remains the same while aging accuracy increases. Although it remains close
to the original 3D performance, it seems some 3D performance was sacrificed in exchange
62
Face Age Progression Based on Generative Adversarial Networks
==PAGE:73==
for aging accuracy. Then, compared to π-GAN and GIRAFFE, the FID of age-EG3D
is much better. This is partially explained by age-EG3D, and EG3D having trained on
FFHQ, the images being used to find the FID, but is also due to higher 3D quality. The
FID of GIRAFFE is likely impacted by its extremely low output resolution of 64 × 64.
It is also prudent to note that the range of viewing angles of EG3D and age-EG3D is
much greater than the other models. Other models are for faces only capable of relatively
small horizontal adjustments in camera angle, whereas age-EG3D and EG3D are capable
of larger adjustments in any direction.
Although FID is mainly a visual quality measure, this thesis uses it as a rough measure of
3D quality due to time constraints. Thus, it can be seen that not only is the visual quality
of age-EG3D much better than the related works (except for EG3D, which it extends),
but the 3D quality is likely similarly good to EG3D and better than that of π-GAN and
GIRAFFE.
Face Age Progression Based on Generative Adversarial Networks
63
==PAGE:74==
64
Face Age Progression Based on Generative Adversarial Networks
==PAGE:75==
Chapter 6
Discussion
This section will analyze and summarize all the findings made in Chapter 5 in a holistic
manner.
The synthetic images of age-EG3D are of very high quality in visual fidelity and aging
accuracy compared to existing works. The configuration with the best uncalibrated aging
accuracy is Model A with ψ = 1 as evidenced by Table 5.1. This is likely because the
network focuses purely on improving aging accuracy and not identity preservation while
maintaining 3D accuracy.
Age-EG3D’s advantages are, of course, not limited to synthetic faces. Aging accuracy
is incredibly high on reconstructed face images compared to state-of-the-art, in some
age ranges being almost three times better in terms of MAE. Even compared to the
best of the related work, SAM, age-EG3D, starts to outperform SAM when greater age
transformations are applied and is much better when the target age is extremely young or
old.
Additionally, this work introduced calibration, which improved the MAE of truncated
models while retaining their advantages in visual fidelity and identity preservation by
reducing ψ. The calibration could be utilized for both generating synthetic images and
reconstructing real face images. The calibration was only possible since the age conditions
are implemented as floating point age values (except for categorical models, which cannot
be calibrated). The floating point age value means age-EG3D learns to generalize the
aging patterns. This allows for extrapolation to target ages outside the age-range age-
EG3D was trained on and enables calibration. Here, age-EG3D shows a clear advantage
compared to many other related works, as they are constrained to certain age ranges by
their implementation.
Although aging accuracy was impressive, it is extremely diﬀicult to perfect it due to
the highly individual way different people age due to lifestyle and genetics [4]. It could
therefore be interesting to find a way to condition age-EG3D and other similar networks
on not just age but also lifestyle choices that impact aging rates, such as smoking.
The identity preservation was increased by introducing an additional identity loss term.
This is evidenced by Model B having the highest IDscore in Table 5.1, which was also
chosen as the optimal model partly due to this reason. However, identity preservation is
a potential weak point of the model that requires further study. The difference in scales,
and potential overfitting, means that MagFace comparison scores show very good identity
preservation, whereas ArcFace indicates weaker identity preservation. Additionally, due
Face Age Progression Based on Generative Adversarial Networks
65
==PAGE:76==
to imperfect inversions, ArcFace may have diﬀiculties seeing similarities between input
face images and reconstructed face images, which likely impacts identity preservation.
However, it must be noted that the models that performed best in identity preservation
performed worst in aging accuracy, which indicates the high identity preservation of some
models comes from not changing the faces enough to match the target age rather than
high-quality identity preservation.
The visual fidelity of age-EG3D’s synthetic images is very high, with an FID slightly
higher than the original EG3D and much lower than other state-of-the-art 3D models.
Additionally, the 3D accuracy of age-EG3D, based on exploratory analysis in Section 5.3.4
and using FID as a proxy, remains very close to that of the original EG3D and, thus, much
better than other state-of-the-art 3D GANs.
Although some reconstructions have slightly lower visual quality, they appear similar to
the original input face images. Due to time constraints and a focus on the aging aspect,
further analysis was not made of the 3D accuracy of age-EG3D, but based on the FID
and subjective exploratory analysis, age-EG3D’s 3D accuracy very closely follows that of
EG3D.
Before finding the optimal model, one attempted configuration was the categorical age-
EG3D model. Because many older works have injected age as one-hot-encoded data, and
yu4u’s output layer corresponds to 101 age categories, it was natural to see if using cate-
gories would improve performance. Unfortunately, this resulted in the worst-performing
model configuration for aging accuracy. This indicates that floating point age values are
likely superior to categorical.
The optimal model of age-EG3D was found to be the calibrated model B at index 3 in
Table 5.1 with ψ = 0.75.
The introduction of delaying the start of LID increased its
performance compared to the remaining model B configurations. Figure 5.12 showed the
capabilities of the model as the synthetic faces are very life-like and closely resembling its
target age. This means that the model can easily be used to populate face image databases,
which is one of the major goals of FAM since it can help limit biases they currently possess.
The non-uniform age distribution in most available face image datasets is one bias that
age-EG3D can help to eliminate. But others still exist, such as gender, where one might
be overrepresented compared to another. It could be interesting to further condition the
network on other factors of variation, such as gender and race. In that way, an even more
controllable output could be used to populate face image datasets. However, it is not
guaranteed that the network can learn these traits as well as it has with the age condition,
which is a promising area for future research.
Age-EG3D is capable of high-quality inversions such that the reconstructed image is very
similar to the original input image, as seen in Figure 5.21.
The reconstructed image
quality is mainly affected by the camera angle of the input image.
This is evidenced
by Figure 5.21 where the top right reconstruction shows the most blur and overall least
perceptual similarity to the original input image.
The age condition of age-EG3D is still effective on inverted images, as shown by Figure 5.23
and in Sections 5.3.1 and 5.3.2.
The aging accuracy was, however, lowered after the
network’s weights had been updated using the inversion technique proposed in Section 4.6.
Once again, calibration proved to be an easy and effective tool to improve aging accuracy.
After calibration, the aging accuracy of age-EG3D on real images was better than state-
of-the-art related works in most cases, as shown in the analysis in Section 5.3. While
calibration helps, the aging accuracy for reconstructed images is still not as good as for
66
Face Age Progression Based on Generative Adversarial Networks
==PAGE:77==
synthetic images. Further improvements to the inversion technique could help improve
the aging accuracy.
The resulting inversions show that age-EG3D is not limited to creating age-accurate syn-
thetic faces for populating datasets. It is also potentially applicable to forensics applica-
tions such as finding missing persons. This is the case because a missing person can be
displayed from various custom camera angles and with a target age. The use is still limited
since the identity is not fully preserved as the target age of a reconstruction is changed.
Reconstructions with a camera angle far from the original also yield blurry and unrealistic
results, which is also not ideal. With more time, it would be interesting to investigate
age-EG3D’s aging accuracy and identity preservation of real face images using a dataset
of mated samples at varying ages.
For the use cases of face age simulation on real images with age-EG3D, like the search
for missing persons, the inversion is the main bottleneck. This is clear since synthetic
images look like real images from most camera angles, as seen in Figure 5.34. This is not
always the case for reconstructions of real images as in Figure 5.24 and 5.35, which both
display a lower quality for extreme camera angles. By addressing and solving these issues,
age-EG3D could potentially be a powerful agent in forensics work. The second bottleneck
is the identity preservation problem. From an input image, it is extremely diﬀicult to
tell what a missing person looks like after, e.g., ten years. Knowledge of the individual’s
lifestyle could potentially be a way to address this problem.
Face Age Progression Based on Generative Adversarial Networks
67
==PAGE:78==
68
Face Age Progression Based on Generative Adversarial Networks
==PAGE:79==
Chapter 7
Conclusion
FAM models are critical for various purposes, from predicting missing persons’ appear-
ance to face recognition systems and balancing datasets. However, they must successfully
address the three main problems to be useful: aging accuracy, identity preservation, and
visual fidelity. Extending FAM from 2D to 3D adds the challenge of 3D quality and rep-
resentation but also expands the uses of FAM. For example, by giving frontal views of
an aged face of a missing person when there are only side views of the subject available,
improving face recognition systems by making them robust to any age and viewing angle,
and balancing datasets by age and viewing angle.
Age-EG3D set out to find a possible combined solution to all three problems of aging
accuracy, identity preservation, and visual fidelity. This major task included many high-
lights and obstacles that are still worth investigating, as explained in the previous chapter.
To summarize and conclude, each research question is answered following the results and
insights gained from the journey to the final contributions of this thesis.
1. Is it possible to add an age condition to the EG3D framework and re-train the model
without loss of the high visual fidelity of the original model?
The research showed that it was possible to successfully add an age condition to the EG3D
framework.
This was accomplished by first adding estimated age labels to the FFHQ
dataset used for training. The mapping network of EG3D was then extended to properly
handle the added age condition while still allowing the use of a pre-trained network trained
without the age condition. The added age condition allowed for control over the age of
the output image to a high degree. Evaluation results showed it was very accurate, with
FPAge estimating an MAE of 5.6 years after calibration for synthetic images.
The visual fidelity of the original EG3D model was slightly decreased after re-training
the model. The original model showed an FID of 4.7, which increased to 6.0, showing
a slight loss of visual fidelity.
By answering this question, age-EG3D addresses FAM
models’ problems with aging accuracy and visual fidelity, while extending FAM from the
traditional 2D to 3D.
2. After training the new age-conditioned EG3D model, age-EG3D, is it then possible
to generate a face image and then change the subject’s age only by modifying the
added age condition? And is the identity of the subject retained in this process?
The results clearly showed that age-EG3D is capable of generating face images that match
the target age and that identity is preserved to some extent while holding the latent vector
Face Age Progression Based on Generative Adversarial Networks
69
==PAGE:80==
z constant. In doing so, age-EG3D addresses the problem of identity preservation and
aging accuracy.
3. Is it possible to use age-EG3D to edit the age of a real face by projecting the image
into the latent space of the GAN?
The analysis in Section 5.2.7 showed the process of projecting a real face image to the
latent space of age-EG3D. This was accomplished by using the proposed modified PTI
inversion technique described in Section 4.6. It is then possible after the inversion to edit
the age of the reconstructed face image G(z|c) by only changing the target age embedded
in c. The control of an output image’s age was weakened by the inversion compared to
the generation of synthetic images. It was, however, improved by calibrating the network.
Therefore, it was indeed possible to project a real face image into the latent space of the
age-EG3D.
The quality of reconstructed real face images with age-EG3D’s optimal model was very
high, as displayed in Figure 5.21. The reconstructions did show minor artifacts for small
details like earrings, which were not perfectly reconstructed. The main facial features were,
however, reconstructed to a near-perfect extent, as the identity of the reconstruction was
clearly identical to the input image.
The aging accuracy of age-EG3D was tested on a set of real face images compared to state-
of-the-art related works. The FAM performance of age-EG3D was found to be comparable
in some cases and much better in most cases than the related works.
7.1
Future work
The following paragraphs will detail future work and experiments which could be made
on age-EG3D, both for potential improvements and better evaluation of the network.
Currently, the age condition is only injected into the mapping network for M(z|c) = w
and is ignored by the neural renderer and superresolution modules. Because these modules
do receive the camera parameter conditions, it is possible that injecting the age condition
would further improve the aging accuracy of the model and warrants investigation. Ad-
ditionally, inversions to the W latent space are not controllable by the age condition, as
described in Section 4.6, but would be controllable if the age condition was also injected
in the synthesis step.
Several things could be further worked on to improve the evaluation and training of identity
preservation. A separate face recognition model could be used for evaluation, as ArcFace
was used for training SAM. Additionally, using ArcFace to train instead of MagFace would
likely greatly improve identity preservation, mainly due to the difference in scale. Due to
diﬀiculties and time constraints in implementing ArcFace in PyTorch, this was not done in
this work. Lastly, experimenting with other forms of identity loss as implemented in other
works, such as with LPIPS distance or L2 pixel distance, either alone or in combination,
would be interesting to explore.
Due to time restrictions and a focus on the aging aspect, investigation of the 3D capabil-
ities of the network was limited to exploratory analysis and using FID as a proxy for 3D
quality. Although these indicate that age-EG3D follows EG3D very closely in quality, an
evaluation of the network’s depth accuracy would be useful to confirm the findings. Addi-
tionally, a more thorough evaluation of the 3D quality of age-EG3D would be interesting
for examining whether aging accuracy, identity preservation, training time, or any other
factors have an effect on the 3D accuracy.
70
Face Age Progression Based on Generative Adversarial Networks
==PAGE:81==
Despite the quality of inversions and the reconstructed image’s resemblance to the input
image, they are not always identical to the input images. If an encoder could be trained
alongside the age-EG3D network, such that it became an image-to-image network with an
encoder/decoder structure like that of SAM, it may improve the similarity of input and
output images, thus also improving identity preservation and image realism.
Additionally, training a separate encoder to the age-EG3D space on a fully trained age-
EG3D network would also be useful for two reasons. First, as with the previous idea,
is that it may show an improvement in inversion quality. Secondly, this would greatly
decrease the time it takes to invert an image, which would be useful in cases such as
border control, where quickly getting people through a queue is important. The current
time it takes to invert an image of around 250 seconds is not feasible in such a scenario.
All of the model configurations tested were models which continued training from a pre-
trained EG3D network. EG3D’s latent space is disentangled from the viewing angle but not
from age, as different latent vectors can clearly give subjects of different ages. Therefore, it
may be diﬀicult for age-EG3D to disentangle the latent space from the age. A disentangled
latent space would greatly improve identity preservation, as the latent space would ideally
only hold identifying information about faces that is invariant with respect to age. In
this case, training from scratch may improve the disentanglement and, thus, identity
preservation. However, training from scratch is diﬀicult because of the required time to
train, which would limit the amount of experimentation and hyperparameter testing that
can be done. For reference, the pre-trained EG3D network has trained for 8.5 days on 8
Tesla V100 GPUs to reach their results.
The inversion is the bottleneck in visual fidelity and aging accuracy when it comes to using
age-EG3D for FAM for real face images. This clearly shows that synthetic images’ visual
fidelity and aging accuracy are higher than reconstructions of inverted real images. The
issue with the modified technique of PTI described in Section 4.6 is that the weights of
the network have to be updated in order to get a reconstruction almost identical to the
input image. Without updating the weights, this is not possible, and it is, therefore, a
valid choice. However, changing the weights of age-EG3D weakens the conditional control
of the output image. So, there is a clear trade-off between reconstruction quality and
controllability. This trade-off should ideally not be present as the goal is to use age-EG3D
FAM on reconstructions that are identical to the real image that is inverted. Therefore,
further investigation is still needed into how to improve inversion techniques for cGANs
like age-EG3D.
Age-EG3D does not solve all issues of FAM, as many prevail and still need further research.
The identity of both synthetic and real images is not perfectly preserved as the target age
is changed. The proposed identity loss did, however, increase identity preservation, which
warrants further research. The other two main problems of FAM, aging accuracy and visual
fidelity, are where age-EG3D excels. This is evidenced by the analysis in Section 5.2.5 and
Figure 5.12 in particular, which shows aging accuracy and visual fidelity are especially
high for the synthetic images of age-EG3D. While FAM on real face images for, e.g.,
forensics work requires inversions, which is the aforementioned bottleneck, the synthetic
images do still serve a purpose. Public image datasets contain biases, like the non-uniform
distribution of ages in FFHQ (Figure 4.3), which will subsequently affect the models that
train on them. This is one area where age-EG3D can help to level out biases in the future
since the synthetic images of this stage are already of such high quality that they could
be used to populate face image datasets.
Face Age Progression Based on Generative Adversarial Networks
71
==PAGE:82==
72
Face Age Progression Based on Generative Adversarial Networks
==PAGE:83==
Bibliography
[1]
Guillermo Gomez-Trenado et al. Custom Structure Preservation in Face Aging. 2022.
doi: 10.48550/arxiv.2207.11025. url: https://arxiv.org/abs/2207.11025.
[2]
Xu Yao et al. “High Resolution Face Age Editing”. In: CoRR abs/2005.04410 (2020).
arXiv: 2005.04410. url: https://arxiv.org/abs/2005.04410.
[3]
Yuval Alaluf, Or Patashnik, and Daniel Cohen-Or. “Only a Matter of Style: Age
Transformation Using a Style-Based Regression Model”. In: CoRR abs/2102.02754
(2021). arXiv: 2102.02754. url: https://arxiv.org/abs/2102.02754.
[4]
Ian Sample. “Gene linked to youthful looks has been discovered, scientists claim”.
eng. In: The Guardian (2016). url: https://www.theguardian.com/science/2016/apr/
28/gene-linked-to-youthful-looks-has-been-discovered-scientists-claim.
[5]
Eric R. Chan et al. “Eﬀicient Geometry-aware 3D Generative Adversarial Networks”.
In: CoRR abs/2112.07945 (2021). arXiv: 2112.07945. url: https://arxiv.org/abs/
2112.07945.
[6]
Tero Karras et al. “Analyzing and Improving the Image Quality of StyleGAN”. In:
Proc. CVPR. 2020.
[7]
Ian J. Goodfellow et al. Generative Adversarial Networks. 2014. doi: 10.48550/arxiv.
1406.2661. url: https://arxiv.org/abs/1406.2661.
[8]
Yujun Shen et al. “InterFaceGAN: Interpreting the Disentangled Face Representa-
tion Learned by GANs”. In: TPAMI (2020).
[9]
Ken Shoemake. “Animating Rotation with Quaternion Curves”. eng. In: Computer
Graphics (acm) 19.3 (1985), pp. 245–254. issn: 15584569, 00978930. doi: 10.1145/
325165.325242.
[10]
Tom White. “Sampling Generative Networks: Notes on a Few Effective Techniques”.
In: CoRR abs/1609.04468 (2016). arXiv: 1609.04468. url: http://arxiv.org/abs/
1609.04468.
[11]
Tero Karras, Samuli Laine, and Timo Aila. “A style-based generator architecture for
generative adversarial networks”. eng. In: Proceedings of the Ieee Computer Society
Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition 2019- (2019), pp. 4396–
4405. issn: 2332564x, 10636919, 25757075. doi: 10.1109/CVPR.2019.00453.
[12]
Andrew Brock, Jeff Donahue, and Karen Simonyan. “Large Scale GAN Training for
High Fidelity Natural Image Synthesis”. und. In: (2019).
[13]
Richard Zhang et al. “The Unreasonable Effectiveness of Deep Features as a Per-
ceptual Metric”. In: CoRR abs/1801.03924 (2018). arXiv: 1801.03924. url: http:
//arxiv.org/abs/1801.03924.
[14]
Rameen Abdal, Yipeng Qin, and Peter Wonka. “Image2StyleGAN: How to Embed
Images Into the StyleGAN Latent Space?” In: CoRR abs/1904.03189 (2019). arXiv:
1904.03189. url: http://arxiv.org/abs/1904.03189.
Face Age Progression Based on Generative Adversarial Networks
73
==PAGE:84==
[15]
Weihao Xia et al. “GAN Inversion: A Survey”. eng. In: Ieee Transactions on Pattern
Analysis and Machine Intelligence (2022), pp. 1–17. issn: 19393539, 01628828. doi:
10.1109/TPAMI.2022.3181070.
[16]
Qianli Feng et al. “Near Perfect GAN Inversion”. und. In: (2022).
[17]
Daniel Roich et al. “Pivotal Tuning for Latent-based Editing of Real Images”. und.
In: (2021).
[18]
Encyclopedia.com. “Age Progression”. In: (2022). url: https://www.encyclopedia.
com/science/applied-and-social-sciences-magazines/age-progression.
[19]
Marcel Grimmer, Raghavendra Ramachandra, and Christoph Busch. “Deep Face
Age Progression: A Survey”. In: IEEE Access PP (June 2021), pp. 1–1. doi: 10.
1109/ACCESS.2021.3085835.
[20]
Jun Yan Zhu et al. “Unpaired Image-to-Image Translation Using Cycle-Consistent
Adversarial Networks”. eng. In: Proceedings of the Ieee International Conference
on Computer Vision 2017- (2017), pp. 2242–2251. issn: 23807504, 15505499. doi:
10.1109/ICCV.2017.244.
[21]
Mehdi Mirza and Simon Osindero. “Conditional Generative Adversarial Nets”. In:
CoRR abs/1411.1784 (2014). arXiv: 1411.1784. url: http://arxiv.org/abs/1411.1784.
[22]
Xin Geng, Zhi Hua Zhou, and K. Smith-Miles. “Automatic age estimation based on
facial aging patterns”. eng. In: Ieee Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine
Intelligence 29.12 (2007), pp. 2234–2240. issn: 19393539, 01628828, 21609292. doi:
10.1109/TPAMI.2007.70733.
[23]
A. Midori Albert, Karl Ricanek, and Eric Patterson. “A review of the literature
on the aging adult skull and face: Implications for forensic science research and
applications”. eng. In: Forensic Science International 172.1 (2007), pp. 1–9. issn:
03790738, 18726283. doi: 10.1016/j.forsciint.2007.03.015.
[24]
LS Mark et al. “Wrinkling and head shape as coordinated sources of age-level in-
formation”. eng. In: Perception and Psychophysics 27.2 (1980), pp. 117–124. issn:
15325962, 00315117. doi: 10.3758/BF03204298.
[25]
Raphael Angulu, Jules R. Tapamo, and Aderemi O. Adewumi. “Age estimation via
face images: a survey”. eng. In: Eurasip Journal on Image and Video Processing
2018.1 (2018), p. 42. issn: 16875281, 16875176. doi: 10.1186/s13640-018-0278-6.
[26]
Chen Change Loy. “Face Detection”. eng. In: Computer Vision (2020), pp. 1–5. doi:
10.1007/978-3-030-03243-2_798-1.
[27]
Chen Change Loy. “Face Detection”. eng. In: Computer Vision (2021), pp. 429–434.
doi: 10.1007/978-3-030-63416-2_798.
[28]
Karen Simonyan and Andrew Zisserman. “Very Deep Convolutional Networks for
Large-Scale Image Recognition”. und. In: (2015).
[29]
Yusuke Uchida. Age Gender Estimation. https://github.com/yu4u/age- gender-
estimation. 2020.
[30]
Yiming Lin et al. FP-Age: Leveraging Face Parsing Attention for Facial Age Esti-
mation in the Wild. 2021. arXiv: 2106.11145 [cs.CV].
[31]
Cognitec Systems GmbH. https://www.cognitec.com/. 2022.
[32]
Rasmus Rothe, Radu Timofte, and Luc Van Gool. “DEX: Deep EXpectation of
Apparent Age from a Single Image”. In: Dec. 2015. doi: 10.1109/ICCVW.2015.41.
[33]
Jie Hu, Li Shen, and Gang Sun. “Squeeze-and-Excitation Networks”. In: 2018.
[34]
Markus Mathias et al. “Face Detection without Bells and Whistles”. In: Computer
Vision – ECCV 2014. Ed. by David Fleet et al. Cham: Springer International Pub-
lishing, 2014, pp. 720–735. isbn: 978-3-319-10593-2.
74
Face Age Progression Based on Generative Adversarial Networks
==PAGE:85==
[35]
Jiankang Deng et al. “Retinaface: Single-shot multi-level face localisation in the
wild”. In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition. 2020, pp. 5203–5212.
[36]
Yiming Lin et al. “RoI Tanh-polar transformer network for face parsing in the
wild”. eng. In: Image and Vision Computing 112 (2021), p. 104190. issn: 18728138,
02628856. doi: 10.1016/j.imavis.2021.104190.
[37]
Mei Ngan Patrick Grother. “Face Recognition Vendor Test (FRVT)”. eng. In: NIST
Interagency Report 8009 (2014). url: https://nvlpubs.nist.gov/nistpubs/ir/2014/
NIST.IR.8009.pdf.
[38]
Yassin Kortli et al. “Face Recognition Systems: A Survey”. In: Sensors 20.2 (2020).
issn: 1424-8220. doi: 10 . 3390 / s20020342. url: https : / / www . mdpi . com / 1424 -
8220/20/2/342.
[39]
Martin Heusel et al. “GANs Trained by a Two Time-Scale Update Rule Converge to
a Local Nash Equilibrium”. In: Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems.
Ed. by I. Guyon et al. Vol. 30. Curran Associates, Inc., 2017. url: https://proceedings.
neurips.cc/paper/2017/file/8a1d694707eb0fefe65871369074926d-Paper.pdf.
[40]
Christian Szegedy et al. “Rethinking the Inception Architecture for Computer Vi-
sion”. In: CoRR abs/1512.00567 (2015). arXiv: 1512.00567. url: http://arxiv.org/
abs/1512.00567.
[41]
Michael Niemeyer and Andreas Geiger. “GIRAFFE: Representing Scenes as Compo-
sitional Generative Neural Feature Fields”. In: CoRR abs/2011.12100 (2020). arXiv:
2011.12100. url: https://arxiv.org/abs/2011.12100.
[42]
Eric R. Chan et al. “pi-GAN: Periodic Implicit Generative Adversarial Networks for
3D-Aware Image Synthesis”. In: CoRR abs/2012.00926 (2020). arXiv: 2012.00926.
url: https://arxiv.org/abs/2012.00926.
[43]
Qiang Meng et al. “MagFace: A Universal Representation for Face Recognition and
Quality Assessment”. In: CoRR abs/2103.06627 (2021). arXiv: 2103 . 06627. url:
https://arxiv.org/abs/2103.06627.
[44]
Jiankang Deng, Jia Guo, and Stefanos Zafeiriou. “ArcFace: Additive Angular Margin
Loss for Deep Face Recognition”. In: CoRR abs/1801.07698 (2018). arXiv: 1801.
07698. url: http://arxiv.org/abs/1801.07698.
[45]
Bingyu Shen et al. “A Study of the Human Perception of Synthetic Faces”. und. In:
(2021).
[46]
Roy Or-El et al. “Lifespan Age Transformation Synthesis”. In: CoRR abs/2003.09764
(2020). arXiv: 2003.09764. url: https://arxiv.org/abs/2003.09764.
[47]
Takeru Miyato and Masanori Koyama. “cGANs with Projection Discriminator”. und.
In: (2018).
[48]
Vincent Sitzmann et al. “Implicit Neural Representations with Periodic Activation
Functions”. In: CoRR abs/2006.09661 (2020). arXiv: 2006.09661. url: https://arxiv.
org/abs/2006.09661.
[49]
Eric R. Chan et al. Eﬀicient Geometry-aware 3D Generative Adversarial Networks.
https://catalog.ngc.nvidia.com/orgs/nvidia/teams/research/models/eg3d/files. 2022.
[50]
Adam Paszke et al. “PyTorch: An Imperative Style, High-Performance Deep Learn-
ing Library”. In: Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 32. Curran
Associates, Inc., 2019, pp. 8024–8035. url: http://papers.neurips.cc/paper/9015-
pytorch-an-imperative-style-high-performance-deep-learning-library.pdf.
[51]
Davis E. King. “Dlib-ml: A Machine Learning Toolkit”. In: Journal of Machine
Learning Research 10 (2009), pp. 1755–1758.
Face Age Progression Based on Generative Adversarial Networks
75
==PAGE:86==
[52]
Yu Deng et al. “Accurate 3D Face Reconstruction with Weakly-Supervised Learning:
From Single Image to Image Set”. In: IEEE Computer Vision and Pattern Recogni-
tion Workshops. 2019.
[53]
Kaipeng Zhang et al. “Joint Face Detection and Alignment using Multi-task Cas-
caded Convolutional Networks”. In: CoRR abs/1604.02878 (2016). arXiv: 1604.02878.
url: http://arxiv.org/abs/1604.02878.
[54]
J. Sola and J. Sevilla. “Importance of input data normalization for the application of
neural networks to complex industrial problems”. In: IEEE Transactions on Nuclear
Science 44.3 (1997), pp. 1464–1468. doi: 10.1109/23.589532.
[55]
Yiming Lin et al. FP-Age: Leveraging Face Parsing Attention for Facial Age Esti-
mation in the Wild GitHub. https://github.com/ibug-group/fpage. 2021.
[56]
Yusuke Uchida. Age Gender Estimation. https://github.com/yu4u/age-estimation-
pytorch/releases/tag/v1.0. 2020.
[57]
Eirikur Agustsson et al. “Apparent and Real Age Estimation in Still Images with
Deep Residual Regressors on Appa-Real Database”. eng. In: Proceedings - 12th Ieee
International Conference on Automatic Face and Gesture Recognition, Fg 2017
(2017), p. 7961727. issn: 23265396. doi: 10.1109/FG.2017.20.
[58]
Tom Hanks. https://cdn.fansshare.com/images/tomhanks/young-tom-hanks-photo-
615124510.jpg.
[59]
“Linear Interpolation”. eng. In: Curves and Surfaces for Computer Graphics (2006),
pp. 49–69. doi: 10.1007/0-387-28452-4_2.
76
Face Age Progression Based on Generative Adversarial Networks
==PAGE:87==
Appendices
Face Age Progression Based on Generative Adversarial Networks
77
==PAGE:88==
Appendix A
Models
A.1
Age Estimation Models
The ability to accurately estimate a subject’s age in an image is, as described in sections
2.3.3, pivotal for some cGANs. A generator cannot be expected to generate images near
the conditioning age if the model used in training to evaluate the age is poor. The primary
age estimation model used in age-EG3D is the yu4u model proposed by Uchida [29].
A.1.1
Comparison of yu4u and FPAge
The two models are compared by benchmarking them on the APPA-REAL dataset [57],
which contains ground truth age labels. The yu4u model was trained on this data set, but
the comparison is made in the test set, which it did not see during training. The test set
contains 1978 images of shifting resolution but generally high quality. The true minimum
age is 1 year old, while the maximum is 96.
Each image in the test set is pre-processed according to the authors of yu4u and FPAge
before predicting the age. The MAE is then calculated by
MAE = 1
N
N
∑
i=1
|yi −ˆyi|,
where N is the number of predicted images, yi is the true age and ˆyi is the predicted
age. The pre-processing step of FPAge was not possible in 25 cases out of 1978. These
instances were excluded when computing the MAE.
Summary statistics are shown in Table A.1. yu4u has the lowest MAE, which means that
it overall outperforms FPAge. Interestingly, yu4u minimum age is 1 year while FPAge’s
minimum prediction is 9 years old, which shows that it is not able to accurately estimate
the age of children. Conversely, the maximum estimated age of FPAge is about 5 years
above that of yu4u meaning that FPAge is advantageous when estimating the age of seniors.
Table A.1: Evaluation of age estimation models given in years.
yu4u
FPAge
Ground truth
Min. age
1.118
9.053
1
Max. age
76.63
83.25
96
MAE
4.800
5.697
0
78
Face Age Progression Based on Generative Adversarial Networks
==PAGE:89==
To further investigate the models’ performances across ages, the distribution of the esti-
mated ages vs. the true distribution of ages is shown in top plot of fig. A.1. Both models
follow the true distribution quite well except in the case of FPAge for ages less than 10
and above 83 years, and yu4u for ages above 76 years.
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
Age
0
25
50
75
Count
True
distribution
FPAge
yu4u
(0, 5]
(5, 10]
(10, 15]
(15, 20]
(20, 25]
(25, 30]
(30, 35]
(35, 40]
(40, 45]
(45, 50]
(50, 55]
(55, 60]
(60, 65]
(65, 70]
(70, 75]
(75, 80]
(80, 85]
(85, 90]
Age intervals
0
5
10
15
20
25
MAE
yu4u
FPAge
Figure A.1: The top plot is the true and estimated distributions of the test set. The
bottom plot shows the MAE of the two models divided into age intervals.
To pinpoint where the models differentiate, the MAE has been computed for different age
intervals in the bottom plot of fig. A.1. This clearly shows how yu4u outperforms FPAge
for ages below 20 years. The two models are comparable in performance up until around
65 years, when FPAge is noticeably better.
Figure A.2 shows the number of images in each age interval for the test set. It is noted
that the number of images for intervals from 70 years and up is quite low.
(0, 5]
(5, 10]
(10, 15]
(15, 20]
(20, 25]
(25, 30]
(30, 35]
(35, 40]
(40, 45]
(45, 50]
(50, 55]
(55, 60]
(60, 65]
(65, 70]
(70, 75]
(75, 80]
(80, 85]
(85, 90]
Age intervals
0
100
200
300
400
# images in
interval
Figure A.2: Number of images in each age interval.
Face Age Progression Based on Generative Adversarial Networks
79
==PAGE:90==
A.1.2
Cropping with yu4u
The yu4u model uses a pre-processing method as described in Section 2.4.3. The step
involves detecting the input face, aligning and adjusting the margin to 40 % around the
face.
The face images in FFHQ have already been centered and aligned, so the only
remaining step is to adjust the margin. It will still be necessary to detect the face, but it
will already be aligned.
This pre-processing step slows the training, and it was tested whether it could be skipped
since the images in FFHQ have already undergone similar (but not identical) pre-processing.
This was tested by comparing the estimated age of 3000 images from FFHQ that had been
pre-processed as proposed by the author and the same 3000 images without pre-processing.
The overall result was a difference in MAE of 0.558.
0
5
10
15
20
MAE
0
10
100
1000
Counts
Figure A.3: Histogram of the MAE between estimating images using the pre-processing
method proposed by the author and estimating the age without pre-processing. This was
tested on 3000 images from the FFHQ dataset.
The MAE was binned into 100 bins in Figure A.3 to see more clearly how significant the
pre-processing step is. From Figure A.3, it is clear that most estimations are very close.
Only a handful of images have an MAE above 5. This was deemed solid grounds to skip
the pre-processing step when training age-EG3D to save time since the effect was minimal.
For reference, it took the yu4u 60 seconds to estimate the age of the 3000 images without
pre-processing. On the other hand, it took 813 seconds to estimate the age of the 300
images when each had to be pre-processed.
The non-cropping yu4u model estimated an age of 33 years old, while the yu4u using
cropping estimated 55 years old. It is impossible to determine which is true since FFHQ
does not contain age labels, but a lower age might seem more plausible. The instance
where the MAE was 22 years old, as seen in Figure A.3 to the right, was when estimating
the image in Figure A.4.
80
Face Age Progression Based on Generative Adversarial Networks
==PAGE:91==
Figure A.4: Image with an estimated age difference of 22 years when using the pre-
processing compared to not doing so.
Face Age Progression Based on Generative Adversarial Networks
81
==PAGE:92==
Appendix B
Equations
This appendix is used for the equations and formulas that are unnecessary for understand-
ing age-EG3D but can be nice to know.
B.1
Interpolations
The concept of interpolation is to find a point P between two points in space P 1 and
P 2 by traversing a curve between the two points. When making a linear interpolation, a
straight line is made between P 1 and P 2. The parametric representation for point P on
the line between P 1 and P 2 is given by [59]
P (t) = (1 −t)P 0 + tP 1,
for
0 ≤t ≤1
(B.1)
It will, therefore, be the case that P (0) = P 0, P (1) = P 1 and, e.g., P (0.5) is the halfway
point between P 1 and P 2. The linear interpolation is used when making the interpolations
in the W-space of age-EG3D.
The spherical linear interpolation (slerp) [9] is used when doing interpolations in the Z-
space of EG3D as it is more fitting [10]. The slerp with P 1 and P 2 as the start and end
points is defined by
slerp(P 1, P 2, t) = sin((1 −t)Ω)
sin(Ω)
P 0 + sin(tΩ)
sin(Ω) P 1,
for
0 ≤t ≤1
(B.2)
where cos(Ω) = P 0 · P 1, which can be used to compute Ω.
B.1.1
Normalizing to a Range
Estimated ages ˆy are normalized from the range of 0-75 years to -1 to 1. This is done with
the function
f(ˆy) = 2
( ˆy
75
)
−1
(B.3)
82
Face Age Progression Based on Generative Adversarial Networks
==PAGE:93==
Appendix C
Images
This appendix contains the images that were not included in the main paper.
C.1
Original EG3D Output
A sample image using the original, unaltered EG3D model is shown in Figure C.1. The
seed used to generate the latent code for generating the image is the same as used in
Figure 5.12. Figure C.1 shows how this seed was originally a girl with an apparent age of
around 15 years old. As in Figure 5.12, this image also shows a few artifacts around the
eyes when the camera pose is changed from the frontal view. The head shape around the
right temple on the far right image in Figure C.1 is also not quite human-like.
Figure C.1: Output of the original EG3D using the same seed as in Figure 5.12.
C.2
Variety at Different Truncation Factors
Figure C.2 shows how the age condition is ineffective when ψ = 0 since the mapping
w = M(z) becomes insignificant as ¯w is used instead as described in Section 3.1.2.
Lowering of ψ will push G(z|c) towards the average face seen in Figure C.2, and at ψ = 0
G(z|c) becomes that face regardless of the age condition embedded in c. In Figure 5.8, it
is shown how the calibrated optimal model obtains the lowest MAEFPAge around ψ = 0.4.
A few selected images generated with this model with ψ = 0.4 is shown in Figure C.3. It
is clear how the variety of the outputs is very low and how all the images noticeably look
influenced by the average face in Figure C.2. This is a clear trend for all images generated
using ψ = 0.4.
Face Age Progression Based on Generative Adversarial Networks
83
==PAGE:94==
Figure C.2: Generated images with ψ = 0 showing how the age condition is ineffective at
this value of ψ.
Figure C.3: Selected generated images with ψ = 0.4.
By increasing ψ, this trend of clear similarities to the average face in Figure C.2 goes away.
A number of selected images are shown in Figure C.4 generated with the optimal model
with ψ = 0.75.
84
Face Age Progression Based on Generative Adversarial Networks
==PAGE:95==
Figure C.4: Selected generated images with ψ = 0.75.
Face Age Progression Based on Generative Adversarial Networks
85
==PAGE:96==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Building 324
2800 Kongens Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.compute.dtu.dk
