==PAGE:1==
MSc Thesis
Master of Science in Engineering
Modelling of dopamine-mediated action
selection in computational basal ganglia
Ewa Rusiecka (s203262)
==PAGE:2==
Supervisors:
Silvia Tolu, Associate Professor @ DTU Electro
Beck Strohmer, Postdoctoral Researcher @ DTU Electro
ECTS: 30
Project period: August 15th, 2022 - January 15th, 2023
DTU Electro
Department of Electrical and Photonics Engineering
Technical University of Denmark
Elektrovej
Building 326
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
Action selection is a mechanism that facilitates movement by enhancing desired ac-
tions and inhibiting unwanted actions based on their firing rate level. Action selection
is mediated by dopamine and takes place in the basal ganglia. Basal ganglia dysfunc-
tions resulting from abnormal dopamine levels can reduce the accuracy of voluntary
movement. Action selection has been previously accurately reproduced in compu-
tational basal ganglia models. However, in existing models researchers neglect the
aspect of learning cue-reward associations for individual actions by designating the
selected and non-selected actions in advance.
In this thesis, a step is taken towards enabling the implementation of learning
in future basal ganglia models by showing that system-wide dopamine levels and
dopaminergic spikes affect neuron firing. Here, biologically plausible modules of two
of the main basal ganglia were developed and used to simulate action selection, whose
effect was shown to be enhanced or weakened based on, respectively, higher and
lower levels of dopamine receptor activation. Moreover, it was demonstrated that,
given a suﬀiciently excitatory state of a basal ganglia neuron and an appropriately
timed dopaminergic spike, synaptic weight can be adjusted. In addition, a higher
neuron firing rate induced by heightened system-wide dopamine levels was shown to
increase neuron sensitivity to dopaminergic spikes. These results illustrate how differ-
ent dopamine modulation techniques could be combined to increase biological fidelity
of basal ganglia models and how they complement each other. The basal ganglia
model implemented in this thesis is extensible and could be used as a starting point
in future research for simulating learning in between the cortex and the basal ganglia
by applying dopaminergic spikes as either rewards or punishments. Incorporating
learning in action selection experiments could have applications in the fields of neu-
roscience and neurorobotics by helping investigate pathophysiology of basal ganglia
dysfunctions and mimick voluntary movement.
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Contents
Abstract
i
Contents
iii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Background and motivation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Research questions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.3
Objectives . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.4
Thesis overview . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2
Theory
5
2.1
Basal ganglia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
Spike-time-dependent plasticity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3
Literature review
11
3.1
Alternative interpretation of the basal ganglia pathways . . . . . . . .
12
3.2
Neuron-level modeling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3.3
Modeling of the pathophysiology of basal ganglia dysfunctions . . . . .
13
3.4
Modeling of different dopamine release patterns . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
4
Design and implementation
19
4.1
Resources . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
4.1.1
NEST simulator
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
4.1.2
NESTML modeling language . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
4.2
Network architecture . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
4.2.1
Spiking neural networks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
4.2.2
Architecture design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
4.3
Module implementation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
4.3.1
Neuron dynamics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
4.3.2
Synaptic dynamics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
4.3.3
Dopaminergic modulation extension in the MSN
. . . . . . . .
25
4.3.4
Substantia Nigra Pars Reticulata module
. . . . . . . . . . . .
26
4.3.5
Dopamine modulated STDP synapse . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
==PAGE:6==
iv
Contents
4.4
Testing and validation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
4.4.1
The basal ganglia model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
4.4.2
STDP synapse
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
4.4.2.1
STDP learning rule
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
4.4.2.2
Learning with dopamine
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
5
Results
35
5.1
The basal ganglia model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
5.1.1
MSN . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
5.1.1.1
Control dopaminergic conditions . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
5.1.1.2
Low dopaminergic conditions . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
5.1.1.3
High dopaminergic conditions
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
5.1.2
SNr
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
5.1.2.1
Control dopaminergic conditions . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
5.1.2.2
Low dopaminergic conditions . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
5.1.2.3
High dopaminergic conditions
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
5.1.3
Raster plots of the direct pathway
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
5.1.3.1
Control dopaminergic conditions . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
5.1.3.2
Low dopaminergic conditions . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
5.1.3.3
High dopaminergic conditions
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
5.2
STDP synapse
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
5.2.1
STDP learning rule
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
5.2.2
Learning with dopamine . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
5.2.2.1
Control dopaminergic conditions . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
5.2.2.2
Low dopaminergic conditions . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
5.2.2.3
High dopaminergic conditions
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
6
Discussion
59
7
Conclusion
63
Appendices
65
Appendix A
Basal ganglia model parameters
67
Appendix B
Traces from the STDP experiment
71
Bibliography
85
==PAGE:7==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
1.1
Background and motivation
Performing actions and movements is a large part of life for any animal. Moving
our limbs enables us to locomote, reach for objects, dodge potential threats and even
communicate.
It makes us more independent in navigating our surroundings and
provides a means for us to react to widespread triggers and stimuli that we encounter
daily.
An obvious role in performing actions is played by the musculoskeletal system
which gives the body the necessary form and support to execute movements. Another
important component is the motor cortex, which controls the movement execution
by passing a neural signal down the spinal cord. But where does the signal come
from? And how do we know which action to perform considering the large number
of potential actions we can do at any given moment? Performing movements brings
value only as long as there is a degree of deliberation and precision to it.
This action selection aspect is managed by an area of our brains called the basal
ganglia. The basal ganglia receive signals triggered by environmental and proprio-
ceptive stimuli and, with the help the neurotransmitter dopamine, distinguish which
action should be taken. Thanks to experimental and laboratory studies, we have
gained a lot of knowledge about how basal ganglia work, including what drives their
activation and circumstances that cause that system to break down [1]. But there
is only so much you can learn given the stringent safety and cost requirements as-
sociated with experimental studies, particularly involving human subjects. Not to
mention the inaccessibility of the basal ganglia themselves, located deep within our
brains, which makes it diﬀicult to study the region as an isolated environment.
Computational modeling offers an alternative, bypassing these obstacles and allow-
ing for a reproducible and more detailed and cost-effective manipulation of different
brain networks.
An increasing number of researchers has been choosing to either
conduct their research entirely using computational models or supplement their ex-
perimental research with them [2] [3]. And while a lot of basal ganglia models have
been produced already, plenty remains to be studied, most notably regarding the role
of dopamine in the healthy functioning of the basal ganglia as well as in basal gan-
glia disorders. One particularly interesting aspect of the basal ganglia is the action
==PAGE:8==
2
1 Introduction
selection mechanism, which has already been reproduced in multiple models [4] [5] [6].
However, there continue to be gaps in our understanding of how action selection
behaves with different dopamine modulation techniques and it would therefore be
valuable to continue to study it.
With computational modeling, we can accelerate basal ganglia research, helping
with effectively studying their dysfunctions and tailoring treatments. We can also
provide valuable insights and hypotheses to in-vivo studies.
Computational basal
ganglia models will be particularly helpful in understanding Parkinson’s disease causes
and pathophysiology [4], eventually helping to contribute towards one of the UN
Sustainability Goals - Good health and well-being [7]. Potential benefits will also be
found in the field of neurorobotics, where fully integrated basal ganglia can be used
to make robots more independent in their movements, being able to learn appropriate
motor responses to particular triggers [8].
1.2
Research questions
The project will be primarily focused on and structured around answering the follow-
ing research questions:
1. How does the action selection mechanism in the direct pathway behave with
different values of D1 and D2 receptor activation?
2. Can the impact of positive and negative dopaminergic spikes on synaptic weight
be quantified?
The first question aims to measure the effect of one of the types of dopamine
modulation on action selection - the D1 and D2 dopamine receptor activation. This
will be carried out by building a basal ganglia model including a medium spiny neuron
module, instantiating two different populations of the medium spiny neuron with
parameters characterizing expression of either D1 or D2 dopamine receptors and
altering their activation level. The effects of three different levels of dopamine receptor
activation (defined later in chapter 4) will be explored in this thesis.
Effects of another type of dopamine modulation will be examined in the second
question, where a dopamine modulated spike-time-dependent plastic synapse will be
implemented and connected to a standalone medium spiny neuron cell with the goal of
analyzing the effects of the timing of dopamine spikes on synaptic eﬀicacy (strength).
While a spike-time-dependent plastic synapse will not be implemented directly in
the developed basal ganglia model, the experiment will provide meaningful insights
on how and if such a synapse could be implemented in future basal ganglia models
to simulate learning. It will also be of interest to compare the effects of the two
different types of dopamine modulation and explore if they can be used together
to achieve higher biological fidelity. Both of these questions will require a working
==PAGE:9==
1.3 Objectives
3
implementation of the direct pathway of the basal ganglia, i.e. the medium spiny
neurons and the substantia nigra pars reticulata.
The analysis of the outcome and the investigation process of these research ques-
tions will be presented in the Discussion chapter. Moreover, this thesis is building
directly upon the work produced in the special course titled ’Exploration of compu-
tational models of basal ganglia for modeling pathophysiology of Parkinson’s disease’
which took place in the Spring semester of 2022 under the supervision of professor
Silvia Tolu and Beck Strohmer at DTU. During the course, the implementation and
testing of the medium spiny neuron module in control dopaminergic conditions was
performed and a discussion about its overall performance was carried out. Therefore,
the technical details and control results regarding the medium spiny neuron module
described in sections 4.3.1, 4.3.2, 4.3.3 and 5.1.1.1 have already been graded and are
not part of the novel material presented in this thesis.
1.3
Objectives
The main aim of this thesis is to implement a computational basal ganglia network
that follows closely the biological one using an available simulator tool, investigate and
combine different dopamine modulation methods in a simulation and understand their
effects on basal ganglia activity by comparing the results with other experimental and
computational studies. This will be achieved by completing the following intermediate
goals:
• Assess the significance of including individual basal ganglia nuclei in the network
design for an accurate and suﬀicient representation of action selection
• Design the basal ganglia network by translating biological nuclei into computa-
tional nodes and synaptic connections
• Design necessary dopamine modulation extensions
• Implement the design of the network using the NEST simulator and NESTML
modeling language
• Test the network given an appropriate cortical input in various dopaminergic
conditions
• Evaluate the performance of the implemented network during an action selection
task in comparison with experimental data
1.4
Thesis overview
The rest of the thesis is organized into the following 6 chapters:
==PAGE:10==
4
1 Introduction
• Chapter 2 - Theory: Presents fundamental theory on the basal ganglia and
spike-time-dependent plasticity and introduces background concepts that will
be mentioned throughout the thesis.
• Chapter 3 - Literature review: Provides the reader with a thorough overview
of the state-of-the-art research in the basal ganglia and introduces some of the
more influential models that will be used as a starting point in this thesis.
• Chapter 4 - Design and implementation: Explains the technical details
behind the design and the implementation of the computational basal ganglia
model. Additionally, it describes the setup of the different experiments used to
validate the model.
• Chapter 5 - Results: Demonstrates and reviews the results obtained from
the different experiments.
• Chapter 6 - Discussion: Provides a summary of the main findings from
the project and evaluates the strengths and limitations of the developed model.
Moreover, the obtained results are compared against previous research.
• Chapter 7 - Conclusion: Restates the main motivation behind the study and
underlines the objectives achieved throughout the thesis.
==PAGE:11==
CHAPTER 2
Theory
This chapter is intended to familiarize the reader with a basic overview of the basal
ganglia anatomy and provide essential theory behind basal ganglia functions and the
processes involved in them. Moreover, a brief description of spike-time-dependent
plasticity and how this process occurs in the synapses is provided.
2.1
Basal ganglia
The basal ganglia is a group of subcortical nuclei and a part of the cortico-basal
ganglia-thalamo-cortical loop responsible for the control of voluntary movements.
They are located at the top of midbrain and the base of the forebrain. The basal
ganglia have a strong connectivity network with the cortex, thalamus, brainstem and
other brain areas [9].
The basal ganglia are composed of the following major regions: the striatum
(STR), globus pallidus pars interna (GPi), globus pallidus pars externa (GPe), sub-
thalamic nucleus (STN), substantia nigra pars compacta (SNc) and substantia nigra
pars reticulata (SNr) [10].
Figure 2.1 illustrates the location of the basal ganglia
within the brain as well as the main components. The striatum itself consists of both
the dorsal striatum (caudate nucleus and putamen) and the ventral striatum (nucleus
accumbens and olfactory tubercle) [10]. Moreover, around 90% of striatal neurons
are the medium spiny neurons (MSN), which can be later subdivided into MSNs ex-
pressing the D1-type or D2-type dopamine receptors. In this thesis, the striatum will
be represented exclusively by MSN.
Additionally, striatum is the main point of entry for any input to the basal ganglia
[12]. GPi and SNr both serve the role of projecting the output from the basal ganglia
out to the thalamic nuclei and the cortical areas in the frontal lobe. GPe and STN,
on the other hand, are the intermediate layers of the basal ganglia and, instead of
projecting outside, they are deeply interconnected with other subnuclei of the nigral
and pallidal complex. Lastly, neurons in the SNc produce and release dopamine into
the striatum [9]. Dopamine is a neurotransmitter (a signaling molecule secreted by a
neuron to affect another cell [13]) associated primarily with drive and motivation [14].
In the basal ganglia, dopamine helps modulate their primary functions.
==PAGE:12==
6
2 Theory
Figure 2.1. Basal ganglia anatomy. The caudate nucleus and the putamen form the stria-
tum and are the entry point of the basal ganglia. The globus pallidus and the subthalamic
nucleus constitute the intermediate layer of the basal ganglia, with the substantia nigra
being the output layer and projecting to the thalamus. Adapted from [11].
The basal ganglia have been shown to be predominantly associated with habit and
reinforcement learning, as well as action selection - a mechanism that differentiates
between and selects a desired action over other competing actions based on their
salience level (their activity or firing rate level) [15].
Action selection is accomplished through the complex circuitry that basal ganglia
offer, where afferent input signals are received in the striatum and are later propagated
further to the intermediary or output layers of the basal ganglia. Each possible action
is represented by one signal, whose salience is modulated in the basal ganglia. As the
connections from the SNr to the thalamus are inhibitory, it is actually the signal with
the lowest salience in the SNr that is said to be selected as it inhibits the thalamus
in the smallest degree, allowing for it to send efferent signals to the motor cortex to
initiate the corresponding action [12].
A key aspect of action selection is lateral inhibition present in the striatum (figure
2.2). Lateral inhibition is the ability of excited neurons to reduce the activity and
excitability of the surrounding neurons. It has been hypothesized that lateral inhi-
bition in the MSN suppresses or maintains desired cortical input and that learning
new motor and cognitive skills helps establish and strengthen the pattern of these
axon collaterals [16]. Additionally, some research has shown that cortex activity can
generate two different selection components in the striatum - a steady state and a
transient state. It is further proposed that the transient state momentarily enhances
the difference between the different actions [17].
Action selection is reliant on the healthy functioning of two different pathways in
==PAGE:13==
2.1 Basal ganglia
7
Figure 2.2.
Lateral inhibition in the basal ganglia - excitation of the neurons in the
selected channel leads to the inhibition of the stimulation of the surrounding neurons in
the non-selected channel. Lateral inhibition in the striatum directly contributes to action
selection.
the basal ganglia, the direct and indirect pathways, responsible for action initiation
and action inhibition respectively. The direct pathway (figure 2.3) involves the cortex
sending excitatory input to the D1-type MSNs, which propagates an inhibitory signal
down to the output structures of the basal ganglia (SNr), which eventually disinhibit
the thalamus, allowing for an action to happen.
In the indirect pathway (figure
2.4), on the other hand, the D2-type MSNs receive excitatory input from the cortex
and further inhibit the GPe, which in the end excites the SNr.
Furthermore, a
hyperdirect pathway exists, in which the cortex projects directly to the STN which
inhibits movement by diffusely exciting the SNr.
Under healthy dopaminergic circumstances there is a balanced interplay between
the direct and indirect pathways and, depending on the receptor type, dopaminer-
gic transmission is excitatory when mediated by D1-type receptors and inhibitory
when mediated by D2-type receptors [4]. Dopamine-related dysfunctions impair the
equilibrium between the direct and indirect pathways and can lead to a wide range
of behavioral and movement disorders, e.g.
Parkinson’s Disease [4], Huntington’s
Disease [6] and Tourette syndrome [18]. Dopamine dysfunctions can develop due to
several different factors, such as loss of dopaminergic neurons or inadequate dopamine
receptor activation [19] [4]. Under such circumstances, the dopamine-modulated stri-
atal output negatively influences the overall basal ganglia output, causing it to be
either excessive (associated with complete or partial limitation of voluntary move-
==PAGE:14==
8
2 Theory
Figure 2.3. The direct pathway of the basal ganglia. The direct pathway consists of the
D1-type MSN and the SNr. Lateral inhibition is present in both the whole of the striatum
and the SNr.
Figure 2.4. The indirect pathway of the basal ganglia. The indirect pathway consists of
the D2-type MSN, STN, GPe and the SNr. Lateral inhibition is present in the whole of the
striatum, the GPe and the SNr.
==PAGE:15==
2.2 Spike-time-dependent plasticity
9
ments) or too low (associated with uncontrolled and involuntary movements) [20].
This thesis will focus solely on modeling the direct pathway of the basal gan-
glia and simulating the action selection mechanism within it. Moreover, the thesis
will tackle one of the aspects of dopamine-related dysfunctions by modulating the
dopamine receptor activation levels in the system.
2.2
Spike-time-dependent plasticity
Spike-time-dependent plasticity (STDP) is a phenomenon in which the timing of the
spikes can adjust the strength of neural connections in the brain by affecting their
sign and magnitude. The process takes under consideration the relative timing of the
neuron’s output and input action potentials [21], i.e. if a neuron’s input spike tends
to occur immediately before its output spike, that input is made stronger. However,
if a neuron’s input spike occurs, on average, right after an output spike, that input is
made weaker.
Consistent strengthening of the synapse is called long-term potentiation and con-
sistent weakening of the input is the long-term depression of the synapse. Long-term
potentiation is widely considered a mechanism responsible for storing memory and
learning [22] [23]. STDP synapses work by utilizing the so-called eligibility traces -
temporary records left by either the pre- or post-synaptic spikes at their arrival and
which decay exponentially with time. The eligibility trace is read out at the time of
the arrival of the second spike and the value of the eligibility trace directly influences
the weight change in the synapse.
==PAGE:16==
10
==PAGE:17==
CHAPTER 3
Literature review
In this chapter, an analysis of the existing computational basal ganglia models will be
carried out, with a particular focus on state-of-the-art models which this thesis will
draw upon. Additionally, the chapter will provide further information on the main
concepts and features tackled in basal ganglia models. Moreover, an explanation will
be provided on how the model developed in this thesis will the current research.
Basal ganglia impairments are associated with a wide range of movement disor-
ders, but the complex network of nuclei and the connections between them is often
prohibitive in any attempt to single out a definitive causative factor originating in
the basal ganglia. Not only is studying basal ganglia challenging in regards to patho-
physiology, it is also diﬀicult in respect to experimentation with treatments given the
unpredictability of the neural dynamics.
With the recent technological advances, many researchers have therefore turned to
computational modeling seeking a more stable solution and a tool that allows system-
atic parameter modification in a controllable environment. Computational models
help with faster and more accurate data collection, as well as with higher precision
and detail of simulations.
They improve research reproducibility and circumvent
many aspects inherent in experimental studies involving human subjects (e.g. ethical
and endurance issues) [5].
Computational models strive to emulate the behavioral and physiological complex-
ities of the human brain as closely as possible. However, because of the sheer number
of parameters that require tuning, the biological fidelity of such models is still in
question and can be limited depending on the scope of the study and software and
hardware used. This is why constant efforts are being made to bring computational
models closer to reality by building upon existing models and increasing their scope.
This literature review presents a survey of some of the computational basal ganglia
models that have been developed, organized into sections defining the main goals of
each of the models.
==PAGE:18==
12
3 Literature review
3.1
Alternative interpretation of the basal ganglia
pathways
In the case of the basal ganglia, of major interest has been modeling of the three
different pathways, particularly in the context of better understanding the action
selection mechanism. One of the earliest models of basal ganglia was built by Gurney
et al. [12] [24], where they, in fact, challenged this idea and proposed an alternative
whereby the direct and indirect pathways are substituted by the selection and the
control pathways.
However, in their study they still maintained the hypothesis that action selection
is the primary function of the basal ganglia - an assumption already explored and
confirmed by other researchers. They interpreted action selection as signal selection
by encoding the salience (propensity for selecting an action) as a scalar value. They
further argued that by quantitatively defining the concept of selection they can more
accurately predict the true expected output of the basal ganglia given an input of a
certain salience. In their model this was done by partitioning transformed signals into
three intervals determined by two selection thresholds. This allowed them to define
such concepts as decisiveness of the selection or selection promiscuity (what fraction
of signals were simultaneously selected).
Their newly introduced pathways constituted a reinterpretation of the functional
anatomy of the basal ganglia, with the selection pathway being entirely devoted to
the selection process, and the control pathway regulating the functioning of the se-
lection pathway.
The selection pathway was then built as a feedforward network
with off-center on-surround connectivity (where stimulation of the center inhibits the
neurons of interest and stimulation of the surround excites them) and included the
cortex/thalamus, STN, D1-type MSN and the main output structure of the basal
ganglia - GPi/SNr. The control pathway, on the other hand, was composed of the
cortex/thalamus, D2-type MSN, STN and the GPe which modulates the selection
pathway by supplying control signals to other basal ganglia nuclei. Gurney et al. ad-
ditionally omitted the use of lateral inhibition in their model. Instead, they suggested
that this process arises through the interaction of their two pathways and the main
function of their MSN is to just extract salience from individual channels.
In their study, Gurney et al. also introduced dopaminergic modulation of the
MSN by creating tonic (background, constant) dopaminergic input to the striatum
that was diffuse and constant over all channels. They additionally added a parameter
that downregulated the afferent synaptic strength of D2-type MSN to reflect the
inhibitory effects of tonic dopamine in the control pathway.
==PAGE:19==
3.2 Neuron-level modeling
13
3.2
Neuron-level modeling
Humphries et al. later used and built upon this model in their study revolving around
action selection and oscillatory activity in the basal ganglia [25].
They proposed
similar assumptions about the role of the basal ganglia in action selection as Gurney
[12] [24], and used the same spiking neural network architecture including the major
components of the selection and control pathways.
Humphries et al., however, implemented the functional anatomy at a greater level
of detail to focus more on assessing the dynamics present between individual basal gan-
glia structures. The changes they implemented therefore included adapting the prop-
erties of the leaky integrate-and-fire model neurons for each neuron species, modeling
the postsynaptic current contribution made to the membrane potential, modeling
interneuronal transmission delays and investigating different locations and distribu-
tions of synaptic inputs on the postsynaptic membrane. To test their model and its
biological plausibility they validated it against data describing the firing of STN and
GP low-frequency and γ-band oscillations.
3.3
Modeling of the pathophysiology of basal ganglia
dysfunctions
While the primary goal of those two models was replicating the biological basal gan-
glia architecture to the highest possible degree, an alternative approach was taken
by researchers who built their models with the intention of investigating the patho-
physiology of a particular disease, e.g. Parkinson’s [4], Huntington’s [6] or Tourette
syndrome [18], and yet other models were constructed to study the effects of potential
treatments, like deep brain stimulation [26].
Specifically, Kumaravelu et al. [26] conducted a study where they used a com-
putational model to investigate the effectiveness of deep brain stimulation (DBS)
at suppressing pathological beta-band (low-frequency) oscillations correlated with
akinesia and bradykinesia. Their model comprised the entire cortical-basal-ganglia-
thalamus cortex circuit, including a closed loop between the thalamus and the cortex.
The model was built to represent the parkinsoninan state of 6-OHDA lesioned rats,
as these are often used to study the Parkinson’s disease (PD) pathophysiology in
experimental studies.
For the cortical network, Kumaravelu et al. included mutually connected regular
spiking excitatory neurons and fast-spiking inhibitory neurons, both of them imple-
mented using the Izhikevich model [27].
Additionally, they used Hodgkin-Huxley
neurons to represent the other single compartment model neurons for the STR, STN,
==PAGE:20==
14
3 Literature review
GPe, GPi and the thalamus. Their striatal network included both D1 and D2-type
MSN.
The model was later parameterized to represent three different states: healthy,
6-OHDA lesioned (Parkinsonian) and 6-OHDA lesioned with STN deep brain stim-
ulation. Dopaminergic modulation in the Parkinsonian state was accomplished by
implementing the following changes: increasing the acetylcholine levels in the STN,
reducing the sensitivity of the D1-type MSN to cortical stimulation and producing
aberrant GPe firing by increasing the synaptic strength of the collateral branches of
axons within GPe. The DBS state was modeled by adding intracellular current pulses
in all STN model neurons.
The developed model was validated by comparing responses of different basal
ganglia areas evoked by cortical stimulation in terms of strength and duration of
the response. They found that the model was able to reproduce the key differences
observed in response patterns and firing rates between the healthy and Parkinsonian
states. Additionally, the simulated effects of DBS equalled the frequency-dependent
normalization of anomalous responses evoked in GPi by cortical stimulation.
Kumaravelu’s model was subsequently used and adapted by Romano et al [28],
who further investigated the frequency-dependent effects of DBS. This adapted model
was later used in a study by Pimentel et al. [8], where it was embedded in a humanoid
robot who had to engage in a behavioral task with biologically enforced constraints.
Pimentel et al. [8] wanted to replicate the decision-making process with the in-
terplay of the external and internal stimuli under Parkinsonian conditions.
They
achieved this by implementing a sensorimotor loop in the robot, in which the thala-
mus would obtain a signal from the environment and propel it further to the cortex,
where it would be translated into a motor command that could be used to simulate
motor perturbations in the robot. The loop consisted of four different modules: the
encoding module (encoding environmental stimuli into BG input), the brain module
(BG model), the decoding module (decoding the BG output into motor stimulation)
and the behavioral module (translating the sensory input, central oscillator input and
motor stimulation into a robot command).
Another important model investigating a basal ganglia dysfunction was developed
by Gonzalez et al. in their study focusing on explaining the paradoxical improvement
in sensorial discrimination tasks in Huntington’s patients [6]. Their model comprised
all the main basal ganglia nuclei (cortex, the striatum including D1 and D2-type MSN,
STN, GPe and SNr) as well as their typical firing properties. What differentiated this
model from most of the models developed to date was the use of Izhikevich neurons for
all neuronal types. They implemented each of the basal ganglia nuclei as Izhikevich
neuron models, parameterized differently to capture the individual neuron dynamics
of each one of them.
Like a lot of the aforementioned studies, Gonzalez et al. also implemented chan-
nels in their model to represent the different possible signals/actions. Neurons in
==PAGE:21==
3.3 Modeling of the pathophysiology of basal ganglia dysfunctions
15
each channel were only allowed to connect to neurons in the same channel, with the
exception of the diffuse STN efferents and the lateral inhibition in the MSN and SNr
channels. Salience of an action was defined as the average rate of firing in each channel
in the MSN. Overall, three different types of chemical receptors with different tempo-
ral dynamics were implemented (GABAA, NMDA and AMPA), as well as chemical
synapses with exponentially-decaying functions and constant synaptic weights.
Similarly to Gurney et al. [12] [24], the dopaminergic modulation in this model con-
sisted of implicit modulatory connections from the SNc as a constant tonic dopamine
level in the whole model. Additionally, to model Huntington’s disease they removed
some of the D2-type MSN and increased the synaptic weight of the NMDA receptors
to represent their over-expression in the MSN neurons.
The model was later validated against experimental results from an auditory dis-
crimination task. The task consisted of a subject listening to a short and long auditory
tones and having to distinguish between them by pressing either a left or right but-
ton corresponding to a given tone. They simulated this scenario using their model by
supplying two Poisson-generated spike trains as the cortical input for the short and
long tones. The selected action was represented as one of the channels with 40% of
the neurons, the non-selected action as another channel with 40% of the neurons, and
the third channel not competing in the selection task was given 20% of the neurons.
The main model limitations lie in the lack of the recurrent loop between the
thalamus and the cortex and the limited dopamine modulation capabilities. However,
despite these issues and the fact that this model was developed primarily in the
context of Huntington’s disease, it will be used as the main point of reference and
as a foundation for the development of a basal ganglia model in this project. This
is motivated by the fact that the Gonzalez model contains the main basal ganglia
structures and takes advantage of the Izhikevich neuron type which combines the
computational eﬀiciency of an integrate-and-fire neuron with biological plausibility
[27], making it therefore a superior choice for the scope of this project. Additionally,
as their modeling software, Gonzalez et al. used the NEST simulator which allows for
a detailed customization of the dynamics and structure of a spiking neural network,
and which has been selected as the main development tool for this thesis.
The thesis will also similarly forgo the cortico-basal ganglia-thalamo-cortical loop
implementation. Although the lack of the recurrent loop restricts the result analysis
to only a small time frame around the external stimulus and prevents the basal ganglia
from getting any feedback from the environment, an implementation of such a loop
would add further complexity and is outside the scope of this project. The model
developed in this thesis will also draw upon the dopaminergic modulation extension
presented in the Gonzalez model by differentiating between the MSN D1 and D2 types
as well as implementing the parameterization of the dopamine receptor activation.
==PAGE:22==
16
3 Literature review
3.4
Modeling of different dopamine release patterns
Dopamine impairments were also investigated in a study conducted by Caligiore et
al., where they built a basal ganglia model to study how dopamine dysfunctions with
different dopamine release patterns can result in different symptoms [29]. Their model
included three main features that they claimed had never been integrated in a single
computational basal ganglia model: biology-inspired anatomy of the basal ganglia-
thalamo-cortical system, spiking neurons with physiologically constrained parameters
and an incorporation of both phasic and tonic dopamine release patterns.
The architecture of their basal ganglia model was based on previous work done
by Humphries et al., where a five population spiking-neuron model was proposed [25].
The five populations encompassed STN, D1 and D2-type MSN, GPe and GPi. In
addition to the basal ganglia, they implemented the primary motor cortex and the
thalamus, as well as the recurring loop between them. Their primary motor cortex
included two mutually connected neuron populations (one with excitatory and one
with inhibitory neurons) and their thalamus consisted of one neural population.
Similarly to Gonzalez et al. [6], they also used the NEST simulator for the imple-
mentation. However, instead of using the Izhikevich neuron type, they modeled each
neuron as a leaky integrate-and-fire unit with exponential shaped post-synaptic cur-
rents. Dopamine modulation in the model was done by building new synapse modules
that reproduced the functions and the responsiveness of the D1 and D2-type receptors
and represented their neuromodulatory effect on synaptic eﬀicacy. Additionally, they
implemented phasic dopamine release by adding a volume transmitter that delivered
dopaminergic spikes (causing peaks in the level of dopamine in the system) to the
synapses with particular firing rates right before the action selection-inducing trigger.
They validated their model by parameterizing and testing it in five different condi-
tions: with an undamaged dopamine system, with a reduced synchronization between
the phasic burst and the movement onset, with a reduced phasic peak, with a reduced
tonic baseline level and with a reduced responsiveness of dopamine D2 receptor. Their
main finding was that phasic dopamine is primarily important in producing sequences
of actions, while tonic dopamine is generally more involved in starting a movement
from rest.
This thesis will draw upon the dopamine-modulated synapse modules introduced
in the Caligiore study [29] by implementing a dopamine-modulated STDP synapse
and combining its functionality with the MSN dopamine modulation based on dopamine
receptor activation from the Gonzalez study [6]. While the recognition of the differ-
ent dopamine receptor types in the MSN is a crucial part of building the respective
characteristics of the direct and indirect pathways, it is not suﬀicient to capture the
full dopaminergic dynamics of the basal ganglia.
Combining the receptor respon-
siveness/activation level with spike-time dependent plasticity is an important step
==PAGE:23==
3.4 Modeling of different dopamine release patterns
17
in advancing the current research towards more biologically plausible basal ganglia
models which not only reflect the action selection aspect, but also the neuroplasticity
of learning how to distinguish between the actions [30]. Although the STDP synapse
will not be directly build into the basal ganglia model in this thesis, its compatibility
will be tested with the developed MSN module, paving the way for the integration of
the synapse into future basal ganglia models.
==PAGE:24==
18
==PAGE:25==
CHAPTER 4
Design and
implementation
This chapter will provide an overview of the technical details related to the devel-
opment of the aforementioned basal ganglia network. The chapter will go over the
design and implementation choices taken and the reasoning behind them. Addition-
ally, the architecture of the network will be presented, including a comprehensive
description of the individual nodes used as well as the parameters and the equations
governing their behavior.
The chapter will first introduce the concept of spiking neural networks and explain
the benefits of their application in building computational models of the brain. The
tools used in the project for the implementation of the network architecture as a spik-
ing neural network will also be explained. Moreover, a comparison with existing basal
ganglia models will be carried out, highlighting both the similarities of how the model
developed in this project has been adapted from previous works, as well as additional
extensions to previous models. Descriptions of the testing and validation processes
for the developed model will also be provided, along with a detailed explanation of
the experiment design and parameter choices.
4.1
Resources
4.1.1
NEST simulator
NEST is a spiking neural network simulator that collapses the morphology of individ-
ual neurons and instead focuses on the structure and the dynamics of whole neural
networks, making it a good tool for modeling system-level model of the basal ganglia.
NEST provides a wide range of published neuron and synapse modules that can be ac-
cessed from their directory. This includes neuromodulatory synapses using dopamine
whose application constitutes one of the implementation goals for this thesis.
Additionally, NEST requires minimal dependencies and can be run on any UNIX-
like systems. This is an advantage given the lack of any extra hardware provided for
==PAGE:26==
20
4 Design and implementation
this project. Moreover, NEST provides a programming language interface for Python
and is an open source software with a large community of contributing researchers.
4.1.2
NESTML modeling language
NEST can also be extended with new neuron and synapse modules using the NESTML
modeling language. NESTML is a domain-specific language for neuron and synapse
modules used in simulations of brain activity. The user can specify the dynamics
and the architecture of the module using a Python-like syntax and the PyNESTML
toolchain can be used to subsequently parse the module and generate code that
matches NEST’s templates.
NESTML files are structured in blocks that define particular characteristics of the
module. This includes a state block for neuron variables that can change over time,
a parameters block for constant variables, an equations block for kernel definitions
and differential equations and input and output blocks. NESTML provides additional
support in the form of control structures (such as loops and conditional statements) as
well as predefined functions for e.g. the convolution of kernels with spike input ports,
integrating all stated differential equations and resolution of current time. Given that
NEST does not have separate modules of the basal ganglia structures, those features
are crucial for the development of ad-hoc modules of the direct pathway in this project
- the MSN and the SNr.
4.2
Network architecture
4.2.1
Spiking neural networks
Spiking neural networks are a type of artificial neural networks that closely imitate
the dynamics and plasticity rules of natural neural networks. Unlike traditional ar-
tificial neural networks, which work with continually changing time values, spiking
neural networks take advantage of discrete temporal events, i.e. they only transmit
information when a membrane potential of a neuron reaches a certain threshold value.
The neuron subsequently fires, generating a spike that is further propagated to neigh-
boring connected neurons and that modulates their membrane potential. After this
action potential, the neuron will go through a refractory period where its membrane
potential gradually returns to its average value, similarly to biological neurons.
Spiking neural networks were first introduced in computational neuroscience in
1952, when the Hodgkin-Huxley model of a spiking neuron was proposed and the
dynamics of an action potential were described as a set of nonlinear differential equa-
tions. Since then, many different spiking neuron models have been put forward, with
the most frequently used being the leaky integrate-and-fire neuron model and its
derivatives due to the ease of computation.
==PAGE:27==
4.2 Network architecture
21
However, despite these continuous advances, spiking neural networks have not had
a wide appeal in the deep learning community due to the lack of suitable supervised
training methods for them. Traditional artificial neural networks can take advantage
of gradient descent based training algorithms such as backpropagation, while in the
case of spiking neural networks the non-differentiability of spike operations makes such
techniques prohibitive. Additionally, much larger computational costs and hardware
requirements restrict the use of spiking neural networks in more common applications
[31].
On the other hand, due to their higher biological plausibility, spiking neural net-
works prove superior to traditional neural networks in such applications as modeling
the central nervous system of biological organisms. Spiking neural networks can work
with sparsity found in biology and capture temporal coding, making them an obvious
choice for the purposes of modeling the basal ganglia [32].
4.2.2
Architecture design
The main functional goal of the system was to replicate action selection in the direct
pathway of the basal ganglia, therefore the architecture of the system is limited to
the structures involved in the direct pathway (the MSN and the SNr) as well as
other supporting nodes. The system implementation was heavily influenced by the
Gonzalez model [6], with the main nodes, channels and connections adapted from
their NEST code. The architecture of the system can be seen in figure 4.1.
The model is organized in partially segregated channels, just like multiple previ-
ous models [18] [6] [25]. The channels represent signals related to individual actions
or thoughts. Three channels are used - one for the selected action, one for the non-
selected action and one to represent the background activity. The channels are imple-
mented as separate subpopulations within main neural populations and connections
between nodes linking only the subpopulations belonging to the same channel. There
are three exceptions to this rule, where between-channel connections are implemented
- the diffuse excitatory input from the STN and the lateral inhibition between and
within the MSN and the SNr channels. Implementing the channels separately allows
us to examine the functioning of the action selection mechanism by comparing the
firing rate output of each of the channels which signifies the salience of an action
represented by that channel.
The total number of simulated neurons is 5292 with the MSN layer containing 2292
neurons (1146 expressing the D1 dopamine receptor and 1146 neurons expressing the
D2 dopamine receptor) and the SNr layer containing 3000 neurons. The neurons are
divided into the three different channels with the structure proposed in the Gonzalez
study [6] to accommodate the experimental task simulated in this project: 40% of
neurons for the selected option, 40% of neurons for the non-selected option and 20%
of neurons representing background activity.
==PAGE:28==
22
4 Design and implementation
Figure 4.1. System architecture implemented in NEST. The cortical input to the basal
ganglia is simulated via the top Poisson generators which deliver excitatory spikes to the
MSN via parrot neurons. The D1-type MSN send inhibitory projections to the SNr. The
SNr receives diffuse excitatory input from a Poisson generator approximating the STN and
inhibitory input from a Poisson generator approximating the GPe.
Additionally, lateral
inhibition is implemented in both the MSN and the SNr by an in-between channel connection
to themselves. Spike recorders are used separately for the MSN and the SNr to record the
firing rate output.
Due to time and scope constraints of the project, the cortical input to the system
was modeled using three Poisson generators which are also the entry point to the
system. Poisson generators simulate neuron firing with Poisson statistics (exponen-
tially distributed interspike intervals) and produce spike trains generated through the
Poisson process. Poisson process has been shown to be able to successfully approx-
imate the temporal distribution of the cortical spikes [33]. Three separate Poisson
generators were used, one for each channel. The Poisson generators are connected
to three populations of parrot neurons. Using parrot neurons ensures that the spike
trains generated by the Poisson generators will be identical for all of the targets.
The parrot neurons are subsequently connected to the global population of MSNs,
which is itself comprised of separate populations of MSNs expressing the D1 dopamine
receptor and the MSNs expressing the D2 dopamine receptor. NEST does not provide
an MSN node and therefore this was implemented as a new NEST module using the
NESTML modeling language. More details about the implementation can be found
==PAGE:29==
4.3 Module implementation
23
in section 4.3.1. Similarly, the SNr node to which the MSN of type D1 are connected
was also implemented as a new module, with the implementation process described
in section 4.3.4. Both the MSN and the SNr modules exhibit the lateral inhibition
behavior by being connected to themselves.
Additionally, the MSN and the SNr
populations are each connected to their own spike recorders which collect and record
incoming spikes from across all channels and save them for future analysis. Moreover,
two additional groups of spike recorders are monitoring the spikes coming directly
from the MSN D1 and MSN D2 neuron populations.
Lastly, the two Poisson generator populations connected to the SNr population
simulate the STN and GPe firing. More details behind their implementation can be
found in section 4.3.4. The system architecture was implemented using NEST version
3.3.
4.3
Module implementation
4.3.1
Neuron dynamics
Similarly to the implementation seen in the Gonzalez basal ganglia model [6], the
MSN and SNr modules in this project were constructed using the Izhikevich neu-
ron model [27].
The Izhikevich neuron model combines the biological plausibility
of Hodgkin-Huxley neuron type with the computational eﬀiciency of leaky integrate-
and-fire neuron type [32]. Additionally, it has been shown to be able to successfully
capture all the firing patterns described in the basal ganglia [34] [35].
The membrane potential of an Izhikevich model is governed by the following equa-
tion:
C dv
dt = k(v −vr)(v −vt) −u + I,
(4.1)
where k is derived from the I-V curve of a neuron and regulates the current membrane
potential value, C indicates the membrane capacitance, I is the total synaptic and
dendritic current and vr and vt are the resting and threshold potentials respectively.
Additionally, u is the recovery variable with the following update function:
du
dt = a(b(v −vr) −u),
(4.2)
where a is the time scale of the recovery variable, b is the sensitivity of the recovery
variable to the fluctuations of the membrane potential. An action potential in the
Izhikevich neuron type is generated when the membrane potential v surpasses the
firing threshold vpeak, in which case the variables in the neuron are updated with the
following rule:
if v ≥vpeak then v ←c, u ←u + d,
(4.3)
==PAGE:30==
24
4 Design and implementation
where c is the after-spike reset value of the membrane potential and d is the after-spike
reset of the recovery variable.
4.3.2
Synaptic dynamics
All the connections in the model were implemented using chemical synapses built
with the standard conductance-based model [36]. The conductances were governed
by exponentially decaying functions and constant synaptic weights with different pa-
rameter values for each of the receptor types implemented to reflect their distinctive
temporal dynamics.
The excitatory neurotransmitter used in this model wast glutamate, which binds
to the AMPA and NMDA postsynaptic receptors. The GABAA receptor responds
to the γ-aminobutyric acid, the chief inhibitory neurotransmitter. GABAB receptors
were omitted for the purposes of this project (similarly to previous models [25] [37])
as they have not been shown to be contributing to generating current [38].
The input current in the equation 4.1 for the MSN can be further broken down
into currents from the AMPA, GABA and NMDA receptors:
I = Iampa + InmdaB(v) + Igaba,
(4.4)
where both Iampa and Inmda are derived from cortical input, Igaba is derived from
local MSN collaterals and B(v) models the voltage-dependent magnesium plug in the
NMDA receptors [39] and is defined as follows:
B(v) =
1
1 + [Mg2+]0
3.57
exp(−0.062v)
(4.5)
where v is the same as in equation 4.1 and [Mg2+]0 is the equilibrium concentration
of magnesium ions.
The GABAergic SNr neurons do not model the magnesium plug and therefore
their current is broken down into the following:
I = Iampa + Inmda + Igaba,
(4.6)
At any given time in the simulation, the current of each synapse can be defined
as follows:
Iij(t) =
{
¯gije−(t−ti+λ))/τ(E −vj)
if t ≥(ti + λ)
0
if t < (ti + λ)
(4.7)
where ti is the time of last firing of neuron i, λ is the delay of the synapse, ¯g is
the maximum conductance (the weight of the connection), E is the synaptic reversal
potential and τ is the synaptic decay time constant. Therefore each of the different
==PAGE:31==
4.3 Module implementation
25
synaptic input types z in equation 4.4 (z being one of AMPA, GABA or NMDA) is
modeled by:
Iz = ¯gzhz(Ez −v),
(4.8)
where hz parameter models the exponential decay of the post-synaptic current.
At the arrival time (ti + λ)), a spike is propagated to the post-synaptic neuron
j, the current reaches a value with the maximum conductance gij
z and decays expo-
nentially with rate τ which defines the duration of a neurotransmitter re-uptake and
dispersal. Different combinations of the E and τ can be used to replicate the effects
of different neurotransmitter and post-synaptic receptor pairings [37].
4.3.3
Dopaminergic modulation extension in the MSN
The technical details described in this section have already been graded as part of
the special course described in chapter 1.
To fully reproduce the functioning of MSNs, several parameters were added on
top of the basic Izhikevich neuron model. The crucial step was the recognition of
the two dopamine receptor types (D1 and D2) that MSNs can express. The different
dopamine receptor types and their activation dictate the neuromodulatory response
of the brain - activation of the D1-dominant MSNs leads to excitatory post-synaptic
potentials (EPSPs), while activation of the D2-dominant MSNs creates an inhibitory
response. These opposing effects additionally correlate with the involvement of D1
receptors in the direct BG pathway and the D2 receptors in the indirect one.
The tonic dopamine levels in the model were modulated by the activation of the D1
and D2 receptors as proposed by Humphries et al. [34], with the proportion of active
D1 and D2 receptors being described by ϕ1 and ϕ2 respectively, where ϕ1, ϕ2 ∈[0, 1].
The values of the ϕ1 and ϕ2 parameters for the different dopaminergic states simulated
in this thesis can be seen in figure 4.1. Additionally, two of the effects of the D1
Dopaminergic conditions
ϕ1 value
ϕ2 value
Low
0
0
Control
0.3
0.3
High
1
1
Table 4.1. Different dopaminergic conditions definition
receptor activation is the enhancement of the inward-rectifying potassium current
and the lowering of the activation threshold of the L-type Ca2+ current [40] [41].
These are modeled by:
vr ←vr(1 + Kϕ1)
(4.9)
d ←d(1 −Lϕ1)
(4.10)
where K and L determine the scale on which these currents will be affected by the
D1 receptor activation ϕ1 and K, L ∈[0, 1]. D2 receptor activation has been shown
==PAGE:32==
26
4 Design and implementation
to increase the sensitivity to injection current by reducing the neuron’s rheobase
current [42]. This is modeled with the modulation of the k parameter from equation
4.1:
k ←k(1 −αϕ2),
(4.11)
where ϕ2 is the D2 receptor activation and α is the size of the appropriate reduction
in k to get the required f-I curve.
Furthermore, according to Moyer et al. [42], D1 receptor activation only affects
excitatory post-synaptic potentials evoked by the NMDA receptors, while D2 receptor
modulates the AMPA receptor evoked EPSPs. This is described by the following:
ID1
nmda = Inmda(1 + β1ϕ1)
(4.12)
ID2
ampa = Iampa(1 −β2ϕ2),
(4.13)
where β1 and β2 are coeﬀicients that determine the degree of the modulation given the
ratio of the respective dopamine receptor activation and ϕ1 and ϕ2 are the receptor
activation for D1 and D2 respectively. The exact parameter values used for the MSN
module can be seen in table A.1 in appendix A. The synaptic parameter values can be
seen in table A.3 in appendix A. This concludes the description of the methodology
used and graded in the special course.
4.3.4
Substantia Nigra Pars Reticulata module
The substantia nigra pars reticulata module was implemented using the basic Izhike-
vich neuron dynamics introduced in section 4.3.1. To compensate for the lack of input
that the SNr usually receives from the STN and the GPe, several Poisson generators
were created and connected to the SNr.
One Poisson generator was implemented as an in-between channels connection
to approximate the excitatory glutamatergic diffuse connection from the STN. Three
other Poisson generators were used to simulate the inhibitory intra-channel connection
from the GPe. The firing rates and timings of the Poisson generators were tuned
manually to make the SNr output firing rates best resemble values observed in-vivo
as well as values obtained in previous simulated results [6]. SNr parameters can be
seen in table A.2 in appendix A. Synaptic parameters can be seen in table A.3 in
appendix A.
4.3.5
Dopamine modulated STDP synapse
The spike-time-dependent plastic synapse used in this model is the dopamine modu-
lated STDP synapse from NEST [43]. The synapse module was developed based on
previous studies indicating that synaptic plasticity does not only depend on the activ-
ity of the pre- and post-synaptic neurons, but also on the release of a neuromodulator
such as dopamine. Long-range dopaminergic projections have been shown particular
==PAGE:33==
4.3 Module implementation
27
focus in neuroscientific communities based on their role in reward learning through
the release of dopamine in the striatum from the midbrain areas [44].
The dopaminergic signal in the NESTML STDP synapse is a low-pass filtered
version of the spike rate of spikes coming from a third, non-local pool of dopamine
neurons delivered to the synapse via a volume transmitter. A volume transmitter is
a support node used in neuromodulated plastic synapses in NEST. It collects spikes
from all neurons connected to the volume transmitter and delivers the spikes to a
desired synapse. The neuromodulatory effect is represented as a function of the spike
times of all the spikes emitted by the neurons connected to the volume transmitter.
The dynamics of the dopaminergic influence on the synapse are later calculated in
the synapse itself.
Izhikevich [45] has suggested that dopamine-modulated STDP has a conditioning
property, whereby behavioral associations between environmental cues and rewards
are automatically learned through reinforcing the firing patterns of the neurons in-
volved, despite the firing being masked by other non-related network activity. This
is achieved in the model by the use of an eligibility trace c, which is a record of a
synapse’s past activity so that any feedback arriving after an activity can also be used
to influence the strength of the synapse:
dc
dt = −c
τc
+ STDP(∆t)δ(t −tpre/post)
(4.14)
where τc is the decay time constant of the eligibility trace, STDP (∆t) is the mag-
nitude of the change that needs to be made to the eligibility trace in response to
a pair of pre- and post- synaptic spikes with temporal difference ∆t = tpost −tpre
and δ(t −tpre/post) is the Dirac delta function that applies the effect of STDP to the
eligibility trace at the time of pre- or post-synaptic neuron firing.
The concentration of dopamine in the system is defined by D:
dD
dt = −D
τd
+ Dc
∑
tf
d
δ(t −tf
d)
(4.15)
where τd is the time constant of dopamine re-absorption, Dc is a real number indicat-
ing the increase in dopamine concentration caused by each incoming dopaminergic
spike and tf
d are the spike timings.
The overall change in the synaptic strength can then be calculated by combining
equations 4.14 and 4.16:
dW
dt = cD
(4.16)
This indicates that changes are only applied to the synaptic strength if the concen-
tration of dopamine D is not zero. Additionally, once the eligibility trace has decayed
back to 0, the synaptic strength will also not be changed [46]. The STDP synapse
==PAGE:34==
28
4 Design and implementation
additionally contains the following parameters which will be used in the experiment
described in section 4.4.2:
• vt - the volume transmitter providing the dopaminergic spikes
• Aplus - a multiplier applied to the weight changes caused by pre-before-post
spike pairings. Given a dopamine baseline concentration of 0, Aplus will be the
multiplier for facilitation.
• tauc - time constant of the eligibility trace
• taun - time constant of dopaminergic trace
• c - eligibility trace
• n - neuromodulator concentration
4.4
Testing and validation
4.4.1
The basal ganglia model
The simulation used to investigate the accuracy of the individual modules and the
whole model in replicating experimental action selection results was taken from the
Gonzalez study [6], where they replicated an auditory discrimination task described by
Beste [47]. Although the experiment was initially designed to investigate the cognitive
functioning of symptomatic Huntington’s patients, responses of healthy subjects have
also been obtained and they are therefore appropriate to use as baseline values for
the purposes of this project. The simulation stages and their respective cortical firing
rates can be seen in figure 4.2.
In the experiment, the subject is repeatedly exposed to an auditory stimulus (a
short 200ms tone or a long 400ms tone) after which they need to press either the
left or the right button depending on the stimulus. The experiment presented here
assumes that the subject has already learnt the action selection task and performs
the action automatically, bypassing the necessity of the feedback from the thalamus.
Cortical firing rates of the subjects were recorded during the experiment.
The obtained cortical firing rates were used as an input to the model, emulated
via the three populations of Poisson generators from figure 4.1 and projected over
the three channels (one for pressing the left button, one for pressing the right button
and one processing unrelated cortical background activity).
The protocol for the
simulation was the following:
• Stabilization period of 1500ms with the mean firing rate of the three Poisson
generators set to a baseline of 5 Hz. This period corresponded to the stimuli
presentation phase.
==PAGE:35==
4.4 Testing and validation
29
• A period of 25ms during which the firing rates of the two Poisson generators
responsible for recognizing the short and the long tones were gradually increased
to a mean firing rate of 5.5 Hz.
This period corresponded to the evidence
accumulation phase.
• A period of 25ms during which the Poisson generator responsible for the selected
action kept increasing its firing rate until it reached an average firing rate of
6 Hz. The firing rate of the Poisson generator connected to the non-selected
action gradually returned to the baseline 5 Hz. This period corresponded to
the action selection phase.
• A period of 1000ms during which the activation levels for the two channels were
maintained.
• The firing rate of the third Poisson generator associated with background ac-
tivity was fixed to a baseline firing rate of 5 Hz throughout the duration of the
simulation (2550ms).
Figure 4.2.
Simulation stages and their respective cortical firing rates in the selected
and non-selected channels.
Both channels start with low activation during the network
stabilization stage and have an increased firing rate during evidence accumulation.
At
the action selection, the selected channel increases its firing and the non-selected channel
decreases it. Adapted from Gonzalez et al. [6]
==PAGE:36==
30
4 Design and implementation
4.4.2
STDP synapse
Testing of the STDP synapse closely followed the procedures described in the NESTML
dopamine-modulated STDP synapse tutorial [46]. The main goal of these experiments
was to investigate whether the developed MSN module could be used in combination
with the STDP synapse and whether the conditioning/learning phenomenon could
be observed. The experiment setup was divided into two parts. The first part of the
experiment was an attempt to recreate the dopamine learning rule governing synaptic
weight change described in the NESTML STDP tutorial ( [46]) using the synaptic
dynamics defined in section 4.3.5 and the developed MSN neuron module. The sec-
ond part of the experiment focused on applying the learning rule as reinforcement
signals in a neural network with MSNs and observing the weight and eligibility traces
of individual neurons.
4.4.2.1
STDP learning rule
During this part of the experiment, a simple network was instantiated where one pre-
synaptic cell was connected to one post-synaptic cell using the STDP synapse. The
post-synaptic cell was created as an MSN D1 neuron and the pre-synaptic cell was
created as a parrot neuron. The setup of the experiment can be seen in figure 4.4.2.1.
The aim of the experiment was to investigate the effect of the timing of a dopamine
spike on the weight of the STDP synapse. The protocol for the experiment was the
following:
• Two spike generators were created and were used to provide spikes to the pre-
and post-synaptic neurons (one spike generator for each neuron).
• A separate spike generator was used to provide spikes to the volume transmitter,
with a parrot neuron in between.
• The volume transmitter was later used in the STDP synapse between the pre-
synaptic parrot neuron and the post-synaptic MSN neuron.
• The experiment lasted 10000 ms, with the pre-synaptic spike occurring at the
1 ms mark and the post-synaptic spike occurring at the 3 ms mark.
• The full experiment was composed of 12 rounds of simulations, each one using
a different timing of the dopaminergic spike (the first one occurring at 4 ms and
the last one occurring at 5000 ms).
• The experiment was carried out for three different values of the Aplus parameter:
1, 5 and 10. The Aplus parameter directly influences the magnitude of the weight
change effected by a dopaminergic spike.
• The experiment was carried out for the control dopamine receptor activation
levels of ϕ1 = 0.3.
==PAGE:37==
4.4 Testing and validation
31
Figure 4.3.
Dopamine learning rule experiment setup. An STDP synapse was used in
between a pre-synaptic parrot neuron and a post-synaptic MSN D1 neuron. The pre-synaptic
neuron received a spike at 1 ms mark and the post-synaptic neuron received a spike at the
3 ms mark. The experiment was performed 12 times, each round with a different timing of
the dopaminergic spike.
• The MSN D1 parameters were set to the same values as described in section 4.3
(with the exception of τnmda which was reduced to 2.0).
• Voltage-dependent magnesium plug in the NMDA receptors was excluded from
the model.
4.4.2.2
Learning with dopamine
In this experiment a group of neurons was instantiated and a spiking activity was
simulated between them using the learning rule described in section 4.4.2.1.
The
network consisted of 10 independent identical pre-post cell pairs, which can be seen
in figure 4.4. The protocol for the experiment was the following:
• The experiment was performed using 10 MSN D1 neurons, each receiving a
18Hz input from their own independent Poisson source.
• A separate spike generator with a volume transmitter was used to provide
dopamine spikes to each of the 10 neurons.
==PAGE:38==
32
4 Design and implementation
Figure 4.4.
Simple network for testing out the dopamine learning rule.
The network
consisted of 10 Poisson generators supplying an 18 Hz input to 10 parrot neurons, which
were each subsequently connected to their own D1-type MSN neuron. An STDP synapse
was used in between the parrot neurons and the MSN neurons, with positive and negative
dopaminergic spikes supplied to the synapse via a volume transmitter at different times.
Only 3 out of the 10 identical neuron pairs were illustrated for simplicity purposes.
• The dopamine spikes were delivered to the neurons as either reward or pun-
ishment signals. The positive (reward) dopamine spikes occurred at 2000ms,
3000ms and 4000ms marks and the negative (punishment) dopamine spikes oc-
curred at 8000ms, 9000ms and 10 000ms marks.
• At the time of a positive dopamine spike the Aplus parameter was set to 1 and
during a negative dopamine spike the Aplus parameter was set to -1. The Aplus
parameter directly influences the magnitude of the weight change effected by a
dopaminergic spike.
• tauc parameter was set to 100 and the taun was set to 50.
• Each STDP synapse was implemented for the three different receptor types
present in the MSN cell (AMPA, NMDA and GABAA)
• The experiment was carried out for the control (ϕ1, ϕ2 = 0.3), low (ϕ1, ϕ2 = 0)
and high (ϕ1, ϕ2 = 1) dopaminergic conditions.
==PAGE:39==
4.4 Testing and validation
33
• The MSN D1 parameters were set to the same values as described in section 4.3
(with the exception of τnmda which was reduced to 2.0).
• Voltage-dependent magnesium plug in the NMDA receptors was excluded from
the model.
==PAGE:40==
34
==PAGE:41==
CHAPTER 5
Results
This chapter will present the results obtained from the different testing frameworks
described in section 4.4. A brief discussion of the results and a comparison of the
results from different dopaminergic states is also provided. The various dopaminergic
conditions were achieved by adjusting the ϕ1, ϕ2 parameters from table 4.1.
5.1
The basal ganglia model
5.1.1
MSN
5.1.1.1
Control dopaminergic conditions
The description and discussion of the MSN results with control dopaminergic condi-
tions have already been written and graded as part of the special course detailed in
chapter 1. The following is a summary of that discussion.
The MSN results of the simulation presented in section 4.4.1 for the control
dopaminergic conditions can be seen in figure 5.1(a). As can be seen in the plot, the
first measurable values for either of the channels were only recorded around 300ms
after the start of the simulation. Both the selected and non-selected channels subse-
quently start to gradually increase their mean firing rates at roughly the same pace
throughout the stabilization period (first 1500ms of the simulation), reaching a value
of approximately 3 Hz at its end. During the next 25ms after the stabilization pe-
riod, the firing rates of both of the channels increase more sharply, with the selected
channel gaining a small, but a visible, advantage over the non-selected channel. In
the following 25ms, there is an even more considerable increase in the firing rate of
the selected channel, with it reaching approximately 16 Hz. This is in contrast to
the non-selected channel, which decreased its firing rate down to around 0.5 Hz. The
firing rate of the selected channel then continues to slowly grow for another 250ms
before converging to around 18.5 Hz and fluctuating around this value for the rest
of the simulation. After the 1550ms mark, the spiking rate of the non-selected chan-
nel starts to very slowly grow again, reaching the value of 2.5 Hz at the end of the
simulation. The obtained firing rate values for the control dopaminergic conditions
(figures 5.1(a) and 5.3) correlate with the firing rate levels observed in vivo, which
are below 2 Hz in low activity and around 17 Hz in high activity. The activity of
==PAGE:42==
36
5 Results
((a)) MSN firing rates with control dopaminergic conditions of ϕ1, ϕ2=0.3.
((b)) MSN firing rates with low dopaminergic conditions of ϕ1, ϕ2=0.
((c)) MSN firing rates with high dopaminergic conditions of ϕ1, ϕ2=1.
Figure 5.1. MSN firing rates with control, low and high dopaminergic conditions. The blue
line represents the selected channel and the orange line represents the non-selected channel.
The firing rate levels of the third channel were omitted in the plot due to it not representing
any particular action in the simulation.
the two channels throughout the network stabilization part of the simulation (first
1500 ms) matches the input from the cortex - there is no distinguishable difference in
the salience of the channels given an identical input from the cortex. Moreover, the
==PAGE:43==
5.1 The basal ganglia model
37
average firing rates of the two channels increase steadily at the same time. During the
evidence accumulation period, where the firing rate in the cortex sharply increases in
both of the channels, a similar reaction can be seen in the MSN. Subsequently, when
the firing rate of the selected channel overtakes the non-selected channel in the cortex
at the action selection stage, the selected channel can also be seen to be substantially
rising over the non-selected channel in the MSN, with the non-selected channel even
decreasing its firing rate.
5.1.1.2
Low dopaminergic conditions
The MSN results from the simulation in low dopaminergic conditions can be seen
in figure 5.1(b).
The simulation starts out similarly to the simulation in control
dopaminergic conditions, with the first recordable firing rate values only appearing
around the 300ms mark. Both the selected and non-selected channels then start to
gradually increase their firing rates for the rest of the stabilization period, culminating
at around 5 Hz for the selected channel and 4 Hz for the non-selected channel. These
firing rates are further maintained for the 25ms of the evidence accumulation phase.
Subsequently, 50ms after the end of the stabilization period, action selection occurs
where the selected channel sharply increases its firing rate up to around 16 Hz and
the non-selected channel decreases its firing rate down to around 1 Hz. During the
following 50ms of the simulation, the firing rate of the selected channel increases
slightly by around 1 Hz and marginally oscillates around a 16.5 Hz value for the rest
of the simulation. On the other hand, after action selection, the firing rate of the
non-selected channel starts to very slowly increase, ending the simulation at around
2.5 Hz.
The MSN results with low dopaminergic conditions (figures 5.1(b) and 5.4) are
only marginally different from the control conditions. The obtained firing rate val-
ues are also contained within the range observed in vivo, with the selected channel
reaching just short of 17.5 Hz. A noticeable difference from the control dopaminergic
conditions is the smaller gap between the average firing rate of the two channels,
most evident during the evidence accumulation phase, although visible after action
selection as well. This is an expected output given that a lower dopamine receptor
activation will decrease the current from the NMDA receptors and lower the neu-
ron’s resting potential. However, the gap between the firing rates of the selected and
non-selected channels is still relatively large due to the lateral inhibition carried out
through the inhibitory GABA receptors, which are not directly affected in the module
by the lower dopamine receptor activation.
5.1.1.3
High dopaminergic conditions
The firing rate results for the MSN in high dopaminergic conditions can be seen in
figure 5.1(c).
First noticeable firing rate levels only appear at around the 450ms
mark - later than in both control and low dopaminergic conditions. However, for the
==PAGE:44==
38
5 Results
rest of the stabilization period the selected and non-selected channels follow closely
the pattern observed in control and low dopaminergic conditions with their firing
rates increasing gradually from 0 Hz to around 2.5 Hz.
Similarly, at the end of
teh stabilization period, the firing rates in both of the channels increase even further,
reaching just under 4 Hz in the selected channel and around 2.5 Hz in the non-selected
channel.
In the first 450ms after action selection, the firing rate of the selected channel
increases up to around 24 Hz through a series of intermittent increments of decreasing
scale. This is in contrast with the control and low dopaminergic conditions, where
action selection consisted only of one sharp increase and one small increase. The
firing rate for that channel continues to fluctuate around the 24 Hz for the rest of the
simulation. At the 1550ms mark, the firing rate of the non-selected channel drops
down to around 0.5 Hz and to around 0 Hz in the following 50ms, after which it starts
to very slowly grow again, finishing at around 1.5 Hz.
The MSN results for high dopaminergic conditions from figures 5.1(c) and 5.5 show
a considerable difference from the control dopaminergic conditions.
The selected
channel not only requires more time to converge, it additionally reaches a firing
rate level almost 5 Hz higher than in the control conditions. Moreover, the firing
rate levels of the non-selected channel after action selection are lower than in both
control and low dopaminergic conditions. This increased gap between the channels
is corroborated by previous research, where higher dopamine levels were shown to
enhance the response of the MSN to cortical input [48]. The enhanced response to
the cortical input can also potentially explain the longer, sustained growth of the
firing rate of the selected channel right after action selection, whereby the initial
increased MSN response subsequently strengthens the lateral inhibition in the MSN,
causing the two channels to diverge more before reaching their final values.
5.1.2
SNr
5.1.2.1
Control dopaminergic conditions
The results for the SNr performance in the simulation in control dopaminergic con-
ditions can be seen in figure 5.2(a). In comparison with the MSN, the SNr produces
high frequency spiking rates right from the start of the simulation. This is particu-
larly the case for the non-selected channel, whose firing rate value turned out to be
outside the frequency range presented in the plot. The selected channels starts out at
a value of 20 Hz. This lasts for around the first 50ms of the simulation, after which
the firing rates for both of the channels can be seen to be in overall decline up till the
450ms mark, with the exception of a noticeable 18 Hz spike in the firing rate of the
non-selected channel between the 250 and 300ms marks.
Between the 450ms and 750ms of the simulation the firing rates for both of the
channels are gradually increasing back to the values from the start of the simulation,
==PAGE:45==
5.1 The basal ganglia model
39
oscillating around 15 Hz. The average firing rate of the selected channel tends to be
in general slightly higher than that of the non-selected channel. Starting at around
the 750ms mark and up till the 1200ms mark, both of the channels maintain their
firing rate levels, reaching values as high as 22 Hz (for both channels) and as low as
7.5 Hz for the selected channel.
In the last 250ms of the stabilization period (until the 1500ms mark), there is
a noticeable decline in the firing rate of the selected channel, with the non-selected
channel roughly upholding its previous firing levels. Moreover, a stronger inhibition
between the two channels starts to be apparent. This is in contrast to the earlier stages
of the simulation, where the inhibition was less noticeable or where the two channels
were superimposed on several occasions, producing spikes of the same frequency at
the same times.
In the first 50ms after the end of the stabilization period we can observe a sharp
decline in the firing level of both of the channels, down to around 7.5 Hz. In the
following 150ms the firing rate of the selected channel continues to strongly decrease,
before reaching a value of 0 Hz and oscillating around it for the rest of the simulation.
On the other hand, the firing rates of the non-selected channel are increasing between
around the 1550ms and 1625ms marks, reaching a high point of about 24 Hz. Subse-
quently, its firing rate levels start to gradually decrease, finishing the simulation at
a value of around 10 Hz. Throughout the duration of the simulation, the firing rate
levels of either of the channels are characterized by overall high altitudes and sharp
and quick changes of the values.
Similarly to the MSN module, the obtained firing rate values for the SNr in control
dopaminergic conditions (figures 5.2(a) and 5.3) are within the ranges observed in
vivo - close to zero when receiving inhibition from the MSN and between 20 and
30 Hz when activated [49] [50]. The SNr module shows intrinsic activation even at
the very beginning of the simulation, with larger amplitudes of firing rates and more
spontaneous spiking throughout the simulation compared to the MSN. This is in
accordance with previous research, where it was shown that GABAergic SNr neurons
fire short spontaneous spikes at high frequencies and dopaminergic neurons fire long
spike at low frequencies [51]. This is further evidenced by an increased number of
neurons firing in the SNr compared to MSN in figure 5.3.
5.1.2.2
Low dopaminergic conditions
The low dopaminergic level simulation results for the SNr can be seen in figure 5.2(b).
The simulation starts off with a very high firing rate value for the non-selected channel,
which sharply decreases down to around 5 Hz 100ms after the start of the simulation
and shows a general downward trend for the first 400ms, with the exception of a brief
spike between 250ms-300ms marks in the simulation. Similarly, the selected channel
also shows high firing rates at the beginning of the simulation (up to around 20 Hz),
==PAGE:46==
40
5 Results
with the average firing rate for that channel steadily decreasing down to around 7 Hz
in the first 400ms of the simulation.
((a)) SNr firing rates with control dopaminergic conditions of ϕ1, ϕ2=0.3.
((b)) SNr firing rates with low dopaminergic conditions of ϕ1, ϕ2=0.
((c)) SNr firing rates with high dopaminergic conditions of ϕ1, ϕ2=1.
Figure 5.2. SNr firing rates with control, low and high dopaminergic conditions. The blue
line represents the selected channel and the orange line represents the non-selected channel.
The firing rate levels of the third channel were omitted in the plot due to it not representing
any particular action in the simulation.
After the 400ms mark, both channels start to increase their firing rates for approx-
==PAGE:47==
5.1 The basal ganglia model
41
imately the next 300ms. Throughout this period, the selected channel consistently
shows higher average firing rate values than the non-selected channel. For the rest of
the stabilization period, both channels maintain roughly the same average firing rate,
with individual recorded values oscillating around the average with high amplitudes
and high frequency. During the evidence accumulation period, we observe a sharp
decline in the firing rate of both channels (down to around 5 Hz for the selected chan-
nel and 4 Hz for the non-selected channel). The firing rate in the selected channel
subsequently drops down to 0 Hz and fluctuates around that value for the rest of the
simulation. The non-selected channel, however, strongly increases its firing rate after
the action selection, reaching a high of around 22 Hz at the 1700ms mark. For the
rest of the simulation, the firing rate of the the non-selected channels generally tends
to decrease, with several noticeable spikes along the way up to around 17 Hz.
Looking at the SNr results in low dopaminergic conditions (figures 5.2(b) and 5.4),
we can observe that the overall average firing rate levels throughout the simulation
have decreased, primarily for the non-selected channel. While there is still a very
strong selection visible in the SNr, the gap between the two channels has slightly
decreased. This is an expected reaction given the input firing from the MSN. More-
over, the declining trend of the non-selected channel firing after action selection is less
steep than under control conditions. This should be a direct result of the marginally
smaller amplitude between the initial and final inhibitions of the non-selected channel
in the MSN after action selection, since the STN and the GPe firing rates from the
Poisson generators were not adjusted in relation to the change in dopamine receptor
activation.
5.1.2.3
High dopaminergic conditions
The SNr simulation results in high dopaminergic conditions can be seen in figure 5.2(c).
The first 450ms of the simulation closely resemble the firing patterns observed in
control and low dopaminergic conditions - both channels start out high, with a general
downward trend, higher average values for the selected channel and a noticeable spike
in non-selected channel firing around the 250-300ms mark.
After the first 450ms both channels start to increase their firing rate values just as
in the control and low dopaminergic conditions. However, the scale of the growth in
the high dopaminergic conditions is decidedly bigger, with both the channels reaching
values exceeding the illustrated scale on multiple occasions. Moreover, the average
firing rate for both of the channels is as high as around 20 Hz. Additionally, we can
observe higher firing amplitudes, particularly in the selected channel.
Between the 1250 and 1400ms there is also an increase in the lateral inhibition
present between the channels, in comparison with previous results. During the ev-
idence accumulation phase there is no characteristic drop in the firing rate of the
non-selected channel, which instead happens at the end of the stabilization period.
Similarly, the firing rate of the selected channel is growing quickly during the evi-
==PAGE:48==
42
5 Results
dence accumulation period, with the channel selection only noticeable at the 1600ms
mark, whereby the selected channel decreases its firing sharply down to around 7.5
Hz. Subsequently, the firing rate for this channel continues to steadily decline down
to 0 Hz and oscillates around it for the rest of the simulation, reaching marginally
lower levels than in both the control and low dopaminergic conditions.
After action selection, the average firing rate in the non-selected channel grows
gradually up till the 2000ms mark and is on a general downward trend for the rest
of the simulation. The firing pattern for this channel is still characterized by sharp
spikes and high amplitudes, just as in the other dopaminergic conditions. However,
the average firing rate is decidedly higher at around 24 Hz and with the lateral
inhibition between the channels once again emphasized.
The SNr results for the high dopaminergic conditions (figures 5.2(c) and 5.5) differ
substantially from the control and low dopaminergic conditions. While the first 500
ms of the simulation are almost identical as in the control conditions, this is due to
the fact that there is no input from the MSN throughout that time and therefore
the lower dopamine receptor activation is irrelevant. However, after the 500ms mark,
not only are the average firing rates for both channels higher than in the control
dopaminergic conditions, the amplitude of spiking in each channel is also increased.
The is most likely the result of the minuscule changes in the MSN firing, given that the
GPe and STN firing rates from the Poisson generators were not adjusted in relation
to the change in dopamine receptor activation.
The difference from the control dopaminergic conditions becomes most evident
around the evidence accumulation and action selection stages, particularly for the
selected channel (channel 1), which appears to have a slightly delayed reaction and a
more gradual decline when selected, compared to control conditions. This ties in well
with the input from the MSN where the sustained evolution of the selected channel’s
firing rate is present due to lateral inhibition and it indicates that the enhanced
response of the MSN to the cortical input can be propagated down to the SNr (see
figure 5.5).
5.1.3
Raster plots of the direct pathway
5.1.3.1
Control dopaminergic conditions
The raster plots for the MSN and the SNr modules can be seen in figure 5.3, along
with the plot of the cortical firing rate throughout the simulation. The raster plots
visualize the spikes emitted by individual neurons in the form of the black dots.
In the first 500ms of the simulation there are barely any individual neurons firing in
the MSN, which correlates with the very low population firing rates. In the rest of the
stabilization period, there is an increasing number of individual neurons firing as the
time progresses. After the channel selection the number of neurons firing in the non-
selected channel remains approximately the same, while the number of neurons firing
==PAGE:49==
5.1 The basal ganglia model
43
Figure 5.3.
Raster plots visualizing the population firing rates in control dopaminergic
conditions (solid lines - orange line represents the non-selected channel and the blue line
represents the selected channel) along with the firing of individual neurons (black dots).
The green vertical line indicates the end of the stabilization period.
in the selected channel is greatly increased and the density of the firings continues to
stay high for the rest of the simulation. In the SNr, we can observe a very frequent
level of neuron firings for the non-selected channel throughout the simulation. The
number of neurons firing in the selected channel is nearly as high during the first
1550ms of the simulation and sharply decreases after the channel selection, with only
several neurons seen to be firing.
5.1.3.2
Low dopaminergic conditions
Raster plots of the MSN and the SNr in low dopaminergic conditions can be seen
in figure 5.4. The density of individual neurons firing in the MSN during the stabi-
lization period closely resembles the pattern seen in figure 5.3 showcasing the control
dopaminergic conditions - almost no neurons firing up till the 500ms mark, with a
gradual increase in the frequency for the next 1000ms. The highest frequency of firing
in the non-selected channel can be seen around the evidence accumulation phase, with
the density decreasing once again after action selection. The frequency of the firing in
the selected channel maintains a steady high level after action selection.
As for the
SNr, we can see a moderately high density of individual neurons firing throughout
the whole stabilization period. After action selection, there are very few noticeable
firings present in the selected channel, with the density of firing in the non-selected
channel maintained approximately at the same level as in the stabilization period.
==PAGE:50==
44
5 Results
Figure 5.4. Raster plots visualizing the population firing rates in low dopamine conditions
(solid lines - orange line represents the non-selected channel and the blue line represents the
selected channel) along with the firing of individual neurons (black dots). The green vertical
line indicates the end of the stabilization period.
Figure 5.5. Raster plots visualizing the population firing rates in high dopamine conditons
(solid lines - orange line represents the non-selected channel and the blue line represents the
selected channel) along with the firing of individual neurons (black dots). The green vertical
line indicates the end of the stabilization period.
==PAGE:51==
5.2 STDP synapse
45
5.1.3.3
High dopaminergic conditions
Raster plots of the MSN and the SNr in high dopaminergic conditions can be seen in
figure 5.5. The density of individual neurons firing in the MSN during the stabilization
period roughly corresponds to previous levels observed in the other dopaminergic
conditions. We can also observe a delayed reaction of the non-selected channel during
action selection compared to the action selection in the cortex.
Additionally, the
frequency of the firings in the selected channel after action selection is moderately
increased compared to the control and low dopaminergic conditions.
As for the SNr, we can observe a higher density of the firings in both channels
in the last 1000ms of the stabilization period and also a higher density of firings in
the selected channel the first 200ms after the stabilization period as compared to
the other dopaminergic conditions. Moreover, the frequency of neurons firing in the
non-selected channel after the stabilization period is also increased.
5.2
STDP synapse
5.2.1
STDP learning rule
Figure 5.6. Evolution of the STDP synaptic weight strength given different timings of a
dopaminergic spike with Aplus = 1 and dopamine receptor activation level ϕ1 = 0.3. The pre-
and post-synaptic spikes occur at 1 ms and 3 ms respectively. This plots combines results
obtained from 12 separate runs of the simulation, each run with a different timing of the
dopaminergic spike. The dopaminergic spikes are represented in the plot as the blue dots.
The lines connecting each dot are only visualized to help examine the transition between
weight values.
==PAGE:52==
46
5 Results
The experiment described in section 4.4.2.1 was carried out for the following values
of the Aplus parameter: 1, 5 and 10. The results for Aplus = 1 can be seen in figure 5.6.
Given a dopaminergic spike at time 4 ms, the weight of the synapse is around 42. At
the next dopaminergic spike, the weight falls down sharply to around 28 and with the
next couple of spikes, the weight almost reaches a value of 10. The overall decreasing
trend remains the same for the rest of the experiment, but the magnitude of the
weight change gets smaller, gradually converging at value 1 if the dopaminergic spike
occurs at 5000 ms.
The experiment results for Aplus = 5 can be seen in figure 5.7.
Figure 5.7. Evolution of the STDP synaptic weight strength given different timings of a
dopaminergic spike with Aplus = 5 and dopamine receptor activation level ϕ1 = 0.3. The pre-
and post-synaptic spikes occur at 1 ms and 3 ms respectively. This plots combines results
obtained from 12 separate runs of the simulation, each run with a different timing of the
dopaminergic spike. The dopaminergic spikes are represented in the plot as the blue dots.
The lines connecting each dot are only visualized to help examine the transition between
weight values.
The weight starts out decidedly higher than for Aplus = 1, achieving a value of 200.
However, the pattern of the weight development closely resembles the one in figure
5.6, with the synapse weight experiencing the biggest reduction in the next 1000 ms.
With a dopaminergic spike occurring at around 2500 ms mark of the simulation, the
synapse weight has a value equal to around 20. For the next 2500 ms, the weight
decline is very minor, with the weight reaching a value of 1 given a dopaminergic
spike at 5000 ms.
The experiment results for Aplus = 10 can be seen in figure 5.8.
Similarly to
the results in figure 5.7, given a dopaminergic spike at the 4 ms mark, the weight
of the synapse has a value of 200. However, unlike the previous results, the weight
remains the same even if the dopaminergic spike occurs around 400 ms later. The
==PAGE:53==
5.2 STDP synapse
47
Figure 5.8. Evolution of the STDP synaptic tweight strength given different timings of a
dopaminergic spike with Aplus = 10 and dopamine receptor activation level ϕ1 = 0.3. The
pre- and post-synaptic spikes occur at 1 ms and 3 ms respectively. This plots combines
results obtained from 12 separate runs of the simulation, each run with a different timing of
the dopaminergic spike. The dopaminergic spikes are represented in the plot as the blue dots.
The lines connecting each dot are only visualized to help examine the transition between
weight values.
first noticeable difference in weight can be observed if the spike occurs between the
400 ms and 900 ms marks. However, the sharpest drop can only be observed between
the 1000 ms and around 2250 ms marks, with the weight falling down to just under 50.
For the rest of the experiment the weight gradually decreases with the decline rate
slightly higher than for Aplus = 1 and Aplus = 5, but, similarly to previous results,
if a dopaminergic spike occurs at around 5000 ms after the pre- and post-synaptic
spikes, the weight of the synapse is 1.
Overall, the weight development results in section are consistent with the synapse
model and the learning rule described in [45] i.e. the further away the dopamine spike
is from the pre and post-synaptic spikes, the lower the weight of the STDP synapse
will be. Moreover, given an increase in the value of the Aplus parameter, the weight
of the synapse rises accordingly. However, as evidenced by figure 5.8, given an upper
limit of the weight value, the maximum value will maintain for a longer time before
starting to fall.
==PAGE:54==
48
5 Results
5.2.2
Learning with dopamine
5.2.2.1
Control dopaminergic conditions
The results showing the firing patterns of the individual neurons in experiment de-
scribed in section 4.4.2.2 can be seen in figure 5.9. The green triangles at the bottom
of the plot indicate the timings of the positive (reward) dopaminergic spikes, while the
red triangles indicate the timings of the negative (punishment) dopaminergic spikes.
In the first 2000 ms of the simulation there are very few spikes emitted, with
neurons number 6, 8 and 9 having emitted the highest number of spikes (2) and
neurons number 2, 3 and 10 not having emitted any spikes.
After the first two
Figure 5.9. Spiking activity of the MSN D1 neurons in an experiment using the dopamin-
ergic learning rule described in section 4.4.2.2 in low dopaminergic conditions (ϕ1, ϕ2 = 0.3).
The green triangles at the bottom of the plot indicate the timings of the positive (reward)
dopaminergic spikes, while the red triangles indicate the timings of the negative (punish-
ment) dopaminergic spikes.
positive dopaminergic spikes, we can observe an increase in the overall spiking trend,
particularly for neurons number 1, 3, 6 and 7. After the third dopaminergic spike
there is also an increase in the firing pattern of neurons 2, 5 and 10, although the
frequency of their firing is still substantially lower than of the other neurons.
When the first negative dopaminergic spike is emitted at the 8000ms mark, neu-
rons numer 1 and 10 stop firing completely, while neuron 2 fires twice before stopping
as well. The firing rate of the other neurons remains approximately the same as during
the middle of the simulation. However, shortly after the second negative dopaminer-
gic spike, most of the other neurons stop firing as well, with neuron number 4 being
the last one to emit a spike right before the last negative dopaminergic spike.
The eligibility and dopamine traces along with the weight of each synapse can
be seen in figure 5.10. The figure only illustrates the first 6 neurons for simplicity
==PAGE:55==
5.2 STDP synapse
49
purposes (results are described for the first 3 neurons), with the rest of the plots
available in figure B.1 in appendix B. The dopaminergic traces are the same for each
neuron, since the dopaminergic spikes occurred at the same time for all of the neurons.
In the plot for neuron number 1, we can observe that the eligibility trace starts to
rise right before the first dopaminergic spike. This correlates well with the timing of
this neuron’s first spike in figure 5.9. The eligibility trace then very slowly increases
with each subsequent dopaminergic spike, achieving and maintaining its highest value
of around 19 between the 5000ms and 8000ms marks of the experiment. The weight
trace for neuron 1 follows a similar trend, with the weight increasing with each incom-
ing dopaminergic spike, obtaining a high of 20 between the last positive dopaminergic
spike and the first negative dopaminergic spike. After the first negative dopaminergic
spike the eligibility trace sharply decreases to around -20 and then continues to rise
back up to zero again, while the weight trace gradually decreases with each negative
dopaminergic trace, ending at -5.
The eligibility trace for neuron number 2 only starts to rise right before the last
positive dopaminergic spike and maintains a relatively low level for the next 1500
ms. It rises up to around 10 in the middle of the experiment when the neuron fires
the most and proceeds to gradually decrease for the next 2000 ms, before eventually
falling down sharply to almost -10 after the first negative dopaminergic spike. The
synapse for neuron number 2 maintains the initial weight of 5.6 for the first 4000 ms
of the experiment, with the weight only rising up to around 7 after the reward signals.
After the first negative dopaminergic spike there is a noticeable brief increase in the
weight which is caused by the firing of this neuron around that time. However, the
weight then rapidly decreases with each punishment signal.
For neuron number 3, the eligibility trace starts to increase right after the first
dopaminergic spike and continues to constantly rise up till the first negative dopamin-
ergic spike, after which it decreases a bit before sharply dropping around 500 ms later.
It then remains at a negative level until after the second negative dopaminergic spike
and starts to rise back up to 0 afterwards. The relatively steady eligibility trace cor-
relates well with the consistent levels of firing that this neuron displayed in figure 5.9.
The weight trace of the synapse for this neuron closely resembles the weight trace for
neuron 1, with the exception of the sudden increase and the delay in the weight drop
after the first negative dopaminergic spike visible in neuron 3. This is explained by
the longer firing time period of neuron 3 from figure 5.9.
The spiking activity results using the STDP synapse in control dopaminergic con-
ditions (figure 5.9) show that the overall firing of the neurons increases after positive
dopaminergic spikes and decreases or stops altogether after negative dopaminergic
spikes. We can additionally observe from figure 5.10 that the higher the eligibility
trace of a neuron is at the moment of the positive dopaminergic spike, the greater the
increase in its weight, which ultimately increases the firing of the neuron. This can
easily be seen for neuron 6 at the last positive dopaminergic spike and neuron 3 at
==PAGE:56==
50
5 Results
Figure 5.10. Eligibility, weight and dopamine trace values for selected neurons from the
dopamine learning experiment described in section 4.4.2.2 in control dopaminergic conditions
(ϕ1, ϕ2 = 0.3). The dopamine traces are the same for all neurons. The green triangles at the
bottom of the plot indicate the timings of the positive (reward) dopaminergic spikes, while
the red triangles indicate the timings of the negative (punishment) dopaminergic spikes.
==PAGE:57==
5.2 STDP synapse
51
Figure 5.10. Eligibility, weight and dopamine trace values for selected neurons from the
dopamine learning experiment described in section 4.4.2.2 in control dopaminergic conditions
(ϕ1, ϕ2 = 0.3). The dopamine traces are the same for all neurons. The green triangles at the
bottom of the plot indicate the timings of the positive (reward) dopaminergic spikes, while
the red triangles indicate the timings of the negative (punishment) dopaminergic spikes.
==PAGE:58==
52
5 Results
the last positive dopaminergic spike. Likewise, the the more negative the eligibility
trace of a neuron is during a negative dopaminergic spike, the larger the drop in the
synapse weight, as evidenced by neuron 1 at the first negative dopaminergic spike.
Moreover, if the eligibility trace is close to 0 during a dopaminergic spike, the weight
will not change or will only change a marginal amount (e.g. neuron 5 at the second
positive dopaminergic trace and neuron 6 at the first negative dopaminergic spike).
This behavior in accordance with the synaptic dynamics described in section 4.3.5.
5.2.2.2
Low dopaminergic conditions
The results showing the spiking pattern for the individual neurons in the experiment
described in section 4.4.2.2 can be seen in figure 5.11. In the first 2000 ms of the
simulation, relatively few spikes were emitted, with neurons number 2, 3 and 10 not
emitting any spikes at all. After the first two dopaminergic spikes we can notice an
increase in the overall number of emitted spikes, although there are still very few
of them. After the last positive dopaminergic spike, the frequency of firing further
increases, with neurons number 2, 4 and 10 firing the most.
The first negative dopaminergic spike brings the firing in neuron 1 to a complete
halt.
The next two negative dopaminergic spikes greatly reduce the frequency of
firing in the remaining neurons, which is mostly visible in the previously high-activity
neurons - number 2 and 10. In general, the total number of emitted spikes throughout
the simulation is distinctly lower than in control conditions. However, the majority
of the neuron firing can still be seen to be mostly taking place between the second
positive and the second negative dopaminergic spikes. The eligibility, dopamine and
Figure 5.11. Spiking activity of the MSN D1 neurons in an experiment using the dopamin-
ergic learning rule described in section 4.4.2.2 in low dopaminergic conditions (ϕ1, ϕ2 = 0).
The green triangles at the bottom of the plot indicate the timings of the positive (reward)
dopaminergic spikes, while the red triangles indicate the timings of the negative (punish-
ment) dopaminergic spikes.
synapse weight traces for each neuron in low dopaminergic conditions can be seen in
==PAGE:59==
5.2 STDP synapse
53
figure 5.12. For simplicity purposes only 3 neurons were shown, with the full figure
available in figure B.2 in appendix B. The eligibility trace for neuron 1 remains at
0 up till around the time of the first positive dopaminergic spike. In the next 4000
ms we can see the eligibility trace rising up several times, which correlates well with
the spikes emitted by neuron 1 in figure 5.11. At the first negative dopaminergic
spike, there is a sudden drop in the eligibility trace which goes down to -10 and rises
promptly again back to 0. The weight trace for neuron 1 does not extend much from
its initial value of 5.6. The weight increases gradually with each positive dopaminergic
spike and falls rapidly to 0 after the first negative dopaminergic spike.
The first spike in the eligibility trace for neuron 8 happens well before the first
dopaminergic spike, around the time the neuron fires twice at the 500 ms mark. After
the positive dopaminergic spikes, there are a few occasions where the eligibility trace
increases, reaching a highest value of around 2.5. Following the first and the second
negative dopaminergic spikes, the eligibility trace drops on three separate occasions
and remains at 0 after the last negative dopaminergic spike. The weight of neuron 8
increases only slightly to 5.7 at the second positive dopaminergic spike and decreases
in increments to around 5.45 after the second negative dopaminergic spike.
From the eligibility trace plot for neuron 10 we can observe that the majority of
the firing happened after the second positive dopaminergic spike, with the eligibility
trace rising slightly multiple times and achieving the highest value of 5 right at the last
positive dopaminergic spike. Just like the eligibility trace, the weight trace changes
the most after the last positive dopaminergic spike, with the weight going up to 8
from 6. The weight remains stable for the next 4000 ms - an indication that even
though neuron 10 fires throughout that time, the spikes do not affect the weight. The
neuron subsequently fires at the first negative dopaminergic spike, with the weight of
its synapse falling down to below its initial value. Despite firing again towards the
end of the simulation, the weight of the synapse for neuron 10 remains unaffected.
The spiking activity results using the STDP synapses in low dopaminergic condi-
tions (figure 5.11) differ substantially from the control dopaminergic conditions - the
overall frequency of firing is reduced for all neurons and the effect of the dopamin-
ergic spikes is not immediately evident. This is consistent with the results observed
in the MSN module in low dopaminergic conditions described in sections 5.1.1.2 and
5.1.3.2, where a lower frequency of firing and a lower average firing rate can be seen in
the MSN. Looking at the trace values of the neurons in low dopaminergic conditions
(figure 5.12 we can observe that the underlying dynamics of the synapse still behave
accordingly i.e. given a higher eligibility trace at a dopaminergic spike, the weight will
increase more and given a more negative eligibility trace at a negative dopaminergic
spike will lead to a larger weight drop (neuron 10 at the last positive dopaminergic
spike and neuron 1 and the first negative dopaminergic spike respectively). However,
due to the inherent lower firing rate caused by the reduced value of the dopamine
receptor activation parameter, the eligibility trace does not get high enough for it to
affect the synaptic weight to a significant extent. Moreover, a lower firing rate also
reduces the probability of the eligibility trace being heightened around the time of
==PAGE:60==
54
5 Results
Figure 5.12. Eligibility, weight and dopamine trace values for selected neurons from the
dopamine learning experiment described in section 4.4.2.2 in low dopaminergic conditions
(ϕ1, ϕ2 = 0). The dopamine traces are the same for all neurons. The green triangles at the
bottom of the plot indicate the timings of the positive (reward) dopaminergic spikes, while
the red triangles indicate the timings of the negative (punishment) dopaminergic spikes.
==PAGE:61==
5.2 STDP synapse
55
a dopaminergic spike. Another noteworthy difference from the control dopaminergic
conditions is the reaction of the dopamine trace to dopaminergic spikes - given the
same dopamine time constant, the dopamine trace in the low dopaminergic conditions
not only reaches a value almost four times as high as in the control conditions, it also
seems to decay faster.
5.2.2.3
High dopaminergic conditions
The results showing the individual neurons’ firing patterns from the experiment de-
scribed in section 4.4.2.2 in high dopaminergic conditions can be seen in figure 5.13.
As visible in the plot, the firing frequency for all neurons is very high from the very
start of the simulation. There is no noticeable increase in the firing frequency after the
positive dopamienergic spikes. However, after the first negative dopaminergic spike,
neurons 1, 6 and 10 stop firing completely, with neurons 8 and 9 ceasing to fire after
the second negative dopaminergic spike. Neuron 4 and 5 continue firing until the last
negative dopaminergic spike. Although neurons 2, 3 and 5 continue to fire until the
end of the simulation, the frequency of their firing is marginally reduced compared
to the their previous firing frequency. The eligibility, dopamine and synapse weight
Figure 5.13. Spiking activity of the MSN D1 neurons in an experiment using the dopamin-
ergic learning rule described in section 4.4.2.2 in high dopaminergic conditions (ϕ1, ϕ2 = 1).
The green triangles at the bottom of the plot indicate the timings of the positive (reward)
dopaminergic spikes, while the red triangles indicate the timings of the negative (punish-
ment) dopaminergic spikes.
traces for each neuron in low dopaminergic conditions can be seen in figure 5.14. For
simplicity purposes only 3 neurons were shown, with the full figure available in figure
B.3 in appendix B.
The eligibility trace for neuron 3 can be seen oscillating frequently during the first
2000 ms of the simulation. After the first and the subsequent positive dopaminergic
spikes, the rate of the change of the eligibility trace further increases and moreover
achieves higher values. The eligibility trace begins to drop below 0 after the first
==PAGE:62==
56
5 Results
negative dopaminergic spike and achieves its lowest values briefly after the first and
the second negative dopaminergic spikes. Subsequently, the eligibility trace begins to
rise back up to 0. The weight trace for neuron 3 increases directly after each positive
dopaminergic spike and remains stable from the 4000 ms to 8000 ms mark of the
simulation. At the first negative dopaminergic spike, the weight trace very briefly
rises before falling down with each consecutive negative dopaminergic spike.
The eligibility trace for neuron 8 follows a similar oscillatory pattern to the eli-
gibility trace of neuron 3, with the exception of having only one dip instead of two
after the negative dopaminergic spikes. The eligibility trace falls down to as low as
-50. The weight trace up till the 8000 ms mark of the simulation resembles the one for
neuron 3 as well. However, contrary to the three gradual dips in weight for neuron
3, neuron 8 achieves its final synaptic weight after only two dips, right at the second
negative dopaminergic spike.
The eligibility trace for neuron 10 similarly shows a lot of fluctuations up till the
first negative dopaminergic spike, indicative of a lot of firing. The eligibility trace
drops down sharply to around -40 at the first negative dopaminergic spike and returns
promptly back to 0. The weight trace once again exhibits a similar pattern as neurons
3 and 8 for majority of the simulation. However, the weight drops abruptly down to
around -4 at the first negative dopaminergic spike and remains there for the rest of
the simulation.
Compared to the control and low dopaminergic conditions, the spiking activity
of the MSN D1 neurons with STDP synapses in high dopaminergic conditions is a
lot more abundant (figure 5.13). Higher frequency firing can be seen from the very
beginning of the simulation, showcasing the inherent heightened excitability of the
MSN D1 neurons given an increased value of the dopamine receptor activation. While
the impact of the positive dopaminergic spikes on the firing frequency is not directly
apparent from the spiking activity plot, we can see from figure 5.14 that higher el-
igibility traces around positive dopaminergic spikes will indeed further increase the
firing rate, although not as noticeably as in control dopaminergic conditions. While
the eligibility trace fluctuates around the same low values for the majority of the
simulation, large dips going down to as low as -50 can be noticed after some of the
negative dopaminergic spikes. This shows that firing right after a negative dopamin-
ergic spike seems to have a relatively larger affect on the firing frequency compared
to the positive dopaminergic spikes.
This is evidenced by e.g.
neuron 10, where
the firing of the neuron right after the first negative dopaminergic spike caused the
eligibility trace to decline substantially and the weight to plummet well below zero,
consequently preventing the neuron from firing again.
Moreover, similarly to low
dopaminergic conditions, the dopamine trace reaches higher values than in control
dopaminergic conditions and decays in a shorter period of time.
==PAGE:63==
5.2 STDP synapse
57
Figure 5.14. Eligibility, weight and dopamine trace values for selected neurons from the
dopamine learning experiment described in section 4.4.2.2 in high dopaminergic conditions
(ϕ1, ϕ2 = 1). The dopamine traces are the same for all neurons. The green triangles at the
bottom of the plot indicate the timings of the positive (reward) dopaminergic spikes, while
the red triangles indicate the timings of the negative (punishment) dopaminergic spikes.
==PAGE:64==
58
==PAGE:65==
CHAPTER 6
Discussion
This chapter will reflect back on the work carried out in this thesis and present a
summary of the main findings. Additionally, obtained results will be compared with
the ones from previous experimental and simulated studies. Answers will be provided
for the research questions specified in section 1.2. Finally, the chapter will outline
the limitations of the study and provide suggestions on how it could be improved in
future research.
The general MSN behavior under control dopaminergic conditions closely matches
the results demonstrated in the Gonzalez paper [6], where the firing rates for both
of the channels develop similarly throughout the simulation and there is a clear dis-
tinction between the two channels after action selection. Additionally, the same final
range of values is obtained in study by Gonzalez et al. [6] (17.5-20 Hz for the selected
channel and around 2.5 Hz for the non-selected channel). The transient peaks (200ms
long or less) in the firing rate of the selected channel visible during after action se-
lection are a direct result of the lateral inhibition and the long time constant of the
NMDA receptor and have also been produced in the study.
One of the noticeable differences between the study and the results from figure
5.1(a) is that after action selection, the selected channel takes approximately 250 ms
more than its counterpart in [6] to converge to its final high value. Moreover, both
channels achieve a slightly lower firing rate value at the end of the stabilization period
(around 5 Hz in [6] compared to 3 Hz in figure 5.1(a)). This is further demonstrated
by a lower number of neurons firing in the MSN in figure 5.3 during the stabilization
period. These findings point to the fact that, given an identical cortical input and the
same number of neurons, the MSN population described in this thesis fires less often
and it takes marginally more time for the firing rate levels of both of the channels to
converge. As mentioned in the special course discussion (see chapter 1), a potential
explanation for this phenomenon is the manner of handling incoming spikes in the
two different MSN modules.
The MSN module developed in the Gonzalez study
does not use convolution to add up spikes from different receptors. However, in the
MSN module developed for the special course and this thesis, incoming spikes are
convolved with the kernel to simulate a more realistic firing process, instead of the
spikes being added instantaneously. This kind of addition will naturally extend the
time necessary for the firing rates to develop. Additionally, the differences can stem
from the experimental adjusting of the τgaba parameter, which can affect the neuron
==PAGE:66==
60
6 Discussion
firing pattern by determining how rapidly the incoming spikes take effect on the
receptor.
Comparing the SNr results to the ones obtained in the Gonzalez study, we can
observe a higher inhibition between the two channels after action selection in figure
5.2(a), with the average firing rate in the selected channel (channel 1) barely reach-
ing 1 Hz. Given that the amount of inhibition in the SNr received from the MSN
is approximately the same in the two experiments, a possible explanation for this
phenomenon is the diffuse excitation from the STN not being as strong. Additionally,
in figure 5.2(a) we can observe a steady decline in the firing rate of the non-selected
channel (channel 2) after action selection. This could have been caused by a higher
level of inhibition from the GPe for this channel. Overall, these differences are likely
to stem from the fact that the STN and the GPe neuron populations were only ap-
proximated using Poisson generators and therefore intrinsic firing properties of their
neuron models were not reflected in the simulation. Additionally, the firing rates of
the STN and GPe Poisson generators were also manually adjusted. Moreover, recur-
rent loops between the STN and the GPe were not implemented, limiting the amount
of continuous feedback that would ultimately affect SNr firing.
The first research question (see section 1.2) concerns the expected behavior of
action selection in the direct pathway with different values of dopamine receptor acti-
vation. Given the results obtained in this thesis and the initial discussion surrounding
them, the answer to this question can be summarized as follows: in control dopamin-
ergic conditions, there is a clear channel selection in both the MSN and the SNr with
the firing rates matching in vivo values. In low dopaminergic conditions, a lower
firing rate in the selected channel can be seen (compared to the firing rate of the
selected channel in control dopaminergic conditions) and a smaller lateral inhibition
between the two channels. As lateral inhibition works in-between channels, lower
lateral inhibition levels indicate that there is a smaller difference between the firing
rates of the selected and non-selected channels. Conversely, in high dopaminergic
conditions, the selected channel has a higher firing rate after action selection than in
control conditions, and there is more lateral inhibition between the two channels (i.e.,
a greater difference between the firing rates of the two channels).
Although the different values of the dopamine receptor activation are biologically-
based and can evidently be used to replicate the divergence in action selection eﬀi-
ciency, it would be beneficial to contextualize the different dopamine receptor activa-
tion levels within the Parkinsonian realm. This, as well as implementing additional
model modifications to represent a Parkinsonian state (e.g changes implemented by
Kumaravelu et al. [26] described in chapter 3), would help future models narrow
down the investigation scope and therefore better understand action selection given
particular symptoms such as akinesia or tremor.
Moreover, while this thesis set out with the intention of investigating the func-
tioning of action selection in the direct pathway in particular, the SNr results have
demonstrated that it might not be feasible to entirely isolate either of the basal gan-
==PAGE:67==
6 Discussion
61
glia pathways without losing out on the precision of nuclei firing due to the complex
connectivity network and the modulatory role of the indirect pathway on the direct
one. In future work, implementing a complete model of the basal ganglia instead of
approximating input from some of the major nuclei would be beneficial for obtaining
a more biologically plausible and all-encompassing view into the basal ganglia envi-
ronment. Additionally, it would be of interest to investigate the balance between
the two pathways given dissimilar values of dopamine receptor activation in D1-type
MSN versus D2-type MSN. Another improvement over the current model would be
building a recurrent loop between the cortex and the output of the basal ganglia and
including the thalamus. The feedback from the basal ganglia and the cortex provides
vital information on the accuracy of the selected actions and the necessary further
corrections. Such a recurrent loop would help represent action selection as a bilateral
dynamical process, rather than a simple cause-effect one. Additionally, including a
more detailed representation of the cortex in the model would better reflect its true
role in a biological setup as a decision making unit which continually integrates and
selects between evidence gathered from multiple nuclei [52]. This would ultimately
also allow for studying the exchange of signals surrounding a whole event, rather than
a brief response to a single stimulus.
The second research question from section 1.2 tackles the issue of the effect of
dopaminergic spikes on the synaptic weight. Based on the synaptic dynamics of the
STDP synapse and the results from section 5.2 it can be concluded that the impact of
the positive and negative dopaminergic spikes on the synaptic strength should only
be considered in the context of their timing relative to the pre- and post-synaptic
spike and can be thereby quantified in terms of the eligibility trace of a neuron
at the time of the dopaminergic spike and the dopaminergic trace which becomes
smaller the more time has passed since a dopaminergic spike. A general observation
could additionally be stated that the higher the firing rate of a neuron around the
time of the dopaminergic spike, the more significant the increase in the synaptic
weight will be, which, in turn, will eventually lead to an even higher firing rate. The
results confirm that STDP synapses can be effectively used with the developed MSN
module to simulate strengthening/weakening of the synapses in response to stimuli
that produce dopaminergic spikes. Although the obvious limitation present in this
thesis is that the STDP-MSN connection was investigated in an isolated experiment
and that the STDP synapses were not actually integrated into the main basal ganglia
model, the results still offer promising insights on how the STDP could be used in
basal ganglia models to reproduce learning of cues associated with particular actions
and stimuli, e.g. using action utilities [53]. In order for the STDP to be embedded into
a basal ganglia model, a separate experiment would first need to be designed where
the positive and negative dopaminergic spikes are used to perform reinforcement
learning to train the STDP synapses together with the MSN, before simulating an
action selection behavior.
In addition to modulating the synaptic weight in an STDP scenario, dopaminergic
spikes could also be used to provide and represent another way of releasing dopamine
==PAGE:68==
62
6 Discussion
in the system even using static synapses - phasic dopamine. The current model only
considers tonic dopamine, represented indirectly via the dopamine receptor activation
parameters. Many researchers also choose to restrict their basal ganglia models to only
include tonic dopamine release for the sake of simplicity. However, as phasic dopamine
has been shown to play a vital role in affecting the spiking response of the basal ganglia
to different stimuli, it would be valuable to include it in future adaptations of this
model. This would require implementing an ad-hoc synapse module using NESTML,
whereby a volume transmitter would be used to deliver the dopaminergic spikes to
the synapse at the precise time of action selection. Alternatively, an STDP synapse
could be used in place of a static one, once it has been trained.
==PAGE:69==
CHAPTER 7
Conclusion
The main motivation behind this paper was to explore the behavior of the action
selection mechanism in the direct pathway of the basal ganglia and determine how
dopamine modulation affects firing in the basal ganglia. This was accomplished by
conducting an analysis and constructing a thorough overview of the state-of-the-art
research in computational basal ganglia. Additionally, based on the identified short-
comings of the recent models, a basal ganglia model was designed and implemented,
including the major structures of the direct pathway of the basal ganglia - the MSN
and the SNr. The developed model was validated using data acquired from an ex-
perimental auditory discrimination task.
The firing rates obtained in the control
dopaminergic conditions correlated with values observed in vivo and an evident ac-
tion selection was produced. In low dopaminergic conditions smaller lateral inhibition
between the selected and the non-selected channel could be seen. Conversely, higher
dopaminergic conditions exhibited larger lateral inhibition between the two channels
and a longer convergence time of the selected channel after action selection. How-
ever, channel selection occurred regardless of the dopamine level. MSN neurons were
subsequently independently used in an STDP experiment, where it was shown that
dopaminergic spikes can successfully change the synaptic weight and influence MSN
neuron firing. It was determined that the direct pathway alone is suﬀicient, yet not
exhaustive, in adequately reproducing action selection. Suggestions were put forward
on how to improve the model in regards to implementing phasic dopamine release
and incorporating an STDP-synapse with the intention of simulating learning.
==PAGE:70==
64
==PAGE:71==
Appendices
==PAGE:72==
==PAGE:73==
APPENDIX A
Basal ganglia model
parameters
Parameter
D1
D2
N
1146
1146
C
15.0
15.0
Eampa
0.0
0.0
Enmda
0.0
0.0
Egaba
-60.0
-60.0
τampa
6.0
6.0
τnmda
160.0
160.0
τgaba
4.0
11.0
k
1.0
1.0
vt
-30.0
-30.0
vr (vp in NESTML)
-80.0
-80.0
vpeak (Vth in NESTML)
40.0
40.0
a
0.01
0.01
b
-20.0
-20.0
c
-55.0
-55.0
d
91.0
91.0
ϕ1 (y1 in NESTML)
0.3
0.3
ϕ2 (y2 in NESTML)
0.3
0.3
β1 (alpha_1 in NESTML)
6.3
6.3
β2 (alpha_2 in NESTML)
0.215
0.215
alpha
0.0
0.032
K (c_1 in NESTML)
0.0289
0.0
L (c_2 in NESTML)
0.331
0.0
Table A.1.
MSN parameters from the basal ganglia model. All parameters were taken
from [6].
==PAGE:74==
68
A Basal ganglia model parameters
Parameter
SNr
N
3000
C
172.1
k
0.7836
vt
-51.8
vr (vp in NESTML)
-64.58
vpeak (Vth in NESTML)
9.8
a
0.113
b
11.057
c
-62.7
d
138.4
I
690.4
Table A.2.
SNr parameters from the basal ganglia model.
All parameters were taken
from [6].
==PAGE:75==
A Basal ganglia model parameters
69
Connection
Receptor
Connection type
Probability
Delay
Weight
E
τ
Cortex ->MSN
AMPA
One-to-one
-
10
6.1 / τampa
0.0
6.0
NMDA
One-to-one
-
10
3.05 / τnmda
0.0
160.0
MSN ->MSN
GABA_A
All-to-all
0.32
uniform(1.0,2.0)
0.25
-60.0
4.0
MSN ->SNr
GABA_A
All-to-all
0.033
1
57.65
-80.0
5.2
SNr ->SNr
GABA_A
All-to-all
0.1
1
0.33
-80.0
3.0
GPe ->SNr
GABA_A
All-to-all
0.1066
3
59.67
-80.0
2.1
STN ->SNr
AMPA
All-to-all
0.3
1.5
3.392
0.0
2.0
NMDA
All-to-all
0.3
1.5
0.678
0.0
100
Table A.3. Synaptic and connectivity parameters for the basal ganglia model. All parameters were taken from [6].
==PAGE:76==
70
==PAGE:77==
APPENDIX B
Traces from the STDP
experiment
==PAGE:78==
72
B Traces from the STDP experiment
Figure B.1. Eligibility, weight and dopamine trace values for selected neurons from the
dopamine learning experiment described in section 4.4.2.2 in control dopaminergic conditions
(ϕ1, ϕ2 = 0.3). The dopamine traces are the same for all neurons. The green triangles at the
bottom of the plot indicate the timings of the positive (reward) dopaminergic spikes, while
the red triangles indicate the timings of the negative (punishment) dopaminergic spikes.
==PAGE:79==
B Traces from the STDP experiment
73
Figure B.1. Eligibility, weight and dopamine trace values for selected neurons from the
dopamine learning experiment described in section 4.4.2.2 in control dopaminergic conditions
(ϕ1, ϕ2 = 0.3). The dopamine traces are the same for all neurons. The green triangles at the
bottom of the plot indicate the timings of the positive (reward) dopaminergic spikes, while
the red triangles indicate the timings of the negative (punishment) dopaminergic spikes.
==PAGE:80==
74
B Traces from the STDP experiment
Figure B.1. Eligibility, weight and dopamine trace values for selected neurons from the
dopamine learning experiment described in section 4.4.2.2 in control dopaminergic conditions
(ϕ1, ϕ2 = 0.3). The dopamine traces are the same for all neurons. The green triangles at the
bottom of the plot indicate the timings of the positive (reward) dopaminergic spikes, while
the red triangles indicate the timings of the negative (punishment) dopaminergic spikes.
==PAGE:81==
B Traces from the STDP experiment
75
Figure B.1. Eligibility, weight and dopamine trace values for selected neurons from the
dopamine learning experiment described in section 4.4.2.2 in control dopaminergic conditions
(ϕ1, ϕ2 = 0.3). The dopamine traces are the same for all neurons. The green triangles at the
bottom of the plot indicate the timings of the positive (reward) dopaminergic spikes, while
the red triangles indicate the timings of the negative (punishment) dopaminergic spikes.
==PAGE:82==
76
B Traces from the STDP experiment
Figure B.2. Eligibility, weight and dopamine trace values for selected neurons from the
dopamine learning experiment described in section 4.4.2.2 in low dopaminergic conditions
(ϕ1, ϕ2 = 0). The dopamine traces are the same for all neurons. The green triangles at the
bottom of the plot indicate the timings of the positive (reward) dopaminergic spikes, while
the red triangles indicate the timings of the negative (punishment) dopaminergic spikes.
==PAGE:83==
B Traces from the STDP experiment
77
Figure B.2. Eligibility, weight and dopamine trace values for selected neurons from the
dopamine learning experiment described in section 4.4.2.2 in low dopaminergic conditions
(ϕ1, ϕ2 = 0). The dopamine traces are the same for all neurons. The green triangles at the
bottom of the plot indicate the timings of the positive (reward) dopaminergic spikes, while
the red triangles indicate the timings of the negative (punishment) dopaminergic spikes.
==PAGE:84==
78
B Traces from the STDP experiment
Figure B.2. Eligibility, weight and dopamine trace values for selected neurons from the
dopamine learning experiment described in section 4.4.2.2 in low dopaminergic conditions
(ϕ1, ϕ2 = 0). The dopamine traces are the same for all neurons. The green triangles at the
bottom of the plot indicate the timings of the positive (reward) dopaminergic spikes, while
the red triangles indicate the timings of the negative (punishment) dopaminergic spikes.
==PAGE:85==
B Traces from the STDP experiment
79
Figure B.2. Eligibility, weight and dopamine trace values for selected neurons from the
dopamine learning experiment described in section 4.4.2.2 in low dopaminergic conditions
(ϕ1, ϕ2 = 0). The dopamine traces are the same for all neurons. The green triangles at the
bottom of the plot indicate the timings of the positive (reward) dopaminergic spikes, while
the red triangles indicate the timings of the negative (punishment) dopaminergic spikes.
==PAGE:86==
80
B Traces from the STDP experiment
Figure B.3. Eligibility, weight and dopamine trace values for selected neurons from the
dopamine learning experiment described in section 4.4.2.2 in high dopaminergic conditions
(ϕ1, ϕ2 = 1). The dopamine traces are the same for all neurons. The green triangles at the
bottom of the plot indicate the timings of the positive (reward) dopaminergic spikes, while
the red triangles indicate the timings of the negative (punishment) dopaminergic spikes.
==PAGE:87==
B Traces from the STDP experiment
81
Figure B.3. Eligibility, weight and dopamine trace values for selected neurons from the
dopamine learning experiment described in section 4.4.2.2 in high dopaminergic conditions
(ϕ1, ϕ2 = 1). The dopamine traces are the same for all neurons. The green triangles at the
bottom of the plot indicate the timings of the positive (reward) dopaminergic spikes, while
the red triangles indicate the timings of the negative (punishment) dopaminergic spikes.
==PAGE:88==
82
B Traces from the STDP experiment
Figure B.3. Eligibility, weight and dopamine trace values for selected neurons from the
dopamine learning experiment described in section 4.4.2.2 in high dopaminergic conditions
(ϕ1, ϕ2 = 1). The dopamine traces are the same for all neurons. The green triangles at the
bottom of the plot indicate the timings of the positive (reward) dopaminergic spikes, while
the red triangles indicate the timings of the negative (punishment) dopaminergic spikes.
==PAGE:89==
B Traces from the STDP experiment
83
Figure B.3. Eligibility, weight and dopamine trace values for selected neurons from the
dopamine learning experiment described in section 4.4.2.2 in high dopaminergic conditions
(ϕ1, ϕ2 = 1). The dopamine traces are the same for all neurons. The green triangles at the
bottom of the plot indicate the timings of the positive (reward) dopaminergic spikes, while
the red triangles indicate the timings of the negative (punishment) dopaminergic spikes.
==PAGE:90==
84
==PAGE:91==
Bibliography
[1]
A. M. Graybiel, “The basal ganglia,” Current biology, vol. 10, no. 14, pp. R509–
R511, 2000.
[2]
J. E. Rubin, C. C. McIntyre, R. S. Turner, and T. Wichmann, “Basal ganglia ac-
tivity patterns in parkinsonism and computational modeling of their downstream
effects,” European Journal of Neuroscience, vol. 36, no. 2, pp. 2213–2228, 2012.
[3]
H. Schroll and F. H. Hamker, “Basal ganglia dysfunctions in movement disorders:
What can be learned from computational simulations,” Movement Disorders,
vol. 31, no. 11, pp. 1591–1601, 2016.
[4]
M. D. Humphries, J. A. Obeso, and J. K. Dreyer, “Insights into parkinson’s
disease from computational models of the basal ganglia,” Journal of Neurology,
Neurosurgery and Psychiatry, 2018.
[5]
S. Pronin, L. Wellacott, J. Pimentel, R. C. Moioli, and P. A. Vargas, “Neuro-
robotic models of neurological disorders: A mini review,” Frontiers in Neuro-
robotics, vol. 15, 3 2021.
[6]
Álvaro González-Redondo, F. Naveros, E. Ros, and J. A. Garrido, “A basal
ganglia computational model to explain the paradoxical sensorial improvement
in the presence of huntington’s disease,” International Journal of Neural Systems,
vol. 30, 10 2020.
[7]
“Un sustainability goals - good health and well-being.” https://sdgs.un.org/
goals/goal3. Accessed: 2022-01-06.
[8]
J. M. Pimentel, R. C. Moioli, M. F. De Araujo, C. M. Ranieri, R. A. Romero,
F. Broz, and P. A. Vargas, “Neuro4pd: An initial neurorobotics model of parkin-
son’s disease,” Frontiers in neurorobotics, vol. 15, p. 640449, 2021.
[9]
H. J. Groenewegen, “The basal ganglia and motor control,” Neural plasticity,
vol. 10, no. 1-2, pp. 107–120, 2003.
[10] J. D. Fix and W. Wilkins, “Basal ganglia and the striatal motor system,” Neu-
roanatomy (Board Review Series)(4th ed.). Baltimore: Wulters Kluwer & Lip-
pincott Wiliams & Wilkins, pp. 274–281, 2008.
==PAGE:92==
86
Bibliography
[11] “Basal ganglia article.” https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Basal_ganglia. Ac-
cessed: 2022-12-27.
[12] K. Gurney, T. J. Prescott, and P. Redgrave, “A computational model of action
selection in the basal ganglia. i. a new functional anatomy,” Biological cybernetics,
vol. 84, no. 6, pp. 401–410, 2001.
[13] H. Lodish, A. Berk, S. L. Zipursky, P. Matsudaira, D. Baltimore, and J. Darnell,
“Neurotransmitters, synapses, and impulse transmission,” 2000.
[14] K. K. Jain, “Neuropharmacology: Molecular neuropharmacology: A foundation
for clinical neuroscience,” Trends in Pharmacological Sciences, vol. 23, no. 2,
p. 99, 2002.
[15] P. Redgrave, T. J. Prescott, and K. Gurney, “The basal ganglia: A vertebrate
solution to the selection problem?,” Neuroscience, vol. 89, 1999.
[16] D. A. Burke, H. G. Rotstein, and V. A. Alvarez, “Striatal local circuitry: a new
framework for lateral inhibition,” Neuron, vol. 96, no. 2, pp. 267–284, 2017.
[17] A. Tomkins, E. Vasilaki, C. Beste, K. Gurney, and M. D. Humphries, “Transient
and steady-state selection in the striatal microcircuit,” Frontiers in Computa-
tional Neuroscience, 2014.
[18] D. Caligiore, F. Mannella, M. A. Arbib, and G. Baldassarre, “Dysfunctions of the
basal ganglia-cerebellar-thalamo-cortical system produce motor tics in tourette
syndrome,” PLoS Computational Biology, vol. 13, 2017.
[19] M. L. Heltberg, H. N. Awada, A. Lucchetti, M. H. Jensen, J. K. Dreyer, and R. N.
Rasmussen, “Biophysical modeling of dopaminergic denervation landscapes in
the striatum reveals new therapeutic strategy,” eNeuro, vol. 9, 3 2022.
[20] M. R. DeLong and T. Wichmann, “Circuits and circuit disorders of the basal
ganglia,” Archives of neurology, vol. 64, no. 1, pp. 20–24, 2007.
[21] H. Z. Shouval, S. S.-H. Wang, and G. M. Wittenberg, “Spike timing dependent
plasticity: a consequence of more fundamental learning rules,” Frontiers in com-
putational neuroscience, vol. 4, p. 19, 2010.
[22] T. V. Bliss and G. L. Collingridge, “A synaptic model of memory: long-term
potentiation in the hippocampus,” Nature, vol. 361, no. 6407, pp. 31–39, 1993.
[23] S. F. Cooke and T. V. Bliss, “Plasticity in the human central nervous system,”
Brain, vol. 129, no. 7, pp. 1659–1673, 2006.
[24] K. Gurney, T. J. Prescott, and P. Redgrave, “A computational model of action
selection in the basal ganglia. ii. analysis and simulation of behaviour,” Biological
cybernetics, vol. 84, no. 6, pp. 411–423, 2001.
==PAGE:93==
Bibliography
87
[25] M. D. Humphries, R. D. Stewart, and K. N. Gurney, “A physiologically plausible
model of action selection and oscillatory activity in the basal ganglia,” Journal
of Neuroscience, vol. 26, no. 50, pp. 12921–12942, 2006.
[26] K. Kumaravelu, D. T. Brocker, and W. M. Grill, “A biophysical model of the
cortex-basal ganglia-thalamus network in the 6-ohda lesioned rat model of parkin-
son’s disease,” Journal of Computational Neuroscience, vol. 40, pp. 207–229, 4
2016.
[27] E. M. Izhikevich, “Simple model of spiking neurons,” IEEE Transactions on
neural networks, vol. 14, no. 6, pp. 1569–1572, 2003.
[28] M. R. Romano, R. C. Moioli, and L. A. Elias, “Evaluation of frequency-
dependent effects of deep brain stimulation in a cortex-basal ganglia-thalamus
network model of parkinson’s disease,” pp. 3638–3641, 2020.
[29] D. Caligiore, F. Mannella, and G. Baldassarre, “Different dopaminergic dysfunc-
tions underlying parkinsonian akinesia and tremor,” Frontiers in Neuroscience,
vol. 13, 2019.
[30] E. Fino and L. Venance, “Spike-timing dependent plasticity in the striatum,”
Frontiers in synaptic neuroscience, vol. 2, p. 6, 2010.
[31] “A
tutorial
on
spiking
neural
networks
for
beginners.”
https://
analyticsindiamag.com/a-tutorial-on-spiking-neural-networks-for-
beginners/. Accessed: 2022-10-25.
[32] K. Yamazaki, V.-K. Vo-Ho, D. Bulsara, and N. Le, “Spiking neural networks and
their applications: A review,” Brain Sciences, vol. 12, no. 7, p. 863, 2022.
[33] M. Caiola, A model and analysis for the onset and progression of Parkinson’s
disease. Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute, 2016.
[34] M. D. Humphries, N. Lepora, R. Wood, and K. Gurney, “Capturing dopamin-
ergic modulation and bimodal membrane behaviour of striatal medium spiny
neurons in accurate, reduced models,” Frontiers in computational neuroscience,
p. 26, 2009.
[35] E. M. Izhikevich, “Dynamical systems in neuroscience: the geometry of excitabil-
ity and bursting mit press,” 2005.
[36] P. Dayan and L. F. Abbott, Theoretical neuroscience: computational and math-
ematical modeling of neural systems. MIT press, 2005.
[37] Z. Fountas and M. Shanahan, “The role of cortical oscillations in a spiking neural
network model of the basal ganglia,” PloS one, vol. 12, no. 12, p. e0189109, 2017.
[38] J. Bormann, “Electrophysiology of gabaa and gabab receptor subtypes,” Trends
in neurosciences, vol. 11, no. 3, pp. 112–116, 1988.
==PAGE:94==
88
Bibliography
[39] C. E. Jahr and C. F. Stevens, “Voltage dependence of nmda-activated macro-
scopic conductances predicted by single-channel kinetics,” Journal of Neuro-
science, vol. 10, 1990.
[40] E. S. Nisenbaum and C. J. Wilson, “Potassium currents responsible for inward
and outward rectification in rat neostriatal spiny projection-neurons,” Journal
of Neuroscience, vol. 15, 1995.
[41] S. Hernández-López, J. Bargas, D. J. Surmeier, A. Reyes, and E. Galarraga, “Re-
ceptor activation enhances evoked discharge in neostriatal medium spiny neurons
by modulating an l-type ca2+ conductance,” Journal of Neuroscience, vol. 17,
1997.
[42] J. T. Moyer, J. A. Wolf, and L. H. Finkel, “Effects of dopaminergic modulation on
the integrative properties of the ventral striatal medium spiny neuron,” Journal
of Neurophysiology, vol. 98, 2007.
[43] “Neuromodulated stdp synapse.” https://nest-simulator.readthedocs.io/
en/v3.3/models/stdp_dopamine_synapse.html. Accessed: 2022-11-14.
[44] W. Potjans, A. Morrison, and M. Diesmann, “Enabling functional neural circuit
simulations with distributed computing of neuromodulated plasticity,” Frontiers
in computational neuroscience, vol. 4, p. 141, 2010.
[45] E. M. Izhikevich, “Solving the distal reward problem through linkage of stdp and
dopamine signaling,” Cerebral cortex, vol. 17, no. 10, pp. 2443–2452, 2007.
[46] “Dopamine modulated stdp synapse tutorial.” https://nestml.readthedocs.
io/en/latest/tutorials/stdp_dopa_synapse/stdp_dopa_synapse.html.
Accessed: 2022-11-14.
[47] C. Beste, C. Saft, O. Güntürkün, and M. Falkenstein, “Increased cognitive func-
tioning in symptomatic huntington’s disease as revealed by behavioral and event-
related potential indices of auditory sensory memory and attention,” Journal of
Neuroscience, vol. 28, no. 45, pp. 11695–11702, 2008.
[48] R. Natarajan and B. K. Yamamoto, “The basal ganglia as a substrate for the
multiple actions of amphetamines,” Basal ganglia, vol. 1, no. 2, pp. 49–57, 2011.
[49] Z. Fountas, “Action selection in the rhythmic brain: The role of the basal ganglia
and tremor.,” 2016.
[50] M. Lindahl, I. Kamali Sarvestani, Ö. Ekeberg, and J. H. Kotaleski, “Signal
enhancement in the output stage of the basal ganglia by synaptic short-term
plasticity in the direct, indirect, and hyperdirect pathways,” Frontiers in compu-
tational neuroscience, vol. 7, p. 76, 2013.
==PAGE:95==
Bibliography
89
[51] F.-M. Zhou and C. R. Lee, “Intrinsic and integrative properties of substantia
nigra pars reticulata neurons,” Neuroscience, vol. 198, pp. 69–94, 2011.
[52] R. Bogacz and K. Gurney, “The basal ganglia and cortex implement optimal
decision making between alternative actions,” Neural computation, vol. 19, no. 2,
pp. 442–477, 2007.
[53] T. C. Stewart, T. Bekolay, and C. Eliasmith, “Learning to select actions with
spiking neurons in the basal ganglia,” Frontiers in neuroscience, vol. 6, p. 2,
2012.
==PAGE:96==
