==PAGE:1==
Master’s thesis
Realistic representation of residential
ventilation in building performance
simulation
Author :
Ákos Hortobágyi
Student Number:
s210163
January, 2023
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Realistic representation of residential ventilation in building performance simula­
tion
Master Thesis
January, 2023
By
Ákos Hortobágyi
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus­
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Published by:
DTU, Department of Civil Engineering, Brovej, Building 118, 2800 Kgs.
Lyngby Denmark
www.byg.dtu.dk
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over five months at the Section for Indoor Climate, Depart­
ment of Civil Engineering, at the Technical University of Denmark, DTU, in partial fulfilment
for the degree Master of Science in Engineering, MSc Eng.
It is assumed that the reader has a basic knowledge in the areas of statistics.
Ákos Hortobágyi ­ s210163
Signature
Date
ii
Realistic representation of residential ventilation in building performance simulation
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
Since people spend the majority of their time indoors, it is highly important to design
a suitable indoor environment for them. Climate change is also happening faster than
ever, therefore precise indoor climate simulations are necessary to estimate the energy
consumption of the buildings more accurately. The dynamic simulation software of Indoor
Climate and Energy from IDA (IDA ICE) is an excellent simulation tool to get an overview
on these parameters. In order for the simulations to be accurate, the reality must be
approximated as closely as possible. However, IDA ICE only has a couple of standard air
handling units, which may not resemble the air handling units in the reality well enough.
Therefore, the ventilation units on the Danish market were investigated and custom air
handling units were developed in the software, that represent the different air handling
units, that can be bought nowadays. The functionalities of the real air handling units were
grouped in order to create a basic, a mid­level and a high­level air handling unit. Control
strategies such as supply air temperature control, heat exchanger and bypass control, fan
control according to schedule or according to exhaust air concentration or frost­protection
control were implemented in the air handling unit. After creating the custom air handling
units, some modifications, such as varying supply air temperature, usage of ideal fans,
built­in frost­protection or built­in demand control, were set up and compared to the custom
functionalities. Lastly, the standard air handling unit of IDA ICE was modified slightly to
be comparable to the previous units. All these units were compared in terms of how well
they fulfill their objectives, how they create the indoor environment and how much energy
they need for that. It was found, that the basic unit generally requires the least amount
of energy, but in relatively colder or hotter periods of the year it cannot always produce
the desired conditions. The mid­level unit was found to be perfectly suitable for Denmark,
since it can cope with the cold winter, whereas there is not much time during summer,
when it fails. The high­level unit could fulfill every criteria on the cost of the most energy
consumed.
Realistic representation of residential ventilation in building performance simulation
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
Ákos Hortobágyi, MSc Civil Engineering, DTU
Creator of this thesis template.
Jakub Kolarik, [Associate Professor], [Department of Civil and Mechanical Engineering,
Energy and Service, DTU]
[I would like to thank Jakub Kolarik the immense help he provided throughout the whole
project. The regular meetings both in person and online were vital for me working on
the thesis from week to week. Teaching me how to configure IDA ICE, and how to use
it efficiently is very much appreciated. I am grateful for his patience towards my never
ending questions, as well as for the useful suggestions both on how to solve issues in the
models and on how to create the report.]
iv
Realistic representation of residential ventilation in building performance simulation
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
2
2
Background
3
2.1
Residential ventilation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
Ventilation in IDA ICE
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.3
Market research
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
2.4
The chosen air handling units . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
2.5
Objectives . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
3
Methodology
20
3.1
Assembling the representative units in the test model
. . . . . . . . . . . . 20
3.2
Real model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 50
3.3
Comparison of the air handling units . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 55
4
Results
61
4.1
Results of the custom air handling units . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 61
4.2
Results of the varying supply air temperature . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 77
4.3
Results of the units with ideal fans . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 78
4.4
Results of the units with built­in frost protection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 79
4.5
Results of the units with built­in demand control . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 82
4.6
Results of the standard units
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 84
4.7
Comparison of the air handling units regarding their energy consumption
. 84
5
Discussion
86
5.1
Basic unit . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 86
5.2
Mid­level unit . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 89
5.3
High­level unit
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 90
5.4
Units with ideal fans . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 91
5.5
Units with built­in frost­protection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 91
5.6
Units with built­in demand control . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 91
5.7
Energy consumption of the units
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 92
6
Conclusion
93
7
Further work
94
Bibliography
95
A Appendix
97
Realistic representation of residential ventilation in building performance simulation
1
==PAGE:8==
1
Introduction
Residential ventilation is getting more important nowadays. Since an average person in
an industrialized country spends around 90% of their lifetime indoors, providing a healthy
indoor climate is crucial. [1]. It can not only increase productivity [2], but it can also help
avoiding the so called sick building syndrome. The cause of this sickness can be several­
fold, e.g. building design, materials used in the building design or materials used indoors,
but people can experience sick building syndrome more likely in case of an inadequate
ventilation. Poor indoor air quality can result in chemicals building up in the occupant zone
causing symptoms like blocked nose, dry sore throat, dry cough among other symptoms
[3].
Another reason for the importance of ventilation is the large energy consumption of the
buildings. Buildings are responsible for around 40% of the total energy consumption and
for around 36% of the total CO2 emissions in the European Union. Therefore, it is vitally
important to have a clear picture on the energy consumption of the buildings in order to
decrease it alongside the emissions [4].
Simulations are important because they provide insight on how the application of the given
product will be in the future. Creating models is a relatively cheap way of testing the
outcome of the design, since the construction of the product does not have to be built,
in order to gain information on how it is going to perform. However, it is also important
to create ”realistic enough” models to have close to realistic results after the simulation,
providing important data on both indoor climate and energy consumption. Creating a
completely realistic model is almost impossible, but the reality can be approximated with
the available software quite well [5].
Creating realistic models in the construction industry is especially important, since they
can provide great visualization for the designers. They can also be used for simulations
which can result in estimates of the energy consumption and the indoor climate conditions.
In this project the dynamic simulation tool Indoor Climate and Energy from IDA (IDA ICE)
was used to simulate air handling units. The software has different built­in air handling
units, but they do not represent the air handling units, that can be found on the Danish
market, well enough. This could result in unrealistic simulation results which could affect
the value of the information provided by the simulation.
Therefore, an investigation of the on the Danish market available air handling units was
made in order to create realistic ventilation units, that could later be imported in other
models as well to provide more realistic results. The aim of this project was to create
custom air handling units in IDA ICE that could be used for realistic simulations in the
future as well. These air handling units were tested on a test model and later on an
architectural model as well to compare them to the built­in ventilation units that can be
found in IDA ICE and draw conclusions on their performance of indoor air quality and
energy use. Furthermore, they were compared to standard air handling units, available
in the software, as well as to modifications of these developed units.
2
Realistic representation of residential ventilation in building performance simulation
==PAGE:9==
2
Background
2.1
Residential ventilation
The purpose of using heating, ventilation and air conditioning (HVAC) systems is to pro­
vide a healthy indoor environment with good thermal comfort and indoor air quality. Pro­
viding fresh, outdoor air to an indoor space has several other reasons as well [6] [7]:
• supplying oxygen for human respiration
• extraction of contaminants to limit the the exposure of odors, vapors and harmful
chemicals
• control the aerosols indoors by supplying filtered air with lower aerosol concentration
• control the humidity indoors by providing outdoor air with lower humidity levels
• maintaining good indoor air quality by adequate air distribution
There are two main types of ventilation systems: a constant air volume system (CAV)
and a variable air volume system (VAV). Both systems have their advantages and disad­
vantages. CAV systems run their fans on one speed all the time, supplying a constant
airflow to the dwelling. VAV systems however, change their fan speed continuously ac­
cording to demand. These systems are dominant in industrial, commercial, school and
office buildings, where the occupancy and therefore the required airflow is unpredictable.
CAV systems are more common in residential buildings [8]. This study also compares the
use of CAV and VAV systems in a Swedish dwelling. It was concluded, that decreasing
the airflow rate during unoccupied times, when the residents are not home, savings of the
fan and heating could be up to 16%. CAV systems have lower installation costs, since no
sensors, controller, dampers and wiring are needed. However, since VAV systems can
save energy during operation, so they might be more cost efficient over time.
An interesting control strategy was investigated in the following study [9]. The airflow
rate was changed between a high and low value, but individual room control was not
supported. The flow rates were chosen according to the Danish building regulations and
the indoor air quality standards. The quality of the exhaust air was measured and the
airflow was changed accordingly. The CO2 concentration of the exhaust air was used to
provide a proper ventilation for the occupants, when they are present in the building. The
humidity concentration in the extract air was measured in order to know, when to increase
the airflow to remove humidity from the building. They found, that the concentrations were
generally within the limits. The results showed, that ventilation could be run on low level
for 37% of the time without significant increase in CO2 and humidity concentration of
the exhaust air. This could result in a 35% reduction in fan power consumption. The
conclusion was that the airflow in dwellings could be reduced without significant changes
in the indoor air quality in the apartment. Another advantage of this strategy is that it is
simple and all the necessary components can be found in the air handling unit.
There are different types of mechanical ventilation, e.g. supply ventilation, exhaust venti­
lation, balanced ventilation or smoke ventilation. In case of supply ventilation, the indoor
space only receives supply air through the ventilation system and air will leave through
cracks on the building, doors or windows. In residential buildings this is commonly found
in living rooms and bedrooms. Exhaust ventilation however, only provides air extraction
from the room and air will come through cracks, doors or windows. Commonly used in
Realistic representation of residential ventilation in building performance simulation
3
==PAGE:10==
bathrooms and kitchens, where a lot of moisture can be generated which must be re­
moved from indoors. Balanced ventilation supplies and extracts air at the same time,
providing the features of both supply and exhaust ventilation. This is generally used in
the whole dwelling, where some of the rooms have only supply airflow and some of them
only exhaust airflow. All the other rooms, e.g. corridors, staircases, should only have an
airflow as a result of the air movement through the apartment due to the air supply and
exhaust in the different rooms of the building [10].
Since the regulations are becoming more strict on thermal losses of the building and more
insulation is used to decrease the heat losses through the building envelope, the role of
ventilation losses are getting more important [11]. Heat losses through the ventilation
system can reach up to 50% of the total thermal losses of a modern building [12]. To
decrease heat losses through the ventilation system, a heat exchanger can be put the air
handling unit [13]. There are two main categories of heat exhchangers. One category
is the rotating energy wheel regenerators, which is a heat exchanger, that consist of a
slowly rotating wheel with a material, that can absorb heat and moisture as well. Both of
these can be reused by the supply air. The other group is the flat­plat heat exchangers,
where the airflow is separated by the plate. The warm exhaust air flows on one side and
the cold supply air takes the temperature on the other side. This heat exchangeer cannot
transfer moisture, since the airflows are separated completely [14]. One study showed,
that heat exchangers in a cold climate can have a profound effect on decreasing the
heat losses of the ventilation systems. The study was made in Finland and it was found,
that a traditional system can use 67% more energy compared to a ventilation system
using a heat exchanger with 80% efficiency and 41% more, if the heat echanger has 60%
efficiency [15].
In order to keep up with the more and more strict regulations of the energy consumption
of buildings, other technologies might be helpful. Smart ventilation could be one of them.
Smart ventilation is meant to be a simpler but more energy efficient control system, that
can be applied to more advanced systems. In additions to energy efficiency, smart venti­
lation is capable of monitoring the electricity grid activities and ventilate more in off­peak
periods, providing a greater grid­reliability [16].
On Figure 2.1 the definition of smart ventilation is explained. Smart ventilation contin­
uously adjusts the air flow rate in order to reach the target. The target can be different
regarding the requirements of the regulations or needs of the occupants. They can be e.g.
thermal comfort, noise level or energy consumption limits. This means that the system
analyses and adjusts the airflow rate without delay. The smart ventilation system can also
adjust its flow rate according to location. This means, that different rooms can have dif­
ferent need of airflow, which can be supplied by or extracted by the system. A ventilation
system with constant airflow cannot be smart. All in all, a smart ventilation system must
provided the best possible indoor air quality by using the least possible energy [17].
4
Realistic representation of residential ventilation in building performance simulation
==PAGE:11==
Figure 2.1: Main features of smart ventilation [17]
Figure 2.2 summarizes what a smart ventilation system can respond to.
• A smart ventilation system is capable of adjusting the ventilation flow rate according
to demand such as decreasing the flow in case the building is unoccupied.
• The control system can register the outdoor thermal conditions and use the infor­
mation to adjust the ventilation according to that. A time­shift of the ventilation can
be used to use the outdoor air when it has the best attributes such as low temper­
ature, humidity, when outdoor air quality is acceptable or when indoor and outdoor
temperatures are appropriate for ventilative cooling.
• Reducing the utility bills is possible, since the smart ventilation system can respond
to the electricity grid needs. This means that the ventilation is decreased at peak
electricity consumption times and increased off­peak electricity consumption times
in order to make up for the decrease in the indoor air quality due to the reduction of
air flow rate.
• Smart ventilation can directly sense the indoor air contaminants and can respond to
the measured level of those by changing the ventilation flow rate accordingly.
• Operation of other air moving / cleaning elements can result in adjustments of the air
flow rate of the ventilation system to avoid unnecessarily high or low air flow rates.
These elements can be e.g. kitchen hood, bath fan, toilet fan, night cooling.
Realistic representation of residential ventilation in building performance simulation
5
==PAGE:12==
Figure 2.2: Parameters to which a smart ventilation system can respond [17]
2.1.1
Regulations
Since both the indoor air quality in the apartment and the energy consumption of the air
handling unit is important nowadays, regulations were created to regulate these ventilation
systems.
One of the regulations to follow is the Danish Building Regulations (BR18) [18]. It has a
number of requirements on the ventilation systems. According to BR18, in general, the
ventilation system should provide a satisfactory indoor climate following the standards of
DS 447 (Ventilation on buildings)[19], DS 428 (Fire protection of ventilation systems)[20]
and DS 452 (Thermal insulation of mechanical installations)[21].
General requirements of the building regulations are:
• The ventilation system must be located in a way that cleaning and maintenance can
be done properly.
• All the sensors must be reachable in case of maintenance.
• The supply air must be taken directly from outside.
• Inlets and outlets must be placed properly meaning, that fresh air should enter the
system all the time and the exhaust air should not disturb the surroundings.
• In case of supplying and extracting air from a room, draught must be avoided.
• Transfer of air from a more polluted room to a less polluted room must not occur.
6
Realistic representation of residential ventilation in building performance simulation
==PAGE:13==
• Ventilation systems must not introduce substances like micro­organisms into the
ventilated area.
The building regulations have energy requirements for the ventilation systems as well:
• Unnecessary energy consumption must be avoided.
• The airflow rate must be possible to decrease in case of unoccupancy. However,
the air quality must be acceptable when the apartment is in use.
• If the ventilation system has supply and extraction as well, heat recovery must be
introduced. (It can be combined with a heat pump.) The dry temperature efficiency
of the heat exchanger must be at least 80%.
• If the unit serves only one apartment, the specific electricity consumption (or SFP /
specific fan power) must not exceed 1000 J/m3 at the basic air exchanger.
SFP is defined by the ratio of electrical power and the airflow, shown in Equation 2.1[22]:
SFP = electrical −power
airflow
(2.1)
The electrical power is defined by Equation 2.2 [22]:
electrical −power =
airflow · pressure
fan −total −efficiency
(2.2)
Therefore, the SFP can be calculated using Equation 2.3[22]:
SFP =
pressure
fan −total −efficiency
(2.3)
There can be found additional requirements for residential buildings:
• A supply airflow rate of 0.3 L/s/m2 heated floor area must be provided at all times.
It is however permitted to reduce this flow rate to 0.15 L/s/m2 if the building is
unoccupied for a longer period of time.
• If the ventilation of the apartment is managed mechanically, the living rooms and the
bedrooms must have supply airflow, whereas the bathrooms, toilets, kitchens and
utility rooms must have extraction.
• Kitchens must be equipped with a kitchen hood, which must have an air flow of at
least 120 L/s to remove the moisture and airborne contaminants from the indoor
space efficiently. However, this flow rate can be reduced by the use of correlation
factors
In Table 2.1 the minimum flow rates can be seen, which must be extracted from the given
rooms in order to provide acceptable air quality and fulfill the criteria of the building regu­
lations.
Realistic representation of residential ventilation in building performance simulation
7
==PAGE:14==
Table 2.1: The minimum extracted flow rates[18]
Room
Flow rate [L/s]
Bathroom / toilet
15
Toilet without bath / utility room
10
Kitchen
20
Other requirements to fulfill is the Ecodesign. Ecodesign and Energy Labelling regu­
lations establish minimum requirements for ventilation units. This guide formulates the
requirements by firstly stating the scope. Secondly, summerizes the requirements of both
Ecodesign and Energy Labelling and by mentioning the responsibilities of for the man­
ufacturers, suppliers and dealers. Thirdly, it closes with additional information. These
requirements are not legally binding and are only supposed to be guidelines.
Figure 2.3: Guidelines of Ecodesign on residential ventilation units
[23]
On Figure 2.3 the guidelines of Ecodesign on the residential ventilation units can be seen.
Stage 1 implies the earlier regulations from 2014, whereas Stage 2 indicates the newer,
up­to­date recommendations. The guidelines of Ecodesign limit the specific energy con­
sumption (SEC), which can be calculated using the Annex VIII of Regulation 1253/2014.
It also prescribes a maximum sound power level of 40 db. Other requirements are that
the ventilation units should be equipped with a multi­speed or variable speed drive, that
bidirectional ventilation units should have bypass functions, and units with filter should
have a visual warning signal[23].
2.2
Ventilation in IDA ICE
The simulations software, that was used for this project, is Indoor Climate and Energy
from IDA (IDA ICE). It is a dynamic simulation software to study the indoor climate and
the energy consumption of the building. This means, that a detailed model of a building
can be set up, where all the architecture, building services, indoor and outdoor climate
and occupants can be set up to do the calculations. [24]
The following tasks can be done in the software to prepare a model that is ready for the
dynamic simulation:
8
Realistic representation of residential ventilation in building performance simulation
==PAGE:15==
• The location of the project can be set alongside the weather file according to that
location.
• The geometry of the building can also be set up in the software. However, since
there are other tools where it is easier to create the architectural model, those files
can be imported in IDA and have the architectural model prepared in another soft­
ware. Easier models like a one zone model is however very easy to create and use
in IDA ICE.
• Once the geometry is in IDA ICE, the heating, cooling and ventilation system can
be set up. In this project, only the ventilation system was studied.
• The leaks for airflow, the radiation of the sun, the shading and numerous other things
can be set up.
• A standard air handling unit is imported automatically. This unit can be modified
by changing the attributes of the existing objects, importing new objects in the unit,
replacing existing objects with new ones or importing a whole new air handling unit.
This is how the custom air handling units were created later in this project.
• Complex control strategies can be set up in the software by using the numerous
built­in objects of IDA ICE. Macros for the different control methods were set up to
create the custom air handling units with advanced control strategies.
• All the zones specified in the architectural model can have their own control setpoints
in case of variable air volume system.
• Different schedules can be defined for the occupants in all the different zones.
Schedules can also be defined for all the other equipment or lighting that is produc­
ing heat and / or moisture over time, or periodically. Activity levels of the occupants
can be defined and they produce heat, moisture and CO2 accordingly. Occupant
behavior can be modelled on an advanced level.
• Once the whole model is set, a simulation can be started. Once the required time for
the simulation is done, detailed results can be seen under the corresponding tabs.
In this project,the results of the indoor air quality, the energy consumption and the
flow rates play the largest roles.
Unlike the reality, IDA ICE is a flow­based system. This means, that it is not a pressure­
based system, where the airflow is distributed according to the pressure losses in the
different ducts. IDA ICE however does not work with pressure losses, but the previously
decided air flow rate will be transported to all the different terminals in the end of the duct
system.
Equation 2.4 shows, how the air flow to the different zones is calculated in IDA ICE:
flow = max(CentralMode· (mMax · Contr + mMin · (1 −Contr)), cLow · mMin) (2.4)
Where:
• flow: The airflow to the given zone.
• CentralMode: It is the signal, sent by the ”AirCtrl” signal. The ”AirCtrl” signal is a
schedule of the fans, that is sent to all the zones from the air handling unit.
Realistic representation of residential ventilation in building performance simulation
9
==PAGE:16==
• mMax: The maximum required airflow by the zone.
• Contr: The control signal, sent from the zone to the air handling unit. This signal
implies the necessity, decided by the zone.
• mMin: The minimum required airflow by the zone.
• cLow: A low number, just to avoid having 0 as a signal, which would make the
software crash.
The flow to a zone in IDA ICE is calculated by multiplying the ”CentralMode” signal and
the ”Contr” signal. This basically means, that the amount of flow is decided by both the
air handling unit via the ”CentralMode” signal (deciding on how much airflow the zone can
have, out of the maximum possible, that the unit can produce) and by the zone via the
”Contr” signal (deciding on how much flow the zone actually needs). This is multiplied by
the maximum flow rate and a term including the minimum flow rate and the control signal
from the zone. The ”CentralMode” signal can be always 1, indicating that the air handling
unit is in full operation all the time and ready to supply and extract as much air as the
zones require. It can also follow a schedule for example, when the airflow is decreased
in times when the building is unoccupied. The ”Contr” signal is always 1 in case of a
constant air volume system, but it can vary from 0 to 1 in case of a variable air volume
system. If the zone sends the ”Contr” signal 1 to the air handling unit, it means, that the
zone needs all the possible airflow that was previously set as a maximum for that given
zone.
If the fan speed changed, the signal should be sent to both the air handling unit and
zones. If the signal is sent to the air handling unit, the electricity consumption of the fans
will change accordingly, and if the signal is sent to the zone, the airflow reaching that zone
will change accordingly.
2.3
Market research
In order to be able to create representative models of the on the Danish market available
air handling units, a market analysis was made. Residential air handling units were cho­
sen according to the maximum possible air flow rate of the of the given unit and according
to the suggestions of the company. It was also important to have enough documentation
of the unit, to create the realistic model of them. The architectural model in the project
is a row­house model (see Section 3.2), which is an individual apartment, so decentral­
ized air handling units were chosen to be implemented in the representative models. The
apartment has 150 m2 as a brutto floor area (including the walls).
Five producers were chosen to be investigated. The producers were Systemair, Exhausto,
Nilan, Swegon and Genvex. The main purpose of the market research was to find five air
handling units from these producers, that have the attributes, that are required to build a
custom residential air handling unit.
Systemair units
The company Systemair has the VTC series as their residential air handling unit series.
Four different models are currently on the market, and those are represented in Table
2.2[25]:
10
Realistic representation of residential ventilation in building performance simulation
==PAGE:17==
Table 2.2: Residential air handling units of Systemair
Unit
Designed for up to
VTC 200
180 m2
VTC 300
240 m2
VTC 500
400 m2
VTC 700
550 m2
The units have similar features, the difference is that they have different filter kits available,
other than their size. The main features however are the same:
• ”High energy­efficiency counter flow heat exchanger and EC technology fans”
• ”Demand control regulation with built­in humidity sensor”
• ”Automatic defrosting”
• ”Multiple control options to choose from”
• ”Connection board for easy access and connection of accessories”
• ”Modbus commnnication RS­485 as standard”
• ”Passive House and Eurovent Certification”
Since the units have no major difference, the smallest one, VTC 200 was chosen to be
part of the project, because it is designed for apartments with similar size.
Exhausto units
The company Exhausto has a variety of acceptable air handling units. The decentralized
air handling units are represented in Table 2.3[26]:
Table 2.3: Decentralized air handling units of Exhausto
Unit type
Capacity [m3/h]
Comment
VEX40
up to 330
for residential buildings
VEX80T
150­850
for schools, offices
The unit called VEX40T in Table 2.3 has the following features[26]:
• ”Highly energy efficient”
• ”Extremely quiet”
• ”Automatic control based on air quality”
• ”Large selection of filters”
• ”Air flow can easily be reversed”
• ”Automatic bypass for night­time cooling”
• ”Can be built into a standard cabinet”
The unit called VEX80T in Table 2.3 has the following attributes[26]:
• ”Decentralized ventilation of schools, offices, etc.”
• ”Visible installation in the room it ventilates”
Realistic representation of residential ventilation in building performance simulation
11
==PAGE:18==
• ”Many color combinations”
• ”Simple installation”
• ”Easy to use”
• ”EXact2 control system”
• ”Quiet operation”
In Table 2.4 the compact air handling units with counterflow heat exchanger of Exhausto
can be seen. It is clear, that most of the units are too large for a residential apartment[26].
Table 2.4: Compact air handling units with counterflow heat exchanger of Exhausto
Unit
Capacity [m3/h]
VEX140CF H+V
396 ­ 1920
VEX150CF H­V
725 ­ 3160
VEX160CF H­V
1053 ­ 4680
VEX170CF H
1296 ­ 8320
VEX310T
80 ­ 550
VEX320T
100 ­ 1050
VEX330T
200 ­ 2080
VEX340T
350 ­ 2460
VEX350T
400 ­ 4095
VEX330H1
70 ­ 900
VEX330H2
100 ­ 1555
VEX340H
400 ­ 2450
VEX350H
700 ­ 3820
VEX360H
1100 ­ 5360
VEX370H
no data
There are two units, that could fit in a residential building: VEX310T and VEX320T. These
units have the following features[26]:
• All the ducts exit on the top of the unit, so it can be placed closely to other objects
or walls.
• The connection of the water to heating/cooling coil is also connected on the top, and
the condensate drain is on the front of the unit.
• Control system can be EXact2 (from Exhausto) or a third party control system.
• The units have been constructed with integral heating and cooling coil.
• Although the unit is compact, it is easy to clean or change filters.
Since three different units were possible to use in this project, one of them had to be
chosen. The unit called VEX40T was chosen, because it is a decentralized unit, prepared
directly for residential buildings.
Nilan units
The company Nilan has a relatively large range of available air handling units, out of which
more could be used in the single family apartment in this project. Table 2.5 represents
the possible air handling units with counterflow heat exchanger [27]:
12
Realistic representation of residential ventilation in building performance simulation
==PAGE:19==
Table 2.5: Air handling units with counterflow heat exchanger of Nilan
Unit
Capacity [m3/h]
Comment
Comfort CT150
25 ­ 168
for small dwellings
Comfort CT200
25 ­ 198
for apartment buildings
and terraced houses
Comfort CT500
100 ­ 500
for large single family dwellings
Comfort 200 Top
75 ­ 308
for renovation projects in
apartments or terraced houses
Comfort 350 Top
upt to 372
for homes and smaller
commercial buildings
Comfort 300LR
100 ­ 400
for single family dwellings and
terraced houses
Comfort 350LR
up to 372
for remodeling projects and
new buildings
Comfort 450
250 ­ 525
for large dwellings or small
commercial buildings
Comfort 600
200 ­ 800
for small commercial buildings
or central ventilation of apartments
Comfort 1200
400 ­ 1675
for centralized ventilation of residential
buildings or for ventilation of schools,
offices and commercial buildings
Comfort 5000
500 ­ 5000
for centralized ventilation of residential
buildings or for ventilation of schools,
offices and commercial buildings
The units, that are possible to implement in this project are Comfort 200 Top, Comfort 350
Top, Comfort 300LR and Comfort 350LR. Nilan recommends to use the units Comfort
CT200 for apartments and terraced houses as well, but the maximum airflow rate of this
unit is too low for this project. The size of Comfort 300LR is perfect for this project, and
the company recommends using it for single family dwellings and terraced houses, which
is exactly the case.
Swegon units
The company Swegon has a wide range of air handling units to choose from. They provide
clear data on the capacity of every unit, and the size of the building they were designed
for. Therefore, it was relatively easy to to research the units that are adequate for this
project, leaving the large units for commercial buildings behind. The group of units, that
are suitable for for this apartment, is called CASA ventilation units. Table 2.6 represents
the air handling units of Swegon, that is possible to use in this project[28]:
Realistic representation of residential ventilation in building performance simulation
13
==PAGE:20==
Table 2.6: CASA ventilation units of Swegon
Unit
Max flow
[m3/h]
Designed for
up to
Comment
W3 Smart xs
288
150 m2
residential
W4 Smart xs
360
200 m2
residential
W5 Smart
468
250 m2
residential
R2 Smart
216
140 m2
for renovation
R3 Smart
288
150 m2
lowest sound level
R4­C genius
331
200 m2
for ceiling mounting
R5 Smart
432
240 m2
rotary heat exchanger
R5­H Smart
432
250 m2
placement in attic
There were many candidates again to choose from, since many air handling units were
designed for an apartment this size. The unit called W4 Smart xs was chosen because
it was designed for a similarly sized apartment, but has a bit of an extra capacity, in case
more airflow is needed. The unit has the following attributes[28]:
• ”Ecodesign energy class A*”
• ”Temperature efficiency up to 82%”
• ”Demand­controlled humidity function as standard”
• ”Automatic summer function and passive cooling”
• ”Anti­frost protection ensures ”
• ”External coils for heating and cooling as an option”
• ”Can be connected to the automated building management system”
• ”Low installation height for installation above laundry columns”
• ”Control System CASA Smart”
Genvex units
The company Genvex has a relatively low variety of available air handling units, compared
to the other companies. The range of units is represented in Table 2.7[29]:
Table 2.7: Air handling units of Genvex
Unit
Flow rate [m3/h]
at 100 Pa
ECO 190 XL
310
ECO 275
440
ECO 360R
410
ECO 375
460
ECO 400XL
660
The unit ECO 190XL was chosen, because the size of the unit seemed right in regard of
the project.
14
Realistic representation of residential ventilation in building performance simulation
==PAGE:21==
2.4
The chosen air handling units
In Table 2.8 the chosen air handling units can be seen. These ventilation units were used
to assemble the representative models.
Table 2.8: The chosen air handling units
No.
Company
Type
Max. air flow [m3/h]
1
Systemair
VTC 200
550
2
Exhausto
VEX40T
330
3
Nilan
Comfort 300LR
400
4
Swegon
W4 Smart xs
360
5
Genvex
ECO XL
270
However, documentation was not always easy to find on the website of the companies.
Therefore, representatives of above mentioned companies were contacted to get more
input data for the models.
After reviewing the documentation of the air handling units, it was decided to create three
different representative models, that have the features of the real units. A basic unit was
made to have the basic attributes that were typical for these ventilation units, and that
were built­in features. A mid­level unit was created to include attributes that were given
as accessories in the real units, providing an option for the customers to upgrade the
most simple, basic unit. A high­level unit was also produced representing features that
can usually not be found in most of the units on the Danish market, but either provide
additional comfort, or include more advanced control method.
Realistic representation of residential ventilation in building performance simulation
15
==PAGE:22==
Table
2.9:
All
the
control
methods
found
in
the
documentation
[30],
[31],[32],[33],[34],[35],[36],[37],[38],[39]
Control strategies
1
2
3
4
5
Manual change of airflow
X
X
Airflow steps
X
X
X
X
Automatic flow control
X
Temperature control
X
X
XX
X
X
Humidity control
XX
X
X
XX
XX
CO2 control
XX
X
XX
XX
XX
VOC control
XX
Temporary / permanent modes
XX
X
Eco mode
XX
X
Week schedule
XX
X
X
X
X
Preheater
XX
XX
XX
XX
Reheater
XX
XX
XX
XX
Manual defrost
X
Automatic defrost
XX
XX
XX
X
Extended / forced run
XX
Extra functions (Digital Input)
XX
X
Manual summer / winter mode
X
Automatic summer / winter mode
XX
X
XX
X
Passive cooling
X
Active cooling
XX
XX
XX
Extra controller
XX
Bypass control
X
X
X
Constant room pressure
X
Night cooling
X
In Table 2.9 all the different control methods can be seen, that were found in the documen­
tation of the given air handling units. The names of the air handling units were replaced
by numbers in Table 2.9 in order to save space. Unit number 1 represents the unit from
Systemair, number 2 is Exhausto, number 3 is Nilan, number 4 is Swegon and number 5
is Genvex. The attributes of the representative models were chosen according to Table
2.9. The choices were made subjectively, but considering the best possible categoriza­
tion of the attributes in order to get the three required representative air handling units.
The X­marks in Table 2.9 mean that the marked control method was found in the docu­
mentation of the given air handling unit. One X represents a basic functionality, that is a
built­in control method of the air handling unit. Two X­s represent an accessory, which
is not an automatically built­in control method. However, these are possible to include in
the ventilation unit, if necessary. In order to create the three different air handling units
using these control methods, a categorization was made according to how basic or how
rare the given control method was. The result of the choices can be seen in the following
Sections 3.1.1, 3.1.2 and 3.1.3.
There were control methods, that were not chosen to be part of any of the representative
air handling units. The reason behind this is severalfold. There were manual control
methods, which were not done automatically by the air handling unit, but taking action
was required by the occupant to make the changes resulting in controlling the ventilation
unit. These control methods were:
16
Realistic representation of residential ventilation in building performance simulation
==PAGE:23==
• Manual change of air flow: A very basic option for the occupant to change the airflow
according to free will, based on personal senses e.g. odor or humidity. [30]
• Temporary / permanent modes: These modes are long­ or short­term changes in
the air flow due to occupant behavior. However, these changes have specific im­
portance. The following temporary and permanent modes were found in the docu­
mentation:
– Auto mode (permanent mode): Automatic airflow control using week schedule,
demand control, external functions (if they are configured). [30]
– Manual mode (permanent mode): Manual airflow selection. [30]
– Holiday mode (temporary mode): Both the supply and exhaust fan speed is
set to low while the occupant is away for a longer time, ECO mode is activated
during this period of time. [30]
– Crowded (temporary mode): Both the supply and exhaust fan speed is set to
maximum and the supply air temperature setpoint is decreased by 3K. [30]
– Away (temporary mode): Both the supply and exhaust fan speed is set to low
while the occupant is away for a short period of time.
– Refresh (temporary mode): Both supply and exhaust fan speed is set to maxi­
mum to replace the indoor air in a short period of time. [30],[37]
– Fireplace (temporary mode): Supply fan speed is set to high whereas exhaust
fan speed is set to low to increase the pressure indoors and help the smoke
extraction through the. chimney [30],[37]
– Cooker hood function (temporary mode): This function is used to balance the
indoor pressure when the cooker hood is in operation by increasing the supply
air flow rate, improving the extraction capability. [37]
– Central vacuum cleaner function (temporary mode): This function is used to
balance the indoor pressure when the central vacuum cleaner is in operation
by increasing the supply air flow rate, improving the cleaning result. [37]
• Manual defrost: In case of Systemair, a humidity sensor is needed to be configured
in the exhaust duct in order to have automatic defrost. However, in case of the lack
of the sensor, the frost protection has to be done manually by the occupant. [31]
• Extended / forced run: It is possible to run the unit for an additional, extended time
under operation conditions other than the determined schedule. [31]
• Manual summer / winter mode: If there is no temperature setpoint selected, the unit
can be put in summer mode manually as well. [31]
There were other control methods, that were chosen not to be implemented in IDA ICE.
The reasons behind this were various:
• VOC control: Controlling according to volatile organic compounds is not possible in
IDA ICE, since there are no emissions represented in the software and therefore no
sensors either. [37]
• Eco mode: Using this mode the air handling unit of Swegon is trying to operate with
the best possible temperature efficiency. It was not imported in the models because
Comfort mode was used instead. It keeps the supply temperature constant even if
Realistic representation of residential ventilation in building performance simulation
17
==PAGE:24==
it has to bypass the heat exchanger to do so, and thus changing the temperature
efficiency. This way it was always possible to supply air with the required temper­
ature. [37] Eco mode is also a possibility when purchasing the air handling unit of
Systemair. Eco mode in this unit is only possible if an internal heater is installed
and configured. Inn case of using Eco mode, the temperature setpoint at which the
heater is activated is lowered, saving energy this way. [32]
• Extra functions (Digital Input): The unit an have a lot of additional ON/OFF functions
that can be activated using external ON/OFF controllers. These controllers can be
connected to the digital inputs of the unit. Different extra functions can be connected
to these. Digital input 1­3 are freely configurable and can be used for any purpose.
Digital input 4 is used to switch the electrical heater on and off. Digital input 5 is
used to activate the extended / forced running. Digital input 6 has the purpose of
controlling the heat exchanger. Digital input 7 controls the Home / leave mode,
supporting energy saving this way. These extra functions were not implemented
because they can either be freely chosen by the occupant or they also depend on
occupant behavior. [31]
• Passive cooling: If the outdoor air is colder than the indoor air, the heat exchanger
can be bypassed in order to supply as cold air as possible without mechanically
cooling it during summertime. The software is using it by default. [34]
• Extra controller: It is possible to add extra controllers such as Preheater, Heating,
Cooling and GEO Exchanger. Preheater, Heating, or Cooling elements were im­
plemented in the more advanced model, see Sections 3.1.2 and 3.1.3, but GEO
Exchanger was decided not to be used. [32]
• Constant room pressure: It is possible to set up pressure sensor that sense when
there is a sudden rise or fall in the indoor pressure. If this happens, they can send
signals to the fans to either increase or decrease the flow rate and thus keep the
pressure in the room constant. This function could be added to one of the represen­
tative units in the future. [37]
After eliminating all the functions that were not used in any of the representative units,
the remaining control methods were divided into three groups according to how basic the
functionality was.
2.5
Objectives
In this section the objectives of the project can be seen:
• The commercially available residential air handling units were determined, that are
representing the typical solutions installed in Denmark. A market analysis was per­
formed in order to achieve this, to select the suitable models, that could be used to
create the representative units (see Section 2.3.)
• After choosing the attributes of the representative units, they had to be implemented
in IDA ICE. These customized air handling units were created by using the compo­
nent models available in the software. Macros were created in order to virtually build
as similar units as possible to the real units. (see Sections 3.1.1, 3.1.2, 3.1.3.)
• The functionality of the created component models was first tested on a one zone
model to be able to analyze the results quickly and understand the behavior of each
macro that was created in IDA ICE. After this, the units were dragged and dropped
18
Realistic representation of residential ventilation in building performance simulation
==PAGE:25==
in the architectural model as well to see how well they could perform in a real apart­
ment. (see Sections 3.1 and 3.2.)
• The main objective of the project was to compare the functionality of the standard
air handling units, that can be found in the software originally, to the representative
units, that were built to represent the air handling units on the Danish market. This
was important because this way more accurate simulations could be performed in
the future if the model has a closer relation to the reality. (see Section 4.)
On Figure A.1 the project plan with the tasks and objectives of the report can be seen,
represented in a Gantt­chart.
All the objectives were set to get as realistic results as possible. The importance of this is
clear: more realistic simulations lead to more realistic approximations of operational costs,
which is one of the main drivers of the market nowadays. However, it is also important to
have an estimation of the energy usage, since the effects of climate change are escalating
dramatically. Lastly, a realistic analysis is available for the indoor air quality. By creating
new, realistic units in IDA ICE, the possibility is going to be there for everyone to have
better estimations for their projects and thus see a clearer picture of what is really going
to happen if one decided to use a certain air handling unit available on the Danish market.
Realistic representation of residential ventilation in building performance simulation
19
==PAGE:26==
3
Methodology
3.1
Assembling the representative units in the test model
In this section the remaining attributes of Table 2.9 were grouped in order to create the
three different representative air handling units in IDA ICE: the basic unit, the mid­level
unit, and the high level unit. After deciding on which control method to be part of which
representative unit, the units were composed in the software using the available compo­
nents.
In Section 3.1 a one zone model was used to assemble the representative units. This
one zone model served as a test model, where all the functionalities were tested before
implementing them in the real architectural model. The benefit of using these test models
was, that they require significantly less computational power, therefore more simulations
could be run in a certain amount of time. An additional benefit was, that due to the simplic­
ity of the one zone model, the effects of the different control strategies could be realized
easier, making it quicker to develop a certain control method and test whether it is working
according to the plans, or there is a malfunction which had to be corrected.
3.1.1
The basic unit
The purpose of this unit was to feature control methods that were standard functionalities
in all of the chosen air handling units. This way, the most standard representative unit
could be imitated, that is available on the Danish market. Therefore, it serves as a low­
cost opportunity for the customers, who do not want a high­end unit in their homes. This
unit was created to fulfil anyone’s basic necessities of indoor air quality.
The following attributes were chosen to be included in the basic model, according to Table
2.9:
• Airflow steps: The change of airflow is made in steps instead of continuous adjust­
ment. [31],[36], [37], [39]
• Week schedule: The fan speed follows a daily schedule. The schedule is different
during the weekdays and the weekend days. [31], [33], [36], [37], [39]
• Supply temperature control: The supply temperature is kept constant and the tem­
perature is only regulated by the cross­flow heat exchanger and the ON­OFF oper­
ation of the bypass, since the heater is only an accessory. [32], [36], [37], [39]
• Automatic summer / winter mode: The bypass system continuously checks the out­
door and return temperatures and decides whether it is summertime or wintertime
accordingly. [31], [33], [35], [37]
• Automatic defrost mode is set up to avoid ice formation on the heat exchanger. [31],
[33], [35], [37]
In the following, the control methods of the given air handling units are represented, re­
garding the chosen attributes mentioned above. This way, choosing the exact settings
for the basic unit was possible. It is important to note, that not all the manuals of these air
handling units could deliver data about every control method, some manuals were missing
data about some functionalities. In these cases, representatives of the companies were
contacted to get more information on the units.
20
Realistic representation of residential ventilation in building performance simulation
==PAGE:27==
Detailed representation of the basic air handling unit
In this section, the attributes of the commercially available air handling units are repre­
sented, which were chosen to be part of the basic unit.
Table 3.1: Control methods of airflow steps
Airflow steps
Systemair
VTC 200
Off: 0%
Low: 25%
Normal: 45%
High: 70%
Max: 100%
Exhausto
VEX40T
­
Nilan
Comfort 300LR
Supply Extract
Off: 0% 0%
Level 1: 23% 25%
Level 2: 40% 45%
Level 3: 65% 70%
Level 4: 100% 100%
Swegon
W4 Smart xs
No steps, only different settings:
Boost: max airflow
Home: normal airflow
Away: low airflow
Travelling: very low
Genvex
ECO XL
Off
Level 1: 30%
Level 2: 50%
Level 3: 75%
Level 4: 100%
Basic unit
0.3 L/s/m2 (BR18)
Level 1: 25%
Level 2: 50%
Level 3: 75%
Level 4:100%
In Table 3.1 different ways of setting the airflow steps by the air handling units are shown.
It can be seen that Systemair, Nilan and Genvex provided a clear picture of how the setting
of the airflow steps is planned. The tendency is, that there are four different airflow levels
in addition to the case, where the unit is switched off. These four levels are approximately
distributed evenly from 0% to 100%. It is also visible, that Nilan has supply and extract
flow rates which are slightly different from each other. Swegon does not have a preset for
the airflow steps, it only has temporary modes, that the user can set up. Exhausto did not
provide any detail about this functionality. Looking at the data represented in Table 3.1
the airflow steps for the representative, basic air handling unit could be decided as well,
which is represented in the last row of the table. It is important to note, that according to
the Danish Building Regulations (BR18) [18], a minimum airflow rate of 0.3 L/s/m2 heated
floor area is required to be provided all the time. Therefore, this amount of airflow was
chosen to be supplied and extracted instead of the unit completely switching off.
Realistic representation of residential ventilation in building performance simulation
21
==PAGE:28==
Table 3.2: Possible weekly schedule methods
Weekly schedule
Systemair
VTC 200
It is possible to set two periods for each day. Starting and
finishing time has to be set. Airflow levels need to be set for
the ON period, and the rest of the day is the OFF period, which
can be another level of flow.
Exhausto
VEX40T
Three different weekly schedules can be chosen from: Classic,
Comfort and Eco. See A.2 for more details.
Nilan
Comfort 300LR
Three different weekly schedules can be created. To set them
up, time, ventilation level and desired room temperature has
to be chosen.
Swegon
W4 Smart xs
Four different week programs can be set, for which time
limits and supply temperature values must be chosen.
Genvex
ECO XL
No preset schedule is available, but daily schedules can be
copied to create a weekly schedule.
Basic unit
Classic schedule from Exhausto (see Figure 3.1).
Table 3.2 represents the different weekly schedule methods, that are possible, when
choosing one of the mentioned air handling units. The way of setting the schedules is
similar in case of all the five units. Users can manually set up the schedule by setting a
starting and finishing time, and a fan speed level or the temperature of either the supply
air or the room that is supplied. It is also common, that more schedules can be set in the
memory of one unit. It was decided to use the Classic schedule from Exhausto because
it was the only company that provided examples of preset schedules. The Classic sched­
ule was chosen above the Comfort and the Eco schedules because it is believed that this
schedule would be used by the most occupants. On Figure 3.1 the chosen schedule can
be seen.
Figure 3.1: Classic schedule (Exhausto) [33]
On Figure 3.1 it is shown, that there is a different schedule for the weekdays, when the
occupants spend most of the daytime at outside the apartment, and for weekends, when
they are expected to spend more time at home. During the weekdays, the fan speed is
increased to Level 2 only during the morning and the evening, 3­3 hours respectively.
Otherwise, it is on Level 1. However, during the weekend, the fan speed is set to Level 2
for the daytime and Level 1 is only set during the night.
22
Realistic representation of residential ventilation in building performance simulation
==PAGE:29==
Table 3.3: Automatic summer / winter mode
Automatic summer / winter mode
Systemair
VTC 200
Automatic switch between winter operation with heat recovery
and summer operation without heat recovery is used. If no
temperature setpoint is selected, manual summer mode occurs.
If a heater is installed, manual summer will go automatically to
a setpoint of 12 ◦C, if the outdoor temperature is 5 ◦C or below
Exhausto
VEX40T
The unit checks the temperature every hour each day. If the
daily average temperature is above 19 ◦C or the or the daily
maximum is above 28 ◦C and the daily minimum is above 7 ◦C,
summer mode is activated. If the daily average temperature is
below 19 ◦C or the daily maximum is below 28 ◦C, winter mode
is activated.
Nilan
Comfort 300LR
An outdoor temperature setpoint can be set, which decides
whether it is winter or summer mode. By default this is 12 ◦C,
but it can be changed.
Swegon
W4 Smart xs
­
Genvex
ECO XL
A daylight saving timer is installed, which switches between
winter and summer omde automatically.
Basic unit
The strategy of Exhausto is used for the bypass control (see
Figures 3.2 and 3.3), and the strategy of Nilan is used for the
humidity control in the mid­level unit (see Section 3.1.2).
In Table 3.3 the different control methods of switching between summer and winter mode
automatically are described. It can be seen that most of the units use a temperature set­
point to decide whether summer or winter mode is required. There is also the unit from
Genvex, that uses the daylight saving timer to change between summer and winter mode,
instead of a temperature setpoint. This strategy could work, but the outdoor temperatures
in Denmark are still relatively low at the time of the year when summer is starting accord­
ing to the daylight saving time [40]. In March for example, the average temperature in
Denmark is 3.7 ◦C (see Appendix A.3). Therefore this is not a useful control strategy in
this case. Exhausto’s algorithm was chosen to be implemented as a bypass control (see
Figures 3.2 and 3.3) in the model because it provides a clear strategy on how to make the
decision automatically. However, Nilan’s control method was used in the case of humidity
control in the mid­level unit (see Section 3.1.2).
Realistic representation of residential ventilation in building performance simulation
23
==PAGE:30==
Table 3.4: Supply temperature control methods
Supply temperature control
Systemair
VTC 200
A setpoint is needed for the supply temperature. This setpoint
varies, depending on whether there is an electrical reheater
(range: 12­22 ◦C), or a water based reheater (range:
12­40 ◦C), or no reheater (range: 15­19 ◦C).
Exhausto
VEX40T
No supply temperature strategy was defined in the manuals.
According to the representative of the company only a
setpoint needs to be set.
Nilan
Comfort 300LR
An electrical or a water­based after­heating element is needed
to control the supply temperature regardless of the outdoor
temperature. However, if there is no after­heating element in
operation, the bypass can be used to regulate the temperature.
Swegon
W4 Smart xs
The supply temperature can be regulated by changing the
temperature efficiency of the heat exchanger or with an
integrated air heater.
Genvex
ECO XL
A supply temperature setpoint can be set, but only with a
reheater. This reheater will aim for a temperature, which is
2 ◦C lower, than the room temperature.
Basic unit
Two options will be investigated and compared: the strategy
of a constant temperature setpoint and the strategy of aiming
2 ◦C below the room temperature. Control by bypass.
Table 3.4 shows the control methods of the different units work. It can be seen, that with
an after­heater (either electrical or water­based) the possibilities of controlling the sup­
ply air temperature increase, but there are units, which can only regulate the supply air
temperature in case there is an after­heating element in operation. Since the basic rep­
resentative unit does not contain any heating element, other ways of supply temperature
control had to be found. The units offer a strategy of controlling the supply air temperature
only by using the heat exchanger and the bypass. This is a cost efficient control method
because the heat of the extract air is reused. However, it has its limits as well, since if
the outdoor air is too cold, the heat exchanger may not be able to produce the required
temperature. This depends highly on the efficiency of the heat exchanger as well.
The two different supply temperature control methods mentioned in Table 3.4 were im­
plemented in the models and investigated. The results of the comparison can be seen in
Chapter 4. Both methods have advantages and disadvantages. Supplying air which is
2 ◦C colder than the room air temperature is important to have proper mixing due to the
density difference of the warmer room air and the slightly cooler supply air. This is how
fresh air can be supplied to the occupants, in case the supply air terminals are located
on the ceiling. The difference between these two control methods can be seen, if the
room temperature is changing. In case of increased room air temperature, the system
with constant supply air temperature may cause local discomfort in form of draught. If the
supply temperature follows the increase of the room air temperature, the supply air would
have to be heated more, which might require the use of a heating coil which would result
in increased energy use and cost. If the room air temperature is below the setpoint, but
the system with constant supply air temperature is in use, mixing might not happen due
to thermal stratification. If the fresh air stays close to the ceiling, it would result in lack of
fresh air reaching the occupants. However, if the supply air temperature changes along
24
Realistic representation of residential ventilation in building performance simulation
==PAGE:31==
the room air temperature, the cooler fresh air will always reach the occupants. The disad­
vantage of this system is that supplying colder air would decrease the indoor temperature
even more, making it more difficult for the heating system to reach the setpoint.
Figure 3.2: Bypass control during winter (Exhausto) [33]
Figure 3.3: Bypass control during summer (Exhausto) [33]
The bypass control method of Exhausto was implemented, which can be seen on Fig­
ures 3.2 and 3.3. There are different bypass control strategies for the winter and summer
season. The automatic summer / winter mode decides according to the algorithm, which
strategy has to be used. During winter the unit bypasses the the air only in case of return
temperature lower than 24 ◦C and if the outdoor temperature is higher than the return tem­
perature. This is how the unit ensures heating in winter by bypassing the air. In summer
however, the functionality of bypassing is to cool the room. Therefore, the unit will bypass
the air if the return temperature is higher than 27 ◦C and the outdoor air temperature is
lower than the return air temperature. An additional condition is, that the the outdoor air
has to be warmer than 10 ◦C not to cause local discomfort in form of supplying relatively
cold air and causing draught.
Realistic representation of residential ventilation in building performance simulation
25
==PAGE:32==
Table 3.5: Automatic frost protection strategies
Automatic defrost
Systemair
VTC 200
There is a difference in defrost levels between a unit with RH
sensor and without. If there is a RH configured, three levels of
defrost can be selected, deepnding on the case (soft: warehouse,
industrial building, normal: apartments, hard: buildings with
very high humidity levels). If there is no RH sensor configured,
the defrost level has to be set manually. Six different levels of
defrost can be set, also depending on the case (Off: RH <20%,
Min: 20%<RH<29% (dry areas), Low: 30%<RH<40% (office
buildings), Medium: 41%<RH<% (apartments with normal
humidity), High: 61%<RH<80% (apartments with high
humidity), Extremely high: >80% (buildings with very high
humidity levels)
Exhausto
VEX40T
A detailed frost­protection scheme was provided by the company,
whit a different strategy for a unit with and without a preheater.
In the basic model the method of without the preheater was
impemented. (see Appendix A.4)
Nilan
Comfort 300LR
A detailed frost­protection scheme was provided by the company,
whit a different strategy for a unit with and without a preheater.
In the basic model the method of without the preheater was
impemented. (see Appendix A.5)
Swegon
W4 Smart xs
There is automatic frost­protection with different preset levels,
which can be changed. A minimum supply air temperature limit
can also be set. If the supply air temperature goes below this
limit, the units decreases its air flow rate.
Genvex
ECO XL
Frost­protection works with a preheater. A setpoint for the
preheater can be set (in the range of ­15 ◦C ­ 10 ◦C), by default this
temperature is set to be ­3 ◦C.
Basic unit
Nilan’s strategy was chosen because it provides a detailed
strategy, but not as complicated as Exhausto’s method.
Table 3.5 represents the frost­protection strategies of the different units. It is visible, that
the anti­freeze strategies are different depending on whether the unit has a preheater or
not. Two companies provided a detailed frost­protection scheme: Exhausto and Nilan.
Both methods include a strategy for frost­protection with and without a preheater. Since
the basic model has no preheater, the strategies without preheater could be used in this
unit. Nilan’s startegy was more compact, and easier to implement, so it was the one that
was programmed in IDA ICE.
If a preheater is not installed, the frost protection functionality must start when the out­
door temperature is below 1 ◦C and the discharge air temperature (which is leaving the
heat exchanger) is below 3 ◦C. If these conditions apply at the same time, the following
procedure must be done:
• Bypass damper opens
• The supply fan switches off
• Warm extracted air will flow through the heat exchanger
26
Realistic representation of residential ventilation in building performance simulation
==PAGE:33==
• The ice on the heat exchanger will melt
Defrosting should stop, when the discharge air is above 7 ◦C. The next check of frosting
should happen in 30 minutes.
Building the basic unit in a test model IDA ICE
In this section the exact setup of the basic unit in IDA ICE is explained, following the
guidelines of Section 3.1.1.
Figure 3.4: Airflow steps in IDA ICE
As it can be seen in Table 3.1, the possible provided airflow could have five levels from
0% to 100% fan speed. This was implemented in IDA ICE using the object called ”Linear
segment controller”. Figure 3.4 represents the setting of the airflow steps in IDA ICE. In
the basic model there are no proportional controllers, therefore this was not used in this
model as much as in the mid­level model (Section 3.1.2) and high­level model (Section
3.1.3). But it was necessary to introduce these airflow steps, because these levels were
used in the week­schedule as well (although not with the use of the linear segment con­
troller), which is a main functionality of the basic model. The function of this linear segment
controller is to receive an input signal from a controller between 0 and 1 and transform it
into an output signal of 0, 0.25, 0.5, 0.75 or 1, according to the transfer function. It can be
seen, that the change between two steps is includes a small part, where the output signal
can have different value from the above mentioned five values. The function of this is to
prevent the oscillation of the fan that would increase and decrease its speed with a high
frequency.
Realistic representation of residential ventilation in building performance simulation
27
==PAGE:34==
Figure 3.5: Week schedule (Exhausto) in IDA ICE
After deciding on the airflow steps, the week schedule from Exhausto could also be set.
On Figure 3.5 the week schedule is shown, implemented in IDA ICE. The Classic sched­
ule only features Level 1 and Level 2 airflow steps (Figure 3.1), which were decided to
correspond to the level of 25% and 50%, respectively. To simulate this behavior of the
fans, the object called ”Schedule” was used, which gives an output between 0 and 1 for
each time step of a day.
Figure 3.6: Macro for deciding between summer and winter mode in IDA ICE
The unit is capable of switching between winter and summer mode automatically. A macro
was created for this, where the ambient temperature is measured every day and the
minimum, maximum and average temperatures are calculated. The unit then decides,
whether it should operate in winter or summer mode, according to Table 3.3. This control
macro is presented on Figure 3.6. The objects used in IDA ICE are marked by numbers:
28
Realistic representation of residential ventilation in building performance simulation
==PAGE:35==
• 1 ­ ”Calculate mean, min and max of input signal during an interval of given length”:
This object registers the input signal in the given time period (it was 24 hours in this
case), and gives the minimum, maximum, and average of it as outputs.
• 2 ­ ”Greater than”: this object takes the input value and gives a boolean output (true
or false). In this case, the input was the average temperature over the 24 hours and
the limit for switching to summer mode was 19 3 ◦C.
• 3 ­ ”Greater than2: the same object as number 2, the input for this was the minimum
temperature over the last 24 hours, for which the limit was set to be 7 ◦C.
• 4 ­ ”Greater than”: 3 the same object as number 2, the input for this was the maxi­
mum temperature over the last 24 hours, for which the limit was set to be 28 ◦C.
• 5 ­ ”AND”: This object takes two boolean inputs and gives the boolean output of true
in case both the inputs are true, otherwise the output is false.
• 6 ­ ”OR”: This object takes two boolean inputs and gives the boolean output of true
in case at least one of the outputs are true, otherwise the output is false.
• 7 ­ Input for the macro: The input variable in this case was the ambient temperature,
according to the weather file.
• 8 ­ Output of the macro: The output of the macro is a boolean output of true or false.
True means that the temperatures are high enough to switch to summer mode, false
means that the temperatures are not over the limit to switch to summer mode, so
winter mode is used.
In case of a constant supply temperature, the software only needed a temperature setpoint
for the heat exchanger, or for the heating and cooling coils in the mid­level and high
level models. The reason behind not using a signal between 0 and 1 for the temperature
setting is that these objects (heat exchanger, heating and cooling coils) already have built
in controllers, therefore they only need a setpoint to operate. In the basic model, the
supply temperature is only controlled by the heat exchanger and its bypass functionality.
The supply air can be bypassed according to Exhausto’s method (Figures 3.2 and 3.3).
Figures 3.7 and 3.8 present how the bypass control was implemented in IDA ICE.
Figure 3.7 shows how the control method for the summer mode was built in the software.
The following objects were used:
• 1 ­ ”Logical switch”: The purpose of this object is to decide between two output
signals according to a boolean input signal. If the input (marked by pink, in the
middle of each switch) is true, the upper signal is used as output signal, if it is false,
the lower signal is used as output signal. The switch is used create sections on
Figure 3.3.
• 2 ­ ”Constant value”: This object is used as an input for the switches. Depending
on the measured temperature satisfying the boolean input of the switch, the heat
exchanger is in use (output of 1) or the bypass is used (output of 0, turning off the
heat exxhanger).
• 3 ­ ”Less than”: According to Figure 3.3, if the exhaust air temperature is less than
27 ◦C, the bypass should be closed.
• 4 ­ ”Less than”: According to Figure 3.3, if the ambient temperature is less than 10
◦C, the bypass should be closed.
Realistic representation of residential ventilation in building performance simulation
29
==PAGE:36==
• 5 ­ ”Less than”: According to Figure 3.3, if the ambient temperature is less than 27
◦C and the previous two boolean outputs were false, the bypass should be open.
• 6 ­ ”Proportional controller”: In case of all the previous boolean outputs are false,
the proportional controller has to set the limit for the bypass being open or closed.
• 7 ­ ”Linear segment controller”: The setpoint for the proportional controller is set
according to the linear segment controller, which is representing the diagonal line on
Figure 3.3. In case the ambient temperature is lower than the exhaust temperature,
the bypass is open, otherwise it is closed.
• 8 ­ ”Constant value”: This constant value serves as the proportional band of the
proportional controller. It is a low number to simulate the ON­OFF functionality of
the bypass. If this number is positive, it means, that it is in cooling mode. Cooling
mode means, that in case the measured value is above setpoint, it gives 1, if it is
below, it gives 0.
• 9 ­ Input variable for the macro: The exhaust air temperature measured in the ex­
haust duct.
• 10 ­ Input variable for the macro: The ambient temperature according to the weather
file.
• 11 ­ Output of the macro: The decision of the bypass being open or closed.
Figure 3.7: Macro for summer mode in IDA ICE
Figure 3.8 shows the control strategy of the bypass during wintertime. The objects used
here are similar to the ones used in the macro for the summertime:
• 1 ­ ”Logical switch”: Same use, as in the previous macro (Figure 3.7.
• 2 ­ ”Constant value”: Same use, as in the previous macro (Figure 3.7.
• 3 ­ ”Greater than”: According to Figure 3.2, if the exhaust temperature is higher than
24 ◦C, the bypass should be closed.
30
Realistic representation of residential ventilation in building performance simulation
==PAGE:37==
• 4 ­ ”Greater than”: According to Figure 3.2, if the previous criteria is false and the
ambient temperature is higher than 24 ◦C, the bypass should be open.
• 5 ­ ”Proportional controller”: In case all the previous boolean inputs are false, the
proportional controller has to set the limit for the bypass being open or closed.
• 6 ­ ”Linear segment controller”: The setpoint for the proportional controller is set
according to the linear segment controller, which is representing the diagonal line on
Figure 3.2. In case the ambient temperature is lower than the exhaust temperature,
the bypass is closed, otherwise it is open.
• 7 ­ ”Constant value”: This constant value serves as the proportional band of the
proportional controller. It is a low number to simulate the ON­OFF functionality of
the bypass. If this number is negative, it means, that it is in heating mode. Heating
mode means, that in case the measured value is above setpoint, it gives 0, if it is
below, it gives 1.
• 8 ­ Input variable for the macro: The exhaust air temperature measured in the ex­
haust duct.
• 9 ­ Input variable for the macro: The ambient temperature according to the weather
file.
• 10 ­ Input variable for the macro: The discharge air temperature measured in the
exhaust duct.
• 11 ­ Frost­protection macro: In case the discharge air temperature and the ambient
air temperature are below the limit, the bypass should open. The output of this
macro is either 0 (bypass open) or 1 (bypass closed).
• 12 ­ ”Less than”: In case the output of the frost­protection macro is less than 0.5, the
bypass should open, if it is greater than this value, further investigation is needed.
(other temperature checks explained above).
• 13 ­ Output of the macro: The decision of the bypass being open or closed.
Figure 3.8: Macro for winter mode in IDA ICE
Realistic representation of residential ventilation in building performance simulation
31
==PAGE:38==
Figure 3.9: Macro for frost­protection and supply fan control in IDA ICE
On Figure 3.9 the control strategy for frost­protection without preaheater is shown. The
objects described in the following will describe the functionality of the macro as well:
• 1 ­ ”Thermostat”: A thermostat is used to check the discharge air temperature. Ac­
cording to Figure A.5, is the discharge air temperature gets below 3 ◦C, the the
bypass should open, and if it gets above 7 ◦C, it can close again.
• 2 ­ ”Constant value”: It serves as the setpoint of the thermostat. It is set to 5 because
the proportional band of the thermostat is 4 ◦C, so the that is how the limits of the
bypass opening and closing is achieved.
• 3 ­ ”Sampling controller”: This object regulates how frequently the measured value
can be measured.
• 4 ­ ”Logical switch”: It has the same purpose as in the previous macros. If the input
boolean value is true, the upper input is taken as the output, if it is false, the lower
will be taken.
• 5 ­ ”Constant value”: If the input for the switch is true, the bypass should open.
• 6 ­ ”Constant value”: If the input for the switch is true, the bypass should close.
• 7 ­ ”Less than”: If the measured value (the ambient temperature in this case) is lower
than 1 ◦C, the object should give a boolean signal of true as an input for the switch.
In case of an ambient temperature higher than 1 ◦C, the boolean input for the switch
is false.
• 8 ­ The database of the ambient temperature.
• 9 ­ ”Max”: This object takes the input values and outputs the largest one of them. It
is used here in order to regulate the bypass and the supply fan. If either the check
for the discharge air temperature or the check for the ambient air temperature gives
1 as an output, the bypass should remain closed. If both of them have an output
signal of 0, the maximum value of those is 0 as well, therefore the bypass will open.
32
Realistic representation of residential ventilation in building performance simulation
==PAGE:39==
• 10 ­ Input variable for the macro: The discharge air temperature measured in the
exhaust duct.
• 11 ­ Output of the macro: The decision of the bypass being open or closed and the
supply fans being in operation or stopping.
• 12 ­ ”Output file”: This is the object necessary to log any preferred variable.
• 13 ­ ”Logical switch”. This object decides, whether the supply fan should operate
normally, or should stop alongside the bypass being open.
• 14 ­ ”Less than”: If the input signal for this object, which is the output signal of
the frost­protection strategy, is smaller than 0.5, the frost­protection strategy is in
operation. If it is larger, the supply fan should operate normally.
• 15 ­ ”Fan control with kitchen hood”: Normal operation is shown on Figure 3.10.
Figure 3.10: Macro for the exhaust and supply fan control in IDA ICE, normal operation
In case there is no risk of ice on the heat exchanger, both the exhaust and the supply fan
should have the same control strategy. This method is shown on Figure 3.10:
• 1 ­ ”Schedule”: This schedule is the occupancy schedule for the kitchen. The sched­
ule is shown on Figure 3.11.
• 2 ­ ”Schedule”: This schedule is the classic schedule of Exhausto. In case the
occupants do not use the kitchen hood, this schedule is in operation (see Figure
3.1).
• 3 ­ ”Greater than”: If the occupant schedule in the kitchen is above 0.9, the kitchen
schedule is in operation for the fan control.
• 4 ­ ”Logical switch”: This object decides, whether the schedule of the kitchen or the
schedule of Exhausto is in operation.
• 5 ­ Output of the macro: The decision of the fan schedule.
Realistic representation of residential ventilation in building performance simulation
33
==PAGE:40==
Figure 3.11: Kitchen occupancy schedule in IDA ICE
Figure 3.11 represents the occupant schedule in the kitchen. In case the output of the
schedule is 1, the kitchen hood is turned on and the air handling unit is running the fans
on maximum speed.
On Figure 3.12 the basic unit is shown, created for the one zone model with all the features
described in the previous pages. The additional objects on the figure are:
• 1 ­ ”Constant value”: Setpoint for the heat exchanger.
• 2 ­ ”Temperature sensor”: Sensor measuring the discharge air temperature.
• 3 ­ ”Temperature sensor”: Sensor measuring the exhaust air temperature.
• 4 ­ Output of the exhaust fan control macro, this is the ”AirCtrl” signal or ”Cen­
tralMode” signal.
• 5 ­ Output of the frost­protection and supply fan control macro, sent to the supply
fans by the ”Advanced model”.
Figure 3.12: Basic unit in IDA ICE (One zone model)
34
Realistic representation of residential ventilation in building performance simulation
==PAGE:41==
Controlling the supply and exhaust fan differently required additional settings. An ad­
vanced model had to be built in order to separate the fans from working simultaneously.
Initially in IDA ICE, the ”AirCtrl” signal is controlling both of the fans at once. To be able
to stop the supply fan in case of frost formation, but continue to run the exhaust fan all
the time, one of the fans had to be disconnected from the ”AirCtrl” signal. The supply
fans were chosen arbitrarily to be supplied a different signal, which comes from the frost­
protection macro described earlier. This signal was connected to the supply fan in the
advanced model.
Figure 3.13: Basic unit in IDA ICE (One zone, advanced model)
On Figure 3.13 it can be seen, that the supply fan control signal, described earlier, is con­
necting the air handling and the zone in the advanced model. This signal was connected
to the supply fan by disconnecting the ”AirCtrl” signal first, as shown on Figure 3.14.
Figure 3.14: Basic unit, zone model in IDA ICE (One zone, advanced model)
Realistic representation of residential ventilation in building performance simulation
35
==PAGE:42==
3.1.2
Mid­level unit
The mid­level unit is a more advanced unit than the basic unit, because it has additional
features, which are not standard functionalities of the chosen units from the market, but
can be purchased as accessories. The purpose of this unit is the provide more comfort for
the customers, by featuring additional control methods and ventilation unit components,
that cannot be found automatically in all the air handling units that are present on the
Danish market.
The following attributes were chosen to be part of the mid­level unit, according to Table
2.9:
• Humidity control: a relative humidity sensor is placed in the exhaust duct, which
measures the humidity of the exhaust air and adjusts the fan speed to reach the
desired setpoint.
• CO2 control: a CO2 sensor is placed in the exhaust duct, which measures the CO2
content of the exhaust air and adjusts the fan speed to reach the desired setpoint.
• Night cooling: the supply air temperature is reduced during nighttime in case cooling
is needed, possible and beneficial.
• Preheater: a preheating element is designed in the unit to avoid ice forming on the
heat exchanger.
• After­heater: a reheating element is placed after the heat exchanger in order to
reach the desired supply temperature easier, in case the heat recovery of the heat
exchanger cannot provide enough heat to the air.
• Frost­protection using a preheater: the frost­protection procedure changes if a pre­
heater is present in the unit. Using a preheater can help reducing the number of
times, when the unit is in anti­freeze mode, as well as decreasing the ambient tem­
perature, at which the frost­protection strategy is in operation.
The above­mentioned functionalities, that were implemented in the mid­level model, are
justified in the following section, where detailed descriptions of these attributes are pre­
sented. This is how the decisions were made about which exact settings to use in the IDA
ICE model. After this it is explained, how the mid­level air handling unit was built in the
one zone model, and which components and control macros were used for it to function
as desired.
Detailed representation of the mid­level air handling unit
In this section the control strategies of the five different air handling units are described in
detail. In the end of every description, the chosen settings of the unit are shown as well.
36
Realistic representation of residential ventilation in building performance simulation
==PAGE:43==
Table 3.6: Humidity control strategies
Humidity control
Systemair
VTC 200
There are different settings for controlling the humidity during
summer and winter. The default setpoint during summer is 60%,
whereas the default setting in winter is 50%. (These can be set
in the range of 1­100%.) Settings for the PI controller are also
provided: the proportional band is by default 10% (range:
1­100%), the integral time is by default turned off (range:
1­120s or off).
Exhausto
VEX40T
There is a sensor in the exhaust duct, that check the humidity
every minute. If there is a sudden increase in the humidity, the
the fans switch to Level 3 to remove more air. This boost lasts
maximum for 60 mintes.
Nilan
Comfort 300LR
There is a built in humidity control in the unit. However, this is
an intelligent humidity control and it was decided to be part of
the high­level unit. (see Section 3.1.3)
Swegon
W4 Smart xs
Preset boost levels can be set by the user, which define boost
limit and full boost limit. The ventilation is changed steplessly,
the fans start increasing their speed if the humidity reaches boost
limit and reaches maximum air flow if the full boost limit of
humidity was reached.
Genvex
ECO XL
The humidity control setpoint can be set between the values of
35­85%, by default it is 60%. The unit checks the humidity
levels in every 10 minutes by default, but it can be changed to
be checked in the range of 1­60 minutes.
Mid­level unit
The strategy of Systemair was chosen, because it provides clear
information on how to set up the system and it is also easy to do.
Table 3.6 represents the control methods of the different air handling units. It is common
between the units, that a setpoint or a preset level has to be chosen at which the the fan
speed increases to remove the excess humidity from the building. Although the setpoint
can be changed, a common value for the setpoint was found to be around 50­60% indoor
humidity level. Nilan provided an advanced control method using their intelligent humidity
control, but this was only implemented in the high­level model, as this strategy is more
complicated than the other control methods (see Section 3.1.3). Nilan’s method of decid­
ing between summer and winter mode was used in the case of humidity control (see Table
3.3), because a more simple control method was acceptable there. Since indoor humid­
ity is highly dependent on the outdoor humidity, in case of lower outdoor temperatures,
the relative humidity indoors will follow the tendency of the one outdoors. Therefore, a
lower setpoint could be used in case of winter mode. The final settings can be seen in
Table 3.7. However, changes were made, because the PI controllers did not function as
desired. Therefore, P controllers were used instead of them.
Table 3.7: Chosen values for humidity control
Humidity control
Setpoint
Summer:
60%
Winter:
50%
Proportional band
20%
Realistic representation of residential ventilation in building performance simulation
37
==PAGE:44==
Table 3.8: CO2 control strategies
CO2 control
Systemair
VTC 200
A setpoint of CO2 can be set in the range of 100­2000 ppm. The
default setting is 800 ppm. Settings for the PI controller are
provided as well. The proportional band can be set in the range
of 50­2000 ppm, by default it is 200 ppm. The integral time is by
default set to be turned off, but it can be in the range of 1­120
seconds.
Exhausto
VEX40T
The CO2 sensor in the unit has a measuring range of 0­5000
ppm, but the unit should switch to Level 3 ventilation speed
after the CO2 level is above 1000 ppm. The boost can last
maximum 120 minutes.
Nilan
Comfort 300LR
A CO2 level for switching to a higher ventilation flow rate
should be set, at which the unit increases the fan speed. This can
be set in the range of 650­2500 ppm, by default it is set to be
800 ppm. A CO2 level for switching back to normal ventilation
flow rate can also be set, at which the unit decreases the fan
speed. This can be set in the range of 400­750 ppm, and by
default it is set to be 600 ppm.
Swegon
W4 Smart xs
Air quality control can only be performed on units that have
VOC sensor. Since it is not possible to simulate VOC levels in
IDA ICE, this control method was diregarded.
Genvex
ECO XL
The setpoint for CO2 control can set in a range of 400­2000
ppm, and by default it is set to be 800 ppm. The time between
changing the fan speed can also be set, in a range of 0­1000
minutes. By default, this is set to be 30 minutes.
Mid­level unit
The strategy of Systemair was chosen, because it provides clear
information on how to set up the system and it is also easy to do.
In Table 3.8 the control methods of the air handling units can be seen. The similarity
between the units is the highest of all, so far. They require a setpoint for the CO2 level
which they will try to keep stable. Nilan’s control method is a bit different, because that unit
requires a lower and a higher limit, which implies a thermostat­like operation. Controlling
according to VOC would have been interesting, but due to the limitations of the simulation
software, it was not possible. Systemair’s control strategy was chosen again, due to
similar reasons to the choice at the humidity control, because it is easy to implement,
and for every required value there is a range and a default value. The final settings can
be seen in Table 3.9. The same changes as in case of the humidity control had to be
made. The PI controller was changed to be a P controller, because of the inability of the
PI controller to provide satisfactory control behavior.
Table 3.9: Chosen values for CO2 control
CO2 control
Setpoint
800 ppm
Proportional band
200 ppm
38
Realistic representation of residential ventilation in building performance simulation
==PAGE:45==
Table 3.10: Night cooling control strategies
Night cooling
Systemair
VTC 200
In case of a low temperature and an actice heater during
nighttime, the unit will accumulate heat the next day and
will use that heat the following night with a lowered
temperature setpoint for the heater.
Exhausto
VEX40T
­
Nilan
Comfort 300LR
­
Swegon
W4 Smart xs
The unit realizes the need for cooling. In this case, the
temperature setpoint is lowerd and the heat exchanger is
bypassed.
Genvex
ECO XL
In case of night cooling, a speed increase of the fans can
be set (in the range of 0­100%, by default 0%), and a
temperature setpoint can also be set at which the unit will
not only bypass but increase the speed of the fans as well
(in the range of 0­5 ◦C, by default 3 ◦C)
Mid­level unit
A custom macro was built for the realization of the
cooling need during nighttime.
Table 3.10 represents the night cooling control strategies of the investigated air handling
units. It can be seen that the companies operate with a variety of methods. The strategy
of Swegon was chosen, because a custom control method was preferred to be built in the
software of IDA ICE. The cooling need is realized by a limit for the exhaust temperature,
the possibility of cooling is decided by monitoring the outdoor temperatures during the
nighttime. The outdoor temperature should be colder than the indoor air temperature. In
this case, a new supply temperature can be set.
Table 3.11: Preheater and after­heater types
Preheater
After­heater
Systemair
VTC200
electrical
electrical or water­based
Exhausto
VEX40T
electrical
electrical
Nilan
Comfort 300LR
not specified
electrical or water­based
Swegon
W4 Smart xs
electrical
electrical or water­based
Genvex
ECO XL
electrical
electrical or water­based
Mid­level unit
electrical
water­based
In Table 3.11 the available heating elements of the different air handling units are shown.
It is clearly visible, that the most common preheater type is the electrical preheater. The
reason behind this is, that the power of the preheater does not have to be that high,
it should only heat the air to a relatively low temperature, above freezing point. This
Realistic representation of residential ventilation in building performance simulation
39
==PAGE:46==
can usually be done by using an electrical heater, whereas reaching the desired supply
temperature usually requires a higher power, which can be achieved by a water­based
heater.
Table 3.12: Automatic frost­protection strategies using a preheater
Automatic frost­protection with a preheater
Systemair
VTC 200
No difference compared to the case without a preheater.
Exhausto
VEX40T
It is easier to avoid frost formation on the heat exchanger
in case a preheater is in operation. The temperature limit
for the outdoor air can be lower without taking action. If
the outdoor temperature reaches an even lower value,
the airflow has to be decreased. If this is still not enough,
the fans have to stop for a certain amount of time. (see
Appenix A.4)
Nilan
Comfort 300LR
It is easier to avoid frost formation on the heat exchanger
in case a preheater is in operation. The temperature limit
for the outdoor air can be lower without taking action. If
the outdoor temperature reaches an even lower value,
the airflow has to be decreased. (see
Appenix A.5)
Swegon
W4 Smart xs
No difference compared to the case without a preheater.
Genvex
ECO XL
No difference compared to the case without a preheater.
Mid­level unit
The control strategy of Nilan was implemented.
Using a preheater makes it easier for the air handling unit to avoid frost formation on the
heat exchanger. Nilan’s control strategy was preferred above Exhausto’s, because it is
simpler and therefore easier to implement in IDA ICE. In case there is a preheater, the
forst formation can be avoided by only decreasing the fan speed in case the outdoor air
is lower than ­12 ◦C. This rarely happens in Denmark, since the lowest temperatures may
only go below this limit temperature only in December (see Appendix A.3).
Building the mid­level unit in a test model in IDA ICE
In this section, the implementation of the functionalities mentioned in Section 3.1.2 in IDA
ICE are represented.
The mid­level unit is capable of changing the air flows of the air handling unit according
to the level or relative humidity and the level of CO2 indoors. This is achieved by placing
a relative humidity sensor and a CO2 sensor in the exhaust duct. The sensors could also
be placed in each zone in order to have more accurate measurements and to supply or
extract airflow following the needs more accurately, but the installation cost would increase
a lot due to the additional sensors, wiring, dampers and other elements. Therefore, it was
decided to only measure the relative humidity and the CO2 levels in the exhaust duct,
which is a mixture level of all the zones connected to the exhaust terminals. Figure 3.15
shows how the humidity control macro was built in IDA ICE:
• 1 ­ ”Proportional controller”: Proportional controller is used to keep the humidity
setpoint in the exhaust duct. This controller is for the summer case.
40
Realistic representation of residential ventilation in building performance simulation
==PAGE:47==
• 2 ­ ”Proportional controller”: Proportional controller is used to keep the humidity
setpoint in the exhaust duct. This controller is for the winter case.
• 3 ­ ”Constant values”: These values are the settings of the P­controller. The one,
which is connected to the right side of the controller is the setpoint, the other one
is the proportional band. The setpoint during summertime is 60%, the proportional
band is 20%.
• 4 ­ ”Constant values”: These are the settings of the P­controller as well, but the
setpoint during wintertime is decreased to 50%, due to the lower humidity levels in
general during winter.
• 5 ­ The dataset of the ambient temperature.
• 6 ­ ”Greater than”: Gives a boolean value of true, in case the ambient temperature
is above 12 ◦C.
• 7 ­ ”Logical switch”: Decides according to the result of the ”Greater than” object
before, whether it is summer or winter operation.
• 8 ­ ”Sampling controller”: The humidity is not measured constantly, but only once
in every time period set here. In this case, a measurement happens in every 30
minutes.
• 9 ­ ”Linear segment controller”: The objective of this controller is to transform the
continuous output signal of the P­controllers to a stepwise controller, since the fans
use steps when changing rotation speed. The controller can be seen in more detail
on Figure 3.4.
• 10 ­ Input signal for the controller: The relative humidity is measured in the exhaust
duct.
• 11 ­ Output signal of the controller: The output signal of the humidity control is sent
to the fan control macro.
Figure 3.15: Humidity control in IDA ICE
On Figure 3.16 the control strategy of the unit according to CO2 is presented. It is very
Realistic representation of residential ventilation in building performance simulation
41
==PAGE:48==
similar to the control macro of the humidity control. The objects in IDA ICE used for this
control method are the following:
• 1 ­ ”Proportional controller”: The CO2 content of the apartment is controlled by a
proportional controller.
• 2 ­ ”Constant values”: These values are the settings of the P­controller. The setpoint
is 800 ppm, the proportional band is 200 ppm.
• 3 ­ ”Sampling controller”: The CO2 is not measured constantly, but only once in every
time period set here. In this case, a measurement happens in every 30 minutes.
• 4 ­ ”Linear segment controller”: The objective of this controller is to transform the
continuous output signal of the P­controllers to a stepwise controller, since the fans
use steps when changing rotation speed. The controller can be seen in more detail
on Figure 3.4.
• 10 ­ Input signal for the controller: The CO2 content is measured in the exhaust
duct.
• 11 ­ Output signal of the controller: The output signal of the CO2 control is sent to
the fan control macro.
Figure 3.16: CO2 control in IDA ICE
As it can be seen in Table 3.10, a custom control strategy was implemented in IDA ICE for
night cooling. The temperature setback during night should realize the need for cooling,
and decrease the supply temperature in that case. The control strategy was built in IDA
ICE in order to fulfill all the control criteria:
• 1 ­ ”Schedule”: The night cooling an only take place during night. Therefore, the
first criteria is that nigh setback can only occur between 9 pm and 6 am.
• 2 ­ ”Greater than”: Night cooling is only in operation, if the indoor temperature,
measured in the exhaust duct, is higher than 22 ◦C.
• 3 ­ ”Comparator”: This object is comparing two input signals and outputs a preset
value in case the first one is larger than the second one, and outputs another preset
42
Realistic representation of residential ventilation in building performance simulation
==PAGE:49==
value in case it is the other was. In this case, the exhaust air temperature and
the ambient temperature was compared. Night cooling should only happen if the
exhaust air temperature is higher than the ambient temperature.
• 4 ­ ”Greater than”: Night cooling should only be in operation in case the ambient
temperature is higher than 12 ◦C. If it is lower, it can cause local discomfort in form
of draught.
• 5 ­ The database for the ambient temperature.
• 6 ­ ”Multiplier”: This object multiplies all the input signal and gives the result as an
output. Since all the objects in this macro have outputs of either 0 or 1, the final
output of the macro will also be either 0 or 1.
• 7 ­ Input signal for the macro: the exhaust temperature is measure, indicating the
room temperature here.
• 8 ­ Output signal of the macro: the macro can either output the signal 1, if the
criteria for the night cooling are fulfilled, or it can output the signal of 0, in case no
night cooling should operate.
Figure 3.17: Macro for night cooling in IDA ICE
The night setback control strategy is part of the supply temperature control method, which
is presented on Figure 3.18. The objects used in this control macro are the following:
• 1 ­ ”Constant value”: This is the supply temperature setpoint in case of night cooling.
• 2 ­ ”Constant value”: This is the supply temperature setpoint in case of normal op­
eration.
• 3 ­ ”Night setback control” macro: This is the control strategy described before (see
Figure 3.17).
• 4 ­ ”Greater than”: If the output of the ”Night setback control” macro is greater than
0.5, the supply temperature setting for the night cooling is chosen. In case it is lower,
temperature for normal operation is chosen.
Realistic representation of residential ventilation in building performance simulation
43
==PAGE:50==
• 5 ­ ”Logical switch”: This switch chooses the setpoint for the supply temperature.
• 6 ­ Input for the macro: the exhaust temperature is measured.
• 7 ­ Output of the macro: the result of the supply temperature setting is sent to the
heat exchanger and the after­heater.
Figure 3.18: Macro for supply temperature control night cooling in IDA ICE
Figure 3.19: Macro for frost­protection with a preheater in IDA ICE
On Figure 3.19 the frost­protection macro is introduced. It was built in IDA ICE using the
following objects:
• 1 ­ ”Greater than”: If the ambient temperature is higher than ­12 ◦C, normal operation
should follow. Frost­protection is turned on in case it is lower than that.
44
Realistic representation of residential ventilation in building performance simulation
==PAGE:51==
• 2 ­ The database for the ambient temperature.
• 3 ­ ”Logical switch”: The switch chooses between normal operation or operation with
frost­protection.
• 4 ­ ”Macro for frost­protection”: In case frost protection is needed, the fan speed is
decreased. This macro is shown in detail on Figure 3.20.
• 5 ­ Input for the macro: the output signal of the demand control is sent to this macro
in case of frost­protection.
• 6 ­ Output of the macro: the fan speed has either remained in normal operation or
decreased in case of frost­protection.
Figure 3.20: Macro for frost­protection with a preheater in IDA ICE
On Figure 3.20 the frost­protection strategy can be seen and how the fan speed is de­
creased in case of risk of ice. The macro was built using the following objects:
• 1 ­ ”Feedback”: This object is used to decrease the fan speed by deducting a value
from it.
• 2 ­ ”Constant value”: This is the value, that is deducted from the fan speed control
signal in case of frost­protection.
• 3 ­ ”LessEqual”: In case the deducted fan speed control signal 0 or less than 0, the
following switch should make a decision. The objective is to avoid negative control
signals.
• 4 ­ ”Constant value”: This is the value to be taken, if the output ”LessEqual” object
is true.
• 5 ­ ”Logical switch”: This switch decides between 0 or the actual value for the fan
speed control signal.
• 6 ­ Input for the macro: the fan speed control signal is sent to this macro.
• 7 ­ Output if the macro: the fan speed control signal is sent to the fan control.
Realistic representation of residential ventilation in building performance simulation
45
==PAGE:52==
• 8 ­ Output file: this file is used to log preferred variables.
The fan control strategy in the mid­level unit is now complete, featuring the demand control
macros of humidity control and CO2 control as well as the forst­protection macro. The
additional increase of fan speed due to the operation of kitchen hood is added to this
macro, the same way as it was done in the basic model. It can be seen on Figure 3.21:
Figure 3.21: Macro for fan control in IDA ICE
On Figure 3.22 the mid­level unit in the one zone model can be seen.
Figure 3.22: Mid­level unit in IDA ICE (One zone model)
3.1.3
High­level unit
The high­level unit is similar to the mid­level unit, they have most of their attributes in com­
mon. However, this unit provides functionalities, that may not be necessary, but provide
high comfort, or uses a more advanced technology.
46
Realistic representation of residential ventilation in building performance simulation
==PAGE:53==
Detailed representation of the high­level air handling unit
The features of the high­level unit, that can not be found in the mid­level unit:
• Active cooling: a cooling coil is installed to provide the desired indoor conditions
during the hot summer days as well. The cooling coil is optional in the units of
Systemair, Nilan and Swegon.
• Intelligent humidity control is used, which was assumed to have a more precise
control result and therefore could provide better indoor air quality. This unit was
expected to provide the best indoor air quality but use the most energy for that.
Figure 3.23: The intelligent humidity control strategy of Nilan [35]
On Figure 3.23 the intelligent humidity control of Nilan can be seen. The X­axis represents
the average humidity over the last 24 hours, and the Y­axis represents the immediate
change of the relative humidity. The diagram is divided in three parts by the amount of
ventilation provided by the unit. Below the average relative humidity of 30% the unit only
provides a low amount of airflow, called reduced ventilation. It is set to be the minimum
required airflow rate of 0.3 L/s/m2. Above this average relative humidity limit, the airflow
rate is decided by immediate change of the relative humidity. If this change is above
a given value (set by the diagram), forced ventilation is in operation, and if it is below,
normal ventilation will be used. Forced ventilation was decided to be maximum fan speed,
whereas the normal ventilation in this case was set to be half speed between the minimum
and the maximum speed.
The immediate change of realtive humidity can be calculated using the following equation
[41]:
∆RH = RHinst −RH24
RH24
(3.1)
Where ∆RH is the immediate change in humidity, RHinst is the instantaneous change in
humidity and RH24 is the sliding avergae over 24 hours.
Realistic representation of residential ventilation in building performance simulation
47
==PAGE:54==
Building the high­level unit in a test model in IDA ICE
In this section the process of creating the high­level unit in IDA ICE is described. The unit
only has a few changes compared to the mid­level unit: the humidity control macro and
the the presence of the cooling coil has changed.
To have active cooling in the model, a cooling coil was placed in the air handling unit after
the reheater. This way the supply temperature can be kept at the desired level even if the
ambient temperature is high in the summer and the intake air has to be cooled to provide
supply air on the desired temperature.
The intelligent humidity control was created according to Figure 3.23. However, the macro
that can be found in IDA ICE was taken from a previous Master’s thesis [41]. The division
of the diagram explained in Section 3.1.3 was created in IDA ICE using P­controllers. The
humidity control macro is presented on Figure 3.24:
Figure 3.24: The intelligent humidity control strategy in IDA ICE
The object in IDA ICE was created using the follwoing objects:
• 1 ­ ”Sliding average”: This object registers the value of a given time period and
calculates the average of it.
• 2 ­ ”Feedback”: This object is used to create the difference of the instantaneous
humidity and the average humidity.
• 3 ­ ”Division”: This object is used to make the division described in Equation 3.1.
• 4 ­ ”Proportional controller”: This controller is used to divide the graph shown on
Figure 3.23. Using this controller it is possible to separate the parts of ”Normal
ventilation” and ”Forced ventilation”. Can create an output of 0.5 (for ”Normal ven­
tilation”) or 1 (for ”Forced ventilation”).
• 5 ­ ”Linear segment controller”: This is how the setpoint is created for the P­controller.
More detailed on Figure 3.25.
• 6 ­ ”Constant value”: Proportional band of the P­controller. It is low to simulate the
ON­OFF behavior.
48
Realistic representation of residential ventilation in building performance simulation
==PAGE:55==
• 7 ­ ”Proportional controller”: This controller is used in order to divide the graph (Fig­
ure 3.23 and create the vertical border, which separates the region ”Reduced venti­
lation” from the other segments. Can create an output of 0 (for ”Reduced ventilation”)
or 1 (for other ventilation).
• 8 ­ ”Constant values”: These are the settings of the P­controller. 30% is the humidity
level at which the fans increase their speed.
• 9 ­ ”Multiplier”: Multiplies the output signals of the P­controllers. The output of this
could be 0, 0.5 or 1, depending on which type of ventilation is in operation at the
moment.
• 10 ­ Input signal for the macro: the humidity level measured in the exhaust duct is
supplied to this macro.
• 11 ­ Output of the macro: the control signal for the fan is the output.
Figure 3.25: The linear segment controller in the intelligent humidity control strategy in
IDA ICE
Figure 3.26: The high level unit in IDA ICE (One zone model)
Realistic representation of residential ventilation in building performance simulation
49
==PAGE:56==
3.2
Real model
After creating all the different custom air handling units and testing them in a one zone
model, they were put in the real model, containing the architectural model of one apart­
ment of a row house. In this section the procedure of setting up these different real models
is explained, e.g what the architectural model looks like, dimensioning the minimum and
maximum air flow rates of each zone and the additional settings that had to be made, after
inserting the prebuilt air handling units.
3.2.1
The architectural model
The architectural model for this Master’s thesis was created in another project, the Bach­
elor’s project of Peter Birkholm and Rune Huntley Andersen [42]. The floor plans can be
seen in Appendices A.6, A.7 and A.8.
The aim of that project was to investigate the holistic renovation of a typical Danish apart­
ment. The chosen building is a row house, which is one of the most used building types
in Denmark. Since the apartment is not and end­of­row house, is is surrounded by two
other apartments with a vertical separation on two sides. The apartment consists of a
basement, located 1.6 meters below ground, a ground floor and a first floor on the top.
On Figure A.9 in the Appendix the architectural model can be seen.
The geometry does not represent the exact shape of the building, some simplifications
were made. For example, instead of the flat roof, an attic should have been designed. A
more relevant simplification was made at the connection of the floors, at the staircases.
The vertical opening between the floors was modelled by the option called ”Leak area” in
IDA ICE. The values for each individual leak area were set to be 0.1 m2 at a pressure of
4 Pa. This is how the air movement was made possible between the floors as well.
The building is occupied by a family of four: the parents and their two small children.
The occupancy of the different rooms was mostly taken from the previous project [42], but
some of them were changed in order to have a better estimation of the building occupancy,
e.g. the occupancy schedule for the kitchen, that can be seen on Figure 3.11. However,
this was made subjectively.
The building is heated by radiators, which were represented in IDA ICE by the option
called ”Ideal heater” in each room. The setpoints for the heating in all the rooms are 20
◦C for the heating and 26 ◦C for the cooling. However, a cooling system is not installed in
the building.
In the rooms with increased moisture production (bathroom, kitchen, laundry) an addi­
tional equipment called ”moisture production” was installed. The function of this is to
simulate the increased moisture production if the room or the machines in the room in
use. These equipment produce moisture according to a schedule, which was also set
before. The amount of moisture produced by the equipment is different. The moisture
production in the bathroom and the laundry was set to be 2.6 ∗10−4 kg/s, whereas the
moisture production in the kitchen is 1.1 ∗10−4 kg/s.
The remaining schedules are shown in the Appendix on Figures A.10, A.13, A.12, A.13,
A.14, A.15, A.16, A.17.
3.2.2
Dimensioning the air flow rates
Knowing the floor plan of the apartment, the calculations for the floor area could be made.
The minimum required flow rate set by BR18 is 0.3 L/s/m2 heated floor area. This means,
that in order to calculate the required total flow area for the rooms, the area of the walls
must also be taken into account, this is called the brutto floor area. The calculations can be
50
Realistic representation of residential ventilation in building performance simulation
==PAGE:57==
seen in the Appendix A.18. First, the brutto room area was calculated. The values were
taken from the previous project [42]. These values determine the required flow rate for
all the rooms, respectively. However, not every room has direct supply or direct exhaust.
As it is written in Section 2.1.1, the living rooms must have supply air flow whereas the
bathroom, kitchen and utility room (laundry room, in this case) should have exhaust. As
mentioned in Section 2.1, the other rooms, that are not specified have neither direct supply
nor direct exhaust air flow, only airflow coming from and going to other rooms. However, if
these areas of the apartment are heated, their flow rate caused by their floor area should
be included in the total supply and exhaust air flow of the apartment. This means, that the
rooms with direct supply air flow should supply additional air flow as a result, and the rooms
with direct exhaust air flow should extract this additional air flow. A sectioning on every
floor was introduced, so that every floor has the maximum and minimum flow rate that
should be supplied and extracted, respectively. These flow rates were divided according
to floor area both between rooms with supply and exhaust air flow, so the specific air flow
rate per m2 was calculated for each room. These can be seen in Appendix A.18. In the
end, the calculations show, that the minimum airflow rate is case of supplying 0.3 L/s/m2
is 45 L/s, and the maximum flow rate of the air handling unit should be 85 L/s.
However, when implementing all this in IDA ICE, changes had to be made. The floor
areas in IDA ICE are not brutto floor areas, as they are in the regulations, but netto floor
areas meaning, that the walls are not included. Therefore, the above calculated specific
air flow rates were recalculated using the same values of the total flow rates for every
room. The results, which can also be seen in the last two columns Appendix A.18, were
implemented in IDA ICE as a minimum and maximum air flow rate for every room. This
way, the requirement of the minimum flow rate of 0.3 L/s/m2 heated floor area is fulfilled
in IDA ICE as well.
3.2.3
Fans and the heat exchanger
The pressure loss of a residential apartment is usually around 50­150 Pa [43]. Knowing
the airflow rates required for the ventilation, the characteristic of the fan curve could be
set. The fan of Exhausto was chosen, since this fan is able to produce 75 Pa pressure
difference when supplying 85 L/s airflow rate and stay within the requirements of BR18
of keeping the SFP under 1000 J/m3 (see Section 2.1.1). The fan curve can be seen
on Figure A.19. This fan curve was then implemented in IDA ICE, which can be seen on
Figure 3.27.
Figure 3.27: The real fan curve in IDA ICE
Realistic representation of residential ventilation in building performance simulation
51
==PAGE:58==
The heat exchanger was also chosen to be produced by Exhausto, since it has a good
thermal efficiency of more than 87% at the maximum flow rate of 85 L/s. The fan efficiency
curve can be seen on Figure A.20.
The initial objective of the project was to create custom air handling units inn IDA ICE, that
can be ”drag and drop”. This means, that the goal was to develop a unit in a one zone
model and save it from there. After this, the unit is available in the library of the software,
and in case it is required in a new model, it could just be imported and it could be ready
to be used. However, as the project was developed further, it became clear, that this was
not going to be this simple. Additional changes were made in order to apply the control
methods properly, according to plan. The supervisory control was also introduced as a
solution for controlling multi­zone models. The changes slightly vary between the basic
unit, the mid­level unit and the high­level unit. These modifications as well as the setup
in IDA ICE are introduced in the following sections for the three units, respectively.
3.2.4
Row­house model with the basic unit
The additional changes that were made in IDA ICE:
• The connection of the exhaust fan to ”AirCtrl” was deleted.
• A new schedule with the setting ”Always on” was put instead as the ”CentralMode”
signal. The schedule ”Always on” send a constant signal of 1 to the ”CentralMode”
signal, which is the signal sent to the fans connected to ”AirCtrl”. This way the unit
is set up to deliver any amount of air flow to the fans, that they require.
• After this, the advanced model was built for the supply fan control to be connected
to all the five rooms with supply fans.
• In the advanced model the link of the supervisory control was deleted from all five
supply fans and the new supply fan control connected instead to ”Control IN”. This
is how the supply fans were controlled on the zone level.
• The supervisory controller was set up to set the airflow to the zones. Additional
macros in every zone were set up as well to send the signal from the supervisory
controller to the zones.
Figure 3.28: The advanced model of the basic unit in the real model
The advanced model was set up the same way as in the one zone model, the supply fan
52
Realistic representation of residential ventilation in building performance simulation
==PAGE:59==
control signal is connected to all the zones, that require supply air flow (see Figure A.21).
Inside each zone, that is connected to the air handling unit by the supply fan control signal,
the supply fan had to be disconnected from the ”Control IN” signal and the supply fan
control signal was connected instead. The ”CentralMode” signal was kept connected this
time, which is supplied by the ”CentralMode” schedule (see Figure 3.29), and is constantly
1. This can be seen on Figure 3.28, where the connection marked by number ”1” is the
”Control IN” connection, and connection number ”2” is the ”CentralMode” connection.
There was a need for the supervisory controller to be set up because the air handling
unit was connected to many different zones. In the supervisory controller a signal can be
sent from the building level to the zone level. The zones ask for an amount of air flow
according to their individual macro, which can be different for each zone and which is
different from the supervisory controller. This controller however, can be connected to the
supervisory controller, so every zone, that is connected to the supervisory controller via
its own macro, is asking for the airflow according to the control method described in the
supervisory controller. The supervisory controller can be seen on Figure A.22. It is the
same fan control strategy, that is demonstrated on Figure 3.10. In this case, the zones
require the airflow according to the ”Classic schedule” from Exhausto (see Figure A.2)
and change their need for airflow if the kitchen hood is turned on. Since all the zones
are connected to the supervisory controller, if one zone asks for more flow, all the zones
will change their flow proportionally to that. This is how a residential unit with exhaust air
control works. The additional macros, that send the signal from the supervisory controller
to the chosen zones is presented on Figure A.23. This macro was chosen in case of all
the zones with either supply or exhaust in the apartment.
Figure 3.29: The model of the real basic unit
3.2.5
Row­house model with the mid­level unit
In case of the mid­level unit, the only additional change in the air handling unit was, that
the fan control signal was disconnected from the ”AirCtrl” signal, and the ”CentralMode”
schedule of ”Always on” was connected instead. This can be seen on Figure 3.30.
Realistic representation of residential ventilation in building performance simulation
53
==PAGE:60==
Figure 3.30: The model of the real mid­level unit
There was a change in the supervisory controller as well, since the fans ask for flow
according to the humidity and CO2 levels in the exhaust duct. The new supervisory con­
troller can be seen on Figure 3.31. The humidity and CO2 sensors in the exhaust duct
were linked here in order to be able to get the data from them. The demand control macro
with frost­protection was explained in Section 3.1.2 on Figures 3.19, 3.20, 3.21, and the
humidity and CO2 control strategy on Figures 3.15 and 3.16, respectively.
Figure 3.31: The supervisory controller of the mid­level unit
3.2.6
Row­house model with the high­level unit
The changes in the high­level unit after implementing in the real model were similar to the
ones in the mid­level model. The schedule for the ”CentralMode” signal was created and
the supervisory controller was modified according to the new humidity control strategy.
The supervisory controller however looks the same as the one of the mid­level unit, only
the humidity control macro was replaced to the intelligent humidity control macro, shown
54
Realistic representation of residential ventilation in building performance simulation
==PAGE:61==
on Figure 3.24. The high­level air handling unit in the real model is presented on Figure
3.32.
Figure 3.32: The model of the real high­level unit
3.3
Comparison of the air handling units
After creating the custom air handling units and real models according to Sections 3.2.4,
3.2.5, and 3.2.6, the units were compared to several other units. The main focuses of
the comparisons were indoor air quality, energy consumption or their functionality, how
well they fulfill their objectives. Firstly, the basic unit, the mid­level unit and the high­
level unit was compared to each other. Secondly, the standard air handling units were
compared to the custom ones. Thirdly, the modifications of the custom air handling units
were compared to the unmodified custom units. This will include the following cases:
• Comparison of one unit of a certain level (basic unit, mid­level unit, or high­level
unit) with constant supply temperature to one with a varying supply temperature
• Comparison of one unit on a certain level with real fans to one with ideal fans
• Comparison of one unit on a certain level with a custom frost­protection functionality
to one with the standard frost­protection functionality built in the heat exchanger
• Comparison of one unit on a certain level with custom demand control to one unit
with the built in humidity or CO2 controls
Units with varying supply temperature
In case of using a varying supply temperature setpoint, the exhaust air temperature was
measured as an indicator of the indoor air temperature. After measuring this temperature,
the controller simply subtracts 2 ◦C of it and supplies it to the heat exchanger or heating
and cooling coils.
An example for this can be seen on Figure 3.33. The object ”Feedback” (number 1) is
used to deduct 2 ◦C (number 2) from the exhaust temperature, that is measured in the
exhaust duct and serves as an indicator for the indoor temperature. In case the night
setback control is not in operation, this varying supply temperature is used (see Figure
3.18. Other than this change, the unit is the same as the corresponding custom unit
described earlier with constant supply temperature.
Realistic representation of residential ventilation in building performance simulation
55
==PAGE:62==
Figure 3.33: The control strategy for the varying supply temperature
Units with ideal fans
These models were created by substituting the real fans, described in Section 3.2.3, by
ideal fans, that are available in IDA ICE and are easy to set up. The fan were set up
as shown on Figure 3.34. The SFP value and the electricity to air efficiency had to be
supplied to the software under the button ”Give SFP”. These were 1000 J/m3 and 0.45,
respectively. The rated flow was also set, which is the maximum flow at which the fans
operate. This is the maximum flow of 85 L/s. Other than this modification, the air handling
unit is identical to the previous corresponding custom air handling units.
Figure 3.34: Settings for the ideal fans in IDA ICE
When working with the ideal fans and the real fans (or axial fans, as they are called in IDA
ICE), the power consumption can be compared. The software uses different equations to
calculate the power consumption of the two types of fans.
Equations 3.2, 3.3 and 3.4 are the equations required to calculate the fan power of the
56
Realistic representation of residential ventilation in building performance simulation
==PAGE:63==
ideal fans.
Equation 3.2 presents the way to calculate the part load ratio ”PLR”, where ”VolFlow” is
air flow and ”VolFlRat” is the rated volume flow.
PLR = min(V olFlow/V olFlRat, 1)
(3.2)
Equation 3.3 describes the fraction of full­load power, where c[1] = 0.0013, c[2] = 0.1470,
c[3] = 0.9506 and c[4] = ­0.0998 are the fan curve polynomial coefficients from ASHRAE
90.1 Appendix G.
FFLP = c[1] + (c[2] + (c[3] + c[4] · PLR) · PLR) · V olFlow
V olFlRat
(3.3)
Equation 3.4 is to calculate the power consumption of the ideal fan, where ”dpMax” is the
pressure head at fan control signal equals to 1 and ”eta” is the overall motor­drive­fan
efficiency.
QSup = V olFlRat
1000
· dpMax · FFLP
eta
(3.4)
Equation 3.5 presents the way how the power of the axial fan can be calculated, where
”dPtot” is the total pressure efficiency, ”VFAir” is the volume flow rate and ”eff” is the fan
efficiency. This equation is valid if the absolute value of the efficiency is higher than 1.0e­6.
PowerSup = dPtot · V FAir
eff
(3.5)
Units with standard frost­protection
There is a standard, built­in frost­protection option in IDA ICE, though it is simple. In
the heat exchanger, there is an option to set a value for the ”minimum allowed leaving
temperature”. This value was arbitrarily set to 3 ◦C, because this was the value for the
previous frost­protection strategy as well (see Figure 3.9). This is shown on Figure 3.35.
In case of this model, some minor modifications were made to the model in order to have
this, above described frost­protection strategy as the only one in the model. This is the
reason behind removing the custom frost­protection macros from all the models and using
only this one (on Figure 3.35) instead.
Figure 3.35: Settings for the heat exchanger built­in frost­protection in IDA ICE
To calculate the efficiency of the heat exchanger, Equation 3.6 can be used, where tsup
is the supply air temperature, tamb is the ambient temperature and texh is the exhaust air
Realistic representation of residential ventilation in building performance simulation
57
==PAGE:64==
temperature. This equation is valid if the mass flow and the specific heat of the two flows
are the same. This equation is set up for heating the ambient air.
η = tsup −tamb
texh −tamb
(3.6)
Units with built­in demand control
IDA ICE provides a built­in demand control as well. However, this kind of demand control
is different from the custom demand control programmed earlier, because it is not an
exhaust­based demand control but a zone­based one. This means, that the humidity or
CO2 levels are not measured in the exhaust duct as previously, but in each zone instead.
This system requires more resources because sensors, wiring and dampers have to be
installed in every room to control the airflow differently for each zone. This way, in case
of a change in the airflow supplied by the ventilation unit, the flow rates are not changing
simultaneously as before, but it is possible to change the flow of each zone separately,
if it is required. Since there is no humidity and CO2 control in the basic unit, this control
strategy was only applied in the mid­level unit and the high­level unit. To control the airflow
like this, the following modifications were made in the models:
• The custom demand control (humidity control macro on Figure 3.15 and CO2 control
macro on Figure 3.16) were removed from the models, from both the fan control of
the air handling unit and the supervisory controller. The new macro for the fan control
can be seen on Figure 3.36. This is the same for both the air handling unit and the
supervisory controller. The custom demand control is replaced by a schedule of
”Always on”. This is how the air handling unit allows the the fans to provide as much
air for the zones as the demand control requires, with the limit of 85 L/s.
• The ”System type” option was changed in the zones, which are connected either to
the supply or the exhaust ductwork. This is where the built­in demand control for
the zones can be set. The zones where the primary pollution is moisture production
(bathroom, kitchen, laundry), are controlled according to humidity, and the setting
”VAV, humidity control” is chosen. The zones where the primary pollution source is
CO2 (living roome, 3 bedrooms, office) are controlled accroding to CO2 by choosing
the option ”VAV, CO2 control”.
58
Realistic representation of residential ventilation in building performance simulation
==PAGE:65==
Figure 3.36: Fan control macro and supervisory control macro for the demand controlled
model in IDA ICE
Standard air handling units
The standard air handling unit is a combination of the previously described, modified air
handling units. This unit is created using only basic functions with no custom macros.
Thew following settings were implemented in this unit:
• The supply temperature is a constant value of 18 ◦C.
• There is no bypass control, the heat exchanger is turned on all the time. The only
control is the built­in frost­protection control, which is described in Section 3.3.
• The fans are always turned on.
• The airflow to and from the zones is controlled by the built­in demand control, de­
scribed in Section 3.3.
• The fans used in this unit are the standard ideal fans, with the settings described in
Section 3.3.
• A preheater is added, and the after­heater is used in case of the mid­level unit and
the after­heater and the cooling­coil in case of the high­level unit.
On Figures 3.37, 3.38 and 3.39 the basic standard unit, mid­level standard unit and the
high­level standard unit are presented.
Realistic representation of residential ventilation in building performance simulation
59
==PAGE:66==
Figure 3.37: Basic standard unit
Figure 3.38: Mid­level standard unit
Figure 3.39: High­level standard unit
60
Realistic representation of residential ventilation in building performance simulation
==PAGE:67==
4
Results
In this chapter, the results of the dynamic simulations made in IDA ICE is presented. One
year simulations were run for all the different model in order to be able to compare them.
Comparisons were made regarding the energy consumption and the indoor air quality.
Moreover, results on how well the air handling units fulfill their tasks are shown as well.
Firstly, the results of the three main custom air handling units are visualized and compared:
the basic unit, the mid­level unit and the high­level unit. Secondly, the comparison of the
results of the standard are handling units to the corresponding custom air handling units
can be seen. Thirdly, all the modified ventilation units are compared to the corresponding
custom air handling units using the plots of the results. Lastly, the units are compared
according to their energy consumption throughout the whole year.
4.1
Results of the custom air handling units
In the following sections, the results of the three main air handling units are shown. The
results demonstrate whether or not the air handling units fulfill their function.
4.1.1
Basic­unit
In this section the results of the basic unit are represented. The functions of the basic unit
are having airflow steps, weekly schedule, supply temperature controlled by bypass only,
automatic change between summer and winter mode and automatic defrost.
Airflow steps
Figure 4.1: Results of the airflow change in steps
On Figure 4.1 the results of the airflow steps, provided by the air handling unit, are shown.
It is clearly visible, that both the supply and the exhaust airflow follows the preset airflow
steps of the air handling unit. According to Table 3.1, the unit can have minimum and max­
imum flow rate, and 25%, 50% and 75% fan speed between the minimum and maximum
values. Since the minimum airflow was set to be 45 L/s and the maximum airflow was 85
Realistic representation of residential ventilation in building performance simulation
61
==PAGE:68==
L/s, it can be seen that the airflow values, supplied by the air handling unit correspond to
25% and 50% fan speed between the extreme values most of the time. Maximum airflow
is reached only in the evening, when the kitchen hood is turned on. It can also be seen,
that the exhaust volume flow rate is about 3 L/s lower than the supply volume flow rate.
Week schedule
Figure 4.2: Results of the week schedule
Figure 4.2 represents the results of the week schedule of the basic air handling unit. It
can be seen, that the results follow the preset schedule of Exhausto, according to Figure
A.2. During the weekdays, the airflow is set to be around 55 L/s (25%) when the building
is expected to be unoccupied or the occupants are sleeping, and is around 65 L/s (50%)
in the morning and in the evening, when higher activity and presence is expected. In
the weekend the unit supplies around 65 L/s during the day and decreases the airflow to
around 55 L/s during the night. The kitchen hood is turned on every evening for cooking,
so the airflow is increased to maximum during that time. Additionally, the kitchen hood is
turned on on Sundays for preparing lunch as well. There is a small difference between
the supply and exhaust airflow rates during the whole.
Supply temperature control by bypass
In the main custom unit, the air handling unit is trying to keep the supply temperature on
a constant temperature of 18 ◦C.
62
Realistic representation of residential ventilation in building performance simulation
==PAGE:69==
Figure 4.3: Results of the supply temperature during a year
On Figure 4.3 the results of the supply temperature presented during the year. It is visible,
that although the supply temperature is kept at 18 ◦C throughout most of the year, there are
significant changes on the colder days of winter and the hotter days of summer. Figure 4.4
shows the changes of the temperatures around the air handling unit during a cold winter
day. It can be seen that the supply temperature (TSUPOUT, marked by blue) changes
drastically due to the frost­protection during the day. Although the supply temperature can
be colder than 0 ◦C, the exhaust air temperature (marked by green) does not decrease
to an unacceptable level, even if the decrease of the supply temperature as a result of
the frost­protection is necessary for most of the day, indicating, that the room temperature
remains more or less constant.
Figure 4.4: Results of the temperatures around the air handling unit during a cold winter
day
Realistic representation of residential ventilation in building performance simulation
63
==PAGE:70==
Figure 4.5: Results of the temperatures around the air handling unit during a hot summer
day
On Figure 4.5 the temperatures around the air handling unit are presented on a hot sum­
mer day. The graph shows, that in case the outdoor temperature is higher than the 18
◦C, it is impossible to maintain the constant supply temperature, since there is no cooling
coil. In this case, the outdoor air is supplied directly to the zones, through the bypass.
Automatic summer / winter mode
Figure 4.6: Results of the output of the macro that decides between summer or winter
mode
Figure 4.6 shows the output of the macro that decides whether the heat exchanger should
operate in summer or winter mode. As it is described in Section 3.3, the macro checks
64
Realistic representation of residential ventilation in building performance simulation
==PAGE:71==
the minimum, maximum and average temperature during every day and decides whether
summer mode or winter mode should be in operation, accordingly. The macro gives 0 in
case it is winter mode and 1 if it is summer mode. It can be seen, that most of the time
the temperatures are not high enough for switching to summer mode. However, there are
periods during the summer months of June, July and August, when the unit switches to
summer mode.
Figure 4.7: Output of the bypass control in summer mode
On Figure 4.7 the results of the bypass control in summer mode can be seen. It is visible,
that if the unit is in summer mode, the supply air is barely ever bypassed. The signal of 1
is sent to the heat exchanger in case it should be used, and the signal of 0 if it has to be
turned off meaning, that the bypass should be used instead.
Figure 4.8: Output of the bypass control in winter mode, without the frost­protection
Figure 4.8 shows the results of the bypass control in winter mode. It can be seen, that the
unit uses bypass only in the warmer months, from May to August. This graph presents
Realistic representation of residential ventilation in building performance simulation
65
==PAGE:72==
the output of the bypass control without the frost­protection. (The results of the bypass
control of the frost­protection are presented on Figure 4.9.)
Automatic defrost
Figure 4.9: Results of the output of the frost­protection macro
On Figure 4.9 the output signal of the frost­protection macro can be seen. It is clear, that
the frost­protection is only in operation during wintertime, when the ambient temperature
is below 1 ◦C and the discharge air temperature, which is leaving the heat exchanger, is
below 3 ◦C.
Figure 4.10: Results of the temperatures around the air handling unit with and without
frost­protection
66
Realistic representation of residential ventilation in building performance simulation
==PAGE:73==
The temperatures around the air handling unit were already demonstrated once on Figure
4.4, but the function of the frost­protection strategy is better visible on Figure 4.10. This
figure represents the temperatures on a cold winter day. It can be seen, that the frost­
protection is in operation if the ambient and the discharge air temperatures are below 1 ◦C
and 3 ◦C, respectively. In this case, the supply air is bypassed, so it cannot be heated in
the heat exchanger, so it remains as cold as the ambient air. The discharge air however,
increases its temperature and is as warm as the exhaust air taken from the zone, since
the supply air is not cooling it down anymore. The frost­protection is put in operation in
every other half an hour.
4.1.2
Mid­level unit
In this section the results of the different control methods of the mid­level unit are pre­
sented. The functions of the mid­level unit, that are shown here, are the humidity control,
CO2 control, night cooling, preheater, after­heater and frost protection with preheater.
Humidity control
Figure 4.11: Humidity level in the exhaust duct
On Figure 4.11 the humidity level in the exhaust duct on a given day is presented. It
can be seen, that the humidity graph has a local maximum in the morning and in the
evening, and a another smaller spike on the graph is visible later in the night. These
sudden increases in the humidity level are results of the activities of the occupants. It can
also be seen, that the humidity levels stay high only for a short period of time, when the
moisture production is present in the building. The excess moisture is removed by the
ventilation system quickly from the apartment.
Realistic representation of residential ventilation in building performance simulation
67
==PAGE:74==
Figure 4.12: Output of the humidity controller
Figure 4.12 shows the output of the P controller on the same day. The airflow steps are
visible on the graph. It is visible, that the controller follows the change of the humidity in
half and hour time intervals. It sends the signal of 0.75 to the fans in the morning, since
the humidity is high, but is not over the upper limit of the proportional band. Later in the
day, during the afternoon and evening, the signal was increased again as a result of the
change in the exhaust air humidity level.
Figure 4.13: Humidity level in the bathroom
Figure 4.13 is presented as an example of how the humidity control of the apartment
works. The graph shows the changes in the humidity level in the bathroom, which is the
largest contributor to the total moisture production of the building. It can be seen, that
even though the the humidity level reaches 100% during the day twice, the humidity level
in the exhaust duct (see on Figure 4.11) is far from the that. This is why the fans do not
increase their speed to the maximum, even if the humidity in the bathroom is higher than
the setpoint of the controller, which is measuring the humidity only in the exhaust duct.
68
Realistic representation of residential ventilation in building performance simulation
==PAGE:75==
Carbon dioxide control
Figure 4.14: CO2 level in the exhaust duct
On Figure 4.14 the CO2 level i the exhaust duct is shown. It can be seen, that the CO2
concentration in the exhaust duct is relatively high during the beginning on the day, and
gets even higher in the morning, when the occupants wake up. The concentration drops
significantly during the day, when the apartment is empty and the minimum airflow is
supplied and extracted. The concentration increases again in the late afternoon and in
the evening, when the occupants arrive home and spend their time there.
Figure 4.15: Output of the CO2 controller
Figure 4.15 represents the response of the CO2 controller to the CO2 concentration in the
exhaust duct. It is visible, that the controller can follow the concentration accurately, and
can send a signal to the fans accordingly. Although the controller was set to send signals
of 0, 0.25, 0.5, 0.75 or 1 only, it can be seen that other output signals occur as well. This
Realistic representation of residential ventilation in building performance simulation
69
==PAGE:76==
happens mostly in the morning, when the signal is around the limit of the proportional
band.
Figure 4.16: Output of the CO2 controller during the whole year
On Figure 4.16 the output signal of the whole year of the CO2 controller is presented.
Firstly, it is visible, the the maximum value that the controller sends to the fans is 0.75.
Not reaching the output signal of 1 means, that the concentration of CO2 alone is never
causing the fans to switch to maximum speed. It can also be seen, that the CO2 concen­
tration is not high enough in the exhaust duct during the hot summer days for the controller
to send a higher signal than 0.
On Figure 4.17 the combined output of the demand control can be seen. This is the output
signal, that is the maximum of the humidity control signal and the CO2 control signal.
Figure 4.17: Combined output of the demand control
70
Realistic representation of residential ventilation in building performance simulation
==PAGE:77==
Night cooling
Figure 4.18: Night cooling setpoint during the year
On Figure 4.18 the change in the supply temperature setpoint during the year is shown. It
can be seen, that the supply temperature setpoint is kept on a constant value of 18 ◦C in
the cooler seasons of autumn, winter and spring, whereas night setback is in operation in
the warmer months of May, June, July, August and beginning of September. It is important
to note, that this is not the actual supply temperature, only the supply temperature setpoint.
Figure 4.19: Night cooling setpoint during a week
Figure 4.19 shows the function of night cooling during a week in July. It is visible, that the
temperature is not decreased to 15 ◦C in all nights, only if the conditions are fulfilled (see
Section 3.1.2).
Realistic representation of residential ventilation in building performance simulation
71
==PAGE:78==
Figure 4.20: Temperature input for night cooling
On Figure 4.20 the temperature input for night setback is presented. Since one condition
for the night setback to turn on is that it is nighttime (possible operation time: 21:00­7:00),
only those periods of the day must be investigated. It can be seen, that the ambient tem­
perature is always lower, than the exhaust temperature, which represents the conditions
in the apartment. Therefore, the only criteria, that is not fulfilled on a couple of days is,
when the ambient temperature is lower than 12 ◦C. In this case, the night cooling was
turned off and the supply temperature was set to be 18 ◦C.
Preheater
Figure 4.21 shows the leaving air of the preheater. It can be seen, that the air is never
lower, than 1 ◦C, which was set to be the setpoint for the preheater. In case the ambient
temperature was higher than 1 ◦C, the preheater is not in use.
Figure 4.21: Leaving air of the preheater
Since the ambient temperature never got lower, than ­12 ◦C, an additional simulation was
72
Realistic representation of residential ventilation in building performance simulation
==PAGE:79==
run to test that functionality (see Figure 4.26). This simulation was carried on at Arlanda
airport, Sweden, there the ambient temperature goes well below ­12 ◦C. On Figure 4.22
the leaving air temperature of the preheater can be seen, in case the unit is used in
Sweden. It is visible, that the preheater with a maximum power of 1000 W cannot heat
the ambient air to the desired 1 ◦C.
Figure 4.22: Leaving air of the preheater (air handling unit used in Sweden
After­heater
On Figure 4.23 the leaving air of the after­heater can be seen. It is visible, that the supply
air temperature is never lower than 18 ◦C, which is the setpoint of the after­heater. In case
the ambient temperature is high enough for the heat exchanger to heat up the supply air
to 18 ◦C or the ambient temperature is 18 ◦C or above, the after­heater is not in use.
Figure 4.23: Leaving air of the after­heater
Frost protection with a preheater
On Figure 4.24 the ambient temperature in Copenhagen during the year is shown. It can
be seen, that the outdoor temperature never goes below ­12 ◦C. There is one day, when
Realistic representation of residential ventilation in building performance simulation
73
==PAGE:80==
the minimum temperature reaches ­11.29 ◦C. Therefore, the frost­protection macro in the
mid­level unit is never in operation in Copenhagen.
Figure 4.24: The ambient temperature in Copenhagen during the year
To demonstrate the functionality of the frost­protection strategy, the mid­level unit was
put in colder climate as well. Arlanda airport in Sweden was chosen, since temperatures
there go below ­12 ◦C On Figure 4.25 the ambient temperature in Sweden is shown, with
a yearly minimum temperature of ­17.26 ◦C.
Figure 4.25: The ambient temperature in Arlanda airport, Sweden during the year
In such a cold climate, the frost­protection strategy is needed, even with the use of a
preheater. Figure 4.26 presents an example day, where the frost­protection functionality
is in operation. The green line called ”final output of demand control” is the output signal,
supplied to the fans. It can be seen, that this output signal is constantly below the pink line,
which is the ”output of demand control”, the theoretical output without the frost­protection.
74
Realistic representation of residential ventilation in building performance simulation
==PAGE:81==
Figure 4.26: The demand control strategy with preheater
4.1.3
High­level unit
The results of the custom high­level unit are presented in this section. The extra features
compared to the mid­level unit are the active cooling and the intelligent humidity control.
The functionalities of these are presented in the following.
Active cooling
Figure 4.27: The leaving air temperature of the cooling coil
On Figure 4.27 the leaving air temperature of the cooling coil is shown. It can be seen that
the supply air temperature, that is leaving the coil, is constantly 18 ◦C. The only exception
of this is, when there is night cooling during the warm summer days.
Realistic representation of residential ventilation in building performance simulation
75
==PAGE:82==
Intelligent humidity control
The intelligent humidity control strategy is using the values of the sliding average and the
instantaneous humidity level in the exhaust duct to calculate the change in humidity (see
Equation 3.1). On Figure 4.28 the sliding average of the relative humidity over 24 hours
can be seen. It is visible, that the average humidity in the exhaust duct is the highest
during the summer and the lowest during the winter, with a maximum of around 70%, in
June and a minimum of around 20% in some of the colder winter months.
Figure 4.28: The sliding average over 24 hours of the relative humidity
Figure 4.29: The instantaneous level of relative humidity
It can be seen on Figure 4.28, that the average relative humidity is below 30% for a couple
of days during the winter, which is limit for the ”Reduced ventilation”. Therefore, for most
of the year, the unit is running either on the level of ”Normal ventilation”, or on the level
of ”Forced ventilation”. The deciding factor between these two levels is the change in
relative humidity, which is presented on Figure 4.30. To calculate this value, the humidity
76
Realistic representation of residential ventilation in building performance simulation
==PAGE:83==
controller need the level of the instantaneous humidity as well, which is shown on Figure
4.29.
On Figure 4.30 the change in the relative humidity level is presented. It is visible, that
the changes in the humidity level have their maximum and minimum values during the
wintertime, whereas the changes during summertime are generally lower. The highest
change in the relative humidity level is around 120%.
Figure 4.30: The change in the relative humidity level
4.2
Results of the varying supply air temperature
Figure 4.31: The varying supply temperature of the basic model
On Figure 4.31 the varying supply temperature of the basic model can be seen. It is
visible, that the supply temperature is kept 2 ◦C lower than the exhaust temperature,
Realistic representation of residential ventilation in building performance simulation
77
==PAGE:84==
which represents the rooms temperature. In case frost protection is in operation, and the
heat exchanger is bypassed by the supply air, the supply air temperature is not able to
follow the room air temperature. During summertime, when the outdoor air is too warm,
the unit is not able to provide 2 ◦C lower supply air temperature either. However, other
than these two specific cases, the control strategy is working well throughout most of the
year. This tendency is even more visible on Figures A.24 and A.25 in the Appendix, which
present this supply air control strategy used in the models of mid­level and high level units.
4.3
Results of the units with ideal fans
On Figure 4.32 the supply and exhaust airflow of the basic unit is plotted on a week. This
airflow is the same for both the unit with ideal fans and with real fans.
Figure 4.32: The supply and exhaust airflow of the basic unit on a week
On Figure 4.33 the fan power consumption of the ideal fans can be seen on the same
week.
78
Realistic representation of residential ventilation in building performance simulation
==PAGE:85==
Figure 4.33: The ideal fan power consumption on a week
Figure 4.34 shows the power consumption of the real fans on the same week. It can
be seen, that the power consumption decreases to 0 in case the fan is running on min­
imum airflow, which is incorrect because if there is airflow produced by the fan, power
consumption is always connected to the activity.
Figure 4.34: The real fan power consumption on a week
4.4
Results of the units with built­in frost protection
The mid­level and high­level units did not use the custom frost­protection strategy devel­
oped for this project due to the relatively warm Danish winter. Therefore, only the custom
Realistic representation of residential ventilation in building performance simulation
79
==PAGE:86==
basic unit and its frost­protection strategy was compared to the built­in frost­protection
method in the same model.
On Figure 4.35 the heat exchanger efficiency of the basic unit with custom frost­protection
strategy is presented. It can be seen, that the efficiency is generally around 0.9, but in
some cases, mostly in wintertime, it drops to 0.
Figure 4.35: The heat exchanger efficiency of the basic unit with custom frost­protection
strategy
Looking at the model with the built­in frost­protection strategy on Figure 4.36 it can be
seen, that the heat exchanger efficiency does not decrease during wintertime. This in­
dicates that the built­in frost­protection is never used. The heat exchanger efficiency is
decreased during summertime a couple of times, as it is in the custom model.
Figure 4.36: The heat exchanger efficiency of the basic unit with built­in frost­protection
strategy
80
Realistic representation of residential ventilation in building performance simulation
==PAGE:87==
However, Figure 4.37 presents the changes in the temperatures around the heat ex­
changer. The discharge air temperature is marked by brown (TEXHOUT), whereaes the
supply air temperature is marked by blue (TSUPOUT). It can be seen, that the discharge
air temperature never goes below 3 ◦C, but in case it reached 3 ◦C, the supply temperature
decreases drastically. This indicates the use of the built­in frost­protection and
Figure 4.37: The temperatures around the heat exchanger throughout the year
In Table 4.1 the yearly heat recovered by the air handling units can be seen. It is visible,
that the unit with built­in frost protection strategy can recover 7% more energy than the unit
with the custom frost­protection method. This implies, that the latter is using the bypass
more, due to frost­protection.
Table 4.1: The yearly heat recovered
Custom frost­protection
Built­in frost­protection
Yearly heat recovered
5405,3 kWh
5776,3 kWh
Realistic representation of residential ventilation in building performance simulation
81
==PAGE:88==
4.5
Results of the units with built­in demand control
Figure 4.38: The airflow rate in the mid­level unit with built­in demand control
Figure 4.38 presents the overall airflow rates of the air handling units with built­in demand
control. It can be seen, that the ventilation is no longer balanced, because the airflow of
supply and exhaust do not match anymore.
Figure 4.39: The indoor air quality in the bathroom in the mid­level unit with built­in de­
mand control
On Figure 4.39 the indoor air quality in the bathroom can be seen. The bathroom is con­
trolled according to relative humidity. It is visible, that the relative humidity level reaches
82
Realistic representation of residential ventilation in building performance simulation
==PAGE:89==
100% in the morning and in the evening, when the occupants are showering. However,
the ventilation quickly react to the sudden increase of humidity and replaces the indoor
air. This is shown on Figure 4.40, where the exhaust airflow rate in the bathroom can be
seen. In case of the sharp increase in the humidity, the airflow rate quickly develops to
the maximum level for a short time.
Figure 4.40: The airflow rate in the bathroom in the mid­level unit with built­in demand
control
On Figures 4.41 and 4.42 another example, but with CO2 control is shown. It can be
seen, that the CO2 level in the master bedroom quickly increases during the night, which
is met by the maximum available airflow supplied to this room to lower the concentration.
Figure 4.41: The indoor air quality in the master bedroom in the mid­level unit with built­in
demand control
Realistic representation of residential ventilation in building performance simulation
83
==PAGE:90==
Figure 4.42: The airflow rate in the master bedroom in the mid­level unit with built­in
demand control
4.6
Results of the standard units
The standard air handling unit is more different from the custom unit, compared to the
other previous units. Therefore, the standard air handling units are only compared to the
custom ones in terms of energy consumption throughout the whole year. This is presented
in Section 4.7.
4.7
Comparison of the air handling units regarding their
energy consumption
On Figure 4.43 the energy consumption of the different units is presented. The following
data is shown in the table for every unit: energy consumption of the fans, of the total
heating (preheater and after­heater combined), of the preheater, of the after­heater, of
the cooling coil, recovered heat, recovered cold, total energy spent (sum of the energy
consumption of the fans, total heating and cooling), total energy used (sum of total spent,
heat recovery and cold recovery) and the heating used for the building.
In general, the basic unit spends the least extra energy on the top of the recovered energy,
while the high­level unit spend the most additionally per year. There is a tendency, that
the units with varying supply temperature can recover more energy than the units with
constant supply temperature. The same tendency can be seen in case of the units with
built­in heat exchanger against the regular custom units. The mid­ and high­level units
use approximately the same amount of energy for preheating, but the high­level units use
a bit more energy for that. The same tendency can be seen in case of the heat recovered,
where the high­level unit tends the have the advantage. The basic unit is better than the
mid­level unit in this regard, probable because it runs on a constant flow which is higher,
than the demand controlled flow of the mid­level unit. Even though the unit with built­
in demand control and the standard unit (which also has built­in demand control) spend
the most extra energy on the top of the recovered energy, the total heating consumption
of the buildings, where these units are installed, is generally the lowest. There is one
result, for the mid­level unit with varying supply temperature, where IDA ICE gave a result
several orders higher than the other results. Therefore, this is considered unrealistic and
unusable.
84
Realistic representation of residential ventilation in building performance simulation
==PAGE:91==
Figure 4.43: Results of the energy consumption of the different units
Realistic representation of residential ventilation in building performance simulation
85
==PAGE:92==
5
Discussion
The main objective of the project was to create realistic air handling units in the software
of IDA ICE by imitating the units, that can currently be found on the Danish market. After
creating the custom air handling units using the available data provided by the producers,
comparisons were made between the custom units, modifications of these units and the
standard units available in the software. The units were evaluated based on how well
they perform in terms of indoor air quality and energy consumption. It was also assessed
whether they can fulfill their purpose that was set by the type of the unit and the producers.
Limitations were present already in the early stage of the thesis. First of all, there were
only a few previous studies that used IDA ICE as a simulations tool, and those were not
relevant because no highly relevant studies could be found. However, most of the limita­
tions in the beginning were caused by the lack of available data on the air handling units.
Manuals, that were used to understand the functionalities of the ventilation units were
often missing necessary data on either explaining the control strategy in detail or on pro­
viding data at all on certain control methods. In case of the lack of data, representatives of
the chosen producers were contacted, but they could not always provide sufficient data.
The reason behind this was either that the data was confidential or communication diffi­
culties through mail, which ended the conversation after a series of questions. However,
since five different air handling units from five producers were chosen, enough data could
be collected to create three representative units, which imitate three levels of technical at­
tributes: the basic unit, the mid­level unit and the high­level unit. A modification was also
made in the modelling. The capacity of the kitchen hood was taken from the previous re­
quirements, which are outdated now [44]. However, the kitchen hood capacity from those
regulations were taken, because the new regulations prescribe a relatively huge minimum
capacity fro the kitchen hood. The previous capacity of 20 L/s was increased to 120 L/s,
which would require a much larger air handling unit, overdimensioning the system. The
regulations prescribe a reduction factor if the kitchen hood is efficient enough. This can
be a way to force the occupants to buy efficient kitchen hoods. It is also beneficial for
them, since a better capture efficiency could remove more particles from the indoor air.
In order to test the custom air handling units created in the software, whole year simu­
lations were run both in the test model, which was a simple one zone model, and in the
real model, which was a complex architectural model. The results of these simulations
generally showed, that the control methods developed in IDA ICE could fulfill their objec­
tives, and could create a healthy indoor climate by removing the moisture and CO2 from
indoors.
5.1
Basic unit
The results of the airflow steps in the basic unit show that the supply flow is exactly the
desired amount and is perfectly following the airflow steps set by the schedule. However,
it can clearly be seen, that there is a gap between the supply and exhaust volume flows.
The reason behind this is the density difference between the supply air leaving the heat
exchanger towards the zones and the discharge leaving the heat exchanger towards the
ambient. Since the efficiency of the heat exchanger is relatively high (above 87%, see
Figure A.20), the temperature difference can also be high during the wintertime. However,
looking at the volume flow rate on a warm summer day it can be seen, that the supply
and discharge volume flow rates are a lot closer due to the smaller density difference
86
Realistic representation of residential ventilation in building performance simulation
==PAGE:93==
caused by the smaller temperature difference. The results of an example day can be
seen on Figure 5.1. The graph, presenting the supply and discharge air temperatures
can be seen on Figure 4.5, presented earlier.
Figure 5.1: Volume flow rates during summer
On Figure 4.2 the results of the week schedule was presented. It can be seen, that the
airflow rates follow the schedule specified by Exhasuto’s Classic schedule. The kitchen
hood however, is capable of overwriting the schedule, if the occupants turn it on manu­
ally. Generally, it is turned on once a day, in the evening, but on Sundays it is turned
on for lunchtime as well. Therefore, the spikes in the airflow rates are the result of the
schedule, programmed in IDA ICE (see Figure 3.11. The kitchen hood is turned on only
if the occupancy schedule is set to be 1, otherwise the kitchen can be occupied without
using the kitchen hood, e.g. for preparing breakfast.
Figure 5.2: Power consumption of the heaters of the apartment
Realistic representation of residential ventilation in building performance simulation
87
==PAGE:94==
In the basic model, the supply temperature is controlled only by the heat exchanger and
the bypass, eventually. Figure 4.3 presents the supply temperature throughout the year.
It can be seen, that even though the supply temperature is set to be constantly 18 ◦C, it
cannot be fulfilled all the time. There are several occasions, e.g. when the frost­protection
is in operation during wintertime or when the ambient temperature is higher the the supply
temperature setpoint during summertime. However, the low supply temperature does not
result in a cold indoor temperature, because the heaters of the building increase their
power in order to maintain the setpoint. Figure 5.2 shows the power consumption of the
heaters in the apartment on the same day. It can be seen, that the power consumption
changes periodically depending on the temperature drops as a result of the low supply air
temperature. However, the bypass of the supply is inevitable, otherwise ice could form on
the heat exchanger, decreasing the efficiency and resulting in a continuously low supply
temperature.
A control strategy for switching between summer and winter modes were implemented
in the air handling unit as well to control the heat exchanger and its bypass according to
the season. On Figure 4.6 the result of the decision between summer and winter mode
can be seen. It is visible, that the heat exchanger is operating in winter mode for most of
the year, sometimes even during the warm summer months. This means, that the bypass
control is done according to the graph, that can be seen on Figure 3.2. The results of the
bypass control during wintertime is presented on Figure 4.8. It is interesting to see, that
the occasions, when the unit is bypassing the supply air in winter mode happen during
the summer. Since the ambient temperature is usually relatively cold during summer as
well, it can be beneficial to use it as cooling in case there is a need for it. Operating in
winter mode is the result of the relatively cold Danish climate, that the average, minimum
and maximum temperatures during the day are not high enough for the unit to switch
to summer mode. In case the unit switches to summer mode, it is following the control
strategy shown on Figure 3.3. The results of the bypass control are presented on Figure
4.7. The supply air is bypassed only two times during the year, because the outdoor
temperature in Denmark is rarely above the indoor temperature.
The results of the frost­protection strategy are shown on Figure 4.9. It can be seen, that
the frost­protection is used a lot during the cold winter months. An example day is pre­
sented on Figure 4.10, where the frost­protection was explained in detail. An interesting
behavior can also be seen here. In case the frost­protection is in operation, the supply
and discharge temperatures are changing values instantly after the bypass opens and
closes. The behavior of the supply air temperature can be explained by sudden opening
and closing of the bypass, but the discharge would not change its temperature suddenly
like this in the reality. The reason behind this is that when the frost­protection is put into
operation, and the bypass for the supply air opens, the the temperature of the discharge
air would increase gradually due to the thermal mass of the heat exchanger, which was
still cold. In case of the bypass is closed again and the supply air is going through the heat
exchanger, the discharge air would decrease its temperature more slowly due to the same
reason. In case of ice forming on the heat exchanger due to extreme cold temperatures,
this change in the discharge air temperature would be even slower , since the ice has to
be melted first and the discharge air temperature can only rise after that. However, if the
frost­protection is working well, frost­formation on the heat exchanger can be avoided.
There is a limitation in IDA ICE for the frost­protection strategy in the basic model. The
frost­protection strategy involves the stoppage of the supply fan in case of the ambient
and discharge air temperatures are lower, than the limit. In this case, the supply fan in the
air handling unit should receive a signal of 0 in order to stop the energy consumption. The
88
Realistic representation of residential ventilation in building performance simulation
==PAGE:95==
zones should receive the same signal in order to stop requiring airflow from the ventilation
unit, since the supply fan stopped. However, in case there is no risk of ice, the fans should
always run to provide at least 0.3 L/s/m2 heated floor area minimum flow rate, even if
there is no demand for it. Therefore, the signal of 0 was dedicated to this minimum air
flow . This means, that if the fans receive the signal of 0, and the zones require 0 airflow,
there will be an airflow, corresponding the heated floor area, even if thee frost­protection
control stops the supply fan. This is presented on Figure 5.3.
Figure 5.3: Airflow rate of the fans in case of frost­protection
5.2
Mid­level unit
The main feature of the mid­level unit is that it has a demand­controlled airflow meaning,
that the humidity level and CO2 concentration is measured in the exhaust duct. Propor­
tional controllers were used to regulate the airflow necessary to remove the contaminants
from the indoor air. On Figures 4.11 and 4.14 it can be seen, that the output signal of the
controller is following precisely the humidity and CO2 levels with the stepwise regulation
of the airflow according to Figure 3.4. The maximum of these two signals is presented on
Figure 4.17. Even though the linear segment controller is set up to transform the continu­
ous input signal into a stepwise output signal of 0, 0.25, 0.5, 0.75 or 1, results of different
output can also bee found on the graph. The reason behind is, that the proportional con­
troller has a small range of values, where it does not output the above mentioned values,
but values in between. This is needed for the controller not to crash when being on the
limit between the airflow steps. For example, on Figure 4.14 it can be seen, that in the con­
centration of CO2 in the night and early morning is around the lower limit of the controller,
which is 700 ppm. Once the concentration is very close to 700 ppm, but is still above it,
the controller is on the verge of switching off and thus decreasing the airflow rate. This
induces an increase in the concentration of CO2 in the apartment, which increases the
airflow automatically. Figure 4.16 show an interesting phenomenon as well. The output
of the CO2 controller is presented, and it can be seen, that the CO2 concentration in the
exhaust duct is rarely reaching the minimum level during the warm summer months. The
reason behind this is the window­opening. In IDA ICE, the window opening is set to be
Realistic representation of residential ventilation in building performance simulation
89
==PAGE:96==
controlled by a PI controller according to temperature. This means, that in case cooling
by opening the windows is possible, fresh ambient air is let in to the apartment, replacing
the used air with higher CO2 concentration.
A new strategy was implemented for the supply air control, which is night­cooling. The
purpose of this is to realize the need for cooling during the warm summer days and provide
colder supply air in this case during the night. It can be seen on Figure 4.18, that the night­
cooling is excessively used during the warm summer nights. However, Figure 4.19 shows,
that the use of night­setback is not continuous. There are nights, when the conditions for
night cooling are only fulfilled for a shorter period of time, and there are other nights, when
the conditions are fulfilled from time to time, causing the supply temperature to change
accordingly.
Figure 5.4: The change of temperatures regarding night­cooling
Using Figure 5.4 the change of temperatures and therefore the change in night­setback
can be explained. This is an example day taken from Figure 4.19, the 13.07.2021. On this
day, the night setback was used once during the night, only for a short period of time. The
reason behind this is, that conditions were only fulfilled for a short time. At 9 PM, when
the night­setback could potentially start, all the conditions were fulfilled. However, later
this evening, the room temperature dropped below 22 ◦C, resulting in the night­setback
to turn off. Even though all the remaining conditions were fulfilled (ambient temperature
being above 12 ◦C but being lower than the indoor air temperature, and the time being in
the range of 9 PM ­ 7 AM), this conditions caused the supply temperature to rise to 18 ◦C
for the remaining of the night.
5.3
High­level unit
Figure 4.23 presents the supply air temperature after the after­heater was used in the
mid­level unit. It can be seen, that the supply temperature can only be kept at 18 ◦C, if no
90
Realistic representation of residential ventilation in building performance simulation
==PAGE:97==
cooling is needed. It is also visible, that the supply temperature cannot always be as a low
as 15 ◦C in case night cooling is needed. In order to be able to reach low temperatures
like this, active cooling has to be used. The high­level unit with the use of the cooling coil
can cool the supply air to 18 ◦C and to 15 ◦C, respectively. This is shown on Figure 4.27.
5.4
Units with ideal fans
The air handling units with ideal fans were planned to be compared to the same custom
units with axial fans. However, the comparison could not be made due to the way of the
calculation of the power consumption of the different fans. As it is shown on Figures 4.33
4.34, the tendency of the changes in the airflow rate in case of both the ideal and the axial
fans follows the changes of the airflow rate provided by the unit. It can also be seen, that
the power consumption drops in case of the frost­protection is in operation. However,
although the power consumption for the ideal fan is realistic, following the AHSRAE poly­
nomial, the power consumption is not. It is not realistic, because the power consumption
of the fans cannot be 0 W in case of minimum airflow, which is around 45 L/s (see Figure
4.32. In order to understand the behavior of the axial fans, further work needs to be done.
5.5
Units with built­in frost­protection
The custom frost­protection of the realistic units was compared to the built­in frost pro­
tection of IDA ICE. On Figure 4.35 the heat exchanger efficiency of the basic unit can be
seen. The drops of the heat exchanger efficiency can be explained by the ON­OFF bypass
control strategy. The bypass of the basic unit can only be used in ON­OFF control mode,
which means, that the bypass cannot be used partially. In IDA ICE the heat exchanger
simulates the bypass by dropping the efficiency partially or fully, depending on how much
bypass is needed. In this model, the air can be bypassed due to frost­protection, passive
heating or passive cooling. These are the drops in winter and summer, respectively.
Figure 4.36 presents the changes in the heat exchanger efficiency of the unit with a built­in
frost­protection control strategy. It looks like as if there was no bypass at all during winter­
time, neither as a result of frost­protection, nor as a result of passive heating. However,
looking at Figure 4.37 it is clearly visible, that the bypass during wintertime is present. On
this figure the temperatures around the heat exchanger can be seen. There are significant
drops in the supply air temperature (blue line), which indicates the bypass functionality.
To understand the reason why the efficiency did not decrease on Figure 4.36, the equa­
tion for calculating the heat exchanger efficiency has to be used. In case the ambient
temperature is decreased, the supply air temperature is decreasing as well in order to
keep the efficiency of the heat exchanger.
5.6
Units with built­in demand control
By introducing the built­in demand control to the units in IDA ICE, the balanced ventilation
disappears. This happens because this demand control controls all the zones separately,
as if there were dampers installed in each terminal. This is presented on Figure 4.38. On
this figure it is visible, that the airflow barely ever reaches the maximum flow possible. The
reason behind this can be severalfold. Firstly, the schedule for the kitchen hood control
was removed from the fan control macro in order to completely use the built­in demand
control. The other reason behind this behavior can be that since the airflow is continuously
adjusted for each zone, the increase in humidity or CO2 can be handled more directly, and
other zones might not need increased airflow. This results in a lower total airflow. Another
effect of the built­in demand control on the ventilation in general is, that the airflow is not
provided in steps anymore, since the linear segment controllers were removed from the
Realistic representation of residential ventilation in building performance simulation
91
==PAGE:98==
fan control macro. The bypass is not used in ON­OFF function, the supply air is bypassed
only partially, as much as it is needed to keep the efficiency constant.
5.7
Energy consumption of the units
Since the basic unit does not have heating or cooling coils, it uses the least extra energy
on the top of the recovered energy. Since the mid­level unit does not have a cooling coil, it
uses less energy than the high­level unit. This is the price of the comfort, that the higher­
level units can provide, since the supply temperature can be provided more accurately in
case of a more advanced unit.
The units with varying supply temperature can recover more heat, than the units with
constant supply temperature. The reason behind this is that in case of the constant sup­
ply temperature, the unit does not utilize the energy to heat the supply air above 18 ◦C.
However, in case of the varying supply air temperature, the supply air temperature rises
sometimes even to above 20 ◦C. To heat the outdoor air in this case, more energy is used.
Looking at the units with built­in frost­protection, similar conclusions can be drawn. It is
visible, that the units with built­in frost­protection can recover more heat, than the unit
with the units with custom frost­protection. This happens probably because the units with
custom frost­protection bypass more, than the units with built­in frost­protection.
In case of the electrical preheating, the units use similar amount of energy. However, the
high­level units tend to use a bit more. The reason behind this is, that the high­level units
rarely run on low fan speed, since the humidity indoors is usually higher than 30%. More
airflow can result in more heat transfer which can make the preheater work more. The
same tendency is visible in case of the heat recovered in the different units. The high­
level units recover the most heat, because they transfer the most air in general. The basic
unit follows, because they never turn off, they run constantly, whereas the mid­level units
recover the least amount of energy.
The total yearly heating energy is logged in the table as well. The purpose of this is
to show how much the heating should compensate the work of the air handling unit. It
can be seen, that units with built­in demand control and the standard units (which also
have built­in demand control) spend the most extra energy, but the heating system in
the apartment spend the least throughout the year. The reason behind this is, that the
air handling units heat up the air more than e.g. the basic unit with constant supply air
temperature. Therefore, the heating system does not have to provide so much extra heat
to keep the room temperature setpoint. However, it is still better to use less energy on
the air handling unit and use more on the heating of the building in order to have the
lowest energy consumption. This might be relevant in a case, when the heating is not
operated by electricity. In this case, it is worth considering, which model to prefer: the
one, that is using more electricity on the air handling unit but use less of the other type
of energy source (such as district heating, fossil fuel, etc.) or vice versa. Generally, the
models featuring more custom functionalities were using more electricity compared to the
standard units and the ones using built­in demand control. The deciding factor could be
the cost of the energy source, that is dependent on the area the building is located in.
The table shows data about fan consumption as well, but the values are incorrect in case
of the axial fans. This has an influence on the extra energy spent as well, but the order
would probably remain with correct energy consumption values as well.
Since the energy consumption of the axial fans is unrealistic, it is impossible to make a
general comparison regarding the total energy consumption of the different units.
92
Realistic representation of residential ventilation in building performance simulation
==PAGE:99==
6
Conclusion
This project was carried out to develop realistic air handling units and compare them to
the standard air handling units that are present in IDA ICE. The importance of this is to run
realistic simulations and be able to estimate the indoor air quality and the energy consump­
tion better. Three custom air handling units were created in the software to represent the
Danish market. After running simulations in a one zone model and testing the developed
functionalities, the units were put in a real architectural model, which was a three­storey
apartment in a row­house. Modifications such as varying supply air temperature, custom
heat exchanger and bypass control, custom frost­protection strategy or units with ideal
fans were implemented as well to be able to compare the different parts of the custom
unit to the already existing, standard units in IDA ICE. It was found, that the custom control
strategies have a significant impact on the behavior of the air handling units. There was
a difference in terms of fulfilling the indoor environmental criteria between the three units.
Although the basic unit could provide the required supply air temperature for most of the
time, in case of relatively extreme conditions such as cold winter days or warm summer
days, it struggled to do so. The mid­level unit was found to be suitable for the Danish
climate, since it could produce the desired conditions in the long winter, and only had
issues during the warm summer days, which happened relatively rarely. The high­level
unit used generally the most energy in order to provide perfect conditions throughout the
whole year. However, in case of using less energy for the air handling unit, more energy
was used for the heating system of the apartment. Therefore, the source of energy used
for heating might be relevant when choosing which air handling units to use. The cost
efficient way to go is to use the basic unit, since it consumes the least amount of energy
per year. If the comfort of the occupants is the most important, then the high­level unit
can be chosen. The mid­level unit serves as an in between solution for occupants, who
would like to have a decent indoor environment but not spend too much on the utilities. It
can be concluded, that realistic simulations are important both in terms of indoor air qual­
ity and energy consumption. This way, the results can be approximated better, providing
a clearer picture for the designers and customers in case of building a new apartment
or renovating the ventilation system. The results provide an insight on what the Danish
market currently looks like as well as serve as a guide to choose the air handling unit, that
fits the requirements and necessities of everyone.
Realistic representation of residential ventilation in building performance simulation
93
==PAGE:100==
7
Further work
In this study residential air handling units of five different producers were investigated in
order to choose only five units and create the representative units according to them. More
producers and more units could be involved in the research in order to create even more
realistic representations of the market. By having a larger sample, more data could be
gathered and the missing information on the control strategies could be found. The study
was conducted in Denmark, only investigating the Danish market. Later in the future,
other countries could be investigated as well that have similar climate condition to create
even more detailed units for this region.
Using decentralized air handling units is one way of providing fresh air to residential apart­
ments. However, larger apartment houses often have centralized air handling units. This
means, that there are private units but there is one larger unit that serves multiple apart­
ment in the same time. Including these units in the study could provide a broader picture
on how to ventilate residential apartments.
The pressure loss for the ventilation system in the apartment was estimated using general
values. However, in order to get even more realistic models, this could be calculated. In
order to do so, more detailed description of the ventilation system is needed such as
the exact location and size of the ducts, terminals and other objects that appear in the
ventilation system.
Sizing the preheater, after­heater and cooling coil could also provide more accurate re­
sults. The energy consumption and the heating and cooling capabilities of the air handling
unit could be estimated more precisely.
In case of the frost­protection being in operation, cold ambient air is supplied to the zones
for a period of time, until the risk of frost­formation on the heat exchanger is over. Even
though this big change in the supply temperature has minor influence on the indoor air
temperature, it can cause local discomfort for the occupants in from of draft. This could
be investigated more in detail to be able to provide a clearer picture for the occupants.
The power of the axial fans could not be estimated accurately, because the models were
set up in a different way, which resulted in a poor calculation of the power consumption.
A solution for this could be to change the model in a way, that the fan control macro does
not provide 0 power consumption for the input signal of 0. This is important, because
although the fans receive the signal of 0 in case of no demand, they still have to provide
0.3 L/s/m2 airflow rate for the apartment. The solution for this is to rethink the way the
fans get their input signal so that in case of supplying the minimum airflow, they get a
signal, that is proportional to the airflow decrease compared to the maximum airflow. In
this case, if the maximum airflow provided by the fans is 85 L/s, and the minimum airflow
air around 45 L/s, the fans should receive the signal of 45/85 = 0.53 in case to calculate
the energy accurately.
94
Realistic representation of residential ventilation in building performance simulation
==PAGE:101==
Bibliography
[1]
RJ Laumbach. “Sick building syndrome”. In: International Encyclopedia of Public
Health. Elsevier Inc., 2008, pp. 4–8.
[2]
Pawel Wargocki et al. “The relationships between classroom air quality and chil­
dren’s performance in school”. In: Building and Environment 173 (2020), p. 106749.
[3]
Janis Jansz. “Sick building syndrome”. In: International Encyclopedia of Public Health.
Elsevier Inc., 2017, pp. 502–505.
[4]
Gaelle Guyot et al. “A review of performance­based approaches to residential smart
ventilation”. In: Ventilation Information Paper (March 2019).
[5]
J. Lebrun. “Simulation of HVAC systems”. In: Pergamon (1994).
[6]
Dennis Johansson Frederik Engdahl. “Optimal supply air temperature with respect
to energy use in a variable air volume system”. In: Energy and Buildings (2003).
[7]
Behrang Chenari et al. “Towards sustainable, energy­efficient and healthy ventila­
tion strategies in buildings: A review”. In: Renewable and Sustainable Energy Re­
views (2015).
[8]
Arefeh Hesaraki and Sture Holmberg. “Demand­controlled ventilation in new resi­
dential buildings: consequences on indoor air quality and energy savings”. In: Indoor
and Built Environment 24.2 (2015), pp. 162–173.
[9]
Toke Rammer Nielsen and Christian Drivsholm. “Energy efficient demand controlled
ventilation in single family houses”. In: Energy and buildings 42.11 (2010), pp. 1995–
1998.
[10]
Pratley Partners. What are the types of ventilation? url: https://www.ljpratley.co.uk/
blog/different-types-of-ventilation.
[11]
Renato M Lazzarin and Andrea Gasparella. “Technical and economical analysis
of heat recovery in building ventilation systems”. In: Applied thermal engineering
18.1­2 (1998), pp. 47–67.
[12]
C­A Roulet et al. “Real heat recovery with air handling units”. In: Energy and build­
ings 33.5 (2001), pp. 495–502.
[13]
Mats Fehrm, Wilhelm Reiners, and Matthias Ungemach. “Exhaust air heat recovery
in buildings”. In: International Journal of Refrigeration 25.4 (2002), pp. 439–449.
[14]
ASHRAE Handbook. HVAC systems and equipment. Vol. 39. chapter, 1996.
[15]
Juha Jokisalo et al. “Performance of balanced ventilation with heat recovery in resi­
dential buildings in a cold climate”. In: International Journal of Ventilation 2.3 (2003),
pp. 223–236.
[16]
Brennan Less et al. Smart ventilation for advanced California homes. Lawrence
Berkeley National Laboratory, June 2020.
[17]
Max Sherman Francois Durier Rémi Carrié. “What is smart ventilation?” In: Venti­
lation Information Paper (March 2018).
[18]
Bolig­ og Planstyrelsen. Bygningsreglementet. url: https://bygningsreglementet.dk/
Tekniske-bestemmelser/22/Kravn.
[19]
Ventilation i bygninger ­ Mekaniske, naturlige og hybride ventilationssystemer. Stan­
dard. Göterborg Plads 1: Dansk Standard, 2021.
[20]
Brandsikrinng af ventilationsanlaeg. Standard. Göterborg Plads 1: Dansk Standard,
May 2021.
[21]
Termisk isolering af tekniske installationer. Standard. Göterborg Plads 1: Dansk
Standard, 2021.
Realistic representation of residential ventilation in building performance simulation
95
==PAGE:102==
[22]
William Lawrance. “Duct system pressure and SFP”. In: And About Indoor Climate
(12.08.2021). url: https://blog.swegon.com/uk/duct-system-pressure-and-sfp.
[23]
Ecodesign. Guidelines. European Commission, 2016.
[24]
IDA Indoor Climate and Energy 4.0. EQUA Simulation AB. 2009. url: https://www.
equa.se/deliv/ICE4eng.pdf?lic=ICE40X:ED140.380.361.1.17.
[25]
Systemair website. url: https://shop.systemair.com/en/save--vtc/c40063.
[26]
Exhausto website. url: https://www.exhausto.com/produkter.
[27]
Nilan website. url: https://www.en.nilan.dk/products/ventilation-units.
[28]
Swegon website. url: https://www.swegon.com/products/air-handling/casa/.
[29]
Genvex website. url: https://www.genvex.com/en/products/ventilation.
[30]
SAVE VTC 200 User manual. Systemair UAB. Liny st. 101, LT­20174, Ukmerge,
LITHUANIA, 2021. url: https://www.systemair.com.
[31]
SAVE VTC 200. Systemair UAB. Liny st. 101, LT­20174, Ukmerge, LITHUANIA,
2017. url: https://www.systemair.com.
[32]
SAVE VTC 200 Service Accessories Installation Manual. Systemair UAB. Liny st.
101, LT­20174, Ukmerge, LITHUANIA, 2021. url: https://www.systemair.com.
[33]
VEX40T Montagevejledning. Exhausto. url: https://www.exhausto.dk.
[34]
The road to a healthy indoor climate. Nilan A/S. Nilanvej 2, 8722 Hedensted, DEN­
MARK, 2021. url: https://www.nilan.dk.
[35]
Product data ­ Comfort 300LR. Nilan A/S. Nilanvej 2, 8722 Hedensted, DENMARK,
2021. url: https://www.nilan.dk.
[36]
Software instructions ­ CTS602LIGHT. Nilan A/S. Nilanvej 2, 8722 Hedensted, DEN­
MARK, 2020. url: https://www.nilan.dk.
[37]
Casa W3 / W4 XS SMART ­ Installation, commissioning and maintenance instruc­
tion. Swegon. url: https://serviceportal.swegon.com/fi//docs/TM_W3W4-C_EN.
[38]
ECO 190 XL. KVM­Genvex A/S. Sverigesvej 6, 6100 Haderslev, DENMARK. url:
https://www.genvex.com.
[39]
Operating instructions ­ Optima 270. KVM­Genvex A/S. Sverigesvej 6, 6100 Hader­
slev, DENMARK. url: https://www.genvex.com.
[40]
Danmarks Meteorologiske Institut. Vejrarkiv. url: https://www.dmi.dk/vejrarkiv/.
[41]
Christian Nicolai Nielsen. “Climate change and smart ventilation”. 2020.
[42]
Rune Huntley Andersen Peter Birkholm. “Holisitk energirenovering”. 2021.
[43]
Boligventilation. Exhausto A/S. Odensevej 76, DK­5550, Langeskov, DENMARK,
2015. url: https://www.exhausto.dk.
[44]
Bolig­ og Planstyrelsen. Bygningsreglementet. url: https://historisk.bygningsreglementet.
dk/br15_00_id145/0/42.
[45]
VEX40T Decentral boligventilation. Exhausto A/S. Odensevej 76, DK­5550, Langeskov,
DENMARK, 2021. url: https://www.exhausto.dk.
96
Realistic representation of residential ventilation in building performance simulation
==PAGE:103==
Realistic representation of residential ventilation in building performance simulation
97
==PAGE:104==
A
Appendix
Figure A.1: Project plan with the tasks and objectives
98
Realistic representation of residential ventilation in building performance simulation
==PAGE:105==
Figure A.2: Weekly schedules of the Exhausto unit [33]
Realistic representation of residential ventilation in building performance simulation
99
==PAGE:106==
Figure A.3: Temperatures in Denmark in 2022 [40]
100
Realistic representation of residential ventilation in building performance simulation
==PAGE:107==
Figure A.4: Frost­protection strategy of Exhausto [33]
Realistic representation of residential ventilation in building performance simulation
101
==PAGE:108==
Figure A.5: Frost­protection strategy of Nilan [35]
102
Realistic representation of residential ventilation in building performance simulation
==PAGE:109==
Figure A.6: Floor plan of the basement [42]
Realistic representation of residential ventilation in building performance simulation
103
==PAGE:110==
Figure A.7: Floor plan of the ground floor [42]
104
Realistic representation of residential ventilation in building performance simulation
==PAGE:111==
Figure A.8: Floor plan of the first floor [42]
Realistic representation of residential ventilation in building performance simulation
105
==PAGE:112==
Figure A.9: 3D model of the row house [42]
Figure A.10: Occupant schedule (1 person) of the office in the basement [42]
106
Realistic representation of residential ventilation in building performance simulation
==PAGE:113==
Figure A.11: Washing machine (for moisture production) and occupant schedule (1 per­
son) in the laundry room [42]
Figure A.12: Dryer schedule of the laundry room [42]
Figure A.13: Kitchen dishwasher schedule (for moisture production) [42]
Realistic representation of residential ventilation in building performance simulation
107
==PAGE:114==
Figure A.14: Occupant schedule for the living room (4 people) [42]
Figure A.15: Occupant schedule (1 person) and moisture production schedule (due to
showering) [42]
Figure A.16: Occupant schedule for the childrens bedrooms [42]
108
Realistic representation of residential ventilation in building performance simulation
==PAGE:115==
Figure A.17: Occupant schedule for the master bedroom (2 people) [42]
Realistic representation of residential ventilation in building performance simulation
109
==PAGE:116==
Figure A.18: Calculations of the floor area and the required flow rates of the rooms
110
Realistic representation of residential ventilation in building performance simulation
==PAGE:117==
Figure A.19: Fan curve of the real fans (Exhausto) [45]
Figure A.20: Efficiency of the heat exchanger (Exhausto) [45]
Realistic representation of residential ventilation in building performance simulation
111
==PAGE:118==
Figure A.21: The advanced model of the basic unit in the real model
Figure A.22: The supervisory controller for the basic model
112
Realistic representation of residential ventilation in building performance simulation
==PAGE:119==
Figure A.23: The supervisory controller signal sent to each zone for the basic model
Figure A.24: The varying supply temperature of the mid­level model
Realistic representation of residential ventilation in building performance simulation
113
==PAGE:120==
Figure A.25: The varying supply temperature of the high­level model
114
Realistic representation of residential ventilation in building performance simulation
==PAGE:121==
Realistic representation of residential ventilation in building performance simulation
115
==PAGE:122==
Hello, here is some text without a meaning. This text should show what a printed text will look like
at this place. If you read this text, you will get no information. Really? Is there no information? Is
there a difference between this text and some nonsense like “Huardest gefburn”? Kjift – not at all!
A blind text like this gives you information about the selected font, how the letters are written and an
impression of the look. This text should contain all letters of the alphabet and it should be written in
of the original language. There is no need for special content, but the length of words should match
the language.
Technical
University of
Denmark
Brovej, Building 118
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.byg.dtu.dk
