==PAGE:1==
Danmarks Tekniske Universitet
Investigation of KIR-mediated
CD8+ T cell recognition
By
Simone Majken Stegenborg-Grathwohl
s174596
Department of Health Technology
Sine Reker Hadrup
Grigorii Nos
Mohammad Kadivar
Kamilla Kjærgaard Munk
January 22, 2023
==PAGE:2==
Abstract
The killer-cell immunoglobulin-like receptors (KIR) molecules are known to be important
receptors for antigen recognition and regulation of natural killer (NK) cells. Meanwhile, their
expression on a subset of CD8+ T cells has only recently been described and is yet to be fully
understood. These cells have been described to be increased in patients with autoimmune
diseases and cancer, indicating that they might possess immunoregulatory properties [1] [2].
In this study, the nature of the KIR-expressing CD8+ T cells is investigated by multimodal
single-cell sequencing analysis combining three different properties of the T cells. Transcrip-
tomics are investigated by RNA sequencing data while phylogeny is assessed by cell surface
markers. Lastly, the clonality of the T cells is described through sequencing of their T cell
receptor (TCR) repertoire. A standard Seurat-workflow is applied to the data, following an
expression and clonotype analysis. Through this examination a heterogeneity and oligoclon-
ality is revealed in the CD8+ T cell populations. Moreover, the KIR+ CD8+ T cells display
a more NK-like gene and surface marker expression. This leads to the conclusion that these
cells are more innate-like compared to the other CD8+ T cells.
Motivation
Receptors belonging to the KIR-family are well described in NK-cells. Recently, KIR has also
been described in a subset of CD8+ T cells but the exact functions are yet to be discovered.
Interestingly, previous studies have found that interactions between KIR and pMHC have a
profound influence on the CD8+ T cell expression profile indicating that an understanding of
KIR is relevant when designing targets for T cell mediated therapies [2]. This study centers
around describing these exact T cells through transcriptomics, phylogenetics and clonality.
Data from each category is combined and investigated through single cell multiomics. Recent
advances in single-cell isolation and barcoding technologies have enabled this type of analysis
and the hope is to gain a comprehensive understanding of the KIR+ CD8+ T cells. Thus,
the goal of this project is to investigate the role of KIRs antigen recognition in CD8+ T
cells.
i
==PAGE:3==
Acknowledgement
Foremost, I would like to thank my supervisors; Grigorii Nos, Kamilla Kjærgaard Munk,
Mohammad Kadivar and Sine Reker Hadrup for the opportunity of conducting this study.
A great thanks is given to Grigorii for his help with the analysis along with preparation
and guidance throughout the project. Many thanks are also given to Mohammad Kadivar
for his biological insights and help with the project and to Kamilla for her help with the
bioinformatical part of the project. Lastly, a huge thanks to Sunil and Sine for inputs and
interesting discussions. Additionally, I want to thank the rest of the colleagues from xTI for
being extremely kind, friendly, and for always offering a helping hand.
i
==PAGE:4==
Contents
Table of Contents
ii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Introduction to adaptive immunity and T cells . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.1.1
T cells . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.1.2
MHC class I recognition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.1.3
KIR-mediated recognition of MHC-I
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.2
KIR expression on T cells
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.3
Theory . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
1.3.1
Single Cell Sequencing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
1.3.2
Antibody capture . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
1.3.3
Cell Hashing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
1.3.4
Cell Ranger . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
1.4
The experiment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2
Methods
10
2.1
Introduction to data
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.2
Cell Ranger . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.3
General data cleaning and wrangling
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.4
Seurat package in R . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.4.1
HTO and antigen barcode demultiplexing
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.4.2
Evaluation of hashings, barcodes, VDJ and RNA libraries . . . . . . .
11
2.4.3
Quality control and filtering . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.4.4
Normalization and identification of highly variable features . . . . . .
12
2.4.5
Principal component analysis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.4.6
Clustering and differential expression analysis of biomarkers
. . . . .
13
2.5
Gene Enrichment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
2.6
Analysis of clonotypes
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3
Results
16
3.1
Demultiplexing
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
3.2
Quality control
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3.3
Principal components analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
3.4
Clustering . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
3.5
Differential expression analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
3.6
Clonotypes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
4
Discussion
29
4.1
Limitations of single-cell analysis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
4.2
Results obtained through the analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
4.3
Future investigation possibilities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
5
Conclusion
31
ii
==PAGE:5==
Investigation of KIR-mediated CD8+ T cell recognition
Contents
List of Figures
I
Nomenclature
II
References
III
6
Appendix A
VII
7
Appendix B
VIII
8
Appendix C
IX
9
Appendix D
X
10 Appendix E
XI
11 Appendix F
XII
12 Appendix G
XIII
13 Code availability
XIV
iii
==PAGE:6==
Investigation of KIR-mediated CD8+ T cell recognition
1
Introduction
1
Introduction
1.1
Introduction to adaptive immunity and T cells
The immune system is a complex network of organs, cells, proteins, and biological processes.
This system is kept in a constant homeostasis between tolerance and action towards self
proteins and pathogenic organisms.
A community of obligate pathogens, beneficial, and
commensal microbes must be tolerated and controlled in order to support normal organ and
tissue functions. Meanwhile, our environment contains a range of pathogenic microbes and
substances that can challenge the host immune system by a selection of pathogenic mecha-
nisms. A central part of the immune system’s ability to organize a response to an invading
pathogen, allergen or toxin is its ability to distinguish self from non-self. This response is
mobilized on the basis of the proteins originating from the potential pathogen which are
recognized by immune cells in different manners [3].
The mechanisms that allow for the recognition of microbial, allergenic or toxic structures
can be divided into two categories: i) Hard-wired responses that are encoded by genes in the
germ line and that recognize molecular patterns shared amongst microbes and toxins that
are not normally present in its host, and ii) Responses that are encoded by gene elements
that somatically rearrange to construct antigen-binding molecules with immense specificity
for individual unique structures.
The first set of responses make up the innate immune response. As the recognizing receptors
used by the innate system are being expressed widely on a great amount of cells, this system
has the ability to act rapidly after the invading pathogens are encountered. Based on this,
the innate system constitutes the initial response of the host [3].
The second set of responses produce the adaptive immune response. This system is composed
of a distinct class of cells with specificity for individual pathogens. This smaller class of cells
must proliferate after encountering their specific antigen to accomplish sufficient numbers of
cells to assemble an effective response against the pathogen. Therefore, the adaptive system
is generally active after the innate response as a part of the host defense.
The adaptive system produces long-lived cells that persists in the body following a response.
These cells have the ability to re-express effector functions rapidly after another encounter
with their specific antigen which provides the adaptive response with immune memory [4].
1.1.1
T cells
The cells within the adaptive immune system are lymphocytes derived from hematopoietic
stem cells from the bone marrow. Among these lymphocytes, the T cells are critical effectors
when it comes to detection and clearance of infected and cancerous cells while also maintain-
ing homeostasis. The T cells mature in the thymus, where they multiply and differentiate
into helper, regulatory, memory or cytotoxic T cells. Activation of these cells happens by
Page 1 of 31
==PAGE:7==
Investigation of KIR-mediated CD8+ T cell recognition
1
Introduction
the main receptor expressed on their surface; the T cell receptor (TCR).
This receptor binds antigens presented by major histocompatibility complexes (MHC), which
are expressed on antigen-presenting cells (APCs). This binding is dependent on several other
factors, such as the presence of co-receptors. The two co-receptors classifying T cells are CD4,
expressed on helper T cells and CD8 expressed on cytotoxic T cells. Apart from these, T
cells also express CD28, which by binding to B7.1/2 on APCs provide co-stimulatory signals
leading to the production of interleukin (IL)-2 and thereby differentiation of the naïve T cell
[5].
During maturation in the thymus, each T cell develops a unique TCR which allows for dif-
ferent phenotypes of the T cells and for the immune system to recognize a broad variety of
peptides. The TCR is composed of two chains, which in around 95% of the cases are from
the TCR α- and a β-locus with the remainder being from the γ- and δ-genes [6]. The chains
are produced through somatic rearrangement of multiple variable (V), diversity (D), joining
(J) and constant (C) gene segments. The D segment is only present in the β-chain locus.
The recombination process along with addition and deletion of nucleotides between spliced
segments can generate a TCR repertoire with a theoretically diversity around 2∗1019 unique
α-β-chain combinations [7].
The actual repertoire in humans is expected to be less due to selection pressure and the
limited number of T cells. The diversity is mainly maintained in the complementary deter-
mining regions (CDR) which form short hairpin loops in each chain. Three CDR-regions
are found within each chain with the CDR3 region being hypervariable. This loop is created
by random deletion and addition of template and non-template nucleotides at the junction
between the recombining V, (D) and J segments. The CDR1- and CDR2-regions are deter-
mined by the V gene and are significantly less diverse. In the TCR gene structure, these
regions are flanked by framework regions (FWR), which are expected to also have an effect
on the binding efficiency of the TCR to the peptide-MHC (pMHC) complex [8].
1.1.2
MHC class I recognition
The MHC is a large locus which produces molecules that mediate the interaction between
the antigen and TCR. MHC class I molecules are expressed on all nucleated cells and made
to present epitopes to CD8+ T cells. The MHC-I molecules come from polymorphic genes
which allows them to bind and present a wide range of epitopes [3].
The human MHC is called human leukocyte antigen (HLA) and the common class I genes
include HLA-A, -B and -C. This gene locus encodes a transmembrane α chain which is bound
to a β-2 microglobulin chain in the MHC-I molecule [9]. The diversity within these genes
is maintained by the maintenance of several alleles in the population which results in any
individual having two different or identical alleles at a specific HLA locus.
In the case that a cell expresses abnormal properties, such as during a viral-infection or
Page 2 of 31
==PAGE:8==
Investigation of KIR-mediated CD8+ T cell recognition
1
Introduction
cancer, the T cell with a binding TCR will react by making its target cell undergo cell
death. The MHC-I molecules are mainly recognized in this manner by a TCR but also have
the ability to interact with other receptors. These include the killer immunoglobulin-like
receptors (KIRs), which are active in both the innate and adaptive immune response [10]
[11].
1.1.3
KIR-mediated recognition of MHC-I
KIRs are members of the immunoglobulin (Ig) superfamily and their presence is most com-
monly described in natural killer (NK) cells, though a subset of T cells also express them.
Their nomenclature is based on the number of extracellular domains along with the length
of the cytoplasmic tail. The receptors can contain either two (KIR2D) or three (KIR3D)
extracellular domains while the cytoplasmic tail is either long (KIR2DL, KIR3DL) or short
(KIR2DS, KIR3DS).
KIRs can be inhibitory (iKIRs) when the cytoplasmic part of the receptor contains im-
munoreceptor tyrosine based inhibitory motifs (ITIMs). These domains become phosphory-
lated upon ligand-binding and recruit tyrosine phosphates which acts to inhibit the NK cell
response. The activating KIRs (aKIRs) lack these domains and instead contain a positively
charged amino acid residue in the transmembrane region. This residue allows for interaction
with DAP-12, an adaptor signaling molecule which contains an immunoreceptor tyrosine
based activating motif (ITAM) [12].
The KIR genes have been mapped on human chromosome 19q13.4 in the leukocyte receptor
complex. These genes form haplotypes with a high degree of diversity due to allelic poly-
morphism and differences in copy numbers [13]. The gene family consists of 13 genes and 2
pseudogenes. Overall, the haplotypes can be divided into two distinct regions; centomeric
(Cen) and telomeric (Tel) by the presence of a recombination hotspot. From these two re-
gions, two KIR haplotypes have been identified; A and B. The A haplotypes have a stable
gene content and are composed of Cen-A and Tel-A regions. The remaining KIR B haplo-
types carry combinations of Cen-A/Tel-B, Cen-B/Tel-A and Cen-B/Tel-B. An overview of
these can be seen in Figure 1
Page 3 of 31
==PAGE:9==
Investigation of KIR-mediated CD8+ T cell recognition
1
Introduction
Figure 1: Gene organization of KIR locus [11]
A) Most frequent Cen and Tel regions detected in Caucasians B) KIR gene order in A and B
haplotypes
As a result, the KIR A haplotypes predominantly vary on the basis of KIR allelic poly-
morphism while the KIR B haplotypes are distinguished by their gene content [11]. The
haplotypes are both maintained within all human populations, only varying in frequencies.
This suggests that they contain distinct and complementary functions and that they are
chosen under balancing selection [14].
1.2
KIR expression on T cells
As mentioned, KIR are known to regulate the activity of NK cells of the innate immune
system. These receptors have the ability to respond to MHC-I downregulation, which plays
an important role in the response to viral infections and tumor transformations. Besides
NK cells, a subset of CD8+ T cells also express KIR. The exact functional significance of
these KIRs are unclear and both activating and inhibitory functions have been reported [15]
[16]. However, the specificity and repertoire of KIR expressed by CD8+ T cells has been
found to be random and distinct compared with that expressed by NK cells within the same
individuals. This indicates the function of KIRs on CD8+ T cells are different from those
found in NK cells [17]. In healthy individuals KIR+ CD8+ T cells account for 1-38% of
all CD8+ T cells. Increased amounts have been found in subjects carrying autoimmune of
infectious diseases. This indicates that KIR might have an immunoregulatory role [1].
As KIR have been found to be both activating and inhibiting in CD8+ T cells, these can
both co-stimulate and dampen the TCR-mediated activation [18]. Moreover, it is shown
that ex vivo KIR+ CD8+ T cells were hyporesponsive to TCR triggering compared to KIR-
CD8+ T cells. On this background, a current hypothesis is that the KIR expression protects
from activation-induced cell death in a ligand-independent manner [13].
Page 4 of 31
==PAGE:10==
Investigation of KIR-mediated CD8+ T cell recognition
1
Introduction
1.3
Theory
To investigate the KIR+ CD8+ T cells, several techniques and methods are utilized. The
theory behind these will be evaluated in this section.
1.3.1
Single Cell Sequencing
The single-cell RNA (scRNA) sequencing is a method developed for detailed and compre-
hensive studies of individual cells. To sequence only a single cell at a time, they must first be
captured and sorted. Several approaches are possible here and in this project the fluorescence
activated cell sorting (FACS) is utilized. Here, the cells are labeled with a fluorescent dye
and sorted according to fluorescence intensity. This is carried out in a flow cytometer which
measures the fluorescence of the cells as they pass through a laser beam. The cells are sus-
pended in microdroplets with single cells by the use of an electric charge at high pressure [19].
The transcriptome of an individual cell is not stable as it reflects the functionality of the
cell as well the responses the cell is giving to stimuli. Therefore, profiling all coding and
non-coding cellular transcripts makes it possible to reveal the exact state of the cell in the
given environment.
The first step of the scRNA sequencing is to amplify the transcriptomes which is performed
by whole-transcriptome amplification (WTA). The exact WTA method can have a great
impact on the results of the sequencing as the amplification may distort the relative abun-
dance of transcripts in case of amplification bias [20]. The amplification is made by reverse
transcription producing cDNA, which is converted into amplifiable molecules. These step
constitutes the key limiting factors in detection and quantification of transcripts in the indi-
vidual cells. On average, around 5-25% of mRNA-molecules are converted into amplifiable
cDNA which also makes it a considerable source of errors [21]. However, some of these errors
may be avoided by linear amplification of the transcriptome. These issues will be evaluated
further in the discussion section.
In the 10x Genomic’s scRNA-seq technology, the single cells, reverse transcription reagents
and Gel Beads containing barcode oligonucleotides, are merged on a chip to create vesicles
called Gel Beads in emulsion (GEMs) [22]. Within the GEM, the single cell is lysed and
the reverse transcription occurs. The Gel Bead primers each contain (i) an Illumina TruSeq
Read 1 sequence, (ii) a 10x barcode, (iii) a unique molecular identifier (UMI), (iv) a template
switch oligo (TSO). Simultaneously, the Gel Bead primer captures cell surface antigens
feature barcodes conjugated to antibodies containing a capture sequence and feature barcode
sequence.
As a result, all the cDNA produced have the barcode which allows the reads to be mapped
back to the original cell of origin.
Following the conversion to cDNA, the cells are sequenced by next-generation sequencing
(NGS).The NGS sequencing is performed by Illumina sequencing [23].
Here chemically
modified nucleotides with a fluorescent tag attach to the cDNA fragments. Each tag contains
Page 5 of 31
==PAGE:11==
Investigation of KIR-mediated CD8+ T cell recognition
1
Introduction
a reversible terminator that blocks the incorporation into the next base. The strands are
then read by the fluorescent signals emitted upon synthesis of the complementary strand.
1.3.2
Antibody capture
To obtain an insight in the antibody capture of the cells, the surface proteins can be identified
by antibody-oligo conjugates called antibody-derived tags (ADTs). These are labeled directly
on the cell surface with a barcode.
Once these are attached to the cells, the cells are
encapsulated inside the GEM. Both ADT and mRNA cDNA are amplified and separated
based on size. The cDNA libraries are pooled together afterwards to sequence both proteomic
and transcriptomic data in one run.
1.3.3
Cell Hashing
Antibody-oligo conjugates are also used to enable sample multiplexing with a technique
called cell hashing [24]. The hashing antibodies are made to bind ubiquitously expressed cell
surface proteins, such as CD3 or CD8 on cytotoxic T cells. The oligonucleotide sequence
on the antibody contains a unique barcode which is specific to cells from each sample. This
sample-specific tag makes it possible to pool the sequencing libraries prepared from different
samples together. As the antibody tags are sequenced along with the transcriptome, the
origin can be determined for each analyzed cell.
1.3.4
Cell Ranger
Cell Ranger is the tool used to process the raw FASTQ files obtained from the single cell
sequencing. In this project the Cell Ranger multi pipeline is used, which enables simultaneous
examination of the T cell receptor V(D)J repertoire, the gene expression data (RNA) and
the cell surface proteins (ADT), as well as marking the different samples and their added
pMHCs [25]. An overview of the process is seen in Figure 2.
Figure 2: Cell Ranger pipeline for single cell sequencing
As the first step of the alignment, the sequences are trimmed from their TSOs and poly-A
tails to improve the sensitivity of the assay. The sequences are then aligned to references
by a splicing-aware alignment algorithm (STAR [26]). Cell Ranger then uses the aligned
transcripts to determine whether each sequence is exonic or intronic, prioritizing the exonic
loci. The intronic and exonic reads are aligned again to annotated transcripts to check their
Page 6 of 31
==PAGE:12==
Investigation of KIR-mediated CD8+ T cell recognition
1
Introduction
compatibility with the transcriptome.
Before moving on to UMI counts, Cell Ranger attempts to correct for sequencing errors in
the UMI sequences. The reads are placed into groups that share the same barcode, UMI
and gene annotation. Cell Ranger then groups the reads by barcode and UMI. The gene
annotation is chosen for each group by deciding which have most supporting reads and these
are kept for UMI counting. In the unfiltered feature-barcode matrix, each observed barcode,
UMI and gene combination is recorded as a UMI count along with their number of reads.
In the last step, Cell Ranger filters GEMs with low RNA contents. The algorithm for this
has two steps, i) identify the initial number of high RNA content cells, ii) use the RNA
profile of the barcode to determine if the GEM is empty or contains a cell. This results in a
filtered barcode-matrix which can be used for further analysis.
1.4
The experiment
The data is gained through an experiment using blood samples of two healthy individuals.
The CD8+ T cells are isolated from these samples and divided into 5 samples from each
individual. The donors are known by tagging the buffy coat of the blood with barcoded
hashing antibodies; BC351 or BC357. The buffy coat is the fraction of the blood sample
containing all lymphocytes and thereby all CD8+ T cells. An overview of the samples can
be seen in Table 1.
Table 1
Buffy coat
Sample names
pMHC barcode
Sorting
KIR staining
Notation
BC351
S1
BC1
Multimer+
TCR specific
BC351
S2
BC2
Multimer+
Multimer+
BC351
S3
BC3
Multimer+
Multimer+
BC351
S4
BC2 + BC3
KIR+ & Multimer+
KIR+_multimer+
BC351
S5
KIR+
Control
BC357
S6
BC6
Multimer+
TCR specific
BC357
S7
BC7
Multimer+
TCR specific
BC357
S8
BC4 + BC5
KIR+ & Multimer+
KIR+_multimer+
BC357
S9
BC9 to BC16
KIR+ & Multimer+
KIR+_multimer+
BC357
S10
KIR+
Control
The cells all have a sample name and pMHC barcode to which they are demultiplexed. The
sorting column defines the parameter on which the cells are sorted by FACS. The plots on
some of these are seen in Appendix A.1 Figure 19, depicting some of the tested peptides in
buffy coat 351. Here the interaction of the peptides are shown to not be TCR-mediated, as
the addition of a KIR-blocking antibody makes the cell lose their binding ability.
In this experiment, T cell recognition using DNA barcoded pMHCs and cell surface markers
are investigated along with transcriptomics and clonality of CD8+ T cells via sequencing
Page 7 of 31
==PAGE:13==
Investigation of KIR-mediated CD8+ T cell recognition
1
Introduction
of their TCR repertoire. This is accomplished by a method developed in our group where
we use multimers composed of peptide-MHC complexes conjugated to feature DNA barcode
oligonucleotides on a dextran backbone.
The peptides used to catch KIR and TCR are determined in a previous study [27]. An
overview of these are seen in Table 2. Not all peptides used are matches for the paired
MHC-molecule, making it possible to investigate KIR interaction with match and mismatch
HLAs. UV-ligands are used to test the relevance of the peptide in the binding to KIR. The
UV-ligands attach to the MHC molecule forcing it into a closed state.
Table 2
Samples
pMHC Barcode
HLA
Peptide
HLA-match
Sample 1
BC1
C0202
IACPIVMRY
YES
Sample 2
BC2
C0202
KARDHLAVL
YES
Sample 3
BC3
C0202
FTANNRVSF
YES
C0202
KARDHLAVL
YES
Sample 4
BC2 + BC3
C0202
FTANNRVSF
YES
Sample 5
No SC barcode
No pMHC staining
Sample 6
BC6
C0702
CRVLCCYVL
YES
Sample 7
BC7
C0702
FRCPRRFCF
YES
C0202
IACPIVMRY
NO
Sample 8
BC4 + BC5
C0501
FLDKGTYTL
NO
BC9
C0102
UV-ligand
NO
BC10
C0202
UV-ligand
NO
BC11
C0304
UV-ligand
NO
BC12
C0401
UV-ligand
NO
BC13
C0501
UV-ligand
NO
BC14
C0602
UV-ligand
YES
BC15
C0701
UV-ligand
NO
Sample 9
BC16
C0702
UV-ligand
YES
Sample 10
BC17
No pMHC staining
In the experiment, 16 pMHC complexes with a barcode attached are coupled to dextran
backbones. The samples were stained with multimers according to Table 1 and sorted as
seen in Appendix A.2 Figure 20. Four different conditions are made with these dextramers,
depending on the specificity of the pMHC and addition of a staining antibody. These con-
ditions are depicted below in Figure 3.
Page 8 of 31
==PAGE:14==
Investigation of KIR-mediated CD8+ T cell recognition
1
Introduction
Figure 3: Representation of the four conditions in the experiment
Here it is seen how the fluorescence-labeled pMHC complex is either specific for the TCR or
KIR receptor.
The surface antigens on the cells are also analyzed by the addition of an antibody library.
Here the TotalSeqTM-C reagent is used, which contains antibody-oligonucleotide conjugates
made to bind 130 cell surface antigens [28].
Page 9 of 31
==PAGE:15==
Investigation of KIR-mediated CD8+ T cell recognition
2
Methods
2
Methods
2.1
Introduction to data
The data provided from the study are raw FASTQ files containing all the sequence informa-
tion gained in the experiment. FASTQ format is a common format for storing a biological
sequence which contains a read title followed by the sequence and an associated quality
score per base [29].The experimental data consists of three libraries generated by the 10x
protocol, containing gene expression data (RNA), TCR data (V(D)J) and antibody-capture
data (HTO and pMHC barcodes)
2.2
Cell Ranger
The Cell Ranger software pipeline (v7.0.0, 10X Genomics) was used to process the raw
single-cell FASTQ files by mapping the reads to a set of references [25]. The TotalSeqTM-C
feature reference csv file with oligo sequences was passed to the CellRanger multi command
along with V(D)J and gene expression reference and libraries for analysis. These were all
given in a config csv file and the output was obtained as a feature-barcode matrix consisting
of three output files that define a sparse matrix. The filtered matrix was used as input for
the Seurat R software package (v4.1.3) to create the Seurat R object [30].
2.3
General data cleaning and wrangling
The filtered contig annotations csv file produced by the CellRanger software contains the
barcodes, sequence of FWRs and CDRs along with number of UMIs and V(D)J segments
per chain. As this data table contains redundant information, it needs to be cleaned before
further processing. To do so, a single α- and β- chain was chosen for each GEM by picking
the one with highest UMI count. Further, "TRA" or "TRB" were added to the column
names, depending of their origin from the α or β-chain.
Cells with identical VJ segments and CDR3 sequence were grouped into clonotypes, this
grouping was done per each chain separately. The final clonal ID for all the GEMs was given
in the format as TRB-clone_TRA-clone.
2.4
Seurat package in R
Seurat is an R package used for the quality control (QC), analysis and exploration of the
single-cell data. The filtered matrix from Cell Ranger was loaded by the Read10x function.
This function returns a UMI count matrix where each column represents a cell. The count
matrix was then used to create the Seurat-object used in the analysis. This object was used
as a repository for all the data and analysis-results. Two assays were created within the
object containing RNA-data and antibody-capture (ADT) data.
Page 10 of 31
==PAGE:16==
Investigation of KIR-mediated CD8+ T cell recognition
2
Methods
2.4.1
HTO and antigen barcode demultiplexing
HTO demultiplexing is the process by which the scRNA-seq reads are assigned to their sam-
ple of origin based on the sequence of their molecular tags. The process was performed on
the basis of the sample-hashing with hashtag oligo (HTO) antibodies attached to the GEMs
and the pMHC barcodes bound to the cell. A new assay, "HTO", was created to contain this
data and the data count-matrix was normalized using a centered log ratio transformation.
The Seurat-function HTODemux was then used on the sample-data. This function applies a
k-medoids clustering algorithm and calculates a negative distribution for each HTO. A nega-
tive binomial distribution is then fitted to the negative cluster and the GEMs were classified
as either positive or negative for the HTO. The GEMs that are positive for more than one
HTO were classified as multiplets and removed from the object later in the process. The de-
multiplexing of the hashings was evaluated by creation of a heatmap, showing the counts of
each cell within the 10 hashings. Heatmaps with HTO groups annotation were generated by
the DoHeatmap-function in Seurat by selecting the data columns in the features-parameter.
In order to compare samples in groups of different conditions, these categories are created
and assigned in the metadata along with the buffy coat of each GEM.
Further, as all pMHC barcodes were mixed together as well, these do also need to be demul-
tiplexed. This was performed in the same manner, by creating a new assay called "Barcodes"
containing the count matrix and metadata with the assigned pMHC barcodes to each GEM.
The GEMs that do not meet the threshold for any of the pMHC barcodes were assigned as
negative.
2.4.2
Evaluation of hashings, barcodes, VDJ and RNA libraries
To create an overview of the data prior to any analysis, a Venn diagram was created by the
ggVennDiagram package [31]. This diagram was made to show the five sets of data on each
cell; the antibody-capture, RNA, HTO, pMHC barcode counts and TCR libraries. This data
was extracted and put into a large list of lists for the ggVennDiagram-function to process.
The demultiplexing of the hashings and barcodes were validated by a barplot, created by the
ggplot2 R package [32]. This barplot shows the count of the barcodes within each hashing.
The bars were made to be coloured by each barcode, making it possible to visualize the
most frequent barcode within each hashing. Some of the doublets within the hashings were
assessed and assigned to one of the barcodes in cases where the demultiplexing threshold
needed adjustment.
2.4.3
Quality control and filtering
Mitochondrial transcripts are released into the cytoplasm of dying cells and can distort the
scRNA seq data. These transcripts were filtered by adding the percentage of genes beginning
with "MT" as metadata with the PercentageFeatureSet-function in Seurat. GEMs express-
ing more than 5% mitochondrial counts were removed by subsetting the Seurat-object with
Page 11 of 31
==PAGE:17==
Investigation of KIR-mediated CD8+ T cell recognition
2
Methods
this condition.
The number of unique genes detected in each GEM was also used for quality assessment.
Low-quality cells or empty droplets will most likely have very few unique genes while mul-
tiplets may exhibit unusual high counts. The number of unique genes and mitochondrial
counts in the data were visualized in scatter plots to obtain an initial insight on the quality.
For this project, cells that have unique expressed genes above 2500 or below 200 were re-
moved. The number of unique genes was automatically counted when loading the Seurat-
object. This left 4143 GEMs out of an initial amount of 6360.
As the last step, all non-coding genes were removed from the object as these do not provide
information on proteins specific for the cell. For this purpose, the Bioconductor BiomaRt
package (v2.52.0) was used [33]. This package contains the getBM-function which retrieves
the user-specified genes from a BioMart database. In this case, a dataset of human genes were
used from the Ensembl-website to find the genes from the Seurat-object and select for only
the protein-coding genes. Subsequently, it was seen that there were 18216 genes left, which
is reasonable considering that scientists have approximated the amount of protein-coding
genes in humans to be around 20000 [34].
2.4.4
Normalization and identification of highly variable features
Following the removal of all unwanted GEMs from the data, the object was normalized. This
was performed by normalizing each cell by library size and multiplying by a scaling factor
of 10000. Moreover, the natural logarithm was taken to obtain the resulting normalized
data. All of these steps are incorporated into the NormalizeData-function in Seurat with the
method-parameter set to "LogNormalize".
The highly variable genes were identified by the Seurat function FindVariableFeatures using
"vst" as the selection method and 2000 top variable features. This function identifies outlier-
genes by calculation of mean and variance of the feature values along with standardization of
these values. The variable genes were plotted in a scatterplot highlighting the top 10 genes
with the highest cell-to-cell variation.
2.4.5
Principal component analysis
Prior to dimensional reduction of the dataset, mean centering and scaling was applied to the
dataset. This scaling was performed to shift the expression of each GEM in order to give all
genes equal weight in the PCA. This obstructs the highly expressed genes from dominating
in the analysis. In Seurat, the ScaleData-function performs the scaling and centering and
all genes were chosen in the feature-parameter.
The PCA was then performed to reduce the dimensionality of the dataset. For this purpose,
the RunPCA function was used on the scaled data and by default parameters.
Page 12 of 31
==PAGE:18==
Investigation of KIR-mediated CD8+ T cell recognition
2
Methods
An elbow plot was then created by the ElbowPlot-function, to identify how much the princi-
pal components account for the variation in the data and how many to include in downstream
analysis. The elbow plot ranks the principal components based on the percentage of variance
explained and the "elbow" marks the threshold for identifying the majority of the variation.
2.4.6
Clustering and differential expression analysis of biomarkers
The cells were clustered on the basis of the chosen principal components. To overcome the
extensive amount of noise in any single feature in scRNA-seq sequencing data, the Seurat
package clusters the GEMs based on their PCA scores. Here each principal component es-
sentially represents a "metafeature", that unites information across a correlated feature set.
The top principal components thereby represent a robust compression of the dataset. Seurat
uses a k-nearest neighbor-algorithm (KNN) based on euclidean distances in the PCA space
when preparing the data for clustering. The chosen amount of principal components were
used as input and the clusters were identified by shared nearest neighbor (SNN). The KNN
and SNN were both executed by the FindNeighbors-function in Seurat by giving the Seurat
object and the chosen amount of principal components as input.
The final clustering was accomplished by the Louvain-algorithm, which is an unsupervised
algorithm that iteratively groups the GEMs based on shared connections in the SNN space,
until the optimal modularity is found. A resolution-parameter was given in this step, which
affects the amount of clusters being made. The resolution was tested for different values and
decided to be set at 0.5. This parameter was given to the FindClusters-function in Seurat
which assigned all cells to a cluster.
Next, a dimensional reduction was performed to create a uniform manifold approximation
and projection (UMAP) of the clusters.
Cells that were within the determined clusters
should co-localize in these plots and the same chosen principal components were again used
as input. The plot was made by the DimPlot-function when setting the reduction parameter
to "umap".
To investigate the data further, the UMAPs were made to highlight different aspects besides
the clusters, such as the buffy-coat of the cells and the condition assigned. This was carried
out by the group.by-parameter which can be used to color the cells by different metadata.
After creation of these UMAPs, it was decided to only analyze a single buffy coat at a
time, since the variability was heavily affected by the donor. Meanwhile, the fact that both
patients were pulled into the same 10x run, cannot justify using any batch-effect correction
method.
As indicated in Table 2 the pMHCs used in buffy coat 351 do not include any MHC-
mismatches, which was optimal for the coming analysis.
Furthermore, the cells were inspected by using differential expression to find marker-genes
within each condition in the experiment. A differential expression analysis takes normalized
read count data and performs statistical analysis on these to uncover quantitative changes
Page 13 of 31
==PAGE:19==
Investigation of KIR-mediated CD8+ T cell recognition
2
Methods
in expression levels between the chosen groups or clusters. The statistical testing was used
to determine whether an observed difference in read counts is significant for a given gene.
This was done by deciding whether the difference is greater than expected or due to natural
random variation.
A threshold was set for detection of the features at a minimum 25% which is the default.
This was set as a parameter in the FindMarkers-function.
Gene markers were found within each condition by comparison to one or several other condi-
tions. Gene and surface antigen markers were found within buffy coat 351 by comparing the
KIR and multimer positive group against the TCR specific, the multimer positive against
KIR and multimer positive and lastly the TCR specific against the KIR, multimer and con-
trol groups. In this setup, it is possible to detect differences between all the pMHC barcodes.
The most significant genes within the conditions were visualized in heatmaps to get an
overview of the features and antibodies. These heatmaps were created by the Complex-
Heatmap R package [35].
The marker genes of the KIR positive group were also visualized in feature plots to examine
in which cluster they were localized. This was performed by the FeaturePlot-function in
Seurat. Here the gene names were added to the features-parameter to look into few, specific
genes. To examine which condition matched with the appearance of these genes, a UMAP
of only buffy coat 351 was made with each condition coloured.
2.5
Gene Enrichment
The gene set enrichment analysis was performed using the gprofiler2 package (v0.2.1). To
examine the difference between the KIR and multimer positive group and the TCR specific
group the genes from this comparison with buffy coat 351 was used.
The significant up-regulated marker genes within the comparison were subsetted by filtering
on the basis of a p-value below 0.05 and a positive log fold-value.
The gost-function was then used to perform the functional enrichment of the genes. The
query was set to be a list of the up-regulated genes and the sources were set to include data
from Gene Ontology, KEGG, Reactome and Human Protein Atlas. The results from this
function were visualized by the related gostplot function. A table containing the information
on the most significant pathways is made along with the plot.
2.6
Analysis of clonotypes
The TCR repertoire is central to each individual’s ability to recognize a range of pathogens
and thereby initiate an adaptive immune response. Once a TCR has recognized its peptide,
the T cell is activated and driven to clonally expand. Due to the low probability of somatic
recombination producing an exact V(D)J rearrangement more than once, the TCR sequence
can be used as unique identifiers of T cell clones.
Page 14 of 31
==PAGE:20==
Investigation of KIR-mediated CD8+ T cell recognition
2
Methods
In the V(D)J data of the Seurat-object, clonotypes were assigned to each cell. Out of 2665
cells, there are 1567 cells with TCR data for the α-chain and 2502 cells with β-chain data.
This means that 935 cells are lost when both α- and β-chain are required for the clonotypes.
This issue was looked into by the creation of a Sankey diagram, which illustrates the flow
of information between clones with only β-chain information and clones with information
for both chains. The Sankey plots were created in a Python script by importing the V(D)J
dataframe. Two arrays were created with the combined clonotypes and β-chain clones and
the plot was made using the Plotly library [36].
With this plot in mind, only the β-chain clones were used for further analysis. The most
frequent clonotypes observed were also visualized in a UMAP to investigate if these cluster
together and in which part of the UMAP they are attributed.
The distribution of clonotypes were further analyzed by creating a plot showing the sample-
hashings on the y-axis and clonotypes on the x-axis. The count of each clonotype within
the buffy coats are visualized by the size of the dot at each point. This plot was created
with the geom_count function in the ggplot2 package by setting the size and color in the
aesthetic-parameter to the count of each clonotype.
The diversity of clones is also assessed by the creation of an abundance curve for each buffy
coat. For this purpose the estimateAbundance-function from the Alakazam-package is used
[37]. This function is used to report observed abundances and a complete clonal abundance
distribution with confidence intervals derived via bootstrapping.
A final overview of the top 10 most frequent clones within each buffy coat was made by the
generation of a stacked bar plot. In this plot, the frequency of the top 10 clones are shown
in three bar plots coloured by condition, barcode and hashing assigned. This plots makes
it possible to inspect each clonotype and compare the most frequent clones to each other.
These were made in ggplot2 by the geom_bar function and stacked on top of each other by
using plot_grid from the cowplot package [38].
Page 15 of 31
==PAGE:21==
Investigation of KIR-mediated CD8+ T cell recognition
3
Results
3
Results
The Seurat R package is a popular pipeline for analysis of scRNA seq data. This workflow
consists of loading the UMI count data, performing normalization, identifying variable genes,
scaling the data, finding cell neighbors and defining clusters. An overview of the Seurat-
process can be seen in Figure 4. Here the variable parameters at each step are listed below.
Figure 4: Seurat pipeline
Main steps of the Seurat analysis pipeline and the parameters considered at each step.
3.1
Demultiplexing
Following the loading and initial demultiplexing of the hashings, it is seen that there are
4655 annotated singlets, 5 negatives and 1700 multiplets in the data. This is visualized in a
violin plot, to compare the amount of UMIs in each category seen in Appendix B.1 Figure
21. The enrichment within each hashing is visualized in a ridge plot in Appendix B.2 Figure
22, showing the expression level of the hashings.
Here we see a nice division between the sample numbers (S1-10), which indicates correct de-
multiplexing. This division is further shown in a heatmap in Figure 5, visualizing expression
within each hashing.
Page 16 of 31
==PAGE:22==
Investigation of KIR-mediated CD8+ T cell recognition
3
Results
Figure 5: Heatmap of hashings and their expression level
Sample names depicted on the y-axis and GEMS on the x-axis. The sample groups are indicated
on the top bar along with the group of multiplets, that are not assigned to any of the sample
numbers.
From figure 5 it is also seen how the amount of GEMs from the second individual (S6-S10)
is much larger as more cells were obtained here. By assigning each hashing to its buffycoat,
we see that there are 945 GEMs within buffycoat 351 and 3710 GEMs within buffycoat 357.
The next demultiplexing is made with regards to the barcodes (BCs). Here the barcode
matrix is extracted and we look at the counts within each barcode.
These are seen in
Table 3.
Table 3: Barcode counts
BC1
BC2
BC3
BC4
BC5
BC6
BC7
BC9
BC10
BC11
BC12
BC13
BC14
BC15
BC16
14094
40028
32213
81937
96714
6250
89506
42
419
355
277
134
6483
98
13
The pMHC barcodes with low counts are excluded from the demultiplexing to avoid zero-
clusters. On this background, BC1, BC2, BC3, BC4, BC5, BC6, BC7 and BC14 are kept
for the demultiplexing.
Page 17 of 31
==PAGE:23==
Investigation of KIR-mediated CD8+ T cell recognition
3
Results
The classification of GEMS according to pMHC specificity is visualized by the creation of a
barplot depicting the number of pMHC barcodes within each hashing as seen in Figure 6.
Figure 6: Barplot of pMHC barcode counts within each sample
The plot depicts the count of MHC barcodes found within all the samplenumbers. Each pMHC
barcode is depicted with a color and a label is added to the bars to help distinguish them. GEMs
that are demultiplexed to a hashing but not a pMHC barcode are labelled as negative.
Here we see that the majority group of barcodes within each hashing is demultiplexed to the
correct one according to the experiment. Furthermore, it is noted that there is a big amount
of negatives found within S6 and that BC14 is ultimately the most frequently found barcode
within S9, which contains BC9 to BC16.
Prior to moving on with the analysis, a final overview of the data is made in the form of a
Venn diagram, seen in Figure 7.
Page 18 of 31
==PAGE:24==
Investigation of KIR-mediated CD8+ T cell recognition
3
Results
Figure 7: Venn diagram of data libraries
A Venn diagram illustrating the percentage of GEMs with information in each of the five data
libraries.
This diagram shows the distribution of data within the five different libraries. Here it is
visible that most data is not caught in the V(D)J library for the TCR modeling and that
some of this also is missing pMHC data from the barcode matrix.
3.2
Quality control
During quality control, the percent of mitochondrial transcripts, overall UMI counts and
number of expressed genes are considered. Two plots are created in order to look into these
parameters, seen in Figure 8. A scatterplot was made to check how many molecules have
high mitochondrial gene counts, in which we see that the majority of the RNA transcript
counts are associated with a mitochondrial gene count below 5%, which will later be used
as a threshold for filtering. Moreover, the amount of molecules is compared to the number
of genes. A good quality dataset should follow the trendline, indicating a linear relationship
between the amount of RNA transcripts and genes. The data used is plotted nicely around
the trendline and no great outliers are seen. A common error could have been that only few
genes which were highly transcribed, had been caught in the experiment.
Page 19 of 31
==PAGE:25==
Investigation of KIR-mediated CD8+ T cell recognition
3
Results
Figure 8: Scatterplot of quality control metrics
Scatter plot with each dot representing a GEM. The amount of transcripts are found on the x-axis
while the y-axis depict the percentage of mitochondrial genes and number of unique genes.
In the next step, multiplets and low-quality cells are filtered from the Seurat-object, which
leaves us with 4143 GEMs.
After normalization and removal of non-protein-coding genes, the genes with highest cell-
to-cell variation are identified. In Table 4 we see the top 10 genes within this category.
Among these, we notice that several are known to be involved in cytotoxic responses, which
correlates with the cells being CD8+ T cells.
Table 4: Highly variable features with descriptions of each [39]
Gene
Name
Protein function
CCL4
C-C motif chemokine ligand 4
Monokine with inflammatory and chemokinetic properties. Binds to CCR5.
CCL4L2
C-C motif chemokine ligand 4 like 2
Chemokine that induces chemotaxis of cells expressing CCR5 or CCR1
XCL2
X-C motif chemokine ligand 2
Chemotactic activity for lymphocytes but not for monocytes or neutrophils.
GNLY
Granulysin
Antimicrobial protein that kills intracellular pathogens
JUN
Jun proto-oncogene, AP-1 transcription factor subunit
Transcription factor that recognizes and binds to the AP-1 consensus motif.
Together with FOSB, plays a role in activation-induced cell death of T cells by binding to the AP-1 promoter site
XCL1
X-C motif chemokine ligand 1
Chemotactic activity for lymphocytes but not for monocytes or neutrophils
TNF
Tumor necrosis factor
Cytokine that binds to TNFRSF1A/TNFR1 and TNFRSF1B/TNFBR.
It is mainly secreted by macrophages and can induce cell death of certain tumor cell lines.
FOS
Fos proto-oncogene, AP-1 transcription factor subunit
Nuclear phosphoprotein which forms a tight but non-covalently linked complex with the JUN/AP-1 transcription factor.
CCL3
C-C motif chemokine ligand 3
Monokine with inflammatory and chemokinetic properties
S100A9
S100 calcium binding protein A9
S100A9 is a calcium- and zinc-binding protein which plays a prominent role in the regulation of inflammatory processes and immune response
The variable features are also shown in a scatterplot in Appendix C.1 Figure 23. Here we
see the genes plotted with their variance as a function of the average expression value. On
this plot the top 10 variable genes are clear outliers in amount of variance.
Page 20 of 31
==PAGE:26==
Investigation of KIR-mediated CD8+ T cell recognition
3
Results
3.3
Principal components analysis
Prior to performing the PCA, the data is scaled. The variable features described above are
used as input to create the analysis. The cells and features that define the PCA are visual-
ized in different manners to decide which principal components to include for downstream
analysis. Among these are heatmaps that visualize the cells and features ordered according
to their PCA scores, which can be seen in Appendix D.1 Figure 24. Ultimately, the amount
of principal components to be the primary sources of variance are decided from an elbow
plot, seen in Figure 9.
Figure 9: Elbow plot of principle components
Elbow plot showing the standard deviation as a function of the number of principal components.
This is a heuristic method which ranks the principal components based on the percentage
of variance explained. Based on these results, 15 principal components are chosen to be
considered for the rest of the analysis as the elbow plot flattens out around this point.
3.4
Clustering
When performing the clustering of the cells, a resolution is chosen. This value is chosen
by calculating clusters from the first 15 principal components with a range of different
resolutions and visualizing. A resolution of 0.5 is chosen based on the number of groups
forming at this value. These can be seen in Figure 10
Page 21 of 31
==PAGE:27==
Investigation of KIR-mediated CD8+ T cell recognition
3
Results
Figure 10: UMAP
Dimension reduction for visualization of the clusters using a resolution of 0.5.
Since all cells were sorted to be CD8 and multimer positives, the dataset has relatively low
transcriptional diversity, making a cell state identification particularly challenging.
To identify if any of the clusters are related to a specific individual, the UMAPs were also
made in relation to the subjects as seen in Appendix E.1 Figure 25. Here we see that the
majority of the clusters are found within the second buffy coat 357, coming from the subject
where the most cells were obtained. Moreover, a clear division is seen between the two buffy
coats, meaning that many of the differences in the data might be subject-specific and TCR
clonotypes are affecting the clustering. In order to obtain a meaningful comparison, a subset
is made with data from buffy coat 351 for the next part of the analysis.
3.5
Differential expression analysis
To explore the marker genes and surface molecules within buffy coat 351, three different
comparisons are made, i) KIR and multimer positive vs TCR specific, ii) Multimer positive
vs KIR and multimer positive and iii) TCR specific vs KIR and multimer positive, multimer
positive and control group. Each of these are highlighted in a heatmap depicting the top 5
significant genes and surface markers within the experiment conditions. Moreover, a couple
of extra interesting and significant genes are included to gain insight on these.
In Figure 11 the significant genes found by the described comparisons are shown. Here it is
noted that both KIR2DL1 and KIR3DL1 are expressed, especially in the KIR and multimer
positive group. As this group is sorted on KIR+ in the initial experiment, it is expected
that some of the KIR genes will be more expressed here.
B2M, β-2 microglobulin, and
Page 22 of 31
==PAGE:28==
Investigation of KIR-mediated CD8+ T cell recognition
3
Results
HLA-C is also seen expressed in all conditions, indicating activation of the cells. Moreover,
the KLRC2-gene, killer cell lectin like receptor C2, is seen to be expressed in the KIR and
multimer positive section, which is normally known to be produced by NK-cells. The GNLY,
granulysin, gene is also apparent which also points to a more innate-like nature in the KIR+
cells as this gene is most commonly expressed in innate cells as a response to bacteria.
Lastly, the TCF7 gene is noticed.
This gene is expressed in cells that are still able to
proliferate, indicating that these cells might be progenitors of exhausted T cells [39].
Figure 11: Differential expression analysis of marker genes
Differentially expressed genes found by comparison of three conditions. Significant genes are
highlighted within each.
The significantly expressed genes in the first comparison between KIR and multimer positive
and TCR specific T cells are assessed in a gene enrichment analysis as well. Some of the
most up-regulated pathways are in the table in Appendix F.1 Figure 26. Here there are
further indications on cytotoxicity and NK-like pathways.
A similar differential expression analysis is made for the surface markers on the cells, shown
in Figure 12. In this plot, the KIR2DL1 is also present, here in both the KIR and multimer
positive group and the multimer positives. This correlates with the multimer positive group
also containing a part of the KIR+ CD8+ T cells. The CD45RO antibody is a marker for
memory on T cells, which is found in the multimer positive group. This leads to a suspicion
that the multimer positive cells are possibly late differentiated T cells, while the TCR specific
cells are more memory-like as they have less capacity of proliferation, indicated by the TCF7
gene. Lastly the CD28 co-receptor is seen in the TCR specific group, supporting that these
cells bind through their TCR.
Page 23 of 31
==PAGE:29==
Investigation of KIR-mediated CD8+ T cell recognition
3
Results
Figure 12: Differential expression analysis of surface markers
Differentially expressed surface antibodies found by comparison of three conditions. Significant
antibodies are highlighted within each.
As a final investigation of the surface antigens within the KIR and multimer positive group,
the antibodies are plotted in a UMAP for buffy coat 351.
Along with these plots, the
different conditions in the buffy coat are highlighted to inspect the presence of certain marker
antibodies in distinct areas. This is seen in Figure 13.
Figure 13: Differential expression analysis of surface markers
On the left: UMAP of BF351 with highlighted conditions, on the right: Surface antibodies of the
KIR and multimer positive group highlighted in UMAPs.
We see that the surface markers are scattered around the UMAP and do not center around
the KIR and multimer positive group. This points to a heterogeneous nature of the KIR+
CD8+ T cells as the cells within this group express distinct surface markers.
Page 24 of 31
==PAGE:30==
Investigation of KIR-mediated CD8+ T cell recognition
3
Results
3.6
Clonotypes
A Sankey diagram is made to investigate the need for inclusion of both α- and β-chain when
determining the clonotypes of the CD8+ T cells. This can be seen in Figure 14. In the
diagram, it can be seen that each β-chain pairs with either one specific α-chain or does not
have a detected α-chain pair. This indicates that the information achieved by the β-chain
clones is sufficient for detecting clonotypes and on this background only the β-chain clones
are considered in this analysis.
Figure 14: Sankey diagram of β−chain clones vs β- and α-chain clones
Sankey diagram depicting the presence of information of the TCR α- and β-chain pr TCR
β-chain.
The clonotypes produced in the experiment are looked further into by their placement on a
UMAP (Appendix G.1 Figure 27) and sizes within the different hashings as seen below in
Figure 15.
Page 25 of 31
==PAGE:31==
Investigation of KIR-mediated CD8+ T cell recognition
3
Results
Figure 15: Clonotype plots of top 10 biggest clones within each buffy coat.
Most frequent clonotypes within each buffy coat shown with dot-sizes and colour representing the
number of each clonotype within the buffy coat
Again, it is clear to see the differences in the amount of cells from each buffy-coat. The
low number of GEMs in buffy coat 351 makes the data look unstable thus the focus for this
analysis is on buffy coat 357. In sample 7, which is TCR-specific, it is seen that a distinct
group of clones are made which is not seen in the KIR groups. The KIR-groups are repre-
sented by a more oligoclonal nature, which is also seen in sample 8. By looking at Table 2
it is seen that the HLAs used in sample 8 do not match the host, which might be the cause
of the oligoclonality here.
To investigate whether the condition-specific responses are oligoclonal, two diversity curves
are created, depicting the percentage of repertoire for each clone as a function of the size of
the clones. The curves can be seen in Figure 16.
Figure 16: Abundance curve of clones within each subject
The x-axis goes from largest to smallest clone while the y-axis is the percentage of repertoire seen
for each clone. Buffy coat 351 is on the left and buffy coat 357 is on the right.
When looking at the plots, there seems to be no significant differences in repertoire diversity
between the samples. For the most common clonotype, the repertoire is less diverse while
Page 26 of 31
==PAGE:32==
Investigation of KIR-mediated CD8+ T cell recognition
3
Results
getting more diverse in the smaller clonotypes. Highlighted around each curve is a 95% con-
fidence interval, indicating more uncertainty in the first buffy coat, due to the lower amount
of data within this buffy coat.
As a final comparison of the top 10 most frequently seen clonotypes, the conditions, pMHC
barcodes and hashings are depicted in a stacked barplot made for each of the buffy-coats.
These are shown in Figure 17 and 18.
Figure 17: Stacked barplot of clones within barcode 351
Figure 18: Stacked barplot of clones within barcode 357
Number of clones within each clonotype depicted within three measures; experiment condition,
pMHC barcode and sample-hashing.
Page 27 of 31
==PAGE:33==
Investigation of KIR-mediated CD8+ T cell recognition
3
Results
These plots enable more detailed inspection of each clonotype. E.g. the first clonotype, which
is all KIR-mediated, is found in S3 with pMHC BC3 which correlates with the experiment-
setup. It is seen that most clonotypes tend to prefer a specific condition with exception of a
few. In S1 and S6, a TCR-specific clonotype is found which does not proliferate as much as
the KIR-mediated. This supports the hypothesis that the more specific TCR-pMHC binding
results in more specific clonality while the less specific KIR-pMHC binding results in a more
diverse clonality. Both the KIR- and TCR-binding clones are still seen to be oligoclonal .
From these results, the recognition of each peptide is updated and added to Table 2 as seen
below in Table 5.
Table 5
Samples
pMHC Barcode
HLA
Peptide
HLA-match
Recognition
Sample 1
BC1
C0202
IACPIVMRY
YES
YES
Sample 2
BC2
C0202
KARDHLAVL
YES
YES
Sample 3
BC3
C0202
FTANNRVSF
YES
YES
C0202
KARDHLAVL
YES
YES
Sample 4
BC2 + BC3
C0202
FTANNRVSF
YES
YES
Sample 5
No SC barcode
No pMHC staining
Sample 6
BC6
C0702
CRVLCCYVL
YES
YES
Sample 7
BC7
C0702
FRCPRRFCF
YES
YES
C0202
IACPIVMRY
NO
YES
Sample 8
BC4 + BC5
C0501
FLDKGTYTL
NO
YES
BC9
C0102
UV-ligand
NO
NO
BC10
C0202
UV-ligand
NO
NO
BC11
C0304
UV-ligand
NO
NO
BC12
C0401
UV-ligand
NO
NO
BC13
C0501
UV-ligand
NO
NO
BC14
C0602
UV-ligand
YES
YES
BC15
C0701
UV-ligand
NO
NO
Sample 9
BC16
C0702
UV-ligand
YES
NO
Sample 10
BC17
No pMHC staining
During the data analysis, it was found that the mismatch HLAs used in sample 8 were able
to bind oligoclonally. In the pooled sample 9 a clear preference was seen for the BC14 HLA
match, which is therefore noted as a recognition while BC16 is not. These findings will be
evaluated further in the coming sections.
Page 28 of 31
==PAGE:34==
Investigation of KIR-mediated CD8+ T cell recognition
4
Discussion
4
Discussion
In this project, a pipeline for analysis of transcriptomics, antibody-capture and TCR-clonality
is described. In this section, the applied methods will be discussed and compared. Moreover,
further investigation opportunities will be discussed.
4.1
Limitations of single-cell analysis
A central problem when analyzing single cell transcriptional data is that the expression of
a gene may be altered by random fluctuations. This should be taken into account in down-
stream analysis of gene expressions and biological interpretations. In this project, a standard
differential expression test is performed to seek out marker genes within the different clusters
and conditions. If one wished to investigate these further, several other models containing
more parameters could be looked into [40].
Further, the transcriptomics of single cell sequencing also relies on transverse transcription
of RNA to cDNA and subsequent amplification by qPCR which are processes that are prone
to losses or biases. In the amplification step these biases will be exaggerated as the initial
amount of RNA found in each cell is small. This is partly overcome by the usage of UMIs
to detect original cDNA molecules.
4.2
Results obtained through the analysis
The overall workflow utilized has shown to be feasible and descriptive for analyzing the spe-
cific data libraries.
As seen when demultiplexing, the hashing antibodies have effectively tagged the samples and
the overall correct pMHC barcodes are also found in each sample. The amount of negatives
seen in Figure 6 refers to GEMs without any attached pMHC barcode, indicating that not
all CD8+ T cells have bound an pMHC effectively. This may be due to the peptides chosen
for the lab experiment not binding the whole range of KIR or TCR expressed by the T cells.
A great share of the GEMs with the sample 6 hashings are negatives, and as this pMHC is
made to be TCR-specific, the peptides might not bind these TCRs very effectively.
In sample 9, a great share of the GEMs have bound pMHC barcode 14, indicating that KIR
binds specifically to this HLA-match peptide. These results point to KIR on the host CD8+
T cells also being dependent on the MHC molecule. On the other hand, the peptide de-
pendencies were tested in sample 8 by inclusion of a peptide-match with a MHC mismatch.
Here, the binding still occurs, indicating that a matching peptide is also relevant in the
KIR-pMHC binding.
Prior to analysis, the cells are filtered and the quality of the dataset is checked. This filtering
removes GEMs with too many mitochondrial gene counts, as these are considered to be of low
quality. At this step it could also be a possibility to remove ribosomal genes as non-protein
coding genes are not of interest. These genes did not appear as significant markers or as
Page 29 of 31
==PAGE:35==
Investigation of KIR-mediated CD8+ T cell recognition
4
Discussion
highly variable features and on this background the genes were not removed from the dataset.
As another quality check the pMHC barcodes are assessed. Doublets are checked in each
sample and some of the doublets from sample 9 are investigated by checking the counts of
each pMHC barcode. In cases where the distribution of doublets are clearly coming from one
pMHC barcode, these are forced to be assigned the correct pMHC barcode. In the Seurat-
pipeline the pMHC barcodes are clustered, fitted to a distribution and the 0.99 quantile of
this distribution is then used as a general threshold. For a more optimal outcome, some of
these doublet-thresholds were investigated and altered.
The GEMs are clustered according to the standard Seurat-pipeline using the Louvain cluster-
ing algorithm. This clustering is highly affected by the subject from which the cells originate,
which is seen when coloring the cells according to the buffy coat. The great amount of cells
coming from one individual could be skewing the data, and optimally more subjects with
a similar number of isolated GEMs would be used. The differences between the two indi-
viduals might be found as significant when testing for gene and antibody expressions and
accordingly the differential expression analysis is made on data coming from only buffy coat
351.
In the differential expression and gene enrichment analysis, several genes and antibodies
from more innate or NK-like cells were seen in the KIR-containing group. This points to the
KIR-cells having a more NK-cell like nature which corresponds with KIR being commonly
found on NK-cells.
As a result from the clonotype analysis, only the β-chain in the TCR is used to assign each
clonotype. This may be an overall generalization, but the amount of data saved by doing
so is estimated to be of greater impact. As the α-chain of the TCR has a lower expression
level, this chain is naturally harder to obtain reliable sequences for. By looking into the
most frequent clonotypes it is seen that neither the KIR or TCR expressing populations are
monoclonal but polyclonal as the same clone as bound in several conditions. Furthermore, it
is seen that the biggest clones in the TCR-specific condition are not present in the conditions
with KIR, suggesting that the TCR-specific clones are not shared with the KIR-specific
clones.
4.3
Future investigation possibilities
The project described here is a pilot project and many things can be more thoroughly inves-
tigated. Several interesting genes were shown to be significantly expressed when performing
a differential expression analysis. Along with these, it could be relevant to do similar tests
in cancer patients to compare the KIR+ expression on CD8+ T cells and assess connections.
Page 30 of 31
==PAGE:36==
Investigation of KIR-mediated CD8+ T cell recognition
5
Conclusion
5
Conclusion
Single-cell sequencing and multiomics is a set of attached analysis methods. These are evolv-
ing fast due to the many advancements within next generation sequencing. The potential
within this field is great as several cell properties can be described and compared simulta-
neously and thereby reveal new aspects and connections.
In this project, a pipeline for analyzing data describing the transcriptome, surface antigens
and TCR library is made, leading from an initial count matrix to a cluster assignment and
further analysis.
Based on the conducted analysis it is concluded that the binding of the KIRs and TCRs iso-
lated is oligoclonal. This conclusion is based on the findings in the clonotype analysis, which
showed indications on one dominant clone followed by several sub clones in both groups. The
diversity within the clonotypes was low which made it more difficult to determine differences
between the KIR and TCR binding cells.
The binding of KIR was further investigated by the inclusion of both match and mismatch
MHCs. The discoveries here pointed to both MHC and the peptide having an impact on
the KIR binding independently of each other. The ability to recognize a mismatch HLA is
interesting to note and might be relevant in graft versus host contexts. Here a HLA-match
is used to overcome the reaction of the donated T cells through their TCR but disease cases
are still seen often. Several factors can cause the reaction of the immune cells, and one of
these might be through KIR.
Furthermore, it is concluded that the KIR+ CD8+ T cell population is heterogeneous due
to its different properties within gene and surface antibody repertoires. Through analysis
of the antibody and gene markers an innate-like pattern was seen in the KIR containing
groups, with NK-cell markers appearing. This indicates a more NK-like nature of the KIR+
CD8+ T cells.
Page 31 of 31
==PAGE:37==
Investigation of KIR-mediated CD8+ T cell recognition
List of Figures
List of Figures
1
Gene organization of KIR locus [11] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2
Cell Ranger pipeline for single cell sequencing
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
3
Representation of the four conditions in the experiment . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
4
Seurat pipeline
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
5
Heatmap of hashings and their expression level . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
6
Barplot of pMHC barcode counts within each sample . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
7
Venn diagram of data libraries . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
8
Scatterplot of quality control metrics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
9
Elbow plot of principle components . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
10
UMAP . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
11
Differential expression analysis of marker genes
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
12
Differential expression analysis of surface markers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
13
Differential expression analysis of surface markers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
14
Sankey diagram of β−chain clones vs β- and α-chain clones
. . . . . . . . .
25
15
Clonotype plots of top 10 biggest clones within each buffy coat.
. . . . . . .
26
16
Abundance curve of clones within each subject . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
17
Stacked barplot of clones within barcode 351 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
18
Stacked barplot of clones within barcode 357 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
19
FACS plots of an example of the process of choosing peptides
. . . . . . . .
VII
20
FACS plots showing the sorting of the CD8+ T cells prior to the experiment. VII
21
Violin plot of number of UMIs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . VIII
22
Ridge plot of all hashings demultiplexed
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . VIII
23
Scatter plot of identified variable features . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
IX
24
Heatmap of PCA scores within each cell and highly variable feature . . . . .
X
25
UMAP coloured by the two buffy coat
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
XI
26
Gene enrichment analysis of KIR and multimer positive cells against TCR
specific cells. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
XII
27
Most frequent clonotypes shown in UMAP . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . XIII
Page I of XIV
==PAGE:38==
Investigation of KIR-mediated CD8+ T cell recognition
Nomenclature
Nomenclature
ADT Antibody-derived tag
APC Antigen presenting cell
BC
Barcode
CDR Complementarity determining region
FACS Fluorescence activated cell sorting
FWR Framework region
GEM Gel beads-in-emulsion
HLA Human leukocyte antigen
HTO Hashtag oligo
Ig
Immunoglobulin
IL
Interleukin
ITAM Immunoreceptor tyrosinebased activating motif
ITIM Immunoreceptor tyrosinebased inhibitory motif
KNN K-nearest neighbor-algorithm
MHC Major histocompatibility complex
NGS
Next-generation sequencing
NK
Natural killer
PCA Principal component analysis
pMHC peptide-MHC
scRNA Single-cell RNA
SNN
Shared nearest neighbor
TCR T cell receptor
TSO
Template switch oligo
UMAP Uniform Manifold Approximation and Projection
UMI
Unique molecular identifier
WTA Whole-transcriptome amplification
Page II of XIV
==PAGE:39==
Investigation of KIR-mediated CD8+ T cell recognition
References
References
[1] J. Kemming, A. Kongsgaard, and N. K. et. al., “Cd8 t cells express randomly selected
kirs with distinct specificities compared with nk cells,” Journal for ImmunoTherapy of
Cancer, vol. 10, 2022. Available at: https://jitc.bmj.com/content/10/Suppl_1/
A42.2.
[2] L. Gimeno, E. M. Serrano-LĂłpez, and J. A. C. et. al., “Kir+ cd8+ t lymphocytes in
cancer immunosurveillance and patient survival: Gene expression profiling,” Cancers
(Basel), vol. 15, 2020. Available at: https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/33076479/.
[3] K. Murphy and C. Weaver, Janeway’s Immunobiology. United States: WW Norton &
Co, 2017.
[4] D. D. Chaplin, “Overview of the immune response,” J Allergy Clin Immunol, vol. 125,
2010. Available at: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2923430/.
[5] L. Chen and D. B. Flies, “Molecular mechanisms of t cell co-stimulation and co-
inhibition,” Nature Reviews Immunology, vol. 13, 2013. Available at: https://www.
nature.com/articles/nri3405.
[6] J. A. Pai and A. T. Satpathy, “High-throughput and single-cell t cell receptor sequencing
technologies,” Nat Methods, vol. 18, 2021. Available at: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.
gov/pmc/articles/PMC9345561/.
[7] M. M. Davis and P. J. Bjorkman, “T-cell antigen receptor genes and t-cell recognition,”
Nature, vol. 4, 1988. Available at: https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/3043226/.
[8] M. Attaf, M. Legut, and D. K. C. et. al., “The t cell antigen receptor: The swiss
army knife of the immune system,” Clinical & Experimental Immunology, vol. 181,
2015. Available at: https://www.researchgate.net/publication/273386621_The_
T_cell_antigen_receptor_The_Swiss_Army_knife_of_the_immune_system.
[9] T. M. Williams, “Human leukocyte antigen gene polymorphism and the histocompati-
bility laboratory,” J Mol Diagn., vol. 3, 2001. Available at: https://www.ncbi.nlm.
nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1906958/.
[10] B. V. Kumar, T. J. Connors, and D. L. Farber, “Human t cell development, localization,
and function throughout life,” Immunity, vol. 20, 2018. Available at: https://pubmed.
ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/29466753/.
[11] D. Pende, M. Falco, and M. V. et. al., “Killer ig-like receptors (kirs): Their role in nk cell
modulation and developments leading to their clinical exploitation,” Front Immunol.,
vol. 28, 2019. Available at: https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/31231370/.
[12] M. Falco, L. Moretta, and A. M. et. al., “Kir and kir ligand polymorphism: a new
area for clinical applications?,” Tissue Antigens, vol. 82, 2013. Available at: https:
//pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/24498992/.
Page III of XIV
==PAGE:40==
Investigation of KIR-mediated CD8+ T cell recognition
References
[13] V. BĂŠziat,
H. G. Hilton,
and P. J. N. et. al.,
“Deciphering the killer-cell
immunoglobulin-like receptor system at super-resolution for natural killer and t-cell
biology,” Immunology, vol. 150, 2016. Available at: https://onlinelibrary.wiley.
com/doi/10.1111/imm.12684.
[14] P. Parham, “Mhc class i molecules and kirs in human history, health and survival,”
Nat Rev Immunol., vol. 5, 2005. Available at: https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
15719024/.
[15] J. H. Phillips, J. E. Gumperz, and P. P. et. al., “Superantigen-dependent, cell-mediated
cytotoxicity inhibited by mhc class i receptors on t lymphocytes,” Science, vol. 268,
1995. Available at: https://www.science.org/doi/10.1126/science.7716542.
[16] B. Huard and L. Karlsson, “Kir expression on self-reactive cd8+ t cells is controlled
by t-cell receptor engagement,” Nature, vol. 403, 2000. Available at: https://www.
nature.com/articles/35002105#citeas.
[17] M. C. Mingari, F. Schiavetti, and M. P. et. al., “Human cd8+ t lymphocyte subsets that
express hla class i-specific inhibitory receptors represent oligoclonally or monoclonally
expanded cell populations.,” Nature, vol. 93, 1996. Available at: https://www.pnas.
org/doi/abs/10.1073/pnas.93.22.12433.
[18] N. A. amd Jean-Marc Doisne and M.-A. P. et. al., “Coordinated expression of ig-like
inhibitory mhc class i receptors and acquisition of cytotoxic function in human cd8+
t cells,” J Immunol, vol. 15;173, 2004. Available at: https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.
gov/15585844/.
[19] Y. Wang and N. E.Navin, “Advances and applications of single-cell sequencing technolo-
gies,” Molecular Cell, vol. 58, 2015. Available at: https://www.sciencedirect.com/
science/article/pii/S109727651500341X.
[20] A.-E. Saliba, A. J. Westermann, and S. A. G. et. al., “Single-cell rna-seq: advances and
future challenges,” Nucleic Acids Res., vol. 18, 2014. Available at: https://www.ncbi.
nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4132710/.
[21] S. Islam, U. KjĂ¤llquist, and A. M. et. al., “Highly multiplexed and strand-specific
single-cell rna 5’ end sequencing,” Nature Protocols, vol. 7, 2012. Available at: https:
//www.nature.com/articles/nprot.2012.022.
[22] 10x
Genmoics’
scRNA-seq
technology;
Chromium
Single
Cell
3’
solu-
tion,
information
available
at:
https://www.10xgenomics.com/blog/
single-cell-rna-seq-an-introductory-overview-and-tools-for-getting-started.
[23] Illumina NGS, information available at:
https://www.illumina.com/science/
technology/next-generation-sequencing/sequencing-technology.html.
Page IV of XIV
==PAGE:41==
Investigation of KIR-mediated CD8+ T cell recognition
References
[24] M. Stoeckius, S. Zheng, and B. H.-L. et al., “Cell hashing with barcoded antibodies
enables multiplexing and doublet detection for single cell genomics,” Genome Biology,
vol. 19, 2018. Available at: https://genomebiology.biomedcentral.com/articles/
10.1186/s13059-018-1603-1#citeas.
[25] Cell
Ranger,
information
available
at:
https://support.10xgenomics.com/
single-cell-gene-expression/software/pipelines/3.1/what-is-cell-ranger.
[26] Spliced Transcripts Alignment to Reference, information available at: https://github.
com/alexdobin/STAR.
[27] A. H. Kongsgaard, “Identification of hla-c driven antigen-specific t cells by blocking kir
binding,” 2021. Master Thesis.
[28] TotalSeqTM-C technology, information available at:
https://www.biolegend.com/
en-us/products/totalseq-c-human-universal-cocktail-v1-0-19736?GroupID=
GROUP28.
[29] P. J. A. Cock, C. J. Fields, and N. G. et al., “The sanger fastq file format for sequences
with quality scores, and the solexa/illumina fastq variants,” Nucleic Acids Res, vol. 6,
2010. Available at: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2847217/.
[30] Y. Zhao, C. Kilian, and J.-E. T. et al., “Clonal expansion and activation of tissue-
resident memory-like th17 cells expressing gm-csf in the lungs of patients with severe
covid-19,” Science Immunology, vol. 6, 2021. Available at: https://www.science.org/
doi/10.1126/sciimmunol.abf6692.
[31] ggVennDiagram package for ggplot in R, information available at: https://github.
com/gaospecial/ggVennDiagram.
[32] ggplot2 package used for plots in R, information available at:
https://ggplot2.
tidyverse.org/.
[33] S. Durinck, Y. Moreau, and A. K. et al., “Biomart and bioconductor: a powerful link
between biological databases and microarray data analysis,” Bioinformatics, vol. 21,
2005. Available at: https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/16082012/.
[34] S. Nurk, S. Koren, and A. R. et al., “The complete sequence of a human genome,”
Science, vol. 376, 2022. Available at: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/
PMC9186530/?report=classic.
[35] ComplexHeatmap package used for differential expression heatmaps in R, informa-
tion available at: https://www.bioconductor.org/packages/release/bioc/html/
ComplexHeatmap.html.
[36] Plotly package for Sankey plot in Python, information available at: https://github.
com/plotly/plotly.py.
Page V of XIV
==PAGE:42==
Investigation of KIR-mediated CD8+ T cell recognition
References
[37] Alakazam is part of the Immcantation analysis framework for Adaptive Immune Re-
ceptor Repertoire sequencing (AIRR-seq) and provides a set of tools to investigate
lymphocyte receptor clonal lineages etc, information available at: https://alakazam.
readthedocs.io/en/stable/.
[38] cowplot package used for arranging barplots, information available at:
https://
github.com/wilkelab/cowplot.
[39] The Human Protein Atlas, available at: https://www.proteinatlas.org/.
[40] R. Sandberg, “Entering the era of single-cell transcriptomics in biology and medicine,”
Nature Methods, vol. 11, 2013.
Available at: https://www.nature.com/articles/
nmeth.2764.
Page VI of XIV
==PAGE:43==
Investigation of KIR-mediated CD8+ T cell recognition
6
Appendix A
6
Appendix A
Appendix A.1
Figure 19: FACS plots of an example of the process of choosing peptides
Figure 9 obtained from [27] depicting peptides tested for KIR binding. In the first row only a
tetramer is added, while a KIR-blocking antibody is added in second row. The
KARDHLAVL-peptide is included in the experiment in barcode 2.
Appendix A.2
Figure 20: FACS plots showing the sorting of the CD8+ T cells prior to the experiment.
Here each sc-10S corresponds to the pMHC barcode and the sorting is made of the multimers and
in some cases KIR.
Page VII of XIV
==PAGE:44==
Investigation of KIR-mediated CD8+ T cell recognition
7
Appendix B
7
Appendix B
Appendix B.1
Figure 21: Violin plot of number of UMIs
Appendix B.2
Figure 22: Ridge plot of all hashings demultiplexed
Page VIII of XIV
==PAGE:45==
Investigation of KIR-mediated CD8+ T cell recognition
8
Appendix C
8
Appendix C
Appendix C.1
Figure 23: Scatter plot of identified variable features
Page IX of XIV
==PAGE:46==
Investigation of KIR-mediated CD8+ T cell recognition
9
Appendix D
9
Appendix D
Appendix D.1
Figure 24: Heatmap of PCA scores within each cell and highly variable feature
Page X of XIV
==PAGE:47==
Investigation of KIR-mediated CD8+ T cell recognition
10
Appendix E
10
Appendix E
Appendix E.1
Figure 25: UMAP coloured by the two buffy coat
Page XI of XIV
==PAGE:48==
Investigation of KIR-mediated CD8+ T cell recognition
11
Appendix F
11
Appendix F
Appendix F.1
Figure 26: Gene enrichment analysis of KIR and multimer positive cells against TCR specific
cells.
Gene enrichment results obtained from the ggprofiler2 enrichment package. Highlighted dots
pathways are described in the table.
Page XII of XIV
==PAGE:49==
Investigation of KIR-mediated CD8+ T cell recognition
12
Appendix G
12
Appendix G
Appendix G.1
Figure 27: Most frequent clonotypes shown in UMAP
Page XIII of XIV
==PAGE:50==
Investigation of KIR-mediated CD8+ T cell recognition
13
Code availability
13
Code availability
All scripts, metadata and Cell Ranger files can be found at my github:
https://github.com/simonestegenborg/KIR_project
Page XIV of XIV
