==PAGE:1==
 
 
 
==PAGE:2==
Page 2 of 40 
 
 
ABSTRACT 
With the fervent arms race between bacteria and bacteriophages, bacteria have developed a wide 
variety of immune defense systems. The full scope of these anti-phage systems that bacteria have 
is, however, not yet known, and many efforts are still currently being made to discover new 
defense systems. Our findings serve not only as an exploratory analysis of the defense systems in 
the gut microbiome of 1-year old children and their host bacteria – but also a comparison of these 
to a coupled data set of the virome. Results confirm that RM and CRISPR-Cas are some of the most 
abundant defense systems, as well as the newly described PARIS system. Using a Parafac model on 
data of defense systems in different bacteria, it was possible describe a relatively high amount of 
the variation of the data with just a few bacteria and highly abundant defense systems. Some of 
these include highly abundant bacteria of the infant microbiome, such as Bifidobacterium, 
Ruminococcus and Bacteroides. Findings point towards the defense systems RM and PARIS being 
connected with a difference in phage abundances for a big variety of novel and known phage 
families, suggesting a wide range of phage specificities for the defense systems. A wealth of other 
such connections was found between phages and bacterial anti-phage system as well. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:3==
Page 3 of 40 
 
 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
Abstract ................................................................................................................................................ 2 
Outline .................................................................................................................................................. 4 
Introduction ......................................................................................................................................... 5 
Bacteria and Their Fight for Survival ................................................................................................ 5 
Bacterial Defense Systems ............................................................................................................... 5 
Metagenomics and Sequencing ....................................................................................................... 7 
Compositional Data .......................................................................................................................... 8 
DefenseFinder ................................................................................................................................ 10 
Methods and Materials ...................................................................................................................... 11 
Metagenomic Data Set .................................................................................................................. 11 
DefenseFinder ................................................................................................................................ 11 
In Bacteria Or On Mobile Genetic Elements? ................................................................................ 12 
Defense Systems’ Prevalence ........................................................................................................ 12 
Virome data .................................................................................................................................... 14 
Results ................................................................................................................................................ 14 
Absence/Presence Tensor.............................................................................................................. 16 
Virome Comparison ....................................................................................................................... 18 
Virome Comparison with CLR Transformed Abundances .............................................................. 22 
Summary ........................................................................................................................................ 26 
Discussion ........................................................................................................................................... 26 
Parafac Model ................................................................................................................................ 27 
Virome Comparison ....................................................................................................................... 29 
Conclusion .......................................................................................................................................... 30 
References.......................................................................................................................................... 32 
Appendix ............................................................................................................................................ 34 
 
 
==PAGE:4==
Page 4 of 40 
 
 
OUTLINE 
A plethora of new immune defense systems in bacteria have recently been discovered, but are not 
yet fully understood. Many of their functions have been documented, but not their environment 
and roles within this. This study will focus on finding, characterizing the defense system and lastly 
correlating these new defense systems to the phages that the bacteria have to defend themselves 
against. This will help gain a better understanding of the gut bacteria and viruses in young 
children, which can be used as a vital steppingstone further research. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:5==
Page 5 of 40 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
Bacteria and Their Fight for Survival 
We live in a world in which viruses attack us every single day and it has become a huge problem in 
many peoples’ daily lives. However, it is not only us humans and our cells that get attacked by 
viruses – the bacteria in the human microbiome do too. Where we humans have our innate and 
adaptive immune defenses of pathogenic structure recognition and immune cells, so have bacteria 
developed a wide range of innate and adaptive defense systems to protect them. With how 
rapidly viruses can mutate and evolve, there has been an evolutionary pressure on the organisms, 
which viruses infect, to develop many ways of protecting themselves. This can certainly be said is 
true for bacteria and the viruses that infect them, known as bacteriophages (or simply, “phages”). 
These phages usually come in two types: Virulent, meaning that they cause the death of the host 
bacteria, or temperate, meaning that they incorporate themselves in the host bacteria genome. As 
a result of phages infecting and killing bacteria, natural selection comes into play. 
Because of the immense evolutionary pressure from the rapidly developing viruses, bacteria have 
developed a diverse and complicated plethora of immune defenses and the full capacity of the 
bacterial defense arsenal has yet to be discovered and characterized [1]. While more than 50 
defense systems have been discovered in recent years [2], many of the defense mechanisms of 
these systems are not yet fully understood as some of their proteins still have unknown functions. 
There is also very little known on what specific phages they protect against, and there are also 
gaps in knowledge about phages themselves and their biology [3]. This means that there is still a 
unique opportunity to compare defense systems and the specific phages they defend against on a 
larger scale, as current studies focus on discovering defense systems. While much about phages 
and defense systems are unknown, there are, however, also much that is known. For example, 
some of these defense systems are quite well characterized and are being used as tools in 
molecular biology in modern laboratories. 
Bacterial Defense Systems 
One of the defense systems, which bacteria can protect themselves with, is the Restriction 
Modification (RM) system. This system is by far the most abundant of the defense systems and has 
==PAGE:6==
Page 6 of 40 
 
 
been found to exist in up to 74-84% of bacteria in studies[1], [4]. In general, RM systems functions 
as an innate immune system, with their two main enzymes: The first is a restriction enzyme 
(restriction endonuclease (REase)), which has been widely used for genetic engineering in labs 
because of its ability to cleave DNA[5]. This happens when its’ recognition sequence is present and 
unmethylated – thereby neutralizing foreign DNA invading the bacteria. The second is a 
methyltransferase (MTase), which methylates the host DNA to protect it from cleavage. RM 
systems exist in three classical types, each with a different composition of REases and MTases, 
different sequence recognition, and cofactor requirements[4]. A fourth type of restriction system 
also exists and consists only of REases and functions by cleaving modified recognition sites. 
Defense systems like DISARM (Defence Island System Associated with Restriction-Modification) 
and BREX (Bacteriophage Exclusion) work in a similar fashion to the MTase in RM systems by 
methylating the host DNA to protect it, but unlike for RM systems, this methylation protects the 
host by halting phage propagation[6], [7]. Defense systems like the Wadjet system are predicted 
to have the same principle of action by using an endonuclease when detecting certain types of 
genetic material – In the Wadjet system’s case, this is when closed-circular DNA is detected, for 
example in case of an invading plasmid. 
The second most abundant defense system is CRISPR-Cas systems, found in studies to exist in 39-
45% of bacteria[1], [8]. CRISPR-Cas systems consist of two parts, a CRISPR array of spacers (foreign 
DNA) and operons of CRISPR-associated (Cas) proteins. These systems work by a Cas protein 
complex cutting the foreign target DNA at a recognition site and integrating the foreign DNA, 
called a protospacer, into the CRISPR array. With the protospacer inserted between repeats in the 
CRISPR array, it becomes a spacer. When the CRISPR array is transcribed, each spacer is processed 
and becomes crRNA (CRISPR RNA). This crRNA then functions as a guide for the Cas nucleases to 
cut the DNA or RNA of an invading phage or plasmid. With this process, CRISPR-Cas works like the 
human adaptive immune system, as it adapts to fight invading genetic material, as the threats 
appear. This property and its ease of use has allowed it to become a revolutionizing new step 
within the field of genetic engineering in the past decade and many associate CRISPR-Cas with the 
CRISPR-Cas9 genome editing technology[5]. 
Finally, bacteria also have a wide range of heterologous proteins that fights phage invasion by 
abortion of the infection. These are called abortive infection (Abi) systems and typically target a 
==PAGE:7==
Page 7 of 40 
 
 
crucial step of the invading phage’s multiplication such as replication, transcription or translation. 
They also cause premature cell death to limit the phages that spread to other cells[9]. These 
systems have been known for over 50 years and are, like other defense systems and their 
mechanisms, not yet completely understood[3].  Nonetheless, other defense systems have been 
predicted to have similar functions, such as the PARIS system, which induces abortive infection in 
presence of phage-encoded anti-restriction proteins that would otherwise block defense systems 
like RM[10]. This is but one example of why such a wide range of defense systems have emerged 
and how they might work together in bacteria. 
Just as defense systems seem to work together, they are often located close to each other on so-
called “defense islands”[1]. Many new systems could thus be uncovered by using a guilt by 
association approach[2]. Studies also point towards their defense islands being able to be 
transferred through horizontal gene transfer between bacteria. Studies suggest that the effective 
immune system is in fact not only encoded by a single organism, but rather the sum of the defense 
systems it can acquire via horizontal gene transfer and use[2]. Thus, while this study will focus 
mostly on defense systems that can be attributed to belong in a bacteria species, not only are the 
defense systems in bacteria important, but also the interplay within these – as well as mobile 
genetic elements (MGE) that can transfer genetic material horizontally in the gut microbiome. A 
reason for the focus on defense systems only found in bacteria, is that MGEs can prove to be a 
hurdle when assigning taxonomy to the metagenomic samples used in this study, as will be 
explained in the Methods section. 
Metagenomics and Sequencing 
As described in previous sections, the human microbiome is filled with bacteria that contain these 
defense systems. To get data on all of these bacteria that can work together and exchange 
defense systems, it is important to use a method that allows a larger microbial community to be 
studied as a whole. This is where metagenomics come in. Metagenomic data is a type of data of 
environmental samples. For this study, the environment sampled is the gut. For infants and young 
children, which is the case in this study, this community would consist mostly of Bifidobacterium at 
one month and then as solid foods are eaten, Clostridiaceae, Lachnospiraceae and 
Ruminococcaceae would be introduced at around 6-12 months of age[11]. After this, at 2-3 years 
==PAGE:8==
Page 8 of 40 
 
 
and into adulthood, Bacteroidaceae, Lachnospiraceae and Ruminococcaceae would be most 
abundant. 
In general, the human gut happens to be filled with many bacteria that cannot be cultured in-
vitro[12], which would mean that other sequence analysis methods depending on cultruring would 
not work. Metagenomics works by either the whole genome or just parts of the ribosome (16S 
rRNA) being sequenced by a method called shotgun sequencing. This method gets its name from 
the process of splitting the genome into fragments, after which it can be sequenced in reads that 
are either long or short, depending on the technology. In general, long reads are easier to 
assemble and can overcome problems of repeats in the genome, but short reads sequencing is 
made with a lower error rate and is more affordable, thus allowing for deeper coverage. When 
sequencing is done, it is then possible to assemble the reads into longer pieces (contigs), after data 
processing and error corrections. After assembly, these pieces of genetic material can be grouped 
together and assigned to a genome and then lastly assigned taxonomy. After all this processing, 
there is a property of the data that is important to consider when doing analyses – 
compositionality. 
Compositional Data 
In recent years, there has been an increase in awareness that the method, in which the 
metagenomic sequencing is done, causes the data to become compositional. This is because of the 
reads never being absolute numbers of what is in a microbial community, but will always be a 
relative amount of the maximum reads that the sequencing platform has capacity to sequence in a 
sample[13]. This results in metagenomic abundances never fully being independent of each other, 
as when one organism goes up in abundance, another organism has to be less abundant, as the 
total of abundances measured stays the same. When one works with metagenomic data, one 
therefore has to be aware of the properties of this kind of data. However, many traditional 
methods of working with metagenomics are rarely developed with this in mind. Therefore, it is 
important to be aware of this complication when using traditional methods or use methods 
developed for compositional data.  
Luckily, there are ways to normalize the data, so that one looks at ratios between features, 
thereby overcoming the aforementioned issues. These transformations will map a composition 
==PAGE:9==
Page 9 of 40 
 
 
from the D-part simplex to a D-1 dimensional Euclidian vector that one can then, if interpreted 
properly, use standard multivariate data analysis methods on. One such transformation used to 
normalize data is the simple additive log-ratio (ALR) transformation, in which the logarithm is 
taken on all parts of the composition which have been divided by one part of the composition. 
This transformation, while easy to interpret, does not conserve distances and thus limits the 
statistical methods that can be used. Instead, the transformation most widely used is the centered 
log-ratio (CLR)[14] where the logarithm is taken on each value for each feature divided by the 
geometrical mean: 
𝐺(𝑥) = √𝑥1 ⋅𝑥2 ⋅… ⋅𝑥𝐷
𝐷
 
𝑥𝑐𝑙𝑟= [𝑙𝑜𝑔( 𝑥1
𝐺(𝑥)) , 𝑙𝑜𝑔( 𝑥2
𝐺(𝑥)) … , 𝑙𝑜𝑔( 𝑥𝐷
𝐺(𝑥))] 
In which x is each observation (samples) and D is the dimension (number of taxa or OTUs). In 
difference to ALR, distances are conserved, so Euclidean metrics can be used – this also means 
that interpretation is quite easy since the relation between the original and a transformed variable 
is preserved. The downsides, however, include that statistical methods used on this cannot rely on 
full rank of the covariance matrix and that sub-setting (making sub-compositions) can only be 
done before the transformation. In other words, the compositional data will only be comparable 
(sub-compositionally coherent), if the sub-composition is made before CLR transforming. The last 
transformation, the isometric log-ration (ILR) builds upon the CLR transformation by multiplying it 
with an orthonormal basis. While overcoming most downsides of ALR and CLR, interpretation and 
explanation thereof is especially difficult, and results will depend on the orthonormal basis chosen.  
The last thing to keep in mind, is that when it comes to logarithmic transformations, values of zero 
are problematic. Mostly because the logarithm of 0 is undefined – but also because the nature of 
metagenomics mean that a sample might miss a certain organism, that is otherwise present in the 
gut, or the abundance of the organism might be below the detection limit. While the most proper 
way of replacing zeroes is still being tested and discussed in the community[15], there are many 
methods to use: Some of them being by adding a fitting pseudo-count (for example half of the 
lowest value) or as a probability distribution using the R package ALDEx2, which uses Monte-Carlo 
instances drawn from the Dirichlet distribution. With zeroes replaced, log transformations can 
then be performed. 
==PAGE:10==
Page 10 of 40 
 
 
To get a picture of both traditional and compositional data methods, analyses will be run on pure 
relative abundances as well as CLR transformed abundances in this study. Some data will be 
converted to absence and presence to minimize, or even avoid,  some of the downfalls when 
working with compositional properties, for optimal data analysis. These methods are further 
explained in the methods section. 
DefenseFinder 
To gather the data of defense systems in the metagenomic data for this project, the tool 
DefenseFinder[2] was used. This tool uses Hidden Markov Model (HMM) profiles of each of the 
defense systems and will include rules of which genes are mandatory and which are accessory 
genes. This will allow it to detect matches amongst the input of ordered protein sequences from 
each sample. As the field of study into bacterial defense systems is ever growing, it offers the 
utility of updating the HMM models independently by use of the MacSyData utility from the 
MacSyFinder tool[16], for fully updated searches of defense systems. At DefenseFinder’s release, 
the number of defense system types that could be found was 60, but this number is up to 130 
types as of writing this study (full list can be viewed on the mdmparis github 1). When running 
DefenseFinder, three separate files will be created: 
 
Figure 1 - Workflow of DefenseFinder. The different files produced by DefenseFinder and what their 
contents are. 
Of which the defense_finder_systems.tsv files have information on the defense systems found: 
contig name, type of defense system, its subtype, position and genes in the system.  
With this tool and the remaining datasets, we could then apply our analyses and statistical 
methods to test the hypothesis, that some defense systems in bacteria would affect phages and 
vice versa. This would help fulfill our objectives of exploring the defense systems in the gut 
microbiome and exploring connections between the systems and phages. 
 
1 https://github.com/mdmparis/defense-finder-models/blob/master/List_system_article.md  
==PAGE:11==
Page 11 of 40 
 
 
METHODS AND MATERIALS 
Metagenomic Data Set 
The data used in this study is gathered from the COPSAC2010 cohort, consisting of 690 1-year-old 
children. The metagenomic data comes from fecal samples gathered with the methods described 
in the article “Maturation of the gut microbiome and risk of asthma in childhood”[17]. Samples 
were sequenced with the NovaSeq system (Illumina Inc.) at 150 bp paired-end reads. The 
metagenomic data had been processed via adapter removal, low quality removal, removing of 
contamination by human genetic material and then assembled. In the end, the data consisted of 
assemblies from 662 samples. To assign taxonomy to these samples, binning was performed with 
the program VAMB (Variational Autoencoders for Metagenomic Binning)[18], using unsupervised, 
artificial neural network-based machine learning (deep learning). After binning, VAMB clusters the 
bins together and via a method termed “multisplit” they are split into clusters corresponding to 
the genome of different organisms, roughly corresponding to a species. For the further analyses, 
only bins of at least 200 kbp were chosen as smaller bins tend to be noisy and unprecise. The bins 
were quality filtered with checkM[19], to get relatively complete and uncontaminated bins. Lastly, 
the taxonomy of the VAMB clusters were determined by using the GTDB-Tk toolkit. Bacterial 
abundances could then be found by finding species-unique signature genes and map reads against 
them. 
DefenseFinder 
Defensefinder2 was run on protein sequences from the metagenomic data, computed by 
Prodigal[20]. To run it on several contigs, DefenseFinder was run with  gembase format file 
(defense-finder run –dbtype gembase). This produced 3 files for each sample: systems in the 
sample, defense system genes and the HMM hits, as described in the introduction section. Using 
the defense_finder_systems.tsv file, the type of defense system and the contig it was placed on, 
was gathered. Furthermore, with special interest into CRISPR-Cas and because of differences 
between class 1 and 2, all CRISPR-Cas systems were split into class 1, class 2 or - if not accurately 
attributed to a specific subtype - “Cas”. 
 
2 Defense-finder version 1.0.9 (https://github.com/mdmparis/defense-finder) 
==PAGE:12==
Page 12 of 40 
 
 
In Bacteria Or On Mobile Genetic Elements? 
As stated in the introduction, bacteria will sometimes exchange defense systems via mobile 
genetic elements (MGEs). This makes it harder for binners like VAMB to correctly cluster them 
with certain bacteria – meaning that they will not get attributed to a certain species but rather will 
end up in smaller bins. To take a look into this problem for our data, it was therefore chosen to 
look at the distribution of defense systems on contigs that are in bins over 200kbp and those in 
bins under 200 kbp. With this, we would see how many defense systems had been assigned to a 
species of bacteria and those that might be hypothesized to be on MGE – as well as give us a look 
into how much of the data we actually portray by only looking at defense systems for which a host 
bacteria could be found. Finding data on how to portray the connection between bacteria and 
defense systems in each sample was then the next goal. 
Defense Systems’ Prevalence 
To obtain relative abundances of defense systems, a mapping of reads against their own assembly 
was provided for each sample from the children. BAM files for the samples were provided, 
converted from the results from running BWA-MEM with default settings. Using the mappings that 
were provided, SAMtools3 was used to sort the BAM files by QNAME (read ID). Following this, 
msamtools4 was then used for alignment filtering, in accordance with the suggested settings: 
reads have to be a minimum of 80 bp long, alignment sequence identity has to be higher than or 
equal to 95% and at least 80% of the read has to be aligned. Lastly, all highest scoring hits per read 
were kept. With the sorted and filtered BAM files, msamtools was used to create a profile of the 
relative abundance of each contig. Each defense system was then matched to the relative 
abundance of the contig it was on and added up to get the relative abundance of each defense 
system amongst the contigs in each sample. A downside to this is that the relative abundances 
only describe the relative abundance of the contig the defense system was found on, and not how 
abundant it was in relation to the host bacteria. The next step was then to look into this. 
As the focus was to compare defense systems, bacterial hosts and the virome, finding the counts 
and relative abundances was only the first step. Since data was available of which bacteria each 
 
3 SAMtools version 1.9, using HTSlib version 1.9 
4 msamtools version 0.9 (https://github.com/arumugamlab/msamtools) 
==PAGE:13==
Page 13 of 40 
 
 
contig belonged to, this was to be considered in the data as well. This would add a unique and 
novel depth of information to the data and make it possible to directly compare bacteria and the 
phages that target them. Thus, an absence/presence table was created for each child and whether 
or not a genus of bacteria in that child had a certain defense system in its genome. With this, a 3-
dimensional table, referred to as a ‘tensor’ was created with samples, bacteria, and defense 
systems as the three dimensions.  
While the connection between bacteria and the defense systems they host, could simply be put 
into an absence/presence table, it was of interest to find out whether it would be representative 
to describe the data in this binary way, rather than as a continuous variable. The question was 
thus whether the genera of bacteria in a sample would, due to evolutionary pressure, in general 
either have a defense system or exist entirely without it – or, in the other case, if some species of 
the genera with a certain defense system could co-exist with species without the defense system. 
To examine this question, the following method was formed, to have a look into a ratio between 
the defense systems and host bacteria: 
The amount of reads for each contig was collected from the sorted and filtered bam files – Then 
for each of the top 50 most abundant bacteria, each of their defense systems and the contig they 
belonged on, was collected. The number of reads for these contigs were found and normalized 
with the corresponding contig length. To find how often each defense system existed in a bacterial 
genus, the normalized read count for each defense system was then divided with the reads 
belonging to different bacteria (normalized for length as well). With this, it was possible to get a 
number for how prevalent each defense system is within each bacterial genus. Although there are 
caveats to this method, if all - or the vast majority - of species in a genus have a certain defense 
system, we would see the data approximating to 1. 
Many analyses were done with this version of the data. We performed some of these with the 
Parallel Factor Analysis (Parafac) method, which is an unsupervised multi-way decomposition and 
in general functions a lot like the PCA method, but for higher order data. With this method it 
would be possible to see trends across the data for further investigation and comparison with the 
virome data.  
 
==PAGE:14==
Page 14 of 40 
 
 
Virome data 
For the objective of comparing defense systems and their host bacteria with the virome, relative 
abundances for the virome of the COPSAC2010 cohort was provided as well. The virome data was 
collected with the methods described in the article “Hundreds of viral families in the healthy infant 
gut”[21]. For this data set, in addition to known viral families, 248 novel viral families were found 
and named after the children from the cohort. For the relative abundances, these had been 
normalized by genome size. With information from CRISPRs in bacteria it was also possible to 
predict the bacterial host of the virus, creating the opportunity in this study to compare bacteria, 
defense systems and viruses.  
 
RESULTS 
The following section will be focused on exploring 3 versions of the dataset: The relative 
abundances of the defense systems based on the contig abundances, counts of defense systems 
and absence/presence of defense systems in different bacteria, based on proportion of 
appearance. The latter will also be compared to the virome data set. A preliminary test of the 
binary qualities of the proportions data can be seen in appendix 1, which points towards the 
assumption of binary distribution being appropriate.  
For an initial overview, the relative abundances of defense systems were found by selecting the 
contigs in which defense systems were found and adding up their relative abundances. The 
distribution can be seen in figure 2: 
 
Figure 2 - Relative abundances of defense systems: A) Relative abundances of defense systems for all 
samples. B) Average relative abundances of defense systems across all samples. Note that abundances 
for CRISPR-Cas classes are amalgamated. 
==PAGE:15==
Page 15 of 40 
 
 
As can be seen in figure 2, RM is by far the most abundant defense system found in the samples, 
when it comes to relative abundance. After that, we can see that the top 6 most abundant 
systems, CRISPR-Cas, PARIS (Rst_PARIS), Abi2, Wadjet and AbiH are, at first glance, found 
consistently across samples in figure 2A. In figure 2B, we see a bit more clearly that up to 35-40% 
of defense system contigs have an RM defense system on them, while approximately 10% have 
CRISPR-Cas, PARIS and Abi2.  
When it came to connecting the data of the bacteria in the samples and the defense systems in 
them, it was of interest to see how much of the data was found in bins belonging to bacterial 
species. The distribution of the defense systems in smaller bins (<200 kbp) and in larger bins with 
taxonomy, can be seen in figure 3: 
 
Figure 3 - Counts of defense systems separated depending on whether or not they were found in bins of 
bigger or smaller than 200 kbp). Counts marked by their respective defense system. 
We can see that defense systems like RM, CRISPR-Cas class 1, Abi2, Wadjet and PARIS (Rst_PARIS) 
were most abundant when it came to absolute counts. Furthermore, RM was found 54,656 times 
– a vast difference to CRISPR-Cas which was counted 20,072 times by DefenseFinder. For sake of 
further analysis and for figure 3, CRISPR-Cas had been split into subtype class 1 and 2 as well as the 
==PAGE:16==
Page 16 of 40 
 
 
unclassified Cas proteins. Of those three types, class 1 had the highest number of counts at a total 
of 12,092.  
Another observation to be made is that for most defense systems, approximately 60% were found 
in bins over 200 kbp. However, we see a lot of deviation in the proportions when the count 
number is less than 80 – which, due to the small sample size of the defense systems, is quite noisy. 
To avoid the problem of small sample sizes, further analysis was done with a focus on defense 
systems that was found more than 1000 times. 
Absence/Presence Tensor 
To be able to compare this data with the virome, it was of interest to narrow it down which 
bacteria and which defense systems that could represent the data. The next step was thus to use 
Parafac on the tensor of data with samples, bacteria, and defense systems and perform tensor 
decomposition. The initial plot can be seen in appendix 2. Negative loadings can be seen and made 
interpretation more complicated as opposite loading mean opposite trends and it would not make 
sense to look at tendencies for the samples that acted opposite – for example for all the children 
with negative loadings. Therefore, non-negative constraints (enforcement that no loadings are 
negative) were used, to keep all loadings positive and interpretation intuitive. Furthermore, to 
decide whether or not three components, or factors, were most fitting, several tests were made: 
Parafac models were run with 25 random starts for 1-10 factors and compared to an equivalent 
PCA model, to test the Parafac method: 
 
Figure 4 - Variance explained for the different tested models (PCA and Parafac). Factors 1-10 were 
tested and Variance explained marked for Parafac model. 
==PAGE:17==
Page 17 of 40 
 
 
On the plot in figure 4, it is shown that with just one factor (component), 23% of the variance is 
explained - with two factors bringing it to 28%. In comparison, the PCA reached 32% on first factor 
and 36% on second factor. With a relatively small improvement in variance explained, from 
Parafac to PCA, it was decided to move on with Parafac, as it is a simpler model to explain our 3-
dimensional data. Finding a compromise between explaining as much of the variation as possible, 
while still being a simple model (low number of factors), we move on with two factors to explore. 
With a total of 100 random starts, two factors and non-negative constraints, we get the loadings 
seen in plot 5. The full plot over loadings in the final plot can be seen in appendix 3.  
 
Figure 5 - Parafac model of absence/presence data of defense systems in bacteria. Run with 100 
random starts, non-negative constraints and 2 factors (X1 and X2). Bacteria loadings filtered to only 
show loadings over 0.75. The “groups” of children were marked with blue lines for better readability of 
the trends. Higher loadings mean a bigger tendency to follow the patterns of the data. 
From the figure, we can derive that there are two distinct patterns across the samples that 
describes the data. For the first factor (X1), we see the highest loadings including Blautia and 
Ruminococcus, closely followed by Agathobacter, Anaerostipes, Bifidobacterium, Faecalibacterium 
and Lachnospira. For this first pattern, we see that RM, as well as Wadjet, CRISPR-Cas (class 1) and 
==PAGE:18==
Page 18 of 40 
 
 
Abi2 to a lesser degree, is often associated with these bacteria and is present in them. This pattern 
explained 23.26% of the variation in the data. For the second factor (X2), we see a second pattern 
in which Bacteroides, Phocaeicola and Parabacteroides often are associated with RM and PARIS 
defense systems. What is interesting to note, is that both species from the genera Phocaeicola and 
Parabacteroides have previously been classified as belonging to Bacteroides[22], [23], signifying a 
close relation between the genera. Lastly, the children in which we see these patterns, seem to 
differ between the two factors – meaning that different children follow different patterns. 
Meanwhile, other children seem to follow both patterns, as can be seen by their high loading in 
both factors. What can be derived from this will be discussed in the Discussion section.  
Virome Comparison 
With the Parafac analysis from previous section, the bacteria with the highest loading (meaning 
those that follow the patterns in the data) will be compared to the virome of the same children. 
For the first pattern, a closer look was taken at the defense systems Abi2, CRISPR-Cas class 1, RM 
and Wadjet – in specific those that are hosted in Blautia, Bifidobacterium and Ruminococcus. 
Subsets of the phage families that were predicted to infect Blautia, Bifidobacterium and 
Ruminococcus, respectively, were closed to a constant of 1 for each sample and tested via a 
Wilcoxon rank sum test. The purpose of this was to see if there was a significant difference in 
relative abundances of phage families, when a sample had that genus of bacteria with or without a 
certain defense system. FDR adjusted p-values (q-values) were reported as well, to adjust for 
multiple testing. Phage abundances were also adjusted for abundance of the defense system host 
bacteria to adjust for inflation in samples where the host of the phage might be more abundant. 
The genera with the highest loading in factor one for the Parafac model was Blautia. When tests 
were performed for the phages in samples with or without a defense system, no significant 
differences were seen, after adjusting p-values. The plot for this can be seen in appendix 4. 
For phages that target Bifidobacterium, differential analysis with each defense system can be seen 
in figure 6: 
==PAGE:19==
Page 19 of 40 
 
 
 
Figure 6 - Violin plot over the relative abundances of different virus (phage) families that target 
Bifidobacterium. A Wilcoxon ranked sum test was done to calculate differences between groups. Blue 
(1) signifies the samples in which the bacterium hosted a defense system, while red (0) is the samples 
without the defense system. FDR adjusted p-values (q-value) and p-values are highlighted when <0.05. 
Medians for each group are marked with a black dot. 
The results show that for the Ellinorviridae and Helenaviridae virus families that targets 
Bifidobacterium, we see a significant difference in the abundance, when the bacterium they 
invade have the Abi2 defense system (p=0.017 for both) – even after adjusting p-values for 
multiple testing.  For both of these virus families, it seems that the abundance is lower when the 
Bifidobacterium has the Abi2 defense system. For the RM system, we see no significant differences 
in abundance, while for CRISPR-Cas class 1 and Wadjet, none of the significant p-values are 
significant after adjustment. Worth noting, however, is that Ellinorviridae had a low p-value for all 
defense systems tested before adjustment (p-value>0.054), even if not significantly so on all plots. 
The same tests were done for phages targetting Ruminococcus:  
==PAGE:20==
Page 20 of 40 
 
 
 
Figure 7 - Violin plot over the relative abundances of different virus (phage) families that target 
Ruminococcus. A Wilcoxon ranked sum test was done to calculate differences between groups. Blue (1) 
signifies the samples in which the bacterium hosted a defense system, while red (0) is the samples 
without the defense system. FDR adjusted p-values (q-value) and p-values are highlighted when <0.05. 
Medians for each group are marked with a black dot. 
We observe several more significant differences for phages targeting Ruminococcus: For samples 
in which Ruminococcus carries Abi2, there is a significant difference in abundance of Emilieviridae, 
Adrianviridae and Ludvigviridae (p=0.017 for all). For samples where the bacteria carries CRISPR-
Cas class 1, Ludvigviridae was significantly less abundant (p=0.001), while Inaviridae was less 
abundant, but not significantly so after p-value adjustment. For RM we see significant differences 
for Sisseviridae (p=0.028), Jeppeviridae (p>0.001), Emilieviridae (p<0.001), Adrianviridae (p=0.006), 
Gustavviridae (p=0.047) and Ludvigviridae (p=0.006). For the Wadjet system, there are just barely 
significant differences for Adrianviridae and Dinaviridae (p=0.05), as well as Emilieviridae before 
adjusting for multiple testing. In summary, results for most defense systems tested from 
Ruminococcus seem in agreement that abundances for Ludvigviridae and Emilieviridae are lower 
when the defense systems are present. 
==PAGE:21==
Page 21 of 40 
 
 
For the second pattern, Bacteroides was tested, as the virome data did not have Phocaeicola 
annotated as target hosts because of slightly differing taxonomy between datasets. 
Parabacteroides was tested as well and plots of this can be found in the appendix. Phage 
abundances were separated for when the host bacteria have Abi2, CRISPR-Cas class 1, CRISPR-Cas 
class 2, Mokosh, RM or the PARIS system, to make a wider investigation of the single genus. The 
analysis for Bacteroides can be seen in figure 8:  
 
Figure 8 - Violin plot over the relative abundances of different virus (phage) families that target 
Bacteroides. A Wilcoxon ranked sum test was done to calculate differences between groups. Blue (1) 
signifies the samples in which the bacterium hosted a defense system, while red (0) is the samples 
without the defense system. FDR adjusted p-values (q-value) and p-values are highlighted when <0.05. 
Medians for each group are marked with a black dot 
For phages targeting Bacteroides, we see there is a difference in Soniaviridae abundances for Abi2 
(p=0.049), Almaviridae and Lasseviridae for CRISPR-Cas class 1 (p=0.005 & p=0.003), 
Hannahviridae (p=0.023), Bertilviridae (p=0.023), Olineviridae (p=0.05) and Soniaviridae (p<0.001) 
==PAGE:22==
Page 22 of 40 
 
 
for CRISPR-Cas class 2, while there is no significant difference in phage abundances for Mokosh 
after adjustment of p-value. Interestingly, it seems that for some defense systems, phage 
abundances are higher when the defense system is present – notably for Almaviridae and CRISPR-
Cas class 1 where the difference is significant. What is also notable is that almost all phage families 
targeting Bacteroides were found to be significantly different in abundance when splitting up in 
groups for RM and PARIS. 
The plot over the differential analysis for Parabacteroides can be seen in appendix 5. Many of the 
phages pictured in the plots are the same as for Bacteroides, meaning that viruses in these families 
infect both and are quite abundant in the gut microbiome, even after normalizing for bacteria 
abundance in samples. Some of these same phages are also showing significant p-values for both 
Bacteroides and Parabacteroides, in particular when compared to RM and PARIS: δ-crassphage 
(Bacteroides: p=0.015 & p=0.034, Parabacteroides: p=0.009 & p=0.011), Bertilviridae (Bacteroides: 
both p=0.005, Parabacteroides: both p<0.001) and Olineviridae (Bacteroides: p=0.015 & 0.016, 
Parabacteroides: p=0.009 & p=0.035) 
It is important to note that when running traditional methods on compositional data, many false 
positive connections might appear simply due to the characteristics of compositional data. It was 
therefore of interest to compare ratios as well. 
Virome Comparison with CLR Transformed Abundances 
To compare ratios between abundances, a CLR transformation was done after sub-setting for 
bacteriophage host (thereby keeping the rule of sub-compositional coherence). This was done 
with half of the minimum abundance in the table as a pseudocount to replace zeroes. The 
differences in CLR transformed relative abundances of phages for the different defense systems 
were likewise tested with a Wilcoxon rank sum test and p-values adjusted with the FDR method. 
Only phages with significant differences (p-value < 0.05) were plotted. Again, no p-values were 
significant after adjusting with FDR for Blautia and thus not relevant for plotting. The first plot was 
then made for Bifidobacterium and can be seen in figure 9: 
==PAGE:23==
Page 23 of 40 
 
 
 
Figure 9 – Violin plot over the CLR transformed abundances of different virus (phage) families that 
target Bifidobacterium. A Wilcoxon ranked sum test was done to calculate differences between groups. 
Blue signifies the samples in which the bacterium hosted a defense system, while red is the samples 
without the defense system. Adjusted p-values are done with FDR method. Medians for each group are 
marked with a black dot 
In somewhat agreement with the test performed on the non-log-transformed data, we see that 
the Ellinorviridae family has a significantly lower relative abundance (or more specifically, because 
these are CLR values, the ratio between this family and other phages in the sample is lower) when 
Abi2 (p<0.0001), CRISPR-Cas class 1 (p=0.0001), RM (p<0.0001) and Wadjet(p<0.0001) are present 
in the bacteria. Another point of agreement is seen for Helenaviridae being significantly lower for 
samples with Abi2 present (p=0.0015). The ratio for Hubertviridae is also significantly lower when 
in samples where Bifidobacterium has Abi2 (p=0.037), RM (p=0.0082) and Wadjet (p=0.024) – 
whereas for the non-transformed data, this family was not at all close to being significantly 
differentially abundant. In general, the phage families ratio compared to other phages are either 
entirely lower when the defense systems are present or much denser in occurrences around the 
minimum value. 
Same procedure was run for phages targeting Ruminococcus: 
==PAGE:24==
Page 24 of 40 
 
 
 
Figure 10 - Violin plot over the CLR transformed abundances of different virus (phage) families that 
target Ruminococcus. A Wilcoxon ranked sum test was done to calculate differences between groups. 
Blue signifies the samples in which the bacterium hosted a defense system, while red is the samples 
without the defense system. Adjusted p-values are done with FDR method. Medians for each group are 
marked with a black dot. 
The reason for the Wadjet system’s absence in the figure, is that Wadjet had no significant p-
values and was thus excluded from the plot. For this plot, we see some of the same phage families 
as the non-transformed data: The families Emilieviridae and Ludvigviridae for Abi2 (p<0.0001 & 
p=0.0008) – as well as Ludvigviridae for CRISPR-Cas class 1 (p<0.001).  In addition, Adrianviridae 
previously had a p-value that was not significant for Cas class1, but is now significant (p=0.046). 
Whereas Jeppeviridae only showed significant change for RM in the non-transformed data, it is 
now only significant for Abi2 (p=0.0007). Other than these similarities, RM had wide spread of 
significant phage abundance differences that had not been seen in previous plots. 
Analysis was done based on the Parafac model’s second factor as well, where Abi2, CRISPR-Cas 
class 1, CRISPR-Cas class 2, Mokosh, RM and the PARIS system had high loadings. Phages targeting 
Bacteroides were selected and run through the same analysis of comparing to defense systems: 
==PAGE:25==
Page 25 of 40 
 
 
 
Figure 11 - Violin plot over the CLR transformed abundances of different virus (phage) families that 
target Bacteroides. A Wilcoxon ranked sum test was done to calculate differences between groups. 
Blue signifies the samples in which the bacterium hosted a defense system, while red is the samples 
without the defense system. Adjusted p-values are done with FDR method. Medians for each group are 
marked with a black dot. 
Mokosh was tested as well but had no significant p-values and is thus not pictured in the plot. 
Interestingly, Alpaviridae is significantly different when RM (p<0.0001), PARIS (p<0.0001), Abi2 
(p=0.037) and CRISPR-Cas class 2 (p<0.0001) are present, whereas it was not for the non-
transformed data. In fact, the only significant difference found for Abi2 was for Soniaviridae, 
whereas in this figure it is not significant. In general, many similarities can be seen between figure 
11 and the non-transformed version in figure 8, such as Lasseviridae for RM (p=0.018), PARIS 
(p=0.0077) and CRISPR-Cas class 1 (p=0.0047) as well as Soniaviridae for RM (p=0.010), PARIS 
==PAGE:26==
Page 26 of 40 
 
 
(p=0.036) and CRISPR-Cas class 2 (p<0.0001). From these results, it appears that many phage 
families are affected by the RM and PARIS systems – many of the affected ones being the same, 
perhaps signifying a mutual defense against many of the same phages. For the two systems RM 
and PARIS, we also saw an interesting result in Alpaviridae and Almaviridae actually having a 
higher median when the defense systems are present. This will be discussed further in discussion 
section.  
Whereas δ-crassphage, Bertilviridae and Olineviridae were previously significantly affected by RM 
and PARIS in both Bacteroides and Parabacteroides, now these are only significant for the systems 
in Parabacteroides (see appendix 6). A similar difference between phage abundance when 
separating for RM and PARIS could be seen for Inesviridae with a p-value of 0.02 and 0.004 in 
Bacteroides and a p-value of 0.02 for both in Parabacteroides. Other similar connection could be 
seen for Rasmusviridae and RM for both bacterial genera as well. 
Summary 
A summary table was made as an overview for the different phage families in different bacteria 
and the defense systems, that are theorized to be conferring defensive properties against the 
phages. This table will focus on phages that were shown to be significantly affected (or close to 
p=0.05) in both non-transformed data and the CLR transformed data. Phage specificities hinted in 
previous results are not to be overlooked, however, as this table merely serves as overview of the 
consensus between tests. These tables can be found in appendix 7 and 8 due to their length. 
  
DISCUSSION 
In the investigation of abundance of defense systems, it was seen that RM is indeed also the most 
abundant defense system, with CRISPR-Cas following. This is very much congruent with what other 
studies have found, for example in original paper for DefenseFinder (“Systematic and quantitative 
view of the antiviral arsenal of prokaryotes” [2]), although the systems CBASS and Retron that 
were 5th and 6th most abundant defense systems in the paper are not even in top 10 in the 
COPSAC data. We also saw that the 15th most abundant defense system in the paper, PARIS, is the 
3rd most relatively abundant system in the COPSAC data. The difference in the rank amongst 
==PAGE:27==
Page 27 of 40 
 
 
abundances of CBASS, Retron and the PARIS systems might be indicative of a difference in the 
composition of bacteria in 1-year old children compared to the general wide study by F. Tesson et 
al.[2]. While not included in this study, it would be of interest to look into the abundance of these 
defense systems for species of bacteria in 1-year-olds and compare to the abundance for bacteria 
in general – Perhaps CBASS and Retron is less abundant in the young human gut microbiome while 
the PARIS system is more abundant. 
For the plot over defense systems on contigs in larger bins vs smaller bins of less than 200kbp, we 
saw that a quite large percentage (~30-40%) of defense systems were found in smaller bins 
without taxonomy attributed to them. While this is quite a large proportion of data that we do not 
look at, it is a technical limitation that is difficult to get around since taxonomy will be less precise 
for smaller bins. This high percentage does, however, point towards many defense systems being 
shared amongst species and therefore cannot be assigned to a specific species – or even just 
present on MGE in the gut microbiome samples. It is thus worth noting that our subsequent 
analyses were very specifically for unique defense systems in bacteria and might not reflect the 
properties of the entire dataset of defense systems in the samples. Future studies might be able to 
dig further into the assignment of taxonomy for MGEs and thus overcome this complication. While 
it is a downside to the data, it is important to state that certain bacteria will still have unique and 
informative defense system compositions, as the phages that target them would cause 
evolutionary selection, because they would have killed the bacteria with unrelated and unhelpful 
defense systems.  
Parafac Model 
For the Parafac models a R2 value of 28% was seen for the two selected factors. While this would 
be quite a low number in traditional data science, biological data will most often be irregular to 
some degree and hard to perfectly model. This performance is not unexpectedly low, considering 
the equivalent PCA was only slightly better at 36% and yet much more complex – since one would 
have to perform many 2-dimensional PCAs to look at the 3-dimensional data and would lose the 
overview and interplay between the three dimensions in the process. The same can be said for the 
3-factor Parafac model with a R2 value of 31%, where the amount of added variation explained 
would not make up for the added complexity of the model, despite not being totally irrelevant to 
==PAGE:28==
Page 28 of 40 
 
 
the data. So, while the Parafac model chosen pointed towards two distinct patterns of certain 
defense systems being present in specific bacterial genera, there are more patterns to extract 
from the Parafac model if one were to test with more factors. These models would not, however, 
be as simple, while explaining overall trends in the data. 
The two unique patterns, seen in the two Parafac factors, did not see much overlap between 
loadings of the bacteria, and we were thus able to extract unique defense system tendencies in 
bacteria. As for the children, many children followed both patterns in the factors while other 
children only followed one of them (meaning that they had high loadings for one, while low 
loading for the other). There are many interpretations that can be derived from these differing 
groups of children, as the causality is not explained by this plot. One is that different bacteria 
could be prevalent in different children because of a difference in gut microbiome composition – 
perhaps because of their diet. The defense systems with high loadings might then just happen to 
exist in these bacteria. Otherwise, perhaps the difference in composition could be because the 
phages would have killed the bacteria that didn’t have the appropriate defense system.  
The possibility that defense systems simply follow trends of the bacteria, might be a simplification 
of the true dynamics that lie under these biological systems, however. The fact that RM and 
CRISPR-Cas systems had high loadings in both factors could be explained by how these systems are 
so abundant in general and are thus simply present in many of the bacteria. However, it is 
theorized that due to the strain on the bacteria and their resources, a defense system would not 
be present if it was not necessary for survival and thus not coincidental. The explanation could 
then be that these systems might offer protection against a variety of phages (or simply phages 
that are very abundant) and be needed for survival in the bacterial genera we saw high loadings 
for in the Parafac model. 
The Parafac factors each had Blautia, Ruminococcus, Bifidobacterium and Bacteroides as their 
highest loadings. These go under the Lachnospiraceae, Ruminococcaceae, Bifidobacteriaceae and 
Bacteroidaceae families, respectively. As explained in the introduction, these are some of the most 
abundant bacteria for the early life gut microbiome, with Bacteroidaceae being markedly more 
abundant later around 2-3 years of age. What might be distinguishing these patterns could then 
be a factor of how “mature” the microbial composition is. Studies have previously proven that gut 
==PAGE:29==
Page 29 of 40 
 
 
microbiome “immaturity” is a risk factor for complications such as asthma[17], and it could thus 
be a fascinating point of future study to look into the distribution of bacterial defense systems and 
connections to such. 
Virome Comparison 
In general, for the differential analyses we saw many connections to both novel and known phage 
families. Surprisingly, the Blautia genus showed an absence of significant p-values (after 
adjustment) when comparing phages targeting it, which could be thought to be caused by the 
method or simply an unknown dynamic between the genus and the phages targeting it. However, 
many significant differences were the same both for non-transformed data and for the CLR 
transformed data. Interestingly, the overall trend for Bifidobacterium and Ruminococcus was that 
the number of significant differences went up after CLR transformation, while there was slightly 
less significant differences for Bacteroides. Having a lower number of significant differences seems 
to follow the normal occurrence that performing statistical tests without log-transforming 
compositional data could introduce false positive correlations. These are known to happen when 
comparing compositional data features because they are not entirely independent. The reason for 
Bifidobacterium and Ruminococcus having more significant values after CLR transformation is thus 
not entirely clear, but it could be thought that looking at ratios might accentuate the relationship 
between phages in samples with or without certain defense systems. Another possibility is that 
the method of zero replacement could make a difference in abundance significant, as this was the 
only difference between the two Wilcoxon rank sum tests other than the CLR transformation (and 
of course the normalization for bacteria abundance in each sample, which would evidently not 
have changed the results of the CLR transformation, since ratios stay the same).  
Another general tendency we saw across differential analyses was that for most phage families, 
abundances would be lower when the host had the specific defense system. This makes sense 
when the defense systems are presumed to be working against the phages that were tested. 
While there were exceptions to this in the non-transformed data, this might be a follow of the 
compositionality of the data, hence why we will focus on this only for the CLR-transformed data: 
The vast majority of phages were – relative to other phages – less abundant in presence of a 
defense system, however, Almaviridae and Alpaviridae for RM and the PARIS system in 
==PAGE:30==
Page 30 of 40 
 
 
Bacteroides were examples of exceptions to this. While there could be many possible theories of 
why this is, one could be that certain phages like to co-exist with certain bacteria, as they need the 
bacteria host present, for them to be replicated. The reason that the host bacteria have not been 
killed, could be thought to be because they are temperate phages, as these do not directly cause 
cell lysis. This seems in line with the findings of the study that suggested the naming of Alpaviridae 
(previously Alpavirinae)[24]. The newly defined family, Almaviridae, was also found to be a 
temperate phage [21]. It is, however, uncertain if this is the sole reason to this tendency, as many 
other temperate phage families, such as Adrianviridae, did not follow the exception of relatively 
lower abundance in samples with defense systems. 
While an incredible abundance of information can be found on how defense systems affect viruses 
and vice versa, there are still many parameters that can have an affect on the results found. One 
of these includes sequence information, which would help answer if the defense systems are 
placed together on defense islands and therefore the viruses show similar tendencies for both 
defense systems. Another information that could play into the dynamic between bacteria, phages 
and defense systems, is the effect of how these develop over time. Our data is a snapshot of how 
the abundances look for humans at 1 year of age, but these could very well change over time as 
the phages infect the bacteria. Further studies into these parameters could prove to be very 
important and should be investigated before final conclusions on phage specificity can be drawn. 
CONCLUSION 
Our study into defense systems in the gut microbiome showed that using DefenseFinder, it was 
possible to detect many thousands of defense system in the gut of over 600 children, 1 year of 
age. It was found that the composition of bacteria in 1-year-olds have RM, CRISPR-Cas, PARIS, 
Wadjet and Abi2 as their most relatively abundant defense systems. It was also found that a 
relatively great proportion (30-40%) of these defense systems were difficult to assign taxonomy 
to, perhaps signifying the presence of these systems on MGE. With this finding, there could 
therefore be perspectives for future studies to look into these defense systems and how they 
might differ from the defense systems assigned bacterial taxonomy to. 
The novel opportunity to couple metagenomic data with virome data for the same cohort 
elucidated an impressive plethora of possible connections from bacteria and defense systems to 
==PAGE:31==
Page 31 of 40 
 
 
bacteriophage families. Many of these connections each function as steppingstones for further 
studies looking into interplay between defense systems, how these systems might be placed in the 
bacteria genome and perhaps even predator-prey models over the phage and bacteria abundance 
dynamics that happen over time in the gut microbiome. 
While five genera of bacteria were tested in detail, many more gut microbiome bacteria exist and 
could contain valuable biological information. This could help finally answering the many 
questions that still remain over the biology of phages and defense systems, as well as their 
hitherto unknown functions. With these initial findings, many more bacteria can be tested in a 
likewise manner or with many more parameters taken into consideration and perhaps finally give 
us a better view into the wonderfully complex relationship between bacterial gut microbiome, 
their defense systems, and the gut virome. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:32==
Page 32 of 40 
 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
A. Millman et al., “An expanded arsenal of immune systems that protect bacteria from 
phages,” Cell Host Microbe, vol. 30, no. 11, pp. 1556-1569.e5, 2022, doi: 
10.1016/j.chom.2022.09.017. 
[2] 
F. Tesson et al., “Systematic and quantitative view of the antiviral arsenal of prokaryotes,” 
Nat. Commun., vol. 13, no. 1, 2022, doi: 10.1038/s41467-022-30269-9. 
[3] 
S. J. Labrie, J. E. Samson, and S. Moineau, “Bacteriophage resistance mechanisms,” Nat. Rev. 
Microbiol. 2010 85, vol. 8, no. 5, pp. 317–327, Mar. 2010, doi: 10.1038/NRMICRO2315. 
[4] 
P. H. Oliveira, M. Touchon, and E. P. C. Rocha, “The interplay of restriction-modification 
systems with mobile genetic elements and their prokaryotic hosts,” Nucleic Acids Res., vol. 
42, no. 16, pp. 10618–10631, 2014, doi: 10.1093/nar/gku734. 
[5] 
A. Pickar-Oliver and C. A. Gersbach, “The next generation of CRISPR–Cas technologies and 
applications,” doi: 10.1038/s41580-019-0131-5. 
[6] 
G. Ofir et al., “DISARM is a widespread bacterial defence system with broad anti-phage 
activities,” Nat. Microbiol., vol. 3, no. 1, pp. 90–98, 2018, doi: 10.1038/s41564-017-0051-0. 
[7] 
T. Goldfarb et al., “BREX is a novel phage resistance system widespread in microbial 
genomes,” EMBO J., vol. 34, pp. 169–183, 2015, doi: 10.15252/embj.201489455. 
[8] 
A. Bernheim, D. Bikard, M. Touchon, and E. P. C. Rocha, “Atypical organizations and epistatic 
interactions of CRISPRs and cas clusters in genomes and their mobile genetic elements,” 
Nucleic Acids Res., vol. 48, no. 2, pp. 748–760, 2020, doi: 10.1093/nar/gkz1091. 
[9] 
M. C. Chopin, A. Chopin, and E. Bidnenko, “Phage abortive infection in lactococci: Variations 
on a theme,” Current Opinion in Microbiology, vol. 8, no. 4. Elsevier Current Trends, pp. 
473–479, Aug. 01, 2005, doi: 10.1016/j.mib.2005.06.006. 
[10] 
F. Rousset et al., “Phages and their satellites encode hotspots of antiviral systems,” Cell Host 
Microbe, vol. 30, no. 5, pp. 740-753.e5, 2022, doi: 10.1016/j.chom.2022.02.018. 
[11] 
M. C. Arrieta, L. T. Stiemsma, N. Amenyogbe, E. Brown, and B. Finlay, “The intestinal 
microbiome in early life: Health and disease,” Frontiers in Immunology, vol. 5, no. AUG. 
==PAGE:33==
Page 33 of 40 
 
 
2014, doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2014.00427. 
[12] 
T. C. Mangericao, Z. Peng, and X. Zhang, “Computational prediction of CRISPR cassettes in 
gut metagenome samples from Chinese type-2 diabetic patients and healthy controls,” 
2015, doi: 10.1186/s12918-015-0248-x. 
[13] 
G. B. Gloor, J. M. Macklaim, V. Pawlowsky-Glahn, and J. J. Egozcue, “Microbiome datasets 
are compositional: And this is not optional,” Front. Microbiol., vol. 8, no. NOV, p. 2224, Nov. 
2017, doi: 10.3389/FMICB.2017.02224/BIBTEX. 
[14] 
A. D. Fernandes, J. N. S. Reid, J. M. Macklaim, T. A. McMurrough, D. R. Edgell, and G. B. 
Gloor, “Unifying the analysis of high-throughput sequencing datasets: Characterizing RNA-
seq, 16S rRNA gene sequencing and selective growth experiments by compositional data 
analysis,” Microbiome, vol. 2, no. 1, pp. 1–13, May 2014, doi: 10.1186/2049-2618-2-
15/COMMENTS. 
[15] 
S. Lubbe, P. Filzmoser, and M. Templ, “Comparison of zero replacement strategies for 
compositional data with large numbers of zeros,” Chemom. Intell. Lab. Syst., vol. 210, p. 
104248, Mar. 2021, doi: 10.1016/J.CHEMOLAB.2021.104248. 
[16] 
S. S. Abby, B. Néron, H. Ménager, M. Touchon, and E. P. C. Rocha, “MacSyFinder: A program 
to mine genomes for molecular systems with an application to CRISPR-Cas systems,” PLoS 
One, vol. 9, no. 10, 2014, doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0110726. 
[17] 
J. Stokholm et al., “Maturation of the gut microbiome and risk of asthma in childhood,” doi: 
10.1038/s41467-017-02573-2. 
[18] 
J. N. Nissen et al., “Improved metagenome binning and assembly using deep variational 
autoencoders,” Nat. Biotechnol. 2021 395, vol. 39, no. 5, pp. 555–560, Jan. 2021, doi: 
10.1038/S41587-020-00777-4. 
[19] 
D. H. Parks, M. Imelfort, C. T. Skennerton, P. Hugenholtz, and G. W. Tyson, “CheckM: 
assessing the quality of microbial genomes recovered from isolates, single cells, and 
metagenomes,” Genome Res., vol. 25, no. 7, pp. 1043–1055, Jul. 2015, doi: 
10.1101/GR.186072.114. 
==PAGE:34==
Page 34 of 40 
 
 
[20] 
D. Hyatt, G. L. Chen, P. F. LoCascio, M. L. Land, F. W. Larimer, and L. J. Hauser, “Prodigal: 
Prokaryotic gene recognition and translation initiation site identification,” BMC 
Bioinformatics, vol. 11, no. 1, pp. 1–11, Mar. 2010, doi: 10.1186/1471-2105-11-
119/TABLES/5. 
[21] 
S. A. Shah et al., “Hundreds of viral families in the healthy infant gut,” bioRxiv, p. 
2021.07.02.450849, Jul. 2021, doi: 10.1101/2021.07.02.450849. 
[22] 
F. Cobo et al., “Misidentification of Phocaeicola (Bacteroides) dorei in two patients with 
bacteremia,” Anaerobe, vol. 75, Jun. 2022, doi: 10.1016/j.anaerobe.2022.102544. 
[23] 
M. Sakamoto and Y. Benno, “Reclassification of Bacteroides distasonis, Bacteroides 
goldsteinii and Bacteroides merdae as Parabacteroides distasonis gen. nov., comb. nov., 
Parabacteroides goldsteinii comb. nov. and Parabacteroides merdae comb. nov,” Int. J. Syst. 
Evol. Microbiol., vol. 56, no. Pt 7, pp. 1599–1605, Jul. 2006, doi: 10.1099/IJS.0.64192-0. 
[24] 
M. Krupovic and P. Forterre, “Microviridae goes temperate: microvirus-related proviruses 
reside in the genomes of Bacteroidetes.,” PLoS One, vol. 6, no. 5, p. e19893, May 2011, doi: 
10.1371/JOURNAL.PONE.0019893. 
 
 
 
 
 
APPENDIX 
 
Appendix 0: 
NB: All scripts produced for this project can be seen in according folders at  
https://github.com/AstaLaugesen/MastersThesis 
 
==PAGE:35==
Page 35 of 40 
 
 
Appendix 1:  
 
Appendix 1: Counts over data of the RM defense system ratio in different bacterial genera - showing 
binary tendency.  
 
Appendix 2:  
 
Appendix 2: Initial Parafac model of absence/presence data of defense systems in bacteria. Run with 
100 random starts, no constraints and 3 factors.  
 
 
==PAGE:36==
Page 36 of 40 
 
 
Appendix 3: 
 
Appendix 3: Parafac model of absence/presence data of defense systems in bacteria. Run with 100 
random starts, non-negative constraints and 2 factors. Shows all top 50 most abundant bacteria.  
Appendix 4:  
 
Appendix 4: Wilcoxon rank sum test of phage abundances in samples where the target bacteria, 
Blautia, had or did not have certain defense systems. Phage abundances normalized for bacterial 
abundance; p-values adjusted with FDR method. 
 
==PAGE:37==
Page 37 of 40 
 
 
Appendix 5:  
 
Appendix 5: Wilcoxon rank sum test of phage abundances in samples where the target bacteria, 
Parabacteroides, had or did not have certain defense systems. Phage abundances normalized for 
bacterial abundance; p-values adjusted with FDR method. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:38==
Page 38 of 40 
 
 
Appendix 6:  
 
 
Appendix 6: Violin plot over the CLR transformed abundances of different virus (phage) families that 
target Parabacteroides. A Wilcoxon ranked sum test was done to calculate differences between groups. 
Blue signifies the samples in which the bacterium hosted a defense system, while red is the samples 
without the defense system. Adjusted p-values are done with FDR method. Medians for each group are 
marked with a black dot 
Appendix 7: 
Table 1: Factor 1 – Bifidobacterium and Ruminococcus. Consensus table of significant or near-
significant p-values from Wilcoxon rank sum test over phage abundances when certain defense 
systems are present in sample: 
Bacteria genus 
Phage family 
Defense system 
FDR adjusted p-value 
for non log-
transformed data 
FDR adjusted p-value 
for CLR transformed 
data 
Bifidobacterium 
Ellinorviridae 
Abi2 
0.017 
<0.0001 
Ellinorviridae 
Cas class 1 
0.083 
0.0001 
Helenaviridae 
Abi2 
0.017 
0.0015 
==PAGE:39==
Page 39 of 40 
 
 
Ruminococcus 
Emilieviridae 
Abi2 
0.017 
<0.0001 
Ludvigviridae 
Abi2 
0.017 
0.0003 
Ludvigviridae 
Cas class 1 
0.001 
<0.0001 
Adrianviridae 
Abi2 
0.017 
0.0008 
Adrianviridae 
Cas class 1 
0.096 
0.046 
 
Appendix 8: 
Table 1: Factor 2 – Bacteroides and Parabacteroides. Consensus table of significant or near-
significant p-values from Wilcoxon rank sum test over phage abundances when certain defense 
systems are present in sample: 
Bacteria genus 
Phage family 
Defense system 
FDR adjusted p-value 
for non log-
transformed data 
FDR adjusted p-value 
for CLR transformed 
data 
Bacteroides 
Lasseviridae 
Cas class1 
0.003 
0.0047 
Lasseviridae 
RM 
0.002 
0.018 
Lasseviridae 
PARIS 
0.001 
0.0077 
Hannahviridae 
Cas class2 
0.023 
0.0067 
Hannahviridae 
RM 
<0.001 
<0.0001 
Hannahviridae 
PARIS 
<0.001 
<0.0001 
Soniaviridae 
Cas class 2 
<0.001 
<0.0001 
Soniaviridae 
RM 
0.001 
0.010 
Soniaviridae 
PARIS 
0.002 
0.036 
Rigmorviridae 
RM 
<0.001 
<0.0001 
Rigmorviridae 
PARIS 
<0.001 
<0.0001 
Inesviridae 
RM 
0.004 
0.020 
Inesviridae 
PARIS 
0.016 
0.0035 
Arnviridae 
RM 
0.002 
0.010 
Arnviridae 
PARIS 
0.002 
0.011 
Almaviridae 
RM 
0.005 
0.0069 
Almaviridae 
PARIS 
0.003 
0.0023 
Parabacteroides 
Olineviridae 
Abi2 
0.022 
0.010 
==PAGE:40==
Page 40 of 40 
 
 
Olineviridae 
Mokosh 
0.050 
0.028 
Olineviridae 
RM 
0.009 
0.0002 
Olineviridae 
PARIS 
0.035 
0.0028 
Karenviridae 
Abi2 
0.044 
0.025 
Karenviridae 
Mokosh 
0.015 
0.0034 
Karenviridae 
RM 
0.002 
<0.0001 
Karenviridae 
PARIS 
0.002 
<0.0001 
Rasmusviridae 
Abi2 
0.009 
0.0008 
Rasmusviridae 
Mokosh 
0.014 
0.0021 
Rasmusviridae 
RM 
<0.001 
<0.0001 
Rasmusviridae 
PARIS 
0.001 
<0.0001 
Astridviridae 
Cas class2 
0.028 
0.0008 
Astridviridae 
RM 
<0.001 
<0.0001 
Astridviridae 
PARIS 
<0.001 
<0.0001 
ε-Crassviridae 
Mokosh 
0.002 
0.0002 
ε-Crassviridae 
RM 
0.013 
0.0019 
ε-Crassviridae 
PARIS 
0.014 
0.0029 
Vibeviridae 
Mokosh 
0.026 
0.0040 
Vibeviridae 
RM 
0.009 
0.0003 
Vibeviridae 
PARIS 
0.019 
0.0018 
Sandersviridae 
Mokosh 
<0.001 
<0.0001 
Sandersviridae 
RM 
0.004 
0.0004 
Sandersviridae 
PARIS 
0.011 
0.0028 
Inesviridae 
Mokosh 
0.060 
0.0144 
Bertilviridae 
Mokosh 
0.05 
0.0376 
Bertilviridae 
RM 
<0.001 
<0.0001 
Bertilviridae 
PARIS 
<0.001 
<0.0001 
δ -Crassviridae 
RM 
0.009 
0.0019 
δ -Crassviridae 
PARIS 
0.011 
0.0028 
 
 
