==PAGE:1==
Thermal Radiation Between Wooden Facades in
High-Rise Buildings
An Investigation in Fire Safety Distance Between High-Rise Buildings
with Wooden Facades
Master Thesis
DTU Construct
Department of Civil and Mechanical Engineering
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Thermal Radiation Between Wooden Facades in High­Rise Buildings
An Investigation in Fire Safety Distance Between High­Rise Buildings with Wooden Facades
Master Thesis
January, 2023
By
Karoline Sandfeld­Nielsen
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the custom­
ary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Photo to the left: Photo of facade fire experiment, Karoline Sandfeld­Nielsen,
2022. Photo to the the right: Screenshot of FDS facade simulation, Karoline
Sandfeld­Nieslen, 2023
Published by:
DTU, Department of Civil and Mechanical Engineering, Koppels Allé, Build­
ing 404, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
www.construct.dtu.dk
==PAGE:4==
Preface
This thesis has been prepared over five months at the Section for Design and Processes, De­
partment of Civil and Mechanical Engineering, at the Technical University of Denmark, DTU,
in partial fulfilment for the degree in Master of Science in Engineering – Civil Engineering,
M.Sc. Eng. The extent of the thesis is 30 ECTS points.
It is assumed that the reader has a basic knowledge in the areas of fire safety and fire
dynamics.
Karoline Sandfeld­Nielsen ­ s173793
Signature
Date
ii
Thermal Radiation Between Wooden Facades in High­Rise Buildings
21/01/2023
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
The aim of this thesis was to determine a safety distance between wooden facades on high­
rise building, to prevent fire propagation. To investigate and determine a safety distance the
following are covered and completed in this report.
Two methods were used as preliminary hand calculations to determine a safety distance.
Rough FDS models were created to support the results, and determine which method gave
the most realistic results. For the hand calculations and rough FDS models, it was assumed
that the whole facade was ablaze and radiating toward an adjacent facade.
Experimental testing was executed with four intermediate facade burning experiments. Each
of the four experiments were influenced by varying exterior conditions, such as various wind
speeds and size in ignition source. The construction of the facade was stationary and was
2.4 m wide and 1.9 m high. The greatest temperature was measured with thermocouple type
K, to be 888.4°C in the cavity. Additionally bomb calorimetry tests of the wooden species
used in the facade construction were conducted. All the wooden species were pinewood but
treated differently by the suppliers.
A FDS model of the first facade burning test was created. This model did not include a
wind source, and the ignition source in FDS was on 14 kW, instead of the 9.5 kW used
in the experiment. The FDS model’s results fitted somewhat to the physical experiment’s
results. The largest difference in model and physical test, was the flame propagation. The
propagation of flames in the FDS and physical experiment was similar up until the ignition
source was removed. The flames extinguished when the ignition source was removed in the
physical experiment, where in the FDS model the flames continued. This might be credited
to the model not accounting for Ts,min. The temperature development in the FDS model, was
like the experiment test, up until the ignition source was removed.
The FDS model of the intermediate facade burning experiment was scaled up to resemble
two wooden facades adjacent to one another, where on one of the facades a fire was simu­
lated. Six different cases were created. Where there were two fire scenarios. One scenario
had a fire comparable to a waste basket with a HRR on 100 kW. The other fire was coming
from two windows in a compartment, which had experienced a flashover. There were three
different distances tested for each initial fire, which where 5 m, 7.5m, and 10 m. The fire on
the burning facade was too small to influence an adjacent facade with radiation significant.
From the simulations it was found that 5 m would be a safe distance, but this was due to the
initial fire not being large, and not spreading very much. Furthermore, the simulations did
not run for more than 888 seconds. Whereas it was found with the initial rough models, that
when the whole facade was ablaze, a safety distance on 12.2 m would be sufficient to not
spread fire to an adjacent building.
Thermal Radiation Between Wooden Facades in High­Rise Buildings
iii
==PAGE:6==
Resumé
Formålet med dette kandidatspeciale var at bestemme en sikkerhedsafstand mellem to høj­
huse med træfacader således, at der ikke vil opstå brandspredning. For at undersøge og
bestemme en sikkerhedsafstand, er følgende blevet udført og gennemgået i denne rapport:
Der blev udført indledende håndberegninger, hvor to metoder blev brugt, til at udregne en
sikkerhedsafstand. Yderligere blev der lavet grove FDS modeller, med tilhørende simu­
leringer, til at støtte op om håndberegningerne, og undersøge hvilken metode der gav de
mest realistiske resultater. Det var antaget i både håndberegningerne og FDS modellerne,
at hele den brandramte facade var antændt.
Fire eksperimentelle forsøg blev udført, med facadeafbrændinger under forskellige omkring­
værende forhold. Hvert afbrændingsforsøg blev udsat for varierende kombinationer af vin­
dstyrker og størrelse på brændstofkilde. Selve facadekonstruktionen blev der ikke ændret
på undervejs. Facadekonstruktionen var 2,4 m bred og 1,9 m høj. Den højeste temper­
atur målt, med termokobler type K, lå på 888,4°C, hvilket var inde i det ventilerede hulrum.
Yderligere blev der udført bombekalorimetri på de forskellige typer af træ, brugt til at bygge
facaden op. Alle trætyperne var fyrretræ, men de var fra producentens side blevet behandlet
på forskellige måder.
Der blev udført en FDS model af det første facadeafbrændingsforsøg. I denne model var
der ikke nogen vindpåvirkning på facaden, og der blev benyttet en brandkilde på 14 kW,
selvom der i forsøget blev brugt en brandkilde på 9,5 kW. Resultaterne fra FDSsimulerin­
gen var sammenlignelige med det fysiske forsøg op indtil brandkilden blev fjernet. Inden
brandkilden blev fjernet, havde både simulering og forsøg samme temperatur­ og flamme­
spredningsforløb. Efter brandkilden blev fjernet i forsøget døde flammerne ud kort tid efter.
I FDS simuleringen fortsatte flammespredningen, og dermed var der også målt højere tem­
peraturer senere i brandforløbet i FDS simuleringen sammenlignet med forsøget. Dette kan
forklares med, at der ikke er blevet taget højde for Ts,min i FDS modellen.
FDS­modellen af facadeafbrændingsforsøget, blev skaleret op til at ligne to højhuse med
træfacader placeret over for hinanden. Der var på den ene af facaderne placeret en brand,
der skulle sprede sig til resten af facaden. Der blev lavet seks forskellige modeller. Der
blev brugt to brandscenarier, det ene scenarie blev kodet til at minde om en affaldsspand
med en brandeffekt på 100 kW. Det andet brandscenarie var kodet til at være flammer fra
to vinduer i facaden. Fra hvert vindue var der en brandeffekt på 200 kW. For hver af de
to brandscenarier, blev der modelleret tre forskellige afstande på hhv. 5 m, 7,5 m og 10
m. Selve branden på facaden i simuleringerne spredte sig ikke særlig meget, og var derfor
forholdsvis lille. Branden var så lille, at denne ikke havde nogen betydelig effekt på den
modstående facade. Det var således muligt at udlede, at der ikke ville ske brandspredning
mellem facaderne, med en afstand helt ned på 5 m. Dog er dette kun gældende for de første
888 sekunder af brandforløbet, og for lige netop de brandscenarier og den facadeopbygning
brugt i denne rapport. Resultatet fra de grove modeller, hvor hele facaden var antændt, var,
at der skulle være en sikkerhedsafstand på minimum 12,2 m for at undgå brandspredning
mellem træfacaderne.
iv
Thermal Radiation Between Wooden Facades in High­Rise Buildings
==PAGE:7==
Acknowledgements
Lars Schiøtt Sørensen Supervisor
Associate Professor, Technical University of Denmark DTU
I’d like to express my gratitude to Lars Schiøtt Sørensen, for providing supervision throughout
the process of creating this thesis, and for providing measurement equipment for part of the
experimental work.
Joakim Wåhlén Sparring partner
Fire specialist and Master in Fire Safety
Sincere gratitude to Joakim for being a great cooperation partner throughout the process of
the experimental work.
MOE ­ Artelia Group Fire Safety Department
Finally, I’d like to express my sincere gratitude to MOE for providing a great workplace
through the entire process. Especially thanks to the Fire Safety team for the support, en­
couragement, and always being ready to answer questions ranging from fire safety, FDS
and HPC Clusters.
Thermal Radiation Between Wooden Facades in High­Rise Buildings
v
==PAGE:8==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Resumé . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
v
Nomenclature
viii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Introduction and Motivation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Aim and Objective . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.3
Limitations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.4
Method
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2
Background Information
3
2.1
Legislation Regarding Wooden Facades and Safety Distance . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
Construction of Wooden Facades in Commercial Use
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.3
Fire Performance of Wood . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.4
Urban­ and Facade Fires
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.5
Case: Stavnsholtskolen . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3
Theory
15
3.1
Heat Transfer . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3.2
Wood Properties and Fire Spread
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3.3
How a Fire Starts in a Facade . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
3.4
CFD . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
4
Method
25
4.1
Experimental Work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
4.2
FDS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
4.3
Up­scaling of Experiment in FDS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
5
Preliminary Safety Distance Calculations
41
5.1
SFPE
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
5.2
Radiation from Flame and Smoke
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
5.3
Rough FDS models
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
5.4
Discussion
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
6
Experimental Investigations
45
6.1
Results: Facade burning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
6.2
Discussion
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
6.3
Results: Bomb Calorimeter . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
56
7
FDS Simulation of Facade Experiment
60
7.1
Results: Temperature and Heat Flux Development . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
60
7.2
Results: Flame Height and Charring . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
63
7.3
Discussion
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
65
vi
Thermal Radiation Between Wooden Facades in High­Rise Buildings
==PAGE:9==
8
Up­Scaling of FDS­Model
68
8.1
Results
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
68
8.2
Discussion
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
72
9
Discussion
73
10 Conclusion
74
11 Further Work
76
Bibliography
80
Appendix
86
Thermal Radiation Between Wooden Facades in High­Rise Buildings
vii
==PAGE:10==
Nomenclature
Abbreviations
ACM­PE Aluminium composite material polyethylene
ATV
Akademiet for de Tekniske Videnskaber
BR(E) Building Research Establishment
CFAST Consolidated Fire and Smoke Transport
CFD
Computational fluid dynamics
CFT
Critical flame temperature
DNS
Direct numerical simulation
DTU
Danmarks Tekniske Universitet
FDS
Fire Dynamic Simulation
FEM
Finite element method
FVM
Finite volume method
Glulam Glue laminated timber
HPC
High Performance Computing
HRR
Heat release rate
IEBC International Existing Building Code
IEC
International Electrotechnical Commission
MDF
Medium density fiberboard
NIST
National Institute of Standards and Technology
OBS
Oriented strandboard
PIR
Polyisocyanurate
PPV
Positive pressure ventilator
REI
R ­ load­bearing capacity and stability. E ­ integrity. I ­ insulation ability
RTE
Direct numerical simulation
SFPE Society of Fire Protection Engineers
TGA
Thermogravimetric analysis
VLES Very large eddy simulation
VTT
Technical Research Centre of Finland
Greek Symbols
α
Absorption
β
Thermal expansion coefficient
viii
Thermal Radiation Between Wooden Facades in High­Rise Buildings
==PAGE:11==
χradpine Heat release fraction for pine
∆Hc
Heat of combustion
δn
Gas phase cell size
∆T
Temperature increase
δf
Distance fuel is exposed to flames
κ
Absorption coefficient
λ
Wavelength
µ
Absolute viscosity
ϕ
Configuration factor (also view factor)
ρ
Density
ρ∞
Density of ambient air
σ
Stefan­Boltzmann’s constant, 5.67 · 10−8 [W/m2K4]
τ
Reflection
θ
Angle
ε
Emissivity
εfl
Emissivity from flames
Latin Symbols
˙qs′′′
Source term
˙
qs,c′′′
Chemical source term in the solid phase heat conduction equation
˙
qs,r′′′
Radiative source term in the heat conduction equation
˙Q
Heat release rate
˙q′′
Heat flux
A
Area
C
Correction factor
C
Empirical coefficient for natural convection
c
Specific heat capacity
D∗
Characteristic fire diameter
E
Total emissive power
Eλ
Emissive power of real surface
Ep
Emissive power
Eb,λ
Energy emitted per unit area of an ideal emitter
F12
Configuration factor (also view factor)
g
Gravitational acceleration
Gr
Grashof number
Thermal Radiation Between Wooden Facades in High­Rise Buildings
ix
==PAGE:12==
hc
Convective heat flux coefficient
Hf
Height of rectangular wall flames
Ir
Irradiance
K
Absorption coefficient
k
Thermal conductivity
K1
Radiation reduction factor
L
Characteristic length
l
Characteristic length
L0
Geometric mean beam length
Le
Mean beam length
m
Mass
Nu
The Nusselt number
Pr
Prandtl’s number
q
Heat Flux
qc
Convective heat transfer
Qair
Air volume
qemi,fl Incident radiation
qinc
Incident heat flux
Qw
Heat release rate per unit width
r
Radius
T∞
Ambient temperature
TCFT
Critical flame temperature
Te
Expected flame temperature
Tfb
“free­burn” temperature
Tfl
Flame temperature
Tg
Gas temperature
Tig
Ignition temperature
Tijk
Cell bulk temperature
TOI
Thermodynamic equilibrium property at extinction
Ts
Surface temperature
Tw
Temperature near surface
v
Velocity
Xo2,ijk Limiting oxygen concentration
XOI
Thermodynamic equilibrium property at extinction
x
Thermal Radiation Between Wooden Facades in High­Rise Buildings
==PAGE:13==
1
Introduction
1.1
Introduction and Motivation
The increased focus on the building sector’s carbon footprint has created a need to build
more environmentally sustainable. This has led to changes in the Danish building legislation
from 2023. From 2023 there will be requirements for production of buildings materials and
waste processing of building materials by the end of their usage. There is an enhanced focus
on new buildings’ life cycles [1]. Wood as a building material is much less CO2 demanding,
than the traditional building materials such as concrete and steel. Hence wood is used more
often in new constructions, not only in small single­family houses, but in big high­risers and
prestige projects. E.g. Mjøstårnet, an 85.4 m high­rise building in Norway [2], the new UN17
village, with several apartment blocks in Copenhagen [3] and Marmormolen, a domicile in
Copenhagen [4]. Some of these new buildings are a mix between wood, concrete, and
steel, but often the aim is to build with as much wood as possible. Today wood can be used
in the structural parts, room dividers and facades [2]. However, buildings with wood in bigger
projects, such as high risers, are challenging in regard to the fire safety regulations, and the
legislation can inhibit the use of wood [5].
To aid in the process of building more sustainable with wood, there is a need to investigate
how to construct fire safe wooden buildings. Today’s focus, regarding fire safety, is fire spread
on wooden facades, and how it spreads on facades. However, investigations of fire spread
between high­rise buildings with wooden facades are limited.
Fire spread between buildings, especially in densely built cities, can be critical, since it can
lead to large city fires, this has been seen before in Japan, Denmark, and Germany, see
section 2 ­ Urban­ and Facade Fires for more. If a whole city burns down, it is of little value if
it was built environmentally sustainable in wood, because all the stored CO2, will be released
back into the atmosphere. Therefore, it is crucial to construct new buildings with great caution
and be aware of the fire risks, and which measurements are needed to prevent fire spread.
1.2
Aim and Objective
There has been an increase in facade fires in recent years [6], and on top of that, there is an
enhanced pressure on the construction industry to apply more wood [7]. The occurrence of
facade fires and the added amount of combustible material can be a dangerous combination
for personal and property safety, if not handled with caution. A great amount of research has
been completed regarding facade fires in wood. Most research have focused fire spread on
a singular facade, which is also of great importance. However, there is less research in the
safety distance between wooden facades. Therefore, the aim of this thesis is to investigate:
What safety distance, between high­rise buildings with wooden facades, should be applied
to avoid fire propagation?
This is to be accomplished with a combination of preliminary hand calculations, experiments
and CFD simulations.
1.3
Limitations
For a fire to spread between buildings, the fire needs to be huge and cover a large section
of the facade. Large flames must be present. This demands facades which contains a great
amount of combustible material, that can be used as fuel. Then the heat flux and radiation
Thermal Radiation Between Wooden Facades in High­Rise Buildings
1
==PAGE:14==
might be large enough to reach and ignite a radiation exposed facade. To reach this type
of fire spread and growth, it will have to be late in the duration of the fire. Therefore, rather
large, but realistic, fires and fuel sources are applied in this thesis. To furthermore narrow
the scope of the thesis, a few limitations are applied:
• The focus is on high­rise buildings, hence legislation and fires in smaller buildings are
not included. Additionally in this project a building is regarded as a high­rise building
when it is above 12 m (∼4 floors).
• Only one type of wooden facade is considered. The facade is constructed in a specific
way, and there is only used pine wood. A thorough description of the facade is given
in section 4.1.1. There are many ways to construct a wooden facade, and different
wooden species can be used, hence the results from this thesis applies only for this
specific facade construction. The results cannot be generalized to all wooden facades.
• The wind’s effect on fires varies depending on wind direction and wind speed. For this
reason, there is the assumption in the CFD simulations that no wind is present.
1.4
Method
1.4.1
Background Information
Literature with background information has been written, to emphasize why this thesis is rel­
evant, and bring background information to the reader regarding legislation, how a common
wooden facade is built, how many high­rise facade fires have occurred in recent years, and
the severity of them, and history on urban fires. The primary sources for the literature used
have been articles found by using DTU’s digital library Findit and Google Scholar, where
access to articles has been granted through DTU.
1.4.2
Experiments
Experiments are a part of this thesis. Four tests with a wooden facade fire in FireLab, with
different conditions were performed. The facade burning experiments were completed in
collaboration with Joakim Wåhlén and built with the help of Morten Mølgaard Schmidt.
Experiments with a Bomb Calorimeter have been run on the wooden materials used in the
facade. Testing of the wooden materials was made to calibrate the FDS model, with heat of
combustion data, to be more attuned to the facade experiment.
1.4.3
Preliminary Calculations
Preliminary hand calculations were done to find a safety distance, between two wooden
facades. Two methods have been used, one by the SFPE Handbook, chapter 86, and one by
theory used on radiation from smoke and flames, from the book: Temperature Calculation in
Fire Safety Engineering, by Ulf Wickström. In addition to the calculations, rough FDS models
have been made to support the calculations.
1.4.4
CFD Simulations
Multiple CFD simulations have been conducted using The National Institute of Standards
and Technology’s (NIST) simulation software FDS (Fire Dynamic Simulator), additionally the
simulations have been run on Central DTU HPC Cluster (LSF 10). A FDS model have been
made to resemble the first facade burning experiment. In this model the results from the
bomb calorimeter test were utilized. The results from the FDS simulation have been com­
pared to the results from the experiment. The FDS model was then scaled up to resemble
two high­rise buildings with wooden facades. Both buildings were modelled to be 17 m tall
and 15 m wide. Six simulations with variations of this model were run, with different distances
between the facades, and two different fire scenarios.
2
Thermal Radiation Between Wooden Facades in High­Rise Buildings
==PAGE:15==
2
Background Information
2.1
Legislation Regarding Wooden Facades and Safety Distance
This section describes the Danish legislation regarding building facades, and the safety dis­
tance between buildings. Since this report focus on high­rise buildings, the requirements
described are for high­rise buildings, however there are some overlaps between regulation
for smaller buildings.
According to the Danish building legislation § 82, part 4, when a building is designed, it must
be designed in a way so, in case of fire, fire will not spread to other buildings. Furthermore,
according to § 125, a building must be placed, so fire will not spread to other buildings [8].
2.1.1
Prescriptive-Based Codes
The prescriptive codes from the Danish building legislation offers two different distance re­
quirements. One is the distance between buildings on the same plot, and the other is the
distance from the building to the neighboring site boundary.
In table 2.1 there is an overview of the prescriptive codes’ safety distances regarding place­
ment of buildings near site boundary and buildings on the same plot. As it can be observed
in table 2.1 the distance differs depending on the construction of the external wall surface
and which material classification the rain cover has.
Table 2.1: Overview of the relation between covering class, material class and distance.
Adapted from BR18 chapter 5, chapter 4 – Ignition, fire­ and smoke propagation [9]
External wall
surface1)
Rain cover on
the external
wall
Minimum distance
from external wall
to site boundary
Rain cover on
other buildings on
the same plot
Minimum distance from
building to other
buildings on the same
plot
Covering Class
K1 10 / B­s1,d0
­
2.5 m
­
5.0 m
Material class
B­s1,d02)
2.5 m
Material class
B­s1,d0
5.0 m
Material class
D­s2,d2
7.5 m
Open facades or
glass facades3)
5.0 m
Not applicable
Further specifications of table 2.1:
1. External wall surfaces, on buildings with top floor being 22 m above ground or less, can
be in covering class K1 10 / B­s2,d0, instead of K1 10 / B­s1,d0. This can be constructed
in such a way, that either the outer wall is in covering class K1 10 / B­s2,d0, without
a rain cover, or with rain cover being in B­s2,d0, and the underlying wall surface is in
covering class K1 10 / B­s1,d0.
2. Rain cover in material class B­s1,d0, is only allowed to be used in buildings with top
floor being 22 m above ground or less. If the top floor is placed more than 22 m above
ground, the rain cover has to be in material class A2­s1,d0.
3. If a building is fully sprinkled, the distance to site boundary can be decreased to 2.5 m.
Furthermore, if a building is placed less than 2.5 meters from the site boundary, the outer
wall facing the site boundary must be constructed in building part class REI 120 A2­s1, d0.
Thermal Radiation Between Wooden Facades in High­Rise Buildings
3
==PAGE:16==
If there are any installations or other building parts that are part of the wall facing the site
boundary, they have be constructed in a way, so it does not decrease the fire resistance of
the wall [9, section 4.7.1].
Facades in material class D­s2,d2 is only allowed on buildings, which is either one story tall
or top floor is maximum placed 5.1 meters above ground, if the building is fully sprinklered
[9].
2.1.2
Performance-Based Codes
There is the option to use performance­based codes, when designing new buildings. This is
used when it is not possible to follow the prescriptive codes. When it comes the performance­
based codes regarding safety distance between buildings, the acceptance requirement is;
there must not be a thermal heat radiation on the adjacent building on more than 15 kW/m²
within the first 60 minutes of the beginning of the fire. This is described in the Danish building
regulation chapter 5 – Fire, chapter 8 ­ Verification Guide [10, section 8.2.4].
2.2
Construction of Wooden Facades in Commercial Use
It is important to notice the difference between rain cover and facade cladding. The primary
purpose of a rain cover is to protect, the materials behind it, against the weather. Where
the objective of the facade cladding is to protect the materials behind it against fire. This is
the reason why there are different requirement for respectively coverings class and material
class [11].
Construction of an external wall with wooden facade, is in the commercial world often done
in one of the following three different ways:
A The external wall is constructed using a wooden frame, this can either be with or without
primary load bearing elements. Then the facade cladding is suspended on the exterior
side.
B The external wall is constructed with a load bearing rear wall, which can be in concrete
or masonry. In front of the rear wall a wooden frame (front wall) is placed, where the
facade cladding is suspended, just as if the whole construction was in wood.
C The facade cladding can also be suspended on a heavy external wall, where both front
and rear wall are in concrete or masonry.
There are in figure 2.1 three drawings of the different exterior walls described above. The
figure is a redrawn version of the one found in TRÆ 55 [11]. A facade cladding can also
be suspended on and used with prefabricated wooden elements. Usually the prefabricated
wooden element producers’ offer special­made elements, that fit the costumers’ need. Here
the facade cladding can either be part of the prefabricated exterior wall element or be sus­
pended on the element later in the construction process.
It is worth mentioning, that steel is also used in construction today, and can be used in a
frame structure, in the same fashion as a wooden frame, described above in point A.
4
Thermal Radiation Between Wooden Facades in High­Rise Buildings
==PAGE:17==
Figure 2.1: Examples of external walls with wooden facade cladding
2.2.1
Void and Ventilation
Generally, there are four different ways of suspending a wooden facade suspended on the ex­
ternal wall in regard to ventilation and void between the exterior wall and the facade cladding
[12]:
A The void can be fully rear ventilated. There is a void between the external wall and the
facade cladding, furthermore there are openings in the top and bottom of the wall, so
it is possible to have an air flow between the external wall and the facade cladding.
B The void can partly rear­ventilated. Having the same construction as mentioned in A,
but there is only a vent­opening in the bottom of the construction.
C The void can be non­ventilated. Meaning there is still a void between external wall and
cladding, but there are no ventilation openings. Therefore the air in the void is standing
still, besides for the movement due to buoyancy.
D The cladding can be directly suspended on the external wall, leaving no room for a void
and ventilation.
A visual overview of the suspending with and without a void can be seen in figure 2.2.
Thermal Radiation Between Wooden Facades in High­Rise Buildings
5
==PAGE:18==
Figure 2.2: Four types of voids behind a facade
2.2.2
Suspending Method
The most common used wooden facade cladding methods are either overlapping or tongue
and groove. When using the overlapping of boards method, the overlapping must be at least
22 mm due to fire safety reasons. However, when built in the real world the overlapping will
most likely be at least 25 mm due the moist avoidance measurements. The facade boards
used in the facade cladding can be suspended horizontal or vertical. The boards in the facade
cladding are suspended on counter battens. When the boards are placed in the horizontal
direction, they are suspended on vertical counter battens. When the facade boards are
positioned in the vertical direction, they are suspended on horizontal counter battens, and
these are suspended on vertical counter battens [11]. If the suspending system, the counter
battens, are constructed in wood and there are both horizontal and vertical battens, more
than 10 percent of the wood will be exposed, which is opposed to the requirement in the
building regulations. If either the horizontal or vertical wooden battens are changed to metal,
then the suspending system will be legal. The suspension system just described is only
allowed for buildings with top floor placed 22 m above ground or lower [9, section 4.4.10].
The suspending methods are visually presented in figure 2.3
6
Thermal Radiation Between Wooden Facades in High­Rise Buildings
==PAGE:19==
Figure 2.3: Suspending types: A & B: Horizontal and vertical battens. C & D: Only vertical battens.
A & C: tongue and groove. B & D: Overlapping
2.2.3
Commercially Used Wooden Species
The most commonly wooden species used in Denmark are Douglass pine, Western red
cedar, spruce, oak and larch. These wood species are found and produced in the northern
European forests [11]. In addition to the use of wooden planks as facade cladding, other
wooden products, that have been through a process, can be used as paneling. The wooden
products generally used are; hardboard, medium density fiberboard (MDF), oriented strand­
board (OSB), particleboard, plywood and waferboard [13]. Wooden boards used as facade
cladding, need to be CE­marked in accordance to EN 14915 [11]. Most wood based facades
can be categorized as covering class K1 10 D­s2,d2, if not tested [11].
2.3
Fire Performance of Wood
There is a great difference between wooden species. Wood can be divided into two cate­
gories: Softwood and hardwood. The thermal properties of each of the wooden species add
to the difference in the burning of it as a fuel. As a general rule hardwood, e.g., beech and
birch, is denser than softwood, e.g., pine and fir [14], [15].
Wooden products usually reach the European Reaction to Fire Class D­s1, d0[16] or D­s2,
d0 and Dfl­s1 for flooring [17]. It is not uncommon, for wood products to be placed in class
D­s2,d2 [10]. Wood is an organic material of different species, and can be treated in different
ways, hence the fire rating class, depending on the wooden product, can vary greatly.
Thermal Radiation Between Wooden Facades in High­Rise Buildings
7
==PAGE:20==
2.3.1
Temperature and Flaming
Temperatures from experimental wooden facade fires, have been examined, and the follow­
ing have been observed. From a paper during full scale testing on wooden facades, a facade
with unpainted wood panels, was tested with the SP fire 105 test. From this test a tempera­
ture peak was measured to 950°C on the facade [16]. Another experimental study of facade
fires, measured on the burning facade a temperature between 800­900°C. This facade was
constructed with birch wood [18].
In the SFPE Handbook, chapter 86, the author of that chapter remarks, that the lowest ex­
pected flame temperature on a wooden facade would be 1100K (827°C) [19, Chapter 86]. If
a wooden facade panel is thin enough to be thermally thin, a fire can continue, whereas if
the wooden panel is so thick, that it is thermally thick, the fire is most likely to self­extinguish
[20].
2.3.2
HRR and Heat Flux
The heat release rate and heat flux from wood depends on several different factors, such
as the influence from the environment, how much wood is available and which wood specie
is applied. Heat fluxes for different wood species calculated based on the flames ranges
from 23.9 kW/m² to 77.5 kW/m² [20]. Furthermore an intermediate facade fire burning test,
with painted pine wood boards showed a HRR which reached ∼300 kW after 15 minutes of
burning [21]. When burning wood pallets stacked 3 m high a HRR on 7 MW is generated
[22].
2.3.3
Heat of Combustion
There are complete heat of combustion and effective heat of combustion. The complete
heat of combustion, ΔHc, is the total amount of heat release, for a quantity oxidized under
ideal conditions, which is at 25°C and atmospheric pressure [23]. In this thesis, when heat
of combustion is mentioned, it is the complete heat of combustion, which is referred to. The
effective heat of combustion, ΔHc,eff, is the ratio between the heat release rate and the mass
loss rate [23]. Heat of combustion values for different wooden species are given in table 2.2.
Table 2.2: Complete heat of combustion values for wooden species [19, SFPE Handbook
table 5.3, 26.33 and A.38]
Wood specie
Heat of Combustion [MJ/kg]
Red oak
17.1
Douglas fir
16.4
Pine
17.9
European beech
19.5
European beech char
34.3
Ponderosa pine
19.4
Plywood, 12.7 mm thick
14.9
Plywood, 3.2 mm thick
16.9
Particleboard, 19 mm thick
17.5
2.4
Urban- and Facade Fires
2.4.1
Urban Fires
Numerous cities have experienced a city fire. Some cities have even been rebuilt and burned
down again, due to a new city fire. The concept of city fires is not new, to mention one of the
earliest, but yet very significant city fire is The Great Fire of Rome (year 64). The Great Fire
of Rome lasted 6 days, and ruined more than 70 % of the city [24]. When rebuilding the city,
8
Thermal Radiation Between Wooden Facades in High­Rise Buildings
==PAGE:21==
emperor Neo enforced building regulations regarding fire safety. Fireproof materials should
be used in external walls [25]. Another impactful city fire is The Great Fire of London in 1666,
where more than 80 % of the city was destroyed. This resulted in the first building regulations
in London, requiring houses to be built with stone and brick, and have fire resisting walls in
separations [26].
The city of Copenhagen has burned down three times respectively in 1728, 1795 and 1807.
In 1728 the fire started in a residential building, and burned most of the inner city down. The
city fire lasted for three days, before the fire department put out the fire. As a consequence
of the fire, some streets were straightened out, new buildings’ street facing wall had to be
built of stone or brick and not constructed in timber framing, however that requirement got
renounced [27]. The concept of “Ildebrandshus” (Eng: Fire House) was introduced and used
in some new buildings. The Fire House was be a building in two to three stories, with gable
dormers in masonry, the external wall facing the street would be constructed in stone/brick
and the rest of the building in a timber frame [28].
Figure 2.4: A general sketch of a fire house from 1744 [27].
In 1795 the second Great Fire of Copenhagen started in the navy’s lumberyard by Gammel­
holm. Here the fire grew so ferociously, that it could “jump” over Holmens Canal (a water
filled canal back in 1795): The fire spread to all of the southern part of the old city, and the fire
continued for two days, before it was extinguished. After the fire, the requirement regarding
a mason wall facing the street, was reinforced, and the corners of new buildings had to be
beveled. The requirement of beveled corners was to make is easier for the fire department
to get through the city and reach the fire faster [29]. It was also decided, that not all of the city
should be rebuilt, thus creating more space between buildings [30]. In 1807 from 2nd ­ 4th of
September, Copenhagen was bombarded by England. This bombardment is considered the
first terror bombardment of a European big city. Yet again the southern part of Copenhagen
burned down [31].
Thermal Radiation Between Wooden Facades in High­Rise Buildings
9
==PAGE:22==
In the 20th century large city fires occurred in Hamburg, Dresden, Tokyo and Hiroshima.
Those fires where due to several air­raids during the second world war. The bombing of
Dresden resulted in a firestorm, destroying almost 85% of the city, equaling 15 km². Likewise,
the bombing of Hiroshima lead to a firestorm, which spread in a radius over 4 km. The worst
fire bombing was in Tokyo, where the bombing and fire destroyed 40 km² of the city and killing
around 84.000 people [32]. It has been observed that when firestorms occur, temperature
exceeds 1000°C in the center of the fire [33].
In recent years fires like the Edinburgh Cowgate fire (2002) and The Camp Fire (2018) have
made it clear that city fires can still occur today. The Cow Gate fire was a smaller city fire,
which occurred in a densely built area of Edinburgh, with historical and old buildings. It took
the fire brigade three days to put out the fire.The fire started in a night club and spread to
the surrounding buildings [34]. The Camp Fire was a wildfire moving into an urban area, and
destroyed more than 18.800 structures (“structures” included the following: Single family
houses, mobile homes, businesses, detached garages, outbuildings and larger sheds > 120
ft²) in the areas of Paradise and Concow in California [34].
Causes of City Fires
There are several ways a city fire can start. The first great fire of Copenhagen is believed
to have started by an accident. A boy dropping a candle in hay, and then first the building
was on fire, which spread to other buildings [35]. However that is years ago, and not likely
to happen again. Today a city fire will most likely start in one of the following ways; As an
act of war or terror, where bombing or arson is a way to purposely destroy, nature disasters,
such as earthquakes, which can cause many fires to start at the same time, and wildfires,
which can move from vegetation into urban areas. With several fires spread all over the city,
emergency services can face great difficulties in extinguishing all the fires, before they get
out of hand [33], [36], [37].
Consequences of Urban Fires
For a long period of time, the common buildings materials in Denmark have been steel,
concrete, and masonry. This is due to experiences with former city fires, both within Denmark
and foreign countries. The regulations in use today, requires that the building can withstand
a fire long enough for occupants to evacuate, and rescue personnel to provide assistance.
Furthermore there are required distances between buildings. Those requirements transpired
from prior city fires, and experiences with fires over time. In the past buildings, constructed
in wood, had to be placed far from each other. Now wood is used in larger constructions and
buildings again, and brought back into the cities [33].
Even though the fire safety in buildings today has improved, there have been implemented
heavy fire regulations, and the used of open fires in the everyday life has decreased, city
and building fires can still occur today. There will still be fire safety challenges. Wooden
constructions are back in the cities again. Accidents like in Cowgate can still happen. Terror,
war and wildfire can also cause a threat to the safety of the cities if the building industry
forgets the hard learned experiences from the past. The building industry needs to build in
a way, that in case of an accident the buildings do not contribute to a city fire, but instead
prevent the spread of fire [33].
2.4.2
High-Rise Facade Fires
Houses with five to seven stories in France were already seen in the seventeenth century,
but it was first in the late nineteenth century, that tall buildings with ten or more stories were
constructed. Thus the occurrence of facade fires in high­rise buildings are in a historic per­
spective relatively new [38]. The first recorded facade fire in a high­rise building was in
10
Thermal Radiation Between Wooden Facades in High­Rise Buildings
==PAGE:23==
Canada in 1990, which is more than a hundred years after the first tall building was built.
Research shows that there have been 59 facade fire incidents from 1990 to 2018, where
most of the facade fires have happened after 2000. The facade fires that have occurred,
have been in recently constructed high risers or in newly refurbished high­rise buildings [6].
An example of this is the Grenfell tower case, which was constructed in 1972­1974 and re­
furbished in 2015­2016. Since 2018 (to writing moment 16/01­2023) 15 facade fires have
occurred [39], with the most recent fire in a 35 story residential building in Dubai on the 7th
of November 2022.
Most of the oldest high­rise buildings from the late nineteenth century were constructed in
masonry and steel, and later concrete [40]. Combustible exterior wall systems are commonly
used in newer high­rise buildings from the twenty­first century [41].
Recent high­rise facade fires are described below:
Grenfell Tower ­ 2017
In 2017 a fire broke out in The Grenfell Tower, a 24­story tall high­rise building in London.
According to an article in Journal of Hazardous Materials 368 [42], the fire started inside a
compartment in a fridge/freezer on fourth floor. The fire spread to the exterior of the building,
and then spread rapidly to most of the facade, and into almost all the apartments above [42].
In 2006 UK relaxed the requirements regarding the use of combustible materials on the ex­
terior of buildings and increased the requirements for the energy efficiency of buildings. Due
to this change in regulations, it was then allowed to use ACM­PE (Aluminum Composite Ma­
terial ­ Polyethylene) cladding system in the facade, when Grenfell Tower renovated it. In
2016 the refurbishing of Grenfell was done, and the new insulated facade was suspended
on the existing concrete exterior wall. The new facade consisted of combustible polyisocya­
nurate (PIR) foam insulation and aluminum­polyethylene composite material, separated by
a ventilated cavity. Furthermore, new windows were fitted [42]. Investigations by an arti­
cle in Journal of Hazardous Materials 368 [42] identifies PE in the ACM­PE panel to have
contributed to the rapid fire spread.
The Marina Torch ­ 2015 and 2017
The Marina Torch is a 300­meter­tall high­rise building with 86 stories in Dubai. The high­
rise’s facade has been on fire twice once in 2015 and again in 2017. The facade was con­
structed with an ACM­PE based cladding system, just as the system used in the refurbish­
ment of The Grenfell Tower [43]. The facade was also rebuilt with an ACM­PE based cladding
system.
The first fire started on a balcony on the 50th floor, and spread to the exterior of the facade
[44]. There was a rapid fire spread due to high winds, and ignited debris falling to the ground.
The facade fire spread from the 50th floor to the top [43]. The second fire started on the 26th
floor, and is reported to have started due to cigarette butts being discarded into a potted
plant. Yet again the fire spread to the top floor [44]. The fire spread rapidly due to falling
flaming debris, which started a second fire in the bottom of the tower [43]. The building is
sprinklered, which resulted in fire damage being contained to only the exterior of the building,
and no reported casualties in both fires [44].
China Telecom Building ­ 2022
One of the most recent facade fires in a high­rise building is the fire in the China Telecom
building, which broke out on the 16th of September. The fire was discovered about 15.47 in
the 218­meter­tall building. The fire spread was rapid, and in about ten minutes the whole
Thermal Radiation Between Wooden Facades in High­Rise Buildings
11
==PAGE:24==
front side of the facade, covering 42 floors, was covered in flames and smoke. The 280
firefighters were able to extinguish the rapid fire, and had it put out by 16.30. According to
an article by Global Times, no casualties have been reported [45]. The fire was reported to
have started in an external air condition unit, and then glass from a few windows burst, and
fell to the ground [46].
Figure 2.5: Facade fires in relatively Grenfell Tower [47], The Marina Torch [48] and The China Tele­
com Building [49].
Ignition and Causes to Fatal Facade Fires
The Grenfell Tower and The Marina Torch fires shows that a combustible facade and a fire
in a compartment, can lead to a fatal facade fire. The China Telecom building fire shows
that a faulty air condition unit and a combustible facade leads to a devastating fire too. The
combination of combustible facade elements, and piloted ignition can potentially end up in a
large fire, that spreads rapidly.
China has over the past years experienced several fires in high­rise buildings, with a sig­
nificant number of casualties. According to an article from inside telecom, this could be
prevented or at least decreased, if the government implemented more strict laws regarding
fire safety [46].
Most facade fires start with a fire ignited inside, and then it spreads to the exterior. The
second most common way a facade fire starts are by external ignition, such as balcony fires,
fires started by a weed burner or an outdoor barbecue [41]. An external ignition can also be
caused by fireworks [44], or by rubbish being ignited by the bottom of a facade [6].
Research shows that when using the combustible ACM­ PE cladding system, the integrity of
the cavity is not ensured [43] and can cause a rapid fire spread in the facade [42]. Statistics
shows that most facade fires have occurred in countries, where there have been none or
poor regulation control on combustible materials used in the exterior wall [41].
Changes Caused by Past Facade Fires
The facade fires through the years have gained attention. In some cases, like the Grenfell
Tower, reasons to why and how the fire turned so fatal have been investigated. Historically
fire safety regulations have been formed by tragic disasters [50]. Following, but not limited
to, are regulations and recommendations that have been enforced or purposed due to the
last two decades of facade fires:
12
Thermal Radiation Between Wooden Facades in High­Rise Buildings
==PAGE:25==
• After the Grenfell Tower fire United Kingdom re­enforced stricter requirements in their
fire regulations, banning the use of combustible materials on the outside of tall buildings
[42].
• Due to facade fires in London, Honolulu, and Dubai the large property insurance com­
pany FM Global has suggested that there should be an increase in the use of sprin­
klers in tall buildings. With interior sprinkling activated, often only the exterior gets
damaged, and people can safely evacuate the building. Furthermore, FM Global has
recommended a prohibition of combustible facade materials [44].
• The new codes from IEBC (International Existing Building Code) edition 2021, states
that if an exterior wall covering or envelope is added or replaced to an existing external
wall, the new covering/envelope must follow the most recent requirements from IEBC
[51].
2.4.3
Facade Fires During the Thesis Period
In the short period of working with this thesis, three large facade fires occurred in high­rise
buildings. The China Telecom fire, which is described in section 2.4.2, occurred on the 16th
of September. Then a facade caught on fire in a 24­story tall building in Istanbul on the 15th
of October [52], and lastly a 35­story residential building in Dubai was damaged by a facade
fire on the 7th of November [53]. That three facades fires occur in the short period of thee
months, emphasize the importance of incorporating fire safety precautions when applying
facades of combustible materials.
2.5
Case: Stavnsholtskolen
The case about Stavnsholtskolen is part of the background information, even though it might
not seem to resonate with the high­rise buildings in densely built areas. However, it is rele­
vant, since it was mainly constructed in wood, with wooden facades, and fire “leapt” over a
rather large distance of air to another wooden facade.
In the morning on March the 27th, 1973 the school, Stavnsholtskolen, burned down. The
fairly new school on 12.000 m², had only a few hundred square meters left when the firemen
had contained and extinguished the fire [54]. Even though the school was fulfilling all the
requirements from the building regulations, and the fire department was at the scene no
later than 20 minutes after ignition of the fire, it ended up catastrophic in terms of property
damage. Luckily no casualties occurred. The firemen tried to “cut off” the fire, to prevent
spreading, but the fire was too strong, so it did not prevent fire propagation [55]. To find out
why it went so wrong, the fire was investigated thoroughly. Fire tests were performed on the
remaining part of the school and in a laboratory. The results from the tests, combined with
the fire department’s observations during the fire, and the property damage were analyzed
by a workgroup established by ATV – the Danish Academy of Technical Sciences (In Danish:
ATV ­ Akademiet for de Tekniske Videnskaber) [54].
To understand how the fire could turn out so severe, a description of how the school was
built is necessary. The school was a new “open plan” concept school. The structure was
constructed with a steel column/beam system. For room dividers, a light construction was
used. However, only some of the room dividers went all the way up to the ceiling. Some
dividers were only a little higher than a person, thus creating a semi open “school landscape”
[56]. The roof was constructed of load bearing wooden roof cassettes. To add to the open
plan concept, outdoor atriums with the size of 14.4 x 9.6 m were placed several places
throughout the school. The atriums’ functions were supposed to be fire sectioning and part
of the escape route. The atriums were used as a fire wall. The facades in the atriums were
also clad with wood, more specific glue laminated timber (glulam) [54].
Thermal Radiation Between Wooden Facades in High­Rise Buildings
13
==PAGE:26==
Figure 2.6: Aerial photo of the Stavnsholtskole, after the fire [57]
The conclusions from the workgroup, established by ATV, were that the most significant el­
ement for the duration and fierceness of the fire was the construction of the wooden roof
cassettes. These had a surface area two to three times larger than the floor area and con­
tributed to largely 80% of the fuel load. Furthermore, the large­scale tests performed in the
remaining part of the school showed that if there were a fire in one side of the atrium yard,
flame temperature could reach between 750­850°C. The thermal radiation, in the atrium,
would reach between 14­65 kW/m². With this radiation the dimensional critical radiation for
the glulam facades was exceeded, and the opposite facade (the non­burning one), would
receive high enough radiation to ignite, and break the windows too. Because of this the
fire would spread into a new fire section. With this discovery the atriums’ purposes as fire
sectioning and safe escape route, were not fulfilled [54].
At the time of the school’s construction the building regulations allowed atriums to be used as
fire sectioning, and escape routes. The fire proved that the dimensions of the atriums were
inadequate. As a consequence, authorities started questioning the atriums’ use as a fire wall
and to be part of the escape route. This made the Ministry of Housing add an appendix to
the building regulation’s fire prevention procedures regarding atrium yards and other narrow
passageways [58].
14
Thermal Radiation Between Wooden Facades in High­Rise Buildings
==PAGE:27==
3
Theory
3.1
Heat Transfer
There are five forms of heat transfer: Convention, conduction, radiation, advection, and
latent. Convention, conduction, and radiation are of relevance in this project and will be
described. The section regarding radiation will be more thorough than the others, since
this form of heat transfer is of great importance regarding fire spread to adjacent facades.
Advection and latent heat transfer will not be covered.
Often convention, conduction, and radiation are present in a fire, however one will be more
dominant, depending on the type fire and fire duration[23, Chapter 2].
3.1.1
Convection
Convection is exchange of heat between an object and its environment due to fluid motion
[59]. This can be between a gas and liquid, or gas and solid. Temperature changes drives the
convection, e.g. if the temperature rises the density of air decreases and moves upward. If
the temperature is cooled the density of the air gets denser, and descends. This is buoyancy
driven flows, which are referred to as either free or natural convection. If wind is present and
impacts the flow, then it is referred to as forced convection. Convective heat transfer is most
dominant in the beginning of the fire, when the radiation is low [23].
The equation to describe the convective heat transfer is:
˙q′′ = hc∆T
[W/m²]
(3.1)
Where hc is the convective heat transfer coefficient, which is not a material dependent con­
stant. The heat transfer coefficient is mainly dependent on flow­ and temperature parame­
ters. The range for hc for free convection is 5­25 W/m²·K, and for forced convection 10­500
W/m²·K in air. The convective heat transfer coefficient can be determined from equation 3.2
Nu = hl
k
(3.2)
Where k is the thermal conductivity, l is the characteristic length of the surface, and Nu is the
local Nusselt number. The Nusselt number is the ratio of temperature gradients. For natural
convection, by a vertical plate, the Nusselt number can be determined from equation 3.3 if
the flow is laminar (104 < Gr·Pr < 109) or equation 3.4 if the flow is turbulent (Gr·Pr > 109).
For laminar flow:
Nu = 0.59(Gr · Pr)
1
4
(3.3)
For turbulent flow:
Nu = 0.13(Gr · Pr)
1
3
(3.4)
To determine whether laminar or turbulent flow is present, the Grashof and Prandtl numbers
are used, see equation 3.5:
Gr = gl3(ρ∞−ρ)
ρν2
= gl3β∆T
ν2
and
Pr = µcp
k
(3.5)
Thermal Radiation Between Wooden Facades in High­Rise Buildings
15
==PAGE:28==
Convective Heat Transfer Coefficient in Regard to Adjacent Buildings
The convective heat transfer coefficient is not of great importance when there is no wind, in
regards to the heat influence on an adjacent building. When there is no wind, there is free
convection only moving vertical from the fire. Here the convection is in the smoke and fire
moving upward on the facade, at which the fire originated. If there is wind present (forced
convection), and it is blowing in the direction towards another building, the convective heat
transfer will occur in regards of smoke and flames moving towards the adjacent building.
Then the convective heat transfer will possibly have an influence on an adjacent building.
However, if there is enough wind, it could mix the smoke with cold air, and hence cool the
smoke, and decrease some of the convective heat transfer influence.
3.1.2
Conduction
Conduction as a heat transfer mode occurs as molecular energy transport [22]. It is when
heat is in direct contact with either a solid, which is most common, or a fluid and heat transfers
to said solid or fluid [23]. For steady state conduction Fourier’s law of heat conduction can
be applied, and is written in equation 3.6.
˙qx′′ = −kdT
dx
[W/m²]
(3.6)
Where:
˙qx′′ =
(dqx
dt
)
/A
[W/m²]
(3.7)
With A being the area in m², through which heat is being transferred into. k is the thermal
conductivity with unit W/m·K. The thermal conductivity is dependent on temperature, and
most values found in reference works is either for T=0°C or T=20°C. T is either in °C or K,
and x is in m [23].
Fire is a transient occurrence, where the thermal conductivity is not steady. For non­steady
state conductivity, the temperature will change over time, and can be expressed as [35]:
∂T
∂t = k
ρc
(∂2T
∂x2 + ∂2T
∂y2 + ∂2T
∂z2
)
(3.8)
Where k/ρc = α, and is the thermal diffusivity [23].
3.1.3
Radiation
Radiation is heat transfer by electromagnetic waves, which ranges from visible light to in­
frared on the electromagnetic spectrum. The wavelengths are ranging from λ=0.4 to 100
μm³. As prior mentioned convection is dominant in the beginning of the fire, where the tem­
perature is low (150­200°C). Radiation either becomes dominant at higher temperatures (>
400°C) or when the fuel bed increases beyond ∼0.3 m [23]. Radiation can be absorbed,
transmitted, or reflected at any surface of a body, and is described as α + ρ + τ = 1 and is
visualized in figure 3.1.
16
Thermal Radiation Between Wooden Facades in High­Rise Buildings
==PAGE:29==
Figure 3.1: Incoming radiation on a surface, redrawn from [59].
Stefan­Boltzmann’s equation describes the total emissive power:
E = εσT 4
[W/m²]
(3.9)
Where T is in K, σ is Stefan Boltzmann constant on 5.67 · 10−8 W/m2K4, ε is the emissivity,
which is described in section 3.1.3 ­ Emissivity.
The intensity of radiant energy reaching a surface is given in equation 3.10, which consider
the geometrical relationship between the emitter and receiver.
˙q′′ = ϕεσT 4
[W/m²]
(3.10)
ϕ is the geometrical relationship between the emitter and receiver, which is referred to as
either configuration factor or view factor. This is further elaborated in section 3.1.3 ­ Config­
uration Factor.
Emissivity
Emissivity is according to Drysdale “a measure of the efficiency of the surface as a radiator”
[23], and have a value between 0 ­ 1.
The ideal emitter is a black­body, where ε = 1, and the total amount of energy emitted per
unit area of an ideal emitter is:
Eb,λ =
2 · πc2hλ−5
exp(ch/λκT) −1
(3.11)
However real surfaces are not ideal black body emitters, and have an ε < 1, and can depend
on wavelength. This surface can be defined as:
ελ = Eλ
Eb,λ
(3.12)
Where Eλ is the emissive power of the real surface and can be found in reference works such
as Drysdale, figure 2.18(b)[23]. It is convenient to introduce ‘grey body’ which is an ‘ideal,
non­black’ body, where the ε is independent on the wavelength. This is an approximation;
yet, it allows the use of the Stefan Boltzmann equation (Total emissive power)[23].
Thermal Radiation Between Wooden Facades in High­Rise Buildings
17
==PAGE:30==
Kirchhoff’s law states that the emissivity equals the absorption coefficient for a medium with
the same temperature and wavelength (αλ(λ, T) = ελ(λ, T)), however for the grey­body
assumption (α(T) = ε(T)) [35].
Configuration Factor
In relation to radiation between buildings, the configuration factor is how an exposed building
sees the radiation from the burning building.
Stefan­Boltzmann equation is in equation 3.13 rewritten to include the finite­to­finite area
configuration factor’ and area of radiator.
˙Q1,2 = F1,2A1ε1σT 4
1
(3.13)
Where the finite­to­finite area configuration factor’ is:
F1,2 = 1
A1
∫
A1
∫
A2
cos θ1 cos θ2
πr2
dA1dA2
(3.14)
The configuration factor used for a burning building towards a critical point on an adjacent
building is shown in equation:
F12 = 2
π
[
X
√
1 + X2 tan−1
Y
√
1 + X2 +
Y
√
1 + Y 2 tan−1
X
√
1 + Y 2
]
(3.15)
This is in the SPFE Handbook described as ‘The view factor for parallel, rectangular radiator’.
Where figure 3.2 illustrates, where to measure a, b, and c [19].
Figure 3.2: View factor illustration from the SFPE Handbook [19]
3.2
Wood Properties and Fire Spread
3.2.1
Fire Dynamics Properties of Wood
When wood is exposed to heating at raised temperatures decomposition of wood occurs, this
process is called pyrolysis. When the pyrolysis process takes place two gaseous products
are created. One product avoids the forming of solid residue, and the other product turns into
char. When charring is formed the decomposition of wood under the char is decelerated [60].
The pyrolysis, and char formation of wood, varies between the different wooden species, and
18
Thermal Radiation Between Wooden Facades in High­Rise Buildings
==PAGE:31==
their thermal properties. Some important properties are mentioned below. The properties
are for pine wood, if there is no value for pine wood, the general value for wood is noted.
• Ignition temperature. Also called firepoint. The ignition temperature is the tempera­
ture needed before a fuel can be ignited. The temperature is measured on the solid
fuel’s surface. The ignition temperature depends on the amount of concentrated de­
composed fuel and how the fuel is heated [35]. Depending on the sources used, the
ignition temperature for pinewood varies between 349­446°C [61].
• Ignition time is the time it takes before piloted ignition takes place. With equation 3.16
it is possible to calculate it [19, chapter 36]. There are different equations to calculate
the ignition temperature, since it is dependent on whether the solid is thermally thick or
thermally thin.
tig(thick) =
π
4 kρcp(Tig −T0)2
( ˙qe′′ −χ ˙qcr′′)2
and
tig(thin) = ρcpd(Tig −T0)2
˙qe′′ −χ ˙qcr′′
(3.16)
Where k, ρ, c is the thermal conductivity, density and specific heat. Tig is the ignition
temperature, and T0 is the ambient temperature. ˙qe′′ is the incident heat flux and ˙qcr′′
is the critical heat flux. χ is the fraction of the approximated heat loss which occurred
from heating up the solid to ignition temperature. d is the thickness of the solid [19,
chapter 36].
• Critical heat flux. It is the lowest needed heat flux exposed onto an object to ignite
it. The critical heat flux can be calculated if the ambient and ignition temperature are
known, see equation 3.17.
˙qcr′′ = σ(T 4
ig −T 4
0 )
(3.17)
Literature have also given some values for the critical heat flux, according to SFPE
Handbook, chapter 86, the critical heat flux for spontaneous ignition on wood is 33.5
kW/m², and for piloted ignition is 12.5 kW/m² [19, chapter 86].
• Surface temperature of a material outside the reach of flames, and the minimum sur­
face temperature of the fuel, this is explained in section 3.2.2 ­ Fire Spread on Wood.
• Specific heat capacity. Which is the amount of heat (J) absorbed per unit mass (kg)
when the temperature of the fuel increases by one K. The specific heat for pinewood
is 2.3 kJ/(kg·K) [62].
• Density: The charring rate is dependent on the density. If the density is low the charring
rate is faster, than compared to more dense wood types [63]. The density for the pine
wood used in this project is calculated in appendix E, and ranges from 417 to 624 kg/m³.
• Thermal conduction. The thermal conduction is wood’s ability to conduct heat. Re­
ducing the thermal conduction because an increase in void volume, causes increased
flame spread rates [63]. The thermal conductivity for pinewood is 0.12 W/mK [62].
However, the thermal conduction is dependent on temperature. The prior given ther­
mal conductivity for wood, is when ambient temperature is 20°C.
Thermal Radiation Between Wooden Facades in High­Rise Buildings
19
==PAGE:32==
3.2.2
Fire Spread on Wood
In this section upward flame spread in a solid fuel is described.
Vertical flame spread is faster than horizontal flame spread, due to the natural buoyancy
of flames. With natural buoyancy of flames’ hot gasses and upwards flame flow, a larger
pre­heated area is created, than compared to downward and lateral flame spread [23].
There are multiple conditions which influence the speed and spread of flames:
• Thickness of solid fuel. When the fuel is thin the heating of the material is faster, and
the flame spread increases. When the fuel is thicker, more energy is used to heat it
up, because there is more mass. This creates a smaller pre­heated area, and flames
propagate slower [23].
• Temperature of the fuel. If the fuel temperature increases the rate of flame spread
increases [23].
• Flat surface or edge. Flame spread occurs faster, when it is by an edge or corner
compared to a flat surface [23].
• Pressure. When the atmospheric pressure is increased, an increased flame spread
is observed. When pressure is increased, the effective heat transfer coefficient is in­
creased, since it is dependent on either Reynold’s number, for forced convection, or
the Grasfhof number, for natural convection [23].
• Wind flow. When wind flows in the direction of the flame spread, it is common to observe
the wind aiding the flame spread. However, if the degree of turbulence is increased,
the aiding influence of the wind flow is decreased significantly [23].
The equation for flame spread on a solid surface, such as wood is:
v =
˙q′′δf
ρcl(Tig −Ts)
[m/s]
(3.18)
Where ˙q′′ is the heat flux effect from the flames. It has been determined from prior exper­
iments, that the flame heat flux is 25 kW/m² for upward moving flame spread, from flames
ranging from 0.2 to 2 m in height. Additionally, for upward flame spread, the flame heat flux
is independent on the fuel. δf is the distance, in m, on the fuel, which is exposed to direct
contact to the flames. ρ is the density of the fuel [kg/m³]. c is the specific heat capacity of
the fuel [kJ/(kg·K)]. l is the thickness of the fuel, in m. Tig is the ignition temperature of the
fuel, which is either in °C or K, however it is important that Tig and Ts has the same unit. Ts
is the temperature of the surface of the fuel outside the area heated by flames. The value of
Ts has to by higher than the fuel’s Ts,min to have continuous flaming. Ts,min is the minimum
temperature the surface of the fuel has to be, before either ignition or flame propagation can
occur [35].
3.3
How a Fire Starts in a Facade
Fire in high­rise facades can occur in three basic ways, which are described in this section.
3.3.1
From One Building to Another Building
Fire can spread from one burning building to a non­burning building. If the burning building is
close to the non­burning building, the fire can spread with direct flame contact, heat radiating
from the fire and/or flying brands and embers. If flying brands land on an already heated
surface, the potential for ignition is increased. If there is more distance between the burning
20
Thermal Radiation Between Wooden Facades in High­Rise Buildings
==PAGE:33==
building and non­burning building, fire can spread to the non­burning building. For this case
of fire spread, the non­burning building needs to be exposed for strong enough radiation for
enough time to quell the integrity of the wall or barrier. According to NFPA 80A and BR 187
(BR ­ Building Research Establishment) a fire spread caused by radiation can occur when
there is direct line­of­sight between radiating building and non­burning building. If a radiating
building has a non­combustible exterior barrier, it is only the flame front, that is considered
the radiator. If the exterior barrier is constructed in a combustible material, the whole front
can act as a radiator [19, Chapter 86].
3.3.2
From a Window/Compartment in The Building
Flames from a compartment can extend to the facade trough a window, either if was open
or burst during the fire due to high temperatures in the compartment. Flames from a window
can extend more than 5 m above the top of the window. Additionally hot gases from the
window at 1.75 m above to top of the window, can reach temperatures between 400­600 °C,
which is a high enough temperature to ignite untreated wood. A facade can be ignited in the
cavity, if the exterior wall structure is ignited from within a compartment, and the integrity fails,
or there are an opening into the cavity. An oping into a cavity, if not due to loss of integrity,
can be caused by a fire stop not implemented correctly [19, Chapter 86].
Fire in the compartments behind the facade fire, contributes to the collective heat radiation
towards the adjacent building.
3.3.3
Fire Near the Facade
A facade can be ignited by fires occurring close to the facade. It has previously been ob­
served that the following can start a facade fire [6]:
• Rubbish gathered at ground level, if ignited near the bottom of a facade.
• Electrical equipment, which can be placed at ground level near facade, directly on the
facade or on roof, can comprise electrical short circuits.
• A barbeque accident either by ground level or at a balcony, can ignite a facade.
• A weed burner getting to close to the bottom of a facade.
• Fireworks set off close to the building, and when it explodes, it hits and ignites the
facade.
3.4
CFD
CFD is a numerical tool used to model and simulate physical models including fluid flows.
The Navier­Stokes equations describe any kind of fluid, with three governing equations: Con­
servation of mass, momentum, and energy. There are no analytical solutions to the Navier­
Stokes equations, they can only be solved numerically. FDS numerically solves a reduced
form of the Navier­Stokes equations, which is appropriate for low speed, thermally driven
flow with a focus on smoke and heat transport from fire.
3.4.1
FDS - Fire Dynamics Simulator
FDS is a CFD software, developed to simulate thermally driven flows in buildings, and can be
used to simulate fire related problems. Furthermore it can effectively be utilized for low­speed
transport of heat and combustion, and radiative and convective heat transfer.
FDS is created in a collaboration between VTT (Technical Research Centre of Finland) and
NIST (National Institute of Standards and Technology), and the current version available and
used in this project is FDS 6.7.9.
Thermal Radiation Between Wooden Facades in High­Rise Buildings
21
==PAGE:34==
3.4.2
Visualization Tools
Smokeview (SMW) is a visualization program. A tool to use when visualizing numerical pre­
dictions produced by FDS and CFAST. Smokeview can be used as part of the post process­
ing of data from the fire models. Smokeview can visualize and generate data as 2D contour
slices and vector plots as are relevant for this project. Furthermore, it is able to generate 3D
contours, however not relevant here. Smokeview is in this project used for visualization of
the small FDS­simulation described in section 4.2.
PyroSim is a software produced by Thunderhead Engineering. PyroSim can be used as
a graphical user interface for FDS, and as a visualization tool to view and analyze data
from FDS simulations. PyroSim is able to visualize the same slice files and vector plots
as Smokeview but is running more efficiently than Smokeview when processing large FDS
simulations.
3.4.3
Mode of Operation
FDS’ default mode of operation is Very Large Eddy Simulations (VLES). VLES is a simplified
version of the Navier­Stokes equations, a spatial filter is applied to the equations. For very
fine grid resolution it is possible to use Direct Numerical Simulation (DNS). However this is
computational very heavy, and a supercomputer is needed for running such simulations. For
this type of project, VLES is adequate to use.
3.4.4
Combustion
The “simply chemistry” combustion model is used for gas phase combustion, where a reac­
tion of fuel vapor and oxygen takes place. The reaction is only controlled by mixing, where
it is assumed that fuel and oxygen react at an infinitely fast pace. The model uses fuels with
simple chemistry, primarily containing the following molecules: C, H, O and N. When using
this model, it is assumed that the chemical reaction follows equation 3.19.
CxHyOzNv + νO2O2 →νCO2CO2 + νH2OH2O + νCOCO + νSSoot + νN2N2
(3.19)
The reaction is done in a single step, and produces a product containing a mixture of H2O,
CO2, soot, and carbon monoxide, based on the reactant and fuel source defined [64].
3.4.5
Pyrolysis
Pyrolysis is a solid phase combustion, that is when a material undergoes a phase change
from a solid to a gas phase. During pyrolysis a generation of fuel vapor takes place at a
solid surface. In FDS pyrolysis depends largely on the material properties, such as, but not
restricted to, conductivity, density and specific heat. The material properties indicate how
fast the material heats up and how the material burns during a fire. The pyrolysis model
requires that a gas phase reaction has been defined. It is only possible to use one pyrolysis
model at a time. In this project, at simple pyrolysis model for flame spread in a solid material
have been used.
Flame Spread
Flame spread in FDS is activated by prescribing an ignition temperature. Ignition temperature
is a surface parameter and not a material parameter. When a surface reaches the prescribed
ignition temperature, the material burns at a user prescribed heat release rate. However, in
FDS there is no coupling between burning rate and surface temperature, implying that heat
transfer in the solid is calculated independently on the surface temperature. This might lead
to a too large increase in surface temperature.
3.4.6
Extinction
The mixing­controlled reaction model for combustion assumes that fuel and oxygen always
react infinitely fast. It does not consider the heat conditions and reactant concentration,
22
Thermal Radiation Between Wooden Facades in High­Rise Buildings
==PAGE:35==
hence if there is heat and reactant enough for combustion to take place. Therefore an ex­
tinction model is needed to tell FDS, when to stop the combustion processes.
FDS has two extinction models. Extinction model l, which considers oxygen available and
cell temperature at the beginning of each time step. It uses equation 3.20 to find the limiting
oxygen concentration, Xo2,ijk. The limiting oxygen concentration is dependent on the cell bulk
temperature, Tijk. Local combustion is suppressed when Xo2,ijk < Xo2,lim.
XO2,lim(Tijk) =
{
XOI
( TOI−Tijk
TOI−T∞
)
Tijk < Tfb
0
Tijk ≥Tfb
(3.20)
Furthermore, when Extinction model 1 is used, local suppression of combustion will not occur
when the cell temperature is 600°C or above even if there is no oxygen available. The 600°C
indicate that flashover have occurred, and experiments have shown that the upper layer
oxygen concentration drops to zero during flashover [65]. Extinction model 1 is intended
for simulations with coarse grids, where details of flaming and flame temperature cannot be
resolved.
Extinction 2 is the default extinction model in FDS and is also used here. Extinction 2 takes
fuel and its thermophysical properties of the reactants and products, oxygen, and tempera­
ture in the cell into consideration at the beginning of each timestep. If the heat release rate
potential cannot raise the temperature in the cell to the critical flame temperature, TCFT, or
higher, local combustion is suppressed [65].
3.4.7
Heat Transfer and Thermal Properties
How the three modes of heat transfer and thermal properties for mainly solids are modelled
in FDS, are described in the sections below.
Conductive Heat Transfer
In FDS conduction is assumed to move in one direction, which is normal to the surface. Heat
conduction in a solid, is calculated in FDS with equation 3.21.
ρscs
∂Ts
∂t = ∂
∂x
(
ks
∂Ts
∂x
)
+ ˙q′′′
s
(3.21)
Where qs’’’, the source term, is given in equation 3.22, and consists of two parts. qs,c’’’ covers
the chemical reactions, that is the heat production loss rate, from one of the chosen pyrolysis
models for solids and liquids. qs,r’’’ is the radiative absorption, which also includes emission.
˙q′′′
s = ˙q′′′
s,c + ˙q′′′
s,r
(3.22)
Here 1D heat transfer is used, and adequate since it transspires in homogeneous materials.
However, issues in corners with transient layers from cold to warm gas can occur [65].
Convective Heat Transfer
The equation for convective heat transfer is given in equation 3.23 and 3.24.
˙q′′′
c = h (Tq −Tw)
[W/m2]
(3.23)
h = max
[
C |Tg −Tw|1/3 , k
LNu,
k
δn/2
]
[W/(m2 · K)]
(3.24)
Thermal Radiation Between Wooden Facades in High­Rise Buildings
23
==PAGE:36==
Since the FDS solver utilized for this project is VLES, the convective heat transfer coefficient
h, is calculated on the basis of a combination of natural and forced convection correlations.
Here Tg is the gas temperature and Tw is the temperature near the surface. Furthermore, C
is an empirical coefficient for natural convection, here applied for a vertical plate so C = 1.31,
L is a characteristic length, k is the thermal conductivity of the gas, and δn is the gas phase
cell size [65].
Radiative Heat Transfer
The thermal radiation contribution in the energy equation is given in equation 3.25 and 3.26.
Solving for the radiation contribution can be a rather demanding process and is hence solved
with the Finite Volume Method (FVM).
˙q′′′
r = −∇· ˙
qr′′(x) = κ(x) [U(x) −4πIb(x)]
(3.25)
U(x) =
∫
4π
I(x, s′)ds′
(3.26)
In equation 3.25 and 3.26, κ(x) is the absorption coefficient, Ib(x) is the source term, and
I(x,s’) is the solution of the radiation transport equation (RTE) for a non­scattering gray gas
[65].
Thermal Properties
For the solid materials near the fire, the thermal properties are of great importance. The
thermal properties that can be specified for a material are listed in table 3.1
Table 3.1: Thermal properties in FDS
Thermal Property
Symbol
Unit
Conductivity
k
W/m·K
Specific heat
cp
kJ/(kg·K)
Density
ρ
kg/m³
Emissivity
ε
­
By default, in FDS, the emissivity is set to 0.9, if nothing else is specified by the user. Con­
ductivity and specific heat can be specified to be dependent on the temperature, here the
function RAMP can be activated [64].
Per default, if a material is one cell thick or smaller, the innermost layer of the material is
exposed to the air temperature on the back side. It is possible to specify the back side
boundary conditions. If the back of the wall or material is exposed to ambient conditions, the
attribute BACKING=’VOID’ is appropriate to use [64].
24
Thermal Radiation Between Wooden Facades in High­Rise Buildings
==PAGE:37==
4
Method
4.1
Experimental Work
In the project several experiments have been conducted. Four experiments, where a mock­
up of a wooden facade was ignited. Three out of the four experiments were influenced
by a PPV. Furthermore, bomb calorimeter measurements of the wooden products used in
the facade have been conducted. This chapter aims to describe the methods used in the
experiments and measurements.
The facade burning experiments, have been conducted in collaboration with Joakim Wåhlén,
a student on the DTU Master in fire safety. His focus was on the wind’s impact on the fire
spread, whereas the writer’s focus was on the temperature and heat flux caused by the
wooden facade fire.
4.1.1
Facade Burning
Experimental Set-Up
The facade is constructed with a wooden frame type structure. The wooden frame is covered
by two layers of fire safe gypsum boards. Outside on the gypsum board horizontal and
vertical wooden battens are mounted with screws. The facade cladding is installed on the
battens, this creates a ventilated void between the back wall and the facade cladding. The
facade cladding is mounted in the vertical tongue and groove method. Moelven Thermowood
Profile 581 was used as the facade cladding and had a moisture content between 3.2­4.5 %
see appendix B. For measurements and further detailing, see figure 4.1, 4.2 and appendix A
for drawings of the wooden facade. The whole construction is placed on three wooden laths
with wheels underneath. This makes it possible the easily move the whole wall construction
for safety reasons.
Figure 4.1: Front facing picture of the wall construction
Thermal Radiation Between Wooden Facades in High­Rise Buildings
25
==PAGE:38==
Four experiments were conducted with the facade:
Experiment, test 1: The wooden facade is exposed to a fire source.
Experiment, test 2: The wooden facade is exposed to a fire source, and variating wind ve­
locities.
Experiment, test 3: The wooden facade is exposed to a fire source and wind with a velocity
on 3.5 m/s and 5 m/s.
Experiment, test 4: The wooden facade is exposed to a fire source three times greater in
size, than the three other experiments, and exposed to a wind with a velocity on 2 m/s.
Figure 4.2: Drawing of the wall construction. TL: Side view. TR: Front view.
Fire Source
The test standard DS/ISO 13785, used for testing the performance of facades and facade
cladding, uses a propane gas burner, with a heat output on 100 kW (± 5 kW) as an ignition
source [66]. This corresponds with the same heat output as a wastebasket [22], and is not an
unrealistic fire size. This size of fire can also occur on a balcony with a BBQ, some rubbish
by the bottom of the building or an even larger heat output can occur from a window from
a compartment, where flashover has occurred. However, the fire source for the first three
experiments was a pan, Ø24 cm, filled with 408 g of methanol, having a heat output on 9.5
kW and an estimated burning time on 600 seconds. For experiment 4, three pans were
used, Ø20, Ø24, and Ø28 cm. Each pan contained 208 g of methanol. Here the source was
estimated to burn for relatively 11, 7, and 5 minutes depending on the size of the pan. See
calculations for the ignition source in appendix C. The heat output had to be scaled down
compared to the 100 kW, due to safety measures. The flame height had to be less than half
the height of the facade (> 0.90 m). It was determined that a calculated mean flame height
on 0.33 m, would be sufficient to ignite the facade cladding and still be safe. With 408 g of
methanol in a pan with a diameter on 24 cm, the fuel is according to calculations in appendix
C, able to burn for 600 seconds.
26
Thermal Radiation Between Wooden Facades in High­Rise Buildings
==PAGE:39==
Wind Source
The wind source was borrowed from Beredskab Øst, a positive pressure ventilator (PPV)
with variating wind speed. It was an older model, with power cord connected to its battery,
probably by the manufacturer Ramfan. The wind speed was controlled by up and down
buttons and showed in levels. Therefore, an anemometer was used to measure the wind
speed for each level before the fire tests. The wind speed used under the experiments were
between 2 – 5 m/s. The PPV was placed 2 m from the fire source, with a 45­degree angle
onto the facade.
Measurements
25 thermocouples in experiment test 2­4 and 33 thermocouples in experiment test 1 were
used to measure the temperature development during the experiments. Thermocouples of
type K with cord IEC­KX­2 from www.tc.co.uk were used. Thermocouples type K, usually
have an accuracy on +/­2°C or +/­0.75%, depending on which is greater [67]. The data was
collected with the data­logger Agilent 34970A, which had two 34901A: 20­Channel Armature
Multiplexer inserted. Agilent 34970A was connected to a PC, with the software BenchLink
data logger 3, which was used to collect and save the data from the thermocouples.
In the void(L1) between the gypsum boards and facade cladding, 12 thermocouples were
placed. In the same position, but directly on the facade(L2) further 12 thermocouples were
placed. For experiment test 1, further two by four thermocouples were placed respectively
60 cm(L3) and 120 cm(L4) in front of the facade. Figure 4.3 and 4.4 displays the setup of
the thermocouples on and in front the facade. See appendix D for thorough drawings of the
placement of the thermocouples.
Figure 4.3: Placement of thermocouples in the void(L1) behind the facade cladding
A device invented by Lars Schiøtt Sørensen was used to measure the heat flux one meter
away from the burning facade. Figure 4.4 displays the device, and its placement during the
experiment. A FLIR MSX (Multi­Spectral Dynamic Imaging) thermal camera, of the model
TG165, was used to measure temperature on the front of the facade during test 1 and take
thermal pictures of the front.
Each experiment was recorded by two cameras. One camera was placed in front of the
facade, and the second camera was placed to the side of the wall construction, facing the
void. Each camera was connected to a laptop with picture and video editing software.
Thermal Radiation Between Wooden Facades in High­Rise Buildings
27
==PAGE:40==
Figure 4.4: TL: Heat flux measuring device in front of the facade. TR: Placement of thermocouples
in front of facade.
Safety Precautions
The experiments took place in DTU’s FireLab, building 122. The wall construction, was dur­
ing the experiments, placed under the large hood in the laboratory. The hood and ventilation
system are restricted in their usage, therefore it was during the experiments important to
have safety measures in place. For the experiments the following safety precautions were
taken:
• Flames may not touch the roof of the large hood continuously.
• The exhaust fan in the hood is turned all the way up to its maximum. If smoke spills out
from under the hood, and spread to the ambient room, the fire needs to be extinguished.
To extinguish the fire, the following equipment were available at all times:
• A water­filled hose, connected to a faucet and ready to turn on.
• Two pressure sprayers, filled with 16 liters of water in each.
• A powder extinguisher placed close to the experiment.
When building and setting up the experiment, the following were done to increase the safety
during the experiments:
• The wall construction was placed on three wooden laths with wheels underneath. Mak­
ing it possible to wheel out the construction in case the fire being too extensive.
• Wooden laths were placed with an incline between the wall and the laths with wheels,
supporting the wall. In case the wall construction needed to be wheeled out, the wall
had support, and would not fall over.
• A rope was tethered to the wall construction, so it could be pulled in case the wall
construction needed to be moved. The rope made sure, that during movement of the
wall, one would be in a safe distance from the fire.
• The cords of the thermocouples were gathered and rolled up, so they would not inter­
fere with the wheels, and obstruct the movement of the wall construction.
28
Thermal Radiation Between Wooden Facades in High­Rise Buildings
==PAGE:41==
• A wooden plate was mounted horizontal behind the wall, where the two Armature Mul­
tiplexer connected to all the thermocouples, could be placed during movement of the
wall construction.
Process of Experiments
Experiment, test 1
A pan, with a diameter on 24 cm was filled with 408 g of methanol and ignited. The pan was
placed under the wooden facade, so the fire from the source attacked the facade cladding
on the front and back side. During the experiment 33 thermocouples were used to measure
the temperature development. The heat flux measuring device was placed in front of the
fire, and not moved during the experiment1. Every 60th second the heat flux was noted. 4
minutes and 31 seconds after ignition the ignition source was removed from the facade. The
flames were continuously in contact with the hood.
Experiment, test 2
The same fire source and placement as in experiment, test 1 were used. During the experi­
ment 25 thermocouples were used to measure the temperature development. The device to
measure the heat flux, was used every 60th second, and removed from facing the fire after
taking the measurement. The wind machine was turned on after ignition of the fire source.
During the experiment the velocity of the wind was variating. After 7 minutes and 42 seconds
the fuel was depleted.
Experiment, test 3
The same fire source and placement as in experiment, test 1 were used. During the experi­
ment 25 thermocouples were used to measure the temperature development. The device to
measure the heat flux, was used every 60th second, and removed from facing the fire after
taking the measurement. The wind machine was turned on to 3.5 m/s 5 minutes and 40
seconds after ignition of the ignition source. 6 minutes and 48 seconds after ignition of the
ignition source the wind was increased to 5 m/s. The fuel depleted and the fire on the facade
and in the void died down 8 minutes and 16 seconds after ignition. The wind was shut down
10 minutes and 31 seconds after ignition.
Experiment, test 4
Three pans with a diameter on respectively 20 cm, 24 cm and 28 cm were each filled with 208
g of methanol and ignited. During the experiment 25 thermocouples were used to measure
the temperature development. The device to measure the heat flux, was used every 60th
second, and removed from facing the fire after taking the measurement. The wind machine
was turned on to 2 m/s 2 minutes and 31 seconds after ignition of fire source. 3 minutes and
43 seconds after ignition the Ø28 pan had burned all its fuel. 4 minutes and 29 seconds after
ignition the Ø24 pan had run out of fuel. 5 seconds after that the wind was shut down, due to
an extensive fire in the void, and flames were continuously touching the hood. At 5 minutes
and 20 seconds after ignition the small pan was removed from the facade. 19 seconds later
the pressure sprayers were used to extinguish the facade fire.
After experiment 1­3 the facade was rebuilt. Only the wooden battens and facade cladding
were rebuilt, since the rest of the construction could be reused. Placement of the thermo­
couples were kept the same.
1This gave faulty results. The device is only supposed to be facing the fire for 2­3 seconds, while measuring
the heat flux, and then removed.
Thermal Radiation Between Wooden Facades in High­Rise Buildings
29
==PAGE:42==
4.1.2
Bomb Calorimeter
With a bomb calorimeter the heat of combustion can be determined. The combustion process
of the test species takes place in ideal conditions, and the test species undergo a complete
combustion. In this project three test species are used for testing. All three species are found
in the construction of the facade experiment. The markings on figure 4.5 shows where the
different wooden species are used in the construction.
Figure 4.5: Test species in the facade construction
The facade cladding used was Moelven Thermowood Profile 581, which was planed thermo­
treated pinewood. The wooden battens were of pressure impregnated pinewood. The frame
was of pinewood constructual timber.
The test species were prepared before the bomb calorimeter measurements could take
place. Each of the test species was original a piece of wood. To test the wood in the bomb
calorimeter, the wood to be in a saw­dust­state. The sawdust state of each test species are
seen in figure 4.6.
Figure 4.6: Test species, in the following order: Wooden battens, frame and facade cladding
30
Thermal Radiation Between Wooden Facades in High­Rise Buildings
==PAGE:43==
Table 4.1: Weight of the test species
Test
species
Wooden battens
Frame
Facade cladding
Test no.
1
2
3
1
2
3
1
2
3
Mass [g]
0.599
0.630
0.636
0.611
0.606
0.609
0.615
0.614
0.614
Process of Bomb Calorimeter Experiment
Before tests with test species:
First the bomb calorimeter needed to be calibrated. This was done with pelletized IKA C
723 Benzoic Acid. The calibration value used further in the experiments was 8464 J/K. The
calibration value was based on the average over multiple Benzoic Acid measurements with
the bomb calorimeter.
Test with test species:
A standard decomposition vessel was prepared with a test specie; a crucible was placed on
a scale, then the tare button was used, so only the weight of the test specie was measured.
The weight of each test specie is found in table 4.1. A cotton thread was with tweezers,
coiled around the ignition wire, and the crucible placed in the crucible holder. The tweezers
was used to make sure that the cotton tread was immersed in the test specie. The cover with
the test specie was placed on the lower section of the decomposition vessel and the union
nut screwed on tight by hand.
Figure 4.7: 1­3: Decomposition vessel C 5010. 1: Cover with electric ignition contact, ignition wire
and crucible holder. 2: Lower section. 3: Union nut. 4: Venting button 5: Crucible. 6: Handle. 7:
Tweezers. 8: Ignition adapter. 9: Cotton thread.
Using the oxygen station IKA C 248, the decomposition vessel was filled with oxygen to
approximately 30 bar. On top of the cover, the ignition adaptor was slid on. Then the de­
composition vessel was ready for testing. The decomposition vessel was placed into the
inner vessel of the bomb calorimeter between the three locating bolts.
The bomb calorimeter was prepared for testing. In the display menu ”Prepare” was chosen,
the following was entered in the “Prepare a test” menu:
Thermal Radiation Between Wooden Facades in High­Rise Buildings
31
==PAGE:44==
Table 4.2: Settings for the prepare menu
Menu item
Value
Weight
See table 4.1
Calibration
0
Vessel
1
QExt1
50
QExt2
0
Calibration is set to 0, since this means that the bomb calorimeter is running a test, and not
a calibration. There is only one decomposition vessel in use. The energy generated by the
cotton thread is 50 J, which is specified in menu item “QExt1”. There is not used additional
burning aids, hence “QExt2” is set to 0.
2 liters of water was poured into the tank filler. Here the temperature had to be between 19°C
to 24°C. The temperature of the water was measured with a type K thermocouple connected
to the data­logger Agilent 34970A.
Figure 4.8: 1: IKA Calorimeter System C 200. 2: Tank filler. 3 Menu display. 4 Measuring cell cover
5: C 248 – Oxygen filling station
When the measuring cell cover was closed, the test could begin. The first action of the bomb
calorimeter test was filling the water storage and equalizing, which took 3 minutes. After­
ward the main test began. Both for equalizing and main test the temperature development
was written down every 12th second. After 8.2 minutes the testing was done, and a heat
of combustion value was showed on the display. The results can be observed in section
6.3. The test was done nine times. Three times each for each wooden species used in the
construction of the facade.
32
Thermal Radiation Between Wooden Facades in High­Rise Buildings
==PAGE:45==
4.2
FDS
This section describes the set­up of the FDS model, which simulates experiment, test 1 of
the facade burning experiments. The full code is in appendix K.
4.2.1
Time
The FDS code is set to simulate for 950 seconds. This equals ∼15 minutes, which was the
time the experimental, test 1 lasted before it was terminated.
4.2.2
Meshes and Cell Sizes
The model has meshes in variating cell sizes, depending on the placement of the mesh.
The meshes close to the fire, the facade, and where smoke and wind speed are present the
mesh is finer. This is done to ensure better resolution and better calculations of the flame
spread and temperature development. In the fire and smoke region the cell size will be kept
constant. In places where there lower velocity and low smoke spread the mesh is coarser. To
determine the mesh resolution the non­dimensional expression D*/δx is used. Where δx is
the nominal size of a mesh cell² and D* is the characteristic fire diameter. The characteristic
fire diameter is found with equation 4.1.
D∗=
(
˙Q
ρ∞cpT∞√g
) 2
5
(4.1)
Table 4.3 lists the values used to calculate the characteristic fire diameter, and the minimum
and maximum cell size appropriate near the ignition source. D*/δx should be in the range of
4­16 [68].
Table 4.3: Values for characteristic fire diameter, minimum and maximum cell size
˙Q
ρ∞
cp
T∞
g
D*
Min cell size
Max cell size
kW
Kg/m³
kJ/(kg·K)
K
m/s²
­
m
m
9.5
1.21
1
291
9.81
0.149
D*/16=0.01
D*/4=0.04
Based on the cell size range found in table 4.3, the cell size used for the fine meshes is
0.02x0.02x0.02 m. For the coarser mesh, where a fine resolution is not necessary the cell
size is determined to be 0.10x0.10x0.10 m.
4.2.3
Reaction and Fire
During the experimental tests, the ignition source was methanol. Methanol in the FDS model
is defined on the REAC line, and the properties used for methanol are presented in table 4.4.
Table 4.4: Properties for methanol.
Value
Unit
Source
Chemical formula
CH3OH
­
[64]
Soot yield
0.001
g/g
[19]
Heat of combustion
19830
kJ/kg
[19]
The fire was modelled to have a maximum heat release rate (HRR) on 14 kW. This was
modelled on the SURF line, where the HRRPUA was set to be 324.1, and corresponding
ignition source top surface on 0.043m². In the experimental test, an ignition source on 9.5
kW was used. The 14 kW in the FDS model is larger, due to test simulations, that showed
Thermal Radiation Between Wooden Facades in High­Rise Buildings
33
==PAGE:46==
temperature curves and heat fluxes in the FDS model is more comparable to the experimental
test, with an increased HRR. It was noted from the test results from the experimental, test
1, that there was a time period before the fire from the ignitions source was burning at its
maximum capacity. Therefore the function RAMP_Q is applied to the code. The fire from
the ignition source is modelled to be at its maximum heat release 86 seconds after ignition.
Additionally the RAMP function is used to simulate the removal of the fire source, which is
removed after 271 seconds. This is a model, where radiation from flames is an important
part of the heat transfer, therefore the number of radiation angles in the FDS model is set to
500.
4.2.4
Materials and Surfaces
Three materials are present in the model: Wood, gypsum, and steel. There are three different
wooden materials in the model, and these cover the wooden frame, wooden battens, and
the facade cladding. The properties applied to each of the wooden materials and wooden
surfaces are listed in table 4.5. Ignition temperature and HRRPUA are modelled on the
SURF line, since these are surface properties and not material properties. The BURN_AWAY
function is applied for the surfaces for facade cladding and wooden battens. This function is
added, so an obstacle with the surface parameter, is decomposed after it has been pyrolyzed.
In the visualization of the simulation, part of the material, which is burned away, is removed.
Table 4.5: Material properties for pine wood
General ­ pine
Value
Unit
Source
Formula
CH1.7O0.83
­
[69]
Molecular weight
57.6
g/mol
[70]
Specific heat
2.3
kJ/(kg·K)
[62]
Conductivity
0.12
W/(m·K)
[62]
Ignition temperature
375
°C
[61]
HRRPUA
150
kW/m²
[71]
Frame
Density
449
kg/m³
Appendix E
Heat of combustion
20950
kJ/kg
Section 6.3
Thickness
0.045
m
­
Wooden battens
Density
624
kg/m³
Appendix E
Heat of combustion
23518
kJ/kg
Section 6.3
Thickness
0.045
m
­
Facade cladding
Density
417.46
kg/m³
Appendix E
Heat of combustion
21919
kJ/kg
Section 6.3
Thickness
0.021
m
­
Steel is in the model used as the material in the steel hood, and gypsum was used as the
backing of the wall construction. The material properties for steel and gypsum are listed in
table 4.6.
34
Thermal Radiation Between Wooden Facades in High­Rise Buildings
==PAGE:47==
Table 4.6: Material properties of steel and gypsum
Steel
Value
Unit
Source
Specific heat
0.48
kJ/(kg·K)
[22]
Conductivity
45
W/(m·K)
[22]
Density
7820
kg/m³
[22]
Thickness
0.02
m
­
Gypsum
Specific heat
0.84
kJ/(kg·K)
[22]
Conductivity
0.48
W/(m·K)
[22]
Density
1440
kg/m³
[22]
Thickness
0.015
m
­
4.2.5
Surfaces of Exterior Mesh Boundaries
The exterior boundaries are defined as VENT and placed on the exterior side of meshes
where one or more sides are not aligned to other meshes. The VENT is given the SURF_ID
= ‘OPEN’. This is done because only a small part of the FireLab is included in the model.
FireLab has a large volume, and can contribute with enough makeup air, so the fire does not
suffer from oxygen starvation, when the exhaust is turned on.
4.2.6
Mechanical Ventilation
The exhaust fan in FireLab is of the brand EXHAUSTO, type: BESF28043EC. According to
the exhaust fan’s data sheet, the maximum capacity is 1870 m³/h. Given that there is a little
length in the piping, and the piping have two elbows, there must be some pressure loss in
the exhaust system. It is estimated, that when the vent is turned to maximum exhaust, the
amount of air exhausted is 1600 m³/h. To model this into FDS, the airflow is needed in m/s.
This can be calculated as shown in equation 4.2.
Qair = v · (π · r2) →v = Qair
π · r2
(4.2)
The vent has been measured to have a diameter on 52 cm. This gives the following airflow:
v = Qair
π · r2 =
1600 m3
h
π · (52cm
2
)2 = 2.09m
s
(4.3)
For the exhaust fan in FDS, a SURF line is written with VEL = 2.09. When the number for VEL
is positive, air will be removed from the model. Had the number been negative, air would be
added to the model. The SURF entry is called upon a VENT line, with a surface area close
to π · (52cm/2)2 = 0.21m2 To fit it to the grid, the dimension of the vent is 0.4 · 0.5 = 0.2m2.
4.2.7
Geometry
The FDS model is 3x3.8x3.6m and is only a piece of the FireLab. In the model the large
steel hood, the steel floor underneath the hood, and the wall construction with the facade
are modelled with obstructions (OBST). In figure 4.9 is the picture to the left displaying the
part of FireLab, that is of relevance in the FDS model, which is displayed to the right.
Thermal Radiation Between Wooden Facades in High­Rise Buildings
35
==PAGE:48==
Figure 4.9: TL: Picture of the experimental setup in FireLab. TR: The geometry of the test setup in
the FDS model, visualized in Smokeview.
The wall construction is made up of a gypsum backing, which is 4 cm thick in FDS, equivalent
to the size of two cells. The framing, that was on the back of the gypsum plates in the
experiment, have not been modelled. The framing was considered not to have influence on
the fire. The wooden battens were modelled to be 2 cm thick in the horizontal direction, and
4 cm thick in the vertical direction. This is a little smaller than in the experiment, but this
were the measurements, that was closest the to real version and still fit into the grid. The
mesh is fine with 0.02³ sized cells near the fire, further away it gets coarser, which is why in
figure 4.9 the wooden battens change in size close to the edge of the wall construction. The
facade cladding is modelled to be one cell size thick; this is 1 mm thinner than the Moelven
Thermowood boards used.
The steel hood is made of four inclining sides. It is not possible in FDS to model a smooth
incline. The incline has been model with smaller rectangular pieces, which is shown in figure
4.10. It was important to have the sides to resemble an incline, since it would influence the
wind movement, speed, and air temperature above the wall construction.
Figure 4.10: The rectangular construction of the steel hood, seen from below. Visualized in Smoke­
view.
36
Thermal Radiation Between Wooden Facades in High­Rise Buildings
==PAGE:49==
4.2.8
Measuring Points
To be able to analyze and compare simulation results with the results from the experiment,
measuring points are added to the model. Slice files (SLCF) to visualize temperature, are
added so it is possible to observe the temperature development by each of the thermocou­
ples. Furthermore, slice files have been added to go through the center of the fire, in both
the X and Y direction.
Slice files to display the velocity have been added in the center of the exhaust, in front of the
exhaust and in the center of the fire. Here VECTOR=.TRUE. is activated, making it possible
to visualize the movement of air with vectors.
Boundary files (BNDF) are applied for ‘NET HEAT FLUX’ and ‘WALL TEMPERATURE’, mak­
ing it possible to visualize respectively the heat flux on the HT­meter and the wall temperature
on the facade cladding.
Point devices (DEVC) with QUANTITY= ’THERMOCOUPLE’ are placed in all the points
where there in the real experiment was placed a thermocouple. The output from the thermo­
couples, is by FDS given in a .csv file.
One surface device is placed by the HT­meter to measure the net heat flux, the output is
given in the same .csv file as the thermocouples.
4.2.9
HPC servers
Several simulations have been run to tune the model, and correct mistakes to have it cor­
respond to the experiment done in FireLab. The simulations have been running on DTU’s
HPC clusters. The access to the clusters has been through G­databar and the software
ThinLinc client. To start a simulation one must run a script in the lsf10sh terminal. The script
includes information on the placement of the code for the FDS model, number of cores to
use, it specifies how many cores to be assigned per MPI process, and how many machines
the computation can be spread out on.
The FDS model had 26 meshes divided out on 12 MPI processes. The meshes that would be
computational heavy, such as the finer meshes near the fire, had its own MPI process. This
was done to increase the efficiency and reduce the computational cost and time. 4 cores
were assigned to each MPI process.
4.3
Up-scaling of Experiment in FDS
The smaller FDS model of the facade test 1, has been compared to the results in section
6. Since the results are comparable, the model has been scaled up. Some things are the
same, such as surface and material parameters and REAC line. The size of the whole
domain, meshes, obstructions and fire are changed to simulate two adjacent facades, which
is placed outside in Danish climate.
4.3.1
Geometry
Six cases of different size domains are going to be run in FDS for the up scaling. The
model consists of two facades adjacent to one another. The facades are being constructed
in the same way, as in the small FDS model regarding material and surface parameters, and
thickness of the gypsum, wooden battens, and facade cladding. However, the height of the
facades is 17 m, and the width is 15 m. Ideally the model would be geometrically larger
and resemble Mjøstårnet which is 17m x 37m and 85.4 m high. The model is smaller due
to the computational power available. There is not any compartments behind the facades.
The distance between the two facades is 5 m, 7.5 m, and 10 m depending on the case.
The cases run for this part are listed in table 4.7.The distances are according to the pre­
accepted solutions. 10 m corresponds to two buildings each with open facades or glass
Thermal Radiation Between Wooden Facades in High­Rise Buildings
37
==PAGE:50==
facades, and each placed 5 meters from the shared property line. 7.5 m corresponds to one
building with an open or glass facade placed 5 m from shared property line, and the building
on the other side with a facade in material class B­s1,d0 placed 2.5 m from property line.
5 m corresponds to two buildings each with B­s1,d0 facades, and each placed 2.5 meters
from the shared property line. The facades are still modelled in wood, and hence not abiding
by the prescriptive­based codes. These simulations are done to see if it is possible to have
wooden buildings close to each other without decreasing the fire safety.
Figure 4.11: The geometry of the model, where the distance between facades is 10 m. Visualized in
Smokeview.
4.3.2
Ignition Sources
Two different fire scenarios are used, one fire scenario uses an ignition source placed by
the foot of the facade on the high­rise building. This is to simulate rubbish burning. The
ignition source used has a HRR on 100 kW, which is the energy release used in the ISO
test standard 13785­1 for intermediate­scale facade testing [66]. This fire size equals the
energy release from a waste basket, according to Enclosure Fire Dynamics [22]. This is not
an unrealistic ignition source. The area of the ignition source is 0.3m x 0.6m=0.18m², given
this the HRRPUA is 555.55 kW/m². The ignition source is placed, so it has access to the
ventilated cavity. The ignition source is removed after 20 minutes. The other fire scenario
use an ignition source placed 4.1 m up on the facade, and mimics flames being emitted from
a post­flashover compartment, where two windows have burst. In former experiments [19,
Chapter 25], heat fluxes up till 200 kW/m² have been measured. Hence for this fire scenario
two fires (each from the windows burst), are modelled with a HRRPUA = 200 kW/m². The
ignition source is removed after 20 minutes. According to Drysdale, the ignition source burns
out after 20 minutes [23, chapter 10]. The fire scenarios are listed in table 4.7
38
Thermal Radiation Between Wooden Facades in High­Rise Buildings
==PAGE:51==
Table 4.7: Fire cases run in FDS
Fire case name
Placement of
ignition source
Distance between
building facades [m]
Sc1.1
Foot of high riser
5
Sc1.2
Flashover compartmen
5
Sc2.1
Foot of high riser
7.5
Sc2.2
Flashover compartmen
7.5
Sc3.1
Foot of high riser
10
Sc3.2
Flashover compartmen
10
4.3.3
Meshing
The method to determine the resolution of the mesh near the ignition source, is the same
as with the small FDS model. In table 4.8 the minimum and maximum cell sizes are listed
for both fire scenarios. For both fire scenarios the grid cell size by the ignition source is
0.05x0.05x0.05m. Where the evolution of the fire from the ignition source fire and flame
spread are estimated to occur the cell size is 0.1x0.1x0.1 m. Further away from the fire on
the facade, where there might not be much flame action the cell size is 0.2x0.2x0.2 m. The
mesh further away from the fire on the facade is coarser due to the large size of the model,
and not enough available time to solve a finer mesh in the whole model. The models for cases
with a 5 m distance between facades has 30 meshes divided out on 18 MPI processes. The
models with 7.5 m and 10 m distance have 33 meshes divided out on 18 MPI processes.
Table 4.8: Values for characteristic fire diameter, minimum and maximum cell size
Scenario
˙Q
ρ∞
cp
T∞
g
D*
Min cell size
Max cell size
­
kW
kg/m³
kJ/(kg*K)
K
m/s²
­
m
m
1
100
1.25
1
282.25
9.81
0.38
D*/16=0.02
D*/4=0.1
2
200
1.25
1
282.25
9.81
0.5
D*/16=0.03
D*/4=0.13
4.3.4
Weather Conditions
As with the small model, the sides of the model are open vents. There will then be enough
makeup air to avoid the fire being repressed from oxygen starvation. No wind is modelled,
as it is assumed that there is no wind influencing the ignition source and its fire spread, as
there where no wind in the experiment. The ambient start temperature is the yearly mean
temperature in Denmark, which is 9.1°C [72].
4.3.5
Time to Run the Simulation
The simulation is covering 60 minutes (3600 seconds), this time is chosen because BR18
§117 states that external walls should be constructed to prevent fire spread between different
fire­related units in external walls, in the time it takes to perform evacuation and the rescue
efforts of the emergency services, which is usually 60 minutes [9].
4.3.6
Measuring Points and Slice Files of Interest
Slice files (SLCF) in the middle of the ignition source in the X and Y directions are inserted
to display temperature development throughout the simulation. Furthermore, temperature
slice files are placed between the two facades, and on the exterior side of both facades.
Boundary files (BNDF) are applied for ‘NET HEAT FLUX’ and ‘WALL TEMPERATURE’, mak­
ing it possible to visualize the heat flux on the radiation exposed facade and the wall temper­
ature on the facade cladding.
Thermal Radiation Between Wooden Facades in High­Rise Buildings
39
==PAGE:52==
Surface devices to measure net heat flux are placed on the radiation exposed facade directly
in front of the ignition source. Point devices (DEVC) with QUANTITY= ’THERMOCOUPLE’
are placed on the front of the radiation exposed facade, to observe the temperatures which
it is exposed to. Thermocouples are used instead of temperature as quantity, to compare
FDS results from the small model, the large two facade model and the experiment test 1.
40
Thermal Radiation Between Wooden Facades in High­Rise Buildings
==PAGE:53==
5
Preliminary Safety Distance Calculations
Two methods to calculate a safety distance for two adjacent buildings with wooden facades
have been used. The first method used is from the SFPE Handbook chapter 86 ­ The Building
Envelope: Fire Spread, Construction Features and Loss Examples. The other approach
is by using theory described by Ulf Wickström in Temperature Calculation in Fire Safety
Engineering, regarding “Radiation from flames and smoke”. An important assumption, which
is used in both methods, is that since the facade, which is on fire, is of a combustible material,
the whole facade is included as a radiator.
To support the hand calculations, and estimate which method is most suitable, three rough
FDS models have been made. For the hand calculations and FDS models the geometry
from the facades modelled in the up­scaling of the FDS model is used. Each facade has the
dimensions of 15 m in width and 17 m of height. The thickness of the facade cladding is 21
mm, but in FDS due to meshes is 50 mm. Both horizontal and vertical wooden battens are
each 50 mm x 50 mm, so the gathered width of combustible facade is 0.15 m
This section covers the results of the calculations, for full calculations, see appendix J
5.1
SFPE
The heat release rate is determined from table A.3 in literature [73]. This table is for obtaining
the theoretical unit of heat release rate for fuels burning in the open. However this table only
covers buildings with a height up to 3.7 m. With data from table A.3 in [73], a linear fitting
was done, and a heat release rate was determined to be 10477.73kW/m per 0.15 m of width.
Then Delichatsios correlation for rectangular wall flames (Hf = 0.05 · Q2/3
w ) is used to obtain
a flame height on 23.94 m. This is 6.94 meter above the top of the building. To account for
the linear fitting, other literature are being compared to this value. It is more common to see
flames about 5 m above a window opening [16]. Therefore the heat release rate are being
adjusted, so the height of flames does not exceed 22 m. This results with a heat release rate
on 9233.3 kW/m per 0.15 m of width. The emissive power is the radiant heat release rate
per unit flame surface, which is
Ep = χradpine · Qw
Hf
= 88.11
[kW/m²]
(5.1)
The value is higher than if one used known flame temperature and an emissivity of unity, that
can be calculated the following way if one assumes the lowest expected flame temperature
on 827°C (1100 K) [19].
E = σ · (273 + Te)4 = 83.01
[kW/m²]
(5.2)
With equation 5.3 used for the configuration factor, which is for a parallel rectangular radiator
and equation 5.4 for irradiance, it is possible to determine a safety distance on 25.6 m, where
the exposed surface receive an irradiance on less than 33.5 kW/m². A, B, and C are the same
as in figure 3.2.
F12 = 2
π
[
X
√
1 + X2 · tan−1
Y
√
1 + X2 +
Y
√
1 + Y 2 · tan−1
X
√
1 + Y 2
]
(5.3)
Thermal Radiation Between Wooden Facades in High­Rise Buildings
41
==PAGE:54==
X = A
C
and
Y = B
C
Ir = K1θεσ(273 + Te)4 = F12 · Ep
[kW/m²]
(5.4)
5.2
Radiation from Flame and Smoke
Determining the radiation from flames is based on using the formular for emissivity, which
includes the mean beam length. The formular for emissivity:
εfl = 1 −e−K·Le
[−]
(5.5)
The mean beam length is:
Le = L0C
(5.6)
Where L0 is the geometric mean beam length. The expressions for the Geometric mean
beam length and C ­ correction factor, are found in the SFPE Handbook, chapter 4 ­ Radiation
Heat Transfer. The whole facade that is on fire, is the beam length, and is in this case seen
as an Infinite Slab, hence the mean beam length is determined to be 39.6. For wooden
cribs, according to Temperature Calculation in Fire Safety Engineering [74], K is 0.8 m­1.
With these values known the emissivity is calculated to be 1. Assuming, as in the SFPE
calculation, that the flame temperature is 1100 K, the incident radiation can be calculated to
be 83 kW/m² using equation 5.7
qemi,fl = (1 −e−K·Le) · σ · T 4
fl
[kW/m²]
(5.7)
The incident heat flux can be determined when the configuration factor is found. Here the
method for determining the configuration factor is from Temperature Calculation in Fire Safety
Engineering [74], where the configuration factor from the wall can be divided into four equal
contributions. Therefore is the following equation multiplied with four, so the contribution
from the whole wall is accounted for. A,B and C are the same as in figure 3.2.
F12 = 4 ·
( 1
2π
[
X
√
1 + X2 · tan−1
Y
√
1 + X2 +
Y
√
1 + Y 2 · tan−1
X
√
1 + Y 2
])
(5.8)
X = A
2C
and
Y = B
2C
The equation for the incident heat flux is given in equation 5.9, and with equation 5.9 and
5.8, the safety distance has been determined to be 12.2 mm which causes an incident heat
flux on 33.3 kW/m² and a configuration factor on 0.4.
qinc = qemi,fl · F12
[kW/m²]
(5.9)
42
Thermal Radiation Between Wooden Facades in High­Rise Buildings
==PAGE:55==
5.3
Rough FDS models
Three rough FDS models have been prepared, based on the model for two facades with a
distance on 10 m between them, described in section 4.3. In the models one of the facades
have been made into a radiator, where the whole facade is 1100 K, and radiating toward the
wooden facade. The radiator is non­combustible. Modelling a whole facade as a radiator, it
done to simulate the whole facade being ablaze. The models are rough, but they are made to
investigate approximately how long it takes for the radiation exposed facade to ignite, when
the wooden cladding has an ignition temperature on 375°C. The results from the simulations
are only based on visualizations and temperatures. It would have been ideal to investigate
the heat flux on the exposed wall, but a segmentation error occurred with the Linux server.
Three models were simulated. The difference in the models is the distance between the
1100 K hot radiator and the radiation exposed facade. The distances used were 10 m, 12.2
m, and 25.6 m. Where the 12.2 m and 25.6 m are the safety distances calculated above.
The 10 m case is created to be able to observe and compare the influence different ignition
sources, such as the two used in section 4.3.2, and a whole radiating facade can have.
It was observed in the FDS simulation with a distance on 10 m, that the facade cladding
exposed to heat ignited after 491 s. This is displayed in figure 5.1, TL. The fire on the facade
spread quickly after ignition. 65 s after the facade had been ignited, the whole facade is
engulfed in flames, see figure 5.1 TR. After ignition, the facade reached a temperature on
660°C. For a period from 122 s to ignition, the facade had a temperature ranging between
70°C ­ 80°C.
Figure 5.1: Facade 10 m in front of radiator. TL: Facade ignited after 491 s of radiation exposure.
TR: Facade fully ablaze after 556 s of radiation exposure.
The simulation with a safety distance on 12.2 m, were computed for 3600 s. The radiation
exposed facade did not ignite after an hour of exposure. The maximum temperature mea­
sured on the facade was 75°C, this is displayed in figure 5.2, TL. The simulation where there
was a safety distance on 25.6 m did not ignite either. The maximum temperature measured
on the radiation exposed facade was 29.5°C, this is displayed in figure 5.2, TR.
Thermal Radiation Between Wooden Facades in High­Rise Buildings
43
==PAGE:56==
Figure 5.2: Temperature slice files on radiation exposed facades. TL: FDS simulation with a 12.2 m
safety distance. TR: FDS simulation with a 25.6 m safety distance.
5.4
Discussion
There is a large difference in the results from the safety distance calculations. With the SFPE,
chapter 86 method the safety distance with the present conditions, had to be 25.6 m. The
method with radiation from smoke and flames showed that a safety distance on 12.2 m was
necessary. The results depend greatly on the configuration factor for the two calculations.
Where for the ten­meter distance case the SFPE, chapter 86 had a configuration factor on
0.79 and an irradiance on 69.64 kW/m². With calculations from flame radiation, the ten­meter
case had a configuration factor on 0.496 and an incident heat flux on 41.15kW/m².
In the appendix of the SFPE handbook formulars for different configuration factors are listed.
From the appendix the configuration equation for rectangular parallel plates, was used on
the ten­meter distance case. This was done to find an equation, that could be used on both
methods, or find a way to calculate a configuration factor, that would resemble one of the
already calculated configuration factors. However, it was discovered, that there are limits to
the use of this equation. When the distance exceeds the length of one of the sides a or b,
the configuration factor increases, which is not how it works in the actual world.
But using the configuration factor from the SFPE appendix, within it is limits, gives a config­
uration factor on 0.47 for the ten­meter case. Which is a lot closer to the calculations from
Flame Radiation than of the SFPE chapter 86 method. Table 5.1 displays the configuration
factors for the ten­meter case, for each of the methods used
Table 5.1: Configuration factor for a distance on 10 m between facades
Method
SFPE chapter 86
Flame Radiation
SFPE appendix
Configuration factor
0.79
0.496
0.47
Here it is the Flame Radiation and SFPE appendix that are most similar. Which makes the
Flame Radiation safety distance, on 12.2 m most plausible. Furthermore, the Danish building
legislation recommends for this type of wall exterior, that there be a 10 m safety distance [9].
The rough FDS simulations support this too. Where a 10 m safety distance was not sufficient
to prevent fire spread, but 12.2 m was safe to use. Therefore, it was shown that a safety
distance on 25.6 m definitely was a safe distance to avoid fire spread, however it is overkill
to use such a large safety distance.
44
Thermal Radiation Between Wooden Facades in High­Rise Buildings
==PAGE:57==
6
Experimental Investigations
This section covers the results from the experiments performed in DTU’s FireLab. There
have been conducted four facade burning experiments, and nine bomb calorimeter tests. For
facade burning experiments the most relevant temperature graphs and figures are presented
in this section. For graphs displaying the temperature development for all thermocouples
during the experiments, see appendix F.
6.1
Results: Facade burning
6.1.1
Test 1
With facade burning test 1, there was no wind, and the ignition source had a HRR on 9.5
kW. 27 seconds after igniting the ignition source, the facade cladding had been ignited. The
flames spread to the facade and the cavity. After the ignition source had been burning for 4
minutes and 31 seconds, it was removed. This was done, due to an intense chimney effect in
the cavity, that lead to flames reaching above the construction and touching the steel hood. In
figure 6.1 the thermocouples in the two first columns nearest the fire developed in the cavity
and on the facade are showed in a graph. It can be observed that the highest temperature
does not occur closest to the ignition source, but at L1P21, which is in the cavity and 1.2 m
above the ignition source. This can be due the back of the facade cladding being on fire, and
hence contributing to the heat release and temperature increase, and due to convection the
heat rises up.
Figure 6.1: Thermocouples 2 columns closest to fire in test 1
Thermal Radiation Between Wooden Facades in High­Rise Buildings
45
==PAGE:58==
The temperature in the cavity is higher than on the facade. This can be due to the chimney
effect, even though the cavity is ventilated, the heat cannot escape, as it would be able to on
the front of the facade. The heat intensifies, and more of the back of the cladding is ignited,
hence the fire in the cavity is more intense, than the fire on the front of the facade. In figure
6.2, the facade cladding is displayed after the fire was extinguished. The picture to the left
is of the front of the facade, where charring is visible up to 80 cm from the bottom. On the
picture to the right, the back of the facade cladding is displayed. Here charring has occurred
from bottom to top, clearly showing the chimney effect.
Figure 6.2: Charring on the facade cladding in test 1. TL: Front of facade. TR: Back of the facade.
Figure 6.3: Thermocouples in layer 3(L3) and 4(L4)
46
Thermal Radiation Between Wooden Facades in High­Rise Buildings
==PAGE:59==
Test 1 was the only facade burning test with thermocouples placed relatively 60 cm and
120 cm in front of the facade. This was to measure how much heat radiated from the test.
Figure 6.3 displays the temperature development during the experiment. In layer 3, the
temperature was higher than in layer 4. This was a given since layer 3 was closer to the
fire. The largest temperature increase was in L3P11, which was nearest the fire, where the
temperature increased with 14°C. The temperature had a steady increase, until the ignition
source was removed.
In figure 6.4 to the left, dots in the same colors as the graphs in the diagram in figure 6.4
to the right have been placed. The dots represent the placement of the thermocouples,
which temperature development are displayed in the diagram to the right. In the diagram
measurements from the thermocouples in the cavity are included. The measurement data
used in the diagram, is at the time 4.31 min. When the ignition source was removed, and
before the temperature in layer 3 and 4 started to decrease again. There was a drastic
decrease in temperature from cavity to 120 cm in front of the facade, for point 1.1 and point
2.1, which were the points above the fire.
Figure 6.4: TL: Coloured dots representing thermocouples in test 1. TR: Temperature development
from cavity to layer 4.
6.1.2
Test 2
During facade burning test 2, there was wind with variating speed, and the ignition source had
a HRR on 9.5 kW. A horizontal gypsum plate was added to the top of the facade construction,
to prolong the time before the flames reached the steel hood. This also increased the time
the facade was affected by the ignition source. The side of the hood opposite the wind source
was drawn, to protect the rest of the lab from flying embers and keep the smoke under the
hood.
In table 6.1, are the wind speed, and when it was turn on and off listed. The time is time from
when the ignition source was ignited.
Table 6.1: Start and stop time for wind machine, and wind speed for test 2.
Wind start
m:ss
0.11
1.13
3.31
5.23
6.06
8.06
Wind stop
m:ss
0.35
1.30
3.51
­
­
12.32
Wind speed
m/s
5
5
5
2.8
5
2.8
Thermal Radiation Between Wooden Facades in High­Rise Buildings
47
==PAGE:60==
From the graph in figure 6.5 it can be observed that during the wind breaks, the heat in­
creased. In the periods where there was no wind, the fire grew. When the wind was applied
the temperature decreased, and the fire in the facade was kept down and close to being
extinguished.
Figure 6.5: Thermocouples 2 columns closest to fire in test 2
In figure 6.6, the heat flux measured once every 60th second, is displayed. The heat flux
pattern follows the temperature pattern. When there was no wind affecting the facade the
heat flux increased, and decreased when wind was applied, and when the heat source was
gone.
Figure 6.6: Heat flux development for test 2
In test 2 the ignition source was not removed, due to the flames not spreading up over the
wall construction. This was clear from the charring displayed in figure 6.7 to the right. The
charring on the back of the facade cladding has only spread up to 80 cm. The bottom of the
facade was influenced by the ignition source for 7.42 minutes.
48
Thermal Radiation Between Wooden Facades in High­Rise Buildings
==PAGE:61==
Figure 6.7: Charring on the facade cladding in test 2. TL: Front of facade. TR: Back of the facade.
6.1.3
Test 3
In facade burning test 3, the ignition source had a HRR on 9.5 kW, and the facade was
exposed to wind, with a speed of 3.5 m/s 5.40 minutes after ignition of the ignition source.
The wind was then after 1 minute increased to 5 m/s and kept constant. The wind was first
applied after 5.40 minutes to make sure that the fire was burning steady and had ignited the
facade cladding. Figure 6.8 shows the thermocouples closets to the fire. There was a steady
temperature growth for the points L1P11, L1P21 and L2P11 until the facade was exposed to
wind. Then the temperature started to increase. However, for the points L1P22, L2P12 and
L2P22 the temperature had a steep increase, as soon as the wind machine was turned on to
3.5 m/s, this could be due to wind blowing the heat in the direction of the thermocouples. The
temperature for the aforementioned thermocouples decreased again when the wind speed
was increased to 5 m/s.
Figure 6.8: Thermocouples 2 columns closest to fire in test 3
Thermal Radiation Between Wooden Facades in High­Rise Buildings
49
==PAGE:62==
The heat flux evolution is shown in figure 6.9. The heat flux peaks right before the facade is
exposed to wind, and then it steadily decreases, as the wind speed increases. The evolution
of the heat flux does not follow the temperature graph. This can be explained by the heat
flux was measured and noted once every minute, whereas the temperature from the ther­
mocouples was measured every second. The heat flux measurement is coarser, and hence
the increase and decrease over a shorter period can be difficult to catch.
Figure 6.9: Heat flux development for test 3
The bottom of the facade cladding was exposed to the ignition source for 8.16 minutes until
there was no methanol left. This led to almost 15x15 cm² burned away. In figure 6.10 to the
right the charring is showed on the back of the cladding. Here it is clear that the fire on the
facade had time to grow and ignite the back of the cladding, since there is charring all the
way to the top of the facade cladding. There is a lighter charring to the right of the fire on
the facade, at a place, where there has not been charring in the other tests. This indicates
that a steady fire exposed to wind will lead to more flame spread. This also corresponds to
figure 6.8, where there is an increase in temperature for three thermocouples, when the wind
machine is applied.
Figure 6.10: Charring on the facade cladding in test 3. TL: Front of facade. TR: Back of the facade.
50
Thermal Radiation Between Wooden Facades in High­Rise Buildings
==PAGE:63==
6.1.4
Test 4
The ignition source in test 4 was increased. In the first three test one pan with a diameter on
24 cm was used. In this test two pans were added, with a diameter on relatively 20 cm and
28 cm. Each pan was filled with 204g of methanol. Together the three pans contributed to a
ignition source on 29 kW. 2.31 minutes after ignition, the fire on the facade was steady and
strong enough to apply the wind source. A wind speed on 2 m/s was used. After 5.39 min­
utes the flames coming out from the top of the wall construction were too high and touching
the steel hood. Therefore the ignition source (the pans) was removed, and water extinction
started. Figure 6.11 displays the temperature development during the short test. The tem­
perature increased much faster than the previous tests. However, given that, the ignition
source was much larger, this was expected.
Figure 6.11: Thermocouples 2 columns closest to fire in test 4
In figure 6.12 the heat flux for test 4 is displayed. The heat flux is peaking at 920 W/m² one
meter away from the fire, right as the facade is exposed to wind. The heat flux decreases as
the pans either run out of fuel or is removed, thus visible flames on the facade disappears,
and do not radiate heat. There are few data points for the heat flux in this test compared
to the prior tests. This is because the fire needed to be extinguished, since the fire was too
large to be safe at the FireLab.
Figure 6.12: Heat flux development for test 4
Thermal Radiation Between Wooden Facades in High­Rise Buildings
51
==PAGE:64==
From figure 6.13 the charring on the front and back of the facade cladding is displayed. The
charring on the front, has at its highest reached 70 cm, and there is only charging above the
ignition source. On the back of the facade cladding, charring has spread to the top of the
cladding, and is not only above the ignition source.
Figure 6.13: Charring on the facade cladding in test 4. TL: Front of facade. TR: Back of the facade.
6.1.5
Validation of Thermocouples
During the facade burning experiments, a thermal camera was used to take thermal images
of the facade and do point measures of temperature. The pictures and temperature mea­
surements taken with FLIR TG165, have been used to validate the thermocouples’ measure­
ments.
In figure 6.14, thermal pictures with temperature measurements, are shown for, what is es­
timated to be relatively 2.15 min and 3.15 min into facade test 1. Furthermore, the fire at the
given time, is shown next to the thermal picture.
Figure 6.14: TL: Thermal picture and temperature on the facade point L2P11 at 2.15 min, and a
picture of the fire. TR: Thermal picture and temperature on the facade between point L2P21 and
L2P22 at 3.15 min, and a picture of the fire.
The precise time­step of the thermal pictures taken, has not been noted. However, based
on the recordings of the experiment test 1, and that the thermal camera was used after
52
Thermal Radiation Between Wooden Facades in High­Rise Buildings
==PAGE:65==
measurements was noted for the HT­meter, the time of the pictures have been estimated.
Furthermore, to account for the insecurities of the time­step of picture taken, the thermocou­
ple measurements have been averaged over a 11 second time­span, with 5 seconds before
and after the estimated time­step for the thermal picture.
The thermal picture shown to the left in figure 6.14, shows a point temperature of 380.7°C, at
what corresponds to the thermocouple placed on the facade at point 1.1 (L2P11). The L2P11
thermocouple has an average temperature on 378.5°C at the corresponding time­step. This
is a 0.6% difference between the thermocouple and thermal camera, corresponding to 2.2°C.
For the thermal picture to the right in figure 6.14, the point temperature measured is 68.8°C.
The point of measurement corresponds to a point right in between the thermocouples L2P21
and L2P22. To determine the temperature between the two thermocouples, linear interpo­
lation was used. Afterwards the temperatures have been averaged over an 11 second time
period, and resulted in a temperature on 70.3°C. This is a 2.2°C temperature difference, cor­
responding to a 3.1% difference between thermocouples and thermal camera. As clarified
in section 4.1.1, the accuracy of thermocouples type K is +/­ 2.2°C or +/­ 0.75%, depend­
ing on which one is greater. This validates the accuracy of the thermocouples, since both
measurements are within this range.
6.1.6
Error Sources
During the facade burning tests error sources occurred.
• The thermocouples at point L2P26, placed on the facade in the topmost left corner,
turned out to be faulty, and could only register a temperature on ­9.90·1037°C. Ther­
mocouple XX, which was placed in the cavity, but right above the ignition source (in test
1­3), did not register any temperature higher than 25°C. Given that the thermocouples
placed above XX measured temperatures much higher, thermocouple XX was deemed
faulty too.
• The gypsum used as the back of the wall construction, was covered a thin layer of
paper. This paper was burned away during test 1 and can have contributed a little to
the heat release in the beginning of the fire. The back gypsum plate was not changed
between the tests, and hence did not contribute to the fire in test 2­4.
• The gypsum plate, placed horizontal on top of the wall construction, shown in figure
6.15, was added to the construction after test 1. This was done to prolong the time the
facade cladding could be exposed to the ignition source before flames started touching
the steel hood. This was a change, which increased the time the facade was exposed
for the ignition source for the later tests. This change makes charring and burned away
cladding difficult to compare within the four tests.
Figure 6.15: Gypsum plate on top of wall construction.
Thermal Radiation Between Wooden Facades in High­Rise Buildings
53
==PAGE:66==
• The size of the facade burning experiments were too large for the facilities of FireLab,
and hence test 1 and 4 were stopped premature. Where in test 1, the ignition source
was removed, and after some time the fire died down. With test 4, one pan had to be
removed, and water extinction was used to kill the fire. In these two tests, it was not
possible to observe the full extent and potential of the fire and flame spreading.
6.1.7
Result Summation
From the facade burning tests it can be concluded that wind influences how the flame spread
behave. Where it was notable from charring, and temperature moving in the same direction
as the wind direction. In table 6.2 the temperature from the thermocouples in the cavity and
on the facade are displayed from test 1 and 3. This was a test with no wind influence, and
the same test with a constant wind applied after 5.40 minutes. From the table it can be
observed that when comparing test 1 with test 3, the thermocouples father away from the
fire registered a higher maximum temperature, with wind applied. For the test without wind,
the higher temperatures are concentrated near and above the fire from ignition source, and
fire on the facade.
Table 6.2: Max temperature in cavity and on facade for test 1 and 3
Cavity
L1P11
L1P12
L1P13
L1P14
L1P15
L1P16
L1P21
L1P22
L1P23
L1P24
L1P25
L1P26
Test 1
687.0
48.4
18.1
18.8
18.2
18.5
888.4
283.8
18.5
18.8
18.8
17.7
Test 3
525.6
130.1
130.8
174.5
71.8
60.5
872.8
486.9
186.1
268.3
152.3
72.5
Facade
L2P11
L2P12
L2P13
L2P14
L2P15
L2P16
L2P21
L2P22
L2P23
L2P24
L2P25
–
Test 1
456.1
58.4
22.8
22.5
24.7
23.6
141.8
58.7
25.4
21.2
21.7
–
Test 3
746.2
704.7
38.9
44.7
28.1
23.5
153.1
500.6
68.2
193.9
27.8
–
It was also observed, that if the wind was activated before the fire on the facade had grown
strong, the wind would repress the fire. This was especially clear from test 2, where the
temperature and heat flux decreased when wind was applied and increased again when it
was off. Of the four tests, the highest temperature observed was in test 1 (888.4°C), where
there was no wind, implying that wind can contribute to cooling of the fire too.
The size of the ignition source is of importance. This was notable from test 4, where the
ignition source was increased, and more than doubled compared to previous tests. The part
of facade cladding exposed to the ignition source, was by this measure also increased. In
table 6.3 temperatures from test 1 and 4 are displayed. From the table it can be observed
that the overall temperature in the cavity increases significantly. However, the maximum
temperature in test 4 does not exceed the maximum temperature in the test 1, which can be
explained, with a low wind speed influencing the facade in test 4. Furthermore, in test 4, the
highest peak heat flux is reached at 920 W/m². Compared to test 2 and 3, it is considerably
higher, than their peak heat flux on respectively 250 and 340 W/m²
Table 6.3: Max temperature in cavity and on facade for test 1 and 4
Cavity
L1P11
L1P12
L1P13
L1P14
L1P15
L1P16
L1P21
L1P22
L1P23
L1P24
L1P25
L1P26
Test 1
687.0
48.4
18.1
18.8
18.2
18.5
888.4
283.8
18.5
18.8
18.8
17.7
Test 4
600.5
842.4
516.8
289.0
40.2
32.1
756.7
815.3
838.1
726.1
74.7
29.9
Facade
L2P11
L2P12
L2P13
L2P14
L2P15
L2P16
L2P21
L2P22
L2P23
L2P24
L2P25
–
Test 1
456.1
58.4
22.8
22.5
24.7
23.6
141.8
58.7
25.4
21.2
21.7
–
Test 4
345.0
323.5
186.9
46.4
35.6
36.3
145.2
164.8
144.8
645.4
47.3
–
54
Thermal Radiation Between Wooden Facades in High­Rise Buildings
==PAGE:67==
6.2
Discussion
The size of the ignition source used in the tests, 9.5 kW, was rather small compared to test
standards. Test standard 13785 uses an ignition source on 100 kW, from a sandbox burner
with propane as fuel [66]. As mentioned in section 4.1.1, the fuel source was chosen to be
small due to safety reasons. Had an ignition source with a HRR on 100 kW been used,
flames would have engulfed the facade, and the flames would have damaged the steel hood
and exhaust system. The exhaust system would not have been able to keep up with the
smoke production, which could potentially cause personal and property damage. However,
an ignition source with a HRR on 100 kW is more realistic to occur in the real world. According
to Enclosure Fire Dynamics, by Karlsson and Quintiere [22] this corresponds to the energy
release from a waste basket. It would be realistic to assume this size of fire could occur by a
high­rise building, either by some rubbish by the bottom, or from a balcony with a barbeque.
It would have been interesting to observe how the fire on the facade would have propagated,
had it been able to use all the fuel. Flames might have spread on the front of the facade,
since the wood would have more time to heat up and make the conditions more ideal for
flame spread.
The construction of the facade, with open sides into the void behind the facade cladding is
not ordinary building practice. The sides are in general closed off, and then the void is either
fully ventilated, partly ventilated or closed off at top and bottom, as described in figure 2.2.
Additionally, it is according to Danish regulations not permitted to build with both horizontal
and vertical wooden battens in buildings with floors above 22 meter. For buildings with top
floor placed 22 m above ground or less, the 10% rule applies, where only 10% of the exposed
surface of the suspension system can be in material class D­s2,d2 [9]. There where lots of
oxygen present, due to the way the facade was constructed. The chimney effect occurred
in experiment 1, 3, and 4. The chimney effect was anticipated for the experiments, but not
in the extent that occurred. The large chimney effect can have occurred since the fire in the
cavity had optimal conditions. There were great access to both fuel, the facade cladding,
and oxygen coming from the side openings. Even though the large extent of the chimney
effect was not anticipated, it came to have a great influence on the experiments. Due to
the chimeny effect the wall construction had to be altered, and some of the experiments
shortened. The chimney effect showed that it is very important to think of fire stop, and other
ways to prevent rapid fire spread in the cavity. Furthermore this can explain how some of
the facade fires from section 2.4 spread as much as they did.
The wind source was directed onto the facade surface at a 45­degree angle. This impacted
the ignition source and the fire on the front of the facade, however as mentioned in the results,
it also aided in the flame spreading. Had the wind source been placed with a 0­degree angle
to the facade, the wind would have blown directly into the void. This would probably had
contributed to more horizontal flame­, and temperature spread in the flow direction of the
wind. As previously described the sides are closed off in common building practice. When
this is done, wind from the side will not have as great an influence on the horizontal flame
and temperature spread in the void. If the void is ventilated, or partially ventilated, wind has
access from the bottom of the facade, and the wind can aid the fire in the vertical direction
[23].
Given that on the front of the facade there were not much flame and flame spread compared
to the cavity, the thermocouples in layer 3 and 4 should have been placed lower and closer to
the fire. This would have given a higher temperature increase, and the measurement would
have been more interesting to observe. However, these measurements also show that there
is not a large temperature increase 60­120 cm away from the fire, which for fire safety and
spread to other buildings is a positive result.
Thermal Radiation Between Wooden Facades in High­Rise Buildings
55
==PAGE:68==
6.3
Results: Bomb Calorimeter
The bomb calorimeter tests, as described in section 4.1.2, were carried out with the wooden
battens, frame, and facade cladding as test species. The results from each of the test are
displayed in this section. For each of the three test types, a graph, showing the temperature
development, and a table, with the complete heat of combustion, have been created.
Each graph starts at the 180 second mark. This is because the first 180 seconds are used
for the IKA C2000 bomb calorimeter to equalize. After the 180 seconds, the main test starts,
here the test specie is ignited, and one will observe a temperature increase.
Wooden Battens
In figure 6.16 and table 6.4 the temperature development and heat of combustion results
for the three tests with the wooden battens are shown. The temperature increase follows a
logarithmic curve, where there is a fast increase of temperature in the beginning, and then
the increase slows down. The average heat of combustion for the three tests was determined
to be 23.52 MJ/kg.
Table 6.4: Results of bomb calorimeter test for wooden battens
Wooden Battens
Unit
Test 1
Test 2
Test 3
Average
Heat of Combustion
[MJ/kg]
23.78
23.36
23.42
23.52
Mass
[g]
0.599
0.630
0.636
0.622
Temperature increase
[K]
1.59
1.77
1.71
1.69
Figure 6.16: Temperature development in bomb calorimeter with wooden battens
6.3.1
Frame
In figure 6.17 and table 6.5 the temperature development and heat of combustion results for
the three tests with the frame are shown. The temperature increase follows a logarithmic
56
Thermal Radiation Between Wooden Facades in High­Rise Buildings
==PAGE:69==
curve, just as the wooden battens. However a little bump in test 1 and 3 is observed. The
average heat of combustion for the three tests was determined to be 20.95 MJ/kg.
Table 6.5: Results of bomb calorimeter test for the Frame
Frame
Unit
Test 1
Test 2
Test 3
Average
Heat of Combustion
[MJ/kg]
23.72
19.69
19.44
20.95
Mass
[g]
0.611
0.606
0.609
0.609
Temperature increase
[K]
1.62
1.36
1.57
1.52
Figure 6.17: Temperature development in bomb calorimeter with frame
Facade Cladding
In figure 6.18 and table 6.6 the temperature development and heat of combustion results
for the three tests with the facade cladding are shown. The temperature increase follows a
logarithmic curve, just as with the wooden battens and frame. As with the frame, there is
also a decrease in temperature between 210 to 260 seconds, this is observed in test 1­3.
The average heat of combustion for the three tests was determined to be 21.91 MJ/kg.
Table 6.6: Results of bomb calorimeter test for Facade cladding
Facade cladding
Unit
Test 1
Test 2
Test 3
Average
Heat of Combustion
[MJ/kg]
23.25
22.99
19.46
21.91
Mass
[g]
0.615
0.614
0.614
0.614
Temperature increase
[K]
1.68
1.65
1.68
1.67
Thermal Radiation Between Wooden Facades in High­Rise Buildings
57
==PAGE:70==
Figure 6.18: Temperature development in bomb calorimeter with facade cladding
Summary
It was observed that after each test, the whole test specie was combusted. Furthermore,
no residue was left back in the crucible. On the bottom of the cover of the decomposition
vessel, small droplets of water were found.
All tests conducted with the bomb calorimeter have been made with pinewood, but each have
been treated differently. The wooden battens have been pressure impregnated, the facade
cladding has been thermos treated, so the moisture content has been decreased, and the
frame has only been planed. As can be observed from table 6.7 the heat of combustion
varies between 20.91 and 23.52 MJ/kg. Comparing this with values found in literature, the
heat of combustion found in the bomb calorimeter test are higher. In the SFPE handbook
the heat of combustion value for Ponderosa pine is 19.4 MJ/kg [19, p. 143] and for Wood
(pine) the heat of combustion is 17.9 MJ/kg [19, p. 3467]. However just observing the values
from the SFPE handbook, the values for pine varies. Other literature mentions that the heat
of combustion for wood is about 15­20 MJ/kg [13, p. 68]. It is then noted that the bomb
calorimeter tests have given higher values, than the literature. Both the frame and facade
cladding are somewhat close to the high end of the literature values. It could be that the
wooden battens have been treated with pressure impregnation, and hence contributing to a
higher heat of combustion value.
Table 6.7: Summary of average heat of combustion for test species
Test species
Wooden battens
Frame
Facade cladding
Average heat of
combustion [MJ/kg]
23.52
20.95
21.91
58
Thermal Radiation Between Wooden Facades in High­Rise Buildings
==PAGE:71==
6.3.2
Uncertainties
As mentioned in the section above, the measured values for pine does not correspond to the
literature. There can occur some possible errors during the bomb calorimeter experiments,
that could affect the results. The weight of each test specie can influence the results. The
measured mass could be more precise with one more decimal. The scale available in FireLab
had one decimal less than what could be written into the bomb calorimeter display/prepare
menu. Hence the heat of combustion values could have been more accurate. The cleaning of
the decomposition vessel and crucible can influence the results too. The vessel and crucible
were cleaned between each test, however the inside of the vessel, had some dirt, that was
not possible to remove.
Thermal Radiation Between Wooden Facades in High­Rise Buildings
59
==PAGE:72==
7
FDS Simulation of Facade Experiment
This section covers the results from the FDS simulation of experiment test 1. The tempera­
ture and heat flux development from the FDS simulation will be compared to the experiment
with graphs and tables. Through Smokeview visualizations flame height and burned area will
be compared to the experiment. In appendices H are tables displaying the fire development
from front and side, for both FDS and experiment, minute by minute. The most significant
figures are too displayed in this section.
7.1
Results: Temperature and Heat Flux Development
Figure 7.1 displays the temperature development curves from the experiment (TL) and from
the FDS simulation (TR) for the two columns closest to the fire in the cavity and on the facade.
The curves are not the same, but where the difference is especially clear is from when the
ignition source is removed. In the experiment the decrease in temperature is much less
drastic compared to the simulation, where there is a big temperature drop.
Figure 7.1: Thermocouples in the two columns near the fire. TL: Experiment test 1. TR: FDS simu­
lation of test 1.
Figure 7.2 and 7.3 display only two thermocouple measuring points each of temperature
development. Here experiment and simulation data are in one diagram. The temperature
curves are held up against each other, to see how much the simulation resemble the exper­
iment. The curves with the legend ending on _TC are from the simulation.
60
Thermal Radiation Between Wooden Facades in High­Rise Buildings
==PAGE:73==
Figure 7.2: Temperature development from the two measuring points with the greatest temperature
from experiment and simulation.
Figure 7.3: Temperature development from important measuring points close to the fire.
A notable difference between the experiment and simulation is the large temperature in the
simulation long after the ignition source has been removed. This is discussed later in section
7.3. In figure 7.4 and 7.5 the thermocouples’ temperature curves for layer 3 and 4 are dis­
played. Data showed are from both experiment and simulation. The curves with the legend
ending on _TC are from the simulation. In both figures the gray broken lines shows a range
of ± 20% of the most centered curve from the experiment. This is done, because according to
the Technical Reference Guide for FDS, it is extremely rare to have simulated temperatures
Thermal Radiation Between Wooden Facades in High­Rise Buildings
61
==PAGE:74==
that comes within 10% of experimental measured temperatures. It is more common that
the simulated temperatures have an accuracy within 20% of the experimentally measured
temperatures [75]. There are in the simulated temperatures for layer 3 not the same steep
increase in temperature as in the experiment, and hence the simulated temperatures are not
within the 20% accuracy.
Figure 7.4: Thermocouple temperatures in layer 3, from experiment test 1 and FDS simulation.
Figure 7.5: Thermocouple temperatures in layer 4, from experiment test 1 and FDS simulation.
For the temperature in the simulation there is a large decrease in temperature when the
fire source is removed. Then the temperature starts to increase again. In table 7.1 peak
temperatures before the fire is removed, are displayed, together with the peak temperatures
from the experimental, test 1. The pattern of temperature is similar, where the temperatures
are high by the thermocouples L1P11, L1P21, L2P11, and L2P21 and then decrease further
away from the fire. There is a significant temperature difference between the FDS result and
the result from test 1 in thermocouple L1P21. L1P21 in the FDS simulation has a temperature
on 397.7°C, the experimental value was 888.4°C. The only place in the FDS simulation, the
62
Thermal Radiation Between Wooden Facades in High­Rise Buildings
==PAGE:75==
temperature reaches that temperature, is by thermocouple XX, which has a peak temperature
on 922.6°C.
Table 7.1: First peak temperatures before removal of ignition source for FDS simulation and
experimental, test 1.
Cavity
L1P11
L1P12
L1P13
L1P14
L1P15
L1P16
L1P21
L1P22
L1P23
L1P24
L1P25
L1P26
FDS
781.8
53.7
18.4
18.2
18.0
18.0
397.7
171.2
25.0
18.7
18.1
18.2
Test 1
687.0
48.4
18.1
18.8
18.2
18.5
888.4
283.8
18.5
18.8
18.8
17.7
Facade
L2P11
L2P12
L2P13
L2P14
L2P15
L2P16
L2P21
L2P22
L2P23
L2P24
L2P25
L2P26
FDS
330.2
40.6
19.0
18.5
18.2
18.1
136.3
69.3
20.8
18.3
18.2
18.2
Test 1
456.1
58.4
22.8
22.5
24.7
23.6
141.8
58.7
25.4
21.2
21.7
N/A
The heat flux one meter in front if the fire was simulated too. In figure 7.6, is the heat flux
development for the first 4 minutes showed. Here the simulated heat flux follows the exper­
imental measured heat flux very well. The heat flux development curves are from the FDS
simulation and experiment test 3. The results from test 3 is used here, because up till 4
minutes test 1 and test 3 had the same exterior conditions, and the heat flux measurements
in test 1 were faulty.
Figure 7.6: Heat flux development from test 3 and FDS simulation.
7.2
Results: Flame Height and Charring
Another parameter to compare the FDS simulation with the experiment is flame heights. In
Smokeview it is possible to visualize HRRPUV, which is the fire, and is per default colored
orange. In figure 7.7 are screenshots from the visualization under pictures of the fire from the
experiment. There are pictures for the following time steps: When ignition source is removed
(4.31 minutes mark), one minute after the ignition source is removed (5.31 minutes) and when
no flaming is visible at the front of the facade and the fire on the facade had self­extinguished
(11.31 minutes).
At the time step 4.26 minutes, the flame height on the front, is in the experiment 60 cm up,
whereas in the FDS simulation the flame height is 55 cm. In the cavity in the experiment the
flames are already reaching the top of the facade, where in the FDS simulation, the flames
have only reached up 120 cm. One minute after the ignition source has been removed there
are only small non­continuous flames on the front of the facade in the experiment. In the
Thermal Radiation Between Wooden Facades in High­Rise Buildings
63
==PAGE:76==
cavity the flames are up reaching 160 cm in the experiment. In the simulation there are
flames 40 cm up on the front of the facade, and in the cavity, the flames have reached 102
cm. At the time when the fire on the facade had extinguished in the experiment, the FDS
simulation displayed flames 30 cm above the top of the facade cladding, and 35 cm flames
from the bottom on the front of the facade.
Figure 7.7: Flame development of fire in experiment and simulation
The BURN_AWAY function was applied to the FDS model, making it possible to see how
much of the wood burned away during the simulation. In figure 7.8, TL the facade cladding
64
Thermal Radiation Between Wooden Facades in High­Rise Buildings
==PAGE:77==
nearest the fire from test 1 is displayed next to a screenshot from the simulation, TR. The
screenshot from the simulation is zoomed into the same place near the fire. Here it is possible
to see, that some of the facade cladding is missing, hence it has burned away. This is similar
to the wood burned away in test 1. More facade cladding has burned away in the simulation,
compared to test 1. This is due to the simulation’s burning time is longer than test 1.
Figure 7.8: Wood burned away on the facade cladding. TL: Experiment test 1. TR: FDS simulation
7.3
Discussion
It is important when doing FDS simulations, to be aware of pitfalls, errors and where uncer­
tainties can occur. Professor Phillip Rubini1 has once said:
”A report of a CFD simulation without discussion of error is of little value”
Hence this section covers issues to be aware of, when applying this model, errors and where
reality and simulation might not compare.
7.3.1
Iteration Process
Multiple simulations have been run, to adjust and make the model as true to the real world
as possible. However, one has to be careful not to change too much. If one must change
too much in the model, it is not a good model to explain the real physical conditions.
The parameters that have been changed between the different simulations have been: Igni­
tion temperature, number of radiation angels and HRR of the ignition source.
There have been run simulations with different ignition temperatures, since different sources
have determined different ignition temperatures for pine. By the last simulations it was found
that the ignition temperature, that had the most similar temperature development as the ex­
periment was 375°C. As mentioned in section 3.2.1, the ignition temperature varies between
349­446°C depending on the source used. Alternatively, the ignition temperature could have
been determined with a TGA­analysis (Thermogravimetric analysis) in the FireLab.
Simulations were run with 100 and 500 radiation angles. Where it was clear that the most re­
alistic results came from the simulations with 500 radiation angles. One should in simulations
validating experiments, measuring radiation from flames to building parts, and verification of
flame spread increase the number of radiation angles to 500. Increasing the number of radi­
ation angles increases the computational time, hence why it was tested with the default 100
radiations angles. The final simulation was run with 500 radiation angles.
The HRR of the ignition source, was the parameter changed the most. In the experiment in
the FireLab an ignition source with a HRR on 9.5 kW was used. Running simulations with
a 9.5 kW HRR brought temperatures that were nowhere near the ones measured in the lab.
1Professor Philip Rubini. CEng, FIChemE, MIET. University of Hull, UK [76]
Thermal Radiation Between Wooden Facades in High­Rise Buildings
65
==PAGE:78==
It was found, that if the HRR was increased to 14 kW, the same temperatures as in the lab
were reached. The large difference in HRR can be due to that fact, that FDS is not optimal
for solving conductivity. This is explained in more detail in section 7.3.3.
7.3.2
Flame Spread
In the simulation, the flames are present during the whole simulation, and does not extinguish
as they do in the experimental test. This can be due to the fact, that there is no coupling
between the burning rate and surface temperature in FDS. Which can lead to a too large
increase in surface temperature. Since there is a higher surface temperature, the conditions
for flame spread, and a continuous flames in the cavity are ideal. In the experiment the
flames extinguish in the cavity 3.33 minutes after removal of ignition source. The last flames
on the front of the facade are observed 5.35 minutes after removal of ignition source. Here
the Ts,min (temperature outside the immediate range of flames, in this case, the temperature
of the facade cladding) is too low for the flames to continue. As far as the writer knows,
there is not a Ts,min or similar, that can be added as either a material­ or surface parameter
in FDS. However, another approach to the model could have been to use AUTO_IGNITION
on the REAC line, and not used the IGNITION_TEMPERATURE as a surface parameter.
Then REACTION_TEMPERATURE could have been added to the thermal properties of the
material. The reaction temperature is typically found with a TGA­analysis. This approach
has not been used, since it is a bit more complex, and not enough time to redo the model
was available.
7.3.3
Other Errors and Uncertainties
FDS is originally made for fluids and not solids. FDS uses FVM (Finite Volume Method), and
can hence solve for fluids fairly successful. However when it comes to solids, it is much more
appropriate to use FEM (Finite Element Method). Heat conduction takes place in a solid, and
is then best solved with FEM. The default solver for conduction is the 1D heat conduction
solver, and the 3D solver is still in BETA testing. This can lead to the heat conduction not
being solved just as good as radiation and convection. This can be of influence on the results
for the heat, since convection and radiation from the cavity are not being lead by conduction
into the gypsum layer behind it.
One should for FDS simulations conduct grid analysis, to check for grid convergence. This
has not been done here. It is most common to observe weak convergence for larger models
with coarse grids. In this simulation a grid resolution near the fire was on 0.02³m, and then
in areas not too relevant 0.1³ m. This was deemed to be a fine grid, and hence there should
be grid convergence.
Physical instabilities can occur in FDS simulations. This tends to occur near changes in
cell sizes, where there is a sudden change in obstructions or heat release rate, and in fully
closed enclosures. The model has been checked for any physical abnormalities by checking
the velocity vector slices near the fire and the exhaust fan, here no abnormalities occurred.
The velocity vector flow was as expected; flowing upwards from the fire to the exhaust fan.
However, the model should have been checked with pressure slice files, but it was assumed
that given the model is open, there would not occur pressure instabilities. Had there been
issues with pressure, it would have been noted from the flow of velocity.
7.3.4
Up-Scaling
The FDS model is used moving forward with up­scaling it to simulate a fire on a high rise
building adjacent to another high­rise building. It is deemed appropriate to do so, because
the FDS model is conservative compared to the experiment, with exemption from the effect
from the HRR from the ignition source. The HRR must be higher in the model to generate
temperature and heat flux results that are comparable to the experiment. However, the flame
66
Thermal Radiation Between Wooden Facades in High­Rise Buildings
==PAGE:79==
development follows the experiment until the ignition source is removed, then flame spread
is more extensive in the FDS model than in the experiment. In a bigger model the flame will
probably be more extensive, since a bigger ignition source is used. There will be more flame
spread, and a greater fire on the facade will evolve than what will happen in reality, hence
making this parameter of the model conservative. When scaling up the model, one should
be attentive on the heat release rate. Discussion on the up­scaled FDS­models is found in
section 8.2.
Thermal Radiation Between Wooden Facades in High­Rise Buildings
67
==PAGE:80==
8
Up-Scaling of FDS-Model
This section contains results and discussion of six FDS simulations, with three different dis­
tances between facades and two fire scenarios. The FDS models are described previously
in section 4.3. The results are displayed in graphs and visualizations of the simulations.
8.1
Results
The simulations completed for this section, were supposed to simulate 3600 s (one hour).
However it has not been possible to compute the simulation long enough, due to time limita­
tions and available computational power. Additionally, each of the models have not simulated
the same amount of time, therefore the amount of data for the results for the different cases
will not be same.
8.1.1
Temperature
The thermocouples were placed on the facade which was exposed to radiation, however,
there has been a problem with the placement of the thermocouples, because they do not
display any change in temperature. This can be caused by the model seeing the placement of
the thermocouples in the cladding, and not in front of the cladding. To get some temperature
measurements, a temperature slice was placed 5 mm in front of the facade exposed to
radiation. The maximum temperatures are found for fewer time­steps with the use of slice
files instead of the data. In figure 8.1 is a visualization of a temperature slice file just in front
of the radiation exposed facade.
Figure 8.1: Visualization of temperature slice on radiation exposed facade.
In figure 8.2 the maximum temperature at each timestep is displayed for each of the six cases
simulated. There are three simulations with a waste basket igniting the facade at the bottom,
one for relatively 5 m, 7.5 m, and 10 m distance between the facades. The same distances
have been used for three simulations with flames coming out of two windows on the first
floor.
68
Thermal Radiation Between Wooden Facades in High­Rise Buildings
==PAGE:81==
Figure 8.2: Maximum temperature on the facade of the radiation exposed facade, for each simulation.
It can be seen from figure 8.2, that the temperature on the radiation exposed facade is larger
in the simulations with the ignition source coming from the windows than compared to the
simulations with the ignition source being a wastebasket. Furthermore, the temperature is
higher, when the distance is 5 m than compared to the 7.5 m and 10 m.
In figure 8.3 a slice file in the 10 m case with a waste basket is displayed. Here it is notable,
that the temperature from the burning facade toward the radiation exposed facade is not
increasing significantly, which pairs well with the results from figure 8.2.
Figure 8.3: Temperature slice file in between two facades, with 10 m distance, for the case with a
waste basket as fire scenario
Thermal Radiation Between Wooden Facades in High­Rise Buildings
69
==PAGE:82==
8.1.2
Heat Flux
The net heat flux received on the wall adjacent to the fire have been measured. The net
heat flux is the sum of emitted and absorbed radiation on the solid surface of the facade. In
this case the facade cladding, which is adjacent to the fire, is the solid surface where heat
flux is measured. In figure 8.4 the heat flux received on the radiation exposed facade for
scenario SC11, SC21, and SC31 are displayed. Scenarios ending with a “1”, are the cases
with fire scenarios with a waste basket as ignition source. Where scenarios ending with “2”
are fire scenarios with the ignition source being flames from two windows in a compartment
influenced by the occurrence of a flashover. Figure 8.5 displays the heat flux received by the
radiation exposed facade for the fire scenarios SC12, SC22, and SC32.
Figure 8.4: Heat flux received on the radiation exposed facade for the fire cases with a waste basket
as ignition source
Figure 8.5: Heat flux received on the radiation exposed facade for the fire cases with a flashover
compartment with two windows, as ignition source.
At the 300 s, 450 s, and 600 s mark, there are large dips in the measurements. These
dips occur at the time, where the model have been restarted. The dips are not caused by
a change in ignition source or ambient conditions. They are a computational error from the
restart, hence the dips should just be disregarded.
70
Thermal Radiation Between Wooden Facades in High­Rise Buildings
==PAGE:83==
8.1.3
Flame Spread
For the fire cases with a waste basket, as an ignition source the following were observed:
• The same chimney effect as with the experiment and the FDS simulation of the exper­
iment. The ignition source was placed by the bottom of the facade and had access to
the cavity in the facade. The flame spread in the cavity was large enough to extend
out and above the facade. This is pictured in figure 8.7 TL.
• The temperature on the radiation exposed facade, was highest at the top of the facade,
since there was more radiation from the flames on top of the facade, than compared
to the bottom, where ignition occurred.
• Not much flame spread on the front of the facade. There were a lot more flame spread
in the cavity.
• By the ignition source a small part of the facade cladding burned away. This is pictured
in figure 8.6 for two timesteps.
Figure 8.6: For fire case with waste basket as ignition source, burned away facade cladding at: TL:
710 seconds after ignition. TR: 785 seconds after ignition.
For the fire cases with flames from windows as ignition source, the following was observed:
• Flame. did not spread into the cavity, hence only flame spread on the front of the
facade. The flame spread on the facade is pictured in figure 8.7 TR.
• The highest temperature on the radiation exposed facade was observed right in the
middle, between the flaming windows.
Figure 8.7: Flame spread for the two different fire scenarios: TL: Waste basket as ignition source.
TR: Flames from two windows as ignition source.
Thermal Radiation Between Wooden Facades in High­Rise Buildings
71
==PAGE:84==
8.1.4
Safety Distance
Based on the results from the six large scale simulations, 5 m is a safe distance to apply
between the two buildings with wooden facades. The highest heat flux on the radiation
exposed facade is less than 1 kW/m² and the highest temperature is near 21°C. Given that
the critical heat flux for piloted ignition for wood is 12.5 kW/m² and the ignition temperature
for pinewood is 375°C, ignition on the radiation exposed facade will not occur. This is within
850 seconds (∼14minutes) of the fire duration, and ignition of ignition source.
8.2
Discussion
There are three things that could have improved the simulations. The first thing is the com­
puting time of the simulations. The simulations did not reach the full 3600 s (60 min) of
simulation. As a result the simulations does not cover the full influence of the fire on the
radiation exposed building. Hence the results are only valid for at most 888 s, and anything
beyond that, are estimated and approximated. It would create better results if the simulations
covered the full 3600 seconds. Secondly the number of radiation angles are only set to 100.
Even though in section 7.3 it was concluded, that with cases where radiation from flames
was present, it would be best with number of radiation angles set to 500. The choice to use
only 100 as number of radiation angles, was made to make the models less computational
heavy, and decrease computation time. This might lead to temperatures and heat fluxes on
the radiation exposed wall a little lower, than if the number of radiation angles had been 500.
The third thing that could be improved would be the placement of the thermocouples. The
thermocouples have been placed in such a way, that they do not measure any temperature
change on the surface of the radiation exposed facade. The temperatures in figure 8.2 were
found by using a temperature slice file placed 5 mm in front of the exposed facade, which is
not optimal. It would have been better if measurements were found directly on the facade.
This would have resulted in higher and more precise temperatures. However, given that the
temperatures that were found were not higher than 21°C, it is estimated, that had it been pos­
sible the get results directly from the facade, it would still not be temperatures high enough
to ignite the facade.
Even though the simulations did not run the full amount of time, the heat flux graphs for
the fire cases with flames from windows look like they have reached a level where the heat
flux does not increase much. There is further no reason to believe that the heat flux would
increase, unless part of the facade burned away, so flames could creep into the cavity, and
there would occur flaming above the top of the facade. For the heat flux to increase there
would have to be more flame spread on the front of the facade as well. Additionally. The
heat flux from the fire cases with the waste basket did have a steep increase, the heat flux
is so low, maximum 10.88 W/m², that it would not be likely to increase 12.489 kW/m², to a
level where it would be able to ignite the radiation exposed facade. In all the fire cases the
fire and ignition source are too small to spread to an adjacent building.
In the cases with flames from windows, as ignition source, no part of the facade burned away.
This can be because the simulations did not run for long enough time. Furthermore, the
facade cladding only received fire exposure from one side, compared to the waste basket
ignition source, where the cladding burned away because it was exposed to fire on both
sides. The assumption is that, if the simulation had been running for a longer time, part of
the facade would have burnt away, and then created an opening to the cavity, and the same
chimney effect as in the waste basket scenarios would have been observed.
72
Thermal Radiation Between Wooden Facades in High­Rise Buildings
==PAGE:85==
9
Discussion
Different methods used to estimate a safety distance have been used, and the distance
have varied greatly depending on method. Some methods have been very conservative
with assumptions, like the whole facade being on fire, whereas other methods have been less
conservative and more realistic. The methods used in the section regarding the preliminary
calculations, section 5, were on the conservative side. Where in the calculations it was
assumed that the whole facade was ignited. This gave safety distances ranging from 12.2
m to 25.6 m, which is a large span. However, this was roughly modelled in FDS, where
it turned out that the 25.6 m was on the very conservative side, and that 12.2 m was an
appropriate distance, when the building is 15 m wide and 17 m tall. The building regulation’s
most conservative distance, in the pre­accepted solutions, is 10 m, but even here one cannot
use wood in the whole facade, when the top floor is placed 22 m or less above ground. Only
20 % of the facade is allowed to be in wood, when it is classified as D­s2,d2, and it has to be
evenly distributed. If the top floor is placed more than 22 m above ground, the rain cover has
to be in class A2­s1,d0 [9]. Furthermore, if one follows the performance­based requirement
there cannot be a radiated heat flux on an adjacent building/construction on more than 15
kW/m² within the first hour of the fire. This heat flux is higher than the 12.5 kW/m² for piloted
ignition for wood, and lower than the 33.5 kW/m² for spontaneous ignition. Here the 15 kW/m²
restriction will be fine, to avoid spontaneous ignition. However if the wood has been heated
up, and exposed to radiation for a while, and then an ember or brand lands on the exposed
wood, the 15 kW/m² might not be good enough to avoid a piloted ignition [19, Chapter 86].
However the chapter notes, that the 12.5 kW/m² can be on the conservative side, regarding
piloted ignition. This maybe need to be investigated further. The large FDS models based on
the up­scaling of the facade experiment, showed that a 5 m distance was safe enough avoid
fire propagation between two high­rise building with wooden facades. However, the fires on
the large facades were small compared to having the whole facade ablaze. Here the author
was too focused on the ignition sources being as realistic as possible and comply with former
experiments and literature on the topic. To have ended up with some more useful results from
the large simulations, it would have been more appropriate to have created larger ignition
sources. Where the larger ignition source should represent a case of a fire that had been
burning for a while and grown strong. The models used here, are from the beginning of a
fire. It would have been better to start the simulation further into the duration of a fire.
There are things that could have been improved, to get more credible and useful results.
The large FDS models should have contained larger ignition sources, as described prior,
to comply with the limitation section in section 1.3. The facade should already be partially
ablaze, when the simulations were started. Here the rough FDS models in the preliminary
calculations might be better to give an estimate of a safety distance, because it is a rough
estimate of a huge fire. Time could have been utilized more optimal, either on optimizing
the large FDS models, or making the rough FDS models more thorough and detailed. It
would have been beneficial if there had been more focus on using heat flux measurement,
in the rough FDS models from the preliminary calculations. The results would have been
more comparable to the heat flux requirement from the building regulations, and the ignition
heat flux from the SFPE handbook. However, a segmentation error occurred, which possible
could be a problem with Linux. It was deemed by the author, that instead of using a great
amount of time trying to work around it, that temperature slice files, were the second­best
option, with less time wasted.
Thermal Radiation Between Wooden Facades in High­Rise Buildings
73
==PAGE:86==
10
Conclusion
There have been many facade fires in high­rise buildings throughout the last 20 years [6].
The facade fires occur in the combustible part of the facade and spreads. More wood is intro­
duced into buildings and hence increasing the amount of combustible material. Additionally,
the legislation regarding fire does not make it straightforward to use wood in buildings. Even
wood in facade cladding in high­rise building above 22 m is not permitted in the prescriptive­
based codes [9]. Therefore, this thesis was completed with the purpose to determine a
safety distance between high­rise buildings with facades of wooden material, and contribute
to work needing to be done, so the increased use of wood in buildings, can be done in a
safely manner.
The following was performed and concluded:
In the preliminary hand calculations and rough FDS models, the whole facade was consid­
ered as a radiator, i.e., the whole facade being ablaze. With the given conditions, there
should be a safety distance between two wooden facade buildings on either 12.2 m or 25.6
m depending on which method used. The SFPE, chapter 86 method resulted in a safety
distance on 25.6 m. The method using theory on radiation from flames resulted in a safety
distance on 12.2 m. This is only for buildings with dimensions on 15 m of width and 17 m of
height, and for the SFPE handbook method, a thickness on the facade cladding on 150 mm.
Rough FDS models with 10 m, 12.2 m, and 25.6 m distance between radiator and facade
were created to compare hand calculations with FDS simulations. It was found that with
these conservative assumptions, that in FDS if the distance between facades was 10 m the
radiation exposed facade would ignite after 491 seconds. It proved safe with an increased
safety distance to 12.2 m. With this distance the radiation exposed facade would not ignite
within 3600 s. The simulation was computed for 3600 s. The 12.2 m corresponds to the
hand calculations using theory on radiation from flames.
Four intermediate facade burning experiments were conducted, with different conditions
present. There was test 1, which was without wind present. Test 2 had same ignition source,
but a PPV was used as a wind source with different levels. Test 3 had the same conditions
as in test 2, but only two lower wind speeds was used. Test 4 used an ignition source more
than double HRR from test 1 and was exposed to a continuous low wind speed. The tests
demonstrated that wind and ignition source influence the flame spread and the temperature
in the cavity and on the facade. The heat flux, measured one meter from the fire on the
facade, was also affected by wind and size of ignition source. The greatest temperature
measurement was 888.4°C in the cavity in test 1. Additionally, a strong chimney effect was
observed in the tests with no wind or low wind speeds.
A FDS model was constructed to simulate the conditions from the physical experiment, test
1 with no wind applied. It was possible to create the same chimney effect, and the same
temperature patterns were also found. However, in the model used, the Ts,min was not ac­
counted for, so more persistent flame and flame spread was observed. When the fire in
the experiment extinguished, the flames in the simulation continued. It was necessary to
increase the ignition source from 9.5 kW, which was used in the physical experiment, to 14
kW. This was done so the temperatures in the cavity, and on the facade, in the simulation
were in the same range as in the physical experiment. The peak temperature in the simula­
tion, before the ignition source was removed, was found in the cavity near the ignition source
on 922.5°C. It was deemed that the results from the FDS model resembled the results from
74
Thermal Radiation Between Wooden Facades in High­Rise Buildings
==PAGE:87==
the physical test enough to use in further FDS simulations. The model was used as a basis
to construct larger models for high­rise buildings with wooden facades.
Six large FDS cases, with two different fire scenarios and three different facade distances,
5 m, 7.5 m, and 10 m, were created based on the FDS simulation made of the physical
experiment. The first fire scenario was an ignition source modelled to resemble a waste
basket, with a HRR on 100 kW. The second fire scenario was created to resemble flames
spreading out from two windows from a compartment fire. Each window had a heat release
rate per unit area on 200 kW/m². The intention was to observe the fire propagation over the
course of one hour. The models were computational heavy. The case that covered the most
amount of simulated time was the case with flames from windows as ignition source, and 5
m distance between the wooden facades. The simulation ran for 888 seconds, and no fire
spread between the two facades occurred. No fire propagation between the facades in the
other cases was observed either. From the six simulations it could be concluded that 5 m
would be a safe distance. However the fires were small, and in the beginning stages of a
fire. The full duration of the fire was not simulated, so this result should be considered with
skepticism.
The research completed in this thesis suggest that when using wooden facades, the safety
distance should be chosen with care. There is a conservative approach, that results in a 12.2
m safety distance between two wooden facades with the dimensions of 15 m x 17 m. A less
conservative method with the use of FDS suggests that for the prior mentioned dimensions,
that 5 m would be sufficient. However, this method does not consider the whole facade being
ablaze, has only been simulated for 888 s, and should be used with care, since this is not
generalized for all wooden species and facade constructions.
Thermal Radiation Between Wooden Facades in High­Rise Buildings
75
==PAGE:88==
11
Further Work
Small Scale CFD
For further work, it would seem logical to investigate and optimize the small scale FDS model
of test 1, in regards to the inclusion of a Ts,min.
Whether it be with a segment missing
to the software, or if the physical parameter is in some way accounted for when applying
AUTO_IGNITION_TEMPERATURE, REACTION_TEMPERATURE and other more detailed
kinetic parameters. For future validation models, it would be optimal to have a more realistic
range of flame spread, and for flames to extinguish, to comply with the real physical world.
Large Scale CFD
It would for further work with the large CFD models, make sense to set aside enough time,
more than a month, to run the models, so the results could be observed for an hour. Fur­
thermore, the model could be optimized, so it would be less computational heavy, making it
possible to compute the whole hour of the model in a shorter time span.
This model could for further works be used to investigate the wind influence on fire propaga­
tion on either one or both facades. This could be done with the same approach, as the in this
project, and the experiments with different wind speeds and impact is already completed,
and could be used. One only needs to create the FDS models and analyze the simulations.
Further Work, With a Real-World Perspective
To increase the amount of wood in constructions, in a safely manner, with regards to fire
safety, the following work would, according to the author, be beneficial to carry out:
• Research on how to create generalized values for wood’s thermal properties, so fire
dynamics calculations for wood are not specific or depending on the wood specie.
• Investigation of the contribution from flashover compartments, with internal surfaces
and interior made of wood, regarding HRR and fire spread on facades and to adjacent
buildings.
• Continuous research in fire stops, specifically made for wooden facades.
• Continuous research in fire paint and treatment of wood to decrease its ability to ignite
and contribute to a fire.
• Research on how composite materials, with wood included, can be used beneficial.
• Investigations on how to make it safe to use a whole wooden covered facade in high
risers and buildings, with top floor placed more than 5.1 m above ground [9].
• Develop prescriptive codes, which includes the use of wood in high­rise buildings.
• Collaborative work between urban planners and fire safety experts, which specialize in
wildfires, on how to include fire safety into new urban development. Which can create
a fire safety plan, which not only covers a single building but a larger area.
76
Thermal Radiation Between Wooden Facades in High­Rise Buildings
==PAGE:89==
List of Figures
2.1
Examples of external walls with wooden facade cladding . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
Four types of voids behind a facade
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.3
Suspending types: A & B: Horizontal and vertical battens. C & D: Only vertical
battens. A & C: tongue and groove. B & D: Overlapping . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.4
A general sketch of a fire house from 1744 [27].
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.5
Facade fires in relatively Grenfell Tower [47], The Marina Torch [48] and The
China Telecom Building [49].
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.6
Aerial photo of the Stavnsholtskole, after the fire [57] . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3.1
Incoming radiation on a surface, redrawn from [59]. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3.2
View factor illustration from the SFPE Handbook [19] . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
4.1
Front facing picture of the wall construction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
4.2
Drawing of the wall construction. TL: Side view. TR: Front view. . . . . . . . .
26
4.3
Placement of thermocouples in the void(L1) behind the facade cladding . . .
27
4.4
TL: Heat flux measuring device in front of the facade. TR: Placement of ther­
mocouples in front of facade. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
4.5
Test species in the facade construction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
4.6
Test species, in the following order: Wooden battens, frame and facade cladding 30
4.7
1­3: Decomposition vessel C 5010. 1: Cover with electric ignition contact,
ignition wire and crucible holder. 2: Lower section. 3: Union nut. 4: Venting
button 5: Crucible. 6: Handle. 7: Tweezers. 8: Ignition adapter. 9: Cotton
thread. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
4.8
1: IKA Calorimeter System C 200. 2: Tank filler. 3 Menu display. 4 Measuring
cell cover 5: C 248 – Oxygen filling station
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
4.9
TL: Picture of the experimental setup in FireLab. TR: The geometry of the test
setup in the FDS model, visualized in Smokeview.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
4.10 The rectangular construction of the steel hood, seen from below. Visualized
in Smokeview.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
4.11 The geometry of the model, where the distance between facades is 10 m.
Visualized in Smokeview. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
5.1
Facade 10 m in front of radiator. TL: Facade ignited after 491 s of radiation
exposure. TR: Facade fully ablaze after 556 s of radiation exposure. . . . . .
43
5.2
Temperature slice files on radiation exposed facades. TL: FDS simulation with
a 12.2 m safety distance. TR: FDS simulation with a 25.6 m safety distance.
44
6.1
Thermocouples 2 columns closest to fire in test 1 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
6.2
Charring on the facade cladding in test 1. TL: Front of facade. TR: Back of
the facade.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
6.3
Thermocouples in layer 3(L3) and 4(L4) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
6.4
TL: Coloured dots representing thermocouples in test 1. TR: Temperature
development from cavity to layer 4. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
6.5
Thermocouples 2 columns closest to fire in test 2 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
6.6
Heat flux development for test 2
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
6.7
Charring on the facade cladding in test 2. TL: Front of facade. TR: Back of
the facade.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
Thermal Radiation Between Wooden Facades in High­Rise Buildings
77
==PAGE:90==
6.8
Thermocouples 2 columns closest to fire in test 3 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
6.9
Heat flux development for test 3
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
6.10 Charring on the facade cladding in test 3. TL: Front of facade. TR: Back of
the facade.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
6.11 Thermocouples 2 columns closest to fire in test 4 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
6.12 Heat flux development for test 4
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
6.13 Charring on the facade cladding in test 4. TL: Front of facade. TR: Back of
the facade.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
6.14 TL: Thermal picture and temperature on the facade point L2P11 at 2.15 min,
and a picture of the fire. TR: Thermal picture and temperature on the facade
between point L2P21 and L2P22 at 3.15 min, and a picture of the fire. . . . .
52
6.15 Gypsum plate on top of wall construction. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
6.16 Temperature development in bomb calorimeter with wooden battens . . . . .
56
6.17 Temperature development in bomb calorimeter with frame . . . . . . . . . . .
57
6.18 Temperature development in bomb calorimeter with facade cladding . . . . .
58
7.1
Thermocouples in the two columns near the fire. TL: Experiment test 1. TR:
FDS simulation of test 1. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
60
7.2
Temperature development from the two measuring points with the greatest
temperature from experiment and simulation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
61
7.3
Temperature development from important measuring points close to the fire.
61
7.4
Thermocouple temperatures in layer 3, from experiment test 1 and FDS sim­
ulation.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
62
7.5
Thermocouple temperatures in layer 4, from experiment test 1 and FDS sim­
ulation.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
62
7.6
Heat flux development from test 3 and FDS simulation.
. . . . . . . . . . . .
63
7.7
Flame development of fire in experiment and simulation . . . . . . . . . . . .
64
7.8
Wood burned away on the facade cladding. TL: Experiment test 1. TR: FDS
simulation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
65
8.1
Visualization of temperature slice on radiation exposed facade. . . . . . . . .
68
8.2
Maximum temperature on the facade of the radiation exposed facade, for each
simulation.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
69
8.3
Temperature slice file in between two facades, with 10 m distance, for the case
with a waste basket as fire scenario
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
69
8.4
Heat flux received on the radiation exposed facade for the fire cases with a
waste basket as ignition source . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
70
8.5
Heat flux received on the radiation exposed facade for the fire cases with a
flashover compartment with two windows, as ignition source. . . . . . . . . .
70
8.6
For fire case with waste basket as ignition source, burned away facade cladding
at: TL: 710 seconds after ignition. TR: 785 seconds after ignition. . . . . . . .
71
8.7
Flame spread for the two different fire scenarios: TL: Waste basket as ignition
source. TR: Flames from two windows as ignition source. . . . . . . . . . . .
71
78
Thermal Radiation Between Wooden Facades in High­Rise Buildings
==PAGE:91==
List of Tables
2.1
Overview of the relation between covering class, material class and distance.
Adapted from BR18 chapter 5, chapter 4 – Ignition, fire­ and smoke propaga­
tion [9] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
Complete heat of combustion values for wooden species [19, SFPE Handbook
table 5.3, 26.33 and A.38] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
3.1
Thermal properties in FDS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
4.1
Weight of the test species . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
4.2
Settings for the prepare menu . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
4.3
Values for characteristic fire diameter, minimum and maximum cell size
. . .
33
4.4
Properties for methanol.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
4.5
Material properties for pine wood . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
4.6
Material properties of steel and gypsum . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
4.7
Fire cases run in FDS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
4.8
Values for characteristic fire diameter, minimum and maximum cell size
. . .
39
5.1
Configuration factor for a distance on 10 m between facades
. . . . . . . . .
44
6.1
Start and stop time for wind machine, and wind speed for test 2.
. . . . . . .
47
6.2
Max temperature in cavity and on facade for test 1 and 3
. . . . . . . . . . .
54
6.3
Max temperature in cavity and on facade for test 1 and 4
. . . . . . . . . . .
54
6.4
Results of bomb calorimeter test for wooden battens . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
56
6.5
Results of bomb calorimeter test for the Frame . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
6.6
Results of bomb calorimeter test for Facade cladding . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
6.7
Summary of average heat of combustion for test species
. . . . . . . . . . .
58
7.1
First peak temperatures before removal of ignition source for FDS simulation
and experimental, test 1. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
63
B.1 Moisture content [%] of facade cladding and wooden battens.
. . . . . . . .
93
Thermal Radiation Between Wooden Facades in High­Rise Buildings
79
==PAGE:92==
Bibliography
[1]
Kort om kravene. Sept. 2022. URL: https://byggeriogklima.dk/klimakrav-i-br/kort-om-
kravene/.
[2]
Laura Tupenaite et al. “Sustainability Assessment of Modern High­Rise Timber Build­
ings”. In: Sustainability 13.16 (2021). ISSN: 20711050. URL: https://%20doi.org/10.
3390/su13168719.
[3]
UN17 Village. URL: https://nrep.dk/projekter/un17-village/.
[4]
Marmormolen ­ Bæredygtighed. 2022. URL: https://marmormolen.dk/features/.
[5]
Martin Einfeldt. Lovgivning forhindrer højhuse af træ unødvendigt. Oct. 2020. URL:
https://www.trae.dk/artikel/lovgivning-forhindrer-hoejhuse-af-trae-unoedvendigt/.
[6]
Ian Fu, Michael Spearpoint, and Kevin Frank. “Façade fire incidents in tall buildings”.
In: CTBUH Journal (Apr. 2019). URL: www.ofrconsultants.com.
[7]
Birgit Östman. “National fire regulations for the use of wood in buildings–worldwide
review 2020”. In: Wood Material Science and Engineering 17.1 (2022), pp. 2–5. ISSN:
17480280. DOI: 10.1080/17480272.2021.1936630.
[8]
Bolig og planstyrelsen. Bygningsreglementet 2018. Kapitel 5 ­ Brand § 82 ­ § 158.
2022. URL: https://bygningsreglementet.dk/Tekniske-bestemmelser/05/Krav.
[9]
Bolig og planstyrelsen. “Bygningsreglements vejledning til kap 5 ­ Brand. Kapitel 4 ­
Antændelse brand og røgspredning. Version 02”. In: BR18 (Jan. 2021). URL: https:
//bygningsreglementet.dk/Tekniske- bestemmelser/05/Vejledninger/Generel_Brand/
Kapitel-4#b6a79f27-7c28-4231-a630-260f4bf80055.
[10]
Bolig og planstyrelsen. “Bygningsreglements vejledning til kapitel 5 ­ Brand. Kapitel 8:
Eftervisning. Version 1.1”. In: BR18 (Sept. 2021). URL: https://bygningsreglementet.
dk/Tekniske-bestemmelser/05/Vejledninger/Generel_Brand/Kapitel-8#3dcd8c0b-0bfd-
451d-a26b-deb05db764e7.
[11]
Mikael Kock. TRÆ 55 Træfacader. Jan. 2021.
[12]
Thomas Engel and Norman Werther. “Structural Means for Fire­Safe Wooden Façade
Design”. In: Fire Technology (Oct. 2021). ISSN: 0015­2684. DOI: 10.1007/s10694-021-
01174-2.
[13]
Edited by Andrew Buchanan and Birgit Östman. Fire Safe Use of Wood in Buildings:
Global Design Guide. Tech. rep. 2022. DOI: 10.1201/9781003190318.
[14]
Toshiro Harada. “Time to ignition, heat release rate and fire endurance time of wood
in cone calorimeter test”. In: Fire and Materials 25.4 (July 2001), pp. 161–167. ISSN:
03080501. DOI: 10.1002/fam.766.
[15]
Hardwood vs. Softwood: What Are The Differences? Oct. 2021. URL: https://duffieldtimber.
com/the-workbench/categories/timber- trends/hardwood-vs-softwood-what-are-the-
differences.
[16]
Birgit Östman and Lazaros Tsantaridis. “Fire Scenarios for Multi­storey Façades with
Emphasis on Full­Scale Testing of Wooden Façades”. In: Fire Technology 51.6 (Nov.
2015), pp. 1495–1510. ISSN: 15728099. DOI: 10.1007/s10694-015-0508-8.
[17]
Birgit A.L. Östman and Esko Mikkola. “European classes for the reaction to fire perfor­
mance of wood products”. In: Holz als Roh ­ und Werkstoff 64.4 (Aug. 2006), pp. 327–
337. ISSN: 00183768. DOI: 10.1007/s00107-006-0116-x.
[18]
El Mehdi Koutaïba et al. “Experimental Study on Vertical Wooden Façade Combus­
tion”. In: Procedia Engineering. Vol. 210. Elsevier Ltd, 2017, pp. 520–527. DOI: 10.
1016/j.proeng.2017.11.109.
80
Thermal Radiation Between Wooden Facades in High­Rise Buildings
==PAGE:93==
[19]
Morgan J. Hurley et al. SFPE handbook of fire protection engineering, fifth edition.
Springer New York, Jan. 2016, pp. 1–3493. ISBN: 9781493925650. DOI: 10.1007/978-
1-4939-2565-0.
[20]
Richard Emberley et al. “Critical heat flux and mass loss rate for extinction of flam­
ing combustion of timber”. In: Fire Safety Journal 91 (July 2017), pp. 252–258. ISSN:
03797112. DOI: 10.1016/j.firesaf.2017.03.008.
[21]
Tuula Hakkarainen and Tuuli Oksanen. “Fire safety assessment of wooden facades”.
In: Fire and Materials 26.1 (2002), pp. 7–27. ISSN: 03080501. DOI: 10.1002/fam.780.
[22]
Björn Karlsson and James G. Quintiere. Enclosure Fire Dynamics. CRC Press LLC,
1999. ISBN: 0­8493­1300­7.
[23]
Dougal. Drysdale. An introduction to fire dynamics. Wiley, 2011. ISBN: 9780470319031.
[24]
National Geographic Society. Jul 18,64 CE: Great Fire of Rome. Sept. 2022. URL:
https://education.nationalgeographic.org/resource/great-fire-rome.
[25]
Guo Qiang Li, Chao Zhang, and Jian Jiang. “A review on fire safety engineering: Key
issues for high­rise buildings”. In: International Journal of High­Rise Buildings 7.4 (Dec.
2018), pp. 265–285. ISSN: 22889930. DOI: 10.21022/IJHRB.2018.7.4.265.
[26]
Ya. V. Lisova and O. O Spirkina. “The Background of Fire Protection Engineering”. In:
8 (2020), pp. 258–260.
[27]
Michael Bregnsbo. Københavns brande. Branden i 1728. Nov. 2020. URL: https://
denstoredanske.lex.dk/K%C3%B8benhavns_brande#-Branden_i_1728.
[28]
Gertrud With. ildebrandshus. Nov. 2020. URL: https://denstoredanske.lex.dk/ildebrandshus.
[29]
Micheal Bregnsbo. Københavns brande. Branden i 1795. Nov. 2020. URL: https://
denstoredanske.lex.dk/K%C3%B8benhavns_brande#-Branden_i_1795.
[30]
Peter Schøning. “Gevinsten af Københavns brand 1795”. In: Historie & Kunst, Køben­
havns Biblioteker (Jan. 2020). URL: https://bibliotek.kk.dk/nyheder/artikel/gevinsten-
af-koebenhavns-brand-1795.
[31]
Ole Louis Frantzen. Københavns bombardement. Mar. 2020. URL: https://denstoredanske.
lex.dk/K%C3%B8benhavns_bombardement.
[32]
Joe R Mcbride et al. Reconstruction of Urban Forests. Post World War II and the
Bosnian War. Tech. rep. Springer, 2021. URL: https://link.springer.com/book/10.
1007/978-3-030-64938-8.
[33]
Kristian Hertz et al. Kronik: Traebygninger kan føre til altødelaeggende bybrande. Tech.
rep. Ingeniøren, Sept. 2019. URL: https://ing.dk/artikel/kronik-traebygninger-kan-
foere-altoedelaeggende-bybrande-228579.
[34]
Gerard Seenan. Fire devastates Edinburgh’s Old Town. Dec. 2002. URL: https://www.
theguardian.com/uk/2002/dec/09/gerardseenan.
[35]
Lars Schiøtt Sørensen. Fire­Safety Engineering and Performance­Based Codes. Ed.
by Pia Barnholdt Kristoffersen. 1st ed. Copenhagen: Polyteknisk Forlag, 2014. ISBN:
978­87­502­0992­8.
[36]
Sijian Zhao. “Simulation of Mass Fire­Spread in Urban Densely Built Areas Based on
Irregular Coarse Cellular Automata”. In: Fire Technology 47.3 (July 2011), pp. 721–
749. ISSN: 00152684. DOI: 10.1007/s10694-010-0187-4.
[37]
William M. Pitts. “Wind Effects on Fires”. In: Prog. Energy Combust. Sci 17 (Mar. 1991),
pp. 83–134.
[38]
Robert Gifford. “The consequences of living in high­rise buildings”. In: Architectural
Science Review 50.1 (2007), pp. 2–17. ISSN: 17589622. DOI: 10.3763/asre.2007.5002.
[39]
Wikipedia contributors. List of high­rise facade fires. Aug. 2022. URL: https : / / en .
wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_high-rise_facade_fires.
Thermal Radiation Between Wooden Facades in High­Rise Buildings
81
==PAGE:94==
[40]
Mir M Ali. “Evolution of Concrete Skyscrapers: from Ingalls to Jinmao”. In: Electronic
Journal of Structural Engineering (2001). URL: https://ejsei.com/EJSE/article/view/
11/11.
[41]
Nathan White and Michael Delichatsios. Fire Hazards of Exterior Wall Assemblies Con­
taining Combustible Components. Ed. by James A. Milke. Springer, 2015. ISBN: 978­
1­4939­2897­2. DOI: 10.1007/978-1-4939-2898-9. URL: http://www.springer.com/
series/10476.
[42]
Sean T. McKenna et al. “Fire behaviour of modern façade materials – Understanding
the Grenfell Tower fire”. In: Journal of Hazardous Materials 368 (Apr. 2019), pp. 115–
123. ISSN: 18733336. DOI: 10.1016/j.jhazmat.2018.12.077.
[43]
Eric Guillaume et al. “Study of fire behaviour of facade mock­ups equipped with alu­
minium composite material­based claddings, using intermediate­scale test method”.
In: Fire and Materials 42 (Apr. 2018), pp. 561–577. DOI: 10.1002/fam.2635. URL:
chrome-extension://dagcmkpagjlhakfdhnbomgmjdpkdklff/enhanced-reader.html?openApp&
pdf=https%3A%2F%2Fonlinelibrary.wiley.com%2Fdoi%2Fpdfdirect%2F10.1002%2Ffam.
2635.
[44]
Christopher J Wieczorek. Grenfell: The Perfect Formula for Tragedy. Tech. rep. FM
Global, Oct. 2017. URL: https://www.curie.org/sites/default/files/2017%20FM_Global_
Whitepaper-Grenfell_Tower_Fire.pdf.
[45]
Global Times. “China Telecom investigates fire in Changsha building; no casualties re­
ported”. In: China / Society ­ Global Times (Sept. 2022). URL: https://www.globaltimes.
cn/page/202209/1275416.shtml.
[46]
Adnan Kaytali. “The China Telecom Building Fire: After the Dust Settled ”. In: Inside
telecom ­ International Telecoms Business Magazine (Sept. 2022). URL: https : / /
insidetelecom.com/the-china-telecom-building-fire-after-the-dust-settled/.
[47]
David Cohen. Revealed: The dossier of deadly failures at Grenfell Tower. Apr. 2018.
URL: https://www.standard.co.uk/news/london/revealed-the-dossier-of-deadly-failures-
at-grenfell-tower-a3814871.html.
[48]
Reuters. Large fire breaks out at Dubai’s Torch Tower. Aug. 2017. URL: https://www.
egypttoday.com/Article/1/15464/Large-fire-breaks-out-at-Dubai-s-Torch-Tower.
[49]
Kevin Jones. “China Building Fire: Destructive fire burnt a huge building of China tele­
com, with likely hundreds of people in it”. In: OutFable (Sept. 2022). URL: https://
www.outfable.com/world-news/china-building-fire-destructive-fire-burnt-a-huge-building-
of-china-telecom-with-likely-hundreds-of-people-in-it/.
[50]
Mustafa Selçuk Çıdık and Stephen Phillips. “Buildings as complex systems: the im­
pact of organisational culture on building safety”. In: Construction Management and
Economics 39.12 (2021), pp. 972–987. DOI: 10.1080/01446193.2021.1966816. URL:
https://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=rcme20.
[51]
Marcelo M Hirschler. “Façade requirements in the 2021 edition of the US International
Building Code Summary”. In: Fier and Materials 45.5 (2020), pp. 586–597. DOI: 10.
1002/fam.2803.
[52]
Mario Bowden. Fire at a 24­story skyscraper in Istanbul brought under control by fire­
fighters. Oct. 2022. URL: https://www.euronews.com/2022/10/16/fire-at-a-24-story-
skyscraper-in-istanbul-brought-under-control-by-firefighters.
[53]
Gino Spocchia. RMJM’s 35­storey Dubai apartment block badly damaged by fire. Nov.
2022. URL: https://www.architectsjournal.co.uk/news/rmjm-35-storey-dubai-apartment-
block-badly-damaged-by-fire?fbclid=IwAR2UYfEvZefD_36q_e_kgnDU0rZGa18ZNGvfA7gjPWadGHLSjDclj2
[54]
Ok. Rapport om branden på Stavnsholtskolen. Sept. 1793. URL: https : / / www . e -
pages.dk/ingarkiv/10274/?page=4&query=Stavnsholtskolen.
82
Thermal Radiation Between Wooden Facades in High­Rise Buildings
==PAGE:95==
[55]
Ok. Stavnsholtskolen overholder alle reglementer og krav. May 1973. URL: https://
www.e-pages.dk/ingarkiv/10255/?page=14&query=stavnsholtskolen.
[56]
Ole H. Willerum. Stavnsholtskolen. Apr. 1973. URL: https://www.e-pages.dk/ingarkiv/
10253/?page=7&query=Stavnsholtskolen.
[57]
Sven Hadvig et al. Stavnsholtskolen ­ Brandtekniske Undersøgelser. Tech. rep. Køben­
havn, Sept. 1973.
[58]
Ok. Stavnsholteskolen får konsekvenser for lovgivningen. Feb. 1974. URL: https://
www.e-pages.dk/ingarkiv/10296/?page=5&query=Stavnsholtskolen.
[59]
Carsten Rode and Menghao Qin. 11122 HEAT AND MASS TRANSFER IN BUILD­
INGS: Heat transfer 2020. Kongens Lyngby, Sept. 2021.
[60]
Laura Lowden and Terence Hull. “Flammability behaviour of wood and a review of the
methods for its reduction”. In: Fire Science Reviews 2.1 (2013), p. 4. ISSN: 2193­0414.
DOI: 10.1186/2193-0414-2-4.
[61]
LI Yudong and Dougal Drysdale. “Measurement of the Ignition Temperature of Wood”.
In: Fire Safety Science 1 (1992), pp. 25–30.
[62]
Pine Wood – Density – Strength – Melting Point – Thermal Conductivity. URL: https://
material-properties.org/pine-wood-density-strength-melting-point-thermal-conductivity/.
[63]
Alastair I. Bartlett, Rory M. Hadden, and Luke A. Bisby. A Review of Factors Affecting
the Burning Behaviour of Wood for Application to Tall Timber Construction. Jan. 2019.
DOI: 10.1007/s10694-018-0787-y.
[64]
Kevin B McGrattan et al. Fire Dynamics Simulator. User’s Guide. Tech. rep. Gaithers­
burg, MD: National Institute of Standards and Technology, 2020. DOI: 10.6028/NIST.
SP.1019. URL: https://nvlpubs.nist.gov/nistpubs/Legacy/SP/nistspecialpublication1019.
pdf.
[65]
Kevin B McGrattan et al. Fire Dynamics Simulator. Technical Reference Guide. Volume
1: Mathematical Model. Tech. rep. Gaithersburg, MD: National Institute of Standards
and Technology, 2020. DOI: 10.6028/NIST.SP.1018. URL: https://nvlpubs.nist.gov/
nistpubs/Legacy/SP/nistspecialpublication1018.pdf.
[66]
Reaktion­på­brand­prøvning af facader­Del 1: Mellemskala­prøvninger. Reaction­to­
fire tests for facades ­ Part 1: Intermediate­scale tests. Tech. rep. Geneva: ISO ­ the
International Organization for Standardization, Feb. 2003.
[67]
What is a K­type Thermocouple? Nov. 2020. URL: https://www.akcp.com/blog/what-
is-a-k-type-thermocouple/.
[68]
Alex Jakobsen et al. CFD Best Practice. Tech. rep. Best Practice gruppen, Nov. 2009.
[69]
Jessie Yih­Pying Hou. “Distribution Curves for Interior Furnishings on CO 2 , CO, HCN,
Soot and Heat of Combustion”. PhD thesis. Christchurch, New Zealand: University of
Canterbury, 2011.
[70]
Allison Tolbert et al. Characterization and analysis of the molecular weight of lignin for
biorefining studies. Nov. 2014. DOI: 10.1002/bbb.1500.
[71]
Jukka Hietaniemi and Esko Mikkola. “Design Fires for Fire Safety Engineering”. 2010.
[72]
John Cappelen. Temperaturen i Danmark. June 2021. URL: https://www.dmi.dk/
klima/temaforside-klimaet-frem-til-i-dag/temperaturen-i-danmark/.
[73]
Robert G. Zalosh. “Appendix A: Flame Radiation Review”. In: Industrial Fire Protec­
tion Engineering. John Wiley & Sons, Ltd, Jan. 2014, pp. 337–346. DOI: 10.1002/
9781118903117.app1.
[74]
Ulf Wickström. Temperature Calculation in Fire Safety Engineering. Springer Interna­
tional Publishing, 2016, pp. 83–88. ISBN: N 978­3­319­30170­9. DOI: I10.1007/978-3-
319-30172-3.
[75]
Kevin Mcgrattan et al. Fire Dynamics Simulator (Version 5) Technical Reference Guide
Volume 1: Mathematical Model. Tech. rep. NIST, 2009.
Thermal Radiation Between Wooden Facades in High­Rise Buildings
83
==PAGE:96==
[76]
Philip Rubini. CFD Simulation of Fires in Enclosures. Lund, 2021.
84
Thermal Radiation Between Wooden Facades in High­Rise Buildings
==PAGE:97==
Appendix
Thermal Radiation Between Wooden Facades in High­Rise Buildings
85
==PAGE:98==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Resumé . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
v
A Drawings of the Facade for the Experimental Work
87
B Moisture Content in Wood
93
C Calculations for the Fire Sources
94
D Placement and System of Thermocouples
100
E
Densities of Wood
105
F
Results from Thermocouples
108
G Data from Heat Flux Measurements
117
H Test 1 and FDS Comparison
119
I
Data from Bomb Calorimeter Tests
127
J
Preliminary Calculations for Safety Distance
131
K FDS code: Facade experiment test 1
141
L
FDS code: High­rise facade fire, bottom ignition
149
M FDS code: High­rise facade fire, fire from window ignition
168
N FDS code: Rough FDS model with 10 m Facade Distance
187
O FDS code: Rough FDS model with 12.2 m Facade Distance
192
P
FDS code: Rough FDS model with 25.6 m Facade Distance
197
Q Data from Thermocouples
202
86
Thermal Radiation Between Wooden Facades in High­Rise Buildings
==PAGE:99==
A
Drawings of the Facade for the
Experimental Work
Thermal Radiation Between Wooden Facades in High­Rise Buildings
87
==PAGE:100==
==PAGE:101==
==PAGE:102==
==PAGE:103==
==PAGE:104==
==PAGE:105==
B
Moisture Content in Wood
Table recreated from Joakim Wåhlén’s Master thesis: Horisontal brandspredning med vind­
påvirkning på træfacader ­ Brandforsøg af træfacader.
Table B.1: Moisture content [%] of facade cladding and wooden battens.
Product
Measurement 1
Measurement 2
Measurement 3
Measurement 4
Average
Experiment test 1
Cladding
4.3
3.7
3.8
3.4
3.8
Battens
8.1
11.3
9.1
8.4
9.2
Experiment test 2
Cladding
3.2
4.5
4.3
4.1
4.0
Battens
14
7.3
7.4
9.6
9.5
Experiment test 3
Cladding
3.6
4.5
4.3
4.1
4.1
Battens
9.6
6.0
8.4
8.6
8.1
Experiment test 4
Cladding
3.5
4.0
4.5
4.1
4.0
Battens
6.8
8.3
7.5
7.4
7.5
Thermal Radiation Between Wooden Facades in High­Rise Buildings
93
==PAGE:106==
C
Calculations for the Fire Sources
94
Thermal Radiation Between Wooden Facades in High­Rise Buildings
==PAGE:107==
Calculations related to the facade fire experiments and its fire source 
All theory and values is either from Enclosure Fire Dynamics, by Björn Karlson and James G. Quintiere 
or from the SFPE Handbook, fifth edition. 
It has been decided that the fuel source is methanol (
)
The energy release / burning rate (Q) of methanol
The burning rate is determinedd by equation 3.5 from Enclosure Fire Dynamics
Equation 3.5 
Where:
: Area of the pool of methanol in [m²]
: mass loss rate [kg/m²s]
: combustion efficiency [-]
: Heat of of combustion [MJ/kg]
Normally when calculating the the energy release rate for a pool fire, one should use equation 3.6 too 
K eK
However, acording to the SFPE Handbook p. 866, the diameter effect does exist, hence for methanol 
when D < 0.6 m it is recomended to use 
:
The heat of combustion is found in Enclosure Fire Dynamics, table 3.3
:
It is assumed that the combustion efficiency is:
:
There are three different size pans in DTU FireLab, and they have the following diameter and area:
:
:
:
Area of small pan
 = 
Area of medium pan
 = 
Area of large pan
==PAGE:108==
 = 
Now all the values to calculate the energy release is known, which gives the following Q-values: 
 = 
 = 
 = 
Flame height
The flame height is calculated to make sure, that the flames will not be higher than the hood in the 
FireLab. 
Equation 4.3 from Enclosure Fire Dynamics is used. 
K
:
Where: 
L: Flame height [m]
: The energy release rate [kW]
D: Diameter of the pool, here the pan that contains the methanol [m]
This gives the following flame heights:
:
:
:
:
:
:
K
 = 0.2958117433
K
 = 0.3335054755
K
 = 0.3686153156
Here the flame height varies between 0.3 m to 0.37 m. This is the average flame height over the entire 
course of the methanol fire. Meaning that the flame height will fluctuate over time, and can be both 
higher and lower than the calculated values.
Time to ignition of wood 
Assumptions:
-The wooden facade is thermally thick. 
ou see this as being two black bodies.
The theory and equations in this section are from the book Fire-Safety Engineering and Performance-
based Codes by Lars Schiøtt Sørensen
Time to ignition for a thermerally thick solid object is:
==PAGE:109==
(3)
(3)
(2)
(2)
(1)
(1)
K
Where:
C: Is a constant, that is independent of the material. In this case, it is assumed, that there will be heat loss
: Is dependent of the temperature, however one must choose a constant value. Here values from table
10.3 in the book Fire-Safety Engineering and Performance-based Codes by Lars Schiøtt Sørensen. 
: Is the ignition temperature. This value is found in the book Fire-Safety Engineering and 
Performance-based Codes by Lars Schiøtt Sørensen.
: Is the ambient temperature.
q: In this case, this value is the critical heat flux. The value is found in the book Fire-Safety Engineering 
and Performance-based Codes by Lars Schiøtt Sørensen 
Values for "Plywood, plain (1.27cm)"
K :
K :
K
K
:
:
K
Values for "Douglas fir particleboard (1.27cm)"
K
K
K :
K :
:
==PAGE:110==
(4)
(4)
:
K
The estimated time it takes for the two types of wood to ignite, when exposed for the critical heat flux 
and ignition temperature is relatively 3.78 min (226.8 s) and 6.29 min (377.9 s)
Amount of methanol needed for at 600 s fire
The equation for how long a fire will burn is in this case the following: 
Here the mass for the fire source (methanol) can be isolated, and hence written as:  
It needs to be noted that 
 and 
 are not the same. 
Where:
t: How long the fire source is burning [s]
M: Mass of the fire source  [g]
: The total mass loss rate [kg/s]
The total mass loss rate is found here: 
 = 
 = 
 = 
If the fire source needs to burn in 600 seconds (10 minutes) then the following amount of fuel is needed:
:
 = 
 = 
 =
Summery
Diameter of pan - D
Energy release - Q
Flame height - L
Amount of fuel for a 
600 s fire - M
==PAGE:111==
(5)
(5)
How long the fire source will burn when using 204 g of methanol 
:
Small pan: 
 = 
Medium pan:
 = 
Large pan: 
 = 
The total energy release from the three pans burning at the same time is 
==PAGE:112==
D
Placement and System of Thermocouples
100
Thermal Radiation Between Wooden Facades in High­Rise Buildings
==PAGE:113==
==PAGE:114==
==PAGE:115==
==PAGE:116==
==PAGE:117==
E
Densities of Wood
Thermal Radiation Between Wooden Facades in High­Rise Buildings
105
==PAGE:118==
(1)
(1)
(3)
(3)
(2)
(2)
(7)
(7)
(9)
(9)
(5)
(5)
(6)
(6)
(4)
(4)
(8)
(8)
Densities of the wood used
Facade cladding 
Volumen 
Mass
Density 
Frame
Volume
Mass
Density
Wooden battens
Volume
Mass
Density 
==PAGE:119==
==PAGE:120==
F
Results from Thermocouples
108
Thermal Radiation Between Wooden Facades in High­Rise Buildings
==PAGE:121==
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
800
900
00:00
01:26
02:53
04:19
05:46
07:12
08:38
10:05
Temperature [°C]
Time [mm:ss]
All thermocouples, test 1
L1P11
L1P12
L1P13
L1P14
L1P15
L1P16
L1P21
L1P22
L1P23
L1P24
L1P25
L1P26
L2P11
L2P12
L2P13
L2P14
L2P15
L2P16
L2P21
L2P22
L2P23
L2P24
L2P25
L3P11
L3P12
L3P21
L3P22
L4P11
L4P12
L4P21
L4P22
XX
Fire source removed
10
15
20
25
30
35
00:00
01:26
02:53
04:19
05:46
07:12
08:38
10:05
Temperature [°C]
Time [mm:ss]
Thermocouples in layer 3 and 4
L3P11
L3P12
L3P21
L3P22
L4P11
L4P12
L4P21
L4P22
==PAGE:122==
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
450
500
00:00
01:26
02:53
04:19
05:46
07:12
08:38
10:05
Temperature [C]
Time [mm:ss]
All thermocouples on facade, test 1
L2P11
L2P12
L2P13
L2P14
L2P15
L2P16
L2P21
L2P22
L2P23
L2P24
L2P25
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
800
900
00:00
01:26
02:53
04:19
05:46
07:12
08:38
10:05
Temperature [°C]
Time [mm:ss]
All thermocouples in cavity, test 1
L1P11
L1P12
L1P13
L1P14
L1P15
L1P16
L1P21
L1P22
L1P23
L1P24
L1P25
L1P26
==PAGE:123==
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
800
900
00:00
01:27
02:53
04:19
05:46
07:12
08:39
10:05
11:31
Temperature [°C]
Time [mm:ss]
All thermocouples, test 2
L1P11
L1P12
L1P13
L1P14
L1P15
L1P16
L1P21
L1P22
L1P23
L1P24
L1P25
L1P26
L2P11
L2P12
L2P13
L2P14
L2P15
L2P16
L2P21
L2P22
L2P23
L2P24
L2P25
XX
Fire source out
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
00:00
02:53
05:46
08:39
11:31
14:24
Temperature [°C]
Time [mm:ss]
All thermocouples on facade, test 2
L2P11
L2P12
L2P13
L2P14
L2P15
L2P16
L2P21
L2P22
L2P23
L2P24
L2P25
==PAGE:124==
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
800
900
00:00
02:53
05:46
08:39
11:31
14:24
Temperature [°C]
Time [mm:ss]
All thermocouples in cavity, test 2
L1P11
L1P12
L1P13
L1P14
L1P15
L1P16
L1P21
L1P22
L1P23
L1P24
L1P25
L1P26
==PAGE:125==
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
800
900
00:00
01:27
02:53
04:19
05:46
07:12
08:39
10:05
11:31
12:58
Temperature [°C]
Time [mm:ss]
All thermocouples, test 3
L1P11
L1P12
L1P13
L1P14
L1P15
L1P16
L1P21
L1P22
L1P23
L1P24
L1P25
L1P26
L2P11
L2P12
L2P13
L2P14
L2P15
L2P16
L2P21
L2P22
L2P23
L2P24
L2P25
XX
Wind 3.5 m/s
Wind 5 m/s
Port open
Wind stop
Fire source out
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
800
00:00
02:53
05:46
08:39
11:31
14:24
17:17
Temperature [°C]
Time [mm:ss]
Thermocouples on facade, test 3
L2P11
L2P12
L2P13
L2P14
L2P15
L2P16
L2P21
L2P22
L2P23
L2P24
L2P25
==PAGE:126==
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
800
900
00:00
02:53
05:46
08:39
11:31
14:24
17:17
Temperature [°C]
Time [mm:ss]
Thermocouples in cavity, test 3
L1P11
L1P12
L1P13
L1P14
L1P15
L1P16
L1P21
L1P22
L1P23
L1P24
L1P25
L1P26
==PAGE:127==
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
800
900
00:00
01:27
02:53
04:19
05:46
07:12
Temperature [°C]
Time [mm:ss]
All thermocouples, test 4
L1P11
L1P12
L1P13
L1P14
L1P15
L1P16
L1P21
L1P22
L1P23
L1P24
L1P25
L1P26
L2P11
L2P12
L2P13
L2P14
L2P15
L2P16
L2P21
L2P22
L2P23
L2P24
L2P25
XX
Wind 2 m/s
Wind out
Ø28 out
Ø24 out
Ø20 removed
Water extinguishing
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
00:00
01:27
02:53
04:19
05:46
07:12
Temperature [°C]
Time [mm:ss]
Thermocouples on facade, test 4
L2P11
L2P12
L2P13
L2P14
L2P15
L2P16
L2P21
L2P22
L2P23
L2P24
L2P25
==PAGE:128==
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
800
900
00:00
01:27
02:53
04:19
05:46
07:12
Temperature [°C]
Time [mm:ss]
Thermocouples in cavity, test 4
L1P11
L1P12
L1P13
L1P14
L1P15
L1P16
L1P21
L1P22
L1P23
L1P24
L1P25
L1P26
==PAGE:129==
G
Data from Heat Flux Measurements
Thermal Radiation Between Wooden Facades in High­Rise Buildings
117
==PAGE:130==
==PAGE:131==
H
Test 1 and FDS Comparison
Thermal Radiation Between Wooden Facades in High­Rise Buildings
119
==PAGE:132==
This table only regards the fire on the front of the façade. The next table displays the fire 
development from the side/inside the void 
Experiment 1 
Flame height, 
test 1
FDS screen dumps of 
experiment 1
Flame height, FDS 
model
1 minute after ignition of fire source  
40 cm from 
bottom of 
wooden cladding  
26 cm from bottom 
of wooden cladding 
2 minutes and 30 seconds after ignition of fire source  
 
70 cm from 
bottom of 
wooden cladding 
38 cm from bottom 
of wooden cladding 
3 minutes and 30 seconds after ignition of fire source  
 
60 cm from 
bottom of 
wooden cladding. 
50 cm from bottom 
of wooden cladding 
==PAGE:133==
4 minutes and 30 seconds after ignition of fire source  
 
57 cm from 
bottom of 
wooden cladding 
55 cm from bottom 
of wooden cladding 
5 minutes and 30 seconds after ignition of fire source  
 
Little flame 
observed 40 up 
on the façade 
cladding  
30 cm from bottom 
of wooden cladding 
6 minutes and 30 seconds after ignition of fire source 
Small flames are 
observed at the 
10 to 50 cm up 
from the bottom 
of the façade 
cladding  
35 cm from bottom 
of wooden cladding 
7 minutes and 30 seconds after ignition of fire source 
==PAGE:134==
Small flames 
observed at the 
40 to 50 cm up 
from the bottom 
of the façade 
cladding 
35 cm from bottom 
of wooden cladding 
8 minutes and 30 seconds after ignition of fire source 
Small flames 
observed at the 
50 to 70 cm up 
from the bottom 
of the façade 
cladding 
32 cm from bottom 
of wooden cladding 
9 minutes and 30 seconds after ignition of fire source 
Small flames 
observed at the 
50 to 60 cm up 
from the bottom 
of the façade 
cladding 
32 cm from bottom 
of wooden cladding 
10 minutes and 30 seconds after ignition of fire source
==PAGE:135==
No flames are 
observed after 
this time step  
32 cm from bottom 
of wooden cladding 
11 minutes and 31 seconds after ignition of fire source
No flames  
Flame 30 cm atop of 
facade  
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:136==
Table shows the void/side of the façade during the experiment. In the FDS model it is possible to 
remove the gypsum wall and observe the flames in the cavity from the back of the facade cladding. 
This is the viewpoint in the following table.  
Experiment 1 
Flame height, test 
1
FDS screen dumps of 
experiment 1
Flame height, FDS 
model 
1 minute after ignition of fire source 
40 cm from bottom 
of wooden 
cladding 
30 cm from bottom 
of wooden cladding 
2 minutes and 30 seconds after ignition of fire source  
 
60 cm from bottom 
of wooden 
cladding 
84 cm from bottom 
of wooden cladding 
3 minutes and 30 seconds after ignition of fire source  
 
==PAGE:137==
120 cm from 
bottom of wooden 
cladding 
74 cm from bottom 
of wooden cladding 
4 minutes and 30 seconds after ignition of fire source 
150 cm or higher 
from bottom of 
wooden cladding 
120 cm from bottom 
of wooden cladding 
5 minutes and 30 seconds after ignition of fire source 
150 cm or higher 
from bottom of 
wooden cladding 
102 cm from bottom 
of wooden cladding 
6 minutes and 30 seconds after ignition of fire source 
==PAGE:138==
80 cm from bottom 
of wooden 
cladding, but 8 
seconds earlier 
150 cm with 
buoyant plume 
116 cm from bottom 
of wooden cladding 
7 minutes and 30 seconds after ignition of fire source 
Some flaming can 
be observed but 
nothing in the 
continuity regime. 
Flames can be 
seen near the 
wooden battens.  
112 cm from bottom 
of wooden cladding 
11 mintes and 31 seconds after ignition of fire source
There is no flaming left in the cavity or on the 
front of the facade at this time 
Flames are observed 
30 cm above the 
facade cladding  
 
==PAGE:139==
I
Data from Bomb Calorimeter Tests
Thermal Radiation Between Wooden Facades in High­Rise Buildings
127
==PAGE:140==
Bombe Calorimeter Experiments 
Wooden battens 
Test 1
Test 2
Test 3
Average 
Heat of combustion [J/g]
23782
23357
23415
23518
Heat of combustion [MJ/kg]
23.78
23.36
23.42
23.52
Weight [g]
0.599
0.63
0.636 0.621667
Start temp [°C]
24.8825
23.9811
23.7928
End temp [°C]
26.47
25.75
25.5
Total temp increase [°C]
1.59
1.77
1.71
1.69
Temperture development during test [K]
Time [s]
Time 
12
-0.0105
-0.0088
-0.0049
180
-0.0608
0.0471
-0.0429
24
-0.008
-0.0124
-0.0099
192
-0.059
0.0385
-0.0385
36
-0.0153
-0.0182
-0.0143
204
-0.0576
0.024
-0.0355
48
-0.0196
-0.0149
-0.0155
216
0.02
0.0135
0.0121
60
-0.0232
0.0081
-0.0156
228
0.0632
0.0205
0.0428
72
-0.0298
0.0304
-0.0154
240
0.0764
0.2175
0.0956
84
-0.0509
0.0143
-0.017
252
0.2412
0.4323
0.3583
96
-0.0689
-0.0183
-0.027
264
0.4384
0.5591
0.6144
108
-0.0683
-0.0256
-0.0426
276
0.5338
0.6962
0.7085
120
-0.0619
-0.006
-0.0507
288
0.659
0.8292
0.8291
132
-0.0593
0.0129
-0.0498
300
0.7907
0.9454
0.929
144
-0.0586
0.0189
-0.0495
312
0.8876
1.0643
1.0108
156
-0.0599
0.0294
-0.0496
324
0.9674
1.176
1.0911
168
-0.0611
0.0424
-0.0471
336
1.0515
1.2641
1.1714
180
-0.0608
0.0471
-0.0429
348
1.1295
1.3304
1.2479
360
1.1983
1.3918
1.3182
372
1.2598
1.4494
1.379
384
1.3125
1.4979
1.4284
396
1.3577
1.5394
1.4717
408
1.3961
1.576
1.511
420
1.4277
1.6086
1.5454
432
1.4554
1.638
1.5765
444
1.4795
1.6649
1.6051
456
1.5009
1.6893
1.6301
468
1.5215
1.7112
1.6518
480
1.5401
1.7309
1.6718
492
1.554
1.748
1.6897
Equalizing 
Main test
==PAGE:141==
Frame
Test 1
Test 2
Test 3
Average 
Heat of combustion [J/g]
23721
19694
19442 20952.33
Heat of combustion [MJ/kg]
23.72
19.69
19.44
20.95
Weight [g]
0.611
0.606
0.609
0.609
Start temp [°C]
23.6476
23.5787
23.4059
End temp [°C]
25.27
24.94
24.98
Total temp increase [°C]
1.62
1.36
1.57
1.52
Temperture development during test [K]
Time [s]
Time 
12
0.032
-0.0072
-0.0026
180
-0.066
-0.0401
0.0078
24
0.002
-0.0024
-0.003
192
-0.0577
-0.0389
-0.0025
36
-0.0047
-0.0054
-0.0066
204
-0.0453
-0.0376
-0.014
48
-0.0084
-0.0091
-0.0076
216
-0.0231
-0.0378
-0.0201
60
-0.0136
-0.0123
-0.0046
228
0.0047
0.0375
0.0215
72
-0.024
-0.0146
0.0022
240
0.077
0.0857
0.3647
84
-0.0309
-0.0193
0.0046
252
0.2442
0.2775
0.7175
96
-0.0308
-0.0252
-0.0029
264
0.531
0.4261
0.7971
108
-0.0316
-0.0312
-0.0145
276
0.7365
0.5453
0.795
120
-0.0357
-0.042
-0.0267
288
0.8078
0.6859
0.8565
132
-0.0418
-0.0494
-0.0325
300
0.8544
0.7768
0.94
144
-0.0509
-0.0455
-0.0289
312
0.9299
0.8447
1.0232
156
-0.0609
-0.0399
-0.0129
324
1.0256
0.904
1.0934
168
-0.0669
-0.0396
0.0044
336
1.1164
0.9601
1.1545
180
-0.066
-0.0401
0.0078
348
1.1928
1.02
1.209
360
1.258
1.0757
1.2584
372
1.3109
1.1181
1.3041
384
1.3571
1.1533
1.3472
396
1.3995
1.1868
1.3858
408
1.4364
1.2168
1.4185
420
1.47
1.2419
1.4458
432
1.5022
1.2639
1.4685
444
1.5296
1.2843
1.4885
456
1.5514
1.3034
1.5076
468
1.5764
1.3208
1.5253
480
1.588
1.336
1.5412
492
1.6
1.3499
1.5556
Equalizing
Main test
==PAGE:142==
Facade cladding 
Test 1
Test 2
Test 3
Average
Heat of combustion [J/g]
23252
22986
19490 21909.33
Heat of combustion [MJ/kg]
23.25
22.99
19.49
21.91
Weight [g]
0.615
0.614
0.614
0.614
Start temp [°C]
23.161
23.1001
22.9418
End temp [°C]
24.84
24.75
24.617
Total temp increase [°C]
1.68
1.65
1.68
1.67
Temperture development during test [K]
Time [s]
Time 
12
-0.0038
-0.0071
-0.0065
180
-0.0493
-0.0346
-0.0099
24
-0.0069
-0.07
-0.0069
192
-0.0464
-0.0331
-0.0116
36
-0.0118
-0.0153
-0.0157
204
-0.0404
-0.03
-0.0185
48
-0.014
-0.0199
-0.0236
216
-0.0037
0.2961
-0.024
60
-0.0162
-0.023
-0.0279
228
0.2051
0.7974
0.1398
72
-0.0229
-0.0252
-0.0348
240
0.6352
0.9046
0.5648
84
-0.0388
-0.0257
-0.0482
252
0.8624
0.7057
0.8305
96
-0.0601
-0.0279
-0.0545
264
0.8561
0.767
0.8275
108
-0.0782
-0.0317
-0.0521
276
0.9494
0.8572
0.9243
120
-0.082
-0.0352
-0.0634
288
1.0446
0.9587
1.0186
132
-0.0726
-0.0376
-0.0711
300
1.1404
1.0538
1.1018
144
-0.0621
-0.0378
-0.0633
312
1.2129
1.1324
1.168
156
-0.0565
-0.0368
-0.0491
324
1.2701
1.2041
1.2266
168
-0.0527
-0.0357
-0.027
336
1.3189
1.2696
1.2909
180
-0.0493
-0.0346
-0.0099
348
1.3606
1.3282
1.3526
360
1.4023
1.3806
1.4015
372
1.4435
1.4227
1.442
384
1.4788
1.4566
1.4784
396
1.5082
1.4872
1.5096
408
1.5349
1.5141
1.5356
420
1.5591
1.5377
1.5587
432
1.5806
1.56
1.5805
444
1.6005
1.5801
1.6006
456
1.6192
1.5976
1.6178
468
1.6369
1.6135
1.6332
480
1.6511
1.628
1.6476
492
1.646
1.6407
1.6605
Equalizing
Main test
==PAGE:143==
J
Preliminary Calculations for Safety
Distance
Thermal Radiation Between Wooden Facades in High­Rise Buildings
131
==PAGE:144==
Preliminary Safety Distance Calculations
SFPE Handbook, chapter 86 calculation
For this calculation the two building facades modelled in the up-scaling of the CFD model. Each 
facade have a dimension of width 15 m and height 17 m. The thickness of the facade cladding is 21 
mm, but in FDS due to meshes is 50 mm, and then there is bout horizontal and vertical wooden 
battens each on 50 mm, so the gathered width of combustible facade is 0.15 m
According to the SFPE handbook chaptor 86, the irradiance levels needed to cause iqnition in a 
building, which is exposed, is for spontaneous ignition 33.5 kW/m², and for piloted ignition (such as 
brands), 12.5kW/m². 
The formular for irradiance is 
R
K
e
Where 
K : radiation reduction factor for glazing of exposed building when wall cladding is  
noncombustible. Since the facade cladding is wood and combustible, K=1
So the formula can be rewritten to
which corresponds to the Stefan-Boltzmann equation including the configureation factor. 
Note that as explained in therory section, whene a facade is combustible, the whole facade counts, as
an emitter, as if there were fire on the whole facade.
  
Chapter 86 uses the following table to find the heat release for a 3.7 m tall building 
Table from (Zalosh, R. G. (2014). Appendix A: Flame Radiation Review. https://doi.
org/10.1002/9781118903117.app1)
If the values are convereted to ft=m and Btu/sec=kW, and plotted one gets the following 
:
==PAGE:145==
(2)
(2)
(1)
(1)
(5)
(5)
(3)
(3)
(4)
(4)
K
When doing a linear fitting the formular is then 
K
K
So if the building is 17 m tall the heat realse pr width in kW is:
K
The width of the facade is 0.15m, given then the heat realease rate pr. 0.15m is 
Then it possible to use Delichatsios correlation for rectangular wall flames, to determine the 
corresponding flame height (Zalosh, R. G. (2014)). 
The flame height from bottom is 23.94 meters, which is 6.94 meter above the top of the building. To 
account for this being a model extended, other littereature is being compared to this value. It is more 
common to see flames about 5 m above a window opening (see Östman, B., Tsantaridis, L. Fire 
Scenarios for Multi-storey Façades with Emphasis on Full-Scale Testing of Wooden Façades). 
Therefore the heat realese rate are being adjusted, so the height of flames does not increase 22 m. 
==PAGE:146==
(12)
(12)
(9)
(9)
(7)
(7)
(10)
(10)
(6)
(6)
(11)
(11)
(8)
(8)
Then it possible to use Delichatsios correlation for rectangular wall flames, to determine the 
corresponding flame height (source: Zalosh, R. G. (2014)). 
The emissive power is the radiant heat release rate per unit flame surface, which is 
Pine has a radiant heat release fraction on (found in SPFE Handbook)
The value is higher than if one used known flame temperature and an emissivity of unity, that can be 
calculated the following way, if one assumes lowest expected flame temperature on 827°C (1100K)
e
e
K
K
K
Know the conservetive distance is found here, using 88.11kW/m²
The two facades is parallel to each other, so the configureation factor is found with formular for two 
parallel sufaces. This is calculated with the distances 5 m, 7.5 m and 10 m. 
:
:
:
 = 3
 = 22
5
K
K
0.9365716246
:
:
:
 = 2.000000000
==PAGE:147==
(16)
(16)
(19)
(19)
(18)
(18)
(15)
(15)
(14)
(14)
(13)
(13)
(17)
(17)
 = 2.933333333
K
K
0.8688866012
:
:
:
 = 3
2
 = 11
5
K
K
0.7903661548
The incident radiation for the three distances is 
This is significantly higher than the 33.5 kW/m² for spontaneous ignition for all the distances. 
To get a safe distance where the incident radiation is under 33.5 kW/m², the distance has to be 27.5m
according to the calculation below: 
:
:
:
 = 0.5859375000
 = 0.8593750000
K
K
0.3788531102
This distance, 25.6 m, is more than double the pre-accpeted solutions, but also highly conservative. 
Ulf Wickström: Flames and Smoke calculation 
Kirchhoff's law states that absorptivity and emissivity are equal, and therefore Beer's law can be 
==PAGE:148==
(20)
(20)
(23)
(23)
(24)
(24)
(21)
(21)
(22)
(22)
used:
e
K e
KK
e
Where K is absorption or emission coefficient, and e is the mean beam length. 
The emitted heat from flame [
]
K e
KK
e
For wooden cribs, according to Temperature Calculation in Fire Safety Engineering, K is either 0.8 
or 0.51 [
K ]
The mean beam length:
e
:
 Geometric mean beam length and C Correcton factor 
The expression for the Geometric mean beam length and C Correcton factor are found in the SFPE 
Handbook, chapter 4 - Radiation Heat Transfer. The whole facade on fire, is the beam length, and are
in this case seen as an Infinte slab:
:
e
e
K
:
e
K e
KK
e
e
Then the incident radiation 
 is:
:
K :
K e
KK
e
The incident heat flux, can be determined when the configuration factor is found. 
Here the method for determine view factor is from Temperature Calculation in Fire Safety 
Engineering, where the view factor is from the wall can be divided into four equal contributions, 
hence  the formular for view factor 
 is multiplied with 4
==PAGE:149==
(29)
(29)
(28)
(28)
(30)
(30)
(25)
(25)
(26)
(26)
(27)
(27)
:
:
:
 = 11
10
 = 3
4
K
K
0.4957524028
The incident heat flux is:
The incident heat flux, with the safety distance determined 
View factor
:
:
:
 = 0.9016393443
 = 0.6147540984
K
K
0.4009628348
Here the safety distance is found to be 12.2 m. 
Using the SFPE handbook for parallel plates (which the same dimensions)
:
:
:
==PAGE:150==
(34)
(34)
(32)
(32)
(35)
(35)
(38)
(38)
(31)
(31)
(36)
(36)
(37)
(37)
(33)
(33)
K
K
K
K
K
K
If there need to be a safe distance SFPE
:
:
:
K
K
K
K
K
K
It was discovered, that there are limits to the use of this equation. When the distance exceeds the 
==PAGE:151==
(39)
(39)
(40)
(40)
length of one of the sides a or b, then the configuation factor increases, which is not how it works in 
the actual world. 
Investigating the limits of the SFPE equation 
:
:
K
K
K
K
K
K
:
K
==PAGE:152==
K
K
K
==PAGE:153==
K
FDS code: Facade experiment test 1
Thermal Radiation Between Wooden Facades in High­Rise Buildings
141
==PAGE:154==
// This fds simulation/model is made for the master thesis: Thermal Radiation Between Wooden Facades in High-Rise Buildings
// Simulating test 1 of the experimental facade burning tests done at DTU FireLab. 
// Experimental test done in colaboration with Joakim Wåhlen 
// fds model made by Karoline Sandfeld-Nielsen (s173793)
// fds version: FDS6.7.9 
//-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
//---- MAIN
//-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
&HEAD 
    CHID='WOOD_EXPTEST14_DTU' 
    TITLE='Brand i trae facade test' /
&TIME           
    T_BEGIN  =  0
    T_END    =  950 /           
&MISC           
    RESTART  =  .FALSE.
    TMPA     =  18
    BNDF_DEFAULT   =  .FALSE.
    RADIATION      =  .TRUE.
    SURF_DEFAULT   =   'FRAME' /
&RADI           
    TIME_STEP_INCREMENT  =  12
    NUMBER_RADIATION_ANGLES  =  500
    ANGLE_INCREMENT  =  20
/
//-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------                                                  
//---- MESH Total Cells 1216464                                                                                         
//-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------                                                  
&MESH   IJK=    20      40      100     XB= 2.6     3       1.6     2.4     0       2       MPI_PROCESS=    0   COLOR=  "AQUAMARINE"    /   MESH #  1   "Brand og facade"               CELLS
&MESH   IJK=    20      35      100     XB= 2.6     3       2.4     3.1     0       2       MPI_PROCESS=    1   COLOR=  "AQUAMARINE"    /   MESH #  2   "Brand og facade2"              CELLS
&MESH   IJK=    20      40      100     XB= 2.6     3       3.1     3.9     0       2       MPI_PROCESS=    2   COLOR=  "AQUAMARINE"    /   MESH #  3   "Brand og facade3"              CELLS
&MESH   IJK=    50      25      100     XB= 1.6     2.6     1.6     2.1     0       2       MPI_PROCESS=    3   COLOR=  "BEIGE"         /   MESH #  4   "Foran brand"                   CELLS
&MESH   IJK=    50      25      100     XB= 1.6     2.6     2.1     2.6     0       2       MPI_PROCESS=    4   COLOR=  "BEIGE"         /   MESH #  5   "Foran brand2"                  CELLS
&MESH   IJK=    60      50      40      XB= 1.5     2.7     2.3     3.3     2       2.8     MPI_PROCESS=    5   COLOR=  "BLACK"         /   MESH #  6   "Udsugning"                     CELLS
&MESH   IJK=    60      50      40      XB= 1.5     2.7     2.3     3.3     2.8     3.6     MPI_PROCESS=    6   COLOR=  "BLACK"         /   MESH #  7   "Udsugning2"                    CELLS
&MESH   IJK=    60      10      80      XB= 1.5     2.7     2.1     2.3     2       3.6     MPI_PROCESS=    7   COLOR=  "BLACK"         /   MESH #  8   "Udsugning"                     CELLS
&MESH   IJK=    30      115     20      XB= 2.7     3.3     1.6     3.9     2.5     2.9     MPI_PROCESS=    7   COLOR=  "CADET BLUE"    /   MESH #  11  "Inde i hood2"                  CELLS
&MESH   IJK=    20      115     45      XB= 1.1     1.5     1.6     3.9     2       2.9     MPI_PROCESS=    8   COLOR=  "BLUE"          /   MESH #  9   "Inde i hood"                   CELLS
&MESH   IJK=    30      115     25      XB= 2.7     3.3     1.6     3.9     2       2.5     MPI_PROCESS=    9   COLOR=  "CADET BLUE"    /   MESH #  10  "Inde i hood"                   CELLS
&MESH   IJK=    60      25      45      XB= 1.5     2.7     1.6     2.1     2       2.9     MPI_PROCESS=    10  COLOR=  "CORAL"         /   MESH #  12  "Inde i hood"                   CELLS
&MESH   IJK=    10      13      20      XB= 1.6     2.6     2.6     3.9     0       2       MPI_PROCESS=    10  COLOR=  "FOREST GREEN"  /   MESH #  14  "Under hood, front venstre"     CELLS
&MESH   IJK=    13      38      20      XB= 0.3     1.6     0.8     4.6     0       2       MPI_PROCESS=    10  COLOR=  "GREEN"         /   MESH #  15  "Uden for hood front"           CELLS
&MESH   IJK=    10      38      20      XB= 3       4       0.8     4.6     0       2       MPI_PROCESS=    10  COLOR=  "GOLD"          /   MESH #  16  "Uden for hood bagved"          CELLS
&MESH   IJK=    14      8       20      XB= 1.6     3       0.8     1.6     0       2       MPI_PROCESS=    10  COLOR=  "HONEYDEW"      /   MESH #  17  "Uden for hood, til højre"      CELLS
&MESH   IJK=    14      7       20      XB= 1.6     3       3.9     4.6     0       2       MPI_PROCESS=    10  COLOR=  "HOT PINK"      /   MESH #  18  "Uden for hood, til venstre"    CELLS
&MESH   IJK=    7       38      9       XB= 3.3     4       0.8     4.6     2       2.9     MPI_PROCESS=    10  COLOR=  "INDIAN RED"    /   MESH #  19  "Luft bagerst"                  CELLS
&MESH   IJK=    8       38      9       XB= 0.3     1.1     0.8     4.6     2       2.9     MPI_PROCESS=    10  COLOR=  "BLUE VIOLET"   /   MESH #  20  "Luft forest"                   CELLS
&MESH   IJK=    22      8       9       XB= 1.1     3.3     0.8     1.6     2       2.9     MPI_PROCESS=    10  COLOR=  "LAVENDER"      /   MESH #  21  "Luft højre"                    CELLS
&MESH   IJK=    22      7       9       XB= 1.1     3.3     3.9     4.6     2       2.9     MPI_PROCESS=    10  COLOR=  "MELON"         /   MESH #  22  "Luft venstre"                  CELLS
&MESH   IJK=    12      38      7       XB= 0.3     1.5     0.8     4.6     2.9     3.6     MPI_PROCESS=    10  COLOR=  "MINT"          /   MESH #  23  "Top front"                     CELLS
&MESH   IJK=    13      38      7       XB= 2.7     4       0.8     4.6     2.9     3.6     MPI_PROCESS=    10  COLOR=  "OLIVE"         /   MESH #  24  "Top bag"                       CELLS
&MESH   IJK=    12      13      7       XB= 1.5     2.7     0.8     2.1     2.9     3.6     MPI_PROCESS=    10  COLOR=  "POWDER BLUE"   /   MESH #  25  "Top højre"                     CELLS
&MESH   IJK=    12      13      7       XB= 1.5     2.7     3.3     4.6     2.9     3.6     MPI_PROCESS=    10  COLOR=  "SKY BLUE"      /   MESH #  26  "Top venstre "                  CELLS
&MESH   IJK=    60      30      45      XB= 1.5     2.7     3.3     3.9     2       2.9     MPI_PROCESS=    11  COLOR=  "EMERALD GREEN" /   MESH #  13  "Inde i hood"                   CELLS
==PAGE:155==
//-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
//---- REACTIONS
// lige nu er der en methanol combustion process fra pool fire, og pyrolyse process i træet
//-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
&REAC ID = 'METHANOL'   
 C = 1  
 H = 4  
 O = 1  
 SOOT_YIELD = 0.001 
HEAT_OF_COMBUSTION = 19830  
 IDEAL = .FALSE. /  
//-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------                                     
//---- Methanol fire. Fire is stopped after 4 minutes and 31 seconds  (271 seconds)                       
//-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------                                     
/   Q_max   14 kW                          
&SURF   ID='FIRE' HRRPUA= 324.1  RAMP_Q='fireramp'  COLOR=   'RED'  /   
&RAMP   ID='fireramp', T=0.0, F=0.0 /
&RAMP   ID='fireramp', T=86,  F=1.0 /
&RAMP   ID='fireramp', T=271, F=1.0 /
&RAMP   ID='fireramp', T=272, F=0.0 /
&OBST   XB= 2.78    2.96    2.00    2.24    0.10    0.20    SURF_IDS=    'FIRE','INERT','INERT'     /
                     
//-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
//---- MATERIALS
//-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
// MATERIALS
&MATL ID=
'GYPSUM'
CONDUCTIVITY=
0.48
SPECIFIC_HEAT=
0.84
DENSITY=
1440
/
&SPEC ID='WOOD' , FORMULA='CH1.7O0.83' , MW=57.6 , DENSITY_SOLID=420 ,  SPECIFIC_HEAT = 2.3, CONDUCTIVITY= 0.12 /
&MATL ID=
'FRAME'
 FYI=
'It is pine wood'
 CONDUCTIVITY=
0.12
 SPECIFIC_HEAT = 2.3
 DENSITY=
449 /
&MATL ID=
'BATTENS'
 FYI=
'It is pine wood'
 CONDUCTIVITY=   0.12    
 SPECIFIC_HEAT = 2.3    
 DENSITY=   624 
 SPEC_ID= 'WOOD'
 HEAT_OF_COMBUSTION= 23518
 /
&MATL ID=
'CLAD'
 FYI=
'It is pine wood'
 CONDUCTIVITY=   0.12    
 SPECIFIC_HEAT = 2.3    
 DENSITY=   417.460 
==PAGE:156==
 SPEC_ID= 'WOOD'
 HEAT_OF_COMBUSTION= 21919 /
&MATL ID=
'STEEL'
CONDUCTIVITY=
45
SPECIFIC_HEAT=
0.48
DENSITY=
7820
/
//-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
//---- SURFACES 
//-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
&SURF ID=
'GYPSUM'
 MATL_ID(1,1) = 'GYPSUM'
COLOR = 'KHAKI'
 THICKNESS(1)=
0.015
 TRANSPARENCY=
1
/
&SURF ID=
'FRAME'
 MATL_ID(1,1)=
'FRAME'
 COLOR= 'MELON'
 THICKNESS= 0.045
 TRANSPARENCY=
1
/
&SURF ID=
'BATTENS'
 MATL_ID(1,1)=
'BATTENS'
 COLOR= 'ORANGE'
 THICKNESS= 0.045
 TRANSPARENCY=
1
 HRRPUA = 150.
 IGNITION_TEMPERATURE = 375.
 BURN_AWAY=.TRUE.
 BACKING='VOID' /
&SURF ID=
'CLAD'
 MATL_ID(1,1)=
'CLAD'
 COLOR= 'BROWN'
 THICKNESS= 0.021
 TRANSPARENCY=
1
 HRRPUA = 150.
 IGNITION_TEMPERATURE = 375.
 BURN_AWAY=.TRUE.
 BACKING='VOID' /
&SURF ID=
'STEEL'
 MATL_ID(1,1) = 'STEEL'
 COLOR= 'SILVER'
 THICKNESS= 0.02
 TRANSPARENCY=
1
/
//-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
//---- VENTS & OPENINGS: Mesh boundaries and exhaust in hood
//-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
==PAGE:157==
// Surfaces of exterior mesh boundaries                     
&VENT   MB=  'YMAX' SURF_ID=     'OPEN' /   
&VENT   MB=  'YMIN' SURF_ID=     'OPEN' /   
&VENT   MB=  'XMAX' SURF_ID=     'OPEN' /   
&VENT   MB=  'XMIN' SURF_ID=     'OPEN' /   
&VENT   MB=  'ZMIN' SURF_ID=     'OPEN' /   
&VENT   MB=  'ZMAX' SURF_ID=     'OPEN' /   
// Mechanical ventilation                                       
&SURF   ID='EXHAUST'   VEL=    2.09    COLOR=  'BLUE'   /           
&VENT   XB= 1.8     2.3     3.2     3.2     3   3.4     SURF_ID=    'EXHAUST' /
//-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
//---- OBSTACLES: Floor, hood, facade and ht-meter.
//-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
// Steel floor                                             
&OBST   ID= 'STEEL FLOOR'       XB= 0.7     3.6     1.3     4.2     0       0.1     SURF_ID=    'STEEL'     /
                                                
// Steel hood                                              
&OBST   ID= 'STEEL SIDE1'       XB= 0.7     3.6     4.1     4.2     2       3       SURF_ID=    'STEEL'     /
&OBST   ID= 'STEEL SIDE2'       XB= 0.7     3.6     1.3     1.4     2       3       SURF_ID=    'STEEL'     /
&OBST   ID= 'STEEL SIDE3'       XB= 0.7     0.8     1.3     4.2     2       3       SURF_ID=    'STEEL'     /
&OBST   ID= 'STEEL SIDE4'       XB= 3.5     3.6     1.3     4.2     2       3       SURF_ID=    'STEEL'     /
                                                
&OBST   ID= 'STEEL UDSUG1'      XB= 1.5     2.7     3.2     3.3     2.9     3.5     SURF_ID=    'STEEL'     /
&OBST   ID= 'STEEL UDSUG2'      XB= 1.5     2.7     2.1     2.2     2.9     3.5     SURF_ID=    'STEEL'     /
&OBST   ID= 'STEEL UDSUG3'      XB= 1.5     1.6     2.1     3.3     2.9     3.5     SURF_ID=    'STEEL'     /
&OBST   ID= 'STEEL UDSUG4'      XB= 2.6     2.7     2.1     3.3     2.9     3.5     SURF_ID=    'STEEL'     /
&OBST   ID= 'STEEL UDSUGTOP'    XB= 1.5     2.7     2.1     3.3     3.4     3.5     SURF_ID=    'STEEL'     /
                                                
// Steel hood INCLINE                                               
&OBST   ID= 'STEELHOOD1'        XB= 1.4     1.5     2       3.4     2.8     2.9     SURF_ID=    'STEEL'     /
&OBST   ID= 'STEELHOOD2'        XB= 1.3     1.4     1.9     3.5     2.7     2.8     SURF_ID=    'STEEL'     /
&OBST   ID= 'STEELHOOD3'        XB= 1.2     1.3     1.8     3.6     2.6     2.7     SURF_ID=    'STEEL'     /
&OBST   ID= 'STEELHOOD4'        XB= 1.1     1.2     1.7     3.7     2.5     2.6     SURF_ID=    'STEEL'     /
&OBST   ID= 'STEELHOOD5'        XB= 1       1.1     1.6     3.8     2.4     2.5     SURF_ID=    'STEEL'     / 
&OBST   ID= 'STEELHOOD6'        XB= 0.9     1       1.5     3.9     2.3     2.4     SURF_ID=    'STEEL'     /
&OBST   ID= 'STEELHOOD7'        XB= 0.8     0.9     1.4     4       2.2     2.3     SURF_ID=    'STEEL'     / 
                                                    
&OBST   ID= 'STEELHOOD8'        XB= 2.7     2.8     2.1     3.3     2.8     2.9     SURF_ID=    'STEEL'     /
&OBST   ID= 'STEELHOOD9'        XB= 2.8     2.9     2       3.4     2.7     2.8     SURF_ID=    'STEEL'     /
&OBST   ID= 'STEELHOOD10'       XB= 2.9     3       1.9     3.5     2.6     2.7     SURF_ID=    'STEEL'     /
&OBST   ID= 'STEELHOOD11'       XB= 3       3.1     1.8     3.6     2.5     2.6     SURF_ID=    'STEEL'     /
&OBST   ID= 'STEELHOOD12'       XB= 3.1     3.2     1.7     3.7     2.4     2.5     SURF_ID=    'STEEL'     /
&OBST   ID= 'STEELHOOD13'       XB= 3.2     3.3     1.6     3.8     2.3     2.4     SURF_ID=    'STEEL'     /
&OBST   ID= 'STEELHOOD14'       XB= 3.3     3.4     1.5     3.9     2.2     2.3     SURF_ID=    'STEEL'     /
&OBST   ID= 'STEELHOOD15'       XB= 3.4     3.5     1.4     4       2.1     2.2     SURF_ID=    'STEEL'     /
                                                    
&OBST   ID= 'STEELHOOD16'       XB= 1.5     2.8     3.3     3.4     2.8     2.9     SURF_ID=    'STEEL'     /
&OBST   ID= 'STEELHOOD17'       XB= 1.4     2.9     3.4     3.5     2.7     2.8     SURF_ID=    'STEEL'     /
&OBST   ID= 'STEELHOOD18'       XB= 1.3     3       3.5     3.6     2.6     2.7     SURF_ID=    'STEEL'     /
&OBST   ID= 'STEELHOOD19'       XB= 1.2     3.1     3.6     3.7     2.5     2.6     SURF_ID=    'STEEL'     /
&OBST   ID= 'STEELHOOD20'       XB= 1.1     3.2     3.7     3.8     2.4     2.5     SURF_ID=    'STEEL'     /
&OBST   ID= 'STEELHOOD21'       XB= 1       3.3     3.8     3.9     2.3     2.4     SURF_ID=    'STEEL'     /
&OBST   ID= 'STEELHOOD22'       XB= 0.9     3.4     3.9     4       2.2     2.3     SURF_ID=    'STEEL'     /
&OBST   ID= 'STEELHOOD23'       XB= 0.8     3.5     4       4.1     2.1     2.2     SURF_ID=    'STEEL'     /
                                                
&OBST   ID= 'STEELHOOD24'       XB= 1.5     2.8     2       2.1     2.8     2.9     SURF_ID=    'STEEL'     /
==PAGE:158==
&OBST   ID= 'STEELHOOD25'       XB= 1.4     2.9     1.9     2       2.7     2.8     SURF_ID=    'STEEL'     /
&OBST   ID= 'STEELHOOD26'       XB= 1.3     3       1.8     1.9     2.6     2.7     SURF_ID=    'STEEL'     /
&OBST   ID= 'STEELHOOD27'       XB= 1.2     3.1     1.7     1.8     2.5     2.6     SURF_ID=    'STEEL'     /
&OBST   ID= 'STEELHOOD28'       XB= 1.1     3.2     1.6     1.7     2.4     2.5     SURF_ID=    'STEEL'     /
&OBST   ID= 'STEELHOOD29'       XB= 1       3.3     1.5     1.6     2.3     2.4     SURF_ID=    'STEEL'     /
&OBST   ID= 'STEELHOOD30'       XB= 0.9     3.4     1.4     1.5     2.2     2.3     SURF_ID=    'STEEL'     /
                                             
// Facade                                              
&OBST   ID= 'GYPSUMWEEL1'       XB= 2.6     3.6     1.5     1.6     0.1     0.26    SURF_ID=    'GYPSUM'    /
&OBST   ID= 'GYPSUMWEEL2'       XB= 2.6     3.6     2.7     2.8     0.1     0.26    SURF_ID=    'GYPSUM'    /
&OBST   ID= 'GYPSUMWEEL3'       XB= 2.6     3.6     3.9     4       0.1     0.26    SURF_ID=    'GYPSUM'    /
&OBST   ID= 'GYPSUMWALL1'       XB= 2.96    3       1.5     1.6     0.26    1.9     SURF_ID=    'GYPSUM'    /
&OBST   ID= 'GYPSUMWALL2'       XB= 2.96    3       1.6     2.7     0.04    1.9     SURF_ID=    'GYPSUM'    /
&OBST   ID= 'GYPSUMWALL3'       XB= 2.96    3       2.7     2.8     0.26    1.9     SURF_ID=    'GYPSUM'    /
&OBST   ID= 'GYPSUMWALL4'       XB= 2.96    3       2.8     3.4     0.04    1.9     SURF_ID=    'GYPSUM'    /
&OBST   ID= 'GYPSUMWALL5'       XB= 2.96    3       3.4     4       0.26    1.9     SURF_ID=    'GYPSUM'    /
&OBST   ID= 'HORI_BATTEN1'      XB= 2.94    2.92    1.5     4       0.5     0.54    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'HORI_BATTEN2'      XB= 2.94    2.92    1.5     4       1.04    1.08    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'HORI_BATTEN3'      XB= 2.94    2.92    1.5     4       1.6     1.64    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'VERT_BATTEN1'      XB= 2.96    2.94    1.5     1.54    0.26    1.8     SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'VERT_BATTEN2'      XB= 2.96    2.94    2.48    2.52    0.26    1.8     SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'VERT_BATTEN3'      XB= 2.96    2.94    3.06    3.1     0.26    1.8     SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'VERT_BATTEN4'      XB= 2.96    2.94    3.94    3.98    0.26    1.8     SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'FACADE CLADDING'   XB= 2.92    2.90    1.74    3.6     0.28    1.8     SURF_ID=    'CLAD'    BNDF_OBST=.TRUE.    /
// HT-meter                                             
&OBST   ID= 'HTMETER'           XB= 1.94    1.96    2       2.24    0.32    0.6     SURF_ID=    'STEEL'   BNDF_OBST=.TRUE.    /
//-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
//---- OUTPUT: Slice files, Boundary files, Point devices and Surface devices 
//-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
// Slice files 
// Temperature 
&SLCF   ID=  'FIRE_CENTERX_TEMP'    PBX=    2.8  QUANTITY=    'TEMPERATURE'  /       Fire center X direction
&SLCF   ID=  'FIRE_CENTERY_TEMP'    PBY=    2.1  QUANTITY=    'TEMPERATURE'  /       Fire center Y direction
&SLCF   ID=  'LAYER1_TEMP'          PBX=    2.96 QUANTITY=    'TEMPERATURE'  /       Layer 1 i hulrum
&SLCF   ID=  'LAYER2_TEMP'          PBX=    2.88 QUANTITY=    'TEMPERATURE'  /       Layer 2 på facade 
&SLCF   ID=  'LAYER3_TEMP'          PBX=    2.36 QUANTITY=    'TEMPERATURE'  /       Layer 3 60 cm ud for facade 
&SLCF   ID=  'LAYER4_TEMP'          PBX=    1.76 QUANTITY=    'TEMPERATURE'  /       Layer 4 120 cm ud fra facade 
&SLCF   ID=  'POINT1_TEMP'          PBY=    2.10 QUANTITY=    'TEMPERATURE'  /       Point 1 in layer 1, 2, 3 and 4
&SLCF   ID=  'POINT2_TEMP'          PBY=    2.40 QUANTITY=    'TEMPERATURE'  /       Point 2 in layer 1 and 2
&SLCF   ID=  'POINT3_TEMP'          PBY=    2.70 QUANTITY=    'TEMPERATURE'  /       Point 3 in layer 1 and 2
&SLCF   ID=  'POINT4_TEMP'          PBY=    3.00 QUANTITY=    'TEMPERATURE'  /       Point 4 in layer 1 and 2
&SLCF   ID=  'POINT5_TEMP'          PBY=    3.30 QUANTITY=    'TEMPERATURE'  /       Point 5 in layer 1 and 2
&SLCF   ID=  'POINT6_TEMP'          PBY=    3.60 QUANTITY=    'TEMPERATURE'  /       Point 6 in layer 1 and 2
&SLCF   ID=  'POINT1_L34_TEMP'      PBY=    2.10 QUANTITY=    'TEMPERATURE'  /       Point 1 in layer 3 and 4
&SLCF   ID=  'POINT2_L34_TEMP'      PBY=    2.60 QUANTITY=    'TEMPERATURE'  /       Point 2 in layer 3 and 4
// Velocity files (vector)
&SLCF   ID=  'FIRE_CENTERX_VEL'     PBX=    2.85 QUANTITY=    'VELOCITY'    VECTOR= .TRUE.  / Fire center X direction
&SLCF   ID=  'FIRE_CENTERY_VEL'     PBY=    2.12 QUANTITY=    'VELOCITY'    VECTOR= .TRUE.  / Fire center Y direction 
&SLCF   ID=  'EXHAUST_CENTERX_VEL'  PBX=    2.1  QUANTITY=    'VELOCITY'    VECTOR= .TRUE.  / Exhaust center-ish X direction
&SLCF   ID=  'EXHAUST_CENTERY_VEL'  PBY=    3.2  QUANTITY=    'VELOCITY'    VECTOR= .TRUE.  / Alligned on exhaust Y direction   
&SLCF   ID=  'EXHAUST_FRONT_VEL'    PBY=    2.9  QUANTITY=    'VELOCITY'    VECTOR= .TRUE.  / In front of the exhaust fan  
// Visability (smoke)
&SLCF   ID=  'FIRE_CENTERX_VIS'     PBX=    2.85 QUANTITY=    'VISIBILITY'   /  Fire center     X direction
&SLCF   ID=  'FIRE_CENTERY_VIS'     PBY=    2.12 QUANTITY=    'VISIBILITY'   /  Fire center     Y direction
==PAGE:159==
// Boundary files
&BNDF   QUANTITY='NET HEAT FLUX'        /
&BNDF   QUANTITY='WALL TEMPERATURE'     /
// Devices 
// Point devices, temperature measurement                                        
&DEVC   ID=  'L1P11_TC'           XYZ=    2.96    2.10    0.86    QUANTITY=   'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'L1P12_TC'           XYZ=    2.96    2.40    0.86    QUANTITY=   'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'L1P13_TC'           XYZ=    2.96    2.70    0.86    QUANTITY=   'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'L1P14_TC'           XYZ=    2.96    3.00    0.86    QUANTITY=   'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'L1P15_TC'           XYZ=    2.96    3.30    0.86    QUANTITY=   'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'L1P16_TC'           XYZ=    2.96    3.60    0.86    QUANTITY=   'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'L1P21_TC'           XYZ=    2.96    2.10    1.46    QUANTITY=   'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'L1P22_TC'           XYZ=    2.96    2.40    1.46    QUANTITY=   'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'L1P23_TC'           XYZ=    2.96    2.70    1.46    QUANTITY=   'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'L1P24_TC'           XYZ=    2.96    3.00    1.46    QUANTITY=   'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'L1P25_TC'           XYZ=    2.96    3.30    1.46    QUANTITY=   'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'L1P26_TC'           XYZ=    2.96    3.60    1.46    QUANTITY=   'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'L2P11_TC'           XYZ=    2.90    2.10    0.86    QUANTITY=   'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'L2P12_TC'           XYZ=    2.90    2.40    0.86    QUANTITY=   'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'L2P13_TC'           XYZ=    2.90    2.70    0.86    QUANTITY=   'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'L2P14_TC'           XYZ=    2.90    3.00    0.86    QUANTITY=   'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'L2P15_TC'           XYZ=    2.90    3.30    0.86    QUANTITY=   'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'L2P16_TC'           XYZ=    2.90    3.60    0.86    QUANTITY=   'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'L2P21_TC'           XYZ=    2.90    2.10    1.46    QUANTITY=   'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'L2P22_TC'           XYZ=    2.90    2.40    1.46    QUANTITY=   'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'L2P23_TC'           XYZ=    2.90    2.70    1.46    QUANTITY=   'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'L2P24_TC'           XYZ=    2.90    3.00    1.46    QUANTITY=   'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'L2P25_TC'           XYZ=    2.90    3.30    1.46    QUANTITY=   'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'L2P26_TC'           XYZ=    2.90    3.60    1.46    QUANTITY=   'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'L3P11_TC'           XYZ=    2.36    2.10    0.80    QUANTITY=   'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'L3P12_TC'           XYZ=    2.36    2.60    0.80    QUANTITY=   'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'L3P21_TC'           XYZ=    2.36    2.10    1.24    QUANTITY=   'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'L3P22_TC'           XYZ=    2.36    2.60    1.24    QUANTITY=   'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'L4P11_TC'           XYZ=    1.76    2.10    0.80    QUANTITY=   'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'L4P12_TC'           XYZ=    1.76    2.60    0.80    QUANTITY=   'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'L4P21_TC'           XYZ=    1.76    2.10    1.24    QUANTITY=   'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'L4P22_TC'           XYZ=    1.76    2.60    1.24    QUANTITY=   'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'XX_TC'              XYZ=    2.96    2.12    0.28    QUANTITY=   'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
// Point devices, wall thickness
&DEVC   ID=  'WALL_THICKNESS_X1'  XYZ=    2.90    2.10    0.36  IOR=-1, QUANTITY='WALL THICKNESS' / 
&DEVC   ID=  'WALL_THICKNESS_X2'  XYZ=    2.90    2.10    0.38  IOR=-1, QUANTITY='WALL THICKNESS' / 
&DEVC   ID=  'WALL_THICKNESS_X3'  XYZ=    2.90    2.10    0.40  IOR=-1, QUANTITY='WALL THICKNESS' / 
&DEVC   ID=  'WALL_THICKNESS_X4'  XYZ=    2.90    2.10    0.42  IOR=-1, QUANTITY='WALL THICKNESS' / 
&DEVC   ID=  'WALL_THICKNESS_X5'  XYZ=    2.90    2.10    0.44  IOR=-1, QUANTITY='WALL THICKNESS' / 
&DEVC   ID=  'WALL_THICKNESS_X6'  XYZ=    2.90    2.10    0.46  IOR=-1, QUANTITY='WALL THICKNESS' / 
&DEVC   ID=  'WALL_THICKNESS_Y1'  XYZ=    2.90    2.14    0.36  IOR=-1, QUANTITY='WALL THICKNESS' / 
&DEVC   ID=  'WALL_THICKNESS_Y2'  XYZ=    2.90    2.14    0.38  IOR=-1, QUANTITY='WALL THICKNESS' / 
&DEVC   ID=  'WALL_THICKNESS_Y3'  XYZ=    2.90    2.14    0.40  IOR=-1, QUANTITY='WALL THICKNESS' / 
&DEVC   ID=  'WALL_THICKNESS_Y4'  XYZ=    2.90    2.14    0.42  IOR=-1, QUANTITY='WALL THICKNESS' / 
&DEVC   ID=  'WALL_THICKNESS_Y5'  XYZ=    2.90    2.14    0.44  IOR=-1, QUANTITY='WALL THICKNESS' / 
&DEVC   ID=  'WALL_THICKNESS_Y6'  XYZ=    2.90    2.14    0.46  IOR=-1, QUANTITY='WALL THICKNESS' / 
==PAGE:160==
// Surface device                                                                       
&DEVC   ID=  'NET HEAT FLUX'    XB=  1.94    1.96    2      2.24    0.32    0.6  QUANTITY=    'NET HEAT FLUX'   IOR=    1   / Ved HT-meter
&DEVC   ID=  'MASS FLUX WALL'   XB=  1.94    1.96    2      2.24    0.32    0.6  QUANTITY=    'MASS FLUX WALL'  SPEC_ID='WOOD'  SPATIAL_STATISTIC='SURFACE INTEGRAL' / Ved HT-meter
&DEVC   ID=  'MASS FLUX WALL'   XB=  2.90    2.92    1.74   3.6     0.3     1.8  QUANTITY=    'MASS FLUX WALL'  SPEC_ID='WOOD'  SPATIAL_STATISTIC='SURFACE INTEGRAL' / Ved facade
// DUMP files                           
&DUMP  DT_SLCF=1  DT_DEVC=1    DT_BNDF=5    DT_HRR=1    DT_CTRL=1   DT_RESTART=200  DT_MASS=1 / 
                                                                        
&TAIL /
==PAGE:161==
L
FDS code: High-rise facade fire, bottom
ignition
Thermal Radiation Between Wooden Facades in High­Rise Buildings
149
==PAGE:162==
// This fds simulation/model is made for the master thesis: Thermal Radiation Between Wooden Facades in High-Rise Buildings
// Simulating Scenario Sc1.1, with a wastepaper basket at the bottom of the facade. 5 m distance between facades. 
// fds model made by Karoline Sandfeld-Nielsen (s173793)
// fds version: FDS6.7.9 
//-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
//---- MAIN
//-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
&HEAD 
    CHID='FACADE5' 
    TITLE='Brandspredning mellem to facader' /
&TIME           
    T_BEGIN  =  0
    T_END    =  3600 /        
&MISC           
    RESTART  =  .FALSE.
    TMPA     =  9.1
    BNDF_DEFAULT   =  .FALSE.
    RADIATION      =  .TRUE.
    SURF_DEFAULT   =   'FRAME' /
&RADI           
    TIME_STEP_INCREMENT  =  12
    NUMBER_RADIATION_ANGLES  =  100
    ANGLE_INCREMENT  =  20
/
//-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
//---- MESH Total Cells 1650800                                                                                 
//-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
// Facades                                                                                          
&MESH   IJK=    6   80  160 XB= 6       6.3     2       6       0       8   MPI_PROCESS=    0   /   MESH #  1   "Rad_facade"      
&MESH   IJK=    6   120 40  XB= 6       6.3     6       12      8       10  MPI_PROCESS=    0   /   MESH #  2   "Rad_facade"      
&MESH   IJK=    10  120 80  XB= 5.8     6.3     6       12      0       4   MPI_PROCESS=    1   /   MESH #  3   "Ved brand"       
&MESH   IJK=    10  120 80  XB= 5.8     6.3     6       12      4       8   MPI_PROCESS=    2   /   MESH #  4   "Ved brand"       
&MESH   IJK=    6   100 160 XB= 6       6.3     12      17      0       8   MPI_PROCESS=    3   /   MESH #  5   "Rad_facade"      
&MESH   IJK=    6   80  40  XB= 6       6.3     2       6       8       10  MPI_PROCESS=    4   /   MESH #  6   "Rad_facade"      
&MESH   IJK=    6   100 140 XB= 6       6.3     12      17      10      17  MPI_PROCESS=    4   /   MESH #  7   "Rad_facade"      
&MESH   IJK=    6   100 40  XB= 6       6.3     12      17      8       10  MPI_PROCESS=    5   /   MESH #  8   "Rad_facade"      
&MESH   IJK=    6   80  140 XB= 6       6.3     2       6       10      17  MPI_PROCESS=    5   /   MESH #  9   "Rad_facade"      
&MESH   IJK=    6   120 140 XB= 6       6.3     6       12      10      17  MPI_PROCESS=    6   /   MESH #  10  "Rad_facade"      
&MESH   IJK=    5   75  85  XB= 6.3     7.3     2       17      0       17  MPI_PROCESS=    7   /   MESH #  11  "bag_rad"         
&MESH   IJK=    4   80  200 XB= 1       1.2     2       6       0       10  MPI_PROCESS=    7   /   MESH #  12  "Exp_facade"      
&MESH   IJK=    4   120 200 XB= 1       1.2     6       12      0       10  MPI_PROCESS=    8   /   MESH #  13  "Exp_facade"      
&MESH   IJK=    12  10  180 XB= 0       1.2     1       2       0       18  MPI_PROCESS=    9   /   MESH #  14  "Små luft stykker
&MESH   IJK=    4   100 200 XB= 1       1.2     12      17      0       10  MPI_PROCESS=    9   /   MESH #  15  "Exp_facade"      
&MESH   IJK=    4   80  140 XB= 1       1.2     2       6       10      17  MPI_PROCESS=    10  /   MESH #  16  "Exp_facade"      
&MESH   IJK=    4   100 140 XB= 1       1.2     12      17      10      17  MPI_PROCESS=    10  /   MESH #  17  "Exp_facade"      
&MESH   IJK=    4   120 140 XB= 1       1.2     6       12      10      17  MPI_PROCESS=    11  /   MESH #  18  "Exp_facade"      
&MESH   IJK=    5   75  85  XB= 0       1       2       17      0       17  MPI_PROCESS=    11  /   MESH #  19  "bag_exp"         
&MESH   IJK=    24  30  50  XB= 1.2     6       6       12      8       18  MPI_PROCESS=    12  /   MESH #  20  "Luft mellem facad
&MESH   IJK=    46  60  20  XB= 1.2     5.8     6       12      0       2   MPI_PROCESS=    12  /   MESH #  21  "Luft mellem facad
&MESH   IJK=    46  60  30  XB= 1.2     5.8     6       12      2       5   MPI_PROCESS=    13  /   MESH #  22  "Luft mellem facad
&MESH   IJK=    46  60  30  XB= 1.2     5.8     6       12      5       8   MPI_PROCESS=    14  /   MESH #  23  "Luft mellem facad
&MESH   IJK=    6   85  5   XB= 0       1.2     1       18      17      18  MPI_PROCESS=    14  /   MESH #  24  "Luft over"       
&MESH   IJK=    24  25  90  XB= 1.2     6       1       6       0       18  MPI_PROCESS=    15  /   MESH #  25  "Luft mellem facad
&MESH   IJK=    13  10  180 XB= 6       7.3     1       2       0       18  MPI_PROCESS=    15  /   MESH #  26  "Små luft stykker
&MESH   IJK=    13  10  180 XB= 6       7.3     17      18      0       18  MPI_PROCESS=    16  /   MESH #  27  "Små luft stykker
&MESH   IJK=    12  10  180 XB= 0       1.2     17      18      0       18  MPI_PROCESS=    16  /   MESH #  28  "Små luft stykker
&MESH   IJK=    13  170 10  XB= 6       7.3     1       18      17      18  MPI_PROCESS=    16  /   MESH #  29  "Luft over"       
&MESH   IJK=    24  30  90  XB= 1.2     6       12      18      0       18  MPI_PROCESS=    17  /   MESH #  30  "Luft mellem facad
//-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
//---- REACTIONS
//-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
&REAC ID = 'METHANOL'   
 C = 1  
 H = 4  
 O = 1  
 SOOT_YIELD = 0.001 
HEAT_OF_COMBUSTION = 19830  
 IDEAL = .FALSE. /  
//-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
//---- Methanol fire, which is stopped after 20 minutes (1200 seconds)                       
//-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
/   Q_max   100 kW
&SURF   ID='FIRE' HRRPUA=555.555   RAMP_Q='fireramp'  COLOR=   'RED'  /   
&RAMP   ID='fireramp', T=0.0, F=0.0 /
&RAMP   ID='fireramp', T=86,  F=1.0 /
&RAMP   ID='fireramp', T=1140, F=1.0 /
&RAMP   ID='fireramp', T=1200, F=0.0 /
==PAGE:163==
&OBST   XB= 6    6.3    9.2     9.8     0.0     0.1   SURF_IDS=    'FIRE','INERT','INERT'     /
                     
//-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
//---- MATERIALS
//-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
// MATERIALS
&MATL ID=
'GYPSUM'
CONDUCTIVITY=
0.48
SPECIFIC_HEAT=
0.84
DENSITY=
1440
/
&SPEC ID='WOOD' , FORMULA='CH1.7O0.83' , MW=57.6 , DENSITY_SOLID=420 ,  SPECIFIC_HEAT = 2.3, CONDUCTIVITY= 0.12 /
&MATL ID=
'FRAME'
 FYI=
'It is pine wood'
 CONDUCTIVITY=
0.12
 SPECIFIC_HEAT = 2.3
 DENSITY=
449 /
&MATL ID=
'BATTENS'
 FYI=
'It is pine wood'
 CONDUCTIVITY=   0.12    
 SPECIFIC_HEAT = 2.3    
 DENSITY=   624 
 SPEC_ID= 'WOOD'
 HEAT_OF_COMBUSTION= 23518
 /
&MATL ID=
'CLAD'
 FYI=
'It is pine wood'
 CONDUCTIVITY=   0.12    
 SPECIFIC_HEAT = 2.3    
 DENSITY=   417.460 
 SPEC_ID= 'WOOD'
 HEAT_OF_COMBUSTION= 21919 /
&MATL ID=
'STEEL'
CONDUCTIVITY=
45
SPECIFIC_HEAT=
0.48
DENSITY=
7820
/
//-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
//---- SURFACES 
//-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
&SURF ID=
'GYPSUM'
 MATL_ID(1,1) = 'GYPSUM'
COLOR = 'KHAKI'
 THICKNESS(1)=
0.015
 TRANSPARENCY=
1
/
&SURF ID=
'FRAME'
 MATL_ID(1,1)=
'FRAME'
 COLOR= 'MELON'
 THICKNESS= 0.045
 TRANSPARENCY=
1
/
&SURF ID=
'BATTENS'
 MATL_ID(1,1)=
'BATTENS'
 COLOR= 'ORANGE'
 THICKNESS= 0.045
 TRANSPARENCY=
1
 HRRPUA = 150.
 IGNITION_TEMPERATURE = 375.
 BURN_AWAY=.TRUE.
 BACKING='VOID' /
&SURF ID=
'CLAD'
 MATL_ID(1,1)=
'CLAD'
 COLOR= 'BROWN'
 THICKNESS= 0.021
 TRANSPARENCY=
1
 HRRPUA = 150.
 IGNITION_TEMPERATURE = 375.
 BURN_AWAY=.TRUE.
 BACKING='VOID' /
&SURF ID=
'STEEL'
==PAGE:164==
 MATL_ID(1,1) = 'STEEL'
 COLOR= 'SILVER'
 THICKNESS= 0.02
 TRANSPARENCY=
1
/
//-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
//---- VENTS & OPENINGS: Mesh boundaries and exhaust in hood
//-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
// Surfaces of exterior mesh boundaries                     
&VENT   MB=  'YMAX' SURF_ID=     'OPEN' /   
&VENT   MB=  'YMIN' SURF_ID=     'OPEN' /   
/&VENT   MB=  'XMAX' SURF_ID=     'OPEN' /   
/&VENT   MB=  'XMIN' SURF_ID=     'OPEN' /   
/&VENT   MB=  'ZMIN' SURF_ID=     'OPEN' /   
&VENT   MB=  'ZMAX' SURF_ID=     'OPEN' /   
//-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
//---- OBSTACLES                                                
//-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                
// Exposed wall                                                 
&OBST   ID= 'Gypsym wall1'  XB= 0       1       2       17      0       17      SURF_ID=    'GYPSUM'    /
&OBST   ID= 'EV_batten1'    XB= 1       1.05    2.6     2.65    0.05    16.4    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EV_batten2'    XB= 1       1.05    3.2     3.25    0.05    16.4    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EV_batten3'    XB= 1       1.05    3.8     3.85    0.05    16.4    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EV_batten4'    XB= 1       1.05    4.4     4.45    0.05    16.4    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EV_batten5'    XB= 1       1.05    5       5.05    0.05    16.4    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EV_batten6'    XB= 1       1.05    5.6     5.65    0.05    16.4    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EV_batten7'    XB= 1       1.05    6.2     6.25    0.05    16.4    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EV_batten8'    XB= 1       1.05    6.8     6.85    0.05    16.4    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EV_batten9'    XB= 1       1.05    7.4     7.45    0.05    16.4    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EV_batten10'   XB= 1       1.05    8       8.05    0.05    16.4    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EV_batten11'   XB= 1       1.05    8.6     8.65    0.05    16.4    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EV_batten12'   XB= 1       1.05    9.2     9.25    0.05    16.4    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EV_batten13'   XB= 1       1.05    9.8     9.85    0.05    16.4    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EV_batten14'   XB= 1       1.05    10.4    10.45   0.05    16.4    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EV_batten15'   XB= 1       1.05    11      11.05   0.05    16.4    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EV_batten16'   XB= 1       1.05    11.6    11.65   0.05    16.4    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EV_batten17'   XB= 1       1.05    12.2    12.25   0.05    16.4    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EV_batten18'   XB= 1       1.05    12.8    12.85   0.05    16.4    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EV_batten19'   XB= 1       1.05    13.4    13.45   0.05    16.4    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EV_batten20'   XB= 1       1.05    14      14.05   0.05    16.4    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EV_batten21'   XB= 1       1.05    14.6    14.65   0.05    16.4    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EV_batten22'   XB= 1       1.05    15.2    15.25   0.05    16.4    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EV_batten23'   XB= 1       1.05    15.8    15.85   0.05    16.4    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EV_batten24'   XB= 1       1.05    16.4    16.45   0.05    16.4    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
                                                
                                                
&OBST   ID= 'EH_batten1'    XB= 1.05    1.1     2.4     16.6    0.4     0.45    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EH_batten2'    XB= 1.05    1.1     2.4     16.6    1       1.05    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EH_batten3'    XB= 1.05    1.1     2.4     16.6    1.6     1.65    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EH_batten4'    XB= 1.05    1.1     2.4     16.6    2.2     2.25    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EH_batten5'    XB= 1.05    1.1     2.4     16.6    2.8     2.85    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EH_batten6'    XB= 1.05    1.1     2.4     16.6    3.4     3.45    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EH_batten7'    XB= 1.05    1.1     2.4     16.6    4       4.05    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EH_batten8'    XB= 1.05    1.1     2.4     16.6    4.6     4.65    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EH_batten9'    XB= 1.05    1.1     2.4     16.6    5.2     5.25    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EH_batten10'   XB= 1.05    1.1     2.4     16.6    5.8     5.85    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EH_batten11'   XB= 1.05    1.1     2.4     16.6    6.4     6.45    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EH_batten12'   XB= 1.05    1.1     2.4     16.6    7       7.05    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EH_batten13'   XB= 1.05    1.1     2.4     16.6    7.6     7.65    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EH_batten14'   XB= 1.05    1.1     2.4     16.6    8.2     8.25    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EH_batten15'   XB= 1.05    1.1     2.4     16.6    8.8     8.85    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EH_batten16'   XB= 1.05    1.1     2.4     16.6    9.4     9.45    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EH_batten17'   XB= 1.05    1.1     2.4     16.6    10      10.05   SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EH_batten18'   XB= 1.05    1.1     2.4     16.6    10.6    10.65   SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EH_batten19'   XB= 1.05    1.1     2.4     16.6    11.2    11.25   SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EH_batten20'   XB= 1.05    1.1     2.4     16.6    11.8    11.85   SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EH_batten21'   XB= 1.05    1.1     2.4     16.6    12.4    12.45   SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EH_batten22'   XB= 1.05    1.1     2.4     16.6    13      13.05   SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EH_batten23'   XB= 1.05    1.1     2.4     16.6    13.6    13.65   SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EH_batten24'   XB= 1.05    1.1     2.4     16.6    14.2    14.25   SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EH_batten25'   XB= 1.05    1.1     2.4     16.6    14.8    14.85   SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EH_batten26'   XB= 1.05    1.1     2.4     16.6    15.4    15.45   SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EH_batten27'   XB= 1.05    1.1     2.4     16.6    16      16.05   SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
                                                
&OBST   ID= 'CLADDING_EXP'  XB= 1.1     1.15    2       17      0.2     17      SURF_ID=    'CLAD'      /
                                                
//  Radiation wall                                          
&OBST   ID= 'Gypsum wall 2' XB= 6.3     7.3     2       17      0       17      SURF_ID=    'GYPSUM'    /
                                                
&OBST   ID= 'RV_batten1'    XB= 6.25    6.3     2.6     2.65    0.05    16.4    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'RV_batten2'    XB= 6.25    6.3     3.2     3.25    0.05    16.4    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'RV_batten3'    XB= 6.25    6.3     3.8     3.85    0.05    16.4    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
==PAGE:165==
&OBST   ID= 'RV_batten4'    XB= 6.25    6.3     4.4     4.45    0.05    16.4    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'RV_batten5'    XB= 6.25    6.3     5       5.05    0.05    16.4    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'RV_batten6'    XB= 6.25    6.3     5.6     5.65    0.05    16.4    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'RV_batten7'    XB= 6.25    6.3     6.2     6.25    0.05    16.4    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'RV_batten8'    XB= 6.25    6.3     6.8     6.85    0.05    16.4    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'RV_batten9'    XB= 6.25    6.3     7.4     7.45    0.05    16.4    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'RV_batten10'   XB= 6.25    6.3     8       8.05    0.05    16.4    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'RV_batten11'   XB= 6.25    6.3     8.6     8.65    0.05    16.4    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'RV_batten12'   XB= 6.25    6.3     9.2     9.25    0.05    16.4    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'RV_batten13'   XB= 6.25    6.3     9.8     9.85    0.05    16.4    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'RV_batten14'   XB= 6.25    6.3     10.4    10.45   0.05    16.4    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'RV_batten15'   XB= 6.25    6.3     11      11.05   0.05    16.4    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'RV_batten16'   XB= 6.25    6.3     11.6    11.65   0.05    16.4    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'RV_batten17'   XB= 6.25    6.3     12.2    12.25   0.05    16.4    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'RV_batten18'   XB= 6.25    6.3     12.8    12.85   0.05    16.4    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'RV_batten19'   XB= 6.25    6.3     13.4    13.45   0.05    16.4    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'RV_batten20'   XB= 6.25    6.3     14      14.05   0.05    16.4    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'RV_batten21'   XB= 6.25    6.3     14.6    14.65   0.05    16.4    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'RV_batten22'   XB= 6.25    6.3     15.2    15.25   0.05    16.4    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'RV_batten23'   XB= 6.25    6.3     15.8    15.85   0.05    16.4    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'RV_batten24'   XB= 6.25    6.3     16.4    16.45   0.05    16.4    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
                                                
                                                
&OBST   ID= 'RH_batten1'    XB= 6.2     6.25    2.6     16.6    0.4     0.45    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'RH_batten2'    XB= 6.2     6.25    2.6     16.6    1       1.05    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'RH_batten3'    XB= 6.2     6.25    2.6     16.6    1.6     1.65    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'RH_batten4'    XB= 6.2     6.25    2.6     16.6    2.2     2.25    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'RH_batten5'    XB= 6.2     6.25    2.6     16.6    2.8     2.85    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'RH_batten6'    XB= 6.2     6.25    2.6     16.6    3.4     3.45    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'RH_batten7'    XB= 6.2     6.25    2.6     16.6    4       4.05    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'RH_batten8'    XB= 6.2     6.25    2.6     16.6    4.6     4.65    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'RH_batten9'    XB= 6.2     6.25    2.6     16.6    5.2     5.25    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'RH_batten10'   XB= 6.2     6.25    2.6     16.6    5.8     5.85    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'RH_batten11'   XB= 6.2     6.25    2.6     16.6    6.4     6.45    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'RH_batten12'   XB= 6.2     6.25    2.6     16.6    7       7.05    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'RH_batten13'   XB= 6.2     6.25    2.6     16.6    7.6     7.65    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'RH_batten14'   XB= 6.2     6.25    2.6     16.6    8.2     8.25    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'RH_batten15'   XB= 6.2     6.25    2.6     16.6    8.8     8.85    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'RH_batten16'   XB= 6.2     6.25    2.6     16.6    9.4     9.45    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'RH_batten17'   XB= 6.2     6.25    2.6     16.6    10      10.05   SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'RH_batten18'   XB= 6.2     6.25    2.6     16.6    10.6    10.65   SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'RH_batten19'   XB= 6.2     6.25    2.6     16.6    11.2    11.25   SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'RH_batten20'   XB= 6.2     6.25    2.6     16.6    11.8    11.85   SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'RH_batten21'   XB= 6.2     6.25    2.6     16.6    12.4    12.45   SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'RH_batten22'   XB= 6.2     6.25    2.6     16.6    13      13.05   SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'RH_batten23'   XB= 6.2     6.25    2.6     16.6    13.6    13.65   SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'RH_batten24'   XB= 6.2     6.25    2.6     16.6    14.2    14.25   SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'RH_batten25'   XB= 6.2     6.25    2.6     16.6    14.8    14.85   SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'RH_batten26'   XB= 6.2     6.25    2.6     16.6    15.4    15.45   SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'RH_batten27'   XB= 6.2     6.25    2.6     16.6    16      16.05   SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
                                                
&OBST   ID= 'CLADDING_RAD'  XB= 6.15    6.2     2       17      0.2     17      SURF_ID=    'CLAD'      /
//-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
//---- OUTPUT: Slice files, Point devices and Surface devices 
//-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
// Slice files 
// Temperature 
&SLCF   ID=  'FIRE_C_X_TEMP'        PBX=    6.2     QUANTITY=    'TEMPERATURE'  /           
&SLCF   ID=  'FIRE_C_Y_TEMP'        PBY=    9.5     QUANTITY=    'TEMPERATURE'  /           
&SLCF   ID=  'Y_TEMP_H3MFIRE'       PBY=    6.5     QUANTITY=    'TEMPERATURE'  /           
&SLCF   ID=  'Y_TEMP_V3MFIRE'       PBY=    12.5    QUANTITY=    'TEMPERATURE'  /           
&SLCF   ID=  'Z_2M_ABOVE_FIRE'      PBZ=    2.1     QUANTITY=    'TEMPERATURE'  /           
&SLCF   ID=  'X_MIDT_FACADE_TEMP'   PBX=    3.7     QUANTITY=    'TEMPERATURE'  /           
&SLCF   ID=  'X_EXP_FACADE_TEMP'    PBX=    1.2     QUANTITY=    'TEMPERATURE'  /           
&SLCF   ID=  'X_RAD_FACADE_TEMP'    PBX=    6.2     QUANTITY=    'TEMPERATURE'  /           
                                        
&SLCF   ID=  'FIRE_C_X_VEL'         PBX=    6.2     QUANTITY=    'VELOCITY' VECTOR= .TRUE.  /   
&SLCF   ID=  'FIRE_C_Y_VEL'         PBY=    9.5     QUANTITY=    'VELOCITY' VECTOR= .TRUE.  /   
                                        
//EXPOSED WALL THERMOCOUPLES                                        
                                        
//Exposed facade                                        
&DEVC   ID=  'EX_FAC_0_P1'  XYZ=    1.15    9.5     1.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'EX_FAC_0_P2'  XYZ=    1.15    9.5     2.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'EX_FAC_0_P3'  XYZ=    1.15    9.5     4.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'EX_FAC_0_P4'  XYZ=    1.15    9.5     8.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'EX_FAC_0_P5'  XYZ=    1.15    9.5     12.1    QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'EX_FAC_0_P6'  XYZ=    1.15    9.5     16.1    QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
                                        
/Venstre side                                       
&DEVC   ID=  'EX_FAC_L1_P1' XYZ=    1.15    6.5     1.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'EX_FAC_L1_P2' XYZ=    1.15    6.5     2.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'EX_FAC_L1_P3' XYZ=    1.15    6.5     4.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'EX_FAC_L1_P4' XYZ=    1.15    6.5     8.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
==PAGE:166==
&DEVC   ID=  'EX_FAC_L1_P5' XYZ=    1.15    6.5     12.1    QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'EX_FAC_L1_P6' XYZ=    1.15    6.5     16.1    QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
                                        
&DEVC   ID=  'EX_FAC_L2_P1' XYZ=    1.15    3.5     1.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'EX_FAC_L2_P2' XYZ=    1.15    3.5     2.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'EX_FAC_L2_P3' XYZ=    1.15    3.5     4.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'EX_FAC_L2_P4' XYZ=    1.15    3.5     8.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'EX_FAC_L2_P5' XYZ=    1.15    3.5     12.1    QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'EX_FAC_L2_P6' XYZ=    1.15    3.5     16.1    QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
                                        
/Højre side                                     
&DEVC   ID=  'EX_FAC_R1_P1' XYZ=    1.15    12.5    1.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'EX_FAC_R1_P2' XYZ=    1.15    12.5    2.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'EX_FAC_R1_P3' XYZ=    1.15    12.5    4.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'EX_FAC_R1_P4' XYZ=    1.15    12.5    8.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'EX_FAC_R1_P5' XYZ=    1.15    12.5    12.1    QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'EX_FAC_R1_P6' XYZ=    1.15    12.5    16.1    QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
                                        
&DEVC   ID=  'EX_FAC_R2_P1' XYZ=    1.15    15.5    1.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'EX_FAC_R2_P2' XYZ=    1.15    15.5    2.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'EX_FAC_R2_P3' XYZ=    1.15    15.5    4.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'EX_FAC_R2_P4' XYZ=    1.15    15.5    8.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'EX_FAC_R2_P5' XYZ=    1.15    15.5    12.1    QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'EX_FAC_R2_P6' XYZ=    1.15    15.5    16.1    QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
                                        
                                        
//RADIATION WALL THERMOCOUPLES                                      
//Radiating cavity                                      
&DEVC   ID=  'RA_CAV_0_P1'  XYZ=    6.3     9.5     1.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'RA_CAV_0_P2'  XYZ=    6.3     9.5     2.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'RA_CAV_0_P3'  XYZ=    6.3     9.5     4.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'RA_CAV_0_P4'  XYZ=    6.3     9.5     8.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'RA_CAV_0_P5'  XYZ=    6.3     9.5     12.1    QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'RA_CAV_0_P6'  XYZ=    6.3     9.5     16.1    QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
                                        
/Venstre side                                       
&DEVC   ID=  'RA_CAV_L1_P1' XYZ=    6.3     6.5     1.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'RA_CAV_L1_P2' XYZ=    6.3     6.5     2.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'RA_CAV_L1_P3' XYZ=    6.3     6.5     4.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'RA_CAV_L1_P4' XYZ=    6.3     6.5     8.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'RA_CAV_L1_P5' XYZ=    6.3     6.5     12.1    QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'RA_CAV_L1_P6' XYZ=    6.3     6.5     16.1    QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
                                        
&DEVC   ID=  'RA_CAV_L2_P1' XYZ=    6.3     3.5     1.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'RA_CAV_L2_P2' XYZ=    6.3     3.5     2.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'RA_CAV_L2_P3' XYZ=    6.3     3.5     4.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'RA_CAV_L2_P4' XYZ=    6.3     3.5     8.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'RA_CAV_L2_P5' XYZ=    6.3     3.5     12.1    QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'RA_CAV_L2_P6' XYZ=    6.3     3.5     16.1    QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
                                        
/Højre side                                     
&DEVC   ID=  'RA_CAV_R1_P1' XYZ=    6.3     12.5    1.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'RA_CAV_R1_P2' XYZ=    6.3     12.5    2.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'RA_CAV_R1_P3' XYZ=    6.3     12.5    4.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'RA_CAV_R1_P4' XYZ=    6.3     12.5    8.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'RA_CAV_R1_P5' XYZ=    6.3     12.5    12.1    QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'RA_CAV_R1_P6' XYZ=    6.3     12.5    16.1    QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
                                        
&DEVC   ID=  'RA_CAV_R2_P1' XYZ=    6.3     15.5    1.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'RA_CAV_R2_P2' XYZ=    6.3     15.5    2.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'RA_CAV_R2_P3' XYZ=    6.3     15.5    4.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'RA_CAV_R2_P4' XYZ=    6.3     15.5    8.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'RA_CAV_R2_P5' XYZ=    6.3     15.5    12.1    QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'RA_CAV_R2_P6' XYZ=    6.3     15.5    16.1    QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
                                        
//RAposed facade                                        
&DEVC   ID=  'RA_FAC_0_P1'  XYZ=    6.15    9.5     1.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'RA_FAC_0_P2'  XYZ=    6.15    9.5     2.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'RA_FAC_0_P3'  XYZ=    6.15    9.5     4.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'RA_FAC_0_P4'  XYZ=    6.15    9.5     8.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'RA_FAC_0_P5'  XYZ=    6.15    9.5     12.1    QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'RA_FAC_0_P6'  XYZ=    6.15    9.5     16.1    QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
                                        
/Venstre side                                       
&DEVC   ID=  'RA_FAC_L1_P1' XYZ=    6.15    6.5     1.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'RA_FAC_L1_P2' XYZ=    6.15    6.5     2.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'RA_FAC_L1_P3' XYZ=    6.15    6.5     4.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'RA_FAC_L1_P4' XYZ=    6.15    6.5     8.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'RA_FAC_L1_P5' XYZ=    6.15    6.5     12.1    QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'RA_FAC_L1_P6' XYZ=    6.15    6.5     16.1    QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
                                        
&DEVC   ID=  'RA_FAC_L2_P1' XYZ=    6.15    3.5     1.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'RA_FAC_L2_P2' XYZ=    6.15    3.5     2.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'RA_FAC_L2_P3' XYZ=    6.15    3.5     4.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'RA_FAC_L2_P4' XYZ=    6.15    3.5     8.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'RA_FAC_L2_P5' XYZ=    6.15    3.5     12.1    QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'RA_FAC_L2_P6' XYZ=    6.15    3.5     16.1    QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
==PAGE:167==
                                        
/Højre side                                     
&DEVC   ID=  'RA_FAC_R1_P1' XYZ=    6.15    12.5    1.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'RA_FAC_R1_P2' XYZ=    6.15    12.5    2.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'RA_FAC_R1_P3' XYZ=    6.15    12.5    4.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'RA_FAC_R1_P4' XYZ=    6.15    12.5    8.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'RA_FAC_R1_P5' XYZ=    6.15    12.5    12.1    QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'RA_FAC_R1_P6' XYZ=    6.15    12.5    16.1    QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
                                        
&DEVC   ID=  'RA_FAC_R2_P1' XYZ=    6.15    15.5    1.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'RA_FAC_R2_P2' XYZ=    6.15    15.5    2.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'RA_FAC_R2_P3' XYZ=    6.15    15.5    4.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'RA_FAC_R2_P4' XYZ=    6.15    15.5    8.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'RA_FAC_R2_P5' XYZ=    6.15    15.5    12.1    QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'RA_FAC_R2_P6' XYZ=    6.15    15.5    16.1    QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
                                        
// Surface device                                                                       
&DEVC   ID=  'NET HEAT FLUX_WALL'         XB=  1.1     1.15    2       17      0.2     17   QUANTITY=    'NET HEAT FLUX'          
&DEVC   ID=  'NET HEAT FLUX_WALLPIECE'    XB=  1.1     1.15    9.2     9.8     0.2     0.8  QUANTITY=    'NET HEAT FLUX'          
// DUMP files                           
&DUMP  DT_SLCF=2  DT_DEVC=2       DT_HRR=2    DT_CTRL=2   DT_RESTART=450  DT_MASS=2 / 
 
&TAIL /
==PAGE:168==
// This fds simulation/model is made for the master thesis: Thermal Radiation Between Wooden Facades in High-Rise Buildings
// Simulating Scenario Sc3.1, with a wastepaper basket at the bottom of the facade. 10 m distance between facades. 
// fds model made by Karoline Sandfeld-Nielsen (s173793)
// fds version: FDS6.7.9 
//-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
//---- MAIN
//-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
&HEAD 
    CHID='FACADE10' 
    TITLE='Brandspredning mellem to facader' /
&TIME           
    T_BEGIN  =  0
    T_END    =  3600 /     
&MISC           
    RESTART  =  .FALSE.
    TMPA     =  9.1
    BNDF_DEFAULT   =  .FALSE.
    RADIATION      =  .TRUE.
    SURF_DEFAULT   =   'FRAME' /
&RADI           
    TIME_STEP_INCREMENT  =  12
    NUMBER_RADIATION_ANGLES  =  100
    ANGLE_INCREMENT  =  20
/
//-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
//---- MESH Total Cells 2052050                                                                                 
//-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
// Facader                                                                                          
&MESH   IJK=    6   80  160 XB= 11      11.3    2       6       0       8   MPI_PROCESS=    0   /   MESH #  1   "Rad_facade"      
&MESH   IJK=    5   75  85  XB= 0       1       2       17      0       17  MPI_PROCESS=    0   /   MESH #  2   "bag_exp"         
&MESH   IJK=    10  120 80  XB= 10.8    11.3    6       12      0       4   MPI_PROCESS=    1   /   MESH #  3   "Ved brand"       
&MESH   IJK=    12  10  180 XB= 0       1.2     1       2       0       18  MPI_PROCESS=    1   /   MESH #  4   "Små luft stykker
&MESH   IJK=    10  120 80  XB= 10.8    11.3    6       12      4       8   MPI_PROCESS=    2   /   MESH #  5   "Ved brand"       
&MESH   IJK=    12  10  180 XB= 0       1.2     17      18      0       18  MPI_PROCESS=    2   /   MESH #  6   "Små luft stykker
&MESH   IJK=    13  170 10  XB= 11      12.3    1       18      17      18  MPI_PROCESS=    3   /   MESH #  7   "Luft over"       
&MESH   IJK=    6   100 160 XB= 11      11.3    12      17      0       8   MPI_PROCESS=    3   /   MESH #  8   "Rad_facade"      
&MESH   IJK=    5   75  85  XB= 11.3    12.3    2       17      0       17  MPI_PROCESS=    4   /   MESH #  9   "bag_rad"         
&MESH   IJK=    6   80  160 XB= 11      11.3    2       6       8       16  MPI_PROCESS=    4   /   MESH #  10  "Rad_facade"      
&MESH   IJK=    6   120 160 XB= 11      11.3    6       12      8       16  MPI_PROCESS=    5   /   MESH #  11  "Rad_facade"      
&MESH   IJK=    6   100 160 XB= 11      11.3    12      17      8       16  MPI_PROCESS=    6   /   MESH #  12  "Rad_facade"      
&MESH   IJK=    6   120 20  XB= 11      11.3    6       12      16      17  MPI_PROCESS=    6   /   MESH #  13  "Rad_facade"      
&MESH   IJK=    6   80  20  XB= 11      11.3    2       6       16      17  MPI_PROCESS=    7   /   MESH #  14  "Rad_facade"      
&MESH   IJK=    6   100 20  XB= 11      11.3    12      17      16      17  MPI_PROCESS=    7   /   MESH #  15  "Rad_facade"      
&MESH   IJK=    4   120 100 XB= 1       1.2     6       12      12      17  MPI_PROCESS=    7   /   MESH #  16  "Exp_facade"      
&MESH   IJK=    4   100 100 XB= 1       1.2     12      17      12      17  MPI_PROCESS=    7   /   MESH #  17  "Exp_facade"      
&MESH   IJK=    6   85  5   XB= 0       1.2     1       18      17      18  MPI_PROCESS=    7   /   MESH #  18  "Luft over"       
&MESH   IJK=    4   80  240 XB= 1       1.2     2       6       0       12  MPI_PROCESS=    8   /   MESH #  19  "Exp_facade"      
&MESH   IJK=    49  25  25  XB= 1.2     11      1       6       13      18  MPI_PROCESS=    8   /   MESH #  20  "Luft mellem facad
&MESH   IJK=    4   120 240 XB= 1       1.2     6       12      0       12  MPI_PROCESS=    9   /   MESH #  21  "Exp_facade"      
&MESH   IJK=    4   100 240 XB= 1       1.2     12      17      0       12  MPI_PROCESS=    10  /   MESH #  22  "Exp_facade"      
&MESH   IJK=    13  10  180 XB= 11      12.3    17      18      0       18  MPI_PROCESS=    10  /   MESH #  23  "Små luft stykker
&MESH   IJK=    4   80  100 XB= 1       1.2     2       6       12      17  MPI_PROCESS=    11  /   MESH #  24  "Exp_facade"      
&MESH   IJK=    49  30  50  XB= 1.2     11      6       12      8       18  MPI_PROCESS=    11  /   MESH #  25  "Luft mellem facad
&MESH   IJK=    96  60  20  XB= 1.2     10.8    6       12      0       2   MPI_PROCESS=    12  /   MESH #  26  "Luft mellem facad
&MESH   IJK=    96  60  20  XB= 1.2     10.8    6       12      2       4   MPI_PROCESS=    13  /   MESH #  27  "Luft mellem facad
&MESH   IJK=    96  60  20  XB= 1.2     10.8    6       12      4       6   MPI_PROCESS=    14  /   MESH #  28  "Luft mellem facad
&MESH   IJK=    96  60  20  XB= 1.2     10.8    6       12      6       8   MPI_PROCESS=    15  /   MESH #  29  "Luft mellem facad
&MESH   IJK=    49  25  65  XB= 1.2     11      1       6       0       13  MPI_PROCESS=    16  /   MESH #  30  "Luft mellem facad
&MESH   IJK=    49  30  25  XB= 1.2     11      12      18      13      18  MPI_PROCESS=    16  /   MESH #  31  "Luft mellem facad
&MESH   IJK=    49  30  65  XB= 1.2     11      12      18      0       13  MPI_PROCESS=    17  /   MESH #  32  "Luft mellem facad
&MESH   IJK=    13  10  180 XB= 11      12.3    1       2       0       18  MPI_PROCESS=    17  /   MESH #  33  "Små luft stykker
//-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
//---- REACTIONS
//-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
&REAC ID = 'METHANOL'   
 C = 1  
 H = 4  
 O = 1  
 SOOT_YIELD = 0.001 
HEAT_OF_COMBUSTION = 19830  
 IDEAL = .FALSE. /  
//-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
//---- Methanol fire, which is stopped after 20 minutes (1200 seconds)                       
//-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
/   Q_max   100 kW
&SURF   ID='FIRE' HRRPUA=555.555   RAMP_Q='fireramp'  COLOR=   'RED'  /   
&RAMP   ID='fireramp', T=0.0, F=0.0 /
==PAGE:169==
&RAMP   ID='fireramp', T=86,  F=1.0 /
&RAMP   ID='fireramp', T=1140, F=1.0 /
&RAMP   ID='fireramp', T=1200, F=0.0 /
&OBST   XB= 11    11.3    9.2     9.8     0.0     0.1   SURF_IDS=    'FIRE','INERT','INERT'     /
                     
//-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
//---- MATERIALS
//-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
// MATERIALS
&MATL ID=
'GYPSUM'
CONDUCTIVITY=
0.48
SPECIFIC_HEAT=
0.84
DENSITY=
1440
/
&SPEC ID='WOOD' , FORMULA='CH1.7O0.83' , MW=57.6 , DENSITY_SOLID=420 ,  SPECIFIC_HEAT = 2.3, CONDUCTIVITY= 0.12 /
&MATL ID=
'FRAME'
 FYI=
'It is pine wood'
 CONDUCTIVITY=
0.12
 SPECIFIC_HEAT = 2.3
 DENSITY=
449 /
&MATL ID=
'BATTENS'
 FYI=
'It is pine wood'
 CONDUCTIVITY=   0.12    
 SPECIFIC_HEAT = 2.3    
 DENSITY=   624 
 SPEC_ID= 'WOOD'
 HEAT_OF_COMBUSTION= 23518
 /
&MATL ID=
'CLAD'
 FYI=
'It is pine wood'
 CONDUCTIVITY=   0.12    
 SPECIFIC_HEAT = 2.3    
 DENSITY=   417.460 
 SPEC_ID= 'WOOD'
 HEAT_OF_COMBUSTION= 21919 /
&MATL ID=
'STEEL'
CONDUCTIVITY=
45
SPECIFIC_HEAT=
0.48
DENSITY=
7820
/
//-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
//---- SURFACES 
//-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
&SURF ID=
'GYPSUM'
 MATL_ID(1,1) = 'GYPSUM'
COLOR = 'KHAKI'
 THICKNESS(1)=
0.015
 TRANSPARENCY=
1
/
&SURF ID=
'FRAME'
 MATL_ID(1,1)=
'FRAME'
 COLOR= 'MELON'
 THICKNESS= 0.045
 TRANSPARENCY=
1
/
&SURF ID=
'BATTENS'
 MATL_ID(1,1)=
'BATTENS'
 COLOR= 'ORANGE'
 THICKNESS= 0.045
 TRANSPARENCY=
1
 HRRPUA = 150.
 IGNITION_TEMPERATURE = 375.
 BURN_AWAY=.TRUE.
 BACKING='VOID' /
&SURF ID=
'CLAD'
 MATL_ID(1,1)=
'CLAD'
 COLOR= 'BROWN'
 THICKNESS= 0.021
 TRANSPARENCY=
1
 HRRPUA = 150.
 IGNITION_TEMPERATURE = 375.
 BURN_AWAY=.TRUE.
 BACKING='VOID' /
==PAGE:170==
&SURF ID=
'STEEL'
 MATL_ID(1,1) = 'STEEL'
 COLOR= 'SILVER'
 THICKNESS= 0.02
 TRANSPARENCY=
1
/
//-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
//---- VENTS & OPENINGS: Mesh boundaries and exhaust in hood
//-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
// Surfaces of exterior mesh boundaries                     
&VENT   MB=  'YMAX' SURF_ID=     'OPEN' /   
&VENT   MB=  'YMIN' SURF_ID=     'OPEN' /   
/&VENT   MB=  'XMAX' SURF_ID=     'OPEN' /   
/&VENT   MB=  'XMIN' SURF_ID=     'OPEN' /   
/&VENT   MB=  'ZMIN' SURF_ID=     'OPEN' /   
&VENT   MB=  'ZMAX' SURF_ID=     'OPEN' /   
Prøve                                                   
// Exposed wall                                                     
&OBST   ID= 'Gypsym wall1'  XB= 0       1       2       17      0       17      SURF_ID=    'GYPSUM'    /
&OBST   ID= 'EV_batten1'    XB= 1       1.05    2.6     2.65    0.05    16.4    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EV_batten2'    XB= 1       1.05    3.2     3.25    0.05    16.4    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EV_batten3'    XB= 1       1.05    3.8     3.85    0.05    16.4    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EV_batten4'    XB= 1       1.05    4.4     4.45    0.05    16.4    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EV_batten5'    XB= 1       1.05    5       5.05    0.05    16.4    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EV_batten6'    XB= 1       1.05    5.6     5.65    0.05    16.4    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EV_batten7'    XB= 1       1.05    6.2     6.25    0.05    16.4    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EV_batten8'    XB= 1       1.05    6.8     6.85    0.05    16.4    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EV_batten9'    XB= 1       1.05    7.4     7.45    0.05    16.4    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EV_batten10'   XB= 1       1.05    8       8.05    0.05    16.4    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EV_batten11'   XB= 1       1.05    8.6     8.65    0.05    16.4    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EV_batten12'   XB= 1       1.05    9.2     9.25    0.05    16.4    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EV_batten13'   XB= 1       1.05    9.8     9.85    0.05    16.4    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EV_batten14'   XB= 1       1.05    10.4    10.45   0.05    16.4    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EV_batten15'   XB= 1       1.05    11      11.05   0.05    16.4    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EV_batten16'   XB= 1       1.05    11.6    11.65   0.05    16.4    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EV_batten17'   XB= 1       1.05    12.2    12.25   0.05    16.4    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EV_batten18'   XB= 1       1.05    12.8    12.85   0.05    16.4    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EV_batten19'   XB= 1       1.05    13.4    13.45   0.05    16.4    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EV_batten20'   XB= 1       1.05    14      14.05   0.05    16.4    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EV_batten21'   XB= 1       1.05    14.6    14.65   0.05    16.4    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EV_batten22'   XB= 1       1.05    15.2    15.25   0.05    16.4    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EV_batten23'   XB= 1       1.05    15.8    15.85   0.05    16.4    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EV_batten24'   XB= 1       1.05    16.4    16.45   0.05    16.4    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
                                                
                                                
&OBST   ID= 'EH_batten1'    XB= 1.05    1.1     2.4     16.6    0.4     0.45    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EH_batten2'    XB= 1.05    1.1     2.4     16.6    1       1.05    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EH_batten3'    XB= 1.05    1.1     2.4     16.6    1.6     1.65    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EH_batten4'    XB= 1.05    1.1     2.4     16.6    2.2     2.25    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EH_batten5'    XB= 1.05    1.1     2.4     16.6    2.8     2.85    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EH_batten6'    XB= 1.05    1.1     2.4     16.6    3.4     3.45    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EH_batten7'    XB= 1.05    1.1     2.4     16.6    4       4.05    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EH_batten8'    XB= 1.05    1.1     2.4     16.6    4.6     4.65    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EH_batten9'    XB= 1.05    1.1     2.4     16.6    5.2     5.25    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EH_batten10'   XB= 1.05    1.1     2.4     16.6    5.8     5.85    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EH_batten11'   XB= 1.05    1.1     2.4     16.6    6.4     6.45    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EH_batten12'   XB= 1.05    1.1     2.4     16.6    7       7.05    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EH_batten13'   XB= 1.05    1.1     2.4     16.6    7.6     7.65    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EH_batten14'   XB= 1.05    1.1     2.4     16.6    8.2     8.25    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EH_batten15'   XB= 1.05    1.1     2.4     16.6    8.8     8.85    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EH_batten16'   XB= 1.05    1.1     2.4     16.6    9.4     9.45    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EH_batten17'   XB= 1.05    1.1     2.4     16.6    10      10.05   SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EH_batten18'   XB= 1.05    1.1     2.4     16.6    10.6    10.65   SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EH_batten19'   XB= 1.05    1.1     2.4     16.6    11.2    11.25   SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EH_batten20'   XB= 1.05    1.1     2.4     16.6    11.8    11.85   SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EH_batten21'   XB= 1.05    1.1     2.4     16.6    12.4    12.45   SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EH_batten22'   XB= 1.05    1.1     2.4     16.6    13      13.05   SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EH_batten23'   XB= 1.05    1.1     2.4     16.6    13.6    13.65   SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EH_batten24'   XB= 1.05    1.1     2.4     16.6    14.2    14.25   SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EH_batten25'   XB= 1.05    1.1     2.4     16.6    14.8    14.85   SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EH_batten26'   XB= 1.05    1.1     2.4     16.6    15.4    15.45   SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EH_batten27'   XB= 1.05    1.1     2.4     16.6    16      16.05   SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
                                                
&OBST   ID= 'CLADDING_EXP'  XB= 1.1     1.15    2       17      0.2     17      SURF_ID=    'CLAD'      /
                                                
//  Radiation wall                                          
&OBST   ID= 'Gypsum wall 2' XB= 11.3    12.3    2       17      0       17      SURF_ID=    'GYPSUM'    /
                                                
&OBST   ID= 'RV_batten1'    XB= 11.25   11.3    2.6     2.65    0.05    16.4    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'RV_batten2'    XB= 11.25   11.3    3.2     3.25    0.05    16.4    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'RV_batten3'    XB= 11.25   11.3    3.8     3.85    0.05    16.4    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
==PAGE:171==
&OBST   ID= 'RV_batten4'    XB= 11.25   11.3    4.4     4.45    0.05    16.4    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'RV_batten5'    XB= 11.25   11.3    5       5.05    0.05    16.4    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'RV_batten6'    XB= 11.25   11.3    5.6     5.65    0.05    16.4    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'RV_batten7'    XB= 11.25   11.3    6.2     6.25    0.05    16.4    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'RV_batten8'    XB= 11.25   11.3    6.8     6.85    0.05    16.4    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'RV_batten9'    XB= 11.25   11.3    7.4     7.45    0.05    16.4    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'RV_batten10'   XB= 11.25   11.3    8       8.05    0.05    16.4    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'RV_batten11'   XB= 11.25   11.3    8.6     8.65    0.05    16.4    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'RV_batten12'   XB= 11.25   11.3    9.2     9.25    0.05    16.4    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'RV_batten13'   XB= 11.25   11.3    9.8     9.85    0.05    16.4    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'RV_batten14'   XB= 11.25   11.3    10.4    10.45   0.05    16.4    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'RV_batten15'   XB= 11.25   11.3    11      11.05   0.05    16.4    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'RV_batten16'   XB= 11.25   11.3    11.6    11.65   0.05    16.4    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'RV_batten17'   XB= 11.25   11.3    12.2    12.25   0.05    16.4    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'RV_batten18'   XB= 11.25   11.3    12.8    12.85   0.05    16.4    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'RV_batten19'   XB= 11.25   11.3    13.4    13.45   0.05    16.4    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'RV_batten20'   XB= 11.25   11.3    14      14.05   0.05    16.4    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'RV_batten21'   XB= 11.25   11.3    14.6    14.65   0.05    16.4    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'RV_batten22'   XB= 11.25   11.3    15.2    15.25   0.05    16.4    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'RV_batten23'   XB= 11.25   11.3    15.8    15.85   0.05    16.4    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'RV_batten24'   XB= 11.25   11.3    16.4    16.45   0.05    16.4    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
                                                
                                                
&OBST   ID= 'RH_batten1'    XB= 11.2    11.25   2.4     16.6    0.4     0.45    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'RH_batten2'    XB= 11.2    11.25   2.4     16.6    1       1.05    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'RH_batten3'    XB= 11.2    11.25   2.4     16.6    1.6     1.65    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'RH_batten4'    XB= 11.2    11.25   2.4     16.6    2.2     2.25    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'RH_batten5'    XB= 11.2    11.25   2.4     16.6    2.8     2.85    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'RH_batten6'    XB= 11.2    11.25   2.4     16.6    3.4     3.45    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'RH_batten7'    XB= 11.2    11.25   2.4     16.6    4       4.05    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'RH_batten8'    XB= 11.2    11.25   2.4     16.6    4.6     4.65    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'RH_batten9'    XB= 11.2    11.25   2.4     16.6    5.2     5.25    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'RH_batten10'   XB= 11.2    11.25   2.4     16.6    5.8     5.85    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'RH_batten11'   XB= 11.2    11.25   2.4     16.6    6.4     6.45    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'RH_batten12'   XB= 11.2    11.25   2.4     16.6    7       7.05    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'RH_batten13'   XB= 11.2    11.25   2.4     16.6    7.6     7.65    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'RH_batten14'   XB= 11.2    11.25   2.4     16.6    8.2     8.25    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'RH_batten15'   XB= 11.2    11.25   2.4     16.6    8.8     8.85    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'RH_batten16'   XB= 11.2    11.25   2.4     16.6    9.4     9.45    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'RH_batten17'   XB= 11.2    11.25   2.4     16.6    10      10.05   SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'RH_batten18'   XB= 11.2    11.25   2.4     16.6    10.6    10.65   SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'RH_batten19'   XB= 11.2    11.25   2.4     16.6    11.2    11.25   SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'RH_batten20'   XB= 11.2    11.25   2.4     16.6    11.8    11.85   SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'RH_batten21'   XB= 11.2    11.25   2.4     16.6    12.4    12.45   SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'RH_batten22'   XB= 11.2    11.25   2.4     16.6    13      13.05   SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'RH_batten23'   XB= 11.2    11.25   2.4     16.6    13.6    13.65   SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'RH_batten24'   XB= 11.2    11.25   2.4     16.6    14.2    14.25   SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'RH_batten25'   XB= 11.2    11.25   2.4     16.6    14.8    14.85   SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'RH_batten26'   XB= 11.2    11.25   2.4     16.6    15.4    15.45   SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'RH_batten27'   XB= 11.2    11.25   2.4     16.6    16      16.05   SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
                                                
&OBST   ID= 'CLADDING_RAD'  XB= 11.15   11.2    2       17      0.2     17      SURF_ID=    'CLAD'      /
//-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
//---- OUTPUT: Slice files, Boundary files, Point devices and Surface devices 
//-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
// Slice files 
// Temperature 
&SLCF   ID=  'FIRE_C_X_TEMP'        PBX=    11.2    QUANTITY=    'TEMPERATURE'  /        
&SLCF   ID=  'FIRE_C_Y_TEMP'        PBY=    9.5     QUANTITY=    'TEMPERATURE'  /           
&SLCF   ID=  'Y_TEMP_H3MFIRE'       PBY=    6.5     QUANTITY=    'TEMPERATURE'  /           
&SLCF   ID=  'Y_TEMP_V3MFIRE'       PBY=    12.5    QUANTITY=    'TEMPERATURE'  /           
&SLCF   ID=  'Z_2M_ABOVE_FIRE'      PBZ=    2.1     QUANTITY=    'TEMPERATURE'  /           
&SLCF   ID=  'X_MIDT_FACADE_TEMP'   PBX=    6.2     QUANTITY=    'TEMPERATURE'  /           
&SLCF   ID=  'X_EXP_FACADE_TEMP'    PBX=    1.2     QUANTITY=    'TEMPERATURE'  /           
&SLCF   ID=  'X_RAD_FACADE_TEMP'    PBX=    11.1    QUANTITY=    'TEMPERATURE'  /           
                                        
&SLCF   ID=  'FIRE_C_X_VEL'         PBX=    11.2    QUANTITY=    'VELOCITY' VECTOR= .TRUE.  /   
&SLCF   ID=  'FIRE_C_Y_VEL'         PBY=    9.5     QUANTITY=    'VELOCITY' VECTOR= .TRUE.  /   
                                        
//EXPOSED WALL THERMOCOUPLES                                        
                                        
//Exposed facade                                        
&DEVC   ID=  'EX_FAC_0_P1'  XYZ=    1.15    9.5     1.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'EX_FAC_0_P2'  XYZ=    1.15    9.5     2.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'EX_FAC_0_P3'  XYZ=    1.15    9.5     4.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'EX_FAC_0_P4'  XYZ=    1.15    9.5     8.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'EX_FAC_0_P5'  XYZ=    1.15    9.5     12.1    QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'EX_FAC_0_P6'  XYZ=    1.15    9.5     16.1    QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
                                        
/Venstre side                                       
&DEVC   ID=  'EX_FAC_L1_P1' XYZ=    1.15    6.5     1.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'EX_FAC_L1_P2' XYZ=    1.15    6.5     2.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'EX_FAC_L1_P3' XYZ=    1.15    6.5     4.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'EX_FAC_L1_P4' XYZ=    1.15    6.5     8.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'EX_FAC_L1_P5' XYZ=    1.15    6.5     12.1    QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
==PAGE:172==
&DEVC   ID=  'EX_FAC_L1_P6' XYZ=    1.15    6.5     16.1    QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
                                        
&DEVC   ID=  'EX_FAC_L2_P1' XYZ=    1.15    3.5     1.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'EX_FAC_L2_P2' XYZ=    1.15    3.5     2.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'EX_FAC_L2_P3' XYZ=    1.15    3.5     4.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'EX_FAC_L2_P4' XYZ=    1.15    3.5     8.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'EX_FAC_L2_P5' XYZ=    1.15    3.5     12.1    QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'EX_FAC_L2_P6' XYZ=    1.15    3.5     16.1    QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
                                        
/Højre side                                     
&DEVC   ID=  'EX_FAC_R1_P1' XYZ=    1.15    12.5    1.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'EX_FAC_R1_P2' XYZ=    1.15    12.5    2.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'EX_FAC_R1_P3' XYZ=    1.15    12.5    4.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'EX_FAC_R1_P4' XYZ=    1.15    12.5    8.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'EX_FAC_R1_P5' XYZ=    1.15    12.5    12.1    QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'EX_FAC_R1_P6' XYZ=    1.15    12.5    16.1    QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
                                        
&DEVC   ID=  'EX_FAC_R2_P1' XYZ=    1.15    15.5    1.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'EX_FAC_R2_P2' XYZ=    1.15    15.5    2.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'EX_FAC_R2_P3' XYZ=    1.15    15.5    4.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'EX_FAC_R2_P4' XYZ=    1.15    15.5    8.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'EX_FAC_R2_P5' XYZ=    1.15    15.5    12.1    QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'EX_FAC_R2_P6' XYZ=    1.15    15.5    16.1    QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
                                        
                                        
//RADIATION WALL THERMOCOUPLES                                      
//Radiating cavity                                      
&DEVC   ID=  'RA_CAV_0_P1'  XYZ=    11.3    9.5     1.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'RA_CAV_0_P2'  XYZ=    11.3    9.5     2.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'RA_CAV_0_P3'  XYZ=    11.3    9.5     4.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'RA_CAV_0_P4'  XYZ=    11.3    9.5     8.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'RA_CAV_0_P5'  XYZ=    11.3    9.5     12.1    QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'RA_CAV_0_P6'  XYZ=    11.3    9.5     16.1    QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
                                        
/Venstre side                                       
&DEVC   ID=  'RA_CAV_L1_P1' XYZ=    11.3    6.5     1.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'RA_CAV_L1_P2' XYZ=    11.3    6.5     2.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'RA_CAV_L1_P3' XYZ=    11.3    6.5     4.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'RA_CAV_L1_P4' XYZ=    11.3    6.5     8.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'RA_CAV_L1_P5' XYZ=    11.3    6.5     12.1    QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'RA_CAV_L1_P6' XYZ=    11.3    6.5     16.1    QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
                                        
&DEVC   ID=  'RA_CAV_L2_P1' XYZ=    11.3    3.5     1.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'RA_CAV_L2_P2' XYZ=    11.3    3.5     2.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'RA_CAV_L2_P3' XYZ=    11.3    3.5     4.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'RA_CAV_L2_P4' XYZ=    11.3    3.5     8.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'RA_CAV_L2_P5' XYZ=    11.3    3.5     12.1    QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'RA_CAV_L2_P6' XYZ=    11.3    3.5     16.1    QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
                                        
/Højre side                                     
&DEVC   ID=  'RA_CAV_R1_P1' XYZ=    11.3    12.5    1.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'RA_CAV_R1_P2' XYZ=    11.3    12.5    2.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'RA_CAV_R1_P3' XYZ=    11.3    12.5    4.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'RA_CAV_R1_P4' XYZ=    11.3    12.5    8.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'RA_CAV_R1_P5' XYZ=    11.3    12.5    12.1    QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'RA_CAV_R1_P6' XYZ=    11.3    12.5    16.1    QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
                                        
&DEVC   ID=  'RA_CAV_R2_P1' XYZ=    11.3    15.5    1.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'RA_CAV_R2_P2' XYZ=    11.3    15.5    2.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'RA_CAV_R2_P3' XYZ=    11.3    15.5    4.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'RA_CAV_R2_P4' XYZ=    11.3    15.5    8.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'RA_CAV_R2_P5' XYZ=    11.3    15.5    12.1    QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'RA_CAV_R2_P6' XYZ=    11.3    15.5    16.1    QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
                                        
//RAposed facade                                        
&DEVC   ID=  'RA_FAC_0_P1'  XYZ=    11.15   9.5     1.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'RA_FAC_0_P2'  XYZ=    11.15   9.5     2.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'RA_FAC_0_P3'  XYZ=    11.15   9.5     4.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'RA_FAC_0_P4'  XYZ=    11.15   9.5     8.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'RA_FAC_0_P5'  XYZ=    11.15   9.5     12.1    QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'RA_FAC_0_P6'  XYZ=    11.15   9.5     16.1    QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
                                        
/Venstre side                                       
&DEVC   ID=  'RA_FAC_L1_P1' XYZ=    11.15   6.5     1.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'RA_FAC_L1_P2' XYZ=    11.15   6.5     2.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'RA_FAC_L1_P3' XYZ=    11.15   6.5     4.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'RA_FAC_L1_P4' XYZ=    11.15   6.5     8.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'RA_FAC_L1_P5' XYZ=    11.15   6.5     12.1    QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'RA_FAC_L1_P6' XYZ=    11.15   6.5     16.1    QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
                                        
&DEVC   ID=  'RA_FAC_L2_P1' XYZ=    11.15   3.5     1.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'RA_FAC_L2_P2' XYZ=    11.15   3.5     2.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'RA_FAC_L2_P3' XYZ=    11.15   3.5     4.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'RA_FAC_L2_P4' XYZ=    11.15   3.5     8.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'RA_FAC_L2_P5' XYZ=    11.15   3.5     12.1    QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'RA_FAC_L2_P6' XYZ=    11.15   3.5     16.1    QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
                                        
==PAGE:173==
/Højre side                                     
&DEVC   ID=  'RA_FAC_R1_P1' XYZ=    11.15   12.5    1.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'RA_FAC_R1_P2' XYZ=    11.15   12.5    2.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'RA_FAC_R1_P3' XYZ=    11.15   12.5    4.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'RA_FAC_R1_P4' XYZ=    11.15   12.5    8.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'RA_FAC_R1_P5' XYZ=    11.15   12.5    12.1    QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'RA_FAC_R1_P6' XYZ=    11.15   12.5    16.1    QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
                                        
&DEVC   ID=  'RA_FAC_R2_P1' XYZ=    11.15   15.5    1.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'RA_FAC_R2_P2' XYZ=    11.15   15.5    2.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'RA_FAC_R2_P3' XYZ=    11.15   15.5    4.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'RA_FAC_R2_P4' XYZ=    11.15   15.5    8.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'RA_FAC_R2_P5' XYZ=    11.15   15.5    12.1    QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'RA_FAC_R2_P6' XYZ=    11.15   15.5    16.1    QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
                                        
// Surface device                                                                       
&DEVC   ID=  'NET HEAT FLUX_WALL'         XB=  1.1     1.15    2       17      0.2     17   QUANTITY=    'NET HEAT FLUX'          
&DEVC   ID=  'NET HEAT FLUX_WALLPIECE'    XB=  1.1     1.15    9.2     9.8     0.2     0.8  QUANTITY=    'NET HEAT FLUX'          
// DUMP files                           
&DUMP  DT_SLCF=2  DT_DEVC=2       DT_HRR=2    DT_CTRL=2   DT_RESTART=450  DT_MASS=2 / 
 
 
&TAIL /
==PAGE:174==
// This fds simulation/model is made for the master thesis: Thermal Radiation Between Wooden Facades in High-Rise Buildings
// Simulating Scenario Sc2.1, with a wastepaper basket at the bottom of the facade. 7.5 m distance between facades. 
// fds model made by Karoline Sandfeld-Nielsen (s173793)
// fds version: FDS6.7.9 
//-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
//---- MAIN
//-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
&HEAD 
    CHID='FACADE75' 
    TITLE='Brandspredning mellem to facader' /
&TIME           
    T_BEGIN  =  0
    T_END    =  3600 /        
&MISC           
    RESTART  =  .FALSE.
    TMPA     =  9.1
    BNDF_DEFAULT   =  .FALSE.
    RADIATION      =  .TRUE.
    SURF_DEFAULT   =   'FRAME' /
&RADI           
    TIME_STEP_INCREMENT  =  12
    NUMBER_RADIATION_ANGLES  =  100
    ANGLE_INCREMENT  =  20
/
                                                                                    
//-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
//---- MESH Total Cells 1964300                                                                                     
//-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
// Facader                                                                                              
&MESH   IJK=    6   80  160 XB= 8.5     8.8     2       6       0       8   MPI_PROCESS=    0   /   MESH #  1   "Rad_facade"      
&MESH   IJK=    4   80  100 XB= 1       1.2     2       6       12      17  MPI_PROCESS=    0   /   MESH #  2   "Exp_facade"      
&MESH   IJK=    6   120 40  XB= 8.5     8.8     6       12      8       10  MPI_PROCESS=    1   /   MESH #  3   "Rad_facade"      
&MESH   IJK=    10  120 80  XB= 8.3     8.8     6       12      0       4   MPI_PROCESS=    1   /   MESH #  4   "Ved brand"       
&MESH   IJK=    10  120 80  XB= 8.3     8.8     6       12      4       8   MPI_PROCESS=    2   /   MESH #  5   "Ved brand"       
&MESH   IJK=    13  10  180 XB= 8.5     9.8     1       2       0       18  MPI_PROCESS=    2   /   MESH #  6   "Små luft stykker
&MESH   IJK=    6   100 160 XB= 8.5     8.8     12      17      0       8   MPI_PROCESS=    3   /   MESH #  7   "Rad_facade"      
&MESH   IJK=    13  10  180 XB= 8.5     9.8     17      18      0       18  MPI_PROCESS=    3   /   MESH #  8   "Små luft stykker
&MESH   IJK=    6   80  40  XB= 8.5     8.8     2       6       8       10  MPI_PROCESS=    4   /   MESH #  9   "Rad_facade"      
&MESH   IJK=    34  30  90  XB= 1.2     8       12      18      0       18  MPI_PROCESS=    4   /   MESH #  10  "Luft mellem facad
&MESH   IJK=    6   100 40  XB= 8.5     8.8     12      17      8       10  MPI_PROCESS=    5   /   MESH #  11  "Rad_facade"      
&MESH   IJK=    12  10  180 XB= 0       1.2     1       2       0       18  MPI_PROCESS=    5   /   MESH #  12  "Små luft stykker
&MESH   IJK=    12  10  180 XB= 0       1.2     17      18      0       18  MPI_PROCESS=    5   /   MESH #  13  "Små luft stykker
&MESH   IJK=    13  170 10  XB= 8.5     9.8     1       18      17      18  MPI_PROCESS=    5   /   MESH #  14  "Luft over"       
&MESH   IJK=    6   85  5   XB= 0       1.2     1       18      17      18  MPI_PROCESS=    5   /   MESH #  15  "Luft over"       
&MESH   IJK=    5   60  100 XB= 8       8.5     6       12      8       18  MPI_PROCESS=    5   /   MESH #  16  "Luft mellem facad
&MESH   IJK=    6   80  140 XB= 8.5     8.8     2       6       10      17  MPI_PROCESS=    6   /   MESH #  17  "Rad_facade"      
&MESH   IJK=    4   120 100 XB= 1       1.2     6       12      12      17  MPI_PROCESS=    6   /   MESH #  18  "Exp_facade"      
&MESH   IJK=    6   120 140 XB= 8.5     8.8     6       12      10      17  MPI_PROCESS=    7   /   MESH #  19  "Rad_facade"      
&MESH   IJK=    6   100 140 XB= 8.5     8.8     12      17      10      17  MPI_PROCESS=    8   /   MESH #  20  "Rad_facade"      
&MESH   IJK=    5   75  85  XB= 0       1       2       17      0       17  MPI_PROCESS=    8   /   MESH #  21  "bag_exp"         
&MESH   IJK=    4   80  240 XB= 1       1.2     2       6       0       12  MPI_PROCESS=    9   /   MESH #  22  "Exp_facade"      
&MESH   IJK=    5   50  180 XB= 8       8.5     1       6       0       18  MPI_PROCESS=    9   /   MESH #  23  "Luft mellem facad
&MESH   IJK=    4   120 240 XB= 1       1.2     6       12      0       12  MPI_PROCESS=    10  /   MESH #  24  "Exp_facade"      
&MESH   IJK=    4   100 240 XB= 1       1.2     12      17      0       12  MPI_PROCESS=    11  /   MESH #  25  "Exp_facade"      
&MESH   IJK=    4   100 100 XB= 1       1.2     12      17      12      17  MPI_PROCESS=    12  /   MESH #  26  "Exp_facade"      
&MESH   IJK=    5   75  85  XB= 8.8     9.8     2       17      0       17  MPI_PROCESS=    12  /   MESH #  28  "bag_rad"         
&MESH   IJK=    34  25  90  XB= 1.2     8       1       6       0       18  MPI_PROCESS=    13  /   MESH #  27  "Luft mellem facad
&MESH   IJK=    71  60  20  XB= 1.2     8.3     6       12      0       2   MPI_PROCESS=    14  /   MESH #  29  "Luft mellem facad
&MESH   IJK=    71  60  30  XB= 1.2     8.3     6       12      2       5   MPI_PROCESS=    15  /   MESH #  30  "Luft mellem facad
&MESH   IJK=    71  60  30  XB= 1.2     8.3     6       12      5       8   MPI_PROCESS=    16  /   MESH #  31  "Luft mellem facad
&MESH   IJK=    5   60  180 XB= 8       8.5     12      18      0       18  MPI_PROCESS=    17  /   MESH #  32  "Luft mellem facad
&MESH   IJK=    34  30  50  XB= 1.2     8       6       12      8       18  MPI_PROCESS=    17  /   MESH #  33  "Luft mellem facad
//-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
//---- REACTIONS
//-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
&REAC ID = 'METHANOL'   
 C = 1  
 H = 4  
 O = 1  
 SOOT_YIELD = 0.001 
HEAT_OF_COMBUSTION = 19830  
 IDEAL = .FALSE. /  
//-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
//---- Methanol fire, which is stopped after 20 minutes (1200 seconds)                       
//-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
==PAGE:175==
/   Q_max   100 kW
&SURF   ID='FIRE' HRRPUA=555.555   RAMP_Q='fireramp'  COLOR=   'RED'  /   
&RAMP   ID='fireramp', T=0.0, F=0.0 /
&RAMP   ID='fireramp', T=86,  F=1.0 /
&RAMP   ID='fireramp', T=1140, F=1.0 /
&RAMP   ID='fireramp', T=1200, F=0.0 /
&OBST   XB= 8.5    8.8    9.2     9.8     0.0     0.1   SURF_IDS=    'FIRE','INERT','INERT'     /
                     
//-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
//---- MATERIALS
//-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
// MATERIALS
&MATL ID=
'GYPSUM'
CONDUCTIVITY=
0.48
SPECIFIC_HEAT=
0.84
DENSITY=
1440
/
&SPEC ID='WOOD' , FORMULA='CH1.7O0.83' , MW=57.6 , DENSITY_SOLID=420 ,  SPECIFIC_HEAT = 2.3, CONDUCTIVITY= 0.12 /
&MATL ID=
'FRAME'
 FYI=
'It is pine wood'
 CONDUCTIVITY=
0.12
 SPECIFIC_HEAT = 2.3
 DENSITY=
449 /
&MATL ID=
'BATTENS'
 FYI=
'It is pine wood'
 CONDUCTIVITY=   0.12    
 SPECIFIC_HEAT = 2.3    
 DENSITY=   624 
 SPEC_ID= 'WOOD'
 HEAT_OF_COMBUSTION= 23518
 /
&MATL ID=
'CLAD'
 FYI=
'It is pine wood'
 CONDUCTIVITY=   0.12    
 SPECIFIC_HEAT = 2.3    
 DENSITY=   417.460 
 SPEC_ID= 'WOOD'
 HEAT_OF_COMBUSTION= 21919 /
&MATL ID=
'STEEL'
CONDUCTIVITY=
45
SPECIFIC_HEAT=
0.48
DENSITY=
7820
/
//-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
//---- SURFACES 
//-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
&SURF ID=
'GYPSUM'
 MATL_ID(1,1) = 'GYPSUM'
COLOR = 'KHAKI'
 THICKNESS(1)=
0.015
 TRANSPARENCY=
1
/
&SURF ID=
'FRAME'
 MATL_ID(1,1)=
'FRAME'
 COLOR= 'MELON'
 THICKNESS= 0.045
 TRANSPARENCY=
1
/
&SURF ID=
'BATTENS'
 MATL_ID(1,1)=
'BATTENS'
 COLOR= 'ORANGE'
 THICKNESS= 0.045
 TRANSPARENCY=
1
 HRRPUA = 150.
 IGNITION_TEMPERATURE = 375.
 BURN_AWAY=.TRUE.
 BACKING='VOID' /
&SURF ID=
'CLAD'
 MATL_ID(1,1)=
'CLAD'
 COLOR= 'BROWN'
 THICKNESS= 0.021
 TRANSPARENCY=
1
==PAGE:176==
 HRRPUA = 150.
 IGNITION_TEMPERATURE = 375.
 BURN_AWAY=.TRUE.
 BACKING='VOID' /
&SURF ID=
'STEEL'
 MATL_ID(1,1) = 'STEEL'
 COLOR= 'SILVER'
 THICKNESS= 0.02
 TRANSPARENCY=
1
/
//-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
//---- VENTS & OPENINGS: Mesh boundaries and exhaust in hood
//-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
// Surfaces of exterior mesh boundaries                     
&VENT   MB=  'YMAX' SURF_ID=     'OPEN' /   
&VENT   MB=  'YMIN' SURF_ID=     'OPEN' /   
/&VENT   MB=  'XMAX' SURF_ID=     'OPEN' /   
/&VENT   MB=  'XMIN' SURF_ID=     'OPEN' /   
/&VENT   MB=  'ZMIN' SURF_ID=     'OPEN' /   
&VENT   MB=  'ZMAX' SURF_ID=     'OPEN' /   
//-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
//---- OBSTACLES                                                
//-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                
// Exposed wall                                                 
&OBST   ID= 'Gypsym wall1'  XB= 0       1       2       17      0       17      SURF_ID=    'GYPSUM'    /
&OBST   ID= 'EV_batten1'    XB= 1       1.05    2.6     2.65    0.05    16.4    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EV_batten2'    XB= 1       1.05    3.2     3.25    0.05    16.4    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EV_batten3'    XB= 1       1.05    3.8     3.85    0.05    16.4    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EV_batten4'    XB= 1       1.05    4.4     4.45    0.05    16.4    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EV_batten5'    XB= 1       1.05    5       5.05    0.05    16.4    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EV_batten6'    XB= 1       1.05    5.6     5.65    0.05    16.4    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EV_batten7'    XB= 1       1.05    6.2     6.25    0.05    16.4    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EV_batten8'    XB= 1       1.05    6.8     6.85    0.05    16.4    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EV_batten9'    XB= 1       1.05    7.4     7.45    0.05    16.4    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EV_batten10'   XB= 1       1.05    8       8.05    0.05    16.4    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EV_batten11'   XB= 1       1.05    8.6     8.65    0.05    16.4    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EV_batten12'   XB= 1       1.05    9.2     9.25    0.05    16.4    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EV_batten13'   XB= 1       1.05    9.8     9.85    0.05    16.4    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EV_batten14'   XB= 1       1.05    10.4    10.45   0.05    16.4    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EV_batten15'   XB= 1       1.05    11      11.05   0.05    16.4    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EV_batten16'   XB= 1       1.05    11.6    11.65   0.05    16.4    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EV_batten17'   XB= 1       1.05    12.2    12.25   0.05    16.4    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EV_batten18'   XB= 1       1.05    12.8    12.85   0.05    16.4    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EV_batten19'   XB= 1       1.05    13.4    13.45   0.05    16.4    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EV_batten20'   XB= 1       1.05    14      14.05   0.05    16.4    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EV_batten21'   XB= 1       1.05    14.6    14.65   0.05    16.4    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EV_batten22'   XB= 1       1.05    15.2    15.25   0.05    16.4    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EV_batten23'   XB= 1       1.05    15.8    15.85   0.05    16.4    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EV_batten24'   XB= 1       1.05    16.4    16.45   0.05    16.4    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
                                                
                                                
&OBST   ID= 'EH_batten1'    XB= 1.05    1.1     2.4     16.6    0.4     0.45    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EH_batten2'    XB= 1.05    1.1     2.4     16.6    1       1.05    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EH_batten3'    XB= 1.05    1.1     2.4     16.6    1.6     1.65    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EH_batten4'    XB= 1.05    1.1     2.4     16.6    2.2     2.25    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EH_batten5'    XB= 1.05    1.1     2.4     16.6    2.8     2.85    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EH_batten6'    XB= 1.05    1.1     2.4     16.6    3.4     3.45    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EH_batten7'    XB= 1.05    1.1     2.4     16.6    4       4.05    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EH_batten8'    XB= 1.05    1.1     2.4     16.6    4.6     4.65    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EH_batten9'    XB= 1.05    1.1     2.4     16.6    5.2     5.25    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EH_batten10'   XB= 1.05    1.1     2.4     16.6    5.8     5.85    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EH_batten11'   XB= 1.05    1.1     2.4     16.6    6.4     6.45    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EH_batten12'   XB= 1.05    1.1     2.4     16.6    7       7.05    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EH_batten13'   XB= 1.05    1.1     2.4     16.6    7.6     7.65    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EH_batten14'   XB= 1.05    1.1     2.4     16.6    8.2     8.25    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EH_batten15'   XB= 1.05    1.1     2.4     16.6    8.8     8.85    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EH_batten16'   XB= 1.05    1.1     2.4     16.6    9.4     9.45    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EH_batten17'   XB= 1.05    1.1     2.4     16.6    10      10.05   SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EH_batten18'   XB= 1.05    1.1     2.4     16.6    10.6    10.65   SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EH_batten19'   XB= 1.05    1.1     2.4     16.6    11.2    11.25   SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EH_batten20'   XB= 1.05    1.1     2.4     16.6    11.8    11.85   SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EH_batten21'   XB= 1.05    1.1     2.4     16.6    12.4    12.45   SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EH_batten22'   XB= 1.05    1.1     2.4     16.6    13      13.05   SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EH_batten23'   XB= 1.05    1.1     2.4     16.6    13.6    13.65   SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EH_batten24'   XB= 1.05    1.1     2.4     16.6    14.2    14.25   SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EH_batten25'   XB= 1.05    1.1     2.4     16.6    14.8    14.85   SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EH_batten26'   XB= 1.05    1.1     2.4     16.6    15.4    15.45   SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EH_batten27'   XB= 1.05    1.1     2.4     16.6    16      16.05   SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
                                                
&OBST   ID= 'CLADDING_EXP'  XB= 1.1     1.15    2       17      0.2     17      SURF_ID=    'CLAD'      /
==PAGE:177==
                                                
//  Radiation wall                                          
&OBST   ID= 'Gypsum wall 2' XB= 8.8     9.8     2       17      0       17      SURF_ID=    'GYPSUM'    /
                                                
&OBST   ID= 'RV_batten1'    XB= 8.75    8.8     2.6     2.65    0.05    16.4    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'RV_batten2'    XB= 8.75    8.8     3.2     3.25    0.05    16.4    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'RV_batten3'    XB= 8.75    8.8     3.8     3.85    0.05    16.4    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'RV_batten4'    XB= 8.75    8.8     4.4     4.45    0.05    16.4    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'RV_batten5'    XB= 8.75    8.8     5       5.05    0.05    16.4    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'RV_batten6'    XB= 8.75    8.8     5.6     5.65    0.05    16.4    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'RV_batten7'    XB= 8.75    8.8     6.2     6.25    0.05    16.4    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'RV_batten8'    XB= 8.75    8.8     6.8     6.85    0.05    16.4    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'RV_batten9'    XB= 8.75    8.8     7.4     7.45    0.05    16.4    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'RV_batten10'   XB= 8.75    8.8     8       8.05    0.05    16.4    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'RV_batten11'   XB= 8.75    8.8     8.6     8.65    0.05    16.4    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'RV_batten12'   XB= 8.75    8.8     9.2     9.25    0.05    16.4    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'RV_batten13'   XB= 8.75    8.8     9.8     9.85    0.05    16.4    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'RV_batten14'   XB= 8.75    8.8     10.4    10.45   0.05    16.4    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'RV_batten15'   XB= 8.75    8.8     11      11.05   0.05    16.4    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'RV_batten16'   XB= 8.75    8.8     11.6    11.65   0.05    16.4    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'RV_batten17'   XB= 8.75    8.8     12.2    12.25   0.05    16.4    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'RV_batten18'   XB= 8.75    8.8     12.8    12.85   0.05    16.4    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'RV_batten19'   XB= 8.75    8.8     13.4    13.45   0.05    16.4    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'RV_batten20'   XB= 8.75    8.8     14      14.05   0.05    16.4    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'RV_batten21'   XB= 8.75    8.8     14.6    14.65   0.05    16.4    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'RV_batten22'   XB= 8.75    8.8     15.2    15.25   0.05    16.4    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'RV_batten23'   XB= 8.75    8.8     15.8    15.85   0.05    16.4    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'RV_batten24'   XB= 8.75    8.8     16.4    16.45   0.05    16.4    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
                                                
                                                
&OBST   ID= 'RH_batten1'    XB= 8.7     8.75    2.4     16.6    0.4     0.45    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'RH_batten2'    XB= 8.7     8.75    2.4     16.6    1       1.05    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'RH_batten3'    XB= 8.7     8.75    2.4     16.6    1.6     1.65    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'RH_batten4'    XB= 8.7     8.75    2.4     16.6    2.2     2.25    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'RH_batten5'    XB= 8.7     8.75    2.4     16.6    2.8     2.85    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'RH_batten6'    XB= 8.7     8.75    2.4     16.6    3.4     3.45    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'RH_batten7'    XB= 8.7     8.75    2.4     16.6    4       4.05    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'RH_batten8'    XB= 8.7     8.75    2.4     16.6    4.6     4.65    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'RH_batten9'    XB= 8.7     8.75    2.4     16.6    5.2     5.25    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'RH_batten10'   XB= 8.7     8.75    2.4     16.6    5.8     5.85    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'RH_batten11'   XB= 8.7     8.75    2.4     16.6    6.4     6.45    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'RH_batten12'   XB= 8.7     8.75    2.4     16.6    7       7.05    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'RH_batten13'   XB= 8.7     8.75    2.4     16.6    7.6     7.65    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'RH_batten14'   XB= 8.7     8.75    2.4     16.6    8.2     8.25    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'RH_batten15'   XB= 8.7     8.75    2.4     16.6    8.8     8.85    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'RH_batten16'   XB= 8.7     8.75    2.4     16.6    9.4     9.45    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'RH_batten17'   XB= 8.7     8.75    2.4     16.6    10      10.05   SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'RH_batten18'   XB= 8.7     8.75    2.4     16.6    10.6    10.65   SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'RH_batten19'   XB= 8.7     8.75    2.4     16.6    11.2    11.25   SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'RH_batten20'   XB= 8.7     8.75    2.4     16.6    11.8    11.85   SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'RH_batten21'   XB= 8.7     8.75    2.4     16.6    12.4    12.45   SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'RH_batten22'   XB= 8.7     8.75    2.4     16.6    13      13.05   SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'RH_batten23'   XB= 8.7     8.75    2.4     16.6    13.6    13.65   SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'RH_batten24'   XB= 8.7     8.75    2.4     16.6    14.2    14.25   SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'RH_batten25'   XB= 8.7     8.75    2.4     16.6    14.8    14.85   SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'RH_batten26'   XB= 8.7     8.75    2.4     16.6    15.4    15.45   SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'RH_batten27'   XB= 8.7     8.75    2.4     16.6    16      16.05   SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
                                                
&OBST   ID= 'CLADDING_RAD'  XB= 8.65    8.7     2       17      0.2     17      SURF_ID=    'CLAD'      /
                                     
//-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
//---- OUTPUT: Slice files, Boundary files, Point devices and Surface devices 
//-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
// Slice files 
// Temperature 
                                        
&SLCF   ID=  'FIRE_C_X_TEMP'        PBX=    8.7     QUANTITY=    'TEMPERATURE'  /           
&SLCF   ID=  'FIRE_C_Y_TEMP'        PBY=    9.5     QUANTITY=    'TEMPERATURE'  /           
&SLCF   ID=  'Y_TEMP_H3MFIRE'       PBY=    6.5     QUANTITY=    'TEMPERATURE'  /           
&SLCF   ID=  'Y_TEMP_V3MFIRE'       PBY=    12.5    QUANTITY=    'TEMPERATURE'  /           
&SLCF   ID=  'Z_2M_ABOVE_FIRE'      PBZ=    2.1     QUANTITY=    'TEMPERATURE'  /           
&SLCF   ID=  'X_MIDT_FACADE_TEMP'   PBX=    4.9     QUANTITY=    'TEMPERATURE'  /           
&SLCF   ID=  'X_EXP_FACADE_TEMP'    PBX=    1.2     QUANTITY=    'TEMPERATURE'  /           
&SLCF   ID=  'X_RAD_FACADE_TEMP'    PBX=    8.6     QUANTITY=    'TEMPERATURE'  /           
                                        
&SLCF   ID=  'FIRE_C_X_VEL'         PBX=    8.7     QUANTITY=    'VELOCITY' VECTOR= .TRUE.  /   
&SLCF   ID=  'FIRE_C_Y_VEL'         PBY=    9.5     QUANTITY=    'VELOCITY' VECTOR= .TRUE.  /   
                                        
                                        
///EXPOSED WALL THERMOCOUPLES                                       
                                        
//Exposed facade                                        
&DEVC   ID=  'EX_FAC_0_P1'  XYZ=    1.15    9.5     1.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
==PAGE:178==
&DEVC   ID=  'EX_FAC_0_P2'  XYZ=    1.15    9.5     2.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'EX_FAC_0_P3'  XYZ=    1.15    9.5     4.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'EX_FAC_0_P4'  XYZ=    1.15    9.5     8.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'EX_FAC_0_P5'  XYZ=    1.15    9.5     12.1    QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'EX_FAC_0_P6'  XYZ=    1.15    9.5     16.1    QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
                                        
/Venstre side                                       
&DEVC   ID=  'EX_FAC_L1_P1' XYZ=    1.15    6.5     1.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'EX_FAC_L1_P2' XYZ=    1.15    6.5     2.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'EX_FAC_L1_P3' XYZ=    1.15    6.5     4.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'EX_FAC_L1_P4' XYZ=    1.15    6.5     8.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'EX_FAC_L1_P5' XYZ=    1.15    6.5     12.1    QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'EX_FAC_L1_P6' XYZ=    1.15    6.5     16.1    QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
                                        
&DEVC   ID=  'EX_FAC_L2_P1' XYZ=    1.15    3.5     1.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'EX_FAC_L2_P2' XYZ=    1.15    3.5     2.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'EX_FAC_L2_P3' XYZ=    1.15    3.5     4.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'EX_FAC_L2_P4' XYZ=    1.15    3.5     8.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'EX_FAC_L2_P5' XYZ=    1.15    3.5     12.1    QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'EX_FAC_L2_P6' XYZ=    1.15    3.5     16.1    QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
                                        
/Højre side                                     
&DEVC   ID=  'EX_FAC_R1_P1' XYZ=    1.15    12.5    1.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'EX_FAC_R1_P2' XYZ=    1.15    12.5    2.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'EX_FAC_R1_P3' XYZ=    1.15    12.5    4.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'EX_FAC_R1_P4' XYZ=    1.15    12.5    8.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'EX_FAC_R1_P5' XYZ=    1.15    12.5    12.1    QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'EX_FAC_R1_P6' XYZ=    1.15    12.5    16.1    QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
                                        
&DEVC   ID=  'EX_FAC_R2_P1' XYZ=    1.15    15.5    1.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'EX_FAC_R2_P2' XYZ=    1.15    15.5    2.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'EX_FAC_R2_P3' XYZ=    1.15    15.5    4.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'EX_FAC_R2_P4' XYZ=    1.15    15.5    8.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'EX_FAC_R2_P5' XYZ=    1.15    15.5    12.1    QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'EX_FAC_R2_P6' XYZ=    1.15    15.5    16.1    QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
                                        
                                        
//RADIATION WALL THERMOCOUPLES                                      
//Radiating cavity                                      
&DEVC   ID=  'RA_CAV_0_P1'  XYZ=    8.8     9.5     1.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'RA_CAV_0_P2'  XYZ=    8.8     9.5     2.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'RA_CAV_0_P3'  XYZ=    8.8     9.5     4.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'RA_CAV_0_P4'  XYZ=    8.8     9.5     8.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'RA_CAV_0_P5'  XYZ=    8.8     9.5     12.1    QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'RA_CAV_0_P6'  XYZ=    8.8     9.5     16.1    QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
                                        
/Venstre side                                       
&DEVC   ID=  'RA_CAV_L1_P1' XYZ=    8.8     6.5     1.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'RA_CAV_L1_P2' XYZ=    8.8     6.5     2.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'RA_CAV_L1_P3' XYZ=    8.8     6.5     4.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'RA_CAV_L1_P4' XYZ=    8.8     6.5     8.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'RA_CAV_L1_P5' XYZ=    8.8     6.5     12.1    QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'RA_CAV_L1_P6' XYZ=    8.8     6.5     16.1    QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
                                        
&DEVC   ID=  'RA_CAV_L2_P1' XYZ=    8.8     3.5     1.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'RA_CAV_L2_P2' XYZ=    8.8     3.5     2.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'RA_CAV_L2_P3' XYZ=    8.8     3.5     4.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'RA_CAV_L2_P4' XYZ=    8.8     3.5     8.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'RA_CAV_L2_P5' XYZ=    8.8     3.5     12.1    QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'RA_CAV_L2_P6' XYZ=    8.8     3.5     16.1    QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
                                        
/Højre side                                     
&DEVC   ID=  'RA_CAV_R1_P1' XYZ=    8.8     12.5    1.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'RA_CAV_R1_P2' XYZ=    8.8     12.5    2.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'RA_CAV_R1_P3' XYZ=    8.8     12.5    4.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'RA_CAV_R1_P4' XYZ=    8.8     12.5    8.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'RA_CAV_R1_P5' XYZ=    8.8     12.5    12.1    QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'RA_CAV_R1_P6' XYZ=    8.8     12.5    16.1    QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
                                        
&DEVC   ID=  'RA_CAV_R2_P1' XYZ=    8.8     15.5    1.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'RA_CAV_R2_P2' XYZ=    8.8     15.5    2.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'RA_CAV_R2_P3' XYZ=    8.8     15.5    4.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'RA_CAV_R2_P4' XYZ=    8.8     15.5    8.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'RA_CAV_R2_P5' XYZ=    8.8     15.5    12.1    QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'RA_CAV_R2_P6' XYZ=    8.8     15.5    16.1    QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
                                        
//RAposed facade                                        
&DEVC   ID=  'RA_FAC_0_P1'  XYZ=    8.65    9.5     1.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'RA_FAC_0_P2'  XYZ=    8.65    9.5     2.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'RA_FAC_0_P3'  XYZ=    8.65    9.5     4.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'RA_FAC_0_P4'  XYZ=    8.65    9.5     8.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'RA_FAC_0_P5'  XYZ=    8.65    9.5     12.1    QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'RA_FAC_0_P6'  XYZ=    8.65    9.5     16.1    QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
                                        
/Venstre side                                       
&DEVC   ID=  'RA_FAC_L1_P1' XYZ=    8.65    6.5     1.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'RA_FAC_L1_P2' XYZ=    8.65    6.5     2.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
==PAGE:179==
&DEVC   ID=  'RA_FAC_L1_P3' XYZ=    8.65    6.5     4.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'RA_FAC_L1_P4' XYZ=    8.65    6.5     8.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'RA_FAC_L1_P5' XYZ=    8.65    6.5     12.1    QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'RA_FAC_L1_P6' XYZ=    8.65    6.5     16.1    QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
                                        
&DEVC   ID=  'RA_FAC_L2_P1' XYZ=    8.65    3.5     1.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'RA_FAC_L2_P2' XYZ=    8.65    3.5     2.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'RA_FAC_L2_P3' XYZ=    8.65    3.5     4.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'RA_FAC_L2_P4' XYZ=    8.65    3.5     8.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'RA_FAC_L2_P5' XYZ=    8.65    3.5     12.1    QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'RA_FAC_L2_P6' XYZ=    8.65    3.5     16.1    QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
                                        
/Højre side                                     
&DEVC   ID=  'RA_FAC_R1_P1' XYZ=    8.65    12.5    1.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'RA_FAC_R1_P2' XYZ=    8.65    12.5    2.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'RA_FAC_R1_P3' XYZ=    8.65    12.5    4.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'RA_FAC_R1_P4' XYZ=    8.65    12.5    8.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'RA_FAC_R1_P5' XYZ=    8.65    12.5    12.1    QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'RA_FAC_R1_P6' XYZ=    8.65    12.5    16.1    QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
                                        
&DEVC   ID=  'RA_FAC_R2_P1' XYZ=    8.65    15.5    1.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'RA_FAC_R2_P2' XYZ=    8.65    15.5    2.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'RA_FAC_R2_P3' XYZ=    8.65    15.5    4.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'RA_FAC_R2_P4' XYZ=    8.65    15.5    8.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'RA_FAC_R2_P5' XYZ=    8.65    15.5    12.1    QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'RA_FAC_R2_P6' XYZ=    8.65    15.5    16.1    QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
                                        
// Surface device                                                                       
&DEVC   ID=  'NET HEAT FLUX_WALL'         XB=  1.1     1.15    2       17      0.2     17   QUANTITY=    'NET HEAT FLUX'          
&DEVC   ID=  'NET HEAT FLUX_WALLPIECE'    XB=  1.1     1.15    9.2     9.8     0.2     0.8  QUANTITY=    'NET HEAT FLUX'          
// DUMP files                           
&DUMP  DT_SLCF=2  DT_DEVC=2       DT_HRR=2    DT_CTRL=2   DT_RESTART=450  DT_MASS=2 / 
 
 
&TAIL /
==PAGE:180==
M
FDS code: High-rise facade fire, fire from
window ignition
168
Thermal Radiation Between Wooden Facades in High­Rise Buildings
==PAGE:181==
// This fds simulation/model is made for the master thesis: Thermal Radiation Between Wooden Facades in High-Rise Buildings
// Simulating Scenario Sc1.1, with a wastepaper basket at the bottom of the facade. 5 m distance between facades. 
// fds model made by Karoline Sandfeld-Nielsen (s173793)
// fds version: FDS6.7.9 
//-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
//---- MAIN
//-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
&HEAD 
    CHID='FACADE5' 
    TITLE='Brandspredning mellem to facader' /
&TIME           
    T_BEGIN  =  0
    T_END    =  3600 /        
&MISC           
    RESTART  =  .FALSE.
    TMPA     =  9.1
    BNDF_DEFAULT   =  .FALSE.
    RADIATION      =  .TRUE.
    SURF_DEFAULT   =   'FRAME' /
&RADI           
    TIME_STEP_INCREMENT  =  12
    NUMBER_RADIATION_ANGLES  =  100
    ANGLE_INCREMENT  =  20
/
//-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
//---- MESH Total Cells 1650800                                                                                 
//-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
// Facades                                                                                          
&MESH   IJK=    6   80  160 XB= 6       6.3     2       6       0       8   MPI_PROCESS=    0   /   MESH #  1   "Rad_facade"      
&MESH   IJK=    6   120 40  XB= 6       6.3     6       12      8       10  MPI_PROCESS=    0   /   MESH #  2   "Rad_facade"      
&MESH   IJK=    10  120 80  XB= 5.8     6.3     6       12      0       4   MPI_PROCESS=    1   /   MESH #  3   "Ved brand"       
&MESH   IJK=    10  120 80  XB= 5.8     6.3     6       12      4       8   MPI_PROCESS=    2   /   MESH #  4   "Ved brand"       
&MESH   IJK=    6   100 160 XB= 6       6.3     12      17      0       8   MPI_PROCESS=    3   /   MESH #  5   "Rad_facade"      
&MESH   IJK=    6   80  40  XB= 6       6.3     2       6       8       10  MPI_PROCESS=    4   /   MESH #  6   "Rad_facade"      
&MESH   IJK=    6   100 140 XB= 6       6.3     12      17      10      17  MPI_PROCESS=    4   /   MESH #  7   "Rad_facade"      
&MESH   IJK=    6   100 40  XB= 6       6.3     12      17      8       10  MPI_PROCESS=    5   /   MESH #  8   "Rad_facade"      
&MESH   IJK=    6   80  140 XB= 6       6.3     2       6       10      17  MPI_PROCESS=    5   /   MESH #  9   "Rad_facade"      
&MESH   IJK=    6   120 140 XB= 6       6.3     6       12      10      17  MPI_PROCESS=    6   /   MESH #  10  "Rad_facade"      
&MESH   IJK=    5   75  85  XB= 6.3     7.3     2       17      0       17  MPI_PROCESS=    7   /   MESH #  11  "bag_rad"         
&MESH   IJK=    4   80  200 XB= 1       1.2     2       6       0       10  MPI_PROCESS=    7   /   MESH #  12  "Exp_facade"      
&MESH   IJK=    4   120 200 XB= 1       1.2     6       12      0       10  MPI_PROCESS=    8   /   MESH #  13  "Exp_facade"      
&MESH   IJK=    12  10  180 XB= 0       1.2     1       2       0       18  MPI_PROCESS=    9   /   MESH #  14  "Små luft stykker
&MESH   IJK=    4   100 200 XB= 1       1.2     12      17      0       10  MPI_PROCESS=    9   /   MESH #  15  "Exp_facade"      
&MESH   IJK=    4   80  140 XB= 1       1.2     2       6       10      17  MPI_PROCESS=    10  /   MESH #  16  "Exp_facade"      
&MESH   IJK=    4   100 140 XB= 1       1.2     12      17      10      17  MPI_PROCESS=    10  /   MESH #  17  "Exp_facade"      
&MESH   IJK=    4   120 140 XB= 1       1.2     6       12      10      17  MPI_PROCESS=    11  /   MESH #  18  "Exp_facade"      
&MESH   IJK=    5   75  85  XB= 0       1       2       17      0       17  MPI_PROCESS=    11  /   MESH #  19  "bag_exp"         
&MESH   IJK=    24  30  50  XB= 1.2     6       6       12      8       18  MPI_PROCESS=    12  /   MESH #  20  "Luft mellem facad
&MESH   IJK=    46  60  20  XB= 1.2     5.8     6       12      0       2   MPI_PROCESS=    12  /   MESH #  21  "Luft mellem facad
&MESH   IJK=    46  60  30  XB= 1.2     5.8     6       12      2       5   MPI_PROCESS=    13  /   MESH #  22  "Luft mellem facad
&MESH   IJK=    46  60  30  XB= 1.2     5.8     6       12      5       8   MPI_PROCESS=    14  /   MESH #  23  "Luft mellem facad
&MESH   IJK=    6   85  5   XB= 0       1.2     1       18      17      18  MPI_PROCESS=    14  /   MESH #  24  "Luft over"       
&MESH   IJK=    24  25  90  XB= 1.2     6       1       6       0       18  MPI_PROCESS=    15  /   MESH #  25  "Luft mellem facad
&MESH   IJK=    13  10  180 XB= 6       7.3     1       2       0       18  MPI_PROCESS=    15  /   MESH #  26  "Små luft stykker
&MESH   IJK=    13  10  180 XB= 6       7.3     17      18      0       18  MPI_PROCESS=    16  /   MESH #  27  "Små luft stykker
&MESH   IJK=    12  10  180 XB= 0       1.2     17      18      0       18  MPI_PROCESS=    16  /   MESH #  28  "Små luft stykker
&MESH   IJK=    13  170 10  XB= 6       7.3     1       18      17      18  MPI_PROCESS=    16  /   MESH #  29  "Luft over"       
&MESH   IJK=    24  30  90  XB= 1.2     6       12      18      0       18  MPI_PROCESS=    17  /   MESH #  30  "Luft mellem facad
//-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
//---- REACTIONS
//-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
&REAC ID = 'METHANOL'   
 C = 1  
 H = 4  
 O = 1  
 SOOT_YIELD = 0.001 
HEAT_OF_COMBUSTION = 19830  
 IDEAL = .FALSE. /  
//-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
//---- Methanol fire, which is stopped after 20 minutes (1200 seconds)                       
//-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
/   Q_max   100 kW
&SURF   ID='FIRE' HRRPUA=555.555   RAMP_Q='fireramp'  COLOR=   'RED'  /   
&RAMP   ID='fireramp', T=0.0, F=0.0 /
&RAMP   ID='fireramp', T=86,  F=1.0 /
&RAMP   ID='fireramp', T=1140, F=1.0 /
&RAMP   ID='fireramp', T=1200, F=0.0 /
==PAGE:182==
&OBST   XB= 6    6.3    9.2     9.8     0.0     0.1   SURF_IDS=    'FIRE','INERT','INERT'     /
                     
//-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
//---- MATERIALS
//-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
// MATERIALS
&MATL ID=
'GYPSUM'
CONDUCTIVITY=
0.48
SPECIFIC_HEAT=
0.84
DENSITY=
1440
/
&SPEC ID='WOOD' , FORMULA='CH1.7O0.83' , MW=57.6 , DENSITY_SOLID=420 ,  SPECIFIC_HEAT = 2.3, CONDUCTIVITY= 0.12 /
&MATL ID=
'FRAME'
 FYI=
'It is pine wood'
 CONDUCTIVITY=
0.12
 SPECIFIC_HEAT = 2.3
 DENSITY=
449 /
&MATL ID=
'BATTENS'
 FYI=
'It is pine wood'
 CONDUCTIVITY=   0.12    
 SPECIFIC_HEAT = 2.3    
 DENSITY=   624 
 SPEC_ID= 'WOOD'
 HEAT_OF_COMBUSTION= 23518
 /
&MATL ID=
'CLAD'
 FYI=
'It is pine wood'
 CONDUCTIVITY=   0.12    
 SPECIFIC_HEAT = 2.3    
 DENSITY=   417.460 
 SPEC_ID= 'WOOD'
 HEAT_OF_COMBUSTION= 21919 /
&MATL ID=
'STEEL'
CONDUCTIVITY=
45
SPECIFIC_HEAT=
0.48
DENSITY=
7820
/
//-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
//---- SURFACES 
//-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
&SURF ID=
'GYPSUM'
 MATL_ID(1,1) = 'GYPSUM'
COLOR = 'KHAKI'
 THICKNESS(1)=
0.015
 TRANSPARENCY=
1
/
&SURF ID=
'FRAME'
 MATL_ID(1,1)=
'FRAME'
 COLOR= 'MELON'
 THICKNESS= 0.045
 TRANSPARENCY=
1
/
&SURF ID=
'BATTENS'
 MATL_ID(1,1)=
'BATTENS'
 COLOR= 'ORANGE'
 THICKNESS= 0.045
 TRANSPARENCY=
1
 HRRPUA = 150.
 IGNITION_TEMPERATURE = 375.
 BURN_AWAY=.TRUE.
 BACKING='VOID' /
&SURF ID=
'CLAD'
 MATL_ID(1,1)=
'CLAD'
 COLOR= 'BROWN'
 THICKNESS= 0.021
 TRANSPARENCY=
1
 HRRPUA = 150.
 IGNITION_TEMPERATURE = 375.
 BURN_AWAY=.TRUE.
 BACKING='VOID' /
&SURF ID=
'STEEL'
==PAGE:183==
 MATL_ID(1,1) = 'STEEL'
 COLOR= 'SILVER'
 THICKNESS= 0.02
 TRANSPARENCY=
1
/
//-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
//---- VENTS & OPENINGS: Mesh boundaries and exhaust in hood
//-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
// Surfaces of exterior mesh boundaries                     
&VENT   MB=  'YMAX' SURF_ID=     'OPEN' /   
&VENT   MB=  'YMIN' SURF_ID=     'OPEN' /   
/&VENT   MB=  'XMAX' SURF_ID=     'OPEN' /   
/&VENT   MB=  'XMIN' SURF_ID=     'OPEN' /   
/&VENT   MB=  'ZMIN' SURF_ID=     'OPEN' /   
&VENT   MB=  'ZMAX' SURF_ID=     'OPEN' /   
//-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
//---- OBSTACLES                                                
//-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                
// Exposed wall                                                 
&OBST   ID= 'Gypsym wall1'  XB= 0       1       2       17      0       17      SURF_ID=    'GYPSUM'    /
&OBST   ID= 'EV_batten1'    XB= 1       1.05    2.6     2.65    0.05    16.4    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EV_batten2'    XB= 1       1.05    3.2     3.25    0.05    16.4    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EV_batten3'    XB= 1       1.05    3.8     3.85    0.05    16.4    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EV_batten4'    XB= 1       1.05    4.4     4.45    0.05    16.4    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EV_batten5'    XB= 1       1.05    5       5.05    0.05    16.4    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EV_batten6'    XB= 1       1.05    5.6     5.65    0.05    16.4    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EV_batten7'    XB= 1       1.05    6.2     6.25    0.05    16.4    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EV_batten8'    XB= 1       1.05    6.8     6.85    0.05    16.4    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EV_batten9'    XB= 1       1.05    7.4     7.45    0.05    16.4    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EV_batten10'   XB= 1       1.05    8       8.05    0.05    16.4    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EV_batten11'   XB= 1       1.05    8.6     8.65    0.05    16.4    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EV_batten12'   XB= 1       1.05    9.2     9.25    0.05    16.4    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EV_batten13'   XB= 1       1.05    9.8     9.85    0.05    16.4    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EV_batten14'   XB= 1       1.05    10.4    10.45   0.05    16.4    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EV_batten15'   XB= 1       1.05    11      11.05   0.05    16.4    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EV_batten16'   XB= 1       1.05    11.6    11.65   0.05    16.4    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EV_batten17'   XB= 1       1.05    12.2    12.25   0.05    16.4    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EV_batten18'   XB= 1       1.05    12.8    12.85   0.05    16.4    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EV_batten19'   XB= 1       1.05    13.4    13.45   0.05    16.4    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EV_batten20'   XB= 1       1.05    14      14.05   0.05    16.4    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EV_batten21'   XB= 1       1.05    14.6    14.65   0.05    16.4    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EV_batten22'   XB= 1       1.05    15.2    15.25   0.05    16.4    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EV_batten23'   XB= 1       1.05    15.8    15.85   0.05    16.4    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EV_batten24'   XB= 1       1.05    16.4    16.45   0.05    16.4    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
                                                
                                                
&OBST   ID= 'EH_batten1'    XB= 1.05    1.1     2.4     16.6    0.4     0.45    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EH_batten2'    XB= 1.05    1.1     2.4     16.6    1       1.05    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EH_batten3'    XB= 1.05    1.1     2.4     16.6    1.6     1.65    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EH_batten4'    XB= 1.05    1.1     2.4     16.6    2.2     2.25    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EH_batten5'    XB= 1.05    1.1     2.4     16.6    2.8     2.85    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EH_batten6'    XB= 1.05    1.1     2.4     16.6    3.4     3.45    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EH_batten7'    XB= 1.05    1.1     2.4     16.6    4       4.05    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EH_batten8'    XB= 1.05    1.1     2.4     16.6    4.6     4.65    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EH_batten9'    XB= 1.05    1.1     2.4     16.6    5.2     5.25    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EH_batten10'   XB= 1.05    1.1     2.4     16.6    5.8     5.85    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EH_batten11'   XB= 1.05    1.1     2.4     16.6    6.4     6.45    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EH_batten12'   XB= 1.05    1.1     2.4     16.6    7       7.05    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EH_batten13'   XB= 1.05    1.1     2.4     16.6    7.6     7.65    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EH_batten14'   XB= 1.05    1.1     2.4     16.6    8.2     8.25    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EH_batten15'   XB= 1.05    1.1     2.4     16.6    8.8     8.85    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EH_batten16'   XB= 1.05    1.1     2.4     16.6    9.4     9.45    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EH_batten17'   XB= 1.05    1.1     2.4     16.6    10      10.05   SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EH_batten18'   XB= 1.05    1.1     2.4     16.6    10.6    10.65   SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EH_batten19'   XB= 1.05    1.1     2.4     16.6    11.2    11.25   SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EH_batten20'   XB= 1.05    1.1     2.4     16.6    11.8    11.85   SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EH_batten21'   XB= 1.05    1.1     2.4     16.6    12.4    12.45   SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EH_batten22'   XB= 1.05    1.1     2.4     16.6    13      13.05   SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EH_batten23'   XB= 1.05    1.1     2.4     16.6    13.6    13.65   SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EH_batten24'   XB= 1.05    1.1     2.4     16.6    14.2    14.25   SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EH_batten25'   XB= 1.05    1.1     2.4     16.6    14.8    14.85   SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EH_batten26'   XB= 1.05    1.1     2.4     16.6    15.4    15.45   SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EH_batten27'   XB= 1.05    1.1     2.4     16.6    16      16.05   SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
                                                
&OBST   ID= 'CLADDING_EXP'  XB= 1.1     1.15    2       17      0.2     17      SURF_ID=    'CLAD'      /
                                                
//  Radiation wall                                          
&OBST   ID= 'Gypsum wall 2' XB= 6.3     7.3     2       17      0       17      SURF_ID=    'GYPSUM'    /
                                                
&OBST   ID= 'RV_batten1'    XB= 6.25    6.3     2.6     2.65    0.05    16.4    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'RV_batten2'    XB= 6.25    6.3     3.2     3.25    0.05    16.4    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'RV_batten3'    XB= 6.25    6.3     3.8     3.85    0.05    16.4    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
==PAGE:184==
&OBST   ID= 'RV_batten4'    XB= 6.25    6.3     4.4     4.45    0.05    16.4    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'RV_batten5'    XB= 6.25    6.3     5       5.05    0.05    16.4    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'RV_batten6'    XB= 6.25    6.3     5.6     5.65    0.05    16.4    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'RV_batten7'    XB= 6.25    6.3     6.2     6.25    0.05    16.4    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'RV_batten8'    XB= 6.25    6.3     6.8     6.85    0.05    16.4    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'RV_batten9'    XB= 6.25    6.3     7.4     7.45    0.05    16.4    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'RV_batten10'   XB= 6.25    6.3     8       8.05    0.05    16.4    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'RV_batten11'   XB= 6.25    6.3     8.6     8.65    0.05    16.4    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'RV_batten12'   XB= 6.25    6.3     9.2     9.25    0.05    16.4    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'RV_batten13'   XB= 6.25    6.3     9.8     9.85    0.05    16.4    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'RV_batten14'   XB= 6.25    6.3     10.4    10.45   0.05    16.4    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'RV_batten15'   XB= 6.25    6.3     11      11.05   0.05    16.4    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'RV_batten16'   XB= 6.25    6.3     11.6    11.65   0.05    16.4    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'RV_batten17'   XB= 6.25    6.3     12.2    12.25   0.05    16.4    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'RV_batten18'   XB= 6.25    6.3     12.8    12.85   0.05    16.4    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'RV_batten19'   XB= 6.25    6.3     13.4    13.45   0.05    16.4    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'RV_batten20'   XB= 6.25    6.3     14      14.05   0.05    16.4    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'RV_batten21'   XB= 6.25    6.3     14.6    14.65   0.05    16.4    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'RV_batten22'   XB= 6.25    6.3     15.2    15.25   0.05    16.4    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'RV_batten23'   XB= 6.25    6.3     15.8    15.85   0.05    16.4    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'RV_batten24'   XB= 6.25    6.3     16.4    16.45   0.05    16.4    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
                                                
                                                
&OBST   ID= 'RH_batten1'    XB= 6.2     6.25    2.6     16.6    0.4     0.45    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'RH_batten2'    XB= 6.2     6.25    2.6     16.6    1       1.05    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'RH_batten3'    XB= 6.2     6.25    2.6     16.6    1.6     1.65    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'RH_batten4'    XB= 6.2     6.25    2.6     16.6    2.2     2.25    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'RH_batten5'    XB= 6.2     6.25    2.6     16.6    2.8     2.85    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'RH_batten6'    XB= 6.2     6.25    2.6     16.6    3.4     3.45    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'RH_batten7'    XB= 6.2     6.25    2.6     16.6    4       4.05    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'RH_batten8'    XB= 6.2     6.25    2.6     16.6    4.6     4.65    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'RH_batten9'    XB= 6.2     6.25    2.6     16.6    5.2     5.25    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'RH_batten10'   XB= 6.2     6.25    2.6     16.6    5.8     5.85    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'RH_batten11'   XB= 6.2     6.25    2.6     16.6    6.4     6.45    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'RH_batten12'   XB= 6.2     6.25    2.6     16.6    7       7.05    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'RH_batten13'   XB= 6.2     6.25    2.6     16.6    7.6     7.65    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'RH_batten14'   XB= 6.2     6.25    2.6     16.6    8.2     8.25    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'RH_batten15'   XB= 6.2     6.25    2.6     16.6    8.8     8.85    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'RH_batten16'   XB= 6.2     6.25    2.6     16.6    9.4     9.45    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'RH_batten17'   XB= 6.2     6.25    2.6     16.6    10      10.05   SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'RH_batten18'   XB= 6.2     6.25    2.6     16.6    10.6    10.65   SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'RH_batten19'   XB= 6.2     6.25    2.6     16.6    11.2    11.25   SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'RH_batten20'   XB= 6.2     6.25    2.6     16.6    11.8    11.85   SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'RH_batten21'   XB= 6.2     6.25    2.6     16.6    12.4    12.45   SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'RH_batten22'   XB= 6.2     6.25    2.6     16.6    13      13.05   SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'RH_batten23'   XB= 6.2     6.25    2.6     16.6    13.6    13.65   SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'RH_batten24'   XB= 6.2     6.25    2.6     16.6    14.2    14.25   SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'RH_batten25'   XB= 6.2     6.25    2.6     16.6    14.8    14.85   SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'RH_batten26'   XB= 6.2     6.25    2.6     16.6    15.4    15.45   SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'RH_batten27'   XB= 6.2     6.25    2.6     16.6    16      16.05   SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
                                                
&OBST   ID= 'CLADDING_RAD'  XB= 6.15    6.2     2       17      0.2     17      SURF_ID=    'CLAD'      /
//-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
//---- OUTPUT: Slice files, Point devices and Surface devices 
//-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
// Slice files 
// Temperature 
&SLCF   ID=  'FIRE_C_X_TEMP'        PBX=    6.2     QUANTITY=    'TEMPERATURE'  /           
&SLCF   ID=  'FIRE_C_Y_TEMP'        PBY=    9.5     QUANTITY=    'TEMPERATURE'  /           
&SLCF   ID=  'Y_TEMP_H3MFIRE'       PBY=    6.5     QUANTITY=    'TEMPERATURE'  /           
&SLCF   ID=  'Y_TEMP_V3MFIRE'       PBY=    12.5    QUANTITY=    'TEMPERATURE'  /           
&SLCF   ID=  'Z_2M_ABOVE_FIRE'      PBZ=    2.1     QUANTITY=    'TEMPERATURE'  /           
&SLCF   ID=  'X_MIDT_FACADE_TEMP'   PBX=    3.7     QUANTITY=    'TEMPERATURE'  /           
&SLCF   ID=  'X_EXP_FACADE_TEMP'    PBX=    1.2     QUANTITY=    'TEMPERATURE'  /           
&SLCF   ID=  'X_RAD_FACADE_TEMP'    PBX=    6.2     QUANTITY=    'TEMPERATURE'  /           
                                        
&SLCF   ID=  'FIRE_C_X_VEL'         PBX=    6.2     QUANTITY=    'VELOCITY' VECTOR= .TRUE.  /   
&SLCF   ID=  'FIRE_C_Y_VEL'         PBY=    9.5     QUANTITY=    'VELOCITY' VECTOR= .TRUE.  /   
                                        
//EXPOSED WALL THERMOCOUPLES                                        
                                        
//Exposed facade                                        
&DEVC   ID=  'EX_FAC_0_P1'  XYZ=    1.15    9.5     1.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'EX_FAC_0_P2'  XYZ=    1.15    9.5     2.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'EX_FAC_0_P3'  XYZ=    1.15    9.5     4.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'EX_FAC_0_P4'  XYZ=    1.15    9.5     8.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'EX_FAC_0_P5'  XYZ=    1.15    9.5     12.1    QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'EX_FAC_0_P6'  XYZ=    1.15    9.5     16.1    QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
                                        
/Venstre side                                       
&DEVC   ID=  'EX_FAC_L1_P1' XYZ=    1.15    6.5     1.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'EX_FAC_L1_P2' XYZ=    1.15    6.5     2.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'EX_FAC_L1_P3' XYZ=    1.15    6.5     4.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'EX_FAC_L1_P4' XYZ=    1.15    6.5     8.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
==PAGE:185==
&DEVC   ID=  'EX_FAC_L1_P5' XYZ=    1.15    6.5     12.1    QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'EX_FAC_L1_P6' XYZ=    1.15    6.5     16.1    QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
                                        
&DEVC   ID=  'EX_FAC_L2_P1' XYZ=    1.15    3.5     1.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'EX_FAC_L2_P2' XYZ=    1.15    3.5     2.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'EX_FAC_L2_P3' XYZ=    1.15    3.5     4.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'EX_FAC_L2_P4' XYZ=    1.15    3.5     8.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'EX_FAC_L2_P5' XYZ=    1.15    3.5     12.1    QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'EX_FAC_L2_P6' XYZ=    1.15    3.5     16.1    QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
                                        
/Højre side                                     
&DEVC   ID=  'EX_FAC_R1_P1' XYZ=    1.15    12.5    1.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'EX_FAC_R1_P2' XYZ=    1.15    12.5    2.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'EX_FAC_R1_P3' XYZ=    1.15    12.5    4.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'EX_FAC_R1_P4' XYZ=    1.15    12.5    8.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'EX_FAC_R1_P5' XYZ=    1.15    12.5    12.1    QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'EX_FAC_R1_P6' XYZ=    1.15    12.5    16.1    QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
                                        
&DEVC   ID=  'EX_FAC_R2_P1' XYZ=    1.15    15.5    1.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'EX_FAC_R2_P2' XYZ=    1.15    15.5    2.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'EX_FAC_R2_P3' XYZ=    1.15    15.5    4.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'EX_FAC_R2_P4' XYZ=    1.15    15.5    8.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'EX_FAC_R2_P5' XYZ=    1.15    15.5    12.1    QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'EX_FAC_R2_P6' XYZ=    1.15    15.5    16.1    QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
                                        
                                        
//RADIATION WALL THERMOCOUPLES                                      
//Radiating cavity                                      
&DEVC   ID=  'RA_CAV_0_P1'  XYZ=    6.3     9.5     1.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'RA_CAV_0_P2'  XYZ=    6.3     9.5     2.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'RA_CAV_0_P3'  XYZ=    6.3     9.5     4.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'RA_CAV_0_P4'  XYZ=    6.3     9.5     8.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'RA_CAV_0_P5'  XYZ=    6.3     9.5     12.1    QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'RA_CAV_0_P6'  XYZ=    6.3     9.5     16.1    QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
                                        
/Venstre side                                       
&DEVC   ID=  'RA_CAV_L1_P1' XYZ=    6.3     6.5     1.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'RA_CAV_L1_P2' XYZ=    6.3     6.5     2.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'RA_CAV_L1_P3' XYZ=    6.3     6.5     4.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'RA_CAV_L1_P4' XYZ=    6.3     6.5     8.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'RA_CAV_L1_P5' XYZ=    6.3     6.5     12.1    QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'RA_CAV_L1_P6' XYZ=    6.3     6.5     16.1    QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
                                        
&DEVC   ID=  'RA_CAV_L2_P1' XYZ=    6.3     3.5     1.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'RA_CAV_L2_P2' XYZ=    6.3     3.5     2.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'RA_CAV_L2_P3' XYZ=    6.3     3.5     4.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'RA_CAV_L2_P4' XYZ=    6.3     3.5     8.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'RA_CAV_L2_P5' XYZ=    6.3     3.5     12.1    QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'RA_CAV_L2_P6' XYZ=    6.3     3.5     16.1    QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
                                        
/Højre side                                     
&DEVC   ID=  'RA_CAV_R1_P1' XYZ=    6.3     12.5    1.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'RA_CAV_R1_P2' XYZ=    6.3     12.5    2.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'RA_CAV_R1_P3' XYZ=    6.3     12.5    4.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'RA_CAV_R1_P4' XYZ=    6.3     12.5    8.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'RA_CAV_R1_P5' XYZ=    6.3     12.5    12.1    QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'RA_CAV_R1_P6' XYZ=    6.3     12.5    16.1    QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
                                        
&DEVC   ID=  'RA_CAV_R2_P1' XYZ=    6.3     15.5    1.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'RA_CAV_R2_P2' XYZ=    6.3     15.5    2.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'RA_CAV_R2_P3' XYZ=    6.3     15.5    4.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'RA_CAV_R2_P4' XYZ=    6.3     15.5    8.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'RA_CAV_R2_P5' XYZ=    6.3     15.5    12.1    QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'RA_CAV_R2_P6' XYZ=    6.3     15.5    16.1    QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
                                        
//RAposed facade                                        
&DEVC   ID=  'RA_FAC_0_P1'  XYZ=    6.15    9.5     1.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'RA_FAC_0_P2'  XYZ=    6.15    9.5     2.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'RA_FAC_0_P3'  XYZ=    6.15    9.5     4.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'RA_FAC_0_P4'  XYZ=    6.15    9.5     8.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'RA_FAC_0_P5'  XYZ=    6.15    9.5     12.1    QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'RA_FAC_0_P6'  XYZ=    6.15    9.5     16.1    QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
                                        
/Venstre side                                       
&DEVC   ID=  'RA_FAC_L1_P1' XYZ=    6.15    6.5     1.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'RA_FAC_L1_P2' XYZ=    6.15    6.5     2.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'RA_FAC_L1_P3' XYZ=    6.15    6.5     4.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'RA_FAC_L1_P4' XYZ=    6.15    6.5     8.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'RA_FAC_L1_P5' XYZ=    6.15    6.5     12.1    QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'RA_FAC_L1_P6' XYZ=    6.15    6.5     16.1    QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
                                        
&DEVC   ID=  'RA_FAC_L2_P1' XYZ=    6.15    3.5     1.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'RA_FAC_L2_P2' XYZ=    6.15    3.5     2.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'RA_FAC_L2_P3' XYZ=    6.15    3.5     4.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'RA_FAC_L2_P4' XYZ=    6.15    3.5     8.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'RA_FAC_L2_P5' XYZ=    6.15    3.5     12.1    QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'RA_FAC_L2_P6' XYZ=    6.15    3.5     16.1    QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
==PAGE:186==
                                        
/Højre side                                     
&DEVC   ID=  'RA_FAC_R1_P1' XYZ=    6.15    12.5    1.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'RA_FAC_R1_P2' XYZ=    6.15    12.5    2.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'RA_FAC_R1_P3' XYZ=    6.15    12.5    4.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'RA_FAC_R1_P4' XYZ=    6.15    12.5    8.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'RA_FAC_R1_P5' XYZ=    6.15    12.5    12.1    QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'RA_FAC_R1_P6' XYZ=    6.15    12.5    16.1    QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
                                        
&DEVC   ID=  'RA_FAC_R2_P1' XYZ=    6.15    15.5    1.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'RA_FAC_R2_P2' XYZ=    6.15    15.5    2.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'RA_FAC_R2_P3' XYZ=    6.15    15.5    4.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'RA_FAC_R2_P4' XYZ=    6.15    15.5    8.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'RA_FAC_R2_P5' XYZ=    6.15    15.5    12.1    QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'RA_FAC_R2_P6' XYZ=    6.15    15.5    16.1    QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
                                        
// Surface device                                                                       
&DEVC   ID=  'NET HEAT FLUX_WALL'         XB=  1.1     1.15    2       17      0.2     17   QUANTITY=    'NET HEAT FLUX'          
&DEVC   ID=  'NET HEAT FLUX_WALLPIECE'    XB=  1.1     1.15    9.2     9.8     0.2     0.8  QUANTITY=    'NET HEAT FLUX'          
// DUMP files                           
&DUMP  DT_SLCF=2  DT_DEVC=2       DT_HRR=2    DT_CTRL=2   DT_RESTART=450  DT_MASS=2 / 
 
&TAIL /
==PAGE:187==
// This fds simulation/model is made for the master thesis: Thermal Radiation Between Wooden Facades in High-Rise Buildings
// Simulating Scenario Sc3.1, with a wastepaper basket at the bottom of the facade. 10 m distance between facades. 
// fds model made by Karoline Sandfeld-Nielsen (s173793)
// fds version: FDS6.7.9 
//-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
//---- MAIN
//-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
&HEAD 
    CHID='FACADE10' 
    TITLE='Brandspredning mellem to facader' /
&TIME           
    T_BEGIN  =  0
    T_END    =  3600 /     
&MISC           
    RESTART  =  .FALSE.
    TMPA     =  9.1
    BNDF_DEFAULT   =  .FALSE.
    RADIATION      =  .TRUE.
    SURF_DEFAULT   =   'FRAME' /
&RADI           
    TIME_STEP_INCREMENT  =  12
    NUMBER_RADIATION_ANGLES  =  100
    ANGLE_INCREMENT  =  20
/
//-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
//---- MESH Total Cells 2052050                                                                                 
//-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
// Facader                                                                                          
&MESH   IJK=    6   80  160 XB= 11      11.3    2       6       0       8   MPI_PROCESS=    0   /   MESH #  1   "Rad_facade"      
&MESH   IJK=    5   75  85  XB= 0       1       2       17      0       17  MPI_PROCESS=    0   /   MESH #  2   "bag_exp"         
&MESH   IJK=    10  120 80  XB= 10.8    11.3    6       12      0       4   MPI_PROCESS=    1   /   MESH #  3   "Ved brand"       
&MESH   IJK=    12  10  180 XB= 0       1.2     1       2       0       18  MPI_PROCESS=    1   /   MESH #  4   "Små luft stykker
&MESH   IJK=    10  120 80  XB= 10.8    11.3    6       12      4       8   MPI_PROCESS=    2   /   MESH #  5   "Ved brand"       
&MESH   IJK=    12  10  180 XB= 0       1.2     17      18      0       18  MPI_PROCESS=    2   /   MESH #  6   "Små luft stykker
&MESH   IJK=    13  170 10  XB= 11      12.3    1       18      17      18  MPI_PROCESS=    3   /   MESH #  7   "Luft over"       
&MESH   IJK=    6   100 160 XB= 11      11.3    12      17      0       8   MPI_PROCESS=    3   /   MESH #  8   "Rad_facade"      
&MESH   IJK=    5   75  85  XB= 11.3    12.3    2       17      0       17  MPI_PROCESS=    4   /   MESH #  9   "bag_rad"         
&MESH   IJK=    6   80  160 XB= 11      11.3    2       6       8       16  MPI_PROCESS=    4   /   MESH #  10  "Rad_facade"      
&MESH   IJK=    6   120 160 XB= 11      11.3    6       12      8       16  MPI_PROCESS=    5   /   MESH #  11  "Rad_facade"      
&MESH   IJK=    6   100 160 XB= 11      11.3    12      17      8       16  MPI_PROCESS=    6   /   MESH #  12  "Rad_facade"      
&MESH   IJK=    6   120 20  XB= 11      11.3    6       12      16      17  MPI_PROCESS=    6   /   MESH #  13  "Rad_facade"      
&MESH   IJK=    6   80  20  XB= 11      11.3    2       6       16      17  MPI_PROCESS=    7   /   MESH #  14  "Rad_facade"      
&MESH   IJK=    6   100 20  XB= 11      11.3    12      17      16      17  MPI_PROCESS=    7   /   MESH #  15  "Rad_facade"      
&MESH   IJK=    4   120 100 XB= 1       1.2     6       12      12      17  MPI_PROCESS=    7   /   MESH #  16  "Exp_facade"      
&MESH   IJK=    4   100 100 XB= 1       1.2     12      17      12      17  MPI_PROCESS=    7   /   MESH #  17  "Exp_facade"      
&MESH   IJK=    6   85  5   XB= 0       1.2     1       18      17      18  MPI_PROCESS=    7   /   MESH #  18  "Luft over"       
&MESH   IJK=    4   80  240 XB= 1       1.2     2       6       0       12  MPI_PROCESS=    8   /   MESH #  19  "Exp_facade"      
&MESH   IJK=    49  25  25  XB= 1.2     11      1       6       13      18  MPI_PROCESS=    8   /   MESH #  20  "Luft mellem facad
&MESH   IJK=    4   120 240 XB= 1       1.2     6       12      0       12  MPI_PROCESS=    9   /   MESH #  21  "Exp_facade"      
&MESH   IJK=    4   100 240 XB= 1       1.2     12      17      0       12  MPI_PROCESS=    10  /   MESH #  22  "Exp_facade"      
&MESH   IJK=    13  10  180 XB= 11      12.3    17      18      0       18  MPI_PROCESS=    10  /   MESH #  23  "Små luft stykker
&MESH   IJK=    4   80  100 XB= 1       1.2     2       6       12      17  MPI_PROCESS=    11  /   MESH #  24  "Exp_facade"      
&MESH   IJK=    49  30  50  XB= 1.2     11      6       12      8       18  MPI_PROCESS=    11  /   MESH #  25  "Luft mellem facad
&MESH   IJK=    96  60  20  XB= 1.2     10.8    6       12      0       2   MPI_PROCESS=    12  /   MESH #  26  "Luft mellem facad
&MESH   IJK=    96  60  20  XB= 1.2     10.8    6       12      2       4   MPI_PROCESS=    13  /   MESH #  27  "Luft mellem facad
&MESH   IJK=    96  60  20  XB= 1.2     10.8    6       12      4       6   MPI_PROCESS=    14  /   MESH #  28  "Luft mellem facad
&MESH   IJK=    96  60  20  XB= 1.2     10.8    6       12      6       8   MPI_PROCESS=    15  /   MESH #  29  "Luft mellem facad
&MESH   IJK=    49  25  65  XB= 1.2     11      1       6       0       13  MPI_PROCESS=    16  /   MESH #  30  "Luft mellem facad
&MESH   IJK=    49  30  25  XB= 1.2     11      12      18      13      18  MPI_PROCESS=    16  /   MESH #  31  "Luft mellem facad
&MESH   IJK=    49  30  65  XB= 1.2     11      12      18      0       13  MPI_PROCESS=    17  /   MESH #  32  "Luft mellem facad
&MESH   IJK=    13  10  180 XB= 11      12.3    1       2       0       18  MPI_PROCESS=    17  /   MESH #  33  "Små luft stykker
//-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
//---- REACTIONS
//-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
&REAC ID = 'METHANOL'   
 C = 1  
 H = 4  
 O = 1  
 SOOT_YIELD = 0.001 
HEAT_OF_COMBUSTION = 19830  
 IDEAL = .FALSE. /  
//-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
//---- Methanol fire, which is stopped after 20 minutes (1200 seconds)                       
//-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
/   Q_max   100 kW
&SURF   ID='FIRE' HRRPUA=555.555   RAMP_Q='fireramp'  COLOR=   'RED'  /   
&RAMP   ID='fireramp', T=0.0, F=0.0 /
==PAGE:188==
&RAMP   ID='fireramp', T=86,  F=1.0 /
&RAMP   ID='fireramp', T=1140, F=1.0 /
&RAMP   ID='fireramp', T=1200, F=0.0 /
&OBST   XB= 11    11.3    9.2     9.8     0.0     0.1   SURF_IDS=    'FIRE','INERT','INERT'     /
                     
//-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
//---- MATERIALS
//-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
// MATERIALS
&MATL ID=
'GYPSUM'
CONDUCTIVITY=
0.48
SPECIFIC_HEAT=
0.84
DENSITY=
1440
/
&SPEC ID='WOOD' , FORMULA='CH1.7O0.83' , MW=57.6 , DENSITY_SOLID=420 ,  SPECIFIC_HEAT = 2.3, CONDUCTIVITY= 0.12 /
&MATL ID=
'FRAME'
 FYI=
'It is pine wood'
 CONDUCTIVITY=
0.12
 SPECIFIC_HEAT = 2.3
 DENSITY=
449 /
&MATL ID=
'BATTENS'
 FYI=
'It is pine wood'
 CONDUCTIVITY=   0.12    
 SPECIFIC_HEAT = 2.3    
 DENSITY=   624 
 SPEC_ID= 'WOOD'
 HEAT_OF_COMBUSTION= 23518
 /
&MATL ID=
'CLAD'
 FYI=
'It is pine wood'
 CONDUCTIVITY=   0.12    
 SPECIFIC_HEAT = 2.3    
 DENSITY=   417.460 
 SPEC_ID= 'WOOD'
 HEAT_OF_COMBUSTION= 21919 /
&MATL ID=
'STEEL'
CONDUCTIVITY=
45
SPECIFIC_HEAT=
0.48
DENSITY=
7820
/
//-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
//---- SURFACES 
//-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
&SURF ID=
'GYPSUM'
 MATL_ID(1,1) = 'GYPSUM'
COLOR = 'KHAKI'
 THICKNESS(1)=
0.015
 TRANSPARENCY=
1
/
&SURF ID=
'FRAME'
 MATL_ID(1,1)=
'FRAME'
 COLOR= 'MELON'
 THICKNESS= 0.045
 TRANSPARENCY=
1
/
&SURF ID=
'BATTENS'
 MATL_ID(1,1)=
'BATTENS'
 COLOR= 'ORANGE'
 THICKNESS= 0.045
 TRANSPARENCY=
1
 HRRPUA = 150.
 IGNITION_TEMPERATURE = 375.
 BURN_AWAY=.TRUE.
 BACKING='VOID' /
&SURF ID=
'CLAD'
 MATL_ID(1,1)=
'CLAD'
 COLOR= 'BROWN'
 THICKNESS= 0.021
 TRANSPARENCY=
1
 HRRPUA = 150.
 IGNITION_TEMPERATURE = 375.
 BURN_AWAY=.TRUE.
 BACKING='VOID' /
==PAGE:189==
&SURF ID=
'STEEL'
 MATL_ID(1,1) = 'STEEL'
 COLOR= 'SILVER'
 THICKNESS= 0.02
 TRANSPARENCY=
1
/
//-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
//---- VENTS & OPENINGS: Mesh boundaries and exhaust in hood
//-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
// Surfaces of exterior mesh boundaries                     
&VENT   MB=  'YMAX' SURF_ID=     'OPEN' /   
&VENT   MB=  'YMIN' SURF_ID=     'OPEN' /   
/&VENT   MB=  'XMAX' SURF_ID=     'OPEN' /   
/&VENT   MB=  'XMIN' SURF_ID=     'OPEN' /   
/&VENT   MB=  'ZMIN' SURF_ID=     'OPEN' /   
&VENT   MB=  'ZMAX' SURF_ID=     'OPEN' /   
Prøve                                                   
// Exposed wall                                                     
&OBST   ID= 'Gypsym wall1'  XB= 0       1       2       17      0       17      SURF_ID=    'GYPSUM'    /
&OBST   ID= 'EV_batten1'    XB= 1       1.05    2.6     2.65    0.05    16.4    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EV_batten2'    XB= 1       1.05    3.2     3.25    0.05    16.4    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EV_batten3'    XB= 1       1.05    3.8     3.85    0.05    16.4    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EV_batten4'    XB= 1       1.05    4.4     4.45    0.05    16.4    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EV_batten5'    XB= 1       1.05    5       5.05    0.05    16.4    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EV_batten6'    XB= 1       1.05    5.6     5.65    0.05    16.4    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EV_batten7'    XB= 1       1.05    6.2     6.25    0.05    16.4    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EV_batten8'    XB= 1       1.05    6.8     6.85    0.05    16.4    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EV_batten9'    XB= 1       1.05    7.4     7.45    0.05    16.4    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EV_batten10'   XB= 1       1.05    8       8.05    0.05    16.4    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EV_batten11'   XB= 1       1.05    8.6     8.65    0.05    16.4    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EV_batten12'   XB= 1       1.05    9.2     9.25    0.05    16.4    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EV_batten13'   XB= 1       1.05    9.8     9.85    0.05    16.4    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EV_batten14'   XB= 1       1.05    10.4    10.45   0.05    16.4    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EV_batten15'   XB= 1       1.05    11      11.05   0.05    16.4    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EV_batten16'   XB= 1       1.05    11.6    11.65   0.05    16.4    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EV_batten17'   XB= 1       1.05    12.2    12.25   0.05    16.4    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EV_batten18'   XB= 1       1.05    12.8    12.85   0.05    16.4    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EV_batten19'   XB= 1       1.05    13.4    13.45   0.05    16.4    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EV_batten20'   XB= 1       1.05    14      14.05   0.05    16.4    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EV_batten21'   XB= 1       1.05    14.6    14.65   0.05    16.4    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EV_batten22'   XB= 1       1.05    15.2    15.25   0.05    16.4    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EV_batten23'   XB= 1       1.05    15.8    15.85   0.05    16.4    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EV_batten24'   XB= 1       1.05    16.4    16.45   0.05    16.4    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
                                                
                                                
&OBST   ID= 'EH_batten1'    XB= 1.05    1.1     2.4     16.6    0.4     0.45    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EH_batten2'    XB= 1.05    1.1     2.4     16.6    1       1.05    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EH_batten3'    XB= 1.05    1.1     2.4     16.6    1.6     1.65    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EH_batten4'    XB= 1.05    1.1     2.4     16.6    2.2     2.25    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EH_batten5'    XB= 1.05    1.1     2.4     16.6    2.8     2.85    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EH_batten6'    XB= 1.05    1.1     2.4     16.6    3.4     3.45    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EH_batten7'    XB= 1.05    1.1     2.4     16.6    4       4.05    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EH_batten8'    XB= 1.05    1.1     2.4     16.6    4.6     4.65    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EH_batten9'    XB= 1.05    1.1     2.4     16.6    5.2     5.25    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EH_batten10'   XB= 1.05    1.1     2.4     16.6    5.8     5.85    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EH_batten11'   XB= 1.05    1.1     2.4     16.6    6.4     6.45    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EH_batten12'   XB= 1.05    1.1     2.4     16.6    7       7.05    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EH_batten13'   XB= 1.05    1.1     2.4     16.6    7.6     7.65    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EH_batten14'   XB= 1.05    1.1     2.4     16.6    8.2     8.25    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EH_batten15'   XB= 1.05    1.1     2.4     16.6    8.8     8.85    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EH_batten16'   XB= 1.05    1.1     2.4     16.6    9.4     9.45    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EH_batten17'   XB= 1.05    1.1     2.4     16.6    10      10.05   SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EH_batten18'   XB= 1.05    1.1     2.4     16.6    10.6    10.65   SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EH_batten19'   XB= 1.05    1.1     2.4     16.6    11.2    11.25   SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EH_batten20'   XB= 1.05    1.1     2.4     16.6    11.8    11.85   SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EH_batten21'   XB= 1.05    1.1     2.4     16.6    12.4    12.45   SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EH_batten22'   XB= 1.05    1.1     2.4     16.6    13      13.05   SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EH_batten23'   XB= 1.05    1.1     2.4     16.6    13.6    13.65   SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EH_batten24'   XB= 1.05    1.1     2.4     16.6    14.2    14.25   SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EH_batten25'   XB= 1.05    1.1     2.4     16.6    14.8    14.85   SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EH_batten26'   XB= 1.05    1.1     2.4     16.6    15.4    15.45   SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EH_batten27'   XB= 1.05    1.1     2.4     16.6    16      16.05   SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
                                                
&OBST   ID= 'CLADDING_EXP'  XB= 1.1     1.15    2       17      0.2     17      SURF_ID=    'CLAD'      /
                                                
//  Radiation wall                                          
&OBST   ID= 'Gypsum wall 2' XB= 11.3    12.3    2       17      0       17      SURF_ID=    'GYPSUM'    /
                                                
&OBST   ID= 'RV_batten1'    XB= 11.25   11.3    2.6     2.65    0.05    16.4    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'RV_batten2'    XB= 11.25   11.3    3.2     3.25    0.05    16.4    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'RV_batten3'    XB= 11.25   11.3    3.8     3.85    0.05    16.4    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
==PAGE:190==
&OBST   ID= 'RV_batten4'    XB= 11.25   11.3    4.4     4.45    0.05    16.4    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'RV_batten5'    XB= 11.25   11.3    5       5.05    0.05    16.4    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'RV_batten6'    XB= 11.25   11.3    5.6     5.65    0.05    16.4    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'RV_batten7'    XB= 11.25   11.3    6.2     6.25    0.05    16.4    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'RV_batten8'    XB= 11.25   11.3    6.8     6.85    0.05    16.4    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'RV_batten9'    XB= 11.25   11.3    7.4     7.45    0.05    16.4    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'RV_batten10'   XB= 11.25   11.3    8       8.05    0.05    16.4    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'RV_batten11'   XB= 11.25   11.3    8.6     8.65    0.05    16.4    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'RV_batten12'   XB= 11.25   11.3    9.2     9.25    0.05    16.4    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'RV_batten13'   XB= 11.25   11.3    9.8     9.85    0.05    16.4    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'RV_batten14'   XB= 11.25   11.3    10.4    10.45   0.05    16.4    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'RV_batten15'   XB= 11.25   11.3    11      11.05   0.05    16.4    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'RV_batten16'   XB= 11.25   11.3    11.6    11.65   0.05    16.4    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'RV_batten17'   XB= 11.25   11.3    12.2    12.25   0.05    16.4    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'RV_batten18'   XB= 11.25   11.3    12.8    12.85   0.05    16.4    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'RV_batten19'   XB= 11.25   11.3    13.4    13.45   0.05    16.4    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'RV_batten20'   XB= 11.25   11.3    14      14.05   0.05    16.4    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'RV_batten21'   XB= 11.25   11.3    14.6    14.65   0.05    16.4    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'RV_batten22'   XB= 11.25   11.3    15.2    15.25   0.05    16.4    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'RV_batten23'   XB= 11.25   11.3    15.8    15.85   0.05    16.4    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'RV_batten24'   XB= 11.25   11.3    16.4    16.45   0.05    16.4    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
                                                
                                                
&OBST   ID= 'RH_batten1'    XB= 11.2    11.25   2.4     16.6    0.4     0.45    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'RH_batten2'    XB= 11.2    11.25   2.4     16.6    1       1.05    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'RH_batten3'    XB= 11.2    11.25   2.4     16.6    1.6     1.65    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'RH_batten4'    XB= 11.2    11.25   2.4     16.6    2.2     2.25    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'RH_batten5'    XB= 11.2    11.25   2.4     16.6    2.8     2.85    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'RH_batten6'    XB= 11.2    11.25   2.4     16.6    3.4     3.45    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'RH_batten7'    XB= 11.2    11.25   2.4     16.6    4       4.05    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'RH_batten8'    XB= 11.2    11.25   2.4     16.6    4.6     4.65    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'RH_batten9'    XB= 11.2    11.25   2.4     16.6    5.2     5.25    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'RH_batten10'   XB= 11.2    11.25   2.4     16.6    5.8     5.85    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'RH_batten11'   XB= 11.2    11.25   2.4     16.6    6.4     6.45    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'RH_batten12'   XB= 11.2    11.25   2.4     16.6    7       7.05    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'RH_batten13'   XB= 11.2    11.25   2.4     16.6    7.6     7.65    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'RH_batten14'   XB= 11.2    11.25   2.4     16.6    8.2     8.25    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'RH_batten15'   XB= 11.2    11.25   2.4     16.6    8.8     8.85    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'RH_batten16'   XB= 11.2    11.25   2.4     16.6    9.4     9.45    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'RH_batten17'   XB= 11.2    11.25   2.4     16.6    10      10.05   SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'RH_batten18'   XB= 11.2    11.25   2.4     16.6    10.6    10.65   SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'RH_batten19'   XB= 11.2    11.25   2.4     16.6    11.2    11.25   SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'RH_batten20'   XB= 11.2    11.25   2.4     16.6    11.8    11.85   SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'RH_batten21'   XB= 11.2    11.25   2.4     16.6    12.4    12.45   SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'RH_batten22'   XB= 11.2    11.25   2.4     16.6    13      13.05   SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'RH_batten23'   XB= 11.2    11.25   2.4     16.6    13.6    13.65   SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'RH_batten24'   XB= 11.2    11.25   2.4     16.6    14.2    14.25   SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'RH_batten25'   XB= 11.2    11.25   2.4     16.6    14.8    14.85   SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'RH_batten26'   XB= 11.2    11.25   2.4     16.6    15.4    15.45   SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'RH_batten27'   XB= 11.2    11.25   2.4     16.6    16      16.05   SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
                                                
&OBST   ID= 'CLADDING_RAD'  XB= 11.15   11.2    2       17      0.2     17      SURF_ID=    'CLAD'      /
//-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
//---- OUTPUT: Slice files, Boundary files, Point devices and Surface devices 
//-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
// Slice files 
// Temperature 
&SLCF   ID=  'FIRE_C_X_TEMP'        PBX=    11.2    QUANTITY=    'TEMPERATURE'  /        
&SLCF   ID=  'FIRE_C_Y_TEMP'        PBY=    9.5     QUANTITY=    'TEMPERATURE'  /           
&SLCF   ID=  'Y_TEMP_H3MFIRE'       PBY=    6.5     QUANTITY=    'TEMPERATURE'  /           
&SLCF   ID=  'Y_TEMP_V3MFIRE'       PBY=    12.5    QUANTITY=    'TEMPERATURE'  /           
&SLCF   ID=  'Z_2M_ABOVE_FIRE'      PBZ=    2.1     QUANTITY=    'TEMPERATURE'  /           
&SLCF   ID=  'X_MIDT_FACADE_TEMP'   PBX=    6.2     QUANTITY=    'TEMPERATURE'  /           
&SLCF   ID=  'X_EXP_FACADE_TEMP'    PBX=    1.2     QUANTITY=    'TEMPERATURE'  /           
&SLCF   ID=  'X_RAD_FACADE_TEMP'    PBX=    11.1    QUANTITY=    'TEMPERATURE'  /           
                                        
&SLCF   ID=  'FIRE_C_X_VEL'         PBX=    11.2    QUANTITY=    'VELOCITY' VECTOR= .TRUE.  /   
&SLCF   ID=  'FIRE_C_Y_VEL'         PBY=    9.5     QUANTITY=    'VELOCITY' VECTOR= .TRUE.  /   
                                        
//EXPOSED WALL THERMOCOUPLES                                        
                                        
//Exposed facade                                        
&DEVC   ID=  'EX_FAC_0_P1'  XYZ=    1.15    9.5     1.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'EX_FAC_0_P2'  XYZ=    1.15    9.5     2.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'EX_FAC_0_P3'  XYZ=    1.15    9.5     4.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'EX_FAC_0_P4'  XYZ=    1.15    9.5     8.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'EX_FAC_0_P5'  XYZ=    1.15    9.5     12.1    QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'EX_FAC_0_P6'  XYZ=    1.15    9.5     16.1    QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
                                        
/Venstre side                                       
&DEVC   ID=  'EX_FAC_L1_P1' XYZ=    1.15    6.5     1.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'EX_FAC_L1_P2' XYZ=    1.15    6.5     2.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'EX_FAC_L1_P3' XYZ=    1.15    6.5     4.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'EX_FAC_L1_P4' XYZ=    1.15    6.5     8.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'EX_FAC_L1_P5' XYZ=    1.15    6.5     12.1    QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
==PAGE:191==
&DEVC   ID=  'EX_FAC_L1_P6' XYZ=    1.15    6.5     16.1    QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
                                        
&DEVC   ID=  'EX_FAC_L2_P1' XYZ=    1.15    3.5     1.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'EX_FAC_L2_P2' XYZ=    1.15    3.5     2.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'EX_FAC_L2_P3' XYZ=    1.15    3.5     4.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'EX_FAC_L2_P4' XYZ=    1.15    3.5     8.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'EX_FAC_L2_P5' XYZ=    1.15    3.5     12.1    QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'EX_FAC_L2_P6' XYZ=    1.15    3.5     16.1    QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
                                        
/Højre side                                     
&DEVC   ID=  'EX_FAC_R1_P1' XYZ=    1.15    12.5    1.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'EX_FAC_R1_P2' XYZ=    1.15    12.5    2.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'EX_FAC_R1_P3' XYZ=    1.15    12.5    4.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'EX_FAC_R1_P4' XYZ=    1.15    12.5    8.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'EX_FAC_R1_P5' XYZ=    1.15    12.5    12.1    QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'EX_FAC_R1_P6' XYZ=    1.15    12.5    16.1    QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
                                        
&DEVC   ID=  'EX_FAC_R2_P1' XYZ=    1.15    15.5    1.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'EX_FAC_R2_P2' XYZ=    1.15    15.5    2.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'EX_FAC_R2_P3' XYZ=    1.15    15.5    4.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'EX_FAC_R2_P4' XYZ=    1.15    15.5    8.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'EX_FAC_R2_P5' XYZ=    1.15    15.5    12.1    QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'EX_FAC_R2_P6' XYZ=    1.15    15.5    16.1    QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
                                        
                                        
//RADIATION WALL THERMOCOUPLES                                      
//Radiating cavity                                      
&DEVC   ID=  'RA_CAV_0_P1'  XYZ=    11.3    9.5     1.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'RA_CAV_0_P2'  XYZ=    11.3    9.5     2.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'RA_CAV_0_P3'  XYZ=    11.3    9.5     4.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'RA_CAV_0_P4'  XYZ=    11.3    9.5     8.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'RA_CAV_0_P5'  XYZ=    11.3    9.5     12.1    QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'RA_CAV_0_P6'  XYZ=    11.3    9.5     16.1    QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
                                        
/Venstre side                                       
&DEVC   ID=  'RA_CAV_L1_P1' XYZ=    11.3    6.5     1.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'RA_CAV_L1_P2' XYZ=    11.3    6.5     2.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'RA_CAV_L1_P3' XYZ=    11.3    6.5     4.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'RA_CAV_L1_P4' XYZ=    11.3    6.5     8.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'RA_CAV_L1_P5' XYZ=    11.3    6.5     12.1    QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'RA_CAV_L1_P6' XYZ=    11.3    6.5     16.1    QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
                                        
&DEVC   ID=  'RA_CAV_L2_P1' XYZ=    11.3    3.5     1.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'RA_CAV_L2_P2' XYZ=    11.3    3.5     2.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'RA_CAV_L2_P3' XYZ=    11.3    3.5     4.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'RA_CAV_L2_P4' XYZ=    11.3    3.5     8.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'RA_CAV_L2_P5' XYZ=    11.3    3.5     12.1    QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'RA_CAV_L2_P6' XYZ=    11.3    3.5     16.1    QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
                                        
/Højre side                                     
&DEVC   ID=  'RA_CAV_R1_P1' XYZ=    11.3    12.5    1.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'RA_CAV_R1_P2' XYZ=    11.3    12.5    2.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'RA_CAV_R1_P3' XYZ=    11.3    12.5    4.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'RA_CAV_R1_P4' XYZ=    11.3    12.5    8.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'RA_CAV_R1_P5' XYZ=    11.3    12.5    12.1    QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'RA_CAV_R1_P6' XYZ=    11.3    12.5    16.1    QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
                                        
&DEVC   ID=  'RA_CAV_R2_P1' XYZ=    11.3    15.5    1.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'RA_CAV_R2_P2' XYZ=    11.3    15.5    2.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'RA_CAV_R2_P3' XYZ=    11.3    15.5    4.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'RA_CAV_R2_P4' XYZ=    11.3    15.5    8.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'RA_CAV_R2_P5' XYZ=    11.3    15.5    12.1    QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'RA_CAV_R2_P6' XYZ=    11.3    15.5    16.1    QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
                                        
//RAposed facade                                        
&DEVC   ID=  'RA_FAC_0_P1'  XYZ=    11.15   9.5     1.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'RA_FAC_0_P2'  XYZ=    11.15   9.5     2.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'RA_FAC_0_P3'  XYZ=    11.15   9.5     4.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'RA_FAC_0_P4'  XYZ=    11.15   9.5     8.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'RA_FAC_0_P5'  XYZ=    11.15   9.5     12.1    QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'RA_FAC_0_P6'  XYZ=    11.15   9.5     16.1    QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
                                        
/Venstre side                                       
&DEVC   ID=  'RA_FAC_L1_P1' XYZ=    11.15   6.5     1.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'RA_FAC_L1_P2' XYZ=    11.15   6.5     2.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'RA_FAC_L1_P3' XYZ=    11.15   6.5     4.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'RA_FAC_L1_P4' XYZ=    11.15   6.5     8.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'RA_FAC_L1_P5' XYZ=    11.15   6.5     12.1    QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'RA_FAC_L1_P6' XYZ=    11.15   6.5     16.1    QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
                                        
&DEVC   ID=  'RA_FAC_L2_P1' XYZ=    11.15   3.5     1.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'RA_FAC_L2_P2' XYZ=    11.15   3.5     2.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'RA_FAC_L2_P3' XYZ=    11.15   3.5     4.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'RA_FAC_L2_P4' XYZ=    11.15   3.5     8.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'RA_FAC_L2_P5' XYZ=    11.15   3.5     12.1    QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'RA_FAC_L2_P6' XYZ=    11.15   3.5     16.1    QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
                                        
==PAGE:192==
/Højre side                                     
&DEVC   ID=  'RA_FAC_R1_P1' XYZ=    11.15   12.5    1.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'RA_FAC_R1_P2' XYZ=    11.15   12.5    2.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'RA_FAC_R1_P3' XYZ=    11.15   12.5    4.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'RA_FAC_R1_P4' XYZ=    11.15   12.5    8.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'RA_FAC_R1_P5' XYZ=    11.15   12.5    12.1    QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'RA_FAC_R1_P6' XYZ=    11.15   12.5    16.1    QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
                                        
&DEVC   ID=  'RA_FAC_R2_P1' XYZ=    11.15   15.5    1.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'RA_FAC_R2_P2' XYZ=    11.15   15.5    2.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'RA_FAC_R2_P3' XYZ=    11.15   15.5    4.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'RA_FAC_R2_P4' XYZ=    11.15   15.5    8.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'RA_FAC_R2_P5' XYZ=    11.15   15.5    12.1    QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'RA_FAC_R2_P6' XYZ=    11.15   15.5    16.1    QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
                                        
// Surface device                                                                       
&DEVC   ID=  'NET HEAT FLUX_WALL'         XB=  1.1     1.15    2       17      0.2     17   QUANTITY=    'NET HEAT FLUX'          
&DEVC   ID=  'NET HEAT FLUX_WALLPIECE'    XB=  1.1     1.15    9.2     9.8     0.2     0.8  QUANTITY=    'NET HEAT FLUX'          
// DUMP files                           
&DUMP  DT_SLCF=2  DT_DEVC=2       DT_HRR=2    DT_CTRL=2   DT_RESTART=450  DT_MASS=2 / 
 
 
&TAIL /
==PAGE:193==
// This fds simulation/model is made for the master thesis: Thermal Radiation Between Wooden Facades in High-Rise Buildings
// Simulating Scenario Sc2.1, with a wastepaper basket at the bottom of the facade. 7.5 m distance between facades. 
// fds model made by Karoline Sandfeld-Nielsen (s173793)
// fds version: FDS6.7.9 
//-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
//---- MAIN
//-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
&HEAD 
    CHID='FACADE75' 
    TITLE='Brandspredning mellem to facader' /
&TIME           
    T_BEGIN  =  0
    T_END    =  3600 /        
&MISC           
    RESTART  =  .FALSE.
    TMPA     =  9.1
    BNDF_DEFAULT   =  .FALSE.
    RADIATION      =  .TRUE.
    SURF_DEFAULT   =   'FRAME' /
&RADI           
    TIME_STEP_INCREMENT  =  12
    NUMBER_RADIATION_ANGLES  =  100
    ANGLE_INCREMENT  =  20
/
                                                                                    
//-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
//---- MESH Total Cells 1964300                                                                                     
//-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
// Facader                                                                                              
&MESH   IJK=    6   80  160 XB= 8.5     8.8     2       6       0       8   MPI_PROCESS=    0   /   MESH #  1   "Rad_facade"      
&MESH   IJK=    4   80  100 XB= 1       1.2     2       6       12      17  MPI_PROCESS=    0   /   MESH #  2   "Exp_facade"      
&MESH   IJK=    6   120 40  XB= 8.5     8.8     6       12      8       10  MPI_PROCESS=    1   /   MESH #  3   "Rad_facade"      
&MESH   IJK=    10  120 80  XB= 8.3     8.8     6       12      0       4   MPI_PROCESS=    1   /   MESH #  4   "Ved brand"       
&MESH   IJK=    10  120 80  XB= 8.3     8.8     6       12      4       8   MPI_PROCESS=    2   /   MESH #  5   "Ved brand"       
&MESH   IJK=    13  10  180 XB= 8.5     9.8     1       2       0       18  MPI_PROCESS=    2   /   MESH #  6   "Små luft stykker
&MESH   IJK=    6   100 160 XB= 8.5     8.8     12      17      0       8   MPI_PROCESS=    3   /   MESH #  7   "Rad_facade"      
&MESH   IJK=    13  10  180 XB= 8.5     9.8     17      18      0       18  MPI_PROCESS=    3   /   MESH #  8   "Små luft stykker
&MESH   IJK=    6   80  40  XB= 8.5     8.8     2       6       8       10  MPI_PROCESS=    4   /   MESH #  9   "Rad_facade"      
&MESH   IJK=    34  30  90  XB= 1.2     8       12      18      0       18  MPI_PROCESS=    4   /   MESH #  10  "Luft mellem facad
&MESH   IJK=    6   100 40  XB= 8.5     8.8     12      17      8       10  MPI_PROCESS=    5   /   MESH #  11  "Rad_facade"      
&MESH   IJK=    12  10  180 XB= 0       1.2     1       2       0       18  MPI_PROCESS=    5   /   MESH #  12  "Små luft stykker
&MESH   IJK=    12  10  180 XB= 0       1.2     17      18      0       18  MPI_PROCESS=    5   /   MESH #  13  "Små luft stykker
&MESH   IJK=    13  170 10  XB= 8.5     9.8     1       18      17      18  MPI_PROCESS=    5   /   MESH #  14  "Luft over"       
&MESH   IJK=    6   85  5   XB= 0       1.2     1       18      17      18  MPI_PROCESS=    5   /   MESH #  15  "Luft over"       
&MESH   IJK=    5   60  100 XB= 8       8.5     6       12      8       18  MPI_PROCESS=    5   /   MESH #  16  "Luft mellem facad
&MESH   IJK=    6   80  140 XB= 8.5     8.8     2       6       10      17  MPI_PROCESS=    6   /   MESH #  17  "Rad_facade"      
&MESH   IJK=    4   120 100 XB= 1       1.2     6       12      12      17  MPI_PROCESS=    6   /   MESH #  18  "Exp_facade"      
&MESH   IJK=    6   120 140 XB= 8.5     8.8     6       12      10      17  MPI_PROCESS=    7   /   MESH #  19  "Rad_facade"      
&MESH   IJK=    6   100 140 XB= 8.5     8.8     12      17      10      17  MPI_PROCESS=    8   /   MESH #  20  "Rad_facade"      
&MESH   IJK=    5   75  85  XB= 0       1       2       17      0       17  MPI_PROCESS=    8   /   MESH #  21  "bag_exp"         
&MESH   IJK=    4   80  240 XB= 1       1.2     2       6       0       12  MPI_PROCESS=    9   /   MESH #  22  "Exp_facade"      
&MESH   IJK=    5   50  180 XB= 8       8.5     1       6       0       18  MPI_PROCESS=    9   /   MESH #  23  "Luft mellem facad
&MESH   IJK=    4   120 240 XB= 1       1.2     6       12      0       12  MPI_PROCESS=    10  /   MESH #  24  "Exp_facade"      
&MESH   IJK=    4   100 240 XB= 1       1.2     12      17      0       12  MPI_PROCESS=    11  /   MESH #  25  "Exp_facade"      
&MESH   IJK=    4   100 100 XB= 1       1.2     12      17      12      17  MPI_PROCESS=    12  /   MESH #  26  "Exp_facade"      
&MESH   IJK=    5   75  85  XB= 8.8     9.8     2       17      0       17  MPI_PROCESS=    12  /   MESH #  28  "bag_rad"         
&MESH   IJK=    34  25  90  XB= 1.2     8       1       6       0       18  MPI_PROCESS=    13  /   MESH #  27  "Luft mellem facad
&MESH   IJK=    71  60  20  XB= 1.2     8.3     6       12      0       2   MPI_PROCESS=    14  /   MESH #  29  "Luft mellem facad
&MESH   IJK=    71  60  30  XB= 1.2     8.3     6       12      2       5   MPI_PROCESS=    15  /   MESH #  30  "Luft mellem facad
&MESH   IJK=    71  60  30  XB= 1.2     8.3     6       12      5       8   MPI_PROCESS=    16  /   MESH #  31  "Luft mellem facad
&MESH   IJK=    5   60  180 XB= 8       8.5     12      18      0       18  MPI_PROCESS=    17  /   MESH #  32  "Luft mellem facad
&MESH   IJK=    34  30  50  XB= 1.2     8       6       12      8       18  MPI_PROCESS=    17  /   MESH #  33  "Luft mellem facad
//-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
//---- REACTIONS
//-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
&REAC ID = 'METHANOL'   
 C = 1  
 H = 4  
 O = 1  
 SOOT_YIELD = 0.001 
HEAT_OF_COMBUSTION = 19830  
 IDEAL = .FALSE. /  
//-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
//---- Methanol fire, which is stopped after 20 minutes (1200 seconds)                       
//-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
==PAGE:194==
/   Q_max   100 kW
&SURF   ID='FIRE' HRRPUA=555.555   RAMP_Q='fireramp'  COLOR=   'RED'  /   
&RAMP   ID='fireramp', T=0.0, F=0.0 /
&RAMP   ID='fireramp', T=86,  F=1.0 /
&RAMP   ID='fireramp', T=1140, F=1.0 /
&RAMP   ID='fireramp', T=1200, F=0.0 /
&OBST   XB= 8.5    8.8    9.2     9.8     0.0     0.1   SURF_IDS=    'FIRE','INERT','INERT'     /
                     
//-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
//---- MATERIALS
//-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
// MATERIALS
&MATL ID=
'GYPSUM'
CONDUCTIVITY=
0.48
SPECIFIC_HEAT=
0.84
DENSITY=
1440
/
&SPEC ID='WOOD' , FORMULA='CH1.7O0.83' , MW=57.6 , DENSITY_SOLID=420 ,  SPECIFIC_HEAT = 2.3, CONDUCTIVITY= 0.12 /
&MATL ID=
'FRAME'
 FYI=
'It is pine wood'
 CONDUCTIVITY=
0.12
 SPECIFIC_HEAT = 2.3
 DENSITY=
449 /
&MATL ID=
'BATTENS'
 FYI=
'It is pine wood'
 CONDUCTIVITY=   0.12    
 SPECIFIC_HEAT = 2.3    
 DENSITY=   624 
 SPEC_ID= 'WOOD'
 HEAT_OF_COMBUSTION= 23518
 /
&MATL ID=
'CLAD'
 FYI=
'It is pine wood'
 CONDUCTIVITY=   0.12    
 SPECIFIC_HEAT = 2.3    
 DENSITY=   417.460 
 SPEC_ID= 'WOOD'
 HEAT_OF_COMBUSTION= 21919 /
&MATL ID=
'STEEL'
CONDUCTIVITY=
45
SPECIFIC_HEAT=
0.48
DENSITY=
7820
/
//-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
//---- SURFACES 
//-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
&SURF ID=
'GYPSUM'
 MATL_ID(1,1) = 'GYPSUM'
COLOR = 'KHAKI'
 THICKNESS(1)=
0.015
 TRANSPARENCY=
1
/
&SURF ID=
'FRAME'
 MATL_ID(1,1)=
'FRAME'
 COLOR= 'MELON'
 THICKNESS= 0.045
 TRANSPARENCY=
1
/
&SURF ID=
'BATTENS'
 MATL_ID(1,1)=
'BATTENS'
 COLOR= 'ORANGE'
 THICKNESS= 0.045
 TRANSPARENCY=
1
 HRRPUA = 150.
 IGNITION_TEMPERATURE = 375.
 BURN_AWAY=.TRUE.
 BACKING='VOID' /
&SURF ID=
'CLAD'
 MATL_ID(1,1)=
'CLAD'
 COLOR= 'BROWN'
 THICKNESS= 0.021
 TRANSPARENCY=
1
==PAGE:195==
 HRRPUA = 150.
 IGNITION_TEMPERATURE = 375.
 BURN_AWAY=.TRUE.
 BACKING='VOID' /
&SURF ID=
'STEEL'
 MATL_ID(1,1) = 'STEEL'
 COLOR= 'SILVER'
 THICKNESS= 0.02
 TRANSPARENCY=
1
/
//-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
//---- VENTS & OPENINGS: Mesh boundaries and exhaust in hood
//-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
// Surfaces of exterior mesh boundaries                     
&VENT   MB=  'YMAX' SURF_ID=     'OPEN' /   
&VENT   MB=  'YMIN' SURF_ID=     'OPEN' /   
/&VENT   MB=  'XMAX' SURF_ID=     'OPEN' /   
/&VENT   MB=  'XMIN' SURF_ID=     'OPEN' /   
/&VENT   MB=  'ZMIN' SURF_ID=     'OPEN' /   
&VENT   MB=  'ZMAX' SURF_ID=     'OPEN' /   
//-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
//---- OBSTACLES                                                
//-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                
// Exposed wall                                                 
&OBST   ID= 'Gypsym wall1'  XB= 0       1       2       17      0       17      SURF_ID=    'GYPSUM'    /
&OBST   ID= 'EV_batten1'    XB= 1       1.05    2.6     2.65    0.05    16.4    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EV_batten2'    XB= 1       1.05    3.2     3.25    0.05    16.4    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EV_batten3'    XB= 1       1.05    3.8     3.85    0.05    16.4    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EV_batten4'    XB= 1       1.05    4.4     4.45    0.05    16.4    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EV_batten5'    XB= 1       1.05    5       5.05    0.05    16.4    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EV_batten6'    XB= 1       1.05    5.6     5.65    0.05    16.4    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EV_batten7'    XB= 1       1.05    6.2     6.25    0.05    16.4    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EV_batten8'    XB= 1       1.05    6.8     6.85    0.05    16.4    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EV_batten9'    XB= 1       1.05    7.4     7.45    0.05    16.4    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EV_batten10'   XB= 1       1.05    8       8.05    0.05    16.4    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EV_batten11'   XB= 1       1.05    8.6     8.65    0.05    16.4    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EV_batten12'   XB= 1       1.05    9.2     9.25    0.05    16.4    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EV_batten13'   XB= 1       1.05    9.8     9.85    0.05    16.4    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EV_batten14'   XB= 1       1.05    10.4    10.45   0.05    16.4    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EV_batten15'   XB= 1       1.05    11      11.05   0.05    16.4    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EV_batten16'   XB= 1       1.05    11.6    11.65   0.05    16.4    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EV_batten17'   XB= 1       1.05    12.2    12.25   0.05    16.4    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EV_batten18'   XB= 1       1.05    12.8    12.85   0.05    16.4    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EV_batten19'   XB= 1       1.05    13.4    13.45   0.05    16.4    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EV_batten20'   XB= 1       1.05    14      14.05   0.05    16.4    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EV_batten21'   XB= 1       1.05    14.6    14.65   0.05    16.4    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EV_batten22'   XB= 1       1.05    15.2    15.25   0.05    16.4    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EV_batten23'   XB= 1       1.05    15.8    15.85   0.05    16.4    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EV_batten24'   XB= 1       1.05    16.4    16.45   0.05    16.4    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
                                                
                                                
&OBST   ID= 'EH_batten1'    XB= 1.05    1.1     2.4     16.6    0.4     0.45    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EH_batten2'    XB= 1.05    1.1     2.4     16.6    1       1.05    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EH_batten3'    XB= 1.05    1.1     2.4     16.6    1.6     1.65    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EH_batten4'    XB= 1.05    1.1     2.4     16.6    2.2     2.25    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EH_batten5'    XB= 1.05    1.1     2.4     16.6    2.8     2.85    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EH_batten6'    XB= 1.05    1.1     2.4     16.6    3.4     3.45    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EH_batten7'    XB= 1.05    1.1     2.4     16.6    4       4.05    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EH_batten8'    XB= 1.05    1.1     2.4     16.6    4.6     4.65    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EH_batten9'    XB= 1.05    1.1     2.4     16.6    5.2     5.25    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EH_batten10'   XB= 1.05    1.1     2.4     16.6    5.8     5.85    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EH_batten11'   XB= 1.05    1.1     2.4     16.6    6.4     6.45    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EH_batten12'   XB= 1.05    1.1     2.4     16.6    7       7.05    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EH_batten13'   XB= 1.05    1.1     2.4     16.6    7.6     7.65    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EH_batten14'   XB= 1.05    1.1     2.4     16.6    8.2     8.25    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EH_batten15'   XB= 1.05    1.1     2.4     16.6    8.8     8.85    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EH_batten16'   XB= 1.05    1.1     2.4     16.6    9.4     9.45    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EH_batten17'   XB= 1.05    1.1     2.4     16.6    10      10.05   SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EH_batten18'   XB= 1.05    1.1     2.4     16.6    10.6    10.65   SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EH_batten19'   XB= 1.05    1.1     2.4     16.6    11.2    11.25   SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EH_batten20'   XB= 1.05    1.1     2.4     16.6    11.8    11.85   SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EH_batten21'   XB= 1.05    1.1     2.4     16.6    12.4    12.45   SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EH_batten22'   XB= 1.05    1.1     2.4     16.6    13      13.05   SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EH_batten23'   XB= 1.05    1.1     2.4     16.6    13.6    13.65   SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EH_batten24'   XB= 1.05    1.1     2.4     16.6    14.2    14.25   SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EH_batten25'   XB= 1.05    1.1     2.4     16.6    14.8    14.85   SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EH_batten26'   XB= 1.05    1.1     2.4     16.6    15.4    15.45   SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EH_batten27'   XB= 1.05    1.1     2.4     16.6    16      16.05   SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
                                                
&OBST   ID= 'CLADDING_EXP'  XB= 1.1     1.15    2       17      0.2     17      SURF_ID=    'CLAD'      /
==PAGE:196==
                                                
//  Radiation wall                                          
&OBST   ID= 'Gypsum wall 2' XB= 8.8     9.8     2       17      0       17      SURF_ID=    'GYPSUM'    /
                                                
&OBST   ID= 'RV_batten1'    XB= 8.75    8.8     2.6     2.65    0.05    16.4    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'RV_batten2'    XB= 8.75    8.8     3.2     3.25    0.05    16.4    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'RV_batten3'    XB= 8.75    8.8     3.8     3.85    0.05    16.4    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'RV_batten4'    XB= 8.75    8.8     4.4     4.45    0.05    16.4    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'RV_batten5'    XB= 8.75    8.8     5       5.05    0.05    16.4    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'RV_batten6'    XB= 8.75    8.8     5.6     5.65    0.05    16.4    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'RV_batten7'    XB= 8.75    8.8     6.2     6.25    0.05    16.4    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'RV_batten8'    XB= 8.75    8.8     6.8     6.85    0.05    16.4    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'RV_batten9'    XB= 8.75    8.8     7.4     7.45    0.05    16.4    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'RV_batten10'   XB= 8.75    8.8     8       8.05    0.05    16.4    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'RV_batten11'   XB= 8.75    8.8     8.6     8.65    0.05    16.4    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'RV_batten12'   XB= 8.75    8.8     9.2     9.25    0.05    16.4    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'RV_batten13'   XB= 8.75    8.8     9.8     9.85    0.05    16.4    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'RV_batten14'   XB= 8.75    8.8     10.4    10.45   0.05    16.4    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'RV_batten15'   XB= 8.75    8.8     11      11.05   0.05    16.4    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'RV_batten16'   XB= 8.75    8.8     11.6    11.65   0.05    16.4    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'RV_batten17'   XB= 8.75    8.8     12.2    12.25   0.05    16.4    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'RV_batten18'   XB= 8.75    8.8     12.8    12.85   0.05    16.4    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'RV_batten19'   XB= 8.75    8.8     13.4    13.45   0.05    16.4    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'RV_batten20'   XB= 8.75    8.8     14      14.05   0.05    16.4    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'RV_batten21'   XB= 8.75    8.8     14.6    14.65   0.05    16.4    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'RV_batten22'   XB= 8.75    8.8     15.2    15.25   0.05    16.4    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'RV_batten23'   XB= 8.75    8.8     15.8    15.85   0.05    16.4    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'RV_batten24'   XB= 8.75    8.8     16.4    16.45   0.05    16.4    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
                                                
                                                
&OBST   ID= 'RH_batten1'    XB= 8.7     8.75    2.4     16.6    0.4     0.45    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'RH_batten2'    XB= 8.7     8.75    2.4     16.6    1       1.05    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'RH_batten3'    XB= 8.7     8.75    2.4     16.6    1.6     1.65    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'RH_batten4'    XB= 8.7     8.75    2.4     16.6    2.2     2.25    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'RH_batten5'    XB= 8.7     8.75    2.4     16.6    2.8     2.85    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'RH_batten6'    XB= 8.7     8.75    2.4     16.6    3.4     3.45    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'RH_batten7'    XB= 8.7     8.75    2.4     16.6    4       4.05    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'RH_batten8'    XB= 8.7     8.75    2.4     16.6    4.6     4.65    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'RH_batten9'    XB= 8.7     8.75    2.4     16.6    5.2     5.25    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'RH_batten10'   XB= 8.7     8.75    2.4     16.6    5.8     5.85    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'RH_batten11'   XB= 8.7     8.75    2.4     16.6    6.4     6.45    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'RH_batten12'   XB= 8.7     8.75    2.4     16.6    7       7.05    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'RH_batten13'   XB= 8.7     8.75    2.4     16.6    7.6     7.65    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'RH_batten14'   XB= 8.7     8.75    2.4     16.6    8.2     8.25    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'RH_batten15'   XB= 8.7     8.75    2.4     16.6    8.8     8.85    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'RH_batten16'   XB= 8.7     8.75    2.4     16.6    9.4     9.45    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'RH_batten17'   XB= 8.7     8.75    2.4     16.6    10      10.05   SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'RH_batten18'   XB= 8.7     8.75    2.4     16.6    10.6    10.65   SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'RH_batten19'   XB= 8.7     8.75    2.4     16.6    11.2    11.25   SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'RH_batten20'   XB= 8.7     8.75    2.4     16.6    11.8    11.85   SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'RH_batten21'   XB= 8.7     8.75    2.4     16.6    12.4    12.45   SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'RH_batten22'   XB= 8.7     8.75    2.4     16.6    13      13.05   SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'RH_batten23'   XB= 8.7     8.75    2.4     16.6    13.6    13.65   SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'RH_batten24'   XB= 8.7     8.75    2.4     16.6    14.2    14.25   SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'RH_batten25'   XB= 8.7     8.75    2.4     16.6    14.8    14.85   SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'RH_batten26'   XB= 8.7     8.75    2.4     16.6    15.4    15.45   SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'RH_batten27'   XB= 8.7     8.75    2.4     16.6    16      16.05   SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
                                                
&OBST   ID= 'CLADDING_RAD'  XB= 8.65    8.7     2       17      0.2     17      SURF_ID=    'CLAD'      /
                                     
//-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
//---- OUTPUT: Slice files, Boundary files, Point devices and Surface devices 
//-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
// Slice files 
// Temperature 
                                        
&SLCF   ID=  'FIRE_C_X_TEMP'        PBX=    8.7     QUANTITY=    'TEMPERATURE'  /           
&SLCF   ID=  'FIRE_C_Y_TEMP'        PBY=    9.5     QUANTITY=    'TEMPERATURE'  /           
&SLCF   ID=  'Y_TEMP_H3MFIRE'       PBY=    6.5     QUANTITY=    'TEMPERATURE'  /           
&SLCF   ID=  'Y_TEMP_V3MFIRE'       PBY=    12.5    QUANTITY=    'TEMPERATURE'  /           
&SLCF   ID=  'Z_2M_ABOVE_FIRE'      PBZ=    2.1     QUANTITY=    'TEMPERATURE'  /           
&SLCF   ID=  'X_MIDT_FACADE_TEMP'   PBX=    4.9     QUANTITY=    'TEMPERATURE'  /           
&SLCF   ID=  'X_EXP_FACADE_TEMP'    PBX=    1.2     QUANTITY=    'TEMPERATURE'  /           
&SLCF   ID=  'X_RAD_FACADE_TEMP'    PBX=    8.6     QUANTITY=    'TEMPERATURE'  /           
                                        
&SLCF   ID=  'FIRE_C_X_VEL'         PBX=    8.7     QUANTITY=    'VELOCITY' VECTOR= .TRUE.  /   
&SLCF   ID=  'FIRE_C_Y_VEL'         PBY=    9.5     QUANTITY=    'VELOCITY' VECTOR= .TRUE.  /   
                                        
                                        
///EXPOSED WALL THERMOCOUPLES                                       
                                        
//Exposed facade                                        
&DEVC   ID=  'EX_FAC_0_P1'  XYZ=    1.15    9.5     1.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
==PAGE:197==
&DEVC   ID=  'EX_FAC_0_P2'  XYZ=    1.15    9.5     2.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'EX_FAC_0_P3'  XYZ=    1.15    9.5     4.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'EX_FAC_0_P4'  XYZ=    1.15    9.5     8.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'EX_FAC_0_P5'  XYZ=    1.15    9.5     12.1    QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'EX_FAC_0_P6'  XYZ=    1.15    9.5     16.1    QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
                                        
/Venstre side                                       
&DEVC   ID=  'EX_FAC_L1_P1' XYZ=    1.15    6.5     1.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'EX_FAC_L1_P2' XYZ=    1.15    6.5     2.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'EX_FAC_L1_P3' XYZ=    1.15    6.5     4.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'EX_FAC_L1_P4' XYZ=    1.15    6.5     8.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'EX_FAC_L1_P5' XYZ=    1.15    6.5     12.1    QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'EX_FAC_L1_P6' XYZ=    1.15    6.5     16.1    QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
                                        
&DEVC   ID=  'EX_FAC_L2_P1' XYZ=    1.15    3.5     1.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'EX_FAC_L2_P2' XYZ=    1.15    3.5     2.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'EX_FAC_L2_P3' XYZ=    1.15    3.5     4.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'EX_FAC_L2_P4' XYZ=    1.15    3.5     8.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'EX_FAC_L2_P5' XYZ=    1.15    3.5     12.1    QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'EX_FAC_L2_P6' XYZ=    1.15    3.5     16.1    QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
                                        
/Højre side                                     
&DEVC   ID=  'EX_FAC_R1_P1' XYZ=    1.15    12.5    1.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'EX_FAC_R1_P2' XYZ=    1.15    12.5    2.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'EX_FAC_R1_P3' XYZ=    1.15    12.5    4.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'EX_FAC_R1_P4' XYZ=    1.15    12.5    8.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'EX_FAC_R1_P5' XYZ=    1.15    12.5    12.1    QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'EX_FAC_R1_P6' XYZ=    1.15    12.5    16.1    QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
                                        
&DEVC   ID=  'EX_FAC_R2_P1' XYZ=    1.15    15.5    1.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'EX_FAC_R2_P2' XYZ=    1.15    15.5    2.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'EX_FAC_R2_P3' XYZ=    1.15    15.5    4.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'EX_FAC_R2_P4' XYZ=    1.15    15.5    8.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'EX_FAC_R2_P5' XYZ=    1.15    15.5    12.1    QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'EX_FAC_R2_P6' XYZ=    1.15    15.5    16.1    QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
                                        
                                        
//RADIATION WALL THERMOCOUPLES                                      
//Radiating cavity                                      
&DEVC   ID=  'RA_CAV_0_P1'  XYZ=    8.8     9.5     1.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'RA_CAV_0_P2'  XYZ=    8.8     9.5     2.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'RA_CAV_0_P3'  XYZ=    8.8     9.5     4.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'RA_CAV_0_P4'  XYZ=    8.8     9.5     8.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'RA_CAV_0_P5'  XYZ=    8.8     9.5     12.1    QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'RA_CAV_0_P6'  XYZ=    8.8     9.5     16.1    QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
                                        
/Venstre side                                       
&DEVC   ID=  'RA_CAV_L1_P1' XYZ=    8.8     6.5     1.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'RA_CAV_L1_P2' XYZ=    8.8     6.5     2.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'RA_CAV_L1_P3' XYZ=    8.8     6.5     4.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'RA_CAV_L1_P4' XYZ=    8.8     6.5     8.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'RA_CAV_L1_P5' XYZ=    8.8     6.5     12.1    QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'RA_CAV_L1_P6' XYZ=    8.8     6.5     16.1    QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
                                        
&DEVC   ID=  'RA_CAV_L2_P1' XYZ=    8.8     3.5     1.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'RA_CAV_L2_P2' XYZ=    8.8     3.5     2.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'RA_CAV_L2_P3' XYZ=    8.8     3.5     4.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'RA_CAV_L2_P4' XYZ=    8.8     3.5     8.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'RA_CAV_L2_P5' XYZ=    8.8     3.5     12.1    QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'RA_CAV_L2_P6' XYZ=    8.8     3.5     16.1    QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
                                        
/Højre side                                     
&DEVC   ID=  'RA_CAV_R1_P1' XYZ=    8.8     12.5    1.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'RA_CAV_R1_P2' XYZ=    8.8     12.5    2.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'RA_CAV_R1_P3' XYZ=    8.8     12.5    4.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'RA_CAV_R1_P4' XYZ=    8.8     12.5    8.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'RA_CAV_R1_P5' XYZ=    8.8     12.5    12.1    QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'RA_CAV_R1_P6' XYZ=    8.8     12.5    16.1    QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
                                        
&DEVC   ID=  'RA_CAV_R2_P1' XYZ=    8.8     15.5    1.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'RA_CAV_R2_P2' XYZ=    8.8     15.5    2.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'RA_CAV_R2_P3' XYZ=    8.8     15.5    4.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'RA_CAV_R2_P4' XYZ=    8.8     15.5    8.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'RA_CAV_R2_P5' XYZ=    8.8     15.5    12.1    QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'RA_CAV_R2_P6' XYZ=    8.8     15.5    16.1    QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
                                        
//RAposed facade                                        
&DEVC   ID=  'RA_FAC_0_P1'  XYZ=    8.65    9.5     1.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'RA_FAC_0_P2'  XYZ=    8.65    9.5     2.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'RA_FAC_0_P3'  XYZ=    8.65    9.5     4.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'RA_FAC_0_P4'  XYZ=    8.65    9.5     8.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'RA_FAC_0_P5'  XYZ=    8.65    9.5     12.1    QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'RA_FAC_0_P6'  XYZ=    8.65    9.5     16.1    QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
                                        
/Venstre side                                       
&DEVC   ID=  'RA_FAC_L1_P1' XYZ=    8.65    6.5     1.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'RA_FAC_L1_P2' XYZ=    8.65    6.5     2.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
==PAGE:198==
&DEVC   ID=  'RA_FAC_L1_P3' XYZ=    8.65    6.5     4.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'RA_FAC_L1_P4' XYZ=    8.65    6.5     8.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'RA_FAC_L1_P5' XYZ=    8.65    6.5     12.1    QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'RA_FAC_L1_P6' XYZ=    8.65    6.5     16.1    QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
                                        
&DEVC   ID=  'RA_FAC_L2_P1' XYZ=    8.65    3.5     1.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'RA_FAC_L2_P2' XYZ=    8.65    3.5     2.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'RA_FAC_L2_P3' XYZ=    8.65    3.5     4.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'RA_FAC_L2_P4' XYZ=    8.65    3.5     8.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'RA_FAC_L2_P5' XYZ=    8.65    3.5     12.1    QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'RA_FAC_L2_P6' XYZ=    8.65    3.5     16.1    QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
                                        
/Højre side                                     
&DEVC   ID=  'RA_FAC_R1_P1' XYZ=    8.65    12.5    1.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'RA_FAC_R1_P2' XYZ=    8.65    12.5    2.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'RA_FAC_R1_P3' XYZ=    8.65    12.5    4.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'RA_FAC_R1_P4' XYZ=    8.65    12.5    8.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'RA_FAC_R1_P5' XYZ=    8.65    12.5    12.1    QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'RA_FAC_R1_P6' XYZ=    8.65    12.5    16.1    QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
                                        
&DEVC   ID=  'RA_FAC_R2_P1' XYZ=    8.65    15.5    1.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'RA_FAC_R2_P2' XYZ=    8.65    15.5    2.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'RA_FAC_R2_P3' XYZ=    8.65    15.5    4.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'RA_FAC_R2_P4' XYZ=    8.65    15.5    8.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'RA_FAC_R2_P5' XYZ=    8.65    15.5    12.1    QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
&DEVC   ID=  'RA_FAC_R2_P6' XYZ=    8.65    15.5    16.1    QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /
                                        
// Surface device                                                                       
&DEVC   ID=  'NET HEAT FLUX_WALL'         XB=  1.1     1.15    2       17      0.2     17   QUANTITY=    'NET HEAT FLUX'          
&DEVC   ID=  'NET HEAT FLUX_WALLPIECE'    XB=  1.1     1.15    9.2     9.8     0.2     0.8  QUANTITY=    'NET HEAT FLUX'          
// DUMP files                           
&DUMP  DT_SLCF=2  DT_DEVC=2       DT_HRR=2    DT_CTRL=2   DT_RESTART=450  DT_MASS=2 / 
 
 
&TAIL /
==PAGE:199==
N
FDS code: Rough FDS model with 10 m
Facade Distance
Thermal Radiation Between Wooden Facades in High­Rise Buildings
187
==PAGE:200==
// This fds simulation/model is made for the master thesis: Thermal Radiation Between Wooden Facades in High-Rise Buildings
// Simulating Scenario WALL, with a whole wall on fire, T_flame 1100K or 827°C. 10 m distance between facades. 
// fds model made by Karoline Sandfeld-Nielsen (s173793)
// fds version: FDS6.7.9 
//-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
//---- MAIN
//-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
&HEAD 
    CHID='WALL' 
    TITLE='Brandspredning mellem to facader' /
&TIME           
    T_BEGIN  =  0
    T_END    =  3600 /     
&MISC           
    RESTART  =  .FALSE.
    TMPA     =  9.1
    BNDF_DEFAULT   =  .FALSE.
    RADIATION      =  .TRUE.
    SURF_DEFAULT   =   'FRAME' /
&RADI           
    TIME_STEP_INCREMENT  =  12
    NUMBER_RADIATION_ANGLES  =  100
    ANGLE_INCREMENT  =  20
/
//-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
//---- MESH Total Cells 758625                                         
//-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
&MESH   IJK=    50  20  40  XB= 1.2  11.2    2   6   0   8   MPI_PROCESS=    0   /   MESH #  1   "Domæne"    CELLS   40000   RESOL
&MESH   IJK=    50  30  40  XB= 1.2  11.2    6   12  0   8   MPI_PROCESS=    1   /   MESH #  2   "Domæne"    CELLS   60000   RESOL
&MESH   IJK=    50  25  40  XB= 1.2  11.2    12  17  0   8   MPI_PROCESS=    2   /   MESH #  3   "Domæne"    CELLS   50000   RESOL
&MESH   IJK=    50  20  45  XB= 1.2  11.2    2   6   8   17  MPI_PROCESS=    3   /   MESH #  4   "Domæne"    CELLS   45000   RESOL
&MESH   IJK=    50  30  45  XB= 1.2  11.2    6   12  8   17  MPI_PROCESS=    4   /   MESH #  5   "Domæne"    CELLS   67500   RESOL
&MESH   IJK=    50  25  45  XB= 1.2  11.2    12  17  8   17  MPI_PROCESS=    5   /   MESH #  6   "Domæne"    CELLS   56250   RESOL
&MESH   IJK=    5   75  85  XB= 0    1       2   17  0   17  MPI_PROCESS=    6   /   MESH #  7   "bag_exp"   CELLS   31875   RESOL
&MESH   IJK=    4   120 160 XB= 1    1.2     2   8   0   8   MPI_PROCESS=    7   /   MESH #  8   "Ved brand" CELLS   76800   RESOL
&MESH   IJK=    4   180 80  XB= 1    1.2     8   17  0   4   MPI_PROCESS=    8   /   MESH #  9   "Ved brand" CELLS   57600   RESOL
&MESH   IJK=    4   180 80  XB= 1    1.2     8   17  4   8   MPI_PROCESS=    9   /   MESH #  10  "Ved brand" CELLS   57600   RESOL
&MESH   IJK=    4   120 180 XB= 1    1.2     2   8   8   17  MPI_PROCESS=    10  /   MESH #  11  "Ved brand" CELLS   86400   RESOL
&MESH   IJK=    4   180 100 XB= 1    1.2     8   17  8   13  MPI_PROCESS=    11  /   MESH #  12  "Ved brand" CELLS   72000   RESOL
&MESH   IJK=    4   180 80  XB= 1    1.2     8   17  13  17  MPI_PROCESS=    12  /   MESH #  13  "Ved brand" CELLS   57600   RESOL
//-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
//---- REACTIONS
//-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
&REAC ID = 'METHANOL'   
 C = 1  
 H = 4  
 O = 1  
 SOOT_YIELD = 0.001 
HEAT_OF_COMBUSTION = 19830  
 IDEAL = .FALSE. /  
                     
//-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
//---- MATERIALS
//-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
// MATERIALS
&MATL ID=
'GYPSUM'
CONDUCTIVITY=
0.48
SPECIFIC_HEAT=
0.84
DENSITY=
1440
/
&SPEC ID='WOOD' , FORMULA='CH1.7O0.83' , MW=57.6 , DENSITY_SOLID=420 ,  SPECIFIC_HEAT = 2.3, CONDUCTIVITY= 0.12 /
&MATL ID=
'FRAME'
 FYI=
'It is pine wood'
 CONDUCTIVITY=
0.12
 SPECIFIC_HEAT = 2.3
 DENSITY=
449 /
&MATL ID=
'BATTENS'
 FYI=
'It is pine wood'
 CONDUCTIVITY=   0.12    
 SPECIFIC_HEAT = 2.3    
 DENSITY=   624 
 SPEC_ID= 'WOOD'
 HEAT_OF_COMBUSTION= 23518
 /
==PAGE:201==
&MATL ID=
'CLAD'
 FYI=
'It is pine wood'
 CONDUCTIVITY=   0.12    
 SPECIFIC_HEAT = 2.3    
 DENSITY=   417.460 
 SPEC_ID= 'WOOD'
 HEAT_OF_COMBUSTION= 21919 /
&MATL ID=
'STEEL'
CONDUCTIVITY=
45
SPECIFIC_HEAT=
0.48
DENSITY=
7820
/
//-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
//---- SURFACES 
//-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
&SURF ID=
'GYPSUM'
 MATL_ID(1,1) = 'GYPSUM'
COLOR = 'KHAKI'
 THICKNESS(1)=
0.015
 TRANSPARENCY=
1
/
&SURF ID=
'FRAME'
 MATL_ID(1,1)=
'FRAME'
 COLOR= 'MELON'
 THICKNESS= 0.045
 TRANSPARENCY=
1
/
&SURF ID=
'BATTENS'
 MATL_ID(1,1)=
'BATTENS'
 COLOR= 'ORANGE'
 THICKNESS= 0.045
 TRANSPARENCY=
1
 HRRPUA = 150.
 IGNITION_TEMPERATURE = 375.
 BURN_AWAY=.TRUE.
 BACKING='VOID' /
&SURF ID=
'CLAD'
 MATL_ID(1,1)=
'CLAD'
 COLOR= 'BROWN'
 THICKNESS= 0.021
 TRANSPARENCY=
1
 HRRPUA = 150.
 IGNITION_TEMPERATURE = 375.
 BURN_AWAY=.TRUE.
 BACKING='VOID' /
&SURF ID=
'STEEL'
 MATL_ID(1,1) = 'STEEL'
 COLOR= 'SILVER'
 THICKNESS= 0.02
 TRANSPARENCY=
1
/
//-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
//---- VENTS & OPENINGS: Mesh boundaries and exhaust in hood
//-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
&SURF ID = 'HOT' TMP_FRONT = 827. /            
            
// Surfaces of exterior mesh boundaries                     
&VENT   MB=  'YMAX' SURF_ID=     'OPEN' /   
&VENT   MB=  'YMIN' SURF_ID=     'OPEN' /   
&VENT   MB=  'XMAX' SURF_ID=     'HOT' COLOR='RED' /   
/&VENT   MB=  'XMIN' SURF_ID=     'OPEN' /   
/&VENT   MB=  'ZMIN' SURF_ID=     'OPEN' /   
&VENT   MB=  'ZMAX' SURF_ID=     'OPEN' /   
//-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
//---- OBSTACLES                                                
//-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                             
// Exposed wall                                                 
&OBST   ID= 'Gypsym wall1'  XB= 0   1       2       17      0       17  SURF_ID=    'GYPSUM'    /
&OBST   ID= 'EV_batten1'    XB= 1   1.05    2.6     2.65    0.05    16.4    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EV_batten2'    XB= 1   1.05    3.2     3.25    0.05    16.4    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EV_batten3'    XB= 1   1.05    3.8     3.85    0.05    16.4    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
==PAGE:202==
&OBST   ID= 'EV_batten4'    XB= 1   1.05    4.4     4.45    0.05    16.4    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EV_batten5'    XB= 1   1.05    5       5.05    0.05    16.4    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EV_batten6'    XB= 1   1.05    5.6     5.65    0.05    16.4    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EV_batten7'    XB= 1   1.05    6.2     6.25    0.05    16.4    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EV_batten8'    XB= 1   1.05    6.8     6.85    0.05    16.4    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EV_batten9'    XB= 1   1.05    7.4     7.45    0.05    16.4    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EV_batten10'   XB= 1   1.05    8       8.05    0.05    16.4    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EV_batten11'   XB= 1   1.05    8.6     8.65    0.05    16.4    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EV_batten12'   XB= 1   1.05    9.2     9.25    0.05    16.4    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EV_batten13'   XB= 1   1.05    9.8     9.85    0.05    16.4    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EV_batten14'   XB= 1   1.05    10.4    10.45   0.05    16.4    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EV_batten15'   XB= 1   1.05    11      11.05   0.05    16.4    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EV_batten16'   XB= 1   1.05    11.6    11.65   0.05    16.4    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EV_batten17'   XB= 1   1.05    12.2    12.25   0.05    16.4    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EV_batten18'   XB= 1   1.05    12.8    12.85   0.05    16.4    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EV_batten19'   XB= 1   1.05    13.4    13.45   0.05    16.4    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EV_batten20'   XB= 1   1.05    14      14.05   0.05    16.4    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EV_batten21'   XB= 1   1.05    14.6    14.65   0.05    16.4    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EV_batten22'   XB= 1   1.05    15.2    15.25   0.05    16.4    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EV_batten23'   XB= 1   1.05    15.8    15.85   0.05    16.4    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EV_batten24'   XB= 1   1.05    16.4    16.45   0.05    16.4    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
                                                
                                                
&OBST   ID= 'EH_batten1'    XB= 1.05    1.1     2.4     16.6    0.4     0.45    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EH_batten2'    XB= 1.05    1.1     2.4     16.6    1       1.05    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EH_batten3'    XB= 1.05    1.1     2.4     16.6    1.6     1.65    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EH_batten4'    XB= 1.05    1.1     2.4     16.6    2.2     2.25    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EH_batten5'    XB= 1.05    1.1     2.4     16.6    2.8     2.85    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EH_batten6'    XB= 1.05    1.1     2.4     16.6    3.4     3.45    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EH_batten7'    XB= 1.05    1.1     2.4     16.6    4       4.05    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EH_batten8'    XB= 1.05    1.1     2.4     16.6    4.6     4.65    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EH_batten9'    XB= 1.05    1.1     2.4     16.6    5.2     5.25    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EH_batten10'   XB= 1.05    1.1     2.4     16.6    5.8     5.85    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EH_batten11'   XB= 1.05    1.1     2.4     16.6    6.4     6.45    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EH_batten12'   XB= 1.05    1.1     2.4     16.6    7       7.05    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EH_batten13'   XB= 1.05    1.1     2.4     16.6    7.6     7.65    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EH_batten14'   XB= 1.05    1.1     2.4     16.6    8.2     8.25    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EH_batten15'   XB= 1.05    1.1     2.4     16.6    8.8     8.85    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EH_batten16'   XB= 1.05    1.1     2.4     16.6    9.4     9.45    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EH_batten17'   XB= 1.05    1.1     2.4     16.6    10      10.05   SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EH_batten18'   XB= 1.05    1.1     2.4     16.6    10.6    10.65   SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EH_batten19'   XB= 1.05    1.1     2.4     16.6    11.2    11.25   SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EH_batten20'   XB= 1.05    1.1     2.4     16.6    11.8    11.85   SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EH_batten21'   XB= 1.05    1.1     2.4     16.6    12.4    12.45   SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EH_batten22'   XB= 1.05    1.1     2.4     16.6    13      13.05   SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EH_batten23'   XB= 1.05    1.1     2.4     16.6    13.6    13.65   SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EH_batten24'   XB= 1.05    1.1     2.4     16.6    14.2    14.25   SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EH_batten25'   XB= 1.05    1.1     2.4     16.6    14.8    14.85   SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EH_batten26'   XB= 1.05    1.1     2.4     16.6    15.4    15.45   SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EH_batten27'   XB= 1.05    1.1     2.4     16.6    16      16.05   SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
                                                
&OBST   ID= 'CLADDING_EXP'  XB= 1.1     1.15    2       17      0.2     17      SURF_ID=    'CLAD'  /
                                                
//-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
//---- OUTPUT: Slice files, Boundary files, Point devices and Surface devices 
//-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
// Slice files 
// Temperature 
&SLCF   ID=  'FIRE_C_X_TEMP'        PBX=    11.1    QUANTITY=    'TEMPERATURE'  /        
&SLCF   ID=  'FIRE_C_Y_TEMP'        PBY=    9.5     QUANTITY=    'TEMPERATURE'  /           
&SLCF   ID=  'Y_TEMP_H3MFIRE'       PBY=    6.5     QUANTITY=    'TEMPERATURE'  /           
&SLCF   ID=  'Y_TEMP_V3MFIRE'       PBY=    12.5    QUANTITY=    'TEMPERATURE'  /           
&SLCF   ID=  'Z_2M_ABOVE_FIRE'      PBZ=    2       QUANTITY=    'TEMPERATURE'  / 
&SLCF   ID=  'Z_2M_ABOVE_FIRE'      PBZ=    6       QUANTITY=    'TEMPERATURE'  /             
&SLCF   ID=  'X_MIDT_FACADE_TEMP'   PBX=    6.2     QUANTITY=    'TEMPERATURE'  /           
&SLCF   ID=  'X_EXP_FACADE_TEMP'    PBX=    1.2     QUANTITY=    'TEMPERATURE'  /                
                                        
&SLCF   ID=  'FIRE_C_X_VEL'         PBX=    11.1    QUANTITY=    'VELOCITY' VECTOR= .TRUE.  /   
&SLCF   ID=  'FIRE_C_Y_VEL'         PBY=    9.5     QUANTITY=    'VELOCITY' VECTOR= .TRUE.  /   
                                        
//EXPOSED WALL THERMOCOUPLES                                        
                                        
///Exposed facade                                                                       
&DEVC   ID=  'EX_FAC_0_P1'  XYZ=    1.15    9.5 1.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /                               
&DEVC   ID=  'EX_FAC_0_P2'  XYZ=    1.15    9.5 2.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /                               
&DEVC   ID=  'EX_FAC_0_P3'  XYZ=    1.15    9.5 4.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /                               
&DEVC   ID=  'EX_FAC_0_P4'  XYZ=    1.15    9.5 8.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /                               
&DEVC   ID=  'EX_FAC_0_P5'  XYZ=    1.15    9.5 12.1    QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /                               
&DEVC   ID=  'EX_FAC_0_P6'  XYZ=    1.15    9.5 16.1    QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /                               
                                                                        
/Venstre side                                                                       
&DEVC   ID=  'EX_FAC_L1_P1' XYZ=    1.15    6.5 1.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /                               
&DEVC   ID=  'EX_FAC_L1_P2' XYZ=    1.15    6.5 2.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /                               
&DEVC   ID=  'EX_FAC_L1_P3' XYZ=    1.15    6.5 4.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /                               
&DEVC   ID=  'EX_FAC_L1_P4' XYZ=    1.15    6.5 8.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /                               
&DEVC   ID=  'EX_FAC_L1_P5' XYZ=    1.15    6.5 12.1    QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /                               
==PAGE:203==
&DEVC   ID=  'EX_FAC_L1_P6' XYZ=    1.15    6.5 16.1    QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /                               
                                                                        
&DEVC   ID=  'EX_FAC_L2_P1' XYZ=    1.15    3.5 1.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /                               
&DEVC   ID=  'EX_FAC_L2_P2' XYZ=    1.15    3.5 2.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /                               
&DEVC   ID=  'EX_FAC_L2_P3' XYZ=    1.15    3.5 4.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /                               
&DEVC   ID=  'EX_FAC_L2_P4' XYZ=    1.15    3.5 8.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /                               
&DEVC   ID=  'EX_FAC_L2_P5' XYZ=    1.15    3.5 12.1    QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /                               
&DEVC   ID=  'EX_FAC_L2_P6' XYZ=    1.15    3.5 16.1    QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /                               
                                                                        
/Højre side                                                                     
&DEVC   ID=  'EX_FAC_R1_P1' XYZ=    1.15    12.5    1.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /                               
&DEVC   ID=  'EX_FAC_R1_P2' XYZ=    1.15    12.5    2.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /                               
&DEVC   ID=  'EX_FAC_R1_P3' XYZ=    1.15    12.5    4.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /                               
&DEVC   ID=  'EX_FAC_R1_P4' XYZ=    1.15    12.5    8.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /                               
&DEVC   ID=  'EX_FAC_R1_P5' XYZ=    1.15    12.5    12.1    QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /                               
&DEVC   ID=  'EX_FAC_R1_P6' XYZ=    1.15    12.5    16.1    QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /                               
                                                                        
&DEVC   ID=  'EX_FAC_R2_P1' XYZ=    1.15    15.5    1.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /                               
&DEVC   ID=  'EX_FAC_R2_P2' XYZ=    1.15    15.5    2.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /                               
&DEVC   ID=  'EX_FAC_R2_P3' XYZ=    1.15    15.5    4.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /                               
&DEVC   ID=  'EX_FAC_R2_P4' XYZ=    1.15    15.5    8.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /                               
&DEVC   ID=  'EX_FAC_R2_P5' XYZ=    1.15    15.5    12.1    QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /                               
&DEVC   ID=  'EX_FAC_R2_P6' XYZ=    1.15    15.5    16.1    QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /                               
                                                                        
                                   
// Surface device                                                                         
&DEVC   ID=  'NET HEAT FLUX_WALLPIECE1' XB=  1.1  1.15  9  10  4  5   QUANTITY= 'NET HEAT FLUX'   IOR=    1  
// DUMP files                           
&DUMP  DT_SLCF=2  DT_DEVC=2    DT_HRR=2    DT_CTRL=2   DT_RESTART=150  DT_MASS=2 / 
 
&TAIL /
==PAGE:204==
O
FDS code: Rough FDS model with 12.2 m
Facade Distance
192
Thermal Radiation Between Wooden Facades in High­Rise Buildings
==PAGE:205==
// This fds simulation/model is made for the master thesis: Thermal Radiation Between Wooden Facades in High-Rise Buildings
// Simulating Scenario WALL, with a whole wall on fire, T_flame 1100K or 827°C. 12.2 m distance between facades. 
// fds model made by Karoline Sandfeld-Nielsen (s173793)
// fds version: FDS6.7.9 
//-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
//---- MAIN
//-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
&HEAD 
    CHID='WALL12' 
    TITLE='Brandspredning mellem to facader' /
&TIME           
    T_BEGIN  =  0
    T_END    =  3600 /     
&MISC           
    RESTART  =  .FALSE.
    TMPA     =  9.1
    BNDF_DEFAULT   =  .FALSE.
    RADIATION      =  .TRUE.
    SURF_DEFAULT   =   'FRAME' /
&RADI           
    TIME_STEP_INCREMENT  =  12
    NUMBER_RADIATION_ANGLES  =  100
    ANGLE_INCREMENT  =  20
/
//-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
//---- MESH Total Cells 758625                                         
//-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
&MESH   IJK=    50  20  40  XB= 1.2  13.4    2   6   0   8   MPI_PROCESS=    0   /   MESH #  1   "Domæne"    CELLS   40000   RESOL
&MESH   IJK=    50  30  40  XB= 1.2  13.4    6   12  0   8   MPI_PROCESS=    1   /   MESH #  2   "Domæne"    CELLS   60000   RESOL
&MESH   IJK=    50  25  40  XB= 1.2  13.4    12  17  0   8   MPI_PROCESS=    2   /   MESH #  3   "Domæne"    CELLS   50000   RESOL
&MESH   IJK=    50  20  45  XB= 1.2  13.4    2   6   8   17  MPI_PROCESS=    3   /   MESH #  4   "Domæne"    CELLS   45000   RESOL
&MESH   IJK=    50  30  45  XB= 1.2  13.4    6   12  8   17  MPI_PROCESS=    4   /   MESH #  5   "Domæne"    CELLS   67500   RESOL
&MESH   IJK=    50  25  45  XB= 1.2  13.4    12  17  8   17  MPI_PROCESS=    5   /   MESH #  6   "Domæne"    CELLS   56250   RESOL
&MESH   IJK=    5   75  85  XB= 0    1       2   17  0   17  MPI_PROCESS=    6   /   MESH #  7   "bag_exp"   CELLS   31875   RESOL
&MESH   IJK=    4   120 160 XB= 1    1.2     2   8   0   8   MPI_PROCESS=    7   /   MESH #  8   "Ved brand" CELLS   76800   RESOL
&MESH   IJK=    4   180 80  XB= 1    1.2     8   17  0   4   MPI_PROCESS=    8   /   MESH #  9   "Ved brand" CELLS   57600   RESOL
&MESH   IJK=    4   180 80  XB= 1    1.2     8   17  4   8   MPI_PROCESS=    9   /   MESH #  10  "Ved brand" CELLS   57600   RESOL
&MESH   IJK=    4   120 180 XB= 1    1.2     2   8   8   17  MPI_PROCESS=    10  /   MESH #  11  "Ved brand" CELLS   86400   RESOL
&MESH   IJK=    4   180 100 XB= 1    1.2     8   17  8   13  MPI_PROCESS=    11  /   MESH #  12  "Ved brand" CELLS   72000   RESOL
&MESH   IJK=    4   180 80  XB= 1    1.2     8   17  13  17  MPI_PROCESS=    12  /   MESH #  13  "Ved brand" CELLS   57600   RESOL
//-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
//---- REACTIONS
//-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
&REAC ID = 'METHANOL'   
 C = 1  
 H = 4  
 O = 1  
 SOOT_YIELD = 0.001 
HEAT_OF_COMBUSTION = 19830  
 IDEAL = .FALSE. /  
                     
//-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
//---- MATERIALS
//-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
// MATERIALS
&MATL ID=
'GYPSUM'
CONDUCTIVITY=
0.48
SPECIFIC_HEAT=
0.84
DENSITY=
1440
/
&SPEC ID='WOOD' , FORMULA='CH1.7O0.83' , MW=57.6 , DENSITY_SOLID=420 ,  SPECIFIC_HEAT = 2.3, CONDUCTIVITY= 0.12 /
&MATL ID=
'FRAME'
 FYI=
'It is pine wood'
 CONDUCTIVITY=
0.12
 SPECIFIC_HEAT = 2.3
 DENSITY=
449 /
&MATL ID=
'BATTENS'
 FYI=
'It is pine wood'
 CONDUCTIVITY=   0.12    
 SPECIFIC_HEAT = 2.3    
 DENSITY=   624 
 SPEC_ID= 'WOOD'
 HEAT_OF_COMBUSTION= 23518
 /
==PAGE:206==
&MATL ID=
'CLAD'
 FYI=
'It is pine wood'
 CONDUCTIVITY=   0.12    
 SPECIFIC_HEAT = 2.3    
 DENSITY=   417.460 
 SPEC_ID= 'WOOD'
 HEAT_OF_COMBUSTION= 21919 /
&MATL ID=
'STEEL'
CONDUCTIVITY=
45
SPECIFIC_HEAT=
0.48
DENSITY=
7820
/
//-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
//---- SURFACES 
//-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
&SURF ID=
'GYPSUM'
 MATL_ID(1,1) = 'GYPSUM'
COLOR = 'KHAKI'
 THICKNESS(1)=
0.015
 TRANSPARENCY=
1
/
&SURF ID=
'FRAME'
 MATL_ID(1,1)=
'FRAME'
 COLOR= 'MELON'
 THICKNESS= 0.045
 TRANSPARENCY=
1
/
&SURF ID=
'BATTENS'
 MATL_ID(1,1)=
'BATTENS'
 COLOR= 'ORANGE'
 THICKNESS= 0.045
 TRANSPARENCY=
1
 HRRPUA = 150.
 IGNITION_TEMPERATURE = 375.
 BURN_AWAY=.TRUE.
 BACKING='VOID' /
&SURF ID=
'CLAD'
 MATL_ID(1,1)=
'CLAD'
 COLOR= 'BROWN'
 THICKNESS= 0.021
 TRANSPARENCY=
1
 HRRPUA = 150.
 IGNITION_TEMPERATURE = 375.
 BURN_AWAY=.TRUE.
 BACKING='VOID' /
&SURF ID=
'STEEL'
 MATL_ID(1,1) = 'STEEL'
 COLOR= 'SILVER'
 THICKNESS= 0.02
 TRANSPARENCY=
1
/
//-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
//---- VENTS & OPENINGS: Mesh boundaries and exhaust in hood
//-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
&SURF ID = 'HOT' TMP_FRONT = 827. /            
            
// Surfaces of exterior mesh boundaries                     
&VENT   MB=  'YMAX' SURF_ID=     'OPEN' /   
&VENT   MB=  'YMIN' SURF_ID=     'OPEN' /   
&VENT   MB=  'XMAX' SURF_ID=     'HOT' COLOR='RED' /   
/&VENT   MB=  'XMIN' SURF_ID=     'OPEN' /   
/&VENT   MB=  'ZMIN' SURF_ID=     'OPEN' /   
&VENT   MB=  'ZMAX' SURF_ID=     'OPEN' /   
//-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
//---- OBSTACLES                                                
//-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                             
// Exposed wall                                                 
&OBST   ID= 'Gypsym wall1'  XB= 0   1       2       17      0       17  SURF_ID=    'GYPSUM'    /
&OBST   ID= 'EV_batten1'    XB= 1   1.05    2.6     2.65    0.05    16.4    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EV_batten2'    XB= 1   1.05    3.2     3.25    0.05    16.4    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EV_batten3'    XB= 1   1.05    3.8     3.85    0.05    16.4    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
==PAGE:207==
&OBST   ID= 'EV_batten4'    XB= 1   1.05    4.4     4.45    0.05    16.4    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EV_batten5'    XB= 1   1.05    5       5.05    0.05    16.4    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EV_batten6'    XB= 1   1.05    5.6     5.65    0.05    16.4    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EV_batten7'    XB= 1   1.05    6.2     6.25    0.05    16.4    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EV_batten8'    XB= 1   1.05    6.8     6.85    0.05    16.4    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EV_batten9'    XB= 1   1.05    7.4     7.45    0.05    16.4    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EV_batten10'   XB= 1   1.05    8       8.05    0.05    16.4    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EV_batten11'   XB= 1   1.05    8.6     8.65    0.05    16.4    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EV_batten12'   XB= 1   1.05    9.2     9.25    0.05    16.4    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EV_batten13'   XB= 1   1.05    9.8     9.85    0.05    16.4    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EV_batten14'   XB= 1   1.05    10.4    10.45   0.05    16.4    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EV_batten15'   XB= 1   1.05    11      11.05   0.05    16.4    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EV_batten16'   XB= 1   1.05    11.6    11.65   0.05    16.4    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EV_batten17'   XB= 1   1.05    12.2    12.25   0.05    16.4    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EV_batten18'   XB= 1   1.05    12.8    12.85   0.05    16.4    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EV_batten19'   XB= 1   1.05    13.4    13.45   0.05    16.4    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EV_batten20'   XB= 1   1.05    14      14.05   0.05    16.4    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EV_batten21'   XB= 1   1.05    14.6    14.65   0.05    16.4    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EV_batten22'   XB= 1   1.05    15.2    15.25   0.05    16.4    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EV_batten23'   XB= 1   1.05    15.8    15.85   0.05    16.4    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EV_batten24'   XB= 1   1.05    16.4    16.45   0.05    16.4    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
                                                
                                                
&OBST   ID= 'EH_batten1'    XB= 1.05    1.1     2.4     16.6    0.4     0.45    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EH_batten2'    XB= 1.05    1.1     2.4     16.6    1       1.05    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EH_batten3'    XB= 1.05    1.1     2.4     16.6    1.6     1.65    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EH_batten4'    XB= 1.05    1.1     2.4     16.6    2.2     2.25    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EH_batten5'    XB= 1.05    1.1     2.4     16.6    2.8     2.85    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EH_batten6'    XB= 1.05    1.1     2.4     16.6    3.4     3.45    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EH_batten7'    XB= 1.05    1.1     2.4     16.6    4       4.05    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EH_batten8'    XB= 1.05    1.1     2.4     16.6    4.6     4.65    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EH_batten9'    XB= 1.05    1.1     2.4     16.6    5.2     5.25    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EH_batten10'   XB= 1.05    1.1     2.4     16.6    5.8     5.85    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EH_batten11'   XB= 1.05    1.1     2.4     16.6    6.4     6.45    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EH_batten12'   XB= 1.05    1.1     2.4     16.6    7       7.05    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EH_batten13'   XB= 1.05    1.1     2.4     16.6    7.6     7.65    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EH_batten14'   XB= 1.05    1.1     2.4     16.6    8.2     8.25    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EH_batten15'   XB= 1.05    1.1     2.4     16.6    8.8     8.85    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EH_batten16'   XB= 1.05    1.1     2.4     16.6    9.4     9.45    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EH_batten17'   XB= 1.05    1.1     2.4     16.6    10      10.05   SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EH_batten18'   XB= 1.05    1.1     2.4     16.6    10.6    10.65   SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EH_batten19'   XB= 1.05    1.1     2.4     16.6    11.2    11.25   SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EH_batten20'   XB= 1.05    1.1     2.4     16.6    11.8    11.85   SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EH_batten21'   XB= 1.05    1.1     2.4     16.6    12.4    12.45   SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EH_batten22'   XB= 1.05    1.1     2.4     16.6    13      13.05   SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EH_batten23'   XB= 1.05    1.1     2.4     16.6    13.6    13.65   SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EH_batten24'   XB= 1.05    1.1     2.4     16.6    14.2    14.25   SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EH_batten25'   XB= 1.05    1.1     2.4     16.6    14.8    14.85   SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EH_batten26'   XB= 1.05    1.1     2.4     16.6    15.4    15.45   SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EH_batten27'   XB= 1.05    1.1     2.4     16.6    16      16.05   SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
                                                
&OBST   ID= 'CLADDING_EXP'  XB= 1.1     1.15    2       17      0.2     17      SURF_ID=    'CLAD'  /
                                                
//-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
//---- OUTPUT: Slice files, Boundary files, Point devices and Surface devices 
//-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
// Slice files 
// Temperature 
&SLCF   ID=  'FIRE_C_X_TEMP'        PBX=    13.3    QUANTITY=    'TEMPERATURE'  /        
&SLCF   ID=  'FIRE_C_Y_TEMP'        PBY=    9.5     QUANTITY=    'TEMPERATURE'  /           
&SLCF   ID=  'Y_TEMP_H3MFIRE'       PBY=    6.5     QUANTITY=    'TEMPERATURE'  /           
&SLCF   ID=  'Y_TEMP_V3MFIRE'       PBY=    12.5    QUANTITY=    'TEMPERATURE'  /           
&SLCF   ID=  'Z_2M_ABOVE_FIRE'      PBZ=    2       QUANTITY=    'TEMPERATURE'  / 
&SLCF   ID=  'Z_2M_ABOVE_FIRE'      PBZ=    6       QUANTITY=    'TEMPERATURE'  /             
&SLCF   ID=  'X_MIDT_FACADE_TEMP'   PBX=    7.3     QUANTITY=    'TEMPERATURE'  /           
&SLCF   ID=  'X_EXP_FACADE_TEMP'    PBX=    1.2     QUANTITY=    'TEMPERATURE'  /                
                                        
&SLCF   ID=  'FIRE_C_X_VEL'         PBX=    13.3    QUANTITY=    'VELOCITY' VECTOR= .TRUE.  /   
&SLCF   ID=  'FIRE_C_Y_VEL'         PBY=    9.5     QUANTITY=    'VELOCITY' VECTOR= .TRUE.  /   
                                        
//EXPOSED WALL THERMOCOUPLES                                        
                                        
///Exposed facade                                                                       
&DEVC   ID=  'EX_FAC_0_P1'  XYZ=    1.15    9.5 1.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /                               
&DEVC   ID=  'EX_FAC_0_P2'  XYZ=    1.15    9.5 2.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /                               
&DEVC   ID=  'EX_FAC_0_P3'  XYZ=    1.15    9.5 4.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /                               
&DEVC   ID=  'EX_FAC_0_P4'  XYZ=    1.15    9.5 8.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /                               
&DEVC   ID=  'EX_FAC_0_P5'  XYZ=    1.15    9.5 12.1    QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /                               
&DEVC   ID=  'EX_FAC_0_P6'  XYZ=    1.15    9.5 16.1    QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /                               
                                                                        
/Venstre side                                                                       
&DEVC   ID=  'EX_FAC_L1_P1' XYZ=    1.15    6.5 1.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /                               
&DEVC   ID=  'EX_FAC_L1_P2' XYZ=    1.15    6.5 2.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /                               
&DEVC   ID=  'EX_FAC_L1_P3' XYZ=    1.15    6.5 4.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /                               
&DEVC   ID=  'EX_FAC_L1_P4' XYZ=    1.15    6.5 8.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /                               
&DEVC   ID=  'EX_FAC_L1_P5' XYZ=    1.15    6.5 12.1    QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /                               
==PAGE:208==
&DEVC   ID=  'EX_FAC_L1_P6' XYZ=    1.15    6.5 16.1    QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /                               
                                                                        
&DEVC   ID=  'EX_FAC_L2_P1' XYZ=    1.15    3.5 1.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /                               
&DEVC   ID=  'EX_FAC_L2_P2' XYZ=    1.15    3.5 2.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /                               
&DEVC   ID=  'EX_FAC_L2_P3' XYZ=    1.15    3.5 4.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /                               
&DEVC   ID=  'EX_FAC_L2_P4' XYZ=    1.15    3.5 8.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /                               
&DEVC   ID=  'EX_FAC_L2_P5' XYZ=    1.15    3.5 12.1    QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /                               
&DEVC   ID=  'EX_FAC_L2_P6' XYZ=    1.15    3.5 16.1    QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /                               
                                                                        
/Højre side                                                                     
&DEVC   ID=  'EX_FAC_R1_P1' XYZ=    1.15    12.5    1.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /                               
&DEVC   ID=  'EX_FAC_R1_P2' XYZ=    1.15    12.5    2.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /                               
&DEVC   ID=  'EX_FAC_R1_P3' XYZ=    1.15    12.5    4.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /                               
&DEVC   ID=  'EX_FAC_R1_P4' XYZ=    1.15    12.5    8.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /                               
&DEVC   ID=  'EX_FAC_R1_P5' XYZ=    1.15    12.5    12.1    QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /                               
&DEVC   ID=  'EX_FAC_R1_P6' XYZ=    1.15    12.5    16.1    QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /                               
                                                                        
&DEVC   ID=  'EX_FAC_R2_P1' XYZ=    1.15    15.5    1.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /                               
&DEVC   ID=  'EX_FAC_R2_P2' XYZ=    1.15    15.5    2.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /                               
&DEVC   ID=  'EX_FAC_R2_P3' XYZ=    1.15    15.5    4.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /                               
&DEVC   ID=  'EX_FAC_R2_P4' XYZ=    1.15    15.5    8.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /                               
&DEVC   ID=  'EX_FAC_R2_P5' XYZ=    1.15    15.5    12.1    QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /                               
&DEVC   ID=  'EX_FAC_R2_P6' XYZ=    1.15    15.5    16.1    QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /                               
                                                                        
                                   
// Surface device                                                                         
&DEVC   ID=  'NET HEAT FLUX_WALLPIECE1'  XB=  1.1  1.15  9  10  4  5   QUANTITY=  'NET HEAT FLUX'  IOR=    1 / 
// DUMP files                           
&DUMP  DT_SLCF=2  DT_DEVC=2       DT_HRR=2    DT_CTRL=2   DT_RESTART=150  DT_MASS=2 / 
 
&TAIL /
==PAGE:209==
P
FDS code: Rough FDS model with 25.6 m
Facade Distance
Thermal Radiation Between Wooden Facades in High­Rise Buildings
197
==PAGE:210==
// This fds simulation/model is made for the master thesis: Thermal Radiation Between Wooden Facades in High-Rise Buildings
// Simulating Scenario WALL, with a whole wall on fire, T_flame 1100K or 827°C. 25.6 m distance between facades. 
// fds model made by Karoline Sandfeld-Nielsen (s173793)
// fds version: FDS6.7.9 
//-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
//---- MAIN
//-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
&HEAD 
    CHID='WALL25' 
    TITLE='Brandspredning mellem to facader' /
&TIME           
    T_BEGIN  =  0
    T_END    =  3600 /     
&MISC           
    RESTART  =  .FALSE.
    TMPA     =  9.1
    BNDF_DEFAULT   =  .FALSE.
    RADIATION      =  .TRUE.
    SURF_DEFAULT   =   'FRAME' /
&RADI           
    TIME_STEP_INCREMENT  =  12
    NUMBER_RADIATION_ANGLES  =  100
    ANGLE_INCREMENT  =  20
/
//-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
//---- MESH Total Cells 1255875                                         
//-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
&MESH   IJK=    128 20  30  XB= 1.2  26.8    2   6   0   6   MPI_PROCESS=    0   /   MESH #  1   "Domæne"    CELLS   76800   RESOL
&MESH   IJK=    128 15  30  XB= 1.2  26.8    6   9   0   6   MPI_PROCESS=    1   /   MESH #  2   "Domæne"    CELLS   57600   RESOL
&MESH   IJK=    5   75  85  XB= 0    1       2   17  0   17  MPI_PROCESS=    2   /   MESH #  3   "bag_exp"   CELLS   31875   RESOL
&MESH   IJK=    128 15  30  XB= 1.2  26.8    9   12  0   6   MPI_PROCESS=    3   /   MESH #  4   "Domæne"    CELLS   57600   RESOL
&MESH   IJK=    128 25  30  XB= 1.2  26.8    12  17  0   6   MPI_PROCESS=    4   /   MESH #  5   "Domæne"    CELLS   96000   RESOL
&MESH   IJK=    128 20  25  XB= 1.2  26.8    2   6   6   11  MPI_PROCESS=    5   /   MESH #  6   "Domæne"    CELLS   64000   RESOL
&MESH   IJK=    128 30  25  XB= 1.2  26.8    6   12  6   11  MPI_PROCESS=    6   /   MESH #  7   "Domæne"    CELLS   96000   RESOL
&MESH   IJK=    128 25  25  XB= 1.2  26.8    12  17  6   11  MPI_PROCESS=    7   /   MESH #  8   "Domæne"    CELLS   80000   RESOL
&MESH   IJK=    128 20  30  XB= 1.2  26.8    2   6   11  17  MPI_PROCESS=    8   /   MESH #  9   "Domæne"    CELLS   76800   RESOL
&MESH   IJK=    128 15  30  XB= 1.2  26.8    6   9   11  17  MPI_PROCESS=    9   /   MESH #  10  "Domæne"    CELLS   57600   RESOL
&MESH   IJK=    128 15  30  XB= 1.2  26.8    9   12  11  17  MPI_PROCESS=    10  /   MESH #  11  "Domæne"    CELLS   57600   RESOL
&MESH   IJK=    128 25  30  XB= 1.2  26.8    12  17  11  17  MPI_PROCESS=    11  /   MESH #  12  "Domæne"    CELLS   96000   RESOL
&MESH   IJK=    4   120 160 XB= 1    1.2     2   8   0   8   MPI_PROCESS=    12  /   MESH #  13  "Ved brand" CELLS   76800   RESOL
&MESH   IJK=    4   180 80  XB= 1    1.2     8   17  0   4   MPI_PROCESS=    13  /   MESH #  14  "Ved brand" CELLS   57600   RESOL
&MESH   IJK=    4   180 80  XB= 1    1.2     8   17  4   8   MPI_PROCESS=    14  /   MESH #  15  "Ved brand" CELLS   57600   RESOL
&MESH   IJK=    4   120 180 XB= 1    1.2     2   8   8   17  MPI_PROCESS=    15  /   MESH #  16  "Ved brand" CELLS   86400   RESOL
&MESH   IJK=    4   180 100 XB= 1    1.2     8   17  8   13  MPI_PROCESS=    16  /   MESH #  17  "Ved brand" CELLS   72000   RESOL
&MESH   IJK=    4   180 80  XB= 1    1.2     8   17  13  17  MPI_PROCESS=    17  /   MESH #  18  "Ved brand" CELLS   57600   RESOL
//-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
//---- REACTIONS
//-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
&REAC ID = 'METHANOL'   
 C = 1  
 H = 4  
 O = 1  
 SOOT_YIELD = 0.001 
HEAT_OF_COMBUSTION = 19830  
 IDEAL = .FALSE. /  
                     
//-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
//---- MATERIALS
//-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
// MATERIALS
&MATL ID=
'GYPSUM'
CONDUCTIVITY=
0.48
SPECIFIC_HEAT=
0.84
DENSITY=
1440
/
&SPEC ID='WOOD' , FORMULA='CH1.7O0.83' , MW=57.6 , DENSITY_SOLID=420 ,  SPECIFIC_HEAT = 2.3, CONDUCTIVITY= 0.12 /
&MATL ID=
'FRAME'
 FYI=
'It is pine wood'
 CONDUCTIVITY=
0.12
 SPECIFIC_HEAT = 2.3
 DENSITY=
449 /
&MATL ID=
'BATTENS'
 FYI=
'It is pine wood'
 CONDUCTIVITY=   0.12    
 SPECIFIC_HEAT = 2.3    
==PAGE:211==
 DENSITY=   624 
 SPEC_ID= 'WOOD'
 HEAT_OF_COMBUSTION= 23518
 /
&MATL ID=
'CLAD'
 FYI=
'It is pine wood'
 CONDUCTIVITY=   0.12    
 SPECIFIC_HEAT = 2.3    
 DENSITY=   417.460 
 SPEC_ID= 'WOOD'
 HEAT_OF_COMBUSTION= 21919 /
&MATL ID=
'STEEL'
CONDUCTIVITY=
45
SPECIFIC_HEAT=
0.48
DENSITY=
7820
/
//-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
//---- SURFACES 
//-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
&SURF ID=
'GYPSUM'
 MATL_ID(1,1) = 'GYPSUM'
COLOR = 'KHAKI'
 THICKNESS(1)=
0.015
 TRANSPARENCY=
1
/
&SURF ID=
'FRAME'
 MATL_ID(1,1)=
'FRAME'
 COLOR= 'MELON'
 THICKNESS= 0.045
 TRANSPARENCY=
1
/
&SURF ID=
'BATTENS'
 MATL_ID(1,1)=
'BATTENS'
 COLOR= 'ORANGE'
 THICKNESS= 0.045
 TRANSPARENCY=
1
 HRRPUA = 150.
 IGNITION_TEMPERATURE = 375.
 BURN_AWAY=.TRUE.
 BACKING='VOID' /
&SURF ID=
'CLAD'
 MATL_ID(1,1)=
'CLAD'
 COLOR= 'BROWN'
 THICKNESS= 0.021
 TRANSPARENCY=
1
 HRRPUA = 150.
 IGNITION_TEMPERATURE = 375.
 BURN_AWAY=.TRUE.
 BACKING='VOID' /
&SURF ID=
'STEEL'
 MATL_ID(1,1) = 'STEEL'
 COLOR= 'SILVER'
 THICKNESS= 0.02
 TRANSPARENCY=
1
/
//-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
//---- VENTS & OPENINGS: Mesh boundaries and exhaust in hood
//-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
&SURF ID = 'HOT' TMP_FRONT = 827. /            
            
// Surfaces of exterior mesh boundaries                     
&VENT   MB=  'YMAX' SURF_ID=     'OPEN' /   
&VENT   MB=  'YMIN' SURF_ID=     'OPEN' /   
&VENT   MB=  'XMAX' SURF_ID=     'HOT' COLOR='RED' /   
/&VENT   MB=  'XMIN' SURF_ID=     'OPEN' /   
/&VENT   MB=  'ZMIN' SURF_ID=     'OPEN' /   
&VENT   MB=  'ZMAX' SURF_ID=     'OPEN' /   
//-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
//---- OBSTACLES                                                
//-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                             
==PAGE:212==
// Exposed wall                                                 
&OBST   ID= 'Gypsym wall1'  XB= 0   1       2       17      0       17      SURF_ID=    'GYPSUM'    /
&OBST   ID= 'EV_batten1'    XB= 1   1.05    2.6     2.65    0.05    16.4    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EV_batten2'    XB= 1   1.05    3.2     3.25    0.05    16.4    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EV_batten3'    XB= 1   1.05    3.8     3.85    0.05    16.4    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EV_batten4'    XB= 1   1.05    4.4     4.45    0.05    16.4    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EV_batten5'    XB= 1   1.05    5       5.05    0.05    16.4    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EV_batten6'    XB= 1   1.05    5.6     5.65    0.05    16.4    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EV_batten7'    XB= 1   1.05    6.2     6.25    0.05    16.4    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EV_batten8'    XB= 1   1.05    6.8     6.85    0.05    16.4    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EV_batten9'    XB= 1   1.05    7.4     7.45    0.05    16.4    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EV_batten10'   XB= 1   1.05    8       8.05    0.05    16.4    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EV_batten11'   XB= 1   1.05    8.6     8.65    0.05    16.4    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EV_batten12'   XB= 1   1.05    9.2     9.25    0.05    16.4    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EV_batten13'   XB= 1   1.05    9.8     9.85    0.05    16.4    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EV_batten14'   XB= 1   1.05    10.4    10.45   0.05    16.4    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EV_batten15'   XB= 1   1.05    11      11.05   0.05    16.4    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EV_batten16'   XB= 1   1.05    11.6    11.65   0.05    16.4    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EV_batten17'   XB= 1   1.05    12.2    12.25   0.05    16.4    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EV_batten18'   XB= 1   1.05    12.8    12.85   0.05    16.4    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EV_batten19'   XB= 1   1.05    13.4    13.45   0.05    16.4    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EV_batten20'   XB= 1   1.05    14      14.05   0.05    16.4    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EV_batten21'   XB= 1   1.05    14.6    14.65   0.05    16.4    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EV_batten22'   XB= 1   1.05    15.2    15.25   0.05    16.4    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EV_batten23'   XB= 1   1.05    15.8    15.85   0.05    16.4    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EV_batten24'   XB= 1   1.05    16.4    16.45   0.05    16.4    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
                                                
                                                
&OBST   ID= 'EH_batten1'    XB= 1.05    1.1     2.4     16.6    0.4     0.45    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EH_batten2'    XB= 1.05    1.1     2.4     16.6    1       1.05    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EH_batten3'    XB= 1.05    1.1     2.4     16.6    1.6     1.65    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EH_batten4'    XB= 1.05    1.1     2.4     16.6    2.2     2.25    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EH_batten5'    XB= 1.05    1.1     2.4     16.6    2.8     2.85    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EH_batten6'    XB= 1.05    1.1     2.4     16.6    3.4     3.45    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EH_batten7'    XB= 1.05    1.1     2.4     16.6    4       4.05    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EH_batten8'    XB= 1.05    1.1     2.4     16.6    4.6     4.65    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EH_batten9'    XB= 1.05    1.1     2.4     16.6    5.2     5.25    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EH_batten10'   XB= 1.05    1.1     2.4     16.6    5.8     5.85    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EH_batten11'   XB= 1.05    1.1     2.4     16.6    6.4     6.45    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EH_batten12'   XB= 1.05    1.1     2.4     16.6    7       7.05    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EH_batten13'   XB= 1.05    1.1     2.4     16.6    7.6     7.65    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EH_batten14'   XB= 1.05    1.1     2.4     16.6    8.2     8.25    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EH_batten15'   XB= 1.05    1.1     2.4     16.6    8.8     8.85    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EH_batten16'   XB= 1.05    1.1     2.4     16.6    9.4     9.45    SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EH_batten17'   XB= 1.05    1.1     2.4     16.6    10      10.05   SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EH_batten18'   XB= 1.05    1.1     2.4     16.6    10.6    10.65   SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EH_batten19'   XB= 1.05    1.1     2.4     16.6    11.2    11.25   SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EH_batten20'   XB= 1.05    1.1     2.4     16.6    11.8    11.85   SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EH_batten21'   XB= 1.05    1.1     2.4     16.6    12.4    12.45   SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EH_batten22'   XB= 1.05    1.1     2.4     16.6    13      13.05   SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EH_batten23'   XB= 1.05    1.1     2.4     16.6    13.6    13.65   SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EH_batten24'   XB= 1.05    1.1     2.4     16.6    14.2    14.25   SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EH_batten25'   XB= 1.05    1.1     2.4     16.6    14.8    14.85   SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EH_batten26'   XB= 1.05    1.1     2.4     16.6    15.4    15.45   SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
&OBST   ID= 'EH_batten27'   XB= 1.05    1.1     2.4     16.6    16      16.05   SURF_ID=    'BATTENS'   /
                                                
&OBST   ID= 'CLADDING_EXP'  XB= 1.1     1.15    2       17      0.2     17      SURF_ID=    'CLAD'  /
                                                
//-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
//---- OUTPUT: Slice files, Boundary files, Point devices and Surface devices 
//-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
// Slice files 
// Temperature 
&SLCF   ID=  'FIRE_C_X_TEMP'        PBX=    26.7    QUANTITY=    'TEMPERATURE'  /        
&SLCF   ID=  'FIRE_C_Y_TEMP'        PBY=    9.5     QUANTITY=    'TEMPERATURE'  /           
&SLCF   ID=  'Y_TEMP_H3MFIRE'       PBY=    6.5     QUANTITY=    'TEMPERATURE'  /           
&SLCF   ID=  'Y_TEMP_V3MFIRE'       PBY=    12.5    QUANTITY=    'TEMPERATURE'  /           
&SLCF   ID=  'Z_2M_ABOVE_FIRE'      PBZ=    2       QUANTITY=    'TEMPERATURE'  / 
&SLCF   ID=  'Z_2M_ABOVE_FIRE'      PBZ=    6       QUANTITY=    'TEMPERATURE'  /             
&SLCF   ID=  'X_MIDT_FACADE_TEMP'   PBX=    6.2     QUANTITY=    'TEMPERATURE'  /           
&SLCF   ID=  'X_EXP_FACADE_TEMP'    PBX=    1.2     QUANTITY=    'TEMPERATURE'  /  
\\ Between the facades
&SLCF   ID=  'MIDT25_X_TEMP'    PBX=    25.7    QUANTITY=    'TEMPERATURE'  /
&SLCF   ID=  'MIDT24_X_TEMP'    PBX=    24.7    QUANTITY=    'TEMPERATURE'  /
&SLCF   ID=  'MIDT23_X_TEMP'    PBX=    23.7    QUANTITY=    'TEMPERATURE'  /
&SLCF   ID=  'MIDT22_X_TEMP'    PBX=    22.7    QUANTITY=    'TEMPERATURE'  /
&SLCF   ID=  'MIDT21_X_TEMP'    PBX=    21.7    QUANTITY=    'TEMPERATURE'  /
&SLCF   ID=  'MIDT20_X_TEMP'    PBX=    20.7    QUANTITY=    'TEMPERATURE'  /
&SLCF   ID=  'MIDT19_X_TEMP'    PBX=    19.7    QUANTITY=    'TEMPERATURE'  /
&SLCF   ID=  'MIDT18_X_TEMP'    PBX=    18.7    QUANTITY=    'TEMPERATURE'  /
&SLCF   ID=  'MIDT17_X_TEMP'    PBX=    17.7    QUANTITY=    'TEMPERATURE'  /
&SLCF   ID=  'MIDT16_X_TEMP'    PBX=    16.7    QUANTITY=    'TEMPERATURE'  /
&SLCF   ID=  'MIDT15_X_TEMP'    PBX=    15.7    QUANTITY=    'TEMPERATURE'  /
&SLCF   ID=  'MIDT14_X_TEMP'    PBX=    14.7    QUANTITY=    'TEMPERATURE'  /
&SLCF   ID=  'MIDT13_X_TEMP'    PBX=    13.7    QUANTITY=    'TEMPERATURE'  /
==PAGE:213==
&SLCF   ID=  'MIDT12_X_TEMP'    PBX=    12.7    QUANTITY=    'TEMPERATURE'  /
&SLCF   ID=  'MIDT11_X_TEMP'    PBX=    11.7    QUANTITY=    'TEMPERATURE'  /
&SLCF   ID=  'MIDT10_X_TEMP'    PBX=    10.7    QUANTITY=    'TEMPERATURE'  /
&SLCF   ID=  'MIDT9_X_TEMP'     PBX=    9.7     QUANTITY=    'TEMPERATURE'  /
&SLCF   ID=  'MIDT8_X_TEMP'     PBX=    8.7     QUANTITY=    'TEMPERATURE'  /
&SLCF   ID=  'MIDT7_X_TEMP'     PBX=    7.7     QUANTITY=    'TEMPERATURE'  /
&SLCF   ID=  'MIDT6_X_TEMP'     PBX=    6.7     QUANTITY=    'TEMPERATURE'  /
&SLCF   ID=  'MIDT5_X_TEMP'     PBX=    5.7     QUANTITY=    'TEMPERATURE'  /
&SLCF   ID=  'MIDT4_X_TEMP'     PBX=    4.7     QUANTITY=    'TEMPERATURE'  /
&SLCF   ID=  'MIDT3_X_TEMP'     PBX=    3.7     QUANTITY=    'TEMPERATURE'  /
&SLCF   ID=  'MIDT2_X_TEMP'     PBX=    2.7     QUANTITY=    'TEMPERATURE'  /
&SLCF   ID=  'MIDT1_X_TEMP'     PBX=    1.7     QUANTITY=    'TEMPERATURE'  /
                                        
&SLCF   ID=  'FIRE_C_X_VEL'         PBX=    26.7    QUANTITY=    'VELOCITY' VECTOR= .TRUE.  /   
&SLCF   ID=  'FIRE_C_Y_VEL'         PBY=    9.5     QUANTITY=    'VELOCITY' VECTOR= .TRUE.  /   
                                        
//EXPOSED WALL THERMOCOUPLES                                        
                                        
///Exposed facade                                                                       
&DEVC   ID=  'EX_FAC_0_P1'  XYZ=    1.15    9.5 1.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /                               
&DEVC   ID=  'EX_FAC_0_P2'  XYZ=    1.15    9.5 2.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /                               
&DEVC   ID=  'EX_FAC_0_P3'  XYZ=    1.15    9.5 4.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /                               
&DEVC   ID=  'EX_FAC_0_P4'  XYZ=    1.15    9.5 8.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /                               
&DEVC   ID=  'EX_FAC_0_P5'  XYZ=    1.15    9.5 12.1    QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /                               
&DEVC   ID=  'EX_FAC_0_P6'  XYZ=    1.15    9.5 16.1    QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /                               
                                                                        
/Venstre side                                                                       
&DEVC   ID=  'EX_FAC_L1_P1' XYZ=    1.15    6.5 1.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /                               
&DEVC   ID=  'EX_FAC_L1_P2' XYZ=    1.15    6.5 2.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /                               
&DEVC   ID=  'EX_FAC_L1_P3' XYZ=    1.15    6.5 4.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /                               
&DEVC   ID=  'EX_FAC_L1_P4' XYZ=    1.15    6.5 8.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /                               
&DEVC   ID=  'EX_FAC_L1_P5' XYZ=    1.15    6.5 12.1    QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /                               
&DEVC   ID=  'EX_FAC_L1_P6' XYZ=    1.15    6.5 16.1    QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /                               
                                                                        
&DEVC   ID=  'EX_FAC_L2_P1' XYZ=    1.15    3.5 1.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /                               
&DEVC   ID=  'EX_FAC_L2_P2' XYZ=    1.15    3.5 2.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /                               
&DEVC   ID=  'EX_FAC_L2_P3' XYZ=    1.15    3.5 4.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /                               
&DEVC   ID=  'EX_FAC_L2_P4' XYZ=    1.15    3.5 8.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /                               
&DEVC   ID=  'EX_FAC_L2_P5' XYZ=    1.15    3.5 12.1    QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /                               
&DEVC   ID=  'EX_FAC_L2_P6' XYZ=    1.15    3.5 16.1    QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /                               
                                                                        
/Højre side                                                                     
&DEVC   ID=  'EX_FAC_R1_P1' XYZ=    1.15    12.5    1.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /                               
&DEVC   ID=  'EX_FAC_R1_P2' XYZ=    1.15    12.5    2.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /                               
&DEVC   ID=  'EX_FAC_R1_P3' XYZ=    1.15    12.5    4.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /                               
&DEVC   ID=  'EX_FAC_R1_P4' XYZ=    1.15    12.5    8.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /                               
&DEVC   ID=  'EX_FAC_R1_P5' XYZ=    1.15    12.5    12.1    QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /                               
&DEVC   ID=  'EX_FAC_R1_P6' XYZ=    1.15    12.5    16.1    QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /                               
                                                                        
&DEVC   ID=  'EX_FAC_R2_P1' XYZ=    1.15    15.5    1.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /                               
&DEVC   ID=  'EX_FAC_R2_P2' XYZ=    1.15    15.5    2.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /                               
&DEVC   ID=  'EX_FAC_R2_P3' XYZ=    1.15    15.5    4.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /                               
&DEVC   ID=  'EX_FAC_R2_P4' XYZ=    1.15    15.5    8.1     QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /                               
&DEVC   ID=  'EX_FAC_R2_P5' XYZ=    1.15    15.5    12.1    QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /                               
&DEVC   ID=  'EX_FAC_R2_P6' XYZ=    1.15    15.5    16.1    QUANTITY=    'THERMOCOUPLE'     /                               
                                                                        
                                   
// Surface device                                                                         
&DEVC   ID=  'NET HEAT FLUX_WALLPIECE1'  XB= 1.1  1.15  9  10  4  5  QUANTITY=   'NET HEAT FLUX'  IOR=    1 /  
// DUMP files                           
&DUMP  DT_SLCF=2  DT_DEVC=2       DT_HRR=2    DT_CTRL=2   DT_RESTART=150  DT_MASS=2 / 
 
&TAIL /
==PAGE:214==
Q
Data from Thermocouples
202
Thermal Radiation Between Wooden Facades in High­Rise Buildings
==PAGE:215==
Data from Thermocouples, test 1
Scan
Time
L1P11
L1P12
L1P13
L1P14
L1P15
L1P16
L1P2
L1P22
L1P23
L1P24
L1P25
L1P26
L2P11
L2P12
L2P13
L2P14
L2P15
L2P16
L2P21
L2P22
L2P23
L2P24
L2P25
L2P26
L3P11
L3P12
L3P21
L3P22
L4P11
L4P12
L4P21
L4P22
XX
1
03/10/2022 13:27
18.14
17.55
17.37
17.27
17.33
17.33
17.45
17.49
17.38
17.41
17.26
17.19
17.97
18.05
17.82
17.58
17.85
17.68
18.32
18.19
18.06
17.70
17.83 ########
17.47
17.79
18.26
18.13
18.49
17.84
17.84
17.76 22.50
2
03/10/2022 13:27
18.11
17.57
17.35
17.27
17.35
17.34
17.46
17.47
17.38
17.40
17.28
17.19
17.96
18.04
17.83
17.56
17.85
17.71
18.31
18.19
18.04
17.74
17.82 ########
17.48
17.78
18.29
18.15
18.47
17.82
17.86
17.77 22.52
3
03/10/2022 13:27
18.13
17.56
17.35
17.29
17.36
17.32
17.48
17.49
17.37
17.39
17.27
17.18
17.98
18.06
17.83
17.56
17.85
17.69
18.31
18.18
18.08
17.75
17.85 ########
17.51
17.79
18.32
18.17
18.45
17.83
17.82
17.76 22.52
4
03/10/2022 13:27
18.14
17.56
17.36
17.30
17.35
17.34
17.49
17.47
17.38
17.39
17.26
17.21
17.97
18.05
17.83
17.54
17.84
17.69
18.30
18.15
18.07
17.76
17.85 ########
17.52
17.78
18.33
18.16
18.43
17.84
17.85
17.75 22.51
5
03/10/2022 13:28
18.12
17.59
17.35
17.30
17.34
17.34
17.50
17.45
17.36
17.37
17.27
17.21
17.96
18.05
17.83
17.58
17.84
17.68
18.29
18.16
18.08
17.79
17.85 ########
17.52
17.78
18.37
18.19
18.39
17.82
17.87
17.73 22.52
6
03/10/2022 13:28
18.12
17.56
17.37
17.30
17.37
17.35
17.51
17.44
17.35
17.39
17.29
17.20
17.99
18.03
17.83
17.58
17.84
17.70
18.29
18.14
18.09
17.81
17.86 ########
17.53
17.78
18.39
18.19
18.40
17.82
17.89
17.76 22.51
7
03/10/2022 13:28
18.10
17.60
17.37
17.30
17.38
17.34
17.52
17.46
17.36
17.38
17.28
17.21
17.98
18.06
17.83
17.59
17.85
17.69
18.29
18.16
18.10
17.83
17.86 ########
17.55
17.77
18.42
18.20
18.40
17.83
17.89
17.76 22.53
8
03/10/2022 13:28
18.11
17.60
17.37
17.31
17.35
17.34
17.52
17.47
17.36
17.39
17.27
17.17
18.00
18.04
17.83
17.59
17.85
17.69
18.32
18.16
18.10
17.85
17.88 ########
17.55
17.76
18.41
18.22
18.38
17.83
17.90
17.74 22.54
9
03/10/2022 13:28
18.15
17.60
17.38
17.31
17.34
17.35
17.55
17.48
17.37
17.41
17.28
17.18
17.99
18.06
17.84
17.59
17.84
17.65
18.31
18.17
18.11
17.83
17.88 ########
17.54
17.78
18.41
18.24
18.38
17.83
17.92
17.74 22.52
10
03/10/2022 13:28
18.12
17.62
17.38
17.30
17.35
17.35
17.55
17.47
17.41
17.41
17.28
17.21
18.00
18.06
17.84
17.59
17.85
17.69
18.31
18.14
18.10
17.84
17.87 ########
17.53
17.81
18.44
18.22
18.37
17.84
17.94
17.73 22.53
11
03/10/2022 13:28
18.13
17.60
17.37
17.30
17.36
17.35
17.59
17.48
17.39
17.41
17.28
17.19
18.00
18.04
17.84
17.58
17.85
17.68
18.29
18.17
18.08
17.81
17.87 ########
17.54
17.79
18.43
18.27
18.39
17.85
17.93
17.73 22.53
12
03/10/2022 13:28
18.13
17.61
17.36
17.30
17.36
17.36
17.56
17.50
17.39
17.39
17.27
17.21
18.02
18.06
17.85
17.59
17.86
17.67
18.32
18.16
18.07
17.82
17.86 ########
17.55
17.78
18.43
18.26
18.38
17.86
17.97
17.73 22.53
13
03/10/2022 13:28
18.09
17.59
17.37
17.31
17.36
17.34
17.56
17.49
17.38
17.41
17.30
17.20
18.02
18.06
17.85
17.60
17.87
17.67
18.31
18.17
18.07
17.83
17.87 ########
17.54
17.79
18.43
18.26
18.40
17.87
17.97
17.75 22.54
14
03/10/2022 13:28
18.10
17.58
17.36
17.30
17.35
17.35
17.57
17.50
17.36
17.37
17.28
17.21
18.02
18.05
17.86
17.61
17.85
17.66
18.31
18.17
18.07
17.82
17.87 ########
17.57
17.81
18.43
18.26
18.42
17.88
18.00
17.76 22.53
15
03/10/2022 13:28
18.11
17.58
17.36
17.32
17.34
17.36
17.56
17.49
17.36
17.40
17.29
17.19
18.01
18.04
17.85
17.61
17.85
17.66
18.30
18.17
18.08
17.82
17.86
-156.59
17.56
17.79
18.43
18.26
18.42
17.88
18.01
17.77 22.56
16
03/10/2022 13:28
18.13
17.59
17.36
17.32
17.37
17.37
17.57
17.52
17.35
17.37
17.28
17.20
18.03
18.07
17.85
17.62
17.85
17.69
18.31
18.17
18.05
17.80
17.83 ########
17.57
17.77
18.45
18.31
18.45
17.88
18.02
17.78 22.57
17
03/10/2022 13:28
18.10
17.58
17.37
17.29
17.34
17.37
17.57
17.51
17.36
17.39
17.29
17.20
18.03
18.05
17.84
17.63
17.85
17.68
18.29
18.18
18.06
17.81
17.84 ########
17.56
17.81
18.43
18.29
18.45
17.90
18.03
17.78 22.56
18
03/10/2022 13:28
18.12
17.60
17.37
17.31
17.34
17.38
17.58
17.50
17.38
17.38
17.28
17.18
18.03
18.05
17.85
17.62
17.85
17.66
18.30
18.18
18.08
17.81
17.86 ########
17.57
17.78
18.42
18.29
18.44
17.89
18.04
17.80 22.57
19
03/10/2022 13:28
18.11
17.58
17.36
17.29
17.33
17.36
17.56
17.52
17.33
17.39
17.26
17.18
18.02
18.06
17.85
17.63
17.86
17.66
18.30
18.20
18.05
17.82
17.86 ########
17.57
17.82
18.43
18.29
18.45
17.92
18.04
17.81 22.56
20
03/10/2022 13:28
18.12
17.57
17.36
17.29
17.36
17.36
17.56
17.53
17.36
17.37
17.27
17.19
18.03
18.05
17.84
17.62
17.86
17.68
18.31
18.19
18.04
17.82
17.89 ########
17.56
17.81
18.41
18.31
18.45
17.89
18.04
17.80 22.55
21
03/10/2022 13:28
18.08
17.54
17.33
17.28
17.33
17.34
17.55
17.49
17.35
17.39
17.29
17.20
18.03
18.03
17.85
17.64
17.85
17.66
18.31
18.17
18.08
17.82
17.89 ########
17.59
17.81
18.40
18.30
18.47
17.92
18.03
17.79 22.54
22
03/10/2022 13:28
18.07
17.52
17.33
17.26
17.31
17.31
17.57
17.47
17.34
17.37
17.27
17.20
18.08
18.07
17.85
17.63
17.86
17.65
18.29
18.17
18.07
17.82
17.89 ########
17.65
17.80
18.42
18.25
18.45
17.91
18.03
17.79 22.56
23
03/10/2022 13:28
18.07
17.53
17.31
17.27
17.32
17.35
17.58
17.49
17.32
17.37
17.30
17.19
18.08
18.05
17.86
17.66
17.85
17.63
18.27
18.16
18.05
17.84
17.89 ########
17.68
17.80
18.41
18.26
18.45
17.90
18.03
17.77 22.55
24
03/10/2022 13:28
18.05
17.52
17.30
17.25
17.30
17.31
17.59
17.47
17.30
17.38
17.29
17.19
18.09
18.08
17.88
17.68
17.85
17.67
18.31
18.13
18.04
17.86
17.90 ########
17.72
17.81
18.44
18.26
18.45
17.89
18.02
17.76 22.55
25
03/10/2022 13:28
18.05
17.54
17.31
17.27
17.31
17.32
17.59
17.48
17.32
17.41
17.31
17.19
18.08
18.09
17.88
17.67
17.86
17.68
18.28
18.16
18.04
17.84
17.92 ########
17.72
17.81
18.42
18.27
18.46
17.91
18.04
17.76 22.55
26
03/10/2022 13:28
18.04
17.57
17.29
17.29
17.31
17.33
17.60
17.47
17.31
17.42
17.33
17.19
18.09
18.08
17.88
17.65
17.86
17.70
18.29
18.17
18.04
17.87
17.92 ########
17.70
17.82
18.41
18.29
18.45
17.91
18.05
17.76 22.55
27
03/10/2022 13:28
18.06
17.58
17.30
17.29
17.31
17.32
17.60
17.48
17.32
17.44
17.32
17.21
18.11
18.08
17.88
17.66
17.85
17.70
18.28
18.14
18.04
17.85
17.93 ########
17.71
17.83
18.42
18.29
18.46
17.91
18.04
17.75 22.56
28
03/10/2022 13:28
18.05
17.59
17.30
17.30
17.31
17.31
17.62
17.47
17.32
17.43
17.35
17.19
18.08
18.08
17.90
17.66
17.84
17.68
18.30
18.15
18.04
17.85
17.93 ########
17.70
17.85
18.42
18.29
18.46
17.90
18.05
17.73 22.56
29
03/10/2022 13:28
18.04
17.62
17.29
17.29
17.31
17.32
17.62
17.50
17.32
17.45
17.34
17.20
18.06
18.08
17.90
17.68
17.84
17.68
18.29
18.16
18.03
17.88
17.93 ########
17.70
17.85
18.41
18.27
18.45
17.91
18.06
17.73 22.56
30
03/10/2022 13:28
18.06
17.58
17.31
17.30
17.31
17.34
17.61
17.51
17.30
17.46
17.36
17.21
18.06
18.08
17.88
17.68
17.85
17.68
18.30
18.16
18.05
17.87
17.93 ########
17.72
17.86
18.43
18.28
18.45
17.92
18.06
17.72 22.57
31
03/10/2022 13:28
18.04
17.58
17.29
17.31
17.29
17.34
17.59
17.50
17.33
17.43
17.36
17.18
18.03
18.07
17.88
17.65
17.83
17.70
18.28
18.16
18.04
17.87
17.94 ########
17.73
17.86
18.42
18.26
18.44
17.93
18.06
17.75 22.57
32
03/10/2022 13:28
18.03
17.58
17.27
17.30
17.31
17.34
17.61
17.50
17.32
17.45
17.39
17.18
18.01
18.06
17.90
17.68
17.84
17.71
18.28
18.15
18.05
17.87
17.91 ########
17.73
17.85
18.42
18.26
18.43
17.91
18.07
17.76 22.56
33
03/10/2022 13:28
18.05
17.58
17.28
17.30
17.30
17.36
17.60
17.52
17.33
17.46
17.37
17.21
18.02
18.07
17.88
17.67
17.85
17.67
18.28
18.15
18.08
17.85
17.91 ########
17.74
17.86
18.42
18.27
18.43
17.92
18.06
17.75 22.55
34
03/10/2022 13:28
18.02
17.57
17.30
17.31
17.30
17.35
17.60
17.52
17.32
17.45
17.36
17.19
18.01
18.06
17.89
17.69
17.84
17.70
18.28
18.15
18.06
17.85
17.91 ########
17.74
17.85
18.40
18.27
18.43
17.90
18.03
17.75 22.56
35
03/10/2022 13:28
18.05
17.58
17.28
17.29
17.30
17.37
17.59
17.53
17.35
17.43
17.35
17.20
17.99
18.06
17.91
17.68
17.85
17.68
18.29
18.15
18.06
17.84
17.92 ########
17.76
17.84
18.40
18.28
18.42
17.90
18.05
17.75 22.56
36
03/10/2022 13:28
18.03
17.57
17.28
17.28
17.32
17.37
17.60
17.54
17.35
17.43
17.36
17.21
17.99
18.07
17.90
17.70
17.83
17.69
18.28
18.16
18.05
17.84
17.92 ########
17.73
17.84
18.40
18.28
18.45
17.89
18.05
17.76 22.56
37
03/10/2022 13:28
18.02
17.57
17.29
17.29
17.30
17.37
17.61
17.54
17.36
17.41
17.34
17.20
18.01
18.07
17.89
17.67
17.84
17.69
18.28
18.16
18.06
17.85
17.92 ########
17.75
17.82
18.39
18.31
18.45
17.88
18.01
17.77 22.56
38
03/10/2022 13:28
18.02
17.59
17.30
17.29
17.32
17.38
17.60
17.56
17.34
17.43
17.31
17.20
18.01
18.06
17.88
17.69
17.83
17.69
18.26
18.13
18.05
17.83
17.92 ########
17.74
17.83
18.39
18.29
18.45
17.86
18.01
17.77 22.55
39
03/10/2022 13:28
18.03
17.57
17.29
17.28
17.31
17.36
17.63
17.57
17.33
17.40
17.33
17.20
17.99
18.05
17.88
17.71
17.83
17.71
18.26
18.12
18.05
17.84
17.92 ########
17.74
17.84
18.40
18.29
18.46
17.90
17.99
17.76 22.54
40
03/10/2022 13:28
18.04
17.58
17.29
17.27
17.32
17.37
17.64
17.57
17.33
17.39
17.32
17.20
18.01
18.05
17.87
17.70
17.85
17.70
18.28
18.14
18.05
17.85
17.90 ########
17.75
17.86
18.37
18.30
18.42
17.88
17.98
17.76 22.57
41
03/10/2022 13:28
18.02
17.58
17.28
17.26
17.32
17.36
17.62
17.60
17.33
17.39
17.30
17.21
18.03
18.05
17.87
17.66
17.85
17.70
18.28
18.13
18.02
17.84
17.89 ########
17.75
17.86
18.39
18.31
18.43
17.90
17.97
17.75 22.57
42
03/10/2022 13:28
18.03
17.53
17.27
17.24
17.32
17.36
17.64
17.65
17.33
17.38
17.30
17.21
18.02
18.03
17.87
17.65
17.85
17.73
18.27
18.12
18.03
17.85
17.88 ########
17.74
17.88
18.41
18.29
18.43
17.88
17.96
17.76 22.55
43
03/10/2022 13:28
18.05
17.54
17.28
17.23
17.30
17.36
17.64
17.67
17.33
17.40
17.28
17.20
18.01
18.04
17.86
17.64
17.84
17.71
18.29
18.12
18.02
17.85
17.89 ########
17.72
17.88
18.40
18.30
18.45
17.90
17.96
17.74 22.54
44
03/10/2022 13:29
18.04
17.52
17.28
17.21
17.32
17.36
17.64
17.67
17.33
17.42
17.27
17.20
18.02
18.04
17.87
17.63
17.84
17.72
18.30
18.13
18.02
17.83
17.89 ########
17.74
17.87
18.40
18.28
18.45
17.90
17.95
17.75 22.57
45
03/10/2022 13:29
18.03
17.51
17.30
17.23
17.33
17.36
17.65
17.65
17.34
17.41
17.27
17.22
18.01
18.04
17.84
17.63
17.84
17.70
18.28
18.12
18.02
17.85
17.87 ########
17.73
17.86
18.38
18.26
18.44
17.88
17.95
17.72 22.56
46
03/10/2022 13:29
18.02
17.51
17.29
17.23
17.33
17.36
17.62
17.65
17.32
17.41
17.27
17.21
18.00
18.06
17.84
17.65
17.86
17.70
18.28
18.11
18.02
17.84
17.86 ########
17.75
17.87
18.38
18.25
18.47
17.89
17.94
17.74 22.55
47
03/10/2022 13:29
18.03
17.50
17.28
17.22
17.32
17.37
17.62
17.66
17.33
17.39
17.30
17.20
18.01
18.08
17.83
17.64
17.86
17.70
18.28
18.13
18.02
17.82
17.87 ########
17.75
17.85
18.38
18.23
18.45
17.87
17.95
17.74 22.56
48
03/10/2022 13:29
18.03
17.51
17.29
17.24
17.33
17.36
17.63
17.64
17.32
17.37
17.29
17.19
18.01
18.06
17.84
17.64
17.86
17.71
18.28
18.12
17.99
17.82
17.86 ########
17.79
17.85
18.42
18.23
18.44
17.87
17.94
17.73 22.56
49
03/10/2022 13:29
18.01
17.51
17.30
17.23
17.31
17.36
17.68
17.64
17.32
17.35
17.28
17.19
18.00
18.06
17.85
17.65
17.84
17.71
18.27
18.15
18.00
17.80
17.86 ########
17.81
17.83
18.44
18.23
18.43
17.85
17.96
17.73 22.57
50
03/10/2022 13:29
18.01
17.53
17.29
17.22
17.31
17.35
17.67
17.67
17.33
17.35
17.30
17.21
18.00
18.07
17.85
17.67
17.83
17.70
18.29
18.16
18.01
17.80
17.85 ########
17.82
17.84
18.42
18.25
18.45
17.87
17.99
17.73 22.56
51
03/10/2022 13:29
18.02
17.50
17.29
17.22
17.31
17.38
17.67
17.69
17.32
17.34
17.28
17.23
18.01
18.07
17.86
17.67
17.83
17.71
18.29
18.17
17.99
17.78
17.85 ########
17.84
17.85
18.42
18.24
18.45
17.86
17.99
17.76 22.56
52
03/10/2022 13:29
18.02
17.51
17.28
17.23
17.31
17.37
17.66
17.68
17.33
17.35
17.27
17.21
18.02
18.05
17.87
17.67
17.85
17.69
18.30
18.16
17.99
17.80
17.84 ########
17.82
17.83
18.42
18.21
18.46
17.85
18.02
17.76 22.54
53
03/10/2022 13:29
18.02
17.47
17.28
17.24
17.33
17.33
17.66
17.68
17.33
17.35
17.27
17.20
18.04
18.06
17.86
17.67
17.83
17.70
18.28
18.17
17.99
17.79
17.86 ########
17.83
17.82
18.41
18.22
18.47
17.86
18.02
17.77 22.53
54
03/10/2022 13:29
18.03
17.48
17.28
17.23
17.31
17.33
17.66
17.69
17.33
17.33
17.26
17.19
18.02
18.06
17.85
17.68
17.83
17.69
18.30
18.16
18.00
17.78
17.86 ########
17.85
17.82
18.41
18.22
18.45
17.86
18.03
17.76 22.56
55
03/10/2022 13:29
18.03
17.48
17.29
17.24
17.33
17.33
17.68
17.66
17.33
17.37
17.26
17.21
18.03
18.09
17.87
17.69
17.84
17.67
18.29
18.17
18.02
17.80
17.88 ########
17.86
17.87
18.44
18.24
18.47
17.89
18.06
17.78 22.57
56
03/10/2022 13:29
18.03
17.48
17.29
17.24
17.31
17.32
17.67
17.64
17.32
17.35
17.26
17.23
18.05
18.06
17.85
17.68
17.82
17.69
18.29
18.16
18.04
17.81
17.88 ########
17.87
17.85
18.45
18.24
18.47
17.89
18.06
17.76 22.57
57
03/10/2022 13:29
18.04
17.48
17.29
17.25
17.33
17.32
17.65
17.62
17.34
17.35
17.28
17.20
18.04
18.07
17.86
17.68
17.84
17.70
18.31
18.20
18.06
17.81
17.88 ########
17.87
17.86
18.44
18.26
18.49
17.90
18.07
17.78 22.57
58
03/10/2022 13:29
18.03
17.51
17.30
17.24
17.31
17.32
17.65
17.61
17.37
17.37
17.27
17.21
18.03
18.07
17.85
17.67
17.85
17.71
18.28
18.18
18.08
17.84
17.91 ########
17.92
17.88
18.45
18.27
18.47
17.92
18.09
17.79 22.58
59
03/10/2022 13:29
18.03
17.50
17.31
17.24
17.33
17.33
17.64
17.62
17.36
17.37
17.27
17.20
18.10
18.12
17.89
17.70
17.87
17.70
18.31
18.18
18.11
17.85
17.92 ########
17.93
17.86
18.48
18.30
18.47
17.94
18.12
17.83 22.59 Fire 
60
03/10/2022 13:29
19.09
17.53
17.30
17.22
17.32
17.33
17.66
17.62
17.34
17.38
17.27
17.21
32.99
18.18
17.93
17.73
17.86
17.74
19.39
18.78
18.17
17.88
17.97 ########
18.00
17.92
18.56
18.34
18.51
17.98
18.13
17.86 22.61 source
61
03/10/2022 13:29
30.60
17.54
17.29
17.26
17.32
17.34
21.98
19.32
17.34
17.36
17.27
17.23
45.48
18.75
17.97
17.74
17.87
17.75
21.02
19.64
18.20
17.92
18.00 ########
18.03
17.93
18.58
18.35
18.52
17.99
18.17
17.86 22.63 ignited
62
03/10/2022 13:29
38.67
17.56
17.30
17.26
17.32
17.34
27.37
21.83
17.34
17.37
17.29
17.22
54.98
20.21
18.06
17.78
17.88
17.74
24.12
22.31
18.21
17.96
18.02 ########
18.08
17.97
18.59
18.37
18.56
18.04
18.19
17.89 22.66
63
03/10/2022 13:29
46.66
17.55
17.29
17.28
17.32
17.33
30.51
23.04
17.35
17.38
17.27
17.21
70.77
21.40
18.11
17.83
17.91
17.77
27.42
23.11
18.26
17.96
18.03 ########
18.11
17.98
18.61
18.38
18.57
18.06
18.20
17.92 22.71
64
03/10/2022 13:29
57.80
17.56
17.30
17.25
17.32
17.34
35.21
23.95
17.36
17.40
17.27
17.22
82.11
21.47
18.17
17.88
17.91
17.78
29.46
24.55
18.28
18.00
18.05 ########
18.16
18.02
18.65
18.39
18.58
18.11
18.24
17.95 22.71
65
03/10/2022 13:29
65.99
17.57
17.31
17.27
17.31
17.34
39.18
24.06
17.33
17.41
17.28
17.22
84.73
23.11
18.22
17.92
17.91
17.81
29.16
26.57
18.30
18.00
18.08 ########
18.22
18.06
18.66
18.43
18.59
18.12
18.23
17.97 22.73
66
03/10/2022 13:29
71.85
17.56
17.30
17.27
17.32
17.35
43.11
24.71
17.35
17.42
17.29
17.21
93.37
25.73
18.30
17.98
17.95
17.81
29.64
28.82
18.32
18.04
18.10 ########
18.26
18.10
18.68
18.45
18.64
18.15
18.24
17.99 22.78
67
03/10/2022 13:29
77.47
17.59
17.30
17.26
17.30
17.36
47.37
25.84
17.36
17.43
17.30
17.22
92.72
25.12
18.37
18.05
17.95
17.82
29.28
29.67
18.33
18.06
18.10 ########
18.33
18.14
18.71
18.47
18.66
18.19
18.27
18.04 22.78
68
03/10/2022 13:29
81.53
17.58
17.29
17.26
17.33
17.36
49.11
26.87
17.36
17.44
17.30
17.23
97.02
24.94
18.45
18.07
17.95
17.85
30.57
30.02
18.38
18.10
18.11 ########
18.39
18.17
18.72
18.48
18.66
18.23
18.28
18.06 22.84
==PAGE:216==
69
03/10/2022 13:29
86.54
17.59
17.30
17.26
17.31
17.38
53.23
28.46
17.34
17.45
17.30
17.22 100.10
24.84
18.47
18.12
17.97
17.88
31.29
31.20
18.39
18.12
18.12 ########
18.45
18.21
18.75
18.49
18.70
18.26
18.33
18.06 22.86
70
03/10/2022 13:29
90.98
17.60
17.28
17.27
17.32
17.36
54.49
29.78
17.35
17.47
17.33
17.21
98.74
25.48
18.54
18.17
17.96
17.87
31.35
31.61
18.42
18.14
18.15 ########
18.50
18.25
18.76
18.51
18.71
18.29
18.35
18.08 22.90
71
03/10/2022 13:29
95.82
17.63
17.30
17.26
17.33
17.38
58.94
30.88
17.38
17.46
17.30
17.22 104.06
26.03
18.60
18.23
18.00
17.91
32.85
31.92
18.45
18.16
18.15 ########
18.56
18.27
18.77
18.54
18.73
18.33
18.35
18.10 22.94
72
03/10/2022 13:29
99.81
17.62
17.30
17.25
17.32
17.38
61.31
32.32
17.37
17.50
17.33
17.24 113.01
25.36
18.66
18.27
17.99
17.91
33.78
32.26
18.45
18.17
18.19 ########
18.62
18.30
18.77
18.58
18.76
18.37
18.35
18.11 22.98
73
03/10/2022 13:29
101.88
17.65
17.29
17.26
17.32
17.38
62.99
33.14
17.38
17.49
17.32
17.22 112.59
25.44
18.68
18.30
17.99
17.93
33.99
32.34
18.46
18.21
18.20 ########
18.68
18.32
18.78
18.57
18.77
18.40
18.37
18.14 22.96
74
03/10/2022 13:29
105.24
17.67
17.30
17.25
17.31
17.40
65.89
34.43
17.39
17.51
17.32
17.24 112.79
25.88
18.76
18.38
18.02
17.93
33.85
32.76
18.50
18.23
18.23 ########
18.77
18.34
18.79
18.58
18.82
18.44
18.35
18.16 22.99
75
03/10/2022 13:29
110.83
17.68
17.30
17.24
17.32
17.40
68.27
35.02
17.38
17.50
17.32
17.23 121.07
25.81
18.82
18.40
18.04
17.98
33.94
33.33
18.51
18.23
18.23 ########
18.82
18.36
18.79
18.61
18.82
18.49
18.36
18.17 23.04
76
03/10/2022 13:29
118.42
17.72
17.31
17.24
17.34
17.41
73.13
34.24
17.38
17.49
17.33
17.23 119.64
26.99
18.86
18.45
18.03
17.96
33.60
33.24
18.48
18.25
18.25 ########
18.86
18.40
18.82
18.63
18.81
18.52
18.40
18.22 23.07
77
03/10/2022 13:29
128.38
17.72
17.31
17.24
17.34
17.40
76.70
33.89
17.39
17.50
17.35
17.23 121.91
27.43
18.89
18.47
18.03
17.96
33.99
34.18
18.54
18.24
18.26 ########
18.91
18.44
18.83
18.65
18.83
18.57
18.40
18.22 23.11
78
03/10/2022 13:29
132.81
17.75
17.31
17.24
17.33
17.40
78.92
34.48
17.40
17.52
17.32
17.23 125.75
27.94
18.95
18.50
18.05
17.96
35.81
34.08
18.55
18.27
18.26 ########
18.97
18.47
18.86
18.66
18.85
18.63
18.42
18.23 23.14
79
03/10/2022 13:29
147.94
17.79
17.31
17.27
17.32
17.39
84.69
35.29
17.41
17.52
17.34
17.21 134.01
27.25
18.99
18.52
18.04
17.98
37.13
33.23
18.57
18.30
18.28 ########
19.03
18.50
18.89
18.70
18.89
18.66
18.42
18.25 23.19
80
03/10/2022 13:29
158.04
17.81
17.31
17.24
17.34
17.40
87.99
34.75
17.42
17.50
17.32
17.22 131.95
27.71
19.01
18.54
18.05
18.01
37.74
34.07
18.57
18.30
18.30 ########
19.09
18.52
18.92
18.68
18.89
18.71
18.48
18.27 23.19
81
03/10/2022 13:29
164.39
17.85
17.31
17.25
17.33
17.39
91.01
34.37
17.40
17.51
17.34
17.23 129.23
29.79
19.05
18.58
18.07
18.01
38.26
34.92
18.57
18.31
18.31 ########
19.16
18.54
18.96
18.71
18.91
18.76
18.51
18.27 23.22
82
03/10/2022 13:29
170.89
17.89
17.30
17.25
17.32
17.39
94.22
34.30
17.41
17.51
17.33
17.23 130.25
29.30
19.09
18.59
18.09
18.03
38.89
34.97
18.59
18.36
18.33 ########
19.23
18.57
18.97
18.75
18.94
18.79
18.52
18.28 23.27
83
03/10/2022 13:29
177.98
17.91
17.31
17.27
17.33
17.38
99.02
33.68
17.40
17.54
17.34
17.23 140.22
29.19
19.11
18.63
18.09
18.02
39.86
36.40
18.61
18.36
18.33 ########
19.31
18.58
19.01
18.76
18.95
18.82
18.51
18.31 23.29
84
03/10/2022 13:30
184.74
17.93
17.31
17.26
17.33
17.38
103.65
33.15
17.41
17.50
17.34
17.22 153.93
29.94
19.15
18.66
18.08
18.03
41.83
36.60
18.61
18.35
18.30 ########
19.36
18.59
19.04
18.79
18.97
18.85
18.50
18.31 23.31
85
03/10/2022 13:30
194.94
17.97
17.32
17.25
17.32
17.37
108.46
32.77
17.42
17.49
17.34
17.23 176.48
30.15
19.20
18.69
18.08
18.03
43.03
39.32
18.63
18.37
18.31 ########
19.45
18.62
19.08
18.80
19.02
18.88
18.50
18.31 23.31
86
03/10/2022 13:30
198.89
18.01
17.32
17.25
17.33
17.36
110.41
32.31
17.43
17.45
17.33
17.23 182.50
30.00
19.25
18.73
18.09
18.06
44.95
40.35
18.64
18.37
18.33 ########
19.55
18.65
19.09
18.85
19.04
18.91
18.50
18.34 23.32
87
03/10/2022 13:30
200.79
18.05
17.33
17.25
17.32
17.36
112.28
31.53
17.42
17.46
17.35
17.24 179.52
29.08
19.29
18.78
18.12
18.06
44.76
40.31
18.65
18.35
18.34 ########
19.62
18.68
19.12
18.85
19.06
18.95
18.51
18.35 23.35
88
03/10/2022 13:30
209.30
18.07
17.31
17.26
17.33
17.35
117.35
31.71
17.43
17.43
17.32
17.24 180.29
29.05
19.32
18.82
18.14
18.09
46.02
41.23
18.65
18.38
18.34 ########
19.73
18.70
19.15
18.90
19.09
18.99
18.53
18.36 23.37
89
03/10/2022 13:30
214.46
18.11
17.32
17.24
17.32
17.36
120.54
32.62
17.44
17.42
17.31
17.23 192.13
31.86
19.34
18.84
18.15
18.09
48.02
40.66
18.69
18.37
18.33 ########
19.82
18.71
19.18
18.91
19.10
19.01
18.54
18.37 23.37
90
03/10/2022 13:30
216.92
18.14
17.31
17.24
17.32
17.37
125.42
32.59
17.42
17.41
17.32
17.24 188.26
32.94
19.40
18.89
18.14
18.11
48.64
41.55
18.70
18.38
18.33 ########
19.92
18.72
19.18
18.93
19.13
19.04
18.54
18.37 23.40
91
03/10/2022 13:30
223.42
18.16
17.31
17.22
17.31
17.37
127.71
33.29
17.43
17.40
17.33
17.24 181.91
33.89
19.41
18.92
18.17
18.13
48.07
43.66
18.73
18.41
18.33 ########
20.01
18.75
19.20
18.97
19.15
19.06
18.56
18.37 23.42
92
03/10/2022 13:30
225.68
18.19
17.31
17.22
17.30
17.36
129.69
32.93
17.42
17.38
17.31
17.23 181.80
37.60
19.48
18.97
18.19
18.14
48.37
45.10
18.76
18.42
18.34 ########
20.10
18.77
19.23
19.00
19.18
19.07
18.58
18.37 23.43
93
03/10/2022 13:30
227.58
18.23
17.31
17.23
17.32
17.36
131.92
33.73
17.45
17.36
17.31
17.24 182.85
39.43
19.52
18.99
18.17
18.15
48.23
45.66
18.99
18.43
18.35 ########
20.20
18.80
19.27
19.03
19.19
19.12
18.61
18.38 23.47
94
03/10/2022 13:30
230.56
18.29
17.30
17.22
17.33
17.36
131.75
36.05
17.43
17.40
17.31
17.24 199.21
38.75
19.59
19.04
18.19
18.16
51.23
46.53
18.96
18.45
18.37 ########
20.30
18.83
19.30
19.05
19.24
19.15
18.67
18.41 23.51
95
03/10/2022 13:30
227.30
18.33
17.31
17.25
17.31
17.35
130.85
36.68
17.45
17.36
17.30
17.23 200.17
39.19
19.66
19.10
18.21
18.16
51.92
46.35
18.95
18.47
18.36 ########
20.40
18.86
19.34
19.07
19.27
19.18
18.68
18.42 23.51
96
03/10/2022 13:30
224.90
18.38
17.32
17.22
17.31
17.36
131.07
36.69
17.43
17.38
17.30
17.24 206.27
41.44
19.70
19.13
18.23
18.19
50.87
47.55
18.95
18.48
18.39 ########
20.49
18.90
19.36
19.10
19.28
19.23
18.71
18.42 23.55
97
03/10/2022 13:30
225.96
18.44
17.31
17.24
17.33
17.37
132.01
37.56
17.45
17.37
17.29
17.23 200.60
41.10
19.74
19.15
18.25
18.20
50.56
47.62
18.99
18.47
18.40 ########
20.56
18.94
19.41
19.14
19.32
19.27
18.75
18.47 23.58
98
03/10/2022 13:30
224.33
18.46
17.33
17.26
17.33
17.37
132.55
38.19
17.44
17.35
17.29
17.23 197.30
44.01
19.85
19.22
18.27
18.23
50.29
48.17
19.04
18.51
18.43 ########
20.66
18.92
19.44
19.16
19.34
19.33
18.76
18.46 23.58
99
03/10/2022 13:30
223.27
18.48
17.31
17.25
17.34
17.39
134.28
37.46
17.44
17.37
17.28
17.22 204.84
46.20
19.89
19.26
18.28
18.25
50.39
48.13
19.05
18.55
18.42 ########
20.74
18.98
19.46
19.22
19.38
19.37
18.78
18.50 23.61
100
03/10/2022 13:30
223.34
18.53
17.34
17.26
17.33
17.37
134.36
39.50
17.44
17.36
17.28
17.23 204.18
45.44
19.97
19.31
18.28
18.25
50.98
49.42
19.10
18.57
18.49 ########
20.86
19.00
19.49
19.24
19.40
19.44
18.81
18.53 23.64
101
03/10/2022 13:30
226.61
18.58
17.33
17.27
17.33
17.39
137.55
41.01
17.45
17.38
17.31
17.24 208.17
46.12
20.03
19.36
18.29
18.29
52.18
48.79
19.13
18.61
18.49 ########
20.93
19.03
19.53
19.26
19.43
19.51
18.85
18.55 23.66
102
03/10/2022 13:30
236.17
18.61
17.34
17.26
17.34
17.39
139.28
42.71
17.42
17.39
17.29
17.23 198.42
44.27
20.09
19.42
18.35
18.33
52.11
48.22
19.14
18.66
18.53 ########
21.02
19.08
19.54
19.32
19.47
19.57
18.89
18.58 23.64
103
03/10/2022 13:30
246.69
18.66
17.34
17.30
17.32
17.37
146.61
43.50
17.44
17.38
17.29
17.23 197.30
43.57
20.15
19.49
18.36
18.36
53.46
47.05
19.16
18.69
18.55 ########
21.13
19.14
19.56
19.35
19.48
19.66
18.90
18.61 23.69
104
03/10/2022 13:30
254.75
18.76
17.34
17.27
17.34
17.39
151.31
44.60
17.44
17.38
17.30
17.25 197.28
45.81
20.21
19.50
18.38
18.38
52.52
46.43
19.21
18.75
18.60 ########
21.19
19.18
19.61
19.39
19.51
19.73
18.93
18.64 23.72
105
03/10/2022 13:30
267.91
18.85
17.33
17.28
17.32
17.39
154.93
46.86
17.44
17.38
17.30
17.25 195.23
44.79
20.25
19.55
18.39
18.39
53.17
46.45
19.21
18.79
18.62 ########
21.30
19.20
19.63
19.45
19.55
19.76
18.98
18.69 23.76
106
03/10/2022 13:30
278.05
18.89
17.33
17.28
17.34
17.39
160.77
46.30
17.45
17.44
17.32
17.26 198.56
43.04
20.32
19.62
18.42
18.41
52.42
45.61
19.27
18.84
18.66 ########
21.38
19.27
19.67
19.48
19.59
19.84
19.01
18.71 23.78
107
03/10/2022 13:30
301.22
18.99
17.31
17.28
17.33
17.40
173.34
44.84
17.44
17.44
17.31
17.24 192.94
43.48
20.37
19.66
18.44
18.45
52.08
44.86
19.28
18.88
18.71 ########
21.43
19.29
19.72
19.52
19.65
19.93
19.02
18.73 23.83
108
03/10/2022 13:30
317.85
19.06
17.33
17.27
17.34
17.42
181.62
45.04
17.47
17.47
17.33
17.26 191.15
42.88
20.39
19.70
18.47
18.46
52.29
43.96
19.32
18.95
18.70 ########
21.48
19.32
19.75
19.57
19.68
20.00
19.08
18.77 23.85
109
03/10/2022 13:30
328.24
19.17
17.34
17.27
17.34
17.40
190.15
46.03
17.46
17.48
17.34
17.26 192.62
42.50
20.45
19.72
18.46
18.46
54.06
42.92
19.40
18.98
18.75 ########
21.52
19.35
19.80
19.62
19.73
20.08
19.11
18.79 23.89
110
03/10/2022 13:30
332.74
19.22
17.32
17.29
17.35
17.40
190.74
45.87
17.45
17.48
17.34
17.26 190.67
49.40
20.48
19.74
18.50
18.49
53.76
44.45
19.57
18.98
18.78 ########
21.54
19.36
19.84
19.65
19.77
20.14
19.16
18.82 23.94
111
03/10/2022 13:30
339.58
19.33
17.33
17.31
17.35
17.43
195.32
46.75
17.46
17.51
17.34
17.26 184.90
47.83
20.56
19.80
18.51
18.51
53.04
43.44
19.62
19.04
18.83 ########
21.62
19.41
19.90
19.72
19.79
20.21
19.18
18.84 23.99
112
03/10/2022 13:30
335.43
19.36
17.35
17.30
17.36
17.44
192.28
47.96
17.47
17.51
17.34
17.27 185.26
46.00
20.64
19.85
18.55
18.54
53.51
43.44
19.67
19.09
18.88 ########
21.66
19.44
19.95
19.74
19.79
20.27
19.24
18.85 24.02
113
03/10/2022 13:30
336.93
19.46
17.34
17.31
17.36
17.43
193.89
49.77
17.46
17.52
17.36
17.26 191.45
45.78
20.69
19.91
18.57
18.57
52.93
42.80
19.70
19.11
18.88 ########
21.72
19.48
19.98
19.77
19.82
20.37
19.24
18.88 24.06
114
03/10/2022 13:30
351.10
19.58
17.34
17.29
17.35
17.43
200.68
50.47
17.49
17.52
17.36
17.25 182.00
43.75
20.75
19.95
18.59
18.60
53.28
41.96
19.73
19.14
18.92 ########
21.82
19.53
20.00
19.83
19.85
20.43
19.23
18.91 24.06
115
03/10/2022 13:30
352.39
19.64
17.34
17.30
17.35
17.44
205.24
51.87
17.47
17.52
17.33
17.27 178.98
43.91
20.75
19.96
18.60
18.58
52.66
40.78
19.75
19.19
18.91 ########
21.93
19.55
20.03
19.85
19.86
20.47
19.23
18.92 24.07
116
03/10/2022 13:30
351.48
19.75
17.34
17.30
17.37
17.45
205.34
51.53
17.47
17.53
17.36
17.26 183.59
42.12
20.80
20.03
18.63
18.61
52.80
39.99
19.77
19.19
18.96 ########
22.03
19.59
20.08
19.87
19.87
20.55
19.26
18.93 24.08
117
03/10/2022 13:30
344.86
19.87
17.35
17.32
17.36
17.42
202.51
56.55
17.47
17.54
17.35
17.26 188.42
41.66
20.85
20.07
18.65
18.62
52.64
40.35
19.79
19.22
18.97 ########
22.08
19.63
20.12
19.92
19.93
20.55
19.27
18.93 24.13
118
03/10/2022 13:30
333.47
19.95
17.35
17.32
17.37
17.42
196.64
62.47
17.49
17.51
17.34
17.26 207.14
41.83
20.89
20.06
18.65
18.62
53.88
40.24
19.81
19.24
19.01 ########
22.12
19.64
20.16
19.95
19.95
20.61
19.29
18.95 24.19
119
03/10/2022 13:30
335.60
20.03
17.36
17.34
17.35
17.43
195.95
68.68
17.51
17.52
17.35
17.28 208.52
41.80
20.94
20.10
18.67
18.62
54.10
41.10
19.84
19.27
19.02 ########
22.20
19.67
20.19
19.99
19.97
20.68
19.33
18.95 24.26
120
03/10/2022 13:30
335.05
20.07
17.36
17.34
17.37
17.40
196.22
70.43
17.49
17.53
17.35
17.27 222.26
42.22
20.99
20.15
18.71
18.65
56.43
41.26
19.84
19.32
19.03
-161.50
22.29
19.70
20.24
20.01
19.99
20.72
19.32
18.95 24.31
121
03/10/2022 13:30
329.47
20.15
17.35
17.34
17.37
17.41
193.31
77.20
17.52
17.54
17.35
17.28 233.26
42.23
21.06
20.20
18.72
18.65
57.46
41.24
19.86
19.33
19.06 ########
22.41
19.74
20.26
20.06
20.03
20.78
19.36
18.98 24.37
122
03/10/2022 13:30
329.05
20.23
17.36
17.35
17.37
17.41
191.68
82.49
17.51
17.53
17.37
17.26 234.92
41.07
21.10
20.24
18.74
18.69
57.05
41.62
19.87
19.36
19.07 ########
22.50
19.79
20.30
20.07
20.07
20.84
19.38
19.01 24.41
123
03/10/2022 13:31
325.77
20.27
17.37
17.33
17.36
17.41
189.92
83.12
17.52
17.53
17.35
17.29 229.60
40.92
21.13
20.25
18.75
18.71
55.54
41.06
19.88
19.39
19.10 ########
22.60
19.78
20.34
20.09
20.08
20.90
19.39
19.02 24.46
124
03/10/2022 13:31
315.93
20.32
17.35
17.34
17.37
17.42
185.53
88.08
17.53
17.54
17.38
17.28 230.82
40.28
21.19
20.29
18.77
18.72
56.82
40.63
19.88
19.41
19.12 ########
22.74
19.81
20.37
20.12
20.09
20.98
19.40
19.07 24.51
125
03/10/2022 13:31
310.01
20.41
17.35
17.35
17.37
17.43
182.20
92.58
17.52
17.52
17.37
17.27 233.77
40.07
21.20
20.31
18.78
18.75
56.56
39.40
19.87
19.41
19.15 ########
22.74
19.80
20.37
20.14
20.13
21.01
19.42
19.06 24.54
126
03/10/2022 13:31
325.45
20.56
17.36
17.36
17.35
17.41
187.95
93.18
17.52
17.53
17.38
17.28 235.91
39.30
21.27
20.32
18.80
18.77
58.18
40.44
19.91
19.43
19.15 ########
22.85
19.82
20.40
20.16
20.17
21.07
19.45
19.07 24.58
127
03/10/2022 13:31
320.04
20.60
17.37
17.36
17.37
17.40
186.72
95.48
17.52
17.52
17.39
17.28 244.95
40.27
21.32
20.37
18.81
18.78
58.94
42.32
19.96
19.45
19.17 ########
22.97
19.85
20.47
20.19
20.19
21.14
19.47
19.10 24.62
128
03/10/2022 13:31
311.60
20.63
17.36
17.35
17.36
17.40
182.65
99.32
17.52
17.53
17.38
17.26 254.62
39.03
21.35
20.40
18.82
18.76
58.72
41.76
19.97
19.45
19.19 ########
23.08
19.90
20.46
20.23
20.21
21.21
19.49
19.13 24.63
129
03/10/2022 13:31
307.75
20.72
17.36
17.36
17.37
17.39
184.78
99.29
17.55
17.54
17.38
17.28 257.22
39.13
21.40
20.46
18.84
18.79
59.12
42.19
20.00
19.46
19.20 ########
23.23
19.94
20.50
20.29
20.24
21.25
19.51
19.14 24.66
130
03/10/2022 13:31
322.74
20.89
17.39
17.37
17.39
17.41
189.72
105.10
17.53
17.54
17.39
17.25 272.01
38.21
21.44
20.45
18.86
18.79
60.54
41.71
19.99
19.48
19.22 ########
23.37
19.97
20.52
20.31
20.28
21.31
19.51
19.15 24.70
131
03/10/2022 13:31
328.99
20.97
17.36
17.38
17.37
17.38
187.59
109.06
17.54
17.54
17.38
17.30 271.69
37.23
21.48
20.46
18.84
18.80
61.29
42.00
20.00
19.48
19.23 ########
23.46
20.00
20.57
20.33
20.28
21.38
19.52
19.21 24.71
132
03/10/2022 13:31
335.06
21.05
17.38
17.38
17.39
17.38
187.22
110.08
17.52
17.54
17.40
17.28 268.43
36.61
21.51
20.48
18.87
18.80
61.32
41.68
19.98
19.49
19.22 ########
23.54
20.06
20.57
20.37
20.29
21.46
19.56
19.25 24.70
133
03/10/2022 13:31
344.76
21.11
17.37
17.39
17.39
17.38
192.63
111.18
17.55
17.55
17.39
17.28 269.84
36.54
21.50
20.51
18.86
18.78
62.14
40.45
20.06
19.47
19.23 ########
23.57
20.05
20.58
20.35
20.30
21.48
19.58
19.29 24.73
134
03/10/2022 13:31
371.29
21.26
17.38
17.38
17.38
17.38
210.20
108.68
17.53
17.54
17.39
17.29 276.71
36.25
21.52
20.52
18.86
18.79
62.54
40.84
20.05
19.48
19.23 ########
23.58
20.04
20.61
20.36
20.30
21.52
19.57
19.28 24.77
135
03/10/2022 13:31
390.46
21.39
17.39
17.38
17.37
17.36
228.28
106.12
17.54
17.51
17.39
17.29 269.64
36.05
21.53
20.55
18.85
18.76
62.98
40.32
20.00
19.49
19.26 ########
23.59
20.05
20.68
20.37
20.29
21.53
19.55
19.30 24.78
136
03/10/2022 13:31
425.01
21.59
17.39
17.41
17.39
17.35
246.33
105.63
17.54
17.52
17.39
17.29 273.58
36.43
21.52
20.59
18.85
18.76
65.63
40.96
19.98
19.47
19.25 ########
23.56
20.05
20.72
20.39
20.32
21.61
19.54
19.34 24.81
137
03/10/2022 13:31
443.07
21.76
17.40
17.40
17.37
17.35
251.79
105.31
17.53
17.53
17.41
17.27 279.50
38.44
21.50
20.61
18.83
18.75
65.57
41.52
19.97
19.44
19.26 ########
23.61
20.04
20.76
20.39
20.33
21.60
19.55
19.33 24.83
138
03/10/2022 13:31
447.74
21.91
17.39
17.40
17.41
17.34
259.28
103.71
17.55
17.53
17.40
17.30 278.98
39.35
21.48
20.58
18.84
18.73
64.76
42.52
19.96
19.43
19.24 ########
23.69
20.05
20.78
20.41
20.34
21.61
19.54
19.34 24.83
==PAGE:217==
139
03/10/2022 13:31
451.62
22.06
17.40
17.41
17.38
17.36
269.41
101.79
17.55
17.51
17.41
17.30 278.42
39.17
21.46
20.53
18.84
18.75
65.75
43.54
19.99
19.41
19.23 ########
23.75
20.04
20.81
20.42
20.33
21.64
19.50
19.33 24.83
140
03/10/2022 13:31
457.11
22.21
17.39
17.40
17.40
17.33
274.29
99.59
17.56
17.54
17.40
17.30 291.71
37.85
21.48
20.54
18.81
18.76
65.98
43.33
19.96
19.40
19.20 ########
23.82
20.05
20.84
20.42
20.31
21.65
19.50
19.32 24.85
141
03/10/2022 13:31
464.06
22.34
17.41
17.41
17.39
17.32
279.48
96.93
17.55
17.52
17.38
17.29 303.51
38.33
21.45
20.54
18.83
18.75
67.35
44.31
19.93
19.39
19.20 ########
23.90
20.01
20.84
20.44
20.31
21.66
19.47
19.31 24.87
142
03/10/2022 13:31
475.19
22.57
17.42
17.43
17.40
17.31
286.65
92.78
17.56
17.53
17.39
17.27 309.51
37.41
21.48
20.55
18.80
18.75
70.01
45.51
19.90
19.36
19.22 ########
23.98
20.02
20.89
20.45
20.33
21.72
19.47
19.31 24.84
143
03/10/2022 13:31
481.02
22.68
17.42
17.44
17.41
17.30
291.14
91.78
17.55
17.51
17.40
17.27 317.05
38.05
21.43
20.55
18.79
18.75
69.36
45.09
19.88
19.36
19.21 ########
24.11
20.03
20.96
20.45
20.33
21.72
19.47
19.30 24.83
144
03/10/2022 13:31
487.96
22.86
17.42
17.43
17.41
17.30
300.19
87.84
17.55
17.51
17.39
17.28 346.68
37.76
21.40
20.57
18.81
18.73
71.36
46.39
19.88
19.36
19.21 ########
24.24
20.05
20.97
20.45
20.36
21.72
19.49
19.29 24.80
145
03/10/2022 13:31
482.53
22.95
17.43
17.43
17.40
17.29
298.23
84.93
17.56
17.52
17.40
17.30 335.17
38.21
21.40
20.54
18.81
18.74
71.72
49.71
19.87
19.33
19.23 ########
24.37
20.07
21.02
20.47
20.37
21.71
19.50
19.27 24.78
146
03/10/2022 13:31
475.01
23.01
17.41
17.42
17.42
17.29
295.59
81.69
17.56
17.52
17.38
17.30 341.29
39.05
21.43
20.55
18.81
18.73
73.55
50.98
19.88
19.30
19.20 ########
24.43
20.07
21.08
20.50
20.43
21.72
19.52
19.27 24.76
147
03/10/2022 13:31
475.78
23.03
17.42
17.42
17.40
17.26
294.76
78.73
17.56
17.50
17.39
17.28 376.20
41.09
21.42
20.51
18.80
18.75
77.94
51.45
19.92
19.29
19.19 ########
24.54
20.07
21.13
20.52
20.45
21.68
19.55
19.24 24.70
148
03/10/2022 13:31
468.82
23.06
17.44
17.44
17.42
17.26
295.27
76.02
17.54
17.51
17.40
17.27 406.98
41.02
21.45
20.52
18.80
18.74
78.91
51.06
19.93
19.30
19.16 ########
24.66
20.10
21.21
20.53
20.50
21.67
19.58
19.25 24.73
149
03/10/2022 13:31
467.19
23.13
17.44
17.42
17.40
17.25
295.10
73.57
17.56
17.51
17.38
17.29 412.76
41.55
21.48
20.57
18.81
18.76
77.89
52.16
20.31
19.33
19.13 ########
24.79
20.11
21.25
20.58
20.54
21.67
19.60
19.25 24.69
150
03/10/2022 13:31
459.30
23.22
17.45
17.44
17.41
17.24
291.57
71.08
17.55
17.55
17.39
17.28 431.94
42.31
21.49
20.60
18.81
18.75
83.56
53.34
20.32
19.37
19.15 ########
24.81
20.17
21.28
20.57
20.57
21.65
19.63
19.25 24.68
151
03/10/2022 13:31
459.25
23.30
17.44
17.44
17.43
17.26
292.26
68.71
17.58
17.52
17.39
17.29 437.78
42.46
21.52
20.57
18.82
18.75
85.35
52.15
20.32
19.40
19.20 ########
24.94
20.21
21.35
20.61
20.60
21.68
19.63
19.25 24.68
152
03/10/2022 13:31
456.62
23.31
17.44
17.45
17.42
17.26
289.50
68.69
17.55
17.52
17.38
17.28 447.73
43.28
21.55
20.61
18.80
18.77
87.09
52.88
20.36
19.45
19.22 ########
25.06
20.24
21.36
20.61
20.62
21.65
19.65
19.25 24.68
153
03/10/2022 13:31
459.18
23.35
17.46
17.45
17.42
17.27
290.78
66.59
17.56
17.51
17.39
17.28 429.61
42.59
21.56
20.65
18.82
18.80
83.15
54.37
20.32
19.49
19.21 ########
25.18
20.28
21.45
20.60
20.65
21.64
19.67
19.27 24.67
154
03/10/2022 13:31
459.63
23.43
17.44
17.45
17.42
17.28
285.16
67.83
17.55
17.50
17.42
17.29 426.59
46.99
21.58
20.65
18.82
18.81
81.09
54.19
20.26
19.52
19.20 ########
25.27
20.28
21.47
20.64
20.68
21.61
19.69
19.24 24.65
155
03/10/2022 13:31
459.64
23.46
17.45
17.46
17.42
17.27
284.06
65.58
17.56
17.53
17.40
17.28 416.64
46.97
21.60
20.63
18.83
18.82
82.45
56.17
20.26
19.49
19.17 ########
25.31
20.34
21.53
20.66
20.71
21.55
19.72
19.26 24.64
156
03/10/2022 13:31
460.13
23.48
17.46
17.44
17.43
17.26
280.25
65.59
17.55
17.53
17.41
17.29 432.52
46.89
21.64
20.63
18.82
18.82
81.80
56.28
20.29
19.52
19.17 ########
25.42
20.36
21.55
20.67
20.75
21.55
19.75
19.24 24.66
157
03/10/2022 13:31
463.43
23.51
17.44
17.46
17.42
17.27
281.27
65.11
17.56
17.53
17.41
17.28 449.48
45.29
21.66
20.62
18.83
18.81
83.64
58.73
20.39
19.53
19.19 ########
25.49
20.38
21.61
20.72
20.76
21.50
19.81
19.26 24.65
158
03/10/2022 13:31
465.02
23.57
17.46
17.47
17.42
17.30
281.01
62.85
17.58
17.52
17.42
17.29 456.14
44.20
21.70
20.65
18.85
18.81
84.86
56.80
20.35
19.52
19.20 ########
25.59
20.36
21.67
20.75
20.79
21.47
19.82
19.30 24.64
159
03/10/2022 13:31
462.71
23.64
17.46
17.47
17.43
17.29
282.44
61.11
17.57
17.52
17.44
17.28 453.74
43.33
21.68
20.65
18.85
18.81
85.34
58.12
20.33
19.52
19.17 ########
25.69
20.39
21.72
20.77
20.83
21.43
19.82
19.29 24.65
160
03/10/2022 13:31
461.01
23.67
17.47
17.48
17.44
17.29
281.82
59.44
17.57
17.56
17.42
17.30 438.50
44.93
21.65
20.68
18.85
18.81
83.81
57.20
20.75
19.54
19.20 ########
25.73
20.45
21.79
20.79
20.85
21.38
19.81
19.31 24.67
161
03/10/2022 13:31
457.29
23.77
17.47
17.49
17.43
17.30
283.87
57.66
17.57
17.56
17.41
17.29 430.63
44.59
21.62
20.65
18.84
18.81
85.70
55.52
21.10
19.56
19.21 ########
25.88
20.45
21.81
20.81
20.87
21.33
19.82
19.30 24.68
162
03/10/2022 13:32
458.82
23.88
17.47
17.49
17.42
17.31
287.96
56.03
17.57
17.55
17.43
17.30 432.59
45.32
21.63
20.66
18.84
18.81
84.33
56.01
21.63
19.61
19.22 ########
26.01
20.49
21.85
20.83
20.90
21.30
19.82
19.30 24.69
163
03/10/2022 13:32
452.11
23.98
17.49
17.48
17.44
17.33
289.42
54.67
17.56
17.55
17.44
17.28 429.59
44.22
21.57
20.63
18.84
18.83
86.79
56.68
21.51
19.66
19.25 ########
26.11
20.52
21.90
20.85
20.92
21.28
19.82
19.31 24.70
164
03/10/2022 13:32
459.27
24.05
17.47
17.48
17.45
17.32
299.47
54.48
17.57
17.55
17.41
17.29 429.47
43.83
21.60
20.60
18.84
18.82
88.19
55.87
21.38
19.66
19.25 ########
26.24
20.56
21.95
20.85
20.95
21.26
19.84
19.33 24.71
165
03/10/2022 13:32
460.84
24.14
17.49
17.52
17.43
17.34
305.47
53.30
17.56
17.52
17.45
17.30 409.08
45.45
21.56
20.61
18.82
18.83
87.38
55.12
21.93
19.70
19.28 ########
26.35
20.58
21.98
20.87
20.95
21.22
19.86
19.30 24.72
166
03/10/2022 13:32
463.92
24.30
17.48
17.50
17.44
17.35
314.47
52.64
17.57
17.55
17.44
17.29 402.35
46.63
21.55
20.58
18.84
18.83
88.95
55.13
21.96
19.73
19.28 ########
26.51
20.62
22.01
20.89
20.99
21.24
19.86
19.31 24.74
167
03/10/2022 13:32
476.09
24.41
17.48
17.53
17.44
17.34
322.46
52.53
17.57
17.53
17.45
17.30 393.78
47.94
21.55
20.55
18.82
18.84
88.47
57.30
21.76
19.72
19.26 ########
26.59
20.63
22.06
20.92
21.00
21.21
19.88
19.32 24.78
168
03/10/2022 13:32
482.64
24.50
17.50
17.53
17.43
17.35
327.24
53.24
17.57
17.53
17.46
17.31 391.75
47.41
21.53
20.52
18.83
18.85
87.85
56.80
21.61
19.70
19.28 ########
26.65
20.66
22.09
20.92
21.03
21.20
19.87
19.33 24.78
169
03/10/2022 13:32
494.51
24.63
17.50
17.53
17.45
17.36
337.74
53.07
17.56
17.54
17.45
17.29 378.52
46.78
21.53
20.50
18.82
18.85
85.43
56.94
21.46
19.72
19.27 ########
26.67
20.70
22.14
20.95
21.04
21.18
19.87
19.34 24.80
170
03/10/2022 13:32
505.34
24.76
17.49
17.53
17.44
17.38
344.40
51.86
17.59
17.55
17.46
17.31 383.94
47.97
21.49
20.45
18.81
18.84
87.23
57.24
21.35
19.75
19.27 ########
26.76
20.72
22.17
20.98
21.05
21.16
19.93
19.32 24.81
171
03/10/2022 13:32
512.05
24.96
17.51
17.56
17.45
17.38
355.07
50.41
17.58
17.53
17.46
17.29 372.96
48.91
21.48
20.42
18.83
18.84
86.85
58.05
21.24
19.76
19.30 ########
26.85
20.71
22.18
20.99
21.07
21.12
19.98
19.32 24.80
172
03/10/2022 13:32
523.05
25.05
17.53
17.56
17.45
17.40
351.74
51.50
17.54
17.52
17.45
17.30 353.82
50.05
21.44
20.42
18.81
18.86
86.31
57.54
21.13
19.74
19.28 ########
26.88
20.72
22.22
21.00
21.09
21.10
20.05
19.32 24.83
173
03/10/2022 13:32
531.69
25.12
17.51
17.58
17.47
17.40
354.20
53.04
17.59
17.56
17.46
17.30 356.26
49.57
21.44
20.40
18.82
18.85
88.20
57.09
21.26
19.74
19.30 ########
26.80
20.75
22.22
21.03
21.10
21.12
20.01
19.30 24.84
174
03/10/2022 13:32
551.75
25.22
17.53
17.59
17.46
17.41
370.50
51.94
17.58
17.58
17.48
17.32 338.17
50.16
21.43
20.39
18.81
18.84
87.88
55.42
21.12
19.70
19.28 ########
26.79
20.76
22.28
21.03
21.12
21.12
20.09
19.32 24.84
175
03/10/2022 13:32
572.44
25.36
17.54
17.61
17.46
17.44
377.17
52.83
17.57
17.60
17.49
17.31 329.64
50.44
21.43
20.43
18.79
18.86
87.76
57.26
21.07
19.72
19.27 ########
26.84
20.79
22.30
21.06
21.14
21.10
20.17
19.32 24.86
176
03/10/2022 13:32
578.15
25.50
17.53
17.61
17.48
17.43
382.66
51.44
17.59
17.60
17.49
17.31 320.99
49.69
21.41
20.44
18.79
18.86
85.24
57.10
21.09
19.73
19.25 ########
26.85
20.78
22.34
21.08
21.16
21.08
20.19
19.30 24.84
177
03/10/2022 13:32
584.86
25.64
17.53
17.61
17.47
17.45
398.74
51.85
17.58
17.63
17.49
17.32 310.58
50.10
21.42
20.42
18.78
18.84
84.92
56.63
20.97
19.74
19.26 ########
26.82
20.79
22.36
21.11
21.18
21.05
20.21
19.31 24.85
178
03/10/2022 13:32
593.44
25.79
17.53
17.62
17.49
17.46
417.01
55.72
17.59
17.64
17.49
17.31 306.74
49.68
21.43
20.43
18.78
18.86
84.72
55.17
20.89
19.69
19.25 ########
26.77
20.81
22.40
21.11
21.18
21.06
20.22
19.31 24.85
179
03/10/2022 13:32
597.56
25.97
17.55
17.62
17.47
17.48
431.54
54.86
17.59
17.64
17.50
17.29 313.37
48.23
21.44
20.43
18.78
18.86
85.84
56.18
20.88
19.69
19.25 ########
26.86
20.79
22.48
21.14
21.21
21.03
20.25
19.33 24.85
180
03/10/2022 13:32
602.06
26.18
17.55
17.65
17.50
17.49
447.99
54.86
17.61
17.64
17.49
17.31 336.81
48.24
21.41
20.42
18.79
18.86
87.02
57.45
20.89
19.67
19.23 ########
26.89
20.78
22.47
21.16
21.21
21.03
20.31
19.33 24.86
181
03/10/2022 13:32
601.64
26.39
17.55
17.67
17.47
17.51
472.97
56.56
17.60
17.67
17.50
17.31 329.89
48.76
21.41
20.40
18.80
18.85
84.95
55.98
20.80
19.66
19.22 ########
26.88
20.80
22.53
21.18
21.24
21.00
20.35
19.33 24.87
182
03/10/2022 13:32
609.06
26.66
17.58
17.69
17.50
17.52
494.33
55.40
17.60
17.65
17.49
17.30 338.34
48.82
21.40
20.37
18.82
18.88
84.23
55.81
20.78
19.62
19.21 ########
26.80
20.82
22.56
21.21
21.26
21.01
20.34
19.34 24.86
183
03/10/2022 13:32
608.59
26.92
17.57
17.71
17.53
17.51
527.76
55.06
17.61
17.68
17.50
17.30 346.41
48.29
21.45
20.38
18.79
18.86
85.05
56.74
20.91
19.61
19.22 ########
26.80
20.85
22.63
21.22
21.27
20.98
20.34
19.35 24.86
184
03/10/2022 13:32
610.80
27.17
17.57
17.73
17.53
17.51
535.14
54.50
17.61
17.68
17.50
17.31 325.64
48.99
21.42
20.39
18.82
18.86
83.67
55.06
21.09
19.62
19.20 ########
26.85
20.89
22.68
21.28
21.30
20.98
20.36
19.37 24.86
185
03/10/2022 13:32
606.35
27.47
17.57
17.73
17.53
17.51
566.86
56.30
17.62
17.70
17.52
17.31 333.23
50.27
21.47
20.41
18.83
18.87
85.36
56.03
21.27
19.69
19.21 ########
26.87
20.96
22.72
21.29
21.32
20.97
20.39
19.35 24.85
186
03/10/2022 13:32
602.46
27.81
17.59
17.76
17.54
17.53
580.99
57.91
17.61
17.72
17.51
17.29 321.31
52.79
21.47
20.43
18.82
18.86
85.07
55.94
21.62
19.66
19.27 ########
26.85
21.03
22.75
21.34
21.34
20.96
20.42
19.35 24.82
187
03/10/2022 13:32
605.27
28.05
17.61
17.78
17.55
17.54
614.28
58.54
17.64
17.72
17.53
17.31 322.26
52.33
21.47
20.43
18.83
18.86
85.83
56.72
21.71
19.64
19.26 ########
26.81
21.04
22.77
21.36
21.34
20.96
20.46
19.38 24.85
188
03/10/2022 13:32
597.43
28.40
17.61
17.80
17.58
17.53
654.76
58.82
17.63
17.74
17.52
17.32 310.03
51.03
21.46
20.44
18.83
18.85
85.66
55.61
21.74
19.62
19.27 ########
26.83
21.08
22.81
21.37
21.37
20.95
20.44
19.37 24.83
189
03/10/2022 13:32
596.54
28.81
17.61
17.83
17.56
17.53
687.79
61.33
17.64
17.76
17.55
17.33 293.18
52.02
21.42
20.44
18.81
18.87
83.79
55.45
21.79
19.60
19.25 ########
26.82
21.10
22.86
21.39
21.40
20.98
20.47
19.37 24.84
190
03/10/2022 13:32
596.82
29.11
17.62
17.83
17.57
17.52
716.12
65.33
17.67
17.78
17.55
17.30 292.04
55.81
21.46
20.45
18.81
18.88
84.51
54.40
21.74
19.59
19.24 ########
26.83
21.08
22.94
21.42
21.42
20.98
20.55
19.38 24.84
191
03/10/2022 13:32
596.65
29.46
17.63
17.83
17.58
17.53
737.41
69.27
17.66
17.83
17.55
17.31 297.40
54.52
21.43
20.45
18.78
18.87
86.75
54.30
21.62
19.59
19.24 ########
26.93
21.05
22.99
21.44
21.43
20.97
20.54
19.38 24.86
192
03/10/2022 13:32
590.95
29.76
17.63
17.86
17.59
17.53
763.90
69.46
17.65
17.81
17.58
17.32 286.64
55.24
21.41
20.45
18.81
18.90
86.21
54.08
21.66
19.57
19.23 ########
27.02
21.07
23.02
21.45
21.45
20.97
20.54
19.41 24.85
193
03/10/2022 13:32
594.90
30.10
17.63
17.87
17.60
17.54
775.22
72.44
17.69
17.82
17.58
17.30 290.01
55.68
21.42
20.44
18.79
18.88
86.02
53.25
21.50
19.52
19.23 ########
27.05
21.07
23.07
21.49
21.46
20.97
20.58
19.42 24.85
194
03/10/2022 13:32
601.30
30.50
17.66
17.90
17.61
17.55
789.37
71.28
17.69
17.87
17.59
17.32 283.61
55.83
21.40
20.47
18.80
18.91
87.39
53.01
21.56
19.53
19.24 ########
27.05
21.06
23.13
21.50
21.50
20.97
20.59
19.40 24.87
195
03/10/2022 13:32
605.16
30.85
17.66
17.92
17.61
17.54
800.54
74.16
17.69
17.88
17.60
17.31 278.68
57.24
21.39
20.46
18.81
18.90
87.73
54.01
21.61
19.53
19.22 ########
27.19
21.08
23.20
21.55
21.53
20.98
20.63
19.45 24.84
196
03/10/2022 13:32
604.96
31.22
17.66
17.92
17.62
17.56
808.27
80.21
17.72
17.91
17.62
17.31 286.62
58.44
21.40
20.46
18.81
18.91
88.64
55.34
21.63
19.53
19.23 ########
27.27
21.10
23.24
21.56
21.55
20.95
20.67
19.46 24.85
197
03/10/2022 13:32
607.69
31.55
17.68
17.94
17.64
17.56
812.66
80.12
17.73
17.94
17.64
17.32 294.63
56.83
21.41
20.49
18.81
18.94
89.35
56.12
21.59
19.51
19.26 ########
27.36
21.14
23.30
21.62
21.58
20.96
20.68
19.47 24.85
198
03/10/2022 13:32
607.88
31.82
17.68
17.96
17.64
17.55
814.94
83.06
17.72
17.94
17.65
17.30 288.51
56.40
21.41
20.48
18.81
18.93
90.32
55.58
21.44
19.50
19.23 ########
27.47
21.14
23.34
21.63
21.58
20.96
20.68
19.47 24.89
199
03/10/2022 13:32
609.46
32.22
17.67
17.98
17.67
17.56
822.25
82.50
17.73
17.98
17.64
17.31 292.57
53.94
21.39
20.51
18.82
18.93
90.70
54.44
21.32
19.51
19.27 ########
27.52
21.14
23.39
21.65
21.62
20.93
20.74
19.47 24.87
200
03/10/2022 13:32
611.57
32.62
17.69
17.98
17.66
17.57
820.11
82.31
17.75
17.99
17.66
17.32 284.73
52.85
21.39
20.48
18.81
18.93
91.64
53.85
21.24
19.56
19.29 ########
27.52
21.15
23.44
21.68
21.63
20.91
20.75
19.48 24.86
201
03/10/2022 13:32
613.61
32.99
17.71
18.00
17.66
17.56
825.90
83.23
17.76
17.99
17.70
17.32 279.13
51.68
21.39
20.45
18.80
18.95
91.92
54.71
21.18
19.54
19.26 ########
27.53
21.23
23.48
21.70
21.64
20.92
20.78
19.47 24.90
202
03/10/2022 13:33
619.37
33.44
17.72
18.02
17.67
17.56
824.44
85.89
17.80
18.02
17.68
17.33 270.86
51.51
21.37
20.43
18.81
18.94
90.03
53.81
21.10
19.54
19.28 ########
27.66
21.30
23.55
21.71
21.66
20.91
20.81
19.52 24.89
203
03/10/2022 13:33
620.90
33.82
17.72
18.02
17.70
17.59
828.06
91.32
17.79
18.05
17.71
17.30 263.83
52.17
21.37
20.46
18.83
18.93
90.63
54.64
21.01
19.51
19.24 ########
27.69
21.35
23.59
21.75
21.68
20.90
20.81
19.51 24.90
204
03/10/2022 13:33
621.84
34.14
17.74
18.04
17.71
17.57
826.13
93.64
17.79
18.03
17.73
17.33 261.12
53.36
21.38
20.46
18.82
18.94
92.38
53.87
21.07
19.51
19.25 ########
27.81
21.34
23.64
21.78
21.71
20.88
20.80
19.53 24.89
205
03/10/2022 13:33
626.89
34.49
17.75
18.05
17.71
17.58
830.26
99.78
17.81
18.07
17.75
17.31 253.49
53.14
21.36
20.48
18.84
18.96
91.86
53.18
21.11
19.49
19.22 ########
27.86
21.41
23.63
21.79
21.72
20.86
20.82
19.53 24.92
206
03/10/2022 13:33
629.24
34.81
17.76
18.08
17.73
17.59
823.66
104.37
17.83
18.04
17.75
17.31 250.35
51.33
21.41
20.45
18.82
18.93
92.14
52.86
21.17
19.49
19.19 ########
27.84
21.40
23.68
21.82
21.74
20.85
20.81
19.53 24.94
207
03/10/2022 13:33
634.38
35.13
17.76
18.09
17.74
17.59
826.05
107.16
17.83
18.08
17.78
17.33 246.63
52.20
21.45
20.47
18.82
18.93
92.85
53.90
21.58
19.49
19.19 ########
27.82
21.40
23.71
21.85
21.74
20.81
20.84
19.54 24.93
208
03/10/2022 13:33
639.49
35.52
17.76
18.10
17.75
17.59
825.52
108.28
17.86
18.08
17.77
17.31 243.21
54.31
21.45
20.49
18.85
18.94
93.68
54.05
21.78
19.49
19.19 ########
27.91
21.42
23.76
21.86
21.77
20.82
20.87
19.54 24.91
==PAGE:218==
209
03/10/2022 13:33
644.22
35.79
17.75
18.13
17.75
17.60
826.05
114.36
17.86
18.08
17.80
17.33 243.84
53.68
21.46
20.49
18.83
18.93
94.47
53.84
21.85
19.46
19.19 ########
28.05
21.42
23.83
21.88
21.79
20.80
20.88
19.55 24.92
210
03/10/2022 13:33
645.43
37.07
17.77
18.13
17.78
17.63
829.47
123.85
17.87
18.10
17.80
17.33 242.00
54.74
21.46
20.49
18.85
18.95
96.19
53.31
21.99
19.48
19.19 ########
28.12
21.43
23.88
21.95
21.82
20.80
20.91
19.55 24.90
211
03/10/2022 13:33
645.42
37.30
17.77
18.14
17.76
17.62
833.51
126.05
17.89
18.13
17.82
17.32 245.06
53.29
21.45
20.51
18.86
18.94
95.89
54.37
21.97
19.50
19.20 ########
28.08
21.41
23.91
21.95
21.85
20.82
20.93
19.57 24.88
212
03/10/2022 13:33
646.20
37.55
17.79
18.16
17.79
17.62
827.91
131.54
17.90
18.14
17.84
17.32 258.84
51.86
21.47
20.54
18.87
18.94
97.20
55.10
22.11
19.50
19.22 ########
28.02
21.49
23.99
21.99
21.88
20.88
20.94
19.58 24.87
213
03/10/2022 13:33
646.26
37.79
17.80
18.16
17.80
17.65
833.17
137.48
17.90
18.17
17.84
17.31 259.65
50.69
21.47
20.55
18.88
18.94
99.25
54.87
22.25
19.53
19.20 ########
28.00
21.54
24.06
22.05
21.90
20.85
21.01
19.59 24.88
214
03/10/2022 13:33
647.61
38.06
17.82
18.18
17.80
17.63
829.90
137.46
17.91
18.20
17.87
17.32 256.59
51.47
21.47
20.57
18.88
18.95
101.02
53.39
22.52
19.60
19.24 ########
27.96
21.58
24.15
22.09
21.92
20.88
21.05
19.60 24.89
215
03/10/2022 13:33
655.81
38.21
17.81
18.20
17.81
17.64
835.27
143.36
17.93
18.21
17.90
17.32 273.83
51.32
21.52
20.57
18.91
18.97
105.50
55.16
22.32
19.61
19.24 ########
28.07
21.59
24.25
22.16
21.97
20.90
21.10
19.61 24.86
216
03/10/2022 13:33
654.86
38.35
17.83
18.20
17.83
17.66
845.61
150.93
17.94
18.24
17.91
17.32 285.64
49.94
21.57
20.62
18.93
18.98
107.03
55.52
22.21
19.64
19.29 ########
28.28
21.60
24.33
22.21
22.01
20.90
21.11
19.64 24.84
217
03/10/2022 13:33
655.30
38.62
17.82
18.22
17.84
17.64
844.56
147.62
17.95
18.24
17.94
17.34 289.19
49.01
21.65
20.61
18.93
18.98
105.65
55.76
22.30
19.69
19.34 ########
28.40
21.66
24.42
22.24
22.03
20.92
21.17
19.66 24.82
218
03/10/2022 13:33
656.78
38.96
17.84
18.25
17.87
17.64
840.56
150.82
17.97
18.26
17.95
17.33 282.89
48.21
21.71
20.62
18.94
19.02
107.86
54.55
22.54
19.74
19.37 ########
28.54
21.66
24.51
22.30
22.04
20.92
21.21
19.69 24.84
219
03/10/2022 13:33
661.73
39.29
17.85
18.27
17.86
17.67
838.89
148.21
17.99
18.25
17.96
17.34 288.85
46.97
21.76
20.62
18.94
19.02
108.29
54.40
22.82
19.77
19.40 ########
28.68
21.70
24.61
22.36
22.04
20.96
21.27
19.71 24.82
220
03/10/2022 13:33
661.48
39.52
17.87
18.27
17.86
17.67
838.12
153.20
18.00
18.29
17.98
17.33 288.64
45.85
21.74
20.60
18.95
19.01
110.00
53.76
22.64
19.87
19.40 ########
28.77
21.75
24.63
22.42
22.08
20.98
21.24
19.73 24.82
221
03/10/2022 13:33
663.84
39.81
17.85
18.29
17.88
17.68
838.88
154.24
18.01
18.28
17.97
17.32 278.95
49.39
21.76
20.59
18.97
19.03
109.50
52.91
23.39
19.87
19.43 ########
28.88
21.81
24.74
22.43
22.09
21.01
21.27
19.74 24.83
222
03/10/2022 13:33
665.27
40.10
17.87
18.29
17.89
17.67
841.28
156.17
18.03
18.29
18.00
17.35 292.72
48.62
21.82
20.63
18.98
19.04
110.01
53.86
23.59
19.84
19.44 ########
28.84
21.82
24.80
22.48
22.03
21.06
21.34
19.76 24.85
223
03/10/2022 13:33
665.74
40.33
17.88
18.33
17.91
17.66
839.65
161.12
18.05
18.30
18.02
17.32 301.51
48.31
21.85
20.65
18.97
19.04
113.07
54.80
23.73
19.81
19.40 ########
28.88
21.85
24.85
22.53
22.03
21.17
21.36
19.81 24.84
224
03/10/2022 13:33
666.62
40.65
17.88
18.35
17.93
17.67
832.59
163.68
18.06
18.31
18.04
17.33 305.52
48.42
21.89
20.68
18.98
19.06
113.70
55.77
24.14
19.83
19.41 ########
28.97
21.89
24.87
22.56
22.08
21.28
21.30
19.87 24.86
225
03/10/2022 13:33
667.35
40.81
17.92
18.35
17.93
17.67
831.15
166.64
18.06
18.35
18.05
17.32 308.15
51.02
21.90
20.77
18.97
19.07
114.48
56.75
25.05
19.94
19.42 ########
28.97
21.96
24.87
22.56
22.09
21.37
21.25
19.92 24.86
226
03/10/2022 13:33
671.98
41.21
17.90
18.37
17.95
17.66
828.05
169.96
18.06
18.39
18.09
17.32 328.86
51.33
21.97
20.79
18.99
19.09
118.31
57.19
25.39
19.97
19.48 ########
29.07
22.05
24.96
22.61
22.09
21.46
21.28
19.97 24.85
227
03/10/2022 13:33
670.89
41.79
17.90
18.40
17.96
17.68
828.28
173.37
18.09
18.41
18.09
17.34 326.77
50.19
22.04
20.85
19.00
19.10
120.74
57.11
25.29
20.07
19.54 ########
29.28
22.10
25.03
22.62
22.11
21.54
21.25
20.02 24.85
228
03/10/2022 13:33
672.41
42.16
17.94
18.42
17.99
17.67
818.57
178.36
18.12
18.43
18.13
17.32 309.76
54.13
22.09
20.89
19.03
19.10
120.41
56.26
25.11
20.09
19.55 ########
29.39
22.08
25.11
22.65
22.15
21.66
21.25
20.03 24.87
229
03/10/2022 13:33
675.78
42.40
17.95
18.43
17.97
17.68
818.18
186.89
18.15
18.44
18.15
17.33 288.38
54.04
22.08
20.87
19.02
19.14
119.67
55.11
24.93
20.21
19.61 ########
29.53
22.02
25.17
22.72
22.15
21.76
21.27
20.12 24.91
230
03/10/2022 13:33
676.27
42.67
17.95
18.48
17.99
17.67
814.68
201.55
18.13
18.45
18.16
17.34 285.52
53.71
22.05
20.83
19.06
19.10
119.15
55.78
24.44
20.19
19.62 ########
29.57
21.97
25.24
22.74
22.16
21.85
21.28
20.18 24.91
231
03/10/2022 13:33
679.75
43.07
17.96
18.50
18.00
17.67
806.79
206.16
18.15
18.47
18.18
17.35 304.11
51.84
22.03
20.85
19.04
19.08
121.41
55.25
24.05
20.12
19.64 ########
29.61
21.98
25.28
22.77
22.21
21.92
21.22
20.23 24.94
232
03/10/2022 13:33
679.08
43.51
17.98
18.51
18.01
17.67
809.27
218.94
18.19
18.50
18.20
17.33 302.16
52.19
22.06
20.88
19.05
19.09
120.56
54.58
23.78
20.11
19.62 ########
29.70
22.03
25.28
22.82
22.26
21.96
21.26
20.26 24.99
233
03/10/2022 13:33
679.15
43.67
18.00
18.53
18.02
17.67
803.44
233.13
18.19
18.53
18.22
17.35 293.84
50.56
22.09
20.87
19.06
19.12
120.73
53.74
23.55
20.05
19.59 ########
29.78
22.11
25.32
22.86
22.28
21.96
21.23
20.27 25.03
234
03/10/2022 13:33
678.28
44.10
18.01
18.55
18.02
17.65
795.85
238.80
18.22
18.53
18.24
17.35 278.78
49.65
22.09
20.88
19.06
19.10
120.63
51.84
23.37
20.05
19.61 ########
29.89
22.13
25.42
22.88
22.33
21.94
21.21
20.28 25.05
235
03/10/2022 13:33
682.50
45.46
18.04
18.57
18.04
17.66
793.31
251.71
18.25
18.54
18.28
17.36 270.36
49.39
22.15
20.89
19.07
19.10
121.67
50.50
23.19
20.00
19.58 ########
30.02
22.07
25.51
22.93
22.37
21.93
21.18
20.27 25.06
236
03/10/2022 13:33
687.01
47.03
18.03
18.58
18.05
17.65
793.50
264.57
18.27
18.59
18.29
17.35 269.94
48.18
22.19
20.88
19.09
19.10
121.15
49.61
23.00
19.96
19.54 ########
30.01
22.07
25.49
22.94
22.42
21.96
21.15
20.26 25.05
237
03/10/2022 13:33
684.60
47.31
18.04
18.61
18.05
17.67
799.16
267.97
18.30
18.61
18.28
17.35 257.00
46.94
22.30
20.89
19.12
19.07
120.18
50.34
22.77
19.91
19.55 ########
32.61
22.28
25.42
22.96
22.46
22.04
21.18
20.30 24.99
238
03/10/2022 13:33
677.54
47.26
18.09
18.63
18.05
17.71
808.90
283.76
18.32
18.62
18.30
17.33 250.35
48.33
22.59
21.06
19.22
19.15
119.57
48.30
22.62
19.90
19.55 ########
32.65
25.69
25.93
23.12
22.54
22.12
21.20
20.32 24.93
239
03/10/2022 13:33
671.36
47.48
18.09
18.66
18.08
17.71
800.81
272.84
18.34
18.63
18.33
17.36 235.48
46.32
22.71
21.03
19.29
19.18
119.09
46.89
22.79
19.94
20.30 ########
32.22
25.48
25.85
23.57
22.59
22.08
21.29
20.32 24.86
240
03/10/2022 13:33
671.08
47.69
18.08
18.68
18.09
17.76
795.91
272.72
18.35
18.68
18.34
17.35 221.85
44.50
22.59
20.98
19.32
19.20
119.19
45.53
22.71
20.07
20.93 ########
31.72
25.15
25.81
23.45
22.62
21.99
21.26
20.34 24.81
241
03/10/2022 13:34
673.72
47.82
18.09
18.70
18.11
17.75
793.76
269.41
18.39
18.70
18.37
17.36 210.03
42.94
22.47
20.94
19.36
19.22
118.63
44.25
22.52
20.10
20.89 ########
31.30
24.77
25.73
23.32
22.62
21.87
21.28
20.37 24.76
242
03/10/2022 13:34
675.32
48.03
18.09
18.73
18.11
17.75
800.36
263.21
18.40
18.74
18.40
17.35 200.90
41.57
22.36
20.94
19.38
19.21
118.82
43.32
22.42
20.13
20.89 ########
30.78
24.51
25.66
23.18
22.61
21.78
21.30
20.35 24.71
243
03/10/2022 13:34
676.84
48.15
18.10
18.74
18.12
17.74
804.49
257.06
18.40
18.78
18.43
17.37 192.53
40.33
22.26
20.89
19.42
19.24
119.09
42.37
22.26
20.09
20.87 ########
30.31
24.32
25.61
23.12
22.64
21.67
21.26
20.35 24.68
244
03/10/2022 13:34
678.21
48.30
18.11
18.77
18.13
17.75
814.72
250.62
18.42
18.78
18.44
17.37 183.33
39.42
22.17
20.90
19.43
19.29
119.73
41.59
22.14
20.05
20.82 ########
29.84
24.17
25.64
23.10
22.67
21.59
21.23
20.36 24.64
245
03/10/2022 13:34
676.06
48.40
18.10
18.76
18.12
17.74
825.27
246.46
18.44
18.76
18.45
17.37 175.60
38.53
22.12
20.88
19.50
19.26
120.86
40.88
22.11
20.08
20.75 ########
29.32
24.06
25.62
23.12
22.67
21.51
21.21
20.40 24.59
246
03/10/2022 13:34
674.35
48.42
18.12
18.74
18.14
17.75
832.74
238.34
18.45
18.74
18.46
17.37 169.72
37.84
22.04
20.89
19.54
19.31
121.94
40.21
22.03
20.09
20.70 ########
28.94
24.00
25.63
23.13
22.66
21.47
21.26
20.42 24.56
247
03/10/2022 13:34
668.93
48.29
18.11
18.76
18.15
17.73
843.99
233.90
18.45
18.74
18.48
17.37 166.52
37.07
21.97
20.87
19.58
19.32
124.32
39.47
21.97
20.08
20.65 ########
28.54
23.98
25.61
23.16
22.71
21.44
21.25
20.45 24.55
248
03/10/2022 13:34
664.75
48.20
18.11
18.74
18.15
17.74
854.24
229.29
18.46
18.75
18.47
17.36 164.83
36.53
21.93
20.88
19.63
19.37
127.70
38.82
21.94
20.07
20.63 ########
28.16
23.84
25.55
23.12
22.72
21.39
21.26
20.48 24.51
249
03/10/2022 13:34
664.74
48.06
18.11
18.76
18.15
17.73
864.83
224.43
18.49
18.76
18.52
17.37 162.74
36.02
21.88
20.88
19.72
19.44
130.76
38.33
21.89
20.11
20.62 ########
27.97
23.80
25.49
23.13
22.73
21.36
21.23
20.55 24.47
250
03/10/2022 13:34
665.76
47.97
18.11
18.76
18.17
17.75
871.15
217.62
18.48
18.75
18.55
17.36 161.78
35.54
21.87
20.88
19.77
19.48
132.71
37.68
21.81
20.13
20.60 ########
27.71
23.76
25.44
23.17
22.75
21.35
21.21
20.59 24.45
251
03/10/2022 13:34
666.13
47.86
18.11
18.76
18.15
17.74
874.30
212.27
18.49
18.74
18.57
17.37 160.89
35.09
21.80
20.92
19.83
19.50
135.28
37.35
21.76
20.17
20.56 ########
27.35
23.76
25.48
23.15
22.77
21.32
21.26
20.67 24.42
252
03/10/2022 13:34
666.46
47.72
18.10
18.73
18.17
17.72
880.47
205.53
18.49
18.73
18.58
17.37 158.02
34.53
21.78
20.94
19.90
19.53
135.45
37.04
21.76
20.21
20.56 ########
27.04
23.76
25.28
23.17
22.76
21.30
21.26
20.69 24.40
253
03/10/2022 13:34
665.18
47.43
18.11
18.74
18.17
17.73
882.34
200.89
18.49
18.73
18.57
17.39 157.27
34.22
21.73
20.90
19.96
19.57
135.94
36.68
21.78
20.21
20.51 ########
26.89
23.80
25.13
23.16
22.78
21.28
21.25
20.74 24.39
254
03/10/2022 13:34
665.75
47.21
18.10
18.73
18.17
17.72
885.08
194.64
18.50
18.71
18.58
17.37 153.24
33.64
21.73
20.85
20.00
19.61
137.19
36.38
21.74
20.24
20.49 ########
26.76
23.76
25.09
23.21
22.81
21.23
21.22
20.75 24.37
255
03/10/2022 13:34
672.57
46.97
18.12
18.71
18.17
17.73
888.40
189.76
18.49
18.73
18.60
17.37 152.78
33.18
21.68
20.79
20.09
19.61
137.91
36.12
21.74
20.26
20.47 ########
26.60
23.73
25.06
23.26
22.81
21.22
21.20
20.81 24.34
256
03/10/2022 13:34
674.19
46.55
18.11
18.72
18.15
17.72
887.80
184.00
18.51
18.70
18.59
17.38 150.87
32.92
21.64
20.85
20.14
19.73
138.90
35.87
21.70
20.29
20.49 ########
26.49
23.61
25.14
23.27
22.85
21.19
21.17
20.83 24.32
257
03/10/2022 13:34
672.65
46.34
18.12
18.70
18.15
17.75
884.34
179.94
18.52
18.73
18.60
17.37 150.54
32.61
21.58
20.83
20.20
19.76
139.35
35.62
21.67
20.30
20.41 ########
26.35
23.54
25.08
23.20
22.86
21.15
21.13
20.85 24.32
258
03/10/2022 13:34
673.07
46.11
18.10
18.69
18.16
17.74
879.55
173.46
18.53
18.70
18.61
17.37 149.79
32.45
21.63
20.78
20.26
19.78
139.42
35.35
21.69
20.32
20.40 ########
26.27
23.47
24.96
23.20
22.87
21.14
21.09
20.86 24.30
259
03/10/2022 13:34
675.27
46.00
18.12
18.68
18.17
17.74
881.92
167.99
18.51
18.73
18.60
17.39 147.92
32.31
21.68
20.73
20.32
19.76
140.02
35.18
21.66
20.30
20.37 ########
26.22
23.37
25.00
23.21
22.90
21.14
21.04
20.87 24.27
260
03/10/2022 13:34
673.65
45.66
18.11
18.65
18.16
17.73
875.79
163.34
18.53
18.72
18.62
17.38 146.74
32.08
21.71
20.68
20.33
19.74
140.46
35.06
21.67
20.31
20.36 ########
26.16
23.26
24.96
23.23
22.90
21.12
21.02
20.89 24.28
261
03/10/2022 13:34
675.53
45.40
18.10
18.65
18.16
17.74
867.97
158.63
18.53
18.70
18.62
17.39 142.32
31.95
21.72
20.65
20.36
19.74
138.32
34.91
21.68
20.32
20.32 ########
26.02
23.22
24.85
23.18
22.91
21.09
20.97
20.89 24.23
262
03/10/2022 13:34
676.40
45.26
18.09
18.64
18.16
17.76
862.51
154.81
18.53
18.70
18.62
17.37 143.11
31.69
21.72
20.62
20.42
19.77
137.06
34.75
21.66
20.27
20.29 ########
25.99
23.26
24.88
23.14
22.92
21.10
20.94
20.90 24.22
263
03/10/2022 13:34
676.00
44.86
18.10
18.64
18.15
17.77
857.78
150.04
18.54
18.69
18.61
17.39 142.64
31.35
21.65
20.63
20.49
19.78
136.30
34.63
21.68
20.20
20.22 ########
26.00
23.15
24.97
23.07
22.93
21.09
20.88
20.87 24.23
264
03/10/2022 13:34
673.44
44.46
18.08
18.61
18.15
17.75
861.12
145.61
18.54
18.68
18.61
17.40 141.46
31.15
21.66
20.62
20.56
19.82
137.10
34.63
21.73
20.17
20.20 ########
25.81
23.02
25.01
23.05
22.97
21.09
20.88
20.87 24.21
265
03/10/2022 13:34
668.66
44.13
18.09
18.62
18.15
17.77
863.83
143.85
18.54
18.67
18.63
17.40 141.19
30.98
21.61
20.59
20.62
19.85
137.08
34.52
21.77
20.17
20.19 ########
25.52
22.86
25.05
23.00
22.97
21.06
20.84
20.91 24.20
266
03/10/2022 13:34
669.41
43.60
18.09
18.61
18.15
17.77
858.50
139.05
18.53
18.68
18.64
17.39 141.34
30.80
21.67
20.64
20.69
19.94
136.76
34.46
21.82
20.17
20.18 ########
25.25
22.70
24.98
23.00
22.96
21.03
20.85
20.99 24.19
267
03/10/2022 13:34
662.94
43.08
18.08
18.61
18.14
17.78
851.68
134.15
18.50
18.67
18.61
17.40 140.12
30.66
21.70
20.67
20.75
19.99
135.42
34.34
21.89
20.24
20.19 ########
25.01
22.53
24.89
23.02
23.04
21.02
20.86
20.99 24.19
268
03/10/2022 13:34
658.42
42.79
18.07
18.57
18.13
17.80
845.39
130.73
18.51
18.68
18.61
17.40 139.57
30.74
21.75
20.73
20.80
20.04
133.88
34.05
21.93
20.30
20.29 ########
24.91
22.36
24.68
22.89
23.07
21.00
20.90
21.02 24.18
269
03/10/2022 13:34
650.87
42.53
18.07
18.56
18.12
17.83
835.91
128.81
18.52
18.65
18.60
17.39 136.16
30.58
21.78
20.76
20.87
20.05
133.43
33.94
21.89
20.30
20.32 ########
24.71
22.16
24.65
22.77
23.06
20.93
20.93
21.05 24.18
270
03/10/2022 13:34
646.85
42.36
18.07
18.55
18.12
17.86
807.33
126.88
18.48
18.63
18.60
17.39 132.93
30.52
21.78
20.76
20.87
20.07
133.28
34.68
21.96
20.41
20.36 ########
24.68
22.13
24.80
22.73
23.05
20.95
21.02
21.08 24.16
271
03/10/2022 13:34
642.43
42.19
18.06
18.54
18.14
17.92
765.89
123.78
18.50
18.66
18.61
17.40 129.62
30.81
21.81
20.77
20.87
20.09
132.87
35.83
21.97
20.47
20.38 ########
24.56
22.23
24.88
22.66
23.08
21.00
21.06
21.14 24.16
272
03/10/2022 13:34
637.84
42.07
18.07
18.54
18.12
17.92
742.40
121.93
18.50
18.67
18.63
17.41 127.76
31.12
21.81
20.75
20.91
20.16
132.70
36.00
22.02
20.44
20.38 ########
24.46
22.32
25.03
22.66
23.05
21.04
21.03
21.19 24.15
273
03/10/2022 13:34
633.00
41.91
18.04
18.54
18.15
17.94
700.04
120.00
18.51
18.69
18.63
17.41 126.65
31.01
21.87
20.73
20.96
20.21
133.03
36.02
22.10
20.49
20.41 ########
24.45
22.40
25.18
22.68
23.06
21.07
21.02
21.22 24.15
274
03/10/2022 13:34
604.91
41.71
18.06
18.54
18.13
17.95
691.48
118.02
18.51
18.69
18.64
17.41 125.88
31.02
21.83
20.77
21.05
20.33
133.43
36.27
22.06
20.52
20.38 ########
24.45
22.55
25.27
22.75
23.06
21.10
21.15
21.26 24.13
275
03/10/2022 13:34
571.81
41.51
18.05
18.51
18.13
17.98
700.35
114.64
18.51
18.70
18.65
17.40 123.78
30.86
21.84
20.86
21.12
20.39
133.19
36.38
22.09
20.53
20.37 ########
24.47
22.62
25.46
22.74
23.04
21.14
21.25
21.24 24.13
276
03/10/2022 13:34
541.22
41.21
18.05
18.52
18.13
17.97
726.22
111.04
18.52
18.68
18.66
17.42 125.08
30.70
21.83
20.94
21.13
20.46
132.92
36.13
22.07
20.53
20.43 ########
24.51
22.64
25.56
22.72
23.07
21.21
21.27
21.24 24.14
277
03/10/2022 13:34
513.92
40.95
18.05
18.51
18.13
17.99
730.75
107.07
18.53
18.70
18.70
17.43 124.44
30.58
21.85
20.94
21.21
20.41
132.65
35.95
22.13
20.56
20.44 ########
24.57
22.66
25.68
22.82
23.09
21.27
21.31
21.24 24.11
278
03/10/2022 13:34
489.61
40.61
18.04
18.51
18.13
17.96
725.02
103.52
18.53
18.73
18.71
17.43 124.44
30.44
21.85
20.99
21.23
20.45
132.76
35.86
22.16
20.53
20.49 ########
24.60
22.63
25.78
22.90
23.14
21.34
21.30
21.26 24.12
==PAGE:219==
279
03/10/2022 13:34
469.61
40.33
18.04
18.51
18.12
17.94
710.96
100.07
18.53
18.74
18.72
17.44 126.81
30.41
21.85
21.02
21.26
20.43
133.11
36.12
22.20
20.57
20.51 ########
24.54
22.66
25.86
22.97
23.15
21.34
21.35
21.25 24.12
280
03/10/2022 13:35
450.06
40.08
18.02
18.49
18.12
17.93
706.22
97.04
18.53
18.76
18.73
17.43 127.45
30.29
21.81
21.01
21.30
20.49
133.16
36.63
22.21
20.61
20.53 ########
24.43
22.62
25.82
23.02
23.19
21.34
21.35
21.25 24.10
281
03/10/2022 13:35
433.72
39.66
18.00
18.50
18.13
17.93
700.02
94.07
18.54
18.74
18.72
17.43 131.44
30.26
21.84
21.02
21.37
20.52
132.88
36.40
22.23
20.58
20.51 ########
24.30
22.58
25.70
23.07
23.22
21.27
21.33
21.25 24.09
282
03/10/2022 13:35
417.52
39.39
18.01
18.49
18.12
17.90
690.94
91.46
18.53
18.74
18.74
17.45 133.41
30.17
21.84
21.01
21.38
20.60
132.64
35.98
22.16
20.52
20.45 ########
24.17
22.48
25.67
23.15
23.21
21.19
21.29
21.23 24.09
283
03/10/2022 13:35
401.99
39.01
18.00
18.47
18.14
17.89
687.20
88.97
18.52
18.76
18.76
17.41 137.68
29.98
21.82
21.01
21.38
20.54
132.17
35.57
22.16
20.49
20.47 ########
24.01
22.43
25.66
23.12
23.23
21.08
21.22
21.19 24.10
284
03/10/2022 13:35
388.57
38.78
18.02
18.49
18.13
17.87
682.52
86.77
18.54
18.76
18.76
17.43 140.81
29.92
21.86
21.01
21.41
20.54
132.13
35.10
22.15
20.47
20.51 ########
23.86
22.38
25.60
23.08
23.20
21.04
21.13
21.18 24.09
285
03/10/2022 13:35
377.76
38.58
18.02
18.48
18.14
17.87
670.27
84.84
18.52
18.76
18.76
17.44 147.53
29.91
21.78
20.96
21.47
20.50
132.04
34.72
22.19
20.48
20.57 ########
23.74
22.29
25.58
23.05
23.21
21.02
21.08
21.14 24.08
286
03/10/2022 13:35
369.21
38.38
18.01
18.48
18.12
17.84
660.31
82.62
18.52
18.76
18.77
17.47 151.61
29.82
21.75
20.95
21.50
20.60
133.48
34.43
22.17
20.48
20.51 ########
23.64
22.26
25.55
22.98
23.21
21.01
21.00
21.16 24.09
287
03/10/2022 13:35
362.16
38.02
17.99
18.46
18.13
17.83
645.46
80.62
18.54
18.73
18.76
17.46 157.56
29.64
21.74
20.95
21.53
20.62
133.79
34.21
22.15
20.49
20.48 ########
23.49
22.24
25.54
23.02
23.23
20.98
20.96
21.15 24.06
288
03/10/2022 13:35
357.17
37.82
18.00
18.46
18.12
17.81
636.14
78.55
18.53
18.74
18.74
17.47 163.79
29.53
21.75
20.95
21.57
20.62
134.85
34.09
22.14
20.48
20.47 ########
23.39
22.30
25.51
23.02
23.22
20.98
20.90
21.14 24.08
289
03/10/2022 13:35
352.20
37.59
18.00
18.45
18.11
17.83
624.09
76.64
18.54
18.71
18.75
17.45 163.01
29.38
21.66
20.96
21.54
20.61
136.37
33.71
22.09
20.47
20.44 ########
23.29
22.36
25.48
23.03
23.21
20.92
20.92
21.15 24.06
290
03/10/2022 13:35
347.60
37.43
17.98
18.43
18.11
17.84
606.44
74.85
18.51
18.68
18.73
17.46 156.56
29.34
21.68
20.95
21.56
20.58
139.25
33.29
22.10
20.51
20.39 ########
23.24
22.37
25.46
23.02
23.18
20.88
20.96
21.12 24.05
291
03/10/2022 13:35
344.19
37.11
17.99
18.43
18.11
17.83
589.05
72.96
18.51
18.65
18.75
17.46 152.03
29.25
21.71
20.96
21.57
20.63
140.44
32.98
22.09
20.48
20.40 ########
23.23
22.38
25.46
22.92
23.21
20.90
20.96
21.12 24.05
292
03/10/2022 13:35
340.12
36.95
17.98
18.43
18.11
17.81
574.10
71.31
18.51
18.63
18.71
17.49 147.89
29.20
21.70
20.93
21.59
20.59
141.84
32.76
22.08
20.48
20.41 ########
23.22
22.34
25.35
22.87
23.20
20.93
20.91
21.08 24.06
293
03/10/2022 13:35
336.16
36.79
17.97
18.40
18.09
17.81
556.74
69.92
18.49
18.62
18.72
17.47 143.34
29.20
21.71
20.94
21.61
20.57
141.81
32.53
22.08
20.45
20.37 ########
23.26
22.40
25.34
22.81
23.19
20.96
20.85
21.03 24.06
294
03/10/2022 13:35
331.91
36.55
17.98
18.38
18.09
17.79
538.24
68.26
18.48
18.59
18.72
17.47 139.46
29.18
21.62
20.91
21.66
20.59
140.76
32.37
21.98
20.41
20.35 ########
23.22
22.50
25.44
22.78
23.21
20.97
20.83
20.99 24.06
295
03/10/2022 13:35
327.92
36.36
17.97
18.40
18.08
17.78
514.34
66.71
18.49
18.58
18.69
17.47 137.12
29.07
21.56
20.89
21.72
20.60
139.52
32.07
22.01
20.39
20.38 ########
23.21
22.61
25.49
22.79
23.20
20.93
20.87
21.01 24.05
296
03/10/2022 13:35
322.78
36.18
17.97
18.38
18.09
17.79
491.42
65.30
18.49
18.56
18.69
17.48 134.30
28.98
21.54
20.89
21.72
20.65
139.16
31.91
21.98
20.38
20.41 ########
23.16
22.67
25.59
22.80
23.17
20.95
20.83
21.04 24.04
297
03/10/2022 13:35
317.71
35.96
17.96
18.36
18.07
17.80
469.84
63.95
18.48
18.54
18.69
17.48 134.01
28.87
21.54
20.92
21.74
20.69
139.43
31.86
21.89
20.33
20.41 ########
23.06
22.70
25.60
22.80
23.15
20.96
20.83
21.03 24.05
298
03/10/2022 13:35
313.73
35.78
17.94
18.35
18.06
17.81
451.07
62.65
18.48
18.54
18.66
17.47 133.44
28.81
21.58
20.91
21.78
20.78
139.23
31.74
21.81
20.32
20.37 ########
22.99
22.71
25.63
22.86
23.15
20.95
20.80
21.04 24.07
299
03/10/2022 13:35
310.67
35.58
17.95
18.35
18.06
17.83
433.42
61.52
18.46
18.51
18.65
17.47 132.59
28.77
21.58
20.94
21.78
20.74
139.24
31.64
21.83
20.31
20.40 ########
22.97
22.78
25.57
22.85
23.17
20.89
20.77
21.04 24.06
300
03/10/2022 13:35
308.04
35.44
17.95
18.35
18.06
17.85
417.97
60.42
18.47
18.50
18.64
17.49 131.18
28.66
21.60
21.00
21.80
20.78
138.64
31.47
21.87
20.31
20.43 ########
23.01
22.79
25.46
22.80
23.16
20.86
20.82
21.00 24.04
301
03/10/2022 13:35
305.77
35.25
17.94
18.33
18.05
17.86
404.33
59.24
18.46
18.47
18.62
17.48 131.46
28.64
21.64
21.02
21.81
20.72
138.76
31.42
21.83
20.29
20.45 ########
22.97
22.79
25.31
22.78
23.17
20.84
20.79
20.99 24.04
302
03/10/2022 13:35
302.50
35.15
17.93
18.32
18.05
17.87
392.01
58.12
18.45
18.49
18.60
17.47 131.71
28.54
21.63
21.00
21.82
20.70
138.77
31.26
21.80
20.33
20.42 ########
22.89
22.76
25.31
22.71
23.15
20.82
20.77
20.99 24.05
303
03/10/2022 13:35
300.04
34.91
17.93
18.33
18.04
17.84
380.29
57.27
18.45
18.47
18.57
17.47 130.62
28.52
21.62
21.04
21.85
20.68
138.81
31.16
21.82
20.26
20.38 ########
22.89
22.77
25.32
22.69
23.15
20.83
20.74
20.96 24.06
304
03/10/2022 13:35
297.46
34.75
17.91
18.32
18.02
17.86
371.00
56.29
18.44
18.47
18.57
17.47 131.05
28.58
21.62
21.03
21.88
20.67
139.17
31.16
21.81
20.24
20.31 ########
22.89
22.78
25.19
22.57
23.14
20.78
20.69
20.94 24.04
305
03/10/2022 13:35
295.44
34.61
17.94
18.32
18.03
17.87
362.72
55.39
18.43
18.45
18.55
17.47 132.39
28.42
21.60
21.03
21.89
20.67
137.99
31.09
21.79
20.26
20.31 ########
22.84
22.80
25.19
22.50
23.13
20.78
20.65
20.93 24.05
306
03/10/2022 13:35
293.09
34.39
17.93
18.31
18.02
17.85
355.82
54.38
18.42
18.44
18.53
17.47 134.52
28.43
21.62
21.02
21.91
20.68
138.01
31.01
21.81
20.29
20.25 ########
22.80
22.78
25.23
22.47
23.13
20.77
20.61
20.88 24.03
307
03/10/2022 13:35
290.69
34.24
17.92
18.29
18.02
17.87
348.12
53.72
18.41
18.42
18.52
17.48 133.65
28.44
21.63
21.00
21.93
20.66
136.88
30.75
21.73
20.28
20.22 ########
22.80
22.75
25.16
22.39
23.12
20.75
20.54
20.84 24.04
308
03/10/2022 13:35
287.85
34.03
17.93
18.30
18.02
17.90
339.31
52.91
18.40
18.41
18.52
17.47 132.24
28.32
21.67
20.97
21.91
20.68
136.60
30.72
21.74
20.29
20.20 ########
22.78
22.64
25.05
22.30
23.10
20.76
20.51
20.83 24.04
309
03/10/2022 13:35
286.17
33.85
17.93
18.29
18.00
17.90
330.91
52.11
18.39
18.42
18.51
17.47 132.29
28.34
21.66
20.95
21.88
20.69
135.87
30.71
21.79
20.25
20.22 ########
22.75
22.67
24.91
22.21
23.09
20.74
20.45
20.79 24.01
310
03/10/2022 13:35
284.21
33.67
17.90
18.29
18.01
17.94
324.70
51.21
18.40
18.41
18.48
17.48 131.34
28.36
21.65
20.90
21.89
20.71
135.08
30.72
21.72
20.22
20.16 ########
22.70
22.65
24.82
22.19
23.08
20.73
20.42
20.78 24.02
311
03/10/2022 13:35
282.43
33.56
17.91
18.27
18.01
17.92
319.21
50.54
18.37
18.40
18.45
17.49 130.64
28.26
21.62
20.86
21.89
20.74
133.80
30.81
21.75
20.18
20.12 ########
22.79
22.56
24.85
22.19
23.07
20.76
20.38
20.75 24.02
312
03/10/2022 13:35
279.20
33.50
17.91
18.28
18.00
17.93
314.20
49.87
18.35
18.39
18.46
17.47 128.29
28.21
21.58
20.82
21.87
20.77
132.34
30.82
21.74
20.15
20.10 ########
22.83
22.60
24.76
22.13
23.05
20.77
20.32
20.71 24.03
313
03/10/2022 13:35
276.87
33.44
17.92
18.26
18.00
17.93
309.21
49.43
18.37
18.39
18.44
17.46 127.47
28.20
21.56
20.80
21.87
20.72
131.05
30.73
21.75
20.17
20.10 ########
22.86
22.66
24.85
22.11
23.06
20.77
20.28
20.70 24.02
314
03/10/2022 13:35
274.54
33.26
17.91
18.26
17.98
17.91
304.67
48.76
18.36
18.38
18.40
17.46 127.20
28.19
21.53
20.78
21.88
20.80
129.61
30.75
21.76
20.16
20.09 ########
22.85
22.63
24.98
22.15
23.04
20.76
20.25
20.68 24.03
315
03/10/2022 13:35
272.26
33.15
17.91
18.24
17.96
17.88
300.47
48.15
18.36
18.36
18.40
17.47 128.67
28.22
21.53
20.75
21.88
20.79
128.28
30.70
21.72
20.16
20.07 ########
22.81
22.68
25.05
22.10
23.06
20.73
20.23
20.67 24.03
316
03/10/2022 13:35
269.92
33.03
17.91
18.22
17.97
17.91
296.19
47.60
18.35
18.35
18.37
17.44 131.57
28.19
21.49
20.75
21.94
20.83
127.19
30.52
21.75
20.20
20.19 ########
22.77
22.65
25.06
22.07
23.06
20.69
20.24
20.68 24.03
317
03/10/2022 13:35
267.36
32.84
17.90
18.22
17.97
17.90
291.02
46.92
18.32
18.30
18.34
17.46 135.96
28.12
21.53
20.76
21.99
20.82
126.70
30.38
21.79
20.24
20.21 ########
22.67
22.56
24.95
22.02
23.07
20.67
20.26
20.70 24.03
318
03/10/2022 13:35
264.64
32.64
17.90
18.21
17.95
17.90
286.01
46.34
18.33
18.28
18.32
17.46 136.99
28.12
21.60
20.74
22.00
20.85
125.63
30.40
21.79
20.27
20.27 ########
22.69
22.56
24.84
21.96
23.07
20.70
20.24
20.69 24.02
319
03/10/2022 13:36
262.11
32.49
17.90
18.19
17.95
17.94
281.41
45.84
18.31
18.24
18.31
17.45 137.51
28.05
21.62
20.77
21.99
20.96
124.27
30.41
21.73
20.30
20.33 ########
22.68
22.64
24.76
21.90
23.06
20.72
20.23
20.66 24.04
320
03/10/2022 13:36
260.33
32.29
17.89
18.18
17.96
17.96
277.41
45.33
18.30
18.22
18.28
17.43 138.85
27.95
21.64
20.78
22.00
20.99
122.74
30.43
21.76
20.29
20.33 ########
22.57
22.64
24.72
21.80
23.06
20.70
20.26
20.67 24.00
321
03/10/2022 13:36
257.30
32.13
17.86
18.17
17.95
17.95
273.88
44.95
18.30
18.23
18.30
17.46 135.33
27.87
21.64
20.77
22.03
21.01
121.28
30.55
21.73
20.29
20.35 ########
22.47
22.58
24.62
21.75
23.06
20.65
20.26
20.68 23.99
322
03/10/2022 13:36
254.55
32.02
17.90
18.14
17.93
17.99
270.09
44.41
18.30
18.23
18.28
17.46 134.84
27.83
21.60
20.78
22.03
21.01
120.05
30.52
21.71
20.28
20.36 ########
22.36
22.57
24.54
21.72
23.05
20.61
20.22
20.72 24.01
323
03/10/2022 13:36
251.71
31.93
17.90
18.16
17.94
18.02
266.40
43.88
18.31
18.24
18.29
17.47 135.36
27.86
21.61
20.78
22.06
21.04
119.01
30.50
21.70
20.28
20.41 ########
22.26
22.57
24.56
21.68
23.04
20.54
20.23
20.72 23.99
324
03/10/2022 13:36
249.36
31.86
17.88
18.15
17.91
18.01
262.81
43.41
18.29
18.23
18.27
17.46 135.39
27.66
21.60
20.77
22.09
21.09
118.68
30.33
21.72
20.24
20.39
-153.01
22.25
22.59
24.70
21.62
23.03
20.49
20.21
20.70 24.00
325
03/10/2022 13:36
246.05
31.73
17.88
18.12
17.92
18.03
258.56
43.06
18.29
18.23
18.28
17.47 135.36
27.61
21.59
20.75
22.14
21.17
118.69
30.11
21.75
20.24
20.36 ########
22.25
22.66
24.72
21.59
23.04
20.51
20.19
20.69 24.00
326
03/10/2022 13:36
243.54
31.53
17.87
18.11
17.93
18.03
254.92
42.62
18.29
18.25
18.27
17.46 131.98
27.63
21.62
20.80
22.19
21.28
118.40
29.93
21.76
20.25
20.39 ########
22.11
22.70
24.78
21.56
23.05
20.48
20.16
20.66 23.99
327
03/10/2022 13:36
240.77
31.32
17.86
18.13
17.90
18.04
251.25
42.35
18.29
18.22
18.28
17.46 128.74
27.64
21.64
20.78
22.21
21.33
118.23
29.81
21.78
20.27
20.37 ########
22.08
22.64
24.83
21.53
23.07
20.46
20.12
20.65 23.99
328
03/10/2022 13:36
238.78
31.10
17.87
18.12
17.91
18.04
247.50
41.95
18.28
18.21
18.25
17.45 125.53
27.62
21.64
20.81
22.20
21.40
117.74
29.83
21.77
20.27
20.41 ########
22.08
22.62
24.90
21.51
23.09
20.48
20.12
20.62 23.99
329
03/10/2022 13:36
238.15
31.02
17.86
18.13
17.90
18.04
244.53
41.68
18.29
18.21
18.25
17.45 120.98
27.56
21.62
20.90
22.23
21.44
117.38
29.80
21.75
20.26
20.44 ########
21.99
22.69
24.97
21.51
23.07
20.50
20.10
20.58 23.99
330
03/10/2022 13:36
238.37
30.96
17.89
18.11
17.90
18.03
242.04
41.38
18.29
18.19
18.25
17.46 118.21
27.52
21.67
20.87
22.24
21.56
117.86
29.72
21.69
20.27
20.43 ########
22.00
22.63
24.96
21.57
23.09
20.49
20.06
20.54 23.97
331
03/10/2022 13:36
237.44
30.84
17.85
18.13
17.89
18.01
238.88
41.08
18.28
18.20
18.26
17.47 114.71
27.54
21.65
20.90
22.23
21.56
117.60
29.64
21.70
20.34
20.39 ########
22.03
22.68
24.96
21.61
23.09
20.53
20.05
20.53 23.96
332
03/10/2022 13:36
237.13
30.74
17.85
18.12
17.88
18.05
236.61
40.77
18.28
18.21
18.27
17.49 111.86
27.45
21.61
20.95
22.24
21.66
117.58
29.44
21.73
20.37
20.38 ########
22.08
22.74
24.83
21.60
23.09
20.53
20.00
20.49 23.97
333
03/10/2022 13:36
236.55
30.65
17.85
18.11
17.89
18.07
234.05
40.55
18.27
18.23
18.23
17.46 108.80
27.46
21.60
20.96
22.26
21.55
117.69
29.40
21.80
20.36
20.40 ########
22.12
22.82
24.61
21.56
23.07
20.58
19.98
20.44 23.97
334
03/10/2022 13:36
235.05
30.61
17.85
18.10
17.90
18.09
231.57
40.30
18.26
18.23
18.24
17.46 106.01
27.47
21.69
20.99
22.36
21.69
117.09
29.28
21.80
20.34
20.41 ########
22.10
22.84
24.45
21.57
23.06
20.61
19.95
20.45 23.95
335
03/10/2022 13:36
234.35
30.53
17.85
18.10
17.89
18.11
229.04
39.96
18.27
18.23
18.24
17.46 103.39
27.57
21.68
21.06
22.37
21.75
115.82
29.23
21.80
20.36
20.44 ########
22.09
22.92
24.31
21.60
23.07
20.63
19.92
20.41 23.94
336
03/10/2022 13:36
233.93
30.47
17.85
18.11
17.87
18.14
224.69
39.59
18.27
18.20
18.23
17.46 100.81
27.65
21.75
21.11
22.41
21.75
114.42
29.28
21.74
20.38
20.48 ########
22.09
22.92
24.24
21.62
23.09
20.71
19.91
20.37 23.95
337
03/10/2022 13:36
233.49
30.33
17.86
18.08
17.85
18.16
221.52
39.34
18.25
18.19
18.20
17.47
99.65
27.59
21.80
21.10
22.41
21.88
113.79
29.11
21.70
20.41
20.45 ########
22.13
22.82
24.28
21.70
23.10
20.72
19.88
20.33 23.95
338
03/10/2022 13:36
233.03
30.23
17.87
18.12
17.86
18.18
218.85
39.12
18.25
18.18
18.22
17.46
98.06
27.56
21.81
21.11
22.38
22.07
113.01
29.01
21.76
20.43
20.48 ########
22.13
22.74
24.34
21.74
23.12
20.82
19.85
20.32 23.94
339
03/10/2022 13:36
230.63
30.17
17.83
18.11
17.87
18.17
217.13
38.83
18.25
18.19
18.21
17.48
96.02
27.57
21.81
21.11
22.45
22.02
112.31
29.17
21.80
20.42
20.51 ########
22.05
22.67
24.36
21.81
23.13
20.82
19.86
20.32 23.93
340
03/10/2022 13:36
229.01
30.12
17.84
18.11
17.87
18.20
214.50
38.62
18.25
18.21
18.20
17.48
94.91
27.58
21.86
21.20
22.49
22.02
112.24
29.32
21.83
20.40
20.48 ########
21.96
22.55
24.43
21.80
23.16
20.83
19.86
20.30 23.93
341
03/10/2022 13:36
226.95
30.01
17.84
18.09
17.88
18.15
212.28
38.30
18.25
18.19
18.18
17.49
93.25
27.61
21.88
21.34
22.53
22.04
111.78
29.48
21.87
20.39
20.48 ########
21.86
22.47
24.54
21.80
23.18
20.83
19.84
20.28 23.93
342
03/10/2022 13:36
223.97
29.87
17.85
18.10
17.87
18.15
210.06
38.04
18.24
18.18
18.17
17.47
92.02
27.52
21.93
21.48
22.59
22.05
111.16
29.52
21.78
20.42
20.48 ########
21.82
22.33
24.43
21.72
23.20
20.81
19.90
20.30 23.91
343
03/10/2022 13:36
222.31
29.71
17.85
18.09
17.85
18.12
208.29
37.76
18.25
18.19
18.18
17.49
90.73
27.45
22.02
21.50
22.62
22.05
110.39
29.54
21.83
20.45
20.50 ########
21.83
22.19
24.41
21.68
23.20
20.74
19.96
20.30 23.91
344
03/10/2022 13:36
220.40
29.55
17.86
18.10
17.84
18.10
205.81
37.62
18.26
18.21
18.18
17.49
89.34
27.38
22.07
21.48
22.66
22.14
109.73
29.61
21.93
20.45
20.51
-118.78
21.79
22.10
24.46
21.64
23.19
20.72
20.03
20.33 23.92
345
03/10/2022 13:36
218.95
29.46
17.84
18.09
17.86
18.11
203.81
37.42
18.24
18.19
18.18
17.49
88.82
27.43
22.06
21.55
22.67
22.19
109.45
29.72
21.91
20.43
20.49 ########
21.88
22.06
24.62
21.69
23.19
20.78
20.06
20.38 23.92
346
03/10/2022 13:36
216.84
29.40
17.83
18.09
17.84
18.12
202.01
37.27
18.26
18.20
18.20
17.50
88.28
27.54
22.09
21.50
22.66
22.24
108.80
29.84
21.95
20.42
20.55 ########
21.91
22.05
24.60
21.72
23.20
20.82
20.10
20.37 23.91
347
03/10/2022 13:36
215.58
29.29
17.83
18.08
17.84
18.14
200.36
37.04
18.24
18.21
18.20
17.50
87.08
27.72
22.16
21.55
22.71
22.29
108.22
30.04
21.95
20.41
20.53 ########
21.95
22.02
24.60
21.81
23.23
20.86
20.15
20.39 23.91
348
03/10/2022 13:36
213.04
29.17
17.81
18.08
17.84
18.14
197.99
36.86
18.24
18.19
18.21
17.52
86.47
27.77
22.20
21.62
22.79
22.32
107.44
30.20
21.96
20.42
20.58 ########
21.94
21.99
24.65
21.80
23.22
20.91
20.21
20.42 23.91
==PAGE:220==
349
03/10/2022 13:36
210.68
29.05
17.81
18.09
17.84
18.15
195.73
36.73
18.26
18.19
18.19
17.51
85.57
27.81
22.21
21.59
22.94
22.33
107.08
30.26
21.98
20.44
20.62 ########
21.98
21.97
24.73
21.75
23.25
20.87
20.19
20.42 23.90
350
03/10/2022 13:36
207.37
28.87
17.82
18.07
17.84
18.17
192.62
36.47
18.25
18.20
18.19
17.52
85.12
27.97
22.30
21.66
22.96
22.30
106.59
30.18
22.05
20.47
20.69 ########
21.95
21.99
24.76
21.76
23.26
20.88
20.16
20.43 23.87
351
03/10/2022 13:36
203.36
28.72
17.79
18.08
17.84
18.18
188.45
36.26
18.24
18.20
18.17
17.53
84.51
28.23
22.35
21.81
23.04
22.37
106.12
30.13
22.07
20.50
20.69 ########
22.00
22.01
24.76
21.77
23.27
20.79
20.14
20.43 23.87
352
03/10/2022 13:36
200.58
28.55
17.80
18.06
17.83
18.20
184.34
36.18
18.24
18.20
18.16
17.53
83.78
28.36
22.42
21.84
23.17
22.44
105.57
30.15
22.08
20.54
20.80 ########
22.06
22.03
24.92
21.88
23.27
20.78
20.11
20.41 23.90
353
03/10/2022 13:36
197.28
28.45
17.79
18.07
17.81
18.18
180.76
35.99
18.24
18.20
18.16
17.54
83.50
28.39
22.47
21.94
23.19
22.47
105.07
30.10
22.19
20.60
20.94 ########
22.08
22.00
25.03
21.98
23.27
20.74
20.09
20.41 23.89
354
03/10/2022 13:36
193.93
28.34
17.80
18.07
17.82
18.20
177.31
35.88
18.24
18.19
18.16
17.53
83.07
28.49
22.52
22.00
23.28
22.53
105.02
30.10
22.24
20.58
20.98 ########
22.08
21.99
25.11
22.08
23.28
20.77
20.08
20.41 23.88
355
03/10/2022 13:36
192.04
28.29
17.81
18.07
17.81
18.22
174.64
35.73
18.23
18.19
18.15
17.52
82.45
28.44
22.53
22.13
23.29
22.58
104.25
30.05
22.23
20.60
21.02 ########
22.04
22.01
25.18
22.15
23.28
20.79
20.05
20.45 23.90
356
03/10/2022 13:36
189.45
28.21
17.80
18.05
17.83
18.24
172.73
35.53
18.24
18.17
18.15
17.51
81.85
28.39
22.51
22.10
23.39
22.69
104.01
30.08
22.27
20.67
21.03 ########
21.99
22.03
25.19
22.12
23.27
20.77
20.05
20.44 23.91
357
03/10/2022 13:36
187.13
28.07
17.79
18.06
17.82
18.22
170.04
35.41
18.23
18.17
18.16
17.54
81.57
28.38
22.61
22.12
23.45
22.66
103.52
30.00
22.28
20.68
21.10 ########
21.99
22.06
25.19
22.23
23.32
20.76
20.04
20.42 23.89
358
03/10/2022 13:36
185.08
27.93
17.80
18.05
17.82
18.25
168.51
35.22
18.23
18.18
18.16
17.54
81.59
28.42
22.66
22.12
23.54
22.60
103.56
29.96
22.29
20.75
21.15 ########
21.96
22.05
25.25
22.29
23.30
20.75
20.03
20.43 23.88
359
03/10/2022 13:37
183.33
27.83
17.79
18.03
17.82
18.27
166.05
35.19
18.23
18.20
18.15
17.54
81.66
28.35
22.71
22.11
23.57
22.56
103.36
29.82
22.33
20.88
21.26 ########
21.91
22.04
25.29
22.26
23.33
20.76
20.01
20.42 23.88
360
03/10/2022 13:37
181.37
27.66
17.81
18.04
17.84
18.26
163.60
34.96
18.24
18.16
18.15
17.52
81.50
28.32
22.64
22.10
23.63
22.57
102.70
29.80
22.35
20.96
21.26 ########
21.93
22.03
25.23
22.34
23.35
20.75
20.01
20.46 23.87
361
03/10/2022 13:37
179.24
27.55
17.79
18.03
17.81
18.26
161.24
34.83
18.23
18.17
18.16
17.53
80.80
28.22
22.68
22.15
23.69
22.52
102.16
29.81
22.30
20.97
21.27 ########
21.90
22.02
25.20
22.31
23.37
20.75
19.97
20.45 23.87
362
03/10/2022 13:37
177.51
27.43
17.78
18.04
17.82
18.27
158.45
34.70
18.20
18.19
18.18
17.53
81.02
28.09
22.68
22.19
23.77
22.50
101.64
29.76
22.32
20.97
21.33 ########
21.89
22.00
25.25
22.34
23.39
20.69
19.96
20.44 23.88
363
03/10/2022 13:37
175.13
27.31
17.80
18.03
17.81
18.26
155.73
34.54
18.23
18.17
18.17
17.53
80.96
28.04
22.71
22.25
23.78
22.45
101.13
29.79
22.36
20.99
21.39 ########
21.90
21.99
25.29
22.39
23.39
20.68
19.96
20.46 23.85
364
03/10/2022 13:37
172.97
27.30
17.77
18.05
17.78
18.25
153.97
34.50
18.21
18.18
18.17
17.53
80.74
28.01
22.75
22.28
23.84
22.44
100.83
29.77
22.32
21.02
21.43 ########
21.93
21.94
25.30
22.39
23.39
20.66
19.98
20.44 23.87
365
03/10/2022 13:37
171.02
27.19
17.80
18.05
17.79
18.25
152.24
34.36
18.22
18.18
18.18
17.53
80.13
28.06
22.78
22.29
23.87
22.58
100.71
29.76
22.35
21.03
21.46 ########
21.97
21.93
25.29
22.44
23.39
20.64
20.00
20.43 23.86
366
03/10/2022 13:37
169.03
27.12
17.78
18.06
17.79
18.24
150.20
34.18
18.22
18.19
18.17
17.54
79.57
28.11
22.82
22.27
23.95
22.67
100.75
29.70
22.38
21.06
21.55 ########
22.01
21.95
25.29
22.45
23.41
20.66
20.03
20.45 23.86
367
03/10/2022 13:37
167.71
27.07
17.77
18.04
17.80
18.26
148.86
34.10
18.22
18.16
18.16
17.54
79.73
28.07
22.83
22.28
23.98
22.64
100.58
29.56
22.40
21.12
21.57 ########
21.99
22.01
25.37
22.44
23.43
20.67
20.09
20.48 23.87
368
03/10/2022 13:37
166.83
27.01
17.79
18.06
17.79
18.31
147.46
34.02
18.21
18.17
18.14
17.53
80.39
28.05
22.81
22.33
24.03
22.62
100.09
29.57
22.40
21.15
21.54 ########
21.93
22.05
25.42
22.39
23.45
20.66
20.14
20.50 23.86
369
03/10/2022 13:37
165.44
26.89
17.78
18.04
17.78
18.32
147.23
33.94
18.22
18.17
18.15
17.52
80.57
28.02
22.68
22.32
24.05
22.70
99.99
29.58
22.48
21.21
21.58 ########
21.89
22.05
25.47
22.35
23.45
20.65
20.17
20.55 23.85
370
03/10/2022 13:37
164.10
26.81
17.79
18.05
17.79
18.33
146.02
33.93
18.21
18.17
18.12
17.54
80.01
28.10
22.70
22.27
24.13
22.82
99.85
29.61
22.43
21.22
21.58 ########
21.85
22.05
25.51
22.32
23.48
20.62
20.23
20.55 23.85
371
03/10/2022 13:37
163.54
26.73
17.80
18.04
17.78
18.34
145.69
33.72
18.21
18.15
18.15
17.54
79.88
28.03
22.67
22.25
24.14
22.91
99.43
29.70
22.38
21.21
21.61 ########
21.85
22.07
25.46
22.28
23.47
20.61
20.25
20.55 23.83
372
03/10/2022 13:37
162.84
26.68
17.78
18.04
17.78
18.34
144.71
33.59
18.20
18.17
18.13
17.51
79.60
27.99
22.65
22.25
24.20
22.94
99.21
29.65
22.36
21.18
21.60 ########
21.81
22.08
25.33
22.20
23.49
20.57
20.26
20.58 23.84
373
03/10/2022 13:37
161.96
26.60
17.77
18.05
17.78
18.38
143.87
33.40
18.21
18.17
18.12
17.55
79.59
27.89
22.62
22.22
24.25
23.02
98.92
29.63
22.31
21.15
21.57 ########
21.81
22.18
25.22
22.13
23.47
20.57
20.27
20.63 23.84
374
03/10/2022 13:37
160.10
26.48
17.78
18.05
17.78
18.40
142.53
33.24
18.20
18.19
18.13
17.53
79.07
27.86
22.53
22.24
24.29
23.06
98.56
29.76
22.21
21.12
21.61 ########
21.87
22.35
25.12
22.11
23.47
20.56
20.27
20.62 23.84
375
03/10/2022 13:37
158.60
26.39
17.78
18.05
17.77
18.42
142.24
33.14
18.21
18.21
18.14
17.56
79.56
27.76
22.45
22.22
24.35
23.17
98.29
29.82
22.21
21.11
21.56 ########
21.84
22.51
25.13
22.12
23.47
20.60
20.27
20.62 23.85
376
03/10/2022 13:37
157.67
26.32
17.78
18.06
17.76
18.44
141.98
33.00
18.19
18.23
18.15
17.54
79.64
27.78
22.51
22.26
24.39
23.25
98.29
29.82
22.23
21.07
21.52 ########
21.84
22.67
25.09
22.14
23.49
20.62
20.26
20.63 23.81
377
03/10/2022 13:37
156.74
26.25
17.78
18.06
17.76
18.45
141.66
32.84
18.21
18.22
18.15
17.56
80.00
27.67
22.47
22.28
24.43
23.37
98.15
29.87
22.27
21.04
21.49 ########
21.79
22.72
24.95
22.09
23.50
20.62
20.26
20.65 23.82
378
03/10/2022 13:37
154.53
26.24
17.79
18.07
17.77
18.44
140.89
32.65
18.21
18.22
18.15
17.55
80.00
27.62
22.55
22.28
24.46
23.34
97.92
29.87
22.34
21.01
21.56 ########
21.80
22.64
24.96
22.03
23.47
20.68
20.23
20.65 23.80
379
03/10/2022 13:37
153.22
26.17
17.78
18.07
17.76
18.44
139.34
32.43
18.20
18.25
18.15
17.59
80.07
27.57
22.52
22.31
24.47
23.39
97.70
29.83
22.28
20.96
21.53 ########
21.80
22.63
24.92
21.96
23.50
20.67
20.22
20.62 23.81
380
03/10/2022 13:37
151.52
26.06
17.78
18.08
17.75
18.44
137.12
32.19
18.20
18.25
18.16
17.56
80.24
27.53
22.49
22.32
24.52
23.40
97.20
29.67
22.26
20.95
21.58 ########
21.76
22.67
24.93
21.93
23.46
20.61
20.20
20.62 23.80
381
03/10/2022 13:37
150.29
26.05
17.77
18.08
17.77
18.46
135.16
32.00
18.20
18.25
18.17
17.57
79.21
27.62
22.50
22.35
24.57
23.39
96.95
29.57
22.35
20.91
21.55 ########
21.75
22.74
24.98
21.89
23.49
20.58
20.18
20.63 23.78
382
03/10/2022 13:37
148.57
25.99
17.80
18.09
17.75
18.43
132.97
31.90
18.20
18.25
18.20
17.55
79.33
27.68
22.51
22.43
24.57
23.43
96.91
29.54
22.38
20.89
21.61 ########
21.68
22.73
24.88
21.86
23.50
20.59
20.19
20.63 23.78
383
03/10/2022 13:37
147.20
25.95
17.78
18.07
17.75
18.45
131.47
31.74
18.21
18.25
18.20
17.56
78.80
27.76
22.54
22.49
24.58
23.44
96.72
29.49
22.35
20.87
21.66 ########
21.74
22.75
24.79
21.82
23.50
20.63
20.18
20.67 23.78
384
03/10/2022 13:37
146.70
25.93
17.77
18.07
17.75
18.48
130.36
31.71
18.20
18.24
18.20
17.56
78.43
27.78
22.60
22.49
24.65
23.49
96.37
29.47
22.28
20.91
21.68 ########
21.67
22.81
24.77
21.83
23.50
20.62
20.23
20.67 23.78
385
03/10/2022 13:37
146.40
25.91
17.79
18.07
17.74
18.53
130.22
31.51
18.19
18.21
18.18
17.56
77.89
27.68
22.66
22.45
24.65
23.47
96.35
29.28
22.27
20.91
21.70 ########
21.71
22.78
24.80
21.86
23.47
20.62
20.31
20.67 23.77
386
03/10/2022 13:37
146.31
25.86
17.78
18.07
17.74
18.54
130.96
31.53
18.20
18.23
18.18
17.55
77.13
27.72
22.69
22.49
24.63
23.58
96.57
29.26
22.26
20.87
21.68 ########
21.76
22.89
24.88
21.86
23.49
20.65
20.36
20.69 23.74
387
03/10/2022 13:37
146.75
25.85
17.78
18.08
17.75
18.53
132.40
31.44
18.19
18.21
18.17
17.56
76.81
27.75
22.78
22.52
24.69
23.57
97.01
29.33
22.29
20.83
21.74 ########
21.83
22.95
24.71
21.85
23.49
20.70
20.43
20.72 23.69
388
03/10/2022 13:37
148.90
25.81
17.79
18.06
17.77
18.50
134.26
31.41
18.20
18.21
18.15
17.55
76.33
27.87
22.82
22.54
24.69
23.61
96.86
29.29
22.31
20.84
21.65 ########
21.87
23.07
24.65
21.81
23.52
20.74
20.44
20.75 23.68
389
03/10/2022 13:37
150.68
25.83
17.77
18.06
17.75
18.51
135.49
31.40
18.21
18.20
18.14
17.55
76.01
27.93
22.83
22.51
24.71
23.63
96.49
29.39
22.30
20.80
21.68 ########
21.87
23.13
24.58
21.78
23.53
20.78
20.44
20.77 23.64
390
03/10/2022 13:37
151.72
25.82
17.77
18.05
17.75
18.52
135.46
31.31
18.19
18.20
18.15
17.56
75.87
27.97
22.82
22.45
24.67
23.64
96.66
29.37
22.34
20.81
21.68 ########
21.87
23.08
24.45
21.78
23.55
20.80
20.43
20.79 23.61
391
03/10/2022 13:37
152.54
25.81
17.78
18.06
17.74
18.53
133.37
31.29
18.20
18.20
18.12
17.57
75.44
27.86
22.71
22.36
24.68
23.64
96.58
29.41
22.35
20.85
21.68 ########
21.78
23.13
24.42
21.76
23.54
20.84
20.41
20.74 23.58
392
03/10/2022 13:37
153.44
25.85
17.79
18.06
17.74
18.53
133.37
31.13
18.20
18.22
18.14
17.56
75.51
27.85
22.67
22.38
24.58
23.49
96.32
29.53
22.31
20.87
21.62 ########
21.71
23.18
24.37
21.83
23.54
20.82
20.37
20.74 23.55
393
03/10/2022 13:37
152.52
25.77
17.78
18.06
17.75
18.55
133.72
30.92
18.19
18.22
18.16
17.57
75.28
27.85
22.64
22.32
24.52
23.42
95.89
29.56
22.26
20.86
21.54 ########
21.66
23.00
24.34
21.80
23.53
20.78
20.37
20.73 23.54
394
03/10/2022 13:37
151.52
25.73
17.78
18.07
17.74
18.52
132.08
30.75
18.21
18.21
18.15
17.58
75.23
27.79
22.57
22.24
24.55
23.32
95.67
29.57
22.22
20.85
21.51 ########
21.61
22.86
24.41
21.79
23.50
20.78
20.33
20.70 23.52
395
03/10/2022 13:37
149.81
25.68
17.77
18.06
17.74
18.50
130.30
30.63
18.21
18.22
18.20
17.58
74.13
27.62
22.60
22.23
24.55
23.27
95.32
29.51
22.20
20.82
21.47 ########
21.61
22.78
24.56
21.82
23.48
20.78
20.31
20.66 23.50
396
03/10/2022 13:37
148.64
25.65
17.78
18.07
17.73
18.48
128.48
30.47
18.20
18.25
18.21
17.58
73.71
27.63
22.58
22.15
24.55
23.22
95.03
29.53
22.20
20.78
21.46 ########
21.65
22.66
24.68
21.77
23.47
20.76
20.34
20.63 23.48
397
03/10/2022 13:37
148.02
25.63
17.78
18.07
17.74
18.47
127.69
30.45
18.21
18.23
18.24
17.57
73.40
27.63
22.49
22.08
24.53
23.20
94.76
29.46
22.19
20.76
21.40 ########
21.62
22.69
24.84
21.73
23.45
20.81
20.35
20.60 23.44
398
03/10/2022 13:38
147.82
25.61
17.79
18.09
17.74
18.45
128.49
30.47
18.19
18.22
18.22
17.57
73.70
27.57
22.43
22.14
24.58
23.26
94.57
29.46
22.19
20.75
21.34 ########
21.62
22.73
24.95
21.72
23.40
20.84
20.33
20.57 23.45
399
03/10/2022 13:38
148.29
25.62
17.78
18.10
17.73
18.43
128.96
30.38
18.22
18.19
18.21
17.60
74.11
27.49
22.42
22.15
24.57
23.32
94.69
29.52
22.17
20.65
21.29 ########
21.62
22.78
25.08
21.75
23.40
20.86
20.32
20.55 23.43
400
03/10/2022 13:38
148.36
25.61
17.77
18.09
17.74
18.43
129.04
30.32
18.18
18.18
18.21
17.62
73.39
27.50
22.41
22.21
24.60
23.37
94.55
29.48
22.13
20.65
21.22 ########
21.61
22.82
25.17
21.79
23.40
20.77
20.35
20.55 23.42
401
03/10/2022 13:38
148.68
25.66
17.78
18.10
17.75
18.43
129.27
30.28
18.19
18.17
18.20
17.59
73.87
27.55
22.45
22.25
24.53
23.53
94.56
29.46
22.19
20.61
21.22 ########
21.61
22.77
25.22
21.88
23.38
20.72
20.34
20.54 23.41
402
03/10/2022 13:38
148.57
25.64
17.78
18.10
17.75
18.41
129.80
30.25
18.18
18.17
18.21
17.61
74.03
27.57
22.44
22.23
24.47
23.45
94.51
29.53
22.24
20.61
21.14 ########
21.57
22.80
25.23
21.98
23.35
20.74
20.32
20.49 23.40
403
03/10/2022 13:38
148.59
25.66
17.79
18.12
17.73
18.38
129.91
30.26
18.18
18.16
18.24
17.60
73.91
27.42
22.56
22.27
24.48
23.42
94.65
29.49
22.25
20.63
21.08 ########
21.51
22.71
25.29
22.01
23.34
20.71
20.30
20.46 23.40
404
03/10/2022 13:38
148.59
25.65
17.80
18.13
17.75
18.40
129.75
30.19
18.19
18.16
18.21
17.60
73.88
27.46
22.57
22.19
24.43
23.39
94.65
29.40
22.28
20.64
21.07 ########
21.45
22.63
25.19
22.05
23.33
20.67
20.27
20.43 23.38
405
03/10/2022 13:38
148.26
25.63
17.78
18.15
17.73
18.36
129.32
30.19
18.19
18.14
18.21
17.61
73.75
27.47
22.56
22.13
24.32
23.38
94.77
29.38
22.29
20.62
20.98 ########
21.45
22.56
25.14
22.04
23.34
20.65
20.23
20.39 23.38
406
03/10/2022 13:38
147.64
25.64
17.80
18.15
17.73
18.37
129.01
30.18
18.19
18.12
18.20
17.59
73.32
27.38
22.56
22.08
24.24
23.43
94.70
29.31
22.33
20.61
20.98 ########
21.43
22.55
24.97
21.97
23.34
20.62
20.22
20.40 23.36
407
03/10/2022 13:38
147.38
25.61
17.79
18.14
17.74
18.42
128.74
30.16
18.18
18.10
18.19
17.59
73.34
27.25
22.54
22.08
24.21
23.24
94.37
29.40
22.35
20.56
20.89 ########
21.39
22.58
24.86
21.95
23.32
20.55
20.18
20.36 23.38
408
03/10/2022 13:38
147.33
25.60
17.79
18.16
17.75
18.43
128.15
30.16
18.16
18.08
18.16
17.60
73.54
27.19
22.49
22.04
24.21
23.19
94.27
29.41
22.33
20.51
20.83 ########
21.43
22.60
24.79
22.03
23.32
20.53
20.16
20.34 23.39
409
03/10/2022 13:38
146.98
25.60
17.78
18.16
17.74
18.45
127.36
30.15
18.17
18.12
18.17
17.59
73.83
27.06
22.47
21.98
24.23
23.28
94.20
29.41
22.26
20.52
20.86 ########
21.43
22.68
24.73
22.01
23.32
20.50
20.15
20.32 23.38
410
03/10/2022 13:38
146.37
25.58
17.80
18.14
17.73
18.47
127.26
30.03
18.19
18.10
18.15
17.60
73.55
27.10
22.45
21.94
24.20
23.29
94.23
29.37
22.18
20.49
20.90 ########
21.40
22.71
24.73
21.98
23.31
20.47
20.14
20.30 23.36
411
03/10/2022 13:38
145.69
25.58
17.78
18.16
17.73
18.45
127.52
30.02
18.18
18.13
18.14
17.60
73.45
27.09
22.48
21.98
24.08
23.17
94.12
29.37
22.15
20.45
20.94 ########
21.35
22.63
24.81
21.97
23.29
20.54
20.11
20.28 23.37
412
03/10/2022 13:38
145.20
25.60
17.79
18.15
17.73
18.44
127.43
30.04
18.15
18.13
18.14
17.61
73.57
27.08
22.49
21.95
24.07
23.14
94.01
29.37
22.13
20.43
20.86 ########
21.34
22.54
24.77
22.04
23.29
20.49
20.14
20.28 23.38
413
03/10/2022 13:38
144.70
25.63
17.81
18.15
17.74
18.41
126.83
30.01
18.17
18.13
18.16
17.61
73.33
27.04
22.42
21.90
24.05
23.13
93.91
29.38
22.10
20.45
20.83 ########
21.31
22.52
24.87
22.12
23.27
20.50
20.15
20.26 23.36
414
03/10/2022 13:38
144.24
25.61
17.78
18.16
17.72
18.38
126.12
29.97
18.17
18.15
18.15
17.61
73.21
27.00
22.44
21.82
24.02
23.16
93.78
29.41
22.12
20.48
20.87 ########
21.33
22.50
24.83
22.18
23.29
20.48
20.17
20.27 23.35
415
03/10/2022 13:38
143.66
25.59
17.79
18.15
17.75
18.38
124.73
29.92
18.17
18.16
18.14
17.62
72.97
27.07
22.42
21.85
24.04
23.24
93.72
29.47
22.10
20.48
20.86 ########
21.35
22.48
24.77
22.19
23.28
20.44
20.24
20.28 23.36
416
03/10/2022 13:38
143.14
25.55
17.77
18.15
17.74
18.34
123.85
29.92
18.18
18.12
18.14
17.62
73.23
27.11
22.38
21.86
24.03
23.36
93.67
29.43
22.09
20.45
20.84 ########
21.38
22.46
24.74
22.15
23.26
20.41
20.28
20.28 23.35
417
03/10/2022 13:38
142.71
25.57
17.78
18.12
17.74
18.34
123.10
29.94
18.17
18.13
18.14
17.60
73.00
27.13
22.36
21.86
24.08
23.37
93.57
29.51
22.14
20.46
20.87 ########
21.42
22.48
24.72
22.15
23.27
20.44
20.29
20.26 23.34
418
03/10/2022 13:38
142.10
25.63
17.81
18.14
17.75
18.31
122.48
29.95
18.17
18.10
18.12
17.60
72.78
27.14
22.31
21.80
24.05
23.42
93.53
29.41
22.12
20.51
20.95 ########
21.43
22.50
24.65
22.18
23.28
20.43
20.28
20.25 23.34
==PAGE:221==
419
03/10/2022 13:38
141.81
25.65
17.81
18.15
17.73
18.29
120.78
29.90
18.16
18.11
18.10
17.61
72.60
27.14
22.32
21.75
24.07
23.46
93.51
29.37
22.10
20.53
21.01 ########
21.44
22.56
24.62
22.24
23.26
20.44
20.34
20.28 23.34
420
03/10/2022 13:38
141.63
25.61
17.81
18.14
17.74
18.33
120.07
29.87
18.18
18.11
18.10
17.61
72.52
27.15
22.35
21.74
24.04
23.48
93.55
29.34
22.09
20.55
21.05 ########
21.44
22.58
24.58
22.22
23.26
20.47
20.33
20.30 23.33
421
03/10/2022 13:38
141.40
25.56
17.80
18.12
17.75
18.35
119.55
29.89
18.16
18.12
18.12
17.61
71.86
27.12
22.31
21.68
24.04
23.44
93.50
29.31
22.04
20.50
21.01 ########
21.46
22.56
24.53
22.20
23.23
20.48
20.30
20.28 23.33
422
03/10/2022 13:38
141.06
25.58
17.81
18.12
17.74
18.34
118.79
29.92
18.18
18.14
18.08
17.61
71.60
27.02
22.26
21.65
24.02
23.41
93.53
29.24
22.03
20.50
20.98 ########
21.51
22.55
24.47
22.21
23.20
20.49
20.31
20.27 23.32
423
03/10/2022 13:38
140.87
25.57
17.81
18.13
17.75
18.34
116.81
29.93
18.16
18.11
18.10
17.61
71.54
27.00
22.28
21.60
24.00
23.33
93.52
29.28
21.99
20.47
21.02 ########
21.56
22.61
24.42
22.27
23.19
20.49
20.26
20.26 23.33
424
03/10/2022 13:38
140.19
25.53
17.82
18.12
17.74
18.32
115.62
29.89
18.17
18.10
18.09
17.60
71.43
26.95
22.21
21.57
24.00
23.24
93.52
29.20
21.97
20.47
21.04 ########
21.64
22.66
24.53
22.31
23.17
20.52
20.23
20.22 23.30
425
03/10/2022 13:38
139.70
25.56
17.79
18.12
17.73
18.31
114.86
29.86
18.16
18.10
18.08
17.58
71.41
26.91
22.17
21.48
23.92
23.22
93.58
29.18
21.89
20.43
20.98 ########
21.64
22.64
24.69
22.40
23.15
20.50
20.20
20.19 23.31
426
03/10/2022 13:38
139.04
25.51
17.79
18.12
17.73
18.30
113.75
29.87
18.15
18.07
18.06
17.58
71.69
26.88
22.14
21.41
23.89
23.16
93.62
29.13
21.90
20.41
21.01 ########
21.60
22.60
24.78
22.37
23.13
20.49
20.17
20.15 23.30
427
03/10/2022 13:38
138.54
25.52
17.79
18.13
17.74
18.28
112.51
29.91
18.17
18.10
18.08
17.59
71.60
26.78
22.08
21.37
23.84
23.15
93.62
29.13
21.88
20.38
20.96 ########
21.59
22.58
24.79
22.31
23.10
20.46
20.14
20.14 23.30
428
03/10/2022 13:38
138.00
25.52
17.81
18.14
17.75
18.28
111.29
29.94
18.15
18.10
18.07
17.60
71.77
26.75
22.06
21.30
23.80
23.12
93.54
29.00
21.86
20.34
20.98 ########
21.59
22.51
24.74
22.37
23.08
20.42
20.11
20.13 23.29
429
03/10/2022 13:38
137.64
25.54
17.84
18.14
17.76
18.30
110.87
29.99
18.15
18.11
18.05
17.60
71.86
26.73
22.04
21.30
23.79
23.06
93.49
28.93
21.81
20.29
20.98 ########
21.65
22.49
24.80
22.39
23.08
20.41
20.10
20.11 23.28
430
03/10/2022 13:38
137.40
25.45
17.83
18.17
17.79
18.30
110.26
30.03
18.18
18.10
18.04
17.59
71.96
26.70
22.06
21.22
23.73
22.97
93.52
28.90
21.74
20.23
20.98 ########
21.71
22.48
24.72
22.45
23.05
20.42
20.09
20.13 23.29
431
03/10/2022 13:38
136.96
25.48
17.85
18.16
17.77
18.28
109.48
30.03
18.17
18.09
18.05
17.59
71.96
26.68
21.94
21.20
23.64
22.96
93.46
28.87
21.69
20.26
20.94 ########
21.68
22.44
24.71
22.49
23.02
20.44
20.07
20.10 23.27
432
03/10/2022 13:38
136.37
25.48
17.86
18.17
17.77
18.27
108.26
30.03
18.17
18.10
18.03
17.58
71.29
26.63
21.88
21.15
23.56
22.88
93.46
28.76
21.66
20.25
20.90 ########
21.74
22.39
24.78
22.46
23.01
20.45
20.07
20.07 23.26
433
03/10/2022 13:38
135.94
25.48
17.88
18.16
17.77
18.29
107.79
30.08
18.17
18.10
18.02
17.59
70.87
26.62
21.84
21.05
23.48
22.91
93.41
28.68
21.68
20.25
20.93 ########
21.78
22.31
24.80
22.47
22.97
20.43
20.06
20.06 23.27
434
03/10/2022 13:38
135.66
25.41
17.89
18.16
17.77
18.28
106.13
30.06
18.17
18.12
18.03
17.59
70.63
26.64
21.83
20.98
23.44
22.86
93.43
28.68
21.64
20.25
20.90 ########
21.73
22.23
24.88
22.42
22.97
20.44
20.04
20.02 23.27
435
03/10/2022 13:38
135.56
25.41
17.86
18.13
17.77
18.24
105.20
30.12
18.16
18.12
18.02
17.61
70.37
26.65
21.72
20.91
23.38
22.79
93.35
28.58
21.62
20.23
20.89 ########
21.65
22.22
24.98
22.39
22.94
20.44
20.03
20.03 23.27
436
03/10/2022 13:38
135.59
25.38
17.85
18.14
17.78
18.24
103.72
30.06
18.14
18.13
18.01
17.58
70.37
26.63
21.62
20.87
23.31
22.76
93.24
28.56
21.60
20.19
20.82 ########
21.59
22.16
25.04
22.35
22.93
20.45
20.02
20.03 23.27
437
03/10/2022 13:39
135.07
25.33
17.85
18.12
17.77
18.24
102.74
30.00
18.15
18.14
18.01
17.58
70.02
26.64
21.63
20.77
23.23
22.70
93.01
28.56
21.54
20.17
20.78 ########
21.55
22.15
25.04
22.26
22.88
20.46
19.97
20.02 23.26
438
03/10/2022 13:39
134.37
25.34
17.85
18.12
17.77
18.23
103.00
29.97
18.15
18.12
18.01
17.58
69.74
26.60
21.59
20.71
23.11
22.59
92.73
28.61
21.53
20.11
20.75 ########
21.53
22.15
24.86
22.20
22.86
20.46
19.93
20.03 23.26
439
03/10/2022 13:39
133.93
25.33
17.86
18.14
17.77
18.21
102.64
29.93
18.17
18.11
18.02
17.58
69.51
26.51
21.57
20.77
23.03
22.54
92.46
28.66
21.49
20.09
20.70 ########
21.49
22.06
24.71
22.09
22.84
20.42
19.95
20.00 23.26
440
03/10/2022 13:39
133.82
25.27
17.86
18.11
17.79
18.22
102.57
29.95
18.17
18.15
17.99
17.59
69.29
26.54
21.52
20.72
23.02
22.47
92.38
28.77
21.51
20.05
20.64 ########
21.43
21.98
24.75
22.01
22.82
20.42
19.95
19.99 23.24
441
03/10/2022 13:39
133.69
25.27
17.86
18.11
17.78
18.21
101.16
29.92
18.14
18.15
17.98
17.59
69.29
26.52
21.46
20.67
22.96
22.38
92.16
28.84
21.47
20.00
20.59 ########
21.37
21.83
24.67
21.98
22.79
20.36
19.97
19.98 23.25
442
03/10/2022 13:39
133.53
25.28
17.88
18.09
17.77
18.21
100.33
29.86
18.15
18.15
18.01
17.58
69.20
26.56
21.43
20.61
22.92
22.42
92.08
28.89
21.39
19.95
20.54 ########
21.33
21.70
24.53
21.90
22.78
20.32
19.94
19.94 23.25
443
03/10/2022 13:39
133.23
25.31
17.86
18.06
17.79
18.18
99.00
29.76
18.15
18.16
17.98
17.59
68.99
26.58
21.43
20.67
22.87
22.42
91.93
28.83
21.30
19.89
20.52 ########
21.27
21.63
24.56
21.82
22.75
20.30
19.93
19.95 23.24
444
03/10/2022 13:39
133.23
25.29
17.86
18.07
17.76
18.18
97.57
29.72
18.14
18.13
17.99
17.60
68.82
26.59
21.42
20.64
22.86
22.36
91.67
28.91
21.33
19.92
20.47 ########
21.23
21.50
24.50
21.75
22.74
20.24
19.89
19.91 23.25
445
03/10/2022 13:39
133.06
25.25
17.87
18.06
17.76
18.16
96.18
29.65
18.13
18.14
17.99
17.60
68.74
26.57
21.43
20.62
22.82
22.39
91.57
28.96
21.33
19.90
20.40 ########
21.18
21.39
24.57
21.72
22.72
20.21
19.85
19.89 23.24
446
03/10/2022 13:39
133.25
25.23
17.86
18.06
17.76
18.15
95.07
29.60
18.15
18.15
17.99
17.58
68.70
26.61
21.37
20.63
22.81
22.32
91.55
29.01
21.28
19.87
20.38 ########
21.13
21.30
24.52
21.73
22.71
20.15
19.82
19.88 23.24
447
03/10/2022 13:39
132.87
25.22
17.89
18.07
17.78
18.15
94.08
29.50
18.16
18.13
18.00
17.60
68.66
26.60
21.38
20.59
22.76
22.26
91.34
29.00
21.25
19.88
20.37 ########
21.10
21.34
24.55
21.75
22.68
20.17
19.79
19.85 23.23
448
03/10/2022 13:39
132.95
25.21
17.89
18.07
17.79
18.16
93.19
29.42
18.17
18.17
17.98
17.59
68.53
26.57
21.37
20.54
22.72
22.23
91.30
29.00
21.25
19.87
20.36 ########
21.07
21.35
24.52
21.73
22.68
20.18
19.77
19.84 23.23
449
03/10/2022 13:39
132.43
25.20
17.89
18.07
17.79
18.15
92.18
29.36
18.16
18.18
17.99
17.59
68.45
26.57
21.37
20.50
22.71
22.23
91.24
29.01
21.26
19.85
20.33 ########
21.06
21.23
24.37
21.70
22.66
20.16
19.74
19.83 23.22
450
03/10/2022 13:39
132.28
25.16
17.88
18.04
17.78
18.17
90.74
29.32
18.15
18.18
18.00
17.60
68.36
26.61
21.33
20.47
22.67
22.18
90.93
28.96
21.20
19.80
20.29 ########
21.00
21.14
24.27
21.67
22.63
20.17
19.69
19.83 23.22
451
03/10/2022 13:39
131.54
25.15
17.88
18.05
17.78
18.16
89.57
29.21
18.17
18.16
17.99
17.57
68.34
26.54
21.30
20.42
22.62
22.18
90.90
28.95
21.20
19.76
20.25 ########
20.96
21.11
24.21
21.57
22.61
20.15
19.62
19.78 23.23
452
03/10/2022 13:39
131.17
25.12
17.89
18.04
17.77
18.15
88.48
29.15
18.13
18.15
18.00
17.59
67.95
26.59
21.27
20.36
22.56
22.15
90.80
28.87
21.17
19.73
20.23 ########
20.94
20.98
24.13
21.60
22.62
20.15
19.59
19.77 23.24
453
03/10/2022 13:39
130.67
25.11
17.90
18.01
17.79
18.15
87.69
29.13
18.15
18.13
17.99
17.59
67.94
26.59
21.18
20.33
22.49
22.14
90.67
28.87
21.18
19.70
20.16 ########
20.93
20.84
24.11
21.67
22.60
20.13
19.53
19.72 23.21
454
03/10/2022 13:39
130.45
25.06
17.89
18.02
17.76
18.14
87.10
29.03
18.16
18.13
18.01
17.58
67.90
26.52
21.15
20.28
22.43
22.06
90.76
28.86
21.15
19.66
20.11 ########
20.87
20.78
24.09
21.73
22.59
20.11
19.55
19.68 23.23
455
03/10/2022 13:39
129.46
25.14
17.89
18.02
17.78
18.15
86.16
29.00
18.14
18.13
18.02
17.59
67.65
26.53
21.14
20.24
22.44
22.01
90.63
28.85
21.11
19.63
20.11 ########
20.83
20.71
24.03
21.75
22.54
20.09
19.55
19.65 23.25
456
03/10/2022 13:39
129.23
25.09
17.89
18.03
17.76
18.14
86.19
28.92
18.15
18.10
17.98
17.59
67.94
26.56
21.19
20.23
22.42
21.95
90.57
28.91
21.09
19.61
20.09 ########
20.82
20.58
23.99
21.78
22.55
20.05
19.57
19.66 23.23
457
03/10/2022 13:39
128.78
25.06
17.89
18.02
17.78
18.14
86.12
28.88
18.14
18.10
17.99
17.57
67.25
26.54
21.23
20.31
22.42
21.93
90.46
28.96
21.09
19.59
20.04 ########
20.80
20.49
23.97
21.80
22.53
20.02
19.61
19.66 23.25
458
03/10/2022 13:39
128.65
25.00
17.87
18.01
17.77
18.14
85.59
28.80
18.13
18.08
17.97
17.58
66.97
26.53
21.25
20.31
22.43
21.90
90.34
28.84
21.10
19.57
19.98 ########
20.71
20.41
23.89
21.85
22.50
19.98
19.62
19.65 23.26
459
03/10/2022 13:39
127.90
24.98
17.89
18.01
17.77
18.14
85.12
28.73
18.13
18.08
17.96
17.59
67.36
26.60
21.20
20.35
22.43
21.89
90.25
28.88
21.13
19.52
19.94 ########
20.66
20.35
23.85
21.86
22.46
19.90
19.63
19.62 23.25
460
03/10/2022 13:39
126.35
24.98
17.89
18.00
17.77
18.15
83.81
28.78
18.14
18.08
17.98
17.59
67.94
26.69
21.18
20.37
22.40
21.82
89.97
28.88
21.06
19.46
19.89 ########
20.67
20.31
23.93
21.84
22.39
19.85
19.65
19.59 23.26
461
03/10/2022 13:39
125.03
25.01
17.87
17.99
17.77
18.14
82.23
28.70
18.15
18.07
17.98
17.59
68.17
26.71
21.23
20.42
22.38
21.76
89.92
28.95
21.02
19.44
19.87 ########
20.60
20.25
24.12
21.77
22.35
19.81
19.70
19.57 23.26
462
03/10/2022 13:39
123.99
25.04
17.89
18.02
17.75
18.14
80.72
28.75
18.12
18.07
17.96
17.58
68.33
26.74
21.24
20.46
22.37
21.65
89.71
28.96
21.05
19.42
19.88 ########
20.56
20.21
24.29
21.79
22.36
19.77
19.74
19.55 23.25
463
03/10/2022 13:39
122.79
25.07
17.87
18.02
17.77
18.12
78.56
28.75
18.11
18.07
17.96
17.61
68.74
26.80
21.26
20.45
22.31
21.57
89.52
29.05
21.08
19.48
19.88 ########
20.53
20.19
24.40
21.78
22.36
19.72
19.78
19.53 23.24
464
03/10/2022 13:39
121.65
25.11
17.89
18.04
17.77
18.12
76.83
28.74
18.12
18.04
17.95
17.60
68.41
26.74
21.28
20.48
22.27
21.55
89.33
29.08
21.04
19.60
19.88 ########
20.52
20.17
24.48
21.88
22.34
19.72
19.82
19.55 23.25
465
03/10/2022 13:39
120.70
25.18
17.88
18.01
17.76
18.14
75.76
28.69
18.12
18.06
17.92
17.60
68.25
26.70
21.27
20.52
22.22
21.44
89.27
29.21
21.09
19.64
19.87 ########
20.54
20.16
24.54
21.97
22.30
19.73
19.85
19.53 23.25
466
03/10/2022 13:39
120.05
25.12
17.88
18.02
17.77
18.10
75.05
28.61
18.11
18.05
17.97
17.60
68.44
26.71
21.26
20.53
22.20
21.36
89.31
29.20
21.17
19.69
19.90 ########
20.53
20.14
24.64
22.06
22.31
19.66
19.88
19.49 23.25
467
03/10/2022 13:39
119.96
25.07
17.89
18.01
17.76
18.13
75.10
28.53
18.12
18.08
17.95
17.60
68.47
26.65
21.27
20.53
22.15
21.40
89.26
29.14
21.15
19.73
19.86 ########
20.53
20.12
24.70
22.06
22.28
19.59
19.89
19.47 23.26
468
03/10/2022 13:39
120.21
25.00
17.87
18.00
17.77
18.13
75.71
28.45
18.13
18.10
17.95
17.61
68.39
26.62
21.26
20.53
22.12
21.37
89.19
29.14
21.19
19.74
19.82 ########
20.51
20.11
24.75
22.12
22.29
19.57
19.88
19.43 23.25
469
03/10/2022 13:39
120.11
24.90
17.88
18.01
17.76
18.15
76.41
28.41
18.13
18.08
17.95
17.60
68.35
26.59
21.26
20.56
22.09
21.29
89.04
29.11
21.19
19.72
19.81 ########
20.55
20.09
24.81
22.11
22.31
19.54
19.88
19.43 23.25
470
03/10/2022 13:39
119.78
24.85
17.85
18.01
17.77
18.13
77.14
28.34
18.12
18.07
17.95
17.63
68.34
26.56
21.27
20.59
22.08
21.30
88.90
29.03
21.20
19.72
19.79 ########
20.60
20.08
24.83
22.10
22.30
19.50
19.86
19.45 23.26
471
03/10/2022 13:39
119.51
24.82
17.86
18.00
17.77
18.14
78.01
28.34
18.13
18.08
17.96
17.63
68.01
26.54
21.26
20.59
22.06
21.31
88.86
29.07
21.19
19.76
19.88 ########
20.60
20.06
24.84
22.07
22.28
19.49
19.86
19.46 23.26
472
03/10/2022 13:39
118.82
24.75
17.85
18.00
17.76
18.11
78.79
28.31
18.12
18.10
17.94
17.62
67.81
26.54
21.24
20.61
22.04
21.27
88.86
29.10
21.22
19.87
19.89 ########
20.62
20.04
24.76
22.07
22.30
19.46
19.84
19.44 23.27
473
03/10/2022 13:39
118.73
24.67
17.83
17.99
17.76
18.13
79.24
28.29
18.11
18.08
17.94
17.62
67.49
26.53
21.24
20.61
22.03
21.22
88.69
29.04
21.18
19.83
19.86 ########
20.62
20.00
24.62
22.07
22.30
19.45
19.81
19.43 23.27
474
03/10/2022 13:39
118.17
24.62
17.85
17.99
17.74
18.11
80.23
28.26
18.12
18.09
17.94
17.62
67.03
26.45
21.22
20.64
21.97
21.21
88.57
29.01
21.13
19.85
19.81 ########
20.63
20.05
24.56
22.14
22.29
19.45
19.77
19.41 23.25
475
03/10/2022 13:39
117.84
24.60
17.84
17.99
17.75
18.12
81.08
28.27
18.13
18.09
17.93
17.61
67.02
26.45
21.16
20.64
21.98
21.20
88.43
28.98
21.10
19.92
19.81 ########
20.68
20.16
24.59
22.13
22.30
19.41
19.78
19.41 23.26
476
03/10/2022 13:40
117.50
24.56
17.84
18.00
17.74
18.14
81.75
28.22
18.13
18.08
17.94
17.61
66.90
26.46
21.17
20.63
21.97
21.17
88.34
28.92
21.08
19.93
19.87 ########
20.73
20.17
24.68
22.13
22.31
19.39
19.81
19.37 23.26
477
03/10/2022 13:40
117.12
24.52
17.85
18.00
17.75
18.12
82.40
28.19
18.13
18.10
17.93
17.61
66.51
26.38
21.11
20.58
21.94
21.17
88.26
28.87
21.03
19.94
19.91 ########
20.74
20.18
24.61
22.16
22.30
19.36
19.80
19.36 23.27
478
03/10/2022 13:40
116.84
24.45
17.86
18.02
17.76
18.12
83.13
28.15
18.10
18.11
17.93
17.64
66.37
26.37
21.08
20.56
21.91
21.27
88.13
28.91
20.93
19.96
19.95 ########
20.75
20.17
24.49
22.21
22.30
19.34
19.80
19.35 23.25
479
03/10/2022 13:40
116.60
24.44
17.86
18.00
17.74
18.13
83.61
28.12
18.13
18.13
17.92
17.63
66.13
26.34
21.10
20.53
21.90
21.30
88.09
28.85
20.88
19.98
19.95 ########
20.73
20.15
24.54
22.25
22.30
19.32
19.77
19.31 23.25
480
03/10/2022 13:40
116.22
24.36
17.85
18.00
17.75
18.14
84.14
28.07
18.13
18.12
17.92
17.63
66.12
26.36
21.09
20.50
21.89
21.28
88.06
28.79
20.91
19.97
19.98 ########
20.68
20.19
24.59
22.23
22.31
19.34
19.72
19.36 23.25
481
03/10/2022 13:40
115.78
24.33
17.84
18.00
17.77
18.14
84.47
28.07
18.13
18.11
17.94
17.62
66.25
26.32
21.09
20.48
21.87
21.27
87.93
28.72
20.90
19.96
19.96 ########
20.63
20.23
24.55
22.29
22.28
19.34
19.71
19.39 23.26
482
03/10/2022 13:40
115.61
24.26
17.87
17.99
17.73
18.14
84.70
27.99
18.13
18.13
17.93
17.63
66.51
26.30
21.04
20.45
21.87
21.29
87.90
28.71
20.91
19.95
19.97 ########
20.59
20.31
24.44
22.33
22.29
19.34
19.68
19.43 23.25
483
03/10/2022 13:40
115.03
24.22
17.82
18.00
17.75
18.15
84.97
27.97
18.12
18.11
17.93
17.61
66.63
26.29
21.03
20.45
21.84
21.28
87.84
28.73
20.93
19.95
19.95 ########
20.60
20.35
24.35
22.37
22.30
19.40
19.66
19.48 23.25
484
03/10/2022 13:40
114.71
24.21
17.83
18.00
17.75
18.15
84.93
27.90
18.12
18.14
17.93
17.61
66.64
26.31
20.99
20.41
21.83
21.24
87.77
28.73
20.93
19.94
19.99 ########
20.59
20.41
24.26
22.40
22.29
19.43
19.62
19.46 23.25
485
03/10/2022 13:40
114.41
24.20
17.83
18.00
17.77
18.15
85.03
27.87
18.12
18.11
17.93
17.63
66.22
26.30
21.01
20.37
21.79
21.25
87.70
28.73
20.93
19.94
19.94 ########
20.53
20.47
24.17
22.45
22.30
19.45
19.58
19.45 23.25
486
03/10/2022 13:40
114.12
24.13
17.83
18.00
17.75
18.15
84.72
27.82
18.14
18.10
17.92
17.62
65.96
26.35
21.02
20.36
21.78
21.28
87.59
28.72
20.93
19.97
19.95 ########
20.53
20.52
24.11
22.51
22.31
19.47
19.57
19.44 23.23
487
03/10/2022 13:40
113.95
24.06
17.84
17.99
17.75
18.14
84.58
27.81
18.11
18.10
17.92
17.63
65.81
26.30
21.01
20.35
21.79
21.31
87.42
28.76
20.98
19.95
19.91 ########
20.54
20.47
24.10
22.56
22.32
19.50
19.54
19.43 23.24
488
03/10/2022 13:40
113.79
24.03
17.84
17.99
17.75
18.12
84.71
27.77
18.13
18.08
17.94
17.63
65.76
26.32
21.04
20.33
21.80
21.30
87.25
28.75
20.97
19.92
19.89 ########
20.53
20.45
24.03
22.62
22.32
19.55
19.50
19.42 23.25
==PAGE:222==
489
03/10/2022 13:40
113.34
23.96
17.84
17.98
17.75
18.11
84.62
27.77
18.10
18.08
17.91
17.63
65.68
26.34
21.04
20.29
21.79
21.32
87.23
28.81
20.99
19.91
19.93 ########
20.56
20.41
24.02
22.63
22.31
19.61
19.50
19.40 23.24
490
03/10/2022 13:40
112.97
23.90
17.83
17.98
17.74
18.12
84.50
27.72
18.12
18.09
17.93
17.63
65.79
26.40
21.04
20.28
21.79
21.36
87.10
28.85
21.02
19.90
19.95 ########
20.57
20.38
24.00
22.68
22.32
19.66
19.47
19.38 23.24
491
03/10/2022 13:40
112.69
23.85
17.85
18.00
17.75
18.11
84.35
27.64
18.09
18.09
17.92
17.61
65.60
26.43
21.07
20.24
21.77
21.38
87.03
28.82
21.03
19.87
19.91 ########
20.62
20.37
23.92
22.66
22.33
19.68
19.46
19.36 23.25
492
03/10/2022 13:40
113.02
23.81
17.83
17.99
17.74
18.12
84.03
27.60
18.12
18.08
17.91
17.61
65.27
26.44
21.11
20.20
21.77
21.34
86.93
28.84
21.05
19.87
19.94 ########
20.65
20.43
23.85
22.58
22.34
19.73
19.46
19.36 23.23
493
03/10/2022 13:40
112.98
23.76
17.84
17.98
17.75
18.12
83.22
27.55
18.11
18.07
17.94
17.64
65.25
26.43
21.10
20.19
21.76
21.35
86.86
28.85
21.08
19.85
19.95 ########
20.65
20.44
23.81
22.44
22.35
19.74
19.46
19.38 23.24
494
03/10/2022 13:40
112.51
23.72
17.83
17.98
17.76
18.11
82.98
27.52
18.12
18.09
17.91
17.62
65.21
26.40
21.11
20.15
21.70
21.28
86.74
28.87
21.11
19.84
19.93 ########
20.72
20.52
23.79
22.43
22.34
19.74
19.48
19.37 23.24
495
03/10/2022 13:40
112.36
23.69
17.81
17.97
17.73
18.11
82.99
27.51
18.11
18.07
17.89
17.63
65.18
26.41
21.10
20.14
21.69
21.25
86.75
28.96
21.11
19.81
19.93 ########
20.74
20.58
23.77
22.38
22.33
19.78
19.48
19.38 23.25
496
03/10/2022 13:40
112.09
23.65
17.81
17.98
17.75
18.14
82.86
27.48
18.11
18.07
17.90
17.62
64.97
26.40
21.08
20.14
21.70
21.26
86.81
28.94
21.15
19.80
19.93 ########
20.77
20.61
23.80
22.41
22.35
19.82
19.52
19.38 23.24
497
03/10/2022 13:40
112.12
23.59
17.85
17.99
17.75
18.14
82.04
27.43
18.10
18.08
17.91
17.63
64.73
26.33
21.08
20.17
21.67
21.23
86.77
28.83
21.10
19.77
19.93 ########
20.81
20.71
23.92
22.40
22.37
19.80
19.49
19.40 23.23
498
03/10/2022 13:40
111.95
23.51
17.83
17.97
17.76
18.14
81.69
27.39
18.09
18.09
17.88
17.64
64.70
26.36
21.10
20.18
21.67
21.22
86.83
28.73
21.09
19.78
19.96 ########
20.86
20.80
24.00
22.48
22.38
19.83
19.53
19.40 23.25
499
03/10/2022 13:40
111.53
23.40
17.83
17.97
17.75
18.12
81.76
27.33
18.11
18.06
17.88
17.64
64.67
26.26
21.08
20.14
21.69
21.21
86.82
28.53
21.08
19.75
19.93 ########
20.92
20.87
24.12
22.52
22.36
19.85
19.55
19.44 23.23
500
03/10/2022 13:40
111.30
23.39
17.82
17.96
17.75
18.11
81.66
27.32
18.11
18.06
17.89
17.65
64.49
26.27
21.08
20.16
21.68
21.14
86.75
28.53
21.08
19.71
19.88 ########
20.91
20.93
24.10
22.49
22.37
19.83
19.58
19.45 23.25
501
03/10/2022 13:40
111.23
23.32
17.82
17.95
17.76
18.11
81.71
27.31
18.12
18.10
17.89
17.63
64.61
26.30
21.10
20.15
21.66
21.13
86.72
28.59
21.07
19.69
19.82 ########
20.93
20.97
24.02
22.45
22.38
19.81
19.63
19.46 23.24
502
03/10/2022 13:40
110.70
23.26
17.81
17.94
17.76
18.07
81.59
27.27
18.13
18.10
17.91
17.62
64.50
26.25
21.11
20.13
21.65
21.08
86.66
28.57
21.05
19.67
19.81 ########
20.95
21.03
24.09
22.35
22.37
19.75
19.66
19.50 23.23
503
03/10/2022 13:40
110.36
23.20
17.83
17.95
17.76
18.09
81.70
27.21
18.13
18.10
17.88
17.63
64.57
26.15
21.05
20.14
21.66
21.02
86.67
28.49
21.07
19.64
19.83 ########
20.97
21.10
24.12
22.25
22.39
19.76
19.72
19.54 23.25
504
03/10/2022 13:40
109.86
23.16
17.84
17.93
17.75
18.08
81.51
27.19
18.11
18.08
17.90
17.64
64.82
26.11
21.13
20.12
21.66
21.02
86.64
28.43
21.05
19.59
19.81 ########
21.03
21.14
24.18
22.15
22.39
19.78
19.73
19.53 23.24
505
03/10/2022 13:40
109.30
23.05
17.83
17.93
17.75
18.08
81.54
27.19
18.09
18.07
17.88
17.62
65.14
26.10
21.18
20.18
21.64
20.99
86.62
28.35
21.03
19.59
19.80 ########
21.05
21.19
24.24
22.06
22.39
19.82
19.78
19.55 23.25
506
03/10/2022 13:40
108.89
22.97
17.83
17.94
17.75
18.06
81.58
27.17
18.12
18.08
17.91
17.62
65.37
26.14
21.18
20.20
21.63
21.01
86.59
28.32
21.04
19.61
19.79 ########
21.11
21.25
24.24
21.97
22.39
19.85
19.78
19.60 23.24
507
03/10/2022 13:40
108.66
22.84
17.83
17.92
17.75
18.06
81.40
27.18
18.12
18.09
17.88
17.64
65.35
26.10
21.17
20.20
21.64
20.94
86.52
28.35
21.07
19.63
19.79 ########
21.17
21.31
24.28
21.89
22.40
19.86
19.80
19.61 23.26
508
03/10/2022 13:40
108.36
22.80
17.82
17.96
17.72
18.07
81.38
27.13
18.10
18.08
17.88
17.63
65.36
26.09
21.15
20.16
21.66
20.94
86.52
28.35
21.09
19.63
19.77 ########
21.19
21.35
24.33
21.83
22.42
19.88
19.81
19.64 23.26
509
03/10/2022 13:40
107.98
22.76
17.80
17.95
17.74
18.08
81.20
27.12
18.11
18.09
17.88
17.63
65.29
26.05
21.14
20.19
21.64
20.94
86.45
28.36
21.09
19.67
19.79 ########
21.24
21.41
24.34
21.80
22.41
19.89
19.86
19.61 23.27
510
03/10/2022 13:40
107.80
22.69
17.83
17.96
17.74
18.06
81.00
27.07
18.10
18.10
17.86
17.61
65.32
26.05
21.14
20.20
21.63
20.92
86.36
28.35
21.09
19.70
19.81 ########
21.29
21.41
24.36
21.72
22.41
19.90
19.91
19.61 23.26
511
03/10/2022 13:40
107.38
22.66
17.83
17.94
17.74
18.05
81.00
27.01
18.11
18.11
17.87
17.64
65.07
26.05
21.11
20.18
21.61
20.89
86.34
28.26
21.11
19.70
19.83 ########
21.29
21.46
24.38
21.66
22.44
19.96
19.91
19.61 23.29
512
03/10/2022 13:40
107.44
22.65
17.81
17.93
17.74
18.05
80.65
26.97
18.11
18.09
17.86
17.64
64.66
26.05
21.08
20.20
21.60
20.87
86.28
28.20
21.09
19.70
19.83 ########
21.30
21.48
24.39
21.61
22.42
20.01
19.89
19.61 23.29
513
03/10/2022 13:40
107.30
22.61
17.82
17.94
17.75
18.07
80.33
26.90
18.13
18.09
17.88
17.64
64.57
26.03
21.07
20.20
21.58
20.85
86.27
28.19
21.10
19.72
19.87 ########
21.25
21.52
24.38
21.56
22.43
20.06
19.88
19.64 23.29
514
03/10/2022 13:40
106.87
22.56
17.81
17.94
17.73
18.06
79.85
26.87
18.11
18.09
17.88
17.64
64.59
26.08
21.10
20.20
21.56
20.83
86.19
28.10
21.13
19.71
19.86 ########
21.20
21.56
24.28
21.52
22.44
20.13
19.88
19.63 23.30
515
03/10/2022 13:40
106.70
22.53
17.83
17.93
17.74
18.06
79.48
26.89
18.10
18.10
17.88
17.64
64.24
26.15
21.08
20.19
21.55
20.87
86.10
27.97
21.12
19.72
19.83 ########
21.15
21.56
24.22
21.46
22.46
20.10
19.84
19.66 23.30
516
03/10/2022 13:41
106.60
22.48
17.82
17.95
17.74
18.05
78.96
26.82
18.11
18.08
17.87
17.62
63.88
26.18
21.06
20.18
21.54
20.83
85.98
27.88
21.09
19.71
19.82 ########
21.07
21.55
24.10
21.41
22.45
20.16
19.82
19.63 23.30
517
03/10/2022 13:41
106.60
22.45
17.81
17.95
17.75
18.06
78.50
26.79
18.13
18.08
17.84
17.64
63.40
26.09
21.07
20.15
21.54
20.83
85.79
27.71
21.08
19.76
19.82 ########
20.99
21.52
24.02
21.32
22.43
20.18
19.78
19.65 23.28
518
03/10/2022 13:41
106.75
22.47
17.83
17.94
17.74
18.06
77.69
26.76
18.11
18.09
17.85
17.63
63.57
26.12
21.04
20.12
21.48
20.84
85.58
27.52
21.07
19.74
19.85 ########
20.95
21.52
23.88
21.24
22.43
20.21
19.75
19.66 23.28
519
03/10/2022 13:41
107.06
22.44
17.81
17.93
17.75
18.05
76.69
26.63
18.10
18.12
17.86
17.63
63.48
26.07
21.08
20.09
21.44
20.73
85.36
27.35
21.08
19.75
19.86 ########
20.87
21.50
23.74
21.21
22.41
20.21
19.72
19.66 23.28
520
03/10/2022 13:41
107.40
22.42
17.81
17.93
17.72
18.05
75.72
26.59
18.11
18.11
17.87
17.63
63.05
26.06
21.02
20.06
21.39
20.70
85.39
27.37
21.04
19.71
19.87 ########
20.80
21.47
23.65
21.17
22.40
20.21
19.67
19.67 23.29
521
03/10/2022 13:41
107.39
22.36
17.84
17.93
17.72
18.08
74.89
26.57
18.13
18.10
17.85
17.63
63.02
26.03
20.99
19.98
21.28
20.63
85.23
27.38
21.04
19.69
19.85 ########
20.76
21.48
23.65
21.14
22.39
20.21
19.63
19.65 23.28
522
03/10/2022 13:41
107.24
22.36
17.83
17.92
17.74
18.10
74.61
26.56
18.12
18.10
17.85
17.63
62.67
26.01
20.93
19.95
21.27
20.64
85.22
27.41
21.02
19.69
19.86 ########
20.70
21.49
23.63
21.12
22.37
20.20
19.59
19.66 23.28
523
03/10/2022 13:41
107.38
22.37
17.84
17.94
17.74
18.07
73.79
26.50
18.12
18.08
17.85
17.63
62.47
26.00
20.89
19.92
21.26
20.59
85.24
27.34
20.98
19.70
19.83 ########
20.65
21.48
23.60
21.18
22.35
20.17
19.55
19.61 23.29
524
03/10/2022 13:41
107.62
22.39
17.82
17.95
17.74
18.07
73.24
26.44
18.13
18.09
17.83
17.63
62.18
25.92
20.85
19.91
21.27
20.61
85.22
27.30
20.96
19.67
19.76 ########
20.57
21.48
23.64
21.20
22.35
20.12
19.53
19.63 23.29
525
03/10/2022 13:41
107.23
22.40
17.82
17.96
17.74
18.09
72.37
26.40
18.11
18.11
17.85
17.62
62.21
25.90
20.83
19.89
21.24
20.59
85.23
27.34
20.96
19.61
19.72 ########
20.56
21.49
23.68
21.29
22.35
20.11
19.50
19.61 23.28
526
03/10/2022 13:41
106.59
22.37
17.81
17.94
17.74
18.09
72.23
26.37
18.12
18.14
17.84
17.62
61.92
25.88
20.86
19.83
21.24
20.58
85.15
27.31
20.91
19.61
19.72 ########
20.49
21.49
23.68
21.31
22.33
20.12
19.48
19.62 23.28
527
03/10/2022 13:41
106.63
22.32
17.82
17.96
17.75
18.07
72.21
26.34
18.12
18.11
17.86
17.62
61.95
25.91
20.85
19.81
21.22
20.53
85.05
27.33
20.90
19.64
19.70 ########
20.47
21.46
23.79
21.36
22.35
20.14
19.45
19.63 23.29
528
03/10/2022 13:41
106.64
22.33
17.83
17.95
17.75
18.06
71.43
26.32
18.11
18.12
17.89
17.62
61.66
25.87
20.82
19.81
21.19
20.55
85.00
27.38
20.88
19.63
19.67 ########
20.42
21.45
23.88
21.32
22.34
20.16
19.43
19.62 23.28
529
03/10/2022 13:41
106.56
22.30
17.82
17.99
17.74
18.09
70.72
26.23
18.12
18.12
17.87
17.61
61.53
25.87
20.82
19.80
21.18
20.56
84.95
27.39
20.90
19.64
19.66 ########
20.38
21.47
23.84
21.35
22.32
20.20
19.42
19.61 23.28
530
03/10/2022 13:41
106.36
22.31
17.82
17.98
17.75
18.08
70.25
26.23
18.10
18.13
17.88
17.60
61.83
25.87
20.82
19.76
21.18
20.53
84.89
27.44
20.88
19.60
19.63 ########
20.37
21.49
23.78
21.44
22.32
20.17
19.40
19.63 23.26
531
03/10/2022 13:41
105.80
22.28
17.81
17.98
17.73
18.06
69.52
26.21
18.13
18.12
17.88
17.64
61.67
25.94
20.81
19.69
21.17
20.53
84.76
27.46
20.88
19.58
19.64 ########
20.30
21.49
23.61
21.53
22.32
20.18
19.40
19.61 23.26
532
03/10/2022 13:41
106.09
22.25
17.82
17.97
17.75
18.05
68.88
26.21
18.10
18.12
17.88
17.61
61.64
25.88
20.81
19.71
21.18
20.57
84.66
27.48
20.88
19.57
19.64 ########
20.30
21.46
23.51
21.60
22.33
20.19
19.39
19.60 23.27
533
03/10/2022 13:41
106.20
22.24
17.81
17.96
17.74
18.05
68.58
26.17
18.13
18.10
17.86
17.62
61.48
25.85
20.82
19.72
21.18
20.52
84.69
27.42
20.84
19.56
19.65 ########
20.26
21.46
23.43
21.65
22.31
20.22
19.38
19.61 23.29
534
03/10/2022 13:41
105.65
22.21
17.82
17.96
17.73
18.06
68.27
26.16
18.13
18.09
17.86
17.62
61.61
25.91
20.83
19.71
21.17
20.60
84.53
27.37
20.83
19.58
19.64 ########
20.25
21.41
23.45
21.65
22.34
20.20
19.34
19.61 23.27
535
03/10/2022 13:41
105.67
22.18
17.83
17.97
17.73
18.06
67.44
26.12
18.12
18.08
17.86
17.63
61.51
25.94
20.82
19.67
21.16
20.58
84.44
27.52
20.84
19.58
19.64 ########
20.27
21.39
23.45
21.62
22.29
20.23
19.40
19.59 23.28
536
03/10/2022 13:41
105.71
22.18
17.83
17.96
17.74
18.05
66.91
26.12
18.11
18.09
17.87
17.61
61.56
25.90
20.81
19.67
21.16
20.54
84.33
27.62
20.79
19.56
19.62 ########
20.25
21.38
23.45
21.61
22.29
20.24
19.44
19.57 23.28
537
03/10/2022 13:41
105.86
22.21
17.82
17.97
17.76
18.05
66.65
26.12
18.11
18.09
17.88
17.62
61.61
25.94
20.80
19.65
21.17
20.49
84.25
27.64
20.79
19.56
19.61 ########
20.25
21.35
23.43
21.58
22.28
20.22
19.41
19.57 23.28
538
03/10/2022 13:41
105.49
22.18
17.81
17.96
17.73
18.06
66.42
26.12
18.12
18.11
17.91
17.62
61.89
25.94
20.75
19.65
21.18
20.48
84.22
27.82
20.84
19.54
19.61 ########
20.21
21.32
23.46
21.46
22.28
20.20
19.41
19.55 23.26
539
03/10/2022 13:41
105.58
22.17
17.83
17.97
17.74
18.04
66.02
26.05
18.10
18.08
17.90
17.62
61.90
25.93
20.67
19.63
21.21
20.51
84.12
27.95
20.85
19.51
19.58 ########
20.20
21.29
23.47
21.39
22.29
20.20
19.44
19.56 23.25
540
03/10/2022 13:41
105.76
22.19
17.80
17.96
17.74
18.04
65.74
26.00
18.11
18.09
17.90
17.63
61.92
25.98
20.64
19.62
21.21
20.53
83.97
27.96
20.84
19.52
19.57 ########
20.20
21.25
23.49
21.28
22.27
20.18
19.48
19.56 23.27
541
03/10/2022 13:41
105.99
22.15
17.80
17.98
17.75
18.02
65.58
25.98
18.11
18.08
17.90
17.62
61.76
25.98
20.68
19.60
21.21
20.55
83.86
28.06
20.83
19.49
19.54 ########
20.19
21.12
23.50
21.22
22.28
20.13
19.49
19.59 23.27
542
03/10/2022 13:41
105.98
22.15
17.81
17.96
17.75
18.00
65.30
25.97
18.12
18.08
17.90
17.61
61.64
25.95
20.68
19.57
21.20
20.56
83.79
28.19
20.79
19.50
19.56 ########
20.19
20.99
23.49
21.17
22.28
20.10
19.46
19.60 23.27
543
03/10/2022 13:41
105.54
22.13
17.81
17.97
17.74
18.00
65.46
25.98
18.11
18.09
17.90
17.62
61.52
25.89
20.69
19.52
21.18
20.56
83.74
28.27
20.78
19.48
19.55 ########
20.18
20.86
23.50
21.16
22.28
20.07
19.44
19.62 23.27
544
03/10/2022 13:41
105.23
22.10
17.81
17.95
17.73
18.01
65.81
25.97
18.11
18.09
17.89
17.62
61.27
25.91
20.70
19.55
21.12
20.56
83.67
28.18
20.73
19.51
19.53 ########
20.20
20.74
23.50
21.17
22.28
20.04
19.42
19.65 23.26
545
03/10/2022 13:41
104.71
22.06
17.81
17.94
17.74
18.03
66.25
25.96
18.11
18.09
17.89
17.62
61.52
25.85
20.70
19.54
21.12
20.57
83.58
28.18
20.74
19.53
19.53 ########
20.23
20.64
23.50
21.26
22.29
20.00
19.41
19.64 23.27
546
03/10/2022 13:41
104.38
22.04
17.81
17.93
17.72
18.03
66.92
25.94
18.11
18.10
17.89
17.62
61.32
25.86
20.73
19.57
21.12
20.61
83.60
28.15
20.75
19.50
19.53 ########
20.21
20.55
23.53
21.33
22.28
20.00
19.39
19.66 23.27
547
03/10/2022 13:41
104.04
22.02
17.82
17.94
17.73
18.04
67.54
25.91
18.11
18.11
17.88
17.62
61.23
25.78
20.70
19.54
21.11
20.63
83.59
28.24
20.73
19.50
19.52 ########
20.18
20.45
23.57
21.43
22.28
19.94
19.39
19.66 23.26
548
03/10/2022 13:41
103.79
22.01
17.81
17.91
17.73
18.04
68.02
25.90
18.11
18.10
17.90
17.62
61.08
25.81
20.68
19.51
21.07
20.65
83.53
28.19
20.73
19.48
19.53 ########
20.18
20.36
23.54
21.48
22.28
19.91
19.36
19.67 23.25
549
03/10/2022 13:41
103.43
21.95
17.82
17.93
17.71
18.04
68.50
25.89
18.11
18.10
17.88
17.64
61.02
25.76
20.66
19.52
21.12
20.63
83.46
28.25
20.78
19.44
19.51 ########
20.17
20.31
23.44
21.59
22.28
19.91
19.33
19.66 23.27
550
03/10/2022 13:41
102.93
21.90
17.82
17.90
17.72
18.05
68.79
25.87
18.10
18.11
17.87
17.63
60.95
25.75
20.68
19.54
21.14
20.66
83.50
28.15
20.75
19.43
19.50 ########
20.13
20.25
23.36
21.67
22.30
19.90
19.37
19.67 23.28
551
03/10/2022 13:41
102.84
21.89
17.81
17.92
17.73
18.06
68.75
25.86
18.11
18.09
17.90
17.64
60.79
25.80
20.70
19.61
21.13
20.66
83.45
28.15
20.70
19.42
19.51 ########
20.10
20.18
23.34
21.71
22.30
19.86
19.42
19.65 23.27
552
03/10/2022 13:41
102.51
21.87
17.82
17.90
17.73
18.08
69.09
25.79
18.11
18.12
17.87
17.64
60.91
25.84
20.71
19.62
21.14
20.64
83.44
28.18
20.71
19.41
19.55 ########
20.06
20.18
23.32
21.73
22.30
19.80
19.41
19.67 23.27
553
03/10/2022 13:41
102.04
21.89
17.82
17.90
17.72
18.07
68.69
25.77
18.10
18.12
17.89
17.63
60.95
25.88
20.70
19.60
21.16
20.63
83.33
28.23
20.70
19.37
19.51 ########
20.04
20.14
23.24
21.65
22.29
19.75
19.39
19.70 23.28
554
03/10/2022 13:41
101.98
21.91
17.82
17.89
17.72
18.08
66.93
25.82
18.12
18.14
17.89
17.63
61.27
25.89
20.71
19.65
21.19
20.62
83.21
28.26
20.75
19.37
19.54 ########
19.97
20.09
23.14
21.60
22.29
19.73
19.39
19.73 23.27
555
03/10/2022 13:42
102.24
21.91
17.80
17.91
17.74
18.08
66.13
25.77
18.10
18.15
17.88
17.62
61.66
25.92
20.68
19.67
21.17
20.65
83.17
28.28
20.81
19.40
19.59 ########
19.94
20.07
23.09
21.63
22.30
19.77
19.39
19.70 23.27
556
03/10/2022 13:42
101.91
21.89
17.81
17.88
17.72
18.09
65.49
25.78
18.13
18.16
17.90
17.63
62.02
25.90
20.66
19.68
21.18
20.63
83.14
28.23
20.84
19.44
19.57 ########
19.93
20.08
23.14
21.65
22.30
19.78
19.38
19.66 23.29
557
03/10/2022 13:42
101.45
21.88
17.81
17.89
17.74
18.09
64.23
25.82
18.11
18.13
17.91
17.62
62.31
25.86
20.69
19.69
21.16
20.64
83.09
28.26
20.86
19.40
19.55 ########
19.89
19.98
23.24
21.62
22.30
19.74
19.37
19.66 23.28
558
03/10/2022 13:42
100.80
21.87
17.81
17.89
17.72
18.09
63.09
25.82
18.13
18.16
17.90
17.64
62.32
25.89
20.72
19.75
21.14
20.62
82.99
28.23
20.85
19.40
19.59 ########
19.90
19.94
23.31
21.56
22.30
19.72
19.37
19.67 23.27
==PAGE:223==
559
03/10/2022 13:42
100.14
21.87
17.81
17.91
17.75
18.10
62.11
25.85
18.13
18.16
17.88
17.63
62.43
25.89
20.70
19.73
21.15
20.61
82.88
28.17
20.91
19.40
19.59 ########
19.99
19.93
23.36
21.52
22.32
19.71
19.38
19.68 23.29
560
03/10/2022 13:42
99.62
21.89
17.82
17.91
17.73
18.09
61.29
25.82
18.15
18.15
17.88
17.65
62.50
25.90
20.72
19.74
21.15
20.62
82.74
28.24
20.88
19.37
19.61 ########
20.00
19.89
23.48
21.52
22.29
19.67
19.38
19.70 23.30
561
03/10/2022 13:42
98.85
21.93
17.83
17.91
17.73
18.10
60.31
25.83
18.16
18.17
17.90
17.66
62.52
25.87
20.72
19.72
21.14
20.63
82.66
28.23
20.84
19.37
19.61 ########
20.05
19.86
23.62
21.51
22.28
19.62
19.39
19.65 23.30
562
03/10/2022 13:42
98.33
21.92
17.82
17.94
17.75
18.09
59.73
25.82
18.14
18.17
17.90
17.64
62.32
25.89
20.68
19.71
21.09
20.63
82.52
28.12
20.84
19.38
19.59 ########
20.08
19.83
23.71
21.53
22.24
19.58
19.45
19.65 23.31
563
03/10/2022 13:42
98.00
21.91
17.83
17.94
17.76
18.12
59.49
25.75
18.14
18.18
17.90
17.64
62.30
25.90
20.63
19.69
21.06
20.65
82.49
28.09
20.86
19.39
19.54 ########
20.08
19.81
23.69
21.50
22.23
19.57
19.46
19.63 23.32
564
03/10/2022 13:42
97.50
21.92
17.86
17.97
17.76
18.13
59.36
25.78
18.14
18.17
17.89
17.64
62.45
25.85
20.61
19.67
21.02
20.66
82.44
28.12
20.82
19.35
19.54 ########
20.06
19.83
23.67
21.56
22.24
19.57
19.47
19.64 23.30
565
03/10/2022 13:42
97.82
21.92
17.86
17.97
17.77
18.12
59.35
25.74
18.14
18.20
17.91
17.65
62.16
25.82
20.65
19.69
20.99
20.68
82.44
28.07
20.87
19.34
19.51 ########
20.02
19.88
23.76
21.59
22.23
19.57
19.50
19.64 23.33
566
03/10/2022 13:42
98.30
21.92
17.86
17.98
17.76
18.15
59.65
25.71
18.16
18.20
17.88
17.65
61.91
25.80
20.56
19.69
20.98
20.61
82.38
28.04
20.82
19.32
19.54 ########
20.02
19.95
23.84
21.61
22.20
19.54
19.52
19.61 23.32
567
03/10/2022 13:42
98.37
21.89
17.85
17.95
17.76
18.14
59.83
25.69
18.17
18.20
17.89
17.66
61.40
25.74
20.55
19.67
20.99
20.57
82.27
28.07
20.78
19.33
19.52 ########
20.03
20.00
23.76
21.58
22.19
19.50
19.52
19.55 23.32
568
03/10/2022 13:42
98.67
21.89
17.84
17.97
17.78
18.15
59.85
25.68
18.17
18.21
17.93
17.66
61.30
25.75
20.51
19.67
21.00
20.62
82.23
28.05
20.77
19.32
19.50 ########
20.05
20.04
23.69
21.62
22.18
19.49
19.55
19.54 23.33
569
03/10/2022 13:42
98.89
21.87
17.86
17.98
17.80
18.15
59.77
25.65
18.18
18.21
17.92
17.65
61.39
25.73
20.50
19.73
21.00
20.61
82.16
27.99
20.74
19.28
19.46 ########
20.09
20.03
23.63
21.61
22.18
19.44
19.56
19.51 23.34
570
03/10/2022 13:42
99.24
21.82
17.84
17.96
17.78
18.14
59.44
25.61
18.17
18.22
17.94
17.67
61.27
25.76
20.47
19.72
21.03
20.59
82.09
27.96
20.70
19.29
19.48 ########
20.11
20.11
23.63
21.59
22.15
19.42
19.53
19.45 23.32
571
03/10/2022 13:42
99.13
21.82
17.85
17.98
17.76
18.15
59.71
25.57
18.16
18.19
17.91
17.66
61.21
25.79
20.49
19.70
21.01
20.56
82.02
27.91
20.68
19.31
19.47 ########
20.13
20.12
23.66
21.61
22.14
19.40
19.54
19.43 23.31
572
03/10/2022 13:42
99.39
21.75
17.83
17.99
17.76
18.13
59.94
25.53
18.18
18.22
17.92
17.68
60.95
25.68
20.50
19.73
21.00
20.54
82.00
27.91
20.68
19.29
19.52 ########
20.14
20.16
23.54
21.64
22.14
19.37
19.49
19.40 23.31
573
03/10/2022 13:42
99.37
21.71
17.83
17.99
17.78
18.12
59.93
25.51
18.20
18.18
17.90
17.66
60.84
25.63
20.55
19.72
21.02
20.53
82.07
27.81
20.68
19.35
19.54 ########
20.14
20.19
23.60
21.67
22.14
19.36
19.48
19.37 23.33
574
03/10/2022 13:42
99.19
21.70
17.85
17.98
17.76
18.11
59.59
25.50
18.20
18.20
17.93
17.67
60.96
25.69
20.54
19.72
21.01
20.53
82.03
27.72
20.70
19.31
19.60 ########
20.17
20.28
23.67
21.72
22.14
19.33
19.46
19.33 23.32
575
03/10/2022 13:42
99.30
21.64
17.84
18.02
17.77
18.08
59.44
25.47
18.20
18.17
17.94
17.68
60.44
25.67
20.54
19.70
20.98
20.53
81.96
27.75
20.69
19.32
19.59 ########
20.19
20.32
23.72
21.76
22.14
19.33
19.46
19.31 23.31
576
03/10/2022 13:42
99.49
21.65
17.86
18.02
17.80
18.13
59.16
25.44
18.21
18.18
17.94
17.69
60.59
25.66
20.53
19.69
20.98
20.54
81.87
27.72
20.72
19.30
19.60 ########
20.19
20.38
23.77
21.75
22.14
19.31
19.43
19.29 23.32
577
03/10/2022 13:42
99.19
21.66
17.85
17.98
17.79
18.10
58.90
25.40
18.19
18.17
17.95
17.70
60.61
25.64
20.53
19.67
20.96
20.54
81.90
27.71
20.68
19.31
19.61 ########
20.17
20.46
23.80
21.72
22.14
19.30
19.40
19.29 23.31
578
03/10/2022 13:42
99.23
21.65
17.85
17.99
17.79
18.09
58.86
25.37
18.18
18.17
17.95
17.68
60.61
25.56
20.54
19.66
20.94
20.51
81.85
27.72
20.66
19.28
19.59 ########
20.15
20.50
23.78
21.73
22.14
19.29
19.40
19.27 23.31
579
03/10/2022 13:42
99.35
21.64
17.85
18.01
17.80
18.13
58.59
25.37
18.19
18.17
17.96
17.68
60.33
25.57
20.53
19.64
20.92
20.51
81.78
27.72
20.68
19.30
19.59 ########
20.15
20.53
23.74
21.70
22.11
19.29
19.37
19.29 23.30
580
03/10/2022 13:42
99.45
21.65
17.86
18.00
17.80
18.12
58.29
25.35
18.20
18.16
17.95
17.69
60.06
25.57
20.53
19.65
20.91
20.46
81.68
27.70
20.65
19.27
19.56 ########
20.12
20.55
23.71
21.65
22.09
19.28
19.36
19.30 23.31
581
03/10/2022 13:42
99.47
21.61
17.87
18.02
17.81
18.10
58.56
25.32
18.20
18.17
17.94
17.68
60.06
25.54
20.51
19.63
20.93
20.45
81.65
27.69
20.61
19.22
19.56 ########
20.11
20.58
23.59
21.60
22.08
19.25
19.33
19.32 23.32
582
03/10/2022 13:42
99.53
21.59
17.88
18.02
17.80
18.11
58.59
25.33
18.18
18.19
17.93
17.69
60.58
25.57
20.44
19.61
20.93
20.41
81.58
27.75
20.65
19.20
19.52 ########
20.07
20.59
23.56
21.54
22.08
19.27
19.38
19.32 23.31
583
03/10/2022 13:42
99.35
21.57
17.87
18.05
17.82
18.13
58.22
25.31
18.19
18.19
17.95
17.68
60.57
25.57
20.43
19.59
20.92
20.38
81.41
27.76
20.63
19.21
19.50 ########
20.04
20.63
23.41
21.43
22.09
19.25
19.36
19.33 23.31
584
03/10/2022 13:42
99.06
21.56
17.88
18.04
17.82
18.12
57.81
25.28
18.19
18.20
17.94
17.68
60.80
25.65
20.40
19.56
20.91
20.37
81.27
27.85
20.65
19.22
19.48 ########
19.98
20.63
23.31
21.38
22.08
19.25
19.40
19.31 23.32
585
03/10/2022 13:42
98.55
21.59
17.88
18.04
17.80
18.13
57.33
25.29
18.20
18.22
17.93
17.67
60.73
25.67
20.36
19.54
20.92
20.34
81.24
27.87
20.64
19.19
19.48 ########
19.98
20.67
23.22
21.36
22.05
19.21
19.39
19.29 23.33
586
03/10/2022 13:42
97.75
21.59
17.88
18.05
17.82
18.11
56.96
25.43
18.18
18.18
17.92
17.67
60.74
25.61
20.31
19.55
20.92
20.33
81.15
27.89
20.58
19.16
19.53 ########
19.96
20.70
23.20
21.30
22.07
19.24
19.38
19.30 23.32
587
03/10/2022 13:42
97.06
21.58
17.87
18.04
17.82
18.11
56.72
25.39
18.19
18.17
17.91
17.69
60.52
25.59
20.31
19.58
20.90
20.34
81.13
27.93
20.60
19.17
19.50 ########
19.93
20.72
23.16
21.25
22.07
19.29
19.39
19.29 23.32
588
03/10/2022 13:42
96.53
21.58
17.89
18.04
17.80
18.10
56.50
25.41
18.19
18.20
17.90
17.68
60.61
25.57
20.29
19.62
20.88
20.33
81.02
27.95
20.57
19.14
19.50 ########
19.91
20.78
23.20
21.20
22.07
19.30
19.38
19.28 23.30
589
03/10/2022 13:42
96.21
21.57
17.87
18.03
17.80
18.10
56.43
25.39
18.19
18.18
17.89
17.68
60.21
25.55
20.28
19.60
20.84
20.42
80.92
28.02
20.51
19.15
19.49 ########
19.88
20.80
23.18
21.20
22.08
19.31
19.34
19.31 23.31
590
03/10/2022 13:42
95.81
21.55
17.88
18.03
17.82
18.09
56.27
25.40
18.20
18.19
17.89
17.67
60.11
25.55
20.29
19.60
20.84
20.38
80.84
28.00
20.51
19.11
19.45 ########
19.84
20.81
23.11
21.25
22.06
19.33
19.28
19.31 23.31
591
03/10/2022 13:42
95.47
21.54
17.87
18.05
17.82
18.07
56.22
25.37
18.19
18.18
17.89
17.68
60.16
25.56
20.31
19.60
20.85
20.37
80.75
27.96
20.52
19.10
19.47 ########
19.84
20.82
23.05
21.26
22.07
19.35
19.28
19.27 23.31
592
03/10/2022 13:42
95.13
21.53
17.89
18.02
17.83
18.10
56.05
25.40
18.17
18.17
17.89
17.68
60.24
25.52
20.29
19.59
20.83
20.38
80.79
27.96
20.48
19.10
19.44 ########
19.80
20.82
22.92
21.31
22.08
19.37
19.24
19.23 23.30
593
03/10/2022 13:42
94.51
21.51
17.87
18.05
17.81
18.08
55.70
25.34
18.19
18.19
17.88
17.67
60.21
25.48
20.29
19.58
20.83
20.36
80.72
27.92
20.46
19.14
19.44 ########
19.77
20.86
22.90
21.33
22.06
19.39
19.23
19.22 23.30
594
03/10/2022 13:43
94.23
21.50
17.87
18.04
17.80
18.08
55.55
25.31
18.19
18.17
17.88
17.69
59.87
25.42
20.25
19.56
20.83
20.35
80.71
27.89
20.44
19.13
19.46 ########
19.74
20.85
22.89
21.42
22.05
19.42
19.21
19.17 23.30
595
03/10/2022 13:43
93.86
21.51
17.88
18.04
17.81
18.08
55.84
25.26
18.19
18.18
17.90
17.67
59.59
25.44
20.28
19.54
20.83
20.33
80.60
27.93
20.44
19.12
19.50 ########
19.76
20.78
22.84
21.43
22.03
19.47
19.16
19.17 23.30
596
03/10/2022 13:43
93.28
21.51
17.89
18.05
17.81
18.07
55.76
25.26
18.19
18.20
17.91
17.67
59.46
25.44
20.26
19.57
20.82
20.32
80.47
27.88
20.49
19.16
19.52 ########
19.72
20.69
22.80
21.39
22.01
19.46
19.13
19.14 23.31
597
03/10/2022 13:43
92.93
21.50
17.88
18.02
17.82
18.06
55.48
25.26
18.19
18.18
17.92
17.67
58.94
25.58
20.30
19.60
20.78
20.31
80.39
27.72
20.49
19.20
19.52 ########
19.71
20.66
22.79
21.38
22.00
19.47
19.13
19.11 23.30
598
03/10/2022 13:43
92.59
21.51
17.89
18.03
17.81
18.08
55.13
25.29
18.19
18.18
17.90
17.69
58.86
25.61
20.31
19.61
20.77
20.31
80.27
27.78
20.48
19.21
19.51 ########
19.69
20.59
22.84
21.37
22.00
19.48
19.09
19.08 23.31
599
03/10/2022 13:43
92.20
21.57
17.87
18.03
17.83
18.07
54.56
25.32
18.18
18.20
17.89
17.69
59.07
25.50
20.32
19.64
20.78
20.27
80.17
27.79
20.52
19.17
19.49 ########
19.68
20.48
22.91
21.39
22.01
19.49
19.07
19.07 23.31
600
03/10/2022 13:43
91.78
21.57
17.88
18.03
17.81
18.08
54.14
25.39
18.19
18.20
17.90
17.67
58.94
25.59
20.36
19.62
20.76
20.26
80.13
27.82
20.52
19.21
19.52 ########
19.67
20.41
22.94
21.43
22.00
19.52
19.08
19.07 23.31
601
03/10/2022 13:43
91.28
21.57
17.88
18.04
17.81
18.08
53.43
25.46
18.19
18.23
17.89
17.67
59.26
25.61
20.35
19.62
20.76
20.26
80.07
27.92
20.54
19.26
19.55 ########
19.67
20.35
23.01
21.42
22.00
19.51
19.08
19.07 23.30
602
03/10/2022 13:43
90.69
21.56
17.87
18.03
17.82
18.07
52.63
25.45
18.20
18.22
17.90
17.67
59.09
25.56
20.40
19.67
20.74
20.26
79.98
27.90
20.55
19.27
19.55 ########
19.70
20.30
23.11
21.42
22.04
19.50
19.11
19.06 23.29
603
03/10/2022 13:43
90.37
21.59
17.88
18.02
17.81
18.09
52.11
25.47
18.20
18.25
17.90
17.68
58.76
25.56
20.41
19.66
20.76
20.25
79.83
27.85
20.55
19.30
19.56 ########
19.70
20.25
23.12
21.36
22.03
19.50
19.14
19.04 23.31
604
03/10/2022 13:43
89.99
21.59
17.87
18.03
17.82
18.05
51.51
25.43
18.20
18.27
17.90
17.67
58.96
25.54
20.45
19.65
20.73
20.25
79.65
27.92
20.53
19.31
19.58 ########
19.74
20.23
23.26
21.44
22.02
19.49
19.23
19.04 23.31
605
03/10/2022 13:43
89.56
21.59
17.88
18.04
17.80
18.08
51.11
25.43
18.20
18.26
17.91
17.66
58.81
25.56
20.44
19.67
20.72
20.27
79.60
27.79
20.54
19.32
19.59 ########
19.75
20.21
23.33
21.46
22.02
19.44
19.29
19.02 23.34
606
03/10/2022 13:43
89.29
21.61
17.87
18.05
17.82
18.10
50.77
25.42
18.19
18.25
17.90
17.67
58.80
25.56
20.45
19.71
20.74
20.25
79.61
27.86
20.59
19.37
19.61 ########
19.76
20.19
23.34
21.56
22.05
19.45
19.29
18.99 23.32
607
03/10/2022 13:43
88.87
21.61
17.87
18.06
17.82
18.09
50.68
25.42
18.22
18.25
17.91
17.67
58.97
25.57
20.43
19.74
20.72
20.27
79.55
27.83
20.57
19.38
19.62 ########
19.78
20.19
23.31
21.63
22.04
19.42
19.26
19.02 23.32
608
03/10/2022 13:43
88.85
21.63
17.88
18.06
17.82
18.09
50.91
25.40
18.20
18.24
17.88
17.66
59.14
25.57
20.47
19.74
20.71
20.30
79.58
27.82
20.57
19.39
19.59 ########
19.75
20.21
23.26
21.63
22.05
19.39
19.27
19.00 23.33
609
03/10/2022 13:43
89.04
21.62
17.88
18.06
17.80
18.08
51.01
25.38
18.19
18.23
17.88
17.68
59.04
25.55
20.47
19.74
20.72
20.32
79.42
27.80
20.61
19.44
19.62 ########
19.76
20.25
23.22
21.67
22.08
19.36
19.27
18.97 23.34
610
03/10/2022 13:43
89.55
21.61
17.87
18.04
17.83
18.10
51.25
25.32
18.19
18.22
17.89
17.68
59.58
25.58
20.48
19.76
20.74
20.33
79.37
27.75
20.64
19.41
19.61 ########
19.79
20.30
23.26
21.74
22.09
19.37
19.29
18.99 23.35
611
03/10/2022 13:43
90.02
21.60
17.89
18.05
17.82
18.09
51.64
25.26
18.19
18.22
17.89
17.68
59.63
25.57
20.50
19.76
20.71
20.32
79.29
27.65
20.66
19.43
19.63 ########
19.77
20.32
23.28
21.79
22.07
19.33
19.26
19.00 23.37
612
03/10/2022 13:43
90.06
21.62
17.88
18.03
17.81
18.10
52.00
25.26
18.19
18.22
17.89
17.69
59.55
25.56
20.49
19.76
20.72
20.32
79.26
27.66
20.64
19.40
19.63 ########
19.76
20.35
23.28
21.84
22.06
19.32
19.26
18.99 23.37
613
03/10/2022 13:43
90.31
21.62
17.88
18.04
17.83
18.10
52.44
25.21
18.19
18.22
17.91
17.67
59.51
25.56
20.50
19.75
20.72
20.32
79.20
27.71
20.65
19.46
19.66 ########
19.73
20.32
23.26
21.87
22.07
19.32
19.24
19.00 23.36
614
03/10/2022 13:43
90.74
21.60
17.88
18.05
17.83
18.10
52.61
25.14
18.19
18.23
17.91
17.67
59.28
25.52
20.49
19.74
20.71
20.35
79.05
27.72
20.60
19.46
19.66 ########
19.72
20.26
23.23
21.91
22.06
19.29
19.23
18.97 23.36
615
03/10/2022 13:43
90.91
21.58
17.89
18.04
17.82
18.08
52.97
25.09
18.19
18.23
17.91
17.68
59.14
25.50
20.48
19.73
20.73
20.33
79.04
27.65
20.60
19.48
19.65 ########
19.72
20.21
23.20
21.94
22.05
19.26
19.22
18.96 23.35
616
03/10/2022 13:43
91.36
21.61
17.88
18.05
17.83
18.08
53.13
25.05
18.19
18.24
17.90
17.67
58.85
25.45
20.50
19.72
20.74
20.34
78.93
27.66
20.61
19.48
19.67 ########
19.78
20.20
23.15
21.97
22.04
19.28
19.21
18.97 23.36
617
03/10/2022 13:43
91.71
21.61
17.89
18.03
17.83
18.07
53.50
25.04
18.18
18.23
17.91
17.67
59.10
25.46
20.50
19.72
20.73
20.33
78.88
27.66
20.60
19.48
19.66 ########
19.79
20.13
23.09
22.01
22.05
19.27
19.22
18.94 23.34
618
03/10/2022 13:43
91.84
21.60
17.86
18.03
17.83
18.09
53.98
25.01
18.20
18.24
17.89
17.67
59.13
25.47
20.49
19.70
20.72
20.32
78.81
27.67
20.61
19.48
19.71 ########
19.80
20.09
23.07
22.01
22.04
19.26
19.22
18.94 23.35
619
03/10/2022 13:43
92.06
21.59
17.89
18.04
17.82
18.10
54.32
24.97
18.19
18.23
17.90
17.68
59.16
25.46
20.46
19.69
20.72
20.34
78.80
27.63
20.59
19.49
19.73 ########
19.82
20.10
23.07
22.03
22.02
19.25
19.25
18.94 23.35
620
03/10/2022 13:43
92.10
21.59
17.89
18.06
17.82
18.09
54.45
24.94
18.19
18.23
17.92
17.69
59.04
25.45
20.47
19.68
20.71
20.29
78.69
27.63
20.59
19.50
19.72 ########
19.87
20.07
23.03
22.03
21.97
19.23
19.25
18.92 23.36
621
03/10/2022 13:43
92.47
21.57
17.87
18.03
17.83
18.08
54.51
24.91
18.19
18.21
17.91
17.68
58.78
25.43
20.47
19.65
20.70
20.25
78.66
27.64
20.60
19.46
19.76 ########
19.90
20.07
23.10
22.05
21.97
19.24
19.24
18.93 23.37
622
03/10/2022 13:43
92.61
21.52
17.87
18.04
17.81
18.08
54.35
24.92
18.19
18.21
17.91
17.67
58.78
25.42
20.46
19.64
20.71
20.23
78.56
27.63
20.60
19.49
19.76 ########
19.89
20.07
23.15
22.08
21.97
19.22
19.22
18.92 23.36
623
03/10/2022 13:43
92.36
21.50
17.89
18.05
17.81
18.10
54.55
24.89
18.17
18.21
17.94
17.68
58.78
25.42
20.44
19.64
20.67
20.23
78.50
27.66
20.59
19.47
19.76 ########
19.90
20.12
23.21
22.05
21.94
19.24
19.21
18.89 23.36
624
03/10/2022 13:43
92.36
21.50
17.86
18.03
17.81
18.09
54.64
24.88
18.19
18.18
17.93
17.69
58.75
25.42
20.44
19.62
20.66
20.27
78.47
27.59
20.56
19.46
19.71 ########
19.88
20.15
23.18
21.99
21.94
19.26
19.22
18.92 23.36
625
03/10/2022 13:43
91.97
21.45
17.88
18.03
17.83
18.10
54.24
24.89
18.18
18.16
17.94
17.69
58.75
25.42
20.41
19.63
20.65
20.26
78.45
27.60
20.57
19.41
19.71 ########
19.87
20.19
23.23
22.00
21.93
19.24
19.21
18.92 23.37
626
03/10/2022 13:43
91.50
21.44
17.89
18.05
17.81
18.10
53.84
24.86
18.19
18.17
17.96
17.68
58.56
25.41
20.42
19.60
20.65
20.25
78.41
27.59
20.55
19.40
19.76 ########
19.87
20.21
23.17
21.98
21.92
19.22
19.21
18.93 23.36
627
03/10/2022 13:43
90.90
21.43
17.88
18.01
17.82
18.10
53.57
24.86
18.17
18.16
17.94
17.67
58.54
25.39
20.41
19.59
20.64
20.28
78.38
27.55
20.52
19.39
19.77 ########
19.85
20.26
23.11
21.99
21.91
19.20
19.20
18.94 23.35
628
03/10/2022 13:43
90.68
21.42
17.88
18.02
17.84
18.10
53.54
24.81
18.17
18.18
17.95
17.68
58.58
25.38
20.39
19.57
20.64
20.26
78.30
27.49
20.53
19.37
19.75 ########
19.84
20.29
23.04
22.00
21.93
19.21
19.17
18.95 23.36
==PAGE:224==
629
03/10/2022 13:43
90.53
21.41
17.86
18.01
17.83
18.11
53.06
25.00
18.19
18.17
17.91
17.69
58.48
25.39
20.38
19.54
20.64
20.27
78.26
27.46
20.53
19.35
19.75 ########
19.84
20.35
22.94
21.89
21.91
19.23
19.15
18.95 23.36
630
03/10/2022 13:43
90.62
21.39
17.87
18.03
17.83
18.11
53.02
24.96
18.19
18.19
17.93
17.68
58.49
25.41
20.35
19.55
20.63
20.27
78.06
27.43
20.51
19.34
19.74 ########
19.85
20.37
22.89
21.81
21.89
19.26
19.15
18.99 23.36
631
03/10/2022 13:43
90.44
21.36
17.87
17.99
17.82
18.10
53.07
24.93
18.19
18.21
17.91
17.68
58.39
25.38
20.33
19.51
20.63
20.30
78.05
27.48
20.47
19.33
19.70 ########
19.82
20.39
22.89
21.74
21.90
19.27
19.13
19.00 23.36
632
03/10/2022 13:43
89.95
21.33
17.87
17.98
17.84
18.11
52.88
24.90
18.19
18.20
17.94
17.67
58.27
25.36
20.32
19.52
20.62
20.29
77.87
27.43
20.46
19.31
19.67 ########
19.79
20.44
22.94
21.74
21.88
19.27
19.11
18.97 23.38
633
03/10/2022 13:44
89.84
21.32
17.87
17.99
17.84
18.10
52.51
24.89
18.18
18.20
17.93
17.69
58.05
25.36
20.31
19.49
20.61
20.30
77.84
27.37
20.46
19.31
19.66 ########
19.79
20.48
22.90
21.71
21.86
19.24
19.11
18.98 23.36
634
03/10/2022 13:44
89.58
21.30
17.88
17.99
17.83
18.11
52.41
24.91
18.18
18.19
17.91
17.69
57.74
25.30
20.32
19.48
20.60
20.27
77.82
27.27
20.43
19.28
19.65 ########
19.79
20.54
22.97
21.67
21.85
19.21
19.10
19.02 23.38
635
03/10/2022 13:44
89.36
21.28
17.87
18.00
17.84
18.11
51.95
24.89
18.20
18.20
17.92
17.68
57.65
25.23
20.27
19.44
20.59
20.26
77.86
27.19
20.41
19.26
19.60 ########
19.82
20.53
23.04
21.64
21.86
19.18
19.09
19.04 23.37
636
03/10/2022 13:44
89.18
21.29
17.89
18.02
17.84
18.11
51.86
24.87
18.18
18.20
17.92
17.67
57.29
25.17
20.21
19.39
20.56
20.24
77.85
27.16
20.39
19.22
19.55 ########
19.79
20.56
23.11
21.61
21.86
19.17
19.08
19.04 23.36
637
03/10/2022 13:44
89.23
21.30
17.87
18.02
17.83
18.10
51.84
24.88
18.18
18.17
17.90
17.70
57.42
25.14
20.16
19.37
20.55
20.18
77.86
27.04
20.39
19.22
19.53 ########
19.77
20.58
23.18
21.53
21.86
19.16
19.05
19.03 23.36
638
03/10/2022 13:44
88.84
21.30
17.87
18.04
17.83
18.12
51.81
24.87
18.20
18.21
17.91
17.68
57.36
25.14
20.14
19.38
20.52
20.19
77.86
27.00
20.36
19.20
19.50 ########
19.77
20.57
23.23
21.51
21.85
19.15
19.05
19.03 23.33
639
03/10/2022 13:44
88.51
21.29
17.88
18.02
17.84
18.08
51.43
24.85
18.20
18.20
17.89
17.68
57.03
25.17
20.12
19.32
20.51
20.15
77.88
26.95
20.34
19.18
19.50 ########
19.75
20.59
23.15
21.45
21.85
19.17
19.02
19.07 23.36
640
03/10/2022 13:44
88.06
21.30
17.88
18.01
17.84
18.11
51.19
24.82
18.18
18.18
17.90
17.68
56.78
25.13
20.08
19.30
20.51
20.14
77.84
26.99
20.34
19.15
19.45 ########
19.73
20.60
23.04
21.45
21.84
19.16
18.98
19.05 23.35
641
03/10/2022 13:44
87.85
21.28
17.88
18.01
17.84
18.12
50.91
24.85
18.19
18.18
17.89
17.67
56.52
25.13
20.13
19.29
20.49
20.10
77.72
26.94
20.32
19.13
19.40 ########
19.70
20.62
22.91
21.46
21.84
19.18
18.99
19.03 23.36
642
03/10/2022 13:44
87.35
21.25
17.88
18.01
17.84
18.10
51.17
24.79
18.20
18.15
17.88
17.67
56.23
25.08
20.09
19.28
20.47
20.10
77.62
26.88
20.31
19.12
19.36 ########
19.71
20.65
22.83
21.45
21.81
19.17
18.95
19.02 23.38
643
03/10/2022 13:44
87.53
21.23
17.89
18.02
17.82
18.10
51.70
24.74
18.20
18.15
17.86
17.70
56.34
25.02
20.06
19.24
20.47
20.08
77.60
26.74
20.30
19.08
19.32 ########
19.68
20.65
22.80
21.45
21.76
19.17
18.96
19.03 23.35
644
03/10/2022 13:44
87.70
21.24
17.88
18.01
17.84
18.10
52.48
24.73
18.20
18.15
17.88
17.67
56.47
24.98
20.08
19.23
20.48
20.03
77.60
26.70
20.30
19.06
19.31 ########
19.69
20.64
22.90
21.48
21.75
19.21
18.94
19.03 23.37
645
03/10/2022 13:44
87.94
21.21
17.88
18.02
17.84
18.09
53.09
24.71
18.19
18.14
17.89
17.68
56.28
24.93
20.02
19.19
20.40
20.03
77.61
26.56
20.30
19.03
19.28 ########
19.71
20.61
23.00
21.43
21.75
19.23
18.98
19.05 23.35
646
03/10/2022 13:44
88.11
21.17
17.88
18.04
17.83
18.09
53.32
24.65
18.20
18.16
17.89
17.67
56.04
24.82
20.03
19.22
20.39
20.02
77.61
26.56
20.26
19.02
19.27 ########
19.71
20.58
23.12
21.34
21.71
19.26
19.01
19.03 23.35
647
03/10/2022 13:44
88.10
21.19
17.86
18.02
17.83
18.08
53.94
24.61
18.20
18.16
17.88
17.69
55.50
24.75
20.04
19.23
20.38
19.99
77.31
26.48
20.27
19.01
19.20 ########
19.66
20.57
23.22
21.26
21.72
19.26
19.06
19.06 23.36
648
03/10/2022 13:44
87.83
21.16
17.87
18.02
17.81
18.07
54.39
24.60
18.21
18.15
17.89
17.70
55.04
24.82
20.04
19.24
20.38
19.98
77.11
26.57
20.23
19.00
19.20 ########
19.63
20.58
23.29
21.25
21.68
19.29
19.10
19.09 23.36
649
03/10/2022 13:44
87.34
21.12
17.84
18.03
17.82
18.07
54.55
24.60
18.20
18.17
17.91
17.70
55.41
24.84
20.01
19.26
20.40
19.95
76.90
26.58
20.25
19.05
19.17 ########
19.58
20.58
23.36
21.20
21.70
19.34
19.14
19.12 23.36
650
03/10/2022 13:44
87.27
21.10
17.85
18.05
17.84
18.06
55.01
24.56
18.20
18.16
17.89
17.70
55.59
24.85
20.00
19.27
20.38
19.94
76.76
26.61
20.24
19.04
19.17 ########
19.58
20.57
23.42
21.19
21.70
19.39
19.22
19.12 23.37
651
03/10/2022 13:44
87.19
21.04
17.87
18.03
17.82
18.06
55.53
24.53
18.21
18.18
17.89
17.71
55.65
24.83
20.02
19.26
20.42
19.91
76.65
26.64
20.26
19.06
19.15 ########
19.55
20.48
23.47
21.20
21.70
19.38
19.23
19.16 23.36
652
03/10/2022 13:44
87.13
21.05
17.84
18.02
17.81
18.06
56.00
24.48
18.22
18.18
17.90
17.71
55.52
24.85
20.01
19.29
20.41
19.94
76.48
26.70
20.24
19.06
19.18 ########
19.58
20.50
23.50
21.22
21.71
19.39
19.27
19.16 23.36
653
03/10/2022 13:44
87.19
21.05
17.84
18.00
17.79
18.03
55.90
24.45
18.20
18.17
17.89
17.72
55.38
24.87
20.04
19.32
20.43
19.97
76.35
26.76
20.22
19.03
19.19 ########
19.59
20.42
23.54
21.25
21.71
19.36
19.34
19.13 23.36
654
03/10/2022 13:44
86.95
21.05
17.83
18.01
17.82
18.04
55.42
24.43
18.22
18.17
17.92
17.73
55.41
24.88
20.00
19.34
20.44
19.95
76.27
26.93
20.24
19.03
19.21 ########
19.63
20.36
23.56
21.31
21.68
19.36
19.41
19.10 23.36
655
03/10/2022 13:44
87.20
21.05
17.84
18.02
17.82
18.05
55.10
24.40
18.22
18.15
17.89
17.74
55.46
24.91
20.02
19.33
20.42
19.97
76.19
27.00
20.27
19.04
19.23 ########
19.63
20.32
23.60
21.37
21.72
19.37
19.44
19.11 23.39
656
03/10/2022 13:44
87.08
21.10
17.83
18.02
17.83
18.04
54.63
24.44
18.21
18.17
17.90
17.71
55.36
24.86
20.02
19.33
20.43
19.94
76.04
27.07
20.25
19.04
19.21 ########
19.61
20.26
23.59
21.41
21.72
19.38
19.47
19.13 23.40
657
03/10/2022 13:44
86.30
21.12
17.83
18.02
17.82
18.04
53.83
24.48
18.21
18.17
17.88
17.72
55.36
24.83
20.04
19.34
20.45
19.98
75.96
27.08
20.32
19.07
19.24 ########
19.66
20.23
23.62
21.45
21.74
19.39
19.49
19.12 23.39
658
03/10/2022 13:44
85.75
21.14
17.82
18.05
17.82
18.04
53.00
24.48
18.21
18.14
17.89
17.72
55.32
24.84
20.00
19.35
20.43
19.99
75.90
27.16
20.27
19.06
19.22 ########
19.66
20.17
23.60
21.48
21.74
19.40
19.50
19.11 23.40
659
03/10/2022 13:44
85.36
21.18
17.83
18.03
17.82
18.04
51.98
24.51
18.21
18.14
17.88
17.71
55.27
24.80
20.06
19.35
20.42
19.99
75.80
27.12
20.24
19.03
19.26 ########
19.70
20.12
23.59
21.50
21.77
19.40
19.53
19.12 23.40
660
03/10/2022 13:44
84.82
21.20
17.84
18.01
17.82
18.04
50.80
24.59
18.22
18.17
17.87
17.72
55.31
24.80
20.09
19.33
20.45
19.97
75.66
27.14
20.26
19.00
19.30 ########
19.75
20.09
23.60
21.50
21.76
19.42
19.56
19.12 23.42
661
03/10/2022 13:44
84.36
21.23
17.82
18.02
17.82
18.05
49.79
24.78
18.20
18.14
17.87
17.73
55.23
24.84
20.09
19.33
20.47
19.97
75.58
27.12
20.28
18.99
19.32 ########
19.80
20.05
23.59
21.50
21.74
19.43
19.61
19.11 23.42
662
03/10/2022 13:44
84.23
21.26
17.84
18.01
17.82
18.05
49.16
24.82
18.22
18.18
17.87
17.73
55.42
24.82
20.05
19.37
20.45
19.93
75.47
27.08
20.30
19.02
19.33 ########
19.84
20.04
23.58
21.55
21.70
19.45
19.66
19.08 23.44
663
03/10/2022 13:44
84.43
21.26
17.84
18.00
17.83
18.05
49.68
24.80
18.21
18.20
17.85
17.71
55.09
24.78
20.08
19.37
20.44
19.90
75.47
27.04
20.24
19.03
19.32 ########
19.81
19.99
23.49
21.54
21.64
19.41
19.62
19.06 23.43
664
03/10/2022 13:44
84.48
21.26
17.85
18.02
17.82
18.07
49.93
24.76
18.22
18.22
17.86
17.72
55.26
24.79
20.10
19.38
20.41
19.87
75.36
26.99
20.27
19.01
19.34 ########
19.83
19.97
23.49
21.52
21.60
19.41
19.58
19.05 23.42
==PAGE:225==
Data from Thermocouples, test 2 
Scan
Time
L1P11
L1P12
L1P13
L1P14
L1P15
L1P16
L1P2
L1P22
L1P23
L1P24
L1P25
L1P26
L2P11
L2P12
L2P13
L2P14
L2P15
L2P16
L2P21
L2P22
L2P23
L2P24
L2P25
L2P26
XX
1
04/10/2022 10:04
16.48
17.05
16.33
16.33
16.42
16.38
16.52
16.49
16.29
16.19
16.28
16.25
16.83
16.15
16.57
16.52
16.40
16.27
16.64
16.23
16.53
16.51
16.73 #######
25.75
2
04/10/2022 10:04
16.51
17.05
16.33
16.31
16.41
16.38
16.53
16.49
16.28
16.20
16.29
16.26
16.83
16.14
16.59
16.51
16.39
16.27
16.66
16.23
16.53
16.51
16.73 #######
25.75
3
04/10/2022 10:04
16.51
17.05
16.32
16.31
16.42
16.37
16.53
16.50
16.28
16.19
16.29
16.27
16.83
16.14
16.59
16.52
16.39
16.27
16.68
16.24
16.55
16.50
16.73 #######
25.75
4
04/10/2022 10:04
16.51
17.05
16.32
16.31
16.43
16.39
16.54
16.47
16.27
16.19
16.27
16.24
16.84
16.17
16.58
16.51
16.40
16.25
16.65
16.24
16.55
16.50
16.74 #######
25.76
5
04/10/2022 10:04
16.51
17.06
16.33
16.32
16.41
16.38
16.53
16.48
16.28
16.21
16.29
16.25
16.82
16.18
16.58
16.52
16.40
16.26
16.68
16.23
16.56
16.50
16.72 #######
25.75
6
04/10/2022 10:04
16.51
17.06
16.32
16.30
16.42
16.38
16.55
16.49
16.27
16.21
16.27
16.25
16.82
16.19
16.59
16.53
16.39
16.26
16.66
16.25
16.56
16.50
16.72 #######
25.74
7
04/10/2022 10:04
16.53
17.04
16.33
16.34
16.42
16.38
16.56
16.49
16.27
16.19
16.30
16.28
16.85
16.19
16.56
16.50
16.39
16.25
16.67
16.24
16.54
16.49
16.74 #######
25.75
8
04/10/2022 10:04
16.54
17.05
16.32
16.31
16.41
16.37
16.56
16.49
16.26
16.22
16.29
16.24
16.82
16.19
16.59
16.50
16.40
16.25
16.67
16.24
16.54
16.50
16.73 #######
25.77
9
04/10/2022 10:04
16.55
17.04
16.32
16.31
16.42
16.38
16.56
16.50
16.27
16.22
16.27
16.24
16.83
16.21
16.59
16.50
16.39
16.27
16.67
16.22
16.54
16.48
16.73 #######
25.77
10
04/10/2022 10:04
16.53
17.05
16.32
16.33
16.42
16.35
16.55
16.51
16.26
16.21
16.28
16.24
16.83
16.21
16.57
16.52
16.39
16.26
16.68
16.24
16.54
16.49
16.72 #######
25.76
11
04/10/2022 10:04
16.55
17.06
16.33
16.32
16.41
16.37
16.58
16.49
16.27
16.19
16.29
16.26
16.83
16.20
16.58
16.50
16.39
16.25
16.68
16.22
16.54
16.52
16.74 #######
25.75
12
04/10/2022 10:04
16.55
17.06
16.32
16.32
16.43
16.37
16.56
16.50
16.25
16.20
16.27
16.25
16.84
16.21
16.58
16.51
16.40
16.28
16.66
16.23
16.53
16.50
16.74 #######
25.76
13
04/10/2022 10:04
16.56
17.08
16.33
16.30
16.43
16.37
16.56
16.52
16.27
16.21
16.28
16.25
16.80
16.24
16.58
16.50
16.41
16.24
16.66
16.23
16.54
16.50
16.74 #######
25.74
14
04/10/2022 10:04
16.56
17.07
16.32
16.32
16.40
16.36
16.57
16.51
16.26
16.23
16.28
16.23
16.82
16.21
16.59
16.50
16.39
16.26
16.68
16.23
16.53
16.48
16.73 #######
25.76
15
04/10/2022 10:04
16.57
17.06
16.32
16.32
16.42
16.36
16.57
16.51
16.25
16.20
16.27
16.25
16.82
16.23
16.57
16.52
16.40
16.25
16.66
16.24
16.54
16.48
16.73 #######
25.78
16
04/10/2022 10:04
16.58
17.06
16.33
16.34
16.42
16.35
16.58
16.52
16.26
16.21
16.29
16.25
16.82
16.24
16.59
16.50
16.39
16.26
16.67
16.24
16.53
16.48
16.72 #######
25.76
17
04/10/2022 10:04
16.59
17.06
16.31
16.32
16.41
16.36
16.57
16.52
16.27
16.21
16.28
16.24
16.82
16.23
16.58
16.50
16.40
16.25
16.66
16.25
16.54
16.50
16.74 #######
25.75
18
04/10/2022 10:04
16.58
17.07
16.32
16.34
16.41
16.36
16.57
16.54
16.26
16.23
16.27
16.24
16.82
16.24
16.59
16.51
16.42
16.25
16.66
16.25
16.54
16.50
16.73 #######
25.76
19
04/10/2022 10:04
16.58
17.07
16.30
16.33
16.42
16.34
16.58
16.52
16.26
16.23
16.27
16.25
16.82
16.25
16.57
16.50
16.38
16.28
16.65
16.24
16.53
16.49
16.75 #######
25.75
20
04/10/2022 10:04
16.58
17.06
16.32
16.32
16.41
16.35
16.58
16.53
16.26
16.24
16.27
16.24
16.82
16.24
16.59
16.50
16.40
16.25
16.66
16.25
16.54
16.50
16.73 #######
25.77
21
04/10/2022 10:04
16.59
17.08
16.32
16.31
16.41
16.35
16.55
16.54
16.26
16.22
16.25
16.25
16.81
16.24
16.57
16.49
16.39
16.25
16.66
16.24
16.55
16.50
16.75 #######
25.76
22
04/10/2022 10:04
16.58
17.06
16.33
16.34
16.42
16.33
16.56
16.53
16.26
16.22
16.28
16.26
16.82
16.24
16.57
16.50
16.39
16.27
16.65
16.26
16.53
16.49
16.75 #######
25.76
23
04/10/2022 10:04
16.57
17.06
16.32
16.33
16.41
16.34
16.58
16.53
16.26
16.22
16.26
16.23
16.81
16.25
16.59
16.51
16.39
16.27
16.66
16.25
16.53
16.49
16.74 #######
25.75
24
04/10/2022 10:04
16.58
17.06
16.33
16.34
16.41
16.33
16.57
16.54
16.26
16.23
16.27
16.24
16.79
16.24
16.59
16.51
16.40
16.26
16.66
16.26
16.53
16.50
16.75 #######
25.74
25
04/10/2022 10:04
16.59
17.08
16.33
16.33
16.42
16.34
16.58
16.54
16.28
16.20
16.28
16.24
16.83
16.26
16.60
16.50
16.39
16.27
16.63
16.26
16.53
16.50
16.75 #######
25.76
26
04/10/2022 10:04
16.58
17.07
16.33
16.33
16.41
16.35
16.57
16.54
16.27
16.22
16.27
16.22
16.81
16.25
16.58
16.50
16.38
16.26
16.65
16.25
16.53
16.49
16.75 #######
25.76
27
04/10/2022 10:04
16.59
17.07
16.32
16.34
16.40
16.35
16.60
16.54
16.25
16.22
16.27
16.24
16.83
16.22
16.57
16.50
16.40
16.26
16.66
16.25
16.53
16.51
16.74 #######
25.74
28
04/10/2022 10:04
16.58
17.06
16.31
16.32
16.42
16.35
16.60
16.54
16.27
16.22
16.27
16.23
16.82
16.23
16.59
16.49
16.37
16.24
16.65
16.24
16.53
16.49
16.75 #######
25.76
29
04/10/2022 10:04
16.58
17.06
16.32
16.33
16.40
16.34
16.60
16.54
16.25
16.21
16.28
16.26
16.81
16.25
16.59
16.50
16.39
16.26
16.66
16.24
16.53
16.49
16.76 #######
25.75
30
04/10/2022 10:04
16.57
17.05
16.31
16.31
16.42
16.33
16.59
16.53
16.27
16.21
16.25
16.23
16.82
16.25
16.58
16.51
16.40
16.26
16.66
16.27
16.55
16.48
16.75 #######
25.76
31
04/10/2022 10:05
16.59
17.06
16.32
16.32
16.42
16.34
16.60
16.52
16.24
16.22
16.28
16.23
16.83
16.26
16.57
16.49
16.39
16.25
16.66
16.26
16.53
16.48
16.77 #######
25.76
32
04/10/2022 10:05
16.57
17.05
16.34
16.32
16.41
16.32
16.59
16.53
16.27
16.22
16.26
16.23
16.83
16.24
16.58
16.52
16.40
16.27
16.66
16.25
16.53
16.48
16.78 #######
25.75
33
04/10/2022 10:05
16.60
17.06
16.32
16.32
16.41
16.34
16.58
16.52
16.26
16.23
16.27
16.24
16.82
16.24
16.58
16.51
16.38
16.26
16.66
16.27
16.51
16.48
16.74 #######
25.76
34
04/10/2022 10:05
16.58
17.07
16.32
16.30
16.42
16.31
16.58
16.53
16.26
16.22
16.27
16.25
16.83
16.23
16.61
16.51
16.40
16.25
16.65
16.26
16.54
16.48
16.74 #######
25.75
35
04/10/2022 10:05
16.61
17.07
16.31
16.29
16.42
16.33
16.59
16.52
16.25
16.21
16.27
16.24
16.83
16.22
16.59
16.52
16.40
16.26
16.67
16.26
16.55
16.48
16.75 #######
25.75
36
04/10/2022 10:05
16.60
17.06
16.32
16.32
16.40
16.32
16.59
16.50
16.24
16.20
16.26
16.23
16.81
16.23
16.60
16.51
16.40
16.25
16.67
16.28
16.55
16.47
16.75 #######
25.77
37
04/10/2022 10:05
16.58
17.04
16.31
16.31
16.42
16.35
16.59
16.52
16.25
16.21
16.27
16.24
16.83
16.24
16.60
16.50
16.40
16.27
16.65
16.26
16.54
16.48
16.77 #######
25.76
38
04/10/2022 10:05
16.60
17.07
16.31
16.29
16.41
16.34
16.61
16.52
16.26
16.19
16.27
16.24
16.83
16.23
16.60
16.51
16.40
16.24
16.66
16.27
16.54
16.47
16.74 #######
25.76
39
04/10/2022 10:05
16.59
17.07
16.34
16.28
16.42
16.34
16.60
16.51
16.26
16.21
16.26
16.25
16.83
16.25
16.60
16.51
16.41
16.24
16.66
16.26
16.53
16.47
16.75 #######
25.75
40
04/10/2022 10:05
16.59
17.07
16.31
16.31
16.41
16.32
16.61
16.53
16.25
16.21
16.27
16.23
16.83
16.23
16.60
16.52
16.38
16.25
16.66
16.25
16.52
16.46
16.76 #######
25.74
41
04/10/2022 10:05
16.61
17.08
16.31
16.31
16.42
16.34
16.63
16.51
16.26
16.18
16.28
16.24
16.85
16.24
16.64
16.53
16.40
16.26
16.66
16.26
16.54
16.46
16.75 #######
25.74
42
04/10/2022 10:05
16.58
17.06
16.31
16.33
16.42
16.32
16.62
16.53
16.26
16.18
16.27
16.22
16.83
16.24
16.63
16.51
16.39
16.25
16.65
16.26
16.54
16.48
16.78 #######
25.76
43
04/10/2022 10:05
16.58
17.10
16.30
16.31
16.41
16.32
16.63
16.53
16.27
16.18
16.28
16.23
16.83
16.24
16.62
16.50
16.40
16.24
16.66
16.27
16.53
16.45
16.75 #######
25.77
44
04/10/2022 10:05
16.60
17.09
16.32
16.33
16.40
16.32
16.64
16.53
16.26
16.18
16.27
16.24
16.83
16.24
16.62
16.51
16.41
16.24
16.66
16.26
16.54
16.48
16.77 #######
25.76
45
04/10/2022 10:05
16.57
17.10
16.32
16.33
16.41
16.34
16.64
16.54
16.26
16.20
16.29
16.21
16.84
16.24
16.63
16.51
16.40
16.25
16.66
16.27
16.53
16.47
16.77 #######
25.76
46
04/10/2022 10:05
16.60
17.09
16.31
16.32
16.41
16.34
16.64
16.55
16.25
16.19
16.29
16.24
16.85
16.23
16.64
16.51
16.41
16.25
16.67
16.25
16.53
16.48
16.76 #######
25.77
47
04/10/2022 10:05
16.61
17.11
16.32
16.34
16.42
16.33
16.65
16.55
16.24
16.20
16.29
16.25
16.84
16.25
16.64
16.49
16.40
16.25
16.67
16.27
16.54
16.45
16.78 #######
25.77
48
04/10/2022 10:05
16.61
17.09
16.32
16.34
16.42
16.33
16.64
16.54
16.26
16.21
16.26
16.24
16.84
16.24
16.63
16.53
16.39
16.26
16.67
16.27
16.54
16.46
16.77 #######
25.75
49
04/10/2022 10:05
16.59
17.10
16.33
16.35
16.42
16.34
16.66
16.55
16.24
16.24
16.27
16.25
16.83
16.24
16.64
16.51
16.40
16.27
16.67
16.26
16.55
16.49
16.77 #######
25.76
50
04/10/2022 10:05
16.60
17.09
16.32
16.33
16.42
16.34
16.67
16.55
16.25
16.22
16.27
16.26
16.85
16.23
16.62
16.51
16.40
16.26
16.68
16.27
16.55
16.46
16.76 #######
25.76
51
04/10/2022 10:05
16.59
17.11
16.32
16.34
16.41
16.34
16.65
16.55
16.25
16.22
16.27
16.24
16.84
16.25
16.64
16.51
16.38
16.27
16.66
16.28
16.54
16.46
16.78 #######
25.74
52
04/10/2022 10:05
16.58
17.09
16.32
16.34
16.42
16.33
16.67
16.55
16.25
16.23
16.29
16.22
16.84
16.24
16.64
16.52
16.40
16.26
16.66
16.27
16.53
16.48
16.77 #######
25.75
53
04/10/2022 10:05
16.61
17.11
16.31
16.35
16.42
16.33
16.66
16.57
16.25
16.24
16.27
16.24
16.86
16.26
16.65
16.53
16.41
16.27
16.66
16.27
16.53
16.48
16.77 #######
25.75
54
04/10/2022 10:05
16.59
17.11
16.30
16.37
16.41
16.34
16.67
16.57
16.23
16.22
16.27
16.23
16.84
16.25
16.65
16.51
16.40
16.25
16.66
16.27
16.54
16.47
16.78 #######
25.73
55
04/10/2022 10:05
16.61
17.11
16.31
16.35
16.42
16.33
16.65
16.57
16.25
16.23
16.27
16.23
16.86
16.26
16.65
16.52
16.40
16.26
16.66
16.26
16.54
16.46
16.77 #######
25.75
==PAGE:226==
56
04/10/2022 10:05
16.61
17.11
16.31
16.35
16.43
16.33
16.66
16.57
16.25
16.25
16.28
16.23
16.85
16.24
16.67
16.50
16.40
16.26
16.67
16.27
16.54
16.45
16.78 #######
25.76
57
04/10/2022 10:05
16.60
17.09
16.31
16.36
16.43
16.35
16.64
16.57
16.24
16.22
16.27
16.23
16.86
16.25
16.65
16.53
16.40
16.25
16.68
16.28
16.55
16.47
16.79 #######
25.76
58
04/10/2022 10:05
16.61
17.13
16.30
16.36
16.41
16.34
16.66
16.58
16.25
16.22
16.29
16.23
16.86
16.25
16.65
16.53
16.41
16.25
16.67
16.27
16.52
16.47
16.78 #######
25.76
59
04/10/2022 10:05
16.62
17.12
16.31
16.36
16.42
16.34
16.67
16.59
16.25
16.23
16.27
16.24
16.86
16.25
16.65
16.51
16.41
16.27
16.66
16.28
16.54
16.47
16.78 #######
25.75
60
04/10/2022 10:05
16.61
17.13
16.33
16.37
16.41
16.35
16.66
16.57
16.27
16.25
16.28
16.23
16.85
16.27
16.65
16.53
16.41
16.27
16.68
16.29
16.54
16.47
16.79 #######
25.76
61
04/10/2022 10:05
16.62
17.13
16.30
16.36
16.40
16.34
16.66
16.57
16.25
16.24
16.27
16.25
16.84
16.27
16.66
16.52
16.41
16.26
16.66
16.28
16.56
16.49
16.79 #######
25.76
62
04/10/2022 10:05
16.61
17.12
16.30
16.36
16.41
16.34
16.66
16.58
16.25
16.27
16.29
16.22
16.86
16.27
16.66
16.51
16.41
16.25
16.67
16.28
16.53
16.48
16.79 #######
25.76
63
04/10/2022 10:05
16.61
17.13
16.33
16.35
16.42
16.32
16.65
16.57
16.24
16.26
16.29
16.23
16.84
16.27
16.63
16.53
16.40
16.25
16.67
16.28
16.55
16.48
16.79 #######
25.76
64
04/10/2022 10:05
16.61
17.13
16.31
16.37
16.41
16.34
16.67
16.59
16.23
16.24
16.26
16.25
16.85
16.25
16.66
16.51
16.39
16.24
16.66
16.30
16.55
16.50
16.77 #######
25.75
65
04/10/2022 10:05
16.61
17.12
16.31
16.38
16.41
16.35
16.67
16.58
16.26
16.26
16.27
16.24
16.85
16.26
16.64
16.53
16.40
16.25
16.66
16.28
16.53
16.50
16.78 #######
25.73
66
04/10/2022 10:05
16.63
17.12
16.31
16.38
16.39
16.32
16.66
16.58
16.25
16.26
16.27
16.23
16.85
16.25
16.64
16.51
16.40
16.26
16.66
16.29
16.54
16.49
16.78 #######
25.74
67
04/10/2022 10:05
16.60
17.12
16.29
16.37
16.42
16.33
16.69
16.60
16.24
16.25
16.28
16.23
16.86
16.25
16.63
16.52
16.41
16.25
16.68
16.29
16.54
16.50
16.78 #######
25.77
68
04/10/2022 10:05
16.61
17.11
16.32
16.37
16.41
16.34
16.67
16.60
16.27
16.25
16.27
16.24
16.85
16.25
16.64
16.52
16.40
16.24
16.66
16.30
16.54
16.49
16.79 #######
25.75
69
04/10/2022 10:05
16.59
17.10
16.31
16.36
16.41
16.35
16.65
16.61
16.25
16.26
16.27
16.25
16.83
16.24
16.63
16.52
16.40
16.26
16.66
16.31
16.54
16.48
16.79 #######
25.76
70
04/10/2022 10:05
16.60
17.10
16.30
16.36
16.40
16.34
16.65
16.62
16.25
16.26
16.28
16.23
16.85
16.25
16.65
16.52
16.40
16.24
16.66
16.31
16.54
16.48
16.79 #######
25.75
71
04/10/2022 10:05
16.58
17.13
16.30
16.36
16.40
16.33
16.66
16.62
16.26
16.27
16.26
16.23
16.85
16.23
16.64
16.52
16.41
16.27
16.67
16.30
16.55
16.49
16.78 #######
25.76
72
04/10/2022 10:05
16.58
17.10
16.31
16.39
16.41
16.33
16.64
16.62
16.25
16.26
16.28
16.25
16.85
16.25
16.65
16.52
16.41
16.25
16.66
16.31
16.54
16.49
16.80 #######
25.77
73
04/10/2022 10:05
16.58
17.10
16.30
16.37
16.40
16.33
16.63
16.61
16.25
16.24
16.26
16.24
16.84
16.24
16.63
16.52
16.39
16.26
16.66
16.31
16.55
16.48
16.78 #######
25.75
74
04/10/2022 10:05
16.58
17.09
16.30
16.36
16.39
16.34
16.63
16.63
16.23
16.24
16.27
16.25
16.85
16.25
16.65
16.53
16.39
16.28
16.68
16.31
16.55
16.49
16.78 #######
25.75
75
04/10/2022 10:05
16.57
17.07
16.28
16.34
16.40
16.34
16.64
16.62
16.24
16.27
16.28
16.25
16.83
16.27
16.66
16.53
16.41
16.25
16.68
16.32
16.55
16.49
16.80 #######
25.76
76
04/10/2022 10:05
16.56
17.08
16.31
16.34
16.40
16.33
16.62
16.61
16.26
16.28
16.27
16.25
16.86
16.25
16.65
16.53
16.41
16.26
16.68
16.34
16.55
16.48
16.80 #######
25.75
77
04/10/2022 10:05
16.54
17.08
16.29
16.34
16.40
16.33
16.62
16.60
16.26
16.28
16.26
16.25
16.87
16.25
16.64
16.53
16.42
16.28
16.66
16.32
16.54
16.49
16.78 #######
25.75
78
04/10/2022 10:05
16.55
17.09
16.28
16.35
16.40
16.34
16.62
16.62
16.26
16.28
16.27
16.24
16.85
16.25
16.64
16.54
16.40
16.25
16.68
16.33
16.53
16.48
16.80 #######
25.76
79
04/10/2022 10:05
16.55
17.08
16.30
16.34
16.39
16.35
16.61
16.63
16.27
16.26
16.29
16.25
16.85
16.23
16.65
16.53
16.41
16.27
16.67
16.31
16.54
16.49
16.81 #######
25.75
80
04/10/2022 10:05
16.54
17.09
16.30
16.37
16.39
16.35
16.61
16.62
16.26
16.23
16.27
16.25
16.86
16.24
16.65
16.53
16.40
16.25
16.67
16.34
16.54
16.49
16.81 #######
25.75
81
04/10/2022 10:05
16.56
17.07
16.30
16.34
16.41
16.35
16.60
16.63
16.26
16.24
16.27
16.26
16.85
16.24
16.64
16.52
16.39
16.26
16.66
16.32
16.55
16.51
16.80 #######
25.75
82
04/10/2022 10:05
16.56
17.07
16.29
16.35
16.41
16.35
16.59
16.61
16.26
16.25
16.25
16.26
16.84
16.23
16.64
16.53
16.40
16.26
16.66
16.34
16.56
16.48
16.81 #######
25.76
83
04/10/2022 10:06
16.56
17.07
16.28
16.35
16.40
16.38
16.57
16.60
16.25
16.24
16.25
16.26
16.85
16.23
16.63
16.52
16.39
16.25
16.65
16.33
16.54
16.49
16.80 #######
25.76
84
04/10/2022 10:06
16.58
17.07
16.29
16.36
16.40
16.37
16.55
16.60
16.26
16.23
16.25
16.25
16.83
16.23
16.63
16.52
16.42
16.24
16.68
16.32
16.55
16.50
16.80 #######
25.75
85
04/10/2022 10:06
16.60
17.09
16.31
16.35
16.41
16.38
16.56
16.59
16.25
16.22
16.25
16.24
16.84
16.25
16.62
16.51
16.40
16.25
16.64
16.33
16.54
16.49
16.79 #######
25.75
86
04/10/2022 10:06
16.58
17.09
16.30
16.35
16.39
16.37
16.56
16.59
16.25
16.23
16.25
16.23
16.84
16.24
16.61
16.50
16.39
16.24
16.65
16.31
16.55
16.50
16.82 #######
25.75
87
04/10/2022 10:06
16.58
17.10
16.30
16.38
16.41
16.37
16.58
16.59
16.25
16.22
16.24
16.26
16.85
16.24
16.61
16.51
16.40
16.24
16.65
16.31
16.55
16.49
16.78 #######
25.76
88
04/10/2022 10:06
16.58
17.09
16.32
16.35
16.41
16.38
16.56
16.59
16.25
16.23
16.24
16.25
16.82
16.23
16.60
16.50
16.40
16.24
16.67
16.32
16.55
16.50
16.81 #######
25.75
89
04/10/2022 10:06
16.58
17.10
16.32
16.36
16.41
16.41
16.55
16.58
16.25
16.26
16.25
16.25
16.82
16.22
16.62
16.52
16.39
16.24
16.66
16.28
16.55
16.49
16.81 #######
25.76
90
04/10/2022 10:06
16.56
17.09
16.31
16.36
16.39
16.41
16.55
16.59
16.26
16.24
16.23
16.25
16.85
16.22
16.62
16.49
16.40
16.27
16.65
16.30
16.55
16.50
16.80 #######
25.75
91
04/10/2022 10:06
16.60
17.10
16.30
16.36
16.42
16.40
16.55
16.59
16.25
16.24
16.23
16.27
16.82
16.22
16.62
16.50
16.40
16.25
16.64
16.30
16.54
16.50
16.80 #######
25.74
92
04/10/2022 10:06
16.58
17.09
16.32
16.37
16.40
16.42
16.55
16.61
16.26
16.25
16.24
16.28
16.85
16.24
16.63
16.52
16.41
16.27
16.65
16.30
16.55
16.49
16.79 #######
25.74
93
04/10/2022 10:06
16.61
17.11
16.33
16.37
16.40
16.41
16.55
16.60
16.26
16.27
16.25
16.27
16.82
16.24
16.63
16.52
16.43
16.26
16.68
16.31
16.55
16.50
16.82 #######
25.75
94
04/10/2022 10:06
16.59
17.10
16.30
16.38
16.41
16.41
16.59
16.59
16.27
16.26
16.26
16.26
16.85
16.26
16.63
16.52
16.40
16.26
16.68
16.32
16.57
16.50
16.80 #######
25.77
95
04/10/2022 10:06
16.60
17.11
16.32
16.39
16.41
16.43
16.60
16.59
16.26
16.24
16.25
16.28
16.86
16.24
16.65
16.52
16.40
16.25
16.67
16.31
16.55
16.49
16.80 #######
25.76
96
04/10/2022 10:06
16.61
17.11
16.32
16.37
16.41
16.41
16.60
16.60
16.26
16.26
16.26
16.27
16.85
16.24
16.63
16.52
16.42
16.27
16.66
16.31
16.55
16.53
16.81 #######
25.75
97
04/10/2022 10:06
16.60
17.11
16.31
16.38
16.41
16.46
16.61
16.57
16.26
16.24
16.27
16.27
16.85
16.26
16.64
16.52
16.41
16.28
16.66
16.31
16.54
16.50
16.81 #######
25.76
98
04/10/2022 10:06
16.63
17.12
16.31
16.40
16.40
16.45
16.62
16.59
16.26
16.25
16.26
16.27
16.85
16.25
16.64
16.52
16.40
16.27
16.65
16.29
16.54
16.49
16.81 #######
25.76
99
04/10/2022 10:06
16.63
17.12
16.32
16.39
16.42
16.42
16.60
16.57
16.26
16.26
16.28
16.28
16.87
16.25
16.66
16.52
16.41
16.27
16.65
16.27
16.55
16.50
16.82 #######
25.76
100
04/10/2022 10:06
16.64
17.10
16.31
16.38
16.41
16.44
16.63
16.56
16.24
16.27
16.26
16.28
16.85
16.28
16.64
16.51
16.40
16.26
16.67
16.31
16.54
16.51
16.82 #######
25.77
101
04/10/2022 10:06
16.63
17.10
16.30
16.38
16.40
16.45
16.63
16.58
16.26
16.28
16.28
16.26
16.86
16.29
16.67
16.51
16.40
16.26
16.65
16.28
16.55
16.51
16.82 #######
25.74
102
04/10/2022 10:06
16.63
17.11
16.28
16.40
16.38
16.45
16.62
16.56
16.25
16.29
16.26
16.27
16.86
16.29
16.66
16.52
16.42
16.26
16.68
16.29
16.54
16.50
16.81 #######
25.75
103
04/10/2022 10:06
16.63
17.08
16.29
16.38
16.39
16.45
16.62
16.58
16.25
16.31
16.27
16.27
16.87
16.29
16.66
16.51
16.42
16.28
16.67
16.29
16.57
16.51
16.83 #######
25.76
104
04/10/2022 10:06
16.62
17.11
16.29
16.39
16.40
16.45
16.65
16.59
16.26
16.32
16.27
16.30
17.25
16.31
16.70
16.53
16.45
16.31
16.69
16.30
16.54
16.50
16.82 #######
25.84 Fire
105
04/10/2022 10:06
17.88
17.35
16.27
16.37
16.40
16.45
16.66
16.57
16.26
16.33
16.28
16.29
20.84
16.92
16.73
16.53
16.45
16.31
17.01
16.29
16.54
16.51
16.82 #######
25.94 source 
106
04/10/2022 10:06
22.54
18.25
16.27
16.37
16.40
16.46
18.98
17.16
16.28
16.32
16.28
16.30
24.38
17.27
16.78
16.54
16.46
16.33
17.78
16.84
16.53
16.53
16.85 #######
26.08 ignited 
107
04/10/2022 10:06
29.50
18.38
16.28
16.38
16.39
16.44
22.30
19.09
16.62
17.17
16.30
16.30
27.34
17.25
16.81
16.53
16.45
16.34
18.52
17.97
16.54
16.74
16.86 #######
26.25
108
04/10/2022 10:06
32.20
18.46
16.26
16.38
16.40
16.44
23.18
19.92
16.69
17.68
16.37
16.30
27.93
17.21
16.85
16.56
16.47
16.35
18.58
18.81
16.53
16.81
16.86 #######
26.39
109
04/10/2022 10:06
35.14
19.13
16.26
16.39
16.38
16.45
24.45
21.44
16.72
17.63
16.39
16.29
29.54
17.19
16.88
16.54
16.48
16.35
18.85
20.25
16.55
16.81
16.88 #######
26.57
110
04/10/2022 10:06
37.96
20.59
16.26
16.39
16.39
16.47
25.51
23.34
16.70
17.51
16.36
16.29
29.87
17.17
16.89
16.54
16.49
16.36
19.01
21.23
16.56
16.80
16.91 #######
26.53
111
04/10/2022 10:06
39.17
23.05
16.28
16.39
16.38
16.45
26.10
24.14
16.68
17.34
16.35
16.30
28.29
18.16
17.79
16.55
16.54
16.38
18.77
21.61
16.62
16.81
16.95 #######
26.48
112
04/10/2022 10:06
37.52
22.55
16.36
16.50
16.39
16.45
25.19
23.57
16.70
17.44
16.34
16.30
26.91
20.94
17.61
16.57
16.84
17.16
18.62
21.48
16.62
16.88
17.05 #######
26.51
==PAGE:227==
113
04/10/2022 10:06
36.23
22.01
16.62
17.36
16.53
16.65
24.47
24.16
16.89
19.35
16.61
16.35
25.91
22.22
17.74
16.64
16.95
17.12
18.47
21.80
16.65
17.93
17.12 #######
26.44
114
04/10/2022 10:06
34.77
21.55
17.23
19.67
16.97
17.26
23.82
23.51
16.99
23.60
17.56
16.42
25.13
21.71
17.68
16.68
17.11
17.63
18.36
21.55
16.68
18.31
17.15 #######
26.40
115
04/10/2022 10:06
33.41
21.02
17.52
21.76
17.20
17.57
23.11
22.96
16.97
25.71
18.54
16.75
24.40
21.22
17.55
16.67
17.07
17.46
18.27
21.18
16.72
18.56
17.11 #######
26.34
116
04/10/2022 10:06
31.63
20.58
17.54
22.82
17.99
18.43
22.44
22.35
16.95
24.72
18.80
17.35
23.67
20.65
17.46
16.69
17.06
17.49
18.20
20.93
16.74
18.54
17.08 #######
26.28
117
04/10/2022 10:06
29.83
20.15
17.44
22.33
18.13
18.75
21.77
21.80
16.96
23.06
18.57
17.34
22.98
20.13
17.41
16.70
17.06
17.48
18.14
20.62
16.76
18.45
17.07 #######
26.21
118
04/10/2022 10:06
28.06
19.70
17.34
21.87
18.10
18.81
21.16
21.29
16.95
21.59
18.37
17.30
22.38
19.74
17.36
16.73
17.16
17.67
18.10
20.31
16.75
18.37
17.12 #######
26.16
119
04/10/2022 10:06
26.44
19.38
17.30
21.58
18.29
19.19
20.55
20.80
16.95
20.43
18.22
17.30
21.83
19.36
17.31
16.74
17.35
17.89
18.10
20.01
16.78
18.27
17.17 #######
26.09
120
04/10/2022 10:06
25.12
19.13
17.29
21.56
18.54
19.59
20.07
20.41
16.95
19.49
18.10
17.37
21.43
19.01
17.27
16.78
17.31
17.73
18.06
19.73
16.77
18.18
17.17 #######
26.05
121
04/10/2022 10:06
24.11
18.94
17.33
22.08
18.94
20.35
19.75
20.08
16.94
18.85
18.03
17.44
21.01
18.75
17.24
16.81
17.35
17.67
17.97
19.44
16.77
18.09
17.15 #######
26.03
122
04/10/2022 10:06
23.17
18.72
17.54
23.22
19.65
21.42
19.41
19.73
16.93
18.42
18.18
17.78
20.76
18.50
17.22
16.83
17.34
17.79
17.97
19.22
16.77
18.05
17.18 #######
25.99
123
04/10/2022 10:06
22.31
18.59
17.50
23.26
19.87
21.83
19.11
19.46
16.91
18.07
18.09
17.78
20.52
18.31
17.22
16.84
17.49
18.10
17.93
19.01
16.80
17.95
17.18 #######
25.96
124
04/10/2022 10:06
21.65
18.49
17.47
22.94
20.00
22.02
18.85
19.26
16.94
17.85
17.98
17.76
20.32
18.15
17.22
16.85
17.49
18.03
17.92
18.85
16.79
17.90
17.19 #######
25.94
125
04/10/2022 10:06
21.00
18.40
17.44
22.66
20.13
22.22
18.64
19.04
16.93
17.63
17.91
17.74
20.15
18.01
17.26
16.90
17.55
18.25
17.92
18.65
16.80
17.83
17.20 #######
25.93
126
04/10/2022 10:06
20.55
18.38
17.46
22.67
20.27
22.43
18.46
18.87
16.90
17.48
17.81
17.73
19.90
17.90
17.23
16.91
17.63
18.48
17.86
18.52
16.77
17.77
17.18 #######
25.92
127
04/10/2022 10:06
20.11
18.30
17.50
22.94
20.51
22.78
18.29
18.73
16.92
17.39
17.78
17.86
19.76
17.76
17.22
16.96
17.63
18.40
17.82
18.39
16.78
17.74
17.19 #######
25.88
128
04/10/2022 10:06
19.72
18.25
17.47
22.73
20.62
22.97
18.13
18.57
16.90
17.32
17.74
17.87
19.64
17.68
17.22
16.96
17.64
18.44
17.86
18.23
16.77
17.66
17.19 #######
25.89
129
04/10/2022 10:06
19.43
18.21
17.49
22.77
20.74
23.29
18.02
18.42
16.89
17.39
17.68
17.85
19.47
17.62
17.23
17.01
17.64
18.35
17.79
18.08
16.80
17.79
17.18 #######
25.88
130
04/10/2022 10:06
19.11
18.19
17.75
24.03
21.46
23.93
17.91
18.32
16.94
18.25
18.13
18.20
19.31
17.55
17.20
17.03
17.66
18.32
17.75
17.93
16.79
17.75
17.21 #######
25.88
131
04/10/2022 10:06
18.88
18.14
17.89
24.82
22.02
24.77
17.80
18.19
16.90
18.16
18.31
18.47
19.21
17.46
17.20
17.06
17.66
18.25
17.70
17.79
16.79
17.71
17.17 #######
25.87
132
04/10/2022 10:06
18.66
18.11
17.87
24.60
22.21
25.04
17.70
18.07
16.89
17.86
18.19
18.44
19.07
17.37
17.20
17.04
17.63
18.16
17.69
17.66
16.76
17.63
17.17 #######
25.86
133
04/10/2022 10:06
18.43
18.06
17.87
24.51
22.30
25.07
17.63
18.00
16.89
17.59
18.21
18.43
18.95
17.32
17.20
17.06
17.65
18.05
17.65
17.59
16.79
17.59
17.16 #######
25.84
134
04/10/2022 10:06
18.29
18.04
17.84
24.43
22.41
25.24
17.56
17.89
16.88
17.46
18.12
18.42
18.79
17.32
17.22
17.07
17.66
18.24
17.61
17.52
16.77
17.57
17.15 #######
25.91
135
04/10/2022 10:07
18.20
18.18
17.99
24.87
22.65
25.40
17.51
17.93
16.93
18.38
18.09
18.44
18.76
20.10
17.78
17.16
18.17
19.00
17.59
17.48
16.76
18.04
17.34 #######
25.97
136
04/10/2022 10:07
18.10
18.14
18.71
27.33
22.86
25.97
17.46
18.14
17.38
26.94
19.37
18.59
18.79
25.88
18.18
17.26
18.70
19.40
17.58
17.47
16.75
20.93
17.73 #######
26.10
137
04/10/2022 10:07
18.08
18.59
18.97
28.08
22.83
26.01
17.44
20.45
18.56
33.25
20.24
18.74
18.93
34.56
19.29
17.36
18.95
19.34
17.61
19.43
16.77
21.40
18.39 #######
26.10
138
04/10/2022 10:07
18.04
24.19
19.07
28.14
22.74
25.80
17.40
21.52
19.27
34.01
20.52
18.90
19.27
34.04
20.22
17.43
18.97
19.17
17.68
20.18
16.80
21.66
18.67 #######
26.31
139
04/10/2022 10:07
20.96
29.69
18.94
27.69
22.60
25.53
19.14
21.70
19.40
32.43
20.54
18.91
19.54
33.48
21.30
17.44
18.91
18.97
17.79
20.81
16.93
21.72
18.86 -131.35
26.47
140
04/10/2022 10:07
28.51
32.96
18.83
27.27
22.43
25.27
21.21
22.75
19.42
30.84
20.54
18.90
19.93
32.82
20.81
17.44
18.84
18.80
17.87
21.55
17.10
21.79
18.94 #######
26.62
141
04/10/2022 10:07
39.70
36.92
18.75
26.84
22.29
25.07
26.14
22.95
19.47
29.33
20.45
18.86
20.57
32.37
20.56
17.43
18.76
18.69
17.91
21.85
17.20
21.73
18.85 #######
26.69
142
04/10/2022 10:07
51.55
38.23
18.66
26.48
22.11
24.87
29.55
23.36
19.43
27.89
20.35
18.80
23.66
31.86
20.28
17.43
18.70
18.59
17.94
21.95
17.33
21.64
18.73
-87.79
26.74
143
04/10/2022 10:07
68.96
38.04
18.56
26.14
21.94
24.65
37.04
23.62
19.41
26.65
20.25
18.76
28.06
31.38
20.11
17.44
18.64
18.50
18.19
21.94
17.42
21.59
18.64 #######
26.86
144
04/10/2022 10:07
85.21
39.94
18.51
25.79
21.80
24.45
42.65
23.31
19.41
25.50
20.18
18.68
30.86
30.97
20.01
17.44
18.60
18.42
18.59
21.96
17.52
21.50
18.56 #######
26.92
145
04/10/2022 10:07
102.85
40.48
18.45
25.47
21.65
24.26
47.91
24.22
19.54
24.53
20.09
18.63
33.86
30.56
19.86
17.44
18.59
18.35
19.05
22.15
17.60
21.38
18.47 #######
26.94
146
04/10/2022 10:07
125.75
40.93
18.37
25.15
21.52
24.08
53.56
24.28
19.69
23.81
20.02
18.63
34.91
30.19
19.80
17.45
18.53
18.32
19.33
22.21
17.67
21.30
18.42 #######
27.05
147
04/10/2022 10:07
132.29
43.53
18.33
24.86
21.41
23.88
56.78
24.41
20.02
23.27
19.89
18.59
35.07
29.82
19.69
17.46
18.51
18.28
19.77
22.27
17.81
21.23
18.38 #######
27.25
148
04/10/2022 10:07
136.92
45.75
18.29
24.61
21.28
23.71
58.05
24.70
20.19
22.75
19.81
18.54
35.90
29.50
19.70
17.47
18.48
18.23
19.85
22.39
17.90
21.14
18.33 #######
27.29
149
04/10/2022 10:07
139.53
45.31
18.23
24.32
21.16
23.58
60.08
25.33
20.19
22.26
19.74
18.52
40.50
29.17
19.59
17.49
18.45
18.22
20.79
23.14
17.97
21.03
18.27 #######
27.41
150
04/10/2022 10:07
154.13
46.41
18.20
24.04
21.07
23.39
66.19
25.32
20.11
21.79
19.68
18.48
45.29
28.86
19.66
17.51
18.45
18.19
21.30
23.15
17.99
20.92
18.28 #######
27.38
151
04/10/2022 10:07
161.75
47.35
18.18
23.79
20.96
23.20
69.47
25.00
20.07
21.42
19.62
18.46
47.89
28.55
19.70
17.52
18.43
18.16
21.72
23.03
18.08
20.83
18.24 #######
27.37
152
04/10/2022 10:07
168.23
48.31
18.12
23.59
20.84
23.03
72.18
24.62
20.03
21.09
19.56
18.40
52.19
28.30
19.85
17.54
18.41
18.15
22.48
22.96
18.10
20.74
18.22 #######
27.31
153
04/10/2022 10:07
170.83
49.28
18.07
23.34
20.74
22.86
73.66
25.01
20.30
20.76
19.48
18.36
52.88
28.06
19.77
17.51
18.38
18.12
23.12
23.20
18.14
20.63
18.19 #######
27.28
154
04/10/2022 10:07
184.41
49.16
18.05
23.13
20.65
22.68
77.24
25.25
20.61
20.78
19.42
18.33
57.34
27.79
19.73
17.53
18.37
18.10
23.55
23.36
18.22
20.77
18.18 #######
27.25
155
04/10/2022 10:07
191.97
50.32
18.01
22.97
20.53
22.55
80.39
25.63
20.91
22.69
19.31
18.30
62.36
27.50
19.68
17.55
18.35
18.10
24.53
23.52
18.30
21.12
18.16 #######
27.32
156
04/10/2022 10:07
201.17
50.84
17.99
22.75
20.46
22.39
84.33
25.69
21.20
22.62
19.26
18.26
67.13
27.23
19.67
17.55
18.34
18.06
24.83
23.57
18.38
21.07
18.14 #######
27.39
157
04/10/2022 10:07
206.97
51.18
17.95
22.55
20.38
22.22
88.39
25.66
21.24
22.19
19.21
18.25
70.57
27.00
19.65
17.56
18.33
18.06
25.56
23.70
18.46
21.00
18.13 #######
27.41
158
04/10/2022 10:07
220.61
50.86
17.90
22.41
20.29
22.09
91.51
25.79
21.27
21.80
19.15
18.22
70.98
26.76
19.63
17.56
18.30
18.06
25.83
23.74
18.53
20.93
18.11 #######
27.44
159
04/10/2022 10:07
228.12
51.49
17.90
22.23
20.21
21.92
94.16
25.52
21.22
21.37
19.11
18.18
73.66
26.49
19.62
17.57
18.30
18.05
26.44
23.60
18.57
20.83
18.09 #######
27.49
160
04/10/2022 10:07
231.36
54.19
17.87
22.05
20.15
21.75
95.72
25.07
21.15
21.00
19.04
18.13
80.31
26.30
19.66
17.57
18.27
18.03
27.39
23.47
18.64
20.75
18.09 #######
27.62
161
04/10/2022 10:07
238.62
52.63
17.82
21.91
20.06
21.62
98.10
24.92
21.34
20.71
19.00
18.10
79.20
26.13
19.66
17.57
18.25
18.00
27.66
23.37
18.68
20.67
18.08 #######
27.79
162
04/10/2022 10:07
231.38
55.03
17.81
21.74
19.99
21.46
96.91
24.81
21.44
20.46
18.93
18.08
76.38
25.91
19.72
17.56
18.22
17.98
27.42
24.08
18.74
20.57
18.06 #######
27.70
163
04/10/2022 10:07
217.83
55.56
17.78
21.55
19.91
21.31
93.24
25.52
21.30
20.17
18.88
18.05
72.51
28.87
21.29
17.59
18.22
17.98
27.34
24.49
18.81
20.46
18.47 #######
27.56
164
04/10/2022 10:07
204.65
53.12
17.78
21.51
19.84
21.19
88.52
26.56
21.24
20.23
18.84
18.03
68.92
30.53
22.53
17.65
18.68
18.39
27.24
25.52
18.87
20.80
18.93 #######
27.45
165
04/10/2022 10:07
193.29
53.07
17.95
22.11
19.87
21.09
84.15
28.22
21.67
22.49
18.87
18.01
66.08
44.26
22.21
17.71
18.83
19.02
27.23
27.30
18.91
21.44
19.24 #######
27.36
166
04/10/2022 10:07
181.42
50.14
18.21
23.99
19.95
21.11
79.61
30.12
22.34
26.31
19.34
18.09
63.81
47.46
24.75
17.82
19.36
19.71
27.26
27.99
19.01
22.64
20.38 #######
27.22
167
04/10/2022 10:07
169.07
47.46
18.50
24.69
20.13
21.08
76.07
30.46
23.05
29.66
19.82
18.20
60.92
45.48
24.56
17.86
19.43
19.81
27.30
27.89
19.13
23.44
20.18 #######
27.09
168
04/10/2022 10:07
156.86
44.63
19.02
27.13
20.30
21.09
72.22
29.78
23.26
33.85
20.44
18.33
58.22
44.87
23.34
17.85
19.25
19.64
27.24
27.60
19.18
24.11
19.72 #######
27.05
169
04/10/2022 10:07
144.23
41.87
19.82
31.45
21.19
21.91
68.24
29.81
23.45
39.53
22.36
19.19
55.78
45.33
22.66
17.89
19.19
19.60
27.20
27.45
19.44
27.17
19.45 #######
26.96
==PAGE:228==
170
04/10/2022 10:07
131.53
39.07
20.64
34.77
22.30
23.04
63.94
29.08
23.71
45.86
24.23
20.11
52.57
42.29
21.81
17.93
19.13
19.41
27.09
27.00
19.45
27.38
19.16 #######
26.86
171
04/10/2022 10:07
119.87
36.70
21.04
36.81
23.04
24.21
60.13
28.45
23.56
43.74
25.12
20.71
49.87
43.20
21.24
17.93
18.99
19.19
27.07
26.96
19.53
28.49
18.92 #######
26.84
172
04/10/2022 10:07
110.15
34.66
21.89
40.15
23.79
24.92
56.32
28.38
23.71
46.51
27.33
21.68
47.80
40.63
20.75
17.95
18.90
19.02
26.93
26.58
19.53
29.02
18.70 #######
26.76
173
04/10/2022 10:07
100.02
32.95
22.03
41.63
24.54
25.95
52.88
27.73
23.61
42.35
27.68
22.29
45.96
39.89
20.43
17.98
18.83
18.95
26.80
26.23
19.67
29.21
18.61 #######
26.73
174
04/10/2022 10:07
91.76
31.41
22.27
43.69
25.13
26.75
49.60
27.14
23.63
41.79
28.35
22.88
43.70
38.00
20.05
18.05
18.73
18.74
26.73
25.82
19.70
29.36
18.42 #######
26.63
175
04/10/2022 10:07
83.47
30.05
22.68
45.66
26.39
27.79
46.64
26.52
23.61
40.52
29.40
23.91
41.50
36.30
19.78
18.09
18.67
18.67
26.58
25.40
19.74
29.52
18.31 #######
26.55
176
04/10/2022 10:07
76.00
28.79
22.70
45.42
26.89
28.52
43.77
25.96
23.40
37.88
29.37
24.14
39.59
34.26
19.53
18.20
18.66
18.64
26.44
24.99
19.67
29.14
18.23 #######
26.49
177
04/10/2022 10:07
69.36
27.68
22.61
45.01
27.26
29.08
41.09
25.40
23.23
34.11
28.94
24.29
38.17
32.59
19.30
18.28
18.69
18.82
26.30
24.62
19.67
28.67
18.21 #######
26.39
178
04/10/2022 10:07
63.10
26.79
22.51
44.27
27.47
29.50
38.69
24.90
23.03
31.07
28.54
24.38
36.62
31.19
19.09
18.38
18.73
18.77
26.09
24.24
19.63
28.18
18.11 #######
26.37
179
04/10/2022 10:07
58.28
26.12
22.69
45.14
27.98
30.36
36.68
24.44
22.84
29.01
28.65
24.90
35.28
30.12
18.95
18.44
18.70
18.60
25.95
23.85
19.60
27.93
18.03 #######
26.34
180
04/10/2022 10:07
54.55
25.40
23.22
46.68
28.46
31.16
34.95
24.11
22.77
28.44
29.49
25.53
34.21
29.85
18.82
18.51
18.78
18.59
25.78
23.54
19.62
28.21
18.05 #######
26.32
181
04/10/2022 10:07
50.78
24.89
23.53
47.81
29.09
31.58
33.26
23.83
22.78
31.23
30.20
26.09
33.23
28.87
18.73
18.58
18.77
18.41
25.66
23.21
19.57
28.37
17.99 #######
26.31
182
04/10/2022 10:07
47.62
24.38
23.88
48.57
29.62
32.08
31.88
23.54
22.74
33.31
31.01
26.46
32.11
29.87
18.64
18.66
18.77
18.36
25.44
23.01
19.54
28.21
17.95 #######
26.35
183
04/10/2022 10:07
45.01
24.01
24.27
49.31
29.91
32.24
30.84
23.33
23.08
40.17
32.18
26.58
31.71
29.66
18.70
18.72
18.86
18.62
25.38
22.75
19.52
30.04
17.88 #######
26.36
184
04/10/2022 10:07
43.35
23.76
24.84
50.77
30.26
32.34
29.94
23.46
23.29
45.46
33.27
26.83
31.49
39.30
20.18
18.77
19.02
18.83
25.38
24.45
19.46
30.53
17.99 #######
26.36
185
04/10/2022 10:07
42.03
23.96
24.90
49.52
30.09
32.02
29.30
25.66
24.18
46.77
33.44
27.03
31.82
43.47
22.04
18.94
19.26
18.91
25.39
24.48
19.47
31.90
19.64 #######
26.51
186
04/10/2022 10:08
44.26
25.49
24.80
48.14
29.68
31.52
30.45
27.72
25.44
46.69
33.00
26.83
32.71
48.40
24.78
19.01
19.37
19.04
25.59
26.54
19.51
32.14
19.55 #######
26.49
187
04/10/2022 10:08
44.58
36.24
24.51
46.39
29.21
31.04
31.66
29.99
25.64
43.88
32.41
26.50
34.14
48.45
24.44
19.05
19.41
18.91
26.01
27.24
19.61
31.82
19.51 #######
26.72
188
04/10/2022 10:08
63.09
38.88
24.23
44.77
28.81
30.59
38.64
31.13
25.63
40.73
31.83
26.13
44.52
47.45
23.97
19.12
19.43
18.80
26.86
27.80
19.69
31.50
19.45 #######
26.78
189
04/10/2022 10:08
72.24
38.99
23.98
43.37
28.41
30.05
44.17
30.93
25.56
37.83
31.24
25.80
44.95
46.31
23.41
19.17
19.44
18.73
26.83
27.82
19.82
31.08
19.35 #######
26.95
190
04/10/2022 10:08
89.16
39.51
23.75
42.14
28.01
29.61
51.09
31.57
25.49
35.44
30.76
25.55
46.33
45.32
23.02
19.22
19.45
18.67
27.22
28.02
19.92
30.73
19.26 #######
27.10
191
04/10/2022 10:08
116.82
40.03
23.54
41.03
27.65
29.14
61.23
31.30
25.40
33.51
30.29
25.34
50.37
44.38
22.76
19.26
19.45
18.64
26.99
27.99
20.04
30.34
19.14 #######
27.19
192
04/10/2022 10:08
144.20
40.13
23.35
39.96
27.31
28.74
69.19
30.94
25.33
31.91
29.79
25.13
52.67
43.52
22.54
19.29
19.46
18.60
28.20
27.91
20.10
29.94
19.09 #######
27.22
193
04/10/2022 10:08
158.46
41.71
23.17
38.94
27.02
28.43
74.17
30.58
25.28
30.54
29.34
24.94
60.78
42.68
22.35
19.36
19.49
18.58
28.78
27.73
20.19
29.58
19.02 #######
27.24
194
04/10/2022 10:08
167.71
41.69
23.00
38.06
26.73
28.07
78.21
30.25
25.21
29.39
28.98
24.65
65.54
41.90
22.23
19.39
19.51
18.55
29.66
27.58
20.27
29.27
19.00 #######
27.19
195
04/10/2022 10:08
173.74
42.55
22.85
37.18
26.44
27.79
80.50
29.97
25.16
28.38
28.60
24.42
73.52
41.18
22.11
19.43
19.52
18.55
30.57
27.49
20.33
28.91
18.95 #######
27.20
196
04/10/2022 10:08
180.43
45.09
22.68
36.34
26.17
27.51
81.78
30.71
25.37
27.41
28.21
24.19
72.77
40.53
22.03
19.50
19.52
18.53
30.57
27.63
20.42
28.53
18.93 #######
27.23
197
04/10/2022 10:08
186.02
47.25
22.52
35.56
25.96
27.19
84.92
30.71
25.69
26.76
27.84
24.00
82.05
39.84
21.97
19.52
19.55
18.53
32.07
27.78
20.55
28.27
18.91 #######
27.22
198
04/10/2022 10:08
195.01
47.14
22.41
34.77
25.70
26.88
88.15
30.99
25.93
26.16
27.50
23.85
85.40
39.25
22.05
19.55
19.54
18.53
32.41
27.93
20.55
27.94
18.89 #######
27.26
199
04/10/2022 10:08
201.04
49.37
22.29
34.06
25.46
26.56
91.22
30.90
26.02
25.56
27.18
23.68
85.36
38.60
22.20
19.57
19.55
18.54
33.00
27.81
20.66
27.63
18.89 #######
27.25
200
04/10/2022 10:08
202.71
51.44
22.16
33.39
25.25
26.28
91.70
31.10
25.93
24.99
26.83
23.46
88.40
38.01
22.09
19.60
19.57
18.52
33.89
28.03
20.76
27.30
18.88 #######
27.28
201
04/10/2022 10:08
207.73
51.77
22.03
32.77
25.05
26.02
93.13
31.62
26.27
24.52
26.51
23.26
93.81
37.47
22.06
19.61
19.57
18.55
34.52
28.19
20.83
27.05
18.86 #######
27.28
202
04/10/2022 10:08
215.61
52.28
21.90
32.15
24.84
25.70
96.65
32.07
26.32
24.15
26.21
23.12
94.33
36.97
21.97
19.62
19.60
18.55
34.65
28.22
20.89
26.80
18.88 #######
27.35
203
04/10/2022 10:08
227.00
51.31
21.79
31.53
24.65
25.39
102.41
32.08
26.15
23.81
25.95
22.98
104.72
36.49
21.96
19.63
19.58
18.56
34.93
28.19
20.92
26.54
18.89 #######
27.46
204
04/10/2022 10:08
235.31
51.97
21.69
30.96
24.44
25.10
107.16
31.61
26.02
23.52
25.71
22.83
112.94
36.01
21.91
19.64
19.58
18.57
36.34
28.08
21.00
26.24
18.91 #######
27.49
205
04/10/2022 10:08
242.78
53.51
21.59
30.44
24.26
24.85
109.58
31.54
26.15
23.21
25.48
22.64
112.71
35.65
21.93
19.65
19.58
18.56
37.10
28.02
21.01
25.98
18.91 #######
27.53
206
04/10/2022 10:08
252.27
53.11
21.50
29.92
24.09
24.61
112.22
31.59
26.24
22.91
25.19
22.48
118.67
35.20
21.89
19.64
19.57
18.57
38.03
28.10
21.04
25.76
18.91 #######
27.54
207
04/10/2022 10:08
256.60
52.65
21.38
29.46
23.92
24.38
113.88
31.57
26.38
22.66
24.97
22.34
120.60
34.81
21.87
19.64
19.57
18.56
38.23
28.09
21.13
25.52
18.90 #######
27.52
208
04/10/2022 10:08
261.92
52.43
21.30
29.06
23.76
24.16
114.35
32.01
26.54
22.43
24.73
22.21
124.85
34.45
21.83
19.63
19.54
18.55
38.76
28.21
21.13
25.32
18.90 #######
27.56
209
04/10/2022 10:08
278.27
52.20
21.21
28.60
23.60
23.92
119.22
31.77
26.42
22.24
24.52
22.09
126.40
34.07
21.81
19.61
19.52
18.55
39.79
28.08
21.16
25.08
18.88 #######
27.55
210
04/10/2022 10:08
290.43
51.90
21.11
28.19
23.42
23.70
123.45
31.78
26.22
22.11
24.28
21.95
129.66
33.69
21.78
19.61
19.52
18.55
40.59
27.90
21.16
24.85
18.91 #######
27.56
211
04/10/2022 10:08
296.97
51.17
21.03
27.81
23.25
23.46
128.79
32.36
26.07
21.96
24.02
21.84
128.64
33.33
21.80
19.58
19.51
18.56
40.77
27.79
21.16
24.64
18.93 #######
27.59
212
04/10/2022 10:08
309.51
52.21
20.96
27.45
23.06
23.24
134.38
31.71
25.89
21.82
23.78
21.68
127.41
33.03
21.76
19.58
19.49
18.56
40.65
27.60
21.17
24.44
18.91 #######
27.67
213
04/10/2022 10:08
328.30
52.06
20.88
27.14
22.89
23.04
142.04
31.54
25.83
21.69
23.61
21.53
133.26
32.71
21.76
19.56
19.48
18.56
41.35
27.49
21.14
24.27
18.91 #######
27.70
214
04/10/2022 10:08
347.00
52.47
20.80
26.83
22.74
22.86
145.50
31.12
25.73
21.52
23.45
21.41
132.01
32.39
21.76
19.55
19.46
18.57
41.97
27.39
21.13
24.09
18.90 #######
27.67
215
04/10/2022 10:08
352.86
54.16
20.73
26.50
22.60
22.66
149.77
32.31
25.64
21.38
23.27
21.33
129.11
32.10
21.70
19.52
19.43
18.55
41.78
28.00
21.11
23.90
18.91 #######
27.65
216
04/10/2022 10:08
360.76
53.65
20.66
26.19
22.44
22.47
153.17
32.00
25.55
21.27
23.12
21.22
126.78
31.90
21.69
19.49
19.43
18.55
42.34
28.82
21.09
23.73
18.87 #######
27.65
217
04/10/2022 10:08
381.50
53.67
20.60
25.95
22.31
22.32
158.53
33.77
25.42
21.18
22.95
21.14
128.20
31.65
21.64
19.49
19.39
18.53
42.48
28.80
21.07
23.57
18.87 #######
27.71
218
04/10/2022 10:08
402.55
54.00
20.50
25.70
22.16
22.17
165.59
33.00
25.33
21.06
22.77
21.07
129.12
31.43
21.61
19.45
19.38
18.53
42.85
28.67
21.05
23.42
18.87 #######
27.71
219
04/10/2022 10:08
423.96
52.29
20.45
25.44
22.03
21.98
170.97
32.38
25.21
20.99
22.62
20.97
129.12
31.16
21.54
19.44
19.35
18.52
43.56
28.43
21.05
23.25
18.86 #######
27.65
220
04/10/2022 10:08
438.60
50.97
20.39
25.19
21.89
21.83
176.46
31.88
25.03
20.87
22.46
20.89
131.56
30.90
21.50
19.42
19.34
18.51
44.49
28.24
21.04
23.08
18.80 #######
27.58
221
04/10/2022 10:08
437.35
50.52
20.33
24.94
21.77
21.69
175.61
31.34
24.95
20.76
22.34
20.79
130.03
30.69
21.46
19.38
19.29
18.48
44.17
28.43
21.03
22.92
18.81 #######
27.52
222
04/10/2022 10:08
436.66
49.12
20.26
24.76
21.66
21.56
179.19
32.36
24.99
20.66
22.21
20.69
127.12
30.47
21.40
19.38
19.28
18.48
44.08
28.68
20.98
22.77
18.81 #######
27.42
223
04/10/2022 10:08
445.61
48.30
20.22
24.55
21.57
21.44
182.11
32.53
25.06
20.59
22.07
20.60
125.30
30.27
21.35
19.36
19.25
18.45
44.35
28.69
20.94
22.66
18.79 #######
27.35
224
04/10/2022 10:08
455.06
47.65
20.16
24.37
21.47
21.29
187.89
32.83
24.89
20.51
21.94
20.51
125.71
30.04
21.31
19.32
19.24
18.44
44.38
28.48
20.90
22.49
18.74 #######
27.33
225
04/10/2022 10:08
461.44
46.90
20.11
24.14
21.33
21.16
186.96
32.12
24.73
20.41
21.78
20.41
124.18
29.92
21.29
19.30
19.23
18.45
44.13
28.23
20.85
22.36
18.73 #######
27.43
226
04/10/2022 10:08
471.89
46.32
20.06
23.95
21.24
21.04
189.33
32.35
24.63
20.33
21.64
20.35
123.22
29.64
21.26
19.28
19.18
18.44
44.84
28.36
20.84
22.23
18.73 #######
27.55
==PAGE:229==
227
04/10/2022 10:08
452.24
46.87
20.00
23.74
21.13
20.88
181.64
33.00
24.48
20.27
21.48
20.26
120.40
29.46
21.23
19.25
19.17
18.44
44.68
29.95
20.79
22.09
18.72 #######
27.58
228
04/10/2022 10:08
462.96
47.63
19.95
23.56
21.04
20.76
186.25
33.55
24.32
20.17
21.37
20.19
121.64
29.27
21.21
19.23
19.13
18.42
45.14
29.57
20.77
21.95
18.72 #######
27.51
229
04/10/2022 10:08
446.76
48.09
19.91
23.37
20.96
20.65
183.89
32.74
24.21
20.11
21.25
20.10
128.70
29.07
21.15
19.19
19.12
18.41
46.94
29.31
20.74
21.82
18.71 #######
27.63
230
04/10/2022 10:08
444.86
46.94
19.86
23.19
20.89
20.56
186.70
32.18
24.09
20.03
21.17
20.04
133.25
28.94
21.16
19.17
19.11
18.41
48.05
29.08
20.70
21.71
18.70 #######
27.73
231
04/10/2022 10:08
441.03
47.39
19.82
23.02
20.82
20.47
187.73
32.57
23.98
19.94
21.09
19.97
135.99
28.79
21.16
19.15
19.07
18.41
48.56
29.27
20.64
21.60
18.71 #######
27.86
232
04/10/2022 10:08
431.81
49.81
19.78
22.87
20.73
20.36
184.19
32.99
23.91
19.91
20.98
19.89
131.17
28.65
21.22
19.12
19.06
18.37
48.11
29.50
20.62
21.49
18.66 #######
28.09
233
04/10/2022 10:08
425.46
51.82
19.75
22.71
20.68
20.26
179.68
33.30
23.78
19.89
20.87
19.84
133.35
28.58
21.22
19.10
19.02
18.37
48.22
29.69
20.57
21.37
18.63 #######
28.22
234
04/10/2022 10:08
445.56
52.18
19.72
22.54
20.55
20.15
182.81
33.54
23.67
19.86
20.74
19.79
135.28
28.54
21.16
19.08
19.01
18.35
48.99
31.17
20.53
21.27
18.61 #######
28.27
235
04/10/2022 10:08
452.63
53.74
19.69
22.37
20.50
20.03
180.20
34.53
23.58
19.77
20.66
19.70
136.71
28.59
21.13
19.05
18.97
18.34
49.38
32.17
20.49
21.16
18.58 #######
28.41
236
04/10/2022 10:08
447.72
54.58
19.65
22.26
20.44
19.97
179.58
35.12
23.47
19.74
20.56
19.67
134.81
28.54
21.05
19.01
18.96
18.34
49.41
33.68
20.45
21.08
18.56 #######
28.49
237
04/10/2022 10:08
449.21
54.09
19.62
22.11
20.35
19.84
180.64
36.51
23.38
19.65
20.44
19.61
136.04
28.48
21.06
19.00
18.94
18.33
49.83
34.65
20.41
20.97
18.55 #######
28.48
238
04/10/2022 10:09
453.91
52.54
19.60
21.98
20.29
19.76
186.31
39.76
23.28
19.59
20.31
19.54
134.27
28.39
21.03
18.97
18.90
18.30
50.65
36.17
20.37
20.87
18.54 #######
28.51
239
04/10/2022 10:09
455.76
50.69
19.54
21.88
20.21
19.63
192.94
41.31
23.17
19.50
20.21
19.45
132.96
28.37
21.02
18.96
18.91
18.31
51.32
37.94
20.31
20.78
18.53 #######
28.59
240
04/10/2022 10:09
453.11
49.11
19.52
21.72
20.14
19.53
196.21
43.64
23.05
19.40
20.11
19.42
132.97
28.39
21.01
18.95
18.88
18.29
51.80
39.38
20.27
20.68
18.53 #######
28.57
241
04/10/2022 10:09
466.52
47.68
19.47
21.57
20.03
19.46
201.49
43.53
22.93
19.28
19.99
19.34
136.11
28.29
21.02
18.92
18.87
18.29
52.70
39.00
20.27
20.60
18.52 #######
28.55
242
04/10/2022 10:09
472.71
46.25
19.44
21.44
19.99
19.36
205.65
44.54
22.84
19.17
19.88
19.25
136.25
28.20
21.01
18.90
18.85
18.29
53.92
40.28
20.19
20.50
18.52 #######
28.54
243
04/10/2022 10:09
465.84
45.73
19.42
21.31
19.90
19.29
204.37
45.23
22.73
19.06
19.82
19.19
141.98
28.04
20.99
18.87
18.82
18.26
55.26
42.15
20.16
20.40
18.52 #######
28.56
244
04/10/2022 10:09
463.99
44.90
19.36
21.19
19.83
19.23
205.25
45.55
22.63
18.99
19.73
19.14
149.87
27.91
20.97
18.85
18.80
18.27
56.86
42.12
20.12
20.33
18.53 #######
28.52
245
04/10/2022 10:09
458.79
44.15
19.34
21.09
19.77
19.19
207.21
45.08
22.53
18.90
19.64
19.09
153.05
27.76
20.95
18.83
18.80
18.27
57.46
41.92
20.09
20.25
18.50 #######
28.46
246
04/10/2022 10:09
460.08
43.21
19.32
20.99
19.71
19.10
209.74
45.80
22.45
18.84
19.55
19.02
167.30
27.63
20.93
18.82
18.79
18.26
59.57
42.40
20.03
20.17
18.51 #######
28.46
247
04/10/2022 10:09
463.93
42.28
19.28
20.89
19.65
19.05
212.29
44.50
22.34
18.80
19.47
18.96
168.30
27.52
20.89
18.79
18.77
18.27
59.98
42.03
20.00
20.09
18.49 #######
28.47
248
04/10/2022 10:09
462.01
41.46
19.25
20.80
19.58
18.99
213.38
44.45
22.23
18.74
19.40
18.91
174.03
27.38
20.85
18.80
18.75
18.26
61.51
43.38
19.95
20.01
18.46 #######
28.44
249
04/10/2022 10:09
468.76
40.65
19.22
20.71
19.53
18.93
219.59
46.73
22.15
18.68
19.32
18.83
175.91
27.29
20.84
18.76
18.72
18.22
61.16
43.54
19.92
19.93
18.48 #######
28.39
250
04/10/2022 10:09
485.29
40.10
19.21
20.62
19.46
18.86
230.22
45.82
22.03
18.64
19.22
18.79
179.68
27.20
20.82
18.75
18.72
18.21
61.58
43.46
19.89
19.87
18.45 #######
28.38
251
04/10/2022 10:09
513.09
39.32
19.16
20.51
19.41
18.79
243.40
44.67
21.95
18.57
19.18
18.74
181.35
27.15
20.77
18.76
18.67
18.21
62.82
42.75
19.85
19.79
18.46 #######
28.42
252
04/10/2022 10:09
534.41
38.60
19.16
20.44
19.35
18.73
250.10
43.54
21.86
18.50
19.13
18.70
183.51
27.09
20.77
18.73
18.68
18.20
64.35
42.17
19.80
19.72
18.44 #######
28.36
253
04/10/2022 10:09
547.63
37.98
19.12
20.35
19.29
18.67
258.49
43.06
21.77
18.46
19.07
18.66
188.29
27.03
20.76
18.73
18.65
18.17
64.79
41.50
19.78
19.68
18.43 #######
28.29
254
04/10/2022 10:09
553.45
37.36
19.10
20.28
19.24
18.61
259.06
42.54
21.71
18.40
19.02
18.59
195.92
26.94
20.74
18.70
18.64
18.17
65.11
41.14
19.74
19.61
18.43 #######
28.22
255
04/10/2022 10:09
539.16
37.23
19.06
20.24
19.19
18.57
255.80
41.34
21.62
18.36
18.98
18.57
201.31
26.85
20.75
18.67
18.62
18.19
65.81
40.56
19.71
19.55
18.43 #######
28.23
256
04/10/2022 10:09
536.26
38.65
19.04
20.13
19.13
18.51
255.03
40.95
21.54
18.34
18.94
18.50
211.86
26.79
20.70
18.67
18.59
18.17
67.35
40.58
19.68
19.49
18.43 #######
28.21
257
04/10/2022 10:09
540.79
38.53
19.03
20.09
19.10
18.49
255.07
40.26
21.46
18.32
18.90
18.48
219.74
26.71
20.69
18.65
18.59
18.16
68.01
40.99
19.65
19.45
18.40 #######
28.24
258
04/10/2022 10:09
544.22
38.56
19.01
20.00
19.06
18.43
253.11
41.58
21.37
18.28
18.84
18.46
220.57
26.71
20.67
18.64
18.57
18.15
68.30
40.34
19.61
19.40
18.40 #######
28.15
259
04/10/2022 10:09
557.63
38.13
19.00
19.96
19.02
18.39
253.48
40.52
21.30
18.24
18.82
18.40
224.51
26.66
20.65
18.64
18.55
18.12
68.32
40.38
19.58
19.33
18.39 #######
28.12
260
04/10/2022 10:09
554.56
37.73
18.96
19.89
18.96
18.35
258.33
39.51
21.21
18.22
18.76
18.37
229.35
26.55
20.62
18.61
18.55
18.15
69.33
39.68
19.55
19.28
18.42 #######
28.08
261
04/10/2022 10:09
540.22
38.48
18.94
19.82
18.94
18.34
254.48
38.93
21.13
18.21
18.72
18.34
240.94
26.49
20.61
18.60
18.52
18.14
70.63
39.49
19.52
19.24
18.41 #######
28.08
262
04/10/2022 10:09
531.56
37.94
18.94
19.77
18.93
18.29
249.11
39.09
21.07
18.23
18.68
18.31
247.74
26.44
20.60
18.60
18.51
18.11
70.94
38.90
19.50
19.18
18.38 #######
28.01
263
04/10/2022 10:09
543.27
37.49
18.89
19.70
18.88
18.27
253.75
38.28
21.00
18.19
18.65
18.28
251.20
26.43
20.61
18.58
18.49
18.10
72.28
38.35
19.47
19.12
18.37 #######
28.09
264
04/10/2022 10:09
545.21
38.13
18.89
19.63
18.83
18.22
253.15
38.16
20.91
18.18
18.58
18.25
252.51
26.39
20.60
18.58
18.48
18.09
72.58
39.32
19.43
19.11
18.38 #######
28.06
265
04/10/2022 10:09
548.20
38.62
18.87
19.55
18.78
18.18
256.35
38.51
20.84
18.15
18.53
18.23
246.61
26.34
20.58
18.55
18.47
18.08
72.96
38.72
19.40
19.06
18.34 #######
28.03
266
04/10/2022 10:09
557.50
37.92
18.86
19.46
18.78
18.13
263.18
37.52
20.78
18.12
18.50
18.20
244.67
26.29
20.49
18.53
18.45
18.06
73.28
38.13
19.38
19.01
18.33 #######
28.06
267
04/10/2022 10:09
557.55
37.23
18.84
19.42
18.74
18.12
262.94
37.87
20.70
18.12
18.48
18.16
243.10
26.28
20.52
18.53
18.43
18.07
74.23
38.57
19.34
18.98
18.31 #######
28.12
268
04/10/2022 10:09
571.85
37.03
18.82
19.36
18.69
18.09
271.46
37.35
20.63
18.07
18.44
18.12
239.96
26.25
20.48
18.51
18.41
18.04
75.04
38.11
19.34
18.93
18.29 #######
28.14
269
04/10/2022 10:09
569.50
36.80
18.80
19.31
18.65
18.02
269.81
36.59
20.56
18.05
18.40
18.10
238.81
26.25
20.48
18.50
18.41
18.05
74.78
37.54
19.29
18.88
18.28 #######
28.15
270
04/10/2022 10:09
576.74
36.39
18.79
19.27
18.60
17.98
273.51
35.81
20.48
18.01
18.38
18.06
236.11
26.25
20.43
18.50
18.39
18.03
74.49
36.94
19.28
18.86
18.27 #######
28.17
271
04/10/2022 10:09
571.66
37.72
18.75
19.21
18.57
17.92
275.46
35.02
20.43
17.98
18.36
18.02
229.41
26.13
20.43
18.47
18.37
18.06
75.34
36.58
19.25
18.82
18.26 #######
28.08
272
04/10/2022 10:09
557.22
37.80
18.75
19.19
18.55
17.93
270.82
35.12
20.38
17.95
18.33
18.00
228.38
26.02
20.47
18.47
18.39
18.04
75.36
36.05
19.24
18.79
18.26 #######
28.08
273
04/10/2022 10:09
564.85
38.81
18.74
19.14
18.54
17.88
271.83
34.49
20.32
17.91
18.28
17.98
227.02
26.00
20.45
18.47
18.39
18.03
75.64
35.61
19.18
18.76
18.25 #######
28.05
274
04/10/2022 10:09
556.48
40.09
18.72
19.10
18.50
17.85
266.01
33.95
20.25
17.90
18.25
17.95
223.59
25.90
20.46
18.46
18.37
18.02
75.53
35.10
19.20
18.74
18.25 #######
28.10
275
04/10/2022 10:09
534.52
43.72
18.70
19.07
18.48
17.83
256.76
36.18
20.19
17.88
18.21
17.90
213.09
27.37
22.54
18.45
18.37
17.99
74.10
36.03
19.12
18.69
18.39 #######
28.06
276
04/10/2022 10:09
488.91
44.07
18.70
19.24
18.47
17.82
239.50
38.99
20.15
17.91
18.20
17.88
202.45
47.24
23.18
18.49
18.50
18.26
73.37
43.58
19.09
18.67
19.51 #######
28.04
277
04/10/2022 10:09
446.22
43.51
18.74
20.12
18.50
17.83
222.50
48.22
20.17
18.33
18.30
17.86
197.05
71.25
26.36
18.53
18.67
18.70
72.99
48.12
19.12
18.84
20.85 #######
28.04
278
04/10/2022 10:09
411.25
44.15
18.92
20.42
18.55
17.93
207.16
59.04
21.15
21.55
18.59
17.93
189.12
116.10
26.93
18.71
19.15
19.24
72.10
55.42
19.15
20.11
21.47 #######
28.13
279
04/10/2022 10:09
378.75
42.38
19.06
21.44
18.60
18.03
192.48
71.48
22.43
23.92
18.71
17.92
182.02
139.37
27.51
18.87
19.30
19.54
71.37
59.55
19.21
20.51
21.78 #######
28.04
280
04/10/2022 10:09
349.23
41.79
19.25
21.79
18.60
18.10
178.77
79.70
23.03
25.34
18.95
18.02
176.54
156.71
27.29
18.91
19.63
19.55
70.74
63.12
19.31
21.47
22.64 #######
28.09
281
04/10/2022 10:09
325.07
40.15
19.44
22.62
18.66
18.16
166.67
85.43
26.58
27.42
19.05
18.04
169.89
175.48
26.81
18.92
19.93
20.16
69.99
66.99
19.37
21.84
22.61 #######
28.09
282
04/10/2022 10:09
301.88
38.98
19.70
23.74
18.68
18.21
156.30
94.03
27.49
29.06
19.30
18.02
163.70
198.15
26.20
18.92
19.95
20.30
69.49
70.50
19.47
22.54
22.28 #######
28.03
283
04/10/2022 10:09
280.72
37.76
19.95
24.58
18.71
18.25
145.44
95.11
29.67
31.17
19.59
18.15
157.85
201.73
26.49
18.97
20.68
21.77
69.11
71.86
19.90
23.20
22.88 #######
28.09
==PAGE:230==
284
04/10/2022 10:09
263.12
36.65
20.36
25.48
18.72
18.33
136.94
98.75
31.97
32.89
19.73
18.24
152.83
208.91
27.83
19.04
20.67
21.59
68.73
73.03
20.10
23.95
23.21 #######
27.92
285
04/10/2022 10:09
247.74
36.83
20.62
25.88
18.72
18.35
127.84
97.61
33.28
33.94
19.94
18.34
147.90
214.99
27.61
19.10
21.10
21.91
67.91
74.75
20.52
24.88
24.22 #######
28.03
286
04/10/2022 10:09
234.48
35.95
21.07
26.65
18.78
18.42
121.30
100.74
36.65
35.00
20.12
18.37
143.90
218.71
26.78
19.16
20.97
21.46
67.37
75.68
21.21
25.77
23.51 #######
27.91
287
04/10/2022 10:09
218.15
35.44
21.63
27.58
18.86
18.48
113.32
100.14
38.29
39.80
20.39
18.41
137.31
206.75
25.56
19.19
21.37
21.93
66.31
74.40
22.23
29.91
22.76 #######
27.76
288
04/10/2022 10:09
200.48
33.99
23.47
34.11
19.25
18.80
104.24
94.82
38.62
60.35
23.56
18.94
131.97
188.51
24.64
19.20
21.12
22.08
65.32
72.19
22.58
32.88
22.14 #######
27.57
289
04/10/2022 10:10
184.18
32.90
24.16
40.60
21.21
20.20
95.89
89.60
38.16
60.82
26.93
20.34
125.96
171.13
23.75
19.19
20.95
22.00
64.27
70.11
22.66
33.59
21.52 #######
27.39
290
04/10/2022 10:10
169.72
31.86
24.99
45.07
22.70
21.85
89.24
85.21
38.09
61.25
29.38
21.66
120.94
157.16
23.07
19.26
20.65
21.78
63.23
67.87
22.99
35.49
21.13 #######
27.26
291
04/10/2022 10:10
154.95
30.96
25.66
49.47
24.20
23.48
81.95
80.55
37.98
58.94
31.39
23.07
115.05
142.85
22.50
19.31
20.39
21.25
62.09
65.50
23.12
35.82
20.65 #######
27.13
292
04/10/2022 10:10
141.94
30.24
26.30
53.60
25.70
25.01
75.91
76.40
37.68
54.32
33.63
24.21
109.05
130.13
22.05
19.36
20.19
21.28
60.96
63.21
23.29
35.88
20.35 #######
27.02
293
04/10/2022 10:10
130.33
29.53
26.29
54.91
26.38
26.30
70.61
72.84
37.48
49.89
34.73
25.09
104.50
119.16
21.65
19.40
19.99
21.00
59.94
61.10
23.43
35.98
19.99 #######
26.98
294
04/10/2022 10:10
120.03
29.00
27.54
58.07
27.08
27.55
65.76
69.40
37.39
54.78
37.39
26.10
100.79
109.93
21.33
19.49
19.98
20.71
59.01
58.96
23.62
38.11
19.73 #######
26.86
295
04/10/2022 10:10
108.63
28.51
27.62
60.04
28.27
28.72
61.32
66.01
36.95
53.54
37.79
26.97
95.47
100.92
21.08
19.59
19.97
20.56
58.31
56.96
23.73
37.66
19.55 #######
26.79
296
04/10/2022 10:10
100.95
28.26
27.80
61.28
28.73
29.63
57.53
63.21
36.66
48.67
38.53
27.49
91.13
93.72
21.36
19.79
19.98
20.50
57.41
55.02
23.89
37.22
19.52 #######
26.73
297
04/10/2022 10:10
92.62
27.94
27.85
62.59
29.57
30.98
53.91
60.27
36.28
44.43
39.04
28.52
87.68
86.44
21.05
19.95
19.90
20.28
56.61
52.99
23.95
36.76
19.30 #######
26.66
298
04/10/2022 10:10
86.01
27.58
28.09
64.58
30.67
32.46
51.04
57.66
36.00
41.60
39.84
29.41
83.83
81.21
20.82
20.09
20.03
20.32
55.78
51.26
24.03
36.41
19.15 #######
26.60
299
04/10/2022 10:10
79.53
27.42
28.15
65.83
31.13
33.26
48.11
55.36
35.68
40.53
40.18
29.98
80.39
75.88
20.71
20.22
20.34
21.15
55.14
49.81
24.07
36.14
19.05 -115.80
26.59
300
04/10/2022 10:10
74.42
27.26
28.39
65.96
31.25
33.51
46.03
53.58
35.53
45.58
40.87
30.16
77.19
72.47
20.53
20.34
20.27
20.66
54.17
48.45
24.12
37.97
18.94 #######
26.63
301
04/10/2022 10:10
70.38
27.19
28.81
67.21
31.89
33.83
44.22
52.93
35.62
53.44
42.03
30.51
75.12
72.25
20.50
20.46
20.33
20.54
53.78
47.63
24.14
40.07
18.81 #######
26.57
302
04/10/2022 10:10
65.92
26.87
29.21
68.26
32.55
34.63
42.15
51.06
35.67
56.43
42.98
30.98
73.08
67.71
20.32
20.58
20.31
20.47
52.91
46.21
24.13
39.65
18.70 #######
26.51
303
04/10/2022 10:10
62.10
26.80
29.54
69.17
33.06
35.70
40.64
49.43
35.43
53.05
43.71
31.55
71.36
63.59
20.24
20.72
20.24
20.38
52.35
44.95
24.15
39.43
18.59 #######
26.50
304
04/10/2022 10:10
59.07
26.66
30.02
72.19
34.12
36.34
39.09
47.98
35.23
53.60
44.53
32.45
69.96
61.74
20.23
20.83
20.18
20.13
51.77
43.94
24.15
40.87
18.53 #######
26.47
305
04/10/2022 10:10
55.96
26.58
30.52
74.65
35.42
36.84
37.75
46.61
35.06
56.08
46.05
33.12
69.34
58.68
20.23
20.92
20.49
20.72
51.30
42.99
24.10
40.59
18.50 #######
26.46
306
04/10/2022 10:10
53.93
26.99
30.58
72.76
35.85
37.35
36.70
45.38
34.89
55.57
46.05
33.67
68.76
57.59
20.70
21.09
20.69
20.72
51.26
42.10
24.18
41.90
18.88 #######
26.52
307
04/10/2022 10:10
52.33
27.12
31.01
72.55
35.57
36.80
35.94
45.57
35.69
60.46
46.00
33.55
68.87
67.75
22.39
21.35
21.03
20.78
50.81
42.63
24.16
43.74
20.20 #######
26.67
308
04/10/2022 10:10
51.33
31.27
30.86
70.08
35.11
36.24
35.16
46.20
38.23
60.13
45.38
33.16
70.75
88.32
24.50
21.57
21.25
20.78
50.52
43.65
24.46
43.44
20.85 #######
27.00
309
04/10/2022 10:10
54.58
41.40
30.41
66.92
34.49
35.50
36.59
50.18
38.62
55.55
44.19
32.61
75.86
91.35
24.65
21.66
21.23
20.58
50.31
48.10
24.54
42.73
20.83 #######
27.12
310
04/10/2022 10:10
67.67
43.95
29.96
64.07
33.86
34.81
40.45
53.98
38.30
50.74
43.07
32.02
80.48
87.77
24.42
21.74
21.21
20.40
50.22
48.90
24.73
41.95
20.66 #######
27.18
311
04/10/2022 10:10
93.21
46.32
29.56
61.70
33.25
34.01
50.62
54.75
37.93
46.61
41.94
31.51
84.97
84.45
24.18
21.82
21.19
20.28
50.21
48.96
24.86
41.26
20.59 #######
27.22
312
04/10/2022 10:10
110.60
47.09
29.22
59.48
32.63
33.25
57.94
53.87
37.54
43.18
40.87
31.11
88.57
81.42
23.98
21.90
21.19
20.19
50.36
48.48
25.05
40.51
20.49 #######
27.24
313
04/10/2022 10:10
147.91
46.70
28.88
57.46
32.09
32.54
72.70
53.06
37.26
40.39
39.95
30.69
97.96
78.66
23.82
21.96
21.17
20.09
51.53
47.85
25.18
39.77
20.37 #######
27.28
314
04/10/2022 10:10
175.97
45.93
28.55
55.53
31.58
31.91
88.11
52.25
37.00
38.12
39.12
30.34
107.56
76.11
23.71
22.02
21.18
20.03
52.39
47.26
25.36
39.07
20.32 #######
27.31
315
04/10/2022 10:10
188.55
47.85
28.26
53.80
31.08
31.31
96.59
51.41
36.78
36.29
38.33
29.91
111.60
73.79
23.67
22.13
21.19
19.99
52.44
46.75
25.48
38.37
20.26 #######
27.35
316
04/10/2022 10:10
208.09
47.00
27.97
52.16
30.65
30.83
104.87
50.50
36.56
34.69
37.66
29.45
114.57
71.61
23.63
22.18
21.20
19.94
52.63
46.38
25.59
37.71
20.21 #######
27.38
317
04/10/2022 10:10
220.95
50.67
27.70
50.66
30.25
30.37
109.31
49.80
36.48
33.38
36.98
29.09
113.59
69.57
23.59
22.24
21.19
19.90
52.53
45.81
25.63
37.10
20.17 -113.23
27.49
318
04/10/2022 10:10
253.86
50.43
27.44
49.14
29.89
29.91
120.74
48.97
36.21
32.31
36.30
28.83
114.95
67.64
23.57
22.29
21.18
19.88
52.59
45.15
25.60
36.45
20.10 #######
27.56
319
04/10/2022 10:10
272.46
49.17
27.21
47.64
29.45
29.38
130.91
48.23
35.91
31.28
35.59
28.53
116.63
65.83
23.56
22.31
21.16
19.80
52.25
44.54
25.62
35.86
20.04 #######
27.54
320
04/10/2022 10:10
280.94
49.05
26.97
46.24
29.05
28.88
137.03
47.52
35.65
30.36
34.86
28.27
116.02
64.13
23.50
22.36
21.14
19.76
52.21
43.96
25.61
35.27
19.97 #######
27.51
321
04/10/2022 10:10
290.81
49.02
26.75
44.99
28.71
28.40
139.42
46.57
35.49
29.59
34.30
27.92
114.61
62.64
23.44
22.37
21.14
19.76
51.87
43.31
25.63
34.72
19.96 #######
27.44
322
04/10/2022 10:10
308.94
48.16
26.50
43.84
28.41
27.99
143.52
45.87
35.30
28.95
33.77
27.58
114.48
61.31
23.66
22.40
21.14
19.77
52.36
42.86
25.58
34.14
19.94 #######
27.41
323
04/10/2022 10:10
312.88
48.47
26.35
42.67
28.12
27.61
146.65
45.26
35.03
28.35
33.25
27.23
114.73
60.03
23.53
22.43
21.11
19.77
52.34
42.30
25.52
33.57
19.95 #######
27.36
324
04/10/2022 10:10
317.59
48.18
26.13
41.58
27.83
27.27
150.31
44.63
34.77
27.85
32.72
26.98
115.15
58.73
23.63
22.42
21.13
19.74
52.50
41.74
25.43
33.05
19.93 #######
27.38
325
04/10/2022 10:10
333.74
48.27
25.95
40.51
27.51
26.96
157.96
44.30
34.52
27.37
32.15
26.74
117.39
57.48
23.53
22.41
21.11
19.74
53.30
41.18
25.39
32.58
20.05 #######
27.44
326
04/10/2022 10:10
331.59
49.16
25.75
39.50
27.20
26.61
157.56
43.61
34.22
26.90
31.53
26.51
119.75
56.26
23.55
22.40
21.09
19.72
53.74
40.70
25.34
32.10
20.01 #######
27.43
327
04/10/2022 10:10
355.01
49.37
25.58
38.69
26.97
26.27
166.64
42.90
34.03
26.46
31.12
26.21
121.55
55.19
23.50
22.40
21.08
19.71
53.54
40.07
25.28
31.69
19.96 #######
27.41
328
04/10/2022 10:10
361.38
48.57
25.39
37.78
26.70
25.94
168.16
42.40
33.80
26.16
30.70
25.98
121.88
54.03
23.41
22.39
21.07
19.69
53.99
39.58
25.18
31.28
19.96 #######
27.42
329
04/10/2022 10:10
369.86
49.96
25.25
36.94
26.47
25.62
170.51
41.90
33.54
25.84
30.27
25.75
122.45
53.00
23.32
22.35
21.05
19.69
54.08
39.09
25.12
30.83
19.94
-78.96
27.40
330
04/10/2022 10:10
380.86
50.13
25.07
36.17
26.19
25.33
175.66
41.28
33.29
25.48
29.90
25.57
123.38
52.00
23.29
22.32
21.02
19.64
54.32
38.59
25.05
30.44
19.90 #######
27.36
331
04/10/2022 10:10
380.08
49.13
24.93
35.48
25.95
25.05
178.92
40.52
33.09
25.18
29.50
25.34
123.91
51.11
23.29
22.29
21.00
19.64
54.60
38.07
24.96
30.06
19.86 #######
27.36
332
04/10/2022 10:10
385.43
49.06
24.80
34.72
25.74
24.81
182.94
40.00
32.84
24.92
29.14
25.18
123.67
50.18
23.25
22.26
20.99
19.63
54.72
37.67
24.90
29.67
19.83 #######
27.31
333
04/10/2022 10:10
393.73
49.34
24.67
34.08
25.53
24.54
190.33
39.51
32.60
24.69
28.77
24.96
124.33
49.39
23.26
22.22
20.98
19.63
55.03
37.22
24.83
29.34
19.82 #######
27.29
334
04/10/2022 10:10
386.21
48.97
24.50
33.39
25.31
24.27
187.84
38.98
32.34
24.46
28.41
24.79
125.13
48.55
23.26
22.21
20.93
19.59
55.98
36.83
24.75
29.00
19.82 #######
27.28
335
04/10/2022 10:10
388.67
48.44
24.39
32.80
25.12
24.00
189.78
38.70
32.10
24.22
28.07
24.62
127.95
47.79
23.22
22.16
20.90
19.56
56.39
36.35
24.64
28.66
19.79 -180.62
27.24
336
04/10/2022 10:10
395.62
48.14
24.25
32.24
24.94
23.73
192.15
38.21
31.87
24.01
27.74
24.42
129.50
47.06
23.25
22.11
20.88
19.54
56.93
35.89
24.57
28.35
19.76 -173.36
27.29
337
04/10/2022 10:10
392.80
47.61
24.15
31.73
24.74
23.48
190.73
37.58
31.64
23.81
27.47
24.23
130.56
46.44
23.22
22.06
20.83
19.54
57.42
35.48
24.48
28.02
19.77 #######
27.29
338
04/10/2022 10:10
396.05
46.99
24.04
31.23
24.53
23.32
197.50
37.14
31.38
23.63
27.15
24.08
133.94
45.82
23.21
22.04
20.81
19.54
58.01
35.17
24.40
27.73
19.77 #######
27.35
339
04/10/2022 10:10
398.16
46.41
23.94
30.73
24.35
23.10
200.53
36.72
31.13
23.43
26.85
23.90
134.60
45.24
23.19
22.01
20.81
19.52
59.00
34.80
24.33
27.45
19.76 #######
27.40
340
04/10/2022 10:10
398.05
45.70
23.82
30.27
24.15
22.92
203.32
36.28
30.91
23.26
26.51
23.77
136.77
44.55
23.17
21.95
20.76
19.52
59.86
34.45
24.22
27.20
19.77 #######
27.46
==PAGE:231==
341
04/10/2022 10:11
392.14
46.00
23.71
29.77
23.99
22.77
202.67
35.84
30.68
23.07
26.24
23.60
137.76
43.94
23.18
21.91
20.75
19.52
60.47
34.11
24.17
26.93
19.73 #######
27.49
342
04/10/2022 10:11
391.14
46.40
23.61
29.38
23.83
22.61
201.94
35.44
30.48
22.90
26.00
23.46
138.74
43.21
23.18
21.87
20.71
19.51
60.78
33.75
24.06
26.68
19.74 #######
27.57
343
04/10/2022 10:11
393.64
45.78
23.51
28.93
23.64
22.46
204.86
35.12
30.22
22.72
25.73
23.31
138.46
42.71
23.14
21.82
20.71
19.48
60.76
33.47
23.99
26.44
19.71 #######
27.65
344
04/10/2022 10:11
404.00
45.42
23.40
28.52
23.49
22.29
204.81
34.72
30.01
22.59
25.47
23.16
138.77
42.19
23.11
21.78
20.65
19.45
60.92
33.17
23.90
26.17
19.70 #######
27.74
345
04/10/2022 10:11
407.34
44.83
23.32
28.15
23.34
22.11
207.48
34.30
29.80
22.47
25.24
23.03
139.94
41.61
23.09
21.74
20.61
19.43
61.47
32.89
23.82
25.92
19.71 #######
27.76
346
04/10/2022 10:11
411.73
44.06
23.21
27.78
23.18
21.92
214.18
34.06
29.59
22.35
25.04
22.89
143.14
41.07
23.04
21.69
20.60
19.43
62.09
32.59
23.73
25.71
19.69 #######
27.81
347
04/10/2022 10:11
418.18
43.18
23.12
27.44
23.05
21.76
215.54
33.73
29.35
22.20
24.78
22.77
144.68
40.64
23.03
21.65
20.57
19.42
62.36
32.30
23.65
25.48
19.66 #######
27.81
348
04/10/2022 10:11
425.47
42.41
23.05
27.14
22.91
21.61
221.75
33.36
29.11
22.03
24.52
22.63
145.29
40.20
23.01
21.59
20.54
19.39
63.04
31.99
23.58
25.26
19.63 #######
27.80
349
04/10/2022 10:11
429.64
41.84
22.98
26.81
22.76
21.44
224.41
33.02
28.90
21.86
24.28
22.51
148.26
39.82
22.98
21.54
20.50
19.39
63.35
31.70
23.51
25.06
19.64 #######
27.85
350
04/10/2022 10:11
442.32
41.88
22.91
26.55
22.65
21.32
229.09
32.75
28.70
21.72
24.07
22.40
148.27
39.48
22.99
21.51
20.47
19.36
63.46
31.49
23.42
24.86
19.64 #######
27.88
351
04/10/2022 10:11
438.50
41.66
22.84
26.24
22.53
21.19
227.08
32.44
28.47
21.63
23.93
22.29
147.24
39.05
22.98
21.46
20.43
19.37
64.08
31.27
23.36
24.67
19.63 #######
27.85
352
04/10/2022 10:11
436.72
41.28
22.74
26.02
22.44
21.07
227.34
32.12
28.33
21.53
23.78
22.15
148.27
38.64
22.97
21.43
20.43
19.35
64.58
31.01
23.29
24.49
19.63 #######
27.81
353
04/10/2022 10:11
442.38
40.58
22.69
25.77
22.31
20.94
229.21
31.86
28.13
21.45
23.62
22.04
148.45
38.35
22.97
21.38
20.40
19.32
64.87
30.77
23.20
24.34
19.62 #######
27.83
354
04/10/2022 10:11
459.04
40.40
22.64
25.54
22.24
20.82
238.93
31.48
27.97
21.38
23.48
21.96
154.62
37.96
22.97
21.34
20.36
19.32
65.18
30.50
23.13
24.15
19.62 #######
27.77
355
04/10/2022 10:11
463.96
40.57
22.56
25.32
22.13
20.71
242.27
31.15
27.75
21.28
23.29
21.86
154.97
37.59
22.95
21.30
20.33
19.25
65.10
30.19
23.07
24.03
19.59 #######
27.74
356
04/10/2022 10:11
471.96
40.26
22.48
25.06
22.03
20.56
241.08
30.80
27.55
21.18
23.09
21.74
152.81
37.31
22.90
21.25
20.28
19.24
65.49
29.96
22.99
23.84
19.57 #######
27.66
357
04/10/2022 10:11
489.51
40.50
22.44
24.80
21.91
20.46
247.87
30.51
27.39
21.09
22.93
21.62
153.67
37.06
22.86
21.22
20.26
19.21
65.79
29.80
22.94
23.69
19.52 #######
27.73
358
04/10/2022 10:11
523.64
41.08
22.35
24.60
21.83
20.39
257.60
30.40
27.34
21.00
22.81
21.46
155.31
36.96
22.86
21.20
20.25
19.20
65.37
29.74
22.97
23.55
19.54 #######
27.84
359
04/10/2022 10:11
561.61
43.06
22.32
24.44
21.72
20.30
272.41
31.09
27.70
20.93
22.68
21.36
153.65
36.77
23.34
21.15
20.22
19.19
64.85
30.35
22.92
23.42
19.51 #######
28.13
360
04/10/2022 10:11
565.31
53.00
22.27
24.26
21.61
20.20
279.00
33.20
27.42
20.88
22.55
21.24
152.76
36.78
23.43
21.10
20.19
19.16
65.25
34.58
22.87
23.28
19.53 #######
28.28
361
04/10/2022 10:11
591.51
53.51
22.21
24.02
21.53
20.04
285.93
35.29
27.15
20.73
22.35
21.12
154.68
36.67
23.17
21.07
20.15
19.13
66.02
34.56
22.79
23.12
19.57 #######
28.44
362
04/10/2022 10:11
619.68
53.69
22.15
23.78
21.43
19.94
307.46
34.88
26.93
20.61
22.19
21.04
158.65
36.65
23.10
21.04
20.13
19.14
67.86
35.05
22.74
22.99
19.58 #######
28.59
363
04/10/2022 10:11
636.89
54.03
22.13
23.63
21.34
19.83
316.11
35.40
26.75
20.53
22.04
20.96
159.62
36.72
23.02
21.02
20.10
19.10
69.07
36.31
22.71
22.85
19.55 #######
28.71
364
04/10/2022 10:11
659.13
53.88
22.07
23.47
21.26
19.70
335.52
35.95
26.55
20.43
21.87
20.86
160.39
36.77
22.94
20.96
20.08
19.10
70.15
36.33
22.67
22.73
19.57 #######
28.68
365
04/10/2022 10:11
660.36
52.84
22.03
23.30
21.17
19.64
345.02
35.71
26.36
20.32
21.75
20.80
161.71
36.90
22.89
20.93
20.06
19.09
71.85
37.83
22.64
22.62
19.55 #######
28.70
366
04/10/2022 10:11
672.62
51.10
21.99
23.13
21.10
19.51
349.46
36.89
26.19
20.26
21.61
20.72
165.88
37.71
22.79
20.90
20.03
19.10
72.43
40.22
22.59
22.51
19.53 #######
28.68
367
04/10/2022 10:11
678.20
49.55
21.93
22.99
21.01
19.46
358.97
38.50
26.01
20.17
21.51
20.64
170.66
37.67
22.74
20.88
20.01
19.08
74.00
41.51
22.54
22.41
19.51 #######
28.80
368
04/10/2022 10:11
701.04
48.12
21.90
22.82
20.93
19.36
379.25
42.69
25.85
20.05
21.37
20.55
175.71
37.75
22.73
20.85
19.99
19.07
75.05
43.25
22.51
22.31
19.48 #######
28.82
369
04/10/2022 10:11
718.71
48.67
21.86
22.68
20.85
19.29
406.78
44.07
25.69
19.97
21.21
20.47
177.40
37.78
22.71
20.80
19.96
19.06
76.10
44.65
22.47
22.22
19.46 #######
28.82
370
04/10/2022 10:11
732.49
47.57
21.82
22.53
20.77
19.21
431.37
44.86
25.54
19.87
21.11
20.41
174.98
37.82
22.73
20.76
19.94
19.07
76.96
44.91
22.41
22.12
19.43 #######
28.82
371
04/10/2022 10:11
744.00
46.78
21.77
22.42
20.72
19.15
445.21
49.40
25.41
19.75
20.97
20.33
177.68
37.97
22.70
20.74
19.91
19.07
79.08
48.52
22.36
22.04
19.40 #######
28.80
372
04/10/2022 10:11
749.36
45.57
21.74
22.28
20.67
19.06
463.43
51.92
25.23
19.68
20.86
20.23
181.00
37.97
22.71
20.72
19.91
19.06
79.62
49.52
22.30
21.94
19.41 #######
28.78
373
04/10/2022 10:11
762.51
44.58
21.70
22.19
20.60
19.01
478.06
54.50
25.08
19.59
20.79
20.17
185.25
38.03
22.70
20.68
19.89
19.05
80.81
50.21
22.26
21.85
19.38 #######
28.72
374
04/10/2022 10:11
776.94
43.55
21.64
22.07
20.54
18.96
501.87
56.40
24.96
19.52
20.68
20.11
185.49
38.08
22.67
20.66
19.86
19.06
81.61
51.58
22.22
21.75
19.37 #######
28.71
375
04/10/2022 10:11
787.39
42.64
21.60
21.96
20.48
18.87
519.29
57.17
24.82
19.46
20.58
20.04
186.24
38.55
22.63
20.64
19.84
19.05
83.14
52.32
22.20
21.67
19.40 #######
28.74
376
04/10/2022 10:11
793.97
41.84
21.57
21.85
20.44
18.80
530.32
58.66
24.67
19.39
20.51
20.00
187.55
39.08
22.55
20.63
19.81
19.03
83.97
55.69
22.12
21.58
19.40 #######
28.70
377
04/10/2022 10:11
818.52
41.09
21.54
21.77
20.38
18.72
558.53
60.95
24.52
19.34
20.41
19.89
189.86
39.11
22.52
20.61
19.81
19.02
85.46
55.54
22.10
21.48
19.41 #######
28.63
378
04/10/2022 10:11
835.92
40.41
21.51
21.67
20.34
18.68
590.28
59.29
24.43
19.29
20.30
19.84
191.27
39.19
22.47
20.58
19.78
19.00
87.31
55.11
22.06
21.41
19.39 #######
28.52
379
04/10/2022 10:11
847.60
39.75
21.48
21.60
20.28
18.63
606.65
57.94
24.29
19.26
20.24
19.80
193.40
39.21
22.46
20.56
19.77
19.00
88.46
54.54
22.04
21.33
19.37 #######
28.44
380
04/10/2022 10:11
853.44
39.43
21.47
21.50
20.25
18.55
631.97
56.64
24.17
19.23
20.14
19.73
197.11
39.30
22.45
20.54
19.75
18.98
89.97
54.46
21.99
21.26
19.35 #######
28.42
381
04/10/2022 10:11
859.78
38.89
21.41
21.42
20.20
18.49
656.94
57.12
24.07
19.22
20.05
19.69
199.59
39.35
22.42
20.52
19.75
18.97
91.61
54.34
21.99
21.22
19.35 #######
28.36
382
04/10/2022 10:11
855.86
38.36
21.39
21.34
20.15
18.45
658.98
55.74
23.95
19.22
19.98
19.64
206.13
39.35
22.40
20.50
19.72
18.97
94.04
53.57
21.95
21.14
19.33 #######
28.33
383
04/10/2022 10:11
859.21
37.90
21.36
21.25
20.12
18.40
668.68
54.48
23.84
19.20
19.89
19.60
210.68
39.33
22.41
20.47
19.71
18.95
96.05
52.93
21.92
21.10
19.32 #######
28.32
384
04/10/2022 10:11
859.93
37.57
21.33
21.18
20.06
18.37
672.21
53.19
23.72
19.19
19.81
19.55
213.60
39.38
22.36
20.45
19.69
18.95
98.07
52.21
21.88
21.03
19.32 #######
28.37
385
04/10/2022 10:11
839.04
37.43
21.31
21.11
20.01
18.37
663.39
52.59
23.61
19.19
19.74
19.49
221.40
39.38
22.37
20.44
19.68
18.93
100.41
51.90
21.86
20.97
19.36 #######
28.31
386
04/10/2022 10:11
799.37
41.90
21.29
21.02
19.98
18.34
638.29
51.52
23.49
19.18
19.71
19.44
219.54
49.23
23.63
20.47
19.65
18.91
101.73
54.40
21.76
20.89
19.94 #######
28.18
387
04/10/2022 10:11
748.73
42.50
21.35
21.34
19.97
18.34
590.95
62.23
24.20
21.38
19.68
19.38
211.57
96.70
23.14
20.49
19.80
19.22
102.11
63.49
21.90
21.70
19.94 #######
28.02
388
04/10/2022 10:11
705.82
40.64
22.55
23.64
20.11
18.37
532.86
76.26
27.87
25.89
20.00
19.39
205.73
121.79
23.38
20.53
20.39
20.49
102.77
74.65
21.90
24.97
19.96 #######
27.92
389
04/10/2022 10:11
677.42
39.20
23.70
26.90
20.39
18.62
484.43
91.67
31.69
43.88
21.52
19.67
199.93
139.23
23.11
20.60
20.91
21.77
103.13
84.29
22.08
29.96
20.28 #######
27.92
390
04/10/2022 10:11
657.94
37.59
24.62
28.42
20.58
18.91
442.87
103.54
36.77
53.84
22.00
19.75
193.41
163.75
22.96
20.64
21.21
22.20
103.81
94.31
22.51
31.76
21.06 #######
27.82
391
04/10/2022 10:11
640.42
36.45
25.47
30.02
20.71
19.14
406.76
113.72
39.61
57.67
22.26
19.82
189.09
183.37
22.71
20.67
21.33
22.29
104.27
103.46
22.97
34.76
21.26 #######
27.90
392
04/10/2022 10:11
625.68
35.28
25.77
31.14
20.92
19.33
379.30
125.58
43.28
58.72
22.91
20.01
184.85
212.64
22.44
20.76
21.69
22.45
104.70
112.61
23.57
35.06
21.23 #######
27.90
393
04/10/2022 10:12
605.87
34.82
25.73
31.40
20.92
19.41
353.24
136.35
45.10
54.02
22.94
20.07
182.44
237.78
23.29
20.94
21.90
22.35
105.07
120.58
24.46
35.08
21.92 #######
27.99
394
04/10/2022 10:12
582.50
34.87
25.63
31.46
20.87
19.44
338.19
146.51
45.93
49.53
23.00
20.07
178.66
259.74
23.77
20.94
21.97
22.33
105.34
128.18
24.81
34.91
22.06 #######
28.07
395
04/10/2022 10:12
566.50
34.37
25.67
31.94
20.95
19.45
320.08
153.36
47.49
46.36
23.13
20.10
175.19
270.51
23.90
21.07
23.15
23.48
105.02
132.73
25.47
34.88
22.15 #######
28.09
396
04/10/2022 10:12
554.62
34.41
25.71
31.67
20.93
19.53
303.53
160.07
49.63
43.76
23.17
20.09
173.01
288.89
24.51
21.15
23.19
23.38
105.22
139.47
26.19
34.66
22.27 #######
28.14
397
04/10/2022 10:12
554.50
34.08
25.62
32.09
20.92
19.54
293.11
168.56
50.05
40.86
23.10
20.13
169.72
298.36
24.68
21.23
23.32
23.68
104.82
144.09
26.48
34.32
22.31 #######
28.05
==PAGE:232==
398
04/10/2022 10:12
557.69
34.47
25.68
32.12
20.97
19.54
283.56
170.85
51.09
39.49
23.26
20.20
167.21
296.04
26.23
21.36
23.49
23.94
103.97
146.70
27.04
34.31
23.67 #######
28.08
399
04/10/2022 10:12
545.92
35.19
25.99
32.45
20.98
19.58
266.41
175.73
53.06
39.79
23.37
20.35
165.53
306.67
26.73
21.40
23.48
23.86
103.45
150.14
27.76
34.88
24.62 #######
28.15
400
04/10/2022 10:12
530.62
35.00
26.12
32.39
20.98
19.61
254.35
184.52
54.64
39.84
23.42
20.40
162.95
312.74
27.10
21.54
23.84
23.83
103.18
153.67
28.24
35.08
24.10 #######
27.99
401
04/10/2022 10:12
523.66
34.56
27.24
34.24
21.15
19.64
241.65
181.25
56.86
42.50
23.72
20.36
159.69
297.23
26.17
21.62
23.90
24.44
102.26
154.44
29.03
37.71
23.75 #######
27.95
402
04/10/2022 10:12
506.67
33.79
28.18
35.96
21.42
19.68
232.84
179.29
60.33
51.54
24.35
20.56
157.23
305.76
25.36
21.58
23.69
24.34
100.92
156.53
29.50
38.87
23.07 #######
28.00
403
04/10/2022 10:12
496.00
33.31
28.46
36.31
21.46
19.79
225.21
180.95
63.07
53.15
24.81
20.55
153.79
302.68
24.89
21.60
23.48
24.07
100.33
157.87
30.38
38.89
22.63 #######
28.03
404
04/10/2022 10:12
484.85
32.92
28.54
36.94
21.52
19.85
218.07
183.85
64.79
51.28
24.77
20.54
151.34
304.38
25.53
21.59
23.38
23.84
99.73
159.39
31.07
39.27
22.78 #######
27.93
405
04/10/2022 10:12
465.16
32.53
29.12
38.08
21.67
19.97
205.10
182.58
67.03
56.80
25.24
20.63
149.11
287.58
26.23
21.57
23.51
24.18
99.07
159.51
31.91
43.10
22.71 #######
27.82
406
04/10/2022 10:12
449.44
32.27
30.52
40.53
21.77
20.04
193.25
180.46
69.47
75.87
26.00
20.86
147.27
270.41
25.94
21.69
24.04
24.65
98.05
159.02
32.14
48.61
22.66 #######
27.75
407
04/10/2022 10:12
432.99
32.10
31.53
42.42
21.74
20.10
183.29
178.89
71.91
90.99
26.56
20.95
146.13
272.07
25.42
21.91
24.19
24.58
97.62
160.83
32.83
50.64
22.66 #######
27.90
408
04/10/2022 10:12
417.21
32.05
31.34
42.49
21.84
20.31
181.02
185.23
73.52
83.75
26.34
20.94
143.92
295.56
24.94
21.95
24.33
24.77
96.96
163.98
33.60
49.97
22.28 #######
27.92
409
04/10/2022 10:12
403.72
32.60
31.04
42.18
21.91
20.46
177.50
187.54
73.80
74.26
26.36
21.00
146.62
292.76
25.14
21.93
24.12
24.34
96.50
165.59
34.25
49.20
22.09 #######
27.95
410
04/10/2022 10:12
394.28
33.91
30.73
41.43
21.91
20.51
179.48
190.64
73.48
65.85
26.34
20.99
146.04
294.10
27.32
21.96
24.19
24.51
95.95
166.20
35.12
48.24
22.88 #######
27.96
411
04/10/2022 10:12
379.41
34.55
30.38
40.49
21.88
20.51
176.30
193.23
73.08
58.39
26.07
20.93
146.98
294.57
27.09
22.06
24.21
24.19
95.62
167.31
35.55
47.27
23.14 #######
28.06
412
04/10/2022 10:12
367.65
37.91
30.05
39.21
21.86
20.52
174.38
195.87
72.63
52.69
25.94
20.88
146.24
299.43
27.39
22.14
24.18
24.01
95.19
169.92
35.93
46.30
24.10 #######
28.25
413
04/10/2022 10:12
351.21
37.85
29.73
38.33
21.82
20.50
176.22
205.11
72.03
47.78
25.74
20.83
146.65
314.87
28.12
22.20
24.03
23.96
95.09
174.33
36.40
45.17
24.38 #######
28.31
414
04/10/2022 10:12
338.22
38.62
29.55
37.59
21.84
20.47
176.23
213.11
71.63
44.20
25.57
20.77
146.30
327.55
28.73
22.37
24.28
24.07
93.91
177.01
36.69
44.36
25.58 #######
28.34
415
04/10/2022 10:12
323.94
38.25
29.45
37.40
21.78
20.41
172.97
217.26
71.38
42.25
25.55
20.74
146.87
322.80
29.07
22.40
24.18
23.83
93.24
178.11
36.85
43.68
25.41 #######
28.35
416
04/10/2022 10:12
307.88
38.72
29.25
36.76
21.72
20.41
174.15
215.37
70.76
40.16
25.33
20.68
145.52
321.75
28.38
22.52
24.55
23.92
92.72
176.62
37.16
42.73
25.19 #######
28.40
417
04/10/2022 10:12
291.85
39.81
29.15
36.49
21.73
20.41
170.21
215.35
70.85
38.82
25.26
20.62
142.62
330.37
28.77
22.55
24.38
23.66
92.30
178.66
37.44
42.14
25.43 #######
28.35
418
04/10/2022 10:12
277.36
39.22
29.26
37.88
21.76
20.43
165.71
215.72
71.18
42.00
25.44
20.58
139.19
326.17
28.22
22.54
24.07
23.59
90.96
176.62
37.61
45.28
24.70 #######
28.21
419
04/10/2022 10:12
260.88
39.00
30.66
41.94
22.66
20.91
157.09
207.59
73.14
64.37
26.98
20.85
134.15
298.82
26.91
22.53
23.56
23.29
89.45
170.95
37.84
49.21
23.83 #######
27.96
420
04/10/2022 10:12
241.55
37.58
32.13
49.23
24.91
23.03
146.02
194.77
72.81
79.47
32.35
22.15
129.46
270.61
25.83
22.52
23.16
22.79
88.29
164.73
37.58
51.39
23.07 #######
27.78
421
04/10/2022 10:12
222.16
36.46
33.61
55.95
26.47
24.76
136.03
182.85
72.12
86.00
36.84
23.74
125.08
244.97
25.07
22.53
22.80
22.33
86.93
158.16
37.54
53.52
22.37 #######
27.62
422
04/10/2022 10:12
203.58
35.53
35.17
62.53
28.84
26.97
127.14
171.61
71.21
85.90
41.07
25.13
120.65
222.01
24.46
22.62
22.76
22.41
85.85
151.94
37.44
54.36
21.94 #######
27.50
423
04/10/2022 10:12
185.90
34.60
36.15
67.42
30.59
29.07
120.71
161.93
70.78
86.56
44.72
26.36
117.07
208.37
23.93
22.59
22.52
22.15
85.01
146.78
37.31
57.66
21.48 #######
27.49
424
04/10/2022 10:12
171.72
33.84
38.03
71.55
31.75
29.85
114.88
153.55
71.30
102.84
47.59
27.15
113.96
198.58
23.41
22.59
22.28
21.75
83.93
141.80
37.35
62.76
21.05 #######
27.52
425
04/10/2022 10:12
160.96
32.96
39.18
74.06
32.76
30.52
110.05
147.45
73.24
124.73
49.52
27.61
111.30
195.71
23.00
22.57
22.04
21.56
82.98
137.25
37.31
70.44
20.79 #######
27.65
426
04/10/2022 10:12
151.29
32.37
39.93
74.51
33.01
30.75
105.13
141.29
75.79
144.10
49.71
27.90
108.87
192.28
22.77
22.59
22.02
21.63
82.26
132.98
37.55
78.06
20.58 #######
27.75
427
04/10/2022 10:12
142.26
31.81
41.12
77.33
33.25
30.84
100.38
136.68
77.62
153.92
50.97
28.28
105.86
189.59
22.44
22.64
21.82
21.34
81.13
129.10
37.59
84.08
20.39 #######
27.73
428
04/10/2022 10:12
133.37
31.58
42.17
78.94
33.89
31.00
95.04
131.11
78.68
157.69
52.44
28.42
103.68
178.31
22.37
22.76
21.86
21.40
80.40
125.40
37.85
87.15
20.52 #######
27.66
429
04/10/2022 10:12
124.00
31.44
43.71
82.78
35.18
32.00
89.95
125.79
78.07
146.82
55.54
29.46
100.62
165.62
22.14
22.87
21.80
21.35
79.86
121.69
37.94
87.56
20.24 #######
27.54
430
04/10/2022 10:12
114.88
31.04
44.75
86.57
36.40
33.29
84.66
121.39
76.94
129.94
59.26
30.70
97.34
154.23
21.93
23.01
21.72
21.29
78.97
118.15
37.97
87.04
20.01 #######
27.48
431
04/10/2022 10:12
107.74
30.62
46.03
90.51
37.53
34.43
80.47
117.17
76.71
127.39
62.20
31.78
94.13
150.00
21.65
23.12
21.57
21.06
78.19
115.09
38.21
89.79
19.83 #######
27.39
432
04/10/2022 10:12
100.96
30.25
47.25
94.15
38.60
35.57
75.17
113.25
76.17
124.00
65.37
32.94
91.99
138.72
21.48
23.31
21.68
21.23
77.10
111.97
38.17
88.72
19.65 #######
27.43
433
04/10/2022 10:12
95.57
29.94
48.44
96.98
40.11
36.97
71.81
110.41
75.97
126.56
68.69
34.30
89.57
137.79
21.25
23.45
21.63
21.00
76.43
109.56
38.10
91.89
19.51
-10.91
27.52
434
04/10/2022 10:12
93.20
29.77
48.97
96.10
40.54
37.09
68.43
108.58
78.48
135.88
68.37
34.58
87.96
156.08
21.33
23.63
21.61
20.93
76.06
108.68
38.41
95.71
19.51 #######
27.55
435
04/10/2022 10:12
90.09
29.51
49.56
94.28
40.38
37.03
65.51
106.16
80.57
143.73
67.78
34.61
86.30
148.43
21.23
23.76
21.57
20.88
75.56
105.88
38.76
97.69
19.42 #######
27.40
436
04/10/2022 10:12
84.28
29.28
50.44
97.50
41.32
38.50
62.19
101.90
78.82
131.70
70.74
35.86
84.79
136.40
21.17
23.95
21.54
20.82
74.52
103.22
38.79
95.93
19.36 #######
27.40
437
04/10/2022 10:12
79.01
29.04
51.46
101.62
42.73
39.87
59.06
98.31
76.91
114.57
74.06
37.05
82.19
124.58
21.05
24.17
21.80
21.15
73.52
100.65
38.80
92.99
19.30 #######
27.33
438
04/10/2022 10:12
74.90
28.82
52.42
103.69
43.62
40.45
56.76
95.48
75.74
107.63
77.06
38.06
80.74
124.14
20.96
24.31
21.80
20.94
72.62
98.90
38.84
95.12
19.24 #######
27.33
439
04/10/2022 10:12
71.96
28.66
53.76
104.55
44.03
40.47
55.40
93.60
76.03
120.64
78.28
38.54
79.87
121.13
20.91
24.43
21.81
20.79
71.97
96.87
38.87
95.17
19.17 #######
27.29
440
04/10/2022 10:12
69.23
28.41
55.13
105.60
44.56
40.67
53.29
90.76
75.99
124.40
79.93
38.90
77.91
121.32
20.87
24.64
21.85
20.81
71.02
94.96
38.95
96.59
19.18 #######
27.32
441
04/10/2022 10:12
66.57
28.33
56.26
106.42
45.12
40.80
51.37
89.12
76.14
129.83
81.19
39.18
76.12
115.63
20.84
24.94
21.87
20.83
70.36
92.82
38.95
96.62
19.13 #######
27.31
442
04/10/2022 10:12
62.91
28.18
57.20
109.74
46.08
41.77
48.91
86.57
74.70
121.46
83.69
40.54
74.35
107.42
20.78
25.18
21.83
20.66
69.49
90.56
38.83
94.52
19.14
-86.81
27.22
443
04/10/2022 10:12
59.93
27.88
57.83
112.03
46.91
42.57
47.29
84.42
73.18
109.14
85.10
41.77
72.77
99.78
20.74
25.46
21.98
21.09
68.40
88.20
38.70
92.53
19.17 #######
27.19
444
04/10/2022 10:13
56.65
27.77
57.58
114.70
48.04
43.93
45.44
82.34
71.46
95.73
84.30
43.32
71.63
93.71
20.73
25.70
22.26
21.54
67.79
86.46
38.41
89.89
19.14 #######
27.15
445
04/10/2022 10:13
54.47
27.60
58.13
117.19
49.24
45.07
43.73
80.31
69.94
87.63
85.69
44.55
69.64
89.06
20.71
26.03
22.37
21.42
66.77
84.95
38.34
87.44
19.11 #######
27.14
446
04/10/2022 10:13
52.84
27.48
58.88
118.58
50.39
46.34
42.92
79.42
69.34
88.55
87.75
45.63
67.94
86.54
20.65
26.33
22.34
21.21
66.26
83.52
38.01
86.25
19.06 #######
27.13
447
04/10/2022 10:13
50.59
27.33
59.06
119.40
51.04
47.12
41.22
77.74
68.05
84.13
88.90
46.84
66.75
80.31
20.73
26.57
22.57
21.22
65.29
81.44
37.74
83.41
19.09 #######
27.17
448
04/10/2022 10:13
48.82
27.30
59.70
121.69
52.15
48.24
40.20
75.82
66.72
80.00
89.82
47.98
65.64
78.02
20.71
26.77
22.84
21.40
64.67
80.10
37.36
82.12
19.07 #######
27.10
449
04/10/2022 10:13
47.40
27.21
60.13
122.09
52.88
48.59
39.34
74.00
65.99
82.75
91.63
48.76
64.47
74.82
20.64
27.06
22.86
21.22
64.27
78.17
37.05
80.96
19.08 #######
27.14
450
04/10/2022 10:13
45.73
27.16
60.40
124.13
54.25
50.17
38.10
72.21
64.54
80.29
92.24
50.19
63.81
70.63
20.65
27.45
23.00
21.43
63.28
76.47
36.77
79.20
19.13 #######
27.22
451
04/10/2022 10:13
44.54
27.04
61.15
126.54
55.06
51.18
36.92
70.76
63.50
79.15
93.43
51.50
62.72
69.16
20.70
27.65
23.02
21.11
62.63
75.27
36.50
78.29
19.13 #######
27.26
452
04/10/2022 10:13
43.73
26.98
62.28
127.80
55.37
51.42
36.37
69.74
62.89
86.03
95.00
52.05
61.69
69.69
20.72
27.82
23.11
21.02
62.12
74.28
36.11
81.03
19.22 #######
27.29
453
04/10/2022 10:13
42.85
27.05
63.71
128.31
55.23
51.13
35.72
68.76
62.61
100.60
96.69
52.22
61.40
72.09
20.91
27.89
23.24
21.01
61.52
73.67
35.88
83.15
19.33 #######
27.46
454
04/10/2022 10:13
44.79
27.22
64.46
123.60
54.67
50.23
36.13
69.33
64.40
123.46
95.60
51.99
60.96
86.04
20.98
28.02
23.37
20.91
61.04
73.52
35.85
89.48
19.41 #######
27.50
==PAGE:233==
455
04/10/2022 10:13
44.56
27.07
65.08
123.02
54.12
49.52
35.75
68.87
65.71
140.91
94.92
51.59
60.32
87.36
20.91
28.28
23.38
21.01
60.59
72.49
35.81
93.77
19.43 #######
27.41
456
04/10/2022 10:13
44.13
26.95
66.53
123.09
54.09
49.21
35.74
67.99
65.79
147.86
95.80
51.13
59.61
89.58
20.89
28.38
23.57
21.19
60.20
71.85
35.85
95.77
19.52 #######
27.39
457
04/10/2022 10:13
43.39
26.87
67.27
122.78
54.07
48.99
35.50
67.83
66.36
152.85
96.05
50.66
58.39
91.25
20.88
28.49
23.57
21.13
59.82
71.37
35.75
98.24
19.57 #######
27.43
458
04/10/2022 10:13
43.63
26.67
68.12
120.71
53.93
48.77
35.42
68.62
67.33
160.64
94.99
50.12
57.57
99.62
20.91
28.60
23.59
20.91
59.20
71.68
35.92
102.32
19.61 #######
27.47
459
04/10/2022 10:13
43.49
26.60
68.99
117.60
53.41
48.15
35.07
68.55
68.68
164.78
93.33
49.64
56.65
121.48
20.92
28.78
23.62
20.84
58.97
72.94
36.11
105.27
19.97 #######
27.73
460
04/10/2022 10:13
45.04
26.47
68.32
113.06
52.87
47.36
35.60
72.70
73.72
160.12
90.71
49.09
55.82
150.28
21.06
28.85
23.62
20.77
58.67
75.81
36.33
106.97
19.96 #######
27.89
461
04/10/2022 10:13
47.16
26.50
67.77
108.50
52.22
46.38
35.65
75.76
77.18
161.05
88.00
48.53
55.05
157.39
21.12
28.96
23.65
20.76
58.54
75.44
36.89
112.47
19.99 #######
27.92
462
04/10/2022 10:13
46.88
26.46
68.03
106.19
51.56
45.65
35.27
77.38
79.07
169.68
86.00
47.77
54.56
165.23
21.63
29.16
23.83
21.24
58.37
75.62
37.17
116.31
20.15 #######
28.06
463
04/10/2022 10:13
47.73
26.39
67.85
102.53
50.78
45.04
35.40
77.23
82.35
172.54
83.66
47.05
54.20
185.24
21.46
29.21
23.82
21.05
57.88
75.86
37.77
119.50
20.15 #######
28.20
464
04/10/2022 10:13
48.02
26.20
67.67
99.11
50.03
44.47
35.39
78.85
85.62
172.85
81.76
46.53
53.48
201.08
21.32
29.15
23.67
20.91
57.67
77.42
38.51
121.51
20.15 #######
28.07
465
04/10/2022 10:13
48.17
25.93
68.08
99.71
49.93
44.05
35.83
78.03
86.36
162.98
81.32
46.24
52.36
186.05
21.23
29.23
23.51
20.81
57.40
75.67
39.15
120.02
20.09 #######
27.89
466
04/10/2022 10:13
47.02
25.73
69.23
103.65
50.73
44.86
35.81
75.27
85.44
151.98
83.89
46.44
52.08
174.09
21.15
29.36
23.47
20.74
57.02
73.87
39.68
119.00
20.06 #######
27.75
467
04/10/2022 10:13
45.55
25.60
70.23
106.66
51.89
45.86
35.53
72.17
84.45
139.33
87.04
47.00
51.71
160.75
21.14
29.50
23.55
21.25
56.58
71.76
40.03
116.79
19.98 #######
27.62
468
04/10/2022 10:13
43.76
25.37
70.51
108.67
52.95
46.84
34.62
68.98
82.55
122.93
88.57
47.98
51.29
145.89
21.05
29.65
23.49
21.26
56.36
69.68
40.35
113.50
19.88
399.75
27.59
469
04/10/2022 10:13
42.05
25.13
71.56
111.14
53.62
47.66
34.04
66.56
81.09
114.79
91.56
48.95
50.62
135.19
20.94
29.74
23.42
21.08
55.99
67.71
40.54
110.76
19.85 #######
27.55
470
04/10/2022 10:13
41.02
25.07
72.74
113.47
54.03
48.15
33.71
64.34
79.69
115.73
94.44
49.84
50.42
128.86
20.89
29.96
23.60
21.37
55.95
66.05
40.71
110.01
19.82 #######
27.55
471
04/10/2022 10:13
40.78
25.13
73.13
111.90
53.69
47.68
34.08
63.95
81.32
131.07
93.54
49.96
50.25
155.69
21.04
29.90
23.57
21.12
55.55
67.75
40.77
110.81
19.80 #######
27.80
472
04/10/2022 10:13
50.81
25.14
71.70
106.25
52.81
46.78
38.40
78.93
84.50
125.17
90.31
48.79
51.46
180.93
21.12
29.87
23.56
20.95
55.51
73.04
40.96
110.16
19.83 #######
27.77
473
04/10/2022 10:13
50.63
25.25
71.36
102.80
52.02
45.73
38.42
79.91
87.12
138.01
87.48
48.25
50.66
190.92
21.03
29.81
23.48
20.74
55.30
73.53
41.23
113.50
19.82 #######
27.87
474
04/10/2022 10:13
51.24
25.17
71.04
99.14
51.46
45.23
38.14
81.12
91.11
144.88
85.07
47.52
50.65
202.95
21.12
29.73
23.39
20.58
54.98
74.46
41.36
115.70
19.85 #######
27.83
475
04/10/2022 10:13
51.47
25.28
70.72
97.61
50.96
44.73
37.96
79.82
93.33
152.01
83.23
46.98
50.31
190.23
21.17
29.83
23.44
20.79
54.52
73.15
41.55
116.47
19.88 #######
27.74
476
04/10/2022 10:13
50.47
25.22
71.68
100.48
51.20
45.54
37.40
77.09
91.92
151.88
85.03
46.86
50.61
179.94
21.18
29.75
23.44
20.92
54.55
72.27
41.79
117.32
19.89 #######
27.67
477
04/10/2022 10:13
48.55
25.44
72.09
100.76
51.11
45.51
36.66
75.27
91.05
147.35
85.45
46.83
51.14
173.60
21.17
29.75
23.42
20.92
54.67
70.58
42.04
117.60
19.92 #######
27.83
478
04/10/2022 10:13
48.27
25.39
72.02
98.71
50.92
45.35
36.48
75.65
93.03
153.81
85.22
46.62
50.79
191.84
21.27
29.64
23.36
20.76
54.19
71.35
42.22
120.43
19.93 #######
27.80
479
04/10/2022 10:13
49.23
25.37
71.60
95.45
50.10
44.48
36.46
75.87
95.37
159.85
82.82
46.05
50.74
188.84
21.16
29.66
23.32
20.69
53.96
70.82
42.77
123.91
19.95 #######
27.86
480
04/10/2022 10:13
48.92
25.27
71.40
93.08
49.54
43.90
36.27
75.63
98.79
165.63
80.94
45.43
49.55
208.48
21.18
29.55
23.25
20.59
53.64
71.79
43.23
124.61
19.97
-53.48
27.90
481
04/10/2022 10:13
49.31
25.10
70.87
91.00
48.88
43.25
36.32
78.33
101.54
158.43
78.81
44.67
49.16
208.33
21.06
29.50
23.20
20.58
53.32
71.44
43.80
125.85
19.92 #######
27.84
482
04/10/2022 10:13
48.36
24.96
70.73
89.53
48.56
42.68
36.48
77.48
102.12
162.22
77.36
44.22
48.85
202.41
21.04
29.52
23.18
20.58
53.05
70.26
43.99
129.54
19.88 #######
27.87
483
04/10/2022 10:13
48.38
24.93
70.02
88.30
48.08
42.30
36.66
76.06
103.95
169.38
76.23
43.86
48.72
198.44
20.97
29.43
23.14
20.53
53.06
69.82
44.72
132.33
19.87 #######
27.81
484
04/10/2022 10:13
47.83
24.99
70.06
87.34
47.60
41.91
36.79
75.70
104.87
171.54
75.20
43.56
48.61
185.55
21.02
29.61
23.15
20.61
52.84
68.62
45.21
131.74
19.83 #######
27.66
485
04/10/2022 10:13
46.06
24.90
70.23
90.65
48.51
42.88
35.65
72.15
101.72
147.47
78.11
44.43
48.01
168.16
20.93
29.60
23.11
20.51
52.70
66.76
45.43
127.79
19.75 #######
27.57
486
04/10/2022 10:13
44.44
24.79
70.92
93.18
48.84
43.26
34.89
69.32
99.49
132.62
81.57
45.03
48.01
153.10
20.84
29.62
23.06
20.48
52.49
64.87
45.61
124.33
19.74 -102.28
27.50
487
04/10/2022 10:13
42.71
24.65
71.52
95.90
49.48
43.72
34.04
66.29
97.12
118.20
84.91
45.68
47.31
140.97
20.73
29.66
22.97
20.36
52.38
63.16
45.68
120.37
19.70 -181.84
27.40
488
04/10/2022 10:13
40.95
24.62
72.27
97.41
50.04
43.94
33.24
63.80
94.90
107.15
88.18
46.21
47.00
127.89
20.68
29.76
22.90
20.28
52.37
61.24
45.70
116.86
19.67 -150.12
27.36
489
04/10/2022 10:13
39.30
24.55
72.61
101.37
50.98
44.48
32.41
61.18
92.25
97.47
89.61
47.36
46.69
117.77
20.63
29.83
22.92
20.25
52.16
59.63
45.34
113.65
19.64 -146.47
27.35
490
04/10/2022 10:13
38.38
24.62
73.13
102.53
51.12
44.53
31.95
59.15
90.54
98.57
91.55
48.00
46.16
113.39
20.62
29.85
22.91
20.13
51.79
58.31
45.31
111.38
19.67
-69.18
27.35
491
04/10/2022 10:13
37.67
24.62
73.70
102.10
51.00
44.30
31.83
58.29
89.42
110.85
92.77
48.19
45.43
111.41
20.63
29.99
22.93
20.08
51.50
57.34
44.92
110.35
19.63 #######
27.36
492
04/10/2022 10:13
36.89
24.62
74.71
102.68
50.80
44.11
31.69
56.80
88.03
111.04
94.49
48.11
44.95
105.33
20.60
30.06
22.93
20.03
51.11
56.28
44.58
108.07
19.59 -194.46
27.34
493
04/10/2022 10:13
35.99
24.53
75.65
102.88
50.62
43.97
31.37
55.29
86.34
106.00
97.00
48.28
44.58
100.35
20.59
30.18
22.88
20.00
51.01
54.96
44.18
105.74
19.52 #######
27.34
494
04/10/2022 10:13
35.13
24.51
76.29
103.76
50.76
43.75
30.75
53.51
84.30
99.20
98.67
48.61
44.24
94.58
20.57
30.26
22.91
19.96
51.10
53.57
43.66
103.34
19.54 #######
27.34
495
04/10/2022 10:13
34.45
24.65
76.36
104.23
50.80
43.85
30.37
52.00
82.80
98.51
99.37
49.17
44.52
90.47
20.56
30.30
22.92
19.88
50.84
52.41
43.20
101.91
19.53 #######
27.28
496
04/10/2022 10:14
34.44
24.77
76.38
103.48
50.86
43.64
30.10
50.62
81.29
98.57
100.61
49.44
44.70
85.57
20.59
30.54
22.97
19.81
50.84
51.22
42.72
99.64
19.50 #######
27.29
497
04/10/2022 10:14
33.46
24.80
76.75
106.93
51.14
43.93
29.31
49.32
79.06
92.13
100.16
50.36
44.43
82.25
20.55
30.73
23.00
19.73
50.55
50.29
42.37
96.85
19.46 #######
27.27
498
04/10/2022 10:14
32.77
24.81
77.13
108.08
51.49
44.07
28.91
48.34
77.48
87.57
101.31
50.92
44.41
77.23
20.61
30.93
23.07
19.72
50.28
49.16
41.80
94.28
19.45 #######
27.27
499
04/10/2022 10:14
32.12
24.83
77.36
110.15
51.96
44.50
28.20
47.21
75.56
82.43
101.00
51.75
44.07
72.74
20.63
31.24
23.15
19.66
50.14
48.11
41.26
92.01
19.45 #######
27.28
500
04/10/2022 10:14
31.61
24.84
77.27
112.32
52.23
44.59
27.75
46.09
73.65
76.68
99.85
52.39
43.55
71.89
20.68
31.32
23.22
19.63
49.97
47.45
40.66
89.52
19.47 #######
27.29
501
04/10/2022 10:14
31.99
25.02
76.87
109.91
51.72
44.17
28.09
46.74
73.95
96.56
99.26
52.52
43.29
85.01
20.70
31.23
23.25
19.59
49.44
47.86
40.18
92.79
19.52 #######
27.41
502
04/10/2022 10:14
33.68
25.11
75.79
103.72
50.59
43.20
28.79
48.82
77.80
107.32
95.69
51.63
42.91
110.53
20.73
31.09
23.26
19.54
49.24
49.18
39.98
93.10
19.58 #######
27.51
503
04/10/2022 10:14
35.73
25.17
74.45
97.88
49.48
42.24
29.61
53.97
80.53
104.38
92.03
50.74
42.91
128.07
20.79
31.03
23.28
19.54
49.21
50.86
39.86
94.36
19.62 #######
27.52
504
04/10/2022 10:14
36.32
25.17
73.69
93.99
48.47
41.38
29.62
53.39
80.98
120.35
89.09
49.74
43.10
135.95
20.83
30.94
23.28
19.51
48.68
51.69
39.78
96.94
19.66 #######
27.55
505
04/10/2022 10:14
36.50
25.28
73.01
90.27
47.55
40.67
29.31
54.12
81.61
130.17
87.13
48.75
42.86
131.44
20.85
30.91
23.31
19.50
48.10
51.36
39.62
100.67
19.73 -139.23
27.58
506
04/10/2022 10:14
37.55
25.33
72.19
86.65
46.66
39.92
29.51
54.66
82.62
135.08
84.49
47.78
42.71
141.93
20.86
30.80
23.23
19.49
47.94
51.65
39.58
102.78
19.75
-70.36
27.57
507
04/10/2022 10:14
37.64
25.26
71.55
82.83
45.79
39.22
29.28
54.16
82.64
137.20
82.12
46.74
42.71
140.88
20.83
30.79
23.23
19.48
48.01
51.92
39.58
103.36
19.79
-37.72
27.50
508
04/10/2022 10:14
37.46
25.27
70.91
80.73
45.07
38.52
29.30
54.12
82.60
139.51
80.32
45.74
42.66
139.27
20.86
30.73
23.22
19.49
48.04
51.91
39.71
105.89
19.84 -149.37
27.51
509
04/10/2022 10:14
37.23
25.16
70.18
77.74
44.36
37.94
29.43
53.52
83.27
144.79
78.18
45.19
42.91
134.46
20.86
30.75
23.23
19.50
47.83
51.44
40.13
108.39
19.87 #######
27.44
510
04/10/2022 10:14
36.43
25.01
70.27
77.36
43.94
37.42
29.33
52.28
82.00
142.13
77.67
44.74
42.67
127.41
20.82
30.86
23.22
19.51
47.83
50.83
40.31
108.17
19.88 #######
27.38
511
04/10/2022 10:14
36.02
24.99
70.50
76.77
43.47
36.93
29.30
51.26
81.38
139.40
77.62
44.15
42.92
124.69
20.84
30.80
23.18
19.51
47.84
50.25
40.39
108.32
19.91 #######
27.36
==PAGE:234==
512
04/10/2022 10:14
35.79
24.96
70.54
75.87
43.10
36.52
29.04
50.56
80.81
140.40
77.06
43.84
42.86
122.97
20.85
30.79
23.18
19.51
47.65
49.89
40.58
109.15
19.92 #######
27.39
513
04/10/2022 10:14
35.72
24.87
69.82
74.25
42.49
36.05
28.82
49.61
81.18
140.47
75.24
43.22
42.46
123.44
20.82
30.68
23.12
19.51
47.50
49.52
40.89
109.49
19.91 #######
27.43
514
04/10/2022 10:14
35.57
24.86
69.05
72.35
41.86
35.56
29.05
49.90
81.68
142.08
73.77
42.59
42.20
121.20
20.86
30.69
23.08
19.49
47.67
48.99
41.21
110.63
19.91 #######
27.41
515
04/10/2022 10:14
35.06
24.84
69.00
72.54
41.54
35.21
28.51
48.75
80.60
133.41
74.60
42.22
42.12
112.51
20.82
30.82
23.04
19.51
47.63
48.19
41.15
108.17
19.94 #######
27.35
516
04/10/2022 10:14
34.59
24.77
69.31
73.11
41.46
35.21
28.38
47.81
79.58
123.87
76.07
42.25
41.99
108.01
20.78
30.80
23.04
19.47
47.58
47.63
41.29
107.20
19.94 #######
27.31
517
04/10/2022 10:14
34.23
24.78
69.37
73.62
41.12
35.04
27.99
46.89
78.71
120.18
76.14
41.95
42.20
108.97
20.84
30.76
23.01
19.48
47.34
47.28
41.26
106.36
19.90
-67.74
27.34
518
04/10/2022 10:14
34.16
24.72
68.61
70.86
40.76
34.70
28.23
47.31
79.89
123.81
74.47
41.54
41.61
113.34
20.86
30.71
22.98
19.48
46.98
47.20
41.34
107.69
19.89
-35.47
27.36
519
04/10/2022 10:14
34.54
24.68
67.80
67.78
40.24
34.23
28.34
49.58
81.08
120.92
72.26
40.76
40.94
122.71
20.85
30.63
22.95
19.47
46.83
48.63
41.55
106.07
19.93 -190.82
27.34
520
04/10/2022 10:14
34.50
24.67
67.41
65.87
39.62
33.69
28.27
49.45
81.50
122.00
70.12
40.08
40.78
118.02
20.86
30.56
22.89
19.47
46.45
48.18
41.63
106.04
19.92 -113.54
27.37
521
04/10/2022 10:14
34.21
24.67
67.10
65.17
39.40
33.34
28.01
48.78
81.71
121.49
69.25
39.72
40.49
118.81
20.86
30.56
22.82
19.46
46.39
47.80
41.74
105.99
19.92 -157.09
27.37
522
04/10/2022 10:14
33.66
24.69
67.16
65.15
39.07
33.06
27.86
47.85
80.26
120.60
69.89
39.43
40.42
110.54
20.82
30.61
22.77
19.44
46.22
47.15
41.82
104.27
19.89 #######
27.36
523
04/10/2022 10:14
32.83
24.59
67.59
65.85
38.91
33.05
27.29
46.67
78.33
112.42
72.21
39.44
40.37
102.08
20.88
30.62
22.75
19.45
46.53
46.35
41.91
101.71
19.86 #######
27.26
524
04/10/2022 10:14
31.92
24.61
67.51
68.62
39.34
33.42
26.69
45.35
76.40
101.98
73.21
39.96
40.75
93.60
20.95
30.70
22.75
19.42
46.59
45.47
41.92
99.16
19.87 #######
27.24
525
04/10/2022 10:14
31.15
24.62
67.55
70.83
39.62
33.99
26.16
44.23
74.80
91.95
74.58
40.65
41.19
86.83
21.05
30.86
22.77
19.45
46.76
44.67
41.93
96.13
19.86 #######
27.21
526
04/10/2022 10:14
30.87
24.75
67.91
72.37
39.70
34.28
25.73
43.36
73.35
86.12
75.64
40.98
41.56
86.31
21.10
30.78
22.82
19.45
46.69
44.20
41.75
95.08
19.88 #######
27.20
527
04/10/2022 10:14
30.79
24.90
67.72
70.87
39.33
33.91
25.65
42.92
72.99
95.65
74.57
40.87
41.54
89.65
21.13
30.66
22.79
19.44
46.57
43.85
41.69
95.08
19.92 #######
27.26
528
04/10/2022 10:14
30.74
24.93
67.08
68.82
38.90
33.48
25.46
42.74
73.20
105.33
72.95
40.53
41.25
87.70
21.16
30.57
22.78
19.44
46.27
43.52
41.52
95.68
19.94 #######
27.26
529
04/10/2022 10:14
30.53
25.00
66.42
66.47
38.46
33.05
25.36
42.23
72.89
113.95
71.22
40.13
41.43
87.89
21.20
30.47
22.79
19.42
46.31
43.20
41.35
96.63
19.95 #######
27.27
530
04/10/2022 10:14
30.51
25.04
65.56
64.28
38.04
32.59
25.52
42.17
74.01
114.71
69.37
39.69
40.98
98.02
21.26
30.38
22.71
19.40
46.16
43.28
41.15
96.33
19.94 -164.07
27.29
531
04/10/2022 10:14
30.56
25.19
64.84
61.98
37.62
32.16
25.55
41.86
75.18
112.52
67.35
39.20
41.05
100.19
21.33
30.30
22.72
19.40
45.97
43.04
41.14
96.74
19.96 -152.10
27.24
532
04/10/2022 10:14
31.17
25.19
64.35
60.21
37.22
31.79
25.59
42.14
74.82
111.55
65.58
38.74
41.41
96.34
21.37
30.31
22.68
19.42
46.05
42.98
41.15
95.60
19.96 #######
27.23
533
04/10/2022 10:14
30.63
25.27
64.53
60.52
36.91
31.56
25.27
41.54
73.31
105.18
65.71
38.38
42.01
90.71
21.43
30.30
22.69
19.41
46.01
42.56
41.15
94.15
19.97 #######
27.25
534
04/10/2022 10:14
30.34
25.23
64.82
60.45
36.62
31.36
24.97
41.01
72.38
102.45
65.75
38.11
41.63
89.86
21.46
30.23
22.64
19.39
45.90
42.34
41.24
94.17
20.00 -168.17
27.23
535
04/10/2022 10:14
30.18
25.20
64.33
59.24
36.26
31.02
24.86
40.71
72.15
106.70
64.49
37.77
41.33
89.56
21.46
30.20
22.60
19.36
45.86
42.02
41.29
93.96
20.00 -156.27
27.20
536
04/10/2022 10:14
29.92
25.20
64.04
58.33
35.90
30.73
24.83
40.34
71.81
108.21
63.27
37.35
41.06
85.97
21.48
30.15
22.53
19.34
45.88
41.73
41.18
93.78
20.01 #######
27.20
537
04/10/2022 10:14
29.74
25.17
63.98
57.95
35.59
30.47
24.74
39.84
70.80
105.32
62.50
37.02
41.08
84.01
21.50
30.14
22.47
19.36
45.73
41.42
41.15
92.44
20.00 #######
27.16
538
04/10/2022 10:14
29.53
25.22
63.92
57.16
35.34
30.23
24.54
39.37
70.05
104.84
62.22
36.80
41.28
80.14
21.58
30.07
22.43
19.31
45.70
41.02
41.13
91.72
20.00 #######
27.16
539
04/10/2022 10:14
29.43
25.19
63.80
57.29
35.18
30.07
24.70
39.02
69.37
103.37
62.55
36.55
41.07
78.69
21.56
30.12
22.38
19.30
45.61
40.80
41.08
91.12
19.96 #######
27.18
540
04/10/2022 10:14
29.33
25.34
63.33
56.77
34.87
29.78
24.73
38.78
69.14
106.01
61.77
36.23
41.39
78.88
21.61
29.98
22.33
19.26
45.85
40.61
40.86
91.65
19.95 #######
27.14
541
04/10/2022 10:14
29.56
25.37
62.85
55.52
34.51
29.51
24.80
39.13
68.96
107.50
60.58
35.87
41.56
79.87
21.68
29.90
22.30
19.27
45.90
40.50
40.64
91.62
19.96 #######
27.12
542
04/10/2022 10:14
29.52
25.37
62.25
54.35
34.20
29.31
24.93
39.07
69.28
107.69
59.27
35.53
41.43
78.16
21.68
29.83
22.22
19.28
45.75
40.31
40.51
91.92
19.95 #######
27.14
543
04/10/2022 10:14
29.74
25.35
61.79
53.54
33.92
29.09
24.96
39.03
69.29
107.80
58.32
35.22
41.65
81.61
21.68
29.66
22.16
19.24
45.78
40.66
40.28
91.50
19.92 #######
27.14
544
04/10/2022 10:14
29.91
25.30
61.18
52.12
33.62
28.88
25.06
39.80
69.66
105.26
57.03
34.92
41.42
79.75
21.63
29.61
22.11
19.25
45.58
40.56
40.40
91.32
19.91
-91.93
27.12
545
04/10/2022 10:14
29.90
25.21
60.82
51.17
33.34
28.64
25.09
39.76
69.27
104.84
56.02
34.52
41.71
79.04
21.73
29.54
22.09
19.26
45.66
40.54
40.28
90.97
19.95 -137.25
27.05
546
04/10/2022 10:14
29.83
25.20
60.66
51.33
33.16
28.47
24.93
39.46
68.55
103.09
55.60
34.23
41.85
75.97
21.68
29.45
22.04
19.24
45.45
40.37
40.24
90.33
19.92 #######
27.03
547
04/10/2022 10:15
29.98
25.20
60.33
51.68
32.96
28.36
24.85
39.11
67.99
99.63
55.77
34.00
41.83
75.46
21.64
29.30
21.99
19.20
45.35
40.37
40.13
89.42
19.92 #######
27.02
548
04/10/2022 10:15
30.00
25.15
60.08
51.58
32.76
28.21
24.80
39.28
67.55
97.46
55.45
33.67
41.63
73.39
21.61
29.22
21.93
19.19
45.45
40.18
40.17
89.00
19.89 #######
27.01
549
04/10/2022 10:15
29.56
25.13
59.79
51.38
32.57
28.08
24.67
38.97
66.90
98.20
54.92
33.40
41.63
71.64
21.63
29.23
21.88
19.16
45.31
39.93
40.25
88.82
19.89 #######
27.02
550
04/10/2022 10:15
29.75
25.10
59.34
50.41
32.35
27.89
24.60
38.72
67.13
99.82
54.33
33.11
41.82
74.77
21.68
29.22
21.88
19.19
45.61
39.77
40.32
88.52
19.87 #######
26.99
551
04/10/2022 10:15
29.54
25.06
59.20
50.33
32.19
27.72
24.49
38.50
66.47
96.18
54.23
32.92
41.71
70.35
21.65
29.25
21.85
19.20
45.54
39.32
40.25
86.74
19.86 #######
26.97
552
04/10/2022 10:15
29.04
25.06
59.08
51.45
32.40
27.81
24.30
37.85
65.10
87.50
55.41
33.11
42.24
65.75
21.67
29.26
21.82
19.17
45.68
38.85
39.90
84.96
19.83 #######
26.95
553
04/10/2022 10:15
28.42
25.02
58.91
53.28
32.97
28.37
24.16
37.24
63.86
80.02
55.87
33.56
42.18
63.68
21.67
29.20
21.80
19.18
45.53
38.59
39.79
83.22
19.83 #######
26.93
554
04/10/2022 10:15
28.21
25.01
58.94
53.80
33.12
28.46
24.19
36.85
63.03
79.62
57.19
33.75
42.16
62.67
21.62
29.16
21.77
19.15
45.37
38.29
39.53
82.00
19.79 #######
26.89
555
04/10/2022 10:15
28.09
25.01
58.81
54.36
33.15
28.44
24.36
36.48
62.48
79.73
58.02
33.89
42.11
59.96
21.65
29.12
21.73
19.13
45.26
37.97
39.29
80.51
19.78 #######
26.91
556
04/10/2022 10:15
27.64
25.06
58.97
56.04
33.48
28.74
24.08
36.00
61.30
73.47
59.34
34.22
42.03
58.26
21.63
29.11
21.69
19.12
45.15
37.73
39.09
78.81
19.76 #######
26.89
557
04/10/2022 10:15
27.51
25.09
59.00
56.82
33.54
28.95
24.00
35.93
60.41
71.34
60.82
34.44
42.26
55.51
21.61
29.21
21.71
19.12
45.15
37.41
38.73
77.18
19.75 #######
26.88
558
04/10/2022 10:15
27.13
25.16
58.96
58.11
33.74
29.17
23.88
35.51
59.29
67.89
61.59
34.68
42.40
52.52
21.61
29.24
21.70
19.12
45.05
37.09
38.45
75.28
19.72 #######
26.91
559
04/10/2022 10:15
26.85
25.10
59.40
59.33
33.76
29.30
23.91
35.10
58.27
66.05
62.86
34.97
41.90
50.73
21.61
29.25
21.70
19.11
45.02
36.74
38.32
73.90
19.71 #######
26.88
560
04/10/2022 10:15
26.53
25.12
59.31
60.50
34.05
29.48
23.80
34.73
57.42
65.44
63.46
35.26
41.60
48.79
21.62
29.28
21.71
19.09
44.86
36.45
38.04
72.50
19.70 #######
26.87
561
04/10/2022 10:15
26.28
25.17
59.36
61.39
34.21
29.67
23.60
34.36
56.34
62.88
64.18
35.67
41.54
47.03
21.62
29.28
21.76
19.08
44.63
36.20
37.74
70.88
19.71 #######
26.86
562
04/10/2022 10:15
25.99
25.17
59.33
61.47
34.35
29.75
23.45
34.06
55.56
63.77
64.83
35.76
41.60
46.18
21.64
29.19
21.76
19.10
44.64
35.92
37.38
69.99
19.71 #######
26.91
563
04/10/2022 10:15
25.98
25.15
59.67
61.85
34.23
29.69
23.27
33.75
54.70
65.45
65.46
35.91
41.17
47.74
21.61
29.25
21.77
19.08
44.55
35.76
37.17
69.77
19.70 #######
26.93
564
04/10/2022 10:15
26.00
25.18
59.32
60.15
33.98
29.47
23.24
34.00
54.93
72.58
64.75
35.79
40.73
54.93
21.62
29.24
21.78
19.06
44.40
36.37
36.98
70.85
19.72 #######
26.92
565
04/10/2022 10:15
26.03
25.22
58.91
58.51
33.68
29.18
23.33
34.72
55.22
80.04
63.12
35.48
40.43
55.33
21.58
29.18
21.79
19.06
44.45
36.43
36.73
72.05
19.71 #######
26.93
566
04/10/2022 10:15
26.06
25.30
58.52
57.54
33.36
28.90
23.43
35.04
55.33
85.02
61.79
35.15
40.54
61.21
21.64
29.12
21.81
19.01
44.52
36.60
36.59
72.85
19.73 -130.64
26.91
567
04/10/2022 10:15
26.19
25.34
57.98
55.61
33.08
28.68
23.37
35.28
56.00
86.05
60.28
34.73
40.81
64.72
21.68
29.12
21.82
19.04
44.62
36.60
36.28
73.18
19.75 -112.33
26.90
568
04/10/2022 10:15
26.56
25.42
57.62
54.09
32.78
28.41
23.33
35.72
56.52
87.12
58.77
34.38
40.60
69.21
21.69
29.10
21.85
19.04
44.80
36.72
36.33
73.69
19.76 #######
26.90
==PAGE:235==
569
04/10/2022 10:15
26.78
25.43
57.26
52.39
32.46
28.16
23.31
35.61
57.48
86.58
57.28
33.94
40.97
73.51
21.75
29.08
21.84
19.02
45.03
36.71
36.16
73.68
19.77 #######
26.90
570
04/10/2022 10:15
27.10
25.50
56.89
50.86
32.16
27.94
23.45
35.66
58.45
84.85
55.88
33.67
40.75
74.98
21.77
29.03
21.85
19.04
45.01
36.82
36.25
73.85
19.79 #######
26.89
571
04/10/2022 10:15
27.11
25.51
56.53
49.46
31.88
27.68
23.53
35.70
59.08
84.53
54.60
33.34
41.06
74.40
21.79
28.99
21.80
19.02
45.00
36.83
36.30
74.44
19.76 #######
26.88
572
04/10/2022 10:15
27.26
25.45
56.19
48.54
31.60
27.48
23.59
35.55
58.96
85.62
53.54
33.02
41.00
77.65
21.76
28.92
21.77
18.99
45.03
37.16
36.34
74.58
19.74 #######
26.89
573
04/10/2022 10:15
27.44
25.28
55.79
47.04
31.33
27.28
23.73
36.54
59.69
83.59
52.41
32.71
40.54
76.61
21.69
28.89
21.74
18.99
44.66
37.55
36.42
74.72
19.72 #######
26.88
574
04/10/2022 10:15
27.35
25.17
55.47
46.29
31.10
27.08
23.80
36.85
59.57
83.94
51.61
32.41
40.37
76.75
21.72
28.77
21.72
18.98
44.65
37.64
36.48
74.46
19.74 #######
26.86
575
04/10/2022 10:15
27.08
25.08
55.26
46.06
30.90
26.89
23.78
36.53
59.03
81.63
51.03
32.17
40.59
73.19
21.71
28.69
21.69
19.00
44.40
37.44
36.58
73.43
19.69 #######
26.86
576
04/10/2022 10:15
26.88
25.04
55.03
45.63
30.73
26.77
23.63
36.08
58.26
77.23
51.07
31.93
41.11
71.80
21.77
28.70
21.68
19.01
44.36
37.29
36.73
72.28
19.71 -180.61
26.82
577
04/10/2022 10:15
26.76
25.10
54.84
45.10
30.54
26.59
23.74
35.74
57.91
75.63
50.93
31.79
40.76
68.35
21.76
28.67
21.68
19.00
44.32
37.09
36.82
72.07
19.69 -199.59
26.85
578
04/10/2022 10:15
26.61
24.99
54.79
44.97
30.42
26.47
23.69
35.42
57.41
76.76
50.67
31.61
40.65
67.95
21.70
28.64
21.65
19.00
44.22
37.18
36.95
72.09
19.70 #######
26.83
579
04/10/2022 10:15
26.62
24.91
54.51
44.43
30.25
26.34
23.83
35.59
57.41
78.69
49.97
31.40
40.43
66.45
21.66
28.58
21.63
18.99
44.15
37.00
36.95
71.61
19.66 #######
26.84
580
04/10/2022 10:15
26.44
24.88
54.29
44.49
30.14
26.19
23.75
35.27
57.19
77.95
49.78
31.18
40.78
66.55
21.66
28.53
21.59
18.97
44.31
36.86
36.98
71.40
19.64 #######
26.84
581
04/10/2022 10:15
26.61
24.85
54.01
43.76
29.96
26.04
23.79
36.08
57.24
77.11
49.19
31.00
40.93
68.02
21.65
28.45
21.56
18.98
44.26
37.22
37.03
71.24
19.65 #######
26.86
582
04/10/2022 10:15
26.69
24.81
53.80
43.07
29.76
25.89
23.81
36.05
57.72
77.49
48.31
30.79
40.69
65.75
21.58
28.42
21.54
18.97
44.26
37.17
37.08
71.50
19.63 #######
26.83
583
04/10/2022 10:15
26.55
24.70
53.60
42.99
29.63
25.78
23.80
35.72
57.16
78.02
48.21
30.63
40.43
63.01
21.59
28.34
21.51
18.96
44.12
36.97
37.04
70.82
19.63 #######
26.81
584
04/10/2022 10:15
26.40
24.68
53.51
43.19
29.47
25.66
23.71
35.41
56.52
76.24
48.29
30.54
40.29
61.86
21.52
28.34
21.49
18.96
44.06
36.79
37.11
70.67
19.59 #######
26.82
585
04/10/2022 10:15
26.41
24.70
53.37
42.79
29.34
25.54
23.89
35.14
56.36
77.41
48.28
30.45
40.05
60.93
21.52
28.29
21.44
18.97
43.92
36.70
37.03
70.33
19.57 #######
26.81
586
04/10/2022 10:15
26.37
24.63
53.07
42.56
29.24
25.49
23.95
35.12
56.26
77.79
47.89
30.31
39.79
62.16
21.53
28.17
21.43
18.94
43.83
36.79
36.98
70.38
19.59 #######
26.81
587
04/10/2022 10:15
26.45
24.55
52.78
41.74
29.06
25.37
23.83
35.20
56.47
78.76
47.05
30.05
39.67
60.86
21.47
28.18
21.38
18.95
43.60
36.65
37.03
70.58
19.58 #######
26.81
588
04/10/2022 10:15
26.45
24.53
52.62
41.52
29.01
25.30
23.78
35.00
56.13
77.92
46.88
29.86
39.76
61.59
21.47
28.20
21.37
18.97
43.73
36.59
37.17
70.16
19.57 #######
26.79
589
04/10/2022 10:15
26.46
24.48
52.54
41.40
28.87
25.19
23.84
34.85
55.59
77.16
46.93
29.67
39.53
61.95
21.51
28.12
21.37
18.97
43.60
36.51
37.16
69.93
19.57 #######
26.78
590
04/10/2022 10:15
26.53
24.57
52.30
40.98
28.77
25.14
24.01
35.31
55.86
76.22
46.45
29.49
39.10
62.39
21.56
28.01
21.34
18.94
43.62
36.75
37.12
69.90
19.56 #######
26.77
591
04/10/2022 10:15
26.43
24.47
52.22
40.84
28.66
25.01
23.88
35.02
55.31
74.10
46.13
29.31
38.84
62.00
21.54
27.95
21.35
18.96
43.42
36.77
37.10
68.77
19.56 #######
26.81
592
04/10/2022 10:15
26.42
24.37
52.05
40.57
28.58
24.93
23.95
35.10
55.28
74.65
45.88
29.18
38.63
61.89
21.46
27.90
21.30
18.95
43.48
36.95
37.20
69.25
19.54 #######
26.79
593
04/10/2022 10:15
26.28
24.38
51.92
40.22
28.45
24.86
23.94
34.86
55.35
75.73
45.49
29.03
38.45
59.03
21.44
27.87
21.28
18.92
43.39
36.79
37.08
68.98
19.53 #######
26.80
594
04/10/2022 10:15
26.23
24.31
51.87
40.50
28.41
24.78
23.89
34.56
54.66
74.59
45.96
28.94
38.32
59.84
21.43
27.81
21.24
18.91
43.45
36.76
37.02
68.57
19.52 #######
26.81
595
04/10/2022 10:15
26.15
24.31
51.61
39.96
28.29
24.69
23.74
34.57
54.67
74.69
45.57
28.73
38.23
62.33
21.41
27.68
21.21
18.87
43.24
36.75
37.07
68.19
19.50 #######
26.81
596
04/10/2022 10:15
25.99
24.32
51.33
39.39
28.12
24.57
23.68
35.13
54.74
74.08
45.01
28.63
37.94
60.45
21.44
27.63
21.18
18.89
43.14
36.65
36.93
68.35
19.50 #######
26.81
597
04/10/2022 10:15
25.95
24.28
51.13
39.13
28.03
24.49
23.77
34.87
54.34
75.60
44.51
28.52
37.79
58.89
21.40
27.60
21.14
18.88
43.03
36.54
36.87
68.15
19.48 #######
26.79
598
04/10/2022 10:15
25.96
24.29
50.94
38.87
27.92
24.43
23.62
34.65
54.25
75.91
44.06
28.42
37.84
58.09
21.43
27.53
21.11
18.87
43.20
36.39
36.73
68.23
19.47 #######
26.77
599
04/10/2022 10:16
25.87
24.26
50.75
38.69
27.80
24.33
23.51
34.37
53.86
74.99
43.61
28.30
38.11
57.51
21.45
27.46
21.12
18.86
43.05
36.21
36.69
67.66
19.47 #######
26.76
600
04/10/2022 10:16
25.84
24.20
50.62
38.47
27.70
24.25
23.46
34.17
53.50
74.73
43.58
28.20
38.00
54.99
21.46
27.50
21.13
18.89
42.80
36.01
36.53
67.28
19.46 #######
26.80
601
04/10/2022 10:16
25.64
24.24
50.53
38.73
27.64
24.19
23.36
33.87
52.78
70.23
43.75
28.14
37.88
55.24
21.46
27.45
21.12
18.89
42.64
35.83
36.48
66.26
19.45 #######
26.79
602
04/10/2022 10:16
25.46
24.20
50.51
38.91
27.60
24.14
23.38
33.66
52.92
68.91
43.85
28.11
37.95
54.59
21.46
27.45
21.12
18.87
42.68
35.59
36.43
66.06
19.46 #######
26.77
603
04/10/2022 10:16
25.23
24.27
50.53
39.97
27.67
24.12
23.16
33.34
52.17
66.19
44.67
28.21
37.88
52.14
21.50
27.49
21.12
18.89
42.63
35.39
36.28
65.03
19.46 #######
26.77
604
04/10/2022 10:16
25.11
24.37
50.59
40.65
27.71
24.20
23.08
33.12
51.49
64.62
45.49
28.35
37.79
52.04
21.48
27.42
21.11
18.87
42.67
35.26
36.27
64.62
19.48 #######
26.77
605
04/10/2022 10:16
25.13
24.31
50.44
40.55
27.65
24.18
23.21
33.13
51.49
67.99
45.14
28.32
37.68
50.22
21.53
27.40
21.10
18.89
42.57
35.04
36.11
64.34
19.48 #######
26.78
606
04/10/2022 10:16
25.09
24.34
50.44
40.96
27.68
24.15
23.22
32.89
50.97
67.29
45.57
28.35
37.77
50.56
21.51
27.46
21.10
18.90
42.53
34.89
36.08
64.20
19.47 #######
26.79
607
04/10/2022 10:16
24.97
24.28
50.22
40.44
27.62
24.12
23.13
32.75
51.01
70.59
45.19
28.28
37.83
50.61
21.51
27.40
21.07
18.89
42.53
34.74
35.91
64.34
19.46 #######
26.79
608
04/10/2022 10:16
24.91
24.27
50.20
40.61
27.56
24.09
23.15
32.63
50.72
72.40
45.20
28.24
38.08
52.47
21.52
27.45
21.06
18.90
42.51
34.85
35.96
64.41
19.46 #######
26.77
609
04/10/2022 10:16
24.71
24.22
50.11
40.69
27.54
24.02
23.09
32.63
50.49
70.98
45.23
28.17
38.06
52.03
21.48
27.38
21.04
18.87
42.31
34.67
35.82
63.66
19.47 #######
26.76
610
04/10/2022 10:16
24.61
24.33
50.01
40.75
27.52
24.05
23.10
32.64
50.20
70.93
45.42
28.08
38.20
52.75
21.54
27.36
21.01
18.86
42.38
34.58
35.73
63.95
19.48 #######
26.79
611
04/10/2022 10:16
24.57
24.43
49.77
40.12
27.38
23.97
23.14
33.09
50.56
71.09
44.78
27.96
37.96
56.81
21.65
27.32
21.05
18.84
42.42
34.99
35.65
64.11
19.50 #######
26.80
612
04/10/2022 10:16
24.55
24.40
49.57
39.57
27.27
23.88
23.33
33.23
51.02
71.72
44.05
27.85
37.82
58.23
21.60
27.29
21.03
18.86
42.31
34.93
35.64
64.73
19.48 #######
26.81
613
04/10/2022 10:16
24.57
24.39
49.37
39.28
27.22
23.84
23.42
33.25
51.24
73.92
43.65
27.74
37.88
57.66
21.62
27.31
20.98
18.87
42.51
34.88
35.52
65.42
19.52 #######
26.79
614
04/10/2022 10:16
24.48
24.46
49.16
38.70
27.10
23.80
23.40
33.06
51.36
75.95
43.13
27.64
38.37
56.84
21.69
27.25
20.99
18.85
42.45
34.67
35.59
65.79
19.53 #######
26.81
615
04/10/2022 10:16
24.30
24.42
49.13
38.90
27.03
23.72
23.14
32.71
50.80
73.30
43.05
27.55
38.58
54.51
21.67
27.33
20.97
18.85
42.36
34.26
35.54
64.99
19.53 #######
26.80
616
04/10/2022 10:16
24.05
24.31
49.10
40.76
27.60
24.22
22.96
32.27
49.84
66.83
43.29
28.03
38.46
51.44
21.65
27.38
20.95
18.85
42.35
33.94
35.48
63.87
19.48 #######
26.76
617
04/10/2022 10:16
23.77
24.29
49.27
42.62
27.80
24.71
22.77
31.91
49.09
61.02
44.38
28.45
38.23
48.57
21.63
27.48
20.97
18.84
42.27
33.56
35.31
62.66
19.46 #######
26.79
618
04/10/2022 10:16
23.54
24.30
49.39
44.31
28.19
25.16
22.61
31.50
48.32
56.29
44.89
29.00
38.12
46.00
21.65
27.55
20.98
18.86
42.16
33.28
35.29
61.51
19.46 #######
26.77
619
04/10/2022 10:16
23.33
24.31
49.65
46.61
28.52
25.65
22.43
31.11
47.61
53.09
45.58
29.60
38.06
43.68
21.66
27.63
21.02
18.85
42.02
32.96
35.10
60.37
19.47 #######
26.76
620
04/10/2022 10:16
23.11
24.33
49.74
48.89
28.94
25.99
22.33
30.86
46.91
50.44
45.86
30.08
37.89
41.70
21.68
27.71
21.03
18.85
41.88
32.71
34.98
59.40
19.45 #######
26.75
621
04/10/2022 10:16
22.97
24.46
49.83
50.82
29.36
26.35
22.18
30.52
46.20
48.29
46.19
30.69
38.02
39.72
21.67
27.76
21.06
18.83
41.82
32.38
34.88
58.21
19.43 #######
26.75
622
04/10/2022 10:16
22.65
24.49
49.78
52.41
29.87
26.93
21.86
30.12
45.36
46.66
46.08
31.16
37.70
37.95
21.70
27.76
21.10
18.84
41.49
32.08
34.59
57.07
19.45 #######
26.76
623
04/10/2022 10:16
22.60
24.47
49.93
53.97
30.31
27.53
21.71
29.85
44.71
45.28
46.44
31.54
37.58
36.37
21.63
27.87
21.14
18.83
41.31
31.77
34.41
55.99
19.39 #######
26.77
624
04/10/2022 10:16
22.44
24.60
50.08
55.31
30.59
27.99
21.61
29.57
44.09
44.44
46.54
31.95
37.58
35.23
21.66
27.96
21.18
18.81
41.19
31.52
34.24
55.13
19.41 #######
26.78
625
04/10/2022 10:16
22.31
24.60
50.30
56.09
30.75
28.08
21.46
29.34
43.47
45.00
47.22
32.30
37.25
34.70
21.70
28.08
21.19
18.79
41.12
31.33
34.05
54.27
19.42 #######
26.79
==PAGE:236==
626
04/10/2022 10:16
22.24
24.62
50.43
56.91
30.99
28.29
21.32
29.11
43.02
46.06
48.14
32.70
37.17
33.36
21.73
28.19
21.20
18.78
40.97
31.07
33.86
53.51
19.38 #######
26.79
627
04/10/2022 10:16
22.01
24.68
50.59
59.26
31.22
28.57
21.32
28.93
42.34
45.18
48.22
33.26
37.01
32.39
21.75
28.28
21.27
18.77
40.85
30.87
33.66
52.78
19.39 #######
26.79
628
04/10/2022 10:16
21.81
24.69
50.80
60.70
31.49
28.89
21.24
28.74
41.69
44.07
48.82
33.84
36.98
31.38
21.80
28.36
21.29
18.76
40.71
30.73
33.36
51.93
19.39 #######
26.81
629
04/10/2022 10:16
21.78
24.70
50.86
60.64
31.56
29.01
21.29
29.05
41.42
46.52
49.30
34.17
36.63
33.79
21.78
28.48
21.32
18.76
40.61
30.85
33.13
51.78
19.37 #######
26.80
630
04/10/2022 10:16
21.74
24.76
51.24
61.09
31.65
28.96
21.19
28.88
40.85
46.70
50.32
34.34
36.73
32.64
21.77
28.53
21.37
18.75
40.49
30.70
32.91
51.22
19.39 #######
26.80
631
04/10/2022 10:16
21.80
24.82
51.39
61.50
31.89
29.08
21.03
28.81
40.48
46.21
50.87
34.54
36.87
34.10
21.86
28.62
21.44
18.74
40.45
30.64
32.62
51.26
19.43 #######
26.88
632
04/10/2022 10:16
21.91
24.99
51.43
60.54
31.83
28.96
21.10
28.79
40.58
51.41
51.07
34.63
37.34
33.62
21.94
28.76
21.54
18.81
40.64
30.55
32.66
51.52
19.48 #######
26.86
633
04/10/2022 10:16
21.87
25.10
51.58
59.72
31.57
28.63
21.04
28.67
40.34
56.58
51.71
34.51
37.83
34.66
21.99
28.81
21.57
18.79
40.70
30.48
32.48
51.97
19.50 #######
26.88
634
04/10/2022 10:16
21.97
25.18
51.58
58.86
31.36
28.38
21.09
28.72
40.58
61.52
51.68
34.31
37.77
36.41
22.07
28.74
21.58
18.80
40.76
30.56
32.33
53.23
19.52 #######
26.88
635
04/10/2022 10:16
22.40
25.25
51.19
57.02
31.05
28.05
21.33
29.45
40.85
65.94
51.02
34.01
37.57
39.86
22.07
28.73
21.61
18.82
40.71
31.44
32.33
54.38
19.53 #######
26.85
636
04/10/2022 10:16
22.50
25.29
51.05
55.69
30.76
27.75
21.42
29.76
41.02
68.58
50.45
33.67
37.50
40.07
22.03
28.79
21.59
18.80
40.61
31.44
32.33
54.81
19.50 #######
26.82
637
04/10/2022 10:16
22.39
25.14
51.21
55.37
30.83
27.70
21.44
29.58
40.51
65.04
51.22
33.54
37.27
38.61
21.99
28.92
21.57
18.80
40.39
31.29
32.25
54.23
19.50 #######
26.81
638
04/10/2022 10:16
22.24
25.10
51.32
56.31
31.01
27.99
21.40
29.33
40.01
60.33
51.55
34.01
37.28
38.21
21.98
28.95
21.55
18.77
40.26
31.20
32.14
54.24
19.49 #######
26.83
639
04/10/2022 10:16
22.06
25.04
51.29
56.59
31.12
28.04
21.26
29.14
39.73
59.64
51.95
34.11
37.40
36.77
21.98
29.04
21.54
18.77
40.22
30.97
32.02
53.71
19.50 #######
26.83
640
04/10/2022 10:16
22.08
24.97
51.54
57.48
31.42
28.27
21.18
28.95
39.27
56.36
52.71
34.31
37.21
35.37
21.93
29.10
21.52
18.75
39.97
30.76
31.93
53.16
19.47 #######
26.85
641
04/10/2022 10:16
21.87
24.92
51.69
59.09
31.65
28.36
21.05
28.70
38.80
52.73
52.72
34.68
37.01
34.08
21.87
29.16
21.53
18.76
39.97
30.53
31.79
52.49
19.49 #######
26.85
642
04/10/2022 10:16
21.84
24.83
51.77
60.01
32.12
28.73
21.09
28.53
38.43
50.20
52.79
35.12
36.65
33.36
21.79
29.32
21.55
18.78
39.81
30.39
31.63
51.87
19.47 #######
26.87
643
04/10/2022 10:16
21.68
24.79
51.87
60.82
32.42
28.86
20.90
28.31
38.07
48.08
53.01
35.39
36.40
32.10
21.78
29.39
21.58
18.76
39.69
30.11
31.54
50.90
19.48 #######
26.88
644
04/10/2022 10:16
21.67
24.73
52.07
62.24
32.62
29.31
20.92
28.19
37.70
46.68
53.55
35.84
36.18
32.03
21.76
29.40
21.59
18.76
39.60
30.07
31.38
50.31
19.45 #######
26.89
645
04/10/2022 10:16
21.68
24.78
52.27
62.53
32.79
29.38
20.92
28.08
37.45
46.85
54.34
36.08
36.03
31.47
21.71
29.45
21.56
18.76
39.44
29.93
31.29
49.95
19.44 #######
26.88
646
04/10/2022 10:16
21.55
24.72
52.48
63.21
32.93
29.42
20.88
27.96
37.10
47.45
55.10
36.51
36.00
30.79
21.72
29.56
21.61
18.79
39.40
29.80
31.19
49.46
19.45 #######
26.86
647
04/10/2022 10:16
21.42
24.73
52.51
63.94
33.14
29.57
20.85
27.83
36.69
46.60
55.37
36.82
35.86
29.97
21.73
29.64
21.64
18.76
39.37
29.60
31.00
48.87
19.45 #######
26.89
648
04/10/2022 10:16
21.28
24.70
52.68
64.97
33.31
29.84
20.73
27.70
36.41
46.23
55.53
37.09
35.95
30.02
21.70
29.72
21.70
18.76
39.44
29.41
30.89
48.55
19.44 #######
26.90
649
04/10/2022 10:16
21.20
24.68
52.87
65.41
33.52
29.93
20.71
27.63
36.16
46.11
56.26
37.38
35.85
29.40
21.72
29.81
21.77
18.76
39.23
29.29
30.75
48.13
19.47 #######
26.90
650
04/10/2022 10:16
21.16
24.74
52.96
65.69
33.67
30.09
20.84
27.57
36.04
48.05
56.52
37.65
35.99
30.21
21.73
29.79
21.79
18.76
39.22
29.28
30.56
48.39
19.47 #######
26.88
651
04/10/2022 10:17
21.14
24.82
53.19
64.74
33.49
29.94
20.93
27.55
36.05
55.11
57.59
37.48
36.03
32.05
21.80
29.72
21.82
18.75
39.30
29.30
30.47
50.12
19.44 #######
26.88
652
04/10/2022 10:17
21.27
24.87
53.04
63.61
33.22
29.65
21.00
27.62
36.37
65.56
57.50
37.26
35.97
34.13
21.82
29.73
21.88
18.75
39.16
29.36
30.47
52.49
19.45 #######
26.90
653
04/10/2022 10:17
21.41
24.89
52.80
61.89
32.91
29.29
21.14
28.42
36.80
74.16
56.93
36.97
35.96
39.41
21.86
29.72
21.92
18.79
39.00
30.02
30.47
54.77
19.44 #######
26.91
654
04/10/2022 10:17
21.62
24.83
52.47
59.72
32.54
28.92
21.35
28.71
37.99
79.12
55.74
36.63
35.65
42.44
21.91
29.69
21.92
18.80
38.95
30.17
30.50
56.93
19.45 #######
26.90
655
04/10/2022 10:17
21.75
24.91
52.23
58.11
32.24
28.62
21.51
28.76
38.75
82.63
54.71
36.19
35.48
43.48
21.87
29.72
21.92
18.78
38.98
30.25
30.54
58.69
19.46 #######
26.86
656
04/10/2022 10:17
21.74
24.81
52.08
57.07
31.96
28.34
21.61
28.77
38.79
82.02
54.54
35.79
35.33
42.03
21.88
29.79
21.98
18.81
38.83
30.27
30.54
58.75
19.45 -175.67
26.88
657
04/10/2022 10:17
21.70
24.77
52.03
56.22
31.88
28.14
21.54
28.68
38.51
78.79
55.03
35.50
35.11
44.23
21.86
29.78
21.97
18.80
38.88
30.60
30.49
58.60
19.49 #######
26.86
658
04/10/2022 10:17
21.93
24.74
51.84
54.72
31.59
27.91
21.66
30.03
38.90
75.12
54.52
35.22
34.87
46.24
21.88
29.77
21.96
18.82
38.79
31.24
30.70
59.65
19.48 #######
26.87
659
04/10/2022 10:17
22.10
24.64
51.52
53.25
31.28
27.60
21.79
29.95
39.65
76.50
53.42
34.86
34.75
47.05
21.84
29.72
21.97
18.84
38.73
31.29
30.76
60.67
19.48 #######
26.86
660
04/10/2022 10:17
22.26
24.65
51.30
51.80
31.01
27.41
21.85
29.99
40.01
78.66
52.51
34.52
34.65
46.85
21.81
29.72
21.97
18.84
38.75
31.30
31.00
61.46
19.49 #######
26.88
661
04/10/2022 10:17
22.35
24.49
51.10
50.64
30.78
27.17
21.79
29.83
39.99
79.64
51.92
34.17
34.83
48.92
21.74
29.64
21.94
18.84
38.79
31.38
31.15
61.95
19.45 #######
26.85
662
04/10/2022 10:17
22.59
24.45
50.83
49.16
30.50
26.90
21.95
30.25
40.71
80.61
51.07
33.90
34.80
48.84
21.77
29.52
21.89
18.83
38.88
31.45
31.25
63.00
19.45 #######
26.85
663
04/10/2022 10:17
22.61
24.40
50.75
48.29
30.27
26.66
22.07
30.18
40.63
80.59
50.49
33.55
34.80
48.34
21.80
29.46
21.87
18.84
38.92
31.43
31.43
63.36
19.47 #######
26.86
664
04/10/2022 10:17
22.69
24.38
50.53
47.32
30.07
26.49
22.17
30.09
41.13
79.79
49.86
33.37
34.60
49.04
21.81
29.29
21.86
18.84
38.89
31.41
31.44
63.56
19.49 #######
26.86
665
04/10/2022 10:17
22.84
24.34
50.27
46.37
29.88
26.31
22.22
30.48
41.55
76.63
49.36
33.11
34.68
50.48
21.75
29.28
21.79
18.86
38.65
31.69
31.62
63.60
19.50 #######
26.84
666
04/10/2022 10:17
22.84
24.33
50.13
45.79
29.65
26.10
22.30
30.40
41.56
76.29
48.75
32.81
34.54
48.07
21.73
29.33
21.81
18.86
38.65
31.64
31.74
63.32
19.51 #######
26.84
667
04/10/2022 10:17
22.77
24.21
50.11
45.65
29.53
25.97
22.42
30.24
41.49
74.79
48.80
32.57
34.66
49.70
21.70
29.21
21.78
18.87
38.74
31.67
31.87
63.77
19.52 #######
26.83
668
04/10/2022 10:17
22.93
24.26
49.75
44.49
29.38
25.80
22.55
30.18
42.27
75.06
48.07
32.29
34.37
48.97
21.69
29.14
21.74
18.85
38.67
31.67
31.94
64.01
19.50 #######
26.81
669
04/10/2022 10:17
22.95
24.17
49.67
43.79
29.19
25.63
22.54
30.08
42.16
73.70
47.75
32.05
34.46
48.33
21.75
29.11
21.74
18.86
38.53
31.57
32.14
63.55
19.50 #######
26.81
670
04/10/2022 10:17
23.05
24.09
49.45
42.91
29.06
25.53
22.61
30.32
42.32
74.42
47.21
31.88
34.47
48.32
21.75
29.06
21.74
18.86
38.49
31.71
32.19
63.52
19.51 #######
26.82
671
04/10/2022 10:17
23.11
24.11
49.50
43.01
28.96
25.41
22.60
30.20
42.09
72.63
47.30
31.68
34.60
47.37
21.71
28.99
21.71
18.86
38.51
31.62
32.40
63.20
19.52 #######
26.80
672
04/10/2022 10:17
23.01
24.04
49.46
42.90
28.88
25.35
22.44
29.96
41.87
70.02
47.54
31.44
34.54
45.81
21.73
29.04
21.69
18.88
38.54
31.47
32.38
62.53
19.50 #######
26.79
673
04/10/2022 10:17
22.97
23.98
49.47
42.87
28.78
25.32
22.33
29.78
41.61
68.18
47.87
31.32
34.08
44.86
21.68
29.02
21.67
18.89
38.36
31.40
32.48
62.23
19.51 #######
26.80
674
04/10/2022 10:17
23.04
23.94
49.27
42.19
28.61
25.22
22.35
29.84
42.09
69.61
47.32
31.19
34.00
46.89
21.72
28.90
21.61
18.88
38.31
31.52
32.55
62.44
19.49 #######
26.80
675
04/10/2022 10:17
23.07
23.79
49.12
41.49
28.42
25.03
22.43
29.82
42.61
70.64
46.41
30.97
33.86
47.45
21.74
28.90
21.61
18.88
38.27
31.50
32.56
62.70
19.48 #######
26.79
676
04/10/2022 10:17
23.08
23.85
48.96
41.03
28.27
24.90
22.39
29.79
42.80
71.02
45.88
30.77
33.82
46.86
21.76
28.82
21.57
18.89
38.29
31.44
32.59
62.69
19.48 #######
26.78
677
04/10/2022 10:17
23.20
23.79
48.75
40.48
28.12
24.78
22.44
29.74
43.25
71.73
45.61
30.56
33.72
48.98
21.79
28.77
21.56
18.88
38.38
31.45
32.67
62.85
19.47 #######
26.77
678
04/10/2022 10:17
23.21
23.87
48.55
39.94
27.96
24.66
22.46
29.76
43.62
71.62
44.98
30.30
33.47
47.34
21.80
28.73
21.52
18.86
38.24
31.35
32.71
62.79
19.47 #######
26.76
679
04/10/2022 10:17
23.18
23.83
48.52
40.30
27.91
24.59
22.39
29.65
43.30
69.14
45.28
30.18
33.48
45.00
21.77
28.74
21.49
18.86
38.20
31.20
32.87
61.94
19.44 #######
26.75
680
04/10/2022 10:17
22.96
23.71
48.70
41.32
28.04
24.68
22.31
29.46
42.74
63.43
46.19
30.29
33.54
43.36
21.75
28.81
21.46
18.84
38.22
31.04
32.89
60.77
19.43 #######
26.74
681
04/10/2022 10:17
22.73
23.79
48.80
42.06
28.22
24.91
22.12
29.23
42.33
58.72
47.00
30.55
33.86
41.88
21.77
28.84
21.44
18.84
38.21
30.82
32.90
59.79
19.47 #######
26.74
682
04/10/2022 10:17
22.64
23.90
48.96
43.06
28.41
25.15
22.02
29.00
42.04
56.93
47.45
30.78
33.99
43.87
21.88
28.76
21.41
18.82
38.21
30.80
32.83
59.58
19.46 #######
26.75
==PAGE:237==
683
04/10/2022 10:17
22.69
24.04
48.77
42.32
28.33
25.13
22.15
29.04
42.57
61.56
47.21
30.90
34.00
45.65
21.98
28.73
21.45
18.86
38.40
30.76
32.77
60.02
19.53 #######
26.75
684
04/10/2022 10:17
22.74
24.12
48.61
41.89
28.19
25.00
22.18
29.11
42.83
65.36
46.63
30.71
34.39
45.68
21.98
28.66
21.42
18.85
38.22
30.73
32.72
60.28
19.51 -183.32
26.74
685
04/10/2022 10:17
22.80
24.11
48.43
41.25
28.09
24.88
22.14
29.00
43.11
67.86
46.16
30.51
34.38
46.70
21.98
28.64
21.41
18.85
38.25
30.68
32.78
60.43
19.54 #######
26.75
686
04/10/2022 10:17
22.91
24.08
48.24
40.68
27.95
24.72
22.14
28.94
43.27
69.89
45.51
30.30
34.52
48.39
22.01
28.57
21.39
18.85
38.24
30.66
32.87
61.28
19.57 #######
26.72
687
04/10/2022 10:17
22.82
24.08
48.12
40.31
27.81
24.58
22.10
28.87
43.31
70.80
45.22
30.05
34.31
46.55
22.08
28.54
21.41
18.86
38.08
30.49
32.92
61.07
19.57 #######
26.77
688
04/10/2022 10:17
22.70
24.05
48.19
40.74
27.82
24.54
21.88
28.69
42.82
66.93
45.63
29.99
34.25
46.79
22.07
28.56
21.39
18.87
37.91
30.65
32.83
60.23
19.58 #######
26.78
689
04/10/2022 10:17
22.71
24.03
48.05
40.35
27.77
24.53
21.95
29.14
43.16
67.54
45.33
29.97
34.29
45.58
22.13
28.68
21.42
18.89
37.73
30.52
32.95
60.31
19.61 #######
26.76
690
04/10/2022 10:17
22.55
24.04
48.08
41.23
27.81
24.53
21.75
28.87
42.61
63.94
45.45
29.96
34.39
43.59
22.15
28.67
21.42
18.92
37.77
30.34
32.91
59.28
19.62 #######
26.78
691
04/10/2022 10:17
22.48
24.05
48.30
41.84
27.90
24.68
21.72
28.68
42.24
60.86
45.99
30.13
34.33
44.82
22.18
28.64
21.41
18.89
37.82
30.33
32.92
59.00
19.61 #######
26.78
692
04/10/2022 10:17
22.48
24.08
48.23
41.43
27.77
24.61
21.73
28.93
42.59
63.88
45.60
30.13
34.35
43.96
22.20
28.70
21.43
18.89
37.75
30.23
32.84
58.64
19.60 #######
26.78
693
04/10/2022 10:17
22.51
24.14
48.08
40.91
27.70
24.54
21.76
28.78
42.70
63.69
45.53
30.05
34.31
43.62
22.21
28.67
21.40
18.90
37.74
30.14
32.96
58.58
19.59 #######
26.79
694
04/10/2022 10:17
22.38
24.09
48.10
40.91
27.65
24.43
21.69
28.59
42.35
61.33
45.46
29.95
34.32
42.21
22.19
28.64
21.40
18.89
37.67
29.99
32.80
57.58
19.56 #######
26.78
695
04/10/2022 10:17
22.36
24.16
48.23
41.14
27.64
24.41
21.70
28.57
42.06
59.30
45.98
29.97
34.07
42.93
22.22
28.53
21.36
18.90
37.67
30.01
32.77
57.72
19.58 #######
26.79
696
04/10/2022 10:17
22.34
24.15
48.15
40.81
27.54
24.34
21.78
28.67
42.26
61.95
45.72
29.87
33.93
42.70
22.23
28.48
21.34
18.89
37.69
30.01
32.78
57.62
19.60 #######
26.76
697
04/10/2022 10:17
22.47
24.20
47.94
40.32
27.45
24.22
21.86
28.61
42.23
63.59
45.37
29.72
34.04
42.02
22.22
28.39
21.32
18.91
37.72
29.99
32.78
57.66
19.58 #######
26.76
698
04/10/2022 10:17
22.51
24.22
47.93
40.27
27.39
24.15
21.77
28.56
41.93
63.22
45.23
29.54
33.94
43.17
22.24
28.36
21.34
18.89
37.73
30.01
32.66
57.07
19.59 #######
26.74
699
04/10/2022 10:17
22.66
24.31
47.72
39.58
27.27
24.08
21.83
29.49
42.02
62.24
45.04
29.45
33.64
44.68
22.23
28.28
21.31
18.88
37.72
30.48
32.67
57.21
19.61 #######
26.75
700
04/10/2022 10:17
22.74
24.28
47.54
39.10
27.15
23.98
21.75
29.38
42.13
63.58
44.37
29.29
33.73
44.77
22.18
28.23
21.25
18.88
37.59
30.48
32.67
57.48
19.62 #######
26.76
701
04/10/2022 10:17
22.92
24.31
47.46
38.74
27.03
23.90
21.83
29.33
42.14
65.15
43.88
29.10
33.92
45.99
22.24
28.17
21.26
18.86
37.54
30.58
32.75
57.70
19.63 #######
26.75
702
04/10/2022 10:18
22.87
24.25
47.33
38.30
26.91
23.83
21.99
29.42
42.28
66.21
43.30
28.97
33.55
45.42
22.18
28.17
21.24
18.86
37.38
30.51
32.73
57.80
19.58 #######
26.73
703
04/10/2022 10:18
22.89
24.27
47.22
38.11
26.82
23.74
22.06
29.36
42.35
66.55
42.94
28.78
33.83
45.46
22.23
28.20
21.20
18.83
37.38
30.46
32.88
57.83
19.61 #######
26.73
704
04/10/2022 10:18
22.75
24.23
47.27
38.43
26.82
23.73
21.95
29.18
42.06
63.70
43.47
28.71
34.00
43.81
22.21
28.22
21.21
18.81
37.25
30.35
32.79
56.95
19.61 #######
26.73
705
04/10/2022 10:18
22.62
24.22
47.34
38.71
26.86
23.80
21.83
29.00
41.68
61.68
43.98
28.77
33.93
42.82
22.21
28.26
21.21
18.82
37.31
30.23
32.75
56.52
19.58 #######
26.74
706
04/10/2022 10:18
22.55
24.26
47.29
38.50
26.84
23.75
21.69
28.83
41.34
61.03
43.97
28.72
33.94
43.52
22.22
28.23
21.22
18.82
37.34
30.17
32.79
56.53
19.60 #######
26.74
707
04/10/2022 10:18
22.50
24.16
47.17
38.31
26.76
23.68
21.57
28.90
41.35
60.19
43.93
28.62
33.47
42.66
22.19
28.23
21.21
18.82
37.28
30.07
32.82
55.85
19.60 #######
26.72
708
04/10/2022 10:18
22.41
24.14
47.10
38.44
26.81
23.66
21.52
28.79
41.27
59.24
44.07
28.56
33.13
41.16
22.14
28.24
21.17
18.83
37.23
29.93
32.66
55.40
19.54 #######
26.70
709
04/10/2022 10:18
22.38
24.08
47.14
38.47
26.80
23.64
21.47
28.64
41.03
57.93
44.47
28.54
33.12
40.45
22.13
28.27
21.15
18.82
37.11
29.78
32.72
55.29
19.56
-85.56
26.73
710
04/10/2022 10:18
22.32
23.99
47.20
38.87
26.84
23.64
21.34
28.42
40.59
56.63
44.73
28.51
32.88
39.24
22.18
28.25
21.15
18.83
37.27
29.66
32.70
54.58
19.55 -193.63
26.72
711
04/10/2022 10:18
22.24
24.02
47.23
39.03
26.87
23.72
21.47
28.30
40.31
55.47
45.00
28.55
32.95
38.71
22.25
28.30
21.13
18.83
37.24
29.58
32.58
54.15
19.50 #######
26.68
712
04/10/2022 10:18
22.18
24.02
47.18
39.34
26.91
23.75
21.50
28.27
40.11
54.85
45.60
28.59
32.95
37.44
22.25
28.36
21.08
18.80
37.11
29.37
32.45
53.75
19.51 #######
26.68
713
04/10/2022 10:18
21.91
23.98
47.13
40.57
27.20
24.17
21.22
27.95
39.43
52.41
45.09
28.86
32.97
35.76
22.29
28.41
21.11
18.80
36.87
29.21
32.26
53.03
19.54 #######
26.69
714
04/10/2022 10:18
21.84
24.02
47.16
41.47
27.40
24.60
21.18
27.71
38.98
49.90
44.72
29.18
32.76
34.93
22.25
28.48
21.12
18.79
36.63
29.05
32.22
52.17
19.51 #######
26.69
715
04/10/2022 10:18
21.70
23.95
47.26
42.74
27.64
24.90
21.15
27.52
38.62
48.27
45.02
29.59
32.84
34.75
22.26
28.49
21.12
18.78
36.52
28.87
32.01
51.46
19.52 #######
26.69
716
04/10/2022 10:18
21.64
23.94
47.31
43.19
27.81
25.01
21.16
27.38
38.35
47.13
44.97
29.75
32.75
33.62
22.27
28.55
21.13
18.78
36.43
28.72
31.89
50.92
19.53 #######
26.70
717
04/10/2022 10:18
21.50
24.03
47.31
44.24
27.99
25.30
20.95
27.15
37.88
45.18
44.56
29.98
32.75
32.26
22.30
28.61
21.16
18.79
36.34
28.51
31.74
50.23
19.55 #######
26.70
718
04/10/2022 10:18
21.33
24.15
47.27
45.71
28.26
25.77
20.81
26.92
37.45
43.37
44.12
30.31
32.95
31.31
22.32
28.64
21.19
18.79
36.46
28.33
31.66
49.57
19.56 #######
26.69
719
04/10/2022 10:18
21.32
24.20
47.16
46.74
28.52
26.05
20.66
26.79
37.04
41.71
43.91
30.56
32.86
31.03
22.38
28.66
21.23
18.78
36.35
28.26
31.54
48.92
19.60 #######
26.70
720
04/10/2022 10:18
21.29
24.19
47.17
47.42
28.68
26.23
20.53
26.66
36.72
41.74
43.92
30.84
32.71
30.42
22.37
28.75
21.26
18.79
36.18
28.15
31.40
48.26
19.64 #######
26.72
721
04/10/2022 10:18
21.26
24.22
47.45
47.58
28.62
26.26
20.56
26.61
36.44
43.87
44.48
30.93
32.57
29.75
22.36
28.85
21.26
18.77
36.13
28.05
31.31
48.07
19.59 #######
26.69
722
04/10/2022 10:18
21.12
24.25
47.57
48.80
28.85
26.51
20.46
26.45
35.98
43.18
44.23
31.25
32.35
29.14
22.42
28.81
21.27
18.77
35.99
27.92
31.13
47.41
19.59 #######
26.70
723
04/10/2022 10:18
21.08
24.32
47.68
48.97
28.79
26.48
20.39
26.36
35.71
42.60
44.87
31.31
32.44
28.67
22.51
28.87
21.34
18.79
36.10
27.82
31.06
46.86
19.64 #######
26.71
724
04/10/2022 10:18
20.94
24.45
47.61
49.19
28.80
26.34
20.24
26.22
35.39
41.77
44.88
31.41
32.95
28.10
22.70
28.94
21.45
18.79
36.28
27.73
30.85
46.29
19.70 #######
26.70
725
04/10/2022 10:18
20.85
24.58
47.67
49.25
28.79
26.37
20.12
26.11
35.08
40.78
45.10
31.55
33.24
27.96
22.86
28.96
21.52
18.83
36.40
27.67
30.73
45.59
19.76 #######
26.70
726
04/10/2022 10:18
20.89
24.68
47.57
48.51
28.66
26.28
20.05
26.05
34.98
42.22
45.00
31.51
33.45
27.82
22.99
29.12
21.59
18.87
36.34
27.58
30.67
45.55
19.83 #######
26.69
727
04/10/2022 10:18
20.94
24.84
47.73
48.66
28.56
26.05
20.03
25.99
34.82
44.22
44.94
31.36
33.52
27.55
23.04
29.14
21.62
18.87
36.43
27.53
30.58
45.30
19.85 #######
26.71
728
04/10/2022 10:18
21.06
24.91
47.76
48.54
28.45
25.92
20.00
25.90
34.60
45.20
45.29
31.33
33.68
30.41
23.03
29.10
21.64
18.90
36.37
28.08
30.38
44.91
19.87 #######
26.72
729
04/10/2022 10:18
21.17
25.02
47.52
47.14
28.33
25.76
20.04
27.09
34.77
45.09
44.77
31.22
34.08
31.63
23.16
29.15
21.68
18.90
36.47
28.43
30.39
45.34
19.89 #######
26.72
730
04/10/2022 10:18
21.34
25.15
47.30
45.98
28.15
25.52
20.08
27.14
34.84
48.13
44.03
31.03
34.25
34.03
23.23
29.20
21.71
18.91
36.47
28.71
30.31
45.82
19.90 #######
26.69
731
04/10/2022 10:18
21.42
25.22
47.12
44.91
27.99
25.36
20.16
27.14
35.49
51.17
43.35
30.84
33.92
34.58
23.27
29.15
21.72
18.92
36.44
28.75
30.32
46.64
19.92 #######
26.70
732
04/10/2022 10:18
21.44
25.22
46.94
44.15
27.79
25.20
20.19
27.11
35.51
53.49
42.65
30.59
34.06
34.92
23.36
29.17
21.74
18.93
36.49
28.81
30.30
46.89
19.92 #######
26.69
733
04/10/2022 10:18
21.55
25.28
46.71
43.28
27.66
25.05
20.23
27.16
35.70
52.98
42.28
30.41
34.00
37.97
23.34
29.13
21.73
18.94
36.41
28.98
30.27
47.13
19.96 #######
26.70
734
04/10/2022 10:18
21.64
25.29
46.50
42.09
27.52
24.90
20.31
27.53
36.00
53.95
41.80
30.23
34.43
38.91
23.39
29.12
21.73
18.94
36.41
29.09
30.27
47.52
19.98 #######
26.70
735
04/10/2022 10:18
21.70
25.33
46.32
41.22
27.38
24.72
20.33
28.01
36.05
54.89
41.15
30.02
34.60
38.77
23.42
29.14
21.74
18.97
36.48
29.08
30.30
48.02
20.05 #######
26.67
736
04/10/2022 10:18
21.83
25.41
46.18
40.56
27.23
24.57
20.31
27.97
36.21
56.57
40.66
29.81
34.54
39.33
23.50
29.13
21.76
18.99
36.52
29.13
30.38
48.57
20.06 #######
26.69
737
04/10/2022 10:18
21.96
25.39
45.95
39.68
27.10
24.39
20.33
27.92
36.99
56.15
40.04
29.69
34.72
41.09
23.49
29.12
21.77
19.00
36.52
29.16
30.47
48.60
20.08 #######
26.67
738
04/10/2022 10:18
22.10
25.39
45.73
38.76
26.98
24.23
20.39
28.41
37.65
53.95
39.41
29.50
35.43
43.44
23.61
29.09
21.78
19.00
36.64
29.44
30.48
48.43
20.15 #######
26.67
739
04/10/2022 10:18
22.07
25.51
45.57
37.98
26.83
24.08
20.52
28.43
38.16
53.03
38.78
29.34
35.51
42.77
23.74
29.11
21.78
19.02
36.68
29.45
30.59
48.76
20.20 #######
26.65
==PAGE:238==
740
04/10/2022 10:18
22.02
25.46
45.43
37.53
26.72
23.96
20.64
28.30
38.26
54.14
38.24
29.15
35.58
41.58
23.76
29.12
21.78
19.01
36.63
29.42
30.70
49.20
20.23 #######
26.66
741
04/10/2022 10:18
22.08
25.49
45.30
37.12
26.61
23.86
20.66
28.20
38.14
55.38
37.98
29.02
35.54
43.73
23.73
29.07
21.74
19.03
36.63
29.53
30.80
49.37
20.20 #######
26.66
742
04/10/2022 10:18
22.26
25.51
45.10
36.39
26.50
23.78
20.77
28.83
38.71
54.22
37.49
28.80
35.34
46.07
23.75
29.05
21.74
19.05
36.73
29.87
30.93
49.16
20.21 #######
26.61
743
04/10/2022 10:18
22.27
25.55
44.98
35.80
26.38
23.65
20.95
28.91
39.11
53.27
36.95
28.61
35.46
44.79
23.75
29.05
21.71
19.05
36.58
29.89
31.03
49.23
20.22 #######
26.63
744
04/10/2022 10:18
22.26
25.55
44.94
35.67
26.30
23.60
20.94
28.78
38.99
53.56
36.90
28.48
35.61
44.25
23.71
28.97
21.72
19.03
36.64
29.87
31.20
49.63
20.18 #######
26.62
745
04/10/2022 10:18
22.44
25.49
44.84
35.37
26.20
23.53
21.04
28.72
39.17
55.29
36.55
28.25
35.45
45.54
23.66
28.94
21.67
19.02
36.58
29.99
31.31
50.00
20.16 #######
26.64
746
04/10/2022 10:18
22.54
25.46
44.74
34.83
26.11
23.46
21.10
29.17
39.68
56.01
36.13
28.14
35.54
45.32
23.58
28.87
21.62
19.00
36.56
30.04
31.38
50.44
20.15 #######
26.61
747
04/10/2022 10:18
22.40
25.45
44.69
34.76
26.02
23.38
21.10
29.09
39.77
56.84
35.91
28.00
35.29
43.47
23.55
28.85
21.58
18.98
36.56
29.96
31.42
50.36
20.12 #######
26.62
748
04/10/2022 10:18
22.30
25.38
44.76
35.40
26.05
23.40
21.09
28.89
39.55
55.07
36.43
27.94
35.07
42.16
23.56
28.83
21.56
19.00
36.59
29.86
31.60
50.24
20.10 #######
26.62
749
04/10/2022 10:18
22.16
25.33
44.78
35.46
26.02
23.39
21.15
28.69
39.33
56.07
36.74
27.88
34.97
40.65
23.54
28.84
21.54
18.99
36.37
29.73
31.69
50.13
20.05 #######
26.62
750
04/10/2022 10:18
22.00
25.32
44.84
35.80
25.96
23.37
21.04
28.46
39.04
54.18
37.10
27.80
34.94
39.42
23.53
28.87
21.54
19.00
36.37
29.59
31.75
49.63
20.08 #######
26.60
751
04/10/2022 10:18
21.91
25.44
44.95
36.19
25.93
23.32
21.11
28.28
38.91
53.46
37.63
27.77
35.00
38.88
23.57
28.79
21.54
18.96
36.40
29.49
31.80
49.64
20.09 #######
26.58
752
04/10/2022 10:18
21.78
25.49
45.00
36.38
25.89
23.28
21.10
28.12
38.73
52.96
38.07
27.69
34.99
37.77
23.56
28.75
21.52
18.97
36.35
29.34
31.83
49.38
20.07 #######
26.60
753
04/10/2022 10:18
21.75
25.42
45.06
36.64
25.89
23.25
21.06
27.97
38.57
53.66
38.67
27.66
34.90
36.82
23.59
28.73
21.51
18.96
36.44
29.24
31.78
49.30
20.06 #######
26.59
754
04/10/2022 10:19
21.82
25.53
44.94
36.60
25.83
23.20
21.09
27.93
38.56
54.52
38.85
27.60
34.86
39.91
23.58
28.69
21.53
18.97
36.49
29.38
31.78
49.64
20.06 #######
26.58
755
04/10/2022 10:19
21.90
25.58
44.73
35.69
25.74
23.13
21.18
28.53
39.17
53.94
38.33
27.48
34.97
40.58
23.74
28.63
21.54
18.98
36.54
29.48
31.72
49.59
20.05 #######
26.58
756
04/10/2022 10:19
21.96
25.60
44.58
35.07
25.65
23.02
21.23
28.49
39.43
53.75
37.72
27.36
35.03
40.61
23.78
28.56
21.52
19.01
36.54
29.49
31.73
49.58
20.07 #######
26.58
757
04/10/2022 10:19
22.02
25.63
44.39
34.54
25.56
22.93
21.31
28.46
39.65
53.25
37.17
27.27
34.94
44.67
23.80
28.52
21.52
19.03
36.56
29.72
31.74
49.60
20.08 #######
26.59
758
04/10/2022 10:19
22.12
25.59
44.23
33.97
25.47
22.84
21.35
28.89
40.20
51.79
36.65
27.12
34.96
46.98
23.93
28.49
21.52
19.02
36.59
30.00
31.68
49.34
20.07 #######
26.59
759
04/10/2022 10:19
22.35
25.77
44.09
33.30
25.39
22.77
21.43
29.37
40.49
49.96
36.09
26.97
35.20
50.15
24.03
28.47
21.55
19.04
36.64
30.36
31.77
48.75
20.12 #######
26.57
760
04/10/2022 10:19
22.52
25.96
43.89
32.68
25.28
22.66
21.52
30.24
40.73
47.20
35.52
26.85
35.84
53.06
24.27
28.46
21.60
19.10
36.75
31.20
31.86
47.96
20.16 #######
26.57
761
04/10/2022 10:19
22.64
26.13
43.73
32.16
25.19
22.50
21.61
31.22
40.74
44.28
34.95
26.65
36.51
55.42
24.53
28.46
21.63
19.11
36.85
31.77
31.96
47.24
20.24 #######
26.57
762
04/10/2022 10:19
22.67
26.43
43.56
31.62
25.10
22.39
21.56
31.64
40.77
41.78
34.42
26.45
37.07
56.96
24.80
28.45
21.69
19.15
36.92
32.31
32.07
46.46
20.35 #######
26.55
763
04/10/2022 10:19
22.98
26.75
43.37
31.16
25.04
22.29
21.59
32.47
40.78
39.78
33.80
26.27
37.64
58.02
24.96
28.44
21.74
19.19
37.03
33.33
32.21
45.72
20.43 #######
26.55
764
04/10/2022 10:19
23.08
27.01
43.18
30.73
24.93
22.16
21.69
34.18
40.74
38.00
33.29
26.10
38.28
58.33
25.20
28.44
21.79
19.23
37.14
34.49
32.36
44.88
20.53 #######
26.56
765
04/10/2022 10:19
23.44
27.26
43.01
30.31
24.82
22.03
21.85
35.08
40.61
36.45
32.72
25.89
38.87
59.35
25.40
28.42
21.82
19.29
37.19
35.75
32.45
44.14
20.62 #######
26.59
766
04/10/2022 10:19
24.22
27.43
42.88
29.92
24.74
21.88
21.81
36.90
40.47
35.13
32.21
25.72
39.40
59.51
25.50
28.43
21.82
19.32
37.27
36.62
32.55
43.49
20.69 #######
26.60
767
04/10/2022 10:19
24.54
27.59
42.75
29.58
24.64
21.73
22.86
38.06
40.38
34.10
31.77
25.51
39.87
58.76
25.65
28.43
21.87
19.34
37.35
37.61
32.65
42.79
20.75 #######
26.60
768
04/10/2022 10:19
25.39
27.72
42.61
29.25
24.57
21.66
24.13
38.91
40.25
33.15
31.32
25.37
40.34
58.21
25.73
28.41
21.90
19.39
37.38
38.55
32.74
42.10
20.81 #######
26.62
769
04/10/2022 10:19
25.59
27.98
42.49
28.93
24.47
21.58
24.02
40.00
40.07
32.40
30.90
25.20
40.82
58.84
25.92
28.42
21.93
19.41
37.44
39.53
32.81
41.44
20.91 #######
26.62
770
04/10/2022 10:19
25.64
28.14
42.41
28.74
24.38
21.52
23.99
41.26
40.01
31.71
30.49
25.10
41.22
59.99
26.07
28.41
21.97
19.44
37.48
40.14
32.86
40.88
20.99 #######
26.64
771
04/10/2022 10:19
26.08
28.33
42.27
28.53
24.33
21.41
24.11
42.19
39.93
31.27
30.18
24.96
41.67
62.46
26.23
28.41
22.01
19.44
37.45
41.22
32.89
40.33
21.03 #######
26.65
772
04/10/2022 10:19
26.18
28.56
42.18
28.36
24.27
21.28
24.07
43.66
39.88
30.85
29.88
24.83
41.97
62.96
26.34
28.41
22.03
19.48
37.51
41.94
32.95
39.75
21.08 #######
26.65
773
04/10/2022 10:19
26.53
28.78
42.07
28.15
24.19
21.18
24.20
44.58
39.72
30.44
29.53
24.67
42.41
63.72
26.49
28.42
22.03
19.51
37.49
42.65
33.00
39.26
21.17 #######
26.67
774
04/10/2022 10:19
26.79
28.92
41.95
27.98
24.14
21.09
24.20
45.64
39.59
30.00
29.20
24.51
42.71
62.59
26.63
28.40
22.03
19.55
37.50
43.17
33.01
38.78
21.21 #######
26.69
775
04/10/2022 10:19
28.75
29.09
41.84
27.75
24.08
21.02
25.59
45.57
39.41
29.63
28.94
24.42
43.07
61.58
26.77
28.36
22.09
19.60
37.53
43.62
33.02
38.29
21.21 #######
26.70
776
04/10/2022 10:19
30.60
29.18
41.74
27.58
24.03
20.96
26.06
45.77
39.23
29.28
28.65
24.28
43.44
60.30
26.90
28.35
22.09
19.62
37.60
43.70
33.02
37.88
21.25 #######
26.68
777
04/10/2022 10:19
33.54
29.28
41.67
27.38
23.95
20.90
27.74
45.31
38.99
28.98
28.38
24.18
43.71
59.03
27.00
28.33
22.08
19.62
37.64
43.48
33.00
37.43
21.28 #######
26.67
778
04/10/2022 10:19
36.26
29.47
41.54
27.19
23.89
20.78
28.61
44.89
38.76
28.76
28.18
24.09
44.12
57.69
27.08
28.32
22.03
19.63
37.70
43.20
32.99
37.01
21.30 #######
26.65
779
04/10/2022 10:19
38.22
29.78
41.44
26.91
23.82
20.68
29.72
44.48
38.48
28.53
27.91
24.00
44.51
56.52
27.18
28.30
22.02
19.63
37.69
42.86
32.96
36.70
21.30 #######
26.66
780
04/10/2022 10:19
39.67
30.07
41.32
26.70
23.78
20.56
30.48
44.06
38.23
28.25
27.67
23.89
44.88
55.43
27.29
28.27
22.02
19.61
37.77
42.57
32.96
36.34
21.31 #######
26.65
781
04/10/2022 10:19
40.58
30.26
41.24
26.48
23.69
20.48
30.79
43.70
37.97
27.92
27.42
23.75
45.34
54.47
27.42
28.26
22.02
19.60
37.85
42.31
32.91
36.01
21.30 #######
26.67
782
04/10/2022 10:19
40.98
30.34
41.16
26.26
23.63
20.40
30.98
43.43
37.73
27.71
27.20
23.60
45.73
53.50
27.51
28.22
22.03
19.59
37.92
42.16
32.89
35.70
21.35 #######
26.65
783
04/10/2022 10:19
41.60
30.57
41.07
26.06
23.58
20.34
31.11
43.17
37.50
27.43
26.95
23.50
46.13
52.52
27.62
28.21
22.04
19.60
37.96
41.95
32.84
35.36
21.35 #######
26.65
784
04/10/2022 10:19
41.69
30.72
41.00
25.85
23.50
20.27
31.78
42.88
37.25
27.10
26.75
23.40
46.53
51.68
27.70
28.20
22.03
19.60
37.99
41.71
32.80
35.03
21.29 #######
26.64
785
04/10/2022 10:19
42.46
30.92
40.89
25.67
23.43
20.19
31.57
42.62
37.04
26.92
26.53
23.23
46.92
50.87
27.75
28.18
22.03
19.64
38.09
41.53
32.75
34.70
21.35 #######
26.64
786
04/10/2022 10:19
42.58
31.06
40.81
25.53
23.36
20.09
31.26
42.39
36.80
26.77
26.30
23.20
47.28
50.20
27.78
28.18
22.05
19.62
38.17
41.33
32.73
34.46
21.41 #######
26.62
787
04/10/2022 10:19
42.06
31.26
40.69
25.37
23.29
20.05
30.85
42.23
36.56
26.62
26.12
23.11
47.69
49.55
27.87
28.16
22.05
19.63
38.22
41.17
32.66
34.19
21.49 #######
26.62
788
04/10/2022 10:19
41.40
31.42
40.62
25.23
23.24
19.97
30.31
42.13
36.36
26.48
25.91
23.00
47.99
48.92
27.93
28.14
22.04
19.62
38.27
41.17
32.61
33.96
21.53 #######
26.60
789
04/10/2022 10:19
41.00
31.54
40.53
25.07
23.18
19.90
29.91
42.15
36.17
26.33
25.74
22.94
48.27
48.32
27.99
28.14
22.05
19.62
38.34
41.09
32.53
33.70
21.56 #######
26.60
790
04/10/2022 10:19
40.53
31.62
40.45
24.96
23.13
19.83
29.50
42.13
35.98
26.14
25.53
22.88
48.64
47.74
28.10
28.13
22.06
19.64
38.42
41.13
32.47
33.45
21.55 #######
26.60
791
04/10/2022 10:19
40.35
31.71
40.37
24.85
23.10
19.77
29.20
42.22
35.78
26.00
25.39
22.82
48.90
47.13
28.13
28.11
22.07
19.66
38.51
41.22
32.42
33.17
21.58 #######
26.59
792
04/10/2022 10:19
39.85
31.66
40.27
24.72
23.02
19.70
29.21
42.17
35.60
25.89
25.21
22.77
49.22
46.66
28.18
28.08
22.05
19.67
38.58
41.24
32.38
32.88
21.57 #######
26.56
793
04/10/2022 10:19
39.50
31.75
40.21
24.62
22.99
19.67
28.94
42.08
35.41
25.76
25.05
22.69
49.60
46.11
28.26
28.07
22.04
19.67
38.65
41.26
32.31
32.68
21.57 #######
26.56
794
04/10/2022 10:19
38.92
31.79
40.11
24.52
22.94
19.63
28.71
42.06
35.24
25.63
24.90
22.65
49.89
45.63
28.29
28.05
22.05
19.67
38.76
41.20
32.24
32.45
21.59 #######
26.59
795
04/10/2022 10:19
38.40
31.79
40.00
24.45
22.90
19.56
28.29
42.10
35.01
25.52
24.76
22.62
50.16
45.25
28.31
28.04
22.04
19.68
38.82
41.29
32.16
32.25
21.63 #######
26.55
796
04/10/2022 10:19
38.08
31.87
39.93
24.34
22.87
19.50
27.92
42.09
34.84
25.48
24.63
22.59
50.41
44.81
28.40
28.02
22.05
19.70
38.86
41.37
32.13
32.05
21.60 #######
26.55
==PAGE:239==
797
04/10/2022 10:19
37.62
31.99
39.82
24.27
22.84
19.48
27.60
42.46
34.71
25.42
24.50
22.51
50.70
44.53
28.46
28.02
22.05
19.70
38.92
41.59
32.06
31.82
21.60 #######
26.54
798
04/10/2022 10:19
36.95
32.15
39.70
24.19
22.82
19.45
27.39
42.78
34.58
25.38
24.44
22.45
50.90
44.58
28.45
27.99
22.03
19.70
39.01
41.82
31.98
31.60
21.61 #######
26.53
799
04/10/2022 10:19
36.43
32.39
39.60
24.11
22.81
19.40
27.03
43.28
34.48
25.40
24.39
22.39
51.09
45.11
28.51
27.97
22.04
19.68
39.05
42.06
31.94
31.45
21.60 #######
26.53
800
04/10/2022 10:19
35.80
32.83
39.51
24.05
22.76
19.36
26.76
43.99
34.44
25.48
24.36
22.35
51.35
46.15
28.57
27.98
22.06
19.70
39.11
42.27
31.89
31.29
21.63 #######
26.51
801
04/10/2022 10:19
35.12
33.15
39.41
23.98
22.73
19.34
26.43
44.73
34.40
25.55
24.34
22.31
51.57
47.97
28.58
27.97
22.05
19.71
39.15
42.71
31.82
31.15
21.66 -154.75
26.50
802
04/10/2022 10:19
34.26
33.30
39.36
23.93
22.69
19.32
26.08
45.20
34.38
25.62
24.29
22.27
51.80
49.22
28.57
27.97
22.05
19.70
39.21
42.83
31.78
31.06
21.66 #######
26.47
803
04/10/2022 10:19
33.77
33.38
39.30
23.84
22.66
19.30
25.78
45.24
34.39
25.71
24.25
22.20
52.00
50.22
28.64
27.95
22.02
19.67
39.22
42.80
31.72
30.96
21.63 #######
26.47
804
04/10/2022 10:19
33.08
33.40
39.23
23.80
22.67
19.29
25.39
45.27
34.42
25.75
24.21
22.10
52.09
50.92
28.57
27.92
22.01
19.67
39.25
42.97
31.68
30.83
21.57 #######
26.46
805
04/10/2022 10:19
32.51
33.38
39.14
23.73
22.63
19.28
25.06
45.37
34.41
25.75
24.17
22.08
52.28
51.63
28.61
27.90
22.01
19.64
39.26
43.12
31.63
30.73
21.53 #######
26.46
806
04/10/2022 10:20
32.14
33.36
39.09
23.70
22.59
19.26
24.77
45.57
34.39
25.76
24.13
22.00
52.43
52.57
28.64
27.90
21.98
19.61
39.28
43.49
31.62
30.63
21.50 #######
26.43
807
04/10/2022 10:20
31.73
33.40
39.00
23.63
22.57
19.23
24.49
46.08
34.37
25.75
24.09
21.95
52.58
53.57
28.61
27.90
21.97
19.64
39.28
43.78
31.60
30.51
21.45 #######
26.43
808
04/10/2022 10:20
31.19
33.28
38.93
23.56
22.53
19.18
24.29
46.53
34.33
25.71
24.05
21.86
52.67
54.65
28.60
27.89
21.97
19.65
39.31
44.08
31.59
30.39
21.49 #######
26.42
809
04/10/2022 10:20
30.57
33.31
38.88
23.51
22.48
19.15
24.11
47.00
34.31
25.66
24.03
21.82
52.73
55.34
28.64
27.89
21.98
19.65
39.33
44.29
31.56
30.25
21.44 #######
26.42
810
04/10/2022 10:20
30.25
33.39
38.84
23.47
22.45
19.15
23.84
47.23
34.31
25.65
23.98
21.77
52.77
56.02
28.62
27.86
21.97
19.62
39.30
44.61
31.53
30.21
21.44 #######
26.40
811
04/10/2022 10:20
30.04
33.38
38.77
23.42
22.43
19.12
23.56
47.74
34.30
25.66
23.95
21.73
52.85
56.33
28.63
27.89
21.98
19.61
39.31
44.83
31.52
30.13
21.43 #######
26.39
812
04/10/2022 10:20
29.71
33.61
38.71
23.33
22.37
19.11
23.43
48.15
34.27
25.65
23.88
21.69
52.93
56.68
28.68
27.85
21.96
19.60
39.30
44.99
31.51
30.04
21.41 #######
26.40
813
04/10/2022 10:20
29.44
33.81
38.62
23.27
22.38
19.09
23.16
48.00
34.29
25.59
23.85
21.64
52.96
56.72
28.74
27.87
21.94
19.60
39.28
45.08
31.49
29.95
21.43 #######
26.38
814
04/10/2022 10:20
29.08
33.96
38.55
23.24
22.35
19.04
23.00
48.19
34.28
25.54
23.80
21.60
53.02
56.86
28.79
27.85
21.96
19.59
39.27
45.24
31.48
29.86
21.39 #######
26.39
815
04/10/2022 10:20
28.80
33.96
38.46
23.21
22.32
18.99
22.89
48.21
34.26
25.51
23.77
21.54
53.08
56.92
28.83
27.85
21.96
19.57
39.27
45.45
31.48
29.81
21.41 #######
26.40
816
04/10/2022 10:20
28.46
34.05
38.41
23.16
22.28
18.95
22.72
48.51
34.24
25.45
23.72
21.51
53.10
56.96
28.81
27.83
21.95
19.58
39.26
45.53
31.46
29.71
21.41 #######
26.37
817
04/10/2022 10:20
28.02
34.02
38.34
23.11
22.24
18.93
22.60
48.76
34.18
25.40
23.72
21.50
53.12
56.98
28.85
27.84
21.94
19.58
39.25
45.53
31.46
29.62
21.38 #######
26.35
818
04/10/2022 10:20
27.82
34.02
38.29
23.07
22.22
18.92
22.45
48.94
34.18
25.41
23.70
21.44
53.16
57.03
28.89
27.81
21.93
19.57
39.24
45.60
31.45
29.59
21.38 #######
26.36
819
04/10/2022 10:20
27.58
34.06
38.24
23.02
22.22
18.89
22.39
49.16
34.15
25.36
23.66
21.42
53.14
56.88
28.91
27.81
21.92
19.59
39.20
45.66
31.44
29.57
21.35 #######
26.34
820
04/10/2022 10:20
27.34
34.04
38.17
22.96
22.20
18.89
22.22
49.60
34.13
25.37
23.63
21.40
53.12
57.24
28.94
27.79
21.92
19.61
39.13
45.86
31.42
29.52
21.37 #######
26.36
821
04/10/2022 10:20
27.14
34.07
38.12
22.93
22.17
18.87
22.14
49.83
34.10
25.32
23.61
21.37
52.99
57.41
28.96
27.75
21.94
19.60
39.08
45.87
31.41
29.44
21.40 #######
26.35
822
04/10/2022 10:20
26.89
34.33
38.07
22.87
22.15
18.85
22.03
49.38
34.11
25.30
23.60
21.33
52.81
57.23
28.94
27.76
21.94
19.59
38.99
45.65
31.39
29.39
21.38 #######
26.35
823
04/10/2022 10:20
26.64
34.44
38.03
22.85
22.16
18.83
21.95
48.93
34.11
25.28
23.55
21.26
52.79
57.52
29.00
27.76
21.92
19.61
38.97
45.59
31.38
29.30
21.43 #######
26.33
824
04/10/2022 10:20
26.56
34.73
37.96
22.81
22.12
18.81
21.84
48.59
34.11
25.25
23.53
21.21
52.76
57.68
28.98
27.73
21.92
19.62
38.96
45.32
31.37
29.26
21.41 #######
26.34
825
04/10/2022 10:20
26.50
34.52
37.94
22.81
22.12
18.79
21.75
48.61
34.12
25.23
23.50
21.18
52.77
57.70
28.99
27.73
21.93
19.62
38.91
45.50
31.37
29.20
21.31 #######
26.34
826
04/10/2022 10:20
26.27
34.42
37.91
22.79
22.10
18.79
21.61
48.80
34.10
25.22
23.47
21.12
52.79
57.89
28.96
27.70
21.92
19.63
38.89
45.49
31.37
29.18
21.35 #######
26.33
827
04/10/2022 10:20
26.14
34.36
37.88
22.74
22.08
18.76
21.58
48.91
34.08
25.23
23.47
21.06
52.75
57.90
28.84
27.70
21.93
19.62
38.85
45.48
31.35
29.12
21.31 #######
26.34
828
04/10/2022 10:20
26.06
34.42
37.83
22.72
22.06
18.73
21.53
48.99
34.07
25.24
23.41
21.03
52.61
57.86
28.89
27.66
21.91
19.61
38.82
45.42
31.35
29.07
21.33 #######
26.32
829
04/10/2022 10:20
25.91
34.41
37.78
22.72
22.04
18.73
21.50
49.08
34.02
25.18
23.37
20.95
52.53
57.64
28.94
27.64
21.91
19.60
38.80
45.37
31.34
28.99
21.31 #######
26.34
830
04/10/2022 10:20
25.73
34.63
37.75
22.71
22.06
18.68
21.52
49.12
33.98
25.06
23.32
20.93
52.44
57.45
28.99
27.64
21.90
19.60
38.74
45.23
31.34
28.99
21.32 #######
26.33
831
04/10/2022 10:20
25.61
34.98
37.67
22.69
22.06
18.66
21.55
49.06
33.90
24.96
23.31
20.89
52.33
56.88
28.98
27.63
21.89
19.58
38.73
45.12
31.31
28.91
21.33 #######
26.33
832
04/10/2022 10:20
25.58
35.24
37.61
22.64
22.04
18.61
21.49
49.10
33.80
24.85
23.26
20.84
52.29
56.47
28.92
27.60
21.87
19.56
38.71
45.04
31.31
28.87
21.38 #######
26.32
833
04/10/2022 10:20
25.55
35.29
37.57
22.59
22.04
18.60
21.54
49.14
33.71
24.77
23.16
20.80
52.26
55.66
28.95
27.57
21.89
19.58
38.69
44.94
31.31
28.78
21.41 #######
26.34
834
04/10/2022 10:20
25.44
35.50
37.51
22.56
22.03
18.60
21.56
49.16
33.60
24.72
23.12
20.80
52.20
54.79
29.00
27.56
21.88
19.55
38.61
44.88
31.28
28.76
21.43 #######
26.33
835
04/10/2022 10:20
25.33
35.57
37.45
22.53
22.02
18.54
21.54
49.14
33.46
24.64
23.11
20.77
52.19
54.04
29.01
27.54
21.87
19.59
38.60
44.81
31.26
28.69
21.35 #######
26.32
836
04/10/2022 10:20
25.26
35.28
37.44
22.51
21.98
18.50
21.62
49.22
33.35
24.56
23.06
20.71
52.18
52.96
29.03
27.55
21.89
19.58
38.56
44.71
31.24
28.65
21.34 #######
26.32
837
04/10/2022 10:20
25.14
35.09
37.40
22.48
21.96
18.43
21.62
48.95
33.21
24.48
22.96
20.70
52.15
52.01
29.07
27.52
21.89
19.61
38.50
44.54
31.20
28.55
21.39 #######
26.32
838
04/10/2022 10:20
25.00
35.01
37.35
22.44
21.92
18.39
21.64
48.60
33.07
24.34
22.91
20.65
52.11
51.11
29.01
27.51
21.88
19.61
38.47
44.41
31.17
28.50
21.43 #######
26.32
839
04/10/2022 10:20
25.04
35.02
37.33
22.41
21.89
18.36
21.66
48.29
32.97
24.24
22.84
20.62
52.06
50.21
29.05
27.50
21.87
19.61
38.47
44.18
31.16
28.44
21.43 #######
26.32
840
04/10/2022 10:20
24.96
35.17
37.30
22.37
21.88
18.36
21.64
47.87
32.83
24.15
22.77
20.61
51.99
49.32
29.04
27.49
21.86
19.61
38.44
43.95
31.13
28.38
21.42 #######
26.31
841
04/10/2022 10:20
25.00
35.15
37.25
22.35
21.87
18.34
21.60
47.43
32.67
23.99
22.71
20.56
51.96
48.55
29.05
27.47
21.86
19.62
38.43
43.72
31.10
28.31
21.46 #######
26.30
842
04/10/2022 10:20
25.19
35.16
37.21
22.34
21.84
18.34
21.75
47.04
32.53
23.88
22.65
20.54
51.88
47.80
29.03
27.46
21.85
19.63
38.37
43.49
31.07
28.28
21.52 #######
26.31
843
04/10/2022 10:20
25.36
34.93
37.17
22.31
21.84
18.34
21.87
46.62
32.39
23.82
22.62
20.54
51.86
47.05
29.06
27.44
21.85
19.63
38.33
43.23
31.02
28.21
21.51 #######
26.33
844
04/10/2022 10:20
25.60
34.79
37.13
22.26
21.82
18.35
22.08
46.13
32.25
23.82
22.57
20.50
51.80
46.35
29.10
27.42
21.85
19.61
38.31
42.97
30.99
28.20
21.52 #######
26.31
845
04/10/2022 10:20
25.76
34.64
37.10
22.24
21.79
18.35
22.21
45.67
32.11
23.78
22.54
20.51
51.79
45.62
29.10
27.40
21.84
19.61
38.30
42.70
30.95
28.15
21.55 #######
26.30
846
04/10/2022 10:20
25.71
34.54
37.08
22.15
21.79
18.31
22.42
45.26
31.98
23.74
22.48
20.49
51.74
45.00
29.08
27.38
21.84
19.61
38.24
42.43
30.90
28.08
21.55 #######
26.31
847
04/10/2022 10:20
25.75
34.51
37.04
22.13
21.76
18.30
22.43
44.93
31.85
23.73
22.46
20.46
51.71
44.37
29.10
27.37
21.83
19.62
38.18
42.22
30.85
28.05
21.52 #######
26.31
848
04/10/2022 10:20
25.81
34.48
37.01
22.07
21.73
18.29
22.48
44.58
31.73
23.71
22.39
20.44
51.69
43.85
29.05
27.36
21.84
19.59
38.18
42.00
30.82
27.95
21.55 #######
26.30
849
04/10/2022 10:20
25.82
34.45
36.98
22.03
21.72
18.26
22.43
44.20
31.59
23.66
22.36
20.44
51.67
43.33
29.04
27.35
21.82
19.60
38.15
41.77
30.78
27.88
21.57 #######
26.29
850
04/10/2022 10:20
25.85
34.38
36.96
21.97
21.71
18.22
22.56
43.88
31.47
23.63
22.35
20.41
51.63
42.72
29.02
27.33
21.83
19.60
38.09
41.52
30.73
27.82
21.58 #######
26.30
851
04/10/2022 10:20
25.99
34.36
36.92
21.89
21.70
18.21
22.93
43.45
31.34
23.65
22.29
20.43
51.62
42.12
28.99
27.33
21.82
19.60
38.08
41.20
30.70
27.76
21.60 #######
26.30
852
04/10/2022 10:20
26.55
34.39
36.90
21.84
21.67
18.18
23.17
43.05
31.22
23.56
22.25
20.40
51.64
41.60
28.98
27.30
21.79
19.60
38.06
40.94
30.65
27.67
21.56 #######
26.29
853
04/10/2022 10:20
26.58
34.36
36.86
21.81
21.65
18.18
23.25
42.66
31.09
23.53
22.22
20.40
51.62
41.07
28.86
27.31
21.80
19.57
38.03
40.62
30.61
27.66
21.53 #######
26.30
==PAGE:240==
854
04/10/2022 10:20
26.68
34.32
36.83
21.76
21.62
18.14
23.37
42.31
30.98
23.48
22.16
20.40
51.57
40.68
28.84
27.28
21.78
19.58
38.03
40.37
30.58
27.60
21.58 #######
26.30
855
04/10/2022 10:20
26.59
34.43
36.80
21.70
21.60
18.13
23.30
41.96
30.85
23.40
22.08
20.37
51.56
40.38
28.83
27.28
21.77
19.58
38.01
40.22
30.51
27.57
21.61 #######
26.30
856
04/10/2022 10:20
26.55
34.54
36.76
21.64
21.57
18.11
23.27
41.82
30.74
23.32
22.07
20.35
51.55
40.06
28.86
27.26
21.77
19.56
38.00
40.00
30.45
27.53
21.65 #######
26.28
857
04/10/2022 10:21
26.50
34.53
36.74
21.63
21.56
18.07
23.18
41.59
30.63
23.30
22.00
20.36
51.53
39.70
28.88
27.24
21.78
19.55
37.96
39.86
30.42
27.47
21.67 #######
26.29
858
04/10/2022 10:21
26.84
34.54
36.70
21.56
21.54
18.09
23.15
41.34
30.53
23.28
21.98
20.35
51.52
39.30
28.91
27.24
21.77
19.58
37.97
39.70
30.35
27.41
21.68 #######
26.29
859
04/10/2022 10:21
26.97
34.42
36.67
21.48
21.50
18.06
23.42
41.01
30.43
23.21
21.92
20.35
51.49
38.96
28.86
27.23
21.78
19.56
37.92
39.50
30.32
27.38
21.69 #######
26.28
860
04/10/2022 10:21
27.06
34.41
36.62
21.46
21.49
18.06
23.37
40.82
30.32
23.20
21.86
20.36
51.46
38.73
28.89
27.21
21.76
19.56
37.90
39.33
30.28
27.36
21.69 #######
26.28
861
04/10/2022 10:21
27.18
34.35
36.58
21.41
21.47
18.06
23.59
40.52
30.22
23.18
21.80
20.39
51.43
38.36
28.93
27.20
21.75
19.58
37.92
39.14
30.22
27.33
21.71 #######
26.29
862
04/10/2022 10:21
27.13
34.31
36.55
21.37
21.44
18.05
23.83
40.24
30.12
23.12
21.76
20.35
51.47
38.08
28.96
27.21
21.73
19.57
37.91
38.92
30.19
27.27
21.69 #######
26.26
863
04/10/2022 10:21
27.09
34.24
36.52
21.29
21.42
18.03
23.88
39.96
30.00
23.12
21.71
20.34
51.48
37.81
28.96
27.19
21.73
19.59
37.92
38.69
30.14
27.23
21.70 #######
26.28
864
04/10/2022 10:21
27.29
34.14
36.49
21.24
21.42
18.00
24.07
39.71
29.86
23.06
21.65
20.35
51.49
37.56
28.98
27.16
21.71
19.58
37.93
38.49
30.09
27.19
21.68 #######
26.28
865
04/10/2022 10:21
27.98
34.10
36.46
21.21
21.41
18.01
24.30
39.45
29.77
23.01
21.62
20.32
51.49
37.17
28.97
27.17
21.72
19.57
37.94
38.34
30.06
27.17
21.69 #######
26.28
866
04/10/2022 10:21
28.81
34.03
36.42
21.16
21.35
18.02
24.84
39.19
29.67
23.00
21.59
20.32
51.48
36.97
28.97
27.15
21.71
19.58
37.89
38.07
29.99
27.14
21.68 #######
26.27
867
04/10/2022 10:21
29.38
33.99
36.39
21.14
21.34
17.99
25.03
38.92
29.56
22.96
21.55
20.32
51.49
36.62
28.98
27.14
21.71
19.58
37.86
37.91
29.96
27.08
21.71 #######
26.28
868
04/10/2022 10:21
30.11
33.92
36.35
21.10
21.32
17.97
25.36
38.68
29.47
22.93
21.54
20.31
51.51
36.42
28.98
27.13
21.69
19.57
37.87
37.68
29.90
27.04
21.71 #######
26.27
869
04/10/2022 10:21
30.12
33.93
36.31
21.05
21.32
17.98
25.36
38.46
29.36
22.90
21.49
20.31
51.51
36.30
28.97
27.12
21.70
19.57
37.88
37.52
29.87
27.01
21.72 #######
26.27
870
04/10/2022 10:21
29.90
33.93
36.29
21.03
21.30
17.96
25.23
38.30
29.30
22.94
21.48
20.29
51.59
36.22
28.94
27.12
21.68
19.60
37.88
37.40
29.83
27.00
21.72 #######
26.26
871
04/10/2022 10:21
29.88
33.96
36.28
21.02
21.27
17.95
25.21
38.17
29.22
22.90
21.45
20.28
51.59
36.04
28.92
27.11
21.69
19.57
37.92
37.30
29.79
26.96
21.71 #######
26.26
872
04/10/2022 10:21
29.82
33.98
36.23
20.99
21.23
17.95
25.10
38.06
29.13
22.90
21.43
20.30
51.62
35.91
28.89
27.10
21.69
19.57
37.90
37.24
29.75
26.93
21.72 #######
26.27
873
04/10/2022 10:21
29.96
33.94
36.20
20.97
21.22
17.94
25.04
37.91
29.06
22.96
21.40
20.23
51.66
35.72
28.90
27.08
21.68
19.57
37.91
37.17
29.71
26.91
21.75 #######
26.27
874
04/10/2022 10:21
30.23
33.89
36.15
20.95
21.19
17.92
25.40
37.84
28.98
22.90
21.37
20.23
51.70
35.58
28.86
27.06
21.68
19.57
37.90
37.06
29.66
26.90
21.78 #######
26.24
875
04/10/2022 10:21
30.73
33.93
36.11
20.93
21.17
17.92
25.69
37.58
28.90
22.93
21.37
20.20
51.75
35.44
28.81
27.06
21.66
19.58
37.87
36.91
29.62
26.93
21.79 #######
26.25
876
04/10/2022 10:21
30.80
34.00
36.10
20.89
21.15
17.91
25.77
37.44
28.82
22.95
21.33
20.20
51.75
35.25
28.85
27.05
21.65
19.57
37.88
36.81
29.60
26.90
21.83 #######
26.23
877
04/10/2022 10:21
30.67
33.99
36.07
20.85
21.15
17.90
25.86
37.23
28.73
22.89
21.34
20.18
51.79
35.18
28.89
27.03
21.66
19.55
37.91
36.69
29.54
26.88
21.83 #######
26.22
878
04/10/2022 10:21
31.18
33.92
36.02
20.84
21.14
17.89
26.09
37.13
28.69
22.86
21.33
20.17
51.79
35.06
28.89
27.04
21.67
19.57
37.89
36.58
29.51
26.81
21.81 #######
26.22
879
04/10/2022 10:21
31.22
33.88
35.99
20.84
21.09
17.89
26.51
36.91
28.58
22.85
21.34
20.13
51.83
34.90
28.89
27.00
21.66
19.54
37.93
36.43
29.47
26.79
21.83 #######
26.23
880
04/10/2022 10:21
31.69
33.89
35.98
20.82
21.10
17.88
26.68
36.76
28.52
22.82
21.32
20.12
51.90
34.64
28.91
27.02
21.65
19.54
37.94
36.27
29.41
26.78
21.76 #######
26.24
881
04/10/2022 10:21
32.30
33.91
35.91
20.80
21.08
17.87
26.76
36.56
28.40
22.82
21.31
20.09
51.94
34.47
28.86
26.99
21.65
19.54
37.97
36.12
29.36
26.77
21.77 #######
26.21
882
04/10/2022 10:21
32.27
33.81
35.87
20.80
21.05
17.85
26.90
36.40
28.34
22.79
21.28
20.08
52.00
34.30
28.79
26.94
21.60
19.56
37.95
36.02
29.35
26.80
21.69 #######
26.24
883
04/10/2022 10:21
32.21
33.80
35.85
20.81
21.05
17.85
26.78
36.27
28.27
22.78
21.26
20.09
52.04
34.23
28.80
26.96
21.60
19.54
37.96
35.89
29.30
26.73
21.69 #######
26.22
884
04/10/2022 10:21
32.62
33.87
35.82
20.81
21.05
17.83
26.69
36.15
28.20
22.75
21.21
20.10
52.07
34.13
28.78
26.94
21.59
19.54
37.96
35.79
29.27
26.73
21.65 #######
26.21
885
04/10/2022 10:21
32.72
33.93
35.79
20.82
21.07
17.82
26.71
36.01
28.12
22.72
21.20
20.09
52.09
34.11
28.74
26.92
21.62
19.55
37.89
35.65
29.25
26.68
21.62 #######
26.21
886
04/10/2022 10:21
32.65
33.93
35.76
20.82
21.08
17.81
26.82
35.86
28.08
22.73
21.18
20.06
52.09
34.09
28.71
26.93
21.61
19.53
37.89
35.53
29.21
26.66
21.68 #######
26.20
887
04/10/2022 10:21
32.34
33.95
35.72
20.82
21.08
17.81
27.04
35.70
28.00
22.72
21.18
20.04
52.10
34.05
28.63
26.89
21.59
19.54
37.89
35.40
29.17
26.63
21.71 #######
26.22
888
04/10/2022 10:21
31.91
33.89
35.69
20.87
21.09
17.82
27.06
35.61
27.94
22.70
21.15
20.03
52.06
33.99
28.71
26.89
21.61
19.53
37.91
35.30
29.14
26.63
21.77 #######
26.20
889
04/10/2022 10:21
31.58
33.98
35.68
20.88
21.09
17.81
26.90
35.48
27.89
22.68
21.15
20.03
52.07
33.96
28.71
26.90
21.62
19.52
37.89
35.25
29.09
26.62
21.70 #######
26.18
890
04/10/2022 10:21
31.30
34.03
35.67
20.88
21.07
17.79
26.83
35.40
27.84
22.70
21.15
19.98
52.09
33.92
28.69
26.87
21.60
19.54
37.87
35.20
29.07
26.61
21.69 #######
26.19
891
04/10/2022 10:21
31.24
34.02
35.62
20.89
21.10
17.83
26.96
35.31
27.80
22.68
21.15
19.94
52.11
33.89
28.66
26.88
21.61
19.53
37.89
35.14
29.03
26.53
21.61 #######
26.19
892
04/10/2022 10:21
31.10
34.02
35.58
20.86
21.08
17.80
26.80
35.21
27.74
22.67
21.15
19.95
52.10
33.83
28.68
26.87
21.58
19.51
37.89
35.02
29.00
26.52
21.56 #######
26.18
893
04/10/2022 10:21
31.40
34.05
35.57
20.86
21.08
17.83
26.92
35.08
27.69
22.65
21.14
19.95
52.10
33.69
28.69
26.86
21.57
19.48
37.90
34.93
28.96
26.52
21.57 #######
26.17
894
04/10/2022 10:21
31.52
34.11
35.53
20.87
21.07
17.85
27.11
34.95
27.61
22.63
21.14
19.94
52.13
33.59
28.73
26.86
21.57
19.49
37.89
34.85
28.94
26.50
21.59 #######
26.18
895
04/10/2022 10:21
31.60
34.14
35.50
20.91
21.07
17.88
27.16
34.82
27.58
22.63
21.15
19.93
52.15
33.54
28.78
26.83
21.56
19.49
37.87
34.73
28.91
26.44
21.62 #######
26.18
896
04/10/2022 10:21
31.60
34.06
35.46
20.91
21.06
17.87
27.33
34.73
27.54
22.59
21.13
19.92
52.17
33.53
28.80
26.84
21.59
19.50
37.85
34.68
28.85
26.43
21.61 #######
26.18
897
04/10/2022 10:21
31.43
34.21
35.43
20.92
21.07
17.88
27.23
34.69
27.47
22.60
21.14
19.89
52.18
33.39
28.85
26.84
21.59
19.51
37.89
34.62
28.84
26.41
21.61 #######
26.17
898
04/10/2022 10:21
31.42
34.22
35.40
20.96
21.08
17.90
27.21
34.60
27.44
22.55
21.11
19.90
52.14
33.35
28.86
26.84
21.57
19.52
37.88
34.57
28.81
26.41
21.59 #######
26.17
899
04/10/2022 10:21
31.17
34.36
35.38
20.99
21.09
17.92
27.25
34.56
27.41
22.52
21.12
19.91
52.14
33.31
28.84
26.82
21.56
19.52
37.90
34.60
28.77
26.38
21.61 #######
26.17
900
04/10/2022 10:21
30.98
34.33
35.33
21.00
21.11
17.93
27.04
34.57
27.38
22.56
21.12
19.88
52.14
33.29
28.84
26.78
21.56
19.51
37.89
34.57
28.74
26.34
21.62 #######
26.17
901
04/10/2022 10:21
31.05
34.40
35.34
21.04
21.11
17.96
26.98
34.52
27.37
22.59
21.12
19.89
52.18
33.26
28.85
26.77
21.57
19.50
37.89
34.53
28.72
26.34
21.62 #######
26.17
902
04/10/2022 10:21
30.75
34.32
35.31
21.02
21.11
17.95
26.80
34.50
27.33
22.66
21.14
19.85
52.12
33.27
28.84
26.75
21.56
19.50
37.89
34.56
28.70
26.34
21.61 #######
26.15
903
04/10/2022 10:21
30.47
34.21
35.25
21.05
21.11
17.96
26.89
34.50
27.30
22.67
21.12
19.88
52.03
33.22
28.89
26.73
21.54
19.52
37.87
34.54
28.68
26.33
21.60 #######
26.14
904
04/10/2022 10:21
30.66
34.21
35.25
21.04
21.10
17.95
26.80
34.46
27.27
22.63
21.17
19.90
52.03
33.10
28.91
26.74
21.54
19.51
37.83
34.51
28.64
26.34
21.62 #######
26.15
905
04/10/2022 10:21
31.55
34.26
35.23
21.06
21.11
17.96
27.31
34.40
27.20
22.59
21.16
19.90
52.04
32.99
28.90
26.73
21.54
19.50
37.77
34.44
28.64
26.33
21.62 #######
26.14
906
04/10/2022 10:21
31.52
34.25
35.20
21.03
21.10
17.95
27.52
34.25
27.17
22.61
21.16
19.89
52.08
33.00
28.90
26.73
21.51
19.50
37.76
34.40
28.60
26.31
21.62 #######
26.15
907
04/10/2022 10:21
31.25
34.36
35.19
21.03
21.09
17.94
27.36
34.25
27.12
22.60
21.16
19.89
52.11
33.50
28.88
26.75
21.53
19.53
37.76
34.46
28.59
26.27
21.66 #######
26.14
908
04/10/2022 10:21
30.86
34.76
35.11
21.05
21.12
17.96
27.01
34.63
27.17
22.60
21.12
19.88
52.11
34.17
28.93
26.73
21.50
19.50
37.78
34.58
28.57
26.23
21.65 #######
26.16
909
04/10/2022 10:22
30.47
35.21
35.07
21.06
21.09
17.97
26.68
34.99
27.26
22.62
21.15
19.84
52.07
34.89
28.95
26.72
21.50
19.51
37.77
34.81
28.51
26.20
21.65 #######
26.13
910
04/10/2022 10:22
30.18
35.23
35.04
21.03
21.09
17.97
26.37
35.36
27.32
22.66
21.15
19.85
52.03
35.61
28.90
26.71
21.52
19.49
37.79
35.03
28.47
26.17
21.63 #######
26.12
==PAGE:241==
911
04/10/2022 10:22
29.88
35.21
35.02
21.03
21.09
17.97
26.19
35.77
27.38
22.75
21.16
19.83
52.02
35.60
28.91
26.71
21.50
19.48
37.79
35.24
28.48
26.17
21.64 #######
26.13
912
04/10/2022 10:22
29.57
35.39
35.00
20.99
21.08
17.97
25.93
36.01
27.37
22.75
21.12
19.84
51.98
35.69
28.92
26.70
21.50
19.48
37.77
35.41
28.47
26.15
21.63 #######
26.11
913
04/10/2022 10:22
29.48
35.43
34.98
21.00
21.09
17.97
25.67
36.38
27.36
22.69
21.10
19.82
51.95
35.56
28.95
26.69
21.48
19.48
37.77
35.58
28.46
26.08
21.63 #######
26.12
914
04/10/2022 10:22
29.18
35.76
34.91
20.98
21.08
17.96
25.53
36.45
27.35
22.64
21.13
19.84
51.95
35.54
28.99
26.68
21.48
19.49
37.74
35.72
28.44
26.04
21.60 #######
26.10
915
04/10/2022 10:22
29.03
35.71
34.90
20.98
21.06
17.95
25.38
36.59
27.34
22.63
21.05
19.84
51.86
35.45
28.99
26.68
21.49
19.48
37.73
35.86
28.44
26.01
21.54 #######
26.11
916
04/10/2022 10:22
28.85
35.78
34.85
21.01
21.06
17.94
25.26
36.72
27.32
22.61
21.03
19.83
51.81
35.34
29.02
26.67
21.47
19.49
37.73
36.02
28.44
26.01
21.52 #######
26.10
917
04/10/2022 10:22
28.60
35.77
34.83
21.00
21.05
17.92
25.05
36.80
27.32
22.61
21.01
19.84
51.79
35.26
29.01
26.67
21.48
19.50
37.74
36.09
28.43
25.97
21.52 #######
26.11
918
04/10/2022 10:22
28.36
35.54
34.80
20.97
21.05
17.93
24.91
36.89
27.32
22.60
21.04
19.83
51.76
35.29
29.00
26.67
21.48
19.48
37.71
36.18
28.43
25.98
21.56 #######
26.11
919
04/10/2022 10:22
28.10
35.22
34.76
20.96
21.04
17.91
24.79
37.05
27.33
22.61
21.01
19.81
51.74
35.20
29.01
26.67
21.45
19.47
37.69
36.33
28.41
26.02
21.58 #######
26.10
920
04/10/2022 10:22
27.94
35.01
34.75
20.93
21.03
17.90
24.70
37.14
27.30
22.66
20.99
19.81
51.73
35.09
29.00
26.67
21.48
19.49
37.69
36.39
28.42
26.00
21.58 #######
26.11
921
04/10/2022 10:22
27.82
34.80
34.74
20.92
21.01
17.90
24.65
36.98
27.28
22.65
20.97
19.82
51.68
34.95
28.99
26.65
21.50
19.48
37.67
36.32
28.41
25.98
21.60 #######
26.10
922
04/10/2022 10:22
27.84
34.71
34.71
20.91
20.99
17.88
24.75
36.82
27.25
22.56
20.94
19.78
51.66
34.77
28.96
26.65
21.49
19.46
37.64
36.24
28.41
26.00
21.61 #######
26.10
923
04/10/2022 10:22
27.69
34.63
34.69
20.90
21.01
17.88
24.81
36.60
27.23
22.50
20.96
19.77
51.58
34.63
28.94
26.63
21.48
19.45
37.59
36.13
28.39
25.97
21.63 #######
26.10
924
04/10/2022 10:22
27.79
34.53
34.68
20.91
21.00
17.87
24.88
36.43
27.17
22.51
20.96
19.76
51.52
34.38
28.89
26.62
21.47
19.45
37.58
36.02
28.39
25.97
21.61 #######
26.10
925
04/10/2022 10:22
27.86
34.55
34.68
20.88
20.99
17.89
24.87
36.23
27.16
22.50
20.97
19.76
51.44
34.26
28.85
26.60
21.46
19.45
37.54
35.89
28.37
25.98
21.65 #######
26.07
926
04/10/2022 10:22
27.77
34.54
34.65
20.88
20.97
17.87
24.90
36.11
27.13
22.45
20.98
19.75
51.41
34.17
28.86
26.60
21.45
19.45
37.52
35.79
28.36
25.96
21.67 #######
26.08
927
04/10/2022 10:22
28.13
34.55
34.63
20.88
20.97
17.84
25.04
35.99
27.09
22.43
20.96
19.72
51.35
34.01
28.88
26.58
21.47
19.46
37.49
35.68
28.34
25.94
21.65 #######
26.09
928
04/10/2022 10:22
28.20
34.55
34.62
20.89
20.95
17.84
25.35
35.82
27.08
22.43
20.96
19.70
51.27
33.89
28.88
26.58
21.47
19.47
37.46
35.58
28.33
25.93
21.64 #######
26.09
929
04/10/2022 10:22
28.50
34.59
34.61
20.89
20.95
17.83
25.38
35.68
27.05
22.45
20.94
19.73
51.26
33.71
28.90
26.56
21.48
19.46
37.45
35.46
28.31
25.95
21.60 #######
26.06
930
04/10/2022 10:22
28.75
34.47
34.55
20.88
20.95
17.80
25.54
35.50
27.02
22.50
20.96
19.71
51.18
33.55
28.90
26.56
21.48
19.46
37.41
35.32
28.29
25.89
21.59 #######
26.08
931
04/10/2022 10:22
29.37
34.45
34.55
20.86
20.91
17.81
25.82
35.33
26.98
22.49
20.96
19.71
51.13
33.42
28.91
26.53
21.47
19.45
37.39
35.19
28.29
25.86
21.55 #######
26.09
932
04/10/2022 10:22
29.76
34.36
34.52
20.83
20.85
17.80
26.02
35.19
26.94
22.47
20.98
19.73
51.11
33.32
28.95
26.52
21.45
19.44
37.34
35.07
28.29
25.83
21.51 #######
26.07
933
04/10/2022 10:22
29.68
34.30
34.51
20.82
20.87
17.80
26.53
35.03
26.91
22.43
20.97
19.71
51.09
33.25
28.93
26.52
21.43
19.45
37.34
34.94
28.25
25.85
21.51 #######
26.07
934
04/10/2022 10:22
30.09
34.37
34.49
20.80
20.84
17.80
26.47
34.90
26.87
22.36
20.98
19.71
51.05
33.14
28.92
26.52
21.39
19.42
37.32
34.84
28.25
25.82
21.52 #######
26.07
935
04/10/2022 10:22
30.05
34.32
34.49
20.79
20.83
17.77
26.67
34.75
26.84
22.32
20.96
19.71
51.03
33.05
28.91
26.51
21.40
19.41
37.30
34.70
28.23
25.83
21.45 #######
26.07
936
04/10/2022 10:22
30.13
34.24
34.47
20.79
20.81
17.80
26.67
34.62
26.82
22.27
20.93
19.70
51.03
32.94
28.91
26.51
21.41
19.39
37.26
34.61
28.19
25.80
21.46 #######
26.07
937
04/10/2022 10:22
30.15
34.24
34.44
20.76
20.81
17.77
26.68
34.50
26.76
22.25
20.92
19.70
51.04
32.88
28.90
26.48
21.39
19.41
37.24
34.51
28.18
25.74
21.44 #######
26.06
938
04/10/2022 10:22
30.16
34.27
34.41
20.76
20.81
17.78
26.77
34.40
26.72
22.20
20.89
19.69
51.03
32.87
28.90
26.48
21.39
19.40
37.22
34.41
28.16
25.71
21.51 #######
26.05
939
04/10/2022 10:22
30.04
34.19
34.40
20.77
20.83
17.79
26.58
34.40
26.70
22.23
20.93
19.68
51.03
32.85
28.92
26.45
21.38
19.41
37.21
34.41
28.15
25.70
21.49 #######
26.04
940
04/10/2022 10:22
29.79
34.17
34.38
20.76
20.81
17.77
26.44
34.34
26.68
22.21
20.94
19.69
51.01
32.79
28.89
26.48
21.41
19.40
37.21
34.37
28.12
25.70
21.54 #######
26.06
941
04/10/2022 10:22
29.69
34.01
34.33
20.76
20.80
17.77
26.32
34.31
26.67
22.24
20.90
19.68
51.01
32.69
28.90
26.45
21.39
19.39
37.20
34.34
28.11
25.69
21.47 #######
26.05
942
04/10/2022 10:22
29.46
33.97
34.30
20.76
20.81
17.79
26.21
34.21
26.66
22.23
20.92
19.67
50.96
32.59
28.88
26.45
21.38
19.41
37.18
34.29
28.08
25.68
21.47 #######
26.05
943
04/10/2022 10:22
29.32
33.93
34.29
20.71
20.81
17.78
26.12
34.10
26.65
22.25
20.90
19.66
50.93
32.46
28.82
26.43
21.40
19.42
37.15
34.26
28.05
25.66
21.47 #######
26.03
944
04/10/2022 10:22
29.74
33.80
34.28
20.71
20.81
17.77
26.04
34.10
26.63
22.23
20.89
19.66
50.92
32.34
28.81
26.43
21.40
19.39
37.14
34.23
28.07
25.62
21.44 #######
26.06
945
04/10/2022 10:22
29.47
33.80
34.25
20.70
20.83
17.78
25.92
33.98
26.61
22.23
20.87
19.64
50.91
32.41
28.78
26.43
21.38
19.41
37.10
34.20
28.03
25.58
21.44 #######
26.05
946
04/10/2022 10:22
29.26
33.79
34.21
20.70
20.82
17.80
25.71
34.14
26.60
22.23
20.89
19.65
50.84
32.56
28.80
26.42
21.39
19.39
37.11
34.32
28.01
25.56
21.44 #######
26.05
947
04/10/2022 10:22
28.95
33.75
34.18
20.68
20.81
17.80
25.51
34.37
26.60
22.20
20.83
19.65
50.82
32.67
28.83
26.40
21.37
19.37
37.09
34.43
28.00
25.56
21.46 #######
26.04
948
04/10/2022 10:22
28.74
33.72
34.15
20.68
20.82
17.77
25.29
34.60
26.63
22.19
20.83
19.65
50.81
32.80
28.84
26.40
21.37
19.39
37.06
34.51
27.98
25.56
21.45 #######
26.04
949
04/10/2022 10:22
28.70
33.79
34.13
20.68
20.81
17.78
25.03
34.79
26.64
22.22
20.81
19.66
50.77
32.80
28.84
26.40
21.38
19.40
37.05
34.68
27.97
25.55
21.44 #######
26.05
950
04/10/2022 10:22
28.52
33.71
34.08
20.67
20.81
17.80
24.84
34.97
26.63
22.19
20.81
19.67
50.70
32.79
28.87
26.39
21.38
19.38
37.03
34.83
27.93
25.56
21.42 #######
26.03
951
04/10/2022 10:22
28.26
33.64
34.05
20.68
20.80
17.78
24.58
35.07
26.64
22.21
20.80
19.66
50.65
32.71
28.87
26.38
21.38
19.39
37.00
34.95
27.96
25.55
21.48 #######
26.04
952
04/10/2022 10:22
28.27
33.72
33.99
20.66
20.81
17.79
24.35
35.28
26.66
22.19
20.80
19.66
50.63
32.64
28.87
26.38
21.36
19.40
36.96
35.06
27.94
25.51
21.49 #######
26.03
953
04/10/2022 10:22
28.18
33.74
33.99
20.67
20.80
17.79
24.15
35.35
26.64
22.22
20.82
19.63
50.64
32.57
28.87
26.37
21.35
19.38
36.95
35.18
27.93
25.50
21.46 #######
26.03
954
04/10/2022 10:22
27.98
33.70
33.96
20.69
20.79
17.81
24.00
35.35
26.66
22.26
20.78
19.64
50.58
32.48
28.87
26.37
21.36
19.38
36.92
35.20
27.91
25.50
21.46 #######
26.03
955
04/10/2022 10:22
27.84
33.75
33.95
20.66
20.79
17.82
23.83
35.47
26.64
22.22
20.83
19.60
50.51
32.43
28.88
26.37
21.37
19.37
36.92
35.32
27.91
25.46
21.50 #######
26.01
956
04/10/2022 10:22
27.65
33.76
33.90
20.66
20.76
17.79
23.65
35.55
26.65
22.23
20.85
19.62
50.43
32.40
28.92
26.35
21.35
19.38
36.91
35.41
27.88
25.44
21.52 #######
26.03
957
04/10/2022 10:22
27.56
33.65
33.87
20.65
20.76
17.78
23.54
35.58
26.64
22.23
20.85
19.60
50.40
32.37
28.87
26.35
21.34
19.37
36.87
35.49
27.90
25.42
21.44 #######
26.02
958
04/10/2022 10:22
27.34
33.59
33.86
20.66
20.74
17.79
23.45
35.55
26.63
22.24
20.83
19.62
50.36
32.46
28.86
26.33
21.31
19.36
36.85
35.50
27.87
25.45
21.44 #######
26.02
959
04/10/2022 10:22
27.34
33.64
33.85
20.64
20.71
17.79
23.42
35.59
26.63
22.24
20.81
19.62
50.32
32.47
28.86
26.33
21.29
19.34
36.82
35.57
27.87
25.43
21.45 #######
26.01
960
04/10/2022 10:23
27.15
33.69
33.81
20.66
20.70
17.79
23.35
35.57
26.65
22.26
20.78
19.62
50.26
32.38
28.84
26.31
21.32
19.34
36.79
35.56
27.85
25.42
21.44 #######
26.01
961
04/10/2022 10:23
27.08
33.65
33.80
20.66
20.68
17.80
23.40
35.42
26.61
22.26
20.75
19.60
50.21
32.35
28.85
26.30
21.31
19.37
36.78
35.53
27.82
25.39
21.42 #######
26.02
962
04/10/2022 10:23
26.89
33.70
33.77
20.67
20.70
17.78
23.38
35.31
26.59
22.28
20.72
19.60
50.15
32.34
28.83
26.30
21.32
19.36
36.75
35.51
27.82
25.33
21.48 #######
26.01
963
04/10/2022 10:23
26.60
33.81
33.77
20.64
20.70
17.80
23.31
35.33
26.59
22.27
20.69
19.61
50.10
32.34
28.78
26.29
21.32
19.38
36.74
35.49
27.81
25.28
21.43 #######
26.02
964
04/10/2022 10:23
26.62
33.80
33.72
20.67
20.69
17.80
23.25
35.42
26.59
22.25
20.62
19.62
50.09
32.29
28.73
26.27
21.32
19.36
36.70
35.48
27.80
25.29
21.39 #######
26.01
965
04/10/2022 10:23
26.53
33.84
33.71
20.65
20.70
17.80
23.20
35.25
26.59
22.24
20.62
19.61
50.04
32.32
28.74
26.25
21.32
19.35
36.67
35.47
27.79
25.28
21.42 #######
26.02
966
04/10/2022 10:23
26.40
33.77
33.68
20.63
20.70
17.81
23.17
35.28
26.55
22.23
20.60
19.62
49.94
32.25
28.74
26.25
21.32
19.35
36.64
35.43
27.78
25.24
21.36 #######
26.01
967
04/10/2022 10:23
26.35
33.85
33.66
20.65
20.70
17.81
23.07
35.19
26.55
22.27
20.59
19.60
49.87
32.22
28.73
26.25
21.30
19.34
36.59
35.37
27.77
25.24
21.37 #######
26.01
==PAGE:242==
968
04/10/2022 10:23
26.18
33.85
33.62
20.62
20.68
17.81
22.98
35.13
26.54
22.22
20.59
19.61
49.83
32.12
28.73
26.24
21.32
19.35
36.55
35.34
27.76
25.19
21.38 #######
25.99
969
04/10/2022 10:23
26.12
33.72
33.60
20.63
20.68
17.82
22.94
35.11
26.54
22.20
20.56
19.61
49.76
32.07
28.67
26.22
21.33
19.33
36.55
35.35
27.75
25.17
21.41 #######
26.01
970
04/10/2022 10:23
26.17
33.75
33.57
20.61
20.68
17.75
23.00
35.07
26.52
22.21
20.56
19.60
49.74
32.02
28.69
26.20
21.31
19.33
36.53
35.33
27.74
25.17
21.43 #######
26.01
971
04/10/2022 10:23
26.15
33.74
33.56
20.62
20.69
17.77
23.08
34.98
26.51
22.18
20.53
19.59
49.72
32.03
28.70
26.20
21.31
19.32
36.51
35.31
27.73
25.18
21.44 #######
25.99
972
04/10/2022 10:23
26.17
33.72
33.51
20.59
20.66
17.77
23.03
35.00
26.52
22.20
20.52
19.59
49.70
31.92
28.72
26.20
21.31
19.30
36.48
35.34
27.73
25.16
21.47 #######
26.00
973
04/10/2022 10:23
26.05
33.79
33.49
20.59
20.67
17.79
23.14
35.06
26.51
22.18
20.55
19.58
49.68
31.88
28.72
26.19
21.27
19.29
36.44
35.31
27.71
25.15
21.42 #######
26.02
974
04/10/2022 10:23
25.89
33.79
33.49
20.57
20.64
17.76
23.20
35.01
26.49
22.18
20.55
19.57
49.62
31.87
28.69
26.18
21.26
19.30
36.41
35.30
27.72
25.13
21.45 #######
26.00
975
04/10/2022 10:23
25.91
33.66
33.47
20.56
20.65
17.76
23.17
35.00
26.49
22.19
20.52
19.56
49.60
31.87
28.69
26.17
21.26
19.30
36.41
35.35
27.69
25.12
21.45 #######
25.99
976
04/10/2022 10:23
25.76
33.72
33.45
20.54
20.65
17.75
23.16
35.01
26.50
22.16
20.51
19.53
49.57
31.87
28.65
26.16
21.25
19.31
36.35
35.32
27.66
25.09
21.44 -156.34
25.98
977
04/10/2022 10:23
25.89
33.66
33.42
20.56
20.66
17.74
23.11
35.06
26.47
22.15
20.50
19.53
49.48
31.82
28.65
26.15
21.23
19.31
36.36
35.39
27.68
25.11
21.38 #######
26.02
978
04/10/2022 10:23
25.80
33.66
33.41
20.54
20.65
17.75
23.10
35.04
26.48
22.12
20.54
19.51
49.45
31.85
28.64
26.14
21.22
19.27
36.31
35.39
27.65
25.05
21.38 #######
26.01
979
04/10/2022 10:23
25.71
33.69
33.40
20.52
20.63
17.76
23.02
35.00
26.46
22.10
20.53
19.51
49.36
31.83
28.64
26.12
21.23
19.30
36.30
35.40
27.64
25.03
21.34 #######
26.00
980
04/10/2022 10:23
25.61
33.65
33.38
20.51
20.61
17.74
23.03
35.03
26.44
22.11
20.54
19.51
49.35
31.71
28.63
26.11
21.23
19.28
36.28
35.38
27.64
25.05
21.35 #######
26.01
981
04/10/2022 10:23
25.53
33.66
33.38
20.48
20.60
17.73
23.08
34.93
26.43
22.10
20.53
19.48
49.29
31.60
28.65
26.11
21.22
19.27
36.25
35.33
27.64
25.08
21.33 #######
26.00
982
04/10/2022 10:23
25.42
33.61
33.39
20.49
20.61
17.73
23.10
34.80
26.43
22.08
20.54
19.46
49.26
31.57
28.61
26.10
21.22
19.28
36.23
35.30
27.60
25.02
21.37 #######
25.99
983
04/10/2022 10:23
25.54
33.67
33.34
20.50
20.59
17.72
23.16
34.75
26.42
22.03
20.55
19.42
49.19
31.55
28.61
26.10
21.21
19.29
36.23
35.27
27.61
25.02
21.35 #######
25.99
984
04/10/2022 10:23
25.45
33.73
33.35
20.45
20.57
17.71
23.12
34.73
26.41
22.01
20.55
19.44
49.15
31.51
28.62
26.07
21.19
19.28
36.18
35.25
27.61
25.00
21.36 #######
26.00
985
04/10/2022 10:23
25.40
33.78
33.32
20.45
20.55
17.70
23.15
34.65
26.39
21.99
20.55
19.42
49.12
31.48
28.59
26.06
21.21
19.28
36.16
35.20
27.60
24.98
21.37 #######
26.00
986
04/10/2022 10:23
25.64
33.83
33.30
20.41
20.54
17.67
23.02
34.60
26.38
22.01
20.56
19.41
49.08
31.42
28.58
26.04
21.17
19.25
36.12
35.15
27.58
24.98
21.35 #######
25.99
987
04/10/2022 10:23
25.48
33.83
33.28
20.43
20.53
17.68
23.00
34.48
26.36
22.01
20.58
19.38
49.01
31.37
28.55
26.05
21.17
19.27
36.10
35.11
27.55
24.94
21.37 #######
26.00
988
04/10/2022 10:23
25.37
33.77
33.29
20.43
20.55
17.67
23.00
34.38
26.37
22.00
20.60
19.38
48.95
31.33
28.52
26.05
21.19
19.26
36.07
35.02
27.53
24.97
21.39 #######
26.01
989
04/10/2022 10:23
25.47
33.82
33.26
20.41
20.54
17.67
23.02
34.38
26.35
21.98
20.59
19.37
48.91
31.33
28.54
26.04
21.20
19.27
36.06
35.02
27.52
24.97
21.39 #######
25.99
990
04/10/2022 10:23
25.48
33.94
33.24
20.40
20.53
17.68
23.11
34.29
26.34
21.99
20.61
19.37
48.90
31.29
28.55
26.01
21.18
19.26
36.01
34.91
27.52
24.94
21.40 #######
26.02
991
04/10/2022 10:23
25.35
33.87
33.25
20.41
20.53
17.68
23.05
34.23
26.32
21.99
20.62
19.36
48.82
31.27
28.58
26.01
21.17
19.25
35.99
34.84
27.47
24.93
21.39 #######
26.00
992
04/10/2022 10:23
25.31
33.77
33.22
20.39
20.52
17.69
23.31
34.15
26.30
22.01
20.64
19.36
48.81
31.24
28.54
26.00
21.16
19.25
35.93
34.73
27.45
24.93
21.40 #######
26.02
993
04/10/2022 10:23
25.69
33.75
33.19
20.36
20.47
17.66
23.59
34.05
26.26
21.95
20.63
19.35
48.79
31.11
28.53
25.98
21.17
19.27
35.91
34.61
27.46
24.90
21.42 #######
26.00
994
04/10/2022 10:23
26.11
33.71
33.20
20.33
20.46
17.65
23.85
33.85
26.25
21.93
20.62
19.35
48.76
31.00
28.51
25.98
21.17
19.26
35.89
34.47
27.44
24.88
21.40 #######
26.00
995
04/10/2022 10:23
26.95
33.68
33.19
20.32
20.44
17.64
24.57
33.67
26.21
21.88
20.58
19.35
48.70
30.84
28.49
25.97
21.18
19.26
35.87
34.32
27.43
24.86
21.37 #######
26.00
996
04/10/2022 10:23
27.59
33.73
33.16
20.31
20.42
17.63
25.46
33.47
26.17
21.83
20.54
19.38
48.66
30.67
28.48
25.98
21.15
19.27
35.82
34.15
27.41
24.85
21.38 #######
26.02
997
04/10/2022 10:23
28.37
33.70
33.14
20.29
20.42
17.63
25.99
33.33
26.13
21.82
20.53
19.37
48.63
30.54
28.42
25.96
21.15
19.26
35.80
34.00
27.38
24.86
21.39 #######
26.00
998
04/10/2022 10:23
28.49
33.62
33.12
20.30
20.42
17.65
26.29
33.16
26.10
21.81
20.53
19.38
48.63
30.58
28.40
25.95
21.14
19.24
35.78
33.86
27.37
24.86
21.40 #######
25.99
999
04/10/2022 10:23
28.49
33.58
33.11
20.30
20.42
17.64
25.92
33.19
26.08
21.82
20.56
19.37
48.60
30.66
28.39
25.96
21.12
19.26
35.77
33.85
27.35
24.81
21.39 #######
25.99
1000
04/10/2022 10:23
28.58
33.56
33.08
20.28
20.43
17.67
25.55
33.42
26.11
21.83
20.56
19.38
48.59
30.73
28.39
25.95
21.15
19.25
35.77
33.93
27.32
24.84
21.38 #######
25.99
1001
04/10/2022 10:23
28.54
33.56
33.06
20.26
20.43
17.66
25.30
33.59
26.14
21.84
20.55
19.35
48.54
31.04
28.44
25.93
21.13
19.26
35.77
34.00
27.31
24.79
21.36 #######
25.99
1002
04/10/2022 10:23
28.34
33.65
33.03
20.24
20.44
17.66
25.09
33.72
26.15
21.87
20.53
19.34
48.48
31.31
28.40
25.93
21.11
19.25
35.75
34.07
27.30
24.83
21.39 #######
26.00
1003
04/10/2022 10:23
28.20
33.71
33.00
20.22
20.43
17.67
24.88
33.85
26.12
21.91
20.53
19.34
48.46
31.47
28.40
25.91
21.11
19.23
35.73
34.11
27.29
24.85
21.35 #######
25.99
1004
04/10/2022 10:23
28.07
33.50
32.98
20.18
20.44
17.68
24.67
34.03
26.11
21.90
20.55
19.34
48.46
31.57
28.37
25.90
21.10
19.24
35.71
34.19
27.27
24.81
21.38 #######
25.98
1005
04/10/2022 10:23
27.75
33.46
32.96
20.16
20.44
17.65
24.48
34.14
26.11
21.91
20.52
19.34
48.45
32.01
28.36
25.90
21.11
19.24
35.69
34.24
27.26
24.83
21.36 #######
26.00
==PAGE:243==
Data from Thermocouples, test 3
Scan
Time
L1P11
L1P12
L1P13
L1P14
L1P15
L1P16
L1P2
L1P22
L1P23
L1P24
L1P25
L1P26
L2P11
L2P12
L2P13
L2P14
L2P15
L2P16
L2P21
L2P22
L2P23
L2P24
L2P25
L2P26
XX
2
04/10/2022 10:39
17.97
22.80
25.75
18.10
18.78
16.74
17.63
23.02
22.20
19.30
18.43
17.92
19.21
23.58
21.38
20.07
17.99
17.00
16.98
22.54
22.54
20.28
18.13 #######
25.98
3
04/10/2022 10:39
17.98
22.82
25.76
18.13
18.78
16.76
17.69
23.01
22.16
19.31
18.43
17.91
19.23
23.65
21.38
20.09
18.02
17.01
16.93
22.53
22.54
20.30
18.11 #######
25.98
4
04/10/2022 10:40
18.00
22.79
25.77
18.14
18.77
16.72
17.66
22.99
22.15
19.30
18.44
17.91
19.27
23.61
21.36
20.08
17.99
17.01
16.90
22.52
22.53
20.31
18.11 #######
25.98
5
04/10/2022 10:40
18.00
22.79
25.75
18.17
18.77
16.74
17.67
23.00
22.14
19.29
18.46
17.87
19.31
23.59
21.37
20.08
18.00
17.02
16.91
22.51
22.54
20.28
18.12 #######
25.97
6
04/10/2022 10:40
18.00
22.82
25.74
18.19
18.77
16.73
17.66
22.97
22.13
19.29
18.45
17.87
19.34
23.55
21.39
20.07
17.98
16.99
16.94
22.53
22.54
20.29
18.11 #######
25.96
7
04/10/2022 10:40
18.00
22.80
25.74
18.22
18.76
16.73
17.67
22.99
22.13
19.27
18.46
17.88
19.34
23.51
21.37
20.07
17.99
16.99
16.94
22.51
22.52
20.28
18.12 #######
25.97
8
04/10/2022 10:40
18.03
22.79
25.73
18.23
18.76
16.75
17.66
23.00
22.11
19.24
18.44
17.86
19.40
23.47
21.37
20.06
18.00
16.99
16.97
22.51
22.53
20.29
18.12 #######
25.97
9
04/10/2022 10:40
18.02
22.78
25.76
18.25
18.76
16.75
17.66
23.01
22.07
19.24
18.47
17.88
19.40
23.53
21.36
20.05
17.97
16.99
16.99
22.51
22.52
20.29
18.11 #######
25.98
10
04/10/2022 10:40
18.01
22.80
25.74
18.26
18.74
16.77
17.69
23.00
22.07
19.25
18.48
17.84
19.41
23.55
21.37
20.06
17.97
16.99
17.00
22.50
22.52
20.30
18.11 #######
25.97
11
04/10/2022 10:40
18.02
22.79
25.74
18.24
18.73
16.77
17.84
23.00
22.02
19.21
18.48
17.85
19.43
23.59
21.37
20.06
17.98
17.01
16.99
22.51
22.49
20.29
18.11 #######
25.95
12
04/10/2022 10:40
18.03
22.79
25.73
18.22
18.73
16.78
17.95
22.99
22.01
19.22
18.50
17.88
19.45
23.63
21.37
20.05
18.01
16.99
17.02
22.52
22.48
20.32
18.14 #######
25.97
13
04/10/2022 10:40
18.03
22.80
25.72
18.23
18.75
16.81
17.98
22.97
21.98
19.22
18.50
17.87
19.49
23.67
21.35
20.06
17.98
17.00
17.04
22.51
22.49
20.32
18.13 #######
25.98
14
04/10/2022 10:40
18.04
22.78
25.73
18.24
18.73
16.80
17.95
23.01
21.96
19.23
18.51
17.85
19.51
23.61
21.36
20.04
18.00
17.01
17.02
22.54
22.47
20.31
18.12 #######
25.98
15
04/10/2022 10:40
18.04
22.78
25.69
18.25
18.74
16.79
17.86
23.01
21.98
19.25
18.50
17.85
19.56
23.60
21.35
20.05
17.99
16.99
17.02
22.53
22.48
20.32
18.12 #######
25.98
16
04/10/2022 10:40
18.04
22.78
25.70
18.26
18.76
16.81
17.84
23.02
21.98
19.27
18.48
17.87
19.59
23.55
21.34
20.05
17.95
17.00
17.02
22.51
22.47
20.32
18.11 #######
25.98
17
04/10/2022 10:40
18.03
22.81
25.68
18.27
18.75
16.82
17.80
22.98
21.98
19.30
18.51
17.84
19.53
23.53
21.34
20.05
17.93
16.98
17.02
22.52
22.45
20.34
18.12 #######
25.98
18
04/10/2022 10:40
18.04
22.81
25.69
18.29
18.74
16.81
17.76
22.95
22.02
19.30
18.50
17.85
19.52
23.53
21.32
20.06
17.94
16.99
17.02
22.51
22.45
20.32
18.11 #######
25.99
19
04/10/2022 10:40
18.02
22.81
25.68
18.31
18.74
16.83
17.73
22.95
22.04
19.31
18.47
17.85
19.49
23.50
21.34
20.03
17.96
17.00
17.03
22.51
22.44
20.30
18.09 #######
25.96
20
04/10/2022 10:40
18.02
22.81
25.67
18.30
18.76
16.81
17.74
22.98
22.10
19.33
18.44
17.86
19.46
23.46
21.32
20.02
17.94
16.99
17.03
22.50
22.45
20.32
18.09 #######
25.98
21
04/10/2022 10:40
18.04
22.82
25.67
18.29
18.75
16.86
17.71
22.95
22.11
19.34
18.46
17.85
19.43
23.39
21.25
20.03
17.95
16.97
17.03
22.49
22.45
20.33
18.10 #######
25.96
22
04/10/2022 10:40
18.00
22.80
25.63
18.30
18.76
16.83
17.67
22.93
22.13
19.37
18.43
17.86
19.37
23.40
21.19
20.02
17.95
16.96
17.04
22.47
22.45
20.33
18.12 #######
25.98
23
04/10/2022 10:40
18.01
22.81
25.64
18.32
18.77
16.84
17.65
22.89
22.16
19.40
18.47
17.87
19.35
23.34
21.23
20.01
17.96
16.98
17.00
22.46
22.41
20.33
18.10 #######
25.97
24
04/10/2022 10:40
18.00
22.81
25.63
18.35
18.77
16.87
17.62
22.91
22.21
19.44
18.47
17.89
19.29
23.28
21.23
20.03
17.95
16.96
16.99
22.45
22.43
20.34
18.10 #######
25.99
25
04/10/2022 10:40
18.00
22.84
25.62
18.37
18.78
16.86
17.57
22.85
22.25
19.47
18.49
17.86
19.29
23.25
21.25
20.02
17.97
16.96
17.00
22.42
22.43
20.35
18.13 #######
25.96
26
04/10/2022 10:40
17.99
22.87
25.62
18.38
18.78
16.87
17.53
22.79
22.29
19.50
18.52
17.88
19.24
23.21
21.22
20.03
17.97
16.95
17.00
22.41
22.41
20.37
18.12 #######
25.97
27
04/10/2022 10:40
17.98
22.88
25.61
18.38
18.81
16.89
17.55
22.74
22.32
19.60
18.55
17.86
19.20
23.13
21.22
20.02
17.96
16.95
17.01
22.40
22.42
20.39
18.13 #######
25.98
28
04/10/2022 10:40
17.97
22.87
25.61
18.40
18.80
16.89
17.51
22.72
22.35
19.67
18.57
17.87
19.18
23.10
21.19
20.03
17.94
16.97
16.99
22.36
22.43
20.41
18.13 #######
25.97
29
04/10/2022 10:40
17.95
22.87
25.60
18.44
18.80
16.91
17.51
22.60
22.37
19.72
18.62
17.87
19.13
23.06
21.20
20.01
17.94
16.97
16.98
22.32
22.43
20.45
18.14 #######
25.98
30
04/10/2022 10:40
17.94
22.87
25.60
18.46
18.83
16.93
17.45
22.46
22.40
19.77
18.66
17.85
19.11
23.01
21.16
20.00
17.94
16.98
16.99
22.28
22.43
20.46
18.13 #######
25.98
31
04/10/2022 10:40
17.98
22.89
25.61
18.51
18.81
16.94
17.41
22.23
22.41
19.83
18.68
17.86
19.08
22.91
21.18
20.01
17.94
16.96
16.95
22.23
22.45
20.48
18.15 #######
25.96
32
04/10/2022 10:40
17.97
22.91
25.60
18.48
18.83
16.95
17.36
22.11
22.44
19.89
18.70
17.85
19.07
22.90
21.17
20.01
17.95
16.98
16.94
22.17
22.45
20.52
18.20 #######
25.98
33
04/10/2022 10:40
17.95
22.87
25.56
18.50
18.82
16.96
17.33
21.94
22.48
20.01
18.75
17.88
19.04
22.87
21.18
20.02
17.98
16.97
16.97
22.11
22.46
20.55
18.22 #######
25.97
34
04/10/2022 10:40
17.96
22.84
25.58
18.51
18.85
16.96
17.31
21.97
22.48
20.06
18.78
17.89
19.00
22.87
21.12
20.02
17.97
16.99
16.93
22.11
22.45
20.61
18.22 #######
25.97
35
04/10/2022 10:40
17.95
22.78
25.59
18.51
18.85
16.97
17.29
21.86
22.50
20.12
18.79
17.90
18.99
22.85
21.11
20.03
17.98
16.97
16.88
22.04
22.45
20.63
18.19 #######
25.97
36
04/10/2022 10:40
17.97
22.74
25.59
18.55
18.86
17.02
17.24
21.63
22.51
20.24
18.80
17.89
18.97
22.84
21.08
20.04
17.98
16.99
16.87
21.93
22.44
20.69
18.15 #######
25.95
37
04/10/2022 10:40
17.96
22.72
25.58
18.54
18.85
17.01
17.20
21.55
22.56
20.51
18.83
17.91
18.96
22.85
21.07
20.03
17.98
16.99
16.84
21.86
22.45
20.79
18.13 #######
25.99
38
04/10/2022 10:40
17.99
22.68
25.56
18.54
18.85
17.00
17.21
21.37
22.60
20.63
18.83
17.88
18.95
22.78
21.08
20.02
18.00
16.97
16.84
21.78
22.45
20.84
18.10 #######
25.97
39
04/10/2022 10:40
17.99
22.63
25.57
18.56
18.87
16.99
17.18
21.31
22.63
20.62
18.85
17.88
18.98
22.77
21.03
20.00
18.01
17.00
16.86
21.77
22.46
20.83
18.10 #######
25.97
40
04/10/2022 10:40
17.97
22.60
25.56
18.57
18.87
16.99
17.20
21.29
22.66
20.59
18.89
17.89
18.98
22.76
20.97
20.02
18.01
16.99
16.86
21.75
22.48
20.86
18.09 #######
25.96
41
04/10/2022 10:40
17.99
22.58
25.53
18.59
18.87
16.97
17.18
21.42
22.66
20.53
18.89
17.91
18.91
22.77
20.95
20.01
17.97
16.98
16.89
21.75
22.47
20.88
18.12 #######
26.05
42
04/10/2022 10:40
20.48
22.62
25.56
18.60
18.88
16.99
17.19
21.46
22.72
20.44
18.88
17.91
20.67
22.92
21.02
19.99
17.97
17.01
20.42
21.71
22.50
20.90
18.13 #######
26.13
43
04/10/2022 10:40
28.37
22.78
25.56
18.63
18.88
16.98
18.82
22.35
22.75
20.40
18.89
17.89
26.10
23.13
21.00
20.00
17.96
17.02
23.88
22.67
22.50
20.92
18.14 #######
26.31
44
04/10/2022 10:40
36.92
23.06
25.59
18.64
18.87
16.98
22.73
24.12
22.85
20.46
18.90
17.88
34.67
23.13
21.02
20.00
17.98
17.01
28.49
23.03
22.50
20.94
18.14 #######
26.53
45
04/10/2022 10:40
46.90
23.20
25.58
18.63
18.88
16.99
27.02
25.25
22.84
20.44
18.90
17.89
40.67
23.13
21.08
20.02
18.01
17.02
33.43
23.68
22.50
20.95
18.15 #######
26.63
46
04/10/2022 10:40
53.55
23.37
25.58
18.60
18.89
16.96
29.43
25.27
22.79
20.28
18.93
17.88
43.89
23.14
21.11
20.02
18.00
17.02
36.92
24.02
22.53
20.96
18.15 #######
26.75
47
04/10/2022 10:40
56.80
24.13
25.57
18.60
18.89
16.96
31.43
25.30
22.77
20.11
18.89
17.88
48.63
23.29
21.15
20.00
18.02
17.02
38.88
24.48
22.54
20.95
18.15 #######
26.92
48
04/10/2022 10:40
58.21
25.19
25.57
18.59
18.87
16.95
34.95
26.30
22.74
20.04
18.92
17.87
54.63
23.31
21.17
19.99
18.00
17.00
41.56
25.15
22.53
20.95
18.18 #######
27.06
49
04/10/2022 10:40
63.31
25.00
25.59
18.60
18.89
16.95
38.62
26.82
22.72
20.02
18.93
17.87
63.30
23.33
21.20
20.00
18.01
17.01
42.01
25.52
22.54
20.94
18.23 #######
27.35
50
04/10/2022 10:40
67.36
24.80
25.60
18.57
18.89
16.96
44.13
27.54
22.68
19.93
18.90
17.86
73.51
23.33
21.25
20.00
18.01
17.01
43.79
26.64
22.55
20.93
18.23 #######
27.59
51
04/10/2022 10:40
71.67
24.64
25.59
18.56
18.87
16.96
49.68
28.77
22.64
19.85
18.90
17.84
81.08
24.53
21.28
20.00
18.01
17.01
44.00
27.06
22.55
20.92
18.24 #######
27.68
52
04/10/2022 10:40
74.83
24.62
25.60
18.57
18.90
16.92
51.90
29.52
22.61
19.72
18.90
17.83
84.41
24.44
21.27
19.99
18.01
17.03
47.76
27.76
22.56
20.88
18.26 #######
27.72
53
04/10/2022 10:40
81.55
24.54
25.57
18.57
18.89
16.93
55.09
29.97
22.58
19.65
18.89
17.82
88.78
24.44
21.30
20.00
18.00
17.02
50.18
28.03
22.57
20.88
18.30 #######
27.88
54
04/10/2022 10:40
83.16
24.46
25.58
18.58
18.89
16.91
57.71
29.99
22.55
19.59
18.91
17.83
92.58
24.43
21.31
19.98
18.01
17.01
50.35
28.56
22.59
20.87
18.32 #######
27.90
==PAGE:244==
55
04/10/2022 10:41
84.68
24.34
25.59
18.59
18.88
16.92
60.20
30.92
22.50
19.51
18.88
17.79
96.44
24.44
21.31
19.98
18.03
17.04
49.93
29.14
22.58
20.82
18.32 #######
27.92
56
04/10/2022 10:41
84.08
24.26
25.57
18.57
18.87
16.92
61.45
31.21
22.48
19.49
18.85
17.81
99.38
24.43
21.37
19.97
18.03
17.04
49.89
29.22
22.57
20.83
18.34 #######
28.02
57
04/10/2022 10:41
82.10
24.39
25.54
18.57
18.86
16.90
64.37
31.49
22.47
19.46
18.88
17.82
101.25
24.44
21.42
19.98
18.02
17.06
53.12
30.15
22.55
20.81
18.35 #######
28.07
58
04/10/2022 10:41
88.80
24.66
25.56
18.57
18.89
16.93
63.95
32.11
22.45
19.44
18.85
17.79
104.15
24.74
21.44
19.98
18.05
17.08
54.68
30.65
22.56
20.80
18.38 #######
28.19
59
04/10/2022 10:41
91.15
24.58
25.57
18.57
18.89
16.92
63.37
33.35
22.42
19.44
18.86
17.81
107.40
25.08
21.47
19.95
18.04
17.07
55.37
31.29
22.57
20.79
18.42 #######
28.34
60
04/10/2022 10:41
92.59
24.64
25.55
18.56
18.89
16.90
63.94
33.81
22.40
19.47
18.84
17.80
111.82
25.10
21.46
19.97
18.07
17.09
58.04
32.06
22.54
20.81
18.43 #######
28.33
61
04/10/2022 10:41
92.69
24.57
25.53
18.54
18.89
16.87
63.93
34.32
22.37
19.45
18.83
17.78
115.38
25.72
21.50
19.96
18.04
17.06
55.12
32.29
22.50
20.79
18.43 #######
28.38
62
04/10/2022 10:41
92.19
24.63
25.55
18.53
18.88
16.88
64.70
34.67
22.32
19.44
18.84
17.78
121.07
25.96
21.54
19.96
18.04
17.08
57.13
32.64
22.50
20.78
18.44 #######
28.46
63
04/10/2022 10:41
93.80
24.77
25.55
18.55
18.89
16.86
66.24
35.07
22.33
19.39
18.84
17.76
125.77
25.96
21.54
19.97
18.04
17.09
58.66
32.74
22.51
20.76
18.46 #######
28.56
64
04/10/2022 10:41
94.97
24.72
25.55
18.54
18.88
16.89
67.43
35.15
22.29
19.39
18.88
17.82
131.17
25.99
21.57
19.97
18.03
17.10
60.62
32.89
22.47
20.76
18.43 #######
28.56
65
04/10/2022 10:41
101.80
24.77
25.53
18.53
18.88
16.87
68.16
35.76
22.26
19.35
18.89
17.82
132.99
25.95
21.61
19.96
18.05
17.13
61.22
33.81
22.47
20.75
18.43 #######
28.52
66
04/10/2022 10:41
107.25
24.93
25.55
18.54
18.86
16.87
70.84
36.18
22.24
19.30
18.89
17.79
137.97
25.93
21.57
19.96
18.03
17.10
62.31
33.78
22.46
20.75
18.46 #######
28.52
67
04/10/2022 10:41
109.84
24.91
25.53
18.53
18.87
16.87
74.06
36.26
22.22
19.26
18.87
17.78
143.79
25.91
21.57
19.95
18.03
17.10
63.81
34.02
22.43
20.73
18.45 #######
28.56
68
04/10/2022 10:41
114.46
24.84
25.51
18.51
18.86
16.87
77.25
37.19
22.17
19.25
18.88
17.81
149.07
25.84
21.60
19.94
18.03
17.09
62.78
34.78
22.42
20.71
18.46 #######
28.50
69
04/10/2022 10:41
118.83
25.19
25.51
18.49
18.87
16.88
80.17
37.90
22.16
19.24
18.89
17.81
152.14
25.80
21.62
19.95
18.03
17.11
64.25
34.72
22.43
20.69
18.46 #######
28.58
70
04/10/2022 10:41
121.49
25.19
25.52
18.50
18.86
16.88
82.13
37.39
22.14
19.22
18.86
17.80
154.88
25.74
21.65
19.95
18.05
17.13
63.23
35.26
22.41
20.68
18.46 #######
28.60
71
04/10/2022 10:41
119.82
25.46
25.51
18.49
18.86
16.88
81.59
38.11
22.10
19.25
18.88
17.80
154.35
25.70
21.71
19.94
18.06
17.15
64.34
35.31
22.37
20.67
18.48 #######
28.59
72
04/10/2022 10:41
117.73
25.42
25.49
18.49
18.87
16.89
82.50
38.11
22.10
19.25
18.87
17.79
149.68
25.78
21.72
19.96
18.08
17.13
64.87
35.57
22.39
20.67
18.50 #######
28.55
73
04/10/2022 10:41
125.42
25.39
25.47
18.47
18.86
16.89
81.99
39.01
22.07
19.24
18.88
17.81
151.30
25.74
21.72
19.97
18.09
17.15
68.48
36.84
22.37
20.66
18.54 #######
28.52
74
04/10/2022 10:41
133.15
25.32
25.48
18.44
18.87
16.89
82.13
39.80
22.05
19.30
18.91
17.83
154.16
25.71
21.72
19.96
18.09
17.16
70.22
36.74
22.37
20.67
18.54 #######
28.61
75
04/10/2022 10:41
137.51
25.15
25.48
18.46
18.86
16.90
86.11
39.86
22.03
19.32
18.92
17.82
157.61
25.65
21.72
19.95
18.07
17.16
71.22
36.98
22.35
20.66
18.52 #######
28.54
76
04/10/2022 10:41
134.81
25.07
25.45
18.44
18.86
16.90
88.65
39.97
21.99
19.28
18.91
17.81
161.83
25.64
21.75
19.96
18.10
17.16
69.76
37.47
22.33
20.64
18.49 #######
28.48
77
04/10/2022 10:41
134.84
25.32
25.47
18.41
18.86
16.89
92.81
40.47
21.96
19.23
18.86
17.78
166.92
25.64
21.73
19.96
18.11
17.17
68.41
37.16
22.34
20.60
18.49 #######
28.51
78
04/10/2022 10:41
132.43
25.25
25.45
18.39
18.85
16.90
102.02
40.18
21.95
19.16
18.87
17.77
171.16
25.62
21.74
19.95
18.11
17.17
67.12
37.27
22.32
20.58
18.47 #######
28.45
79
04/10/2022 10:41
136.86
25.14
25.44
18.37
18.83
16.91
104.97
39.67
21.93
19.13
18.86
17.80
173.69
25.60
21.74
19.95
18.11
17.18
69.94
37.39
22.31
20.57
18.44 #######
28.42
80
04/10/2022 10:41
138.54
25.06
25.44
18.37
18.86
16.90
111.16
39.34
21.92
19.09
18.83
17.80
176.96
25.54
21.74
19.97
18.10
17.19
70.69
37.09
22.29
20.55
18.45 #######
28.38
81
04/10/2022 10:41
140.26
24.99
25.43
18.35
18.86
16.91
112.81
39.21
21.87
19.08
18.82
17.81
177.24
25.52
21.74
19.96
18.12
17.18
71.85
36.99
22.26
20.54
18.49 #######
28.41
82
04/10/2022 10:41
141.09
24.93
25.43
18.34
18.84
16.92
115.80
38.46
21.85
19.08
18.83
17.79
178.18
25.47
21.74
19.96
18.14
17.18
74.40
36.66
22.26
20.54
18.53 #######
28.42
83
04/10/2022 10:41
139.25
25.25
25.41
18.31
18.86
16.92
116.00
39.04
21.84
19.14
18.86
17.82
179.56
25.45
21.75
19.97
18.13
17.18
72.90
36.75
22.25
20.54
18.55 #######
28.43
84
04/10/2022 10:41
137.37
26.17
25.40
18.32
18.85
16.92
120.09
38.80
21.82
19.14
18.87
17.82
182.48
25.42
21.76
19.96
18.14
17.19
72.93
37.40
22.25
20.53
18.56 #######
28.40
85
04/10/2022 10:41
137.57
26.78
25.40
18.31
18.85
16.90
122.47
39.75
21.78
19.15
18.85
17.82
180.06
25.41
21.81
19.93
18.15
17.18
74.17
37.18
22.21
20.54
18.57 #######
28.37
86
04/10/2022 10:41
137.53
26.79
25.39
18.29
18.85
16.89
123.02
39.08
21.77
19.16
18.86
17.82
179.65
25.38
21.84
19.95
18.15
17.19
77.04
36.87
22.20
20.50
18.58 #######
28.31
87
04/10/2022 10:41
144.17
27.14
25.39
18.29
18.85
16.92
125.54
38.45
21.74
19.15
18.88
17.80
175.99
25.31
21.84
19.95
18.15
17.16
79.72
36.53
22.22
20.53
18.60 #######
28.24
88
04/10/2022 10:41
153.06
27.70
25.41
18.28
18.82
16.93
126.06
37.74
21.73
19.19
18.88
17.82
171.37
25.25
21.85
19.93
18.13
17.21
80.35
36.18
22.23
20.53
18.62 #######
28.22
89
04/10/2022 10:41
155.41
28.28
25.40
18.28
18.83
16.92
125.52
37.14
21.71
19.22
18.88
17.81
170.53
25.22
21.88
19.93
18.14
17.20
80.75
35.87
22.22
20.53
18.61 #######
28.17
90
04/10/2022 10:41
159.34
29.18
25.39
18.29
18.84
16.95
125.72
36.52
21.72
19.30
18.91
17.84
170.28
25.22
21.95
19.94
18.15
17.20
82.81
35.48
22.20
20.54
18.61 #######
28.13
91
04/10/2022 10:41
159.03
29.26
25.41
18.28
18.85
16.95
123.56
36.65
21.71
19.34
18.95
17.85
168.03
25.18
21.99
19.94
18.14
17.22
82.98
35.88
22.19
20.54
18.59 #######
28.12
92
04/10/2022 10:41
167.02
30.26
25.39
18.27
18.84
16.94
126.70
37.47
21.69
19.36
18.96
17.82
167.98
25.19
21.99
19.93
18.12
17.23
83.30
35.49
22.19
20.55
18.55 #######
28.15
93
04/10/2022 10:41
167.48
30.25
25.38
18.29
18.83
16.94
127.62
36.77
21.69
19.33
18.96
17.83
169.48
25.14
22.04
19.94
18.14
17.23
84.71
35.11
22.17
20.56
18.60 #######
28.06
94
04/10/2022 10:41
166.66
30.60
25.37
18.26
18.84
16.98
127.19
36.02
21.67
19.30
18.92
17.83
165.83
25.11
22.02
19.95
18.16
17.22
86.81
34.84
22.17
20.55
18.58 #######
28.02
95
04/10/2022 10:41
170.25
31.29
25.37
18.24
18.83
16.97
127.41
35.38
21.64
19.32
18.93
17.87
164.09
25.07
22.02
19.93
18.18
17.23
84.95
34.48
22.16
20.56
18.55 #######
27.98
96
04/10/2022 10:41
169.42
32.56
25.37
18.27
18.84
16.98
129.23
35.08
21.67
19.38
18.96
17.84
161.25
25.10
22.01
19.94
18.19
17.23
84.15
34.22
22.14
20.57
18.59 #######
27.98
97
04/10/2022 10:41
166.68
33.09
25.36
18.28
18.85
16.97
130.96
34.63
21.62
19.40
18.98
17.82
163.10
25.10
22.00
19.92
18.16
17.26
83.46
34.02
22.12
20.56
18.59 #######
28.00
98
04/10/2022 10:41
163.40
33.34
25.36
18.28
18.87
16.99
137.47
34.72
21.60
19.36
18.96
17.84
171.78
25.11
22.00
19.91
18.16
17.24
82.83
33.72
22.13
20.53
18.60 #######
28.08
99
04/10/2022 10:41
167.12
33.36
25.35
18.28
18.85
17.00
138.83
34.58
21.59
19.31
18.95
17.83
173.44
25.09
22.07
19.93
18.18
17.25
84.27
33.42
22.11
20.52
18.61 #######
28.15
100
04/10/2022 10:41
169.23
34.63
25.38
18.29
18.85
17.02
138.65
34.07
21.58
19.31
18.94
17.84
173.97
25.04
22.05
19.91
18.18
17.26
83.09
33.58
22.09
20.52
18.63 #######
28.12
101
04/10/2022 10:41
172.41
34.39
25.34
18.27
18.84
17.02
136.90
34.80
21.57
19.31
18.96
17.83
173.57
25.08
22.09
19.94
18.19
17.27
83.10
33.40
22.11
20.52
18.61 #######
28.03
102
04/10/2022 10:41
175.85
33.85
25.35
18.26
18.85
17.00
135.91
34.18
21.55
19.36
18.96
17.84
173.28
25.09
22.09
19.93
18.18
17.27
85.20
33.05
22.09
20.55
18.58 #######
28.06
103
04/10/2022 10:41
179.58
33.34
25.35
18.28
18.86
17.02
140.51
33.60
21.55
19.38
18.99
17.87
174.22
25.11
22.14
19.94
18.20
17.28
83.83
32.74
22.07
20.56
18.63 #######
28.05
104
04/10/2022 10:41
178.90
33.41
25.34
18.27
18.88
17.02
142.75
33.06
21.54
19.35
19.00
17.87
172.81
25.15
22.13
19.96
18.19
17.29
84.00
32.53
22.09
20.53
18.67 #######
28.08
105
04/10/2022 10:41
180.16
33.77
25.30
18.27
18.87
17.03
144.76
32.65
21.52
19.36
18.98
17.85
172.30
25.20
22.12
19.93
18.21
17.28
83.33
32.25
22.07
20.54
18.67 #######
28.01
106
04/10/2022 10:41
179.50
35.29
25.30
18.25
18.86
17.02
144.97
32.26
21.49
19.37
18.97
17.87
172.59
25.24
22.14
19.93
18.20
17.28
87.02
31.93
22.06
20.53
18.69 #######
28.05
107
04/10/2022 10:42
179.37
36.02
25.32
18.24
18.88
17.00
149.77
32.04
21.50
19.35
18.97
17.86
174.25
25.23
22.15
19.93
18.19
17.29
88.26
31.66
22.06
20.51
18.70 #######
28.04
108
04/10/2022 10:42
182.30
35.64
25.28
18.27
18.86
17.02
151.30
32.71
21.49
19.33
18.97
17.88
174.32
25.30
22.19
19.93
18.21
17.30
88.79
31.72
22.06
20.51
18.72 #######
28.07
109
04/10/2022 10:42
188.21
35.58
25.31
18.28
18.84
17.00
153.35
32.27
21.48
19.31
18.98
17.86
179.13
25.34
22.21
19.94
18.20
17.31
86.53
31.50
22.05
20.51
18.68 #######
28.11
==PAGE:245==
110
04/10/2022 10:42
188.26
35.05
25.29
18.26
18.85
17.02
155.54
31.89
21.47
19.32
18.97
17.87
179.33
25.38
22.23
19.92
18.18
17.31
87.22
31.31
22.04
20.50
18.66 #######
28.09
111
04/10/2022 10:42
187.28
34.86
25.29
18.26
18.86
17.01
163.49
31.44
21.45
19.30
18.97
17.88
180.98
25.44
22.22
19.93
18.20
17.30
88.47
31.06
22.01
20.49
18.64 #######
28.10
112
04/10/2022 10:42
188.77
34.98
25.28
18.25
18.83
17.03
164.25
31.04
21.44
19.30
18.98
17.88
181.87
25.47
22.24
19.94
18.19
17.31
88.02
30.79
22.01
20.49
18.61 #######
28.03
113
04/10/2022 10:42
190.37
34.86
25.28
18.25
18.84
17.03
164.32
30.64
21.42
19.30
18.99
17.88
179.91
25.49
22.29
19.94
18.20
17.32
87.81
30.67
22.02
20.50
18.59 #######
28.04
114
04/10/2022 10:42
191.31
34.77
25.29
18.25
18.84
17.04
166.03
30.67
21.44
19.30
18.99
17.88
181.71
25.53
22.32
19.95
18.21
17.33
86.34
30.38
22.01
20.50
18.58 #######
28.01
115
04/10/2022 10:42
190.40
35.48
25.28
18.26
18.85
17.05
165.04
30.32
21.41
19.26
19.00
17.89
184.06
25.52
22.34
19.94
18.19
17.32
84.72
30.19
22.01
20.51
18.59 #######
28.01
116
04/10/2022 10:42
191.73
37.51
25.28
18.27
18.86
17.05
166.32
29.97
21.41
19.27
19.01
17.90
186.79
25.60
22.35
19.95
18.21
17.33
85.89
29.98
21.99
20.52
18.56 #######
28.02
117
04/10/2022 10:42
193.75
38.36
25.25
18.27
18.84
17.06
167.31
29.62
21.41
19.26
18.98
17.91
192.43
25.63
22.36
19.97
18.21
17.36
86.26
29.72
22.00
20.50
18.59 #######
28.02
118
04/10/2022 10:42
207.39
38.86
25.23
18.27
18.85
17.04
169.16
29.41
21.39
19.25
18.96
17.91
198.24
25.70
22.38
19.94
18.21
17.35
87.24
29.56
22.00
20.53
18.59 #######
28.05
119
04/10/2022 10:42
213.86
39.06
25.23
18.28
18.85
17.06
173.99
29.69
21.40
19.22
18.98
17.89
204.55
25.72
22.41
19.95
18.20
17.35
88.84
29.37
22.02
20.51
18.61 #######
28.06
120
04/10/2022 10:42
227.31
40.87
25.23
18.26
18.83
17.03
172.07
29.35
21.35
19.16
18.97
17.87
208.64
25.72
22.44
19.95
18.23
17.37
90.39
29.16
22.00
20.50
18.61 #######
28.04
121
04/10/2022 10:42
228.44
41.14
25.22
18.26
18.81
17.03
171.32
29.12
21.35
19.16
18.96
17.88
211.31
25.75
22.48
19.94
18.24
17.38
88.86
29.02
22.00
20.51
18.60 #######
28.03
122
04/10/2022 10:42
223.49
40.81
25.21
18.26
18.80
17.03
172.28
28.98
21.40
19.19
18.99
17.89
210.40
25.77
22.47
19.96
18.26
17.37
87.94
28.90
22.00
20.52
18.57 #######
28.00
123
04/10/2022 10:42
228.20
40.22
25.22
18.26
18.81
17.05
173.46
30.77
21.42
19.25
19.01
17.90
218.50
25.82
22.50
19.96
18.24
17.39
92.44
28.99
21.99
20.51
18.60 #######
28.01
124
04/10/2022 10:42
234.23
39.61
25.18
18.23
18.81
17.02
174.69
30.29
21.39
19.20
19.00
17.91
221.45
25.87
22.50
19.95
18.24
17.38
95.52
28.86
22.01
20.50
18.61 #######
28.04
125
04/10/2022 10:42
241.57
39.66
25.19
18.21
18.81
17.03
174.68
29.96
21.40
19.21
18.99
17.91
223.91
25.91
22.51
19.95
18.26
17.39
96.49
28.72
22.00
20.50
18.58 #######
28.10
126
04/10/2022 10:42
239.39
39.86
25.19
18.24
18.79
17.02
177.39
29.66
21.38
19.24
18.99
17.90
228.34
25.97
22.56
19.97
18.26
17.39
98.77
28.59
22.00
20.50
18.60 #######
28.19
127
04/10/2022 10:42
242.67
40.84
25.19
18.23
18.79
17.04
178.72
29.65
21.37
19.22
18.99
17.89
228.68
26.00
22.56
19.96
18.27
17.40
99.22
28.57
21.99
20.48
18.61 #######
28.16
128
04/10/2022 10:42
247.99
40.20
25.20
18.22
18.78
17.03
182.36
30.11
21.35
19.20
19.02
17.89
227.07
26.07
22.56
19.97
18.29
17.41
100.55
28.53
21.97
20.47
18.62 #######
28.10
129
04/10/2022 10:42
253.33
39.46
25.21
18.23
18.78
17.02
179.04
29.69
21.33
19.22
18.99
17.89
229.21
26.05
22.57
19.96
18.29
17.39
100.55
28.39
21.97
20.47
18.66 #######
28.12
130
04/10/2022 10:42
248.71
38.88
25.20
18.23
18.80
17.03
184.81
29.35
21.32
19.21
18.97
17.87
227.78
26.12
22.57
19.95
18.30
17.40
97.26
28.28
21.98
20.45
18.69 #######
28.18
131
04/10/2022 10:42
248.86
38.21
25.20
18.27
18.79
17.04
187.85
29.06
21.33
19.20
18.98
17.88
225.54
26.17
22.56
19.96
18.29
17.41
95.19
28.12
21.98
20.46
18.71 #######
28.18
132
04/10/2022 10:42
250.22
39.11
25.19
18.31
18.79
17.05
188.63
28.92
21.32
19.18
18.97
17.87
224.83
26.20
22.55
19.98
18.30
17.42
95.75
27.99
21.97
20.43
18.73 #######
28.14
133
04/10/2022 10:42
243.77
39.81
25.19
18.33
18.80
17.03
188.71
28.69
21.31
19.21
18.97
17.87
227.79
26.26
22.53
19.98
18.28
17.42
95.53
27.99
21.97
20.43
18.71 #######
28.21
134
04/10/2022 10:42
244.35
40.17
25.17
18.35
18.80
17.04
191.47
28.90
21.31
19.19
18.94
17.88
231.71
26.32
22.53
19.96
18.29
17.43
94.90
28.52
21.95
20.43
18.73 #######
28.20
135
04/10/2022 10:42
237.07
40.28
25.17
18.35
18.77
17.04
194.44
30.43
21.32
19.19
18.94
17.88
232.26
26.33
22.51
19.97
18.31
17.43
89.82
28.40
21.95
20.44
18.73 #######
28.15
136
04/10/2022 10:42
236.37
40.23
25.19
18.33
18.79
17.03
198.48
30.05
21.28
19.12
18.90
17.84
226.91
26.37
22.50
19.94
18.31
17.42
93.02
28.26
21.95
20.42
18.72 #######
28.18
137
04/10/2022 10:42
244.39
39.76
25.17
18.31
18.77
17.05
198.51
29.71
21.27
19.11
18.91
17.85
224.82
26.42
22.47
19.95
18.28
17.40
91.06
28.13
21.95
20.38
18.76 #######
28.09
138
04/10/2022 10:42
239.87
39.55
25.20
18.31
18.77
17.07
198.52
29.80
21.25
19.11
18.91
17.84
225.39
26.45
22.49
19.95
18.29
17.39
93.82
28.30
21.95
20.43
18.72 #######
28.16
139
04/10/2022 10:42
234.99
38.69
25.17
18.31
18.77
17.04
201.54
30.48
21.23
19.15
18.92
17.84
227.69
26.46
22.46
19.94
18.29
17.42
93.94
28.44
21.94
20.41
18.76 #######
28.20
140
04/10/2022 10:42
239.68
38.16
25.18
18.29
18.78
17.06
201.23
30.03
21.24
19.12
18.92
17.82
231.66
26.52
22.50
19.94
18.29
17.42
99.27
28.38
21.95
20.42
18.79 #######
28.13
141
04/10/2022 10:42
243.86
38.20
25.16
18.29
18.78
17.05
204.75
29.68
21.22
19.11
18.90
17.83
229.45
26.52
22.48
19.95
18.29
17.44
98.37
28.26
21.95
20.40
18.79 #######
28.10
142
04/10/2022 10:42
249.09
37.93
25.17
18.29
18.79
17.03
203.49
29.69
21.21
19.09
18.86
17.84
232.97
26.59
22.46
19.95
18.28
17.42
95.81
28.16
21.95
20.39
18.81 #######
28.15
143
04/10/2022 10:42
248.29
37.59
25.15
18.31
18.79
17.04
203.61
29.23
21.20
19.08
18.83
17.84
235.01
26.62
22.48
19.92
18.27
17.41
96.74
28.06
21.94
20.41
18.79 #######
28.12
144
04/10/2022 10:42
249.28
38.41
25.16
18.31
18.80
17.04
203.81
28.90
21.18
19.11
18.82
17.84
232.28
26.68
22.48
19.96
18.28
17.41
97.48
28.00
21.93
20.40
18.77 #######
28.16
145
04/10/2022 10:42
248.26
38.04
25.15
18.30
18.78
17.02
206.01
28.62
21.19
19.09
18.80
17.83
246.80
26.77
22.49
19.95
18.29
17.42
94.06
27.84
21.94
20.40
18.82 #######
28.20
146
04/10/2022 10:42
246.93
38.14
25.13
18.27
18.78
17.03
205.07
29.99
21.16
19.04
18.79
17.85
249.57
26.82
22.56
19.94
18.29
17.44
97.70
28.05
21.94
20.39
18.83 #######
28.19
147
04/10/2022 10:42
243.87
37.87
25.15
18.28
18.77
17.01
204.87
29.54
21.15
19.00
18.75
17.83
251.73
26.88
22.56
19.94
18.30
17.43
97.42
28.28
21.94
20.37
18.85 #######
28.13
148
04/10/2022 10:42
237.72
39.07
25.11
18.29
18.78
17.00
205.51
30.95
21.17
19.01
18.75
17.84
253.42
26.93
22.61
19.96
18.31
17.47
98.88
28.92
21.94
20.35
18.87 #######
28.22
149
04/10/2022 10:42
241.05
39.45
25.11
18.29
18.78
17.02
210.17
30.43
21.15
19.02
18.75
17.82
258.52
27.04
22.56
19.96
18.33
17.46
99.38
28.83
21.95
20.36
18.85 #######
28.28
150
04/10/2022 10:42
243.68
39.18
25.11
18.28
18.76
17.01
211.34
31.49
21.13
19.00
18.73
17.82
264.77
27.15
22.58
19.96
18.31
17.44
102.00
29.05
21.94
20.32
18.87 #######
28.36
151
04/10/2022 10:42
244.92
39.12
25.11
18.29
18.75
17.00
219.58
31.02
21.11
18.98
18.70
17.82
263.98
27.19
22.59
19.96
18.32
17.46
103.90
29.01
21.94
20.33
18.88 #######
28.37
152
04/10/2022 10:42
247.97
39.91
25.09
18.29
18.73
17.00
222.90
30.55
21.10
18.94
18.72
17.82
261.53
27.21
22.60
19.97
18.33
17.46
104.50
28.90
21.93
20.31
18.91 #######
28.35
153
04/10/2022 10:42
242.57
43.09
25.09
18.27
18.76
16.99
220.33
30.07
21.09
18.91
18.73
17.82
264.06
27.26
22.61
19.98
18.33
17.45
106.34
28.79
21.92
20.32
18.90 #######
28.30
154
04/10/2022 10:42
246.18
43.82
25.08
18.28
18.74
16.99
222.55
29.71
21.09
18.91
18.73
17.85
260.59
27.33
22.62
19.96
18.31
17.45
107.98
28.87
21.94
20.30
18.88 #######
28.25
155
04/10/2022 10:42
253.96
43.62
25.09
18.29
18.73
16.99
222.14
31.88
21.10
18.96
18.72
17.83
262.39
27.37
22.60
19.96
18.34
17.46
106.48
29.27
21.93
20.32
18.87 #######
28.27
156
04/10/2022 10:42
249.37
44.51
25.11
18.29
18.73
16.99
224.68
31.18
21.10
18.94
18.72
17.82
262.03
27.38
22.59
19.97
18.32
17.45
107.27
29.20
21.92
20.30
18.88 #######
28.34
157
04/10/2022 10:42
249.25
44.00
25.09
18.28
18.75
16.98
226.40
30.67
21.10
18.90
18.72
17.83
260.15
27.45
22.59
19.97
18.32
17.46
108.72
29.07
21.93
20.29
18.90 #######
28.36
158
04/10/2022 10:42
254.01
44.68
25.09
18.30
18.73
17.00
228.69
31.98
21.10
18.90
18.74
17.82
260.78
27.48
22.61
19.97
18.33
17.45
106.96
29.82
21.93
20.30
18.89 #######
28.25
159
04/10/2022 10:43
260.30
44.04
25.08
18.30
18.74
16.98
224.41
31.88
21.09
18.91
18.74
17.85
263.24
27.46
22.63
19.97
18.32
17.47
105.12
29.69
21.94
20.31
18.91 #######
28.15
160
04/10/2022 10:43
263.71
43.68
25.09
18.31
18.72
16.99
221.32
31.33
21.07
18.89
18.72
17.85
261.84
27.50
22.66
19.97
18.36
17.47
106.20
29.52
21.93
20.28
18.93 #######
28.12
161
04/10/2022 10:43
269.52
43.70
25.07
18.30
18.72
16.99
219.80
30.87
21.05
18.89
18.72
17.86
257.98
27.49
22.71
19.98
18.35
17.47
106.69
29.42
21.91
20.29
18.93 #######
28.21
162
04/10/2022 10:43
272.52
43.96
25.07
18.32
18.73
17.01
216.92
31.59
21.06
18.96
18.72
17.87
269.55
27.57
22.70
19.99
18.35
17.49
105.61
30.83
21.90
20.31
18.97 #######
28.29
163
04/10/2022 10:43
276.26
43.21
25.06
18.30
18.73
16.98
229.15
32.75
21.04
18.97
18.73
17.85
274.60
27.66
22.73
19.95
18.37
17.48
106.85
30.66
21.91
20.32
18.95 #######
28.30
164
04/10/2022 10:43
282.91
42.53
25.06
18.30
18.72
16.98
231.13
32.16
21.03
18.95
18.74
17.83
275.13
27.76
22.74
19.96
18.36
17.49
108.43
30.54
21.91
20.30
18.98 #######
28.24
==PAGE:246==
165
04/10/2022 10:43
289.72
42.10
25.07
18.30
18.72
16.98
229.09
31.68
21.01
18.92
18.73
17.85
273.07
27.79
22.75
19.98
18.36
17.49
105.39
30.41
21.90
20.27
18.96 #######
28.22
166
04/10/2022 10:43
287.87
43.19
25.07
18.32
18.72
16.99
224.59
31.23
21.01
18.94
18.72
17.85
268.01
27.78
22.87
19.97
18.36
17.51
102.93
30.27
21.90
20.28
18.97 #######
28.16
167
04/10/2022 10:43
289.33
44.48
25.07
18.34
18.72
16.97
220.20
31.17
21.03
19.07
18.77
17.86
269.00
27.82
22.93
19.97
18.37
17.52
102.66
30.29
21.90
20.33
19.00 #######
28.17
168
04/10/2022 10:43
304.00
48.29
25.07
18.36
18.74
17.00
221.76
31.02
21.07
19.21
18.80
17.85
272.68
27.81
22.95
19.98
18.39
17.50
102.07
30.19
21.89
20.32
18.98 #######
28.16
169
04/10/2022 10:43
327.52
48.28
25.05
18.35
18.74
16.99
221.62
30.66
21.03
19.21
18.82
17.87
278.31
27.82
22.96
19.98
18.39
17.52
102.93
30.12
21.91
20.32
18.96 #######
28.21
170
04/10/2022 10:43
355.92
48.02
25.05
18.35
18.72
17.00
218.66
30.49
21.07
19.24
18.80
17.88
279.27
27.84
22.99
19.98
18.36
17.52
102.45
29.96
21.90
20.32
18.98 #######
28.14
171
04/10/2022 10:43
363.52
49.71
25.04
18.35
18.73
16.99
213.09
30.80
21.03
19.26
18.79
17.86
282.17
27.83
23.01
19.98
18.38
17.53
105.26
30.28
21.90
20.33
19.03 #######
28.12
172
04/10/2022 10:43
376.68
49.04
25.04
18.37
18.72
16.99
212.89
30.59
21.02
19.29
18.81
17.88
284.49
27.85
23.02
19.98
18.39
17.52
102.22
30.25
21.88
20.35
19.09 #######
28.07
173
04/10/2022 10:43
384.52
49.66
25.05
18.38
18.73
16.99
212.67
31.29
21.05
19.34
18.83
17.88
285.30
27.88
23.06
19.99
18.38
17.52
104.57
30.41
21.89
20.36
19.12 #######
28.20
174
04/10/2022 10:43
398.60
48.62
25.03
18.38
18.72
16.99
205.90
31.13
21.03
19.32
18.86
17.91
286.29
27.92
23.08
20.00
18.40
17.54
104.86
30.63
21.90
20.37
19.16 #######
28.29
175
04/10/2022 10:43
421.74
47.61
25.04
18.38
18.74
16.98
201.87
31.43
21.04
19.30
18.88
17.90
303.29
28.07
23.11
19.99
18.42
17.53
107.69
31.26
21.90
20.37
19.21 #######
28.50
176
04/10/2022 10:43
440.07
47.52
25.02
18.40
18.74
16.97
204.40
31.94
21.04
19.28
18.86
17.90
308.49
28.15
23.12
19.99
18.43
17.53
102.74
31.48
21.89
20.36
19.24 #######
28.49
177
04/10/2022 10:43
448.85
46.31
25.05
18.43
18.72
16.98
205.43
31.63
21.04
19.26
18.83
17.91
312.41
28.20
23.13
20.00
18.42
17.53
103.57
31.40
21.89
20.33
19.27 #######
28.42
178
04/10/2022 10:43
470.59
44.96
25.03
18.44
18.72
16.98
206.44
31.26
21.02
19.22
18.82
17.93
313.21
28.22
23.13
20.00
18.42
17.51
104.66
31.33
21.89
20.33
19.23 #######
28.37
179
04/10/2022 10:43
478.56
44.06
25.00
18.45
18.72
16.97
210.24
31.31
21.00
19.20
18.78
17.91
317.36
28.30
23.16
19.99
18.42
17.52
110.00
31.31
21.88
20.35
19.20 #######
28.37
180
04/10/2022 10:43
471.55
44.20
25.01
18.46
18.73
16.96
213.51
32.65
21.01
19.20
18.81
17.91
325.60
28.43
23.15
20.01
18.44
17.52
109.10
31.87
21.89
20.33
19.17 #######
28.47
181
04/10/2022 10:43
480.63
43.25
25.02
18.46
18.72
16.94
221.12
33.62
21.01
19.19
18.81
17.92
330.76
28.61
23.09
20.01
18.44
17.54
105.90
32.02
21.90
20.31
19.18 #######
28.54
182
04/10/2022 10:43
487.79
42.99
25.01
18.44
18.73
16.95
227.07
34.35
20.99
19.15
18.78
17.91
334.08
28.71
23.04
19.98
18.42
17.53
109.12
31.96
21.90
20.29
19.14 #######
28.62
183
04/10/2022 10:43
514.04
41.89
25.03
18.41
18.70
16.94
230.91
36.31
20.99
19.11
18.79
17.92
341.33
28.83
23.03
19.99
18.42
17.54
110.20
33.41
21.89
20.31
19.10 #######
28.65
184
04/10/2022 10:43
517.60
41.34
24.99
18.39
18.70
16.94
230.28
37.50
20.99
19.07
18.79
17.91
344.43
28.89
22.99
19.99
18.41
17.53
112.09
33.89
21.90
20.30
19.08 #######
28.61
185
04/10/2022 10:43
524.06
40.70
25.00
18.38
18.71
16.95
225.41
38.47
20.95
19.01
18.79
17.91
341.71
28.91
23.02
19.99
18.42
17.56
111.01
34.41
21.89
20.29
19.09 #######
28.55
186
04/10/2022 10:43
525.62
40.50
25.01
18.37
18.70
16.96
223.15
37.90
20.97
19.01
18.81
17.89
341.18
28.96
23.03
19.99
18.43
17.56
107.74
34.22
21.87
20.27
19.06 #######
28.47
187
04/10/2022 10:43
520.13
40.46
25.00
18.36
18.70
16.95
219.28
38.58
20.95
18.96
18.79
17.90
335.94
29.00
23.05
19.99
18.40
17.53
108.33
34.83
21.87
20.26
19.06 #######
28.47
188
04/10/2022 10:43
519.43
41.09
25.02
18.35
18.71
16.95
220.22
38.00
20.95
18.96
18.81
17.90
334.71
29.02
23.03
19.97
18.42
17.53
110.83
34.63
21.88
20.28
19.05 #######
28.40
189
04/10/2022 10:43
517.16
41.63
25.02
18.35
18.71
16.95
221.83
37.52
20.93
19.03
18.82
17.89
329.20
28.94
23.06
20.00
18.41
17.53
108.89
34.44
21.88
20.27
19.01 #######
28.38
190
04/10/2022 10:43
509.89
42.59
25.01
18.35
18.70
16.96
220.25
36.74
20.93
19.02
18.78
17.88
325.33
28.96
23.03
19.98
18.41
17.54
109.51
34.27
21.87
20.27
19.00 #######
28.29
191
04/10/2022 10:43
506.93
42.75
25.00
18.37
18.69
16.96
219.16
36.03
20.94
19.04
18.78
17.88
317.51
28.94
23.04
19.99
18.42
17.54
110.67
33.96
21.86
20.27
19.03 #######
28.17
192
04/10/2022 10:43
513.89
42.72
25.00
18.37
18.71
16.95
216.62
36.43
20.93
19.01
18.80
17.91
311.32
28.95
23.08
19.99
18.42
17.55
114.43
34.69
21.87
20.26
19.04 #######
28.15
193
04/10/2022 10:43
509.68
42.15
24.98
18.37
18.72
16.94
217.87
36.91
20.91
19.02
18.83
17.92
307.47
28.92
23.10
19.98
18.41
17.57
111.26
34.48
21.86
20.26
19.06 #######
28.17
194
04/10/2022 10:43
496.26
42.15
24.99
18.36
18.68
16.95
213.66
37.13
20.92
19.08
18.83
17.91
309.78
28.93
23.10
19.98
18.41
17.56
119.21
34.30
21.85
20.27
19.02 #######
28.10
195
04/10/2022 10:43
492.85
41.50
24.97
18.37
18.68
16.96
213.83
37.14
20.91
19.06
18.84
17.92
317.77
29.04
23.11
19.99
18.43
17.57
117.86
34.74
21.87
20.27
19.01 #######
28.14
196
04/10/2022 10:43
492.46
40.90
24.98
18.37
18.68
16.94
216.81
37.00
20.89
19.08
18.84
17.91
319.14
29.08
23.07
20.00
18.41
17.55
124.45
34.78
21.87
20.26
19.04 #######
28.12
197
04/10/2022 10:43
482.11
40.15
24.97
18.37
18.69
16.93
218.69
36.45
20.90
19.03
18.83
17.91
320.32
29.13
23.06
20.00
18.42
17.53
124.15
34.79
21.88
20.26
19.07 #######
28.12
198
04/10/2022 10:43
465.57
39.76
24.97
18.38
18.67
16.93
222.57
36.45
20.89
19.03
18.84
17.92
318.05
29.20
23.09
19.98
18.43
17.55
123.97
34.99
21.88
20.25
19.07 #######
28.19
199
04/10/2022 10:43
461.52
39.22
24.97
18.36
18.68
16.93
226.33
36.67
20.88
19.02
18.82
17.90
322.23
29.31
23.07
20.00
18.41
17.56
122.81
35.13
21.87
20.24
19.05 #######
28.24
200
04/10/2022 10:43
456.86
39.66
24.95
18.33
18.68
16.93
230.71
36.35
20.89
19.03
18.80
17.87
320.55
29.34
23.05
19.99
18.42
17.55
122.97
34.91
21.87
20.23
19.03 #######
28.19
201
04/10/2022 10:43
455.02
39.54
24.94
18.34
18.69
16.93
232.59
35.68
20.90
18.99
18.79
17.88
322.61
29.42
23.02
19.99
18.44
17.56
129.02
34.66
21.87
20.22
19.00 #######
28.14
202
04/10/2022 10:43
461.39
39.01
24.93
18.33
18.71
16.92
231.80
35.14
20.88
19.01
18.76
17.88
320.53
29.43
22.98
19.99
18.42
17.54
125.67
34.44
21.88
20.21
18.98 #######
28.19
203
04/10/2022 10:43
443.21
38.89
24.96
18.32
18.71
16.92
230.09
34.74
20.88
19.03
18.74
17.87
331.35
29.49
22.96
19.97
18.43
17.55
121.57
34.15
21.85
20.20
18.96 #######
28.27
204
04/10/2022 10:43
426.07
38.45
24.94
18.32
18.69
16.93
233.58
34.31
20.88
19.04
18.77
17.90
336.36
29.55
22.97
19.99
18.44
17.56
123.79
33.88
21.87
20.19
18.97 #######
28.29
205
04/10/2022 10:43
419.52
38.09
24.94
18.34
18.69
16.92
231.29
33.90
20.85
19.02
18.76
17.89
337.18
29.59
22.99
19.99
18.44
17.56
127.74
33.61
21.86
20.17
18.95 #######
28.29
206
04/10/2022 10:43
425.76
37.78
24.94
18.35
18.69
16.92
232.54
33.78
20.85
18.97
18.75
17.86
340.89
29.66
22.99
20.00
18.44
17.54
123.98
33.58
21.85
20.17
18.93 #######
28.29
207
04/10/2022 10:43
409.96
39.13
24.93
18.33
18.69
16.92
230.60
34.34
20.84
18.98
18.74
17.86
341.98
29.69
22.98
19.99
18.45
17.55
122.54
33.37
21.84
20.15
18.93 #######
28.27
208
04/10/2022 10:43
423.70
39.25
24.91
18.33
18.69
16.91
229.44
33.74
20.84
18.97
18.70
17.88
339.92
29.71
23.00
19.99
18.44
17.56
121.20
33.13
21.85
20.14
18.93 #######
28.24
209
04/10/2022 10:43
422.92
40.42
24.93
18.31
18.67
16.93
234.72
33.29
20.84
18.94
18.71
17.87
342.62
29.77
23.02
19.99
18.46
17.56
120.39
33.70
21.85
20.14
18.91 #######
28.29
210
04/10/2022 10:44
421.59
40.29
24.92
18.35
18.69
16.91
234.26
35.74
20.85
19.01
18.73
17.86
341.88
29.98
23.03
19.99
18.45
17.56
118.64
33.84
21.83
20.14
18.94 #######
28.26
211
04/10/2022 10:44
417.75
40.13
24.92
18.35
18.70
16.92
236.07
35.45
20.82
19.01
18.74
17.88
340.41
29.99
23.02
20.00
18.43
17.56
118.73
33.59
21.83
20.17
18.94 #######
28.18
212
04/10/2022 10:44
419.88
40.07
24.91
18.34
18.68
16.93
240.97
34.73
20.84
19.04
18.73
17.88
337.79
30.00
23.01
19.99
18.45
17.56
119.10
33.35
21.84
20.15
18.94 #######
28.15
213
04/10/2022 10:44
425.88
40.34
24.92
18.34
18.68
16.92
239.47
34.20
20.84
19.02
18.76
17.86
335.97
30.03
23.02
20.01
18.45
17.55
120.91
33.15
21.84
20.15
18.94 #######
28.13
214
04/10/2022 10:44
428.34
40.57
24.94
18.33
18.71
16.92
241.26
34.36
20.83
19.00
18.74
17.84
335.50
30.00
23.02
19.98
18.45
17.57
123.38
33.10
21.85
20.14
18.94 #######
28.14
215
04/10/2022 10:44
443.76
41.78
24.92
18.33
18.67
16.91
237.71
34.04
20.83
19.03
18.74
17.83
337.80
30.11
23.02
19.99
18.45
17.57
121.92
32.88
21.84
20.16
18.98 #######
28.08
216
04/10/2022 10:44
436.29
42.49
24.90
18.30
18.68
16.90
236.69
33.47
20.83
19.02
18.73
17.85
333.90
30.12
23.01
20.00
18.42
17.57
118.69
32.58
21.87
20.15
19.01 #######
28.06
217
04/10/2022 10:44
437.86
43.72
24.90
18.30
18.68
16.91
242.07
32.93
20.81
18.99
18.76
17.85
324.12
30.16
23.00
19.97
18.45
17.57
118.99
32.32
21.87
20.13
19.01 #######
28.06
218
04/10/2022 10:44
416.40
42.76
24.89
18.31
18.69
16.91
248.43
32.47
20.78
18.99
18.73
17.85
314.88
30.29
23.02
20.00
18.43
17.58
116.17
32.09
21.89
20.14
19.02 #######
28.08
219
04/10/2022 10:44
408.85
43.14
24.90
18.29
18.66
16.90
251.32
31.97
20.78
18.95
18.75
17.85
305.40
30.27
23.03
19.99
18.44
17.58
118.79
31.82
21.88
20.14
19.01 #######
28.08
==PAGE:247==
220
04/10/2022 10:44
388.34
43.85
24.89
18.30
18.67
16.90
246.64
31.57
20.80
18.94
18.74
17.84
305.22
30.29
23.01
19.99
18.44
17.57
114.55
31.52
21.87
20.13
18.99 #######
28.24
221
04/10/2022 10:44
376.41
43.81
24.89
18.31
18.67
16.89
242.87
31.40
20.80
18.98
18.74
17.85
322.37
30.42
23.01
20.02
18.46
17.59
111.31
31.39
21.86
20.13
19.04 #######
28.37
222
04/10/2022 10:44
364.28
43.24
24.89
18.35
18.66
16.89
235.26
32.65
20.81
19.01
18.75
17.84
333.45
30.58
23.04
20.01
18.46
17.57
108.15
32.75
21.88
20.14
19.02 #######
28.61
223
04/10/2022 10:44
352.85
44.32
24.89
18.33
18.65
16.90
229.69
40.41
20.80
18.99
18.75
17.84
351.25
30.82
23.02
19.99
18.45
17.59
109.26
37.02
21.95
20.14
18.98 #######
28.68
224
04/10/2022 10:44
351.83
45.36
24.89
18.33
18.67
16.87
223.34
40.95
20.78
18.95
18.75
17.82
355.06
30.80
22.99
20.00
18.43
17.59
106.02
37.62
21.93
20.10
18.99 #######
28.76
225
04/10/2022 10:44
350.93
45.49
24.88
18.34
18.66
16.88
218.36
41.09
20.78
18.90
18.74
17.82
367.68
31.43
22.98
20.00
18.43
17.59
107.59
38.23
21.93
20.11
19.02 #######
28.92
226
04/10/2022 10:44
342.78
46.90
24.88
18.34
18.65
16.89
215.94
43.29
20.79
18.89
18.76
17.82
377.12
31.53
23.02
20.00
18.42
17.59
107.38
40.28
21.93
20.11
19.01 #######
29.00
227
04/10/2022 10:44
329.16
47.07
24.88
18.33
18.66
16.88
213.30
44.68
20.80
18.91
18.74
17.81
383.53
32.10
23.07
20.01
18.45
17.60
105.04
41.47
21.94
20.10
19.00 #######
29.09
228
04/10/2022 10:44
327.10
48.26
24.85
18.33
18.64
16.87
217.59
47.78
20.79
18.90
18.73
17.81
390.84
33.18
23.07
20.01
18.45
17.58
104.59
44.64
21.92
20.11
18.98 #######
29.16
229
04/10/2022 10:44
318.17
47.05
24.86
18.33
18.63
16.87
218.46
49.09
20.78
18.83
18.71
17.80
397.94
33.32
23.06
20.00
18.45
17.58
102.83
44.66
21.93
20.10
18.97 #######
29.11
230
04/10/2022 10:44
312.43
45.70
24.85
18.35
18.66
16.86
229.49
49.13
20.76
18.80
18.74
17.81
417.48
33.64
23.04
20.00
18.45
17.59
103.44
44.54
21.93
20.10
19.01 #######
29.16
231
04/10/2022 10:44
309.95
44.50
24.88
18.36
18.64
16.88
239.45
50.39
20.75
18.75
18.71
17.82
431.38
33.91
23.01
20.00
18.44
17.58
101.40
46.03
21.93
20.11
19.01 #######
29.16
232
04/10/2022 10:44
300.98
43.63
24.84
18.35
18.64
16.89
252.62
50.00
20.75
18.71
18.73
17.81
437.24
34.04
23.00
20.02
18.44
17.59
101.35
45.91
21.91
20.11
19.01 #######
29.20
233
04/10/2022 10:44
295.46
42.63
24.85
18.37
18.61
16.86
263.31
50.00
20.75
18.72
18.69
17.79
449.39
34.31
22.98
20.01
18.47
17.59
100.34
46.21
21.93
20.11
18.99 #######
29.20
234
04/10/2022 10:44
295.37
41.77
24.86
18.37
18.62
16.86
275.65
48.85
20.72
18.71
18.70
17.79
456.72
34.51
22.97
20.00
18.44
17.60
103.85
45.77
21.91
20.09
19.00 #######
29.17
235
04/10/2022 10:44
289.91
40.95
24.85
18.38
18.63
16.84
286.20
48.02
20.71
18.70
18.69
17.79
470.75
34.74
22.94
20.01
18.43
17.59
105.42
45.37
21.93
20.12
18.98 #######
29.12
236
04/10/2022 10:44
284.33
40.14
24.85
18.39
18.63
16.87
303.12
48.33
20.72
18.68
18.68
17.77
483.65
34.99
22.93
20.00
18.44
17.59
107.91
45.32
21.89
20.11
18.98 #######
29.10
237
04/10/2022 10:44
283.06
39.48
24.86
18.38
18.63
16.86
314.15
48.98
20.72
18.67
18.69
17.77
496.88
35.27
22.93
20.00
18.44
17.59
107.15
45.45
21.90
20.09
18.97 #######
29.09
238
04/10/2022 10:44
275.94
38.84
24.85
18.38
18.63
16.87
325.37
49.70
20.71
18.67
18.68
17.75
503.78
35.52
22.92
20.00
18.44
17.58
109.12
45.47
21.89
20.11
18.97 #######
29.05
239
04/10/2022 10:44
270.01
38.31
24.86
18.38
18.66
16.87
327.60
51.31
20.70
18.68
18.68
17.76
511.07
35.80
22.88
19.99
18.44
17.58
110.37
45.66
21.88
20.10
18.98 #######
29.00
240
04/10/2022 10:44
270.34
37.77
24.86
18.40
18.65
16.84
346.97
50.87
20.71
18.67
18.70
17.77
521.35
36.08
22.90
20.02
18.46
17.59
110.14
46.87
21.90
20.12
18.98 #######
28.98
241
04/10/2022 10:44
267.76
37.43
24.84
18.40
18.66
16.86
363.17
52.39
20.71
18.66
18.64
17.79
527.00
36.41
22.91
20.00
18.43
17.60
114.18
46.45
21.88
20.12
18.96 #######
28.97
242
04/10/2022 10:44
268.44
37.00
24.84
18.40
18.67
16.84
385.61
51.09
20.70
18.63
18.65
17.78
533.33
36.67
22.93
20.00
18.45
17.60
113.01
46.93
21.88
20.11
18.99 #######
28.99
243
04/10/2022 10:44
262.24
36.70
24.86
18.42
18.66
16.86
403.73
53.84
20.68
18.62
18.66
17.77
536.61
36.94
22.92
20.00
18.45
17.57
111.69
47.24
21.88
20.11
18.98 #######
28.88
244
04/10/2022 10:44
255.60
36.33
24.85
18.45
18.64
16.84
420.54
56.00
20.68
18.63
18.65
17.78
550.28
37.22
22.92
19.98
18.45
17.60
114.77
48.26
21.87
20.09
18.98 #######
28.85
245
04/10/2022 10:44
253.90
35.92
24.85
18.44
18.63
16.83
433.99
54.68
20.66
18.62
18.65
17.77
544.46
37.52
22.91
19.99
18.45
17.59
111.94
47.86
21.86
20.08
18.93 #######
28.77
246
04/10/2022 10:44
247.88
35.92
24.87
18.44
18.64
16.83
445.83
53.10
20.66
18.63
18.64
17.78
545.86
37.78
22.92
20.01
18.45
17.60
109.84
47.76
21.87
20.08
18.94 #######
28.69
247
04/10/2022 10:44
250.46
36.17
24.87
18.45
18.65
16.82
450.64
53.77
20.68
18.68
18.61
17.75
547.66
37.98
22.93
20.01
18.45
17.59
112.98
47.50
21.89
20.07
18.96 #######
28.59
248
04/10/2022 10:44
259.09
35.97
24.88
18.46
18.65
16.83
461.21
52.28
20.67
18.67
18.62
17.76
545.34
38.22
22.91
20.01
18.48
17.59
113.81
46.99
21.87
20.08
18.97 #######
28.58
249
04/10/2022 10:44
263.60
35.62
24.85
18.49
18.65
16.84
485.68
51.15
20.65
18.67
18.62
17.77
541.08
38.42
22.89
20.00
18.45
17.59
115.50
46.44
21.89
20.07
18.97 #######
28.58
250
04/10/2022 10:44
267.72
35.42
24.87
18.49
18.67
16.84
493.62
49.96
20.65
18.66
18.58
17.74
538.95
38.62
22.92
20.02
18.47
17.60
115.20
45.88
21.89
20.08
18.99 #######
28.56
251
04/10/2022 10:44
273.00
35.58
24.88
18.48
18.67
16.84
495.71
49.63
20.66
18.66
18.60
17.75
544.16
38.87
22.93
20.00
18.47
17.61
115.91
45.71
21.88
20.08
19.04 #######
28.47
252
04/10/2022 10:44
281.47
35.39
24.88
18.51
18.65
16.83
513.62
48.87
20.65
18.67
18.59
17.75
540.65
39.05
22.95
20.01
18.45
17.62
120.30
45.25
21.88
20.08
19.01 #######
28.43
253
04/10/2022 10:44
288.76
35.63
24.87
18.51
18.67
16.85
521.13
47.78
20.67
18.65
18.57
17.75
542.94
39.21
22.96
20.02
18.46
17.61
120.53
44.72
21.87
20.07
19.03 #######
28.48
254
04/10/2022 10:44
287.68
36.11
24.88
18.53
18.68
16.84
524.11
46.73
20.67
18.63
18.56
17.76
545.75
39.51
22.99
20.01
18.46
17.60
117.91
45.71
21.88
20.06
19.05 #######
28.48
255
04/10/2022 10:44
288.14
36.33
24.87
18.53
18.68
16.83
516.16
48.08
20.66
18.68
18.56
17.76
549.05
39.64
22.98
20.02
18.48
17.61
114.26
46.25
21.86
20.07
19.04 #######
28.43
256
04/10/2022 10:44
287.57
37.19
24.86
18.53
18.67
16.83
516.10
47.84
20.65
18.67
18.58
17.76
557.12
39.88
22.99
20.00
18.49
17.62
113.39
45.77
21.87
20.06
19.04 #######
28.42
257
04/10/2022 10:44
289.87
38.18
24.87
18.57
18.67
16.83
517.93
47.11
20.64
18.65
18.57
17.75
557.27
40.09
23.02
20.01
18.47
17.61
114.00
45.27
21.87
20.05
19.03 #######
28.33
258
04/10/2022 10:44
309.32
39.00
24.85
18.55
18.68
16.84
521.41
46.12
20.63
18.61
18.56
17.76
554.54
40.26
23.04
20.00
18.48
17.63
117.74
44.62
21.88
20.07
19.04 #######
28.26
259
04/10/2022 10:44
308.82
39.59
24.88
18.59
18.68
16.84
523.53
45.09
20.66
18.60
18.53
17.75
546.99
40.35
23.09
20.01
18.48
17.62
116.59
44.32
21.87
20.07
19.06 #######
28.28
260
04/10/2022 10:44
313.10
41.28
24.87
18.55
18.68
16.85
531.14
45.00
20.65
18.62
18.54
17.76
546.03
40.46
23.03
20.01
18.48
17.62
116.05
43.71
21.90
20.06
19.05 #######
28.26
261
04/10/2022 10:44
319.09
40.74
24.86
18.57
18.69
16.83
538.03
44.29
20.63
18.64
18.51
17.74
543.48
40.56
23.07
20.01
18.47
17.63
119.35
43.39
21.87
20.06
19.04 #######
28.18
262
04/10/2022 10:45
315.31
40.80
24.86
18.56
18.68
16.83
542.91
43.52
20.63
18.63
18.48
17.76
534.72
40.66
23.08
20.02
18.49
17.62
115.51
42.78
21.90
20.07
19.02 #######
28.16
263
04/10/2022 10:45
312.04
42.05
24.86
18.58
18.65
16.84
540.91
43.72
20.62
18.65
18.49
17.76
531.57
41.90
23.09
20.01
18.49
17.64
116.00
42.83
21.90
20.09
19.02 #######
28.05
264
04/10/2022 10:45
320.89
41.57
24.84
18.59
18.68
16.84
543.10
43.34
20.63
18.70
18.50
17.75
525.06
41.95
23.08
20.02
18.51
17.63
120.24
42.38
21.92
20.07
19.04 #######
27.98
265
04/10/2022 10:45
319.14
42.00
24.84
18.57
18.67
16.84
538.10
42.56
20.64
18.69
18.49
17.74
517.31
42.07
23.11
20.03
18.49
17.64
118.90
42.04
21.92
20.08
19.06 #######
27.98
266
04/10/2022 10:45
321.86
42.66
24.87
18.59
18.66
16.85
547.60
41.89
20.63
18.71
18.51
17.74
508.62
42.07
23.16
20.03
18.50
17.66
116.51
41.88
21.90
20.07
19.07 #######
27.95
267
04/10/2022 10:45
329.67
43.22
24.86
18.59
18.68
16.84
550.81
43.71
20.65
18.74
18.49
17.72
500.51
42.08
23.14
20.02
18.52
17.65
117.92
41.85
21.90
20.09
19.06 #######
28.01
268
04/10/2022 10:45
334.94
43.18
24.85
18.58
18.65
16.84
551.68
43.91
20.63
18.77
18.50
17.73
499.76
42.15
23.12
20.04
18.51
17.65
116.25
41.50
21.92
20.11
19.08 #######
28.00
269
04/10/2022 10:45
325.60
45.71
24.86
18.59
18.65
16.85
548.43
43.24
20.63
18.78
18.50
17.72
494.48
42.19
23.14
20.03
18.50
17.64
117.78
41.34
21.93
20.11
19.07 #######
28.04
270
04/10/2022 10:45
324.58
48.31
24.84
18.59
18.68
16.82
559.93
42.78
20.63
18.73
18.49
17.73
486.18
42.26
23.21
20.02
18.53
17.67
118.72
40.93
21.94
20.10
19.06 #######
28.02
271
04/10/2022 10:45
335.61
48.13
24.86
18.60
18.67
16.83
558.81
42.02
20.64
18.77
18.51
17.70
479.36
42.41
23.20
20.03
18.54
17.68
129.12
40.59
21.92
20.12
19.06 #######
28.02
272
04/10/2022 10:45
335.81
47.63
24.85
18.59
18.66
16.83
552.76
41.32
20.64
18.77
18.52
17.71
466.73
42.47
23.17
20.03
18.55
17.67
128.66
40.14
21.93
20.13
19.05 #######
27.98
273
04/10/2022 10:45
344.09
46.56
24.85
18.64
18.68
16.81
543.85
40.52
20.64
18.76
18.54
17.71
455.93
42.61
23.13
20.05
18.55
17.66
128.90
39.68
21.95
20.12
19.06 #######
27.92
274
04/10/2022 10:45
346.64
45.62
24.87
18.63
18.68
16.85
548.64
40.00
20.63
18.75
18.53
17.72
447.49
42.77
23.15
20.04
18.55
17.69
133.72
39.30
21.94
20.14
19.09 #######
27.87
==PAGE:248==
275
04/10/2022 10:45
346.85
45.34
24.84
18.64
18.67
16.85
546.37
39.38
20.66
18.73
18.51
17.72
443.05
42.88
23.16
20.05
18.54
17.68
131.45
38.91
21.95
20.14
19.12 #######
27.82
276
04/10/2022 10:45
350.06
45.43
24.86
18.64
18.68
16.86
552.31
39.50
20.65
18.70
18.50
17.72
439.93
42.84
23.24
20.05
18.55
17.70
133.05
38.52
21.96
20.14
19.11 #######
27.83
277
04/10/2022 10:45
358.47
45.62
24.84
18.65
18.69
16.84
557.43
38.90
20.64
18.70
18.52
17.73
427.24
42.95
23.25
20.04
18.58
17.68
133.99
38.22
21.94
20.13
19.10 #######
27.83
278
04/10/2022 10:45
362.37
44.98
24.82
18.65
18.66
16.85
557.67
38.39
20.65
18.71
18.51
17.71
416.51
43.16
23.27
20.05
18.57
17.68
133.75
37.89
21.96
20.14
19.13 #######
27.81
279
04/10/2022 10:45
366.73
45.77
24.84
18.68
18.68
16.84
568.74
37.92
20.65
18.77
18.52
17.73
407.18
43.30
23.29
20.07
18.59
17.68
135.07
37.55
21.96
20.12
19.13 #######
27.83
280
04/10/2022 10:45
373.71
45.62
24.84
18.68
18.69
16.87
571.90
37.44
20.64
18.77
18.53
17.72
399.02
43.46
23.31
20.07
18.59
17.70
136.25
37.27
21.95
20.12
19.18 #######
27.89
281
04/10/2022 10:45
376.10
45.58
24.80
18.69
18.71
16.87
571.38
36.96
20.64
18.81
18.52
17.71
393.69
43.58
23.33
20.05
18.56
17.71
137.42
37.45
21.97
20.15
19.24 #######
28.00
282
04/10/2022 10:45
375.35
45.57
24.83
18.70
18.72
16.86
581.14
38.95
20.64
18.83
18.55
17.74
395.39
43.73
23.35
20.07
18.58
17.72
141.18
37.60
21.98
20.16
19.23 #######
28.11
283
04/10/2022 10:45
395.40
46.03
24.84
18.67
18.70
16.85
595.26
38.42
20.63
18.91
18.57
17.74
400.07
43.78
23.37
20.06
18.60
17.73
144.03
37.36
21.96
20.16
19.25 #######
28.07
284
04/10/2022 10:45
397.57
48.36
24.83
18.68
18.72
16.84
604.55
37.92
20.63
18.91
18.55
17.76
396.44
43.89
23.40
20.07
18.60
17.72
147.82
37.09
21.99
20.18
19.25 #######
28.09
285
04/10/2022 10:45
403.09
48.99
24.85
18.69
18.72
16.87
594.21
37.47
20.64
18.92
18.54
17.76
403.01
44.05
23.44
20.08
18.58
17.72
146.41
36.81
21.99
20.19
19.24 #######
28.05
286
04/10/2022 10:45
414.57
49.36
24.85
18.69
18.70
16.86
597.93
37.11
20.63
18.92
18.54
17.78
404.49
44.26
23.40
20.08
18.58
17.73
149.63
36.61
21.98
20.18
19.22 #######
28.04
287
04/10/2022 10:45
412.44
48.02
24.86
18.70
18.72
16.85
612.09
36.70
20.62
18.92
18.54
17.76
413.49
44.43
23.35
20.06
18.59
17.75
144.03
36.43
21.99
20.19
19.19 #######
28.05
288
04/10/2022 10:45
409.94
47.40
24.84
18.69
18.69
16.86
612.28
36.40
20.62
18.93
18.55
17.76
418.61
44.56
23.35
20.08
18.59
17.76
148.71
36.19
22.01
20.21
19.19 #######
28.00
289
04/10/2022 10:45
410.56
46.63
24.85
18.68
18.70
16.87
625.20
36.09
20.65
18.93
18.55
17.77
419.11
44.69
23.37
20.09
18.60
17.75
148.31
35.93
22.02
20.23
19.22 #######
28.03
290
04/10/2022 10:45
415.43
46.77
24.83
18.69
18.72
16.87
620.11
35.72
20.65
18.91
18.59
17.77
413.49
44.90
23.38
20.09
18.61
17.76
147.47
35.74
22.02
20.24
19.19 #######
28.06
291
04/10/2022 10:45
424.20
45.79
24.82
18.68
18.72
16.87
615.05
35.38
20.64
18.87
18.61
17.77
413.66
45.12
23.42
20.09
18.62
17.75
151.08
35.44
22.02
20.23
19.20 #######
28.02
292
04/10/2022 10:45
423.42
45.39
24.83
18.69
18.71
16.87
611.51
35.50
20.63
18.86
18.61
17.78
405.73
45.20
23.38
20.09
18.61
17.77
147.30
35.22
22.02
20.24
19.17 #######
28.00
293
04/10/2022 10:45
423.82
44.94
24.82
18.69
18.69
16.87
603.27
35.19
20.63
18.87
18.62
17.78
398.03
45.30
23.33
20.09
18.62
17.77
146.41
35.02
22.02
20.25
19.18 #######
27.90
294
04/10/2022 10:45
430.21
44.16
24.84
18.66
18.68
16.88
592.43
34.74
20.62
18.86
18.62
17.77
391.27
45.32
23.34
20.12
18.64
17.74
152.04
34.79
22.03
20.24
19.19 #######
27.86
295
04/10/2022 10:45
433.64
43.46
24.81
18.70
18.68
16.88
590.40
34.41
20.63
18.90
18.64
17.78
381.30
45.33
23.36
20.11
18.63
17.74
151.34
34.57
22.03
20.23
19.20 #######
27.84
296
04/10/2022 10:45
437.51
43.37
24.82
18.69
18.69
16.87
582.84
34.14
20.63
18.89
18.63
17.77
372.98
45.37
23.34
20.09
18.64
17.76
153.11
34.32
22.05
20.25
19.19 #######
27.82
297
04/10/2022 10:45
441.18
43.24
24.81
18.70
18.68
16.88
582.63
33.80
20.63
18.88
18.66
17.78
364.57
45.44
23.34
20.10
18.63
17.75
150.54
34.16
22.06
20.26
19.16 #######
27.79
298
04/10/2022 10:45
432.93
42.92
24.81
18.70
18.67
16.90
591.12
33.56
20.65
18.88
18.65
17.77
357.42
45.55
23.33
20.11
18.64
17.76
150.42
34.00
22.06
20.27
19.18 #######
27.85
299
04/10/2022 10:45
427.76
42.14
24.82
18.72
18.68
16.89
588.17
33.37
20.64
18.85
18.67
17.79
354.16
45.64
23.34
20.12
18.64
17.76
150.26
33.80
22.07
20.27
19.18 #######
27.82
300
04/10/2022 10:45
424.22
43.36
24.81
18.71
18.69
16.88
590.75
33.12
20.66
18.89
18.66
17.79
357.74
45.74
23.35
20.11
18.65
17.76
150.58
33.65
22.08
20.26
19.20 #######
27.79
301
04/10/2022 10:45
420.03
43.09
24.80
18.71
18.68
16.91
603.69
34.10
20.65
18.90
18.67
17.78
367.30
45.85
23.37
20.11
18.64
17.75
149.91
33.46
22.08
20.26
19.26 #######
27.86
302
04/10/2022 10:45
421.20
42.93
24.80
18.69
18.68
16.87
621.23
33.82
20.67
18.91
18.65
17.77
380.52
45.91
23.40
20.12
18.65
17.76
147.67
33.39
22.08
20.29
19.27 #######
28.00
303
04/10/2022 10:45
426.21
44.38
24.79
18.71
18.70
16.89
632.84
34.06
20.66
18.93
18.67
17.79
401.39
45.93
23.43
20.11
18.66
17.77
143.83
33.43
22.09
20.28
19.29 #######
28.10
304
04/10/2022 10:45
411.87
46.67
24.80
18.73
18.69
16.89
644.38
36.24
20.66
18.96
18.67
17.80
422.52
45.87
23.56
20.11
18.67
17.78
140.97
34.58
22.11
20.29
19.32 #######
28.18
305
04/10/2022 10:45
408.05
49.13
24.81
18.74
18.71
16.89
638.94
36.70
20.68
19.00
18.67
17.79
456.45
45.98
23.72
20.13
18.66
17.75
139.99
34.90
22.13
20.30
19.33 #######
28.18
306
04/10/2022 10:45
406.25
49.83
24.82
18.78
18.74
16.90
636.55
36.80
20.68
19.02
18.67
17.79
491.36
46.15
23.94
20.15
18.66
17.76
139.48
35.17
22.15
20.31
19.31 #######
28.54
307
04/10/2022 10:45
412.10
53.49
24.81
18.79
18.74
16.90
649.33
37.74
20.70
19.10
18.69
17.81
541.50
47.49
24.39
20.13
18.66
17.75
138.06
38.15
22.16
20.33
19.31 #######
28.82
308
04/10/2022 10:45
401.97
54.32
24.82
18.81
18.74
16.90
641.65
42.15
20.72
19.12
18.71
17.81
578.48
48.40
24.37
20.12
18.65
17.75
138.60
40.61
22.17
20.34
19.28 #######
28.97
309
04/10/2022 10:45
386.08
54.08
24.84
18.81
18.73
16.91
640.49
43.70
20.73
19.14
18.70
17.78
601.17
48.95
24.23
20.12
18.67
17.76
137.58
41.89
22.20
20.37
19.30 #######
29.12
310
04/10/2022 10:45
382.43
52.61
24.86
18.82
18.72
16.91
657.18
46.35
20.74
19.12
18.73
17.80
625.68
49.50
24.14
20.12
18.67
17.74
135.86
44.12
22.20
20.40
19.31 #######
29.19
311
04/10/2022 10:45
374.04
52.08
24.85
18.81
18.73
16.92
671.24
50.97
20.75
19.11
18.76
17.77
638.73
49.87
24.00
20.12
18.66
17.72
140.60
46.23
22.20
20.41
19.32 #######
29.27
312
04/10/2022 10:45
378.16
51.01
24.86
18.81
18.72
16.90
668.25
51.42
20.77
19.11
18.72
17.79
654.83
50.49
23.92
20.14
18.65
17.74
142.01
48.14
22.21
20.42
19.33 #######
29.30
313
04/10/2022 10:46
379.54
49.96
24.86
18.81
18.71
16.92
681.16
58.29
20.77
19.10
18.74
17.79
668.96
51.06
23.86
20.11
18.67
17.73
144.27
51.43
22.22
20.46
19.31 #######
29.36
314
04/10/2022 10:46
388.96
49.10
24.88
18.81
18.74
16.92
680.75
65.03
20.77
19.11
18.72
17.79
685.11
51.69
23.78
20.11
18.68
17.71
140.71
57.77
22.24
20.47
19.33 #######
29.36
315
04/10/2022 10:46
370.92
47.87
24.87
18.83
18.73
16.93
700.68
70.07
20.76
19.08
18.73
17.76
696.64
52.19
23.74
20.13
18.66
17.73
138.04
61.98
22.25
20.50
19.36 #######
29.34
316
04/10/2022 10:46
362.06
48.24
24.87
18.84
18.75
16.91
725.35
74.69
20.78
19.08
18.74
17.78
707.25
52.78
23.73
20.13
18.68
17.73
134.15
64.40
22.25
20.49
19.35 #######
29.34
317
04/10/2022 10:46
358.97
49.87
24.87
18.82
18.74
16.91
742.95
81.50
20.80
19.11
18.76
17.79
713.06
53.91
23.70
20.12
18.68
17.72
132.94
68.40
22.26
20.54
19.31 #######
29.36
318
04/10/2022 10:46
360.86
50.05
24.90
18.82
18.74
16.92
755.60
83.99
20.82
19.11
18.80
17.78
715.93
54.51
23.66
20.12
18.67
17.71
131.03
70.53
22.28
20.56
19.31 #######
29.38
319
04/10/2022 10:46
357.90
49.79
24.90
18.86
18.77
16.93
765.11
87.73
20.82
19.14
18.80
17.80
714.29
55.50
23.60
20.11
18.67
17.72
131.06
72.84
22.29
20.61
19.33 #######
29.41
320
04/10/2022 10:46
374.86
48.60
24.89
18.86
18.77
16.93
778.89
90.30
20.82
19.18
18.82
17.80
714.56
56.28
23.57
20.11
18.69
17.74
132.74
74.24
22.33
20.66
19.33 #######
29.34
321
04/10/2022 10:46
371.67
47.36
24.91
18.86
18.79
16.95
801.93
92.51
20.82
19.22
18.82
17.81
724.19
56.97
23.56
20.12
18.69
17.74
135.07
77.08
22.34
20.69
19.34 #######
29.23
322
04/10/2022 10:46
381.90
46.35
24.92
18.86
18.79
16.94
805.32
95.49
20.84
19.24
18.86
17.82
727.45
57.68
23.50
20.11
18.69
17.74
135.78
77.40
22.37
20.73
19.32 #######
29.12
323
04/10/2022 10:46
402.47
45.53
24.93
18.90
18.79
16.93
830.44
95.69
20.87
19.28
18.89
17.83
728.92
58.49
23.45
20.11
18.70
17.73
136.42
78.58
22.39
20.77
19.32 #######
29.16
324
04/10/2022 10:46
405.20
45.05
24.93
18.89
18.79
16.93
840.31
93.69
20.87
19.27
18.90
17.82
734.06
59.23
23.45
20.11
18.68
17.75
141.19
79.23
22.41
20.78
19.34 #######
29.07
325
04/10/2022 10:46
405.33
45.16
24.94
18.89
18.81
16.92
849.74
94.19
20.89
19.29
18.93
17.81
734.50
60.07
23.51
20.13
18.69
17.75
136.66
80.57
22.44
20.83
19.39 #######
29.01
326
04/10/2022 10:46
407.25
44.93
24.95
18.91
18.81
16.92
862.24
92.55
20.92
19.32
18.96
17.82
736.10
60.77
23.50
20.12
18.69
17.77
134.24
80.79
22.47
20.87
19.38 #######
28.95
327
04/10/2022 10:46
407.45
44.81
24.97
18.91
18.82
16.92
872.76
92.28
20.94
19.34
18.96
17.81
733.16
61.51
23.49
20.14
18.71
17.79
134.97
80.42
22.51
20.91
19.34 #######
29.05
328
04/10/2022 10:46
418.25
44.92
24.98
18.96
18.85
16.91
863.22
95.65
20.96
19.40
18.97
17.84
727.16
62.09
23.51
20.13
18.73
17.80
140.18
81.09
22.55
20.93
19.36 #######
28.91
329
04/10/2022 10:46
426.73
49.46
24.97
18.96
18.85
16.93
855.84
94.35
20.99
19.46
18.99
17.84
727.68
62.30
28.52
20.16
18.73
17.81
132.50
80.27
22.57
20.98
19.43 #######
28.79
==PAGE:249==
330
04/10/2022 10:46
402.65
52.50
25.01
19.04
18.87
16.95
858.32
95.84
21.01
19.54
19.00
17.84
733.90
78.00
28.88
20.16
18.77
17.82
123.65
89.75
22.59
20.99
20.72 #######
28.70
331
04/10/2022 10:46
373.12
52.02
25.11
19.95
18.89
16.98
793.88
111.85
21.28
20.37
19.04
17.85
739.04
107.78
28.95
20.22
18.97
18.03
115.52
99.89
22.63
21.37
21.29 #######
28.58
332
04/10/2022 10:46
366.15
50.60
25.27
21.05
18.93
16.99
742.28
131.97
21.92
22.52
19.21
17.86
746.22
147.12
28.64
20.37
19.70
18.74
110.51
113.76
22.71
21.83
22.12 #######
28.45
333
04/10/2022 10:46
355.00
52.53
25.39
21.45
18.94
17.05
693.23
155.49
23.12
23.89
19.52
17.94
746.03
189.99
28.52
20.50
19.87
19.01
105.38
134.19
22.80
22.10
22.44 #######
28.31
334
04/10/2022 10:46
340.65
53.44
25.55
22.02
18.97
17.21
653.70
176.95
23.83
25.03
19.62
17.95
742.45
221.98
32.10
20.65
20.18
19.10
103.86
144.95
22.96
22.55
23.88 #######
28.27
335
04/10/2022 10:46
335.59
55.29
25.58
22.06
19.02
17.30
623.40
193.35
24.51
25.85
19.77
17.99
744.67
261.14
32.39
20.86
20.57
19.63
99.59
159.13
23.07
22.70
25.26 #######
28.25
336
04/10/2022 10:46
315.48
54.51
25.62
22.63
19.04
17.35
600.69
210.40
24.99
25.71
19.82
18.03
742.21
287.74
33.19
21.04
21.15
20.18
95.00
175.98
23.19
22.87
25.38 #######
28.19
337
04/10/2022 10:46
298.79
54.87
25.76
23.34
19.09
17.43
581.43
234.14
25.64
26.56
20.03
18.09
741.28
307.86
33.49
21.13
21.69
20.73
91.61
187.87
23.29
23.28
25.70 #######
28.10
338
04/10/2022 10:46
290.99
55.19
25.85
23.40
19.13
17.55
563.50
248.77
26.07
26.96
20.16
18.12
740.35
322.70
34.06
21.23
21.77
20.93
88.85
196.56
23.44
23.44
25.28 #######
28.20
339
04/10/2022 10:46
278.41
56.48
25.92
23.69
19.20
17.62
546.91
264.82
26.41
27.10
20.27
18.21
739.69
352.04
34.97
21.39
21.91
21.07
85.60
209.16
23.62
23.68
25.73 #######
28.19
340
04/10/2022 10:46
260.13
57.24
26.00
25.34
19.23
17.68
524.29
273.44
27.01
28.15
20.45
18.23
737.98
376.15
34.25
21.45
22.13
21.34
82.05
218.75
23.71
24.28
26.90 #######
28.18
341
04/10/2022 10:46
245.64
56.18
26.12
26.13
19.30
17.78
501.29
280.29
29.60
30.45
21.01
18.32
738.06
399.99
33.01
21.54
22.35
21.40
79.64
236.04
23.91
24.80
27.24 #######
28.19
342
04/10/2022 10:46
239.94
54.80
26.32
26.46
19.37
17.87
479.97
298.27
30.78
30.70
21.06
18.39
737.87
422.50
32.79
21.60
22.27
20.94
77.26
245.21
24.11
25.07
26.92 #######
28.21
343
04/10/2022 10:46
232.28
53.17
26.37
26.57
19.40
18.01
465.41
314.40
31.22
30.50
21.15
18.47
734.67
450.50
33.23
21.67
22.44
21.20
74.70
258.38
24.33
25.22
26.69 #######
28.21
344
04/10/2022 10:46
219.81
51.70
26.50
27.06
19.46
18.11
443.98
325.32
32.30
30.87
21.24
18.52
733.12
475.12
32.88
21.69
22.45
21.12
72.20
268.24
24.53
25.61
26.25 #######
28.21
345
04/10/2022 10:46
212.46
52.80
26.66
27.17
19.48
18.15
426.55
335.69
33.08
31.12
21.40
18.56
731.36
496.24
34.67
21.80
22.51
21.33
70.11
277.69
24.85
25.77
26.60 #######
28.24
346
04/10/2022 10:46
207.41
53.36
26.70
27.20
19.55
18.23
418.21
348.66
33.42
30.73
21.41
18.62
734.88
503.63
35.96
21.98
22.40
21.25
69.09
282.03
25.04
25.95
27.78 #######
28.22
347
04/10/2022 10:46
198.26
53.44
26.73
26.95
19.59
18.30
408.99
353.49
33.69
30.27
21.50
18.70
732.44
511.97
35.14
22.10
22.63
21.85
67.58
286.35
25.29
25.97
27.57 #######
28.22
348
04/10/2022 10:46
192.51
52.76
26.81
27.32
19.62
18.32
392.84
363.79
34.72
29.92
21.58
18.80
726.77
530.39
35.96
22.07
22.38
21.35
66.69
290.82
25.69
26.15
27.60 #######
28.10
349
04/10/2022 10:46
186.66
52.87
27.08
27.94
19.66
18.36
378.21
361.61
35.42
32.66
21.71
18.83
725.16
528.75
34.15
22.05
22.23
21.78
64.89
289.42
25.95
30.49
26.70 #######
27.99
350
04/10/2022 10:46
177.43
51.04
29.86
34.87
20.81
18.69
354.43
353.50
41.64
69.36
24.01
19.14
719.15
518.70
32.36
22.04
22.07
21.82
63.40
295.57
26.42
39.12
25.84 #######
27.90
351
04/10/2022 10:46
168.38
49.24
31.93
42.18
22.31
19.20
338.83
348.36
48.26
91.67
26.46
19.71
717.82
507.36
31.34
22.04
21.79
21.32
62.07
301.25
26.51
44.03
25.14 #######
27.99
352
04/10/2022 10:46
160.96
47.99
32.34
43.40
22.82
19.52
324.52
353.58
52.55
91.14
27.51
20.15
710.61
518.24
30.85
22.11
21.88
21.44
60.60
311.77
27.16
44.33
24.62 #######
28.02
353
04/10/2022 10:46
155.69
46.79
32.89
44.39
23.08
19.84
312.54
354.59
54.82
87.51
28.01
20.35
708.95
525.77
30.12
22.11
21.87
21.59
59.45
318.53
27.56
48.67
23.99 #######
28.08
354
04/10/2022 10:46
149.39
45.49
33.62
45.45
23.29
20.09
300.12
355.98
61.99
86.60
28.82
20.50
707.84
534.49
29.02
22.11
21.73
21.44
58.27
325.35
28.52
49.02
23.71 #######
28.12
355
04/10/2022 10:46
143.75
44.28
33.95
45.85
23.36
20.28
290.06
362.02
64.76
79.07
28.78
20.58
705.04
547.40
28.91
22.16
21.65
21.33
57.31
334.77
29.12
48.94
23.24 #######
28.13
356
04/10/2022 10:46
139.08
43.24
34.03
45.95
23.67
20.48
280.94
366.70
65.84
72.75
29.08
20.60
703.79
561.09
28.30
22.19
21.61
21.69
56.11
341.52
29.98
49.42
22.89 #######
28.17
357
04/10/2022 10:46
134.96
42.35
34.96
47.16
23.79
20.58
271.36
364.20
71.07
70.71
29.59
20.68
693.44
566.39
27.73
22.26
21.61
21.79
54.74
344.44
31.21
52.00
22.78 #######
28.18
358
04/10/2022 10:46
131.92
42.31
35.74
47.62
23.75
20.66
258.71
366.99
76.60
72.26
29.73
20.79
684.27
579.46
27.81
22.30
21.63
21.94
54.39
351.74
32.14
55.28
22.59 #######
28.14
359
04/10/2022 10:46
129.95
42.34
37.51
49.85
23.85
20.91
249.42
371.79
82.93
82.85
30.59
20.97
680.43
589.45
27.75
22.43
21.73
21.85
53.72
362.29
33.51
56.95
22.41 #######
28.16
360
04/10/2022 10:46
125.88
41.72
37.93
50.20
23.94
21.13
245.91
377.14
86.41
79.97
30.58
20.98
680.36
599.23
27.77
22.49
21.64
21.73
52.75
363.44
35.14
58.27
22.82 #######
28.11
361
04/10/2022 10:46
123.43
41.13
38.70
51.33
24.19
21.30
236.79
373.09
91.22
80.99
31.03
21.11
680.14
603.92
26.88
22.54
21.50
21.50
52.22
367.61
35.76
59.30
22.42 #######
28.19
362
04/10/2022 10:46
121.33
40.46
39.00
51.61
24.34
21.36
232.50
376.92
94.85
79.80
31.51
21.34
680.76
616.10
26.71
22.60
21.55
21.53
51.31
374.37
37.21
59.24
22.15 #######
28.22
363
04/10/2022 10:46
119.86
40.22
38.90
51.15
24.41
21.47
226.43
387.60
96.10
74.28
31.35
21.38
684.53
625.79
27.39
22.70
21.87
22.09
50.54
377.17
38.34
59.03
21.89 #######
28.32
364
04/10/2022 10:46
116.58
39.79
39.31
50.89
24.49
21.49
218.09
392.10
99.93
72.49
31.63
21.45
684.42
630.27
27.02
22.73
21.74
21.63
50.33
388.01
39.35
58.72
21.63 #######
28.34
365
04/10/2022 10:47
113.35
39.24
39.42
50.53
24.43
21.51
216.67
405.39
100.97
67.76
31.35
21.49
681.12
638.17
26.25
22.77
21.59
21.34
49.85
394.62
40.32
58.40
21.33
-158.97
28.38
366
04/10/2022 10:47
110.54
38.73
39.61
50.79
24.76
21.56
207.70
403.95
104.34
67.30
31.73
21.57
667.31
648.87
26.30
22.83
21.58
21.51
49.60
396.62
41.81
60.71
21.59 #######
28.39
367
04/10/2022 10:47
108.10
38.50
40.31
50.89
24.82
21.73
208.11
412.79
107.11
73.28
31.97
21.55
665.66
648.95
26.27
22.91
21.56
21.52
49.59
404.81
42.95
60.52
21.29 #######
28.37
368
04/10/2022 10:47
106.31
38.23
40.97
52.92
24.97
21.86
201.38
410.09
110.84
77.05
32.75
21.74
651.06
657.99
25.77
23.00
21.85
21.91
49.10
405.90
43.89
64.06
21.03 #######
28.24
369
04/10/2022 10:47
104.25
37.62
42.86
57.74
25.48
22.15
193.41
400.86
115.24
99.68
34.31
22.20
623.16
663.54
25.30
23.03
21.77
21.83
48.23
405.33
45.10
72.49
20.80 #######
28.10
370
04/10/2022 10:47
103.10
37.24
44.17
65.86
26.96
22.60
185.30
395.56
121.63
125.01
37.46
22.49
610.22
662.36
24.86
23.07
21.61
22.34
47.86
408.42
46.18
77.29
20.64 #######
28.20
371
04/10/2022 10:47
100.43
37.33
44.75
65.87
27.32
23.05
180.06
404.91
124.23
120.63
38.01
22.58
604.45
663.61
24.94
23.12
21.45
21.82
47.27
413.38
47.41
76.92
20.68 #######
28.11
372
04/10/2022 10:47
99.70
37.45
45.41
64.91
27.28
23.18
173.64
400.33
125.59
119.41
37.80
22.64
583.40
666.04
25.28
23.32
22.01
22.64
46.96
412.31
48.12
79.30
20.55 #######
28.14
373
04/10/2022 10:47
101.63
37.78
45.66
63.97
27.55
23.20
170.02
400.59
128.08
110.98
37.74
22.85
582.17
670.27
25.31
23.41
21.95
22.16
46.82
416.10
49.26
77.79
20.45 #######
28.20
374
04/10/2022 10:47
100.08
38.52
45.50
62.55
27.43
23.19
169.67
413.64
128.86
99.35
37.33
22.82
565.90
671.26
24.86
23.42
21.67
21.70
45.70
427.70
49.98
76.30
20.23 #######
28.25
375
04/10/2022 10:47
99.58
39.14
45.04
60.51
27.30
23.11
170.93
427.21
128.70
88.80
36.99
22.77
554.04
672.75
25.15
23.56
21.91
21.91
45.32
433.50
50.97
74.51
20.46 #######
28.22
376
04/10/2022 10:47
97.34
39.00
44.77
58.68
27.14
23.07
166.64
429.83
129.62
80.81
36.51
22.70
527.87
678.44
25.76
23.83
23.28
23.37
44.83
433.81
51.99
73.53
20.78 #######
28.10
377
04/10/2022 10:47
99.60
39.66
45.33
59.71
27.12
23.10
161.36
428.55
132.85
79.58
36.52
22.73
508.50
682.26
26.36
24.03
23.70
23.52
44.95
436.72
53.19
73.77
20.85 #######
28.03
378
04/10/2022 10:47
99.07
40.02
45.94
58.94
26.98
23.14
156.81
420.54
137.68
81.61
36.27
22.75
476.60
689.46
25.82
24.07
23.40
23.21
44.12
436.27
53.94
73.63
20.61 #######
28.21
379
04/10/2022 10:47
97.55
40.02
45.93
58.20
26.93
23.16
154.24
423.79
139.65
78.32
36.02
22.71
448.01
688.76
26.02
24.14
23.30
23.30
43.54
439.20
54.86
72.32
20.62 #######
28.31
380
04/10/2022 10:47
95.90
39.72
46.17
57.91
27.00
23.12
151.41
421.49
142.03
75.38
35.92
22.88
420.50
694.94
25.66
24.14
23.05
23.09
43.14
440.98
55.42
72.01
20.57 #######
28.30
381
04/10/2022 10:47
94.59
39.48
46.87
59.56
27.25
23.22
146.92
414.79
146.58
76.53
36.17
23.17
395.74
696.01
25.34
24.23
22.89
22.78
42.91
442.13
56.41
72.39
20.39 #######
28.29
382
04/10/2022 10:47
93.34
39.04
47.55
59.74
27.18
23.37
145.76
417.17
149.84
78.68
36.10
23.24
381.24
692.42
25.53
24.23
22.67
22.53
42.62
452.81
57.13
71.39
20.28 #######
28.40
383
04/10/2022 10:47
93.84
39.55
47.43
59.05
27.12
23.50
145.26
442.85
149.13
74.65
35.84
23.18
366.56
690.36
25.69
24.31
22.49
22.24
42.71
463.05
57.90
70.44
20.28 #######
28.51
384
04/10/2022 10:47
93.40
39.83
47.44
57.85
27.22
23.49
146.38
457.10
150.38
72.27
35.87
23.22
361.77
691.18
25.38
24.32
22.47
22.31
42.56
477.59
58.67
69.46
20.20 #######
28.56
==PAGE:250==
385
04/10/2022 10:47
92.41
39.72
47.05
56.64
27.26
23.46
146.69
483.72
149.49
67.75
35.49
23.19
350.05
687.01
25.16
24.34
22.28
21.96
42.65
494.11
59.47
67.93
20.40 #######
28.49
386
04/10/2022 10:47
91.57
39.74
47.30
56.63
27.44
23.49
144.76
486.90
150.48
71.16
35.58
23.32
333.46
689.85
24.95
24.37
22.13
22.09
42.35
499.69
60.34
72.16
20.28 #######
28.33
387
04/10/2022 10:47
90.42
39.57
49.20
62.20
28.35
23.66
138.43
460.50
159.36
105.91
37.53
23.60
316.47
694.46
24.57
24.35
21.85
21.61
41.77
500.64
60.67
81.60
20.01 #######
28.28
388
04/10/2022 10:47
88.04
39.27
51.05
68.67
29.60
24.23
132.11
437.59
170.44
139.28
39.85
24.02
299.49
692.89
24.06
24.37
21.65
21.32
40.89
497.14
61.34
90.62
19.82 #######
28.21
389
04/10/2022 10:47
85.10
38.71
52.81
71.37
30.35
24.78
128.90
418.05
179.29
151.81
41.11
24.26
286.32
697.85
23.86
24.34
21.48
21.16
40.48
494.11
62.18
98.90
19.66 #######
28.13
390
04/10/2022 10:47
82.88
38.17
55.05
78.93
31.61
26.08
122.93
398.98
183.70
186.68
44.51
24.76
269.99
703.10
23.41
24.37
21.35
21.01
39.54
484.37
62.94
113.95
19.46 #######
27.95
391
04/10/2022 10:47
80.05
37.54
56.85
87.19
33.75
27.71
115.79
378.15
183.88
221.89
50.38
26.19
252.58
704.67
23.11
24.42
21.24
20.94
38.82
468.93
63.12
122.72
19.30 #######
27.76
392
04/10/2022 10:47
78.30
37.16
58.75
92.68
36.03
30.28
108.88
360.11
180.30
226.51
58.21
27.50
237.12
674.57
22.86
24.46
21.13
20.77
38.25
451.29
63.38
129.98
19.18 #######
27.71
393
04/10/2022 10:47
76.35
36.90
61.08
98.12
38.24
32.52
104.12
345.89
179.88
238.86
63.83
29.28
222.12
630.98
22.67
24.63
21.16
20.78
37.73
432.91
63.89
137.46
19.15 #######
27.62
394
04/10/2022 10:47
74.76
36.95
62.95
102.43
39.51
33.96
100.33
331.28
179.69
250.09
68.03
30.44
210.53
584.07
22.38
24.73
21.08
20.73
37.33
415.92
64.24
146.73
19.02 #######
27.52
395
04/10/2022 10:47
72.80
37.13
64.41
108.23
41.71
35.79
96.85
320.37
178.26
255.76
72.86
31.98
202.04
537.87
22.30
24.86
21.07
20.60
36.86
400.10
64.85
156.10
18.99 #######
27.51
396
04/10/2022 10:47
71.36
37.40
67.23
114.90
43.14
37.11
93.00
308.26
176.97
254.79
78.27
33.46
192.51
491.81
22.03
24.99
21.10
20.63
36.63
384.00
65.22
158.44
18.96 #######
27.51
397
04/10/2022 10:47
70.43
37.89
68.83
117.42
44.47
38.11
90.57
298.76
176.76
257.85
81.57
34.51
188.16
459.18
21.95
25.12
21.23
20.68
36.35
369.63
65.76
167.51
19.01 #######
27.52
398
04/10/2022 10:47
69.81
38.45
71.12
122.73
45.53
38.76
87.49
289.12
175.69
261.76
85.09
35.28
182.93
428.65
21.72
25.23
21.25
20.67
36.01
355.93
66.06
174.09
18.95 #######
27.49
399
04/10/2022 10:47
67.86
38.42
73.42
126.08
46.68
39.95
86.08
279.97
175.83
268.07
88.23
36.16
175.57
400.08
21.61
25.46
21.24
20.59
35.66
343.25
66.05
176.90
18.93 #######
27.45
400
04/10/2022 10:47
66.26
38.70
75.68
129.60
47.89
40.98
83.06
270.66
173.68
254.72
93.59
37.67
171.66
378.56
21.56
25.57
21.37
20.72
35.47
331.85
65.55
177.99
18.96 #######
27.66
401
04/10/2022 10:47
65.67
39.05
76.60
127.26
48.35
40.95
84.32
267.21
179.38
240.04
92.89
38.09
170.01
366.83
21.64
25.85
21.34
20.52
35.72
321.71
66.63
179.44
19.01 #######
27.71
402
04/10/2022 10:47
64.78
39.12
78.40
127.49
48.71
40.81
85.97
260.53
183.67
243.39
91.76
37.83
168.10
357.88
21.49
26.03
21.33
20.37
35.48
311.98
67.14
184.31
18.98 #######
27.83
403
04/10/2022 10:47
64.35
39.23
80.82
126.86
49.19
40.80
85.66
255.15
186.08
260.22
91.07
37.88
163.91
344.05
21.55
26.29
21.41
20.36
35.30
303.07
67.74
191.00
18.99 #######
27.73
404
04/10/2022 10:47
64.02
39.37
82.43
131.69
50.47
42.05
82.75
245.87
183.47
266.21
94.59
38.28
159.16
331.43
21.49
26.46
21.77
20.69
35.09
294.46
68.10
193.88
19.00 #######
27.61
405
04/10/2022 10:47
63.16
39.41
83.37
133.88
51.59
42.90
80.69
237.68
182.23
268.32
96.66
39.08
154.49
313.51
21.44
26.85
21.80
20.79
34.99
286.14
67.95
193.39
19.03 #######
27.56
406
04/10/2022 10:47
62.82
39.18
85.46
137.40
52.83
44.16
78.34
231.07
179.95
268.23
99.45
39.75
149.41
302.28
21.34
27.09
21.93
20.85
34.86
277.59
68.17
193.82
19.02 #######
27.49
407
04/10/2022 10:47
61.53
38.97
86.38
140.05
54.22
45.63
75.78
222.05
178.01
255.61
103.61
41.13
144.56
289.48
21.31
27.36
21.85
20.61
34.52
269.53
67.86
191.56
19.07 #######
27.43
408
04/10/2022 10:47
60.28
38.88
87.48
142.92
55.35
46.92
73.32
215.56
174.42
230.84
109.13
42.87
138.13
273.47
21.37
27.66
21.90
20.60
34.36
261.52
67.33
185.77
19.00 #######
27.39
409
04/10/2022 10:47
59.71
38.61
88.76
147.00
56.95
48.62
71.06
208.38
170.98
207.31
114.83
44.82
132.94
260.14
21.33
27.97
21.95
20.60
34.20
254.14
67.14
182.23
18.94 #######
27.36
410
04/10/2022 10:47
60.31
38.56
89.52
149.45
58.21
49.56
69.25
202.62
168.50
196.74
118.66
46.04
129.15
247.43
21.35
28.30
21.99
20.52
33.97
247.12
66.89
178.35
18.96 #######
27.32
411
04/10/2022 10:47
59.49
38.45
90.09
150.05
59.30
50.09
67.18
197.56
165.50
187.71
122.06
47.12
125.89
236.55
21.37
28.58
22.05
20.36
33.88
240.77
66.54
175.06
18.93 #######
27.30
412
04/10/2022 10:47
58.72
38.26
90.61
150.45
59.82
50.94
66.06
193.10
164.05
188.17
123.69
47.78
123.04
227.78
21.50
28.75
22.11
20.43
33.90
234.71
65.93
172.11
18.96 #######
27.27
413
04/10/2022 10:47
58.31
38.13
91.40
150.54
60.28
51.33
63.90
188.70
161.77
181.98
125.37
48.21
121.39
220.70
21.71
29.10
22.47
20.75
33.90
228.98
65.51
169.72
19.07 #######
27.31
414
04/10/2022 10:47
57.53
38.05
92.38
150.00
60.71
51.77
63.37
184.23
160.75
194.04
126.01
48.77
118.87
215.63
21.73
29.31
22.51
20.64
33.68
223.31
65.05
171.87
19.12 #######
27.36
415
04/10/2022 10:47
57.14
37.87
93.04
150.78
61.10
51.77
62.63
178.97
159.87
204.22
125.80
49.04
116.56
208.38
21.87
29.72
22.57
20.58
33.51
217.72
64.47
169.46
19.15 #######
27.33
416
04/10/2022 10:47
57.24
37.78
92.85
152.24
62.61
52.67
61.58
174.50
157.16
189.30
127.16
49.65
115.12
201.50
22.05
29.93
22.59
20.48
33.27
212.76
64.15
166.06
19.22 #######
27.34
417
04/10/2022 10:48
56.72
37.53
93.22
151.85
63.11
53.16
60.61
170.49
155.44
188.14
127.76
49.81
114.44
199.33
22.08
30.10
22.59
20.37
33.21
207.72
63.81
165.31
19.20 #######
27.33
418
04/10/2022 10:48
56.35
37.21
93.56
153.83
63.91
53.74
59.60
164.87
153.21
181.19
129.48
50.78
112.01
191.94
22.22
30.38
22.71
20.53
33.18
202.51
63.03
161.18
19.15 #######
27.27
419
04/10/2022 10:48
55.97
36.96
93.54
153.33
64.42
54.42
58.86
160.87
150.55
175.20
130.82
51.61
111.83
189.72
22.26
30.58
22.76
20.43
33.19
198.56
62.46
159.88
19.13 #######
27.32
420
04/10/2022 10:48
55.75
36.60
95.10
153.09
64.57
54.35
58.54
158.05
149.00
182.62
130.97
51.95
110.87
185.69
22.53
30.93
22.88
20.44
33.04
194.29
61.85
158.88
19.22 #######
27.34
421
04/10/2022 10:48
55.49
36.38
96.09
152.00
64.21
54.40
57.30
155.05
147.55
191.46
131.08
52.28
109.82
183.47
22.55
31.13
22.94
20.35
32.94
189.92
61.61
158.96
19.22 #######
27.34
422
04/10/2022 10:48
54.92
36.02
96.67
153.82
65.14
55.12
56.63
150.41
145.14
187.61
132.45
53.11
108.23
178.96
22.55
31.36
23.09
20.63
32.77
185.45
61.34
156.85
19.29 #######
27.29
423
04/10/2022 10:48
53.88
35.45
96.87
154.71
65.82
55.07
55.46
146.42
142.44
177.36
134.05
54.16
105.84
173.21
22.62
31.70
23.13
20.72
32.72
180.73
60.79
153.08
19.32 #######
27.23
424
04/10/2022 10:48
53.22
35.16
96.86
155.08
66.57
55.79
54.59
142.31
139.24
158.18
135.10
55.74
103.08
167.04
22.79
32.00
23.30
20.89
32.77
176.93
60.00
148.93
19.37 #######
27.20
425
04/10/2022 10:48
52.43
34.85
97.18
155.59
67.41
57.06
53.65
139.39
136.23
147.35
136.92
57.24
101.15
160.54
22.81
32.33
23.48
21.14
32.74
173.50
59.31
145.79
19.37 #######
27.14
426
04/10/2022 10:48
52.08
34.54
97.59
157.43
68.16
57.64
53.38
135.99
133.66
147.62
138.50
58.41
99.64
157.62
22.91
32.77
23.63
21.10
32.59
170.41
58.74
143.85
19.36 #######
27.10
427
04/10/2022 10:48
51.55
34.52
97.91
158.21
68.83
58.07
53.06
134.25
132.14
150.82
140.98
59.41
98.80
156.67
22.88
33.14
23.68
20.93
32.64
167.69
57.99
142.39
19.37 #######
27.09
428
04/10/2022 10:48
51.43
34.61
99.15
160.19
69.15
58.16
51.96
131.70
130.13
151.09
143.82
60.25
97.88
151.77
22.88
33.51
23.87
21.01
32.82
164.56
57.43
140.00
19.42 #######
27.08
429
04/10/2022 10:48
51.10
34.43
100.24
164.41
70.63
59.52
50.95
128.62
127.23
146.39
146.04
61.99
96.83
150.40
22.96
33.86
24.15
21.37
32.68
161.68
56.73
139.30
19.48 #######
27.07
430
04/10/2022 10:48
50.72
34.36
101.03
165.25
71.00
59.77
50.68
127.21
126.16
154.53
147.68
62.77
95.65
151.36
23.02
34.14
24.24
21.29
32.53
159.09
56.08
139.23
19.53 #######
27.10
431
04/10/2022 10:48
50.45
34.11
103.21
167.75
71.42
60.10
50.52
125.53
125.51
166.01
149.49
63.23
95.00
151.95
22.90
34.50
24.31
21.11
32.27
156.79
55.65
139.88
19.55 #######
27.08
432
04/10/2022 10:48
50.44
34.13
104.32
171.11
71.81
60.50
50.79
124.83
124.73
172.99
150.63
63.52
95.52
153.84
22.94
34.76
24.36
20.97
32.23
154.99
55.21
142.33
19.60 #######
27.14
433
04/10/2022 10:48
49.54
33.83
106.88
171.17
71.36
60.35
50.38
124.23
124.51
192.84
151.44
63.51
96.17
155.35
22.89
34.92
24.49
20.99
32.23
152.90
54.93
146.32
19.66 #######
27.21
434
04/10/2022 10:48
49.39
33.86
108.34
170.10
70.99
59.35
50.71
122.43
124.79
216.75
149.66
63.12
96.94
160.03
22.83
35.14
24.56
20.87
32.19
150.88
54.90
153.38
19.70 #######
27.24
435
04/10/2022 10:48
49.85
33.92
109.71
169.31
70.58
59.04
51.10
121.10
125.52
233.31
147.13
62.51
96.91
162.80
23.00
35.24
24.61
20.99
32.02
148.77
54.80
158.67
19.75 #######
27.26
436
04/10/2022 10:48
49.85
33.64
111.27
168.01
70.12
58.82
51.62
119.87
126.18
238.64
145.82
62.05
97.53
166.38
22.85
35.25
24.64
20.85
31.95
147.23
55.05
164.23
19.70 #######
27.26
437
04/10/2022 10:48
49.34
33.39
113.13
167.36
69.94
58.38
51.98
119.39
125.71
234.77
144.79
61.53
95.98
163.75
22.81
35.54
24.67
20.77
31.77
145.26
54.82
162.49
19.69 #######
27.25
438
04/10/2022 10:48
49.59
33.15
113.70
168.02
70.44
58.76
51.47
116.93
124.00
215.30
147.19
62.14
96.39
165.26
22.81
35.63
24.63
20.70
32.03
143.63
54.58
164.62
19.70 #######
27.24
439
04/10/2022 10:48
49.68
33.10
114.90
166.75
69.66
57.86
51.78
115.95
125.39
230.32
144.62
61.95
95.23
170.01
22.66
35.92
24.67
20.72
31.91
141.89
54.91
169.93
19.70 #######
27.24
==PAGE:251==
440
04/10/2022 10:48
49.57
32.96
116.43
168.39
69.53
57.40
51.72
114.15
125.73
233.03
144.65
61.60
94.35
168.27
22.60
36.01
24.71
20.81
31.76
139.85
54.62
167.71
19.72 #######
27.21
441
04/10/2022 10:48
48.99
32.60
117.49
171.83
70.15
57.95
51.24
111.60
123.64
212.04
148.41
62.80
93.33
165.82
22.49
36.25
24.67
20.69
31.87
137.78
54.45
166.95
19.71 #######
27.18
442
04/10/2022 10:48
48.97
32.52
118.72
174.28
70.35
58.06
50.79
109.61
122.72
204.44
150.16
63.29
92.21
162.05
22.44
36.41
24.71
20.80
32.04
135.77
54.10
164.12
19.70 #######
27.17
443
04/10/2022 10:48
48.95
32.23
120.03
174.48
70.55
57.91
50.35
106.81
121.47
197.30
152.30
63.77
91.96
164.67
22.50
36.55
24.79
20.75
32.15
133.67
54.03
165.06
19.76 #######
27.12
444
04/10/2022 10:48
48.58
32.05
121.03
173.30
70.46
57.88
50.07
105.29
121.84
201.05
151.90
63.61
91.07
163.36
22.50
36.84
24.85
20.84
32.06
131.56
53.92
164.30
19.79 #######
27.13
445
04/10/2022 10:48
48.46
31.94
122.04
173.43
70.65
57.54
49.94
103.55
121.54
200.32
152.34
63.86
90.35
165.11
22.50
37.00
24.91
20.82
31.92
129.64
53.89
165.70
19.82 #######
27.14
446
04/10/2022 10:48
48.39
31.84
123.44
170.32
70.14
56.94
49.47
101.78
121.49
219.89
149.73
63.38
89.88
166.37
22.36
37.11
24.94
20.84
31.95
127.92
53.88
168.74
19.86 #######
27.15
447
04/10/2022 10:48
48.20
31.92
124.47
167.27
69.42
56.04
49.97
102.44
124.23
233.69
145.86
62.67
90.93
172.33
22.43
37.02
24.94
20.82
31.95
126.96
54.24
174.34
19.90 #######
27.20
448
04/10/2022 10:48
48.06
31.94
124.76
160.57
68.61
55.17
50.65
105.19
128.73
240.32
140.72
61.60
91.78
180.62
22.36
37.00
24.94
20.76
31.74
126.94
54.60
177.70
19.91 #######
27.22
449
04/10/2022 10:48
47.87
31.80
125.40
152.65
67.34
54.01
51.71
107.48
132.13
237.29
135.37
60.62
91.64
186.74
22.33
36.87
24.88
20.78
31.74
126.59
55.11
181.56
19.94 #######
27.24
450
04/10/2022 10:48
48.43
31.83
125.76
147.52
66.24
53.04
51.97
108.31
134.17
232.27
131.26
59.77
91.28
187.09
22.29
36.91
24.85
20.96
31.50
125.83
55.00
180.65
19.88 #######
27.23
451
04/10/2022 10:48
47.99
31.85
126.55
148.99
66.20
53.31
51.28
105.89
131.01
212.22
133.32
59.86
89.82
179.75
22.33
37.13
24.89
21.03
31.48
124.22
54.92
175.86
19.85 #######
27.17
452
04/10/2022 10:48
47.45
31.59
126.91
149.63
66.49
53.74
50.12
103.58
128.29
188.70
136.23
60.61
88.44
174.72
22.29
37.23
24.91
21.06
31.45
122.64
55.20
171.72
19.83 #######
27.15
453
04/10/2022 10:48
47.19
31.37
127.29
150.24
66.46
54.01
49.11
100.88
126.02
173.16
138.99
60.73
87.08
170.22
22.22
37.40
24.88
20.93
31.38
121.10
55.32
168.36
19.86 #######
27.19
454
04/10/2022 10:48
46.83
31.31
128.29
147.74
66.13
53.73
49.01
99.35
126.12
185.05
139.28
60.56
86.56
169.51
22.26
37.63
24.86
20.83
31.46
119.65
55.50
169.23
19.92 #######
27.16
455
04/10/2022 10:48
46.96
31.42
128.87
147.14
65.80
53.12
48.31
97.34
124.68
184.42
140.07
60.58
85.27
166.62
22.41
37.64
24.89
20.80
31.58
118.09
55.27
166.59
19.95 #######
27.13
456
04/10/2022 10:48
47.01
31.58
128.98
145.79
65.36
53.19
48.32
95.53
123.81
188.39
140.01
60.39
84.74
164.33
22.41
37.50
24.90
20.80
31.57
116.52
55.37
166.05
19.98 #######
27.11
457
04/10/2022 10:48
46.83
31.51
129.68
143.75
64.49
52.53
47.97
94.09
122.86
192.45
138.51
59.88
83.46
159.87
22.33
37.58
24.79
20.72
31.45
115.14
55.42
164.38
19.99 #######
27.09
458
04/10/2022 10:48
46.37
31.43
129.73
142.53
64.00
52.38
47.52
92.91
121.80
187.49
137.67
59.65
82.56
157.74
22.33
37.67
24.79
20.65
31.53
113.62
55.36
162.72
20.03 #######
27.06
459
04/10/2022 10:48
46.62
31.53
130.14
141.13
63.46
51.96
46.33
91.65
120.60
186.24
137.23
59.23
82.42
155.86
22.37
37.70
24.81
20.62
31.57
112.61
55.20
162.73
20.10 #######
27.10
460
04/10/2022 10:48
46.30
31.54
130.76
139.04
62.72
51.17
45.84
90.64
119.66
191.32
135.70
58.61
82.17
153.38
22.34
37.84
24.81
20.59
31.67
111.47
55.22
161.55
20.14 #######
27.09
461
04/10/2022 10:48
46.25
31.59
130.65
138.25
62.58
50.69
45.14
89.61
118.09
183.07
136.45
58.54
81.76
149.87
22.46
38.06
24.88
20.58
31.75
110.23
55.09
159.55
20.22 #######
27.08
462
04/10/2022 10:48
46.36
31.79
130.32
134.59
61.75
50.09
45.26
89.29
118.14
189.42
133.28
57.65
82.85
151.95
22.44
37.84
24.85
20.56
31.77
109.58
55.08
161.40
20.29 #######
27.08
463
04/10/2022 10:48
45.94
31.73
129.87
129.95
60.81
49.40
45.82
89.50
120.00
202.61
128.89
56.88
83.46
153.86
22.43
37.71
24.78
20.51
31.75
109.00
55.14
164.39
20.35 #######
27.06
464
04/10/2022 10:48
45.88
31.87
129.23
126.23
60.00
48.71
45.53
88.89
119.87
206.27
126.48
55.95
83.59
154.42
22.59
37.72
24.76
20.48
32.05
108.26
55.12
165.82
20.41 #######
27.05
465
04/10/2022 10:48
45.81
31.84
128.54
123.44
59.26
48.00
45.20
88.19
119.84
202.39
124.03
55.48
83.27
155.68
22.59
37.69
24.76
20.50
32.05
107.51
55.15
165.30
20.40 #######
27.05
466
04/10/2022 10:48
45.81
31.80
128.18
119.82
58.57
47.39
45.47
88.04
120.43
200.67
121.65
54.98
82.75
154.21
22.50
37.58
24.71
20.45
31.94
106.70
54.80
164.57
20.43 #######
27.03
467
04/10/2022 10:48
45.64
31.66
127.46
116.61
57.85
46.77
45.62
87.86
120.80
200.86
119.19
54.40
82.21
157.93
22.42
37.42
24.63
20.41
31.74
106.36
54.86
165.51
20.41 #######
27.05
468
04/10/2022 10:49
44.99
31.55
126.86
114.26
57.02
45.92
44.81
87.36
119.75
189.34
118.55
53.90
80.98
154.45
22.38
37.50
24.57
20.42
31.64
105.42
54.57
161.83
20.44 #######
27.00
469
04/10/2022 10:49
44.78
31.46
126.61
114.40
56.94
45.60
44.67
85.87
117.39
172.25
121.22
53.99
79.46
151.27
22.38
37.56
24.54
20.38
31.53
104.43
54.15
158.25
20.41 #######
26.99
470
04/10/2022 10:49
44.55
31.41
126.07
114.01
56.83
45.40
44.36
85.05
116.16
166.00
122.68
54.30
79.05
149.54
22.41
37.55
24.48
20.37
31.43
103.62
54.10
156.40
20.46 #######
26.95
471
04/10/2022 10:49
44.25
31.28
125.48
113.07
56.38
44.81
44.08
84.06
115.13
162.93
123.01
53.77
77.81
146.82
22.44
37.61
24.48
20.34
31.30
102.80
53.95
153.71
20.43 #######
26.97
472
04/10/2022 10:49
44.28
31.30
124.87
111.15
55.76
44.37
44.36
83.93
115.03
167.17
121.93
53.47
77.54
145.79
22.51
37.52
24.52
20.41
31.31
102.20
53.84
154.48
20.42 #######
26.97
473
04/10/2022 10:49
44.50
31.33
123.89
108.05
54.78
43.67
43.97
84.32
115.31
175.61
118.90
52.70
77.50
145.60
22.50
37.46
24.49
20.38
31.39
101.65
54.12
155.95
20.42 #######
26.96
474
04/10/2022 10:49
44.50
31.18
123.37
106.70
53.86
42.99
43.74
83.93
114.74
184.03
116.35
51.74
76.91
144.61
22.49
37.51
24.53
20.33
31.42
101.10
54.28
156.69
20.45 #######
26.97
475
04/10/2022 10:49
44.52
31.32
122.79
104.69
52.97
42.26
43.10
83.71
114.32
189.67
113.56
50.97
76.78
146.00
22.54
37.30
24.49
20.30
31.55
101.01
54.51
155.83
20.48 #######
26.97
476
04/10/2022 10:49
44.25
31.35
122.28
102.05
52.28
41.50
42.47
84.02
114.57
180.66
112.40
50.57
75.86
146.71
22.55
37.24
24.41
20.28
31.50
100.42
54.41
154.95
20.49 #######
26.98
477
04/10/2022 10:49
43.89
31.36
121.35
99.13
51.45
40.95
42.58
84.36
114.23
177.17
110.18
49.87
75.60
147.23
22.56
37.02
24.37
20.27
31.41
100.19
54.37
154.49
20.48 #######
26.97
478
04/10/2022 10:49
44.10
31.20
120.20
96.26
50.65
40.37
42.67
84.17
114.35
178.76
107.13
49.20
74.51
143.80
22.56
36.88
24.27
20.23
31.31
99.70
54.22
153.39
20.46 #######
26.96
479
04/10/2022 10:49
44.13
31.09
119.83
95.57
50.17
39.92
42.36
83.34
112.89
175.70
106.59
48.78
73.79
141.14
22.53
36.73
24.18
20.20
31.50
99.07
54.30
151.74
20.48 #######
26.94
480
04/10/2022 10:49
43.72
31.00
119.88
96.30
50.07
39.62
42.29
82.69
110.76
163.35
109.14
48.85
73.18
136.45
22.60
36.72
24.10
20.16
31.43
98.26
53.94
147.88
20.47 #######
26.92
481
04/10/2022 10:49
43.87
30.94
119.57
97.39
50.47
39.88
41.68
81.62
109.17
154.77
110.89
48.93
72.74
132.76
22.64
36.66
24.09
20.17
31.45
97.53
53.76
145.33
20.45 #######
26.94
482
04/10/2022 10:49
43.54
30.75
118.85
99.39
50.77
39.64
40.74
80.48
107.21
143.27
111.25
49.33
72.29
129.42
22.65
36.57
24.07
20.15
31.45
96.74
53.65
143.12
20.46 #######
26.94
483
04/10/2022 10:49
44.22
30.89
118.25
96.40
50.25
39.34
40.70
80.42
108.33
152.87
108.67
49.31
72.02
130.46
22.69
36.44
24.06
20.16
31.24
96.12
53.82
143.12
20.49 #######
26.96
484
04/10/2022 10:49
43.88
30.79
117.29
94.02
49.64
38.78
40.08
79.98
107.90
160.49
106.23
48.62
72.19
131.47
22.62
36.21
23.98
20.12
31.31
95.63
53.85
144.11
20.50 #######
26.94
485
04/10/2022 10:49
43.53
30.69
116.47
92.54
48.95
38.22
40.04
80.11
108.31
161.63
104.58
47.95
71.52
130.03
22.57
36.12
23.95
20.09
31.10
94.97
53.69
143.10
20.44 #######
26.96
486
04/10/2022 10:49
43.34
30.64
115.51
90.16
48.29
37.76
39.76
79.30
107.66
162.71
102.60
47.36
71.08
130.51
22.55
36.14
23.88
20.08
31.15
94.20
53.68
143.13
20.44 #######
26.98
487
04/10/2022 10:49
42.94
30.58
114.91
88.35
47.66
37.15
38.88
78.31
107.10
163.37
101.01
46.78
70.50
131.71
22.56
36.03
23.87
20.03
30.98
93.31
53.76
143.28
20.42 #######
27.01
488
04/10/2022 10:49
43.08
30.53
113.99
86.61
47.05
36.73
38.51
77.84
108.19
168.78
98.78
46.05
70.23
130.68
22.54
35.83
23.78
20.00
31.10
92.70
53.79
144.19
20.39 #######
26.98
489
04/10/2022 10:49
43.53
30.52
113.24
84.43
46.40
36.20
38.39
78.45
108.63
169.67
96.14
45.52
71.22
131.70
22.53
35.72
23.72
20.02
31.07
92.40
53.66
144.90
20.37 #######
26.99
490
04/10/2022 10:49
43.48
30.29
112.46
83.59
45.92
35.75
38.40
77.97
107.83
169.14
94.21
44.89
70.68
128.62
22.53
35.58
23.64
19.97
31.15
91.91
53.71
143.37
20.34 #######
27.00
491
04/10/2022 10:49
43.51
30.25
112.74
84.08
45.52
35.42
38.80
77.14
106.45
163.50
95.27
44.66
69.96
126.37
22.58
35.44
23.59
19.97
31.18
91.40
53.68
140.87
20.30 #######
26.99
492
04/10/2022 10:49
43.58
30.12
112.33
83.50
45.26
35.13
38.60
77.22
106.21
158.03
95.36
44.57
69.68
126.59
22.67
35.37
23.59
19.96
31.21
90.89
54.41
140.09
20.31 #######
26.97
493
04/10/2022 10:49
43.25
29.97
111.88
83.88
45.03
34.97
38.57
76.63
105.49
156.66
95.46
44.31
69.51
125.15
22.65
35.23
23.51
19.96
31.19
90.32
54.54
139.49
20.32 #######
26.96
494
04/10/2022 10:49
43.16
29.93
111.85
83.81
44.73
34.73
37.98
75.70
104.26
153.81
95.92
44.10
68.68
123.06
22.70
35.11
23.47
19.92
31.15
89.72
54.59
137.35
20.32 #######
26.97
==PAGE:252==
495
04/10/2022 10:49
43.11
29.91
111.33
82.70
44.27
34.41
37.94
74.89
103.08
148.86
95.94
43.78
68.29
119.86
22.69
35.21
23.41
19.91
31.21
89.05
54.73
134.59
20.29 #######
26.96
496
04/10/2022 10:49
42.85
29.77
111.25
84.48
44.57
34.52
37.22
73.90
101.15
135.97
97.84
44.51
67.47
117.44
22.73
35.18
23.41
19.92
31.25
88.35
54.58
132.06
20.29 #######
26.97
497
04/10/2022 10:49
42.34
29.65
111.01
84.08
44.38
34.44
37.07
76.63
100.65
135.02
97.77
44.45
68.59
119.95
22.70
35.05
23.34
19.88
31.34
88.69
54.54
131.31
20.32 #######
26.96
498
04/10/2022 10:49
42.35
29.84
110.75
83.90
44.04
34.25
36.98
76.21
100.02
140.15
97.81
44.22
68.08
118.08
22.67
35.11
23.28
19.84
31.33
88.40
54.33
129.18
20.26 #######
26.95
499
04/10/2022 10:49
42.00
29.64
110.54
83.98
44.10
34.34
37.23
75.76
98.84
137.70
98.84
44.39
68.27
118.94
22.69
35.02
23.26
19.81
31.14
88.16
54.04
129.28
20.27 #######
26.94
500
04/10/2022 10:49
42.07
29.78
110.04
82.90
43.82
34.16
37.11
74.95
98.52
143.30
98.38
44.19
67.63
116.43
22.71
35.16
23.25
19.80
31.14
87.63
53.84
128.43
20.24 #######
26.97
501
04/10/2022 10:49
41.70
29.59
110.36
83.78
43.60
33.90
36.45
73.61
96.70
137.42
100.22
44.21
66.42
113.53
22.72
35.13
23.23
19.78
31.18
87.02
53.59
125.40
20.13 #######
26.99
502
04/10/2022 10:49
41.65
29.44
110.64
84.37
43.75
33.89
35.90
72.70
95.11
129.08
101.48
44.65
65.37
111.73
22.77
35.31
23.28
19.82
31.16
86.48
53.40
122.52
20.15 #######
27.00
503
04/10/2022 10:49
41.51
29.46
110.47
82.88
43.51
34.11
35.08
71.58
93.85
126.76
101.46
45.03
64.47
109.00
22.74
35.33
23.26
19.83
31.33
86.07
53.20
120.07
20.17 #######
27.03
504
04/10/2022 10:49
41.14
29.29
109.57
82.29
43.31
33.93
34.67
71.11
93.20
123.52
99.83
45.11
64.17
108.30
22.77
35.26
23.25
19.81
31.49
85.63
53.02
119.28
20.15 #######
27.01
505
04/10/2022 10:49
40.91
29.32
109.21
82.74
42.99
33.64
34.16
70.21
91.98
122.86
99.47
44.98
64.08
109.10
22.91
35.13
23.27
19.82
31.29
85.28
52.88
118.50
20.20 #######
27.03
506
04/10/2022 10:49
40.66
29.40
108.29
79.49
42.59
33.33
34.28
71.15
94.03
128.80
96.78
44.72
63.80
110.57
23.07
35.05
23.27
19.83
31.16
85.07
53.09
118.90
20.26 #######
26.98
507
04/10/2022 10:49
40.76
29.50
107.96
78.50
42.25
33.03
34.10
70.52
92.76
131.21
96.16
44.34
63.74
109.17
23.02
35.11
23.19
19.78
31.19
84.79
53.16
118.70
20.25 #######
26.98
508
04/10/2022 10:49
40.60
29.53
108.02
78.95
42.02
32.89
34.16
69.99
91.75
131.42
96.34
44.12
63.12
106.40
23.03
35.13
23.19
19.80
30.93
84.23
53.00
116.83
20.24 #######
26.99
509
04/10/2022 10:49
40.65
29.39
107.94
81.02
42.66
33.21
34.21
69.06
90.17
122.17
97.82
44.47
62.87
105.45
23.04
35.18
23.15
19.77
30.87
83.73
52.76
114.90
20.20 #######
26.96
510
04/10/2022 10:49
40.53
29.35
107.97
81.25
42.68
33.38
33.94
68.54
89.41
120.62
99.25
44.53
62.07
104.00
23.00
35.19
23.11
19.75
30.87
83.19
52.69
114.19
20.19 #######
26.96
511
04/10/2022 10:49
40.38
29.37
107.54
80.33
42.53
33.31
33.80
67.48
88.07
119.83
99.40
44.61
61.68
101.43
22.98
35.37
23.10
19.73
30.88
82.58
52.22
111.62
20.14 #######
26.96
512
04/10/2022 10:49
40.35
29.31
107.39
80.60
42.46
33.27
34.02
67.35
86.97
115.67
100.52
44.75
61.05
99.04
22.98
35.31
23.05
19.71
30.93
82.07
51.81
109.35
20.08 #######
26.96
513
04/10/2022 10:49
40.03
29.24
107.14
83.88
43.03
33.63
33.85
66.17
85.26
105.95
100.65
45.71
60.11
96.17
23.03
35.43
23.06
19.71
30.96
81.37
51.34
106.74
20.05 #######
26.94
514
04/10/2022 10:49
39.87
29.21
107.14
89.61
43.66
34.54
33.40
65.00
83.57
97.49
101.20
47.27
59.17
93.58
23.05
35.64
23.04
19.68
30.97
80.53
50.86
104.47
20.05 #######
26.93
515
04/10/2022 10:49
39.79
29.11
106.44
94.61
45.35
35.87
33.00
63.97
81.61
91.87
99.17
49.10
58.37
89.67
23.09
35.82
23.08
19.66
30.92
79.79
50.25
102.01
20.10 #######
26.92
516
04/10/2022 10:49
39.67
29.13
105.90
100.06
46.34
37.87
32.55
63.20
79.80
86.69
97.49
51.01
57.60
86.49
23.15
36.13
23.16
19.64
30.91
78.95
49.67
99.54
20.12 #######
26.92
517
04/10/2022 10:49
39.47
28.99
104.90
103.29
47.42
40.28
32.35
62.41
78.15
82.70
94.74
52.32
56.64
83.63
23.13
36.28
23.22
19.60
30.97
78.16
48.87
97.08
20.12 #######
26.91
518
04/10/2022 10:49
38.87
28.92
104.02
105.35
49.04
42.54
31.80
61.43
76.27
79.79
91.85
53.48
55.57
81.06
23.30
36.65
23.41
19.62
30.97
77.45
48.11
94.96
20.18 #######
26.93
519
04/10/2022 10:49
38.91
28.99
103.74
106.97
49.57
43.63
31.81
60.86
75.09
79.54
91.50
54.09
55.83
81.80
23.29
36.83
23.53
19.61
30.92
77.11
47.80
93.86
20.18 #######
26.91
520
04/10/2022 10:50
39.11
29.24
104.12
104.57
49.14
42.98
32.27
61.35
75.02
95.56
93.47
53.77
55.89
83.07
23.22
36.81
23.66
19.61
30.99
77.04
47.64
97.22
20.18 #######
26.92
521
04/10/2022 10:50
39.08
29.32
103.96
101.68
48.45
42.05
32.84
61.84
74.85
112.20
92.82
53.20
56.59
84.51
23.17
36.86
23.67
19.56
30.94
77.12
47.45
98.96
20.18 #######
26.93
522
04/10/2022 10:50
38.92
29.46
104.35
99.35
48.12
41.30
33.60
62.51
74.56
119.39
95.27
52.73
56.40
84.73
23.22
36.89
23.72
19.55
31.01
76.93
47.18
98.64
20.11 #######
26.90
523
04/10/2022 10:50
38.72
29.62
104.97
100.51
48.49
41.20
33.87
62.18
73.48
113.82
98.56
53.21
56.24
83.94
23.28
37.04
23.81
19.56
30.97
76.68
46.65
97.69
20.11 #######
26.89
524
04/10/2022 10:50
38.70
29.75
105.12
102.49
48.85
41.43
33.69
61.71
72.38
106.18
100.67
54.20
56.42
83.91
23.39
37.04
23.87
19.57
30.78
76.32
46.35
96.51
20.11 #######
26.89
525
04/10/2022 10:50
38.52
29.80
105.82
102.85
49.05
41.30
33.78
61.38
71.70
104.67
103.88
54.11
56.54
84.23
23.34
37.13
23.92
19.58
30.78
76.07
46.07
96.13
20.11 #######
26.88
526
04/10/2022 10:50
38.47
29.92
106.17
103.92
49.28
41.26
33.39
61.33
71.22
104.59
105.54
54.62
56.86
84.30
23.27
37.34
23.92
19.55
30.84
75.81
45.64
96.13
20.10 #######
26.88
527
04/10/2022 10:50
38.49
29.93
106.46
104.32
49.62
41.29
33.36
61.04
70.51
102.72
107.22
54.96
56.87
84.06
23.32
37.52
24.04
19.56
30.74
75.58
45.21
95.22
20.08 #######
26.87
528
04/10/2022 10:50
38.58
30.17
106.99
103.24
49.66
41.21
33.78
61.03
70.13
104.32
110.07
55.10
56.69
84.37
23.31
37.57
24.06
19.59
30.86
75.33
44.94
94.83
20.05 #######
26.87
529
04/10/2022 10:50
38.61
30.20
107.22
103.93
49.96
41.28
33.64
61.00
69.33
100.89
111.36
55.55
56.83
84.14
23.26
37.57
24.12
19.57
30.75
75.14
44.52
93.80
20.01 #######
26.89
530
04/10/2022 10:50
38.39
30.15
107.55
105.54
50.42
41.50
33.57
60.72
68.43
97.09
112.63
56.21
56.59
83.94
23.20
37.77
24.17
19.60
30.60
74.82
44.25
93.32
19.96 #######
26.89
531
04/10/2022 10:50
38.03
30.06
108.01
106.24
50.51
41.52
33.64
60.27
67.74
97.77
114.93
56.47
56.77
83.56
23.26
37.94
24.20
19.60
30.62
74.53
43.89
92.95
19.97 #######
26.89
532
04/10/2022 10:50
37.96
30.22
108.47
105.57
50.82
41.34
33.64
60.15
67.30
96.96
117.19
56.48
56.44
83.13
23.32
38.10
24.34
19.62
30.61
74.25
43.70
91.93
19.99 #######
26.87
533
04/10/2022 10:50
37.78
30.24
108.91
104.96
50.94
41.28
34.01
60.30
67.05
100.77
120.00
56.57
56.49
83.75
23.27
38.15
24.32
19.61
30.56
74.11
43.50
92.67
19.96 #######
26.87
534
04/10/2022 10:50
37.80
30.36
109.32
103.17
50.79
40.96
33.87
60.38
67.23
112.80
121.53
56.34
57.16
86.68
23.22
38.23
24.35
19.61
30.58
73.99
43.37
96.49
19.95 #######
26.88
535
04/10/2022 10:50
37.91
30.61
109.61
100.57
50.22
40.40
33.62
60.36
67.71
127.63
121.21
55.73
57.83
90.35
23.21
38.33
24.35
19.62
30.61
74.20
43.80
101.68
19.99 #######
26.89
536
04/10/2022 10:50
38.10
30.81
109.60
98.32
49.42
39.75
34.05
61.60
68.60
139.42
118.88
54.83
58.05
92.34
23.23
38.30
24.37
19.63
30.59
74.31
43.86
103.79
19.96 #######
26.90
537
04/10/2022 10:50
37.94
30.80
110.08
96.31
48.89
39.26
34.05
61.81
68.56
145.58
117.93
54.24
58.10
93.95
23.25
38.30
24.38
19.64
30.48
74.27
43.95
107.18
19.99 #######
26.92
538
04/10/2022 10:50
38.21
31.09
110.11
93.91
48.32
38.69
33.73
61.53
68.54
150.21
117.18
53.53
58.37
95.41
23.30
38.46
24.42
19.64
30.56
74.35
44.42
107.58
20.01 #######
26.93
539
04/10/2022 10:50
38.23
31.23
110.09
94.93
48.39
38.66
33.20
61.84
68.01
140.43
116.08
53.93
57.45
92.92
23.35
38.58
24.39
19.63
30.59
74.01
44.26
105.99
20.03 #######
26.91
540
04/10/2022 10:50
38.09
31.19
109.82
97.99
49.09
39.22
32.66
61.12
67.07
125.39
115.51
55.06
57.00
90.72
23.41
38.79
24.44
19.66
30.49
73.69
44.14
103.99
20.03 #######
26.90
541
04/10/2022 10:50
38.08
31.06
109.85
97.79
49.27
39.60
32.82
60.75
67.01
121.40
115.75
55.33
57.10
93.05
23.39
38.71
24.44
19.65
30.34
73.57
44.29
105.35
20.05 #######
26.89
542
04/10/2022 10:50
38.04
31.03
109.59
94.82
48.77
39.01
32.60
61.89
68.04
131.19
114.12
54.81
57.87
96.42
23.37
38.72
24.40
19.65
30.07
73.86
44.80
109.23
20.05 #######
26.89
543
04/10/2022 10:50
38.05
30.92
109.73
92.98
48.22
38.44
33.22
62.51
68.66
135.55
114.01
54.02
57.17
94.92
23.33
38.81
24.38
19.65
30.10
73.70
44.55
107.80
20.08 #######
26.89
544
04/10/2022 10:50
37.91
30.90
110.13
95.24
48.63
38.70
32.67
61.84
68.10
126.27
114.99
55.08
57.07
94.20
23.40
38.92
24.38
19.65
30.10
73.44
44.42
106.29
20.04 #######
26.89
545
04/10/2022 10:50
37.84
30.85
110.09
96.98
49.07
39.38
32.63
61.47
67.72
122.29
115.32
55.66
57.06
94.07
23.40
38.95
24.37
19.65
30.11
73.24
44.15
106.08
20.01 #######
26.88
546
04/10/2022 10:50
37.87
30.90
110.19
95.67
48.86
39.12
32.83
61.60
67.94
122.28
116.33
55.29
57.31
95.78
23.43
39.00
24.39
19.67
30.09
73.20
44.08
106.38
20.00 #######
26.90
547
04/10/2022 10:50
37.83
30.84
110.65
95.39
48.86
38.97
32.72
61.36
67.81
119.81
117.93
55.16
57.62
94.70
23.42
39.09
24.38
19.70
30.00
73.07
43.89
105.52
20.00 #######
26.87
548
04/10/2022 10:50
37.63
30.85
110.87
94.69
48.76
38.95
32.68
61.21
67.59
116.83
119.10
55.03
57.26
95.01
23.36
38.95
24.35
19.68
30.00
72.88
43.97
105.82
19.98 #######
26.87
549
04/10/2022 10:50
37.23
30.76
111.14
93.89
48.64
38.57
33.03
61.19
67.71
121.68
121.42
54.79
57.06
94.55
23.35
38.98
24.30
19.65
29.87
72.73
43.82
105.79
19.98 #######
26.87
==PAGE:253==
550
04/10/2022 10:50
37.08
30.70
111.55
93.52
48.70
38.40
33.01
60.95
67.43
119.58
123.11
54.82
56.92
93.94
23.33
38.91
24.26
19.65
29.87
72.61
43.70
105.02
19.98 #######
26.89
551
04/10/2022 10:50
37.37
30.77
111.97
93.17
48.98
38.34
32.95
60.69
67.33
116.83
125.33
54.90
56.58
92.53
23.38
39.06
24.31
19.68
29.84
72.34
43.62
104.11
19.97 #######
26.88
552
04/10/2022 10:50
37.32
30.75
112.10
94.29
49.19
38.58
32.59
60.17
66.50
110.25
125.63
55.31
56.32
92.18
23.42
39.19
24.32
19.67
29.75
72.10
43.44
103.68
20.01 #######
26.86
553
04/10/2022 10:50
37.10
30.69
112.17
94.28
49.21
38.59
32.94
60.39
67.07
117.86
125.52
55.33
56.35
93.72
23.48
39.21
24.34
19.67
29.56
72.00
43.34
105.56
20.03 #######
26.88
554
04/10/2022 10:50
37.24
30.82
112.38
92.76
48.84
38.20
33.28
60.83
67.66
129.51
125.46
54.88
57.10
94.25
23.45
39.25
24.32
19.67
29.65
71.96
43.37
107.59
20.00 #######
26.86
555
04/10/2022 10:50
37.07
30.78
112.59
93.33
48.92
37.98
33.11
60.50
67.58
129.23
126.34
54.89
56.54
93.50
23.53
39.29
24.42
19.71
29.68
71.63
43.20
106.62
20.04 #######
26.87
556
04/10/2022 10:50
37.18
30.98
112.88
92.57
48.94
37.79
33.00
60.91
67.94
131.35
127.43
54.71
57.57
97.76
23.62
39.16
24.40
19.71
29.66
71.87
43.34
109.96
20.05 #######
26.88
557
04/10/2022 10:50
37.30
31.18
112.62
89.69
48.19
37.26
32.89
61.75
69.28
147.15
124.18
53.97
58.85
101.73
23.68
38.95
24.37
19.68
29.67
71.90
43.47
114.87
20.09 #######
26.87
558
04/10/2022 10:50
37.48
31.35
112.10
87.22
47.51
36.68
33.13
62.23
70.91
159.58
120.24
53.06
58.95
104.35
23.62
38.87
24.31
19.67
29.54
71.91
43.49
116.76
20.10 #######
26.85
559
04/10/2022 10:50
37.14
31.33
112.42
87.41
47.13
36.37
32.77
61.87
70.78
156.33
120.43
52.65
58.68
103.36
23.69
38.89
24.30
19.67
29.50
71.75
43.62
116.56
20.04 #######
26.87
560
04/10/2022 10:50
36.91
31.24
112.58
89.77
47.40
36.55
32.39
61.22
69.94
141.82
120.98
53.83
57.90
102.24
23.65
39.02
24.29
19.67
29.44
71.40
43.66
114.70
20.01 #######
26.86
561
04/10/2022 10:50
36.73
31.03
112.73
90.39
47.75
36.91
32.28
60.87
69.53
132.53
120.76
54.29
57.38
101.50
23.66
39.18
24.25
19.66
29.49
71.18
43.72
113.52
19.99 #######
26.87
562
04/10/2022 10:50
36.81
30.97
113.08
90.37
47.56
36.91
32.21
60.50
69.39
128.70
121.70
54.04
56.71
100.55
23.67
39.08
24.21
19.66
29.44
70.99
43.81
112.85
19.95 #######
26.87
563
04/10/2022 10:50
36.30
30.58
113.15
92.83
47.89
37.20
31.70
59.85
68.56
120.75
120.64
54.48
55.20
96.20
23.54
39.44
24.16
19.55
29.30
70.56
43.74
109.70
19.85 #######
26.86
564
04/10/2022 10:50
35.81
30.07
111.84
95.70
49.35
40.01
30.90
58.83
67.13
108.05
115.46
55.54
53.84
92.64
23.48
39.53
24.07
19.47
29.16
70.12
43.48
106.77
19.77 #######
26.86
565
04/10/2022 10:50
35.74
30.03
112.14
99.20
49.96
40.40
30.94
58.39
66.77
101.28
115.73
57.13
53.37
92.54
23.36
39.44
24.01
19.42
29.00
69.87
43.27
105.10
19.66 #######
26.88
566
04/10/2022 10:50
35.59
29.95
112.71
98.63
50.09
40.14
31.03
58.16
66.84
102.81
118.06
56.94
52.93
92.62
23.27
39.38
24.02
19.36
28.89
69.56
43.07
103.91
19.60 #######
26.88
567
04/10/2022 10:50
35.39
29.92
112.60
98.55
50.61
40.36
30.70
57.45
66.26
101.93
118.33
57.24
52.09
91.18
23.34
39.48
23.98
19.30
28.74
69.20
42.85
101.79
19.49 #######
26.85
568
04/10/2022 10:50
35.02
29.84
112.81
103.61
51.21
40.80
30.28
57.03
65.63
97.41
118.08
58.82
51.59
88.87
23.38
39.53
24.01
19.25
28.69
68.93
42.71
99.97
19.42 #######
26.86
569
04/10/2022 10:50
34.73
29.65
112.69
108.08
51.96
41.40
30.25
56.67
64.78
93.74
117.37
60.45
51.44
86.83
23.46
39.66
24.06
19.23
28.65
68.64
42.58
98.25
19.37 #######
26.83
570
04/10/2022 10:50
34.55
29.64
112.54
110.07
52.35
41.88
30.05
56.30
64.00
91.01
116.35
61.40
51.08
84.85
23.54
40.02
24.17
19.25
28.80
68.34
42.21
96.59
19.44 #######
26.84
571
04/10/2022 10:51
34.72
29.66
111.97
115.36
53.44
43.36
29.70
55.83
63.03
86.66
113.78
63.04
50.36
83.73
23.61
40.20
24.28
19.28
28.81
68.09
41.97
94.79
19.46 #######
26.85
572
04/10/2022 10:51
34.70
29.72
111.93
118.83
53.96
44.06
29.45
55.45
62.48
84.06
112.50
64.82
50.17
82.36
23.59
40.43
24.30
19.26
28.77
67.78
41.64
93.05
19.44 #######
26.87
573
04/10/2022 10:51
34.71
29.80
111.91
123.71
54.63
45.00
29.10
55.20
61.58
81.74
110.76
66.43
49.44
80.58
23.68
40.69
24.40
19.27
28.90
67.56
41.20
91.39
19.49 #######
26.86
574
04/10/2022 10:51
34.80
30.01
112.36
127.76
55.26
45.67
29.10
54.93
61.19
81.67
111.30
68.12
49.34
80.08
23.64
40.98
24.41
19.18
28.77
67.27
41.00
89.86
19.42 #######
26.86
575
04/10/2022 10:51
34.57
29.68
111.83
130.42
56.00
46.49
28.45
54.28
60.29
79.05
108.70
69.11
48.94
77.74
23.56
41.39
24.50
19.17
28.72
66.89
40.67
87.70
19.39 #######
26.85
576
04/10/2022 10:51
34.37
29.77
111.67
133.10
56.65
47.71
28.10
53.84
59.58
77.23
107.52
70.08
48.75
77.74
23.64
41.84
24.59
19.16
28.63
66.64
40.49
86.51
19.41 #######
26.85
577
04/10/2022 10:51
34.13
29.65
111.12
133.54
57.19
48.53
27.72
53.32
58.74
75.44
105.12
70.97
48.13
75.46
23.64
42.23
24.69
19.14
28.53
66.15
40.13
84.68
19.44 #######
26.86
578
04/10/2022 10:51
34.10
29.56
110.79
133.58
58.01
49.81
27.75
52.94
57.96
74.71
103.97
71.20
47.96
74.47
23.68
42.62
24.90
19.15
28.50
65.82
39.79
83.51
19.51 #######
26.87
579
04/10/2022 10:51
33.94
29.58
110.40
136.60
58.65
50.59
27.68
52.63
57.19
72.44
102.22
71.96
47.66
73.16
23.67
42.98
25.03
19.14
28.57
65.60
39.58
81.57
19.51 #######
26.89
580
04/10/2022 10:51
33.68
29.39
110.10
139.88
59.35
51.76
27.69
52.30
56.38
70.31
100.24
72.50
47.28
71.84
23.73
43.19
25.18
19.17
28.64
65.40
39.39
79.93
19.57 #######
26.87
581
04/10/2022 10:51
33.68
29.46
110.17
139.33
59.34
52.17
27.52
52.40
55.99
72.73
101.21
72.55
47.83
73.18
23.89
43.19
25.40
19.21
28.85
65.38
39.31
81.72
19.66 #######
26.88
582
04/10/2022 10:51
33.82
29.91
111.31
135.82
58.34
50.74
27.45
52.89
56.56
94.81
102.79
71.68
48.77
76.18
24.18
43.54
25.77
19.30
29.16
65.48
39.24
86.56
19.80 #######
26.90
583
04/10/2022 10:51
34.71
30.78
111.26
128.38
57.08
49.19
27.28
55.15
59.81
117.40
100.84
70.33
53.57
87.00
24.79
43.74
26.21
19.41
29.20
66.24
39.63
89.18
19.96 #######
26.90
584
04/10/2022 10:51
35.77
31.53
110.12
121.04
55.89
48.04
27.11
58.72
65.05
112.39
97.10
68.31
58.24
100.07
25.40
43.91
26.61
19.51
29.46
67.19
40.44
88.03
20.23 #######
26.90
585
04/10/2022 10:51
37.69
32.77
108.94
114.69
54.74
47.07
26.90
62.56
68.07
101.72
93.47
66.43
64.19
115.07
26.07
44.12
26.95
19.66
29.81
69.19
41.31
86.08
20.51 #######
26.92
586
04/10/2022 10:51
42.78
34.77
107.77
109.10
53.43
45.79
26.74
69.31
68.91
91.25
90.09
64.74
70.50
132.54
26.66
44.29
27.20
19.71
31.03
72.34
42.27
83.88
20.65 #######
26.91
587
04/10/2022 10:51
49.54
35.77
106.58
103.96
52.20
44.56
26.56
78.46
68.76
82.35
86.86
63.10
75.80
149.66
27.11
44.42
27.43
19.79
32.07
76.96
43.10
81.87
20.71 #######
26.89
588
04/10/2022 10:51
54.07
36.63
105.39
99.21
50.98
43.45
26.40
90.87
68.62
75.02
83.70
61.95
81.73
164.30
27.69
44.49
27.66
19.90
33.51
82.29
44.00
80.00
20.82 #######
26.89
589
04/10/2022 10:51
55.63
37.37
104.26
94.76
49.84
42.34
26.69
108.62
68.62
69.28
81.01
60.74
85.79
177.79
28.12
44.59
27.83
20.02
34.01
87.95
44.87
78.14
21.02 #######
26.88
590
04/10/2022 10:51
56.28
38.59
103.23
90.55
48.73
41.37
27.68
115.99
68.95
64.56
78.35
59.61
87.42
186.26
28.59
44.67
27.95
20.09
34.16
91.55
45.72
76.32
21.17 #######
26.85
591
04/10/2022 10:51
57.95
40.42
102.25
86.85
47.73
40.34
27.50
117.26
69.86
60.84
75.80
58.42
88.14
193.18
29.05
44.68
28.02
20.18
34.32
93.99
46.51
74.48
21.30 #######
26.88
592
04/10/2022 10:51
59.58
41.50
101.26
83.33
46.81
39.47
27.29
118.38
70.50
57.63
73.46
57.42
87.95
197.22
29.47
44.71
28.09
20.25
34.36
95.78
47.20
72.85
21.41 #######
26.85
593
04/10/2022 10:51
60.42
41.68
100.27
79.81
45.94
38.67
27.39
120.29
70.97
55.04
71.23
56.41
87.80
203.27
29.54
44.69
28.13
20.35
34.54
97.59
47.85
71.38
21.54 #######
26.86
594
04/10/2022 10:51
61.39
41.53
99.32
76.56
45.12
37.87
27.63
124.34
71.14
52.82
69.04
55.26
88.48
206.52
29.79
44.62
28.11
20.40
35.03
99.76
48.38
69.84
21.59 #######
26.84
595
04/10/2022 10:51
62.08
41.50
98.38
73.64
44.26
36.96
29.15
128.71
71.19
50.84
67.03
54.09
90.30
207.89
29.98
44.54
28.12
20.42
34.95
102.11
48.89
68.28
21.62 #######
26.84
596
04/10/2022 10:51
63.42
41.25
97.42
70.80
43.58
36.16
30.17
132.80
71.17
49.32
65.25
53.12
92.88
208.26
30.30
44.42
28.12
20.45
35.22
104.55
49.36
66.96
21.66 #######
26.83
597
04/10/2022 10:51
64.98
41.46
96.47
68.34
42.88
35.43
31.26
137.69
71.05
47.98
63.51
52.05
94.21
208.24
30.63
44.29
28.09
20.53
36.10
106.76
49.74
65.63
21.72 #######
26.81
598
04/10/2022 10:51
65.68
41.77
95.61
66.03
42.25
34.85
31.25
141.44
70.95
46.76
61.85
51.00
95.63
207.59
30.93
44.16
28.09
20.57
36.86
108.61
50.11
64.49
21.72 #######
26.79
599
04/10/2022 10:51
67.74
42.29
94.73
63.77
41.66
34.23
31.15
142.83
70.89
45.64
60.36
50.20
95.39
206.68
31.32
44.00
28.05
20.65
37.13
109.69
50.42
63.20
21.82 #######
26.79
600
04/10/2022 10:51
67.98
42.84
93.89
61.66
41.15
33.79
30.91
141.94
70.93
44.69
58.87
49.30
95.01
205.91
31.57
43.82
28.00
20.63
37.35
110.24
50.72
62.15
21.86 #######
26.79
601
04/10/2022 10:51
70.15
43.50
93.12
59.65
40.65
33.41
30.62
141.14
70.95
43.79
57.41
48.64
94.87
205.11
31.81
43.72
27.94
20.68
37.79
110.67
50.98
61.06
21.91 #######
26.78
602
04/10/2022 10:51
71.88
44.14
92.31
57.72
40.18
32.87
30.03
138.53
71.05
43.14
56.10
47.84
93.96
203.20
32.05
43.59
27.86
20.69
37.88
110.00
51.30
60.10
21.91 #######
26.76
603
04/10/2022 10:51
70.88
44.56
91.49
55.94
39.75
32.26
29.63
134.04
72.20
42.63
54.91
47.10
93.00
201.54
32.07
43.38
27.73
20.72
37.78
109.08
51.55
59.20
21.90 #######
26.77
604
04/10/2022 10:51
71.64
44.88
90.72
54.26
39.28
31.76
29.90
130.97
72.57
42.21
53.69
46.50
92.56
200.53
32.25
43.20
27.66
20.73
38.53
108.54
51.72
58.31
21.82 #######
26.75
==PAGE:254==
605
04/10/2022 10:51
72.92
45.40
89.97
52.75
38.81
31.31
29.91
128.79
72.43
41.71
52.47
45.76
91.87
198.72
32.56
43.00
27.61
20.77
38.95
107.87
51.93
57.54
21.81 #######
26.74
606
04/10/2022 10:51
72.85
45.94
89.28
51.20
38.40
30.90
30.06
127.26
72.36
41.30
51.32
45.03
91.03
198.48
32.80
42.79
27.59
20.87
38.87
107.76
52.09
56.62
21.81 #######
26.71
607
04/10/2022 10:51
71.74
46.59
88.58
49.77
37.98
30.55
30.21
126.42
72.26
40.78
50.23
44.30
90.14
197.66
32.93
42.65
27.58
20.94
39.05
107.25
52.26
55.74
21.91 #######
26.71
608
04/10/2022 10:51
72.34
46.92
87.97
48.53
37.52
30.09
30.42
125.87
72.20
40.27
49.29
43.66
89.03
196.71
33.04
42.48
27.50
20.99
39.13
107.35
52.41
54.83
21.95 #######
26.71
609
04/10/2022 10:51
71.50
47.18
87.33
47.31
37.10
29.65
30.85
127.29
72.09
39.87
48.39
43.04
87.90
195.33
33.23
42.30
27.42
21.03
39.27
106.89
52.59
54.17
21.93 #######
26.72
610
04/10/2022 10:51
72.66
47.60
86.70
46.25
36.83
29.26
30.47
124.09
72.28
39.69
47.55
42.51
87.01
193.13
33.41
42.10
27.34
21.01
39.09
105.89
52.71
53.55
21.96 #######
26.71
611
04/10/2022 10:51
73.92
48.45
86.10
45.28
36.48
28.98
29.93
121.57
72.45
39.50
46.75
41.99
86.11
191.39
33.67
41.91
27.29
21.04
39.36
104.89
52.82
52.81
21.93 #######
26.70
612
04/10/2022 10:51
75.59
48.80
85.49
44.29
36.18
28.72
29.43
118.45
72.46
39.16
45.92
41.33
85.22
188.82
33.94
41.69
27.22
21.08
40.14
103.85
52.92
52.28
21.98 #######
26.70
613
04/10/2022 10:51
77.64
49.17
84.87
43.31
35.86
28.37
29.17
117.73
72.22
38.88
45.14
40.79
84.46
186.61
34.11
41.51
27.15
21.11
41.10
103.38
53.00
51.70
21.95 #######
26.70
614
04/10/2022 10:51
79.58
49.53
84.24
42.40
35.48
27.99
29.11
118.28
71.88
38.49
44.44
40.20
83.81
184.36
34.31
41.35
27.12
21.13
41.46
103.05
53.07
51.22
21.98 #######
26.69
615
04/10/2022 10:51
81.09
49.95
83.67
41.63
35.12
27.63
28.89
117.91
71.54
38.11
43.83
39.54
83.18
182.26
34.54
41.16
27.06
21.14
42.04
102.83
53.11
50.75
22.01 #######
26.69
616
04/10/2022 10:51
82.15
50.58
83.06
40.86
34.76
27.30
28.63
117.34
71.25
37.79
43.18
38.99
83.00
179.56
34.72
40.98
27.02
21.17
42.17
102.43
53.16
50.19
22.12 #######
26.67
617
04/10/2022 10:51
84.25
51.02
82.54
40.09
34.43
27.00
28.56
116.45
70.89
37.45
42.49
38.51
82.18
176.51
34.94
40.82
26.99
21.20
42.70
101.98
53.20
49.71
22.14 #######
26.68
618
04/10/2022 10:51
85.61
51.31
82.01
39.51
34.13
26.69
28.47
117.22
70.51
37.16
41.94
37.99
81.83
174.08
35.11
40.66
26.95
21.23
42.91
101.75
53.21
49.19
22.23 #######
26.70
619
04/10/2022 10:51
86.63
51.74
81.47
38.86
33.78
26.40
28.36
117.34
70.12
36.93
41.39
37.54
81.21
171.39
35.29
40.53
26.93
21.25
43.21
101.72
53.18
48.67
22.27 #######
26.68
620
04/10/2022 10:51
88.65
52.11
80.97
38.25
33.49
26.12
28.29
117.07
69.71
36.67
40.90
37.04
80.97
169.20
35.40
40.36
26.88
21.28
43.30
101.50
53.15
48.28
22.33 #######
26.66
621
04/10/2022 10:51
88.27
52.51
80.48
37.72
33.20
25.82
28.12
116.89
69.48
36.39
40.47
36.62
80.54
168.41
35.52
40.20
26.78
21.29
43.15
101.28
53.10
47.87
22.42 #######
26.68
622
04/10/2022 10:51
87.98
53.44
79.99
37.21
32.95
25.55
28.16
116.05
69.25
36.23
39.96
36.15
79.84
166.67
35.65
40.07
26.67
21.28
42.97
100.79
53.07
47.50
22.43 #######
26.67
623
04/10/2022 10:52
86.51
54.01
79.58
36.77
32.72
25.31
28.01
113.94
69.37
36.09
39.51
35.78
78.97
167.00
35.66
39.93
26.65
21.26
42.24
100.16
53.00
47.07
22.47 #######
26.67
624
04/10/2022 10:52
85.79
53.99
79.16
36.24
32.52
25.05
27.84
112.55
69.30
36.05
39.07
35.47
78.51
165.58
35.56
39.79
26.56
21.27
42.16
99.58
52.95
46.70
22.40 #######
26.65
625
04/10/2022 10:52
85.66
53.92
78.73
35.71
32.27
24.82
27.49
110.88
69.05
35.89
38.63
35.12
77.97
164.45
35.71
39.63
26.44
21.22
42.54
98.99
52.87
46.27
22.24 #######
26.64
626
04/10/2022 10:52
85.39
54.09
78.33
35.24
32.07
24.61
27.47
110.29
68.80
35.70
38.24
34.69
77.67
164.25
35.63
39.51
26.36
21.17
42.70
98.54
52.81
45.90
22.16 #######
26.62
627
04/10/2022 10:52
85.31
53.96
77.95
34.82
31.87
24.42
27.49
108.83
68.57
35.64
37.82
34.34
77.02
162.95
35.80
39.32
26.26
21.09
43.01
98.12
52.74
45.54
22.00 #######
26.63
628
04/10/2022 10:52
85.31
53.90
77.54
34.40
31.65
24.27
27.22
109.35
68.30
35.60
37.43
34.02
76.89
162.37
35.86
39.20
26.19
21.09
43.37
97.90
52.68
45.20
21.97 #######
26.62
629
04/10/2022 10:52
84.92
53.87
77.14
34.06
31.49
24.10
27.26
108.96
68.01
35.44
36.98
33.76
76.96
161.53
36.01
39.05
26.13
21.10
43.21
97.90
52.64
44.95
21.98 #######
26.61
630
04/10/2022 10:52
84.43
53.86
76.71
33.69
31.32
23.92
27.45
109.69
67.65
35.26
36.66
33.41
76.50
160.44
36.07
38.94
26.05
21.11
42.92
97.70
52.60
44.65
22.02 #######
26.61
631
04/10/2022 10:52
85.58
53.52
76.33
33.28
31.16
23.73
27.38
108.68
67.35
35.03
36.37
33.05
75.80
158.02
36.11
38.80
25.97
21.09
44.00
97.19
52.54
44.35
22.08 #######
26.61
632
04/10/2022 10:52
86.76
53.27
75.98
32.99
31.00
23.59
27.25
106.47
67.14
34.85
36.10
32.77
75.30
155.50
36.23
38.66
25.89
21.07
43.45
96.35
52.50
44.14
22.04 #######
26.60
633
04/10/2022 10:52
86.37
54.09
75.66
32.71
30.85
23.43
26.91
103.59
67.23
34.77
35.75
32.45
74.78
153.08
36.30
38.53
25.85
20.98
42.82
95.29
52.47
43.87
21.92 #######
26.58
634
04/10/2022 10:52
85.78
54.38
75.30
32.39
30.73
23.32
26.67
101.73
67.22
34.72
35.43
32.08
74.41
152.10
36.39
38.47
25.83
21.02
42.65
94.52
52.43
43.51
21.82 #######
26.59
635
04/10/2022 10:52
84.99
54.44
74.94
32.01
30.54
23.16
26.46
102.08
66.88
34.53
35.15
31.73
74.31
150.90
36.41
38.38
25.81
21.06
42.76
94.14
52.41
43.21
21.86 #######
26.59
636
04/10/2022 10:52
84.56
54.20
74.62
31.75
30.36
22.97
26.17
101.69
66.55
34.30
34.94
31.50
74.32
149.43
36.42
38.31
25.79
21.06
42.96
93.85
52.37
43.06
21.81 #######
26.58
637
04/10/2022 10:52
85.56
54.27
74.30
31.46
30.24
22.86
25.86
101.88
66.18
34.11
34.63
31.25
74.17
147.89
36.57
38.23
25.73
21.08
43.55
93.63
52.31
42.76
21.86 #######
26.58
638
04/10/2022 10:52
86.27
54.33
73.97
31.21
30.12
22.71
25.67
101.29
65.84
34.08
34.36
30.96
73.89
146.57
36.68
38.15
25.72
21.04
43.16
93.02
52.26
42.57
21.78 #######
26.58
639
04/10/2022 10:52
86.05
54.47
73.67
30.98
29.95
22.57
25.36
99.69
65.60
33.94
34.18
30.72
73.35
145.73
36.78
38.09
25.67
21.05
43.10
92.33
52.20
42.41
21.79 #######
26.58
640
04/10/2022 10:52
85.87
54.48
73.35
30.76
29.77
22.44
25.14
98.42
65.31
33.80
33.98
30.46
73.06
144.65
36.85
37.98
25.61
21.06
43.54
91.85
52.13
42.09
21.81 #######
26.58
641
04/10/2022 10:52
85.99
54.58
73.06
30.53
29.60
22.34
24.93
98.09
65.00
33.75
33.78
30.23
72.63
143.57
36.93
37.89
25.55
21.04
44.20
91.67
52.06
41.89
21.85 #######
26.56
642
04/10/2022 10:52
88.37
54.46
72.78
30.31
29.47
22.24
24.88
99.05
64.67
33.63
33.62
29.94
72.33
143.46
36.93
37.81
25.55
21.06
45.29
91.79
51.99
41.72
21.86 #######
26.56
643
04/10/2022 10:52
90.53
54.08
72.46
30.06
29.32
22.11
25.01
100.74
64.24
33.43
33.39
29.63
72.04
143.68
37.00
37.72
25.48
21.09
47.10
91.92
51.89
41.34
21.87 #######
26.56
644
04/10/2022 10:52
91.16
54.11
72.17
29.84
29.14
21.98
25.15
102.03
63.72
33.10
33.23
29.41
71.91
143.66
37.10
37.62
25.44
21.08
46.94
92.31
51.82
41.17
21.83 #######
26.55
645
04/10/2022 10:52
91.55
54.15
71.84
29.64
29.04
21.85
25.08
102.93
63.30
32.96
33.06
29.16
71.78
142.92
37.17
37.55
25.40
21.06
46.49
92.66
51.69
40.91
21.85 #######
26.56
646
04/10/2022 10:52
91.28
54.13
71.60
29.37
28.89
21.71
24.93
103.52
62.91
32.76
32.86
28.97
71.28
142.69
37.19
37.46
25.38
21.09
46.22
92.98
51.59
40.74
21.83 #######
26.55
647
04/10/2022 10:52
90.59
54.27
71.32
29.15
28.75
21.57
24.83
104.36
62.48
32.59
32.66
28.78
71.16
142.87
37.24
37.40
25.32
21.08
46.41
93.31
51.48
40.61
21.82 #######
26.54
648
04/10/2022 10:52
91.82
54.30
71.00
28.94
28.67
21.42
24.79
105.33
61.97
32.37
32.45
28.60
70.99
142.50
37.25
37.31
25.28
21.09
47.12
93.62
51.36
40.38
21.84 #######
26.56
649
04/10/2022 10:52
95.04
54.11
70.75
28.79
28.59
21.32
25.06
105.97
61.42
32.07
32.21
28.46
70.92
142.69
37.14
37.16
25.22
21.07
47.44
93.90
51.22
40.15
21.83 #######
26.54
650
04/10/2022 10:52
94.88
53.86
70.50
28.63
28.48
21.25
26.42
106.69
60.89
31.85
31.89
28.25
71.37
142.28
37.19
37.07
25.15
21.01
47.01
94.31
51.07
39.93
21.68 #######
26.54
651
04/10/2022 10:52
93.95
53.83
70.22
28.44
28.40
21.12
28.17
107.54
60.27
31.58
31.71
28.01
71.85
140.54
37.24
36.98
25.12
21.01
47.00
94.62
50.90
39.73
21.64 #######
26.53
652
04/10/2022 10:52
94.93
53.86
69.97
28.28
28.30
21.05
29.01
108.27
59.70
31.42
31.58
27.84
71.89
140.02
37.34
36.93
25.12
20.98
47.55
95.01
50.75
39.61
21.66 #######
26.52
653
04/10/2022 10:52
95.80
53.75
69.70
28.09
28.16
20.93
28.97
109.11
59.22
31.25
31.43
27.45
71.95
140.12
37.41
36.88
25.10
21.00
47.82
95.33
50.59
39.42
21.66 #######
26.52
654
04/10/2022 10:52
95.63
53.65
69.44
27.93
28.08
20.84
28.90
109.82
58.78
31.11
31.23
27.27
72.04
139.83
37.41
36.82
25.09
20.98
48.25
95.59
50.40
39.25
21.69 #######
26.52
655
04/10/2022 10:52
99.12
53.58
69.24
27.82
27.98
20.72
28.96
110.24
58.25
30.97
31.04
27.18
71.85
139.71
37.44
36.77
25.05
21.00
49.63
95.87
50.23
39.07
21.75 #######
26.51
656
04/10/2022 10:52
101.16
53.37
68.97
27.70
27.94
20.62
28.83
110.79
57.70
30.86
30.83
27.01
71.68
139.73
37.51
36.73
25.06
21.01
51.13
96.15
50.04
38.98
21.79 #######
26.51
657
04/10/2022 10:52
104.51
53.35
68.75
27.57
27.88
20.56
28.71
111.04
57.22
30.73
30.64
26.83
71.56
139.60
37.53
36.69
25.01
20.99
50.99
96.25
49.87
38.86
21.80 #######
26.51
658
04/10/2022 10:52
104.99
53.32
68.51
27.42
27.81
20.46
28.78
111.32
56.78
30.70
30.46
26.62
71.40
139.98
37.50
36.66
24.96
20.98
50.26
96.37
49.70
38.72
21.80 #######
26.51
659
04/10/2022 10:52
105.81
53.07
68.31
27.29
27.72
20.38
29.67
111.76
56.33
30.69
30.33
26.46
70.94
139.91
37.53
36.60
24.95
20.98
50.35
96.49
49.50
38.68
21.77 #######
26.50
==PAGE:255==
660
04/10/2022 10:52
104.40
53.06
68.08
27.19
27.62
20.34
29.56
111.07
55.99
30.76
30.24
26.36
70.42
138.20
37.60
36.58
24.91
20.97
49.88
96.18
49.31
38.53
21.68 #######
26.49
661
04/10/2022 10:52
101.97
53.71
67.85
27.07
27.53
20.26
29.14
108.93
55.76
30.90
30.16
26.25
69.75
136.11
37.64
36.54
24.88
20.95
48.99
95.51
49.15
38.47
21.70 #######
26.47
662
04/10/2022 10:52
99.45
54.41
67.63
26.98
27.44
20.21
28.62
106.07
55.71
31.10
30.13
26.21
69.16
134.20
37.67
36.51
24.87
20.95
48.02
94.54
49.02
38.42
21.75 #######
26.48
663
04/10/2022 10:52
97.30
54.60
67.45
26.91
27.35
20.15
28.18
102.60
55.59
31.18
30.03
26.13
68.14
133.10
37.76
36.47
24.86
20.93
47.27
93.50
48.86
38.35
21.77 #######
26.47
664
04/10/2022 10:52
96.32
54.48
67.23
26.79
27.25
20.08
27.64
100.06
55.49
31.27
29.98
26.02
67.66
131.34
37.77
36.46
24.83
20.93
46.88
92.56
48.76
38.25
21.86 #######
26.45
665
04/10/2022 10:52
95.04
54.39
67.04
26.73
27.15
20.05
27.33
98.70
55.32
31.25
29.90
25.83
67.22
129.90
37.83
36.44
24.81
20.91
46.59
91.85
48.62
38.14
21.85 #######
26.48
666
04/10/2022 10:52
94.38
54.32
66.87
26.63
27.09
19.99
27.14
97.98
55.13
31.37
29.79
25.72
66.85
128.95
37.84
36.44
24.79
20.90
46.25
91.12
48.52
38.00
21.86 #######
26.46
667
04/10/2022 10:52
92.85
54.49
66.67
26.57
27.00
19.95
26.87
96.70
54.99
31.42
29.70
25.65
66.73
128.38
37.90
36.42
24.78
20.90
45.51
90.48
48.44
37.91
21.83 #######
26.45
668
04/10/2022 10:52
91.82
54.57
66.48
26.47
26.94
19.92
26.48
95.55
54.86
31.35
29.66
25.58
66.18
127.49
37.96
36.40
24.74
20.90
45.05
89.78
48.37
37.83
21.80 #######
26.44
669
04/10/2022 10:52
91.31
54.66
66.32
26.42
26.89
19.81
26.26
93.29
54.81
31.34
29.62
25.49
65.59
126.27
38.00
36.36
24.71
20.90
44.76
88.98
48.29
37.83
21.84 #######
26.43
670
04/10/2022 10:52
90.33
55.15
66.16
26.34
26.84
19.74
26.06
91.55
54.83
31.24
29.52
25.39
65.28
125.92
38.05
36.36
24.71
20.90
44.61
88.30
48.26
37.78
21.93 #######
26.44
671
04/10/2022 10:52
89.49
55.47
65.96
26.24
26.76
19.69
25.75
90.61
54.70
31.24
29.43
25.31
65.04
125.13
38.08
36.33
24.69
20.88
44.42
87.60
48.20
37.69
21.93 #######
26.44
672
04/10/2022 10:52
88.85
55.89
65.80
26.16
26.71
19.61
25.40
89.33
54.57
31.21
29.35
25.26
64.76
124.09
38.09
36.31
24.68
20.87
44.42
86.93
48.16
37.56
21.93 #######
26.43
673
04/10/2022 10:52
88.22
56.06
65.60
26.04
26.66
19.54
25.41
89.39
54.40
31.13
29.28
25.19
64.18
123.78
38.17
36.27
24.68
20.89
44.57
86.57
48.10
37.42
21.91 #######
26.41
674
04/10/2022 10:52
86.74
55.98
65.42
25.94
26.56
19.47
25.28
90.16
54.21
30.98
29.19
25.09
64.07
123.46
38.17
36.24
24.68
20.90
44.32
86.29
48.05
37.30
21.89 #######
26.43
675
04/10/2022 10:53
86.30
56.20
65.23
25.84
26.48
19.45
25.24
90.49
54.04
30.71
29.13
25.00
64.17
123.57
38.18
36.22
24.63
20.91
44.40
86.16
48.00
37.19
21.98 #######
26.41
676
04/10/2022 10:53
86.06
55.81
65.06
25.80
26.43
19.38
25.22
91.27
53.83
30.47
29.14
24.91
63.97
123.22
38.23
36.18
24.64
20.89
45.04
86.12
47.96
37.21
21.94 #######
26.41
677
04/10/2022 10:53
85.42
56.03
64.84
25.80
26.34
19.33
25.28
92.58
53.65
30.39
29.08
24.82
64.28
123.44
38.30
36.16
24.60
20.86
44.96
86.47
47.89
37.09
21.82 #######
26.40
678
04/10/2022 10:53
84.31
55.94
64.66
25.75
26.28
19.28
25.28
93.29
53.49
30.28
29.00
24.74
64.01
123.12
38.27
36.13
24.56
20.83
44.42
86.53
47.84
37.06
21.87 #######
26.39
679
04/10/2022 10:53
83.76
56.09
64.51
25.70
26.21
19.26
25.14
92.51
53.38
30.36
28.90
24.71
63.57
122.18
38.16
36.10
24.53
20.80
43.80
86.26
47.78
36.98
21.83 #######
26.40
680
04/10/2022 10:53
83.13
56.51
64.34
25.65
26.23
19.29
24.98
90.35
53.57
30.46
28.81
24.61
62.91
120.03
38.20
36.07
24.48
20.74
42.82
85.71
47.78
36.89
21.82 #######
26.40
681
04/10/2022 10:53
82.58
57.23
64.19
25.66
26.22
19.30
24.66
87.87
54.08
30.78
28.78
24.52
62.17
118.10
38.16
36.03
24.45
20.67
42.37
85.04
47.81
36.91
21.68 #######
26.39
682
04/10/2022 10:53
82.70
57.70
64.08
25.66
26.23
19.32
24.31
85.68
54.67
31.23
28.73
24.43
61.91
117.54
38.11
35.98
24.46
20.63
41.84
84.38
47.81
36.91
21.59 #######
26.39
683
04/10/2022 10:53
82.51
58.40
63.93
25.65
26.18
19.29
24.21
85.03
54.63
31.30
28.63
24.30
61.79
116.93
38.19
35.92
24.37
20.62
41.83
83.91
47.82
36.88
21.41 #######
26.39
684
04/10/2022 10:53
81.05
58.61
63.78
25.61
26.11
19.29
24.07
86.01
54.46
31.23
28.57
24.22
61.28
117.24
38.04
35.90
24.37
20.58
41.44
83.81
47.88
36.79
21.23 #######
26.38
685
04/10/2022 10:53
79.57
58.22
63.66
25.54
26.07
19.31
24.29
85.89
54.49
31.14
28.52
24.21
60.73
117.26
37.93
35.85
24.35
20.60
41.23
83.58
47.88
36.83
21.23 #######
26.36
686
04/10/2022 10:53
79.64
58.05
63.53
25.47
26.06
19.31
25.07
86.15
54.49
31.00
28.40
24.09
60.53
117.28
37.94
35.79
24.28
20.57
41.56
83.56
47.90
36.69
21.16 #######
26.36
687
04/10/2022 10:53
79.47
58.09
63.36
25.45
26.04
19.32
25.36
86.51
54.42
30.90
28.36
23.89
60.22
117.17
37.92
35.76
24.25
20.53
42.05
83.50
47.93
36.63
21.07 #######
26.35
688
04/10/2022 10:53
78.87
58.57
63.24
25.46
26.04
19.34
25.11
86.78
54.36
30.81
28.28
23.86
59.87
117.42
37.94
35.71
24.24
20.54
42.04
83.60
47.92
36.54
21.23 #######
26.35
689
04/10/2022 10:53
78.72
59.14
63.09
25.43
26.00
19.29
25.08
86.97
54.25
30.72
28.24
23.81
59.81
117.74
38.00
35.67
24.23
20.53
41.74
83.75
47.92
36.52
21.29 #######
26.34
690
04/10/2022 10:53
78.48
58.55
62.97
25.35
25.98
19.25
25.02
88.12
54.09
30.57
28.24
23.73
59.96
117.74
38.12
35.65
24.25
20.53
42.00
83.93
47.91
36.44
21.30 #######
26.36
691
04/10/2022 10:53
78.77
58.98
62.84
25.32
25.98
19.23
24.96
88.96
53.93
30.35
28.21
23.63
60.36
118.62
38.10
35.61
24.25
20.55
42.37
84.33
47.92
36.28
21.34 #######
26.36
692
04/10/2022 10:53
78.94
59.09
62.71
25.26
25.96
19.22
25.13
89.98
53.74
30.09
28.07
23.56
60.31
118.34
38.10
35.59
24.24
20.58
42.54
84.52
47.88
36.24
21.45 #######
26.36
693
04/10/2022 10:53
79.07
59.51
62.55
25.19
25.94
19.20
25.11
90.08
53.57
29.90
28.01
23.48
60.33
117.97
38.19
35.58
24.24
20.59
42.45
84.58
47.83
36.16
21.41 #######
26.36
694
04/10/2022 10:53
78.56
59.81
62.44
25.18
25.90
19.16
25.10
90.45
53.36
29.70
27.98
23.42
60.09
117.60
38.24
35.57
24.22
20.55
42.06
84.69
47.78
35.96
21.41 #######
26.35
695
04/10/2022 10:53
78.42
59.91
62.26
25.13
25.88
19.18
25.02
90.79
53.13
29.60
27.85
23.34
60.34
118.50
38.28
35.54
24.21
20.55
42.23
84.95
47.70
35.80
21.43 #######
26.36
696
04/10/2022 10:53
78.34
60.06
62.18
25.10
25.90
19.16
25.03
91.82
52.79
29.46
27.76
23.26
60.48
118.51
38.33
35.53
24.23
20.56
42.65
85.41
47.62
35.75
21.53 #######
26.37
697
04/10/2022 10:53
79.90
59.72
62.02
25.05
25.82
19.09
25.35
93.14
52.37
29.35
27.67
23.19
60.87
118.61
38.38
35.50
24.22
20.58
42.91
85.99
47.54
35.72
21.56 #######
26.35
698
04/10/2022 10:53
80.10
59.25
61.94
25.01
25.74
19.00
25.74
94.42
51.99
29.21
27.56
23.08
61.03
118.90
38.40
35.48
24.23
20.58
43.09
86.47
47.45
35.66
21.56 #######
26.36
699
04/10/2022 10:53
80.73
58.94
61.82
24.94
25.73
18.92
25.91
95.50
51.62
28.96
27.51
23.03
61.11
119.60
38.46
35.46
24.25
20.64
43.83
86.90
47.35
35.52
21.48 #######
26.35
700
04/10/2022 10:53
80.57
58.96
61.68
24.86
25.72
18.88
26.05
96.34
51.31
28.86
27.40
22.96
60.99
120.37
38.49
35.45
24.25
20.60
43.28
87.16
47.22
35.42
21.50 #######
26.34
701
04/10/2022 10:53
79.82
58.89
61.52
24.82
25.67
18.81
25.90
96.56
51.10
28.89
27.44
22.95
61.12
120.22
38.50
35.43
24.25
20.58
43.30
87.28
47.12
35.37
21.52 #######
26.33
702
04/10/2022 10:53
79.68
59.07
61.39
24.78
25.65
18.82
25.76
96.20
50.93
28.91
27.39
22.88
61.20
120.01
38.50
35.42
24.25
20.60
43.40
87.42
46.99
35.28
21.52 #######
26.34
703
04/10/2022 10:53
80.18
58.87
61.27
24.79
25.61
18.84
25.74
95.70
50.73
28.96
27.43
22.84
61.16
118.77
38.53
35.40
24.25
20.61
43.90
87.17
46.87
35.19
21.58 #######
26.34
704
04/10/2022 10:53
79.27
59.26
61.13
24.85
25.58
18.84
25.48
94.32
50.59
29.10
27.41
22.80
61.40
117.69
38.55
35.38
24.21
20.60
43.81
86.77
46.76
35.17
21.52 #######
26.31
705
04/10/2022 10:53
79.33
59.55
60.99
24.85
25.55
18.84
25.29
93.38
50.46
29.17
27.43
22.76
61.22
116.73
38.56
35.35
24.26
20.59
43.90
86.42
46.64
35.13
21.34 #######
26.32
706
04/10/2022 10:53
78.72
59.16
60.85
24.88
25.52
18.88
25.13
91.78
50.38
29.31
27.43
22.76
61.29
115.41
38.57
35.33
24.25
20.63
43.39
85.87
46.54
35.04
21.26 #######
26.32
707
04/10/2022 10:53
78.34
59.25
60.75
24.87
25.49
18.88
24.93
89.93
50.35
29.39
27.43
22.73
60.81
114.74
38.56
35.37
24.23
20.60
43.08
85.30
46.47
34.99
21.38 #######
26.32
708
04/10/2022 10:53
77.19
58.85
60.63
24.86
25.44
18.85
24.89
88.66
50.36
29.44
27.42
22.58
60.37
113.93
38.43
35.35
24.20
20.60
42.58
84.70
46.36
34.94
21.45 #######
26.32
709
04/10/2022 10:53
76.38
58.93
60.55
24.83
25.40
18.82
24.88
86.97
50.50
29.51
27.41
22.53
59.49
113.18
38.50
35.32
24.15
20.60
42.05
84.05
46.32
34.99
21.38 #######
26.30
710
04/10/2022 10:53
75.37
59.14
60.43
24.87
25.37
18.81
24.88
86.09
50.55
29.51
27.40
22.51
58.94
112.51
38.47
35.31
24.13
20.57
42.01
83.55
46.24
34.93
21.27 #######
26.31
711
04/10/2022 10:53
74.26
59.31
60.32
24.86
25.33
18.82
24.68
85.52
50.48
29.57
27.38
22.52
58.50
111.85
38.34
35.27
24.14
20.55
42.05
83.14
46.21
34.92
21.22 #######
26.30
712
04/10/2022 10:53
75.06
59.29
60.23
24.86
25.30
18.85
24.70
85.11
50.43
29.54
27.36
22.44
58.80
111.28
38.36
35.20
24.10
20.52
42.37
82.78
46.16
34.93
21.17 #######
26.30
713
04/10/2022 10:53
75.30
59.21
60.08
24.85
25.28
18.82
24.78
84.71
50.32
29.50
27.36
22.39
58.42
110.19
38.39
35.17
24.09
20.51
42.27
82.30
46.11
34.84
21.16 #######
26.31
714
04/10/2022 10:53
75.33
59.63
59.99
24.81
25.27
18.83
24.71
83.36
50.31
29.49
27.31
22.35
58.13
108.95
38.43
35.15
24.09
20.48
41.72
81.78
46.10
34.85
21.18 #######
26.29
==PAGE:256==
715
04/10/2022 10:53
75.69
59.99
59.90
24.78
25.19
18.79
24.59
82.36
50.26
29.48
27.31
22.32
58.04
108.24
38.43
35.13
24.08
20.51
41.48
81.35
46.07
34.79
21.08 #######
26.30
716
04/10/2022 10:53
75.40
59.84
59.81
24.73
25.18
18.74
24.46
81.97
50.19
29.52
27.28
22.34
57.86
107.37
38.30
35.13
24.07
20.49
41.90
80.87
46.03
34.73
21.10 #######
26.27
717
04/10/2022 10:53
75.20
59.54
59.70
24.66
25.15
18.74
24.39
80.66
50.20
29.62
27.28
22.36
57.73
106.44
38.19
35.09
24.03
20.45
41.78
80.30
46.01
34.80
21.03 #######
26.30
718
04/10/2022 10:53
74.88
59.30
59.57
24.65
25.15
18.76
24.25
79.20
50.31
29.74
27.30
22.39
57.35
105.07
38.17
34.99
24.00
20.44
41.99
79.70
46.00
34.83
20.93 #######
26.29
719
04/10/2022 10:53
75.11
59.14
59.48
24.67
25.14
18.77
24.07
77.39
50.57
29.73
27.32
22.41
57.00
104.05
38.18
34.96
24.00
20.43
41.60
79.01
45.98
34.82
20.85 #######
26.28
720
04/10/2022 10:53
75.25
60.00
59.41
24.71
25.16
18.74
23.91
75.75
50.75
29.70
27.30
22.38
56.89
103.27
38.20
34.97
24.04
20.44
41.15
78.36
45.99
34.81
20.87 #######
26.27
721
04/10/2022 10:53
76.06
61.35
59.33
24.72
25.14
18.71
23.71
74.49
50.82
29.73
27.28
22.35
56.98
102.45
38.25
34.97
24.00
20.44
41.18
77.71
46.02
34.80
20.97 #######
26.27
722
04/10/2022 10:53
76.52
61.05
59.28
24.66
25.14
18.70
23.60
73.52
50.82
29.80
27.27
22.34
56.66
101.95
38.31
34.99
24.00
20.44
41.27
77.08
46.03
34.77
20.96 #######
26.26
723
04/10/2022 10:53
76.61
61.58
59.17
24.67
25.09
18.69
23.72
72.50
50.82
29.78
27.25
22.34
56.55
101.32
38.32
34.97
23.97
20.46
41.14
76.54
46.05
34.74
20.99 #######
26.27
724
04/10/2022 10:53
76.43
60.92
59.08
24.63
25.06
18.71
23.71
72.52
50.83
29.81
27.19
22.35
56.42
101.27
38.13
34.97
23.98
20.47
41.45
76.45
46.09
34.67
21.07 #######
26.28
725
04/10/2022 10:53
76.58
59.85
59.00
24.58
25.05
18.74
23.94
73.40
50.83
29.68
27.14
22.35
56.19
100.64
38.10
34.95
23.96
20.42
41.90
76.20
46.10
34.72
21.07 #######
26.26
726
04/10/2022 10:54
76.59
59.46
58.92
24.55
25.02
18.73
23.71
72.35
50.99
29.68
27.15
22.30
55.94
99.64
38.22
34.92
23.96
20.41
41.84
75.82
46.12
34.62
20.95 #######
26.28
727
04/10/2022 10:54
76.34
60.75
58.82
24.54
24.99
18.77
23.56
71.38
51.22
29.68
27.15
22.31
55.81
98.95
38.21
34.89
23.94
20.40
41.58
75.37
46.13
34.63
20.87 #######
26.27
728
04/10/2022 10:54
76.33
62.14
58.67
24.52
24.97
18.82
23.47
70.17
51.38
29.61
27.14
22.29
55.72
98.28
38.00
34.84
23.90
20.37
41.18
74.94
46.16
34.68
20.94 #######
26.26
729
04/10/2022 10:54
76.20
62.47
58.56
24.49
24.94
18.83
23.37
69.52
51.45
29.62
27.11
22.25
55.67
97.86
37.88
34.81
23.90
20.35
41.01
74.56
46.19
34.62
20.93 #######
26.25
730
04/10/2022 10:54
76.59
62.57
58.48
24.48
24.91
18.82
23.48
69.64
51.35
29.60
27.07
22.25
55.49
97.67
37.88
34.73
23.90
20.37
40.98
74.40
46.24
34.56
20.90 #######
26.26
731
04/10/2022 10:54
75.91
63.19
58.38
24.47
24.81
18.77
23.48
69.43
51.30
29.57
27.05
22.22
55.23
97.84
37.87
34.59
23.85
20.35
40.53
74.16
46.28
34.58
20.85 #######
26.25
732
04/10/2022 10:54
74.77
62.33
58.30
24.44
24.76
18.72
23.70
69.23
51.32
29.49
27.02
22.18
54.90
97.38
37.78
34.57
23.85
20.40
40.22
74.02
46.28
34.52
20.76 #######
26.24
733
04/10/2022 10:54
72.52
61.18
58.23
24.46
24.80
18.74
23.80
69.10
51.43
29.42
26.97
22.17
54.20
96.55
37.81
34.48
23.78
20.32
39.47
73.79
46.24
34.46
20.58 #######
26.25
734
04/10/2022 10:54
71.22
60.43
58.17
24.77
24.80
18.79
23.84
68.33
51.98
29.69
26.97
22.16
53.91
96.32
37.73
34.45
23.66
20.24
39.19
73.54
46.22
34.62
20.57 #######
26.22
735
04/10/2022 10:54
70.33
60.92
58.14
24.85
24.84
18.79
23.82
68.17
52.25
30.52
26.98
22.13
53.66
95.84
37.72
34.41
23.69
20.22
38.89
73.28
46.28
34.78
20.63 #######
26.23
736
04/10/2022 10:54
69.86
62.07
58.05
24.87
24.85
18.74
23.62
67.40
52.41
30.64
27.02
22.07
53.40
95.27
37.83
34.39
23.70
20.22
39.16
72.94
46.37
34.77
20.64 #######
26.23
737
04/10/2022 10:54
69.86
62.65
57.97
24.83
24.81
18.73
23.64
67.17
52.43
30.43
26.99
21.99
53.33
94.43
37.86
34.45
23.73
20.22
39.41
72.68
46.45
34.70
20.59 #######
26.21
738
04/10/2022 10:54
69.71
64.48
57.93
24.81
24.82
18.72
23.51
66.20
52.70
30.24
26.97
21.95
53.29
94.27
37.89
34.44
23.71
20.22
39.36
72.42
46.55
34.71
20.60 #######
26.23
739
04/10/2022 10:54
69.40
64.24
57.83
24.82
24.82
18.71
23.54
66.65
52.78
30.08
26.97
21.94
53.43
94.26
37.96
34.44
23.66
20.20
39.39
72.40
46.61
34.64
20.67 #######
26.23
740
04/10/2022 10:54
69.94
64.68
57.77
24.81
24.81
18.69
23.44
66.54
52.70
29.92
26.92
21.95
53.33
93.49
37.98
34.45
23.69
20.20
39.48
72.14
46.69
34.63
20.63 #######
26.21
741
04/10/2022 10:54
70.00
66.02
57.70
24.82
24.82
18.72
23.33
65.70
53.09
30.00
26.91
21.93
52.95
92.32
38.01
34.45
23.68
20.21
39.57
71.79
46.76
34.67
20.68 #######
26.20
742
04/10/2022 10:54
69.02
68.02
57.66
24.82
24.85
18.76
23.30
64.85
53.65
30.19
26.90
21.94
52.70
91.10
38.16
34.45
23.70
20.22
39.16
71.38
46.86
34.69
20.77 #######
26.24
743
04/10/2022 10:54
68.68
69.81
57.59
24.81
24.83
18.74
23.18
64.18
54.12
30.28
26.82
21.91
52.70
90.88
38.15
34.42
23.69
20.24
39.26
71.06
46.93
34.62
21.01 #######
26.22
744
04/10/2022 10:54
68.66
68.47
57.48
24.85
24.81
18.75
23.30
65.00
54.02
30.20
26.81
21.88
52.92
91.13
38.12
34.39
23.69
20.20
39.89
71.29
46.97
34.63
21.01 #######
26.22
745
04/10/2022 10:54
69.25
67.21
57.36
24.84
24.75
18.75
23.50
66.13
53.79
29.99
26.78
21.89
53.00
91.05
38.08
34.36
23.65
20.19
40.01
71.25
47.06
34.51
21.01 #######
26.23
746
04/10/2022 10:54
69.63
67.74
57.25
24.79
24.70
18.74
23.48
66.15
53.67
29.73
26.79
21.89
53.10
91.59
38.15
34.34
23.62
20.22
39.76
71.36
47.14
34.54
21.04 #######
26.22
747
04/10/2022 10:54
69.76
67.31
57.17
24.74
24.67
18.68
23.63
67.01
53.57
29.60
26.79
21.83
53.18
92.23
38.13
34.35
23.65
20.22
40.20
71.80
47.17
34.47
21.11 #######
26.23
748
04/10/2022 10:54
70.16
67.61
57.12
24.64
24.68
18.69
23.59
68.79
53.33
29.35
26.69
21.79
53.27
94.57
38.21
34.36
23.70
20.22
40.51
72.55
47.21
34.39
21.20 #######
26.22
749
04/10/2022 10:54
70.70
67.03
57.03
24.60
24.68
18.68
23.56
71.18
52.98
29.07
26.60
21.70
53.22
97.12
38.28
34.35
23.69
20.27
41.14
73.34
47.21
34.24
21.14 #######
26.22
750
04/10/2022 10:54
71.49
66.00
56.97
24.63
24.68
18.68
23.66
73.02
52.68
28.81
26.51
21.67
53.13
98.60
38.27
34.36
23.71
20.26
41.75
73.95
47.19
34.30
21.18 #######
26.22
751
04/10/2022 10:54
71.60
65.59
56.87
24.63
24.69
18.68
23.67
74.31
52.40
28.62
26.46
21.67
53.20
98.25
38.30
34.37
23.70
20.25
41.61
74.33
47.15
34.15
21.27 #######
26.23
752
04/10/2022 10:54
70.85
65.71
56.79
24.65
24.71
18.70
23.65
73.63
52.26
28.59
26.51
21.67
52.85
97.79
38.41
34.36
23.70
20.28
41.17
74.45
47.10
34.09
21.24 #######
26.23
753
04/10/2022 10:54
69.62
65.25
56.70
24.65
24.66
18.70
23.72
74.03
52.12
28.59
26.51
21.69
52.65
98.41
38.19
34.33
23.74
20.27
40.50
74.79
47.03
34.04
21.42 #######
26.21
754
04/10/2022 10:54
69.91
64.71
56.61
24.61
24.62
18.69
23.81
74.88
51.94
28.68
26.48
21.67
52.45
99.05
38.28
34.35
23.68
20.27
40.48
75.18
46.94
33.97
21.34 #######
26.23
755
04/10/2022 10:54
70.16
64.75
56.52
24.59
24.56
18.70
23.78
75.98
51.77
28.66
26.47
21.66
52.62
100.54
38.32
34.31
23.69
20.26
40.33
75.59
46.85
33.91
21.38 #######
26.23
756
04/10/2022 10:54
70.44
64.57
56.42
24.57
24.51
18.71
23.83
76.70
51.58
28.61
26.49
21.62
52.83
101.58
38.27
34.30
23.70
20.29
41.17
76.01
46.75
33.81
21.34 #######
26.22
757
04/10/2022 10:54
70.78
64.78
56.31
24.53
24.52
18.69
23.87
77.00
51.33
28.58
26.48
21.62
52.96
101.15
38.36
34.29
23.73
20.30
41.32
76.16
46.63
33.74
21.41 #######
26.21
758
04/10/2022 10:54
71.53
65.16
56.24
24.49
24.49
18.70
23.80
76.52
51.21
28.61
26.50
21.64
52.84
100.56
38.43
34.29
23.72
20.26
41.19
76.00
46.56
33.64
21.34 #######
26.20
759
04/10/2022 10:54
71.21
65.86
56.16
24.44
24.49
18.73
23.69
75.56
51.13
28.55
26.45
21.59
52.81
100.01
38.42
34.27
23.71
20.27
41.06
75.83
46.47
33.58
21.39 #######
26.20
760
04/10/2022 10:54
70.90
66.33
56.02
24.39
24.44
18.71
23.77
74.95
51.03
28.56
26.42
21.51
52.79
99.14
38.44
34.27
23.71
20.28
41.04
75.55
46.38
33.54
21.31 #######
26.20
761
04/10/2022 10:54
71.02
67.81
55.93
24.36
24.40
18.75
23.65
74.21
50.85
28.57
26.38
21.50
52.56
98.28
38.51
34.26
23.68
20.26
40.37
75.23
46.30
33.46
21.33 #######
26.21
762
04/10/2022 10:54
70.88
69.09
55.86
24.37
24.39
18.78
23.56
73.08
50.78
28.56
26.37
21.47
52.35
97.19
38.60
34.28
23.70
20.30
40.13
74.82
46.21
33.48
21.43 #######
26.19
763
04/10/2022 10:54
70.87
70.09
55.83
24.34
24.38
18.78
23.44
71.87
50.93
28.70
26.35
21.48
52.32
96.11
38.61
34.29
23.71
20.30
40.11
74.39
46.14
33.46
21.58 #######
26.19
764
04/10/2022 10:54
71.17
71.48
55.79
24.38
24.38
18.77
23.37
70.73
50.93
28.82
26.32
21.51
52.17
94.50
38.69
34.26
23.73
20.33
39.87
73.90
46.08
33.42
21.63 #######
26.20
765
04/10/2022 10:54
71.68
71.61
55.73
24.34
24.34
18.73
23.30
69.64
51.28
29.09
26.32
21.51
52.04
93.51
38.68
34.25
23.71
20.30
40.10
73.33
46.06
33.41
21.68 #######
26.19
766
04/10/2022 10:54
71.81
72.41
55.67
24.37
24.37
18.75
23.14
68.39
51.48
29.13
26.31
21.53
52.04
92.37
38.70
34.24
23.67
20.29
40.19
72.75
46.07
33.38
21.56 #######
26.18
767
04/10/2022 10:54
72.12
72.62
55.61
24.40
24.33
18.76
23.05
67.83
51.39
29.16
26.31
21.52
52.07
91.56
38.68
34.25
23.66
20.32
40.08
72.30
46.05
33.36
21.55 #######
26.19
768
04/10/2022 10:54
72.27
73.11
55.55
24.41
24.28
18.73
23.04
67.25
51.27
29.09
26.27
21.52
52.18
90.74
38.71
34.22
23.71
20.32
40.27
71.89
46.05
33.29
21.48 #######
26.20
769
04/10/2022 10:54
72.27
73.87
55.50
24.39
24.24
18.67
22.92
66.68
51.24
29.04
26.25
21.50
52.03
90.27
38.71
34.22
23.66
20.33
40.57
71.53
46.07
33.31
21.60 #######
26.19
==PAGE:257==
770
04/10/2022 10:54
72.34
72.49
55.42
24.34
24.24
18.67
23.02
66.78
51.11
28.90
26.21
21.49
52.10
90.11
38.80
34.22
23.69
20.33
40.40
71.32
46.08
33.26
21.66 #######
26.22
771
04/10/2022 10:54
71.50
71.89
55.36
24.32
24.23
18.61
23.49
67.62
50.92
28.83
26.19
21.47
51.81
90.97
38.72
34.21
23.70
20.31
40.12
71.50
46.08
33.18
21.47 #######
26.19
772
04/10/2022 10:54
71.35
71.23
55.29
24.30
24.21
18.60
23.50
68.69
50.75
28.64
26.18
21.45
51.89
90.48
38.86
34.19
23.71
20.32
40.14
71.59
46.06
33.18
21.43 #######
26.19
773
04/10/2022 10:54
71.35
70.37
55.24
24.31
24.22
18.60
23.43
68.29
50.81
28.62
26.15
21.47
51.48
89.53
38.83
34.16
23.73
20.33
40.36
71.43
46.04
33.16
21.46 #######
26.18
774
04/10/2022 10:54
71.06
69.65
55.20
24.34
24.22
18.61
23.25
67.43
50.96
28.69
26.12
21.48
51.75
89.15
38.81
34.17
23.74
20.36
40.55
71.23
46.03
33.15
21.39 #######
26.18
775
04/10/2022 10:54
71.05
68.60
55.12
24.32
24.22
18.59
23.40
67.69
50.86
28.61
26.12
21.41
52.06
89.09
38.48
34.13
23.74
20.35
40.81
71.24
46.02
33.08
21.39 #######
26.18
776
04/10/2022 10:54
71.37
68.52
55.04
24.29
24.16
18.57
23.54
67.99
50.69
28.43
26.11
21.36
52.18
89.40
38.31
34.11
23.72
20.35
40.30
71.18
46.00
33.02
21.45 #######
26.20
777
04/10/2022 10:54
71.95
70.39
54.97
24.28
24.13
18.55
23.51
68.57
50.46
28.26
25.99
21.31
52.04
89.33
38.20
34.11
23.71
20.32
40.42
71.28
45.95
33.03
21.45 #######
26.18
778
04/10/2022 10:55
71.40
71.34
54.88
24.22
24.10
18.58
23.43
69.25
50.23
28.09
25.93
21.29
52.07
89.27
38.16
34.07
23.71
20.34
40.23
71.30
45.91
32.94
21.45 #######
26.19
779
04/10/2022 10:55
71.36
71.73
54.82
24.13
24.12
18.52
23.41
69.57
49.98
27.93
25.89
21.28
52.22
89.53
38.07
34.06
23.71
20.32
39.98
71.44
45.87
32.86
21.45 #######
26.18
780
04/10/2022 10:55
71.45
72.73
54.72
24.06
24.11
18.51
23.38
70.53
49.66
27.81
25.85
21.28
52.16
90.21
38.04
34.04
23.71
20.35
39.88
71.66
45.80
32.73
21.58 #######
26.19
781
04/10/2022 10:55
71.59
73.62
54.63
24.01
24.11
18.45
23.27
71.14
49.43
27.64
25.82
21.21
52.10
91.48
38.13
34.01
23.71
20.34
40.09
71.90
45.73
32.69
21.59 #######
26.18
782
04/10/2022 10:55
71.70
74.71
54.56
23.98
24.12
18.44
23.36
72.74
49.15
27.50
25.80
21.17
52.37
93.61
38.19
34.03
23.71
20.35
40.17
72.61
45.62
32.60
21.61 #######
26.16
783
04/10/2022 10:55
72.01
75.63
54.48
23.92
24.13
18.44
23.41
74.11
48.93
27.37
25.76
21.17
52.20
93.51
38.21
34.04
23.71
20.38
40.16
72.97
45.54
32.57
21.66 #######
26.17
784
04/10/2022 10:55
72.81
75.89
54.42
23.91
24.16
18.46
23.41
73.87
48.80
27.32
25.72
21.16
52.29
93.32
38.24
34.04
23.72
20.37
40.14
73.08
45.43
32.50
21.79 #######
26.17
785
04/10/2022 10:55
73.12
75.52
54.38
23.86
24.19
18.42
23.39
73.77
48.66
27.39
25.75
21.16
52.47
93.25
38.31
34.04
23.69
20.38
40.51
73.08
45.32
32.42
21.79 #######
26.16
786
04/10/2022 10:55
73.44
77.46
54.26
23.87
24.18
18.39
23.40
73.74
48.46
27.40
25.75
21.14
52.11
93.54
38.38
34.02
23.72
20.40
40.48
73.13
45.21
32.38
21.74 #######
26.15
787
04/10/2022 10:55
73.53
79.61
54.22
23.85
24.16
18.40
23.46
73.57
48.37
27.38
25.76
21.15
52.08
93.01
38.48
34.01
23.75
20.39
40.49
72.97
45.12
32.38
21.76 #######
26.16
788
04/10/2022 10:55
73.41
81.17
54.16
23.84
24.16
18.40
23.47
72.85
48.21
27.47
25.77
21.17
51.88
92.60
38.51
34.01
23.73
20.38
40.31
72.76
45.01
32.24
21.85 #######
26.15
789
04/10/2022 10:55
73.27
82.72
54.11
23.86
24.13
18.41
23.46
72.57
48.13
27.67
25.79
21.18
51.74
92.21
38.56
34.00
23.73
20.36
40.27
72.71
44.90
32.29
21.83 #######
26.16
790
04/10/2022 10:55
73.60
83.08
54.03
23.79
24.12
18.40
23.52
72.35
47.99
27.69
25.76
21.22
51.73
92.53
38.61
33.99
23.75
20.37
40.51
72.72
44.80
32.24
21.95 #######
26.14
791
04/10/2022 10:55
73.53
84.62
53.98
23.81
24.06
18.41
23.54
72.75
47.78
27.68
25.78
21.21
51.58
93.22
38.58
33.97
23.76
20.34
40.99
72.88
44.71
32.19
21.96 #######
26.15
792
04/10/2022 10:55
73.76
83.24
53.88
23.77
24.07
18.35
23.46
73.22
47.61
27.73
25.75
21.22
51.66
92.90
38.53
33.96
23.75
20.34
41.00
72.91
44.63
32.20
21.98 #######
26.16
793
04/10/2022 10:55
73.97
83.64
53.80
23.74
24.05
18.36
23.33
72.84
47.48
27.70
25.73
21.19
51.65
92.09
38.60
33.95
23.72
20.35
40.97
72.80
44.53
32.18
21.87 #######
26.16
794
04/10/2022 10:55
74.19
86.56
53.72
23.74
24.01
18.39
23.19
72.36
47.35
27.71
25.74
21.20
51.82
91.42
38.62
33.93
23.73
20.36
41.24
72.63
44.45
32.14
21.89 #######
26.15
795
04/10/2022 10:55
74.59
87.79
53.67
23.74
23.98
18.39
23.09
71.67
47.28
27.74
25.74
21.21
51.80
90.77
38.66
33.92
23.69
20.36
41.19
72.39
44.36
32.10
21.95 #######
26.14
796
04/10/2022 10:55
74.36
89.28
53.59
23.74
23.95
18.40
22.96
71.00
47.20
27.73
25.71
21.20
51.74
89.85
38.70
33.92
23.71
20.38
41.22
72.11
44.28
32.11
21.98 #######
26.14
797
04/10/2022 10:55
73.55
92.04
53.54
23.68
23.97
18.39
22.98
70.31
47.18
27.78
25.70
21.21
51.88
89.00
38.74
33.90
23.71
20.38
40.94
71.83
44.21
32.07
21.98 #######
26.15
798
04/10/2022 10:55
73.01
93.92
53.49
23.70
23.97
18.34
22.95
69.78
47.12
27.79
25.70
21.16
51.76
88.37
38.71
33.87
23.72
20.38
41.10
71.57
44.15
32.03
22.03 #######
26.15
799
04/10/2022 10:55
72.93
94.54
53.42
23.70
23.99
18.31
22.95
69.17
47.03
27.77
25.69
21.16
51.60
87.78
38.75
33.87
23.72
20.38
41.11
71.35
44.08
31.95
22.00 #######
26.14
800
04/10/2022 10:55
73.21
94.93
53.37
23.69
24.01
18.30
22.82
69.06
46.92
27.61
25.64
21.12
51.42
87.50
38.78
33.86
23.72
20.38
41.13
71.19
44.01
31.89
22.00 #######
26.15
801
04/10/2022 10:55
73.26
96.59
53.29
23.71
24.04
18.29
22.81
68.92
46.85
27.54
25.70
21.11
51.20
87.51
38.78
33.84
23.71
20.40
41.19
71.08
43.96
31.84
21.97 #######
26.13
802
04/10/2022 10:55
73.09
97.27
53.24
23.69
24.04
18.26
22.82
68.68
46.73
27.48
25.74
21.12
51.09
87.81
38.78
33.82
23.71
20.36
40.99
71.08
43.90
31.82
22.03 #######
26.14
803
04/10/2022 10:55
72.88
95.77
53.19
23.68
24.03
18.25
22.81
68.93
46.63
27.50
25.75
21.12
51.14
87.46
38.73
33.82
23.69
20.39
41.05
71.05
43.86
31.78
22.10 #######
26.13
804
04/10/2022 10:55
72.51
95.70
53.15
23.73
24.02
18.21
22.96
69.09
46.50
27.50
25.73
21.09
51.04
86.85
38.75
33.79
23.72
20.38
41.16
71.03
43.78
31.80
22.21 #######
26.15
805
04/10/2022 10:55
72.64
95.63
53.07
23.72
24.01
18.21
22.92
68.62
46.44
27.56
25.72
21.13
51.21
86.57
38.78
33.78
23.69
20.40
41.06
70.86
43.75
31.85
22.22 #######
26.10
806
04/10/2022 10:55
72.62
95.60
53.01
23.74
24.01
18.18
23.02
68.90
46.29
27.55
25.74
21.10
51.35
88.32
38.78
33.77
23.71
20.40
41.09
70.96
43.66
31.77
22.22 #######
26.13
807
04/10/2022 10:55
72.71
94.99
52.91
23.73
23.99
18.17
23.00
69.61
46.12
27.56
25.75
21.11
51.27
88.52
38.76
33.73
23.71
20.41
40.98
71.03
43.61
31.75
22.11 #######
26.15
808
04/10/2022 10:55
72.35
92.68
52.83
23.71
23.95
18.15
23.04
69.45
46.06
27.59
25.69
21.12
51.15
88.39
38.73
33.70
23.67
20.39
40.90
70.99
43.57
31.75
22.10 #######
26.13
809
04/10/2022 10:55
71.78
91.62
52.78
23.70
23.92
18.17
22.98
69.18
46.04
27.62
25.70
21.11
51.04
89.13
38.49
33.65
23.66
20.33
41.22
71.06
43.50
31.74
21.93 #######
26.14
810
04/10/2022 10:55
70.62
91.79
52.73
23.72
23.90
18.19
23.16
69.59
45.96
27.67
25.70
21.09
50.79
90.03
38.30
33.55
23.64
20.32
41.28
71.11
43.43
31.69
21.84 #######
26.13
811
04/10/2022 10:55
70.14
88.69
52.69
23.67
23.87
18.22
23.20
69.50
45.99
27.78
25.70
21.09
50.68
89.99
38.10
33.54
23.57
20.31
42.69
71.00
43.40
31.73
21.73 #######
26.13
812
04/10/2022 10:55
70.02
87.30
52.65
23.63
23.84
18.27
23.24
68.87
46.19
27.78
25.74
21.05
50.68
89.88
38.07
33.48
23.55
20.29
42.28
70.86
43.33
31.72
21.62 #######
26.11
813
04/10/2022 10:55
70.03
90.64
52.62
23.59
23.87
18.31
23.30
68.24
46.33
27.87
25.73
21.08
50.41
88.50
38.16
33.44
23.52
20.19
41.57
70.61
43.29
31.81
21.49 #######
26.13
814
04/10/2022 10:55
69.91
94.67
52.57
23.59
23.84
18.33
23.08
67.24
47.08
28.23
25.75
21.11
50.27
87.57
38.25
33.42
23.50
20.21
40.97
70.34
43.30
31.91
21.50 #######
26.10
815
04/10/2022 10:55
69.40
94.34
52.56
23.61
23.83
18.36
22.92
66.63
47.64
28.39
25.75
21.10
50.20
86.68
38.23
33.39
23.46
20.22
40.85
70.04
43.35
31.90
21.49 #######
26.12
816
04/10/2022 10:55
68.31
96.05
52.50
23.60
23.81
18.37
22.93
66.00
47.81
28.40
25.73
21.11
49.96
86.18
38.38
33.34
23.40
20.21
40.39
69.76
43.37
31.88
21.43 #######
26.12
817
04/10/2022 10:55
67.24
96.80
52.45
23.62
23.77
18.40
23.02
65.79
47.85
28.27
25.70
21.12
50.04
87.04
38.32
33.30
23.32
20.17
40.18
69.65
43.44
31.83
21.57 #######
26.11
818
04/10/2022 10:55
67.22
97.91
52.41
23.65
23.75
18.40
23.35
66.19
47.88
28.18
25.67
21.09
49.73
86.95
38.24
33.27
23.30
20.13
40.46
69.55
43.51
31.77
21.47 #######
26.13
819
04/10/2022 10:55
66.96
98.94
52.37
23.65
23.77
18.41
23.32
66.12
47.82
28.07
25.64
21.06
49.71
86.61
38.19
33.25
23.32
20.13
40.80
69.40
43.60
31.76
21.43 #######
26.11
820
04/10/2022 10:55
67.13
99.48
52.32
23.64
23.82
18.41
23.20
65.64
47.86
28.01
25.62
21.07
49.58
86.32
38.16
33.25
23.32
20.13
40.94
69.14
43.68
31.75
21.47 #######
26.12
821
04/10/2022 10:55
67.31
98.21
52.26
23.60
23.79
18.37
23.00
65.23
47.87
27.96
25.60
21.06
49.59
87.27
38.17
33.25
23.30
20.11
41.12
69.05
43.76
31.77
21.39 #######
26.10
822
04/10/2022 10:55
67.67
100.07
52.22
23.58
23.81
18.32
22.94
66.33
47.79
27.86
25.57
21.04
49.82
89.89
38.14
33.21
23.31
20.12
41.63
69.39
43.80
31.71
21.42 #######
26.13
823
04/10/2022 10:55
67.48
103.80
52.14
23.58
23.79
18.31
23.06
68.31
47.56
27.65
25.56
21.03
49.58
92.40
38.06
33.20
23.32
20.11
41.72
69.79
43.83
31.60
21.37 #######
26.12
824
04/10/2022 10:55
67.97
106.86
52.07
23.57
23.75
18.29
23.29
69.49
47.39
27.41
25.49
20.99
49.71
94.04
38.14
33.20
23.33
20.12
41.41
70.33
43.86
31.52
21.43 #######
26.11
==PAGE:258==
825
04/10/2022 10:55
68.56
115.34
52.04
23.56
23.73
18.30
23.31
70.32
47.28
27.33
25.50
20.98
50.08
93.80
38.18
33.16
23.35
20.12
41.13
70.51
43.87
31.47
21.47 #######
26.12
826
04/10/2022 10:55
68.90
121.82
51.98
23.56
23.72
18.30
23.36
69.99
47.27
27.38
25.46
20.90
50.03
93.80
38.18
33.14
23.36
20.12
40.71
70.56
43.83
31.42
21.51 #######
26.09
827
04/10/2022 10:55
68.85
123.32
51.95
23.53
23.70
18.27
23.40
70.29
47.18
27.44
25.42
20.88
49.82
95.16
38.18
33.12
23.32
20.13
40.72
70.84
43.82
31.40
21.46 #######
26.12
828
04/10/2022 10:55
68.62
123.78
51.89
23.50
23.70
18.27
23.39
70.96
47.04
27.39
25.42
20.89
49.90
96.13
38.16
33.12
23.28
20.14
40.47
71.07
43.78
31.35
21.46 #######
26.11
829
04/10/2022 10:55
68.39
124.02
51.84
23.48
23.70
18.27
23.34
71.61
46.92
27.26
25.36
20.83
50.10
96.75
38.19
33.11
23.31
20.13
40.56
71.24
43.73
31.27
21.54 #######
26.09
830
04/10/2022 10:56
68.09
124.50
51.80
23.48
23.69
18.27
23.37
72.40
46.75
27.17
25.31
20.79
50.34
98.11
38.22
33.08
23.25
20.13
40.61
71.61
43.69
31.31
21.37 #######
26.09
831
04/10/2022 10:56
67.77
129.39
51.77
23.45
23.67
18.27
23.54
73.40
46.60
27.12
25.32
20.78
50.12
98.38
38.29
33.06
23.15
20.08
40.27
71.85
43.63
31.26
21.35 #######
26.10
832
04/10/2022 10:56
68.30
129.00
51.70
23.43
23.63
18.27
23.60
73.09
46.47
27.05
25.35
20.76
50.02
99.05
38.24
33.06
23.19
20.09
40.26
71.96
43.55
31.20
21.38 #######
26.10
833
04/10/2022 10:56
68.03
127.73
51.65
23.42
23.64
18.28
23.55
73.65
46.39
27.03
25.32
20.76
50.04
100.55
38.25
33.03
23.21
20.10
40.54
72.27
43.48
31.09
21.37 #######
26.10
834
04/10/2022 10:56
68.11
125.78
51.57
23.40
23.61
18.28
23.59
74.76
46.09
26.98
25.32
20.74
49.77
102.21
38.29
33.03
23.25
20.11
41.23
72.76
43.43
31.02
21.39 #######
26.11
835
04/10/2022 10:56
67.83
126.78
51.53
23.43
23.60
18.28
23.60
75.89
45.82
26.88
25.28
20.66
49.84
103.96
38.21
33.01
23.26
20.13
42.06
73.15
43.35
30.96
21.35 #######
26.09
836
04/10/2022 10:56
68.29
124.77
51.49
23.41
23.62
18.25
23.67
76.91
45.57
26.79
25.21
20.64
49.87
104.08
38.20
33.00
23.24
20.14
41.86
73.55
43.26
30.97
21.35 #######
26.11
837
04/10/2022 10:56
69.12
123.00
51.42
23.41
23.59
18.24
23.70
77.22
45.37
26.68
25.20
20.64
50.15
103.54
38.23
32.99
23.25
20.16
41.83
73.74
43.17
30.90
21.33 #######
26.10
838
04/10/2022 10:56
69.65
123.42
51.35
23.40
23.58
18.26
23.64
76.75
45.25
26.61
25.21
20.61
50.37
101.96
38.22
33.00
23.26
20.15
41.39
73.56
43.08
30.86
21.41 #######
26.08
839
04/10/2022 10:56
69.53
120.79
51.29
23.41
23.56
18.27
23.57
75.26
45.24
26.63
25.21
20.57
50.50
100.64
38.02
32.99
23.28
20.17
41.34
73.20
43.00
30.87
21.49 #######
26.09
840
04/10/2022 10:56
69.68
120.88
51.26
23.41
23.57
18.29
23.60
74.75
45.19
26.70
25.17
20.54
50.57
99.60
38.03
32.96
23.27
20.17
41.50
73.04
42.92
30.87
21.39 #######
26.10
841
04/10/2022 10:56
69.51
119.69
51.20
23.41
23.55
18.31
23.60
73.77
45.11
26.75
25.21
20.59
50.44
98.22
38.01
32.93
23.25
20.11
41.08
72.70
42.84
30.80
21.29 #######
26.09
842
04/10/2022 10:56
69.31
122.42
51.16
23.42
23.54
18.32
23.55
72.80
45.05
26.82
25.19
20.62
50.45
96.84
38.02
32.92
23.20
20.12
40.58
72.36
42.74
30.82
21.20 #######
26.10
843
04/10/2022 10:56
69.43
124.04
51.12
23.40
23.54
18.34
23.49
71.89
45.00
26.86
25.21
20.62
50.50
95.51
38.03
32.91
23.22
20.11
40.52
72.01
42.68
30.83
21.19 #######
26.10
844
04/10/2022 10:56
68.70
122.37
51.04
23.38
23.50
18.34
23.53
71.40
44.94
26.92
25.17
20.62
50.60
94.79
38.04
32.89
23.21
20.12
40.63
71.82
42.62
30.79
21.28 #######
26.09
845
04/10/2022 10:56
67.98
121.37
50.98
23.35
23.48
18.29
23.50
71.32
44.81
26.86
25.14
20.60
50.32
93.94
38.06
32.88
23.21
20.13
40.92
71.76
42.56
30.79
21.30 #######
26.10
846
04/10/2022 10:56
67.81
118.79
50.91
23.31
23.47
18.26
23.43
70.98
44.72
26.81
25.19
20.57
49.99
92.84
38.05
32.85
23.25
20.13
41.19
71.57
42.51
30.77
21.22 #######
26.10
847
04/10/2022 10:56
67.61
117.70
50.85
23.26
23.45
18.20
23.33
70.52
44.65
26.79
25.17
20.59
49.84
92.12
38.01
32.86
23.24
20.08
42.34
71.34
42.44
30.74
21.30 #######
26.10
848
04/10/2022 10:56
67.57
115.35
50.82
23.22
23.43
18.19
23.34
70.20
44.61
26.81
25.16
20.63
49.55
91.35
37.99
32.83
23.26
20.09
42.14
71.14
42.39
30.69
21.26 #######
26.08
849
04/10/2022 10:56
68.02
115.10
50.77
23.21
23.41
18.19
23.22
69.52
44.60
26.78
25.10
20.62
49.60
90.42
37.99
32.82
23.26
20.11
41.30
70.91
42.34
30.71
21.27 #######
26.09
850
04/10/2022 10:56
68.37
116.97
50.74
23.20
23.39
18.18
23.13
69.16
44.59
26.86
25.07
20.64
49.37
89.76
37.99
32.83
23.26
20.13
41.18
70.70
42.29
30.65
21.19 #######
26.10
851
04/10/2022 10:56
67.83
119.68
50.69
23.20
23.40
18.18
22.95
68.57
44.59
26.96
25.06
20.65
49.44
89.51
38.06
32.82
23.24
20.12
40.74
70.47
42.27
30.70
21.25 #######
26.08
852
04/10/2022 10:56
67.72
118.53
50.67
23.22
23.41
18.16
22.84
68.56
44.65
27.05
25.04
20.63
49.49
89.08
38.06
32.78
23.25
20.13
41.00
70.25
42.25
30.72
21.23 #######
26.08
853
04/10/2022 10:56
67.18
117.95
50.64
23.25
23.40
18.17
22.76
68.19
44.67
27.03
25.03
20.65
49.55
88.85
38.02
32.77
23.27
20.12
42.09
70.05
42.22
30.69
21.25 #######
26.09
854
04/10/2022 10:56
66.20
116.00
50.60
23.25
23.43
18.14
22.84
68.08
44.67
27.07
25.05
20.63
49.59
89.74
37.99
32.74
23.28
20.13
43.15
69.91
42.19
30.73
21.27 #######
26.08
855
04/10/2022 10:56
65.97
114.39
50.53
23.23
23.41
18.13
22.81
68.10
44.56
27.06
25.03
20.62
49.56
90.34
38.00
32.72
23.28
20.11
43.95
69.84
42.20
30.68
21.30 #######
26.09
856
04/10/2022 10:56
66.48
115.16
50.48
23.23
23.37
18.14
22.97
67.86
44.47
26.95
25.04
20.62
49.61
89.43
38.04
32.70
23.28
20.15
44.47
69.70
42.18
30.68
21.33 #######
26.09
857
04/10/2022 10:56
67.04
116.17
50.43
23.24
23.39
18.17
22.94
66.99
44.47
27.00
25.04
20.65
49.51
88.58
38.01
32.70
23.29
20.16
44.31
69.51
42.17
30.68
21.33 #######
26.09
858
04/10/2022 10:56
67.44
116.44
50.40
23.24
23.39
18.18
22.94
66.43
44.56
27.03
25.04
20.64
49.32
87.57
38.03
32.67
23.30
20.15
43.23
69.24
42.14
30.66
21.33 #######
26.09
859
04/10/2022 10:56
67.52
115.44
50.39
23.27
23.40
18.15
22.90
65.61
44.68
27.07
25.02
20.65
49.12
86.46
37.97
32.66
23.30
20.15
42.58
68.95
42.15
30.66
21.39 #######
26.08
860
04/10/2022 10:56
67.86
115.69
50.34
23.28
23.39
18.15
22.73
65.05
44.83
27.15
25.04
20.65
49.31
85.58
38.00
32.66
23.29
20.16
42.17
68.68
42.14
30.66
21.31 #######
26.09
861
04/10/2022 10:56
67.95
112.36
50.33
23.25
23.36
18.12
22.61
64.84
44.90
27.18
25.03
20.65
49.29
84.60
37.99
32.63
23.32
20.17
41.65
68.52
42.16
30.64
21.33 #######
26.08
862
04/10/2022 10:56
68.22
108.55
50.27
23.27
23.34
18.10
22.52
64.86
44.91
27.20
25.05
20.68
49.26
83.83
37.90
32.60
23.27
20.16
41.86
68.35
42.17
30.65
21.41 #######
26.09
863
04/10/2022 10:56
68.37
106.43
50.22
23.26
23.33
18.10
22.49
64.93
44.84
27.11
25.04
20.70
49.19
83.22
37.81
32.57
23.28
20.14
42.20
68.33
42.18
30.64
21.34 #######
26.09
864
04/10/2022 10:56
68.40
103.12
50.17
23.23
23.30
18.12
22.48
65.16
44.79
27.03
25.00
20.67
49.25
84.66
37.81
32.55
23.27
20.12
44.10
68.35
42.18
30.60
21.32 #######
26.08
865
04/10/2022 10:56
68.60
100.62
50.10
23.16
23.28
18.11
22.68
66.57
44.63
26.89
25.00
20.65
49.28
87.25
37.84
32.52
23.27
20.13
45.62
68.97
42.19
30.54
21.30 #######
26.09
866
04/10/2022 10:56
68.56
99.04
50.07
23.13
23.25
18.08
23.00
68.41
44.36
26.78
24.93
20.57
49.42
89.02
37.86
32.46
23.27
20.10
46.84
69.72
42.20
30.50
21.25 #######
26.08
867
04/10/2022 10:56
68.57
98.30
50.04
23.11
23.24
18.05
23.34
70.26
44.10
26.61
24.87
20.54
49.58
91.63
37.88
32.43
23.23
20.08
46.28
70.52
42.17
30.41
21.22 #######
26.11
868
04/10/2022 10:56
68.73
98.30
49.95
23.07
23.23
18.03
23.33
71.92
43.90
26.49
24.75
20.49
49.38
91.75
37.86
32.42
23.12
20.09
45.53
70.95
42.11
30.42
21.20 #######
26.09
869
04/10/2022 10:56
68.79
104.81
49.89
23.06
23.25
18.03
23.33
71.07
43.84
26.41
24.76
20.49
49.14
90.31
37.90
32.46
23.10
20.11
44.62
70.89
42.07
30.38
21.22 #######
26.07
870
04/10/2022 10:56
68.26
115.33
49.87
23.12
23.25
18.04
23.22
69.73
44.30
26.63
24.76
20.51
48.97
88.92
37.94
32.44
23.08
20.10
43.82
70.72
42.10
30.48
21.35 #######
26.08
871
04/10/2022 10:56
68.24
125.81
49.85
23.15
23.24
18.05
23.00
68.55
44.78
26.98
24.75
20.45
48.94
87.39
38.03
32.44
23.07
20.09
43.24
70.46
42.11
30.54
21.49 #######
26.08
872
04/10/2022 10:56
68.40
130.06
49.79
23.19
23.28
18.07
22.88
67.74
45.16
27.14
24.72
20.45
48.63
86.05
38.12
32.44
23.08
20.10
43.04
70.18
42.13
30.51
21.64 #######
26.09
873
04/10/2022 10:56
68.62
128.36
49.75
23.17
23.28
18.05
22.88
67.04
45.27
27.22
24.72
20.45
48.46
84.97
38.14
32.43
23.09
20.09
42.77
69.91
42.17
30.53
21.82 #######
26.08
874
04/10/2022 10:56
68.08
125.63
49.75
23.18
23.26
18.05
22.80
66.51
45.30
27.13
24.63
20.44
48.35
84.67
38.04
32.42
23.09
20.06
42.34
69.62
42.22
30.50
21.76 #######
26.07
875
04/10/2022 10:56
67.85
123.70
49.72
23.17
23.28
18.04
22.67
66.50
45.28
27.07
24.63
20.42
48.28
85.70
38.00
32.39
23.12
20.07
42.55
69.70
42.24
30.44
21.70 #######
26.07
876
04/10/2022 10:56
67.82
121.94
49.65
23.12
23.25
18.04
22.87
67.46
45.16
26.94
24.64
20.44
48.26
87.60
37.93
32.38
23.11
20.08
43.65
69.90
42.30
30.36
21.65 #######
26.07
877
04/10/2022 10:56
67.64
119.03
49.59
23.07
23.23
18.04
22.95
68.14
45.01
26.77
24.63
20.44
48.43
87.43
37.93
32.37
23.09
20.09
43.88
69.92
42.30
30.32
21.68 #######
26.08
878
04/10/2022 10:56
67.74
116.38
49.56
23.10
23.18
18.02
22.94
67.87
44.93
26.70
24.61
20.41
48.29
87.54
37.89
32.36
23.13
20.08
45.41
69.88
42.29
30.33
21.67 #######
26.08
879
04/10/2022 10:56
67.83
115.22
49.49
23.07
23.17
17.99
22.95
68.27
44.82
26.60
24.57
20.43
48.19
88.91
37.93
32.33
23.12
20.08
45.35
70.16
42.30
30.33
21.64 #######
26.06
==PAGE:259==
880
04/10/2022 10:56
67.67
113.51
49.44
23.06
23.16
17.98
23.04
69.09
44.56
26.52
24.60
20.42
48.41
90.51
37.86
32.29
23.12
20.08
45.05
70.47
42.29
30.25
21.64 #######
26.08
881
04/10/2022 10:57
67.59
114.68
49.41
23.00
23.18
17.94
23.01
70.20
44.33
26.36
24.55
20.42
48.61
92.68
37.82
32.25
23.08
20.09
44.60
70.87
42.27
30.22
21.56 #######
26.06
882
04/10/2022 10:57
67.32
116.68
49.34
22.96
23.16
17.95
23.05
70.75
44.24
26.29
24.54
20.38
48.67
93.97
37.70
32.22
23.06
20.09
44.22
71.14
42.23
30.14
21.60 #######
26.07
883
04/10/2022 10:57
66.88
118.36
49.32
22.92
23.15
17.93
23.00
71.18
44.13
26.23
24.56
20.36
48.85
94.04
37.63
32.20
23.05
20.09
44.06
71.31
42.17
30.09
21.57 #######
26.06
884
04/10/2022 10:57
66.54
117.01
49.27
22.91
23.14
17.92
23.00
70.84
44.09
26.25
24.55
20.37
48.85
94.35
37.67
32.20
23.08
20.10
43.66
71.31
42.12
30.04
21.61 #######
26.07
885
04/10/2022 10:57
66.58
116.84
49.22
22.89
23.12
17.94
23.19
70.67
44.06
26.27
24.54
20.37
48.63
95.23
37.61
32.19
23.06
20.07
43.58
71.32
42.06
30.05
21.63 #######
26.07
886
04/10/2022 10:57
66.29
115.19
49.17
22.85
23.08
17.96
23.32
70.37
44.00
26.29
24.52
20.40
48.48
94.01
37.59
32.17
23.04
20.11
43.77
71.11
41.99
30.05
21.65 #######
26.07
887
04/10/2022 10:57
66.52
114.78
49.14
22.87
23.08
17.96
23.18
69.34
44.18
26.36
24.51
20.39
48.22
92.45
37.65
32.16
22.98
20.01
43.05
70.79
41.95
30.00
21.69 #######
26.06
888
04/10/2022 10:57
66.58
117.01
49.12
22.88
23.08
18.00
22.95
68.35
44.56
26.53
24.54
20.40
47.87
90.78
37.65
32.16
22.96
19.99
42.18
70.49
41.94
30.08
21.58 #######
26.06
889
04/10/2022 10:57
66.92
120.10
49.09
22.87
23.09
18.07
22.69
67.34
45.14
26.92
24.62
20.44
47.65
89.27
37.63
32.16
22.96
19.99
41.17
70.20
41.95
30.27
21.70 #######
26.06
890
04/10/2022 10:57
67.05
124.75
49.13
22.92
23.11
18.04
22.53
66.66
45.59
27.40
24.62
20.39
47.28
87.69
37.71
32.15
22.97
19.97
40.72
69.78
42.03
30.45
21.69 #######
26.07
891
04/10/2022 10:57
66.41
123.78
49.14
22.95
23.08
18.02
22.29
65.36
46.12
27.95
24.62
20.34
47.07
86.50
37.71
32.14
22.96
19.98
40.53
69.28
42.09
30.62
21.77 #######
26.06
892
04/10/2022 10:57
65.00
124.14
49.11
22.97
23.12
18.06
22.48
65.35
46.36
27.99
24.59
20.33
47.09
85.52
37.51
32.14
22.94
19.98
40.48
69.01
42.19
30.60
21.67 #######
26.04
893
04/10/2022 10:57
64.33
118.37
49.09
22.93
23.12
18.09
22.53
64.60
46.41
27.87
24.60
20.34
46.92
84.51
37.31
32.10
22.90
19.93
40.17
68.67
42.25
30.63
21.52 #######
26.05
894
04/10/2022 10:57
63.92
114.49
49.06
22.90
23.11
18.11
22.61
63.98
46.56
27.75
24.63
20.36
46.73
83.19
37.29
31.98
22.86
19.88
39.70
68.28
42.34
30.62
21.33 #######
26.06
895
04/10/2022 10:57
63.62
114.23
49.06
22.90
23.10
18.16
22.35
63.35
46.88
27.58
24.63
20.36
46.66
82.09
37.35
31.94
22.83
19.88
39.64
67.98
42.45
30.57
21.13 #######
26.06
896
04/10/2022 10:57
63.39
115.31
49.03
22.87
23.08
18.21
22.27
62.79
47.26
27.56
24.63
20.35
46.18
81.08
37.38
31.94
22.82
19.93
39.12
67.68
42.54
30.60
21.09 #######
26.02
897
04/10/2022 10:57
63.68
117.79
49.01
22.83
23.09
18.18
22.07
62.00
47.60
27.57
24.65
20.32
46.10
79.94
37.46
31.91
22.83
19.93
38.77
67.42
42.67
30.66
21.20 #######
26.05
898
04/10/2022 10:57
63.63
114.52
48.98
22.89
23.09
18.17
21.91
61.52
48.00
27.49
24.70
20.29
46.25
79.28
37.39
31.92
22.85
19.90
39.76
67.17
42.79
30.61
21.23 #######
26.04
899
04/10/2022 10:57
63.79
110.82
48.93
22.85
23.11
18.16
21.84
61.45
48.13
27.39
24.64
20.30
46.41
78.41
37.43
31.90
22.85
19.89
40.55
66.93
42.93
30.61
21.19 #######
26.07
900
04/10/2022 10:57
63.92
107.21
48.88
22.82
23.08
18.16
21.79
61.23
48.08
27.24
24.61
20.27
46.52
77.96
37.39
31.88
22.88
19.88
39.90
66.72
43.03
30.65
21.16 #######
26.05
901
04/10/2022 10:57
63.73
105.55
48.81
22.83
23.04
18.16
21.80
61.27
48.02
27.09
24.59
20.27
46.39
77.31
37.41
31.88
22.86
19.89
40.00
66.51
43.13
30.59
21.20 #######
26.05
902
04/10/2022 10:57
62.88
105.40
48.79
22.79
23.04
18.19
21.99
61.26
47.98
26.89
24.55
20.30
45.96
77.99
37.44
31.84
22.86
19.89
40.29
66.61
43.24
30.52
21.28 #######
26.06
903
04/10/2022 10:57
62.31
104.23
48.73
22.75
23.02
18.23
22.25
62.05
47.97
26.82
24.54
20.31
45.84
77.70
37.37
31.81
22.85
19.85
40.36
66.62
43.32
30.50
21.27 #######
26.03
904
04/10/2022 10:57
62.50
104.65
48.70
22.73
23.02
18.27
22.27
61.35
48.25
26.77
24.52
20.32
45.79
77.10
37.30
31.76
22.80
19.80
40.14
66.47
43.36
30.51
21.11 #######
26.06
905
04/10/2022 10:57
62.62
107.50
48.67
22.74
23.03
18.26
22.18
60.79
48.36
26.71
24.52
20.31
45.77
76.55
37.36
31.74
22.82
19.83
39.78
66.30
43.42
30.47
20.99 #######
26.06
906
04/10/2022 10:57
62.79
107.63
48.61
22.68
23.05
18.25
22.17
60.40
48.39
26.67
24.52
20.27
45.76
76.33
37.37
31.76
22.81
19.82
39.26
66.11
43.48
30.49
21.05 #######
26.04
907
04/10/2022 10:57
62.97
108.33
48.57
22.65
23.03
18.22
22.07
60.40
48.31
26.62
24.49
20.26
45.86
76.60
37.29
31.75
22.84
19.84
39.27
66.06
43.52
30.36
21.12 #######
26.04
908
04/10/2022 10:57
62.23
107.81
48.52
22.64
23.02
18.20
22.09
60.39
48.23
26.55
24.44
20.26
45.65
76.17
37.35
31.74
22.84
19.85
38.97
65.99
43.55
30.30
21.13 #######
26.03
909
04/10/2022 10:57
61.82
108.61
48.49
22.66
22.99
18.17
22.18
59.91
48.21
26.51
24.41
20.27
45.44
75.43
37.37
31.73
22.82
19.79
38.44
65.81
43.61
30.24
21.08 #######
26.02
910
04/10/2022 10:57
62.30
106.79
48.50
22.75
22.98
18.16
22.06
59.64
48.55
26.54
24.40
20.30
45.40
74.79
37.30
31.70
22.83
19.78
38.24
65.59
43.60
30.27
21.11 #######
26.05
911
04/10/2022 10:57
62.15
105.57
48.49
22.76
22.96
18.18
21.98
59.39
48.86
26.82
24.42
20.32
45.58
74.18
37.20
31.64
22.77
19.72
38.21
65.50
43.61
30.28
20.97 #######
26.05
912
04/10/2022 10:57
61.68
105.17
48.46
22.77
22.97
18.20
21.95
59.32
49.06
26.96
24.41
20.36
45.63
74.12
37.16
31.58
22.69
19.71
38.07
65.49
43.60
30.29
20.92 #######
26.03
913
04/10/2022 10:57
61.18
103.35
48.42
22.78
22.97
18.19
22.03
59.74
49.02
26.91
24.37
20.33
45.64
74.91
37.04
31.56
22.65
19.69
38.70
65.49
43.66
30.28
20.81 #######
26.04
914
04/10/2022 10:57
61.87
101.89
48.35
22.78
22.94
18.16
22.14
59.92
48.87
26.86
24.35
20.32
45.70
75.42
37.03
31.50
22.64
19.67
39.63
65.51
43.69
30.21
20.74 #######
26.05
915
04/10/2022 10:57
62.40
99.96
48.28
22.77
22.91
18.18
22.02
59.86
48.81
26.80
24.33
20.32
45.84
77.26
36.93
31.47
22.62
19.63
40.55
65.47
43.74
30.27
20.70 #######
26.05
916
04/10/2022 10:57
62.80
96.41
48.26
22.72
22.90
18.14
22.03
60.86
48.61
26.67
24.31
20.26
45.91
81.00
36.85
31.44
22.62
19.66
42.87
66.04
43.75
30.17
20.62 #######
26.06
917
04/10/2022 10:57
63.04
94.39
48.21
22.67
22.90
18.07
22.31
63.05
48.20
26.38
24.29
20.21
46.13
83.74
36.90
31.44
22.62
19.62
43.74
66.86
43.75
30.05
20.58 #######
26.04
918
04/10/2022 10:57
62.90
95.07
48.14
22.61
22.86
18.01
22.37
64.87
47.85
26.15
24.27
20.21
46.38
86.37
36.89
31.46
22.62
19.55
42.68
67.66
43.74
30.05
20.66 #######
26.05
919
04/10/2022 10:57
62.35
96.75
48.11
22.55
22.85
17.99
22.45
65.60
47.61
25.98
24.26
20.21
46.04
87.40
36.92
31.45
22.59
19.55
41.97
67.90
43.71
29.96
20.73 #######
26.05
920
04/10/2022 10:57
62.34
96.00
48.10
22.49
22.79
17.94
22.47
65.57
47.43
25.83
24.19
20.19
46.13
89.68
36.79
31.41
22.52
19.55
41.56
68.23
43.64
29.90
20.65 #######
26.04
921
04/10/2022 10:57
62.23
93.26
48.05
22.44
22.75
17.91
22.58
66.96
47.13
25.69
24.09
20.16
46.52
92.05
36.52
31.40
22.48
19.56
42.08
68.91
43.57
29.87
20.68 #######
26.04
922
04/10/2022 10:57
62.15
90.59
48.00
22.33
22.71
17.86
22.78
68.45
46.73
25.49
23.95
20.15
46.52
93.29
36.40
31.38
22.46
19.59
42.32
69.45
43.48
29.82
20.65 #######
26.04
923
04/10/2022 10:57
62.45
88.70
47.95
22.28
22.71
17.85
22.79
69.91
46.37
25.31
23.98
20.13
46.44
95.98
36.09
31.36
22.39
19.57
42.66
70.29
43.38
29.78
20.54 #######
26.03
924
04/10/2022 10:57
62.90
87.24
47.90
22.24
22.69
17.83
22.79
70.97
46.06
25.23
23.98
20.12
46.61
96.96
35.99
31.34
22.33
19.54
42.09
70.66
43.29
29.69
20.42 #######
26.04
925
04/10/2022 10:57
63.29
88.40
47.84
22.25
22.69
17.80
22.63
70.40
45.96
25.22
23.97
20.12
46.37
95.65
36.11
31.32
22.27
19.56
41.85
70.60
43.17
29.63
20.51 #######
26.03
926
04/10/2022 10:57
63.73
90.30
47.84
22.24
22.67
17.77
22.75
69.37
46.06
25.35
23.96
20.09
46.10
93.87
36.19
31.35
22.29
19.57
41.39
70.44
43.08
29.64
20.51 #######
26.03
927
04/10/2022 10:57
63.89
91.89
47.80
22.29
22.67
17.75
22.54
68.35
46.38
25.52
23.99
20.08
45.93
92.18
36.32
31.35
22.37
19.61
40.64
70.27
43.01
29.63
20.57 #######
26.03
==PAGE:260==
Data from Thermocouples, test 4
Scan
Time
L1P11
L1P12
L1P13
L1P14
L1P15
L1P16
L1P2
L1P22
L1P23
L1P24
L1P25
L1P26
L2P11
L2P12
L2P13
L2P14
L2P15
L2P16
L2P21
L2P22
L2P23
L2P24
L2P25
L2P26
XX
1
04/10/2022 13:14
17.85
17.83
19.06
18.02
17.92
17.57
17.69
18.09
18.15
18.33
18.25
17.77
17.68
17.89
17.83
18.19
17.69
17.40
17.33
17.64
17.63
18.45
17.75 #######
26.36
2
04/10/2022 13:14
17.86
17.83
19.08
18.00
17.91
17.56
17.70
18.07
18.14
18.29
18.26
17.78
17.72
17.93
17.82
18.19
17.69
17.41
17.34
17.64
17.64
18.44
17.75 #######
26.38
3
04/10/2022 13:14
17.87
17.82
19.08
18.02
17.91
17.56
17.68
18.11
18.15
18.33
18.26
17.79
17.73
17.95
17.84
18.18
17.69
17.41
17.34
17.67
17.63
18.47
17.74 #######
26.37
4
04/10/2022 13:14
17.90
17.83
19.10
18.02
17.90
17.57
17.70
18.08
18.17
18.35
18.24
17.76
17.74
17.95
17.88
18.16
17.69
17.41
17.33
17.68
17.65
18.47
17.73 #######
26.38
5
04/10/2022 13:14
17.89
17.85
19.09
18.03
17.90
17.56
17.70
18.10
18.18
18.36
18.25
17.77
17.77
17.97
17.88
18.17
17.69
17.41
17.34
17.73
17.63
18.46
17.73 #######
26.38
6
04/10/2022 13:14
17.91
17.84
19.08
18.02
17.93
17.54
17.71
18.11
18.17
18.36
18.24
17.76
17.77
17.97
17.90
18.18
17.69
17.40
17.35
17.74
17.64
18.47
17.71 #######
26.36
7
04/10/2022 13:14
17.92
17.85
19.10
18.00
17.92
17.54
17.68
18.12
18.18
18.36
18.23
17.76
17.80
17.99
17.92
18.17
17.69
17.41
17.36
17.76
17.66
18.48
17.72 #######
26.36
8
04/10/2022 13:14
17.92
17.85
19.08
18.00
17.90
17.54
17.70
18.14
18.19
18.37
18.22
17.74
17.80
18.02
17.94
18.17
17.70
17.39
17.35
17.76
17.65
18.48
17.74 #######
26.39
9
04/10/2022 13:14
17.94
17.85
19.11
18.00
17.90
17.53
17.70
18.15
18.18
18.38
18.22
17.73
17.82
18.04
17.94
18.18
17.70
17.41
17.38
17.78
17.65
18.50
17.73 #######
26.39
10
04/10/2022 13:14
17.97
17.87
19.11
17.98
17.91
17.53
17.72
18.14
18.21
18.34
18.20
17.74
17.85
18.06
17.94
18.18
17.70
17.42
17.37
17.79
17.67
18.50
17.71 #######
26.39
11
04/10/2022 13:14
17.98
17.89
19.10
17.98
17.89
17.53
17.72
18.18
18.22
18.33
18.21
17.74
17.85
18.07
17.94
18.18
17.69
17.41
17.36
17.80
17.67
18.51
17.71 #######
26.36
12
04/10/2022 13:14
18.00
17.92
19.12
17.99
17.88
17.52
17.74
18.19
18.26
18.35
18.18
17.74
17.86
18.07
17.97
18.17
17.71
17.43
17.36
17.78
17.69
18.50
17.70 #######
26.36
13
04/10/2022 13:14
18.00
17.92
19.13
17.97
17.90
17.54
17.72
18.18
18.26
18.34
18.18
17.71
17.86
18.07
17.96
18.17
17.72
17.42
17.40
17.80
17.70
18.52
17.72 #######
26.36
14
04/10/2022 13:14
18.01
17.92
19.12
17.96
17.91
17.52
17.72
18.22
18.27
18.36
18.16
17.72
17.86
18.08
17.97
18.16
17.71
17.44
17.37
17.78
17.70
18.51
17.70 #######
26.38
15
04/10/2022 13:14
18.03
17.92
19.13
17.95
17.90
17.52
17.72
18.23
18.28
18.37
18.16
17.69
17.88
18.10
17.99
18.17
17.70
17.40
17.40
17.82
17.72
18.54
17.71 #######
26.37
16
04/10/2022 13:14
18.03
17.92
19.12
17.94
17.89
17.52
17.72
18.21
18.27
18.37
18.18
17.71
17.88
18.09
18.00
18.19
17.72
17.42
17.41
17.80
17.70
18.55
17.74 #######
26.38
17
04/10/2022 13:14
18.04
17.94
19.14
17.95
17.88
17.52
17.74
18.23
18.28
18.38
18.15
17.70
17.89
18.09
18.01
18.18
17.71
17.43
17.40
17.79
17.72
18.52
17.75 #######
26.36
18
04/10/2022 13:14
18.04
17.95
19.15
17.93
17.89
17.51
17.73
18.24
18.29
18.36
18.17
17.71
17.89
18.09
18.03
18.19
17.73
17.41
17.41
17.80
17.72
18.53
17.76 #######
26.38
19
04/10/2022 13:14
18.05
17.94
19.14
17.94
17.90
17.51
17.73
18.22
18.30
18.36
18.16
17.69
17.89
18.10
18.05
18.18
17.74
17.44
17.41
17.80
17.72
18.53
17.78 #######
26.38
20
04/10/2022 13:14
18.07
17.94
19.14
17.96
17.88
17.50
17.76
18.23
18.30
18.36
18.14
17.69
17.90
18.10
18.06
18.18
17.73
17.43
17.42
17.82
17.73
18.54
17.77 #######
26.37
21
04/10/2022 13:14
18.05
17.95
19.13
17.93
17.88
17.49
17.75
18.23
18.31
18.35
18.14
17.68
17.92
18.12
18.05
18.18
17.73
17.41
17.43
17.80
17.74
18.55
17.79 #######
26.39
22
04/10/2022 13:14
18.06
17.98
19.14
17.95
17.88
17.50
17.77
18.26
18.32
18.34
18.14
17.67
17.92
18.10
18.07
18.17
17.73
17.42
17.42
17.83
17.75
18.57
17.79 #######
26.38
23
04/10/2022 13:14
18.07
17.96
19.14
17.93
17.86
17.51
17.77
18.28
18.35
18.32
18.13
17.69
17.93
18.12
18.09
18.18
17.71
17.44
17.45
17.82
17.76
18.54
17.79 #######
26.38
24
04/10/2022 13:14
18.09
18.00
19.14
17.92
17.86
17.51
17.78
18.26
18.36
18.31
18.11
17.68
17.96
18.13
18.10
18.17
17.72
17.43
17.44
17.82
17.79
18.55
17.81 #######
26.38
25
04/10/2022 13:14
18.09
18.00
19.15
17.91
17.87
17.50
17.74
18.28
18.39
18.30
18.14
17.68
17.95
18.13
18.10
18.18
17.72
17.44
17.45
17.83
17.78
18.56
17.82 #######
26.36
26
04/10/2022 13:14
18.10
18.00
19.15
17.90
17.86
17.50
17.76
18.28
18.40
18.31
18.09
17.69
17.97
18.14
18.11
18.16
17.72
17.43
17.44
17.85
17.81
18.55
17.86 #######
26.39
27
04/10/2022 13:14
18.12
18.01
19.15
17.89
17.89
17.49
17.77
18.27
18.40
18.27
18.10
17.68
17.99
18.15
18.11
18.19
17.72
17.42
17.45
17.84
17.81
18.56
17.88 #######
26.38
28
04/10/2022 13:14
18.14
18.02
19.16
17.87
17.87
17.49
17.76
18.29
18.39
18.27
18.11
17.67
17.95
18.16
18.13
18.18
17.73
17.44
17.47
17.86
17.81
18.55
17.87 #######
26.36
29
04/10/2022 13:14
18.16
18.02
19.16
17.88
17.88
17.49
17.78
18.31
18.41
18.26
18.11
17.68
17.98
18.18
18.12
18.19
17.72
17.45
17.44
17.85
17.81
18.56
17.90 #######
26.38
30
04/10/2022 13:14
18.18
18.01
19.17
17.90
17.89
17.51
17.78
18.33
18.40
18.23
18.11
17.69
17.98
18.16
18.12
18.18
17.72
17.43
17.45
17.85
17.82
18.55
17.89 #######
26.37
31
04/10/2022 13:15
18.18
18.03
19.18
17.89
17.89
17.48
17.77
18.32
18.41
18.23
18.10
17.68
17.97
18.14
18.14
18.20
17.75
17.42
17.46
17.85
17.80
18.55
17.86 #######
26.37
32
04/10/2022 13:15
18.18
18.04
19.17
17.89
17.88
17.49
17.80
18.32
18.42
18.22
18.08
17.66
17.97
18.17
18.14
18.19
17.73
17.44
17.45
17.82
17.79
18.55
17.85 #######
26.36
33
04/10/2022 13:15
18.20
18.02
19.17
17.87
17.86
17.48
17.83
18.32
18.42
18.17
18.11
17.67
17.96
18.16
18.15
18.19
17.73
17.44
17.43
17.85
17.80
18.54
17.88 #######
26.37
34
04/10/2022 13:15
18.21
18.01
19.18
17.87
17.87
17.51
17.81
18.34
18.42
18.15
18.09
17.66
17.96
18.16
18.13
18.17
17.75
17.44
17.43
17.85
17.78
18.53
17.87 #######
26.36
35
04/10/2022 13:15
18.21
18.05
19.20
17.87
17.85
17.48
17.84
18.35
18.43
18.12
18.09
17.65
17.96
18.16
18.13
18.22
17.74
17.44
17.43
17.85
17.78
18.52
17.90 #######
26.37
36
04/10/2022 13:15
18.21
18.05
19.20
17.84
17.86
17.50
17.84
18.36
18.42
18.13
18.09
17.66
17.96
18.16
18.13
18.20
17.73
17.44
17.44
17.86
17.79
18.52
17.90 #######
26.36
37
04/10/2022 13:15
18.22
18.06
19.20
17.88
17.87
17.48
17.85
18.38
18.42
18.12
18.08
17.64
17.98
18.17
18.13
18.18
17.75
17.43
17.45
17.87
17.76
18.51
17.90 #######
26.38
38
04/10/2022 13:15
18.23
18.06
19.20
17.87
17.87
17.48
17.84
18.38
18.43
18.11
18.06
17.64
17.98
18.16
18.12
18.20
17.72
17.43
17.43
17.88
17.76
18.51
17.89 #######
26.37
39
04/10/2022 13:15
18.25
18.06
19.19
17.85
17.86
17.47
17.84
18.37
18.42
18.12
18.06
17.65
17.98
18.18
18.13
18.19
17.74
17.45
17.45
17.87
17.77
18.52
17.90 #######
26.37
40
04/10/2022 13:15
18.25
18.08
19.21
17.84
17.85
17.46
17.88
18.39
18.44
18.11
18.05
17.63
17.99
18.18
18.13
18.19
17.75
17.42
17.44
17.85
17.76
18.51
17.90 #######
26.36
41
04/10/2022 13:15
18.24
18.06
19.19
17.85
17.85
17.48
17.87
18.41
18.41
18.11
18.04
17.63
17.99
18.17
18.13
18.19
17.75
17.44
17.44
17.86
17.75
18.50
17.90 #######
26.37
42
04/10/2022 13:15
18.26
18.08
19.19
17.85
17.86
17.49
17.87
18.40
18.42
18.09
18.06
17.63
17.99
18.18
18.13
18.19
17.74
17.44
17.45
17.84
17.74
18.48
17.90 #######
26.38
43
04/10/2022 13:15
18.25
18.07
19.21
17.85
17.85
17.47
17.87
18.41
18.43
18.10
18.04
17.62
17.99
18.20
18.14
18.17
17.75
17.44
17.43
17.86
17.78
18.50
17.90 #######
26.36
44
04/10/2022 13:15
18.27
18.08
19.20
17.84
17.84
17.44
17.86
18.40
18.44
18.10
18.04
17.61
18.00
18.19
18.12
18.17
17.74
17.44
17.43
17.84
17.76
18.50
17.89 #######
26.37
45
04/10/2022 13:15
18.26
18.08
19.21
17.85
17.86
17.45
17.88
18.39
18.43
18.09
18.03
17.62
18.01
18.19
18.10
18.18
17.73
17.43
17.47
17.84
17.79
18.46
17.89 #######
26.38
46
04/10/2022 13:15
18.29
18.08
19.20
17.85
17.86
17.45
17.88
18.40
18.45
18.07
18.02
17.63
18.01
18.18
18.13
18.19
17.73
17.42
17.47
17.85
17.80
18.48
17.89 #######
26.39
47
04/10/2022 13:15
18.26
18.05
19.20
17.85
17.86
17.44
17.89
18.41
18.44
18.08
18.01
17.62
18.01
18.21
18.12
18.19
17.73
17.43
17.48
17.85
17.79
18.48
17.85 #######
26.38
48
04/10/2022 13:15
18.26
18.04
19.21
17.82
17.85
17.43
17.88
18.41
18.45
18.06
18.02
17.61
18.01
18.21
18.13
18.19
17.72
17.41
17.46
17.86
17.79
18.47
17.85 #######
26.38
49
04/10/2022 13:15
18.25
18.02
19.19
17.81
17.82
17.42
17.89
18.40
18.46
18.07
18.00
17.61
18.00
18.24
18.14
18.19
17.72
17.43
17.48
17.87
17.77
18.47
17.85 #######
26.36
50
04/10/2022 13:15
18.28
18.02
19.19
17.81
17.82
17.41
17.88
18.39
18.46
18.06
17.99
17.62
18.01
18.22
18.15
18.17
17.70
17.43
17.48
17.88
17.79
18.48
17.86 #######
26.36
51
04/10/2022 13:15
18.26
18.03
19.17
17.81
17.83
17.41
17.87
18.42
18.47
18.03
18.02
17.60
18.02
18.20
18.15
18.18
17.72
17.43
17.48
17.87
17.78
18.48
17.86 #######
26.36
52
04/10/2022 13:15
18.27
18.02
19.16
17.77
17.83
17.39
17.89
18.40
18.46
18.06
17.99
17.60
18.01
18.21
18.16
18.18
17.71
17.41
17.50
17.88
17.79
18.48
17.86 #######
26.37
53
04/10/2022 13:15
18.27
18.01
19.16
17.76
17.82
17.42
17.88
18.40
18.48
18.06
18.01
17.60
18.01
18.21
18.15
18.18
17.73
17.42
17.51
17.87
17.77
18.47
17.85 #######
26.37
54
04/10/2022 13:15
18.26
18.02
19.18
17.76
17.84
17.39
17.87
18.40
18.47
18.08
18.00
17.59
18.02
18.19
18.17
18.17
17.72
17.40
17.49
17.89
17.79
18.49
17.83 #######
26.37
==PAGE:261==
55
04/10/2022 13:15
18.27
18.01
19.16
17.77
17.82
17.38
17.88
18.40
18.46
18.13
18.00
17.59
18.01
18.19
18.15
18.16
17.73
17.42
17.48
17.87
17.80
18.51
17.84 #######
26.38
56
04/10/2022 13:15
18.25
17.99
19.14
17.74
17.81
17.38
17.86
18.40
18.43
18.15
17.99
17.59
18.02
18.19
18.16
18.18
17.71
17.40
17.50
17.85
17.80
18.50
17.83 #######
26.38
57
04/10/2022 13:15
18.27
18.01
19.17
17.77
17.82
17.39
17.88
18.42
18.46
18.19
17.99
17.59
18.00
18.21
18.12
18.18
17.73
17.42
17.49
17.86
17.81
18.51
17.85 #######
26.38
58
04/10/2022 13:15
18.27
18.01
19.17
17.77
17.83
17.40
17.86
18.43
18.46
18.18
18.00
17.60
18.02
18.22
18.13
18.18
17.71
17.43
17.49
17.88
17.79
18.51
17.84 #######
26.38
59
04/10/2022 13:15
18.29
17.99
19.16
17.76
17.84
17.40
17.87
18.44
18.46
18.18
17.98
17.60
18.03
18.23
18.14
18.18
17.72
17.41
17.48
17.88
17.79
18.52
17.84 #######
26.37
60
04/10/2022 13:15
18.30
17.99
19.17
17.75
17.81
17.39
17.86
18.43
18.48
18.17
17.99
17.60
18.01
18.22
18.13
18.17
17.72
17.41
17.47
17.86
17.79
18.53
17.87 #######
26.38
61
04/10/2022 13:15
18.27
17.95
19.17
17.75
17.80
17.38
17.87
18.41
18.46
18.15
17.99
17.59
18.04
18.23
18.13
18.16
17.73
17.44
17.49
17.89
17.80
18.53
17.85 #######
26.39
62
04/10/2022 13:15
18.30
17.99
19.16
17.74
17.82
17.39
17.87
18.42
18.48
18.14
17.98
17.60
18.03
18.23
18.13
18.16
17.73
17.41
17.48
17.91
17.80
18.53
17.84 #######
26.37
63
04/10/2022 13:15
18.28
17.96
19.16
17.71
17.82
17.37
17.87
18.42
18.46
18.12
17.99
17.58
18.06
18.23
18.12
18.16
17.73
17.42
17.49
17.90
17.79
18.53
17.83 #######
26.36
64
04/10/2022 13:15
18.28
17.96
19.15
17.72
17.80
17.38
17.86
18.43
18.47
18.13
17.96
17.60
18.05
18.21
18.11
18.17
17.72
17.41
17.49
17.90
17.78
18.51
17.83 #######
26.37
65
04/10/2022 13:15
18.28
17.96
19.16
17.73
17.80
17.35
17.88
18.42
18.48
18.12
17.98
17.59
18.07
18.22
18.13
18.17
17.71
17.40
17.50
17.89
17.78
18.51
17.84 #######
26.37
66
04/10/2022 13:15
18.28
17.95
19.16
17.73
17.79
17.36
17.88
18.43
18.48
18.11
17.97
17.59
18.05
18.23
18.12
18.17
17.71
17.38
17.51
17.89
17.77
18.52
17.87 #######
26.35
67
04/10/2022 13:15
18.28
17.95
19.14
17.72
17.77
17.33
17.88
18.44
18.48
18.11
17.99
17.58
18.05
18.21
18.12
18.16
17.73
17.40
17.51
17.89
17.79
18.50
17.85 #######
26.37
68
04/10/2022 13:15
18.28
17.96
19.16
17.69
17.79
17.34
17.90
18.43
18.48
18.10
17.98
17.58
18.05
18.22
18.12
18.15
17.72
17.40
17.53
17.88
17.80
18.50
17.86 #######
26.39
69
04/10/2022 13:15
18.28
17.98
19.14
17.70
17.77
17.35
17.91
18.44
18.47
18.10
18.00
17.60
18.04
18.22
18.14
18.17
17.72
17.39
17.49
17.89
17.79
18.52
17.87 #######
26.36
70
04/10/2022 13:15
18.30
17.97
19.15
17.72
17.81
17.36
17.92
18.44
18.49
18.11
18.00
17.57
18.04
18.21
18.14
18.15
17.74
17.37
17.47
17.88
17.78
18.51
17.88 #######
26.38
71
04/10/2022 13:15
18.30
17.97
19.15
17.73
17.80
17.36
17.92
18.46
18.48
18.10
18.02
17.58
18.03
18.21
18.13
18.15
17.71
17.39
17.47
17.87
17.78
18.50
17.87 #######
26.36
72
04/10/2022 13:15
18.32
17.99
19.16
17.72
17.80
17.35
17.90
18.46
18.48
18.12
17.99
17.56
18.03
18.21
18.13
18.17
17.74
17.38
17.46
17.84
17.80
18.50
17.85 #######
26.39
73
04/10/2022 13:15
18.33
17.99
19.17
17.73
17.79
17.37
17.92
18.45
18.49
18.11
18.00
17.58
18.03
18.21
18.13
18.17
17.73
17.39
17.45
17.85
17.81
18.49
17.87 #######
26.38
74
04/10/2022 13:15
18.33
18.00
19.16
17.74
17.80
17.37
17.93
18.47
18.51
18.10
18.00
17.57
18.04
18.21
18.13
18.17
17.72
17.40
17.46
17.84
17.78
18.49
17.86 #######
26.38
75
04/10/2022 13:15
18.37
18.02
19.17
17.73
17.82
17.37
17.93
18.47
18.50
18.09
17.99
17.57
18.04
18.22
18.13
18.17
17.72
17.39
17.47
17.84
17.77
18.48
17.87 #######
26.38
76
04/10/2022 13:15
18.35
18.02
19.20
17.73
17.82
17.39
17.93
18.48
18.52
18.11
17.99
17.59
18.05
18.20
18.11
18.18
17.72
17.40
17.48
17.82
17.77
18.48
17.86 #######
26.38
77
04/10/2022 13:15
18.37
18.02
19.20
17.76
17.81
17.36
17.93
18.48
18.53
18.10
18.00
17.57
18.04
18.23
18.12
18.18
17.73
17.41
17.48
17.84
17.76
18.48
17.86 #######
26.39
78
04/10/2022 13:15
18.38
18.03
19.21
17.75
17.80
17.38
17.93
18.48
18.53
18.11
17.99
17.55
18.05
18.21
18.13
18.15
17.74
17.41
17.48
17.83
17.77
18.49
17.88 #######
26.37
79
04/10/2022 13:15
18.38
18.01
19.20
17.76
17.80
17.37
17.94
18.47
18.54
18.11
17.98
17.57
18.07
18.22
18.13
18.17
17.72
17.41
17.47
17.84
17.76
18.46
17.87 #######
26.37
80
04/10/2022 13:15
18.37
18.02
19.19
17.74
17.81
17.37
17.93
18.47
18.53
18.11
17.99
17.57
18.05
18.22
18.14
18.16
17.72
17.39
17.46
17.85
17.78
18.47
17.87 #######
26.37
81
04/10/2022 13:15
18.37
17.99
19.19
17.74
17.80
17.37
17.93
18.49
18.52
18.12
17.97
17.57
18.05
18.23
18.12
18.16
17.71
17.38
17.44
17.85
17.76
18.45
17.88 #######
26.37
82
04/10/2022 13:15
18.35
17.98
19.15
17.71
17.77
17.34
17.92
18.45
18.51
18.07
17.98
17.56
18.06
18.23
18.12
18.15
17.71
17.37
17.45
17.85
17.79
18.45
17.84 #######
26.38
83
04/10/2022 13:16
18.34
17.98
19.15
17.71
17.78
17.33
17.90
18.45
18.50
18.05
17.94
17.54
18.05
18.21
18.13
18.17
17.72
17.39
17.43
17.85
17.76
18.44
17.83 #######
26.37
84
04/10/2022 13:16
18.31
17.95
19.13
17.68
17.78
17.34
17.90
18.45
18.52
18.03
17.93
17.55
18.06
18.24
18.11
18.13
17.70
17.40
17.44
17.84
17.77
18.44
17.82 #######
26.38
85
04/10/2022 13:16
18.29
17.92
19.11
17.68
17.76
17.31
17.86
18.44
18.50
18.01
17.92
17.53
18.04
18.23
18.14
18.14
17.69
17.37
17.46
17.84
17.77
18.46
17.79 #######
26.38
86
04/10/2022 13:16
18.30
17.93
19.12
17.68
17.75
17.32
17.86
18.44
18.48
18.02
17.94
17.53
18.04
18.23
18.14
18.15
17.70
17.38
17.46
17.84
17.76
18.43
17.78 #######
26.39
87
04/10/2022 13:16
18.30
17.92
19.13
17.69
17.73
17.31
17.82
18.43
18.50
18.01
17.93
17.53
18.04
18.23
18.12
18.15
17.70
17.36
17.46
17.85
17.76
18.43
17.76 #######
26.38
88
04/10/2022 13:16
18.30
17.94
19.11
17.70
17.75
17.31
17.81
18.44
18.50
18.03
17.91
17.56
18.05
18.22
18.11
18.14
17.69
17.37
17.45
17.86
17.77
18.43
17.75 #######
26.38
89
04/10/2022 13:16
18.32
17.94
19.14
17.71
17.75
17.32
17.79
18.45
18.51
18.04
17.90
17.54
18.06
18.22
18.13
18.15
17.69
17.37
17.45
17.86
17.78
18.43
17.75 #######
26.37
90
04/10/2022 13:16
18.31
17.94
19.15
17.70
17.77
17.34
17.79
18.46
18.51
18.04
17.90
17.53
18.06
18.22
18.10
18.15
17.70
17.38
17.47
17.87
17.76
18.43
17.76 #######
26.37
91
04/10/2022 13:16
18.32
17.94
19.15
17.71
17.76
17.32
17.77
18.46
18.50
18.06
17.92
17.54
18.10
19.12
18.90
18.14
17.72
17.40
17.49
17.92
17.81
18.43
17.75 #######
26.37
92
04/10/2022 13:16
18.31
17.85
19.19
17.70
17.76
17.32
17.74
18.45
18.51
18.08
17.91
17.54
18.18
27.05
19.99
18.14
17.74
17.42
17.50
22.13
18.88
18.44
17.76 #######
26.36
93
04/10/2022 13:16
18.42
18.82
19.34
17.72
17.78
17.34
17.68
18.69
18.87
18.16
17.91
17.53
18.29
36.90
21.70
18.18
17.77
17.44
18.49
27.17
21.05
18.56
17.81 #######
26.44 Fire
94
04/10/2022 13:16
19.41
27.58
19.45
17.75
17.77
17.33
20.85
21.56
20.90
21.67
18.11
17.54
18.94
42.49
22.01
18.17
17.79
17.48
18.69
29.83
24.87
19.25
17.84 #######
26.57 source
95
04/10/2022 13:16
22.93
36.26
19.46
17.75
17.78
17.33
21.76
24.49
24.04
23.81
18.91
17.57
24.01
45.43
23.37
18.17
17.80
17.48
21.96
35.01
27.35
20.03
17.87 #######
26.72 ignited
96
04/10/2022 13:16
25.10
51.19
19.33
17.78
17.77
17.34
23.61
31.59
24.91
23.84
19.06
17.62
26.75
47.13
25.29
18.19
17.86
17.54
22.97
39.68
30.71
19.99
17.89 #######
27.01
97
04/10/2022 13:16
29.64
64.62
19.19
17.76
17.76
17.33
27.71
38.29
25.41
23.11
18.98
17.61
30.31
57.66
26.88
18.18
17.85
17.57
24.95
43.41
32.60
19.94
17.93 #######
27.15
98
04/10/2022 13:16
33.09
78.57
19.10
17.71
17.76
17.33
31.35
44.01
25.76
22.40
18.89
17.59
38.05
59.73
32.83
18.19
17.92
17.60
27.22
47.61
35.71
19.93
17.97 #######
27.31
99
04/10/2022 13:16
38.66
91.47
19.02
17.72
17.74
17.34
36.85
50.29
26.30
21.80
18.82
17.57
41.29
63.74
35.18
18.22
17.93
17.63
29.13
49.92
37.88
19.91
18.00 #######
27.40
100
04/10/2022 13:16
41.99
102.68
19.05
17.71
17.76
17.34
40.35
55.15
26.31
21.30
18.75
17.58
45.50
66.76
37.65
18.22
17.95
17.64
32.22
51.80
40.67
19.90
18.04 #######
27.52
101
04/10/2022 13:16
46.80
115.13
19.06
17.70
17.77
17.36
45.59
61.77
27.17
21.52
18.72
17.57
47.67
66.02
41.08
18.22
17.97
17.69
34.13
52.80
42.62
19.98
18.08 #######
27.65
102
04/10/2022 13:16
49.34
129.35
19.04
17.71
17.74
17.33
47.91
68.06
27.91
22.21
18.65
17.58
47.88
70.72
41.45
18.23
18.02
17.72
35.20
54.39
43.71
20.14
18.09 #######
27.86
103
04/10/2022 13:16
52.54
140.91
19.09
17.73
17.76
17.36
50.20
74.56
29.12
22.19
18.61
17.57
49.19
71.81
42.48
18.25
18.03
17.73
36.70
57.37
45.45
20.15
18.12 #######
28.00
104
04/10/2022 13:16
55.02
149.97
19.16
17.72
17.74
17.36
53.57
80.18
28.70
21.66
18.56
17.59
49.88
75.69
40.96
18.25
18.07
17.75
37.75
60.65
45.37
20.13
18.13 #######
28.07
105
04/10/2022 13:16
60.44
157.15
19.15
17.73
17.77
17.37
55.87
86.28
29.18
21.23
18.53
17.58
52.34
82.10
41.55
18.27
18.10
17.75
38.97
62.01
45.58
20.08
18.17 #######
28.10
106
04/10/2022 13:16
64.13
168.06
19.25
17.74
17.79
17.37
59.83
92.06
29.65
20.86
18.49
17.60
54.67
83.28
42.71
18.27
18.11
17.78
41.43
63.43
45.45
20.05
18.20 #######
28.21
107
04/10/2022 13:16
70.27
177.83
19.22
17.74
17.77
17.37
64.79
97.16
29.89
20.52
18.48
17.59
57.61
82.52
43.39
18.28
18.13
17.81
42.98
63.45
47.59
20.01
18.24 #######
28.21
108
04/10/2022 13:16
72.84
187.41
19.28
17.75
17.78
17.38
66.68
102.70
30.73
20.24
18.45
17.59
59.24
81.85
46.83
18.29
18.15
17.82
45.05
62.69
50.70
19.98
18.29 #######
28.20
109
04/10/2022 13:16
76.71
194.31
19.30
17.76
17.77
17.38
69.81
108.30
30.78
20.00
18.42
17.58
64.20
81.50
47.41
18.32
18.18
17.85
47.66
62.78
51.50
19.95
18.32 #######
28.27
110
04/10/2022 13:16
82.43
197.99
19.29
17.78
17.77
17.39
74.22
112.06
31.03
19.80
18.39
17.58
66.60
82.53
49.09
18.33
18.21
17.87
50.02
64.34
52.22
19.89
18.34 #######
28.33
==PAGE:262==
111
04/10/2022 13:16
86.81
204.14
19.25
17.76
17.78
17.37
76.58
116.78
31.07
19.62
18.37
17.57
66.83
81.96
51.74
18.33
18.22
17.89
52.52
65.19
54.62
19.87
18.36 #######
28.35
112
04/10/2022 13:16
92.34
209.72
19.19
17.74
17.75
17.36
81.01
120.47
31.36
19.69
18.36
17.57
66.63
84.17
54.00
18.33
18.24
17.90
53.01
66.96
57.46
19.93
18.42 #######
28.41
113
04/10/2022 13:16
93.83
214.46
19.14
17.75
17.76
17.37
83.18
124.67
31.69
19.78
18.34
17.58
68.43
84.34
59.12
18.35
18.27
17.94
53.42
69.49
58.91
19.93
18.45 #######
28.38
114
04/10/2022 13:16
97.89
221.34
19.16
17.75
17.75
17.38
84.79
129.06
32.53
19.59
18.31
17.60
70.70
87.67
63.61
18.36
18.27
17.96
53.73
70.92
62.17
19.90
18.47 #######
28.36
115
04/10/2022 13:16
103.03
226.12
19.19
17.75
17.76
17.36
86.62
132.59
32.31
19.40
18.29
17.58
73.29
89.96
62.90
18.38
18.29
17.98
54.97
72.98
62.64
19.86
18.49 #######
28.37
116
04/10/2022 13:16
108.78
230.30
19.18
17.75
17.75
17.37
90.44
136.56
32.05
19.23
18.27
17.56
75.40
91.62
63.97
18.38
18.32
18.00
58.32
73.70
62.99
19.85
18.52 #######
28.40
117
04/10/2022 13:16
116.49
234.47
19.05
17.76
17.76
17.39
97.70
139.05
32.19
19.14
18.27
17.58
81.14
91.67
66.02
18.40
18.33
17.99
59.37
73.14
62.64
19.81
18.55 #######
28.40
118
04/10/2022 13:16
121.20
240.56
19.11
17.75
17.76
17.38
101.29
142.22
32.63
19.05
18.24
17.56
79.63
95.61
66.16
18.42
18.36
18.02
60.00
72.78
64.82
19.80
18.58 #######
28.43
119
04/10/2022 13:16
130.16
244.57
19.16
17.77
17.75
17.37
105.54
145.18
32.43
18.94
18.26
17.56
77.86
99.79
68.04
18.43
18.39
18.02
58.58
76.10
65.66
19.75
18.63 #######
28.42
120
04/10/2022 13:16
138.73
243.57
18.96
17.75
17.76
17.38
113.27
145.24
32.09
18.85
18.24
17.58
77.22
97.40
67.91
18.44
18.41
18.03
58.32
75.85
65.79
19.72
18.64 #######
28.39
121
04/10/2022 13:16
143.38
248.61
19.04
17.74
17.77
17.38
115.16
147.30
32.13
18.79
18.21
17.57
84.76
100.17
68.73
18.46
18.43
18.06
59.22
75.99
67.64
19.68
18.70 #######
28.44
122
04/10/2022 13:16
152.47
251.00
19.24
17.74
17.75
17.37
124.79
148.87
31.66
18.74
18.20
17.58
89.74
106.25
69.02
18.50
18.45
18.08
60.89
79.05
69.38
19.65
18.76 #######
28.51
123
04/10/2022 13:16
160.26
255.34
19.09
17.75
17.76
17.36
130.55
148.75
31.19
18.68
18.19
17.58
89.23
112.62
67.49
18.48
18.47
18.09
60.87
78.45
70.33
19.63
18.77 #######
28.52
124
04/10/2022 13:16
169.33
257.35
19.20
17.77
17.75
17.37
136.37
149.94
31.06
18.62
18.18
17.58
89.53
113.08
69.09
18.52
18.48
18.13
60.88
76.59
71.63
19.73
18.79 #######
28.49
125
04/10/2022 13:16
176.31
257.12
19.26
17.77
17.75
17.37
138.07
152.80
31.10
18.55
18.18
17.55
86.37
108.15
75.34
18.60
18.49
18.15
60.36
76.01
74.61
19.72
18.82 #######
28.48
126
04/10/2022 13:16
181.88
261.69
19.28
17.78
17.77
17.37
140.33
154.17
30.67
18.52
18.16
17.58
87.13
109.69
76.81
18.63
18.51
18.17
60.84
75.71
75.36
19.70
18.89 #######
28.53
127
04/10/2022 13:16
186.62
265.22
19.38
17.82
17.77
17.38
145.11
155.94
30.87
18.51
18.18
17.59
88.91
112.43
79.46
18.68
18.53
18.20
61.79
74.97
78.55
19.66
18.91 #######
28.50
128
04/10/2022 13:16
189.03
268.54
19.35
17.79
17.77
17.38
143.82
158.55
30.86
18.45
18.15
17.58
91.58
109.78
79.32
18.73
18.55
18.21
61.12
74.74
79.64
19.62
18.91 #######
28.48
129
04/10/2022 13:16
187.89
269.59
19.30
17.82
17.78
17.37
142.72
157.86
30.60
18.42
18.16
17.58
98.10
110.78
78.36
18.75
18.58
18.26
62.68
77.68
79.90
19.60
18.97 #######
28.43
130
04/10/2022 13:16
191.41
272.12
19.36
17.81
17.79
17.37
145.92
157.93
30.67
18.41
18.13
17.58
105.60
114.59
82.49
18.76
18.61
18.27
64.78
79.34
79.98
19.58
19.01 #######
28.51
131
04/10/2022 13:16
196.75
274.46
19.40
17.84
17.76
17.36
151.04
156.42
30.11
18.38
18.15
17.60
106.92
111.25
88.38
18.90
18.63
18.27
66.52
77.92
82.19
19.56
19.03 #######
28.50
132
04/10/2022 13:16
201.76
276.81
19.32
17.84
17.78
17.38
155.24
158.24
30.28
18.36
18.14
17.60
105.05
109.14
94.72
18.95
18.65
18.30
66.97
77.05
85.01
19.57
19.06 #######
28.48
133
04/10/2022 13:16
205.56
279.25
19.35
17.87
17.80
17.38
157.92
159.45
30.41
18.34
18.15
17.60
110.23
110.43
98.73
19.04
18.67
18.29
68.21
77.17
84.21
19.55
19.06 #######
28.46
134
04/10/2022 13:16
211.32
279.54
19.33
17.86
17.78
17.38
161.76
158.69
30.08
18.29
18.12
17.59
113.11
109.85
103.16
19.19
18.69
18.32
71.75
77.51
85.47
19.51
19.23 #######
28.52
135
04/10/2022 13:17
213.15
280.44
19.28
17.86
17.78
17.37
164.84
158.40
29.74
18.26
18.11
17.61
119.83
110.38
102.88
19.38
18.72
18.35
73.06
77.47
86.57
19.51
20.59 #######
28.53
136
04/10/2022 13:17
219.56
280.87
19.29
17.88
17.79
17.41
169.57
157.57
29.31
18.27
18.12
17.61
128.79
108.75
104.41
19.42
18.77
18.37
76.78
78.95
86.43
19.48
20.91 #######
28.54
137
04/10/2022 13:17
221.18
282.14
19.36
17.90
17.79
17.41
173.05
156.16
28.90
18.23
18.11
17.62
128.68
110.65
112.12
19.55
18.78
18.42
78.96
79.21
86.71
19.46
21.98 #######
28.52
138
04/10/2022 13:17
223.94
284.09
19.19
17.92
17.80
17.40
172.18
156.19
28.66
18.23
18.10
17.63
136.15
112.60
110.42
19.53
18.83
18.45
79.75
79.85
87.03
19.45
22.13 #######
28.56
139
04/10/2022 13:17
229.86
288.05
19.18
17.95
17.79
17.39
179.66
156.31
28.57
18.21
18.10
17.64
139.47
120.25
116.44
19.58
18.84
18.45
80.17
85.44
89.45
19.42
22.24 #######
28.57
140
04/10/2022 13:17
234.04
294.07
19.09
17.97
17.79
17.40
180.01
155.39
28.28
18.18
18.08
17.64
142.20
124.70
115.32
19.89
18.87
18.48
83.79
85.72
89.57
19.41
22.72 #######
28.62
141
04/10/2022 13:17
237.51
301.70
19.03
17.99
17.79
17.40
183.05
156.69
28.25
18.20
18.09
17.68
143.70
120.78
116.22
20.07
18.89
18.48
84.35
85.88
90.07
19.39
23.88 #######
28.68
142
04/10/2022 13:17
240.86
310.56
19.19
18.04
17.79
17.40
181.63
160.57
28.65
18.21
18.09
17.64
142.21
118.34
120.05
20.05
18.94
18.55
83.39
86.09
93.03
19.38
23.76 #######
28.64
143
04/10/2022 13:17
240.46
311.46
19.11
18.08
17.80
17.42
182.10
160.71
28.40
18.20
18.10
17.67
145.01
119.05
117.96
20.05
18.96
18.55
84.22
84.52
92.47
19.37
23.61 #######
28.67
144
04/10/2022 13:17
243.50
314.64
19.07
18.09
17.79
17.42
183.25
165.47
29.07
18.22
18.09
17.66
152.55
118.89
118.35
20.31
18.98
18.56
87.73
85.12
94.89
19.37
23.45 #######
28.69
145
04/10/2022 13:17
247.84
318.89
19.10
18.12
17.81
17.42
184.44
169.22
28.69
18.21
18.10
17.69
152.64
121.92
120.99
20.27
19.00
18.60
90.69
85.52
100.29
19.36
23.26 #######
28.64
146
04/10/2022 13:17
254.60
322.93
19.14
18.13
17.80
17.40
189.45
171.62
29.00
18.25
18.11
17.69
159.00
125.90
126.08
20.30
19.03
18.62
92.47
88.58
101.14
19.35
23.06 #######
28.67
147
04/10/2022 13:17
260.26
328.77
19.20
18.16
17.81
17.43
191.74
172.02
28.62
18.26
18.12
17.69
159.47
122.50
123.80
20.28
19.05
18.67
94.88
88.54
103.68
19.36
22.89 #######
28.68
148
04/10/2022 13:17
265.52
334.38
19.40
18.17
17.82
17.42
193.61
172.58
28.60
18.27
18.11
17.69
156.17
128.10
126.15
20.29
19.06
18.67
94.41
92.17
104.01
19.32
22.67 #######
28.68
149
04/10/2022 13:17
271.52
336.20
19.36
18.18
17.81
17.43
198.12
171.37
28.33
18.26
18.11
17.70
160.48
134.23
123.89
20.33
19.08
18.66
94.54
92.89
101.99
19.32
22.52 #######
28.65
150
04/10/2022 13:17
279.63
339.31
19.45
18.22
17.83
17.45
207.39
169.43
27.93
18.29
18.10
17.70
163.02
132.82
129.99
20.38
19.11
18.68
95.07
92.84
100.74
19.30
24.79 #######
28.66
151
04/10/2022 13:17
282.15
348.16
19.50
18.24
17.84
17.43
209.30
173.83
28.32
18.29
18.10
17.71
164.99
138.37
134.53
20.36
19.14
18.72
95.28
92.96
102.42
19.29
24.75 #######
28.65
152
04/10/2022 13:17
289.39
353.31
19.49
18.27
17.84
17.46
217.83
173.26
28.06
18.29
18.12
17.72
165.47
140.51
133.70
20.34
19.17
18.73
96.49
94.91
103.47
19.31
24.54 #######
28.65
153
04/10/2022 13:17
301.33
351.72
19.39
18.28
17.84
17.46
228.21
172.69
27.71
18.28
18.13
17.74
168.37
147.79
134.24
20.77
19.18
18.75
97.02
96.23
103.81
19.29
24.53 #######
28.68
154
04/10/2022 13:17
310.25
351.56
19.53
18.26
17.84
17.47
233.52
170.82
27.47
18.29
18.13
17.75
179.34
149.17
135.06
20.98
19.20
18.77
99.61
96.59
105.56
19.29
24.21 #######
28.64
155
04/10/2022 13:17
315.20
349.64
19.49
18.28
17.85
17.47
234.45
171.22
27.48
18.28
18.12
17.75
185.88
149.06
139.64
20.95
19.24
18.80
102.51
100.30
104.61
19.30
23.93 #######
28.65
156
04/10/2022 13:17
314.96
361.54
19.51
18.30
17.86
17.49
231.35
174.67
27.75
18.30
18.12
17.76
185.81
155.91
135.22
21.03
19.24
18.80
102.21
100.97
103.29
19.31
23.70 #######
28.70
157
04/10/2022 13:17
318.02
363.69
19.37
18.31
17.85
17.46
234.76
177.40
28.93
18.29
18.13
17.77
187.55
149.30
143.29
21.11
19.26
18.84
104.05
100.68
104.43
19.32
23.63 #######
28.67
158
04/10/2022 13:17
321.37
372.59
19.70
18.35
17.85
17.47
236.29
183.72
30.20
18.35
18.13
17.75
199.42
155.33
137.32
21.25
19.28
18.84
106.88
100.44
105.20
19.40
23.50 #######
28.69
159
04/10/2022 13:17
328.46
377.09
19.79
18.35
17.86
17.46
238.08
186.39
30.23
19.07
18.14
17.78
195.96
157.33
133.90
21.30
19.32
18.87
107.62
100.90
106.28
19.49
23.32 #######
28.68
160
04/10/2022 13:17
334.29
379.56
19.94
18.38
17.86
17.45
246.08
185.17
29.69
19.00
18.13
17.78
197.85
156.63
133.23
21.42
19.34
18.90
106.27
102.15
106.97
19.50
23.50 #######
28.71
161
04/10/2022 13:17
347.24
389.59
20.30
18.41
17.85
17.46
248.48
189.20
29.49
18.92
18.13
17.79
199.26
165.48
142.84
21.56
19.38
18.91
108.63
103.29
108.66
19.53
23.67 #######
28.71
162
04/10/2022 13:17
355.81
392.30
20.13
18.41
17.89
17.46
257.17
187.93
29.26
18.85
18.14
17.80
206.49
170.50
145.95
21.72
19.38
18.91
110.89
105.37
110.29
19.55
24.62 #######
28.74
163
04/10/2022 13:17
360.11
393.30
20.10
18.44
17.86
17.48
266.84
186.70
29.01
18.78
18.15
17.80
208.36
173.85
143.62
21.78
19.43
18.94
108.87
106.41
112.79
19.55
25.28 #######
28.70
164
04/10/2022 13:17
369.57
390.47
20.19
18.47
17.89
17.48
276.04
185.11
28.94
18.72
18.14
17.80
202.70
182.65
140.76
21.96
19.43
18.95
107.08
107.18
114.26
19.59
25.32 #######
28.75
165
04/10/2022 13:17
381.05
397.81
20.15
18.51
17.89
17.47
286.41
184.89
30.34
18.66
18.16
17.80
210.20
194.34
140.04
22.04
19.46
18.99
109.35
111.25
114.17
19.58
25.02 #######
28.75
166
04/10/2022 13:17
386.30
400.10
20.07
18.53
17.90
17.49
294.26
186.44
31.49
18.63
18.17
17.81
212.56
193.03
142.29
22.03
19.48
18.99
109.12
109.99
116.66
19.59
25.45 #######
28.71
==PAGE:263==
167
04/10/2022 13:17
387.77
411.79
20.02
18.56
17.90
17.47
295.72
189.83
30.83
18.57
18.18
17.85
217.25
196.33
146.27
22.26
19.52
19.01
109.78
114.59
120.88
19.57
25.21 #######
28.73
168
04/10/2022 13:17
408.07
411.58
19.89
18.60
17.92
17.49
313.35
187.96
30.33
18.57
18.19
17.87
224.67
191.45
152.65
22.26
19.55
19.06
113.02
113.70
126.60
19.57
25.01 #######
28.80
169
04/10/2022 13:17
411.21
420.10
20.05
18.64
17.93
17.49
318.72
190.86
30.58
18.54
18.20
17.88
240.82
197.17
154.57
22.28
19.56
19.07
118.92
115.41
129.64
19.59
25.14 #######
28.83
170
04/10/2022 13:17
417.32
427.67
20.15
18.68
17.94
17.49
326.08
192.85
30.27
18.53
18.18
17.89
236.89
202.35
157.66
22.33
19.60
19.06
121.40
118.92
131.89
19.60
25.15 #######
28.84
171
04/10/2022 13:17
424.98
430.48
20.20
18.71
17.95
17.50
336.85
191.68
29.84
18.53
18.21
17.90
239.96
196.92
156.96
22.31
19.61
19.10
120.24
116.88
134.74
19.60
25.32 #######
28.82
172
04/10/2022 13:17
430.98
441.26
20.17
18.75
17.95
17.51
344.35
190.64
29.37
18.51
18.22
17.90
240.95
192.53
162.29
22.30
19.64
19.14
122.59
119.13
135.88
19.62
25.13 #######
28.84
173
04/10/2022 13:17
441.17
448.59
20.18
18.80
17.98
17.51
352.37
195.25
29.37
18.51
18.24
17.93
244.24
192.89
161.89
22.28
19.67
19.15
121.82
119.00
135.25
19.63
25.03 #######
28.87
174
04/10/2022 13:17
447.12
460.23
20.31
18.86
17.99
17.53
362.45
199.65
29.14
18.52
18.26
17.93
249.44
206.66
162.60
22.32
19.71
19.18
122.86
124.24
133.65
19.65
24.87 #######
28.89
175
04/10/2022 13:17
453.81
469.14
20.19
18.87
18.00
17.53
367.89
200.66
28.94
18.53
18.26
17.97
258.24
203.90
164.29
22.32
19.74
19.21
127.26
124.39
134.64
19.66
25.13 #######
28.88
176
04/10/2022 13:17
460.62
483.34
20.10
18.96
18.02
17.55
370.83
208.03
28.81
18.54
18.27
17.95
253.24
203.19
159.48
22.31
19.77
19.21
129.66
123.39
133.41
19.66
25.15 #######
28.91
177
04/10/2022 13:17
461.31
502.30
20.08
19.01
18.04
17.54
366.34
217.25
29.30
18.57
18.27
17.98
254.10
208.23
159.03
22.30
19.78
19.24
129.70
121.87
133.65
19.71
25.45 #######
28.86
178
04/10/2022 13:17
464.60
512.17
20.12
19.04
18.04
17.53
373.60
219.78
29.19
18.61
18.29
17.99
256.56
211.97
161.29
22.37
19.82
19.25
131.06
123.34
131.30
19.71
25.25 #######
28.78
179
04/10/2022 13:17
467.05
531.78
20.29
19.10
18.09
17.53
375.44
231.03
30.05
18.64
18.30
17.99
262.21
205.04
160.26
22.60
19.85
19.28
129.20
123.09
132.45
19.75
26.78 #######
28.74
180
04/10/2022 13:17
468.42
556.44
20.40
19.12
18.05
17.53
373.82
243.68
30.65
18.65
18.32
18.01
262.93
202.46
176.92
22.64
19.86
19.32
129.55
124.68
132.68
19.78
26.94 #######
28.74
181
04/10/2022 13:17
471.23
565.39
20.35
19.21
18.09
17.53
371.48
251.42
30.43
18.67
18.34
18.02
257.49
206.73
176.47
22.66
19.89
19.36
127.50
123.75
137.67
19.79
26.94 #######
28.70
182
04/10/2022 13:17
477.44
586.02
20.45
19.27
18.10
17.55
370.57
268.34
30.74
18.73
18.35
18.07
255.67
222.33
173.04
22.83
19.91
19.37
127.51
125.06
136.01
19.83
26.78 #######
28.71
183
04/10/2022 13:17
485.04
612.30
20.67
19.34
18.11
17.55
379.48
280.68
31.29
18.74
18.36
18.10
262.45
219.71
171.66
22.85
19.92
19.41
129.85
125.07
138.79
19.88
26.46 #######
28.68
184
04/10/2022 13:17
487.58
635.06
20.73
19.42
18.14
17.58
382.33
294.14
31.46
18.80
18.41
18.10
253.18
222.18
176.99
22.86
19.97
19.43
128.04
121.14
139.10
19.90
26.21 #######
28.67
185
04/10/2022 13:17
492.23
658.24
20.66
19.49
18.15
17.57
386.75
310.29
31.67
18.83
18.43
18.12
258.20
215.94
174.35
22.82
19.99
19.44
128.85
122.65
137.08
19.91
26.29 #######
28.63
186
04/10/2022 13:18
499.83
668.70
20.57
19.53
18.17
17.56
398.60
315.73
32.07
18.88
18.46
18.14
272.77
217.23
176.67
22.89
20.03
19.48
134.78
126.32
132.89
19.95
26.20 #######
28.72
187
04/10/2022 13:18
507.06
684.75
20.62
19.59
18.17
17.59
409.44
322.57
32.02
18.92
18.48
18.14
287.18
225.55
176.10
22.89
20.04
19.49
135.06
126.45
131.51
19.99
26.05 #######
28.78
188
04/10/2022 13:18
513.53
699.66
20.64
19.67
18.21
17.56
421.05
333.18
32.24
18.96
18.50
18.13
294.74
232.72
171.59
22.97
20.06
19.52
137.10
133.11
131.10
20.02
26.07 #######
28.77
189
04/10/2022 13:18
518.78
717.46
20.65
19.75
18.23
17.57
437.32
341.30
32.73
19.05
18.52
18.14
298.01
231.61
172.34
23.00
20.09
19.56
136.03
133.90
126.85
20.09
25.97 #######
28.77
190
04/10/2022 13:18
526.41
741.68
20.67
19.85
18.27
17.60
439.80
362.31
34.65
19.10
18.55
18.14
299.60
234.83
167.99
22.95
20.08
19.54
134.00
139.11
129.41
20.18
25.67 #######
28.74
191
04/10/2022 13:18
532.39
757.68
20.81
19.92
18.29
17.60
456.56
372.31
34.49
19.18
18.58
18.14
296.69
238.55
164.16
22.89
20.12
19.55
135.50
143.89
126.25
20.25
25.36 #######
28.72
192
04/10/2022 13:18
534.91
769.87
20.85
19.99
18.31
17.63
460.91
390.27
35.39
19.21
18.60
18.13
297.61
235.60
167.00
22.89
20.11
19.57
132.28
139.22
123.49
20.30
25.22 #######
28.62
193
04/10/2022 13:18
538.02
781.33
21.00
20.04
18.33
17.61
469.96
398.99
35.97
19.30
18.61
18.13
322.94
242.30
172.41
22.87
20.13
19.57
138.80
140.49
127.13
20.34
24.98 #######
28.62
194
04/10/2022 13:18
536.89
789.68
21.04
20.15
18.38
17.61
478.90
417.79
36.83
19.37
18.63
18.15
329.35
244.98
170.48
22.90
20.15
19.59
141.07
143.38
130.49
20.41
24.84 #######
28.59
195
04/10/2022 13:18
543.41
801.18
21.11
20.21
18.38
17.63
490.25
436.57
37.90
19.44
18.68
18.15
337.41
254.47
167.46
22.88
20.15
19.61
144.85
144.40
129.37
20.46
24.66 #######
28.56
196
04/10/2022 13:18
548.95
805.95
21.21
20.23
18.40
17.64
496.44
453.43
39.46
19.50
18.70
18.14
335.24
266.27
165.12
22.92
20.15
19.59
142.79
143.59
129.03
20.56
24.46 #######
28.59
197
04/10/2022 13:18
559.06
804.54
21.43
20.31
18.45
17.64
507.32
460.33
40.91
19.79
18.73
18.13
345.99
277.10
168.91
22.94
20.16
19.62
141.35
148.49
127.75
20.63
24.32 #######
28.53
198
04/10/2022 13:18
555.33
812.00
21.61
20.36
18.44
17.62
510.97
480.28
42.30
19.84
18.75
18.15
333.30
279.55
168.68
22.95
20.19
19.62
137.87
155.09
125.92
20.67
24.21 #######
28.53
199
04/10/2022 13:18
558.81
816.46
21.76
20.43
18.46
17.64
522.30
486.99
42.46
19.84
18.76
18.16
327.04
300.12
170.41
22.92
20.22
19.62
141.77
158.26
125.80
20.70
24.06 #######
28.41
200
04/10/2022 13:18
559.21
812.48
21.80
20.48
18.49
17.62
531.80
496.04
42.82
19.82
18.77
18.15
325.86
322.75
168.22
22.94
20.22
19.66
145.22
162.70
125.59
20.74
23.92 #######
28.41
201
04/10/2022 13:18
562.96
813.01
21.83
20.54
18.51
17.62
542.93
507.73
43.25
19.80
18.83
18.14
310.45
320.01
172.97
22.98
20.23
19.66
142.15
164.85
127.06
20.78
23.75 #######
28.39
202
04/10/2022 13:18
570.30
817.54
21.79
20.60
18.55
17.66
555.66
512.99
43.61
19.84
18.87
18.14
304.33
323.54
170.25
22.98
20.26
19.66
141.72
163.66
133.46
20.84
23.59 #######
28.49
203
04/10/2022 13:18
581.78
810.63
21.77
20.69
18.55
17.66
570.90
524.14
43.71
19.84
18.86
18.16
300.55
315.23
172.11
23.00
20.30
19.70
138.11
158.56
137.29
20.90
23.47 #######
28.48
204
04/10/2022 13:18
584.69
814.06
21.85
20.77
18.57
17.68
575.58
537.51
44.03
19.91
18.88
18.15
294.94
312.85
171.50
22.99
20.30
19.72
137.83
159.94
138.93
20.92
23.46 #######
28.59
205
04/10/2022 13:18
586.41
821.46
21.88
20.83
18.61
17.66
581.16
547.88
45.06
19.92
18.93
18.12
289.64
309.43
167.22
23.00
20.29
19.73
134.05
156.36
138.65
21.00
23.42 #######
28.55
206
04/10/2022 13:18
584.97
825.67
22.01
20.88
18.63
17.67
584.69
562.05
45.97
19.97
18.93
18.13
287.12
314.25
165.23
22.97
20.28
19.72
129.99
161.63
136.31
21.04
23.31 #######
28.62
207
04/10/2022 13:18
591.57
829.37
22.05
20.92
18.66
17.67
599.24
573.78
46.39
20.26
18.97
18.14
283.22
311.71
166.92
22.98
20.31
19.73
128.85
156.24
136.35
21.10
23.23 #######
28.70
208
04/10/2022 13:18
591.52
827.98
22.17
20.99
18.69
17.68
607.13
578.16
46.25
20.31
18.98
18.14
288.47
308.16
174.18
22.98
20.31
19.73
131.82
159.17
139.47
21.15
23.36 #######
28.74
209
04/10/2022 13:18
593.88
823.55
22.13
21.03
18.71
17.67
621.30
587.94
46.35
20.28
19.03
18.15
294.64
296.88
172.52
23.00
20.30
19.74
134.91
154.19
139.05
21.20
23.31 #######
28.81
210
04/10/2022 13:18
589.46
818.72
22.15
21.05
18.71
17.66
630.27
585.65
45.62
20.31
19.04
18.15
297.21
296.23
180.94
23.02
20.35
19.76
135.58
154.05
143.10
21.25
23.42 #######
28.93
211
04/10/2022 13:18
593.02
821.08
22.26
21.13
18.73
17.64
648.68
590.82
46.22
20.33
19.04
18.18
302.82
297.21
185.32
23.13
20.36
19.80
132.49
152.92
143.05
21.29
23.72 #######
28.91
212
04/10/2022 13:18
591.51
824.27
22.35
21.18
18.76
17.66
650.62
598.67
46.71
20.35
19.07
18.16
302.53
293.20
180.76
23.20
20.36
19.79
133.37
149.54
141.75
21.36
23.92 #######
28.90
213
04/10/2022 13:18
595.17
821.77
22.47
21.24
18.76
17.65
664.70
598.73
46.68
20.40
19.10
18.16
293.87
292.43
177.58
23.30
20.38
19.78
131.82
148.29
140.48
21.39
24.58 #######
28.94
214
04/10/2022 13:18
596.49
823.85
22.81
21.30
18.79
17.66
673.46
605.90
47.90
20.37
19.14
18.18
295.27
287.07
171.75
23.36
20.38
19.81
133.13
149.31
137.23
21.45
24.40 #######
29.03
215
04/10/2022 13:18
600.46
827.24
23.12
21.35
18.81
17.65
680.52
611.48
47.75
20.37
19.14
18.17
302.39
283.23
171.47
23.42
20.42
19.85
135.19
148.41
144.84
21.52
24.57 #######
28.95
216
04/10/2022 13:18
596.16
824.90
23.15
21.38
18.84
17.65
688.35
620.24
48.43
20.44
19.18
18.19
305.03
287.75
171.57
23.49
20.46
19.86
140.49
148.80
142.06
21.55
24.84 #######
28.98
217
04/10/2022 13:18
594.51
831.56
23.07
21.41
18.85
17.66
702.57
624.89
48.44
20.49
19.22
18.18
305.40
276.20
169.62
23.53
20.46
19.87
140.84
150.78
142.16
21.58
25.67 #######
28.94
218
04/10/2022 13:18
591.49
833.47
23.09
21.49
18.88
17.63
707.80
631.39
49.15
20.52
19.23
18.21
300.76
263.33
172.62
23.54
20.50
19.87
140.26
147.53
143.08
21.66
26.30 #######
28.90
219
04/10/2022 13:18
590.80
836.95
23.09
21.54
18.91
17.65
710.07
638.75
49.61
20.59
19.26
18.18
303.04
259.49
171.01
23.92
20.52
19.89
139.53
148.71
140.25
21.69
26.66 #######
28.92
220
04/10/2022 13:18
587.58
837.08
23.22
21.57
18.91
17.65
717.82
649.11
50.00
20.62
19.27
18.21
299.58
257.49
170.88
23.99
20.55
19.91
144.58
144.94
142.28
21.74
27.65 #######
28.92
221
04/10/2022 13:18
587.22
839.54
23.22
21.61
18.95
17.65
723.58
657.70
50.22
20.67
19.31
18.20
311.91
250.55
174.97
24.02
20.55
19.92
142.51
145.26
144.69
21.80
27.96 #######
28.91
222
04/10/2022 13:18
580.55
842.38
23.25
21.70
18.96
17.65
724.33
661.61
51.85
20.72
19.35
18.22
305.38
244.98
183.19
24.32
20.58
19.90
138.76
147.21
140.38
21.86
28.79 #######
28.77
==PAGE:264==
223
04/10/2022 13:18
561.43
839.22
23.56
21.78
18.99
17.64
722.76
673.01
71.01
21.41
19.42
18.22
279.03
233.86
181.86
26.39
20.84
19.96
128.64
135.34
135.49
23.72
35.72 #######
28.63
224
04/10/2022 13:18
542.02
822.96
25.99
21.91
19.04
17.64
699.46
693.02
110.74
27.14
19.48
18.21
257.02
218.82
186.88
27.16
21.67
20.89
120.53
125.71
130.74
24.38
39.48 #######
28.48
225
04/10/2022 13:18
526.57
816.28
28.14
22.80
19.06
17.66
682.41
706.09
137.73
29.35
19.52
18.36
237.64
204.84
174.52
27.15
23.11
23.08
112.27
117.63
124.68
40.67
40.21 #######
28.38
226
04/10/2022 13:18
507.94
796.33
43.87
24.35
19.14
17.77
647.92
729.37
202.87
68.28
19.99
18.48
221.57
191.62
163.48
28.47
24.75
24.39
104.85
110.29
118.07
39.39
43.28 #######
28.27
227
04/10/2022 13:18
496.45
795.44
47.51
28.64
19.30
18.09
635.30
745.11
234.57
81.62
20.33
18.60
210.01
181.06
154.61
28.95
26.14
26.44
98.68
104.19
112.12
45.43
44.66 #######
28.21
228
04/10/2022 13:18
481.55
791.73
56.15
30.10
19.69
18.61
613.30
757.04
272.13
85.35
20.46
18.76
199.92
177.01
150.16
29.12
28.45
27.66
93.13
99.35
107.66
51.90
45.16 #######
28.16
229
04/10/2022 13:18
469.17
796.95
63.03
32.41
19.97
18.91
583.71
766.73
310.20
92.38
20.82
19.01
189.32
168.72
142.02
29.20
29.22
28.30
88.35
94.54
102.88
54.84
44.06 #######
28.06
230
04/10/2022 13:18
459.41
802.03
68.43
36.03
20.33
19.20
567.53
768.89
331.52
100.21
21.06
19.21
180.74
162.25
137.75
29.28
29.81
28.72
83.83
91.22
99.13
66.43
42.57 #######
28.03
231
04/10/2022 13:18
449.34
803.46
76.21
36.96
20.55
19.48
555.81
777.19
360.77
115.30
21.78
19.59
174.17
155.51
132.48
29.69
30.93
29.89
80.28
88.38
95.11
67.29
46.06 #######
27.95
232
04/10/2022 13:18
439.06
803.16
82.96
36.96
20.70
19.54
538.48
787.03
396.85
107.30
21.91
19.76
167.51
150.37
126.33
30.03
32.43
30.32
76.32
86.02
91.25
66.98
47.27 #######
27.88
233
04/10/2022 13:18
436.00
813.82
85.41
37.46
20.76
19.62
529.95
778.24
398.95
101.56
21.96
19.94
159.38
144.09
120.23
30.32
32.69
30.40
72.33
82.79
86.34
69.84
45.98 #######
27.86
234
04/10/2022 13:18
425.88
810.71
91.61
38.74
21.08
19.66
515.06
784.51
421.54
99.45
22.01
20.03
152.53
143.74
116.27
30.50
33.40
30.07
69.83
82.62
83.13
72.90
45.30 #######
27.86
235
04/10/2022 13:18
417.59
810.99
97.56
41.50
21.49
19.85
498.70
790.21
439.19
110.69
22.28
20.07
146.19
138.97
111.38
31.04
34.77
31.87
66.78
80.15
79.37
80.63
43.88 #######
27.83
236
04/10/2022 13:18
407.52
806.26
106.96
45.37
21.70
20.18
487.08
800.32
460.62
120.26
22.55
20.46
142.58
135.72
107.35
31.22
35.09
33.49
65.15
79.03
75.98
83.16
42.56 #######
27.81
237
04/10/2022 13:18
399.47
800.94
119.12
46.56
21.90
20.43
472.76
806.74
485.69
126.82
22.80
20.78
139.61
138.40
102.65
31.09
35.60
34.21
62.96
78.26
73.61
85.86
41.39 #######
27.76
238
04/10/2022 13:19
391.39
793.02
131.29
46.95
22.31
20.73
461.18
815.25
512.18
125.98
23.04
20.96
135.72
139.12
99.72
31.24
35.16
33.96
61.41
77.44
71.54
86.95
42.60 #######
27.81
239
04/10/2022 13:19
387.05
799.63
140.96
53.57
22.54
20.90
451.22
808.81
522.05
133.78
24.36
21.02
130.70
134.38
96.87
31.26
35.21
34.43
59.34
75.92
68.87
91.91
41.30 #######
27.87
240
04/10/2022 13:19
383.57
800.78
147.40
56.92
22.84
21.38
444.12
809.66
543.31
132.53
24.75
21.40
127.76
132.65
93.24
31.34
35.33
34.33
57.84
75.86
66.17
95.84
40.17 #######
27.85
241
04/10/2022 13:19
382.59
805.83
153.14
62.76
23.05
21.57
436.26
804.37
565.71
142.56
26.57
21.56
126.91
128.73
89.11
31.14
34.26
33.80
58.84
75.13
63.24
98.85
38.99 #######
27.84
242
04/10/2022 13:19
376.81
806.65
160.10
68.12
23.60
22.19
427.36
801.79
586.74
151.95
27.56
21.85
122.62
127.46
89.41
31.49
34.62
34.04
56.98
73.12
61.38
104.76
40.50 #######
27.84
243
04/10/2022 13:19
374.03
804.87
165.96
72.24
24.04
22.46
419.49
801.45
603.22
160.17
28.42
22.16
120.78
126.66
89.44
31.38
34.22
33.96
55.99
72.82
59.72
119.48
38.96 #######
27.82
244
04/10/2022 13:19
366.78
784.57
176.69
78.05
24.33
22.58
404.96
802.84
622.50
196.25
29.61
22.45
118.41
125.88
85.65
31.28
33.60
33.34
55.74
74.73
58.89
134.06
38.88 #######
27.78
245
04/10/2022 13:19
358.09
766.16
188.38
80.89
24.92
23.29
387.94
801.55
641.05
209.71
30.06
22.74
115.52
121.25
82.88
31.30
34.33
34.58
54.48
73.38
57.29
138.96
38.94 #######
27.79
246
04/10/2022 13:19
349.78
768.47
196.28
85.76
25.26
23.67
375.56
798.04
642.39
210.69
30.82
22.94
112.48
118.15
80.04
31.29
34.36
34.84
53.30
71.91
55.27
149.58
37.91 #######
27.82
247
04/10/2022 13:19
344.61
760.26
209.60
99.33
25.60
24.06
366.53
796.12
648.62
234.13
32.95
23.19
115.60
116.98
79.73
31.35
33.69
33.60
53.75
71.96
53.96
157.64
37.02 #######
27.76
248
04/10/2022 13:19
341.62
754.46
218.05
104.90
26.25
24.56
362.42
795.38
649.63
252.18
33.14
23.44
111.82
113.66
77.86
31.47
33.47
34.69
52.14
70.57
52.10
162.64
36.19 #######
27.81
249
04/10/2022 13:19
341.93
753.88
225.98
110.36
26.60
24.82
358.59
792.14
649.97
252.00
34.55
23.70
107.72
112.12
75.20
31.46
32.94
35.41
50.64
69.43
50.36
166.83
35.00 #######
27.78
250
04/10/2022 13:19
336.25
743.23
236.11
117.58
26.99
25.02
352.58
790.85
651.11
268.89
34.82
23.93
104.43
108.81
73.09
31.56
32.95
35.43
49.58
68.82
48.26
180.20
34.08 #######
27.75
251
04/10/2022 13:19
328.51
731.62
245.03
118.66
27.27
25.32
343.89
788.77
652.95
271.52
35.04
24.30
104.35
109.51
73.74
31.73
33.12
35.31
48.13
67.80
47.15
179.78
34.91 #######
27.74
252
04/10/2022 13:19
327.95
729.42
250.60
116.62
27.55
25.46
342.09
784.30
659.53
242.81
34.96
24.41
109.62
109.24
72.63
31.78
32.94
34.53
48.59
68.22
45.82
178.85
33.69 #######
27.71
253
04/10/2022 13:19
321.63
731.02
257.59
115.33
27.67
25.32
336.54
781.23
661.13
239.50
34.92
24.48
107.61
107.35
71.66
32.29
34.15
35.82
47.19
67.23
44.49
180.74
35.58 #######
27.73
254
04/10/2022 13:19
320.39
733.49
263.21
115.54
27.76
25.30
332.14
780.96
663.77
228.55
34.80
24.52
104.76
104.79
70.11
32.77
34.56
35.00
46.52
66.63
42.81
186.34
34.75 #######
27.67
255
04/10/2022 13:19
313.92
722.62
271.38
122.83
28.24
25.61
325.03
776.07
662.00
256.53
37.28
24.58
103.43
104.35
69.06
33.04
33.87
34.74
46.42
66.93
42.04
197.48
34.08 #######
27.69
256
04/10/2022 13:19
307.75
717.64
283.53
135.34
28.48
25.79
317.78
770.24
660.56
296.65
39.51
24.87
101.71
102.69
68.09
33.24
33.53
34.56
46.78
66.46
41.11
214.03
33.82 #######
27.68
257
04/10/2022 13:19
301.26
703.93
293.28
137.95
29.20
26.24
312.80
769.43
667.10
309.85
39.94
25.02
100.07
102.98
70.73
33.56
33.34
35.42
46.49
66.11
40.56
218.21
34.42 #######
27.70
258
04/10/2022 13:19
296.58
705.81
303.20
145.39
29.64
26.51
308.07
769.24
667.99
324.26
40.72
25.11
96.98
101.17
71.62
34.11
34.32
36.04
45.28
65.56
39.31
229.17
35.35 #######
27.72
259
04/10/2022 13:19
297.33
704.58
309.17
149.28
30.16
26.98
308.51
766.28
668.85
316.65
40.92
25.36
98.02
100.97
69.30
34.26
33.56
34.35
44.63
65.52
39.11
232.67
34.19 #######
27.69
260
04/10/2022 13:19
296.58
711.67
318.08
155.52
30.41
27.43
306.01
764.12
658.19
309.99
42.05
25.59
94.97
98.85
66.95
34.37
32.74
33.39
43.77
64.95
38.22
237.42
33.11 #######
27.74
261
04/10/2022 13:19
290.64
716.59
328.19
163.93
31.10
27.88
301.59
761.25
647.46
316.00
43.23
25.70
92.91
97.24
66.51
34.55
32.60
33.05
42.89
64.51
37.21
235.18
32.97 #######
27.74
262
04/10/2022 13:19
287.92
728.20
334.40
163.75
31.59
28.31
297.76
761.58
647.40
325.59
44.06
25.86
91.29
97.41
67.37
34.85
32.60
33.59
43.14
64.82
36.73
248.80
32.53 #######
27.73
263
04/10/2022 13:19
283.98
717.37
342.07
162.08
31.75
28.42
295.28
756.01
645.08
327.28
43.79
26.03
90.64
98.05
68.99
35.19
32.73
33.05
42.77
65.06
36.28
260.81
33.72 #######
27.77
264
04/10/2022 13:19
278.77
713.55
348.68
166.17
31.93
28.62
291.07
748.02
654.87
358.40
44.30
26.01
90.65
97.78
67.05
35.39
32.55
32.45
43.51
66.00
35.65
265.58
32.97 #######
27.84
265
04/10/2022 13:19
274.02
725.89
356.60
170.51
32.12
28.78
285.98
744.19
644.19
344.16
44.83
26.03
88.49
95.56
65.58
35.52
32.03
32.04
42.61
65.68
34.76
264.72
31.78 #######
27.87
266
04/10/2022 13:19
273.54
735.19
361.37
169.46
32.40
28.90
287.46
743.95
633.60
319.22
44.62
26.13
86.89
94.46
63.57
35.68
31.95
32.58
41.94
65.59
34.28
258.92
31.34 #######
27.84
267
04/10/2022 13:19
273.37
751.12
363.33
167.12
32.55
28.94
286.63
744.75
629.10
310.36
44.97
26.25
86.18
94.68
64.42
35.90
31.74
33.09
41.72
65.51
33.93
257.65
30.85 #######
27.79
268
04/10/2022 13:19
268.54
745.01
367.59
166.13
32.80
29.11
286.68
744.46
633.42
324.63
45.57
26.44
84.27
94.63
64.77
36.30
32.53
35.40
40.60
64.54
33.24
265.62
31.54 #######
27.79
269
04/10/2022 13:19
262.70
732.59
372.54
163.33
32.95
29.04
282.41
741.98
635.51
328.97
46.18
26.55
83.28
95.42
64.27
36.66
34.71
36.27
39.77
64.20
32.65
265.59
30.66 #######
27.78
270
04/10/2022 13:19
259.06
736.04
375.57
166.30
33.21
29.00
279.86
743.63
638.55
321.60
46.29
26.66
90.41
106.25
65.78
36.92
34.31
34.86
42.51
68.77
34.01
267.95
31.09 #######
27.72
271
04/10/2022 13:19
254.42
738.23
381.68
168.13
33.63
29.22
276.31
740.78
645.76
367.11
47.25
26.79
87.93
103.88
66.85
37.23
34.14
34.65
42.57
67.83
34.08
294.91
31.64 #######
27.65
272
04/10/2022 13:19
246.87
706.26
387.25
192.23
33.97
29.35
266.51
722.30
685.35
551.90
52.80
27.17
84.49
99.39
64.54
37.54
34.44
35.87
41.56
66.65
33.38
352.97
31.92 #######
27.63
273
04/10/2022 13:19
239.15
673.25
389.00
210.86
34.42
29.82
260.03
705.96
715.83
644.48
57.06
27.59
81.22
95.22
62.05
38.27
34.58
36.08
40.56
65.45
32.69
392.75
31.89 #######
27.62
274
04/10/2022 13:19
230.50
650.09
391.62
247.17
35.42
30.84
252.08
689.74
747.43
703.79
65.01
28.88
78.38
92.28
60.16
38.60
33.89
35.04
39.70
64.62
32.04
426.59
30.76 #######
27.67
275
04/10/2022 13:19
224.20
635.29
395.62
270.84
36.25
31.20
245.85
681.59
764.12
726.06
69.73
29.45
76.34
90.25
58.58
39.03
33.19
35.50
39.31
64.01
31.40
461.71
29.67 #######
27.65
276
04/10/2022 13:19
218.91
616.45
398.02
288.99
37.17
31.42
244.63
672.77
774.06
701.42
73.81
29.72
75.17
89.26
57.51
39.15
32.38
34.18
38.93
64.54
31.15
473.06
28.73 #######
27.72
277
04/10/2022 13:19
215.89
625.14
400.99
288.41
37.44
31.63
240.24
671.59
759.72
670.91
74.69
29.86
74.10
88.99
57.57
39.37
31.87
33.35
38.82
64.95
30.80
476.82
28.04 #######
27.73
278
04/10/2022 13:19
212.63
623.44
405.65
282.76
37.74
31.81
236.43
665.54
751.91
657.37
74.22
29.88
74.18
89.95
57.56
39.89
33.06
33.35
39.32
65.87
30.67
475.70
28.28 #######
27.72
==PAGE:265==
279
04/10/2022 13:19
211.16
641.28
405.61
268.48
37.95
31.96
237.27
669.24
724.42
579.69
73.07
29.91
74.87
91.80
60.16
40.16
32.83
32.71
39.60
66.83
30.68
471.09
28.71 #######
27.75
280
04/10/2022 13:19
210.45
655.70
406.48
256.88
38.01
32.07
238.42
669.08
718.93
569.99
72.20
29.77
75.24
96.17
60.52
40.56
33.00
32.91
41.19
68.07
32.40
462.90
28.65 #######
27.73
281
04/10/2022 13:19
207.03
666.87
407.78
244.12
38.10
31.89
237.99
670.40
711.29
540.26
71.03
29.73
74.76
95.32
59.48
41.04
32.43
32.21
40.75
67.84
32.35
459.76
29.52 #######
27.73
282
04/10/2022 13:19
204.40
672.47
407.56
232.36
37.99
31.65
235.51
669.24
700.46
493.19
69.44
29.48
73.63
94.39
60.00
41.42
31.93
31.84
40.12
67.47
32.20
448.40
29.93 #######
27.73
283
04/10/2022 13:19
203.99
678.66
408.23
225.17
38.07
31.71
237.76
671.45
690.48
470.75
68.70
29.39
73.88
95.72
60.68
41.82
31.62
31.37
41.59
68.48
33.05
444.81
30.04 #######
27.74
284
04/10/2022 13:19
200.52
675.68
412.46
219.52
38.33
31.56
235.17
666.69
694.08
519.44
68.22
29.35
73.22
95.24
60.14
42.28
31.13
30.85
40.87
68.22
32.81
440.24
30.16 #######
27.78
285
04/10/2022 13:19
198.51
687.49
412.54
213.06
38.39
31.42
233.91
668.01
684.06
519.87
67.60
29.25
73.63
93.68
59.19
42.71
30.63
30.87
40.39
67.94
32.34
436.52
29.44 #######
27.77
286
04/10/2022 13:19
204.99
698.81
412.15
207.08
38.48
31.31
239.30
670.92
676.98
485.72
66.33
29.13
73.63
93.45
60.77
43.16
30.38
30.41
40.52
68.56
32.55
441.39
29.51 #######
27.75
287
04/10/2022 13:19
201.68
687.18
415.70
202.63
38.63
31.28
235.86
668.45
687.68
521.04
65.86
29.25
72.65
92.91
60.17
43.49
30.29
29.98
40.72
68.56
32.43
439.40
29.31 #######
27.74
288
04/10/2022 13:19
199.11
687.92
419.80
197.14
38.84
31.19
232.34
668.13
687.21
521.78
65.27
29.19
71.98
92.70
59.68
43.96
30.58
29.63
40.51
68.55
32.60
439.72
30.25 #######
27.75
289
04/10/2022 13:20
196.64
687.70
422.21
192.51
38.86
30.97
231.13
669.13
680.02
525.42
64.35
29.08
71.23
92.27
59.47
44.36
30.63
29.56
39.87
68.24
32.14
437.25
29.67 #######
27.75
290
04/10/2022 13:20
194.06
684.76
425.49
192.43
39.25
30.88
227.16
668.41
687.41
586.10
64.57
28.97
71.32
92.15
58.74
44.79
30.54
30.09
39.55
68.33
31.74
455.06
29.77 #######
27.75
291
04/10/2022 13:20
191.71
675.53
429.63
186.35
39.11
30.71
223.54
669.86
691.84
585.59
63.70
28.84
71.25
92.19
58.37
45.01
30.31
29.97
38.92
68.23
31.19
448.73
29.20 #######
27.75
292
04/10/2022 13:20
193.93
692.03
428.30
182.77
39.19
30.57
226.49
675.07
680.44
504.99
62.70
28.75
70.03
92.37
58.04
45.18
29.97
29.44
38.73
68.51
30.99
441.57
28.66 #######
27.74
293
04/10/2022 13:20
196.10
704.14
430.07
184.60
39.65
30.45
227.09
676.62
678.79
518.76
62.88
28.75
69.11
92.70
57.04
45.31
29.63
28.90
38.19
68.58
30.59
448.01
28.46 #######
27.79
294
04/10/2022 13:20
201.78
722.27
429.96
178.37
39.70
30.25
233.58
677.86
675.13
506.29
62.19
28.63
69.32
92.11
57.76
45.41
29.22
28.49
37.90
68.87
30.84
439.09
27.93 #######
27.80
295
04/10/2022 13:20
199.73
728.06
432.00
175.61
39.82
30.08
227.65
677.52
674.19
509.78
61.61
28.41
68.46
91.04
58.55
45.79
29.67
28.70
37.42
68.70
30.60
434.13
27.59 #######
27.79
296
04/10/2022 13:20
198.63
741.77
433.04
172.87
40.00
29.88
224.55
676.94
669.73
492.27
61.11
28.28
69.85
98.59
58.97
45.97
29.56
28.48
37.62
69.48
32.05
440.00
28.22 #######
27.78
297
04/10/2022 13:20
195.91
729.33
438.34
170.90
40.04
29.81
218.27
673.00
674.88
540.24
60.94
28.15
69.83
97.25
58.00
46.08
29.94
29.31
37.86
69.54
31.60
445.94
27.77 #######
27.75
298
04/10/2022 13:20
196.98
736.58
441.57
167.83
40.12
29.64
221.83
672.36
666.41
536.68
60.90
28.04
72.61
97.24
57.55
46.20
29.91
28.94
38.80
70.11
31.33
442.23
27.43 #######
27.72
299
04/10/2022 13:20
196.00
744.56
443.46
165.97
40.16
29.66
218.63
673.06
662.66
511.57
60.38
27.92
71.20
99.66
60.11
46.35
29.87
28.96
38.27
69.71
31.30
447.85
28.28 #######
27.77
300
04/10/2022 13:20
193.88
737.65
446.57
163.74
40.24
29.62
215.58
671.23
666.30
540.65
60.05
27.82
68.89
97.02
58.91
46.40
29.99
28.92
37.79
69.61
30.86
453.76
27.79 #######
27.78
301
04/10/2022 13:20
197.85
737.65
446.60
160.83
40.03
29.50
217.24
672.49
661.96
514.73
59.38
27.73
68.61
96.26
58.47
46.40
29.89
28.61
37.32
69.37
30.53
446.31
27.48 #######
27.72
302
04/10/2022 13:20
196.42
735.49
446.50
155.81
39.87
29.40
218.06
674.93
665.35
508.64
58.69
27.60
70.06
98.44
60.17
46.39
29.84
28.44
37.34
70.57
30.47
439.75
27.97 #######
27.82
303
04/10/2022 13:20
196.14
741.82
446.44
158.63
39.79
29.25
222.55
680.13
664.27
475.63
58.16
27.55
68.50
96.85
59.55
46.42
29.57
28.27
36.99
70.26
30.14
440.80
27.99 #######
27.77
304
04/10/2022 13:20
196.59
749.93
446.48
154.56
39.86
29.12
222.18
682.30
664.67
475.38
57.81
27.41
69.42
97.45
59.51
46.42
29.53
28.29
37.01
70.80
30.68
433.29
28.01 #######
27.73
305
04/10/2022 13:20
198.02
750.91
449.11
153.69
39.75
28.96
221.94
683.64
664.68
482.53
57.51
27.32
68.27
97.13
59.20
46.35
29.35
28.26
37.27
70.79
30.80
446.62
27.85 #######
27.69
306
04/10/2022 13:20
195.78
750.61
453.91
151.20
39.70
28.83
218.64
680.58
665.00
518.83
57.09
27.26
67.62
97.12
59.23
46.33
29.82
28.86
37.24
70.99
30.91
446.42
27.74 #######
27.68
307
04/10/2022 13:20
192.89
759.44
456.27
150.76
39.73
28.87
217.01
682.82
660.62
500.71
56.60
27.16
67.63
96.45
58.67
46.29
30.07
28.84
37.41
71.17
30.80
441.07
27.62 #######
27.71
308
04/10/2022 13:20
192.66
761.63
459.23
148.97
39.95
28.90
216.23
685.42
656.46
514.12
56.68
27.04
66.01
95.53
57.72
46.21
29.59
28.35
36.85
70.97
30.50
448.30
27.08 #######
27.73
309
04/10/2022 13:20
193.08
758.04
461.84
146.49
39.83
28.78
213.51
686.07
657.93
516.73
56.32
27.08
66.63
98.10
58.71
46.13
29.35
28.23
36.90
71.68
30.46
445.14
27.03 #######
27.76
310
04/10/2022 13:20
194.76
770.17
463.17
145.28
39.83
28.68
213.04
688.79
653.21
497.37
56.33
27.05
67.17
97.20
59.10
46.00
29.20
27.71
36.51
71.33
30.17
444.33
26.65 #######
27.72
311
04/10/2022 13:20
196.97
780.85
462.08
141.69
39.75
28.54
213.54
691.41
659.01
487.99
55.96
27.02
66.20
96.69
59.12
45.85
28.78
27.44
36.44
71.47
30.05
439.52
26.36 #######
27.67
312
04/10/2022 13:20
198.84
783.63
461.97
139.02
39.66
28.40
212.99
694.39
659.30
485.64
55.41
26.92
66.56
95.28
58.40
45.82
28.71
27.48
36.40
71.00
29.82
447.01
25.99 #######
27.66
313
04/10/2022 13:20
197.66
779.71
464.61
136.94
39.66
28.24
208.71
692.81
667.69
555.29
55.39
26.91
65.94
97.08
58.91
45.90
28.65
27.55
37.00
71.22
29.89
461.58
26.81 #######
27.69
314
04/10/2022 13:20
197.84
776.70
467.70
134.91
39.49
27.99
207.50
691.13
669.93
577.25
55.00
26.82
66.01
97.41
60.49
45.82
28.50
27.40
36.71
72.65
30.66
467.89
27.20 #######
27.68
315
04/10/2022 13:20
197.94
769.22
471.45
136.07
39.52
27.95
210.59
692.75
672.59
567.35
54.84
26.76
65.73
97.95
59.83
45.76
28.50
27.29
36.30
72.14
30.32
477.13
27.76 #######
27.68
316
04/10/2022 13:20
196.73
773.98
474.74
136.03
39.81
27.92
209.39
694.23
671.02
567.62
54.95
26.73
65.34
98.02
59.77
45.77
28.54
27.17
36.05
72.14
30.07
475.56
27.69 #######
27.67
317
04/10/2022 13:20
199.46
783.98
478.26
135.07
39.73
27.91
214.53
698.84
668.77
551.30
54.90
26.61
65.68
97.54
60.38
45.73
28.67
27.54
36.11
71.87
29.89
493.11
27.92 #######
27.64
318
04/10/2022 13:20
195.70
771.96
482.80
135.43
39.84
27.78
208.84
696.30
679.48
625.41
55.22
26.56
67.95
98.45
60.59
45.70
28.94
27.81
36.09
71.78
29.42
494.22
28.55 #######
27.59
319
04/10/2022 13:20
199.54
778.96
484.49
131.94
39.71
27.72
213.25
701.13
671.51
567.02
54.65
26.49
68.59
99.87
61.11
45.59
28.86
27.50
36.53
72.46
29.71
500.22
28.64 #######
27.55
320
04/10/2022 13:20
197.37
767.37
488.60
130.01
39.66
27.61
209.85
699.69
674.16
600.62
54.60
26.44
69.61
99.78
61.60
45.46
28.81
27.37
37.02
73.30
29.97
507.21
28.53 #######
27.53
321
04/10/2022 13:20
195.10
770.47
492.38
127.61
39.56
27.53
207.86
700.67
667.51
574.85
54.28
26.37
69.18
99.37
61.76
45.40
28.76
27.37
37.03
72.68
30.00
519.37
28.28 #######
27.50
322
04/10/2022 13:20
193.81
763.55
496.96
126.91
39.53
27.42
206.22
700.12
669.70
591.64
53.99
26.27
68.44
98.14
62.66
45.46
29.17
27.67
36.70
72.81
30.07
534.28
28.56 #######
27.48
323
04/10/2022 13:20
191.83
742.54
501.67
127.71
39.59
27.28
206.33
697.04
673.57
650.13
54.08
26.37
66.25
95.85
61.33
45.51
29.50
27.91
36.27
72.28
29.60
551.70
28.16 #######
27.41
324
04/10/2022 13:20
189.92
727.77
504.35
127.81
39.50
27.20
203.61
696.65
675.54
638.01
54.05
26.30
65.52
96.04
60.39
45.43
29.22
27.69
36.07
72.51
29.21
560.38
27.75 #######
27.40
325
04/10/2022 13:20
187.93
722.96
506.68
126.50
39.51
27.23
202.98
699.62
682.21
608.97
53.75
26.22
65.19
96.33
59.91
45.30
29.23
27.67
36.33
73.76
28.85
572.05
27.06 #######
27.35
326
04/10/2022 13:20
185.79
720.60
508.36
128.14
39.52
27.21
205.11
699.45
679.64
597.42
53.46
26.15
63.93
94.77
58.64
45.20
28.97
27.11
35.91
73.53
28.45
578.41
26.45 #######
27.30
327
04/10/2022 13:20
185.08
717.37
508.45
126.20
39.54
27.16
207.80
700.61
676.00
545.95
53.13
26.11
62.78
94.34
58.15
45.12
28.58
26.68
35.54
73.81
28.29
578.02
25.95 #######
27.27
328
04/10/2022 13:20
182.48
707.07
510.76
125.68
39.50
27.15
204.51
697.10
682.36
605.56
52.95
26.02
62.14
94.30
57.61
45.07
28.36
26.95
35.25
73.76
28.25
587.41
25.47 #######
27.21
329
04/10/2022 13:20
179.91
686.53
514.01
126.60
39.41
27.06
199.79
692.12
700.26
670.96
53.27
25.99
61.82
94.56
57.42
44.94
28.39
27.37
34.85
73.56
27.82
593.49
25.03 #######
27.18
330
04/10/2022 13:20
180.49
695.01
513.59
125.78
39.38
27.03
200.92
694.38
703.55
628.72
53.02
25.94
61.27
94.88
57.16
44.92
28.17
26.77
34.80
73.66
27.58
598.76
24.76 #######
27.18
331
04/10/2022 13:20
177.89
691.21
516.78
125.82
39.42
27.00
197.00
690.75
710.09
660.85
53.15
25.88
61.59
96.60
59.07
44.93
28.08
27.01
34.46
74.19
27.38
607.32
24.65 #######
27.16
332
04/10/2022 13:20
177.04
703.08
514.60
122.07
39.28
26.88
195.76
693.34
704.49
584.40
52.64
25.80
61.79
98.69
62.40
44.86
27.98
26.79
34.33
75.37
27.73
616.83
25.79 #######
27.14
333
04/10/2022 13:20
177.88
725.72
510.20
118.10
39.11
26.69
198.66
701.12
702.71
495.22
52.16
25.67
64.47
107.43
63.94
44.77
27.84
26.52
36.05
78.77
28.09
625.57
26.58 #######
27.13
334
04/10/2022 13:20
177.87
750.76
505.36
114.22
38.90
26.51
202.37
712.15
706.49
437.43
51.59
25.56
65.94
111.49
64.93
44.76
27.76
26.30
37.27
80.18
30.62
634.67
26.30 #######
27.12
==PAGE:266==
335
04/10/2022 13:20
179.02
778.21
500.37
110.88
38.64
26.24
209.34
722.38
713.34
394.55
51.09
25.41
72.42
116.15
66.06
44.78
27.68
26.13
40.18
85.08
31.26
641.51
26.25 #######
27.10
336
04/10/2022 13:20
181.27
796.62
495.01
107.80
38.41
26.04
220.63
729.89
729.81
374.48
50.70
25.27
76.34
119.43
66.36
44.78
27.58
26.02
44.77
87.54
31.46
645.45
26.17 #######
27.09
337
04/10/2022 13:20
187.10
792.76
489.69
104.94
38.12
25.77
231.76
732.74
757.73
353.96
50.20
25.12
78.09
120.81
67.13
44.79
27.50
25.95
46.99
89.65
32.03
645.25
26.09 #######
27.06
338
04/10/2022 13:20
197.14
788.28
484.44
102.27
37.80
25.59
249.54
733.95
771.34
346.81
49.78
24.95
81.20
124.48
68.06
44.79
27.40
25.77
48.46
90.26
32.60
629.42
25.86 #######
27.08
339
04/10/2022 13:20
206.95
780.29
479.36
99.86
37.62
25.35
268.31
732.56
772.47
350.07
49.27
24.81
85.39
125.91
68.87
44.78
27.34
25.66
51.26
91.35
32.97
604.71
25.70 #######
27.06
340
04/10/2022 13:20
216.77
767.45
474.14
97.75
37.44
25.14
280.14
731.40
756.60
355.85
48.85
24.65
86.58
127.39
69.31
44.75
27.25
25.51
53.06
92.50
33.54
578.25
25.69 #######
27.04
341
04/10/2022 13:21
225.27
755.96
469.09
95.66
37.17
24.88
295.87
729.37
746.50
362.57
48.42
24.52
89.31
129.26
69.66
44.71
27.14
25.45
54.13
93.77
33.84
552.15
25.48 #######
27.05
342
04/10/2022 13:21
234.41
739.67
464.11
93.57
37.00
24.71
311.52
727.23
746.38
355.59
47.91
24.38
89.83
131.03
70.63
44.68
27.06
25.38
54.47
94.83
35.00
527.95
25.31 #######
27.04
343
04/10/2022 13:21
240.13
738.16
459.25
91.80
36.80
24.50
326.01
726.50
754.37
335.02
47.49
24.26
88.96
135.02
71.52
44.66
27.03
25.31
54.14
96.65
35.80
503.83
25.21 #######
27.03
344
04/10/2022 13:21
246.74
736.64
454.23
90.10
36.62
24.31
339.93
725.48
755.90
315.40
47.07
24.15
88.16
138.63
72.11
44.62
26.94
25.24
53.67
95.97
36.13
482.44
25.16 #######
27.03
345
04/10/2022 13:21
255.41
729.11
449.32
88.39
36.44
24.14
358.31
725.44
767.48
295.43
46.59
24.06
89.62
139.02
72.33
44.56
26.87
25.14
53.95
96.55
36.45
460.55
25.05 #######
27.03
346
04/10/2022 13:21
262.83
723.01
444.57
86.69
36.24
23.96
366.76
725.66
776.87
276.20
46.25
23.95
89.74
138.26
73.01
44.52
26.82
25.05
53.95
98.02
37.17
440.60
24.93 #######
27.02
347
04/10/2022 13:21
270.93
712.65
439.86
85.13
36.05
23.79
388.89
726.47
793.61
257.12
46.06
23.85
89.37
135.94
73.46
44.42
26.75
24.99
54.72
98.45
37.47
422.85
24.91 #######
27.03
348
04/10/2022 13:21
280.26
706.89
435.05
83.71
35.81
23.60
411.22
726.70
807.15
234.05
45.85
23.75
89.73
136.53
74.28
44.40
26.65
24.94
54.81
97.73
38.86
406.65
24.83 #######
27.01
349
04/10/2022 13:21
285.28
708.73
430.75
82.40
35.60
23.46
428.58
728.99
817.43
219.21
45.60
23.65
90.40
136.71
74.85
44.34
26.60
24.89
54.93
98.37
38.88
390.91
24.74 #######
27.00
350
04/10/2022 13:21
294.15
704.94
426.58
81.16
35.44
23.31
451.73
730.09
827.17
207.80
45.29
23.50
91.50
136.66
75.21
44.30
26.54
24.77
55.60
98.96
40.46
377.59
24.88 #######
27.01
351
04/10/2022 13:21
301.27
706.14
422.70
80.13
35.30
23.18
466.69
733.00
832.42
215.34
45.06
23.43
92.21
138.26
75.61
44.28
26.51
24.75
56.94
101.25
41.44
366.32
24.85 #######
27.01
352
04/10/2022 13:21
306.38
705.65
418.73
79.05
35.17
23.04
477.91
734.43
826.73
214.10
44.80
23.32
91.25
140.39
76.12
44.21
26.47
24.70
57.56
101.98
41.64
355.30
24.80 #######
27.00
353
04/10/2022 13:21
311.77
706.18
414.85
77.94
35.00
22.94
493.32
735.82
831.01
206.34
44.61
23.25
95.12
141.34
76.18
44.18
26.44
24.67
57.66
101.07
42.39
344.29
24.85 #######
27.00
354
04/10/2022 13:21
317.75
705.10
411.18
76.95
34.79
22.81
505.53
739.17
838.07
194.93
44.52
23.14
97.65
142.02
76.42
44.11
26.39
24.64
58.00
101.19
42.01
333.55
24.90 #######
26.99
355
04/10/2022 13:21
322.36
707.92
407.76
76.08
34.65
22.66
520.52
741.16
837.29
184.94
44.30
23.10
98.49
142.39
76.93
44.04
26.36
24.62
58.42
101.63
41.85
323.59
24.96 #######
27.00
356
04/10/2022 13:21
328.83
711.52
404.41
75.05
34.44
22.52
539.80
744.50
837.79
175.17
44.04
23.04
99.46
143.27
77.93
43.99
26.33
24.53
58.96
101.69
41.71
313.88
25.04 #######
27.00
357
04/10/2022 13:21
335.55
710.53
401.19
74.08
34.31
22.42
558.41
744.46
830.53
164.46
43.77
22.97
101.16
143.73
78.29
43.90
26.31
24.47
60.28
101.68
41.16
305.22
25.04 #######
27.01
358
04/10/2022 13:21
346.05
708.25
398.11
73.05
34.17
22.30
575.71
745.52
824.48
154.23
43.46
22.91
100.14
143.45
78.25
43.86
26.30
24.46
61.77
102.00
41.54
297.28
25.18 #######
26.99
359
04/10/2022 13:21
352.62
705.50
395.40
72.24
34.01
22.18
595.38
745.53
822.12
148.32
43.17
22.83
100.44
147.46
78.51
43.76
26.30
24.41
60.41
102.44
41.86
289.46
25.14 #######
27.00
360
04/10/2022 13:21
361.93
700.33
392.87
71.47
33.88
22.05
609.13
744.31
812.02
142.75
42.92
22.78
98.70
147.36
78.48
43.67
26.30
24.38
60.91
102.49
41.88
282.09
25.10 #######
26.99
361
04/10/2022 13:21
372.01
703.41
390.39
70.70
33.75
21.95
636.64
744.61
800.13
142.37
42.69
22.71
103.59
147.57
78.79
43.59
26.26
24.35
60.41
102.88
41.71
275.68
25.13 #######
27.01
362
04/10/2022 13:21
379.15
702.12
388.13
69.90
33.68
21.85
656.50
744.61
793.18
139.18
42.47
22.61
102.49
148.02
78.94
43.50
26.21
24.31
61.17
104.11
41.53
269.90
25.13 #######
27.01
363
04/10/2022 13:21
382.89
704.66
386.09
69.13
33.55
21.78
675.18
747.42
787.84
134.49
42.28
22.57
103.39
146.05
79.11
43.42
26.21
24.27
60.44
103.72
41.20
263.08
25.17 #######
27.00
364
04/10/2022 13:21
388.20
708.67
384.24
68.58
33.45
21.67
693.86
747.78
785.67
130.54
42.12
22.50
103.23
148.32
79.30
43.33
26.19
24.27
60.92
103.81
42.37
257.63
25.05 #######
27.01
365
04/10/2022 13:21
390.53
713.25
382.48
68.06
33.33
21.55
698.88
749.23
791.01
132.02
42.09
22.45
101.74
147.80
79.64
43.23
26.15
24.22
61.11
104.26
42.02
252.84
25.09 #######
26.98
366
04/10/2022 13:21
396.40
721.68
380.66
67.49
33.19
21.49
711.34
752.58
792.60
131.90
42.02
22.41
102.79
148.32
79.69
43.16
26.14
24.19
61.99
106.14
41.95
249.08
25.12 #######
26.98
367
04/10/2022 13:21
397.81
729.66
378.90
66.84
33.07
21.41
717.82
755.30
799.00
132.95
41.96
22.33
103.86
149.69
79.90
43.06
26.12
24.14
63.28
106.58
41.81
245.93
25.14 #######
27.00
368
04/10/2022 13:21
400.01
747.41
377.14
66.35
32.92
21.34
723.32
759.27
805.02
141.60
41.84
22.30
105.53
149.38
79.95
42.98
26.11
24.14
64.42
106.64
43.52
243.24
25.12 #######
26.98
369
04/10/2022 13:21
397.26
765.91
375.53
65.89
32.79
21.23
729.72
767.57
806.56
147.38
41.79
22.22
103.34
147.05
83.69
42.94
26.14
24.15
65.04
106.71
47.57
239.63
25.04 #######
26.98
370
04/10/2022 13:21
392.66
774.74
373.97
65.34
32.69
21.14
734.05
775.44
807.00
140.25
41.64
22.18
101.22
144.78
83.08
42.93
26.16
24.19
64.10
104.85
47.86
235.22
25.00 #######
26.95
371
04/10/2022 13:21
392.03
776.41
372.40
64.96
32.60
21.08
740.49
781.23
805.47
135.48
41.48
22.13
99.70
142.72
82.00
42.75
26.17
24.26
63.09
103.91
46.70
232.43
25.41
-120.07
26.97
372
04/10/2022 13:21
391.71
783.13
371.06
64.44
32.53
21.00
743.75
781.12
805.93
132.28
41.45
22.08
97.88
141.25
82.09
42.68
26.19
24.27
62.24
102.93
46.07
229.14
25.35
-141.50
26.95
373
04/10/2022 13:21
390.69
783.77
369.50
63.96
32.44
20.96
750.53
776.80
804.24
128.16
41.33
22.05
96.61
140.90
82.00
42.67
26.21
24.30
61.32
102.55
45.79
226.53
25.48
-86.26
26.94
374
04/10/2022 13:21
388.79
788.08
368.24
63.38
32.31
20.89
751.26
773.76
803.46
124.67
41.15
22.02
95.85
139.38
82.38
42.66
26.25
24.31
60.76
102.24
45.36
223.29
25.55 #######
26.93
375
04/10/2022 13:21
388.16
781.20
366.91
63.09
32.18
20.80
756.66
770.52
796.48
120.00
41.05
21.96
94.90
138.20
83.00
42.61
26.26
24.31
59.68
101.71
45.15
219.70
25.55 #######
26.92
376
04/10/2022 13:21
385.93
780.04
365.62
62.70
32.04
20.76
745.65
767.68
790.34
118.73
40.83
21.89
94.28
137.43
83.30
42.62
26.30
24.32
58.68
101.48
45.03
216.94
25.66 #######
26.92
377
04/10/2022 13:21
385.01
771.37
364.66
62.33
31.97
20.70
740.39
762.99
787.18
121.42
40.70
21.85
93.56
136.80
83.40
42.61
26.33
24.36
58.16
101.27
44.77
214.70
25.77 #######
26.91
378
04/10/2022 13:21
383.91
762.39
363.56
61.98
31.88
20.66
745.88
760.06
784.35
120.63
40.43
21.81
93.12
135.88
83.58
42.61
26.33
24.42
57.63
100.83
44.32
211.65
25.84 #######
26.92
379
04/10/2022 13:21
382.81
751.12
362.42
61.69
31.80
20.58
734.70
756.32
778.86
117.42
40.25
21.74
92.21
135.23
84.07
42.57
26.37
24.42
56.83
100.40
44.14
209.11
25.94
-135.03
26.91
380
04/10/2022 13:21
383.65
743.86
361.31
61.33
31.71
20.57
732.44
753.00
770.28
111.73
40.10
21.71
91.87
134.77
84.48
42.57
26.42
24.41
56.66
100.54
44.13
205.73
26.06
-104.69
26.91
381
04/10/2022 13:21
382.15
739.67
360.48
61.02
31.65
20.54
721.22
749.73
768.88
109.02
39.94
21.71
91.57
134.47
84.72
42.54
26.44
24.46
56.17
100.92
43.93
203.02
26.14
-41.23
26.89
382
04/10/2022 13:21
378.87
739.90
359.63
60.70
31.58
20.51
710.48
748.49
768.54
107.10
39.78
21.67
91.09
133.58
85.55
42.51
26.46
24.50
54.80
100.71
43.11
200.70
26.11
-55.63
26.90
383
04/10/2022 13:21
375.71
738.61
358.92
60.36
31.48
20.45
705.85
745.27
765.43
106.41
39.68
21.63
89.23
130.42
86.20
42.50
26.50
24.49
45.95
81.16
41.68
198.31
26.13
-116.44
26.90
384
04/10/2022 13:21
371.61
735.43
358.36
60.09
31.41
20.39
702.15
745.20
765.75
106.65
39.57
21.62
85.18
127.63
81.65
42.47
26.50
24.49
43.50
75.60
39.73
196.20
26.13
-152.25
26.89
385
04/10/2022 13:21
367.25
724.59
357.76
59.84
31.35
20.34
687.38
744.82
765.86
109.36
39.45
21.58
83.31
126.53
77.64
42.44
26.52
24.47
41.05
72.04
37.91
194.38
26.01 #######
26.89
386
04/10/2022 13:21
362.88
718.57
357.17
59.60
31.31
20.30
680.41
742.16
769.38
111.12
39.30
21.54
77.28
123.50
70.74
42.45
26.52
24.44
36.55
66.48
36.25
193.72
25.99 #######
26.86
387
04/10/2022 13:21
358.11
704.21
356.42
59.38
31.24
20.26
659.86
741.49
769.79
116.56
39.23
21.53
69.77
119.93
62.64
42.31
26.54
24.46
35.86
59.56
34.92
192.05
25.83 #######
26.89
388
04/10/2022 13:21
355.93
699.69
355.47
59.13
31.20
20.22
645.78
741.36
767.98
116.88
39.11
21.49
65.96
111.20
56.30
41.96
26.47
24.41
33.60
54.75
32.99
191.61
25.68 #######
26.87
389
04/10/2022 13:21
352.23
693.63
354.43
58.82
31.13
20.20
610.73
738.08
768.55
117.03
38.98
21.46
59.49
98.04
52.75
41.70
26.33
24.36
33.55
52.21
31.91
189.83
25.53 #######
26.84
390
04/10/2022 13:21
351.02
690.54
352.95
58.49
31.08
20.19
594.16
736.29
760.76
113.21
38.87
21.43
55.90
84.76
50.06
41.55
26.22
24.38
33.19
52.47
30.84
188.14
25.60 #######
26.78
==PAGE:267==
391
04/10/2022 13:21
347.14
679.31
352.34
58.31
31.07
20.16
592.09
733.11
758.00
115.99
38.79
21.42
54.41
77.61
49.54
41.36
25.97
24.33
33.27
51.46
29.79
187.12
25.38 #######
26.76
392
04/10/2022 13:21
341.45
663.40
351.26
57.92
30.99
20.16
584.48
726.13
753.03
114.19
38.65
21.40
54.80
73.14
48.80
41.31
25.76
24.35
32.59
51.77
28.88
185.08
25.04 #######
26.75
393
04/10/2022 13:22
336.56
647.11
349.80
57.44
30.89
20.12
576.45
719.66
741.08
106.89
38.46
21.36
54.91
69.83
49.61
41.24
25.61
24.23
32.89
50.37
29.21
182.31
24.81 #######
26.77
394
04/10/2022 13:22
333.94
634.23
347.99
57.18
30.83
20.15
564.95
717.68
729.13
98.94
38.29
21.34
55.33
69.03
49.58
41.19
25.39
24.09
32.23
50.47
29.88
179.53
24.59 #######
26.75
395
04/10/2022 13:22
330.19
624.33
346.36
56.86
30.77
20.11
561.30
714.67
725.53
94.93
38.20
21.32
55.29
68.87
49.67
41.10
25.17
23.87
31.43
50.22
29.95
177.25
24.44 #######
26.74
396
04/10/2022 13:22
327.35
613.09
344.66
56.58
30.70
20.12
540.12
706.80
722.70
93.53
38.21
21.29
55.23
65.94
49.30
41.00
25.05
23.73
30.79
50.12
29.45
175.24
24.12 #######
26.74
397
04/10/2022 13:22
323.87
608.63
342.99
56.13
30.61
20.07
523.17
700.50
718.43
90.46
38.12
21.22
56.36
66.95
49.23
40.95
24.90
23.58
30.37
50.06
28.81
173.04
24.01 #######
26.75
398
04/10/2022 13:22
321.48
596.62
341.40
55.56
30.52
20.03
522.63
694.79
714.91
88.46
38.05
21.14
57.07
69.33
49.37
40.87
24.80
23.36
29.43
50.72
28.86
170.84
23.84 #######
26.74
399
04/10/2022 13:22
319.21
582.28
339.81
54.99
30.42
20.00
511.98
687.19
715.74
87.57
37.97
21.10
58.49
74.53
49.14
40.84
24.71
23.25
29.25
52.30
28.43
168.81
23.65 #######
26.72
400
04/10/2022 13:22
315.81
572.01
338.04
54.52
30.34
19.97
509.36
679.03
718.83
88.49
37.85
21.06
59.62
80.54
48.92
40.77
24.61
23.16
29.05
54.68
27.78
166.63
23.61 #######
26.72
401
04/10/2022 13:22
313.04
563.59
336.22
53.98
30.27
19.93
506.07
674.08
718.92
87.94
37.80
21.07
60.22
85.72
48.94
40.75
24.44
22.98
28.57
57.00
28.23
164.98
23.42 #######
26.75
402
04/10/2022 13:22
311.51
551.40
334.32
53.51
30.19
19.90
514.27
668.45
720.53
87.48
37.77
21.05
61.09
88.99
49.17
40.78
24.34
22.86
29.83
59.10
28.42
163.09
23.28 #######
26.75
403
04/10/2022 13:22
308.37
542.73
332.40
53.10
30.14
19.87
512.13
664.71
718.90
85.71
37.73
21.05
61.50
90.30
49.28
40.84
24.28
22.77
30.73
61.10
27.59
161.16
23.11 #######
26.75
404
04/10/2022 13:22
304.81
534.34
330.46
52.82
30.12
19.83
518.06
660.54
727.90
88.02
37.68
21.00
62.51
93.24
49.89
40.93
24.24
22.69
31.14
62.95
27.71
159.88
23.12 #######
26.75
405
04/10/2022 13:22
303.24
525.01
328.65
52.50
30.08
19.78
482.50
611.00
710.76
106.84
37.58
20.98
63.64
73.78
48.23
41.03
24.14
22.52
31.57
63.54
28.06
161.52
23.25 #######
26.78
406
04/10/2022 13:22
79.51
513.07
326.42
51.54
29.81
19.78
448.47
581.70
665.94
134.51
37.12
20.94
61.12
63.86
47.09
40.81
24.13
22.51
31.51
63.44
29.56
165.30
23.21 #######
26.76
407
04/10/2022 13:22
75.45
491.92
322.34
49.38
29.47
19.77
412.09
546.43
631.96
162.54
36.74
20.92
54.20
61.53
46.49
40.65
24.06
22.40
30.97
64.97
29.72
163.08
23.57 #######
26.71
408
04/10/2022 13:22
73.97
473.01
317.72
48.04
29.13
19.75
390.99
535.57
635.47
149.64
36.39
20.90
55.32
63.25
49.02
40.62
24.09
22.36
30.47
66.70
28.48
162.32
23.99 #######
26.51
409
04/10/2022 13:22
69.40
454.89
313.72
47.45
28.88
19.74
367.18
527.65
625.40
139.24
36.16
20.89
55.26
63.88
49.76
40.65
24.33
22.48
29.67
67.45
28.93
163.77
23.71 #######
26.49
410
04/10/2022 13:22
57.32
434.11
309.18
47.46
28.43
19.71
345.95
503.90
599.63
147.50
36.06
20.90
56.03
62.58
48.42
40.60
24.67
22.62
29.20
68.84
28.86
162.57
23.96 #######
26.46
411
04/10/2022 13:22
65.85
416.06
304.46
46.56
27.55
19.76
327.06
494.84
585.90
133.46
35.59
20.96
53.60
62.83
48.29
40.45
24.66
22.59
29.66
69.96
29.07
159.94
23.54 #######
26.47
412
04/10/2022 13:22
67.82
400.25
299.97
45.74
26.78
19.72
309.42
489.83
572.27
118.57
35.16
20.97
52.27
63.20
47.96
40.25
24.61
22.60
30.12
68.96
29.02
157.87
23.48 #######
26.44
413
04/10/2022 13:22
67.82
388.64
295.47
45.02
26.16
19.69
277.94
479.63
557.43
95.62
34.79
20.94
51.72
62.88
47.84
40.03
24.47
22.57
30.78
67.87
29.61
155.05
23.42 #######
26.46
414
04/10/2022 13:22
58.66
379.00
291.08
44.25
25.67
19.66
263.07
465.09
541.83
88.98
34.33
20.87
51.11
63.04
47.36
39.87
24.35
22.44
30.55
68.46
29.09
152.02
22.98 #######
26.45
415
04/10/2022 13:22
65.24
363.71
287.10
43.58
25.18
19.62
251.03
450.65
523.07
82.59
33.86
20.82
49.86
64.42
47.38
39.75
24.34
22.37
30.96
70.71
28.66
149.10
22.75 #######
26.44
416
04/10/2022 13:22
60.75
348.46
283.08
43.08
24.86
19.53
238.23
439.30
506.79
77.93
33.49
20.73
49.17
65.54
47.95
39.64
24.36
22.38
31.10
72.31
28.11
146.31
22.89 #######
26.44
417
04/10/2022 13:22
61.25
333.57
279.74
42.76
24.57
19.49
227.29
426.07
493.36
75.31
33.11
20.65
49.30
69.76
47.00
39.52
24.50
22.44
31.28
73.56
27.93
143.48
23.33 #######
26.45
418
04/10/2022 13:22
60.75
322.85
276.26
42.45
24.23
19.43
217.39
415.08
481.58
72.01
32.68
20.60
50.67
75.18
46.51
39.40
24.53
22.48
29.80
75.28
28.29
140.84
22.97 #######
26.44
419
04/10/2022 13:22
55.75
311.51
272.44
41.96
23.88
19.36
205.74
401.80
468.23
68.18
32.26
20.53
52.68
80.56
46.93
39.27
24.46
22.31
29.06
76.81
28.17
138.27
22.40 #######
26.45
420
04/10/2022 13:22
62.19
302.73
268.52
41.49
23.53
19.33
196.20
393.89
451.35
64.20
31.85
20.51
51.78
84.83
46.96
39.18
24.33
22.34
28.99
77.48
27.60
136.06
22.08 #######
26.44
421
04/10/2022 13:22
63.60
295.85
264.70
41.03
23.23
19.27
188.52
387.29
431.30
60.63
31.27
20.46
49.95
88.34
46.72
39.10
24.30
22.25
28.94
77.74
27.87
133.89
21.83 #######
26.42
422
04/10/2022 13:22
63.85
289.15
261.01
40.68
22.95
19.13
182.11
377.82
416.46
57.83
30.73
20.41
49.49
90.67
47.00
39.09
24.29
22.18
28.52
76.67
27.28
131.22
21.71 #######
26.40
423
04/10/2022 13:22
63.09
284.20
257.42
40.30
22.68
19.02
176.42
367.98
403.31
55.68
30.23
20.40
49.25
93.63
47.49
39.05
24.10
22.10
28.30
77.75
27.27
129.42
21.61 #######
26.41
424
04/10/2022 13:22
63.00
278.64
253.90
39.92
22.48
18.95
169.00
355.59
390.65
53.83
29.67
20.37
48.68
95.41
48.60
38.91
24.01
21.94
28.12
78.80
27.83
127.52
21.52 #######
26.42
425
04/10/2022 13:22
61.59
273.56
250.51
39.55
22.25
18.89
162.26
346.98
377.50
52.04
29.14
20.34
48.92
97.05
50.07
38.58
23.98
21.86
28.70
79.38
26.79
125.57
21.33 #######
26.41
426
04/10/2022 13:22
62.37
268.14
247.20
39.22
22.09
18.86
153.92
339.03
365.65
50.69
28.67
20.32
49.51
99.18
51.28
38.39
23.85
21.74
29.58
79.88
26.07
123.80
21.07 #######
26.45
427
04/10/2022 13:22
61.26
263.87
243.99
38.92
21.90
18.82
146.62
332.17
354.28
48.95
28.23
20.30
50.04
100.74
52.16
38.23
23.72
21.72
29.65
80.22
25.61
122.06
20.91 #######
26.44
428
04/10/2022 13:22
60.38
259.64
240.84
38.62
21.68
18.78
139.40
325.38
342.46
47.13
27.82
20.29
50.57
102.14
53.36
38.04
23.58
21.64
29.47
80.81
25.59
120.40
20.88 #######
26.45
429
04/10/2022 13:22
59.07
255.43
237.79
38.33
21.54
18.74
132.09
319.53
331.81
45.10
27.43
20.28
51.06
103.52
54.66
37.86
23.53
21.60
29.28
81.47
25.75
118.70
20.75 #######
26.43
430
04/10/2022 13:22
58.37
250.94
234.89
38.01
21.42
18.74
41.70
311.08
324.02
43.64
27.23
20.24
52.53
104.65
56.41
37.70
23.48
21.52
29.56
81.85
26.18
117.21
20.54 #######
26.46
431
04/10/2022 13:22
57.76
246.83
231.91
37.71
21.21
18.71
43.63
286.16
318.47
42.03
26.91
20.19
54.39
105.62
58.10
37.46
23.29
21.52
29.67
80.86
25.99
115.28
20.51 #######
26.45
432
04/10/2022 13:22
53.69
241.27
229.02
37.29
21.05
18.68
41.83
264.13
310.72
39.84
26.58
20.15
55.86
104.92
57.76
37.22
23.19
21.48
29.18
78.98
25.90
109.57
20.32 #######
26.46
433
04/10/2022 13:22
47.66
231.06
226.46
36.89
21.06
18.65
41.44
253.32
304.28
46.81
26.25
20.13
56.78
102.12
57.58
36.96
23.10
21.39
29.13
78.21
25.36
106.34
20.16 #######
26.46
434
04/10/2022 13:22
48.65
223.35
223.69
36.40
20.93
18.64
39.56
247.42
297.67
43.66
25.78
20.09
53.86
96.80
57.50
36.84
23.03
21.32
29.99
78.19
25.33
104.17
20.03 #######
26.44
435
04/10/2022 13:22
48.03
215.22
221.90
36.21
20.95
18.60
40.51
242.87
292.92
41.72
25.55
20.02
51.07
95.37
57.68
36.81
22.95
21.20
29.24
78.39
25.37
103.15
19.99 #######
26.43
436
04/10/2022 13:22
40.92
202.70
220.20
35.88
20.87
18.57
39.70
234.30
286.59
53.08
25.28
19.95
53.81
97.09
59.37
36.69
22.93
21.13
28.55
78.38
25.14
102.92
20.49 #######
26.41
437
04/10/2022 13:22
43.36
197.24
217.69
35.26
20.70
18.50
38.85
231.67
279.93
48.95
24.97
19.94
54.22
98.13
60.81
36.60
22.86
21.07
28.45
76.69
25.51
101.67
20.48 #######
26.44
438
04/10/2022 13:22
45.05
193.73
215.10
34.82
20.53
18.44
38.65
230.63
272.66
45.29
24.69
19.92
54.28
98.74
61.48
36.50
22.83
21.01
29.58
76.03
25.71
100.89
20.31 #######
26.41
439
04/10/2022 13:22
48.84
190.32
212.68
34.43
20.37
18.38
39.34
229.57
265.31
42.63
24.45
19.95
53.88
98.86
61.99
36.40
22.78
20.94
30.66
76.72
25.00
100.16
20.07 #######
26.43
440
04/10/2022 13:22
50.78
186.59
210.32
34.13
20.25
18.32
39.25
228.69
258.63
40.84
24.24
19.92
53.96
99.84
62.32
36.32
22.67
20.90
30.41
77.30
24.53
99.51
20.00 #######
26.42
441
04/10/2022 13:22
51.74
182.79
208.08
33.84
20.18
18.30
38.27
227.23
253.32
39.84
24.03
19.90
54.66
100.76
63.21
36.25
22.57
20.82
30.22
77.55
24.25
98.87
19.91 #######
26.41
442
04/10/2022 13:22
53.39
179.46
205.84
33.69
20.09
18.25
37.54
226.10
249.24
38.99
23.77
19.85
55.08
101.42
64.27
36.17
22.47
20.76
30.12
77.77
23.60
98.18
19.81 #######
26.40
443
04/10/2022 13:22
54.26
176.28
203.75
33.53
20.02
18.20
36.75
224.50
244.66
38.22
23.59
19.81
54.78
101.94
65.47
36.13
22.39
20.72
29.37
78.16
23.53
97.36
19.65 #######
26.41
444
04/10/2022 13:23
50.27
163.48
201.74
33.34
19.98
18.18
35.57
220.85
242.76
37.83
23.48
19.77
54.40
102.24
66.17
36.06
22.31
20.67
28.20
78.37
23.11
96.62
19.53 #######
26.43
445
04/10/2022 13:23
41.47
134.46
199.78
32.99
19.93
18.16
35.53
212.82
241.14
38.57
23.42
19.76
54.20
102.52
66.50
36.02
22.22
20.62
28.64
78.54
23.49
95.86
19.42 #######
26.42
446
04/10/2022 13:23
45.97
130.23
197.78
32.33
19.85
18.13
34.29
209.69
238.73
38.14
23.26
19.73
54.08
102.74
67.00
35.96
22.12
20.61
28.61
78.47
23.51
95.00
19.24 #######
26.42
==PAGE:268==
447
04/10/2022 13:23
48.16
125.80
195.86
31.84
19.75
18.09
39.01
207.28
235.43
37.82
23.09
19.70
54.05
102.87
67.33
35.91
22.03
20.54
27.89
78.35
23.94
94.30
19.10 #######
26.41
448
04/10/2022 13:23
46.91
127.41
194.08
31.43
19.69
18.09
38.38
202.35
231.15
37.36
22.97
19.69
53.62
103.22
67.74
35.89
21.97
20.49
27.07
78.14
23.91
93.59
19.07 #######
26.41
449
04/10/2022 13:23
47.93
127.71
192.31
31.09
19.65
18.07
37.04
201.18
228.04
36.92
22.83
19.66
53.89
103.07
67.77
35.86
21.94
20.43
27.81
77.86
23.52
92.91
18.93 #######
26.41
450
04/10/2022 13:23
46.89
127.64
190.68
30.88
19.60
18.07
35.64
199.79
224.39
36.48
22.71
19.64
53.90
102.93
68.28
35.84
21.88
20.39
26.50
77.61
23.52
92.26
18.94 #######
26.41
451
04/10/2022 13:23
45.95
127.64
188.97
30.62
19.54
18.04
36.42
198.84
220.90
36.03
22.64
19.63
54.85
102.94
68.63
35.80
21.84
20.31
26.18
77.28
23.48
91.56
18.95 #######
26.40
452
04/10/2022 13:23
46.20
128.06
187.37
30.44
19.47
18.03
35.50
197.75
217.15
35.58
22.56
19.61
55.94
102.92
68.93
35.81
21.76
20.33
27.08
77.23
23.78
90.90
18.86 #######
26.42
453
04/10/2022 13:23
47.50
128.48
185.72
30.23
19.39
18.02
35.28
196.95
212.72
35.12
22.47
19.59
56.98
102.98
69.16
35.80
21.70
20.23
27.96
77.15
23.96
90.30
18.89 #######
26.40
454
04/10/2022 13:23
47.69
129.43
184.11
30.05
19.33
18.02
35.12
196.59
207.56
34.59
22.42
19.59
57.92
102.80
69.19
35.76
21.65
20.17
29.12
77.20
24.16
89.67
18.76 #######
26.39
455
04/10/2022 13:23
48.09
129.99
182.58
29.80
19.27
17.98
36.14
196.17
202.81
34.07
22.34
19.58
59.11
102.70
69.27
35.76
21.62
20.13
29.33
77.22
23.89
89.09
18.72 #######
26.39
456
04/10/2022 13:23
48.57
129.87
181.11
29.63
19.20
17.97
36.33
195.75
198.46
33.75
22.24
19.53
60.29
102.62
69.43
35.74
21.57
20.10
28.89
77.16
23.87
88.48
18.65 #######
26.41
457
04/10/2022 13:23
48.48
130.27
179.69
29.49
19.14
17.94
36.66
194.95
194.39
33.50
22.17
19.50
61.20
102.52
69.76
35.73
21.50
20.07
29.23
77.17
23.35
87.91
18.66 #######
26.40
458
04/10/2022 13:23
47.57
130.23
178.30
29.36
19.10
17.93
36.46
194.10
190.32
33.26
22.09
19.48
62.15
102.12
70.05
35.75
21.49
20.08
29.32
76.99
24.51
87.44
18.66 #######
26.40
459
04/10/2022 13:23
47.53
130.47
176.96
29.26
19.03
17.92
39.90
188.79
188.39
33.21
22.06
19.48
62.91
101.98
70.24
35.77
21.42
20.00
29.63
76.91
24.56
86.94
18.57 #######
26.42
460
04/10/2022 13:23
47.63
130.63
175.58
29.19
19.01
17.92
42.51
184.41
186.10
33.07
22.00
19.46
63.52
101.81
70.52
35.73
21.34
19.97
29.69
76.77
24.61
86.41
18.59 #######
26.40
461
04/10/2022 13:23
47.09
130.23
174.28
29.15
19.02
17.93
34.08
163.69
186.33
33.33
21.94
19.42
64.39
101.87
70.50
35.42
21.31
19.94
30.18
76.45
25.49
86.18
18.59 #######
26.40
462
04/10/2022 13:23
49.45
128.67
173.00
29.05
19.02
17.91
36.11
98.03
186.66
34.78
22.00
19.42
64.85
101.35
70.52
35.21
21.25
19.89
30.41
76.57
24.98
76.61
18.64 #######
26.39
463
04/10/2022 13:23
48.69
127.19
171.76
28.89
19.01
17.92
33.51
69.08
187.34
34.38
21.97
19.44
65.38
100.67
70.30
35.11
21.22
19.88
30.46
76.49
24.64
75.51
18.61 #######
26.41
464
04/10/2022 13:23
47.21
126.26
170.58
28.59
18.98
17.91
39.13
61.52
186.26
32.70
21.93
19.41
65.95
98.91
69.97
34.96
21.17
19.84
30.57
76.41
24.85
75.18
18.68 #######
26.40
465
04/10/2022 13:23
46.87
125.24
169.37
28.31
18.95
17.90
35.89
55.41
186.50
31.35
21.88
19.40
65.85
98.99
69.73
34.85
21.13
19.85
30.47
76.10
24.69
75.25
18.62 #######
26.39
466
04/10/2022 13:23
35.73
99.49
168.40
28.09
18.95
17.92
38.50
55.05
186.98
30.17
21.85
19.39
64.83
98.04
68.22
34.78
21.11
19.82
29.90
75.29
24.46
76.20
18.51 #######
26.41
467
04/10/2022 13:23
32.52
74.68
167.59
27.88
18.92
17.91
34.51
51.86
185.16
36.42
21.84
19.38
63.49
95.26
66.85
34.70
21.06
19.79
30.33
75.02
24.41
76.64
18.54 #######
26.41
468
04/10/2022 13:23
34.60
64.83
166.43
27.47
18.89
17.89
31.35
54.09
185.55
34.07
21.81
19.37
62.88
95.85
66.71
34.62
21.03
19.81
29.33
74.62
24.20
76.76
18.49 #######
26.40
469
04/10/2022 13:23
37.84
62.16
165.31
27.17
18.85
17.89
35.08
55.53
185.57
31.06
21.75
19.34
62.39
96.38
67.19
34.59
21.02
19.81
28.57
74.03
24.27
76.58
18.51 #######
26.40
470
04/10/2022 13:23
37.85
61.42
164.09
26.85
18.81
17.90
34.74
55.07
184.27
28.59
21.68
19.35
62.43
94.58
67.54
34.53
20.98
19.80
27.64
72.80
24.29
76.33
18.53 #######
26.41
471
04/10/2022 13:23
37.55
61.76
163.04
26.59
18.78
17.90
33.95
54.09
182.02
26.96
21.65
19.32
61.85
93.17
67.47
34.49
20.95
19.79
26.93
72.03
24.04
76.05
18.49 #######
26.39
472
04/10/2022 13:23
38.51
62.51
161.96
26.34
18.73
17.92
31.24
52.67
182.01
26.40
21.62
19.31
61.88
94.04
67.37
34.47
20.88
19.80
26.16
72.12
24.33
75.66
18.50 #######
26.39
473
04/10/2022 13:23
39.38
63.07
160.86
26.10
18.70
17.94
30.61
52.66
182.15
25.88
21.61
19.31
62.54
94.61
67.46
34.46
20.89
19.77
26.19
72.21
23.85
74.77
18.39 #######
26.39
474
04/10/2022 13:23
39.57
63.20
159.86
25.94
18.65
17.96
31.07
53.00
179.75
24.84
21.58
19.31
62.98
94.90
67.65
34.49
20.87
19.68
26.95
72.48
24.00
73.70
18.33 #######
26.40
475
04/10/2022 13:23
39.39
64.64
158.88
25.72
18.61
17.92
30.83
52.39
175.96
24.09
21.55
19.31
63.52
95.13
67.69
34.56
20.85
19.67
28.03
72.65
24.30
72.76
18.34 #######
26.40
476
04/10/2022 13:23
40.46
66.20
157.95
25.49
18.62
17.94
31.49
51.99
172.83
23.61
21.50
19.30
64.05
95.30
67.71
34.61
20.85
19.68
27.97
72.75
24.37
72.27
18.41 #######
26.39
477
04/10/2022 13:23
40.33
67.61
156.95
25.26
18.61
17.93
30.99
51.67
170.29
23.22
21.46
19.29
64.51
95.44
67.53
34.68
20.84
19.65
28.02
72.88
24.87
71.93
18.40 #######
26.38
478
04/10/2022 13:23
40.63
68.89
156.03
25.19
18.57
17.93
30.22
51.43
168.14
22.94
21.42
19.29
64.97
95.44
67.43
34.72
20.80
19.66
27.91
72.80
25.33
71.76
18.37 #######
26.37
479
04/10/2022 13:23
40.57
69.92
155.20
25.08
18.54
17.93
30.30
52.32
166.08
22.77
21.40
19.26
65.27
95.31
67.29
34.76
20.78
19.62
27.61
72.66
25.77
71.66
18.39 #######
26.39
480
04/10/2022 13:23
40.71
71.43
154.39
24.98
18.49
17.92
30.37
54.12
164.04
22.67
21.38
19.24
65.77
95.42
67.44
34.81
20.76
19.59
27.21
72.73
25.49
71.58
18.46 #######
26.39
481
04/10/2022 13:23
40.37
72.52
153.55
24.89
18.46
17.93
30.85
56.36
161.51
22.53
21.34
19.21
65.93
95.16
67.63
34.83
20.78
19.55
26.07
72.70
25.75
71.50
18.51 #######
26.37
482
04/10/2022 13:23
39.79
73.67
152.75
24.88
18.44
17.93
30.63
59.69
159.98
22.42
21.30
19.22
66.25
95.06
67.51
34.86
20.77
19.53
26.40
72.60
25.85
71.45
18.54 #######
26.39
483
04/10/2022 13:23
39.53
74.97
151.86
24.79
18.43
17.90
30.59
64.17
158.18
22.28
21.24
19.21
66.34
94.85
67.34
34.90
20.74
19.52
26.01
72.29
26.30
71.40
18.61 #######
26.38
484
04/10/2022 13:23
38.89
76.25
151.05
24.75
18.42
17.90
29.73
68.96
155.97
22.12
21.22
19.19
66.37
94.91
67.15
34.91
20.74
19.48
25.99
72.15
25.99
71.31
18.66 #######
26.39
485
04/10/2022 13:23
39.58
77.70
150.22
24.66
18.41
17.89
29.76
73.03
153.99
22.07
21.19
19.18
66.39
94.68
67.08
34.93
20.74
19.46
25.60
72.12
25.88
71.25
18.71 #######
26.38
==PAGE:269==
Thermal Radiation Between Wooden Facades in High­Rise Buildings
257
==PAGE:270==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Koppels Allé, Building 404
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.construct.dtu.dk
