==PAGE:1==
Single-shot waveform detection of air-plasma
based THz sources
Master’s Thesis
DTU Electro
Department of Electrical and Photonics Engineering
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Single-shot waveform detection of air-plasma based THz sources
Master’s Thesis
December, 2022
By
Alexander Ohrt
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus-
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Alexander Ohrt, 2022
Published by:
DTU, Department of Electrical and Photonics Engineering, Ørsteds Plads,
Building 343, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
www.electro.dtu.dk
ISSN:
[0000-0000] (electronic version)
ISBN:
[000-00-0000-000-0] (electronic version)
ISSN:
[0000-0000] (printed version)
ISBN:
[000-00-0000-000-0] (printed version)
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over five months at the Ultrafast Infrared and Terahertz
Science group, Department of Electronics and Photonics Engineering, at the Technical
University of Denmark, DTU, in partial fulfilment for the degree Master of Science in
Engineering, MSc Eng.
It is assumed that the reader has a basic knowledge in the area of photonics.
Alexander Ohrt - s173904
Signature
Date
ii
Single-shot waveform detection of air-plasma based THz sources
22.12.2022
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
In this master’s thesis project, a system has been constructed that is capable of coherent
waveform detection of ultra-broadband air-plasma based terahertz (THz) pulses using a
spatially resolved detection scheme. The system allows for three orders of magnitude
faster acquisition times than that of a state of the art ultra-broadband air-biased coherent
detection (ABCD) THz time-domain spectrometer (TDS), which is also constructed during
this project. The faster system is in principle capable of detecting THz waveforms from
just a single shot of an ultrafast femtosecond pulsed laser, as long as the driving laser
produces strong enough pulses. It is therefore referred to as an ultra-broadband single-
shot THz TDS. The system is already in this project proven capable of detecting THz
waveforms from just 20 shots/pulses from an ultrafast femtosecond driving laser with a
good signal-to-noise ratio (SNR). In the future, a higher power laser can be used to drive
the system to demonstrate single-shot waveform detection. The single-shot THz TDS
relies on a time-to-space encoding of the THz waveform along a one-dimensional line in
space, which is obtained through a non-collinear beam geometry between the THz pulse
and a probe pulse. Both pulses are focused along one dimension to overlap within the
active region of a solid-state detector. Special reflectors for focusing the THz radiation as
needed have been designed during the project. The solid-state detector is also custom
designed and fabricated for the purpose of this project. Different ideas for further improving
upon the system are presented.
Single-shot waveform detection of air-plasma based THz sources
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
Alexander Ohrt, MSc Photonics Engineering, DTU
Creator of this thesis.
Binbin Zhou, Associate Professor, supervisor
I cannot thank Assoc. Prof. Binbin Zhou enough for the guidance, sparring and sharing of
knowledge that he has awarded me with on a daily basis throughout this project. I am very
appreciative of how he has always been open to listen to my – sometimes strange – ideas
of varying quality related to the project, and his feedback has always been highly useful
and constructive. It is truly no exaggeration that he has been involved in the project almost
every single day, and his door has always been open. It has been a pleasure to share
both the excitement and passion for the project, as well as to face the challenges with
him, and I can comfortably say that the goal of this project would not have been reached
without his guidance – especially when it comes to deep knowledge of the physics, design
and optimization of ultra-broadband air-plasma based THz spectrometers. He has in
every sense been an excellent mentor for me throughout the entirety of this extremely
challenging but equally exciting project.
Peter Uhd Jepsen, Professor, Group Leader, Deputy Head of Department, co-supervisor
Special thanks to Prof. Peter Uhd Jepsen for providing not just outstanding guidance
and sparring, but his comprehensive knowledge on THz science as a whole has been
essential to help set the scope of the project. He has always been open to giving critical
and valuable input on an idea or a result that needed interpretation. His encouragement
and clear-sightedness when faced with a problem has been especially appreciated and
useful when the challenges ahead seemed to great to overcome.
Besides the excellent guidance from my two supervisors, I am incredibly lucky to have
had the privilege of working in the Terawatt lab at DTU. It is probably one of the only
places in the world where this project could have yielded the results it has. Not only have
I had ample access to ultrafast femtosecond amplified lasers, but also everything needed
to build an air-plasma ultra-broadband THz spectrometer and subsequently to modify it
in unconventional ways. Even luckier is it that DTU Physics also has a clean-room with
capabilities to produce custom-designed solid-state detectors, which have turned out to
be crucial for the project to work. I would like to thank fellow DTU master’s student Siyan
Zhou for having been the driving force in designing and making these solid-state detectors.
Finally, the project has required unique THz reflectors that are not commercially available,
and therefore it has been of great benefit that the workshop in building 348 at DTU is
capable of rapidly producing high-quality metallic THz reflectors from 3D CAD models.
iv
Single-shot waveform detection of air-plasma based THz sources
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
1
2
Fundamentals of ultra-broadband THz generation and detection
3
2.1
Generation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
Detection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
3
Theory of single-shot waveform detection
21
3.1
The idea . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
3.2
Previous research on single-shot THz waveform detection . . . . . . . . . . 28
4
Implementing the ultra-broadband single-shot detection system
29
4.1
Designing components for the setup . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30
4.2
Constructing and aligning the setup
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 37
4.3
Results
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 37
5
Discussion and future outlook
51
Bibliography
53
A Additional figures
55
A.1 Measurements from ABCD THz TDS characterization . . . . . . . . . . . . 55
A.2 Images of experimental setups and equipment
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 56
A.3 THz and probe line focus characterization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 59
Single-shot waveform detection of air-plasma based THz sources
v
==PAGE:8==
vi
Single-shot waveform detection of air-plasma based THz sources
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction
Over the past centuries, humankind has been on a constant search for ways to generate
and detect light – or more broadly speaking electromagnetic radiation – of any kind of
wavelength. With the advancement of semiconductor light sources and detectors, it has
become exceedingly easy to generate and detect light in the ultra-violet (UV), visible, near-
infrared (NIR) and mid-infrared (MIR) region of the electromagnetic spectrum, which in
total covers from around 100 nm to 10 µm. At the same time, electronics have gotten
faster and faster, pushing the frequencies at which data can be transmitted and received.
With the as of writing recent advent of 5G networks that are being deployed all over the
world, data in the form of electromagnetic radiation be transmitted and received to and
from our smartphones at frequencies beyond 50 GHz [1], corresponding to wavelengths
shorter than 6 mm.
The field of terahertz science is pushing to fill the gap between milliliter wavelengths and
the MIR/NIR region. The terahertz region of the electromagnetic spectrum is commonly
defined to cover the frequency range from 0.3 to 30 THz (or sometimes 10 THz [2, p. 4]),
which corresponds to wavelengths between 1 mm and 10 µm. Being able to generate
and detect electromagnetic radiation within the THz region is valuable for many different
reasons. Broadly speaking, any kind of material or compound with energetic transitions
in the meV range interact with THz radiation, and examples include phonons in semi-
conductors and other solids [3], plasma’s with electron densities in the modern tokamak
range [4] or nonlinear effects in neat molecular liquids [5]. For this reason, specifically
THz spectroscopy is of interest for scientists across many different fields.
Spectroscopy in the THz region was first accomplished with the use of Fourier Transform
Infrared (FTIR) Spectrometers in the 1950s, as described in [6]. This method of obtain-
ing spectroscopic data in the THz (or LWIR) region only allows for amplitude data to be
extracted, meaning one can only directly measure the imaginary part of the complex per-
mittivity of a material, or in other words its absorption spectrum [3]. With the development
of THz time-domain spectrometers (TDS), first using photoconductive antennas in 1989
[6], the full electric field of ultra-short THz pulses in time can be extracted, i.e. with phase
information. This is also referred to in the literature as coherent detection. This invention
relied on the development of ultrafast lasers with a temporal duration in the femtosecond
(fs) range, which allow for efficient generation of ultrashort THz pulses in time. Due to the
short time-duration of the THz radiation, the resulting spectrum can be very wide. Being
able to recover the full electric field of an electromagnetic pulse is extremely valuable, as
it enables the determination of the full-complex permittivity of materials [3]. When doing
spectroscopy with such a system, both the absorption coefficient and the refractive index
of a material can be directly measured. In recent decades, different ways of generating
and detecting THz radiation coherently have been developed and researched widely. Most
prominent of these are the use of electro-optic (EO) sampling with nonlinear crystals [3] as
well as THz generation using air ionization and detection in air using the air itself as a third
order nonlinear medium. While the former allows for coherent THz detection up to around
5-7 THz limited by phonons in the THz band [2, p. 97], the latter allows for the far superior
detection bandwidth [2, p. 111] due to a lack of absorption features in dry air across the
whole THz region. Indeed, it has been demonstrated that using air-ionization as the THz
generation medium combined with dry air as the detection medium can allow for coherent
THz detection in an impressive range between 0.3 and 40 THz [7]. Being able to perform
Single-shot waveform detection of air-plasma based THz sources
1
==PAGE:10==
spectroscopy of materials within such a broad bandwidth with access to the full-complex
permittivity of the material is truly valuable. Further, by synchronizing an ultra-fast optical
pulse with the THz pulse when performing ultra-broadband air-plasma THz waveform
measurements of a sample, and repeatedly measuring THz waveforms while varying the
exact timing of when the optical excitation beam is incident on the sample, the ultrafast
photo-induced carrier dynamics of the sample can be probed. This technique is known
as transient THz spectroscopy or time-resolved THz spectroscopy (TRTS) [3]. This is
an incredibly powerful technique useful for characteristic for instance the photo-response
of semiconductors on a much shorter time-scale than previously possible, which could
potentially give researcher insight into improving the performance of semiconductors used
for solar cells [8]. While a single waveform scan using an air-plasma based THz spectrom-
eter often only takes a few minutes (which will be demonstrated in chapter 2 of this thesis)
doing a very long series of them, which is necessary for transient THz spectroscopy, leads
to a very long acquisition time of easily +12 hours. This can make it impossible to do tran-
sient THz spectroscopy on samples that change over time or in an environment that is not
perfectly controlled. One way of combating this problem is attempt capturing waveforms
faster by using lasers with higher repetition rates, but as will be elaborated on in chapter
3, there is an inherent limit to how fast waveforms can be measured using a traditional
scanning technique employed in most systems. The ultimate would instead be a system
that is capable of capturing a single THz waveform in time. This requires fundamentally
redesigning the way the waveform detection is performed. The goal of this project is thus
to build a THz waveform detection system that is inherently capable of detecting single
ultra-broadband THz pulses in time – i.e. a single-shot waveform detection system that
can be used for spectroscopy.
Before attempting to construct a single-shot ultra-broadband THz spectrometer, a state
of the art ultra-broadband THz spectrometer similar in design to the one in [7] must be
constructed and characterized. This serves as a platform upon which to develop the
single-shot spectrometer. The fundamentals and physics behind air-plasma based ultra-
broadband THz generation and detection are introduced in Chapter 2. This chapter also
introduces the so-called ABCD system as well as a characterization of the system built
at DTU for this project. Finally, Chapter 2 also introduces other approaches to coherent
detection, which will prove to be very useful for achieving coherent detection in the single-
shot THz system.
The third chapter of this thesis introduces the theory behind how single-shot THz waveform
measurements of ultra-broadband pulses can be obtained, and it contains a brief literature
study of previous research on single-shot THz waveform detection. Based on this, as well
as knowledge gained from working with the ABCD system introduced in Chapter 2, Chapter
4 summarizes the development results from the single-shot capable ultra-broadband THz
spectrometer that is built as a part of this project. Chapter 5 contains a discussion on
different aspects of the project as well as the future outlook for single-shot ultra-broadband
THz waveform detection.
2
Single-shot waveform detection of air-plasma based THz sources
==PAGE:11==
2
Fundamentals of ultra-broadband THz
generation and detection
Ultra-broadband air-plasma THz time-domain spectrometers are incredibly advanced pho-
tonics equipment that require exceptional attention to the details during construction and
operation, and the requirements for alignment are relentless – both for the generation-
and detection part. Attempting to build a single-shot version of such a system without prior
experiences building the current state-of-the-art translation-stage based version would be
overly optimistic at best. As such, this chapter not only serves to outline the physics of
air-plasma ultra-broadband THz radiation generation (chapter 2.1) and detection (chapter
2.2), but also describes the process and results from constructing and characterizing an
ultra-broadband THz spectrometer. The spectrometer built for this purpose also serves
as a baseline for comparison with the subsequent single-shot ultra-broadband THz spec-
trometer that was ultimately developed as a part of this thesis project.
2.1
Generation
When a high-power ultrafast optical pulse is focused to a small spot size, the air at and
around the focus region can be ionized. This occurs if the peak electric field of the pulse
exceeds the dielectric strength of air, which is approximately 30 kV/cm [2, p. 98]. The key
to efficient air-plasma based THz generation is to give the free electrons produced during
the air-breakdown a net non-zero overall drifting velocity. While focusing the radiation
from an ultrafast amplified laser can effectively cause air-ionization, the total drift velocity
from the acceleration and deceleration of the free electrons will be rather small [2, p. 98].
In a microscopic description of the situation, an electron freed during the laser induced
air-breakdown will experience a force – the Lorentz force – proportional to the electric field
of the laser [9]. The force on the electron will also be proportional to the cross-product
of its velocity with the magnetic field (of the laser), but this force will be negligible as
long as it is only the beginning of the process of accelerating the electron that is being
considered. Thus, the total velocity gain of the electron after a certain time has passed
will simply be proportional to the integral of the electric field of the driving laser over that
time period. However, as long as only a single laser is used to accelerate the electron,
the net velocity will always be zero, since the laser field is an electromagnetic wave –
most appropriately described as a secant hyperbolic envelope function multiplied by a
sinusoidal oscillating at a central frequency – with a time-averaged field strength that is
thus always zero. However, if the fundamental laser frequency is superimposed with
its second harmonic with certain relative phase between the two, the total field will be
asymmetric, and importantly the symmetry of the ionized free electrons drifting along the
laser electrical field can be broken, which produces a nonzero net current over the entire
laser pulse duration.
This is a simplified picture of the situation, but it nevertheless correctly captures the
essence of introducing a symmetry-broken total electric field in order to give the elec-
trons a net drift velocity. The generation process is commonly modelled as an ionization-
enhanced degenerate four-wave mixing process between the fundamental laser frequency
and its second harmonic. The third order nonlinear susceptibility of ambient air is very
low (χ(3) = 1.68 · 10−25m2/V2 [2, p. 99]), but the ionization process and subsequent pho-
tocurrent due to the total asymmetric field results in an effectively increased χ(3) [10]. The
Single-shot waveform detection of air-plasma based THz sources
3
==PAGE:12==
nonlinear mixing process generating the THz electric field ETHz (here simply represented
as a scalar quantity) can be modelled as [2, p. 99]
ETHz / χ(3)p
I2!I!,
(2.1)
where I! and I2! is the intensity of the fundamental and second harmonic field, respec-
tively. The generation efficiency is maximized when the fundamental and second harmonic
beams are polarized parallel to each other, and this results in a THz electric field that is
also polarized parallel to the generation fields [2, p. 99]. Eq. 2.1 is a simple but useful way
of quantifying the THz generation, but the relation only holds true if the total electric field
from the optical pulses exceeds the dielectric breakdown of air. As such, the dielectric
breakdown serves as a threshold for efficient THz generation. In order to fully model the
THz generation from air-ionization by the two-color field, a quantum mechanical approach
is required, the details of which are outside the scope of this project, which is mainly
focused on THz detection.
The length of the optical field induced plasma will depend on the focal length of the lens
(or mirror) used to focus the optical beams. For the generation part of the ABCD THz TDS
built for this project, a 300 m focal length lens is used to a fundamental laser pulse and
its second harmonic to form a plasma. The fundamental field is supplied by Solstice Ace
Ti:Sapphire regenerative amplifier laser, which delivers 100 fs full width a half max (FWHM)
pulses with a central wavelength of 800 nm from. The second harmonic is generated by
placing a beta barium borate (BBO) crystal in the fundamental beam path before the focus.
At the focus of the beams, a plasma filament with a length of at least 1.5 cm judged by
the naked eye is created in air. The bright white line centered in the bottom of the thesis
front page image is the plasma filament generated. It glows white due to supercontinuum
generation in the plasma [11]. It has been demonstrated that no significant THz radiation
will be generated in the forward direction (defined by the two generation beams) from a
long THz filament [10]. This is due to a varying relative phase between the fundamental
and second harmonic pulses over the length of the plasma, which is caused by a refractive
index difference at the two wavelengths. The refractive index difference is partially due to
the dispersion in the air and partially due to plasma dispersion. In other words, continuous
phase-matching in the forward direction is not possible for a long plasma. However, it
has been demonstrated both theoretically and experimentally that phase-matching does
occur in off-axis directions around the plasma filament [10]. This implies that conical
THz emission will be observed from the plasma filament, with emission angles usually
between 5-10° relative to the optical axis of the generation beams. The phase matching
occurs at different off-axis angles for different THz frequencies, with lower THz frequencies
being phase-matched at higher angles than the high THz frequencies [10]. In [10], it was
also demonstrated that the plasma generation efficiency in the off-axis directions is not
dependent on the initial phase between the generation beams. However, it is of course
still important for the THz generation that the fundamental and second harmonic pulses
overlap in time. Therefore, optical components with a minimal refractive index difference
at the two wavelengths have to be used. Exactly which optical elements are used in the
ABCD THz TDS built in this project are mentioned in chapter 2.2.1. In contrast to on-axis
THz generation where THz yield does not increase with plasma filament length, THz yield
from off-axis emission grows almost linearly with plasma filament length [10]. In the far
field, a cross-section of the conical THz radiation that is emitted, will appear like a donut
shape. The THz radiation emitted from the air-plasma is ultra-broadband, and in chapter
4 of this thesis, it will be demonstrated that the THz generated using a 100 fs driving laser
4
Single-shot waveform detection of air-plasma based THz sources
==PAGE:13==
contains frequencies above 60 THz. It has previously been shown through frequency-
resolved beam profile measurements of two-color air-plasma induced THz that the high
THz frequencies result in a hollow donut profile, frequencies at and below 2 THz instead
closer resemble a Gaussian profile [12].
A THz camera has been used to image the THz beam profile from the generation part of
the ABCD THz TDS, and the resulting image is shown in Fig. 2.1. The generated THz field
is collimated and then focused using two off-axis parabolic (OPA) mirrors, and the image
is captured before a focus is formed after the second OAP. It is noted that it is often difficult
to get a completely even donut profile, since it is highly dependent on alignment of the
optics and the spatial walk-off between the fundamental wave and the second harmonic.
Figure 2.1: THz beam profile captured using a THz camera. The pixels pitch of the sensor
is 23.5 µm, and the resolution is 320x240 pixels (the image has been slightly cropped
though). The small circles in the top right portion of the image is not a feature of the beam
profile, but rather an imperfection in the camera sensor where some pixels have been
damaged.
The generation part of the system will not be modified further in this project. The rest of
this thesis concerns different methods of performing THz waveform measurements. In
the following chapter, the physics of ultra-broadband THz detection will be presented, as
well as state-of-the-art measurement techniques.
2.2
Detection
Using air as the detection medium for THz radiation relies on the third order nonlinear
susceptibility χ(3) = 1.68 · 10−25m2/V2 [2, p. 99] of air. Specifically, a probe beam, which
is most often a beam dump from the fundamental frequency used when generating the
THz, is made to overlap spatially with the focus of the THz radiation. If the overlap in space
and time is good enough, degenerate four-wave mixing will occur. Through this process,
a signal oscillating at a frequency very close to twice that of the fundamental/probe beam
will be generated, and according to energy conservation, it will have a frequency of [13, p.
236]
Single-shot waveform detection of air-plasma based THz sources
5
==PAGE:14==
2! = ! + ! ± ⌦THz,
(2.2)
where ! is the angular frequency of the probe and ⌦THz is the angular frequency of the
THz. The resulting signal is often referred to as the THz-field-induced second harmonic
(TFISH) [14]. Since air is isotropic, assuming that all interacting fields are plane waves
polarized parallel to each other, a scalar equation can be used to express the induced
third-order polarization [13, p. 238], which is proportional to the electric field of the TFISH:
ETFISH
2!
/ P TFISH
2!
= ✏0χ(3)E!E⇤
!ETHz,
(2.3)
When using a photodetector – in this project either an avalanche photodiode (APD) or a
charge-coupled device (CCD) camera – to measure the TFISH, it is the intensity that is
measured. This can be expressed as:
ITFISH
2!
/ |ETFISH
2!
|2 / |χ(3)I!ETHz|2
(2.4)
Thus, if one simply measures the second harmonic generated from the probe beam over-
lapping with the THz, no phase information of the THz waveform can be obtained [2, p.
110]. By introducing a beam oscillating at the probe second harmonic, and which is gen-
erated locally to beat with the TFISH, therefore known as a local oscillator (LO), and it
can be shown that the total second harmonic intensity that can be measured (now both
arising from the TFISH and the LO induced second harmonic) will contain a term that is
proportional to the electric field of the THz radiation. A local oscillator can both be intro-
duced optically or electronically. If the probe beam intensity is high enough, a plasma is
formed in the detection region. Due to many nonlinear interactions occurring in the plasma,
a supercontinuum can be generated, which contains the second harmonic of the probe
beam [11]. This second harmonic can work as a local oscillator, and if it is much stronger
than the THz, the detected second harmonic signal will be dominated by a term that is
proportional to the electric field of the THz [2, p. 109]. When this condition is satisfied, the
detection is know as coherent, because it is sensitive to the phase of the THz electric field.
If instead the measured second harmonic is dominated by a term proportional to |ETHz|2,
no phase information will be obtained, and the detection is incoherent. A plasma-induced
local oscillator is not easily controllable and requires a very high probe beam peak inten-
sity. Alternatively, it has been demonstrated that a controllable optical local oscillator can
be introduced by placing a BBO crystal in the optical beam path of the probe before the
detection region [11]. A controllable local oscillator can also be introduced by applying a
voltage across the probe-THz interaction region, and the second harmonic arising from
this process will be ELO
2! / χ(3)I!Ebias, where Ebias is the static electric field arising due
to the bias voltage [14]. In practice, this can be done by positioning two electrodes con-
nected to a high voltage power supply around the detection region. Regardless of how
it is introduced in practice, adding a local oscillator term ELO
2! to Eq. 2.4 will result in a
second harmonic signal given by [14]
6
Single-shot waveform detection of air-plasma based THz sources
==PAGE:15==
I2! / |E2!|2 = (ETFISH
2!
+ ELO
2! )(ETFISH
2!
+ ELO
2! )⇤
= (ETFISH
2!
+ ELO
2! )((ETFISH
2!
)⇤+ (ELO
2! )⇤)
= ITFISH
2!
+ ILO
2! + ETFISH
2!
(ELO
2! )⇤+ (ETFISH
2!
)⇤ELO
2!
= ITFISH
2!
+ ILO
2! + ETFISH
2!
(ELO
2! )⇤+ (ETFISH
2!
(ELO
2! )⇤)⇤
= ITFISH
2!
+ ILO
2! + 2Re(ETFISH
2!
(ELO
2! )⇤)
(2.5)
In this project, a local oscillator will exclusively be introduced by means of a bias electric
field, since it is a well established method that provides great control of the local oscillator
strength, phase and polarization while requiring no additional optical components. Insert-
ing ELO
2! / χ(3)I!Ebias as well as the expression for ETFISH
2!
(Eq. 2.3) in Eq. 2.5, one
obtains
I2! / |χ(3)I!ETHz|2 + |χ(3)I!Ebias|2 + 2Re((χ(3)I!)2ETHzE⇤
bias)
= (χ(3)I!)2(|ETHz|2 + |Ebias|2 + 2|ETHz||Ebias|Re(ei(φT Hz−φbias))
= (χ(3)I!)2(|ETHz|2 + |Ebias|2 + 2|ETHz||Ebias|cos(∆φ)),
(2.6)
where ∆φ = φTHz −φbias is the phase difference between the THz field and the bias field.
If the bias voltage is kept constant, the cosine will only depend on the phase of the THz
electric field. It is thus apparent that the third term in the above has the desired property of
being proportional to ETHz, including its phase information. Achieving coherent detection
is thus a matter of making the third term in Eq. 2.5 dominant. This can accomplished
in different ways. A relatively simple way of accomplishing this is to let Ebias be a static
(DC) voltage that is sufficiently high to satisfy Ebias >> ETHz. This way, the term |ETHz|2
vanishes while |Ebias|2 is simply a constant background that can be removed with a low-
pass filter [14]. However, this approach will usually not work well with air as the detection
medium due to its relatively low dielectric strength of 30 kV/cm. As will be demonstrated
later in this chapter, peak THz electric fields of more than 700 kV/cm can be generated
using the system developed as a part of this project. Without attenuating the THz radiation
a lot, coherent detection in air using the homodyne detection technique is thus impossible.
However, if one uses a detection medium with a higher breakdown voltage, coherent
detection can be achieved for much higher THz electric fields. This can be achieved using
solid-state detectors, which will be elaborated upon in chapter 2.2.3.
On the other hand, the so-called heterodyne scheme allows for coherent detection regard-
less of THz to bias electric field strength ratio [14]. It is accomplished by reversing the
bias electric field between each emitted laser pulse, which is equivalent to performing a
⇡radians phase shift of φbias, which in turn results in cos(∆φ) flipping sign [2, p. 110].
The difference between I2! with one bias polarity and I2! with the opposite bias polarity
is thus:
∆I2! = I2!(φbias = 0) −I2!(φbias = ⇡) / (χ(3)I!)2|Ebias||ETHz|cos(φTHz),
(2.7)
i.e. the detection will be coherent. In Eq. 2.7, the phase of the bias field is changed
from 0 to ⇡radians, but it could just as well have been from any arbitrary phase φ0 to
φ0 + ⇡. The result would just be that the cosine term oscillating at φTHz is phase-shifted
by φ0. In this project, a heterodyne scheme is employed to obtain coherent detection with
Single-shot waveform detection of air-plasma based THz sources
7
==PAGE:16==
the the ultra-broadband ABCD THz TDS spectrometer constructed. In order to flip the
bias voltage between every laser pulse, a trigger signal which is phase and repetition rate
locked to the fundamental laser beam is sent to a signal generator to provide a square
wave oscillating at half the laser repetition rate. The square wave is sent to a high voltage
amplifier which is connected to the bias electrodes. The laser trigger signal as well as
the detected I2! (measured with an APD) is fed to a boxcar integrator, which integrates
the APD signal within an electronically controlled time-window. This way, random noise
incident on the APD at a moment in time that is not within the specified integration time
window will not contribute to the measured signal. Finally, the integrated signal is fed to a
lock-in amplifier together with the frequency-halved square wave signal, and the lock-in
outputs the differential signal, i.e. ∆I2! from Eq. 2.7. The results of this detection scheme
applied to the optical setup shown in Fig. 2.2 are presented in the following. Eq. 2.6 is
valid for any probe-THz delay ⌧between the two time-dependent ultrafast pulses E!(t)
and ETHz(t). If the system is arranged such that I2! can be measured at many different ⌧,
the probe-THz dependent TFISH signal will be a cross-correlation between the intensity
of the probe beam and the electric field of the THz [11]:
∆I2!(⌧) /
Z 1
−1
I!(t + ⌧)2ETHz(t)dt
(2.8)
The implication of this is that if one repeatedly measures I2! at different ⌧, even though I2!
is proportional to ETHz (Eq. 2.7), then the resulting waveform will not be a perfect recon-
struction of the THz waveform, since it will be ”smeared out” by the temporal duration of
the probe pulse. Ideally, the probe would be an impulse function. In principle, if one knows
the intensity profile of the probe beam, the actual THz waveform can be reconstructed
from the measured waveform using a cross-correlation theorem. For practical applications
such as ultra-broadband THz spectroscopy, however, it is not so much important that the
actual waveform can be reconstructed. Rather, the concern is that the nonzero time dura-
tion of the probe causes the spectrum of the measured waveform to be narrower than the
spectrum of the actual THz waveform, which thus results in a reduced usable detection
bandwidth for spectroscopy. This is the core benefit of using a probe laser beam with a
time-duration that is as short as possible. However, compared to other THz waveform
measurement techniques, the detection technique presented here using air as four-wave
mixing medium by far produces the widest detected THz bandwidths [2]. The detectable
bandwidth is only rivaled/equaled by a very similar detection scheme that replaces air as
the detection medium with an ultra-thin solid-state material that has a higher χ(3). This
solid-state technique is examined further in chapter 2.2.3.
Lastly, it is noted that a kind of hybrid detection scheme referred to as a differential homo-
dyne scheme has been employed to enable coherent detection of THz radiation without
the need of a square-wave bias voltage signal with a repetition rate of half of that of the
laser, and it also does not put any requirements on the THz vs bias electric field strength
[14]. In brief, the idea is to simply do a homodyne measurement series of I2! for all ⌧
within a chosen range, and then to repeat the exact same measurements but with a flipped
DC bias voltage. For every ⌧one can then compute ∆I2!, which will be proportional to
ETHz. This approach has the benefit of requiring a much simpler electrical setup. As
will be shown later in this thesis, this detection scheme can actually be used to obtain
coherent detection even without the use of any lock-in amplifier, boxcar integrator or signal
generator. However, the signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) will especially rely on the stability of
the laser and the noise level of the DC high voltage supply. For these exact reasons, the
differential homodyne detection scheme is employed in the ultra-broadband single-shot
8
Single-shot waveform detection of air-plasma based THz sources
==PAGE:17==
THz spectrometer developed for this project to obtain coherent detection using images
captured by a line CCD camera. This we be explained in further detail in chapters 3 and
4.
2.2.1
The ABCD system
Ultra-broadband THz spectrometers that use a heterodyne detection scheme with air
as the detection medium are often referred to as air-biased coherent detection (ABCD)
systems [11]. As mentioned in the introduction to this chapter, an air-plasma based ultra-
broadband THz spectrometer was constructed as a part of this thesis project prior to
attempting to create a single-shot version. Fig. 2.2 is a schematic of the spectrometer,
which more precisely is a two-color air-plasma THz generation, air-biased coherent de-
tection (ABCD) THz TDS. The system thus relies on two-color driven air-ionization for
ultra-broadband THz generation as described in chapter 2.1. The air-biased coherent
detection is carried out using a lock-in assisted heterodyne scheme. An image of the
actual constructed ABCD THz TDS is shown in Fig. A.4 in the appendix. In the following,
a general description of the construction of the system is given. THz waveform mea-
surements obtained using the spectrometer are presented in chapter 2.2.2, as well as a
characterization of the system.
Figure 2.2: Top-view schematic of the air-plasma based ultra-broadband THz spectrome-
ter. Black 45° tilted lines represent plane mirrors if no text in the figure states otherwise.
The pink lines after the BBO represent the 800 nm beam overlapping with its 400 nmm
second harmonic. The violet lines to the right in the figure represent TFISH.
As mentioned, the Solstice Ace Ti:Sapphire regenerative amplifier laser by Spectra-Physics
[15] delivers 100 fs full-width at half-max (FWHM) pulses with a repetition rate of 1 kHz.
The output of the laser is divided in two using a beamsplitter. The beam exiting the laser
Single-shot waveform detection of air-plasma based THz sources
9
==PAGE:18==
is collimated, and it has a 1/e2 beam diameter of ⇡10 mm (⇡5.9 mm FWHM). It is hori-
zontally polarized relative to the optical table, which in the schematic is the same plane
as the paper. The transmitted part of the beam – which will be referred to the generation
beam – is passed through a thin λ/2 wave plate which flips the polarization by 90° (to
vertical, i.e. in/out of the paper). It is then focused through a 300 mm focal length spherical
lens. Approximately 150 mm after the lens is a beta barium borate (BBO) crystal, which
is aligned for type I phase-matching, such that the second harmonic of the generation
beam is generated as efficiently as possible. The 400 nm pulse is horizontally polarized,
due to the frequency doubling process being type I phase-matched. As close as possible
after the BBO crystal is a dual wavelength waveplate mounted, which acts as a λ/2 wave
plate for the 800 nm pulse and a λ wave plate for the 400 nm pulse, meaning that both
beams after this are horizontally polarized. The 400 nm generation efficiency can naturally
be increased by moving the BBO crystal closer to the beam focus, however this is with
a risk of optically induced damage to the BBO crystal as well as the dual wavelength
waveplate. Approximately 300 mm from the lens, the peak electric field from the 800 nm
and 400 nm beams is so high that it excess the dielectric strength of air and a multiple
millimeters long plasma pellet is formed in the air. The plasma filament ”glows” white
due to supercontinuum generation with wavelengths in the visible part of the spectrum.
Importantly, ultra-broadband THz radiation is generated along the plasma filament, from
which it is emitted in a cone-like manner. The transverse beam-profile of the generated
THz radiation therefore has a donut-shaped profile in the far field as described in chapter
2.1. The THz radiation is collimated as good as possible using an off-axis parabolic mirror
(OAP) with an effective focal length of 101.6 mm. A high-resistivity (HR) silicon wafer (Si)
is positioned in the collimated THz beam path close to Brewster’s angle to transmit most
of the THz while reflecting the residual 400 nm and 800 nm radiation (as well as any other
visible light generated).
Another OAP also with an effective 101.6 mm focal length is used to focus the THz radiation
to a point. This OAP has a small hole in the middle, through the probe beam can pass,
while the THz with its donut beam profile is unaffected by the hole in the middle of the mirror.
The probe beam refers to the reflected portion of the beam incident on the beamsplitter
in the beginning of the setup. The probe beam is first incident on a pair of plane mirrors
both angled 45° with respect to the incident beam. The angled mirrors are mounted on a
PI (Physik Instrumente) linear stage that can move parallel to the direction of the probe
beam as it enters/exits the translation stage/mirror assembly. The position of the stage
can be changed with high precision down to a fraction of a micrometer using a controller
connected to a computer. The translation stage assembly is aligned with high precision
such that translating the stage only has the effect of adding optical path length to the
probe beam while not changing the beam pointing. Two other mirrors are used to direct
the probe beam towards the hole in the OAP. Approximately 200 mm before the exit hole
of the OAP, a spherical lens with a 300 mm focal length is positioned along the probe
beam path such that the probe beam comes to a focus around 100 mm after the hole
in the OAP surface. This way, the probe beam focus is made to overlap with the THz
beam focus. The optical paths of the generation and probe beams have been set up such
that they are approximately equal when the translation stage is set to its middle position.
This way, the translation stage can cover the where the peak of the probe beam in time
matches that of the THz waveform peak. It is also crucial for the detection part of the
system to work that the spatial overlap between the THz and the probe is good. To ensure
this, a THz camera was temporarily positioned after the focus of the THz, such that a
donut beam profile was clearly visible in the viewfinder of the camera. A pinhole with a
variable aperture was then positioned where the focus of the THz was expected to be,
10
Single-shot waveform detection of air-plasma based THz sources
==PAGE:19==
and the size of the aperture was decreased until it had a visible effect on the THz beam
profile. The pinhole was moved slightly until the full THz profile was yet again visible. The
aperture size was then reduced further, and the process was repeated. Performing this
interative process in all spatial dimensions until the pinhole cannot be closed further –
ideally when the aperture diameter is less than a fraction of a mm – should result in the
pinhole quite accurately marking the location of the THz focus. After this process was
carefully performed, the probe beam was aligned such that it is focused at the center on
the pinhole while not clipping the edges of the hole in the last OAP.
After the detection region, a 45° mirror is placed which is high-reflective (HR) for 400
nm radiation and anti-reflective (AR) for 800 nm radiation. After the mirror, a lens is
positioned to approximately form an imaging system between the detection region and the
active area of an APD. In front of the APD is a bandpass filter with a ± 10 nm passband
centered around 400 nm. The output of the APD is connected to the boxcar integrator
as well as an oscilloscope. The rest of the electronics are set up as mentioned earlier
in chapter 2.2. The goal is naturally to optimize the TFISH signal incident on the APD.
No TFISH with be observed on the oscilloscope if the temporal and spatial overlap is not
perfect. However, if the probe intensity is high enough, a second harmonic signal will
relatively easily be picked up by the APD and viewed on the oscilloscope. This probe-
induced second harmonic is suspected to originate from supercontinuum generation from
air-breakdown due to the probe field. However, this second harmonic is also observed
when the probe is focused into a solid (silicon nitride) while being greatly attenuated,
meaning that no plasma is formed. It has previously been demonstrated that a very
broadband supercontinuum spanning almost the entire visible range can be generated
by focusing an ultrafast Ti:Sapphire pulse onto a thin silica plate [16]. One could also
hypothesize that this second harmonic is the bias electric field induced local oscillator.
While the signal does indeed get stronger when a bias is applied, it is also detectable
without a bias. Thus, there exists a second harmonic signal purely generated by the probe
field, and introducing the bias generates a local oscillator also at the second harmonic of
the fundamental frequency – exactly as predicted by Eq. 2.5. The probe-field induced
second harmonic serves as a great way to ensure that the imaging system from the
detection region to the APD is optimized, since the TFISH follows the same optical path.
The timing of the pulse on the oscilloscope is also the same as the timing of the TFISH,
since both are synchronized to the laser repetition rate. When the imaging system is
optimally aligned, meaning the second harmonic signal is maximized, the translation stage
can be scanned back and forth while the oscilloscope live readout from the APD is being
monitored. If everything is aligned well, a sharp peak in the signal will be observed on the
oscilloscope when the translation stage is positioned such that the probe overlaps with
the THz pulse in time. When this initial signal is obtained, fine tuning of the probe-THz
overlap can be performed, which usually improves the detected TFISH signal by many
orders of magnitude – neutral density (ND) filters might therefore be necessary in front
of the APD to avoid saturation. In this setup, an ND filter with an optical density (OD) of
2.0 is always used, and sometimes more. After initial optimizations, the pinhole can be
replaced with the bias electric connected to the high voltage amplifier. A waveform can
then be obtained by translating the stage in steps usually around 1 µm (corresponding
to 6.67 fs probe-THz delay) and measuring the differential I2! at each position. A data
acquisition averaging time at each probe-THz position less than 500 ms usually yields
a decent SNR. For the waveforms presented later in this chapter, an averaging time of
0.9 s was used. In the event that no initial TFISH is observed with the naked eye on the
oscilloscope when translating the stage, it can be useful to simply insert the electrodes
and setup the electronics as described anyways, since the lock-in detection scheme is
Single-shot waveform detection of air-plasma based THz sources
11
==PAGE:20==
far more sensitive than trying to manually pick up a signal on the oscilloscope. This often
requires one to scan across a relatively large time window when looking for the initial
waveform. Finally, it a nitrogen purge chamber is built around part of the setup where the
THz radiation exists to replace the ambient air with pure nitrogen. This ensures that the
THz pulse is not attenuated by water vapor absorption in the air.
When choosing components for the optical setup, an emphasis should be put on not using
thick transmissive elements or materials for transmission of the optical pulses that are
highly dispersive. It is naturally always the case when working with ultrafast optics that
dispersion control is important. However, the requirements are quite a lot more relaxed
for a 100 fs pulse than a 35 fs one. This is demonstrated in Fig. 2.3a and 2.3b below,
which is a simple simulation of the impact of ultra-fast pulse transmission through various
thicknesses of glass. Even though dispersion control is not as critical for a 100 fs pulse,
spherical lenses have been chosen in this setup over aspherical doublets, which are
much thicker, even though the focus from a spherical lens is not as tight as that from an
aberration compensated lens. For the ultra-broadband THz pulse, reflective optics are
almost solely used – except for the HR Si wafer, which uniquely is almost completely
transparent and dispersionless across the whole THz range [17].
-150
-100
-50
0
50
100
150
Time [fs]
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
Normalized intensity
Original 100 fs pulse
After 5 mm
After LD = 72.1 mm
(a) The impact of dispersion on an originally 100
fs sech pulse after transmission through various
thicknesses of glass. A group-velocity disper-
sion parameter of β2 = 44.65 fs2/mm is used.
-150
-100
-50
0
50
100
150
Time [fs]
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
Normalized intensity
Original 35 fs pulse
After 5 mm
After LD = 8.8 mm
(b) The impact of dispersion on an originally 35
fs sech pulse after transmission through various
thicknesses of glass, using the otherwise same
parameters as in (a).
2.2.2
Demonstrating the ABCD system at work
Below is a waveform measurement using the ABCD detection scheme outlined above.
The y-axis in Fig. 2.4(a) has been calibrated to show actual THz electric field strength in
kV/cm. This is done by measuring the average THz power using a THz power meter under
the same conditions as when the waveform was measured, which yielded Pavg = 67.4
µW. Knowing the repetition rate fr = 1 kHz and time duration of the THz pulse ⌧THz = 83
fs, the peak power can be approximated as Pmax = Pavg/(fr⌧THz) = 812 kW. It is noted
that the THz pulse duration is taken as the FWHM of the intensity of the envelope of a
Gaussian fit to the waveform (the dotted gray graph in Fig. 2.4(a)). The peak power is
converted to peak electric field strength, Emax =
q
2z0Pmax
⇡w2
T Hz = 872 kV/cm, where z0 = 377
12
Single-shot waveform detection of air-plasma based THz sources
==PAGE:21==
⌦is the impedance of air. Given that the refractive index of nitrogen and air is almost
the same at THz frequencies [17], the value of z0 should be a good approximation even
though a nitrogen purge chamber surrounds the generation and detection areas of the
setup. wTHz is the FWHM transverse beam waist of the THz focus after the second OAP
in Fig. 2.2, which using a THz camera is measured at 160 µm – this is shown in chapter 3.
-200
-100
0
100
200
300
400
500
Time [fs]
-100
-50
0
50
100
THz electric field [kV/mm]
(a)
Gaussian fit to waveform
Envelope of fit (positive)
Envelope of fit (negative)
Measured THz waveform
Truncated THz waveform
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
20
Frequency [THz]
10-1
100
101
 THz power spectral density
(b)
Spectrum of Gaussian fit
Spectrum of THz waveform
Spectrum of truncated THz waveform
Figure 2.4: (a) Measured waveform using ABCD THz spectrometer (blue graph). The
vertical axis is calibrated to actual THz electric field strength, and the horizontal axis is
probe-THz delay. The red graph is the same as the blue, but where the slow oscillation
after 100 fs is removed. The gray solid graph is a Gaussian fit to the waveform with a
FWHM intensity time-duration of 83 fs and a central carrier frequency of 3.53 THz. The
dashed gray graph is the Gaussian envelope. (b) Power spectral density of the waveform,
as well as power spectral density of the truncated waveform and the Gaussian fit to the
waveform.
The value of Emax is the peak THz electric field strength of the envelope of the pulse.
However, since the peak of the single carrier oscillation in the THz waveform is not perfectly
Single-shot waveform detection of air-plasma based THz sources
13
==PAGE:22==
centered around the envelope due to a phase shift of approximately ⇡/8 radians, the
actual peak of the waveform only reaches 70% of the envelope peak. It is observed that
the Gaussian fit to the waveform is quite good, except for the slow oscillation after the
main pulse (after 100 fs in the plot). By artificially removing this slow oscillation from
the waveform, the spectrum of the waveform also better matches the spectrum of the
Gaussian waveform in the low frequencies (below 1 THz). This indicates that a waveform
that is very ”slow” at returning to the zero-baseline is lacking low-frequency THz.
The power spectral density in Fig. 2.4(b) is above 10% of the peak value all the way
from 0.4 THz to 11 THz. This compares quite favorably to what was demonstrated in
[18], where a very similar setup also employing a coherent heterodyne technique was
reported to cover the THz gap from 0.3 to 10 THz with at least 10% of the maximum signal.
However, that setup used shorter 80 fs laser pulses from a Ti:Sapphire regenerative
amplifier laser for the THz generation and detection. In another study [11], a 35 fs laser
was used to drive a setup where the detection relied on an optically induced local oscillator
for coherent detection. This system yielded a THz spectrum up to 10 THz (with the same
10% measure). The somewhat poor bandwidth is likely due to water vapor absorption of
the THz, as a purge chamber was not construed around it. Oscillations in the waveform
after the main pulse is a clear signature of this [11]. In [7], a much shorter sub-40 fs laser
was used in a setup very similar to the one presented in this project, and this yielded a
very impressive THz spectrum coverage almost up to 40 THz, again with the same 10%
measure.
It is emphasized that the detected bandwidth of ABCD THz spectrometers is highly align-
ment sensitive. It is through an often very tedious and painstaking process of ”squeezing”
every last bit of performance out of the system through very careful adjustments that a
good spectral coverage is reached. For the detection part of the setup, it is crucial that the
probe beam overlaps with the center of the THz focus, as this is where the very high THz
frequencies are confined – whereas the low THz frequencies are much more spread out.
Further, in an ABCD setup it is important that crossing of the THz and probe beams are
minimized such that the interaction in the detection region is as collinear as possible. This
is important for two reasons. Firstly, the TFISH generation is only efficient if it can happen
throughout the entire depth of focus of the overlapping THz and probe beam. Secondly, a
crossing of the beams – i.e. not perfectly collinear interaction – will lead to the measured
signal being a time-averaged value of the actual TFISH within a certain time-window. This
causes a kind of temporal smearing of the waveform, that acts as a low-pass filter of the
detected spectrum. The width of the time-window increases for a larger angle between
the propagation vectors of the two interacting beams. This problem can, however, be
almost completely resolved using solid-state detectors, since they only rely on a probe-
THz overlap in a very thin (sub-µm) detection region. While this temporal smearing is
a very undesirable effect in traditional ABCD systems, the very concept of introducing
a time-window to the probe-THz interaction through a non-collinear beam geometry is a
fundamental idea behind the workings of the single-shot THz spectrometer constructed
for this project. This will be explored much further in chapter 3.
In order to characterize the ABCD system, as well as to verify that the detection is indeed
coherent, meaning Eq. 2.7 is satisfied, three experiments have been carried out. The
experiments are designed to quantify the dependence of the measured second harmonic
signal and differential second harmonic signal (through lock-in detection) on THz electric
field strength, bias voltage amplitude and probe beam intensity.
In the first experiment, waveforms are measured with different numbers of Si wafers placed
14
Single-shot waveform detection of air-plasma based THz sources
==PAGE:23==
at a normal incidence in the collimated beam path of the THz. Each Si wafer attenuates
the THz power by a factor of two due to Fresnel reflection losses from the refractive index
mismatch between the air and Si, which has an almost perfectly constant refractive index of
3.47 [17] across the entire THz spectrum. All other parameters are kept identical between
each measurement. Besides measuring a waveform, the peak second harmonic signal
I2! is also measured. This is done by setting the translation stage position such that
probe-THz overlap is optimal, and the oscilloscope is then set to measure the average of
the peak signal. The resulting waveforms and their corresponding power spectral density
plots are shown in Fig. 2.5.
0
200
400
600
800
Time [fs]
-0.6
-0.4
-0.2
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
  
I2
(a)
0
1
2
3
Added Si wafers:
0
5
10
15
20
Frequency [THz]
10-3
10-2
10-1
100
 Power spectral density of  
I2
(b)
0
1
2
3
Added Si wafers:
Figure 2.5: (a) THz waveforms measured with different numbers of Si wafers placed in
the THz beam path. (b) Power spectral density of the waveforms in (a).
As explained with Eq. 2.7, any point on the waveform is proportional to the lock-in extracted
differential second harmonic signal incident on the APD. Thus, the peak value of each
waveform (i.e. peak ∆I2!), should satisfy Eq. 2.7, and thus be proportional to the electric
field strength of the THz. In Fig. 2.4(a), the peak THz electric field strength when no extra
Si wafers are inserted is known. Given that each inserted Si wafer attenuates the THz
electric field by a factor of
p
2, the peak electric field at each waveform measurement with
a different number of wafers inserted can be obtained. Fig. 2.6(b) is a plot of the computed
electric field strength for every Si wafer inserted versus the corresponding measured peak
∆I2! from the waveforms in Fig. 2.5(a). A linear fit is applied to the data points, and
it very confidently shows that ∆I2! / ETHz, as predicted by Eq. 2.7. Fig. 2.6(a) is
the same, however with the oscilloscope measured I2! rather than the lock-in extracted
differential signal on the vertical axis. A quadratic fit is applied in order to quantify if the
expected I2! / E2
THz from Eq. 2.6 can be observed. The fit is not excellent, but this can
be explained by the fact that the data rely on raw measurements from the oscilloscope
which fluctuate a lot especially at low signal strengths, even when an average is measured.
Further, there is some ambiguity as to whether the translation stage position is exactly at
the peak probe-THz overlap. Despite of this, it is clear that when the THz electric field
strength is doubled, the second harmonic intensity is more than doubled, which clearly
Single-shot waveform detection of air-plasma based THz sources
15
==PAGE:24==
demonstrates that the relation is faster growing than linear. It is noted that the fit is forced
to intersect the origin. This is justified since the bias field was switched off during the
oscilloscope measurements, meaning that all terms including an LO in Eq. 2.6 are zero,
making it a pure quadratic dependence in ETHz.
0
200
400
600
800
Peak  ETHz [kV/cm]
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
 Peak  I2
(a)
Measurements
Quadratic fit, R 2=0.9491
0
200
400
600
800
Peak  ETHz [kV/cm]
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
 Peak  
 I2
(b)
Measurements
Linear fit, R2=0.9994
Figure 2.6: (a) Peak second harmonic intensity versus peak THz electric field strength,
both measurements (blue points) and a quadratic fit (orange graph). (b) Peak differential
second harmonic intensity versus peak THz electric field strength, with measurements
(blue points) and a linear fit (orange graph).
In the second experiment, the amplitude of the AC (square-wave) bias electric field is
varied, and both waveforms are measured at each setting. The resulting waveforms and
spectra are shown in Fig. A.1 in the appendix. Fig. 2.7 shows the peak value of each
waveform (peak ∆I2!) versus bias voltage amplitude (which is proportional to Ebias), and
a linear fit is applied to the data in order to investigate if the relationship ∆I2! / Ebias
expected from Eq. 2.7 can be observed. This is indeed the case, since the fit mates the
data very well. The amplitude of the bias voltage could only be set with three significant
digits on the high voltage amplifier, which leads to some uncertainty in the measurements.
In general, slight deviations from the expected relation are also expected since the peak
I2! is obtained by simply extracting the peak value of the waveform, which of course
leads to a small discretisation error since the maximum data point might not happen to be
samples at the exact peak of the waveform. However, a rather small step size of 1 µm,
corresponding to 6.67 fs was used, which ensures that the impact of this error is minimal.
16
Single-shot waveform detection of air-plasma based THz sources
==PAGE:25==
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
AC bias voltage amplitude [kV]
-0.2
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
1.4
Peak  
 I2
Measurements
Linear fit, R2=0.991
Figure 2.7: Peak differential second harmonic intensity versus AC bias voltage amplitude,
both measurements (blue points) and a linear fit to the data (orange graph).
In the last experiment, the probe power is varied. This is done by inserting ND filters of
different OD ratings in the optical path of the probe. For each filter setting, a waveform
and an oscilloscope readout a was obtained similarly to in the first experiment, yielding
values of peak ∆I2! and I2! for different probe powers. The average probe power just
before the detection region (i.e. after the OAP with a hole in it) was measured using a
power meter for each setting. While one could also have chosen to trust the ND filter OD
ratings and simply compute relative probe powers from this, an actual measurement was
deemed more precise. The obtained waveforms and corresponding spectra are shown
in Fig. A.2 in the appendix. From the measurements, plots of peak I2! and ∆I2! versus
probe average power (which naturally is proportional to the peak intensity) are obtained.
These are shown in Fig. 2.8(a) and (b), respectively. Quadratic fits have been applied
to the data, since Eq. 2.6 predicts I2! / I2
! and Eq. 2.7 predicts ∆I2! / I2
!. Both of the
expected trends are clearly observed with minimal deviations that can be explained by
the aforementioned uncertainties including the fact that the power meter measured probe
power is only accurate to a certain degree.
Single-shot waveform detection of air-plasma based THz sources
17
==PAGE:26==
0
20
40
60
80
100
Average Ip [mW]
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
Peak  I2
(a)
Measurements
Quadratic fit, R 2=0.9992
0
20
40
60
80
100
Average Ip [mW]
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
1.4
Peak  
I2
(b)
Measurements
Quadratic fit, R2=0.9974
Figure 2.8: (a) Peak second harmonic intensity versus average probe power. The blue
dots are measurements, and the orange graph is a quadratic fit to the measurements. (b)
Peak differential second harmonic intensity versus average probe power. Again blue dots
are measurements, and the orange graph is a quadratic fit to these.
In summary, these experiments show that the signal measured directly on the oscilloscope
behaves as expected from Eq. 2.6, and that the lock-in signal used to obtain waveforms
behaves as expected from Eq. 2.7. Importantly, this shows that coherent detection, i.e. a
waveform measurement that is sensitive to the amplitude and phase of the electric field,
is achieved with a heterodyne scheme.
2.2.3
Solid-state biased coherent detection
Due to the low nonlinearity of air, the TFISH generation is very inefficient. Further, the
breakdown voltage of ⇡30 kV/cm of air severely limits how large a bias voltage that
can be applied between the electrodes in the ABCD setup. Solid-state detectors offer
an attractive alternative to performing the detection in air, since they circumvent exactly
those two problems. The first solid-state devices were developed for this purpose in 2017
by Alessandro Tomasino et al. [19], and they consisted of a thin (' 1 µm) sheet of UV
fused silica layer on top of two neighboring sub-1 µm gold layers deposited on a thick
silica substrate (' 1 mm). The deposited gold layers serve as electrodes, and different
layouts were tested in [19]. Plasma-enhanced chemical vapor deposition of the silica
on top of the gold electrodes ensures that the gap between the electrodes is also filled
with silica. Schematic drawings of the designs are shown in Fig. 2.9. Using the same
heterodyne detection scheme as outlined in the above for the ABCD scheme, coherent
detection with solid-state devices were achieved. The authors of [19] named the technique
solid-state biased coherent detection (SSBCD). They reported that an SNR comparable to
that obtained using an ABCD scheme with the same setup was achieved with the SSBCD
scheme when using a three times lower bias voltage and a three orders of magnitude
lower probe power than in the ABCD setup. This is in part due to almost four orders of
magnitude higher third order nonlinearity of silica (χ(3) ⇡2.2 · 10−22m2/V2 [19]) than air,
as well as a two orders of magnitude higher breakdown voltage [19]. The bandwidth of the
detected waveform is not compromised by using a SSBCD scheme rather than the ABCD
18
Single-shot waveform detection of air-plasma based THz sources
==PAGE:27==
scheme, since the TFISH is generated in the very first hundreds of manometers of silica
within the gap between the electrodes. So while the THz is almost completely absorbed by
the silica, the TFISH, which when using an 800 nm probe beam has a central wavelength
around 400 nm, will propagate unimpeded through the silica substrate. The researchers
since improved upon their design using silicon nitride (SiN) as the top-layer rather than
silica, due to its higher third order nonlinearity of χ(3) ⇡8 · 10−21m2/V2 [20]. As will be
explained further in chapter 3, using solid-state detectors are imperative for achieving the
goal of this project.
Figure 2.9: Schematic of the first SSBCD devices from [19]. (a) Gold electrodes deposited
to form a 30 µm wide gap along the whole device. (b) Gold electrodes deposited to form
two interlocking 10 µm wide fingers that are 3 µm apart.
In order to gain experience working with an SSBCD system, already existing SiN solid-
state devices fabricated at DTU Physics were used in the place of the bias electrodes in
the traditional ABCD setup shown in Fig. 2.2. The layout of the electrodes in the devices
used is similar to Fig. 2.9 (b), in the sense that they are shaped as interlocking fingers. The
idea behind the interlocking fingers design is to maximize THz field enhancement while
ensuring a uniform bias electric field will point orthogonal to the direction of the fingers.
Whereas in an ABCD scheme the TFISH generation relies heavily on a good collinear
probe-THz overlap throughout the Rayleigh range of the beams, the TFISH generation
happens within a few hundreds of nm propagation in a solid-state device. Therefore, as
long as the THz and probe beams overlap well right at the active area of the device, TFISH
generation will happen efficiently. In the devices used here, the interlocking fingers are so
small that they are invisible to the human eye, and they are surrounded by a large region of
SiN on silica substrate. As such, it is easy to get the overlapping probe and THz beams to
hit the SiN layer and generate TFISH, but making sure that they actually hit the electrodes
can be a challenge. When a TFISH signal can be measured on the oscilloscope, the
only way of knowing if the beams overlap on the electrodes is if running a scan with the
lock-in detection results in a detected waveform. One might therefore have to move the
solid-state detector (which is mounted on a three-axis translation stage) relative to the
beams in a systematic manner and then running a scan after each adjustment. Below
are the results from using the solid-state devices for coherent waveform detection using a
lock-in assisted heterodyne scheme.
Single-shot waveform detection of air-plasma based THz sources
19
==PAGE:28==
0
200
400
600
Time [fs]
-3
-2
-1
0
1
2
3
 THz electric field
(a)
Air (+2)
SSD 1
SSD 2 (-2)
0
5
10
15
20
Frequency [THz]
10-1
100
101
 THz power spectral density
(b)
Air (+2)
SSD 1
SSD 2 (-2)
Figure 2.10: Comparison of THz waveform (a) and spectrum (b) captured using ACBD
(blue graph) and SSBCD (orange and yellow graph). The yellow graph is a solid-state
device with a total of just six interlocking gold ”fingers” as electrodes that are just 2 µm
wide each and 1 mm long. There is a 10 µm gap between each finger. The orange graph
is similar but has a much larger active area ( around 100 µm) due to larger interlocking
fingers.
As apparent from Fig. 2.10, the SNR is superior with the ABCD method. This is mainly
due to the solid-state devices used being early prototypes that have not been optimized for
TFISH generation efficiency but rather for speed of fabrication. Further, the probe beam in
the SSBCD measurements is attenuated by a neutral density filter with an optical density
of 2.5, i.e. an attenuation of more than a factor 300.
20
Single-shot waveform detection of air-plasma based THz sources
==PAGE:29==
3
Theory of single-shot waveform
detection
In order to obtain the good SNR shown in the waveforms in chapter 2, delay times of
around 1 s at each translation stage position are used. This means that acquiring each
waveform has taken multiple minutes. This is acceptable for doing static spectroscopy
with such a setup, i.e. measuring a single reference waveform and then a single sample
waveform. However, for transient THz spectroscopy – pump-probe spectroscopy where
ultra-fast photocarrier dynamics can be revealed – many scans are necessary, so total
acquisition times can be longer than 12 hours using a translation-stage based THz TDS as
the one presented in chapter 2. Such a long acquisition time is of course highly impractical,
but more importantly it can make it unfeasible to do such measurements when the sample
being measured might degrade over time, or if the surroundings exhibit slow fluctuations
over time (for instance in temperature or humidity).
When performing spectroscopy, where is always an inherent trade-off between acquisi-
tion time and SNR. A single-shot system would not circumvent that. However, normal
translation stage based time-domain spectrometers are fundamentally limited by the fact
that the waveform detection is performed in a serial manner; a certain acquisition time is
necessary at every probe-THz delay where one wishes to measure a signal, and the total
acquisition time scales linearly with the number of probe-THz delay points one wishes to
measure. Making matters worse, between each detection point, a mechanical movement
has to be performed, which adds further to the total acquisition time.
The ultimate goal of a single-shot time-domain THz spectrometer is to perform the wave-
form detection in a parallel manner. This can be achieved if a mechanism for mapping out
different probe-THz delays spatially is in place – this will be referred to as time-to-space
(TS) encoding. Using a spatially resolved detector, for instance a camera, every pixel on
the detector can then be associated with a certain probe-THz delay. In such a setup, a
certain acquisition time is still necessary at every pixel. As a matter of fact, the optical
fluence on each pixel will be reduced compared to a traditional setup, since the total signal
is spread out spatially. However, the true value of such a system lies in the fact that the
total acquisition time is not the sum of the acquisition time for each pixel – rather it is equal
to the acquisition time needed for just a single pixel.
If one has access to a strong enough THz pulse, a THz TDS employing a TS mapping
would - in theory - be capable of detecting the entire waveform of the pulse in time from
just a single ”shot” with whatever laser is used to generate the pulse. On the contrary,
even the best translation-based THz TDS would need at least N shots, where N is the
number of probe-THz delays one wishes to measure. In practice, the higher the pulse
energy of any laser system, the lower the repetition rate of the system is, which of course
poses a constraint on the minimum time between the acquisition of each data point in a
translation stage based THz TDS.
In air-plasma based THz sources, the THz power is highly scalable, since the ionized
air is immediately replaceable [2, p. 97]. The same is not true for crystal or PCA based
THz sources, as these are vulnerable to material damage from high-power lasers [10]. As
such, not only does air-plasma based THz sources offer by far the superior bandwidth, they
are also – theoretically – capable of producing enough THz power such that a waveform
Single-shot waveform detection of air-plasma based THz sources
21
==PAGE:30==
detection setup employing a TS encoding would be capable of measuring the whole
waveform of a single emitted THz pulse. In the following, a setup capable of exactly this
is presented.
3.1
The idea
The basic idea behind the single-shot capable THz TDS is to introduce a TS encoding
through a non-collinear probe-THz beam geometry. Instead of focusing the probe and
THz pulses to points that overlap in space, the probe and THz must both be focused to two
lines overlapping in space. In reality, a point focus is actually a one-dimensional region
of high intensity defined by the Rayleigh range of the beam. Similarly, a line focus is a
two-dimensional sheet of high intensity. The depth of the overlapping sheets from the THz
and probe will be shown to the a crucial parameter, and it is also defined by the Rayleigh
range of the beam unless a solid-state detector is used. Fig. 3.1 is intended to show a
top-view of a non-collinear probe-THz geometry, where both beams are focused along
one dimension to form an overlapping line focus.
Figure 3.1: Top-view of schematic of a non-collinear probe-THz beam geometry. The solid
red lines define the transverse extent of the probe beam, and the solid black lines define
the transverse extent of the THz beam. From the top view, both beams are collimated,
but one should imagine that from the side, both beams come to a focus in the middle
of gray shaded area. The thickness of the gray area defines the region in which TFISH
generation occurs. The dotted black line marks both where the two beams come to an
overlapping line focus, as well as defines the wavefront of the THz. The dark red line is
the wavefront of the probe beam. Due to an angle ✓between the propagation direction of
the two beams, the wavefronts are tilted relative to each other by the same angle. The
semi-opaque blue/red shape represents the waveform of the THz in time, and the semi-
opaque white/red shape represents the intensity of the probe beam in time.
22
Single-shot waveform detection of air-plasma based THz sources
==PAGE:31==
In Fig 3.1 one should imagine that the optical path length of the two beams has been tuned
such that the center of the THz waveform overlaps in time with the peak of the probe beam
temporal intensity profile right in the center of the transverse beam profile. Due to the
angle ✓between the wavefronts, if one considers a point slightly to the right of the middle
of the THz transverse profile, the peak of the probe overlaps with the THz pulse at an
”earlier” point in time, from the perspective of the THz pulse, meaning that the probe-THz
delay is effectively a smaller value to the right on the transverse profile of the THz. The
rightmost point on the THz transverse line focus profile that is overlapped by the probe
line focus thus corresponds to a probe-THz delay t1 that is smaller than the probe THz
delay t2 obtained to the leftmost transverse point. As shown in Eq. 2.4, a TFISH signal
will be generated when the THz and probe pulses overlap in time and space. Since the
beams are arranged to overlap in space along the whole transverse extend of the line
focus of each beam, the TS encoding achieved through the non-collinear beam geometry
means that every point along the transverse extend of the line focus corresponds to a
certain probe-THz delay. From the geometry of the setup, the total window of probe-THz
delays defined by the overlapping beams is
∆t = ∆d
c
= sin(✓)w2!
c
,
(3.1)
where c = 3 · 108 m/s is the speed of light in air, ∆d is the total difference in probe optical
path length between the rightmost position of the line focus and the leftmost position, and
w2! is the transverse width of the TFISH signal, which is determined by the transverse
with of the probe beam and THz beam – this relationship is explored further in a bit. Using
this simple relation, the graphs shown in Fig. 3.2(a) are obtained.
0
1
2
3
4
5
Probe-THz angle [°]
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
Time window [ps]
(a)
0.5 mm
1 mm
2 mm
5 mm
10 mm
w2 :
0
1
2
3
4
5
Probe-THz angle [°]
0
0.5
1
1.5
Time resolution [fs]
(b)
Figure 3.2: (a) Predicted probe-THz time delay window ∆t as a function of ✓for various
transverse TFISH beam widths. (b) Predicted temporal smearing limited time-resolution
δt as a function of ✓.
Fig. 3.2(a) illustrates that even with very modest probe-THz angles ✓, as long as a TFISH
Single-shot waveform detection of air-plasma based THz sources
23
==PAGE:32==
signal with a transverse width in the millimeter range is obtained, it will yield a very useful
probe-THz time window. Anything in the picosecond (ps) range will be very useful for
spectroscopy, and a time window of a few hundreds of fs should be enough to resolve a
full THz waveform of air-plasma based sources. The TFISH generated from each point
along the line focus can then be measured using a spatially resolved detector placed after
the detection region.
However, as alluded to earlier, one very critical parameter to take into consideration is the
depth of the interaction region, which can also be defined as the thickness of the region
in which TFISH can be generated. As mentioned earlier, the ”line focus” of the THz and
probe beams will not be perfect one dimensional lines but rather sheets that come to a
minimal beam waist along the focused dimension at some point – and ideally the waist
of the probe sheet overlaps with the waist of the THz sheet. Twice the Rayleigh range
(i.e. the depth of focus) along the focused dimension of each beam is one measurement
to define the region in which the radiation is the most intense. The probe beam Rayleigh
range is around 6 mm (see Fig. A.8 in the appendix), and THz beam Rayleigh range
is roughly one millimeter (will be shown in Chapter 4.1.1) when using optics that will be
introduced in Chapter 4. The Rayleigh range of a beam is inversely proportional to its
wavelength (which for the TFISH is half that of the probe) and proportional to its beam
waist squared. As will be shown, the beam waist of the TFISH will always be smaller than
the smallest beam waist used to generate the TFISH. A TFISH beam waist of 30 µm is a
reasonable estimate, which yields a TFISH Rayleigh range of 7 mm, i.e. a depth of focus
of 14 mm. When using air as the detection medium, this is this a good estimate of the
depth of the detection region (gray area in Fig. 3.1), which will be referred to as d. This
implies that, in principle, at every transverse position along the probe-THz beam line focus
overlap, TFISH can be generated both millimeters ”ahead” and ”behind” of the actual line
focus overlap. The implication of this is that there will be a temporal ”smearing” of the
TFISH signal generated at each transverse position. This smearing effect defines an the
effective time-resolution δt achievable using the non-collinear beam geometry:
δt = δd
c = tan(✓)d
c
(3.2)
With a slightly conservative d = 10 mm and a modest ✓= 1°, δt ⇡0.6 ps. This shows that
the temporal smearing due to the finite depth of the detection region when using air as
detection medium is way too significant for any waveform measurements of ultrafast pulses
to be performed. If one instead uses a solid-state material in the detection region, the
depth of the detection region will be limited by; (a) either the penetration depth of the THz
radiation into the material or (b) the thickness of the material, in case the penetration depth
is greater than the thickness. As mentioned in chapter 2, silicon nitride (SiN) has proven
to be a promising solid-state detector material for ultra-broadband THz spectroscopy. It
has a skin-depth of around 1 µm and a refractive index of 3.7 at 21 THz [17], yielding a
total effective detection region depth of maximum 4 µm (in optical length at 21 THz), i.e.
more than three orders of magnitude smaller than when using air as detection medium.
However, the absorption spectrum of SiN is highly non-uniform across the THz spectrum
[17], so some frequencies will be better transmitted than others. Previously, a thickness
of SiN used in experiments is 1 µm [20], and this is indeed also the thickness that will
be used for the solid-state detectors in this project. Fig. 3.2(b) shows the predicted time-
resolution as limited by the temporal smearing effect as a function of ✓. A time-resolution
limited by temporal smearing of sub-0.1 fs for angles up to 5° is deemed excellent and
more than acceptable. From this, it is clear that a single-shot system utilizing TS encoding
24
Single-shot waveform detection of air-plasma based THz sources
==PAGE:33==
through a non-collinear beam geometry is heavily reliant on using a solid-state material
for the detection. As mentioned in chapter 2, using solid-state materials also comes with
the benefit of potentially more sensitive detection due to the higher third order nonlinear
coefficient as well as the possibility to use a higher bias voltage for the coherent detection.
In chapter 4, the design of a solid-state SiN line detector is presented, which enables
coherent detection of waveforms with a setup like the one presented here through the
differential homodyne scheme.
Another aspect that is critical to consider is the impact that ”stretching” the THz and
probe pulses from points to lines in space has on the intensity of the generated TFISH.
With coherent detection in place, it is known from Eq. 2.7 that ∆I2! / I2
omegaETHz.
However, for the purpose of assessing whether an initial TFISH signal can be detected, it
is more realistic to assume that the second harmonic signal generated is initially incoherent.
In the differential homodyne scheme, coherent detection is achieved by computing the
difference between two scans, which is not possible when looking for an initial signal. In
the homodyne scheme, ∆I2! / I2
omegaITHz when Ebias >> ETHz is not fulfilled, which
will be assumed to be the case since this gives the most conservative estimate of the
TFISH intensity. Assuming that both the probe and the THz transverse intensity profile is
Gaussian, i.e. I! / e−2w2/w2
! and ITHz / e−2w2/w2
T Hz, respectively, the TFISH will also
be a Gaussian (I2! / e−2w2/w2
2!). w2!, w! and wTHz is the 1/e2 intensity half-width of
the TFISH, probe and THz, respectively. It is noted that it is only a good assumption that
the THz transverse intensity profile is Gaussian when the beam is focused – this will be
demonstrated in Chapter 4. The beam waist of the TFISH as a function of THz and probe
beam waists can then be determined by letting w = w2! in the expression for I2!:
I2!(w = w2!) = (I!(w = w2!))2ITHz(w = w2!)
, e−2 =
 
e
−
2w2
2!
w2!
!2
e
−
2w2
2!
w2
T Hz = e−( 4
w! +
2
wT Hz )w2
2!
, −2 = −2( 2
w!
+
1
wTHz
)w2
2!
, w2! =
s
1
2
w2! +
1
w2
T Hz
(3.3)
In Fig. 3.3(a), Eq. 3.3 is used to plot TFISH beam waist as a function of THz waist for
different probe waists. The figure shows that as long as w! is kept proportional to wTHz,
w2{omega will also be proportional to wTHz. It is only when either the probe or the THz
beam waist is kept constant that the square-root dependence is shown (see cyan graph
in Fig. 3.3). Fig. 3.3(b) is an attempt to illustrate why it is important to only defocus the
probe and THz beams along one dimension rather than two when attempting to perform a
TS encoding on the TFISH signal. The blue graph shows that the TFISH intensity scales
with 1/w2! when defocusing the beam along one spatial dimension and keeping it focused
along the other. When defocusing along two dimensions, the TFISH intensity scales
with 1/w2
2!. If one wishes to generate TFISH with a width of more than a millimeter, it is
absolutely necessary to only defocus the beams along one dimension – otherwise the
TFISH intensity will be so low that it will be impossible to detect. In chapter 4.1.1., it is
shown how a special reflector is designed that is capable of producing the necessary THz
line focus.
Single-shot waveform detection of air-plasma based THz sources
25
==PAGE:34==
0
2
4
6
wTHz [mm]
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
w2  [mm]
(a)
0.33wTHz
0.5wTHz
1wTHz
2wTHz
3wTHz
6 mm
w :
0
2
4
6
w2  [mm]
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
 I2
(b)
1D defocusing
2D defocusing
Figure 3.3: (a) TFISH beam waist versus THz waist for different probe waists, computed
using Eq. 3.3. (b) Relative TFISH intensity versus minimum TFISH beam waist when
defocusing in either one (blue graph) or two (orange graph) dimensions. The intensity
is normalized to the TFISH intensity at a beam waist of 50 µm along both transverse
dimensions. This is the estimated beam waist of the TFISH signal from a 160 µm wide
THz spot and a 53 µm wide probe spot, which are typical values for the ABCD THz TDS
presented in chapter 2.
However, one could also ask if it is really necessary to produce a TFISH with a spatial
extent on the millimeter scale. If the THz-probe angle is increased far beyond 5°, it should
indeed be possible to generate a TS encoding with a wide enough probe-THz time delay
window to capture an entire THz waveform. This is demonstrated in Fig. 3.4. This figure
shows the same as Fig. 3.2, just for much greater probe-THz angles and much smaller
w2!. As seen in the figure, a merely 200 µm wide TFISH signal can produce a time-window
greater than 400 fs, if a probe-THz angle of 40° can be introduced. In Fig. 3.4(a) it is
shown that a 200 µm wide TFISH signal can be generated for instance from a probe and
THz beams that are both 250 µm wide. Due to diffraction, high THz frequencies will be
confined to the center of a focused THz beam, whereas low frequencies will be more
spread out. This means that if one probes the spatial profile of a focused THz beam with
a similarly focused probe beam, only the central part of the generated TFISH will contain
high THz frequencies. Any waveform detected using a TS encoding with such a setup
would be heavily distorted due to the fact that only pixels corresponding to the central part
of the TFISH signal would be sensitive to high THz frequencies. In general, the proposed
TS encoding requires that the THz frequency content is uniform across the spatial extent
of the detection region. As will be shown in Chapter 4, this is relatively easily obtained
using a tens of millimeter wide THz line focus and only probing a small region of it, where
the frequency content can be presumed uniform.
26
Single-shot waveform detection of air-plasma based THz sources
==PAGE:35==
0
20
40
60
80
Probe-THz angle [°]
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
800
900
1000
Time window [fs]
(a)
25 µm
50 µm
75 µm
100 µm
150 µm
200 µm
300 µm
w2 :
0
20
40
60
80
Probe-THz angle [°]
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
Time resolution [fs]
(b)
Figure 3.4: (a) Predicted probe-THz time delay window ∆t as a function of ✓for various
transverse TFISH beam widths. (b) Predicted temporal smearing limited time-resolution
δt as a function of ✓.
0
200
400
600
wTHz [µm]
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
800
w2  [µm]
(a)
0.33wTHz
0.5wTHz
1wTHz
2wTHz
3wTHz
6 mm
w :
0
200
400
600
w2  [µm]
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
 I2
(b)
1D defocusing
2D defocusing
Figure 3.5
One could also attempt to obtain a somewhat spatially uniform 190 µm wide TFISH detector
responsivity by using a 200 µm probe beam to probe the central part of a 600 µm wide THz
beam according to Fig. 3.5. At such relatively small beam waists, one could again pose the
question if it really is necessary to use ”fancy” optics that only have focusing power along
one dimension, rather than simply expanding the beams a bit in a traditional SSBCD THz
TDS and then introducing a quite significant angle – 40° would as mentioned be required
Single-shot waveform detection of air-plasma based THz sources
27
==PAGE:36==
for a 400 fs time window with a I2! = 200 µm. Fig. 3.5(b) shows that this should indeed
be possible, even though the TFISH intensity will drop to around 5% of its value with an
I2! = 50 µm, which is what is achieved with a tightly focused THz and probe. This should
still yield a rather easily detectable TFISH signal. However, it is doubtful that this approach
will enable waveform detection that is useful for spectroscopy, since the time-windows
attainable through this approach are expected to be limited to below 1 ps, as shown in
Fig. 3.4(a). While Fig. 3.4(b) shows that for probe-THz angles below 40-45°, the temporal
smearing effect will likely not limit the waveform detection time resolution, it is anticipated
that introducing a probe-THz angle big enough to get a necessary time-window might
prove to be a technical/alignment challenge. With all the abovementioned considerations
in mind, it was decided to attempt constructing a single-shot capable ultra-broadband THz
TDS that relies on a TS encoding introduced by a non-collinear probe-THz geometry with
a multiple millimeter wide THz and probe beam line focus. The results of this, as well as
details about the experimental setup, are presented in chapter 4.
3.2
Previous research on single-shot THz waveform detection
- Time-delay due to non-collinear beam geometry not an original idea (much to the dismay
of the writer). However, only explored for crystal-based THz generation and detection
sources. I.e. second order processes, so efficient generation is not a challenge. Therefore,
no need for fancy optics required, just simply expand the beams a little at the generation
side [21]. However, promising results form this.
- In general, single-shot techniques can be split into two groups: Time-to-space encoding
methods and frequency-to-space methods [22], [23]. Summarize frequency-to-space
methods critically. Frequency-to-space methods used successfully in combination w. EO
sampling of ultra-broadband two-color generated THz – however the resulting bandwidth
was very limited [4]. First demonstrated in [24].
- Other approaches to time-to-space mapping: Keeping point-to-point overlap in detection
region. How to introduce time-delay in probe arm? - Why not use a thin wedge to create
a transverse dimension time dependence in the probe arm? Show proof why it does not
work. Same can be shown for any continuous modulation of refractive index to create time
shift. Fundamentally, it can be explained by the theorem that light always travels along
the shortest optical path. This is Fermat’s principle: ”Light rays travel along the path of
least time” [25, p. 4] - Successfully demonstrated in [26], [27], [28]. Never done in ABCD
– could be very interesting. - It would rely on it being possible to create a kind of nonlinear
4f system between the probe beam transverse profile and the TFISH transverse profile.
This has been demonstrated to be possible experimentally, see Fig. A.7a and A.7b in the
appendix.
28
Single-shot waveform detection of air-plasma based THz sources
==PAGE:37==
4
Implementing the ultra-broadband
single-shot detection system
A schematic of the constructed single-shot capable ultra-broadband THz TDS that relies
on a TS encoding introduced by a non-collinear probe-THz beam geometry is shown in
Fig. 4.1 below. The entire generation part of the setup is identical to that of the setup
introduced in chapter 2 – except for the minor detail that the polarization of all interacting
fields is rotated by 90° (i.e. from horizontal to vertical) by simply moving the λ/2 waveplate
from the generation beam arm to the detection arm. This allows for a vertically polarized
bias electric field to be introduced at all points of the probe-THz line focus overlap. This is
done using a SiN line SSD, which will be mentioned further in section 4.1.2. The collimated
THz radiation, which has an approximately 2 cm wide donut-shaped intensity profile, is
focused to a line using a custom designed parabolic mirror, which only has focusing power
along one dimension. Thus from the top view, the THz still appears collimated, but from
the side it is being focused. The probe beam is also focused to a line which is aligned to
overlap as well as possible with the THz line focus.
Figure 4.1: Top-view schematic of the single-shot ultra-broadband THz spectrometer. As
in Fig. 2.2, black 45° tilted lines represent plane mirrors if no labels in the figure state
otherwise. The blue/violet lines after the BBO represent the second-harmonic of the
fundamental 800 nm beam. The blue/violet lines to the left in the figure represent TFISH.
Single-shot waveform detection of air-plasma based THz sources
29
==PAGE:38==
4.1
Designing components for the setup
4.1.1
One-dimensional parabolic reflector
This chapter describes how the special one-dimensional focusing THz reflector is designed.
Different experiments are carried out to both characterize the reflector in terms of its ability
to produce the desired THz line focus, as well as to characterize the THz radiation.
Figure 4.2
30
Single-shot waveform detection of air-plasma based THz sources
==PAGE:39==
0
10
20
30
y [mm]
45
50
55
60
D [mm]
(a)
Ideal curve
Linear fit
0
10
20
30
y [mm]
25
30
35
40
45
50
55
feff [mm]
(b)
Ideal curve, feff,mid=w=40.33 mm
Linear D, feff,mid=40.09 mm
Figure 4.3
Figure 4.4
Figure 4.5
Single-shot waveform detection of air-plasma based THz sources
31
==PAGE:40==
0
10
20
30
x [mm]
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
 Peak intensity
(c)
10
15
20
x [mm]
-50
0
50
Relative vertical location of peak [µm]
(d)
10
15
20
x [mm]
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
Beam waist (FWHM) [µm]
(e)
Figure 4.6: (a) THz camera image of focused THz point from commercially available 100
mm focal length OAP. The FWHM spot size along the horizontal dimension is measured
at 161 µm, and it is 159 µm along the vertical dimension. (b)
Why weird curvature in beam waist? Two hypotheses: 1) Due to liner approximaiton in
mirror design 2) Due to ”echo” of THz peak
Figure 4.7
32
Single-shot waveform detection of air-plasma based THz sources
==PAGE:41==
-4
-2
0
2
4
Relative position along optical axis [mm]
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
800
900
Beam width (FWHM) [µm]
Data points
Fit, parameters: z0=883.6 µm,  = 4.44°
Figure 4.8
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
800
900
y [µm]
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
 Intensity
Polished, w=160 µm
Polished, filter, w=205 µm
Unpolished, w=175 µm
Unpolished, filter, w=222 µm
Figure 4.9
Single-shot waveform detection of air-plasma based THz sources
33
==PAGE:42==
Figure 4.10: THz camera image of line focus captured at an angle of approximately 37°
(estimated using Fig. A.5 in the Appendix) between the THz line focus plane and the plane
of the camera sensor. The vertical axis is position in mm along the vertical dimension of
the camera sensor. The horizontal axis has been converted from position in mm along
the horizontal axis of the camera sensor to distance along the optical axis by accounting
for the introduced angle.
34
Single-shot waveform detection of air-plasma based THz sources
==PAGE:43==
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
z [mm]
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
800
900
1000
Width (FWHM) of THz line [µm]
Data
Min. beam waist (FWHM) = 175 µm
Rayleigh range = 1.28 mm
Predicted Gaussian beam divergence
Measured beam divergence angle = 16.4°
Figure 4.11: Width of THz line versus distance along optical axis of THz beam. The blue
graph is obtained by measuring the beam width at every z in Fig. 4.10. The dotted black
line marks the minimum beam waist, and the dotted gray line marks the Rayleigh range.
The dotted orange line is a linear fit to the part of the blue curve that appears linear, and
from the fit a far-field divergence angle of 16.4 degrees is obtained. The orange solid
graph is a simulated beam divergence profile for a perfect Gaussian (M2 = 1) with the
same Rayleigh range and beam waist as the blue graph. From the ratio of the measured
beam divergence to the beam divergence of the orange graph, an effective M2 of 4.9 for
the THz beam is obtained.
Also mention that for alignment purposes, parabolic reflector is cut in half. Demonstrate
impact of this and mention modifying THz beam profile to center most power in bottom,
where it is not cut off.
Single-shot waveform detection of air-plasma based THz sources
35
==PAGE:44==
Figure 4.12: THz camera images of line focus from 1D parabolic mirrors with different
focal lengths. All images are normalized by the same factor. (a) Mirror with an average
focal length of 100 mm. The FWHM beam waist is ⇡130 µm. (b) Same as (a), but cut in
half. The FWHM beam waist is ⇡215 µm. (c) Mirror with an average focal length of 40
mm, cut in half. The FWHM beam waist is ⇡100 µm.
4.1.2
Solid-state detectors
Fig. 4.13 shows a schematic of the silicon nitride based solid-state detector that has been
specially designed to efficiently generate TFISH within an active region defined by a 30
µm wide slit between two gold electrodes. The electrodes are placed on a millimeter thick
silica substrate, which is glue to a PCB. The length of the slit is 2.5 cm. The electrodes,
as well as the slit are covered in a 1 µm thin layer of SiN. Ultra-thin gold wires are bonded
to the electrodes as well as to electrodes on the PCB. Insulated wires are soldered onto
these electrodes. A slit is cut in the PCB so there is no material behind the active area of
the detector.
Figure 4.13: Schematic drawing of the SiN-based line solid-state detector.
36
Single-shot waveform detection of air-plasma based THz sources
==PAGE:45==
4.2
Constructing and aligning the setup
Describe the painstaking process - Setup collinear (by eye) first - Make sure THz line
passes through SSD slit (line-to-point imaging system) with THz camera (SiN blocks most
THz below 60 THz ([17]), but still visible spot) - Show THz spot from 60+ THz radiation to
prove that generation is indeed ultra-broadband, even though the driving laser frequency
is only 100 fs
Figure 4.14: THz camera image of THz radiation that has passed through the line SSD,
then been collimated by a 1D parabolic mirror and focused to a point using a normal OAP.
- Make sure probe line passes through SSD slit (first by eye) - First time: Focus blue light
from probe onto APD (collimate w. f50mm cyl. lens and then focus w. f100mm spherical
lens). Notice, also 400 nm reflective, 800 nm transmissive mirror is used to steer beam.
Setup electronics for detection with APD and lockin – scan big range on delay line. Small
signal detected –> optimise TFISH! In the optimization process, beams are made quite
collinear (that way avg. TFISH as measured by APD is optimized). - Remove APD, image
line from SSD using cyl. lens onto line CCD camera. Go to TFISH peak position according
to APD –> bingo! Set integration time to ≈4 ms, average over 10 pulses, then TFISH is
clearly visible. - Now try to optimize magnitude and width of TFISH by adjusting probe
beam and pos. of SSD. - Eventually try to introduce greater and greater angle.
- Notice: Having a big angle from the first try seems highly prohibitive. Signal measured
by APD is then close to zero, since it gets avg. of waveform. Also, if one tries with a large
angle to measure TFISH using CCD line camera, it is also super difficult, since even with
a relatively small angle, the whole waveform is just a small fraction of the beam width.
- When the approximate timing of the TFISH peak is known, it is not necessary to use
APD and electronics to pinpoint it. TFISH successfully captured using just line CCD. The
process of introducing a greater and great angle while keeping track of TFISH is still not
perfected, but so far it is usable (see increase from 0.3 to 0.7 degrees).
4.3
Results
Before attempting to deliberately introduce an angle between the probe and THz beams,
measurements are first done with what appears to be a perfectly collinear beam geometry.
Single-shot waveform detection of air-plasma based THz sources
37
==PAGE:46==
A series of images are captured at different probe-THz delays within a range such that to
the naked eye, there is no TFISH signal at the first at last delay position (with a certain
margin). At every probe-THz position, the camera is set to integrate for 10 ms, i.e. over
10 pulses, and this is done 1000 times. This setting is used for all results shown in the
following. Thus, at every probe-THz delay, a total acquisition time of 10 s is used. The
measurements are first conducted with one DC bias polarity, and they are then repeated
with the opposite bias polarity. Fig. 4.15(a) and (b) show the averaged images at every
probe-THz delay within a 300 fs time window, with the first image of the measurement
series subtracted from all images. This is done to subtract all background noise that is
not TFISH. As such, Fig. 4.15(a) and (b) are examples of homodyne signals that result in
quasi-coherent detection; there is a slight negative polarity besides the dominating positive
polarity in both pictures, which indicates that the bias electric field is not much stronger
than the THz. As such, the measured intensity depends both on ETHz and |ETHz|2 as
predicted by Eq. 2.6. The difference between Fig. 4.15(a) and (b) is then computed, i.e. a
differential homodyne scheme is employed, and the result is shown in Fig. 4.15(c), which
shows a full THz waveform along the probe-THz axis with both polarities. It is quite obvious
that the waveform exists at different probe-THZ delays for different pixels on the sensor.
This indicates that while no significant probe-THz angle was deliberately introduces, there
still is a detectable angle – specifically 0.3°. However, it is clearly not quite big enough
for a full waveform to be captured by the camera at a single probe-THZ position, which of
course is the goal.
38
Single-shot waveform detection of air-plasma based THz sources
==PAGE:47==
Figure 4.15: (a) Measured second harmonic intensity with CCD line camera at different
probe-THz delays controlled using a translation stage when a 220 V DC bias is applied to
the SSD electrodes. The constant (THz independent) background has been subtracted.
(b) Same as (a), but with the bias polarity reversed. (c) The difference in (a) and (b).
In Fig. 4.15(c) it is clear that the detected waveform is strongest towards the pixels in
the center of the image and weaker at the sides. This is due to the non-uniformity of the
overlapping THz and probe line focuses that generate the TFISH, as well as any other
distortions from optical components and the solid-state detector. A simple normalization
procedure is therefore applied to every pixel in Fig. 4.15(c); every pixel value is divided
by the difference between the maximum and the minimum value it reaches throughout
the scan. Thus, the peak-to-peak amplitude of the waveforms along the probe-THz delay
axis is forced to the same value for every pixel. The result of applying this procedure
to Fig. 4.15(c) is shown in Fig. 4.16(a). With the normalization in place, the scanned
waveforms at every pixel are very similar. Fig. 4.16(b) shows the power spectral density of
the waveforms corresponding to each pixel. The frequency content is fairly uniform across
the camera pixels, but there is a slight difference in how wide the spectrum is at every
pixel (it gets slightly wider from left to right) as well as what the central carrier frequency
Single-shot waveform detection of air-plasma based THz sources
39
==PAGE:48==
is (it drops slightly from left to right)). As shown in Fig. 4.15, a significant TFISH signal
can be detected across 600 pixels on the CCD line camera, corresponding to a 4.8 µm
wide TFISH line. This is a highly satisfactory number, since it implies that almost all of the
approximately 5 mm wide high intensity part of the approximately 2 cm wide THz line focus
is used to generate the TFISH. It is expected that the frequency content across these 5
mm of the THz is not perfectly uniform, which can indeed explain the tendencies observed
in Fig. 4.16(b). Indeed, Fig. 4.16(b) can be considered a method of spatially resolving
the frequency content of the THz radiation. So while an experimental setup like this is
of course intended for single-shot THz waveform measurements, it also has a potentially
useful application even when no probe-THz angle is deliberately introduced.
Figure 4.16: (a) Same as Fig. 4.15(c), but normalized. A 0.29° probe-THz angle is
measured. (b) Power spectral density of (a), computed along the probe-THz time-delay
axis for every pixel.
Below are similar figures to Fig. 4.15 and Fig. 4.16 presented, and they are the results
of iterative attempts at introducing a larger and larger probe-THz angle, without ”loosing”
the TFISH signal in the process, since it is very difficult to find the initial TFISH signal.
Attempts at introducing a visually noticeable angle of a few degrees were also made,
but with the current setup this requires relatively big modifications to the beam path that
consistently result is loosing the TFISH signal. Finding the initial TFISH signal after the
angle is increased was not accomplished. It is expected that this will also be harder, since
the TFISH signal will take up a much smaller portion of the camera sensor than when
the angle is small. In Fig. 4.17 and 4.18, a probe-THz angle of 0.72° was successfully
introduced. The bias voltage was also turned up from 220 V in the previous results to
250 V, and the laser driving current was increased from 8.0 A to 8.2 A in order to push
for an even stronger signal. However, the probe-THz overlap appears to have been
compromised, since only a 2.4 mm wide TFISH signal (300 pixels) was measured with a
good SNR. However within these 300 pixels, the spectra achieved at each pixel from the
scanned waveforms are very similar (see Fig. 4.18(b)). Due to the narrower image, the
greater angle was not enough to fully resolve a waveform in one image.
40
Single-shot waveform detection of air-plasma based THz sources
==PAGE:49==
Figure 4.17: (a) Measured second harmonic intensity with CCD line camera at different
probe-THz delays controlled using a translation stage when a 250 V DC bias is applied to
the SSD electrodes. The constant (THz independent) background has been subtracted.
(b) Same as (a), but with the bias polarity reversed. (c) The difference in (a) and (b).
Single-shot waveform detection of air-plasma based THz sources
41
==PAGE:50==
Figure 4.18: (a) Same as Fig. 4.17(c), but normalized. A 0.72° probe-THz angle is
measured. (b) Power spectral density of (a), computed along the probe-THz time-delay
axis for every pixel.
Fig. 4.19 and 4.20 show the results of pushing for an even bigger probe-THz angle while
trying to improve upon the probe-THz overlap to generate a wider TFISH image. As shown
in the figures, an angle of 0.78° was achieved within 400 pixels (3.2 mm). The time-window
is very close to wide enough to fully resolve a waveform within one image.
42
Single-shot waveform detection of air-plasma based THz sources
==PAGE:51==
Figure 4.19: (a) Measured second harmonic intensity with CCD line camera at different
probe-THz delays controlled using a translation stage when a 250 V DC bias is applied to
the SSD electrodes. The constant (THz independent) background has been subtracted.
(b) Same as (a), but with the bias polarity reversed. (c) The difference in (a) and (b).
Single-shot waveform detection of air-plasma based THz sources
43
==PAGE:52==
Figure 4.20: (a) Same as Fig. 4.19(c), but normalized. A 0.78° probe-THz angle is
measured. (b) Power spectral density of (a), computed along the probe-THz time-delay
axis for every pixel.
In Fig. 4.19 and 4.20, an angle of 0.88° was achieved with a strong TFISH signal within
almost 600 pixels, i.e. 4.8 mm. The setup was pushed even further than in the previous
measurements by turning up the bias voltage to 450 V and setting the laser current to 8.3
A.
44
Single-shot waveform detection of air-plasma based THz sources
==PAGE:53==
Figure 4.21: (a) Measured second harmonic intensity with CCD line camera at different
probe-THz delays controlled using a translation stage when a 450 V DC bias is applied to
the SSD electrodes. The constant (THz independent) background has been subtracted.
(b) Same as (a), but with the bias polarity reversed. (c) The difference in (a) and (b).
Single-shot waveform detection of air-plasma based THz sources
45
==PAGE:54==
Figure 4.22: (a) Same as Fig. 4.21(c), but normalized. A 0.88° probe-THz angle is
measured. (b) Power spectral density of (a), computed along the probe-THz time-delay
axis for every pixel.
As apparent from Fig. 4.20(a), there appears to be translation stage defined probe-THz
delays where a full waveform can be captured within a single frame. At a translation stage
defined probe-THz delay of 200 fs, the blue graph in Fig. 4.24 is obtained. In this figure,
the camera pixels have been converted to probe-THz delay. This calibration is first done
roughly using the probe-THz angle determined in Fig. 4.22, and then fine adjustments are
made by making sure that waveforms obtained when scanning the stage and measuring
the TFISH at a single pixel (gray graphs in Fig. 4.23) match well with the waveform
obtained with the camera. The blue graph in Fig. 4.23 shows that a waveform within a 250
fs probe-THz time delay window is captured using the CCD line camera. The waveform
takes up 600 pixels on the CCD line camera, which yields an effective time-resolution of
0.4 fs as limited by the pixel pitch of the camera sensor. This is a much higher resolution
that what is achievable using a translation stage.
It is noticed that a consistent high-frequency oscillation is present on the blue waveform.
In the uncalibrated data (Fig. 4.23), fringes are present along the pixels. The calibration
procedure should remove most of these fringes such that they are not present in the
waveform, but clearly residual noise from the fringes are still present in the calibrated
results, as visible in the blue graph in Fig. 4.24. By examining the frequency content of the
graphs in Fig. 4.23, it is observed that some high-frequency noise corresponding to the
fringes is present. Otherwise the bandwidth of the camera-captured waveform matches
well with that of the translation-stage based waveforms. By removing the high-frequency
noise (everything above 17 THz), the orange waveform in Fig. Fig. 4.23 is obtained, and
it is clearly less noisy but has the same main oscillations as the blue graph. It should be
noted that by numerically removing the noise above 17 THz, this of course puts a hard
cap on the detection bandwidth of the system. However, at 17 THz the signal is anyways
so low that the low-pass filtering does not compromise the current system – however if a
temporally shorter probe beam was used, a signal around 20-30 THz would be expected
to be detectable, so in that case the low-pass filtering would be problematic.
The SNR at the pixels to the right in the figure is clearly worse. There is an interesting
46
Single-shot waveform detection of air-plasma based THz sources
==PAGE:55==
tendency for the change in waveform peak position as a function of pixels to not be
constant, especially towards the rightmost pixels. This could be due to many things.
Firstly, non-uniformity of the THz line frequency content could cause a change in width
of the waveforms measured at each pixel. This, combined with a poorer SNR to the right
could be responsible for the change in shape. However, it could also be caused by a
difference in the solid-stage detector at positions that are responsible for generating the
TFISH at points to the rightmost pixels in Fig. 4.24(a). Specifically, a bit of extra SiN
material was deposited at the edges of the detector in order to ensure that the gold on the
sides of the detector was also covered with SiN to prevent short-circuiting of the detector
through air when a high voltage is applied. The extra thickness would result in a shift in
probe-THz delay. When the measurements in Fig. 4.24(a) were conducted, a part of the
probe did hit the edge of the SSD, which is shown on the front page picture of the thesis,
which makes it plausible that TFISH might also have been generated there if THz radiation
was present. This problem could easily be fixed by translating the SSD a bit away from
its edge. However, no more measurements using this SSD were conducted, because it
was accidentally short-circuited after these results were obtained.
Figure 4.23: A full THz waveform captured using the CCD line camera (blue graph). The
orange graph is a 17 THz low-pass filtered version of the blue graph. The gray graphs
are waveforms obtained by scanning the translation stage and measuring the signal at
different pixels along the camera.
Single-shot waveform detection of air-plasma based THz sources
47
==PAGE:56==
Figure 4.24: Power spectral density of the waveforms in Fig. 4.23.
Finally, Fig. 4.25 show the same camera-captured waveform as shown in the above,
which is obtained by averaging over a total of 10,000 laser pulses. The orange graph
is the resulting waveform if one only averages over 10 laser pulses. While the SNR is
visibly worse, it is still a very clear waveform that matches the blue curve very well. The
cray curves are all of the 1000 frames captured, where each frame integrates over 10
pulses. It serves to illustrate how the individual frames deviate from the mean. It is thus
clearly demonstrated that the system is capable of capturing a waveform from averaging
over just 10 pulses, and the total acquisition time is then 10 ms x 2 (due to the differential
scheme). The bias voltage can be switched very rapidly electronically, so that does not
add significant acquisition time. A waveform with a similar SNR can be measured using the
translation based setup shown in Chapter 2 in about a half minute, so the setup presented
in this chapter presents at least a two orders of magnitude reduction in acquisition time.
And if a larger probe-THz angle can be introduced, much greater time windows can be
measured in the same time as now, providing even more favorable comparison with the
translation stage based setup.
48
Single-shot waveform detection of air-plasma based THz sources
==PAGE:57==
Figure 4.25: Waveforms captured using CCD line camera. The blue graph is the same as
in Fig. 4.23, which is a waveform from averaging over 10,000 pulses. The orange graph
is a waveform from averaging over just 10 pulses. The gray graphs are 1000 waveforms
obtaining also from averaging over 10 pulses.
Single-shot waveform detection of air-plasma based THz sources
49
==PAGE:58==
50
Single-shot waveform detection of air-plasma based THz sources
==PAGE:59==
5
Discussion and future outlook
In summary, a system has been constructed that is inherently capable of coherent wave-
form detection of a ultra-broadband air-plasma based THz pulses in a parallel manner as
opposed to a serial manner like in a traditional translation stage based setup. The system
has been demonstrated to be capable of detecting a THz waveform from just 20 pulses,
and it presents an improvement in acquisition time of more than three orders of magnitude
compared to a traditional ABCD THz TDS. Unfortunately, the solid-state detector that is
used in the system was short circuited before an attempt at detecting single pulses was
made. It is noted that the frame-rate of the line CCD camera used is limited to 269 fps [29].
Therefore, in order to detect single pulses, the rep-rate must be turned down to a quarter
of its standard 1 kHz. However, when turning down the rep-rate, the average power on
components is also decreased. This specifically means that optical damage to the SSD
is less of a concern, and the probe beam can thus be attenuated less (there is currently
an ND 2.0 filter in front of it), yielding stronger TFISH. It is therefore very likely that the
system in its current for already can yield a good enough SNR for single-shot waveform
detection.
THz Terawatt lab at DTU also has access to a TOPAS Optical Parametric Amplifier (OPA)
by Spectra-Physics, which could be used to boost the peak power of the seed pulses for
the system by at least an order of magnitude, which would yield a much better SNR at
the same acquisition time, or allow for a similar SNR as shown in Chapter 4.3 but with
a much shorter acquisition time. With this modification, it is very likely that a single-shot
from the laser would yield an SNR sufficient for waveform detection. It is therefore no
over-exaggeration calling the constructed single-shot capable; the physical design of it is
inherently capable of single-shot detection, the question is just if the driving laser supplies
powerful enough pulses for a good SNR. Further improvements in SNR could come from
optimizing the solid-state detector, shich is an entire field of science in itself. However, a
promising idea is to create a detector with very long interlocking fingers running along a
2.5 cm wide line – essentially an elongated version of Fig. 2.9, but with more interlocking
fingers.
With the current setup, introducing a significant probe-THz angle requires major requires
relatively big modifications to the beam path, which consistently result is loosing the TFISH
signal on the camera sensor. A simple but likely effective way to improve upon this issue
would be to mount the last probe-steering mirror (see Fig. A.4) on a translation stage that
can move along the horizontal dimension when looking at the schematic in Fig. A.4. With
this in place, it should be possible to slowly introduce a greater and greater probe-THz
beam angle while keeping the initial TFISH signal in the camera image and observing that
the peak gets more and more narrow within the frame as the angle is increased. This way,
the setup will be capable of detecting waveforms within a much bigger probe-THz time
window, which will make it truly useful for spectroscopy.
With all the abovementioned potential ways of improving the design, the system would
likely be in a very good shape to perform high SNR single-(or few)-shot waveform measure-
ments within a large time-window, and as such it would be perfect to use in a transient THz
spectroscopy setup for 2D pump-probe measurements. This would completely revolution-
ize the utility of transient THz spectroscopy and potentially also make it more appealing
tool in various industries. Just the already achieved reduction in acquisition time of a
Single-shot waveform detection of air-plasma based THz sources
51
==PAGE:60==
factor of 1000 with the current implementation of this system would reduce a 12 hours 2D
pump-probe scan to something that can be performed in around a minute.
52
Single-shot waveform detection of air-plasma based THz sources
==PAGE:61==
Bibliography
[1]
Kei Sakaguchi et al. “Where, when, and how mmwave is used in 5G and be-
yond”. eng. In: Ieice Transactions on Electronics C.10 (2017), pp. 790–808. ISSN:
17451353, 09168524. DOI: 10.1587/transele.E100.C.790.
[2]
Xi-Cheng Zhang and Jingzhou Xu. Introduction to THz Wave Photonics. Jan. 2010,
pp. 1–246. ISBN: 978-1-4419-0977-0. DOI: 10.1007/978-1-4419-0978-7.
[3]
P.U. Jepsen, D.G. Cooke, and M. Koch. “Terahertz spectroscopy and imaging – Mod-
ern techniques and applications”. In: Laser & Photonics Reviews 5.1 (2011), pp. 124–
166. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1002/lpor.201000011. eprint: https://onlinelibrary.wiley.
com/doi/pdf/10.1002/lpor.201000011. URL: https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/
10.1002/lpor.201000011.
[4]
Keekon Kang et al. “Experimental demonstration of the plasma electron density
diagnostics using the single-shot THz detection method”. eng. In: Plasma Physics
and Controlled Fusion 62.12 (2020), p. 125008. ISSN: 13616587, 07413335. DOI:
10.1088/1361-6587/abbf09.
[5]
Griffin Mead et al. “An echelon-based single shot optical and terahertz Kerr effect
spectrometer”. In: Review of Scientific Instruments 90.5 (2019), p. 053107. DOI:
10.1063/1.5088377. eprint: https://doi.org/10.1063/1.5088377. URL: https://doi.org/
10.1063/1.5088377.
[6]
Ernest V. Loewenstein. “The History and Current Status of Fourier Transform Spec-
troscopy”. In: Appl. Opt. 5.5 (May 1966), pp. 845–854. DOI: 10.1364/AO.5.000845.
URL: https://opg.optica.org/ao/abstract.cfm?URI=ao-5-5-845.
[7]
Korbinian J. Kaltenecker et al. “Bridging the gap between the THz and IR frequency
regime”. In: 2017 42nd International Conference on Infrared, Millimeter, and Ter-
ahertz Waves (IRMMW-THz). 2017, pp. 1–2. DOI: 10.1109/IRMMW-THz.2017.
8066979.
[8]
Rasmus Nielsen et al. “Origin of photovoltaic losses in selenium solar cells with open-
circuit voltages approaching 1 V”. eng. In: Journal of Materials Chemistry a 10.45
(2022), pp. 24199–24207. ISSN: 20507496, 20507488. DOI: 10.1039/d2ta07729a.
[9]
Paul M. Bellan. Fundamentals of Plasma Physics. Cambridge University Press,
2006. DOI: 10.1017/CBO9780511807183.
[10]
Y. S. You, T. I. Oh, and K. Y. Kim. “Off-Axis Phase-Matched Terahertz Emission from
Two-Color Laser-Induced Plasma Filaments”. In: Physical Review Letters 109.18
(2012). PRL, p. 183902. URL: http://link.aps.org/doi/10.1103/PhysRevLett.109.
183902.
[11]
Chia-Yeh Li et al. “Broadband field-resolved terahertz detection via laser induced air
plasma with controlled optical bias”. In: Opt. Express 23.9 (May 2015), pp. 11436–
11443. DOI: 10.1364/OE.23.011436. URL: https://opg.optica.org/oe/abstract.cfm?
URI=oe-23-9-11436.
[12]
M. Rasmussen, P.U. Jepsen, and B.B. Zhou. “Accurately frequency-resolved air-
plasma THz beam profile from knifeedge assisted waveform measurements”. In:
Aug. 2021, pp. 1–1. DOI: 10.1109/IRMMW-THz50926.2021.9567636.
[13]
Karsten Rottwitt and Peter Tidemand-Lichtenberg. Nonlinear Optics: Principles and
Applications. English. CRC Press, 2014. ISBN: 978-1-4665-6582-1.
[14]
Alessandro Tomasino et al. “Homodyne Solid-State Biased Coherent Detection of
Ultra-Broadband Terahertz Pulses with Static Electric Fields”. In: Nanomaterials 11
(Jan. 2021), p. 283. DOI: 10.3390/nano11020283.
Single-shot waveform detection of air-plasma based THz sources
53
==PAGE:62==
[15]
Solstice Ace, High Energy, Industrial One Box, Ultrafast Amplifier datasheet. Ascend
60 version. Spectra-Physics. 2021. URL: https://www.spectra-physics.com/en/f/
solstice-ace-ultrafast-amplifier.
[16]
Peng He et al. “High-efficiency supercontinuum generation in solid thin plates at
0.1&#x2009;&#x2009;TW level”. In: Opt. Lett. 42.3 (Feb. 2017), pp. 474–477. DOI:
10.1364/OL.42.000474. URL: https://opg.optica.org/ol/abstract.cfm?URI=ol-42-3-
474.
[17]
Mikhail N. Polyanskiy. Refractive index database. URL: https://refractiveindex.info
(visited on 12/20/2022).
[18]
Nicholas Karpowicz et al. “Coherent heterodyne time-domain spectrometry covering
the entire “terahertz gap””. In: Applied Physics Letters 92.1 (2008), p. 011131. DOI:
10.1063/1.2828709. URL: https://aip.scitation.org/doi/abs/10.1063/1.2828709.
[19]
Alessandro Tomasino et al. “Solid-state-biased coherent detection of ultra-broadband
terahertz pulses”. In: Optica 4.11 (Nov. 2017), pp. 1358–1362. DOI: 10 . 1364 /
OPTICA.4.001358. URL: https://opg.optica.org/optica/abstract.cfm?URI=optica-4-11-
1358.
[20]
Alessandro Tomasino et al. “Invited Article: Ultra-broadband terahertz coherent
detection via a silicon nitride-based deep sub-wavelength metallic slit”. In: APL
Photonics 3 (Nov. 2018), p. 110805. DOI: 10.1063/1.5052628.
[21]
Jie Shan et al. “Single-shot measurement of terahertz electromagnetic pulses by
use of electro-optic sampling”. In: Opt. Lett. 25.6 (Mar. 2000), pp. 426–428. DOI:
10.1364/OL.25.000426. URL: https://opg.optica.org/ol/abstract.cfm?URI=ol-25-6-
426.
[22]
Stephanie Teo et al. “Invited Article: Single-shot THz detection techniques optimized
for multidimensional THz spectroscopy”. In: The Review of scientific instruments 86
(May 2015). DOI: 10.1063/1.4921389.
[23]
Chun Li, Guo-Qian Liao, and Yu-Tong Li. “Non-scanning systems for far-infrared
radiation detection from laser-induced plasmas”. In: High Power Laser Science and
Engineering 3 (Jan. 2015). DOI: 10.1017/hpl.2015.10.
[24]
Zhiping Jiang and X. C. Zhang. “Electro-optic measurement of THz field pulses with
a chirped optical beam”. eng. In: Applied Physics Letters 72.16 (1998), pp. 1945–
1947. ISSN: 00036951, 10773118. DOI: 10.1063/1.121231.
[25]
Bahaa Saleh and Malvin Teich. Fundamentals of Photonics, 2nd Edition. June 2007.
ISBN: 9780471358329.
[26]
Benjamin Ofori-Okai. “Developments and applications of THz polaritonics, efficient
THz generation, and single-shot THz detection”. PhD thesis. Jan. 2016.
[27]
Marta Duchi et al. “2D-Raman-THz spectroscopy with single-shot THz detection”. In:
The Journal of Chemical Physics 155.17 (2021), p. 174201. DOI: 10.1063/5.0065804.
eprint: https://doi.org/10.1063/5.0065804. URL: https://doi.org/10.1063/5.0065804.
[28]
Benjamin Ofori-Okai et al. “THz generation using a reflective stair-step echelon”. In:
Optics Express 24 (Dec. 2015). DOI: 10.1364/OE.24.005057.
[29]
Advanced Digital High-Speed CCD Line Camera. CCD-S3600-D(-UV). Alphalas.
2013. URL: https://www.alphalas.com/images/stories/products/laser_diagnostic_
tools/ALPHALAS_Advanced_Digital_CCD_Line_Camera_CCD-S3600-D(-UV).pdf.
54
Single-shot waveform detection of air-plasma based THz sources
==PAGE:63==
A
Additional figures
A.1
Measurements from ABCD THz TDS characterization
0
200
400
600
800
Time [fs]
-0.6
-0.4
-0.2
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
  
 I2
(a)
0.5 kV
1 kV
1.5 kV
2.0 kV
AC bias amplitude:
0
5
10
15
20
Frequency [THz]
10-3
10-2
10-1
100
 Power spectral density of  
I2
(b)
0.5 kV
1 kV
1.5 kV
2.0 kV
AC bias amplitude:
Figure A.1: (a) Waveforms measured using ABCD THz TDS with different AC bias voltage
amplitudes. (b) Power spectral density of waveforms.
0
200
400
600
800
Time [fs]
-0.6
-0.4
-0.2
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
  
I2
(a)
0.0
0.2
0.3
0.5
Probe ND filter OD:
0
5
10
15
20
Frequency [THz]
10-3
10-2
10-1
100
 Power spectral density of  
I2
(b)
0.0
0.2
0.3
0.5
Probe ND filter OD:
Figure A.2: (a) Waveforms measured using ABCD THz TDS with different ND filters if
front of probe beam. (b) Power spectral density of waveforms.
Single-shot waveform detection of air-plasma based THz sources
55
==PAGE:64==
A.2
Images of experimental setups and equipment
Figure A.3: Image of the ABCD THz TDS that was built as a part of this project. The top
cover of the purge box is lifted such that the components defining the THz beam path
is visible. The high-voltage electrodes are missing in the picture, but the approximate
location of where they would be placed has been marked.
56
Single-shot waveform detection of air-plasma based THz sources
==PAGE:65==
Figure A.4: Image of the single-shot ultra-broadband THz TDS built as a part of this project.
The THz generation part of the setup is identical to that shown in Fig. A.3. The top cover
of the purge chamber is lifted such that the components defining the THz beam path is
visible, and various covers and beam blockers placed around the setup for suppression
of noise and stray-light have been removed for the purpose of showcasing the setup.
Single-shot waveform detection of air-plasma based THz sources
57
==PAGE:66==
Figure A.5: Image of THz line focus incident captured by the THz camera, where the
camera purposely has been tilted relative to the plane of focus of the THz.
Figure A.6: Image of line SSD with probe and THz line focus incident on the active area
of the detector.
58
Single-shot waveform detection of air-plasma based THz sources
==PAGE:67==
(a) Beam profile of probe with a small corner
blocked
(b) Beam profile of TFISH from ABCD THz TDS
setup with the probe-THz delay resulting in the
strongest TFISH detected.
The beam profile
was measured when a corner of the probe was
blocked as shown in A.7a, and it is observed that
a corner of the TFISH also appears to be miss-
ing.
A.3
THz and probe line focus characterization
Figure A.8: Beam-profiler image of probe beam focus using 150 mm focal length cylindrical
lens. The vertical and horizontal axes are in µm. The width of the line focus is measured
at roughly 40 µm, which is about half the diffraction-limited spot size.
Single-shot waveform detection of air-plasma based THz sources
59
==PAGE:68==
y [mm]
 Intensity
0
1
2
0
50
100
150
200
-4 mm
0
1
2
0
50
100
150
200
-3 mm
0
1
2
0
50
100
150
200
-2 mm
0
1
2
0
50
100
150
200
-1 mm
0
1
2
0
50
100
150
200
0 mm
0
1
2
0
50
100
150
200
1 mm
0
1
2
0
50
100
150
200
2 mm
0
1
2
0
50
100
150
200
3 mm
Figure A.9
60
Single-shot waveform detection of air-plasma based THz sources
==PAGE:69==
Figure A.10: THz camera images of THz line focus obtained using (a) a polished mirror, (b)
the same polished mirror but with a 10 THz long-pass filter (removes high THz frequencies)
in front of the camera, (c) an unpolished mirror and (d) the same unpolished mirror but
with the 10 THz long-pass filter in the beam path.
Single-shot waveform detection of air-plasma based THz sources
61
==PAGE:70==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Ørsteds Plads, Building 343
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. +4545256352
www.electro.dtu.dk
