==PAGE:1==
Examination of Wave Interference
on Insertion Loss of Highway Traffic Barriers
Master Thesis
DTU Electro
Department of Engineering Acoustics
 
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Examination of Wave Interference
on Insertion Loss of Highway Traffic Barriers
Master Thesis
January, 2023
By
Andreas Kramer
Supervisors
Jonas Brunskog, Vicente Cutanda Henriguez, Ulf Orrenius
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus-
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Published by:
DTU, Department of Engineering Acoustics, Ørsteds Plads, Building 352,
2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
https://www.elektro.dtu.dk/english
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over five months within the Department of Engineering
Acoustics, at the Technical University of Denmark, DTU, in partial fulfilment for the degree
Master of Science in Engineering Acoustics.
(Some core concepts regarding the major mathematical principles will be discussed in
the Theory section. Beyond the most important elements needed to comprehend the
authors process, it will be assumed that the reader has a basic knowledge in the areas of
acoustics.)
Andreas Kramer - s203120
Signature
Date
ii
Examination of Wave Interference
Ah
22
01
23
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
Numerical simulations using the boundary element method were conducted to examine
the impact of adding a wave interference device to the top of highway noise reduction bar-
riers. A two-dimensional open source simulation, known as OpenBEM, was used to run
the calculations on nine different designs of wave interference type structures attached
to the top of these noise barriers. This device was called a waveguide, and early models
examined the overall impact of the additional pathways and body shape of these guide
on the surrounding pressure field. All the results were examined using the insertion loss
produced by adding a barrier with the attachment place on the top. The final design uti-
lized three separate pathways attached to the top of a barrier, with each path designed
to have fundamental frequencies of 70 Hz, 80 Hz, and 100 Hz. For this model compar-
isons were made between the resulting insertion loss found with the pathway open and
closed, along with when the waveguide attachment was not included. The study exam-
ine a range of frequencies from 60 Hz up to 1 kHz. The purpose of this study was to
examine whether the use of wave interference could improve barrier performance for ur-
ban environments near highways producing excessive noise. At the conclusion of the
study it was found that within the early designs used there were some improvements in
the insertion loss created by the addition of more pathways at specific frequencies. With
the final model it was seen in the near- and far-field that the insertion loss was improved
over the closed waveguide and the barrier alone. In the middle distance the shape of the
waveguide was the biggest contributor to the improvement, with the open waveguide only
out performing for the higher frequencies examined in this study. It was also found that
the lowest frequencies designed for each pathway were not greatly impacted within the
pressure field just beyond the barrier, but showed improvements at positions farther than
100 m. Other areas of interest were found in the exit point of the pathways were strong
regions of destructive wave interference could be seen behind the barrier. Unfortunately,
these responses were frequency dependent, meaning that a more complex design con-
taining addition pathways to see if this effect could be seen within a broader frequency
range. With such a small selection of frequencies used in these designs the results did
not present enough evidence to conclude that the use of wave interference would be a
beneficial way of improving the insertion loss for highway noise barriers.
Examination of Wave Interference
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
Andreas Kramer, MSc Engineering Acoustics, DTU
[Jonas Brunskog], [Associate Professor DTU], [Adviser]
[Providing guidance in every part of the study. Examining results and supplying construc-
tive feedback to further the knowledge and understanding to better pursue meaningful
results. Allow for the freedom to learn individual while being regularly available for con-
sultations.]
[Vicente Cutanda Henríquez], [Associate Professor DTU], [Adviser]
[Designing and providing the two-dimensional OpenBEM simulation that was modified
and used for this study. Providing guidance and feedback through out the study. Adding
clarification and recommendations for improving the simulation.]
[Ulf Orrenius], [Akustikdoktorn Sweden AB], [Adviser]
[Participation in advisory meeting with questions and recommendations. Providing mean-
ingful resources for improving knowledge on major concepts.]
[Tony Johannson], [Wavebreaker CEO], [Consultant]
[Assistance in examining results and providing recommendations along with highlighting
possible complications to avoid. ]
[Tomer Tchelet], [Acoustic Engineer at GN Hearing A/S], [Colleague]
[Assistance on developing Matlab scripts for reading and plotting data.]
iv
Examination of Wave Interference
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Approval
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
1
2
Theory
3
2.1
Free-Field Sound Propagation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.2
Sound Diffraction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.3
Parallel Walls . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.4
Wave Interference / Herchel-Quincke Tube
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
2.5
Boundary Element Method
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3
OpenBEM Simulation
13
4
Scale Model
19
4.1
Designing the Scale Model
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
4.2
Testing the Scale Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
5
Numerical Simulation Results and Analysis
27
5.1
Early Study of OpenBEM
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
5.2
Results for Waveguide Model Designs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 28
5.3
Final Model Design with a High Resolution Insertion Loss . . . . . . . . . . 39
5.4
Scale Model Validation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 47
6
Conclusion
51
7
Future Studies
53
Bibliography
55
A Appendix A
59
A.1 Waveguide Model 1
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 59
A.2 Waveguide Model 2
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 60
A.3 Waveguide Model 3
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 64
A.4 Waveguide Model 4
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 67
A.5 Waveguide Model 5
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 69
A.6 Waveguide Model 6
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 72
A.7 Waveguide Model 7
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 76
A.8 Waveguide Model 8
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 85
A.9 Waveguide Model 9
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 93
B Appendix B
99
B.1 Two Hertz Resolution Comparisons with Waveguide Model 9 . . . . . . . . 99
B.2 Two Hertz Resolution Comparisons with Waveguide Model 9 at Different
Distances . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 101
B.3 One Third Octave Comparisons of Waveguide Model 9
. . . . . . . . . . . 104
Examination of Wave Interference
v
==PAGE:8==
vi
Examination of Wave Interference
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction
As the population of the world continues to grow many issues are becoming more promi-
nent within society. One of the major issues arising is the increase of individuals that
are moving into urban areas to find work. This increase in population density in cities
and other urban areas requires a infrastructure that can support the number of people
transporting themselves. Many cities have used public transportation to help with this
growth, be it metros, railways, buses, or other means of transportation. One of the bigger
infrastructure solutions to growing cities has been to construct highways that would help
improve the flow of traffic through and around large urban areas. These highways can
cut through the very center of many urban spaces, and tend to produce large amount of
traffic noise. This noise can propagate out into the homes, businesses, and recreational
areas along these highways. This noise pollution has been found to be one of the leading
health risks for people in the European Union, with an estimation of 7.9 million people be-
ing disturbed during their sleep, and around 10 thousand premature deaths from stroke
and coronary heart disease attributed to excessive noise exposure. With 90% of these
effects being contributed by traffic noise [1][2].
Since the 1960s, one of the solutions to this problem have been to erect large barriers
and/or embankments to reduce the noise levels reaching the surrounding areas [3]. This
has reduced the negative effect that these heavily used roads can have on the public
health, but do require major construction and cost to create. In the past the designs of
these barriers have needed to be successful in reducing the level of noise, while also
being aesthetically pleasing as they could remain standing for many decades [4].
Figure 1.1 presents some ways in which barriers can vary in the size, shape, and ma-
terials used. Many of these barriers tend to be large and obstruct visibility across these
road ways. This thesis project wanted to examine a new addition to the overall barrier
design in an attempt to help reduce noise by using wave interference as a solution. This
solution could help reduce the overall height of these barriers, while allowing for the same
acceptable level of reduction. It is important to look into this problem as excessive noise
exposure can impact people of all ages and is one of the biggest health risks in urban
areas as it can increase anxiety, reduce cognitive skills, along with many other health
issues. [2][5].
(a) Bending concrete highway barriers located in
Barcelona, Spain.
(b) Transparent highway barrier just in Copen-
hagen, Denmark.
Figure 1.1: Examples of different types of highway barriers used in Europe [4].
Examination of Wave Interference
1
==PAGE:10==
Recently, a company in Sweden has designed a product that uses a wave interference
type solution to help improve the insertion loss (IL) of barriers [6]. The first reported full
scale test in Sweden has shown promise when used to reduce noise from trains. Simu-
lated results from this report showed that an added reduction of 4 - 6 dB was achieved,
which is the equivalent of increasing the barrier height by 1 - 1.5 m. This device seems to
have success in noise reduction without adding the visual obstructions caused by larger
barriers of similar IL. As this use of wave interference is relatively new when examined
in a free field environment, it seemed intriguing to learn some of the basics to understand
the benefits and possible issues with this form of noise reduction. Specifically, in the
application of highway traffic noise barriers.
The overall purpose of this thesis was to use a numerical simulation to examine the pos-
sible benefits that a wave interference device, referred to as a waveguide in this report,
attached to the top section of a traffic barrier could produce. The questions revolved
around simplistic models to examine the impact on frequencies between 60 Hz and 1
kHz, as lower frequencies tend to be more difficult to reduce due to their longer wave-
lengths. These frequencies had also been chosen as this study was conducted using the
boundary element method (BEM) to numerically calculate the sound pressure levels, as
well as the IL in a two-dimensional free-field. This method is good at producing results for
lower frequencies, but the computational time and power increase with higher frequen-
cies. With this fact it was import to examine a range of frequencies that could be well
computed in the time given for this study, as many designs have been examined over the
course of this project.
This topic presented a lot of unknowns to look into, as the only information about using
wave interference in this type of application has been reported by the Swedish company
mentioned earlier. During the later stages of this thesis study the author of this report was
able to contact the head of the company, and as of this writing the company is still waiting
for a patent for their design. This meant that little information was available about how a
device of this nature should be constructed to best reduce a broadband of frequencies.
The targeted goals of this study were in designing and running numerical simulations of
waveguides consisting of different shapes and pathway lengths to see what effects are
evident when these parameters are changed. Additionally, it was of interest to view how
the trajectory of the exit of the waveguide might impact the propagation of the sound
behind the barrier. By using a combination of three alternative pathways and a specific
exit angle, could a reduction of sound for this range of frequencies be seen at varying
distances from the highway barrier. To understand if these results were a product of
the actual design of the waveguide, the simulations needed to be tested with the paths
closed as well. Verification of the numerical calculations would need to be done by using
an alternative testing method. In this report the author conducted scale model testing in
a control environment using a simple waveguide to compare the two sets of data.
2
Examination of Wave Interference
==PAGE:11==
2
Theory
To test the effect that can occur when using some type of wave interference, the different
basic phenomenon need to be understood. This helps in seeing results that are caused
by the general impact from diffraction over larger bodies, or if the changes are actually
due to the impact of additional pathways.
Traffic noise has been around since vehicles for ground transportation were invented.
Even before cars started to travel around, horse drawn carts and wagons created noise
on the roads from the wheels and animals that powered them. Records dating back to
the late first century show individuals complaining about the noise that was produced by
traffic in the streets [7]. But regulations on noise produced and transmitted by vehicles only
recently became an area of importance, with the first major government regulations being
from Japan in 1968 [8]. The United States would follow with a much more comprehensive
set of regulations known as the Noise Control Act in 1972 [9].
Even before regulations had be put into place, the study of traffic noise was examined. It
was the advancement of the highway system in the United States that produced the first
known recommendation of using a barrier to reduce this noise, presented by the acoustic
physicist, Dr. Vern Oliver Knudsen, at the University of California Los Angeles (UCLA)
back in 1945 [10]. This report presented a solution to the increased noise produced by
the new highway systems and widening vehicle tires that led the way for noise reducing
barrier as a solution to this growing noise problem. The first noise barrier was constructed
in 1968 in California and shortly after the concept began being used all over the world as
a way to reduce the noise from roads on the surrounding area [3].
From the first construction of highway noise barriers many studies have been conducted
on how best to accomplish good reduction in the noise by using certain materials, shapes
and top edges. The decision to build a barrier in a location tends to be based on the type of
road, like a highway, and if it passes by areas that have dense population. This is typically
around larger urban areas where people live, go to school, and work. Cost is usually the
driving factor when deciding how a barrier will be built, but more recently aesthetic design
has been a growing influence as people have to see these structure. These barriers can
also obstruct the visibility so many designs have found ways to either improve the look of
the barrier or even use clear materials to allow transparency [4]. One hopeful benefit of
examining wave interference as a solution to the noise reduction of the barrier is that it
could make it possible to reduce the size of barriers being built, which might reduce the
overall cost and increase visibility [6].
As noise barriers are important tools for reducing unwanted noise for the surrounding
communities it is important to understand the main aspects of acoustics that are in play.
This chapter explains many of the phenomenon impacting the sound in this outdoor en-
vironment. Additionally, the solution of introducing wave interference is fundamental to
this project and Herschel-Quincke tube theory will thus be explained. As this study uses
numerical simulations to examine the impact of these waveguide attachments to the top
of barriers, the boundary element method used will be discussed in detail.
Examination of Wave Interference
3
==PAGE:12==
2.1
Free-Field Sound Propagation
With the focus of this study relating to the impact of sound from road traffic noise, the
fundamentals of free-field propagation must be understood. This represents the simplest
form of how sound waves interact, and requires an assumption that the atmospheric con-
ditions are stagnant. If the conditions are unchanging, then it is acceptable to combine
Euler’s equation of motion with the equation of an injected volume velocity at the source
position. These combined equations result in an inhomogeneous Helmholtz equation that
can be used to represent a monopole free-field point source [11],
ˆp(r) = iωρQei(ωt−kR)
4πR
(2.1)
With noise from vehicles propagating into the open air there is only reflections impacting
the waves from the ground and possible objects, such as the barriers and other vehicles
on the road. This in addition to the barriers flanking both side of the road will change the
direction and strength of the pressure wave as it moves through the space. The simplest
reflection that is present for any source that is near to the ground will be the ground itself.
Figure 2.1 presents this type of reflection in a simplistic form with the main factors that
contribute to a single plane-wave against the ground surface.
Figure 2.1: A Diagram showing how a plane-wave reflects off of the ground towards a
receiver [12].
This type of reflection will produce a secondary image source from the gound.
ˆp(x, y, z) = iωρQe−ikr1
4πr1
+ iωρQe−ikr2
4πr2
(2.2)
It is also apparent that the time dependency of eiωt is present, but will be omitted to further
simplify the pressure at a given moment in time. These pressure changes are caused by
the angles of the surface in relationship to the angle of the plane-wave as it meets the
surface. When introducing an absorptive ground a normalization of the frequency can be
applied. For a local reactive ground and a monopole source a sound field can be found
by
ˆp(x, y, z) = e−ikr1
4πr1
+ [RP + (1 −RP )F(ω)]xe−ikr2
4πr2
(2.3)
with the terms inside the brackets representing the spherical wave coefficient, Q term.
F(ω) is considered to be the boundary loss factor, and corresponds to the spherical wave
4
Examination of Wave Interference
==PAGE:13==
reflecting of a ground of finite impedance. Generally, the plane-wave reflection coefficient
can be found when the ground is locally reactive, based on the ratio of impedance between
the air and the ground [13],
R = sinφ −Z1/Z2
sinφ + Z1/Z2
(2.4)
With φ being the grazing angle of the wave, Z1 the impedance of air, and Z2 that of ground.
Within this thesis study the ground reflection has a very minor impact to the insertion loss
(IL) of the barrier. This is due to using the source position of 30cm above the ground,
which is an average source position for vehicle noise from both the engine and tires.
These two sources being the greatest contributors to the sound that propagates from the
vehicle it is important to note that the source height can change in relation to the type of
vehicle being examined, with the location rising for commercial vehicles [14].
As the impact distance that is considered of interest needs to be half the wavelength, the
frequencies from 572 Hz and above would have some impact from the ground reflection.
With some of the higher frequencies being impacted, the ground admittance must be taken
into account as it will have an influence on some of the calculations. For the simulations
run in this study the ground admittance was a product of the effective flow resistivity which
would be set to 30,000 rayls, which corresponds to the average for asphalt found for many
highways [12]. This high of a flow resistivity only presents sound pressure reduction at
frequencies far above those tested in this study, and thus act closely to that of a reflective
surface.
2.2
Sound Diffraction
When trying to examine the effect that a highway noise barrier has, it is important to relate
the sound pressure level (SPL) from the free-field propagation of a source, with that of the
SPL from the inclusion of the barrier. This type of relationship is known as the insertion
loss (IL) produced by the added barrier. Finding the IL is done by first calculating the free-
field SPL from source to receiver by using the pressure with ground ’Eq.2.3’, or if ground
is not a factor ’Eq.2.1’. This value should then be transposed from a linear pressure to a
logarithmic representation known as decibels (dB).
SPLfree = 20log10
!pfree
pref
"
(2.5)
This will create a logarithmic value, which is typically used when dealing with sound as it
is similar in the way humans perceive change in pressure. The two pressure values in the
equation represent the pressure in the free-field (pfree) and the reference pressure (pref)
which is 20 μPa for sound in air. This is chosen as it is roughly the lowest audible level
that a person can hear for a 1 kHz tone [11].
To find the SPL value when a barrier is constructed there will no longer be the direct path
from source to receiver to be calculated in the free-field. For simplicity it helps to look
at a direct path plane-wave, and ignore the reflections produced from the surface of the
barrier. With this obstruction, additional paths will need to be calculated to find what the
pressure would be at the receiving position. This type of additional pathway is known as
diffraction and occurs when the wave meets an edge of an object, resulting in the wave
bending around this edge. Figure 2.2 presents this type of event with a simple plane-
wave, and the different paths along with terms that impact the change in the SPL due to
Examination of Wave Interference
5
==PAGE:14==
the barrier. Similar to an image source created by waves reflecting back off of surfaces,
edge diffraction creates a new source of radiating sound. To find the resulting SPL at
the receiver, the change in pressure from the source to the top of the barrier must be
found and then that new pressure at the barrier will be used to calculate the pressure at
the receiver. By following the pressure relation from ’Eq.2.3,’ the second reflection can
be replaced by the addition of the angle of change by the propagating wave to find the
pressure at the top of the barrier. This new pressure can then be used to find the pressure
at the receiving position.
By finding the pressure from the direct sound path and the diffracted pathway the differ-
ence between each pressure can be represented in decibels as the insertion loss (IL)
that the added barrier would impose on the receiver position.
IL = 20log10
!pfree
pbar
"
(2.6)
or if the SPL has already been found for each the equation would become,
IL = SPLfree −SPLbar.
(2.7)
IL of most barriers tend to range between 5 and 10 dB, with increased IL requiring
much larger and expensive barrier designs [4]. Most of the sound pressure results from
the diffraction of sound waves over the top edge of the barrier. This diffraction will have
the largest impact to the quality of the barriers. Many of the most common solutions
to improving the IL of a barrier are done by changing the shape or material of the top
segment [15][16].
Figure 2.2: A Diagram showing the diffraction of a plane-wave caused by the top edge of
a thin barrier [17].
A much more simplified relationship for examining the IL, which is also referred to as
the attenuation (Att) of the barrier, begins with the Kirchhoff-Fresnel approximation which
will include the Fresnel numbers allowing for a line integral solution for rigid thin barriers.
This can be used as a quick first approximations to understand what to expect from the
diffraction of a sound wave as it no longer relies on the use of pressure from the source as a
factor [17]. To apply this theory a general assumption is required, that both the source and
6
Examination of Wave Interference
==PAGE:15==
receiver need to be at least a wavelength from the barrier and the the receiving position
be located somewhere inside the shadow zone of this barrier. The Fresnel number is a
value that can be found from the direct pathways that a plane wave would travel from
source to barrier and barrier to receiver.
N1 = R′ −R1
λ/2
= k
π(R′ −R1)
(2.8)
With R′ being the total length of rs and rr. There is also an additional value that can be
found to improve the calculations of the attenuation produced by the barrier. A secondary
Fresnel number corresponds to the relationship between the image source and receiver.
N2 = R′ −R2
λ/2
= k
π(R′ −R2)
(2.9)
By using these values a simple way of finding the basic Att of the barrier could be ob-
tained. This simplified equation was derived by Maekawa and is known to give a good
approximation of what would be expected when a barrier of this type is constructed [18].
Att = 5 + 20log10
√2πN1
tanh√2πN1
(2.10)
With this equation Maekawa was able to produce a chart that provides values of Att that
corresponded to different Fresnel numbers found. This approximation was later expanded
by Menounou to differentiate the Att within different regions around the barrier [19]. This
helped give a more precise approximation of the overall Att that would occur from the
specific source and receiver positions.
Att = Atts + Attb + Attsb + Attsp
(2.11)
Atts = 20log10
√2πN1
tanh√2πN1
−1
(2.12)
Attb = 20log10
#
1 + tanh
!
0.6lgN2
N1
"$
(2.13)
Attsb =
%
6tanh
&
N2 −2 −Attb
'
x
%
1 −tanh
&
10N1
'
(2.14)
Attsp = −10log10
1
(R′/R1)2 + (R′/R1)
(2.15)
It is important to note that these are simple calculations that neglect the impact from
ground, and that of the material properties and shape of the barrier. The assumptions
are that the barrier itself is thin and rigid, and thus fully reflective. This assumption is used
within this study as well. Furthermore, the results of these equations represent the impact
that can be expected in the relatively near field to the barrier. With greater distance from
the barrier the additional impact of the ground and atmosphere will play a larger role in
how the sound pressure propagates.
Examination of Wave Interference
7
==PAGE:16==
2.3
Parallel Walls
As many of the major highways pass through parts of large urban areas around cities, they
tend to require barriers to be erected along both sides of these roads. Depending on the
width of the highway and size of the barriers, these barriers can add additional noise to the
surrounding areas. When these barriers are close to each other more sound reflections
can occur between the two barriers causing the noise from the highways to increase. This
can be viewed by the additional image sources produced by each reflection from a barrier,
as is shown in Figure 2.3.
Figure 2.3: Parallel barriers and the adding image sources with each barrier reflection. a)
Direct path, b) first image source, c) second image source [20].
Early on in this study, it was of interest to see how the impact of parallel walls would effect
the IL of a barrier on the region outside of the road. Many past studies have found that
when the ratio of the height of the barriers and the distance between them are less than
a tenth the impact of multiple reflections produce a meaningful reduction in the barriers
noise efficiency [20] [21]. Within Bowlby and Cohn’s study they presented an equation
that would be able to represent the intensity ((Ieq)i) of a line source reflecting multiple
times off of each barrier,
(Ieq)i =
!0.231ILV
S
" ![(φ2)i −(φ1)i]
di
"
X
(i−1
)
k=1
(1 −αk)
*
(2.16)
.
With V being the hourly flow rate of vehicles, S the average speed of vehicles in miles
per hour, IL being the energy produced due to the emission level of the vehicles being
examined, di the distance to the ith image, both φ1 and φ2 representing the horizontal
angles of reflection of each barrier, and αk being the absorption coefficient for the kth
reflection. This equation was used to calculate the equivalent acoustic energy at the
receiving point as a result of the ith number of line sources. Though this is an equation
with many factors that are simplified in this study, specifically the type of source being
used. The equation provided by Watts in their 1996 report on parallel walls can be a
8
Examination of Wave Interference
==PAGE:17==
closer representation of the way that the reflections from a line source can be summed
[21].
Icr(total) = f(AoIoαdd−1 +
+
i
AiIoα(d+2iw)b2i(d + 2iw)−1)
(2.17)
Similar to the earlier Figure 2.3, the 2w is an indication of the added distance separat-
ing the two barriers. Ao represents the barrier correction from the source and the initial
reflected barrier, Io is the intensity at 1 m from the source, and f in this equation repre-
sents a constant that is used in screening a line source from a point. The i in this case is
the number of reflections examined, with b being a fraction of the original incident sound
intensity. α is the revised intensity due to the direct and initial set of reflections on the
receiver, also written as 10−a/10. The a corresponds to the effect the atmosphere has on
the reduction of intensity for every meter from the source in decibel.
As the atmospheric conditions are not applied in this study the resulting IL can be found
by relating these multiple reflections as additional image sources, similar to the earlier
equations ’Eq.2.2,’ and add the resulting pressures to find the Fresnel number that could
be then used with the collection of attenuation equations ’Eq.2.11-2.15’ that indicates
the expected total attenuation, which was earlier stated to indicate the same reduction
in decibel as the IL. The resulting equation for the IL from multiple reflections can be
written as,
(ILeq)i = 10log10
!
0.1
"#0.321ILV
S
$ #[(φ2)i −(φ1)i]
di
$%
X
&i−1
'
k=1
(1 −α)
( ) 10
*
j=1
#
1
(αa)j
$+,
−(△B)i
(2.18)
which is much more similar to ’Eq.2.16.’ But in this case the intensity is being made
logarithmic and subtracted by the barrier attenuation of an image line source (△B) [20].
(△B)i = 10log10
,!
1
[(φR)i −(φL)i]
"
X
(- (φR)
(φL)
(10△i/10))dφ
*.
(2.19)
The angles referring to the left ((φL)) and right ((φR)) endpoint of the barrier from the
receivers view, along with the point source barrier attenuation (△i) at any point i along
the line source. The attenuation is based on the Kurze-Anderson formulations which
relate back to the Fresnel number [22],
△=







0
for
≤−0.1916
5 + 20log10[(
&
2π|N|)/tan(
&
2π|N|)]
for
−0.1916 < N ≤0
5 + 20log10[(
&
2π|N|)/tanh(
&
2π|N|)]
for
0 < N ≤5.03
20
for
N > 5.03
(2.20)
These reports showed that the material and barrier shape would need to be taken into
account to reduce this impact. Like studies done for single barriers many of the same
solutions can be considered to help with reducing the impact of this type of IL degradation
[16]. Other studies have found that improvements can also be made by adding median
dividers designed for both cross traffic safety and noise redirection [23] [24].
Examination of Wave Interference
9
==PAGE:18==
In controlled or simulated environments, where assumptions are made for replicating re-
sults, this degradation by parallel barriers seems to be a noticeable aspect that needs to
be examined when thinking about improving the IL of barriers. Though, when applied in
reality these effects are much less impactful due to the atmospheric conditions that play
such a major role in how sound propagates in the free-field [25]. Though the atmospheric
conditions are important for understanding the real world impact of noise reduction tech-
niques, this study ignores these factors as the importance was focused primarily on the
whether there would be any noticeable improvement from the addition of waveguides
attachments on top of barriers.
Throughout this study the design of the simulation and scale model compose of paral-
lel barriers. These barriers have been placed relatively close together to guarantee that
the multiple reflections would produce and increase SPL interacting with the barrier that
would include the waveguide attachment. As only one barrier would have the attachment
the results would only be examined behind the attached barrier making the additional
parallel barrier act mostly as an amplifier of the source and to relate the findings to situ-
ations in the real world where this wave interference might have the most impact on the
surrounding environment.
2.4
Wave Interference / Herchel-Quincke Tube
The most important theory that is applied to this specific study is that of wave interference.
The simple principle in acoustics in a fully controlled environment is that a sound wave
traveling in one direction and the same wave traveling in the opposite direction but in anti-
phase will produce a pressure cancellation due to the nodal points of one wave being at the
same position of the anti-nodes of the other. This type of relationship can be designed
by adding an additional pathway for a sound wave to travel, shown in Figure 2.4. The
recommendation of using an additional pathway for wave cancellation was first presented
by Sir John F.W. Herschel back in 1833 [26]. Later in the century this theory was expanded
by German physicist Georg H. Quincke in 1866 [27].
This type of phenomenon has been used to help reduce sound in ducts, where the propa-
gation of the wave moves mostly in a single direction. The way that this occurs is that an
additional pathway is added to the duct to allow the sound waves to move in an alternate
direction, which will be longer than the original path [28]. Once, the two pathways meet
the waves will be in opposite phase of each other and will thus cancel each other out.
The frequencies at which the cancellation occurs is directly influenced by the difference
in length for each pathway.
Figure 2.4: A simple diagram of the Herchel-Quincke tube design for wave ducts [29].
10
Examination of Wave Interference
==PAGE:19==
This alternative pathway theory is now known as the Herchel-Quincke tube, where the
difference between the two path lengths would indicate the lowest frequency that would
be effected by the two pressure waves diverging and combining. This is visible in Figure
2.4 and the fundamental frequency that will be impacted by this secondary pathway can
be found by using the equation:
f = n x
c
2 (L −D)
(2.21)
This simple expression can present the frequencies that will be impacted by this design,
with n being the multiple of the fundamental frequency. It is important to note that only
the odd multiples will produce destructive interference, as the even multiples will actually
return to the original path in phase and instead create a constructive interference. This
could be avoided by an additional pathway to mitigate the even path multiples. The fre-
quencies impacted would be multiples up to the highest frequency, which can be found
by the cross section S of the alternate path opening.
Later, this concept was examined not in enclosed spaces, like ducts and turbines, but
within the free field. The study in Japan found that when the multi-pathway was positioned
close to the sound source the effect of the wave interference had a comprehensive effect
on the cancellation of frequencies at receiver positions on the other side of the apparatus
[30][31].
2.5
Boundary Element Method
The majority of the study consisted of examining the impact that waveguides might pro-
duce on the IL of a barrier by simulating their effects using a numerical method known
as the boundary element method (BEM). Numerical methods are helpful tools used in
acoustics to analyse stationary objects such as loudspeakers and in this case highway
noise barriers. Unlike other numerical methods, BEM only requires discretization of the
domain boundary that characterizes the objects shape [32].
This discretization is achieved by solving the Helmholtz integral equation. Which can be
done by implementation of a BEM variant called the direct collocation method, which deals
with the sound pressure and normal velocity directly, as well as the boundary conditions.
By doing this, a relationship can be made between the pressure and normal velocity at
points along all described bodies. Once the boundary pressure has been calculated for the
body shapes the pressure in the domain can be solved at individual field points. It is also
important to note that the harmonic time dependence is removed from these calculations,
producing the equation:
C(P)p(P) =
-
s
!∂G
∂n p(Q) + ikz0v(Q)G
"
dS + 4πpI(P)
(2.22)
The variable S is the surface of the body, P are exterior points, and Q are points along
the boundaries themselves. Additionally, p(Q) refers to the pressure and v(Q) the normal
velocity. C(P) is the resulting factor from whether the calculation is outside the body or on
the surface, and represents the plane angle in a two-dimensional plane [33]. For imple-
mentation in the two-dimensional free-field the Green’s function becomes more complex
as the free-field includes a Hankel function rather than an exponential function. As the
Green’s function is a solution for random position that is generated by the source the
general Green’s function (G) is found to be:
Examination of Wave Interference
11
==PAGE:20==
∇2G(P, Q) + k2G(P, Q) = −δ(Q −P)
(2.23)
with δ(Q −P) representing the source and
G(P, Q) = jπ
2 H(1)
0 (kR)
(2.24)
referring to the Green’s function solution for the two-dimensional case.
Two steps are conducted to calculate the solution in this script. The first solves the equa-
tions to produce values for pressure and normal velocity at each point defined along the
surface of the body. Once these are found the script will calculate all points defined by
the domain. This secondary calculation is helpful in that the bodies and source position
do not need to be inside the domain of field points for the pressure and normal velocities
to be found. This is very helpful in calculating the sound field for positions far from the
bodies. As BEM calculates the boundary pressure before the pressure at field points, it
is not needed to have the field points of interest, receiver position, and the bodies repre-
sented in the mesh grid. This will allow the mesh grid contain the field points to be at any
location and size that is desired. With this type of flexibility a small region of field points
can be calculated, which will reduce the computational cost. This makes it is possible
to examine a position near the body with the same amount of computation as a position
very far from the boundary elements. This makes BEM ideal when wanting to examine
the impact at far distances as the time to run the simulations will not change based on
the field point positions, but only the size of the mesh grid, number of field points, and
frequencies being examined. The frequency is a major factor in the simulation as higher
the frequency, the smaller the wavelength, which will require more boundary and field
points to be calculated. This will result in a much higher number of calculations.
An important addition needs to be made for every body designed in the space as some
errors can arise do to a non-uniqueness caused by resonances from the reciprocal interior
problem. To avoid these type of non-uniqueness errors it is important to include CHIEF
points within each of the bodies. These CHIEF points stand for Combined Helmholtz Inte-
gral Equation Formulation and are used as points at which additional equations produce
zero pressure within the bodies. By including these values inside the bodies the matrix
will be overdetermined [34].
The specific code that was used in this study was provided by Vicente Cutanda Henríquez,
one of the supervisors from DTU. It is a open source script for Matlab called OpenBEM.
OpenBEM consists of three different formulations for axisymmetrical (AxiBEM), three-
dimensional (3DBEM), and two-dimensional (2DBEM) studies. The 2DBEM is used to
examine noise barriers with the assumptions that the z-direction is infinite, and thus not
used in formulating solutions. That also means that the sound source used is not a point
source, but a line source which is ideal for examining the impact on a barrier. Generally,
the simplicity in the two-dimensional design will be helpful for the author in modifying the
script to design these waveguides, along with adding a parallel barrier. On the other hand
two-dimensional simplification creates a more complex numerical implementation [35].
It is important to note that though this type of source can relate to the constant flow of
traffic typically found along highways when the most noise is being produced, it will pose
some issues when comparing to the scale model tests which uses a point source. These
differences can be expected and will have impacts on the ability to clearly compare the
two results for validation purposes.
12
Examination of Wave Interference
==PAGE:21==
3
OpenBEM Simulation
The study was conducted primarily within Matlab and consisted of modifications made to
a preexisting script that was designed by Vicente Cutanda Henriquez, one of the super-
visors of this thesis, along with several other colleges at DTU. The script was originally
designed for examining how changing the top segment of a barrier effects the sound
pressure field. By creating a two-dimensional BEM model students could adjust simple
parameters to visually view the change in pressure cased by the barrier on the pressure
field around the body. For this specific study the changes to the script had started with
creating an additional body shape of identical proportions as the original barrier. This
secondary barrier was positioned opposite to the original barrier so that the source loca-
tion was between each. Simple calculations were made to examine the impact that the
addition barrier made on the sound pressure field, and the source position was moved to
insure that the pressure waves did not arrive at each barrier simultaneously. The source
position was finally located at a 5 m distance from the near barrier and 7 m from the far
barrier. The total distance had been decided to insure that the height to width ratio of
the highway space was small enough that the effect of the parallel barriers would impact
the insertion loss IL of the barrier which would contain the waveguide attachment. As
the height of each barrier was 3 m and the total width of the highway equaled 12 m, this
guarantied that the ratio was below 5 to 1 and meant that the reflections from the paral-
lel barrier would have a significant impact on the sound pressure in the region opposite
of the highway [20]. The height of the source determined to be optimal was 0.3 m from
the ground surface as this has been used in many past studies to represent the average
position where noise is produced from the two main sources of vehicle noise, the engine
and the tires. Figure 3.1 presents a sketch of this simple set up for the positions of the
barriers and source.
Figure 3.1: Sketch of the simple design in OpenBEM, showing positioning of the barriers
and source.
These adjustments can be made in the script by altering first the source position to be
at the zero position in the x-axis. This was done by adjusting the line source position
command in the script. The y-axis could also be changed to have the source at any point
at or above zero, as anything below zero is below the infinite plane defined in OpenBEM
[33].
Examination of Wave Interference
13
==PAGE:22==
First an additional barrier was include by creating a secondary set of admittance, absorp-
tion, reflection, and dimensions. With the admittance section it is important to add to the
existing number of segments that have been described for each body being designed.
This step would be important later in the code when the geometry for all bodies are being
defined. In the case of this study all segments defined had infinite admittance, mean-
ing that all bodies would be fully reflective. The reflection and absorption section should
remain the same for both barriers and any future bodies designed to ensure the full re-
flection of the pressure wave on the bodies. Where the two barriers were altered are in
the barrier dimensions, were every segment can be defined and a shift command can be
used to adjust the positioning of the bodies in relation to the zero point, were the source
has been placed. For the script to properly discern the two different barrier the names give
for defining the geometry of the bodies should be slightly different so that each segment
is unique. In this study that was done by adding a single letter with the barR referring
to the barrier separating the source from the area where the receiver pressure would be
examined, and the parallel barrier being defined as barP.
The next section of the script that needed to be modified is within the defining of the
geometry. In this section it is important to include all of the segments that have been
written for each body. This is the point where having each body have a slightly changed
segment name will allow for easily including more segments, but do note that they all must
be described within a single segment definition as this will be used in the calculations BEM
will do at the boundaries. As long as the segments defined in the geometry match those
defined in the admittance section of the final body shape this should successfully create
the individual bodies in the locations that have been defined.
Another important step in adding any additional bodies to the script is to include the CHIEF
points in each new body. This is found below the geometry section and can be replicated
from the original script, but should include linespace parameters that correspond to points
that have been defined for each of the individual bodies. This should also be done to
guarantee that the points are created within the body itself as this will result in the CHIEF
point calculations functioning correctly. An easy way to test that the body shapes are
positioned correctly and that the CHIEF points are located within these bodies, one can
run the simulation up to just before the calculating of the pressure to have a plot of the
bodies within the space. Figure 3.2 shows this type of plot for the single barrier where the
spacing and design can be examined.
This helps present a visual representation of the design of the body defined in the script.
Within Figure 3.2 the different segments are shown as separate colors with circular points
on the segment defined as elements, where the calculations will be conducted for the
boundary of the body, and the nodes representing the elements along with the plus sign
being the individual nodes separating each element. Above the figure are the number
of nodes, elements, bodies and segments found in the space. This figure specifically
indicates two bodies are present, and that refers to the additional barrier that is not visible
here. The CHIEF points can also be seen in this figure, represented as pink diamonds
within the body.
14
Examination of Wave Interference
==PAGE:23==
The number of elements will be directly effected by the highest frequency being calculated
in the simulation. In the original script only one frequency is tested at a time, but it is
possible to change this to have many frequencies being calculated one after the other.
With higher frequencies the number of elements will increase and result in more points
being calculated on the body as well as later in the free-field. This is one of the major
reason why the computational load can be difficult to handle when dealing with higher
frequencies, and why BEM is a good resource for testing lower frequencies and their
effect on the pressure field around objects [35].
Figure 3.2: The barrier design from the original 2DBEM script. Showing the position
of individual segments shown as different colors. With the CHIEF points presented as
diamonds inside the body.
With the basic source and barrier positions defined the waveguide could be designed
as additional segments to the original barrier. This was done by including segments to
the original barrier to define the lower and back walls of the waveguide. Subsequent
bodies could be added by following the same steps for adding the parallel barrier. As
the BEM simulation only contains the x and y-dimensions additional bodies needed to be
constructed to represent the top segment and inner walls of the waveguide. Figure 3.3
shows the earliest design of the waveguide, which consisted of a single different pathway.
Note in this figure how the early design does not include CHIEF points inside the body
representing the top segment of the waveguide. This was an early error from the author
as the script was still being understood. Later models of the waveguide fixed this mistake
by include these CHIEF points. As the study progressed adjustments to the waveguide
design were made in the shape and length of each pathway, along with one or two more
pathways being added. With every adjustment and additional body being added to the
script the same adjustments described earlier where made.
Examination of Wave Interference
15
==PAGE:24==
Figure 3.3: Body shape of waveguide model 1. Showing the two different bodies used to
make the pathway.
In the early stages of simulated testing adjustments were made to view different effects
of the barriers and source position. Once those positions had been finalized the mesh
grid was adjusted to include the source, the barrier of interest and receiving side of the
barrier as far from the source as 30 m for some of the simulated results. These simula-
tions required a lot of time to compute as the number of field points in that region was very
high, especially when examining the higher frequencies. This meant that only some fre-
quencies would be tested, with most frequencies corresponding to the center frequency
of third octave bands. Some additional simulations were made for frequencies separated
by 10 Hz to see how much change in the pressure field would occur between these two
frequencies. Later in the study many of the frequencies tested were chosen to represent
the odd multiples of the frequencies calculated using ’Eq.2.21’ and corresponded to the
frequencies that in theory should show the most destructive interference.
All of the tests run focused on frequencies between 60 Hz and 1 kHz, as this was the
region of frequencies that the author wanted to examine for the waveguide design. These
frequencies would present a wide enough range of results to understand the impact of a
waveguide on the IL for locations behind the barrier. Other limitations had to be made
in the design as it had to be simple enough to not create an excessive computational
load which would reduce the chances of collecting enough data for analysis before the
time-frame of this project ended.
The Final designed waveguide consisted of three pathways which corresponded to fun-
damental frequencies of 70, 80, and 100 Hz, and had an exit pathway facing directly up.
The additional height of the three openings was 0.5 m above the top of the barrier, the
depth of the guide was 1.3 m, and the guide protruded from the barrier by 0.9 m. Once
this design had been made, which will be described as waveguide model 9 and is visi-
ble in Figure 3.4, the type of examination changed to look at the IL produced for a high
frequency resolution. With the higher resolution it was important to no longer look at the
16
Examination of Wave Interference
==PAGE:25==
pressure field results for the entire area around and behind the barrier, but instead re-
quired a mesh grid that was much smaller. This would mean that only a small number
of field points would be calculated in this reduced mesh grid, reducing the computational
time for each frequency being tested.
Figure 3.4: Body shape of waveguide model 9. Showing the four separate bodies used
to create three pathways.
As the results found in OpenBEM are frozen in time, the high and low pressure in the
pressure field is presented at specific field points. In reality these pressures would be
changing with time and the average of the high and low pressure could be evaluated at
one position. To try and reduce the inconsistency between field points an average of the
field points was taken within a region 2 m wide and 1 m in height. The height parameter
remained the same for all positions and the average corresponded to 1.5 m off of the
ground. This allowed for a collection of field points to be calculated and averaged together,
which would give a better representation of the IL within each region. It is important to
remember this when looking at the results later as the author will discuss the distances
as a single position, but is really referring to the averaging of the fields points around that
position. This averaging was done by adding to the script below the calculations a loop
that would collect all field points defined in this region for each frequency to produce a
single value. These values would be saved and compiled in a separate script to plot all
the frequencies tested for each position. This was done for 5, 19, 106, 120, and 121 m
from the barrier. Note that these positions are not in any type of pattern. This was done
to avoid any specific aspects of the barrier and guide shape playing a major impact on all
of the results. The two furthest distances were chosen to examine the change in a short
distance at a relatively far position from the barrier. Additional tests where done with the
waveguide closed and the parallel barrier without the attachment to compare the IL of
each situation for the near, mid, and far-field positions. The results were also run through
a script designed to show the results for individual one third octave bands, with the lowest
band of 63 Hz and highest band of 1 kHz being omitted due to all of the frequencies in
the full bandwidth not being calculated.
Examination of Wave Interference
17
==PAGE:26==
18
Examination of Wave Interference
==PAGE:27==
4
Scale Model
This section presents a detailed account of the method used to validate the finds cal-
culated in the BEM numerical simulations. These tests were run at the start of January
2023, and consisted of results from the parallel barriers and waveguide attachment. The
first part of the validations consisted of the two barriers without including the waveguide.
The second part had the waveguide attached to the barriers that separated the source
and receiver. A description of the building process for scale model will be presented in
this section, as will set up and running of the scale model. The results will be examined
in a later chapter, and compared with the same design set up run in the simulation for
validation purposes.
4.1
Designing the Scale Model
To be able to properly validate the results from the BEM simulations it is imperative to
use an additional testing method. Typical validations can be found by testing full-scale or
modeled versions of the designs, and comparing these results with those from the simu-
lation [16] [36]. A scale model was chosen to do the validation as many of the assumed
parameters in OpenBEM could be recreated. The model was designed to be a tenth of the
size of a large scale version. The test was conducted in an anechoic chamber in building
354 at DTU. By testing in a controlled environment the atmospheric changes could remain
minimal, which would be closer to the simulation’s atmospheric conditions. This is ideal
for replicating the simulated results, along with doing testing in a space that has reflection
only from the materials being tested and minimal reflections from the equipment. These
factors would help in providing the best chance of validating the simulation. Additionally,
the scale model could be built and tested in a shorter time-frame that fit with the duration
of this study.
Before any testing was done the material used in the experiments needed to be sourced,
and a waveguide design needed to be made and later constructed. To build the waveguide
used in the scale model, it required designing a shape that could be pieced together in a
way that would reduce the chance of sound leakage. It was decided that the waveguide
would be made with six side panels the would be laser cut to allow for individual pieces
of wood to be able to slide through each panel and sealed together. The length of the
guide was 2000 mm long due to the piece of wood acting as the barrier in which the guide
would be attached to was 185 mm in height. From this height it is possible to assume
that the length of the barrier being 2000 mm will be wide enough to have the side edge
diffraction produce no noticeable impact on the receiving position [37]. This being true
when the source and receiver are located in the middle point between each edge. Each
of the panels of the waveguide were equally spaced resulting in two side panels and four
panels in the middle with each about 500 mm apart. With four middle panels there where
five internal spaces that would act as sections on the waveguide, with the middle section
being the main pathway for the sound pressure to pass through.
Examination of Wave Interference
19
==PAGE:28==
Figure 4.1: Design of side panels used in the scale model. This was made using the free
online called SmartDraw to later be laser cut.
Different types of composite woods were used to create the waveguide, and the final
design consisted of a collection of six separate 6 mm thick side panels that were provided
by SkyLab at DTU, and nine pieces of 9 mm thick Plywood purchased from Sylvan. To
create the side panels a sketch was drawn in SmartDraw, an online program that allowed
for precise lengths to be used [38]. The design was then redrawn in the 2022 version of
CorelDRAW, a modeling program that produces files which can be uploaded to a laser
cutter [39]. The side panel design contained slots that would allow separate boards to be
fitted to create the pathways. Figure 4.1 shows what the two designs used for the panels
looked like. The use of SmartDraw was beneficial in making sure that each part of the
design was exactly the dimensions needed for the physical pieces.
The design on the left represents the panels that would be used as the end pieces of the
waveguide, and the right side shows the panels that would be in the middle. It is also
important to note that the white section represented the open slots that the other panels
would fit into. This is visible when looking at one of the final side panels seen in Figure
4.2. Originally, it was planned to add an additional piece later in the testing to direct the
exit path towards the back side of the waveguide. This is the reason for the right design
in Figure 4.1 which would allow the extra panel to fit on top of the inner panels and could
be sealed after the fully open waveguide had been tested. Due to time constraints this
was not possible.
20
Examination of Wave Interference
==PAGE:29==
Figure 4.2: Laser cut end piece used for build the scale model waveguide.
The nine panels of 9 mm plywood used to create the pathway had to be carefully slotted
into the grooves of the side panels one piece at a time. Each piece was carefully posi-
tioned and attached using a combination of wood glue and MultiTech MutiUse sealant to
close any gaps between the wood panels. Figure 4.3a shows how one of the stages in
which the separate wood pieces had been attached. To be sure that the waveguide was
properly sealed each piece needed to be examined for possible air gaps. This process
was completed over a week to allow the glue and sealant time to dry and any gaps to be
closed before the following piece could be attached. The final scale model waveguide is
shown in Figure 4.3b.
(a) One of the inner panels being attached to
the side panels of the waveguide.
(b) Final panel on the back of the waveguide
being attached.
Figure 4.3: Building phase of waveguide scale model testing.
Examination of Wave Interference
21
==PAGE:30==
Once the waveguide had been built testing was conducted in an anechoic chamber where
no reflections would occur outside of the testing material and minor reflections from the
equipment. The barriers consisted of two different types of wood, which had been found
in the wood shop of the Engineer Acoustics building 352 on the Lyngby DTU campus. As
was previously stated, the barrier that contained the attached waveguide had a height of
185 mm, a length of 2000 mm, as well as a thickness of 15 mm. The parallel barrier on the
opposite side of the ’freeway’ consisted of a height of 182 mm, length of 2000 mm, and a
thickness of 20 mm. Additionally, the parallel barrier had a glossed surface that would act
as closely to a reflective boundary, similar to the fully reflective barriers in the numerical
simulation. Duct tape was used at the base of each barrier to reduce the chance of sound
passing through the gap between the barrier and the floor. The floorboard used was a
sheet of particle board with a length of 2500 mm, a width of 1200 mm, and a thickness of
9 mm.
4.2
Testing the Scale Model
When it came to testing the scaled model a source was required that was small enough to
act as closely to a point source as possible. This was done by using a spark discharge as
the source, which is shown in Figure 4.4. This device has the ability of producing a broad
range of frequencies [40]. As the OpenBEM simulations had been done with frequencies
ranging from 60 Hz - 1 kHz, it was important that the source would be able to produce
frequencies between 600 Hz - 10 kHz as the scale model was ten times smaller. The spark
source is typically used for scale model testing as the spark sound source is so small that
it is as close to that of a point source. The disadvantage of using this type of source comes
from the repeatability of the results. Each discharge of the source is relatively unique and
thus requires many tests to be run for all frequencies to be properly recorded. In this
study the testing was done ten times for each position and situation examined. Another
limitation with this source is in the fact that it acts like a point source rather than a line
source, which is the source type in the OpenBEM simulations. This would produce some
differences due to the propagation of the source being in three-dimensions rather than
two.
Figure 4.4: Spark Source used in the scale model testing.
22
Examination of Wave Interference
==PAGE:31==
The facility that the scale model test was conducted in was located in the small anechoic
chamber at DTU over the course of three separate days. This was an ideal location as
ability to control the atmospheric and spacial factors allowed for the results collected to
be as similar to the simulated data as possible. With this space the only major reflections
picked up by the Brüel & Kjær (B&K) 4192 pressure field microphone would be from the
floorboard, barriers, and waveguide. This microphone was connected to a B&K Nexus
preampifier which was fed into a Focusrite soundcard connected to a computer running
the Dirac acoustic software [41]. Some of the responses can be seen in Figure 4.5 where
the impulse response can be viewed. The left image shows the clean response that was
trimmed to the beginning of the impulse and tail end of the response, while the right image
represents a failed measurement due to the vibrations cause by doors closing somewhere
in the build. The exterior vibration is noticeable in the left side of the impulse where the
signal seems to bend. This shows that even though the anechoic chamber is mostly
isolated from the ground, there is still enough connection to transfer vibrations through
the build and be picked up by the pressure microphone. This was only a minor issue as
the time for each test only took three seconds and could be re-run quickly.
The Dirac was an ideal software as it is able to record the wide range of frequencies
needed at a sampling rate that would be efficient enough to be transferred to Matlab and
be compared with the simulated results. The sampling rate for these test were set at
48 kHz, which was more than enough to capture all frequencies of interest. To properly
simulate the atmospheric conditions of these scale model test within OpenBEM, a RS
1366 humidity temperature meter was used at the start of each test. This would allow for
the same values to be used for the simulations.
(a) Photograph of the impulse response
recorded by the Dirac during one of the
scale model measurements.
(b) Photograph showing a poor response
due to vibrations caused by the closing of
an exterior door.
Figure 4.5: To photographs showing the recorded impulse response in the Dirac with one
being a clean response from the spark source, while the other shows additional vibration
noise caused by the building.
On the first day of scale model testing only the two barriers in parallel were tested. These
barrier were separated by a distance of 800 mm with the spark source 300 mm from the
barrier closest to the receiving microphone and at a height of 30 mm. The three different
receiver positions for each set of test were at 450, 600, and 1000 mm from the near barrier.
All positions had the microphone located 100 mm above the floorboard representing the
ground surface.
Examination of Wave Interference
23
==PAGE:32==
Figure 4.6 shows the way that the first test was set up inside of the chamber. These
distance measurements were done using a tape measure and it must be noted that this is
not the optimal way as it is difficult to be precise due to human error. As has been stated
earlier duct tape was used at the base of the near barrier to reduce the chance of any
sound pressure passing through the bottom of the barrier.
Figure 4.6: Test 1 set up for the parallel barriers.
Once the first set of test using the parallel barriers had been completed the waveguide
was attached to the top of the barrier and left overnight to allow the glue and sealant ample
time to dry. Figure 4.7 shows the set up for the second test conducted on day two. The
barriers and position of the source were re-measure to confirm that they were the same
as the first measurements, along with the three receiver positions that would be tested.
For both days of measuring the Nexus gain for the microphone was set at a level which
seemed to produce a response without the danger of overloading the signal. Each of the
spark impulses were saved and transferred to Matlab to be transformed into the frequency
domain allowing the measurements to be compared with the simulated results from the
OpenBEM model of the same design.
With the two different tests finished only one additional test was need to have the data
that was required to compare with the simulated results. As this study focuses on the
insertion loss (IL) provided by adding a waveguide to the top edge of a barrier, it was
important to look at the results from the scale model as a representation of the IL. This
meant that a free-field measurement was needed for all of the positions examined. Free-
field in this case refers to the propagation of sound with ground included. For this test
the scale model measurement need to only include the floorboard used as the ’highway’
between each of the barriers. It was important to be sure that the floorboard only extended
to the point were the barrier would be, as the measurements did not include any ground
reflection beyond the parallel barriers. With the same equipment set up the final round of
free-field testing could be performed. The differences between these tests and the barrier
or waveguide could thus be found to properly present the scale model IL. During this
third day of testing the author chose to do a second round of testing for both the free-field
and waveguide model. This second set of tests increased the gain on the Nexus and
24
Examination of Wave Interference
==PAGE:33==
were done back to back with the free-field first and the barriers including the waveguide
second. This additional round of testing was done to have one set of measurements that
could be all completed in the same day. These IL results could then be compared to the
results collected by the measurements conducted on the three different days.
(a) Photograph showing the front side of the
barrier with the waveguide attachment.
(b) Photograph showing the back side of the
barrier with the waveguide attached.
Figure 4.7: Photograph presenting the set up for test 2, with the waveguide attached to
the barrier.
The next step was to transport the Wav. files from the scale model test to Matlab where a
script had been designed to use a Fast Fourier transform (FFT) to convert the data from
the time domain to the frequency domain. This was done using the internal command
in Matlab once all the files for each test type and position were combined. With each
test now in the frequency domain the next step was to down-shift the frequencies from
600 Hz - 10 kHz of the one tenth scale model to 60 Hz - 1 kHz used in the simulation.
After each set of tests had been configured to represent the same frequency range the
IL was found using the pressure relation inside the brackets of ’Eq. 2.6’ as these values
still were in a linear format. Once this new pressure relationship was found, and using the
rest of ’Eq.2.6 the values were switched from the linear scaling to the logarithmic scaling
typical for presenting the IL. An additional set of SPL values were made for each test
separately to allow comparisons between the free-field and different barrier tests as a way
of checking to see that the set up and data matched with the theoretical expectations.
After the data had been switched to the frequency domain, down-shifted to the proper
frequency range, and the IL values found, the next step was to compare these results
with the simulated data that had been designed and run to represent the same dimensions
of the barriers and structure of the waveguide. To compare these results it was decided
to reproduce the results in one third octave bands to allow for a more clear representation
of the possible similarities and differences from the scale model and simulation. This
was done by using a third octave function to separate the multiple frequencies into the
individual octave bands. How that was done is explained in the following chapter, along
with the analysis of the data.
Examination of Wave Interference
25
==PAGE:34==
26
Examination of Wave Interference
==PAGE:35==
5
Numerical Simulation Results and
Analysis
During the progression of this study changes were made in regard to the specific design
adjustments, and later the impact of the waveguide was compared to the insertion loss
(IL) results of the guide closed and when the guide was not attached to the barrier. Since
the changes in what specifically was examined, and how the results where combined for
analysis, it has been decided to present the findings in a historically linear fashion. This
was done to show the adjustments made by the author to reach a design that would best
examine the most important characteristics produced by the wave interference attach-
ment to the barrier. The progression of this study began with understanding the effects
seen with adjusting parts of the script by adding additional bodies and moving the source
position. It continued into designing simple single and double pathway waveguides and
looking at the IL in the pressure field around the barrier at different frequencies. As
the impact of the waveguide attachment became more clear the author examined the
changes between the waveguide pathways being open and the impact that the shape of
the waveguide would produce when the pathways are closed. With more understandings
a third pathway was included in the design and specific frequencies for each pathway
were calculated using ’Eq.2.21.’ The final design was then examined by running the sim-
ulation at a frequency resulting of 2 Hz for five different horizontal positions behind the
barrier. These results were then compared to the same results for the closed waveguide
and when the waveguide was not present. The last step in this study was to run the scale
model test with the hope of validating the effects of the waveguide seen in the OpenBEM
simulations.
Many figures will be presented in this section examining different designs and phenomenons
observed during this study. This is just a small amount of all the figure and plots collected.
The rest of the figures can be found in the Appendix 7. The author will use the term free-
field in reference to measurements that also include the ground reflections. Most theory
typically presents the resulting IL values in terms of the improved reduction of the sound
pressure level (SPL) as a positive value [16] [25]. This is not the case in this report, in-
stead the OpenBEM script was designed to present the reduction in SPL relative to the
free-field levels. Meaning that the IL values have been calculated as negative values.
Please note that these negative values represent the same change in IL as the positive
values seen in other reports.
5.1
Early Study of OpenBEM
Early examinations of OpenBEM was conducted to understand the way that the simulation
would run and what type of responses would be seen by adjusting the source location
and adding the additional parallel barrier. These simple adjustments showed how the
sound pressure would be calculated each time a parameter was changed. All of the early
simulations were done for individual frequencies, with some of the first results consisted of
the source being placed directly in the center. With both barriers being the same distance
from the source the resulting calculations of points inside and outside of the highway
would be identical for both the right and left barrier. Figure 5.1 shows how the reflections
and diffraction produced by each barrier are identical. This test was used to verify that
both bodies had been calculated properly along with all the mesh points.
Examination of Wave Interference
27
==PAGE:36==
It is also interesting to examine the strong pressure increase seen by the yellow rays
projecting from the source and passing just above the barrier. These are due to the fully
reflective nature of the ground and barriers in this test. At 500 Hz the wavelength meets
in this region to produce constructive interference and results in this focused line of high
pressure compared with the free-field results where no barrier reflections would be coming
into contact with the outward propagating sound pressure. Since the source is near to the
ground and directly in the middle of the two barriers the patterns of pressure are identical
on both sides and above the source. This included free-field wave propagation, ground
influence, and edge diffraction produced by the top of the barrier. The results obtain
from this test were examined in comparison with ’Eq.2.18,’ along with some sound barrier
calculation programs supplied by a free online toolbox [39].
Figure 5.1: Parallel Barriers with the source at the center of the highway producing a
frequency of 500Hz.
With the early examination and simulations of OpenBEM, the core characteristics of bar-
riers where looked into. Even though the results seen in Figure 5.1 shows the barrier to
the right as dark blue, indicating on the scale a high IL, and the one on the left more at
around zero, the patterns in the pressure field are the same on both sides of the source.
This difference is most likely just an issue with the plotting of the figure and not because of
any issues with the calculations of each of the bodies. This was an important realization
to be made as many of the later test results would show similar issues with the shading of
the bodies, but this early test confirmed that the results would still indicate that the bodies
acted as rigid surfaces to the pressure waves. Once the understanding of the reaction
from the simple simulations had been reach it was possible to start designing early models
of the waveguide attachment and run simulations to see their effects.
5.2
Results for Waveguide Model Designs
Early iterations of the waveguide design focused on understanding the single frequency
impact that the addition of the attachment would have on the sound pressure changes
between the free-field and that of the sound pressure levels (SPL) when the waveguide
body had been attached to the top edge of the barrier. The first two waveguide models
consisted only one passage way to view how the simple designs impacted the single fre-
quencies being tested. Figure 5.2 shows the body shape of the second designed waveg-
uide. This design was a slight adjustment from the first iteration as the pathway edges
had be shaped to have no straight vertical or horizontal sides. This was the first attempt
to ”guide” the pressure wave through the waveguide pathway. It also had the exit of the
pathway facing directly upward, similar to the photographers of the Wavebreaker product
seen in the report from the Swedish company [6].
28
Examination of Wave Interference
==PAGE:37==
Figure 5.2: The body shape for waveguide model 2 containing a single pathway.
The early results on the individual frequencies had been produced with the calculated field
points on the mesh grid plots provided by the original OpenBEM script, and help visually
present the reaction that the waveguide produced on the surrounding area. Figure 5.3 is
one of these plots showing the impact of the waveguide on the pressure near the barrier.
Additional frequency plots for this model can be found in the Appendix A.2. There are
clear changes present in the pressure waves directly above the barrier, an indication that
the secondary path through the guide is producing some wave interference at its exit point.
This showed promise in the possible impact that the attachment could have in producing
some form of disruption on the sound field above and behind the barrier. Though the
impact in this early design showed changes at only some frequencies tested. Similar to
the first model shown in the earlier Chapter 3, this model was missing the CHIEF points in
the top segment needed to combat the non-uniqueness present in the BEM calculations.
Figure 5.3: Waveguide model 2 Insertion Loss at 250Hz.
Model 3 was the first design that included these extra calculation points and adjusted the
exit opening to be facing behind the waveguide. Figure 5.4 shows the new body shape
as well as the IL plot at 500 Hz. This updated design presented some new findings
Examination of Wave Interference
29
==PAGE:38==
on how the waveguide interacts with the pressure field behind the barrier, rather than
the last model which showed the interference being produce above the barrier. This is
a direct contribution to the way in which the exit of the waveguide has been oriented.
An additional reason for the exit facing this direction came from many of the early results
showing a strong destructive interference lines above the barrier in line with the projection
of the source. By changing the exit position this interference line was found to be a result
of the top edge of the barrier and waveguide shape rather than the exit position.
(a) The body shape for waveguide model 3.
(b) Waveguide model 3 insertion loss at 500Hz.
Figure 5.4: The waveguide model 3 design and one of the frequencies simulated in
OpenBEM. For additional frequency plots check Appendix A.3.
The next three models were designed to include more pathways to see if more changes
in the pressure field would be seen at different frequencies compared with the single
path which from theory presented in Section 2.4 should only impact a small selection of
frequencies. The main purpose of these earlier designs were intended to study what type
of impact could be visually seen in the pressure field around the barrier. At this point in
the study it is clear that interference patterns occurring in some regions above or behind
the barrier, but it should be noted that at no point during these early simulations did the
pathways get tuned to specific frequencies of interest. These simulations were purely
30
Examination of Wave Interference
==PAGE:39==
done to understand what type of effects the attached waveguide produced. With Figure
5.5 shows the body shape for waveguide model 4, which was the first design to incorporate
a second pathway.
Figure 5.5: Body shape of waveguide model 4, the first design containing two different
pathways.
Figures 5.6 and 5.7 present the strong impact that individual frequencies can produce
on the surrounding pressure field. By just a 10 Hz adjustment in the frequency tested,
different interference results can be seen in slightly different places. Figure 5.6 results
show a large impact at and above the barrier as the waves propagate and interfere with
each other, while Figure 5.7 has a more focused region of interference at the level of the
waveguide attachment with less impact on the overhead region. More results from this
early model are presented in the Appendix A.4 where most of the frequencies showed
little or no interference that could be consisted as a result of the waveguide pathway.
Figure 5.6: Waveguide model 4 insertion loss at 240Hz.
Examination of Wave Interference
31
==PAGE:40==
Figure 5.7: Waveguide model 4 insertion loss at 250Hz.
It is also important to not that many of the results in these early tests showed how the
changes in frequency would result in narrow fields of destructive interference which only
impacted part of the pressure field with the remaining field staying relatively similar to the
free-field pressure. In addition to running simulations on the way in which the pressure
field changed with waveguide design and frequencies being simulated, it was important to
understand what part of the results were due to the additional pathways of the waveguide
and what was due to the large attachment on top of the barrier. The first model to examine
the differences of having the waveguide open or closed was model 5, seen in Figure 5.8.
Additionally, this was the first design that included a third pathway. Here it can be seen
that the closed version was just a box attached to the top of the barrier.
(a) Body Shapes for waveguide model 5 with
the three pathways open.
(b) Body Shapes for waveguide model 5 with
the guide completely closed.
Figure 5.8: Waveguide model 5 design with the pathways and without.
Figure 5.9 and 5.10 present a comparison of how the waveguides size and shape could
be impacting the pressure field, rather than the extra pathways. When the waveguide is
closed the near field behind and bellow the barrier is heavily reduced due to the large
object blocking the diffracted waves from reaching this region with any large amount of
pressure compared to the free field calculations. What is interesting is that the ray of
interference above the barrier, as seen in the earlier model results, is in fact a result of the
waveguide body, rather than the new pathways interfering with the free-field pressure.
Another point of interest, which had been observed in earlier simulated results, is just
how directional the waveguide pressure can be when examining the impact of a single
32
Examination of Wave Interference
==PAGE:41==
frequency. Figure 5.9 shows that some disruption is evident above the barrier, but a strong
focus of destructive interference is present between ten and fifteen meters from the source
(or between five and ten meters from the barrier). The overall impact of the waveguide
open does show areas of pressure change that can be linked to this pathway, but the
closed guide seems better suited for reducing the pressure for a larger region behind and
below the barrier. This closed result could be thought of as a thick barrier were diffraction
is occurring at both top edges of the box and thus would be changing the pressure field
in a different way than the thin barrier diffraction presented in the theory Section 2.2 [17].
More frequencies were calculated in the same manor and are available in the Appendix
A.4.
Figure 5.9: Waveguide model 5 insertion loss at 500Hz.
Figure 5.10: Closed waveguide model 5 insertion loss at 500Hz.
At this point in the study it was important to examine designing the waveguide with specific
frequencies of interest in mind. This required written calculations using ’Eq.2.21’ to see
what frequencies would be impacted by the length differences between the direct sound
path over the waveguide and each pathway traveling through the guide. Since the earlier
waveguide models showed how frequency dependent the effect of the waveguide could
be on the sound field, it was important to examine how a range of different frequencies
might benefit. The next design was chosen to be more of a rectangular shape. Figure
5.11 shows the design for model 6, both closed and open. This shape was decided as it
allowed for a more compact set of pathways. Ideally, the design of the waveguide would
need to insure that the fundamental frequencies would be low enough to impact the lower
frequency range of interest in this study, while also being separated between each other
in a way that would reduce the number of odd multiples that would overlap between each
Examination of Wave Interference
33
==PAGE:42==
pathway’s designed frequency. When calculating the impacted frequencies it was found
that the highest fundamental would be about 108 Hz, while the two lower frequencies
would be 94 Hz and 91.5 Hz. This range seemed slightly irregular in separation, but
allowed for some analysis on pathways close in frequency and also separated by more
than 10 Hz.
(a) Body Shapes for waveguide model 6 with
the three pathways open.
(b) Body Shapes for waveguide model 6 with
the guide completely closed.
Figure 5.11: Waveguide model 6 design with the pathways and without.
Model 6 still maintained an exit path facing the back of the waveguide, with each entry
for the paths having a cross-section opening of 10 cm which would mean that the highest
frequency that would be impacted by the waveguide would be around 3,430 Hz [6]. This
higher bound would be well above the needed range of this study and would guarantee
that all frequencies examined would have some impact caused by the waveguide. With
three separate pathways and three body shapes producing the top and internal sections
of the waveguide, the total additional height of the barrier was 0.5 m. This seemed to be
a reasonable increase in height, but with the exit being in the rear of the waveguide the
required length for each pathway to reach the specified frequencies needed to be relatively
long. This internal length meant that the model 6 protruded out behind the barrier by 1.3
m, with a depth below the original barrier height of 1.6 m. This may be considered bulky
addition to a 3 m tall and 0.2 m thick barrier.
When examining the same frequency simulated for model 5 in Figures 5.9 and 5.10, with
those seen from model 6 in Figures 5.12 and 5.13 some of the same trends of regionally
specific interference can be seen in the open versions. What is clearly noticeable between
these two sets of figures is how much smaller of a region the model 6 examines. This was
done to improve the calculation time for each simulation being done. With a smaller region
of field points the time for computing each frequency was greatly reduced. These results
still showed the region behind the barrier, which was at this time the most interesting area
to examine. Unlike the interference from model 5, model 6 shows the pressure around 15
m from the barrier to be relatively uniformed and with a darker shade of teal, referring to an
IL below zero. It also can be noted that the improvement seen by the closed waveguide
model 5 does not appear to be the same for model 6. Model 6 shows less of a pressure
increase between the barrier and the region of high destructive interference. Many more
frequencies were examined for this model, which are can be found in the Appendix A.6
34
Examination of Wave Interference
==PAGE:43==
Figure 5.12: Waveguide model 6 insertion loss at 500Hz.
Figure 5.13: Closed waveguide model 6 insertion loss at 500Hz.
To try and change the bulky design of model 6, a new design was created to reduce the
length behind the barrier. Figure 5.14a was the resulting design and ended up reducing
the length behind to be exactly 1 m with no changes to the depth of the waveguide. This
resulted in frequencies of 130, 103, and 87 Hz being calculated for the three different
pathways. Outside of this narrowing of the guide, there was no changes made to the
entry or exit points. As is evident in Figure 5.14b the first odd multiple of the highest
fundamental shows some form of destructive interference projecting from the waveguide
and across the sound field. This is helpful in showing that in some regards determining a
specific length for the pathways seems to be having an impact on the pressure field in a
improved way. In principle, this impact is what would be expected from Section 2.4, but
additionally it can be noted that this impact is not over the entire pressure field. Rather the
path of interference is still somewhat narrow in nature. More frequencies where simulated
with other IL for model 7, which are available in the Appendix 7. These additional figures
show that these calculated frequencies for the pathways seem to be the most responsive
in creating interference in the pressure field.
Examination of Wave Interference
35
==PAGE:44==
(a) Body Shapes for waveguide model 7.
(b) Waveguide model 7 calculate response at 390Hz.
Figure 5.14: Waveguide model 7 and one of the frequencies simulated in OpenBEM. More
examples of frequencies for model 7 open and closed can be found in Appendix 7.
It was thus decided that final frequencies of interest would be slightly lower in frequency for
all three paths. Figure 5.15a presents the body shape for the model 8 of the waveguide.
The three frequencies were decided to be 70, 80, and 100 Hz. These where chosen to
allow for a decent amount of separation between each fundamental and to be sure that
within the range of frequencies in this study there would be minimal overlap from their odd
multiples. At the seventh multiple of the longest pathway, seen in Figure 5.15b, there is
another example of the destructive interference that is being produced by the waveguide.
Like many of the other examples from before, these are primarily narrow in the region
of impact that the waveguide produces on some of the specific frequencies. It should
be noted that though the the strongest interference is regional some other areas show a
lower level of reduction. Alternatively at the height of 4 m the pressure field seems to be
relatively the same as the free-field and may be caused by some constructive interference.
36
Examination of Wave Interference
==PAGE:45==
(a) Body Shapes for waveguide model 8. Closed version
available in Appendix A.8.
(b) Waveguide model 8 calculate response at 490Hz.
Figure 5.15: Waveguide model 8 and one of the frequencies simulated in OpenBEM. More
frequency plots can be found in the Appendix 5.15a
While some of the results from model 8 showing promise of validating the theory of wave
interference presented in Section 2.4, other results where less supportive of this. Figure
5.16 shows two more mesh plot results of the IL produced by the waveguide attachment
on other frequencies of interest. Figure 5.16a is the fundamental frequency of the shortest
pathway and continues to support the impact of the waveguide on the field as there is clear
regions of interference between 10 and 12 m. Alternatively, Figure 5.16b shows more of a
vague, if not, lack of impact as the pressure wave distributions seems to be less disrupted.
On further examination though, the IL are still primarily below zero meaning that the
addition of the barrier and waveguide is producing a reduction in the sound pressure
within the near field region behind the barrier. As was shown in the open and closed
waveguides of model 5, when looking at the closed version of model 8 in Figure 5.16c
the impact of the box shape is actually the strongest factor in impacting the IL at such
Examination of Wave Interference
37
==PAGE:46==
a close distance from the barrier. This has been seen in some of the earlier models and
should not be a major surprise as the low frequency wavelengths are long enough to be
impacted by the large body attached to the top of the barrier. This may mean that the
lower frequencies of interest designed to be impacted by the waveguide may be too low
for the pathways to impact the pressure at such a close distance from the barrier.
(a) Waveguide model 8 calculate response at
100 Hz.
(b) Waveguide model 8 calculate response at
210 Hz.
(c) Closed waveguide model 8 calculate re-
sponse at 210 Hz.
Figure 5.16: Examples of insertion loss results for Waveguide model 8 at two different
frequencies. An addition figure shows 210 Hz for the closed version of this model. More
examples of frequencies for model 8 open and closed can be found in Appendix A.8.
It can be seen in all of these pressure field plots that there are points of higher pressure
and lower pressure as the calculations of the field points are done in a moment in time.
With this amount of frequency specific impact of the pressure field many field points would
need to be averaged to have a more clear representation of the impact at a specific region
of interest behind the barrier. To do this a region of 2 m distance and 1 m height needed to
be averaged to present a IL that would be representative of what could be expected at a
specific receiver position. Using individual field points would not be a valuable represen-
tation of the pressure field as is evident when looking at a close up region of the pressure
field seen in Figure 5.17. Here there are four different points of measurement shown all
around 10 m from the source (5 m from the barrier) and at a height around 2 m. As each
38
Examination of Wave Interference
==PAGE:47==
of the points shown in this figure are four field points away from each other, this shows
how much the IL can change between points. With the pressure waves producing both
high pressure areas and low pressure areas, and time not being a factor in the results
from the simulation, using an average of points within a region of interest would give a
much better representation of the expected IL that could be achieved by the addition of
the barrier and waveguide on the free-field sound pressure.
Figure 5.17: Individual field point values from waveguide model 8 calculated insertion loss
for 300 Hz.
This initial examination of how changing the waveguide design produced changes that
focused on specific frequencies implies that there is an impact being seen behind the
barrier that can be partially ’tuned’ based on these pathway lengths. How big of an impact
this can be required a more refined frequency resolution at multiple regions of interest to
understand if this would be a significant alternative tool in reducing the noise for urban
areas located near highways. It would also be important to examine these high frequency
resolution results in comparison with the waveguide pathways closed, along with results
obtained from the barriers alone. By comparing these three separate simulated solutions
a better argument could be made for whether wave interference in this type of manor
would be a valuable option for obtaining improved insertion loss for highway barriers.
These type of results will be examined and discussed in the following section.
5.3
Final Model Design with a High Resolution Insertion Loss
To properly understand the impact a high frequency resolution would be needed. The
resolution used was 2 Hz and was chosen over a 1 Hz resolution to reduce the computa-
tional load for each of the simulated regional positions that would be calculated. Instead
of requiring 940 separate calculations for pressure at both the boundary and field points
for the frequencies from 60 Hz to 1 kHz, having 2 Hz resolution allowed the number of
calculations to be 470 for each position and barrier set up. Note that position will now
refer to the average IL values for the field points spanning 2 m in width and 1 m in height.
The barrier set up also refers to the three types of designs being the open waveguide,
Examination of Wave Interference
39
==PAGE:48==
the closed waveguide, and only the two parallel barriers. With this resolution the change
would still be clear enough to understand the impact that each barrier set up would have
on the IL in the specific positions being examined. The waveguide model used for this
part of the study reverted back to a design that included the exit path being directly up-
ward. This was decided as it allowed for the smallest waveguide design that would still
satisfy the 70, 80, and 100Hz frequencies desired for the separate pathways. Because
the direct path over the barrier was shorter, it would allow the internal pathway lengths to
be reduced. A second benefit for having the exit facing upwards was to try and improve
the spread of impact that the interference could cause by the waveguide. As was visible
in earlier models, many unique frequencies produced highly directional destructive inter-
ference, and this design was an attempt to reduced this focused region of interference.
Figure 5.18 shows the body shapes for the waveguide model 9.
Figure 5.18: Body shapes for waveguide model 9. The closed body shape and some
single frequency pressure field plots can be found in Appendix A.9.
The near field reaction at 5 m from the barrier would indicate the strongest effect that would
be presented by the waveguide being included. This is due to the position being well with
the shadow zone produced by the barrier. In this area the diffraction from the pressure
wave would be the lowest, along with the ground reflections not producing a strong im-
pact on the receiver position. Figure 5.19 shows the high frequency resolution results at
5 m, and confirms some of the expected assumptions from the earlier simulations. That
the impact of the waveguide would be vary heavily depending on different frequencies. It
also shows that the resolution is appropriate to see the trends of change throughout the
frequency range. In the results there seems to be moments of destructive interference
along with some constructive interference. This was expected as the range of frequencies
being impacted by the waveguide is still relatively narrow. That would mean that for all of
the even multiples of the fundamental there could be a possibility of the pressure waves
summing instead of subtracting. Other factors are also at play in this region as within the
40
Examination of Wave Interference
==PAGE:49==
shadow zone the barrier and shape of the waveguide would be impacting the IL. The
frequency were this impact seems to be most prevalent is the response at 72 Hz where
the weakest IL value was calculate. As one of the pathways was designed to have the
fundamental frequency of 70 Hz this does not fit with the theory from Section 2.4 that the
destructive interference would impact this frequency. The only way to describe this differ-
ence is that the length of this wave and the barrier shape must be producing a stronger
relationship with the pressure field than the pathway. Regardless, all of frequencies do
produce some type of reduction compared to the free-field, which means that the pathway
and shape of the barrier are all factors that are impacting the results.
Figure 5.19: 2 Hz resolution for waveguide model 9 at 5m from the barrier. More high
resolution results can be found in Appendix B.
How much each factor plays requires that these results be compared with those from
the closed waveguide. Figure 5.20 presents both the closed waveguide’s IL in the left
figure, and that of the barrier alone on the right, with both being compared to the open
waveguide. Here the earlier statement regarding the IL value at 72 Hz is confirmed as all
three simulated set ups show the same spike at this region of frequencies, which means
that a combination of the distances and barrier are the main factors impacting this fre-
quency. Each of these simulations also show that the resulting IL changes with relatively
larger variation between each frequency. This means that in all cases the barrier shape
has the biggest impact on the changes in the pressure field compared to the free-field
propagation. Whether the waveguide is open will not change the fact that some frequen-
cies will be effected more or less by the dimensions of the obstructing object and the
distance between the source and receiving positions. Like the diffraction theory suggests
in Section 2.2, within the shadow zone the impact of adding a barrier will produce a re-
duction in the sound pressure for almost all frequencies. All three versions of the barrier
at this distance produce negative IL meaning that the addition of a barrier will help re-
duce the noise from the highway. These figures also show that having the waveguide
open has a improved effect over both of the other options for part of the range of fre-
quencies calculated. Specifically, this improvement can be seen in the mid and higher
Examination of Wave Interference
41
==PAGE:50==
frequencies were the open waveguide shows improved reduction in IL over the other two
examples. Though with this resolution the change between frequencies is more drastic,
creating stronger changes in IL values from frequency to frequency. This idea that the
open waveguide is more helpful is not clearly visible within the lower frequencies as there
are some frequencies where a larger improvement can be seen by the barrier alone or
closed waveguide.
(a) The open waveguide model 9 compared
with the same waveguide closed at 5m.
(b) The open waveguide model 9 in comparison
to the barrier without any attachment at 5m.
Figure 5.20: Comparing the open waveguide model 9 with just the barrier and with the
waveguide closed for frequencies between 60 Hz- 1 kHz with a resolution of 2 Hz. More
comparisons at other other distances can be found in Appendix B
To better understand, in a more general way, how well the waveguide’s improvement is
in comparison to the closed guide or barrier, compiling the results into one third octave
bands would help show at what range this improvement could be valid. To do this it was
important to change the results from decibel to pressure before summing and averaging
these results. This is done since the decibel results are logarithmic and must be changed
to a linear form to properly combined individual frequency values. The one third octave
bands were made rectangular with the higher bound frequency value for each band being
summed to the higher frequency band, which would correspond to the lowest value in
that band. This removed any chance of a single value being calculated for two separate
bands. Figure 5.21 presents all three values in one third octave bands starting with 80
Hz and ending with 800 Hz. Even though the range of frequencies tested where between
60 Hz and 1 kHz, the 63 Hz and 1 kHz bands were not calculated. The reason for this
is due to the range of frequencies for both of these bands reaching beyond the values
simulated, and would create IL responses that would only contain some of the values
needed in each band.
Looking at Figure 5.21 the open waveguide has strong improvements compared with
the results from the closed waveguide as well as when the waveguide was not present.
Where this is not the case is in the lowest two bands measured. Within the 80 Hz and
100 Hz band the addition of these new paths are actually resulting in a weaker IL. This
indicates that the shape of the barrier is more important at mitigating the sound pressure
in these lower frequencies. It is possible that by the inclusion of these new pathways
there is an additional source that reduces the IL by increasing the pressure diffracting
from the top edge in a constructive way. This is only apparent in these lower bands. It
42
Examination of Wave Interference
==PAGE:51==
is also interesting to examine the 160 Hz band where the open and closed results are
almost similar. The open waveguide shows a small improvement, but as this region of
frequencies are not part of any odd multiples of the pathway’s fundamental this main
reduction in the pressure would be from the shape of the barrier and waveguide body.
Figure 5.21: Comparing the open waveguide model 9 to both the closed version and with
no guide attached to the barrier at 5m.
To see if these types of results are present beyond the shadow region of the barrier the
results from 19 m were calculated and also compiled into one third octave bands. It
should also be noted again that the position was chosen to avoid having distances that
are multiples of one and other. By doing this any frequencies with wavelengths impacted
by that specific distance would not affect the results for all positions tested. Figure 5.22
shows the same three comparisons at this new distance. At this region the impact of
the waveguide body shape becomes even more prominent. Only four out of the eleven
bands at this distance show an improvement made by the open pathways compared to the
closed waveguide. These improved bands do however correspond with the odd multiples
of the fundamental frequencies confirming again that the frequencies calculated from the
three pathways are creating a destructive interference. Though this also indicated that
once again the shape of the waveguide body has the greatest impact on the changes
seen in pressure field. This indicates that though the waveguide was designed to have
low fundamental frequencies, the impact of these pathways are actually improving the
higher odd multiples, but are not producing the same positive impact at these fundamental
frequencies. By having these lower fundamentals the size and shape of the waveguide
will be the driving factor in the IL at the lower frequencies, while the pathways will become
more dominant at the higher frequencies. This may be an indication that a better design
would focus on a set of higher fundamental frequencies, which would allow for a smaller
waveguide while also offering more pathways to increase the range of frequencies.
Examination of Wave Interference
43
==PAGE:52==
With all of the receiving positions being at the same height, the differences in position
can be used to see what characteristics can be seen in the near-field, mid-distances, and
far-field. The near-field was important to examine as noise has the strongest influence
near to the source, which is where the greatest influence in noise reduction should be
accomplished. But sound will also travel to farther positions when the noise level is high
enough, like during times when highway traffic consists of many vehicles that are traveling
at high speeds, or when the atmospheric conditions increase the propagation of the sound
pressure [13].
Figure 5.22: Comparing the open waveguide model 9 to both the closed version and with
no guide attached to the barrier at 19m.
To understand the changes between the near- and far-field multiple distances were cho-
sen to be simulated. Figure 5.23 presents the IL of the waveguide when open at every
distance examined for this waveguide in each of the third octave bands. At a close dis-
tance of 5 m from the barrier the results are impressive as every band of frequencies has
a strong IL with reductions all below negative 10 dB, excluding the 80 Hz band which is
only around 9 dB. The distance of 19 m shows that the IL is more frequency dependent
as the results fluctuate with a strong response in the 125 Hz band, but reduces to about
negative 2 dB in the 400 Hz region. This distance seems to be extremely dependent on
the frequencies as the higher frequency bands show an improvement in the IL. It has
already been discussed that the majority of these reductions can be contributed to the
shape of the waveguide rather than the added pathways producing destructive interfer-
ence, at least when referring to the lower frequency range.
44
Examination of Wave Interference
==PAGE:53==
Figure 5.23: Insertion loss in one third octave bands produced by waveguide model 5 at
five separate positions.
A different trend entirely can be seen in the far distances, above 100 m, where all three
positions examined produce similar changes with an very poor IL in the higher frequency
bands. Above 200 Hz the IL produced by the waveguide and barrier is no longer negative,
and that means that the inclusion of this large object actually increases the sound pressure
level (SPL) at these positions. This increase is likely a result of many different factors at
play in the calculations performed by OpenBEM. As the ground surface is almost fully
reflective for these simulations the diffracted wave from the top of the waveguide reflects
off of the ground and produces an image source which will propagate towards the far field
with no additional absorption or obstruction.
Along with the direct wave from the source, the pressure wave from the exit point of
the waveguide, and this new image source, all of these separate pressure waves are
creating a combination of constructive interference. So it is not unreasonable to expect
with greater distance these sources would combine to present a stronger SPL compared
with just the single source in the free-field. Additionally, the atmospheric conditions used
in OpenBEM remain the same at all measurement points, which would not be the case
for real conditions where wind and temperature changes would play a factor in how the
pressure wave changes at farther distances.
This strange shift can be seen with more clarity in the Figure 5.24, where the high fre-
quency resolution compares the strongest response in the near-field with the closest far-
field measurement where this positive IL appears. These results show that whether in
the near- or far-field many of the same trends in frequency response are seen for each
position with only the over all levels changing at the higher frequencies. This is a good in-
dication that the simulated results show the waveguide design is still impacting the same
frequencies regardless of distance. It also confirms that the change in IL must be in
Examination of Wave Interference
45
==PAGE:54==
response to the parameters of the simulation itself. That with the increase in distance
and addition of the ground reflection beyond the barrier, the interference produced trends
more in the way of constructive rather than destructive interference. Once a specific dis-
tance is reach the added reflections produce values that appear to be a positive insertion
loss compared to the calculations from the free-field.
Figure 5.24: Comparing the insertion loss from the waveguide at 5m and 106m.
Only looking at the results from the open waveguide shows that the change is related to
some type of calculation issue, which does not indicate whether the added waveguide
is improving the IL at the far distance. Similar to the results comparing the near and
middle distance positions, to better understand these results seen in the far-field it is
helpful to compare them to the same positions for the barrier when the waveguide is
closed or not present. Figure 5.25 shows this type of comparison at 106 m, which is the
closest distance simulated where this diverging trend is apparent. Here there appears to
be further indication that the positive IL values are caused by the calculations performed
within the simulation. Additionally to confirming this, it can also be seen that the open
waveguide does show improvements over the other two set ups. In every third octave
band, outside of the 160 Hz band where the waveguide body shape has already been
proven to be the major factor contributing to the IL results, the open waveguide shows
some improvements. Another point of interest is the difference seen in the far-field for the
lower frequencies. Where it was apparent that closer to the barrier the waveguide body
shape had a better IL compared to the open pathways, now the opposite is seen in the
far-field. At this distance and with the exit of the waveguide facing upward the fundamental
frequencies are able to produce enough destructive interference to disrupt the pressure
field.
46
Examination of Wave Interference
==PAGE:55==
Figure 5.25: Comparing the insertion loss in one third octave bands for waveguide model
9 open, close, and not attached. More third octave comparisons at other positions can be
found in the Appendix 7.
5.4
Scale Model Validation
To better support the findings of the OpenBEM simulation it was necessary to perform
a validation test using another method. As was presented in Chapter 4.2 that a scale
model was made of a simple two pathway waveguide attached to a piece of wood acting
as the highway noise barrier. The results used in this section are presented with compar-
ison to the same design simulated in OpenBEM. To do the comparison it was important
to take the measured results from the controlled free-field measurement, were only the
equipment used for the test and the floorboard used as the ground in between the parallel
barriers were present in the chamber, as well as the results from the parallel barriers and
waveguide attachment to find the IL produced by the included objects.
Unfortunately, it was found that the earlier round of tests produced inconsistent results
most likely due to the test being run on different days. With the spark source being volatile
in the way it produced sound, it is possible for each day to have a different level of pressure
produced when the source discharged. Much of the equipment also needed to be reset
for each day and the precision in the set up could have been lacking in consistency due
to human error in measuring the distances. Another issue with spreading out the testing
days would be the possible change in the atmospheric temperature and humidity which
would impact the way in which the source would react and how that sound pressure would
propagate in the air. Figure 5.26b shows the comparison of one of the earlier measure-
ment results and the same results presented by the simulation. Note how the IL from the
scale model shows both a reduction and an increase depending on the frequency. Since
the distance as a full scale representation is only 4.5 m from the barrier this result should
show a strong IL as in theory this position would fall within the shadow zone of the barrier
2.2.
Examination of Wave Interference
47
==PAGE:56==
(a) Resulting sound pressure level from the
scale model test with the parallel barriers com-
pared to the levels with only the floor board.
(b) Resulting insertion loss from the parallel
barrier scale model test compared with the sim-
ulated results from OpenBEM
Figure 5.26: Scale model test results for the parallel barriers with the receiver position at
4.5 m from the barrier.
By examining Figure 5.26a, showing just the SPL comparison between the tests pre-
formed with and without the barriers, it is clear to see that there is a difference in the
measurement that can be contributed to these possible problems as all of the free-field
SPL measurements are less than the parallel barrier result. This should not be the case
as the direct sound should be stronger for the majority of the frequencies since there are
no objects disrupting the direct pathway of the sound. This is also the simple example
using just the parallel barriers, and as it has been confirmed by many studies the addition
of a barrier should reduce the SPL when the receiver is this close to the barrier [20].
Luckily, an additional set of tests were conducted with the waveguide attached to the bar-
rier on the same day as the free-field measurements and these results show a much more
expected response pattern. Figure 5.27 presents the results at the same position of 4.5
m as the earlier parallel barriers, but show very different results. When looking at the
SPL between the free-field measurements and those with the barriers and waveguide at-
tachment, in Figure 5.27a, the relationship makes more sense. In this case all frequency
bands of interest show that the addition of obstructing objects between the source and
receiver produce a reduction in the SPL. Confirming that the relationship between these
two tests produced measured pressure that fit the expectations. This meant that it was
possible to compare the IL from these scale model test with the response found from the
OpenBEM simulation. These results are shown in Figure 5.27b and present some inter-
esting similarities and differences between the two types of IL data. The main similarity
that helps further confirm that the scale model results were collected properly is the fact
that both results show a range of IL between negative 14 dB and negative 4 dB. Not only
does this allow for the two sets of data to be compared, but that the addition of the barrier
and waveguide produces a similar range of reduction in the simulation as in the scale
model. This helps with confirming that the addition of an obstructing object will create a
reduction in the SPL behind the barrier.
48
Examination of Wave Interference
==PAGE:57==
(a) Resulting sound pressure level from the
scale model test with the waveguide attached
compared to the free-field levels with only the
floor board.
(b) Resulting insertion loss from the barriers
with waveguide scale model test at 4.5 m com-
pared with the simulated results from the same
design calculated in OpenBEM.
Figure 5.27: Scale model test results for the waveguide attachment with the receiver
position at 4.5 m from the barrier.
Some of the differences are in how the results seem to show a shift in the frequencies
of impact with the simulated results having a stronger reduction a third octave below that
of the scale model. This is noticeable in the lower frequencies and may be a result of
the different types of sources used. As the simulation is performed in a two-dimensional
plane using a line-source the sound path propagates in a different way to the source
used in the scale model. The scale model was using a spark source which acted more
like a point source, radiating sound pressure in three-dimensions. With these different
types of sources the longer wavelengths may have come into additional contact with other
elements within the scale model, such as the dividing partitions used in the waveguide. It
is also possible that the atmospheric conditions are not the same throughout the testing,
compared with the simulation, were these conditions never changed. Other differences
between IL from the scale model test and that of the simulation are more expected. In
the higher frequency range there is a larger improvement in IL over the simulation, which
was expected to occur as the materials used in the tests are not completely ridged. Unlike
the simulation, were the barrier and waveguide elements are fully reflecting the sound
pressure, the scale model consisted of wood pieces that have a much more absorptive
response. This along with the floorboard would be expected to absorb more sound at
higher frequencies. The back barrier which did not include a waveguide attachment was
the only wood piece that had varnish applied, which would have been closer to the rigid
bodies used in the simulation.
Additional test from 6 m and 10 m were also conducted and are compared with the simu-
lated results at the same distance in Figure 5.28. Figure 5.28a shows some of the same
trend between the 4.5 m distance and the measured IL at 6 m, but with a much lower
response in all the frequency bands. The higher frequencies present similarities to the
simulated IL between 200 Hz and 500 Hz were the difference between the two is only
around 1 dB. Another comparison between 4.5 m and 6 m can be seen in the strong re-
duction of one specific third octave band, which is 500 Hz for 4.5 m and 630 Hz for 6 m. It
is difficult to determine what is the cause of this reduction, but it may be due to the waveg-
uide in the scale model not being fully sealed which could allow an additional path for the
Examination of Wave Interference
49
==PAGE:58==
sound to travel. This new path could have possibly added to the interference around this
region of frequencies, which might shift based on the distance from the barrier.
The weakest comparison between these waveguide scale model tests and the numerical
simulated results are seen in Figure 5.28b. These results from 10 m have a much larger
difference in IL, and are present in the higher frequencies examined. The changes in
these results are most likely a direct result of the lack of ground reflections in the scale
model. Since the floorboard was only used between the barriers, there was now object
behind the barrier for the pressure wave to reflect off of. Similar to the results from the
mid and far distance simulations of the waveguide model 9, the scale model designed
waveguide that was simulated in OpenBEM had some of the calculated pressure at the
receiver being influenced by the additional reflected sound pressure from the ground.
Without a ground present in the scale model these higher frequencies would have no
additional reflection and thus the IL response would be much higher as the distance of
the receiver increases.
(a) Resulting insertion loss from the barriers
with waveguide scale model test at 6 m com-
pared with the simulated results from the same
design calculated in OpenBEM.
(b) Resulting insertion loss from the barriers
with waveguide scale model test at 10 m com-
pared with the simulated results from the same
design calculated in OpenBEM.
Figure 5.28: Scale model test results for the waveguide attachment compared with the
simulated results. Additional figures for scale model SPL can be found in B.
Excluding the poor testing set up from the earlier results and understanding the impact that
distance would have on the comparison between the simulation and scale model tests, the
scale model shows that the OpenBEM numerical simulation does provide relatively similar
results as the scale model. The scale model indicated that the simulation offers some real
world results that can be interpreted provided that the assumptions used in OpenBEM are
full understood. It can be stated that the impact from the waveguide is valid specifically
when comparing at close positions to the barrier. Once the receiver position exceeds
the shadow region higher frequencies will be impacted by the ground reflections and an
additional round of scale model test would need to be done with the ground reflections
behind the barrier to validate the simulation at further distances.
50
Examination of Wave Interference
==PAGE:59==
6
Conclusion
At the conclusion of this study the addition of a waveguide attached to the top segment of
a highway barrier showed some promising possibilities. During early designs containing
the exit of the pathway in the rear of the barrier, strong regions of frequency specific
interference were viewed. This could be beneficial in focusing noise reduction within
regions of importance behind the barrier, such as homes with yards next to such barriers.
These results were found to be frequency dependent in nature. With more pathways it
was possible to see more frequencies impacting regions behind the barrier in similar ways,
and presents a possibility that a more complex design could produce this focused effect
for a larger range of frequencies. As this study wanted to focus on designing a waveguide
with pathways corresponding to low frequencies with the intent of attempting to improve
the insertion loss at these frequencies. The results found that this was only apparent
very close to the barrier or at far distances. When examining the middle distance of 19 m
the shape of the waveguide ended up being the biggest contributor to the insertion loss
improvement compared with the barrier alone. The best results from the open waveguide
for all positions were found within the higher frequencies were the pathways did present
an improvement over the closed waveguide. Many of the comparisons showed that the
shape of the waveguide would be the largest factor in improving the insertion loss, with
the open waveguide pathways making either a small improvement or deterioration for
each frequency. By only having three pathways tested in the simulation the range of
frequencies was not sufficient enough to produce improved results in all of the frequency
bands studied, as many frequencies were between the odd multiples of these fundamental
frequencies. This leads to the decision that there is no conclusive relationship that shows
a substantial improvement by the addition of these pathways. More data needs to be
examined at additional positions and with a wider frequencies range, along with increasing
the number of pathways in the waveguide to clearly state whether the wave interference
alone is a valuable solution to improving barrier insertion loss. This study showed some
promising signs that there are some positive impacts from this type of attachment, but
ultimately the results do not show a clear enough improvement to verify the use of wave
interference for this of application.
Examination of Wave Interference
51
==PAGE:60==
52
Examination of Wave Interference
==PAGE:61==
7
Future Studies
At the conclusion of this project there are still many questions left about the impact that
wave interference can have on improving highway noise barriers. Within these simula-
tions of a three pathway waveguide attached to the top segment of a noise barrier some
improvements were achieved that can be attributed to the waveguide’s main function. To
continue from the end of this study more positions could have been examined to under-
stand at what point between the near-field and far-field do the higher frequency bands
begin to shift from the negative insertion loss to that of the positive results found in this
study. This could help indicate which elements of the design or simulation are the biggest
impact on this change. Further distances could have also been simulated, as the com-
putational power would not change when applying the boundary element method. With
this method a distance of one kilometer can be simulated within the same time-frame as
any other region of interest. By looking into further distances more could be understood
about how successful this type of noise reduction is for place well beyond neighborhoods
that are near to these highways.
Additionally, changes in the waveguide design could be compared with each other to bet-
ter understand how the different elements making up the waveguide impact the IL behind
these barriers. By adjusting the exit position and size of the opening, more can be learned
about the directional impact of the wave interference at varying distances from the bar-
rier. This could allow for the possibility to customize waveguides to focus the destructive
interference in regions behind the barrier that may request more improvements. Places
like schools and homes near to the barrier might have improved noise reduction with the
waveguide focused on this near field. While other designs, such as the top exit might be
better suited for improving the reduction at further distance.
Additional studies can look into increasing the number of pathways within the waveguide
to have more frequencies impacted by pathways. By adding more pathways two sepa-
rate changes can be looked into. The first being more pathways will allow for a higher
resolution of frequencies being impacted by the waveguide. Instead of just having three
frequencies separated by 10 and 20 Hz, the same range could have ten pathways produc-
ing frequencies separated by 3 Hz. A second study of interest for increasing the number
of pathways would be to have a larger range of frequencies being impacted. Because
only the odd multiples are producing destructive interference, the even multiples will the-
oretically be producing the opposite effect. With more pathways the even multiples can
also be a fundamental frequency for a different pathway. With these new pathways it
could be assumed that the adverse impact could be negated.
These other studies would improve the understanding of how wave interference impacts
the free-field sound and if this top edge attachment is a valuable solution to the reduction
of noise from highways. Many of these proposed studies were not examined in this report
based primarily on time restrictions. In the case of increasing the number of pathways,
this would increase the computational load for the OpenBEM simulation and would most
likely require much stronger computing power than what was available during this specific
study. Wave interference as a means for improving the IL of highway noise barrier does
show some promise, and with more studies this type of solution may be beneficial in
providing an alternative for helping reach acceptable noise reduction for barrier located in
urban areas.
Examination of Wave Interference
53
==PAGE:62==
54
Examination of Wave Interference
==PAGE:63==
Bibliography
[1]
Houthuijs et al. “Health implication of road, railway and aircraft noise in the European
Union : Provisional results based on the 2nd round of noise mapping”. In: (Dec. 12,
2014).
[2]
L. Fritschi et al. “Burden of Disease from Environmental Noise: Quantification of
Healthy Life Years Lost in Europe”. In: WHO Regional Office for Europe eBooks
(Jan. 1, 2011). URL: http://research-repository.griffith.edu.au/handle/10072/45723.
[3]
K. Wagner. Building the Wall: Highway Sound Barriers and the Evolution of Noise.
Dec. 13, 2016. URL: https://99percentinvisible.org/article/building-wall-highway-
sound-barriers-evolution-noise/.
[4]
H. Bendtsen. Noise Barrier Design: Danish and Some European Examples. UCPRC-
RP-2010-04. May 2010. URL: https://dot.ca.gov/-/media/dot-media/programs/
research- innovation- system- information/documents/final- reports/ucprc- rp- 2010-
04.pdf.
[5]
M. Foraster et al. “Exposure to road traffic noise and cognitive development in
schoolchildren in Barcelona, Spain: A population-based cohort study”. In: PLOS
Medicine 19.6 (June 2, 2022). Ed. by Stephen Stansfeld, e1004001. DOI: 10.1371/
journal.pmed.1004001. URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1371/journal.pmed.1004001.
[6]
T. Johansson. “Wavebreaker - a new innovative interference sound damper for rail-
way noise”. In: (2021).
[7]
D. Pesendorfer. “Cross-national convergence of traffic noise policies”. In: Under-
standing Environmental Policy Convergence (Jan. 9, 2014), pp. 140–174. DOI: 10.
1017/cbo9781139795357.006. URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/cbo9781139795357.
006.
[8]
Noise regulation Law No. 98 of 1968. | UNEP Law and Environment Assistance Plat-
form. June 10, 1968. URL: https://leap.unep.org/countries/jp/national-legislation/
noise-regulation-law-no-98-1968.
[9]
United States Congress House Committee on Interstate et al. Legislative History
of Noise Control Act of 1972 (H. Rept. 92-842 and H.R. 11021, as Reported). U.S.
Government Printing Office, 1972.
[10]
M. Fessenden. Hollywood Asked for Freeway Noise Barriers First. Dec. 2, 2014.
URL: https://www.smithsonianmag.com/smart-news/movie-studios-and-hollywood-
bowl-asked-freeway-noise-barriers-first-180953510/.
[11]
F. Jacobsen et al. Fundamentals of Acoustics and Noise Control. Technical Univer-
sity of Denmark, Nov. 2011.
[12]
T. F. W. Embleton, J. E. Piercy, and G. A. Daigle. “Effective flow resistivity of ground
surfaces determined by acoustical measurements”. In: The Journal of the Acoustical
Society of America 74.4 (Oct. 1983), pp. 1239–1244. DOI: 10.1121/1.390029. URL:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1121/1.390029.
[13]
T. F. W. Embleton. “Tutorial on sound propagation outdoors”. In: The Journal of the
Acoustical Society of America 100.1 (July 1996), pp. 31–48. DOI: 10.1121/1.415879.
URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1121/1.415879.
[14]
U.S. Department of Transportation and A. L. Hastings. TNM Version 3.1 Traffic
Noise Model (TNM): Technical Manual. Federal Highway Administration, Sept. 1,
2021.
Examination of Wave Interference
55
==PAGE:64==
[15]
D. C. Hothersall, D. H. Crombie, and S. N. Chandler-Wilde. “The performance of t-
profile and associated noise barriers”. In: 32.4 (1991), pp. 269–287. DOI: 10.1016/
0003-682x(91)90075-p. URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/0003-682x(91)90075-p.
[16]
G.R. Watts, D.H. Crombie, and D.C. Hothersall. “Acoustic Performance Of New
Designs Of Traffic Noise Barriers: Full Scale Tests”. In: Journal of Sound and Vi-
bration 177.3 (Oct. 1994), pp. 289–305. DOI: 10.1006/jsvi.1994.1435. URL: http:
//dx.doi.org/10.1006/jsvi.1994.1435.
[17]
Dunn et al. Springer Handbook of Acoustics (Springer Handbooks). 2nd ed. 2014.
Springer, Mar. 31, 2015.
[18]
Z. Maekawa. “Noise reduction by screens”. In: Applied Acoustics 1.3 (July 1968),
pp. 157–173. DOI: 10.1016/0003-682x(68)90020-0. URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/
0003-682x(68)90020-0.
[19]
P. Menounou. “A correction to Maekawa’s curve for the insertion loss behind barri-
ers”. In: The Journal of the Acoustical Society of America 110.4 (Oct. 2001), pp. 1828–
1838. DOI: 10.1121/1.1398050. URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1121/1.1398050.
[20]
W. Bowlby and Louis F. Cohn. “A model for insertion loss degradation for parallel
highway noise barriers”. In: The Journal of the Acoustical Society of America 80.3
(Sept. 1986), pp. 855–868. DOI: 10.1121/1.393909. URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1121/
1.393909.
[21]
G.R. Watts. “Acoustic performance of parallel traffic noise barriers”. In: Applied
Acoustics 47.2 (Feb. 1996), pp. 95–119. DOI: 10 . 1016 / 0003 - 682x(95 ) 00031 - 4.
URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/0003-682x(95)00031-4.
[22]
U.J. Kurze and G.S. Anderson. “Sound attenuation by barriers”. In: Applied Acous-
tics 4.1 (Jan. 1971), pp. 35–53. DOI: 10.1016/0003-682x(71)90024-7. URL: http:
//dx.doi.org/10.1016/0003-682x(71)90024-7.
[23]
M. R. Monazzam and S. M. B. Fard. “Performance of passive and reactive profiled
median barriers in traffic noise reduction”. In: Journal of Zhejiang University-Science
A 12.1 (Jan. 2011), pp. 78–86. DOI: 10.1631/jzus.a1000065. URL: http://dx.doi.org/
10.1631/jzus.a1000065.
[24]
M. R. Monazzam and S. M. B. Fard. “Impacts of Different Median Barrier Shapes on
a Roadside Environmental Noise Screen”. In: Environmental Engineering Science
28.6 (June 2011), pp. 435–441. DOI: 10.1089/ees.2010.0269. URL: http://dx.doi.
org/10.1089/ees.2010.0269.
[25]
R. W. Hendriks. “Field Evaluation of Acoustical Performance of Parallel Highway
Noise Barriers in California”. In: Transportation Research Record 1366 (Jan. 1,
1992). URL: https://trid.trb.org/view/371512.
[26]
J. F.W. Herschel. “LXIII. On the absorption of light by coloured media, viewed in con-
nexion with the undulatory theory”. In: The London, Edinburgh, and Dublin Philo-
sophical Magazine and Journal of Science 3.18 (Dec. 1833), pp. 401–412. DOI:
10.1080/14786443308648217. URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/14786443308648217.
[27]
G. Quincke. “Ueber Interferenzapparate für Schallwellen”. In: Annalen der Physik
und Chemie 204.6 (1866), pp. 177–192. DOI: 10.1002/andp.18662040602. URL:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/andp.18662040602.
[28]
G. W. Stewart. “The Theory of the Herschel-Quincke Tube”. In: Physical Review
31.4 (Apr. 1, 1928), pp. 696–698. DOI: 10.1103/physrev.31.696. URL: http://dx.doi.
org/10.1103/physrev.31.696.
[29]
R. Hallez and R. Burdisso. “The Herschel-Quincke tube concept as a noise con-
trol device for turbofan engines”. In: 39th Aerospace Sciences Meeting and Exhibit
(Jan. 8, 2001). DOI: 10.2514/6.2001-816. URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.2514/6.2001-
816.
56
Examination of Wave Interference
==PAGE:65==
[30]
K. Mizuno, H. Sekiguchi, and K. Iida. “Research on a Noise Control Device : 1st
Report, Fundamental Principle of the Device”. In: Bulletin of JSME 27.229 (1984),
pp. 1499–1505. DOI: 10.1299/jsme1958.27.1499. URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1299/
jsme1958.27.1499.
[31]
H. Sekiguchi, K. Mizuno, and K. Iida. “Research on a Noise Control Device : 3rd
Report, The Fundamental Design of the Device (2)”. In: Bulletin of JSME 29.253
(1986), pp. 2260–2265. DOI: 10.1299/jsme1958.29.2260. URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.
1299/jsme1958.29.2260.
[32]
N. Atalla and Franck Sgard. Finite Element and Boundary Methods in Structural
Acoustics and Vibration. 1st ed. CRC Press, July 26, 2017.
[33]
S. Quirós y Alpera et al. “A BEM approach to validate a model for predicting sound
propagation over non-flat terrain”. In: Applied Acoustics 64.8 (Aug. 2003), pp. 781–
791. DOI: 10.1016/s0003-682x(03)00033-1. URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/s0003-
682x(03)00033-1.
[34]
H. A. Schenck. “Improved Integral Formulation for Acoustic Radiation Problems”.
In: The Journal of the Acoustical Society of America 44.1 (July 1968), pp. 41–58.
DOI: 10.1121/1.1911085. URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1121/1.1911085.
[35]
V. C. Henriquez and P. M. Juhl. “OpenBEM - An open source Boundary Element
Method software in Acoustics”. In: Internoise 2010 (Jan. 1, 2010), pp. 1–10.
[36]
Q. Li et al. “Comparative Analysis of Different Types of Sources on the Performance
of Rigid Noise Barriers on Rigid Ground Using Analytical Formulae, a 2.5-D BEM
Method and Scale Modelling Tests”. In: Acta Acustica united with Acustica 105.6
(Nov. 1, 2019), pp. 987–999. DOI: 10.3813/aaa.919379. URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.
3813/aaa.919379.
[37]
R.K. Pirinchieva. “The influence of barrier size on its sound diffraction”. In: Journal of
Sound and Vibration 148.2 (July 1991), pp. 183–192. DOI: 10.1016/0022-460x(91)
90570-a. URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/0022-460x(91)90570-a.
[38]
SmartDraw. SmartDraw - Create Flowcharts, Floor Plans, and Other Diagrams on
Any Device. URL: https://www.smartdraw.com/.
[39]
dBmap.net Noise Mapping Tool. URL: https://noisetools.net/dbmap/.
[40]
R. Wyber. “The design of a spark discharge acoustic impulse generator”. In: IEEE
Transactions on Acoustics, Speech, and Signal Processing 23.2 (Apr. 1975), pp. 157–
162. DOI: 10.1109/tassp.1975.1162666. URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/tassp.1975.
1162666.
[41]
Dirac Research AB. Dirac Room Acoustics Software. URL: https://www.dirac.com/.
Examination of Wave Interference
57
==PAGE:66==
58
Examination of Wave Interference
==PAGE:67==
A
Appendix A
The appendix A is a collection of all the designs and single frequency mesh plots used
in OpenBem. Each of the waveguide shapes are shown below. Note that some do not
have mesh plots of the insertion loss, while some others have many near field results.
The final model was run without these plots as the calculations were conducted in a high
resolution of 2 Hz and thus only the insertion vs frequencies between 60 and 1000 Hz
where calculated and plotted.
A.1
Waveguide Model 1
Due to mistakes made by the author in the early stages of this study no results for individ-
ual frequencies using this waveguide design were saved for presentation in this report.
This error was corrected for the future models of the waveguide.
Figure A.1: Body shape of waveguide model 1.
Examination of Wave Interference
59
==PAGE:68==
A.2
Waveguide Model 2
Figure A.2: Body shape of waveguide model 2.
Figure A.3: The insertions loss of waveguide model 2 at 63Hz.
60
Examination of Wave Interference
==PAGE:69==
Figure A.4: The insertions loss of waveguide model 2 at 80Hz.
Figure A.5: The insertions loss of waveguide model 2 at 100Hz.
Figure A.6: The insertions loss of waveguide model 2 at 125 Hz.
Examination of Wave Interference
61
==PAGE:70==
Figure A.7: The insertions loss of waveguide model 2 at 160 Hz.
Figure A.8: The insertions loss of waveguide model 2 at 200Hz.
Figure A.9: The insertions loss of waveguide model 2 at 250 Hz.
62
Examination of Wave Interference
==PAGE:71==
Figure A.10: The insertions loss of waveguide model 2 at 315 Hz.
Figure A.11: The insertions loss of waveguide model 2 at 400 Hz.
Figure A.12: The insertions loss of waveguide model 2 at 500 Hz.
Examination of Wave Interference
63
==PAGE:72==
A.3
Waveguide Model 3
Figure A.13: Body shape of waveguide model 3.
64
Examination of Wave Interference
==PAGE:73==
Figure A.14: The insertions loss of waveguide model 3 at 100 Hz.
Figure A.15: The insertions loss of waveguide model 3 at 125 Hz.
Figure A.16: The insertions loss of waveguide model 3 at 200 Hz.
Examination of Wave Interference
65
==PAGE:74==
Figure A.17: The insertions loss of waveguide model 3 at 250 Hz.
Figure A.18: The insertions loss of waveguide model 3 at 310 Hz.
Figure A.19: The insertions loss of waveguide model 3 at 315 Hz.
66
Examination of Wave Interference
==PAGE:75==
A.4
Waveguide Model 4
Figure A.20: Body shape of waveguide model 4.
Examination of Wave Interference
67
==PAGE:76==
Figure A.21: The insertions loss of waveguide model 4 at 240 Hz.
Figure A.22: The insertions loss of waveguide model 4 at 250 Hz.
Figure A.23: The insertions loss of waveguide model 4 at 500 Hz.
68
Examination of Wave Interference
==PAGE:77==
A.5
Waveguide Model 5
Figure A.24: Body shape of waveguide model 5.
Figure A.25: Closed shape of waveguide model 5.
Examination of Wave Interference
69
==PAGE:78==
(a) Waveguide model 5 insertion loss at 240 Hz.
(b) Closed waveguide model 5 insertion loss at 240 Hz.
Figure A.26: Comparison of the open and closed waveguide model 5 at 240 Hz.
(a) Waveguide model 5 insertion loss at 250 Hz.
(b) Closed waveguide model 5 insertion loss at 250 Hz.
Figure A.27: Comparison of the open and closed waveguide model 5 at 250 Hz.
70
Examination of Wave Interference
==PAGE:79==
(a) Waveguide model 5 insertion loss at 500 Hz.
(b) Closed waveguide model 5 insertion loss at 500 Hz.
Figure A.28: Comparison of the open and closed waveguide model 5 at 500 Hz.
Examination of Wave Interference
71
==PAGE:80==
A.6
Waveguide Model 6
Figure A.29: Body shape of waveguide model 6.
Figure A.30: Closed shape of waveguide model 6.
72
Examination of Wave Interference
==PAGE:81==
(a) Waveguide model 6 insertion loss at 125 Hz.
(b) Closed waveguide model 6 insertion loss at 125 Hz.
Figure A.31: Comparison of the open and closed waveguide model 6 at 125 Hz.
(a) Waveguide model 6 insertion loss at 160 Hz.
(b) Closed waveguide model 6 insertion loss at 160 Hz.
Figure A.32: Comparison of the open and closed waveguide model 6 at 160 Hz.
Examination of Wave Interference
73
==PAGE:82==
(a) Waveguide model 6 insertion loss at 250 Hz.
(b) Closed waveguide model 6 insertion loss at 250 Hz.
Figure A.33: Comparison of the open and closed waveguide model 6 at 250 Hz.
(a) Waveguide model 6 insertion loss at 315 Hz.
(b) Closed waveguide model 6 insertion loss at 315 Hz.
Figure A.34: Comparison of the open and closed waveguide model 6 at 315 Hz.
74
Examination of Wave Interference
==PAGE:83==
(a) Waveguide model 6 insertion loss at 500 Hz.
(b) Closed waveguide model 6 insertion loss at 500 Hz.
Figure A.35: Comparison of the open and closed waveguide model 6 at 500 Hz.
Examination of Wave Interference
75
==PAGE:84==
A.7
Waveguide Model 7
Figure A.36: Body shape of waveguide model 7.
Figure A.37: Closed shape of waveguide model 7.
76
Examination of Wave Interference
==PAGE:85==
(a) Waveguide model 7 insertion loss at 63 Hz.
(b) Closed waveguide model 7 insertion loss at 63 Hz.
Figure A.38: Comparison of the open and closed waveguide model 7 at 63 Hz.
(a) Waveguide model 7 insertion loss at 80 Hz.
(b) Closed waveguide model 7 insertion loss at 80 Hz.
Figure A.39: Comparison of the open and closed waveguide model 7 at 80 Hz.
Examination of Wave Interference
77
==PAGE:86==
(a) Waveguide model 7 insertion loss at 90 Hz.
(b) Closed waveguide model 7 insertion loss at 90 Hz.
Figure A.40: Comparison of the open and closed waveguide model 7 at 90 Hz.
(a) Waveguide model 7 insertion loss at 63 Hz.
(b) Closed waveguide model 7 insertion loss at 100 Hz.
Figure A.41: Comparison of the open and closed waveguide model 7 at 100 Hz.
78
Examination of Wave Interference
==PAGE:87==
(a) Waveguide model 7 insertion loss at 125 Hz.
(b) Closed waveguide model 7 insertion loss at 125 Hz.
Figure A.42: Comparison of the open and closed waveguide model 7 at 125 Hz.
(a) Waveguide model 7 insertion loss at 130 Hz.
(b) Closed waveguide model 7 insertion loss at 130 Hz.
Figure A.43: Comparison of the open and closed waveguide model 7 at 130 Hz.
Examination of Wave Interference
79
==PAGE:88==
(a) Waveguide model 7 insertion loss at 150 Hz.
(b) Closed waveguide model 7 insertion loss at 150 Hz.
Figure A.44: Comparison of the open and closed waveguide model 7 at 150 Hz.
(a) Waveguide model 7 insertion loss at 160 Hz.
(b) Closed waveguide model 7 insertion loss at 160 Hz.
Figure A.45: Comparison of the open and closed waveguide model 7 at 160 Hz.
80
Examination of Wave Interference
==PAGE:89==
(a) Waveguide model 7 insertion loss at 200 Hz.
(b) Closed waveguide model 7 insertion loss at 200 Hz.
Figure A.46: Comparison of the open and closed waveguide model 7 at 200 Hz.
(a) Waveguide model 7 insertion loss at 250 Hz.
(b) Closed waveguide model 7 insertion loss at 250 Hz.
Figure A.47: Comparison of the open and closed waveguide model 7 at 250 Hz.
Examination of Wave Interference
81
==PAGE:90==
(a) Waveguide model 7 insertion loss at 270 Hz.
(b) Closed waveguide model 7 insertion loss at 270 Hz.
Figure A.48: Comparison of the open and closed waveguide model 7 at 270 Hz.
(a) Waveguide model 7 insertion loss at 300 Hz.
(b) Closed waveguide model 7 insertion loss at 300 Hz.
Figure A.49: Comparison of the open and closed waveguide model 7 at 300 Hz.
82
Examination of Wave Interference
==PAGE:91==
(a) Waveguide model 7 insertion loss at 315 Hz.
(b) Closed waveguide model 7 insertion loss at 315 Hz.
Figure A.50: Comparison of the open and closed waveguide model 7 at 315 Hz.
(a) Waveguide model 7 insertion loss at 390 Hz.
(b) Closed waveguide model 7 insertion loss at 390 Hz.
Figure A.51: Comparison of the open and closed waveguide model 7 at 390 Hz.
Examination of Wave Interference
83
==PAGE:92==
(a) Waveguide model 7 insertion loss at 400 Hz.
(b) Closed waveguide model 7 insertion loss at 400 Hz.
Figure A.52: Comparison of the open and closed waveguide model 7 at 400 Hz.
(a) Waveguide model 7 insertion loss at 500 Hz.
(b) Closed waveguide model 7 insertion loss at 500 Hz.
Figure A.53: Comparison of the open and closed waveguide model 7 at 500 Hz.
84
Examination of Wave Interference
==PAGE:93==
A.8
Waveguide Model 8
Figure A.54: Body shape of waveguide model 8.
Figure A.55: Body shape of waveguide model 8.
Examination of Wave Interference
85
==PAGE:94==
(a) Open waveguide model 8 insertion loss at
70 Hz.
(b) Closed waveguide model 8 insertion loss at
70 Hz.
Figure A.56: Comparison of the open and closed waveguide model 8 at 70 Hz.
(a) Open waveguide model 8 insertion loss at
80 Hz.
(b) Closed waveguide model 8 insertion loss at
80 Hz.
Figure A.57: Comparison of the open and closed waveguide model 8 at 80 Hz.
86
Examination of Wave Interference
==PAGE:95==
(a) Open waveguide model 8 insertion loss at
100 Hz.
(b) Closed waveguide model 8 insertion loss at
100 Hz.
Figure A.58: Comparison of the open and closed waveguide model 8 at 100 Hz.
(a) Open waveguide model 8 insertion loss at
150 Hz.
(b) Closed waveguide model 8 insertion loss at
150 Hz.
Figure A.59: Comparison of the open and closed waveguide model 8 at 150 Hz.
Examination of Wave Interference
87
==PAGE:96==
(a) Open waveguide model 8 insertion loss at
150 Hz.
(b) Closed waveguide model 8 insertion loss at
210 Hz.
Figure A.60: Comparison of the open and closed waveguide model 8 at 210 Hz.
(a) Oen waveguide model 8 insertion loss at
240 Hz.
(b) Closed waveguide model 8 insertion loss at
240 Hz.
Figure A.61: Comparison of the open and closed waveguide model 8 at 240 Hz.
88
Examination of Wave Interference
==PAGE:97==
(a) Open waveguide model 8 insertion loss at
150 Hz.
(b) Closed waveguide model 8 insertion loss at
250 Hz.
Figure A.62: Comparison of the open and closed waveguide model 8 at 250 Hz.
(a) Open waveguide model 8 insertion loss at
300 Hz.
(b) Closed waveguide model 8 insertion loss at
300 Hz.
Figure A.63: Comparison of the open and closed waveguide model 8 at 300 Hz.
Examination of Wave Interference
89
==PAGE:98==
(a) Open waveguide model 8 insertion loss at
315 Hz.
(b) Closed waveguide model 8 insertion loss at
315 Hz.
Figure A.64: Comparison of the open and closed waveguide model 8 at 315 Hz.
(a) Open waveguide model 8 insertion loss at
350 Hz.
(b) Closed waveguide model 8 insertion loss at
350 Hz.
Figure A.65: Comparison of the open and closed waveguide model 8 at 350 Hz.
90
Examination of Wave Interference
==PAGE:99==
(a) Open waveguide model 8 insertion loss at
400 Hz.
(b) Closed waveguide model 8 insertion loss at
400 Hz.
Figure A.66: Comparison of the open and closed waveguide model 8 at 400 Hz.
(a) Open waveguide model 8 insertion loss at
490 Hz.
(b) Closed waveguide model 8 insertion loss at
490 Hz.
Figure A.67: Comparison of the open and closed waveguide model 8 at 490 Hz.
Examination of Wave Interference
91
==PAGE:100==
(a) Open waveguide model 8 insertion loss at
500 Hz.
(b) Closed waveguide model 8 insertion loss at
500 Hz.
Figure A.68: Comparison of the open and closed waveguide model 8 at 500 Hz.
92
Examination of Wave Interference
==PAGE:101==
A.9
Waveguide Model 9
Figure A.69: Body shape of waveguide model 9.
Figure A.70: Closed shape of waveguide model 9.
Examination of Wave Interference
93
==PAGE:102==
(a) Open waveguide model 9 insertion loss at
70 Hz.
(b) Closed waveguide model 9 insertion loss at
70 Hz.
Figure A.71: Comparison of the open and closed waveguide model 9 at 70 Hz.
(a) Open waveguide model 9 insertion loss at
80 Hz.
(b) Closed waveguide model 9 insertion loss at
80 Hz.
Figure A.72: Comparison of the open and closed waveguide model 9 at 80 Hz.
94
Examination of Wave Interference
==PAGE:103==
(a) Open waveguide model 9 insertion loss at
100 Hz.
(b) Closed waveguide model 9 insertion loss at
100 Hz.
Figure A.73: Comparison of the open and closed waveguide model 9 at 100 Hz.
(a) Open waveguide model 9 insertion loss at
150 Hz.
(b) Closed waveguide model 9 insertion loss at
150 Hz.
Figure A.74: Comparison of the open and closed waveguide model 9 at 70 Hz.
Examination of Wave Interference
95
==PAGE:104==
(a) Open waveguide model 9 insertion loss at
210 Hz.
(b) Closed waveguide model 9 insertion loss at
210 Hz.
Figure A.75: Comparison of the open and closed waveguide model 9 at 210 Hz.
(a) Open waveguide model 9 insertion loss at
240 Hz.
(b) Closed waveguide model 9 insertion loss at
240 Hz.
Figure A.76: Comparison of the open and closed waveguide model 9 at 240 Hz.
96
Examination of Wave Interference
==PAGE:105==
(a) Open waveguide model 9 insertion loss at
250 Hz.
(b) Closed waveguide model 9 insertion loss at
250 Hz.
Figure A.77: Comparison of the open and closed waveguide model 9 at 250 Hz.
(a) Open waveguide model 9 insertion loss at
300 Hz.
(b) Closed waveguide model 9 insertion loss at
300 Hz.
Figure A.78: Comparison of the open and closed waveguide model 9 at 300 Hz.
Examination of Wave Interference
97
==PAGE:106==
(a) Open waveguide model 9 insertion loss at
500 Hz.
(b) Closed waveguide model 9 insertion loss at
500 Hz.
Figure A.79: Comparison of the open and closed waveguide model 9 at 500 Hz.
98
Examination of Wave Interference
==PAGE:107==
B
Appendix B
Appendix B presents the high resolution responses for the final waveguide design, along
with the closed response, and the response from only the parallel barriers. This section
also includes all comparisons between these three configurations and at the five separate
positions that were tested in this project which may not have been used within the discus-
sion section of this report. The final collection of plots are from the scale model validation
and represent both the scale model tests, along with the simulated results from the same
design and set up.
B.1
Two Hertz Resolution Comparisons with Waveguide
Model 9
(a) The open waveguide model 9 in comparison
to the barrier without any attachment at 19m.
(b) The open waveguide model 9 compared
with the same waveguide closed at 19m.
Figure B.1: Comparing the open waveguide model 9 with just the barrier and with the
waveguide closed at 19m.
Examination of Wave Interference
99
==PAGE:108==
(a) The open waveguide model 9 in comparison
to the barrier without any attachment at 106m.
(b) The open waveguide model 9 compared
with the same waveguide closed at 106m.
Figure B.2: Comparing the open waveguide model 9 with just the barrier and with the
waveguide closed at 106m.
(a) The open waveguide model 9 in comparison
to the barrier without any attachment at 120m.
(b) The open waveguide model 9 compared
with the same waveguide closed at 120m.
Figure B.3: Comparing the open waveguide model 9 with just the barrier and with the
waveguide closed at 120m.
100
Examination of Wave Interference
==PAGE:109==
(a) The open waveguide model 9 in comparison
to the barrier without any attachment at 121m.
(b) The open waveguide model 9 compared
with the same waveguide closed at 121m.
Figure B.4: Comparing the open waveguide model 9 with just the barrier and with the
waveguide closed at 121m.
B.2
Two Hertz Resolution Comparisons with Waveguide
Model 9 at Different Distances
(a) Comparing the high frequency resolution re-
sults at 5m and 19m.
(b) Comparing the high frequency resolution re-
sults at 5m and 121m.
Figure B.5: Comparing the waveguide model 9 with 2Hz frequency resolution at different
distances.
Examination of Wave Interference
101
==PAGE:110==
(a) Comparing the high frequency resolution re-
sults at 19m and 106m.
(b) Comparing the high frequency resolution re-
sults at 19m and 121m.
Figure B.6: Comparing the waveguide model 9 with 2Hz frequency resolution at different
distances.
Figure B.7: Comparing the waveguide model 9 with 2Hz frequency resolution at 106m
and 121m.
102
Examination of Wave Interference
==PAGE:111==
Figure B.8: Comparing the waveguide model 9 with 2Hz frequency resolution at 120m
and 121m.
Figure B.9: Close up comparing the waveguide model 9 with 2Hz frequency resolution at
120m and 121m. Highlighting the slight reduction.
Examination of Wave Interference
103
==PAGE:112==
B.3
One Third Octave Comparisons of Waveguide Model 9
Figure B.10: Comparing the open waveguide model 9 to both the closed version and with
no guide attached to the barrier at 5m.
Figure B.11: Comparing the open waveguide model 9 to both the closed version and with
no guide attached to the barrier at 19m.
104
Examination of Wave Interference
==PAGE:113==
Figure B.12: Comparing the open waveguide model 9 to both the closed version and with
no guide attached to the barrier at 106m.
Figure B.13: Comparing the open waveguide model 9 to both the closed version and with
no guide attached to the barrier at 120m.
Examination of Wave Interference
105
==PAGE:114==
Figure B.14: Comparing the open waveguide model 9 to both the closed version and with
no guide attached to the barrier at 121m.
106
Examination of Wave Interference
==PAGE:115==
Examination of Wave Interference
107
==PAGE:116==
This is a masters thesis project that was conducted from September of 2022 until the end of January
2023. It was conducted by Andreas Kramer from for the completion of the Engineer Acoustics mas-
ters program at the Technical University of Denmark (DTU). The focus of this study was to examine
the use of wave interference for increasing the insertion loss of a highway noise barrier. The study
used a two dimensional boundary element method (BEM) to numerically calculate the changes in
insertion loss caused by different types of waveguides attached to the top of a barrier. The results
collected examined many designs and receiver positions to understand the impact that this type
of attachment would have in the near, mid, and far field (up to 121 meters from the barrier). Re-
sults from the numerical calculation were also compared to a scale model built and tested within an
anechoic chamber located at DTU for validation purposes.
This study was inconclusive on whether the impact from the addition of the waveguide showed
enough improvement the insertion loss response for highway noise barriers. Additional studies need
to be conducted to examine adding additional pathways to produce wave interference for a higher
resolution of frequencies then what was used in the simulation for this study. The author did find that
the change in exit pathway of the waveguide could be helpful in focusing the improved insertion loss
at specific locations behind the barrier, but for a better result in the largest area the exit should be
facing in an upward direction. This type of exit path design also would allow for the smallest design
to be used to produce wave interference for the desired frequencies of interest.
Technical
University of
Denmark
Ørsteds Plads, Building 352
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
https://www.elektro.dtu.dk/english
