==PAGE:1==
Development of a Life Cycle Impact Assess-
ment Method for Climate Change Damages
Master Thesis
DTU Sustain
Department of Environmental and Resource Engineering
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Development of a Life Cycle Impact Assessment Method for Climate Change
Damages
Master Thesis
December, 2022
By
Nele Teutloff
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus-
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title,
etc.
Cover photo:
Nele Teutloff, 2022
Published by:
DTU, Department of Environmental and Resource Engineering, Bygn-
ingstorvet, Building 115, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over five months at the Section for Qualitative Sustainability
Assessment (QSA), Department of DTU Sustain, at the Technical University of Denmark
in partial fulfilment for the degree Master of Science in Engineering, MSc Eng.
Nele Teutloff - s202668
Signature
Date
ii
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
As of 2022, around one million different animal and plant species are threatened with ex-
tinction due to human activities, and the trend is rising. Anthropogenic climate change not
only drives species extinction directly but also increasingly exacerbates the impact of other
factors such as sea level rise on ecosystem quality. However, these other factors are rarely
addressed in environmental impact assessment methods. By modeling impact pathways,
Life Cycle Impact Assessment (LCIA) helps to translate anthropogenic emissions, such as
Greenhouse Gases (GHGs), into potential environmental damages. Applying LCIA pro-
vides researchers with so-called Characterisation Factors (CF). CFs can be used to assess
the potential impact on different Areas of Protection (AoP), such as human health or
ecosystem quality. This study develops an impact pathway that links GHG emissions to
ecosystem damages via climate change-induced Sea Level Rise (SLR). To this end, a total
of 2050 taxon-specific and 410 taxon-generic CFs are calculated, covering 205 GHGs, five
taxonomic groups, and both, average and marginal modeling approaches. The CFs range
from 3.6E-20 to 2.7E-13 PDF·yr·kg−1, where PDF is the Potentially Disappeared Fraction
of species. A spatial analysis of ecosystem damages revealed that SLR flooding and the
related species loss most severely affects the ecoregions Ile Europa and Bassas da India
xeric scrubare, and the Caspian lowland desert. A comparison to established factors and
models confirmed the robustness of the CFs calculation.
The developed impact pathway follows the recommendations of the UNEP-SETAC Life
Cycle Initiative, which aims to harmonise LCIA indicators. The CFs can be integrated in
the existing LCA framework allowing researches, policymakers, and companies to quan-
tify the impact of their products and activities on species loss via SLR. Furthermore, the
developed framework represents a promising starting point for further research on SLR
modeling in LCIA contributing to a better understanding of how climate change damages
biodiversity.
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
Nele Teutloff, MSc Environmental Engineering, DTU
Author of this master thesis.
I would like to thank Martin Dorber for his constructive feedback to all my scientific ques-
tions. His expertise in the field of LCIA and biodiversity helped me to keep the overview
and to solve many of my concerns and issues.
I wish to show my appreciation to Laura Debarre who inspired me through several discus-
sions about sea level rise and its implementations in LCIA. I wish to extend my appreci-
ation to Annie Levasseur for her support in understanding and modeling my fate factor.
An extensive thanks to Nils Müller for his patient to read my complete thesis and give me
very good advice. Thank you for all your support during the stressful episodes.
All my friends, such as Fidi, Luca, and Henriette, and my brother Ole helped me a lot
with their mental support. In particular their distractions in the form of kite surfing and
sauna construction works were intense but also energising.
But most of all, I would like to thank Alexis Laurent. His support with knowledge and
experience helped me to reflect and to question my work critically. He motivated me to
tackle my problems independently but also helped me when I was not able to. I want to
thank him for all the inspiring discussions and the time he took to reconsider my concerns.
His support helped me to focus on the important things and not to get lost in details.
Through his calmness and humor, I was able to work on my thesis with serenity and con-
fidence.
iv
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
Abbreviations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
vi
List of Figures and Tables . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
vi
1
Introduction
1
2
Literature Review
3
3
Methods
5
3.1
Characterisation Factor Framework . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
3.2
Fate Factors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
3.3
Exposure Factors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
3.4
Effect Factors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.5
Severity Factors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3.6
Aggregated Characterisation Factors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3.7
Spatial Analysis of Ecosystem Damages
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
4
Results and Discussion
17
4.1
Fate Factors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
4.2
Exposure Factors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
4.3
Effect Factors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
4.4
Characterisation Factors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
4.5
Spatial Analysis of Ecosystem Damages
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
4.6
Uncertainties and Limitations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
5
Conclusion and Recommendations
27
Bibliography
29
A Appendix
35
v
==PAGE:8==
Abbreviations
Table 1: List of Abbreviations and their definitions
Abbreviation
Definition
AGPT
Absolute Global Temperature change Potential
AR
Assessment Report
CF
Characterisation Factor
CMIP6
Coupled Model Intercomparison Project 6
DEM
Digital Elevation Model
DGA
Danish Geodata Agency
EF
Effect Factor
EGM
Earth Gravitational Model
F
Freshwater
FF
Fate Factor
GBIF
Global Biodiversity Information Facility
GEP
Global Extinction Probability
GHG
Greenhouse Gas
GIS
Geographic Information System
GPS
Global Positioning System
GSHHG
Global Self‑consistent Hierarchical High‑resolution Geography
GWP
Global Warming Potential
IPCC
Intergovernmental Panel of Climate Change
IUCN
International Union for Conservation of Nature and Natural Resources
LCA
Life Cycle Assessment
LCIA
Life Cycle Impact Assessment
M
Marine Water
MHWS
Mean High Water Springs
MERIT
Multi-Error-Removed Improved-Terrain
MIPs
Model Intercomparison Projects
PAF
Potentially Affected Fraction
PDF
Potentially Disappeared Fraction of species
SF
Severity Factor
SI
Supplementary Information
SLR
Sea Level Rise
SSD
Species Sensitivity Distribution
SSP
Shared Socioeconomic Pathway
T
Terrestrial
WWF
World Wildlife Fund
XF
Exposure Factor
vi
==PAGE:9==
List of Figures
2.1
Framework of climate change damages on ecosystems on a global and local scale.
Black solid, black dotted, and red lines represent completely addressed, partly
addressed, and missing pathways, respectively. Missing pathways ending at the
three different categories of species were excluded for illustrative reasons.
The
encircled numbers refer to the number of the publication in the literature matrix
which models the pathway. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
3.1
Framework of SLR showing main causes and consequences for ecosystems: The
Global Scale shows processes which are not spatial differentiated, the Regional &
Local Scale shows processes which occur in a regional or local level. Highlighted
in green are the processes which are included in the developed XF and EF [21]. . .
9
3.2
World split in 50 pieces to model flooding by 2100 following SSP5 8.5. Areas below
sea level are purple, areas above sea level are pink. The region with brighter colors
was modeled twice. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.3
Schematic figure of the PDF as a function of flooded area based on the species-
area relationship (red) with reference point x and y, marginal (blue), and average
(green) modelling approaches.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3.4
z-value distributions for amphibians, reptiles, mammals, and birds across ecore-
gions with median, 25% and 75% quartiles.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
4.1
Local SLR and flooded areas by 2100 following SSP5 with three areas in detail:
1. Part of the Tongan tropical moist forests, 2. Part of the Italian Coastline, and
3. The Caspian Sea. The flooded area is bright blue, the the SLR ranges from
white to dark blue, the areas below SLR but excluded because of hydrological
connectivity is creamy-white, and the ecoregion are red. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
4.2
Percentage of flooded area of the affected ecoregions with median, 25% and 75%
quartiles. With 1. All outliers and 2. Outliers smaller than 30%.
. . . . . . . . .
19
4.3
Flooded areas by SLR or extreme sea level for Zealand in 2100. In blue the self-
modelled flooding, in green the flooding modelled by Kirezci et al. (2020), in pink
the model developed by Scalgo. A: Comparison between the own model and Scalgo
B: Comparison between the own model and Kirezci et al., both for entire Zealand.
C & D: Zoom into a representative area marked in A & B as a circle with further
illustration which areas of Scalgo overlap with the own model (yellow). Note: the
illustration in yellow only applies for sub-figure C. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
4.4
Comparison between the EFs of this study and CFs of Dorber et al. (2020) in
PDF·m−2 for amphibians, reptiles, mammals, and birds across 338 ecoregions [26]
22
4.5
Comparison between De Schryver et al.
(2009) and this study (SLR CFs) in
PDF·yr·kg−1 for 60 GHGs [18] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
4.6
Spatial analysis of ecosystem damages, showing average XF x EF·SF for reptiles
for 436 ecoregion in PDFj·yr·K−1 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
A.1
Google Maps picture of the representative area on Zealand shown in Figure 4.3 . .
35
vii
==PAGE:10==
List of Tables
1
List of Abbreviations and their definitions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
vi
4.1
Main properties of flood models and their projected flooded area on zealand by
2100 [86, 54, 49]
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
5.1
Recommendations for future improvement of the characterisation framework in
its data quality and modeling approach for each individual factor. Further rec-
ommendations for the application of the CFs for LCA practitioners. SAR is the
abbreviation for the species-area relationship model. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
viii
==PAGE:11==
1
Introduction
Anthropogenic climate change is primarily caused by Greenhouse Gas (GHG) emissions,
leading to an increase in global mean surface temperature [1]. It is likely that the global
mean surface temperature will rise between 1.4 and 4.4 °C by 2100, depending on the
underlying GHG emission scenario [1]. However, the effects of climate change go beyond
an increase in global temperature. Climate change triggers a complex system of direct and
indirect effects, including positive and negative feedback loops and tipping points [2, 3,
4]. The direct and indirect effects of climate change have already caused and will continue
to cause damage to human health and ecosystems [5, 6, 7]. The latest Intergovernmental
Panel of Climate Change (IPCC) report on terrestrial and freshwater ecosystems shows
that 47 % of local extinctions among plants and animals are caused by climate change
[6]. To effectively assess and limit the negative effects of climate change, it is necessary to
quantify the impact of different human activities on climate change and link it to ecosystem
damages. A promising tool to quantify the impact of human-made products and systems
is Life Cycle Assessment (LCA).
LCA is a tool to analyse and compare products and systems across several environmental
impact categories, such as climate change. Therefore, the entire life cycle of a product
and system is quantitatively assessed [8]. Impact categories are differentiated between
midpoint (e.g. climate change) and endpoint (Human Health, Ecosystem Quality and
Natural Resources) - also called areas of protection [8, 9]. To address the impacts on these
categories, impact pathways have to be modelled connecting emissions to their effects. Life
Cycle Impact Assessment (LCIA) is a relatively young field that translates anthropogenic
emissions such as GHGs into potential environmental damages by modeling these impact
pathways [10]. Impact pathways are typically divided into several factors. The result of
modeling are Characterisation Factors (CF) translating flows of emissions into a specific
environmental impact category [10].
Although LCIA is a promising approach, only a limited number of climate change impacts
on ecosystem quality have been implemented so far.
Some studies have modeled the
pathway of indirect effects of climate change on ecosystem quality, such as changes in water
salinity, depletion in dissolved oxygen in oceans, and introduction of invasive species [11,
12, 13, 14]. However, only few studies have attempted to model the complete pathway from
GHG emissions to climate change to ecosystem quality [15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20]. Additionally,
these models have several limitations, such as low species and spatial coverage, and a
lack of consideration for species-specific characteristics. The literature review in section 2
provides further details on previous research in this area and points out the lack of covered
impact pathways. One of these missing impact pathway is climate changed induced Sea
Level Rise (SLR).
SLR is a direct and indirect result of climate change which is not yet modeled in LCIA. It is
mainly caused by the thermal expansion of the ocean water, melting land-ice, and changes
in land-water storage, leading to an increase in the global mean sea level. Between 1993
and 2018, the global mean SLR accelerated from 1.35 to 3.25 mm·yr−1 [21]. The IPCC
predicts that the global mean sea level will rise more than 0.28 m and up to one meter by
2100, depending on the Shared Socioeconomic Pathway (SSP) [21]. This leads to a wide
range of effects on ecosystems. Coasts are eroding rapidly and submergence of coastal land
is increasing. The risk for damaging floods through storm surges is rising and salinization
of groundwater and wetlands worsen [21, 22]. While coastal ecosystems are completely
1
==PAGE:12==
disappearing in areas with hard sea defenses behind the coastal zone, the shoreline of
natural coasts and part of the vegetation may move inland. However, the resilience and
capacity of coastal ecosystem to keep up with SRL will be restrained by ocean warming and
other regional and species-specific drivers. Without adaptation and mitigation measures,
the risk from SLR for coastal ecosystems are very likely to increase tenfold by 2100, leading
to a loss of coastal ecosystems across many low-lying and erodible coasts [22, 21]. Despite
its potential impact on coastal ecosystems, SLR has not been included in LCIA modelling
yet. This is surprising given that SLR will affect most coastal ecoregions worldwide with
potentially large areas to be inundated. Coastal ecosystems support a unique and diverse
range of species, including terrestrial, marine, and freshwater species all over the world.
For many of these species, flooding not only results in a change but a complete loss in
habitat. Additionally, it was already proposed to use the Global Sea level rise Potential
as an alternative metrics to compare climate impacts of GHG emissions [23].
This study aims to fill the gap in existing research by developing CFs for SLR in the
context of LCIA. To further complete the picture of climate change effects on ecosystems,
an impact pathway from GHG emissions to SLR and its damages on ecosystem quality will
be modeled. The damages will be assessed in all ecoregions worldwide affected by SLR. The
target is to develop average and marginal CFs for 5 different taxonomic groups of terrestrial
species: amphibians, reptiles, birds, mammals, and vascular plants. The uncertainties of
the model will be evaluated quantitatively when possible, and qualitatively otherwise.
2
==PAGE:13==
2
Literature Review
A literature review was conducted on impact pathways for climate change damages on
ecosystem quality. The literature review only includes studies situated in the framework
of LCIA. The focus of the review was on studies that modeled impact pathways and
developed CFs for GHG emissions and their effects on ecosystem quality. However, also
studies are included that started at categories affected by GHG emissions, such as changes
in salinity or decreases in dissolved oxygen, and ended at ecosystem quality. They are
not necessarily intended to be connected to GHG emissions but describe a similar effect
resulting from climate change.
The literature search was performed using two search engines, Scopus and Google Scholar
[24, 25].
Their databases were systematically screened via key word indexing in title,
abstract, and keywords of the paper (see Supplementary Information (SI) 1). Only peer-
reviewed studies written in English were included. There was no time limit applied to the
publishing dates. The number of total hits, useful hits, and new useful hits for each query
were documented. If more than 300 hits were found, only the first 300 were reviewed
(sorted after relevance by the search engine).
The analysis of fitting results indicated that only few studies covered a complete pathway
from GHG emissions or climate change to ecosystem quality. Additionally, all of them
focused on a specific pathway, such as acidification or change in water discharge caused
by GHG emissions. However, the number of useful hits increases when studies are in-
cluded that can be indirectly linked to climate change but lay somewhere in the middle
of the climate change impact pathway (e.g. increased salinity). Figure 2.1 shows the im-
pact pathway of anthropogenic climate change and the main effects on three categories of
species: marine water, freshwater, and terrestrial species. It can be seen that the impact
pathway is long and complex, with most processes not addressed yet (red lines).
When looking at all studies included, the three categories of species were almost equally
represented. However, when only considering complete pathways, most of the effects fo-
cused on freshwater and terrestrial ecosystems. Only two studies including marine species.
The coverage of taxa within the three categories of species was low, with many studies only
including a single taxon. Similarly, the number of species within a taxon was often low,
with only one study analyzing a representative fraction [26]. Furthermore, species-specific
characteristics are often excluded such as vulnerability, the dispersal-ability, or endemic
species. The most commonly used data set was the IUCN Red List. All studies developed
regional CFs, but only 47 % also derived global factors. The spatial or geographical differ-
entiation of the regional CF varied greatly from continents to single river basins. Often,
data was extracted from multiple sources which can carry a risk of inconsistency. Addi-
tionally, the literature used was published in different time periods, with some potentially
being outdated.
For effect modeling, three main approaches were identified: 1. Species-area or Species-
discharge relationships, 2. Species-distribution models, and 3. Species-sensitivity distri-
butions following effect-response functions commonly used in ecotoxicity. The modeling
approaches were generally consistent and many followed recommendations by the ”Life
cycle Initiative”, such as using PDF as unit of damage level and considering long-term
climate effects over a time-horizon of 100 yr [27]. The uncertainties of the results were
reported qualitatively in 60% of the studies and 20% performed a sensitivity analysis.
Overall, several impact pathways for climate change damages on ecosystems have been
modeled, though most only partly. For almost all pathways, ready-to-use CF have been
3
==PAGE:14==
developed on a regional, and sometimes even global basis, and are uniform in their damage
level unit. However, the main shortcomings of the current models are the low coverage of
taxonomic groups and species. Additionally, CFs are often only applicable for small regions
such as single river basins. Species-specific characteristics only were taken into account in
De schryver at al., Tang et al., and Li et al. [18, 19, 17]. Often, data from multiple sources
were used, of which some may be outdated and can introduce inconsistency. There is a
clear need for further studies that model complete impact pathways with higher species
and regional coverage, and that incorporate ideas for including species-specific factors such
as vulnerability and dispersal-ability. A detailed summary of the literature review in form
of a literature matrix with additional explanatory information is provided in the SI 1.
Figure 2.1: Framework of climate change damages on ecosystems on a global and local scale. Black
solid, black dotted, and red lines represent completely addressed, partly addressed, and missing
pathways, respectively. Missing pathways ending at the three different categories of species were
excluded for illustrative reasons. The encircled numbers refer to the number of the publication in
the literature matrix which models the pathway.
4
==PAGE:15==
3
Methods
3.1
Characterisation Factor Framework
In LCIA, impact pathways are developed to translate anthropogenic emissions into poten-
tial environmental damages. These impact pathways are often divided into several factors,
namely Fate Factor (FF), Exposure Factor (XF), Effect Factor (EF), and Severity Factor
(SF) [10]. The FF deals with the distribution and transformation of a given emission while
the XF typically analysis the level of contact between organisms and emission. The EF
describes the observed adverse effects on the organisms. For impact pathways going to
endpoint level, SFs are often added to analyze the gravity of the effects on the organisms
[10, 9]. The combination of these factors according to Equation 1 is referred as the CF.
CFs typically translate emissions into three endpoint categories, also known as Areas of
Protection: Human Health, Ecosystem Quality, and Natural Resources [9].
CF = FF × XF × EF · SF
(1)
The impact pathway developed in this report translates anthropogenic GHG emissions
into damages to ecosystem quality through climate change induced SLR. The factors were
developed as followed
CFi,g =
FFi
z
}|
{
dTempgl,cum
dGHGi
×
XFj
z
}|
{
∆SLRloc
∆Tempgl
× ∆AreaFj
∆SLRloc
×
EFj,g
z
}|
{
dEQj,g
dAreaFj
·
SFj,g
z }| {
GEPj,g ,
(2)
where dTempgl,cum is the cumulative global mean temperature increase over 100 years
[K·yr] caused by the change in GHG emission i [kg].
∆Tempgl is the global surface
temperature change [K] after approximately 100 years and ∆SLRloc the local change in
mean sea level [height in m] due to the temperature increase. The local SLR will cause
a flooding of an area AreaFj [m2] in an ecoregion j, that leads to a change in ecosystem
quality (EQj,g) expressed as the Potentially Disappeared Fraction of species [PDF] of taxon
g in the affected ecoregion j. To convert the EFs from a regional to a global level, describing
the PDF of taxon g globally, Global Extinction Probabilities (GEPj,g) are used as a SF.
GEP includes taxonomic characteristics such as threat level and distribution ranges and
are without a unit.
The resulting CFi,g is the global PDF·yr·kg−1 aggregated across
ecoregions j for taxonomic group g. It can be further aggregated across taxonomic groups
that leads to a global CFi being taxon-generic. The units of the factors are summarized
in Equation 3.
CFi,g =
FFi
z }| {
K · yr
kgi
×
XFj
z
}|
{
mloc
K
×
m2
j
mloc
×
EFj,g
z
}|
{
PDFj,g
m2
j
·
SFj,g
z}|{
= PDFj,g · yr
kgi
(3)
For the FF, the cumulative Absolute Global Temperature change Potential over 100 years
(AGTP100) were used. The XF was split into two parts. The first part is the local SLR for
one SSP provided by the IPCC divided by the projected global mean surface temperature
5
==PAGE:16==
increase for the corresponding SSP by 2100. The second part of the XF is the flooded area
modeled, based on the local SLR in ecoregion j by 2100. The EFs are calculated for five
taxonomic groups and all ecoregions affected by flooding using a species-area relationship.
All factors can be seen as matrices with the dimensions of i x 1, 1 x j, and j x g for FF,
XF, and EF respectively. The SF has the same dimension as the EF but was multiplied
with the EF as a factor where each value in the matrix of EF (efj,g) is multiplied with the
corresponding value in SF (sfj,g). This converts the regional EFs into global EFs, which are
further used in the subsequent matrix multiplication. Through the matrix multiplication
of FF, XF, and SF·EF, global CFs were calculated with the dimensions of i x g. Further
aggregating across taxonomic groups results in global CF in the dimension of i x 1, and
are consequently only GHG specific.
The FF has a time horizon of 100 yr while the XF is tied to the time horizon of the SSP.
Because the difference of the two time horizons is relatively small (15 yr), a time horizon
of 100 yr was presumed for the CFs to be comparable to other developed factors in LCIA.
3.2
Fate Factors
In general, the FF describes the transport and transformation of an emissions. However,
for climate change the overall impact pathway leading to effects on ecosystem quality can
be comparatively long involving several indirect effects. Therefore, the FF in this case
describes the transport and transformation of GHGs emitted to the atmosphere, as well
as the first direct effect - climate change. This approach has been used in previous studies
that modeled climate change damages [17, 20].
The emission is assumed to be a pulse emission in kg of GHGs i at a point x in time. The
emitted GHGs distribute and mix in the atmosphere. Due to their radiation capacity, they
absorb infrared radiation coming from the Earth’s surface and re-emit heat to the lower
atmosphere. An increase in GHG emission and, therefore, their concentration leads to a
higher proportion of radiation being absorbed and re-emitted. As a result, the amount of
radiation leaving the Earth becomes smaller compared to the radiation entering, changing
the Earth’s energy balance. This process, known as radiative forcing, causes an increase
in global mean temperature [28].
To model the change in temperature for long-term climate change factors such as SLR, the
UNEP-SETAC Life Cycle Initiative recommends to use the Global Temperature change
Potential (GTP100) [27, 29].
The GTP100 converts different GHG emissions into the
potential global mean temperature change still occurring 100 years after emission, relative
to the temperature change caused by CO2 [28].
However, in order to have substance
specific CFs, the GTP100 can not be used directly. Therefore, Bulle at al. (2019) used
the absolute GTP (AGTP100) for the IMPACT World + LCIA method, which measures
the actual global temperature change in K, not related to CO2 [30, 28].
Here, the same approach was followed using the equations given by the fifth Assessment
Report (AR5) of the IPCC to calculate the AGTPs with a time horizon of H [yr] for
non-CO2 GHGs [31]. However, in LCA-climate change modeling, the cumulative global
temperature increase is commonly used, which is the time-integrated AGTP [K·yr·kg−1]
and was derived by Annie Levasseur for 205 GHGs [32]. The integrated mathematical
model for well-mixed GHGs provided by the IPCC is shown in Equation 4 including climate
sensitivity components cj [K(W m–2)−1] and a factor for ocean heat uptake (cj/dj), where
dj [yr] are response times [28]. The lifetime of the GHGs is expressed as τi [yr] and ai
[W·m−2·kg−1] is the radiative forcing per unit mass increase in atmospheric abundance of
GHG i (radiative eﬀiciency) [31].
6
==PAGE:17==
Z H
0
AGTPi(H) dH =
Z H
0
ai ·
2
X
j=1
τi · cj
τi −dj
·

exp

−H
τi

−exp

−H
dj

dH
(4)
The model for CO2 is more complex and includes parameters of the carbon cycle [28, 29].
Due to the complexity of the CO2 model, not all variables are available and it was not yet
possible to derive cumulative AGTP values for CO2.
3.3
Exposure Factors
The XF typically describes how ecosystems and organisms come into contact with an
emission e.g., in ecotoxicity [10]. However, looking at climate change, the XF is not as
straight forward as in ecotoxicity and often even excluded [17, 20]. Here, it was decided
to include a XF to avoid long and unclear FF or EF.
The here analysed effects on ecosystems are not directly caused by the exposure to GHG
emissions or climate change, but rather by their consequences. Therefore, the XF was
defined as climate change induced SLR leading to a flooding. For the sake of practicality,
the XF was divided in two:
1. Climate change induced SLR
2. Flooding caused by SLR
3.3.1
Sea Level Rise
Sea level has changed constantly throughout history due to past ice-sheet changes and
warm periods [22]. By analyzing tide gauge data from the 20th century, scientists have
observed a steady yearly increase in sea level [33]. This increase was not caused by anthro-
pogenic climate change but rather by ocean heat uptake and mass loss from the Greenland
ice sheet not linked to climate change [33]. However, climate change is expected to cause
additional SLR in the future through several mechanisms.
Mechanisms of SLR:
One key mechanism contributing to SLR is thermal expansion, also known as thermosteric
sea level change [21]. Thermal expansion occurs when ocean temperature increases, caus-
ing a reduction in ocean density and consequently the expansion of ocean volume [34].
Another mechanism is the melting of the Greenlandic and Antarctic ice sheets, which are
the largest reservoirs of frozen freshwater on Earth [35]. They discharge water through
various processes such as ice streams, surface and basal melting, sublimation, and iceberg
calving [36, 37, 21]. The discharge of water and ice is highly dependent on temperature
and is expected to increase as temperature rises [37, 21]. In addition, glaciers also con-
tribute to the SLR through mass loss due to increased temperatures [38]. However, the
meltwater from glacier does not immediately flow into the ocean but can instead refreeze,
feed rivers, evaporate, or be stored in lakes.
Land water storage encompasses all water stored on land, excluding glaciers and ice sheets.
This includes surface water, soil moisture, groundwater storage and snow. Land water
storage is constantly changing due to factors such as river discharge into oceans and pre-
cipitation patterns.
Climate change can affect land water storage through changes in
the amount of water stored in lakes, wetlands, soil, permafrost, and snowpack [39, 40].
However, human interventions e.g. building dams in rivers, extracting groundwater, and
deforestation can also impact land water storage [40].
7
==PAGE:18==
The processes discussed so far have been global processes that lead to change in global
sea level. However, there are also several local or regional processes influencing sea level
at a local level. Ocean dynamic sea level change is such a process which is caused by
changes in ocean circulations and density through e.g., ocean currents, winds, and salinity
levels [21, 22]. This can lead to regional changes in sea level but does not have an impact
on the global sea level. In addition, the redistribution of water mass between land ice
cover, water reservoirs, and the ocean can lead to several gravitational effects (the Earth
gravity, Earth rotation and viscoelastic solid Earth deformation). The changes in land ice
cover influence Earth’s gravity, deform the Earth’s crust, and change the angle and rate of
Earth’s rotation. These processes affect sea level regionally causing substantial differences
to the global mean sea level [41].
When terrestrial ice melts, the underlying compressed soil undergoes an elastic solid Earth
uplift. This process known as glacial isostatic adjustment, is one of the factors that can
cause vertical land motion (the change of height of the terrestrial surface). The uplift
causes a nearby fall of sea level relative to the terrestrial surface [42, 43]. However, there
are further causes of vertical land motion, such as tectonic deformations resulting from
earthquakes and the removal of fluids, oil, and water from below the surface leading to a
relative sea level change [21].
While the change in global mean sea level is useful to assess general trends, it is important
to consider local and regional relative SLR when analyzing impacts on coastal ecosystems
and communities. The relative SLR is defined as ”the changes in the height of sea water
relative to land with respect to the average conditions over a reference period” [44]. For
the purpose of this analysis, the sea level projections from the Coupled Model Intercom-
parison Project 6 (CMIP6) used by the IPCC for their latest Assessment Report (AR6)
were chosen [21].
SLR Model:
The CMIP6 is a project of the so-called World Climate Research Program consisting
of 35 comprehensive climate models [45]. They are used to perform coordinated multi-
model experiments known as Model Intercomparison Projects (MIPs). For future SLR
projections, 20 of the 35 models were used with a refernce period of sea level between 1995
to 2014 [46, 47]. Only processes were included whose projections had at least medium
confidence: thermal expansion, Greenland ice sheet, Antarctic ice sheet, glaciers, land-
water storage, ocean dynamic sea level, different drivers of vertical land motion such
as glacial isostatic adjustment, and gravitational, rotational, and deformational effects
[21]. The individual models are forced by time-integrated global surface air temperature
projections from CMIP6 to obtain consistent results which are then combined [21, 46]. The
main mechanisms and their interconnections leading to SLR are depicted in Figure 3.1.
Additionally, the potential effects on the three categories of species are included in the
Figure. The boxes highlighted in green are processes covered by the developed XF and
EF.
Data Specification:
SLR is dependent on both, the period of time over which temperature increases and the
specific climate scenario being considered [21, 46]. Processes such as glacier and ice sheet
responses have slow reaction times, leading to a greater increase in sea level over longer
periods [23]. To accurately analyse SLR, it is necessary to define a point in time and a
specific climate scenario. It was decided to use a regional relative sea level projection for
2015-2100 and a spatial resolution of 1° provided by the IPCC [21, 47]. This data is avail-
able on Github and the IPCC WGI Interactive Atlas [48]. The SLR projection follows the
concept of the SSP from IPCC and was selected because of comparability, reproducibility,
and data availability.
SSPs are artificially-developed concepts that represent potential
8
==PAGE:19==
future emission scenarios based on possible decisions and directions in human society,
politics, and economy. There are five main SSPs ranging from a sustainable and green
human pathway (SSP1) to a continuation of the current fossil based development (SSP5)
[1]. The analysis of SLR and SLR driven inundation was done for one SSP exemplary.
SSP5 8.5 was selected because of two reasons: 1. SLR is partly few centimeters in eleva-
tion. Modeling inundation from SLR of only few centimeters is challenging and requires
high-resolution elevation data. Due to the concern that SLR could be too low to model
any effect, the SSP with the highest SLR was selected. 2. SSP5 has been used in previous
work, what enables robust comparisons [49].
Figure 3.1:
Framework of SLR showing main causes and consequences for ecosystems: The
Global Scale shows processes which are not spatial differentiated, the Regional & Local Scale
shows processes which occur in a regional or local level. Highlighted in green are the processes
which are included in the developed XF and EF [21].
9
==PAGE:20==
In the CF framework, the first XF is defined as the local SLR per global temperature
change. Therefore, the local SLR raster layer was divided by the global mean surface
temperature increase of 4.74 K between 2015-2100 for the respective scenario - the same
time horizon as the SLR.
3.3.2
Flooded Area
To model the coastal area flooded through SLR, a bathtub approach was used.
This
common flooding model assumes that everything below and equal the projected sea level
will be inundated [50, 51].
However, very high resolution elevation data is necessary
to accurately calculate flooding, because SLR often accounts for only small increases of
single centimeters. For this purpose, the Multi-Error-Removed Improved-Terrain Digital
Elevation Model (MERIT DEM) was used. DEMs are generated from satellite data and
are increasingly used for flood modeling [52].
The MERIT DEM derives the terrain elevations in mm scale at a 3-seconds resolution
(approximately 90 m at the equator) and covers land areas between the latitudes of 90N-
60S, referenced to the EGM96 geoid [53, 54].
An Earth Gravitational Model (EGM)
creates a global potential surface that coincides with mean sea level by using a set of
geopotential coeﬀicients.
This surface, called a geoid, fluctuates above and below the
reference ellipsoid surface established by WGS 84. WGS 84 is the standard definition of a
global reference system for geospatial information by the U.S. Department of Defense and
is the reference system for the Global Positioning System (GPS) [55]. The EGM geoid is
important to match the mean sea level to a zero elevation and having the same geospatial
reference system. Because the MERIT DEM does not cover Antarctica and due to local
weather conditions, it was decided to exclude Antarctica from the modeling.
In order to overlay the SLR raster files with the DEM, some adjustments were made using
the programming language R and the geographic information system (GIS) software QGIS.
The SLR layer, originally stopping at the shoreline, was expanded inlands by assigning
the average value of the neighboring cells to cell without data. To enable operations with
DEM and SLR layers, their resolutions were aligned. The resolution of the expanded SLR
layer was adjusted to the 3sec resolution of the DEM using bilinear interpolation [56].
Hydrological Connectivity:
One issue involved in the bathtub approach is that it marks all areas with elevations below
the SLR as inundated. However, areas which are not connected to the sea would not be
affected by SLR in reality. This issue is called hydrological connectivity and is particularly
relevant for coastal regions, as coastal floods only affects adjacent land zones [57]. This
problem was tackled by grouping all grid cells marked as inundated and being connected
into ”clumps”. Only the clumps connected to the sea were kept. The resulting raster file
included grid cells with values of either 1 for water or NA (not available) for land. In a next
step, the grid cells having the value of 1 and being located on previously terrestrial surfaces
(flooded area) were extracted. Therefore, the raster file was masked with a global shoreline
map. This left only the grid cells with values of 1 inside the shoreline. For the shoreline, the
Global self‑consistent hierarchical high‑resolution geography (GSHHG) coastline dataset
was used providing shoreline data in shapefile format in different resolutions [58]. Here,
the high resolution version of approximately 0.2 km was used. This dataset was already
used for similar purposes by Kirezci et al. (2020) [49]. However, the GSHHG shoreline
does not include the coastline of the Caspian sea. For the Caspian sea, an additional
shapefile from the marineregions.org was implemented [59]. In a last step, the flooded
area in each terrestrial ecoregion was calculated using a shapefile from the World Wildlife
Fund (WWF) according to the definition by Olson et al. (2001) [60, 61].
Due to the large data size of the raster files (sometimes exceeding 300 GB), the files were
split into 50 parts and most operations were performed on a high-performance cluster
10
==PAGE:21==
provided by Denmark’s Technical University (DTU). The split of the world can be seen
in Figure 3.2. The purple areas are the grid cells marked as water before cutting them to
the shoreline. The pink areas are grid cells marked as land. For one split highlighted in
bright pink, the connectivity had to be performed twice. All code used and spatial splits
are attached in the SI 3.
Figure 3.2: World split in 50 pieces to model flooding by 2100 following SSP5 8.5. Areas below
sea level are purple, areas above sea level are pink. The region with brighter colors was modeled
twice.
3.4
Effect Factors
In LCIA, the EF typically describes the observed adverse effects on organisms from ex-
posure to an emission like in ecotoxicity. For ecosystem quality, the EF does not only
describe the effects on individual organisms or species, but the overall decrease in species
richness. In this report, the EF is defined as the decrease in species richness in an ecore-
gion or globally due to the habitat loss from inundation. Therefore, only the decrease of
habitat by local SLR was considered and not a potential increase in habitat by local sea
level decrease. The decrease in ecosystem quality is expressed as PDF, as recommended
by the Life Cycle Initiative [9]. PDF is the most commonly used ecosystem quality metric
in LCA and can be calculated across taxonomic groups and ecosystem categories (e.g.,
terrestrial, freshwater, marine water) [9].
A direct connection between species extinction and area decrease has been described first
by Arrhenius (1921) with the species-area relationship [62]. The model shows a power
relationship between number of species S and an area A [m2] of an ecosystem with the
constant c [m−2] and z (without unit) [62]:
S = c · Az,
(5)
where c depends on the taxonomic group and region under study and equals to the number
of species that would exist if the habitat area was resized to one square unit. z describes
the slope of the species-area relationship in log-log space [63]. The species-area relationship
is further used to derive the number of species that might be driven to extinction due to
a change in area. The ration of number of species (Snew) living in the new decreased area
(Anew) to the number of species (Sorg) in the original area (Aorg) is calculated by the
ratio of the two areas to the power of z according to Equation 6 [64]. The species-area
relationship is widely used in research within and outside of LCIA, particularly in land
use change [65, 66, 67, 26].
11
==PAGE:22==
Snew
Sorg
=
Anew
Aorg
z
(6)
However, the classic species-area relationship model is often criticized because it assumes
that all natural areas changed by land use become inhabitable for species other than hu-
mans [68, 66]. It also does not consider that different types of land use such as farm
land or urban areas provide habitat of different qualities for species. Furthermore, there is
evidence that species sensitivity to habitat loss or change varies significantly and no differ-
entiation between ecoregions are made when assessing species richness [69, 70]. To tackle
these shortcomings, elaborated versions of the species-area relationship are under ongoing
development [64, 65, 70, 71]. Chaudhary et al. (2015) addresses the main shortcomings
of the classic model by using the countryside species-area relationship which incorporates
an aﬀinity factor hg,i,j (without unit) that describes the ability of a taxonomic group g to
survive in the new land use type i in the ecoregion j. Additionally, they include a region
specific zj value [66, 70]. Their approach is currently a key reference for land use change
modelling in LCA [72]. In order to receive the fraction of species lost (PDF), the reversed
countryside species-area relationship is used by adding a 1- in front of the area ratio. The
equation is defined as:
Slost,g,j
Sorg,g,j
= 1 −
Anew,j + Pn
i=1 hg,i,j · Ai,j
Aorg,j
zj
,
(7)
where Slost,g,j is the number of species lost in taxon g occurring in ecoregion j due to
a change of the area Ai,j into land use type i. Anew,j is the area which remains of the
previous habitat and Aorg,j is the original natural habitat area in which originally Sorg,g,j
number of species occurred. However, until today there are no aﬀinity (h) factors for the
change to a land use type of inundation. This issue was already mentioned by Dorber et
al. (2020), who proposed a h value of 0 for terrestrial taxa assuming that no terrestrial
species can survive in completely inundated areas [26].
Following the same approach,
Pn
i=1 hg,i,j ·Ai,j = 0 leads back to a classic species-area relationship with adapted z values,
see Equation 8. This only allows a differentiation between regions but does not take taxa
sensitivity into consideration. Therefore, a further developed set of z values were used to
differentiate between ecoregions and four taxa: amphibians, mammals, reptiles, and birds
[71, 73].
Slost,g,j
Sorg,g,j
= 1 −
Anew,j
Aorg,j
zg,j
(8)
Equation 8 was used to calculate the ratio of species lost and species originally existing in
taxon g in ecoregion j equal to PDF.
3.4.1
Average and Marginal Effect Factors
Based on the species-area relationship, the PDF can be expressed as a function of the
flooded area for each ecoregion and each taxon (see Equation 8). This function was used
to derive two different kind of EFs - marginal and average EFs - which are two distinct
modelling approaches in LCIA. Marginal EFs represent an additional impact per addi-
tional unit emission within a product system. This impacts happens on top of an already
existing background impact not caused by the product system. That could be an addi-
tional square meter of land converted from the current land use to another land use type
for the production of a single product. An average approach is based on an average impact
12
==PAGE:23==
independent from existing background impacts. It is strictly linear and similar to dividing
the overall effect by the overall emissions [8].
For marginal EFs, the slope of the function at a specific point x is calculated by taking
the first derivative of the function. Average EFs are based on the slope of a linear function
from point x to the current state (point y) - here a zero-flooding. Basically, average EFs
are calculated by dividing the PDF at point x by the total flooded Area at point x. Point
x is thereby the general reference point and was set to the here assessed potential future
state of flooded area under SSP5 in 2100.
This is a similar approach to Species-Sensitivity-Distribution (SSD) curve used in eco-
toxicity describing the Potentially Affected Fraction (PAF) of species due to chemical
concentration. The SSD can be used to derive to average and marginal EFs at specific
values of PAF (e.g., 0.5 or 0.2 PAF) [8].
Figure 3.3: Schematic figure of the PDF as a function of flooded area based on the species-area
relationship (red) with reference point x and y, marginal (blue), and average (green) modelling
approaches.
3.4.2
Terrestrial Ecoregions j
Terrestrial ecoregions are defined as ecologically homogeneous regions classified based on
biodiversity, environmental properties, climatic conditions, and vegetation [60]. To use the
species-area relationship, it was assumed that all species are distributed homogeneously
in the ecoregion and that the original habitat is uniform. Therefore, it is assumed that
flooding one m2 has an equal effect no matter where in the ecoregion the area is located.
This assumption and method was already used previously [66, 26]. The terrestrial ecore-
gions used follow the recommendation by the Life Cycle Initiative and were downloaded
as a shapefile from WWF’s Terrestrial Ecoregions of the World [27, 60, 61].
Two regions were excluded from the dataset because of missing data: Rock and Ice, and
Lake. The area of each ecoregion was extracted from the shapefile and summed for the
global terrestrial area.
3.4.3
Terrestrial Taxonomic Groups g
In total, 5 terrestrial taxonomic groups were considered: amphibians, reptiles, birds, mam-
mals, and vascular plants. To calculate taxa specific EFs, taxa specific z values were used
[71]. However, one major issue in the current species-area relationship models and belong-
ing dataset is the lack of plant-specific z values. Plant species may be the most important
taxa assessing SLR considering their general lower ability to disperse [74]. While species of
other taxa are potentially able to shift their distribution range inland, many plant species
could be too slow to disperse.
To cope with this issue, a rough estimate of z values for vascular plants were derived
from the z values of the other taxa. The variation between z values was reviewed across
ecoregion in each taxa and across taxa for each ecoregion using the arithmetic standard
13
==PAGE:24==
deviation. The average standard deviation across taxa for all ecoregion was only half the
average standard deviation across ecoregion. Thus, it is assumed that the ecoregion has
a greater impact on the z-values than the taxa. Also, earlier approaches in species-area
relationship modeling mainly distinguished between location when applying z-values (e.g.,
islands and continental z values) [70]. Based on the results it was decided to take the
average z values across taxa for each ecoregion as a rough estimate. A similar approach
was used by Kuipers et al. (2021) who assumed the characteristics between amphibians
and reptiles close enough to use the same values for both taxa [71]. The distributions of
z for amphibians, reptiles, mammals, and birds are shown in Figure 3.4.
Amphibians Reptiles Mammals
Birds
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
z-values
Figure 3.4: z-value distributions for amphibians, reptiles, mammals, and birds across ecoregions
with median, 25% and 75% quartiles.
To asses the actual number of species potentially disappearing, species distribution range
maps were used to calculate the number of species occurring globally and per ecoregion.
These maps were sourced from the IUCN Red list and from BirdLife for amphibians, rep-
tiles, mammals, and birds [75, 76]. For vascular plants, a recently developed dataset was
used based on the IUCN Red List and the Global Biodiversity Information Facility (GBIF)
with native regions and range estimates generated using standardized Maxent predictions
[77]. To be comparable to the other taxonomic groups, only the native regions were used.
The dataset from the IUCN Red list and BirdLife were cleaned by removing species ex-
tinct and extinct in the wild in QGIS. The dataset for vascular plants already excluded
extinct species. After cleaning, the dataset contained 47,675 vascular plant species, 7209
amphibian, 9701 reptile, 5608 mammal, and 12975 bird species that were used in further
modeling. The coverage of species in all taxa is not 100%. However, the EFs aim to
represent the ecosystem quality and hence all included species act as proxies for the rest
of the ecosystem.
All data used to estimate the fraction of species effected by future SLR is based on current
species distributions. However, considering the current rate of species extinction from
other factor than SLR, the number of species will be much lower at the end of the time
horizon of 100 yr than it is today [78].
But due to the higher uncertainty of species
distribution in 100 yr, it is the more feasible and robust approach to take today’s species
distributions.
14
==PAGE:25==
3.5
Severity Factors
To distinct between local and global species extinction is of high relevance. A species which
extincts in one region still occurring in another region could potentially be reestablished.
But a species which is globally extinct is irreversible lost. To assess if a local species loss
leads to a global extinction is thereby important and a consistent approach was presented
by Verones et al.
2022 [79].
They modeled the Global Extinction Probability (GEP)
scaling factor for more than 98 000 species in 20 species groups across marine, terrestrial,
and freshwater ecosystems in different spatial scales. For terrestrial ecosystems, they de-
veloped scaling factors for vascular plants, mammals, reptiles, amphibians, and birds.
As mentioned in the research limitations, species specific characteristics are often not
included in impact pathways for ecosystem quality. The GEP includes such species char-
acteristics by considering species range sizes, global conservation status (IUCN), occur-
rence certainty, and species richness. Even the global conservation status itself involves
five quantitative characteristics [80] such as population size reductions (category A) and
quantitative analysis of extinction risks (category E).
Category E includes several indices which are linked to dispersal abilities, an important
factor considering slow changes as SLR. It covers e.g., generation length - the turnover
rate of breeding individuals in a population - important for species in which range shifts
happen across generations. Additionally, quantitative analysis are performed that include
population viability (ability to persist) to assess extinction risks for time periods up to
100 yr [80].
The GEPs on ecoregion level were used to aggregated the regional PDF to a global level.
This was accomplished by multiplying the ecoregion level CFs with the GEP for the same
species group and ecoregion.
3.6
Aggregated Characterisation Factors
Ecoregions: Both the XFs and the EFs are specific to a ecoregion j. However, because
SLR is a global concern, it is not only the impact on ecosystem quality in single ecoregions
that is of interest, but the potential loss of species on a global scale. This was determined
by matrix multiplication of FF x XF with EF·SF, by which the products of both matrices
for each ecoregion are summed. Thereby, the sum of the impacts in each ecoregion becomes
a global effect.
Taxonomic groups: To facilitate the application and interpretation of the CFs, they
were aggregated across taxonomic groups. The resulting taxon-generic CFs provide the
average or marginal PDF covering all taxonomic groups. One method proposed by Verones
et al. (2015) is to average the taxon-specific CFs by giving equal weight to all taxonomic
groups according to Equation 9 [81]. This approach is commonly used by e.g., Dorber et
al. (2020) and Kuipers et al. (2021) [26, 71].
CFaggregated,i =
nP
t=1
CFi,g
N
,
(9)
where CFaggregated,i are the global CFs of the GHG emission i aggregated across taxonomic
groups g [PDF·yr·kg−1
i ], CFi,g are the global CFs specific to GHG emission i and taxonomic
groups g [PDFt·yr·kg−1
i ], and N is the number of taxonomic groups.
15
==PAGE:26==
3.7
Spatial Analysis of Ecosystem Damages
A thrilling side effect of the established impact pathway is the potential to analyse which
ecoregion and taxonomic groups will be most affected by SLR. By excluding the FF in the
matrix multiplication, factors can be calculated which are spatial differentiated. These
factors can either represent the PDF in the individual ecoregions due to inundation, or
the effect of the PDF of individual ecoregions on the global PDF (how much contributes
the regional factor to the global) depending on whether the SF is included. The regional
factors were calculated accoring to Equation 10. The unit of these factors is PDFj,t·yr·K−1.
contribution to global PDF
z
}|
{
ecoregional PDF
z
}|
{
XFj × EFj,g ·SFj,g
(10)
16
==PAGE:27==
4
Results and Discussion
In total, 2050 taxon-specific CFs and 410 taxon-generic CFs were calculated covering 5
taxonomic groups, 205 GHGs, and 436 coastal ecoregions.
They represent either the
marginal or average PDF per kg GHG emitted due to SLR driven by climate change with
a time horizon of 100 years. No CFs were calculated for ecoregions not affected by SLR,
such as those located inland. The CFs were calculated from the FF, XF, EF, and SF. In
the following chapter, the results of each individual factor, with the exception of the SF,
will be discussed separately.
4.1
Fate Factors
FFs for 205 GHGs were calculated using the cumulative AGTP100. The values, which
range between 1.9E-16 and 1.4E-9 K·yr·kg−1, are summarized in SI 2. The GHG with
the highest FF is sulfur hexafluorid followed by trifluoromethylsulfur pentafluoride. Both
GHGs are similar in their structure with relatively long lifetimes and high radiative eﬀicien-
cies. However, the current concentrations of sulfur hexafluorid and trifluoromethylsulfur
pentafluoride in the atmosphere are considered to be rather low and of least concern [82].
The median value of the FFs is 2.2E-11 K·yr·kg−1.
4.2
Exposure Factors
In this section, the results of the two parts of XF are discussed separately: 1. The local
SLR per global mean surface temperature increase for SSP5 and 2. The regional flooded
area per local SLR for SSP5. For illustrative purposes and due to time constraints, the
XFs were only modeled for one SSP as an example. The results of the first part of the
XFs are spatial raster files at a grid cell resolution of 1°. The second part of the XF are
factors for the ecoregions affected by SLR, such as coastal ecoregions. Combining both
XFs leads to XFs for 436 ecoregions, showing the area flooded in m2 in each ecoregion per
global mean surface temperature increase for SSP5.
4.2.1
Sea Level Rise
The SLR provided by the IPCC shows the increase in sea level between 2015-2100 com-
pared to the reference sea level between 1995-2014 and can be see in Figure 4.1. Figure 4.1
includes further details about the flood modeling, which will be explained in the next sec-
tion. The SLR ranges from -0.2 m and 1.37 m. Hot spots of high SLR can be seen along
the east coast of North America, particularly along the coast of Louisiana (USA), and the
northern Philippines. The main factors contributing to global SLR are thermal expansion,
glaciers, and ice sheets [21]. However, when comparing the hot spots of local SLR, they
do not correspond with the patterns of sea surface temperature increase [48]. They are
also not located close to glaciers or ice sheets. Actually, a decreases in local sea level is
expected in the extreme northern and southern parts of the world, such as around Sval-
bard, Greenland, and northern Canada. This shows that SLR is far more complex and
that the contributors to global SLR do not directly determine local SLR in the vicinity.
It is noteworthy that the expected SLR in the Caspian Sea, which is isolated from the rest
of the oceans and was often not considered in earlier studies about SLR, is also signifi-
cant [49, 83]. The first part of XF is the SLR divided by the global surface temperature
increase, spatial differentiated with a resolution equal to the SLR raster file. The XF is
available in the SI 3 as a GeoTIFF.
17
==PAGE:28==
Figure 4.1: Local SLR and flooded areas by 2100 following SSP5 with three areas in detail: 1.
Part of the Tongan tropical moist forests, 2. Part of the Italian Coastline, and 3. The Caspian
Sea. The flooded area is bright blue, the the SLR ranges from white to dark blue, the areas below
SLR but excluded because of hydrological connectivity is creamy-white, and the ecoregion are red.
4.2.2
Flooded Area
SLR caused flooding affects 436 ecoregions and the proportion of flooded area ranged from
9.64E-8 % to 93.1 % of the original area. The ecoregions with exceptional high proportion
of flooded area were the Tongan tropical moist forests (33.7 %), Caspian lowland desert
(80.4 %), and Ile Europa and Bassas da India xeric scrub (93.1 %). Figure 4.1 shows
the SLR by 2100, all ecoregions, and the flooded areas. Additionally, three representative
areas are depicted in detail: 1. Part of the Tongan tropical moist forests showing a shift
between flood model and ecoregion layer, 2. Part of the Italian coastline as an example of
hydrological connectivity, and 3. The Caspian Sea and the corresponding flooded area.
The Tongan tropical moist forests are islands in the Southern Pacific Islands forests.
However, islands located at the edges of the world projection are partly affected by a
shift between the shoreline, the MERIT-DEM, and ecoregion map which did not overlap
exactly. That can lead to potential over- or underestimation by the model (see Figure 4.1
and section Limitations and Uncertainties). The Ile Europa and Bassas da India xeric
scrub is a single low-lying Island between Madagascar and Mozambique. Here, no shift
between shoreline and DEM map was detected and the flooding of 93% is assessed to
be accurate based on the given data. Notable is again the Caspian Sea and the related
flooding, particularly in the Caspian lowland desert. The area flooded around the Caspian
Sea is approximately 2.95E+5 km2, accounting for 62 % of the global flooding alone.
Although the SLR is not exceptionally high (ca. 0.7 m), even low increases in sea level
can potentially lead to extreme flooding due to the very low elevation levels in the Caspian
lowland desert.
Figure 4.2 shows the proportion of flooded area of the original ecoregion area for all affected
ecoregions, with and without outliers exceeding 30 %. In general, the proportion of flooded
18
==PAGE:29==
area is relatively small, with 50 % of the data distributed between 0.1 % and 1.73 %, and
a median of 0.41 %. Globally, an area of 4.2E+5 km2 is estimated to be inundated by
2100 accounting for 0.31 % of the total global surface area. All flooded areas per ecoregion
in km2, m2, and in % are summarized in SI 3. Furthermore, a spatial raster file with the
flooded area cut and not cut to shoreline are attached as GeoTIF files.
SSP5 -upper limit
0
20
40
60
80
100
Flooded Area [%]
SSP5 +upper limit
0
5
10
15
20
25
Flooded Area [%]
Figure 4.2: Percentage of flooded area of the affected ecoregions with median, 25% and 75%
quartiles. With 1. All outliers and 2. Outliers smaller than 30%.
4.2.3
Validation of Flooding Model
To validate the flooding model, the results were compared to two other models. However,
both models differ slightly in either their extent or approach. The first model is developed
by the Danish company Scalgo and is only available in Nordic countries, Poland, Germany,
and the UK [84]. The second model, by Kirezci et al. (2020), covers global flooding but
for extreme sea levels [49]. The results were compared for a representative area in Den-
mark, Zealand. The limitation to this area was due download restriction of first model to
a size of 500 km2 and its limited accessibility to Denmark through a DTU student account.
Scalgo:
Scalgo is a company that provides tools for high-resolution modeling of surface water and
flooding. One of their tools is a SLR analysis calculating the areas potentially flooded at a
given water level. The water level can be adjusted manually and hydrological connectivity
is included [85]. For the comparison, the sea level was set to the sea level predicted around
Zealand under SPP5 in 2100 (0.58 m) [48]. Scalgo uses a high-resolution elevation model
from the Danish Geodata Agency (DGA) with a 0.4 m resolution and 0.05 m vertical
precision [86]. The data for Zealand, including surrounding island, was downloaded in 14
pieces due to the download restriction. The pieces were merged and reclassified to fit the
self-modeled data in their values for flooded areas using QGIS.
Extreme Sea Levels by Kirezci et al. (2020):
Kirezci et al. (2020) developed a model that projects the flooding due to extreme sea levels
in 2050 and 2100. They used data from two of the IPCC’s Representative Concentration
Pathways (RCPs) 4.5 and 8.5 and included tide models, storm surges, and wave setup in
their model. Thus, it is not a permanent flooding but episodical. Like the model developed
in this study, Kirezci et al. used a bathtub approach with hydrological connectivity and
the same Multi-Error-Removed Improved-Terrain DEM (MERIT DEM) but in a lower
resolution of 1 km at the Equator [49].
19
==PAGE:30==
Table 4.1: Main properties of flood models and their projected flooded area on zealand by 2100
[86, 54, 49]
Model
Resolution
Vertical
Precision
Sea Level
in 2100
Elevation
Model
Flooded
Area [km2]
Scalgo
0.4 m
0.05 m
0.58
by DGA
31.18
Kirezci et al.
1 km
58% <2 m
1.5-2.5 m
MERIT DEM
48,271.06
Self-modeled
90 m
58% <2 m
0.58 m
MERIT DEM
267.21
Comparisons:
Table 4.1 shows significant model properties and compares the areas flooded on Zealand
calculated with the three models. The models show significant differences in flooded areas,
with Scalgo predicting smaller areas along the coastline while the other models showing
larger inland areas. The model developed in this study generally shows more overlapping
areas with Kirezci et al.’s model than with Scalgo.
The differences and similarities in
flooded area are most likely attributed to three main factors: 1. Higher resolution models
can better differentiate elevation and thereby flooding. In models with lower resolution,
grid cells cover larger areas which are projected to be flooded if the elevation is below
sea level. Within the three examples it can be seen, that with decreasing resolution the
flooded area is increasing. 2. Different elevation models can lead to differences in flood
modeling, particularly for sea levels in the magnitude of centimeters. Scalgo uses a spe-
cialised elevation model for Denmark with a higher vertical precision than the MERIT
DEM used in the other models [86, 53]. Although elevation models of such high resolution
may achieve more accurate results for regional modelling, they are impractical for large
scale modelling due to high computational demands. 3. The assumed sea level leads to
significant differences. While Scalgo’s sea level could be adjusted to the the sea level of
this study, Kirezci et al. uses extreme sea levels [49].
All three models consider hydrological connectivity but exclude future coastal defenses.
Despite the differences, all three models show similar areas at risk, but with significant
variations in the extent of flooding [85, 49]. In Figure 4.3 C and D, the differences and sim-
ilarities between the three models are shown on the example of a smaller area of Zealand.
The areas in green, blue, and pink and yellow show the flooding by Kirezci et al., the
self-developed model, and Scalgo’s model, respectively. The areas overlapping between
Scalgo’s model and the self-developed model are shown in yellow, while the non-overlap
is shown in pink. White areas represent either the sea or areas below sea level but that
are not connected to the sea (inland areas). The selected area is marked with a circle in
the overview figures of Zealand, see Figure 4.3 (A & B), and a google maps picture of the
area is attached in the >Appendix (Figure A.1).
The google maps picture reveals that the large flooded area in blue and green is a lake
connected to the sea. Although Scalgo’s manual does not mention, it is possible that they
exclude water bodies on land, such as lakes. This is a reasonable approach when assessing
flood risks for humans. However, flooding of freshwater bodies with saltwater can signif-
icantly alter the habitat of animal and plant species [13]. All files for the validation are
gathered in the SI 3 together with a QGIS project illustrating the individual flooded areas.
Looking at the global flooding, it is worth noting that the flooding by Kirezci et al. is
indeed higher due to higher sea levels. However, the models still show similar results in the
areas flooded with different flooding extents which confirms the effectiveness and robust-
ness of the developed modeling approach. Additionally, a main improvement of the new
model is a higher resolution and the inclusion of the Caspian Sea showing extraordinary
flooding potential.
20
==PAGE:31==
Figure 4.3: Flooded areas by SLR or extreme sea level for Zealand in 2100. In blue the self-
modelled flooding, in green the flooding modelled by Kirezci et al. (2020), in pink the model
developed by Scalgo. A: Comparison between the own model and Scalgo B: Comparison between
the own model and Kirezci et al., both for entire Zealand. C & D: Zoom into a representative area
marked in A & B as a circle with further illustration which areas of Scalgo overlap with the own
model (yellow). Note: the illustration in yellow only applies for sub-figure C.
4.3
Effect Factors
In total, 4,360 EFs were calculated covering 436 ecoregion, 5 taxonomic groups and two
modelling approaches. No EFs were calculated for ecoregions not affected by SLR. The
EFs vary between five orders of magnitude across ecoregions and taxa. Within the taxo-
nomic groups, the range was similar, with a variation of seven orders of magnitude. The
taxonomic groups with the highest EFs (in terms of average, median, and maximum) are
amphibians and reptiles, with the same z-values and EFs for both groups. The taxonomic
group with the lowest EFs is birds.
The ecoregions with the highest EFs are Ile Europa and Bassas da India xeric scrub, the
Malpelo Island xeric scrub, and the Lord Howe Island subtropical forests. These small
islands are located in different regions of the world, including the central-American Pacific
and the Tasman Sea. The next four ecoregions with the highest EFs are also islands. This
may be due to a higher proportion of area that is flooded and a higher fraction of endemic
species, both leading to a steeper slope at the reference point x (SSP5). Additionally, EFs
are expressed as PDF per m2 flooded, and for ecoregions with small areas like islands, the
fraction of species lost by flooding one m2 may be higher than in larger ecoregions. Note,
that PDF is the fraction of species lost and not the absolute number of species which
depends on the absolute area flooded and species richness.
The UNEP-SETAC Life Cycle Initiative recommends to use average modeling to assess
large scale environmental changes while the marginal approach is recommended for assess-
21
==PAGE:32==
ments of small (marginal) changes [27]. However, the flooded area for SSP5 is relatively
small compared to the overall ecoregion area. Thereby, the reference point x lies almost
always in the linear part of the PDF-flooded area slope leading to very similar values for
average and marginal EFs (see Figure 3.3). The average EFs are generally lower than the
marginal EFs. The median of the average differences across taxa and ecoregion is rather
small, at 0.4 %. However, the difference in percentage vary on average between 0.1 % and
58.6 %. For most ecoregions, it will not make a significant difference whether average or
marginal EFs are used, although for some ecoregions and taxa combinations the difference
may be substantial.
4.3.1
Comparison
Dorber et al. (2020) derived CFs for land use change which describe the effect of inundating
one m2 of terrestrial land. They differentiated between inundating five different land use
types, such as urban areas or managed forest, in several ecoregions [26]. Similar to the
here calculated EFs, they describe the effects on ecosystem quality (PDF/m2 inundated)
by adapting the countryside species-area relationship model used by Chaudhary’s et al.
(2015) [66]. Comparing their maximal and minimal CFs with the maximal and minimal
EFs of this study, it can be seen that they are within the same orders of magnitude [26].
Their maximal CF of 1.2E-08 PDF of birds by inundating one m2 of managed forest is
close to the EF of 4.5E-8 PDF of amphibians per m2 flooded. Their minimal CF of 3E-
14 PDF of birds per m2 urban area inundated is slightly lower than the minimal EF of
1.2E-0.13 PDF of birds per m2. To compare the EFs and CFs more comprehensively, the
EFs were mapped against the CFs. For the comparison, the CFs from Drober et al. were
averaged across the five land use types because no differentiation between land use types
was made for the EFs.
10−13
10−12
10−11
10−10
10−9
10−8
10−13
10−12
10−11
10−10
Dorber CFs [PDF/m2]
Self-modelled EFs [PDF/m2]
Amphibians
Reptiles
Mammals
Birds
Figure 4.4:
Comparison between the EFs of this study and CFs of Dorber et al.
(2020) in
PDF·m−2 for amphibians, reptiles, mammals, and birds across 338 ecoregions [26]
Figure 4.4 shows the EFs and CFs in PDF·m−2 for 338 ecoregion and 4 taxonomic groups
in log-log scale. Only the ecoregions and taxonomic groups containing both EFs and CFs
were included. A linear trend between the two factors is visible, differing partly in one
order of magnitude. The linear trend and similarity in the results can serve as a validation
of the robustness of the results. All calculated EFs and the data of the comparison are
summarized in SI 4.
22
==PAGE:33==
4.4
Characterisation Factors
Two different types of CFs were calculated to express: 1. Taxon and GHG specific CFi,g in
PDFg·yr·kg−1
i , and 2. Taxon-generic CFi in PDF·yr·kg−1
i . A total of 2050 taxon-specific
CFs were calculated, ranging from 1.4E-20 to 4.9E-13 PDFg·yr·kg−1
i
with a median of
3.3E-15 PDFt·yr·kg−1
i
across taxonomic groups, GHGs, and modeling approaches. The
taxon-generic CFs are of similar magnitude with a minimum, maximum, and median of
3.6E-20, 2.7E-13, and 4.2E-15 PDF·yr·kg−1
i
across GHGs, respectively. In total, 410 taxon-
generic CFs were derived. CFs of both types vary by 5 orders of magnitude, highlighting
the need to differentiate between GHGs. Within each GHG, the taxon-specific CFs vary
in their values but are constant in magnitude across taxonomic groups.
Hence, it is
reasonable to apply taxon-generic CFs when no differentiation between taxa is possible.
All CFs are summarized in SI 6.
4.4.1
Comparisons
De Schryver et al. (2009) developed average CFs that quantify the impact of an emission
change of 63 GHGs on ecosystem quality [18].
They followed a similar approach, de-
scribing the loss of habitat for terrestrial species (plants, butterflies, birds, and mammals)
using the species-area relationship with a time horizon of 100 years [15]. The main two
differences are: 1. Their combination of three different interpretations of the species area
relationship model, and 2. The fact that they analysed habitat loss due to a regional tem-
perature change rather than SLR. However, it is particularly interesting to compare these
two sets CFs in order to determine which effect of climate change is of higher relevance
and to rank the developed CFs within a LCIA context.
De Schryver’s CFs are given in PDF·km2·yr·kton−1, where km2 originates from an addi-
tional multiplication with the global surface of (semi)natural terrestrial area. In order to
compare both sets of CFs, their results were divided by the mentioned area and converted
to kg instead of kton. They range from 2.5E-15 to 6.1E-9 PDF·yr·kg−1 with a median of
1.6E-10 PDF·yr·kg−1 across GHGs. The CFs calculated in this study and De Schryver’s
CFs are depicted for the GHGs in common (60 GHGs) in Figure 4.5.
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
10−17
10−14
10−11
10−8
GHGs
CFs [PDF·yr · kg−1]
De Schryver et al. CFs
SLR CFs
Figure 4.5:
Comparison between De Schryver et al.
(2009) and this study (SLR CFs) in
PDF·yr·kg−1 for 60 GHGs [18]
De Schryver’s CFs are generally higher by two to four orders of magnitude, indicating that
habitat loss due to temperature change has a higher impact on the global species richness
than climate change driven SLR. However, differences in modeling can also influence the
results. Figure 4.5 also shows that both CFs follow the same pattern across GHGs, which
be seen as a validation of the results.
23
==PAGE:34==
4.5
Spatial Analysis of Ecosystem Damages
A total of 4360 factors were calculated which give the potential loss of species of taxon g in
each ecoregion j due to climate change induced SLR [PDFj,g·yr·K−1]. The ecoregions with
the highest potential species loss are Ile Europa and Bassas da India xeric scrub and the
Caspian lowland desert, with factors of 0.20 and 0.18 PDFj,g·yr·K−1, respectively. These
are the same ecoregions with the highest flood proportion and Ile Europa and Bassas da
India xeric scrub also had the highest EF.
By including SF, 4032 factors represent the PDF globally due to the potential species loss of
each individual ecoregion. Both factors have the same units, but the PDF refers to a global
loss, which means irreversible extinction. The ecoregion with the highest contribution to
global extinction of species is again the Caspian lowland desert, with a maximum factor
of 4.53E-5 PDFj,g·yr·K−1, followed by the Bahamian-Antillean mangroves with 2.15E-5
PDFj,g·yr·K−1.
In Figure 4.6, average factors for reptiles are depicted as an example, showing global
PDF·yr per K temperature increase. The Caspian lowland desert ecoregion exhibits an
exceptionally high CF, consistent with the results of XF. Larger ecoregions tend to have
lower CFs, potentially due to lower proportions of flooding relative to the total ecoregion
area. All factors are summarized in the SI 6.
Figure 4.6: Spatial analysis of ecosystem damages, showing average XF x EF·SF for reptiles for
436 ecoregion in PDFj·yr·K−1
The taxonomic groups with the highest factors for ecoregion-species loss and highest num-
ber of factors falling within the top 2 % are amphibians and reptiles, followed by vascular
plants. After applying the SF, the risk of global amphibian extinction decreases. That
leaves reptiles as the taxonomic group with the highest risk of global species extinction
due to SLR when counting the factors in the top 2 %. However, the highest factor belongs
to taxon birds for the Caspian lowland desert.
24
==PAGE:35==
4.6
Uncertainties and Limitations
Large scale models can entail significant uncertainties and associated limitations. The
global model presented here is no exception and its limitations and uncertainties must
be addressed. The following section was divided into two main parts: uncertainty and
limitations in the data used, and of the developed model itself.
4.6.1
Data Uncertainties and Associated Limitations
The AGTP used for the FF was derived from a combination of mathematical models
and climate models [28]. This method includes more physical process than the Global
Warming Potential (GWP), leading to a higher uncertainty - a trade-off when moving
further along the cause–effect chain to effects of larger societal or environmental relevance.
The uncertainty is dominated by the impulse-response function, ocean heat uptake, and
climate sensitivity summing up to an uncertainty of e.g., ± 90 % for the AGTP of CO2
[28].
The uncertainties in SLR provided by IPCC result of the uncertainties of the individual
models combined in CMIP6. The global SLR for SSP5 by 2100 is given as a median value
with likely ranges that only include processes of medium confidence: 0.77 m (0.63–1.01
m) [21]. The large uncertainties in both FF and SLR can lead to either overestimations
or underestimations in the FF, XF, and consequently CF. To improve these uncertainties,
better mathematical and climate models would be needed, although they are currently
not available.
One major limitation of the SLR data for the purposes of this report is its SSP and
time-boundedness. This creates a mismatch in time perspective between FF and XF. The
AGTP100 gives the increase in global temperature from a specific GHG emission after
100 years while the SLR is modeled for an increase in global temperature starting in 2015
until 2100 (85 years) [28, 21].
Additionally, the SLR is modeled for continuous GHG
emissions along the SSP, while the AGTP models a single impulse emission. To address
both issues, updated SLR data with a 100 years time frame and an impulse emission could
be used. The IPCC provides potentially data for a time horizon of 100 years but high
computational knowledge and power would be required to model SLR due to an impulse
emission. Alternatively, the AGTP could be adapted to a 85-year time frame, which is
unpractical within a LCA context because no other CFs exists with a comparable time
horizon.
Although the elevation model used for flood modeling is a far developed and often used
model, the uncertainty in the vertical precision can be up to 2 m in Southern countries with
missing high-precision elevation data [49, 53]. This uncertainty is particularly significant
when modeling flooding by SLR in centimeters. While higher precision elevations exist
in some Western countries, they are not globally available. The Climate Central claims
to have a model with higher precision, especially in coastal regions (Coastal-DEM) [83].
Unfortunately, the request for the open-access data by the model was never confirmed and
the data was not made available.
Antarctica is not included in the model due to a lack of elevation data. However, the
impact of SLR on Antarctica is assumed to be small due to the low species richness and
extreme weather conditions. As previously mentioned in the Methods section, there are
also missing z-values for vascular plants and identical values for amphibians and reptiles
were used. Especially for vascular plants, z values could lead to a better differentiation
between taxa in the EFs. To address this limitation, a literature review gathering and
combining z-values of large numbers of plant species in all ecoregions would be required
(see Drakare et al. (2006) [67]).
25
==PAGE:36==
4.6.2
Model Uncertainties and Associated Limitations
The main limitations in modeling lie in the flood modeling. Using different global maps for
flood modeling e.g., to cut the flooded areas to the shoreline, and predict the flooded area
in ecoregions creates shifts between landmasses. For example, the shoreline map used to
define the flooded area on land did not overlap exactly with the DEM used at the eastern
and western edges of the world projection. As a result, small islands tend to disappear
in the sea, even if they would not be completely flooded in reality. This problem could
be tackled by developing a shoreline map based on the DEM, ensuring an exact match
between the two maps. Furthermore, the ecoregion map does not overlap exactly with the
shoreline map neither, leading to flooded areas not accounted for in the calculations (see
first zoom in Figure 4.1).
A further idea was to include high tides. By considering the high tides, not only perma-
nently flooded areas, but also areas that are frequently flooded could be included. Ideally,
the Mean High Water Springs (MHWS) would be added on top of the SLR. The MHWS
is the average of high waters appearing twice in 24 hours throughout the year when the
range of the tide is greatest [87].
Another limitation of the modeling is that only one SSP was considered, potentially leading
to a biased result. To evaluate this bias and calculate an average SLR between scenarios,
the modeling should be expanded to at least four SSPs.
As previously mentioned, the classic-species area relationship model has limitations, such
as missing differentiation between land use types flooded. It is assumed that all species
are homogeneously distributed in the ecoregion, which may lead to uncertainty. Thereby,
the difference in species loss if an urban area or a natural habitat is flooded due to their
different habitat quality is not considered. Although taxon and ecoregion specific z values
were used and the GEP includes species-specific properties, important ecological factors,
such as the loss of key species, food webs, and ecosystem fragmentation, are not included.
This leads to a simplified representation of ecosystems properties and species interaction.
Kuipers et al. (2021) have recently proposed an improved species area relationship model
that includes distribution, dispersal, habitat preferences, and habitat fragmentation in a
species-habitat relationship, that could be an interesting alternative [71].
Finally, a sensitivity analysis for the different factors would help to determine which factor
and uncertainties have the greatest impact on the CFs. That could provide a good star-
ing point for improvements. Within the analysis, the affect of different climate matrices,
SSPs, elevation models, and species area relationship models including z values could be
assessed.
26
==PAGE:37==
5
Conclusion and Recommendations
As of 2022, around one million different animal and plant species are threatened with ex-
tinction due to human activities, and the trend is rising [78]. One major factor threatening
biodiversity is anthropogenic climate change. It is a direct cause of species extinction, but
also increasingly exacerbating the effects of other factors on biodiversity. Only few studies
cover complete impact pathways from climate change to ecosystem quality, leaving many
research gaps such as SLR.
The aim of this project was to incorporate the impact pathway of SLR into the LCIA
framework. The pathway covers the cumulative temperature increase from a change in
GHG emission, the local SLR from temperature increase, and the respective flooding of
terrestrial ecoregions, which leads to a potential species loss globally. A total of 2050
taxon-specific and 410 taxon-generic characterisation factors were calculated, covering
205 GHGs, five taxonomic groups, and average and marginal modeling approaches. The
XFs, EFs, and CFs were compared to existing factors within the same field to validate the
modeling and to assess the robustness of the results. It was found that the EFs and CFs
show very similar pattern to the reference factors, but are lower by one to four orders of
magnitude. This leads to the conclusion that the effect of SLR on ecosystems is lower
than the impacts it was compared to, such as temperature rise. The self-developed global
flood model was compared to two other models and the results were similar to one of them
while the second model stands out.
Additionally, a spatial analysis of ecosystem damages was conducted for 436 coastal ecore-
gions. The analysis showed that the ecoregions under highest risk of species loss are Ile
Europa and Bassas da India xeric scrub and the Caspian lowland due to an exceptional
high proportion of area flooded by SLR (up to 93 %). The Caspian lowland is particularly
noteworthy as its flooded area accounts for 62 % of the global area flooded and has not
been considered in previous SLR research.
Although the calculated characterisation factors still bear limitations and potentially over-
estimate or underestimate the real impact of SLR, they are robust in their modeling and
follow the recommendation by the Life Cycle Initiative. They have a high taxonomic and
GHG coverage, differentiate between two LCA modeling approaches, and close a gap in
climate change damage modeling for ecosystem quality. Their implementation can con-
tribute to the development of harmonized LCIA indicators, which are urgently needed for
a consistent quantification of environmental life cycle impacts of products and services.
At a larger perspective, they can help companies and policymakers to take environmen-
tally sustainable decisions by using LCA. This is particularly important considering the
new goals set by the UN Biodiversity conference (COP15) in December 2022, that aim to
protect 30 % of the Earth’s land, coastal areas, and oceans [88].
Personally, I have gained experience in dealing with large data sets and analysing spa-
tial differentiated data in QGIS as well as the programming language R. I have become
familiar with the concepts of LCIA, including its strengths and still existing limitations.
But most important, I have learned to think conceptually and connect several aspects to
a broader framework.
The recommendation, summarized in Table 5.1, were mostly derived from the Limitations
and Uncertainties. Despite the limitations of the individual factors, it is recommended
to implement them in the LCIA framework. The calculated factors, XF and EF, were
checked for robustness by comparing them to already implemented factors and they showed
27
==PAGE:38==
reliable results. The FF and SF are already in use in LCIA and recommended by the
Life Cycle Initiative [89, 29].
Additionally, the developed impact pathway follows the
recommendations of the UNEP-SETAC Life Cycle Initiative when ever possible, which
aims to harmonise LCIA indicators. Furthermore, this work serves as a foundation for
further research, hopefully including some of the listed recommendations. As such, the
developed framework represents a promising starting point for further research on SLR
modeling in LCIA contributing to a better understanding of how climate change damages
biodiversity.
Table 5.1: Recommendations for future improvement of the characterisation framework in its
data quality and modeling approach for each individual factor.
Further recommendations for
the application of the CFs for LCA practitioners. SAR is the abbreviation for the species-area
relationship model.
Factor
Data recommendation
Modeling recommendation
FF
·Use updated values
from AR6 when available
XF1
·Use SLR with time horizon of 100 yr
(potentially available from IPCC)
·Use at least 4 SSPs
·New approach to include SSP
specific Temp. change over time
(potentially the time-integrated
Temp increase of SSP)
XF2
·DEM with higher vertical precision
(e.g., Coastal-DEM)
·Other shoreline and ecoregion
shapefiles to avoid shifts
·Develop a shoreline map based on
used DEM to avoid shifts
·Include Tides
EF
·Search for vascular plant
specific z-values
·Use Kuipers et al. species-habitat
relationship model instead of SAR
·Include more taxa
SF
·Potentially include other factor for
e.g., dispersal and adaptation abilities
(important for slow changes in habitat)
Application
·Include the CFs in the LCIA framework as an additional factor and
potentially combined with De Schryvers factor
·If possible, use CFs which are taxon specific
·Use average CFs as SLR is not a marginal change
28
==PAGE:39==
Bibliography
[1]
IPCC. “Summary for policymakers”. In: Climate Change 2021: The Physical Science
Basis. Contribution of Working Group I to the Sixth Assessment Report of the Inter-
governmental Panel on Climate Change [Masson-Delmotte, V., P. Zhai, A. Pirani,
S.L. Connors, C. Péan, S. Berger, N. Caud, Y. Chen, L. Goldfarb, M.I. Gomis, M.
Huang, K. Leitzell, E. Lonnoy, J.B.R. Matthews, T.K. Maycock, T. Waterfield, O.
Yelekçi, R. Yu, and B. Zhou (eds.)] Cambridge, United Kingdom and New York,
NY, USA: Cambridge University Press, 2021, pp. 3–32. isbn: 9781139177245. doi:
10.1017/CBO9781139177245.003.
[2]
P. Forster et al. “Earth’s energy budget, climate feedbacks, and climate sensitivity”.
In: Climate Change 2021: The Physical Science Basis. Contribution of Working
Group I to the Sixth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate
Change [Masson-Delmotte, V., P. Zhai, A. Pirani, S.L. Connors, C. Péan, S. Berger,
N. Caud, Y. Chen, L. Goldfarb, M.I. Gomis, M. Huang, K. Leitzell, E. Lonnoy,
J.B.R. Matthews, T.K. Maycock, T. Waterfield, O. Yelekçi, R. Yu, and B. Zhou
(eds.)] Cambridge, UK and New York, NY, USA: Cambridge University Press, 2021,
pp. 923–1054. isbn: 9781009157896. doi: 10.12006/j.issn.1673-1719.2021.191.
[3]
P.A. Arias et al. “Technical Summary”. In: Climate Change 2021: The Physical
Science Basis. Contribution of Working Group I to the Sixth Assessment Report of
the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change [Masson-Delmotte, V., P. Zhai, A.
Pirani, S.L. Connors, C. Péan, S. Berger, N. Caud, Y. Chen, L. Goldfarb, M.I.
Gomis, M. Huang, K. Leitzell, E. Lonnoy, J.B.R. Matthews, T.K. Maycock, T.
Waterfield, O. Yelekçi, R. Yu, and B. Zhou (eds.)] Cambridge, UK and New York,
NY, USA: Cambridge University Press, 2021, pp. 33–144. isbn: 9781009157896.
[4]
John T Hardy. Climate change: causes, effects, and solutions. John Wiley & Sons,
2003.
[5]
S. Cooley et al. “Oceans and Coastal Ecosystems and Their Services”. In: Cli-
mate Change 2022: Impacts, Adaptation, and Vulnerability. Contribution of Working
Group II to the Sixth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate
Change [H.-O. Pörtner, D.C. Roberts, M. Tignor, E.S. Poloczanska, K. Minten-
beck, A. Alegría, M. Craig, S. Langsdorf, S. Löschke, V. Möller, A. Okem, B. Rama
(eds.)] Cambridge, UK and New York, NY, USA: Cambridge University Press, 2022,
pp. 379–550. isbn: 9781009325844. doi: 10.1017/9781009325844.005.379.
[6]
C. Parmesan et al. “Terrestrial and Freshwater Ecosystems and Their Services”.
In: Climate Change 2022: Impacts, Adaptation and Vulnerability. Contribution of
Working Group II to the Sixth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel
on Climate Change [H.-O. Pörtner, D.C. Roberts, M. Tignor, E.S. Poloczanska, K.
Mintenbeck, A. Alegría, M. Craig, S. Langsdorf, S. Löschke, V. Möller, A. Okem, B.
Rama (eds.)] Cambridge, UK and New York, NY, USA: Cambridge University Press,
2022, pp. 197–378. isbn: 9781009325844. doi: 10.1017/9781009325844.004.198.
[7]
G. Cissé et al. “Health, Wellbeing and the Changing Structure of Communities”.
In: Climate Change 2022: Impacts, Adaptation and Vulnerability. Contribution of
Working Group II to the Sixth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel
on Climate Change [H.-O. Pörtner, D.C. Roberts, M. Tignor, E.S. Poloczanska, K.
Mintenbeck, A. Alegría, M. Craig, S. Langsdorf, S. Löschke, V. Möller, A. Okem, B.
Rama (eds.)] Cambridge, UK and New York, NY, USA: Cambridge University Press,
2022, pp. 1041–1170. isbn: 9781009325844. doi: 10.1017/9781009325844.009.1042.
29
==PAGE:40==
[8]
Michael Z. Hauschild, Ralph K. Rosenbaum, and Stig Irving Olsen. Life cycle assess-
ment. Theory and Practice. 2018. isbn: 9783319564746. doi: 10.17654/JPHMTFeb2015_
029_042.
[9]
Francesca Verones et al. “LCIA framework and cross-cutting issues guidance within
the UNEP-SETAC Life Cycle Initiative”. In: Journal of Cleaner Production 161
(2017), pp. 957–967.
[10]
Ralph K Rosenbaum et al. “Life cycle impact assessment”. In: Life cycle assessment.
Springer, 2018, pp. 167–270.
[11]
Alba Roibás-Rozas et al. “Modeling the Impact of Salinity Variations on Aquatic
Environments: Including Negative and Positive Effects in Life Cycle Assessment”.
In: Environmental Science and Technology 56 (2022), pp. 874–884. issn: 15205851.
doi: 10.1021/acs.est.1c04656.
[12]
Nuno Cosme and Michael Z. Hauschild. “Effect factors for marine eutrophication in
LCIA based on species sensitivity to hypoxia”. In: Ecological Indicators 69 (2016),
pp. 453–462. issn: 1470160X. doi: 10.1016/j.ecolind.2016.04.006. url: http://dx.doi.
org/10.1016/j.ecolind.2016.04.006.
[13]
Maria José Amores et al. “Biodiversity impacts from salinity increase in a coastal
wetland”. In: Environmental Science and Technology 47.12 (2013), pp. 6384–6392.
issn: 0013936X. doi: 10.1021/es3045423.
[14]
Marlia M. Hanafiah et al. “Including the introduction of exotic species in life cycle
impact assessment: The case of inland shipping”. In: Environmental Science and
Technology 47.24 (2013), pp. 13934–13940. issn: 0013936X. doi: 10.1021/es403870z.
[15]
Chris D. Thomas et al. “Extinction risk from climate change”. In: Nature 427.6970
(2004), pp. 294–296. doi: 10.2307/j.ctv8jnzw1.37.
[16]
Laura Scherer, Irem Gürdal, and Peter M. Van Bodegom. “Characterization factors
for ocean acidification impacts on marine biodiversity”. In: Journal of Industrial
Ecology (2022), pp. 1–11. doi: 10.1111/jiec.13274.
[17]
Dan Li et al. “Global characterization factors for quantifying the impacts of in-
creasing water temperature on freshwater fish”. In: Ecological Indicators 142 (2022),
p. 109201. issn: 1470-160X. doi: 10.1016/j.ecolind.2022.109201. url: https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.ecolind.2022.109201.
[18]
An M. De Schryver et al. “Characterization factors for global warming in life cycle
assessment based on damages to humans and ecosystems”. In: Environmental Sci-
ence and Technology 43.6 (2009), pp. 1689–1695. issn: 0013936X. doi: 10.1021/
es800456m.
[19]
Longlong Tang et al. “Assessment of global warming impact on biodiversity using
the extinction risk index in LCIA: a case study of Japanese plant species”. In: Inter-
national Journal of Life Cycle Assessment 23.2 (2018), pp. 314–323. issn: 16147502.
doi: 10.1007/s11367-017-1319-6.
[20]
Marlia M. Hanafiah et al. “Characterization factors for water consumption and
greenhouse gas emissions based on freshwater fish species extinction”. In: Environ-
mental Science and Technology 45.12 (2011), pp. 5272–5278. issn: 0013936X. doi:
10.1021/es1039634.
[21]
B. Fox-Kemper et al. “Ocean, Cryosphere and Sea Level Change”. In: Climate Change
2021: The Physical Science Basis. Contribution of Working Group I to the Sixth
Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change [Masson-
Delmotte, V., P. Zhai, A. Pirani, S.L. Connors, C. Péan, S. Berger, N. Caud, Y.
Chen, L. Goldfarb, M.I. Gomis, M. Huang, K. Leitzell, E. Lonnoy, J.B.R. Matthews,
T.K. Maycock, T. Waterfield, O. Yelekçi, R. Yu, and B. Zhou (eds.)] Cambridge,
30
==PAGE:41==
UK and New York, NY, USA: Cambridge University Press, 2021, pp. 1211–1362.
isbn: 9781009157896. doi: 10.1017/9781009157896.011.1212.
[22]
Michael Oppenheimer et al. “Chapter 4: Sea Level Rise and Implications for Low Ly-
ing Islands, Coasts and Communities”. In: IPCC Special Report Ocean and Cryosphere
[Abe-Ouchi, Ayako and Gupta, Kapil and Pereira, Joy (eds.) 2018, pp. 1–139.
[23]
Erik Sterner, Daniel JA Johansson, and Christian Azar. “Emission metrics and sea
level rise”. In: Climatic change 127.2 (2014), pp. 335–351.
[24]
Elsevier B.V. Scopus. url: http://www.scopus.com/ (visited on 08/03/2022).
[25]
Google. Google Scholar. url: https://scholar.google.de/ (visited on 08/04/2022).
[26]
Martin Dorber, Koen Kuipers, and Francesca Verones. “Global characterization fac-
tors for terrestrial biodiversity impacts of future land inundation in Life Cycle As-
sessment”. In: Science of the Total Environment 712 (2020). issn: 0048-9697. doi:
10.1016/j.scitotenv.2019.134582. url: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.scitotenv.2019.
134582.
[27]
Olivier Jolliet et al. “Global guidance on environmental life cycle impact assessment
indicators: impacts of climate change, fine particulate matter formation, water con-
sumption and land use”. In: International Journal of Life Cycle Assessment 23.11
(2018), pp. 2189–2207. issn: 16147502. doi: 10.1007/s11367-018-1443-y.
[28]
Gunnar Myhre et al. “Anthropogenic and natural radiative forcing”. In: Climate
Change 2013: The Physical Science Basis. Contribution of Working Group I to
the Fifth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change
[Stocker, T.F., D. Qin, G.-K. Plattner, M. Tignor, S.K. Allen, J. Boschung, A.
Nauels, Y. Xia, V. Bex and P.M. Midgley (eds.)] Cambridge, UK and New York,
NY, USA: Cambridge University Press, 2013. isbn: 9781107415324. doi: 10.1017/
CBO9781107415324.018.
[29]
Annie Levasseur et al. “Chapter 3: Greenhouse gas emissions and climate change
impacts”. In: Global Guidance for L ife Cycle Impact Assessment Indicators Volume
1. Ed. by Rolf Frischknecht and Olivier Jolliet. Vol. 1. UNEP/SETAC Life Cycle
Initiative, 2016, pp. 58–75.
[30]
Cécile Bulle et al. “Supporting Information section IMPACT World+: a globally
regionalized life cycle impact assessment method”. In: International Journal of Life
Cycle Assessment (2019), pp. 1–32.
[31]
Gunnar Myhre et al. “Anthropogenic and Natural Radiative Forcing: Supplementary
Material”. In: Climate Change 2013: The Physical Science Basis. Contribution of
Working Group I to the Fifth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on
Climate Change [Stocker, T.F., D. Qin, G.-K. Plattner, M. Tignor, S.K. Allen, J.
Boschung, A. Nauels, Y. Xia, V. Bex and P.M. Midgley (eds.)] 2013, pp. 1–44. url:
http://www.climatechange2013.org.
[32]
Annie Levasseur. “No Title [Unpublished manuscript]”. In: Université du Québec
(2022).
[33]
M.D. Palmer et al. “An ensemble approach to quantify global mean sea-level rise
over the 20th century from tide gauge reconstructions”. In: Environmental Research
Letters 16.4 (2021), p. 044043.
[34]
Jonathan M. Gregory et al. “Twentieth-century global-mean sea level rise: is the
whole greater than the sum of the parts?” In: Journal of Climate 26.13 (2013),
pp. 4476–4499.
[35]
National Snow and Ice Data Center. Quick facts. url: https://nsidc.org/learn/parts-
cryosphere/ice-sheets/ice-sheet-quick-facts (visited on 10/22/2022).
[36]
Eric Rignot and Robert H. Thomas. “Mass balance of polar ice sheets”. In: Science
297.5586 (2002), pp. 1502–1506.
31
==PAGE:42==
[37]
Jay H. Zwally et al. “Mass changes of the Greenland and Antarctic ice sheets and
shelves and contributions to sea-level rise: 1992–2002”. In: Journal of Glaciology
51.175 (2005), pp. 509–527.
[38]
Johannes Oerlemans. “Extracting a climate signal from 169 glacier records”. In:
Science 308.5722 (2005), pp. 675–677.
[39]
P.C.D. Milly, A. Cazenave, and C. Gennero. “Contribution of climate-driven change
in continental water storage to recent sea-level rise”. In: Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences 100.23 (2003), pp. 13158–13161.
[40]
Yoshihide Wada et al. “Recent changes in land water storage and its contribution
to sea level variations”. In: Surveys in Geophysics 38.1 (2017), pp. 131–152.
[41]
J.X. Mitrovica et al. “On the robustness of predictions of sea level fingerprints”. In:
Geophysical Journal International 187.2 (2011), pp. 729–742.
[42]
Conrad P. Clinton. “The solid Earth’s influence on sea level”. In: Bulletin 125.7-8
(2013), pp. 1027–1052.
[43]
Guy Wöppelmann and Marta Marcos. “Vertical land motion as a key to understand-
ing sea level change and variability”. In: Reviews of Geophysics 54.1 (2016), pp. 64–
92.
[44]
European Environment Agency (EEA). Coastal — relative sea level. url: https://
www.eea.europa.eu/publications/europes-changing-climate-hazards-1/coastal/coastal-
relative-sea-level (visited on 09/11/2022).
[45]
Veronika Eyring et al. “Overview of the Coupled Model Intercomparison Project
Phase 6 (CMIP6) experimental design and organization”. In: Geoscientific Model
Development 9.5 (2016), pp. 1937–1958.
[46]
Tim H.J. Hermans et al. “Projecting global mean sea-level change using CMIP6
models”. In: Geophysical Research Letters 48.5 (2021).
[47]
J.M. Gutiérrez et al. “Atlas”. In: Climate Change 2021: The Physical Science Basis.
Contribution of Working Group I to the Sixth Assessment Report of the Intergov-
ernmental Panel on Climate Change [Masson-Delmotte, V., P. Zhai, A. Pirani,
S.L. Connors, C. Péan, S. Berger, N. Caud, Y. Chen, L. Goldfarb, M.I. Gomis,
M. Huang, K. Leitzell, E. Lonnoy, J.B.R. Matthews, T.K. Maycock, T. Water-
field, O. Yelekçi, R. Yu, and B. Zhou (eds.)] Cambridge, UK and New York, NY,
USA: Cambridge University Press, 2021, pp. 1927–2058. isbn: 9781009157896. doi:
10.1017/9781009157896.021.1928.
[48]
IPCC. IPCC WGI Interactive Atlas. url: https://interactive-atlas.ipcc.ch/ (visited
on 09/01/2022).
[49]
Ebru Kirezci et al. “Projections of global-scale extreme sea levels and resulting
episodic coastal flooding over the 21st Century”. In: Scientific reports 10.1 (2020),
pp. 1–12.
[50]
Ali P Yunus et al. “Uncertainties in tidally adjusted estimates of sea level rise flood-
ing (bathtub model) for the greater London”. In: Remote Sensing 8.5 (2016), p. 366.
[51]
Ben Poulter and Patrick N Halpin. “Raster modelling of coastal flooding from sea-
level rise”. In: International Journal of Geographical Information Science 22.2 (2008),
pp. 167–182.
[52]
Jing Li and David WS Wong. “Effects of DEM sources on hydrologic applications”.
In: Computers, Environment and urban systems 34.3 (2010), pp. 251–261.
[53]
Dai Yamazaki et al. MERIT DEM: Multi-Error-Removed Improved-Terrain DEM.
url: http://hydro.iis.u-tokyo.ac.jp/~yamadai/MERIT_DEM/index.html (visited on
10/01/2022).
[54]
Dai Yamazaki et al. “A high-accuracy map of global terrain elevations”. In: Geo-
physical Research Letters 44.11 (2017), pp. 5844–5853.
32
==PAGE:43==
[55]
National Geospatial-Intellegence Agency. World Geodetic Ssystem 1984 (WGS 84).
url: https://earth-info.nga.mil/index.php?dir=wgs84&action=wgs84 (visited on
10/15/2022).
[56]
Robert J. Hijmans and Joe Cheng. resample: Resample a Raster object. url: https:
//www.rdocumentation.org/packages/raster/versions/3.6-3/topics/resample (visited
on 10/04/2022).
[57]
Bas Van de Sande, Joost Lansen, and Claartje Hoyng. “Sensitivity of coastal flood
risk assessments to digital elevation models”. In: Water 4.3 (2012), pp. 568–579.
[58]
Pål Wessel and Walter HF Smith. “A global, self-consistent, hierarchical, high-
resolution shoreline database”. In: Journal of Geophysical Research: Solid Earth
101.B4 (1996, last update 2017), pp. 8741–8743.
[59]
Marine regions. Marine Gazetteer Placedetails. url: https://www.marineregions.org/
gazetteer.php?p=details&id=4282 (visited on 11/15/2022).
[60]
David M Olson et al. “Terrestrial Ecoregions of the World: A New Map of Life
on EarthA new global map of terrestrial ecoregions provides an innovative tool for
conserving biodiversity”. In: BioScience 51.11 (2001), pp. 933–938.
[61]
World Wildlife Fund (WWF). World Wildlife Fund Terrestrial Ecoregions of the
World. url: https://www.worldwildlife.org/publications/terrestrial-ecoregions-of-the-
world (visited on 09/07/2022).
[62]
Olof Arrhenius. “Species and area”. In: Journal of Ecology 9.1 (1921), pp. 95–99.
[63]
Micheal L. Rosenzweig. “Species diversity in space and time”. In: (1995).
[64]
Lian Pin Koh and Jaboury Ghazoul. “A matrix-calibrated species-area model for
predicting biodiversity losses due to land-use change”. In: Conservation Biology 24.4
(2010), pp. 994–1001.
[65]
Laura De Baan et al. “Land use in life cycle assessment: Global characterization
factors based on regional and global potential species extinction”. In: Environmental
Science and Technology 47.16 (2013), pp. 9281–9290. issn: 0013936X. doi: 10.1021/
es400592q.
[66]
Abhishek Chaudhary et al. “Quantifying Land Use Impacts on Biodiversity: Com-
bining Species-Area Models and Vulnerability Indicators”. In: Environmental Science
and Technology 49.16 (2015), pp. 9987–9995. issn: 15205851. doi: 10.1021/acs.est.
5b02507.
[67]
Stina Drakare, Jack J. Lennon, and Helmut Hillebrand. “The imprint of the ge-
ographical, evolutionary and ecological context on species-area relationships”. In:
Ecology Letters 9.2 (2006), pp. 215–227. issn: 1461023X. doi: 10 . 1111 / j . 1461 -
0248.2005.00848.x.
[68]
Henrique M. Pereira, Luı́s Borda-de-Água, and Ines S. Martins. “Geometry and scale
in species–area relationships”. In: Nature 482.7386 (2012).
[69]
Gretchen C. Daily, Paul R. Ehrlich, and G. Arturo Sanchez-Azofeifa. “Countryside
biogeography: use of human-dominated habitats by the avifauna of southern Costa
Rica”. In: Ecological applications 11.1 (2001), pp. 1–13.
[70]
Henrique M. Pereira and Gretchen C. Daily. “Modeling biodiversity dynamics in
countryside landscapes”. In: Ecology 87.8 (2006), pp. 1877–1885.
[71]
Koen J.J. Kuipers, Roel May, and Francesca Verones. “Considering habitat con-
version and fragmentation in characterisation factors for land-use impacts on ver-
tebrate species richness”. In: Science of the Total Environment 801.149737 (2021).
issn: 18791026. doi: 10.1016/j.scitotenv.2021.149737. url: https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.scitotenv.2021.149737.
33
==PAGE:44==
[72]
Francesca Verones et al. “LC-IMPACT: A regionalized life cycle damage assess-
ment method”. In: Journal of Industrial Ecology 24.6 (2020), pp. 1201–1219. issn:
15309290. doi: 10.1111/jiec.13018.
[73]
David Storch, Petr Keil, and Walter Jetz. “Universal species–area and endemics–area
relationships at continental scales”. In: Nature 488.7409 (2012), pp. 78–81.
[74]
Kevin J Gaston. “Species-range-size distributions: patterns, mechanisms and impli-
cations”. In: Trends in Ecology & Evolution 11.5 (1996), pp. 197–201.
[75]
IUCN (International Union for Conservation of Nature and Natural Resources).
IUCN Red List of Threatened Species – Red List Spatial Data - Version 2022-7. url:
https://www.iucnredlist.org/resources/spatial-data-download (visited on 11/17/2022).
[76]
BirdLife International and Handbook of the Birds of the World. Bird species distri-
bution maps of the world. Version 2021.1. url: http://datazone.birdlife.org/species/
requestdis (visited on 11/15/2022).
[77]
Jan Borgelt et al. “Native range estimates for red-listed vascular plants”. In: Scientific
Data 9.1 (2022), pp. 1–12. issn: 20524463. doi: 10.1038/s41597-022-01233-5.
[78]
Sandra M. Dı́az et al. “Summary for policymakers of the global assessment report
on biodiversity and ecosystem services of the Intergovernmental Science-Policy Plat-
form on Biodiversity and Ecosystem Services”. In: Intergovernmental Science Policy
Platform on Biodiversity and Ecosystem Services (2019).
[79]
Francesca Verones et al. “Global extinction probabilities of terrestrial, freshwater,
and marine species groups for use in Life Cycle Assessment”. In: Ecological Indicators
142 (2022). doi: 10.1016/j.ecolind.2022.109204.
[80]
IUCN Standards and Petitions Committee. “Guidelines for Using the IUCN Red
List Categories and Criteria. Version 15.1.” In: (2022). url: https://www.iucnredlist.
org/documents/RedListGuidelines.pdf.
[81]
Francesca Verones et al. “Harmonizing the assessment of biodiversity effects from
land and water use within LCA”. In: Environmental science & technology 49.6 (2015),
pp. 3584–3592.
[82]
NOAA. Global Monitoring Laboratory. url: https://gml.noaa.gov/ccgg/trends_sf6/
(visited on 12/18/2022).
[83]
Climate Central. Coastal Risk Screening Tool. url: https://coastal.climatecentral.
org/map/2/34.4578/38.8504/?theme=sea_level_rise&map_type=year&basemap=
roadmap&contiguous=true&elevation_model=best_available&forecast_year=2100&
pathway=rcp45&percentile=p50&refresh=true&return_level=return_level_1&rl_
model=gtsr&slr_model=kopp_2014 (visited on 12/07/2022).
[84]
Scalgo. About Us. url: https://scalgo.com/en-US/about (visited on 12/08/2022).
[85]
Scalgo. SCALGO Live Documentation - Analysis - Sea-Level Rise. url: https://
scalgo.com/en- US/scalgo- live- documentation/analysis/sea- level- rise (visited on
12/08/2022).
[86]
Scalgo. SCALGO Compute. url: https://scalgo.com/en-US/scalgo-compute (visited
on 12/08/2022).
[87]
National Tidal and Sea Level Facility. Definitions of tidal levels and other parameters.
url: https://ntslf.org/tgi/definitions (visited on 12/08/2022).
[88]
United Nations. New International Biodiversity Agreement Strengthens Climate Ac-
tion. url: https : / / unfccc . int / news / new - international - biodiversity - agreement -
strengthens-climate-action (visited on 12/27/2022).
[89]
Milà i Canals Llorenç et al. “Chapter 6: Land use related impacts on biodiversity”.
In: Global Guidance for Life Cycle Impact Assessment Indicators Volume 1. Ed. by
Rolf Frischknecht and Olivier Jolliet. Vol. 1. UNEP/SETAC Life Cycle Initiative,
2016.
34
==PAGE:45==
A
Appendix
A.0.1
Details to Validation of Flooding Model
Figure A.1: Google Maps picture of the representative area on Zealand shown in Figure 4.3
35
==PAGE:46==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Bygningstorvet, Building 115
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
