==PAGE:1==
Uncertainty Quantification for conductivity
imaging from information about correspond­
ing magnetic fields
Master Thesis
Kenneth Scheel ­ s174488
DTU Compute
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Uncertainty Quantification for conductivity imaging from information about correspond­
ing magnetic fields
Master Thesis
January, 2023
By
Kenneth Scheel
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the customary
bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Photo of one half of an experimental MREIT setup, MRI machine excluded.
Shown from left to right: An oscilloscope to make sure everything is working.
A function generator that controls the amplitude and frequency of the current
to be injected. A neuro­signal generator supplies the two attached electrodes
with low­frequency current according to the function. The wires on the elec­
trodes are made of rubber, such that they are visible on an MRI scan. Photo by
Kenneth Scheel at Danish Research Centre for Magnetic Resonance, Hvidovre
Hospital, January 2023
Published by:
DTU, Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science, Matematik­
torvet, Building 303b, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over five months at the Section for Scientific Computing, Depart­
ment of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science, at the Technical University of Denmark,
DTU, in partial fulfilment for the degree Master of Science in Engineering, MSc Eng.
It is assumed that the reader has a basic knowledge in the areas of partial differential equations,
probability theory and functional analysis.
ii
Uncertainty Quantification for conductivity imaging from information about corresponding magnetic fields
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
MREIT is a promising approach for non­invasive conductivity imaging. The method combines
Electrical Impedance Tomography (EIT) and Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI). An MR­scanner
measures the magnetic field induced by the externally applied current field from the EIT setup.
This provides interior information in the form of magnetic field data B. Knowing the electrical
conductivity properties of an organ in a patient is vital in some medical applications, e.g. non­
invasive brain stimulation where small currents are applied through electrodes to stimulate brain
activity in certain regions. When performing conductivity imaging it might be that an unknown
inclusion is detected. How certain can we be that the inclusion is actually there and not just a
reconstruction artifact from the algorithm? Can we quantify this uncertainty mathematically?
To answer these questions one may use Bayesian inversion theory which casts the inverse
problem as one of statistical inference. All quantities of interest are modeled as random vari­
ables. We parameterize the conductivity field in the object to be imaged by σ(p), where p are
unknown parameters defining the conductivity field. Then the forward problem in MREIT can
be modeled as an inhomogeneous elliptic partial differential equation in three dimensions. The
Bayesian solution to the inverse problem is a probability distribution called the posterior, which
we use to infer information about the parameters p given magnetic field data. The forward model
in our inverse problem is nonlinear, highly complex, and expensive to evaluate. This makes the
posterior intractable. Since we want to reconstruct the conductivity field σ and quantify the stan­
dard deviation of σ in the images, it amounts to characterizing the posterior by estimating its
moments and statistics. Doing this for our intractable posterior is the main topic of interest.
Uncertainty Quantification for conductivity imaging from information about corresponding magnetic fields
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
I want to want to express my utmost gratitude towards my supervisors Prof. Kim Knudsen and
postdoc Babak Maboudi Afkham, for their expert guidance and wise ideas during our weekly
sparring sessions. I especially want to thank you for all the opportunities you have provided me
during the project. It has been a fruitful experience that has taught me many things and shaped
my future in multiple ways.
Multiple issues arose along the way which we were not able to solve ourselves. In that re­
gard, I want to thank postdoc Amal Mohammed A. Alghamdi from the CUQI team at DTU Com­
pute for teaching me adjoint state methods for gradient computations, for providing insight on
PDE­constrained optimization problems, and for debugging my optimization code. Your sup­
port proved valuable multiple times and I am very grateful that you wanted to spend your time
helping me.
I also want to thank Axel Thielscher from DTU Health for hosting us in the laboratory at the
Danish Research Centre for Magnetic Resonance (DRCMR) at Hvidovre Hospital. It was a
very interesting visit where we got to look at an MRI machine and some MREIT equipment,
while also learning about the experimental part of MREIT from experts in the field.
My sincere gratitude goes out to the entire CUQI team for allowing me to participate in the
weekly seminars and for providing delicious cookies each Tuesday throughout the project pe­
riod. I should especially thank CUQI for hosting and inviting me along to the IUQ22 workshop in
Helsingør at the beginning of the project period, and for allowing me to do a poster presentation
on the research goals of this thesis. Going to IUQ22 was a great experience as I got to meet
my future Ph.D. supervisor Prof. Aku Seppänen from the University of Eastern Finland, who
invited me to Inverse Days 2022 in December to give a short pitch talk on my thesis. In that
regard, I want to thank senior researcher Jakob Sauer Jørgensen and all the Ph.D. students
from the CUQI team who were with me at Inverse Days for a wonderful time in Finland. Lastly,
I want to thank the Villum Foundation, which funds the CUQI project, and the William Demant
Foundation for their generous financial contributions to my trip to Finland.
Kenneth Scheel, MSc Engineering, DTU Compute
Author of this thesis
Kim Knudsen, Professor, DTU Compute
Supervisor
Babak Maboudi Afkham, Post­doc, DTU Compute
Co­supervisor
iv
Uncertainty Quantification for conductivity imaging from information about corresponding magnetic fields
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
1
2
Magnetic Resonance Electrical Impedance Tomography
2
2.1
The forward problem . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2.2
The inverse problem . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
3
Bayesian inverse problems
6
3.1
Markov chain Monte Carlo methods
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
3.2
Chain diagnostics
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
3.3
Posterior inference . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
4
The finite element method and spectral convolution methods
22
4.1
Finite element method for approximating PDE . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
4.2
Spectral method for fast evaluation of magnetic fields
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
5
Computational solution procedure
30
5.1
Building the posterior . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
5.2
Simulation of forward problem . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
5.3
Solution of the Bayesian inverse problem
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
6
Numerical results
41
6.1
Benchmarking
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
6.2
Problem 0: spherical inclusion with known conductivity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
6.3
Problem 1: two spherical inclusions with known conductivity . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
6.4
Problem 2: rotated ellipsoidal inclusion with unknown conductivity
. . . . . . . .
52
6.5
Problem 3: elliptic inclusion in pure 2D with unknown conductivity
. . . . . . . .
56
6.6
Problem 4: sparse magnetic field data in z­direction
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
61
6.7
Problem 5: two inclusions with large conductivity contrast . . . . . . . . . . . . .
66
7
Discussion
73
7.1
Outlook . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
75
7.2
Conclusion
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
76
A Appendix
77
Bibliography
83
Uncertainty Quantification for conductivity imaging from information about corresponding magnetic fields
v
==PAGE:8==
vi
Uncertainty Quantification for conductivity imaging from information about corresponding magnetic fields
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction
Non­invasive imaging in medical and industrial use can often be framed as an inverse problem.
CT scans at the hospital, radar­ and sonar technologies, and seismic imaging to name a few,
are all examples of real­life applications of inverse problems. The Calderón problem in math­
ematics asks whether it is possible to determine the electrical conductivity distribution inside
an object, by making voltage and current measurements on its boundary [1]. The method of
Electrical Impedance Tomography (EIT) was developed to answer this question. In EIT, elec­
trodes are attached to the surface of the object to be imaged and a small low­frequency current
is injected. Voltage measurements are made by other electrodes and these are used in a re­
construction algorithm to produce an image. EIT suffers from ill­posedness as only boundary
data is available, and only low­resolution conductivity images are achievable [2]. Recently, re­
search has shown that coupled­physics imaging techniques can produce even higher contrast
and higher­resolution conductivity images than standard EIT is capable of. One novel method
combines EIT and Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI). By using an MRI machine to measure
the magnetic field induced by the current field from the EIT setup, we gain interior information
in the form of magnetic field data [3, 2]. Having interior data available makes the reconstruction
problem in MREIT well­posed, compared to the ill­posed reconstruction problem of EIT. Com­
puting a cross­sectional conductivity image of some region of a patient can be vital in medical
applications. Current experimental research in MREIT is especially concerned with conductivity
imaging of the brain, as the brain consists of several different regions with different conductivity
levels and both isotropic and anisotropic properties [4, 5]. In non­invasive brain stimulation,
doctors apply small currents through electrodes to stimulate brain activity in certain regions, to
either restore or compensate for the lack of function in that region1. Knowing the conductivity
properties of the entire brain allows for more targeted and safer treatment of the patient.
More often than not, data in the real world is inflicted by noise, sparsity, and errors. It could also
be that a mathematical model is simplified to such a slightly inaccurate degree. These phe­
nomena mean that many parts of an inverse problem in real life are uncertain. We should be
aware of these uncertainties and incorporate them into our computational models. Quantifying
the uncertainty is therefore of interest as we want to characterize the sensitivity of solutions to
inverse problems. This characterization could come in the form of knowing the standard devi­
ation of each pixel in a slice of a patient’s conductivity image. To accomplish this task, we use
Bayesian inversion theory where one models all quantities of interest as random variables [6].
This allows us to encode our degree of information into the probability distributions, making un­
certainty quantification possible by computing standard deviations and credibility intervals. The
solution to the inverse problem is also a probability distribution called the posterior, which en­
codes all information about the unknown conductivity field σ in an object given interior magnetic
field data. Exploring and characterizing the posterior is our main topic of interest in this thesis.
At DTU we have the Computational Uncertainty Quantification for Inverse Problems (CUQI) re­
search initiative funded by the Villum Foundation, which both project supervisors are a part of
[7]. The goal of this thesis is to develop a Bayesian computational framework for solving the
conductivity field reconstruction problem in MREIT.
1https://www.hopkinsmedicine.org/physical_medicine_rehabilitation/services/programs/brain-stimulation/
treatment.html
Uncertainty Quantification for conductivity imaging from information about corresponding magnetic fields
1
==PAGE:10==
2
Magnetic Resonance Electrical Impedance
Tomography
The MREIT experiment answers the question of whether it is possible to reconstruct the interior
conductivity distribution σ of an object, given noisy measurements of the interior magnetic field.
In EIT we only have access to boundary voltage measurements and these are insensitive to
internal conductivity perturbations [8]. An MRI scanner is therefore used to measure the interior
magnetic field induced by the externally applied current from the electrodes. This provides
internal images of the magnetic flux density B. Hidden in these images is information on the
conductivity distribution σ of the object [3]. The inverse problem is to extract that information
about σ from noisy observations of B.
Figure 2.1: Left: Diagram of MREIT system with a human subject. Right: (a) Schematic of
electrodes attached to a deceased dog. (b) Schematic of dog placed inside MRI bore. The
scanner obtains MR magnitude and magnetic flux density images from slices of the head [3].
In a real setting, the MRI scanner measures only the z­component of the magnetic field B in
a few slices parallel to the z­axis as the coordinate system above indicates [9, 10]. Thus only
sparse magnetic flux data is obtained in the z­direction. Obtaining the x­ and y­component of the
magnetic field would require undesired rotation of the subject inside the scanner. This can be
very impractical for human subjects as shown in the left figure above. In a practical setting with
living human subjects, only a very small current is injected. A positive and a negative current
of ±2 mA is injected with a frequency of 6 Hz. The current is just strong enough to produce a
tingling sensation while not being painful when the electrodes are attached [4].
2.1
The forward problem
The forward problem in MREIT is the mapping from a known conductivity field σ ∈L∞
+ (Ω) to the
magnetic field B ∈[L2(Ω)]3 measured in the MRI machine. We can decompose the mapping
into two stages. One operator F : σ 7→J that maps a conductivity field σ to the induced current
density field J ∈[L2(Ω)]3. Then the operator G : J 7→B which maps J to the induced magnetic
field B. The space L∞
+ (Ω) consists of L∞(Ω) functions which are bounded from above and
below by positive constants, i.e. L∞
+ (Ω) = {v ∈L∞(Ω) : v ≥v0 > 0}. The requirement that
σ ∈L∞
+ (Ω) means that σ is bounded and greater than 0. We also assume that σ is an isotropic
conductivity field, i.e. that the current diffuses at the same rate in all directions. The first stage
is very akin to the forward mapping in the EIT problem. It involves solving the Poisson equation
for the potential u ∈H1(Ω) in Ω.
−∇· σ∇u = 0
in Ω,
u = f
on ∂Ω.
(2.1)
2
Uncertainty Quantification for conductivity imaging from information about corresponding magnetic fields
==PAGE:11==
The boundary data f is chosen to fit the characteristics of the problem. This we will discuss in
section 5.2. The current density field J inside Ωis given by Ohm’s law
F : σ(x) 7→J(x) = −σ(x)∇u(x).
(2.2)
The magnetic field B induced by the current density field J in Ωare related via Ampère’s law
∇× B = J. This expression is equivalent to the Biot­Savart law [11] which determines B as a
function of J
G : J(x) 7→B(x) = 1
4π
Z
Ω
J(x′) ×
x −x′
|x −x′|3 dx′.
(2.3)
Due to the cross­product in Ampère’s law the z­component of B, B3, carries no information about
the z­component of J = (J1, J2, J3) [2]. In practice, the magnetic field B is only measured along
slices on the z­axis so we only obtain measurements of B3. Obtaining the x­ and y­ components
of the magnetic field would require undesired rotation of the subject inside the bore as can be
seen on the coordinate­axes on the dog in figure 2.1. Thus, we can only gain knowledge of
(J1, J2) from the B3 measurements. The full forward problem in MREIT is then to compute the
magnetic field B given a known conductivity distribution σ
G ◦F : σ(x) 7→J(x) 7→B(x) = −1
4π
Z
Ω
(σ(x′)∇u(x′)) ×
x −x′
|x −x′|3 dx′.
(2.4)
The forward problem in MREIT is well­posed so we know that solutions exist, given a well­
defined conductivity distribution σ ∈L∞
+ (Ω). As long as we work in the correct spaces u ∈
H1(Ω), B ∈[L2(Ω)]3, etc. we should have well­defined solutions to all forward problems.
2.2
The inverse problem
The reconstruction problem in MREIT is to determine the electrical conductivity distribution σ(x)
given noisy magnetic field data Bnoise
3
. The inverse map of the forward problem is the steps
B3 7→J 7→σ. We want to reconstruct the best estimate of σ given the data, i.e. solve the
equation
Bnoise
3
= E [(G ◦F)(σ)] ,
(2.5)
where E[·] is some noise operator whether that be additive measurement noise, sparsely sam­
pled data, or both. In this thesis, we consider additive noise in the form of
Bnoise
3
= (G ◦F)(σ) + E,
(2.6)
where E is a noise realization from some probability distribution. Reconstructing the conductivity
field σ(x) given the data is not an easy task. The standard deterministic way of solving inverse
problems is to apply regularization methods and use optimization to solve the problem
min
σ∈L∞
+ (Ω) ∥Bnoise
3
−(G ◦F)(σ)∥2 + R(σ),
(2.7)
where R(·) is some suitable regularization term. We have several options available for solving
the inverse problem, we list some of them here
1. Deterministic methods via regularization and non­linear optimization [6]
2. Linearize and solve [2]
3. J­substitution method [12, 8]
4. Harmonic Bz algorithm [10, 8]
5. Bayesian inversion [6]
Uncertainty Quantification for conductivity imaging from information about corresponding magnetic fields
3
==PAGE:12==
Standard deterministic approaches produce a single point estimate for σ as the solution to the
inverse problem given the available data. The J­substitution method has shown promise for
providing accurate high­resolution conductivity images in the deterministic case [8]. However,
if we want to do uncertainty quantification, a single estimate is not going to do us much good.
If we solve the inverse problem using Bayesian inversion, then we reformulate the problem as
a statistical inference problem by using Bayesian statistics [6]. In this framework, all quantities
are modeled as random variables. Information about each random variable is encoded in a
probability distribution. Using probability distributions not only lets us encode which information
we have about the quantities of interest; they also reflect our degree of uncertainty about each
quantity. This approach is the main subject of the thesis and will be described in more detail
next chapter.
2.2.1
Deterministic solution in MREIT via linearization
While the inverse problem of MREIT is well­posed, the experimental setup of the imaging tech­
nique has some major drawbacks. The EIT setup by itself only requires some electrodes, a
low­frequency power source, and a computer to run the calculations and display the results,
while MREIT requires the patient with attached electrodes to be placed inside a very expensive
MRI machine for an extended period. The experimental setup in EIT is essentially portable, and
since the setup allows for real­time monitoring of lung activity, emergency responders could use
the technique for on­scene lung monitoring or stroke detection. Therefore studying the EIT prob­
lem, though ill­posed, is both very beneficial and interesting work. A deterministic solution of the
EIT reconstruction problem using an iterative Newton’s method along with classical regulariza­
tion techniques has been developed in [2]. The forward mapping in EIT consists of computing
J = −σ∇u after solving the Poisson eq. in (2.1) for the potential u. This is the first part of the
forward mapping in MREIT which we denoted F. We linearize the problem by computing the
Fréchet derivative of the forward operator which in turn is used to derive the Newton procedure.
The Fréchet derivative generalizes the notion of differentiability to operators and allows for the
linearization of non­linear operators. Let us first define the forward mapping from a conductivity
distribution σ to an interior current density field J
F : σ 7→J = −σ∇u,
(2.8)
where u ∈H1
0(Ω) solves the PDE in (2.1). Let ˜u be the solution to (2.1) where σ is replaced
by a reference conductivity ˜σ. If we take δσ to be in a class of admissible variations and let
σ = ˜σ + δσ, we want to compute a linear operator dF(˜σ) such that
lim
δσ→0
∥F(˜σ + δσ) −F(˜σ) −dF(˜σ)δσ∥L2(Ω)
∥δσ∥L∞(Ω)
= 0.
(2.9)
This usually involves doing a first­order approximation of the form
dF(˜σ)δσ ≈F(˜σ + δσ) −F(˜σ).
(2.10)
One can show that the Frèchet derivative is given by dF(˜σ)δσ := −˜σ∇δu −δσ∇˜u, where
δu ∈H1
0(Ω) solves
∇· ˜σ∇δu = −∇· δσ∇˜u
in Ω,
δu = 0
on ∂Ω.
(2.11)
It can be shown (Appendix 1) that the following estimate holds
∥F(˜σ + δσ) −F(˜σ) −dF(˜σ)δσ∥L2(Ω) ≤C∥δσ∥2
L∞(Ω).
(2.12)
The linearized EIT problem can then be obtained by replacing F(˜σ + δσ) with the interior cur­
rent density field data J in the first order approximation in (2.10). Since J can be simulated or
4
Uncertainty Quantification for conductivity imaging from information about corresponding magnetic fields
==PAGE:13==
measured via the EIT setup we can use the scheme to estimate σ
dF(˜σ)δσ = −˜σ∇δu −δσ∇˜u = J −F(˜σ).
(2.13)
Along with the defining PDE for δu in (2.11) we can set up a linear system of equations
∇· ([·]∇˜u)
∇· (˜σ∇[·])
−∇˜u
−˜σ∇[·]
 δσ
δu

=

0
J −F(˜σ)

.
(2.14)
This system is in the form Ax = b and can be solved by the iterative Newton approach described
in [2]. Adding a Tikhonov term with α > 0 for regularization, the final problem is to compute the
least squares solution of
x∗= arg min
x ∥Ax −b∥2
L2(Ω) + α∥x∥2
L2(Ω).
(2.15)
Given some initial conductivity σ0 the Newton procedure developed in [2] iteratively simulates
the Poisson PDE in (2.1) for uk, sets up and solves the system of equations in (2.14), extracts
the variation δσk and lastly updates σk+1 = σk + δσ. The procedure stops when either the
update step δσk is small enough say ∥δσk∥L2(Ω) < ϵ, or when a maximum number of iterations
is reached.
Uncertainty Quantification for conductivity imaging from information about corresponding magnetic fields
5
==PAGE:14==
3
Bayesian inverse problems
Bayesian inversion theory is another toolbox we have available when we want to solve inverse
problems. Casting the problem of determining information about some unknown quantity given
observed data, as a statistical inference problem allows us to use the vast theory of probability to
solve the problem and give further insights about the solution. The forward problem in MREIT
has already been defined in section 2.1 as the operator that maps an electrical conductivity
distribution to the z­component of the magnetic field, i.e. G ◦F : σ 7→B3. The inverse problem
in MREIT is then to determine the electrical conductivity distribution σ inside a domain Ωfrom
noisy observations of the z­component of the magnetic field B3.
Bnoise
3
= yobs = (G ◦F)(σ) + e,
(3.1)
where e is some noise realization. Given noisy observations yobs a deterministic solution would
give us a single estimate of σ which we can visualize in some way. Inverse problems are often
hard to solve since they might suffer from ill­posedness. Solutions to the problem may not exist
uniquely and continuous dependence of the solution on the input data is not guaranteed for
such problems [13]. To overcome these issues one has to regularize the problem in some way,
which is often done by putting some pre­defined restrictions on the solution as in (2.7). We
briefly mentioned regularization methods in section 2.2 as the deterministic approach to solving
inverse problems, and how such methods yield point estimates as their solutions. If we are
interested in doing uncertainty quantification then a single image does not reveal much.
The motivation for finding a way to do uncertainty quantification on the reconstructed conduc­
tivity images is the problem of inferring the standard deviation of each pixel in a conductivity
image. For medical use, knowing the standard deviation of each pixel could aid doctors in
performing more accurate diagnostics and giving better treatment. Say for instance that some
unknown inclusion has been detected in a tomographic image of the brain. How certain can
we be that this is malignant tissue, benign tissue, or just a reconstruction artifact from the algo­
rithm? To try and answer these questions we use Bayesian inversion theory where one models
all quantities of interest as random variables [6]. This lets us encode our degree of information
into the underlying probability distributions, thus making uncertainty quantification possible by
estimating standard deviations and credibility intervals. Our quantities of interest are the con­
ductivity distribution σ, observed data yobs, and the noise realization e. We will in the following
use capital letters for denoting these quantities of interest modeled as random variables. We
use the forward model G ◦F to relate the random quantities
Y = (G ◦F)(Σ) + E,
E ∼N(0, γ2),
(3.2)
where Σ is the electrical conductivity distribution σ modeled as a random variable, E is the
random noise and Y is the noisy B3 data. We choose to model the additive noise as a Gaus­
sian distribution with zero mean and variance γ2. A paper treating the Bayesian formulation of
the EIT problem also applied normally distributed noise [14]. The inverse problem is then to
determine information about Σ given a realization of some noisy data Y = yobs. Statistically,
this quantity can be interpreted as a conditional probability distribution π(σ|yobs). We call this
the posterior dsitribution, and it is essentially the solution to our inverse problem in a statisti­
cal sense. This probability distribution is what one uses to infer information about the unknown
conductivity distribution Σ. This is in stark contrast to deterministic methods which only produce
point estimates as solutions. Such methods use a regularization term to enforce prior knowl­
edge of the problem and make it more well­posed. In the Bayesian framework, all information
6
Uncertainty Quantification for conductivity imaging from information about corresponding magnetic fields
==PAGE:15==
about Σ before obtaining data Y can be summarized in a prior distribution πpr(σ). The forward
model and the noise realization that relates Σ and Y is the likelihood function πlike(yobs|σ), and
this acts as a data­fitting term. We determine the posterior density via Bayes’ theorem [15]
πpost(σ|yobs) =
πlike(yobs|σ)πpr(σ)
R
πlike(yobs|σ)πpr(σ) dσ = πlike(yobs|σ)πpr(σ)
π(yobs)
∝πlike(yobs|σ)πpr(σ)
(3.3)
The distribution of the likelihood term follows that of the noise E, which means our likelihood
is Gaussian since E is. The term in the denominator π(yobs) is a scaling factor that makes the
posterior integrate to one, as the posterior is proper density. This term is hard to evaluate as
it represents a probability of a data point and to evaluate that we must know the probability
distribution of the data space. This is normally not something we can compute or something
that we are interested in, and it is also constant given a realization π(yobs) of the data so it only
acts as a scaling. As we shall see in the coming sections we need to compute the maxima of the
posterior, and we know that solutions to optimization problems are invariant to the scaling of the
objective function. We also need to compute relative probabilities involving fractions with the
posterior in both the numerator and denominator, and scaling factors vanish in such fractions.
The posterior distribution will however be intractable in most applications, so characterizing it
and computing point estimates of reconstructed conductivity distributions is no trivial task.
3.1
Markov chain Monte Carlo methods
How can one characterize an intractable probability distribution without a closed­form expres­
sion? Drawing independent samples from such distributions become difficult since we only have
the expression in (3.3) to define the posterior. We have access to the prior and the likelihood
function in the numerator. However, the term in the denominator is often complicated to evalu­
ate as we have to integrate over all parameters σ. The common way to go about sampling from
a posterior density you only know up to a scaling constant is to use Markov chain Monte Carlo
(MCMC) methods [16, 6]. In this framework, one produces dependent samples (x1, x2, . . . , xN)
from a Markov chain, which is constructed in such a way that we only need to compute fractions
of the posterior, while the samples xi approaches the posterior distribution π(x) in the limit. As
in (3.3) we only have access to an unnormalized version of the target density πpost(x). The core
idea behind MCMC methods is to estimate some expected value µ = E[f]π =
R
f(x)π(x) dx by
the ergodic average [16]
ˆµ ≈1
N
n
X
i=1
f(xi).
(3.4)
The function f can be any quantity that we wish to estimate using MCMC methods, e.g. the
mean, variance, or some other function of the probability distribution. If the samples xi are
of large dimension, then evaluating integrals becomes challenging due to the curse of dimen­
sionality. The caveat of using MCMC lies in the fact that the distribution of xi only approaches
the target distribution πpost and is not equal to it. Furthermore, the drawn samples {xi}N
i=1 are
generally not statistically independent since they are links in a Markov chain. These two flaws
essentially go directly against what we mean by independent and identically distributed (i.d.d.)
samples, which are needed for computing a good ergodic average.
In order to derive an MCMC method that is guaranteed to reach its target density provided
enough samples are drawn, certain conditions must apply to the Markov chains that we sample
from. Recall that Markov chains do not remember the past. This means that the distribution of
every new random sample Xi+1 depends only on the immediate predecessor Xi. This can be
formalized as the Markov property.
P(Xi+1|Xj = xj, 0 ≤j ≤i) = P(Xi+1|Xi = xi).
(3.5)
Uncertainty Quantification for conductivity imaging from information about corresponding magnetic fields
7
==PAGE:16==
A Markov chain is then simply a sequence of random variables {Xi}N
i=1 which satisfy this Markov
property. The distribution of each sample in a Markov chain is generally different since the chain
evolves over time, however, this does not have to be the case. When the distribution of adjacent
states does not vary in time the Markov chain is said to be time­homogenous.
P(Xi+1 = y|Xi = x) = P(X1 = y|X0 = x),
(3.6)
As such the probability of going from a state x to a state y does not change no matter where
we are in the chain. Under certain conditions and if we run the chain for long enough, the
chain might reach what is called the stationary distribution after some time t. In this situation,
all links of the chain Xi for i > t are distributed identically according to some π(x) and we
have converged to the target distribution in a sense. We want to construct a Markov chain that
reaches stationarity after some time, but how exactly does one do that? Let us first introduce
some tools from probability theory, namely the concept of a probability transition kernel. Let
B = B(Rn) denote the collection of all open sets on Rn. Following the notation in [6], we say
that a mapping P : Rn × B →[0, 1] is called a probability transition kernel if
1. for each set B ∈B, the mapping Rn →[0, 1], x 7→P(x, B) is a continuous function;
2. for each point x ∈Rn, the mapping B →[0, 1], B 7→P(x, B) is a probability distribution.
We say that an ordered sequence of random variables {Xi}N
i=1 is a discrete time stochastic
process, and if the random variables Xi ∈Rn satisfy the Markov property in (3.5), then the
stochastic process with transition kernel P is called a Markov chain. In the following, let π be
the probability distribution of Xj ∈Bj. We can define a transition kernel P which propagates
the chain k steps forward in time from a state xj.
P (k)(xj, Bj+k) = πXj+k(Bj+k|xj)
=
Z
Rn P(xj+k−1, Bj+k)P (k−1)(xj, Bj+k−1) dxj+k−1,
k ≥2,
(3.7)
where we define the first instance P (1)(xj, Bj+1) := P(xj, Bj+1). The transition kernel is the
mapping that propagates the probability distribution of the state Xi to the next link in the Markov
chain Xi+1, i.e.
πXj+1(Bj+1|xj) =
Z
Rn P(xj, Bj+1)πXj(xj) dxj,
(3.8)
therefore, the transition probability mapping is for computing πXj+1 = πXjP, i.e. we step into
the future by multiplying with the transition kernel P on the right. Having taken enough steps
into the future with the transition kernel it might be that applying the kernel does not change the
distribution, i.e.
πP = π.
(3.9)
Then the distribution π is said to be invariant or stationary w.r.t. the transition kernel P, and the
above condition is known as a stationarity condition. We say that a Markov chain generated
by the transition kernel P is irreducible if, for any open set B and any initial point x there is a
positive probability that the Markov chain visits B. In transition kernel terms it means that for
each point x ∈Rn and each B ∈B there exists an integer k such that P (k)(x, B) > 0.
It can be the case that some state in the Markov chain Xj is recurrent which means that the
Markov chain is guaranteed to return to that state at some time with probability 1. Otherwise,
the state is called transient. Such irreducible kernels can also be periodic in the sense that they
can produce a Markov chain that is stuck in a loop in state space. In terms of the transition
kernel, it means that there is a set of subsets B1, . . . , Bd of Rn, such that for all x ∈Bj we have
that P(x, Bj+1( mod d)) = 1. This means that the probability of going from Bj to Bj+1 is one,
8
Uncertainty Quantification for conductivity imaging from information about corresponding magnetic fields
==PAGE:17==
and this cycle will repeat itself after d steps. A transition kernel P which does not generate a
periodic Markov chain is simply said to be aperiodic.
If all the mentioned conditions apply to a transition kernel P then proposition 3.11 in [6] guaran­
tees the following for all x ∈Rn
Proposition 1 If a transition kernel P generates time­homogenous Markov chains, if it is irre­
ducible and aperiodic, and if π is a stationary distribution w.r.t. P, then
lim
N→∞P (N)(x, B) = π(B),
∀B ∈B,
(3.10)
i.e. the transition kernel reaches the target distribution in the limit as we run the chain for infinitely
long.
This result is crucial for estimating the integral of a function f by the ergodic average in (3.4)
lim
N→∞
1
N
N
X
j=1
f(Xj) =
Z
Rn f(x)π(x) dx.
(3.11)
For the ergodic average to converge properly the samples {Xj} must be independent and iden­
tically distributed. The proposition above ensures that the samples do reach the target distri­
bution, and the samples are thus identically distributed if we sample for long enough. Indepen­
dence between the drawn samples of the Markov chain is another issue that we will discuss
later. All we need to do is to construct an invariant, irreducible, and aperiodic transition kernel
P and generate a Markov chain using that kernel.
3.1.1
Metropolis­Hastings
Constructing a transition kernel P(x, B) such that it is invariant w.r.t. the density π(x) requires
that the detailed balance condition on the kernel is met [6]. In the following, we will derive
the Metropolis­Hastings algorithm which is a standard way of drawing samples from a difficult
probability distribution when direct sampling from it is impractical. If the Markov chain is at some
point x ∈Rn it can either move to a new point y ∈Rn or stay where it is at x. With this thinking we
can split the kernel into two terms, one representing the acceptance of a new sample Xj+1 = y
and one which represents staying at the current step Xj+1 = Xj
P(x, B) =
Z
B
K(x, y) dy + r(x)χB(x).
(3.12)
The first term K(x, y) dy can be thought of as the probability of moving from the point x ∈B to
the infinitesimal set dy at the point y. The second term r(x)χB(x) is the probability of remaining
at the point x. If we are not at the point x ∈B, the only way to reach x is by moving to the point
x. The characteristic function χB(x) is equal to one if x ∈B and zero if not. It appears since
the probability of remaining at x, if we are not at x in the first place, is zero. If we consider the
transition kernel for all possible sets B ∈Rn then it is equal to 1, i.e. P(x, Rn) = 1 since Rn is
the whole probability space. The probability of x being in some set in Rn is naturally 1 since the
domain of x is Rn. Thus we can write
r(x) = 1 −
Z
Rn K(x, y) dy.
(3.13)
Uncertainty Quantification for conductivity imaging from information about corresponding magnetic fields
9
==PAGE:18==
The invariance condition on the distribution π and the transition kernel P means that the follow­
ing must hold for all B ∈B
πP(B) =
Z
Rn
Z
B
K(x, y) dy + r(x)χB(x).

π(x) dx
=
Z
B
Z
Rn π(x)K(x, y) dx + r(y)π(y)

dy
=
Z
B
π(y) dy.
(3.14)
The rewriting in the middle is a consequence of (3.13). The above results further imply that
π(y)(1 −r(y)) =
Z
Rn π(x)K(x, y) dx.
(3.15)
Using (3.13) to rewrite the above we arrive at the balance equation
Z
Rn π(y)K(y, x) dx =
Z
Rn π(x)K(x, y) dx.
(3.16)
A stronger condition called the detailed balance condition can also apply to K. This condition
allows K to automatically satisfy (3.16) if it holds for all x, y ∈Rn
π(y)K(y, x) = π(x)K(x, y).
(3.17)
This condition also ensures that the Markov chain is reversible in the sense that the order of the
chain does not matter. The probability flow is the same whether we go from x →y or y →x. The
goal of the Metropolis­Hastings algorithm is to construct a transition kernel K which satisfies
the detailed balance condition (3.17). The idea is to define a function q(x, y) : Rn × Rn →R+
called the proposal distribution, which we can readily sample from and which integrates to 1 in
the second variable, i.e. it is a proper probability density in y given some x
Z
Rn q(y|x) dy = 1.
(3.18)
The function q will then define a transition kernel
Q(x, A) =
Z
A
q(y|x) dy.
(3.19)
If the proposal distribution q satisfies the detailed balance condition in (3.17) then we are already
done and can simply set K(x, y) = q(x, y) and r(x) = 0 in (3.12) to get a well­defined transi­
tion probability kernel. If q does not satisfy detailed balance, it instead results in the following
inequality for some x, y ∈Rn
π(y)q(x|y) < π(x)q(y|x),
(3.20)
then we modify the kernel by a multiplicative factor α
K(x, y) = α(x, y)q(x|y),
(3.21)
such that we instead satisfy an augmented detailed balance condition
π(y)α(y, x)q(y|x) = π(x)α(x, y)q(x|y).
(3.22)
This is achieved for all x, y ∈Rn if we define the Metropolis­Hastings kernel K(x, y) = α(x, y)q(x|y)
with the following correction term α
α(x, y) = min

1, π(y)q(y|x)
π(x)q(x|y)

.
(3.23)
10
Uncertainty Quantification for conductivity imaging from information about corresponding magnetic fields
==PAGE:19==
This term is often called the acceptance ratio in the literature. A procedure implementing the
Metropolis­Hastings method only requires a few steps which we iterate over for each sample
we want in the Markov chain.
1. Choose initial value for the Markov chain x1 ∈Rn and set counter k = 1.
2. Draw a candidate y ∈Rn from the proposal distribution q(y|xk) and compute the accep­
tance ratio
α(xk, y) = min

1, π(y)q(y|xk)
π(xk)q(xk|y)

.
(3.24)
3. Draw t ∈[0, 1] from a uniform density as the probability of accepting the new sample
4. If t ≤α(xk, y) we update the next sample as xk+1 = y, else we do not update and set
xk+1 = xk. Increment k ←k + 1 and go to step 2. Stop the procedure when k = N and
the desired number of samples has been drawn.
The method is especially simple to implement if the proposal distribution q is symmetric q(x|y) =
q(y|x). Then the acceptance ratio reduces to
α(x, y) = min

1, π(y)
π(x)

.
(3.25)
Instead of directly sampling a new value y ∈Rn we can make a random walk model. This means
that we update the previous step with some random increment we sample from the proposal
distribution q, often just white noise ϵ ∼N(0, σ2)
xk+1 =
xk + ϵ
t ≤α,
xk
t > α.
(3.26)
This ensures that the proposal distribution is always symmetric since q(x, y) = g(x −y) where
g is the Gaussian density. This method produces a Markov chain of dependent samples which
can be subsampled further to produce a set of nearly independent samples. Details on why
and how to do this will be covered in later sections. First though we will take a look at another
common type of sampler called the Gibbs sampler.
3.1.2
Gibbs sampling
If we drop the idea of choosing a proposal distribution q and want to work with the target density
π directly, one can instead turn to Gibbs sampling [16, 6]. Usually, we cannot sample x ∈Rn
from π directly, this is the sole motivation behind MCMC methods. However, sometimes it is
possible to explicitly derive and sample from the conditional distribution of each component xj,
given all the other components x1, . . . , xj−1, xj+1, . . . , xn of the vector x. We consider each
component of the vector by itself. This corresponds to the following partition of Rn
x = [x1, . . . , xn] ∈Rn.
(3.27)
Since we consider the vector x with one element removed it will be convenient to introduce
notation for exactly this. Denote by x−j the vector x with the element xj deleted from the vector.
x−j := [x1, . . . , xj−1, xj+1, . . . , xn] ∈Rn.
(3.28)
Thus, in the following when there is a minus in front of the index it denotes the vector x with
the single element xj removed. Isolating the components and sampling each individually condi­
tioned on all the others is called a single component Gibbs sampler. Let X be a random variable
with distribution π. We can write the probability of component i of X conditioned on all Xj = xj
where i ̸= j
π(xi|x−i) = Ciπ(x1, . . . , xi−1, xi, xi+1, . . . , xn),
(3.29)
Uncertainty Quantification for conductivity imaging from information about corresponding magnetic fields
11
==PAGE:20==
with Ci being a normalization constant ensuring that we integrate to 1. We can then define a
transition kernel K(x, y) similar to the Metropolis­Hastings method [6] for x, y ∈Rn
K(x, y) =
m
Y
i=1
π(yi|y1, . . . , yi−1, xi+1, . . . , xn),
(3.30)
while setting r(x) = 0 in (3.13). Since we sample from the full conditional target distribution it
can be shown that the stationary distribution π is preserved [16]. If we set r(x) = 0 in (3.13)
it means that the probability of remaining inert at step xi+1 is 0, i.e. we never ”stand still” at
xi+1 = xi. Thus we see that every proposal is accepted by the Gibbs sampler which is a major
difference from the Metropolis­Hastings sampler. It can be shown that this transition kernel
K(x, y) satisfies the sufficient condition for the balance equation in (3.16). However, it does
not satisfy the stronger detailed balance condition in (3.17) [p. 101, 6]. We now prove that the
transition kernel satisfies the sufficient condition in (3.16). Since we normalized the conditional
probability distribution in (3.29) we know that it integrates to 1
Z
R
π(xi|x1, . . . , xi−1, yi+1, . . . , yn) dxi = 1,
∀i = 1, . . . , n.
(3.31)
Using this and the transition kernel in (3.30) we can write [6]
Z
R
, K(y, x) dxn =
Z
R
n
Y
i=1
π(xi|x1, . . . , xi−1, yi+1, . . . , yn) dxn
=
n−1
Y
i=1
π(xi|x1, . . . , xi−1, yi+1, . . . , yn)
Z
R
π(xn|y1, . . . , yn−1) dxn
=
n−1
Y
i=1
π(xi|x1, . . . , xi−1, yi+1, . . . , yn).
(3.32)
Doing this n −1 times more we see that
Z
Rn K(y, x) dx = 1.
(3.33)
Multiplying both sides of the above equation with π(y) leads to
π(y)
Z
Rn K(y, x) dx =
Z
Rn π(y)K(y, x) dx = π(y).
(3.34)
The first term i = 1 in K(x, y) from (3.30) is π(y1|x2, . . . , xn). This is independent of x1 since
the transition kernel conditions on all future steps xi+1, . . . , n. Thus we can use the definition of
marginal probability to write
Z
R
π(x)K(x, y) dx1 = K(x, y)
Z
R
π(x) dx1 = K(x, y)π(x2, . . . , xn).
(3.35)
We insert the product expansion of K(x, y) in the above to get
Z
R
π(x)K(x, y) dx1 =
 n
Y
i=1
π(yi|y1, . . . , yi−1, xi+1, . . . , xn)
!
π(x2, . . . , xn)
=
 n
Y
i=2
π(yi|y1, . . . , yi−1, xi+1, . . . , xn)
!
× π(y1|x2, . . . , xn)π(x2, . . . , xn)
=
 n
Y
i=2
π(yi|y1, . . . , yi−1, xi+1, . . . , xn)
!
π(y1, x2, . . . , xn)
12
Uncertainty Quantification for conductivity imaging from information about corresponding magnetic fields
==PAGE:21==
We can then integrate the above expression concerning x2, then for x3 up to and including xn.
This yields the final result
Z
Rn π(x)K(x, y) dx = π(y).
(3.36)
We multiply both sides of the équation by
R
Rn K(y, x) dx = 1 since it integrates to one (3.33)
Z
Rn π(x)K(x, y) dx = π(y)
Z
Rn K(y, x) dx.
(3.37)
Since π(y) is independent of x we can put it inside of the integral
Z
Rn π(x)K(x, y) dx =
Z
Rn π(y)K(y, x) dx,
(3.38)
and we thus see that the balance condition in (3.16) is satisfied for the Gibbs transition kernel.
We sample each component xi from the conditional distribution π(xi|x−i) and by doing this for
each component i = 1, . . . , n we preserve the target distribution π. This also means that each
proposal is accepted as we mentioned before, which reduces the computational overhead of
the method. The conditionals might not have a closed form though so the Gibbs sampler is not
applicable in all situations. Only a few steps are needed to implement the Gibbs sampler
1. Pick an initial value x1 ∈Rn and set counter k = 1.
2. Set x = xk. For all components 1 ≤j ≤n we draw a sample yj ∈R from the distribution
π(yj|y1, . . . , yj−1, xj+1, . . . , xn).
3. When all components have been sampled we update xk+1 = y, increment k ←k + 1 and
repeat from step 2. Stop the procedure when k = N and the desired number of samples
has been drawn.
The sequence in which we sample the individual blocks yj does not matter. We can sample in
a fixed order from 1 to n in which case we denote the sampler by a fixed scan Gibbs sampler,
or do it in a random order where we denote it by a random scan Gibbs sampler. We can show
that sampling component xj from the conditional distribution π(xj|x−j) preserves the stationary
distribution π [16]. Assume that a sample x has been drawn from the target density π. Replace
the jth component xj of x with some value drawn from the conditional z ∼π(xj|x−j). We thus
obtain a proposal y = [x1, . . . , xj−1, z, xj+1, . . . , xn]. We then have from probability theory that
π(y−j)π(yj|y−j) = π(y),
π(x−j)π(z|x−j) = π(x).
(3.39)
We stated that the Gibbs sampler always accepts the proposal which we can think of as being
generated from a Metropolis­Hastings step. Since the proposal y comes from the distribution
π(y) from above we can write the acceptance ratio α(x, y) as
α(x, y) = min

1, π(y−j)π(z|x−j)π(xj|x−j)
π(x−j)π(xj|x−j)π(z|x−j)

= 1.
(3.40)
We have that y−j and x−j are equal since y is defined to be equal to x with only component xj
changed. Deleting component j from both vectors will make them identical, thus showing that
the acceptance ratio is always equal to unity. The main problem with the Gibbs sampler lies in
the fact that we have to sample directly from the full conditionals. Sometimes this is not possible
and we have to find another way to sample from a difficult conditional. The Metropolis­within­
Gibbs method is developed to address this issue. This is discussed in the following section.
Uncertainty Quantification for conductivity imaging from information about corresponding magnetic fields
13
==PAGE:22==
3.1.3
Metropolis­within­Gibbs sampling
An interesting idea is to combine the Metropolis­Hastings and the Gibbs methods when we
cannot directly sample the j∗th from the conditional distribution. Instead of using a regular
Gibbs update for the j∗component of x, we can instead make use of a Metropolis­Hastings
step to sample from the conditional distribution [16]. In each iteration k of the Gibbs sampler
we will do an MH step instead of sampling directly from π(xj|x−j). This procedure takes the
following form given an iteration xk
1. Choose some proposal distribution q(·|xk
−j∗) for component xk
j∗given xk
−j∗.
2. Draw z ∼q(z|xk
−j∗) and set yj =
xk
j
j ̸= j∗
z
j = j∗.
3. Compute the acceptance ratio
α(xk, yj) = min
 
1,
π(yj)q(z|xk
−j∗)
π(xk)q(xk
j∗|xk
−j∗)
!
.
(3.41)
4. Draw t ∼[0, 1] from a uniform density as the probability of accepting the new sample.
5. If t ≤α(xk, y) we update the next sample as xk+1 = yj, else we do not update and set
xk+1 = xk.
6. Finish the Gibbs iteration by sampling the rest of the components xj directly from their full
conditionals π(xj|x−j).
Note that the Metropolis­Hastings step can be applied to more than just one component of
x. We only need to generate one sample in the Metropolis­Hastings step inside the Gibbs
sampler. Although one step guarantees the convergence of the method [16], in practice, it is
often required to take multiple MH steps for each Gibbs iteration. This is not required though,
but it can be beneficial to perform a few extra MH iterations within the Gibbs sampler to reach
some form of stationarity and reduce the correlation between the samples. We have mentioned
that it can be difficult to find closed­form expressions of the conditional distributions in the Gibbs
sampler. We now illustrate how the Gibbs sampler is used for the MREIT problem.
Toy problem: finding conditional distributions for a Gibbs sampler
We consider the toy problem of determining a set of parameters that describes the electrical
conductivity distribution σ of a 1 cm cube in R3. A conductive inclusion is embedded in a back­
ground medium with lesser conductivity properties. We consider the inclusion to be a ball B(c, r)
with a given radius r ∈R and center coordinates c = (cx, cy, cz) ∈R3. Denote by R and C the
random variables that model r and c respectively, and assume that R and C are independent.
Assume that the background conductivity is 1 S/cm (siemens/centimeter) and that the inclusion
has a conductivity of 2 S/cm. We thus define σ(c, r) as
σ(c, r) =
2 S/cm
inside B(c, r),
1 S/cm
outside.
(3.42)
Given some measured magnetic field data y we wish to solve the reconstruction problem in
MREIT by estimating the parameters (c, r) which completely determines the shape of the elec­
trical conductivity distribution σ(c, r).
14
Uncertainty Quantification for conductivity imaging from information about corresponding magnetic fields
==PAGE:23==
Figure 3.1: Example of a ball as a toy conductivity distribution in 3D parametrized by its radius
r and center coordinates c.
Let π(r, c, y) be the joint distribution of the parameters. We wish to sample p and c independently
given y. This amounts to deriving the following conditional probability distributions: π(r|c, y) and
π(c|r, y). The general form of Bayes’ rule states that
π(x|y) = π(y|x)π(x)
π(y)
= π(x, y)
π(y) .
(3.43)
We can thus write
π(c, r|y) = π(y|c, r)π(c, r)
π(y)
= π(y|c, r)π(c)π(r)
π(y)
,
(3.44)
since r and c are assumed to be independent. We can achieve the conditional density π(c|r, y)
by dividing both sides of (3.44) by π(r). It then follows
π(c|r, y) = π(c, r|y)
π(r)
= π(y|c, r)π(c)π(r)
π(y)π(r)
= π(y|c, r)π(c)
π(y)
.
Since y is given as data we know that π(y) is a constant and we can thus write
π(c|r, y) ∝π(y|c, r)π(c).
(3.45)
This is the distribution of c conditioned on the radius r and the data y. Similarly, we obtain the
conditional density π(c|r, y) by dividing (3.44) by π(c)
π(r|c, y) = π(c, r|y)
π(c)
= π(y|c, r)π(c)π(r)
π(y)π(c)
= π(y|c, r)π(r)
π(y)
,
which leaves us with the conditional distribution of r given the center c and magnetic field data
y
π(r|c, y) ∝π(y|c, r)π(r).
(3.46)
We have thus derived the following two conditional distributions
π(r|c, y) = π(y|c, r)π(r),
and
π(c|r, y) = π(y|c, r)π(c).
(3.47)
The two conditional distributions above are the posterior distributions that solve the inverse
problem in (3.3). The terms π(r) and π(c) are the priors and the term π(y|c, r) is the likelihood
function, which we assume to be Gaussian. We cannot sample from the conditionals directly in
the Gibbs sampler, but this is exactly why we have introduced the Metropolis­within­Gibbs step.
Since the conditionals in the above are simply the likelihood π(y|c, r) multiplied by a uniform
Uncertainty Quantification for conductivity imaging from information about corresponding magnetic fields
15
==PAGE:24==
distribution π(r) or π(c), we have expressions that are proportional to the posterior in (3.3).
Thus we can readily use MH updates to sample r and c from the target posterior conditionals
in a Metropolis­within­Gibbs sampler for the toy problem.
But how do we make sure that the samples from the Markov chain that we draw using the
methods are useful? Remember that the ergodic averages in (3.4) require independent and
identically distributed (i.d.d.) samples to converge. Since the links in a Markov chain {xi}N
i=1 are
inherently dependent one might wonder how we can produce a sequence of i.i.d. samples from
this framework. Several techniques exist to analyze the correlation between samples such that
we can determine how to subsample the chain to produce a sequence of close­to­independent
posterior samples.
3.2
Chain diagnostics
When we have produced a set of Markov chain samples {xi}N
i=1 from some sampling method
we need to make sure that the samples are statistically valid for estimating averages. Generally,
we have two problems to address when we have produced samples xi
1. How can we decide whether the distribution of the samples xi has converged to the sta­
tionary distribution π,
2. How can we decide that the samples xi are fully exploring the stationary distribution π.
To illustrate the above points it will be useful to look at an example. Say we use the Metropolis­
Hastings method to sample from the two­dimensional distribution [6]
π(x) ∝exp
 
−10(x2
1 −x2)2 −

x2 −1
4
4!
.
(3.48)
To the knowledge of the author, there is no closed form for this distribution. We will sample
from the distribution using the random walk Metropolis­Hastings method starting from the point
x0 = [1.5, −0.8]. To move forward we increment each step xk+1 = xk + w, where we choose
w as following a Gaussian distribution with zero mean and variance β2. We will then vary β to
see the effect it has on the sampling. Since we use a random walk model we know that the pro­
posal distribution q is symmetric and thus we only have to evaluate π(x) when we compute the
acceptance ratio α(x, y) = min

1, π(y)
π(x)

with π(x) in (3.48). Doing N = 5000 MH iterations for
values of β ∈{0.01, 0.05, 0.1, 1} yields the results in figure 3.2 and 3.3. The standard deviation
β of the random walk step w can be thought of as a step size in the random walk. For small step
sizes β = 0.01 we see from figure 3.2 that the samples are slow at exploring the target density
and for N = 5000 iterations we only get to explore a small region of the target distribution. The
sampled points are very densely packed and we have a lot of samples, which indicates that a
lot of the proposed steps are accepted. This can be confirmed by computing the proportion of
accepted samples out of the K = 5000 samples, which for β = 0.01 is equal to 95.42%. When
the step length β increases we see that we get to explore the target density more, which is a
better result. However, this also means that more of the proposed samples are rejected. With a
larger step size, we are more likely to step outside of the support of the density. For β = 0.05 we
get an acceptance ratio of 88.64%. For β = 0.1 we get 79.24% and lastly for β = 1 we only get
16.8%. In figure 3.2 we see that there are many more samples (black dots) for β = 0.1 than for
β = 1. This implies that the acceptance ratio has become large since the step size has caused
many samples to fall outside the support of π.
3.2.1
Burn­in and thinning
Continuing with the example target distribution in (3.48) we will now introduce methods of pro­
ducing close­to­independent samples from a set of Markov chain samples. The contour plots
16
Uncertainty Quantification for conductivity imaging from information about corresponding magnetic fields
==PAGE:25==
Figure 3.2: Results of the Metropolis­Hastings random walk for different values of β for N = 5000
starting from the lower right, on top of a contour plot of π(x) from (3.48).
in figure 3.2 reveal how the Metropolis­Hastings method likes to move from regions of small
probability to regions of higher probability inside the contours of the density. We initialize the
method in a region of very small probability at x0. If a new proposal x∗has a higher probability
than the current state xk, then π(x∗)/π(xk) is larger than 1, and hence the acceptance ratio
α = 1 and we are sure to accept the proposal. The samples at the beginning of the chains do
not represent the target distribution π(x). It is usually a good idea to discard these ”warm­up”
samples and only use the part of the chain which represents the target distribution better. The
process of discarding the first Nb samples is called the burn­in in the literature. Plotting individ­
ual components of every sample of x as the samples evolve is called a trace plot. Examples of
trace plots for the x1 component of all samples in figure 3.2 are shown in figure 3.3. We see a
need to apply burn­in since the chains only settle in after a while, especially for small values of
β. This is because the Markov chain takes longer to reach the asymptotic behavior. From the
trace plots, we can also get an indication of whether the samples xk have explored the target
distribution well. When the samples are near­independent we should not see a lot of correlation
between subsequent samples in the traces. If points close to each other share similar values
then we know there is a lot of correlation in the samples. We should ideally see a trace plot
that looks like random noise as in the bottom right of 3.3. Here the values of adjacent samples
of x1 are very different from each other. This implies that there is not much correlation going
on between the samples and we have near­independent samples. With respect to the traces
in figure 3.3 we can say that smaller step sizes β ∈{0.01, 0.05, 0.1} lead to a large correlation.
We can only say that the correlation length is small for a large step size β = 1. An eye­ball
estimate for a good trace plot is often referred to as a ”fuzzy caterpillar”. If this is the case then
the step size β in the random walk can be said to be appropriate. We refer to the process of
the samples fluctuating randomly as mixing. The better the mixing the more the trace plots look
like fuzzy caterpillars. This is only a rough estimate of the behavior. To ensure the quality of
Uncertainty Quantification for conductivity imaging from information about corresponding magnetic fields
17
==PAGE:26==
Figure 3.3: Trace plot of the x1 component of x from the Metropolis­Hastings random walk for
different values of β for N = 5000.
the samples, one thing we can however is to only consider every jth sample. This is a process
known as thinning or subsampling the chain. This allows us to substantially reduce the amount
of correlation in the final chain allowing the ergodic averages in (3.4) to converge faster. How­
ever, it requires us to compute j · N times as many samples in the first place if we desire a final
sample size of N.
3.2.2
Effective sample size
We described before how the correlation between consecutive values of an MCMC chain makes
the ergodic averages in (3.4) converge slowly. The correlation between samples can be quan­
tified by the sample auto correlation function which describes the correlation between samples
xi at lag ℓfor 0 ≤ℓ< N. For a realization of a Markov random field, this can be estimated as
βℓ= 1
N
N−ℓ+1
X
i=1
(xi −¯x)(xi+ℓ−¯x),
where ¯x =
N
X
i=1
xi.
(3.49)
The normalized sample autocorrelation of xi at lag ℓis then
ρℓ= βℓ
β0
.
(3.50)
Continuing with the example in (3.48), we have computed the autocorrelation function ρℓof both
components of x for the Metropolis­Hastings example in (3.48), results are displayed in figure
3.4. We see that there is a large amount of correlation between samples even at lags ℓ= 100
for β ∈{0.01, 0.05, 0.1}, while the autocorrelation function decays rapidly for β = 1. This shows
that the mixing is better for larger step sizes since there is less correlation between consecutive
samples in the chain. We want the correlation to be close to zero. The autocorrelation function
18
Uncertainty Quantification for conductivity imaging from information about corresponding magnetic fields
==PAGE:27==
for β = 1 does decay to approximately zero at about lag ℓ= 50. This indicates that every
50th sample provides an independent sample from the others. Thus it is beneficial to thin the
samples and only consider 1 in every 50.
Figure 3.4: Example of autocorrelation function ρℓas function of lag ℓfor the random walk
Metropolis­Hastings example in (3.48) for different values of β. To the left is the autocorrelation
of the x1 component and to the right is the x2 component.
In this report, we estimate the mean of the posterior using ergodic averages in the form of
ˆµN = 1
N ΣN
i=1f(xi). What is the variance of the estimate? Since our samples are correlated and
not independent this makes a naive estimate of the variance to be biased. Assume the chain
has variance σ2, then the variance of the MCMC estimator ˆµN is [17]
V[ˆµN] = σ2
N τf,
(3.51)
where τf is the integrated autocorrelation time (IACT) for a stationary process
τf = 1 + 2
∞
X
k=1
ρk ≈ˆτf = 1 + 2
N−1
X
k=1

1 −k
N

ρk,
(3.52)
with ρk as in (3.50) and where ˆτf is an unbiased estimator of τf. The IACT can be said to be an
estimator of how many iterations it takes on average to produce an independent MCMC sample
[18], so we want this value to be close to 1. This can be used to compute the effective sample
size Neff of a set of MCMC samples of size N
Neff =
N
1 + 2 P∞
k=1 ρk
≈
N
1 + 2 PN−1
k=1
 1 −k
N

ρk
.
(3.53)
The effective sample size can be used to compare the variance estimated via correlated MCMC
samples and the ideal case with the variance computed from completely independent samples.
The aim is to obtain an efficient sample size Neff as close to N as possible, since this would
mean that the samples are mostly independent. For the example target distribution in (3.48) we
drew N = 5000 samples with the Metropolis­Hastings method as shown in figure 3.2. We can
then compute the effective sample size for each component of x to see how well the sampling
performs.
Neff
β = 0.01
β = 0.05
β = 0.1
β = 1
x1
10.94
8.33
33.33
190.50
x2
10.77
17.49
78.44
345.42
Table 3.1: Efficient number of samples for different values of step size β for the samples we
drew from the target density π(x) in (3.48).
Uncertainty Quantification for conductivity imaging from information about corresponding magnetic fields
19
==PAGE:28==
Another metric that can determine how well a chain is mixing is the mean square jump distance
(MSJ). In an ideal sampling scenario, we want adjacent samples xi and xi−1 to be different
from each other for the sake of independence. This is analogous to there being a large ”jump”
between adjacent samples and the MSJ distance computes the average of the sum of squares
between samples.
MSJ = 1
N
N
X
i=1
∥xi −xi−1∥2
2.
(3.54)
We want this MSJ distance to be as large as possible, the larger the magnitude of MSJ the better
the chains are mixing. Another common convergence diagnostic is the Geweke test where we
split the chain into two parts after discarding the burn­in samples [19]. We consider the first
10% of the chain and the last 50% of the chain. If the Markov chain has reached the stationary
distribution we expect the averages of these two parts should be approximately equal. The
Geweke test can be found in external Python libraries.
3.3
Posterior inference
The traditional frequentist approach to solving inverse problems uses deterministic methods
and only gets a point estimate as the solution. A point estimate is nice since it provides a
readily available solution to the inverse problem. Point estimates can be a single estimate of
an unknown parameter to be determined, or in our case a tomographic image of a conductivity
distribution. In statistical inverse problems, the solution is a probability distribution that requires
post­processing to grasp. Computing point estimates from the posterior probability density are
therefore very important since we use these point estimates to infer information. Traditional
deterministic point estimate solutions can take the form of a regularized solution as in (2.7), or
a maximum likelihood estimate
xML = arg max
x
πlike(yobs|x).
(3.55)
Recall that the likelihood function worked as a data­fitting term so by only maximizing this we
are not including any prior information and therefore not any regularization in the solution. This
solution is therefore prone to being very unstable, which is why we use the Bayesian framework
and include prior information in the first place. A Bayesian point estimate can be computed
by instead maximizing the posterior density, to produce what is called a maximum a posteriori
(MAP) estimate. This is the highest point of the posterior and can be said to be the most credible
point
xMAP = arg max
x
πpost(x|yobs).
(3.56)
Note that instead of maximizing the posterior (or likelihood) we usually minimize the negative
logarithm of the posterior for a better numerical stability. We can also compute the posterior
mean or the conditional mean which is defined via an integral. Estimating this quantity is one of
the central motivations for introducing MCMC methods. When we have a set of MCMC samples
{xi}N
i=1 we use these to approximate the posterior mean
xPM = Eπpost[x] =
Z
Rn xπpost(x|y) dx ≈1
N
N
X
i=1
xi.
(3.57)
In the same way, we can estimate the expected value of any function f w.r.t. the posterior
Eπpost[f] =
Z
Rn f(x)πpost(x|y) dx ≈1
N
N
X
i=1
f(xi).
(3.58)
20
Uncertainty Quantification for conductivity imaging from information about corresponding magnetic fields
==PAGE:29==
This is especially useful for estimating posterior quantiles by using an indicator function
P[x > a] =
Z ∞
a
πpost(x|y) dx ≈1
N
N
X
i=1
1xi>a.
(3.59)
When we have computed an estimate ˆµ it is interesting to know how certain we can be of it.
Can we for example say with 95% certainty that the estimate is contained within some interval?
This is possible by using credibility intervals. A credibility interval quantifies our certainty that
an estimate ˆµ is contained within some interval a < ˆµ < b. Credibility intervals quantify the
uncertainty in our estimate ˆµ given the sampling we performed to compute ˆµ. Since we can
compute posterior quantiles we are able to compute credibility intervals. To do this given a set
of Markov chain samples {xi}N
i=1 we first sort the elements of the set. We then determine the q­th
quantile as the value q/100 of the way from the minimum to the maximum, interpolating between
neighboring values if no exact match is found [20]. A 95% credibility interval thus amounts to
computing the 2.5% and 97.5% quantiles. In this report we use the numpy.percentile function
from the NumPy package.
We can compute the ML and MAP estimates in (3.55) and (3.56) using nonlinear optimization
methods. This does not however say anything about the uncertainty of the point estimates.
We can compute an estimate of the posterior mean in (3.57) by using sampling methods, e.g.
MCMC. Using the samples we can compute standard deviations and credibility intervals, which
is essential when we want to do uncertainty quantification for point estimates. We conclude that
it is strictly necessary to explore the posterior if we want to both compute point estimators and
do uncertainty quantification for an inverse problem.
Uncertainty Quantification for conductivity imaging from information about corresponding magnetic fields
21
==PAGE:30==
4
The finite element method and spectral
convolution methods
Since we aim to develop a computational framework for solving the MREIT inverse problem we
need some numerical methods for computing the two forward mappings F and G from section 2.
In this chapter, we will introduce the Finite Element Method (FEM) for numerically solving partial
differential equations and a spectral method based on the Fourier transform for fast computation
of the Biot­Savart integral in (2.3).
4.1
Finite element method for approximating PDE
For numerically solving the Poisson equation in (2.1) we apply the FEM framework. Here we
consider PDE problems in their variational form since this allows one to introduce a finite col­
lection of basis functions, which we will use to represent the solution to the variational problem.
Consider an inhomogeneous Poisson equation with homogenous Dirichlet boundary conditions
on a domain Ω∈Rd where d ∈{2, 3}
−∇· σ∇u = f
in Ω,
u = 0
on ∂Ω.
(4.1)
The solution to this equation is a function u ∈H1
0(Ω), where the subscript 0 denotes vanishing
boundary trace. The vanishing trace condition is due to the homogenous Dirichlet boundary
condition. Remember that for a function to be in H1(Ω), we need both the function and its
first derivative to be square integrable. We look for solutions of the PDE in H1(Ω) as we will
consider the variational formulation of the problem. And for that, we need both the function u
and its gradient ∇u to be L2 functions, such that the integration by parts formula can be applied.
Deriving the variational form of this sort of PDE involves taking a test function v belonging to
the Sobolev space H1
0(Ω), and multiplying both sides of the PDE with v followed by integration
by parts
Z
Ω
(−∇· σ∇u)v dx =
Z
Ω
σ∇u · ∇v dx −
Z
∂Ω
σ(∇u · n)v ds =
Z
Ω
fv dx,
∀v ∈H1
0(Ω),
(4.2)
where n is the outward unit normal to ∂Ω. Since v ∈H1
0(Ω) we know that the boundary term
vanishes and we are left with
a(u, v) :=
Z
Ω
σ∇u · ∇v dx =
Z
Ω
fv dx := ⟨f, v⟩,
∀v ∈H1
0(Ω).
(4.3)
This also explains why H1
0(Ω) is the right space to look for a solution to the PDE problem. If v
does not vanish on the boundary we would have had a contribution from the boundary term in
(4.2), so the condition of vanishing boundary trace is important. The condition of u, v ∈H1
0(Ω)
also has to do with the convergence of the integral
R
Ωσ∇u · ∇v dx. Since a(u, v) = ⟨f, v⟩has
to hold for all v ∈H1
0(Ω), we can also choose v = u. Thus we have the integral
R
Ωσ∇u · ∇u dx,
which is exactly equal to ∥∇u∥2
L2(Ω). If we only had that u ∈L2(Ω) we would not be able to
guarantee that this integral converges, and thus the integration by parts formula would not be
applicable. If u ∈H1
0(Ω) we also have that ∇u ∈L2(Ω) and everything works out fine. The
relation in (4.3) completely defines the variational problem, find u ∈H1
0(Ω) such that
a(u, v) = ⟨f, v⟩,
∀v ∈H1
0(Ω).
(4.4)
The Lax­Milgram theorem insures that the solution to the variational problem 4.4 exists and is
unique under certain conditions on the bilinear form a(u, v) and the functional f
22
Uncertainty Quantification for conductivity imaging from information about corresponding magnetic fields
==PAGE:31==
Theorem 1 (Lax­Milgram theorem [21]) Let a(·, ·) be a bilinear mapping from [H1
0(Ω)]2 →R
and assume there exists constants α, β > 0 such that the bilinear form is bounded
|a(u, v)| ≤α∥u∥∥v∥,
(u, v ∈H1
0(Ω)),
(4.5)
and coercive
β∥u∥2 ≤a(u, u),
(u ∈H1
0(Ω)).
(4.6)
Finally, let g : H−1(Ω) →R be a bounded linear functional. Then there exists a unique element
u ∈H1
0(Ω) such that
a(u, v) = ⟨g, v⟩
(4.7)
for all v ∈H1
0(Ω).
If these conditions are satisfied for all test functions v ∈H1
0(Ω) then we are guaranteed to
have a unique solution u ∈H1
0(Ω) to the variational problem in (4.4). Now, let V denote the
Sobolev space H1
0(Ω). Since V is an infinite­dimensional space we cannot immediately use it
for numerical computations, since we need a discretized domain. In the FEM framework, one
works with a triangulation of the domain Ω. We use a finite set of basis functions as our finite
element basis to build our solution, hence the name of the method. The support of each element
spans only a few triangles. Let h denote some subdivision of Ω. Doing this lets us construct a
finite­dimensional approximation Vh to the infinite­dimensional space V , such that Vh ⊂V . We
can then use the Galerkin method to project the system in (4.4) as a linear system of equations
[22]. Let {ϕi ∈Vh : i = 1, ..., Nh} be a collection of basis functions in Vh and expand the solution
u in this basis and let Ui be the real values expansion coefficients in the basis
uh =
X
i
Uiϕi.
(4.8)
We choose the test functions ϕj to be the basis functions of Vh. A typical example of a finite
element basis functions in both 2D and 3D is shown are figure 4.1, more specifically first or­
der Lagrange elements. Such piecewise linear functions take the shape of ”triangular hats” in
2D and ”pyramids” in 3D. These basis functions are defined over multiple triangles in the trian­
gulation. To increase the accuracy, we can use higher­order basis functions instead of linear
ones
Figure 4.1: Lagrange basis elements for continuous piecewise linear functions in 2D and 3D
[22].
Uncertainty Quantification for conductivity imaging from information about corresponding magnetic fields
23
==PAGE:32==
The discrete variational problem is then to find uh ∈Vh such that a(uh, ϕj) = ⟨f, ϕj⟩for all
ϕj ∈Vh. Using the bilinearity of a after inserting the expansion (4.8) yields
a
 X
i
Uiϕi, ϕj
!
=
X
i
Uia(ϕi, ϕj) = ⟨f, ϕj⟩,
∀j = 1, . . . , Nh.
(4.9)
Now define Aij = a(ϕi, ϕj) and Fi =
R
Ωfϕi dx for all i, j = 1, . . . , Nh. Considering Aij as
elements of a matrix and using that a(ϕi, ϕj) = a(ϕj, ϕi) for the bilinear form defined in (4.3) we
can write the following
Fj =
Z
Ω
fϕj dx = a(uh, ϕj) = a
 X
i
Uiϕi, ϕj
!
=
X
i
Uia(ϕi, ϕj)
=
X
i
AijUi =
X
i
AjiUi = (AU)j,
∀j = 1, . . . , Nh.
(4.10)
So we get the linear system
AU = F,
A ∈RNh×Nh and U, F ∈RNh.
(4.11)
Is the solution U to this linear system unique? To answer this let us again take a look at the
Lax­Milgram theorem governing the uniqueness of solutions to the variational form in (4.4). We
first need to ensure that the variational form in (4.4) actually satisfies the conditions of the Lax­
Milgram theorem. Then we can determine the uniqueness of U in the linear system above.
Boundedness of the bilinear form a(u, v) defined in (4.3) follows from the Cauchy­Schwarz in­
equality, and coercivity follows from [22, 23]. Thus we know that there exists a unique solution
u ∈H1
0(Ω) to the variational problem in (4.4).
Since the coercivity condition in (4.6) holds, we can show that it ensures that the vector U
exists uniquely. From linear algebra, we know that the solution U is unique if and only if the
only solution to F = 0 is U = 0. This is indeed the case, since if F = 0 it implies that the
inhomogeneity f is zero. And if this holds then
0 = ⟨f, v⟩= a(u, v) = 0,
∀v ∈H1
0(Ω).
(4.12)
Coercivity in Lax­Milgram implies that β∥u∥2 ≤a(u, u) = 0,
∀u ∈H1
0(Ω). Thus the only
solution is the zero solution u = 0 which implies that U = 0. Setting up and solving the linear
system in (4.11) for a given discretization h and choice of basis {ϕi} is the brunt of the work
in most FEM implementations. After obtaining the coefficients U the discretized solution uh is
computed by (4.8). We will employ the FEM implementation for PDEs supplied by the FEniCS
package in Python [24].
At the beginning of the section, we assumed we were dealing with an inhomogenous Poisson
equation with homogenous Dirichlet boundary datum. As a short remark, we want to explain
how to remedy the opposite situation, i.e. that we instead had a homogenous Poisson equation
with inhomogenous Dirichlet data
−∇· σ∇u = 0
in Ω,
u = g
on ∂Ω.
(4.13)
We can rewrite the equation by first considering that u = g on ∂Ωin the trace sense. The
bilinear form in 4.4 has to hold for all v ∈H1
0(Ω). This means that there must be some function
w ∈H1(Ω) with trace equal to g on ∂Ω[21]. But then w is a function on the entire Ωwith
24
Uncertainty Quantification for conductivity imaging from information about corresponding magnetic fields
==PAGE:33==
boundary trace equal to g. We can then define ˜u = u −w, which indeed belongs to H1
0(Ω) as
˜u = g −g = 0 on ∂Ω. This function instead solves the problem
−∇· σ∇˜u = −∇· σ∇g
in Ω,
˜u = 0
on ∂Ω.
(4.14)
Which is now an instance of an inhomogenous Poisson equation with homogenous Dirichlet
boundary conditions as in (4.1).
4.1.1
Equivalence between 2D and 3D setting
Whether we solve a PDE in 2D or 3D does not change much in the formulation of the variational
problem in (4.4). If we look at the homogenous Poisson equation with inhomogenous Dirich­
let data in (4.13) and consider both the 2D and the 3D setting, we can prove the equivalence
between the two solutions on the unit square and unit cube respectively, if we impose homoge­
nous Neumann boundary conditions to the top and bottom of the unit cube. The solution in 3D
will then correspond to slices of the 2D solution. We thus have two ways of representing the
same 3D geometry.
1. Consider a bounded and open 2D domain Ω⊂R2 and the conductivity distribution σ ∈
L∞
+ (Ω). Then the potential p ∈H1
0(Ω) solves the 2D problem
−∇· σ(x, y)∇p(x, y) = f(x, y)
in Ω,
p(x, y) = 0
on ∂Ω.
(4.15)
2. Consider an extension of the 2D domain defined by Ω× (0, 1). If we define q ∈H1
0(Ω×
(0, 1)) and γ ∈L∞
+ (Ω× (0, 1)) as q(x, y, z) = p(x, y) and γ(x, y, z) = σ(x, y) for z ∈(0, 1),
then the corresponding 3D problem is
−∇· γ(x, y, z)∇q(x, y, z) = f(x, y)
in Ω× (0, 1),
q(x, y, z) = 0
on ∂Ω∀z ∈(0, 1),
γ ∂q
∂z = 0
for z = 0 and z = 1 in Ω.
(4.16)
We want to show that these two problems are equivalent. Consider a test function φ(x, y, z) ∈
C∞
0 (Ω× (0, 1)) and compute the weak formulation of the 3D problem.
Z
Ω×(0,1)
(−∇· γ∇q)φ dx =
Z
Ω×(0,1)
γ∇q · ∇φ dx −
Z
Ω∩(0,1)
(γ∇q · n)φ ds
=
Z
Ω×(0,1)
fφ dx.
(4.17)
Here n denotes the normal vector in the z­direction, i.e. n = (0, 0, 1). Define now a 2D test
function ψ(x, y) ∈C∞
0 (Ω) and let φ(x, y, z) = ψ(x, y)η(z). The space of 2D test functions
C∞
0 (Ω) multiplied by some continuous function η(z) ̸= 0 is dense in the space of the 3D test
functions C∞
0 (Ω× (0, 1)) [25]. Thus we can approximate each 3D test function φ arbitrarily well
with some ψ(x, y)η(z). We can now write
Z
Ω×(0,1)
γ∇q · ∇φ dx −
Z
Ω∩(0,1)
(γ∇q · n)φ ds
=
Z
Ω×(0,1)
γ


∂xq
∂yq
∂zq

·


∂xφ
∂yφ
∂zφ

dx −
Z
Ω∩(0,1)
γ


∂xq
∂yq
∂zq

·


0
0
1

φ dx
=
Z
Ω×(0,1)
γ(∂xq∂xφ + ∂yq∂yφ + ∂zq∂zη) dx −
Z
Ω∩(0,1)
γ∂zqφ dx.
(4.18)
Uncertainty Quantification for conductivity imaging from information about corresponding magnetic fields
25
==PAGE:34==
We have from the Neumann boundary condition that γ∂zq = 0. Thus the ∂zq term vanishes in
each integral and we are left with
Z
Ω×(0,1)
γ∇q · ∇φ dx −
Z
Ω∩(0,1)
(γ∇q · n)φ ds
=
Z
Ω×(0,1)
γ(∂xq∂xφ + ∂yq∂yφ) dx =
Z
Ω×(0,1)
fφ dx.
(4.19)
Inserting φ = ψη yields
Z
Ω×(0,1)
γ∇q · ∇φ dx −
Z
Ω∩(0,1)
(γ∇q · n)φ ds
=
Z
Ω×(0,1)
γ(∂xq∂x(ψη) + ∂yq∂y(ψη)) dx =
Z
Ω×(0,1)
fψη dx.
(4.20)
Since η is independent of x and y we can pull it out from the differentiations and outside the x­
and y­integration. We also insert γ(x, y, z) = σ(x, y) to get
=
Z
Ω×(0,1)
ση(∂xq∂xψ + ∂yq∂yψ) dx =
Z
Ω×(0,1)
fψη dx
=
Z 1
0
η
Z
Ω
σ(∂xq∂xψ + ∂yq∂yψ) dxdy

dz =
Z 1
0
η
Z
Ω
fψ dxdy

dz.
(4.21)
We can now differentiate w.r.t. z and divide by η since η ̸= 0
Z
Ω
σ(∂xq∂xψ + ∂yq∂yψ) dxdy =
Z
Ω
fψ dxdy.
(4.22)
Since q(x, y, z) = p(x, y) for all (x, y) ∈Ωwe can write
Z
Ω
σ(∂xq∂xψ + ∂yq∂yψ) dxdy =
Z
Ω
σ(∂xp∂xψ + ∂yq∂yψ) dxdy =
Z
Ω
fψ dxdy.
(4.23)
Which is the same as writing
Z
Ω
σ∇p · ∇ψ dxdy =
Z
Ω
fψ dxdy.
(4.24)
Using integrations by parts on the left­hand side we get
−
Z
Ω
(∇· σ∇p)ψ dxdy +
Z
∂Ω
(σ∇p · n)ψ ds =
Z
Ω
fψ dxdy.
(4.25)
And since ψ ∈C∞
0 (Ω) we know that ψ vanishes on ∂Ωso the line integral over ∂Ωvanishes
too. Thus we can write
Z
Ω
(−∇· σ∇p)ψ dxdy =
Z
Ω
fψ dxdy.
(4.26)
Differentiating w.r.t. x and y and then dividing by ψ recovers the strong form of the 2D PDE from
4.15, which is what we wanted to show. Thus the 2D and 3D formulations of the Poisson problem
with appropriate Dirichlet and Neumann conditions are equivalent. On a discretized m × m grid
we can solve the 2D problem in (4.15) and stack m copies on top of each other to generate the
z­discretization in (0, 1) as a ”pseudo­3D” solution. The result of this will be equivalent to solving
the 3D problem with Neumann boundary conditions in (4.16) on an m × m × m grid. Solving a
2D problem in FEM is much faster than solving 3D problems for larger mesh sizes. Therefore
it will be beneficial to consider both formulations of the problem for the sake of resolution and
computation time.
26
Uncertainty Quantification for conductivity imaging from information about corresponding magnetic fields
==PAGE:35==
4.2
Spectral method for fast evaluation of magnetic fields
The presence of a current field J inside Ωinduces a magnetic field B. The two are related via
the Biot­Savart integral
B(x) = 1
4π
Z
Ω
J(x′) ×
x −x′
|x −x′|3 dx′.
(4.27)
Since the forward problem in MREIT requires the evaluation of magnetic fields in large parts
of the domain Ωwe ought to have a fast and efficient method for evaluating the Biot­Savart
integral. In (4.27) we are integrating over a vector in R3, so we can split it up into three Cartesian
coordinate functions B = (B1, B2, B3) using convolutions, which we denote by the ∗operator
[11]
B1(x) = 1
4π
Z
Ω
(x3 −x′
3)J2(x′) −(x2 −x′
2)J3(x′)
|x −x′|3
dx′
= (G3 ∗J2 −G2 ∗J3)(x),
B2(x) = 1
4π
Z
Ω
(x1 −x′
1)J3(x′) −(x3 −x′
3)J1(x′)
|x −x′|3
dx′
= (G1 ∗J3 −G3 ∗J1)(x),
B3(x) = 1
4π
Z
Ω
(x2 −x′
2)J1(x′) −(x1 −x′
1)J2(x′)
|x −x′|3
dx′
= (G2 ∗J1 −G1 ∗J2)(x),
(4.28)
where the Biot­Savart integral kernels Gn are defined by
Gn = 1
4π
xn
|x|3 ,
n = 1, 2, 3.
(4.29)
Each convolution in (4.28) can be defined by
Cn,m(x) = Gn(x) ∗Jm(x),
n ̸= m.
(4.30)
Computing the convolution with a naive implementation on a grid with N sampling points has
the complexity O(N2). In the frequency domain, however, the convolution becomes a simple
multiplication that only has linear complexity O(N). Denote by F the Fourier transform and by
F −1 the inverse Fourier transform. Then
Cn,m(x) = F −1{F{Gn} · F{Jm}}.
(4.31)
To compute this we need the Fourier transform of the Biot­Savart kernel F{Gn} and the Fourier
transform of each component of the current density field F{Jm}. Only the Fourier transform of
the Biot­Savart kernel is available in analytical form, so we use that for better accuracy. We will
discuss shortly how we numerically compute the Fourier transform of the current density field
F{Jm}. Let k = (k1, k2, k3) be the spatial frequency in radian per meter and i the imaginary
unit. Then we have for F{Gn}
F{Gn} = F
 1
4π
xn
|x|3

= F

−∂
∂xn
1
4π|x|

= −iknF

1
4π|x|

.
(4.32)
We know that
1
4π|x| is the fundamental solution for the negative Laplacian −∆u = 0. Its Fourier
transform is given by [26]
F

1
4π|x|

=
1
|k|2 .
(4.33)
Uncertainty Quantification for conductivity imaging from information about corresponding magnetic fields
27
==PAGE:36==
Which then leaves for F{Gn}
F{Gn} = −i kn
|k|2 .
(4.34)
For computing the Fourier transform of the discretized current density field F{Jm} we must
resort to the discrete Fourier transform (DFT) since J is not available in closed form. We use
the Fast Fourier Transform (FFT) from the scipy.fftpack library in python to evaluate the DFT
of J. Recall that J = σ∇u where u is computed numerically via FEM. Assuming the gradient is
discretized on a grid of size N the time complexity for applying FFT is O(N log(N)). The authors
of [11] specify two problems to address for the method to work properly. One problem has to do
with the regularity of the mesh we are using and the other concerns the fact that convolutions
computed via the FFT are not linear convolutions.
1. We must make sure that the current density field J is sampled on an equidistant and
regularly spaced grid. If not then we must interpolate the values to a regular grid first.
The frequencies captured by the FFT are directly related to the resolution of the grid, and
therefore the resolution must be chosen carefully. The FFT is most efficient when the size
of the computational grid is a power of 2, i.e. n = 2m for some m ∈N [27].
2. When we apply the FFT to compute a convolution of the form
g ∗f = F −1{F{g} · F{f}}
the result is a circular convolution since we use an exponential Fourier basis. To fix this,
the authors introduce a periodization of the discretized current density field J. Since the
current field J is zero outside the domain Ω, i.e. it has compact support, we can define a
cube S1 = (−s/2, s/2)3 in R3 centered at the origin as the physical domain which contains
the entire Ω⊂S1. This cube is the domain where we evaluate the linear convolution in
the end. If we consider points x ∈S1, the integral in (4.30) only involves values of the
Biot­Savart kernel Gn on a larger computational domain S2 = (−s, s)3 such that S1 ⊂S2.
This is illustrated in figure 4.2.
Figure 4.2: The large cube S2 which determines the periodization of the current density field J,
and the small cube S1 which shows that J indeed has compact support in Ω[11].
We can then imagine the entire plane filled with multiple copies of S2 placed in an orderly
square grid, with the original instance of Ω⊂S1 ⊂S2 at the origin [28]. To compute
the discrete linear convolution in the original Ωat the origin, we calculate the FFT in a
large region of the plane containing several instances of S2 where all values of J /∈Ω
are set to zero. We are now computing a circular convolution on a periodic domain, and
28
Uncertainty Quantification for conductivity imaging from information about corresponding magnetic fields
==PAGE:37==
this result yields F{J} on multiple copies of S2 in a large part of the plane. If we restrict
our attention to the original S2 cube at the origin the result will be identical to a linear
convolution in S2. The computation of F{J} for all points in the original S2 is then identical
to the linear convolution for all points x in the inclusion S1, and thus also identical to the
linear convolution for all x ∈Ω⊂S1.
After accounting for the two steps above we can compute the discrete convolution in (4.31)
where we use the analytical result for F{Gn} in (4.34). We evaluate the analytical Fourier
transform of the Biot­Savart kernel F{Gn} at the spatial frequencies k which are also present
in the FFT computation. There is a singularity in (4.34) at k = 0 which we would like to avoid,
and we do this numerically by setting
F{Gn}[k = 0] = 0.
(4.35)
Denote the analytical transform F{Gn} evaluated at a set of discrete points by F{Gn}. This can
now be multiplied with the numerically computed FFT(Jm) to produce the convolution in Fourier
space. To get back to our original discretized domain Ωwe must apply the inverse discrete
Fourier transform, which we do via an implementation of the inverse fast Fourier transform
(IFFT) from the scipy.fftpack. This function utilizes the FFT to compute the inverse discrete
transform efficiently. The IFFT and the FFT has the property that for a discrete signal x, then
x = IFFT(FFT(x)). We can now write for the convolution in 4.31
Cn,m(x) = IFFT(F{Gn} · FFT(Jm)).
(4.36)
Efficient computation of the magnetic field B = (B1, B2, B3) can then be achieved by applying
the above Fourier procedure to each Gn ∗Jm term in (4.28). An algorithm implementing the
procedure is presented in listing A.2 in Appendix 2.
Uncertainty Quantification for conductivity imaging from information about corresponding magnetic fields
29
==PAGE:38==
5
Computational solution procedure
We model the MREIT reconstruction problem using the Bayesian framework introduced in chap­
ter 3. Exploring and characterizing the posterior distribution which is the solution to our Bayesian
inverse problem is the main problem we wish to solve in this thesis.
MCMC methods are often computationally expensive, and therefore an efficient implementation
of the forward model G ◦F in (2.4) is required for sampling to be feasible in a reasonable time.
When sampling we have to evaluate the forward model each time we compute the acceptance
probability α in an MCMC iteration (3.24). Constructing the posterior distribution in (3.3) requires
specifying a likelihood function. The likelihood contains the forward model along with the noise
model. How we parameterize the unknown electrical conductivity distribution σ determines the
prior distribution.
5.1
Building the posterior
We choose to model the conductivity distribution σ as a cubic volume conductor. The conductor
will act as a medium of constant conductivity, with one or more inclusions of different conductivity
properties embedded inside. These inclusions are going to model conductivity anomalies in
tissue. The type of parameterization we use for the inclusions should be chosen based on the
regularity of the anomalies we want to model, and how many parameters are feasible to use
with our forward model. These are related as complex shapes often require many degrees of
freedom. We have to evaluate the forward model twice in (3.41) for each parameter we sample,
assuming just a single Metropolis step inside each Gibbs iteration. A Naive approach to setting
a prior for the conductivity σ is discretizing it into pixels and treating each pixel as an unknown,
yielding n3 unknowns in total. Recall that we have to evaluate the forward model twice each
time we compute the acceptance ratio in an MH step in eq. (3.24). Drawing just 1 sample
of a pixel­wise σ would require at least 2n3 evaluations of the forward model, assuming that all
samples are accepted and that we only do a single Metropolis­within­Gibbs iteration. Therefore,
we decide to take an alternative approach to model the conductivity field.
Barth et al. propose a low dimensional representation of the conductivity field in [14] by focusing
on the location of inclusions, i.e. localized anomalies in the conductivity field. The authothe rs
use three types of random fields to describe unknown inclusions, with each prior containing
some number of degrees of freedom. We take a more simplified approach and instead look for
inclusions parameterized by balls and ellipsoids.
5.1.1
Prior distribution
As we chose σ to be one or more inclusions embedded in a background medium of a lesser
conducting material, we need to parameterize the inclusions themselves to determine which
parameters to reconstruct. The parameterization of σ for the spherical inclusion in figure 3.1
is a function of two sets of parameters. Modeling inclusions as spheres is a good compromise
between complexity and efficiency. Spheres provide information about the inclusions’ location
and volume while they are described with just a few parameters. Later in this section, we
also look into ellipsoids for modeling inclusions which reveals the orientation of an inclusion as
well. Assuming a background conductivity value of 1 S/cm and a conductivity value of 2 S/cm
inside the inclusion, we parameterize a sphere using its radius r ∈R and its center coordinates
c = (cx, cy, cz) ∈R3
σ(c, r) =
2 S/cm
if (x −cx)2 + (y −cy)2 + (z −cz)2 ≤r2,
1 S/cm
otherwise.
(5.1)
30
Uncertainty Quantification for conductivity imaging from information about corresponding magnetic fields
==PAGE:39==
This construction assumes that we already know the electrical conductivity values inside and
outside the inclusion. If only the conductivity of the background medium is known we can add
an extra independent parameter κ > 0 to denote the conductivity inside the inclusion. We also
consider an ellipsoidal inclusion with radius parameters denoting the semi­axes r = (rx, ry, rz) ∈
R3, the center coordinates c = (cx, cy, cz) ∈R3, and unknown conductivity value κ ∈R.
σ(c, r, κ) =
(
κ S/cm
if (x−cx)2
r2x
+ (y−cy)2
r2y
+ (z−cz)2
r2z
≤1,
1 S/cm
otherwise.
(5.2)
In the case of multiple inclusions available in the conductivity field, sigma is defined as several
spherical inclusions with different conductivity properties. Consider two spherical inclusions
parameterized by two radii r = (r1, r2) ∈R2, two pairs of center coordinates c1 = (c1x, c1y, c1z) ∈
R3 and c2 = (c2x, c2y, c2z) ∈R3, and two conductivity levels κ = (κ1, κ2) ∈R2
σ(c, r, κ) =



κ1 S/cm
if (x −c1x)2 + (y −c1y)2 + (z −c1z)2 ≤r2
1,
κ2 S/cm
if (x −c2x)2 + (y −c2y)2 + (z −c2z)2 ≤r2
2,
1 S/cm
otherwise.
(5.3)
Intersecting inclusions can be handled by this parameterization too. The conductivity level of the
region of overlap between the intersecting inclusions will have a value of κ2 since the conductiv­
ity distribution σ is built with an if­statement in FEniCS. The advantage of a simple, parametric
approach is that the parameters can be assumed to be independent. In section 3.1.3 we dis­
cuss how to derive the conditional probability densities for a problem involving two independent
parameters r and c. Applying the same technique to include more parameters, e.g. an unknown
conductivity κ, is straightforward.
After choosing a parameterization for σ we must describe the probability distribution of its pa­
rameters. As a running example, consider a spherical inclusion in σ inside the unit cube as
done in section 3.1.3. This inclusion is defined by its center and radius parameters c and r as in
(5.1). We will refer to this specific inclusion parameterization for the rest of the chapter. Since
we work in the unit cube we impose the constraints that the center coordinate c is contained
within [0, 1]3 and that the radius is within [0, 0.5]. Therefore, we assign a uniform prior to c and
r since we have no prior knowledge of their values apart from the bounds.
c ∼U[0, 1]3,
r ∼U[0, 0.5].
(5.4)
Uniform priors make the conditional distributions in (3.47) take a simple form.
5.1.2
The likelihood function
We assumed that the additive noise E in (3.2) follows a Gaussian distribution with zero mean
and variance γ2, i.e. E ∼N(0, γ2). The noisy forward model in (3.2) gives the relation between
conductivity σ, noisy magnetic field data yobs and noise E
yobs = (G ◦F)(σ(c, r)) + E ⇐⇒E = yobs −(G ◦F)(σ(c, r)).
(5.5)
So we conclude that yobs −(G ◦F)(σ(c, r)) is distributed like E. This determines the likelihood
function πlike(yobs|c, r) to be Gaussian, i.e.
πlike(yobs|c, r) =
1
p
2πγ2 exp
 
−1
2
∥yobs −(G ◦F)(σ(c, r))∥2
2
γ2
!
.
(5.6)
Assuming that c and r are independent, we can use Bayes’ theorem in equation (3.3) to write
an expression proportional to the joint posterior distribution
πpost(c, r|yobs) ∝π(yobs|c, r)π(c, r) = π(yobs|c, r)π(c)π(r).
(5.7)
Uncertainty Quantification for conductivity imaging from information about corresponding magnetic fields
31
==PAGE:40==
Using the prior distribution for c and r defined in (5.4) and the likelihood from (5.6) above, we
can write up the joint posterior in closed­form
πpost(c, r|yobs) =
1
p
2πγ2 ·
1
1 −0 ·
1
0.5 −0 · exp
 
−1
2
∥yobs −(G ◦F)(σ(c, r))∥2
γ2
!
.
(5.8)
In the Gibbs sampler, we have to use the conditional distributions π(r|c, yobs) and π(r|c, yobs)
respectively, these were derived in (3.47) for the simple case we are considering. We want to
obtain the conditional distribution of r given the center c and magnetic field data yobs. Applying
the Bayes’ rule and (5.6) yields
π(r|c, yobs) = πlike(yobs|c, r)π(r) =
1
p
2πγ2 ·
1
0.5 −0 · exp
 
−1
2
∥yobs −(G ◦F)(σ(c, r))∥2
γ2
!
.
(5.9)
Similarly, the posterior conditional distribution of c given the radius r and magnetic field data
yobs can be written as
π(c|r, yobs) = πlike(yobs|c, r)π(c) =
1
p
2πγ2 ·
1
1 −0·exp
 
−1
2
∥yobs −(G ◦F)(σ(c, r))∥2
γ2
!
. (5.10)
These conditional distributions are also not available in full closed form and are thus intractable.
It is infeasible to compute the denominator of Bayes’ rule in (3.3) with the above expressions.
Thus we must use a Metropolis­Hasting step to sample from them.
For numerical stability and to avoid computational overflow, we usually take the logarithm of
the posterior conditional distributions. This is allowed since we only have to compute fractions
involving the posterior in both the numerator and denominator. We can thus express the log of
the conditional distributions as
log π(r|c, yobs) ∝−1
2
∥yobs −(G ◦F)(σ(c, r))∥2
γ2
,
c fixed,
log π(c|r, yobs) ∝−1
2
∥yobs −(G ◦F)(σ(c, r))∥2
γ2
,
r fixed.
(5.11)
Where we have removed any proportionality constants in the closed­form expressions of the
log conditional distributions. These can be omitted since we only have to compute fractions
involving the closed­form expression of the log of the conditional distribution in both the numer­
ator and the denominator. We also note that these two expressions are simply equal to the log
of the likelihood function log(π(yobs|c, r)) = log(πlike(yobs|c, r)), but with one of the parameters
fixed. We can thus easily construct the log posterior conditional distributions by simply taking
the log­likelihood function and fixing one parameter. The conditional distributions are the ones
we will sample from via the Metropolis­Hastings step in each Gibbs iteration, for the algorithm
presented in section 3.1.3. Extending the technique to include another unknown parameter
such as an unknown conductivity value κ is straightforward. We have to include an additional
Metropolis step inside the Gibbs sampler since κ is assumed to be independent of c and r.
5.2
Simulation of forward problem
Recall from section 2.1 that the forward problem consisted of two mappings. The first mapping
takes the parameterized conductivity distribution σ(p), with p being the parameters, to the cur­
rent density field J. To obtain the current density, we solve for the electric potential u inside the
32
Uncertainty Quantification for conductivity imaging from information about corresponding magnetic fields
==PAGE:41==
unit cube Ω= [0, 1]3, i.e. solving the Poisson equation with Dirichlet boundary conditions. This
is done using FEM on an n × n × n grid using the FEniCS platform in Python [24].
−∇· σ∇u = 0
in Ω,
u(x, y, z) = x
on ∂Ω.
(5.12)
For the Dirichlet boundary condition, we choose the function u(x) = x. Physically, this means
keeping the voltage on the cube’s right side at a fixed value of one, with the left side is kept at
zero. This construction models that the current applied from the electrodes in the MREIT setup
in figure 2.1 runs from right to left. This choice of boundary condition is inspired by the authors
of [2]. A short piece of code outlining a FEniCS implementation of the Poisson equation along
with the computation of the current density field is shown in listing A.1 in Appendix 2.
After obtaining an approximation of u we compute the gradient ∇u(x) in FEniCS.We then com­
pute the current density field J(x) = −σ(x)∇u(x) inside [0, 1]3 and extract the function values
on the grid. The magnetic field B induced by J is then computed via the Biot­Savart integral [11]
B(x) = 1
4π
Z
Ω
J(x′) ×
x −x′
|x −x′|3 dx′.
(5.13)
We use the spectral­Fourier methods discussed in section 4.2 to evaluate this integral. A Python
implementation of the Fourier method for the Biot­Savart integral covered in section 4.2 as
written by the authors of [11] is shown in listing A.2 in Appendix 2.
5.2.1
Data generation
When generating synthetic data for an inverse problem we must make sure that we do not
commit an inverse crime. An inverse crime is a term commonly used for the act of using the
same numerical ingredients, e.g. parameters and computational mesh, to generate the data
and to invert data [6]. Doing this can make numerical treatment of inverse problems under­
perform in real­life scenarios. Special care must thus be taken when generating synthetic data
for an inverse problem. In this project, we propose to remedy this issue by generating the data
on an (n+2)×(n+2)×(n+2) fine grid and interpolating it down to an n×n×n computational
grid for sampling. We must also make sure to scale the additive noise correctly since we wish
for the data to have relative noise. Given exact magnetic field data yexact and a realization of
standard normal Gaussian noise e, we first normalize the noise by dividing it by its norm. We
then multiply the normalized noise with ∥yexact∥2/100 to obtain 1% noise relative to yexact. This
can then be scaled by any desired percentage of relative noise. Adding 10% relative noise to
yexact to obtain yobs can be achieved by
yobs = yexact + ∥yexact∥2 ·
e
∥e∥2
· 10
100.
(5.14)
In section 4.1.1 we discuss how a two­dimensional and a three­dimensional formulation of the
Poisson problem are equivalent. Given appropriate homogenous Neumann boundary condi­
tions in the z­direction for the 3D problem. This produces a solution that is invariant in the
z­direction, i.e. where each slice in the z­direction is equivalent to the solution of the 2D prob­
lem.In this situation, the gradient of u in the z­direction vanishes. Thus the z­component J3 of
the current density field J = (J1, J2, J3) = −σ∇u also vanishes, and we thus cannot get infor­
mation about the x­ and y­components of the magnetic field (B1, B2) from the computation in
(4.28).
The full­3D model does not need the z­component of the gradient of u. Recall that in an MRI
procedure, as depicted in 2.1, one only measures the z­component of the magnetic field B3.
Thus, from (4.28) we conclude that we only need knowledge of the x­ and y­components of J
Uncertainty Quantification for conductivity imaging from information about corresponding magnetic fields
33
==PAGE:42==
to compute magnetic field data. The code snippet implementing the spectral­Fourier method
for evaluating the Biot­Savart integral in listing A.2 also reveals that the computation of B3 does
not require knowledge of J3. In a sampling method, we can thus omit the computation of B1
and B2 for greater efficiency.
Note that the computational efficiency of the two cases is not equivalent. Solving the 2D Poisson
equation on an n×n grid and stacking the solution n times in the z­direction has a computational
efficiency of O(n2), while solving the 3D Poisson equation on an n × n × n grid is an O(n3)
computation. Therefore we will consider two versions of the inverse problem:
1. Pseudo­3D method: we parameterize σ(p) to be a 2D conductivity field and solve the
2D Poisson equation to obtain the electric potential u. We then compute the current J =
(J1, J2) = σ∇u. Let ˜J denote n copies of J stacked in the z­direction. We then use
˜J = ( ˜J1, ˜J2) to compute magnetic field data B3 via (4.28).
2. Full­3D method: we parameterize σ(p) to be a 3D conductivity field and solve the 3D
Poisson equation to obtain the electric potential u. We then compute J = (J1, J2) = σ∇u
and use these to compute B3 via (4.28).
We can achieve much better resolution in the inversion for the same computational effort by
considering the pseudo­3D method instead of the full­3D method. This approach avoids the
heavy computational load of solving PDE in 3D. We compare the computing time between the
two approaches for different mesh sizes n in table 5.1. We use the simple circular/spherical in­
clusion defined in (5.1) as the true conductivity distribution and propagate it through the forward
pipeline σ 7→˜J 7→B3. The computations were performed on a desktop computer running an
Intel(R) Core(TM) i5­3570K CPU processor at 3.40 GHz with 8 GB of RAM.
Mesh size n
pseudo­3D method
full­3D method
8
0.011 s
0.108 s
16
0.021 s
0.984 s
32
0.069 s
12.94 s
64
0.274 s
­
Table 5.1: Full forward model evaluation time in seconds for different mesh sizes
The execution of the full­3D method is interrupted in table 5.1 for n = 64, since more memory is
required to project the current density J = −σ∇u onto the finite element space. The conductivity
field σ from (5.1) is shown in figure 5.1 for the pseudo­3D and the full­3D method. The magnetic
field data is presented in the middle and bottom rows of figure 5.1 for 10% relative noise. Note
in the bottom row how the magnetic field is flowing in the x­direction. This is due to the current
field also flowing in the x­direction, more precisely from right to left. With the u(x, y, z) = x
boundary condition, we use in eq. (5.12) we have set the potential to u = 1 at the right x = 1
boundary and u = 0 on the left x = 0 boundary. Thus the current field J also points from right
to left. A similar approach is used to generate data for other prior parameterizations σ(p).
34
Uncertainty Quantification for conductivity imaging from information about corresponding magnetic fields
==PAGE:43==
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
Figure 5.1: Top row: Example conductivity distributions σ(c, r) defined by (5.1) for the pseudo­
3D model in (a) and the full­3D model in (b). Middle row: magnetic field data from applying
the forward model G ◦F to the conductivity field σ(c, r) for the pseudo­3D model in (a) and the
full­3D model (b). Bottom row: (e) single slice of magnetic field data.
5.3
Solution of the Bayesian inverse problem
Once the noisy data yobs has been obtained and the posterior distribution (3.3) has been defined,
we are ready to solve the inverse problem in (3.1) via a sampling method. The posterior probabil­
ity distribution contains information about the unknown conductivity field σ given noisy magnetic
field data. We continue with the prior assumption of σ being parameterized by its center c and
Uncertainty Quantification for conductivity imaging from information about corresponding magnetic fields
35
==PAGE:44==
radius r, see (5.1). As an example in the figures below, we consider the pseudo­3D method with
the z­invariant conductivity distribution parameterized by (c, r) = (cx, cy, r) ∈R2×R. The full­3D
method is saved for the next chapter. We will now describe our approach to characterizing the
posterior distribution and reconstructing the conductivity field for given observed data yobs. We
will consider two ways of doing uncertainty quantification on the estimated parameters.
5.3.1
Posterior sampling
Assuming the parameters that determine the geometry of σ are independent, we present the
posterior distributions in (5.11). We sample from these distributions using the Metropolis­within­
Gibbs sampler as described in section 3.1.3.
Here we explain the Metropolis­within­Gibbs method for the particular example of estimating
the two parameters c and r given noisy data yobs. Let xk = [ck, rk] be our state vector at the k’th
Gibbs iteration. Assuming the pseudo­3D method we have xk ∈R2 × R. We choose a proposal
model of form xk+1 = xk + βwk where wk ∼N(0, 1) is a standard normal increment and β is
some step size to be tuned. Since the proposal distribution is symmetric, the computation of
the acceptance probability reduces to (3.25). We also assume that bounds for each parameter
are provided, such that ck ∈(clow, chigh) and rk ∈(rlow, rhigh). If the step taken by the random
walk model exceeds these bounds or any other constraint which we may supply to the sampler
as we wish, we re­sample the step and check the constraints again. The sampling procedure
is presented in algorithm 1
The proposal distribution is essentially determined by the step size β which should be tuned
for each parameter. The step size should be such that the samples are exploring the posterior
well. After sampling we can use the chain diagnostics we discuss in section 3.2 to estimate the
performance of the sampling procedure. We can also look at the acceptance rate which is the
proportion of the proposed samples which are accepted by the sampling method. According to
[29] the optimal acceptance ratio is 23.4%. We can tune the step size β such that the observed
acceptance rate approaches this value. One such tuning period consists of drawing a number
of samples, e.g. Kt = 200, where the acceptance rate is computed and β is updated every 10th
sample. The update is based on the difference between the observed acceptance rate and the
optimal one. The adaptive stepsize procedure is presented in algorithm 2 follow [29]
In the experience of the authors, this adaptive step size scheme in algorithm 2 does not always
yield step sizes β which are good for exploring the posterior. Nevertheless, it gives a good
indication of which step sizes to use initially. Looking at the parameter traces and doing chain
diagnostics can aid in the further manual tuning of step sizes β = [βc, βr] for each parameter.
Sampling from the posterior requires the following ingredients
­ Supply the log­likelihood function log πlike = −1
2
∥yobs−(G◦F)(σ(c,r))∥2
2
γ2
to construct conditional
distributions.
­ An initial guess x0 = [c0, r0] for each parameter.
­ A step size for each parameter β = [βc, βr], either by running the above scheme or guess­
ing.
­ Bounds for each parameter (clow, chigh) and (rlow, rhigh).
­ Number of Metropolis iterations [Mc, Mr] to perform in each Gibbs iteration.
­ Number of samples K to draw in total.
5.3.2
Uncertainty quantification
When we have obtained posterior samples {ck, rk}K
k=1 of the parameters determining the con­
ductivity distribution σ(c, r), we can consider two methods of doing uncertainty quantification
36
Uncertainty Quantification for conductivity imaging from information about corresponding magnetic fields
==PAGE:45==
Algorithm 1 Metropolis­within­Gibbs sampler
Require: Step sizes β = [βc, βr], number of within­Gibbs iterations [Mc, Mr] and desired sam­
ple size K.
Supply initial guess (c0, r0), log conditional densities log π(rk|ck, yobs) and
log π(ck|rk, yobs).
1: k ←0
2: x0 ←[c0, r0]
3: while k < K do
4:
Initialize within­Gibbs chain for the center, z1 ←ck
5:
for i = 1, . . . , Mc do
▷Metropolis­Hastings steps for component ck
6:
Draw wi ∼N(0, 1) and set yc = zi + βcwi. Redraw if yc /∈(clow, chigh)
7:
Compute acceptance probability
α(zi, yc) = min (1, exp (log π(yc|rk, yobs) −log π(zi|rk, yobs))) .
8:
Draw t ∼U[0, 1] as the probability of accepting the new sample.
9:
if t ≤α(zi, yc) then
10:
Update within­Gibbs chain zi+1 = yc
11:
else
12:
Do not update within­Gibbs chain zi+1 = zi
13:
end if
14:
end for
15:
Update outer Gibbs chain and set ck+1 = zMc
16:
Initialize within­Gibbs chain for radius, s1 ←rk
17:
for j = 1, . . . , Mr do
▷Metropolis­Hastings steps for component rk
18:
Draw wj ∼N(0, 1) and set yr = sj + βrwj. Redraw if yr /∈(rlow, rhigh)
19:
Compute acceptance probability
α(sj, yr) = min (1, exp (log π(yr|ck+1, yobs) −log π(sj|ck+1, yobs))) .
20:
Draw t ∼U[0, 1] as the probability of accepting the new sample.
21:
if t ≤α(sj, yr) then
22:
Update within­Gibbs chain sj+1 = yr
23:
else
24:
Do not update within­Gibbs chain sj+1 = sj
25:
end if
26:
end for
27:
Update outer Gibbs chain and set rk+1 = sMr
28:
k ←k + 1
29: end while
Uncertainty Quantification for conductivity imaging from information about corresponding magnetic fields
37
==PAGE:46==
Algorithm 2 Adaptive stepsize procedure
Require: Supply βc, target acceptance ratio, and initial guess c0.
1: k ←0
2: vacc ←{1}
3: nup ←0
4: for k = 1, . . . , 200 do
5:
Draw wk ∼N(0, 1) and set yc = ck + βcwk. Redraw if yc /∈(clow, chigh)
6:
Compute acceptance probability
α(ck, yc) = min (1, exp (log π(yc|rk, yobs) −log π(ck|rk, yobs))) .
7:
Draw t ∼U[0, 1] as the probability of accepting the new sample.
8:
if t ≤α(ck, yc) then
9:
Update chain ck+1 = yc
10:
Append 1 to vacc
11:
else
12:
Do not update chain ck+1 = ck
13:
Append 0 to vacc
14:
end if
15:
if
mod (k, 10) = 0 then
16:
Compute current average acceptance rate ¯vacc, and ζ =
1
√
nup+1.
17:
Update βc ←exp (log(βc) + ζ(¯vacc −acc∗))
18:
nup ←nup + 1
19:
end if
20: end for
(UQ). One involves UQ on the parameter space (ck, rk) ∈R2 ×R directly, and the other involves
UQ on the mapped parameters onto the conductivity space σ ∈Rn×n×n through the parameter­
ization. Mapping the parameters through the parameterization and onto the conductivity space
is also commonly known as a pushforward
1. The first approach involves doing UQ on the samples directly and computing the posterior
mean of the center coordinates and radius as scalars. We also compute the variance of
these parameters. We can then construct the conductivity distribution with the posterior
means as parameters σ(E(ck), E(rk)), yielding a single estimate of a conductivity distribu­
tion. The variance of the sampled chains is used to compute credibility intervals for each
parameter.
2. The second approach involves constructing the conductivity distribution that each sample
(ck, rk) defines, such that we have K different samples of σ(ck, rk) as conductivity fields of
size n×n×n. We can then compute the posterior mean in conductivity space E(σ(ck, rk)),
and also compute the variance of the samples V(σ(ck, rk)) pixel­wise. We can visualize the
sample mean E(σ(ck, rk)) as the conductivity distribution estimate, and also the standard
deviation
p
V(σ(ck, rk)) to get a pixel­by­pixel estimate of the uncertainty.
The circular conductivity prior distribution for the pseudo­3D problem is parameterized by σ(c, r)
with c ∈R2 and r ∈R. This is shown in the top left of figure 5.1. Using this conductivity distri­
bution as an example, we solve the Bayesian inverse problem by sampling from the posterior
conditional distributions in (5.11) via the Metropolis­within­Gibbs sampler we described in the
previous section. After the sampling is done we perform the UQ analysis described above. We
present the posterior mean as our estimate of the conductivity field. The results for uncertainty
38
Uncertainty Quantification for conductivity imaging from information about corresponding magnetic fields
==PAGE:47==
quantification on parameter space are shown in figure 5.2. Results for the uncertainty quan­
tification in conductivity space are shown in 5.3, where we plot a single slice of the vertically
invariant pseudo­3D solution. We plot the full pseudo­3D solution in the open­source visualiza­
tion software Paraview. These results are displayed in figure 5.4. 5000 samples were drawn
and the first 1000 were discarded as burn­in. From figure 5.2 we see that the true values are
Figure 5.2: Example of UQ analysis for parameter samples (ck, rk).
contained within the confidence intervals for all parameters in this simple case, and the esti­
mated values are close to the true ones in all cases. Since the conductivity parameterization
Figure 5.3: Example of UQ analysis for the mapped parameter samples σ(ck, rk). Top left: true
conductivity distribution. Top right: pushforward of parameter sample means. Bottom left: mean
of pushforward of parameters. Bottom right: standard deviation of pushforward of parameters.
σ(c, r) is piecewise constant, the two conductivity distributions in the top row of figure 5.3 will be
so too. For the mean of the parameterization pushforwards in the bottom left row, the conductiv­
ity values seem to decay smoothly at the boundary of the inclusion. This is because the circular
inclusion in all of the individual σ(ck, rk) samples are scattered in a small area around the true
inclusion. Not all of the sampled inclusions overlap exactly at the boundary. This causes the dip
in the mean value of all samples at the boundary, but not in the center of the inclusion as most
Uncertainty Quantification for conductivity imaging from information about corresponding magnetic fields
39
==PAGE:48==
samples overlap here. This is also evident from the plot of the standard deviation in the bottom
right of the above figure. There is some uncertainty around the boundary of the inclusion, but
otherwise, the standard deviation is close to zero inside the inclusion. This is because we as­
sumed the conductivity value of the inclusion to be known with a value of 2 S/cm, so we should
not expect a high standard deviation inside of the inclusion. Results similar to the above can
be displayed in 3D using Paraview. For the true conductivity distribution and the pushforward
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 5.4: Example of UQ analysis for the mapped parameter samples σ(ck, rk) in Paraview.
(a): true conductivity field. (b): pushforward of parameter sample means. (c): mean of push­
forward of parameter samples. (d): standard deviation of pushforward of parameter samples.
of the parameter means in the top row of figure 5.4, we can threshold the conductivity values
in Paraview since the conductivity values are piecewise constant inside the domain. For the
mean and standard deviation of the mapped parameters, we have to visualize via slicing as
these are not piecewise constant. We want to be able to see the decay at the inclusion bound­
ary of the mapped parameter mean. Also, the standard deviation inside the inclusion is not the
same as on the boundary. Note that the viewpoint is the same in the top row and bottom row
respectively. This is chosen such that we can see both inclusions without overlap in the top
row, and such that we can see the slices of both inclusions without anything being obstructed in
the bottom row. For all of the results in the next chapter, we will do uncertainty quantification in
parameter space akin to figure 5.2. For the uncertainty quantification in conductivity space, we
will do the Paraview visualizations as shown in figure 5.4, except for the pure two­dimensional
case in which we will display results as in 5.3.
40
Uncertainty Quantification for conductivity imaging from information about corresponding magnetic fields
==PAGE:49==
6
Numerical results
We apply the computational framework discussed in the previous chapter to reconstruct an
inclusion given noisy magnetic field data. We consider several different inclusions of increasing
complexity parameterized by an increasing number of parameters. We are thus simulating
anomalies with different conductivity properties than the homogenous background medium with
constant conductivity value. As shown in table 5.1 we run into memory issues for larger grid
sizes for the full­3D model. This is because the system of equations we construct in (4.11) when
we use the finite element method becomes too large. This gives rise to very large and very
sparse matrices which are difficult to handle. To remedy these issues we use iterative solvers
instead of direct solvers for solving the system of equations. We have used the biconjugate
gradient stabilized (bicgstab) solver and a successive over­relaxation (sor) preconditioner to
gain the best performance in terms of runtime and memory usage [30, 31]. To gain access
to more memory and be able to run multiple scripts at once, we use the High­Performance­
Computing system at DTU to run all results.
We perform the experiments in a cube with a side length of 1 cm centered at (0.5, 0.5, 0.5) cm.
We arbitrarily set the background conductivity value to κ0 = 1 S/cm and use larger values for
the simulated anomalies. In the sampling, we use 20 Metropolis iterations within each Gibbs
iteration to decrease the covariance between adjacent samples. For the FEniCS parameters,
we use a function space with linear Lagrange elements (CG1) for solving the Poisson equation
in (5.12) for the electric potential u. Consequently, for the gradient of u we can use a vectorized
function space with discontinuous constant Lagrange elements (DG0). This is the space that we
will project the current density field J = −σ∇u onto. We add 10% relative noise to the magnetic
field data B to create the observed data yobs. The options we just described for the solver and
the function spaces are the same for all the following numerical experiments.
6.1
Benchmarking
If we want a point estimate of the reconstructed conductivity field for comparison with the MCMC
results, we can use one of the techniques for posterior inference discussed in section 3.3.
Specifically, we will consider the Maximum a Posteriori (MAP) estimate from equation (3.56).
Computing this point requires using an optimization routine to maximize the joint posterior dis­
tribution in (5.8). We have to use gradient information for the optimization problem. Due to
time constraints, we only consider the MAP estimate in 2D. We will be working with the MREIT
forward model (c, r) 7→u 7→J 7→Bz, mapping parameters of the conductivity field σ(c, r)
to the magnetic field data Bz. Computing gradients of the nonlinear mapping in parameter
space (c, r) ∈R2 × R is tricky though, so we resort to working straight in the conductivity space
σ ∈Rn×n. This makes the negative log posterior distribution take the following form with noise
variance γ2
−log πpost(σ|yobs) ∝1
2
∥yobs −(G ◦F)(σ)∥2
2
γ2
(6.1)
Since we are working directly in conductivity space and not in parameter space, we have to
use a regularization term in the cost functional to ensure we find a feasible conductivity field σ.
We choose the L2 norm of σ scaled by a parameter α as the regularization term. The data­
discrepancy term in the cost functional is the negative log posterior above. The cost functional
can thus be written as
F(σ) =
1
2γ2 ∥yobs −(G ◦F)(σ)∥2
2 + α
2 ∥σ∥2
2.
(6.2)
Uncertainty Quantification for conductivity imaging from information about corresponding magnetic fields
41
==PAGE:50==
If we think of this cost functional as being equal to a negative log posterior then we can write for
the full posterior distribution
π(σ|yobs) ∝exp

−1
2γ2 ∥yobs −(G ◦F)(σ)∥2
2

· exp

−α
2 ∥σ∥2
2

.
(6.3)
So we see that this construction assumes a Gaussian prior on the conductivity field σ with
variance equal to 1
α. To compute the MAP estimate we will minimize the cost functional in (6.2)
using the L­BFGS­B algorithm implemented in the fmin_l_bfgs_b function from the scipy library
in Python [32]. Ideally, we should supply the analytical gradient of the cost functional dF
dσ to the
optimization routine. We compute this as
dF
dσ = 1
γ2
d(G ◦F)
dσ
(yobs −(G ◦F)(σ)) + ασ.
(6.4)
So we have to compute the derivative of the full forward mapping d(G◦F)
dσ
. This can be done
in two stages. We denoted by F the operator which maps a conductivity field σ to a current
density field J. The derivative of this part of the mapping with respect to the conductivity field
σ is the linear operator dF(˜σ) from (2.13) in [2], denote this by dF
dσ . We can then compute the
derivative of the full forward mapping d(G◦F)
dσ
. This is done by applying the Biot­Savart map G to
the derivative of the first part of the model dF
dσ . This is possible because the Biot­Savart integral
is linear and taking derivatives is also a linear operation. We are using that
d(G ◦F)
dσ
= G
dF
dσ

.
(6.5)
The ground truth conductivity field that we are trying to reconstruct is an elliptic inclusion ro­
tated by 45◦in the xy­plane centered at (0.5, 0.5), and with semi­axes equal to 0.15 and 0.3.
The conductivity value of the inclusion is 2 S/cm and the conductivity level of the background
medium is 1 S/cm. The true conductivity field is shown in figure 6.1a to the left in figure 6.1.
All computations have been performed on a 64 × 64 mesh. We have set the regularization pa­
rameter to α = 10−5. For the stopping criteria in the optimization procedure, we have used a
projected gradient tolerance of 10−9 and a relative difference factor of 104. The iteration will stop
when some component of the projected gradient is below tolerance, or if the relative difference
fk−fk+1
max{|fk|,|fk+1|,1} ≤104 · ϵ, where ϵ ≈2.2 · 10−16 is machine precision. The stopping criteria pa­
rameters have been chosen to provide high accuracy [33]. We add 10% noise to the observed
magnetic field data yobs and we initialize the optimization with a constant conductivity field σ0
which takes the value 0.5 S/cm everywhere.
Computing the gradient of the cost functional dF
dσ seems to be relatively straightforward in theory.
However, in practice, we had a lot of issues with computing it. Our analytical gradient was not
comparable with a finite difference approximation of it. Running the L­BFGS­B optimization
with the analytical gradient gave poor results, these are shown in figure 6.1b. Only a small part
of the boundary of the inclusion is reconstructed correctly. The conductivity value of the small
reconstructed part and the value of the background are not far from the true values though. Due
to the poor reconstruction using the analytical gradient, we opted to approximate the gradient
numerically instead. This can be accomplished by setting the approx_grad flag equal to 1 in the
call to the L­BFGS­B routine. The results for the approximate gradient are shown in figure 6.1c.
The MAP estimate computed with approximate gradients has found the shape of the inclusion
quite well, but the conductivity values are underestimated. Also due to time constraints, we did
not manage to estimate the covariance matrix of the MAP point. Therefore we do not have any
UQ results on this posterior estimate.
42
Uncertainty Quantification for conductivity imaging from information about corresponding magnetic fields
==PAGE:51==
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 6.1: Results of the MAP computation in 2D. (a): rotated elliptic inclusion as the ground
truth conductivity field σ. (b): MAP estimate with the analytical gradient dF
dσ computed in (6.4).
(c): MAP estimate with approximate gradients.
Uncertainty Quantification for conductivity imaging from information about corresponding magnetic fields
43
==PAGE:52==
6.2
Problem 0: spherical inclusion with known conductivity
We first consider the toy problem we used as a running example in the previous chapter with
the conductivity field parameterized by the expression for σ(c, r) in (5.1). The ground truth
conductivity fields and the noisy magnetic field data are shown in figure 5.1. For the pseudo­3D
method, we have to estimate three parameters (c, r) = ((cx, cy), r) ∈R2 × R. For the full­3D
method, we have to estimate four parameters (c, r) = ((cx, cy, cz), r) ∈R3 × R. Using the
Metropolis­within­Gibbs sampler presented in algorithm 1 we draw 5000 samples (ck, rk) from
the conditional posterior distributions in (5.10) and (5.9). The parameters shown in table 6.1
were used to construct the true conductivity field and initialize the sampler. The CPU times can
Parameter
Value
True center c
(0.47, 0.36) cm
True radius r
0.195 cm
Conductivity κ
2 S/cm
Data grid
66 × 66 × 66
Reconstruction grid
64 × 64 × 64
Initial center c0
(0.80, 0.10) cm
Initial radius r0
0.10 cm
Stepsize (βc, βr)
(0.03, 0.06)
Bounds (clow, chigh)
(0, 1.0) cm
Bounds (rlow, rhigh)
(0.05, 0.50) cm
Within Gibbs iter.
20
Parameter
Value
True center c
(0.47, 0.36, 0.26) cm
True radius r
0.195 cm
Conductivity κ
2 S/cm
Data grid
10 × 10 × 10
Reconstruction grid
8 × 8 × 8
Initial center c0
(0.50, 0.50, 0.50) cm
Initial radius r0
0.10 cm
Stepsize (βc, βr)
(0.03, 0.04)
Bounds (clow, chigh)
(0, 1) cm
Bounds (rlow, rhigh)
(0.05, 0.50) cm
Within Gibbs iter.
20
Table 6.1: Initial parameters. Left: pseudo­3D method. Right: full­3D method.
be read off from the output files generated from executing scripts on the HPC system. With the
above parameters, the CPU times are shown in table 6.2 below.
pseudo­3D method
full­3D method
CPU time
14.25 hours
8 hours
Table 6.2: CPU times on the HPC system for problem 0.
6.2.1
Statistical analysis of posterior samples
Trace plots of the chains for each set of parameters (c, r) are shown for the pseudo­3D method
in figure 6.2 and for the full­3D method in figure 6.3.
44
Uncertainty Quantification for conductivity imaging from information about corresponding magnetic fields
==PAGE:53==
Figure 6.2: Parameter trace of 5000 samples for the pseudo­3D method in problem 0.
Figure 6.3: Parameter trace of 5000 samples for the full­3D method in problem 0.
Evidently, it takes the sampler a few iterations to converge to the posterior distribution. We
discard the first 1000 samples as burn­in and perform diagnostics on the resulting chain of
Uncertainty Quantification for conductivity imaging from information about corresponding magnetic fields
45
==PAGE:54==
4000 samples. The chains all look to be mixing well compared with the example of good mixing
in the bottom right corner of figure 3.3. For each parameter, we compute the posterior mean
E[·], the integrated autocorrelation time (IACT), and the effective sample size neff. These are
displayed in table 6.3. Recalling the true parameters in table 6.1 we see that the estimates for the
pseudo­3D model are more accurate compared to those of the full­3D model. We note that the
integrated auto­correlation time (IACT) is larger in the full­3D method which consequently, also
leads to a smaller effective sample size neff. On the burned chains we compute 95% credibility
Diagnostic
Value
Center IACT
(1.008, 1.019)
Radius IACT
1.140
Center neff
(3967, 3925)
Radius neff
3509
E[ck]
(0.463, 0.353) cm
E[rk]
0.195 cm
Diagnostic
Value
Center IACT
(1.823, 1.176, 1.315)
Radius IACT
1.561
Center neff
(2194, 3402, 3042)
Radius neff
2562
E[ck]
(0.428, 0.353, 0.250) cm
E[rk]
0.200 cm
Table 6.3: Chain diagnostics for problem 0. Left: pseudo­3D method. Right: full­3D method.
intervals and plot them in figure 6.4 along with the true and estimated parameter values for the
UQ analysis. We only display the results for the full­3D model here as the UQ results for the
pseudo­3D model were shown in figure 5.2. All credibility intervals seem to contain the true and
Figure 6.4: Parameter UQ analysis for problem 0. Left: pseudo­3D method. Right: full­3D
method.
estimated parameter values. The method is able to accurately estimate the true parameters via
the posterior mean. We see that the credibility intervals are a bit larger in the full­3D method,
indicating more uncertainty in those estimates.
6.2.2
Conductivity reconstructions
After drawing and post­processing the samples (ck, rk) we can estimate the conductivity field by
computing posterior means. As described in the previous section we do this in both parameter
space and conductivity space. In conductivity space, we compute the parameterization push­
forwards σ(ck, rk) of all k = 1, . . . , 4000 samples on a 64×64×64 grid for visualization purposes.
We have already shown the results for the pseudo­3D method in figure 5.4 since we used the
current case as a running example in the previous chapter. Results for the full­3D method are
shown in figure 6.5.
The true conductivity field σ(c, r) in the top left corner and the parameter mean pushforward
σ(E[ck], E[rk]) in the top right seem to be nearly identical. Note how the uncertainty shows as a
sphere of high standard deviation around the surface of the inclusion in the bottom row.
46
Uncertainty Quantification for conductivity imaging from information about corresponding magnetic fields
==PAGE:55==
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 6.5: Full­3D reconstructions for problem 0. (a): true conductivity field. (b): pushforward
of parameter sample means. (c): mean of pushforward of parameter samples. (d): standard
deviation of pushforward of parameter samples.
6.3
Problem 1: two spherical inclusions with known conductivity
The problem of reconstructing only a single ball with known conductivity properties was the
simplest proof­of­concept case we considered for our method. Next, we consider the case of
reconstructing two inclusions with known conductivity properties. We thus have to estimate
Pseudo­3D: (c1, c2, r) = ((c1x, c1y), (c2x, c2y), (r1, r2)) ∈R2 × R2 × R2,
Full­3D: (c1, c2, r) = ((c1x, c1y, c1z), (c2x, c2y, c2z), (r1, r2)) ∈R3 × R3 × R2.
For shorthand notation, we use c = (c1, c2). The conductivity field is parameterized in full­3D by
σ(c, r) =



2 S/m
if (x −c11)2 + (y −c12)2 + (z −c13)2 ≤r2
1,
2 S/m
if (x −c21)2 + (y −c22)2 + (z −c23)2 ≤r2
2,
1 S/m
otherwise.
(6.6)
And similarly for the pseudo­3D model with the z­coordinate omitted. The parameters shown in
table 6.4 were used to construct the true conductivity field and initialize the sampler.
We draw 5000 samples (ck, rk) using the Metropolis­within­Gibbs sampler in algorithm 1. We
can use the same posterior conditional distributions as in eq. (5.10) and eq. (5.9) as for the
previous case. Since we only have to sample another set of center coordinates and another ra­
dius, we can simply add more dimensions to the distributions which we sample from. We do not
have to include another MH step in the Gibbs iteration to sample another variable independent
Uncertainty Quantification for conductivity imaging from information about corresponding magnetic fields
47
==PAGE:56==
from (c, r). The CPU times on the HPC system for both cases are shown in table 6.5. The times
are comparable to the previous case shown in table 6.5 since we did not have to add another
MH step inside the Gibbs iteration.
Parameter
Value
True center 1 c1
(0.80, 0.80) cm
True center 2 c2
(0.30, 0.30) cm
True radii (r1, r2)
(0.15, 0.20) cm
Conductivity κ
2 S/cm
Data grid
66 × 66 × 66
Reconstruction grid
64 × 64 × 64
Initial center 1
(0.60, 0.60) cm
Initial center 2
(0.10, 0.10) cm
Initial radii
(0.10, 0.10) cm
Stepsize (βc, βr)
(0.03, 0.03)
Bounds (clow, chigh)
(0, 1)
Bounds (rlow, rhigh)
(0.05, 0.50)
Within Gibbs iter.
20
Parameter
Value
True center 1 c1
(0.8, 0.8, 0.8)
True center 2 c2
(0.3, 0.3, 0.3)
True radii (r1, r2)
(0.15, 0.2)
Conductivity κ
2 S/cm
Data grid
10 × 10 × 10
Reconstruction grid
8 × 8 × 8
Initial center 1
(0.6, 0.6, 0.6)
Initial center 2
(0.1, 0.1, 0.1)
Initial radii
(0.1, 0.1)
Stepsize (βc, βr)
(0.05, 0.07)
Bounds (clow, chigh)
(0, 1)
Bounds (rlow, rhigh)
(0.05, 0.5)
Within Gibbs iter.
20
Table 6.4: Initial parameters for problem 1. Left: pseudo­3D method. Right: full­3D method.
pseudo­3D method
full­3D method
CPU time
14.1 hours
6.6 hours
Table 6.5: CPU times on the HPC system for problem 1.
6.3.1
Statistical analysis of posterior samples
Trace plots of the chains for each parameter are shown for the pseudo­3D method in figure
6.6 and for the full­3D method in figure 6.8. We discard the first 1000 samples as burn­in and
consider only the rest of the chain. For each chain, the posterior mean E[·], the integrated auto­
correlation time (IACT), and the effective sample size neff are computed. These are displayed
in table 6.6. We see in the table that for this problem, the IACT is also the largest in full­3D. The
Diagnostic
Value
Center 1 c1 IACT
(1.585, 1.665)
Center 2 c2 IACT
(1.634, 1.391)
Radii (r1, r2) IACT
(2.081, 1.891)
Center 1 c1 neff
(2524, 2403)
Center 2 c2 neff
(2448, 2876)
Radii (r1, r2) neff
(1922, 2115)
E[ck
1]
(0.792, 0.791) cm
E[ck
2]
(0.294, 0.300) cm
E[(rk
1, rk
2)]
(0.149, 0.196) cm
Diagnostic
Value
Center 1 c1 IACT
(7.153, 3.427, 7.127)
Center 2 c2 IACT
(6.258, 3.489, 5.545)
Radii (r1, r2) IACT
(13.303, 10.145)
Center 1 c1 neff
(559, 1167, 561)
Center 2 c2 neff
(639, 1146, 721)
Radii (r1, r2) neff
(301, 394)
E[ck
1]
(0.805, 0.791, 0.784) cm
E[ck
2]
(0.258, 0.309, 0.300) cm
E[(rk
1, rk
2)]
(0.160, 0.195) cm
Table 6.6: Chain diagnostics for problem 1. Left: pseudo­3D method. Right: full­3D method.
95% credibility intervals are shown in figure 6.7 along with the true and estimated parameters.
In the figure, we see how all true parameters fall within the credibility intervals, and the means of
each chain of posterior samples seem to be good estimates of the true parameters. We again
see that the credibility intervals are wider in the full­3D method which implies more uncertainty
in the estimates. The trace plots in figures 6.6 for the pseudo­3D method indicate the chains
48
Uncertainty Quantification for conductivity imaging from information about corresponding magnetic fields
==PAGE:57==
Figure 6.6: Parameter trace of 5000 samples for the pseudo­3D method in problem 1
are mixing well, as they have the desired ”fuzzy caterpillar” look. For the full­3D method, how­
ever, the Markov chains seem to be more correlated, as the ”fuzzy caterpillars” look less dense
compared to pseudo­3D.
Figure 6.7: Parameter UQ analysis for problem 1. Left: pseudo­3D method. Right: full­3D
method.
Uncertainty Quantification for conductivity imaging from information about corresponding magnetic fields
49
==PAGE:58==
Figure 6.8: Parameter trace of 5000 samples for the full­3D method in problem 1
6.3.2
Conductivity reconstructions
We compute the means of the parameters and map the means to a conductivity field. We also
compute the mean conductivity field generated by mapping all of the parameter samples. We
also compute the standard deviation in conductivity space. The results are displayed in figures
6.9 and 6.10 for the pseudo­3D and full­3D methods respectively.
50
Uncertainty Quantification for conductivity imaging from information about corresponding magnetic fields
==PAGE:59==
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 6.9: Pseudo­3D reconstructions for problem 1. (a): true conductivity field. (b): push­
forward of parameter sample means. (c): mean of pushforward of parameter samples. (d):
standard deviation of pushforward of parameter samples.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 6.10: Full­3D reconstructions for problem 1. (a): true conductivity field. (b): pushforward
of parameter sample means. (c): mean of pushforward of parameter samples. (d): standard
deviation of pushforward of parameter samples.
The true conductivity field in the top left and the parameter mean pushforward σ(E[ck], E[rk]) in
Uncertainty Quantification for conductivity imaging from information about corresponding magnetic fields
51
==PAGE:60==
the top right are close to identical. We see the same trend for the two inclusions as we did for
the single inclusion in 5.4, where the uncertainty accumulates at the boundary of the inclusion.
6.4
Problem 2: rotated ellipsoidal inclusion with unknown
conductivity
We now consider an ellipsoidal inclusion with unknown conductivity properties that has been
rotated by 45◦degrees about the z­axis. For the full­3D method, we have to sample (c, r, κ, δ) =
((cx, cy, cz), (rx, ry, rz), κ, δ) ∈R3 × R3 × R × R and for the pseudo­3D method we sample
(c, r, κ, δ) = ((cx, cy), (rx, ry), κ, δ) ∈R2 × R2 × R × R. The conductivity field can be param­
eterized by the following expression in full­3D
σ(c, r, κ, δ) =
(
κ S/m
if ((x−cx)·cos(δ)+(y−cy)·sin(δ))2
r2x
+ ((y−cy)·cos(δ)−(x−cx)·sin(δ))2
r2y
+ (z−cz)2
r2z
≤1,
1 S/m
otherwise.
(6.7)
With κ being the conductivity level of the inclusion and δ being the rotation angle in the xy­
plane about the z­axis. The pseudo­3D method is similar but with the last term involving the z­
coordinate dropped. In the particular case of a rotated ellipse, the solution to the reconstruction
problem will not be unique unless we impose constraints. Consider an ellipse parameterized by
(c, r) ∈R2 × R2 with c = (cx, cy) and r = (rx, ry), and rotate it by 90◦= π
2 . We can then build an
identical ellipse by instead using r = (ry, rx) in the parameterization, as rotation by 90◦switches
the semi­minor and semi­major axes. To remedy this non­uniqueness problem we introduce a
new constraint to the Metropolis­within­Gibbs sampler
New constraint:
rx < ry.
(6.8)
We also use the bounds δ ∈(0, π) as a constraint on the rotation angle. The parameters shown
in table 6.7 were used to construct the true conductivity field and initialize the sampler. We draw
Parameter
Value
True center c
(0.43, 0.48) cm
True radius r
(0.15, 0.30) cm
True conductivity κ
2 S/cm
True angle δ
45 ·
π
180 ≈0.785
Data grid
66 × 66 × 66
Reconstruction grid
64 × 64 × 64
Initial center c0
(0.1, 0.1) cm
Initial radius r0
(0.1, 0.1) cm
Init. conductivity κ0
1 S/cm
Initial angle δ0
0
Step (βc, βr, βκ, βδ)
(0.03, 0.04, 0.05, 0.04)
Bounds (clow, chigh)
(0, 1) cm
Bounds (rlow, rhigh)
(0.05, 0.5) cm
Bounds (κlow, κhigh)
(0, 100) S/cm
Bounds (δlow, δhigh)
(0, π)
Constraint
r1 < r2 for r ∈R2
Within Gibbs iter.
20
Parameter
Value
True center c
(0.43, 0.48, 0.41) cm
True radius r
(0.15, 0.30, 0.20) cm
True conductivity κ
2 S/cm
True angle δ
45 ·
π
180 ≈0.785
Data grid
10 × 10 × 10
Reconstruction grid
8 × 8 × 8
Initial center c0
(0.1, 0.1, 0.1) cm
Initial radius r0
(0.1, 0.1, 0.1) cm
Init. conductivity κ0
1 S/cm
Initial angle δ0
0
Step (βc, βr, βκ, βδ)
(0.03, 0.04, 0.05, 0.04)
Bounds (clow, chigh)
(0, 1) cm
Bounds (rlow, rhigh)
(0.05, 0.50) cm
Bounds (κlow, κhigh)
(0, 100) S/cm
Bounds (δlow, δhigh)
(0, π)
Constraint
r1 < r2 for r ∈R3
Within Gibbs iter.
20
Table 6.7: Initial parameters. Left: pseudo­3D method. Right: full­3D method.
5000 samples (ck, rk, κk, δk) using a variation of the Metropolis­within­Gibbs sampler described
in algorithm 1. This time we have to modify the posterior conditional distributions in (5.10) and
52
Uncertainty Quantification for conductivity imaging from information about corresponding magnetic fields
==PAGE:61==
(5.9) to make them fit the current case. This is not complicated as the conditional distribution
w.r.t. one variable is simply the joint posterior with all the other variables fixed. The new log
posterior conditionals in the current case are
log π(c|r, κ, δ, yobs) = −1
2
∥yobs −(G ◦F)(σ(c, r, κ, δ))∥2
γ2
,
(r, κ, δ) fixed,
log π(r|c, κ, δ, yobs) = −1
2
∥yobs −(G ◦F)(σ(c, r, κ, δ))∥2
γ2
,
(c, κ, δ) fixed,
log π(κ|c, r, δ, yobs) = −1
2
∥yobs −(G ◦F)(σ(c, r, κ, δ))∥2
γ2
,
(c, r, δ) fixed,
log π(δ|c, r, κ, yobs) = −1
2
∥yobs −(G ◦F)(σ(c, r, κ, δ))∥2
γ2
,
(c, r, κ) fixed.
(6.9)
As we now have double the amount of variables to sample we need to add two more MH steps
to the Metropolis­within­Gibbs sampler described in section 5.3.1. This will inevitably make the
sampling take at least double the amount of time compared to the previous case, and also use
much more memory. The CPU times on the HPC system for system are shown in table 6.8
pseudo­3D method
full­3D method
CPU time
53 hours
35.1 hours
Table 6.8: CPU times on the HPC system for system for problem 2.
6.4.1
Statistical analysis of posterior samples
Trace plots of the chains for each parameter are shown for the pseudo­3D method in figure
6.12 and for the full­3D method in figure 6.13. We discard the first 1000 samples as burn­in and
perform diagnostics on the resulting chain of 4000 samples. For each parameter, we compute
the posterior mean E[·], the integrated autocorrelation time (IACT), and the effective sample
size neff. These are displayed in table 6.9. We also compute the 95% credibility intervals and
Diagnostic
Value
Center IACT
(1.417, 1.321)
Radius IACT
(16.20, 11.00)
Conductivity IACT
39.33
Angle IACT
17.29
Center neff
(2822, 3027)
Radius neff
(247, 364)
Conductivity neff
102
Angle neff
231
E[ck]
(0.420, 0.478) cm
E[(rk)]
(0.145, 0.295) cm
E[(κk)]
2.149 S/cm
E[(δk)]
0.743
Diagnostic
Value
Center IACT
(3.614, 1.890, 3.783)
Radius r IACT
(31.27, 20.45, 23.54)
Conductivity IACT
92.68
Angle IACT
77.78
Center neff
(1107, 2116, 1057)
Radius neff
(128, 196, 170)
Conductivity neff
43
Angle neff
51
E[ck]
(0.402, 0.475, 0.410) cm
E[rk]
(0.172, 0.300, 0.182) cm
E[(κk)]
2.407 S/cm
E[(δk)]
0.865
Table 6.9: Chain diagnostics for problem 2. Left: pseudo­3D method. Right: full­3D method.
plot them in figure 6.11 along with the true and estimated parameter values for the UQ analysis.
Uncertainty Quantification for conductivity imaging from information about corresponding magnetic fields
53
==PAGE:62==
Figure 6.11: Parameter UQ analysis for problem 2. Left: pseudo­3D method. Right: full­3D
method.
Figure 6.12: Parameter trace of 5000 samples for the pseudo­3D method in problem 2.
54
Uncertainty Quantification for conductivity imaging from information about corresponding magnetic fields
==PAGE:63==
Figure 6.13: Parameter trace of 5000 samples for the full­3D method in problem 2.
Figure 6.11 reveals that all the true parameters are contained within the 95% credibility inter­
vals and that the estimated parameters are not far off. However, the credibility intervals for the
full­3D method are much larger compared to the pseudo­3D method. We note that the credi­
Uncertainty Quantification for conductivity imaging from information about corresponding magnetic fields
55
==PAGE:64==
bility intervals for the x­component of the radius rx and the rotation angle δ are quite wide for
both the pseudo­3D model and the full­3D model. We already touched upon how there are
some non­uniqueness issues between these two parameters, which we propose to remedy by
introducing the constraint. As this issue was expected we are not surprised to see it reflected
in the sampling. In the trace plots in figures 6.12 and 6.13 we see that the chains for the cen­
ter coordinate c are mixing very well in both cases, resembling the fuzzy caterpillar behavior.
However, the traces for the radius parameter r, conductivity value κ, and rotation angle δ are
not as dense, indicating bad mixing of the chains for these parameters. The poorer sampling
for (r, κ, δ) is also evident from the chain diagnostics shown in table 6.9, where the IACT is
somewhat small only for the center coordinates. For this problem, we also see a difference in
the performance of our method between the pseudo­3D and the full­3D method. However, this
difference in performance between the pseudo­3D and the full­3D method is no coincidence as
we shall discuss later.
6.4.2
Conductivity reconstructions
After post­processing the samples (ck, rk, κk, δk) we estimate the conductivity field by computing
posterior means. Results for the pseudo­3D problem are shown in figure 6.14 and results for
the full­3D method are shown in figure 6.15. We again see a high standard deviation around
the boundary of the inclusion, as was the trend for the previous results. This time however
since the conductivity value κ is also assumed to be unknown, we also see a high standard
deviation inside the inclusion. Each sample κk is a little different and this introduces the interior
uncertainty when we compute the standard deviation over a set of samples.
We note that similar results can be achieved by grouping the angle parameter δ with the radius
parameter r into a single shape parameter ϕ = (r, δ), as the two cannot be said to be fully
independent due to the non­uniqueness issues we discussed earlier. This is handled by instead
sampling (c, ϕ, κ) ∈R3×R4×R for the full­3D method, and (c, ϕ, κ) ∈R2×R3×R for the pseudo­
3D method.
6.5
Problem 3: elliptic inclusion in pure 2D with unknown
conductivity
We consider the pure 2D problem of estimating the defining parameters of a non­rotated elliptic
inclusion with an unknown conductivity value, given only a single slice of magnetic field data.
Since the pseudo­3D method is invariant in the z­direction the same information is contained in
each vertical slice. We are simulating the case where the MRI machine only takes one cross­
sectional scan of the object to be imaged. The parameterization of the inclusion is
σ(c, r, κ) =
(
κ S/m
if (x−c1)2
r2
1
+ (y−c2)2
r2
2
≤1,
1 S/m
otherwise.
(6.10)
We have to estimate 5 parameters (c, r, κ) = ((cx, cy), (rx, ry), κ) ∈R2 × R2 × R. The log
conditional densities that we use in the Metropolis­within­Gibbs sampler in algorithm 1 are
log π(r|c, κ, yobs) = −1
2
∥yobs −(G ◦F)(σ(c, r, κ))∥2
γ2
,
(c, κ) fixed,
log π(c|r, κ, yobs) = −1
2
∥yobs −(G ◦F)(σ(c, r, κ))∥2
γ2
,
(r, κ) fixed,
log π(κ|c, r, yobs) = −1
2
∥yobs −(G ◦F)(σ(c, r, κ))∥2
γ2
,
(c, r) fixed.
(6.11)
The parameters shown in table 6.10 were used to construct the true conductivity field and ini­
tialize the sampler. We draw 5000 posterior samples (ck, rk, κk). With those parameters, the
CPU time was 18.8 hours.
56
Uncertainty Quantification for conductivity imaging from information about corresponding magnetic fields
==PAGE:65==
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 6.14: Pseudo­3D reconstructions for problem 2. (a): true conductivity field. (b): push­
forward of parameter sample means. (c): mean of pushforward of parameter samples. (d):
standard deviation of pushforward of parameter samples.
Parameter
Value
True center c
(0.5, 0.5) cm
True radius r
(0.2, 0.3) cm
True conductivity κ
2 S/cm
Data grid
66 × 66 × 66
Reconstruction grid
64 × 64 × 64
Initial center c0
(0.1, 0.1) cm
Initial radius r0
(0.1, 0.1) cm
Init. conductivity κ0
1 S/cm
Stepsize (βc, βr, βκ)
(0.03, 0.04, 0.05)
Bounds (clow, chigh)
(0, 1) cm
Bounds (rlow, rhigh)
(0.05, 0.5) cm
Bounds (κlow, κhigh)
(0, 100) S/cm
Within Gibbs iter.
20
Table 6.10: Initial parameters for pure 2D case in problem 3.
6.5.1
Statistical analysis of posterior samples
Trace plots of the chains for each parameter are shown for the pure 2D case in figure 6.16.
We discard the first 1000 samples as burn­in and perform diagnostics on the resulting chain
Uncertainty Quantification for conductivity imaging from information about corresponding magnetic fields
57
==PAGE:66==
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 6.15: Full­3D reconstructions for problem 2. (a): true conductivity field. (b): pushforward
of parameter sample means. (c): mean of pushforward of parameter samples. (d): standard
deviation of pushforward of parameter samples.
of 4000 samples. For each parameter, we compute the posterior mean E[·], the integrated
autocorrelation time (IACT), and the effective sample size neff. These are displayed in table
6.11. We see that the IACT for the x­component of the radius parameter rx and the conductivity
value κ is much larger than the IACT of the other parameters. The trace plot for the x­component
of the radius in figure 6.16 also reveal that the sampling went poorly, likewise with the trace plot
for the conductivity value κ. In figure 6.17 we display the 95% credibility intervals and plot them
with the true and estimated parameters. We note that the credibility intervals for rx and κ are
much larger compared to the others, which indicate higher uncertainty for these two parameters.
58
Uncertainty Quantification for conductivity imaging from information about corresponding magnetic fields
==PAGE:67==
Diagnostic
Value
Center IACT
(1.136, 1.122)
Radius IACT
(51.51, 1.925)
Conductivity IACT
95.00
Center neff
(3520, 3565)
Radius neff
(78, 2078)
Conductivity neff
42
E[ck]
(0.490, 0.493) cm
E[rk]
(0.176, 0.302) cm
E[κk]
2.353 S/cm
Table 6.11: Chain diagnostics for the pure 2D case in problem 3.
Figure 6.16: Parameter trace of 5000 samples for the pure 2D case in problem 3.
Uncertainty Quantification for conductivity imaging from information about corresponding magnetic fields
59
==PAGE:68==
Figure 6.17: Parameter UQ analysis for the pure 2D case in problem 3.
6.5.2
Conductivity reconstructions
After drawing and post­processing the samples (ck, rk, κk) we can estimate the conductivity field
by computing posterior means. We do this in both parameter space and conductivity space.
Results for the pure 2D problem are shown in figure 6.18 where we plot a single slice in the z­
direction. As the conductivity value parameter κ is also an unknown in this problem we expect
nonzero standard deviation inside the inclusion, as well as around the boundary of the inclusion.
This seems also to be the case in figure 6.18.
Figure 6.18: Pure 2D reconstructions for problem 3. Top left: true conductivity field. Top right:
pushforward of parameter sample means. Bottom left: mean of pushforward of parameter
samples. Bottom right: standard deviation of pushforward of parameter samples.
To the bottom right, we see that the standard deviation
p
V[σ(ck, rk, κk)] extends further in the
x­direction than in the y­direction when comparing with the mapped parameter means to the
bottom left E[σ(ck, rk, κk)]. One can say that the ”band of uncertainty” is thicker in the x­direction
than in the y­direction. This makes sense when we have figure 6.17 in mind. The credibility
intervals for the rx estimate are wider than those for the ry estimate, so more uncertainty in the
x­direction is expected. Recall that we used the boundary condition u = x on ∂Ωin (5.12). We
discuss later if this has an influence on the wide band of uncertainty along the x­axis.
60
Uncertainty Quantification for conductivity imaging from information about corresponding magnetic fields
==PAGE:69==
6.6
Problem 4: sparse magnetic field data in z­direction
When an MRI scan is performed multiple cross­sectional images of the object in question are
taken and sampled together as one. For the setup described in figure 2.1 this implies that the
magnetic field data is sparse in the z­direction, meaning that the resolution in the z­direction
is coarser than in the xy­plane [9, 10]. The case of sparse z­data is simulated numerically by
only including every 2nd or every 3rd slice of the magnetic field data in the z­direction, thus
simulating 50% and 33% available Bz data. In figure 6.18 in the previous section, we showed
that good results can be achieved in pure 2D with only a single slice of magnetic field data. As
the pseudo­3D method is z­invariant it is not interesting to consider a sparse z­discretization of
that case, hence we omit it. We consider the same rotated ellipsoidal inclusion as in problem
2, parameterized by the expression in equation (6.7). We are thus going to be sampling 8
parameters (c, r, κ, δ) = ((cx, cy, cz), (rx, ry, rz), κ, δ) ∈R3 × R3 × R × R. The parameters shown
in table 6.12 were used to construct the true conductivity field and initialize the sampler. We
Parameter
Value
True center c
(0.43, 0.48, 0.41) cm
True radius r
(0.15, 0.30, 0.20) cm
True conductivity κ
2 S/cm
True angle δ
45 ·
π
180 ≈0.785
Data grid
10 × 10 × 10
Reconstruction grid
8 × 8 × 8
Initial center c0
(0.5, 0.5, 0.5) cm
Initial radius r0
(0.1, 0.1, 0.1) cm
Init. conductivity κ0
1 S/cm
Initial angle δ0
0
Step (βc, βr, βκ, βδ)
(0.03, 0.04, 0.05, 0.04)
Bounds (clow, chigh)
(0, 1) cm
Bounds (rlow, rhigh)
(0.05, 0.50) cm
Bounds (κlow, κhigh)
(0, 100) S/cm
Bounds (δlow, δhigh)
(0, π)
Constraint
r1 < r2 for r ∈R2
Within Gibbs iter.
20
Table 6.12: Initial parameters for problem 4. The same initial parameters were used for initial­
izing the sampler for both the 50% data and 33% data case.
draw 5000 posterior samples (ck, rk, κk, δk) from the same posterior conditional distributions as
in equation (6.9) using the sampler in algorithm 1. The only difference is that the forward model
in the current case only returns partial Bz data. The CPU times on the HPC system are shown in
table 6.13. We expect that the 50% data case takes a bit longer as there is more data available.
50% data case
33% data case
CPU time
35.4 hours
35.2 hours
Table 6.13: CPU time on the HPC for problem 4.
6.6.1
Statistical analysis of posterior samples
Trace plots of the chains for each parameter are shown for the 50% Bz data case in figure
6.20 and the 33% Bz data case in figure 6.21. Judging from the mixing of each Markov chain it
seems that the sampling for the center coordinates c went very well. The sampling for the radius
Uncertainty Quantification for conductivity imaging from information about corresponding magnetic fields
61
==PAGE:70==
parameters was a bit worse, while the sampling for the conductivity value κ and rotation angle
δ went poorly. Judging from the trace plots of the rotation angle parameter δ it seems that the
chain visits several modes of the distribution. Just as in problem 2 (figures 6.12 and 6.13) the
sampler has some issues when it comes to estimating the conductivity level κ of the inclusion
and its rotation angle δ. As expected the mixing looks better for the 50% data case since more
information is available. Different inclusions could look more similar in the 33% data case due
to more information being left out. We discard the first 1000 samples as burn­in and perform
diagnostics on the resulting chain of 4000 samples. The posterior mean E[·], the integrated
autocorrelation time (IACT), and the effective sample size neff are computed and displayed in
table 6.14.
Diagnostic
Value
Center IACT
(3.165, 1.786, 2.836)
Radius IACT
(11.59, 13.33, 24.87)
Conductivity IACT
56.12
Angle IACT
109.5
Center neff
(1264, 2239, 1411)
Radius neff
(345, 300, 160)
Conductivity neff
71
Angle neff
37
E[ck]
(0.403, 0.476, 0.412) cm
E[(rk)]
(0.184, 0.300, 0.196) cm
E[(κk)]
2.170 S/cm
E[(δk)]
1.168
Diagnostic
Value
Center IACT
(14.00, 3.884, 4.879)
Radius r IACT
(59.72, 27.25, 25.00)
Conductivity IACT
218.5
Angle IACT
265.6
Center neff
(286, 1030, 820)
Radius neff
(67, 147, 160)
Conductivity neff
18
Angle neff
15
E[ck]
(0.412, 0.474, 0.410) cm
E[rk]
(0.168, 0.296, 0.181) cm
E[(κk)]
2.506 S/cm
E[(δk)]
1.467
Table 6.14: Chain diagnostics for problem 4. Left: 50% Bz data. Right: 33% Bz data.
As the integrated auto­correlation times show it is easier for our method to draw independent
samples of the center coordinates than the other parameters, independent of how much data is
used. The full data case was problem 2, and from table 6.9 we see similar results with the IACT
for the pseudo­3D and the full­3D method. We compute 95% credibility intervals and plot them
in figure 6.19 along with the true and estimated parameters. The credibility intervals contain
the true parameters in all cases, and it is only the x­component of the radius parameter rx and
the rotation angle δ which is poorly estimated in both partial data cases. This issue was also
present in problem 2, see figure 6.11. We believe it is caused by the non­uniqueness issues we
had to remedy with the new constraint in section 6.4. Lastly, we note that the chain diagnostics
in table 6.14 clearly show that the 50% data case performs better than the 33% data case.
Figure 6.19: Parameter UQ analysis for problem 4. Left: 50% available Bz data. Right: 33%
available Bz data.
62
Uncertainty Quantification for conductivity imaging from information about corresponding magnetic fields
==PAGE:71==
Figure 6.20: Parameter trace of 5000 samples for the 50% available Bz data case in problem
4.
Uncertainty Quantification for conductivity imaging from information about corresponding magnetic fields
63
==PAGE:72==
Figure 6.21: Parameter trace of 5000 samples for the 33% available Bz data case in problem
4.
64
Uncertainty Quantification for conductivity imaging from information about corresponding magnetic fields
==PAGE:73==
6.6.2
Conductivity reconstructions
After post­processing the samples (ck, rk, κk, δk) for the two different z­resolution cases, we
estimate the conductivity field by the posterior means. Results for the 50% Bz data case are
shown in figure 6.22 and results for the 33% Bz data case are shown in figure 6.23. The two
posterior means for the 50% and 33% data cases look quite similar. Comparing the top row
of each figure it can be seen that there is a larger difference between the true and estimated
conductivity values for the 33% data case. Comparing the bottom right plot of each figure,
we see that there is a larger area of uncertainty with a higher standard deviation around the
inclusion for the 33% data case.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 6.22: 50% data reconstructions for problem 4. (a): true conductivity field. (b): push­
forward of parameter sample means. (c): mean of pushforward of parameter samples. (d):
standard deviation of pushforward of parameter samples.
Uncertainty Quantification for conductivity imaging from information about corresponding magnetic fields
65
==PAGE:74==
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 6.23: 33% data reconstructions for problem 4. (a): true conductivity field. (b): push­
forward of parameter sample means. (c): mean of pushforward of parameter samples. (d):
standard deviation of pushforward of parameter samples.
6.7
Problem 5: two inclusions with large conductivity contrast
Consider the problem of estimating the conductivity levels of two inclusions where one is more
conducting than the other. The motivation for including this experiment is that the conductivity
properties of healthy and malignant tissue are different. One paper considers the reconstruction
problem in EIT with inclusions shaped as balls with conductivity levels 10 times higher than the
background [34]. The parameters for this problem are the center coordinates c, the radius r,
and the conductivity level κ for each of the two inclusions. We thus have to estimate
Pseudo­3D: (c1, c2, r, κ) = ((c1x, c1y), (c2x, c2y), (r1, r2), (κ1, κ2)) ∈R2 × R2 × R2 × R2,
Full­3D: (c1, c2, r, κ) = ((c1x, c1y, c1z), (c2x, c2y, c2z), (r1, r2), (κ1, κ2)) ∈R3 × R3 × R2 × R2.
The parameterization below defines the conductivity field. We use c = (c1, c2) for brevity
σ(c, r, κ) =



κ1 S/m
if (x −c1x)2 + (y −c1y)2 + (z −c1z)2 ≤r2
1,
κ2 S/m
if (x −c2x)2 + (y −c2y)2 + (z −c2z)2 ≤r2
2,
1 S/m
otherwise.
(6.12)
Where (κ1, κ2) are chosen to create high contrast between the two inclusions and the back­
ground conductivity. We choose the conductivity levels (κ1, κ2) = (3, 10) S/cm to simulate the
event that one inclusion is a cancerous anomaly, given a background conductivity of 1 S/cm.
The inclusion with index 2 is the malignant one that we hope to be able to reconstruct. The
66
Uncertainty Quantification for conductivity imaging from information about corresponding magnetic fields
==PAGE:75==
parameters shown in table 6.15 were used for the true conductivity field and to initialize. Note
that we for the full­3D method have used 30 within­Gibbs iterations to improve the sampling.
Parameter
Value
True center 1 c1
(0.8, 0.8) cm
True center 2 c2
(0.3, 0.3) cm
True radii (r1, r2)
(0.15, 0.2) cm
Conductivities (κ1, κ2)
(3, 10) S/cm
Data grid
66 × 66 × 66
Reconstruction grid
64 × 64 × 64
Initial center 1
(0.6, 0.6) cm
Initial center 2
(0.1, 0.1) cm
Initial radii
(0.1, 0.1) cm
Init. conductivities
(1, 1) S/cm
Stepsize (βc, βr, βκ)
(0.01, 0.02, 0.02)
Bounds (clow, chigh)
(0, 1) cm
Bounds (rlow, rhigh)
(0.05, 0.5) cm
Bounds (κlow, κhigh)
(0, 100) S/cm
Within Gibbs iter.
20
Parameter
Value
True center 1 c1
(0.7, 0.7, 0.7) cm
True center 2 c2
(0.3, 0.3, 0.3) cm
True radii (r1, r2)
(0.15, 0.2) cm
Conductivities (κ1, κ2)
(3, 10) S/cm
Data grid
10 × 10 × 10
Reconstruction grid
8 × 8 × 8
Initial center 1
(0.5, 0.5, 0.5) cm
Initial center 2
(0.1, 0.1, 0.1) cm
Initial radii
(0.1, 0.1) cm
Init. conductivities
(1, 1) S/cm
Stepsize (βc, βr)
(0.05, 0.07)
Bounds (clow, chigh)
(0, 1) cm
Bounds (rlow, rhigh)
(0.05, 0.5) cm
Bounds (κlow, κhigh)
(0, 100) S/cm
Within Gibbs iter.
30
Table 6.15: Initial parameters for problem 5. Left: pseudo­3D method. Right: full­3D method.
We draw 5000 posterior samples with the Metropolis­within­Gibbs sampler described in algo­
rithm 1. We use the log posterior conditionals shown in eq. 6.11 with the dimensions of the
parameters tailored to this problem. The CPU times for both cases are shown in table 6.16.
pseudo­3D method
full­3D method
CPU time
16.1 hours
12.9 hours
Table 6.16: CPU times on the HPC system for problem 5.
6.7.1
Statistical analysis of posterior samples
Trace plots for each parameter are shown for the pseudo­3D method in figure 6.24 and for the
full­3D method in figure 6.25. Looking at the parameter traces we see several bad, but inter­
esting, things happening. The Markov chains of the parameters defining the high conductivity
inclusion 2 are mixing better than the Markov chains of the parameters defining the low con­
ductivity inclusion 1. The chain mixing of the center coordinates of inclusion 2 is decent once
burn­in has been performed. The chains for c2x and c2y seem to converge to the true value of
(0.3, 0.3) cm. These observations also apply to the full­3D method in figure 6.25.
Uncertainty Quantification for conductivity imaging from information about corresponding magnetic fields
67
==PAGE:76==
Figure 6.24: Parameter trace of 5000 samples for the pseudo­3D method in problem 5
68
Uncertainty Quantification for conductivity imaging from information about corresponding magnetic fields
==PAGE:77==
Figure 6.25: Parameter trace of 5000 samples for the full­3D method in problem 5
For both the pseudo­3D and the full­3D method, the trace plots for the center coordinates of
Uncertainty Quantification for conductivity imaging from information about corresponding magnetic fields
69
==PAGE:78==
the low conductivity inclusion with index 1, i.e. c1x, c1y, and c1z jump between different modes
of the posterior. For this inclusion, we see that the two modes are around 0.3 and 0.8 which
are also the two true values of the center coordinates. The magnetic field emitted by the lesser
conducting inclusion is weak compared to the more conducting one with index 2, i.e. inclusion
2 dominates the magnetic field data. Therefore the field from inclusion 1 blend in with the back­
ground compared to the strong field from inclusion 2. This makes the sampler believe that there
are two conducting inclusions at around the same place, or a larger inclusion if the two over­
lap. This is most prevalent for the full­3D method in figure 6.25. There is not much bimodality
in the distributions of the parameters for the second, more conducting inclusion. The mixing
of the conductivity parameter chains (κ1, κ2) is very poor in both pseudo­3D and full­3D. We
discard the first 1000 samples as burn­in and perform diagnostics on the resulting chain. The
posterior mean E[·], the integrated autocorrelation time (IACT), and the effective sample size
neff are computed for each chain and displayed in table 6.17. We also compute the 95% cred­
Diagnostic
Value
Center 1 c1 IACT
(40.95, 32.15)
Center 2 c2 IACT
(3.826, 3.564)
Radii (r1, r2) IACT
(153.9, 289.2)
Conductivity 1 IACT
513.7
Conductivity 2 IACT
511.4
Center 1 c1 neff
(98, 124)
Center 2 c2 neff
(1045, 1122)
Radii (r1, r2) neff
(26, 14)
Conductivity 1 neff
8
Conductivity 2 neff
8
E[ck
1]
(0.796, 0.775) cm
E[ck
2]
(0.292, 0.300) cm
E[(rk
1, rk
2)]
(0.143, 0.207) cm
E[(κk
1, κk
2)]
(3.756, 7.541) S/cm
Diagnostic
Value
Center 1 c1 IACT
(337.9, 158.3, 97.25)
Center 2 c2 IACT
(7.865, 294.9, 39.86)
Radii (r1, r2) IACT
(182.4, 454.9)
Conductivity 1 IACT
460.9
Conductivity 2 IACT
543.2
Center 1 c1 neff
(12, 25, 41)
Center 2 c2 neff
(509, 14, 100)
Radii (r1, r2) neff
(22, 9)
Conductivity 1 neff
9
Conductivity 2 neff
7
E[ck
1]
(0.499, 0.576, 0.373) cm
E[ck
2]
(0.264, 0.358, 0.279) cm
E[(rk
1, rk
2)]
(0.267, 0.298) cm
E[(κk
1, κk
2)]
(1.054, 3.615) S/cm
Table 6.17: Chain diagnostics for problem 5. Left: pseudo­3D method. Right: full­3D method.
ibility intervals and plot them in figure 6.26 along with the true and estimated parameters. The
Figure 6.26: Parameter UQ analysis for problem 5. Left: pseudo­3D method. Right: full­3D
method.
parameter uncertainty quantification reveals that all parameters fall within the 95% credibility
intervals for the pseudo­3D method. For the full­3D method, all but one parameter falls within
its 95% credibility interval and that is the conductivity level of the cancerous inclusion κ2. We
already saw in the previous problems that estimating a single conductivity value was hard, and
70
Uncertainty Quantification for conductivity imaging from information about corresponding magnetic fields
==PAGE:79==
it was often the parameter with the most uncertainty involved. Estimating two different conduc­
tivity levels is harder, which is confirmed by the abnormally large IACT in table 6.17 for both
the pseudo­3D and full­3D method. We also see this from the poor chain mixing for (κ1, κ2) in
figures 6.24 and 6.25. These observations lead us to suspect that high­conductivity anomalies
are reconstructed better than low­conductivity anomalies when in the presence of each other.
6.7.2
Conductivity reconstructions
After post­processing the samples (ck, rk, κk) we estimate the conductivity field by computing
posterior means. This is done in parameter space and conductivity space. Results for the
pseudo­3D problem are shown in figure 6.27 and results for the full­3D method are shown in
figure 6.28. For the pseudo­3D method, the pushforward of the parameter means in the top
right resembles the true conductivity field quite well, apart from the underestimated conductivity
level of the two inclusions. We see in the plot to the right in the bottom row, how the standard
deviation is largest at the boundary of the highly conductive inclusion, but also nonzero in the
interior since we also sample the conductivity level. The two inclusions have been reconstructed
quite well in this case, especially the highly conductive one which is what we hoped for.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 6.27: Pseudo­3D reconstructions for problem 5. (a): true conductivity field. (b): push­
forward of parameter sample means. (c): mean of pushforward of parameter samples. (d):
standard deviation of pushforward of parameter samples.
For the full­3D method in figure 6.28 we see that none of the inclusions are reconstructed to a
satisfactory degree. In the plot of the pushforward of the parameter means to the top left we see
that the more conductive gray inclusion is somewhat near the position of the highly conductive
red inclusion in the true conductivity field to the top left. The plots in the bottom row reveal
how the conductivity of the blue ball in the top right plot, has a conductivity value very close
Uncertainty Quantification for conductivity imaging from information about corresponding magnetic fields
71
==PAGE:80==
to the background. In the bottom right plot, we can see the remnants of the less conductive
blue ball as a white shade of nonzero standard deviation, right next to the red area indicating
the uncertainty region of the more conductive gray inclusion. We again see that the uncertainty
accumulates at the boundaries of the inclusions.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 6.28: Full­3D reconstructions for problem 5. (a): true conductivity field. (b): pushforward
of parameter sample means. (c): mean of pushforward of parameter samples. (d): standard
deviation of pushforward of parameter samples.
72
Uncertainty Quantification for conductivity imaging from information about corresponding magnetic fields
==PAGE:81==
7
Discussion
As we discuss briefly in section 2.2 there is a number of methods available when solving the
MREIT reconstruction problem. However, if one wishes to do uncertainty quantification on the
reconstructed conductivity fields then the Bayesian framework is a natural choice. When solving
an inverse problem in the Bayesian setting there are a few ways to do UQ. In this thesis, we
compute standard deviations and credibility intervals of a set of samples we draw from the
posterior density via MCMC methods. MCMC methods are computationally expensive and
often infeasible for large­scale problems because of the many forward model evaluations. This
is why we had to resort to such small grid sizes in the full­3D model. Another way of doing UQ
is to compute an estimate of the posterior covariance matrix around a given point in the solution
space, usually taken to be the mode of the posterior, i.e. the MAP estimate. Computing the
exact covariance is very costly for large dimensional parameter spaces and is often intractable
without further approximation. Some authors suggest using a low­rank approximation of the
posterior covariance matrix [35].
By using MCMC methods we describe the posterior from a set of samples that are expensive
to compute. Another way of avoiding the heavy computational load of evaluating an expen­
sive posterior is to instead approximate the posterior with a simpler probability distribution. One
method is the Laplace approximation which fits an un­normalized Gaussian density to the poste­
rior. The Gaussian is centered at the mode and the covariance matrix is taken to be the negative
inverse of the Hessian of the log posterior at the mode [36, 37]. We also mention variational
Bayesian methods that approximate the posterior with a simpler proposal distribution [37]. This
involves solving an optimization problem where some difference measure between the posterior
and the proposal distribution is minimized. The density one obtains via the variational Bayesian
method is locally optimal and is an analytical approximation of the posterior.
The simple parametric approach we use for the prior distribution assumes quite a lot of informa­
tion. Ultimately we want an approach where we do not have to specify the number of inclusions,
their shapes, or the conductivity levels beforehand. We only know that the conductivity field σ
is bounded between two positive constants, that it is a discontinuous field, and that there is a
contrast between different materials in an object. A prior with this behavior must be able to
generate discontinuous, stochastic fields. Continuous stochastic fields can be generated with
a Karhunen­Loève (KL) expansion, while discontinuity can be introduced by using level sets
[38, 39] to threshold the field. Using such a prior involves more variables than our paramet­
ric approach. UQ on the sampled Karhunen­Loève expansion parameters does not have an
immediate interpretation as UQ on samples of radius or conductivity parameters does.
We discuss in section 5.2 how we choose the boundary conditions in the Poisson equation in
eq. (5.12). Inspired by [2] we chose the Dirichlet condition that u(x, y, z) = x on ∂Ω. This
has the effect that the current density field points from left to right in the x­direction. This is
due to the potential being set to u = 1 on the right side x = 1, and u = 0 on the left side
x = 0. More realistic choices could have been made to simulate the electrodes attached to the
surface of the conducting object in MREIT. We mention the Complete Electrode Model (CEM)
used in [14], which defines short pairs of segments on opposite sides of ∂Ωas electrodes.
On these segments, the normal component of the current field J must integrate to some fixed
value Ij since we are applying a fixed amount of current through the electrodes to induce the
magnetic field. On the segments representing the electrodes, they also impose the condition
that ∇u × n = 0, i.e. no electricity escapes out of the electrodes in a direction normal to the
Uncertainty Quantification for conductivity imaging from information about corresponding magnetic fields
73
==PAGE:82==
surface. On the remaining boundary not covered by electrodes, we have σ ∂u
∂n = 0 on ∂Ω, i.e.
no current goes in or out of the domain.
In figures 6.4, 6.7, 6.11 and especially figure 6.26 we see a large difference between the width
of the credibility intervals of the pseudo­3D method compared to the full­3D method. There
seems to be more uncertainty involved with the parameter estimates for the full­3D method.
The trace plots for the full­3D method in figures 6.8, 6.13, 6.21, 6.20 and 6.25 reveal that the
chains in the pseudo­3D model are mixing better. The trace plots for the full­3D method are not
as dense and do not show the same level of ”fuzzy caterpillar” behavior as the chains for the
pseudo­3D method does. The chain diagnostics show how the integrated auto­correlation time
(IACT) is generally much larger in the full­3D method, which consequently leads to smaller ef­
fective sample sizes. These discrepancies between the performance of the pseudo­3D method
compared to the full­3D method can mostly be ascribed to the curse of dimensionality. Since
there are more degrees of freedom in the full­3D method, it means we are sampling from a pos­
terior distribution of higher dimensions. This makes the sampling way harder, as the volume of
the space in which the sampling is performed grows exponentially with each added dimension.
This makes it harder for the sampler to move around the support of the posterior as there is
more space to cover. Also, as seen in table 6.7 the achievable resolution for the full­3D method
is not as high as for the pseudo­3D method. Having a smaller number of points to represent
your computational domain also leaves room for discretization errors.
The benchmark MAP estimate can be compared with the results for the rotated ellipsoidal inclu­
sion in problem 2 in section 6.4. We achieved the best results by using approximate gradients
in figure 6.1c. If we compare the MAP against a single slice of the mean of the mapped pa­
rameters for the pseudo­3D method in figure 6.14c, we see that the MAP estimate captures
the shape and orientation of the inclusion as well the sampling method does, at least by visual
inspection. However, the conductivity values for the MAP estimate are underestimated. This
issue could be caused by our lack of an exact gradient for the cost functional in the call to the
optimization algorithm. The run time for computing the MAP estimate was substantially smaller
than the time used for sampling with an MCMC method. Using the L­BFGS­B algorithm [32] we
computed the MAP estimate on a 32 × 32 grid in about 5 minutes on the HPC system.
In problem 2 in section 6.4 we discuss how there are some non­uniqueness issues related to
estimating the semi­axes and the rotation angle for a rotated ellipsoidal inclusion. When the
rotation was in the xy­plane about the z­axis, we had to introduce a constraint on the x­ and
y­components of the semi­axes. We briefly mention that if the rotation was about the y­axis
instead, i.e. in the xz­plane, then we would have to introduce the constraint rx < rz. Similarly,
we would introduce ry < rz if the rotation was about the x­axis in the yz plane. The inequality
sign can be flipped in all constraints, as long as they are not allowed to switch values in the
sampling since this is what caused the non­uniqueness issue.
In figure 6.18 for problem 3 we observed that the band of uncertainty is wider in the x­direction
around the boundary 2D elliptic inclusion. This might have something to do with the boundary
condition u(x, y, z) = x. As stated above the current flows from right to left. This has an impact
on the magnetic field data since it determines its orientation. If we instead use the Dirichlet
boundary condition u(x, y, z) = y, then the magnetic field data is rotated by 90 degrees because
the current flows perpendicular to the previous case (see figure A.3 in appendix 3). We see from
figure 5.1 that the magnetic field spreads out in the x­direction, by consequence of the current
flow direction. This spreading could make the magnetic field data insensitive to perturbing the
x­component of the radius of the elliptic inclusion by a small amount. Two inclusions with slightly
different rx values can produce similar magnetic field data, as the information is blurred in the
direction of change.
74
Uncertainty Quantification for conductivity imaging from information about corresponding magnetic fields
==PAGE:83==
In section 6.6 we explored what effect sparse magnetic field data in the z­direction would have
on the reconstructions. The dense data case was covered in section 6.4. Comparing figures
6.11 and 6.19 we see that there is not much difference in the estimates or the uncertainty of the
parameters. Only for the rotation angle do we see a particularly bad estimate from the 33% data
case, while the dense data case is very close to the true one. Due to the heavy computational
load of using MCMC methods, we could only do the 3D sampling on an 83 grid. In the two
experiments with 50% and 33% data, we are using 4 and 3 slices in total respectively. This
setup has the potential for massive discretization errors.
In problem 5 we see from figure 6.26 that the full­3D model is much more uncertain about
the parameters compared with the pseudo­3D model. The estimated parameters in the full­3D
model are not as close to the true parameters as for the pseudo­3D model. Since the cancerous
inclusion is more conducting its magnetic field is stronger compared to the magnetic field from
the lesser conducting inclusion. With high contrast in the conductivity level, the magnetic field
from the low conductivity inclusion is harder to distinguish from the background. Since we only
see high uncertainty for the full­3D model we believe that the curse of dimensionality is also an
issue here. The small computational grid in 3D does not have a positive impact either as two
different inclusions can look similar if they are downsampled enough. In section 6.3 for problem
1 we investigated a very similar case to problem 5, but where we knew the conductivity levels
of the two inclusions. From figure 6.7 we see that the two inclusions are identified with much
more certainty if we already know the conductivity levels.
7.1
Outlook
Using a Metropolis­within­Gibbs sampler to solve the Bayesian inverse problem is possible be­
cause we can derive the conditional distributions of all parameters defining the conductivity field.
This was simple as we assumed independence between the parameters. Hence a component­
wise Gibbs sampler was relatively simple to implement. If we consider more complicated pa­
rameterizations of the conductivity field then we have to use more advanced sampling methods.
More advanced methods such as Hamiltonian Monte Carlo methods can avoid the random walk
behavior of standard MCMC methods such as Metropolis­Hastings and Gibbs sampling, by tak­
ing informed steps rather than random steps [40]. This lowers the correlation between samples
in the Markov chain as the sampler can use the gradient information to move to a high proba­
bility area of the distribution. These methods require that we supply gradients of the posterior
density w.r.t. the parameters, and these can be very tough to compute. One such sampling
method is the No­U­Turn Sampler (NUTS) which is state­of­the­art in Hamiltonian Monte Carlo
methods [41]. We only got to consider gradients of the posterior very late in the project period
in conjunction with computing the MAP estimate for benchmarking. As such time did not permit
us to apply gradient information to improve our sampling methods.
One way of reducing the sampling time of an MCMC method is to make the forward model
cheaper to evaluate. Most computations in our forward model involve solving PDEs in FEniCS.
Solving the large linear system of equations in (4.11) for the expansion coefficients in the finite
element basis is computationally very costly, which is why we resort to iterative solvers in our
method. However, the solving procedure can also be done in parallel as FEniCS can utilize the
Message Passing Interface (MPI). The linear system is split into several parts where each part
is solved in parallel on separate cores [42].
We have assumed that the conductivity is constant inside the inclusions of the isotropic conduc­
tivity field σ. It would be interesting to relax that assumption and consider anisotropic conductiv­
ity fields, as several materials in engineering and several types of tissue in the human body are
anisotropic. Muscle fibers, tendons, and white matter in the brain are examples of soft tissue
that show anisotropic properties [43, 5]. We mentioned non­invasive brain stimulation as a po­
Uncertainty Quantification for conductivity imaging from information about corresponding magnetic fields
75
==PAGE:84==
tential application of MREIT in the introduction in section 1, so relaxing the isotropic constraint
is especially important for this case.
Ideally, we wanted to benchmark our Bayesian method of solving the MREIT reconstruction
problem against a deterministic method well­rooted in the literature. One such method is the
harmonic Bz algorithm [10]. We are only benchmarking the results from the MCMC sampling
against a MAP estimate which we compute in section 6.1. However, the harmonic Bz algo­
rithm assumes the Complete Electrode Model as boundary conditions which we describe in the
previous section [44]. Due to this issue, it was infeasible for us to implement the harmonic Bz
algorithm in due time.
7.2
Conclusion
This research aims to develop a computational framework for solving and doing uncertainty
quantification on the reconstruction problem in Magnetic Resonance Electrical Impedance To­
mography (MREIT). We have used statistical inversion theory to solve the inverse problem in a
probabilistic sense [6]. The solution is a probability distribution we construct with Bayes’ theorem
called the posterior distribution, which is then used to infer hidden information about the conduc­
tivity field. We have taken the approach of parameterizing the conductivity field σ as spherical
and ellipsoidal inclusions embedded in a background medium of constant conductivity value.
The process of inferring and doing uncertainty quantification on the defining parameters of the
inclusions involves using MCMC methods to estimate moments and statistics of the posterior
distribution. The numerical results show that our sampling­based method is able to reconstruct
up to two inclusions of varying shapes and sizes with both known and unknown conductivity
levels κ, even with 10% relative noise to the magnetic field data. Our uncertainty quantification
for the mapped parameters in conductivity space reveals how the pixel­wise standard deviation
accumulates at the boundaries of the inclusions. If the conductivity level is unknown we also
see uncertainty in the interior of the inclusions in the form of nonzero standard deviation.
Using our method, the credibility intervals and chain diagnostics of the Markov chains show that
the two hardest parameters to draw independent samples of, are the conductivity levels κ and
rotation angle δ of the elliptic inclusions. Our results show that there is increased uncertainty
involved with solving the reconstruction problem in full 3D and with sparse data. The curse
of dimensionality increases the difficulty of the sampling. We are able to achieve more robust
results by using the pseudo­3D method as the reconstruction grid is finer and the dimensions
of the posterior distributions are lower. To generalize our results to a broader class of inclu­
sions and conductivity fields, future studies should address the case of using random fields
as a prior distribution. While parameterizing conductivity fields as inclusions in a background
medium limits the generalizability of the results, our method does demonstrate that pixel­wise
uncertainty quantification for the MREIT conductivity reconstruction problem is possible for a
simplified setup.
76
Uncertainty Quantification for conductivity imaging from information about corresponding magnetic fields
==PAGE:85==
A
Appendix
Appendix 1 ­ Frèchet derivative estimate
We want to show that the following estimate holds for the Frèchet derivative we computed in
section 2.2.1
∥F(˜σ + δσ) −F(˜σ) −dF(˜σ)δσ∥L2(Ω) ≤C∥δσ∥2
L∞(Ω).
(A.1)
We linearize the problem by computing the Fréchet derivative of the forward operator which in
turn is used to derive the Newton procedure. We have already defined the forward mapping
from a conductivity distribution σ to an interior current density field J = −σ∇u. Let ˜u be the
solution to (2.1) where σ is replaced by a reference conductivity ˜σ. If we take a perturbation δσ
such that ˜σ + δσ ∈L∞
+ (Ω) we want to compute a linear operator dF(˜σ) such that [45]
lim
δσ→0
∥F(˜σ + δσ) −F(˜σ) −dF(˜σ)δσ∥L2(Ω)
∥δσ∥L∞(Ω)
= 0.
(A.2)
If this holds then the linear operator dF(˜σ) is denoted by the Frèchet derivative. We are doing
a linearization of the forward mapping around ˜σ. Computing the derivative involves doing a
first­order approximation of the form
F(˜σ + δσ) −F(˜σ) ≈dF(˜σ)δσ.
(A.3)
We have the expression σ = ˜σ + δσ, and we use this to compute an identity with u −˜u
∇· ˜σ∇(u −˜u) = ∇· ˜σ∇u −∇· ˜σ∇˜u = ∇· ˜σ∇u −0 = ∇· ˜σ∇u
∇· (˜σ −σ)∇u = ∇· ˜σ∇u −∇· σ∇u = ∇· ˜σ∇u −0 = ∇· ˜σ∇u.
Which yields the following PDE problem for u−˜u since u and ˜u both solve the Poisson equation
with boundary datum f
∇· ˜σ∇(u −˜u) = ∇· (˜σ −σ)∇u
in Ω,
u −˜u = f −f = 0
on ∂Ω.
(A.4)
We have that δu ≈u −˜u to first order in δu. Doing the approximation ∇u ≈∇˜u on the right­
hand­side above yields a PDE problem for δu ∈H1
0(Ω)
∇· ˜σ∇δu = −∇· δσ∇˜u
in Ω,
δu = 0
on ∂Ω.
(A.5)
So (A.5) is the PDE problem for δu. Doing the Frèchet derivative computation in (A.3) yields
F(˜σ + δσ) −F(˜σ) = −(˜σ + δσ)∇(˜u + δu) −(−˜σ∇˜u)
= −˜σ∇˜u −˜σ∇δu −δσ∇˜u −δσ∇δu + ˜σ∇˜u
= −˜σ∇δu −δσ∇˜u −δσ∇δu.
(A.6)
If we define dF(˜σ)δσ := −˜σ∇δu −δσ∇˜u, we can write
F(˜σ + δσ) −F(˜σ) −(−˜σ∇δu −δσ∇˜u) = −δσ∇δu
F(˜σ + δσ) −F(˜σ) −dF(˜σ)δσ = −δσ∇δu.
(A.7)
Uncertainty Quantification for conductivity imaging from information about corresponding magnetic fields
77
==PAGE:86==
Taking the L2 norm on both sides yields
∥F(˜σ + δσ) −F(˜σ) −dF(˜σ)δσ∥L2(Ω) = ∥δσ∇δu∥L2(Ω) ≤∥δσ∥L∞(Ω)∥∇δu∥L2(Ω).
(A.8)
We wish for the bound above to only be expressed only in terms of ∥δσ∥L∞(Ω) so we ought to
explore the term ∥∇δu∥L2(Ω). Remember that δu was the solution to an inhomogenous Poisson
problem in (A.5) with a term containing δσ on the right­hand­side. Generally, we can ask whether
the solution v to a general Poisson equation
∇· σ∇v = g
in Ω,
v = 0
on ∂Ω,
(A.9)
can be bounded in terms of the functional on the right­hand­side g. For a general second­
order elliptic PDE in Ωwe look for solutions u ∈H1
0(Ω). Based on section 5.9.1 in [21] we can
denote the dual space of H1
0(Ω) by H−1(Ω). The functional g on the right­hand­side of the PDE
belongs to H−1(Ω), if it is a bounded linear functional on the space H1
0(Ω). To see this we need
to consider the variational form of the problem which is derived by multiplying both sides of the
PDE with a test function w ∈H1
0(Ω) and integrating by parts on the left­hand­side
a(v, w) :=
Z
Ω
σ∇v · ∇w dx =
Z
Ω
gw dx := ⟨g, w⟩,
∀w ∈H1
0(Ω).
(A.10)
The equation above defines the variational problem, find v ∈H1
0(Ω) such that
a(v, w) = ⟨g, w⟩,
∀w ∈H1
0(Ω).
(A.11)
Certain conditions on the bilinear form a(v, w) must be met in order for a unique solution to
exist. This result is the Lax­Milgram theorem which we introduced in chapter 4. The coercivity
condition in (4.6) implies that for a solution v of the variational problem in (A.11) we have for
some β > 0
β∥v∥2
H1
0(Ω) ≤a(v, v)
=⇒β∥v∥H1
0(Ω) ≤
a(v, v)
∥v∥H1
0(Ω)
=
|⟨g, v⟩|
∥v∥H1
0(Ω)
≤
sup
v̸=0∈H1
0(Ω)
⟨g, v⟩
∥v∥H1
0(Ω)
= ∥g∥H−1(Ω).
(A.12)
So we can actually bound a solution v to the Poisson equation in terms of the H−1 norm of the
right­hand­side g, which will prove to be useful. We can take the functional H−1 norm on both
sides of the PDE in (A.5)
∥∇· ˜σ∇δu∥H−1(Ω) = ∥−∇· δσ∇˜u∥H−1(Ω),
(A.13)
with the norm on H−1(Ω) defined as
∥g∥H−1(Ω) =
sup
∥v∥H1
0 (Ω)=1
|⟨g, v⟩|,
(A.14)
where ⟨, ⟩denotes the dual pairing between H−1(Ω) and H1
0(Ω). Computing the H−1(Ω) norm
on the right hand side in (A.13) along with integration by parts and Cauchy­Schwartz yields
∥−∇· δσ∇˜u∥H−1(Ω) = sup
∥v∥=1
|⟨−∇· δσ∇˜u, v⟩| = sup
∥v∥=1

Z
Ω
(−∇· δσ∇˜u)v dx

= sup
∥v∥=1

Z
Ω
δσ∇˜u∇v dx
 ≤sup
∥v∥=1
Z
Ω
|δσ∇˜u∇v| dx
≤sup
∥v∥=1
∥δσ∥L∞(Ω)∥∇˜u∥L2(Ω)∥∇v∥L2(Ω).
(A.15)
78
Uncertainty Quantification for conductivity imaging from information about corresponding magnetic fields
==PAGE:87==
Recall the definition of the Sobolev norm ∥u∥H1
0(Ω) in terms of L2 norms of u and ∇u
∥u∥H1
0(Ω) =

∥u∥2
L2(Ω) + ∥∇u∥2
L2(Ω)
1/2
.
(A.16)
Thus we have the valid estimate ∥∇u∥L2(Ω) ≤∥u∥H1
0(Ω) which we can use in (A.15)
∥−∇· δσ∇˜u∥H−1(Ω) ≤sup
∥v∥=1
∥δσ∥L∞(Ω)∥∇˜u∥L2(Ω)∥∇v∥L2(Ω)
≤sup
∥v∥=1
∥δσ∥L∞(Ω)∥˜u∥H1
0(Ω)∥v∥H1
0(Ω)
≤∥δσ∥L∞(Ω)∥˜u∥H1
0(Ω).
(A.17)
Now since ˜σ ∈L∞
+ (Ω) is a reference conductivity we know it is bounded from above by a
positive constant M. Since the Poisson equation is elliptic we have by elliptic regularity that the
reference voltage ˜u is also bounded from above by a constant ∥˜u∥H1
0(Ω) ≤C, where C depends
on the bound on ˜σ and the boundary conditions. We thus finally have for the ∥−∇·δσ∇˜u∥H−1(Ω)
estimate
∥−∇· δσ∇˜u∥H−1(Ω) ≤C∥δσ∥L∞(Ω).
(A.18)
This implies for the Poisson problem in (A.5), that we can bound the solution δu in terms of the
right­hand­side
∥δu∥H1
0(Ω) ≤∥−∇· δσ∇˜u∥H−1(Ω).
(A.19)
Using the result we derived in (A.18) we conclude that
∥δu∥H1
0(Ω) ≤∥−∇· δσ∇˜u∥H−1(Ω) ≤C∥δσ∥L∞(Ω).
(A.20)
We will then apply this result to the Fréchet derivative estimate in (A.8) which yields
∥F(˜σ + δσ) −F(˜σ) −dF(˜σ)δσ∥L2(Ω) ≤∥δσ∥L∞(Ω)∥∇δu∥L2(Ω)
≤∥δσ∥L∞(Ω)∥δu∥H1
0(Ω)
≤C∥δσ∥2
L∞(Ω),
(A.21)
which shows that dF(˜σ)δσ ≈F(˜σ + δσ) −F(˜σ) to second order in δσ.
Uncertainty Quantification for conductivity imaging from information about corresponding magnetic fields
79
==PAGE:88==
Appendix 2 ­ forward model implementation
1
def solver(c,r):
2
class sigmafun(UserExpression):
3
if( (x[0] - c[0])**2 + (x[1] - c[1])**2 + (x[2] - c[2])**2 <= r +
DOLFIN_EPS ):
4
values[0] = sigma_1
5
else:
6
values[0] = sigma_0
7
# Initialize conductivity sigma
8
femel = V.ufl_element()
9
sigma_tru = sigmafun(element=femel)
10
sigma_true = project(sigma_tru , V, solver_type='bicgstab',preconditioner_type='
sor')
11
# Define functions and variational form
12
u = TrialFunction(V)
13
v = TestFunction(V)
14
a = inner(sigma*grad(u),grad(v))*dx
# lhs of the weak formulation
15
L = Constant(0)*v*dx
16
# Solve the system
17
u = Function(V)
18
solve(a == L, u, bcs, solver_parameters = {'linear_solver':'bicgstab', '
preconditioner':'sor'})
19
sigma = Function(V)
20
sigma = interpolate(sigma_true , V)
21
# Compute the current density field
22
J_val = project(-sigma*grad(u), V_grad, solver_type='bicgstab',
preconditioner_type='sor').compute_vertex_values(mesh)
23
Jx = J_val[0:(n+1)**3].reshape(n+1, n+1, n+1)
24
Jy = J_val[(n+1)**3:2*(n+1)**3].reshape(n+1, n+1, n+1)
25
# Computes the magnetic field
26
Bz = FFTCONV(Jx,Jy,n)
27
return Bz
Listing A.1: FEniCS code for conductivity to magnetic field mapping
Figure A.1: Procedure for simulating the Poisson equation given parameters for a conductivity
distribution.
80
Uncertainty Quantification for conductivity imaging from information about corresponding magnetic fields
==PAGE:89==
28
def FFTCONV(Jx,Jy,n):
29
''' Calculates the magnetic field caused by a current density distribution Jx,
Jy, and Jz '''
30
#Fourier transform of the Biot-Savart kernel
31
h = 1/n
32
k = 2*np.pi*np.fft.fftfreq(Jx.shape[0],h)
33
kx, ky, kz = np.meshgrid(k,k,k,indexing='ij',sparse=True)
34
kx[0,0,0] = 1e-9
35
K=1j/(kx**2+ky**2+kz**2)
36
K[0,0,0]=0
37
38
Jx_fft = np.fft.rfftn(Jx)
39
Byh = np.multiply((K*kz)[:,:,0:len(K)//2+1],Jx_fft)
40
Bzh = np.multiply(-(K*ky)[:,:,0:len(K)//2+1],Jx_fft)
41
del Jx_fft
42
43
Jy_fft = np.fft.rfftn(Jy)
44
Bxh = np.multiply(-(K*kz)[:,:,0:len(K)//2+1],Jy_fft)
45
Bzh += np.multiply((K*kx)[:,:,0:len(K)//2+1],Jy_fft)
46
del Jy_fft
47
48
Jz_fft = np.fft.rfftn(Jz)
49
Bxh += np.multiply((K*ky)[:,:,0:len(K)//2+1],Jz_fft)
50
Byh += np.multiply(-(K*kx)[:,:,0:len(K)//2+1],Jz_fft)
51
del Jz_fft
52
53
Bxh = np.fft.irfftn(Bxh)
54
Byh = np.fft.irfftn(Byh)
55
Bzh = np.fft.irfftn(Bzh)
56
57
return Bxh, Byh, Bzh
Listing A.2: Fourier method for fast evaluation of Biot­Savart
Figure A.2: Procedure for fast evaluation of magnetic fields via the Fourier transform.
Uncertainty Quantification for conductivity imaging from information about corresponding magnetic fields
81
==PAGE:90==
Appendix 3 ­ magnetic field data from using a different boundary
condition in 2D
Figure A.3: Magnetic field data for a disk­inclusion where we instead use u(x, y, z) = y as the
boundary condition in the Poisson equation in (5.12).
82
Uncertainty Quantification for conductivity imaging from information about corresponding magnetic fields
==PAGE:91==
Bibliography
[1]
Alberto­P. Calderón. On an inverse boundary value problem. In Seminar on Numerical
Analysis and its Applications to Continuum Physics (Rio de Janeiro, 1980), pages 65–73.
Soc. Brasil. Mat., 1980.
[2]
H. Yazdanian and K. Knudsen. Numerical conductivity reconstruction from partial interior
current density information in three dimensions. Inverse Problems, 37(10), 2021. URL:
https://doi.org/10.1088/1361-6420/ac1e81.
[3]
J. K. Seo and E. J. Woo. Magnetic Resonance Electrical Impedance Tomography (MREIT).
SIAM Review, 53(1)., 2011.
[4]
Axel Thielscher, Lars G. Hanson and Kristoffer H. Madsen. Interview from lab visit at
Danish Research Centre for Magnetic Resonance, Hvidovre Hospital. https://www.drcmr.
dk/. Visit date: 2023­01­17. 2023.
[5]
Anisotropy in radiology. URL: https://radiopaedia.org/articles/anisotropy.
[6]
Kaipio J. and Somersalo E. Statistical and Computational Inverse Problems. Springer
Applied Mathematical Sciences, Volume 160, 2005. URL: https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 /
b138659.
[7]
Computational Uncertainty Quantification for Inverse problems ­ research initiative. URL:
https://www.compute.dtu.dk/english/cuqi.
[8]
“Magnetic Resonance Electrical Impedance Tomography”. In: An Introduction to Mathe­
matics of Emerging Biomedical Imaging. Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer Berlin Heidelberg,
2008, pp. 169–175. ISBN: 978­3­540­79553­7. DOI: 10.1007/978-3-540-79553-7_9. URL:
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-540-79553-7_9.
[9]
Hasan H. Eroğlu et al. “On the reconstruction of magnetic resonance current density im­
ages of the human brain: Pitfalls and perspectives”. In: NeuroImage 243 (2021). ISSN:
1053­8119. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2021.118517.
[10]
Suk Oh et al. “Conductivity and current density image reconstruction using Harmonic
Bz algorithm in magnetic resonance electrical impedance tomography”. In: Physics in
medicine and biology 48 (2003). DOI: 10.1088/0031-9155/48/19/001.
[11]
Thielscher A. Yazdanian H. Saturnino G. B. and Knudsen K. Fast evaluation of the Biot–
Savart integral using FFT for electrical conductivity imaging. Journal of Computational
Physics, 411, 2020. URL: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jcp.2020.109408.
[12]
Ohin Kwon et al. “Magnetic resonance electrical impedance tomography (MREIT): Simu­
lation study of J­substitution algorithm”. In: IEEE transactions on bio­medical engineering
49 (2002). DOI: 10.1109/10.979355.
[13]
J. Hadamard. “Sur les problèmes aux dérivés partielles et leur signification physique”. In:
Princeton University Bulletin 13 (1902), pp. 49–52.
[14]
Matthew M. Dunlop and Andrew M. Stuart. “The Bayesian Formulation of EIT: Analysis
and Algorithms”. In: Inverse Problems and Imaging 10 (2016).
[15]
Jim Pitman. Probability. Springer Texts in Statistics, Springer New York, 1993. URL: https:
//doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4612-4374-8.
[16]
Art B. Owen. Monte Carlo theory, methods and examples. 2013.
[17]
M. Betancourt. “A conceptual introduction to Hamiltonian Monte Carlo”. In: arXiv (2017).
[18]
IAT documentation. URL: https://search.r-project.org/CRAN/refmans/LaplacesDemon/
html/IAT.html.
[19]
J. Geweke. Evaluating the accuracy of sampling­based approaches to the calculation of
posterior moments. In Bayesian Statistics 4, Oxford University Press., 1992.
Uncertainty Quantification for conductivity imaging from information about corresponding magnetic fields
83
==PAGE:92==
[20]
numpy.percentile documentation. URL: https://numpy.org/doc/stable/reference/generated/
numpy.percentile.html.
[21]
L. C. Evans. Partial differential equations. Providence, R.I.: American Mathematical So­
ciety, 2010.
[22]
L. Ridgway Scott. Introduction to Automated Modeling using FEniCS, Release 0.3. Uni­
versity of Chicago, 2017.
[23]
S. C. Brenner and L. R. Scott. The Mathematical Theory of Finite Element Methods.
Vol. 15. Texts in Applied Mathematics. Springer, 2008. ISBN: 9780387759333. DOI: 10.
1007/978-0-387-75934-0.
[24]
G. N. Wells et. al. The FEniCS Project Version 1.5. Archive of Numerical Software 3,
2015. URL: https://fenicsproject.org/.
[25]
DH Griffel. Applied Functional Analysis, Other: Revised edition published in 1985. Ellis
Horwood, 1981.
[26]
P. Kythe. Fundamental Solutions for Differential Operators and Applications. Springer Sci­
ence & Business Media, 2012.
[27]
scipy.fftpack.fft documentation. URL: https://docs.scipy.org/doc/scipy/reference/generated/
scipy.fftpack.fft.html.
[28]
S. Siltanen K. Knudsen J. Mueller. Numerical solution method for the dbar­equation in
the plane. Journal of Computational Physics, Volume 198, Issue 2, 2004. URL: https:
//doi.org/10.1016/j.jcp.2004.01.028.
[29]
Chris Sherlock and Gareth Roberts. “Optimal scaling of the random walk Metropolis on
elliptically symmetric unimodal targets”. In: Bernoulli 15.3 (2009), pp. 774–798. DOI: 10.
3150/08-BEJ176.
[30]
H. A. van der Vorst. “Bi­CGSTAB: A Fast and Smoothly Converging Variant of Bi­CG
for the Solution of Nonsymmetric Linear Systems”. In: SIAM Journal on Scientific and
Statistical Computing 13.2 (1992), pp. 631–644. DOI: 10.1137/0913035.
[31]
David M. Young. “Iterative methods for solving partial difference equations of elliptic type”.
In: Transactions of the American Mathematical Society 76 (1954), pp. 92–111.
[32]
Richard H. Byrd et al. “A Limited Memory Algorithm for Bound Constrained Optimization”.
In: SIAM Journal on Scientific Computing 16.5 (1995), pp. 1190–1208. DOI: 10.1137/
0916069.
[33]
scipy.fmin_l_bfgs_b documentation. URL: https://docs.scipy.org/doc/scipy/reference/
generated/scipy.optimize.fmin_l_bfgs_b.html.
[34]
Andrea Barth et al. “Detecting stochastic inclusions in electrical impedance tomography”.
In: Inverse Problems 33.11 (2017). DOI: 10.1088/1361-6420/aa8f5c.
[35]
Peter Benner, Yue Qiu, and Martin Stoll. “Low­rank computation of posterior covariance
matrices in Bayesian inverse problems”. In: (Mar. 2017).
[36]
Robert E. Kass, Luke Tierney, and Joseph (Jay) B. Kadane. “The validity of posterior
expansions based on Laplace”s method”. In: 1990.
[37]
David J. C. MacKay. Information Theory, Inference, and Learning Algorithms. Copyright
Cambridge University Press, 2003.
[38]
Matthew Dunlop, Marco Iglesias, and Andrew Stuart. “Hierarchical Bayesian Level Set
Inversion”. In: Statistics and Computing 27 (2017). DOI: 10.1007/s11222-016-9704-8.
[39]
William Reese, Arvind K. Saibaba, and Jonghyun Lee. Bayesian Level Set Approach for
Inverse Problems with Piecewise Constant Reconstructions. 2021. DOI: 10.48550/ARXIV.
2111.15620.
[40]
M. J. Betancourt and Mark Girolami. “Hamiltonian Monte Carlo for Hierarchical Models”.
In: (2013). DOI: 10.48550/ARXIV.1312.0906.
[41]
Matthew D. Hoffman and Andrew Gelman. “The No­U­Turn Sampler: Adaptively Setting
Path Lengths in Hamiltonian Monte Carlo”. In: (2011). DOI: 10.48550/ARXIV.1111.4246.
84
Uncertainty Quantification for conductivity imaging from information about corresponding magnetic fields
==PAGE:93==
[42]
M. Sussman. “FEniCS, part I”. In: Lecture slides from the course ”math3040_2014 Topics
in Scientific Computing”. Department of Scientific Computing, Florida State University,
2014.
[43]
Zhanxiong Wu et al. “A review of anisotropic conductivity models of brain white matter
based on diffusion tensor imaging”. In: Medical & Biological Engineering & Computing 56
(June 2018), pp. 1–8. DOI: 10.1007/s11517-018-1845-9.
[44]
Kiwan Jeon et al. “MREIT conductivity imaging based on the local harmonic Bz algorithm:
Animal experiments”. In: Journal of Physics: Conference Series 224.1 (2010). URL: https:
//dx.doi.org/10.1088/1742-6596/224/1/012079.
[45]
H. Cartan. Differential Calculus. Hermann, 1983. ISBN: 9780901665140.
Uncertainty Quantification for conductivity imaging from information about corresponding magnetic fields
85
==PAGE:94==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Matematiktorvet, Building 303b
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.compute.dtu.dk
