==PAGE:1==
M.Sc. Individual course
Master of Science in Engineering
Exploring, Modeling and Forecasting Smart-
phone App Usage Behavior
Master Thesis
Abdulstar Kousa (s174360)
Supervisor: Sune Lehmann
Co-supervisor: Anna Sapienza
Counselor: Germans Savcisens
Kongens Lyngby 2023
==PAGE:2==
DTU Compute
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
Technical University of Denmark
Matematiktorvet
Building 303B
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 3031
compute@compute.dtu.dk
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
Smartphone usage has become an integral part of our daily lives, with the majority
of people using their smartphones for various activities such as communication, so-
cial networking, gaming, and browsing. Understanding the patterns and habits of
smartphone usage is crucial for various fields such as marketing, human-computer
interaction, and public health.
In this research, we aimed to build a novel multivariate time series forecasting model
to predict the label of the amount of time a user will spend on their phone the following
week using Hierarchical Attention Network (HAN) based deep learning architecture.
The hierarchical aspect of this method refers to the fact that it first encodes informa-
tion about user weeks using information about days, and then encodes user usage of
the following week by using the weeks’ representation. We also aimed to gain a deeper
understanding of how people use their smartphones and how this usage changes over
time.
We preprocessed a large real-world data collected from about 12,000 smartphone users
and then trained and evaluated our proposed HAN-based models on this dataset.
Our results showed that the proposed HAN-based models outperformed the baseline
models, including persistence and simple GRU/LSTM cells, in all the classification
tasks we conducted. The HAN-based architectures were able to learn a hierarchical
representation of the user input data, allowing the models to capture both weekly and
daily patterns of usage. Additionally, by using attention mechanisms, the proposed
model was able to selectively focus on the most important parts of the input, which
is particularly useful for app usage prediction, where there may be a lot of irrelevant
data. We found that the performance of the model in classifying the low and high
usage labels was relatively better than the in-between labels due to the fact that the
in-between labels have characteristics that overlap with both lower and higher labels.
Additionally, by utilizing HAN-based architectures in our research, we were able to
gain deeper insight into the user’s smartphone app usage by visualizing and analyzing
the daily and weekly attention mechanism weights of the models.
The findings of this research have the potential to be applied in various fields such
as prediction of problematic smartphone use, personalized recommendation systems,
==PAGE:4==
ii
Abstract
targeted advertising, marketing, human-computer interaction, and public health.
In summary, this thesis presents a novel HAN-based deep learning architecture for
predicting smartphone app usage. We have shown that this architecture outperforms
baseline models, and provides insights into the patterns and habits of smartphone
usage.
==PAGE:5==
Preface
This thesis was prepared at the department of Applied Mathematics and Computer
Science at the Technical University of Denmark in fulfilment of the requirements for
acquiring an MSc. degree in Mathematical Modelling and computation.
Kongens Lyngby, January 22, 2023
Abdulstar Kousa (s174360)
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Acknowledgements
I would like to express my gratitude to my supervisor, Sune Lehmann, for support
throughout this research. I would also like to thank my co-supervisors, Anna Sapienza,
for her time, support, and valuable insights throughout this research. I am particu-
larly grateful for her willingness to help and discuss any issues I encountered. I also
extend my thanks to Germans Savcisensa, a PhD student, for his technical assistance
and for always being available to help and discuss any issues I encountered during
this research. I also thank Ejner Fergo for his quick IT assistance.
I would also like to express my sincere appreciation and love to my family, for their
great encouragement. I am especially grateful to my best friend, devoted partner,
and wife, Hadeel Mustafa, for her unending love and support. I would also like to
thank my little daughter, Aida, for always putting a smile on my face and making
me feel like a superhero.
==PAGE:8==
vi
==PAGE:9==
Contents
Abstract
i
Preface
iii
Acknowledgements
v
Contents
vii
1
Introduction
1
2
Literature Review
2
2.1
Smartphone App Usage
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2.2
Gender and Age Differences in Smartphone Usage
. . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.3
Social Media in Smartphone Usage . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.4
Impact of Excessive Smartphone Use . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.5
App Usage Prediction
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
3
Background
6
3.1
What is a Time Series . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
3.2
Neural Network . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
3.3
Backpropagation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
3.4
Word Embeddings
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
3.5
Positional Encoding
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
3.6
Recurrent Neural Networks (RNNs)
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
3.7
Long Short Term Memory (LSTM) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
3.8
Gated Recurrent Units (GRU)
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3.9
Bi-directional RNN . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3.10 Attention
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
3.11 Hierarchical Attention Networks (HAN) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
4
The Dataset
13
4.1
Raw Data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
4.2
Data Preparation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
4.3
Data Exploration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
==PAGE:10==
viii
Contents
5
Methods
26
5.1
The Network Architecture . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
5.2
Embeddings and Positional Encoding . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
5.3
Categories and Durations Encoder . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
5.4
Categories and Durations Attention
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
5.5
Combining Categories and Durations Week Representations . . . . . .
31
5.6
Combining Weeks Representations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
5.7
Weeks Attention
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
5.8
Model Improvements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
5.9
Experimental Setup and Evaluation Metrics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
6
Results
35
6.1
Classification Tasks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
6.2
Models Performance over Classification Tasks . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
6.3
Best Models’ Performance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
6.4
Visualizing Sample Users’ Tokens and Weeks Attentions . . . . . . . .
43
6.5
App Categories Attentions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
6.6
Weeks Attentions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
6.7
Assessing Label Separation in Model Predictions
. . . . . . . . . . . .
50
7
Discussion
52
7.1
Discussions of Different Classification Tasks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
7.2
Challenges in Classifying In-Between Labels: Observations from Confu-
sion Matrix and t-SNE Plot . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
7.3
Analysis of Patterns in App Usage Predictions
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
7.4
Investigating the Importance of App Categories in High Usage Classifi-
cation: Analysis of Outliers and Possible Causes
. . . . . . . . . . . .
55
7.5
Investigating the Importance of App Categories in Low Usage Predic-
tion: The Role of Duration
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
56
7.6
Exploring the Role of Popular vs Unpopular App Categories in Predict-
ing High Usage: An Analysis of the 4 Most Important App Categories
56
7.7
Exploring the Role of Recent Weeks in Predicting App Usage: An Anal-
ysis of Attention Weights
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
58
8
Conclusion
59
8.1
Limitations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
60
8.2
Feature work
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
61
A
Appendix
62
A.1 Figures
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
62
A.2 Tables . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
63
B
Code
64
Bibliography
76
==PAGE:11==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
Smartphones have become a fundamental part of our daily lives, with the majority
of people using their smartphones for a variety activities of such as communication,
social networking, gaming, and browsing. Understanding the patterns and habits of
smartphone usage is crucial for various fields such as personalized recommendation
systems, targeted advertising, marketing, and public health.
Despite the widespread use of smartphones in our daily lives, research on smartphone
usage has been limited compared to other areas of technology [CL17].
In this research, we aimed to build a novel multivariate time series forecasting model
to predict the label of the amount of time a user will spend on their phone the
following week using a Hierarchical Attention Network (HAN) based deep learning
architecture. The hierarchical aspect of this model refers to the fact that it first en-
codes information about user weeks using information about days, and then encodes
user usage of the following week by using the weeks’ representation. We also aimed
to utilize the model to gain a deeper understanding of how people use their smart-
phones and how this usage changes over time. This research is a combination of data
transformation, wrangling, modelling and analysis.
In this study, we will be utilizing a dataset that contains data from nearly 12,000 users.
We will investigate how various techniques, such as discretization, numericalization,
and data padding, can be used to prepare the data for our model. Additionally, we
will explore how techniques like embedding, positional encoding, encoders, attentions
and many more can aid in building the model. We will also examine how we can
analyze user behaviour through the trained model’s attention weights.
Predicting weekly mobile usage is a challenging problem due to the complexity and
variability of user behaviour, but it is an important problem with many practical
applications. We believe that the findings of this research might have the potential to
be applied in various fields such as prediction of problematic smartphone use, person-
alized recommendation systems, targeted advertising, marketing, human-computer
interaction, and public health.
==PAGE:12==
CHAPTER 2
Literature Review
Smartphone apps, or mobile apps, have become an integral part of the smartphone
experience. The first smartphone, the IBM ”Simon”, was released in 1993, with lim-
ited capabilities [SS13]. However, with the release of the iPhone in 2007, the concept
of apps that could be downloaded from an online store was introduced and it has
become more popular. Nowadays, there are millions of apps available on app stores
and it has become a significant part of how people use their smartphones [SS13].
The capabilities of smartphones in their early years were constrained, and there
weren’t many apps to choose from.
However, as smartphone technology has ad-
vanced, their capabilities have increased along with the number of apps available.
Today, there are apps available for a wide range of purposes, including social net-
working, gaming, productivity, and more [Goo].
In fact, research has shown that individuals around the world use their smartphones
daily for anywhere between an hour and 10 hours and a significant portion of that
time is spent using apps. One of the main reasons for the growth in app usage is
the increasing dependence of people on their smartphones for various tasks [DRC18].
With the present of high-speed internet and the increasing number of people who use
their smartphones as their primary computing device, apps have become an impor-
tant way for people to access information, communicate with others, and get things
done on the go [DRC18].
Overall, The history of smartphone apps has seen a rapid increase in both the number
and capabilities of apps, leading to a greater dependence on these tools in daily life.
2.1
Smartphone App Usage
The field of Smartphone App Usage examines the ways in which individuals utilize
apps on their mobile devices. Researchers have employed various techniques to gather
data on app usage, including collecting log files from smartphones, conducting sur-
veys, and performing experiments. Analysis of this data has revealed that app usage
patterns differ among individuals. Additionally, research in this area has explored the
impact of app usage on mental well-being, as well as the effects of app notifications
==PAGE:13==
2.2 Gender and Age Differences in Smartphone Usage
3
on focus and task completion [DRC18].
According to a global survey conducted by E. Ortiz-Ospina, there are 7.7 billion
people in the world, with at least 3.5 billion of us online [Ort19]. This emphasizes
the need of understanding smartphone usage trends and behaviours in our daily lives.
2.2
Gender and Age Differences in Smartphone
Usage
According to research, demographic factors such as gender and age can influence
smartphone usage. Some research has found gender variations in app usage [Lee+14],
where females are more likely to use social and communication apps, whilst males
are more to utilize entertainment and news applications [And+16]. Females are also
found to use their phones more than males (11 minutes more) [And+16]. In addition,
the usage was found to decrease with age [And+16]. Whereas younger people spend
more time on entertainment and social applications and are more likely to develop
addiction [And+16], however, elderly people use smartphones in a more traditional
way, such as for calls and information [And+16].
2.3
Social Media in Smartphone Usage
Since 2004, social media usage has risen fast, with five social media sites reaching
over 1 billion users in 2019, including Facebook and YouTube, which each has about
2 billion users [Ort19]. A questionnaire-based study that sought to investigate the
reasons behind the popularity of social media apps discovered that the majority of
individuals use them for social connection, information seeking, passing time, and
entertainment [WW13]. According to another study [KH10], the constant changing
of content on social media gives a feeling of the need to stay connected.
2.4
Impact of Excessive Smartphone Use
Addiction, depression, anxiety, poor sleep quality, and loneliness have all been con-
nected to excessive smartphone use [DAA15]. Despite these negative consequences,
several studies have discovered that smartphones can be used as instruments for self-
management and self-care, such as tracking and managing health issues or coping
with stress and anxiety [Fir+17].
==PAGE:14==
4
2 Literature Review
2.5
App Usage Prediction
Predicting smartphone app usage is an active area of research, where various meth-
ods have been proposed including statistical models, machine learning algorithms,
and deep learning approaches [CL17]. One of the major challenges in predicting app
usage is the ethical and privacy implications of collecting and analyzing users’ smart-
phone data. Another challenge is dealing with the vast amount of data generated by
smartphones, and processing it eﬀiciently to extract meaningful insights [CL17].
In the study ”Fast App Launching for Mobile Devices Using Predictive User Context”
[Yan+12] the authors investigate the use of predictive user context to increase the
speed of app launch on mobile devices. The authors proposed a machine learning-
based system that predicts which app a user is likely to launch next based on their
current context (e.g.
location, time of day, device usage history).
The predicted
program is then preloaded in the background so that it may be launched fast when
the user demands it.
Another study found that it is possible to estimate the gender of the user with 70%
accuracy based on the apps they have installed, highlighting the variations in app
choices between genders [Sen+15]. Other studies have shown that by utilizing fea-
tures related to recency of communication, usage intensity, time of day, and demo-
graphics, it is possible to infer user boredom with high accuracy [Pie+15].
In the study ”Prediction of problematic smartphone use: A machine learning ap-
proach” [LK21] the authors tested several machine learning methods like decision
tree, random forest, and Xgboost to predict whether a user is at risk of developing
problematic smartphone use based on their usage patterns. They showed that ran-
dom forest can accurately predict whether a user is at risk of developing problematic
smartphone use with an 82.0% accuracy rate. The authors showed that users’ general
information, such as age group, job, and sex did not contribute much to predicting
their smartphone addiction level.
Deep neural network approaches have been also utilized to predict app usage, yielding
better results than traditional machine learning methods [Xu+18].
In the study ”Deepapp: a deep reinforcement learning framework for mobile appli-
cation usage prediction” [Xu+18] the authors explore the use of deep reinforcement
learning for mobile application usage prediction.
The authors proposed a system
called ”Deepapp” that uses a deep reinforcement learning-based approach to predict
the next app a user is likely to use. Where the system utilizes a deep neural network
to learn the user’s app usage patterns and predict the next app to launch. The au-
thors tested their model on a large-scale anonymized app usage dataset and reveal
that DeepAPP provides high accuracy with a precision rate of around 70.0%.
==PAGE:15==
2.5 App Usage Prediction
5
Most deep neural network approaches focus solely on predicting the next app recom-
mendation and lack interpretability [CL17], not considering the hierarchical manner
in which users make decisions about using their phones or not. In this research, we
aim to address these limitations by proposing a novel multivariate time series fore-
casting model to predict the label of the amount of time a user will spend on their
phone the following week using a Hierarchical Attention Network based deep learning
architectures [Yan+16].
==PAGE:16==
CHAPTER 3
Background
In this chapter, we give a brief review of some basic concepts from Natural Language
Processing and Neural Networks- especially Recurrent Neural Networks. The treat-
ment is by no means complete and is meant mostly as a gentle introduction and to
set out the language used in this work. This chapter and the Methods chapter 5 go
hand in hand.
3.1
What is a Time Series
Time series is a sequence of observations recorded at regular time intervals, for exam-
ple, hourly weather measurements and weekly smartphone app usage. Time series can
also be irregularly spaced and sporadic, for example, timestamp data in a computer
system’s event log [Bro17b]. Time series forecasting is highly significant in business
since variables like mobile app usage, demand and sales, stock price, and so on are
all essentially time series data [Bro17b].
3.2
Neural Network
Artificial neural networks are based on how real neurons work in the brain.
The
neurons in artificial neural networks are organized into layers. Each artificial neuron
receives a signal from all neurons in the previous layer. Each signal connection has a
weight assigned to it based on the signal’s importance-the more important the signal
the higher the weight is. These weights are the network’s learnable parameters. each
neuron gets the weighted sum of signals from the previous layer. Then a nonlinear
activation function is applied to the weighted sum to determine how much signal
is passed to the next layer. The network can learn more complex and interesting
patterns thanks to these nonlinearities.
The neurons at the very end control the
decision or outcome of the networks [Bro16a]. Artificial neural networks are used
in a wide range of applications, including natural language processing (NLP), image
recognition and computer vision, recommendation systems and healthcare. These are
just a few examples of the many applications of artificial neural networks [Bro16a].
==PAGE:17==
3.3 Backpropagation
7
3.3
Backpropagation
The weights (or parameters) of a neural network are tuned using backpropagation.
The neural network first makes a guess, we correct it by telling it how incorrect it
is, backpropagation changes the weights to make it more correct, and so on. The
network learns the ideal weights for inferring the decision after seeing many examples
[Bro16a]. Backpropagation is a widely used algorithm for training artificial neural
networks, particularly for supervised learning tasks [Bro16a].
3.4
Word Embeddings
The natural input for a neural network is a vector of numeric values. This imposes
the question, how does one feed language input into a neural network? One way is
via Word Embeddings. Which are word vector representations that try to capture
the semantic meaning of words/tokens. Where a word is represented by a vector
of numerical values and each index in the vector represents some learnable abstract
property of the word. Thus, similar Words will have similar vectors [Bro17a] [NG].
3.5
Positional Encoding
The order of words/tokens and their position in a sentence can significantly affect the
meaning of a natural language. To ensure that a model takes into account the order
of words in a sentence, it may be helpful to include explicit positional information.
This raises the question of how to incorporate this information.
A method used in natural language processing (NLP) to represent a token’s position
within a sequence of tokens is called positional encoding [Vas+17]. Positional encod-
ing is used to give the model a way to understand the order of the tokens within the
sequence.
Positional encoding can be implemented in a variety of ways, but one popular method
is to utilize sine and cosine functions with various frequencies to represent each to-
ken’s position. For instance, a sinusoidal function with a high frequency may be used
to represent the positional encoding for the first token in the sequence, a sinusoidal
function with a little lower frequency could be used to represent the positional encod-
ing for the second token, and so on [Bro22].
Before the input embeddings are sent through the model, the positional encoding is
often added. This enables the model to take into account the position of each token
in the input sequence. This is particularly helpful for tasks like translation, where
the word order can have a significant impact on the sentence’s meaning [Bro22].
==PAGE:18==
8
3 Background
3.6
Recurrent Neural Networks (RNNs)
In a typical feedforward network, each neuron receives input from the neurons in the
previous layer and then sends its output to the neurons in the next layer. Thus, only
the information from the most recent input is used by the neurons at the end to
decide [NG].
output = f(weights ∗input + bias)
where f is non linear activation function.
In a recurrent neural network, each neuron receives information from the layer before
it as well as its own output from the previous time step. Thus, in addition to the
input from the current time step, the neurons at the end of the network also consider
the input from all previous time steps (which took data from the first time step into
account) before making their decision. This is why recurrent neural networks can
recognize patterns over time [NG] [Bro16a].
output = f(weights ∗concatenate(input, previous_output) + bias)
where f is non linear activation function.
The problem with these Basic RNN cells is that they can’t retain information across
a large number of time steps [NG]. In practice, RNNs can lose information in as
few as 4-5 timesteps [NG]. This causes problems in tasks where information needs to
be retained over a long time [NG] [Poi19]. For example, in natural language process-
ing, the meaning of a pronoun may depend on what was stated in a previous sentence.
3.7
Long Short Term Memory (LSTM)
Advanced RNN cells called long short-term memory cells deal with the issue of long-
term dependencies [NG] [GS05] .
Each unit has internal memory that can be selectively written to rather than writing
to every cell at every time step [NG].
The current time step’s input is written to internal memory based on its relevance to
the problem relevance is learned during training via backpropagation [NG].
If the input is irrelevant, no data is stored in the cell. This way, data can thus be
preserved over many time steps and retrieved as needed [NG].
==PAGE:19==
3.8 Gated Recurrent Units (GRU)
9
Gates control data movement into and out of an LSTM cell. A gate is a sigmoid
function that regulates the flow of data through the LSTM. To determine how in-
formation should flow through the LSTM, each gate examines the input data and
previous output. Where each gate returns a value between 0 (no flow) and 1 (full
flow) [NG].
The forget gate controls how much of the previous time step’s internal memory to
forget [NG].
The candidate value is the processed input value of the current time step that can be
added to the memory. Where tanh activation is used to allow negative values to be
subtracted from memory [NG].
The input gate controls how much of the candidate value is added to memory [NG].
The input gate and candidate value work together to determine what new data is
written into memory [NG]. The new memory of the LSTM cell is thus :
forget_gate ∗previous_memory_state + input_gate ∗candidate_value
The LSTM cell does not send its memory contents to the next layer. An output gate,
is used to determine how much memory to output [NG]. Then before being passed
to the next layer, the output is exposed to a final tanh activation.
3.8
Gated Recurrent Units (GRU)
Gated Recurrent Units are similar to LSTMs, but they only have two gates instead
of three [NG].
The update gate controls how much previous memory is retained.
The reset gate determines how the new input is combined with the previous mem-
ory. Without further activation, the entire internal memory is output [NG] [Cho+14]
[Liu+22].
As GRUs are less complex than LSTMs, GRUs train slightly faster [NG]. However,
GRUs and LSTMs are found to perform similarly [Gre+16]. Thus, tuning hyperpa-
rameters such as the number of units is likely to have a greater impact on performance
than choosing between GRU and LSTM.
3.9
Bi-directional RNN
RNN has the drawback of strictly processing inputs in temporal order [Poi19] [NG].
This indicates that current input is contextualized by past inputs but not by future
==PAGE:20==
10
3 Background
inputs. However, sometimes important context for an input appears after the input
itself. Bi-directional RNN [SP97] by utilizing two GRU/LSTM layers, one that reads
the input forward and one that reads the input backwards provides a solution to this
drawback [NG].
3.10
Attention
Sometimes only a few words in a sequence are important and the rest do not have as
much meaning. In a traditional RNN, the output is usually taken at the final time
step, whereas even with GRUs and LSTMs units, information from important words
may have been diluted [BCB14].
Attention mechanism is used to prevent information loss from important words by
calculating how important the GRU/LSTM output at each time step is. It’s a simple
feedforward network with a single hidden layer (tanh) and a softmax output [BCB14].
The softmax output indicates the importance of each time step. Then, instead of us-
ing the GRU/LSTM output at the last time step, a weighted average is used by mul-
tiplying the output at each time step with its corresponding softmax weight [BCB14].
The basic idea behind the attention mechanism is to compare the input vector to
some context vector - the closer they are, the more important the input. Produce a
single scalar value indicating the weight of each input. For a classification task, the
context vector can be randomly initialized and learned during training [BCB14].
3.11
Hierarchical Attention Networks (HAN)
The Hierarchical Attention Network (HAN) is a deep learning model which was first
developed for document classification [Yan+16].
HAN is Built with bidirectional
RNNs made up of GRUs/LSTMs and attention mechanisms. consisting of ”hierar-
chies” where the outputs of the lower hierarchies serve as the inputs for the higher
hierarchies [Yan+16].
We first break a document into sentences before feeding it into the HAN. The word
hierarchy, as seen in figure 3.1, creates sentence embeddings. Where, in the form of
word embeddings, this hierarchy reads one full sentence at a time. Then the most
important words are chosen by the attention mechanism. This results in a sentence
embedding that captures the sentence’s semantic information based on the most im-
portant words [Yan+16].
The sentence hierarchy, as seen in figure 3.1, creates the final document embedding.
Where the structure is identical to the word hierarchy. It reads in the sentence em-
==PAGE:21==
3.11 Hierarchical Attention Networks (HAN)
11
beddings generated by the word hierarchy. Then the most important sentences are
chosen by the attention mechanism. This results in a document embedding that rep-
resents the whole document. The document embedding is then used for classification
[Yan+16].
Figure 3.1: Hierarchical Attention Network (HAN) - Source: Hierarchical Attention
Networks for Document Classification [Yan+16].
HAN has multiple applications one of which was used for information extraction from
cancer pathology reports [Gao+18]. The methodology employs a hierarchical struc-
ture that prioritizes the most significant sentences in the pathology report, followed
by the most important terms inside those sentences. The researchers trained and
tested the HAN model on a dataset of pathology reports and discovered that it out-
performed traditional machine learning methods in extracting important information
from the reports [Gao+18].
In this research, we will utilize HAN-based deep learning architecture to build a novel
==PAGE:22==
12
3 Background
multivariate time series forecasting model to predict the label of the amount of time
a user will spend on their phone the following week.
==PAGE:23==
CHAPTER 4
The Dataset
The raw smartphone app usage datasets utilized in this work and the data prepara-
tion are introduced in this chapter. The target is preparing the data for the deep
learning classification task, where we try to predict the label of the amount of time a
user will spend on the phone the next week.
The dataset utilized here is provided by DTU Compute, Department of Applied Math-
ematics and Computer Science, Technical University of Denmark (DTU).
4.1
Raw Data
In this section, we introduce the utilized raw smartphone app usage datasets.
The raw data
consists of 12,189 users and has the following columns:
• user_id: As the name indicates it’s the user id.
• hour_labels: List that contains the indices of hours for a user’s history, be-
ginning with the first hour of Monday in the first week of user activity.
• categories: List of lists where each sublist includes the app categories opened
in the corresponding hour. The first is a fake one that contains user metadata.
• durations: List of lists where each sublist includes the time (in seconds) spent
by the user on the corresponding category in the corresponding hour.
• target_times: List of hour indexes for when the prediction is required.
• target_values: List of target time spent on the phone that needs to be pre-
dicted.
It is the sum of durations a user will spend on the phone the next
week.
In the raw data, some values are missing, indicating times when the users were not
using their smartphones, however, we left the missing values as they are since we will
try to improve the algorithms we use later, 5, to handle missing values. Moreover,
there are a small number of records in the duration column, where the duration sublist
==PAGE:24==
14
4 The Dataset
adds up to more than one hour, to address this issue, we exclude all information of
the corresponding hours.
The user metadata
is 3-tuple containing information about:
• user gender: Female and Male.
• user age group: The user age group is divided into 4 groups: 20-39 years old
(group 3), 40-54 years old (group 2), 55-73 years old (group 1), and over 73
years old (group 0).
• user country: Country abbreviated - 3-digit alphabetic codes defined in ISO
3166 [Sta97].
In total, there are 52 unique metadata values.
The user categories
have in total 60 unique values about app categories, as clas-
sified by the Google Play store [Goo] (may be subject to change over time), with each
with a suﬀix as the following:
• 0: unpopular app category among users.
• 1: popular app category among users.
In case the suﬀix is missing, this means no one is using the app from all other users.
Figure 4.1: Visualization of an example user’s data before preprocessing (part 1).
==PAGE:25==
4.2 Data Preparation
15
Figure 4.2: Visualization of an example user’s data before preprocessing (part 2).
Figures 4.1 and 4.2 illustrate an example of users prior to preprocessing. It can be seen
that the ’categories’ is a list of lists, where each sublist contains the app categories
opened during the corresponding hour. Similarly, ’durations’ is a list of lists, where
each sublist holds the time (in seconds) the user spent on the corresponding category
during the corresponding hour. It’s also noticed that each week is assigned a target
value that represents the time the user spent on apps the following week. Additionally,
It can be observed that the ’0’ hour category sublist is a fake one that holds user
metadata, with the corresponding duration set to zero. Here, prior to preprocessing,
the number of weeks and the number of records per week can vary for each user.
4.2
Data Preparation
As with any other machine learning problem, the first step is preparing the data. In
this section, we explain the data preparation for the later deep learning classification
task that makes use of HAN (see 3.11), where the goal is to predict the label of the
amount of time a user will spend on the phone in the coming week. This includes
dividing user data into weeks and weeks into a set of tokens over days and padding
the sequences to ensure they all have the same length. The data is then split into
training, validation and test datasets.
==PAGE:26==
16
4 The Dataset
Split Users:
We start by shuffling the users_ids, which are assigned to 12,189 users.
We then split the shuffled users_ids into three groups, with 60% (7,313 users) being
used for training, 20% (2,437 users) for validation, and 20% (2,437 users) for testing.
Having bigger validation and test datasets increases the generalization of the later
utilized models 5. Another advantage of using a larger validation and test dataset
is that it can help to reduce overfitting, where the model is trained too well on the
training data and performs poorly on unseen data.
Discretizing Target Values (to Classification):
The process of discretizing in-
volves converting continuous target values into discrete categories or bins. In this
context, the target values from training users are used to create a function that sepa-
rates them into close to equal-sized bins based on quantiles. This produces bin edges
that can be used to transform each target value from the user’s target values into the
corresponding bin label. This label indicates the quantile membership for that target
value, with a 1-label indicating low usage and higher label numbers indicating higher
usage. 0-label will be used later to indicate missing/padded target values.
Data Transformation:
To re-aggregate user data into weeks and weeks into a set
of tokens over days, for each user we do the following:
• We get the user metadata.
• We get user hour_labels, categories and durations. We also get the user tar-
get_times and target_values.
• Using the discretize function (previously mentioned), we transform the user
target_values into target_labels that indicate the user usage.
• To make the user durations data more manageable for the deep learning task, we
convert the user duration units from seconds to discrete minutes. This reduces
the size of the dictionary used to represent durations when we initialize the
durations’ embedding later in the deep learning task, in chapter 5.
• We create a new variable called days from the user hour_labels data. This new
variable represents the day of the week and can be used for positional encoding
in the deep learning task.
• Looping over the user hour_labels:
– We re-aggregate the user data (categories, durations, and days) into weeks
and weeks into a set of tokens over days and take the corresponding tar-
get_labels.
– It’s worth noting that, during this process, we also check if any records
in the user durations sublist sum up to more than an hour. If found, we
ignore the user data that corresponds to those records.
==PAGE:27==
4.2 Data Preparation
17
• After re-aggregating the user data, we add the user metadata to the beginning
of the user categories first week.
• Finally, we save the user re-aggregated user data (categories, durations, and
days) and the corresponding user target_labels.
Data Wrangling (Padding and Numericalizing):
To convert the user cate-
gories into numerical data and to make sure that each user has the same number of
weeks in their data (max_weeks) and that the re-aggregated user data all have the
same number of tokens per week (max_tokens), we perform the following steps:
• To determine max_weeks, we calculate the q-th quantile of the training users’
number of weeks. Where we set q to 0.6. We chose 0.6 for q to make sure that
40 % of the users don’t need padding. However, this process may also result in
a large amount of padding, which is not a problem as the model we build later
should learn to ignore these padded tokens. Additionally, we will improve the
model to handle padded weeks.
• To determine max_tokens, we calculate the q-th quantile of the training users’
number of tokens each week. Where we set q as the one used to determine
max_weeks (the same argument goes here).
• We create a vocabulary of size 112 (number unique values in re-aggregated
categories) for the categories of train users. This is done to numericalize cate-
gories for the deep learning task. We also save the vocabulary for visualisation
purposes later in the results chapter 6.
• If the number of tokens in a week for a particular user is less than max_tokens,
we pad the user week with additional zeros to have a maximum of max_tokens
tokens. Else, we cut the week to have a maximum of max_tokens tokens.
• If the number of weeks for a particular user is less than max_weeks, we pad the
user data with additional weeks filled with zeros. Else, we cut the user data to
have a maximum of max_weeks weeks.
• If the number of weeks for a particular user is less than max_weeks, we pad
the user target_labels with additional zeros. Else, we cut the target_labels to
have a maximum of max_weeks weeks.
• Finally, we save the users’ padded data with the corresponding users’ padded
target_labels.
==PAGE:28==
18
4 The Dataset
Figure 4.3: Visualization of an example user’s data after preprocessing (part 1).
Figure 4.4: Visualization of an example user’s data after preprocessing (part 2).
Figures 4.4 and 4.4 illustrate an example of users after preprocessing.
It can be
seen that the ’categories’ is a list of lists, where each sublist now contains the set
of app categories opened during the corresponding day, instead of hour. Similarly,
’durations’ is a list of lists, where each sublist holds the time (in minutes) the user
spent on the corresponding category during the corresponding day. It’s also noticed
that each week is assigned a target label that represents the time the user spent on
apps the following week. It’s also noticed that the first week, ’week 1’, is padded with
’padded tokens’, to ensure that the user has the same number of tokens in a week as
other preprocessed users, prior to inputting them into the model. Also, the user is
padded with some weeks to make sure that the user has the same number of weeks as
other preprocessed users. Each padded week is also assigned a padded target label, so
==PAGE:29==
4.3 Data Exploration
19
all users have the same number of target labels prior to passing them into the model.
Additionally, It can be observed that the ’0’ day category sublist is a fake one that
holds user metadata, with the corresponding duration set to zero.
Split User Data:
Using training, validation and testing users_ids, we extract
and save the train, validation and test datasets from users’ padded data and the
corresponding users’ padded target_labels.
Different Classification Tasks:
We process the data for various classification
tasks by using different random seeds for the train/validation/test split. Each task
corresponds to a specific number of labels for smartphone app usage, which will be
presented in the results section 6.
4.3
Data Exploration
In this section, we will focus on gaining insight into the data, through data exploration
and visualization. This will involve analyzing the distribution of users’ metadata and
app categories (without considering durations), to better understand the data set
prior to preprocessing. We will also investigate the usage label time series data of
random users before and after it has been preprocessed. This will give us a better
understanding of how the patterns in the label of user app usage change over time.
We will also have a look into the users’ number of weeks distributions to see how
much padding is needed.
4.3.1
Users’ Metadata
By analyzing the gender distribution, in figure 4.5, we observe that the majority of
users in the dataset are male, comprising around 60% of the total number of users.
==PAGE:30==
20
4 The Dataset
Figure 4.5: Proportion of gender in the dataset (prior to preprocessing) - all users
included.
In our analysis of the dataset, we noticed a trend in which the number of users de-
creases as the age increases, as shown in Figure 4.6. The majority of users in the
dataset are in the younger age groups, with approximately 80% of users being under
55 years old and around 50% being under 40 years old. It is important to note that
this data does not fully represent the entire age range of the user population. This
agrees with what we found in the literature review 2.
Figure 4.6: Proportion of each age group in the dataset (prior to preprocessing) -
all users included.
By analyzing the distribution of users by country in figure 4.7, it is evident that
a large portion of the users is concentrated in just a few countries.
The top 10
==PAGE:31==
4.3 Data Exploration
21
countries make up around 79% of the total users, with Germany and the United
Kingdom alone comprising 28% of all users. Thus, It is worth noting that this data
is not representative of the entire population of all countries.
Figure 4.7: Proportion of nationalities in the dataset (prior to preprocessing) - all
users included.
4.3.2
Apps Categories
Here, we aim to gain an understanding of the popularity of various app categories
among users by examining the distribution of app categories within the dataset, re-
gardless of the duration of usage.
Examining the distribution of popular apps in figure 4.8, we can observe that the
most frequently used app categories among users are Communication and Social,
making up approximately 54% of all popular apps, this agrees with what we found
in the literature review 2. Additionally, we can observe that apps such as Game and
Move/TV, are not regularly used.
==PAGE:32==
22
4 The Dataset
Figure 4.8: Proportion of popular (suﬀix 1) app categories in the dataset (prior to
preprocessing) - all users included.
Looking at the distribution of unpopular apps seen in figure ??, it’s clear that the most
frequently used app categories among users are Communication and Game, making
up approximately 30% of all unpopular apps.
Figure 4.9: Proportion of unpopular (suﬀix 0) app categories in the dataset (prior
to preprocessing) - all users included.
==PAGE:33==
4.3 Data Exploration
23
4.3.3
User weeks
By looking at the distribution of users that requires padded weeks, in figure 4.5, we
observe that the majority of users (7155 users) in the dataset require padding. Where
the minimum number of user weeks is seen to be 22 where 42 weeks padded week is
needed.
Figure 4.10: Distribution of users that requires padded weeks in the dataset - all
users included. Maximum allowed weeks (max_weeks) before cutting
is 64 is 64.
4.3.4
Users Time-Series
Here, we will focus on understanding the patterns of the label of smartphone app
usage over weeks by analyzing the time-series data of random users.
In figure 4.11, the line plot of the random users’ app usage patterns reveals some
interesting observations. For example, we can see that random user 1 and 3 did not
require any data padding while random user 2 had padded weeks starting from week
41. Additionally, there is some missing data in the usage of random user 1 and 2
which could potentially indicate times when the users were not using their smart-
phones. Furthermore, random user 1 appears to have a consistent medium usage
(label 2) with occasional shifts towards high and low usage, while random users 3 and
2 seem to exhibit a lot of variability in their usage. This gives a sign that predicting
weekly mobile usage is a challenging problem due to the complexity and variability
of user behaviour, as seen in the literature review 2.
==PAGE:34==
24
4 The Dataset
Figure 4.11: Line plot of the full-time series of random users, where the target val-
ues (usage) are discretizing into three labels: 1 (low usage), 2 (medium
usage), 3 (high usage). 0 stands for missing/padded target label. Max-
imum allowed weeks (max_weeks) before cutting is 64.
In figure 4.12, we can observe the line plot of random users’ app usage before and
after preprocessing. It can be seen that the target app usage of random user 4 is more
consistent after preprocessing, as higher frequency variability has been categorized.
However, it is also noted that the overall trend of usage has been reduced, but not
completely removed.
==PAGE:35==
4.3 Data Exploration
25
Figure 4.12: Line plot of the full-time series of a random user before (blue) and after
(brown) preprocessing, where the target values (usage) are discretizing
into three labels: 1 (low usage), 2 (medium usage), 3 (high usage). 0
stands for missing/padded target label.
==PAGE:36==
CHAPTER 5
Methods
In this chapter, we present the methods and architectures of the models used to
predict the label of the amount of time a user will spend on their smartphone in the
upcoming week. Specifically, we aim to make multiple predictions for each user based
on observed weeks. The mathematical details of these methods and models are also
discussed
It is assumed that the reader has prior knowledge of the concepts discussed in the
Background chapter, where the language used in this work is explained. If not, it is
recommended that they review Chapter 3 before proceeding.
Let’s begin by acknowledging the contributions of several individuals and research
papers that have served as the foundation for the current work being discussed. This
work is based on the paper ”Hierarchical Attention Networks for Document Classifica-
tion” (Zichao Yang, et al, 2016) [Yan+16] and “Attention Is All You Need” (Ashish
Vaswani, et al, 2017)[Vas+17].
We were also inspired by ”Hierarchical Attention
Networks for Information Extraction From Cancer Pathology Reports” (Shang Gao,
et al, 2017) [Gao+18], ”Deep Learning for Natural Language Processing” (Brownlee,
2017) [Bro17a] and ”Massive exploration of neural machine translation architectures”,
(Britz, et al, 2017) [Bri+17].
The dataset utilized here is the prepared smartphone app usage datasets (see chapter
4 ) provided by DTU Compute, Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer
Science, Technical University of Denmark (DTU).
The dataset is composed of 12,189 users. Each user has in addition to target_labels
three features: categories, durations, and days. Each feature contains a maximum of
max_weeks weeks, and each week contains max_tokens tokens of information about
the set of apps that were opened by the user on each day of the week. Each week is
also assigned a target label, from the user target_labels, that reflects the amount of
time the user spent on phone apps that week.
5.1
The Network Architecture
We tried various architectures and improvements that are similar to the proposed
architecture in figure 5.1. Therefore, let’s begin by understanding the flow of this
==PAGE:37==
5.1 The Network Architecture
27
architecture.
Figure 5.1: Proposed Method Architecture.
==PAGE:38==
28
5 Methods
The model makes multiple predictions for each user. It processes one week at a time,
trying to predict the usage label of the following week, based on the seen inputs from
current and previous weeks.
The model starts with the use of two separate encoders, one for categories input and
one for durations input. To account for the specific day of each token during the
encoding process, the days input is used to generate positional embeddings that are
added to the categories and durations embeddings separately, prior to passing each
through the corresponding bidirectional GRU.
An attention mechanism is applied after each encoder to focus on the most impor-
tant tokens from each input. The outputs of the two attention mechanisms are then
combined to generate a week representation.
The representations of seen weeks are then processed by weeks’ encoder, which is a
bidirectional GRU, followed by another attention mechanism to emphasize the most
relevant weeks. This process results in a final vector representation of all the user’s
weeks observed by the network up to that point in time. This representation is then
passed through a fully connected layer, together with an activation function (soft-
max), to make a prediction for the usage label of the upcoming week.
The hierarchical aspect of this method refers to the fact that it first encodes informa-
tion about weeks using information about days, and then encodes the user usage by
using the weeks’ representation.
5.2
Embeddings and Positional Encoding
The mathematical expressions discussed in this section are inspired by “Attention Is
All You Need” (Ashish Vaswani, et al, 2017) [Vas+17].
The idea behind positional encoding is to add a unique signal to each token’s em-
bedding vector that corresponds to its position in the input sequence. The user days
input is used to generate positional embeddings that are added to the user categories
and durations embeddings separately. This enables the model to take into account
the specific day of each token during the encoding process.
Below we explain the process of creating categories and days embeddings. The dura-
tions and days’ embeddings are identical. Thus, understanding how categories and
days’ embeddings are obtained should provide enough insight into the overall process.
The model starts by creating two separate embedding layers, one for categories and
one for days. The weights of the categories’ embedding layer would be initialized
==PAGE:39==
5.3 Categories and Durations Encoder
29
with a pre-calculated positional encodings matrix for categories, and the model is not
allowed to adjust these weights during training. The weights of the days’ embedding
layer would be initialized with a pre-calculated positional encodings matrix for days
and also not allowed to be adjusted. Then the two embeddings are summed together
to create a combined embedding for the model to learn from during training. This ap-
proach allows the model to learn from both the categories and days’ input while also
incorporating the positional information of the days’ input. It should be noted that
the model would not be able to adjust the encodings based on the specific information
in the dataset, as the embedding weights are fixed and not trainable. However, later
in the 6 Chapter we also experiment with tunable embeddings.
The pre-calculated positional encodings matrixes are given by sine and cosine func-
tions of varying frequencies as the following:
PE(i, 2m) = sin(i/n2m/d)
PE(i, 2m + 1) = cos(i/n2m/d)
(5.1)
Where i is the position of the token, m is the dimension of the embedding, and d is
the total number of dimensions in the embedding. n is a user-defined scalar, set to
10,000 by the authors of ”Attention Is All You Need” [Vas+17], and we stick to that.
The idea, here, is to create a matrix of the same shape as the embedding matrix. The
functions are chosen so that different positions will have unique encodings, allowing
the model to learn the relative position of each token.
5.3
Categories and Durations Encoder
This section explains the process of encoding the combined embeddings of categories
and days. The process of encoding the combined embeddings of duration and days, as
well as encoding weeks, is identical, so understanding how the combined embeddings
of categories and days are encoded should provide enough insight into the overall
process.
The resulting embedding obtained by combining the embeddings of categories and
days is then passed through the corresponding bidirectional recurrent neural network
(RNN) using Gated Recurrent Unit (GRU) cells.
We use GRUs as they are less
complex than LSTMs and are found to perform similarly [Gre+16]. However, Long
Short-Term Memory (LSTM) cells were also experimented with, as seen in chapter 6.
For the encoders, we use Use a 1-layer bidirectional as recommended by (Brownlee,
2017) [Bro17a] based on (Britz, et al, 2017) [Bri+17].
==PAGE:40==
30
5 Methods
Since the user is composed of a series of weeks, returning the hidden state of the GRU
is necessary. Therefore, the initial hidden state of week i+1 will be the last hidden
state of week i, making a ”stateful” model [NG]. Allowing the model to keep track
of information across different weeks. This is useful to understand the sequential
manner of the user data while predicting the label of the time spent by the user on
apps the following week.
We can represent the token in the i−th week from the f −th feature (either categories
or durations) as tfij, where j ∈[1, max_tokens]. Then we have:
⃗hfij = −−−→
GRU (xfij)
←−h fij = ←−−−
GRU (xfij)
(5.2)
Where the vectors ⃗hfij and ←−h fij are the forward and backward outputs from the
bidirectional GRU. Both the forward and backward are concatenated resulting in
hfij, before being passed through the attention mechanism discussed in the following
section.
5.4
Categories and Durations Attention
The idea behind using attention mechanisms here is to allow the model to focus on cer-
tain parts of the input, rather than processing the entire input equally. This is done
by giving more importance to certain parts of the input and less importance to others.
Applying attention to categories and durations can help the model focus on the most
important categories and durations, while discarding less relevant information. The
attention mechanism is able to weight the contributions of different categories and
durations differently so that categories and durations that are most relevant to the
task at hand receive a higher weight and have more influence on the final prediction.
It is a way of performing a type of feature selection on each input, it helps to focus
on only the most relevant information and discard irrelevant information. Applying
attention to categories and durations can be helpful as categories and durations play
an important role in predicting the user app usage label, where it is important to
weigh the contributions of different categories and durations differently and extract
useful features from each one that can help to improve the model’s performance.
The mathematical expressions discussed in this section are inspired by ”Hierarchical
Attention Networks for Document Classification” (Zichao Yang, et al, 2016) [Yan+16].
These expressions are specifically applied to the token attention mechanisms. The
attention mechanism for the weeks is identical but at a higher level. Understanding
these expressions should provide enough insight into the overall process.
The attention mechanism is formulated as:
==PAGE:41==
5.5 Combining Categories and Durations Week Representations
31
ufij = tanh
(
Wwf hfij + bwf
)
αfij =
exp
(
u⊤
fijuwf
)
∑
t exp
(
u⊤
fijuwf
)
sfi =
∑
t
αfijhfij.
(5.3)
Where hfij is the concatenation of the forward and backward outputs from the bidi-
rectional GRU.
The model first transforms hfij through a one-layer MLP with a hyperbolic tangent
activation function, resulting in a hidden representation ufij. The importance of each
token is then determined by calculating the dot product between ufij and a context
vector uwf , which is randomly initialized and learned during training. This results in
a normalized importance weight αfij for each token. The final week vector of feature
f, Wfi, is calculated by taking a weighted sum of the hfij features, with the weights
determined by the normalized importance weights.
5.5
Combining Categories and Durations Week
Representations
To combine the final week vectors of categories and duration attention layers, the
average of the attention maps is used before passing them into the weeks’ encoder.
When using the average of the attention maps, the outputs of the attention layers
are first combined by taking the element-wise mean of the tensors. This results in a
single attention map that represents the average of the attention maps generated by
the different attention layers. Since the average is taken element-wise, the resulting
tensor has the same shape as the original attention maps.
This method is used as the attention layers are applied to different inputs, but both
attention layers are trained to focus on different aspects of the input and we want
to retain a balance between the information from both attention maps. Since This
method gives equal importance to each input, it is less prone to overfitting or bias to-
wards one input over the other. By averaging the outputs of the attention layers, the
sentence encoder can take into account the information from both inputs in a single
vector representation, while giving equal importance to each input. This approach is
computationally eﬀicient since it only involves one additional step of averaging the
attention maps and it doesn’t require additional layers or parameters.
==PAGE:42==
32
5 Methods
On the other hand, taking the average will not reflect any difference in importance
between the inputs, and it could lead to the loss of important information if one input
is less informative than the other. This is why, later in 6, we also experiment with
different combination methods like using a fully connected (FC) layer to combine the
outputs of two attention layers before passing them into the sentence encode.
5.6
Combining Weeks Representations
We combine week representations by concatenating along a week dimension, prior to
passing them through the corresponding weeks’ encoder.
5.7
Weeks Attention
As previously mentioned in section 5.4, the process of the weeks’ attention mechanism
is similar to the token attention mechanism. It uses a one-layer MLP with a hyperbolic
tangent function to compute the importance of each week, based on a dot product
between the hidden representation of the week, and a context vector learned during
training, resulting in a normalized importance weight for each week. The final weeks’
vector is computed as a weighted sum of the hidden representations of the weeks,
using the normalized importance weights as weights.
5.8
Model Improvements
5.8.1
Masking Attention Weights
The attention mechanism uses a probability distribution called attention weights to
focus on specific elements of the input sequence. The softmax function is used to
ensure that the weights are a valid probability distribution, with all values being non-
negative and summing to 1. As we are working with padded data with missing values,
attention should focus solely on the actual data and zero weight should be assigned
to padding or missing data, as it does not carry useful information. To achieve this, a
boolean mask is used to set the weight of padding or missings data to a very negative
number (close to -infinity) before applying the softmax function, ensuring that their
output is zero. This allows the model to focus on the actual data while disregarding
padding/missing data.
The softmax function is given by:
softmax (xi) =
exp (xi)
∑N
j=1 exp (xj)
(5.4)
==PAGE:43==
5.9 Experimental Setup and Evaluation Metrics
33
where xi is an input to the softmax, N is the length of the sequence (max_tokens or
the number of weeks seen by the model so far) and exp is the exponential function.
5.8.2
Cross-Entropy Loss with Padded/Missing Target Value
Ignored
The cross-entropy loss, also known as log loss, is used as a measure of how well the
model’s predictions match the true values. It measures the dissimilarity between the
predicted probability distribution, which is obtained from the output of the model
after applying the softmax function, and the true distribution, which is represented
by one-hot encoded labels. It is a popular choice for classification problems because
it is easy to calculate [Bro16a].
The formula is mathematically defined as:
CE(p, q) = −
C
∑
c=0
p(c) ∗log(q(c))
(5.5)
Where p(c) is the true probability for the c −th class and q(c) is the predicted prob-
ability for the c-th class. The summation is taken over all classes.
This function is calculated for each example in the dataset and then averaged over
the entire dataset. Where the goal of training is to minimize this loss. Minimizing
the cross-entropy loss is equivalent to maximizing the likelihood of the true labels
given the predicted probabilities.
One of the key features of this loss function is that it allows for a specified target
value that is ignored and does not contribute to the input gradient. This can be useful
in our situation as the padded/missing target values are not relevant and should be
ignored [pytb].
5.9
Experimental Setup and Evaluation Metrics
In this section, we will discuss the experimental design and performance metrics used
Our implementation is based on PyTorch [Pas+19] and can be found in B.
As seen in chapter 4, we divided the dataset into train, validation and test sets with
a ratio of 0.6/0.2/0.2 respectively. The model was trained on the training set for 100
epochs and measured the performance on the validation set at each epoch. To pre-
vent overfitting, we used early stopping, where training was stopped if the validation
==PAGE:44==
34
5 Methods
accuracy didn’t increase for 3 consecutive epochs. The best-performing model on the
validation set was saved and then evaluated on the test set.
We used accuracy as the evaluation metric since the target classes were almost uni-
formly distributed among all the users, as seen in Chapter 4 and A.1.1. The model
with the highest accuracy on the validation set was chosen. To minimize bias and
randomness caused by the random split of users, we evaluated each experiment on 5
different random splits of the dataset. The parameters for the experiments, including
the maximum number of weeks (max_weeks) and the maximum number of tokens
(max_tokens) for each seed, can be found in the appendix A.2.1.
The AdamW optimizer (Loshchilov and Hutter, 2017) [LH17] [pyta], with a learn-
ing rate of 0.001 and a weight decay of 0.01 was utilized for training all the models.
AdamW optimizer is a variation of Adam optimizer which includes weight decay, a
regularization technique that helps to prevent overfitting by adding an L2 regulariza-
tion term to the model’s loss function [LH17]. This can be beneficial for our task as
we have a large dataset with a lot of features and we don’t want the model to overfit
the training dataset.
The process of adjusting certain parameters in the model, known as hyperparameter
tuning, can be found in the appendix (A.1.2), and is used to select the optimal default
model parameters.
==PAGE:45==
CHAPTER 6
Results
In this chapter, we present the results of our research experiments, highlighting the
key findings of these results.
6.1
Classification Tasks
In this section, we describe the various classification tasks that have been conducted
and their models’ performance. Each task corresponds to a specific number of la-
bels for smartphone app usage, as determined by preprocessing user information and
discretizing their target values as detailed in the dataset Chapter 4.
3-Label Classification
: The 3-label classification task aims to predict how much
time a user will spend on their phone the following week based on their preprocessed
weekly information of smartphone app usage features, including categories, duration,
and days. The target label is a discretization of the user’s target values into three
categories: 1 for low usage, 2 for medium usage, and 3 for high usage. This is done by
preprocessing the user information and discretizing their target values, as described
in greater detail in the dataset section 4. The performance of this classification task
is displayed in Table 6.1.
4-label classification
: In the 4-labels classification task, the objective is to pre-
dict the amount of time a user will spend on their phone the following week using
their preprocessed weekly information of smartphone app usage features. The target
is divided into four distinct categories, with 1 being the lowest and 4 being the highest
usage label. The performance of this classification task is displayed in Table 6.2
5-label classification
: Similarly, the 5-labels classification task aims to predict
the amount of time a user will spend on their phone the following week based on their
preprocessed weekly information of smartphone app usage features. The target label
is divided into five categories, with 1 being the lowest and 5 being the highest usage.
==PAGE:46==
36
6 Results
The performance of this classification task is displayed in Table 6.3
6.2
Models Performance over Classification Tasks
In this section, we present the performance of the models over the classification tasks
on 5 different random test splits.
Baseline models:
In order to evaluate the performance of models in time series
forecasting tasks, it is necessary to establish a baseline. This baseline serves as a
benchmark for the performance of all other models. A commonly used method for
creating a baseline in supervised machine learning is the Zero Rule algorithm. This
method predicts the majority class in classification problems and the average outcome
in regression problems. However, it does not take into account the serial correlation
found in time series data. An alternative approach for time series datasets is the per-
sistence algorithm, which predicts the next time step to be the same as the current
time step. This approach is commonly used as a baseline for time series forecasting
tasks [Bro17b].
The baseline model used to compare different HAN architectures are the following:
• Persistence Model
• Simple Recurrent neural network (with GRU).
• Simple Recurrent neural network (with LSTM).
Default Proposed Architecture
: The default HAN architecture sittings are
established with the following:
• Features’ embeddings are initialized with the corresponding pre-calculated po-
sitional encodings matrix (not learnable) as described in section 5.2.
• The embedding size is set to 200.
• Two attention layers are implemented, one for categories and one for durations.
• A GRU cell is used for the encoders.
• The encoders’ hidden size is set to 64.
• The attention layer hidden size is set to 200.
==PAGE:47==
6.2 Models Performance over Classification Tasks
37
Classification tasks performance
: The performance of the models over clas-
sification tasks are displayed in Table 6.1, 6.2 and 6.3. The tables show the mean
accuracy, f1-score, and precision of the test data. The tables also include the stan-
dard deviation for each metric, which is obtained by evaluating each experiment
(table cell) on 5 different random splits of train, validation and test sets with a ratio
of 0.6/0.2/0.2 respectively. The Tables display the changes in the default model pa-
rameters in parentheses.
A thorough evaluation of each model’s performance is provided by reporting accu-
racy, F1-score, and precision, which offer several viewpoints on how well the models
are performing.
The accuracy measures the proportion of correct predictions out
of all predictions, F1-score combines precision and recall to give a single score, and
precision measures the proportion of true positive, defined as a situation where the
models correctly predict the true label, predictions out of all positive predictions.
High values for all three metrics indicate that the model is making accurate and
consistent predictions. As the accuracy, F1-score, and precision of the models are
close, it means that the models are performing well in terms of both correctly identi-
fying positive examples and correctly identifying all the positive examples in the data.
We see that the using proposed HAN-based architectures outperformed all other base-
line models in all the performance metrics. For the best-performing architecture (bold
text), this was:
• For the 3-Label classification task, an improvement of 8.1% in accuracy over
the persistence model and an improvement of about 4.5% in the accuracy over
simple RNN with GRU/LSTM.
• For the 4-Label classification task, an improvement of 9.2% in accuracy over
the persistence model, and an improvement of about 5.4% in the accuracy over
simple RNN with GRU/LSTM.
• For the 5-Label classification task, an improvement of 10.7% in accuracy over
the persistence model, and an improvement of about 7.1% in the accuracy over
simple RNN with GRU/LSTM.
It is evident that the benefits of using a HAN-based architecture compared to the
baseline model become more pronounced as the number of labels in the classification
task increases, suggesting that HAN-based architectures are more effective in han-
dling more complex classification tasks with a higher number of labels.
Modifying the HAN network architectures by incorporating an LSTM cell in place of
a GRU cell, making the input embedding weights learnable, adding a fully connected
layer to merge the attention from the two inputs, or merging the input embeddings
and applying a single attention layer on the resulting embeddings layer (as opposed
==PAGE:48==
38
6 Results
to having separate attention layers for categories and durations) did not significantly
improve the final performance accuracy.
Table 6.1:
3-Label classification performance metrics: Mean ± standard deviation
of accuracy, f1-score, and precision on the test data.
.
Accuracy
F1-score
Precision
Baselines
Persistence
70.3±0.004
70.3±0.004
70.7±0.004
GRU
72.8±0.003
73.0±0.003
73.2±0.004
LSTM
72.7±0.003
72.8±0.004
73.0±0.005
HAN
HAN
76.0±0.004
76.0±0.003
76.3±0.001
(default sittings with GRU cell)
HAN
75.7±0.003
75.8±0.002
76.1±0.003
(with LSTM cell)
HAN
75.9±0.003
76.0±0.002
76.3±0.001
(learnable embed. weights)
HAN
75.9±0.004
76.0±0.003
76.2±0.002
(combine inputs 2-att. with fc)
HAN
75.6±0.006
75.7±0.006
76.1±0.005
(with inputs 1-att. layer)
Table 6.2:
4-Label classification performance metrics: Mean ± standard deviation
of accuracy, f1-score, and precision on the test data.
.
Accuracy
F1-score
Precision
Baselines
Persistence
62.1±0.004
62.1±0.004
62.1±0.004
GRU
64.2±0.003
64.3±0.004
64.4±0.005
LSTM
64.5±0.004
64.5±0.003
64.5±0.002
HAN
HAN
67.8±0.004
67.8±0.003
68.0±0.002
(default settings with GRU cell)
HAN
67.6±0.002
67.7±0.003
68.0±0.005
(with LSTM cell)
HAN
67.7±0.003
67.8±0.003
68.0±0.001
(learnable embed. weights)
HAN
67.8±0.003
67.9±0.002
68.1±0.001
(combine inputs 2-att. with fc)
HAN
67.6±0.003
67.7±0.001
68.0±0.002
(with inputs 1-att. layer)
==PAGE:49==
6.2 Models Performance over Classification Tasks
39
Table 6.3:
5-Label classification performance metrics: Mean ± standard deviation
of accuracy, f1-score, and precision on the test data.
.
Accuracy
F1-score
Precision
Baselines
Persistence
55.3±0.004
55.3±0.004
55.3±0.004
GRU
57.3±0.003
57.3±0.003
57.4±0.004
LSTM
57.0±0.004
57.1±0.003
57.1±0.002
HAN
HAN
61.1±0.002
61.2±0.002
61.5±0.004
(default settings with GRU cell)
HAN
60.9±0.004
61.0±0.004
61.1±0.004
(with LSTM cell)
HAN
61.0±0.003
61.2±0.003
61.4±0.003
(learnable embed. weights)
HAN
61.2±0.003
61.3±0.003
61.5±0.003
(combine inputs 2-att. with fc)
HAN
60.9±0.004
61.1±0.003
61.4±0.003
(with inputs 1-att. layer)
==PAGE:50==
40
6 Results
6.3
Best Models’ Performance
In this section, we present the performance of the best classification model in each
task (bold text in Tables 6.1, 6.1 and 6.1) via the confusion matrix.
A confusion matrix is a tool used to evaluate the performance of a classification
model by summarizing the number of correct and incorrect predictions for each class
[Bro16b]. It can be used to understand how well a classifier is performing and which
classes are diﬀicult to classify. The main diagonal elements represent the number of
correct predictions, while the off-diagonal elements represent mislabeled predictions.
It helps identify areas for improvement in the model, by understanding the types of
errors being made by the classifier [Bro16b].
To make it easier to see the model’s performance over each class we present a normal-
ized confusion matrix, in which the count values are replaced by normalized values
that represent the proportion of each class that is predicted correctly or incorrectly.
Figure 6.1: Normalized confusion matrix showing the proportion of correctly and
incorrectly classified samples for each class (3-label classification task)
with darker colours indicating higher accuracy.
==PAGE:51==
6.3 Best Models’ Performance
41
Figure 6.2: Normalized confusion matrix showing the proportion of correctly and
incorrectly classified samples for each class (4-label classification task)
with darker colours indicating higher accuracy.
==PAGE:52==
42
6 Results
Figure 6.3: Normalized confusion matrix showing the proportion of correctly and
incorrectly classified samples for each class (5-label classification task)
with darker colours indicating higher accuracy.
In evaluating the performance of the best proposed HAN-based architectures, (as
indicated by the bold text in Table 6.1, 6.2 and 6.1, the confusion matrix displays that
the main diagonal elements have the highest proportion relative to the off-diagonal
elements, indicating that the models are more often correctly predicting the user’s
app usage in the following week. Additionally, it is apparent that the models have an
easier time classifying the very low and high labels, while it is more challenging for
them to classify the in-between classes.
==PAGE:53==
6.4 Visualizing Sample Users’ Tokens and Weeks Attentions
43
6.4
Visualizing Sample Users’ Tokens and Weeks
Attentions
In order to streamline the presentation of results, from here we will focus on the
best-performing model for the 3-label classification task (as indicated in bold text in
Table 6.1). We chose to focus on this task as it yielded the highest accuracy, as seen
in Table 6.1, and the results of the other tasks and models are similar.
By utilizing HAN-based architectures in our tasks, we are able to gain deeper insight
into the user’s smartphone app usage by analyzing the attention mechanism weights
of the model in both the token and week hierarchies. Visualizing these attention
weights can give a deeper understanding of how much each input combination and
each week contributes to the final classification of a user app usage at a specific point
in time. In this section, we Visually present the selected model attention weights.
Sample users weeks and tokens attentions:
To make the visualization more
manageable, we only show the last two weeks before the prediction is made, as dis-
playing the attention weights of all weeks used before making a prediction would be
too large. Additionally, as we will see later the model primarily focuses on the last
weeks when making predictions.
Figures 6.4 and 6.5 illustrate the attention weights of the last two weeks, before mak-
ing a prediction, for a sample user who was correctly classified with low usage 6.4 for
the next week and for a sample user who was correctly classified with high usage 6.5
for the next week respectively. Both sample users are from the 3-label classification
task.
The figures 6.4 and 6.5 highlight the most important user week (in red) and cat-
egory(day x duration) (in green) before making the prediction, with darker shades
indicating higher importance. These visualizations demonstrate the model’s ability
to incorporate both inputs and weeks’ context within the user, enabling the model to
more accurately identify key information relevant to the classification task. We can
see the last week was important in predicting the high usage label. We can also see
that Game0(7X2) which means an unpopular game on Sunday with a duration of 2
minutes was important in predicting low usage.
==PAGE:54==
44
6 Results
Figure 6.4: Visualizing the output of the utilized model in the 3-label classification
task on a sample user who was correctly classified with Low Usage
for next week. Weeks in red and Tokens in green with the shape: cate-
gory(day x duration). (best viewed in color).
Figure 6.5: Visualizing the output of the utilized model in the 3-label classification
task on a sample user who was correctly classified with High Usage
for next week. Weeks in red and Tokens in green with the shape: cate-
gory(day x duration). (best viewed in color).
==PAGE:55==
6.5 App Categories Attentions
45
6.5
App Categories Attentions
We can also find the apps in the app’s vocabulary associated with the highest atten-
tion weights to identify the most essential apps for each label. In this section, we
present app categories’ attention independently from durations and days. Where, the
best-performing model from the 3-label classification task, seen in table 6.1, is utilized.
In order to identify the most important tokens for each label, we looked at the max-
imum category occurrence weight in the last week before making a prediction for a
specific label, with more than 75% certainty by the model. This approach was chosen
because it allows us to see the maximum effect that a single occurrence of a category
can have in the last week before the prediction. The focus on the last week was chosen
because, as we will see later, the model tends to give the highest weight to the last
weeks before making a prediction. Additionally, we sorted the category results based
on the median, as the categories have many outliers as seen in the figures 6.6, 6.7 and
6.8.
High usage apps categories attentions:
In Figure 6.6, we see the top 10 most important app categories for predicting high
usage.
It can be observed that popular communication app categories are at the
top, with about 25% of their weights being greater than 0.1.
Additionally, it is
apparent that some categories, such as the popular Game category, have outliers
in their weight values. This suggests that there are instances where the model has
assigned a particularly high weight to certain categories, in which the model thinks
they are relevant to the classification task, even though they do not occur frequently
in the data.
==PAGE:56==
46
6 Results
Figure 6.6: Box-plot visualization of attention weights for the app categories input
in the 3-label classification task (in order of importance) - High Usage.
Suﬀix 1 indicates a popular app while 0 denotes an unpopular among
users.
Medium usage apps categories attentions:
Figure 6.7 illustrates the top 10 significant categories, such as the unpopular Art &
Design app category, for predicting medium usage. It is observed that the categories
outliers, in this case, are generally smaller than the ones found in the high usage pre-
dictions. This suggests that the model is assigning higher weights to more consistent
categories in this classification task, compared to the high usage task.
==PAGE:57==
6.5 App Categories Attentions
47
Figure 6.7: Box-plot visualization of attention weights for the app categories input
in the 3-label classification task (In order of importance) - Medium
Usage. Suﬀix 1 indicates a popular app while 0 denotes an unpopular
among users.
Low usage apps categories attentions:
Figure 6.8 illustrates the top 10 key categories for predicting low usage. It can be
observed that popular communication app categories are at the top of the list, with
a median weight that is higher than those found in the cases of high and medium
usage. Additionally, it is noticed that the outliers, or instances where the model has
assigned a particularly high weight to a specific category, are also greater in this case
compared to the other cases of high and medium usage. This suggests that there are
instances where the model found these categories relevant to the classification task,
even though they do not occur frequently in the data. .
==PAGE:58==
48
6 Results
Figure 6.8: Box-plot visualization of attention weights for the app categories input
in the 3-label classification task (In order of importance) - Low usage.
1 suﬀix indicates a popular app while 0 denotes an unpopular among
users.
6.6
Weeks Attentions
In this section, we will analyze the attention weights assigned to different weeks by
the best-performing model from the 3-label classification task. The goal is to identify
which weeks are given the most weight by the model when making a prediction.
In order to understand the most crucial weeks leading up to a prediction, we analyzed
the attention weights of the first 10 and 20 weeks preceding the prediction of week
11 and 21 respectively. This is illustrated in figures 6.9 and 6.10. By considering
the first 10 and 20 weeks, we are able to gain insight into the weeks that are most
impactful for the prediction while also ensuring that the majority of test users have
weeks of information available, and the number of padded weeks is kept to a minimum.
==PAGE:59==
6.6 Weeks Attentions
49
Figure 6.9: Box-plot illustration of the attention weights assigned to the first 10
weeks by the model before making a prediction for week 11 in the 3-
label classification task.
Figure 6.10: Box-plot illustration of the attention weights assigned to the first 20
weeks by the model before making a prediction for week 21 in the 3-
label classification task.
The figures 6.9 and 6.10 demonstrate that the model assigns the majority of the
week’s attention weights to the last week before making a prediction, with the second
most important week being the one before it. This pattern is consistent across both
figures, showing that the model places high importance on the most recent weeks
==PAGE:60==
50
6 Results
when making predictions. However, it’s observed that the last week has outliers on
the low side, indicating that in some instances the model does not assign as much
weight to it as in others. Additionally, the high number of outliers of older weeks may
indicate that the model is assigning high weights to specific weeks based on unique
characteristics of the user’s usage during that time, rather than general patterns that
apply to all users.
6.7
Assessing Label Separation in Model Predictions
In order to better understand the structure of the model prediction embeddings made
by the 3-label classification best-performing model, bold text in table 6.1, and how
well the model separates the different labels, we plot, using t-SNE, the model predic-
tion embeddings.
The t-SNE (t-Distributed Stochastic Neighbor Embedding) plots are commonly used
as a visualization technique for visualizing the structure of embeddings generated by
a machine learning model. The t-SNE plot is able to map high-dimensional embed-
dings to a 2D space while preserving the local structure of the data [HR02].
==PAGE:61==
6.7 Assessing Label Separation in Model Predictions
51
Figure 6.11: The t-SNE visualization of the model prediction embeddings over 5000
weeks from the test data in the 3-label classification task. (best viewed
in color).
From the t-SNE plot in Figure 6.11, it is apparent that while the different classes are
somewhat separated, there is a degree of overlap or continuation between the middle
class and the other two labels.
This indicates that the model is having diﬀiculty
distinguishing between the middle (in-between) class and the other two classes.
==PAGE:62==
CHAPTER 7
Discussion
This chapter provides a summary and examination of the key results from our re-
search on building HAN-based architecture models to predict the label of the amount
of time a user will spend on the phone the following week. Where we try to connect
our findings to relevant literature in the field. However, to the best of our knowl-
edge, there has not been previous research similar to the one presented in this study.
As a result, we often form our own hypotheses based on the findings. The chapter
concludes by identifying the main limitations of the study and suggestions for future
work.
7.1
Discussions of Different Classification Tasks
We saw that using the proposed HAN-based architectures outperforms the baseline
models in all the classification tasks. It was evident that the benefits of using a HAN-
based architecture compared to the baseline model become more pronounced as the
number of labels in the classification task increases, as seen in tables 6.1, 6.2 and 6.3.
This suggests that HAN-based architectures may be more effective in handling more
complex classification tasks with a larger number of labels. We believe that the pro-
posed HAN-based architectures have the ability to learn a hierarchical representation
of the input data, allowing it to capture both daily and weekly information. By using
attention mechanisms, the model is able to selectively focus on the most important
parts of the input, which is particularly useful for app usage prediction, where there
may be a lot of irrelevant data. This agrees with what we saw in relevant literature
in the field [BLM22], [Yan+16] and [Gao+18]. Where utilizing the hierarchical rep-
resentations of problems give promising results.
7.2
Challenges in Classifying In-Between Labels:
Observations from Confusion Matrix and t-SNE Plot
As shown in the confusion matrices in figures 6.1, 6.2, and 6.3, the performance of
the models in identifying the very low and high labels was better than that of the
==PAGE:63==
7.2 Challenges in Classifying In-Between Labels: Observations from Confusion Matrix and t-SNE Plot
53
in-between labels. This suggests that the very low and high labels may be more dis-
tinct and easier for the model to differentiate from the others. This could be due to
the fact that the in-between labels share characteristics with both lower and higher
labels, as evident in the t-SNE plot of the 3-Label classification task in figure 6.11.
The overlap makes it challenging for the model to identify unique patterns or features
that differentiate the in-between classes from the others, especially since the label val-
ues were discretized using continuous bins, as discussed in chapter 4.
Analyzing the characteristics of the data points that the model is having diﬀiculty
classifying, and potentially identifying patterns or features that are causing the over-
lap between the classes, can help us to identify areas for improvement in the model,
such as adjusting the threshold for discretized the label values or incorporating addi-
tional features to help the model distinguish between the classes.
To further understand the continuation seen in the t-SNE plot figure 6.11, we plot the
last week before the prediction of a misclassified sample users from the 3-label classi-
fication task. We chose the last week as it was seen that the model tends to assign
these weeks with the highest attention weight for weeks, as seen in figure 6.9 and 6.10.
We start by visualizing the last week before prediction, where the true label was
medium usage and the prediction of the model was high usage.
Figure 7.1: Visualizing the output of the utilized model in the 3-label classification
task on a sample user who was misclassified with high usage instead
of medium for next week. Weeks in green and Tokens in red with the
shape: category(day x duration). (best viewed in color).
Upon examination of the user’s tokens, in figure 7.1, it became clear that this user is
on the higher end of the medium usage label. The user durations are seen to be high
in general, for example, the high usage of popular Movie/TV apps on days 4 and 3
==PAGE:64==
54
7 Discussion
which could have contributed to the model’s misclassification.
We continue by visualizing the last week before prediction, where the true label was
medium and the prediction of the model was low usage.
Figure 7.2: Visualizing the output of the utilized model in the 3-label classification
task on a sample user who was misclassified with low usage instead of
medium for next week.
Weeks in green and Tokens in red with the
shape: category(day x duration). (best viewed in color).
By examining the user’s tokens, it is clear that this user is on the lower end of the
medium usage label. The user app durations are low in general. With many occur-
rences of News, tools and weather apps.
The two figures, 7.1 and 7.2, of sample users, highlight the fact that the in-between
label has characteristics that overlap with both the very low and high labels, seen
also in the t-SNE plot, particularly since the usage values were discretized by uti-
lizing continuous bins. This imposes the need for both a more effective method of
discretizing the user app usage values and analyzing the features embedding in order
to improve the model’s classification accuracy.
7.3
Analysis of Patterns in App Usage Predictions
The model was observed to use certain general patterns in its predictions, such as
assigning more importance to the last day of each week in predicting app usage for
the following week, as seen in Figures 6.5 and 6.4. Additionally, important app cate-
gories with low duration were found to be important in predicting low usage, as seen
in Figure 6.4, where popular communication apps with low usage duration on the last
==PAGE:65==
7.4 Investigating the Importance of App Categories in High Usage Classification: Analysis of Outliers and
Possible Causes
55
day of the week were important in predicting low usage. Similarly, important app
categories with high duration were found to be important in predicting high usage,
as seen in Figure 6.5, where popular communication apps with high usage duration
on the last day of the week were important in predicting high usage.
The significance of the last day of the week in predictions could be attributed to sev-
eral factors. One possibility is that the last day of the week may be a better indicator
of an individual’s future app usage habits as it captures their behaviour just before
a new week starts, which could be a time when they are more likely to be making
plans for the upcoming week. Furthermore, the last day of the week may also be
a more accurate indicator of an individual’s overall app usage habits as it captures
their behaviour over a longer period of time, given that the model utilizes the GRU
hidden states of each input in a sequential manner to calculate the attention weights,
and the last day of a week hidden state would contain information from all of the
previous days.
The model is possibly identifying a correlation between the presence of certain im-
portant app categories with low usage duration and low usage in the following week.
This could be because low duration usage of these important app categories is an
indication of a change in the user’s habits or behaviour, which in turn predicts lower
phone usage in the following week [AC17].
7.4
Investigating the Importance of App Categories in
High Usage Classification: Analysis of Outliers and
Possible Causes
Before we start the discussion about attentions weights, It’s worth noting that the
attention weights are learned during the training process and it’s important to take
into account that the attention weights are relative values, and even small absolute
values could be meaningful as the model is comparing them to other small absolute
values.
Our analysis of the important categories used by the model to classify high usage
shows that popular Communication, Social, Movie/TV, and Game categories, as seen
in Figure 6.6, are particularly important, which aligns with the previous research in
the field [MW18]. However, it is also apparent that these categories have a lot of
outliers in their weight values, suggesting that there are instances where the model
assigns a particularly high weight to certain categories, even though they do not occur
frequently in the data. This could be an indication of the category is particularly
important for classifying high usage.
==PAGE:66==
56
7 Discussion
It is also possible that these outliers are due to errors or noise in the data. As we
previously discussed in chapter 4, there were a small number of records in the users’
duration feature where the duration sublist added up to more than one hour, even
though we addressed this issue by excluding all information of the corresponding
hours. It is possible that some apps in the original data were recorded as in use at
the same time, resulting in overlapping activities that added up to less than an hour
and causing these outliers to appear.
7.5
Investigating the Importance of App Categories in
Low Usage Prediction: The Role of Duration
Our analysis of the important categories used by the model to classify low usage
reveals that popular Communication and Social categories, as well as unpopular Game
and Communication app categories, are particularly important, as seen in 6.8. We
believe that the model assigns high weight to these categories when they are used
for a short duration as discussed in 7.3 and shown in figure 6.4. Furthermore, it is
apparent that the outliers, or instances where the model has assigned a particularly
high weight to a specific category, are also more prevalent in this case compared to the
high usage case. This could indicate that these categories are particularly important
for accurately classifying low usage, particularly when the duration of usage is short.
7.6
Exploring the Role of Popular vs Unpopular App
Categories in Predicting High Usage: An Analysis
of the 4 Most Important App Categories
To further understand the contribution of popular vs unpopular app categories in pre-
dicting high usage the following week, we plot the 4 most important app categories
seen in Figure 6.6 for popular and unpopular apps.
==PAGE:67==
7.6 Exploring the Role of Popular vs Unpopular App Categories in Predicting High Usage: An Analysis of the
4 Most Important App Categories
57
Figure 7.3: Box-plot visualization of attention weights for selected popular and un-
popular app categories input in the 3-label classification task - High
usage. Suﬀix 1 indicates a popular app while 0 denotes an unpopular
among users.
The figure shows that in general popular apps are more important in the prediction
of high usage the following week. this is perhaps because this app tends to be more
engaging than unpopular app [MW18].
Moreover, it’s seen that the unpopular Game apps category is somewhat a bit more
important than popular games. It is possible that the unpopular Game apps category
is more important than popular games in predicting higher time spent on apps the
following week because the model recognizes that the presence of unpopular Game
apps is indicative of a specific behaviour or interest in the user, which in turn predicts
higher phone usage in the following week. This could be because unpopular Game
apps are specialized games that require more dedicated and prolonged usage, resulting
in higher phone usage the following week. Additionally, it could also be possible that
the users who tend to use unpopular Game apps are more likely to be heavy gamers
in general, and hence, the model is recognizing this pattern.
==PAGE:68==
58
7 Discussion
7.7
Exploring the Role of Recent Weeks in Predicting
App Usage: An Analysis of Attention Weights
We have seen in Figures 6.9 and 6.10 that the model assigns the majority of the
week’s attention weights to the last week before making a prediction. This suggests
that the model is using the recent history of the user’s app usage to make predictions,
rather than relying on patterns that may have occurred further in the past. This is
because it is likely that the information from the last week is the most relevant in
determining the user’s app usage in the following week. Moreover, The weeks’ GRU
hidden states, utilized to calculate the weeks’ attention weights, contains information
about the previous weeks, and the last week’s hidden state contains the most recent
information about the user’s app usage habits. This recent information is likely more
relevant for making a prediction about the user’s app usage in the following week,
compared to information from previous weeks.
==PAGE:69==
CHAPTER 8
Conclusion
In conclusion, the research presented in this thesis aimed to build a novel multivari-
ate time series forecasting model to predict the label of the amount of time a user
will spend on their smartphone the following week using HAN-based deep learning
architectures.
We discovered that the HAN-based architectures proposed in this study performed
better than the baseline models in all classification tasks. This is attributed to the
attention mechanisms and hierarchical representation learning capabilities of these
architectures, which allow them to selectively focus on the most important aspects of
the input data, making the proposed architecture particularly effective for predicting
app usage.
It was evident that the benefits of using the proposed HAN-based architectures com-
pared to baseline models become more pronounced as the number of labels in the
classification task increases. This suggests that the proposed HAN-based architec-
tures are more effective in handling more complex classification tasks with a higher
number of labels.
Our findings showed that the model was more successful in identifying low and high
usage labels, as compared to in-between usage labels.
This is likely because the
intermediate labels had characteristics that overlapped with both lower and higher
labels. This highlights the potential for the model to be used as a tool for identifying
problematic smartphone use. However, in order to improve the model’s classification
accuracy, it is necessary to develop more effective methods for discretizing user app
usage values and analyzing the features embedded within the data.
By utilizing HAN-based architectures, we were able to gain a deeper understanding
of the user’s smartphone app usage by visualizing and analyzing the attention mech-
anism weights of the models.
We found that different combinations of inputs are assigned different important for
weekly predictions and that the important app categories, such as popular Communi-
cation and Social categories, for making predictions are similar across different labels.
However, the duration and day associated with these app categories play a crucial
==PAGE:70==
60
8 Conclusion
role in the prediction. we saw those important app categories with low duration were
found to be important in predicting low usage. Similarly, important app categories
with high duration were found to be important in predicting high usage.
We saw that the proposed models used certain general patterns in their predictions,
such as assigning more importance to the last day of each week and the most recent
week.
In terms of app categories, we found that popular Communication, Social, Movie/TV,
and Game apps were particularly important in classifying high usage, and that pop-
ular app categories were generally more important in classifying high usage than
unpopular app categories.
The research presented in this thesis has provided a deeper insight into the user’s
smartphone app usage and the possible factors that can predict the usage. However,
it’s limited by the size of the dataset, and the range of variables and it’s not general-
izable to the entire population. Further research is required to validate the findings
and improve the model’s prediction accuracy.
8.1
Limitations
In this research, we encountered some limitations, such as:
• The study is based on the provided dataset and the results may not generalize
to other situations or populations, as seen in chapter 4 in figure 4.7.
• The study does not take into account other external factors that may influence
app usage like the users’ location and mood. According to the literature users’
location can be a very good predictor of app usage [Yan+12],
• In the original data, there were instances where multiple apps were recorded
as being in use simultaneously, leading to overlapping activities. During the
previous preprocessing aggregated, prior to having the data, the time was ag-
gregated by app category, which resulted in some categories having a total time
for a specific hour that exceeded one hour. To address this issue, we excluded
any hours where a category added up to more than one hour. However, it is
still possible that there may be cases of overlapping activities that add up to
less than an hour, introducing noise into the dataset.
• The process of preparing the data for each classification task using different
random seeds for the train/validation/test split and training various architec-
tures on the resulting splits is time-consuming, which hinders our ability to
thoroughly fine-tune the model parameters.
==PAGE:71==
8.2 Feature work
61
8.2
Feature work
There are several potential areas of future work that could be done based on the
findings of this research. Some possible options and directions include:
• Investigating the use of an unsupervised pretraining step on unlabeled data us-
ing a modified autoencoder structure. This can be beneficial as it can improve
the overall performance of the model by allowing it to learn a better representa-
tion of the data before being fine-tuned on the labeled data. This can help the
model to generalize better to new data and improve its classification accuracy
[Gao+18].
• Investigating the use of Pretrained word embeddings, such as those created
using Word2Vec [Ron14] or GloVe [PSM14].
• Investigating the use of more advanced pre-processing techniques, such as data
augmentation [Fen+21], to improve the model’s robustness to noise in the input
data.
• Investigating a more effective way of discretizing the user app usage values and
analyzing the features embedding in order to improve the model’s classification
accuracy.
• Investigating the use of other types of data, such as utilising location data more
from the phone, to improve the model’s ability to make predictions about app
usage [Yan+12].
• Developing a more detailed understanding of the specific features that make
certain apps more engaging than others, in order to better understand the
underlying causes of app usage patterns.
• Investigating the use of other types of neural network architectures, such as
transformer networks, to compare the proposed model’s performance.
• Exploring the use of other types of attention mechanisms, such as Multi-Head-
attention, to see if they improve the model’s ability to identify important fea-
tures in the input data.
==PAGE:72==
APPENDIX A
Appendix
A.1
Figures
A.1.1
Distribution of Labels in the 3-label Classification Task
Figure A.1: Distribution of user usage labels over different splits. Where the tar-
get values (usage) are discretizing into three labels: 1 (low usage), 2
(medium usage), 3 (high usage). 0 stands for missing/padded target
label. It’s seen that the labels are almost equally distributed over the
splits.
A.1.2
Hyperparameters Tuning
The following hyperparameters were tuned on the validation datasets, as seen in table
A.2:
• size of word embeddings: 100, default 200;
• number of hidden GRU used in each bidirectional RNN layer: 32, default 64
==PAGE:73==
A.2 Tables
63
• size of hidden layer in attention mechanism: 100, default 200
A.2
Tables
A.2.1
Experiments Parameters
Table A.1:
Table of the parameters used in the experiments, including the max-
imum number of weeks (max_tokens) and the maximum number of
tokens (max_tokens) for each random seed..
seed
max_weeks
max_tokens
1
65
67
2
65
67
3
64
66
4
64
67
5
64
66
A.2.2
Hyperparameters tuning
Table A.2:
Hyperparameters tuning accuracy performance: Mean ± standard de-
viation of accuracy on the validation.
.
Accuracy(3-Label)
Accuracy(4-Label)
Accuracy(5-Label)
HAN (Default)
76.1±0.004
67.9±0.003
61.1±0.002
HAN (with Embed 100)
76.0±0.003
67.8±0.003
61.2±0.004
HAN (with GRU 32)
76.0±0.002
67.8±0.003
61.1±0.003
HAN (with Att 100)
76.0±0.003
67.8±0.004
61.5±0.003
==PAGE:74==
APPENDIX B
Code
1 # Libraries
2 import numpy as np
3 import torch
4 import torch.nn.functional as F
5 from torch import nn
6
7
8 # Setup
9 use_cuda = torch.cuda.is_available()
10
11 # Position Encoding Function
12 def getPositionEncoding(seq_len, d, n=10000):
13
"""
14
https://machinelearningmastery.com/a-gentle-introduction -to-positional -
encoding-in-transformer -models-part-1/
15
"""
16
P = np.zeros((seq_len, d))
17
for k in range(seq_len):
18
for i in np.arange(int(d/2)):
19
denominator = np.power(n, 2*i/d)
20
P[k, 2*i] = np.sin(k/denominator)
21
P[k, 2*i+1] = np.cos(k/denominator)
22
return P
23
24
25 # Embedding Matrix Function
26 def create_embedding_matrix(vocab_size, durs_size, days_size, embed_dim):
27
Cats_w = getPositionEncoding(seq_len=vocab_size, d=embed_dim)
28
Durs_w = getPositionEncoding(seq_len=durs_size , d=embed_dim)
29
Days_w = getPositionEncoding(seq_len=days_size , d=embed_dim)
30
embedding_matrix = {}
31
embedding_matrix['Cats'] = Cats_w
32
embedding_matrix['Durs'] = Durs_w
33
embedding_matrix['Days'] = Days_w
34
return embedding_matrix
35
36
37 # FC combine Net
38 class combineNet(nn.Module):
39
"""
40
Class to combine the two attentions networks
41
"""
42
def __init__(self, input_size, output_size):
==PAGE:75==
B Code
65
43
super().__init__()
44
self.fc = nn.Linear(input_size, output_size)
45
46
def forward(self,x):
47
x = self.fc(x)
48
return x
49
50
51 # Attention
52 class AttentionWithContext(nn.Module):
53
"""
54
Attention Networks with Masked Softmax
55
"""
56
def __init__(self, input_dim, hidden_dim=100):
57
super(AttentionWithContext , self).__init__()
58
self.attn
= nn.Linear(input_dim, hidden_dim)
59
self.contx = nn.Linear(hidden_dim, 1, bias=False)
60
# nn.init.xavier_uniform_(self.attn.weight)
61
# nn.init.xavier_uniform_(self.contx.weight)
62
63
def forward(self, inp, mask_words=None, mask_sents= None):
64
65
if mask_words is not None:
66
# get mask
67
mask = mask_words[0]
68
if use_cuda: mask = mask.cuda()
69
where = mask_words[1]
70
# Attention
71
u = torch.tanh_(self.attn(inp))
72
# Contex
73
v = self.contx(u).squeeze(2)
74
# apply mask so the model dosent pay attention to the padding
75
# as the exp of very larg neg. num. is zero
76
v = v.masked_fill(mask==0, -1e10)
77
# masked
78
# normalized importance weights
79
a = F.softmax(v, dim=1)
80
# expand with dummy dim. for pytorch broadcasting
81
a = a.unsqueeze(2)
82
# The sentence/doc vector
83
s = (a * inp).sum(1)
84
# apply mask for whole padded weeks
85
for i in where: s[i] = 0
86
# return
87
return a.permute(0, 2, 1), s
88
89
elif mask_sents is not None:
90
# get mask
91
cor_uesrs = mask_sents[0]
92
cor_weeks = mask_sents[1]
93
# Attention
94
u = torch.tanh_(self.attn(inp))
95
# Contex
96
v = self.contx(u).squeeze(2)
97
# apply mask so the model dosent pay attention to the padding weeks
==PAGE:76==
66
B Code
98
v[cor_uesrs,cor_weeks]= -1e10
99
# masked
100
# normalized importance weights
101
a = F.softmax(v, dim=1)
102
# expand with dummy dim. for pytorch broadcasting
103
a = a.unsqueeze(2)
104
# The week vector
105
s = (a * inp).sum(1)
106
# return
107
return a.permute(0, 2, 1), s
108
109
else:
110
# Attention
111
u = torch.tanh_(self.attn(inp))
112
# Contex
113
v = self.contx(u).squeeze(2)
114
# masked
115
# normalized importance weights
116
a = F.softmax(v, dim=1)
117
# expand with dummy dim. for pytorch broadcasting
118
a = a.unsqueeze(2)
119
# The week vector
120
s = (a * inp).sum(1)
121
# return
122
return a.permute(0, 2, 1), s
123
124
125 # Token-Level Attention Net
126 class WordAttnNet(nn.Module):
127
"""
128
Token-Level Attention Networks
129
"""
130
131
def __init__(
132
self,
133
vocab_size ,
134
durs_size,
135
days_size,
136
maxlen_sent ,
137
embed_dim=200,
138
hidden_dim=64,
139
att_hidden_dim=100,
140
embed_mat=None,
141
embed_mat_tag=None,
142
embed_mat_train=False,
143
padding_idx=0,
144
RNN='GRU',
145
inputs_attention= True,
146
):
147
148
super(WordAttnNet , self).__init__()
149
150
# Attributes
151
self.padding_idx = padding_idx
152
self.RNN = RNN
==PAGE:77==
B Code
67
153
self.inputs_attention = inputs_attention
154
155
if inputs_attention:
156
# Embed
157
if isinstance(embed_mat, dict):
158
self.input_embed = nn.Embedding(vocab_size, embed_dim,
padding_idx=padding_idx)
159
self.input_embed.weight = nn.Parameter(torch.Tensor(embed_mat[
embed_mat_tag]))
160
self.input_embed.weight.requires_grad = embed_mat_train
161
self.input_days = nn.Embedding(days_size, embed_dim,
padding_idx=padding_idx)
162
self.input_days.weight = nn.Parameter(torch.Tensor(embed_mat['
Days']))
163
self.input_days.weight.requires_grad = embed_mat_train
164
else:
165
self.input_embed = nn.Embedding(vocab_size, embed_dim,
padding_idx=padding_idx)
166
self.input_days
= nn.Embedding(days_size, embed_dim,
padding_idx=padding_idx)
167
168
else:
169
# Embed
170
if isinstance(embed_mat, dict):
171
self.input_cats = nn.Embedding(vocab_size, embed_dim,
padding_idx=padding_idx)
172
self.input_cats.weight = nn.Parameter(torch.Tensor(embed_mat['
Cats']))
173
self.input_cats.weight.requires_grad = embed_mat_train
174
self.input_durs = nn.Embedding(durs_size, embed_dim,
padding_idx=padding_idx)
175
self.input_durs.weight = nn.Parameter(torch.Tensor(embed_mat['
Durs']))
176
self.input_durs.weight.requires_grad = embed_mat_train
177
self.input_days = nn.Embedding(days_size, embed_dim,
padding_idx=padding_idx)
178
self.input_days.weight = nn.Parameter(torch.Tensor(embed_mat['
Days']))
179
self.input_days.weight.requires_grad = embed_mat_train
180
else:
181
self.input_cats = nn.Embedding(vocab_size, embed_dim,
padding_idx=padding_idx)
182
self.input_durs = nn.Embedding(durs_size, embed_dim,
padding_idx=padding_idx)
183
self.input_days = nn.Embedding(days_size, embed_dim,
padding_idx=padding_idx)
184
# RNN
185
if RNN == 'LSTM':
186
self.rnn = nn.LSTM(embed_dim, hidden_dim, bidirectional=True,
batch_first=True)
187
elif RNN == 'GRU':
188
self.rnn = nn.GRU(embed_dim, hidden_dim, bidirectional=True,
batch_first=True)
189
else:
190
assert RNN == 'GRU', 'RNN should be "GRU" or "LSTM"'
==PAGE:78==
68
B Code
191
# Attention
192
self.word_attn = AttentionWithContext(hidden_dim * 2, att_hidden_dim)
193
194
# create mask
195
def _create_mask_(self, x):
196
mask = x != self.padding_idx
197
where = np.where(mask.cpu().sum(1).numpy()==self.padding_idx)[0]
198
return (mask, where)
199
200
def forward(self,X, Z, h_n, Y=None):
201
# create mask
202
mask_words = self._create_mask_(X)
203
# init Positions
204
pos_range = torch.tensor(range(X.shape[1]))
205
if use_cuda: pos_range = pos_range.cuda()
206
# Word Embeddings:
207
if self.inputs_attention:
208
embed = self.input_embed(X.long())
209
days
= self.input_days (Z.long())
210
embed = embed + days
211
else:
212
assert Y is not None, 'As Y is passed inputs_attention should be
False'
213
cats = self.input_cats(X.long())
214
durs = self.input_durs(Y.long())
215
days = self.input_days (Z.long())
216
embed = cats + durs + days
217
# GRU:
218
if self.RNN == 'LSTM':
219
h_t, h_n = self.rnn(embed, (h_n[0], h_n[1]))
220
elif self.RNN == 'GRU':
221
h_t, h_n = self.rnn(embed, h_n)
222
# Attention
223
a, s = self.word_attn(h_t, mask_words=mask_words)
224
return a, s.unsqueeze(1), h_n
225
226
227 # Week-Level Attention Network
228 class WeekAttnNet(nn.Module):
229
def __init__(self, word_hidden_dim=64, sent_hidden_dim=64, att_hidden_dim
=100, padding_idx=0, RNN='GRU'):
230
"""
231
Week-Level Attention Networks
232
"""
233
super(WeekAttnNet , self).__init__()
234
# init
235
self.RNN = RNN
236
# RNN
237
if RNN == 'LSTM':
238
self.rnn = nn.LSTM(
239
word_hidden_dim *2,
240
sent_hidden_dim ,
241
bidirectional=True, # True
<---
242
batch_first=True,
243
)
==PAGE:79==
B Code
69
244
elif RNN == 'GRU':
245
self.rnn = nn.GRU(
246
word_hidden_dim *2,
247
sent_hidden_dim ,
248
bidirectional=True, # True
<---
249
batch_first=True
250
)
251
252
self.sent_attn = AttentionWithContext(sent_hidden_dim * 2,
att_hidden_dim) # *2
<---
253
254
255
# create mask
256
def _create_mask_(self, x):
257
mask_sents = np.where(x.cpu().sum(2).detach().numpy()==0) # cord_1:
users, cord_2:weeks
258
return mask_sents
259
260
def forward(self, X):
261
# create mask
262
mask_sents = self._create_mask_(X)
263
# GRU:
264
h_t, h_n = self.rnn(X)
265
# Attention
266
a, v = self.sent_attn(h_t, mask_sents=mask_sents)
267
return a.permute(0,2,1), v
268
269 class HierAttnNet(nn.Module):
270
def __init__(
271
self,
272
maxlen_sent ,
273
maxlen_doc ,
274
num_class,
275
vocab_size =122,
276
days_size=8,
277
durs_size=1441,
278
embed_dim=200,
279
word_hidden_dim=64,
280
sent_hidden_dim=64,
281
att_hidden_dim=100,
282
padding_idx=0,
283
RNN='GRU',
284
window=None,
285
last_drop=0.0,
286
embed_mat=True,
287
embed_mat_train=False,
288
inputs_attention=True,
289
combine_net= False,
290
):
291
"""
292
Hierarchical Attention Networks for Weekly User App usage
classification
293
"""
294
super(HierAttnNet , self).__init__()
295
==PAGE:80==
70
B Code
296
# attributes
297
self.word_hidden_dim = word_hidden_dim
298
self.num_class = num_class
299
self.RNN = RNN
300
self.combine_net = combine_net
301
self.window = window
302
self.inputs_attention = inputs_attention
303
304
# input check
305
if embed_mat==False:
306
assert embed_mat_train==False, 'embed_mat is needed for
embed_mat_train'
307
if inputs_attention == False:
308
assert combine_net == False, 'inputs_attention is needed for
combine_hidden_dim'
309
if embed_mat_train==True:
310
assert embed_mat==True, 'embed_mat is needed for embed_mat_train'
311
if combine_net:
312
assert inputs_attention==True, 'inputs_attention is needed for
combine_hidden_dim'
313
314
# init embedding matrix
315
if embed_mat:
316
embed_mat = create_embedding_matrix(
317
vocab_size=vocab_size,
318
durs_size=durs_size,
319
days_size=days_size,
320
embed_dim=embed_dim
321
)
322
else: embed_mat = None
323
324
# word Net
325
if self.inputs_attention:
326
self.wordattnnet_cats = WordAttnNet(
327
vocab_size=vocab_size,
328
maxlen_sent=maxlen_sent ,
329
hidden_dim=word_hidden_dim ,
330
att_hidden_dim=att_hidden_dim ,
331
embed_dim=embed_dim,
332
embed_mat=embed_mat,
333
embed_mat_tag='Cats',
334
embed_mat_train=embed_mat_train ,
335
padding_idx=padding_idx ,
336
RNN = RNN,
337
inputs_attention=inputs_attention ,
338
days_size=days_size,
339
durs_size=durs_size,
340
341
)
342
343
self.wordattnnet_durs = WordAttnNet(
344
vocab_size=durs_size,
345
maxlen_sent=maxlen_sent ,
346
hidden_dim=word_hidden_dim ,
347
att_hidden_dim=att_hidden_dim ,
==PAGE:81==
B Code
71
348
embed_dim=embed_dim,
349
embed_mat=embed_mat,
350
embed_mat_tag='Durs',
351
embed_mat_train=embed_mat_train ,
352
padding_idx=padding_idx ,
353
RNN = RNN,
354
inputs_attention= inputs_attention ,
355
days_size=days_size,
356
durs_size=durs_size,
357
358
)
359
else:
360
self.wordattnnet = WordAttnNet(
361
vocab_size=durs_size,
362
maxlen_sent=maxlen_sent ,
363
hidden_dim=word_hidden_dim ,
364
att_hidden_dim=att_hidden_dim ,
365
embed_dim=embed_dim,
366
embed_mat=embed_mat,
367
embed_mat_train=embed_mat_train ,
368
padding_idx=padding_idx ,
369
RNN = RNN,
370
inputs_attention= inputs_attention ,
371
days_size=days_size,
372
durs_size=durs_size,
373
)
374
# combine_net
375
if self.combine_net:
376
self.combine_Net = combineNet(
377
input_size
= 2*2*word_hidden_dim ,
378
output_size = 2*word_hidden_dim ,
379
)
380
# sent net
381
self.weekattnnet = WeekAttnNet(
382
word_hidden_dim=word_hidden_dim ,
383
sent_hidden_dim=sent_hidden_dim ,
384
att_hidden_dim=att_hidden_dim ,
385
padding_idx=padding_idx ,
386
RNN = RNN
387
)
388
# drop
389
self.ld = nn.Dropout(p=last_drop)
390
# fc
391
self.fc = nn.Linear(sent_hidden_dim * 2, num_class) # *2
<---
392
393
def forward(self, X,Y,Z , get_attention_weights = False):
394
# Permute
395
x = X.permute(1, 0, 2) #sent, user, words
396
y = Y.permute(1, 0, 2)
397
z = Z.permute(1, 0, 2)
398
399
# init hidden state
400
if self.RNN == 'LSTM':
401
word_h_n = nn.init.zeros_(torch.Tensor(2, X.shape[0], self.
word_hidden_dim))
==PAGE:82==
72
B Code
402
word_c_n = nn.init.zeros_(torch.Tensor(2, X.shape[0], self.
word_hidden_dim))
403
if use_cuda:
404
word_h_n = word_h_n.cuda()
405
word_c_n = word_c_n.cuda()
406
if self.inputs_attention:
407
word_h_n_cats = (word_h_n, word_c_n)
408
word_h_n_durs = (word_h_n.clone(), word_c_n.clone())
409
elif self.RNN == 'GRU':
410
word_h_n = nn.init.zeros_(torch.Tensor(2, X.shape[0], self.
word_hidden_dim))
411
if use_cuda: word_h_n = word_h_n.cuda()
412
if self.inputs_attention:
413
word_h_n_cats = word_h_n
414
word_h_n_durs = word_h_n.clone()
415
416
# init: a, s and outputs
417
word_a_list , word_s_list = [], []
418
outs = torch.zeros((x.shape[0], X.shape[0], self.num_class))
419
if use_cuda: outs = outs.cuda()
420
if get_attention_weights: self.doc_a_list = []
421
422
# loop over weeks
423
for i in range (x.shape[0]):
424
# Week representation
425
if self.inputs_attention:
426
word_a_cats , word_s_cats , word_h_n_cats = self.wordattnnet_cats
(x[i], z[i], word_h_n_cats)
427
word_a_durs , word_s_durs , word_h_n_durs = self.wordattnnet_durs
(y[i], z[i], word_h_n_durs)
428
else:
429
word_a, word_s, word_h_n = self.wordattnnet(X=x[i], Y=y[i], Z=z
[i], h_n=word_h_n)
430
# save weights for vis only
431
if get_attention_weights:
432
if self.inputs_attention:
433
word_a = (word_a_cats + word_a_durs)/2
434
word_a_list.append(word_a)
435
self.sent_a = torch.cat(word_a_list , 1)
436
# save week
437
if self.inputs_attention:
438
if self.combine_net:
439
word_s = self.combine_Net(torch.cat([word_s_cats ,
word_s_durs],dim=2))
440
else:
441
word_s = (word_s_cats + word_s_durs)/2
442
word_s_list.append(word_s)
443
444
# get sentences
445
if self.window is not None:
446
if len(word_s_list) > self.window:
447
sent_s = torch.cat(word_s_list[-self.window:], 1)
448
else:
449
sent_s = torch.cat(word_s_list , 1)
450
else:
==PAGE:83==
B Code
73
451
sent_s = torch.cat(word_s_list , 1)
452
453
doc_a, doc_s = self.weekattnnet(sent_s)
454
455
# save weights for vis only
456
if get_attention_weights:
457
self.doc_a_list.append(doc_a.squeeze(2))
458
459
# drop out
460
doc_s = self.ld(doc_s)
461
462
# Logits
463
out = self.fc(doc_s)
464
outs[i] = out
465
466
return outs
467
468
469 class RNNAttn(nn.Module):
470
"""
471
Standard RNN network for classification
472
"""
473
474
def __init__(
475
self,
476
maxlen,
477
vocab_size ,
478
durs_size,
479
days_size,
480
num_class,
481
padding_idx=0,
482
embed_dim=200,
483
hidden_dim=64,
484
RNN='LSTM',
485
embedding_matrix=False,
486
embed_trainable=False,
487
init_rnn=False,
488
):
489
490
super(RNNAttn, self).__init__()
491
492
# attributes
493
self.num_class = num_class
494
self.hidden_dim = hidden_dim
495
self.RNN = RNN
496
self.init_rnn=init_rnn
497
498
# init embedding matrix
499
if embedding_matrix:
500
embedding_matrix = create_embedding_matrix(
501
vocab_size=vocab_size,
502
durs_size=durs_size,
503
days_size=days_size,
504
embed_dim=embed_dim
505
)
==PAGE:84==
74
B Code
506
else:
507
embedding_matrix = None
508
509
# Embed
510
if isinstance(embedding_matrix , dict):
511
self.cats_embed = nn.Embedding(vocab_size, embed_dim, padding_idx=
padding_idx)
512
self.cats_embed.weight = nn.Parameter(torch.Tensor(embedding_matrix
['Cats']))
513
self.cats_embed.weight.requires_grad = embed_trainable
514
self.durs_embed = nn.Embedding(durs_size, embed_dim, padding_idx=
padding_idx)
515
self.durs_embed.weight = nn.Parameter(torch.Tensor(embedding_matrix
['Durs']))
516
self.durs_embed.weight.requires_grad = embed_trainable
517
self.days_embed = nn.Embedding(days_size, embed_dim, padding_idx=
padding_idx)
518
self.days_embed.weight = nn.Parameter(torch.Tensor(embedding_matrix
['Days']))
519
self.days_embed.weight.requires_grad = embed_trainable
520
521
else:
522
self.cats_embed = nn.Embedding(vocab_size, embed_dim, padding_idx=
padding_idx)
523
self.durs_embed = nn.Embedding(durs_size , embed_dim, padding_idx=
padding_idx)
524
self.days_embed = nn.Embedding(days_size , embed_dim, padding_idx=
padding_idx)
525
526
# RNN
527
if RNN == 'LSTM':
528
self.rnn = nn.LSTM(
529
embed_dim,
530
hidden_dim ,
531
bidirectional=True,
532
batch_first=True,
533
)
534
535
elif RNN == 'GRU':
536
self.rnn = nn.GRU(
537
embed_dim,
538
hidden_dim ,
539
bidirectional=True,
540
batch_first=True
541
)
542
543
# FC
544
self.fc = nn.Linear(hidden_dim * 2, num_class)
545
546
def forward(self, X,Y,Z ):
547
x = X.permute(1, 0, 2) #sent, user, words
548
y = Y.permute(1, 0, 2)
549
z = Z.permute(1, 0, 2)
550
batch_size = x.shape[1]
551
if self.init_rnn:
==PAGE:85==
B Code
75
552
if self.RNN == 'LSTM':
553
h = nn.init.zeros_(torch.Tensor(self.num_layers*2, X.shape[0],
self.hidden_dim))
554
if use_cuda: h = h.cuda()
555
c = nn.init.zeros_(torch.Tensor(self.num_layers*2, X.shape[0],
self.hidden_dim))
556
if use_cuda: c = c.cuda()
557
558
elif self.RNN == 'GRU':
559
h = nn.init.zeros_(torch.Tensor(self.num_layers*2, X.shape[0],
self.hidden_dim))
560
if use_cuda: h =h.cuda()
561
562
outs = torch.zeros((x.shape[0], X.shape[0], self.num_class))
563
if use_cuda: outs = outs.cuda()
564
565
for i in range (x.shape[0]):
566
# token Embeddings:
567
cats = self.cats_embed(x[i].long())
568
durs = self.durs_embed(y[i].long())
569
days = self.days_embed(z[i].long())
570
embed = cats + durs + days
571
572
if self.init_rnn:
573
if self.RNN == 'LSTM':
574
o, (h, c) = self.rnn(embed, (h, c))
575
out = torch.cat((h[-2], h[-1]), dim=1)
576
elif self.RNN == 'GRU':
577
o, h = self.rnn(embed, h)
578
out = torch.cat((h[-2], h[-1]), dim=1)
579
else:
580
if self.RNN == 'LSTM':
581
o, (h, c) = self.rnn(embed)
582
out = torch.cat((h[-2], h[-1]), dim=1)
583
elif self.RNN == 'GRU':
584
o, h = self.rnn(embed)
585
out = torch.cat((h[-2], h[-1]), dim=1)
586
587
out = self.fc(out)
588
outs[i] = out
589
return outs
==PAGE:86==
Bibliography
[AC17]
Samaneh Aminikhanghahi and Diane J Cook. “A survey of methods for
time series change point detection.” In: Knowledge and information sys-
tems 51.2 (2017), pages 339–367.
[And+16]
Ionut Andone et al. “How age and gender affect smartphone usage.” In:
Proceedings of the 2016 ACM international joint conference on pervasive
and ubiquitous computing: adjunct. 2016, pages 9–12.
[BCB14]
Dzmitry Bahdanau, Kyunghyun Cho, and Yoshua Bengio. “Neural ma-
chine translation by jointly learning to align and translate.” In: arXiv
preprint arXiv:1409.0473 (2014).
[BLM22]
Hongjing Bi, Lilei Lu, and Yizhen Meng. “Hierarchical attention network
for multivariate time series long-term forecasting.” In: Applied Intelligence
(2022), pages 1–12.
[Bri+17]
Denny Britz et al. “Massive exploration of neural machine translation
architectures.” In: arXiv preprint arXiv:1703.03906 (2017).
[Bro16a]
Jason Brownlee. Deep learning with Python: develop deep learning models
on Theano and TensorFlow using Keras. Machine Learning Mastery, 2016.
[Bro16b]
Jason Brownlee. Machine learning mastery with Python: understand your
data, create accurate models, and work projects end-to-end. Machine
Learning Mastery, 2016.
[Bro17a]
Jason Brownlee. “Deep learning for natural language processing.” In: Ma-
chine Learning Mystery, Vermont, Australia 322 (2017).
[Bro17b]
Jason Brownlee. Introduction to time series forecasting with python: how
to prepare data and develop models to predict the future. Machine Learning
Mastery, 2017.
[Bro22]
Jason Brownlee. Building Transformer Models With Attention. Machine
Learning Mastery, 2022.
[Cho+14]
Kyunghyun Cho et al. “Learning phrase representations using RNN encoder-
decoder for statistical machine translation.” In: arXiv preprint arXiv:1406.1078
(2014).
==PAGE:87==
Bibliography
77
[CL17]
Hong Cao and Miao Lin. “Mining smartphone data for app usage predic-
tion and recommendations: A survey.” In: Pervasive and Mobile Comput-
ing 37 (2017), pages 1–22.
[DAA15]
Kadir Demirci, Mehmet Akgönül, and Abdullah Akpinar. “Relationship
of smartphone use severity with sleep quality, depression, and anxiety
in university students.” In: Journal of behavioral addictions 4.2 (2015),
pages 85–92.
[DRC18]
Meredith E David, James A Roberts, and Brett Christenson. “Too much
of a good thing: Investigating the association between actual smartphone
use and individual well-being.” In: International Journal of Human–Computer
Interaction 34.3 (2018), pages 265–275.
[Fen+21]
Steven Y Feng et al. “A survey of data augmentation approaches for
NLP.” In: arXiv preprint arXiv:2105.03075 (2021).
[Fir+17]
Joseph Firth et al. “Can smartphone mental health interventions reduce
symptoms of anxiety? A meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials.”
In: Journal of affective disorders 218 (2017), pages 15–22.
[Gao+18]
Shang Gao et al. “Hierarchical attention networks for information extrac-
tion from cancer pathology reports.” In: Journal of the American Medical
Informatics Association 25.3 (2018), pages 321–330.
[Goo]
Play Google. Android Apps on Google Play. url: https://play.google.
com/store/ (visited on February 20, 2023).
[Gre+16]
Klaus Greff et al. “LSTM: A search space odyssey.” In: IEEE transactions
on neural networks and learning systems 28.10 (2016), pages 2222–2232.
[GS05]
Alex Graves and Jürgen Schmidhuber. “Framewise phoneme classifica-
tion with bidirectional LSTM and other neural network architectures.”
In: Neural networks 18.5-6 (2005), pages 602–610.
[HR02]
Geoffrey E Hinton and Sam Roweis. “Stochastic neighbor embedding.” In:
Advances in neural information processing systems 15 (2002).
[KH10]
Andreas M Kaplan and Michael Haenlein. “Users of the world, unite! The
challenges and opportunities of Social Media.” In: Business horizons 53.1
(2010), pages 59–68.
[Lee+14]
Yu-Kang Lee et al. “The dark side of smartphone usage: Psychological
traits, compulsive behavior and technostress.” In: Computers in human
behavior 31 (2014), pages 373–383.
[LH17]
Ilya Loshchilov and Frank Hutter. “Decoupled weight decay regulariza-
tion.” In: arXiv preprint arXiv:1711.05101 (2017).
[Liu+22]
Ningtao Liu et al. “GRU-TV: Time-and velocity-aware GRU for patient
representation on multivariate clinical time-series data.” In: arXiv preprint
arXiv:2205.04892 (2022).
==PAGE:88==
78
Bibliography
[LK21]
Juyeong Lee and Woosung Kim. “Prediction of problematic smartphone
use: A machine learning approach.” In: International Journal of Environ-
mental Research and Public Health 18.12 (2021), page 6458.
[MW18]
Mary Meeker and Liang Wu. Internet trends 2018. 2018.
[NG]
Andrew NG. Sequence Models. url: https://www.coursera.org/learn/
nlp-sequence-models (visited on February 20, 2023).
[Ort19]
Esteban Ortiz-Ospina. “The rise of social media.” In: Our world in data
18 (2019).
[Pas+19]
Adam Paszke et al. “Pytorch: An imperative style, high-performance deep
learning library.” In: Advances in neural information processing systems
32 (2019).
[Pie+15]
Martin Pielot et al. “When attention is not scarce-detecting boredom
from mobile phone usage.” In: Proceedings of the 2015 ACM international
joint conference on pervasive and ubiquitous computing. 2015, pages 825–
836.
[Poi19]
Ian Pointer. Programming pytorch for deep learning: Creating and deploy-
ing deep learning applications. O’Reilly Media, 2019.
[PSM14]
Jeffrey Pennington, Richard Socher, and Christopher D Manning. “Glove:
Global vectors for word representation.” In: Proceedings of the 2014 con-
ference on empirical methods in natural language processing (EMNLP).
2014, pages 1532–1543.
[pyta]
pytorch pytorch. ADAMW. url: https://pytorch.org/docs/stable/
generated/torch.optim.AdamW.html (visited on February 20, 2023).
[pytb]
pytorch pytorch. CROSSENTROPYLOSS. url: https://pytorch.org/
docs/stable/generated/torch.nn.CrossEntropyLoss.html (visited
on February 20, 2023).
[Ron14]
Xin Rong. “word2vec parameter learning explained.” In: arXiv preprint
arXiv:1411.2738 (2014).
[Sen+15]
Suranga Seneviratne et al. “Your installed apps reveal your gender and
more!” In: ACM SIGMOBILE Mobile Computing and Communications
Review 18.3 (2015), pages 55–61.
[SP97]
Mike Schuster and Kuldip K Paliwal. “Bidirectional recurrent neural net-
works.” In: IEEE transactions on Signal Processing 45.11 (1997), pages 2673–
2681.
[SS13]
Muhammad Sarwar and Tariq Rahim Soomro. “Impact of smartphone’s
on society.” In: European journal of scientific research 98.2 (2013), pages 216–
226.
[Sta97]
ISO Standard. “International Organization for Standardization, Codes
for the representation of names of countries and their subdivisions-Part
1: Country codes.” In: ISO Standard (1997), pages 3166–1.
==PAGE:89==
Bibliography
79
[Vas+17]
Ashish Vaswani et al. “Attention is all you need.” In: Advances in neural
information processing systems 30 (2017).
[WW13]
Anita Whiting and David Williams. “Why people use social media: a uses
and gratifications approach.” In: Qualitative market research: an interna-
tional journal (2013).
[Xu+18]
Shijian Xu et al. “Predicting smartphone app usage with recurrent neural
networks.” In: International Conference on Wireless Algorithms, Systems,
and Applications. Springer. 2018, pages 532–544.
[Yan+12]
Tingxin Yan et al. “Fast app launching for mobile devices using predictive
user context.” In: Proceedings of the 10th international conference on
Mobile systems, applications, and services. 2012, pages 113–126.
[Yan+16]
Zichao Yang et al. “Hierarchical attention networks for document classi-
fication.” In: Proceedings of the 2016 conference of the North American
chapter of the association for computational linguistics: human language
technologies. 2016, pages 1480–1489.
==PAGE:90==
