==PAGE:1==
MSc in Physics and Nanotechnology
Master thesis in Photonics Engineering
On-Chip Pump Filtering For a Single Pho-
ton Source
Author: Daniel Duggan
Kongens Lyngby, Copenhagen, 22/01/2023
==PAGE:2==
Supervisor: Prof. Yunhong Ding
Co-supervisors: Dr. Caterina Vigliar & Yonghe Yu
DTU Fotonik
Department of Photonics Engineering
Technical University of Denmark
Ørsteds Plads
Building 340
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
==PAGE:3==
Summary
In this thesis online machine learning is employed to speed up the fully automised
optimisation of the extinction ratio of 3, 4 and 5 ring Coupled Resonator Optical
Waveguides (CROW). The online optimisation platform, M-LOOP, is employed to
achieve this. The machine learning algorithm used is Gaussian process regression,
trained using the differential evolution (DE) algorithm.
The Nelder-Mead (NM)
algorithm is used as a comparison. It is demonstrated that machine learning does
speed up the optimisation process with it outperforming both the NM and DE both
in initial optimisation and re-optimisation. The optimisation of the 3-ring CROW is
successful with an extinction ratio of 46.05 dBm achieved. This is, however, below
the 100dBm target. The optimisation of the 4 and 5-ring CROW is unsuccessful,
although extinction ratio’s of 46.74dBm and 50.43dBm are still achieved.
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Acknowledgements
I would like to thank the group of Prof. Yunhong Ding. A really nice, laid back
environment is one I thrive in. Thank you for the weekly discussions, your help and
letting me do the project. I would like to thank Caterina, Yonghe, Mujtaba and Cagin
for their help in the lab and insights. Also to Siyan for his patience whilst I hogged
the set-up! But most of all I would like to thank Angélica, mi bonita. Thankyou for
your support, kind words and ofcourse, help with the coding :D It was all so much
easier with you by my side. Ti amo.
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Abbreviations
AI
Artificial Intelligence
ANN
Artificial Neural Network
CROW
Coupled Resonator Optical Waveguides
DE
Differential Evolution
FSR
Free Spectral Range
FWHM
Full Width at Half Maximum
GP
Gaussian process
GPR
Gaussian process regression
GC
Grating Couplers
ML
Machine Learning
M-LOOP Machine Learning Online Optimisation Platform
MM
Max Method
NM
Nelder-Mead
OSA
Optical Spectrum Analyser
Q-factor
Quality Factor
SGD
Stochastic Gradient Descent
TOPS
Thermo-optic Phase Shifters
WSM
Wavelength Seeking Method
q-PIC
Quantum Photonic Integrated Circuits
==PAGE:8==
vi
==PAGE:9==
Contents
Summary
i
Acknowledgements
iii
Abbreviations
v
Contents
vii
Introduction
1
I
Theoretical concepts
3
1
Theory of Chip Components, Machine Learning and Optimisation
5
1.1
Grating Couplers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
1.2
Filtering using Ring Resonators and Thermo-optic Phaseshifters
. . .
6
1.2.1
Single Ring Resonators
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
1.2.1.1
Z-Transform
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
1.2.2
Coupled Resonator Optical Waveguides (CROW) . . . . . . . .
11
1.2.3
Ring Resonator Parameters - Free Spectral Range (FSR), Full
Width at Half Maximum (FWHM) and Q-factor . . . . . . . .
12
1.2.4
Thermo-Optic Phase Shifters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
1.3
Machine Learning and Optimisation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
1.3.0.1
Machine Learning Online Optimisation Platform (M-
LOOP) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
1.3.0.2
Machine Learning Algorithm - Gaussian Process Re-
gression . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
1.3.0.3
Optimisation Algorithm - Differential Evolution
. . .
18
1.3.0.4
Optimisation Algorithm - Nelder-Mead . . . . . . . .
19
==PAGE:10==
viii
Contents
II
Experimental techniques and results
21
2
Experiment
23
2.0.1
Description of Chip
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
2.0.2
Set-up . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
2.0.3
Initial Characterisation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
2.0.3.1
Coupling Angle, Losses and FSR . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
2.0.3.2
Q-factor, Loss Co-eﬀicient and Tuneability
. . . . . .
27
2.1
Experimental Procedure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
2.2
Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
2.2.1
Comparison of Algorithms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
2.2.2
Stability . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
2.3
Discussion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
Conclusion
39
Appendices
41
.0.1
Picture of Set-up . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
.0.2
Code . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
.0.2.1
Code for the Wavelength Seeking Method . . . . . . .
43
.0.2.2
Code Max Method . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
.0.2.3
Code for Stability Measurements . . . . . . . . . . . .
56
.0.2.4
Code for Fitting Lorentzian . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
59
.0.2.5
Code for R-Squared . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
61
.0.3
Machine Learning Algorithm - Artificial Neural Network . . . .
61
Bibliography
63
==PAGE:11==
Introduction
Research into the production and detection of single photons has increased dramati-
cally over the last 50 years primarily driven by the emergence of the field of quantum
technologies at the end of the 20th century. Over the last 10 years in particular,
quantum technologies has seen an explosion in both funding, research and start-ups,
aswell as general interest, due to the potential the field has in various disciplines but
mainly in information science. The field itself is usually broken down into three sub-
fields; quantum cryptography, quantum computing and quantum metrology. Quan-
tum computing in particular holds huge promise and as a result has garnered large
interest both in industry, academia and the media.
Various methods to realise a
quantum computing architecture are currently being explored such as superconduct-
ing circuits [1], Rydberg atoms [2] and photonics [3]. A photonic based quantum
computer, as the name suggests, relies on the use of photons regardless if one is at-
tempting the linear optic or measurement based methods, with huge progress made
ever since Knill, Laflamme and Milburn showed such a quantum computer could be
realised [4]. The criteria is rather more strident, however, as one does not just need
photons but single photons. Similarly, quantum key distribution (QKD), the best
known example of quantum cryptography, near universally relies on the use of single
photons for the implementation of it’s protocols [5] [6] [7] [8], with the security of
these protocols impacted by everything from the purity of the photons, to the fibre
optic/waveguide losses and to the detection eﬀiciency at the end. Quantum metrol-
ogy may also employs single photons, to for example, attempt to beat the shot noise
limit [9]. Whilst early demonstrations of these technologies took place on bulk optics,
and continue to do so, there is now a desire for miniaturisation in order to allow for
scalability and better precision. Integrated circuits are now ubiquitous in every day
life as a result of decades of research and are therefore ideal candidates to realise
this miniaturisation. Silicon in particular has long been a mainstay in integrated
circuits and owing to it’s optical properties (low loss, tight confinement, third-order
non-linearity) is uniquely suited to the realisation of the type of circuits required for
this miniaturisation; Quantum Photonic Integrated Circuits (q-PIC). In order for
q-PIC to remove the requirement for bulk optics, all components found on an optics
table must be demonstrated on a q-PIC and with performance parameters at least as
good as their bulk counterparts. Whilst components such as Mach-Zender interfer-
ometers, single-photon sources and polarisors have been demonstrated on chip with
reasonable performance, the demonstration of effective filtering has lagged behind. It
==PAGE:12==
2
Introduction
is known that for such filters to be useful an extinction ratio of over 100dBm must be
achieved. As such, this thesis sets out to demonstrate if such filtering is achievable on
serially Coupled Resonator Optical Waveguides (CROW) containing 3,4 and 5-rings.
CROW work by filtering out the light they are resonant with. However due to fabrica-
tion errors, each individual ring’s resonance differs. They can be aligned however by
heating the rings. In order to do this, optimisation algorithms are typically employed.
In an attempt to fully automise this process and speed up the optimisation, Machine
Learning (ML) is employed alongside online optimisation. The thesis is broken down
into two chapters. The first details the theory of the chip components present, and in-
troduces the concept of online optimisation and ML before all relevant algorithms are
explained. The second chapter details the experimental techniques before providing
the results which are also discussed.
==PAGE:13==
Part I
Theoretical concepts
==PAGE:14==
==PAGE:15==
CHAPTER 1
Theory of Chip
Components,
Machine Learning
and Optimisation
The theory of the components found on the chip is now introduced. A brief overview
of ML is given and we define the type of optimisation problem undertook, aswell as
the optimisation algorithms used. In order to understand how light is coupled into
and out of the chip we begin with a description of grating couplers.
1.1
Grating Couplers
The eﬀicient coupling of light from an optical fibre into a silicon waveguide is a diﬀicult
process due to the large mode mismatches exhibited between the fibre and the waveg-
uide (∼80µm2 for the fibre and ∼0.2µm2 for the waveguide [10]). Broadly speaking,
one of two methods are usually employed; edge coupling and grating coupling. Edge
coupling is an in-plane technique were the light enters parallel to the waveguide and
require very precise alignment. Grating coupling on the other hand is an out-of-plane
coupling technique that has the light enter at some angle and has a high polarisa-
tion dependency [11]. Although edge couplers exhibit low insertion losses of around
0.5dB they require extensive post-fabrication processes in order to do so [10], and
as such are not suited to high volume manufacture. Grating Couplers (GC) on the
other hand can be placed anywhere on a chip, are easier to manufacture and allow
a wider alignment tolerance so tend to be the preferred choice. They do however
display low coupling eﬀiciencies typically around 65% [10] due to mode mismatches
and grating directionality. GC are usually periodic structures with trenches of length
Le and depth of e. Typically etched on a silicon layer with a periodicity given by Λ,
==PAGE:16==
6
1 Theory of Chip Components, Machine Learning and Optimisation
they work by employing diffraction and interference to couple the light. The effective
index of refraction is given by [10]
neff = F · no + (1 −F) · ne
(1.1)
F is called the grating fill factor defined as the ratio between the end of one trench
to the end of the next trench (F is usually varied, see [10] for more details), no is the
effective index of the original silicon slab and ne is the effective index of the etched
area. Indeed, it is grating couplers that are employed on each device used in this
thesis.
1.2
Filtering using Ring Resonators and Thermo-optic
Phaseshifters
The theory behind ring resonators is extensive. Here we aim to give a brief overview of
the theory relevant to the project in question. A more extensive study is undertaken
in reference [12], upon which this section is based.
1.2.1
Single Ring Resonators
In order to describe the operation of the ring resonators we will first consider the
situation described in figure 1.1. The light in the waveguide is coupled in and out
by the phenomenon of the evanescent field. Assuming we have no coupling losses, a
single polarisation, one mode of the resonator is excited, and all propagation losses
inside the ring are contained in α, the interaction can be described by the matrix
(Et1
Et2
)
=
( t
κ
−κ∗
−t∗
) (Ei1
Ei2
)
(1.2)
where the E’s are the normalised electric field amplitudes, Ei1 being the input field,
Et1 the output (transmitted) field of the output port, Ei2 the field coupled from the
ring back to the waveguide and Et2 the field that re-circulates (is re-transmitted)
around the ring. t and κ are the transmission and coupling coeﬀicients respectively
with ∗indicating the complex conjugate of the parameter in question and |κ2|+|t2| =
1.
To further simplify Ei1 is set to one and thus one round trip is given by
Ei2 = α · eiθEt2
(1.3)
where again α is the loss co-eﬀicient of the ring1 and θ = ωL
cp is the round trip phase
shift. Here, L is the circumference of the ring and is equal to 2πr, r being the radius of
1no loss is given by α = 1
==PAGE:17==
1.2 Filtering using Ring Resonators and Thermo-optic Phaseshifters
7
Figure 1.1. Ring resonator with one bus waveguide
the ring which is measured from the center of the ring to the center of the waveguide.
cp is the phase velocity of the waveguide being equal to
c
neff with c the speed of
light in vacuum and neff the effective refractive index. ω = kc is the fixed angular
frequency2. The effective refractive index neff can be introduced using the vacuum
wavenumber i.e. k = 2π
λ through the propagation constant3 β:
β = k · neff(T) = 2π · neff
λ
(1.4)
Thus θ becomes
θ = ωL
cp
= κcL
cp
= k · neff(T) · 2πr = 2π · neff(T) · 2πr
λ
= 4π2neff(T) r
λ
(1.5)
Using equation 1.2 and equation 1.3 we obtain
Et1 = −α + t · e−iθ
−αt∗+ e−iθ
(1.6)
Ei2 =
−ακ∗
−αt∗+ e−iθ
(1.7)
Et2 =
−κ∗
1 −αt∗e+iθ
(1.8)
2as we have assumed only 1 wavelength is present
3The propogation constant measures the change undergone by the amplitude and phase of the wave
as it propagates in a given direction
==PAGE:18==
8
1 Theory of Chip Components, Machine Learning and Optimisation
Figure 1.2. Ring resonator with two bus waveguide
Therefore the transmission power in the output waveguide is
Pt1 = |Et1|2 = α2 + |t|2 −2α|t|cos(θ + ϕt)
1 + α2|t|2 −2α|t|cos(θ + ϕt)
(1.9)
Here, t = |t|eiϕt with |t| representing loss due to coupling and ϕt is the phase of the
coupler. The circulating power inside the ring is
Pi2 = |Ei2|2 =
α2(1 −|t|2)
1 + α2|t|2 −2α|t|cos(θ + ϕt)
(1.10)
As a filter, θ contains the frequency dependence as seen from equation 1.5, with the
interesting phenomena occurring at the resonance condition:
θ = 2πm
m = 1, 2, 3...
(1.11)
Furthermore, the resonance frequency, or better still wavelength, can be tuned through
the temperature dependence of the refractive index
λres = Lneff(T)
m
m = 1, 2, 3...
(1.12)
meaning the wavelength can fit a whole number of times inside the ring.
Under
resonance conditions the transmitted field reduces to
==PAGE:19==
1.2 Filtering using Ring Resonators and Thermo-optic Phaseshifters
9
Pt1 = |Et1|2 = (α −|t|)2
(1 −α|t|)2
(1.13)
and the field coupled from the ring to the bus waveguide to
Pi2 = |Ei2|2 = α2(1 −|t|2)
(1 −α|t|)2
(1.14)
It can be seen from equation 1.13 that when the internal losses are equal to the
coupling losses (α = |t|) that the transmitted power becomes 0. This is called critical
coupling and is caused by destructive interference. If we now consider the situation
described in figure 1.2 i.e. were we now have two bus waveguides instead of one, the
transmission mode amplitude Et1 becomes [12]
Et1 = t1 +
−κ1κ∗
1t∗
2α
2
1
2 eiθ|t1|2+κ2
1
1 −t∗
1t∗
2α
2
1
2 eiθ
=
t1 −t∗
2α
2
1
2 eiθ
1 −t∗
1t∗
2α
2
1
2 eiθ = t1 −t∗
2αeiθ
1 −t∗
1t∗
2αeiθ
(1.15)
where α 1
2 is the half round trip loss. We also introduce the half round trip phase θ 1
2
and define α = α2
1
2 and θ = 2θ 1
2 . The mode inside the ring has to pass the second
coupler to become what is called the ’dropped’ mode Et24
Et2 =
−κ∗
1κ2α 1
2 e
iθ 1
2
1 −t∗
1t∗
2αeiθ
(1.16)
At resonance Et1 is 0 provided the couplers are identical which implies t1 = t2 and
α = | t1
t2 | = 1 . On the other hand, the power outputted from the drop port is
|Et2−res|2 = Pt2−res = (1 −|t1|2) · (1 −|t2|2) · α
(1 −α|t1t2|)2
(1.17)
As such, the wavelength on resonance is fully extracted by the resonator provided we
have no losses, and thus we have a filter. α can only be made 1 through the use of
gain mechanisms. Otherwise, the transmission coeﬀicients t1 and t2 can be adjusted
to achieve minimum transmission (Pt1 = 0) if passivity is required.
1.2.1.1
Z-Transform
In order to eventually describe multiple ring resonators we introduce the Z-transform
which describes the temporal and spectral response of the rings [12]. The Z-transform
transforms a discrete time signal into a complex-variable frequency signal [12]
H(z) =
∞
∑
n
h(n)z−n
(1.18)
4the filter under consideration is usually referred to as an add-drop filter
==PAGE:20==
10
1 Theory of Chip Components, Machine Learning and Optimisation
where z is a complex variable and h(n) is the impulse response of a filter.
This
equation can be viewed in terms of a unit circuit in the complex plane were the poles
and zeroes of H(z), evaluated along eiω, are plotted. The case of |z| = 1 is the case
of resonance frequencies and one round trip of the unit circle corresponds to the Free
Spectral Range (FSR) of the filter. The filters frequency spectrum is related to the
poles and zeroes by their position on the complex plane, with a zero positioned on the
unit circle resulting in no transmission at the frequency corresponding to the angle of
this zero and a pole describing complete transmission at the frequency corresponding
to the angle of that pole. As either move away from the unit circle, their influence
on the spectrum is reduced. A discrete linear signal with inputs x and output
y(n) = b0x(n)+b)1x(n−1)+...+bMx(n−M)−a1y(n−1)−...−aNy(n−N) (1.19)
has a Z-transform [12]
H(z) =
∑M
m=0 bmz−m
1 + ∑N
n=0 anz−n = B(z)
A(z)
(1.20)
were A(z) and B(z) are M-th and N-th-order polynomials [12].
The zeroes and
poles, zm and pn respectively, of H(z) can be calculated from the roots of these two
polynomials as [12]
H(z) = ΓzN−M ∑M
m=1(z −zm)
∑N
n=1(z −pn)
(1.21)
were Γ is the filter gain. For the filter describe in figure 1.2 there is only one pole, it
being the most simple ring resonator filter. The sum of all optical paths for the drop
port is given by [12]
Et2(z) = −κ1κ2
√
αz−1(1 + t1t2αz−1 + ...)Ei1(z)
(1.22)
which gives a drop port transfer function [12]
H21(z) = Et2(z)
Ei1(z) = −κ1κ2
√
αz−1
1 −t1t2αz−1
(1.23)
were the pole is located at t1t2α and H21 = H12 due to symmetry. The sum of all
the optical paths of the throughport is given by [12]
Et1(z) = t1 −t2αz−1
1 −t1t2αz−1 Ei1(z)
(1.24)
giving a through port transfer function
H11(z) = Et1(z)
Ei1(z) = t1 −t2αz−1
1 −t1t2αz−1
(1.25)
==PAGE:21==
1.2 Filtering using Ring Resonators and Thermo-optic Phaseshifters
11
The transfer function H22 can also be derived and is given as [12]
H22 = t2 −t1αz−1
1 −t1t2αz−1
(1.26)
Once derived, the transfer functions can be expressed in a scattering matrix5 i.e. a
matrix that relates the inputs to the outputs as in equation 1.1
(Et1(z)
Et1(z)
)
=
(
t1−t2αz−1
1−t1t2αz−1
−κ1κ2
√
αz−1
1−t1t2αz−1
−κ1κ2
√
αz−1
1−t1t2αz−1
t2−t1αz−1
1−t1t2αz−1
) (Ei1(z)
Ei1(z)
)
= SRR(z)
(Ei1(z)
Ei1(z)
)
(1.27)
1.2.2
Coupled Resonator Optical Waveguides (CROW)
Multiple ring resonators typically come in two forms, serially coupled and parallel cou-
pled resonators. Using multiple resonators allows one to design custom transmission
functions i.e. allows one to tailor the passband shape. Here we focus on the serially
coupled form, termed CROW in the literature, as these are the type used in this
project. In order to determine the transfer function, one can use the characteristic
matrix approach [13], which is based around the Z-transform. In this approach, the
paths an inputted signal can travel are determined, with the shortest path defined as
unity and dubbed the common path. For a triple ringed CROW, the travelling light
using first-order paths6 has three ’choices’, an additional ring resonator path and the
common path. The mth order transfer function is related to the m+1th order transfer
function by [13]
−→
H m+1 =


H1,m+1
H2,m+1
H3,m+1

=


T11
T12
T13
T21
T22
T23
T31
T32
T33

·


H1,m
H2,m
H3,m

= T · −→
H m
(1.28)
T is called the characteristic matrix. Again assuming symmetric coupling (whereby
κ = κ∗and t = t∗) T is given by [12]
TDropP ort =



t1t2α1eiθ1(1, −κ2
2
t1t2 , 0)
t2t3α2eiθ2(1, 1, −κ2
3
t2
3 )
t3t4α3eiθ3(1, 1, 1)



(1.29)
which when generalised for an N-ringed CROW is
5also called the chain matrix
6A first-order path is the simplest type of path, as it involves the light interacting with a single
resonator.
==PAGE:22==
12
1 Theory of Chip Components, Machine Learning and Optimisation
TDropP ort =








t1t2α1eiθ1(1, −κ2
2
t1t2 , 0...0)
t2t3α2eiθ2(1, 1, −κ2
3
t2
3 , 0...0)
...(1, ...1, ...0)
...(1, ..., ...1, −κN
2
tN
3
tNtN+1αNeiθN (1, ..., ...1, 1)








(1.30)
This thus gives a general expression for the transfer function:
HDropP ort =
∏
k
κk
√∏
k
αkeikθk
|I −TDropP ort|
,
k = 1, ...n
(1.31)
In general, when designing CROW’s to act as filters, the values of κ and t are defined
in such a way to set the preferred filter response i.e. with or without ripple aswell as
filter type e.g. Butterworth or Chebyshev. The values chosen when fabricating the
devices on the chip used in this experiment were unavailable.7
1.2.3
Ring Resonator Parameters - Free Spectral Range (FSR), Full
Width at Half Maximum (FWHM) and Q-factor
Four important parameters regarding ring resonators are the FSR, the Full Width
at Half Maximum (FWHM) the loaded Quality Factor (Q-factor) and the intrinsic
Q-factor.
The FSR is defined as the distance between two resonance wavelength
peaks. One of the uses of CROW’s is to act as filters for an on-chip single photon
source, the aim being to filter out the pump light used to create the single photons
through e.g. four-wave mixing. The FSR is therefore particularly important as one
requires that corresponding resonance peaks occur at the same wavelength as the
signal and idler photon wavelengths8 so as to send these photons to the drop port
of the CROW. They can therefore be detected and one can say the pump light was
filtered out. The FSR is given by
FSR = λ2
ngL
(1.32)
were ng is the group refractive index. The FWHM, also termed the 3dB bandwidth, is
an important parameter as it determines the bandwidth of the filter. The bandwidth
of a filter is the range of frequencies over which the filter will pass or reject signals. A
filter with a narrow FWHM will pass or reject a narrow range of frequencies, while a
filter with a wide FWHM will pass or reject a wide range of frequencies. In the case
7Private conversations with Professor Yunhong Ding
8In one form of four-wave mixing, two pump photons ωp create two new photons dubbed the idler,
ωi, and signaler ,ωs, which have different frequencies related by ωi + ωs = ωp
==PAGE:23==
1.2 Filtering using Ring Resonators and Thermo-optic Phaseshifters
13
of single photons, one wants a narrow FWHM. As the name suggests, to measure
the FWHM, one determines the half of the maximum value of the resonance peak,
and then measures the distance across the whole width at that value. The loaded
Q-factor is proportional to numbers of oscillations of the light inside the ring before
the stored optical power depletes to 1
e of it’s initial power and is given by
Qloaded =
λres
FWHM
(1.33)
were λres is the resonance peak. From this the intrinsic Q-factor may be calculated
Qint = 2πng
αλres
= 2Qloaded
1 + √T0
(1.34)
where α is the loss inside the ring as previously described and T0 is the fraction of
optical power that is transmitted through the resonator calculated as Pout
Pin . Combining
equations 1.33 and 1.34 α can be determined [14]
α =
2πng
Qint · λres
=
πλres
FSR · L[FWHM(1 + sqrt(T0)]
(1.35)
Lastly one can also determine the finesse given by
F SR
F W HM which can also be used as
an estimate of the number of round trips a photon can make in the resonator before
it is lost due to absorption or scattering.
1.2.4
Thermo-Optic Phase Shifters
Thermo-optic Phase Shifters (TOPS) are devices that alter the phase of light typically
by altering the refractive index of the material the light travels in (see equation 1.5).
In this project this material is silicon i.e. a pure silicon waveguide. The temperature
dependent phase change in the heated waveguide is thus
∆θ = 2πL
λ
dn
dt ∆T
(1.36)
were dn
dT is the thermo-optic coeﬀicient which for silicon is approximately 1.8x10−4K−1
for λ = 1550nm and T = 300K [15]. Here, L is the length of the TOPS and ∆T
is the temperature change. The temperature change required for a π-phase shift is
easily seen to be
∆Tπ =
λ
2L dn
dT
(1.37)
What one hopes for when dealing with thermo-optic phase shifters and CROW’s is to
have a low temperature change as possible to have meaningful phase changes. This
is in order to minimise thermal cross-talk between the rings. This can be achieved by
increasing L, however this increases the footprint of the TOPS aswell as propagation
losses therefore L is usually made small. Therefore ∆T is usually reduced by bringing
==PAGE:24==
14
1 Theory of Chip Components, Machine Learning and Optimisation
the heat source as close as possible to the waveguide which reduces the thermal energy
needed to increase the waveguide temperature [15]. In an experimental sense, this
heating is achieved by applying voltages to heating pads placed on the chip, which
in turn heat the ring resonator and change the refractive index. TOPS are required
as during fabrication, imperfections can cause each ring to have differing resonance
frequencies. In order to have maximum filter performance, these imperfections must
be corrected for by heating each ring so that each ring meets the resonance condition
given by equation 1.11. In practice, this is not so simple as one does not know how
’off-resonance’ each filter is in relation to eachother. Secondly, silicon has a strong
thermo-optic coeﬀicient i.e. it’s optical properties are extremely sensitive to variations
in temperature complicating matters further. Therefore, one tends to require the
usage of optimisation algorithms in order to optimise the performance. In this thesis
we make use of two optimisation algorithms aswell as ML. ML is employed due to
the strong temperature dependence on silicons optical properties which make (and
made!) reproducibility diﬀicult. We now introduce these topics and explain further.
1.3
Machine Learning and Optimisation
ML is a sub-discipline within the field of Artificial Intelligence (AI) that focuses on
developing and utilising algorithms that allow computers to learn and make predic-
tions based on a given data set without being explicitly programmed. In other words,
machine learning involves training a computer to recognize patterns in data and to
make predictions or decisions based on those patterns. The field had it’s early ori-
gins in the 1960’s with the work of A.L Samuel [16] and gained particular traction in
the 1980’s after the publication of ’Machine Learning: An AI Approach’ from which
the field takes it’s name. Since these early days, the field has become vast and it’s
techniques are now employed across an array of disciplines for tasks such as speech
recognition, language processing, spam filtering and fraud detection.
There are 3 main paradigms of ML; supervised learning, unsupervised learning and
reinforcement learning.
In supervised learning, the computer is provided with an
annotated data set which it should be able to process and make predictions about.
An oft given example is an algorithm used to learn if one has a picture of a cat or a
tree. A large data set that has been annotated by a human to distinguish between
the two, termed the training data, will be used to train the model. The aim is to
have the algorithm eventually be able to make the appropriate selection based on
learned patterns from the training data on data it has as of yet never seen. Put
another way, supervised learning is the problem of learning input-output mappings
from empirical data (the training data set). Unsupervised learning involves training
a machine learning model on a data set that is not labeled or categorized. In this
case, the model must learn to identify patterns and relationships in the data without
being told what the patterns mean. This type of learning is often used for tasks like
==PAGE:25==
1.3 Machine Learning and Optimisation
15
anomaly detection or clustering, where the goal is to identify patterns in the data
without knowing what those patterns represent. As such, unsupervised learning can-
not tell one that an image is of a cat, but it can distinguish it from a tree. Finally,
reinforcement learning involves training a machine learning model to make decisions
in a dynamic environment, based on the outcomes of its actions. In this type of learn-
ing, the model is typically provided with a set of actions it can take, and it receives
rewards or penalties based on the consequences of those actions. The model learns
to optimize its decision-making process over time in order to maximize the rewards
it receives, and finds applications in e.g. autonomous cars [17]. In this thesis we use
supervised learning for global optimisation.
The aim of global optimisation is to find the global optimum within a parameter
space. In the context of this experiment, the parameter space is that space spanned
by N experimental settings, which are the voltages applied to the heaters on the
silicon chip. A point within the parameter space is given by a vector of experimental
settings i.e. X ∈RN. Each point in the parameter space has an associated cost
Y = f(X) generated by a cost function f(X). The aim is to thus find the maximum
or minimum cost dependent on the problem at hand, with the cost function being
used to steer the optimisation [18]. In this experiment two cost functions were defined
with the objective of finding the voltage inputs that maximised these cost functions.
The first,which will be termed the Wavelength Seeking Method (WSM), was simply
the transmission power outputted from the drop port of the silicon chip. This was
measured by a power meter (Thorlabs PM100D). The second method, termed the Max
Method (MM), the cost function explicitly measured the extinction ratio, with data
obtained from an Optical Spectrum Analyser (OSA). Here, the maximum transmitted
power from the drop port within a user defined range of wavelengths either side of the
pass band (PR1 and PR2 respectively) was recorded and an average was taken. This
corresponded to the rejection band value. For the pass band, a specific wavelength
of interest was defined, and the transmitted power for that wavelength was recorded
(PT ). The aim was to then maximise the difference between this value and the average
of the rejection band i.e.
Y = max|PT −(PR1 + PR2)
2
|
(1.38)
Choice of optimisation algorithms depends on numerous factors such as whether one
has a continuous or discrete objective function9, a differentiable objective function,
an objective function in the first place aswell as experimental issues such as noise and
resolution. In the context of this experiment we do not explicitly define an objective
function (thus have what is known as a black-box optimisation problem). This is due
to four main reasons. The objective function would be based around the squaring of
the drop port transfer function i.e. |HDropP ort|2. Thus the objective function would
9In optimization, the objective function is a mathematical expression for which the algorithm at-
tempts to find the values that maximise or minimise it
==PAGE:26==
16
1 Theory of Chip Components, Machine Learning and Optimisation
be extremely complicated. Secondly, the values of κ and t are unknown and as such
this would introduce inaccuracy as guesses for these values would be required. The
third reason is author interest in learning and using ML for the first time with the
last being due to the novelty aspect. Regardless, it is known that the function ’inside’
this box is non-linear, and that the rings exhibit thermal cross talk (there is noise).
We make no assumptions with regard to differentiability or continuity. Therefore, we
make use of two derivative-free algorithms; the NM algorithm and an evolutionary op-
timization method named Differential Evolution (DE), as such derivative algorithms
are the preferred choice under such conditions [19]. The optimisation ran as a feed-
back loop using the Machine Learning Online Optimisation Platform (M-LOOP) [20]
which we now introduce.
1.3.0.1
Machine Learning Online Optimisation Platform (M-LOOP)
M-LOOP is an open source software package that allows one to develop and deploy
ML models in an online optimization setting. Online optimization refers to the process
of optimizing a system or model while it is in operation, using data that is collected
in real-time. With M-LOOP it is also possible to create an internal model of the
experiment potentially allowing one to optimise faster then using non-ML techniques,
as demonstrated in [20]. The platform is based on the Python scikit-learn library and
was initially developed for optimisation in ultra-cold atom experiments [20]. There are
thus built in machine learning algorithms used to do the modelling, Gaussian process
regression (GPR) and an Artificial Neural Network (ANN) which will be detailed
later.
In addition, there are built in optimisation algorithms, the aformentioned
DE, NM aswell as a regression method based on non-parametric inference called
GPR.10 M-LOOP therefore takes control of the experiment, and uses the learned
model to suggest new parameters for the optimisation algorithm in order to speed
up the finding of the global optimum. Whilst online optimisation has been employed
for optimisation problems involving ring resonators [21] [22] [23] [24], as far as the
author is aware, this is the first times machine learning enhanced online optimisation
of the extinction ratio has been carried on a chip with more than two rings. We now
introduce the algorithms and the reasoning for choosing them.
1.3.0.2
Machine Learning Algorithm - Gaussian Process Regression
There are two common approaches to solving the supervised learning problem [25],
the first is to restrict the number of functions that it is believed to map Y to f(X) e.g
only considering second order polynomial functions. The second is to assign a prob-
ability to all possible functions, with those functions considered more likely given a
higher probability. The first approach has the problem of deciding which functions
to include, with the obvious issue of what happens if you do not include the type of
10Gaussian process regression is a type of statistical model that can be used for both machine
learning and optimization.
==PAGE:27==
1.3 Machine Learning and Optimisation
17
function that describes the mapping. The second approach seems to have an even
more series issue with there being an infinite amount of functions, and the require-
ment to fit the correct one in a finite amount of time. This seemingly insurmountable
problem can be overcome using a Gaussian process (GP), of which GPR is one. In
general, a GP is a generalization of the Gaussian probability distribution [25] i.e. it
is a probability distribution of functions which may describe a given dataset. GPR
utilizes Bayes’ rule to update this probability distribution given new data and allows
a measure of uncertainty. It is a non-parametric algorithm i.e. it makes no assump-
tions on the functional form of the model making it particularly useful here.
The aforementioned distribution is characterized by a mean function and a covariance
function, which define the expected value and the variability of the function values,
respectively. Given a set of n data points (x1, y1), (x2, y2), ..., (xn, yn)11 where xi is the
input and yi is the output, GPR aims to estimate the function f(x)12 that generated
the data points. To do this, GPR assumes that the data points are generated by
adding noise (ϵ) to the true function values i.e yi = f(xi) + ϵ. The noise is assumed
to be independent and identically distributed and to follow a Gaussian distribution
with zero mean and variance σ2. The likelihood of the data points given the true
function f(x) can be written as:
p(y|f) = Πn
i=1N(yi|f(xi), σ2)
(1.39)
where N(y|f(x), σ2) is the Gaussian probability density function. GPR then uses
Bayes’ theorem to obtain the posterior distribution13 over the function f(x) given
the data points y:
p(f|y) = p(y|f)p(f)
p(y)
(1.40)
where p(f) is the prior distribution over the function f(x) and p(y) is the marginal
likelihood of the data points y. This form of Bayes theorem states that the posterior
distribution is proportional to the product of the likelihood of the data and the prior
distribution.
The prior distribution p(f) reflects the initial beliefs about the function f(x) before
seeing the data points y and is used to inform the posterior distribution. In GPR,
the prior distribution is chosen to be a distribution over functions where any finite
number of function values has a joint Gaussian distribution.
This distribution is
characterized by a mean function m(x) and a covariance function k(x, x
′) termed the
11In our experiment we have 3 inputs for every output, however we ignore this here for simplicity
12see above
13The posterior distribution is a probability distribution that reflects the updated belief about a
quantity of interest, given some new data or evidence.
In the context of GP regression, the
posterior distribution is the updated distribution over possible functions that could have generated
the observed data, given a specified prior distribution.
==PAGE:28==
18
1 Theory of Chip Components, Machine Learning and Optimisation
kernel. m(x) defines the expected value and k(x, x
′) the similarity of the function
values i.e how smooth the function is (or isn’t).
The posterior distribution p(f|y) reflects the updated beliefs about the function f(x)
after seeing the data points y. It is characterized by a posterior mean function and
a posterior covariance function that can be computed using the prior mean function,
the prior covariance function, and the data points y.
Which kernel to choose for which problem is important as it specifies the covariance
between pairs of random variables and is an ongoing area of research [26] [27] [28]. A
common choice is the squared exponential kernel which is a used in this thesis due
to it’s ability to model a wide range of functions [25]. It is also the built in kernel in
M-LOOP. The kernel is defined by [18]
k(Xi, Xj) = exp(−1
2
N
∑
k=1
1
ηk
(Xi[k] −Xj[k])2)
(1.41)
Here, Xi[k] represents the kth element in the vector Xi and ηk is the length scale. The
length scale is a hyper-parameter and can be interpreted as the ”typical distance” over
which the output values are correlated. For example, a kernel with a small length scale
will give high covariance between points that are close together in the input space,
resulting in a smooth model with relatively small variance between nearby points. On
the other hand, a kernel with a large length scale will give low covariance between
nearby points, resulting in a rougher GP model with larger variance between nearby
points. The hyper parameter requires careful tuning which in M-LOOP can done
manually or automatically by allowing it to be updated based on new data [29]. In
order to have have the experiment fully automated the hyper-paramters are allowed
to be udated by M-LOOP. DE is used to provide the training for the machine learner.
1.3.0.3
Optimisation Algorithm - Differential Evolution
Differential Evolution belongs to the class of optimisation algorithms called evolu-
tionary algorithms that are inspired by evolution. DE works by initially generating a
random population of ’individuals’. New individuals are created by engaging in what
is termed crossover and mutation. Crossover uses features of pre-existing individuals
with mutation adding in random variation. The algorithm assesses the ’fitness’ of
new individuals and replaces the population with the lowest fitness. In the context
of this experiment, the individuals are vectors of experimental settings Xi and the
fitness is the cost Yi of each vector. A random set of n vectors [X1...Xn] is initially
generated and alongside the associated costs [Y1...Yn] acts as the initial population.
A new vector is produced using mutation
Xmut = Xk + (Xi −Xj)
(1.42)
==PAGE:29==
1.3 Machine Learning and Optimisation
19
where Xk, Xi and Xj are randomly selected vectors. Elements from either Xmut or
Xi are selected at random to produce a new candidate vector Xcan. This is crossover.
The cost for Xcan is determined experimentally to produce a new settings/cost pair
[Xcan, Ycan]. Selection is carried out by determining whether Ycan < Yi. If this is the
case, Xcan replaces Xi and the process starts over until the algorithm converges to a
satisfactory solution or a stopping criterion is reached. The advantage of DE lies in
it’s low complexity, however it is slow to converge to the optimum [18] and does not
guarantee an optimal will be found
The parameters of DE are the population size, the mutation rate and the cross-over
rate and can be altered to tune the optimisation for the problem at hand. This largely
requires a trial and error method [30]. The population size determines the number of
individuals in the population that DE maintains during the optimization process. A
larger population size may increase the chances of finding a good solution, but may
also require more computational resources and take longer to run. The mutation
rate determines the probability that a mutanted individual will be generated at each
iteration of DE. A higher mutation rate may increase the chances of finding a better
solution, but may also increase the risk of getting stuck in a local minimum. The
crossover rate determines the probability that the attributes of two individuals will
be combined to create a new mutant individual. A higher crossover rate may lead
to more diverse and potentially better solutions, but may also increase the risk of
getting stuck in a local minimum. It should be noted however, that although it is
possible for DE to become stuck in a local minima, this tends to be avoided due to
the nature of the algorithm itself [30].
1.3.0.4
Optimisation Algorithm - Nelder-Mead
The Nelder-Mead optimization algorithm, also known as the downhill simplex method,
is a technique for finding the minimum or maximum of function in a multidimensional
space first published in 1965 [31]. It is a simple, robust, and eﬀicient method that
does not require the objective function to be differentiable or even continuous [32]
aswell as being well-suited for black-box optimization because it does not require any
knowledge of the internal workings of an objective function. Instead, it only requires
a way to evaluate a function at a given set of inputs [33] which in the context of this
experiment is the experimentally measured cost function. NM is a standard algorithm
to use for optimisation problems such as the one in this thesis [21] [22] [34], therefore
it can be viewed as a control upon which to benchmark performance.
The algorithm starts with a simplex, which is a polytope14 with n+1 vertices in
n-dimensional space. Firstly, it engages in ordering of the vertexes into worst, second-
worst and best before calculating the geometric center of the best performing side
i.e. the side opposite the worst vertex. The last step is termed transformation were
14a geometric object with flat sides. In 2-D a triangle, in 3-D a tetrehedron
==PAGE:30==
20
1 Theory of Chip Components, Machine Learning and Optimisation
a new working simplex is computed from the current one. This is achieved by trying
to replace the worst vertex with a better one using reflection, expansion, contraction
or shrinkage with respect to the best side:
1. Reflection: The worst vertex is reflected through the geometric center of the
best vertex, creating a new point. If this new vertex is better than the second-
worst vertex, but not better than the best, it becomes the new second-worst
vertex and the process is repeated with the new worst.
2. Expansion: If the new point has a better value than best vertex, it is expanded
even further in the same direction.
3. Contraction: If the new point has a worse value than the second-worst vertex,
it is contracted towards the best vertex.
4. Shrink: If none of the above steps improve the function, the entire simplex is
shrunk towards the best vertex. In reality, this step rarely occurs [35]
The algorithm continues to iterate through these steps until the size of the simplex is
within a certain tolerance or until a maximum number of iterations has been reached.
The main issue with the NM algorithm is it is known to get stuck in local minima
and can be slow to converge if there are many local maxima. Therefore the initial
simplex chosen is of extreme importance [33]. In an experiment such as here, one
thus needs to engage in initialisation to attempt to find a good starting point and to
re-start the algorithm if it gets stuck in what is known to be a local minima.
==PAGE:31==
Part II
Experimental
techniques and results
==PAGE:32==
==PAGE:33==
CHAPTER 2
Experiment
In this chapter the experiment itself is introduced. Firstly, the chip and devices used
are briefly discussed, before the set-up is described. The experiment procedure is
given after which the results themselves are reported and discussed.
2.0.1
Description of Chip
The chip used in the experiment initially contained 112 separate devices and measured
1.7cm by 1.58cm (see figure 2.1(a)). This included 65 devices containing CROW filters
solely, 32 straight waveguides to practice light coupling and 15 devices containing a
single photon source and CROW filters. This device was diced to create two chips,
one with the 15 single photon devices and the other with the straight waveguides and
CROW filters. The latter was used in the experiment. This ’new’ chip contained
30 devices with 3-ringed CROW filters (13 round and 17 racetrack), 19 devices with
4-ringed CROW filters (10 round and 9 racetrack), 17 devices with 4-ringed CROW
filters (10 round and 6 racetrack) plus the aforementioned 32 straight waveguides.
Only the round shaped (i.e. ring) filters were used. These rings had a radius of 15µm
giving an expected FSR of approximately 6.4nm were a value 4 was used for ng [36]
and 1550nm for λ. For the 3-ring CROW, the distance from the center of the bus
waveguides to the center of the inner and outer (first and third) ring was 0.70µm with
inter-ring spacing of 1µm from center to center. The corresponding values for the 4-
ring and 5-ring CROW were 0.60µm and 0.80µm respectively. The throughport bus
waveguide length was approximately 984µm on all devices, with a drop port length
of approx 700µm. All waveguides had a width of 50µm and were constructed from
silicon. The heating pads of the TOPS were coated in gold with a titanium adhesion
layer and measured 200µm by 200µm by 500nm.1 The adhesion layer thickness was
40nm.2. The heaters themselves had a diameter of 0.75µm.
2.0.2
Set-up
The set-up consisted of a tuneable continuous-wave (CW) laser (Ando AQ4321 A)
which lased between 1480 and 1580nm. This light was outputted directly into a fibre-
1Thickness measurement obtained during private correspondence with Prof. Yunhong Ding.
2see footnote above
==PAGE:34==
24
2 Experiment
((a)) Klayout schematic of initial device. This
was cleaved with the upper section used in the
experiment
((b)) Klayout schematic of 3-ring CROW
((c)) Klayout schematic of 4-ring CROW
((d)) Klayout schematic of 5-ring CROW
Figure 2.1. Schematic of devices
optic cable and entered a polarisation controller (PC). This is required as the GC
are polarisation dependent (see section 1.1). After the PC the light was coupled into
and out of a particular device on the chip. This was achieved by cleaving two fibre
optic cables which were mounted on fibre optic holders. These fibre optic holders
are designed so that the light that leaves the fibre optic cable leaves at a particular
angle, in our case 71 and 73 degrees respectively. As the GC also have an angular
dependence, the fibre optic holders were placed on goniometers (Thorlabs GN05) so
one could adjust the angle of the fibre optic cable as required. Having entered and
==PAGE:35==
2 Experiment
25
Figure 2.2. Close up schematic of a ring resonator on a 4-ring CROW. Shown are the di-
mensions between the bus waveguide to the ring (0.60µm), the inter-ring coupling (0.80µm),
the width of the heater (0.75µm) aswell as the width of the ring itself (0.50 µm)
.
exited the chip, the light was coupled into either an OSA (Ando AQ6317B) or a power
meter (Thorlabs PM100D) dependent on the measurement requirement. Both the
chip and the fibre optic holders were placed on stands to allow manoeuvrability with
the chip and cleaved fibre optic being viewed through a microscope. Voltages were
used to heat the CROW’s, with a DC probe used to send the voltage to the heating
pad. These DC probes were driven using an 8-channel driver (Qontrol Q8iv) with
305µV resolution which was sat atop a backplane (Qontrol BP8). This in turn was
connected to an interposer (Qontrol INT8FFC) which was wired to the DC probes.
The set-up was wholly controllable from the authors personal computer with code
primarily written in python. Matlab, however, was typically used in controlling the
OSA, though the ability to use python also existed. All python code was written by
the author, with the Matlab code a gift from Dr. Ayman Nassar Kamel.
==PAGE:36==
26
2 Experiment
Figure 2.3. Schematic of the setup. Note in reality each heating pad would have a DC
probe
2.0.3
Initial Characterisation
2.0.3.1
Coupling Angle, Losses and FSR
Five Devices were used in the experiment: one straight-wave guide (SWG), two 3-
ring CROW filters (15.1.2, 15.2.3), one 4-ring CROW filters (10.1.2) and two 5-ring
CROW filters (15-1-1, 15-1-2). The wavelength that the maximum transmission oc-
curs at shifts dependent on the angle of incidence into the grating coupler.
This
phenomenon can be seen in figures 2.4 and 2.5 for a straight waveguide and device
15.1.2. For the straight waveguide the shift is 10nm per degree. The exact shift for
15.1.2 is, however, more ambiguous. The straight waveguide was used as practice
for light coupling. Device 15.1.2 was used for a burn test, were it was determined
that the heaters should stop working above 4V. Thus 15.2.3 was ultimately used
for extinction ratio maximisation attempts, with a 75◦coupling angle used for cou-
pling light in all devices. Although this choice was somewhat arbitrary as no single
photon source existed on these devices, 75◦was chosen so as to not dismantle the
set-up to re-do this element but mainly as it minimised the coupling loss at around
1550nm on the CROW devices3. It can be seen from figures 2.4 - 2.8 that a 75 degree
coupling angle corresponded to a maximum transmission power from the through-
port at 1548.08nm for the straight waveguide, 1544.08nm for 15.1.2 (3-ring CROW),
1550.44nm for 15.2.3 (3-ring CROW), 1537.54 for 10.1.2 (4-ring CROW) and 1547.30
for device 15-1-1 (5-ring CROW). The corresponding minimum fibre to fibre losses
(FTF) were 10.26dBm for the straight wave guide, 9.59dBm for 15.1.2, 10.46 for
15.2.3, 9.25dBm for 10.1.2 (11.54dBm at 1550nm) and 9.50dBm for 15.1.1. The FSR
of all relevant devices was approximately 6.5nm, close to the expected value of 6.4nm.
3with the exception of the 4-ring CROW
==PAGE:37==
2 Experiment
27
Device Summary
Device
Max
Transmission
Power Wavelength
at 75◦(nm)
Corresponding Min
F2F Loss (dBm)
Average FSR(nm)
Straight Waveguide
1548.08
10.26
N/A
15.1.2 (3-ring)
1544.08
9.59
6.52
15.2.3 (3-ring)
1550.44
10.46
6.51
10.1.2 (4-ring)
1537.54
9.25
6.6
15.1.1 (5-ring)
1547.30
9.50
6.49
Table 2.1. Summary of device losses and peak transmission power through the throughport.
The FSR values were taken over a 30nm range.
2.0.3.2
Q-factor, Loss Co-eﬀicient and Tuneability
The Q-factor given in equation 1.33 is typically calculated for one resonator, however,
for multiple CROW in series with the same radii (termed uniform multiple ring res-
onators in the literature) this relationship holds [37]. It was therefore determined by
fitting a Lorentzian curve to 15.2.3, optimised using the WSM (see figure 2.9), and ex-
tracting the resonant wavelength and FWHM. The resonant wavelength, 1545.685nm,
was determined using the ’find peaks’ method from scipy.signal with the FWHM de-
termined to be 0.35nm. This gave a loaded Q-factor of 4416 and a finesse of 18.56.
Figure 2.4. Wavelength shift of peak transmission power as function of the coupling angle
for the straight waveguide. The minimum fibre to fibre loss occurs at 1548.8nm for a 79
degree coupling angle
==PAGE:38==
28
2 Experiment
Figure 2.5. Wavelength shift of peak transmission power as function of the coupling angle
for device 15.1.2. Notice resonance dips occur at the same wavelength as expected.
Figure 2.6. Throughport response of device 15.2.3 with reference level showing fibre to
fibre loss
==PAGE:39==
2 Experiment
29
Figure 2.7. Throughport response of device 10.1.2 with reference level showing fibre to
fibre loss
Figure 2.8. Throughport response of device 15.1.1 with reference level showing fibre to
fibre loss
==PAGE:40==
30
2 Experiment
The corresponding intrinsic Q-factor was 8363 were Pin was -5.07dBm and Pout was
-15.96dBm which gave T a value of 0.00314. The optical loss co-eﬀicient (α) was
calculated to be 2.93·10−3. The tuning range for the 15.2.3 was attained by applying
voltages to each ring separately and determining the shift in the resonance peak. This
was graphed and a linear fit applied with the slope giving the tuneability of each ring
which was found to be 14nm/V, for ring 1, 0.63nm/V for ring 2 and 0.20nm/V for
ring 3. The author is aware however that more data points should have been taken to
make this more accurate, particularly as the calculated R-squared values for fit 1 and
fit 3 are 0.86 and 0.85 respectively (0.94 for fit 1). For the 4-ring CROW two peaks
were visible however the tuneability was diﬀicult to determine. For example, for ring
1, the first peak follows a linear trend as one would expect, however the second peak,
following an exponential trend, has a larger resonance shift. Regardless, the data
seems to indicate an issue with thermal crosstalk due to both peaks’ large resonance
shifts relative to eachother. Usually, one would expect one peak to stay relatively
stable as the other shifts.
Figure 2.9.
Experimental data and fit to calculate loaded Q-factor. The fit has an R2
value of 0.985
==PAGE:41==
2.1 Experimental Procedure
31
((a))
((b))
((c))
((d))
Figure 2.10. Resonance shifts of both peaks for device 10.1.1
2.1
Experimental Procedure
The optimisation was carried online as previously stated. As a first step, it would be
ensured that the best coupling possible was attained at 1550nm for the throughport
using the PM upon which a scan of the throughport would be taken over 30nm on the
OSA. The largest resonant dip closest to 1550nm would be selected and inputted into
the laser and a 4nm scan taken. The fibre optic cable would next be shifted to the
drop port upon which the coupling would again be optimised at this new wavelength,
with 30nm and 4nm scans taken again. After this step the optimisation could begin.
For the WSM a target power would be selected based on the through port value at
1550nm e.g if the through port value was -6.5dBm, a target cost of -6.5dBm would
be selected.
If it was seen that this value was never being achieved it would be
adjusted accordingly. It should be noted that both optimisation algorithms engage
==PAGE:42==
32
2 Experiment
in minimisation of the cost. Thus, in the code, the negative of the cost function was
taken and one would therefore maximise instead of minimise. For example, if the
PM had a reading of -10dBm, the algorithm would read this value as 10dBm and try
to find a lower value, which in reality would be a higher value. This worked as the
transmission from the drop port was never a positive value. For the MM, a center
wavelength would be inputted into the code used to run the experiment. After a scan
of the OSA was finished, the data would be inputted into a dataframe and the power
at the center wavelength would be extracted by the code. The maximum powers on
both sides of the rejection band would likewise be extracted and the extinction ratio
calculated. The cost would be selected based on the wanted extinction e.g. 60dBm.
The inverse of this would be inputted into the code again due to the optimisation
algorithms minimisation procedure. Similarly, if it was found that this was never
being reached, it would be adjusted accordingly. The maximum values allowed for
the voltage inputs was capped at 3.8V due to the 4V cut off. However, it was seen
during some optimisation runs on the 4 and 5 ring CROW that the heaters would
stop working presumably due to burning out. Thus, it was decided to reduce the
max voltage to 2V, and incrementally increase this value if it was deemed necessary.
This necessity was determined by the fact of no target cost being reached (or nearly
reached) and the maximum achieved value relying on one or more of the heaters being
near the maximum allowed voltage. For example, when optimising the 4-ring CROW
it was seen that the best cost was reached when the 4th heater was close to 2V (see
2.11). Thus the max boundary was increased to 2.2V.
Figure 2.11. Part of log for an optimisation run. The best cost occurs when heater 4 is
near 2V, but is far from the target cost of -13dBm. The Best cost returned is the highest
reading found from the PM for that run, which in reality is -19dBm and -17dBm
Each algorithm would be given an initial 500 runs to attempt to maximise the cost.
If 200 runs occurred without a better cost being found, and before the 500 runs were
completed or the target cost was reached, the optimisation would stop. This was the
stopping procedure. Typically however the NM algorithm would be stopped manually
before this as one would be able to clearly see it was stuck in a local maxima (minima).
The machine learning model obtained would be saved, and on further runs re-invoked
to further improve it. A typical run of 500 would take approximately 9 minutes for
NM, 13 minutes for the GP and 9 minutes for DE for the WSM. After this first
run the GP would be ran again, and the NM would be given the voltages from the
DE that found the best cost i.e. these algorithms would be combined. The MM was
==PAGE:43==
2.2 Results
33
abandoned early on as it was found that the it performed no better than the WSM,
and would take approximately 62 minutes to complete for, for example, the GP. This
was due to the slowness of the OSA which would take ∼6-7 seconds to perform a
scan. Furthermore, when incorporated into a device with single photons present, the
optimisation carried out here would not use an OSA, therefore it was decided to focus
on the WSM.
2.2
Results
The optimisation was successful when applied on device 15.2.3 (figure 2.14) but not
when attempted on 10.1.2 and 15.1.1. The extinction ratio was found to be 46.05
dBm with the center wavelength at 1545.700nm.
For the 4-ring CROW the best
achieved extinction ratio was 46.74 dBm where the transmission at the center peak
was -19.46 dBm with the peak in the rejection band at -66.2dBm. For 10.1.1 the
extinction ratio was 50.43 with a peak pass band transmission of -18.75 and rejection
band of -69.18dBm. Therefore one can see a trend of the higher-order CROW filters
having a higher extinction ratio, whilst the expected flatter pass-band response is also
noticeable.
2.2.1
Comparison of Algorithms
It was found that the GP was a good addition to optimisation procedure. The NM
would easily and quickly become stuck in local maxima unless given a good starting
((a))
((b))
Figure 2.12. Initial and optimised drop and through ports of device 15.2.3. Center wave-
length is 1545.700nm. Extinction ratio is 46.06 dBm with rejection band peak at 1544.44
nm
==PAGE:44==
34
2 Experiment
((a))
[h]
((b))
Figure 2.13. Initial and best attempted optimisation of drop and through ports of device
15.2.3. Center wavelength is 1546.00nm.
((a))
((b))
Figure 2.14. Initial and best attempted optimisation of drop and through ports of device
10.1.1.
parameters4 i.e. already nearly optimised. The DE algorithm on the other hand
would rarely get stuck in local maxima however was slower to converge than then
GP. Given a good starting point, the NM would outperform DE. An example of
the performance of the GP and it’s benefit is seen in figure 2.15. It can be seen
that in the first 500 runs that the minimum is just about hit after run 200. This
is reduced to 125 in run 2 and 60 in run 3. The second advantage of the GP was
it’s ability to ’re-optimise’. Due to the high thermo-optic co-eﬀicient of silicon, the
precise location of the resonance peak would shift from one day to the next as no
thermal control was applied to the chip, resulting in the optimum voltages changing.
However with the GP the new optimum voltages would be found quicker than the
4That is, a good starting simplex
==PAGE:45==
2.3 Discussion
35
NM and DE with the former sometimes not converging at all (figure 2.16). The hyper-
parameters for the DE were ultimately chosen to be 7 for the population size (i.e. the
population size would be multiplied by 7 for a new generation), 0.2 for the cross-over
probability (i.e. probability a parameter was be resampled during a mutation in a
new generation) with a mutation scale between 0.5 and 0.9.
Various values were
chosen with these ultimately selected due to it being deemed that they gave the best
convergence within a reasonable time frame. Typically for optimising the DE would
be ran with it’s best parameters given to the NM. For the optimisation of 15.2.3
this process was carried out. The GP outperformed the DE-NM combination finding
a minimum of -10.817 after approximately 685 runs. The DE-NM combination best
returned cost was -11.2dBm after 500 runs of DE and 58 runs of the NM.
2.2.2
Stability
The stability of the set-up was effected mostly by the coupling. The devices main-
tained filter profile over many hours as shown in figures 2.17a-c however the set-up
suffers from coupling drift. Furthermore the heaters on the devices appear unstable.
These would stop working for varying voltage inputs instead of having the same tol-
erance. Furthermore, heaters would be appear to become unresponsive after having
before hand tolerable voltage inputs. This is seen for the optimised device 10-2-3 in
figure 2.17d. The author went back to this device in the hope of demonstrating wave-
length seeking. After no success a resonance shifting graph was carried out whereby
it was seen that ring 1 had become unresponsive.
2.3
Discussion
The GP machine learning algorithm has been shown to outperform the NM and
DE, and a combination of the two, when trained using DE. As far as the author
is aware, this is the first time that a 3-ring CROW has been optimised using GP.
The obtained extinction ratio is however far below the roughly 100dBm required for
usage on a single photon source chip where no off-chip filtering is used. However the
46.05dBm obtained is in keeping with similar devices found in the literature [38] [22].
Although the 4 and 5-ring CROW devices were not optimised it is suggested that the
100dBm target would not have been reached based on the provisional results. One
method to potentially achieve this 100dBm target would be to cascade the filters
similar to work undertaken in [39] and [40], where in effect the 46.05dBm achieved
here would be doubled. It is suggested the optimisation on the 4 and 5-ring CROW
did not work due to the large thermal cross talk exhibited (see figure 2.10) and poor
tuneability displayed by all devices which was typically less than half the FSR. To
reduce thermal cross talk future rings could be fabricated with a slightly larger inter-
ring distance or thermal isolation trenches could be introduced. The chip showed
good overall stability when maintaining a particular filter profile. There was however
==PAGE:46==
36
2 Experiment
((a)) First Run
((b)) Second Run
((c)) Third Run
Figure 2.15. Graphs Showing the GP machine learning algorithms ability to find the target
cost quicker after having learned the input/output relationship of device 15.2.3
coupling drift. This could be improved by having the set-up placed on a vibration
isolation table.
==PAGE:47==
2.3 Discussion
37
((a)) Cost v Run for NM. In reality the cost
is negative with units of dBm
((b)) Cost v Run for GP
((c)) Logs for the graphs above. The target cost was -11.5dBm
Figure 2.16. Graphs showing that GP machine learning algorithm can find the optimum
were the NM cannot.NM was given starting parameters from a run of the DE algorithm
==PAGE:48==
38
2 Experiment
((a)) Stability of the profile over 8 hours
((b)) Stability of the profile over 8 hours for a
second 5-CROW filter
((c)) The transmission peak transmission stays
stable. 700s is approximately 2 hours
((d)) The optimised device, 15-2-3, gives little
response on heater 1
Figure 2.17. Stability Graphs
==PAGE:49==
Conclusion
The objective of this master thesis was to optimise the extinction ratio of 3,4 and 5-
ring CROW for pump light filtering on a chip containing a single photon source. To
that end, and using a fully automated set-up, an online machine learning algorithm,
Gaussian process regression GP, was employed to investigate if machine learning
could speed up the process of optimisation by learning the input-output relationship.
The Nelder-mead (NM) algorithm, a standard in such optimisation problems, was em-
ployed alongside differential evolution (DE) as a control. It was found that GP did
indeed have a speed up over both the NM and DE algorithms aswell as their combi-
nation. The optimisation was successful for a 3-ring CROW, obtaining an extinction
ratio of 46.05dBm, however was unachievable on the higher ring CROW. Although
only successful on one device, this thesis proves that ML is a useful conception in opti-
misation problems involving ring-resonators and potentially other integrated devices
such as Mach-Zender interferometers. Furthermore, it hints that a cascaded CROW
system maybe a better solution to hitting the 100dBm target required for sole on-chip
pump filtering.
==PAGE:50==
40
==PAGE:51==
Appendices
==PAGE:52==
==PAGE:53==
Appendix Conclusion
43
.0.1
Picture of Set-up
Figure .18. Picture of the Set-up. The laser, OSA and Power meter are not shown
.0.2
Code
.0.2.1
Code for the Wavelength Seeking Method
1 #FOR EXPERIMENT
2 from scipy.io import loadmat
==PAGE:54==
44
Appendix Conclusion
3 import pyvisa as visa #as visa # note the recommended way to import pyvisa
changed as there is an unrelated visa module
4 import qontrol
#to control DC probes
5 import serial
6 import numpy as np
7 import re
#used for finding only numbers
8 from matplotlib import pyplot as plt
9 import pandas as pd
10 import time
11 import random
12 from ThorlabsPM100 import ThorlabsPM100
13
14 #FOR MLOOP
15 from __future__ import absolute_import , division, print_function
16 __metaclass__ = type
17
18 #Imports for M-LOOP
19 import mloop.interfaces as mli
20 import mloop.controllers as mlc
21 import mloop.visualizations as mlv
22 import mloop.learners as mll
23
24 #OPEN QONTROL
25
26 serial_port_name = "COM3"
27 q = qontrol.QXOutput(serial_port_name = serial_port_name , response_timeout =
0.1)
28 print ("Qontroller '{:}' initialised with firmware {:} and {:} channels".
format(q.device_id, q.firmware, q.n_chs) )
29
30 rm = visa.ResourceManager()
31 rm.list_resources()
32 inst = rm.open_resource('USB0::0x1313::0x8078::P0017921::INSTR',
read_termination='\n')
33 power_meter = ThorlabsPM100(inst=inst)
34 inst.timeout = 500
35
36 #laser = rm.open_resource('GPIB0::20::INSTR')
37
38 print("Measurement type :", power_meter.getconfigure)
39 print("Current value :", power_meter.read)
40
41 inst.write('sense:corr:wav 1550.000') #sets the operation wavelength
42 inst.write('power:dc:unit dBm') #sets the power unit
43
44 class CustomInterface(mli.Interface):
45
46
#Initialization of the interface, including this method is optional
47
def __init__(self):
48
#You must include the super command to call the parent class,
Interface, constructor
49
super(CustomInterface ,self).__init__()
50
51
#Attributes of the interface can be added here
==PAGE:55==
Appendix Conclusion
45
52
#If you want to precalculate any variables etc. this is the place to
do it
53
#In this example we will just define the location of the minimum
54
#params_dicts=(np.around(np.array(params_dict['params']),3))
55
56
#You must include the get_next_cost_dict method in your class
57
#this method is called whenever M-LOOP wants to run an experiment
58
def get_next_cost_dict(self,params_dicts):
59
60
#Get parameters from the provided dictionary
61
#params1 = params_dict['params']
62
params = params_dicts['params']
63
64
#params2 = list(map(float, params))
65
#params = np.round_(params_1, decimals = 3)
66
67
#Here you can include the code to run your experiment given a
particular set of parameters
68
#In this example we will just evaluate a sum of sinc functions
69
70
pyval1 = params.item(0) #to change class np.float64 to class float
71
pyval2 = params.item(1)
72
pyval3 = params.item(2)
73
#pyval4 = params.item(3)
74
#pyval5 = params.item(4)
75
76
77
q.v[0]=pyval1
78
q.v[1]=pyval2
79
q.v[2]=pyval3
80
#q.v[3]=pyval4
81
#q.v[4]=pyval5
82
83
time.sleep(1)
84
85
wavelength = 1539.692
86
87
power_cost = inst.query('measure:power?')
88
89
90
fl_power_cost = float(power_cost)
91
for_cost = round(fl_power_cost ,3)
92
print('Power is',for_cost)
93
94
for_cost_pos = -(for_cost)
95
cost = for_cost_pos
96
#uncer = 0 # #There is no uncertainty in our result
97
#q.v[0]=0
98
#q.v[1]=0
99
#q.v[2]=0
100
101
#time.sleep(1)
102
103
bad = False #The evaluation will always be a success
104
==PAGE:56==
46
Appendix Conclusion
105
#The cost, uncertainty and bad boolean must all be returned as a
dictionary
106
#You can include other variables you want to record as well if you
want
107
cost_dict = {'cost':cost, 'bad':bad} #'uncer':uncer, include if have
uncertainty (uncer)
108
return cost_dict
109
110
def main():
111
#M-LOOP can be run with three commands
112
113
#First create your interface
114
interface = CustomInterface()
115
116
controller = mlc.NelderMeadController(interface,
117
controller_type='nelder_mead',
118
#training_type='gaussian_process',
119
#controller_type = 'gaussian_process'
default is gaussian process
120
max_num_runs = 500,
121
max_num_runs_without_better_params =
60,
122
target_cost = 13,
123
num_params = 3,
124
#trust_region =(0.4,0.,0.2),
125
update_hyperparameters = True,
126
no_delay = False,
127
initial_simplex_corner=[0,0,0], #
1.19377534 0.31627258 2.98778305
128
initial_simplex_scale = 1,
129
min_boundary = [0,0,0],
130
max_boundary = [2.4,2.4,2.4],
131
predict_global_minima_at_end
= True)
132
controller.optimize()
133
#controller.find_global_minima()
134
135
#The results of the optimization will be saved to files and can also be
accessed as attributes of the controller.
136
print('Best parameters found:')
137
print(controller.best_params)
138
139
#You can also run the default sets of visualizations for the controller
with one command
140
mlv.show_all_default_visualizations(controller)
141
142
143
#q.v[0]=0
144
#q.v[1]=0
145
#q.v[2]=0
146
147 #Ensures main is run when this code is run as a script
148 if __name__ == '__main__':
149
main()
150
151
def main():
==PAGE:57==
Appendix Conclusion
47
152
#M-LOOP can be run with three commands
153
154
#First create your interface
155
interface = CustomInterface()
156
157
controller = mlc.GaussianProcessController(interface,
158
controller_type='
GaussianProcessController',
159
training_type='differential_evolution
',
160
#controller_type = 'gaussian_process'
default is gaussian process
161
max_num_runs = 500,
162
#max_num_runs_without_better_params =
150,
163
target_cost = 14.4,
164
num_params = 3,
165
#trust_region =(2,2,2),
166
update_hyperparameters = True,
167
no_delay = False,
168
first_params =[0.09762921, 0.5106369,
1.35427202],
169
min_boundary = [0,0,0],
170
max_boundary = [2,2,2],
171
predict_global_minima_at_end
= True,
172
learner_archive_filename ='aaaaaaanew
', #– Filename for archive. The
archive contains costs, parameter
history and other details
depending on the controller type.
Default ‘’controller_archive.
173
learner_archive_file_type ='txt') #–
File type for archive. Can be
either ‘’txt for a human readable
text file, ‘’pkl for a python
pickle file, ‘’mat for a matlab
file, or None to forgo saving a
controller archive. Default ‘’txt
.)
174
controller.optimize()
175
#controller.find_global_minima()
176
177
#The results of the optimization will be saved to files and can also be
accessed as attributes of the controller.
178
print('Best parameters found:')
179
print(controller.best_params)
180
181
#You can also run the default sets of visualizations for the controller
with one command
182
mlv.show_all_default_visualizations(controller)
183
184
185
#q.v[0]=0
186
#q.v[1]=0
187
#q.v[2]=0
==PAGE:58==
48
Appendix Conclusion
188
189 #Ensures main is run when this code is run as a script
190 if __name__ == '__main__':
191
main()
192
193
def main():
194
#M-LOOP can be run with three commands
195
196
#First create your interface
197
interface = CustomInterface()
198
#Next create the controller. Provide it with your interface and any
options you want to set
199
controller = mlc.DifferentialEvolutionController(interface,
200
controller_type='
differential_evolution',
201
training_type='differential_evolution
',
202
#controller_type = 'gaussian_process'
default is gaussian process
203
max_num_runs = 500,
204
max_num_runs_without_better_params =
200,
205
target_cost = 14,
206
num_params = 3,
207
#trust_region =(0.3),
208
no_delay = False,
209
first_params =[0,0,0],
210
min_boundary = [0,0,0],
211
max_boundary = [2,2,2],
212
cost_has_noise = True,
213
evolution_strategy = 'best1',
#evolution strategy can
be 'best1', 'best2', 'rand1' and
'rand2'. Best uses the best
point, rand uses a random one,
the number indicates the number
of directions added.
214
population_size = 7,
#initial is
15
#a multiplier
for the population size of a
generation
215
mutation_scale = (0.5, 0.9), #initial
is(o.5,1)
#the minimum
and maximum value for the
mutation scale factor. Each
generation is randomly selected
from this. Each value must be
between 0 and 2.
216
cross_over_probability = 0.2)#initial
0.6
#the probability a
parameter will be resampled
during a mutation in a new
generation
217
#restart_tolerance = 0.02,
#the fraction the
==PAGE:59==
Appendix Conclusion
49
standard deviation in the costs
of the population must reduce
from the initial sample, before
the search is restarted.
218
#learner_archive_filename = 'DE
Learner',
#filename of the
learner archive, can include path
219
#learner_archive_file_type = 'mat' )
#file type of the learner
archive)
220
#learner = mll.NeuralNetLearner)
221
#To run M-LOOP and find the optimal parameters just use the controller
method optimize
222
controller.optimize()
223
224
#The results of the optimization will be saved to files and can also be
accessed as attributes of the controller.
225
print('Best parameters found:')
226
print(controller.best_params)
227
228
#You can also run the default sets of visualizations for the controller
with one command
229
mlv.show_all_default_visualizations(controller)
230
231
232
#q.v[0]=0
233
#q.v[1]=0
234
#q.v[2]=0
235
236 #Ensures main is run when this code is run as a script
237 if __name__ == '__main__':
238
main()
.0.2.2
Code Max Method
1 #FOR EXPERIMENT
2 from scipy.io import loadmat
3 import pyvisa as visa #as visa # note the recommended way to import pyvisa
changed as there is an unrelated visa module
4 import qontrol
#to control DC probes
5 import serial
6 import numpy as np
7 import re
#used for finding only numbers
8 from matplotlib import pyplot as plt
9 import pandas as pd
10 import time
11 import random
12 from ThorlabsPM100 import ThorlabsPM100
13
14 #FOR MLOOP
15 from __future__ import absolute_import , division, print_function
==PAGE:60==
50
Appendix Conclusion
16 __metaclass__ = type
17
18 #Imports for M-LOOP
19 import mloop.interfaces as mli
20 import mloop.controllers as mlc
21 import mloop.visualizations as mlv
22 import mloop.learners as mll
23
24 #OPEN QONTROL
25
26 serial_port_name = "COM3"
27 q = qontrol.QXOutput(serial_port_name = serial_port_name , response_timeout =
0.1)
28 print ("Qontroller '{:}' initialised with firmware {:} and {:} channels".
format(q.device_id, q.firmware, q.n_chs) )
29
30 rm = visa.ResourceManager() #to take the python backend
31 inst1 = rm.list_resources()
32
33 print(rm.list_resources())
34 osa = rm.open_resource('GPIB0::1::INSTR') #,read_termination = ';',
write_termination=";"
35 osa.timeout = 25000
36 print(osa.query("*IDN?"))
37
38 osa.write('WRTA') # Sets the trace A write mode. 9-23 of manual
39 osa.write('DSPA') # Selects display or non-display for trace A.
40 osa.write('ACTV0')# Activate trace selection
41 osa.write('SD0')
# sets delimiter to ','
42 osa.write('CTRWL 1546.130') # centre wavelength 1546.3 1546.183
43 osa.write('SPAN 4')
# setspan
44 #osa.write('START WL 1500nm')
45 #osa.write('STOP WL 1550nm')
46 osa.write('LSCL 10') #Sets the Y-axis scale on the level display graph.**.*
: 0.1 to 10.0 (0.1 step)
47 osa.write('REFL -30')
# set reference level
48 osa.write('RESLN 2')
# set the resolution. 2.0 recommended when using
AQ4321A laser
49 osa.write('SMPL 1000') # set number of sampling points
50 osa.write('SMID')
# set the sensitivity. SENS NORM RANGE HOLD = SNHD /
SENS NORM RANGE AUTO =SNAT
51
#SENS MID = SMID / SENS HIGH1/2/3 = SHI1 SH2 SH3
52
53 #for 4nm scans
54 #osa.write('SMPL 2500') # set number of sampling points
55 #osa.write('SMID')
56
57 #for 3nm scan
58 #osa.write('SMPL 1000') # set number of sampling points
59 #osa.write('SMID')
60
61 osa.write('SGL') # single sweep
62
63 #osa.write('RPT') # repeated sweep Sweep
64
==PAGE:61==
Appendix Conclusion
51
65 #osa.write('STP') #Stop sweep
66
67 class CustomInterface(mli.Interface):
68
69
#Initialization of the interface, including this method is optional
70
def __init__(self):
71
#You must include the super command to call the parent class,
Interface, constructor
72
super(CustomInterface ,self).__init__()
73
74
#Attributes of the interface can be added here
75
#If you want to precalculate any variables etc. this is the place to
do it
76
#In this example we will just define the location of the minimum
77
#self.minimum_params = np.array([0,0,0])
78
79
#You must include the get_next_cost_dict method in your class
80
#this method is called whenever M-LOOP wants to run an experiment
81
def get_next_cost_dict(self,params_dict):
82
83
#Get parameters from the provided dictionary
84
params_1 = params_dict['params'] #need to make dict
85
params = np.round_(params_1, decimals = 3)
86
87
#Here you can include the code to run your experiment given a
particular set of parameters
88
#In this example we will just evaluate a sum of sinc functions
89
90
pyval1 = params.item(0) #to change class np.float64 to class float
91
pyval2 = params.item(1)
92
pyval3 = params.item(2)
93
pyval4 = params.item(3)
94
95
osa.write('SGL')
96
97
time.sleep(4)
98
99
q.v[0]=pyval1
100
q.v[1]=pyval2
101
q.v[2]=pyval3
102
q.v[3]=pyval4
103
104
osa.write('SGL')
105
106
time.sleep(15)
107
108
#q.v[0]=0
109
#q.v[1]=0
110
#q.v[2]=0
111
112
wavelength_raw = (osa.query('WDATA'))
113
power_raw = (osa.query('LDATA'))
114
115
#To extract only numbers and create a list
==PAGE:62==
52
Appendix Conclusion
116
wavelength_num = [float(s) for s in re.findall(r'-?\d+\.?\d*',
wavelength_raw)]
117
power_num = [float(s) for s in re.findall(r'-?\d+\.?\d*', power_raw)
]
118
119
#get rid of first value, required
120
wavelength_num2 = wavelength_num[1:]
121
power_num2 = power_num[1:]
122
123
#create array, can also graph the list
124
data_wavelength = np.array(wavelength_num2)
125
data_power = np.array(power_num2)
126
127
#put OSA data into a dict
128
data_dict = {'Wavelength':data_wavelength , 'Power':data_power}
129
130
131
#put OSA data into a dataframe
132
df = pd.DataFrame(data_dict, columns=['Wavelength','Power'])
133
134
135
#find wavelength of interest and it's corresponding power
136
Find_wl
= df.where(df['Wavelength'] == 1546.140).dropna(how='all').
dropna(how='all',axis=1)
137
138
139
#extract the power, it is a float
140
get_pow = Find_wl['Power'].tolist()[0]
141
142
if get_pow <-50:
143
144
get_pow = -49
145
146
147
148
df_copy = df.copy()
149
150
df1 = df_copy.iloc[:230,:]
151
df2 = df_copy.iloc[2200:3500,:] #take row 1000 to row 4000 the comma
then means take all columns
152
df3 = df_copy.iloc[3500:,:] #means go from 4000 to end
153
max_rej1 = df1['Power'].max()
154
cost1 = (get_pow - max_rej1)
155
print('The power at 1546.140 is',get_pow,'\nThe rejection band max
is',max_rej1,'\nThe cost is',cost1)
156
157
cost = 1/(cost1)
158
159
#uncer = 0 # #There is no uncertainty in our result
160
161
bad = False #The evaluation will always be a success
162
163
#time.sleep(1) #Add a small time delay to mimic a real experiment
164
==PAGE:63==
Appendix Conclusion
53
165
#The cost, uncertainty and bad boolean must all be returned as a
dictionary
166
#You can include other variables you want to record as well if you
want
167
cost_dict = {'cost':cost, 'bad':bad} #'uncer':uncer, include if have
uncertainty (uncer)
168
return cost_dict
169
170
def main():
171
#M-LOOP can be run with three commands
172
173
#First create your interface
174
interface = CustomInterface()
175
176
controller = mlc.NelderMeadController(interface,
177
controller_type='nelder_mead',
178
#training_type='gaussian_process',
179
#controller_type = 'gaussian_process'
default is gaussian process
180
max_num_runs = 500,
181
#max_num_runs_without_better_params =
400,
182
target_cost = 0.016,
183
num_params = 4,
184
#trust_region =(0.4,0.,0.2),
185
update_hyperparameters = True,
186
no_delay = False,
187
initial_simplex_corner=[0.8626605,
1.91743895, 1.76069341, 2], #
1.19377534 0.31627258 2.98778305
188
initial_simplex_scale = 0.3,
189
min_boundary = [0,0,0,0],
190
max_boundary = [3,3,3,3],
191
predict_global_minima_at_end
= True)
192
controller.optimize()
193
#controller.find_global_minima()
194
195
#The results of the optimization will be saved to files and can also be
accessed as attributes of the controller.
196
print('Best parameters found:')
197
print(controller.best_params)
198
199
#You can also run the default sets of visualizations for the controller
with one command
200
mlv.show_all_default_visualizations(controller)
201
202
203
#q.v[0]=0
204
#q.v[1]=0
205
#q.v[2]=0
206
207 #Ensures main is run when this code is run as a script
208 if __name__ == '__main__':
209
main()
210
==PAGE:64==
54
Appendix Conclusion
211
def main():
212
#M-LOOP can be run with three commands
213
214
#First create your interface
215
interface = CustomInterface()
216
217
controller = mlc.GaussianProcessController(interface,
218
controller_type='
GaussianProcessController',
219
training_type='differential_evolution
',
220
#controller_type = 'gaussian_process'
default is gaussian process
221
max_num_runs = 500,
222
#max_num_runs_without_better_params =
150,
223
target_cost = 0.016,
224
num_params = 4,
225
#trust_region =(2,2,2),
226
update_hyperparameters = True,
227
no_delay = False,
228
first_params =[0. , 0.15965828,
1.05171324, 0.98964165],
229
min_boundary = [0,0,0,0],
230
max_boundary = [3,3,3,3],
231
predict_global_minima_at_end
= True,
232
learner_archive_filename ='aaGP3', #–
Filename for archive. The
archive contains costs, parameter
history and other details
depending on the controller type.
Default ‘’controller_archive.
233
learner_archive_file_type ='txt') #–
File type for archive. Can be
either ‘’txt for a human readable
text file, ‘’pkl for a python
pickle file, ‘’mat for a matlab
file, or None to forgo saving a
controller archive. Default ‘’txt
.)
234
controller.optimize()
235
#controller.find_global_minima()
236
237
#The results of the optimization will be saved to files and can also be
accessed as attributes of the controller.
238
print('Best parameters found:')
239
print(controller.best_params)
240
241
#You can also run the default sets of visualizations for the controller
with one command
242
mlv.show_all_default_visualizations(controller)
243
244
245
#q.v[0]=0
246
#q.v[1]=0
==PAGE:65==
Appendix Conclusion
55
247
#q.v[2]=0
248
249 #Ensures main is run when this code is run as a script
250 if __name__ == '__main__':
251
main()
252
253
254 def main():
255
#M-LOOP can be run with three commands
256
257
#First create your interface
258
interface = CustomInterface()
259
#Next create the controller. Provide it with your interface and any
options you want to set
260
controller = mlc.DifferentialEvolutionController(interface,
261
controller_type='
differential_evolution',
262
training_type='differential_evolution
',
263
#controller_type = 'gaussian_process'
default is gaussian process
264
max_num_runs = 500,
265
max_num_runs_without_better_params =
200,
266
target_cost = 0.016,
267
num_params = 4,
268
#trust_region =(0.3),
269
no_delay = False,
270
first_params =[0. , 0.15965828,
1.05171324, 0.98964165],
271
min_boundary = [0,0,0,0],
272
max_boundary = [3,3,3,3],
273
cost_has_noise = True,
274
evolution_strategy = 'best1',
#evolution strategy can
be 'best1', 'best2', 'rand1' and
'rand2'. Best uses the best
point, rand uses a random one,
the number indicates the number
of directions added.
275
population_size = 7,
#initial is
15
#a multiplier
for the population size of a
generation
276
mutation_scale = (0.5, 0.9), #initial
is(o.5,1)
#the minimum
and maximum value for the
mutation scale factor. Each
generation is randomly selected
from this. Each value must be
between 0 and 2.
277
cross_over_probability = 0.2)#initial
0.6
#the probability a
parameter will be resampled
during a mutation in a new
==PAGE:66==
56
Appendix Conclusion
generation
278
#restart_tolerance = 0.02,
#the fraction the
standard deviation in the costs
of the population must reduce
from the initial sample, before
the search is restarted.
279
#learner_archive_filename = 'DE
Learner',
#filename of the
learner archive, can include path
280
#learner_archive_file_type = 'mat' )
#file type of the learner
archive)
281
#learner = mll.NeuralNetLearner)
282
#To run M-LOOP and find the optimal parameters just use the controller
method optimize
283
controller.optimize()
284
285
#The results of the optimization will be saved to files and can also be
accessed as attributes of the controller.
286
print('Best parameters found:')
287
print(controller.best_params)
288
289
#You can also run the default sets of visualizations for the controller
with one command
290
mlv.show_all_default_visualizations(controller)
291
292
293
#q.v[0]=0
294
#q.v[1]=0
295
#q.v[2]=0
296
297 #Ensures main is run when this code is run as a script
298 if __name__ == '__main__':
299
main()
.0.2.3
Code for Stability Measurements
1
import time
2 import datetime
3 from datetime import datetime
4 rounds = 28800 #8 hours
5 #random.seed(1)
6 data = {}
7 #0.0034133
0.7910493
0.07501028 1.65049013 0. voltages for first one
8 #1.96303373 0.71518848 1.55592281 0.
1.65934322
9 #0.11522972 0.88192015 0.54594177 1.83592076
10 a=0.11522972
11 b=0.88192015
12 c= 0.54594177
13 d=1.83592076
==PAGE:67==
Appendix Conclusion
57
14 #e=1.65934322
15
16 q.v[0]=a
17 q.v[1]=b
18 q.v[2]=c
19 q.v[3]=d
20 #q.v[4]=e
21
22
23 for i in range(0,rounds):
24
25
26
#osa.write('SGL')
27
28
time.sleep(1)
29
30
wavelength = 1545.370
31
power = inst.query('measure:power?')
32
#wavelength_raw = (osa.query('WDATA'))
33
#power_raw = (osa.query('LDATA'))
34
35
if i%100 == 0:
36
osa.write('SGL')
37
time.sleep(45)
38
osa.timeout = 25000
39
wavelength_raw = (osa.query('WDATA'))
40
power_raw = (osa.query('LDATA'))
41
42
#To extract only numbers and create a list
43
wavelength_num = [float(s) for s in re.findall(r'-?\d+\.?\d*',
wavelength_raw)]
44
power_num = [float(s) for s in re.findall(r'-?\d+\.?\d*', power_raw)
]
45
46
#get rid of first value, required
47
wavelength_num2 = wavelength_num[1:]
48
power_num2 = power_num[1:]
49
50
#create array, can also graph the list
51
wavelength = np.array(wavelength_num2)
52
power = np.array(power_num2)
53
54
dt = datetime.now()
55
56
# getting the timestamp
57
ts = datetime.timestamp(dt)
58
59
# Add the timestamp, wavelength , and power to the dictionary
60
data[ts] = {'wavelength': wavelength, 'power': power}
61
62
63
data_dict = {'Voltage_1':[a], 'Voltage_2':[b], 'Voltage_3':[c],'
Voltage_3':[d], 'Power(dBm)':[power], 'Wavelength(nm)':[wavelength]}
64
#print(data_tuples)
==PAGE:68==
58
Appendix Conclusion
65
data_dict1 = {'Voltage_1':[a], 'Voltage_2':[b], 'Voltage_3':[c],'
Voltage_1':[d]}
66
data_dict2 = {'Power(dBm)':[power]}
67
data_dict3 = {'Wavelength(nm)':[wavelength]}
68
69
if i == 0:
70
df = pd.DataFrame(data_dict, columns=['Voltage_1', 'Voltage_2', '
Voltage_3','Voltage_4', 'Power(dBm)', 'Wavelength(nm)']) #These
values must match dic values inside ''
71
#df.head() #df.head shows first 5 rows. df is the table
72
df_1 = pd.DataFrame(data_dict1, columns=['Voltage_1', 'Voltage_2', '
Voltage_3','Voltage_4',])
73
df_2 = pd.DataFrame(data_dict2, columns=['Power(dBm)'])
74
df_3 = pd.DataFrame(data_dict3, columns=['Wavelength(nm)'])
75
76
else: #dataframe is created, and now we create new rows with new data
variables from the next exp. run
77
78
new_row = {'Voltage_1':[a], 'Voltage_2':[b], 'Voltage_3':[c], '
Voltage_3':[d], 'Power(dBm)':[power], 'Wavelength(nm)':[
wavelength]}
79
df_row = pd.DataFrame(data_dict, columns=['Voltage_1', 'Voltage_2',
'Voltage_3', 'Power(dBm)', 'Wavelength(nm)'])
80
df = pd.concat([df,df_row], axis=0, ignore_index=True) #concat to df
, the new row df rowend
81
82
new_row1 = {'Voltage_1':[a], 'Voltage_2':[b], 'Voltage_3':[c],'
Voltage_3':[d]}
83
df_row1 = pd.DataFrame(data_dict1, columns=['Voltage_1', 'Voltage_2'
, 'Voltage_3'])
84
85
df_1 = pd.concat([df_1,df_row1], axis=0, ignore_index=True) #concat
to df, the new row df rowend
86
87
new_row2 = {'Power(dBm)':[power]}
88
df_row2 = pd.DataFrame(data_dict2, columns=['Power(dBm)'])
89
90
df_2 = pd.concat([df_2,df_row2], axis=0, ignore_index=True) #concat
to df, the new row df rowend
91
92
new_row3 = {'Wavelength(nm)':[wavelength]}
93
df_row3 = pd.DataFrame(data_dict3, columns=['Wavelength(nm)'])
94
95
df_3 = pd.concat([df_3,df_row3], axis=0, ignore_index=True) #concat
to df, the new row df rowend
96
97
98 #q.v[0]=0
99 #q.v[1]=0
100 #q.v[2]=0
101
102 df.to_csv('./df_Alldata_Stab.csv', index=False) #index=false to not save
indexes #s is the seed used
103 np.save('OSA_2nd.npy', data)
104
==PAGE:69==
Appendix Conclusion
59
105 timestamps = list(data.keys())
106 #print(len(timestamps))
107 timestamps = [timestamps[i] for i in range(0, len(timestamps), 32)] #divides
no of tme stamps by 50
108 #print(len(values))
109
110 #timestamps = list(data.keys())
111 #print(len(timestamps))
112
113 waves = []
# [ [] , [] , [] ]
114 power = []
115
116 for t in timestamps:
117
waves.append(data[t]['wavelength'])
118
power.append(data[t]['power'])
119
120 power = np.array(power)
121 power = np.where(power < -80, -80, power)
122 power = power.tolist()
123
124 for i in range(len(waves)):
125
if i == 0:
126
label = 'Initial'
127
else:
128
label = 'Hour ' + str(i)
129
plt.plot(waves[i], power[i], label=label, linewidth=0.7)
130
plt.xlabel('Wavelength (s)',fontsize = 10)
131
plt.ylabel('Transmission (dBm)',fontsize = 10)
132
plt.xticks(fontsize = 10)
133
plt.yticks(fontsize = 10)
134
plt.title(label ='Drop Port Transmission with Constant Voltage and
Wavelength', fontsize = 10)
135 plt.legend(fontsize='10')
136 plt.show()
.0.2.4
Code for Fitting Lorentzian
1 import numpy as np
2 import matplotlib.pyplot as plt
3 import scipy.optimize
4 from scipy.optimize import leastsq
5 from scipy import io
6 from scipy.optimize import curve_fit
7 import lmfit as lm
8
9 loaded_xdata = io.loadmat(r"C:\Users\Daniel\OneDrive\Documents\DTU Courses\
Master Thesis\coding\x75data_for fit.mat",struct_as_record=False)
10 loaded_ydata = io.loadmat(r"C:\Users\Daniel\OneDrive\Documents\DTU Courses\
Master Thesis\coding\Y75data_for fit.mat",struct_as_record=False)
11
12 #xData, yData = np.loadtxt('HEMAT_1.dat', unpack=True )
==PAGE:70==
60
Appendix Conclusion
13 xData1 = loaded_xdata
14 yData1 = loaded_ydata
15
16 print(xData1)
17 xData2 = [[element for element in upperElement] for upperElement in xData1['
x75data']]
18
19 #type(xData1)
20 #print(xData2)
21
22 xdata2 = xData1['x75data']
23 xdata = xdata2.astype(float)
24 xdata = xdata[0, :] #data needs to be a 1 row array.
25
26 ydata2 = yData1['y75data']
27 ydata = ydata2.astype(float)
28 ydata = ydata[0, :] #data needs to be a 1 row array.
29
30 print(ydata)
31
32 from scipy.signal import find_peaks
33 # Find the peaks in the data
34 peaks, _ = find_peaks(ydata)
35
36 # Get the x-coordinate of the highest peak
37 x0_guess = xdata[peaks[np.argmax(ydata[peaks])]]
38
39 # Use the x0_guess as the initial guess for the center parameter
40 p0 = [a_guess, x0_guess]
41
42 print(x0_guess)
43 # Fit the data
44 #popt, pcov = curve_fit(lorentzian , xdata, ydata, p0 = p0)
45
46 # Define the asymmetric Lorentzian function
47 def asymmetric_lorentzian(x, A, x0, gamma, C):
48
return A / ((x - x0) ** 2 + gamma ** 2) + C
49
50 # Fit the data
51 p0 = [40, x0_guess, 1.19, 100]
# Initial guess for the parameters
52 popt, pcov = curve_fit(asymmetric_lorentzian , xdata, ydata, p0)
53
54 #A, x0, gamma, C = popt
55 #FWHM = 2*gamma #gamma determines the width of the peak at half maximum
height
56
57 # Plot the data and the fit
58 plt.plot(xdata, ydata, '-', label='data')
59 plt.plot(xdata, asymmetric_lorentzian(xdata, *popt), '-', label='fit')
60 plt.xlabel('Wavelength (nm)',fontsize = 10)
61 plt.ylabel('Transmission (dBm)',fontsize = 10)
62 plt.xticks(fontsize = 10)
63 plt.yticks(fontsize = 10)
64 plt.title(label ='Data and Fit to Determine Loaded Q-factor', fontsize = 10)
65 plt.legend(fontsize='10')
==PAGE:71==
Appendix Conclusion
61
66
67 # Add the FWHM to the legend
68 plt.legend(['data', 'fit',f'FWHM = {FWHM:.2f}'])
69 plt.text(0.769, 0.83, f'FWHM = {FWHM:.2f}nm', transform=plt.gca().transAxes,
fontsize=9.5,
70
verticalalignment='top')
71 plt.show()
.0.2.5
Code for R-Squared
1 y_pred = asymmetric_lorentzian(xdata, *popt)
2 SS_res = np.sum((ydata - y_pred) ** 2)
3 SS_tot = np.sum((ydata - np.mean(ydata)) ** 2)
4 r_squared = 1 - (SS_res / SS_tot)
5 print(f'R-squared: {r_squared:.4f}')
.0.3
Machine Learning Algorithm - Artificial Neural Network
At one stage I was trying to employ an ANN. This was written but taken out of the
main body as it was not used. It is thus here now for pedagogical reasons only.
ANN’s are computational models inspired by the structure and function of the bio-
logical nervous system [41]. They are composed of interconnected ”neurons” that can
process and transmit information, and are capable of learning and adapting to new
data. It has been shown that that ANN’s can approximate most continuous functions
to any degree of accuracy by appropriately choosing the number of neurons [42], and
are particularly useful when dealing with non-linear mappings. An ANN consists
of an input layer, one or more hidden layers, and an output layer. The input layer
receives the input data, and each layer consists of one or more ”neurons” that process
the data and pass it on to the next layer. The output layer produces the final output
of the network. The output of a neuron is computed using an activation function,
which is a mathematical function that determines the output of the neuron based
on its input. The connections between neurons are represented by weights, which
determine the strength of the influence of one neuron on another. During training,
the weights of the connections are adjusted based on the error between the predicted
output of the network and the true output, using an optimization algorithm such as
gradient descent. This is termed ’error back propogation’ and is widely employed in
ANN’s. An heuristic example is as follows:
1. Assume we have an input layer containing three neurons x1, x2, x3, one hidden
layer containing two neurons h1, h2 and an output layer containing one neuron
y
==PAGE:72==
62
Appendix Conclusion
2. The input data is passed through the input layer and then multiplied by a set
of weights, w1, w2 and w3 before being sent to the hidden layer
3. The output of each hidden layer can be represented mathematically as h1 =
af(x1 · w1 + x2 · w2 + x3 · w3 + b1)
h2 = af(x1 · w4 + x2 · w5 + x3 · w6 + b2)
were af stands for activation function
4. The activation function determines whether the neuron transmits it’s output to
the output layer y
Numerous activation functions exist such as the rectified linear unit function (ReLu)
[43], the tanh function [44] and the sigmoid function [45]. Two ANN’s were used in this
thesis. The first, inspired by [23], used the sigmoid activation function5 and consisted
of an input layer with 128 nodes, two hidden layers with 64 and 32 nodes respectively,
and an output layer consisting of 3 nodes. This ANN was created using keras, a ’deep
learning API written in Python, running on top of the machine learning platform
TensorFlow’ [46]. To optimise the weights the Stochastic Gradient Descent (SGD)
algorithm was employed alongside a mean-square error cost function. The second
ANN was built into M-LOOP and consisted of an input layer with one node for each
optimization parameter (in our case three), followed by five hidden layers with 64
nodes each, an output layer with a single node and used the Gaussian error linear
unit (GELU) activation function [47]. The first of these ANN’s was trained using
offline techniques, the aim being to make the ANN be able to predict what power
output corresponded to what voltage setting at the wavelength of interest i.e. the
user would specify a wanted transmission power, and the ANN would give the voltage
settings to obtain that transmission power. This was attempted purely due to the
author’s interest.
scale = 0.815,
5The sigmoid function is defined as
yn =
1
1 + e−z
(1)
where z is the weighted sum of the inputs. If the output is close to 0, the neuron will not transmit
it’s output.
==PAGE:73==
Bibliography
[1]
G. Wendin, “Quantum information processing with superconducting circuits: A
review,” Reports on Progress in Physics, vol. 80, no. 10, p. 106001, 2017.
[2]
X. Wu, X. Liang, Y. Tian, F. Yang, C. Chen, Y.-C. Liu, M. K. Tey, and L. You,
“A concise review of rydberg atom based quantum computation and quantum
simulation*,” Chinese Physics B, vol. 30, no. 2, p. 020305, 2021.
[3]
Y. Shi and E. Waks, “Deterministic generation of multidimensional photonic
cluster states using time-delay feedback,” Phys. Rev. A, vol. 104, p. 013703, Jul
2021.
[4]
E. Knill, R. Laflamme, and G. J. Milburn, “A scheme for eﬀicient quantum
computation with linear optics,” Nature, vol. 409, no. 6816, p. 46–52, 2001.
[5]
V. C. Usenko, “Unidimensional continuous-variable quantum key distribution
using squeezed states,” Phys. Rev. A, vol. 98, p. 032321, Sep 2018.
[6]
C. H. Bennett and G. Brassard, “Quantum cryptography: Public key distribution
and coin tossing,” Theoretical Computer Science, vol. 560, p. 7–11, 2014.
[7]
Y. Liu, Z.-W. Yu, W. Zhang, J.-Y. Guan, J.-P. Chen, C. Zhang, X.-L. Hu, H. Li,
C. Jiang, J. Lin, T.-Y. Chen, L. You, Z. Wang, X.-B. Wang, Q. Zhang, and J.-W.
Pan, “Experimental twin-field quantum key distribution through sending or not
sending,” Phys. Rev. Lett., vol. 123, p. 100505, Sep 2019.
[8]
D. P. Nadlinger, P. Drmota, B. C. Nichol, G. Araneda, D. Main, R. Srinivas,
D. M. Lucas, C. J. Ballance, K. Ivanov, E. Y.-Z. Tan, and et al., “Experimental
quantum key distribution certified by bell’s theorem,” Nature, vol. 607, no. 7920,
p. 682–686, 2022.
[9]
K. R. Motes, J. P. Olson, E. J. Rabeaux, J. P. Dowling, S. J. Olson, and P. P.
Rohde, “Linear optical quantum metrology with single photons: Exploiting spon-
taneously generated entanglement to beat the shot-noise limit,” Physical Review
Letters, vol. 114, no. 17, 2015.
[10] R. Marchetti, C. Lacava, A. Khokhar, X. Chen, I. Cristiani, D. J. Richardson,
G. T. Reed, P. Petropoulos, and P. Minzioni, “High-eﬀiciency grating-couplers:
Demonstration of a new design strategy,” Scientific Reports, vol. 7, no. 1, 2017.
==PAGE:74==
64
Bibliography
[11] J. He, T. Dong, and Y. Xu, “Review of photonic integrated optical phased arrays
for space optical communication,” IEEE Access, vol. 8, pp. 188284–188298, 01
2020.
[12] D. G. Rabus, “Integrated ring resonators,” Springer, Mar 2007.
[13] W. Chen, W. Chen, and Y.-J. Chen, “A characteristic matrix approach for ana-
lyzing resonant ring lattice devices,” IEEE Photonics Technology Letters, vol. 16,
no. 2, pp. 458–460, 2004.
[14] P. An, V. Kovalyuk, A. Golikov, E. Zubkova, S. Ferrari, A. Korneev, W. Pernice,
and G. Goltsman, “Experimental optimisation of o-ring resonator q-factor for
on-chip spontaneous four wave mixing,” Journal of Physics: Conference Series,
vol. 1124, p. 051047, 2018.
[15] M. Jacques, A. Samani, E. El-Fiky, D. Patel, Z. Xing, and D. V. Plant, “Opti-
mization of thermo-optic phase-shifter design and mitigation of thermal crosstalk
on the soi platform,” Opt. Express, vol. 27, pp. 10456–10471, Apr 2019.
[16] A. L. Samuel, “Some studies in machine learning using the game of checkers,”
IBM Journal of Research and Development, vol. 3, no. 3, pp. 210–229, 1959.
[17] N.
Barla,
“Self-driving
cars
with
convolutional
neural
networks,”
https://neptune.ai/blog/self-driving-cars-with-convolutional-neural-networks-
cnn, Accessed 19/12/22.
[18] A. Barker, H. Style, K. Luksch, S. Sunami, D. Garrick, F. Hill, C. Foot, and
E. Bentine, “Applying machine learning optimization methods to the production
of a quantum gas,” Machine Learning: Science and Technology, vol. 1, p. 015007,
02 2020.
[19] J. C. C. Mak, W. D. Sacher, J. C. Mikkelsen, T. Xue, Z. Yong, and J. K. S. Poon,
“Automated calibration of high-order microring filters,” in 2015 Conference on
Lasers and Electro-Optics (CLEO), pp. 1–2, 2015.
[20] P. Wigley, P. Everitt, A. Hengel, J. Bastian, M. Sooriyabandara, G. McDonald,
K. Hardman, C. Quinlivan, M. Perumbil, C. c. Noschang kuhn, I. Petersen,
A. Luiten, J. Hope, N. Robins, and M. Hush, “Fast machine-learning online
optimization of ultra-cold-atom experiments,” Scientific Reports, vol. 6, 07 2015.
[21] J. Mak, W. Sacher, J. Mikkelsen, T. Xue, Z. Yong, and J. Poon, “Automated cal-
ibration of high-order microring filters,” CLEO: Science and Innovations, CLEO-
SI 2015, 05 2015.
[22] J. Mak, T. Xue, Z. Yong, and J. Poon, “Wavelength tunable matched-pair vernier
multi-ring filters using derivative-free optimization algorithms,” IEEE Journal
of Selected Topics in Quantum Electronics, vol. PP, pp. 1–1, 02 2020.
==PAGE:75==
Bibliography
65
[23] W. Gao, L. Lu, L. Zhou, and J. Chen, “Automatic calibration of silicon ring-
based optical switch powered by machine learning,” Optics Express, vol. 28, 03
2020.
[24] G. Qin, Q. Zhu, and Y. Su, “Fast wavelength seeking in a silicon dual-ring switch
based on artificial neural networks,” Journal of Lightwave Technology, vol. 38,
no. 18, pp. 5078–5085, 2020.
[25] C. E. Rasmussen and W. C. K. I., Gaussian processes for machine learning. MIT
Press, 2008.
[26] W. T. Stephenson, S. S. Ghosh, T. D. Nguyen, M. Yurochkin, S. K. Deshpande,
and T. Broderick, “Measuring the sensitivity of gaussian processes to kernel
choice,” ArXiv, vol. abs/2106.06510, 2021.
[27] M. Kanagawa, P. Hennig, D. Sejdinovic, and B. Sriperumbudur, “Gaussian pro-
cesses and kernel methods: A review on connections and equivalences,” 07 2018.
[28] “Ghi forecasting using gaussian process regression:
kernel study,” IFAC-
PapersOnLine, vol. 52, no. 4, pp. 455–460, 2019. IFAC Workshop on Control of
Smart Grid and Renewable Energy Systems CSGRES 2019.
[29] M. Hush, “Learners¶,” 2016.
[30] M. Centeno-Telleria, E. Zulueta, U. Fernandez-Gamiz, D. Teso-Fz-Betoño, and
A. Teso-Fz-Betoño, “Differential evolution optimal parameters tuning with arti-
ficial neural network,” Mathematics, vol. 9, no. 4, 2021.
[31] J. A. Nelder and R. Mead, “A Simplex Method for Function Minimization,” The
Computer Journal, vol. 7, pp. 308–313, 01 1965.
[32] J. C. Lagarias, J. A. Reeds, M. H. Wright, and P. E. Wright, “Convergence
properties of the nelder–mead simplex method in low dimensions,” SIAM Journal
on Optimization, vol. 9, no. 1, pp. 112–147, 1998.
[33] S. Takenaga, Y. Ozaki, and M. Onishi, “Practical initialization of the nelder–
mead method for computationally expensive optimization problems,” Optimiza-
tion Letters, 2022.
[34] J. C. C. Mak, W. D. Sacher, T. Xue, J. C. Mikkelsen, Z. Yong, and J. K. S. Poon,
“Automatic resonance alignment of high-order microring filters,” IEEE Journal
of Quantum Electronics, vol. 51, no. 11, pp. 1–11, 2015.
[35] S. Singer and J. Nelder, “Nelder-mead algorithm.”
[36] G. li, X. Zheng, J. Yao, H. Thacker, I. Shubin, Y. Luo, K. Raj, J. Cunningham,
and A. Krishnamoorthy, “25gb/s 1v-driving cmos ring modulator with integrated
thermal tuning,” Optics express, vol. 19, pp. 20435–43, 10 2011.
==PAGE:76==
66
Bibliography
[37] C. Chaichuay, P. Yupapin, and P. Saeung, “The serially coupled multiple ring
resonator filters and vernier effect,” Optica Applicata, vol. XXXIX, no. 1, 2009.
[38] S. Xiao, M. H. Khan, H. Shen, and M. Qi, “A highly compact third-order silicon
microring add-drop filter with a very large free spectral range, a flat passband
and a low delay dispersion,” Opt. Express, vol. 15, pp. 14765–14771, Oct 2007.
[39] J. R. Ong, R. Kumar, and S. Mookherjea, “Ultra-high-contrast and tunable-
bandwidth filter using cascaded high-order silicon microring filters,” IEEE Pho-
tonics Technology Letters, vol. 25, no. 16, pp. 1543–1546, 2013.
[40] R. R. Kumar, X. Wu, and H. K. Tsang, “Compact high-extinction tunable crow
filters for integrated quantum photonic circuits,” Opt. Lett., vol. 45, pp. 1289–
1292, Mar 2020.
[41] A. Krenker, J. Bester, and A. Kos, “Introduction to the artificial neural net-
works,” Artificial Neural Networks - Methodological Advances and Biomedical
Applications, 2011.
[42] A. Dongare, R. R. Kharde, and A. D. Kachare, “Introduction to artificial neural
network,” 2012.
[43] K. Hara, D. Saito, and H. Shouno, “Analysis of function of rectified linear unit
used in deep learning,” in 2015 International Joint Conference on Neural Net-
works (IJCNN), pp. 1–8, 2015.
[44] B. Kalman and S. Kwasny, “Why tanh: choosing a sigmoidal function,” in [Pro-
ceedings 1992] IJCNN International Joint Conference on Neural Networks, vol. 4,
pp. 578–581 vol.4, 1992.
[45] A. Menon, K. Mehrotra, C. K. Mohan, and S. Ranka, “Characterization of a class
of sigmoid functions with applications to neural networks,” Neural Networks,
vol. 9, no. 5, pp. 819–835, 1996.
[46] K. Team, “Keras documentation: About keras.”
[47] D. Hendrycks and K. Gimpel, “Gaussian Error Linear Units (GELUs),” arXiv
e-prints, p. arXiv:1606.08415, June 2016.
