==PAGE:1==
Representing Reservoir Regulation
in Continental­Scale River Models
Example of the Amur River
Master Thesis
Pernille Storm Sletbjerg
DTU Sustain
Department of Environmental Engineering
==PAGE:2==
Representing Reservoir Regulation in Continental­Scale River Models
Master Thesis
January, 2023
By
Pernille Storm Sletbjerg
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus­
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
FastPic.org, 2023
Published by:
DTU, Department of Environmental Engineering, Bygningstorvet, Build­
ing 115, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
www.sustain.dtu.dk/en
==PAGE:3==
Preface
This project has been written in the Autumn of 2022 as a Master thesis at DTU Sustain,
Department of Environmental Engineering, at the Technical University of Denmark, DTU,
in partial fulfilment for the degree Master of Science in Engineering, MSc Eng. The project
has been prepared over five months from the 22nd of August, 2022, until the 22nd of
January, 2023 and weighted 30 ECTS points.
This thesis was produced with guidance from my supervisor:
Peter Bauer­Gottwein PhD, Professor in Hydrology and Water Resources Management,
DTU Environment
It is assumed that the reader has a basic knowledge in the areas of statistics, hydrology,
hydrodynamics, and data analysis.
Pernille Storm Sletbjerg ­ s164313
Signature
Date
ii
Representing Reservoir Regulation in Continental­Scale River Models
January 22nd 2023
==PAGE:4==
Abstract
It is more important than ever to improve and develop river modeling to be able to face the
challenges of climate change in the form of droughts and floods. One way to improve river
models is to better model reservoir regulation. Reservoir regulation is a human controlled
water system that does not follow normal hydrological rules.
The original hydrodynamic model that this thesis is based on had implemented a Standard
Operation Policy in place of the unknown real life reservoir regulation based on a target
release parameter and a flood control volume.
Using satellite derived data an alternative reservoir operation guideline based on target
volume was created.
This method of developing reservoir regulation based on satellite altimetry is especially
useful for large scale rivers, as they both often have large ungauged areas, as well as
due to the technological limitations of the satellites, which are still struggling to compute
inland water data for relatively small water bodies.
Based on the volume variation data from Hydroweb and water level variation time se­
ries from Sentinel 3A and 3B together with the estimated surface area of the reservoirs,
a yearly target volume time series was created to replace the Standard Operation Pol­
icy (SOP) previously used to describe the reservoir regulation in the Amur catchment.
The reservoir regulation policy based on this target volume was called Volume Operation
Policy (VOP).
The reservoir regulation methods tested in this thesis were very equal in performance
across reservoir operation policies SOP, VOP and AVVOP. The VOP is therefore a valid
alternative to the SOP. The VOP and AVVOP performed better than the SOP along the
Amur River branch downstream from the Zeya and Bureyskaya reservoirs, with an RMSE
reduction of about 0.04 to 0.31 m. This effect may be the result of the volume variation data
being preprocessed by Hydroweb, thereby avoiding some of the errors from estimating
surface area. The WSE simulation upstream from the confluence between Amur­ and
Sungari Rivers was best given by the original SOP model, where the VOP worsened
WSE forecast with an RMSE increase between 0.01 to 0.09 m. A combination of reservoir
regulations (SOP combined with VOP) may be the optimal solution for reservoirs where
volume variation datasets are not available.
The most sensitive parameter to affect the model forecast was the target release in the
SOP. The RMSE changed from 1.80 m to 2.15 m by changing the target release from the
flow average to 60 % of mean annual flow.
Representing Reservoir Regulation in Continental­Scale River Models
iii
==PAGE:5==
Acknowledgements
I would like to thank my brilliant supervisor, Peter Bauer­Gottwein, Professor in the Depart­
ment of Environmental Engineering, for his guidance, patience, and technical assistance.
Also a big thank you to Karina Nielsen from DTU Space who was kind enough to provide
the Sentinel 3A and 3B water level data.
Finally I am eternally grateful to my boyfriend, friends and family for supporting me during
hardships. I especially want to thank my loving parents for mental and nutritional support
in the final period of the project.
iv
Representing Reservoir Regulation in Continental­Scale River Models
==PAGE:6==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Project Outline . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2
Background
4
2.1
Hydrodynamic Modeling of Continental Scale Rivers . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.2
Satellite Altimetry for Hydrodynamic River Modeling
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.3
The Original Hydrodynamic Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
3
Methods
11
3.1
Reservoir Regulation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.2
Data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
3.3
Reservoir Regulation Code Structure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 28
4
Results and Discussion
30
4.1
Target Volume Time Series
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30
4.2
HD Model Performance with SOP, VOP, and AVVOP . . . . . . . . . . . . . 33
4.3
Data quality and availability . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 42
5
Conclusion
44
Bibliography
45
A Inflow Peaks
49
B Residuals of Curve Fittings for the Target Volume Time Series
50
C Hydrographs
51
D Storage Simulations
53
E
RMSE
59
F
Overview of Measuring Stations for Validation
62
G Code
63
Representing Reservoir Regulation in Continental­Scale River Models
v
==PAGE:7==
List of Abbreviations
AV
Area Variation
AVVOP Area Variation Volume Operation Policy
ESA
European Space Agency
FCV
Flood Control Volume
HD
Hydrodynamic
HPP
Hydropower Plants
INIS
Initial Storage
MAF
Mean Annual Flow
MSL
Mean Sea Level
OCOG Offset Centre of Gravity
RMSE Root Mean Square Error
SA
Surface Area
SAR
Synthetic Aperture Radar
SOP
Standard Operation Policy
SRAL Synthetic Aperture Radar Altimetry
SSR
Sum of Squared Residuals
SWO Surface Water Occurrence
SWOT Surface Water and Ocean Topography
TR
Target Release
TS
Time Series
TVTS Target Volume Time Series
UAS
Unmanned Aerial System
VOP
Volume Operation Policy
VS
Virtual Stations
VVTS Volume Variation Time Series
WL
Water Level
WLTS Water Level Time Series
WSE
Water Surface Elevation
vi
Representing Reservoir Regulation in Continental­Scale River Models
==PAGE:8==
1
Introduction
It is crucial to be able to monitor and predict risks of floods and droughts in a river sys­
tem to avoid both social, economic and environmental consequences [1], [2]. Over the
past four decades fluvial floods have killed at least 200,000 people globally, while causing
damages for more than $790 billion [3]. Between 1995 and 2015 flooding accounted for
47 % of all weather­related disasters [4]. China, where much of the Amur River catch­
ment (the study area of this thesis) is located, is the country in the world affected by the
highest number of droughts, and China has recorded a total of 428 water related disasters
between 2001 and 2018 [1]. In the Amur catchment itself severe floods have occurred
with the extreme rainfall flood of 2013 being the worst in the whole period of observations
[5]. Climate change is just one of the drivers behind this heightened flood pattern, but
it is an important one as it controls the processes of the atmosphere and the amount of
precipitation and snow melt falling into the river catchment [2], [6]. Especially severe or
”rare” flood events are sensitive to atmospheric changes [2]. Other changes, such as land
use change (Urbanization and deforestation), or river infrastructure development (dams,
hydropower, etc.), also have consequences for river systems [2], [6].
As a response of the combined issues of an increase in energy demand with a wish to
shift to green energy sources away from fossil fuels and a growing concern for more
frequent flood recurrences, great water infrastructure developments in the form of multi­
purpose hydropower­ and flood control reservoirs have been built worldwide [7]. Likewise,
reservoirs take up large volumes of the Amur River within both the Russian and Chinese
territory of the catchment, and more reservoirs have been planned ­ Especially in the
aftermath of the 2013 flood event [8].
Hydrodynamic (HD) river models can be used to predict Water Surface Elevation (WSE),
and thereby help create risk assessments of floods or droughts at a certain time and
location in the modeled river catchment [9], [10]. Modeling tools such as DHI’s MIKE
Hydro River software have made it much easier to model complex river basins on all
scales. However, a model is only as good as the parameters one feeds it.
One of the key parameters in the hydraulic model is the discharge. But while hydrological
processes can be analyzed to give sufficient estimates of the natural discharge, it can be
tricky to obtain the correct discharges from human controlled reservoirs. Local reservoir
operation records are seldom available for modeling use [11]. An alternative to direct
access to the records is to basically guess what the regulation is. One educated guess is
referred to as the Standard Operation Policy (SOP), which contains the parameters Flood
Control Volume (FCV), Target Release (TR), and Initial Storage (INIS) (CITE).
Moreover, the now high resolution satellite­ and radar altimetry offer yet another alternative
by providing time series measurements of the water levels and water surface area which
together can be converted to water volume variation over time, thereby creating a target
volume time series for estimating the reservoir regulation.
The motivation for introducing a volume variation parameter is to try to improve the accu­
racy of the reservoir regulation integrated in the hydrodynamic model for the Amur River
further ­ or at least to see whether the VOP has any effect in comparison to the SOP on
model performance.
It is particularly important to advance the accuracy of reservoir discharge values as these
Representing Reservoir Regulation in Continental­Scale River Models
1
==PAGE:9==
multipurpose reservoirs increase in numbers worldwide, affecting the discharge pattern in
the river systems they are built into. Hydropower is globally the largest modern renewable
energy source (See Figure 1.1) [7]. China alone has had an increase in hydropower
generation of 1,278 TWh since 1965, while Russia has had an increase of 55 TWh since
1985 [7].
Figure 1.1: The trend in modern renewable energy consumption going from 1965 to 2021.
Hydropower is by far the greatest component of all the renewable energy sources. Source:
Our World in Data.
1.1
Project Outline
The purpose of this thesis is to compute an alternative generic reservoir regulation policy,
the Volume Operation Policy (VOP). It is generated with two settings; one with­ and one
without Area Variation (AV). It will be evaluated whether the VOP or the AVVOP, gives
valid reservoir storage estimates, and whether this new reservoir regulation guideline has
an effect on the continental scale HD model simulation and prediction of Water Surface
Elevation (WSE) when substituting the previous generic regulation scheme: The Standard
Operation Policy (SOP). In other words, this thesis will explore the sensitivity of the WSE
prediction to choice of reservoir regulation scheme.
Additionally the SOP parameters, target release (TR) and flood control volume (FCV) will
be altered and tested to see whether the HD model simulation can be optimized through
the existing reservoir regulation policy, the SOP.
1.1.1
Learning Objectives
The objectives of this study are to (1) investigate different reservoir regulation policies
in a river model at continental­ to global scale; (2) quantify the effect that the VOP and
AVVOP reservoir regulation guidelines have on the HD model discharge simulation and
2
Representing Reservoir Regulation in Continental­Scale River Models
==PAGE:10==
subsequent forecast of WSE; and (3) showcase how different reservoir regulation policies
can be integrated in the HD model for a continental scale river basin, such as the Amur
River catchment.
Representing Reservoir Regulation in Continental­Scale River Models
3
==PAGE:11==
2
Background
2.1
Hydrodynamic Modeling of Continental Scale Rivers
Hydrodynamic (HD) modeling is the combination of hydrological­ and hydraulic modeling.
The rainfall­runoff output of the hydrological model is used as input to the hydraulic model,
which specifies the physical characteristics of the river channels and reservoirs of the
studied water catchment such as the shape, depth, and roughness, thus, simulating a
prediction of the movement of water in the river. In other words, the hydraulic model can
transform the runoff data generated by the hydrological model into WSE­ or discharge
forecast. HD modeling is typically used to understand and predict the behavior of rivers
under various conditions, such as different flow rates or water levels.
There are many purposes for HD modeling. HD modeling can help decision making within
water management such as management of flood risks, monitoring of ecosystems, water
resource management, the analysis of the impacts of land use changes on river systems,
and design of new river infrastructure such as hydropower dams.
The purpose of the model studied in this thesis is to predict Water Surface Elevation
(WSE), which is a crucial parameter for monitoring flood­ or drought scenarios, and to
estimate the water availability at a given time and place in the river basin [10].
2.2
Satellite Altimetry for Hydrodynamic River Modeling
Remote sensing data is a crucial component of large scale river modeling. Several satel­
lite missions for collecting both land­ and water surface data have provided global, freely
available datasets. The availability of data provided by satellites is especially important
for river modeling when taking into account that in situ stations monitoring river discharge
is declining worldwide [12]. The in situ stations that remain do not always have accessi­
bility to their data as they are often managed by federal institutions that may not openly
share it (The Same is true for reservoir management guidelines) [12]. Some areas have
been too remote to place gauging stations in at all, and for these areas altimetry data will
also open doors for data collection [12].
Furthermore, relatively recent satellite missions have provided data with high resolution
that can improve the accuracy of model parameters in hydrodynamic river models. These
parameters include cross section geometries (as for the ICESat­2 in Reference [10]),
water levels, surface water area, etc. [3], [12]–[15].
Satellite altimetry is especially useful for modeling continental­ to global scale river catch­
ments. Both because the satellites moving over an area does so on a fixed track, meaning
that they fly over any given water body by chance. The larger the water body, the more
measurements are likely to be made over it [12]. But also because small rivers face the
challenge of having their altimetry data contaminated by other signals from land and from
other water bodies close to the studied river or lake [12], [14]. Sometimes the correct
water level data can be retrieved by correcting the altimeter radar signal with a retracker
[12], [14]. Technological development of the radar altimetry steadily reduces the footprint
of that the radar scans, meaning that the signal becomes more focused and less exposed
to noise, making satellite altimetry more and more relevant for smaller rivers [16]. More­
over, in the case of smaller scale rivers Unmanned Aerial Systems (UAV) can be used as
a cost effective alternative to satellite altimetry datasets [17].
4
Representing Reservoir Regulation in Continental­Scale River Models
==PAGE:12==
Satellite radar altimetry is a technique used to measure the distance between a satellite
and the Earth’s surface. This is typically done by measuring the time it takes for a radar
electromagnetic pulse to travel from the satellite to the Earth’s surface and back again
[18]. The precision of this measurement allows for the accurate determination of the
height of the Earth’s surface, including the tops of oceans, lakes, and other bodies of
water. The satellite orbits the Earth and takes measurements along fixed ground tracks
that repeat after a certain number of orbits, which means that radar altimetry data gives a
consistent sample of WSE over time at the same geographical locations [19]. The basic
data collection system via altimeter radar signals is shown in Figure 2.1.
Figure 2.1: Diagram of the technical aspects behind data collection via satellite radar
altimetry. Source: GGOS [19].
For the past decades a new generation of satellites (CryoSat and Sentinel 3 amongst
others) have been developed carrying Synthetic Aperture Radar altimeters, also known
as SAR mode [14]. SAR works by emitting a radar pulse and measuring the time it takes
for the pulse to return after it bounces off the target. The SAR system then uses the
time delay and the known speed of light to calculate the distance to the target. These
calculations are based on the Doppler effect [18]. By emitting a series of pulses and
receiving the returned signals coherently along a fixed track, the SAR system can build
up a detailed image of the target with a resolution of under a meter to a few tens of meters
[18]. The SAR system sums the echos from the water surface returning to the radar within
the short period of 2 seconds [20]. This means that the data can be measured with higher
resolution along the track of the satellite orbit [20]. Furthermore, SAR can still produce
images of the Earth’s surface under adverse weather conditions, such as clouds or fog.
Representing Reservoir Regulation in Continental­Scale River Models
5
==PAGE:13==
Sentinel 3A and 3B (Sentinels are always sent up in pairs to shorten the revisit time step
at any given location on Earth) have recorded the surface of the Earth on a global scale
in SAR mode for the first time. They were sent into orbit in 2016 and 2018, respectively,
by the European Space Agency (ESA) [14], [21].
Another global coverage satellite mission called Surface Water and Ocean Topography
(SWOT) was launched in 2022 through collaborative efforts of NASA and Centre National
D’Etudes Spatiales (CNES)(CITE). The SWOT mission will collect both Ocean­ and inland
water surface observation data in the spatial scale of 15­150 km and will return measure­
ments of water level with an accuracy within 1 cm. SWOT is yet another development in
what scales and resolutions are possible within satellite altimetry, and what future data
will be available for, for example, river modeling.
2.2.1
Satellite Altimetry and Reservoir Regulation
As discussed Satellite altimetry is useful for river modeling in more senses than one. Both
in regards to improving the accuracy of model parameters, such as cross section geome­
tries, and as a tool for improved model calibration in the form of being virtual stations (VS)
in place of in situ stations. However, this thesis will focus on satellite altimetry in regards
to surface water estimates such as water elevation level and surface water area, and how
these measurements can be converted to a target volume time series, which in turn is
implemented as a storage/ release controlling factor in the reservoir regulation guidelines
of the HD model of the Amur River catchment.
Due to the largely unknown local reservoir regulation policies, the reservoir discharges
are often roughly estimated based on generic assumptions, which will be applied to the
reservoirs collectively, rather than assessed for each reservoir individually.
By changing the reservoir guideline from the SOP to the VOP the reservoir discharge and
the downstream flows in the model could potentially approximate reality further and make
model predictions of the WSE even better. The question is whether a valid volume vari­
ation approximation is possible with remote sensing, and whether revising the reservoir
regulation policy to a target volume based policy has a basin wide­ or even a local effect
on the model simulation.
2.3
The Original Hydrodynamic Model
The reservoir regulation in this thesis is performed by building on the 1­dimensional hy­
drodynamic (HD) model of the Amur River described in Reference [10].
2.3.1
Model Purpose
The purpose of the HD model is to predict WSE from the simulated runoff. Modeling
WSE is essential flood risk assessment, which is particularly important in a frequently
flooded area, such as the Amur River basin. The WSE is estimated with reference to the
EGM2008 geoid model [22].
The simulated WSE values were validated against both in situ­ and satellite altimetry
Virtual Stations (VS), where the accuracy of WSE was ranging between > 1m and 2.5 m
[10]. Despite the satisfactory accuracy levels the model has several uncertainties, which
may be addressed to further improve the WSE forecast [10]. These uncertainties include
the actual reservoir regulation, which is not on international public record. Thus, the SOP
reservoir regulation was integrated in the model as a generic alternative to actual storages
and releases from the reservoirs.
6
Representing Reservoir Regulation in Continental­Scale River Models
==PAGE:14==
2.3.2
Model Set­Up
The model follows a two­reach setup such that the inflow from subcatchments directly
connected to the main river branches Sungari (44) and Amur (58) function as boundaries
for the HD model inside the MIKE Hydro River software. The remaining subcatchments
with inflow flowing into the Amur­ and Sungari Rivers are catchments to be routed (trans­
ported to a direct connection to HD simulated branches).
2.3.3
Model River System ­ The Amur River Catchment
The Amur River is a continental scale river as it is the tenth longest river in the world, and
the third largest in China [10], [23]. It runs approximately 2800 km from its beginning at
the confluence with the Argun­ and the Shilka Rivers to where it ends up in the Okhotsk
Sea between Russia and China, and Japan, and much of the main branch flows along
the national border between Russia and China [5]. Its catchment area is located in North­
east Asia and is transboundary as it covers three national territories within both Russia,
China, and Mongolia [5]. Around 9 % (or 184,561 km2) of the catchment area is wetlands
[24]. The main tributary river is the Sungari River (also known as Songhua Jiang), which
along with the main Amur River branch is included in the HD model, while the rest of the
tributaries are included indirectly via the Muskingum Routing method [10], [23].
The Amur River catchment along with the main branches included in the HD model, and
river routing reaches is shown in Figure 2.2.
Climate
The Amur River has two discharge peaks, one in June and the other in September [25].
They are probably caused by, firstly, the high flow season during the spring, partly as a
result of snow­melt after the harsh winter and partly due to short­lived storms, and, sec­
ondly, the Summer­ and Autumn monsoon [25], [26]. Due to long precipitation periods
and snow­melt the Amur River catchment is prone to precipitation induced floods. Fur­
thermore, both the recurrence of extreme precipitation and extreme temperature and their
duration has increased between 1953 and 1995 [27]. During the winter the river freezes
over in many places [26].
Representing Reservoir Regulation in Continental­Scale River Models
7
==PAGE:15==
Figure 2.2: The Amur river catchment, divided into subcatchments.
The two main
branches included in the HD model, Amur and Sungari, are displayed in red, while the
remaining routing reaches that lead water to the main branches are shown in light blue.
The national borders are displayed in orange, and much of the border between Russia
and China is hidden beneath the main branch. The Key plan presents the geographical
location of the Amur River catchment in East Asia.
Multipurpose Reservoir Development Plans in the Amur River Basin
Both the Chinese and Russian side of the Amur catchment have future plans to develop
water infrastructure that has the potential to significantly alter the river system in terms of
shape and discharge pattern, in turn affecting the hydraulic model used to assess WSE.
The multipurpose water constructions planned to be implemented in the Amur River basin
on both the Russian and Chinese part of the catchment typically have the purposes of
flood retention volume and generation of hydropower [28]. On the Chinese side a dike
construction program is planned along the Amur and Ussuri Rivers, which potentially will
decrease the natural river valley flood retention volumes by 20 km3, and this will pos­
sibly cause higher WSE levels resulting from the same amount of river discharge, thus,
increasing the risks of floods [28]. Construction is also planned, which could affect the
Amur River main channel directly. For example, establishing a new extended embank­
ment in the Russian city of Blagoveshchensk, which again could impact water levels and
cause bank erosion [28].
While these construction plans are important to China, China also has an increased focus
on the important ecosystem services of the extensive wetlands in the Amur River catch­
ment [24]. The biota of the wetlands depend on the floods occurring to some extent [8].
Thus, a compensation flow (also known as an environmental flow) has become integrated
in the guidelines of reservoir management in the Amur catchment in China to mimic the
8
Representing Reservoir Regulation in Continental­Scale River Models
==PAGE:16==
natural flows and floods of the wetlands [8]. Russia has shown less interest in looking
after ecosystem health compared to China [24].
Included Amur Reservoirs
The reservoirs included in the model are chosen based on their storage capacity. The
seven included reservoirs (shown on Figure 2.2) all have a storage capacity equal to­ or
larger than 1 km3 (Full capacity is shown in Section 3 in Table 3.1). Reservoirs smaller
than this are not included as it is assumed the effect on the hydrodynamic model would
not be significant by doing so.
Zeya and Bureyskaya (also known as Bureya Dam) are the only Russian reservoirs in­
cluded in this thesis. They were opened for operation in 1975 and 2009, respectively
[28]. They are both multipurpose flood retention­ and hydropower reservoirs. They are
placed in two of the main tributaries to the Amur main branch: Zeya­ and Bureya River,
Respectively [29]. Together they control the water levels along the 850 km stretch down­
stream in the middle part of the Amur catchment, such that without them (and the reservoir
regulation policy applied to them) the water levels would have been significantly higher
during the 2013 extreme flood event: 1.7 to 2.1 m higher during the rise of the flood wave
[29]. Zeya is the reservoir with the largest capacity of the seven reservoirs included in
this study, with an active storage of about 30 km3 [28]. It, alone, was able to retain runoff
during the severe flood event in 2013, and reduced damages downstream [5].
The four reservoirs on the Chinese side, Fengman Dam (Songhua Lake), Lianhua reser­
voir, Baishan reservoir, and Nierji Dam, are all multipurpose reservoirs and hydropower
plants. They were opened for operation in 1952, 1996, 1983, and 2006, respectively [30].
Jingpo Lake is (as the name indicates) a lake. It was formed between 4,700 and 8,300
years ago and it is China’s largest barrier lake.
The climate in the Amur River catchment described in the above section is clearly visible in
the reservoir inflows generated by the Rainfall­Runoff model of Reference [10]. The inflow
peaks correspond to the precipitation peaks in Spring and late summer/ early Autumn (see
Figure 2.3). The two distinct precipitation peaks are sharper in the Southern reservoirs
compared to Zeya and Bureyskaya in the North of the catchment. The sharp peaks of the
southern reservoirs are shown more clearly in Figure A.1 in Appendix A.
This shows that no matter how realistic or unrealistic the reservoir regulation procedures
are defined in the model, the reservoirs receive a valid inflow corresponding to reality.
Representing Reservoir Regulation in Continental­Scale River Models
9
==PAGE:17==
Figure 2.3: The Mean Annual Flow (mean flow per day of the year taken from all the
years in the simulation period) going in to the seven studied reservoirs. 2008 is generic
year representing the average inflows for each day of the year. The inflows to the reser­
voirs correspond to the precipitation peaks of the hydrological cycle in the Amur River
catchment.
10
Representing Reservoir Regulation in Continental­Scale River Models
==PAGE:18==
3
Methods
3.1
Reservoir Regulation
A reservoir, in short, is an artificially contained body of water that is formed by placing a
storage dam such that the water volume can be controlled. A basic graphic illustration
is shown in Figure 3.1. This is in contrast to a natural lake which can supply water to
the population, but where the volume is controlled by hydrological forces such as evap­
oration, groundwater seepage, and of course discharge or release to the downstream
river [31], [32]. Even though many reservoirs are tailored for one purpose, the amount of
multipurpose reservoirs is rising.
Figure 3.1: Basic illustration of a dam. The active storage is the storage placed between
the lower­ and upper limits which are the dead storage­ and flood control levels, respec­
tively. Source: WRM lecture notes [33]
The reservoir operating policy is a set of guidelines and procedures that describe how a
reservoir should be operated. These guidelines define how much­ and when water should
be either released or stored in the reservoir. They are often developed and implemented
by the government agencies that manage the reservoir and its water resources. There is
no global database for reservoir regulation policies that can be easily accessed by river
modelers. Therefore experts have to guess the various parameters that go into regulating
the reservoirs in the studied river system [32]. As mentioned before, reservoir more often
than not has more than one purpose. Along with generating energy through hydropower
the purposes may include flood control, and water resource management (i.e. storing
and releasing water at appropriate times) [32]. In this context, the limitation of the generic
reservoir operation scheme is that it cannot model the complex real life operations of the
reservoir [34].
The following parameters usually make up the operation policies described in the following
sections:
• Target release
• Flood control volume ­ The purpose of this is to reserve a volume for retention of
floods.
• Target volume (active storage in the reservoir at certain points in time)
• Minimum release ­ Ensuring a release during dry periods, despite the target volume
not being reached.
Representing Reservoir Regulation in Continental­Scale River Models
11
==PAGE:19==
Flood control volume refers to the amount of water that can be stored in a reservoir specif­
ically for the purpose of reducing the risk of flooding downstream. Active storage, on the
other hand, refers to the total amount of water that can be stored in a reservoir and used
for various purposes such as irrigation, hydropower generation, and recreation. In other
words, flood control volume is a subset of active storage that is designated for flood pro­
tection.
As described in Reference [10] the seven reservoirs included in the HD model were im­
plemented as storage nodes in the Muskingum routing scheme, which simulates the flow
from the tributaries to the main branches that are simulated by the HD model. The equa­
tions for the storage nodes differ depending on the reservoir regulation policy and which
decision variables it is defined by. The three tested reservoir management guidelines will
be described in the following sections.
The if−statements written in the code (see Appendix G) for modeling the reservoir regu­
lation is inspired by Reference [35].
3.1.1
Standard Operation Policy
The reference to the Standard Operation Policy in this thesis is the one implemented in
the HD model described in Reference [10]. The SOP is based on setting a target release
and a flood control limit as decision variables for storing­ or releasing water [33].
The target release was set to the average flow, and the flood control volume was set to
be the full reservoir capacity. In the simulation runs (see Table 4.1 in Section 4.2.1) these
parameters have been changed to test whether changes to the SOP will have an effect
in WSE predictions of the HD model. The FCV was changed from full capacity to 90 % of
full capacity, and the target release was to 10 % of mean annual flow (with mean annual
flow meaning the average for each day of the year over all years in the simulation period)
and 60 % of mean annual flow for two different runs, 1.3 and 1.4 (see Table 4.1).
The graphic representation of the SOP is shown in Figure 3.2.
12
Representing Reservoir Regulation in Continental­Scale River Models
==PAGE:20==
Figure 3.2: A basic illustration of how the SOP works. Water going into the reservoir
is released based on the target release (horizontal line) unless the flood control volume
is exceeded, then more water than the target release is released. Storage is not directly
controlled, other than the flood control volume setting a limit of maximum storage. Source:
WRM lecture notes [33]
3.1.2
Volume Operation Policy
Volume Operation Policy (VOP) is based on the idea that a target volume can be estab­
lished based on satellite altimetry data sets of water levels and ­surfaces (as described in
Section 2.2). The volume is estimated assuming vertical banks, which will lead to some
error, as the shape of the reservoir is unknown, and the banks are likely to have an up­
wards gradient towards land. As the actual reservoir regulation is unknown, the VOP is
an attempt to establish a reservoir operating scheme that is closer to the real manage­
ment of the reservoir compared to using the SOP. In other words, it is another way of
approximating the real regulation.
It is assumed that water demand from industry, agriculture, and domestic sources is in­
trinsically part of the computed target volume time series, meaning that it is assumed that
demand has been met when complying with the target volume, and that the target volume
indirectly represents the needs for irrigation and flood management. Thus, the agricultural
production along with flood pattern of the subcatchments have not been explored further.
Similarly, it is assumed that the evaporation from the reservoir surface is intrinsically part
of the generated target volume.
The storage volume follows a yearly cyclic pattern. Usually a reservoir stores water during
the high­flow season to have enough water for when water demand is high, for example,
the demand for irrigation for the agricultural production season. Or for when water has
become scarce during the low­flow season ­ Or during a drought. The specific timing of
when water is stored and released from a reservoir can vary depending on the specific
needs and guidelines of the reservoir. By making the target volume dynamic in this way,
and not a fixed storage level for the whole year, the target volume combines release
patterns for its multiple purposes, irrigation and flood control [34].
Representing Reservoir Regulation in Continental­Scale River Models
13
==PAGE:21==
As mentioned in Section 2.3.3 the high snowmelt and precipitation in the Amur River
catchment falls in two periods around Spring and then again from late Summer through
Autumn [25]. The precipitation spike from the summer monsoon in the Amur catchment
usually occurs around late July to August [36]. This inflow to the reservoirs can be seen
in the target storage volume in that water is stored more from May through October.
Interannual variation has not been implemented directly since only ”wet years”, meaning
years with a sufficient amount of inflow to fill up the reservoir to the representative target
volume, are included in the data used to generate the TVTS. The target volume varies
dynamically over a yearly cycle, but the real variations from year to year in the reservoirs
has not been included in the simulated storage over the HD model simulation period. The
empirical volume­ and WL variation versus the extracted ”wet year” data for target volume
generation can be seen in Figures 3.4 and 3.6.
The FCV for generating the TVTS was redefined from full capacity to 90 % of full capacity.
Typically, the flood control volume is set to be able to contain a certain amount of water,
such as the volume of water that would be released during a 100­year flood event. This
can be represented as a percentage of the total capacity of the reservoir. However, there
is no standard percentage that applies to all reservoirs. Due to the frequent flooding in the
Amur River catchment the FCV limit was set to 90 % of the reservoir capacity in contrast
to the FCV in the original model, where the FCV was set to full capacity [10]. In this way
the Target Volume will leave 10 % of reservoir capacity specifically for flood retention. Due
to the extensive size of the reservoirs, 10 % of full capacity seems like a valid value.
It was decided to include a minimum release to take environmental needs into account
when computing the target volume. The minimum release could also be called environ­
mental flow or compensation flow [32]. The meaning behind the term is the amount of wa­
ter reserved for sustenance of biological diversity and fluvial ecosystem health [37]. It was
decided that no timestep should have zero release, which would happen in times with dry
spells where the VOP dictates that water should be stored until target volume is reached
without exception. As discussed in Section 2.3.3 China has already incorporated environ­
mental flows in their reservoir management. However, Russia shows no documentation
that suggests that they have concerns for the wetland ecosystems ­ At least not to the
degree of including a compensation flow in their reservoir guidelines. Nevertheless, the
minimum release has been applied equally to all reservoirs.
The minimum release was calculated in two ways. One was to assign a fixed value of 10 %
of the average inflow over the entire simulation period for every timestep in the simulation
period, and the other method was performed according to the Tennant Montana Method,
which, in its simplest form, recommends that at least 10 % of the annual average inflow
should be allocated to the environment [37]. The first, simplified method, was to test
whether a more simple minimum release calculation would have an effect on the WSE
forecast, while the latter tries to give a more dynamic environmental flow. The limitation
of the Tennant Montana Method is that it assumes fixed values (the mean annual flow
for each day of the year based on all years in the simulation period) for each year in the
simulation period, meaning that interannual differences are not accounted for [37], [38].
The graphic representation of the VOP is shown in Figure 3.3.
14
Representing Reservoir Regulation in Continental­Scale River Models
==PAGE:22==
Figure 3.3: The graphic representation of the VOP showing the upper limit of the target
volume being the FCV limit, which has been reduced from full reservoir capacity to 90 %
of the full capacity. The baseline or zero refers to the storage that the volume variation
refers to. It is assumed to be dead storage, while the target volume variation is the active
storage volume.
3.1.3
Area Variation Volume Operation Policy
Area Variation Volume Operation Policy (AVVOP) is the same idea as VOP, but instead
of assuming a static area under a varying water level to estimate the volume variation, an
area variation of the reservoir surface area is included too. This means that this method
assumes that as the WL increases, the area increases to. The volume is still estimated
assuming vertical banks.
The overall process of producing the Target Volume Time Series, both with­ and without
Area Variation, is shown in Table 3.2 under Section 3.2.
3.1.4
Reservoir Regulation Method Reviewed in Literature
Reservoir regulation guidelines can impose more or less dynamic or static rules [35]. The
VOP is based on a semi dynamic rule curve, as it varies with the day of the year, but it
is not modeled by more precise and timely variation as is given by recent inflows, and it
does not include interannual variation, where the ”wet year” pattern is not fulfilled.
Data Driven Reservoir Operation
There have been established models that have more dynamic approaches to modeling
reservoir regulation. These models are an attempt to establish a data driven reservoir
operating scheme in contrast to the generic regulation scheme of the SOP, VOP and
AVVOP, where the reservoir parameters of FCV, minimum release, and target release are
the same for all reservoirs [34].
The advantage of the empirically derived functions that are base on data such as recent
Representing Reservoir Regulation in Continental­Scale River Models
15
==PAGE:23==
inflow, is that they can be tailored to individual reservoirs, rather than follow a generic
scheme for all of them, which will lead to flow errors in river models turner.
What is required for accomplishing a reservoir management guideline from empirical data
is lengthy records of reservoir inflows, storage levels, and releases [34]. This is where
increased satellite water data availability becomes crucial, because this will make it pos­
sible to collect this empirical data over long consecutive periods globally ­ Even in remote,
ungauged areas.
3.2
Data
Satellite Radar Altimetry was used to extract the raw water level­ and water surface area
data applied to estimate the reservoir target volumes in the Amur River Catchment.
3.2.1
Yearly Target Volume Estimates of Amur Reservoirs
The Target Volume Time Series (TVTS) was estimated for each reservoir in the Amur
catchment with a storage capacity equal to or larger than 1km3 ­ Except for Lianhua,
which had no available water level variation data.
An overview of the seven reservoirs included in this study can be seen in Table 3.1.
Table 3.1: The seven reservoirs included in the reservoir regulation model, the data used
to estimate the target volume, and the reservoir regulation method applied to each.
Reservoir
Name
Storage
Capacity [km3]
Data Available
Data Source
Reservoir
Regulation Method
Zeya
68.40
Volume variation
Hydroweb
VOP
Bureyskoye
10.00
Volume variation
Hydroweb
VOP
Baishan
6.50
1) Water level
variation
2) Surface area
1) Sentinel 3A and 3B
2) Global Surface Water
Explorer
1) VOP
2) AVVOP
Fengman
11.46
1) Water level
variation
2) Surface area
1) Sentinel 3A and 3B
2) Global Surface Water
Explorer
1) VOP
2) AVVOP
Jingpo
1.00
1) Water level
variation
2) Surface area
1) Sentinel 3A and 3B
2) Global Surface Water
Explorer
1) VOP
2) AVVOP
Nierji
8.61
1) Water level
variation
2) Surface area
1) Sentinel 3A and 3B
2) Global Surface Water
Explorer
1) VOP
2) AVVOP
Lianhua
4.18
­
­
SOP
A schematic overview of the reservoir TVTS process is shown in Table 3.2.
16
Representing Reservoir Regulation in Continental­Scale River Models
==PAGE:24==
Table 3.2: Overview of the process for calculating the Target Volume Time Series (TVTS)
both with and without area variation.
Steps
Target Volume Time Series Process
1)
Download/ receive volume­ and WL variation data
2)
Extract ”wet year” data.
3)
Insert all ”wet year” volume­ and WL datapoints in year matrices.
4)
Find yearly average volume­/WL variation by taking daily
average over the ”wet year” series.
5)
Plot average volume­/ WL variation and remove outliers.
6)
Choose first occurring value to represent value at beginning
of time series. Make the last value of the time series equal to this,
such that start­ and end­value are the same.
7)
Subtract the Reference Water Level based on the elevation of
the reservoir from the WL variation data.
8)
Calculate volume variation for reservoirs with WL data by
multiplying WL with SA.
9)
Calculate base volume by subtracting the maximum volume
variation from the Flood Control Volume (FCV), and add it to the
variation values to get column of target volume.
10)
Fit a smoothed curve to the volume variation data using the
Univariate­ and LSQ Univariate Spline from the Scipy package in Python.
Steps
Area Variation Target Volume Time Series Process
1)
Estimate the high­ and low occurrence reservoir surface area as a minimum
ans maximum area for the area variation to go between.
2)
Area variation is calculated through linear relationship with WL,
such that the minimum area corresponds to the minimum WL and the
maximum WL is paired with the maximum area, etc.
3)
Establish new base volume to calculate the target volume due
to new maximum variation value. Ensure again that FCV is not exceeded.
The details of the data sets and further data processing will be described in the following
sections.
Volume Variation Time Series
The two Russian reservoirs, Zeya and Bureyskaya, had freely available Volume Varia­
tion Time Series (VVTS) on Hydroweb (https://hydroweb.theia-land.fr/) provided by Theia
Data and Services Centre for continental surfaces [39], [40]. Hydroweb had processed
the raw satellite altimetry data recorded by the Sentinel 3 mission. Thus, the Hydroweb
volume variation data substituted the Sentinel 3 water level data for Zeya and Bureyskaya.
Zeya’s TS ran from 1993 to 2022, while the volume variation TS of Bureyskaya was
recorded from 2008 to 2021. The full data collection period can be seen together with
the extracted ”wet year” data in Figure 3.4.
Representing Reservoir Regulation in Continental­Scale River Models
17
==PAGE:25==
Figure 3.4: The raw volume variation for reservoirs Zeya and Bureyskaya, downloaded
from Hydroweb, plotted next to the extracted ”wet year” data used for estimating the target
volume time series for the reservoirs.
As seen on Figure 3.4 the data varied quite a lot from year to year for Zeya. The quality
of the early data recorded for Zeya does not look good, as there area several years in the
1990’s with no data entries. Assuming that the data quality is reliable, there seems to be a
significantly higher volume variation in the Zeya reservoir compared to Bureyskaya, which
has a repetitive yearly pattern. In the end, not many years of valid data were available for
either reservoir, because the data set was cut further short by only including ”wet year”
datapoints (see the right panels in Figure 3.4).
Water Level Variation Time Series
The raw Water Level Time Series (WLTS) data was provided by Karina Nielsen, Senior
Researcher at the Department of Space Research and Technology at DTU. Data was
given for four reservoirs out of the remaining five. The exception was Lianhua, which had
no usable WL data.
The raw satellite Synthetic Aperture Radar Altimeter (SRAL) data products were down­
loaded from the Copernicus Open Access Hub (https://scihub.copernicus.eu/) and then
processed by the workflow as described in Reference [14] to extract the water levels.
The data was provided by both Sentinel 3A and 3B, and the orbit number was registered
for each WLTS as well. Sentinel 3A was sent into orbit in 2016, while S3B joined its sib­
ling in April 2018. Therefore, the full WLTS was developed by combining the S3A and
S3B data (see Figure 3.5). In case the data from both satellites fell on the same date, the
average was taken.
18
Representing Reservoir Regulation in Continental­Scale River Models
==PAGE:26==
The WLTS recorded by Sentinel 3A and 3B were processed by three different retrackers
to improve the data quality of the water heights. The retrackers were called Improved
Threshold Retracker (IMTH), Ocean retracker (OCEA), and the Offset Centre of Gravity
(OCOG) retracker. The Offset Centre of Gravity (OCOG) retracker product was chosen
for all four reservoirs except Nierji, where only the IMTH retracker data was given by
Karina Nielsen. Both the IMTH and OCOG retrackers are designed for cleaning the radar
signal for in­land water surface measurements, and they can be used in case the Ocean
retracker does not provide reliable data [12]. However, the OCOG products had data
entries where the two other retrackers had holes in the data, and since there was no
other real difference in the data for all three retrackers, OCOG was chosen as the better
retracker (see Figure 3.5).
The combination of S3A and S3B data is illustrated in Figure 3.5 where it can also be
seen that the retracker products from all three retrackers are practically identical.
Figure 3.5: The process of combining the Sentinel 3A and 3B data consisted of adding
the data in chronological order. If the data from both satellites fell on the same date the
average value was taken.
After combining the S3A and S3B data and picking a retracker product the full WLTS was
ready for extracting the ”wet year” data. The resulting ”wet year” WLTS together with the
raw full WLTS can be seen in Figure 3.6.
Representing Reservoir Regulation in Continental­Scale River Models
19
==PAGE:27==
Figure 3.6: The raw water level time series with elevation reference to EGM2008 for
reservoirs Jingpo, Fengman, Baishan, and Nierji plotted next to the extracted ”wet year”
data used for estimating the target volume time series for the reservoirs.
The WL data was given with reference to the Earth Gravitational Model 2008 (EGM2008),
as was the volume variation data from the previous section. EGM2008 is the latest math­
ematical surface model that approximates the Earth’s mean sea level (MSL) and is used
as a reference for determining elevations and altitudes [22], [41].
However, we can­
not use WLs going all the way down to MSL. Thus, after receiving the processed wa­
ter levels, these were corrected by subtracting a reference level, which was chosen to
be the reservoir surface elevation as recorded via the Map Elevation Calculator (https:
//www.calcmaps.com/map-elevation/) [42]. A line with points along each reservoir surface
was drawn, and the elevation value showing up most (which was in accordance with the
raw WLTS data) was chosen as the reference level. The raw WL data can see plotted
together with the chosen reference level in Figure 3.7. The correction is done to avoid
an extreme overestimation of the storage volume, where the volume would otherwise far
surpass the full capacity of the reservoir.
20
Representing Reservoir Regulation in Continental­Scale River Models
==PAGE:28==
Figure 3.7: Elevation of the raw water level data plotted alongside the reference level
found on CalcMaps.com.
The volume variation was calculated by multiplying the corrected water levels with the
estimated surface areas. The process of estimating the surface areas will be described
in the next section.
Reservoir Surface Areas
The reservoir Surface Areas (SA) used for determining the reservoir target volumes of the
active storage together with the WL data are based on the water occurrence dataset freely
available from the Global Surface Water Explorer provided by the Joint Research Centre
of the EU Commission and Google (https://global-surface-water.appspot.com/#data) [43].
The dataset contains Surface Water Occurrence (SWO) from the past 38 years. The
details of the SWO dataset can be found in Reference [44].
The SWO raster files were then processed in QGIS 3.16. The band value of the raster
corresponded to the SWO in percentage, meaning that a pixel with a band value of 80 had
a SWO of water of 80 % over the entire data collection period going from 1984 to 2022
(38 years) with a weighted monthly timestep [43]. The monthly timestep was weighted to
avoid seasonal skewing of data due to less valid observations during cloudy weather [43].
As mentioned earlier, cloudy weather is still a limitation to water surface detection [43].
Two different methods were deployed to estimate the SA. The first method analyzed the
raw raster file, while the second converted the raster to a polygon for calculating the area.
Method 1: The raster file was cut around each reservoir using the mask function in QGIS,
and the unique raster value report was printed and plotted to identify the area correspond­
ing to each SWO value. The area of pixels above a certain occurrence threshold was then
summed.
Method 2: An occurrence threshold was defined based on how much of the area cor­
responded to that SWO value. The area where SWO = 0 was neglected, and the sec­
ond largest area would correspond to relatively high SWO values, thus, representing the
permanent surface area. Refer to Figure 3.8 for details. Once the threshold was estab­
lished the SWO raster was binarized by turning all the values equal to or above the SWO
threshold into ones and the values below into zeroes. The raster was then converted to
Representing Reservoir Regulation in Continental­Scale River Models
21
==PAGE:29==
a polygon via the polygonize tool, and the resulting polygon was cleaned for excess area
placed outside the continuous polygon shape.
Table 3.3: Reservoir surface area calculations performed two different ways for the
maximum­ and minimum occurrence threshold, respectively. The area is either estimated
by summing the area of the pixels with a value above the occurrence threshold from the
occurrence raster layer unique values report in QGIS, or it is calculated by converting
the occurrence raster to a polygon, removing excess polygons, and finally calculating the
area of the remaining polygon.
Reservoir Name
Occurrence Threshold [%]
Occurrence Raster Area [km2]
Polygon Area [km2]
Baishan
80
79.66
77.17
Fengman
80
201.39
200.68
Jingpo
90
73.26
72.11
Nierji
45
297.72
291.65
Baishan
8.33
117.92
116.42
Fengman
8.33
317.41
315.20
Jingpo
8.33
99.81
98.92
Nierji
8.33
449.82
443.14
As seen in Tables 3.3 and 3.4 the method for estimating the surface area, whether it was
via the raster­ or polygon method, gave very similar results. However, the polygon method
was chosen in the end, as the results are a bit more precise by excluding excess area,
despite the method being more time consuming to perform.
Table 3.4: Numeric and percentage difference in the reservoir surface area for both the
occurrence raster and the polygon. Both the numerical value and the percentage are
almost the same for the raster and the polygon. The polygon is, however, somewhat
more precise, as excess pixels have been removed before calculating the area.
Reservoir
Name
Raster ­ Difference
Between Max and
Min Threshold [km2]
Raster ­ Difference
Between Max and
Min Threshold [%]
Polygon ­ Difference
Between Max and
Min Threshold [km2]
Polygon ­ Difference
Between Max and
Min Threshold [%]
Baishan
38.25
32.44
39.25
33.71
Fengman
116.02
36.55
114.52
36.33
Jingpo
26.54
26.59
26.82
27.11
Nierji
152.10
33.81
151.49
34.19
In order to get a more nuanced idea of the area variation (AV) in relation to the WL two
area estimates were performed for a high­ and a low SWO, respectively.
The high occurrence threshold was determined by plotting the area corresponding to a
certain SWO value (see Figure 3.8). The area where the SWO was equal to zero was
neglected altogether as this area was massive compared to all other SWO areas. The
plot gave an idea of where a suitable SWO threshold could be placed for each reservoir.
The reservoirs have different water occurrence histories, as they have been built at dif­
ferent points in time over the 38­year period. This means that Nierji, which was opened
for operation in 2006, compared to Fengman, opening for operation in 1952, has lower
SWO values. However, this doesn’t mean that Nierji’s water surface area is not currently
permanent, but rather that it has not been present during all 38 years of data collection.
Even though Bureyskaya officially started hydropower operation in 2009, construction of
the dam began already in the 1976, and this may explain its high occurrence threshold
22
Representing Reservoir Regulation in Continental­Scale River Models
==PAGE:30==
being higher than that of Nierji [28]. Figure 3.8 shows a comparison between the high
occurrence thresholds set for the four reservoirs. The thresholds were placed around the
peak which represents the area of the permanent water surface and not exactly at the
peak to account for the uncertainty in the surface area.
The low occurrence threshold was set equally for all reservoirs at 8.33 % because of the
monthly timestep in the SWO data [43]. Thus, if water occurred in a pixel at least once a
year (one month out of twelve months), for example due to a fixed seasonal pattern, the
minimum occurrence threshold would be
1
12 = 8.33%. The minimum threshold therefore
assumes that water will occur at least during one month per year to be included.
Figure 3.8: The high­ and low Surface Water Occurrence thresholds for each reservoir
set to estimate the area variability over high­ and low Water Levels.
The high­ and low occurrence surface area estimates for all four reservoirs are shown in
Figure 3.9.
Representing Reservoir Regulation in Continental­Scale River Models
23
==PAGE:31==
(a) Baishan reservoir
Figure 3.9: Surface area estimates for high­ (blue) and low (red) occurrence water levels
for the reservoirs Baishan (a), Fengman (b), Jingpo (c), and Nierji (d). The key plan shows
the Reservoir’s location within the Amur River catchment. Data source: EC JRC/Google.
The relationship between the WL variation and the area variation was assumed to be
linear. The linear function is shown in Equation 3.1:
A(WL) = A(WLmin) + A(WLmax −A(WLmin))
WLmax −WLmin
· WL
(3.1)
where A is the area and WLmin and WLmax are the minimum­ and maximum water lev­
els, respectively. Thus, A(WLmin) and A(WLmax) correspond to the high­ and low occur­
rence areas because as the WL rises the area expands linearly between these minimum­
and maximum area values. Once the area variation was produced the Area Variation
Target Volumes were calculated by multiplying WLs and AVs.
The TVTS with included AV can be seen in Figure 3.10 together with target volumes
assuming a fixed area. The fixed area is set to be the high occurrence area (Refer to
Figure 3.9).
24
Representing Reservoir Regulation in Continental­Scale River Models
==PAGE:32==
(b) Fengman Dam (or Songhua Lake)
(c) Jingpo Lake
(d) Nierji Dam
Representing Reservoir Regulation in Continental­Scale River Models
25
==PAGE:33==
Curve Fitting ­ Establishing the Target Volume Yearly Trend
In order to create a time series for a typical wet year, the raw volume variation datapoints
were inserted into a Year Matrix with an index starting at one, and the days of a full year
(a leap year) along the y­axis and the selected ”wet years” for that particular reservoir
along the x­axis. For each row (day of a ”wet year”) the average volume on that day for
all ”wet years” was found. The exceptions to this were the start­ and end­values of the
TS. The start­ and end­value had to be the same, as the assumption went that the yearly
TS was a pattern that would repeat itself each year. In order to avoid an exaggerated
discharge­ or storage requirement between the end of one year and the start of another
these values were set to be equal. An example of the Year Matrix can be seen in Table
3.5. The value entered as the start value was chosen based on the first value registered
in the average year ­ except for the Fengman reservoir, which had a wide spread in its
volume data throughout the average year, and based on this, the average of the two first
registered datapoints (1.55 and 3.14 km3) was taken as the start value. The end value
was set equal to the generated start value.
Table 3.5: Example of the Year Matrix, where the average daily volume is found for a
”wet year” for every day of the year (a leap year). The method of taking the average is
highlighted in yellow, while the exceptions to the average rule, the start­ and end­values
are highlighted in pink.
Index
Date
(Day­Month)
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
Average Volume Variation
Over the Years [m]
1
01­01
9.08
2
02­01
3
03­01
4
04­01
9.08
9.08
...
...
x1
x2
x3
x4
x5
x6
Average(x’s)
363
28­12
6.96
6.96
364
29­12
365
30­12
366
31­12
9.08
The volume variation was converted to an actual storage volume for each day of the year
by establishing a base volume to add to the variation. The so­called Dead Storage of the
reservoir. The base volume was estimated by Subtracting the maximum volume variation
from the upper limit storage known as the Flood Control Volume (FCV). That way, the
target volume would never exceed the FCV.
The target volume datapoints were plotted to get an idea of what type of curve could fit
the pattern. A yearly pattern was more or less visible for all six reservoirs (See Figure
3.10). Baishan and Fengman reservoirs had the widest spreads in the data.
The target volume data was fitted through interpolation by a cubic spline via both the
Univariate­ and the LSQUnivariate Spline from the SciPy package, which is an open­
source software language for Python. A spline is a continuous mathematical function
made up of various interconnected polynomials (in this case third degree polynomials)
[45], [46]. The interpolation of datapoints via splines works by connecting the different
polynomials at specific points called the knots. The polynomial equations between the
knots are different from each other, as they are all specifically fitted to their exact interval
of datapoints between the knots, and this is the main advantage of a spline compared
to classical fitting techniques. It makes it possible for the spline to correlate data which
26
Representing Reservoir Regulation in Continental­Scale River Models
==PAGE:34==
does not follow any specific pattern smoothly without the extreme oscillations that a single
polynomial fit would produce [45], [46].
The SciPy package’s Univariate Spline had a built­in smoothing factor, which was used
to specify the number of knots for splining ([47]). The more knots, the more smoothed
the curve becomes displaying the more general trend in place of an overfitted curve. The
smoothing factor was set individually for each reservoir to get the best possible fit (See
Table B.1 in Appendix B). After finding the best fit for the Univariate Spline, the specified
knots (set by the defined smoothing factor) were inserted into the LSQUnivariate Spline
function. The LSQUnivariate Spline was a function where the internal knots in the spline
could be freely defined [48].
Thus, the final trendline was fitted in two steps. In order to keep the start­ and end values
equal these points were weighted by a 100 times (w = 100) compared to the default weight
for each point, which is w = 1 (See Listing G.1 in Appendix G). The resulting fitted­ and
smoothed curves can be seen in Figure 3.10.
The error in the fitting procedure can be quantified by obtaining the weighted sum of
squared residuals (SSR) of the spline approximation. The weighted sum of squared resid­
uals for the ten spline approximations shown in Figure 3.10 can be seen in Table B.1 in
Appendix B. The smaller the residual the better the fit of the curve to the datapoints. The
SSR follows the smoothing factor closely, thus, the approximation of the fit very much
depends on the spread of the data, and how many knots had to be computed in the spline
in order to get a smooth curve.
Representing Reservoir Regulation in Continental­Scale River Models
27
==PAGE:35==
Figure 3.10: ”Wet year” volume datapoints and fitted target volume curves with­ and with­
out area variation plotted under the marked Flood Control Volume (FCV). Zeya and Bu­
reyskaya do not have any surface area variation, as it is assumed that this is already
integrated in the Hydroweb processed volume variation time series. The fitted curves
represent the assumed yearly trend of the storage volume in the reservoirs.
The Target volume with AV is placed lower under the FCV because of the linear rela­
tionship between the WL and the AV (see Equation 3.1). This means that because the
maximum volume variation was higher when multiplying the same WL with a larger area
(as given by the low occurrence area estimate), the base volume had to be recalculated
to still fulfill the criteria of not exceeding the FCV. Thus, the trendline was fitted between
a lower minimum and a larger maximum variation when including area variation instead
of assuming a fixed area.
3.3
Reservoir Regulation Code Structure
The simulation setup for the tributary routing scheme to the main branches modeled by
the HD model is developed in Python 3.7. Most of the code used in this model is the same
code as used for the original HD model described in Section 2.3 and in Reference [10].
However, the river routing script based on the Muskingum routing method was revised to
including the new reservoir operation policies, VOP and AVVOP, in the script. The code
for the revised routing script can be seen in Appendix G. The if−statements written in the
code for modeling the reservoir regulation is inspired by Reference [35].
28
Representing Reservoir Regulation in Continental­Scale River Models
==PAGE:36==
The routing script generates storage­ and release files for each reservoir with a daily
timestep. The values in the storage­ and release files are directly determined by the
chosen reservoir regulation policy as this policy consists of the decision variables for ei­
ther storing or releasing a certain amount of inflow. For example, each timestep takes
in parameters of inflow for that day and storage from the previous timestep. These are
added together and based on the summed volume the VOP determines whether to store
or release the water.
Finally, the storage­ and release files are used to generate boundary files to implemented
in the MIKE Hydro River software (described in [49]).
Representing Reservoir Regulation in Continental­Scale River Models
29
==PAGE:37==
4
Results and Discussion
4.1
Target Volume Time Series
4.1.1
Storage Simulation Results
The simulated storage volume in the reservoirs was successfully simulated to fulfill the
criteria set by the VOP. The FCV was not exceeded at any point in the simulation, and the
target volume would only be filled when the amount of inflow allowed it. Various storage
simulation parameters are explored in extracted examples in Figure 4.1.
The storage simulations for the SOP and VOP regulations, respectively, are compared in
Figure 4.1a. The pattern of the generated TVTS is clearly visible in the resulting storage
simulation of the VOP reservoir regulation. If the amount of inflow allows, the water will
be stored to the level of the set target volume (with an assumed minimum release for
sustaining the community and ecosystem). The target volume is never exceeded. The
previous SOP storage simulations for Bureyskaya and Nierji were radically different. Nierji
reservoir had an active storage of zero for much of the simulation period with only a few
peaks, while Bureyskaya reservoir was filled to maximum capacity continuously from the
middle of 2002 to the end of the simulation period. With the VOP simulations result in a
yearly, fixed variation, where the active storage in Nierji and Bureyskaya has increased
and decreased, respectively. See results of VOP storage simulations for all reservoirs in
Appendix D, Figure D.1a.
The storage simulations for the VOP and AVVOP regulations are shown in Figure 4.1b.
Reservoirs Zeya, Bureyskaya, and Lianhua do not have area variation, as they either
had processed volume variation data readily available or had neither volume­ nor WL
variation TS accessible at all. However, Lianhua is still slightly affected by including AV
in the simulation as the discharge from Jingpo reservoir, which does have AV, flows into
Lianhua. The effect is very subtle, but can be seen as red marks around the edge of
the peaks on the graph. In Jingpo reservoir the effect of the AV is more visible. The
AVVOP simulated storage has a higher fluctuation, a wider spread between the maximum
and minimum storage, while the VOP simulated storage has a larger storage in general
compared to the AVVOP. These results are as expected. See results of AVVOP storage
simulations for all reservoirs in Appendix D, Figure D.1c.
The effect of setting the FCV at either full capacity or at 90 % of full capacity can be
seen in reservoirs Bureyskaya and Lianhua in Figure 4.1c. Both reservoirs hits a point
in the SOP simulated storages where the reservoir is filled to maximum capacity for the
remaining part of the simulation period. The effect the FCV has is ultimately the amount
of water that is assumed to be retained. The lower the FCV limit, the lower the active
storage that can be used for irrigation and hydropower generation. None of the simulated
VOP storages exceeded the set FCV as expected (see FCV results for all reservoirs in
Appendix D, Figure D.1b).
The initial storage was either undefined as ”iniS” or set to the target volume for the day
of the start of the simulation, June 1st 2000 or day 153 of the year (refer to line 10 and
11 in the VOP code in Appendix G, Listing G.2). The effect of changing the initial storage
is more or less subtle in all reservoirs and only visible in the beginning of the simulation
period as the storage ”settles in” to the pattern of the yearly TV after a while. See INIS
results for all reservoirs in Appendix D, Figure D.1d.
30
Representing Reservoir Regulation in Continental­Scale River Models
==PAGE:38==
(a) Storage volume from the VOP reservoir regulation versus storage simulation by the SOP.
(b) AVVOP storage simulation compared to VOP simulation without assumed AV.
Representing Reservoir Regulation in Continental­Scale River Models
31
==PAGE:39==
(c) Storage simulations resulting from a FCV of either full reservoir capacity or 90 % of full capacity.
The storage simulation is created with the SOP reservoir regulation for two different values of FCV.
(d) Storage simulation from an initial storage that is undefined compared to an initial storage that
is the target volume for the start of the simulation period on June 1st 2000 (day 153 of the year).
Figure 4.1: Storage simulations over the entire model simulation period with the changing
parameters standard operation storage (a), target volume storage (TV) (a), area variation
(AV) (b), flood control volume (FCV) (c), and initial storage (INIS) (d).
32
Representing Reservoir Regulation in Continental­Scale River Models
==PAGE:40==
4.2
HD Model Performance with SOP, VOP, and AVVOP
4.2.1
Overview of Model Runs
An overview of the HD model simulation runs with the various reservoir regulation policies
is given in Table 4.1.
The following are the intentions behind the model runs (Table 4.1):
• Run 1.1 is the original reservoir regulation policy with out any changed parameters.
This is the baseline model simulation that the WSE results of all the other model
runs will be compared against.
• The idea behind run 1.2, is to see what effect the FCV at 90 % of full reservoir
capacity has on the simulation. For the rest of the model runs FCV is fixed at 90 %
of full capacity.
• Run 1.2, 1.3 and 1.4 test how sensitive simulated WSE is to the target release.
• Runs 1.3, 2.4, and 3.4 compare a SOP regulated reservoir to a VOP­ and an AVVOP
regulated reservoir when they have a target release and a minimum release, respec­
tively, of the same value, 10 % of Mean Annual Flow (MAF).
• Runs 2.1 and 3.1 can be compared with 2.2 and 3.2, respectively, to see how the
initial storage value affects the simulations for VOP and AVVOP.
• Runs 2.1, 2.3, and 2.4 shows how the definition of the minimum release affects the
simulation for the VOP. And runs 3.1, 3.3 and 3.4 does the same, but for the AVVOP.
Besides the comparison between the specific parameters, the reservoir regulations VOP
and AVVOP can be compared across their four runs. And their affect on WSE simulation
can, in turn, be compared with the original reservoir regulation in run 1.1.
Table 4.1: Overview of the HD model simulations performed for the analysis of reservoir
regulation’s effect on the model’s forecast of WSE.
SOP
Reservoir regulation parameters
Run
Target Release
FCV
Initial Storage
1.1
Original Model Target Release
Full Reservoir Capacity
INIS
1.2
Original Model Target Release
90 % of Reservoir Capacity
INIS
1.3
10 % of Mean Annual Flow
90 % of Reservoir Capacity
INIS
1.4
60 % of Mean Annual Flow
90 % of Reservoir Capacity
INIS
VOP
Reservoir regulation parameters
Run
Minimum Release
FCV
Initial Storage
2.1
10 % of Mean of Total Inflow
90 % of Reservoir Capacity
Target Volume
2.2
10 % of Mean of Total Inflow
90 % of Reservoir Capacity
INIS
2.3
No Minimum Release (0)
90 % of Reservoir Capacity
Target Volume
2.4
10 % of Mean Annual Inflow (Tennant, 1975)
90 % of Reservoir Capacity
Target Volume
AVVOP
Reservoir regulation parameters
Run
Minimum Release
FCV
Initial Storage
3.1
10 % of Mean of Total Inflow
90 % of Reservoir Capacity
Target Volume
3.2
10 % of Mean of Total Inflow
90 % of Reservoir Capacity
INIS
3.3
No Minimum Release (0)
90 % of Reservoir Capacity
Target Volume
3.4
10 % of Mean Annual Inflow (Tennant, 1975)
90 % of Reservoir Capacity
Target Volume
Representing Reservoir Regulation in Continental­Scale River Models
33
==PAGE:41==
4.2.2
Simulated WSE ­ Sensitivity to Reservoir Regulation Parameters
The simulated WSE is compared to observed data given by both insitu­ and Virtual Sta­
tions (VS). VS are in fact satellites crossings over the reservoir or river at that point. They
are treated as providing valid reference data just like the insitu stations [10], [14]. A map
of all the observation stations is given in Appendix F in Figure F.1.
The comparison is performed with Root Mean Square Error (RMSE) between the ob­
served WSE and the simulated WSE. The equation for RMSE is as follows in Equation
4.1.
RMSE =
√∑(sim −obs)2
nobs
(4.1)
In order to select observation stations that display the affect of the various parameters
within the reservoir regulation policies on the WSE forecast, the RMSE for each sta­
tion was consulted, and the stations with the highest variation in RMSE were chosen
as demonstration. This can be a high varistion in a positive way, meaning that the RMSE
has diminished a little compared to the original model. But it can also be to show how
WSE is affected on the whole, thus, also cases where RMSE increases in comparison
with the original model.
In case of comparing the reservoir regulation guidelines as a whole (and not the specific
parameters within them) the original SOP (run 1.1) was compared to the VOP and AVVOP
run that gave the best WSE forecast (2.4 and 3.4). The collective results of comparing
reservoir regulations and parameters are shown graphically in Figure 4.3. The graphs
demonstrate how the model forecasts WSE over time at the specific observation station
locations. All models follow the observation values reasonably well. The specific differ­
ences in the RMSE values are easier to use to assess the difference between the models
(see Figure 4.2).
The RMSE’s from the comparisons performed (see overview in Table 4.1) are shown in
Figure 4.2. The lowest RMSE results was obtained from the original model (marked in
yellow). However, in the ”Comparison between reservoir regulation policy” between SOP,
VOP and AVVOP, both volume based reservoir guidelines perform better at WSE forecast
than the original SOP. However, the better performance of the VOP and AVVOP was not
consistent across all observation stations. Most of the improving forecast effect happened
downstream from Zeya and Bureyskaya.
34
Representing Reservoir Regulation in Continental­Scale River Models
==PAGE:42==
Figure 4.2: Each box represents a comparison metric, with the included simulation runs
and observation stations. The numbers inside the boxes are the RMSE in meters WSE.
The simulation runs are marked with colors, such that each reservoir regulation has a
color scheme which goes from light to dark colors from 1 to 4. The lowest RMSE results
was obtained from the original model, marked in yellow.
In case of the ”Target Release in SOP”, the model seems to be sensitive to the target
release value. It was set to be average inflow (1.2), 10 % of MAF (1.3), and 60 % of MAF
(1.4). There are high errors in the two latter target releases. The sensitivity of the target
release is also seen in ”Target Release in SOP versus Minimum Release in VOP”. The
different definitions of the target release gives more variability in the WSE forecast than
changing the assumption for the minimum release.
As seen in the RMSE values in box ”Minimum Release in VOP/AVVOP” in Figure 4.2 for
assessing the influence of the minimum release on both the VOP and the AVVOP, the
best minimum release is the dynamic release that follows 10 % the yearly flow pattern
generated by calculating the MAF. The RMSE values for the VOP and AVVOP are iden­
tical. Thus, the area variation in itself has no effect on improving the reservoir regulation
policy.
Representing Reservoir Regulation in Continental­Scale River Models
35
==PAGE:43==
(a) Comparison of the original SOP (run 1.1) to the VOP and AVVOP run that gave the best WSE
forecast (2.4 and 3.4). Stations Innokentievka, KM1915, and KM1624 are located relatively close
to the big reservoirs, Zeya and Bureyskaya, while Khaborovsk is placed further downstream, but
still experiences some change in WSE compared to run 1.1.
(b) Comparison between simulation 1.1 and 1.2 to assess the effect of the flood control volume
limit (FCV). The FCV has almost no influence on the model’s ability to predict WSE.
36
Representing Reservoir Regulation in Continental­Scale River Models
==PAGE:44==
(c) Comparison of the target release within the different SOP simulation runs. The target release
is set to average inflow (1.2), 10 % of MAF (1.3), and 60 % of MAF (1.4). There are high errors in
the two latter target releases. The model seems very sensitive to these. The model run based on
the average inflow (1.2) is closer to the observed values.
Representing Reservoir Regulation in Continental­Scale River Models
37
==PAGE:45==
(d) Comparison of different values for the minimum release for the VOP. The values are set to 10
% of average inflow over the simulation period (3.1), zero (3.3), and 10 % of MAF (3.4). The best
value to set the minimum release to is the dynamic MAF, which follows the average yearly cycle
of the river flow into the reservoir.
38
Representing Reservoir Regulation in Continental­Scale River Models
==PAGE:46==
(e) Comparison of different values for the minimum release for the AVVOP. The values are set to
10 % of average inflow over the simulation period (3.1), zero (3.3), and 10 % of MAF (3.4). The
best value to set the minimum release to is the dynamic MAF, which follows the average yearly
cycle of the river flow into the reservoir.
Representing Reservoir Regulation in Continental­Scale River Models
39
==PAGE:47==
(f) Comparison of the SOP and VOP regulation policy when target release and minimum release,
respectively, is both set to 10 % of MAF. Even when target release is set to the same yearly value
as the minimum release, the downstream observation station, Khaborovsk, shows that VOP or
AVVOP at least downstream have a better WSE forecast.
Figure 4.3: Comparisons of the reservoir regulation policies as well as the individual pa­
rameters within those policies. The parameters explored are FCV (b), Target release (c),
Minimum release (d) and (e), and the effect of the reservoir policy, when both having the
same rule for target release and minimum release, respectively.
The total count of the RMSE for the VS observations are similar to the RMSE for the
original model across the various reservoir regulation policies and parameters. The RMSE
bar graph between the original model and the best of the reservoir regulation alternative
models (run 2.4 of the VOP) shows that the original model has fewer RMSE counts of
2 m and above than the VOP. For the majority of the Amur River catchment observation
stations there were no real difference between the SOP and VOP values. Upstream of
the Sungari­ and Amur River confluence, the SOP performed better forecasts.
The bar graphs can be seen in Figure 4.4. The rest of the RMSE histograms are shown
in Appendix E in Figure E.2.
40
Representing Reservoir Regulation in Continental­Scale River Models
==PAGE:48==
Figure 4.4: The most frequent counts of RMSE are between 1.3 and 2.2 m (WSE) across
models. Comparing with the original model (simulation 1.1) the RMSE has not improved
with any of the reservoir regulation changes.
Catchment­wide Impact
It can be hard to see from the timestep graphs alone, what impact the reservoir regulation
has on the Amur River flow. In addition to the ability to forecast WSE over time, the HD
model’s ability to forecast WSE over the spatial distribution of the Amur River catchment
is assessed.
The spatial distribution of RMSE in the catchment for simulation runs 1.1 and 2.4 is shown
in Figure E.3 in Appendix E. The difference in RMSE between to two simulation runs
is shown here in Figure 4.5. The negative numbers show that the VOP shows worse
forecasts than the SOP and vice versa.
Representing Reservoir Regulation in Continental­Scale River Models
41
==PAGE:49==
Figure 4.5: The difference (1.1 ­ 2.4) in RMSE between simulation runs 1.1 (the original
HD model with SOP) and 2.4 (VOP) over the spatial range of the two simulated branches
in the Amur River catchment, Amur and Sungari Rivers.
Looking at Figure 4.5 the change in RMSE seems to occur mostly downstream from the
confluence between Amur and Sungari Rivers. This makes sense, as the cascade effect
of the regulations upstream affect the downstream flow cumulatively.
As mentioned earlier, the VOP’s effect on the forecasting ability of the HD model is not
consistent throughout the Amur River catchment. As seen in Figure 4.5, the majority of the
improved forecast (from substituting the SOP by the VOP) is seen downstream from the
major reservoirs, Zeya and Bureyskaya, with capacities of 68.4 and 10 km3, respectively.
The Sungari River branch where Fengman, Nierji, Baishan and Lianhua all are connected,
seems to have an even worse forecast with the VOP.
One reason for this could be the difference in sizes between the reservoirs. However,
Fengman has a larger capacity (11 km3) than Bureyskaya, and should, via this logic, have
a major effect on the downstream flow. But another explanation may be that the volume
variation data was obtained differently. The volume variation data for the Sungari­branch
reservoirs have been through many more steps with estimating surface area, and also
having fewer WL datapoints than the available and already processed volume variation
data form Hydroweb for Zeya and Bureyskaya.
4.3
Data quality and availability
The TVTS was based on a variety of assumptions, for example in setting the surface area
based on the SWO during the past 38 years. Furthermore the WLs generated by satellite
altimetry could be prone to issues of inland water measurements, such as off­nadir signals
or land signal contamination. As mentioned in Section 2.2 in­land satellite altimetry faces
42
Representing Reservoir Regulation in Continental­Scale River Models
==PAGE:50==
some challenges in recording accurate water surface data. It is assumed that none of the
WL datasets used to produce the TVTS were affected by off­nadir errors. The dataset
that gave no usable results, the WLs over Lianhua reservoir, was discarded, probably it
was an error such as this that disrupted the correct WL readings.
The Target Volume Time Series approximation via cubic splines had quite high SSRs for
most of the reservoirs, as seen in Table B.1 in Appendix B. This may influence how rep­
resentative the target volumes in this model are. However, it was a deliberate decision to
have a curve that was as smooth as possible to approximate the general trend of the target
volume, and not follow the datapoints closely, which would have resulted in an overfitted
curve and very rapid and high fluctuations in storage volume in the TVTS. Therefore, the
high SSR values are acceptable for this time series approximation.
However, when looking at the TVTS and comparing it to the information derived about the
climatology of the Amur River catchment, and holding it together with the graphed mean
annual inflow (see Figure 2.3), the yearly curve of the target volume follows the yearly
flow cycle in the Amur catchment. As seen in Figure 4.1 the storage simulations from the
VOP and AVVOP gave valid results which kept within the defined guidelines of FCV, TV,
INIS and AV. But the target volumes may not be entirely perfect.
As mentioned in the spatial distribution of forecast performance the different volume vari­
ation data for the different reservoirs may have had a direct influence. One major im­
portance in regards to substituting the SOP with the VOP for HD models in the future
is to be sure that the volume data is correct. The errors from upstream reservoir oper­
ations are transferred into the connected downstream reservoirs, the so called cascade
effect, and so the error in reservoir regulation can accumulate through the river system
[32]. However, as seems to be the case in Figure 4.5, the improvement of the flow fore­
cast can also flow downstream. The VOP seems to have worked for improving discharge
simulation from Zeya and Bureyskaya.
Representing Reservoir Regulation in Continental­Scale River Models
43
==PAGE:51==
5
Conclusion
The reservoir regulation methods tested in this thesis were very equal in performance
across reservoir operation policies SOP, VOP and AVVOP. The VOP is, therefore, a valid
alternative to the SOP.
The VOP and AVVOP performed better than the SOP along a range of observation sta­
tions along the Amur River branch downstream from the Zeya and Bureyskaya reservoirs
with an RMSE reduction of about 0.04 to 0.31 m. This effect may be the result of the
volume variation data being preprocessed by Hydroweb. The WSE simulation upstream
from the confluence between Amur­ and Sungari Rivers was best given by the original
SOP model, where the VOP worsened RMSE by between 0.01 to 0.09 m.
The most sensitive parameter to affect the model forecast was the target release in the
SOP. The RMSE changed from 1.80 m to 2.15 m by changing the target release from the
flow average to 60 % of mean annual flow.
The methodology for using satellite altimetry informed reservoir regulation parameters is
applicable for continental­ to global scale rivers, as these rivers can have large unmoni­
tored areas, where only satellite data is available. Luckily the satellite data resolution and
data availability is growing. This opens up the opportunity to use more empirically derived
reservoir regulation models, such a reservoir model based on target volume.
44
Representing Reservoir Regulation in Continental­Scale River Models
==PAGE:52==
Bibliography
[1]
J. Lee, D. Perera, T. Glickman, and L. Taing, “Water­related disasters and their
health impacts: A global review,” Progress in Disaster Science, vol. 8, p. 100 123,
2020, ISSN: 25900617. DOI: 10.1016/j.pdisas.2020.100123. [Online]. Available:
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pdisas.2020.100123.
[2]
S. I. Seneviratne, N. Nicholls, D. Easterling, C. M. Goodess, S. Kanae, J. Kossin,
Y. Luo, J. Marengo, K. Mc Innes, M. Rahimi, M. Reichstein, A. Sorteberg, C. Vera,
X. Zhang, M. Rusticucci, V. Semenov, L. V. Alexander, S. Allen, G. Benito, T. Cava­
zos, J. Clague, D. Conway, P. M. Della­Marta, M. Gerber, S. Gong, B. N. Goswami,
M. Hemer, C. Huggel, B. Van den Hurk, V. V. Kharin, A. Kitoh, A. M. Klein Tank, G.
Li, S. Mason, W. Mc Guire, G. J. Van Oldenborgh, B. Orlowsky, S. Smith, W. Thiaw,
A. Velegrakis, P. Yiou, T. Zhang, T. Zhou, and F. W. Zwiers, “Changes in climate ex­
tremes and their impacts on the natural physical environment,” Managing the Risks
of Extreme Events and Disasters to Advance Climate Change Adaptation: Spe­
cial Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, vol. 9781107025,
pp. 109–230, 2012. DOI: 10.1017/CBO9781139177245.006.
[3]
I. J. Sauer, R. Reese, C. Otto, T. Geiger, S. N. Willner, B. P. Guillod, D. N. Bresch,
and K. Frieler, “Climate signals in river flood damages emerge under sound re­
gional disaggregation,” Nature Communications, vol. 12, no. 1, pp. 1–11, 2021,
ISSN: 20411723. DOI: 10 . 1038 / s41467 - 021 - 22153 - 9. [Online]. Available: http :
//dx.doi.org/10.1038/s41467-021-22153-9.
[4]
CRED and UNISDR, “The Human Cost of Weather Related Disasters 1995­2015,”
Teaching and Teacher Education, vol. 12, no. 1, pp. 1–17, 2015, ISSN: 18770428.
[Online]. Available: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/01443410.2015.1044943%0Ahttp:
//dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.sbspro.2010.03.581%0Ahttps://publications.europa.eu/en/
publication-detail/-/publication/2547ebf4-bd21-46e8-88e9-f53c1b3b927f/language-
en%0Ahttp://europa.eu/.%0Ahttp://www.leg.st.
[5]
E. M. Verbitskaya, S. V. Ageeva, I. O. Dugina, I. M. Dunaeva, N. F. Efremova, S. O.
Romanskii, and V. V. Tarasyuk, “Catastrophic flood on the Amur River in summer
2013: Features and causes,” Russian Meteorology and Hydrology, vol. 40, no. 10,
pp. 683–690, 2015, ISSN: 10683739. DOI: 10.3103/S1068373915100064.
[6]
G. Blöschl, L. Gaál, J. Hall, A. Kiss, J. Komma, T. Nester, J. Parajka, R. A. Perdigão,
L. Plavcová, M. Rogger, J. L. Salinas, and A. Viglione, “Increasing river floods: fiction
or reality?” Wiley Interdisciplinary Reviews: Water, vol. 2, no. 4, pp. 329–344, 2015,
ISSN: 20491948. DOI: 10.1002/WAT2.1079.
[7]
H. Ritchie, M. Roser, and P. Rosado, Energy, 2022. [Online]. Available: https://
ourworldindata.org/renewable-energy#breakdown-of-renewables-in-the-energy-mix.
[8]
E. A. Simonov, O. I. Nikitina, and E. G. Egidarev, “Freshwater ecosystems versus
hydropower development: Environmental assessments and conservation measures
in the transboundary Amur River basin,” Water (Switzerland), vol. 11, no. 8, 2019,
ISSN: 20734441. DOI: 10.3390/w11081570.
[9]
J. Liu, L. Jiang, F. Bandini, C. M. M. Kittel, N. Balbarini, N. G. Hansted, H. Grosen,
and P. Bauer­Gottwein, “Spatio­temporally Varying Manning Roughness in Rivers
and Streams: A calibration approach using in­situ water level and UAS altimetry,”
preprint, 2021.
[10]
P. Bauer­gottwein, E. Zakharova, H. Ranndal, and K. Nielsen, “A hydraulic model
of the Amur River informed with ICESat­2 elevation,” preprint, pp. 1–17, 2022.
Representing Reservoir Regulation in Continental­Scale River Models
45
==PAGE:53==
[11]
N. Dong, J. Wei, M. Yang, D. Yan, C. Yang, H. Gao, J. Arnault, P. Laux, X. Zhang,
Y. Liu, J. Niu, H. Wang, H. Wang, H. Kunstmann, and Z. Yu, “Model Estimates
of China’s Terrestrial Water Storage Variation Due To Reservoir Operation,” Wa­
ter Resources Research, vol. 58, no. 6, 2022, ISSN: 19447973. DOI: 10 . 1029 /
2021WR031787.
[12]
C. Schwatke, D. Dettmering, W. Bosch, and F. Seitz, “DAHITI ­ An innovative ap­
proach for estimating water level time series over inland waters using multi­mission
satellite altimetry,” Hydrology and Earth System Sciences, vol. 19, no. 10, pp. 4345–
4364, 2015, ISSN: 16077938. DOI: 10.5194/hess-19-4345-2015.
[13]
Copernicus, Copernicus Sentinels assist in monitoring and management of Fin­
land’s waters, 2023. [Online]. Available: https : / / sentinel . esa . int / web / success -
stories/ - /copernicus - sentinels - assist - in - monitoring - and - management - of - finland -
waters/1.8.
[14]
K. Nielsen, O. B. Andersen, and H. Ranndal, “Validation of sentinel­3a based lake
level over US and Canada,” Remote Sensing, vol. 12, no. 17, pp. 1–15, 2020, ISSN:
20724292. DOI: 10.3390/rs12172835.
[15]
R. C. Paiva, W. Collischonn, M. P. Bonnet, L. G. De Gonçalves, S. Calmant, A.
Getirana, and J. Santos Da Silva, “Assimilating in situ and radar altimetry data into a
large­scale hydrologic­hydrodynamic model for streamflow forecast in the Amazon,”
Hydrology and Earth System Sciences, vol. 17, no. 7, pp. 2929–2946, 2013, ISSN:
10275606. DOI: 10.5194/hess-17-2929-2013.
[16]
K. Nielsen, L. Stenseng, O. B. Andersen, and P. Knudsen, “The performance and
potentials of the CryoSat­2 SAR and SARIn modes for lake level estimation,” Water
(Switzerland), vol. 9, no. 6, 2017, ISSN: 20734441. DOI: 10.3390/w9060374.
[17]
L. Jiang, F. Bandini, O. Smith, I. K. Jensen, and P. Bauer­Gottwein, “The value of
distributed high­resolution UAV­borne observations of water surface elevation for
river management and hydrodynamic modeling,” Remote Sensing, vol. 12, no. 7,
2020, ISSN: 20724292. DOI: 10.3390/rs12071171.
[18]
J. van Zyl and Y. Kim, Synthetic Aperture Radar (SAR) Imaging Basics. John Wiley
& Sons, 2011, pp. 1–22. DOI: 10.1002/9781118116104.ch1.
[19]
L. Sanchéz, M. Pearlman, and K. Heki, Satellite Altimetry, 2023. [Online]. Available:
https://ggos.org/item/satellite-altimetry/.
[20]
R. Abileah and S. Vignudelli, “Precise inland surface altimetry (PISA) with nadir
specular echoes from Sentinel­3: Algorithm and performance assessment,” Remote
Sensing of Environment, vol. 264, p. 112 580, 2021, ISSN: 00344257. DOI: 10.1016/
j.rse.2021.112580. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.rse.2021.112580.
[21]
Copernicus, The Copernicus Sentinel­3 mission: Sentinel­3B is in orbit! 2018. [On­
line]. Available: https://www.copernicus.eu/en/copernicus-sentinel-3-mission-sentinel-
3b-orbit.
[22]
N. K. Pavlis, S. A. Holmes, S. C. Kenyon, and J. K. Factor, “The development and
evaluation of the Earth Gravitational Model 2008 (EGM2008),” Journal of Geophys­
ical Research: Solid Earth, vol. 117, no. 4, pp. 1–38, 2012, ISSN: 21699356. DOI:
10.1029/2011JB008916.
[23]
C. E. Greer, A. P. Muranov, and L. Owen, Amur River, 2016. [Online]. Available:
https://www.britannica.com/place/Amur-River.
[24]
D. Mao, Y. Tian, Z. Wang, M. Jia, J. Du, and C. Song, “Wetland changes in the
Amur River Basin: Differing trends and proximate causes on the Chinese and Rus­
sian sides,” Journal of Environmental Management, vol. 280, no. November 2020,
p. 111 670, 2021, ISSN: 10958630. DOI: 10.1016/j.jenvman.2020.111670. [Online].
Available: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jenvman.2020.111670.
46
Representing Reservoir Regulation in Continental­Scale River Models
==PAGE:54==
[25]
Y. Tachibana, K. Oshima, and M. Ogi, “Seasonal and interannual variations of Amur
River discharge and their relationships to large­scale atmospheric patterns and
moisture fluxes,” Journal of Geophysical Research Atmospheres, vol. 113, no. 16,
2008, ISSN: 01480227. DOI: 10.1029/2007JD009555.
[26]
F. S. Kot, K. G. Bakanov, and N. A. Goryachev, Mercury in bottom sediments of the
Amur River, its flood­plain lakes and estuary, Eastern Siberia, 2010. DOI: 10.1007/
s10661-009-1097-0.
[27]
L. L. Yu, Z. Q. Xia, J. K. Li, and T. Cai, “Climate change characteristics of Amur
River,” Water Science and Engineering, vol. 6, no. 2, pp. 131–144, 2013, ISSN:
16742370. DOI: 10.3882/j.issn.1674-2370.2013.02.002. [Online]. Available: http:
//dx.doi.org/10.3882/j.issn.1674-2370.2013.02.002.
[28]
E. Simonov and E. Egidarev, “Intergovernmental cooperation on the Amur River
basin management in the twenty­first century,” International Journal of Water Re­
sources Development, vol. 34, no. 5, pp. 771–791, 2018, ISSN: 13600648. DOI:
10.1080/07900627.2017.1344122. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1080/
07900627.2017.1344122.
[29]
Y. Motovilov, V. Danilov­Danilyan, E. Dod, and A. Kalugin, “Flood protection ef­
fect of the existing and projected reservoirs in the Amur River basin: Evaluation by
the hydrological modeling system,” IAHS­AISH Proceedings and Reports, vol. 370,
pp. 63–67, 2015, ISSN: 01447815. DOI: 10.5194/piahs-370-63-2015.
[30]
Hydroelectric Power Plants in China ­ Jilin & Heilongjiang, 2010. [Online]. Available:
https://archive.ph/20130126103416/http://www.industcards.com/hydro-china-jilin-
heilongjiang.htm.
[31]
A. Maass, M. M. Hufschmidt, J. H. A. Thomas, S. A. Marglin, and G. M. Fair, Design
of Water­Resource Systems ­ New Techniques for Relating Economic Objectives,
Engineering Analysis, and Governmental Planning. Cambridge, Massachusetts: Har­
vard university Press, 1962.
[32]
J. J. Bogardi, Handbook of Water Resources Management: Discourses, Concepts
and Examples. Springer Cham, 2021, ISBN: 9783030601454. DOI: 10.1007/978-3-
030-60147-8.
[33]
P. Bauer­Gottwein, “Water Resources Systems,” 2021.
[34]
S. W. Turner, K. Doering, and N. Voisin, “Data­Driven Reservoir Simulation in a
Large­Scale Hydrological and Water Resource Model,” Water Resources Research,
vol. 56, no. 10, 2020, ISSN: 19447973. DOI: 10.1029/2020WR027902.
[35]
M. Rivera, S. Nebiker, and B. Wright, “Dynamic Reservoir Operations Support Sus­
tainable Water Management,” Opflow, vol. 42, no. 3, pp. 12–16, 2016.
[36]
Y. Ding, “Seasonal March of the East­Asian Summer Monsoon,” in East Asian Mon­
soon, World Scientific, 2004, ch. 1.1, pp. 3–53. [Online]. Available: https://books.
google.dk/books?hl=da&lr=&id=sp5pDQAAQBAJ&oi=fnd&pg=PR5&dq=East_
Asian_Monsoon&ots=IIpsFG5N9Z&sig=7nuMkZwUyA7isPoUvDOQm6KwIQw&redir_
esc=y#v=onepage&q=East_Asian_Monsoon&f=false.
[37]
Sumit Kumar Kawde and M.K. Jain and Dilip G. Durbude, “Environmental flow as­
sessment: A review,” J. Indian Water Resour. Soc.,, vol. 36, no. 3, pp. 1–5, 2016.
[Online]. Available: http://www.iwrs.org.in/journal/jul2016/1jul.pdf.
[38]
A. Shokoohi and Y. Hong, “Determining the Minimum Ecological Water Require­
ments in Perennial Rives Using Morphological Parameters,” Journal of Environ­
mental Studies, vol. 37, no. 58, 2011.
[39]
J. Santos da Silva, S. Calmant, F. Seyler, O. C. Rotunno Filho, G. Cochonneau, and
W. J. Mansur, “Water levels in the Amazon basin derived from the ERS 2 and EN­
VISAT radar altimetry missions,” Remote Sensing of Environment, vol. 114, no. 10,
Representing Reservoir Regulation in Continental­Scale River Models
47
==PAGE:55==
pp. 2160–2181, 2010, ISSN: 00344257. DOI: 10.1016/j.rse.2010.04.020. [Online].
Available: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.rse.2010.04.020.
[40]
Theia, Theia Data and Services Center, 2020. [Online]. Available: https://www.
theia-land.fr/en/theia-data-and-services-center/.
[41]
NGA, World Geodetic System 1984 (WGS 84), 2022. [Online]. Available: https :
//earth-info.nga.mil/index.php?dir=wgs84&action=wgs84.
[42]
CalcMaps.com, Map Elevation Calculator, 2015. [Online]. Available: https://www.
calcmaps.com/map-elevation/.
[43]
J. F. Pekel, A. Cottam, N. Gorelick, and A. S. Belward, “High­resolution mapping
of global surface water and its long­term changes,” Nature, vol. 540, no. 7633,
pp. 418–422, 2016, ISSN: 14764687. DOI: 10.1038/nature20584.
[44]
Joint Research Centre, “Global Surface Water ­ Data Users Guide (v4),” 2021.
[45]
P. Bruce and A. Bruce, Practical Statistics for Data Scientists ­ 50 Essential Con­
cepts, First Edit. O’Reilly Media, Inc., 2017.
[46]
S. McKinley and M. Levine, “Cubic spline interpolation,” Acta Mathematica Hungar­
ica, vol. 107, no. 1­2, pp. 77–87, 2005, ISSN: 02365294. DOI: 10.1007/s10474-005-
0180-4.
[47]
The SciPy Community, scipy.interpolate.UnivariateSpline, 2023. [Online]. Available:
https://docs.scipy.org/doc/scipy/reference/generated/scipy.interpolate.UnivariateSpline.
html.
[48]
——, Scipy.interpolate.LSQUnivariateSpline, 2023. [Online]. Available: https : / /
docs.scipy.org/doc/scipy/reference/generated/scipy.interpolate.LSQUnivariateSpline.
html.
[49]
DHI, MIKE HYDRO River ­ User Guide, Copenhagen, 2017.
48
Representing Reservoir Regulation in Continental­Scale River Models
==PAGE:56==
A
Inflow Peaks
Figure A.1: The Mean Annual Flow (mean flow per day of the year taken from all the
years in the simulation period) going in to the seven studied reservoirs. 2008 is generic
year representing the average inflows for each day of the year. The inflows to the reser­
voirs correspond to the precipitation peaks of the hydrological cycle in the Amur River
catchment.
Representing Reservoir Regulation in Continental­Scale River Models
49
==PAGE:57==
B
Residuals of Curve Fittings for the
Target Volume Time Series
The weighted sum of the squared residuals of each curve fitting in the target volume time
series can be seen in Table B.1.
Table B.1: The weighted sum of squared residuals (SSR) for both the Univariate and
LSQUnivariate splines can be seen here along with the smoothing factor for each fit. The
smaller the residual the better the fit of the curve to the datapoints. The SSR follows the
smoothing factor closely, thus, the approximation of the fit very much depends on the
spread of the data, and how many knots had to be computed in the spline in order to get
a smooth curve.
Reservoir
Name
Univariate
Spline SSR
Area Variation Data ­
Univariate Spline SSR
LSQUnivariate
Spline SSR
Area Variation Data ­
LSQUnivariate Spline
SSR
Smoothing
Factor
Area Variation Data ­
Smoothing Factor
Zeya
430.01
­
430.01
­
430
­
Bureyskaya
40.00
­
40.00
­
40
­
Jingpo
0.48
0.85
0.48
­
0.5
0.9
Fengman
34.99
90.01
34.99
90.01
35
90
Baishan
8.00
10.00
8.00
10.00
8
10
Nierji
10.00
19.99
10.00
19.99
10
20
50
Representing Reservoir Regulation in Continental­Scale River Models
==PAGE:58==
C
Hydrographs
Hydrographs from four selected insitu weather stations that were closest to the reservoirs
studied (see Figure C.1a). The hydrographs are used to assess whether the pattern of
the target volume generated for the reservoirs looks valid compared to actual rainfall data.
(a) Map of weather stations and reservoirs in the Amur River catchment.
(b) Weather Station 30499. Closest to Zeya reservoir.
Representing Reservoir Regulation in Continental­Scale River Models
51
==PAGE:59==
(c) Weather Station 31884. Closest to Lianhua reservoir.
(d) Weather Station 31960. Closest to Jingpo, Fengman, Baishan, and Lianhua reservoirs.
(e) Weather Station 50468. Closest to Bureyskaya and Nierji reservoirs.
Figure C.1: Hydrographs recorded from in­situ weather stations in various proximities to
the different reservoirs. The hydrographs are used to assess whether the pattern of the
target volume generated for the reservoirs looks valid compared to actual rainfall data.
52
Representing Reservoir Regulation in Continental­Scale River Models
==PAGE:60==
D
Storage Simulations
The various storage simulations with the changing parameters initial storage (INIS), flood
control volume (FCV), target volume storage (TV), standard operation storage (SOP), and
area variation (AV) are shown in Figure D.1.
(a) Storage volume from VOP versus storage simulation by SOP.
Representing Reservoir Regulation in Continental­Scale River Models
53
==PAGE:61==
(b) Storage simulations resulting from a FCV of either full reservoir capacity or 90 % of full capacity.
54
Representing Reservoir Regulation in Continental­Scale River Models
==PAGE:62==
(c) Area variation calculated TV storage simulation compared to target volume simulation with
assumed area variation.
Representing Reservoir Regulation in Continental­Scale River Models
55
==PAGE:63==
(d) Storage simulation from an initial storage that is undefined compared to an initial storage that
is the target volume for the start of the simulation period on June 1st 2000 (day 153 of the year).
56
Representing Reservoir Regulation in Continental­Scale River Models
==PAGE:64==
(e) All storage simulations shown together.
Figure D.1: Storage simulations with the changing parameters initial storage (INIS), flood
control volume (FCV), target volume storage (TV), standard operation storage (SOP), and
area variation (AV).
The change in storage simulation for Bureyskaya as a result of changing the initial storage
is hard to see, as it s very small. But there is an effect (refer to Figure D.2).
Representing Reservoir Regulation in Continental­Scale River Models
57
==PAGE:65==
Figure D.2: Zoomed in graph of the subtle change in the storage simulation of Bureyskaya
when changing the initial storage.
58
Representing Reservoir Regulation in Continental­Scale River Models
==PAGE:66==
E
RMSE
An overview of the RMSE across the various model simulations is given in Figures E.1
and E.2. Each row in Figure E.1 is compared individually.
Figure E.1: RMSE across all insitu stations for the various model simulations. The simula­
tions are named as in the ”run overview”­table. Run 1.1 is the original model in Reference
[10].
(a) RMSE counts for SOP 3 from VS comparison.
Representing Reservoir Regulation in Continental­Scale River Models
59
==PAGE:67==
(b) RMSE counts for VOP 3 from VS comparison.
(c) RMSE counts for AVVOP 3 from VS comparison.
Figure E.2: The RMSE counts from the VS data in the form of a bar graph for the various
reservoir regulation policies integrated in the HD model simulation. The most frequent
counts of RMSE are between 1.3 and 2.2 m (WSE) across models. Comparing with
the original model (simulation 1.1) the RMSE has not improved with any of the reservoir
regulation changes.
The spatial variation in RMSE can be seen on the maps in Figure E.3.
60
Representing Reservoir Regulation in Continental­Scale River Models
==PAGE:68==
(a) RMSE for simulation run 1.1. The original model with the SOP.
(b) RMSE for simulation run 2.4 with the VOP.
Figure E.3: The RMSE over the spatial range of the two simulated branches in the Amur
River catchment, Amur and Sungari Rivers. The change in RMSE seems to occur mostly
downstream from the confluence between Amur and Sungari Rivers. This makes sense,
as the cascade effect of the regulations upstream affect the downstream flow cumulatively.
Representing Reservoir Regulation in Continental­Scale River Models
61
==PAGE:69==
F
Overview of Measuring Stations for
Validation
Both the in­situ and virtual stations used for validating the simulated WSE. Data for the
virtual stations are available through the Hydroweb database (https://hydroweb.theia-land.
fr/?lang=en&basin=Amur).
(a) In­situ stations
(b) Virtual stations (VS)
Figure F.1: In­situ and virtual measuring stations acting as observational data to compare
the simulated WSE values to. The maps are taken from source: [10]
62
Representing Reservoir Regulation in Continental­Scale River Models
==PAGE:70==
G
Code
The process of plotting the target volume datapoints and fitting a trendline to the data via
SciPy’s cubic spline functions, Univariate­ and LSQUnivariate Spline, is shown in Listing
G.1.
1
# Process and fit trendline to the Target Volume Data
2
#-------------------------------------------------------------
3
# Import packages:
4
import os
5
import pandas as pd
6
import numpy as np
7
from datetime import datetime ,timedelta
8
import copy as cp
9
from scipy.interpolate
import UnivariateSpline , LSQUnivariateSpline
10
#-------------------------------------------------------------
11
#%% Define reservoir dictionary and load the raw data into it:
12
13
vol_res1 = dict() # Dictionary with the two reservoirs without area variation
14
15
vol_res1['Zeya'] = dict()
16
vol_res1['Zeya']['vol_old'] =
17
pd.read_excel(r'C:/Users/perni/Documents/Miljo_kandidat/Speciale/20
_Dataprocessing/20_70_in_situ/Target_Volumes/Volume_variation_data/
Year_matrices/Python_TS/vol_old.xlsx', sheet_name = "Zeya")
18
vol_res1['Zeya']['vol_new'] = pd.read_excel(r'C:/Users/perni/Documents/
Miljo_kandidat/Speciale/20_Dataprocessing/20_70_in_situ/Target_Volumes/
Volume_variation_data/Year_matrices/Python_TS/vol_newZeya.xlsx')
19
vol_res1['Zeya']['smooth'] = 430 # Smoothing factor for making the univariate
spline
20
vol_res1['Zeya']['cap'] = 68.4E9 # Full capacity [m3]
21
vol_res1['Zeya']['fcv'] = 0.9 * vol_res1['Zeya']['cap'] # Flood control volume
[m3]
22
23
vol_res1['Bureyskaya'] = dict()
24
vol_res1['Bureyskaya']['vol_old'] = pd.read_excel(r'C:/Users/perni/Documents/
Miljo_kandidat/Speciale/20_Dataprocessing/20_70_in_situ/Target_Volumes/
Volume_variation_data/Year_matrices/Python_TS/vol_old.xlsx', sheet_name =
"Bureyskaya")
25
vol_res1['Bureyskaya']['vol_new'] = pd.read_excel(r'C:/Users/perni/Documents/
Miljo_kandidat/Speciale/20_Dataprocessing/20_70_in_situ/Target_Volumes/
Volume_variation_data/Year_matrices/Python_TS/vol_newBureyskaya.xlsx')
26
vol_res1['Bureyskaya']['smooth'] = 40
27
vol_res1['Bureyskaya']['cap'] = 10E9
28
vol_res1['Bureyskaya']['fcv'] = 0.9 * vol_res1['Bureyskaya']['cap']
29
#-------------------------------------------------------------
30
vol_res = dict() # Dictionary with the four reservoirs with area variation
31
32
vol_res['Jingpo'] = dict()
33
vol_res['Jingpo']['vol_old'] = pd.read_excel(r'C:/Users/perni/Documents/
Miljo_kandidat/Speciale/20_Dataprocessing/20_70_in_situ/Target_Volumes/
Volume_variation_data/Year_matrices/Python_TS/vol_old.xlsx', sheet_name =
"Jingpo")
34
vol_res['Jingpo']['vol_new'] = pd.read_excel(r'C:/Users/perni/Documents/
Miljo_kandidat/Speciale/20_Dataprocessing/20_70_in_situ/Target_Volumes/
Volume_variation_data/Year_matrices/Python_TS/vol_newJingpo.xlsx')
35
vol_res['Jingpo']['smooth'] = 0.9 # Smoothing factor for making the univariate
spline
36
vol_res['Jingpo']['cap'] = 1E9
# Full capacity [m3]
Representing Reservoir Regulation in Continental­Scale River Models
63
==PAGE:71==
37
vol_res['Jingpo']['fcv'] = 0.9 * vol_res['Jingpo']['cap'] # Flood control
volume [m3]
38
39
vol_res['Fengman'] = dict()
40
vol_res['Fengman']['vol_old'] = pd.read_excel(r'C:/Users/perni/Documents/
Miljo_kandidat/Speciale/20_Dataprocessing/20_70_in_situ/Target_Volumes/
Volume_variation_data/Year_matrices/Python_TS/vol_old.xlsx', sheet_name =
"Fengman")
41
vol_res['Fengman']['vol_new'] = pd.read_excel(r'C:/Users/perni/Documents/
Miljo_kandidat/Speciale/20_Dataprocessing/20_70_in_situ/Target_Volumes/
Volume_variation_data/Year_matrices/Python_TS/vol_newFengman.xlsx')
42
vol_res['Fengman']['smooth'] = 90
43
vol_res['Fengman']['cap'] = 11.46E9
44
vol_res['Fengman']['fcv'] = 0.9 * vol_res['Fengman']['cap']
45
46
vol_res['Baishan'] = dict()
47
vol_res['Baishan']['vol_old'] = pd.read_excel(r'C:/Users/perni/Documents/
Miljo_kandidat/Speciale/20_Dataprocessing/20_70_in_situ/Target_Volumes/
Volume_variation_data/Year_matrices/Python_TS/vol_old.xlsx', sheet_name =
"Baishan")
48
vol_res['Baishan']['vol_new'] = pd.read_excel(r'C:/Users/perni/Documents/
Miljo_kandidat/Speciale/20_Dataprocessing/20_70_in_situ/Target_Volumes/
Volume_variation_data/Year_matrices/Python_TS/vol_newBaishan.xlsx')
49
vol_res['Baishan']['smooth'] = 10
50
vol_res['Baishan']['cap'] = 6.5E9
51
vol_res['Baishan']['fcv'] = 0.9 * vol_res['Baishan']['cap']
52
53
vol_res['Nierji'] = dict()
54
vol_res['Nierji']['vol_old'] = pd.read_excel(r'C:/Users/perni/Documents/
Miljo_kandidat/Speciale/20_Dataprocessing/20_70_in_situ/Target_Volumes/
Volume_variation_data/Year_matrices/Python_TS/vol_old.xlsx', sheet_name =
"Nierji")
55
vol_res['Nierji']['vol_new'] = pd.read_excel(r'C:/Users/perni/Documents/
Miljo_kandidat/Speciale/20_Dataprocessing/20_70_in_situ/Target_Volumes/
Volume_variation_data/Year_matrices/Python_TS/vol_newNierji.xlsx')
56
vol_res['Nierji']['smooth'] = 20
57
vol_res['Nierji']['cap'] = 8.61E9
58
vol_res['Nierji']['fcv'] = 0.9 * vol_res['Nierji']['cap']
59
#-------------------------------------------------------------
60
#%% Process old volume data (WITH area variation):
61
62
# For loop going through dictionary:
63
for resk in vol_res.keys():
64
df = vol_res[resk]['vol_old']
65
# Converting date to datetime:
66
df.date = pd.to_datetime(df.date)
67
# create copy:
68
df_index = df.copy()
69
# Set index:
70
df.set_index("Index", inplace = True)
71
df_index.set_index("date", inplace = True)
72
# Create x-vals with dates of the year:
73
doy = df_index.index.dayofyear # Remember to go into .csv file and set
date to US format yyyy-mm-dd
74
# Remove NAN:
75
df = df.dropna()
76
df_index = df_index.dropna()
77
#-------------------------------------------------------------
78
#%% Smoothing the data (WITH area variation):
79
# Univariate spline:
80
81
#Initial x- and y-values:
64
Representing Reservoir Regulation in Continental­Scale River Models
==PAGE:72==
82
x = df_index['Index']
83
y = df['area_Average over the years']
84
#Define weights:
85
asize = len(x.index)
86
weights = np.ones(asize)
87
weights[0], weights[asize -1] = 100, 100
88
#Define smoothing factor:
89
smooth = vol_res[resk]['smooth']
90
#Univariate spline function with smoothing factor:
91
spline = UnivariateSpline(x, y, s = smooth , w = weights)
92
# print(spline.get_knots())
93
#New x-array for interpolation. The array with days of the year (doy):
94
x_spline = doy
95
y_spline = spline(x_spline)
96
#-------------------------------------------------------------
97
#%% Smoothing the data (WITH area variation):
98
# LSQUnivariateSpline - Controlling the knots, but no smoothing factor:
99
100
#Define knots:
101
knt = spline.get_knots() # Knots are defined in previous UnivariateSpline.
102
t = knt[1:-1] # Chop 1st and last knot
103
#Define weights:
104
asize = len(x.index)
105
weights = np.ones(asize)
106
weights[0], weights[asize -1] = 100, 100
107
#LSQUnivariateSpline:
108
LSQ_spline = LSQUnivariateSpline(x, y, t, w = weights)
109
#New x-array for interpolation. The array with days of the year (doy):
110
x_LSQ_spline = doy
111
y_LSQ_spline = LSQ_spline(x_LSQ_spline)
112
#-------------------------------------------------------------
113
#%% Write the new excel file with target volumes for 4 reservoirs with area
variation:
114
115
df_new = vol_res[resk]['vol_new']
116
df_new['area_target_vol'] = y_LSQ_spline*(10**9) # Converting from km3 to
m3 to input correctly in MIKE Hydro HD model
117
df_new.to_excel(r'C:/Users/perni/Documents/Miljo_kandidat/Speciale/20
_Dataprocessing/20_70_in_situ/Target_Volumes/Volume_variation_data/
Year_matrices/Python_TS/vol_new' + resk + '.xlsx', index = False)
118
#-------------------------------------------------------------
119
#%% Process old volume data (WITHOUT area variation):
120
121
# For loop going through dictionary:
122
for resk in vol_res1.keys():
123
df = vol_res1[resk]['vol_old']
124
df.date = pd.to_datetime(df.date)
125
df_index = df.copy()
126
df.set_index("Index", inplace = True)
127
df_index.set_index("date", inplace = True)
128
# Create x-vals with dates of the year:
129
doy = df_index.index.dayofyear # Remember to go into .csv file and set
date to US format yyyy-mm-dd
130
# Remove NAN:
131
df = df.dropna()
132
df_index = df_index.dropna()
133
#-------------------------------------------------------------
134
#%% Smoothing the data (WITHOUT area variation):
135
# Univariate spline:
136
137
#Initial x- and y-values:
138
x = df_index['Index']
Representing Reservoir Regulation in Continental­Scale River Models
65
==PAGE:73==
139
y = df['Average over the years']
140
#Define weights:
141
asize = len(x.index)
142
weights = np.ones(asize)
143
weights[0], weights[asize -1] = 100, 100
144
#Define smoothing factor:
145
smooth = vol_res1[resk]['smooth']
146
#Univariate spline function with smoothing factor:
147
spline = UnivariateSpline(x, y, s = smooth, w = weights)
148
# print(spline.get_knots())
149
#New x-array for interpolation. The array with days of the year (doy):
150
x_spline = doy
151
y_spline = spline(x_spline)
152
#-------------------------------------------------------------
153
#%% Smoothing the data (WITHOUT area variation):
154
# LSQUnivariateSpline - Controlling the knots, but no smoothing factor:
155
156
#Define knots:
157
knt = spline.get_knots() # Knots are defined in previous UnivariateSpline.
158
t = knt[1:-1] # Chop 1st and last knot
159
#Define weights:
160
asize = len(x.index)
161
weights = np.ones(asize)
162
weights[0], weights[asize -1] = 100, 100
163
#LSQUnivariateSpline:
164
LSQ_spline = LSQUnivariateSpline(x, y, t, w = weights)
165
#New x-array for interpolation. The array with days of the year (doy):
166
x_LSQ_spline = doy
167
y_LSQ_spline = LSQ_spline(x_LSQ_spline)
168
#-------------------------------------------------------------
169
#%% Write the new excel file with target volumes for all 6 reservoirs:
170
171
df_new = vol_res[resk]['vol_new']
172
df_new['target_vol'] = y_LSQ_spline*(10**9) # Converting from km3 to m3 to
input correctly in MIKE Hydro HD model
173
df_new.to_excel(r'C:/Users/perni/Documents/Miljo_kandidat/Speciale/20
_Dataprocessing/20_70_in_situ/Target_Volumes/Volume_variation_data/
Year_matrices/Python_TS/vol_new' + resk + '.xlsx', index = False)
Listing G.1: Process Target Volume Time Series and fit a trendline to the data ­ With and
Without Area Variation
The code for the revised routing script for SOP, VOP and AVVOP can be seen below in
Listing G.2.
1
# Revised Muskingum River Routing Script with Volume Operation Policy (VOP)
2
# - With and Without Area Variation
3
#-------------------------------------------------------------
4
#%% Reservoir with operation policy in regards to target storage (Volume)
instead of target release.
5
# Is only applied to reservoirs with available water level altimetry data (
This combined with water surface area is used to estimate the volume
variability).
6
7
def VOP_res(res, inflow, iniS, dt):
8
# Linear interpolation function based on polynomial regression. Basically
it is the polynomial regression function.
9
f_target_vol = interpolate.interp1d(res['target_vol']['Index'],res['
target_vol']['target_vol'])
10
# iniS = f_target_vol(153) # Turn this command off in case of original
iniS of 0.
11
starts = iniS
66
Representing Reservoir Regulation in Continental­Scale River Models
==PAGE:74==
12
f_min_release = interpolate.interp1d(res['min_release'].index,res['
min_release']['min_release'])
13
asize = len(inflow.index)
14
outa_vol = np.zeros(asize)
15
stora_vol = np.zeros(asize)
16
count = 0
17
for date in inflow.index:
18
doy = date.dayofyear
19
# produce y-vals for an x-val vector (days of the year) via the
interpolation function.
20
target_vol = f_target_vol(doy)
21
min_release = f_min_release(doy)
22
if starts + inflow[date]*dt > target_vol:
23
out = (starts + inflow[date]*dt - target_vol)/dt
24
else:
25
out = min_release
26
starts = starts + inflow[date]*dt - out*dt
27
outa_vol[count] = out
28
stora_vol[count] = starts
29
count = count + 1
30
return outa_vol , stora_vol
31
#-------------------------------------------------------------
32
#%% VOP with area variation. Only applied to 4 of the 7 reservoirs:
33
34
def VOP_area_res(vol_res , inflow, iniS, dt):
35
# Linear interpolation function based on polynomial regression. Basically
it is the polynomial regression function.
36
# To include area variation:
37
f_target_area_vol = interpolate.interp1d(vol_res['target_vol']['Index'],
vol_res['target_vol']['area_target_vol'])
38
# iniS = f_target_area_vol(153) # Turn this command off in case of
original iniS of 0.
39
starts = iniS
40
f_min_release = interpolate.interp1d(vol_res['min_release'].index,vol_res[
'min_release']['min_release'])
41
asize = len(inflow.index)
42
outa_area_vol = np.zeros(asize)
43
stora_area_vol = np.zeros(asize)
44
count = 0
45
for date in inflow.index:
46
doy = date.dayofyear
47
# produce y-vals for an x-val vector (days of the year) via the
interpolation function.
48
target_vol = f_target_area_vol(doy)
49
min_release = f_min_release(doy)
50
if starts + inflow[date]*dt > target_vol:
51
out = (starts + inflow[date]*dt - target_vol)/dt
52
else:
53
out = min_release
54
starts = starts + inflow[date]*dt - out*dt
55
outa_area_vol[count] = out
56
stora_area_vol[count] = starts
57
count = count + 1
58
return outa_area_vol , stora_area_vol
Listing G.2: Revised Muskingum River Routing Script with Volume Operation Policy (VOP)
­ With and Without Area Variation
Representing Reservoir Regulation in Continental­Scale River Models
67
==PAGE:75==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Bygningstorvet, Building 115
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.sustain.dtu.dk/en
