==PAGE:1==
Individual reliability of auditory-evoked fNIRS
responses as a function of analysis method
Master Thesis
By Andreas Hafstrøm
s174163
DTU Health Tech
Department of Health Technology
==PAGE:2==
Individual reliability of auditory-evoked fNIRS responses as a function of analysis
method
Master Thesis
January, 2023
By
Andreas Hafstrøm
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus-
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
Functional near-infrared spectroscopy (fNIRS) is non-invasive, silent, mobile and com-
patible with cochlear implants, making it highly suitable to determine the auditory evoked
cerebral activation. A significant challenge with fNIRS is the absence of a standardized
signal processing pipeline, and a limited knowledge of the individual test-retest reliability.
This thesis describes the development and implementation of a two-visit fNIRS study, in-
cluding the creation of the necessary code and setup. Four subjects participated in the
study, with a one-week intersession between their initial and subsequent visits. A script
was created to pre-process, analyze, and perform statistical tests on the data obtained
from the experiment, as well as evaluating the test-retest reliability for two different analy-
sis methods, namely the weighted averaging analysis (WAA) and generalized linear model
(GLM). The aim of the thesis is to establish a signal processing pipeline that can be ap-
plied to a large data set to determine the individual test-retest reliability of both the WAA
and GLM. By providing a way to assess the reliability of these methods, this thesis aims
to contribute to more robust and reproducible results in fNIRS studies.
The processing pipeline was created, and showed the WAA produced a much higher acti-
vation while the GLM had close to no activation in some subjects. This is reflected on the
individual test-retest reliability of each method, however the discrepancy was accredited
to a poor raw fNIRS signal and a insufficient sample size. Additional work to improve the
processing pipeline is suggested which could enhance the quality of the measured data.
ii
==PAGE:4==
Acknowledgements
I would like to thank a number of people for providing invaluable help to my thesis.
Hamish Innes-Brown & Abigail Anne Kressner
For supervising me during this thesis and for their guidance, constructive feedback and
support.
Erik Finn Kjærbøl
For teaching me both the practical and theoretical aspects of calibrating sound files.
Miguel Temboury Gutierrez
For teaching me how to conduct an audiometric test.
The four test subjects
For making the experiment possible.
iii
==PAGE:5==
Contents
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Measuring hemoglobin concentrations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Challenges in processing of fNIRS data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.3
Creating a fNIRS signal processing pipeline . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.4
The scope of the report
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2
Theory
5
2.1
Applying the modified Beer Lambert law . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
Determining t-values using a paired t-test . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.3
Adjusting the false discovery rate . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.4
Calculating individual test-retest reliability . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
3
Methods
8
3.1
Preparing a passive block-design auditory fNIRS experiment
. . . . . . . .
8
3.1.1
Optode placement and regions of interest . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
3.1.2
Equipment used to conduct and calibrate the experiment
. . . . . .
9
3.1.3
Test subjects used in the experiment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
3.2
Signal processing
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.2.1
Pre-processing fNIRS data
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
3.2.2
Analysing data using weighted averaging analysis . . . . . . . . . . 14
3.2.3
Analysing data using a generalized linear model
. . . . . . . . . . . 14
3.2.4
Determining active channels and test-retest reliability
. . . . . . . . 16
3.3
Software used in thesis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
4
Results
17
4.1
Visualising signal using weighted averaging analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
4.2
Active channels in test subjects . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
4.3
Test-retest parameters RA and RO
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
5
Discussion
24
5.1
Comparison of the weighted averaging analysis and generalized linear model 24
5.2
Limitations and future perspectives of the experiment
. . . . . . . . . . . . 24
5.2.1
Test setup . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
5.2.2
Data processing
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26
6
Conclusion
27
A Appendix
30
Individual reliability of auditory-evoked fNIRS responses as a function of analysis method
iv
==PAGE:6==
1
Introduction
Detecting brain activation has the potential to provide valuable insights into the neural
mechanisms underlying cognitive and behavioral processes. This information can be
used to obtain a deeper understanding of the brain’s functions, identify neurological and
psychiatric disorders and objectively asses efficacy of treatments. To measure the activity
of the brain, the dynamics of the brain activation has to be considered.
1.1
Measuring hemoglobin concentrations
When an area of the brain is activated the neurons will have an increased metabolism
which converts oxygenated hemoglobin (HbO) to deoxygenated hemoglobin (HbR). This
results in an initial change of Hb concentrations [1]. The response to Hb change is called
the neurovascular coupling, and increases the blood flow and blood volume in the acti-
vated area approximately 5 seconds after the stimulus started [2]. This will result in a large
influx of fresh blood with a high concentration of HbO, and as a result of this the HbR con-
centration will decrease significantly [3]. The change in Hb concentrations after a stimulus
is called the hemodynamic response. After the activation seizes, the HbO undershoots
the baseline while the HbR has a slight elevation. This is considered the post-stimulus
undershoot, and could be attributed to an increase of venous blood volume [4]. Figure 1.1
shows a model of the hemodynamic response clearly expressing the three stages men-
tioned. By determining the hemoglobin concentrations, a quantitative measure for brain
activation can be obtained.
Figure 1.1: Relative change in tissue Hb concentration following a stimulus at time 0.
One way of measuring Hb concentrations is through light. As seen in figure 1.2, the
absorption coefficient of both hemoglobin and water, which are some of the biggest ab-
sorbers in the brain, is relatively low for light in the 700 - 900 nm wavelength range. This
allows light to penetrate several centimeters into the scalp without losing too much energy
to be measured with a reasonable signal-to-noise ratio [3].
By recording the back scattering of the light sent into the scalp, and assuming a con-
stant scattering from non Hb components as well as homogeneous media, the change
in absorption will be credited towards the change in Hb concentrations. To calculate this
change in absorption the modified Beer Lambert law, described in equation (2.1), can be
used. This modification adds a constant called differential pathlength (DPF), which rep-
resents the increase in length the photon travels due to scattering. To solve the equation
for both HbO and HbR, two or more wavelengths are required, often having one around
750 nm and another at around 850 nm [3].
Individual reliability of auditory-evoked fNIRS responses as a function of analysis method
1
==PAGE:7==
Figure 1.2: Relative absorption of HbO, HbR and H2O as a function of wavelength. The
region between 700 - 900 nm is called the optical window, as light with this wavelength
can penetrate deeper into the body before being absorbed.
By placing optodes on the scalp of the subject near-infrared light can be used to deter-
mine the concentration of HbO and HbR of the cerebral cortex. This method is called
functional near-infrared spectroscopy (fNIRS) and relies on the difference in absorption
coefficients in HbO and HbR. Some fNIRS platforms can modulate its light to obtain ad-
ditional information, either by frequency or time, but this thesis will focus on continuous
wave fNIRS.
While other non-invasive techniques exist for measuring brain activation, each has its own
advantages and disadvantages. The gold standard for measuring blood-oxygen-level-
dependent signal in the brain is functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging (fMRI), which
provides superior spatial resolution and penetration depth compared to fNIRS. However,
fMRI requires patients to remain completely still in the scanner and the scanner itself is
immobile thus the test has to be conducted in the scanner room. Additionally, it gener-
ates a significant amount of noise that can interfere with auditory experiments. Another
method of measuring brain activation is Electroencephalography (EEG), which records
the electrical impulses of neurons in the cerebral cortex. This method shares a lot of the
same advantages as fNIRS but since it measures electrical activity it is prone to artefacts
from cochlear implants. Being non-invasive, silent and mobile makes fNIRS especially
suited for auditory studies of the cerebral cortex where cochlear implants can be present
[2].
1.2
Challenges in processing of fNIRS data
Although fNIRS has many benefits, it is still a relatively new technology that needs further
research in several areas before it can be more widely adopted. A significant challenge
with fNIRS is the absence of a standardized signal processing pipeline, which can result
in ambiguous data [2]. In the pre-processing stage choosing how to remove noise such
as the heartbeat and motion artefacts, whether to exclude channels with poor data quality
and whether to correct data with short channels can lead to different results [5].
After the data has been pre-processed, various analysis techniques can be employed to
extract brain activation from the data. One basic method is using a weighted averaging
2
==PAGE:8==
analysis (WAA), which cuts the signal into periods of time from -5 to 15 second relative
to stimuli onset. These bits are called epochs. The epochs are grouped by each unique
condition and the signal is averaged for each group. This results in an averaged signal for
each test condition, which can then be subjected to statistical analysis [2]. While this is a
more intuitive way to process the data, a more advanced method, called the Generalized
Linear Model (GLM), which is commonly used in fMRI, has also been adapted for use
with fNIRS. In this thesis, the canonical GLM will be referred to just as the GLM. The GLM
analysis considers the entire length of the fNIRS signal and uses a calculated model of the
response to fit a design matrix. The design matrix includes components for each condition
as well as components that help eliminate noise from physiological variations in the data
[6].
In order to gain insight into the effects of the data processing, the study by Luke et al.
2021 [7] sought to investigate the variation in morphology, detection and leteralization of
auditory fNIRS responses when analysed using different methods. The analysis methods
used in the paper were WAA and both the canonical and finite impulse response (FIR)
GLM analysis. Additionally the paper evaluated the effects of the true positive rate when
varying parameters in both GLM methods. To obtain data for the analysis they conducted
a passive block-design auditory fNIRS experiment in which control, noise and speech
stimuli with durations of 5 seconds were presented to 17 test subjects. The study found
all analysis methods to produce similar fNIRS responses at a group level. Though the
study displayed the effects of many parameters in the analysis methods, the individual
test-retest reliability of these methods are yet to be fully explored.
when dealing with diagnostic test, it is important to have a good individual reliability, and
given the many analysis choices for fNIRS, it is possible the reliability varies from one
method to another.
Studies have been conducted to investigate the test-retest reliability of fNIRS, and they
have generally shown good reliability on a group level [8]. However, there is currently
limited information available about the reliability of fNIRS measurements at the individual
level [3]. Therefore it is desired to research the reliability on an individual level, and to see
the effects different analysis methods have on this reliability.
1.3
Creating a fNIRS signal processing pipeline
The overall goal of this project is to explore and compare the single-subject test-retest
reliability for both the WAA and GLM method. To achieve this, fNIRS data is obtained and
a signal processing pipeline for evaluating the reliability is developed, implemented and
documented. Though the number of test subjects used in this project will be limited by
time constraints and will not be sufficient to definitively test the hypotheses, the workflow
developed can be applied to larger sample sizes in future studies to obtain sufficient data.
The data for the analysis will be obtained by recruiting test subject for a two-visit exper-
iment. The experiment follows the same procedures as stated in the Luke et al. (2021)
paper [7] with the addition of a second visit.
1.4
The scope of the report
This thesis describes the development and implementation of a two-visit fNIRS study,
including the creation of the necessary code and setup. The study was conducted on four
participants, with a one-week interval between their first and second visit. A script was
created to pre-process, analyze, and perform statistical tests on the data obtained from
the experiment, as well as evaluating the test-retest reliability for two different analysis
3
==PAGE:9==
methods. The thesis presents the results of the analysis, along with an evaluation of the
experiment and the signal processing pipeline.
This thesis aims to establish a signal processing pipeline that can be applied to a
large data set to determine the individual test-retest reliability of both the WAA and
GLM methods. By providing a way to assess the reliability of these methods, this
thesis aims to contribute to more robust and reproducible results in fNIRS studies.
4
==PAGE:10==
2
Theory
During the processing and analysis steps there are multiple equations used which are
important to fully comprehend in order to ensure proper analysis.
2.1
Applying the modified Beer Lambert law
In fNIRS the modified Beer Lambert law (MBLL), shown in equation (2.1), is used to calcu-
late change in Hb based on the change in light intensity of the measured signal. Figure 2.1
shows four different light interactions for photons emitted into a scattering medium. In the
first interaction nothing happens to the photon, and it will pass through the medium even-
tually. This is less likely to happen the deeper the scattering medium is. The second
interaction is absorption. This is where all the energy of the photon is absorbed, stopping
the photon in its path. The third interaction is scattering. Here the path of the photon is
redirected and a small amount of energy is removed from the photon each time it is scat-
tered. Lastly is back-scattering. The mechanism is the same as scattering, but the path
of the photon is redirected backwards, allowing the detector to measure the intensity of
the photon. The photons which reach the detector will not take a straight path; therefore,
the modification to the Beer Lambert law is the differential path length (DPF), which is a
coefficient used to make up for this increased path length detector [2][3].
Figure 2.1: Conceptual visualisation of the different outcomes for photons shined into
the scalp during fNIRS. 1: photon does not interact with the tissue at all. 2: Photon is
absorbed. 3: Photon is scattered but not redirected towards the detector. 4: Photon is
scattered and redirected towards the detector where it will be measured and contribute to
the raw fNIRS signal.
The MBLL assumes a constant scattering, which means the change in light intensity mea-
sured is credited to the change in absorption. Assuming this, the equation for the MBLL
is as follows:
∆A = ϵ(λ) · ∆c · d · DPF(λ)
(2.1)
Where ∆A is the change in optical attenuation which is measured by the fNIRS platform.
ϵ is the extinction coefficient of the Hb at wavelength λ with know values that can be
looked up. ∆c is the unknown change in Hb concentration. d is the source-detector
distance which can be determined by optode placement. DPF varies with age, gender
and wavelength, so it is important to choose the value carefully.
2.2
Determining t-values using a paired t-test
A paired t-test is used to determine if the responses to active stimuli in each channel in the
WAA were significantly different from the control (silent) stimuli. This is calculated by using
Individual reliability of auditory-evoked fNIRS responses as a function of analysis method
5
==PAGE:11==
the amplitude of the fNIRS responses from control trials as one sample and the amplitudes
of the fNIRS responses from noise or speech conditions as the other sample. The t-value
for each channel can then be calculated using equation (2.2) and the difference in values
for each sample.
The equation for the t-value in the paired t-test is as follows:
t = µd
sd
√n
(2.2)
where t is the t-value, µd is the mean value of the difference between the two samples, sd
is the standard deviation of the difference of the two samples and √n is the square root
of the sample size.
2.3
Adjusting the false discovery rate
In fNIRS data analysis, there is a risk of false discoveries when identifying active channels
due to the many repeated test per channel. To avoid this, a correction for false discovery
rate (FDR) is applied. There are various methods to avoid false positives, and in this
thesis, the Benjamini-Hochberg (BH) procedure is chosen. The advantage of choosing
this method compared to the Bonferroni method for example, is that the BH procedure
adjust the FDR which indicates the probability of a significant finding being a false positive.
The Bonferroni controls the family-wise error rate, which is the probability of at least one
significant finding being a false positive. Since a few false positives will not be detrimental
to the data, it is sufficient to keep the FDR low while keeping the amount of true positives
high. The BH procedure sorts all p-values in ascending order and ranks them based on
their new position, with the lowest p-value being rank 1, and so on. Then, all p-values are
compared to the critical p-value calculated with equation (2.3) shown below
pc = I
n · α
(2.3)
where pc is the critical p-value, I is the rank, n is the number of p-values used in the test
and α is the FDR which is chosen by the user.
To determine which channels should be considered significant, every p-value is compared
to their respective pc value. The highest ranked p-value that is smaller than its respective
pc value will mark the rank where the cutoff for significant channels is. Every p-value with
a rank equal to or less than the cutoff rank will be considered significant. This method
helps to control the proportion of false discoveries among all the significant findings.
2.4
Calculating individual test-retest reliability
To calculate the test-retest reliability on an individual level equation (2.4) and equation (2.5),
used in the Rombouts et al. (1997)[9] to calculate voxel activation in MR scans, is used.
This equation has later been adapted to fNIRS channel activity as in the Plichta et al.
(2006)[10] and Wiggins et al. (2016)[8] papers. The equations gives a ratio of how similar
the amount of activated channels from visit one and two are and for how many of the
activated channels are the same from visit one and two. The equations are:
RA = 1 −|A1 −A2|
A1 + A2
(2.4)
6
==PAGE:12==
RO = 2 · AOverlap
A1 + A2
(2.5)
Where RA is the ratio of similar activation amount, RO is the ratio of overlapping channel
activation, A1 and A2 is the amount of active channels on the first and second visit re-
spectively and AO is the amount of channels active during both visit one and two. Since
this method uses the active channels, it can be applied to both the WAA and GLM results
despite their different format.
7
==PAGE:13==
3
Methods
3.1
Preparing a passive block-design auditory fNIRS
experiment
The experiment was based on the Luke et al. (2021)[7] paper with the addition of a second
visit to conduct a test-retest reliability measurement. The experiment itself includes 3
different types of stimuli, namely noise, speech and control. Each stimuli was played 20
times each, with an inter stimulus interval of 10 to 20 seconds chosen randomly from
an uniform distribution. The noise stimuli played had a spectrum uniformly distributed
between 300 - 700 Hz with a SPL of 75 dB and a duration of 5 seconds. This noise audio
was created by filtering white noise with a band-pass filter with a pass-band of 300 - 700
Hz. The speech stimulus was created by concatenating three short danish sentences
totalling up to a duration of 5.25 second with a SPL of 70 dB. The sentences used in the
experiment were produced in the Nielsen & Dau (2009) paper. The control stimulus was
5 seconds of silence. Each stimulus occured 20 times during the experiment meaning a
total of 60 stimuli were presented. The duration of a session was on average 20 minutes
but could be up to 5 minutes shorter or longer depending on the inter stimulus interval.
During the recording the lights in the room were turned off in order to minimize noise
from outside light sources. To avoid the risk of subjects falling asleep three breaks were
added after 15, 30 and 45 stimuli dividing the experiment into 4 blocks of approximately 5
minutes. During these breaks the subject was allowed to readjust their body in an attempt
to keep the subjects awake. A checklist was created to help conduct the experiment in a
standardized manner, and can be seen in appendix A1.
3.1.1
Optode placement and regions of interest
The fNIRS optodes were placed around 4 different areas of the brain, the left and right
superior temporal gyrus (STG), the left inferior frontal gyrus (IFG) and the occipital lobe.
The STG is used for sound processing and language comprehension and the IFG is used
in processing of speech among other things. The primary function of the occipital lobe is
visual processing, but it has shown some possible visual-auditory connections under spe-
cific circumstances[11]. The layout of the optodes can be seen in figure 3.1 and includes
12 detectors and 12 sources along 8 short channels placed according to the 10-10 system.
The sources were placed at: AF7, F3, F7, FC5, T7, CP5, O1, POz, O2, Iz, CP6 and T8.
The detectors were placed at: F5, C5, TP7, CP3, P5, PO3, PO4, Oz, P6, CP4, TP8 and
C6. Short channels were placed at: AF7, F7, T7, CP5, O1, O2, CP6 and T8. Though the
source-detector pair FC5-C5 is close enough to create a channel, it was outside any ROI
and is therefore removed from the data.
Individual reliability of auditory-evoked fNIRS responses as a function of analysis method
8
==PAGE:14==
Figure 3.1: Optode placement, based on the 10-10 system, used in the experiment.
Bright dots indicate sources, dark dots indicate detectors, and white lines indicate chan-
nels. Notice the channel between FC5 and C5 shown on the left lateral view is not used,
but automatically shown since the source-detector distance is acceptable. The figure
was created by plotting the optodes over a cortical surface using the MNE toolbox [12]
and manually placing 10-10 location annotations.
3.1.2
Equipment used to conduct and calibrate the experiment
The experiment was conducted at Copenhagen Hearing and Balance Centre at Rigshos-
pitalet, which has a sound booth equipped with a NIRX NIRScoutX fNIRS platform. The
fNIRS platform is equiped with APD detectors and sources using wavelengths of 785 nm
and 830 nm. The platform is connected to a PC outside the booth, which is used to con-
duct the experiment and record the fNIRS data. A python script was created to execute
the experiment, and the code can be seen in appendix A2. The sound output from the
experiment was sent directly to a RME Fireface UCX soundcard (44.1 kHz) which played
the sound on a loudspeaker in the sound booth. A monitor was used to convey informa-
tion, such as when the breaks start and stop, to the test subject and provided a fixation
cross during the experiment. The python script also sent triggers via lab streaming layer
to mark each stimuli played. The data acquisition software NIRStar created by NIRX was
used to both obtain the fNIRS data and the triggers simultaneously. An overview of the
hardware communication is shown on the left block of Figure 3.4.
The sound level was calibrated using a Brüel & Kjær 2250 sound level meter with a Brüel
& Kjær 4189 transducer. The transducer was placed at head level above the chair the
patient would be sitting in. The background noise was recorded to measure how sound
proof the booth was. The results from the background recording is shown in figure 3.2 (a).
Since there was no calibration signal available for the speech files, a sample of speech
files were picked and had all pauses removed. The filtered noise audio was adjusted
to match the root mean square value of the continuous speech audio, making the noise
audio act as a calibration clip for the speech audio. The noise sound level was digitally
adjusted until the SPL reached 70 dB over 1 minute continuous recording which is shown
in figure 3.2 (b). After the speech audio was calibrated the magnitude of the noise audio
was multiplied by 1.78 to increase the sound level by 5 dB SPL.
9
==PAGE:15==
(a) Spectrum of background noise in sound booth.
The most prominent noise was of low frequencies
and in the range of 0-60 Hz. The z-weighted
equivalent continuous sound level was 49.4 dB.
(b) Spectrum of noise calibration. The calibration
had a z-weighted equivalent continuous sound
level of 69.9 dB over 1 minute. The influence of
the background noise can be seen from 0-125 Hz.
Figure 3.2: Calibration spectra of background noise and noise audio calibration.
3.1.3
Test subjects used in the experiment
Four test subjects were recruited for the experiment and were required to have a normal
hearing profile and be aged between 18-65. Since the experiment uses Danish sentences,
the subjects also need to be proficient in Danish. One exclusion criterion is recent major
head trauma or brain surgery, since that could impact the physiology of the brain. Lastly
subjects suffering from epilepsy were excluded to avoid any complications with the sub-
jects and the visuals of the monitor. Three male and one female subject were recruited
with a mean age of 25 years. On their first visit the test subject signed a research partici-
pation agreement and underwent an audiometric test to ensure they had a normal hearing
profile. The test was conducted using the Affinity Compact and the Affinity Suite software
both created by Interacoustics. All test subjects recruited had pure-tone hearing thresh-
olds of 20 dB hearing level (HL) or better at frequencies below 6 kHz in both ears and
thresholds of 30 dB HL or better at frequencies above 6 kHz. A summarized audiogram
for all test subjects is shown in figure 3.3. All participants provided informed consent and
all experiments were approved by the Science-Ethics Committee for the Capital Region
of Denmark (reference H-16036391).
When the test subjects arrived they were given a briefing of the experiment and afterwards
placed inside the sound booth in a comfortable chair with instructions to limit their move-
ments as much as possible during recordings. The subjects were facing both the monitor
and loudspeaker.
10
==PAGE:16==
Figure 3.3: Audiogram for all 4 test subjects. Blue and red lines represent the left and
right ear repsectively. Dashed lines are the individual recordings while the solid lines are
the mean HL for all subjects. The black line indicates the threshold for normal hearing.
All test subjects had normal hearing levels.
3.2
Signal processing
After the raw fNIRS data is obtained it undergoes multiple pre-processing steps to increase
signal-to-noise ratio. Once these steps are completed the data will be analysed using
weighted averaging and generalized linear model individually. The raw data is processed
using the MNE [12] and MNE-NIRS [7] packages for python, which help manage and
process data. After processing the data will be analysed for active channels and a test-
retest analysis is applied to the significant active channels of both analysis methods to
determine reliability for each method. An overview of the steps included in both the pre-
processing and analysis is shown in figure 3.4. The entire process is done in the script
shown in appendix A3.
11
==PAGE:17==
Figure 3.4: The data flow for the entire experiment. Grey backgrounds indicate physical
components and green arrows indicate physical connections. Blue backgrounds indicates
steps in the analysis script, and red arrows indicate digital connections. The Hardware
section shows the direction of conveyed data between components. The fNIRS data
moves from the PC into the pre-processing section, which explains all the steps in the pre-
processing script. After the pre-processing the fNIRS data moves to the analysis section
where both the WAA and GLM analysis is applied to the data along with the relevant
statistical test.
3.2.1
Pre-processing fNIRS data
The pre-processing is outlined in the center frame of figure 3.4. Using MNE the fNIRS the
raw intensities are loaded with all meta data such as channel names and stimulus onset
times. To calculate the scalp coupling index (SCI), all the break periods from a copy of the
data are removed in order to not influence the SCI by using data with excessive movement
artefacts. The raw intensity is then converted to optical density, and artefacts are removed.
After this the SCI is calculated by filtering everything but the heartbeat in the signal, since
the presence of a heartbeat means the optodes are measuring blood. The signals from
two different wavelengths measured in a single detector is then cross-correlated and the
value at lag 0 is equal to the SCI [13]. If the SCI value was below 0.5 it was removed, but
only short channels had SCI below this threshold.
To further enhance the signal, bad epochs are removed. These are chosen subjectively
and could be chosen due to artefacts in the data or similar issues. The raw intensity
is converted to relative optical density, giving data around the mean a value close to 0,
values above the mean becomes negative and vice versa. The values now match ∆A in
equation (2.1). The data undergoes artefact correction, which is done by differentiating
the signal, smoothing out the large spikes from motion artefacts and then integrating the
signal to obtain the final motion corrected signal [14]. The corrected optical density signal
is now converted to relative Hb concentrations by applying equation (2.1) to the data.
Based on the findings of Duncan et al. (1996) [15], and given the wavelengths used and
age of the subjects, a value of 6.1 is chosen for the DPF.
As a final step of the pre-processing, the Hb signal needs to be filtered to improve the
12
==PAGE:18==
signal-to-noise ratio. It is important to evaluate the chosen filter to ensure the heartbeat
is removed from the data while conserving the hemodynamic response. The code for this
evaluation was obtained from [16] and modified to suit this experiments particular needs.
The final code used is shown in appendix A4. To evaluate the filter, a modelled response
for the measured data was created. This was done by convolving a model of a hemody-
namic response with a step function having a value of 1 when a stimulus was active. The
expected response shows what signal is expected from the experiment given completely
clean data, and looks similar to the signal seen in figure 3.7. It is desired to keep the
spectrum of the modeled response after filtering, while removing higher frequency com-
ponents from the signal. By comparing the spectrum of the measured signal to that of the
modelled response, it can be visually confirmed whether the filter conserves the modelled
response while removing the heartbeat. As seen in figure 3.5 the filter chosen has a cutoff
shortly after the modelled response is non existent, but before the bump containing the
heart rate shown in the measured data. The chosen filter had an upper pass-band edge
of 0.4 Hz, upper transition bandwidth of 0.2 Hz, lower pass-band edge of 0.05 Hz lower
transition bandwidth of 0.02 Hz.
Figure 3.5: Spectrum of measured fNIRS data is plotted as a black line with shaded area
indicating 95% confidence interval. The red line indicates the spectrum of the modelled
response based on stimulus onset and duration. The blue line is the magnitude response
of the chosen filter. The main purpose of the filter is to include the modelled response
while removing the heartbeat signal located around 1-1.5 Hz
The spectrum before and after filtering can be seen in figure 3.6 (a) and (b) respectively,
showing the heart rate around 1-1.5 Hz is removed while keeping the hemodynamic re-
sponse at around 0.25 Hz.
13
==PAGE:19==
(a) Spectrum of HbO and HbR spectrum before
filtering
(b) Spectrum of HbO and HbR spectrum after
filtering
Figure 3.6: Comparison of spectrum of HbO and HbR before filtering (a) and after filtering
(b). The bump containing the heart beat frequency between 1-1.5 Hz in panel (a) is
successfully removed as seen on panel (b). Additionally the hemodynamic response
signal around 0.25 Hz is preserved
The result of the pre-processing is clean data ready to be analysed by the WAA and GLM.
3.2.2
Analysing data using weighted averaging analysis
In the WAA every stimulus in the data is separated into epochs. Each epoch begins 5
seconds before stimulus onset and ends 15 seconds after stimulus onset. The epochs
are divided into the three stimulus conditions, and the channels in each epoch is divided
into the regions of interest. The three stimuli conditions and three regions of interest yields
nine different sections of data. The signal in each section is averaged in order to combine
all the channels.
3.2.3
Analysing data using a generalized linear model
In the GLM a design matrix is created which is fitted to the measured data by weighing
each condition in the matrix. Each condition is converted to a modelled neurovascular re-
sponse to the stimulus, which can be further examined below in figure 3.7. This shows the
expected hemodynamic response to a stimulus of same duration used in the experiment.
A vector containing the expected response for each stimulus condition is placed in the de-
sign matrix. In addition to the stimuli conditions drift models and a constant is also used
in the design matrix. These drift models and constant are used to model physiological
shifts of different duration, thus multiple drifts are needed with different frequencies. The
drift models used are cosine functions. The amount of drift models used are determined
by the longest interval between two stimuli of the same condition. The full design matrix
can be seen in figure 3.8. To run the GLM analysis, the design matrix is fitted to the mea-
sured data, and a weight, β, is given to each parameter in the design matrix indicating
how prominent that parameter is in the data.
14
==PAGE:20==
Figure 3.7: Modelled expected response based on the stimulus start and duration. The
stimulus function is convoluted with a model of the HDR, which results in the expected
response function.
Figure 3.8: An example of a design matrix used in the GLM analysis for a single data
set. The noise and speech regressors are the modelled expected response. The drift
and constant regressors assist in fitting noise of different frequencies. The amount of
drift models used are correlated to the longest interval between two stimuli of the same
condition.
15
==PAGE:21==
3.2.4
Determining active channels and test-retest reliability
To do statistical analysis regarding the channel activation, the active channels first needs
to be determined. This is done by first calculating the p-values for all channels and after-
wards correcting the FDR.
To determine the p-values in the WAA data, the paired t-test was used. The hypothesis
for the paired t-test is that it will determine if an active stimulus was different from the
control stimulus. If it is considered significantly different then the channel is considered
activated in terms of hemodynamic response. All epochs for a given channel will be used
as samples for the test And to get a single value for each epoch, the average signal from
four to six seconds is used. The test will be conducted separately for each channel to get
a list of t-values which is then connverted to p-values.
The GLM analysis uses the parameter β to determine the p-values. This is done by cal-
culating their respective t-value using their standard error. This t-value is then used to
determine the p-value.
To determine which channels are significant, the Benjamini-Hochberg procedure is applied
on both the WAA and GLM p-values. An α of 20% was used, meaning for every group
of significant channels, up to 20% of those are a false positive. This level, compared to
a lower α, was chosen due to the relative low amount of expected significant channels,
where a lower α could reject a lot of true positives.
Once the significant channels have been found, the test-retest reliability will be calculated
for each method. In order to compare both methods a test-retest analysis using the acti-
vated channels is used. This test gives a score for how similar the amount of significantly
activated channels in the first and second visit, and for a score how many of the activated
channels are identical from the first and second visit.
The hypothesis for the test-retest analysis is that a weak and noisy signal will activate
random channels sometimes and fluctuate in the amount of channels, but a powerful
response will activate both the same channels and therefore a similar amount of channels.
Therefore the analysis should give a high value for regions that are activated by stimulus
and not random probability.
3.3
Software used in thesis
Throughout the thesis different software is used, which is stated in table 3.1 below.
Function
Program
Version
Developer
Experiment and
signal processing code
Python
3.10
Python Software Foundation
Creating and editing sound files
Audacity
3.2.3
Muse group
Recording fNIRS data
NIRStar
14.1
NIRx Medical Technologies
Producing figures
Inkscape
1.2.2
Inkscapes contributors, open source
Creating noise audio file and plotting data
MATLAB
2022b
Mathworks Inc., Natick, Massachusetts, USA
Handling calibration
Measurement Partner Suite
4.8.3.1
Brüel & Kjær
Handling audiometric test
Affinity Suite
2.16.0
Interacoustics
Table 3.1: Different software used throughout the thesis
16
==PAGE:22==
4
Results
4.1
Visualising signal using weighted averaging analysis
By combining the results from the WAA for all subjects and both visits, the data in figure 4.1
is obtained. These results can be useful to visually evaluate the data quality, but it is
important to know what results are expected. The Luke et al. (2021)[7] paper found the
control stimulus to induce no significant HbO change, while both the noise and speech
stimuli induced large changes with speech stimuli inducing a slightly larger change. This
change was apparent in the STG while both the left IFG and occipital lobe experienced
very small changes. They did however find the HbO change in the occipital lobe to have
a large variation, the upper edge of the 95% confidence interval was roughly the same
value as the respective value in the STG ROIs.
Comparing the results from the Luke et al. (2021)[7] paper to the results from figure 4.1,
it can be seen that both the occipital lobe and left IFG experienced a substantial change
in HbO. One of the explanations for this increased HbO could be the lack of short channel
usage in the data. Due to a low short channel quality in the majority of recordings, the
they were left out of signal processing entirely. This allows unrelated changes in the Hb
concentrations to influence the measurements. Despite this the signal from the WAA
still expressed the expected neurovascular coupling on average, indicating some useful
measurements could be present.
Figure 4.1: Mean WAA results from all subjects and both visits. The rows shows different
ROIs and the columns show different experimental conditions. The x-axes indicate time
relative to stimulus onset and the y-axes shows change in Hb concentrations. The red
line is for HbO and the blue line is for HbR.
Individual reliability of auditory-evoked fNIRS responses as a function of analysis method
17
==PAGE:23==
The signal from subject 3 visit 1 shown in figure 4.2, is showing a lot of noise in the occipital
lobe. The signal also shows a Hb fluctuation in the control condition. This indicates that
there are noise in the signal since no activity is expected during that condition. The HbO
change is also induced before, or right at, the stimuli onset in the active conditions, which
normally would be shortly after, thus the change is likely noise in the signal. Besides
these points, the subject also showed a lower response to the speech stimuli through all
ROIs. This is likely due to the noise in the signal and shows that variation in the data like
this could be the explanation of what caused the mean signal to show a larger activation
during the noise condition compared to the speech condition.
Figure 4.2: WAA results from subject 3 visit 1. The rows shows different ROIs and the
columns show different experimental conditions. The x-axes indicate time relative to stim-
ulus onset and the y-axes shows change in Hb concentrations. The red line is for HbO
and the blue line is for HbR.
18
==PAGE:24==
4.2
Active channels in test subjects
The significant channels found for the WAA and GLM methods are shown in figure 4.3 and
figure 4.4, respectively. This shows which channels are active for each test conducted,
and which were active during both the first and second visit. Additionally the number of ac-
tive channels per ROI is displayed, which correspond to A1 and A2 seen in equation (2.4)
and equation (2.5). Each channel is split in the middle, allowing differentiation of HbO and
HbR activation.
The active WAA channels from figure 4.3 shows a lot of variation between visits, which
could indicate problems with the experiment execution. Subject 1 and 4 had zero identical
channels active in both the first and second visit for the speech condition. This was due
to the low activation count for both subjects second visit. Subject 3 however had a lot of
active channels in all ROIs both during the first and second visit. This hyper activation
could be caused by a flaw in the paired t-test which is based on the difference between
the control and active stimuli. Since the HbO concentration for the control signal was
negative around 5 seconds, the paired t-test is more likely to determine channels to be
significantly active.
The overview of active GLM channels in figure 4.4 shows an abnormally low activation,
compared to the WAA, for the majority of the test. Subject 3 who had 146 active channels
across all conditions for both test using the WAA method, only had 2 active channels using
the GLM method. This discrepancy could be explained by the robustness of the GLM
method. Since this method includes drift models it has a way of removing low frequency
physiological shifts in the data without the use of short channels.
19
==PAGE:25==
Figure 4.3: Overview of the active channels for the WAA. The rows shows the test sub-
jects and the columns are separated into noise and speech condition. For each condition
the activation from the first and second visit is shown. The colors of the channels indicate
whether the channel was active for a given condition. Green channels were active in both
visits. Purple channels channels were only active during the specific visit. Black channels
were inactive during the specific visit. Additionally each channel is split in the middle, and
the right side of the circle is for HbO and the left side is for HbR.
20
==PAGE:26==
Figure 4.4: Overview of the active channels for the GLM. The rows shows the test sub-
jects and the columns are separated into noise and speech condition. For each condition
the activation from the first and second visit is shown. The colors of the channels indicate
whether the channel was active for a given condition. Green channels were active in both
visits. Purple channels channels were only active during the specific visit. Black channels
were inactive during the specific visit. Additionally each channel is split in the middle, and
the right side of the circle is for HbO and the left side is for HbR.
21
==PAGE:27==
4.3
Test-retest parameters RA and RO
The results from the test-retest analysis for the WAA and GLM is shown in figure 4.5 and
figure 4.6 respectively, and was calculated using equation (2.4) and equation (2.5). The
figure groups the test subjects with a secondary grouping of ROIs.
The RA values shown in figure 4.5 indicates that most test subjects had a relative even
amount of activated channels in the noise condition between their two visits. The speech
condition had larger variation. The RO values are generally lower compared to the RA
values, which indicates that even though a similar amount of channels were active, not
as many were the same channels. This could be caused by channels being activated by
random noise in the signal, which would have a smaller probability of also being activated
by random noise in a subsequent visit. The RO values for the speech condition have
subject 1 and 4 scoring 0, which is caused by the lack of activation of the speech condition
in their second visit as mentioned earlier.
Figure 4.5: Bar graph showing the RA and RO values for both the noise and speech
condition in the WAA. Colors of the bars indicate subject number.
22
==PAGE:28==
The reliability values for the GLM methods seen in figure 4.6 are very low given the low
channel activation. If there are 0 significant channels for a condition in a test, the values
for RA and RO will be 0. The only test subject who did not have a visit where a condition
had 0 activation in any ROI was subject 4, which is why its the only value, besides subject
2’s speech STG, above 0. Even though the RA scores high in the noise condition, it is
worth noting that on the first visit the STG and occipital lobe had 4 and 2 active channels
respectively, meaning a single false positive will have a large impact on the value.
Figure 4.6: Bar graph showing the RA and RO values for both the noise and speech
condition in the GLM. Colors of the bars indicate subject number.
23
==PAGE:29==
5
Discussion
The results revealed a high prevalence of noise in the majority of the fNIRS recordings,
particularly in those pertaining to the occipital lobe. Additionally the paired t-test and WAA
combination classified more channels as active compared to the GLM. To gain insight into
the reason for these divergent outcomes, concepts for each method are compared.
5.1
Comparison of the weighted averaging analysis and
generalized linear model
Based on the limited sample size and suboptimal quality of the data, it is not possible to
make definitive conclusions regarding the reliability of fNIRS measurements on an indi-
vidual level, nor how analysis methods effect this reliability. However, the results in this
thesis suggests that the GLM method is more conservative when handling noisy data than
the WAA method. This could be due to the GLM method’s robust noise handling, which
stems from the multiple drift models in the design matrix. Despite this it is still unknown
how these methods would compare with cleaner data.
One of the most notable distinctions between the two methods is the formats of their re-
sults. The GLM method is an inherently statistical method, and requires no extra work
to statistically analyse, however it can be more difficult to observe the hemodynamic re-
sponse in the results. The WAA epochs the data and provides an averaged combination
of all data segments. The result is very intuitive and can easily be visually assessed, but
lacks statistical parameters. For this reason the paired t-test had to be applied to the WAA.
Doing this is not a standard practice, and there might be better solutions to determine the
active channels, but it is an under-explored research area.
This statistical difference for the WAA also brings another problem. Since the t-values
was not calculated in the same way as the GLM, the FDR correction does not necessarily
require the same α value for both methods. If it turns out the WAA is indeed more lenient
in regards to channel activation, then the α value could be lowered compared to the GLM
method.
Even though this thesis focused on the individual reliability, group level analysis is often
used in many studies. Both methods can be applied on a group level, however the results
are still limited by their inherent format. Here the GLM could have an advantage on large
scale data sets, where their individual β parameters could be plotted in a box plot to
summarize the data. The WAA can plot the confidence interval for the data, but outlier
data would be hard to discern in the results.
The individual test-retest reliability was explored for the WAA and GLM method. The
results obtained, by applying the signal processing pipeline on a large two visit data set,
can help future experiments make educated choices on their analysis methods.
5.2
Limitations and future perspectives of the experiment
In this experiment there were both things that could have a negative impact on the results,
and things that should be implemented in a future iteration of this experiment.
Individual reliability of auditory-evoked fNIRS responses as a function of analysis method
24
==PAGE:30==
5.2.1
Test setup
Revisiting the optode layout
Given the large interest in the STG compared to the IFG and occipital lobe, it could be
favorable to focus on the STG ROI in the optode placement. Additionaly there are multiple
methods of choosing ROIs, and while the Luke et al. (2021)[7] specifies the ROIs was
selected using the fNIRS optodes’ location decider (fOLD) toolbox, it is not specified which
parcellation atlas and region is used. Upon inspection it appears the Brodmann atlas was
used and the Brodmann area (BA) 17, 41 and 45 were chosen, which are the primary
visual cortex, part of the primary auditory cortex and part of Broca’s area respectively. By
instead combining BA 39, 42 and 45, at 33%, 0% and 34% specificity, three ROIs shown in
figure 5.1, colored orange, green and purple respectively, is created. BA 39 corresponds
to the angular gyrus and contains the Wernicke’s area which, along with Broca’s area
from BA 45, is responsible for speech comprehension [17] [18]. BA 42 is also a part of
the primary auditory cortex. This layout uses 12 sources and 19 detectors (18 regular
detectors and 1 short channel bundle), which is six more detectors, and results in 40
channels compared to 24 from the layout used in this thesis. The fNIRS platform used in
this thesis was already equipped with 5 detector cards allowing up to 20 detectors to be
mounted on the subject.
Figure 5.1: Suggested layout containing three ROIs activated by auditory stimuli. ROI
one marked in purple is the Broca’s area, ROI two marked in green is the STG and ROI
three marked in orange is Wernicke’s area
Properly mounting fNIRS cap and optodes to ensure good data quiality
Obtaining fNIRS data from test subjects requires some training to be able to do properly.
In this thesis the test conducter had no previous experience with conducting fNIRS exper-
iments. When equipping the test subject with the fNIRS cap and optodes, a lot of things
can have an impact on the data quality.
When the optodes are mounted, it is important to move the optode tips in a circular pattern
to ensure the hair is not completely blocking the scalp. The same is required for the short
25
==PAGE:31==
channels, and given the poor quality of short channels in the recordings from this thesis,
it could be argued that this quality would improve with more practice.
When the optodes are placed on the scalp, they are fastened using spring caps with
different spring strengths to ensure a sturdy connection. During the experiment a limited
amount of the strongest springs were available, and usually the occipital lobe needs these
springs to avoid the optodes lifting from the scalp and producing noise. Optodes on the
STG were given priority to the strong springs, resulting in better signal quality in the STG
but at a higher probability for noise in the occipital lobe. This could be an explanation for
the increased noise seen in the occipital lobe ROI.
When the cap is placed on the subjects head, any rotation around the frontal, sagittal
or transverse axes will misalign the optodes with their respective locations, which might
be more likely to happen with an inexperienced test conductor. This is not expected to
make a significant difference to the overall recorded data, but could have an impact on
the reliability
5.2.2
Data processing
Removing systemic changes using short channels
To improve the quality of the data analysis, the short channels should be incorporated in
the processing pipeline. This can be implemented in the WAA by applying a short channel
regression function, found in the MNE-NIRS toolbox [7], to the optical density signal. This
function uses the nearest short channel to correct the signal from each channel. For the
GLM method, all the short channels can be added to the design matrix which then would
make it possible to separate the physiological changes in the signal from the hemody-
namic response.
Limitations of the paired t-test on noisy data
Something to keep in mind when using the paired t-test on the WAA data is that if the mean
of the control stimulus is shifted, the noise and speech stimuli will be considered more or
less active depending on if the mean was below or above 0. If the HbO concentration
change was negative throughout the control stimulus, the noise or speech stimuli could
be considered active without having any change in HbO. The paired t-test method only
works given clean data, which makes it important to thoroughly inspect the fNIRS signal
before data analysis.
Adjusting the false discovery rate
Once the data quality improves the FDR could be revisited. In this experiment it was set to
20% but if the average activation increases substantially with data quality, the FDR could
be lowered to keep the amount of false positives low. Ideally a FDR of 5% is optimal as
long as enough true positives are acquired. In future test, different methods to correct the
FDR could be investigated.
The deconvolution finite-impulse response model
A third analysis method that could be relevant to consider is the deconvoluted FIR model.
This model is a type of GLM analysis that utilizes a different design matrix, and has some
similarities with the WAA. Instead of having a modelled response regressor, drifts and
short channels, the FIR model creates a vector containing FIRs with different time-shifts.
This means that the design matrix makes no assumptions on the shape of the response,
like the canonical GLM does. Instead the signal is epoched from the stimulus onset to a
pre-determined time. In this time window, a chosen number of FIRs are modelled to the
data, and the corresponding β values can be directly used to describe the morphology in
the signal. Not assuming a response shape allows the FIR more freedom in modelling
the HDR, but also allows more variance and overfitting.
26
==PAGE:32==
6
Conclusion
In this thesis, a passive two-visit block-design auditory fNIRS experiment was conducted
on four test subjects. The fNIRS signal recorded was pre-processed and the data was
analysed using both the WAA and canonical GLM method. Using a paired t-test on the
WAA and the Benjamini-Hochberg procedure on both methods, active channels were iden-
tified. The results indicated the presence of significant noise in the signal, likely originat-
ing from noise in the raw fNIRS signal. The individual test-retest reliability was explored,
though no conclusion in regards to the difference in the methods can be drawn. However
a signal processing pipeline was established, which provides a way to assess the relia-
bility on a large scale data set. Additionally future implementations to this pipeline was
proposed.
Individual reliability of auditory-evoked fNIRS responses as a function of analysis method
27
==PAGE:33==
Bibliography
[1]
M. A. Yaqub, U. Ghafoor, and K. S. Hong, “Existence of Initial Dip for BCI: An Illu-
sion or Reality,” Frontiers in Neurorobotics, vol. 12, 2018. DOI: 10.3389/FNBOT.
2018.00069. [Online]. Available: /pmc/articles/PMC6212489/%20/pmc/articles/
PMC6212489/?report=abstract%20https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/
PMC6212489/.
[2]
P. Pinti, I. Tachtsidis, A. Hamilton, et al., “The present and future use of functional
near-infrared spectroscopy (fNIRS) for cognitive neuroscience,” Annals of the New
York Academy of Sciences, vol. 1464, no. 1, pp. 5–29, 2020, ISSN: 1749-6632.
DOI: 10.1111/NYAS.13948. [Online]. Available: https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
30085354/.
[3]
F. Scholkmann, S. Kleiser, A. J. Metz, et al., “A review on continuous wave func-
tional near-infrared spectroscopy and imaging instrumentation and methodology,”
NeuroImage, vol. 85 Pt 1, pp. 6–27, Jan. 2014, ISSN: 1095-9572. DOI: 10.1016/J.
NEUROIMAGE.2013.05.004. [Online]. Available: https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
23684868/.
[4]
J. J. Chen and G. B. Pike, “Origins of the BOLD post-stimulus undershoot,” Neu-
roImage, vol. 46, no. 3, pp. 559–568, Jul. 2009, ISSN: 1095-9572. DOI: 10.1016/J.
NEUROIMAGE.2009.03.015. [Online]. Available: https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
19303450/.
[5]
L. M. Hocke, I. K. Oni, C. C. Duszynski, A. V. Corrigan, B. d. B. Frederick, and
J. F. Dunn, “Automated Processing of fNIRS Data-A Visual Guide to the Pitfalls and
Consequences,” Algorithms, vol. 11, no. 5, May 2018, ISSN: 1999-4893. DOI: 10.
3390/A11050067. [Online]. Available: https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/30906511/.
[6]
A. von Lühmann, A. Ortega-Martinez, D. A. Boas, and M. A. Yücel, “Using the Gen-
eral Linear Model to Improve Performance in fNIRS Single Trial Analysis and Clas-
sification: A Perspective,” Frontiers in Human Neuroscience, vol. 14, p. 30, Feb.
2020, ISSN: 16625161. DOI: 10.3389/FNHUM.2020.00030/BIBTEX.
[7]
R. Luke, E. Larson, M. J. Shader, et al., “Analysis methods for measuring passive
auditory fNIRS responses generated by a block-design paradigm,” Neurophotonics,
vol. 8, no. 2, May 2021, ISSN: 2329-423X. DOI: 10.1117/1.NPH.8.2.025008. [Online].
Available: https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/34036117/.
[8]
I. M. Wiggins, C. A. Anderson, P. T. Kitterick, and D. E. Hartley, “Speech-evoked
activation in adult temporal cortex measured using functional near-infrared spec-
troscopy (fNIRS): Are the measurements reliable?” Hearing Research, vol. 339,
p. 142, Sep. 2016, ISSN: 18785891. DOI: 10.1016/J.HEARES.2016.07.007. [Online].
Available: /pmc/articles/PMC5026156/%20/pmc/articles/PMC5026156/?report=
abstract%20https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5026156/.
[9]
S. A. Rombouts, F. Barkhof, F. G. Hoogenraad, M. Sprenger, J. Valk, and P. Schel-
tens, “Test-retest analysis with functional MR of the activated area in the human
visual cortex.,” AJNR: American Journal of Neuroradiology, vol. 18, no. 7, p. 1317,
Aug. 1997, ISSN: 01956108. DOI: 10.1097/00041327- 199906000- 00012. [Online].
Individual reliability of auditory-evoked fNIRS responses as a function of analysis method
28
==PAGE:34==
Available: /pmc/articles/PMC8338037/?report=abstract%20https://www.ncbi.nlm.
nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC8338037/.
[10]
M. M. Plichta, M. J. Herrmann, C. G. Baehne, et al., “Event-related functional near-
infrared spectroscopy (fNIRS): Are the measurements reliable?” NeuroImage, vol. 31,
no. 1, pp. 116–124, May 2006, ISSN: 1053-8119. DOI: 10.1016/J.NEUROIMAGE.
2005.12.008.
[11]
C. Campus, G. Sandini, M. Concetta Morrone, and M. Gori, “Spatial localization
of sound elicits early responses from occipital visual cortex in humans,” Scientific
Reports, vol. 7, no. 1, Dec. 2017, ISSN: 20452322. DOI: 10.1038/S41598-017-09142-
Z.
[12]
A. Gramfort, M. Luessi, E. Larson, et al., “MEG and EEG data analysis with MNE-
Python,” Frontiers in Neuroscience, vol. 7, no. 7 DEC, p. 267, Dec. 2013, ISSN:
1662453X. DOI: 10.3389/FNINS.2013.00267/BIBTEX.
[13]
L. Pollonini, C. Olds, H. Abaya, H. Bortfeld, M. S. Beauchamp, and J. S. Oghalai,
“Auditory cortex activation to natural speech and simulated cochlear implant speech
measured with functional near-infrared spectroscopy,” Hearing Research, vol. 309,
pp. 84–93, Mar. 2014, ISSN: 0378-5955. DOI: 10.1016/J.HEARES.2013.11.007.
[14]
F. A. Fishburn, R. S. Ludlum, C. J. Vaidya, and A. V. Medvedev, “Temporal Derivative
Distribution Repair (TDDR): A motion correction method for fNIRS,” NeuroImage,
vol. 184, pp. 171–179, Jan. 2019, ISSN: 1053-8119. DOI: 10.1016/J.NEUROIMAGE.
2018.09.025.
[15]
A. Duncan, J. H. Meek, M. Clemence, et al., “Measurement of Cranial Optical Path
Length as a Function of Age Using Phase Resolved Near Infrared Spectroscopy,”
Pediatric Research 1996 39:5, vol. 39, no. 5, pp. 889–894, 1996, ISSN: 1530-0447.
DOI: 10.1203/00006450-199605000-00025. [Online]. Available: https://www.nature.
com/articles/pr19962544.
[16]
Frequency and Filter Commentary — MNE-NIRS 0.5.0 documentation. [Online].
Available: https://mne.tools/mne- nirs/stable/auto_examples/general/plot_30_
frequency.html#sphx-glr-auto-examples-general-plot-30-frequency-py.
[17]
A. Ardila, B. Bernal, and M. Rosselli, “The role of wernicke’s area in language com-
prehension,” Psychology and Neuroscience, vol. 9, no. 3, pp. 340–343, Sep. 2016,
ISSN: 19833288. DOI: 10.1037/PNE0000060.
[18]
C. Rogalsky, W. Matchin, and G. Hickok, “Broca’s area, sentence comprehension,
and working memory: An fMRI study,” Frontiers in Human Neuroscience, vol. 2,
no. OCT, p. 14, Oct. 2008, ISSN: 16625161. DOI: 10.3389/NEURO.09.014.2008/
BIBTEX.
29
==PAGE:35==
A
Appendix
A1: Checklist
Individual reliability of auditory-evoked fNIRS responses as a function of analysis method
30
==PAGE:36==
Checklist before test subject arrives 
Preparing Booth: 
1 
Turn on the lights in lab. 
2 
Turn on “VENT” and “LYS” switches to the left of the booth door. 
3 
Turn on monitor and loudspeaker inside the booth. 
4 
Ensure the loudspeaker is standing at the wall away from the chair and position the monitor to be 
above the speaker. The monitor should be at a height corresponding the subjects eye level when 
seated in the chair. 
5 
Ensure that the tape covering the gain knob on the back of the loudspeaker has not been tampered 
with.  
o If it has been adjusted move the gain knob so that the flat part of the knob is approximately 
horizontal. 
Preparing PC: 
6 
Turn on recording PC and log in to EKSP profile. 
 
Preparing PsychoPy: 
7 
Press the windows button + S and write “PsychoPy3 Coder” and press enter.  
8 
In PsychoPy press Ctrl+O. 
9 
Click on Experiment.py under D:\usr\AHAF and press enter. 
10 Press Ctrl+Shift+R to run the experiment. 
11 When the following screen appears on the monitor in the booth, press ø on the recording PC.  
12 Wait until both noise and speech files have been played to ensure the speaker is working properly. 
13 Shut down the experiment by pressing the red cross in the “PsychoPy3 Experiment Runner” 
window. 
 
Preparing NIRStar: 
14 Press the windows button + S and write “NIRStar15-3” and press enter. 
31
==PAGE:37==
15 Click on “Configure Hardware” in the top left corner. 
16 In the pop-up window click “Predefined Montages” in the top left corner. This should be the default 
window. 
17 Ensure that “Luke2021Montage_12x13” is selected under “Montage:”. The montage should be 
displayed on the page and look like the picture below. 
 
18 In the pop-up window click “Hardware Specification” in the top right corner. 
19 Ensure all the settings on the page match the picture below. 
32
==PAGE:38==
20 Note what number is written under “Detectors connected to bundles”. 
 
21 Click OK at the bottom right of the window. 
22 The following two dialog boxes will appear. Press Continue on both. 
 
Preparing cap: 
23 Take out the zip-lock bag from the bottom of the cupboard next to the chair inside the booth. 
24 Take out the clear plastic bag containing springs for the optodes from the cupboard. 
25 Take the cap corresponding to the test subjects head size from the zip-lock bag. 
26 Take the short channel adaptor from the bag zip-lock bag along with the green Velcro strip with 
clips. If this is mounted in another cap, remove it and take it. 
27 Mount the short channels on the inside of the cap. 
o To mount the short channels on the cap, first remove the C-ring locking the optode 
connector to the cap from the inside. While doing so make sure to keep the connector 
secure to avoid it falling out. Slide the short channel onto the connector from the inside, 
ensuring the 4 pegs are pointing away from the fabric.  
28 Start mounting the sources and detectors on the cap using spring level 1 on all optodes. 
o To mount the optodes on the cap, first remove colored rubber cover from the optode and 
store it in a bag. Afterwards take the spring and mount it over the optode. Then squeeze  
33
==PAGE:39==
o the spring cover slightly and insert it into the optode connector on the cap. Ensure that the 
numbers on the optode and optode connector correspond. 
o Secure the optode cables in the comb like holders on the cap to reduce optode movement 
during recordings. 
o Connect the detector with the number corresponding to the number written under 
“Detectors connected to bundle” as noted earlier to the short channel bundle adapter. This 
should be number 13. 
o Secure the short channel bundle adapter using the green Velcro with clips, to the back of 
the cap so that it will not interfere with the chair if the test person moves their head. 
29 Store the optode caps and springs along the zip-lock bag in the cupboard to keep the workspace 
tidy. 
 
 
 
34
==PAGE:40==
Checklist after test subject arrives 
Introductions: 
1 
Tell them where bathroom is and offer them water. 
2 
If the subject has not had an information meeting yet, conduct that now. Remember to plan this 
into the time schedule. Refer to point on the HEA wiki for information meeting inputs. 
3 
Hand out participation agreement and have the test subject fill it out. 
4 
When the plan for the experiment is explained to the subject ask if they are ready to sit in the chair 
to begin mounting the cap. 
Mounting and calibrating fNIRS equipment: 
5 
Place the cap on the test subject’s head. 
o Make the test subject align the front of the cap with their forehead while you pull the back 
of the cap down over their head. 
6 
Ensure good connection by moving the short channels in circular motions over the scalp and twist 
the optodes around its own axis. While doing this ask the subject if they feel the optode on their 
scalp. Keep trying until they say yes, but if they do not feel it after trying for 10-15 seconds try using 
a spring with a higher value. If they press too hard into the subject’s scalp, try using a spring with a 
lower value. 
 
Calibrating optodes: 
7 
Turn off the light in the booth and close the inner door. 
8 
Turn off the PC monitor in the booth. 
9 
On the Recording PC, open NIRStar and click “CALIBRATE” found on the right. 
10 When the calibration is finished click “DETAILS” above the calibration button. 
11 Inspect the different tabs to find optodes with poor connections. Make sure to untick “Quality 
Scale” and tick “Use TopoView” & “Show Values” when applicable. 
12 If any optodes have poor connection, tick “Show Topo Labels” and note which optodes needs 
improvement. 
o Turn on the light and enter the booth and repeat step 6-12 until all optodes have excellent 
connection or no improvement can be made. 
13 Press save and store the file under D:\data\AHAF\Calibration\SubjectXXvisitYY.stp, where xx is the 
subject ID and YY is the visit number, eg. Subject01visit02.stp.  
35
==PAGE:41==
14 Tell the test subject that the experiment is ready to begin, and they should follow the instructions 
on the screen once they appear. 
15 Turn the PC monitor in the booth back on. 
 
Setting up LSL: 
16 Open PsychoPy and press Ctrl+Shift+R to run the experiment. 
17 Ensure the screen displays the experiment window. 
18 Once the experiment is waiting to start, open NIRStar and click “Configure Hardware” in the top left 
corner. 
19 In the pop-up window click “Data Streaming” in the top row. 
20 Ensure “Receive Triggers (LSL)” is turned on indicated by a bright yellow light and that the “Stream 
Name” is called “Trigger”. 
 
21 Click the “Test Connection” button and the dialog box shown below will be displayed if the 
connection is successful. Click OK to close the dialog box and click OK again to close the settings 
window. The same dialog boxes from step 22 in the “Checklist before subject arrives” will appear, 
click continue these.  
Conducting the experiment: 
36
==PAGE:42==
22 The experiment is now ready to begin. Close the inner and outer door to the booth and ensure the 
light is turned off. 
23 Click “PREVIEW” in NIRSTAR  
24 A dialog box will appear. Fill out name, age, gender and additional notes with the corresponding 
info shown in the picture below and click OK.  
25 Once the preview is running tick “Show labels” and adjust the scale factor at the top of the window. 
The scale should make each channel distinguishable from each other. 
26 See if the heartbeat is visible in the graphs, this will mean that the optodes have a good connection 
to the scalp. 
o If any channels have an abnormal amplitude, untick them from the list to the right of the 
graph. 
27 Click the “RECORD” button to start recording. 
28 Open PsychoPy and press “Ø” on the keyboard. 
29 Click on the PsychoPy icon in the taskbar and select the Experiment Runner. 
o Here the outputs will be displayed, and the red X button can be used to abort the 
experiment.  
o There is a known issue with the PsychoPy3 Experiment runner where the output is not 
updated unless the mouse is active on the window. This means that keeping the mouse 
over the output and doing small circular motions is essential for being updated in regards 
to stimuli and breaks. 
30 During the experiment there will be 3 planned breaks. Once a break starts open both doors. Ask the 
test subject if want to drink some water or move a little. They should avoid moving the head so 
much that the cap and optodes move. 
31 When the test subject is ready to continue close both doors to the booth, turn off the light to the 
booth and press “Ø” on the keyboard. 
32 Once the experiment is finished press the “STOP” button to stop recording. 
o The data is automatically stored at C:\NIRx\Data\YYYY-MM-DD\YYYY-MM-DD_xxx, eg. 
C:\NIRx\Data\2022-10-11\2022 -10 -11 _001  
37
==PAGE:43==
33 Turn on the lights to the booth and open both doors. 
34 Take the cap off the subject and follow them out of the booth. 
 
 
38
==PAGE:44==
Checklist after test subject leaves 
1 
Copy the data folder to D:\data\AHAF\Recordings to ensure the data is backed up. 
2 
Copy the data to OneDrive. 
3 
Close all programs on the PC and enter sleep mode. 
 
Cleaning booth: 
4 
Take the bags stored in the cupboard earlier out again. 
5 
Remove all springs from the cap and place them back into their bags, sorted by spring number. 
6 
Place all the optode covers back on the optodes, ensuring they match in color. 
7 
Place the cap in the zip-lock bag and place the bag at the bottom of the cupboard. 
8 
Place the bag of springs in the cupboard. 
9 
Turn off the monitor and loudspeaker. 
10 Turn off the “LYS” and “VENT” switch to the booth. 
11 Fill payment forms if this was the last test for the subject. 
12 Turn off the light to the room and exit. 
13 Archive participation agreement. 
 
 
39
==PAGE:45==
A2: Experiment Code
1
import sounddevice as sd
2
import numpy as np
3
import time
4
import os
5
import sys
6
import random
7
import math
8
import msvcrt as m
9
10
from scipy.io import wavfile
11
from psychopy import logging , prefs
12
from psychopy import sound, core
13
from random import randint
14
from psychopy import visual
15
from psychopy.hardware import keyboard
16
from pylsl import StreamInfo , StreamOutlet
17
18
#
_______________________________________________________________________________
19
# SETTING UP DEVICES
20
#
_______________________________________________________________________________
21
22
# Initialize LSL for NIRx, Name to input into NIRStar is 'Trigger'
23
info = StreamInfo(name='Trigger', type='Markers', channel_count=1,
channel_format = 'int32', source_id = 'fNIRSexperiment')
24
outlet = StreamOutlet(info) #initialize LSL
25
26
# Trigercodes used throughout code explained:
27
# 1 = Silence
28
# 2 = Noise
29
# 3 = Speech
30
# 4 = Experiment paused
31
# 5 = Experiment started
32
33
# Setting up working directory
34
cwd = os.getcwd()
35
os.chdir('D:/usr/AHAF')
36
37
# Get the list of drivers
38
sd.query_devices()
39
# Setting soundcard t odefault device
40
sd.default.device = 'Asio Fireface USB'
41
# Setting output channel , loudspeaker is pluged into output 1, which in python
index is 0
42
sound_device_channels = [0]
43
extra_settings = sd.AsioSettings(channel_selectors=sound_device_channels)
44
45
46
#
_______________________________________________________________________________
47
# SETTING UP CONSTANTS
48
#
_______________________________________________________________________________
49
50
# Volume to increase Noise to +5dB
51
OffsetVol = 1.78
40
==PAGE:46==
52
53
# Volume for adjusting both speech and noise
54
MasterVol = 0.75
55
56
# Combined scalar for speech and noise
57
SpeechVol = MasterVol
58
NoiseVol = OffsetVol*MasterVol
59
60
# Speech file path
61
Speechpath = 'Audio/Speech/SpeechSent('
62
63
# Array from 1 to number of speechfiles
64
SpeechArray = list(range(1,203))
65
66
# Duration of spech stimulus
67
SpeechDur = 5.25
68
69
# Noise file path
70
AFile_Noise = 'Audio/Noise/FilteredNoise.wav'
71
72
# Noise read
73
Fs, Noise = wavfile.read(AFile_Noise)
74
75
# Convert to float for scaling , int16->float32
76
Noise = Noise.astype(np.float32)/32768.0
77
78
# Volume controll
79
Noise = np.multiply(Noise,NoiseVol)
80
81
# Number of trials per stimuli
82
Ntrials = 20
83
84
# List with unique digit for each stimuli
85
SilenceString = [0]*Ntrials
86
NoiseString = [1]*Ntrials
87
SpeechString = [2]*Ntrials
88
89
# Counter for keeping track of stimuli
90
SilenceCount = 0
91
NoiseCount = 0
92
SpeechCount = 0
93
94
95
96
#
_______________________________________________________________________________
97
# CREATING VISUALS
98
#
_______________________________________________________________________________
99
100
# Make window fullscreen and display on screen 2 (1 in npython index)
101
win = visual.Window(units='height',fullscr = 1, screen=1)
102
103
# Top row text
104
TopRow = visual.TextBox2(win,
105
text = 'Forsøget er klar til at starte',
106
font = 'Open Sans', letterHeight = 0.1,
107
pos = (0.05, 0.3),
108
size = [None,None])
109
41
==PAGE:47==
110
# Bottom row text
111
BotRow = visual.TextBox2(win,
112
text='Slap af og hold øjnene på krydset',
113
font='Open Sans', letterHeight=0.1,
114
pos=(0.05, -0.3),
115
size=[None,None])
116
117
# Fixation cross
118
cross = visual.TextBox2(win,
119
text = '+',
120
font = 'Open Sans', letterHeight = 0.3,
121
pos = (0.15,-0.05),
122
size = [None,None])
123
124
# Make keyboard object
125
kb = keyboard.Keyboard()
126
# Listen for keypresses until escape is pressed
127
keys = kb.getKeys()
128
129
130
131
#
_______________________________________________________________________________
132
# AWAIT USER INPUT TO START EXPERIMENT
133
#
_______________________________________________________________________________
134
135
# Prompting user tp press Ø to begin experiment
136
print('---Press Ø to begin experiment ---')
137
138
# Looking for "ø" keyboardpress , translated to "pound", probably internaitonal
virtual keyboard
139
while 'pound' not in keys:
140
TopRow.draw()
141
BotRow.draw()
142
cross.draw()
143
win.flip()
144
keys = kb.getKeys(keyList=['pound'],clear=True)
145
146
# Reseting keys parameter to use same button in future breaks
147
keys = 0
148
keys = kb.getKeys()
149
150
# Experiment is starting prompt
151
print('Experiment starting...')
152
153
# Text for visuals
154
TopRow.text ='Forsøget starter om'
155
BotTxt = ['5','4','3','2','1']
156
157
# Countdown loop
158
for jj in range(5):
159
BotRow.text = BotTxt[jj]
160
TopRow.draw()
161
BotRow.draw()
162
cross.draw()
163
win.flip()
164
time.sleep(1)
165
166
# Only cross
42
==PAGE:48==
167
cross.draw()
168
win.flip()
169
time.sleep(1)
170
171
# Sending trigger to NIRStar
172
outlet.push_sample(x=[5])
173
174
175
176
#
_______________________________________________________________________________
177
# STIMULI EXECUTION BLOCK
178
#
_______________________________________________________________________________
179
180
# Running 20 * 3 = 60 times
181
for ii in range(len(SilenceString+NoiseString+SpeechString)):
182
183
# Pausing for 10-20 seconds randomly
184
PauseDuration = randint(10,20)
185
# Print pause duration
186
print('')
187
print('Pausing for ' + str(PauseDuration) + ' seconds')
188
print('')
189
# Wait pause duration
190
core.wait(PauseDuration)
191
192
# Counting how many remaining stimuli are left
193
StimCounter = len(SilenceString+NoiseString+SpeechString)
194
195
# Checking if counter is 60, then pass
196
if StimCounter == 60:
197
pass
198
# If counter is divideable by 15 ie 15, 30, 45.
199
elif StimCounter % 15 == 0:
200
# Starting break
201
# Sending trigger to NIRStar
202
outlet.push_sample(x=[4])
203
204
print('---EXPERIMENT PAUSED ---')
205
print('---Press Ø to begin experiment ---')
206
207
# Text for visuals
208
TopRow.text ='Forsøget er nu på pause'
209
BotRow.text ='Vent på yderligere instrukser'
210
211
# Looking for "ø" keyboardpress , translated to "pound", probably
internaitonal virtual keyboard
212
while 'pound' not in keys:
213
TopRow.draw()
214
BotRow.draw()
215
cross.draw()
216
win.flip()
217
keys = kb.getKeys(keyList=['pound'],clear=True)
218
219
# Reseting keys parameter to use same button in future breaks
220
keys = 0
221
keys = kb.getKeys()
222
223
# Experiment is starting prompt
43
==PAGE:49==
224
print('Experiment starting...')
225
226
# Text for visuals
227
TopRow.text ='Forsøget starter om'
228
229
# Countdown loop
230
for jj in range(5):
231
BotRow.text = BotTxt[jj]
232
TopRow.draw()
233
BotRow.draw()
234
cross.draw()
235
win.flip()
236
time.sleep(1)
237
238
# Only cross
239
cross.draw()
240
win.flip()
241
time.sleep(1)
242
243
# Sending trigger
244
outlet.push_sample(x=[5])
245
246
# Pausing for 5 seconds until next stimuli
247
time.sleep(5)
248
249
250
# Choosing random trail from combined string
251
comp = random.choice(SilenceString+NoiseString+SpeechString)
252
253
# SILENCE TRIAL
254
if
comp == 0:
255
# Counter to keep track of experiment
256
SilenceCount+=1
257
258
# Send the trigger
259
outlet.push_sample(x=[1])
260
261
# Pausing for 5 seconds as silence stimulus
262
time.sleep(5)
263
264
# Removing 1 index in silence array
265
SilenceString.remove(0)
266
267
# NOISE TRIAL
268
elif comp == 1:
269
# Counter to keep track of experiment
270
NoiseCount+=1
271
272
# Send the trigger
273
outlet.push_sample(x=[2])
274
275
# Playing the sound file
276
sd.play(Noise, Fs, blocking = True, mapping = None, extra_settings=
extra_settings)
277
278
# Removing 1 index in noise array
279
NoiseString.remove(1)
280
281
# SPEECH TRIAL
282
elif comp ==2:
283
# Counter to keep track of experiment
284
SpeechCount+=1
44
==PAGE:50==
285
286
# Create speech file, Time to compute < 0.001 seconds ,
287
# 0.1-0.05% increase in pause duration
288
289
# Picking random number from array and removing index
290
SpeechInt1 = random.choice(SpeechArray)
291
SpeechArray.remove(SpeechInt1)
292
293
# Picking random number from array and removing index
294
SpeechInt2 = random.choice(SpeechArray)
295
SpeechArray.remove(SpeechInt2)
296
297
# Picking random number from array and removing index
298
SpeechInt3 = random.choice(SpeechArray)
299
SpeechArray.remove(SpeechInt3)
300
301
# Putting numbers into filepath
302
AFile_Speech1 = Speechpath + str(SpeechInt1) + ').wav'
303
AFile_Speech2 = Speechpath + str(SpeechInt2) + ').wav'
304
AFile_Speech3 = Speechpath + str(SpeechInt3) + ').wav'
305
306
# Read the files into arrays and store length of files
307
# Speech 1 read
308
Fs1, SP1 = wavfile.read(AFile_Speech1)
309
length1 = len(SP1)
310
311
# Speech 2 read
312
Fs2, SP2 = wavfile.read(AFile_Speech2)
313
length2 = len(SP2)
314
315
# Speech 3 read
316
Fs3, SP3 = wavfile.read(AFile_Speech3)
317
length3 = len(SP3)
318
319
# Calculating how many indces are in a 5.25 second long audiofile with
44.1kHz fs
320
nIndex = math.ceil(Fs1*SpeechDur)
321
322
# How much available space is left after the 3 audiofiles are joined
323
# Available space is used as silence between sentences.
324
SpeechBuffer = nIndex - length1 - length2 - length3
325
326
# Defining buffers between sentences by dividing empty space in 2
327
# Rounding both up and down in case of uneven number
328
Buffer1 = np.zeros((math.floor(SpeechBuffer/2)),dtype=np.int16)
329
Buffer2 = np.zeros((math.ceil(SpeechBuffer/2)),dtype=np.int16)
330
331
# Combining SP1 + half buffer + SP2 + half buffer + SP3
332
Speech =np.concatenate((SP1, Buffer1 , SP2, Buffer2 , SP3),axis=0)
333
334
# Convert to float for scaling , int16->float32
335
Speech = Speech.astype(np.float32)/32768.0
336
337
# Volume controll
338
Speech = np.multiply(Speech ,SpeechVol)
339
340
# Send the trigger
341
outlet.push_sample(x=[3])
342
343
# Playing concenated speech file
344
sd.play(Speech , Fs, blocking = True)
345
45
==PAGE:51==
346
# Removing 1 index in speech array
347
SpeechString.remove(2)
348
349
print('Stimuli #'+str(SilenceCount+NoiseCount+SpeechCount))
350
print('Speech trial '+str(SpeechCount))
351
print('Silence trial '+str(SilenceCount))
352
print('Noise trial '+str(NoiseCount))
353
354
# A sleep timer to ensure silence after the last stimuli so the epoch is not
contaminated
355
time.sleep(10)
356
357
# finish prompt
358
print('---Experiment is over---')
359
360
# Finishing screen
361
TopRow.text = 'Forsøget er nu slut'
362
TopRow.draw()
363
win.flip()
364
time.sleep(100)
Code/Experiment.py
46
==PAGE:52==
A3: Processing Code
1
#fNIRS Analysis
2
3
# %% Packages
4
5
import os
6
import os.path as op
7
import numpy as np
8
import matplotlib.pyplot as plt
9
import mne
10
import mne_nirs
11
import pandas as pd
12
13
from scipy.stats import sem
14
from scipy import stats
15
from itertools import compress
16
from pprint import pprint
17
from nilearn.plotting import plot_design_matrix
18
19
from mne.viz import plot_compare_evokeds
20
from mne.preprocessing.nirs import (optical_density ,
21
temporal_derivative_distribution_repair)
22
23
from mne_nirs.visualisation import plot_glm_surface_projection
24
from mne_nirs.experimental_design import make_first_level_design_matrix
25
from mne_nirs.statistics import run_glm
26
from mne_nirs.channels import (get_long_channels ,
27
get_short_channels ,
28
picks_pair_to_idx)
29
30
# WAA analysis
31
def weighted_averaging_analysis(raw_haemo):
32
33
# remove short channels
34
raw_haemo = mne_nirs.channels.get_long_channels(raw_haemo)
35
36
# divide events
37
events , event_dict = mne.events_from_annotations(raw_haemo ,{'Control': 1,
'Noise': 2, 'Speech': 3})
38
39
# time frame for epochs
40
tmin, tmax = -5, 15
41
42
# create epochs
43
epochs = mne.Epochs(raw_haemo , events , event_id=event_dict ,
44
tmin=tmin, tmax=tmax,
45
reject_by_annotation=True,
46
proj=True, baseline=(None, 0), preload=True,
47
detrend=None, verbose=True)
48
49
# PAIRED T TEST
50
# create arrays for each condition + channelname. roll 2 to get source 12
to its ROI
51
chnames = np.roll(epochs.copy().ch_names ,2)
52
carray = np.roll(np.mean(epochs['Control'].copy().crop(4,6)._data,axis=2)
,2,axis=1)
53
narray = np.roll(np.mean(epochs['Noise'].copy().crop(4,6)._data,axis=2),2,
axis=1)
54
sarray = np.roll(np.mean(epochs['Speech'].copy().crop(4,6)._data,axis=2)
,2,axis=1)
55
56
maxlen = max([len(carray),len(narray),len(sarray)])
47
==PAGE:53==
57
58
# replace missing values with mean of array
59
while len(carray) < maxlen:
60
carray = np.vstack([carray , np.mean(carray ,axis=0)])
61
62
while len(narray) < maxlen:
63
narray = np.vstack([narray , np.mean(narray ,axis=0)])
64
65
while len(sarray) < maxlen:
66
sarray = np.vstack([sarray , np.mean(sarray ,axis=0)])
67
68
# difference in control : active stimuli
69
ncont = narray - carray
70
scont = sarray - carray
71
72
# calculate t-values
73
m = len(chnames)
74
speechp = np.empty(m)
75
noisep = np.empty(m)
76
77
for ii in range(0,m):
78
speechp[ii] = stats.t.sf(abs(np.mean(scont[:,ii])/sem(scont[:,ii])),
maxlen -1)
79
noisep[ii] = stats.t.sf(abs(np.mean(ncont[:,ii])/sem(ncont[:,ii])),
maxlen -1)
80
81
82
# FDR CORRECTION
83
WAAres = pd.DataFrame()
84
WAAres['Channels'] = chnames
85
WAAres['Noise'] = noisep
86
WAAres['Speech'] = speechp
87
88
# rank array and alpha value
89
FDRarray = np.array(range(1,m+1))
90
FDRalpha = 0.20
91
92
# array containing the comparison value
93
FDRarray = FDRalpha * FDRarray / m
94
95
for jj,cond in enumerate(['Noise','Speech']):
96
# ranking by smallest p-value
97
WAAres = WAAres.sort_values(by=cond, ascending=True)
98
# comparing value to array
99
WAAres[cond] = WAAres[cond] < FDRarray
100
maxpos = WAAres[cond][::-1].idxmax()
101
minpos = WAAres[cond][::-1].idxmin()
102
if maxpos == minpos:
103
continue
104
maxloc = WAAres.index.get_loc(maxpos)
105
# setting all lower ranks to true
106
WAAres[cond].iloc[0:maxloc + 1] = True
107
108
# sorting by channels again
109
WAAres = WAAres.sort_index()
110
111
112
left = [[4, 2], [4, 3], [5, 2], [5, 3], [5, 4], [5, 5]] #, [4, 14], [5,
15]
113
right = [[10, 9], [10, 10], [10, 11], [10, 12], [11, 11], [11, 12]] #,
[10, 18], [11, 19]
48
==PAGE:54==
114
back = [[6, 6], [6, 8], [7, 6], [7, 7], [7, 8], [8, 7], [8, 8], [9, 8]] #,
[6, 16], [8, 17]
115
front = [[1, 1], [2, 1], [3, 1], [3, 2], [12, 1]] #, [2, 13], [12, 20]
116
117
ROIs = dict(STG=np.concatenate((np.array(picks_pair_to_idx(raw_haemo , left
))/2//1,
118
np.array(picks_pair_to_idx(raw_haemo , right))/2//1)),
119
Occipital=np.array(picks_pair_to_idx(raw_haemo , back))/2//1,
120
Frontal=np.array(picks_pair_to_idx(raw_haemo , front))/2//1)
121
122
ROIs['STG'] = ROIs['STG'].astype(int)
123
ROIs['Occipital'] = ROIs['Occipital'].astype(int)
124
ROIs['Frontal'] = ROIs['Frontal'].astype(int)
125
126
evoked_dict = {'Noise/HbO': epochs['Noise'].average(picks='hbo'),
127
'Noise/HbR': epochs['Noise'].average(picks='hbr'),
128
'Speech/HbO': epochs['Speech'].average(picks='hbo'),
129
'Speech/HbR': epochs['Speech'].average(picks='hbr'),
130
'Control/HbO': epochs['Control'].average(picks='hbo'),
131
'Control/HbR': epochs['Control'].average(picks='hbr')}
132
133
134
for condition in evoked_dict:
135
evoked_dict[condition].rename_channels(lambda x: x[:-4])
136
137
condlist=['Control','Noise','Speech']
138
139
fig, axes = plt.subplots(nrows=len(ROIs), ncols=len(event_dict),figsize
=(14, 10))
140
141
WaaRoiGrp = pd.DataFrame()
142
143
144
for ridx, roi in enumerate(ROIs):
145
for cidx, event in enumerate(event_dict):
146
plot_compare_evokeds([evoked_dict[condlist[cidx]+'/HbO'],
evoked_dict[condlist[cidx]+'/HbR']], picks=ROIs[roi], combine=
"mean", title='',
147
axes=axes[ridx,cidx], show=False,colors=['r','b'], ylim=dict(
hbo=[-0.1, 0.2],hbr=[-0.1, 0.2]), legend=False,
show_sensors=True, ci=0.95)
148
149
axes[0,cidx].set_title(f'{event}')
150
axes[ridx, 0].set_ylabel(f"{roi}\n ￿M")
151
152
if cidx == 0:
153
if ridx ==0:
154
contvalhbo = evoked_dict[condlist[cidx]+'/HbO'].copy()
155
contvalhbr = evoked_dict[condlist[cidx]+'/HbR'].copy()
156
contvalhbo._data = contvalhbo._data + evoked_dict[condlist[
cidx]+'/HbO'].copy()._data
157
contvalhbr._data = contvalhbr._data + evoked_dict[condlist[
cidx]+'/HbR'].copy()._data
158
159
160
if cidx == 1:
161
if ridx ==0:
162
noisevalhbo = evoked_dict[condlist[cidx]+'/HbO'].copy()
163
noisevalhbr = evoked_dict[condlist[cidx]+'/HbR'].copy()
164
noisevalhbo._data = noisevalhbo._data + evoked_dict[condlist[
cidx]+'/HbO'].copy()._data
49
==PAGE:55==
165
noisevalhbr._data = noisevalhbr._data + evoked_dict[condlist[
cidx]+'/HbR'].copy()._data
166
167
if cidx == 2:
168
if ridx ==0:
169
speechvalhbo = evoked_dict[condlist[cidx]+'/HbO'].copy()
170
speechvalhbr = evoked_dict[condlist[cidx]+'/HbR'].copy()
171
speechvalhbo._data = speechvalhbo._data + evoked_dict[condlist
[cidx]+'/HbO'].copy()._data
172
speechvalhbr._data = speechvalhbr._data + evoked_dict[condlist
[cidx]+'/HbR'].copy()._data
173
174
WaaRoiGrp={}
175
WaaRoiGrp['ControlHbO'] = contvalhbo
176
WaaRoiGrp['ControlHbR'] = contvalhbr
177
WaaRoiGrp['NoiseHbO'] = noisevalhbo
178
WaaRoiGrp['NoiseHbR'] = noisevalhbr
179
WaaRoiGrp['SpeechHbO'] = speechvalhbo
180
WaaRoiGrp['SpeechHbR'] = speechvalhbr
181
182
183
axes[0, 0].legend(["Oxyhaemoglobin", "Deoxyhaemoglobin"],loc=2)
184
185
186
187
color_dict = dict(HbO='#AA3377', HbR='b')
188
styles_dict = dict(Control=dict(linestyle='dotted'), Noise=dict(linestyle=
'dashed'))
189
190
mne.viz.plot_compare_evokeds(evoked_dict , combine="mean", ci=0.95,
191
colors=color_dict , styles=styles_dict ,show=
True)
192
193
return WAAres , WaaRoiGrp , ROIs
194
195
def GLM_analysis(raw_haemo):
196
197
# removing break annotations
198
unwanted = np.nonzero(raw_haemo.annotations.description == 'Xstart')
199
raw_haemo.annotations.delete(unwanted)
200
unwanted = np.nonzero(raw_haemo.annotations.description == 'Xend')
201
raw_haemo.annotations.delete(unwanted)
202
203
short_chs = get_short_channels(raw_haemo)
204
raw_haemo = get_long_channels(raw_haemo)
205
206
207
events , event_dict = mne.events_from_annotations(raw_haemo , verbose=False)
208
mne.viz.plot_events(events , event_id=event_dict , sfreq=raw_haemo.info['
sfreq'],show=False)
209
210
211
s = mne_nirs.experimental_design.create_boxcar(raw_haemo)
212
fig, axes = plt.subplots(nrows=1, ncols=1, figsize=(15, 6))
213
plt.plot(raw_haemo.times, s, axes=axes)
214
plt.legend(["Control", "Noise", "Speech"], loc="upper right")
215
plt.xlabel("Time (s)")
216
217
218
raw_stim = raw_haemo.copy()
219
raw_stim.annotations.delete(raw_stim.annotations.description == 'Control')
220
50
==PAGE:56==
221
222
isis, names = mne_nirs.experimental_design.
longest_inter_annotation_interval(raw_stim)
223
224
225
226
design_matrix = make_first_level_design_matrix(raw_stim ,
227
drift_model='cosine',
228
high_pass=1/(2*max(isis)),
#
Must be specified per
experiment
229
hrf_model='spm',
230
stim_dur=5.125)
231
232
233
234
235
#design_matrix["ShortHbO"] = np.mean(short_chs.copy().pick(
236
#
picks="hbo").get_data(), axis=0)
237
238
#design_matrix["ShortHbR"] = np.mean(short_chs.copy().pick(
239
#
picks="hbr").get_data(), axis=0)
240
241
242
fig, ax1 = plt.subplots(figsize=(10, 6), nrows=1, ncols=1)
243
fig = plot_design_matrix(design_matrix , ax=ax1)
244
245
246
glm_est = run_glm(raw_haemo , design_matrix , noise_model='auto')
247
248
249
subjects_dir = op.join(mne.datasets.sample.data_path(), 'subjects')
250
mne.utils.set_config("SUBJECTS_DIR", subjects_dir , set_env=True)
251
252
253
GLMresN = pd.DataFrame()
254
GLMresS = pd.DataFrame()
255
df2 = glm_est.to_dataframe()
256
257
258
GLMresN['ch_name'] = df2['ch_name'][df2.Condition == 'Noise']
259
GLMresN['Noise'] = df2['p_value'][df2.Condition == 'Noise']
260
GLMresN = GLMresN.reset_index(drop=True)
261
GLMresS['ch_name'] = df2['ch_name'][df2.Condition == 'Speech']
262
GLMresS['Speech'] = df2['p_value'][df2.Condition == 'Speech']
263
GLMresS = GLMresS.reset_index(drop=True)
264
265
GLMres = pd.merge(GLMresN ,GLMresS , on = 'ch_name')
266
267
m = len(GLMres)
268
FDRarray = np.array(range(1,m+1))
269
FDRalpha = 0.2
270
271
272
FDRarray = FDRalpha * FDRarray / m
273
274
for jj,cond in enumerate(['Noise','Speech']):
275
GLMres = GLMres.sort_values(by=cond, ascending=True)
276
GLMres[cond] = GLMres[cond] < FDRarray
277
maxpos = GLMres[cond][::-1].idxmax()
278
minpos = GLMres[cond][::-1].idxmin()
279
if maxpos == minpos:
51
==PAGE:57==
280
continue
281
maxloc = GLMres.index.get_loc(maxpos)
282
GLMres[cond].iloc[0:maxloc + 1] = True
283
284
285
286
GLMres = GLMres.sort_index()
287
288
mne.viz.plot_events(events , event_id=event_dict , sfreq=raw_haemo.info['
sfreq'],show=True)
289
290
291
return GLMres
292
293
294
#%% START OF PRE-PROCESSING
295
296
def fullanalysis(SubjectID ,VisitID):
297
298
idxstring = np.array([[4,7],[9,7],[13,11],[5,5]])
299
300
BadEpochList = np.empty((4,2,13),dtype=int)
301
BadEpochList[1-1][1-1][0:4]=[2-1, 18-1, 37-1, 54-1]
302
BadEpochList[1-1][2-1][0:7]=[8-1, 15-1, 16-1, 17-1, 28-1, 41-1, 60-1]
303
BadEpochList[2-1][1-1][0:9]=[3-1, 5-1, 9-1, 16-1, 30-1, 37-1, 38-1, 51-1,
53-1]
304
BadEpochList[2-1][2-1][0:7]=[7-1, 8-1, 10-1, 12-1, 51-1, 56-1, 57-1]
305
BadEpochList[3-1][1-1][0:13]=[5-1, 8-1, 9-1, 16-1, 18-1, 19-1, 26-1, 33-1,
46-1, 47-1, 49-1, 57-1, 58-1]
306
BadEpochList[3-1][2-1][0:11]=[1-1, 3-1, 7-1, 13-1, 16-1, 21-1, 35-1, 46-1,
54-1, 57-1, 60-1]
307
BadEpochList[4-1][1-1][0:5]=[7-1, 8-1, 20-1, 41-1, 44-1]
308
BadEpochList[4-1][2-1][0:5]=[33-1, 36-1, 38-1, 40-1, 56-1]
309
310
311
fnirs_data_folder =(r'C:\Users\Andy\OneDrive - Danmarks Tekniske
Universitet\Data\Recordings')
312
fnirs_cw_amplitude_dir = op.join(fnirs_data_folder , 'Subject0'+str(
SubjectID)+'-visit0'+str(VisitID))
313
raw_intensity = mne.io.read_raw_nirx(fnirs_cw_amplitude_dir)
314
raw_intensity.load_data()
315
raw_intensity.info['bads'].extend(['S3_D2 785', 'S3_D2 830'])
316
317
# annotation names
318
raw_intensity.annotations.rename({'1.0': 'Control',
319
'2.0': 'Noise',
320
'3.0': 'Speech',
321
'4.0': 'Xstart',
322
'5.0': 'Xend'})
323
324
# annotation durations
325
raw_intensity.annotations.set_durations({'Control' : 5, 'Noise' : 5, '
Speech' : 5.25})
326
327
# Break events
328
Breaks , event_dict = mne.events_from_annotations(raw_intensity ,{'Xend': 4,
'Xstart': 5})
329
# All events
330
AllEvents , event_dict = mne.events_from_annotations(raw_intensity)
331
332
# Converting from index to time
333
Breaks = Breaks[:,0]/raw_intensity.info['sfreq']
52
==PAGE:58==
334
LastEvent = AllEvents[-1,0]/raw_intensity.info['sfreq']
335
336
337
# constructing block for each block in experiment
338
cropped_intensity = raw_intensity.copy().crop(Breaks[0],Breaks[1])
339
block2 = raw_intensity.copy().crop(Breaks[2],Breaks[3])
340
block3 = raw_intensity.copy().crop(Breaks[4],Breaks[5])
341
block4 = raw_intensity.copy().crop(Breaks[6], LastEvent+15.25)
342
343
# Combining all blocks
344
cropped_intensity.append([block2 ,block3 ,block4])
345
cropped_od = mne.preprocessing.nirs.optical_density(cropped_intensity)
346
cropped_corrected_od = temporal_derivative_distribution_repair(cropped_od)
347
348
349
sci = mne.preprocessing.nirs.scalp_coupling_index(cropped_corrected_od)
350
fig, ax = plt.subplots()
351
ax.hist(sci)
352
ax.set(xlabel='Scalp Coupling Index', ylabel='Count', xlim=[0, 1])
353
354
355
356
# removing break annotations
357
unwanted = np.nonzero(raw_intensity.annotations.description == 'Xstart')
358
raw_intensity.annotations.delete(unwanted)
359
unwanted = np.nonzero(raw_intensity.annotations.description == 'Xend')
360
raw_intensity.annotations.delete(unwanted)
361
362
raw_intensity.annotations.delete(BadEpochList[SubjectID -1][VisitID -1][0:
idxstring[SubjectID -1,VisitID -1]])
363
364
365
raw_od = mne.preprocessing.nirs.optical_density(raw_intensity)
366
367
368
corrected_od = temporal_derivative_distribution_repair(raw_od)
369
370
371
corrected_od.info['bads'] = list(compress(cropped_corrected_od.ch_names ,
sci < 0.5))
372
corrected_od.info['bads'].extend(['S3_D2 785', 'S3_D2 830'])
373
374
raw_haemo = mne.preprocessing.nirs.beer_lambert_law(corrected_od , ppf=6.1)
375
raw_haemo.plot(n_channels=len(raw_haemo.ch_names),
376
duration=500, show_scrollbars=False,show=False)
377
378
379
fig = raw_haemo.plot_psd(average=True,show=False)
380
fig.suptitle('Before filtering', weight='bold', size='x-large')
381
fig.subplots_adjust(top=0.88)
382
383
384
raw_haemo = raw_haemo.filter(l_freq = None, h_freq = 0.4,
385
filter_length = 87,
386
h_trans_bandwidth = 0.2,
387
fir_window = 'hamming',
388
fir_design = 'firwin')
389
390
391
raw_haemo = raw_haemo.filter(0.05, h_freq = None, l_trans_bandwidth=0.02)
392
393
fig = raw_haemo.plot_psd(average=True,show=False)
53
==PAGE:59==
394
fig.suptitle('After filtering', weight='bold', size='x-large')
395
fig.subplots_adjust(top=0.88)
396
397
398
raw_haemo.plot(n_channels=len(raw_haemo.ch_names),
399
duration=500, show_scrollbars=False,show=False)
400
401
402
WAAres ,WaaGrpDF , ROIs = weighted_averaging_analysis(raw_haemo)
403
404
GLMres = GLM_analysis(raw_haemo)
405
return WAAres , WaaGrpDF , ROIs, GLMres
406
407
#%% CALLING FUNCTIONS
408
409
WAAres = {}
410
WaaRoiGrp = {}
411
GLMres = {}
412
413
roilist = ['front', 'left', 'back', 'right']
414
415
for SubjectID in range(1,5):
416
for VisitID in range (1,3):
417
dfwaa, WaaGrpDF , ROIs, dfglm = fullanalysis(SubjectID ,VisitID)
418
dfwaa.to_csv('WAA' + str(SubjectID) + str(VisitID) + '.csv', index=
False)
419
dfglm.to_csv('GLM' + str(SubjectID) + str(VisitID) + '.csv', index=
False)
420
WaaRoiGrp[(SubjectID -1)*2+VisitID] = WaaGrpDF
421
422
condlist =
[['ControlHbO','ControlHbR'],['NoiseHbO','NoiseHbR'],['SpeechHbO',
'SpeechHbR']]
423
424
for test in range (2,9):
425
for condidx , cond in enumerate(condlist):
426
WaaRoiGrp[1][cond[0]]._data = WaaRoiGrp[1][cond[0]]._data + WaaRoiGrp[
test][cond[0]]._data
427
WaaRoiGrp[1][cond[1]]._data = WaaRoiGrp[1][cond[1]]._data + WaaRoiGrp[
test][cond[1]]._data
428
429
430
for ii in range(len(condlist)):
431
WaaRoiGrp[1][condlist[ii][0]]._data = WaaRoiGrp[1][condlist[ii][0]]._data
/8
432
WaaRoiGrp[1][condlist[ii][1]]._data = WaaRoiGrp[1][condlist[ii][1]]._data
/8
433
434
fig, axes = plt.subplots(nrows=len(ROIs), ncols=len(condlist),figsize=(14, 10)
)
435
titlestr = ['Control','Noise','Speech']
436
for ridx, roi in enumerate(ROIs):
437
for cidx, event in enumerate(condlist):
438
plot_compare_evokeds([WaaRoiGrp[1][event[0]],WaaRoiGrp[1][event[1]]],
picks=ROIs[roi], combine="mean", title='',
439
axes=axes[ridx,cidx], show=False,colors=['r','b'], ylim=dict(hbo
=[-0.2, 0.4],hbr=[-0.2, 0.4]), legend=False, show_sensors=True
, ci=0.95)
440
441
axes[0,cidx].set_title(f'{titlestr[cidx]}')
442
axes[ridx, 0].set_ylabel(f"{roi}\n ￿M")
443
444
axes[0, 0].legend(["Oxyhaemoglobin", "Deoxyhaemoglobin"],loc=2)
54
==PAGE:60==
445
446
447
448
print('dont stop debugging')
449
450
# %%
Code/fNIRS Analysis.py
55
==PAGE:61==
A4: Filter Code
1
# Authors: Robert Luke <mail@robertluke.net>
2
#
3
# License: BSD (3-clause)
4
#%%
5
6
import os.path as op
7
import mne
8
import mne_nirs
9
import numpy as np
10
import matplotlib.pyplot as plt
11
from mne_nirs.experimental_design import make_first_level_design_matrix
12
from mne_nirs.simulation import simulate_nirs_raw
13
14
15
# %%
16
# Import and preprocess data
17
18
19
fnirs_data_folder =(r'C:\Users\Andy\OneDrive - Danmarks Tekniske Universitet\
Data\Recordings')
20
fnirs_cw_amplitude_dir = op.join(fnirs_data_folder , 'Subject01 -visit02')
21
raw_intensity = mne.io.read_raw_nirx(fnirs_cw_amplitude_dir ,
22
verbose=True).load_data()
23
24
raw_intensity.annotations.rename({'1.0': 'Control',
25
'2.0': 'Noise',
26
'3.0': 'Speech',
27
'4.0': 'Xstart',
28
'5.0': 'Xend'})
29
30
new_des = [des for des in raw_intensity.annotations.description]
31
new_des = ['Control' if x == "1.0" else x for x in new_des]
32
new_des = ['Noise' if x == "2.0" else x for x in new_des]
33
new_des = ['Speech' if x == "3.0" else x for x in new_des]
34
new_des = ['Xend' if x == "4.0" else x for x in new_des]
35
new_des = ['Xstart' if x == "5.0" else x for x in new_des]
36
37
38
raw_intensity = mne_nirs.channels.pick_sources(raw_intensity ,[4,5,10,11])
39
raw_intensity = mne_nirs.channels.drop_detectors(raw_intensity
,[1,6,7,8,14,15,16,17,18,19])
40
41
annot = mne.Annotations(raw_intensity.annotations.onset,
42
raw_intensity.annotations.duration * 5.125,
raw_intensity.annotations.description)
43
raw_intensity.set_annotations(annot)
44
45
raw_intensity.annotations.delete(
46
np.where([d == 'Control' for d in raw_intensity.annotations.description]))
47
48
raw_intensity.annotations.delete(
49
np.where([d == 'stop' for d in raw_intensity.annotations.description]))
50
51
raw_intensity.annotations.delete(
52
np.where([d == 'start' for d in raw_intensity.annotations.description]))
53
54
raw_od = mne.preprocessing.nirs.optical_density(raw_intensity)
55
raw_haemo = mne.preprocessing.nirs.beer_lambert_law(raw_od , ppf=6.1)
56
raw_haemo = mne_nirs.channels.get_long_channels(raw_haemo)
57
58
56
==PAGE:62==
59
# %%
60
# Model neural response
61
62
63
design_matrix = make_first_level_design_matrix(
64
raw_haemo , drift_order=0, stim_dur=5.125)
65
66
# This is a bit of a hack.
67
# Overwrite the first NIRS channel with the expected response.
68
# Rescale to be in expected units of uM.
69
hrf = raw_haemo.copy().pick(picks=[0])
70
hrf._data[0] = 1e-6 * (design_matrix['Noise'] +
71
design_matrix['Speech']).T
72
73
74
# %%
75
# Plot raw measured data
76
77
raw_haemo._data = raw_haemo._data * 0.6
78
79
80
# %%
81
# Plot epoched data
82
83
84
events , _ = mne.events_from_annotations(raw_haemo)
85
event_dict = {'Noise': 1, 'Speech': 2}
86
reject_criteria = dict(hbo=120e-6)
87
tmin, tmax = -5, 15
88
epochs = mne.Epochs(raw_haemo , events , event_id=event_dict ,
89
tmin=tmin, tmax=tmax,
90
reject=reject_criteria , reject_by_annotation=True,
91
proj=True, baseline=(None, 0), preload=True,
92
detrend=None, verbose=True)
93
94
95
96
# %%
97
# Plot filter response
98
99
100
filter_params = mne.filter.create_filter(
101
raw_haemo.get_data(), raw_haemo.info['sfreq'],
102
l_freq=None, h_freq=0.4, h_trans_bandwidth=0.2)
103
104
105
106
107
# %%
108
# Discussion
109
110
fig = hrf.pick(picks='hbo').plot_psd(average=True, fmax=2,
111
color='r', show=False)
112
raw_haemo.pick(picks='hbo').plot_psd(average=True, fmax=2,
113
ax=fig.axes, show=False)
114
mne.viz.plot_filter(filter_params , raw_haemo.info['sfreq'],
115
flim=(0.005, 2), fscale='log', gain=False,
116
plot='magnitude', axes=fig.axes, show=False)
117
118
leg_lines = [line for line in fig.axes[0].lines if line.get_linestyle() == '-'
]
119
fig.legend(leg_lines , ['Model Response', 'Measured Data',
57
==PAGE:63==
120
'Filter Response'],
121
loc="lower left", bbox_to_anchor=(0.15, 0.2))
122
fig.axes[0].set_ylabel('Filter Magnitude (dB) [invalid for other lines]')
123
fig.axes[0].set_title('')
124
125
126
print('Debug catch')
127
# %%
Code/plot_30_frequency.py
58
