==PAGE:1==
DTU Sustain 
Department of Environmental and Resource Engineering 
 
 
 
 
 
Master’s Thesis 
DURABILITY ESTIMATION OF CONCRETE 
ELEMENTS FOR DIRECT REUSE 
Electrical resistivity & chloride ingress 
 
 
 
 
JANUARY 22, 2023 
==PAGE:2==
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:3==
 
i 
 
 
 
 
 
Author 
Emilie B. Serritzlew 
Supervisor 
Lisbeth M. Ottosen 
Copyright: 
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus-
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc. 
Cover photo: By author 
Published by: DTU, Institut for Miljø- og Ressourceteknologi, Bygningstorvet, Bygning 
115, 2800 Kongens Lyngby  
www.sustain.dtu.dk 
==PAGE:4==
 
ii 
 
 
Preface 
This is a Master’s Thesis written by Emilie Bundgaard Serritzlew, at the Department of 
Environmental and Resources Engineering, Technical University of Denmark, DTU.  
The thesis was completed as a partial requirement for the Master of Science in Architectural 
Engineering, MSc Eng. degree for which the thesis constitutes 30 ECTS point. It was completed 
in the time period 22-08-2022 to 22-01-2023.  
The research for this thesis focuses on non-destructive testing of concrete elements and aims to 
contribute to the existing knowledge in estimating the durability of concrete elements for direct 
reuse. 
 
Acknowledgements 
Thanks to all those who helped and supported me throughout the completion of my Master’s 
thesis. 
I would like to thank my supervisor, Lisbeth M. Ottosen for her guidance and valuable feedback 
throughout the entire project. Her expertise and support have been essential in shaping the 
direction and improving the quality of the project. 
Furthermore, I would like to thank Serkan Karatosun, the laboratory coordinator Ebba C. 
Schnell, the laboratory technicians, Jacob Friis-Grigoncza and the staff in the concrete foundry 
of DTU for their help in assessing the experimental work 
I am also grateful to my family for their support and understanding during the time I dedicated to 
this work. 
 
==PAGE:5==
 
iii 
 
Abstract 
In recent years, the idea of recycling building materials has become increasingly popular.  
Concrete is the most preferred building material in Denmark, however, the production of cement 
emits large quantities of greenhouse gas.  
To meet the increasingly strict emissions requirements, set out by the building regulations, 
concrete elements can be directly reused, as a part of circular economy, prolonging their 
lifespan and thus decreasing the relative emissions of these elements. However, it is required to 
estimate the elements durability, to assess if they are suitable for reuse.  
This thesis explores how the Wenner method can be used, to measure concrete’s electrical 
resistivity (ER), that has been affected by: sodium chloride (NaCl) concentrations, temperature 
change, and rapid chloride migration.  
The objective is to estimate the depth of chloride ingress in concrete using electrical resistivity. 
The chloride content in the concrete specimen is confirmed by titration. 
Results showed that the electrical resistivity decreased as the concentration of NaCl increased, 
which agrees with the literature. 
The electrical resistivity of concrete is influenced by the temperature; as the temperature 
decreases, the electrical resistivity increases. Furthermore, concrete with higher NaCl 
concentrations shows a larger relative difference in ER, compared to concrete with lower 
concentrations. 
The Wenner method is strongly affected by surface conditions and probe placement. The ER 
readings showed varying results for same specimen in the same conditions. 
A strong correlation was found between surface resistivity and resistance from the chloride 
migration test, suggesting potential for the Wenner method to measure ion movement in 
concrete. 
 
 
==PAGE:6==
 
iv 
 
 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
1 
INTRODUCTION ................................................................................................................ 1 
1.1 Objectives and scope ................................................................................................... 2 
2 
THEORY ............................................................................................................................ 3 
2.1 Corrosion ..................................................................................................................... 3 
2.2 Chloride in concrete ..................................................................................................... 6 
2.2.1 
Chloride migration test ................................................................................... 7 
2.2.2 
Titration with potentiometric indication ........................................................... 8 
2.3 Electrical resistivity ....................................................................................................... 9 
2.3.1 
Wenner probe method ................................................................................... 9 
2.4 Chapter summary .......................................................................................................12 
3 
MATERIALS AND METHODS ..........................................................................................13 
3.1 Literature search .........................................................................................................13 
3.2 Experimental work ......................................................................................................15 
3.2.1 
Effect of varying concentrations of NaCl on Electrical Resistivity ..................16 
3.2.2 
Chloride migration test ..................................................................................18 
3.2.3 
Titration.........................................................................................................21 
4 
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION ..........................................................................................22 
4.1 Literature review .........................................................................................................22 
4.1.1 
Insights from the literature on electrical resistivity of concrete .......................27 
4.2 Experimental work ......................................................................................................30 
4.2.1 
Effect of varying concentrations of NaCl on Electrical Resistivity ..................30 
4.2.2 
Chloride migration test ..................................................................................34 
4.2.3 
Concentration of chlorides ............................................................................36 
4.2.4 
Estimating chloride ingress with ER ..............................................................41 
4.3 Further studies ............................................................................................................44 
5 
CONCLUSION ..................................................................................................................45 
Bibliography ............................................................................................................................46 
Appendix A. 
Literatur review ..............................................................................................50 
Appendix B. 
Time schedule of 1. part of experimental work ............................................57 
Appendix C. 
Results 1. part of experimental work ............................................................58 
Appendix D. 
Results from  chloride migration test ...........................................................61 
Appendix E. 
Titration ...........................................................................................................64 
 
==PAGE:7==
 
1 
 
1 INTRODUCTION  
The building industry plays a major role in shaping the world and is a significant contributor to 
economic growth. It has a major impact on the environment, through the materials, the energy 
used on construction work, the operation of buildings, and their influence on land use. 
In circular economy resources are kept in use for as long as possible, with the goal of 
minimizing waste which leads to maximizing the value of products and materials.  
Circular economy has the potential to reduce the environmental impact of the building industry 
by reducing the extraction of raw materials, lowering energy consumption. Implementing a 
circular economy in the building industry can involve a variety of strategies, such as designing 
buildings for disassembly and reuse, using recycled and sustainable materials, and reusing 
resources such as water and energy. 
Concrete elements are commonly used in constructions due to its compressive strength, 
durability, and low cost. However, the production process of cement, used in the concrete, emits 
large quantities of greenhouse gas. It is estimated that the cement and concrete industry 
accounts for approximately 8 % of total global CO2 emissions. [1]  
Due to the increasing consumption of construction materials a new requirement regarding the 
climate impact, has been added to the building regulation in Denmark 2023. This regulation 
forces a limit of the CO2 emission/m2/year on the building industry. [2]  
The concept of direct reusing concrete elements in constructions can contribute to preserving 
the value and energy spend in the manufacturing of the elements. This can be possible by 
developing tests that can clarify and document the durability and strength of the elements. 
Concrete is a long-lasting construction material, that is resistant to many environmental factors 
compared to other materials. However, the durability of concrete can vary significantly due to 
the quality of the materials used in the production and the mixing proportions.  
There are three main deterioration types of concrete. Mechanical attacks, chemical attacks, and 
electrochemical attacks. The mechanical attacks will typically result in cracking and spalling of 
the concrete. The chemical attacks are caused by chemicals getting inside the concrete, but it 
can also come from chemicals within the concrete mix. Dependent of the chemical, the concrete 
will crack, spall, lose strength, lowering the pH and decompose passivating layers around the 
reinforcement which then will lead to corrosion. Electrochemical attacks are corrosion of the 
reinforcement. [3]  
All the deterioration types are correlated. When the concrete is cracked, it is a lot easier for the 
chemicals to enter the concrete. When chemicals have entered the concrete, corrosion process 
of the reinforcement will initiate.  
There are many factors to consider when estimating the durability of concrete. The strength of 
the concrete, the condition of the reinforcement, the concentration of chemicals and the 
accessibility for the chemicals to move in the concrete.  
==PAGE:8==
 
2 
 
A variety of Non-Destructive Testing (NDT) methods have been developed for evaluating the 
properties of concrete. These methods are useful for maintenance without compromising the 
integrity of the structure. 
Many of these methods utilizes different types of waves. Ultrasonic pulse velocity and impact-
echo are commonly used to assess the strength of concrete. Evaluating the reinforcement 
inside the concrete element can be more complex, but it is equally important to evaluate the 
corrosion process of the reinforcement as evaluating the strength of the concrete. 
The method of measuring electrical resistivity (ER) of concrete is claimed to be able to assess 
the state of corrosion in the reinforcement. [4] 
With different NDT methods confirmed to estimate the durability of the concrete elements the 
possibility of direct reuse is closer to become a reality. By inspecting and testing concrete 
elements in old structures, the elements can be disassembled and reused in a new structure, 
thus creating a circular economy.  
 
Figure 1.1: Inspecting and testing concrete elements which then can be used in a new construction. 
1.1 Objectives and scope 
This thesis will explore the electrical resistivity of concrete by using the Wenner method on four 
cylindrical concrete specimens. The specimens will be exposed to different concentrations of 
sodium chloride (NaCl), temperature change and a chloride migration test. To confirm the 
content of chlorides a titration will take place. 
- 
Which properties can affect the ER of concrete? 
- 
How does ER relate to estimating the durability of concrete? 
- 
Is it possible to estimate the depth of chloride ingress, in concrete, using ER? 
 
 
==PAGE:9==
 
3 
 
2 THEORY 
Durability of concrete is the concrete’s ability to resist degrading influences over time. A high 
durability equals a high lifetime of the concrete. To be able to predict the lifetime of the concrete 
its crucial to understand the degrading influences.  
There are three main deterioration types of concrete. Mechanical attacks, chemical attacks, and 
electrochemical attacks. These attacks will lead to cracking, spalling, loss of strength, lowering 
the pH of the concrete and corrosion of the reinforcement. [3]  
This chapter covers the description of the corrosion process, and the impact of chlorides 
present in concrete. It also studies into the electrical resistivity and the Wenner method, to 
exploring the correlation between these factors. This should provide an answer to the question 
about how the ER can relate to estimating the durability of concrete and which properties that 
can affect the ER. 
2.1 Corrosion 
Steel reinforcement is used in concrete to increase the tensile strength and the concrete is 
protecting the steel from corrosion. A high alkalinity of the concrete is protecting the steel by a 
passivating layer of the steel surface. The passive layer can be destroyed by carbonation of the 
concrete and by chlorides penetrating the concrete and thereby exposing the reinforcement to 
critical high chloride concentrations. Corrosion initiated by carbonation often leads to spalling of 
the covering layer above the corroded area and is then easy to detect. Whereas corrosion 
initiated by chloride can be more difficult to detect, since it occurs locally and there may not be 
visible signs such as spalling or cracking. [5]  
    
 
Figure 2.1: Left photo, concrete near sea water. Chloride and moisture have access to the reinforcement 
through cover blocks made of plastic.  Right photo, corrosion on steel profiles in concrete deck High 
chloride content in the concrete due to salting of overlying coating and access for moisture.[5]  
 
==PAGE:10==
 
4 
 
 
Figure 2.2: Left photo is a console with a crack caused by corrosion. The concrete is carbonated and 
affected by moisture. Right photo is a column. A combination of high chloride content and carbonated 
concrete. [5] 
  
Figure 2.2 and Figure 2.1 are clearly demonstrating visible corrosion and serve as examples of 
concrete where further inspection is not required. It is obvious that the corrosion has initiated. 
When the passive layer (Fe2O3) around the reinforcement is destroyed, water (H2O) and oxygen 
(O2) can easily get to the reinforcement and initiate corrosion. [6]  
 
Figure 2.3: Corrosion process. [6]  
==PAGE:11==
 
5 
 
Corrosion is an electrochemical process. The rate of the corrosion depends on the electrical 
resistant in the concrete, diffusion of oxygen to the cathode and the relationship between the 
area of anode and cathode. [3]  
It can be difficult to know when a critical amount of chloride has reached the reinforcement and 
initiated the corrosion process, as it is not visible from the surface. When the concrete element 
is unidentified and the depth of the cover layer and placement of the rebars is uncertain, it can 
be located using specialized equipment. 
By using x-ray technology images will be created of the inside of the concrete. This is extremely 
effective and more precise than other methods. But a lot of disadvantages exist with this 
method. It emits harmful radiation and requires access to both sides of the concrete element. 
The need for special precautions to ensure proper safety makes this method very expensive. 
Another way is to use electromagnetic. A covermeter can determine the depth, location, 
orientation, and diameter of the rebar inside the concrete. This method can help locate the 
rebars, however it does not provide information about the corrosion process. [4]  
When considering corrosion of reinforcement, the service life of a concrete structure is split into 
two stages: the initiation stage and the propagation stage. 
 
Figure 2.4: Schematic sketch of steel corrosion sequence in concrete. [7]   
When a concrete element reaches the propagation stage, the reinforcement has begun to 
deteriorate. The corrosion is becoming visible in this stage and there is no longer a desire for 
reusing the concrete element. Whereas concrete elements in the initiation stage are more 
interesting due to their potential for a long lifetime. However, the penetration is not visible, and 
this limits the safety of reusing concrete without knowing the exact penetration depth.  
It will require advanced methods of testing to assess the structural parameters of the concrete 
and the degradation of the reinforcement.  
To be able to estimate the penetration towards the reinforcement the movement and impacts of 
chlorides will be investigated further. 
==PAGE:12==
 
6 
 
2.2 Chloride in concrete  
Concrete elements are exposed to different types of damage depending on their surrounding 
environment. One of the main deteriorations affecting the durability of the concrete is chloride 
induced corrosion. The two main sources of chloride in concrete are from sea water and de-
icing chemicals. This affects mostly bridges and roads. The chloride can also be air borne in 
coastal environments and lead to chloride ingress. Furthermore, chloride can also be found in 
concrete structures, where the concrete had a substantial initial content of chloride. This can be 
due to the quality of the water, the aggregates, and the cement accelerators. It is usually a 
problem for older concrete structures, since there now exist standards [DS/EN 197-1] where a 
limit is set for initial chloride content in the cement, to prevent chloride from these sources. It is 
normally less than 0.03 %, but it can be up to 0.1 %. [8]   
When sodium chloride penetrates a concrete structure, the Na+ and Cl- ions can cause damage 
to the aggregate and reinforcing steel. Na+ leads to alkali reactions and Cl- leads to corrosion of 
the steel and has no effect on the concrete itself. To prevent damage caused by chloride, the 
concrete material must have sufficient density and a thick cover over the rebar without cracks. 
The w/c ratio has a large impact on the chloride ingress. To improve the chloride resistance of 
concrete, it is important to use high-quality cement and aggregate, control the water-cement 
ratio, and follow proper curing practices. Additionally, the use of supplementary cementitious 
materials such as fly ash or slag can help improve the chloride resistance of the concrete. In 
some cases, the use of corrosion inhibitors or other protective coatings can also help improve 
the chloride resistance of the concrete. [8]  
Chloride in concrete can only be transported in an aqueous phase in concrete and, in the 
capillary pores. However, concrete contains aqueous phases even when it is in equilibrium. 
Chloride will always migrate towards areas with lower concentrations, and if there are different 
concentrations of chloride present in concrete, it will be able to be transported. The rate at which 
chloride moves through concrete is important because, with a low transport speed, it will take a 
long time for the chloride to reach the steel reinforcement and cause it to corrode. [8]   
There are some different ways for the chloride to transport in the concrete. By capillary suction, 
diffusion, and some combined effects. [8]  
Diffusion is movement of particles from a high concentration to a lower concentration. The 
volume of moved particles by diffusion depends on the difference of the concentration and the 
diffusion constant.  The diffusion constant is an expression of how quickly the process takes 
place. The constant is dependent on the temperature. The rate is increasing when the 
temperature is increased. Fick's Second Law is a mathematical equation that describes the 
diffusion of a substance through a medium over time. It is an extension of Fick's First Law, 
which describes the rate of diffusion, and is expressed as: 
∂𝑐
∂𝑡= 𝐷0  ∂2𝑐
∂𝑥2   𝑥 
𝐶(𝑥, 𝑡) = 𝐶𝑠  𝑥= 0, 𝑡≥ 𝑡𝑒𝑥 
==PAGE:13==
 
7 
 
𝐶(𝑥, 𝑡𝑒𝑥) = 𝐶𝑖  𝑥> 0, 𝑡= 𝑡𝑒𝑥 
where, 𝐶 is the concentration, 𝐶𝑠 is the surface concentration, 𝐶𝑖 is the initial concentration, 𝐷0 is 
the diffusion coefficient, 𝑥 is the distance to the surface, 𝑡 is the time and 𝑡𝑒𝑥 is the time of the 
first exposure. [8]  
A function for calculating the chloride content in concrete using Fick's Second Law and the error 
function has been set up: [8] 
𝐶(𝑥, 𝑡) = 𝐶𝑖+ (𝐶𝑠−𝐶𝑖)  𝑒𝑟𝑓𝑐(
𝑥
2 √𝐷0 (𝑡−𝑡𝑒𝑥)
) 
 
2.2.1 Chloride migration test 
There exist several standards that describe the chloride migration test of concrete. One of them 
is NT BUILD 492. [9] These standards provide guidelines on the proper procedures for 
conducting a chloride migration test on concrete specimens, including the specimen 
preparation, test setup, and data analysis methods. 
The chloride migration test is a method used to evaluate the resistance of concrete to the 
penetration of chloride ions, which can cause corrosion of the steel rebar within the concrete. By 
using an electric current, results will be produced quickly, since the ions will move faster. 
Electricity can speed up ion migration by providing energy to the ions, which allows them to 
move more quickly through a material. The rapid chloride migration (RCM) involves the 
application of a voltage across two electrodes placed on the surface of the concrete specimen. 
The resistance to the flow of current is measured and used to calculate the chloride ion 
migration coefficient, which is a measure of the concrete's resistance to chloride ion  
penetration. [9]  
𝐷𝑛𝑠𝑠𝑚= 0.0239 ∙(273 + 𝑇) 𝐿
(𝑈−2) 𝑡
(𝑥𝑑−0.0238√(273 + 𝑇) ∙𝐿∙𝑥𝑑
𝑈−2
) 
 
𝐷𝑛𝑠𝑠𝑚 is the non-steady-state migration coefficient [m2/s], 𝑇 is the average value of the initial 
and final temperatures in the anolyte solution [K], 𝐿 is the length of the specimen [m] , 𝑈 is the 
absolute value of the applied voltage [V], 𝑡 is the test duration [s] and 𝑥𝑑 is the average value of 
the penetration depths [m]. 
When a chloride migration test has been performed the specimen should be split axially into two 
pieces and 0.1 M silver nitrate are sprayed on to the freshly split section. Silver nitrate reacts 
with Sodium chloride and form silver chloride (AgCl) and sodium nitrate (NaNO3). Because of 
this reaction the chloride penetration become visible, and the penetration depth can be 
measured. [9]  
 
==PAGE:14==
 
8 
 
 
Figure 2.5: Illustration of the contrast obtained with the application of the colorimetric method to determine 
the depth of penetration of chlorides, using AgNO3. [10]  
 
To confirm the obtained chloride concentration in the specimen a titration of the specimen 
should be conducted. 
 
2.2.2 Titration with potentiometric indication 
Potentiometric indication is a commonly used technique in laboratory analysis and is particularly 
useful for measuring the concentration of ions in a solution.  
In potentiometric indication, the potentiometer is used to measure the potential difference 
between a reference electrode and the indicator electrode, where the indicator electrode is 
immersed in the solution being analyzed. The reference electrode is a standard electrode that 
has a known and stable potential. By measuring the potential difference, the concentration of 
the chemical can be determined. A way to determine the endpoint in a potentiometric titration is 
to create a graph showing the relationship between the cell potential and the volume of titrant. 
The endpoint is typically determined by identifying the midpoint of the steeply rising portion of 
the graph, which is done visually. [11]   
When the endpoint is determined the content of chlorides (Cl-) is then calculated according to 
the formula: 
𝑊𝑒𝑖𝑔ℎ𝑡%𝐶𝑙−= 3.545 ∙ 𝑉∙ 𝑁
𝑚 
 
Where, 𝑉 is the added amount of silver nitrate solution (ml), 𝑁 is the normality of the silver 
nitrate solution and 𝑚 is the weight of the sample [g]. [12]   
 
 
==PAGE:15==
 
9 
 
2.3 Electrical resistivity 
Electrical resistance is a measure of the difficulty that a conductor presents to the flow of electric 
current. The unit is ohm [Ω]. The resistance can be calculated by using Ohm’s law which is a 
basic principle in physics that describes the relationship between electric current, voltage, and 
resistance. It states that the current flowing through a conductor between two points is directly 
proportional to the voltage across the two points, and inversely proportional to the resistance 
between them.  
𝑉= 𝑅∙𝐼 
where 𝑉 is the voltage in volts, 𝐼 is the electric current in amperes, and 𝑅 is the resistance. [13]   
The resistance is dependent on the dimensions of the conductor and a proportional coefficient 
, the resistivity. The unit of the resistivity is ohm-meter [Ω⋅m].  
ρ = R ∙𝐴
𝐿 
where 𝐴 is the cross-sectional area and 𝐿 is the length of the conductor. The electrical resistivity 
of a material is furthermore dependent on a number of factors, including its temperature, 
composition, and the presence of impurities or defects. Some materials, such as metals, have 
low electrical resistivity and are good conductors of electricity. Other materials, such as 
insulators, have high electrical resistivity and are poor conductors of electricity. [13]   
The resistance in a conductor is partly due to the collision of the electrons with vibrations 
moving atoms, partly collisions with impurities in the crystal lattice. The higher the temperature 
is, the more the atoms will vibrate and therefore more frequently collide with each other and be 
slowed on their way. However, the opposite effect is that a higher temperature provides 
increased energy to the electrons. This will cause more electrons to gain enough energy to 
break free from the outer shells. The number of free electrons in the conductor will therefore 
increase, and the current increases. The consequence of this is that resistivity decreases with 
temperature. [13]  
The electrical resistivity of a material can be measured using various techniques e.g., the 
Wenner probe method. 
 
2.3.1 Wenner probe method 
In 1915, Frank Wenner published a paper in the Bulletin of the Bureau of Standards. This paper 
described a method of measuring earth resistivity. The method has later been modified to be 
used on concrete. [14]  
==PAGE:16==
 
10 
 
 
Figure 2.6: Diagram showing arrangement for measuring four-terminal earth resistance by potentiometer-
voltmeter-ammeter method. [15]  
The arrangement is using alternating current to avoid issues due to polarization with direct 
current. [15] Polarization refers to the separation of electrical charge in a material or system, 
resulting in the development of positive and negative poles or regions. polarization can lead to 
the development of high electric fields, which can cause electrical breakdown or damage to the 
circuit.  
The result of the measurement is affected primarily by the resistivity in the area near and 
between the inner electrodes. The resistivity at distances farther away from the inner electrodes, 
beyond the distance between the outer electrodes, has little impact on the result, when the four 
electrodes are evenly spaced. The current flows radially away from the outer electrodes. By 
using electrodes that are placed closer together, it is possible to focus on the resistivity in a 
specific region or layer within the specimen, which can provide information about the resistivity 
at different depths. [15]   
It is important to consider the spacing of the probes, if steel rebars are present, when testing the 
resistivity of concrete, as the conductivity of the steel can impact the results. Proper spacing of 
the probes can help to ensure that the measurement accurately reflects the resistivity of the 
concrete, rather than being influenced by the conductivity of any steel rebars that may be 
present. [16]   
==PAGE:17==
 
11 
 
Proceq SA, is a technology company, who develops and sells NDT instruments. Proceq is now 
part of Screening Eagle Technologies. [17] Proceq has developed a resistivity meter, named 
Resipod. The Resipod uses the Wenner method where four electrodes are placed in a line.  
“The Resipod is designed to measure the electrical resistivity of concrete. A current is applied to 
the two outer probes and the potential difference is measured between the two inner probes. 
The current is carried by ions in the pore liquid. The calculated resistivity depends on the 
spacing of the probes. Resistivity ρ = 2πaV/l [kΩcm]” [16]  
 
Figure 2.7: The Resipod principle. [16]  
The resistivity of concrete decreases when the ionic activity increases. This is due to the flow of 
electric current, which is an electrolytic process. The resistivity of concrete is therefore lower 
when there is a high water-cement ratio, a high degree of saturation of concrete, and a high 
concentration of dissolved salts in the pore solution. CEB-192 (Comite Euro-International du 
Beton) has proposed some values of the measured resistivity which indicates the likely 
corrosion rate. [4]   
Concrete Resistivity [kΩcm] 
Likely Corrosion Rate 
> 20 
Negligible 
10 - 20 
Low 
5 - 10 
High 
< 5 
Very high 
 
Table 2.1: Recommendations Based on Concrete Resistivity to Estimate the Likely Corrosion Rate.[4]  
==PAGE:18==
 
12 
 
2.4 Chapter summary 
Circular economy is a promising approach to a sustainable construction industry that aims to 
reduce waste and promote the reuse of materials. Direct reuse of concrete elements is an 
important aspect of this approach, as it preserves valuable resources. However, when reusing 
the concrete elements, it is essential to be able to test the concrete for any degrading influences 
to understand the extent of the durability of the exact concrete element.  
Corrosion of reinforcement caused by chloride ingress is a significant influence among many 
others. The theory correlates the electrical resistivity of concrete with the ingress of chlorides, 
due to the relationship between ion flow in concrete and electrical resistance.  
When developing standards for testing concrete for direct reuse, it should be considered that 
not all concrete contains chlorides, and thus, not all concrete elements need to be tested for 
chloride content. Additionally, there should be guidelines for determining the visible degree of 
degradation at which a concrete element is no longer suitable for reuse. If signs of corrosion are 
clearly visible, the concrete element should not be considered for direct reuse and time 
spending on testing elements can be saved.  
The interesting and difficult part is to estimate how far the chlorides have penetrated the 
concrete and thus how close they are to the reinforcement.  
The next chapter presents an overview of previous experiments conducted on ER of concrete 
and its relationship to chloride ingress. After reviewing the literature, an experimental section is 
conducted to expand the understanding on the ER of concrete and how it is affected by different 
environmental conditions. 
 
 
 
==PAGE:19==
 
13 
 
3 MATERIALS AND METHODS 
This chapter provides a detailed description of the used literature, the experimental design, and 
the procedures followed during the conduct of the study. The aim is to provide enough 
information for the reader to be able to understand this and evaluate the methods used in the 
study.  
The principals of circular economy, in this thesis, is based on conferences hosted by the 
engineering association in Denmark (IDA) and the Knowledge Center for Circular Economy in 
Construction (VCØB). 
The theory chapter is based on literature from the course 12612 Concrete Technology at DTU. 
Furthermore, an understanding about models for chloride penetration into concrete were 
established from a lecture of chloride ingress arranged by IDA.  
This chapter is divided into two parts with the literature search first and then followed by the 
experimental work. 
3.1 Literature search 
When a new field is investigated it is important to notice previous studies and learn from these. 
Therefore, a literature study has been performed. 
The literature search aims to identify previous experiments conducted on concrete, with a focus 
on chloride ingress and electrical resistance, in order to enhance the understanding in this field 
by expanding these experiments. 
The literature study, in this thesis, is divided into four steps:  
 
Figure 3.1: Literature process 
 
Some criteria were established from the beginning. Such as using DTU Findit as search 
platform to ensure reliable and trustworthy material and to narrow the process down to 
something tangible. Furthermore, only to search for articles and books in English and Danish 
with access online. 
The first step of defining keywords is an iterative process where the goal is to narrow the search 
down to a number of articles that is manageable to read.  
==PAGE:20==
 
14 
 
Search No. Search words  
No. of items 
1 
Concrete / test 
96,662 
2 
Concrete / test / Chloride 
4,544 
3 
Concrete / test / Chloride / resistance 
1,882 
4 
Concrete / test / Chloride / electrical resistance  
394 
5 
Concrete / test / Chloride / electrical resistance / Wenner probe 
6 
6 
Concrete / test / Chloride / electrical resistance / four probe 
2 
7 
Concrete / test / Chloride / electrical resistance / durability 
11 
8 
Concrete / test / Chloride / electrical resistance / nondestructive 
42 
Table 3.1: Search path 
 
The initial keywords selected for this project are "concrete" and "test" as they are crucial to the 
project's focus. Similarly, "chloride" and "electrical resistance" were also chosen as essential 
keywords. 
The fifth search word was adjusted until an adequate number of relevant items were obtained.  
The search was done in September 2022. 
A table were prepared to ease the step of identifying of the purpose and method.  
 
Location of 
the test 
(Lab/On site) 
Specimen 
type 
Known 
Concrete mix 
(yes/no) 
Test 
method 
Standards 
Comments 
Include 
Wenner 
method 
(yes/no) 
 
Table 3.2: Literature review table 
 
Appendix A Error! Reference source not found.contain the table from the literature review 
with comments to each article. The table is used to argument for the selection of the articles. 23 
articles were selected out of the 42. 
The first four columns in Table 3.2 were answered to establish the scope of each article and to 
find out whether an actual experiment was performed. It was important that the articles 
mentioned the Wenner method. However, some of the articles, which did not include this 
method, was still selected due to their conclusion on general ER for concrete. The column 
“standards” include the mentioned standards that relates to the conducted test methods. Some 
of them are later used in the experimental work. 
The objective of this search was to gain an understanding of how ER is used on concrete and, 
specifically, how it provides insight into chloride ingress and corrosion. 
 
 
 
==PAGE:21==
 
15 
 
3.2 Experimental work 
The experimental work was divided into three parts using the same four specimens. The 
specimens were cylindrical concrete specimens with a diameter of 10 cm and a height of 18 cm. 
Exact dimensions of each specimen can be found in Appendix C.  
The first part is described in section 3.2.1 and is an investigation of the effect of NaCl on ER and 
the temperature effect. The four specimen were saturated in different concentrations of NaCl. 
The second part described in 3.2.2 is an investigation of the ER during a chloride migration test 
(CMT). The same specimen were used, which now contained a different initial chloride 
concentration, but migrated with the same NaCl concentration. The third part in section 3.2.3 is 
a determination of the chloride conctent using silver nitrate and titration. 
 
Figure 3.2: Process of the experimental work 
The results from these experiments are providing answers to the question regarding the 
possibility of estimating the corrosion potential using ER. This is examined by maintaining a 
constant moisture level and different environmental conditions as well as assessing the 
accuracy of the measurements obtained using the Wenner method. The results are the 
observed variations in the obtained measurements. 
All four specimens were casted with the same mix proportions. A high w/c ratio was chosen due 
to fact that the strength was not a priority and to ensure a quicker penetration of chlorides. 
Sea Stone  
8-16 
[kg/m3] 
Sea Stone  
4-8 
[kg/m3] 
Sand 0-
4 
[kg/m3] 
Cement 
[kg/m3] 
Water 
[kg/m3] 
W/C 
 
600 
380 
850 
310 
183 
0.59 
 
Table 3.3: Mix proportions of casted specimens 
 
==PAGE:22==
 
16 
 
3.2.1 Effect of varying concentrations of NaCl on Electrical Resistivity  
The four specimens were tested with the Resipod from Proceq. The Resipod is a Wenner probe 
four points designed to measure the electrical resistivity of concrete. The Wenner method is 
described in the theory section 2.3.1. 
Preparation of the specimens was done as described in the standard AASHTO T 358-15 figure 
4, with test position marks, and the measure procedure was followed from step 10.3 to 10.9.[18] 
The specimens were measured six times with the Resipod. The mass of the specimens was 
also weighed so the degree of saturation could be calculated. 
 
Figure 3.3: Process experiment showing five steps. 1. specimens are prepared with test marks. 2. 
specimens are dried in an oven. 3. specimens are vacuum saturated in their respective NaCl solution. 4. 
specimens are stored in a bucket with their respective NaCl solution. 5. specimens are being cooled in a 
fridge, measured, and then frozen in a freezer and measured. 
==PAGE:23==
 
17 
 
The specimens were vacuum saturated with their respective NaCl concentrations. The solution 
of specimen 1 was plain tap water, whereas the solution of specimens 2,3 and 4 were distilled 
water mixed with NaCl. the pH-value and conductivity of the solution was measured. 
 
 
M NaCl 
pH value 
Conductivity 
[mS/cm] 
Specimen 1 
0 
7.75 
0.71 
Specimen 2 
0.01 
8.06 
1.09 
Specimen 3 
0.05 
7.70 
5.59 
Specimen 4 
0.10 
6.66 
10.83 
 
Table 3.4: Values for solutions of each specimen 
To determine the amount of liquid needed to cover the specimens, the volume of the vacuum 
desiccator was measured and used to calculate the necessary amount of liquid. Based on this 
calculation, it was determined that 5 L would be sufficient.  
As illustrated in Figure 3.3. the test procedure was carried out according to the following steps. 
The duration of the steps was estimated with assistance of the laboratory coordinator. 
1. The preparation of the specimen included drawing position marks on each specimen to 
contain a consistent measure position regarding the ER. 
2. The drying in the oven insured to evaporate water, thus the specimen could absorb the 
saline solution in the desiccator.  
3. The specimen was placed individually into a desiccator. A pump was connected to a 
valve on the desiccator to remove the air inside, which creates the vacuum inside the 
desiccator. The use of the desiccator is an effective way to dry the specimens by 
creating a dry, moisture-free environment that prevents moisture from getting into 
contact with the specimens.  
The pump was turned off after six hours, the solution was added and still preserving the 
==PAGE:24==
 
18 
 
vacuum inside for 24 hours. The vacuum is used to accelerate the process of the 
concrete specimen absorbing the solution. After the specimen had soaked for 24 hours, 
the valve of the desiccator was opened to get air inside. After 24 hours the specimen 
was let out of the desiccator where it was weighted and measured. 
4. The specimen was stored in a bucket covered with their solution from the desiccator. 
They were stored until the next step could be began. 
5. The specimen was first cooled to 5°C and measured. Then the specimen was frozen to -
18°C then weighted and measured. The time duration of freezing was shorter due to the 
cooling of the specimens before. 
The results from this experiment are the observed variations in the obtained measurements. 
Variations occurred due to the NaCl concentration and temperature change. 
After all four specimens had been exposed to the first experiment, another experiment involving 
the same four specimens could be conducted. 
 
3.2.2 Chloride migration test 
The specimens were exposed to a non-steady-state chloride migration test (CMT). Only two 
specimens were tested simultaneously. The first two specimens were specimen 1 and 2. When 
the test setup was prepared the specimens were tested for 10 days and measured almost each 
day. After learning from the first test specimen 3 and 4 was tested. By learning from the 
measures with specimen 1 and 2 and extra measure was done on specimen 3 and 4 the day of 
the test setup. The initial chloride content differed of each specimen due to the first part of 
experimental work. 
 
Figure 3.4: Test setup for the chloride migration test 
==PAGE:25==
 
19 
 
The experiment was based on an earlier experiment from another Master Thesis. [14] In their 
experiment the chloride migrated about 14 cm when exposed to the chloride migration test for 
10 days. The specimens were then tested for 10 days to make sure that the chloride would 
migrate more than half the length.  
For the catholyte solution a mixture of 10 g NaCl with 500 ml tap water was used. The anolyte 
solution was a mixture of 0.01 M of Sodium nitrate (NaNO3) and 500 ml de-ionized water. 2.25 g 
Aragonite (CaCO3) was furthermore added to the anolyte solution, to preserve the pH-value. 
200 ml anolyte solution was added halfway in the experiment, due to a reduction of the anolyte 
in the glass container. 
To improve the seal between the catholyte and anolyte reservoirs, a layer of silicone was 
applied. Additionally, foam tape was applied to the surface of the reservoirs to prevent any leaks 
at the connection between the reservoirs and concrete. The current was set to 15 mA and a 
direct current (DC) was used. During the 10 days of the chloride migration test each specimen 
were tested with the Resipod regularly and the current, voltage and temperature of the anolyte 
solution was recorded. When the surface resistivity was tested the current was turned off. 
To test the concrete using the Resipod, four holes were cut in the wrapping of the specimens at 
the mark of 0° and 90° to allow the probes to make direct contact with the concrete. This was 
done while still preventing the specimens from drying out, with another piece of wrapping 
covering the holes when not being tested. Two readings from the 0° mark and two readings 
from the 90° mark were measured and the average was calculated.  
 
Figure 3.5: Wrapping and testing of specimen 
All the specimens had been individually wrapped and then stored at 5 °C after the first 
experiment. Then, before the chloride migration test, all the specimens were gathered in an 
empty bucket. All specimens were in the bucket for about 6 hours before specimen 1 and 2 was 
tested. Specimen 3 and 4 were placed in buckets with their respective solution from the first 
experiment and stored until they were scheduled to be tested (approximately two weeks). 
==PAGE:26==
 
20 
 
 
Figure 3.6: Diagram of chloride migration test. Concrete specimen exposed to DC. 
When the 10 days had passed the test setup was taken down and each specimen were cut in 
half. One half of the specimens were sprayed with 0.1 M silver nitrate solution on to the freshly 
split section. The penetration depth could then be measured after some time. The other half of 
the specimens were cut into 10 slices, dried in the oven at 105 °C for 24 hours and then 
crushed to powder. The specimens were 18 cm in length. By cutting it into 10 slices, each slice 
would be approximately 1.5 cm due to the thickness of the saw. Starting at slice 1 from the 
surface exposed to chlorides. 
The results, are the observed trend of the measurements, combined with the titration results.  
 
Figure 3.7: Splitting, spraying, and crushing of specimens 
By crushing the slices to powder the concentration of chlorides could be determined by titration. 
Only three slices form each specimen were crushed into powder and titrated. 
==PAGE:27==
 
21 
 
3.2.3 Titration 
The titration process was following a method from a DTU course 11569 – Durability and repair 
of concrete structures (August 2021). 
Steps for the preparation of titration: 
1. Place 5 g of the sample in glass bottle (1) 
2. Add 20 ml de-ionised water and shake the bottle to achieve separation of the particles 
3. Add 10 ml of concentrated nitric acid with dispenser and shake the bottle  
4. Add 50 ml hot de-ionised water and shake the bottle 
5. Let the mixture cool 
6. Add 1 ml of nitric acid. If gas evolution is observed, add more acid 
7. Weigh the glass bottle (2) 
8. Filter the solution in glass bottle (1) into glass bottle (2). Rinse filter with 0.1N nitric acid 
9. Add de-ionised water to a total volume of 150 ml. 
10. Start blank test. 150 ml de-ionised water with 1 ml 0.1 N nitric acid and 1 ml N NaCl. 
The titration was done with the 888 Titrando from Metrohm and using Tiamo. 2.5 software. 
Before the actual titration of the samples could take place, a calibration was done, using blank 
test, to secure proper results. The blank test consisted of 150 ml de-ionised water with 1 ml 0.1 
N nitric acid and 1 ml 0.1 N NaCl. The number of blank tests performed was dependent until the 
test was similar down to the 2. decimal. Due to the time duration, of the titration, specimen 1 
were tested one day and specimen 2, 3 and 4 were tested another day. This leads to the 
necessary of performing blanktest twice. Reports from the titration can be found in Appendix E. 
Double titration on the samples was performed. Only 3 slices of each specimen were titrated. 
Slice 1, 6 and 10. Starting at slice 1 from the surface exposed to chlorides. 
 
Figure 3.8: Titration 
==PAGE:28==
 
22 
 
4 RESULTS AND DISCUSSION 
This chapter presents the results of the literature search and experimental tests, along with a 
discussion of the findings.  
4.1 Literature review 
The literature review shows that a numerous test using the Wenner method has been performed 
on various types of concrete mixes to examine the impact of different cements, w/c ratio, 
aggregates, and supplementary cementing materials.  
The following table presents conclusions from the selected literature that are relevant to the 
topic of this thesis. These conclusions were drawn from the articles included in the literature 
search. 
Reference 
Conclusion 
Khaksefidi S. 
year 2022 - [19]  
- 
Electrical resistivity (ER) increased with age (curing). 
- 
Effect of NaCl reduced the growth rate over time of ER.   
- 
Pore solution conductivity’s effect on ER will increase over time. 
Baten B. 
Manzur T. 
year 2022 - [20]  
- 
ER change due to variations in cementitious materials and w/c 
ratio. 
- 
The way that the electrical resistivity of concrete changes based on 
the mix parameters and types of binders used is the same as the 
way the formation factor changes. This means that the formation 
factor can be used to accurately understand the micro-structure 
and properties of the concrete. 
Balestra C. 
Reichert T. 
Savaris G. 
year 2021 - [21] 
- 
ER is largely influenced by the porous microstructure and the 
degree of pore saturation. Factors that affect these properties 
include the w/c ratio and cement consumption, which control 
porosity, as well as temperature and relative humidity, which 
affect pore saturation. 
- 
The Wenner method can be used in field analysis but provides 
superﬁcial analysis of the ER and is affected by the presence of 
reinforcement. 
- 
Simple measurement with easily interpretable results that are 
well-documented in the literature, however a significant amount of 
testing is needed to effectively evaluate the durability of concrete 
structures. 
==PAGE:29==
 
23 
 
Frenzer G. 
year 2021 - [22] 
- 
ER showed no relation with the other durability characteristics, 
measured in situ or in the laboratory. However, if practical 
measures had been taken to compensate for external influences 
(e.g. testing at similar temperatures, saturating the concrete 
before testing, avoiding neighboring steel bars), the results may 
have been different. 
Konečný P. 
year 2021 - [23] 
- 
Diffusion coefficients calculated from indirect ER are systematically 
higher than those based on chloride profiles. The estimates based 
on ER show very little variability, while in situ measurements 
exhibit much higher variability and are higher than what is typically 
reported in the literature. 
Astuti P. 
year 2021 - [24] 
- 
Electrochemical tests, applied on an old damaged RC structure 
exposed to the marine tidal environment, including half-cell 
potential mapping, the ER of concrete, and corrosion rate, were in 
good agreement with the actual deterioration assessment using 
visual observation. 
Arreola-Sanchez 
M. 
year 2021 - [25] 
- 
Determine a suitable chloride diffusion coefﬁcient with ER being 
the property that best validates the prediction models.  
- 
ER can be altered by aggregate rates, moisture content, cement 
content, type of cement and chloride and sulfate content.  
Rodrigues R. 
year 2021 - [26] 
- 
Several electrical methods techniques exist for determining 
corrosion potential, concrete resistivity, and polarization 
resistance, which are used to assess the corrosion rate of steel. The 
half-cell potential technique must be used only to locate areas with 
a high corrosion risk as it does not permit a quantitative diagnosis 
of corrosion rate. Likewise, concrete resistivity is not directly 
related to the corrosion rate of steel. However, it is a good 
indicator of concrete durability in terms of water content and ion 
diffusivity. 
- 
Assessment of the corrosion rate of steel in concrete with ER: 
Fast measurement, provide insights on concrete durability, can 
identify the main defect points with high corrosion risk. 
- 
Presence of rebar affects the measurement of ER as a distortion of 
the current ﬁeld. 
- 
Corrosion rate is assumed to be inversely proportional to concrete 
resistivity. 
==PAGE:30==
 
24 
 
- 
The degree of pore water saturation is influencing the resistivity. 
An increase in water content leads to a decrease in concrete 
resistivity and an increase in corrosion rate 
- 
No general correlation between concrete resistivity and corrosion 
rate could be determined 
Torrent R. 
year 2021 - [27] 
- 
When using the Wenner method, care should be taken to apply 
the right geometric factor for the test configuration. 
- 
ER has a close relation with the chloride diffusion coefficient. 
However, the accuracy of the prediction depends on the saturation 
level of the concrete and a method for ensuring a high degree of 
saturation should be developed. 
Wang W. 
year 2021 - [28] 
- 
Fly ash, decrease compressive strength, increase surface resistivity 
and the rate of accelerated chloride corrosion decreased. 
Wang Y. 
year 2020 - [29] 
- 
Concrete resistivity is sensitive to a number of factors, such as the 
mix proportion, type of binder, temperature, relative humidity, 
and specimen geometry. To account for these factors and reflect 
the change in concrete resistivity due to steel bar corrosion, a 
normalized concrete resistivity is proposed. 
Mendes A. 
year 2019 - [30] 
- 
Large reduction in ER after first day attributed to the chloride 
solution. 
- 
During the accelerated corrosion test, even with the visual increase 
of the corrosion degree, it was found that the ER tended to 
decrease over time, but this reduction was non-significant 
- 
A direct correlation between the degree of corrosion and the ER 
could not be made. 
- 
The presence of reinforcement led to a reduction in the ER, and 
the level of carbonation interfered in the intensity of this effect 
- 
The longer the exposure in the carbonation chamber, the greater 
the ER of the concrete, and this is related to the pore refinement 
due to the carbonation reaction 
Wutke M. 
year 2018 - [31] 
- 
As it was expected, with decreasing of the saturation degree it is 
observed increasing of dielectric resistivity. 
Measure of concrete resistivity which has lower degree of 
saturation could be more difficult, on the one hand, because of 
high resistivity and limitation of resistivity meter and on the other 
==PAGE:31==
 
25 
 
because of not good electrical contact between electrodes and 
concrete surface. 
FM5 578 
2004 - [32] 
- 
A laboratory test method measures the electrical resistivity of 
water-saturated concrete and provides an indication of its 
permeability. 
Ghosh P. 
year 2015 - [33] 
- 
Both bulk and surface electrical resistivity are well correlated for 
different types of HPC and control mixtures over longer period of 
time (7 to 161 days). 
Ghosh P. 
year 2015 - [34] 
- 
This research demonstrates the inﬂuence of several parameters 
namely probe spacing, specimen size on electrical resistivity for 
several ternary based cementitious mixtures over extended period 
of time. 
- 
While the standard error of SR appears to increase over time, it is 
still signiﬁcantly small compared to the average SR. This feature 
indicates the reliability and conﬁdence of using SR as indirect 
measure of short-term and long-term durability. 
- 
It focus on the role of silica fume and metakaolin as a second 
supplementary cementitious material in ternary mixtures 
Lecieux Y. 
year 2015 - [35] 
- 
Free ions are detectable using resistivity measurement. 
- 
The resistivity increases when time of hydration increase. 
- 
The resistivity decreases when the amount of free chloride content 
increase. 
Andade C. 
year 2014 - [36] 
- 
The concrete resistivity is related to the reinforcement corrosion 
and seems very appropriate to represent concrete resistance 
against chloride ingress. However, the resistivity only informs on 
the available space in the solid material (and when non-saturated 
of the drying level). Due to the reaction of the chlorides with the 
cement phases, it is necessary to consider a term representing the 
retardation of penetration due to the chloride reaction or binding 
with cement phases. 
- 
When chloride ions entry in contact with cement phases they react 
mainly with the aluminates to form monochloroaluminate or 
Friedel salt. Also it seems that the chlorides are adsorbed on the 
CSH gel. Then, a certain proportion of the chlorides that diffuse 
into concrete are bound to the cement phases. 
==PAGE:32==
 
26 
 
Du Plooy R 
year 2013 - [37] 
- 
A multi-electrode resistivity probe is presented with which surface 
measurements can be made on concrete elements of arbitrary 
geometry. 
Sengul O. 
year 2012 - [38] 
- 
ER can be useful for quality control, but it is important to ensure 
that conditions such as moisture content and temperature are 
consistent across all samples. Additionally, factors like the 
water/cement ratio, binder type, and aggregate properties can 
significantly affect resistivity, so care should be taken when 
comparing the resistivity of different types of concrete. 
- 
It is possible to calculate the diffusivity of the concrete by 
measuring the resistivity 
Sbartaï, Z. M. 
year 2007 - [39] 
- 
Laboratory tests showed that ER were strongly affected by the 
water and chloride contents of the concrete. 
- 
On-site tests carried out on a reinforced concrete slab confirmed 
the correlation observed in the laboratory between two methods. 
- 
increase in NaCl concentration, decrease in ER. 
Polder R. 
year 2001 - [40] 
- 
The resistivity can be related to corrosion and protection of steel 
reinforcement. In general, a low resistivity is related to a high risk 
of corrosion. Resistivity mapping will show the most permeable 
spots within a structure, where chloride penetration may be 
quickest and to corrosion rates (after depassivation has taken 
place) may be highest. 
- 
DC is not recommended because it may involve errors due to 
electrode polarization. 
- 
From laboratory work, it appears that the temperature effect may 
vary with moisture content, with 3% for saturated and 5% for dry 
concrete for each degree K temperature change.  
Ip A. 
year 1998 - [41] 
 
Wenner method can be used to determine the moisture content in 
concrete. 
 
Table 4.1: Conclusions from literature 
 
 
==PAGE:33==
 
27 
 
4.1.1 Insights from the literature on electrical resistivity of concrete 
Based on the information provided in the selected literature it seems that electrical resistivity 
(ER) is a property that can be used to assess the durability of concrete, by predicting the 
corrosion rate. However, it also seems that there is no general correlation between ER and 
corrosion rate, and the accuracy of prediction depends on the saturation level of the concrete. 
ER is influenced by various factors including the type and amount of cementitious materials, w/c 
ratio, temperature, relative humidity, and the pore structure and pores saturation. It is 
furthermore demonstrated that the amount of NaCl influences the resistivity. The resistivity 
decreases when the amount of NaCl is increased. It is furthermore discovered that the resistivity 
of concrete is affected by temperature changes. For saturated concrete, one degree change in 
temperature will result in a 3% change in resistivity, while dry concrete will experience a 5% 
change in resistivity for every degree change. It is then important to take temperature into 
account when measuring the ER. 
The Wenner method is an effective method to measure the ER, but it is affected by the 
presence of reinforcement. That is why it is important to consider the placement of the probes 
before using the Wenner method to measure ER. The depth of the concrete cover and direction 
of the reinforcement should be known. The measured resistivity decreases when the measure is 
influenced by the steel reinforcement. This is due to a much higher conductivity of the steel than 
of the concrete, and the current wants to take the easiest way.  
By developing a normalized concrete resistivity equal to the concrete resistivity of reinforced 
concrete divided with the concrete resistivity of the plain concrete, having the same concrete 
mix proportion, the effect of the steel reinforcement can be taking into account. However, this 
method would not be practical for use in the field, when testing a concrete element where the 
mix proportion is unknown.  
It is essential to develop a method for measuring the ER of reinforced concrete, as the vast 
majority of concrete contains reinforcement and the purpose of testing the ER of the concrete is 
to predict the corrosion rate in the reinforcement. 
The half-cell potential test is a method used for measuring the corrosion potential of a metal in a 
specific environment. It involves a reference electrode and an electrode connected to the metal 
and then the voltage difference is measured. This result can then be used to determine the 
corrosion potential of the metal. When using this method on reinforced concrete it is then 
necessary to drill a hole in the concrete, that is big enough so the electrode can be connected to 
the reinforcement. This is a known method that have been used several decades ago. One of 
the articles compared this method to the Wenner method and found that both results were in 
good agreement with the actual deterioration degree checked by defective appearance.  
There have also been experiments with both the bulk resistivity test method and surface 
resistivity and a correlation has been found. A difference between these two methods, is that 
bulk resistivity is determined by the conductivity of the material and its size and shape, while 
surface resistivity is determined by the conductivity of the material and the surface conditions, 
such as roughness and cleanliness. By knowing that others have conducted experiments with 
==PAGE:34==
 
28 
 
the Wenner method and compared it to other methods, helps to understand the reliability of the 
test. 
The ER can be used to calculate the diffusions coefficient. The diffusion coefficient can be 
determined by analyzing the movement of ions through a material and the relationship between 
their concentration and the applied electric field. In general, materials with high ER tend to have 
low diffusion coefficients, while materials with low ER tend to have high diffusion coefficients. 
A substance can more easily flow through materials with low resistance, leading to a higher rate 
of diffusion. 
It is not only the ingress of chlorides that leads to corrosion. Amongst other influences is 
carbonation. Carbonation is the process where carbon dioxide gas (CO2) is absorbed into the 
concrete. CO2 reacts with the calcium hydroxide in the concrete to form calcium carbonate and 
this can lead to a decrease of the pH of the concrete which then leads to corrosion. 
The literature showed that the longer exposure time in the carbonation chamber, the greater the 
ER of the concrete, and this is related to the pore refinement due to the carbonation reaction. 
The continuous carbonation of concrete leads to an increase in ER, which helps to prevent the 
ingress of chlorides. The carbonation of concrete will then result in both positive and negative 
changes to the concrete's properties. Based on this conclusion, it is unclear whether 
carbonation has any effect on the penetration of chlorides into concrete. If the chlorides have 
already penetrated the concrete and reached the reinforcement, an increase in electrical 
resistance due to carbonation would be ineffective because the corrosion process has already 
begun. In addition, carbonation, which lowers the pH of the concrete, will worsen the corrosion. 
 
Highlights from the literature regarding ER: 
- 
ER decrease when amount of NaCl increase. 
- 
ER is affected by moist condition. 
- 
ER is affected by temperature and varies with the moisture content 
- 
ER is decreased when measure is interred by reinforcement 
- 
ER increase due to carbonation 
- 
ER is affected by the concretes mix proportions and SCM  
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:35==
 
29 
 
Table 4.2 lists some relevant standards from the literature that could be useful for the 
experimental work. 
Standard 
Description 
AASHTO T358-15 
year 2015 - [18]   
 
Test for Surface Resistivity Indication of Concrete’s Ability to Resist 
Chloride Ion Penetration. 
American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials  
FM5 578 
year 2004 - [32]  
 
A laboratory test method measures the ER of water-saturated 
concrete and provides an indication of its permeability. 
Florida Method of Test 
NT BUILD 492 
year 1999 - [9] 
Chloride migration coefficient from non-steady-state migration 
experiments 
Nordtest method 
ASTM C 1202-12 
year 2012 - [42]   
 
Test Method for Electrical Indication of Concrete’s Ability to Resist 
Chloride Ion Penetration 
American Society for Testing Materials 
AASHTO TP-95 
year 2011 - [43]    
Test for Surface Resistivity Indication of Concrete’s Ability to Resist 
Chloride Ion Penetration 
 
Table 4.2: Standards used in the literature related to resistivity and chloride in concrete 
 
It was discovered through the literature search that the Wenner method was first mentioned as 
a method for testing moisture content in concrete in 1998. Further research in 2001 revealed 
that the resistivity is linked to corrosion of steel reinforcement in concrete, and that concrete 
temperature has an impact on the resistivity of concrete. In 2007, it was discovered that the 
concentration of NaCl decreases the resistivity of concrete.  
Table 4.2 with the standards, shows that the Wenner method was used to test the resistivity of 
concrete as early as 2004 in the standard FM5 578. Around ten years later the American 
Association of State Highway, published a similar standard AASHTO T358-15, containing more 
information. Most of the procedure, of this standard, was followed in this project when 
measuring the surface resistivity.  
It is obvious that a lot of experimental work has been conducted to test the use of the Wenner 
method and the correlation between chloride ingress and resistivity. The resistivity has been 
measured after the concrete has been exposed to chloride migration and this have resulted in a 
decrease in the resistivity. But from the literature review, it appears that none of the studies 
have conducted experiments where both chloride migration and surface resistivity has been 
measured simultaneously. 
The experimental work in this thesis will examine how concrete responds to various 
concentrations of NaCl, temperature effect and how the ER changes during the movement of 
==PAGE:36==
 
30 
 
chlorides through the concrete. The ER will be measured simultaneously with a rapid chloride 
migration test. 
The results of these experiments are expected to provide an insight into movement of chlorides 
combined with ER, and furthermore allow for an estimation of the penetration depth of chlorides. 
The propagation stage can be predicted, by calculating the time for chlorides to reach the 
reinforcement, by estimating the penetration depth. By determining the remaining time before 
corrosion occurs, the durability can be estimated, and a decision regarding to reuse the 
concrete elements can be done. 
4.2 Experimental work 
The experimental work was divided into three parts but with the same four specimens. The 
specimens were all casted with the same mix proportions. The only difference of the specimens 
was the initial chloride concentration from the first experiment 3.2.1. 
Subscripts has been added to distinguish between the different stages. 
Subscript 
Stage 
OD 
Oven dried 
BV 
*Before vacuum 
VS 
Vacuum saturated 
SB 
Saturated in bucket 
5 
Cooled to 5 °C 
-18 
Frozen to -18 °C 
CM 
After Chloride Migration test 
BCM 
Before Chloride Migration test 
 
Table 4.3: Subscript definition 
*All the specimens were oven dried at the same time but vacuum saturated at different times.  
 
4.2.1 Effect of varying concentrations of NaCl on Electrical Resistivity  
The masses of the specimens were noted after each stage and appears in Appendix C.  
It is notable that the difference in MBV – MOD is increasing from specimen 1 and up. This is due to 
the different time duration for each specimen, since they were oven dried at the same time but 
vacuum saturated at different times.  
All the specimens absorbed approximately 200 g of liquid when going from dried condition to 
vacuum saturated condition. The percentage of absorbed liquid is then calculated as: 
𝑀𝑉𝑆−𝑀𝑂𝐷
𝑀𝑂𝐷
 
==PAGE:37==
 
31 
 
The percentage is about 6% for all the specimens. Figure 4.1 shows the increase of absorbed 
liquid from the oven dried stage to the vacuum saturated stage. Notice that the y-axis starts at 
3000 to emphasize the difference.  
 
 
Figure 4.1: Comparison of masses from oven dried state to vacuum saturated state. 
 
The surface resistivity was measured after each stage, Figure 3.3. But it was only after the 
stages VS, SB and 5 where it was possible to get stabile readings. The values in the table 
below are averages of the readings. Eight readings with the Resipod were done on each 
specimen. The standard deviation was calculated to determine the deviation of each measure 
point. The data set, from the VS stage, had the lowest deviation, whereas the data set of stage  
-18 had very high deviations. The measurements and calculations can be found in Appendix C.  
Specimen 
SRVS 
SRSB 
SR5 
1 
11.0 
11.4 
15.7 
2 
11.0 
11.2 
15.9 
3 
10.0 
10.4 
14.7 
4 
8.3 
9.0 
12.9 
 
Table 4.4: Average Surface Resistivity from measurements [kΩ-cm]. _VS is vacuum saturated. _SB is 
saturated in bucket. _5 is cooled at 5 °C. 
The specimens were stored in their respective liquid for a few days after being vacuum 
saturated. This resulted in a slightly increase in the resistivity. 
3266.4
3227.4
3228.5
3215.5
6.4%
6.2%
6.3%
6.4%
3476
3426.1
3433.3
3419.9
3000
3050
3100
3150
3200
3250
3300
3350
3400
3450
3500
1
2
3
4
Mass [g]
Specimen
MASS & DEGREE OF ABSORBED LIQUID
Oven dried
Vacuum saturated
==PAGE:38==
 
32 
 
The VS and SB stage were measured at 25 °C. In the following figure are the average readings 
from the VS stage and the cooling stage at 5 °C compared. 
 
 
Figure 4.2: Comparison of Surface Resistivity at 25 °C and 5 °C [kΩ-cm] 
 
The results shows that the resistivity is influenced by the concentration of NaCl and the 
temperature. This is consistent with the literature. When the NaCl concentration increases the 
resistivity decreases. This can be due to the ions in the solution acting as a conductor, where 
the electrical current can flow more easily through the concrete. This is related to the measured 
conductivity of the solutions in Table 3.4 where the conductivity increases as the concentration 
of NaCl in the solution increases. 
The temperature effect has been discussed in the theory chapter, and it showed that the 
temperature could both make the resistivity go up and down depending on the atoms and 
number of free electrons. However, the literature review showed that a temperature decrease 
lead to an increase in the resistivity. This relate to this experiment where the resistivity has 
increased with the temperature being decreased.  
The literature furthermore stated that a saturated specimen’s resistivity would change with 3 % 
for each degree temperature change. An estimation of the surface resistivity is then calculated 
by adding 60 % which relates to a temperature change of 20 °C. The 60 % were added to the 
measured SR at 25 °C. 
 
 
 
11.0
11.0
10.0
8.3
4.7
4.9
4.7
4.6
15.7
15.9
14.7
12.9
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
1
2
3
4
SR [kΩ-cm]
Specimen
SURFACE RESISTIVITY AT 25°C & 5°C 
25°C
5°C
==PAGE:39==
 
33 
 
 
Specimen 
Estimated SR 
[kΩ-cm] 
Measured SR 
[kΩ-cm] 
Measured SR 
change [%] 
1 
17.6 
15.7 
42 
2 
17.6 
15.9 
45 
3 
16.1 
14.7 
46 
4 
13.3 
12.9 
55 
 
Table 4.5: Estimated SR compared with the measured SR 
 
None of the specimens are following the expected trend. The SR of specimen 1, 2 and 3 are 
changing approx. 2.2 % for each degree temperature change. Whereas specimen 4 actual got 
closer with 2.8 %.  
From the literature it would seem, that specimen 4 reached a lower temperature than the other 
specimens. However, since all the specimens have been exposed to the same cooling 
conditions, it must be reasonable to assume same temperature of all the specimens. Then the 
literature does not complement the observed phenomenon in this experiment.  
The temperature of the specimens was not measured, however, the temperature of the air 
surrounding the specimens was. This is an uncertainty, due to the importance of the concrete 
temperature. To know more about the temperature change, a thermometer should have been 
casted into the specimens. 
Despite knowing the exact temperature, specimen 4 still reaches a higher resistivity change. 
This is assumed to be due to a higher concentration of salt since this is the only varying factor. 
The results from the frozen specimens were unstable and a steady measure wasn’t possible. All 
the readings started at approx. 1500-1900 kΩ-cm and kept decreasing for many minutes. The 
measurements were done outside the freezer, at 25 °C, this could explain the decreasing. 
Measurements were also done in the beginning at the experiment and after the specimens had 
been dried in the oven. The measurements from the dry specimens were OL “Open line” which 
indicates that there is a bad connection between the probes and the concrete. The 
measurements in the beginning were unstable. Since the resistivity is largely influenced by the 
degree of saturation these results were expected.  
These experiments concludes that the ER of concrete is influenced by the temperature, as the 
temperature decreases, the ER increases. Furthermore, concrete with higher NaCl 
concentrations shows a larger relative difference in ER, compared to concrete with lower 
concentrations. 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:40==
 
34 
 
4.2.2 Chloride migration test 
Each specimen was exposed to a chloride migration test for 10 days. Figure 4.3 shows the 
average of the readings for each specimen. The mark is different from each specimen, so it is 
easier to distinguish between the readings when they are combined in Figure 4.4. 
 
  
 
  
 
Figure 4.3: Measured surface resistivity of specimens exposed to chloride migration test over 10 days    
 
During the chloride migration test, ER of the specimen were tested one time each day. The first 
measure at day 0, were done before turning the power on. After noticing the extreme decrease 
from day 0 to day 1 for specimen 1 and 2, an extra measure was done on specimen 3 and 4, at 
day 0, approximately 3 hours after turning the power on. This measure showed that the 
decrease was early. But it also showed that the ER still decreased until day 1 and first started to 
increase at day 2. 
It was unexpected that the resistivity started to increase. Loss of saturation might explain why 
the resistivity started to increase. 
 
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
SR  kΩ-cm
Days
SPECIMEN 1
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
SR  kΩ-cm
Days
SPECIMEN 2
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
SR  kΩ-cm
Days
SPECIMEN 3
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
SR  kΩ-cm
Days
SPECIMEN 4
==PAGE:41==
 
35 
 
Specimen 
MBCM 
MCM 
1 
- 
3477.1 
2 
- 
3427.7 
3 
3444.5 
3438.3 
4 
3429.8 
3424.6 
 
Table 4.6: Mass of concrete specimen vacuum saturated, before- and after Chloride Migration test 
Specimen 1 and 2 were not weighed right before the chloride migration test. But specimen 3 
and 4 were weighed and both specimens lost about 5.5 g water. The variation in masses is 
minimal and is at first considered to be insufficient to have any impact on the resistivity. 
Both the current and voltage of the chloride migration test were measured while the surface 
resistivity was measured. The resistance was then calculated by using Ohm’s law. 
In Figure 4.4, both the measured surface resistivity and resistance are plotted on the same 
graph. The resistance is on the x-axis and the surface resistivity on the y-axis. A linear curve fit 
has been applied to the data. Note that both the y-axis and x-axis does not start at zero. 
 
Figure 4.4: Surface resistivity and resistance of all specimens 
More data can be found in Appendix D showing all the measurements.  
From the theory it is known that the resistivity could be calculated when knowing the resistance, 
the cross-sectional area and the length. Figure 4.4 shows the relation between resistivity 
measured with the Resipod and the resistance calculated with the voltage and current readings 
from the DC power. When combining all the points into one trendline the coefficient of 
determination is 0.95  
y = 4.8563x - 1.4708
R² = 0.9809
Sample 1
y = 4.0625x - 0.4578
R² = 0.9479
Sample 2
y = 5.5601x - 2.5135
R² = 0.9661
Sample 3
y = 4.0651x - 0.3887
R² = 0.9754
Sample 4 
4.0
4.5
5.0
5.5
6.0
6.5
7.0
7.5
8.0
1.20
1.30
1.40
1.50
1.60
1.70
1.80
1.90
2.00
SR  kΩ-cm
Resistance  kΩ
Surface Resistivity & Resistance
Sample 1
Sample 2
Sample 3
Sample 4
==PAGE:42==
 
36 
 
 
Figure 4.5: Trendline of measured SR and calculated resistance 
The R2 value is considered to be high, and by looking at the graph it is obviously that there is a 
linear context between the resistivity and the resistance. Furthermore, when looking at the data 
in Figure 4.4 each specimen has a higher R2 value individually.  
From these results it can be concluded that that there is a strong correlation between the 
surface resistivity and resistance measurements. 
It is not clear if the surface resistivity can be used to accurately predict the penetration depth of 
chlorides, until further validation has been done, by confirming the penetration depth. 
The measured developing of the resistivity, in the chloride migration test, is furthermore 
discussed in section 4.2.3.1.  
 
4.2.3 Concentration of chlorides 
The concentration of chlorides was determined in two ways.  
4.2.3.1 Silver nitrate 
When the silver nitrate was sprayed onto the concrete, the concrete changed color to brown. 
After 20 min. the silver nitrate should have reacted with the NaCl, and white silver chloride 
precipitation become visible. This can be seen in Figure 4.6. 
y = 4.3503x - 0.7599
R² = 0.9474
4.0
4.5
5.0
5.5
6.0
6.5
7.0
7.5
8.0
1.20
1.30
1.40
1.50
1.60
1.70
1.80
1.90
2.00
SR  kΩ-cm
Resistance  kΩ
Surface Resistivity & Resistance
==PAGE:43==
 
37 
 
 
Figure 4.6: Specimens 20 min. after being sprayed with silver nitrate. Exposure to chlorides from the 
bottom. 
 
  
 
Figure 4.7: Specimens 1 month after being sprayed with silver nitrate. 
The contrast and brightness, of the photos, have been changed 20 % to notice the white silver 
chloride precipitation more clearly.  
After the specimens had been split with the saw, specimen 2 and 3 were carefully rinsed, 
whereas specimen 1 and 2 was not rinsed which clearly can be seen on specimen 2 in the right 
side. This may perhaps be caused by iron ions from the saw. If specimen 1 and 2 also had been 
rinsed after the split, it might have been easier to interpret the silver chloride.  
In Figure 4.7 where the specimens have been stored for a month, inside the laboratory, it was 
clear to see that the chloride had penetrated all the way through the specimen. 
Specimen 1 
 
  Specimen 2  
     Specimen 3 
    Specimen 4 
  Specimen 1  
    Specimen 2  
      Specimen 3 
   Specimen 4 
==PAGE:44==
 
38 
 
In conclusion, interpreting the penetration depth may not always be straightforward, as 
illustrated in Figure 2.5 from the theory chapter. This method shouldn’t stand alone, and there 
for a titration is conducted. 
 
4.2.3.2 Titration 
Each specimen was cut into 10 slices, starting at slice 1 from the surface exposed to the 
chlorides.  
In the following tables are the results from the titration shown. To interpret the chloride content 
in a more illustrative way some graphs are plotted in Figure 4.8. The y-axis is showing the 
chloride content as a percentage of the total mass, and the x-axis are showing the three 
analyzed slices, starting from slice 1. From each slice a double titration was conducted, to verify 
the result. 
Slice No. 
Specimen 1 
Specimen 2 
Mass of  
powder 
[g] 
AgNO3 
[ml] 
Mass of 
chlorides 
Chloride 
content  
Mass of  
powder 
[g] 
AgNO3 
[ml] 
Mass of 
chlorides 
Chloride 
content  
1 
5.02 
0.60 
0.21 
4.21% 
5.01 
0.74 
0.26 
5.21% 
1 
5 
0.59 
0.21 
4.16% 
5.01 
0.75 
0.27 
5.30% 
6 
5 
0.21 
0.07 
1.47% 
5.01 
0.63 
0.22 
4.46% 
6 
5 
0.55 
0.19 
3.90% 
5.02 
0.63 
0.22 
4.47% 
10 
5.02 
0.45 
0.16 
3.19% 
5.01 
0.68 
0.24 
4.83% 
10 
5.02 
0.43 
0.15 
3.05% 
5 
0.71 
0.25 
5.00% 
 
Table 4.7: Titration results of specimen 1 & 2 
Slice No. 
Specimen 3 
Specimen 4 
Mass of  
powder 
[g] 
AgNO3 
[ml] 
Mass of 
chlorides 
Chloride 
content  
Mass of  
powder 
[g] 
AgNO3 
[ml] 
Mass of 
chlorides 
Chloride 
content  
1 
5.01 
0.73 
0.26 
5.20% 
5.04 
0.82 
0.29 
5.75% 
1 
5.01 
0.59 
0.21 
4.16% 
5.02 
0.66 
0.24 
4.69% 
6 
5 
0.80 
0.28 
5.64% 
5.02 
1.10 
0.39 
7.73% 
6 
5.02 
0.79 
0.28 
5.57% 
5 
1.14 
0.40 
8.09% 
10 
5.05 
0.75 
0.27 
5.29% 
5 
1.02 
0.36 
7.20% 
10 
5.04 
0.78 
0.28 
5.49% 
5 
1.09 
0.39 
7.71% 
 
Table 4.8: Titration results of specimen 3 & 4 
The chloride content is calculated based on the volume of AgNO3. The equation from chapter 
2.2.2 is used. 
The reports from the titration can be found in Appendix E.  
==PAGE:45==
 
39 
 
   
 
   
 
Figure 4.8: Concentration of chloride in the specimens, by titration. The chlorides penetrating from slice 1. 
Most of the results from the double titration are showing an acceptable cohesion. But the results 
of specimen 1, slice 6 differs a lot.  
The expected concentration of chlorides of specimen 1, would have decreased from slice 1. 
This is due to the theory [8] where chloride profiles are showed as a monotonically decreasing 
curve. Since specimen 1 wasn’t saturated in a NaCl solution before the migration test it is 
assumed that the concentration is closer to 3.9 % than 1.47 %.  
Specimen 2, 3 and 4 had an initial chloride content evenly distributed, before the chloride 
migration test. After the test, the concentration in specimen 3 and 4, slice 1 is less than slice 6 
and 10. The chlorides are accumulated from the exposed surface to the middle. 
0%
2%
4%
6%
8%
10%
1
6
10
Weight %Cl-
Slice
CHLORIDE CONTENT 
SPECIMEN 1 
1. test
2. test
0%
2%
4%
6%
8%
10%
1
6
10
Weight %Cl-
Slice
CHLORIDE CONTENT 
SPECIMEN 2 
1. test
2. test
0%
2%
4%
6%
8%
10%
1
6
10
Weight %Cl-
Slice
CHLORIDE CONTENT 
SPECIMEN 3 
1. test
2. test
0%
2%
4%
6%
8%
10%
1
6
10
Weight %Cl-
Slice
CHLORIDE CONTENT 
SPECIMEN 4 
1. test
2. test
==PAGE:46==
 
40 
 
If a current is sent through the specimen without adding more chlorides, the initial content of 
chlorides is expected to migrating towards the anode.  
 
We know from specimen 1 how the concentration of chlorides was distributed without being 
exposed to chlorides beforehand.  
 
By adding these two graphs together a graph like this will occur.  
 
This trend correlates with the concentration of chlorides in specimen 3 and 4 after 10 days 
exposure of chloride migration test. 
 
 
==PAGE:47==
 
41 
 
4.2.4  Estimating chloride ingress with ER 
Based on the results gained in the previous sections, a possible estimating of chloride ingress 
with ER is discussed. 
Due to the full penetration of chlorides the diffusion coefficient from chapter 2.2.1 was not 
possible to calculate. But a correlation between the voltage from the CMT and measured 
surface resistivity was established. This may indicate that the resistivity can be used to calculate 
the diffusion which are linked to the depth of the chloride penetration. 
The time duration, of the test, should have been shorter, to prevent the full penetration of 
chlorides. Alternatively, a lower voltage should have been used to slow down the chloride 
ingress. In the experiment the current was set to a constant 15 mA, but the voltage increased 
over time due to being proportional to the resistance.  
The choice of the time duration and current was based on the experiment in [14]. In this 
experiment an unknown type of concrete was used, where cores had been drilled from an old 
structure, resulting in cylindrical specimens with length 18 cm and diamteter 10 cm. After being 
exposed to a chloride migration test for 3 days the chlorides had penetrated 5.93 cm and after 
10 days the chloride had penetrated 14.23 cm. 
 
After conducting the experiments, information was provided; “A chloride migration test has been 
conducted according to NT 492 on concrete with exact same mix proportions. The cylinder was 
50 mm in length, and the chloride had penetrated 43 mm after 24 hours.“ - Serkan Karatosun. 
 
After only 1 day the chlorides had penetrated 4.3 cm, then after 10 days it would probably have 
been a lot higher than 14.23 cm. Which explain why the chlorides had penetrated through out 
the whole specimen in this project. This highlights the importance of the properties of the 
concrete mix. 
 
 
==PAGE:48==
 
42 
 
Figure 4.9 presents the results of the measured surface resistivity before the chloride migration 
test (CMT), 1 day into the CMT and 10 days into the CMT. 
 
Figure 4.9: Measured surface resistivity, before CMT, 1 day into CMT and 10 days into CMT. 
  
Specimen 
Difference 
from before 
until 1 day 
Difference 
from 1 day 
until 10 days 
Difference 
from before 
until 10 days 
1 
-50% 
19% 
-31% 
2 
-50% 
20% 
-30% 
3 
-52% 
13% 
-39% 
4 
-50% 
15% 
-35% 
 
Table 4.9: Measured surface resistivity before and after the chloride migration test 
 
10 days into CMT the surface resistivity increases compared to the measured surface resistivity 
on day 1 into CMT. There is no sure answer to what exactly causes this behavior, but some 
parameters could hypothetically explain the behavior.  
The specimen is less saturated 10 days into the CMT, compared to day 1. This is measured by 
the minor weight reduction of the specimen.  
When testing surface resistivity of the specimen at 1 day into the CMT, the specimen could 
have contained higher concentrations moisture on the outer surface, which would result in a 
lower resistivity, than a drier outer surface.  
This could results in a more direct path for the current running between the probes, in day 1 
during CMT.  
10.83
10.83
10.75
9.08
5.4
5.4
5.2
4.6
7.48
7.53
6.60
5.93
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
1
2
3
4
SR [kΩ-cm]
Specimen
SURFACE RESISTIVITY AFFECTED BY CMT
Before CMT
1 day into CMT
10 days into CMT
==PAGE:49==
 
43 
 
Figure 4.10 illustrates the difference in the measures depending on the surface. As explained 
earlier it was only possible to test the specimens at mark of 0° and 90° due to the test setup, 
during the CMT. Four measures were done almost each day, where two of them was at the 0° 
mark and the other two was at the 90° mark. Figure 4.3 showed the average of these readings. 
In Figure 4.10 readings from day 0 have been excluded. 
 
   
 
   
   
Figure 4.10: Measured SR depending on the position of the probes. 
This shows a consistent trend of variety between the position marks of approximately 0.5 kΩcm. 
To understand the significance of the value it can be referred to Table 2.1. This show that all the 
specimens have a high likely corrosion rate, even after the ER has increased. But specimen 4 
actually have a very high likely corrosion rate on day 1.  
The literature stated that there are additional factors that can influence the ER. Some of these 
factors are cement type, w/c ratio, type and size of the aggregate, and the porosity of the 
concrete.  
Freezing can cause damage to concrete by causing the water in the concrete to freeze and 
expand. This expansion can cause cracking of the concrete. Usually many repeated freezing 
and thawing will weaken the concrete over time, making it more susceptible to further damage.  
5
5.5
6
6.5
7
7.5
8
0
5
10
SR [kΩ-cm]
Days
SR of specimen 1
0°
90°
5
5.5
6
6.5
7
7.5
8
0
5
10
SR [kΩ-cm]
Days
SR of specimen 2
0°
90°
4
4.5
5
5.5
6
6.5
7
7.5
8
0
5
10
SR [kΩ-cm]
Days
SR of specimen 3
0°
90°
4
4.5
5
5.5
6
6.5
7
0
5
10
SR [kΩ-cm]
Days
SR of specimen 4
0°
90°
==PAGE:50==
 
44 
 
Sodium is an alkali metal which can cause alkali reactions. These reactions will cause cracking 
of the aggregates and paste. But to do so, the concrete furthermore needs to contain reactive 
aggregates, water, and a high pH value. 
Before the specimen was exposed to the chloride migration, they had been saturated in a NaCl 
solution and frozen. Although the deteriorations from these exposures will probably have been 
minimal or not existing at all. This is just to point out that a lot of factors can have influenced the 
behavior, and it can be difficult to know what exactly caused it.  
In the experiments in this project, the moisture level of the specimens was kept as a constant 
while the content of chlorides varied. These factors will both be varying in the reality which is 
important to emphasize. The question about whether it is possible to estimate the corrosion 
potential using ER, will not be answered as a closed-ended question yet. To be able to do so, 
more date from experimental work will be needed. 
4.3 Further studies 
- 
More experimental data showing correlation between ER and CM 
- 
Investigate the impact of freezing temperatures on ER. When knowing the that the 
freezing point of a saturated saline solution is lower than the freezing point of water. 
Could this be used to determine the concentration of chlorides inside the concrete and if 
so, would it even be viable since it is very dependent on weather conditions.  
- 
The direction of the measuring is important to the ER. It should be considered how to 
convert the measuring technic from the specimen to a concrete element. In this project 
the specimens were tested parallel with the chloride ingress, and this won’t be possible 
to do on a concrete element that should be reused.  
- 
Experimental work on concrete elements using the Wenner method, that afterwards can 
be destroyed to verify the obtained measurements. 
 
 
==PAGE:51==
 
45 
 
5 CONCLUSION 
This study has contributed to the understanding of electrical resistivity (ER) of concrete and how 
it is affected by different environmental conditions. This is used as step towards circular 
economy where concrete elements can be directly reused after their durability is estimated. 
 
- 
ER decreased when the concentration of sodium chloride (NaCl) was increased. Four 
concrete samples were saturated with different concentrations of NaCl, and the ER were 
measured. The experimental work agreed with the literature. 
- 
ER was affected by temperature change. The effect from the temperature were 
furthermore affected by the degree of saturation. The concrete specimen with the 
highest chloride concentration experienced a greater change in ER combined to the 
other specimens with lower chloride concentrations. 
- 
More properties as cement type, w/c ratio, type and size of the aggregate, moisture 
level, and the porosity of the concrete can affect the ER. This is concluded from the 
literature review. 
- 
The Wenner method is strongly affected by the surface conditions and the placement of 
the probes are important. This was illustrated with the measurements inserted in Figure 
4.10 showing a consistent trend of the variety of approximately 0.5 kΩcm between the 
measured position, of the same specimen, in the same conditions. 
- 
The literature has shown that ER has a close relation to the chloride diffusion coefficient, 
but further development is still needed. 
- 
A strong correlation between the surface resistivity and the resistance calculated from 
the chloride migration test (CMT) was obtained in the experimental work. This suggests 
that there is potential for using the Wenner method to measure the movement of ions in 
concrete. 
 
In conclusion, while this study has provided valuable insights into the electrical resistivity of 
concrete and how it is affected by different environmental conditions, there are still many issues 
that need to be investigated further. More experiments with the Wenner method in coherence 
with the CMT should be conducted. Furthermore, other challenges as the logistics of reusing 
concrete elements, and figuring out how to reassemble them must be addressed further on. 
==PAGE:52==
 
46 
 
BIBLIOGRAPHY 
[1] 
J. Bruun, “Danish project aims for direct reuse of prefab elements in new construction,” 
2022, Accessed: Jan. 19, 2023. [Online]. Available: 
https://ingenioer.au.dk/en/current/news/view/artikel/dansk-projekt-vil-genbruge-hele-
betonelementer-i-nyt-byggeri 
[2] 
Bolig og Planstyrelsen, “Klimakrav (LCA) i bygningsreglementet,” 2022. 
https://bpst.dk/da/Byggeri/Baeredygtigt-byggeri/NY-Klimakrav-i-bygningsreglementet# 
(accessed Jan. 21, 2023). 
[3] 
K. K. Hansen, “Bygningsingeniørernes materialer - uddrag af Materialebogen,” 1st ed., 
Nyt Teknisk forlag, 2012, pp. 67–72. 
[4] 
P. Kumar Mehta and Paulo J. M. Monteiro, “11. nondestructive-methods,” in Concrete. 
Microstructure, properties, and materials’, 4th ed., McGraw-Hill Education, 2013. 
[5] 
C. B. J. Nielsen, “Kap. 18 Betonkonstruktioners tilstand,” in Beton Håndbogen, 2015. 
[6] 
Cement Concrete & Aggregates Australia, “Chloride Resistance of Concrete,” 2009. 
[7] 
K. Tuutti, “Corrosion of steel in concrete,” Swedish Cement and Concrete Research 
Institute, Stockholm, 1982. Accessed: Jan. 12, 2023. [Online]. Available: 
http://www.cbi.se/viewNavMenu.do?menuID=317&oid=857 
[8] 
J. M. Frederiksen, “Kap. 19.3 Chloridindtrængning,” in Beton Håndbogen, Dank 
Betonforening. 
[9] 
“NT BUILD 492, Concrete, Mortar and Cement Based Repair Materials: 
Chloride  Migration Coefficient from Non-steady-state Migration Experiments, 
NORDTEST,” 1999. 
[10] 
C. Vieira Pontes, G. Costa Reus, A. Calvo, and M. H. F. Medeiros, “Procedure to detect 
the penetration of chlorides into carbonated concrete with silver nitrate,” Revista 
ALCONPAT, vol. 11, no. 2, May 2021, doi: 10.21041/ra.v11i2.480. 
[11] 
Vedantu, “Introduction to Potentiometric Titration.” 
https://www.vedantu.com/chemistry/potentiometric-titration (accessed Jan. 12, 2023). 
[12] 
“NT BUILD 208: Concrete, Hardened: Chloride content by volhard titration, NORDTEST,” 
1996. 
[13] 
P. Holck, J. Kraaer, and B. M. Lund, Orbit B htx, 1. udgave, 4. oplag. Systime, 2009. 
[14] 
T. T. Tenev and A. B. Naceur, “Reuse of reinforced concrete elements-evaluation of 
quality and durability by use of electrical resistivity and ultrasonic testing DTU Civil 
Engineering Department of Civil Engineering,” 2021. [Online]. Available: www.byg.dtu.dk 
[15] 
F. Wenner, “A METHOD OF MEASURING EARTH RESISTIVITY,” Washington, 1915. 
==PAGE:53==
 
47 
 
[16] 
Proceq SA, “Operating Instructions - Concrete Durability Testing,” 2017. 
[17] 
Screening Eagle Technologies, “About Screening Eagle.” 
https://www.screeningeagle.com/en/about-us (accessed Nov. 14, 2022). 
[18] 
“AASHTO T358-15: Standard Method of Test for Surface Resistivity Indication of 
Concrete’s Ability to Resist Chloride Ion Penetration American Association of State 
Highway and Transportation Officials,” 2015. [Online]. Available: 
www.salmanco.comwww.salmanco.com 
[19] 
S. Khaksefidi, M. Ghalehnovi, J. de Brito, and H. Rahdar, “Effect of Chloride and 
Sulphate Environments on the Compressive Strength, Density and Electrical Resistivity of 
Ultra-High Performance Concrete (UHPC),” Journal of Rehabilitation in Civil Engineering, 
vol. 10, no. 3, pp. 158–186, Jun. 2022, doi: 10.22075/jrce.2022.24902.1563. 
[20] 
B. Baten and T. Manzur, “Formation Factor Concept for Non-Destructive Evaluation of 
Concrete’s chloride diffusion coefficients,” Cem Concr Compos, vol. 128, Apr. 2022, doi: 
10.1016/j.cemconcomp.2022.104440. 
[21] 
C. E. T. Balestra, T. A. Reichert, and G. Savaris, “Concrete Electrical Resistivity as a 
Durability and Service Life Parameter for Reinforced Concrete Structures,” 2021, pp. 51–
61. doi: 10.1007/978-3-030-62825-3_4. 
[22] 
G. Frenzer, F. Jacobs, and R. J. Torrent, “In situ durability characteristics of new and old 
concrete structures,” Journal of Advanced Concrete Technology, vol. 19, no. 1, pp. 53–
66, 2021, doi: 10.3151/JACT.19.53. 
[23] 
P. Konečný, M. Horňáková, P. Lehner, P. Rovnaníková, and M. Sýkora, “Model 
uncertainty in diffusion coefficient for chloride ingress into concrete,” in Procedia 
Structural Integrity, 2021, vol. 31, pp. 147–153. doi: 10.1016/j.prostr.2021.03.023. 
[24] 
P. Astuti, K. Kamarulzaman, and H. Hamada, “Non-Destructive Investigation of A 44-
Year-Old RC Structure Exposed to Actual Marine Tidal Environments Using 
Electrochemical Methods,” International Journal of Integrated Engineering, vol. 13, no. 3, 
pp. 148–157, 2021, doi: 10.30880/ijie.2021.13.03.018. 
[25] 
M. Arreola-Sanchez, E. M. Alonso-Guzman, W. Martinez-Molina, A. A. Torres-Acosta, H. 
L. Chavez-Garcia, and J. M. Ponce-Ortega, “Reinforced concrete structure performance 
in marine structures: Analyzing durability indexes to obtain more accurate corrosion 
initiation time predictions,” Materials, vol. 14, no. 24, Dec. 2021, doi: 
10.3390/ma14247662. 
[26] 
R. Rodrigues, S. Gaboreau, J. Gance, I. Ignatiadis, and S. Betelu, “Reinforced concrete 
structures: A review of corrosion mechanisms and advances in electrical methods for 
corrosion monitoring,” Construction and Building Materials, vol. 269. Elsevier Ltd, Feb. 
01, 2021. doi: 10.1016/j.conbuildmat.2020.121240. 
==PAGE:54==
 
48 
 
[27] 
R. Torrent, K. ichi Imamoto, and R. Neves, “Resistance of concrete to carbonation and 
chloride penetration assessed on site through nondestructive test,” Structural Concrete, 
vol. 22, no. 5, pp. 2581–2594, Oct. 2021, doi: 10.1002/suco.201900474. 
[28] 
W. Wang and H. Lei, “Study on the Correlation between Surface Resistivity and 
Accelerated Chloride Corrosion of Concrete,” in 2021 IEEE 11th Annual International 
Conference on CYBER Technology in Automation, Control, and Intelligent Systems, 
CYBER 2021, Jul. 2021, pp. 566–570. doi: 10.1109/CYBER53097.2021.9588322. 
[29] 
Y. Wang, C. Liu, Y. Wang, Q. Li, and B. Yan, “Semi-empirical prediction model of 
chloride-induced corrosion rate in uncracked reinforced concrete exposed to a marine 
environment,” Electrochim Acta, vol. 331, Jan. 2020, doi: 
10.1016/j.electacta.2019.135376. 
[30] 
A. Z. Mendes, R. A. Medeiros-Junior, and G. da Silva Munhoz, “Effect of the corrosion 
degree and the carbonation depth on the electrical resistivity, ultrasonic pulse velocity 
and corrosion potential,” Journal of Building Pathology and Rehabilitation, vol. 4, no. 1, 
Dec. 2019, doi: 10.1007/s41024-019-0055-7. 
[31] 
M. K. Wutke, “Use of Ground Penetrating Radar measurement combined to resistivity 
measurement for characterization of the concrete moisture,” in 2018 17th International 
Conference on Ground Penetrating Radar, GPR 2018, Aug. 2018. doi: 
10.1109/ICGPR.2018.8441577. 
[32] 
FLORIDA DEPARTMENT OF TRANSPORTATION, “Florida Method of Test For 
Concrete Resistivity as an Electrical Indicator of its Permeability - FM 5-578,” 2004. 
[33] 
P. Ghosh and Q. Tran, “Correlation Between Bulk and Surface Resistivity of Concrete,” 
Int J Concr Struct Mater, vol. 9, no. 1, pp. 119–132, Mar. 2015, doi: 10.1007/s40069-014-
0094-z. 
[34] 
P. Ghosh and Q. Tran, “Influence of parameters on surface resistivity of concrete,” Cem 
Concr Compos, vol. 62, pp. 134–145, Jul. 2015, doi: 
10.1016/j.cemconcomp.2015.06.003. 
[35] 
Y. Lecieux, F. Schoefs, S. Bonnet, T. Lecieux, and S. P. Lopes, “Quantification and 
uncertainty analysis of a structural monitoring device: Detection of chloride in concrete 
using DC electrical resistivity measurement,” Nondestructive Testing and Evaluation, vol. 
30, no. 3, pp. 216–232, Jul. 2015, doi: 10.1080/10589759.2015.1029476. 
[36] 
C. Andrade, R. D’Andrea, and N. Rebolledo, “Chloride ion penetration in concrete: The 
reaction factor in the electrical resistivity model,” Cem Concr Compos, vol. 47, pp. 41–46, 
Mar. 2014, doi: 10.1016/j.cemconcomp.2013.09.022. 
[37] 
R. du Plooy, S. Palma Lopes, G. Villain, and X. Dérobert, “Development of a multi-ring 
resistivity cell and multi-electrode resistivity probe for investigation of cover concrete 
==PAGE:55==
 
49 
 
condition,” NDT and E International, vol. 54, pp. 27–36, 2013, doi: 
10.1016/j.ndteint.2012.11.007. 
[38] 
O. Sengul, “Factors affecting the electrical resistivity of concrete,” RILEM Bookseries, vol. 
6, pp. 263–269, 2012, doi: 10.1007/978-94-007-0723-8_38. 
[39] 
Z. M. Sbartaï, S. Laurens, J. Rhazi, J. P. Balayssac, and G. Arliguie, “Using radar direct 
wave for concrete condition assessment: Correlation with electrical resistivity,” J Appl 
Geophy, vol. 62, no. 4, pp. 361–374, Aug. 2007, doi: 10.1016/j.jappgeo.2007.02.003. 
[40] 
R. B. Polder, “Test methods for on site measurement of resistivity of concrete a RILEM 
TC-154 technical recommendation,” 2001. 
[41] 
A. Ip, B. Berszakiewicz, and F. Pianca, “Nondestructive test methods for evaluating 
durability of concrete highway structures: experience of Ontario Ministry of 
Transportation</title>,” in Structural Materials Technology III: An NDT Conference, Mar. 
1998, vol. 3400, pp. 270–280. doi: 10.1117/12.300099. 
[42] 
“ASTM C1202-12: Standard Test Method for Electrical Indication of Concrete’s Ability to 
Resist Chloride Ion Penetration, ASTM International,” 2012, doi: 10.1520/C1202-12. 
[43] 
“AASHTO TP 95: Standard Method of Test for Surface Resistivity of Concrete’s Ability to 
Resist Chloride Ion Penetration, American Association of State Highway and 
Transportation Ofﬁcials, Washington, D.C.,” 2011. 
  
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:56==
 
50 
 
Appendix A. Literatur review 
 
Reference
Purpose
Location 
of test
Specimen 
type
Concrete 
mix
Test
Standards
Comments
Include
Wenner
01 -  Effect of 
Chloride and 
Sulphate 
Environments on 
the Compressive 
Strength, Density 
and Electrical 
Resistivity of Ultra-
High Performance 
Concrete (UHPC)
Electrical resistivity 
(ER) and 
compressive strength 
(CS) tests were 
performed on 45 
UHPC cylindrical 
specimen.
Lab
45
Cylindrica
l 
Known
- ER, Wenner test
- Compressive strength 
AASHTO,  2019
AASHTO,  2014
FDOT, 2004
AASHTO T358-19
ASTM C39 (CS test)
Presents a general 
comparison, of test 
result, of RCPT, 
ER and bulk 
resistivity.
Use conclusion of 
effect og curing, 
with water, NaCl 
and magnesium.
X
02 -  Formation 
Factor Concept 
for Non-
Destructive 
Evaluation of 
Concrete’s 
chloride diffusion 
coefficients
Focuses on the 
suitability of an 
alternate 
nondestructive, low-
cost approach of 
estimating diffusion 
coefficients through 
electrical resistivity 
and formation factor 
as a replacement of 
conventional 
destructive migration 
tests.
Lab
360
Cylindrica
l 
Known
- Slump test on fresh 
concrete
- ER, Wenner test 
- Non-steady state rapid 
migration test 
ASTM C143 (2015)
Testing agencies: the 
Florida & Lousiana 
Departments of 
Transportation
NT BUILD 492
-	ER change due 
to variations in 
cementitious 
materials and w/c 
ratio.
X
03 - Testing to 
Reassess – 
Corrosion Activity 
Assessment Based 
on NDT Using a 
Prestressed 
Concrete Bridge 
as CaseStudy
Investigations were 
conducted directly 
on the structure with 
regard to active 
corrosion areas 
inside the box girder.
On site 
& 
Lab
Bridge 
&
56 drilled 
cores
?
- half cell-potential method 
(Active corrosion)
- eddy current method 
(H10Concrete cover)
- GPR (concrete cover)
- LIBS (Chemical analysis)
- Torrent method
- ER (Wenner-Probe, 
surface moisture) 
Speciﬁcation B03 
(German Society for 
Non-destructive 
Testing)
ASTM F2659
Does not show any 
results from the 
Wenner method.
X
04 - Concrete 
Electrical 
Resistivity as a 
Durability and 
Service Life 
Parameter for 
Reinforced 
Concrete 
Structures
Definitions and 
aspects of electrical 
resistivity in concrete, 
test procedures and 
interpretation of 
results and, finally, 
the parameters that 
most influence 
concrete resistivity 
are discussed.
No tests 
have been 
perfomre
d.
Refer to 
other 
references 
?
?
ER:
- Direct method
- Wenner method
- ASTM C1760 
2012, AASHTO 
T358-15  and UNE 
83988-1 (AENOR 
2008)
- AASHTO T358-15 
and UNE 83988-2 
(AENOR 2014)
Conclusion from 
other reports.
X
05 - Experimental 
and computational 
study on chloride 
ion transport and 
corrosion 
inhibition 
mechanism of 
rubber concrete
Durability research of 
rubber concrete.
The chloride ion 
transport 
characteristics and 
corrosion inhibition 
mechanism of rubber 
concrete are 
Lab
3 
specimens
(100x100x
400 mm)
Known
(different 
rubber 
content)
- Electrically accelerated 
experiment
- Ultrasonic testing
-  Rapid chloride migration 
test
ASTM C 1202
The Wenner 
method is not 
mentioned and 
rubber concrete 
doesnt seem 
relevant.
==PAGE:57==
 
51 
 
 
06 - In Situ 
Durability 
Characteristics of 
New and Old 
Concrete 
Structures
This paper analyzes 
field experimental 
data obtained on 
about 30 concrete 
structures, both new 
(age up to 1 year) 
and old (age up to 60 
years). The data 
include in situ NDT 
of air-permeability 
kT, electrical 
resistivity ρ and 
surface moisture m, 
On site 
& 
Lab
17 new 
structures,
12 old 
structures 
&
 drilled 
cores
Known
- Air-permeability
- Surface electrical 
resistivity, Wenner method
- Surface moisture content
- O2-permeability
- Water sorptivity
- Pore characteristics
- Carbonation rate
- Chloride content
- Compressive strength 
- Swiss Standard 
(SIA 2019)
- Guidelines in 
(Polder 2000)
No pictures of 
setup.
 ρ was measured 
with the intention of 
assessing the 
moisture conditions 
of the surface at the 
moment of 
measuring kT; 
measured at the 
prevailing 
temperature and 
moisture conditions 
X
07 - Model 
uncertainty in 
diffusion 
coefficient for 
chloride ingress 
into concrete
This article is 
focusing on 
measurements 
obtained by two 
methods - indirect 
laboratory 
measurements of 
electrical resistivity 
and direct chloride 
profile-based 
evaluation from 
samples exposed to 
in situ conditions.
A comparison is 
made by means of 
the correlation factor 
– ratio.
Diffusion coefficients 
Lab
Casted 
plates
100x100x
60mm
Known
- ER, Wenner test
- Chloride profiles from in 
situ exposure, Accelerated 
chloride penetration
- ND electrochemical 
based tests 
(AASHTO T358, 
2013)
- Destructive 
penetration tests 
(ASTM C1543, 
1996; NTBuild 443, 
1995)
- Semi-destructive 
(ASTM C1202, 
2012)
No pictures of test 
setup. 
Estimating the 
Diffusion coef. 
from ER results and 
compared to a 
measured Diffusion 
coef. By NTBuild 
443
X
08 - Non-
Destructive 
Investigation of A 
44-Year-Old RC 
Structure Exposed 
to Actual Marine 
Tidal 
Environments 
Using 
Electrochemical 
This study presents a 
series of non-
destructive 
assessment on a 44-
year-old naturally 
corroded RC 
structure exposed to 
marine tidal 
environments using 
observation of 
Lab
1 Beam
Known
- half-cell potential mapping
- ER, Wenner method
- Corrosion rate of steel 
rebars
ASTM C876-15 - 
Half-cell potential 
mapping of steel bar
Comparison on ER 
and the other 
experiments.
Visual observation - 
assesment criteria 
of detoration stage.  
Used to evaluationg 
if testing is 
necesarry?
X
09 - Reinforced 
concrete structure 
performance in 
marine structures: 
Analyzing 
durability indexes 
to obtain more 
accurate corrosion 
initiation time 
 Presents a 
comparison of six 
index properties 
collected during 
durability
inspections of ﬁve 
Mexican seaports
Lab
Core 
extraction
s from 47 
reinforced
concrete 
piers
?
- Compressive strength
- non-steady state diffusion 
coefﬁcient of chloride ion
- effective porosity (EP)
 - total porosity (TP)
- Electrical resistivity (ER) 
- Ultrasonic pulse velocity
NMX-C-546-
ONNCCE-2018 
(diffusion coefﬁcient 
)
NMX-C-523-
ONCCE-2016
UNE 83,986
No photo of setup.
Determine a suitable 
chloride diffusion 
coefﬁcient with ER 
X
10 - Reinforced 
concrete 
structures: A 
review of 
corrosion 
mechanisms and 
advances in 
electrical methods 
for corrosion 
monitoring (2020)
Up-to-date review on 
corrosion 
mechanisms and 
recent advances in 
electrical methods for 
corrosion monitoring.
No tests 
have been 
perfomre
d 
-
-
- Half-cell potential
- ER, Wenner
- Linear Polarization
- Tafel scan
- Galvanostatic pulse
- Electrochemical
impedance spectroscopy
- Indirect GP 
- Indirect EIS
ASTM C876 (half-
cell potetials)
Figure 6. describe 
chloride-induced 
corrosion
List of electrical 
methods for the 
assessment of the 
corrosion rate of 
steel in concrete
Figure of procedure 
for evaluation of 
RC struc. by 
X
==PAGE:58==
 
52 
 
 
 
11 - Resistance of 
concrete to 
carbonation and 
chloride 
penetration 
assessed on site 
through 
nondestructive test
The paper describes 
the main mechanisms 
of carbonation and 
chloride penetration 
into concrete and 
how the rate of 
penetration can be 
measured with 
No tests 
have been 
perfomre
d 
-
-
- air permeability (Torrent 
method) 
- ER, Wenner
-  Swiss Standard 
SIA 262/1
- AASHTO T358; 
UNE
83988–2
"	The electrical 
resistivity has a 
natural close 
relation with the 
chloride diffusion 
coefficient"
X
12 - Study on the 
Correlation 
between Surface 
Resistivity and 
Accelerated 
Chloride 
Corrosion of 
Concrete
Based on the test for 
specimens with 
different dosage of 
FA, the regression 
analysis between the 
tests could be carried 
out.
Lab
Casted
Known
- Compressive strength 
- Surface resistivity test, 
wenner
- Accelerated chloride 
corrosion test
Conlusion: Results 
showed that along 
of FA amount 
increasing, the 
compressive 
strength for 
concretes drops 
down, their surface 
resistivity enlarges 
and accelerated 
chloride corrosion 
decreased.
X
13 - Comparison 
of procedures for 
the evaluation of 
time dependent 
concrete diffusion 
coefficient model
The article focuses 
on approaches for 
the computation of 
the input parameters 
of the time-dependent 
service-life model for 
the resistance of  
(HPC) against 
chloride ion 
penetration.
Various concrete 
mixtures used to 
evaluate the 
procedures for the 
determination of 
Lab
33 Casted
Known
- Rapid Chloride Penetration 
Test (RCPT)
-  Bulk conductivity
- ponding tests (only 
mentioned)
 ASTM C1202
AASHTO T259-02
No pictures of test 
setup.
No mention of 
Wenner method.
14 - Semi-
empirical 
prediction model 
of chloride-
induced corrosion 
rate in uncracked 
reinforced 
concrete exposed 
to a marine 
environment
Corrosion of steel 
bars in concrete 
exposed to tidal 
action and salt fog 
was investigated by a 
test method 
combining an 
artiﬁcial-natural 
diffusion test 
(ANDT) and an 
accelerated chloride 
migration test 
(ACMT)
Lab
Casted
with & 
without 
rebars
Known
- artiﬁcial-natural diffusion
test (ANDT
- rapid
chloride migration test 
(RCM)
- accelerated chloride 
migration test (ACMT)
- Wenner four-probe test
Only mention 
Wenner method 
very short.
A normalized 
concrete resistivity 
is proposed.
ap is the normalized 
concrete resistivity; 
rRC is the concrete 
resistivity of 
reinforced concrete; 
rPC is the concrete 
X
15 - Automated 
visualization of 
concrete bridge 
deck condition 
from GPR data
Presents a method 
for a full automation 
of GPR data 
visualization and 
analysis. 
On site
Bridge 
deck
?
- Ground-penetrating radar 
(GPR)
Used for validation:
- electrical resistivity (ER)
-  half-cell potential (HCP)
No pictures of test 
setup.
No mention of 
Wenner method.
==PAGE:59==
 
53 
 
 
16 - Effect of the 
corrosion degree 
and the 
carbonation depth 
on the electrical 
resistivity, 
ultrasonic pulse 
The aim of this article 
is to evaluate the ER, 
the UPV, and the 
Corrosion Potential 
of reinforced 
concrete specimens 
subjected to different 
Lab
72 Casted
Known
- Ionic migration test 
- ER
- UPV
- CP
- European standard 
UNE 83988-2 (ER 
test)(Spansk)
- NBR 8802:1994 
(UPV)
- ASTM C-876 (CP 
test)
Relevant 
conclusion.
Karbonatiserings 
effekt.
X
17 - Self-healing 
bacterial mortar 
with improved 
chloride 
permeability and 
electrical 
resistance
The impacts of 
adding bacteria as a 
self-healing agent in 
the mixing water of 
mortar on its 
durability properties 
were investigated.
Lab
Casted
Known
- Water absorption test
- RCPT
- Electrical resistance
- ASTM C642-13
- ASTM C1202-17a
- ASTM C1760-12
No mention of 
Wenner method.
18 - Experimental 
investigation on 
properties of 
interface between 
concrete layers
A comparison is 
made
between the DC 
resistance and AC 
resistance
Meanwhile, the rapid 
and simple electrical 
tests can also be 
used to evaluate the 
permeability of a 
layered interface.
Lab
Casted
Known
- UPT
- RCPT
- Alternating current test
 ASTM C1202
No pictures of test 
setup.
No mention of 
Wenner method.
19 - Statistical 
analysis of time 
dependent 
variation of 
diffusion 
coefﬁcient for 
various binary and 
ternary based 
Describing the time 
dependent variability 
of the diffusion 
coefﬁcient of 
chlorides into 
concrete.
Lab
32 Casted
Known
- Bulk electrical resistivity
Only mentions:
- RCPT
- Electrical resistivity
- ASTM C1760
- ASTM C1202 & 
AASHTO T277
- AASHTO TP-95
No pictures of test 
setup.
No mention of 
Wenner method.
20 - Use of 
Ground 
Penetrating Radar 
measurement 
combined to 
resistivity 
measurement or 
characterization of 
the concrete 
The paper presents 
great potential of the 
radar measurement 
combined with 
resistivity 
measurement for the 
characterization of 
potential concrete 
corrosion in an early 
Lab
2 Casted 
slabs one 
with & 
one 
without 
reabrs
?
- GPR
- ER, Wenner (werner 
misspelling?)
Measure of 
concrete resistivity 
which has lower 
degree of saturation 
could be more 
difficult
X
21 - Variation of 
diffusion 
coefficient for 
selected binary 
and ternary 
concrete mixtures 
considering 
concrete aging 
effect. (See also 
reference 24)
The goal of the paper 
is the analysis of 
statistical variation of 
diffusion 
coefficient during the 
aging.
The evaluation of the 
diffusion coefficient 
is based on the 
concrete 
Lab
Casted 
cylinders
Known
- ER, wenner method
- AASTHTO TP-95
No pictures of test 
setup.
The actual test 
setup can be found 
in reference [24].
==PAGE:60==
 
54 
 
 
22 - Florida 
Method of Test 
For Concrete 
Resistivity as an 
Electrical Indicator 
Template of how to 
test with Wenner 
array probe.
No actual experiment 
-
-
-
- ER, Wenner
similar to AASHTO-
T-358-2015
X
23 - Chloride 
Electroremediation 
in reinforced 
structures: 
Preliminary 
electrochemical 
tests to detect the 
steel repassivation 
during the 
Preliminary results on 
new methods for 
monitoring the 
efﬁciency of the 
Electrochemical 
chloride extraction 
(ECE) treatments are 
presented.
Lab
Casted
Known
- Electrical resistance
- Half cell potential
- Electrochemical 
impedance spectroscopy, 
EIS
- ASTM C876 -
09 “Standard Test 
Method for 
Corrosion Potentials 
of Uncoated 
Reinforcing Steel in 
Concrete,”
- UNE 112010:2011 
“Chloride 
No pictures of test 
setup.
No mention of 
Wenner method.
24 - Correlation 
Between Bulk and 
Surface Resistivity 
of Concrete
This study examined 
the electrical surface 
resistivity (SR) and 
bulk electrical 
resistivity (BR) of 
concrete cylinders 
for various binary 
and ternary based 
high-performance 
concrete (HPC) 
Lab
33 Casted 
cylinder
Known
- ER, Wenner
- Bulk resistivity
- ASTM C1202-05 
(RCPT)
- FDOT Standard 
2004 (resistivity 
readIngs)
-	Both bulk and 
surface electrical 
resistivity are well 
correlated for 
different types of 
HPC and control 
mixtures over 
longer period of 
time (7 to 161 
days).
X
25 - Criteria for 
nondestructive 
The article couldn’t 
be found.
-
-
-
 26 - Influence of 
parameters on 
surface resistivity 
of concrete
This research 
examined the surface 
resistivity (SR) and 
the bulk electrical 
resistivity (BR) of 
concrete cylinders 
for several ternary 
mixtures at different 
testing ages.
Evaluated inﬂuence 
of geometric size, 
probe spacing, 
replacement levels of 
silica fume and 
metakaolin in ternary 
Lab
23 Casted 
cylinder
Known
- SR, wenner method
- Bulk resistivity
ASTM C1202
AASHTO TP-95
Florida testing 
method
-	It focus on the 
role of silica fume 
and metakaolin as a 
second 
supplementary 
cementitious 
material in ternary 
mixtures
Fokus på forskellige 
SCM og hvordan 
det påvirker SR.
X
27 - Quantification 
and uncertainty 
analysis of a 
structural 
monitoring device 
(2014)
Seek to assess and 
optimise the 
performance of an 
integrated chloride 
detection sensor 
based on the DC 
electrical resistivity 
measurement.
Performed tests in a 
controlled 
environment.
Lab
Casted 
beams 
with 
different 
content of 
chloride
Known
- Resistivity measurement 
using a multi-electrode 
Wenner probe
- chloride determined
- RILEM Technical 
Committee 178-TMC
DC electrical 
resistivity
measurement
-	The resistivity 
increases when time 
of hydration 
increase.
-	The resistivity 
decreases when the 
amount of free 
chloride content 
X
28 - Chloride ion 
penetration in 
concrete: The 
reaction factor in 
the electrical 
resistivity model
Describes the 
calculation of the so-
called ‘‘reaction or 
retardation factor’’
Lab
Casted 
cylinder
Known
-  Multiregime test
- ER, wenner
-	When chloride 
ions entry in contact 
with cement phases 
they react mainly 
with the aluminates 
X
==PAGE:61==
 
55 
 
 
29 - Electrical 
resistance 
tomography 
imaging of 
concrete. (2009)
Electrical Resistance 
Tomography (ERT) 
to imaging of 
concrete.
In this paper we test 
the feasibility of ERT 
to 
concrete imaging. We 
developed new 
computa-
Lab
Casted 
flat 
cylinder
Known
No mention of 
Wenner method.
30 - Development 
of a multi-ring 
resistivity cell and 
multi-electrode 
resistivity probe 
for investigation of 
cover concrete 
condition.
Describes the 
development of a 
multiring electrical 
resistivity cell for the 
evaluation of 
concrete.
Lab
Slabs & 
cylinderca
l 
soecimens
Known
- Multi-ring resistivity cell
- Multi-electrode resistivity 
probe
A multi-electrode 
resistivity probe is 
also presented with 
which surface 
measurements can 
be made on 
concrete elements 
of arbitrary 
geometry.
X
31 - Testing and 
modelling chloride 
penetration into 
concrete
it is illustrated how 
for level II and III the 
measurement of the 
electrical resistivity 
results a very suitable 
proposal
the paper comments 
on the tests methods 
used for the 
measurement of
the diffusion 
-
-
-
Describes theory 
and ranking test 
methods. 
No mention of 
Wenner
32 - Factors 
affecting the 
electrical resistivity 
of concrete
Same concrete 
samples were tested 
in; saturated – 
surface dry, air-dry 
and oven-dry 
conditions. Effect of 
moisture on 
resistivity is shown.
Lab?
?
Known
- ER, by the two-
electrode method
No photos.
Conclusion on: 
special attention 
should be 
given in the 
comparison of ER 
of different 
concretes.
33 - Using radar 
direct wave for 
concrete condition 
assessment
A comparison study 
with ER 
measurements was 
performed in the lab. 
The tests consisted in 
carrying out 
systematic radar and 
electrical resistivity 
measurements on 
concrete samples 
Lab
and
On site
Casted 
slabs and 
carpark 
slab
Known
- Radar measurements
- ER, Wenner
AFPC-AFREM, 
1997
seven samples were 
oven dried and then 
saturated in
aqueous solutions 
containing NaCl 
concentrations of 0, 
10,
20, 30, 40, 50, 60 
g/l. 
X
34 - 'PERMIT' ion 
migration test for 
measuring the 
chloride ion 
transport of 
concrete on site
Lab
 two 
cylinders, 
of 
different 
diameters
?
PERMIT ion migration test
No mention of 
Wenner method.
Does not seem 
relevant.
==PAGE:62==
 
56 
 
 
35 - Measurement 
of loss of steel 
from reinforcing 
bars in concrete 
using linear 
polarisation 
resistance 
weight loss evaluated 
from experimental 
LPR measurements 
gives a signiﬁcant 
over-estimate of the 
weight losses 
measured 
Lab
27 casted
Known
 ASTM C876-91
Doesn’t mention 
electrical resistivity.
No photos, only 
figures and graphs.
36 - Significance 
of steel electrical 
resistance method 
in the evaluation of 
reinforcement 
corrosion in 
cementitious 
The evolution of 
electrical resistance 
measurements in time 
is evaluated. 
The steel is measured 
and not the concrete. 
Lab
Casted
Known
Mortar specimens with 
embedded corrosion 
sensor.
No mention of 
Wenner method.
37 - Macrocell 
sensor systems for 
monitoring of the 
corrosion risk of 
the reinforcement 
in concrete 
structures
Used world-wide to 
monitor the corrosion 
risk of new concrete 
tructures, besides 
other systems.
To be able to 
monitor the corrosion 
risk for existing 
structures as well, a 
new sensor-system 
has been developed 
called expansion-ring-
Lab
Specimen 
with 
embedded 
anode-
ladder
?
No formulas are 
shown.
38 - Test methods 
for on site 
measurement of 
resistivity of 
concrete - a 
RILEM TC-154 
technical 
recommendation
This paper describes 
methods to assess 
the resistivity of the 
cover (near surface). 
concrete on site for 
various purposes 
related to corrosion 
and protection of 
Lab
&
On site
Element & 
extraction
?
- Wenner method
- Disc method
RILEM TC 154 
‘Electrochemical 
methods for 
measuring metallic 
corrosion in 
concrete’
Based on other 
experiments. No 
photos.
DC is not 
recommended.
Temperature effect
X
39 & 40 – (same 
article)  Non-
destructive test 
methods for 
evaluating 
durability of 
concrete highway 
structures 
experience of 
Ontario Ministry 
of Transportation. 
(MTO)
 This paper describes 
two methods used by 
MTO to measure the 
permeability of 
concrete: surface 
water absorption and 
air permeability 
techniques: and 
presents the methods 
used to measure the 
concrete electrical 
resistivity, chloride 
movement in the 
concrete, and 
On site
Four 
different 
concretes 
?
- Torrent test method
- Wenner
ASTM C1202
No experminets 
only description 
about different test 
methods.
Article from 1998
(to old?)
Wenner method can 
be used to 
determine the 
moisture content in 
concrete.
X
Reference: 41 & 
42 – (Same article) 
Tests for 
evaluation of the 
effectiveness of 
penetrating sealers 
in reducing 
penetration of 
Kan ikke tilgås.
==PAGE:63==
 
57 
 
Appendix B. Time schedule of 1. part of experimental work 
 
Test plan
Uge 1
Specimen 1: H2O
Specimen 2: 0,01 M NaCl
Specimen 3: 0,05 M NaCl
Specimen 4: 0,1 M NaCl
Uge 2
Specimen 1: H2O
Specimen 2: 0,01 M NaCl
Specimen 3: 0,05 M NaCl
Specimen 4: 0,1 M NaCl
Uge 3
Specimen 1: H2O
Specimen 2: 0,01 M NaCl
Specimen 3: 0,05 M NaCl
Specimen 4: 0,1 M NaCl
Uge 4
Specimen 1: H2O
Specimen 2: 0,01 M NaCl
Specimen 3: 0,05 M NaCl
Specimen 4: 0,1 M NaCl
Uge 5
Specimen 1: H2O
Specimen 2: 0,01 M NaCl
Specimen 3: 0,05 M NaCl
Specimen 4: 0,1 M NaCl
 00:00 - 
08:00
 00:00 - 
08:00
 08:00 - 
16:00
 16:00 - 
24:00
Monday
Tuesday
Wedensday
Thursday
Friday
 00:00 - 
08:00
 08:00 - 
16:00
 16:00 - 
24:00
 00:00 - 
08:00
 08:00 - 
16:00
 16:00 - 
24:00
 00:00 - 
08:00
Freeze
Cool
 08:00 - 
16:00
 16:00 - 
24:00
Tuesday
Oven dry
Cool
Cool
Monday
 00:00 - 
08:00
 08:00 - 
16:00
 16:00 - 
24:00
 00:00 - 
08:00
 08:00 - 
16:00
 16:00 - 
24:00
 16:00 - 
24:00
 00:00 - 
08:00
Wedensday
 08:00 - 
16:00
 16:00 - 
24:00
 08:00 - 
16:00
Tuesday
Cool
 00:00 - 
08:00
 00:00 - 
08:00
Thursday
Friday
 00:00 - 
08:00
 08:00 - 
16:00
 16:00 - 
24:00
 00:00 - 
08:00
Wedensday
Thursday
Friday
 16:00 - 
24:00
Freeze
Freeze
 00:00 - 
08:00
 08:00 - 
16:00
 16:00 - 
24:00
Desiccator + solution
Desiccator + air
 16:00 - 
24:00
 00:00 - 
08:00
Vacuum
Vacuum
 08:00 - 
16:00
Desiccator + solution
Desiccator + air
Stored in bucket + solution
Desiccator + solution
Desiccator + air
Desiccator + air
Desiccator + solution
 08:00 - 
16:00
 16:00 - 
24:00
 00:00 - 
08:00
Vacuum
 08:00 - 
16:00
 16:00 - 
24:00
 08:00 - 
16:00
 08:00 - 
16:00
 16:00 - 
24:00
 00:00 - 
08:00
 08:00 - 
16:00
 16:00 - 
24:00
 00:00 - 
08:00
 08:00 - 
16:00
 16:00 - 
24:00
 00:00 - 
08:00
 08:00 - 
16:00
 08:00 - 
16:00
 16:00 - 
24:00
 00:00 - 
08:00
 08:00 - 
16:00
 16:00 - 
24:00
 00:00 - 
08:00
 00:00 - 
08:00
 08:00 - 
16:00
 16:00 - 
24:00
 00:00 - 
08:00
Friday
 16:00 - 
24:00
Vacuum
 16:00 - 
24:00
Freeze
Tuesday
Wedensday
Thursday
Friday
Monday
Monday
 16:00 - 
24:00
 00:00 - 
08:00
 08:00 - 
16:00
Tuesday
Wedensday
Thursday
 00:00 - 
08:00
 08:00 - 
16:00
 16:00 - 
24:00
 00:00 - 
08:00
 08:00 - 
16:00
 08:00 - 
16:00
 16:00 - 
24:00
Monday
==PAGE:64==
 
58 
 
Appendix C. Results 1. part of experimental work 
 
Calculation of NaCl content used in the solutions to saturate the specimens. 
 
 
 
 
Sample 
0°
90°
180°
270°
0°
90°
180°
270°
AVERAGE
1
10
10
-
-
18.6
18.5
18.6
18.5
18.6
2
10
10
-
-
18.3
18.3
18.3
18.3
18.3
3
10
10
-
-
18.3
18.4
18.3
18.3
18.3
4
10
10
-
-
18.2
18.25
18.3
18.25
18.3
Dimensions of cylinders
Diamter [cm]
Length [cm]
Na
22.99 g/mol
Cl
35.453 g/mol
NaCl
58.443 g/mol
Water
5 L
Specimen 1
0 NaCl
0 g
Specimen 2
0.01 M NaCl
2.92 g
Specimen 3
0.05 M NaCl
14.61 g
Specimen 4
0.1 M NaCl
29.22 g
Sample 
0°
90°
180°
270°
0°
90°
180°
270°
AVERAGE Stdev
Mass [g]
1
219
240
208
196
215
240
211
192
215
17.8
3347.7
2
250
224
199
206
245
218
196
189
216
22.6
3306.9
3
223
236
320
210
230
235
290
200
243
41.0
3309.8
4
330
210
197
204
285
195
163
199
223
55.4
3295.8
Temperature 25°C
1. measure: Preparation, unstable readings!
Surface Resistivity (SR) Readings, kΩ-cm
Sample 
0°
90°
180°
270°
0°
90°
180°
270°
AVERAGE Stdev
Mass [g]
1
3266.4
2
3227.4
3
3228.5
4
3215.5
All measures OL = Open line
All measures OL = Open line
All measures OL = Open line
Surface Resistivity (SR) Readings, kΩ-cm
All measures OL = Open line
2. measure: Oven dry
==PAGE:65==
 
59 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Sample 
0°
90°
180°
270°
0°
90°
180°
270°
AVERAGE Stdev
Mass [g]
1
11
11.2
10.2
11.4
11.1
11
10.4
11.7
11.00
0.49
3476
2
11.1
11.3
10.6
11.1
11.1
11.1
10.7
10.9
10.99
0.24
3426.1
3
10
9.8
10
10.1
10.1
10.1
10.1
10.1
10.04
0.11
3433.3
4
8.7
8.5
8.2
8.1
8.3
8.6
8.2
8
8.33
0.25
3419.9
Temperature 25°C
3. measure: Vacuum staturated
Surface Resistivity (SR) Readings, kΩ-cm
Sample 
0°
90°
180°
270°
0°
90°
180°
270°
Average Stdev
Mass [g]
1
11.3
11.4
10.6
12.8
11.2
11.7
10.6
11.4
11.38
0.69
3473.7
2
11.5
11.7
10.8
11.1
11.2
11.6
11
11
11.24
0.32
3426.1
3
10.5
10.1
10.6
10.4
10.4
10.2
10.5
10.4
10.39
0.16
3434.8
4
9.1
8.9
8.5
9.1
9.3
9.1
8.6
9
8.95
0.27
3419.1
Temperature 25°C
4. measure: Stored in bucket
Surface Resistivity (SR) Readings, kΩ-cm
Sample 
0°
90°
180°
270°
0°
90°
180°
270°
Average Stdev
Mass [g]
1
15.3
15.6
14.5
16.7
15.4
15.6
15.5
16.6
15.65
0.71
-
2
16.2
16.4
15.7
15.9
15.7
16.1
15.5
15.9
15.93
0.30
-
3
15
14.6
14.5
15
14.9
14.3
14.6
14.6
14.69
0.25
-
4
13.1
13.3
12.4
13.1
13
13.2
12.4
12.9
12.93
0.35
-
Temperature 5°C
5. measure: Cooled
Surface Resistivity (SR) Readings, kΩ-cm
Sample 
0°
90°
180°
270°
0°
90°
180°
270°
Average Stdev
Mass [g]
1
1832
1993
1737
1736
1681
1641
1426
1498
1693.0
179.4
3483.6
2
1917
1764
1722
1774
1653
1569
1596
1495
1686.3
135.1
3430.5
3
1517
1846
1719
1747
1722
1544
1631
1528
1656.8
120.5
3440.3
4
1555
1581
1475
1506
1562
1370
1298
1297
1455.5
117.8
3428.3
Specimen temperature -18°C and air temperature 25°C
The specimen were tested immediately after they left the freezer.
A stable reading was not possible. All the values started high and then keept on decreasing.
The values in the table are the highest value.
6. measure: Frozen, unstable readings!
Surface Resistivity (SR) Readings, kΩ-cm
==PAGE:66==
 
60 
 
The masses of the specimens are gathered in the table below.  
Specimen 
MOD 
MBV 
MVS 
MSB 
M-18 
1 
3266.4 
3269.8 
3476 
3473.7 
3483.6 
2 
3227.4 
3235.4 
3426.1 
3426.1 
3430.5 
3 
3228.5 
3240.1 
3433.3 
3434.8 
3440.3 
4 
3215.5 
3228.5 
3419.9 
3419.1 
3428.3 
  
Table: Mass of specimens [g] 
Specimen 
MVS - MOD 
MBV – MOD 
MSB – MVS 
M-18 - MVS 
1 
209.6 
3.4 
-2.3 
7.6 
2 
198.7 
8 
0 
4.4 
3 
204.8 
11.6 
1.5 
7 
4 
204.4 
13 
-0.8 
8.4 
 
Table: Difference in masses [g] 
 
 
==PAGE:67==
 
61 
 
Appendix D. Results from  chloride migration test 
  
  
Units: Weight [g], A [cm2], L [cm] 
200 ml NaNO3 extra. Day 8 for specimen 1 & 2. Day 4 for 3 & 4. 
Photos of the splitting, spraying, and crushing of the specimens.  
 
 
Weigth before chloride migration
1
2
3
4
-
-
3444.5
3429.8
Weigth after chloride migration
1
2
3
4
3477.1
3427.7
3438.3
3424.6
Cross-sectional area
A
78.5
Length of cylinder
L
18.4
==PAGE:68==
 
62 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Day
Date
Time
Volt
Am
kOhm
ρ = R*A/L
Temp
0°
90°
0°
90°
Average
Stdev
0
08-nov
15:10
23.8
15.03
1.58
6.8
22
10.9
10.8
10.9
10.7
10.8
0.10
1
09-nov
11:10
21.2
14.98
1.42
6.0
26
5.6
5.1
5.7
5.1
5.4
0.32
2
10-nov
12:26
22.8
14.99
1.52
6.5
25.5
6.1
5.6
6
5.5
5.8
0.29
3
11-nov
11:45
23.2
14.98
1.55
6.6
26
6.3
5.8
6.4
5.8
6.1
0.32
4
12-nov
-
-
-
-
5
13-nov
-
-
-
-
6
14-nov
08:37
25.1
14.99
1.67
7.1
26
7
6.6
7.1
6.7
6.9
0.24
7
15-nov
09:42
25.7
14.98
1.72
7.3
26
7.2
6.7
7.2
6.8
7.0
0.26
8
16-nov
10:55
26.4
14.98
1.76
7.5
26
7.4
6.7
7.3
6.8
7.1
0.35
9
17-nov
09:49
27.1
14.98
1.81
7.7
26
7.6
7.1
7.5
7.1
7.2
0.23
10
18-nov
08:12
27.8
14.98
1.86
7.9
26
7.7
7.2
7.7
7.3
7.5
0.26
Sample 1
Migration test
SR Readings, kΩ-cm
Day
Date
Time
Volt
Am
kOhm
ρ = R*A/L
Temp
0°
90°
0°
90°
Average
Stdev
0
08-nov
15:10
23.5
15.04
1.56
6.7
22
10.9
10.8
10.9
10.7
10.8
0.10
1
09-nov
11:10
21
15.02
1.40
6.0
26
5.6
5.1
5.7
5.1
5.4
0.32
2
10-nov
12:26
22.6
15.02
1.50
6.4
25.5
6.1
5.6
6
5.5
5.8
0.29
3
11-nov
11:45
23.1
15.01
1.54
6.6
26
5.4
6
5.2
5.8
5.6
0.37
4
12-nov
-
-
-
-
5
13-nov
-
-
-
-
6
14-nov
08:37
25.5
15.01
1.70
7.3
26
6.2
6.6
6
6.4
6.3
0.26
7
15-nov
09:42
26
15.01
1.73
7.4
26
6.2
6.6
6.2
6.8
6.5
0.30
8
16-nov
10:55
26.9
15.01
1.79
7.6
26
6.5
6.9
6.4
6.9
6.7
0.26
9
17-nov
09:49
27.7
15
1.85
7.9
25.5
6.7
7.5
6.8
7.5
7.1
0.43
10
18-nov
08:12
28.6
15
1.91
8.1
25.5
7.2
7.8
7.2
7.9
7.5
0.38
Migration test
SR Readings, kΩ-cm
Sample 2
Day
Date
Time
V
mA
kOhm
ρ = R*A/L
Temp
0°
90°
0°
90°
Average
Stdev
0
21-nov
12:16
22.2
15.02
1.48
6.3
23
10.9
10.6
10.9
10.6
10.8
0.17
0.1
21-nov
14:54
20.3
14.94
1.36
5.8
25.5
5.7
5
5.5
4.8
5.3
0.42
1
22-nov
11:10
20.6
14.93
1.38
5.9
25.5
5.3
4.9
5.5
4.9
5.2
0.30
2
23-nov
12:15
21.2
14.93
1.42
6.1
25.5
5.5
5.2
5.7
5
5.4
0.31
3
24-nov
-
-
4
25-nov
08:56
22
14.93
1.47
6.3
25.5
5.8
5.6
6.1
5.6
5.8
0.24
5
26-nov
-
-
6
27-nov
-
-
7
28-nov
09:36
23.3
14.93
1.56
6.7
25.5
6.2
6
6.3
5.7
6.1
0.26
8
29-nov
12:29
23.6
14.93
1.58
6.7
25.5
6.6
5.8
6.8
6.1
6.3
0.46
9
30-nov
12:32
24
14.93
1.61
6.9
25
6.8
6.1
6.8
6
6.3
0.44
10
01-dec
08:50
24.1
14.92
1.62
6.9
25.5
6.8
6.3
7.2
6.1
6.6
0.50
Sample 3
Migration test
SR Readings, kΩ-cm
==PAGE:69==
 
63 
 
 
 
Day
Date
Time
V
mA
kOhm
ρ = R*A/L
Temp
0°
90°
0°
90°
Average
Stdev
0
21-nov
12:16
19.3
15.02
1.28
5.5
23.5
8.9
9.2
8.9
9.3
9.1
0.21
0.1
21-nov
14:54
18.1
14.97
1.21
5.2
25.5
4.7
5.1
4.8
5
4.9
0.18
1
22-nov
11:10
18.2
14.97
1.22
5.2
25
4.4
4.7
4.5
4.7
4.6
0.15
2
23-nov
12:15
18.7
14.97
1.25
5.3
25.5
4.6
4.9
4.5
4.8
4.7
0.18
3
24-nov
-
-
4
25-nov
08:56
19.9
14.97
1.33
5.7
25.5
4.9
5.1
5
5.1
5.0
0.10
5
26-nov
-
-
6
27-nov
-
-
7
28-nov
09:36
21.7
14.97
1.45
6.2
25
5.4
5.3
5.6
5.3
5.4
0.14
8
29-nov
12:29
22.2
14.97
1.48
6.3
25
5.8
5.3
5.7
5.3
5.5
0.26
9
30-nov
12:32
22.6
14.97
1.51
6.4
25
6.1
5.5
6.3
5.6
5.9
0.39
10
01-dec
08:50
23.1
14.97
1.54
6.6
25
6.5
5.7
6.4
5.7
5.9
0.40
Sample 4
SR Readings, kΩ-cm
Migration test
==PAGE:70==
 
64 
 
Appendix E. Titration 
==PAGE:71==
Program version tiamo 2.5 - 116 - 1
3325880
2022-12-09 14:37:57 UTC+1
DESKTOP-7K6M6O3
Metrohm
Computer name
License ID
User
Results report
Determination
Course11569-2021
Method
2021-08-03 09:46:58 UTC+2
Method saving date
3
Method version
original
Method state
2022-12-09 13:22:44 UTC+1
Determination start
original
Determination state
1
Determination version
1
Run number
User (full name)
Metrohm
User (short name)
Sample data
Test1
ID1
150 mL
Sample size
End points
DET U
DET U.1
EP1
0,9799
-77,5
mV
mL
Results
0,9799
mL
AgNO3 mL
invalid
mL
MNV AgNO3 mL
  EP1
V [mL]
0
0,2
0,4
0,6
0,8
1
1,2
U [mV]
30
10
-10
-30
-50
-70
-90
-110
-130
-150
DET U.1 - DET U
Page 1 of
1
==PAGE:72==
Program version tiamo 2.5 - 116 - 1
3325880
2022-12-09 14:37:56 UTC+1
DESKTOP-7K6M6O3
Metrohm
Computer name
License ID
User
Results report
Determination
Course11569-2021
Method
2021-08-03 09:46:58 UTC+2
Method saving date
3
Method version
original
Method state
2022-12-09 13:31:15 UTC+1
Determination start
original
Determination state
1
Determination version
2
Run number
User (full name)
Metrohm
User (short name)
Sample data
Test2
ID1
150 mL
Sample size
End points
DET U
DET U.1
EP1
1,0022
-76,2
mV
mL
Results
1,0022
mL
AgNO3 mL
invalid
mL
MNV AgNO3 mL
  EP1
V [mL]
0
0,2
0,4
0,6
0,8
1
1,2
U [mV]
30
10
-10
-30
-50
-70
-90
-110
-130
-150
DET U.1 - DET U
Page 1 of
1
==PAGE:73==
Program version tiamo 2.5 - 116 - 1
3325880
2022-12-09 14:37:55 UTC+1
DESKTOP-7K6M6O3
Metrohm
Computer name
License ID
User
Results report
Determination
Course11569-2021
Method
2021-08-03 09:46:58 UTC+2
Method saving date
3
Method version
original
Method state
2022-12-09 13:45:22 UTC+1
Determination start
original
Determination state
1
Determination version
3
Run number
User (full name)
Metrohm
User (short name)
Sample data
Test3
ID1
150 mL
Sample size
End points
DET U
DET U.1
EP1
0,9831
-67,0
mV
mL
Results
0,9831
mL
AgNO3 mL
invalid
mL
MNV AgNO3 mL
  EP1
V [mL]
0
0,2
0,4
0,6
0,8
1
1,2
U [mV]
30
10
-10
-30
-50
-70
-90
-110
-130
-150
DET U.1 - DET U
Page 1 of
1
==PAGE:74==
Program version tiamo 2.5 - 116 - 1
3325880
2022-12-09 14:37:54 UTC+1
DESKTOP-7K6M6O3
Metrohm
Computer name
License ID
User
Results report
Determination
Course11569-2021
Method
2021-08-03 09:46:58 UTC+2
Method saving date
3
Method version
original
Method state
2022-12-09 13:50:48 UTC+1
Determination start
original
Determination state
1
Determination version
4
Run number
User (full name)
Metrohm
User (short name)
Sample data
Test4
ID1
150 mL
Sample size
End points
DET U
DET U.1
EP1
0,9939
-75,1
mV
mL
Results
0,9939
mL
AgNO3 mL
invalid
mL
MNV AgNO3 mL
  EP1
V [mL]
0
0,2
0,4
0,6
0,8
1
1,2
U [mV]
30
10
-10
-30
-50
-70
-90
-110
-130
-150
DET U.1 - DET U
Page 1 of
1
==PAGE:75==
Program version tiamo 2.5 - 116 - 1
3325880
2022-12-09 14:37:53 UTC+1
DESKTOP-7K6M6O3
Metrohm
Computer name
License ID
User
Results report
Determination
Course11569-2021
Method
2021-08-03 09:46:58 UTC+2
Method saving date
3
Method version
original
Method state
2022-12-09 13:56:02 UTC+1
Determination start
original
Determination state
1
Determination version
5
Run number
User (full name)
Metrohm
User (short name)
Sample data
Test5
ID1
150 mL
Sample size
End points
DET U
DET U.1
EP1
0,9913
-71,6
mV
mL
Results
0,9913
mL
AgNO3 mL
invalid
mL
MNV AgNO3 mL
  EP1
V [mL]
0
0,2
0,4
0,6
0,8
1
1,2
U [mV]
30
10
-10
-30
-50
-70
-90
-110
-130
-150
DET U.1 - DET U
Page 1 of
1
==PAGE:76==
Program version tiamo 2.5 - 116 - 1
3325880
2022-12-09 14:37:52 UTC+1
DESKTOP-7K6M6O3
Metrohm
Computer name
License ID
User
Results report
Determination
Course11569-2021
Method
2021-08-03 09:46:58 UTC+2
Method saving date
3
Method version
original
Method state
2022-12-09 14:04:36 UTC+1
Determination start
original
Determination state
1
Determination version
6
Run number
User (full name)
Metrohm
User (short name)
Sample data
Sample1_Slice1_1
ID1
150 mL
Sample size
End points
DET U
DET U.1
EP1
0,5957
56,9
mV
mL
Results
0,5957
mL
AgNO3 mL
invalid
mL
MNV AgNO3 mL
  EP1
V [mL]
0
0,2
0,4
0,6
0,8
1
1,2
U [mV]
150
130
110
90
70
50
30
10
DET U.1 - DET U
Page 1 of
1
==PAGE:77==
Program version tiamo 2.5 - 116 - 1
3325880
2022-12-09 14:37:51 UTC+1
DESKTOP-7K6M6O3
Metrohm
Computer name
License ID
User
Results report
Determination
Course11569-2021
Method
2021-08-03 09:46:58 UTC+2
Method saving date
3
Method version
original
Method state
2022-12-09 14:10:03 UTC+1
Determination start
original
Determination state
1
Determination version
7
Run number
User (full name)
Metrohm
User (short name)
Sample data
Sample1_Slice1_2
ID1
150 mL
Sample size
End points
DET U
DET U.1
EP1
0,5874
60,2
mV
mL
Results
0,5874
mL
AgNO3 mL
invalid
mL
MNV AgNO3 mL
  EP1
V [mL]
0
0,2
0,4
0,6
0,8
1
1,2
U [mV]
150
130
110
90
70
50
30
10
DET U.1 - DET U
Page 1 of
1
==PAGE:78==
Program version tiamo 2.5 - 116 - 1
3325880
2022-12-09 14:37:50 UTC+1
DESKTOP-7K6M6O3
Metrohm
Computer name
License ID
User
Results report
Determination
Course11569-2021
Method
2021-08-03 09:46:58 UTC+2
Method saving date
3
Method version
original
Method state
2022-12-09 14:15:02 UTC+1
Determination start
original
Determination state
1
Determination version
8
Run number
User (full name)
Metrohm
User (short name)
Sample data
Sample1_Slice6_1
ID1
150 mL
Sample size
End points
DET U
DET U.1
EP1
0,2072
126,6
mV
mL
Results
0,2072
mL
AgNO3 mL
invalid
mL
MNV AgNO3 mL
  EP1
V [mL]
0
0,2
0,4
0,6
0,8
U [mV]
145
135
125
115
105
95
85
75
DET U.1 - DET U
Page 1 of
1
==PAGE:79==
Program version tiamo 2.5 - 116 - 1
3325880
2022-12-09 14:37:49 UTC+1
DESKTOP-7K6M6O3
Metrohm
Computer name
License ID
User
Results report
Determination
Course11569-2021
Method
2021-08-03 09:46:58 UTC+2
Method saving date
3
Method version
original
Method state
2022-12-09 14:18:25 UTC+1
Determination start
original
Determination state
1
Determination version
9
Run number
User (full name)
Metrohm
User (short name)
Sample data
Sample1_Slice6_2
ID1
150 mL
Sample size
End points
DET U
DET U.1
EP1
0,5497
58,3
mV
mL
Results
0,5497
mL
AgNO3 mL
invalid
mL
MNV AgNO3 mL
  EP1
V [mL]
0
0,2
0,4
0,6
0,8
1
U [mV]
150
130
110
90
70
50
30
10
DET U.1 - DET U
Page 1 of
1
==PAGE:80==
Program version tiamo 2.5 - 116 - 1
3325880
2022-12-09 14:37:48 UTC+1
DESKTOP-7K6M6O3
Metrohm
Computer name
License ID
User
Results report
Determination
Course11569-2021
Method
2021-08-03 09:46:58 UTC+2
Method saving date
3
Method version
original
Method state
2022-12-09 14:24:09 UTC+1
Determination start
original
Determination state
1
Determination version
10
Run number
User (full name)
Metrohm
User (short name)
Sample data
Sample1_Slice10_1
ID1
150 mL
Sample size
End points
DET U
DET U.1
EP1
0,4518
61,8
mV
mL
Results
0,4518
mL
AgNO3 mL
invalid
mL
MNV AgNO3 mL
  EP1
V [mL]
0
0,2
0,4
0,6
0,8
U [mV]
140
120
100
80
60
40
20
0
DET U.1 - DET U
Page 1 of
1
==PAGE:81==
Program version tiamo 2.5 - 116 - 1
3325880
2022-12-09 14:37:36 UTC+1
DESKTOP-7K6M6O3
Metrohm
Computer name
License ID
User
Results report
Determination
Course11569-2021
Method
2021-08-03 09:46:58 UTC+2
Method saving date
3
Method version
original
Method state
2022-12-09 14:28:37 UTC+1
Determination start
original
Determination state
1
Determination version
11
Run number
User (full name)
Metrohm
User (short name)
Sample data
Sample1_Slice10_2
ID1
150 mL
Sample size
End points
DET U
DET U.1
EP1
0,4323
68,4
mV
mL
Results
0,4323
mL
AgNO3 mL
invalid
mL
MNV AgNO3 mL
  EP1
V [mL]
0
0,2
0,4
0,6
0,8
U [mV]
140
120
100
80
60
40
20
DET U.1 - DET U
Page 1 of
1
==PAGE:82==
Program version tiamo 2.5 - 116 - 1
3325880
2023-01-05 13:45:32 UTC+1
DESKTOP-7K6M6O3
Metrohm
Computer name
License ID
User
Results report
Determination
Course11569-2021
Method
2021-08-03 09:46:58 UTC+2
Method saving date
3
Method version
original
Method state
2023-01-05 11:20:46 UTC+1
Determination start
original
Determination state
1
Determination version
1
Run number
User (full name)
Metrohm
User (short name)
Sample data
Test1
ID1
150 mL
Sample size
End points
DET U
DET U.1
EP1
0,9323
-74,9
mV
mL
Results
0,9323
mL
AgNO3 mL
invalid
mL
MNV AgNO3 mL
  EP1
V [mL]
0
0,2
0,4
0,6
0,8
1
1,2
U [mV]
20
0
-20
-40
-60
-80
-100
-120
-140
DET U.1 - DET U
Page 1 of
1
==PAGE:83==
Program version tiamo 2.5 - 116 - 1
3325880
2023-01-05 13:45:31 UTC+1
DESKTOP-7K6M6O3
Metrohm
Computer name
License ID
User
Results report
Determination
Course11569-2021
Method
2021-08-03 09:46:58 UTC+2
Method saving date
3
Method version
original
Method state
2023-01-05 11:30:09 UTC+1
Determination start
original
Determination state
1
Determination version
2
Run number
User (full name)
Metrohm
User (short name)
Sample data
Test2
ID1
150 mL
Sample size
End points
DET U
DET U.1
EP1
1,0023
-74,1
mV
mL
Results
1,0023
mL
AgNO3 mL
invalid
mL
MNV AgNO3 mL
  EP1
V [mL]
0
0,2
0,4
0,6
0,8
1
1,2
U [mV]
20
0
-20
-40
-60
-80
-100
-120
-140
DET U.1 - DET U
Page 1 of
1
==PAGE:84==
Program version tiamo 2.5 - 116 - 1
3325880
2023-01-05 13:45:30 UTC+1
DESKTOP-7K6M6O3
Metrohm
Computer name
License ID
User
Results report
Determination
Course11569-2021
Method
2021-08-03 09:46:58 UTC+2
Method saving date
3
Method version
original
Method state
2023-01-05 11:36:01 UTC+1
Determination start
original
Determination state
1
Determination version
3
Run number
User (full name)
Metrohm
User (short name)
Sample data
Test3
ID1
150 mL
Sample size
End points
DET U
DET U.1
EP1
1,0198
-76,4
mV
mL
Results
1,0198
mL
AgNO3 mL
invalid
mL
MNV AgNO3 mL
  EP1
V [mL]
0
0,2
0,4
0,6
0,8
1
1,2
U [mV]
20
0
-20
-40
-60
-80
-100
-120
-140
DET U.1 - DET U
Page 1 of
1
==PAGE:85==
Program version tiamo 2.5 - 116 - 1
3325880
2023-01-05 13:45:29 UTC+1
DESKTOP-7K6M6O3
Metrohm
Computer name
License ID
User
Results report
Determination
Course11569-2021
Method
2021-08-03 09:46:58 UTC+2
Method saving date
3
Method version
original
Method state
2023-01-05 11:39:52 UTC+1
Determination start
original
Determination state
1
Determination version
4
Run number
User (full name)
Metrohm
User (short name)
Sample data
Test4
ID1
150 mL
Sample size
End points
DET U
DET U.1
EP1
0,9932
-73,9
mV
mL
Results
0,9932
mL
AgNO3 mL
invalid
mL
MNV AgNO3 mL
  EP1
V [mL]
0
0,2
0,4
0,6
0,8
1
1,2
U [mV]
20
0
-20
-40
-60
-80
-100
-120
-140
DET U.1 - DET U
Page 1 of
1
==PAGE:86==
Program version tiamo 2.5 - 116 - 1
3325880
2023-01-05 13:45:28 UTC+1
DESKTOP-7K6M6O3
Metrohm
Computer name
License ID
User
Results report
Determination
Course11569-2021
Method
2021-08-03 09:46:58 UTC+2
Method saving date
3
Method version
original
Method state
2023-01-05 11:45:44 UTC+1
Determination start
original
Determination state
1
Determination version
5
Run number
User (full name)
Metrohm
User (short name)
Sample data
Test5
ID1
150 mL
Sample size
End points
DET U
DET U.1
EP1
0,9996
-76,6
mV
mL
Results
0,9996
mL
AgNO3 mL
invalid
mL
MNV AgNO3 mL
  EP1
V [mL]
0
0,2
0,4
0,6
0,8
1
1,2
U [mV]
20
0
-20
-40
-60
-80
-100
-120
-140
DET U.1 - DET U
Page 1 of
1
==PAGE:87==
Program version tiamo 2.5 - 116 - 1
3325880
2023-01-05 13:45:27 UTC+1
DESKTOP-7K6M6O3
Metrohm
Computer name
License ID
User
Results report
Determination
Course11569-2021
Method
2021-08-03 09:46:58 UTC+2
Method saving date
3
Method version
original
Method state
2023-01-05 11:53:51 UTC+1
Determination start
original
Determination state
1
Determination version
6
Run number
User (full name)
Metrohm
User (short name)
Sample data
Sample2_Slice1.1
ID1
150 mL
Sample size
End points
DET U
DET U.1
EP1
0,7368
78,0
mV
mL
Results
0,7368
mL
AgNO3 mL
invalid
mL
MNV AgNO3 mL
  EP1
V [mL]
0
0,2
0,4
0,6
0,8
1
1,2
U [mV]
170
150
130
110
90
70
50
30
10
DET U.1 - DET U
Page 1 of
1
==PAGE:88==
Program version tiamo 2.5 - 116 - 1
3325880
2023-01-05 13:45:26 UTC+1
DESKTOP-7K6M6O3
Metrohm
Computer name
License ID
User
Results report
Determination
Course11569-2021
Method
2021-08-03 09:46:58 UTC+2
Method saving date
3
Method version
original
Method state
2023-01-05 11:59:28 UTC+1
Determination start
original
Determination state
1
Determination version
7
Run number
User (full name)
Metrohm
User (short name)
Sample data
Sample2_Slice1.2
ID1
150 mL
Sample size
End points
DET U
DET U.1
EP1
0,7486
68,4
mV
mL
Results
0,7486
mL
AgNO3 mL
invalid
mL
MNV AgNO3 mL
  EP1
V [mL]
0
0,2
0,4
0,6
0,8
1
1,2
U [mV]
160
140
120
100
80
60
40
20
DET U.1 - DET U
Page 1 of
1
==PAGE:89==
Program version tiamo 2.5 - 116 - 1
3325880
2023-01-05 13:45:25 UTC+1
DESKTOP-7K6M6O3
Metrohm
Computer name
License ID
User
Results report
Determination
Course11569-2021
Method
2021-08-03 09:46:58 UTC+2
Method saving date
3
Method version
original
Method state
2023-01-05 12:05:18 UTC+1
Determination start
original
Determination state
1
Determination version
8
Run number
User (full name)
Metrohm
User (short name)
Sample data
Sample2_Slice6.1
ID1
150 mL
Sample size
End points
DET U
DET U.1
EP1
0,6309
74,3
mV
mL
Results
0,6309
mL
AgNO3 mL
invalid
mL
MNV AgNO3 mL
  EP1
V [mL]
0
0,2
0,4
0,6
0,8
1
U [mV]
160
140
120
100
80
60
40
20
DET U.1 - DET U
Page 1 of
1
==PAGE:90==
Program version tiamo 2.5 - 116 - 1
3325880
2023-01-05 13:45:24 UTC+1
DESKTOP-7K6M6O3
Metrohm
Computer name
License ID
User
Results report
Determination
Course11569-2021
Method
2021-08-03 09:46:58 UTC+2
Method saving date
3
Method version
original
Method state
2023-01-05 12:11:51 UTC+1
Determination start
original
Determination state
1
Determination version
9
Run number
User (full name)
Metrohm
User (short name)
Sample data
Sample2_Slice6.2
ID1
150 mL
Sample size
End points
DET U
DET U.1
EP1
0,6332
73,8
mV
mL
Results
0,6332
mL
AgNO3 mL
invalid
mL
MNV AgNO3 mL
  EP1
V [mL]
0
0,2
0,4
0,6
0,8
1
U [mV]
160
140
120
100
80
60
40
20
DET U.1 - DET U
Page 1 of
1
==PAGE:91==
Program version tiamo 2.5 - 116 - 1
3325880
2023-01-05 13:45:23 UTC+1
DESKTOP-7K6M6O3
Metrohm
Computer name
License ID
User
Results report
Determination
Course11569-2021
Method
2021-08-03 09:46:58 UTC+2
Method saving date
3
Method version
original
Method state
2023-01-05 12:16:57 UTC+1
Determination start
original
Determination state
1
Determination version
10
Run number
User (full name)
Metrohm
User (short name)
Sample data
Sample2_Slice10.1
ID1
150 mL
Sample size
End points
DET U
DET U.1
EP1
0,6832
57,4
mV
mL
Results
0,6832
mL
AgNO3 mL
invalid
mL
MNV AgNO3 mL
  EP1
V [mL]
0
0,2
0,4
0,6
0,8
U [mV]
150
130
110
90
70
50
30
DET U.1 - DET U
Page 1 of
1
==PAGE:92==
Program version tiamo 2.5 - 116 - 1
3325880
2023-01-05 13:45:22 UTC+1
DESKTOP-7K6M6O3
Metrohm
Computer name
License ID
User
Results report
Determination
Course11569-2021
Method
2021-08-03 09:46:58 UTC+2
Method saving date
3
Method version
original
Method state
2023-01-05 12:21:45 UTC+1
Determination start
original
Determination state
1
Determination version
11
Run number
User (full name)
Metrohm
User (short name)
Sample data
Sample2_Slice10.2
ID1
150 mL
Sample size
End points
DET U
DET U.1
EP1
0,7054
52,5
mV
mL
Results
0,7054
mL
AgNO3 mL
invalid
mL
MNV AgNO3 mL
  EP1
V [mL]
0
0,2
0,4
0,6
0,8
1
1,2
U [mV]
150
130
110
90
70
50
30
10
DET U.1 - DET U
Page 1 of
1
==PAGE:93==
Program version tiamo 2.5 - 116 - 1
3325880
2023-01-05 13:45:21 UTC+1
DESKTOP-7K6M6O3
Metrohm
Computer name
License ID
User
Results report
Determination
Course11569-2021
Method
2021-08-03 09:46:58 UTC+2
Method saving date
3
Method version
original
Method state
2023-01-05 12:26:50 UTC+1
Determination start
original
Determination state
1
Determination version
12
Run number
User (full name)
Metrohm
User (short name)
Sample data
Sample3_Slice1.1
ID1
150 mL
Sample size
End points
DET U
DET U.1
EP1
0,7349
70,4
mV
mL
Results
0,7349
mL
AgNO3 mL
invalid
mL
MNV AgNO3 mL
  EP1
V [mL]
0
0,2
0,4
0,6
0,8
1
1,2
U [mV]
160
140
120
100
80
60
40
20
DET U.1 - DET U
Page 1 of
1
==PAGE:94==
Program version tiamo 2.5 - 116 - 1
3325880
2023-01-05 13:45:20 UTC+1
DESKTOP-7K6M6O3
Metrohm
Computer name
License ID
User
Results report
Determination
Course11569-2021
Method
2021-08-03 09:46:58 UTC+2
Method saving date
3
Method version
original
Method state
2023-01-05 12:35:38 UTC+1
Determination start
original
Determination state
1
Determination version
13
Run number
User (full name)
Metrohm
User (short name)
Sample data
Sample3_Slice1.2
ID1
150 mL
Sample size
End points
DET U
DET U.1
EP1
0,5881
112,8
mV
mL
Results
0,5881
mL
AgNO3 mL
invalid
mL
MNV AgNO3 mL
  EP1
V [mL]
0
0,2
0,4
0,6
U [mV]
160
140
120
100
80
60
DET U.1 - DET U
Page 1 of
1
==PAGE:95==
Program version tiamo 2.5 - 116 - 1
3325880
2023-01-05 13:45:19 UTC+1
DESKTOP-7K6M6O3
Metrohm
Computer name
License ID
User
Results report
Determination
Course11569-2021
Method
2021-08-03 09:46:58 UTC+2
Method saving date
3
Method version
original
Method state
2023-01-05 12:42:10 UTC+1
Determination start
original
Determination state
1
Determination version
14
Run number
User (full name)
Metrohm
User (short name)
Sample data
Sample3_Slice6.1
ID1
150 mL
Sample size
End points
DET U
DET U.1
EP1
0,7975
74,1
mV
mL
Results
0,7975
mL
AgNO3 mL
invalid
mL
MNV AgNO3 mL
  EP1
V [mL]
0
0,2
0,4
0,6
0,8
1
1,2
U [mV]
160
140
120
100
80
60
40
20
DET U.1 - DET U
Page 1 of
1
==PAGE:96==
Program version tiamo 2.5 - 116 - 1
3325880
2023-01-05 13:45:18 UTC+1
DESKTOP-7K6M6O3
Metrohm
Computer name
License ID
User
Results report
Determination
Course11569-2021
Method
2021-08-03 09:46:58 UTC+2
Method saving date
3
Method version
original
Method state
2023-01-05 12:47:53 UTC+1
Determination start
original
Determination state
1
Determination version
15
Run number
User (full name)
Metrohm
User (short name)
Sample data
Sample3_Slice6.2
ID1
150 mL
Sample size
End points
DET U
DET U.1
EP1
0,7882
79,9
mV
mL
Results
0,7882
mL
AgNO3 mL
invalid
mL
MNV AgNO3 mL
  EP1
V [mL]
0
0,2
0,4
0,6
0,8
1
1,2
U [mV]
160
140
120
100
80
60
40
20
DET U.1 - DET U
Page 1 of
1
==PAGE:97==
Program version tiamo 2.5 - 116 - 1
3325880
2023-01-05 13:45:17 UTC+1
DESKTOP-7K6M6O3
Metrohm
Computer name
License ID
User
Results report
Determination
Course11569-2021
Method
2021-08-03 09:46:58 UTC+2
Method saving date
3
Method version
original
Method state
2023-01-05 12:53:12 UTC+1
Determination start
original
Determination state
1
Determination version
16
Run number
User (full name)
Metrohm
User (short name)
Sample data
Sample3_Slice10.1
ID1
150 mL
Sample size
End points
DET U
DET U.1
EP1
0,7534
68,6
mV
mL
Results
0,7534
mL
AgNO3 mL
invalid
mL
MNV AgNO3 mL
  EP1
V [mL]
0
0,2
0,4
0,6
0,8
1
1,2
U [mV]
160
140
120
100
80
60
40
20
DET U.1 - DET U
Page 1 of
1
==PAGE:98==
Program version tiamo 2.5 - 116 - 1
3325880
2023-01-05 13:45:16 UTC+1
DESKTOP-7K6M6O3
Metrohm
Computer name
License ID
User
Results report
Determination
Course11569-2021
Method
2021-08-03 09:46:58 UTC+2
Method saving date
3
Method version
original
Method state
2023-01-05 12:58:42 UTC+1
Determination start
original
Determination state
1
Determination version
17
Run number
User (full name)
Metrohm
User (short name)
Sample data
Sample3_Slice10.2
ID1
150 mL
Sample size
End points
DET U
DET U.1
EP1
0,7803
65,9
mV
mL
Results
0,7803
mL
AgNO3 mL
invalid
mL
MNV AgNO3 mL
  EP1
V [mL]
0
0,2
0,4
0,6
0,8
1
1,2
U [mV]
160
140
120
100
80
60
40
20
DET U.1 - DET U
Page 1 of
1
==PAGE:99==
Program version tiamo 2.5 - 116 - 1
3325880
2023-01-05 13:45:15 UTC+1
DESKTOP-7K6M6O3
Metrohm
Computer name
License ID
User
Results report
Determination
Course11569-2021
Method
2021-08-03 09:46:58 UTC+2
Method saving date
3
Method version
original
Method state
2023-01-05 13:07:28 UTC+1
Determination start
original
Determination state
1
Determination version
18
Run number
User (full name)
Metrohm
User (short name)
Sample data
Sample4_Slice1.1
ID1
150 mL
Sample size
End points
DET U
DET U.1
EP1
0,8169
69,4
mV
mL
Results
0,8169
mL
AgNO3 mL
invalid
mL
MNV AgNO3 mL
  EP1
V [mL]
0
0,2
0,4
0,6
0,8
1
1,2
U [mV]
160
140
120
100
80
60
40
20
DET U.1 - DET U
Page 1 of
1
==PAGE:100==
Program version tiamo 2.5 - 116 - 1
3325880
2023-01-05 13:45:14 UTC+1
DESKTOP-7K6M6O3
Metrohm
Computer name
License ID
User
Results report
Determination
Course11569-2021
Method
2021-08-03 09:46:58 UTC+2
Method saving date
3
Method version
original
Method state
2023-01-05 13:13:07 UTC+1
Determination start
original
Determination state
1
Determination version
19
Run number
User (full name)
Metrohm
User (short name)
Sample data
Sample4_Slice1.2
ID1
150 mL
Sample size
End points
DET U
DET U.1
EP1
0,6639
104,7
mV
mL
Results
0,6639
mL
AgNO3 mL
invalid
mL
MNV AgNO3 mL
  EP1
V [mL]
0
0,2
0,4
0,6
0,8
U [mV]
160
140
120
100
80
60
40
DET U.1 - DET U
Page 1 of
1
==PAGE:101==
Program version tiamo 2.5 - 116 - 1
3325880
2023-01-05 13:45:13 UTC+1
DESKTOP-7K6M6O3
Metrohm
Computer name
License ID
User
Results report
Determination
Course11569-2021
Method
2021-08-03 09:46:58 UTC+2
Method saving date
3
Method version
original
Method state
2023-01-05 13:18:18 UTC+1
Determination start
original
Determination state
1
Determination version
20
Run number
User (full name)
Metrohm
User (short name)
Sample data
Sample4_Slice6.1
ID1
150 mL
Sample size
End points
DET U
DET U.1
EP1
1,0950
69,5
mV
mL
Results
1,0950
mL
AgNO3 mL
invalid
mL
MNV AgNO3 mL
  EP1
V [mL]
0
0,2
0,4
0,6
0,8
1
1,2
1,4
U [mV]
170
150
130
110
90
70
50
30
10
DET U.1 - DET U
Page 1 of
1
==PAGE:102==
Program version tiamo 2.5 - 116 - 1
3325880
2023-01-05 13:45:12 UTC+1
DESKTOP-7K6M6O3
Metrohm
Computer name
License ID
User
Results report
Determination
Course11569-2021
Method
2021-08-03 09:46:58 UTC+2
Method saving date
3
Method version
original
Method state
2023-01-05 13:23:46 UTC+1
Determination start
original
Determination state
1
Determination version
21
Run number
User (full name)
Metrohm
User (short name)
Sample data
Sample4_Slice6.2
ID1
150 mL
Sample size
End points
DET U
DET U.1
EP1
1,1417
50,0
mV
mL
Results
1,1417
mL
AgNO3 mL
invalid
mL
MNV AgNO3 mL
  EP1
V [mL]
0
0,2
0,4
0,6
0,8
1
1,2
1,4
1,6
U [mV]
170
150
130
110
90
70
50
30
10
DET U.1 - DET U
Page 1 of
1
==PAGE:103==
Program version tiamo 2.5 - 116 - 1
3325880
2023-01-05 13:45:11 UTC+1
DESKTOP-7K6M6O3
Metrohm
Computer name
License ID
User
Results report
Determination
Course11569-2021
Method
2021-08-03 09:46:58 UTC+2
Method saving date
3
Method version
original
Method state
2023-01-05 13:28:20 UTC+1
Determination start
original
Determination state
1
Determination version
22
Run number
User (full name)
Metrohm
User (short name)
Sample data
Sample4_Slice10.1
ID1
150 mL
Sample size
End points
DET U
DET U.1
EP1
1,0152
60,1
mV
mL
Results
1,0152
mL
AgNO3 mL
invalid
mL
MNV AgNO3 mL
  EP1
V [mL]
0
0,2
0,4
0,6
0,8
1
1,2
1,4
U [mV]
160
140
120
100
80
60
40
20
DET U.1 - DET U
Page 1 of
1
==PAGE:104==
Program version tiamo 2.5 - 116 - 1
3325880
2023-01-05 13:45:01 UTC+1
DESKTOP-7K6M6O3
Metrohm
Computer name
License ID
User
Results report
Determination
Course11569-2021
Method
2021-08-03 09:46:58 UTC+2
Method saving date
3
Method version
original
Method state
2023-01-05 13:33:41 UTC+1
Determination start
original
Determination state
1
Determination version
23
Run number
User (full name)
Metrohm
User (short name)
Sample data
Sample4_Slice10.2
ID1
150 mL
Sample size
End points
DET U
DET U.1
EP1
1,0877
40,8
mV
mL
Results
1,0877
mL
AgNO3 mL
invalid
mL
MNV AgNO3 mL
  EP1
V [mL]
0
0,2
0,4
0,6
0,8
1
1,2
1,4
U [mV]
160
140
120
100
80
60
40
20
DET U.1 - DET U
Page 1 of
1
