==PAGE:1==
Design, development, and assessment of a
graphical user interface for programming digi-
tal microfluidic biochips
Master Thesis
DTU Compute
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Design, development, and assessment of a graphical user interface for program­
ming digital microfluidic biochips
Master Thesis
January, 2023
By
Wojciech Jakub Ciok
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus­
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Published by:
DTU, Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science,
Richard Petersens Plads, Building 324, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:4==
Preface
This thesis was prepared at the Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer sci­
ence of the Technical University of Denmark in fulfillment for the requirements of an MSc
in Computer Science. The thesis was carried out from 29 August 2022 to 29 January
2023 under the supervision of Assistant Professor Luca Pezzarossa and Professor Jan
Madsen.
Wojciech Jakub Ciok ­ s182125
January 28, 2023
ii
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
This thesis explores the field of programmable biology, specifically focusing on digital
microfluidics and developing a user­friendly graphical user interface (GUI) for program­
ming digital microfluidic biochips (DMF). Digital microfluidics involves the precise control
of small droplets of fluids on a chip using electrical signals. It has potential applications in
many fields, such as lab­on­a­chip devices, drug discovery, and genetic analysis. How­
ever, operating DMF biochips can present a significant challenge, particularly for scientific
staff without programming knowledge. The thesis aims to address this challenge by intro­
ducing a web­based GUI that simplifies the programming process and provides a more
intuitive interface for DMF.
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
Luca Pezzarossa, Assistant Professor, supervisor
I would like to express my gratitude to my supervisor, Assistant Professor Luca Pez­
zarossa, for his guidance and support throughout my thesis. Our regular meetings and
his availability were instrumental in completing this work.
Jan Madsen, Professor, supervisor
Thank you to Jan Madsen for giving me the opportunity to contribute to the project.
I would like to extend my appreciation to
Lea Holritz, Researcher,
Neeti Kalyani, Researcher,
Susan Ibi Preus, Researcher and
Christian Vinther Bertelsen, Researcher
for their invaluable assistance in testing the solution. Their contributions were essential
in ensuring the quality and success of the project.
Lastly, I’d like to mention Sylwia for her support and encouragement throughout the pro­
cess of writing this thesis.
iv
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
1
2
Background
3
2.1
Digital microfluidics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
Front­end . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.3
React
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.4
Typescript . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.5
Control flow and data flow graphs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
3
Related work
9
3.1
A block­based graphical user interface for programming digital microfluidic
biochips . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3.2
BioScript
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
3.3
OpenDrop . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.4
Visual programming languages . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
4
Design and specification
17
4.1
High level specification . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
4.2
Initial design
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
4.3
Interface layout and controls
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
4.4
List and functionality of operations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
4.5
Parallelism
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26
4.6
Initial design validation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 28
5
Architecture and implementation
33
5.1
Technical infrastructure and libraries . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 33
5.2
Development process . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 34
5.3
Architectural pattern . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 34
5.4
Classes and interfaces . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 35
5.5
Global state (store) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 53
5.6
Abstract syntax tree
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 55
5.7
React components . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 57
5.8
Extensibility . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 65
6
Testing and evaluation
69
6.1
Automated tests
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 69
6.2
User testing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 73
v
==PAGE:8==
6.3
Size and download speed . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 75
6.4
Performance
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 75
6.5
Protocol examples . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 77
7
Conclusion
81
7.1
Summary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 81
7.2
Advantages and Disadvantages of the Developed Solution
. . . . . . . . . 81
7.3
Future work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 82
7.4
Contributions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 83
Bibliography
85
vi
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction
Programmable biology is the use of engineering principles and techniques to design, cre­
ate, and control biological systems. It is an interdisciplinary field that combines biology,
chemistry, computer science, and engineering knowledge to design and control biological
systems and create new functions and behaviors.
The field of programmable biology has seen rapid growth in recent years, with the de­
velopment of new tools and techniques for manipulating and reprogramming biological
systems. One area of particular interest is digital microfluidics (DMF), which involves the
precise control of small droplets of fluids on a chip using electrical signals. Digital microflu­
idics biochips have potential applications in many fields, such as lab­on­a­chip devices,
drug discovery, and genetic analysis.
This technology represents a significant advancement in laboratory automation by provid­
ing a miniaturized and integrated platform for performing various biochemical processes.
Traditional laboratories use physical equipment, such as pipettes and test tubes, to mix
and manipulate liquids for scientific experiments. DMF platforms emulate the functional­
ities of traditional wet­work laboratories on a chip­size scale. They achieve it by utilizing
small droplets of reagents manipulated by applying an electric potential to electrodes com­
prising a grid that covers the entire platform. This approach enables the manipulation of
droplets with high precision and accuracy, allowing for the execution of complex protocols
that involve merging, splitting, mixing, and other operations akin to those performed in tra­
ditional laboratories. Additionally, the DMF platforms are equipped with various sensors
and tools, such as heating and cooling elements, that enable the performance of bio­
chemical experiments under controlled conditions with minimal consumption of liquids.
Compared to traditional wet laboratories, digital microfluidics is more cost­efficient and
requires less space.
These devices have the potential to revolutionize many areas of research, but the pro­
gramming and control of these devices is still a major challenge. Operating digital mi­
crofluidic biochips can present a significant challenge, particularly for scientific staff with­
out programming knowledge. To effectively use DMF biochips, a user­friendly approach to
protocol design is required to simplify the complex software and programming needed to
operate them. An interface that simplifies the utilization of DMF would enable a broader
range of users to advance research in this area, resulting in more discoveries and ad­
vancements. This is crucial as digital microfluidics has the potential to transform the way
biological experiments are conducted.
This thesis aims to make programming digital microfluidic biochips (DMF) more accessi­
ble and user­friendly by introducing a graphical user interface (GUI). A GUI is an inter­
face that allows users to interact with a system through visual elements, such as icons
and menus, rather than through commands or code. This thesis presents a GUI in the
form of a web­based application that can be accessed through a browser. The design of
1
==PAGE:10==
this project takes into account user feedback and was influenced by related projects. It
presents a novel approach to organizing protocols in a sequential, “block ribbon” format.
The graphical user interface was built with a modern technology stack, utilizing React [1]
as the frontend framework, and was developed using a continuous integration and contin­
uous delivery pipeline. It was evaluated in terms of its ability to program digital microfluidic
biochips, usability, and performance.
To fully understand our system, it is recommended to try the software. By engaging with
the web application, the reader will gain a deeper understanding of the concepts presented
in this thesis. The application has been deployed and can be found and tested at this
website: https://bio­blocks.vercel.app/.
The thesis structure includes seven chapters that provide a comprehensive overview of
the research topic and work carried out in this thesis. These chapters, excluding the
introduction, are as follows.
• Chapter 2, “Background”, provides a general introduction to the topic, explains con­
cepts used in the thesis and sets the context for the research.
• Chapter 3, “Related Work”, reviews existing projects and research in the field to
establish the current state of knowledge.
• Chapter 4, “Design and Specification”, details the design of the interface and the
specific objectives which the project tried to accommodate.
• Chapter 5, “Architecture and Implementation”, describes the technical details of the
proposed solution and how it was implemented.
• Chapter 6, “Testing and Evaluation”, presents the results of the testing and evalua­
tion of the proposed solution.
• Chapter 7, “Conclusion”, summarizes the main findings and contributions of the
thesis and provides recommendations for future work.
2
==PAGE:11==
2
Background
Before we describe the work we have done in this project, we want to present the back­
ground and related work that provides context and introduces the relevant research and
ideas that have influenced this thesis. By discussing this information, we aim to provide
a better understanding of the foundations and influences behind this project.
In this part of the paper, we present the background of the research that has been done.
The purpose of this is to help make it easier to understand the ideas and terminology that
are used in the paper. By giving more information it should be easier to follow along and
grasp the concepts being discussed. As this thesis concerns digital microfluidics, in this
chapter, we first give an introduction to this field. Next, as this thesis focuses on creating
a user interface, we explain the basics of front­end development. Going into more detail,
we describe the UI framework used to build the interface and the language it has been
written with. Finally, we present the theory behind data and control flow graphs to give an
overview of the terminology used for describing data flow visually.
2.1
Digital microfluidics
Digital microfluidics is a lab­on­chip technology that enables the manipulation of small
volumes of liquids to execute biochemical processes on a small and portable scale. It
is enabled by using the technique called electrowetting on dielectric (EWOD) [2] where
individual liquid droplets are manipulated using electrostatic forces. This is achieved by
applying a voltage across a grid of electrodes, which causes the droplets to move towards
or away from electrodes depending on their charge.
As described in ”Biolabs as Computing Components” [3], the primary function of a DMF
electrode is to act as a droplet router, allowing droplets to be transported, merged, mixed,
and split by actuating them over predefined paths. How these four basic operations can
be performed by activating different electrodes is presented in fig. 2.2. When two droplets
are merged, efficient mixing requires movement on the surface of the chip to accelerate
the process, and different actuation paths can have other effects on the speed and ef­
fectiveness of mixing. Controlled splitting of droplets is essential for precisely dispensing
analytes when a single droplet needs to be part of multiple reactions or to provide a re­
quired analyte concentration. Splitting is achieved by simultaneously activating at least
three electrodes beneath the droplet, stretching it over the surface area of the activated
electrodes, and then deactivating the middle electrode to allow the created surface ten­
sion to split the droplet into two smaller ones. A traditional circular mixing pattern is often
used to ensure proper liquid mixing. The paper also describes developing a prototype of
a DMF biochip platform which is presented in fig. 2.1.
It is possible to extend operations available on a DMF platform by introducing sensors.
Sensors allow for real­time monitoring and analysis of biological processes within the
3
==PAGE:12==
chip. For example, pH sensors can be used to measure the acidity of the fluid within
the chip, while temperature sensors can measure the temperature of the fluid. Interface
developed in this thesis introduces additional operations which abstract away from the
transport operation. As an example, the output operation facilitates the movement of a
designated droplet to an output location. A comprehensive list of these operations will be
provided in section 4.4.
Figure 2.1: A DMF biochip platform developed at Technical University of Denmark
(a) Transporting
(b) Splitting
(c) Merging
(d) Mixing
Figure 2.2: Four basic operations possible on a DMF platform
One of the main advantages of digital microfluidics is its ability to perform many reactions
in parallel, enabling high­throughput analysis and reducing the time and cost required for
specific experiments. Furthermore, it allows for avoiding pipetting every time liquids have
to be moved, except for initial droplet placement. This technology will likely be developed
to a point where laboratory work requires minimal human input, and protocols can be
executed automatically on a large­scale biochip.
The electrical operation of fluids opens possibilities for programmable biochemistry. By
building an abstraction on top of controlling the biochip cells, we could provide an ex­
tremely flexible, fast, and efficient way for conducting biochemical experiments.
4
==PAGE:13==
2.2
Front-end
Front­end development refers to the design and development of the user interface of a
website or web application. It involves the implementation of HTML [4], CSS [5], and
JavaScript [6] to create the visual and interactive elements of a website or application
that users interact with.
Browsers are designed to interpret and display HTML, CSS, and JavaScript, which are the
technologies used to build and structure the content and layout of a website. When you
visit a website, your browser sends a request to the server where the website is hosted,
and the server responds by sending the HTML, CSS, and JavaScript files back to the
browser. The browser then parses these files and uses them to build a representation of
the website, known as the Document Object Model (DOM) [7].
The DOM is a tree­like structure that represents the website’s structure and how the differ­
ent elements on the page are related. The browser uses the DOM to render the website
on the screen, applying the styles defined in the CSS and enabling the interactive features
implemented in JavaScript. This is why HTML, CSS, and JavaScript are sometimes re­
ferred to as the ”front­end” technologies, as they are responsible for how a website looks
and behaves in the browser.
2.3
React
React [1] is an open­source JavaScript library for building user interfaces. It was de­
veloped by Facebook and is often used for building single­page applications and mobile
applications.
React allows developers to create reusable components, which can be used in multiple
places throughout an application. This makes it easier to build and maintain large ap­
plications, as developers can reuse code instead of writing everything from scratch or
copying it as they would in HTML. It uses a virtual DOM (a lightweight in­memory repre­
sentation of the actual DOM) to optimize updates to the actual DOM, which helps improve
the performance of applications that use React.
It follows a declarative programming paradigm, which means that developers specify what
the UI should look like at any given point in time, rather than specifying how the UI should
be updated in response to changes in the state. In other words, developers declare the
desired state of the UI, and React takes care of updating the actual DOM to match the
declared state.
React is a popular and widely adopted library with a large and active community of devel­
opers. This means that a wealth of resources is available for learning and troubleshooting,
as well as a large number of third­party libraries and tools that can be used with React.
2.4
Typescript
TypeScript [8] is a popular programming language that has gained significant adoption in
recent years. According to the Stack Overflow Developer Survey for 2022 [9], TypeScript
was the fifth most popular language among developers.
TypeScript is often used in large­scale applications and is particularly popular in the en­
terprise development space. It is also often used in conjunction with frameworks such as
Angular, React, and Vue.js.
5
==PAGE:14==
It is a programming language that is designed to be a superset of JavaScript. This means
that it includes all of the features of JavaScript, but it also adds some additional features
that are not available in standard JavaScript.
One of the main benefits of using TypeScript is that it is a typed language. This means
that variables in the code have a specific type, such as a number, string, or boolean.
These ”primitives” can be combined into more complex types. When a value is assigned
to a variable, the type of the value must match the type of the variable. This helps catch
mistakes in the code.
In addition to the type system, TypeScript also includes other features that are not avail­
able in standard JavaScript. These include things like interfaces, and enums, which can
make it easier to write and maintain large, complex programs.
TypeScript comes with a compiler that compiles it to common JavaScript which then can
be run in the browser.
2.5
Control flow and data flow graphs
Control flow graphs and data flow graphs are two different types of graphical representa­
tions that can be used to model the behavior and operation of a system.
(a) A while loop represented as a control flow
graph.
(b) Addition represented as data flow graph.
Figure 2.3: Basic examples of flow graphs.
A control flow graph is a graphical representation of the control flow in a program or sys­
tem. It shows the sequence in which different instructions or statements are executed
and how the system responds to different inputs or conditions. Control flow graphs are
typically used to visualize the logic and structure of a program or system and to under­
stand how the system makes decisions and takes different paths of execution. It is useful
for showing alternative paths of execution as presented in fig. 2.3a.
Data flow graphs are typically used to model data flow in a system and to understand
how data is transformed and used as it moves through the system. It shows the input
and output of data at various processing stages and the relationships between different
data sources, processes, and destinations. It is useful when trying to show a path a given
value takes and how it is transformed as in a simple example in fig. 2.3b.
Choosing between control flow graphs and data flow graphs depends on the goals and
context of the modeling effort and the level of detail and complexity needed. If the model’s
primary focus is on understanding the control flow in a system, a control flow graph may
6
==PAGE:15==
be the more appropriate choice. A data flow graph may be more suitable if the main focus
is on understanding data flow in a system.
7
==PAGE:16==
8
==PAGE:17==
3
Related work
In this chapter, we review the existing research on digital microfluidic user interfaces and
their role in enabling the use of these devices. We discuss the challenges and limitations
identified in designing these interfaces, as well as the opportunities for future research in
this area.
We also review state­of­the­art visual programming languages. These general­purpose
programming languages can be used via a graphical interface. They do not concern DMF
directly, but they have exciting approaches to problems that this thesis tries to solve in the
context of DMF.
3.1
A block-based graphical user interface for programming
digital microfluidic biochips
Our work builds on top of the work done by Felix Høgstædt Larsen in ”A block­based
graphical user interface for programming digital microfluidic biochips.” [10] Felix aimed to
solve the same issue we are and came up with a block­based design presented in fig. 3.1.
Figure 3.1: Felix’s GUI with components identified by colored borders. Blue: Canvas,
Red: Toolbox, Green: Inspector, Orange: Toolbar
9
==PAGE:18==
In the interface, each block is an operation with an input on the left side and an output
on the right side. The blocks are put in the canvas, where the protocol is built. They
are connected from the previous block’s output to the following blocks’ input, creating a
chain and suggesting making the protocol from left to right. It is up to the user to arrange
the blocks so that the edges between blocks are easily visible. The input and output of
the blocks could suggest that the protocol is built as a data flow graph but also shows
characteristics of a control flow graph. For example, ”input” blocks that add a droplet can
be chained together. The result is a diagram­like representation of a protocol. Conditional
paths are solved using an ”if” block, which splits into a ”true” and a ”false” branch. Looping
is solved by using a ”repeat” block and pointing back to a block before in the chain.
The interface layout is straightforward, and it’s a good thing. The most significant portion
is the canvas ­ the workspace. Available blocks are always visible and available from the
left panel, and the tooltip’s position at the top of the screen should not surprise a first­time
user.
Different blocks are very similar to each other. They have the same color and are distin­
guished by a title at the top. Except for input and output anchors, there is no additional
information on the blocks.
3.2
BioScript
BioScript is a domain­specific programming language explicitly designed for biochemistry.
One of the main features of BioScript is its syntax, which is designed to be easy for people
to read by resembling plain English. It is intended to be easily understood for people
working in life science. It is possible by minimizing the number of operations accessible
to the user and delegating work to the compiler. An overview of the operations available
in BioScript is presented in table 3.1.
Target
Features
Core
Material Declaration
Mix
Output
Store
Repeat
Control Flow
Branch
Loop
Digital
Detect
Heat
Split
Table 3.1: BioScript supported fluidic operations.
Expressions like ”replacement = mix 25uL of PCRMasterMix with 25uL of Template for 5s”,
visible in an example of a BioScript protocol in listing 3.1, are powerful. The expression
will get the appropriate volume of two liquids, merge them and mix them for the specified
amount of time. The language also includes a type system that helps to prevent errors
related to biochemistry, such as the combination of chemicals that could be dangerous.
The BioScript compiler includes optimizations that allow biochemical operations to be per­
10
==PAGE:19==
formed concurrently on a 2D platform rather than on individual blocks of code. It abstracts
from the explicit movement of fluids on a chip by providing a set of operations and allowing
the compiler to take care of the routing.
The utility of BioScript in the context of our work cannot be overstated. While it may lack
a graphical interface, its method of formally capturing and representing biochemical pro­
cesses is both sophisticated and comprehensive. Its straightforward syntax and intuitive
structure make it easily accessible for those with programming knowledge, and its sim­
plicity affords minimal training requirements for those without. BioScript is a useful tool
for acquiring and understanding biochemical processes, offering both efficiency and ease
of use.
1
// PCRMasterMix is a commercially available
2
// pre-mixed concentrated solution that has
3
// all required components to perform PCR
4
// that are specific to the sample.
5
PCRMix = mix PCRMasterMix with Template for 1s
6
repeat 50 times {
7
heat PCRMix at 95C for 20s
8
volumeWeight = detect Weight on PCRMix
9
if (volumeWeight <= 50uL) {
10
replacement = mix 25uL of PCRMasterMix with 25uL of Template for 5s
11
heat replacement at 95C for 45s
12
PCRMix = mix PCRMix with replacement for 5s
13
}
14
heat PCRMix at 68C for 30s
15
heat PCRMix at 95C for 45s
16
}
17
heat PCRMix at 68C for 5min save PCRMix
Listing 3.1: An example of a BioScript protocol ­ PCR with droplet replenishment
While it is a simple language, it does require programming knowledge to start using it. Its
syntax, though similar to plain English, still has to be learned to start using it. It also does
not provide beginner­friendly documentation, which could help new users, or a guide on
how to start using it. It is not easily accessible by new audiences.
3.3
OpenDrop
OpenDrop V4 [11] is a modular, open­source digital microfluidics platform for research
purposes. As visible in fig. 3.2, it offers a well­packaged platform extensible with various
modules. There is a space between the cartridge and the driver board, which can accom­
modate specific components such as elements for temperature control, electromagnets
for magnetic beads, or optical sensors for reaction measurements.
The device can be used with a user interface presented in fig. 3.3 when connected to
a computer. The user interface has been written using Processing [12] ­ a Java­based
sketching environment. The interface has an intuitive design that makes it simple to use.
It is structured such that a protocol is broken down into frames. Each frame has its set
of active and inactive cells. The user can navigate between frames and toggle the status
of individual cells by clicking on them. When the protocol is executed, the device will
activate the cells in each frame in a specific order, as determined by the user. Building a
protocol this way is easy to understand however, it can be time­consuming and prone to
errors, particularly when constructing more complex structures. It is crucial for the user to
11
==PAGE:20==
Figure 3.2: OpenDrop DMF platform (Credit: Susan Preus)
carefully consider the order in which the cells should be activated to ensure the device’s
proper functioning.
Figure 3.3: OpenDrop graphical user interface
While the program is simple to install and operate, it is prone to errors, which necessitates
a significant investment of time and effort on the part of the user to create even a basic
protocol. Additionally, the solution does not scale and becomes increasingly difficult to
use as the protocol complexity increases.
3.4
Visual programming languages
Visual programming languages (VPLs) are programming languages that use visual rep­
resentations of code rather than text to create programs. These languages are designed
to be easier to learn and use, particularly for those who may not have a background in
traditional programming languages.
In a visual programming language, code is written using graphical elements, such as
12
==PAGE:21==
blocks, nodes, or icons, which are connected to form a program. This allows users to
create programs without writing text­based code, making it a more accessible option for
those who may not have the necessary programming skills or knowledge.
Learning about different types of visual programming languages (VPLs) can be beneficial
in the context of DMF for various reasons. One key motivation is that VPLs offer a visu­
ally engaging approach to solving common programming challenges such as data flow,
parallelism, loops, and conditionals. Learning about VPLs can be a valuable asset in the
context of DMF, as they offer an innovative and visually appealing way to tackle various
programming challenges.
A common use case for a VPL is for educational purposes. Educational visual program­
ming languages are designed for use in academic settings, intending to help students
learn programming fundamentals more interactively and intuitively. These languages are
often used in primary and secondary education and higher education to introduce students
to programming concepts and techniques.
3.4.1
Blockly
An example of such a language is Blockly [13]. It is a visual programming language that
uses blocks as a representation of code. It was developed by Google and is used to create
programs for various applications, including web, mobile, and desktop applications. In
Blockly, code is written using blocks connected to form a program. The blocks represent
different types of code, such as variables, loops, and conditionals, and can be easily
rearranged and modified to change the program’s behavior.
Blockly is designed to be flexible and can be customized for different programming lan­
guages, including JavaScript, Python, and PHP. It is used in various settings, including
education, research, and industry, and is particularly popular for creating programs for the
web. Blockly is open source and is available for free online.
Figure 3.4: Blockly example program
Blockly’s blocks have a puzzle­like shape which is meant to help the user to figure out
13
==PAGE:22==
how a given block can be combined with others. Blockly also uses color schemes to sort
different types of blocks into different categories. That could help with readability and help
find relevant pieces of code in a large code base faster. A simple example representing
a while loop is presented in fig. 3.4. The interface is minimalistic and consists of a block
selector on the left side, a program builder in the middle, a code representation of the
program in selected programming languages (here, JavaScript), and a play button in the
bottom right corner.
3.4.2
Unreal Engine's Blueprint
Unreal Engine is a game engine that enables developers to create interactive content,
such as video games and architectural visualizations, in real time. It offers a wide range
of tools and features for level design, scripting, and other aspects of game development.
It is used by game developers of all sizes, from small independent studios to triple­A com­
panies. It has been used to create games for various platforms, including PC, console,
mobile, and VR.
Blueprint [14] is a visual scripting system within Unreal Engine that allows developers to
create gameplay mechanics, interactions, and other systems without coding. It enables
non­programmers to create complex gameplay mechanics and automate tasks that typ­
ically require programming. With Blueprint, developers can create flowcharts that repre­
sent the logic of gameplay mechanics using interconnected nodes representing different
actions or conditions. These nodes can be connected to create a visual representation
of the logic behind the gameplay mechanic, making it easy to understand how different
elements fit together and interact.
Figure 3.5: An example Blueprint program
The design of Blueprint, as shown in fig. 3.5, resembles a flowchart. Objects, functions,
parameters, and actions are represented by nodes and are connected with edges. This
simple example illustrates the spawning and respawning of a player in a game. The
nodes in this example are distinguished from one another by a colorful accent at the top.
Anchors, which edges are connected to, also have colors and different shapes to indicate
which nodes can be connected to them.
Blueprint also has a specific way of handling loops, presented in fig. 3.6. The while loop
has four anchors. The top left anchor is used for connecting to previous nodes. The
14
==PAGE:23==
bottom left anchor, labeled ”condition” and colored red, must be connected to a node
representing a boolean expression. The top right anchor is the loop body and should be
connected to a node that will be repeatedly executed. Finally, the bottom right anchor
points to the rest of the program, which will be executed once the condition is no longer
true.
Figure 3.6: Blueprint while loop node
3.4.3
Simulink
Modeling and simulation are fields where visual programming languages can shine, and
Simulink [15] is a leading tool in this space. Known for its robustness, extensive feature
set, and high performance, Simulink is widely used by professionals across various in­
dustries. Its versatility and reliability make it a valuable asset for anyone looking to model
and simulate dynamic systems.
Simulink is a software tool that helps people design, simulate, and analyze dynamic sys­
tems. It can be used to make computer models of control systems, signal processing
systems, communication systems, and physical systems such as electrical, mechanical,
and hydraulic systems. Engineers, scientists, and economists often use Simulink to study
how systems work and change over time. It has many features that make it easy to build
models, run simulations, and see the results. You can even use Simulink to test control
systems on real hardware. It is part of the MATLAB [16] software suite developed by
MathWorks and is widely used in various fields.
Figure 3.7: Simulation of a bouncing ball in Simulink
Simulink’s graphical interface lets users quickly design and simulate systems by build­
ing block diagrams. It also includes a library of predefined blocks representing various
types of systems and processes. In addition, Simulink includes features for prototyping
15
==PAGE:24==
and testing control systems on real hardware, which makes it easy to validate and refine
designs. Furthermore, Simulink can generate code for various platforms, including em­
bedded systems, making it easy to deploy designs to real­world systems. It also allows
users to create custom blocks and add them to the library of predefined blocks, which
makes it easy to extend the capabilities of the software. Finally, Simulink can be inte­
grated with other tools, such as MATLAB and other software packages, which makes it a
flexible and powerful tool for system design and simulation.
Figure 3.7 shows a basic simulation designed using Simulink ­ a simulation of a bouncing
ball. At first glance, it appears raw and diagram­like, with blocks indicating relationships
between them. However, the layout lacks elements that would improve readability or
guide the user in understanding the simulation. Additionally, the blocks display some
additional information and icons, but they seem disorganized, as seen in the ”Second­
Order Integrator” block. This suggests that Simulink prioritizes structure and versatility
over user experience and ease of use for new users.
16
==PAGE:25==
4
Design and specification
In this chapter of the thesis, we present the detailed design and specifications of the
proposed system. The purpose of the system and the inspirations and motivations behind
its design and protocol are discussed. Additionally, the layout of the user interface and
the implementation of parallelism in the solution are explained.
4.1
High level specification
Before discussing the design, we want to explain what we set out to create by providing
a high­level specification. The specification helped guide the design and development
process, and was created with the target users’ needs in mind. The specification is as
follows:
1. The interface should be designed to be user­friendly and should not require any
coding skills. Users simply need to input the values of the required parameters
using the interface. However, some knowledge of programming concepts, such as
loops and conditions, may be necessary for those who wish to create more complex
protocols.
2. The tool is designed to be intuitive and easy to use, with minimal instructions nec­
essary. Users should be able to start using the tool without any introduction and
always be aware of the next step. Additionally, exploring the various features of the
interface should be an enjoyable experience.
3. The layout and positioning of elements should be intuitive and familiar to the user.
It should be logical and consistent with other interfaces the user may have used in
the past.
4. The interface helps users avoid errors by providing a structured approach to protocol
creation. The process of building elements of the protocol should be organized and
intuitive. Error messages should be informative and assist the user in achieving
their desired result, and the user should always be aware of any required actions.
5. The interface design should allow for easy reading of the completed protocol. UI
elements should be arranged in a way that enables the user to quickly understand
the purpose and function of the protocol
6. The tool should be flexible enough to accommodate a wide range of use cases,
although it may not be capable of supporting the creation of every possible experi­
ment.
7. As the tool is tailored for DMF, it should allow for using DMF­specific operations.
The following features should be available to the user:
17
==PAGE:26==
(a) introducing new droplets to the device,
(b) disposing of droplets,
(c) outputting droplets through a specific channel,
(d) splitting a droplet into multiple smaller droplets,
(e) merging two or more droplets together,
(f) mixing a droplet,
(g) heating up or cooling down a droplet,
(h) using sensors to measure features of a specific droplet,
(i) waiting ­ stopping execution for some time,
(j) creating loops ­ repeating a set of operations,
(k) conditionally executing part of a protocol,
(l) breaking out of a loop,
(m) explicitly ending a protocol
8. The program should allow for generating output from created protocol and exporting
it in a standard form to be used later on.
4.2
Initial design
We have dedicated significant time and effort to creating a visually appealing and user­
friendly way for building digital microfluidic protocols.
Through our research of available options, we have determined that the incorporation of
icons, color, and other visual elements is crucial in reducing confusion and effectively com­
municating the responsibilities and dependencies between various elements. As seen in
the Unreal Engine, utilizing color can aid in the differentiation of classes of nodes. We will
also adopt this approach by utilizing color to distinguish between different operations.
After some consideration, we made the decision not to utilize arrows for connecting blocks
in our design. As we evaluated potential solutions for indicating the order of operations in
our design, we identified two main options. The first option was to provide a canvas­like
interface where users could add blocks at any location and connect them using edges.
However, we also considered the alternative of implementing a design that would require
users to maintain a structured and orderly arrangement of blocks at all times, similar to
how it is done in Blockly.
As shown in fig. 4.1 and fig. 4.2, which are protocol representations taken from the ex­
plorative part of our work, a protocol can be depicted both as a directed graph and a
sequence. These figures also demonstrate that adding arrows does not significantly add
to the overall design. Additionally, it is more convenient to view the parameters of a block
directly on the block itself rather than having to follow the arrows back to previous steps in
the protocol. Figure 4.2 illustrates our initial approach to handling parallelism in the sys­
tem. However, this design has since been modified. Further details on how parallelism is
implemented can be found in section 4.5.
18
==PAGE:27==
Figure 4.1: Part of a protocol as a directed graph with arrows between blocks. Sketch
taken from prototyping stage of the design.
Figure 4.2: Initial design ­ part of a protocol as a sequence without arrows and stacked
parallel operations. Sketch taken from prototyping stage of the design.
While edges can effectively convey the flow of a protocol, they may potentially cause con­
fusion when the protocol becomes more complex. On the other hand, when the protocol
is relatively simple, arrows may seem unnecessary as they merely connect blocks in a se­
quential manner. Given these factors, we determined that the most appropriate approach
for our design would be to order blocks in a sequence, allowing users to add blocks only
to the end of the row and rearrange them as needed.
This approach ensures that protocols always begin on the left side and end on the right
side, and removes the need for arrows. Data flow is indicated by displaying relevant
information about the parameters of each block directly on the block itself. For example,
a block that mixes a droplet would display the name of the droplet being mixed on the
block. By using this method, we aim to provide a clear and intuitive interface for our
users.
19
==PAGE:28==
4.3
Interface layout and controls
After determining the desired design of the protocol, we focused on the visual presentation
of the user interface and the practical creation of the protocol using mouse and keyboard
inputs. In the following section, we will showcase the final result, highlight key features of
the interface, and provide guidance on the use of the tool.
Figure 4.3: Screenshot taken from a browser displaying the final design of the interface
with different UI parts highlighted with colored boxes and letters. A (green) ­ operations
panel, B (blue) ­ protocol building area, C (yellow) ­ toolbar, D (red) ­ block settings, E
(orange) ­ zoom level and reset.
The interface of our web application depicted in fig. 4.3 is the result of our tests, inspira­
tions and considerations. It highlights five main parts of the UI using a colored border and
a letter:
• A (green) ­ the left side panel serves as the operations menu, displaying all available
operations that can be added to the protocol. If the list exceeds the height of the
screen, it becomes scrollable. The operations are organized into three groups and
are represented by a colored square with a title and icon. An information icon in the
top right corner provides additional information about the purpose of each operation
when hovered over, as presented in fig. 4.4. Further details about operations can
be found in the next section.
• B (blue) ­ The central portion of the screen is dedicated to building the protocol. The
play button initiates the protocol by creating an abstract syntax tree (AST) in the
form of a JSON, which can then be compiled into low­level DMF instructions by a
compiler. The process of creating an AST is discussed in more detail in section 5.6.
To build the protocol, the user can drag operations from the operations panel to the
drop icon at the end of the protocol. The user can also rearrange blocks by drag­
ging them. As previously mentioned, we believe it is beneficial to display additional
information on each block within the protocol. As such, blocks in the protocol are
distinguished by the same color and icon, with the main part displaying a summary
of their parameters. The protocol can be repositioned on the screen by clicking and
dragging the surrounding area. It can also be resized using the scroll gesture.
20
==PAGE:29==
• C (yellow) ­ The top of the screen features a tooltip with three icons, which provide
descriptions when hovered. The first icon, depicted as a beaker, represents the
default view and displays the operations menu on the left side. The middle icon
hides panels to provide a clearer view of complex protocols. The final icon switches
to the task editor. The task editor reveals additional buttons between blocks, which
can be used to add or delete tasks ­ independent branches of the protocol (see
fig. 4.5). Tasks are discussed further in the parallelism section 4.5.
• D (red) ­ Upon adding a new block, a settings panel for that block is displayed on the
right side of the interface. The panel shows the color and name of the operation at
the top and a delete button at the bottom, which removes the corresponding block
from the protocol. The settings for a block can also be accessed by clicking directly
on the block, and the panel will hide when the block is clicked again or when the
”X” button in the top right corner of the panel is clicked. The main body of the panel
displays controls for modifying the block’s parameters, which vary based on the type
of operation.
• E (orange) ­ A small element in the top right corner of the screen displays the current
zoom level as a percentage between 20 and 200. This element also includes a reset
button, which sets the zoom level to 100% and centers the protocol on the screen.
(a) Before hovering
(b) Hovered info icon.
Figure 4.4: An example of an operation before and after hovering the information icon.
Figure 4.5: An example of a protocol in the task editing mode.
4.4
List and functionality of operations
In this section, we will provide an overview of all the operations implemented for this
project. This includes their UI representations, as well as explanations of their parameters
and usage. The operations are divided into three groups. Operations within one group
have a cohesive color scheme which helps with recognising blocks. Note that we refer to
21
==PAGE:30==
operations that are available in the menu on the left side of the interface as ”operations”
and when using the term ”block” we mean an instance of the operation visible in a protocol.
All operations with their corresponding UI representation are presented in fig. 4.6.
(a) Input
(b) Output
(c) Split
(d) Merge
(e) Waste
(f) Heat/Cool
(g) Mix
(h) Sense
(i) Wait
(j) Repeat
(k) Condition
(l) Break
(m) End
Figure 4.6: All operations and their corresponding UI representations.
4.4.1
Droplets control
Operations within the droplets control group modify the number of droplets on the biochip.
They are colored with shades of blue, green and purple.
Input
The input operation introduces new droplets onto the device which can then be selected
and used by other operations. It has the following parameters:
1. The name of the new droplet.
2. The volume of the droplet and its unit.
3. Substance ­ what is the droplet made of.
Output
The output operation routes a specified droplet out of the chip through a channel where
it can be picked up and used, it’s meant to be used for the result of a protocol. The
parameters of the operation are:
1. The droplet which should be directed to an output. It should be chosen from a
dropdown list of available droplets.
22
==PAGE:31==
2. The output which can be chosen from a list of predefined outputs.
Split
The split operation can be used to split a droplet into two or more smaller droplets. The
user can choose the ratio of the resulting droplets, they do not have to be all the same
volume. It is possible for one of the new droplets to have the same name as the parent
droplet. The parameters of this operation are:
1. The droplet which will be split ­ selected from a dropdown list of available droplets.
2. Minimum of two name­ratio pairs which represent the names and ratios of the newly
created droplets. The rations has to sum up to a hundred.
Merge
The merge operation is used for merging multiple droplets into one bigger droplet. The
resulting droplet can be named the same as one of its parts. The parameters of ”merge”
are:
1. Droplets which will be combined. They can be chosen from a dropdown of available
droplets.
2. The name of the resulting droplet.
Waste
”Waste” operation simply removes a droplet from the biochip. It has a single parameter:
1. The droplet to remove.
4.4.2
Droplet operations
Droplet operations are those that do not alter the number of droplets, and focus on a
single droplet. These operations are characterized by a warm color palette of orange and
yellow.
Heat/Cool
The heat/cool operation places a droplet in a seleceted temperature for a specified dura­
tion. The parameters of this operation are as follows:
1. Droplet which is the subject to temperature change.
2. Temperature in degrees Celsius.
3. Duration and its unit.
Mix
The mix operation mixes a single droplet. It does so in either a circle pattern where the
droplet travels around on a three­by­three grid or a line pattern where the droplet is moved
left­right or up­down. The operation’s parameters include:
1. The droplet to be mixed.
2. Duration of mixing and its unit.
23
==PAGE:32==
3. Patter as either ”line” or ”circle”.
Sense
The sense operation uses sensors to measure a selected feature of a droplet. For the
MVP available measurements are: Ph, color, temperature and volume. The result of the
operation is stored as either a string representing a color or a number for the rest of the
measurements. The parameters of this operation are:
1. The droplet whose features will be measured.
2. Type of a measurement selected from a predefined list.
3. Name of the measurement by which it can be referenced later on.
4.4.3
Utilities
Utilities are auxiliary operations that do not manipulate droplets but rather facilitate the
workflow of the protocol. These operations use dim gray and brown hues, except for the
”end” operation, which is highlighted in red to quickly distinguish it on the screen. These
utilities enable users to construct more sophisticated protocols.
Wait
The wait operation temporarily halts the execution of the protocol for a specified dura­
tion, beginning the countdown once all operations preceding the wait block have been
completed. It has a single parameter:
1. Amount of time to wait and its unit.
Repeat
The repeat operation allows for the repetition of a sequence of operations. The sequence
can be dragged over the ”repeat” block and dropped into its slot which is shown in fig. 4.7.It
has a single parameter:
1. Number of repetitions.
Please note that, as the interface does not support lists, the repeat operation cannot be
utilized to generate multiple droplets that could be referenced later in the protocol. In
order to maintain the same droplets on the chip before and after the repeat operation,
any new droplets introduced within the loop must be fully consumed before the end of
the corresponding iteration, for example, by merging them with an existing droplet. This
limitation should be considered when designing protocols involving the repeat operation.
Figure 4.7: The repeat block
24
==PAGE:33==
Break
The break operation is intended for use within a repeat loop and functions similarly to
the break statement in other programming languages. It terminates the current loop and
allows the rest of the protocol to continue. It should be noted that, in our current design,
it is not possible to use break to exit outer loops within nested loops. This operation has
no parameters.
Condition
The condition operation allows for the conditional execution of a protocol section based
on a boolean expression. It functions similarly to the if­then­else statement in other pro­
gramming languages. The expression is evaluated, and if it is determined to be true, the
operations in the ”then” branch will be executed. If it is false, the operations in the ”else”
branch will be executed. Both branches can be populated by dragging and dropping op­
erations into the corresponding slots within the condition block which can be observed in
fig. 4.8.
Figure 4.8: The condition block
Conditions can be applied to the results of sense operations, which are referred to as
measurements. The type of a measurement determines the operators that can be used
with it. For example, if a measurement is a numeric value, it can be compared to another
number using the following operators: == (equals), < (less than), > (greater than), <=
(less than or equal to), and >= (greater than or equal to). If the measurement is of type
color, the user can select two colors using a color picker and the measurement will be
considered to be between these two colors if the values of all three RGB channels (red,
green, and blue) fall within the corresponding range of the chosen colors.
(a) Initial state.
(b) After selecting a measure­
ment.
(c) After clicking the ”AND” but­
ton.
Figure 4.9: The process of creating a condition.
25
==PAGE:34==
To create a condition, the user must first select an existing measurement. The interface
will then display the appropriate inputs based on the type of the measurement. It is also
possible to create more complex expressions by combining conditions using the ”AND”
and ”OR” buttons. To do this, the user can select another measurement after clicking one
of these buttons. The process is illustrated in fig. 4.9.
End
The ”end” operation terminates the protocol. It may be utilized in a conditional statement
to prematurely terminate the protocol if a specific condition is not satisfied. Its use is not
mandatory in every protocol. The protocol will conclude automatically once all operations
have been executed. The operation has no parameters.
4.5
Parallelism
One clear benefit of using a two­dimensional grid for routing droplets and performing op­
erations is the ability to execute processes in parallel. While the grid size limits the overall
execution of the protocol, there is potential for optimization within these constraints.
Consider a simple protocol presented in fig. 4.10. It shows a sequence that puts two
droplets named ”D1” and ”D2” into the grid and outputs them. There is no advantage
in waiting for the first input block to finish before inputting the second droplet. Instead, it
would be more effective to introduce both droplets simultaneously and immediately output
them.
Figure 4.10: Example of a simple protocol depicting adding two droplets ”D1” and ”D2”
and then outputting them.
The initial design featured parallelization by stacking blocks vertically, as shown in fig. 4.11.
This approach allows the user to specify which operations should be executed concur­
rently. However, this pattern introduces a problem when stacked operations have dif­
ferent completion times. Should the program wait for the whole stack to be completed
before continuing? For example, in fig. 4.11, it would be more efficient to output droplet
”D2” without waiting for droplet ”D1” to complete mixing.
Moreover, in the scenario depicted in fig. 4.12, it is unnecessary to keep droplet ”D1” on
the device throughout the entire protocol before outputting it at the end. The program
should be able to efficiently manage the flow of droplets as they become available.
Our solution is to delegate the responsibility of parallelization to the compiler and assume
that all blocks will run asynchronously and execute as soon as possible. This approach
allows the user to focus on the desired outcome without worrying about the specific im­
plementation details on the chip. However, it also means that the order of operations is
26
==PAGE:35==
Figure 4.11: Example of a simple protocol depicting parallelization by stacking blocks on
top of each other.
Figure 4.12: Example of a simple protocol depicting adding two droplets ”D1” and ”D2”,
mixing one of them and then outputting them.
not guaranteed. The compiler will create a dependency graph between all blocks and ex­
ecute all paths as soon as the state of the platform allows for it. This ensures that, in the
scenario shown in fig. 4.10, the order of inputs and outputs does not affect the execution
of the protocol.
The ”wait” block is an exception to the assumption of asynchronicity. Of course, it does
not make sense to proceed with the protocol while it should wait. In our design, the ”wait”
block ensures synchronization up to that point, waits for the specified amount of time,
and then continues with the rest of the protocol. The timeout period begins as soon as
all preceding blocks have been executed. It is also possible to use a parameter of zero
seconds with the ”wait” block to manually synchronize the protocol at any point.
The second part of our solution includes the introduction of tasks, which are independent
sequences of blocks branching off from the main protocol or other tasks. These tasks do
not share state with other tasks, meaning they have their own set of resources, droplets
that cannot be used by other tasks. Tasks offer two main benefits. First, they allow for the
repetition of protocols by using repeat blocks and wait blocks. This enables the same pro­
tocol to be run multiple times, either consecutively or with a delay. In fig. 4.13 we present
an example of how this can be achieved. Second, tasks help improve the readability of a
protocol by allowing the user to visually distinguish between independent parts of a proto­
col, such as running multiple protocols concurrently on a single chip. For example adding
two droplets and then outputting them can be done in a single line but the same result will
be achieved using the task syntax as presented in fig. 4.14.
27
==PAGE:36==
Figure 4.13: Protocol which inputs and outputs a droplet after waiting 5 second and does
it 10 times.
(a) Single task.
(b) Two tasks
Figure 4.14: Protocol which puts inputs and outputs two droplets. Implemented in a single
line (left) and using a task (right).
4.6
Initial design validation
In order to test our way of creating protocols for DMF we conducted a lab usability test
[17]. The test was performed in a controlled environment on four users. It included a
moderator who would explain the test and note any mistakes the user made and their
comments, suggestions, and answers. The users have not seen the design before the
test. The task was to use our design to describe a simple protocol:
1. Take two droplets of water ­ 25 and 30 microliters.
2. Mix them together for 10 seconds in a line.
3. Measure the temperature.
4. If the temperature is above 50 degrees Celsius, dispose of the droplet.
We created wireframes representing different UI states during the creation of the protocol.
The only interaction available on the wireframes was to scroll down the list of operations,
otherwise they were static. The users were asked to look at the first wireframe and de­
scribe what they saw and what action they thought they should take to create the protocol.
If they were correct, the next wireframe would appear, and so on. For example, the first
wireframe looked as presented in fig. 4.15. When a user decided to drag the input block
into the middle of the screen, the test would have progressed to the wireframe show­
ing a protocol with an input block and the settings panel open for this block presented in
fig. 4.16.
28
==PAGE:37==
Figure 4.15: The first wireframe of the lab usability test.
Figure 4.16: The second wireframe of the lab usability test.
It is important to note that the design depicted in the wireframes is similar, but not identi­
cal, to the final design shown in fig. 4.3. This is due to changes that occurred as a result
of testing. One significant difference to note is that the condition block functioned differ­
ently. An additional block called ”check” had to be included in the condition block and was
used to create boolean expressions that controlled the execution of the ”then” part of the
condition block. Moreover, the heat/cool block was named ”temperature”.
The complete list of steps required to reach the goal was:
1. Drag the input block to the protocol.
2. Name the new droplet, input 25 microliters as its volume and select water as the
substance.
3. Drag another input block.
4. Name the second droplet, input 30 microliters as its volume, select water as the
substance.
29
==PAGE:38==
5. Drag a merge block.
6. Provide the name of the resulting droplet, and select two droplets as the arguments.
7. Drag a mix block.
8. Select merged droplet as the argument, input 10 seconds as duration and select the
line pattern.
9. Drag the sense block.
10. Provide the name of the measurement, select the droplet which needs to be mea­
sured, choose ”temperature” as what will be measured.
11. Input a condition block.
12. Input a check block into the condition block.
13. Select the measurement and choose ”>” and ”50” as arguments for the check.
14. Input a waste block into the ”then” part of the condition.
15. Select the droplet as the argument.
Any mistakes were documented to quantify how intuitive the solution is. At the end of the
test, the users were asked three questions:
1. Q1: How easy is it to use the system on a scale from 1 to 10?
2. Q2: Is there anything about the design that is not clear?
3. Q3: Is there anything you wish worked differently in the current design?
The results of the test are presented in table 4.1. The error rate is presented as the
percentage of failed steps. Table 4.2 summarizes the issues identified with the original
design during testing and how the design has been modified in response.
User
Errors
Error rate
Q1
Q2
Q3
1
Incorrectly uses mix
operation
before
merging.
Mistakes
tempera­
ture block for sense
block.
Could not find the
condition block.
Did not know how to
use the check block.
20%
8/10
Confused
about
sense and tem­
perature.
Using
conditions is not
intuitive enough.
Would like to see
all available oper­
ations at once.
2
Clicked the blocks
instead of dragging.
Used mix operation
before merging.
Chooses
temper­
ature
instead
of
sense.
20%
7/10
First check block
could appear au­
tomatically in the
condition
block.
Condition should
have
optional
”else” part.
­
30
==PAGE:39==
3
Mixes before merg­
ing.
Confused
tempera­
ture and sense
13%
6/10
Points out there is
no point in putting
blocks
different
than ”check” into
”if”
part
of
the
condition block.
Would
like
the
tool to have more
control over the
hardware.
4
Temperature
con­
fused with sense.
Failed
to
choose
check block.
13%
9/10
­
Temperature
should
be
re­
named. Separate
operations
into
groups ­ for ex­
ample
“Droplet
manipulation”
and “Operations”
Table 4.1: Results of the lab usability test.
Issues
Changes to the design
When trying to measure temperature of a
droplet users use the ”temperature” oper­
ation which is actually for changing tem­
perature.
Temperature operation was renamed to
”Heat/Cool” to underline its purpose. An
information icon was added to each oper­
ation which, when hovered, reveals a de­
scription.
Check operation is confusing to use.
Check operation was deleted.
Instead
Conditions are added in the settings panel
of the condition operation.
Condition operation has no ”else” part.
Condition has now two sub­sequences,
one for ”then” part and one for ”else” part.
Clicking instead of dragging blocks.
When a draggable element is hovered the
cursor changes icon to a grabbing hand.
Being unable to find the ”condition” or
”check” operation.
Functionalities of
blocks not clear enough.
Operations
were
grouped
into
three
groups:
”Droplets
Control”,
”Droplet
Operations” and ”Utilities”.
Operations
within one group were assigned new col­
ors matching their group. An information
icon was added.
Table 4.2: Issues which have been identified during the initial design validation with re­
sulting changes to the design.
31
==PAGE:40==
32
==PAGE:41==
5
Architecture and implementation
In this chapter, we provide a comprehensive overview of the architecture and develop­
ment of the web application created in this thesis. We begin with a description of the
technological stack and the development process, followed by introducing the architec­
tural pattern used in the project and how the project structure relates to it. We then give
an overview and a detailed description of created classes. Next, we describe how data
is stored and manipulated in the application. Finally, we explore the specific implementa­
tions of the various UI components of the system, providing a detailed explanation of how
they were developed and integrated into the overall architecture.
5.1
Technical infrastructure and libraries
This section presents an overview of the technical infrastructure and lists the most relevant
libraries utilized during the development process.
Next.js
The project was developed using the React meta­framework, Next.js [18]. As an open­
source framework, Next.js facilitates developers in building websites and web applications
by utilizing a set of recommended best practices. It offers an optimal developer experience
with a comprehensive set of features for production, including hybrid, static, and server
rendering, support for TypeScript, intelligent bundling, route pre­fetching, and more. It
provides a robust environment for building React applications.
dnd kit
A significant aspect of the application’s interactivity is its drag­and­drop functionality. To
achieve this, the dnd kit [19] library was utilized. This library is a lightweight, high­performing,
and accessible toolkit for drag and drop functionality in React. It does not prescribe spe­
cific visual design for the draggable elements, but rather provides components and func­
tions that assist in describing the desired behavior. In essence, it is a headless library
that offers functional capabilities without visual elements.
Zustand
Zustand [20] is a library for managing state in React applications. It provides a way to
create a “store” object containing data and methods for manipulating that data. React
components can then access the store, and automatically re­render when the data they
use changes. The library has a simple syntax, is easy to use, yet also offers powerful
features. It focuses on providing a good developer experience (DX) while also optimizing
performance.
33
==PAGE:42==
Tailwind CSS
Tailwind CSS [21] is a utility­first CSS framework. It provides a set of pre­defined CSS
classes that can quickly style HTML elements without the need to write custom CSS styles.
These classes are designed to be highly composable, making it easy to build complex
user interfaces with a consistent look and feel. Additionally, Tailwind CSS provides a set
of built­in design constraints, such as spacing, typography, and color, which can help to
ensure that the website or application has a consistent look and feel.
5.2
Development process
The development process of the project was very structured as presented in the flow
graph in fig. 5.1.
Figure 5.1: Flow chart of the development pipeline.
The codebase was stored in a git repository on GitHub [22]. We utilized a continuous inte­
gration and continuous deployment (CI/CD) pipeline to deploy the project into production
using Vercel [23] ­ a front­end hosting platform. With every merge to the main branch, a
GitHub action [24] was executed that automatically ran unit and end­to­end tests to en­
sure the integrity of the code before deployment. The end­to­end tests must wait for the
deployment to finish because they require access to an already­built application through a
browser. This approach allowed for efficient and confident development and ensured that
any changes made to the code were thoroughly tested before being pushed to production.
5.3
Architectural pattern
This project utilizes the Flux architectural pattern, popularized by Facebook and commonly
applied in React applications. Its key advantage is its single­directional data flow, making
it easy to comprehend and modify as the application evolves in complexity. Flux was
designed to address issues with two­way data bindings in frontend patterns like MVC,
which caused cascading updates. These updates made it hard to predict the outcome of
a single­user interaction due to the domino effect of data model changes.
34
==PAGE:43==
Figure 5.2: Overview of the flux architectural pattern.
We present an overview of the Flux pattern as a graph on fig. 5.2. It clearly shows the
unidirectional flow of data. It consists of four elements:
1. Action is an event which initiates change in the state of the web application. It can
be a fetch to an external API as well as clicking a button or filling in an input.
2. Dispatcher is a singleton that directs the flow of data and ensures that updates do
not cascade. It provides methods which can be called when an action is performed
and change the state in the store accordingly.
3. Store holds the app state and is the data layer of this pattern. An application can
have one or many app stores. Stores get updated because they have a callback
that is registered using the dispatcher.
4. View part is responsible for rendering the UI. It depends on the data in the store and
performs re­renders whenever the data changes so that it is up to date. It can also
present UI elements which can create actions like buttons, forms, etc.
In this project the Zustand store acts both as the dispatcher and the store and the views
are the React components. The components consume the state defined in the store and
render interface depending on its value. When the user performs an action, for example
changing the name of a droplet, a method exposed by the store is called which changes
the state.
5.4
Classes and interfaces
This section thoroughly examines the use of TypeScript classes and interfaces for mod­
eling data within the project. We provide in­depth information about the design decisions
that went into these classes, as well as an overview of their relationships with one another
and how they support the web application’s functionality. It was common for us to create
a distinct class for each type of operation, which resulted in a considerable growth of the
codebase. We have divided this section into sub­sections which list and describe spe­
cific classes and their responsibilities rather than displaying all classes in a single class
diagram. The goal of this approach is to enhance the reader’s comprehension of the
connections and structure of the classes. Additionally, it would prove useful for anyone
extending the project who desires additional information about a specific class.
Before diving into specifics, we provide an overview of the classes utilized in the project.
As seen in fig. 5.3, we have included a class diagram showcasing the system’s key
classes, interfaces, and the relationships between them. These will be further explained
in their respective sections. In general, a protocol is represented as an instance of the
Sequence class, which contains a list of blocks. The Block abstract class serves as a
generic representation for blocks, with separate classes extending it for each type of op­
eration. These blocks store their parameters in the “parameters” field, represented by the
abstract BlockParameters class. Note that a Sequence can also be a part of a parameter,
35
==PAGE:44==
as in the case of the repeat block. The Operation interface outlines the structure of an
operation.
Figure 5.3: Overview of classes used in the project.
As this section includes multipage listings of classes it is useful to get a grasp of what will
be presented:
• Operation (section 5.4.1) describes how operations are represented in code and
gives an example,
• Block (section 5.4.2) presents the Block abstract class as well as classes extend­
ing that class for some operations, for example InputBlock which handles blocks of
“input” operation.
• BlockParameters (section 5.4.3) introduces classes which handle parameters of
blocks for each type of operation. Each Block has at most one corresponding Block­
Parameter class. For example InputBlock class has an instance of InputBlockPa­
rameters class.
• Parameter (section 5.4.4) presents the Parameter abstract class and classes ex­
tending that class. These classes might be reused by multiple BlockParameters
classes. For example, SelectDropletParameter is used in both MixBlockParame­
ters and SenseBlockParameters.
• Droplet (section 5.4.5) describes how droplets are modeled in the project.
• Measurement (section 5.4.6 is the class which represents the result of the sense
operation (color, temperature, pH and volume).
36
==PAGE:45==
• LogicalOperator, Condition and ComparisonParameter (section 5.4.7) are the classes
which are used to build logical expressions for the “condition” operation.
• Sequence (section 5.4.8) presents the Sequence class which represents a list of
blocks.
Table 5.1 gives a complete overview of the classes used to model each block. The first
column lists all Block classes. The second column shows corresponding BlockParame­
ters classes (note that not all blocks have parameters). The last column lists Parameter
classes used by the blocks (note that these classes are reused for multiple blocks). Lists
of of instances of the block classes are saved in sequences which are rendered as rows
of blocks.
Block class
Block parameters class
Parameter class
InputBlock
InputBlockParameters
InputDropletParameter
OutputBlock
OutputBlockParameters
SelectDropletParameter
SelectOutputParameter
SplitBlock
SplitBlockParameters
SelectDropletParameter
InputDropletsWithRatioParameter
MergeBlock
MergeBlockParameters
InputDropletParameter
SelectMultipleDropletsParameter
WasteBlock
WasteBlockParameters
SelectDropletParameter
HeatCoolBlock
HeatCoolBlockParameters
SelectDropletParameter
MixBlock
MixBlockParameters
SelectDropletParameter
SenseBlock
SenseBlockParameters
SelectDropletParameter
InputMeasurementParameter
WaitBlock
WaitBlockParameters
RepeatBlock
RepeatBlockParameters
SubSequenceParameter
IfThenBlock
IfThenBlockParameters
ConditionParameter
SubSequenceParameter
BreakBlock
EndBlock
Task
TaskParameters
Table 5.1: Overview of all block­related classes.
The visual representation shown in fig. 5.4 gives an intuition about the responsibilities
of the classes. It highlights different parts of the UI with colored boxes and the name of
the class responsible for that part. The example uses the output operation. An object
which implements the Operation interface is used to represent the output operation in the
operations panel (on the left). The OutputBlock class is an instance of the operation in
the protocol saved in the list of blocks belonging to the Sequence class. When this block
is selected, the settings panel (on the right side) shows its parameters. The parameters
37
==PAGE:46==
are represented by the OutputBlockParameters class. This class has two fields, one for
each parameter. One of them is an instance of the SelectDropletParameter class, which
saves information about the selected droplet.
Figure 5.4: Visual representation of the responsibilities of the classes utilized by the output
operation.
5.4.1
Operation
Operations, which were previously introduced in section 4.4, are represented as an inter­
face visible in fig. 5.3. The type of the operation is taken from the enum “OPERATION”
which can be thought of as the operation’s name. The description is a string that describes
what the operation does. “Color” holds a hexadecimal color value. “Create” is a function
that creates a new block in a sequence with “sequenceId” id; this is how the operation is
tied to a corresponding block. This function is called when the user adds a new block to
the protocol. The “icon” is the path to the icon image of the operation.
A static object “OPERATION_DEFINITIONS” is a collection of objects implementing the
Operation interface. For example, the input operation is defined as in listing 5.1.
1
{
2
type: OPERATION.INPUT,
3
description: 'Adds a new droplet to the protocol.',
4
color: '#0466c8',
5
create: (sequenceId: string) => new InputBlock(sequenceId),
6
icon: 'block-input.svg'
7
}
Listing 5.1: Input operation as an implementation of the Operation interface.
5.4.2
Block
Block is an abstract class which represents instances of an operation in the created pro­
tocol. We present its structure again in fig. 5.5.
Each block is assigned a unique identifier, generated automatically as a universally unique
identifier (UUID). The type of operation is passed to the block’s constructor and saved in
38
==PAGE:47==
Figure 5.5: Block abstract class.
the “operation” field. The “parameters” field holds an instance of the BlockParameters
class, specific to that particular block. For instance, the InputBlock class will have its own
set of parameters, represented as an instance of InputBlockParameters.
The block class exposes two methods. The “toNode” abstract method is used to map a
given block to its representation as a node in an abstract syntax tree which is explained
in detail in section 5.6. The “produce” method is used for altering the list of droplets
available in the protocol. This method takes a list of droplets as a parameter and returns
another list allowing for the dynamic change of droplets available when choosing them as
a parameter.
Note that “tasks” have been implemented as blocks, which are stored in the list of blocks
within a sequence. However, they are not rendered as regular blocks, but rather as an
icon with a line connecting to another sequence.
The Operation­specific classes that extend the Block class vary in their “parameters” field
and the implementation of the “produce” method.
The default implementation of this
method simply passes on the original list, as in the case of the mix block. In the rest
of this subsection, we explore the implementation of the “produce” method in classes that
manipulate the droplets.
InputBlock
As the input operation is responsible for introducing new droplets into the program, its
“produce” method, presented in listing 5.2, adds a new droplet to the list of droplets. Note
the spread syntax “...” used in line 2. This syntax unpacks the values from a list which then
are used in a new list returned from the method. The value returned from this method is the
list containing the original droplets with an appended droplet taken from the parameters
of the input block.
1
produce(available: Droplet[]): Droplet[] {
2
return [...available , this.parameters.inputDroplet.droplet];
3
}
Listing 5.2: Produce method of the InputBlock.
OutputBlock
As presented in listing 5.3 the “produce” method of the OutputBlock class returns the list
of available droplets without the one found in its parameters. The droplet is filtered out
from the list of droplets using “filter” method of the JavaScript array prototype.
1
produce(available: Droplet[]): Droplet[] {
2
return [...available.filter((a) => a.id != this.parameters.selectDroplet.
droplet?.id)];
3
}
39
==PAGE:48==
Listing 5.3: Produce method of the OutputBlock.
SplitBlock
The behavior of the SplitBlock class’s “produce” method depends on whether the user
chooses to split the droplet into entirely new droplets or to retain the original droplet by
assigning it the same name. Consider the implementation in listing 5.4. The code in
line three checks if the droplet saved in the parameters has the same name as any of
the droplets passed to the method as the parameter. If such a droplet was found, the
“produce” method removes the droplet to be split from the list and adds the new droplets.
Otherwise, the original droplet is retained in the list.
1
produce(available: Droplet[]): Droplet[] {
2
// check if one of the new droplets has the same name as the one being
split
3
const preserveDropletIndex = this.parameters.inputDroplets.
dropletsWithRatio.findIndex(
4
(d) => d.droplet.name == this.parameters.selectDroplet.droplet?.name
5
);
6
// if found such a droplet include the original droplet instead of the new
one
7
if (preserveDropletIndex >= 0) {
8
return [
9
...available ,
10
...this.parameters.inputDroplets.dropletsWithRatio
11
.filter((_, i) => i != preserveDropletIndex)
12
.map((d) => d.droplet),
13
];
14
}
15
// if not found delete original droplet from the list and add new ones
16
return [
17
...available.filter((a) => a.id != this.parameters.selectDroplet.droplet
?.id),
18
...this.parameters.inputDroplets.dropletsWithRatio.map((d) => d.droplet)
,
19
];
20
}
Listing 5.4: Produce method of the SplitBlock.
MergeBlock
Similarly to the SplitBlock class, MergeBlock can either merge selected droplets into a new
droplet or merge them into an existing one. The implementation is presented in listing 5.5
and shows, in line three how the persisted droplet is found. Next, if the droplet was found
it is used in the return statement of the method.
1
produce(available: Droplet[]): Droplet[] {
2
const persistedDroplet = available.find(
3
(d) => d.name == this.parameters.inputDroplet.droplet.name
4
);
5
return [
6
...available.filter((d) => !this.parameters.selectMultipleDroplets.
droplets.includes(d)),
7
persistedDroplet ?? this.parameters.inputDroplet.droplet ,
8
];
9
}
40
==PAGE:49==
Listing 5.5: Produce method of the MergeBlock.
WasteBlock
The WasteBlock’s implementation simply removes selected droplet from the array of the
droplets as shown in listing 5.6.
1
produce(available: Droplet[]): Droplet[] {
2
return [...available.filter((a) => a != this.parameters.selectDroplet.
droplet)];
3
}
Listing 5.6: Produce method of the WasteBlock.
IfThenBlock
The IfThenBlock (responsible for condition operation) has two subsequences in its pa­
rameters. Both can include blocks which add or remove droplets from the list. Because
it is unknown which sequence will be executed, the IfThenBlock removes droplets from
the list if it was deleted by either sequence and does not add any new droplets. Consider
the implementation presented in listing 5.7. It highlights comments which describe what
particular lines of code do.
1
// removes droplets but doesn't add new
2
produce(available: Droplet[], store: StoreState): Droplet[] {
3
// get both subsequences of the block
4
const thenSequence = store.getSequence(this.parameters.thenSequence.
sequenceId);
5
const elseSequence = store.getSequence(this.parameters.elseSequence.
sequenceId);
6
// get droplets list as the result of ``then" sequence
7
let alteredByThen = [...available];
8
for (let block of thenSequence.blocks) {
9
alteredByThen = block.produce(alteredByThen);
10
}
11
// get droplets list as the result of ``else" sequence
12
let alteredByElse = [...available];
13
for (let block of elseSequence.blocks) {
14
alteredByElse = block.produce(alteredByThen);
15
}
16
// get droplet ids which are in both lists
17
const alteredIds = alteredByThen
18
.map((d) => d.id)
19
.filter((d) => alteredByElse.map((d) => d.id).includes(d));
20
// return the original droplets but only if they were untouched by ``then"
and ``else"
21
return available.filter((d) => alteredIds.includes(d.id));
22
}
Listing 5.7: Produce method of the IfThenBlock.
5.4.3
BlockParameters
BlockParameters is an abstract class with a single method, “hasError,” which returns false
by default. For each block class, there is a corresponding BlockParameters class. The
“hasError” method is used for highlighting problems with the protocol in the interface. It
41
==PAGE:50==
returns true if there is an error in any of the parameters. A single parameter is a field
in a BlocksParameters class and often is an instance of the Parameter class. Consider
HeatCoolBlockParameters class implementation in listing 5.8. It has three fields, each
for a different parameter. Temperature is just a number, time is a number­unit pair where
time is on of the TIME_UNIT enum values. “SelectDroplet” is a parameter which is an
instance of the SelectDropletParameter class. This class is responsible for selecting a
droplet and is reused in other classes whenever selecting a droplet is necessary. It has a
method called “getError” which returns either nothing or description of an error.
1
class HeatCoolBlockParameters extends BlockParameters {
2
selectDroplet: SelectDropletParameter = new SelectDropletParameter();
3
temperature: number = 0;
4
time: NumberWithUnit <TIME_UNIT > = { unit: TIME_UNIT.s, value: 0 };
5
hasError({ blockId , sequenceId , store }) {
6
return this.selectDroplet.getError({ blockId , sequenceId , store }) != null
;
7
}
8
}
Listing 5.8: HeatCoolBlockParameters class.
In the remainder of this subsection, we provide further detail about each block’s parame­
ters and how they were represented in a corresponding class on a class diagram.
InputBlockParameters
This class represents the collection of parameters of the input block. In this case, it is a sin­
gle parameter, an instance of the InputDropletParameter class, which represents adding
a new droplet. The hasError method returns true if the parameter’s method getError re­
turns any error message. The InputBlockParameters class is presented in the diagram in
fig. 5.6.
Figure 5.6: Input block parameters class diagram.
OutputBlockParameters
OutputBlockParameters class has two fields. An instance of the SelectOutputParameter
class, which allows for selecting one of the predefined outputs (by their name), and an
instance of the SelectDropletParameter class, which handles available droplet selection.
The hasError method returns true if either of the parameters returns an error message
through their getError methods. The OutputBlockParameters class is presented in the
diagram in fig. 5.7.
42
==PAGE:51==
Figure 5.7: Output block parameters class diagram.
SplitBlockParameters
The split block parameters include selecting a droplet through the SelectDropletParam­
eter class and creating a collection of droplets resulting from the operation through the
InputDropletsWithRatioParameter class. The hasError method returns true if either of the
parameters returns an error message or if any new droplets return an error. For exam­
ple, any of the droplets might have an incorrect name. The SplitBlockParameters class is
presented in the diagram in fig. 5.8.
Figure 5.8: Split block parameters class diagram.
MergeBlockParameters
The merge block requires two parameters. The first is the result of the merge operation ­ a
single, new droplet, which can be added via the InputDropletParameter class. The second
is the droplets that will be merged. These are added with the SelectMultipleDropletsPa­
rameter. The hasError method returns true if either of the parameters returns an error
message from their getError methods. The MergeBlockParameters class is presented in
the diagram in fig. 5.9.
WasteBlockParameters
WasteBlockParameters class has a single parameter representing the droplet that will be
disposed of. It is an instance of the SelectDropletParameter. The WasteBlockParameters
class is presented in the diagram in fig. 5.10.
43
==PAGE:52==
Figure 5.9: Merge block parameters class diagram.
Figure 5.10: Waste block parameters class diagram.
HeatCoolBlockParameters
The heat/cool block has three parameters. One of them, selectDroplet, is an instance
of the SelectDropletParameter class and represents the droplet subject to temperature
change. The other parameters include the temperature, which is just a number in de­
grees celsius, time, a number, and a unit, the duration of the operation. The hasError
method of the class returns true if the selectDroplet field returns an error message. The
HeatCoolBlockParameters class is presented in the diagram in fig. 5.11.
Figure 5.11: Heat/Cool block parameters class diagram.
44
==PAGE:53==
MixBlockParameters
This class represents the parameters of the mix operation. It includes a pattern which
is a value chosen from the PATTERN enum (“line” or “circle”), the droplet which will be
mixed as an instance of the SelectDropletParameter class and time. Again, the hasError
method of the class returns true if the selectDroplet field returns an error message. The
MixBlockParameters class is presented in the diagram in fig. 5.12.
Figure 5.12: Mix block parameters class diagram.
SenseBlockParameters
The SenseBlockParameters class is responsible for the parameters of the sense block.
The first is an instance of the InputMeasurementParameter class, which saves the result of
the operation, and an instance of the SelectDropletParameter class. The hasError method
returns true if any of the two parameters returns an error from their getError methods. The
SenseBlockParameters class is presented in the diagram in fig. 5.13.
Figure 5.13: Sense block parameters class diagram.
WaitBlockParameters
This class has just a single field which is the time which the program will wait for. The
WaitBlockParameters class is presented in the diagram in fig. 5.14.
RepeatBlockParameters
The RepeatBlockParameters class represents the parameters of the repeat block. The
first parameter is the number of operations which is a number and is saved in the “rep­
45
==PAGE:54==
Figure 5.14: Wait block parameters class diagram.
etitions” field. The second is an instance of the SubSequenceParameter class, which is
the sequence of blocks that will be repeated. The hasError method depends on the re­
sult of the getError method of the subsequence. The RepeatBlockParameters class is
presented in the diagram in fig. 5.15.
Figure 5.15: Repeat block parameters class diagram.
IfThenBlockParameters
This class has three fields, including an instance of the ConditionParameter class and two
instances of the SubSequenceParameter class for each part of the condition operation ­
“then” and “else.” The hasError method returns true only if the condition parameter’s getEr­
ror method returns an error message. The IfThenBlockParameters class is presented in
the diagram in fig. 5.16.
Figure 5.16: If­Then block parameters class diagram.
46
==PAGE:55==
BreakBlockParameters
This class has no additional fields. The break block does not require any parameters
and works where it is placed in a repeat block. Because the system assumes that the
repeat block does not alter the list of droplets, we had to ensure that it does not do so
when the loop breaks. For that reason, the additional getError method has to check all
blocks in the repeat block which come before the break and make sure they leave an
unchanged list of droplets. It also returns an error if the block is placed outside a repeat.
The BreakBlockParameters class is presented in the diagram in fig. 5.17.
Figure 5.17: Break block parameters class diagram.
TaskParameters
The task has a single parameter which is the id of its sequence. The TaskParameters
class is presented in the diagram in fig. 5.18.
Figure 5.18: Task block parameters class diagram.
5.4.4
Parameter
The Parameter class was created to accommodate the reusability of parameters in the
BlockParameters class. An example would be selecting an available droplet. Blocks like
“mix” and “sense” should have information about the selected droplet. They could both
hold an instance of the Droplet class to keep the selected droplet. However, for some
parameters, there is a need to display an error message, and with the Parameter class,
we could write it in a single class and reuse it for multiple block parameters. “Parameter”
is an abstract class with a single abstract method called “getError,” which returns a string
representing an error message.
Now, we present the classes implementing Parameter along with class diagrams display­
ing their fields and methods and relations to blockParameters where they were used.
47
==PAGE:56==
InputDropletParameter
This class is used for block parameters where a new droplet is created. These include
the input and merge. The class holds an instance of the Droplet class (section 5.4.5) as
shown in fig. 5.19. The “getError” method might return two error messages. The first one
will be returned if the “name” of the droplet is empty (this field is required). The second one
will be returned if the provided name for the droplet is not unique. The method will check
the list of droplets, which it gets from the store passed as an argument, for duplicates in
the droplets’ names.
Figure 5.19: InputDropletParameter class
InputDropletsWithRatioParameter
This class was created to facilitate the split operation. This operation creates new droplets,
as input and merge do, with the difference that it can create multiple droplets, requiring
additional information about their ratio to the original droplet. InputDropletsWithRatioPa­
rameter holds a list of instances of the class InputDropletWithRatioParameter in the field
“dropletsWithRatio” (see fig. 5.20). This helper class extends InputDropletParameter by
adding the “ratio” field. This class returns an error from the “getError” method if the ratios
of the droplets do not add up to one hundred.
Figure 5.20: InputDropletsWithRatioParameter class
SelectDropletParameter
This class represents a droplet selected from a list of available droplets in the settings
panel. It holds an instance of the Droplet class which is set when the user selects the
droplet. If the droplet is not set, it is null, the “getError” method will return an error mes­
sage. The class is presented in fig. 5.21.
48
==PAGE:57==
Figure 5.21: SelectDropletParameter class
SelectMultipleDropletsParameter
The SelectMultipleDropletsParameter class (fig. 5.22) is used when selecting multiple
droplets from a list in the settings panel. It is used with the merge block to choose droplets
to be merged. It has a single field which is a list of droplets. The droplets are instances
of the Droplet class. If the list is empty, the class will produce an error message through
the “getError” method.
Figure 5.22: SelectMultipleDropletsParameter class
InputMeasurementParameter
This class is needed to create a new measurement and is used by the “sense” block. The
class is presented in fig. 5.23. The Measurement class represents the result of the sense
operation and is described in section 5.4.6. InputMeasurementParameter’s “getError”
method returns an error message if the measurement name is empty or not unique.
Figure 5.23: InputMeasurementParameter class
SelectMeasurementParameter
This class is used for creating conditions for the condition block. It holds an instance of the
Measurement class in its field “measurement,” which is set when the user selects it from
a dropdown list. The “getError” method will produce an error message until the measure­
ment is chosen by the user, informing it is required. The SelectMeasurementParameter
class is presented in fig. 5.24.
49
==PAGE:58==
Figure 5.24: SelectMeasurementParameter class
SelectOutputParameter
This parameter class is used only by the “output” block, and it simply provides a place to
store the name of the output. The user can select this name from a dropdown populated
by predefined values. The class implements the “getError” method, which will return the
“Choose an output” message if it is not set yet. The class is presented in fig. 5.25.
Figure 5.25: SelectOutputParameter class
ConditionParameter
The ConditionParameter class (fig. 5.26) is used for a parameter that builds logical ex­
pressions out of measurements. It is used by the condition block (IfThenBlock class)
to determine which path of the block will be executed: “then” or “else.” It has a single
field, “logicalOperator,” an instance of the LogicalOperator class. Building conditions are
described in section 5.4.7.
Figure 5.26: ConditionParameter class
SubSequenceParameter
This class is used for blocks that enclose a sequence of blocks. These are the repeat
block and the condition block. As shown in fig. 5.27, it has a single field which is the id
of the sequence. This field is set when the block is created. It has the “getError” method,
but it is used only by the repeat block. The method will return an error message if the list
of droplets is different at the beginning of the sequence than at the end.
50
==PAGE:59==
Figure 5.27: SubSequenceParameter class
5.4.5
Droplet
Droplets are represented in this system with the Droplet class (fig. 5.28). The class has a
static field called “nameIncrement,” which is a number that is incremented each time an
instance of this class is created. It is used to set each droplet’s default and unique name
starting with “D1”, then “D2,” and so on. The name is saved as a string in the “name”
field. “ParentBlock” refers to the block that created the droplet and is set to an object
passed in the constructor. The id field is an auto­generated UUID string. “Substance” is
a value taken from the SUBSTANCE enum and defaults to “Water.” Finally, the “volume”
field saves information about the volume of the droplet. It is a number paired with a unit
taken from the VOLUME_UNIT enum. The default, initial value of volume is 0 ml.
Figure 5.28: Droplet class
5.4.6
Measurement
Measurement refers to the result of the sense operation. It is modeled in the application as
an instance of the Measurement class (fig. 5.29). Similarly to the Droplet class, it has an
auto­generated id, name, and reference to the parent block. Additionally, it saves the type
of measurement. The type is one of the MEASUREMENT enum values: ph, temperature,
color, or volume.
Figure 5.29: Measurement class
51
==PAGE:60==
5.4.7
LogicalOperator, Condition and ComparisonParameter
LogicalOperator class, Condition class, and ComparisonParameter interface are used to
build logical expressions using measurements. These classes are presented on a dia­
gram in fig. 5.30. The expressions are built as binary trees with instances of the Logical­
Operator class as nodes. If a given node is a leaf, its condition field is populated with
an instance of the Condition class. Otherwise, its “left” and “right” fields are set to other
nodes, and the “type” field is set to LogicalOperatorType enum (“and” or “or”). Building
expressions starts with a single node with a condition. When the user wants to add a
condition, the “compare” method is called, “left” and “right” are assigned new instances
of the LogicalOperator class, the condition is copied to the left node and set to null in the
current node. The “delete” method reverses this process.
Figure 5.30: Class diagram with LogicalOperator class, Condition class and Comparison­
Parameter interface
The Condition class represents an actual comparison of a measurement to some value or
values. Assume a measurement of type “temperature” called M1. It holds the value of the
temperature of a droplet. Consider comparison: “M1 is bigger than 10 degrees celsius”.
The condition has to have knowledge about M1 and a place to save the operator “bigger
than” as well as the value to which it compares. When user selects which measurement
they want to use, it is saved in the “measurementParameter” field of the Condition class.
The information about the comparison is saved in the “comparisonParameter” field, a
class that implements the ComparisonParameter interface. When the user chooses the
measurement, the “setMeasurement” method saves the reference to the measurement.
It sets “comparisonParameter” to a new instance of a class corresponding to the type of
the measurement.
A class was created for each type of measurement that implements the ComparisonPa­
rameter interface (see fig. 5.31). These classes hold information about the comparison
of a given type. For example, color measurements are compared to two colors. The Col­
orComparisonParameter class, which implements the ComparisonParameter, has two
52
==PAGE:61==
fields that save the hexadecimal color codes for these colors.
Figure 5.31: Class diagram of the comparison parameter classes.
5.4.8
Sequence
The Sequence class (fig. 5.32) represents an ordered list of blocks and exposes meth­
ods for manipulating them and their positions. A protocol starts with an empty sequence
to which users might add blocks. Some blocks have sequences themselves. Each se­
quence has an auto­generated id and an optional reference to its parent block, which can
be set via the constructor. Repeat and condition blocks and tasks store the ids of their
subsequences in their parameters. Blocks are stored in the “blocks” field, a list of class
Block objects. The methods of this class are self­explanatory; they manipulate the list of
blocks.
Figure 5.32: Sequence class
5.5
Global state (store)
As previously mentioned, the store and the dispatcher are created using the Zustand
library. It creates an object called the store, which holds data used globally in the appli­
cation and provides methods to alter it. These methods are used as dispatcher functions
and can be called in multiple parts of the interface. The store will handle them and update
the state to which the UI components will react. We present the store in two tables. The
53
==PAGE:62==
first one, presented in table 5.2, explains the state saved in the store and some helper
methods along with their explanations. The second one, table 5.3, lists all dispatcher
functions available through the store.
Field/Method
Explanation
scale
Number representing how much the protocol is
zoomed in or out.
position
Coordinates representing the position of the protocol
on the screen. These are changed when the protocol
is moved around.
activeTool
Current tool chosen from the toolbar. Value is taken
from TOOLS enum.
firstSequenceId
The ID of the first sequence in the protocol. It is al­
ways the same and is not changed.
sequences
An object representing the protocol’s sequences. The
keys are the ids and values are instances of the Se­
quence class. The object is initialised with an empty
sequence and id = firstSequenceId.
getSequence
A helper function which takes a sequence id and re­
turns corresponding sequence object.
getBlock
A helper function which takes a block id and a se­
quence id and returns a block.
activeBlock
An object with a block id and its sequence’s id repre­
senting currently edited block.
getActiveBlock
Returns a block object based on the current value of
the activeBlock field.
droplets
List of droplets currently existing in the system.
getAvailableDroplets
A method used to get a list of droplets available for a
block with a specified id which is in a sequence with
sequenceId id. The list is obtained by recursively call­
ing the “produce” method of the Block class. The first
block in the protocol receives an empty list and alters
it using its produce method. The result is used by the
following blocks up to the block of interest.
measurements
A list of measurement used in the protocol.
getAvailableMeasurements
A method which creates a list of measurement for a
given block. It returns all measurements which were
created before the block with a given id.
tasks
List of sequence ids which are used by tasks.
hasAnyErrors
A helper method which returns a boolean value which
is true if any of the blocks in the protocol has an error.
Table 5.2: Global state of the application stored in a store.
54
==PAGE:63==
Method
Explanation
setScale
Sets the scale to a given number
setPosition
Sets position coordinates to a given x and y values.
setActiveTool
Sets the active tool to a given value of the TOOL
enum.
addSequence
Creates a new sequence and adds it to the sequences
object.
addBlock
Creates a new block of a given operation and adds
it to the sequence with a specified id by calling its
“addBlock” method.
Additionally depending on the
type of operation this method also might add new
droplets (input), new measurements (sense) or new
sequences (condition).
deleteBlock
Deletes a block and all objects associated with it and
nested within it. For example, not only will it delete
a repeat block, but also the sequence used by this
block.
swapBlocks
Swap two blocks with given ids in a given sequence.
Calls “swapBlocks” method of the Sequence class.
updateBlock
Overwrites a block with a new version of it. Calls “up­
dateBlock” method of the Sequence class.
setActiveBlock
Sets the active block to a given id.
addDroplet
Adds an instance of the Droplet class to the list of
droplets.
deleteDroplet
Deletes a given droplet from the list of droplets.
addMeasurement
Adds an instance of the Measurement class to the list
of measurements.
addTask
Creates a task block, adds it to a given sequence at
a given index in its list of blocks. Creates a sequence
corresponding to the task and adds it to “sequences”
as well as the id of this sequence to the “tasks” list.
deleteTask
Deletes the sequence used by a given task from the
“sequences” object and calls the “deleteBlock” on the
task block.
Table 5.3: The dispatcher methods available through the store.
5.6
Abstract syntax tree
The goal of the interface built in this thesis is to create an abstraction of a protocol that can
then be executed on a DMF device. That means the interface has to produce an output
that can be read and processed by a compiler further in the toolchain of the DMF platform.
We decided that an appropriate representation would be an abstract syntax tree.
55
==PAGE:64==
Classically, an Abstract Syntax Tree (AST) is a way of representing the structural elements
of a program’s source code using a tree­like structure. Each node in the tree represents
a part of the code, such as a variable, function, or statement. The AST acts as a middle
step between the source code and the machine code that the computer executes.
Figure 5.33: Diagram of node classes corresponding to blocks.
In the case of our project, the tree nodes represent operations defined in the project, and
56
==PAGE:65==
the resulting tree acts as a step between the user interface and a compiler which would
produce low­level instructions for the DMF platform.
The tree is built with instances of the Node class, classes extending this class for each
operation, and node classes for conditions. These classes are presented in fig. 5.33 and
fig. 5.34. Their fields represent any relevant information that should be passed to the
compiler.
Figure 5.34: Diagram of node classes which build conditions.
The AST is created by calling the “getAbstractSyntaxTree” function and passing the ap­
plication’s store as an argument. The program treats tasks as separate trees. It creates
an object with keys, including the id of the root sequence of the protocol and the ids of all
tasks. The value assigned to each key is an instance of the RootNode class, which holds
a list of nodes. Next, each block found in a sequence is transformed into its corresponding
node class by calling the “toNode” method of the Block class. For example, an instance
of the InputClass will return an instance of the InputNode class. Blocks containing sub­
sequences (like RepeatBlock) will repeat this mapping for their sequences, propagating
the transformation through the protocol.
5.7
React components
In this section, we explain the implementation of the user interface by providing a detailed
description of react components representing different UI elements, how they relate to
each other, and how they respond to the data they depend on.
First, we present an overview of the most important components in a form of a tree in
fig. 5.35. In this figure an arrow going from component <A/> to <B/> means that <B/>
is part of the UI described by <A/>. If a component is inside of square brackets “[ ]”, for
example <A/> →[<B/>], it means that <A/> renders multiple instances of <B/>.
In the remainder of this section we go through the components, describe their purpose,
responsibilities, the data they rely on and actions they can perform.
<Layout/>
This is the root element of the application. It acts as a wrapper for the rest of the compo­
nents but also sets up the drag and drop functionality from the dnd kit library by defining
57
==PAGE:66==
Figure 5.35: Overview of react components used to create the UI in the form of a tree.
handlers for dragStart and dragEnd events of the <DndContext/> component. There are
two drag interactions in the application. First one is dragging new operations from the op­
erations panel and adding it to the protocol in the canvas and the second is dragging tasks
in from the protocol to reorder them. The dragStart event sets either activeOperation or
activeBlock depending on which interaction it is. These are then passed on to <Opera­
tionsPanel/> and <CustomDragOverlay/>. Elements rendered by the layout components
are presented in listing 5.9
1
<>
2
...
3
<Toolbar />
4
<Zoom />
5
<BlockSettingsPanel />
6
<DndContext
7
...
8
onDragStart={handleDragStart}
9
onDragEnd={handleDragEnd}
10
>
11
<OperationsPanel activeOperation={activeOperation} />
12
<Canvas />
13
<CustomDragOverlay activeBlock={activeBlock} activeOperation={
activeOperation} />
14
</DndContext >
15
</>
Listing 5.9: Elements rendered by the <Layout/> component.
58
==PAGE:67==
<DndContext/>
This components is a part of the dnd kit library. It is required for the functionality of dragging
and dropping to work and has to be higher in the hierarchy than all draggable elements.
It accepts a couple of parameters, most importantly onDragStart and onDragEnd which
accept handler functions which are executed when a drag event starts and ends.
<OperationsPanel/>
Operations panel component simply describes the look of the panel, hides it if value of
activeTool state from the store is not equal to TOOLS.BLOCKS. It also passes the active­
Operation down to the <OperationsList/>.
<OperationsList/>
This component for each group of operations defined in OPERATION_DEFINITIONS dis­
plays its name and then maps all operations of this group to a <Draggable/> element which
wraps an <OperationWrapper/>. It passes the type of the operation and a boolean inform­
ing if this is the active operation to the <OperationWrapper/> components as shown in the
snippet below in listing 5.10.
1
<>
2
{Object.keys(OPERATION_DEFINITIONS).map((group) => {
3
return (
4
...
5
<div ...>{group}</div>
6
...
7
{OPERATION_DEFINITIONS[group].map((operation) => {
8
return (
9
<Draggable key={operation.type} id={operation.type}>
10
<OperationWrapper
11
active={activeOperationType == operation.type}
12
operation={operation.type}
13
/>
14
</Draggable >
15
);
16
})}
17
...
18
...
19
);
20
})}
21
</>
Listing 5.10: Elements rendered in the operations list
<Draggable/>
Draggable is a component required in order for an element to be registered by the dnd kit
library as draggable. It is used as a wrapper for an element that we wish to be interactive.
<OperationWrapper/>
This component takes an operation type as a parameter and renders a representation
of the given operation using information from OPERATION_DEFINITIONS. It describes
what a particular operation looks like. For example, the “input” operation’s definition in
listing 5.11 is rendered into an element presented in fig. 5.36. The same component is
used for the overlay (the element visible when dragging). If this component is dragged,
59
==PAGE:68==
it will become bigger. If the value of the “active” parameter is true, it will run a “pulse”
animation.
1
{
2
type: OPERATION.INPUT,
3
name: 'Input',
4
description: 'Adds a new droplet to the protocol.',
5
color: '#0466c8',
6
create: (sequenceId: string) => new InputBlock(sequenceId),
7
icon: 'block-input.svg',
8
}
Listing 5.11: Definition of the input operation
Figure 5.36: Operation wrapper result for input operation
<Canvas/>
The canvas is responsible for the behavior of the area where the protocol is built. It
enables scaling using the scroll gesture. It defined a handler function that fires when
a user scrolls. The handler changes the scale in the store by predefined “scaleFactor”
and between “min” and “max” zoom levels. The component renders the play button, the
primary sequence of the protocol as a <BlockSequence/> component to which it passes
the sequence, and list of tasks as <Task/> components passing corresponding task as a
parameter.
<PlayButton/>
The play button’s role is to run the protocol on the platform. In the current implementation,
it calls the “downloadAST” function, which creates the abstract syntax tree and downloads
it to the user’s computer. The button is disabled if there are any errors present in the
protocol. It knows about the errors by calling “hasAnyErrors” method from the store. The
component renders into an element presented in fig. 5.37.
Figure 5.37: The play button.
<TaskBranch/>
This component renders a <BlockSequence/> for a task passed as a parameter, positions
it, and draws a line between the sequence and the place where the task was spawn.
60
==PAGE:69==
<BlockSequence/>
Block sequence renders a sequence of blocks. It receives an instance of the Sequence
class as a parameter and renders its elements inside of a <SortableContext/>, which en­
ables the sorting of the blocks. If necessary, it adds an <AddTaskButton/> at the beginning
and then maps all blocks from the sequence into a <DraggableBlock/> component with
<AddTaskButton/> elements between them. If the block is a task, it renders a <Delete­
TaskButton/> instead. At the end it renders a <Slot/> element used for adding new blocks
to the end of the sequence. For reference, a single <BlockSequence/> renders to a rep­
resentation presented in fig. 5.38.
Figure 5.38: A sequence of blocks rendered by the <BlockSequence/> component
<SortableContext/>
This component is a part of the dnd kit library. It simplifies sorting elements by dragging
them. When an element is dragged over another one, the context swaps their places, and
when it is dropped, the “swapBlocks” method from the store is called.
<AddTaskButton/>
<AddTaskButton/> renders a button (fig. 5.39) which, when clicked, calls “addTask” method
from the store. It also checks the current mode by checking if “activeTool” from the store
is equal to TOOLS.TASKS. Only then the button is displayed.
Figure 5.39: The add task button.
<DeleteTaskButton/>
This component is displayed in the place of a task in a sequence. In TOOLS.TASKS mode
it displays a red “X” button (fig. 5.40) which, when pressed, deletes the task. In other
modes, it renders an icon used as an anchor (fig. 5.41) from which the task branches out
to another sequence.
Figure 5.40: The delete task button.
61
==PAGE:70==
Figure 5.41: The anchor of a task.
<Slot/>
The slot is a “droppable” component which, in terms of the dnd kit library, will react to
“draggable” elements dropped onto it. As a result, the context used in <Layout/> fires the
onDragEnd event. When an operation is dragged to this component, it recognizes the
type of the operation and passes it to the event. The callback function can then create
the correct block. Slots use the icon presented in fig. 5.42
Figure 5.42: The icon used by the <Slot/> component.
<DraggableBlock/>
This component is responsible for the dragging behavior of a block in a sequence. It
renders a <BlockWrapper/> component to which it passes an instance of a block. It uses
the “useSortable” hook, which signals to the dnd kit library and the <SortableContext/>
context that this element can be dragged and switch places with other elements.
<BlockWrapper/>
The block wrapper handles the look of a block in the protocol. As a parameter, it receives
an instance of a block. It checks its type (which operation it is), finds the definition in
OPERATION_DEFINITIONS, and uses the information to style it. It sets the background,
the name of the operation, and the icon at the top of the block as presented in fig. 5.43a.
Moreover, it reads the “activeBlock” from the store, and if its “id” is the same as the block’s
from the parameter, it adds an outline to the block to emphasize it is currently selected
(see fig. 5.43b). Finally, it calls the “hasError” method on the block’s parameters, and if it
has an error, it displays a red border to indicate the problem to the user (fig. 5.43c). When
a block is clicked this component uses the “setActiveBlock” method from the store to set
it to the block’s id or to null when clicked again.
<BlocksContentFactory/>
This component describes how the summary of the block’s parameters should be dis­
played. It gets an instance of a block as a parameter and then, depending on the block’s
operation type, renders corresponding details. It is simply a switch on the operation type
as presented in listing 5.12. For each operation, an additional component is defined,
which renders a summary for this type. For example for input a <InputBlockContent/>
component is defined.
62
==PAGE:71==
(a) Input block
(b) Selected input block
(c) Input block with an error
Figure 5.43: An example of a block rendered by the <BlockWrapper/> component. On
the left unselected block without any errors, in the middle a selected block, on the right
the block with an error.
1
function BlockContentFactory({ block }: { block: Block }) {
2
switch (block.operation) {
3
case OPERATION.INPUT:
4
return <InputBlockContent key={block.id} inputBlock={block as InputBlock
} />;
5
case OPERATION.HEAT_COOL:
6
return <HeatCoolBlockContent key={block.id} heatCoolBlock={block as
HeatCoolBlock} />;
7
case OPERATION.MIX:
8
return <MixBlockContent key={block.id} mixBlock={block as MixBlock} />;
9
...
10
default:
11
return <></>;
12
}
13
}
Listing 5.12: Simplified <BlocksContentFactory/> component
<CustomDragOverlay/>
Every time an operation or a block is dragged, the element visible as being dragged is
the same ­ <CustomDragOverlay/>. This component looks different depending on which
element initiated the drag. It takes two parameters, “activeBlock” and “activeOperation”
which it receives from the <Layout/> component. A maximum of one of these is defined
at a time. Depending on which is defined, it renders either an <DraggedOperation/> or a
<BlockWrapper/>.
<DraggedOperation/>
This component renders an <OperationWrapper/> passing an operation and setting its
“dragged” parameter to true. It also uses the “scale” from its parameters to scale the
operation. When an operation is dragged its size matches the size of blocks in the scaled
(zoomed in or out) protocol.
<BlockSettingsPanel/>
This component is responsible for the settings panel of a block. When a block is selected,
this panel appears on the right side of the interface and displays the interface, which can
be used to set the parameters of the block. The component reads “activeBlock” from the
store and renders something only if it is defined. It renders a <SettingsHeader/> and a
63
==PAGE:72==
<SettingsFactory/> below. At the end, it renders a delete button that uses “deleteBlock”
from the store. An example of the panel is presented in fig. 5.44.
Figure 5.44: An example of the settings panel rendered for an input block.
<SettingsHeader/>
Settings header formats the top of the settings panel. It consists of a colored square, the
operation’s name, and a button that closes the panel. For example, in fig. 5.44, a blue
square, which is the color of the input operation, then the name “input” in capital letters
and an “x” button at the end of the row. Its parameters are the selected block’s operation
and a function run when the close button is clicked. The function is passed from the parent
component and sets the active block id in the store to null.
<SettingsFactory/>
Settings factory is a simple switch block on the block’s operation type as presented in
listing 5.13.
1
function SettingsFactory({ block }: { block: Block }) {
2
switch (block.operation) {
3
case OPERATION.INPUT:
4
return <InputSettings key={block.id} inputBlock={block as InputBlock}
/>;
5
case OPERATION.HEAT_COOL:
6
return <HeatCoolSettings key={block.id} heatCoolBlock={block as
HeatCoolBlock} />;
7
case OPERATION.MIX:
8
return <MixSettings key={block.id} mixBlock={block as MixBlock} />;
9
...
10
default:
11
return <></>;
12
}
13
}
Listing 5.13: Simplified <SettingsFactory/> component
64
==PAGE:73==
This component has a single parameter ­ the block which is passed to a component spe­
cific to its operation. For each operation, there is a settings component defined. For
example, the input blocks are passed to <InputSettings/> component. Each of these
operation­specific components renders a set of reusable inputs and selectors used to edit
the block’s parameters. For example, <InputSettings/> uses an <InputUniqueName/>,
which is an input of type “text” that makes sure the provided input is unique in some list,
an <InputVolume/>, which is a numerical input combined with a select list of available units
and a <SelectSubstance/> which is a select list of available substances. Parameters of a
block are passed to these components and whenever a parameter is altered in the UI, the
new value is set in the parameters field of the block class and the “updateBlock” method
of the store is called.
<Zoom/>
<Zoom/> uses “scale” from the store to display the current zoom level as well as “setScale”
and “setPosition” to reset the zoom and protocol’s position on the screen with a button. It
renders a simple button and a string as presented in fig. 5.45 below.
Figure 5.45: The element rendered by the <Zoom/> component.
<Toolbar/>
This component is a simple toolbar displayed at the top of the interface. It renders three
buttons with their icons as presented in fig. 5.46.The buttons set the current tool using
“setActiveTool” from the store passing one of the three values of the TOOL enum as an
argument.
Figure 5.46: The element rendered by the <Toolbar/> component.
5.8
Extensibility
In this section, we describe steps that have to be taken to extend the system. As research
progresses, there might be a need to add operations to the system and possibly new types
of parameters. Below we present an instruction on how to achieve that. We assume the
name of the new operation is “Operate.”
1. Add “Operate” as a value in the OPERATIONS enum.
1
enum OPERATION {
2
...
3
OPERATE = 'Operate '
4
}
2. Create a class that will handle blocks of this operation. The class should extend the
Block abstract class.
65
==PAGE:74==
1
class OperateBlock extends Block {
2
constructor(sequenceId: string) {
3
super(OPERATION.OPERATE , sequenceId);
4
}
5
toNode() {
6
return new Node(this);
7
}
8
}
3. Create an object implementing the Operation interface and add it to the OPERA­
TION_DEFINITIONS object. After this step, the operation will appear in the opera­
tions panel and can be used in the system.
1
{
2
type: OPERATION.OPERATE ,
3
description: 'Operates on a droplet ',
4
color: '#000000',
5
create: (sequenceId: string) => new OperateBlock(sequenceId),
6
icon: 'block-operate.svg',
7
},
4. In order to choose parameters for the new operation, a class representing the block’s
parameters should be created. This class can use parameters already defined in the
project, like SelectDropletParameter, for selecting a droplet. The “hasError” method
should be implemented if the block might have an error.
1
class OperateBlockParameters extends BlockParameters {
2
selectDroplet: SelectDropletParameter = new SelectDropletParameter();
3
hasError() {
4
if(random() > 0.5) return true;
5
return false;
6
}
7
}
5. A class extending the Parameter class should be created if a new parameter type is
needed. For example, a percentage parameter which user would input as a number
between 0 and 100. The class produces an error if the value is outside of this range.
1
class InputPercentageParameter implements Parameter {
2
percentage: number = 0;
3
getError() {
4
if(this.percentage < 0 || this.percentage > 100) {
5
return ``The value has to be between 0 and 100.";
6
}
7
return null;
8
}
9
}
6. Some React components must be created to display the parameters to the user and
enable editing them.
66
==PAGE:75==
(a) <OperateBlockContent/> component should be implemented to display the sum­
mary of the parameters on the block. The component should then be used in
the <BlockContentFactory/> component.
(b) <OperateSettings/> component should be created, describing elements dis­
played in the settings panel. The component should then be used in the <Set­
tingsFactory/> to inform that it should be used for blocks of the “Operate” type.
7. If the new operation has information relevant to the compiler, a new Node class
should be created to hold that information. The class should be used in the “toNode”
method of the OperateBlock class. For example, OperateNode class would have a
percentage field.
1
class OperateNode extends Node {
2
percentage: number;
3
constructor(block: OperateBlock) {
4
super(block);
5
this.percentage = block.parameters.percentageParameter.percentage;
6
}
7
}
67
==PAGE:76==
68
==PAGE:77==
6
Testing and evaluation
Testing and evaluation is an essential step in the software development process. It al­
lows developers to ensure that the software they have created functions as intended and
meets the specified requirements. This chapter will cover various testing and evaluation
methods, including unit testing, integration testing, and end­to­end testing. Additionally,
it will discuss the evaluation of the performance and usability of the software.
6.1
Automated tests
Automated testing plays a crucial role in maintaining the integrity of code changes and
identifying bugs early on in the development process. In this project, all automated tests
are executed every time a code change is committed to the main branch of the repository.
Three automated tests were implemented ­ unit tests, integration tests, and end­to­end
tests. Unit and integration tests were employed to verify the functionality of the store
methods, while end­to­end tests were used to simulate user interactions and evaluate
the overall performance of the application. This section provides an overview of the tests
written in the project and introduces the testing libraries utilized in their implementation.
6.1.1
Unit and integration tests
Unit and integration tests were written using Jest [25]. Jest is a popular JavaScript testing
library that makes it easy to test JavaScript code. It has built­in support for assertions,
mocking, and code coverage. Jest also supports the latest JavaScript features, such as
async/await, and it works with popular JavaScript frameworks such as React.
Jest’s syntax is easy to understand and use. A basic Jest test file exports a test function
that takes a string describing the test and a callback function containing the test code.
The callback function contains the code to be executed, and the assertions used to check
if the code is working correctly.
We present the Jest tests defined in in this project in table 6.1.
#
Test type
Title
Description
1
Unit
Store can be created
Tests if the store object can be success­
fully created and checks if the firstSe­
quenceId is set.
2
Unit
Blocks can be added
Tests if the store correctly creates a new
input block and adds it to the main se­
quence.
69
==PAGE:78==
3
Integration
Blocks can be edited
Changes a droplet name in the input block
parameters and updates it in the store.
Checks if the updated block has the new
name.
4
Integration
Blocks can be deleted
Deletes the block from the protocol and
makes sure its not in the sequence any­
more.
5
Integration
Blocks can be swapped
Adds two an input block and an out­
put block and calls swapBlocks method
with their ids. Checks if the blocks were
swapped in the main sequence.
6
Integration
Get available droplets
Adds three blocks: output, input and out­
put. Makes sure there are none available
droplets for the first two blocks and there
is one for the third block.
7
Integration
Get available measure­
ments
Adds three blocks: output, sense and out­
put. Makes sure there are none available
measurements for the first two blocks and
there is one for the third block.
8
Integration
Duplicate
droplet
names error
Adds two input blocks.
Changes the
name of the second droplet to the name
of the first droplet. Calls hasError method
on the parameters of the edited block.
9
Integration
Protocol has any errors
Calls hasAnyErrors method from the store
and makes sure it returns true.
10
Integration
Repeat block preserves
droplet state
Adds a repeat block.
Makes sure the
hasError method returns false. Adds an
input block to the repeat block. Checks
hasError again.
11
Unit
Tasks can be added
Calls addTask from the store and makes
sure the tasks is in the ”tasks” field.
12
Integration
Tasks can be nested
Adds another task to an existing one and
makes sure the first one has a block of
type ”task”.
13
Integration
Nested tasks can be
deleted
Deletes the top task and makes sure all
children tasks were deleted.
14
Unit
AST can be created
Calls the getAbstractSyntaxTree function
on an empty store.
15
Integration
AST parses tasks cor­
rectly
Adds tasks to the protocol and calls
getAbstractSyntaxTree
again
making
sure the tasks are in the resulting object.
70
==PAGE:79==
16
Integration
AST parses conditions
correctly
Adds input, sense and condition blocks
to the protocol.
Sets the measurement
in the condition to the result of the sense
block. Calls getAbstractSyntaxTree again
making sure conditions were added to the
tree.
Table 6.1: Unit and integration tests implemented in the project.
6.1.2
End to end tests
The end­to­end tests in this project were implemented using Playwright [26], an open­
source testing library for web applications. Playwright offers APIs for simulating user
interactions, such as clicks, scrolls, drags, and keyboard inputs, to automate browser
testing. This allows developers to write tests for multiple browsers, including Chrome,
Firefox, and Safari, and run them simultaneously, making it an efficient tool for web appli­
cation testing.
Playwright provides a set of JavaScript APIs allowing developers to interact with web
pages, elements, and the browser. To start a new test, developers can create a new
browser instance and then navigate to a page. Once the page is loaded, developers can
use the provided APIs to interact with the page, such as clicking on buttons, filling out
forms, and inspecting the text of elements. Additionally, Playwright allows developers
to create and manage multiple browser contexts and pages, enabling testing of multiple
pages or states of the same page. The library also allows developers to handle browser
events like network requests and page errors.
All Playwright tests used in the project, presented in table 6.2, run automatically on three
browsers: Chrome, Firefox and Safari. This ensures that the application functions cor­
rectly regardless of the browser utilized by the end user.
#
Title
Description
1
Test break operation
Scrolls down the operations panel to reveal the block
operation.
Drags the operation into the protocol.
Closes the settings panel and makes sure the break
block has a red outline indicating it has an error.
Opens the settings panel again and deletes the block.
Drags in the repeat operation and add a break oper­
ation into the repeat block. Checks if the break block
no longer has a red outline.
2
Test condition operation
Drags the input operation into the protocol. Scrolls the
operations panel to reveal the sense operation. Adds
a sense block. Selects droplet ”D1” in the settings
panel of the sense block. Drags the condition oper­
ation into the protocol. Selects measurement ”M1” in
the settings panel. Closes the panel by clicking the
condition block. Makes sure the block does not have
a red outline.
71
==PAGE:80==
3
Test end operation
Scrolls down the operations panel to reveal the end
operation.
Drags the operation into the protocol.
Closes the settings panel and makes sure the block
does not have a red outline.
4
Test heat/cool operation
Drags the input and heat/cool operations into the pro­
tocol. Selects droplet ”D1” in the heat/cool settings
panel and changes temperature to 10.
Clicks the
heat/cool block to close the panel and makes sure the
block does not have a red outline.
5
Test input operation
Drags the input operation into the protocol. Changes
the name of the droplet in the settings panel. Makes
sure the new name is visible on the block.
6
Test merge operation
Drags the input operation into the protocol twice.
Drags the merge operation. Selects two droplets in
the settings panel of the merge block. Closes the set­
tings panel and makes sure the merge block does not
have a red outline.
7
Test mix operation
Drags the input operation into the protocol. Drags the
mix operation into the protocol. Selects droplet ”D1”
in the settings panel. Types 10 in the mix duration
input field. Closes the panel and makes sure the new
duration is visible on the block and that it does not
have a red outline.
8
Test output operation
Drags the input and output operations into the pro­
tocol. Selects droplet ”D1” to output and selects the
first output from the list. Clicks the output block clos­
ing the settings panel and makes sure the block does
not have a red outline.
9
Test repeat operation
Scrolls down the operations panel to reveal the repeat
operation. Drags the repeat operation to the protocol.
Scrolls up and adds the input operation into the pro­
tocol. Opens the settings panel for the repeat block
and makes sure the panel displays an error.
10
Test sense operation
Drags the input operation into the protocol. Scrolls
down the operation panel to reveal the sense opera­
tion and drags it into the protocol. Selects droplet ”D1”
as the parameter of the sense operation. Closes the
settings panel and makes sure the sense block does
not have a red outline.
11
Test split operation
Drags the input and split operations into the proto­
col. Selects droplet ”D1” as the argument for splitting.
Closes the settings panel and makes sure the split
block does not have a red outline.
72
==PAGE:81==
12
Test wait operation
Scrolls down the operations panel to reveal the wait
operation.
Drags the wait operation to the proto­
col. Types 10 into the field corresponding to duration.
Closes the panel by clicking the block and makes sure
it does not have a red outline.
13
Test waste operation
Drags the input operation into the protocol. Drags the
waste operation into the protocol. Selects droplet ”D1”
from dropdown list. Closes the the settings panel and
makes sure the wait block does not have a red outline.
14
Test settings panel
Drags the input operation into the protocol. Makes
sure the panel is visible. Closes the panel by clicking
the ”x” button. Makes sure the panel is not visible.
15
Test toolbar
Clicks tool which hides panels. Makes sure the oper­
ations panel is not visible. Clicks the tasks tool and
makes sure the protocol has a button for adding a
task. Clicks the beacon icon and makes sure the op­
erations panel is visible again.
16
Test zoom
Moves the mouse into the middle of the screen.
Scrolls down. Makes sure the zoom level number is
smaller than 100.
Table 6.2: All end­to­end tests defined in the project.
All automated tests run and passed when the implementation of the interfaced was con­
cluded.
6.2
User testing
To evaluate the performance of our completed application in a real­world setting, we con­
ducted a second lab usability test on the final product. Similar to the test outlined in
section 4.6, the test followed the same procedures and protocols. In this section, we
present the results of this test and compare them to the previous round of testing. It’s
worth mentioning that the test was conducted on the same four individuals three months
later, who were already familiar with how the system was supposed to function. Further
testing with external users is necessary before implementing the application in a produc­
tion environment.
73
==PAGE:82==
User
Errors
Error
rate
Q1
Q2
Q3
1
Presses play at the
beginning.
Uses
mix
before
merging.
Clicks
the
”then”
part on the condi­
tion
block
instead
of dragging a block
there.
20%
8/10
­
Would like to see all
operations at once.
The protocol could
use
multiple
lines
automatically
in
some way.
2
Tries
to
click
op­
erations instead of
dragging.
Clicks play button at
the beginning.
13%
9/10
Would prefer click­
ing over dragging.
When there is noth­
ing
in
the
”else”
part of the condi­
tion block it feels
incomplete.
The
”else”
part
of
the
condition
block
could
be
hidden
by
default
and
expanded
if
needed.
3
­
0%
8/10
When
trying
to
sense the tempera­
ture of the droplet,
reached
for
the
heat/cool block but
used
the
informa­
tion icon to learn if
this is what should
be used.
­
4
­
0%
9/10
­
When
trying
to
merge droplets,
it
makes more sense
visually
to
see
droplets
parallel
rather than sequen­
tially.
Groups
of
blocks
could
collapse
to
encapsulate
parts
of a protocol.
Protocol could wrap
to a newline, so it
does
not
get
too
long.
Table 6.3: The results of the second lab usability test done on the implemented applica­
tion.
When compared to table 4.2, the results of the test in table 6.3 indicate that the number
of errors stayed at the same level for user number 1 and decreased for all other users.
Moreover, ease of usage (as measured by Q1) increased from average value of 7.5/10 to
8.5/10. It is important to remember that this was the second time the users had contact
74
==PAGE:83==
with the tool. Nonetheless, it gives some indication of how intuitive is the solution. Some
errors and suggestions were common among multiple users, such as clicking the play
button before the protocol is built. Potential solutions include disabling the button when
the protocol is empty or relocating it. Additionally, some users did not utilize the ability to
drag the protocol around the screen or zoom, which could enhance the user experience.
It was not noted in the results table as we did not consider it an error. Providing a quick
instruction when the application is opened could also be beneficial. These feedback points
should be taken into account in future development.
6.3
Size and download speed
The production version of the application has a file size of 524 kB, but they are com­
pressed for faster downloading. When a user visits the website, only 166 kB needs to be
transferred to their browser, which then decompresses the files to display the site. Table
6.4 shows estimated download times in milliseconds for various internet speeds, not in­
cluding server response latency. The time until the application is interactive also depends
on the user’s device and the browser.
Connection Name
Connection Speed
Time to download
Slow 3G (UMTS)
384 kbps
432.3 ms
Fast 3G (HSPA+)
5 Mbps
33.2 ms
Slow 4G (LTE)
15 Mbps
11.067 ms
Fast 4G (LTE­Advanced Pro)
60 Mbps
2.7667 ms
Fiber­optic internet
500 Mbps
0.332 ms
Table 6.4: Example connection speeds and corresponding times to download the appli­
cation’s resources.
6.4
Performance
Figure 6.1: Frames per second rendered by the browser when zooming in and out by
number of blocks in the protocol.
Performance plays a crucial role in determining the overall user experience. A smooth
and responsive interface with fluid animations is vital for user satisfaction. To evaluate the
performance of the application, we devised a test that includes automated zooming in and
out of the protocol for different numbers of blocks while measuring the frames rendered
by the browser per second (FPS). The test was conducted by adding input blocks in a
75
==PAGE:84==
single sequence, focusing on the zooming behavior as it is the most demanding task for
re­rendering the application, particularly with large protocols.
The results, illustrated in fig. 6.1, indicate that the performance drops below 60 FPS when
protocols reach around 120 blocks. Additionally, the 30 FPS mark is passed for proto­
cols with 250 blocks, at which point users may experience difficulty using the application
seamlessly. This outcome is highly satisfactory, as we anticipate that the typical protocol
size will be in the tens of blocks range.
Figure 6.2: The size of an JSON file containing the output (AST) by the number of blocks
in the protocol.
In addition to measuring the performance of our system in terms of frame rate, we also
evaluated its performance in terms of creating the output, specifically the Abstract Syntax
Tree (AST). To do this, we measured both the size of the resulting JSON file and the time
required to create it. These measurements were conducted using the same number of
blocks as in the frame rate test. As shown in fig. 6.2, the size of the output grows linearly,
which is to be expected as the size of the nodes corresponds to the number of blocks
and their parameters. In a protocol made up solely of input blocks, each node will add a
nearly identical number of bytes to the output. The size may vary slightly, for example,
due to differences in the length of the name of a given droplet. A protocol consisting of
one thousand blocks results in a file of 205 kB.
Figure 6.3: Time in milliseconds needed to create the output by number of blocks in the
protocol.
The time it took to produce the outputs, with precision of one millisecond, is illustrated in
fig. 6.3. All of the results were extremely quick, taking no more than five milliseconds.
76
==PAGE:85==
6.5
Protocol examples
It is impossible to fully predict all protocols that users may wish to perform on a digital
microfluidic biochip using the implemented interface. The tool was designed with flexibility
in mind, offering a set of operations and a way to organize them. In this section, we
demonstrate the interface’s capabilities by presenting examples of protocols and their
corresponding results.
Lab usability test example
The first example, presented in fig. 6.4, is the protocol used in the usability tests performed
in this thesis. The protocol was described in section 4.6.
Figure 6.4: The protocol resulting from the lab usability test.
PCR with droplet replenishment
The second example is the protocol called PCR with droplet replenishment. This example
is also used by the authors of the BioScript language in their paper. We presented their
example earlier in listing 3.1. The figure presents three screenshots from the interface.
The top one shows the whole protocol. The two other are the same protocol, zoomed in
for better readability.
Color sorting droplets
The last example is a color sorting protocol. Consider the protocol presented in fig. 6.6.
This protocol runs a task 10 times with a 5 seconds delay between each task. The task
introduces a droplet, senses its color, and routes it to a specific output depending on its
color. If it is red (between two specified shades of red), it goes to “output 1”. If it is blue,
to “output 2”, green, to “output 3,” and otherwise “output 4” is used.
77
==PAGE:86==
Figure 6.5: PCR with droplet replenishment protocol.
78
==PAGE:87==
Figure 6.6: A protocol which sorts droplets based on their color.
79
==PAGE:88==
80
==PAGE:89==
7
Conclusion
In this chapter, we summarize the research and development process of the thesis, high­
lighting the main contributions and findings of our work. We also discuss the evaluation
of the developed solution, highlighting its advantages and disadvantages. Furthermore,
we present potential future work that could be done to improve or extend the solution,
providing a direction for future research.
7.1
Summary
This thesis presents the development and evaluation of a web­based graphical user inter­
face for designing protocols run on digital microfluidic biochips. The interface is designed
to be easy and intuitive to use and takes inspiration from existing visual programming lan­
guages such as Blockly and Blueprint. Additionally, the interface incorporates learnings
from other projects, such as BioScript and OpenDrop, which provide an abstraction for
controlling DMF platforms.
The design process, various interface layout elements, and usage of the interface are
described in detail in this thesis. To validate the design, a lab usability test was conducted.
The results of this test were taken into consideration when implementing the design.
The interface’s implementation and architecture are thoroughly discussed, including de­
scriptions of the classes, interfaces, React components, and the state management so­
lution and how they interact with each other. This information explains how the solution
functions and is a helpful reference for anyone looking to expand the project. The exten­
sibility of the solution is discussed by providing an example of how to add a new operation
to the system.
The solution was thoroughly tested using various methods, including automated tests,
to ensure that changes to the code do not break existing functionalities. A second lab
usability test was performed to gauge the ease of use of the implemented application.
The results of this test were used to make further improvements to the interface. The
performance of the interface, which is essential for a pleasing user experience, was also
tested. This included evaluations of the size of the application, how smooth the application
feels dependent on the number of blocks in the protocol, as well as the size of the output
and time to create it. The results of the tests and evaluations indicate that the GUI is a
practical and user­friendly tool for designing protocols for DMF biochips.
7.2
Advantages and Disadvantages of the Developed Solution
This thesis presents an application that is a distinct solution to the problem of control­
ling digital microfluidic biochips. It stands out from existing software by incorporating a
81
==PAGE:90==
combination of these key features:
1. It is easy to use and requires little introduction or programming knowledge. It also
clearly conveys any errors.
2. Secondly, the solution is easily accessible through a browser and does not require
any additional software.
3. It is complete in the sense that it accommodates all basic operations currently pos­
sible on the DMF platform, extending them by utility operations such as repeating
operations or executing them conditionally.
4. The system is easily extensible with future operations.
5. The web application is lightweight and performant, allowing for placing 250 blocks
before the frame rate drops below 30 FPS.
Nonetheless, it must be acknowledged that the proposed solution does have certain lim­
itations:
1. Building protocols primarily sequentially makes it grow fast in one dimension on the
screen and does not fully utilize vertical space on the screen.
2. In its current state, there is no way to save work on a particular protocol. The proto­
cols have to be designed fully and then exported to AST, and the user cannot close
the browser and return to the protocol later.
7.3
Future work
There are potential opportunities for improvement in this project, such as enhancing its
functionality and integrating it to work seamlessly with the DMF platform.
It is recommended that further testing be conducted with a larger user group to validate
the design decisions implemented in this project. A more comprehensive evaluation of
protocol building should be conducted to assess the system’s ability to model various
protocols. A key consideration in this process should be determining the scalability and
evaluating user feedback regarding overall usability.
An enhancement that could be considered for this application is the implementation of time
constraints between blocks. This feature could be of value to users as it would ensure
maximum delay between two operations on a single droplet.
We anticipate that saving progress when building a protocol is a very important feature.
This feature could be implemented in a couple of ways:
1. Setting up a database along with user authentication.
2. Persisting web application’s state in the browser’s local storage.
3. Importing protocols from an AST.
In order to fully incorporate the interface into the DMF platform toolchain, sending the
output to the compiler should be implemented. It could be done with an HTTP request
to a web server. Security measures should be carefully considered when developing this
communication. Additionally, the request could return updates or errors to the GUI. In that
case, it would be necessary to implement appropriate UI elements for displaying them.
For example, a console window which would log the updates.
82
==PAGE:91==
An efficient feature for the interface would be the ability for users to create and save
custom operations. This could include creating a protocol and turning it into an operation
that can be later reused. These custom operations could be saved in a new group within
the operations panel, creating a personal library for the user. The functionality could be
further developed to enable sharing between users.
7.4
Contributions
The work done in this thesis contributes to the area of controlling digital microfluidic
biochips in the following way.
• Introduction of a new, block­based, intuitive interface for programming digital mi­
crofluidic biochips developed in a user­driven way.
• New, sequential way of visually representing biochemical protocols. Based on con­
trol flow graphs and simplified by placing operations in a row for ease of use.
• Proposition of a new concept ­ assuming parallelism of independent operations in a
protocol, which shifts the responsibility of maintaining the order of operations using
different droplets from the user to the compiler, thus eliminating the need for the user
to worry about the order of operations.
• Introduction of a standardized protocol JSON format in the form of an abstract syntax
tree, which can be compiled to work with any DMF platform.
• Comprehensive evaluation and testing of the web application’s design and imple­
mentation.
83
==PAGE:92==
84
==PAGE:93==
Bibliography
[1]
Inc. Meta Platforms. React documentation. 2022. URL: https://reactjs.org/docs/
getting-started.html.
[2]
Frieder Mugele and Jean­Christophe Baret. “Electrowetting: From basics to appli­
cations”. In: Journal of Physics: Condensed Matter 17.28 (2005), pp. 705–774.
[3]
Georgi Tanev, Winnie Svendsen, and Jan Madsen. Biolabs as Computing Compo­
nents. Jan. 2020. ISBN: 978­3­030­16948­0. DOI: 10.1007/978-3-030-16949-7_12.
[4]
WHATWG community. HTML Standard. 2022. URL: https://html.spec.whatwg.org/
multipage/.
[5]
W3C. CSS Specification. 2022. URL: https://www.w3.org/Style/CSS/specs.en.html.
[6]
Kevin Gibbons Shu­yu Guo Michael Ficarra. ECMAScript® 2023 Language Speci­
fication. 2022. URL: https://tc39.es/ecma262/.
[7]
WHATWG community. DOM Standard. 2022. URL: https://dom.spec.whatwg.org/.
[8]
Microsoft. TypeScript documentation. 2022. URL: https://www.typescriptlang.org/.
[9]
Stack Overflow. Stack Overflow Developer Survey 2022. 2022. URL: https://survey.
stackoverflow.co/2022/.
[10]
Felix Høgstædt Larsen. “A block­based graphical user interface for programming
digital microfluidic biochips”. Bachelor’s Thesis. Technical University of Denmark,
2021.
[11]
GaudiLabs. OpenDrop V4. 2020. URL: https://www.gaudi.ch/OpenDrop/?p=544.
[12]
Processing Foundation. Processing. URL: https://processing.org/.
[13]
Google. Blockly. URL: https://developers.google.com/blockly.
[14]
Inc. Epic Games. Unreal Engine Blueprints. URL: https://docs.unrealengine.com/5.
0/en-US/blueprints-visual-scripting-in-unreal-engine/.
[15]
Inc. The MathWorks. Simulink. URL: https : / / www . mathworks . com / products /
simulink.html.
[16]
Inc. The MathWorks. MATLAB. URL: https://www.mathworks.com/products/matlab.
html.
[17]
Nick Babich. Top 7 Usability Testing Methods. 2019. URL: https://xd.adobe.com/
ideas/process/user-testing/top-7-usability-testing-methods/.
[18]
Inc. Vercel. Next.js. URL: https://nextjs.org/.
[19]
dnd kit. URL: https://dndkit.com/.
[20]
Zustand. URL: https://github.com/pmndrs/zustand.
[21]
Tailwind CSS. URL: https://tailwindcss.com/.
[22]
Github. URL: https://github.com/.
[23]
Vercel. URL: https://vercel.com/.
[24]
Github Actions. URL: https://github.com/features/actions.
[25]
JestJS. URL: https://jestjs.io/.
[26]
Microsoft. Playwright. URL: https://playwright.dev/.
85
==PAGE:94==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Richard Petersens Plads, Building 324
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.compute.dtu.dk
