==PAGE:1==
Data-driven digital twins for monitoring and
control of electricity distribution net
Master’s Thesis
DTU Compute
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
Technical University of Denmark
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Data-driven digital twins for monitoring and control of electricity distribution net
MSc in Mathematical Modelling and Computation
Master’s Thesis
Submitted January 29th, 2023
Authors
Ida Bukh Villesen
Helena Charlotte Hansen
Supervisor
Professor Henrik Madsen
Section for Dynamical Systems
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
Technichal University of Denmark
E-mail: hmad@dtu.dk
Secondary supervisors
Dr Razgar Ebrahimy
Section for Dynamical Systems
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
Technichal University of Denmark
E-mail: raze@dtu.dk
Magnus Nygaard Christensen
Consultant
Teknologisk Insititut
E-mail: mnch@teknologisk.dk
DTU Compute
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
Technical University of Denmark
Matematiktorvet, Building 303B
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Phone +45 4525 3031
compute@compute.dtu.dk
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:4==
==PAGE:5==
Approval
This master’s thesis has been prepared over five months at the Department of Applied Mathemat-
ics and Computer Science at the section for Dynamical Systems, at the Technical University of
Denmark, DTU, in partial fulfilment for the degree Master of Science in Engineering, MSc Eng.
The thesis is weighted 30 ECTS points for each author.
This thesis has been finalised with an equal contribution from both authors. All models, results
and conclusions have been created in collaboration.
It is assumed that the reader has knowledge in the areas of statistics.
Ida Bukh Villesen - s174385
Signature
Date
Helena Charlotte Hansen - s164472
Signature
Date
Data-driven digital twins for monitoring and control of electricity distribution net
iii
==PAGE:6==
Abstract
Following the green transition, more renewable energy sources are causing the energy supply to
become increasingly volatile. As a result, it is needed to readjust demand to meet energy supply in
order to fully utilise the available energy in the electrical grids. This can be accomplished through
flexible energy consumption, and in this regard, it is essential to enable communication between
consumers and suppliers. Here, one challenge is the fact, that the low voltage grid in Denmark
is currently a black box. This is where the Flexible Energy Denmark (FED) project is critical.
FED facilitates research projects seeking to quantify and unlock energy flexibility, by developing
mathematical models, using data collected in the Danish low voltage grid. Hereby increasing
the grid transparency. This thesis will investigate two separate cases as part of the FED project,
with data collected and handled by the project collaborator Center Denmark. Both of these cases
contribute to the FED project goals by increasing transparency of end-user consumption and the
utilisation of the available flexible energy present in the low voltage (LV) grid. The cases being,
first the Lundsøe cooling house, a large industrial facility, and secondly, a set of residential houses
in the area of Nørre Bjert. Respectively data-driven digital twins and physics informed models for
the two dynamical systems are developed. The constructed models are grey-box models, consisting
of sets of stochastic differential equations, supporting the stochasticity of the physical systems. The
grey-box models are able to model the true dynamics present in the data collected from the LV grid,
hence function as a means towards the goal of increasing grid transparency.
Two data-driven digital twins of the Lundsøe cooling house are developed, using two levels of
kernel smoothing on the modelled output signal, using 1 and 3 hour bandwidths. The models
estimate the temperature states of the freezing room. The input data for the models represent
physical variables of the freezing room dynamics. Investigating the predictive capabilities for
both final digital twins, the models were able to capture the freezing room dynamics in the data
and predict temperature states. Root Mean Squared Error values were computed for prediction
steps ranging from 15 minutes to 12.5 hours, showing higher accuracy for the model developed
with increased smoothing of the output signal. Overall, results indicate that dynamics in the output
signal were influenced differently by the two levels of smoothing, resulting in distinct final model
structures. In addition, out-of-sample predictions were computed, proving that the final models
are time variant with respect to seasons and external parameters. In hindsight, the applied room
temperature signals were flawed, therefore additional freezing room temperature data should be
collected to increase model accuracy. The energy flexibility of the residents in Nr. Bjert has
successfully been estimated, using the Flexibility Function presented in [1]. The concept of energy
flexibility is quantified by the Flexibility Function, using data on energy consumption behaviors
which the model assumes to be incentivised by energy prices. A segmentation and clustering of the
consumption data is done, including a segmentation of houses having electrical vehicles (EV). A
model extension has been added to the Flexibility Function by the authors to support the dynamics
observed in consumption profiles of EV owners. Energy flexibility estimates are calculated for
selected radials in Nr. Bjert, as well as for the cluster of houses with EVs. Overall, the results
of this thesis show that it is possible to estimate energy flexibility from consumers not actively
incentivised to be energy flexible. In addition, it verifies the feasibility of utilising cumulated
energy consumption data from clusters of houses, which enables analyses of energy flexibility on
district scale. Results state, that between summer and fall, the percentage specifying how much
energy flexibility can change demand by decreases, while the flexible energy capacity increases.
Using the model extension, more potential flexible energy is estimated, indicating that the EV
consumption profiles are captured. Limitations towards the results include the accuracy of the
baseline consumption estimates and the limited meta-data available. For further improvements of
results, context of consumption behaviors should be clarified additionally. Finally, if more research
were to be done, additional data is needed for both cases studied in order to improve models and
results.
iv
Data-driven digital twins for monitoring and control of electricity distribution net
==PAGE:7==
Acknowledgements
Firstly, we would like to thank our supervisor, Professor Henrik Madsen, for first class guidance
and facilitation during the project, and for including us in the Flexible Energy Denmark project and
allowing us to work on such a relevant and important topic. Also a thank you to our co-supervisor,
Magnus Nygaard Christensen for being an indispensable hotline, and to Dr. Razgar Ebrahimy for
providing knowledge from an electrical perspective.
A special thank you to the collaborators of the FED project. Søren Søe-Larsen from Lundsøe, who
have taken the time to evaluate our results during the project and provide valuable knowledge on
the Lundsøe cooling house. Jesper Pedersen Langvad for providing data on behalf of Konstant, for
the Lundsøe models. Claus Schack Urup from Trefor for ensuring quality data for the flexibility
models. Steffen Ivan Nielsen from Center Denmark for helping us to understand and operate the
Data Lake, and Lars Jensen from Advansor for giving us a private lecture in large-scale cooling
systems and thermodynamics.
We would not have been able to achieve our final models without the many discussions and valuable
meetings with the PhDs and Post Docs from the section of Dynamical Systems at DTU. So, thank
you to Philip Brinck Vetter and Christian Ankerstjerne Thilker for reflecting on our results and
providing valuable feedback and guidance on the Lundsøe models. Thank you to Tao Huang for
discussing grey-box modelling of cooling systems, your input was of great help. Thank you to
Rune Grønborg Junker for our many meetings about your Flexibility Function, and for helping
with guidance and conclusions on our results. Last but not least, thank you to Rongling Li for
introducing us to the Annex 82 project, and for valuable insights on energy flexibility in buildings.
Finally, we would like to thank our families and friends for tagging along the ride, and giving us a
good ground to stand on.
Data-driven digital twins for monitoring and control of electricity distribution net
v
==PAGE:8==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
Acknowledgements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
v
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Literature review and related research . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.3
Thesis objectives and outline . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2
Background
5
2.1
The Flexible Energy Denmark project and Center Denmark . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
Low voltage grid observability and data collection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.3
Importance of grid transparency to enable energy flexibility . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.4
Flexible Energy Denmark partners collaborating to this thesis . . . . . . . . . . .
6
3
Physical modelling and stochastic processes
7
3.1
State space formulation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
3.2
Different shades of grey-box models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
4
Data-driven digital twins of the Lundsøe cooling house
9
4.1
Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
4.2
Presentation of available data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
4.3
Theory and methodology related to modelling dynamics in buildings using data-
driven digital-twins . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
4.4
Preparation, smoothing and filtering of data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
4.5
Description and analysis of cooling system dynamics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
4.6
Development of data-driven digital twins of the Lundsøe cooling house
. . . . .
36
4.7
Results from the Lundsøe cooling house data-driven digital twins . . . . . . . . .
52
4.8
Discussion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
59
5
Energy flexibility for residential area
65
5.1
Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
65
5.2
Case presentation: residential area of Nørre Bjert . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
67
5.3
Presentation of available data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
69
5.4
Theory and methodology related to the Flexibility Function . . . . . . . . . . . .
77
5.5
Method for computing the energy consumption baseline signal . . . . . . . . . .
81
5.6
Results for estimated energy flexibility in Nørre Bjert . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
82
5.7
Implementing time dependency in the Flexibility Function and analysis of house-
holds with electrical vehicles . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
87
5.8
Discussion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
92
6
Discussion of the presented cases
97
6.1
Collective contribution to the Flexible Energy Denmark project goals
. . . . . .
97
6.2
Strengths and weaknesses of the grey-box modelling approach . . . . . . . . . .
98
6.3
Limitations as a result of the available data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
98
6.4
Time variant model parameters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
98
vi
Data-driven digital twins for monitoring and control of electricity distribution net
==PAGE:9==
7
Conclusion
99
7.1
Data-driven digital twins of the Lundsøe cooling house . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
99
7.2
Energy flexibility for Nr. Bjert . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
100
7.3
Concluding remarks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
101
Bibliography
105
A Appendix
107
A.1
Interview notes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
107
A.2
Material related to the data-driven digital twins of the Lundsøe cooling house . .
110
A.3
Material related to estimating energy flexibility in Nr. Bjert . . . . . . . . . . . .
113
Data-driven digital twins for monitoring and control of electricity distribution net
vii
==PAGE:10==
viii
Data-driven digital twins for monitoring and control of electricity distribution net
==PAGE:11==
1
Introduction
1.1
Introduction
As a part of the green transition, more renewable energy sources are contributing to the energy
pool, replacing fossil energy suppliers. As the renewable energy sources are dependent on natural
phenomena, the energy supply becomes increasingly volatile. Added to the increased volatility,
is the ever increasing demand for energy [2]. During peak hours, lack of energy is becoming a
frequent problem, and the inflicted load on components in the electricity grid becomes critical,
making energy supply unstable. As a result, countries all over the world are facing an urgent need
to find ways to redistribute demand and energy consumption, in order to fully utilise the available
energy in the grids [3]. Demand needs to be readjusted to supply to achieve energy balance, which
is also known as flexible energy consumption. Therefore, it is immensely critical to enable grid
transparency to reach energy flexibility.
In order to facilitate this redistribution of energy consumption, it is critical to enable communi-
cation between consumers and suppliers. This communication and transparency must include all
levels of the grids infrastructure and its operators, as well as connected industrial and residential
consumers. One challenge hindering this transition, is the fact that the low voltage grid in Denmark
is currently a black box, i.e. there is no or limited knowledge on grid-operational statuses and con-
sumer behaviour [3]. The energy grids are expanded mostly with the aim of supporting peak hour
demand (cf. section 2.3). Alternatively, availability of the energy in the grid can be maximised by
utilising energy flexibility [4]. This is where the Flexible Energy Denmark (FED) project plays
a big role. The goal of the FED project is to increase grid transparency. This is done through
research projects seeking to quantify and unlock energy flexibility, by developing mathematical
models, using data collected in the Danish low voltage grid.
This thesis will investigate and develop data-driven digital twins and mathematical models of
physics informed dynamical systems, with the aim of unlocking energy flexibility for both an
industrial energy consumer and residential consumers. It does so by analysing two specific cases,
the large industrial cooling house Lundsøe, and a set of residential houses in the area of Nørre
Bjert. The modelling of the real life physical systems will be done using grey-box models, which
consist of sets of stochastic differential equations that support the stochasticity of the physical sys-
tems. The data used for the modelling is collected as a part of the FED project, and handled by the
project collaborator Center Denmark.
The Lundsøe cooling house is a major consumer whose energy consumption inflicts a high load
onto the local grid. Smart energy consumption is strongly encouraged by the Lundsøe management
to reduce operational costs, as well as encouraged by the energy supplier (DSO), to maximise the
available energy in the grid and respond to energy supply. Therefore, there is a strong motivation
to change the consumption behavior, and hence become energy flexible. To accomplish this, a
data-driven digital twin is developed to model temperature state predictions and monitor system
dynamics.
The combined energy consumption from the households in the area of Nr. Bjert inflicts a high load
on the local feeder during peak hours. Therefore, in order for the local DSO, Trefor, to optimally
plan energy supply, it is essential to understand the demand and response dynamics of the end-
consumers, as a result of energy prices. In this thesis, the demand and response behaviors for
residents of Nr. Bjert are estimated using a Flexibility Function [1], which is developed using
the concepts of grey-box modelling. The Flexibility Function contributes to digitalisation of the
Data-driven digital twins for monitoring and control of electricity distribution net
1
==PAGE:12==
grid, and enables the transparency of the end-consumer’s energy demand/response consumption
behaviour.
If successful, the two cases jointly contribute to the FED goals, by increasing grid transparency,
and quantifying energy flexibility through the developed mathematical models.
1.2
Literature review and related research
Today, the field of energy grid modelling is vastly studied and researched, in order to understand
the impacts of variability and uncertainty on power system operations. In relation to the objectives
of the FED project, and in extension to this thesis, relevant papers have been studied. In paper [5],
significant benefits of increasing the flexibility in the Danish energy system are presented. The
paper presents ways of using local regulation mechanisms to increase the energy flexibility. The
regulation mechanisms can further be supported by the Smart-Energy Operating-System scheme
presented in [6], that presents the concept of an Aggregator. The Aggregator coordinates and
operates the production and consumption of its distributed energy resources. In paper [7], the
integration of renewable energy in smart grids is presented, which is needed to unlock the potential
energy flexibility in the grid.
In order to successfully develop a data-driven digital twin of the Lundsøe cooling house, math-
ematical methods and approaches from papers [8] and [9] are adapted. The two papers present
grey-box model formulations of buildings, aimed at modelling the heat dynamics of conventional
residential houses, using continuous time modelling with model parameters that are directly phys-
ical interpretable. In [10], knowledge on thermodynamics and essential components of cooling
systems are covered. This paper models a large cooling system of a residential building in China,
using empirical relationships from data. The suggested model formulations for assumed heat dy-
namics of buildings, combined with knowledge on cooling system dynamics, will be utilised in
order to meet the objectives for the Lundsøe data-driven digital twin.
The demand/response behaviors for residents of Nr. Bjert will be modelled using the Flexibility
Function presented in [1], which was originally fitted and validated using simulated data from
100% flexible single consumers. In contrast, this thesis will use cumulated consumption data from
a cluster of houses, with consumers non-incentivised to be flexible in their energy consumption be-
havior. In paper [11], potential flexibility is estimated for both single houses and clusters of houses,
using energy consumption profiles/patterns and user segmentations. The results of the paper show
that contribution from aggregated impact of flexible individual residential loads, can add flexibility
to the power grid, thereby indicating the feasibility of analysing a cluster of houses in this study.
In addition, paper [12] presents a method to aggregate knowledge from one house to a cluster of
houses. The model presented is a high resolution data driven model, which predicts demand based
on consumption behaviors, specifically using data on occupancy and people behaviour. The pa-
per states that the aggregated predicted demand for an arbitrary number of households is highly
realistic in terms of end-use composition, annual and diurnal variations, and diversity between
households. Again, this supports the feasibility for studying the energy flexibility for clusters of
houses.
2
Data-driven digital twins for monitoring and control of electricity distribution net
==PAGE:13==
1.3
Thesis objectives and outline
1.3.1
Thesis objectives
The objective of this thesis is to develop data-driven digital twins for monitoring and control of
electricity distribution net using data from the Danish low voltage grid and its end-consumers, with
the aim of enabling and exploiting energy flexibility as part of the green transition.
The objectives related towards this end are:
• To develop a data-driven grey-box model for temperature state predictions in a large indus-
trial cooling house.
• To estimate energy flexibility in a cluster of buildings using a data-driven grey-box model.
1.3.2
Thesis outline
This thesis consists of two parts, focusing on the two objectives stated above. In chapter 2 relevant
background information related to the FED project and arguments stressing the energy flexibility
agenda is presented. Chapter 3 presents an overview of the methods and models used in the thesis.
In chapter 4 the data-driven digital twins for temperature state predictions of the Lundsøe cooling
house are presented, and in chapter 5 the modelling of the energy flexibility in Nørre Bjert is
covered. Chapter 6 is a discussion of the cases presented in chapter 4 and 5. Finally, chapter 7
covers the overall conclusion of this thesis.
Data-driven digital twins for monitoring and control of electricity distribution net
3
==PAGE:14==
4
Data-driven digital twins for monitoring and control of electricity distribution net
==PAGE:15==
2
Background
In today’s world, the renewable energy infrastructure expansion and technological developments
are at the top of the political agenda. Following the Paris agreement (2015), nations are aiming
to reduce carbon emissions by increasing their renewable energy sources [13]. Consequently, the
energy is more green but the energy stability is reduced. Renewable energies are volatile, where
conventional energy systems are stable. Seeing as the energy prices are dependent on the avail-
ability of energy in the market, versus the energy demand, this causes the energy prices to be more
unstable, than what has been seen otherwise. In addition, due to the recent war in the Ukraini-
an/Russian conflict, it has been all the more apparent how dependent European countries are of
each other’s energy resources, causing a global energy crisis upon countries restricting energy
trading [14]. Energy prices have skyrocketed and end-users are now feeling the impact of interna-
tional conflicts. This is where Center Denmark and the Flexible Energy Denmark (FED) project
have become all the more relevant.
2.1
The Flexible Energy Denmark project and Center Denmark
The FED project is a 4-year long project with 24 partners that have a common incentive to max-
imise the utilisation of the energy in the grid. The project is data driven and is working towards
developing digital solutions to control and manage the energy distribution. Indeed, since renew-
able energy is slowly replacing the conventional energy systems, the energy available in the grid
becomes more volatile, and is not always available when the demand is high. For instance there
will be more energy coming from solar cells during day hours, and none in the evening/night, when
demand tends to be higher. This suggests that at times, not all available energy will be consumed
in the grid and therefore results in lost energy. Incentives to reduce this waste includes making
smart batteries, or helping change consumer’s behavior. The latter is the main focus of the FED
project. According to FED project collaborator Henrik Madsen, ”It is both in the industry and at
the end-consumers that we need to enable more flexibility[..]. This flexibility presupposes digital-
isation, and systems that communicate through data with the energy grid and renewable energy
production, and based on the data react with their consumption according to supply.” [4]. How-
ever, in order to have digitalisation, collecting data is a priority. This has to be done both in the
industry and on an end-user scale, something that has yet to be done efficiently. This is where
Center Denmark has been the primary driver.
Center Denmark is an independent non-profit organisation with green digital ambitions [15]. It is
an organization that facilitates real-time big data collection in a data lake, for the benefit of new
digital solutions related to the green transition in Denmark. Partners include universities, public
institutions, district energy companies, which are all critical stakeholders in driving this green
transition. For the FED project, Center Denmark facilitates the data collection on sites called
Living Labs. These are real-life environments that serve to test the conditions of products and
innovative solutions. The Living Labs have real-time connectivity to the data lake, where Center
Denmark safely stores and structures data. Center Denmark is an important stakeholder in this
process as it serves as a facilitator in the communication between utilities, industry organizations,
and energy grid distributors such as Distribution System Operators (DSO) who manages the low
voltage grids (LV) in Denmark.
2.2
Low voltage grid observability and data collection
The LV grid is the part of the electrical grid where end-users are connected and collect energy from
the DSOs. The DSOs monitor the energy demand and responses in the grid, and are lead decision
Data-driven digital twins for monitoring and control of electricity distribution net
5
==PAGE:16==
makers when the energy prices have to be decided. These prices are called spot prices, and are set
according to the energy availability in the grid. Typically, LV grids have low observability, meaning
that they essentially are black-box systems, where the DSOs have no or limited knowledge on the
operating state of the grids, the consumer behaviour and the energy demand in general. This is why
Center Denmark’s initiative is important, as it increases the observability in the LV grids by making
consumer data and consumption behaviour accessible, enabling possibilities for grid transparency.
2.3
Importance of grid transparency to enable energy flexibility
It is immensely critical to enable grid transparency to reach energy flexibility. As a result of the
generally increasing digitalisation seen, where more systems require an increasing amount of en-
ergy, the demand for energy does not seem to stabilise in the near future, but on the contrary
drastically increase.
As of now, the LV grids are built to meet and sustain peak-hour energy demand, i.e. one could
argue that they are built for worst case scenarios. Continuing this approach, the DSO in Kolding
(Trefor) would in the next approx. 25 years have to invest an estimated amount of 8 billion DKK
in expanding their LV grids alone1, i.e. this would also be the case for all other DSOs in Denmark,
making the overall investment in the Danish grids considerably larger.
It is not only a critical matter regarding large investments, but also a matter of reliability of the
grids and quality of delivered energy. The European LV grids have to run at 50 Hz at all times.
The combination of high energy demand, a low energy supply, or unstable and unpredictable con-
tribution from renewable energy sources and photovoltaics (PVs), can result in critical deviations
of the frequency in the grid. Ultimately this can result in energy blackouts. If no changes are
made to demand and supply dynamics, the near future could contain energy shortages and planned
blackouts.
As already stated, a part of the solution to avoid energy shortages in the near future, could be to
utilise energy flexibility. Due to the unpredictability of renewable energy sources, a major part
of the flexible energy should be found at the end-users, whether it being large industrial facilities
or private households. The amount of energy flexibility can be estimated by analysing consumer
trends, and investigating processes related to heating/cooling, production, transportation, etc. But
in order to do so, transparency through data is needed. Installing data collecting devices at end-
user’s and critical spots in energy grids, will enable digitalisation and means for developing math-
ematical models that can formulate new novel operating strategies, utilising real time observability
and transparency in the grids.
2.4
Flexible Energy Denmark partners collaborating to this thesis
In order to successfully complete this thesis, data has been provided by FED partners. The partners
being the two DSOs, Konstant from Aarhus [16] and Trefor from Kolding [17], the Danish Tech-
nological Institute (DTI) [18], and finally the Lundsøe cooling house located at Aarhus harbour
[19].
Konstant has provided descriptive data on the utilisation of the transformer connected to the Lund-
søe cooling house, and DTI has facilitated data collection from monitoring devices within the
cooling house.
Trefor has provided access to energy prices through Nord Pool, and additionally delivered descrip-
tive qualitative and quantitative data on private household consumer data for the residential area
of Nørre Bjert in Kolding.
1Information from Trefor’s Energy Supply Director Per Sørensen.
6
Data-driven digital twins for monitoring and control of electricity distribution net
==PAGE:17==
3
Physical modelling and stochastic processes
The main objective of this thesis is to develop models which are data-driven digital twins of real
world systems. Analysing and modelling real-life dynamical systems based on time series data can
be done in several ways, but grey-box modelling is the approach chosen for both case-scenarios in
this thesis. The method is a good tool for combining information from physics, with information
from data. Hereby, grey-box modelling can be considered as a bridge between the physical world
and data.
In general, any basic deterministic physics-informed model of a real life process can be assumed
to be described by a set of non-linear differential equations. Stochastic differential equations are
most often used for modelling dynamic phenomenons, as the stochastic part extends the models
to also describe possible disturbances, noise, measurement errors, unobserved relations in the data
and support model approximations. This is essential, as noise clearly is an intrinsic part of any real
world system. A basic non-linear stochastic differential equation is presented in equation (3.1),
where f describes the input through estimated parameter(s), and σ scales the uncertainty in the
data also by estimating parameter(s).
dxt = f (xt, t) dt + σ (xt, t) dωt
(3.1)
In equation (3.1) ωt is a Wiener process (i.e. stochastic process, to be defined in the following). It
should be emphasised, that equation (3.1) also supports multivariate model structures and data.
Within advanced model-based control, grey-box models have proven to be a game changer. In
complex physical systems where models must be able to predict evolutions, it is essential that they
capture the non-linear effects present in the system, in addition to also accommodate noise [20].
White box models, derived from first principles, are with their often high complexity known to
satisfy and capture the non-linear effects, but not to accommodate the randomness in the system.
Whereas black box models are often seen to lack detail in wider state space range but successfully
capture the random effects.
Grey-box models, or stochastic state space models, are a combination of the two types of models
and bring together both their advantages, allowing for statistical methods for parameter estima-
tion and prior physical knowledge to be utilised. Grey-box models consist of a set of stochastic
differential equations (SDEs) describing the dynamics of the system in continuous time and a set
of discrete time measurement equations. Due to grey-box models’ ability to incorporate prior and
physical knowledge from dynamic systems, and adding the fact that they are built in continuous
time, they generally have fewer but physically meaningful parameters, which are valid in a wider
state space range.
3.1
State space formulation
State space models are useful for describing non-stationary and/or time varying systems. The
reason is due to the (first order) Markov property of the state vector which implies that prediction
and state estimation is fairly easy, also for time varying systems [21]. Most often the state variables
are not measurable and only a function of them is available. Unknown parameters in state space
models can be estimated by including those parameters in the state vector and by using a state
filtering approach. This will be covered further in section 4.3.3.
Data-driven digital twins for monitoring and control of electricity distribution net
7
==PAGE:18==
Equation (3.2) presents a linear state space formulation (note equation (3.1) was non-linear) of a
partly-observed system description
dX = AXdt + BUdt + dw(t)
Y (t) = CX(t) + DU(t) + e(t)
(3.2)
where X is the unobserved state vector and U the input vector. The state vector is defined as the
observed signal(s) which will be the output(s) of the model. The input vector holds the external
variable(s) of data/signal(s) describing the physical system, i.e. information that describes/sup-
ports the system dynamics. The dynamical behaviour of the system is described by the parameters
defined in the matrix A, and parameters of B set the frame for how input signals enter the sys-
tem. The stochastic process w(t) is assumed to be a process with independent increments, in this
thesis a Wiener process, with incremental covariance matrix specified by Σ. Y is introduced and
denotes the observed variables where C is a constant matrix with parameters specifying which
linear combination of the states that is actually measured. D is likewise a constant parameter ma-
trix that accounts for input variables which directly affect the output, and e(t) is the measurement
error (defined as a stochastic process). The equation for Y (t) is therefore called the measurement
equation. Generally it is assumed that w(t) and e(t) are mutually uncorrelated
3.2
Different shades of grey-box models
Within grey-box modelling there are multiple ”shades of grey” ranging between almost white or
black. This thesis will cover two different grey-box models, one being of a lighter shade and the
other darker. Another way of viewing it could be from a centralised and decentralised perspective.
The data-driven digital twin of the Lundsøe cooling house (presented in chapter 4) is an isolated
case of a single, but complex, system and can be labeled as a centralised case. The cooling house is
the only consumer modelled, and this model is considered more white in terms of grey-box models
and is linear. It is possible to define a model structure of stochastic differential equations which
is true to the real world and with parameters that, once estimated, can be directly interpreted, and
either be confirmed by true system parameters, or shed new and valuable information on unknown
parameters estimated through the system dynamics.
In the darker end of the grey-box spectrum is the non-linear model describing the Flexibility func-
tion (presented in chapter 5). The aim of the model is to collectively estimate the energy flexibility
for 164 houses in a residential area. The formulated grey-box model is built based on assumptions
regarding how consumers respond to energy prices related to what the current state of their system
is (fx. temperature in the houses). This model is a decentralised model, as the focus is moved
from a single consumer’s behaviour to describe an overall trend from an entire area. Due to the
fact that the Flexibility Function is formulated based on assumptions that are not deducted directly
from a physical system, it is not possible to interpret the estimated model parameters in the same
manner as for the Lundsøe model. Instead, it is here crucial to keep in mind the predefined variable
relations, and based on that, investigate and comment on how the parameter estimates are results
of the model set-up, the data and presumed dynamics.
In the two chapters covering the cases, their respective theory and methodology will be presented
in greater detail.
8
Data-driven digital twins for monitoring and control of electricity distribution net
==PAGE:19==
4
Data-driven digital twins of the Lundsøe
cooling house
This chapter presents all the steps related to developing a data-driven digital twin for temperature
state predictions of the large industrial Lundsøe cooling house. A cooling house is an oversized
freezer, which functions as a middle station and/or temporary storage room for frozen goods. Ini-
tially a short introduction to the Lundsøe cooling house is presented, then a presentation of the
collected data. Next, theory and methodology supporting the grey-box model development will be
introduced, followed by a section on data cleaning and data preparation. Lastly a section presenting
the final models and results together with a concluding discussion.
4.1
Introduction
A major part of the work done during this thesis has been on modelling the dynamics of the Lund-
søe cooling house using physics informed and data-driven grey-box models. The main objective
for the final grey-box model is to have a data-driven digital twin of the physical system, which is
able to predict future temperature states of the freezing room based on control and external param-
eters affecting the cooling house dynamics. The final model could then be used for temperature
control, and optimally contribute to a greener energy consumption. For instance, future temper-
ature states could be simulated, for which the time to reach either a goal temperature, or defined
temperature bounds, could be quantified. Then, knowing the time estimates, the active cooling of
the Lundsøe cooling house can be done during the cheapest and most green hours in the day in
regards to energy sources and prices. Further, possibilities for stochastic simulations would be en-
abled expanding upon the deterministic results, where the system dynamics and control scenarios
could be described by probability estimates. To the writers’ knowledge, there has not yet before
been published researched grey-box models of large cooling facilities, as the case at hand with
Lundsøe. Therefore, the model development approach and core ideas originate mainly from the
papers [9] and [8], both on modelling heat dynamics in smaller and less complex buildings, i.e.
standard residential houses.
Figure 4.1: Facade of the Lundsøe cooling house and the supplying transformer operated by the
DSO, Konstant.
Data-driven digital twins for monitoring and control of electricity distribution net
9
==PAGE:20==
4.1.1
The Lundsøe cooling house and its connection to the low voltage energy grid
Aarhus harbour constitutes a large part of the industrial area in Aarhus, and this is where the Lund-
søe cooling house is located. The map in figure 4.2 shows the transformer network of Aarhus city
(eastern part), the harbour, where Lundsøe’s location is indicated with a green square. The energy
grid and transformers are maintained and managed by Konstant, the DSO for the area of Aarhus.
As the cooling house is a major energy consumer, it has its own transformer which supplies power
only to the cooling house. In figure 4.3 a close up of the energy grid map is seen, where the trans-
former is placed just next to the cooling house’s compressor storage room. The transformer is the
black box in front of the building in figure 4.1.
Figure 4.2: Aarhus energy grid and transformer map.
Figure 4.3: Close-up of Aarhus harbour energy grid map and the Lundsøe cooling house location.
10
Data-driven digital twins for monitoring and control of electricity distribution net
==PAGE:21==
4.2
Presentation of available data
It is essential to understand the complete dynamics and all components of a physical system, before
one is able to create a functioning and satisfying grey-box model thereof. Therefore, a detailed
description of the cooling house is presented in the following together with the available data.
4.2.1
Sketch of the Lundsøe cooling house and data sources
In figure 4.4 a sketched illustration of the Lundsøe cooling house is provided to give the reader a
visual and physical understanding of its layout. The modelled components of the cooling house are
made of two physical rooms, a freezing room and a cooling room. The freezing room is the white
area with an average room temperature around -25.0 ◦C, this is where the delivered goods are stored
and the room’s approximate size is 70x40 meters. Connected to the freezing room with a gate (dark
blue square) is the cooling room sketched as a dark grey area, with an average room temperature of
approx. 1.0 to 4.0 ◦C. The cooling room functions as the unloading, unpacking and reorganisation
area for goods being delivered to the Lundsøe cooling house. Indicated with the blue squares are
the docking ports where trucks off-load goods. These doors are opened during the on/off loading
of trucks and are a source for temperature exchange with the ambient temperature. The freezing
and cooling rooms are separated by a wall. The freezing room itself has been categorized into
three sub-rooms (indicated by the dotted lines), and separated by concrete half-walls in order to
comply with fire regulation rules. These three sub-rooms are named sub-room 5, sub-room 6
and sub-room 7. In appendix A.2.1 figure A.1 displays a picture from the freezing room where
the division of the sub-rooms can be seen. Each of the sub-rooms have three evaporators placed
evenly distributed just below the ceiling, illustrated by the light orange boxes. In figure A.2 in
the appendix a picture of evaporator placement in sub-room 7 is given. There is a total of nine
evaporators in the freezing room, and the air-flow direction from the evaporators is indicated with
arrows in the sketch. The cooling room is labeled cooling room 8, and have two evenly distributed
evaporators placed near the ceiling, illustrated by dark orange boxes. The compressor supplying
the evaporators with cooled down CO2 is located in an adjacent room, illustrated in the sketch, and
connected to the freezing room through pipes.
Figure 4.4: Sketch of the physical layout of the Lundsøe cooling house.
4.2.2
Data from the Lundsøe cooling house
From each of the evaporators in the cooling house, temperature measurements are collected, Tfi.j
and Tc8.k, on a 5 minute time resolution, see table 4.1. These temperature measurements are the
return temperatures, meaning the room tempered air going into the evaporators that needs to be
cooled down. The temperature in the freezing room is controlled by a signal, Tfctr, also called the
Data-driven digital twins for monitoring and control of electricity distribution net
11
==PAGE:22==
set-point temperature, dictating the target temperature for the freezing room. This control signal
is the same for all evaporators in the freezing room. The Si.j signal describes the current mode of
the evaporators, i.e. whether the evaporators are in cooling or defrost mode. There are three labels
describing the operating statuses, which are [1]=Normal, [-1]=Cut-out and [0]=Defrost. More
on this in section 4.5.1. Φ is the total energy consumption of the compressor supplying all 11
evaporators.
Name
Description
Unit
Tfi.j
Temperature measurements from evaporator j in sub-freezing room i
◦C
Tc8.k
Temperature measurements from evaporator k in the cooling room
◦C
Tfctr
Control (set-point) temperature for freezing room evaporators
◦C
Si.j
Status signal {-1,0,1} indication operational mode for evaporators
-
Φ
Energy consumption of compressor
kWh
Table 4.1: Data collected from the Lundsøe cooling house, where i ∈{5, 6, 7}, j ∈{1, 2, 3},
k ∈{1, 2}. Indices with reference to sketch in figure 4.4.
Figure 4.5: Raw temperature measurements from evaporators 5.1 and 7.3 (freezing room). Top
row data from Wednesday 6th- Tuesday 19th of April 2022. Bottom row data from Friday 8th-
Saturday 9th of April 2022.
Examples of temperature measurements from the freezing room for evaporators 5.1 and 7.3 are
shown in figure 4.5. Data in the upper two plots is from a two week period, Wednesday 6th to
Tuesday 19th of April 2022, and bottom row plots are a zoom in on the Friday 8th and Saturday
9th of April. Data from these two weeks will be used for model development and fitting. The plots
display two trends in the measured temperature. First, there is the main signal fluctuating around
-23.5 ◦C, representing the local room temperature. Secondly, there is a spiking trend, a signal oc-
curring three times a day. This is a result of timed defrosting cycles run by each of the evaporators.
The sensors that measure the temperatures are placed approx. 50 cm below the evaporators. On
the backside of the evaporators, there are cooling coils that attract moisture and heat present in the
12
Data-driven digital twins for monitoring and control of electricity distribution net
==PAGE:23==
freezing room. This means that the local temperature around the evaporators (within a 1.0-1.5 me-
ter radius) will have a higher temperature than the true average temperature in the freezing room,
which is expected to lie around -25.0 ◦C. This particular problem, of not having the true local room
temperature unaffected by evaporator noise, will be further addressed in the discussion in section
4.8. The defrosting spikes are removed from the temperature signals before the data is used for
modelling. Section 4.4 covers this cleaning and smoothing of the temperature signals, and section
4.5.1 explains how defrosting affects the overall dynamics in the freezing room.
The temperature from the cooling room 8, Tc8.k, which will be used as input variable to the model,
is plotted in figure 4.6. These temperature measurements also suffer from noisy spikes, that also
will be smoothed away before the data is used for modelling.
Figure 4.6: Raw temperature measurements from evaporator 8.1 and 8.2 (cooling room). Data
from Wednesday 6th- Tuesday 19th of April 2022.
Figure 4.7: Left: Control temperature for all evaporators of the freezing room. Right: Status
signal for evaporator 5.1. Data from Wednesday 6th- Thursday 7th of April 2022. [1] = Normal
when cooling to reach current control temperature, [-1] = Cut-out when evaporators stops cooling
entirely and [0] = Defrost when mandatory maintenance of evaporators is running
The control temperature, Tfctr, is the same for all evaporators in the freezing room. It is fixed at
-26.0 ◦C and changes twice a day to -24.0 ◦C, around 4:15-8:00 in the morning and 15:45-18:45
Data-driven digital twins for monitoring and control of electricity distribution net
13
==PAGE:24==
in the afternoon. In order to visualise the status signal, Si.j, it has been labeled [1] = Normal when
cooling to reach current control temperature, [-1] = Cut-out when evaporators stop cooling entirely
and [0] = Defrost when mandatory maintenance of evaporators is running. Examples of the control
and status signal parameters are visualised in figure 4.7 for a two day period, Wednesday 6th to
Thursday 7th of April.
The amount of energy consumed by the compressor, to keep the freezing room at the control tem-
perature, is measured as the used Active Power in kWh. Figure 4.8 shows the energy consumption
for the full two week period in April 2022. The bottom plot is zoomed in on Friday 8th to Saturday
9th of April to better visualise daily dynamics. From the plot, it is clear how the energy consump-
tion is almost stable around 3.6 kWh when the control temperature is -26.0 ◦C, but drops when
changed to -24.0 ◦C in the mornings and the afternoons. With an energy consumption around 3.6
kWh on a 15 minute data resolution, resulting in 14.4 kWh per hour, the compressor is expected
to run at approx. 50% capacity1.
Figure 4.8: Electrical consumption of the compressor. Bottom plot zoomed in on Friday the 8th to
Saturday the 9th of April 2022.
4.2.3
Weather data
Weather data is collected by DMI and provided through the Danish Technological Institute. The
parameters global irradiance, wind speed and ambient temperature are considered relevant for the
modelling of the cooling house, see table 4.2 for an overview. All parameters are on a 10 minute
time resolution for the raw unprocessed data.
Name
Description
Unit
Gv
Global irradiance
kW/m2
W
Wind speed
m/s
Ta
Ambient temperature
◦C
Table 4.2: Weather data from the area around the Lundsøe cooling house.
1Information provided by Advansor, the compressor supplier at Lundsøe. Cf. appendix A.1.2
14
Data-driven digital twins for monitoring and control of electricity distribution net
==PAGE:25==
The ambient temperature and wind speed are measured at the DMI weather station in Aarhus Syd,
less than 10 km south of the Lundsøe cooling house. The global irradiance is measured by DMI
in Ødum, 20 km north of the Lundsøe cooling house. The three measured parameters are plotted
in figure 4.9 for the two week period, from Wednesday 6th to Tuesday 19th April 2022. From
the plots it is clear that parameters are correlated. The ambient temperature is dependent on time
(night/day) and on solar radiation levels. The wind speed and the ambient temperature are strongly
correlated, following similar patterns.
Figure 4.9: DMI weather data parameters.
The specific two weeks in April were chosen as training data, due to the variability observed in the
external parameters i.e. weather data, and varying behaviour in energy consumption and measured
temperatures in the freezing room.
4.2.4
Time resolution for combined dataset
As the data is collected through various sources, it is necessary to align the time resolution for all
parameters. The resolution in the dataset is changed to 15 minutes time intervals.
The data collected at the Lundsøe cooling house, i.e. parameters in table 4.1, is down sampled by
choosing every third observation. Observations are hence sampled every 0th, 15th, 30th and 45th
minute of every hour. Initially the mean of every 15 minute period was calculated, but this resulted
in a strongly smoothed signal, such that information on the dynamics in the data was lost, and this
approach was disregarded. The weather data from DMI (c.f. table 4.2) is linearly interpolated in
order to match the observation time intervals to the 0th, 15th, 30th and 45th minute of every hour.
The interpolation further solves the problem of occasionally missing values in the data.
4.2.5
Exploration of data
To elaborate further on the dynamics and trends in the data from the cooling house, the temperature
measurements have been grouped using different dimensions in boxplots to statistically describe
the trends in the data. The measurements from each sub-room have been merged to analyse these
trends. Figure 4.10 shows the hourly temperature trends for each sub-room, and it is observed
Data-driven digital twins for monitoring and control of electricity distribution net
15
==PAGE:26==
that sub-rooms 7 and 5 follow the same patterns, but not sub-room 6. The temperature of sub-
rooms 5 and 7 both drop around midday and midnight, i.e. hours 12 and 24, while the median
temperature of sub-room 6 is fluctuating around -23.4 ◦C. This is interesting, as sub-room 6 is
located in between sub-room 5 and 7. Sub-room 7 is generally the room with the largest fluctuations
in temperature, and also the room with the adjacent wall and gate to cooling room 8, where the
temperature is higher, around 1.0-4.0 ◦C. Nevertheless, it is difficult to say if this is the direct
cause. Additionally, it is necessary to take into account the temperature influence of goods stored
in the freezing room when analysing trends in temperature dynamics. Placement and temperature
of the delivered goods are likely to have a large effect on the local room temperatures. Finally, the
freezer envelope might have a stronger effect on temperatures in rooms with three walls, such as
sub-rooms 5 and 7. Looking at cooling room 8, the temperature median is constant throughout the
hours, and the 1st and 3rd quantile difference get larger as the day evolves. This suggests that there
is larger temperature outlier variance in the later hours of the day. Cooling room 8 does not follow
the same drops and cyclic trends as sub-rooms 5 and 7, but is also not affected by defrosting cycles
in the same way as the freezing room.
Figure 4.10: Boxplots of Tf and Tc room temperatures grouped by hour. From Wednesday 6th to
Tuesday 19th of April.
Figure 4.11 shows the variations in temperatures per day during the chosen two week period. Look-
ing at sub-room 5, 6 and 7, it is noticeable that the temperatures were highest on the Monday 11th
of April 2022, continuously dropped until the Saturday 16th and then increased again around the
Tuesday 19th. It has been confirmed by Søren Søe-Larsen, CEO at Lundsøe (c.f. interview notes
in appendix A.1.1), that these temperature increases are due to larger deliveries of goods, causing
the overall room temperature to significantly increase. It is unknown what the temperature of these
goods were. Looking at cooling room 8, there is a linear increase in temperature. This is interest-
ing, as one could assume that the cooling and freezing room temperatures would follow the same
trend on a daily time frame, for instance due to the effect of ambient temperature, opened doors,
goods deliveries, etc. As observed, this is not the case for all days, and therefore the evaporators
in each room could have an overruling effect on local temperatures and trends, and the assumed
mutual dynamics between the rooms might not be as important as one could expect, based on these
measurements.
16
Data-driven digital twins for monitoring and control of electricity distribution net
==PAGE:27==
Figure 4.11: Boxplots of Tf and Tc room temperatures grouped by day. From Wednesday 6th to
Tuesday 19th of April.
Similarly, figure 4.12 presents the energy consumption of the compressor supplying the Lundsøe
cooling house, grouped by hours and days, again for data from the period 6th-19th of April. When
investigating consumption grouped by day, it can be observed that the median consumption fluc-
tuates around 3.6 kWh. However, the 1st and 3rd quantiles vary significantly during the two week
period, where there is a large consumption span from Wednesday 6th to Sunday 10th, a smaller
consumption span from Monday 11th to Thursday 14th, and then larger span again from Friday
15th to Tuesday 19th. This goes in line with the observed trends seen in the temperatures presented
above. Energy consumption is directly affected by the freezing room temperature. Looking into
the hourly trends, there is a clear drop in energy consumption during the hours 4:15-8:00 and then
again from 15:45-18:45. Since these drops are caused by changes in control temperature, it goes
to show that control temperature not only strongly affect freezing room temperature, but also the
energy consumption of the supplying compressor.
Figure 4.12: Boxplots of energy consumption by day (date) and hour.
Data-driven digital twins for monitoring and control of electricity distribution net
17
==PAGE:28==
To analyse the effect ambient temperature has on energy consumption, a visualisation of the energy
consumption as a function of ambient temperature is plotted in figure 4.13. The data is combining
the periods Tuesday 6th to Tuesday 19th of April 2022, Monday 6th to Sunday 19th of June 2022,
and Tuesday 20th of September 2022 to Monday 3rd of October 2022. To interpret the behaviour
of the seen trends in the scatter plot, the plot is divided into four quadrants. For Φ < 3.3 kWh and
Ta < 13.0 ◦C the consumption observations are scattered, and are observations collected when the
control temperature, Tfctr, is increased to -24.0 ◦C. The energy consumption is therefore lower due
to the increase in control temperature and the fact that the ambient temperature is still relatively low,
keeping the COP of the compressor at a higher performance level (c.f. later section 4.5.2). Looking
at the second quadrant, when the ambient temperature Ta > 13.0 ◦C, and Φ < 3.3 kWh, there is no
observed consumption. Hence, due to the increase in ambient temperature and decrease in COP, the
compressor is forced to run at a higher capacity in order to meet the control temperature, whether
it being -26.0 or -24.0 ◦C. Then, for Φ > 3.3 kWh and Ta < 13.0 ◦C the energy consumption is
kept at a more or less stable level around 3.6 kWh per 15 minutes. Finally, when Φ > 3.3 kWh
and Ta > 13 ◦C, there seems to be a linearly increasing trend between energy consumption and
ambient temperature, i.e. consumption increases as ambient temperature increases.
Figure 4.13: Scatterplot of energy consumption, Φ, as a function of ambient temperature, Ta.
4.2.6
Control of defrosting cycles
As previously mentioned, the defrosting cycles in the evaporators follow the same patterns every-
day, with small variations. All nine evaporators in the freezing room run three defrosting sequences
each day, one in the morning/beginning of the day and two in the night. In table 4.3 is given the
time intervals for defrosting cycles of evaporator 5.3 during the entire day of Wednesday 6th of
April 2022. The defrosting pattern, i.e. the cyclic trend, in table 4.3 is representative for all nine
evaporators in the freezing room, and in figure 4.14 all nine defrosting cycles on respectively the
Wednesday 6th and Friday 15th of April 2022 are plotted. When evaporators are in defrosting
mode, it is indicated with signal [0] = Defrost, and when actively cooling to reach the control
temperature [1] = Normal (the Cut-out signals have additionally been relabeled as [1] = Cut-out,
in order to isolate the defrosting cyclic trends in the plots). The three plots in the first column
(Wednesday 6th of April) illustrate how the evaporators take turn in defrosting. They take turn de-
frosting, as the residual warm gas from the other evaporators is used to melt the ice crystals on the
freezing coils of the evaporator running the defrosting program. Evaporator 5.1 starts defrosting
around 8:00 in the morning, and when it is finished with the defrosting cycle evaporator 5.2 starts
18
Data-driven digital twins for monitoring and control of electricity distribution net
==PAGE:29==
its defrosting around 9:00, etc. In the night the defrosting cycles are slightly overlapping, but by
then there are no goods deliveries and no open gates, i.e. it is not as critical having more evapora-
tors not cooling at the same time. The right column of plots (Friday 15th of April), shows how the
defrosting of the evaporators is slightly overlapping in the morning. After analysing the defrosting
cycles and trends, these two daily scenarios, observed on the Wednesday 6th and Friday 15th of
April, are the two possible combinations of how the defrosting cycles are planed and executed. It
obviously varies from day to day, which combination is run.
Status
Period
Time [h]
Defrost
00:30-01:30
1.00
Normal
01:30-10:00
8.50
Defrost
10:00-11:00
1.00
Normal
11:0-20:15
9.25
Defrost
20:15-21:15
1.00
Normal
21:15-00:30
3.25
Table 4.3: Defrosting cycle for evaporator 5.3 on the 6th April 2022.
Figure 4.14: Defrosting cycle for all nine evaporators. In the left column are shown the cycles
for Wednesday 6th of April and the right column for Friday 15th of April 2022. [1] = {Normal,
Cut-out} and [0] = Defrost.
Data-driven digital twins for monitoring and control of electricity distribution net
19
==PAGE:30==
4.3
Theory and methodology related to modelling dynamics in
buildings using data-driven digital-twins
Data-driven digital twins, specifically grey-box models, have shown to be very effective when
applied for modelling heat dynamics of regular houses, cf. [9]. Grey-box models applied to data
from large cooling facilities, like the Lundsøe cooling house, are yet uncovered territory, but it is
expected that stochastic state space models will be able to perform well, if system dynamics are
uncovered and properly described mathematically.
The theory presented in the following will be based on non-linear model formulations, but the
developed models of the Lundsøe cooling house are linear.
4.3.1
Model formulation of stochastic grey-box models
A grey-box model consists of a set of non-linear, discretely and partially observed SDEs with
measurement noise, i.e.
dxt = f (xt, ut, t, θ) dt + σ (ut, t, θ) dωt
yk = h (xk, uk, tk, θ) + ek
(4.1)
where t ∈R is time, xt ∈Rn is a vector of state variables, ut ∈Rm is a vector of input vari-
ables, yk ∈Rl is a vector of measured output variables, θ ∈Rp is a vector of possibly un-
known parameters, f(·) ∈Rn, σ(·) ∈Rn×n and h(·) ∈Rl are non-linear functions, {ωt} is
an n-dimensional standard Wiener process and {ek} is an l-dimensional white noise process with
ek ∈N (0, S (uk, tk, θ)) [22]. The right-hand term f(·) of equation (4.1) is called the drift term.
It is equivalent to the deterministic term of an ordinary differential equation (ODE), and hence
the contributing part from the white box models. The second term on the right-hand side is the
stochastic diffusion term and accommodate random effects, for example measurement noise. The
estimated parameters of the diffusion term are essential in the model improvement process, as they
provide a measure of model uncertainty based on experimental data.
4.3.2
Grey-box model development using CTSM-R
Continuous Time Stochastic Modelling for R (CTSM-R) is a tool created by DTU Compute de-
veloped over many years. CTSM-R provides a general framework for identifying and estimating
partially observed continuous-discrete time grey-box models. The estimation is based on maxi-
mum likelihood principles and Kalman filtering, see documentation in [23] and [24]. All grey-box
models of the Lundsøe cooling house will be developed using this tool.
4.3.3
Parameter estimation in stochastic grey-box models
Parameter estimation is performed using maximum likelihood (ML), cf. [20]. The estimates of the
unknown parameters can be determined by finding the set of parameters θ that maximises the like-
lihood function for a sequence of measurements y0, y1, ..., yN where Yk = [yk, yk−1, ..., y1, y0],
and the likelihood function is the joint density
L(θ; YN) = P(YN|θ)
(4.2)
An exact evaluation of the likelihood function is found by solving a general non-linear filtering
problem. Thus, the initial probability density function must be known and all subsequent condi-
tional densities must be determined by successively solving Kolmogorov’s forward equation and
applying Bayes’ rule, but in practice this is computationally infeasible.
The SDEs in equation (4.1) are driven by a Wiener process. The increments of the Wiener process
are Gaussian, and hence it is assumed, that the conditional densities can be well approximated by
20
Data-driven digital twins for monitoring and control of electricity distribution net
==PAGE:31==
Gaussian densities which are completely characterised by the mean and covariance. Therefore, a
method based on the extended Kalman filter (EKF) can be applied [20], and where the basic idea
of the EKF is to linearise about each state estimate. The mean and covariance can be described as
ˆyk|k−1 = E {yk | Yk−1, θ}
Rk|k−1 = V {yk | Yk−1, θ}
(4.3)
with the error
εk = yk −ˆyk|k−1
(4.4)
The parameter estimates can now be found by solving the optimisation problem
ˆθ = arg min
θ∈Θ {−ln (L (θ; YN | y0))}
(4.5)
when the likelihood function is expressed as
L (θ; YN) =


N
∏
k=1
exp
(
−1
2εT
kR−1
k|k−1εk
)
√
det
(
Rk|k−1
)
(
√
2π)l

p (y0 | θ)
(4.6)
The EKF estimate of xt+1, given y0, y1, ..., yN, can be found by solving
ˆxt+1|t = f (t, ˆxt) + Kt
[
yt −h
(
t, ˆxt|t−1
)]
(4.7)
where Kt is the Kalman gain of each step and can be computed using prediction, innovation,
updating and state prediction equations, all described in greater detail in [20] section 2.2 and [21]
section 7.4.1. The EKF is implemented and applied in the CTSM-R model fitting process.
4.3.4
Model selection and validation process for grey-box models
In the following section the steps of a systematic framework for improving the CSTMR based grey-
box models is presented. An iterative approach involving, parameter estimation, residual analysis,
statistical tests, and predictions will be used as a means to identify model deficiencies, and thus
expand the models accordingly, enabling them to describe the dynamics of the physical system.
In [22] an approach for advanced model selection is described, and in [9] a model development
process for grey-box models of heat dynamics in a regular house is covered. Parts from these
two references will be described in the following, and function as guidelines to identify the best
performing final model for the Lundsøe cooling house.
4.3.4.1
Model formulation and forward selection
The modelling phase is initiated with the smallest feasible model, i.e. with as few meaningful
parameters and inputs as possible. Generally it is the aim, that the models formulated will comply
with a physical relatable system, i.e. an RC circuit (as done in [9]). In this way, the estimated
parameters will be physically interpretable.
Iteratively more parameters, inputs and hidden states are added to the model while focusing on
only adding and retaining parameters with the lowest p-values, i.e. parameters providing the most
significant improvements and contributions to the model. The process stops when no further ex-
tension to the model proves significant or contributing, or when the model acceptance criteria are
met (criteria covered in the following).
Data-driven digital twins for monitoring and control of electricity distribution net
21
==PAGE:32==
4.3.4.2
Residual analysis
Next step in the model selection framework is to asses the quality of the estimated unknown pa-
rameters. This is done by evaluating the predictive capabilities of the estimated model.
First off, a residual analysis is performed on the one-step predictions. Ideally the residuals from
the model fit should be white noise. If there is in fact clear patterns in the residuals, the effects of
these should be described in the next extended formulated model.
Next, plots of the Auto Correlation Function (ACF), Periodogram, and Cumulated Periodogram
(CP) are created using the model residuals. Based on the lags in the ACF plot, it is possible to
identify functional dependencies and seasonality in the model. The CP plot describes the frequency
in the residuals and visualises where, and how much, the residuals deviate from the true data.
The final sanity check on the estimated model in this analysis, is to perform n-step predictions, and
compare the model’s predictive capabilities with the true observations on a longer time frame.
4.3.4.3
Statistical tests
The Bayesian Information Criterion (BIC) is calculated for each of the developed models, and
yields a consistent estimate of the model order, cf. [25] section 6.5.3,
BIC = k · ln(n) −2 · ln(L)
(4.8)
with k being the number of parameters estimated in the model, n the number of observations and L
the maximised value of the likelihood function (4.6). The BIC will give an indication of how well
the proposed model fits the data, taken into account the complexity of the model and the amount
of available data.
4.3.4.4
Parameter evaluation
When the unknown parameters of the model have been estimated using ML and the EKF as de-
scribed in section 4.3.3, their estimated value and statistical significance are evaluated relative to
the performance of the model and its physical interpretation. Bounds are set on the parameters
during the likelihood optimisation to keep them within a physically meaningful value span. Nev-
ertheless, some parameter estimates hit bounds during optimisation, and it is necessary to alter the
boundaries in order to not dispense certain parameters. The aim is to have only significant pa-
rameters, i.e. p-values less than 5%, however this will not always be feasible due to convergence
problems using the CTSM-R available optimiser.
4.3.4.5
Model acceptance
In the end, whether a model is chosen as the final or not is a subjective matter. The final evaluation
includes a set of heuristics. It is not just best performing parameters on the above mentioned
topics which define the goal, but more so an overall assessment of the model’s performance taking
into the account the applicability of the model’s predictive capabilities, its complexity, quality and
precision in simulations.
22
Data-driven digital twins for monitoring and control of electricity distribution net
==PAGE:33==
4.4
Preparation, smoothing and filtering of data
As previously addressed in the presentation of the freezing room temperatures from the Lundsøe
cooling house, the unwanted spikes originating from the defrosting cycles contaminate the temper-
ature signals, cf. figure 4.5. This noise in the data would disturb the estimation of the true physical
temperature state in the freezing room. The challenge is to separate the defrosting spikes from the
temperature signals without affecting the natural variation in the space cooling measurements.
4.4.1
Non-parametric kernel smoothing for removing defrosting spikes from
temperature measurements
In order to remove the spikes, a statistical time series approach based on kernel smoothing tech-
niques is used and combined with robust estimation, as demonstrated in [26] and [27]. The pro-
posed method enables separation of spikes to be carried out without interfering with the baseline
and true signal. The method uses a non-parametric model (i.e. a kernel smoother) to estimate the
underlying space cooling signal.
4.4.1.1
Elaborating presentation of temperature signals
A presentation of the Lundsøe cooling house data is done in section 4.2.1. The temperature signals
from the nine evaporators in the freezing room can be represented with the time series
{Qt,
t = 1, ..., N}
(4.9)
where Qt is the temperature at time t and N = 1345 is the number of observations in the time
series i.e. equidistant sample points, after reducing the data to 15 minute time resolution in the two
week period Wednesday 6th to Tuesday 19th of April 2022.
The temperature signals from the nine evaporators are comparable, all with noise spikes from the
defrosting routines, as visualised in figure 4.16. As the trend in all signals are the same, evaporator
5.1 from sub-room 5 is selected as test data for implementing and validating the kernel smoothing
method. In figure 4.15, a zoom-in on the data to a four day time frame, from Wednesday 6th
to Saturday 9th, depicts the defrosting spikes that occur three times a day with the defrost cycle
described in section 4.2.6.
Figure 4.15: Top: Temperature measurements from evaporator 5.1 in sub-room 5 in the selected
period 6th to 19th April 2022 on a 15 minute resolution. Bottom: Zoom-in on the temperature
measurements from evaporator 5.1 in the period Wednesday 6th to Saturday 9th of April 2022.
Data-driven digital twins for monitoring and control of electricity distribution net
23
==PAGE:34==
Figure 4.16: Temperature measurements from the nine evaporators in the freezing room from
Wednesday 6th to Tuesday 19th April 2022.
4.4.2
Models and Kernel Smoothing methods
The space cooling changes over time as result of goods being added and removed from the freezing
room. Consequently, the space cooling changes at a frequency related to this in a relatively slow
moving and smooth pattern. The defrosting generates spikes, a noisy and high frequency compo-
nent added to the slower changing space cooling signal. The kernel smoothing method is therefore
designed such that the non-parametric estimate follows the slower changes in the signal, without
being influenced by the spikes. This is possible using a robust estimation scheme. Since the calcu-
lated kernel estimate is not affected by the spikes, the spikes can be identified and separated from
the space cooling signal.
In the following, the applied kernel smoothing models are presented. First, a simple zero order
kernel smoother is presented and thereafter a robust extension to the zero order kernel smoother.
4.4.3
Zero order kernel smoother
A Kernel Smoother method, is a method for estimating the true underlying function for some time
series measurements. The kernel estimation method is non-parametric, meaning that it has no
assumptions of the function’s true shape or parameters to estimate (sect. 2.3 in [21]). The kernel
estimator can be expressed as
ˆg(t) =
N
∑
i=1
Qik( t−i
h )
∑N
i=1 k( t−i
h )
(4.10)
where ˆg(t) is the kernel estimate for a given time t, k(∙) is the kernel function and h is the bandwidth
parameter. From the formula, it is seen that the kernel smoother is a locally weighted average
around a given time t, hence a zero order local estimate. The kernel function k(∙) determines
24
Data-driven digital twins for monitoring and control of electricity distribution net
==PAGE:35==
the weight that should be put on to the neighbouring points for each estimate a time t. For this
implementation a Gaussian kernel has been chosen for the function k(∙), given as
k(u) = 1
2πexp
{
−u2
2
}
.
(4.11)
The bandwidth parameter h is used for controlling the smoothness of ˆg and hence the width of
the Gaussian kernel applying the weights. When h →∞the estimate will go towards the mean
¯Q. A too large h will result in a biased estimate. On the other hand, if h →0, the estimate will
essentially be equal to the nearest data point and have a high variance but low bias. Therefore, the
bandwidth needs to be optimised for specific data. In this case, h = 4 is found appropriate, and
equals a bandwidth of 1 hour in the data.
The separation of the identified defrosting spikes is carried out by
ˆQbase
t
= I (Qt > ˆg(t) −(qthres · ˆg(t))) · ˆg(t) + I (Qt ≤ˆg(t) −(qthres · ˆg(t))) · Qt
(4.12)
where qthres = 0.03. This threshold value determines a percentage of which the spikes in the
original time series are allowed to be larger than the kernel estimate, in order for them not to be
categorised as defrosting spikes. The threshold value is manually tuned to the data at hand.
The zero order kernel estimates for evaporator 5.1 is plotted together with the source signal in
figure 4.17 top plot using equation (4.10) with h = 4. In the lower plot the filtered temperature
signal is plotted using equation (4.12) and qthres = 0.03. It is clear how the defrosting spikes have
been removed by cutting them off. Nevertheless, the filtered base signal still seems affected by the
noisy defrosting spikes. In order to overcome this, the next section introduces a robust extension
to the zero order Kernel Smoother method.
Figure 4.17: Upper: The source data from evaporator 5.1 plotted with the kernel estimate. Lower:
The filtered temperature signal, where the base signal clearly omits the defrosting spikes.
Data-driven digital twins for monitoring and control of electricity distribution net
25
==PAGE:36==
4.4.4
Robust zero order kernel smoother
By making the Kernel Smoother robust, the resulting kernel estimates will be robust towards out-
liers and extreme values. In order to expand on the zero order Kernel Smoother presented in equa-
tion (4.10), it is utilised that equation (4.10) compares to a locally-weighted least squares (LWLS),
which is covered in sect. 2.3.3 in [21], and can be formulated as
ˆg(t) = arg min
θ
1
N
N
∑
i=1
k
(t −i
h
)
· (Qi −θ)2
(4.13)
In this case, the LWLS is an optimisation method which aims to minimise the sum of squared
residuals ρLWLS(ε) = ε2, for the residuals ε = Qi −θ. The estimation is made robust by replacing
the quadratic error function with Tukey’s biweight function
ρbiweight (ε) =
{
1
6
ε2(ε4−3ε2γ2+3γ4)
γ4
if |ε| ≤γ
1
6γ2
if |ε| > γ
(4.14)
such that the final expression for the robust kernel estimate is
ˆg(t) = arg min
θ
1
N
N
∑
i=1
k
(t −i
h
)
· ρbiweight (Qi −θ)
(4.15)
The biweight function minimises the estimate by equation (4.14), and is approximately quadratic
for small residuals and constant for residuals larger than γ. The parameter γ is selected as a thresh-
old determining when residuals are considered large. For the cooling data, a reasonable value is
found to be γ = 2.5 ◦C.
The robust zero order kernel estimates for evaporator 5.1 in sub-room 5 are plotted together with
the source data in figure 4.18 top plot using equation (4.10), still with h = 4. In the lower plot the
filtered temperature signal is plotted using equation (4.12) now with qthres = 0.05. The successful
filtration of the defrosting spikes using the robust method is shown in the lower plot. It is evident,
that by using the robust kernel smoother, the base signal is less affected by the defrosting spikes.
For comparison, the filtered base cooling signals are plotted in figure 4.19 for the robust and non-
robust method. In the lower plot, it is clear how the robust method manages to omit the orange
spikes the non-robust method does not. Therefore, it is decided, that the robust Kernel Smoothing
method will be used for data cleaning and filtration of the temperature signals used for modelling
the freezing room temperature at the Lundsøe cooling house.
26
Data-driven digital twins for monitoring and control of electricity distribution net
==PAGE:37==
Figure 4.18: Upper: The source data from evaporator 5.1 plotted with the robust kernel estimate.
Lower: The filtered temperature signal, where the base signal clearly omits the defrosting spikes.
Figure 4.19: Comparison of non-robust and robust kernel smoothing base signals.
Data-driven digital twins for monitoring and control of electricity distribution net
27
==PAGE:38==
4.4.5
Applying robust kernel smoothing on all temperature signals
In the previous sections only data from evaporator 5.1 in sub-room 5 was processed. The remaining
eight temperature signals from the freezing room need also to be cleaned from defrosting spikes.
The remaining signals are cleaned using equation (4.15) with the same parameter settings as for
evaporator 5.1, and the result is seen in figure 4.20. For each of the sub-rooms 5, 6 and 7, the mean
temperature at each time point t is calculated and plotted as the black line together with the filtered
temperature base signals. By doing this, the nine signals have been reduced to three signals, one
for each sub-room.
When developing grey-box models of the Lundsøe cooling house, models with only one output
signal is initially the aim, i.e. only one temperature signal. Hence, the temperature signals would
need to be grouped and combined in such a way, that it is physically relatable to the layout of
the freezing room and the evaporators. The temperature signals from the nine evaporators have
therefore been reduced to one mean signal describing the overall temperature change in the entire
freezing room. The result is seen in figure 4.21.
The cooling room is located next to the freezing room, cf. sketch in figure 4.4, connecting the two
rooms with a gate. The room temperature in cooling room 8 is maintained at around 1.0-4.0 ◦C.
Robust kernel smoothing is also performed on the cooling room temperature signal, using h = 4,
γ = 2.0 ◦C and qthres = 0.05. In the lower plot of figure A.3 in appendix A.2.2 the spike filtered
cooling room signals are plotted together with the calculated mean (black line) of the two.
Figure 4.20: Plots showing the result of using Robust Kernel Smoothing after also removing the
defrosting spikes from the nine temperature signals. The mean for each sub-room is calculated at
each time point t, and visualised as the black lines.
28
Data-driven digital twins for monitoring and control of electricity distribution net
==PAGE:39==
Figure 4.21: Plots showing the result of using Robust Kernel Smoothing after also removing the
defrosting spikes from the nine temperature signals. The mean for the entire freezing room is
calculated at each time point t, and visualised as the black line.
4.4.6
Additional smoothing of temperature signals
The grey-box models developed during the initial part of the thesis were fitted using the temperature
data as it is presented in section 4.4.5, i.e. where the defrosting spikes are removed from the
temperature signal, but a remaining high degree of volatility is kept in the signals (one should
notice, that the changes in the temperature due to this volatility is still only around 0.5-1.0 ◦C).
Because of this volatility originating from daily cyclic operational effects from the evaporators
(more on this in section 4.5.1), a high degree of uncertainty and auto-correlation was added to
these models. The aim of the grey-box models is to predict the overall temperature changes in
the freezing room, and not the immediate small local temperature changes due to evaporators’
operational modes. Therefore, the decision was made to further smooth the data, to only retain the
overall temperature changes caused by goods deliveries and other larger impacts on the temperature
dynamics in the freezing room. This higher degree of smoothing is performed using the parameters
h = 12, γ = 2.0 ◦C and qthres = 0.01. These parameter adjustments indicate that 1) a 3 hour
window is now used as the smoothing bandwidth instead of 1 hour, 2) that temperature deviations
larger than 2.0 ◦C are considered as noise, and 3) that measurements deviating ± 1% from the kernel
estimate are not retained in the final filtered temperature signal. The separation of the identified
defrosting spikes is carried out by an adjusted filtering function
ˆQbase
t
= I (Qt > ˆg(t) −(qthres · ˆg(t))) · ˆg(t)
+ I (Qt < ˆg(t) + (qthres · ˆg(t))) · ˆg(t)
+ I (Qt ≤ˆg(t) −(qthres · ˆg(t))) · Qt
+ I (Qt ≥ˆg(t) + (qthres · ˆg(t))) · Qt
(4.16)
Now, it is not only temperature values higher than the estimated kernel which are removed, but
also the values which are lower. This is implied in the adjusted function in equation (4.16).
Using the temperature measurements from evaporator 5.1 as example, the result from performing
further smoothing using the robust kernel method is plotted in figure 4.22. From the bottom plot
it can be seen how it is only the mean and overall temperature change that are retained from the
original Qt signal. In figure 4.23 the mean freezing room temperature is calculated and plotted after
having smoothed all nine temperature signals with the new set of parameters. When comparing
Data-driven digital twins for monitoring and control of electricity distribution net
29
==PAGE:40==
the overall trend in this plot with the less smoothed version in figure 4.21, the major trends in the
data are retained, but the volatile daily fluctuations are smoothed away as intended.
Both versions of the temperature signals, filtered with respectively 1 and 3 hour bandwidth, will
be used for modelling.
Figure 4.22: Robust kernel smoothing performed on temperature measurement from evaporator
5.1 using h = 12, γ = 2.0 C◦and qthres = 0.01.
Figure 4.23: Robust kernel smoothing performed on temperature measurements from all nine evap-
orators in the freezing room using h = 12, γ = 2.0 C◦and qthres = 0.01. The mean smoothed
temperature is the black line.
30
Data-driven digital twins for monitoring and control of electricity distribution net
==PAGE:41==
4.5
Description and analysis of cooling system dynamics
To understand and visualise the temperature dynamics in the Lundsøe freezing room, tempera-
ture signals have been plotted together with the control temperature Tfctr, the status signals Si.j
(indicating the operational state of the evaporators), and the energy consumption Φ for the com-
pressor supplying all evaporators. In this section, the compressor and evaporator mechanisms
are visualised in plots to give a clearer physical understanding of how these dynamics most opti-
mally should be modelled2. Note, the following visualisations are done with the 3 hour bandwidth
smoothed temperature signals, as presented in section 4.4.6, with a data resolution of 15 minutes
(i.e. 1 index is 15 minutes).
4.5.1
Temperature and energy consumption dynamics as an effect of evaporator
status and delivered goods
The control temperature is changed for all evaporators simultaneously, and is done as a conse-
quence of energy prices. Every day during the periods 4:15-8:00 and 15:45-18:45 the control tem-
perature is increased to -24.0 ◦C. All other hours during the day the control temperature is -26.0
◦C. In figure 4.24 the measured temperature for evaporator 5.3, Tf5.3, is visualised together with
the control temperature. It is clear how the control temperature drives and influences the measured
temperature. When the the set point is -24.0 ◦C the temperature goes up, and vice versa when the
set point is changed to -26.0 ◦C the local room temperature decreases. It is worth noticing that the
range of temperature change is around 0.7-0.8 ◦C.
Figure 4.24: Measured room temperature for evaporator 5.3, Tf5.3, plotted together with the con-
trol temperature for the Wednesday 6th to Thursday 7th of April 2022.
Besides being controlled by a set-point temperature, the evaporators have three operating statuses,
Normal, Cut-out and Defrost. When in Normal status, the evaporators cool with the aim of reach-
ing the control temperature. When in Cut-out status, the cooling is turned off entirely, and when in
Defrost status the measured temperature increases, and during this period, ice crystals are melted
away from the evaporators using warm excess gas from the system. That each individual evap-
orator has its own operating status schedule complicates the modelling that uses one mean room
temperature, as it is hard to map the status signals into a format which can describe the overall
dynamics through a mean room temperature. In order to visualise these operating statuses together
with the temperature signals, the statuses have been labeled [1] = Normal, [0] = Defrost, and [-1]
= Cut-out.
2In section A.1.1.2 a thorough explanation of the overall mechanisms behind the Lundsøe cooling-setup is given.
This is based partly on an interview conducted with the CEO of Lundsøe, Søren Søe-Larsen, and partly from an interview
with Advansor, the supplier of the cooling system and the compressor.
Data-driven digital twins for monitoring and control of electricity distribution net
31
==PAGE:42==
In figure 4.25 the room temperature from evaporator 7.3, Tf7.3, is plotted together with the status
signal of the evaporator. The data is from Saturday 9th to Monday 11th of April 2022, and around
index 120, there has been made a larger goods delivery, which has been placed in the area around
evaporator 7.3. As a result of this delivery, it is seen that the room temperature locally increases.
Before the deliveries, the evaporator had a cut-out period around index 0-20, 50-70 and again 100-
120. All three times, the cut-out period lasted the same amount of time as the change in control
temperature to -24.0 ◦C (i.e. as seen from the length of the plotted light blue line at -1.0). After
the goods were delivered, and the local temperature increased, the cut-out periods around index,
150-170, 210-220 and 250-270 lasted a shorter amount of time. The evaporators need to run with
a higher capacity in order to bring down the temperature to control temperature level, i.e. - 26.0
◦C, and this ultimately directly results in a higher energy consumption, and shorter cut-off periods.
Figure 4.25: Measured room temperature in evaporator 7.3. Plotted with the evaporator status
signal. [1] = Normal, [-1] = Cut-out and [0] = Defrost. Data from Saturday 9th to Monday 11th of
April 2022.
Figure 4.26: Measured room temperature in evaporator 6.2. Plotted with control temperature and
the evaporator status signal. [1] = Normal, [-1] = Cut-out and [0] = Defrost. Data from Saturday
9th to Tuesday 12th of April 2022.
32
Data-driven digital twins for monitoring and control of electricity distribution net
==PAGE:43==
Similarly to the case presented in figure 4.25, the dynamics between the status of evaporator 6.2,
S6.2, local room temperature, Tf6.2, control temperature Tfctr, and indirectly the effect of goods
delivered are visualised in figure 4.26. The data runs from Saturday 9th to Tuesday 12th of April
2022, and around index 130 (Sunday 10th of April) goods are delivered. The local temperature
increase has a clear effect on the evaporator. The cut-off periods are completely omitted, and the
evaporator runs with full capacity in order to cool down the goods and room temperature. This
again is a direct cause for higher energy consumption, as it will be further supported and seen in
the following plots.
The mean room temperature for all nine evaporators is plotted in figure 4.27. Still, when plotting
the mean temperature for the room, it is clear how the control temperature drives the measured
temperature in the freezing room, but noticeably to a smaller degree in periods where goods have
been delivered (around index 250 and onwards, Sunday 10th April, in figure 4.27).
Figure 4.27: Mean room temperature for all nine evaporators plotted together with the control
temperature from the Friday 8th to Monday 11th of April 2022.
Finally, in figure 4.28, the dynamics discussed in the above are linked to the energy consumption
of the supplying compressor. The overall mean room temperature, Tf, for all nine evaporators
is plotted with the corresponding energy consumption and control temperature, Tfctr. What is
worth noticing, is how during the first two instances of changed control temperature, around index
0-20 and 50-70, the energy consumption drops drastically to around 2.6 kWh as a result of the
evaporators going into cut-off status where much less energy is consumed. During this period, the
overall room temperature is relatively low. Around index 100 the effect of delivered goods can
be seen on the overall room temperature, and here during the increased control temperatures, the
energy consumption does not reach as low energy consumption, only around 3.0-3.2 kWh. This
is a direct result of the evaporators running with higher capacity in order to cool down the room
and goods while maintaining the current control temperature. During the periods where the control
temperature is -26.0 ◦C, the energy consumption is considered somewhat constant around 3.6 kWh,
and the evaporators run with approx. 50% capacity when Tfctr is -26.0 ◦C.
Essentially, the control temperature can be directly used to control the overall energy consumption
(i.e. through the evaporators), but the ambient temperature and amount of delivered goods need to
be taken into account as well.
Data-driven digital twins for monitoring and control of electricity distribution net
33
==PAGE:44==
Figure 4.28: Mean room temperature for all nine evaporators, plotted together with total energy
consumption and the control temperature from Sunday 10th to Wednesday 13th of April 2022.
4.5.2
Seasonal effects and parameters influencing the efficiency of the cooling
system
The energy consumption profile of the compressor is largely dependent on the Coefficient of Per-
formance (COP) for the system. COP is a measure for the ratio of energy supplied to the compressor
compared to the cooling or heating effect. Hence, COP is the heating or cooling efficiency of a sys-
tem [28]. Often the COP is directly affected by the ambient temperature, and for a cooling system
like the Lundsøe cooling house, the higher the ambient temperature, the lower the COP. Hence,
depending on season, the cooling house’s energy consumption is expected to vary. To comply with
the regulations of the control temperature, the energy consumption in summer will be higher, as
the compressor will need to run at a higher capacity to reach the control temperatures, cf. interview
notes from meeting with Advansor A.1.2.
Another seasonal effect which influences the COP, and hence energy consumption, is the need for
cleaning and maintenance of the gas cooler connected to the Lundsøe cooling house compressor,
cf. interview notes from meeting with Advansor A.1.2. The CO2 gas that cools down the freezing
room air through the evaporator cooling coils, can have a temperature as high as 40.0 ◦C, when
it leaves the evaporators to return to the compressor (it is also this warm excess gas which is
used for defrosting among the evaporators). Before the gas continuously gets cooled down by the
compressor, the 40.0 ◦C warm gas passes through the gas cooler, which is placed on the roof above
the compressor. The gas cooler’s function is to pre-cool the gas before it re-enters the compressor,
hence saving energy needed to cool down the gas. In order for the gas cooler to work efficiently, it
needs to be cleaned often for proper ventilation, and more so during summer periods due to higher
capacity needs, at higher ambient temperatures. If this is not done, the compressor continuously
works harder, which is possible to see as a direct change in the pattern of the energy consumption
profile (cf. 4.7.2.1).
4.5.3
Potential pitfalls created as a result of additional smoothing of temperature
signals
After having smoothed the temperature signals with 3 hour bandwidth some potential pitfalls have
been identified. These are especially clear in figure 4.24 and 4.25. Here, the local temperatures
start increasing before the control temperature switches from -26.0 to -24.0 ◦C. This is a defect
created in the data due to the 3 hour bandwidth applied in the smoothing method. At every point t
in time, the measurements will contain information of t + k steps into the future. For this reason,
34
Data-driven digital twins for monitoring and control of electricity distribution net
==PAGE:45==
it is seen how the temperature starts increasing, as an effect of the change in control temperature
before it has happened. Figure 4.29 clearly visualises how this increased smoothing has shifted
knowledge in the data, both back and forth in time. When the applied bandwidth is only 1 hour,
the temperature changes in the same instance as the control temperature. This is no longer the case
when the bandwidth is extended to 3 hours.
Due to this fact, there is a potential risk, that the original dynamics in the data between the tem-
perature and control signal (and in extension the energy consumption) are lost. It will therefore
not be possible to model and describe specific dynamics in the digital twins of the freezing room.
Potentially, the energy consumption will be a less important factor in the final models, which is
not optimal, if future control models or algorithms should use energy prices as penalty to energy
consumption.
Figure 4.29: Comparison of the temperature signals, Tf, with two different smoothing levels,
plotted with the control temperature signal. Data from Friday 8th to Monday 11th April 2022.
Data-driven digital twins for monitoring and control of electricity distribution net
35
==PAGE:46==
4.6
Development of data-driven digital twins of the Lundsøe cooling
house
In this section, the process undergone to model the cooling house is presented. In order to create
the most accurate data-driven grey-box model, models are improved and expanded in an iterative
manner using the model validation framework presented in section 4.3.4.
Whenever starting the process of model selection, it is essential to have a clear understanding of
what the models will be used for and which functionalities should be underlined. In this case,
models are created with the perspective, that the management at the Lundsøe cooling house should
be able to apply the models as a means to estimate and regulate their energy consumption by
controlling the temperature, Tf, in the freezing room. Tf is currently regulated on a daily basis
using the control temperature, as the Lundsøe cooling house management has an interest in keeping
their energy consumption lowest possible to reduce energy related costs. The developed models
should therefore serve as a quantified and precise tool to predict freezing room temperature.
Two final data-driven digital twins of the Lundsøe cooling house are developed in this thesis,
hence the model development process is done twice with two different output signals for Tf. As
presented in section 4.4 on data preparation, two different levels of smoothing are applied to the raw
freezing room temperature signals, respectively kernel smoothing with 1 and 3 hour bandwidths.
The signal with 1 hour bandwidth smoothing retains the daily fluctuations and dynamics caused by
control temperature changes, whereas the signal with a 3 hour bandwidth (cf. section 4.4.6) is less
affected by the daily control changes, and retains the overall temperature trend and changes due
to goods deliveries or changes in the ambient temperature. Applying the extra smoothing comes
with some precautions and potential pitfalls as addressed in section 4.5.3. Firstly, a section on
model development using the 1 hour bandwidth smoothed temperature signal is introduced, cf.
section 4.6.1. Then a section on models using the signal smoothed Tf with a 3 hour bandwidth is
presented, cf. section 4.6.2. The two final models will be compared and tested with reference to
the thesis objectives and applicability of the models.
4.6.1
Model selection for temperature signal smoothed with 1 hour bandwidth
In the following section, the model development process for the grey-box models of the Lundsøe
cooling house is presented using the temperature signal, Tf, smoothed with 1 hour bandwidth.
4.6.1.1
Baseline model
As a first step in the model selection process a baseline model is set up, and will be used as founda-
tion for future models as well as a performance reference point. The baseline model is formulated
as a stochastic differential equation, representing the freezing room temperature as a function of the
energy consumption Φ, and a temperature mean µ (to be estimated), see model equations (4.17).
The energy consumption was chosen as the first input parameter for the model as the energy con-
sumption and freezing room temperature have a strong correlating effect (cf. section 4.2.5); the
higher energy consumption the more cooling the freezing room has undergone.
dTf = 1
Cf
(µ −Tf + b · Φ) dt + σ1dω1
Yf = Tf + e1,
(4.17)
In the equation (4.17), ω1 is a random normal Wiener process, adding noise to the system and Cf
the freezing room heat capacity. A graphical representation of the physical system is presented in
figure 4.30, where Φ is the only input parameter to the model. The parameters Cf, µ, b, σ1 and
e1 are the parameters to be estimated using ML optimisation (cf. section 4.3.3) for this baseline
model.
36
Data-driven digital twins for monitoring and control of electricity distribution net
==PAGE:47==
Figure 4.30: Baseline model layout.
To check the validity of the baseline model and general fit to the data, the model validation and
development framework presented in section 4.3.4 is followed. Initially a residual analysis is per-
formed generating the plots in figure 4.31. Here, it is clear that there are some dynamics in the data
which are not described. According to the residual ACF, there is a strong seasonality in the residu-
als, which can also be hinted at in the raw periodogram. The seasonality is consistent around every
12th and 24th hour (i.e. at lag 48 and 96). In the raw periodogram, the residuals are somewhat
seasonal and increasing at the tail. This is confirmed in the cumulated periodogram, as the line
lies within the confidence interval for the initial frequency up until 0.25, but has a heavy right tail.
The residuals indicate that the model is not grasping the system dynamics accurately, and model
improvements have to be investigated.
Figure 4.31: Residual analysis for the baseline model.
The residual sum of squares (RSS) and the BIC for the baseline model fit are listed in table 4.4.
The RSS and BIC values are relatively small, compared to other values observed in the process of
establishing this baseline model, which show goodness of fit and indicate a good choice of initial
baseline model for the future model development process.
One-step prediction plot and related residuals are seen in figure 4.32 for the baseline model, plotted
for predictions made on data from Wednesday the 6th to Thursday the 7th of April 2022. The one-
step predictions fit the observed data well and are bounded by the 95% prediction interval. This
explains the relatively small RSS for the model fit, and verifies the assumption, that the freezing
room temperature dynamics can be explained by the energy consumption. The residuals are not
white noise, as there are some remaining patterns in the residuals.
Data-driven digital twins for monitoring and control of electricity distribution net
37
==PAGE:48==
Figure 4.32: Baseline model one-step prediction plot and residuals. Data and predictions from
Wednesday the 6th to Thursday the 7th of April 2022.
Before settling on a final model, five expanded versions of the baseline model are investigated in
the following.
4.6.1.2
Models 1 to 5
The models investigated next are summarised in table 4.4 and are all expansions based on the
baseline model. An overview of the models’ added features are presented in the table together with
their RSSs and BICs values. The improvements in RSS and BIC are minimal (or even negative)
when expanding the model. The model selection, expansion and evaluation is based partly on the
performance indicators (being the RSS and BIC), but also on the applicability of the model in terms
of predictive capability and simulation results, which in the end drive the model validation process
(cf. section 4.3.4.5).
Model
Added feature
Mathematically
BIC
RSS
Baseline
-
-
-2595.14
11.06
Model 1
Ambient temperature Ta
1
Rfa · (Ta −Tf)
-2605.19
10.91
Model 2
Cooling room Tc
1
Rfc · (Tc −Tf)
-2597.11
10.92
Model 3
Mass state Tm
dTm
-2567.74
10.92
Model 4
Change mean to Tfctr
Tfctr −Tf
-2617.91
10.56
Model 5
Inner mass state Tmi
dTmi
-2576.49
10.55
Final model
Model 4
-
-2617.91
10.56
Table 4.4: Model development summary when using data smoothed with 1h bandwidth.
Model 1
Model 1 is an expansion of the baseline model, where ambient temperature is addition-
ally inputted to the Tf state. It is assumed that ambient temperature has an effect on the state of the
freezing room. Ambient temperature has an influence on the coefficient of performance (COP) of
38
Data-driven digital twins for monitoring and control of electricity distribution net
==PAGE:49==
the compressor, which ranges between 2-10 depending on the outdoor temperature during the year
(cf. section 4.5.2). Therefore, correlation between the freezing room temperature and the ambient
temperature is assumed. In addition, the ambient temperature potentially has an effect whenever
goods are delivered to Lundsøe, due to gates standing open and warmer goods being added to the
freezing room.
Model 2
In model 2, the cooling room temperature, Tc, is added as another input variable to the
Tf state. The cooling room is located next to the freezing room, hence the rooms share a wall,
and heat transferred through the wall from one room to the other is modelled as a heat resistance
parameter, Rfc. In addition, whenever goods are delivered to Lundsøe, they are unpacked and also
potentially reorganised in the cooling room before being stored in the freezing room. Meaning that
the gate between the two rooms are sometimes opened for a longer period of time, and several times
a day. The assumption is therefore, that the cooling room temperature is influencing the freezing
room temperature. It is likely that the cooling room temperature is influencing the freezing room
sub-areas differently, especially the measured temperature by evaporator 7.3, due to it having the
temperature sensor closest to the gate.
Model 3
Model 3 is an expansion by adding an additional state to capture hidden dynamics in the
data. The added hidden state, Tm, is intended to model the temperature of the goods (mass) stored in
the freezing room, and is mathematically formulated as dTm =
1
Cm
(
1
Rmf (Tf −Tm)
)
dt+σ2dω2,
where Cm is the capacitance of the mass and Rmf is the resistance between room temperature and
the mass. Overall, Tf increases when new deliveries of goods are added to the freezing room, due
to these goods generally having a higher temperature than the freezing room air. Different types
of goods; bread, vegetables, meat, etc., have varying temperatures when arriving at the Lundsøe
cooling house. The randomness in the temperatures, and placement of the goods in the freezing
room, make the mass state Tm difficult to model. Therefore, this hidden state is supposed to account
for the randomness in the data caused by goods.
Model 4
During the model exploration, it was observed that the simulated output temperature
in the Tf state did not capture the sudden increases and decreases in room temperature caused
by the changes in control temperature. The ML estimated constant mean value µ ≈−25.0 ◦C
was therefore replaced by the changing control temperature signal Tfctr. This proved to be very
efficient, and improved the performance and quality of simulations (more on this in the following).
Figure 4.33: Model 5 with inner mass state, Tmi.
Model 5
For model 5 an inner mass temperature state was added. Due to the large amount
of goods, stored very closely together, it is assumed that it takes longer time for the cooling to
Data-driven digital twins for monitoring and control of electricity distribution net
39
==PAGE:50==
reach the center of the mass. Therefore, the extra inner mass state is added, and modelled as an
”onion”, i.e. a mass with multiple layers. Mathematically the extra mass state is formulated as
Tmi =
1
Cmi
(
1
Rmmi (Tm −Tmi)
)
dt + σ2dω2, where Cmi is the capacitance of the inner mass.
This model layout is illustrated in figure 4.33.
Comparison of Model 1 to 5
Models 1 to 5 proved to be very interesting models to investigate,
as they all relate to the expected physical phenomenons and dynamics of the freezing room. Never-
theless, none of the models increase model validating results significantly. Despite the increasing
order of model complexity, the BICs and RSSs do not differ much, and hence do not indicate
which model is the best performing model. As already stated (cf. section 4.3.4), the model val-
idation process is heuristic, and the quality of predictions combined with the performance of the
model simulations are the main driver for model acceptance.
Other models tested
Before settling on the final model, other model extensions were tested.
Examples of additional models expansions were:
• An added hidden state modelling the goods deliverance schedule. The state was a random
walk, and intended to model the randomness of the goods’ arrivals which influence Tf.
• An additional envelope state, also formulated as a hidden state. The state should model the
effect of global irradiance on the building envelope (heating of roof, walls, etc.).
• Supplementary parameter inputs to the model such as wind speed, solar irradiance, and con-
trol signal inputs formulated in different binary ways.
Models with these extensions performed worse on both BIC and RSS than the model formulations
presented in table 4.4.
Models with multiple output states
Models with more input parameters and complexities were
also investigated. It was attempted to model the freezing room temperature dynamics through
three output states, respectively one state for each of sub-room 5, 6 and 7. In this model, thermal
resistance parameters describing the thermal airflow between rooms were estimated using ML.
Here, model dynamics were seen to influence the rooms differently. In sub-room 7, the sub-room
sharing a wall with the cooling room, the predictions were more uncertain when comparing with
sub-rooms 5 and 6. Suggesting that the rooms are influenced differently by e.g. where in the room
the goods are stored. Modelling the freezing room using three output signals was not within the
scope of the model objectives, and hence these models were disregarded.
4.6.1.3
Final model
The best performing, and final model, is presented in equation (4.18), and is essentially the model
structure of the presented Model 4. It is a two state model, with room temperature state Tf and
hidden mass temperature state Tm. Inputs to the state temperature Tf are, the ambient temperature
Ta, the total energy consumption of the freezing room Φ, and the temperature in the cooling room
Tc. ω1 and ω2 are random Wiener processes, and Cm and Cf are the heat capacities of respectively
the freezing room and the stored goods.
dTf = 1
Cf
(
Tfctr −Tf + b · Φ +
1
Rfa
(Ta −Tf) +
1
Rfc
(Tc −Tf) +
1
Rmf
(Tm −Tf)
)
dt + σ1dw1
dTm = 1
Cm
(
1
Rmf
(Tf −Tm)
)
dt + σ2dω2
Yf =Tf + e1,
(4.18)
40
Data-driven digital twins for monitoring and control of electricity distribution net
==PAGE:51==
The estimated mean of Tf is driven by the control temperature, Tfctr, making it perform well
in simulations and grasp the daily manual adjustments of the control temperature. A physical
visualisation of the model is given in figure 4.34, where the inputs to the output state Tf are,
Ta, Tc, Tfctr and Φ, and the two states Tf and Tm exchange heat through the estimated thermal
resistances Rmf and Rmc.
Figure 4.34: Final model layout.
Looking at the residual analysis of the final model in figure 4.35, the plots are similar to those of the
baseline model. Again, the residual ACF presents a seasonality that was unsuccessfully removed,
the raw periodogram residuals are increasing towards the end, and the cumulated periodogram has
a right tail that is not within the confidence interval. These residual trends originate from dynamics
in the data, that the parameters included in the final model are not able to describe. Looking at the
performance indicators in table 4.4, both the BIC and RSS are slightly better than those of the
smaller models, but does not imply a significant improvement.
Figure 4.35: Residual analysis for the final model.
Table 4.5 displays a summary of the ML estimated parameters of the final model. The heat ca-
pacities , Cx have the unit [kWh
◦C ] and the resistances, Rxx, [
◦C
kW ]. Even though the parameters are
Data-driven digital twins for monitoring and control of electricity distribution net
41
==PAGE:52==
supposed to be directly physically interpretable, the mismatch between the data and model struc-
ture, due to missing dynamics in the data, causes an inconsistent interpretation of parameters and
relation to the actual values of the observed system.
Parameter
Estimate
Std. Error
t-value
p-value
Ci
33.13
4.04
8.19
6.66−16
Cm
9.994
1.34
7.454
2.20−16
b
1.51−3
1.59−4
9.46
2.20−16
Rfa
-26.41
4.17
-6.33
3.32−10
Rfc
-17.26
2.85
-6.05
1.89−9
Rmf
-15.83
1.02
-15.45
2.20−16
σ1
-2.42
1.87−2
-129.19
2.20−16
σ2
-7.18
6.73−5
−1.075
2.20−16
e1
-45.66
6.53−4
6.994
2.20−16
Table 4.5: ML estimated parameters for the final model stated in equation (4.18). The heat capac-
ities , Cx, have the unit [kWh
◦C ] and the resistances, Rxx, [
◦C
kW ].
The fit for the one-step predictions plotted in figure 4.36 is good, and the residuals can somewhat
be regarded as noise. The predictions all lie within the 95% prediction interval. Again, there are
no significant improvements compared to the predictions seen previously for the baseline model
(cf. figure 4.32), but the fit is nevertheless promising.
Figure 4.36: One-step predictions and residuals for the final model.
Additional sets of predictions have been made for the final model, see figure 4.37, where 8-step,
24-step and 48-step predictions are plotted. The longer the horizon of the prediction steps, the
more uncertain the model is of its data fit due to the increased span of the prediction interval.
Generally, the predictions tend to stabilise around the mean and neglect the details of the fast
42
Data-driven digital twins for monitoring and control of electricity distribution net
==PAGE:53==
changing dynamics in the temperature. Despite this, it is clear that the model performs well. Even
at 12 hour (48-steps) predictions, the model manages to predict according to the mean trend in the
original observations.
Figure 4.37: N-step prediction for the final model.
Figure 4.38: Simulation results for models during model selection. Models presented in table 4.4.
4.6.1.4
Simulations of models from baseline to final model
Finally, figure 4.38 presents the simulations of all models in the model selection process, presented
in table 4.4, optimised for input signal Tf smoothed with a bandwidth of 1 hour. It is clear how
the simulation becomes somewhat more accurate at each model iteration. This is interesting, as
Data-driven digital twins for monitoring and control of electricity distribution net
43
==PAGE:54==
the residual analysis plots, BIC, and RSS were very similar for all models throughout the process.
Looking at the simulations for each model, it can be seen that the simulations for the baseline model
follow the overall tendency of the observed data, but do not capture any of the daily dynamics.
Model 1 to 3 are the worst performing simulations, as they do not follow the trends of the true
observations. Then, model 5 and the final model simulate the observed data the best, and almost
exactly the same. The models manage to simulate the same tendencies, and it is clear how the
effect of adding the control temperature to drive the mean temperature, enables the model to better
follow the daily sudden changes in the temperature Tf, due to control temperature changes in Tfctr.
Model 5 has one more state than the final model, but the same model accuracy. Therefore, the final
model (Model 4) was chosen based on its simulation performance and its lower model complexity.
4.6.2
Model selection for temperature signal smoothed with 3 hour bandwidth
After having presented the optimised final model using the temperature signal Tf smoothed with
a 1 hour bandwidth, this next section will be carried out in a similar way. A new process of model
selection is initiated and undergone using the temperature signal smoothed with a bandwidth of
3 hours (cf. section 4.4.6). This is done in order to assess, if the suspected disturbances and
measurement noise in the temperature signal for Tf smoothed with 1 hour bandwidth, are related
to the auto-correlated result in the residual analysis (cf. figure 4.35) of the final model in section
4.6.1, and hereby aim to remove the auto-correlation.
4.6.2.1
Baseline model
A baseline model is presented in equation (4.19), which is formulated exactly as the baseline model
already analysed and tested in equation (4.17). The model layout is therefore the same as in figure
4.30. However Tf has changed, and is now smoothed with a 3 hour bandwidth and is presented in
section 4.4.6 and plotted in figure 4.23.
dTf = 1
Cf
(µ −Tf + b · Φ) dt + σ1dω1
Yf = Tf + e1,
(4.19)
Figure 4.39: ACF for the baseline model using Tf smoothed with a 3 hour bandwidth.
The residual analysis for the new baseline fit still shows some daily seasonality, see figure 4.39,
but to a smaller degree compared to what was seen previously in figure 4.31 for the baseline fitted
44
Data-driven digital twins for monitoring and control of electricity distribution net
==PAGE:55==
on data smoothed with 1 hour bandwidth. For the new fit, there is a strong auto-correlation with
the first lag, and the remaining lags are almost within the accepted 95% confidence interval, hence
the ACF suggests goodness of fit. The raw periodogram is increasing slightly, and the cumulated
periodogram is therefore not within the accepted interval. This is due to the clear seasonality
present in the residuals and the 1-lag correlation. The one-step predictions for the baseline model
are seen in figure 4.40. The confidence interval is tight, and the predictions follow the observations
almost perfectly. The residuals are close to being white noise. These predictions again suggest a
strong goodness of fit for the baseline model to the observed and 3 hour bandwidth smoothed data.
Figure 4.40: One-step prediction for the baseline model using Tf smoothed with a 3 hour band-
width.
Model
Added feature
Mathematically
BIC
RSS
Baseline
-
-
-5361.79
1.40
Model 1
Ambient temperature, Ta
1
Rfa · (Ta −Tf)
-5355.08
1.40
Model 2
Heat added during defrosting, Q
S5.1 · Q
-5222.37
1.53
Model 3
Control temp. on/off
Tfon/off
-5222.23
1.52
Model 4
Cooling room temp., Tc
1
Rfc · (Tc −Tf)
-5215.03
1.52
Model 5
Mass state, Tm
dTm
-5179.02
1.52
Model 6
Inner mass state, Tmi
dTmi
-5143.01
1.52
Model 7
Goods state, Tg
dTg
-5114.41
1.52
Final model
Reduced version of Model 7
-
-5229.61
1.52
Table 4.6: Model development summary for model selection process using Tf smoothed with a 3
hour bandwidth.
Looking at the model validating results in table 4.6, the BIC is twice as small, compared to the BIC
of the baseline model modelling the less smoothed Tf signal with 1 hour bandwidth, and the RSS
is ten times smaller. This suggests, that the baseline model is performing more accurately with this
level of smoothed data, which is not surprising, as a lot of the noise in the data has been removed.
Data-driven digital twins for monitoring and control of electricity distribution net
45
==PAGE:56==
Before settling on a final model, seven extensions of the baseline model are investigated in the
following, all with the aim of improving the predictive performance of the baseline model.
4.6.2.2
Models 1 to 6
Even though the baseline model is performing well, the residual analysis plots can be improved,
i.e. by reducing seasonality. Models 1 to 6 presented in the following are the intermediate models
in the selection process from baseline to the final and best performing model.
In table 4.6 the feature added for each iteration in the model development process is stated together
with the performance indicators, i.e. BIC and RSS values.
Model 1
Model 1 is the baseline model with ambient temperature Ta added as an input. See
paragraph 4.6.1.2 for parameter assumptions.
Model 2
Model 2 is an expansion, in which the added heat during defrosting of the evaporators
is included as an input variable, as S5.1 · Q, to the room temperature state, Tf. All status signals
for the nine evaporators were tested (cf. section 4.2.6), but the status signal for evaporator 5.1,
S5.1, resulted in the model with the most accurate ACF and validating results. Q is estimated to be
the heat added during defrosting in the evaporators. It should be noted, that during the modelling
phase, specifically for S5.1, the cut-out signals have been relabeled as [1] = cut-out, in order to
isolate the defrosting cyclic trends, as illustrated in figure 4.14.
Model 3
Model 3 is expanded by adding the control temperature as an input. Due to the enhanced
smoothing of Tf, adjustments had to be made to the control temperature signal. Tfctr is modified
such that Tfon/off = 1 when Tfctr = −26.0◦C, and Tfon/off = 0 when Tfctr = −24.0◦C.
Thereby changing the signal to a binary on/off signal. After this expansion, the model is able to
simulate and predict smaller changes in the diurnal dynamics.
Model 4 to 6
In Model 4 to 6, the models were respectively added:
• The cooling room temperature, Tc, as input parameter to the observed Tf state.
• A hidden state, Tm, describing the mass temperature (goods stored in the freezing room).
• An additional hidden state, Tmi, describing the inner mass temperature.
See paragraphs 4.6.1.2, 4.6.1.2 and 4.6.1.2 on model expansion assumptions, as presented in mod-
els fitted on the less smoothed Tf signal with 1 hour bandwidth.
4.6.2.3
Model 7
Model 7 is presented in equation (4.20). The model has four states, one for the observed room
temperature Tf, and three hidden states to model the mass temperature Tm, the inner mass tem-
perature Tmi and one for the random goods arrival Tg. The freezing room Tf has input signals of
ambient temperature Ta, energy consumption Φ, the binary control signal Tfon/off, the cooling
room temperature Tc and the evaporator status signal S5.1. This model expands on Model 6 by
having the added state Tg. The assumption is, that the occurrence and size of goods deliveries are
random, and therefore a state consisting of a random walk Tg, i.e. the Wiener process, would be
able to model and account for this randomness. The model layout is presented in figure 4.41, with
the mentioned states and input variables.
In the end, Model 7 is not chosen as the final model. When analysing the simulation results for the
7 models investigated through the development process, figure 4.46, it is clear that the significant
improvements in simulation quality happened when parameters S5.1 and Tfon/off were added to
the models. The subsequent models where the three hidden states were added, did not change or
improve simulation results. After concluding this, a backwards selection of model parameters for
46
Data-driven digital twins for monitoring and control of electricity distribution net
==PAGE:57==
Model 7 was done, and a reduced and equally good model was established, more on this in next
section 4.6.2.4.
The Models 1 to 7 were expanded to the extend of Model 7, cf. equation (4.20), as similar dynamics
as the ones observed in the models for the 1 hour bandwidth smoothed Tf signal (sect. 4.6.1) were
expected to be seen for this extra smoothed version of the temperature signal as well. In the end,
it had to be concluded, that too much detail in the data had been removed through the smoothing,
and that it was not possible to model the temperature signal assuming the same dynamics.
dTf = 1
Cf
(
µf −Tf + b · Φ +
1
Rfa
(Ta −Tf) −Q · S5.1 + d · Tfon/off
)
(
+
1
Rmf
(Tm −Tf) +
1
Rfc
(Tc −Tf)
)
dt + σ1dw1
dTm = 1
Cm
(
µm −Tm +
1
Rmf
(Tf −Tm) +
1
Rmmi
(Tmi −Tm)
)
dt + σ2dω2
dTmi = 1
Cmi
(
µmi −Tmi +
1
Rmmi
(Tm −Tmi)
)
dt + σ3dω3
dTg = (µg) dt + σ4dω4
Yf =Tf + e1,
(4.20)
Figure 4.41: Model layout for Model 7 presented in equation (4.20).
4.6.2.4
Final model
The final model presented for the temperature signal smoothed with the 3 hour bandwidth, is a
sub-model of Model 7, cf. equation (4.20), established through backwards model selection. The
reduced model is stated in equation (4.21) and visualised in figure 4.42. The remaining parameters
in the final model are the status signal, the control temperature and the ambient temperature. A
large amount of the daily variation in Tf has been smoothed away, to such an extent that the
energy consumption parameter, Φ, has become insignificant. Due to the high correlations between
the energy consumption and control temperature, the latter is accepted as enough to describe the
daily fluctuations in temperature. Notice how this version of the model is no longer able to predict
temperature changes based on information from energy consumption. This is not optimal, when
an objective of the model is to be able to reduce energy consumption.
dTf = 1
Cf
(
µf −Tf +
1
Rfa
(Ta −Tf) −Q · S5.1 + d · Tfon/off
)
dt + σ1dw1
Yf =Tf + e1,
(4.21)
Data-driven digital twins for monitoring and control of electricity distribution net
47
==PAGE:58==
After the model reduction, the BIC becomes considerably smaller due to the reduced model com-
plexity, stated in table 4.6, and the model simulation performs equally good as the more complex
Model 7 with extensive parameters, cf. figure 4.46
Figure 4.42: Final model layout for the model fitted using the 3 hour bandwidth smoothed tem-
perature signal. See equation (4.20).
Looking at the residual analysis of the final model in figure 4.43, the results have improved notice-
ably compared to the baseline model. The seasonality in the residual ACF has been reduced to only
being significant at lag 1, 48, and 96 (i.e. 15 minute, 12 hour and 24 hour lags). These lags are still
rooted in the data, despite taking into account the physical elements related to the model and the
freezing room. The raw periodogram is mostly white noise, and the cumulated periodogram has
improved, as there are only slight deviations from the confidence interval. However, the model is
not perfect yet, and would be improved if the seasonal lags were removed. The model parameters
for the final model are summarised in table 4.7. The parameters are significant, except for mean
parameter µf.
Figure 4.43: ACF for the final model.
The one-step predictions and corresponding residuals are presented in figure 4.44. All observations
lie within the 95% prediction interval and the residuals simulate mostly white noise, which further
suggests goodness of fit for the final model. In figure 4.45 visualisations of 8-step, 24-step and
48-step predictions are plotted (i.e. 2, 6 and 12 hour predictions). It can be seen how the final
48
Data-driven digital twins for monitoring and control of electricity distribution net
==PAGE:59==
model becomes less confident on longer prediction step horizons. The prediction intervals increase
significantly the more steps are predicted ahead. However, it can be argued that overall, the model
is still able to predict accurately, even for 48-step predictions (12 hours). Indeed, the predictions
lie close to the observed data. Once again, proving that this version of the final model is a good fit
to the data Tf smoothed with a 3 hour bandwidth.
Parameter
Estimate
Std. Error
t-value
p-value
Cf
9.994
170.78
585.02
2.20−16
µf
15.37
58.02
0.26
0.79
Rfa
-13.15
1.11
-11.80
2.20−16
Q
4003.50
6.96
575.52
2.20−16
d
635.44
125.60
5.06
4.80−7
σ1
-3.39
1.94−2
-175.13
2.20−16
e1
-45.10
0.93
-48.49
2.20−16
Table 4.7: ML estimated parameters for the final model stated in equation (4.21). The heat capac-
ities , Cx, have the unit [kWh
◦C ] and the resistances, Rxx, [
◦C
kW ]..
Figure 4.44: One-step predictions for the final model fitted using the 3 hour bandwidth smoothed
Tf signal.
Data-driven digital twins for monitoring and control of electricity distribution net
49
==PAGE:60==
Figure 4.45: N-step predictions for the final model fitted using the 3 hour bandwidth smoothed Tf
signal.
Figure 4.46: Simulation results for models tested during the model selection process.
Data
smoothed using a 3 hour bandwidth.
50
Data-driven digital twins for monitoring and control of electricity distribution net
==PAGE:61==
4.6.2.5
Simulations of models from baseline to final model
Finally, as an additional measure to assess which model is the best performing during model se-
lection, simulations are done and presented in figure 4.46. Despite the models’ goodness of fit and
predictive capabilities, it is clear that the models are not able to make proper simulations on the
data. It is observed, that the models improve as the model selection advances, where Models 3
to 7 and the final model are the best performing. Yet, Model 3 to final model do not follow the
observed data, but merely its trend. It should be noticed, that for all models with Tf smoothed at
a 3 hour bandwidth, the model validation, prediction and residual analyses are significantly better
when comparing with models fitted on Tf smoothed using the 1 hour bandwidth. However, this
does not mean that the simulations are better. On the contrary, the models with data smoothed
using the 1 hour bandwidth perform better during model simulations. It can be argued, that this is
because they retain more dynamics form the physical system, i.e. too much of the information in
the data is removed upon heavier smoothing.
Data-driven digital twins for monitoring and control of electricity distribution net
51
==PAGE:62==
4.7
Results from the Lundsøe cooling house data-driven digital
twins
With the two final models, respectively fitted using temperature signals smoothed and filtered with
1 and 3 hour bandwidths, results produced are presented in the following. Section 4.7.1 compares
the final models to the baseline models by RMSE for varying prediction horizons. Section 4.7.2
presents out-of-sample predictions using the final models, and discusses dynamics in data from
different periods and seasons.
4.7.1
Comparison of models using RMSE
To investigate the models’ predictive capabilities for different prediction horizons, the Root Mean
Squared Error (RMSE) has been calculated for the baseline models and final models on the in-
sample data (6th-19th of April 2022). The RMSE is calculated for k-step predictions as
RMSEk =
√
1
N
∑
(Tf −ˆ
Tfk)2
(4.22)
where k is the predictive step, such that k ∈{1, 2, ..., 50}, and ˆ
Tfk is the k-step predictions for Tf.
N is the number of observations in ˆ
Tfk.
In figure 4.47 the RMSE results are plotted for the final models fitted with respectively 1 and 3
hour bandwidth smoothed temperature signals.
Figure 4.47: RMSE results comparing the baseline model and final model on different prediction
horizons.
4.7.1.1
RMSE results from models using 1 hour bandwidth for smoothing
For the RMSE of the 1 hour bandwidth smoothed data, the following is observed (top plot figure
4.47). The baseline model and final model have equally good predictions up until k = 6 (approx.
1.5 hours). For 6 < k < 26 (hour 1.5-6.5) the baseline model performs better, and from 26 <
52
Data-driven digital twins for monitoring and control of electricity distribution net
==PAGE:63==
k < 44 (hour 6.5-11.0) the final model predictions are the most accurate. Note, that the RSS and
BIC values from the model development process, going from baseline model to final model, both
decrease, respectively the RSS from 11.06 to 10.56, and the BIC from -2595.14 to -2617.91 (cf.
table 4.4). Based on these facts, and the simulation results seen in figure 4.38, it can be suggested
that the final model could be the preferred choice depending on the context. Based on the BIC
results, the final model statistically fits the data better, and the simulations show that the final
model manages to capture the overall trends in the data, in contrast to the baseline model. For the
final model, the RSS is also lower during the one-step predictions, and performs better on a longer
prediction horizon.
It is interesting to notice the variations in the calculated RMSE curves, where the baseline model
and final model respectively peak at step k = 35 and k = 15. In addition, when one model peaks,
the other plateaus, and vice versa. It seems the baseline model best captures the model dynamics
in the early prediction horizons for 5 < k < 25, while the final model best captures the dynamics
for 25 < k < 45. Additionally, both RMSE curves decrease at the same time around k = 24,
i.e. at 6 hours, which is approximately the time difference between change in control temperature
from morning to afternoon. From the ACF plots of the two models, cf. figures 4.31 and 4.35, the
heavy seasonal trends are similar, and it is plausible that these strong seasonal correlations from
the model residuals, are the cause of the seasonal tendencies in the RMSE curves.
4.7.1.2
RMSE results from models using 3 hour bandwidth for smoothing
For the RMSE of the 3 hour bandwidth smoothed data, the following is observed (bottom plot
figure 4.47). Generally the overall RMSE is lower for the 3 hour smoothed data, than the 1 hour
smoothed data. For 1 < k < 15, the predictions of the baseline model and final model are equally
precise, and have the same RMSE. From k = 15 (≈1.5 hour) and onwards the baseline model
outperforms the precision of the predictions from the final model. Nevertheless, the RMSE curves
are more similar in terms of trend and values, compared to RMSE values seen for models using
1h smoothed data. The RSS and BIC values from the model development process, going from
baseline model to final model are both increased, respectively the RSS from 1.40 to 1.52, and BIC
from -5361.79 to -5229.61 (cf. table 4.6). In the simulation results for the baseline model and
final model (cf. figure 4.46), there is a clear difference in the performance of the models, where
the baseline model captures none of the daily fluctuations, and the final model manages to grasp
and simulate the essence of the daily trends in changing room temperature. Comparing once more
with the RMSE results for the 1 hour smoothed data, the general trend of the RMSE curves are less
fluctuating, i.e. less seasonal, but the same trends are retained. For instance, there is a dip around
k = 24. This again could be referred back to the ACF plots, cf. figures 4.39 and 4.43, where the
ACF plot for the baseline model has lags outside the CI around lag 24. Meaning that there is a
strong correlation at lag 24, which causes a more precise RMSE at lag 24. Hence some seasonal
trends in the data are better predicted at this prediction horizon.
Summing up the results for the models using 3 hour bandwidth smoothed data, it is not optimal
that the baseline model outperforms the chosen final model. However, considering all the model
selection measures, i.e. ACF, RSS, etc., the final model was chosen. The expected reason for
the decreasing performance and accuracy of the suggested model seen in the development process
going from baseline to final model, is the increased smoothing on the temperature signal and the
loss of dynamics in the data, as already discussed in the model presentations. In addition, some dy-
namics are only representative of the local evaporator temperatures. This will be further discussed
in section 4.8.
4.7.2
Out-of-sample predictions for final model
The robustness of the final model and its parameters with respect to time invariance is tested using
out-of-sample predictions. The final model stated in equation (4.18), fitted on the 1 hour bandwidth
smoothed data from April, is tested on out-of-sample data from two different seasons. This will
Data-driven digital twins for monitoring and control of electricity distribution net
53
==PAGE:64==
evaluate the final model’s out of sample predictive capabilities. The two new periods are two
weeks in summer (June 2022), and two weeks in autumn (end of September/start October 2022).
The temperature signals from June and September/October are smoothed in the same manner as
done for the April data (cf. section 4.4).
4.7.2.1
Out-of-sample predictions on summer data
To test the final model on a summer period, data from Monday 6th to Sunday 19th of June 2022
has been collected, and the data is plotted in figure 4.48. The parameters are listed in the following
way from top to bottom; mean freezing room temperature Tf, mean cooling room temperature Tc,
energy consumption of compressor Φ, control temperature in the freezing room Tfctr, defrosting
signal for evaporator 5.1 S5.1, and finally ambient temperature Ta.
Figure 4.48: Summer data parameters, June 6th to 19th 2022.
From the top plot displaying the overall freezing room temperature, it is assumed that goods are
delivered around Tuesday 7th, Friday 10th and Monday 13th. Here sudden increase in temperature
is observed, and a subsequent decrease. The cooling room temperature is somewhat generally
higher than in April, which might be a result of the overall higher ambient temperature. The
control and status signal is considered the same as in April, as there are no deviations from the
previously stated patterns. Looping back to the ambient temperature, there is a big difference
54
Data-driven digital twins for monitoring and control of electricity distribution net
==PAGE:65==
when comparing the April and June temperatures. In June, the temperature never reaches below
8.0 ◦C, but goes as high as 20.0 ◦C. This might be the cause of the different pattern seen in the
energy consumption parameter. Only during the first day, Monday 6th of June, are seen two dips
in energy consumption, similar to the trend observed in the April data. From Tuesday 7th and
onwards, which is also when the first goods delivery is noted, the energy consumption fluctuates
around 3.7 kWh, even though the control temperature is changed to -24.0 ◦C. Additionally, daily
increases in the energy consumption are seen from Friday the 10th to Saturday the 18th. This
might be due to a heavy load of goods delivered, or caused by the high ambient temperatures. The
higher the outside temperature, the higher the energy consumption, and this is a direct result of
thermodynamics and the COP of the compressor. Another reason could be that the gas cooler filter
has not been properly cleaned. If the filter is not properly cleaned, the gas is not cooled down to
the expected temperature, and resulting in the compressor to run at a higher capacity, cf. section
4.5.2.
The final model is used to make predictions on the summer data. In figure 4.49 the one-step
predictions and residuals are plotted, and the quality and precision of the prediction estimates are
satisfying.
Figure 4.49: Residuals and one-step predictions of final model used on summer data from June
2022
As expected, the prediction intervals are less tight than for the April data, but the residuals are
relatively small and positive values. Based on these plots, it could be assumed that the model would
be good enough to estimate the future temperature states within a short time frame. Looking at the
predictive capabilities for a longer time frame, the model performs less well. Figure 4.50 shows the
8, 24 and 48-step predictions, i.e. 2, 6 and 12 hours, and here the non-stationarity and time variance
of the model becomes apparent. The 8-step prediction is still somewhat acceptable, and captures
some of the more detailed trends in the data. Whereas the 24-step predictions merely captures the
increasing and decreasing trends. The 48-step predictions can be regarded as the mean value from
the April data, and generally looks like the simulation results of the final model. In addition, the
larger the prediction steps, the more negative the prediction estimates become. Indeed, it is seen
Data-driven digital twins for monitoring and control of electricity distribution net
55
==PAGE:66==
that the observed data is no longer within the 95% prediction interval. This could be due to the
June data having a higher mean ambient temperature, which is not accounted for when the model
is trained on April data.
Figure 4.50: N-step predictions of final model used on summer data.
4.7.2.2
Out-of-sample predictions on fall data
Testing the final model on a fall period, data from Tuesday the 20th of September to Monday 3rd
of October 2022 has been collected, and the parameters are plotted in figure 4.51. Investigating
the plot displaying the overall freezing room temperature (top plot), it is assumed that goods are
delivered around Friday 23rd and Tuesday the 27th of September. There is seen a sudden increase
in temperature, and a subsequent decrease. The temperature in the cooling room is significantly
lower than in April, but probably not due to the ambient temperature, which is not that different in
September compared to April. This might give rise to some misinterpretations of dynamics in the
model. The control and status signal patterns are considered the same as for the April period, as no
changes in tendencies are observed. As already stated, the ambient temperature in September is on
average higher than in the April period. For this reason, it is assumed that the energy consumption
also on average will be higher, or at least not have as big drops during the periods where the control
temperature is increased. However, when inspecting the energy consumption plot, the drops due
to changes in the control temperature are only seen during the first three days up until Friday 23rd
of September when goods are delivered. After this point in time, the load on the cooling capacity
is increased to such an extent, that the compressor energy consumption steadily fluctuates around
3.7 kWh.
56
Data-driven digital twins for monitoring and control of electricity distribution net
==PAGE:67==
Figure 4.51: Input parameters for final model on fall data, September/October 2022.
The one-step and n-step predictions of the final model applied on out-of-sample fall data are plotted
in figure 4.52 and 4.53. The tendencies observed, and the general fit of the predictions of the results,
are similar to those seen for the model fitted on June data (section 4.7.2.1). The first estimate is
inaccurate, due to different initial conditions, the one-step predictions are satisfactory and positive,
and the larger the prediction horizon, the more the prediction estimates approach a mean value, cf.
figure 4.53. In the final plot for the 12 hour predictions, it becomes clear that the model loses sight
of the out of sample data, and predicts a mean based on the Tf signal from the April data the model
was fitted on, and the dynamics upon goods deliveries are disregarded.
4.7.2.3
Overall assessment of predictive capabilities on out-off-sample data
Overall, the one-step predictions on both summer and fall data are good. With few prediction steps,
the model is able to make precise estimations of future observations in the system using unseen
data. Nevertheless, the model is not time invariant, and under performs such that the model loses
sense of the actual system dynamics, as the dynamics changes with seasons. The model merely
predicts according to the fitted overall tendencies, i.e. daily fluctuations around a mean value. The
prediction intervals disregard the inaccuracies between observations and predictions, and still have
a relatively tight fit around the predictions.
Data-driven digital twins for monitoring and control of electricity distribution net
57
==PAGE:68==
Comparing the data from April, June and September/October, the major differences observed in
the input parameters are in the ambient temperature and energy consumption. It is difficult to say
whether the changed trends in the energy consumption is due to increased ambient temperature
(i.e. lower COP) or a heavier load on the evaporators due to large deliveries of goods.
Figure 4.52: Residuals and one-step predictions of final model used on fall data.
Figure 4.53: N-step predictions of final model used on fall data.
58
Data-driven digital twins for monitoring and control of electricity distribution net
==PAGE:69==
4.8
Discussion
During the process of modelling an accurate and data-driven digital twin of the Lundsøe cooling
house, assumptions have been made and limitations met, that all should be discussed for further
understanding of the circumstances.
Looking back at the initial scope and aim of the data-driven digital twin for temperature state
predictions, the criteria for success will be discussed and re-evaluated in regards to model perfor-
mance, and how different performance indicators relate and support the decisions made through-
out the model development process. As presented in section 1.3, the purpose of formulating a
mathematical data-driven digital twin of the physical cooling house, is to establish a model that
understands and can replicate the physical dynamics of the system. In turn, this could be used as an
input to a control optimisation algorithm, which can control the overall temperature in the freezing
room, with the purpose of saving energy and money, i.e. optimisation is penalised based on energy
prices. Therefore, it could be used to plan and control energy consumption during more green and
cheaper periods.
4.8.1
Complications regarding the available data
One major challenge discovered late in the modelling process was the applicability of the temper-
ature measurements representing the overall room temperature in the freezing room. While it was
known that the temperature measuring sensors were placed close to the evaporators, the authors
were late in the process made aware, that the temperature measurements were only representative
in a surrounding radius of 1.0 - 1.5 meters of the evaporators. This is insufficient to model the ac-
tual temperature dynamics of the freezing room, having a physical size of approx. 70x40 meters,
and hereby compromises the assumptions made upon modelling the data-driven digital twins.
As the suggested model structures of the grey-box models assume dynamics of an output signal
describing the overall freezing room temperature, it has not been possible to estimate physical inter-
pretable parameters using ML, as the SDEs were formulated to capture information and dynamics
from data, which are not present. It is also the reason why expanding the models and increasing
their complexity did not result in improved model performance, or a decrease in seasonality in the
ACF plots and residual frequencies, i.e. the periodograms.
To adjust for this shortcoming, new sensors have to be installed in the freezing room, e.g. close
to the floor and ceiling, and in-between goods. After which correct temperature measurements are
collected, and a new final model should be found.
When these new and more correct temperature signals are acquired, an improved and extended
digital twin model should be developed. This enhanced digital-twin should presumably still use the
currently applied temperature signals affected by the evaporator noise/control dynamics, but now
rather as an input parameter, and not output, to optimally capture the true temperature dynamics of
the freezing room. In addition, it is assumed that the control signal and operational status, Tfctr and
Si.j, should also be used as input parameters for the improved models to support the understanding
of the evaporator dynamics.
4.8.2
Model formulations and related constraints
The ideal model simulates and includes all dynamics and parameters of the true physical system,
i.e. the building itself (wall, floors, etc.), the physical layout of the rooms, the exact thermal
contributions (in terms of energy/heat and/or cooling) from the evaporators and the compressor,
and how the external parameters play a role and affect the system, e.g. ambient temperature, size
and timing of goods deliveries, the types of goods, and its temperature when delivered to Lundsøe,
etc. Nevertheless, incorporating all of the details listed above in the model, increases the model
complexity to such an extent, that fitting and optimising the model becomes increasingly time
consuming and complex. Perhaps, this level of detail will even overshoot the goal, when keeping
Data-driven digital twins for monitoring and control of electricity distribution net
59
==PAGE:70==
in mind the scope of the model. The model should be able to predict the temperature in the freezing
room some hours ahead, with reference to the current state of the system. Therefore, based on the
promising results and predictive capabilities early on in the modelling phase, it was not deemed
necessary to increase complexity of the model considerably. In hindsight, it was also not feasible
to increase the physical model complexity in the SDEs, when the temperature measurements were
not representative of the true freezing room dynamics.
As partly discussed in the above, the models are all developed and expanded such that they comply
with physical features and dynamics of the cooling house, which can be explained by thermody-
namics and electrical components in physical units. This makes it possible to estimate, using ML,
physically meaningful parameters which can be interpreted in relation to what is expected as true
physical parameters of the system. Vice versa, it also allows to adjust bounds of the parameters
during the ML optimisation, and in that way, force the model to comply with actual physical con-
straints. This has been used in the modelling process. Initially, the bounds for all parameters were
large, and spanned from negative to positive values, in order to find the overarching optimal solu-
tion, using the optimisation algorithm in CTSM-R. This resulted in models where some parameters,
among others Q, were estimated to be very close to 0.0, essentially truncating the importance and
influence of the input signal S5.1. By limiting the bounds to physically meaningful sets, for ex-
ample forcing Q > 1500, the performance of the model increased considerably. These physically
meaningful bounds were established according to the assumed freezing room dynamics, which in
the end were not feasible considering the wrong input temperature data. Even though the model
performance increased after altering the Q bounds, it is hard to say if this is the actual reason for
the increased performance. The Q estimate could potentially be a local minimum in the data, and
not the actual true physical influence of Q.
To overcome the problem of not having the true room temperature measurements, and the related
fact that increasing model complexity would not necessarily improve model performance, it was
decided to clean and prepare the available temperature data, specifically deficiencies and noise in
the data were attempted to be reduced. It is well known, that model performance and accuracy is
limited by the quality of the input data, and this has been one of the major limitations in the pro-
cess, as the temperature measurements from the evaporators are heavily affected by the defrosting
routines. In the data, the noise is seen as sudden spikes (i.e. temperature increases), and is con-
sidered a disturbance of the true local room temperatures. In section 4.4 on data preparation, the
applied kernel smoothing method for cleaning the temperature signal, Tf, is covered, along with
the approach on how to reduce the nine evaporator temperature measurements to only one, and the
result of smoothing the signals with respectively 1 and 3 hour band widths. The two variations of
the smoothed data results in two different final models, presented in sections 4.6.1.3 and 4.6.2.4.
The reason for presenting both modelling processes of the two smoothed temperature variations, is
to underline and emphasise how much of a difference it makes when adjustments are made to the
output parameter. In this case, the additional smoothing using a 3 hour bandwidth for the kernel,
clearly removes correlation and inter-dependencies between the output and input parameters, e.g.
between the output, Tf, and the energy consumption Φ, which became an insignificant parameter
(cf. section 4.6.2.4). In the end, the binary control signal, Tfon/off, was enough to describe the
small remaining fluctuations in the freezing room temperature, and the energy consumption was
disregarded. The pros and cons between the two presented final models can be argued back and
forth, and in the end it comes down to the applicability of the model, and under what circumstances
and criteria the model should perform. For instance, is it speed over model complexity which is
the indicator. Or, a detailed state prediction of every corner in the freezing room, contra an overall
estimation of the room temperature, require two different models. Every decision comes with a set
of limitations, but also opens up for new possibilities.
60
Data-driven digital twins for monitoring and control of electricity distribution net
==PAGE:71==
Another conclusion that can be drawn when comparing the results from the two final models is, that
smoothing the output signal extensively can potentially remove too much of the dynamics in the
output described by the input signals. This is seen for the control temperature, energy consumption,
ambient temperature, etc., where their influence is scaled down. As a consequence, the simulations
using the model underperforms considerably, as the above listed input parameters are not able to
replicate the fluctuating dynamics of the system, even though the n-step predictions and residual
analysis indicate that the model fit the data well. Despite the good predictive capabilities of the
model, the simulation results are insufficient. This suggests, that the models do not understand the
actual physical dynamics of the system based on the parameters. However, because of the large
amount of data and its stochastisity, the models describe the data through the SDE’s hidden states,
and hence manage to make accurate predictions nevertheless.
Considering the limitations of the digital twins as a result of faulty output temperature signal, digi-
tal twins supporting and modelling the system dynamics from another angle could be investigated.
Here, specifically models modelling the energy consumption are suggested. It is assumed, that
the current available data could support good performing models using the local evaporator tem-
perature signals as input for predicting compressor energy consumption. It should nevertheless be
noted, that these suggested models could not be used for control of the temperature in the freezing
room (which is one of the thesis objectives), as energy consumption is dependent on both freez-
ing room and ambient temperature. These models are assumed to better capture and describe the
dynamics present in the available data, but would not meet the model performance objectives.
4.8.3
Evaluation of model results
In regards to the model selection process for both final models, it is concluded that little improve-
ment is seen in the RSS and BIC values going from the baseline models to the final models.
The model fitted for the 1 hour bandwidth smoothed Tf (sec. 4.6.1) improves RSS and BIC slightly
in the model development process. The eventual decision, that the final model should be Model 4,
was based partly on the low BIC values and partly on the model’s simulation performance. Model
5 with three states has similar simulation results as the final model, meaning that the extra hidden
state does not contribute with additional accuracy considering the increased model complexity.
Therefore, the less complex model (Model 4) with two states, is chosen as final model, even though
the RSS is 0.01 larger than for Model 5.
The model selection process presented in section 4.6.2 for the 3 hour bandwidth smoothed Tf,
has the best model fit for the baseline model, based on the BIC which is -5361.79 and the RSS
which is 1.40. Nevertheless, the baseline model is continuously expanded, while considering the
assumptions of the physical system and the dynamics within the data and the parameters. The
model is expanded with up to four states (three hidden states), in order to investigate how much
of the dynamics in the data can be explained by hidden states and assumed true physical relations.
Due to the heavier smoothing of the data, there is no increase in model performance after Model 3.
Neither the BIC, RSS or simulations of the models improve, which indicates that the final model
should not have four states describing the output signal. Backwards selection is done from Model
4, until the best performing model is found. This is done by finding the best RSS and BIC, while
still showing satisfactory simulations results. The final model chosen is stated in equation (4.42).
Looking into the predictive capabilities of the models, both final models perform well on the April
data. One-step predictions are correctly estimating the observed data, as well as the 8-step predic-
tions (figures 4.37 and 4.44). Prediction steps larger than 24 (i.e. 6 hours) can still be considered
sufficient for estimating the overall temperature state of the future system. For longer prediction
horizons, predictions are not as precise, but merely fluctuate around a mean value while staying
within the CI (cf. figures 4.37 and 4.45).
Data-driven digital twins for monitoring and control of electricity distribution net
61
==PAGE:72==
These above stated observations are justified by the RMSE results in figure 4.47. Between the
models with the 1 hour and 3 hour bandwidth smoothed data, it can be seen that the RMSE values
become smaller upon heavier smoothing, for both the baseline models and the final models. The
models are more accurate with respect to the more smoothed data, which is an expected result after
removing and smoothing away some of the temperature dynamics. By increased smoothing, the
noise is decreased, and the model predictions are more precise. Comparing the baseline models
to their respective final models, it can be noticed that the seasonal trends in the RMSE curves are
reduced. Indeed, both baseline models have errors that vary seasonally with increasing prediction
steps, while for the final models, the RMSE curves appear less seasonal. As expected, including
the control temperature in the model formulations could decrease daily seasonal errors in the model
predictions. In addition, it can be noticed, that when smoothing the data with a 1 hour bandwidth,
the RMSE values increase faster for small prediction steps, i.e. steps k < 10, and less for 10 ≤k.
While for the models with data smoothed by 3 hour bandwidth, the RMSE increase steadily as the
prediction steps become larger. Hence, the RMSE behaviors are different with the varying smooth-
ings. Generally, the RMSE values are not improved by expanding upon the baseline models. As
mentioned previously, the model structure expansions have been done by including more physical
features from the freezing room, which do not apply to the actual temperature dynamics of the
evaporator measurements used as output for the models. Therefore, due to the limited and partly
wrong data sources, the models are not improving on their RMSE, comparing baseline models and
final models.
In order to improve the models, and the performance of the predictions and model simulations,
more data supporting dynamics of parameters in the system is needed, in addition to the correct
temperature measurements for the freezing room output temperature. A parameter that is known
to be of great influence, is the schedule for goods deliveries, which includes product type, delivery
size and product temperature (which is known to be as high as 4.0 ◦C 3). The schedule for goods
deliveries is an external parameter that affects the system dynamics and temperature state signifi-
cantly. This effect can last for several days, until the stored goods reach freezing room temperature.
Also, the COP for the compressor is a crucial parameter, as it describes the energy efficiency of the
compressor based on ambient temperature. If COP values were available for each observation at
time t, it would be possible to more accurately describe the compressor dynamics and the cooling
house energy consumption. In the end, the compressor’s efficiency is the driver of the total energy
consumption, and hence directly translatable into operational cost. Lastly, it would be beneficial
to know the individual energy consumption by evaporator, rather than the combined consumption
for all eleven evaporators, i.e. the single compressor measurements. This would enable better
estimations of the local room temperature, where the effect of defrosting cycles and placement of
goods would be clearly identifiable from the individual energy consumption signals.
In a dynamical system like the Lundsøe cooling house, there are influencing parameters that are
known to be time varying, e.g. the COP, ambient temperature and hence energy consumption.
Therefore, it needs to be considered how often the model parameters need to be re-estimated, in
order to ensure accurate temperature state estimates. In section 4.7.2, out-of-sample predictions
were carried out in order to test the predictive capabilities of the models on other periods/seasons,
and hereby assess the robustness of model with respect to the time variance of the estimated pa-
rameters. For the out-of-sample tests, the one-step predictions were accurate, while considerably
worse for prediction steps for k ≤8. This indicates, that the fitted models and estimated model
parameters can be used for short term predictions on data from other seasonal periods. If longer
term predictions are needed, the model parameter estimates should be re-estimated, as the model
parameters are clearly time varying. An estimation of the optimal time frame of re-estimation of
the model is a task during future work.
3Cf. interview with Søren Søe-Larsen from Lundsøe, appendix A.1.1.4.
62
Data-driven digital twins for monitoring and control of electricity distribution net
==PAGE:73==
4.8.4
Next steps and suggestions for improvements
Moving on from discussing the presented results, some improvements could be investigated. Po-
tential topics for further investigations and reconsideration are presented in the following:
• Correct temperature measurements from the freezing room should be collected. As stated
earlier, sensors would have to be installed, which can measure the actual temperature dy-
namics in the freezing room. When the new temperature signals are acquired, it would not
be necessary to smooth the data using the kernel smoothing method presented in section
4.4.1. The problem of the unwanted auto-correlation would most likely also be avoided.
• Testing models on data using different time resolutions, e.g. observations sampled every 30
or 60 minutes. Doing this, it would be possible to indirectly smooth the data signals, and
reduce measurement noise in the data. The data resolution should in the end be determined
based on: 1) how precise in its predictions the model needs to be, 2) in terms of how often
predictions should be made, and 3) for how many prediction steps into the future.
• The current models are trained on data for 14 days. In further studies of the models, it would
be interesting to test model performance and time variance on trained data for longer time pe-
riods, e.g. 21 or 28 days. If the period for the extended training data is chosen correctly, the
model would be exposed to more scenarios of system dynamics, making the model more ro-
bust overall. Nevertheless, training the model on longer time periods would increase training
time, and can be negatively influenced by time variance of the model parameters (cf. sec-
tion 4.7.2). It would potentially be more optimal to simply re-estimate the model parameters
more often, or implement adaptive/recursive parameter estimation, and thereby avoid time
variance problems.
• A more extensive data exploration could be done, using data from a longer period (e.g. 1
year). This would enable identifying trends in the data, and clarifying some of the raised
questions related to the tendencies seen in figure 4.11 of the boxplot of evaporator temper-
atures plotted by day. Ideally models would, through the hidden states, identify seasonal
effects in the data caused by patterns in goods deliveries and arrival temperatures. In this
way, it would potentially not be necessary to have detailed information/data on size, time
and temperature of goods delivered to the cooling house.
• As the Lundsøe cooling house has shown interest in reducing their operational costs related
to cooling through smarter energy consumption, see section 4.2.5, it should be considered
whether the penalty of the models should be based on spot price or tariffs. Tariff prices also
vary throughout the day, and are depend on the energy provider, see e.g. Konstant tariffs [29].
Tariffs cover the operational cost related to transportation of energy, i.e. it can be considered
as a maintenance fee. Currently, the consumption at Lundsøe is decreased according to the
spot prices. However, for future improvements, tariffs could be considered as an alternative
(or additional) penalty parameter for energy cost, as there would also be costs to cut here.
• Further, separate tests for analysing how often the model and its parameters should be re-
estimated could be investigated. This is mostly applicable when moving onto the preparatory
phase before implementing the model for control on a continuous time scale.
• Acquiring additional external parameters in order to describe more of the temperature dy-
namics. For instance, as already stated the energy consumption is strongly influenced by
the arrival of goods. Therefore, it would be beneficial to investigate models with a higher
knowledge of arrival of goods, their temperature, placement in the freezing room, and size
of deliveries. In addition, it would be interesting to look into, if heat from staff and machines
(small trucks) would influence the room temperature.
Data-driven digital twins for monitoring and control of electricity distribution net
63
==PAGE:74==
• More advanced models should be analysed, using the additional external parameters. Both
the non-linearity of parameters, and splines could be looked into, as well as expanding the
models to estimate the temperature flow through the room. With the correct temperature
data, and additional parameters, it is expected that the models would yield different results
than seen in this thesis.
Summarising the main findings of the discussion, it is highlighted, that acquiring additional true
room temperature measurements are essential to moving forward and obtaining satisfactory mod-
els, which can be used in the desired application for controlling the Lundsøe freezing room tem-
perature.
64
Data-driven digital twins for monitoring and control of electricity distribution net
==PAGE:75==
5
Energy flexibility for residential area
In the following chapter, an introduction to the Flexibility Function and its context is initially
introduced, following a presentation of Nørre Bjert, the residential area outside of Kolding, where
data from a cluster of buildings will be used for modelling energy flexibility. The next section
presents the available data, thereafter a section on theory and methodology. Then a section on
preparation of parameters, followed by a section presenting the main results including a suggested
extension to the Flexibility Function. Lastly a section discussing and reflecting on results.
5.1
Introduction
In order to address the increasing demand and integration of renewable resources in the grid, elec-
tricity providers have to seek new ways to respond to and control the energy production. For this,
state-of-the-art solutions have been researched, among which there is the Flexibility Function,
which models and presents the flexibility potential in a given energy system. See papers [30] [1]
for in depth research on the linear and non-linear Flexibility Function models.
Assuming that the end-consumer has a dynamic response to some chosen penalty, for example
smart buildings that respond to energy prices, the Flexibility Function will map and model the
flexibility potential in one or several buildings. The result can be used as an indicator for a DSO
on how their end-users respond to energy prices. More explicitly, the model can not be used as
a means to control consumption, but rather functions as an indicator on how much consumption
can be reduced if the demand side is dynamic in response to price penalty. The model takes into
account the physical behavior of the system, but notice that the Flexibility Function is not time
invariant.
Figure 5.1: Information flow for using the Flexibility Function to design price signals according
to energy bought on the market [1].
In order to understand the context of the Flexibility Function, when considering the entire ecosys-
tem including the energy market, the Aggregator, and the consumers, a visualisation borrowed
from [1] is presented in figure 5.1. The Aggregator coordinates and operates the production and
consumption of its distributed energy resources (DERs) either directly or indirectly e.g. by broad-
casting a real time price. The main idea for incorporating the Flexibility Function into this set-up,
is to move from supply that follows demand, towards demand that follows supply, and hence im-
plement a Demand Response (DR) mechanism [6]. If DR is implemented in a system, it can take
advantage of the consumers’ flexibility by shifting or changing their consumption. The Aggregator
can be seen as a coordinating unit between its different subsystems [6], and the flexibility provided
by the Aggregators’ portfolio should support the transmission system operators’ needs, and inte-
grate a large share of renewable energy. The Aggregator is able to handle energy fluctuations and
Data-driven digital twins for monitoring and control of electricity distribution net
65
==PAGE:76==
uncertainty coming from stochastic renewable generation sources (e.g. wind and solar). Having
an idea on how the near future looks in terms of amount of energy from renewable sources and
demand, the Aggregator places orders at the energy market. Provided that a Flexibility Function
is estimated for the Aggregator’s service area, the price signal (incentive signal) for the bought
energy is estimated. With the energy flexible price, the consumers are expected to react according
to available energy supply specified by the Aggregator. Hence the demand follows the supply.
As visualised in the illustration, information on demand is fed back into the Flexibility Function,
continuously updating it, and adjusting the estimated flexibility according to observed tendencies
of the end-consumers.
5.1.1
Energy flexibility in clusters of buildings and on district scale
As a part of the Annex 82 project [3], the paper Ten questions concerning energy flexibility in
buildings [31] was written to shed light on and answer ten questions covering technological, so-
cial, commercial, and regulatory aspects to enable the utilisation of energy flexibility in buildings
in practice. The most relevant and critical results related to the Flexibility Function, its implemen-
tation, and impact, are briefly covered in the following.
Due to the inflexibility of an energy system relying on weather dependent energy sources, the po-
tential flexibility should be estimated from a decentralised perspective considering both demand-
and supply-side, including a plethora of residential and commercial buildings. As of now, energy
flexibility in buildings is largely an unexploited resource. The International Energy Agency (IEA)
defines energy flexibility as ”the ability for a building to manage its demand and generation ac-
cording to local climate conditions, user needs, and grid requirements” [31]. Therefore, energy
flexibility in buildings must be harnessed across a cluster of buildings or on a district scale in order
to provide the Aggregator with sufficient impact on the operation of the energy grids. The building
sector accounts for 40% of the primary energy consumption in the EU and U.S., so cutting off only
a few percentages of energy consumption in buildings will result in large savings in the long run.
Energy flexibility harnessed from buildings is considered a potentially cost-effective solution to
the DR problem, and does not require significant capital investments. The thermal infrastructure
within buildings is an already existing important asset for enabling flexibility, and inter-building
cooperative flexibility measures provide a greater degree of flexibility compared to a centralised
framework. In order to estimate the amount of potential flexible energy, it is necessary to obtain a
baseline scenario for the energy consumption. The flexibility can then be quantified by the impact
on different performance metrics, such as peak to average ratio, or electricity costs. When finding
the baseline scenario, the users’ comfort needs (e.g. indoor temperature) must be included in the
simulation or measurements of the baseline profile, in order to get a true estimate of the potential
flexibility, once effects and results are gathered.
Unlocking the energy flexibility must be done through connecting flexibility providers (e.g. clus-
ters of houses, factories, etc.) to a utility operator or Aggregator that can alter energy demand.
Multiple control architectures for DR programs have been investigated, and it comes down to
three different types of set-ups, centralised, decentralised or distributed systems, depending on
who makes the decisions, the Aggregator or the end-user. The centralised option will result in
close to optimal performance, as all knowledge is gathered in one place and actions are based on
complete facts. This comes with the price of computational problems. The decentralised option is
localised closer to the end-users, and the management strategy is decided in the local areas, easing
the computational load on such a solution. The presented Flexibility Function in this thesis should
eventually be a tool for the DSO Trefor to estimate local DR dynamics, enabling decentralised
energy supply decision making.
66
Data-driven digital twins for monitoring and control of electricity distribution net
==PAGE:77==
5.2
Case presentation: residential area of Nørre Bjert
For this thesis, the FED collaborator and DSO, Trefor, has provided energy consumption data of
households from an area with 164 houses in Nørre Bjert, a small town close to Kolding in Jylland.
All houses are connected to the low voltage (LV) grid managed by Trefor. The LV grid, and hence
its connected houses, is divided into five clusters which have been labeled by colour according to
the houses nearest to a feeder, i.e. the radial which they are connected to, see figure 5.2. In table
5.1 it is specified how many houses are connected to each radial (i.e. the size of the five defined
clusters).
As for most towns, houses in Nørre Bjert have been built during different periods in time. Therefore
the houses may have different heat capacities (as a result of differences in material and insolation
type) as well as different heating methods. Table 5.1 shows, that houses connected to radials
of color Red, Green, and Brown are respectively from the decades 2000’s and 2010’s, whereas
the Blue and Pink radials include houses from multiple decades. Additionally, Trefor has been
able to further elaborate on which specific houses are known to have electric vehicles (EV) and
photovoltaic panels (PV), see table in later section 5.3.
Radial
No. houses
Construction year
Heating method
Red
32
00’s
District heating
Green
57
00’s
District heating
Blue
29
80-90’s
Electrical & district heating
Brown
22
10’s
Heat pumps
Pink
24
90-10’s
District heating
Table 5.1: Detailed description of houses connected to the LV grid in Nørre Bjert. Clustering of
houses based on color coding of radials with reference to illustration in figure 5.2.
Figure 5.2: Illustration of color labeled radials in the LV grid of Nørre Bjert. Illustration is bor-
rowed from [32], and the black boxes should be disregarded in this context.
Data-driven digital twins for monitoring and control of electricity distribution net
67
==PAGE:78==
5.2.1
Energy consumption data from Nørre Bjert and reservations towards it
The consumption data from Nørre Bjert is available for the entire year of 2022, and the months
August, September, and October have been chosen for further investigation due to a set of reasons.
In August the energy prices were at their highest while the ambient temperature was high as well.
In September the prices were declining but still high, and the ambient temperature dropped con-
siderably. For October, the prices were almost back to regular levels, and the ambient temperature
did not drop further. Hence, the three selected months vary on the parameters price and ambient
temperature, which influence the energy flexibility considerably, see figure 5.6.
Before deep diving into modelling flexibility using the Flexibility Function on the Nr. Bjert data,
some essential disclaimers have to be addressed. During the energy crisis in 2022, research shows
that 90% of the Danish people have become more aware of their energy consumption, and 62%
intend to turn down space heating to lower levels compared to previous years (data collected on
the 20th and 21st of September 2022) [33].
It was really during August that people started to understand how high the energy prices were, and
how much they varied throughout the day. The topic was all over the media, and it was an everyday
conversational topic. Therefore, it is expected that going from August to September, there will be a
difference in how and when people consume energy, as the behavioural differences are expected to
manifest by the start of September. Additionally, it is worth emphasising, that going from a summer
month (August) to an early winter month (October) there will naturally be differences within the
data originating from space heating of houses. The consumption is expected to increase as the
heating gradually is turned on. Hence, it is not completely unambiguous what drives the expected
time dependent changes in the end-user consumption and behaviours, i.e. low/high energy prices
and low/high ambient temperatures.
Finally, it is important to keep in mind, that the data collected by Trefor is real life data in the
sense, that there has been no incentives or campaigns to make the end-users act energy flexible.
Therefore, it is not guaranteed that any energy flexibility will be observed in the data. Hence, the
analysis and conclusions of the results must be done with a relatively conservative mindset.
68
Data-driven digital twins for monitoring and control of electricity distribution net
==PAGE:79==
5.3
Presentation of available data
The data which will be modelled using the Flexibility Function is summarised in table 5.2. The
variables Eh, P and Ta will respectively be further elaborated on in 5.3.1, 5.3.2 and 5.3.3.
Name
Description
Unit
Eh
Electrical consumption of houses in Nørre Bjert
kWh
P
Energy spot prices from Nord Pool
DKK/MWh
Ta
Ambient temperature
◦C
Table 5.2: Parameters of available data.
5.3.1
Elaboration on the energy consumption variable
In table 5.1 a detailed summary of the house clusters in Nr. Bjert was presented. The energy
consumption data collected from the houses is available on an 1 hour time resolution measured in
kWh. Each house has a unique ID1 and a label indicating what color radial/cluster it belongs to, in
what decade it was built, and if the house either has EV, PV, both or none. EV/PV and contruction
year related information is summarised in table 5.3. In figure 5.3, 5.4 and 5.5 the cumulated energy
consumption observed in August 2022 is plotted for houses respectively grouped by radial color,
construction year, and lastly houses with EV or PV. In appendix A.3.1 similar figures for the same
groupings of houses with energy consumption data from September and October 2022 are plotted.
Label
No. houses
1980s
12
1990s
26
2000s
97
2010s
29
EV
7
PV
18
EV & PV
2
Table 5.3: Detailed description of houses connected to the LV DSO grid in Nørre Bjert.
To elaborate further on the presented plots, in figure 5.3 the total energy consumption in the first
week of August 2022 for each colored radial is plotted together in the top left plot, and then plotted
separately in the remaining five plots. All plots are labeled by radial color with reference to table 5.1
(note that houses with EV and PV are included in the displayed data). The Blue, Pink and Red radial
have more or less the same pattern and level of consumption. The Brown radial clearly represents
most of the houses with PVs due to the negative consumption values. The Green radial has almost
twice as many connected houses compared to the other radials, and therefore the accumulated
consumption is generally higher.
Figure 5.4 shows the energy consumption for the second clustering of houses, where the decades
in which the houses have been built have been used for grouping the houses. Table 5.3 presents
the number of houses built in each decade, and hence the number of contributing end-consumers
to the accumulated energy consumption in each cluster. Houses from the 1980’s and 1990’s are
smaller clusters with fewer houses and therefore the accumulated consumption is lower. Houses
from the 2000’s is the biggest group, and these houses mainly have district heating. Houses in the
2010’s group seem to be the ones having almost all the PVs, which aligns with them being the
1Not disclosed due to Danish GDPR rules.
Data-driven digital twins for monitoring and control of electricity distribution net
69
==PAGE:80==
more modern houses. The energy consumption is positive during the night, and negative during
the day, when there is sunlight and excess of energy. Excess energy which is sold and sent back
into the grid.
The energy consumption from the 7 houses having EVs and 18 houses with PVs is plotted in figure
5.5. The consumption profile for houses with EVs clearly shows that there are consumption spikes
at the end of the day, when people plug-in/charge their vehicles. This happens roughly at the same
time everyday, and hereby pulls a heavier load on the feeder during this period. The consumption
profile for houses with PVs present a diurnal consumption profile where the values are negative
during the day and positive at night. It follows, that by the amount solar irradiance, consumption
is reduced. The consumption profile is alike that of the houses from the 2010’s, seen previously in
bottom right plot in figure 5.4.
Figure 5.3: Total energy consumption in first week of August 2022 for each colored radial in Nr.
Bjert.
70
Data-driven digital twins for monitoring and control of electricity distribution net
==PAGE:81==
Figure 5.4: Total energy consumption in first week of August 2022 for houses clustered by con-
struction decade in Nr. Bjert.
Figure 5.5: Total energy consumption in first week of August 2022 for houses in Nr. Bjert with
respectively EVs and PVs.
Data-driven digital twins for monitoring and control of electricity distribution net
71
==PAGE:82==
5.3.2
Elaboration on the spot price variable
The spot price data signal is on an 1 hour time resolution, i.e. a fixed price for energy sold/bought
for each hour in the day, and with a price unit of DKK/MWh2. The energy prices for the period
August to October 2022 is plotted in figure 5.6. Due to the energy crisis following the war in
Ukraine, the energy prices topped in end of August 2022, and went down to regular levels (as seen
before the crisis) at the end of October 2022.
5.3.3
Elaboration on the ambient temperature variable
Weather data is collected by DMI and provided through the Danish Technological Institute. The
ambient temperature is measured at the DMI weather station in Aarhus Syd, approx. 75 km north
of Nr. Bjert. It is the same ambient temperature data as used for the Lundsøe cooling house
data-driven digital twin. The data will not directly be incorporated into the Flexibility Function,
but merely support potential explanation (together with energy prices) for consumer behaviour.
Therefore, a 75 km distance is not considered too critical for this case. It is expected that people
will use less energy for heating when the ambient temperature is high. The bottom plot in figure
5.6 shows the ambient temperature for the period August to October 2022, and hits the warmest
point in middle August around 25.0 C◦and dips to -1.0 C◦around the end of October.
Figure 5.6: Energy prices and ambient temperature for the period August to October 2022.
5.3.4
Exploration of the presented data
Three different months have been selected for investigating the end-consumer energy flexibility.
Due to the energy crisis, the price signals for these three months are quite different. During the late
summer of 2022, the prices were at their highest, and gradually lowered to more normal ranges dur-
ing the fall (as seen before the crisis). In figures 5.7 and 5.8 the spot prices for August, September
2Energy prices are accessed through Nord Pool [34]. Nord Pool is Europe’s leading power market for energy trading
across 16 European countries, including the Nordics, the Baltic regions, the UK, Central Western Europe and Poland.
The prices are Day-ahead prices from Nord Pool’s implicit auction market. The Day-Ahead Energy Market is a financial
market where market participants purchase and sell energy at financially binding day-ahead prices for the following
day. Orders are matched to maximise social welfare while taking network constraints provided by transmission system
operators into consideration.
72
Data-driven digital twins for monitoring and control of electricity distribution net
==PAGE:83==
and October 2022 are plotted in boxplots, first grouped by weekday and then by hour in the day.
From the trends observed in the prices plotted per weekday, it is evident that, in general, prices
are lower during weekends, and that prices top mid week around Wednesday/Thursday. The price
is relatively high in August and September, and levels out in October with prices that do not vary
much between weekdays. Looking at the hourly trends, overall it is evident that during morning
hours 6:00-9:00, and again in the night from 17:00-20:00, there is an increase in energy price. Ad-
ditionally, it can be concluded from the boxplots, that in August, apart from being higher, the prices
were more volatile with a wider span. In September the average price was more stable, while still
being high, and the prices in the morning and night were considerably higher compared to the rest
of the day. In October the prices did further stabilise around a mean value, with less increase in
prices during peak hours.
Figure 5.7: Spot prices based on weekday trends for August, September and October 2022.
Figure 5.8: Spot prices based on hourly trends for August, September and October 2022.
To understand how energy prices are set in relation to consumer behaviour, the prices and energy
consumption, grouped by radial color, are plotted together in figure 5.9. When the energy con-
sumption at the end-consumer is highest during the morning and night, the energy prices are high.
During the day, when people are off to work, the energy prices generally decrease.
Data-driven digital twins for monitoring and control of electricity distribution net
73
==PAGE:84==
Figure 5.9: The energy consumption for radials labeled by color plotted together with energy prices.
Data form Monday 1st to Sunday 7th of August 2022 with data on an hourly granularity.
The energy consumption has similarly been analysed using boxplots grouped by weekday and
hour in the day, see respectively figures 5.10 and 5.11 for data from houses in the Red radial. Only
energy consumption from the Red radial will be presented to avoid repetitiveness, as the trends
are alike for all radials. Between weekdays, the consumption behavior is similar and does not
vary a lot, where during the weekends the consumption increases slightly. There is an increase in
overall consumption over the three months, where the median is seen to increase a little, as it is
assumed that people turn on space heating. Looking at the energy consumption on an hourly level
in figure 5.11 ,there is a clear peak during the last hours of the day between 17:00-20:00, and a
dip in the middle of the day at 10:00-14:00. The three months’ hourly profiles differ especially
in their behaviours during the first 8 hours of the day, where the consumption in the morning
increases, possibly due to the increasing need for light during dark morning hours, which become
an increasing problem in fall. It should be noted that the morning and afternoon consumption peaks
occur at the same time as the spot price peaks.
Figure 5.10: Red radial daily trends in energy consumption for August, September and October
2022.
74
Data-driven digital twins for monitoring and control of electricity distribution net
==PAGE:85==
Figure 5.11: Red radial hourly trends in energy consumption for August, September and October
2022.
Data-driven digital twins for monitoring and control of electricity distribution net
75
==PAGE:86==
5.3.5
Re-grouping and filtering of consumption data
It has been decided to remove all houses which have either PV or EV (or both) from the data. In
order to produce unambiguous results to draw conclusions from, it is crucial to eliminate noise
within the data. Houses having EVs or PVs have different consumption profiles when comparing
with houses that do not. Houses having PVs sell energy to the grid in the middle of the day, and
houses with EVs mostly charge their vehicles in the night inflicting a high load on the grid. After
removing the houses with EVs and/or PVs, an updated description of the number of houses in each
radial cluster is presented in table 5.4.
Label
No. houses retained
No. houses removed
Red
29
3
Blue
25
4
Green
55
2
Pink
20
4
Brown
8
14
Table 5.4: Detailed description of houses connected to the LV grid in Nørre Bjert, without EV
and/or PV.
For the updated radial clustering of houses with EVs or PVs, summary statistics have been cal-
culated, see table 5.5. For the different radials, except the Blue radial, there is a slight increase
in the mean energy consumption over the months. The difference in variance between the radials
is large, where the Brown radial has the smallest variance. But, there is also only a few houses
left in the Brown cluster after houses with EV and PV are removed. Additional summary statis-
tics is available in the Appendix A.3.2 for consumption data from houses grouped by construction
decade.
Radial
Red
Blue
Green
Month
Aug.
Sep.
Oct.
Aug.
Sep.
Oct.
Aug.
Sep.
Oct.
µ
12.02
12.17
15.27
9.70
9.39
9.95
17.94
17.39
18.02
σ2
8.41
12.22
15.33
11.78
12.23
14.37
39.05
43.87
43.27
Radial
Pink
Brown
Month
Aug.
Sep.
Oct.
Aug.
Sep.
Oct.
µ
9.59
8.99
9.65
2.91
3.01
3.39
σ2
8.84
10.61
12.59
1.18
1.33
1.87
Table 5.5: Summary table of the energy consumption variable grouped by radial color. All values
are in unit kWh.
76
Data-driven digital twins for monitoring and control of electricity distribution net
==PAGE:87==
5.4
Theory and methodology related to the Flexibility Function
In order to cope with the increasing share of renewable energy sources, energy flexibility is re-
quired. Utilising this flexibility necessitates mathematical models describing the operational re-
sponse on energy prices from end-consumers in low voltage grids. This can be done using stochas-
tic grey-box models simulating true system dynamics using SDEs.
5.4.1
Energy flexibility model
This section presents the complete model suggested in [1] for characterising energy flexibility using
non-linear stochastic differential equations. Each of the four SDEs making up the model will in
section 5.4.1.1-5.4.1.3 be explained in greater detail. As the model is formulated as a grey-box
model, the model characteristics and related features are the same as presented in chapter 3. Some
parameters will hence have direct physical interpretations, while others should be interpreted with
more care.
The Flexibility Function, as presented in [1], is stated in equations (5.1a)-(5.1d), and its variables
are presented in table 5.6.
dXt = 1
C (Dt −Bt) dt + Xt (1 −Xt) σX dWt,
(5.1a)
δt = l (f (Xt; α) + g (ut; β) ; k) ,
(5.1b)
Dt = Bt + δt∆(1 (δt > 0) (1 −Bt) + 1 (δt < 0) Bt) ,
(5.1c)
Yt = Dt + σY ϵt
(5.1d)
here W is a Wiener process and ϵk ∼N
(
0, 12)
i. i. d. ∀k ∈N. The parameters C, δ, α, k, β, δX
and δY are parameters that determine the energy flexibility of a price controlled system, together
with the functions l, f and g. A more detailed overview of the parameters and their interpretations
are given in table 5.7. 1 is the indicator function, stated in equation (5.2), and is equal to 1 when
the input is true and 0 when false.
1 (x > 0) =
{
1
x > 0,
0
else.
(5.2)
As presented in table 5.6, the model consists of one state, X which is described by the stochastic
differential equation (5.1a), B and u are inputs, and equation (5.1d) representing Y governs the
observations. Equations (5.1b) and (5.1c) link the value of a given time point of the state and the
input to the observations. The parameters of the model are estimated using nloptr, an optimiser
in R for non-linear problems. In the following sections, a detailed description of the model is
undergone.
Name
Quantity
Use
Unit
Xt
State of Charge
State
Energy
Bt
Baseline Demand
Input
Power
ut
Energy Price
Input
Price
δt
Change in Demand
Internal
−
Dt
Expected Demand
Internal
Power
Yt
Demand
Observation
Power
Table 5.6: Variables used in the Flexibility Function.
Data-driven digital twins for monitoring and control of electricity distribution net
77
==PAGE:88==
Name
Interpretation
Range
Unit
C
Amount of Flexible Energy
> 0
Energy
∆
Proportion of Flexible Demand
[0, 1]
Power
k
Energy Flexibility Eagerness
> 0
−
f
Demand-SoC Relationship
[−1, 1]
−
g
Demand-Price Relationship
[−1, 1]
−
σX
Process Noise Intensity
> 0
Power
σY
Measurement Noise
> 0
Power
Table 5.7: Parameters used in the flexibility function.
5.4.1.1
The state (of charge) equation
The state of charge in the energy flexible system is Xt at time t. When Xt = 0 the system has no
stored energy and the energy consumption cannot be further reduced. Vise versa when Xt = 1, the
system’s energy capacity is fully charged and the consumption cannot be increased further. The
model assumes that at a certain point the energy responsive system is described by the state of
charge and energy price, and that equations (5.1a)-(5.1d) are predicting future values of the state
of charge and the demand based on t.
The baseline demand is described by Bt at time t, and is the demand when the system is exposed
to a mean constant price signal. In equation (5.1a) the parameter C describes how fast the change
in state of charge happens, and as the efficiency of the system is unaffected by the consumption,
the state of charge will increase whenever the demand exceeds the baseline and decrease whenever
demand is lower than the baseline. The total amount of flexible energy in the system will be equal
to
∫T
0 Dt −Btdt = C, since changing Xt from 0 to 1 in T time units. C is hence physically
interpretable.
The demand Yt is normalised and observations are scaled to lie in the interval [0, 1]. This comes as
a natural extension of the fact, that any system will have a minimum observed consumption, ideally
when everything is turned off, i.e. Yt = 0, and the opposite a maximum observed consumption
when all energy consuming devices are turned on, Yt = 1.
The second term in equation (5.1a) describes the process noise. Noise is expected to be e.g. un-
expected behaviour in the system, model deficiencies, or errors in the assumed baseline demand.
Baseline deficiencies are expected to be the main contributor to the system noise. It is extremely
difficult to estimate a good baseline, as it is close to impossible to know what the energy consump-
tion baseline is exactly. Therefore, the baseline is assumed to contribute to a considerable amount
of errors and noise in the model. In section 5.4.1.4 assumptions and heuristics related to estimating
the most optimal baseline are discussed. The noise intensity in the model is proportional to σX,
which exists to limit the state of charge to lie in the interval [0, 1]. The noise will therefore gradu-
ally go towards zero when the state reaches minimum and maximum charge in the system. This is
directly relatable to the real world, where it is expected that high and low energy prices will push
the charge of the system all the way to the bounds with high certainty, but for medium-prices, the
exact state of charge is hard to estimate and is therefore associated with higher uncertainty.
5.4.1.2
Linking demand to state of charge and price
For the second state of the model, i.e. equation (5.1b), δt should be interpreted as the change of
demand from the baseline as a result of energy flexibility. This part of the model is based on three
assumptions, as stated in [1]:
1. High prices tend to reduce demand, and vice versa for low prices.
2. A lot of stored energy tends to reduce demand and vice versa for low amounts of stored
energy.
78
Data-driven digital twins for monitoring and control of electricity distribution net
==PAGE:89==
3. Only a finite amount of energy can be stored in the system.
Even though these assumptions are quite logical, it is hard to say exactly how demand is affected
by energy prices and the amount of stored energy. To overcome this, the relation in the data is esti-
mated using non-linear functions f and g, which both are required to be monotonously decreasing.
The effect of state of charge is described by f which takes the form of a parameterisation (stated
in equation (5.4)), and the effect of energy prices by g modelled by I-splines. To comply with the
third assumption, Xt is required to stay between 0 and 1 for all t. This is ensured by complying
to the bounds specified in table 5.7 for the model parameters. As stated in [1], the modelling task
has been reduced to finding suitable functions that decrease monotonously from 1 to -1, for inputs
between 0 and 1. The implemented approach is described in Appendix A in [1].
A scaled logistic function, l, is applied to estimate to which degree the energy flexibility is used,
and f + g is passed through the function shown in equation (5.3).
l(x; k) = 2 logistic(xk) −1 =
2
1 + exp(−kx) −1
(5.3)
By applying l(x; k), the result is continuous and monotonously increasing with all inputs in the
interval (0, 1). δt = −1 means that demand is limited as much as possible at time t, and for δt = 1
the demand is increased as much as possible.
5.4.1.3
Demand and observation equation
Equation (5.1c) is the expected demand D, based on the baseline demand B, plus some modifi-
cation in either direction. In this regard ∆describes how much of the overall demand is flexible,
and will lie in the interval 0 to 1. If ∆= 0 there is no flexible energy and the expected demand
will be equal to the baseline demand. On the other hand if ∆= 1, all the energy is flexible and in
the case when δt = −1 the demand will be 0, and vise versa when δt = 1 the demand will be 1 at
time t. The term (1 −Bt) essentially scales to which degree it is possible to turn on demand. If
the baseline is close to 1, i.e. the maximum, then demand can only be increased a little, and vice
versa if the baseline is closer to 0.
Rounding off, equation (5.1d) is the observation equation, describing how the observed demand
will differ from the expected demand due to measurement and system noise related to unexpected
consumer behaviour.
5.4.1.4
Estimating suitable baseline signals
The baseline signal Bt at time t is an input that must be estimated/deducted from the observed
demand by the modeller. The baseline is considered to be the inflexible energy, hence the energy
consumption that consumers use when they e.g. wash their hands, make dinner, turn on the light
in the morning and night, etc. The actual flexible energy consumption, is considered as the energy
used when e.g. charging an electric car and other devices, using washing machines, and other
household necessities that can be scheduled or planned for different days in the week and hours in
the day. The baseline consumption changes throughout the year, and must be re-estimated often
due to changes in outdoor temperature, number of hours of sunlight during the day, etc.
As already mentioned, it is difficult to find the true baseline energy consumption for a house/cluster
of houses. The quality of any estimated model fit will in the end be dependent on the chosen
baseline, as the amount of noise in the system will be directly related to the baseline signal, cf.
equation (5.1a).
In section 5.5 the developed and applied method in this thesis for computing the energy consump-
tion baseline will be elaborated with data and plots of an estimated baseline for a cluster of houses
in Nr. Bjert.
Data-driven digital twins for monitoring and control of electricity distribution net
79
==PAGE:90==
5.4.1.5
Changes made to the Flexibility Function parameters to fit the data
Some problems were experienced in the initial phase of modelling the data from Nr. Bjert using
the Flexibility Function, specifically when fitting the function f. All models estimated resulted in
f hitting the bounds 0 or 1 for x. In equation (5.4) the formulation of f is given (cf. [1], Appendix
equation (A.1)) and in equation (5.5) the original parameter bounds as applied in [1]. In order to
overcome this problem, the bounds for the intercept parameter α2 was changed to 0.0 ⩽α2 ⩽0.3.
f(x, α) =
{
1 −2x + α1
[
1 −(2x −1)2]}
×
(
α2 + α3(2x −1)2 + α4(2x −1)6)
(5.4)
−0.5 ⩽α1 ⩽0.5, 0 ⩽α2 ⩽1, −1 ⩽α3 ⩽1, −1 ⩽α4 ⩽1,
∑4
k=2 αk = 1
(5.5)
Additionally, it was necessary to change the bounds for the parameter C. Originally the bounds
were [1.0, 10.0], but were adjusted to [1.0, 20.0]. The explanation for this, is assumed to be related
to the large size of the physical system, i.e. Nr. Bjert, constituting of accumulated energy con-
sumption from multiple houses. Due to the high amount of consumed energy, the upper bound for
the proportion of flexible energy needed to be increased.
5.4.2
Flexibility Function implemented in R-script
The Flexibility Function presented in section 5.4.1 is implemented as a script in R by Rune Grøn-
borg Junker (the main author of the paper [1]). The R script is made accessible as part of the Annex
67 project for Energy Flexible Buildings [35]. The script is available through the reference [36].
80
Data-driven digital twins for monitoring and control of electricity distribution net
==PAGE:91==
5.5
Method for computing the energy consumption baseline signal
The baseline signal is constructed to imitate the observed energy consumption of the clustered
houses the best way possible, a method developed for the data applied in this thesis. First, the
consumption data is grouped by month, as baseline signals will be estimated for an entire month at
a time. The monthly grouping of data and baselines is partly done due to the time variance of the
Flexibility Function fits, and the fact that the consumer behaviour is expected to change through
time. Within each month, days are labeled as either weekday or weekend, as different consumption
profiles are expected during workdays and non-workdays. For all days labeled as weekdays in
the respective month, the energy consumption is grouped by the hour in the day on which it was
consumed, and the mean hourly consumption is calculated for all 24 hours. The same is done for
all days labelled weekend, where the mean hourly consumption is also calculated. Refer to figures
5.12, where boxplots displaying the mean hourly consumption is marked in orange for respectively
weekdays and weekends for each hour during the days in the month of October.
Using the mean hourly consumption for weekdays and weekends for a given month, the baseline
is constructed by allocating these hourly mean values to weekdays and weekends of the days in
the month. The baseline function is constructed such that the data resolution is one hour and the
length of the baseline signal is the same as the month analysed. It is observed that the hourly mean
can be slightly higher than the median when the variation is high.
Figure 5.12: Boxplots displaying the energy consumption of the Red radial in October by hour on
weekdays and weekends.
The presented example of a baseline construction is only for the Red radial in October. The same
methodology and approach is used to create an energy consumption baseline for all radial cluster-
ings, for all three months August, September and October. These are not presented in the thesis,
due to repetitiveness of results.
Data-driven digital twins for monitoring and control of electricity distribution net
81
==PAGE:92==
5.6
Results for estimated energy flexibility in Nørre Bjert
The results when applying the Flexibility Function on the data from the houses in Nr. Bjert are pre-
sented in this section. Only results from the Red and Pink radials will be discussed and presented,
as these are representative of some general tendencies and results observed for all five clusters
grouped by radial color. The remaining results for the Blue, Brown and Green radial can be seen
in appendix A.3.3 together with results for groupings of houses based on their construction year.
5.6.1
How to interpret plots and quantitative results from the Flexibility Function
As presented in section 5.4.2, the Flexibility Function is implemented in R and made available
through the reference [36]. The script aggregates a standard result output, which has been formatted
by the authors to support results found in the thesis.
The results from the Flexibility Function is visualised in two plots:
• A plot with the observed and predicted energy demand, plotted together with the estimated
baseline demand and the energy prices (penalty). This visual support of the results shows
how the predicted demand varies at times t based on energy prices, compared to the baseline
consumption.
• A plot visualising the functional relationships for f(x) and g(x), where x is respectively
representing the normalised state of charge and the normalised energy price.
The results from the Flexibility Function are further quantifying two measures:
• The percentage energy flexibility can change demand by (in %).
• The total estimated energy flexible capacity (in kWh).
5.6.2
Red radial results
Figure 5.13 shows the results of the estimated flexibility in houses of the Red radial during the
time periods August, September and October 2022. Looking at the demand curves (i.e. measured
energy consumption) in the different months (sub-plots (a), (c), (e)), it can be noticed that the
demand profiles change. Especially in October, the demand is higher than that of August and
September. Looking at the normalised spot prices in the three sub-plots, it becomes clear, that there
are important variations between months as price signals vary strongly. For all periods, the demand
predictions follow the observed consumption well, which suggest that the Flexibility Function is
able to capture the consumption behaviors, despite the slight offset from the baseline. In August,
the predicted demand is estimated higher than the baseline, while in October the predictions are
lower than the baseline, just like the observed data, is lower than the baseline. Which suggests that
the predictions follow the true behaviour and not only the baseline tendencies. When zooming in
on the demand in October at index/hour 45 and 70, the observed consumption is high, the prices
are high, while the predictions are lower than the baseline. Vice versa at index 130, where the
prices are low, the observed consumption is low and the predictions are higher. These examples
highlight the main objective of the Flexibility Function, which is to describe and predict consumer
behaviour and energy demand based on changing spot prices. The predicted demand should have
an overall lower penalty compared to the overall penalty of the observed energy consumption.
Looking at the functional relationship between price and demand in figure 5.13, sub-plots (b), (d)
and (f), it is observed, that the price response function g(x) changes between months. In August,
three overall regions can be identified for the price response. When the price is less than 0.3, i.e.
x < 0.3, there is a linear relationship between the price and demand. Seeing as all y-values are
positive in this interval, the houses in the Red radial consider these prices to be cheaper than the
average normalised price. For 0.3 < x < 0.8, there is another linear relationship with a softer
slope, and hence the prices will be considered expensive at a slower rate.
82
Data-driven digital twins for monitoring and control of electricity distribution net
==PAGE:93==
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
Figure 5.13: Results of the estimated flexibility in houses of the Red radial. The spot price signal
is normalized to [0.0,1.0]. Sub-plots (a), (c), and (e) visualise the predictions of demand compared
to the measured demand in the first 150 hours of August, September, and October. Sub-plots (b),
(d), and (f) visualise the functional relationships between the state of charge and energy demand in
August, September, and October. For the functional relationships between the state of charge and
energy demand positive values lead to increased demand while negative values leads to decreased
demand.
Finally, when the price is higher 0.8 < x the response is almost constant and close to −1.0, meaning
that the houses will consider the price very expensive, and cut off consumption entirely. For the
months of September and October the response can be classified into only two regions. When the
prices are less than 0.4, there is a linear relation between price and response. Here, the y-values
cover the full range from 1.0 to −1.0, which suggests that at x = 0.4 the price is considered most
expensive and at x = 0.0 the price is at its cheapest. When the price is larger 0.4 < x, the response
is constant and estimated to be −1.0, meaning that consumption will be cut off when x ≤0.4 for
September and October in the Red radial.
Data-driven digital twins for monitoring and control of electricity distribution net
83
==PAGE:94==
Now looking at the functional relationship between the state of charge and energy demand curve
f(x), in figure 5.13 sub-plots (b), (d) and (f), f(x) also changes between the months. In August,
f(0.5) = 0.0, which means that the houses prefer to be filled/charged 50% if there is no price
incentive to do otherwise, it dictates that this is the natural state of charge. For levels 0.2 <
x < 0.8, there is a linear relationship and the effect is modest, meaning that the exact state of
charge is not too critical as long as it is between 0.2 < x < 0.8. However, when f(x) is close
to the boundaries, it quickly converges away from respectively 1.0 and −1.0, to make sure the
houses quickly return back to the preferred charge of 20-80% after having been discharged or fully
charged. For September f(x) ≈0.0 when 0.2 < x < 0.7, meaning that the natural state of charge
is when houses are charged 20-70%. At the boundaries the charge converges quickly/exponentially
as also seen in August. In October f(0.8) ≈0.0, meaning that the houses in the Red radial has a
preference at being charged to around 80% in October.
Table 5.8 presents a summary of the Red radial’s flexibility dynamics. The houses’ flexibility is
computed by the two measures, the energy flexibility which can change demand by some percentage
and the total energy flexible capacity. The first is a direct result of the estimated parameter ∆, see
table 5.7, which reflects the amount of flexible energy detected in the system. The latter is presented
in equation 5.6 by the maximum energy load observed in the consumption data, and baseline load
together with the estimated parameter C, that describes how fast the change in state of charge
happens, and equals the total amount of flexible energy in the system, such that:
Total energy flexible capacity = C · (Max load −Base load)
(5.6)
From table 5.8 it is seen how energy flexibility decreases significantly throughout the months,
and from the data it is estimated that flexibility can change demand by up to 72% in August,
52% in September and 14% in October. Which means that consumers would be expected to react
more strongly to changing energy prices in August compared to October. On the other hand, the
computed total energy flexible capacity increases significantly between months, where the capacity
is 9.9 kWh in August, 307.6 kWh in September and 337.1 kWh in October. It was mentioned
earlier, that the total energy consumption in the Red radial increases from August to October.
The assumption is, that because the houses continuously turn on space heating going into fall the
total energy consumption increases, there is a larger energy capacity which has the potential to be
flexible.
Red radial
Description
August
September
October
Energy flexibility can change demand by up to:
72%
52%
14%
Total energy flexible capacity is estimated to be:
9.9 kWh
307.6 kWh
337.1 kWh
Parameter estimate for C:
0.57
14.51
16.28
Table 5.8: Results from estimating energy flexibility in houses of the Red radial when using energy
consumption and price data from August, September and October 2022.
5.6.3
Pink radial results
Figure 5.14 presents results of the estimated flexibility of houses in the Pink radial. In sub-plots
(a), (c), and (e) the measured demand is visualised for the first 150 hours of respectively August,
September, and October, together with the estimated baseline consumption and demand predic-
tions. When looking at August and October the consumption and baseline profiles are quite alike,
whereas September differs. Compared to the results seen for the Red radial, the measured demand,
84
Data-driven digital twins for monitoring and control of electricity distribution net
==PAGE:95==
baseline and predictions are generally more alike, and there are seen fewer local deviations in the
plots. Looking at index 45 and 95 in the August plot, the predicted demand is lower than the mea-
sured demand, and also lower than the baseline. At these two specific instances in time, the energy
prices are locally high, and therefore it is expected that the Flexibility Function would predict a
lower demand in order to overall decrease the penalty from the energy prices.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
Figure 5.14: Results of the estimated flexibility in houses of the Pink radial. The spot price signal
is normalized to [0.0,1.0]. Sub-plots (a), (c), and (e) visualise the predictions of demand compared
to the measured demand in the first 150 hours of August, September, and October. Sub-plots (b),
(d), and (f) visualise the functional relationships between the state of charge and energy demand in
August, September, and October. For the functional relationships between the state of charge and
energy demand positive values lead to increased demand while negative values leads to decreased
demand.
The price response function, g(x), for the pink radial is seen in figure 5.14 sub-plots (b), (d), and
(f). Among the three months, the general tendency of g(x) is the same, where between approxi-
mately 0.2 < x < 0.8, the price impact is close to constant, indicating that the houses in the Pink
Data-driven digital twins for monitoring and control of electricity distribution net
85
==PAGE:96==
radial are indifferent to prices in this range. While having exponential tendencies at the extrem-
ities converging towards prices in the range 0.2 < x < 0.8, indicating that houses prefer to use
energy when the price is within this range. However, in August g(0.2) ≈0.0, which indicates that
prices above 0.2 are considered more expensive than the average monthly price. For the months
of September and October g(0.8) ≈0.8, which means that prices above 0.8 are considered higher
than the average monthly price.
Looking at the functional relationships between the state of charge and energy demand in figure
5.14 sub-plots (b), (d), and (f), clear similar behaviors for the three months are observed. For
0.3 < x < 0.6 the charge is f(x) ≈0.0, i.e. constant, meaning that houses are indifferent to
the state of charge as long as it is 30-60%. At the extremities, the state of charges exponentially
approaches f(x) = 0.0, indicating that when the state of charge is either lower or higher than
30-60%, the system will faster approach the preferred natural state of charge.
From table 5.9 it is observed how energy flexibility decreases minimally throughout the months,
and from the data it is estimated that flexibility can change demand from 13% in August, to 10%
in October. Hence, consumers would be expected to react more or less equally to changing energy
prices in August compared to October. The computed total energy flexible capacity is roughly
increased by ≈250% going from August to September, and ≈150% from August to October. As
for the Red radial, the total energy consumption in the Pink radial is expected to increase from Au-
gust to October due to houses turning on space heating, and hence there is a larger energy capacity
which has the potential to be flexible. The expected reason for September having a higher energy
flexible capacity is due to the more volatile tendencies in the measured and predicted demand. The
C parameter describes how fast the change in state of charge happens, and for this reason the C
parameter is estimated to a larger value. This is reflected in the calculated energy flexible capacity.
Pink radial
Description
August
September
October
Energy flexibility can change demand by up to:
13%
12%
10%
Total energy flexible capacity is estimated to be:
78.3 kWh
193.6 kWh
121.9 kWh
Parameter estimate for C:
3.76
10.33
6.21
Table 5.9: Results from estimating energy flexibility in houses of the Pink radial when using energy
consumption and price data from August, September and October 2022.
86
Data-driven digital twins for monitoring and control of electricity distribution net
==PAGE:97==
5.7
Implementing time dependency in the Flexibility Function and
analysis of households with electrical vehicles
As briefly discussed in section 5.3.5, houses with electrical vehicles (EVs) have relatively different
consumption profiles when comparing to households that do not have EVs. Their consumption
significantly increases late afternoon/early night when people return home and start charging their
vehicles. Therefore, data from houses with EVs have been separated from the rest of the houses and
assigned their own cluster. By doing this, the aim is to create a clear and unambiguous image of how
flexible households with EVs are, when using the Flexibility Function exclusively on data from
these houses. To accommodate this goal, some changes are made to g, i.e. the parameterisation
of the effect of price on demand in the Flexibility Function. By incorporating time dependency
that indicates and emphasises the hours where people are energy flexible, the flexibility estimate is
expected to be more affected by the price signal in those hours, and additionally, a higher estimated
degree of potential flexibility should be observed.
The following presented add-on (cf. equation (5.9)) to the Flexibility Function (cf. paper [1]) is the
authors’ contribution to the state of the art research being done on energy flexibility in buildings
and clusters of buildings.
In this section consumption data from September will not be considered. Due to the September
data coming from another data source than the August and October data, September data from
the houses with EVs have been non-compatible (in terms of format and meta-data detail) with the
other two months, and it has therefore been decided not to consider September data in the following
analysis.
Houses with PVs will altogether not be considered in this analysis using the extended Flexibil-
ity Function. Despite having a diurnal energy consumption profile, the consumption profiles of
houses with PVs are driven by the amount of energy produced through solar irradiance, rather than
the end-users’ energy consumption behaviors. Therefore, the Flexibility Function is expected to
misinterpret PV dynamics in the data as potential energy flexibility.
5.7.1
Incorporating time dependency in the parameterisation of the effect of price
In the original version of the Flexibility Function, the function g describing the penalty (price)
signal is constructed by I-splines, as already mentioned in section 5.4.1.2, and the exact expression
for g is stated in equation (5.7) (cf. [1] appendix A) where Ng = 7. Due to the fact that g is only
a function of the input u, it is computationally feasible to find a solution when modelling u as a
linear combination of I-splines. I-splines are chosen since they are monotonously increasing, and
can be formulated such that Ik : (0, 1) →[0, 1]. This, combined with the restrictions of β, ensures
that g is monotonously decreasing and maps values to [−1, 1], as required [1].
g(u; β) = −2
Ng
∑
k=1
βkIk(u) + 1,
Ng
∑
k=1
βk = 1, ∀k = 1, 2, . . . , Ng : βk ⩾0
(5.7)
This original parameterisation of g (in equation (5.7)) emphasises the effect of the penalty equally
on all t, i.e. it disregards the possibility that users might not have the chance to be energy flexible
in the middle of the day when they are not at home. Therefore, g is expanded to include this logic
using an indicator function 1 (t). The indicator function is formulated in such a way, that during
hours where households are expected to be energy flexible, the function equals 1, and vice versa
when households are not flexible the function equals 0, cf. equation (5.8).
Data-driven digital twins for monitoring and control of electricity distribution net
87
==PAGE:98==
1 (t) =
{
1
t ∈Energy flexible hours,
0
else.
(5.8)
Additionally a new set of parameters α is further introduced, which models u when households
are considered energy flexible. The final expression for the expanded g is stated in equation (5.9).
g(u, t; β, α) = −2


Ng
∑
k=1
(1 −1 (t))βkIk(u) +
Ng
∑
k=1
1 (t) αkIk(u)

+ 1,
Ng
∑
k=1
βk = 1, ∀k = 1, 2, . . . , Ng : βk ⩾0,
Ng
∑
k=1
αk = 1, ∀k = 1, 2, . . . , Ng : αk ⩾0,
(5.9)
5.7.2
Applying the expanded Flexibility Function to data from houses with EVs in
Nr. Bjert
After isolating the seven known houses with EVs in Nr. Bjert (cf. table 5.3 and figure 5.5), their
energy consumption is analysed using the Flexibility Function, as already done in the previous
section 5.6 using g(u; β), but additionally using the expanded function for g, i.e. g(u, t; β, α),
stated in equation (5.9). As it is the energy flexibility for charging EVs that is analysed, the flexible
time period considered should reflect when the vehicles are expected to be charging. For this
analysis, the period from 17:00 in the afternoon to 7:00 the next morning is chosen. Hence the
indicator function is set to be
1 (t) =
{
1
t ∈17:00 - 7:00,
0
else.
(5.10)
In table 5.10 results for the months of August and October are summarised. In this table a compar-
ison of results is presented when applying g(u; β) and the extended g(u, t; β, α) function, for the
given measures of energy flexibility that can change demand by some percentage and estimated
total energy flexible capacity. In figure 5.15 for October and in figure 5.16 for August, the 1) pre-
dicted and observed demand, and 2) the functional relationships between the state of charge and
price, are plotted.
When comparing the two months using different g functions, the biggest difference is in the per-
centage that energy flexibility can change demand by, see table 5.10. In August, the percentage
of the g(u; β) and g(u, t; β, α) functions are respectively 26% and 56%, and for October it is 0%
for both versions of the g function. In October, the reason for the zero estimated flexibility is due
to the predicted demand being more or less equal to the baseline consumption for both versions of
the g function, this is seen in plots (a) and (c) in figure 5.15. In the functional relationship plots,
(b) and (d) in figure 5.15, for both g functions in October, the relationships of g(x) between price
and demand are linear, which means that demand is adjusted proportionally to price. It is due to
this linearity, that there is no estimated flexibility to be collected in October.
88
Data-driven digital twins for monitoring and control of electricity distribution net
==PAGE:99==
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 5.15: Results of the estimated flexibility in houses with electrical cars in October when ap-
plying the Flexibility Function for g(u; β) (no extension) and g(u, t; β, α) (extension) functions.
The spot price signal is normalised to [0.0,1.0]. Sub-plots (a) and (c) visualise the predictions of
demand compared to the measured demand in the first 150 hours of August and October. Sub-plots
(b) and (d) visualise the functional relationships between the state of charge and energy demand in
August and October. For the functional relationships between the state of charge and energy de-
mand positive values lead to increased demand while negative values leads to decreased demand.
August 2022
Description
g(u; β)
g(u, t; β, α)
Energy flexibility can change demand by up to:
26%
56%
Total energy flexible capacity is estimated to be:
237.2 kWh
137.0 kWh
Parameter estimate for C:
6.71
3.87
October 2022
Description
g(u; β)
g(u, t; β, α)
Energy flexibility can change demand by up to:
0%
0%
Total energy flexible capacity is estimated to be:
135.7 kWh
127.1 kWh
Parameter estimate for C:
4.77
4.47
Table 5.10: Results from estimating energy flexibility in houses having EVs when using energy
consumption and price data from August and October 2022. For g(u; β) with (no extension) and
g(u, t; β, α) with (extension).
Data-driven digital twins for monitoring and control of electricity distribution net
89
==PAGE:100==
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 5.16: Results of the estimated flexibility in houses with electrical cars in August when ap-
plying the Flexibility Function for g(u; β) (no extension) and g(u, t; β, α) (extension) functions.
The spot price signal is normalised to [0.0,1.0]. Sub-plots (a) and (c) visualise the predictions of
demand compared to the measured demand in the first 150 hours of August and October. Sub-plots
(b) and (d) visualise the functional relationships between the state of charge and energy demand in
August and October. For the functional relationships between the state of charge and energy de-
mand positive values lead to increased demand while negative values leads to decreased demand.
Analysing the functional relationship between state of charge and demand in October 2022, f(x),
both methods have the same tendencies, see plots (b) and (d) in figure 5.15. For both versions of
the g function f(0.5) = 0.0, which means that the houses prefer to be filled/charged 50%. When
x > 0.5 and x < 0.5, the state of charge is respectively negatively and positively exponential,
converging towards −1.0 and 1.0. This means that the state of charge of the houses will quickly
return back to the preferred charge of 50% after having been discharged or fully charged. Looking
at the energy flexible capacity and the parameter estimates C, for both g functions in October, are
more or less estimated to be the same (cf. table 5.10), due to the fact that the two models’ fits are
alike.
Moving on to the results for August, a difference is observed in the results between the two g func-
tions. In table 5.10, a 30% higher obtainable energy flexibility is estimated with the g(u, t; β, α)
function compared to the g(u; β) function. When investigating the demand prediction plots (a)
and (c) in figures 5.16, deviations from the baseline are seen in the predictions, which enable this
estimated potential energy flexibility. These deviations are observed just before the baseline in-
creases, more specifically at index (hours) 15, 60 and 80. Here, the local energy prices are low,
which trigger the predicted demand to increase, and cause a gap between the baseline and pre-
dicted demand. As expected, at index 15 and 60, the predictions are closer to the observed demand
compared to the baseline consumption, and to a larger degree this is true for the flexibility estimate
done with g(u, t; β, α). Whereas looking at the off-set at index 80, the overestimated consumption
90
Data-driven digital twins for monitoring and control of electricity distribution net
==PAGE:101==
is a direct result of the low price signal, and the prediction is not closer to the observed demand.
However, due to the Flexibility Function’s goal to have a higher consumption where prices are
low, it is essentially the wanted behaviour. Overall, these described behaviours are the reason why
the estimated flexibility is 30% higher for the g(u, t; β, α) function.
When comparing the functional relationship, between energy price and state of charge, to demand,
see plots (b) and (d) in figure 5.16, there are differences to find between the two function fits.
Considering the price versus demand relationship for g(u; β) the consumers are indifferent to prices
for 0.4 < x < 0.8, whereas for g(u, t; β, α) this interval is approximately 0.3 < x < 0.7. This
indicates, that with g(u, t; β, α) consumers consider prices to be higher than the average price 10%
before g(u; β) consumers, thereby adjusting their energy demand earlier.
Another interesting result related to the state of charge versus demand relationship, is that con-
sumers are indifferent towards their state of charge for 0.25 < x < 0.6 when using the g(u; β)
function. But when applying the g(u, t; β, α) function, the consumers prefer their houses to be
charged above the baseline up until the state of charge reaches 75%. This means, that when using
the extended g(u, t; β, α), a combination of energy consumption from the house and from the EVs
will demand a positive charge until the system reaches 75% state of charge, after which the system
decreases the demand for energy due to high energy prices.
Additionally, there is a noticeable difference between the two methods in the total energy flex-
ible capacity and the parameter estimate for C, seen in table 5.10. When applying g(u, t; β, α)
the estimated total energy flexible capacity parameter value for C is almost halved. This can be
explained by the model formulation in equation (5.1). Between the two model fits obtained using
the two versions of the g functions, the base and maximum load do not change. Therefore, the
only parameter that could cause the difference in the energy flexible capacity is C, according to
equation (5.6). Following model equation (5.1a), C is inversely related to the expected demand
Dt, and Dt is further influenced by the change in demand ∆. ∆is estimated to be 56% when using
g(u, t; β, α) and 26% for g(u; β). This aligns with C and the energy capacity being twice as small
for g(u, t; β, α).
5.7.3
Evaluation on performance of the expanded function for price versus
demand
Following the expansion of g(u, t; β, α), it has been possible to analyse two different behaviour
profiles within the same cluster of houses. For the houses with EVs this means, that the consumer
behaviour during the day is viewed separately from evening/night behaviour, and in this way the
very abrupt increase in consumption which happens every day around 17:00, does not influence
the estimated effect of price on demand during the day period. As a result, the estimated energy
flexible capacity in August (cf. tab. 5.10) decreases with 100.2 kWh as the charging of the cars is
viewed as an other event than e.g. space heating that naturally happens during the day. Therefore,
the available energy capacity estimated with g(u, t; β, α) for the cluster of houses is less, i.e. 137.2
kWh.
The model extension has proven to some extend better explain the phenomena happening in the
August data, but shows no real change when applied to the data from October. It is difficult to say,
based on the limited amount of data available, both in terms of number of houses and months, to
which extent the model extension of g improves the correctness of the estimated flexibility for the
cluster of houses with EVs, but some improvement is observed.
Additionally, the time period chosen as the flexible hours in the modelling, cf. 1 (t) in equation
(5.8), is equally critical for the final result and potentially limits the estimated flexibility.
Data-driven digital twins for monitoring and control of electricity distribution net
91
==PAGE:102==
5.8
Discussion
Moving on to discussing the presented results of the estimated flexibility in Nr. Bjert, topics cov-
ered will be; reservations towards the results, how the model performs on real life data, the esti-
mated parameters, problems related to the baseline consumption, the model extension for including
electrical vehicles, and finally suggested improvements, and next steps.
5.8.1
The estimated energy flexibility in Nr. Bjert
One of the drivers for estimating the energy flexibility of the Nr. Bjert residents, was the expected
increase in energy flexibility as a result of the energy crisis introduced in 5.2.1. When looking into
the results in section 5.6, it was observed, that the amount of change in energy flexibility was either
constant or decreasing as the months progressed into fall. It is expected that the households start
turning on space heating during September/October when the ambient temperature drops. There-
fore, it has been difficult to conclude whether or not the residents behave more energy flexible.
Even though the energy crisis has been highlighted in the news, resulting in increased awareness,
the change in the residents consumption behaviors towards being more flexible can not be ob-
served directly from the data. It could be argued, that the awareness of the energy crisis has not
been enough to change energy consumption behaviors in Nr. Bjert. Ideally, private consumers
need to know how they can change their behaviors, and further need the means to do so. Means
could include incorporating smart devices in energy consuming installations, timing of washers,
as well as understanding how to change settings (hence energy consumption) of installed heat-
ing devices, such as e.g. heat pumps. Generally, the energy consumption is assumed influenced
by many parameters, such as ambient temperature, space heating methods, the insulation quality
of the houses, etc. Therefore, estimating the true flexibility of a cluster of households can be a
challenging task.
An interesting finding is the overall difference in the estimated energy flexibility potential (in
percentage) between the Red and Pink radials. The price signal is the same for both radials, as well
as the heating method of the houses, i.e. district heating. Hence, the difference between the two
radials should be found in the energy consumption patterns. The Red and Pink radials respectively
have 29 and 20 houses, and are constructed during the periods 2000’s and 1990’s-2010’s. One
potential explanation for the large difference in percentage estimated flexibility, could be, that
the houses in the Red radial are more compatible in terms of how the houses are built, and with
what materials, insulation, etc., and that the houses generally have the same baseline consumption
profile. Whereas houses from the Pink radial are built over a 30 year period, and energy efficiency
of the houses could therefore vary to a larger extent. Leading to potential differences in baseline
consumption behaviour, causing the combined/overall consumption signal for the Pink radial to be
noisy.
Therefore, due to the less unambiguous trends in energy consumption for the Red radial house-
holds, the Flexibility Function is able to estimate a higher flexibility potential, when ccomparing
with the Pink radial households whose total accumulated energy consumption has more noise. This
could be explained by the different construction decades of the houses and different consumption
behaviors, which challenges the Flexibility Function to recognise clear trends. Therefore, it is
difficult to estimate the actual energy flexibility potential for the Pink radial.
From the plots of the results for the Red and Pink radials in figures 5.13 and 5.14, one should ideally
see clear trends of energy flexibility. Nevertheless, there is no apparent tendencies considering
what would be the expected behaviour in terms of energy flexibility penalised by price. Hence,
it is difficult to see if the predicted energy consumption deviates from the baseline model, when
there is a price incentive to do so.
92
Data-driven digital twins for monitoring and control of electricity distribution net
==PAGE:103==
5.8.2
Model formulation of the Flexibility Function and related constraints
Next, the applicability of the Flexibility Function in relation to the data from Nr. Bjert will be
discussed. Originally, the Flexibility Function is formulated to estimate energy flexibility for a
single household/end-consumer in response to energy prices, see [1]. The Flexibility Function is
tested and presented on simulated data designed to be 100% energy flexible, which evidently is
not the case for the Nr. Bjert real-life data. In this study of Nr. Bjert, the Flexibility Function
has been used to estimate energy flexibility of a cluster of houses not incentivised to consume
energy following energy price regulations. Nevertheless, and supported by referenced literature in
section 1.2, it is attempted to unlock the potential energy flexibility of the Nr. Bjert house clusters.
By grouping the houses in radials, the combined load on the feeders is known. The major issue
related to analysing a cluster of houses is, that the Flexibility Function estimates flexibility for the
combined group of houses. Therefore, it is unknown whether some individual houses in the clusters
are flexible in their energy consumption while others are not, as the accumulated consumption
might smooth out individual trends. In relation to this, meta-data/information on whether residents
of the houses are home or not is unknown. Such information is expected to affect the accumulated
consumption, and hence it would contribute to noise in the data, and therefore also negatively affect
the results.
Additionally, it should be noted, that the Flexibility Function is a relatively simple model incorpo-
rating simple DR dynamics. In this study, the Flexibility Function is used on complex accumulated
energy consumption variables, i.e. from clusters of houses, and as the Flexibility Functions isolates
assumptions, and to an extent uses generalisations, it is not always applicable to real-life data. For
instance, the difficulty in estimating a proper baseline becomes apparent as consumption changes
with seasons and between households.
5.8.3
Data and estimated model parameters
In the introduction to the Nr. Bjert case, a set of disclaimers towards the data was presented in
section 5.2.1. Indeed, the case deals with real-life data, for which there are no guarantees to see
any flexibility in the end-users’ energy consumption. One could debate whether the estimated
flexibility is a result of price, or if some other external parameters are triggering the dynamics in
the data. In the ideal case, the data would be gathered from houses that are actively energy flex-
ible according to prices, as well as gathered from houses that are not actively energy flexible. It
would then be possible to compare and identify flexible consumer tendencies using the Flexibility
Function. Additionally, energy consumption data from the same houses for different time period-
s/seasons could be collected, where residents are respectively flexible and non-flexible to energy
prices. This would further enable both quantitative and qualitative analyses, which could clarify
and support some of the results observed, and questions raised, in this thesis.
As presented in chapter 3 on physical modelling and stochastic processes, arguments for different
shades of grey-box models were presented. The Nr. Bjert case was categorised as a darker grey-
box model and decentralised in terms of DR scenarios. For this reason, some of the estimated
model parameters are not physically interpretable. For instance, the estimated parameters of f
and g do not make physical sense, but rather serve to fit the most accurate parameterisation of the
consumption and price. This is also the case for ∆, that does not have a physical unit, but is a
measure of change in demand in percentage. For this reason, the model/result validation process
became tedious at times, as it was not obvious which model behavior, based on different sets of
parameter estimates, was the cause for the change in flexibility and functional relationships.
During the initial fitting of the Flexibility Function on the data from Nr. Bjert, model parameters
would hit their defined boundaries. Therefore, the bounds had to be adjusted, see section 5.4.1.5.
It was concluded, that the assumed reason was due to the model originally being developed and
fitted on simulated data for 100% energy flexible consumers, see [1]. For the houses in Nr. Bjert
Data-driven digital twins for monitoring and control of electricity distribution net
93
==PAGE:104==
∆̸= 1, and data is hereby not in the same way designed for the Flexibility Function. The Nr. Bjert
data would force the model dynamics towards illegal parameter values, and cause some unreliable
results. Sometimes, it was hard to conclude whether the observed problems of fitting f and g
were due to parameters bounds, problems with the baseline estimate, or simply because of limited
energy flexibility dynamics present in the data.
5.8.4
Baseline fitting heuristics
It has already been argued how critical the estimated baseline consumption is, in order to estimate
any appropriate flexibility in available data, see section 5.4.1.4. However, achieving this is diffi-
cult when working with data from non-controlled environments. Seeing as consumption behaviors
change over time, e.g. due weather changes, the prediction horizon at which the baseline is esti-
mated is critical. In the results from the Red radial, see figure 5.13, despite using the same baseline
estimation method, the baseline consumption was respectively higher in August and lower in Oc-
tober, when comparing with the observed consumption in the plots. As the estimated baseline Bt
represents the observed consumption, and the actual observed consumption vary throughout the
months, the baseline will at times be lower and other times higher, than the observed consumption.
These local inconsistencies with the observed data can drive the Flexibility Function to make a
misleading flexibility fit, which again is a result of the model’s time variance. It should be con-
sidered, and potentially investigated, to estimate the energy flexibility on data for shorter time
periods, e.g. two weeks instead of a full month. This would generally increase local accuracy of
the baseline fit, by accounting for the time varying Flexibility Function. All in all, the difficulty in
estimating a good baseline consumption estimate, combined with its criticality of accuracy, only
highlights how the Flexibility Function is better suited for simulated data, where variables affect-
ing the energy flexibility can be isolated. In the results presented in section 5.6, it is hard to say if
the observed flexibility is actually flexible energy, or if the predictions merely follow the baseline.
There is enough degrees of freedom in the model to fit the data well, and calculate predictions that
simply follow the baseline if no incentive signal can be deduced from the energy price signal.
Finally, it was further considered to estimate a baseline function for houses with PVs, to in turn
estimate energy flexibility of houses with PVs. Seeing as the baseline function represents the
inflexible energy of the consumers, it would have been necessary to remove any consumption
reduction caused by produced energy from the PVs. To accomplish this, the energy conversion
rate of the solar irradiance by the PVs should be known and hence deducted from the baseline. It
was decided not to move on with this.
5.8.5
Extension to the Flexibility Function
When applying the extension of the Flexibility Function accounting for houses with EVs, see sec-
tion 5.7.2, the model is able to fit two energy consumption profiles, and highlight the consumption
dynamics within different time frames. The method proved to be successful, as 30% more energy
flexibility was estimated, cf. table 5.10 for August 2022. However, the model extension could
be further improved. It is still essential to fit/estimate appropriate baselines, which also take into
account the two consumption profiles. Just as critical, is the defined time frame where cars are
expected to be home specified by the indicator function, cf. equation (5.8). In the results only
one scenario was presented, where more should be investigated, e.g. weekend versus weekdays.
Additionally, some inconsistencies between periods are observed, as not all EVs will be charged
everyday at the same time for each house. Once again, these time periods are determined by the
end-users’ behavior, and can not be considered constant. Moreover, it is known that some EV
owners have a monthly energy subscription with a fixed price, so they can charge independently
of price and time. This contradicts the incentive of flexible energy consumption and possibly un-
dermines the results.
94
Data-driven digital twins for monitoring and control of electricity distribution net
==PAGE:105==
5.8.6
Next steps and suggestions for improvements
Finally, suggestions for improvements are presented in the following:
• The first improvement that could be investigated, is the accuracy of the baseline fit for the ob-
served energy consumption. Shorter prediction horizons of data would potentially improve
correctness of the fit and hence also increase accuracy of the energy flexible estimate.
• The baseline fit could be expanded by adaptive estimation (i.e. continuously re-estimate
the baseline fit on shorter prediction horizons). It would be expected, that this addition to
the baseline estimate would improve accuracy in the predictions with respect to observed
consumption.
• The effect of outdoor temperature could also be added as a parameter to the baseline model.
It is known, that energy consumption and ambient temperature are correlated, and therefore
ambient temperature would be an interesting factor to consider when creating the baselines,
e.g. by lowering baseline consumption estimate when ambient temperatures are locally high.
• Moving on to improvements related to available data, one suggestion could be to gather more
information on the variables, i.e. meta-data. The accuracy of the flexibility estimates are
expected to increase if more meta-data is known, such as e.g. daily schedules of residents, the
number of inhabitants, vacation days, etc. Having this meta-data, the consumption variable
could be separated into more granular clusters, and enable identification of noise which could
be removed from the data.
• Additionally, an analysis could be done on houses grouped by consumption patterns instead
of feeder radials. For feeder radials, it is known, that behavioural patterns to some extent
will deviate between households. Instead, it would be possible to identify the flexibility
categorised by consumption profiles/behaviors, as e.g. done in paper [11].
• Since the assumptions, the Flexibility Function is built on, are based on single consumers,
it would be interesting to incorporate DR dynamics from district scale energy consumption
in an extended model, and test on the Nr. Bjert data. This would allow the extended model
to grasp more of the complex decentralised DR dynamics, which are currently generalised
under the current assumptions.
• Lastly, having data from clusters of houses that are known to act energy flexible (i.e. 100%
flexible with ∆= 1.0), would presumably significantly improve the models, as seen in [1],
as already discussed above.
Summarising the main findings of the discussion, it is highlighted, that additional meta-data should
be made available, in order to verify and fully explain the flexibility results and the quantified
amount of possible flexible consumption behaviour. In addition, the difficulty in estimating an
accurate baseline consumption has been emphasised, and the baseline will supposedly become
more accurate once detailed meta-data is made available. This would result in overall improvement
and precision of results.
Data-driven digital twins for monitoring and control of electricity distribution net
95
==PAGE:106==
96
Data-driven digital twins for monitoring and control of electricity distribution net
==PAGE:107==
6
Discussion of the presented cases
In the following, an overall discussion of the two presented cases will be covered, specifically their
individual and collective contribution to the FED project goals, and in addition an evaluation of
the modelling approach of using grey-box models.
6.1
Collective contribution to the Flexible Energy Denmark project
goals
Increasing the utilisation of the available flexible energy in the LV grid is the key driver of the
FED project, as well as increasing visibility of end-user consumption enabled through data, see
section 2.1. The main objective of this thesis has been to develop data-driven digital twins for
monitoring and control of electricity distribution net using data from the Danish low voltage grid
and its end-consumers, with the aim of enabling and exploiting energy flexibility as part of the
green transition. The analysis and results from the two grey-box models fitted on the datasets
from the Lundsøe cooling house and Nr. Bjert, presented in respectively chapter 4 and 5, both
contribute to the research done in the FED project. The models are built with the aim of increasing
transparency on the energy consumption of the Lundsøe cooling house and the residents of Nr.
Bjert. This is done by different approaches for the two cases. The Lundsøe cooling house is a
major end-consumer for the DSO in Aarhus, whose energy consumption can impact the load on its
connected feeder significantly. The digital-twin of the Lundsøe cooling house aims to model the
temperature dynamics of the physical system, with the goal of being able to create smart control
of the energy consumption and increase the energy flexibility. The Nr. Bjert case focuses on
a cluster of houses, whose consumption behavior is modelled by the Flexibility Function. The
houses’ potential for being energy flexible, as a response to energy prices, is estimated. The result
is especially useful for their DSO, Trefor, who would be able to set energy prices according to how
and when they would like the residents in Nr. Bjert to consume energy. Both models work towards
the same goal, by increasing the visibility of the end-users consumption behaviour and patterns.
To unlock the potential flexible energy available, the needed information is made more accessible
with the results presented in this thesis. In the end, this could increase smart data-driven methods,
and incentivise working towards planning energy consumption, as well as help DSOs understand
the end-consumer’s consumption responses to varying energy price signals.
As already stated, both presented cases have approached the FED project goals differently. The
Lundsøe cooling house has already a strong incentive to decrease its energy consumption, which is
presently done by decreasing the active cooling of the freezing room twice a day. The developed
data-driven digital twin of the freezing room should be used for smart control of the temperature,
and by extension for control of the energy consumption. The data used for estimating Nr. Bjert
flexibility, is not collected from houses incentivised to be flexible. This has challenged the appli-
cability of the Flexibility Function, see section 5.8. The estimated flexibility is a result of model
assumptions which are sought out in the real life data. Therefore, the estimated flexibility has yet to
be verified as actual flexible energy consumption behavior. Only then would the DSO have a true
image of the consumption behavior of their end-consumers and their responses to energy prices.
Hence it can be argued, that the Lundsøe cooling house and Nr. Bjert cases differ in regards to the
immediate applicability of the results. The Lundsøe model could be directly implemented into a
control system logic controlling the temperature, as the model is directly physically relatable to the
isolated and centralised system of the freezing room. Whereas the results and function estimates
from the Nr. Bjert case are still to be verified as the true energy flexible behaviour. More research
Data-driven digital twins for monitoring and control of electricity distribution net
97
==PAGE:108==
and integration of the results should be made before the decentralised data-driven model can be
applied in real life.
6.2
Strengths and weaknesses of the grey-box modelling approach
When looking at the success of the overall results, while reflecting on the mathematical method
chosen, i.e. grey-box modelling, there are some strengths and weaknesses to address. For the data-
driven digital twin of Lundsøe freezing room, grey-box models are confirmed to be of preferred
choice when modelling similar systems, as according to literature [9], due to the direct physical
interpretation of the model formulation and the stochastic diffusion term. As it is known what
the approximate true physical parameter estimates should be, in order for them to concise with
real world, it has been possible to validate the correctness of the model fits, by either denying or
confirming the found model dynamics. If the estimated parameters do not align with the expected
values, then the dynamics described are not the ones assumed.
The advantage of using grey-box models for estimating flexibility in data, such as done for the res-
idential area in Nr. Bjert, is that the modeller is allowed to formulate assumptions about dynamics
and tendencies that are incorporated into the model. This prompts the model to estimate and quan-
tify behaviours in the data, expressing these assumed tendencies. This is the strength of the model
presented in this thesis, cf. [1]. Using the Flexibility Function, it is possible to visualise the found
dynamics in the data, e.g. by f and g, allowing for qualitative interpretation of the system, energy
flexibility, and response tendencies.
6.3
Limitations as a result of the available data
During the process of modelling the two cases, one major improvement applicable for both grey-
box models was identified, namely the need for an increase in data quality and amount of available
data. As already argued in section 4.8, additional temperature measurements should be gathered
at the Lundsøe cooling house, specifically temperature measurements representative of the floor,
ceiling and other areas of the freezing room. This new data would enable modelling the true temper-
ature fluctuations and dynamics in the cooling house. For the data collected in Nr. Bjert, additional
meta-data for each of the house IDs would increase the understanding of the observed consumption
behaviors, and allow for a better baseline consumption estimation, which would directly improve
the results. Hereby, the results from both cases presented in the thesis were limited by the quality
of the available data.
6.4
Time variant model parameters
In the presented cases for the Lundsøe cooling house and the residents in Nr. Bjert, data cov-
ering multiple months has been analysed/modelled. Due to changing seasons, the weather and
ambient temperature, is obviously varying throughout the analysed periods. The grey-box models
are specifically modelling energy consumption and cooling temperatures directly affecting energy
consumption. The energy consumption is in both cases highly influenced by ambient temperatures,
causing time variance in the data.
Therefore, because of the non-stationary data, the parameters of the models become time variant.
Hence, it is in both presented cases, necessary to either re-estimate models more often, or make
model extensions that support adaptive/recursive parameter estimation, cf. section 10 [21], if the
models were to be implemented for control.
98
Data-driven digital twins for monitoring and control of electricity distribution net
==PAGE:109==
7
Conclusion
In order to meet the thesis objectives of developing data-driven digital twins for monitoring and
control of the Danish electricity distribution net, a data-driven grey-box model for temperature state
predictions of the Lundsøe cooling house has been developed, as well as fitting of consumption
data from clusters of houses in Nr. Bjert, using an energy Flexibility Function [1] formulated
like the grey-box models as a set of stochastic differential equations, to model and estimate the
energy flexibility. This has been accomplished using data from the Danish low voltage grid and
its end-consumers. The data applied in this thesis has been collected and made available through
the Flexible Energy Denmark (FED) project and Center Denmark.
7.1
Data-driven digital twins of the Lundsøe cooling house
Data-driven digital twins of the Lundsøe cooling house have successfully been developed. The
digital twins are grey-box models consisting of SDEs. They predict and estimate the tempera-
ture states of the freezing room, using input data of energy consumption, control temperature and
status signals from evaporators in the freezing room, ambient temperature and cooling room tem-
perature. The data used for model fitting is from a two week period, the 6th to 19th of April 2022.
The digital twins are built using the modelling framework Continuous Time Stochastic Modelling
for R (CTSM-R), which is a physics informed framework for identifying and estimating partially
observed continuous-discrete time grey-box models.
The freezing room temperature signal was pre-processed using non-parametric kernel smoothing
to remove noise from the measurements. Two different temperature signals were constructed using
1 hour and 3 hour bandwidths. The signals retained different levels of dynamics from the original
data, and therefore two model selection processes were done to identify the best performing digital
twin.
Going from baseline model to final model in the two model development processes, the follow-
ing results are obtained in relation to model performance. For the model using 1 hour bandwidth
smoothed temperature signal, the BIC values were seen to improve from −2595.14 to −2617.91
between the baseline model and the final model. Where the model using the 3 hour bandwidth
smoothed temperature signal did not improve, with BIC values going from −5361.79 to −5229.61.
It is seen, that by expanding model complexity for the less smoothed signal, it is possible to en-
hance model performance and capture more dynamics present in the data. Suggesting, that for
the presented modelling approach, smoothing the output signal too much, to some extent limits
the description of the system dynamics by external input parameters. For both sets of models, the
residual ACF plots improved between baseline models and final models. The different levels of
retained dynamics in the two temperature signals are especially clear in the ACF plots of the two
finals models. Here the degree of seasonality, hence auto-correlation, is less strong in the final
model for the 3 hour smoothed temperature signal, compared to the 1 hour smoothed signal. This
indicates that, when reducing fluctuations by smoothing the temperature signals, it is possible to
model the dynamics and reduce seasonality to a higher degree.
The predictive capabilities of the final digital twin models are accurate, and the models are able to
capture the dynamics of the data. Root Mean Squared Error (RMSE) values were computed in order
to evaluate the predictive capabilities between baseline models and final models, with prediction
steps ranging from 1-50, equalling 15 minutes to 12.5 hours predictions. Overall, the RMSE values
are lower for models fitted using temperature signals smoothed with 3 hour bandwidth, compared to
models with 1 hour bandwidth. However, the RMSE values are not improved between the baseline
Data-driven digital twins for monitoring and control of electricity distribution net
99
==PAGE:110==
models and their final models. Significant and influential parameters describing the dynamics in
the data, have been identified using both forward and backwards model selection. The identified
and retained input parameters in the final models are different when using the two temperature
signals, which means that there is a change in dynamics between the output variable and input
variables. This further emphasises the resulting difference between the two output signals, where
for example the energy consumption parameter was insignificant in the model fitted using the 3
hour smoothed temperature signal. Alternatively, methods for adaptive estimation of the model
parameters could be considered.
After settling on the two final digital twins, an additional analysis was carried out to test time
variance of the model parameters. Out-of-sample predictions for periods in summer and fall were
computed using the final model fitted on the temperature signal smoothed with 1 hour bandwidth.
Here, it was seen that for small prediction steps, the model is able to predict precise estimations
of future observations. However, the model is not time invariant, and loses accuracy for larger
prediction steps. The dynamics in the data change through seasons, due to differences in goods de-
liveries, changing ambient temperature, etc., which further cause the compressor COP and energy
consumption to change. Hence, the parameters should be re-estimated according to the needed
precision of the model through different seasons.
In hindsight, it was discovered, that the applied freezing room temperature signal is not represen-
tative for the true freezing room temperature. In fact, the temperature measurements are collected
too close to the evaporators, hence heavily affected by defrosting cycle noise, and only applicable
to an area of 1.0-1.5 meters surrounding the evaporators. This supports the observed lack of im-
provements in the model development processes, e.g. for the RMSE, BIC values, and ACF plots,
as the expected temperature dynamics in the freezing room are essentially not present in the ap-
plied data. Hence, the final models are limited by the quality of the available data, and are not able
to capture the true freezing room dynamics. To improve, additional temperature data needs to be
measured close to the ceiling, the floor, etc., representing true freezing room temperatures. Then,
other and more advanced models could be explored. It is expected, that the unobserved state of the
goods can be estimated using such more advanced state space models based on appropriate sensor
data for the indoor air temperature.
7.2
Energy flexibility for Nr. Bjert
The energy flexibility of the residents in Nr. Bjert has successfully been estimated using the Flex-
ibility Function. The Flexibility Function is fitted using energy consumption data from residential
houses and energy spot prices, both variables collected in the periods August, September, and
October 2022. It should be noted, that the applied data is gathered from consumers not active-
ly/directly incentivised to behave energy flexible. A segmentation and clustering of the energy
consumption data is done based on which feeder, and hence radial, the houses are connected to.
This is done, with the aim of reducing noise in the data by isolating and grouping consumption
profiles. Additionally, a segmentation of houses having electrical vehicles (EV) is done, to sup-
port the two underlying consumption profiles, representing when EVs are charging and when not
charging. Therefore, a model extension has been added to the Flexibility Function by the authors,
an indicator function added as an extension to the parameterisation g that maps the price signal
dynamics. The extension makes it possible to emphasise and model the two consumption profiles
expected to be present in the data during one day.
Energy flexibility estimates are calculated for two selected radials, Red and Pink, in Nr. Bjert using
the Flexibility Function without the model extension, as well as for the cluster of houses with EVs
using the model extension. The flexibility results include, 1) consumption demand predictions, 2)
visualisation of system response to respectively spot prices and state of charge, as well as 3) the
percentage demand can be changed by utilising energy flexibility, and 4) the total energy flexible
100
Data-driven digital twins for monitoring and control of electricity distribution net
==PAGE:111==
capacity of the systems in kWh. Comparing the results from the Red and Pink radials, a differ-
ence in potential energy flexibility is estimated. Specifically, in August 2022, a 59% difference is
observed between the radials in how much energy flexibility can change demand by (cf. section
5.6.1). Here, the Red radial has 72% compared to the Pink radial which has 13%. Generally, the
percentage specifying how much energy flexibility can change demand by, decreases from August
to October. For the Red radial the decrease over the period is 58%, while the estimated energy
flexible capacity increases from 9.9 to 337.1 kWh. The relatively large increase of 327.2 kWh
is assumed to be caused by an increase in space heating, which increases the overall energy con-
sumption and hence the available capacity of energy which could be flexible. The Pink radial was
observed to be relatively flexibility indifferent, with only a decrease of 3% potential flexibility
during the three month period. But the energy capacity increased with 43.6 kWh, probably also
due to an increase in space heating.
For the house cluster with EVs, using respectively the Flexibility Function without and with the
model extension, there is an increase in possible change in demand from 26% to 56% in August
2022. In response, there is a decrease in estimated energy flexible capacity, from 237.1 kWh
to 137.0 kWh. This suggests, that the model using the extension captures more potential flexible
energy, and down regulates the estimated energy capacity. Hereby, the extended model captures the
differences from the patterns of the two underlying consumption profiles, when EVs are charging
and not charging.
Considering that the Flexibility Function was originally developed using simulated data of 100%
flexible consumers, the results of this thesis show, that it is still possible to estimate energy flexi-
bility from consumers not directly/actively incentivised to be flexible. Further, the results suggest,
that it is also feasible to apply the model to accumulated consumption data from clusters of houses,
and hence enable analyses of energy flexibility on district scale. The most critical aspect in relation
to the presented results, is the correctness of the baseline consumption estimate as a result of un-
derlying model assumptions. The applied baseline is an average consumption estimate per cluster
based on weekdays. But for further improvement and accuracy of results, additional meta-data and
analysis of context for observed consumption behaviours should be investigated, and incorporated
into the baseline consumption estimate.
The importance of meta-data in relation to consumption behaviour and context should be further
emphasised. Without enough relational knowledge, interpreting flexibility results gets increasingly
complex when clustering different consumption behaviours, e.g. due to effects of people leaving
for vacation. The problem of limited meta-data has been one of the biggest challenges in the
process of analysing Flexibility Function results, in addition to the standing question on, whether
the observed flexibility is truly flexible consumption behaviour. Lastly, if more work were to be
done, an analysis using the Flexibility Function on house clusters grouped by matching energy
consumption profiles would be relevant. To some extent, this could avoid some of the complexity
related to limited meta-data, as more unknowns and noise is expected to be removed from the
clustering of the data.
7.3
Concluding remarks
Finally, the two cases contribute to the FED project goals, by increasing transparency of end-user
consumption and the utilisation of the available flexible energy in the low voltage grids. The
models successfully present results for respectively an industrial and residential end-consumers. If
more research were to be done, additional data for both cases is needed in order to improve models
and results. This would lead way to promising implementations, such as predictive control of the
temperature in the Lundsøe cooling house, using a data-driven digital twin. By considering the
time-varying electricity prices of today, this could, most likely, lead to significant savings in the
cost for electricity used.
Data-driven digital twins for monitoring and control of electricity distribution net
101
==PAGE:112==
The flexibility estimates of the Nr. Bjert households are indicators of the demand/respond dy-
namics with respect to spot prices for this isolated area. The flexibility estimates could be used
by the DSO, Trefor, to set energy prices to control demand to follow supply. For more accurate
results, flexibility estimates using data from incentivised consumers should be computed, in order
to verify demand/response behaviors in Nr. Bjert presented in this thesis. Additionally, due to the
fact that the data applied in both presented cases is non-stationary, which causes the parameters of
the models to become time variant, future work preparing the models for implementation should
include methods for avoiding limitations as a result of time varying parameters. This could be
accomplished by re-estimation models more frequently, or make model extensions that support
adaptive/recursive parameter estimation.
The FED project is aiming to use digitalisation as a means to optimise the utilisation of the Dan-
ish energy grid, and thereby further enable the ease of the green transition. The results from the
presented cases jointly contribute to this goal, by increasing transparency of end-user consumption
and the utilisation of the available flexible energy in the Danish low voltage grid.
102
Data-driven digital twins for monitoring and control of electricity distribution net
==PAGE:113==
.
Data-driven digital twins for monitoring and control of electricity distribution net
103
==PAGE:114==
104
Data-driven digital twins for monitoring and control of electricity distribution net
==PAGE:115==
Bibliography
[1]
Jaume Palmer Reala Bianca Howardd Rui Amaral Lopese Henrik Madsen Rune Grønborg
Junker Carsten Skovmose Kallesøe. “Stochastic nonlinear modelling and application of
price-based energy flexibility”. In: Applied Energy 275 (2020).
[2]
ENTSO-E. “Vision on Market Design and System Operation towards 2030”. In: ERA-Interim
(2019).
[3]
IEA EBC - Annex 82 - Energy Flexible Buildings Towards Resilient Low Carbon Energy
Systems. https://annex82.iea-ebc.org. Accessed: 2022-12-13.
[4]
Flexible Energy Denmark. https://www.flexibleenergydenmark.com/about-the-fed-
project/. Accessed: 2022-09-12.
[5]
Ebbe Münster Henrik Lund. “Integrated energy systems and local energy markets”. In: En-
ergy Policy (2006).
[6]
Henrik Madsen Jacopo Parvizi John Bagterp Jørgensen. “Smart Energy Operating System”.
In: Technical University of Denmark (2020).
[7]
S. Tia N. Phuangpornpitak. “Opportunities and Challenges of Integrating Renewable Energy
in Smart Grid System”. In: Energy Procedia (2013).
[8]
Lars H. Hansen Klaus Kaae Andersen Henrik Madsen. “Modelling the heat dynamics of a
building using stochastic differential equations”. In: Energy and Buildings (1998).
[9]
Henrik Madsen Peder Bacher. “Identifying suitable models for the heat dynamics of build-
ings”. In: Energy and Buildings (2011).
[10]
Zhijian Hou Xiangjiang Zhou Ye Yao Zhiwei Lian. “Optimal operation of a large cooling
system based on an empirical model”. In: Applied Thermal Engineering (2004).
[11]
Farrokh Jazizadeh Milad Afzalan. “Residential loads flexibility potential for demand re-
sponse using energy consumption patterns and user segments”. In: Applied Energy (2019).
[12]
Ewa Wäckelgård Joakim Widén. “A high-resolution stochastic model of domestic activity
patterns and electricity demand”. In: Applied Energy (2010).
[13]
United Nations, Climate Change. https://unfccc.int/news/the-world-needs-a-swift-
transition-to-sustainable-energy. Accessed: 2022-12-19.
[14]
Council of the EU and the European Council. https://www.consilium.europa.eu/en/
press/press-releases/2022/09/30/council-agrees-on-emergency-measures-to-
reduce-energy-prices/. Accessed: 2022-12-19.
[15]
Center Denmark. https://www.centerdenmark.com/en/. Accessed: 2022-12-15.
[16]
KONSTANT. https://konstant.dk. Accessed: 2022-09-12.
[17]
Trefor. https://www.trefor.dk. Accessed: 2022-09-21.
[18]
Danmarks Teknologiske Institut. https://www.teknologisk.dk. Accessed: 2022-09-12.
[19]
Lineage Logistics. https://lineagelogistics.com. Accessed: 2022-09-12.
[20]
Sten Bay Jørgensen Niels Rode Kristensen Henrik Madsen. “Parameter estimation in stochas-
tic grey-box models”. In: Automatica 40 (2003).
[21]
Henrik Madsen; Jan Holst. Modelling Non-Linear and Non-Stationary Time Series. IMM,
December 2006.
[22]
Sten Bay Jørgensen Niels Rode Kristensen Henrik Madsen. “A method for systematic im-
provement of stochastic grey-box models”. In: Computers and Chemical Engineering 28
(2003).
[23]
CTSM-R. https://ctsm.info/index.html. Accessed: 2022-09-21.
[24]
Henrik Madsen Niels Rode Kristensen. “Continuous Time Stochastic Modelling - Mathe-
matics Guide”. In: User’s Guide (2003).
[25]
Henrik Madsen. Time Series Analysis. CHAPMAN and HALL/CRC, December 2007.
Data-driven digital twins for monitoring and control of electricity distribution net
105
==PAGE:116==
[26]
Peder Bacher; Philip Anton de Saint-Aubain; Lasse Engbo Christiansen Henrik Madsen.
“Non-parametric method for separating domestic hot water heating spikes and space heat-
ing”. In: Energy and Buildings (2016).
[27]
Philip Anton de Saint-Aubain. Adaptive Load Forecasting. Master Thesis, DTU, 2011.
[28]
Coefficient of Performane (COP) heat pumps. https://www.grundfos.com/solutions/
learn/research-and-insights/coefficient-of-system-performance. Accessed: 2023-01-
08.
[29]
Konstant Tarifmodel. https : / / konstant . dk / net / priser - og - vilkaar / nettariffer - og -
abonnementer/. Accessed: 2023-01-22.
[30]
Rui Amaral Lopesc Karen Byskov Lindbergb Glenn Reynderse Rishi Relana Henrik Mad-
sena Rune Grønborg Junkera Armin Ghasem Azara. “Characterizing the energy flexibility
of buildings and districts”. In: Applied Energy 225 (2018).
[31]
Rongling Li Andrew J. Satchwell Donal Finn Toke Haunstrup Christensen Michaël Kum-
mert Jérôme Le Dréau Rui Amaral Lopes Henrik Madsen Jaume Salom Gregor Henze Kim
Wittchen. “Ten questions concerning energy flexibility in buildings”. In: Building and En-
vironment (2021).
[32]
Henrik Madsen Emma M.V. Blomgren Mohsen Banaeia. “Intensive data-driven model for
real-time observability in low voltage radial DSO grids”. In: Applied Energy (2022).
[33]
Energikrisen har for alvor sat sig i danskernes vaner, viser måling. https://nyheder.tv2.dk/
2022-09-21-energikrisen-har-for-alvor-sat-sig-i-danskernes-vaner-viser-maaling.
Accessed: 2022-12-21.
[34]
Nord Pool. https://www.nordpoolgroup.com/en/Market- data1/Dayahead/Area-
Prices/DK/Hourly/?dd=DK1&view=table. Accessed: 2022-09-29.
[35]
Annex 67 - Energy Flexible Buildings. https://www.annex67.org. Accessed: 2023-01-02.
[36]
Rune Grønborg Junker. Annex 82 - Common Exercise 1. 2022.
106
Data-driven digital twins for monitoring and control of electricity distribution net
==PAGE:117==
A
Appendix
A.1
Interview notes
A.1.1
Interview with Søren Søe-larsen from Lundsøe
Notes from interview with Søren Søe-larsen, the CEO at Lundsøe. Interview held on the 20th Oct.
2022.
A.1.1.1
Physical layout of the freezing/cooling room
The freezing room is divided into three sections (in Danish ”brand celler”) to comply with fire
safety rules.
In the freezing room the 9 evaporators are placed evenly (distribution-wise) along the ceiling, as
shown in figure 4.4. The evaporators blow air in the direction along the building, such that AR 22
and AR 28 blows towards the wall opposite the blue door, and AR 25 blows towards 25. The same
logic goes for the rest of the evaporators. In the cooling rooms both evaporators blow towards the
wall connected to the ”new” freezing room, hence away from the blue door.
The gate separating the cooling and freezing room is a plastic-like curtain which opens and closes
automatically when a pallet is sent into the freezing room on a conveyor belt. This happens fast
and efficient, as this is one of the main points in regards to being energy efficient. If the door stands
open too long, the circulation of cold air in the freezing room will be disturbed, and a large amount
of energy lost.
A.1.1.2
Temperature control and evaporators
The evaporators function in the following way: the compressor sends cooled down (-35 ◦C) CO2 to
the evaporators, which then cools down the fans. The -35◦C. CO2 can in most optimal conditions
cool down the air to -27◦C, so a difference/loss in 8◦C. The evaporators cool the air by extracting
all moisture from the air, and by air passing the cooled down fans. The evaporators then blow out
cool air from the side, and take in the room-tempered return-air. This is the circle of the cooling
mechanism.
Ice crystals on the evaporator fans are a result of the moisture extraction from the air, and three
times a day a defrosting program is run. Here the temperature is increased to around -19◦C in
order to get rid of the ice crystals on the fans. After the defrosting, it would take some time to
reach the set point temperature again, as the fans in the evaporator would need to be cooled down
again before they are able to properly cool down the air.
It is very important that the temperature in the freezing room is kept even throughout the room.
The temperature is controlled by a set point, which normally ranges between -26 to - 21 ◦C. The
set point temperature does not need to reflect the actual measured temperature. Søren showed
an example of the current status of evaporator 5.1, where the set point was -26 ◦C, and actual
temperature -20,1 ◦C. The set point can be manually tuned according to how much one wants to
cool the room down. The lower the temperature, the more energy is needed to fuel the compressor
and decrease the temperature level. As it is seen in the plots of Lundsøe’s energy consumption,
figure 4.12, during the morning and afternoon/early night, the consumption is lowered. This is due
to the fact that the set temperature is increased, in order to use less energy and hence save money,
as this is the peak point for energy prices.
When looking at the temperature data in figure 4.16, Søren pointed out that in freezing room evap-
orator 5.1, it looks like a large delivery has been made around the 9th of April, and the after effects
Data-driven digital twins for monitoring and control of electricity distribution net
107
==PAGE:118==
are seen on the closest evaporator (5.1), where the temperature generally is higher for this pe-
riod. This elevated temperature would also mean that this evaporator uses more energy in order to
maintain the set control temperature.
A.1.1.3
Energy consumption and trends
At the moment the compressor utilisation, thereby energy consumption and the freezing room set
temperature, is adapted to energy prices. The method increases the set temperature during the hours
approx. 4:15-8:00 and again 15:45-18:45, which means the compressor runs with lower capacity
and uses less power. This scheme is only done in order to decrease costs. At the moment the set
point control is done manually, but Søren was open to the idea of a more intelligent system where
the compressor is fed information on energy prices, and tune the set temperature accordingly with
the aim of saving money.
When Lundsøe cools down the freezing room, the only parameter controlling the energy consump-
tion in the compressor is lowered set points during energy price peak hours, other than that the
system runs with the aim of meeting the set point temperature. This means than when big amounts
of goods have been delivered, the systems automatically increases capacity and power up to meet
the desired set temperature. Essentially, the hypothesis is, that even more energy and money could
be saved if one combined the information on the next 24h energy prices forecasts plus information
on good deliveries and their expected temperatures, size and type.
A.1.1.4
Goods deliveries
When goods are delivered, the change and increase in temperature can sometimes be seen in the
data for up to one day. Notice differences in temperatures on weekdays vs. weekends. The goods
delivery peak times are generally weekdays from 7:00-15:00.
It would be interesting to investigate the relation between increase in temperature and energy con-
sumption. Large good deliveries require the compressor and evaporators to work harder, thus we
might expect the energy consumption to be higher when we see increase in temperatures (due to the
system being under higher pressure due to warm goods being placed close to some evaporators).
Lundsøe should register the amount, size, temperature, delivery time and item type of all deliveries
made. Although this is all done manually, and it would require much time and effort for them to
provide us with a full data set of goods deliveries for a given period. Therefore, this data will not
be provided at the moment. Nevertheless, Søren told about a project run at Teknologisk Institut
where they are modelling some flow and temperatures related to Lundsøes good deliveries.
Søren also emphasized the expected difficulty in modelling Lundsøe’s specific dynamics compared
to a freezing house storing only one type of goods. Lundsøe stores all kinds of foods, ranging from
meet, to cheese, shrimps, bread, etc. Meat needs to maintain a certain low temperature at all times
and requires faster cooling, whereas bread is not as critical and it would not be the biggest issue if
the freezing period until reaching the goal temperature took more than 24h, which is not the case
for meat. Therefore, when having one large freezing room storing all these different item types
makes it is presumably more difficult to build a predictive control system based on forecasted
planed deliveries and energy prices. Even though Lundsøe has day to day and long term plans for
good deliveries.
Additionally, the handling of goods of different types and origins are in the end specified and
requested by the owner of the goods. The more special goods needs, the more expensive the
storing in the freezing room of course will be. This also requires Lundsøe to be flexible and able
do meet different demands simultaneously.
A.1.2
Interview with Advansor
Interview with Lars Jensen from Advansor, the 8th November 2022. Questions related to the
compressor and evaporators installed in the Lundsøe cooling house.
108
Data-driven digital twins for monitoring and control of electricity distribution net
==PAGE:119==
A.1.2.1
Compressor
Due to thermodynamics, the COP of the compressor can range between 2 in the summer up to 10 in
the winter. Because the temperature difference between the freezing room and the outsides is higher
in summer, more energy is needed in order to move the heat from the freezing room to outside. This
is also the reason why the COP is lower, because the suction pressure needs to be +3 kelvin/Celsius
compared to the outside temperature, and this corresponds to more bars. Also explained in https:
//www.tesisat.org/en/pressure-and-temperature-concepts-cooling-circuit.html.
Lundsøe controls their energy consumption by setting the control temperature in the evaporators.
The suction pressure is here kept constant, but the compressor needs to work less to reach the outlet
temperature. A more energy efficient way would be to control the room temperature by changing
the suction pressure. This would save energy because the COP would generally be higher. This
is also much harder and technical to control. Therefore the other solution is considered the easier
solution.
A.1.2.2
Evaporators
It is normal to run the defrost cycles in turn, as this would keep a more stable overall temperature
in the freezing room. To defrost the cooling coils, Lundsøe’s system uses the excess warm heat
(which is essentially waste from the cooling) to defrost the coils. This is much cheaper in regards
to energy, than using local heating devices. Because the heating is so local, the added heat to
the system leaved the freezing room as water from the melted ice from the coils. It is also faster
because the warm gas is released directly onto the coils. The expected amount of energy from the
warm gas would be around 30-40 kW, but can not be estimated exactly. During the defrosting the
fans stops. The small heating device mounted on the evaporators is used to keep the tips of the
fans clear from ice, such that they do not freeze and in that way get stuck.
The defrosting cycle in steps: Stop cooling, then blow the rest of the cool air out, stop the fans,
inlet the warm gas, wait for the fans to heat up, dripping time where the water is drained, then start
the cooling and fans again.
Data-driven digital twins for monitoring and control of electricity distribution net
109
==PAGE:120==
A.2
Material related to the data-driven digital twins of the Lundsøe
cooling house
A.2.1
Pictures from Lundsøe cooling house
Figure A.1: Picture from Lundsøe freezing room. The sub-rooms are indicated by the red numbers.
The blue and green arrows indicate where the concrete half-walls are separating the freezing room.
110
Data-driven digital twins for monitoring and control of electricity distribution net
==PAGE:121==
Figure A.2: Picture from Lundsøe freezing room indicating where the evaporators in sub-room 7
are placed.
Data-driven digital twins for monitoring and control of electricity distribution net
111
==PAGE:122==
A.2.2
Plot from Kernel Smoothing of cooling room temperature signals
Figure A.3: Upper: The source data from the cooling room. Lower: The filtered temperature
signals, where the base signal omits the spikes, and the calculated mean of the two is plotted in
black.
112
Data-driven digital twins for monitoring and control of electricity distribution net
==PAGE:123==
A.3
Material related to estimating energy flexibility in Nr. Bjert
A.3.1
Energy consumption for houses in Nr. Bjert
Figure A.4: Total energy consumption in first week of September 2022 for each colored radial in
Nr. Bjert.
Figure A.5: Total energy consumption in first week of September 2022 for houses clustered by
construction decade in Nr. Bjert.
Data-driven digital twins for monitoring and control of electricity distribution net
113
==PAGE:124==
Figure A.6: Total energy consumption in first week of September 2022 for houses in Nr. Bjert
with respectively EVs and PVs.
Figure A.7: Total energy consumption in first week of October 2022 for each colored radial in Nr.
Bjert.
114
Data-driven digital twins for monitoring and control of electricity distribution net
==PAGE:125==
Figure A.8: Total energy consumption in first week of October 2022 for houses clustered by con-
struction decade in Nr. Bjert.
Figure A.9: Total energy consumption in first week of October 2022 for houses in Nr. Bjert with
respectively EVs and PVs.
Data-driven digital twins for monitoring and control of electricity distribution net
115
==PAGE:126==
A.3.2
Data exploration
Radial
1980’s
1990’s
2000’s
2010’s
Month
Aug.
Sep.
Oct.
Aug.
Sep.
Oct.
Aug.
Sep.
Oct.
Aug.
Sep.
Oct.
µ
5.25
5.17
5.59
6.99
6.81
6.93
34.51
34.11
38.08
5.39
4.86
5.86
σ2
4.60
4.49
5.08
5.59
6.76
8.41
67.65
86.92
102.96
6.65
6.31
7.04
Table A.1: Summary table of statistical behavior by year of house construction.
A.3.3
Flexibility plots
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
Figure A.10: Results of the estimated flexibility in houses of the brown radial. The spot price
signal is normalized to [0.0,1.0]. Sub-plots (a), (c), and (e) visualise the predictions of demand
compared to the measured demand in the first 150 hours of August, September, and October. Sub-
plots (b), (d), and (f) visualise the functional relationships between the state of charge and energy
demand in August, September, and October. For the functional relationships between the state of
charge and energy demand positive values lead to increased demand while negative values leads
to decreased demand.
116
Data-driven digital twins for monitoring and control of electricity distribution net
==PAGE:127==
(a)
(b)
(c)
]
(e)
(f)
Figure A.11: Results of the estimated flexibility in houses of the blue radial. The spot price signal
is normalized to [0.0,1.0]. Sub-plots (a), (c), and (e) visualise the predictions of demand compared
to the measured demand in the first 150 hours of August, September, and October. Sub-plots (b),
(d), and (f) visualise the functional relationships between the state of charge and energy demand in
August, September, and October. For the functional relationships between the state of charge and
energy demand positive values lead to increased demand while negative values leads to decreased
demand.
Data-driven digital twins for monitoring and control of electricity distribution net
117
==PAGE:128==
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
Figure A.12: Results of the estimated flexibility in houses of the green radial. The spot price signal
is normalized to [0.0,1.0]. Sub-plots (a), (c), and (e) visualise the predictions of demand compared
to the measured demand in the first 150 hours of August, September, and October. Sub-plots (b),
(d), and (f) visualise the functional relationships between the state of charge and energy demand in
August, September, and October. For the functional relationships between the state of charge and
energy demand positive values lead to increased demand while negative values leads to decreased
demand.
118
Data-driven digital twins for monitoring and control of electricity distribution net
==PAGE:129==
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
Figure A.13: Results of the estimated flexibility in houses built in the 1980’s. The spot price signal
is normalized to [0.0,1.0]. Sub-plots (a), (c), and (e) visualise the predictions of demand compared
to the measured demand in the first 150 hours of August, September, and October. Sub-plots (b),
(d), and (f) visualise the functional relationships between the state of charge and energy demand in
August, September, and October. For the functional relationships between the state of charge and
energy demand positive values lead to increased demand while negative values leads to decreased
demand.
Data-driven digital twins for monitoring and control of electricity distribution net
119
==PAGE:130==
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
Figure A.14: Results of the estimated flexibility in houses built in the 1990’s. The spot price signal
is normalized to [0.0,1.0]. Sub-plots (a), (c), and (e) visualise the predictions of demand compared
to the measured demand in the first 150 hours of August, September, and October. Sub-plots (b),
(d), and (f) visualise the functional relationships between the state of charge and energy demand in
August, September, and October. For the functional relationships between the state of charge and
energy demand positive values lead to increased demand while negative values leads to decreased
demand.
120
Data-driven digital twins for monitoring and control of electricity distribution net
==PAGE:131==
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
Figure A.15: Results of the estimated flexibility in houses built in the 2000’s. The spot price signal
is normalized to [0.0,1.0]. Sub-plots (a), (c), and (e) visualise the predictions of demand compared
to the measured demand in the first 150 hours of August, September, and October. Sub-plots (b),
(d), and (f) visualise the functional relationships between the state of charge and energy demand in
August, September, and October. For the functional relationships between the state of charge and
energy demand positive values lead to increased demand while negative values leads to decreased
demand.
Data-driven digital twins for monitoring and control of electricity distribution net
121
==PAGE:132==
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
Figure A.16: Results of the estimated flexibility in houses built in the 2010’s. The spot price signal
is normalized to [0.0,1.0]. Sub-plots (a), (c), and (e) visualise the predictions of demand compared
to the measured demand in the first 150 hours of August, September, and October. Sub-plots (b),
(d), and (f) visualise the functional relationships between the state of charge and energy demand in
August, September, and October. For the functional relationships between the state of charge and
energy demand positive values lead to increased demand while negative values leads to decreased
demand.
122
Data-driven digital twins for monitoring and control of electricity distribution net
==PAGE:133==
Data-driven digital twins for monitoring and control of electricity distribution net
123
==PAGE:134==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Matematiktorvet, Building 303B
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
www.compute.dtu.dk
