==PAGE:1==
Technical University of Denmark
Department for Health Technology
MSc thesis of 30 ects
Kmer-based quantification of biosynthetic
gene clusters.
Author:
Henrik Sparre Spiegelhauer
174571
Supervisors:
Asker Brejnrod Postdoc
Trine Zachariasen PhD student
Anders Gorm Pedersen Professor
27th of January, 2023
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
CHAPTER
ONE
ABSTRACT
Biosynthetic gene clusters (BGCs) are known to encode a large and diverse set of enzy-
matic pathways that produce specialised secondary metabolites in bacteria. These en-
coded secondary metabolites include a myriad of medicines such as antibiotics, antifungal
agents, antitumor agents, and immunosuppresants. Therefore, uncovering the function
of BGCs is of great interest, and although advances in insilico BGC discovery have been
made, quantification and determination of action are still largely unsolved problems for
BGCs.
In this study, the problem of obtaining robust quantification of BGCs is undertaken. A
k-mer-based pipeline was developed for BGC quantification in order to quantify clusters
of BGCs based on refined catalogues of k-mers. BGCs were clustered on the basis of local
sequence similarity, and for each cluster of BGCs, a 500 k-mer catalogue was obtained
through an iterative refinement method. A ranked binomial rank scoring scheme was
implemented to identify the best k-mer catalogues for each cluster.
The k-mer-based approach performed better compared to that of a reference method
based on read mapping. The k-mer approach had a more consistent approximation across
sample sizes and BGC clusters. The improvement in performance was greater for smaller
sample sizes and more poorly defined clusters of BGCs.
A better approximation of BGCs in metagenomics samples is expected to increase the
precision of downstream analyses and allow better annotation of BGCs by comparing
abundance estimations with observed effects. The more consistent quantification obtained
using the developed pipeline will be a relevant stepping stone for future investigations into
the actions of biosynthetic gene clusters.
iii
==PAGE:4==
CHAPTER
TWO
PREFACE
This master’s thesis is the finalisation of the MSc in Bioinformatics & System Biology at
the Technical University of Denmark (DTU). The project was carried out in the Depart-
ment of Health Technology at DTU and is the product of 30 ECTS points.
Throughout the project I have been supported by serveral persons who have helped shape
the project. I would like to thank my supervisors Asker Brejnrod and Trine Zachariasen for
their guidance and Anders Gorm Pedersen for setting up the framework of the project.
I also extend my thanks to Ole Lund, who has provided feedback and encouragement
throughout the project.
Code availability
The source code for the project is hosted on Github (github.com/HenrikSpiegel/Screener).
The project was developed using Computerome, the Danish national life science super-
computing center, and thus the pipelines have been developed for that environment and
are dependent on the specific infrastructure.
A larger amount of code was developed specifically for the project, which includes; a
job-manager, various python class wrappers, various scripts, and large python classes. In
total, more than 9000 lines of code were written for this project.
iv
==PAGE:5==
CONTENTS
1
Abstract
iii
2
Preface
iv
3
Introduction
1
3.1
Biosynthetic gene clusters
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
3.1.1
Unravelling the action of BGCs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
3.2
The aim of the project. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
3.3
Shotgun metagenomics, characteristics and modeling. . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
4
Methods
4
4.1
Workflow
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
4.2
Simulated datasets . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
4.2.1
Development data set . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
4.2.2
Benchmark data set
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
4.2.3
Generation of synthetic metagenomic samples. . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
4.2.4
Preprocessing of simulated reads. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
4.3
Biosynthetic Gene clusters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
4.3.1
Comparison of biosynthetic gene clusters. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
4.3.2
Clustering the biosynthetic gene clusters. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
Cluster centres as representative sequences. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
4.4
BGC quantification by distinct kmer counting. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
4.4.1
Expected number of detected identifiers. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
4.4.2
Mean Ranked pearson residuals. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
4.4.3
Generation of initial pool of identifying kmers. . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
4.4.4
Obtaining refined catalogue. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
Removing outlying k-mers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
Hot start . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
Iterative refinement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
4.4.5
Correcting information loss from kmer generation. . . . . . . . . . .
11
4.4.6
Emperical support for correction terms. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
4.5
BGC quantification by mapping depth. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
4.6
Evaluation of methods. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
5
Results
15
5.1
Empirical support for methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
5.1.1
Blast based similarity score
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
5.1.2
Kmer correction factors
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
v
==PAGE:6==
5.2
Simulated Dataset characteristics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
5.2.1
Development set
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
5.2.2
Benchmark set
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
Distribution of strains in samples . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
5.3
Clustering of biosynthetic gene clusters. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
5.4
Refinement of kmer-catalogues . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
5.4.1
Outlier handling
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
5.4.2
Count distribution of catalogues . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
5.4.3
BGC abundance estimation from catalogues. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
5.4.4
Comparison of Kmer method to standard.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
5.5
Effect of sample simulation.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
6
Discussion
30
6.1
Identifying families of BGCs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
6.2
Simulating metagenomics data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
6.3
Statistical challenges in sparse metagenomics data . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
6.4
Adressing outliers via filtering . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
6.5
Limitations of the kmer count model. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
6.6
Performance of the kmer-based quantification. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
6.7
Perspectives for kmer-based quantification. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
7
Conclusion
35
References
35
==PAGE:7==
CHAPTER
THREE
INTRODUCTION
Natural products and their semi-synthetic derivatives have been an important source for
drugs in the pharmaceutical industry, as well as molecules and enzymes in the biotechnical
sector. From 1981 to 2006 34% of the new drugs were natural products or their semi-
synthetic derivatives[1].
Furthermore, the human microbiome harbours thousands of bacterial species that
impact the well-being of the host[2]. The microbiome affects the host in part through a
repetoire of products that are not directly involved in the growth of the cells, the secondary
metabolites. These secondary metabolites can directly impact the host by interacting with
human cells[3, 4]. Otherwise suppressing[5, 6] or promoting other species[7] within the
microbiome, thus changing the overall composition or behaviour of the microbiome.
Gaining a better understanding of the repetoire of secondary metabolites which bac-
teria carry can not only lead to new drug discoveries, but also increase our understanding
of the human microbiome.
3.1
Biosynthetic gene clusters
Biosynthetic gene clusters (BGCs) are known to encode a large and diverse set of enzy-
matic pathways that produce specialised secondary metabolites. BGCs describe locally
clustered groups of at least two genes that in their combination encode an enzymatic
pathway[8]. In addition to the core biosynthetic enzymes, BGCs can also harbour genes
for transporteres, regulatory elements, and genes that promote the conservation of BGCs
within the host[9].
BGCs evolve rapidly, both due to the short replication times of the bacterial host
and due to their tendency to transfer horizontally[10]. The collection of genes in BGCs
appears to carry most of the information, since the order of the domains has little impact
on the structure of the encoded metabolite[11]. NPRS and PKS types are an exception,
as they act as an assembly line by sequentially adding to the metabolite[10].
There are several classes of BGCs, and the standard detection tool AntiSMASH has
been continuously expanded to detect a larger suite of BGC classes[12]. Exploring and
analysing BGCs is of interest both in the pharmaceutical and biotech interest spheres.
For example, nonribosomal peptide synthetases (NRPS) and polyketide synthases (PKS)
types are known to contain members that synthesise a diversity of antibiotics and im-
munosuppressants[13, 14].
1
==PAGE:8==
Master Thesis
Henrik Sparre Spiegelhauer
3.1.1
Unravelling the action of BGCs
Prior, uncovering the workings of a BGC was based on the cloning of environmental DNA
into host organimism[15] or using a PCR primer approach[16]. Such approaches had a
limited bandwidth. However, advances in metagenomics have allowed an insilico approach
to detect BGCs. AntiSMASH is the current standard for genome-mining BGCs and is
capable of discovering novel clusters using the rule-based approach of the tool[12]. BGCs
are detected based on manually curated rules that dictate the core biosynthetic functions
that must be present for AntiSMASH to call a given cluster. However, the problem of
determining the encoded chemistry of the detected BGCs remains largely unsolved.
A general approach to gain an understanding of BGCs would be to correlate the
presence of a given BGC with a chemical signal. Such an approach could be a global
meta-analysis linking chemical information from natural product (NP) databases such as
NPAtlas[14] or mass spectrometric (MS) data to BGCs that are taxonomically conserved.
Taxonomically conserved BGCs made available with BiG-FAM[17] could be linked based
on species/genus level presence/absence patterns observed across the NP and MS data
bases[18]. A meta-analysis would be limited to taxonomically conserved BGCs and would
not facilitate the exploration of transtaxonomic BGCs.
The meta-analysis is further complicated by the finding that the presence of BGCs
is not consistent at the species/genus level. A study of 84 Faecalibacterium prausnitzii
strains showed that while the ranthipeptide and cyclic-lactone-autoinducer BGC classes
were conserved (85.7%), other classes, including RiPP-like and lantipeptide class I, were
detected in less than half of the strains (39.2%)[19].
Detection of BGCs within the sample would avoid some of the above problems. Sug-
imoto et al.
suggested the building of short protein hidden Markov protein models
(spHMM) for segments of signature genes within a cluster and then mine metagenomic
samples using the spHMMS[2]. Their strategy is capable of detecting their query BGC in
the human metagenome; however, spHMMs must be built for every BGC. Additionally,
their approach is limited by the ability to correctly identify signature genes for a given
BGC. Finally, the approach allows for confirmation that a given BGC exists in a niche
but does not allow for a broader exploration of the workings of a large number of BGCs.
A more general approach to quantifying BGCs within samples could improve the un-
derstanding of BGCs by allowing a link between BGCs and sample-specific response
variables. Inspiration for such an approach could be found in other metagenomic disci-
plines. RNA-Skim is an RNA-seq quantification method that works by quantifying sets
of k-mers uniquely associated with disjoint transcript clusters[20]. Similarly, Zachariasen
proposes species quantification and profiling using a set of marker genes associated with
each species. The sets of marker genes were refined by comparing the count distribution
with the negative binomial (NB) distribution[21].
3.2
The aim of the project.
The project aims to improve the state of the quantification of BGCs, thus contributing
to the continued exploration and understanding of the actions of BGCs. The project will
investigate a quantification method based on refined catalogues of k-mers significant to
each cluster of BGCs. The catalogues will be refined on the basis of their goodness-of-fit to
the negative binomial distribution. Thus, the project incorporates the methods proposed
2
Chapter 3 - Introduction
==PAGE:9==
Henrik Sparre Spiegelhauer
Master Thesis
by Zachariasen[21] and those implemented in the RNA-skim method. The goal of this
study is to propose a pipeline to find, cluster, and quantify a set of BGCs with a set
of samples, which could help further analysis and uncovering the actions of the detected
BGCs.
3.3
Shotgun metagenomics, characteristics and mod-
eling.
Shotgun metagenomics describes non-targeted (shotgun) sequencing of all (meta) micro-
bial genomes (genomics). Thus, the method relies on neither cultivation nor amplification,
such as 16-s rRNA sequencing or classical microbiology, and is therefore less biased. Fur-
thermore, it also allows sequencing of non-culturable microorganisms[22]. The resulting
reads from the sequencing technology are the result of a series of random draws from the
underlying pool of DNA in the sample. Thus, the count of reads covering a given sec-
tion of DNA can be approximated by a series of idenpendent and identically distributed
Bernoulli trials.
The distribution of such series of Bernoulli trials can be described by the negative
binomial (NB) distribution. The NB distribution is parameterised by two parameters,
denoted mean and dispersion, which allow mean and variance to differ.
This trait is
unlike the simpler Poisson distribution, which is parameterised by a single parameter
linking mean and variance. Thus, the NB distribution is more flexible with respect to
modelling the variance of the data.
Flexibility is required because not only may the
variance within a sample exceed the mean, but the variance may also differ between
samples due to a variety of bias factors. Bias may arise from intrinsic factors, such as
GC content or repetetive regions in the sample material, or differences in technology and
sequencing protocols[23]. The NB distribution as a model for sequencing count data has
seen popular use with packages such as edgeR[24] and DeSeq2[25].
Chapter 3 - Introduction
3
==PAGE:10==
CHAPTER
FOUR
METHODS
4.1
Workflow
The overall project workflow is described in Figure 4.1. The flow initiates at the creation
of data sets as described in Section 4.2 and terminates at the quantification of the BGCs
within the data sets in Sections 4.4.5 and 4.5.
The main goal for the workflow was to obtain a refined set of k-mers, a catalogue,
for each cluster of BGCs, and use the counts of the k-mers within a catalogue to obtain
an abundance measure of the cluster of BGCs. Thus, the process attempts to define
catalogues of 500 k mers that are representative of the clustered BGCs.
Figure 4.1: Flowchart of workflow
4.2
Simulated datasets
It was chosen to work with simulated data because it allowed a comparison between the es-
timates obtained and the expected values. Two data sets were used throughout the work;
initially, a small development set was created for early development, and later a larger
benchmarking set was simulated. Both sets were rooted in the human gut microbiome.
4
==PAGE:11==
Henrik Sparre Spiegelhauer
Master Thesis
4.2.1
Development data set
Species
NCBI RefSeq
Veillonella parvula
NZ LT906445.1
Clostridium beijerinckii
NZ CP053893.1
Clostridium ljungdahlii
NC 014328.1
Veillonella atypica
NZ CP020566.1
Veillonella rodentium
NZ LT906470.1
Table 4.1:
Overview of genomes used in
the development data set.
The three
top genomes were known to contain the
ranthipeptide BGC, while the two bottom
genomes are closely related.
The initial development set was created
with five genomes.
The simplicity of
the set was chosen to allow easier de-
velopment of the tool set and inspec-
tion of preliminary results. The data set
was anchored in the ranthipeptide clus-
ter type found in Veilonella parvula. Fur-
thermore, the species Clostridium beijer-
inckii and Clostridium ljungdahlii were
found to contain the ranthipeptide homo-
logue BGC[26]. In addition, the Veillonella
atypica and Veillonella rodentium genomes
were included to increase the complexity
of the simulated community.
In the lit-
erature, only the first three species were
known to carry the ranthidepeptide BGC.
The species and the specific NCBI reference sequence are listed in Table 4.1.
4.2.2
Benchmark data set
The benchmark set was created to allow for clustering of BGCs and testing of the analysis
against more complex samples. The benchmark set consisted of assemblies from Bifidobac-
terium spp., Faecalibacterium spp., and Escherichia coli. The assemblies were randomly
drawn from the NCBI genbank assembly summary and subsetted to 100 unique assemblies
from each of the three taxonomies. For Faecalibacterium spp. only 23 unique assemblies
could be obtained; thus, the benchmarking set contained a total of 223 assemblies.
4.2.3
Generation of synthetic metagenomic samples.
CAMISIM (v1.3) software was used to simulate metagenomic samples for both the devel-
opment set and the benchmark set. CAMISIM facilitates simulating shotgun metagenomic
sequencing from various platforms and error rates[27]. The mbarc error profile was used
which simulates HiSeq 2500 technology and has been trained on the MBARC-26 mock
community and with average paired end fragments of 270bp[28]. CAMISIM first simulates
the communities from which it then simulates the reads. The concentration of each strain
was drawn from a lognormal distribution with parameters mu = 0 and sigma = 0.25.
For both sets, varying read masses were chosen and for each selected mass a number of
samples were simulated. Varying the simulated read mass allowed testing of the analysis
at different read depths, and multiple samples allowed investigation into the variance of
the analysis. An overview of the simulated samples can be found in Table 4.2.
Chapter 4 - Methods
5
==PAGE:12==
Master Thesis
Henrik Sparre Spiegelhauer
Set
Simulated
mass (GB)
Samples
per mass
Total
Samples
Complexity
Development set
0.005 - 0.5 (9)
5
45
5 strains
Benchmark set
0.005 - 4 (14)
10
140
223 strains
Table 4.2: Overview of the Simulated data sets, simulated mass refers to the amount of
reads, in gigabytes, which were sampled.
4.2.4
Preprocessing of simulated reads.
The reads generated by CAMISIM simulation software were preprocessed using Sickle
(v1.13)[29], which is a window-based trimming tool. CAMISIM generated reads do not
include adapters in the simulated reads nor host contamination, which is why a sim-
ple preprocessing approach was suitable. The Sickle software was run with the default
parameters for the paired-end subroutine.
4.3
Biosynthetic Gene clusters
BGCs were identified in the input strains for both data sets using antiSMASH (v6.1.1),
which is a rule-based tool for the detection of biosynthetic gene clusters based on genes
within the potential cluster[12]. Antismash was run using Prodigal gene prediction soft-
ware[30]. It should be noted that Antismash was run on assemblies pulled from NCBI
and not on contigs assembled on the basis of the simulated reads.
4.3.1
Comparison of biosynthetic gene clusters.
A meaningful statistic of similarity between BGCs was required to group similar BGCs
into a cluster. More specifically, a one-number metric is needed that allows the inter-
pretation of similarity between two BGCs. There could be multiple approaches to this
similarity metric with different foci. An approach could be the Biosynthetic Gene Simi-
larity Clustering and Prospecting Engine (BiG-SCAPE), which essentially clusters BGCs
based on the pfam annotation of the genes within the clusters[31]. However, while BiG-
SCAPE allows for a more biologically meaningful clustering, the clusters may be quite
diverse with regard to sequence similarity. To generate a representative k-mer catalogue
for each cluster of BGCs, the sequences of the included BGCs must be homogeneous,
which is why a sequence-based similarity metric was required.
However, sequence-based similarity was not easily obtained because the order of do-
mains within a BGC may change. Therefore, an approach that allowed multiple local
alignments was required as global aligners would not be able to handle the swapping of
elements within otherwise identical BGCs.
Initially, the Average Nucleotide Identity (ANI) was considered and then discarded
because the implementations do not scale well. Furthermore, fastANI [32, 33] was in-
vestigated. The tool approximates the ANI values without expensive blast subroutines
and has a good approximation for ANI estimation between whole genomes. However, the
tool is developed for genome-level comparisons and performed poorly on the shorter BGC
sequences, resulting in non-robust ANI estimates.
6
Chapter 4 - Methods
==PAGE:13==
Henrik Sparre Spiegelhauer
Master Thesis
Finally, a BLAST-based approach was implemented using the BLAST+ suite (v2.12.0)[34].
Alignment was performed using the discontinous-megablast task and using the subject besthit
flag, resulting in the culling of overlapping high scoring pairs (HSP) within each query-
subject pair. The resulting HSPs were then summarised for each query-subject pair and
given a single-number similarity metric using the formula in Equation 4.1. The metric
describes similarity as the ratio of correctly aligned base pairs to the number of base pairs
in perfect alignment. The metric is penalised according to the longest query or subject
sequence.
Similarity(query, subject) =
P
i
len(HSPi) · %iden(HSPi)
max(queryseqLength, subjectseqLength)
(4.1)
The metric given in Equation 4.1 is symmetric; however, BLAST is not symmetric, since
it is not given that the same HSPs are obtained when subject and query sequences are
swapped. Therefore, the two similarity scores were averaged and a pairwise symmetric
similarity matrix was obtained. An experiment was carried out to test the BLAST-based
similarity metric. The experimental setup involved comparing a sequence with shuffled
versions of itself. The initial sequence, SequenceX, was shuffled in chunks to emulate the
potential shuffle of genes in a BGC and then compared with itself. The results of the
experiment are described in Section 5.1.1.
4.3.2
Clustering the biosynthetic gene clusters.
Marcov Clustering (MCL) process was used to cluster BGCs, as it allows a BLAST-based
input and, as such, was analogous to the similarity metric proposed in Section 4.3.1.
The MCL process has been applied for both protein and gene family investigations[35],
with the OrthoMCL procedure that resembles the steps taken for this application[36].
The main parameter in the MCL process, the inflation parameter I, was set to 4. The
recommended range for I is 1.3-6, where a higher inflation parameter results in smaller
and more homogeneous clusters. Clusters are illustrated in Section 5.3. Clustered BGCs
were the initial input to the catalogue assembler, as described in Section 4.4.3.
Cluster centres as representative sequences.
A single sequence representation of the clustered BGCs was obtained in order to compare
the kmer-based quantification to the mapping-based quantification. For each cluster, the
representative sequence was determined as the BGC that had the overall highest pairwise
similarity score within the cluster.
4.4
BGC quantification by distinct kmer counting.
The centre of the work was the quantification of BGCs within a sample based on a
catalogue of identifying kmers. The BGCs were clustered, as described in Section 4.3.2
and for each cluster, k-mers were found that described the cluster.
The collection of
describing k-mers will be denoted as a catalogue and the implementation described below
aims at refining a catalogue for each cluster through an iterative process.
The implementation relies on two main ideas; expected number of detected k-mers as
explained in Section 4.4.1 and the ranked pearson residuals as a measure of the goodness
Chapter 4 - Methods
7
==PAGE:14==
Master Thesis
Henrik Sparre Spiegelhauer
of fit to the negative binomial distribution as described in Section 4.4.2.
Furthermore, quantification using a k-mer-based approach was found to involve han-
dling a certain loss of information, which is described in Section 4.4.5.
4.4.1
Expected number of detected identifiers.
Refined catalogues should have k-mers that are equally likely to be sequenced. Therefore,
a method was required to evaluate whether the k-mers within the catalogue were indeed
equally likely to be sequenced. Assuming that each k-mer is equally likely to be detected
and that the detection process is independent, the probability of not observing a given
identifier P0 is given by Equation 4.2 where G is the size of the catalogue and N is the
total number of observations of members of the catalogue.
P0 =
G −1
G
N
(4.2)
Equation 4.2 can be extended to obtain the expected number of uniquely detected
k-mers Edetect as a function of the number of identifiers G and the total number of obser-
vations. The formula for expected detected identifiers is given in Equation 4.3.
Edetect = (1 −P0) ∗G =
 
1 −
G −1
G
N!
· G
(4.3)
The overall performance of a catalogue can then be determined by calculating the mean
squared error (MSE) between Edetect and the observed number of detected identifiers
across all samples.
The MSE for Edetect was denoted MSEdetect.
The observed and
expected detection of the catalogue identifiers is illustrated in Figure 4.2a. Note that
while G is constant as the catalogue size is fixed, N depends on the sample size and the
specific simulation of reads and errors and thus varies between samples.
4.4.2
Mean Ranked pearson residuals.
In addition to the overall performance measure of a catalogue given by MSEdetect, a
method was needed to rank the individual k-mers within a catalogue. Ranking the per-
formance of k-mers within a catalogue would allow the elimination of poor-performing
k-mers in favour of new ones.
The individual performance of the k-mers was measured by their mean rank Pearson
residuals across all samples. Each sample was fitted to the negative binomial distribu-
tion, and the observed counts were scored against the expected counts using the Pearson
residual. The NB was fitted using the Python package: Statsmodels (v0.13.5)[37] and
the absolute Pearson residual for each identifier and sample rij were calculated from the
expected count yij and the observed count xij given Equation 4.4.
rij = |xij −yij|
√yij
(4.4)
8
Chapter 4 - Methods
==PAGE:15==
Henrik Sparre Spiegelhauer
Master Thesis
(a)
(b)
Figure 4.2: Illustrations of the two main ideas behind the catalogue refinement process.
(a) Expected and observed relationship between the detection of unique identifiers and
the total number of observed identifiers for a single catalogue. (b) Fitted NB distribution
for single sample and the absolute pearson residuals.
To allow comparison of absolute residuals across different sample sizes, the k-mers of
the catalogue were ranked within each sample and their mean rank across all samples was
used as an indicator of performance for the individual k-mers. The mean rank Pearson
residual was an indicator of how well the counts of the individual identifier fit the expected
NB distribution in the context of the counts of the other k-mers in the catalogue. The
method is illustrated in Figure 4.2b. The Pearson residual for each identifier was given
as the residual of the bin to which its count belongs.
4.4.3
Generation of initial pool of identifying kmers.
The initial pool of kmers for each BGC cluster was determined to be those kmers that
are distinctive for the cluster and highly conserved within. The kmer length was set to 21
to ensure close to uniqueness. Furthermore, the kmers were converted to their canonical
representation. Since the later obtained counts are based on reads, it is unknown from
which strand the read originates. Therefore, there is no difference between a kmer and
its reverse complement.
The canonical representation is defined as the alphabetically
smallest of a kmer and its reverse complement.
K-mers shared between the clusters were not included, and the kmers within a cluster
were ranked according to the prevalence within. A Python class (CatalogueAssembler)
was developed to handle the task and is available on GitHub (refer to the Preface sec-
tion). Since the number of kmers within a cluster may be very large, they were subsetted
to a maximum of 10.000 identifiers sorted by within-cluster prevalence; in case of ties, a
random identifier was selected. The initial set of the 10k most prevalent identifiers was
then counted using Jellyfish2(v2.3.0)[38]. For each sample, a kmer count database was
generated from the pre-processed reads. The databases were built using canonical rep-
resentation. Then, for each cluster, a count matrix was obtained by querying the count
databases for each sample. The count matrices and the prevalence within the cluster of
Chapter 4 - Methods
9
==PAGE:16==
Master Thesis
Henrik Sparre Spiegelhauer
kmers were the input for the refinement process.
4.4.4
Obtaining refined catalogue.
The refinement process starting at the initial 10k kmers to the final catalogue at 500
kmers was handled by the developed Python class MAGpy. The source code is available
on Github (refer to the preface section). The refinement process occurred in three steps;
first, global outlier k-mers were identified and discarded, second, a number of semirandom
start catalogues were tested, and third, the best start catalogue was updated through a
number of refine steps.
Removing outlying k-mers
The Tukey´s method for outlier detection was applied to the count data. Tukey´s method
is defined by the lower QL and upper QU quantiles, and the distance between these is
denoted as the interquantile range (IQR). The extreme values or outliers can then be
determined as those observations that fall outside the extremes xL and xU as defined in
Equation 4.5[39].
xL = QL −1.5 · IQR
(4.5)
xU = QU + 1.5 · IQR
It should be noted that Tukey´s method may not handle samples, with a large number
of the same count, as expected. This is especially true for samples with a large proportion
of zero counts, where the upper extreme will be close to zero, giving a disproportionately
large number of detected outliers. Therefore, in the application of Tukey´s method in
this work, a heuristic has been implemented that compares k-mers based on how many
times they were observed as outliers.
It was found that many kmers were outliers in a few samples, and few kmers were
outliers in many samples. The upper 20th percentile kmers with the most outlier oc-
currences were therefore marked as overall outliers and ignored for the remainder of the
process. Furthermore, the remaining kmers were scored from 0-1 (degreeoutlier) based on
how many samples they were found to be outliers.
The outlier score was combined with the prevalence that k-mers had in their cluster to
obtain the metric desireblity as described in Equation 4.6. A kmer that was found within
all BGCs of the cluster and was outlier in zero samples would have a desirability of 2.
desirability = prevalence + (1 −outlierdegree)
(4.6)
Hot start
Multiple combinations of kmers were initially tested to avoid starting with a very poor
catalogue of kmers. 50 combinations were drawn from the pool of 8.000 kmers remaining
after discarding the general outliers. Each combination was drawn from the pool with
a probability weight for each kmer equal to its desiability score given by Equation 4.6.
10
Chapter 4 - Methods
==PAGE:17==
Henrik Sparre Spiegelhauer
Master Thesis
The combination of kmers with the lowest MSEdetect (see Section 4.4.1) was chosen as
the initial catalogue. This initial catalogue was called kmerinit.
Iterative refinement
Each refinement iteration attempts to improve the fit to the expected detection curve
described by MSEdetect by exchanging the kmers with the poorest mean ranked Pearson
residuals. The procedure is described in Algorithm 1.
Algorithm 1 Refinement step
Calculate MSEdetect of current set
Calculate mean ranked Pearson residual for each kmer in current set
Set kmerkeep by dropping the P percentile of worst performing kmers.
for attempts do
Sample candidate kmers weighted on desirability.
Create candidate set from retained kmers and sampled candidates
Calculate MSEdetect for candidate set.
if Candidate set has lower MSEdetect then
Set candidate set as new current set.
Break
end if
end for
The stepping procedure was parameterised by P which controls the percentile of kmers
was attempted to be exchanged.
The parameter P was denoted stepsize and can be
interpreted as a learning rate. At higher values of stepsize, a higher proportion of kmers
can be exchanged, allowing for a wider sampling of the kmer combination space, while
lower values allow for refinement.
For the complete refinement procedure, the refinement step was performed multiple
times with a decreasing parameter stepsize, with multiple attempts to improve for each
stepsize. The refinement was carried out with stepsizes ∈{40, 35, 30, 25, 20, 15, 10, 5, 2} and
50 retries per stepsize, furthermore, for a new candidate set to be accepted, its MSEdetect
must be an improvement of at least 5%.
4.4.5
Correcting information loss from kmer generation.
Two correction steps must be taken to convert the raw counts of catalogue kmers to a
coverage estimate. First, since the analysis used kmers, one cannot rely on the fussy
mapping to negate the impact of sequencing errors. When mapping a read to a reference
of interest, one can allow a certain degree of difference between query and reference so that
the mapping becomes fussy, non-perfect. However, when counting kmers, either two mers
are equal or they are not; one works in absolutes. Thus, the effect of sequencing errors
may be more pronounced. For a kmer to survive, as in being correctly sequenced and
detected, there cannot be a sequencing error in any of the bases belonging to the kmer. Put
differently, all bases must be correctly sequenced for the kmer to survive. Assuming that
the sequencing error events are independent, the definition of statistically independent
events applies, and therefore also the product rule, given in Equation 4.7. It was known
that the assumption of independence and equality was violated, as sequencing errors
Chapter 4 - Methods
11
==PAGE:18==
Master Thesis
Henrik Sparre Spiegelhauer
depend on their context; however, it allowed an initial correction which was empirically
supported.
P(A ∩B) = P(A) · P(B)
(4.7)
For a kmer of length k and an error rate of r Equation 4.7 can be extended to Equation 4.8,
where Psurvival describes the probability that a kmer will survive the sequencing process.
Psurvival = (1 −r)k
(4.8)
Thus, for a kmer of length k = 21 and error rate of 3%, approximately 52% kmers
are expected to survive. Figure 4.3, illustrates how a single substitution sequencing error
leads to multiple lost erroneous kmers.
Figure 4.3: Illustration of the loss of kmers due to sequencing errors.
In addition to information loss due to sequencing errors, not all positions in a read give
rise to a kmer. Kmers cannot be obtained for the last k-1 bases in the sequenced read,
since the region that would define the kmer extends the read and thus is not defined. The
edge loss problem is illustrated in Figure 4.4.
Figure 4.4: Illustration of the information loss due to the edge problems in kmers.
The loss of information from the edge effect can be described as the difference between
the length of the read and the number of possible kmers. The relation is described in
Equation 4.9, where Lossedge describes the lost information given the kmer length k and
the read length L.
Lossedge = L −(L −k + 1)
L
= k −1
L
(4.9)
12
Chapter 4 - Methods
==PAGE:19==
Henrik Sparre Spiegelhauer
Master Thesis
Finally, to convert raw counts to coverage estimate, the combined correction of loss due
to sequencing error and loss due to edge effect.
4.4.6
Emperical support for correction terms.
A series of simulation experiments were performed to gain empirical support for the cor-
rections. The aim of the experiments was to investigate whether the kmer-based method
could obtain a true abundance estimate.
The simulation setup is described in Figure 4.5. A read of length L base pairs (bp) was
simulated from a random underlying genome with length 3L bp. Thus, the true coverage
was 1
3. Substitution errors were then simulated to emulate sequencing errors with a rate
of 1-6% and generated kmers from the read.
The coverage of the underlying artificial genome was estimated from a catalogue gen-
erated as a set of random kmers from the genome.
The genome and catalogue were
generated at random for each iteration of the simulation. Both the per base sequencing
error and the read length L were varied. One should note that the spread of the results
may be overexaggerated, as both the catalogue location and the errors in the read were
random, leading to extreme edgecases.
Figure 4.5: Schematics of the simulation experiments for testing the kmer quantification
corrections.
Simulations were performed for error rates e ∈{0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5} and read lengths L ∈
{50, 100, 150, 200, 300}. The results are described in Section 5.1.2.
4.5
BGC quantification by mapping depth.
Quantification by mapping reads to reference was used as a baseline approach to which
the kmer-based quantification could be compared. The by-mapping quantification was
performed by mapping the preprocessed reads against a database containing the reference
BGCs for each cluster of BGCs. The reference BGC for each cluster was chosen as the
centre of the cluster as described in Section 4.3.2. The mapping was performed using
minimap2(v2.6), post-processing was performed with SAMtools(v1.14), and finally the
coverage for each reference BGC was summarised using CMseq (v1.0.4)[40–42]. CMseq
reports both average and median depths, of which the median depth was chosen as the
abundance estimate, as it was more robust to outliers.
Chapter 4 - Methods
13
==PAGE:20==
Master Thesis
Henrik Sparre Spiegelhauer
4.6
Evaluation of methods.
The methods were evaluated on the basis of their estimates relative error to the expected
abundance. The expected abundance was obtained from the distribution of the genomes
and the total simulated mass of the reads for each sample.
The relative error is given by the signed difference between the estimated and expected
values relative to the expected values. The ratio is given in Equation 4.10, where Aij is
the expected abundance of strain i for the sample j and Pij the estimated.
REij =
X
i
Pij −Aij
Aij
(4.10)
The absolute error as given in Equation 4.11 is known as the Thiel U statistic[43] and
is a measure of forecast accuracy. However, in the current application the sign of the error
was of interest, as a constant error rate has very different implications from a fluctuating
error of the same magnitude. Therefore, the signed relative error RE was applied for the
evaluation of the methods.
RAEij = Uij =
pP (Pij −Aij)2
qP A2
ij
(4.11)
14
Chapter 4 - Methods
==PAGE:21==
CHAPTER
FIVE
RESULTS
5.1
Empirical support for methods
5.1.1
Blast based similarity score
The similarity score based on BLAST described in Section 4.3.1 was tested by comparing a
given SequenceX sequence with shuffled versions of itself. The experiment was performed
to test whether it would handle two shuffled but otherwise identical sequences, as is needed
when comparing biosynthetic gene clusters.
The experimental results can be seen in Figure 5.1 where the coloured stretches de-
scribe BLAST high scoring pairs (HSPs) between the query and the subject. Note that
the similarity metric is 100%, even though the sequences were shuffled, indicating that the
method is fit for purpose. SequenceX refers to the original sequence, while SequenceX-(1)
and SequenceX-(2) refer to shuffled versions.
Figure 5.1: Results of test comparing a sequence with shuffled versions of itself. It can
be seen that the BLAST approach using the similarity metric in 4.1 gives the expected
100% similarity.
15
==PAGE:22==
Master Thesis
Henrik Sparre Spiegelhauer
5.1.2
Kmer correction factors
The kmer correction experiments described in Section 4.4.6 aimed to provide empirical
proof of the derived correction terms. The experiments tested both the correction due to
sequencing errors and the edge loss effect.
The experimental results are summarised in Figure 5.2a and Figure 5.2b, in which we
observe that for all error rates and read lengths, a good estimate of the true coverage
of 33% was obtained. It is also noted that higher error rates and shorter read lengths
increase the spread of the post-corrections estimates. The simulation experiment provided
empirical support for the correction applied during the kmer quantification process.
(a) Varied error rates.
In addition to the above experiment, the correction terms were tested by quantifying
the BGCs in the development set by counting all distinct kmers in each BGC and estimat-
ing the abundance as the median count. The result is shown in Figure 5.3, and provides
additional support as the corrected kmer-based estimate stabilises around RE = 0. In
this simple example, the corrected kmer-based estimate outperforms the mapping-based
method.
16
Chapter 5 - Results
==PAGE:23==
Henrik Sparre Spiegelhauer
Master Thesis
(b) Varied read length.
Figure 5.2: Experiment results from testing the kmer error correction. We find that the
corrections result in a good agreement between the estimated and true coverage as marked
with the dotted line. The corrections appear robust across errorrates and read lengths,
with higher variance for shorter readlength and higher errorrates.
Figure 5.3: Evaluation of the correction terms for the median count of distinct kmers and
mapping-based approach. The RE is averaged for all 16 BGCs and 5 samples at each
sample size.
Chapter 5 - Results
17
==PAGE:24==
Master Thesis
Henrik Sparre Spiegelhauer
5.2
Simulated Dataset characteristics
5.2.1
Development set
The Antismash software detected BGCs for all genomes. In V. parvula and atypica only
one BGC was detected in each while in C. beijerinckii six were detected as expected.
Furthermore, in all genomes, ranthipeptide clusters were detected. The BGCs detected
with Antismash were compared using the sequence similarity metric described in Section
4.3.1. The pairwise similarities are shown in Figure 5.4.
Figure 5.4: Pairwise similarity scores between the biosynthetic gene clusters in the input
genomes for the simulated data.
5.2.2
Benchmark set
In the benchmark set, 436 BGCs were called using Antismash in the three taxonomies;
Bifidobacterium spp., Faecalibacterium spp., and E. coli. The count for each category is
included in Table 5.1. It should be noted that, even though E. ecoli and Bifidobacterium
spp. have an equal number of assemblies in the set, the total count of BGCs in E. coli
was more than three fold higher.
The BGCs are illustrated with a heat map of similarity in Figure 5.5 ordered after
the taxonomy, where it can be observed that little similarity was found between the
taxonomies.
18
Chapter 5 - Results
==PAGE:25==
Henrik Sparre Spiegelhauer
Master Thesis
taxonomy
NRPS
NRPS-like
RiPP-like
T1PKS
arylpolyene
cyclic-lactone-autoinducer
ranthipeptide
siderophore
thiopeptide
lanthipeptide
other
total
Bifidobacterium spp.
2
11
29
0
0
0
0
0
0
30
19
91
Escherichia coli
112
1
8
18
21
1
0
26
91
0
11
289
Faecalibacterium spp.
1
0
6
0
0
26
22
0
0
0
1
56
Table 5.1: BGC count for each taxonomy split into assigned BGC category.
Figure 5.5: Heatmap illustrating the pairwise similarity between BGCs in the benchmark
set, ordered by taxonomy.
Chapter 5 - Results
19
==PAGE:26==
Master Thesis
Henrik Sparre Spiegelhauer
Distribution of strains in samples
The distribution of strains in the sample was drawn from a lognormal distribution with
parameters µ = 0 and σ = 0.25, which resembles a bell-shaped shape with a slight scew
and a centre at 1. The distribution of strains within the samples is illustrated in Figure
5.6. The average coverage for the strains was also used as the expected coverage for the
BGCs within each strain and was later used to calculate the error between the expected
coverage and those obtained using kmer-based and map-based quantification.
Figure 5.6: The average coverages of the various strains accross samples and simulated
sequencing depths.
5.3
Clustering of biosynthetic gene clusters.
Higher
Lower
Larger
cluster 00
(99 - 86%)
cluster 02
(37 - 43%)
Smaller
cluster 08
(15 - 92%)
cluster 07
(15 - 32%)
Table 5.2: Selected clusters to showcase
performance across size (large/small)
and homogeinity(high/small), where ho-
mogeinity is given as the mean intra
cluster pairwise similarity.
The BGCs detected using Antismash were clus-
tered using MCL processes based on pairwise
BLAST scores as described in Section 4.3.2.
Clustering was only feasible for the bench-
marking set as the development set had too
few members.
The effort resulted in BGC
clusters ranging in size from 99 to 2 and
with within-cluster identities ranging from 92%
to 6%.
The clusters are illustrated in Fig-
ure 5.7.
The figure shows overall homoge-
neous clusters with little crosstalk between clus-
ters.
In order to review the performance of the quantification, special attention will be paid to
four clusters that represent smaller, larger clusters, clusters with lower homogeneity and
clusters with greater homogeneity. The selected clusters are described in Table 5.2.
20
Chapter 5 - Results
==PAGE:27==
Henrik Sparre Spiegelhauer
Master Thesis
Figure 5.7: Heatmap depicting the pairwise similarities between BGCs, ordered by the
cluster assignments. Arrows indicate the four clusters which the analysis will go into
detail with.
Chapter 5 - Results
21
==PAGE:28==
Master Thesis
Henrik Sparre Spiegelhauer
5.4
Refinement of kmer-catalogues
The refinement method aimed at determining a catalogue of k-mers which counts was
well described by the negative binomial distribution. The refinement process employed
two ideas; namely relationship between total assigned count and detected identifiers for
a catalogue and the NB fit for the count values, as described in Sections 4.4.1-4.4.2.
5.4.1
Outlier handling
The NB distribution is not robust to outliers, so filtering of the count data was necessary.
The effect of outliers is illustrated for cluster 00 in Figure 5.8a. In the figure, the upper
frame illustrates the outlier detection using the Tukeys IQR method, and the two bottom
frames illustrate the effect outliers have on the NB model. Note that the outlier problem
is more prominent in some clusters than in others, as is observed for cluster 01 in Figure
5.8b. Cluster 01 has size and homogeneity comparable to cluster 00 but is not nearly as
affected.
(a) Outlier detection for cluster 00.
(b) Outlier detection for cluster 01.
Figure 5.8: Outlier detection and the difference in effect outliers have on clusters, illus-
trated using all samples with size 0.5GB.
The source of outlier counts may be the existence of genetic elements in the BGC,
which is also found elsewhere in the genomes. This was the case for one BGC in the de-
velopment set that included rRNA elements. The rRNA elements caused a highly skewed
count distribution, as can be observed in Figure 5.9. The BGC region was simulated
at the same depth; therefore, the higher count must be attributed to identical genetic
elements in the sample.
5.4.2
Count distribution of catalogues
The fit to the expected detection curve improved across all clusters during the refinement
process, with the exception of a single cluster (cluster 20) that saw little improvement.
22
Chapter 5 - Results
==PAGE:29==
Henrik Sparre Spiegelhauer
Master Thesis
Figure 5.9: Coverage of a BGC which contains rRNA regions. The rRNA regions had
coverage of much higher magnitude.
The starting point for refinement was the 10k most prevalent kmers within each cluster,
then the outliers were dropped, and the iterative refinement process was run.
The measure of fit to the expected detection curve MSEdetect is shown in Table 5.3 as the
mean score between the clusters. Also, the four selected clusters are shown separately.
Random 10k refers to catalogues drawn from the initial 10k kmers, outlier+hotstart refers
to catalogues obtained after the initial procedures, and Refined refers to catalogues ob-
tained after the iterative refinement process. Successful iterations describe the number of
times that a refinement step resulted in an improved MSEdetect
random 10k
Outliers+hotstart
Refined
Succesful iterations
All clusters
1380
542
223
10.8
wo. cluster 22
1247
371
39
11.2
cluster 00
98
15
9
8
cluster 02
45
29
22
3
cluster 07
324
53
43
8
cluster 08
69
35
31
3
Table 5.3: Average measures for the overall fit of each catalogue through the steps of the
full refinement procedure, measured as MSEdetect (rounded).
A significant improvement in the overall measurement of the fit of the catalogues was
obtained through the refinement process, the majority of the gain coming from the ini-
tial step with outlier removal and hot start. Regarding the four selected clusters, only
cluster 07 had significant reduction in MSEdetect as the other three clusters already had
a good fit. The fit of cluster 07 is shown in Figure 5.10.
Chapter 5 - Results
23
==PAGE:30==
Master Thesis
Henrik Sparre Spiegelhauer
(a) Before to refinement precedure
(b) After refinement procedure
Figure 5.10: Expected and observed relationship between detected kmers and total count
of kmers in catalogues for cluster 07.
The improvement of fit was investigated on a single sample basis. It was found that the
NB distribution fitted to the refined sets had a more narrow distribution with a taller
peak and generally fit the data better. This is illustrated for cluster 00 and cluster 07
in Figure 5.11.
Most of the improvement was obtained in the initial step and little
improvement was observed for the refined set. Furthermore, it was observed that the
high-count observations for the random subset of the initial 10k kmers had a higher fitted
µ value (marked with ∗) compared to the initial set (after outlier removal) and the best
(after refinement procedure).
24
Chapter 5 - Results
==PAGE:31==
Henrik Sparre Spiegelhauer
Master Thesis
(a) cluster 00
(b) cluster 07
Figure 5.11: Counts and fitted NB distributions for initial and refined catalogues for a
single sample. The bottom frame indicate the position of individual reads and the ∗marks
the fitted µ parameter.
5.4.3
BGC abundance estimation from catalogues.
The kmer-based abundances were obtained for the random subset of the initial 10k kmers,
the initial catalogue after outlier removal, and for the final refined catalogue. The abun-
dance estimate was taken as the parameter µ of the fitted NB distribution and corrected
for read-error and read-length loss as described in Section 4.4.6.
(a)
The RE of the abundance estimates is shown for the four selected clusters in Figure
5.12 with the mean and standard deviation of the RE shown for each sample size. The
Chapter 5 - Results
25
==PAGE:32==
Master Thesis
Henrik Sparre Spiegelhauer
(b)
Figure 5.12: Relative error (RE) for selected clusters, shown with mean and standard
deviation for sample sizes with each n=10 samples. Additionally the overall per cluster
performance is sumarised in the right panes.
catalogues; init and best, had a higher negative RE compared to random for all clusters,
which was in line with the results shown in Figure 5.11. Furthermore, it was found that
the variance of the estimates decreases monotonically with sample size. No link was found
between the stages of catalogue refinement and RE variance.
5.4.4
Comparison of Kmer method to standard.
The kmer-based quantification as described in the previous section was compared with the
quantification obtained using a read mapping approach. The mapping-based abundances
were obtained by mapping the simulated reads to each cluster representative and using
the median coverage as described in Section 4.5.
The four different abundance estimates were compared across the different sample
sizes using the relative error (RE) metric. Comparisons were plotted for the four selected
clusters in Figure 5.13, and were representative of all clusters.
The relative error was consistent for all clusters in the tested sample space when using
kmer-based quantification. In contrast, mapping-based quantification was only consistent
for cluster 00 as the RE for the remaining clusters was drastically different in smaller
samples compared to larger ones. Furthermore, a monotonic decrease in the variance
of RE within samples of the same size occurred when the sample sizes increased. This
indicated that the kmer-based method became increasingly consistent with larger sample
sizes. The same consistency was not observed for the mapping-based method, where the
overall consistency in RE increased from the smallest to the largest samples, but the
development was not monotonic. In most clusters, we observe that the variance of RE
was magnitudes higher for some sample sizes compared to the previous.
26
Chapter 5 - Results
==PAGE:33==
Henrik Sparre Spiegelhauer
Master Thesis
(a) cluster 00 - Larger / more homogeneous
(b) cluster 02 - Larger / less homogeneous
(c) cluster 08 - smaller / more homogeneous
(d) cluster 07 - smaller / less homogeneous
Figure 5.13: Comparison of mean relative error for kmer based methods and mapping
based method. Bars indicate the standard deviation in the relative error for samples of
same size (n=10)
Finally, little change in the precision of the estimates was observed between the dif-
ferent iterations of the catalogues for the kmer-based quantification.
In terms of accuracy, the refinement process appeared to result in a poorer catalouge.
The more refined catalogues were consistently found to have a higher absolute RE. The
trend can be observed in Figure 5.13 where we observe the following relationship between
catalogues in terms of RE 0 > kmerrandom > kmerinit > kmerbest. The accuracy was
comparable to the mapping-based method at higher sample sizes, but drastically better at
low sample sizes, where the mapping-based method tended to overestimate the abundance
by several folds.
Chapter 5 - Results
27
==PAGE:34==
Master Thesis
Henrik Sparre Spiegelhauer
5.5
Effect of sample simulation.
In addition to the benchmark set described above and analysed, a second data set was
simulated with strains drawn from a wider distribution. The distribution of strains in
the sample was drawn from a normal distribution with parameters µ = 2 and σ = 2,
therefore approximately 15% of the probability mass falls below 0.
This distribution
allowed samples dominated by single strains and samples where given strains were not
included. Distributions between sample sizes are included in Figure 5.14, where it can
be observed that the average coverage of the strains varied between 10−4 and 102 for
the largest samples. This set will be referenced as the high-variance set and the original
benchmarking set as the low-variance set.
Figure 5.14: Distribution of expected coverage of each strain over sample sizes for the
simulation with higher within sample strain variance.
The performance of kmer-based quantification could not be realiably determined for the
high-variance set. Variance in RE varied greatly between clusters and sample sizes, and
no relationship between sample size and variation could be found. The mapping-based
approach also gave very poor results with variance magnitudes larger than the mean
estimates.
The improvement in MSEdetect was compared for low- and high-variance data sets by
comparing the measure in a normalised space. Normalisation was performed within each of
the two data sets as a log-ratio of the per cluster MSEdetect over the maximum MSEdetect
of the initial catalogues.
The comparison is shown in Figure 5.15, where each point is a cluster of BGCs.
Inspecting the distribution along the x-axis, it was observed that in the high-variance
simulation, the bulk of the clusters had an initial MSEdetect closer to the maximum
MSEdetect. Little differences were observed in the MSEdetect distribution for the refined
catalogues. In both high and low variance sets, we observe an improvement in MSEdetect
for all but single clusters.
Thus, the poor performance of the abundance estimates could not be readily explained
by a difference in the catalogue refinement results. Due to time restrictions, it was not
possible to further investigate the cause of the poor performance for the high-variance
samples.
28
Chapter 5 - Results
==PAGE:35==
Henrik Sparre Spiegelhauer
Master Thesis
Figure 5.15: Change in MSEdetect from the initial set to the refined set in a normalised
space. Each marker represent a cluster of BGCs and the coloring represents the data set.
Chapter 5 - Results
29
==PAGE:36==
CHAPTER
SIX
DISCUSSION
6.1
Identifying families of BGCs
The biosynthetic gene clusters are diverse and evolve rapidly, due to the short replication
times of the host and the horizontal transer between microbes[44]. Mutations in genes
within BGC can have a widely different effect on encoded metabolism. In cyanobacterium
Prochloron a 7-gene BGC was found that produces cyclic peptides with structures that
are widely different despite the fact that the BGCs are close to identical. The precursor is
derived from short segments of a single gene, and changes in this gene resulted in a wide
diversity of cyclic peptides, even when the remaining six genes were identical[10]. On the
contrary, BGCs with widely divergent sequences have been found to encode pathways for
remarkably similar secondary metabolites[11].
Therefore, multiple implementations work by comparing higher-level annotations of
BGCs. BiG-SCAPE and BiG-SLiCE algorithms approach the similarity problem by ex-
tracting the Pfam annotations of the BGCs and applying them as features used for sim-
ilarity calculations[17, 31]. Pfam families are protein-centric, thus by comparing BGCs
using Pfam one can compare the function of the BGCs instead of the DNA sequences.
However, a high-level annotation style comparison was not applicable to the comparisons
made in this study. In this study, the BGCs were grouped by sequence similarity, so
representative k-mer catalogues could be generated. This approach could result in BGCs
with similar metabolic products being split into multiple clusters. This could affect the
subsequent analysis, and care must be taken to merge the abundances of clusters with
similar metabolic products.
6.2
Simulating metagenomics data
Working with simulated data allows for a direct comparison between expected and es-
timated values. Thus, simulated data make the development and testing of tools more
feasible, as simulated data give a tangible ground truth that is otherwise difficult to
obtain.
CAMISIM as other simulation tools is focused on modelling community structure and
sequencing attributes. Therefore, the tools can be reduced to simulated samples from ref-
30
==PAGE:37==
Henrik Sparre Spiegelhauer
Master Thesis
erence genomes with realistic read length and error rate attributes. CAMISIM attempts
to address the problem of relying on references by implementing the genome evolution
simulator sgEvolver[45]. However, given that the variability within true natural samples
is poorly defined[46], it seems unlikely that simulated samples can replicate the type and
variability of natural communities[47]. Therefore, one must be careful with the interpre-
tation of the performance on the simulated data.
Interpretation of performance can be further complicated, as the performance of a given
method may depend on the simulator configuration. In this study, it was found that
the kmer-based method generally outperformed the mapping-based reference method for
the more homogeneous sample simulation.
However, both kmer- and mapping-based
methods performed poorly on the simulation data with a greater variation in the strain
composition. Thus, in one simulation regime the proposed kmer-based method is perfered,
but in another it may not. Therefore, the study highlighted the problems with simulated
data and the need for carefully created benchmarking data sets.
6.3
Statistical challenges in sparse metagenomics data
Zero counts may be caused by being absent (structural zeros) or present but not sampled
(sampling zeros). In microbiome studies, when comparing operational taxonomic unit
(OTU) counts, there is a high degree of structural zeros because the abundance of OTUs
depends on the subject, which is why the composition is unique within each subject or
context of the sample[48].
The Negative Binomial (NB) distribution is often used to describe the count data [24,
25]. However, it cannot account for excess zeros as the model requires the proportion of
zeros to be neccesarily linked to the distribution of positive values[49]. The zero-inflated
NB model (ZINB) attempts to handle zero inflation using a mixture model, thus allowing
a point mass at zero[50]. Another approach, the hurdle model[51], is a two-part model
where the first part is a binomial probability to determine whether a zero or non-zero
occoured, and the second part analyses positive non-zero counts. The hurdle model is
also called a truncated model.
However, both the ZINB and the hurdle model were tested without success.
The
ZINB model has more parameters compared to the NB model, as it models both a zero
distribution and a mixing parameter, and it was suspected that the data size of 500
points (catalogue size) was insufficient to fit the ZINB model. Furthermore, the statis-
tical Python framework (Statsmodels v0.13.5) used in the project does not support the
hurdle model. The hurdle model was tested using the Statsmodels development branch
(dev0.14.0) with limited success. The model is expected to be fully included in the next
major release of statsmodels and could then be relevant.
In the case of the simulated data, a zero count may occur because the BGCs from which
it originates were not included in the sample or because it was not sampled due to low
frequency.
The first was likely a larger source of zeros in the higher strain-variance
simulation.
The zero counts problem may be amplified by the kmer approach as the conversion of
reads to kmers introduces an information loss, shifting the overall distribution of counts
Chapter 6 - Discussion
31
==PAGE:38==
Master Thesis
Henrik Sparre Spiegelhauer
towards zero, and thus leading to more sampling zeros. The abundance estimates can be
corrected for information loss as described in Section 4.4.6. However, the correction does
not mitigate the effect of amplified zero counts.
6.4
Adressing outliers via filtering
Initial outlier detection of the count data was required, as fitting of the NB distribution is
susceptible to outliers. Outliers could arise, in the context of kmer counts of BGCs, from
numerable technical and biological phenomena. The sequencing of reads from a genome is
not uniform as certain biases, such as GC content or sequence motifs[23] will affect local
sequencing performance. In addition to outliers arising from technical bias, certain BGCs
can also include genes or regions present elsewhere in the sampled genomes, leading to
overcovered regions. The issue of BGCs that includes regions present elsewhere in the
sample was apparent for BGC in C. beijerinckii (see Figure 5.9) in which a subregion of
4k base pairs was counted 50 times higher than the remaining stretches of the BGC.
The Tukeys method was implemented to detect outlying kmer counts within each sample.
The method relies on the variance of the centre of the data, the interquantile range (IQR),
which in samples with few counts will be close to zero, thus giving an inflated number of
outlier counts. Thus, kmers may be marked as outliers in certain samples, but within the
bulk of data points in most samples. Global heuristical outlier detection was implemented
by counting the number of samples within which each k-mer was outlier and removing
the top 20% most frequent outlying k-mers.
Most of the decrease in MSEdetect was found to be achieved in the outlier removal step,
which could support the outlier removal methodology (see Table 5.3). Furthermore, it
could be observed when inspecting the count data for individual samples that few outlying
counts had a detrimental impact on the fit of the negative binomial distribution.
6.5
Limitations of the kmer count model.
Using the NB distribution to fit sequencing count data is a standard approach and is used
in popular analytical tools such as edgeR[24] and DESeq2[25] to successfully approximate
the read count distribution of RNA sequencing data (RNA-seq).
However, while the
structure of the data is similar, the sources of variation are different for the RNA-seq and
metagenomic gene counts. Biological variations in RNA seq data arise from both differ-
ences in gene expression levels;in contrast, the biological variation in metagenomic data
arises primarily from the sampling of available DNA and is therefore primarily affected
by the composition of organisms in the sample[52]. RNA is unstable and thus sensitive to
variation in the extraction protocol. Bias in extraction kits may also lead to differences
in technical variance for the two datasources[53].
Furthermore, the performance of edgeR and DESeq2 has been critized, especially the
ability of the tools to control the false discovery rate (FDR) was found to be poor, resulting
in false positive results for differential expression analysis[54, 55]. Although the cause
for the low performance could easily be explained by the NB distribution fitting the
real sequence count data poorly, multiple investigations support describing the sequence
count data using the NB distribution[56, 57]. Interestingly, an investigation of the fit
32
Chapter 6 - Discussion
==PAGE:39==
Henrik Sparre Spiegelhauer
Master Thesis
of NB to sequence count data in environmental studies found that the NB distribution
model without a zero inflation extension (as discussed in Section 6.3) provided a better
representation of the data than a model with a specific zero handling element[58].
In this study, the NB distribution was fitted to samples of different variance, and
the contribution to the fit of individual kmers was estimated and ranked for each sam-
ple before the mean rank was found. The k-mers were compared on the basis of their
within-sample ranks, and thus the variability that would affect a parametric comparison
was circumvented.
In the study, the NB model was not fitted to gene count data, but rather to kmer counts
obtained directly from the reads. The counts were limited to kmers in the catalogues
and thus the principle was similar to the quantification of operation taxonomical units
(OTU) by mapping to gene catalogues specific to each OTU. However, the kmer-based
approach involves a certain degree of information loss that was quantified and handled
using correction factors as described in Section 4.4.6. The correction factor that handles
the effect of sequencing error was deduced from the definition of statistically independent
events by assuming that the sequencing errors of the individual bases were equal and
independent. However, the assumption of independence is violated, since the probability
of a sequencing error depends on the sequence context (%G+C, motifs, etc.). Multiple
experiments in this study provided empirical support for the correction, but the violated
assumptions highlight uncertainties with the kmer-based quantification.
6.6
Performance of the kmer-based quantification.
The kmer-based approach outperformed the mapping-based reference method by having
stable estimates. The estimates obtained by the k-mer-based approach were consistent for
smaller, larger, more homogeneous, and less homogeneous BGC clusters. Furthermore,
the k-mer approach showed consistent accuracy across sample sizes, with a monotonously
decreasing variance for larger sample sizes.
In contrast, the mapping-based approach
showed poor accuracy for smaller samples and a nonmonotonical relationship between
the estimate variance and sample sizes.
Interestingly, for the kmer-based approach, no clear link was established between the
homogeneity of the cluster and the magnitude of the relative error. It was expected that
the less homogeneous clusters would tend to show a higher (negative) relative error, since
the kmers included in the cluster catalogues would have a lower degree of prevalence, and
thus a given BGC could exist in a sample without giving rise to a k-mer included in the
catalogue.
The performance of the method was poor in the high-variance set. The variance of the
estimates was much larger and less consistent with the sample size. It was also noted
that mapping-based quantification performed equally poorly or worse, suggesting that
the quantification task in the high-variance set was unfeasibly difficult. A larger selection
of benchmark sets with a wide range of simulation configurations might have given a
better overall estimate of the performance.
The pipeline was tested in an external data set investigating the gut microbiome in the
context of inflammatory bowel disease (IBD). The data set consists of samples (n = 220)
from a cohort of 155 patients; 68 with chrons disease, 53 with ulcerative colitis, and
34 healthy controls[59]. 9562 BGCs were detected with AntiSMASH giving 43 BGCs
Chapter 6 - Discussion
33
==PAGE:40==
Master Thesis
Henrik Sparre Spiegelhauer
per sample. The clustering procedure resulted in a large number of small non-homogenic
clusters, and the refinement procedure was unable to produce meaningful catalogues. The
samples were suspected to be too shallow for the pipeline to function; however, further
investigations could not be persued due to time restrictions.
6.7
Perspectives for kmer-based quantification.
The approach presented in this study attempts a bottom-up approach to quantification.
BGCs were identified within the samples and clustered based solely on their sequence
similarity, after which a k-mer catalougue ewas refined and quantified. The approach
takes little prior knowledge about the k-mers into account and thus may risk splitting
BGCs with the same encoded chemistry into multiple clusters, while also risking polluted
clusters. The clustering problem may be mitigated in the future by restricting the clusters
by their family annotations, as provided by BiG-FAM.
It was also observed that the major changes to the catalogue could be attributed to
the outlier detection, while only little improvement was achieved during the NB based
refinement. Therefore, future studies could investigate the relationship and whether other
refinement approaches may be more prudent.
Finally, the approach taken in this study results in a fixed-size catalogue regardless of
cluster size. It would be interesting to investigate the impact the size of a catalogue has
on its performance and whether the catalouge size should be relative to cluster size.
34
Chapter 6 - Discussion
==PAGE:41==
CHAPTER
SEVEN
CONCLUSION
The study succeeded in implementing a k-mer-based biosynthetic gene cluster quantifica-
tion pipeline. The pipeline included detection and clustering of BGCs followed by cata-
logue generation and refinement and finally abundance estimates of the identified clusters
of BGCs. The proposed k-mer-based quantification performed better compared to that of
a traditional mapping-based approach. Performance gain was observed for BGC clusters
of varying sizes and homogeneities, indicating that the k-mer-based quantification is more
robust.
Most of the performance gain of the model was achieved in the outlier removal step,
while little gain was observed in iterative refinement using the fit to the negative binomial
distribution.
Future work should further investigate sequence-based BGC clustering and whether to
restrict clustering based on prior knowledge of BGC families. Furthermore, future work
should include a more comprehensive benchmarking strategy using data sets with diverse
variance structures to ensure the validity of proposed solutions.
==PAGE:42==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
1.
Newman, D. J. & Cragg, G. M. Natural products as sources of new drugs over the
last 25 years. Journal of Natural Products 70, 461–477. doi:10.1021/np068054v
(2007).
2.
Sugimoto, Y. et al. A metagenomic strategy for harnessing the chemical repertoire
of the human microbiome. Science 366. doi:10.1126 (2019).
3.
Schneditz, G. et al. Enterotoxicity of a nonribosomal peptide causes antibiotic-
associated colitis. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United
States of America 111, 13181–13186. doi:10.1073/pnas.1403274111 (2014).
4.
Wlodarska, M. et al. Indoleacrylic Acid Produced by Commensal Peptostreptococcus
Species Suppresses Inflammation. Cell Host & Microbe 22, 25–37. doi:10.1016/j.
chom.2017.06.007 (2017).
5.
Zipperer, A. et al. Human commensals producing a novel antibiotic impair pathogen
colonization. Nature 535, 511–516. doi:10.1038/nature18634 (2016).
6.
Donia, M. S. et al. A systematic analysis of biosynthetic gene clusters in the human
microbiome reveals a common family of antibiotics. Cell 158, 1402–1414. doi:10.
1016/j.cell.2014.08.032 (2014).
7.
Buffie, C. G. et al. Precision microbiome reconstitution restores bile acid mediated
resistance to Clostridium difficile. Nature 517, 205–208. doi:10.1038/nature13828
(2015).
8.
Medema, M. H. et al. Minimum Information about a Biosynthetic Gene cluster.
Nature Chemical Biology 2015 11:9 11, 625–631. doi:10 . 1038 / nchembio . 1890
(2015).
9.
Walsh, C. T. & Fischbach, M. A. Natural Products Version 2.0: Connecting Genes
to Molecules. Journal of the American Chemical Society 132, 2469–2493. doi:10.
1021/ja909118a (2010).
10.
Fischbach, M. A., Walsh, C. T. & Clardy, J. The evolution of gene collectives: How
natural selection drives chemical innovation. Proceedings of the National Academy
of Sciences of the United States of America 105, 4601–4608. doi:10.1073/pnas.
0709132105 (2008).
11.
Cimermancic, P. et al. Insights into secondary metabolism from a global analysis of
prokaryotic biosynthetic gene clusters. Cell 158, 412–421. doi:10.1016/j.cell.
2014.06.034 (2014).
12.
Blin, K. et al. AntiSMASH 6.0: Improving cluster detection and comparison capa-
bilities. Nucleic Acids Research 49, W29–W35. doi:10.1093/nar/gkab335 (2021).
36
==PAGE:43==
Henrik Sparre Spiegelhauer
Master Thesis
13.
Schwecke, T. et al. The biosynthetic gene cluster for the polyketide immunosup-
pressant rapamycin. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United
States of America 92, 7839–7843. doi:10.1073/PNAS.92.17.7839 (1995).
14.
Wang, H., Fewer, D. P., Holm, L., Rouhiainen, L. & Sivonen, K. Atlas of nonribo-
somal peptide and polyketide biosynthetic pathways reveals common occurrence of
nonmodular enzymes. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United
States of America 111, 9259–9264. doi:10.1073/pnas.1401734111 (2014).
15.
Rondon, M. R. et al. Cloning the soil metagenome: a strategy for accessing the
genetic and functional diversity of uncultured microorganisms. Applied and envi-
ronmental microbiology 66, 2541–2547. doi:10.1128/AEM.66.6.2541-2547.2000
(2000).
16.
Charlop-Powers, Z., Owen, J. G., Reddy, B. V. B., Ternei, M. A. & Brady, S. F.
Chemical-biogeographic survey of secondary metabolism in soil. Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences 111, 3757–3762. doi:10.1073/pnas.1318021111
(2014).
17.
Kautsar, S. A., Blin, K., Shaw, S., Weber, T. & Medema, M. H. BiG-FAM: The
biosynthetic gene cluster families database. Nucleic Acids Research 49, D490–D497.
doi:10.1093/nar/gkaa812 (2021).
18.
Van Der Hooft, J. J. et al. Linking genomics and metabolomics to chart special-
ized metabolic diversity. Chemical Society Reviews 49, 3297–3314. doi:10.1039/
d0cs00162g (2020).
19.
Bai, Z., Zhang, N., Jin, Y., Chen, L. & Mao, Y. Comprehensive analysis of 84 Fae-
calibacterium prausnitzii strains uncovers their genetic diversity , functional charac-
teristics , and potential risks, 1–13. doi:10.3389/fcimb.2022.919701 (2023).
20.
Zhang, Z. & Wang, W. RNA-Skim: A rapid method for RNA-Seq quantification at
transcript level. Bioinformatics 30, 283–292. doi:10.1093/bioinformatics/btu288
(2014).
21.
Zachariasen, T. Species identification from metagenomics data by use of marker
gene sets. (Master Thesis). DTU National Food Institute, Technical University of
Denmark (2020).
22.
Quince, C., Walker, A. W., Simpson, J. T., Loman, N. J. & Segata, N. Shot-
gun metagenomics, from sampling to sequencing and analysis. Nature 35, 833–844
(2017).
23.
Aird, D. et al. Characterizing and measuring bias in sequence data. Genome biology
02, 1 (2012).
24.
Chen, Y., Lun, A. T. L. & Smyth, G. K. Statistical Analysis of Next Generation
Sequencing Data. Statistical Analysis of Next Generation Sequencing Data. doi:10.
1007/978-3-319-07212-8 (2014).
25.
Anders, S. & Huber, W. Differential expression analysis for sequence count data.
Genome Biology 11, R106. doi:10.1186/gb-2010-11-10-r106 (2010).
26.
Chen, Y. et al. The SCIFF-Derived Ranthipeptides Participate in Quorum Sensing in
Solventogenic Clostridia. Biotechnology Journal 15. doi:10.1002/biot.202000136
(2020).
Chapter 7 - BIBLIOGRAPHY
37
==PAGE:44==
Master Thesis
Henrik Sparre Spiegelhauer
27.
Fritz, A. et al. CAMISIM: simulating metagenomes and microbial communities. Mi-
crobiome 7, 17. doi:10.1186/s40168-019-0633-6 (2019).
28.
Singer, E. et al. Next generation sequencing data of a defined microbial mock com-
munity. Scientific Data 2016 3:1 3, 1–8. doi:10.1038/sdata.2016.81 (2016).
29.
Joshi NA, F. J. Sickle: A sliding-window, adaptive, quality-based trimming tool for
FastQ files (Version 1.33) [Software]. https://github.com/najoshi/sickle.
30.
Hyatt, D. et al. Prodigal: prokaryotic gene recognition and translation initiation
site identification. BMC Bioinformatics 11, 119. doi:10.1186/1471-2105-11-119
(2010).
31.
Navarro-Mu˜noz, J. C. et al. A computational framework to explore large-scale biosyn-
thetic diversity. Nature chemical biology 16, 60. doi:10.1038/S41589-019-0400-9
(2020).
32.
ParBLiSS/FastANI: Fast Whole-Genome Similarity (ANI) Estimation https://
github.com/ParBLiSS/FastANI.
33.
Jain, C., Rodriguez-R, L. M., Phillippy, A. M., Konstantinidis, K. T. & Aluru,
S. High throughput ANI analysis of 90K prokaryotic genomes reveals clear species
boundaries. Nature Communications 9. doi:10.1038/S41467-018-07641-9 (2018).
34.
Camacho, C. et al. BLAST+: architecture and applications. BMC Bioinformatics
10, 421. doi:10.1186/1471-2105-10-421 (2009).
35.
Van Dongen, S. Graph clustering via a discrete uncoupling process. SIAM Journal
on Matrix Analysis and Applications 30, 121–141. doi:10.1137/040608635 (2008).
36.
Li, L., Stoeckert, C. J. & Roos, D. S. OrthoMCL: Identification of Ortholog Groups
for Eukaryotic Genomes. Genome Research 13, 2178. doi:10.1101/GR.1224503
(2003).
37.
Seabold, S. & Perktold, J. Statsmodels: Econometric and Statistical Modeling with
Python in Proceedings of the 9th Python in Science Conference (2010), 92–96. doi:10.
25080/majora-92bf1922-011.
38.
Mar¸cais, G. & Kingsford, C. A fast, lock-free approach for efficient parallel counting
of occurrences of k-mers. Bioinformatics 27, 764–770. doi:10.1093/BIOINFORMATICS/
BTR011 (2011).
39.
The Concise Encyclopedia of Statistics doi:10.1007/978-0-387-32833-1 (Springer
New York, 2008).
40.
Li, H. Minimap2: Pairwise alignment for nucleotide sequences. Bioinformatics 34,
3094–3100. doi:10.1093/bioinformatics/bty191 (2018).
41.
Danecek, P. et al. Twelve years of SAMtools and BCFtools. GigaScience 10, 1–4.
doi:10.1093/gigascience/giab008 (2021).
42.
Zolfo, M. SegataLab/cmseq https://github.com/SegataLab/cmseq.
43.
Thiel, H. Economic Forecasts and policy First, 31–42 (North-Holland Publishing Co,
1958).
44.
Lawrence, J. G. & Roth, J. R. Selfish operons: Horizontal transfer may drive the
evolution of gene clusters. Genetics 143, 1843–1860. doi:10.1093/genetics/143.
4.1843 (1996).
38
Chapter 7 - BIBLIOGRAPHY
==PAGE:45==
Henrik Sparre Spiegelhauer
Master Thesis
45.
Darling, A. C., Mau, B., Blattner, F. R. & Perna, N. T. Mauve: Multiple alignment
of conserved genomic sequence with rearrangements. Genome Research 14, 1394–
1403. doi:10.1101/gr.2289704 (2004).
46.
Rocha, E. P. Neutral theory, microbial practice: Challenges in bacterial population
genetics. Molecular Biology and Evolution 35, 1338–1347. doi:10.1093/molbev/
msy078 (2018).
47.
Nelson, W. C., Tully, B. J. & Mobberley, J. M. Biases in genome reconstruction from
metagenomic data. PeerJ 8, 1–26. doi:10.7717/peerj.10119 (2020).
48.
Xu, L., Paterson, A. D., Turpin, W. & Xu, W. Assessment and selection of compet-
ing models for zero-inflated microbiome data. PLoS ONE 10, 1–30. doi:10.1371/
journal.pone.0129606 (2015).
49.
Welsh, A. H., Cunningham, R. B., Donnelly, C. F. & Lindenmayer, D. B. Mod-
elling the abundance of rare species: Statistical models for counts with extra zeros.
Ecological Modelling 88, 297–308. doi:10.1016/0304-3800(95)00113-1 (1996).
50.
Lambert, D. Zero-inflated poisson regression, with an application to defects in manu-
facturing. Technometrics 34, 1–14. doi:10.1080/00401706.1992.10485228 (1992).
51.
Mullahy, J. Specification and testing of some modified count data models. Journal
of Econometrics 33, 341–365. doi:10.1016/0304-4076(86)90002-3 (1986).
52.
Jonsson, V., ¨Osterlund, T., Nerman, O. & Kristiansson, E. Variability in Metage-
nomic Count Data and Its Influence on the Identification of Differentially Abundant
Genes. Journal of Computational Biology 24, 311–326. doi:10.1089/cmb.2016.0180
(2017).
53.
Shi, H. et al. Bias in RNA-seq Library Preparation: Current Challenges and Solu-
tions. BioMed Research International 2021. doi:10.1155/2021/6647597 (2021).
54.
Assefa, A. T. et al. Differential gene expression analysis tools exhibit substandard
performance for long non-coding RNA-sequencing data. Genome Biology 19, 1–16.
doi:10.1186/s13059-018-1466-5 (2018).
55.
Hawinkel, S., Mattiello, F., Bijnens, L. & Thas, O. A broken promise: Microbiome
differential abundance methods do not control the false discovery rate. Briefings in
Bioinformatics 20, 210–221. doi:10.1093/bib/bbx104 (2019).
56.
Gierli´nski, M. et al. Statistical models for RNA-seq data derived from a two-condition
48-replicate experiment. Bioinformatics 31, 3625–3630. doi:10.1093/bioinformatics/
btv425 (2015).
57.
Mi, G., Di, Y. & Schafer, D. W. Goodness-of-fit tests and model diagnostics for
negative binomial regression of RNA sequencing data. PLoS ONE 10, 1–16. doi:10.
1371/journal.pone.0119254 (2015).
58.
Warton, D. I. Many zeros does not mean zero inflation: Comparing the goodness-of-
fit of parametric models to multivariate abundance data. Environmetrics 16, 275–
289. doi:10.1002/env.702 (2005).
59.
Franzosa, E. A. et al. Gut microbiome structure and metabolic activity in inflam-
matory bowel disease. Nature Microbiology 4, 293–305. doi:10.1038/s41564-018-
0306-4 (2019).
Chapter 7 - BIBLIOGRAPHY
39
