==PAGE:1==
Implementation of Federated
Learning for Network Anomaly
Detection
Tomasz Koziak
Kongens Lyngby 2023
==PAGE:2==
Technical University of Denmark
Department of Electrical and Photonics Engineering
Ørsteds Plads, building 343,
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 6352
info@fotonik.dtu.dk
https://electro.dtu.dk/
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
The number of IoT devices used in our daily life is growing every year. As the
majority of them are not equipped with resources able to provide appropriate
security, IoT devices are considered as highly vulnerable. This makes them a
natural target for adversaries. One way to combat possible attacks is the use of
machine learning based intrusion detection systems. To create a well-functioning
network attack detection system, one needs to have access to large amounts of
data that can be used for training the model. This introduces the challenge
caused by lack of adequate data in this scenario. A proposed solution to that
is to share data describing the attacks amongst parties that face a similar is-
sue. However, due to privacy constraints, data often should not be disclosed
with unauthorised users. Federated learning is a relatively new machine learn-
ing technique that encourages cooperation between many systems operated by
different parties without disclosing any sensitive information. It operates on a
principle of sharing models pretrained on the sensitive data instead of the data
itself. This thesis demonstrates how to create software that can facilitate feder-
ated learning for network attack detection in case of IoT devices. It covers what
underlying machine learning and what averaging algorithms can be included in
the solution. Additionally, different communication methods are considered to
replicate an IoT usage scenario. All these aspects are at the final stage com-
bined into a Python based tool that enables federated learning. The developed
solution shows impressive performance in attack detection, reporting F1 score
of around 95% on IID data and around 86% on non-IID data.
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Contents
Abstract
i
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Project Scope & Objectives . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.2
Structure Overview . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2
Federated Learning
5
2.1
Federated Learning Theory
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.1.1
Horizontal & Vertical Federated Learning . . . . . . . . .
6
2.1.2
Deployment Scenarios . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.2
Federated Learning on the Edge
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.3
Challenges & Resolutions
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.3.1
Synchronisation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.3.2
Miscommunication . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.3.3
Battery Consumption
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.3.4
Unbalanced Data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.3.5
IID & Non-IID Data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.4
Existing Solutions
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.4.1
Query Suggestion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.4.2
Smart Healthcare . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
2.4.3
Drug Discovery . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
2.5
Federated Learning on IoT
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
2.5.1
Placement in the Local Network
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
2.5.2
Related Papers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
2.6
Investigated Frameworks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3
Implementation Foundations
22
3.1
Machine Learning Models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
==PAGE:6==
iv
CONTENTS
3.1.1
Logistic Regression . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
3.1.2
Artificial Neural Network . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
3.2
Federated Learning Models
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
3.2.1
Simple Averaging Method . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
3.2.2
Gradient and Stochastic Gradient Descent . . . . . . . . .
27
3.2.3
Federated Stochastic Gradient Descent . . . . . . . . . . .
27
3.2.4
Federated Averaging . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
3.3
Communication Architecture
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
4
Experiment Setup
31
4.1
Assumptions
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
4.2
Datasets . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
4.2.1
Preprocessing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
4.3
Metrics
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
4.4
Machine Learning Models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
4.4.1
Hyperparameter Fine-tuning
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
4.4.2
Centralised Model
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
4.5
Federated Learning Models
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
4.6
Communication Architecture
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
4.6.1
HTTP REST API-based FL . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
4.6.2
Socket-based Federated Learning . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
4.6.3
Client Node . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
4.6.4
Method Comparison . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
5
Results
46
5.1
Centralised Model
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
5.1.1
Hyperparameter Fine-tuning
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
5.1.2
Model Comparison . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
5.2
Federated Learning Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
5.2.1
Simple Averaging Method . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
5.2.2
Federated Averaging . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
5.2.3
Federated & Local Models Performance . . . . . . . . . .
54
5.3
Communication Architecture
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
56
5.3.1
Method Comparison . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
56
5.4
Implementation Summary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
58
6
Possible Future Work
60
6.1
Further Algorithm Stability . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
60
6.2
Real Traffic Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
60
6.3
Alerting system . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
61
6.4
RPC . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
61
7
Conclusions
62
==PAGE:7==
CONTENTS
v
A FedAvg Scores
65
A.1 UNSW . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
65
A.2 CICIDS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
69
Bibliography
75
==PAGE:8==
vi
CONTENTS
==PAGE:9==
Chapter 1
Introduction
The recent rapid technological advancements have also extended to network-
enabled everyday use devices within the area known as Internet of Things (IoT).
This trend is especially visible while considering the steadily increasing number
of IoT devices commonly used in our day-to-day lives, such as smartwatches,
smart home devices, smart driving sensors, and many more. As most of the
IoT devices work on low power, low battery, and low storage hardware [4], the
implementation of security software directly on the device is often not a viable
option. For this reason, IoT devices are regarded as highly vulnerable [11], which
encourages potential black-hat hackers to design new malicious software. Large
subset of those vulnerability exploits concern the communication aspect, thus
network attacks are an important concern that should be addressed while im-
plementing IoT devices.
Machine learning (ML) based solutions are widely viewed as a state-of-the-art
remedy to combat IoT based network attacks [13]. The high number of logs and
packets, which are generated as a by-product of any communication between
devices, can be extracted and analysed by applying ML techniques. As network
attacks are becoming more and more sophisticated, the simple rule based intru-
sion detection systems (IDS) are becoming insufficient in detecting more novel
and complex attacks [35]. The anomaly based IDS, which contain the ML so-
lution in their subset, are generally better for detecting zero-day attacks1 [35].
The clear advantage of the ML-based systems is the fact that the model learns
how both benign and malicious traffic looks like. Such a system will be able to
detect already classified attacks, as well as it will try to analyse and label the
1Zero-day attack - a type of attack exploiting a vulnerability previously unknown to the
product manufacturers.
==PAGE:10==
2
Introduction
unknown traffic basing on the functioning ML algorithm. The data that was
already collected by the system allows for a fundamental investigation of the
new network activities in order to find any similarities. If the unknown traffic
somehow resembles the already experienced attacks, it will trigger an alarm.
This makes the ML-based solutions more robust for detecting network attacks.
Data is a major driving force of the ML solutions. The more data is being used
to train the model, the more accurate and more universal the model will be.
The primary challenge in applying ML to network attack detection is the lack
of quality datasets which can reflect the behaviour of the current network traf-
fic [25]. The need to collect as much data as possible has been addressed by a
relatively new technique called federated learning (FL).
The central principle behind FL is to encourage cooperation between many sys-
tems operated by different parties without disclosing any sensitive information.
In this approach of the FL framework, each party is not disclosing the data itself,
but only the calculated local models. Each client participating in the collective
learning is required to train a local model and then send it to the central node.
Consequently, an averaging is performed on the central node after collecting all
the models. During the averaging process, the local models are combined into
a global model that will merge the local solutions into a single one. The major
advantage of FL is the fact that each participating party can access the rules
extracted from the collective data (including data that is not directly accessible
to a single user).
The value of applying FL is highlighted in cases where a certain anomaly has not
been recorded before. In most ML-based solutions concerning data sourced from
multiple clients, the data recording the anomaly is simply sent to a centralised
location where the training will be performed. Storing all data in a single point
will result in a situation where the administrator of the central server will have
access to all the data. The core of the FL approach allows for the newly observed
phenomenon to be shared with other parties without disclosing any sensitive in-
formation. This in particular is of great significance for situations concerning
industries where data privacy is key (e.g. bank frauds, healthcare monitoring,
cybersecurity). Intuitively, each anomaly detection problem, where certain be-
haviours can be described using data, is likely to benefit from applying FL.
As previously mentioned, the implementation of IoT devices poses a challenge
in regards to the security aspect, as it is difficult to install security measures
directly on the device. Cryptography tools or network traffic analysers are sim-
ply too expensive or consume too much power to be implemented. In the usual
setup, the data is collected on the devices themselves and next sent to the cloud
for investigation. Dealing with all data at a centralised location introduces a
single point of failure, which becomes a natural target for the adversary. The
recent growth in the number of data breaches during the transmission and at
cloud location, as well as the latency constraints that are crucial for the coop-
erative model calculations, raise a question if the current way of dealing with
detection of IoT security is sufficient.
==PAGE:11==
1.1 Project Scope & Objectives
3
Transfer of large amounts of data to the cloud also increases the bandwidth
and introduces additional costs. The notion of FL firstly, lowers the amount of
data that needs to be communicated between the central node and the client.
Secondly, it does not send the data itself but the model, from which it will
be harder to extract the sensitive user-data. In the FL approach, the learning
part can be performed at the edge of the network, which enables the clients
to always store their data in a secure location. As the IoT devices are in most
scenarios not powerful enough to calculate the complex models, the additional
overlay in the form of an edge computing (EC) device may allow facilitating
more sophisticated detection solutions.
1.1
Project Scope & Objectives
The scope of the project is to investigate how the FL approach can be adapted
into an IoT setup. The motivation behind this undertaking is to investigate the
state-of-the-art FL solutions attempting to create a robust and easily deployable
ML-based IDS. This study will go into which models should be used on the
client nodes and what algorithms can be used to calculate the final global model.
Finally, the potential communication scenarios will be considered with the effort
of finding the most optimal one. The objectives of the project that highlight the
potential research value of this study are as follows.
• Review the already existing open-source FL solutions in order to find the
most modular one and next adapt it into the network malware detection
scenario in IoT devices. If none of the solutions proves to be good enough
to ensure federated transmission, an effort of developing a new solution
will be undertaken.
• Find an appropriate dataset that can simulate the network connection.
Preprocess data to make it available for the learning stage.
• Test and implement a number of ML models and define which model type
should be selected for the local training and will result in obtaining the
best results.
• Find a suitable FL algorithm that will ensure that the FL model delivers
sufficient results and stability. Implement the model into the solution. Find
what values of hyperparameters should be used in order to achieve best
results.
• Research several communication protocols and develop server and client
software that will facilitate the FL.
==PAGE:12==
4
Introduction
• Study the available security features and implement some to ensure the
confidentiality and integrity of communication between a server and a
client.
• Test the solution on real hardware by setting up both the server and client
nodes on Raspberry PI 4 devices. Measure the performance of the solution
and calculate the overhead introduced by the tested solutions.
The highest emphasis during the project development was put on creating a
straightforward solution that will be simple to maintain and will introduce and
encourage any potential new users to the benefits of implementing FL.
1.2
Structure Overview
The focus of the paper is at the beginning placed on the theoretical aspects
of FL. Chapter 2 covers several FL deployment scenarios from the conceptual
side as well as several real-life implementations. The chapter is finalised with an
analysis of the currently available FL frameworks and details their advantages
and disadvantages.
Chapter 3 focuses on covering all the theoretical details behind the considered
solutions. All considered ML models, FL averaging algorithms and communica-
tion protocols are demonstrated.
Chapter 4 concentrates on explaining how the test environment was composed.
First, the project assumptions are presented alongside with performance metrics
that will be used in the project. Next, datasets on which the FL will be per-
formed are presented. Finally, the chapter shows what individual components
were used during the tests for the purpose of ML, FL and communication.
Chapter 5 presents the results of the tests and summarises all the choices made
during the implementation in the form of final solution architecture.
In Chapter 6, the possible future improvements of the project are presented.
Lastly, Chapter 7 concludes the whole project.
Code developed for the purpose of this thesis can be found on the Github repos-
itory: https://github.com/indianatoms/FL-PCAP-Analysis.
==PAGE:13==
Chapter 2
Federated Learning
In this chapter the basic concepts of FL will be presented. The discussion will
cover the split across data and deployment scenarios as well as the main chal-
lenges that can be encountered during FL development. Next, the several exist-
ing FL applications in various fields, including IoT, will be introduced. Lastly,
the open-source FL frameworks will be analysed with the effort of finding the
most modular one that can facilitate the FL platform that will be developed in
this project.
2.1
Federated Learning Theory
The main goal of FL is to train a model where a number of third-parties can
cooperate by indirectly sharing data amongst each other. This is executed by
sending only the pre-trained local models to the central node excluding the lo-
cally stored information that was used in the learning process. The data privacy
is being preserved and the user can benefit from the communication without
major concerns.
A key step of the FL solution is to develop the client and the centralised node.
The development of the shared model is divided into four steps, as presented
on Figure 2.1. In the first stage, the local nodes train their own models based
on a local dataset. Afterward, the local models are sent to a central server. In
the third stage, after receiving those values, the model will use an averaging al-
gorithm to combine the local model into a global one. For example, in a simple
scenario such as a logistic regression, the intercepts and biases of the models
==PAGE:14==
6
Federated Learning
Figure 2.1: Federated model development cycle
can be summed up and next divided by the number of clients that have sent
their models in step two. Finally, the averaged model will be shared between
the local parties and it will be used for further analysis.
2.1.1
Horizontal & Vertical Federated Learning
In FL, there are two major concepts, which are based on what type of data is
being stored by clients locally. The approach is centred on whether the data
features are consistent across the parties or not. The first scenario, called hor-
izontal, presented on Figure 2.2, refers to a situation where each end-client is
working on a dataset that is characterised by exactly the same features as the
other clients participating in the learning. This approach is also referred to as
homogenous.
The second approach, called vertical or heterogenous, is presented on Figure 2.3.
It is significantly more complex, as not all clients are working on datasets with
the same features. Consequently, it requires a more sophisticated central model
averaging, as simple averaging of parameters will not work across all clients.
This can negatively impact the model in itself.
2.1.2
Deployment Scenarios
FL can also be split in terms of two potential scenarios of deployment. The
first scenario is called cross-device. It assumes that the model aggregation is
==PAGE:15==
2.1 Federated Learning Theory
7
Figure 2.2: Horizontal Federated Learning
Figure 2.3: Vertical Federated Learning
performed between a high number of devices that can be anywhere between
hundreds, thousands or even millions. In this scenario, the devices are charac-
terised by relatively low power and low bandwidth constraints. As a result, not
all devices are always available for communication. Additionally, in this scenario,
the devices are considered stateless. The amount of data that is being stored
on the devices is relatively small, therefore the data can be sent to a central
node in one go. This in turn means that such devices do not store data for
sessions in which the information was being transferred. An example of cross-
device FL is the Google mobile keyboard - Gboard. One of the features of this
application is a query suggestion engine, which significantly benefits from FL
(explained in more detail in Section 2.4.1). It is a straightforward representa-
tion of cross-device communication, as each client is equipped with a device with
computational power and transmission limitations.
The other opposing architecture is called cross-silo FL. Here, the number of
clients is significantly smaller. It is mostly lower than one hundred. For this
scenario, it is expected that each client stores a significant amount of data,
therefore the number of communication rounds is higher than one and as a con-
sequence the design is categorised as stateful. This architecture is characterised
by the high computation power and high bandwidth of the devices participat-
ing in local learning. Additionally, it is expected that the machines are always
up and running. An example of such architecture is the Federated Learning for
==PAGE:16==
8
Federated Learning
Healthcare Informatics scenario [33], which covers a number of hospitals coop-
erating with each other by sharing the models built on the electronic health
record of patients. The patients’ information is considered sensitive, therefore
FL is a potential solution that can be utilised in creating a joint model. In this
scenario, it is assumed that the amount of data will be significantly large and
that the computers taking part in the FL are powerful and always available.
This makes it an appropriate example of the cross-silo architecture. In addition,
this approach of FL is highly suited for edge computing applications.
2.2
Federated Learning on the Edge
The need for local computational power is growing continuously [5]. The demand
for more time-sensitive applications, such as virtual reality or autonomous ve-
hicles, opposes a need to analyse the data locally and not send them over to
a centralised cloud server. This type of challenge seems to be suitable for the
application of FL, which in the case of dealing with IoT can be combined with
EC. FL and EC both attempt at lowering the amount of the data being sent to
a centralised location. Additionally, both approaches are considered more secure
as the data is stored only on the local device.
The Figures 2.4 and 2.5 were created to illustrate the benefit of combining FL
and EC. On Figure 2.4, it can be seen that the data generated by IoT devices
is only being transmitted to the EC, on which a model is later calculated and
finally sent over to the centralised cloud server without any of the original data.
This requires the potential attacker to undertake additional effort by reverse
engineering the model. The second approach (centralized) depicted on Figure
2.5 is considered less secure. The data is being sent directly from the devices to
the centralised cloud server for model calculation, which creates an opportunity
for the data to be intercepted by an adversary.
2.3
Challenges & Resolutions
The practical application of FL comes with certain challenges, in regards mostly
to the constraints and quality of the devices used by each client involved in the
learning process. This section is focused on outlining the key issues that may
arise while implementing FL, as well as proposing a solution for each issue
described.
==PAGE:17==
2.3 Challenges & Resolutions
9
Figure 2.4: Federated Learning Architecture
Figure 2.5: Centralized Learning Architecture
==PAGE:18==
10
Federated Learning
2.3.1
Synchronisation
FL is a cutting edge solution that enables collaborative learning securely. How-
ever, due to the fact that several customers at once are participating in the
creation of the federated model, it is crucial to ensure that the users are syn-
chronised. In practice, however, it is highly unlikely that the devices will have
exactly the same computing power. What is more, the data across the clients
may be unbalanced, which also affects the length of learning across the devices.
To ensure that the unnecessary waiting across the clients will be limited, but at
the same time allow the less advanced parties to participate, some policy needs
to be introduced.
One solution for ensuring synchronisation is to set up an exact limit, based on
how long it takes for the slowest device to complete the learning. As it can be
seen on Figure 2.6, it is assumed that the learning is started at the same time
on all the devices. Then, the faster devices need to simply wait for the slowest
one before sending the model.
Figure 2.6: Device synchronization
One other solution is to specify the time on which the model must be sent.
==PAGE:19==
2.3 Challenges & Resolutions
11
Assuming that the FL is performed daily, it may be agreed that all parties
need to send their model before midnight. Because of this, the customers must
prepare their local model early enough by themselves. Although this approach
introduces the need for time synchronisation across the devices, it gives more
flexibility when it comes to local model calculating.
Another approach of tackling the synchronisation issue is the implementation
of the asynchronous FL model, where the data is being sent only once during
the aggregation process. This approach is popular across cross-device learning,
as with the high amount of devices taking part in that communication type, it
does not make sense to wait for all of them to send over the models.
2.3.2
Miscommunication
The next major challenge that needs to be resolved is the miscommunication
across the devices. If a certain client will not receive the global solution, they
may perform the learning on the obsolete version of the global model, which
may influence the overall quality of the end-product model. Resolution of this
issue requires that before beginning the transmission, it will be ensured that
each client participating in the local training is equipped with the most recent
version of the global model. Moreover, the problems with communication may
also cause a situation in which the global node will only receive a small fraction
of models out of the total number of local models. This introduces a need to
define a threshold of clients and models received that needs to be exceeded in
order to start learning.
2.3.3
Battery Consumption
The learning of the model is a task that can overload the Central Processing
Unit (CPU) heavily. Because of that, if the device on which the learning process
is carried out has a relatively weak battery, it needs to be ensured that certain
conditions were first applied. One way to tackle this is to make sure that the
learning is only triggered when the device is connected to a stable source of
power and is using a reliable connection. Another solution is to introduce an edge
device that will collect data from smaller devices unable to make the training
and offload them.
==PAGE:20==
12
Federated Learning
2.3.4
Unbalanced Data
In most real-life scenarios, the data stored on local clients will not be evenly split.
Because of that, during the averaging phase, the local models that have used
more data for training should be considered more relevant. One other approach
is to prioritise the clients that have gathered more positive records (meaning
they display unusual behaviour), as they are more significant for model creation,
especially in case of anomaly detection problems.
2.3.5
IID & Non-IID Data
Data distribution plays an important role in ML model creation. If the data used
for training is not distributed in the same way as the test data, the performance
of the model will be considered as poor. In FL, it is not always given that the
data split across the clients will always be IID (independent and identically
distributed). Li et al. [18] did a study on the convergence of FL models on the
non-IID data, in which they state that in such setup, it is significantly harder to
obtain satisfactory results, yet it is still possible to achieve them. Non-IID data
can cause that the local evaluation of model performance may not reflect the
actual performance of the global model. This introduces the need for reliable
test data that will convey the true and accurate performance of the model.
2.4
Existing Solutions
In this section, several existing implementations of FL are discussed. FL has been
adapted in several fields of science with success. Some of the most recognized
examples are in the area of Information Technology (IT) and e-Health. The
purpose of reviewing real-life scenarios of FL implementation is to outline in
which cases this technique turned out to be particularly beneficial. A further
goal is to see how the solutions were implemented in each of the given examples.
2.4.1
Query Suggestion
A flagship case of FL is the Google keyboard query suggestions engine [20]
called Gboard. It is a horizontal and cross-device implementation, which bases
on users’ locally stored data. Due to privacy reasons, the involved records should
not be shared with other users, since it would disclose one’s private searches. As
==PAGE:21==
2.4 Existing Solutions
13
the learning is performed on mobile devices, the previously mentioned battery
consumption aspect is properly managed. Gborad introduces the idea of calcu-
lating local models only when the phone is plugged in and connected to a Wi-Fi
network.
Additionally, the learning is performed only in the night hours. Thanks to that,
the user experience should not be reduced in quality. Yang et al. [34] in their
paper present some insights on the Gboard implementation, portrayed with a
graphic example, as can be seen on Figure 2.7.
Figure 2.7: Gboard Architecture [20]
The data that is being stored in the training cache contains queries, suggested
text, and information of whether the user has chosen to go forward with the text
suggestion. That data is later utilised for training the local model. Since Gboard
is a project owned and run by the Google company, the authors have decided
to use a Google manufactured machine learning library - TensorFlow - for local
model calculation. In order to show which device has spent more time on the
local training, both the local model and the number of epochs used for training
are being sent to the central node. Moreover, to ensure the quality of service,
it is defined that only users with a sufficient acceptance ratio are taken into
consideration when calculating the global model. This restriction is introduced
to only include the models produced by users frequently using the tool. This
takes in consideration that a model that would be based on data from users that
either do not use the feature at all or use it very rarely, will add incoherent data
that may in the long run decrease the performance of the solution.
The algorithm used for calculating the local model in the Gboard solution is
the logistic regression (LR). This choice was justified with the fact that LR
has the advantage of being easily trainable on the analysed data type. The
creators, following the state-of-the-art federated algorithm FedAvg [23], have
decided to use the stochastic gradient descent (SGD) as an optimizer. During the
averaging part, the minimum reporting fraction has been set to 80% - meaning
that the averaging will be performed only if the fraction of participating clients
==PAGE:22==
14
Federated Learning
is exceeded. The report windows are set to 2 minutes and the training period is
set to 5 minutes. Thus, the problem of synchronisation and miscommunication
is addressed.
In order to sufficiently train a model with 100 clients participating, it was needed
to perform around 200 rounds. Only after that many iterations, the model was
stable and delivered good enough performance. The FL model with comparison
to the Long Short Term Memory (LSTM) solution (a non-FL approach) achieved
a better click through ratio and at the same time, it also ensured the users’
privacy.
2.4.2
Smart Healthcare
Implementing FL in the healthcare industry has led to developing different ap-
plications based on personal data collected from wearable devices such as wrist-
bands, smartphone accessories or smart glasses. An example of this type of
application is FedHealth [7]. The premise of FedHealth was to develop a model
that can effectively detect diseases or any other anomalies in ones’ health. This
required a collection of data from two user groups - ones with relatively good
health and ones that are struggling with diseases. Although there is a plethora
of such data, due to privacy constraints, there are not so many real-life imple-
mentations of centralised systems that utilise it to train a model. In view of
the General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR), health data needs to be kept
private. This makes FL the ideal solution, since the data itself is not being dis-
closed.
FedHealth uses deep learning models in the local training process. Similarly
to the example of Gboard, the authors of FedHealth have also decided to use
the FedAvg algorithm to average the obtained local models and to use SGD
as an optimizer. The FedAvg hyperparameters were chosen on an arbitrary ba-
sis - learning rate was set to 0.01. During a singular round, local models use
80 epochs, and the batch size is equal to 64 records. The final global model
was compared against some classic ML models used in a scenario where each
client calculates a local model, and next the accuracy is summed and divided by
the number of clients. It was found that K-nearest Neighbours, Support Vector
Machine (SVC), and Random Forest (RF) ML models perform worse than the
federated Convolutional Neural Network (CNN). Eventually, the model was also
compared against the non-federated CNN.
The authors indicate that the federated model introduced an improvement of
5.3% in relation to the averaged out scores achieved by the non-federated CNN.
Overall, FedHealth introduced a framework that enhances the learning proce-
dure and maintains the required privacy while sharing data.
==PAGE:23==
2.4 Existing Solutions
15
2.4.3
Drug Discovery
FL was also implemented in another health-related scenario, namely drug dis-
covery. Xiong et. al. [32] have tested the effectiveness of applying FL in order
to enable institutions such as hospitals, pharmaceutical companies, and labora-
tories to better coordinate drug development. Drug metrics such as ADME/T
(Absorption, Distribution, Metabolism, Excretion and Toxicity) can be shared
over the institutions to figure out how certain drug treatments benefit the pa-
tient. Here, the privacy constraints of data sharing are also present and can be
addressed with help of FL. The model used for local training was again CNN,
and the algorithm used for averaging was FedAvg. The aggregation strategy has
been tested in multiple scenarios - aggregation every 1, 5, 10, 15, and 20 epochs.
The 5 epochs aggregation obtained the best results. The condition set in place
for stopping the FedAvg algorithm was a situation in which the model does not
improve its results for over 30 rounds of communication.
In order to see how the algorithm behaves in different scenarios, the authors
have tested the model on seven datasets that included both IID and non-IID
examples. The study indicated that the federated model generally performed
better than the local ones in both IID and non-IID setup. What is more, one
of the datasets introduced even better results than a model that has access to
all the local clients’ data. Additionally, the study showed that if a client was
not taking part in the training, the use of a federated model is still beneficial to
that client.
After summarising the key facts concerning the discussed solutions (Table 2.1),
it can be observed that FL has been successfully implemented in these scenarios.
In each case, the FL model has achieved better scores than the local models.
The same averaging algorithm has been applied in all three solutions, which
emphasises the popularity of the FedAvg algorithm and points to considering it
for the implementation of FL that will be conducted later in the scope of this
project.
Gboard
FedHealthcare
Drug Discovery
Local ML Model
LR
CNN
CNN
FL Algorithm
FedAvg
FedAvg
FedAvg
Data Considered
IID
IID
IID / non-IID
Was FL model better?
Yes
Yes
Yes
Table 2.1: Federated Learning Examples
Nonetheless, there is a disparity between the FL theoretical framework and the
real-life implementations. Most of the available studies simulate the communi-
cation between nodes and do not take into the account what communication
==PAGE:24==
16
Federated Learning
protocol should be used or how the potential delays may decrease the model
quality. As Gboard is a commercial product, the exact technical specifications
of its implementation are not known publicly. Out of the remaining two papers
discussed, only the last one - the drug discovery solution - undertook additional
steps to provide real communication between clients using Federated AI Tech-
nology Enabler (FATE) engine, which is an open-source module enabling FL.
In general, the authors of papers on the topic of FL implementation do not dis-
cuss any further technical details apart from local models and federated model
hyperparameters.
2.5
Federated Learning on IoT
As the target of this project is the implementation of FL on IoT devices, it
is necessary to first consider some of the previously mentioned approaches in
FL in relation to IoT devices specifically. The cross-silo and the cross-device
approaches were evaluated in order to choose the better fit for the project scope.
Due to the fact that most IoT devices do not have a high computation power by
design, they are simply unable to facilitate the calculation of a complex machine
learning model on-site. This rules out the use of a cross-device approach. Hence,
the cross-silo architecture was chosen as it is the better fit. For this project, it
has been decided that in order to implement FL in the IoT device environment,
an edge device needs to be introduced, so that it will store and perform the
analysis on the received packets.
2.5.1
Placement in the Local Network
With the goal of covering the full throughput that is handled by IoT devices,
it is crucial to determine where the learning should be performed and where
the network packets should be collected. This challenge is similar to an existing
problem that concerns the issue of placement of a network intrusion detection
system (NIDS) [28] in order to secure IoT devices. Thus, it is beneficial to
consider this corresponding example and its solutions. NIDS are typically placed
in the most outer point of the IoT infrastructure in order to gather as much
information as possible. The analysis is not performed directly on the data but
on the copy which is being sent to the NIDS by the network tap [22]. This
outermost place appears to be also suitable to collect the data for training of
the local model in the FL approach. The client node running the FL analysis can
be placed, in this example, close to NIDS, therefore it will have an easy access
to all the packets and it will simplify applying the new model to the NIDS. One
==PAGE:25==
2.5 Federated Learning on IoT
17
may also consider running the FL client on the same node as NIDS, however
it may lead to unwanted downtime as it may happen that either learning or
analysis may overload the CPU. To increase the diversity, the nodes should be
delivered separately.
2.5.2
Related Papers
To better understand the implementation of FL models on IoT devices and the
associated challenges, several articles were studied. The most relevant of those
are described in more detail below.
Rey et al. [29] have developed and presented a solution for malware detection
on IoT devices. The Multi Layer Perceptron (MLP) and auto-encoders were
selected for the local training. The authors focused their efforts on identifying
what is the best solution by meticulously tuning the hyperparameters. For the
purpose of model aggregation, the authors have implemented two variations of
the FedAvg algorithm [23]. In the first approach, called multi-epoch averaging,
all of the data stored on the local node is used for training. During a single
round of communication, a relatively small amount of epochs is involved. In the
second method, called multi-batch averaging, the number of epochs calculated
per round is significantly higher but only a fraction of data is used for learning.
The multi-epoch approach takes more local training steps, but it requires a
lower number of communication rounds. On the other hand, the multi-batch
averaging model performs fewer calculations of the site, but it requires more
communication rounds to obtain a stable model. It has been highlighted that
if the goal is to minimise the number of communication rounds, one should use
more epochs per one communication round and try to learn on a bigger sample
of data.
The final model was tested on the N-BaIoT [24] dataset. The accuracy for both
the MLP and auto-encoder models was at the level of around 99%. To obtain
such accuracy, the model needed 30 rounds in the multi-epoch setup and 100
rounds in the multi-batch setup.
Bakopoulou et al. [2] have applied FL in a mobile packet classification problem.
The model is based on the Hypertext Transfer Protocol (HTTP) packets, which
are received and handled by mobile phones while browsing the internet. For
the local models, the authors have analysed the use of Decision Tree (DT), RF
and SVM. Despite the fact that the DT based model is the most popular one
in case of such problems, the authors finally decided to use SVM. This choice
was motivated by the fact that models, such as DT and RF, do not use SGD
as the optimizer. The authors have also considered applying the Deep Neural
Network (DNN), which is one of the most popular local model types in terms of
FL. However, due to the fact that the training is performed on mobile phones,
it would be too costly to execute - it would most likely cause high CPU us-
==PAGE:26==
18
Federated Learning
age and exhaust the battery life. Bakopoulou et al. have settled on using the
FedAvg model for aggregation of the models on the central node. The authors
have empirically chosen to execute 30 rounds (1 epoch per round) in case of the
IID data and 100 rounds in terms of non-IID data.
For training and testing, the authors have applied the NoMoAds [31] and AntShield
[30] datasets. Both of those datasets contain HTTP and unencrypted HTTPS
packets. In those packets all activities are labelled by activity type which al-
lows differentiating between benign packets and ones with unwanted and po-
tentially harmful content (ad requests, Personally Identifiable Information ex-
posure, etc.).
The model was tested in both IID and non-IID setup. Where in the first data
setup, the model has achieved the F1-score of around 94% and in the latter of
90% - both of the scores were better than the average score for the local models.
Additionally the FL model scores almost reached the level of the centralised
model, which was able to obtain F1 of 95%.
FL in the malware detection scenario was tested by Bertoli et al. [9] basing on
IoT communication packets. For the local model, the authors selected LR with
SGD optimizer applied. That choice was made due to the model’s simplicity and
good performance obtained during preliminary tests on local data. The FedAvg
algorithm again was used here to calculate the FL model. The hyperparameters
chosen for the training were as follows: 10 epochs, learning rate of 0.15 and 50
rounds.
The TON_IoT [1] dataset, split among 13 clients, was used for training and
testing. The local training delivered on average an F1 score of 83%. Whereas
in the federated scenario, on average the F1 score has improved to reach and
exceed 85%.
From the presented papers, it can be seen that FL introduces a great value in
IoT malware detection. In each study FL managed to produce improved results
and outperform the local models.
2.6
Investigated Frameworks
In order to develop an FL based solution that can detect malicious network
connections, first the effort was put on finding the most suitable open-source so-
lution. The tools and solutions that have been taken into account are all already
acknowledged frameworks that have been used before in several researches. They
are introduced and evaluated in the following list in order to see if and how they
can be applied in the scope of this project.
• PySyFt [36] is an open-source tool created with the main goal of promot-
ing privacy in multi-machine computing. A great advantage of PySyFt
==PAGE:27==
2.6 Investigated Frameworks
19
over the other competing solutions is the fact that it offers three extensive
courses that introduce the potential user into the area of FL and secure
multi-party computation.
PySyFt offers a Duet module that enables the communication between
multiple Jupyter notebooks. Thanks to that, learning can be performed
from a remote location. It is very useful to understand the principles of
FL as well as the privacy restrictions. Duet is based on PyTorch and re-
quires the user to specify data handlers which will manage transferring
restricted data between users with correct permissions. For the more com-
plex scenarios, PySyFt offers the PyGrid platform, which can be also used
as a central node for FL communication. For both PyGrid and Duet, web
sockets are used as an underlying method of communication. Additionally,
both modules offer user authentication and multiple data access policies.
PySyFt is still under development and in the late 2022 its creators have
decided to focus more on the differential privacy aspect of distributed com-
puting and to deprioritize FL. Their reasoning to do so is the fact that
for FL, the transmission aspect may generate issues and it is required to
process with one of the two-paths introduced below:
– Data Owner needs to approve every data-request to be sure that no
restricted information are being intercepted by unwanted parties;
– Data Owner uses a pre-prepared model, such as FedAvg, which makes
the room for flexibility decreased as this specific model or its en-
hanced versions must be used.
The current approach is to make a system where data will be completely
anonymised and secured with use of cryptography and differential privacy.
Even though it is a well developed solution with an active user community,
it does not offer sufficient tools to implement an end-to-end FL platform.
The modification of the available codebase was considered but there is
no detailed documentation available, which makes it especially difficult to
implement additional features. For this reason, an attempt to implement
PySyFt was not made.
• TensorFlow Federated (TFF) is a Python package delivered by Google
that bases on TensorFlow and enables users to implement FL. It is build
out of two layers:
– FL API - High-level interface that enables federated training with
the use of the models offered by TensorFlow;
– Federated Core API - Lower-level interface, which is a foundation for
the FL API. It is more suitable for implementing more novel FL al-
gorithms and combining TensorFlow with communication functions.
==PAGE:28==
20
Federated Learning
TFF is a promising solution, it offers a comprehensive documentation as
well as an interesting set of tutorials that give an overview of how to use
the tool. However, at this stage it does not provide any privacy related
mechanisms and it is mostly concentrated on a single node scenarios. As
it will be required to adapt new security mechanisms and enhance com-
munication, it was decided not to proceed with the solution.
• FATE [19] is an open-source project developed by the Linux foundation.
It offers a vast amount of models such as MLP, Gradient Boosting Decision
Tree (GBDT) and LR. FATE uses homomorphic encryption and supports
differential privacy for security reasons. It offers tutorials that allow for
familiarising oneself with the solution. In FATE, the operations run with
pipelines which can be triggered with the use of HTTP Representational
State Transfer (REST) API. Although FATE is regarded as a convenient
and the most mature solution out of the investigated tools, it is consid-
ered that the lack of a clear dedicated API makes it complicated to add
new features, as the only way of adding them can be done by modifying
the source code [17]. For that reason, it was also excluded as a potential
solution to build the FL platform.
• Flower [3] is an FL solution developed in 2020, it is claimed by its au-
thors as a game-changer that will reduce the disparity between the re-
search world and the real-world implementation of FL. Flower is deliv-
ered in the form of a Python package that can be installed with the
Python pip module. One of its biggest advantages is the fact that Flower is
framework-agnostic. It supports solutions implemented in PyTorch, Ten-
sorFlow, Scikit-learn and other leading ML packages. It also offers a set of
tutorials that resolve the problem of recognizing the MNIST dataset [10].
The communication between the client and server is implemented with
the use of Remote Procedure Call (RPC) communication. Additionally,
Flower offers a high number of averaging algorithms including FedAvg,
FedOptim, FedProx, and more. One drawback of the solution is the lack
of the available out-of-the-box authentication for the clients. Therefore,
the real-life implementation requires an additional development of secu-
rity features.
Due to the fact that Flower is an intuitive and straightforward Python-
module based solution, which allows for making modifications, some efforts
were undertaken to adapt it for the scope of this project. First, the tool
was tested on the sklearn LR solution, however it did not deliver satisfying
results. Further, during applying the PyTorch as a tool to calculate the
local model, a versioning error was encountered. The cause of the resulting
errors was that Flower uses an older version of underlying ML solutions,
which are right now deprecated.
==PAGE:29==
2.6 Investigated Frameworks
21
Key characteristics of all discussed tools are presented in the Table 2.2 for an
easier comparison. Flower turned out to be the most modular solution. This
made it the only tool, out of the presented four, for which an attempt at adapting
it was made. It was put to a test on a dataset that describes IoT communication.
Unfortunately, during that implementation, Flower raised a high amount of
errors, proving that it is still a relatively new and somewhat unstable solution
for the purposes of this project.
Name
Flower
TTF
PySyFt
FATE
Communication
RPC
-
Web Sockets
REST API
Underlying tools
Agnostic
Tensorflow
Agnostic
Keras
Privacy Ensured
No
No
Yes
Yes
Table 2.2: Federated Frameworks Summarised
==PAGE:30==
Chapter 3
Implementation
Foundations
In the previous chapter, it was discussed that none of the currently available
open-source frameworks are sufficiently modular and stable to be used for cre-
ating a simple, secure, and user-friendly tool. For this reason, it was decided to
implement an independent solution. Next to that, the decision was motivated by
the fact that more knowledge will be drawn out of the project while developing
a full end-to-end federated framework.
In this chapter, the framework of implementing an FL platform for IoT devices
will be presented. Here, the focus will be put on the theoretical basis of the
components that will be evaluated in later chapters with the aim of achieving
the best performing solution. Prior to the implementation, it was crucial to first
design the initial architecture of the system. To do that, a number of questions
must be answered:
• Q1 - Which dataset should be used to test the model?
• Q2 - Which underlying ML model(s) should be used?
• Q3 - Which FL Model(s) should be used?
• Q4 - How the communication between nodes should be performed and
which underlying technology should be used?
• Q5 - How to achieve sufficient synchronisation?
• Q6 - How to authenticate the user and how to make the protocol secure?
==PAGE:31==
3.1 Machine Learning Models
23
This chapter will focus on finding the answers to questions two through four.
In the following chapters, the remaining questions will be addressed and finally
the foundations of the tool will be presented in detail.
3.1
Machine Learning Models
This section will discuss the ML models that will be considered as potential
choices for local models in this implementation. The selection of models is based
on the articles discussed in Sections 2.4 and 2.5.2.
3.1.1
Logistic Regression
LR is a parametric classification model. It is dependent on the number of pa-
rameters that represent the features which were used to train the model in the
first place. In order to make a prediction, LR uses the sigmoid function, which
is expressed by the following formula.
f(x) =
1
1 + e−x
Here, x stands for the dot product of coefficient values with the adequate vari-
able values, summed with the intercept. Next, the output of the function is
assigned to a value between 0 and 1. The output determines which class is pre-
dicted for a given observation.
In the case of two binary classes, the threshold is usually set to 0.5. Meaning
that, if the value of a function is higher than the threshold value, the obser-
vation is classified as 1, and if the value is lower than the threshold value, the
observation is classified as 0. The maximal likelihood is mostly used in order to
determine what are the values of the weights associated with certain features.
The option of using LR with SGD as an optimizer (LR-SGD) will also be tested.
Most popular averaging algorithms use SGD as an optimizer, therefore it was
decided to also investigate how this version of LR behaves in the centralised
scenario.
==PAGE:32==
24
Implementation Foundations
Figure 3.1: ReLu functiuon
3.1.2
Artificial Neural Network
Artificial Neural Network (ANN) is a deep learning model that tries to emulate
the neurons’ behaviour by sending one signal from a neuron to another with the
purpose of solving either a regression or a classification task. The neurons are
composed of input layer, output layer, and hidden layer(s). Each of these layers
is made out of nodes (neurons) that are interconnected. Each neuron has an
associated weight and threshold. If a value surpasses the threshold, the neuron
value is passed to the next layer.
The total number of input neurons represents the number of features in each
dataset. The last layer - the output layer - in case of binary classification will
only contain two neurons, which will indicate whether the observation is con-
sidered as positive (1) or negative (0).
Each neuron holds a value between 0 and 1. The value of weights can be loosely
translated as whether a certain feature is relevant for solving the task at hand.
Next, in the hidden layers, those values are investigated more closely. When the
weights are set to a lower value, the associated element will be disregarded.
Between the layers, there is also an activation function, which determines if a
certain neuron should be muted or activated. The function used in this study is
the ReLu function, presented in Figure 3.1. It can be observed that for the neg-
ative input, the output of the function will always be zero, and for the positive
input nothing is changed. Thanks to that, neurons will be activated only if the
output value of the function is positive. A bias is also used on the neurons at
the input of ReLu to specify how high the value should be to activate a neuron.
ANN is a more complicated algorithm than LR. It has significantly more train-
able parameters. For that reason, the hardware that trains neural networks needs
to have a sufficient CPU to calculate the network in a reasonable time.
==PAGE:33==
3.2 Federated Learning Models
25
Figure 3.2: Crossentropy function
The values of the trainable parameters are at first initialised at random. Next,
with the help of a loss function, they are optimised. The loss function outputs
a low value when the network calculates the correct values, and a high value if
the calculated values are wrong.
The idea behind the optimising is to test possible weights and biases, that next
will be used on the training set to check if the initialised values minimise the loss
function. The Cross Entropy Loss was used as the loss function in this project.
It is designed especially for classification problems. The curve of the function is
presented on Figure 3.2. The graph of the function shows that when the pre-
dicted probability is close to the true label (set to 1 in the example), the “log
loss” value is lower and if the predicted probability is different from the true
label, the “log loss” value is higher.
The equation below is used to calculate Cross Entropy Loss values. The first
term of the sum, calculates the logarithm of probability (p) if the true value is
equal to 1. The second term is used when the true value is equal to 0.
−(y × log(p) + (1 −y) × log(1 −p)))
3.2
Federated Learning Models
To implement the FL model, it is necessary to find the appropriate averaging
algorithm that can be used to aggregate the local models. This section will fo-
cus on averaging algorithms considered for the implementation of this project.
The FedAvg algorithm, as well as most of the other state-of-the-art averaging
==PAGE:34==
26
Implementation Foundations
algorithms, are based on SGD, which is convenient in terms of building a feder-
ated model as SGD-based models can be partially fit. The partial fit depicts a
situation where a model can be trained on parts of data without reinitialization.
It is particularly suitable for learning a joint model across a number of different
devices. To measure the performance of FedAvg against a simple baseline model,
it was also decided to compare it with the Simple Averaging Method.
3.2.1
Simple Averaging Method
In this section, the basis of the simple averaging method will be explained.
To make the discussion more specific, the algorithm is presented in a form of
pseudocode in Algorithm 1. The algorithm executes only one round of commu-
Algorithm 1 Simple Averaging Algorithm
On Server:
Receive Models and Dataset Size used for trainings
Sum the Dataset Sizes
for each c ∈Clients do
LOCAL TRANINIG
Global Parameters = Dataset Size × Model Parameters
Dataset Sum += Dataset size
end for
Global Parameters = Global Parameters / Dataset Sum
Send Model back to Clients
procedure Local training
Calculate Local Model
Send Model and Dataset Size to a server
Wait for global model
end procedure
nication. It starts with the clients nodes calculating the model locally. Next, the
model and the dataset size used for training are sent to a centralised server. If
the client is unable to calculate a sufficient model, it does not participate in the
averaging stage. The server, after receiving the data from the local nodes, first
accumulates the total dataset size, second, it sums together the model param-
eters multiplied by the local dataset size. Next, this second sum is divided by
the total number of entries used to calculate the global models. Which later is
sent back to the participating clients.
==PAGE:35==
3.2 Federated Learning Models
27
3.2.2
Gradient and Stochastic Gradient Descent
Currently, most commonly implemented FL solutions rely on the SGD. It is
a natural choice, as it allows for calculating a single batch of data during a
single communication round. Its basis is the Gradient Descent (GD), which
is a common optimization method that is used to train ML models. Its main
purpose is to produce a solution that minimises the loss function (for example,
Cross Entropy introduced in Section 3.1.2). The algorithm tries to locate the
place where the function is minimised on a step-by-step basis. It starts with
setting initial points that specify the boundaries for the space which will be
considered. The algorithm will try to browse through that space to find a local
minimum by iterating through it with steps. The variable that specifies how
large the step will be is called learning rate. The lower the learning rate, the
better the final solution will be. However, a low learning rate results in a greater
calculation time.
In the case of neural networks, where GD is often used, the function that needs
to be optimised can be quite complex. Especially when the number of features
in the dataset is high, the gradients that need to be calculated can require a lot
of time and computational power. Therefore, for datasets which contain many
features, optimising the loss function with GD may turn out to be a slow process.
A solution to that problem is to use the SGD. It selects only a small number
of samples, on which the GD is later performed. Consequently, not all dataset
entries are being used in the optimization, which eventually saves computation
time. It is especially useful where there is a lot of redundancy in the dataset, as
the data chosen at random may still represent the distribution sufficiently. The
small amount of data used for each step is called a mini-batch. The advantage
of this algorithm is the fact that when the new data is obtained, it can be
simply treated as another mini-batch. This is advantageous in the federated
setup, as models can be sent between parties and learn on new data treated as
mini-batches.
3.2.3
Federated Stochastic Gradient Descent
Federated Stochastic Gradient Descent (FedSGD) introduced by Chen et al. [6]
is one of the most fundamental algorithms in FL. It assumes that during the
communication within a single round, all clients train one epoch on the whole
available dataset. Afterward, the local models are sent to the central node where
they are averaged and re-sent to the clients and the next round can be started.
The number of rounds required for the model to converge depends on what
dataset is being used and how many clients participate in the learning process.
Even though this algorithm is efficient in terms of results, it requires a high
==PAGE:36==
28
Implementation Foundations
amount of communication rounds, as each round only uses one epoch, which
may require some time to reach model stability.
3.2.4
Federated Averaging
McMahan et al. [23] created the FedAvg algorithm, which can be considered as
an enhanced version of FedSGD. It assumes that there is a certain redundancy
across the clients and that not all local data needs to be used during the local
learning.
The first improvement that FedAvg introduces is the assumption that all clients
participating in the learning do not need to take part in each communication
round. This is highly beneficial as communication issues may arise and exclude
some clients from a singular round. FedAvg also assumes that the batch size used
for communication per round does not need to contain all the locally stored data.
The algorithm allows for using more than one epoch during the local learning
step. Generally, the concept behind utilising FedAvg is to minimise the number
of communication rounds and train the model more intensively during each step.
It is achieved by using a larger amount of data and multiple epochs.
The exact algorithm that describes the FedAvg solution is presented in Algo-
rithm 2. The server in each round first chooses a fraction or a subset of clients
- variable C - that will participate in the learning. Next, each of those clients
sends their model parameters, which are later averaged on the central node.
Like for the simple averaging method (Algorithm 2.), the dataset size is used for
determining the relevancy of the parameters during averaging. The algorithm
first fetches the newest version of the global model on the client nodes. Then it
chooses the fraction of data which will be used during the training - variable B.
Next, the local model performs E partial fits, where E stands for the number
of epochs used. Finally, the client sends the model back to the central node for
averaging.
FedSGD and FedAvg both base on the algorithm presented in Algorithm 2. In
the case of the FedSGD model, C is always set to 1 signifying 100% of the
clients, E is set to 1 as only one epoch is used, and B is set to 1 as 100% of
the data is used per communication round. Where in the case of FedAvg those
values can be chosen freely.
McMahan et al. [23] compare the two algorithms. They present that FedAvg
(with B<1, E>1) achieves a similar performance to FedSGD while executing a
significantly lower number of communication rounds. The results show that in
a scenario where the fundamental idea is to limit the number of communication
rounds, the FedAvg algorithm is a better solution.
==PAGE:37==
3.3 Communication Architecture
29
Algorithm 2 Federated Averaging
On Server:
for each r ∈Rounds do
for each c ∈Clients do
w(+1) = UPDATE CLIENT MODEL
end for
global model = average new parameters
end for
procedure UpdateClientModel
Fetch Global Model Parameters
use B
for each e ∈E do
fitmodel(B)
end for
end procedure
3.3
Communication Architecture
During the previous sections, the main emphasis was put on finding a proper
methodology for FL model development. Thus, the communication part was set
aside. This section will focus on researching the possible tools that can facilitate
the communication between a server and clients. Below, the three considered
communication tools will be discussed.
IoT devices by design require a communication protocol that can support low-
power devices. For that reason, in some solutions, the lightweight MQTT (MQ
Telemetry Transport) protocol is used. An example of this approach is intro-
duced by Fremantle et al. [12]. The authors justify their solution by highlighting
that MQTT is simple, secure, and does not consume a lot of resources. As it is a
commonly used protocol for IoT solutions, it has several implementations. It is
highly flexible and the additional security enhancements can be easily adapted.
However, due to the fact that in the EC based FL the FL-transport layer does
not need to strictly follow IoT communication principles, it was decided to use
a different technology.
HTTP-REST API (Application Programming Interface) is a simple and more
popular solution that has already been used in several FL implementations [16],
[27]. It is one of the most widely used protocols in today’s Internet. HTTP is
based on the unidirectional request and response format. It runs on top of the
TCP, which ensures that the data packets will be delivered by using the three-
way handshake. After an HTTP connection is completed, it is immediately ter-
minated. Therefore, for each round, a new connection needs to be established.
==PAGE:38==
30
Implementation Foundations
This introduces an additional delay, which may prolong the exchange phase.
HTTP-REST has a lot of implementations and modules that are available out-
of-the-box. What is more, its security features can be easily adapted.
Socket s a low-level networking interface. Just like HTTP, it is a protocol that
enables the communication between a server and a client. Web sockets, unlike
HTTP, use bidirectional communication. Additionally, it is a stateful protocol
which needs to be closed by one of the sides to terminate the communication.
Web sockets are advised to be used in real-time applications such as online
games or chats. In those scenarios, a continuous stream of data between the
applications needs to be maintained. Socket has a lower delay when it comes
to sending the models between parties. Moreover, socket communication for en-
abling FL has been implemented by IBM [8] and Zonghao Lu et al. [21]. In
the second paper listed, the authors highlight the simplicity of the solution and
its low delay scores during transmission. Out of the discussed communication
solutions, sockets and HTTP REST API were chosen to be implemented, with
the idea of testing them and choosing the appropriate one for the final model
implementation. The motivation for testing both methods was their modularity
and easily adaptable features.
==PAGE:39==
Chapter 4
Experiment Setup
This chapter will present what assumptions were made for the framework of
the implementation. It will also introduce the metrics used for performance
assessments for the purposes of the project and what datasets have been used
to evaluate the analysed models. Next, the implementation of both ML and FL
will be presented in detail and the features used will be discussed. Finally, the
architecture behind the real communications setup that will be used for testing
is presented.
4.1
Assumptions
The core idea of this undertaking is to detect network attacks in a decentralised
manner. In the initial phases of the project, most of the experiments will be
performed in a virtual setup, excluding the real communication aspect (which
will be involved in the closing stages). Due to that, some assumptions first need
to be made to specify the constraints of the devices and data used:
• It is assumed that the devices on which the models are trained are secure
by design and that in order to compromise them the adversary needs to
perform a network attack;
• The detection is based only on packet and flow based data available in the
UNSW and CICIDS datasets (both will be introduced in Section 4.2);
==PAGE:40==
32
Experiment Setup
• The attacks taken into account are as follows: denial of service (DoS), dis-
tributed denial of service (DDoS), brute force, cross site scripting (XXS),
Structured Query Language (SQL) injection, infiltration, port scan, back-
door access, fuzzers, and worms;
• The aim is to combine the models in the federated manner and not to
develop the best local models - therefore, their quality is of secondary
significance;
• The local machines on which the detection will take place are expected to
simulate the EC units. Meaning that they will have sufficient CPU power
for calculation of the more complicated models. Additionally, they will
always be available for communication and no downtime is assumed.
4.2
Datasets
In order to train the algorithm, one needs to first find a suitable dataset. In
case of network attacks, it is crucial that the dataset used for training will be
up-to-date - meaning it will contain relatively new and modern attacks. It was
decided to use two datasets that are characterised by different features to find
out if the investigated models are flexible enough to be applied to a border scope
of data. Finding an appropriate dataset is a challenge in itself, as not so many
ones of the desired quality are published as accessible to the public. The two
datasets selected for the implementation are described, as follows.
• UNSW - dataset released in 2015 by Moustafa et al. [25]. It consists of
around 2.5 million network flow entries that describe the communication
between three servers. The dataset is composed out of packet-based values
like port numbers and transmission protocols used, it also contains server
flow based statistics. The dataset covers several network attacks, such
as: backdoor, exploits, fuzzers, generic reconnaissance, and worms. One
major characteristic of this dataset is the fact that it is imbalanced -
87% entries from the original dataset are labelled as benign. Due to that
fact, the creators of UNSW have also released a more balanced version of
the dataset, which is composed of 68% benign entries and 32% malicious
entries. Due to possible problems that can be caused by the use of the
unbalanced dataset, for the purpose of this project, the balanced version
of the dataset has been used.
• CICIDS - dataset released in 2017 by the Canadian Institute for Cyber-
security [15]. It covers seven types of attacks, namely: DoS, DDoS, brute
force, XSS, SQL injection, infiltration, and port scan. The dataset contains
==PAGE:41==
4.2 Datasets
33
network activities which have been collected over a span of five days. The
full dataset has in total around 2.8 million entries, which are described
with 78 features regarding packets and flow. CICIDS, as well as UNSW, is
unbalanced in its original form - around 80% of the collected activities are
benign. To achieve a more balanced ratio between benign and malicious
entries, for this project, data was sampled from only one day (Wednesday)
out of the total five.
4.2.1
Preprocessing
The chosen datasets first had to be made fit for the latter implementation. In
the section, all steps that were performed to preprocess both datasets will be
described in detail. The preprocessing of datasets was rather straightforward in
both cases. Preprocessing of the CICIDS required less steps than in the case of
UNSW.
CICIDS dataset - preprocessing stages
1. The label values describing what type of attack has been experienced,
were changed to either 1 from "DoS", "Heartbleed", "DDoS", "Bot",
"PortScan" or to 0 for the ”Benign” label.
2. The entries containing non-numerical parameters have been removed.
3. Data containing empty features was removed.
UNSW dataset - preprocessing stages
1. The ID and attack category columns were dropped, as they are not useful
for detection purposes.
2. The values found in the categorical features have been counted and the
ones that appear more than 6 times (value chosen arbitrarily) are marked
under original names and the others were grouped as [Feature Name]_rest.
Example: For the proto feature, that describes the protocols used in the
transmission layer, only the five most frequently occurring protocols (tcp,
udp, uns, arp, and ospf ) were left under the original naming and the less
popular protocols, such as icmp or rdp, were renamed to proto_rest.
3. The one-hot-encoder has been used to transform categorical data and sub-
stitute the values with numbers. The features that have been encoded are
proto, state and service.
==PAGE:42==
34
Experiment Setup
4. Data containing empty features was removed.
The features in both datasets have been standardized. For which, the Stan-
darScaler offered by the sklearn.preprocessing library was used. In which, each
value is calculated with use of the following equation:
z = (x −u)/s
Where, u parameter stands for the mean of the values, s is the standard devi-
ation, and x is the value that is being standardised.
4.3
Metrics
The metric used for accessing the performance of models is the F1 score, de-
fined as the harmonic mean of the measures precision and recall. The measure-
ment produces a combined score of precision and recall, where both metrics are
weighted equally, basing on the formula given below. It is regarded as a better
metric for classification than the accuracy metric, as it maximises precision and
recall, which leads to minimising the number of both false positives and false
negatives.
F1 = 2 × precision × recall
precision + recall
Precision is the ratio between the number of true positives divided by the
sum of true positives and false positives. In case of the considered datasets, true
positive signifies that an observation tagged as malicious was correctly predicted
as malicious by the model. False positive on the other hand is an observation
which has been predicted as malicious, however their true label is benign.
Precison =
tp
tp + fp
Recall is a ratio value similar to precision, however, for recall the true positives
number is divided by the sum of true positives and false negatives. Where false
negative is an observation that is tagged as malicious, but its true label is benign.
==PAGE:43==
4.4 Machine Learning Models
35
Recall =
tp
tp + fn
Communication Overhead is an another considered metric that will be solely
used for the purpose of benchmarking the communication protocols. It refers to
additional information that needs to be sent with the data, in order to facilitate
the connection. The amount of data used for that reason depends on the network
protocol that is used. It can be measured by observing how much data is sent
between nodes while sending the object and how much data is needed by the
device to store the object itself.
4.4
Machine Learning Models
In this project to facilitate both LR-SGD and LR the sklearn Python mod-
ule was used. LR-SGD is offered as a class named SGDClassifier, where the loss
component needs to be set to the value “log_loss”. The class for LR is named Lo-
gisticRegression and does not require setting any additional model components.
For the UNSW dataset it is required to calculate the values of 57 parameters
and for CICIDS - 78 parameters.
The ANN model used in the project was implemented with the use of the Py-
Torch module. In the task performed, the input layer is made up of 78 and
57 input neurons for the CICIDS and the UNSW datasets, respectively. The
number of hidden layers (1 layer) and the number of how many neurons it will
consist of (30 neurons for UNSW, 40 neurons for CICIDS), were chosen arbi-
trarily. In the case of CICIDS the total number of parameters that needs to be
trained is equal to 3242 and for UNSW to 1742.
4.4.1
Hyperparameter Fine-tuning
Some of the hyperparameters contained in the analysed models need to be fine-
tuned in order to obtain the best solutions. For that reason, the twofold Cross
Validation (CV) will be performed by using the GridSearchCV function offered
by the sklearn module. It allows for specifying the grid of parameters, which later
are tested in different variations to find the model that maximises the scoring.
Since the function belongs to the sklearn package, it supports the sklearn-based
models and can specify which values of hyperparameters are the best for the
calculated model.
==PAGE:44==
36
Experiment Setup
The ANN model was developed with the PyTorch module, which does not pro-
vide any method for fine-tuning of the hyperparameters. To combat this issue,
the Skorch module can be used to find the best fitting parameters for the ANN
model. Skorch acts as a layer translating the Pytorch models in a way that
makes them available for the sklearn syntax. Thus, after the modification, the
GridSearchCV can also be used on the ANN model.
4.4.2
Centralised Model
The centralised model, which is present in the less secure centralised setup (pre-
viously introduced in Section 2.2), has direct access to all data stored on the
local nodes. In this project, it will be used as a point of comparison with the FL
model, as it is regarded as the highest attainable performance on a particular
dataset. Before developing an FL algorithm, it is crucial to determine how well
the centralised model will perform. The basis for recording the maximal feasible
performance is that it will be useful for benchmarking purposes in the future
analysis of local and aggregated models.
4.5
Federated Learning Models
As discussed before, it was decided not to use any third-party module enabling
FL. Therefore, a Python module, called “fede”, was developed specifically for this
implementation. It is responsible for receiving parameters sent by the clients par-
ticipating in the learning, averaging the received parameters and next sending
them back to clients. The module bases on both Algorithm 1 and Algorithm 2.
Most of the required functionality was developed with generic Python function-
alities, and for the purpose of model parameters averaging the NumPy module
was used.
4.6
Communication Architecture
For the purposes of this project, it was decided to investigate how communica-
tion based on either HTTP REST API or sockets can enable FL. In this section,
both solutions will be presented alongside their respective implementation de-
tails, such as architecture, security features, and usage scenarios.
==PAGE:45==
4.6 Communication Architecture
37
4.6.1
HTTP REST API-based FL
The HTTP REST API solution is based on a set of endpoints and database
models that facilitate the communication between the client and the central
server. To specify the models that will reflect the communication, the User and
the Model models have been created in a database. The final solution has been
developed in Python, and it consists of two major components - Server module
and Client class.
4.6.1.1
Solution Architecture
The properties of the two database models, on which this solution is based, are
listed below.
User model fields:
• ID - a unique private ID suited for internal use to pair the user with an
appropriate local model in the database
• public_ID - a unique public ID that serves as a user identifier
• username - a unique username used for authentication
• email - used to inform the client about new deadline for submitting a
model
• password - used for authentication
• admin - administrator (admin) flag that specifies whether a user can run
a specific endpoint; for example, only admin users can start the model
aggregation
Model model fields:
• ID - a unique local model ID to identify the models
• model_type = a field that specifies the type of the model used; it can only
be set as: “Logistic Regression”, “SGD Classifier”, “Neural Network”
• global_model - a flag that specifies whether the model is global or not
• date_posted - specifies when the model was posted, it is used to inform
when the model was developed
==PAGE:46==
38
Experiment Setup
• user_id - a field used to specify who is the original creator of the model;
it can only be set as the ID of an already existing user
• model - a JSON structure where the model intercept(s) biases, and dataset
size are being stored
• Dataset_size - an integer defining how many entries were used to calculate
the model
The communication assumes that one of the users is an administrator of the
system and has elevated rights. The administrator can add or remove the client
users and is the only user that can start the calculation of the global model.
The API consists of the following endpoints.
• Add User - a POST request that can create a new service user.
• Delete User - a DELETE request that can delete users from the service.
• Update User - a PUT request that can update the user data.
• Login - a GET request, which takes username and password as input and
returns a token that can be used for future authentication.
• Add model - a POST request that adds model data to the database, it
requires the local models’ intercept(s), biases, and dataset size.
• Calculate global model - a GET request that triggers the calculation of a
global model basing on the local model IDs passed as parameters.
• Get global model - a GET request that returns the global model’s param-
eters that can be used to update the local model.
The Server component is connected to an SQLite database, which is responsible
for storing instances of the User and Model models. SQLite is a C-based library,
which serves as a small, fast, and self-contained SQL database. It is suitable
for proof-of-concept development but in the case of using the application as a
commercial solution, it needs to be replaced with either PostgreSQL or MySQL.
SQLAlchemy was used to map the models defined in the database to the Python
solution. It allows for easy access to the data and simplifies the pattern of making
SQL queries in the Python code. The communication between the Server and
the Client is being handled in the form of requests and responses.
The Server module has been developed in Flask - a web microframework. It is
one of the most popular tools used to build web applications is Python. Flask
is frequently used for API development and microservices as it supports API
==PAGE:47==
4.6 Communication Architecture
39
Figure 4.1: HTTP REST API-based FL architecture
communication out-of-the-box.
For the client, the Client module was developed in the form of a Command Line
Interface (CLI) tool presented in Section 3.6.3. The solution architecture can be
seen on Figure 4.1.
4.6.1.2
Security
To ensure the security of the solution and to restrict user-access, an authoriza-
tion system has been implemented. First, the system requires the user to input
username and password to access the central server. As the password should
not be stored in the form of plain text due to security reasons, the bcrypt hash
function has been applied for password protection. The function is offered by
the Flask-Bcrypt module, which is an extension to the basic Flask solution. The
bcrypt has been selected as a hashing function, as it is considered more secure
than other popular hashing algorithms, such as SHA-2 and MD5. Bcrypt, unlike
the other two algorithms, performs the hashing at an intentionally slow speed.
This protects from any rainbow table attacks1, as they will take significantly
more time than in the case of the other solutions, which will make them easier
to detect. Another convenience of bcrypt is the fact that during the hashing, the
1Popular type of attack with the aim of intercepting the password
==PAGE:48==
40
Experiment Setup
Figure 4.2: Token Example
password is being reinforced by automatically adding salt2 to the final output.
Next, if the password is a match to the input user ID, the application server
returns a session token to the client (example pictured on Figure 4.2), which
can be used for all future requests.
It has been decided to use tokens, as it is easier to regenerate a token in case of
access loss than to create and authenticate a new password. Additionally, tokens
have an expiration date which prevents any adversaries from causing too much
damage in the event that the token would be compromised, as they would have
only the limited time slot for performing the attacks. In order to include the
token in the URL request, a client needs to specify an additional header during
the communication. The name of the header is “x-access-token” and in the value
of that header a token needs to be specified.
The token used in the project is based on the JSON Web Token (JWT) open
standard (RFC 7519). JWT token is an encoded structure composed out of three
strings: header, payload, and signature. The header defines what cryptographic
algorithm was used to make the token contents secure. The payload contains in-
formation such as the token owner ID and token expiration date. The signature
is used to ensure the integrity and authenticity of the token. It operates on a
secret key stored on a server site, which should not be exposed to other parties.
After receiving the token along with the request, the server can securely identify
the user trying to communicate and later handle the user request accordingly.
The example of token decoding is presented on Figure 4.3.
In the server implementation for the purposes of this project, a “token_required”
wrapper function has been implemented. The function checks the header upon
the request and if the secret key matches the one stored at the server, and the
token is not expired, the current user object will be returned. Thanks to that,
any functions that use the “token_required” declarator will know the ID of the
user that has sent the request, which will allow the platform to maintain the
confidentiality of the solution.
2Salt (in cryptography) is random text or data added to a password to ensure that it is
unique within the passwords’ database
==PAGE:49==
4.6 Communication Architecture
41
Figure 4.3: Token Decoding
4.6.1.3
Usage Scenario
In the usage scenario for this solution, it is assumed that the administrator is
creating the users and redistributes their passwords securely. Next, the users can
obtain a token for authorising the communication. After calculating the local
models, users can send them to the server by using the Add model endpoint.
Later, an admin can trigger the Calculate global model endpoint basing on two
conditions - the predefined time for aggregation has expired or all of the users
participating in the round have sent over their local models.
4.6.2
Socket-based Federated Learning
The implemented socket-based FL was built on two CLI applications that use
web sockets for communication. The final solution was developed in Python,
and it consists of two main classes - Client and Fedavg.
4.6.2.1
Solution Architecture
The Fedavg class acts as a server responsible for obtaining the calculated local
models, performing the model aggregation, and sending back the newly created
==PAGE:50==
42
Experiment Setup
Figure 4.4: Socket-based FL architecture
global model back to clients. The Client class follows the same principles as for
the HTTP REST API-based solution and will be introduced in more detail in
section 4.6.3.
The simultaneous connections between the Fedavg and the Client are performed
with the help of multithreading. Each connection is stored in an array and when
a connection is established, a single thread is started to handle both sending and
receiving the data. The Fedavg is responsible for authenticating clients basing
on usernames and passwords, which are being compared with the private JSON
(JavaScript Object Notation) file that stores data about currently enrolled users.
Another notable class of the socket-based FL is a helper class called Fed_transfer,
which takes the form of data structures that define what data should be sent
during the communication. It consists of:
• dataset size - number of data entries used to train the model;
• model parameters - intercept(s) and biases of the model
In the socket-based approach, it is needed to define how much data will be
sent during the transmission. In the performed simulation, the amount of data
was always the same, however, in the real communication data may be lost
or not received in the proper form. To prevent this issue, prior to sending the
Fed_transfer, a prefix containing the byte-length of the message was defined.
The receiving end, basing on that prefix, can determine whether it should still
wait for additional data or if the model has been delivered properly. The archi-
tecture of the solution is presented on Figure 4.4.
==PAGE:51==
4.6 Communication Architecture
43
4.6.2.2
Security
In this scenario, there is no need to send a token during the transmission, as the
connection is maintained for the entire length of the transmission. Therefore,
the clients authenticate themselves only once at the beginning of the communi-
cation. The hidden ghost.json file was used to store the credentials in the form
of usernames and hashed passwords. Example contents of the file can be seen
on Figure 4.5.
Figure 4.5: Password storage file contents
Next, the client can simply log in into the service with their username and
password with the help of the CLI application, as can be seen in Figure 4.6.
Figure 4.6: Client node CLI panel
4.6.2.3
Usage Scenario
In the usage scenario for the solution, it is assumed that the credentials are
delivered to the users securely. Next, each user logs into the server with the
login command. Afterwards, the clients send the calculated local models to the
server, where the model averaging is performed. The Fedavg server waits for
all clients local models, calculates the global FL model and sends it back to
the clients. In this solution, the aggregation is performed automatically on the
server side, and it does not require any action to be taken by the administrator.
==PAGE:52==
44
Experiment Setup
4.6.3
Client Node
The Client is used in both considered scenarios. Its role is to first load the
data and preprocess it. Next, it splits the input data into a training and testing
dataset. Client facilitates the user to trigger any of the seven possible commands,
which are listed below.
1. Login
• For the HTTP REST API-based FL - allows for logging in to the
server by providing both username and password. If the authentica-
tion is successful, the token will be sent to a user.
• For the socket-based, FL - allows for logging in to the server by
providing both username and password. If the values are correct, the
socket connection with the server will be established.
2. Send:
• For the HTTP REST API-based FL - the send_model endpoint can
be used for sending the data, where model parameters and dataset
size are used as input.
• For the socket-based FL - model parameters and dataset size values
can be sent in the form of the Fed_transfer class. Additionally, the
process of sending data is performed in a loop, where at the end of
each iteration, Client waits for the server to send back the FL model.
3. Reset - allows for resetting the local model to its initial state.
4. Local - triggers the training of the local model on the available local data
5. Score - returns the F1 score of the local model after testing it on the locally
stored test data.
6. Load (available only for HTTP REST API based-FL) - fetches the cur-
rently available global model from the server.
7. Stop - terminates the program.
During Client initialization, the user is required to specify:
• the name of the node;
• IP address of the server that is used;
==PAGE:53==
4.6 Communication Architecture
45
• port number of the server that is used;
• path to the CSV formatted data ;
• the connection type, either API or Socket;
• the local model type, either ANN or LR-SGD.
4.6.4
Method Comparison
In order to evaluate the behaviour of the API-based and socket-based systems,
the implementations will be tested on real devices. For that reason, a local
environment with the architecture shown on Figure 4.7 has been built. The
server runs on Ubuntu 22.04 on Intel Core i7-8565U CPU @ 1.80GHz with
16GB RAM. Raspberry Pi 4 devices, running the Debian 11 Bullseye OS, serve
as the client nodes. All the devices were connected to the Sagemcom F@ST
3890V3 Wu router, which enabled the connectivity. The goal of this test is to
find out how much data is used by each protocol and whether the applied FL
can achieve satisfactory results.
Figure 4.7: Testcase architecture
==PAGE:54==
Chapter 5
Results
After discussing all the applied tools and specifying the test setup, this chap-
ter is focused on test execution and the results obtained. Sections 5.1 and 5.2
concentrate on benchmarking the ML and FL models, while the communication
part is simulated. In Section 5.3, the performance of the solution on real de-
vices is considered and for that purpose tests encompassing all of the discussed
implementation aspects will be carried out on Raspberry Pi devices.
5.1
Centralised Model
In this section, the centralised model will be calculated on the UNSW and
CICIDS datasets. To address that problem, two models have been applied - LR
and ANN. In order to obtain the best performance of the tested models, first
the hyperparameters of each model were put under a fine-tuning process. The
results obtained in this section will be later used for comparison with the FL
model.
5.1.1
Hyperparameter Fine-tuning
To find the most effective hyperparameters in case of each model, the CV func-
tion was run on 10 folds, on both CICIDS and UNSW datasets. Parameters that
==PAGE:55==
5.1 Centralised Model
47
have been optimised for each model are listed below, grouped by model type.
Logistic Regression with use of maximum likelihood optimizer (plain
LR)
• C - Inverse of regularisation strength, used for reducing the overfitting.
The space used to find the most optimal value for C was set with the step
size 10i, where i ∈< −3, 7 >.
• Penalty - norm of the penalty where both L1 and L2 were considered. L1
is the sum of the absolute values of the vector. The L2 norm is calculated
using the square root of the sum of squared vectors.
LR-SGD
• Alpha - The constant used to multiply the regularisation term. Also used
to calculate the learning rate, which determines how small the SGD step
size should be. The variable space used to find the optimal value was set
with the step size 10i, where i ∈< −7, −1 >.
• Penalty - same as in the case of plain LR, described above.
ANN with use of the SGD optimizer
• Learning Rate - the rate defines how quickly the SGD should converge.
The higher the value is specified, the bigger step the SGD will have to
take to find a local minimum. The space used to find the optimal value is
set with the step size 10i, where i ∈< −4, 0 >.
The optimal parameters are summarised in Table 5.1. It can be observed that
there is a consistency across the two datasets, as for both the parameters of each
type of model are the same.
5.1.2
Model Comparison
After calculating the optimal values of the hyperparameters, the F1 score of the
models in the centralised setup was calculated. In order to see how the models
behave in both IID and non-IID data setup, the models were trained in these
two scenarios.
==PAGE:56==
48
Results
UNSW
CICIDS
LR
C = 105, penalty = l2
C = 105, penalty = l2
LR-SGD
alpha = 10−3, penalty = l1
alpha= 10−3, penalty = l1
ANN
learning rate = 0.1
learning rate = 0.1
Table 5.1: Central Model Hyperparameters
UNSW
CICIDS
LR
0.91
0.99
LR-SGD
0.93
0.97
ANN
0.94
0.99
Table 5.2: Central Model IID scores
1. IID - It is assumed that the data follows the same distribution across
all training nodes. The IP/TCP (Internet Protocol/Transmission Control
Protocol) traffic is repetitive and in the context of the IoT devices most of
the time, the data can remain the same. In this scenario, for both datasets,
the collected network activities have been shuffled before training and the
data was split into training and test subsets. The 10-K CV was used to
calculate the results. The number of epochs for the SGD based models
was chosen arbitrarily with the goal of empirically optimising the F1 score
obtained by the models. In the case of the CICIDS dataset, 50 epochs have
been used, and for the UNSW - 30 epochs. The average scores obtained by
the models can be observed in Table 5.2. The results indicate that on the
UNSW dataset, LR obtained the F1 score of 91%, LR-SGD - 93%, and
ANN - 94%. When it comes to the CICIDS dataset, the LR-SGD obtained
the F1 score of 97%, whereas the plain LR and ANN achieved 99%.
2. Non-IID - The non-IID data reassembles the real-life scenarios more closely.
It is highly unlikely that the data received on the different nodes will fol-
low the same distribution. Especially in computer networks, where the
behaviour of traffic can be unpredictable. A typical example of unpre-
dicted communication can be zero-day attacks or simply a malfunction
that can happen on only one of the nodes and not on the others. In the
case of non-IID data, again the 10-K fold CV was used, however the data
was not shuffled for the train-test split. The results can be observed in
Table Y. In the case of UNSW both LR and LR-SGD obtained the F1
score of 89%, whereas ANN achieved 90%. For CICIDS, LR reached the
F1 score of 92%, LR-SGD obtained 88% and again ANN achieved the best
score of 96%.
In general, it is evident that all three models deliver better results on the IID
==PAGE:57==
5.2 Federated Learning Model
49
UNSW
CICIDS
LR
0.89
0.92
LR-SGD
0.89
0.88
ANN
0.90
0.96
Table 5.3: Central Model non=IID scores
data (Table 5.2) than on the non-IID data (Table 5.3). For the UNSW dataset,
the IID data based models obtained a performance in the range of 91-94% and
for the non-IID based models the range of performance was 89-90%. In the case
of CICIDS, for the IID data based models the performance was in the range of
97-99% and for the non-IID data it was in the widest range of 88-96%.
The ANN-based models achieved the best scores for the analysed data across
both datasets. Yet, the performance of all the presented models is sufficiently
satisfactory in a way that allows for further development. As stated in the
project assumptions, the main emphasis is put on combining the local models
in a federated manner and not on intensively optimising the performance of
these models. Therefore, all ML models analysed above can be considered as
candidates for local models in a federated setup. Furthermore, the inclusion of
all three models in the later analysis may be advantageous when developing the
best performing FL model as different options can be considered.
5.2
Federated Learning Model
In this section, the results of tests run on the CICIDS and UNSW datasets will
be presented in order to select the best performing averaging method for the de-
velopment of the FL model. As all investigated ML models will be considered for
the final solution, it was decided to first test the most straightforward scenario
of plain LR, for which a Simple Averaging Method can be applied. Additionally,
the model will be used as a baseline against the more complicated federated
models.
5.2.1
Simple Averaging Method
The simple averaging model was tested on LR and ANN on both datasets in
the IID and the non-IID scenarios. The parameters being averaged out in the
LR model are the intercept and biases used in the sigmoid function, whereas for
ANN - the neurons’ weights and layer biases.
==PAGE:58==
50
Results
UNSW dataset, out-of-the-box, contains the training data and testing dataset.
The test set has been used as a validation set for calculating the F1 score for
both local and federated models. The training set was arbitrarily split across
five clients for the training purposes. For the non-IID data, the arbitrary split
resulted in one of the five clients receiving only “benign” entries, which does not
allow for proper model calculation. However, this split was kept in the study, as
it simulates a real-life case in which one of the customers involved in the training
has insufficient data to calculate the local model.
For the CICIDS, the dataset was again split across the five clients. The dataset
providers did not introduce any type of a default split. Therefore, the majority
of the entries were distributed across the clients for the training. Whereas, the
remaining entries were used for testing purposes. The results of simple averaging
method based tests for the IID and non-IID data from both datasets in the form
of F1 scores are presented in Tables 5.4 and 5.5.
Model Type
LR
ANN
Dataset
UNSW
CICIDS
UNSW
CICIDS
Client 1
0.93
0.97
0.93
0.97
Client 2
0.93
0.97
0.93
0.97
Client 3
0.92
0.97
0.93
0.96
Client 4
0.92
0.97
0.93
0.96
Client 5
0.92
0.97
0.93
0.97
FL Model
0.92
0.97
0.92
0.48
Table 5.4: Simple Averaging Methods IID scores
Model Type
LR
ANN
Dataset
UNSW
CICIDS
UNSW
CICIDS
Client 1
0
0.81
0
0.77
Client 2
0.72
0.81
0.68
0.77
Client 3
0.75
0.87
0.69
0.66
Client 4
0.74
0.25
0.70
0
Client 5
0.74
0.55
0.69
0.59
FL Model
0.77
0.46
0.68
0.56
Table 5.5: Simple Averaging Methods non-IID scores
5.2.1.1
UNSW IID data
When it comes to the IID setup, each client was able to calculate a local model.
For the UNSW dataset, both ANN and LR achieved similar results for both local
==PAGE:59==
5.2 Federated Learning Model
51
models and the federated models. In both of the given methods, the FL model
did not produce a better performance than all local models. For LR, Client 1
(93%) and Client 2 (93%) achieved better results than the FL model (92%).
For ANN, the FL model (92%) was outperformed by all of the clients, who all
achieved the score of 93%. Nonetheless, for both methods, the averaged results
for all local models are similar to the results achieved by the corresponding
federated model. This suggests that in the IID setup, the FL model executed by
following a simple aggregating algorithm(Algorithm ) will not exceed the scores
obtained by the majority of local users.
5.2.1.2
CICIDS IID data
For the IID data from the CICIDS dataset, the findings are similar to the UNSW
dataset. For the LR, the results across the local models and the FL model were
uniform (97%). ANN performed similarly to LR in the case of local models.
However, it was unable to calculate a sufficient FL model as its F1 score was at
the low level of 48%. All participating clients have achieved significantly higher
scores - Client 1 (97%), Client 2 (97%), Client 3 (96%), Client 4 (96%), Client
5 (97%). This result was most likely caused by the complex nature of the data
contained in CICIDS. ANN is prone to overfitting, which can lead to insufficient
results of the averaging of the local models.
5.2.1.3
UNSW Non-IID data
By first observing the results obtained from LR applied on the UNSW dataset
in the non-IID setup, it can be seen that one of the clients, Client 1, achieved
a F1 score of 0. It was caused by the fact that the model had insufficient data
to calculate a local model. When it comes to the other clients, they were able
to successfully calculate the models locally. In this scenario, the clients have
benefited from the application of FL. The FL model achieved better scores than
each of the local models. The application of ANN was not beneficial as the
FL model produced an F1 score of 68%, where the clients participating in the
averaging delivered better results - Client 2 (70%), Client 3 (72%), Client 4
(70%), Client 5 (69%).
5.2.1.4
CICIDS Non-IID data
By looking at the CICIDS results for LR applied on non-IID data, it can be seen
that the FL model achieved worse results than most of the local models. Client
==PAGE:60==
52
Results
1 (81%), Client 2 (81%), and Client 3 (87%) outperformed the FL model (46%).
The reasoning behind the low FL model score with comparison to UNSW may
come from the fact that in the UNSW scenario, the model that had an F1 score of
0 did not participate in the training. Therefore, only models which had achieved
fairly good results took part in training. Yet, when the model was tested on the
CICIDS scenario, both Client 4 (25%) and Client 5 (55%) provided fairly bad
models which still qualified for the latter model aggregation. The ANN again
did not deliver an FL model that would achieve better performance than any of
the local models participating. The cause is probably the same as in the case of
ANN applied on IID CICIDS data, the local models used during the averaging
could have simply overfit the data.
Overall, the simple averaging method does not provide a sufficient improvement
for all of the analysed cases. The exception is the UNSW dataset in the non-
IID setup, where LR was able to deliver satisfactory results. This leads to a
conclusion that the averaging of parameters works only in a situation where the
models are built on data from low-complexity non-IID datasets.
5.2.2
Federated Averaging
With the purpose of checking how FedAvg behaves on the IoT-based datasets,
the algorithm was also tested against the UNSW and CICIDS datasets. Where
LR-SGD and ANN were used as underlying local models. Again, the number
of participating clients was set to five for each dataset. The data distribution
across the clients was the same as used as in Section 5.1.
McMahan et al. [23] state that when the number of epochs is higher, the model
takes a lower number of rounds to reach a satisfying solution. For that reason,
the setup with 10 and 20 epochs will be tested. The main idea behind the
tests is to see how many rounds of communication need to be performed before
the model converges, and what is the optimal fraction of data that should be
used during one communication round. Also, one of the goals was to find the
hyperparameters that can be applied to both IID and non-IID datasets. The
results of this experiment will be discussed below and can be seen in the form
of graphs in the appendix A.
5.2.2.1
UNSW LR-SGD
For FedAvg based on the LR-SGD model optimizer combination, it can be ob-
served that for the UNSW IID data models executed with 10 and 20 epochs
behave similarly (Figure A.1, A.2). The models seem to converge as early as
on the fifth round and they are relatively stable. The situation differs when
==PAGE:61==
5.2 Federated Learning Model
53
it comes to the non-IID setup (Figure A.3, A.4), here it can be clearly seen
that the more rounds are being executed, the federated model is getting better.
These models are definitely less stable than the ones based on IID data. The
models reach stability after around 15 rounds. It also can be seen that for both
IID and non-IID data, the models converge in the same manner regardless of
whether 10% or 20% of data is being used to train the local models during a
single round. Finally, it was decided to set the FedAvg hyperparameters to the
following values - E=10, B=0.1, Rounds = 15. For this and all other tested
models, the number of Clients was set as 100%.
5.2.2.2
CICIDS LR-SGD
For LR-SGD on the CICIDS IID data (Figure A.9, A.10), the same conclusions
as for the UNSW dataset can be drawn. The model appears to be fairly stable
and only needs a relatively small amount of rounds to reach this stability. The
number of epochs does not influence the behaviour of the model in a significant
way. However, again, the clear difference can be seen when it comes to the non-
IID data (Figure A.11, A.12). Around 5 rounds should be performed to obtain
satisfactory results. It is hard to distinguish whether the model with B=0.1 or
the model with B=0.2 performed better than the other one. For that reason, the
more computation friendly setup - B=0.1 and E=10 - per round was chosen.
5.2.2.3
UNSW ANN
In the case of ANN applied on the UNSW dataset for IID data (Figure A.5, A.6),
the model using 10 epochs and the model using 20 epochs have similar stability.
Also, there is non-significant improvement in using a 20% split over a 10% split.
The performance of the models in the non-IID (Figure A.7, A.8) setup is also
similar, both E=10 and E=20 epochs per round reached stability and obtained
almost the same performance. What is more, again B=0.2 and B=0.1 deliver
similar results, therefore to achieve a lower computation time on the local devices
it was decided to use the 10% of data and 10 epochs per communication round.
When it comes to the number of rounds for both IID and non-IID, the 15th
round is a point in which the model has reached sufficient score and stability.
5.2.2.4
CICIDS ANN
When it comes to the CICIDS dataset, the model using 10 epochs used per
learning round was equally stable as the one using 20 epochs for the non-IID
==PAGE:62==
54
Results
UNSW - non IID
CICIDS - non IID
LR-SGD
E= 10, B=0.1, Rounds = 15
E= 10, B=0.1, Rounds = 5
ANN
E= 10, B=0.1, Rounds = 15
E= 10, B=0.1, Rounds = 5
Table 5.6: FedAvg Hyperparameters
data (Figure A.15, A.16). Additionally the data split does not influence the
performance in a significant manner. Once more, in the IID setup (Figure A.13,
A.14), the model works equally well regardless of the assumed data split and
the number of epochs used. When it comes to the number of rounds, exactly
like in the LR-SGD case, only 5 rounds are needed to obtain the model that is
stable and has converged successfully. This is probably caused by the fact that,
locally, more data is being used to train the network per round as the dataset
is larger. It is also possible that the data is more evenly split.
Overall the IID setup is more stable, and it allows for more epochs to be used
as it is less likely that the local model will overfit the data. Similar results were
also obtained by McMahan et al. [23] but it is worth to note that the model
from their study was tested on a larger dataset, resulting in more rounds needed
to achieve the convergence. However, for the investigated data, it can be seen
that there was a non-significant difference between the models using 20 and 10
epochs. Therefore, it was decided to use - the less computational heavy approach
- 10 epochs for the final solution. The optimal parameters obtained basing on
the results of the conducted tests can be observed in Table 5.6. It is evident that
there is a consistency among the number of epochs and the amount of data that
should be used per round. The choice of 10 epochs does not cause an overfit
on the local data, and at the same time is powerful enough to generalise the
model in a relatively low number of rounds. The choice of using 20% of the
data per round did not prove significantly better results than the use of 10%
of data, therefore fewer data was used to find the optimal solution to lower the
complexity of calculations.
One clear difference among all the models applied to the investigated datasets
is that when it comes to the CICIDS, fewer communication rounds need to
be performed for both LR and ANN. It may be the result of the fact that in
the UNSW, less clients participated in the learning stage as the data used for
training on one client was insufficient. Suggesting that the FL model calculates
a joint model faster when there is a higher number of participants.
5.2.3
Federated & Local Models Performance
To see how the chosen hyperparameter values impact the model performance,
it was decided to run each model 10 times and examine how the stochasticity of
==PAGE:63==
5.2 Federated Learning Model
55
the model influenced these results. The final results of those tests can be seen
in Table 5.7 and Table 5.8, containing the F1 scores of the local clients (along
with average client score), the centralised models, and the federated models.
In the case of non-IID data, local models submitted by different clients can
vary in a significant way, which will introduce less heterogeneous results in the
aggregation phase. In the case of IID data, the local clients delivered similar
models and thus it was simpler to average them.
When it comes to IID data, the LR-SGD has not outperformed the average
scores obtained by the local solutions. In the IID scenario, ANN turned out to
be a better solution. It reached the level of the centralised solution for both
UNSW and CICIDS datasets.
The LR-SGD performed best when it comes to the non-IID datasets. It has
achieved an F1 score of around 86% on the UNSW dataset and 82% on the
CICIDS. Whereas, ANN achieved an F1 score of around 84% and 79% for the
respective datasets.
When comparing the ANN model to the simple one step averaging, it can be
observed that the model has managed to obtain a solution that was better than
the average of local scores. Additionally, FedAvg with the ANN as an underlying
model was able to always improve the score across the local clients.
Model Type
LR
ANN
Dataset
UNSW
CICIDS
UNSW
CICIDS
Client 1
0.92
0.97
0.93
0.97
Client 2
0.92
0.97
0.93
0.97
Client 3
0.92
0.97
0.93
0.97
Client 4
0.92
0.97
0.93
0.97
Client 5
0.92
0.97
0.93
0.97
Clients Averaged
0.92
0.97
0.93
0.97
FL Model
0.92
0.97
0.94
0.99
Centralised Model
0.94
0.98
0.94
0.99
Table 5.7: FedAvg IID scores
To summarise, FedAvg is a more complete and robust solution than the simple
averaging algorithm. ANN was the only model that achieved improvement over
the IID data. As expected, the model is less stable when operating on non-IID
data. In the non-IID setup, LR-SGD turned out to be a better local model for
FL averaging. As it is possible that both types of data can be encountered in
real-life scenarios, therefore both underlying local models will be included in the
final solution.
==PAGE:64==
56
Results
Model Type
LR
ANN
Dataset
UNSW
CICIDS
UNSW
CICIDS
Client 1
0
0.80
0
0.74
Client 2
0.81
0.72
0.69
0.75
Client 3
0.73
0.81
0.71
0.65
Client 4
0.71
0.43
0.70
0
Client 5
0.71
0.43
0.69
0.62
Clients Averaged
0.79
0.71
0.70
0.69
FL Model
0.86
0.82
0.84
0.79
Centralised Model
0.89
0.87
0.90
0.96
Table 5.8: FedAvg non-IID scores
5.3
Communication Architecture
This section describes the results of tests run on the physical setup presented
in Section 4.6.4. It concentrates on calculating how much communication over-
head is introduced by the discussed methods by comparing the number of bytes
sent during the transmission. Additionally, the performance of one selected FL
algorithm - FedAvg - will be tested on real devices.
5.3.1
Method Comparison
The system in both communication scenarios was tested on a CICIDS dataset
in non-IID setup. The motivation behind selecting this data sample was the
previously mentioned fact that the non-IID data are most likely to represent real-
life scenarios. Additionally, the main aim of this section is to test the feasibility
of this solution after the communication aspect is included. For that reason,
only one dataset was selected for running the tests.
The applied data split was the same as in Section 5.2.1, but only the data
coming from Client1, Client2, and Client3 was used, due to a limited number
of available devices. The hyperparameters calculated in Section 5.1.1. were used
for the ML models, and the hyperparameters calculated in Section 5.2.2. were
used for the FL averaging algorithm. Another aim of the tests is to study the
results in terms of different data overhead. The difference in the quantity of data
that is sent during the averaging process will rely on the chosen communication
method.
For both investigated scenarios, it was possible to reproduce the scores obtained
by the simulated application of the algorithm in Section 5.2.3. However, since
only three clients are involved, resulting in fewer data used for the purpose
==PAGE:65==
5.3 Communication Architecture
57
of developing a FL model, the achieved scores were less stable but not in a
significant way. The best obtained results from the experiment are presented in
Table 5.9 in the form of F1 scores. The socket-based FL models achieved the F1
score of 84% for the LR-SGD algorithm and 79% for the ANN algorithm. For
the HTTP REST API-based FL models, the LR-SGD was able to obtain 82%,
whereas ANN delivered an F1 score of 78%.
Sockets
HTTP REST API
LR-SGD
0.84
0.82
ANN
0.79
0.77
Table 5.9: Scores on real devices
The Darkstat1 tool was used to calculate the size of data that is sent and received
by the clients and the server. The results of that calculation can be seen in Tables
5.10, 5.11, 5.12, and 5.13. Noticeably, LR-SGD uses significantly less data for
model aggregation than ANN in both socket-based and HTTP REST API-based
approaches. Out of the two tested communication methods, the sockets-based
solutions delivered better results in minimising the data overhead.
IP
Host
In (bytes)
Out (bytes)
Total (bytes)
192.168.0.13
Server
31,548
26,831
58,379
192.168.0.31
Client 1
8,965
10,589
19,554
192.168.0.32
Client 2
8,965
10,589
19,554
192.168.0.33
Client 3
8,901
10,370
19,721
Table 5.10: Socket - LR-SGD
IP
Host
In (bytes)
Out (bytes)
Total (bytes)
192.168.0.13
Server
869,050
859,420
1,728,470
192.168.0.31
Client 1
286,716
289,830
576,546
192.168.0.32
Client 2
286,352
289,830
576,054
192.168.0.33
Client 3
286,352
289,518
575,870
Table 5.11: Socket - ANN
1https://unix4lyfe.org/darkstat/
==PAGE:66==
58
Results
IP
Host
In (bytes)
Out (bytes)
Total (bytes)
192.168.0.13
Server
45,088
39,111
84,199
192.168.0.31
Client 1
12,989
15,224
28,213
192.168.0.32
Client 2
13,133
15,003
28,136
192.168.0.33
Client 3
12,898
14,861
27,850
Table 5.12: HTTP REST API - LR-SGD
IP
Host
In (bytes)
Out (bytes)
Total (bytes)
192.168.0.13
Server
4,564,612
4,383,483
8,948,095
192.168.0.31
Client 1
1,463,111
1,616,810
3,079,921
192.168.0.32
Client 2
1,460,976
1,474,130
2,935,106
192.168.0.33
Client 3
1,459,396
1,473,672
2,933,068
Table 5.13: HTTP REST API - ANN
Overall, both tested communication methods were able to produce satisfactory
results in regard to FL implementation. Since the tests were run using the same
data and the same models, with the only difference being the communication
method, the obtained results are in a very similar range. Based only on the nu-
merical results it cannot be clearly stated which of the solutions is better for FL
purposes. Yet, moving away from the F1 score based method of assessment, it
is important to highlight that both communication methods optimise different
valuable aspects. In order to achieve low latency, sockets are considered a better
solution [26]. Additionally, sockets use less data, but are more prone to errors as
the connection between nodes needs to be maintained during the whole averag-
ing process. Basing the solution on HTTP REST API is more robust, but on the
other hand it is slower and adds more overhead to the transmission. Generally,
if the system has strong requirements in terms of data size or latency, socket-
based systems are a better choice. If the system does not have any restrictions,
the HTTP REST API-based solution is more convenient and fault-proof.
5.4
Implementation Summary
This section will outline the final solution architecture by summarising all re-
sults of the tests that were executed as part of the FL implementation process.
In Section 5.1, the focus was placed on testing the ML models, where LR, LR-
SGD, and ANN were primarily selected as the ML modes to be included in the
implementation. In Section 5.2, the FL averaging algorithms were tested, where
==PAGE:67==
5.4 Implementation Summary
59
two considered averaging algorithms were combined with the selected ML mod-
els. The FedAvg algorithm was finally chosen for application, as it was the only
aggregation method to deliver sufficient results. Therefore, it was decided to
proceed with the LR-SGD and ANN ML models, as plain LR is not compatible
with the FedAvg algorithm. Next, in Section 5.3, the proposed solution archi-
tecture was run on real IoT devices by applying FL on the CICIDS dataset in
the non-IID data setup for the two considered communication methods. Out of
the two ML models used in the final FL implementation, LR-SGD proved to use
significantly less data in the model aggregation process than ANN. The results
allow for stating that both socket-based and HTTP REST API-based solutions
are sufficient to facilitate FL, and introduce different types of advantages to the
implementation.
==PAGE:68==
Chapter 6
Possible Future Work
In this chapter, possible future enhancements of the project will be discussed.
6.1
Further Algorithm Stability
Even though the algorithm was able to converge and deliver stable scores during
the simulated aggregation, the real life implementation produced less table re-
sults. For that reason, one possible future venture concerning this project would
be to further investigate the influence of hyperparameters and number of clients
on the stability of the FedAvg algorithm. The main goal would be to offload the
clients from fine-tuning the FL model and suggest the tunable parameters for
various scenarios.
6.2
Real Traffic Analysis
In the current state of the project, the solution is tested on the data preloaded
from a CSV file. The major improvement of the system would be to analyse the
actual traffic available on the machine with the currently available local model.
One solution is to utilise the Zeek Analysis Tools (ZAT), which is a Python
package that performs a translation of Zeek NIDS logs into Python accessible
data that next can be analysed in an FL model.
==PAGE:69==
6.3 Alerting system
61
6.3
Alerting system
Assuming that the solution will be used commercially, it would be highly ben-
eficial to either implement a simple alerting system that informs the security
operation centre if an attack has been detected. Another approach could be to
integrate the solution with an existing Security Information and Event Manage-
ment (SIEM) platform that already covers the alerting functionality.
6.4
RPC
The RPC is a modern open-source protocol that can facilitate the communi-
cation between the server and the clients. It has been used by a number of
researchers to implement device communication in FL [14]. It might be bene-
ficial to investigate whether it can introduce any improvement when compared
against sockets or HTTP REST API communication.
==PAGE:70==
Chapter 7
Conclusions
In this project, the application of FL on IoT devices has been researched, anal-
ysed, and implemented in a practical scenario. The main effort was put into
developing a simple user-friendly solution that can encourage the users to im-
plement an FL platform. For that reason, a comprehensive research of available
literature was conducted, where a number of papers both covering FL in general
and the ones specifically targeting the area of IoT were analysed. This allowed
for consideration on how to implement the solution. At first, the idea was to
base on one of the existing open-source platforms that facilitate FL. Out of the
four investigated frameworks (PySyFt, Flower, FATE, TensorFlow Federated),
none turned out to be mature and stable enough to build upon. Therefore, it
has been decided to develop a FL platform for IoT devices from scratch.
The process of developing the tool consisted of several steps. First, it was re-
quired to find a suitable dataset on which the local models could perform the
learning process. For that, both UNSW and CICIDS datasets were selected and
preprocessed accordingly. It is important to highlight, for the purpose of this
study, the data was tested in both the IID and non-IID data setups. Next, sev-
eral ML models were tested with the purpose of finding ones that can be used
for aggregation. This step also consisted of finding appropriate hyperparame-
ters that will maximise the performance of the learning. It turned out that SGD
optimizer-based models are the most popular and because of that SGD-based
ANN and LR were selected for the implementation. In the effort of selecting
an appropriate averaging model, two FL algorithms were tested. Here, FedAvg
turned out to be the most optimal model that can achieve both stability and
good performance for both IID and non-IID data. The last step of developing
an FL platform was to enable the model exchange between the server and the
clients. Out of three discussed solutions, two were adapted - sockets, HTTP
==PAGE:71==
63
REST API. Additionally, both solutions were enhanced by addition of secu-
rity features, which will ensure confidentiality and authenticity of the developed
communication. The socket-based and the HTTP REST API-based solutions
were tested on real hardware, exhibiting that both tools can be used as an un-
derlying communication protocol for an FL solution. What is more, for both
LR-SGD-based and ANN-based models, FedAvg algorithms were able to calcu-
late a secure global model that can be used by the clients for local malware
detection. This research provides a tool that with relatively low effort can be
adapted to several scenarios that deal with network intrusion detection. Addi-
tionally, it can help to reinforce IoT infrastructure. With the emergence of EC
solutions, FL should be considered as one of the countermeasures that can be
implemented for attack detection.
==PAGE:72==
64
Conclusions
==PAGE:73==
Appendix A
FedAvg Scores
A.1
UNSW
(a) B=0.1 E=10
(b) B=0.2 E=10
Figure A.1: UNSW IID LR-SGD
==PAGE:74==
66
FedAvg Scores
(a) B=0.1 E=20
(b) B=0.2 E=20
Figure A.2: UNSW IID LR-SGD
(a) B=0.1 E=10
(b) B=0.2 E=10
Figure A.3: UNSW Non-IID LR-SGD
==PAGE:75==
A.1 UNSW
67
(a) B=0.1 E=20
(b) B=0.2 E=20
Figure A.4: UNSW Non-IID LR-SGD
(a) B=0.1 E=10
(b) B=0.2 E=10
Figure A.5: UNSW IID ANN
==PAGE:76==
68
FedAvg Scores
(a) B=0.1 E=20
(b) B=0.2 E=20
Figure A.6: UNSW IID ANN
(a) B=0.1 E=10
(b) B=0.2 E=10
Figure A.7: UNSW Non-IID ANN
==PAGE:77==
A.2 CICIDS
69
(a) B=0.1 E=20
(b) B=0.2 E=20
Figure A.8: UNSW Non-IID ANN
A.2
CICIDS
(a) B=0.1 E=10
(b) B=0.2 E=10
Figure A.9: CICIDS IID LR-SGD
==PAGE:78==
70
FedAvg Scores
(a) B=0.1 E=20
(b) B=0.2 E=20
Figure A.10: CICIDS IID LR-SGD
(a) B=0.1 E=10
(b) B=0.2 E=10
Figure A.11: CICIDS Non-IID LR-SGD
==PAGE:79==
A.2 CICIDS
71
(a) B=0.1 E=20
(b) B=0.2 E=20
Figure A.12: CICIDS Non-IID LR-SGD
(a) B=0.1 E=10
(b) B=0.1 E=10
Figure A.13: CICIDS IID ANN
==PAGE:80==
72
FedAvg Scores
(a) B=0.1 E=20
(b) B=0.2 E=20
Figure A.14: CICIDS IID ANN
(a) B=0.1 E=10
(b) B=0.2 E=10
Figure A.15: CICIDS Non-IID ANN
==PAGE:81==
A.2 CICIDS
73
(a) B=0.1 E=20
(b) B=0.2 E=20
Figure A.16: CICIDS Non-IID ANN
==PAGE:82==
74
FedAvg Scores
==PAGE:83==
Bibliography
[1] Abdullah Alsaedi, Nour Moustafa, Zahir Tari, Abdun Mahmood, and Ad-
nan Anwar. Telemetry dataset: A new generation dataset of iot and iiot
for data-driven intrusion detection systems.
[2] Evita Bakopoulou, Bálint Tillman, and Athina Markopoulou. Fedpacket:
A federated learning approach to mobile packet classification. IEEE Trans-
actions on Mobile Computing, 21(10):3609–3628, 2022.
[3] Daniel J. Beutel, Taner Topal, Akhil Mathur, Xinchi Qiu, Javier Fernandez-
Marques, Yan Gao, Lorenzo Sani, Kwing Hei Li, Titouan Parcollet, Pedro
Porto Buarque de Gusmão, and Nicholas D. Lane. Flower: A friendly fed-
erated learning research framework, 2020.
[4] S. Birleanu, D. Glavan, C. Racuci, and R. Moinescu. Attacks on iot devices
for power consumption. Scientific Bulletin of Naval Academy, 2021.
[5] Keyan Cao, Yefan Liu, Gongjie Meng, and Qimeng Sun. An overview on
edge computing research. IEEE Access, 8:85714–85728, 2020.
[6] Xi Chen, Jason D. Lee, Xin T. Tong, and Yichen Zhang. Statistical infer-
ence for model parameters in stochastic gradient descent, 2016.
[7] Yiqiang Chen, Jindong Wang, Chaohui Yu, Wen Gao, and Xin Qin. Fed-
health: A federated transfer learning framework for wearable healthcare,
2019.
[8] Shashank Rajamoni David Tam, Gegi Thomas.
Train machine learning
models with federated learning.
==PAGE:84==
76
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[9] Gustavo de Carvalho Bertoli, Lourenço Alves Pereira Júnior, and Os-
amu Saotome. Improving detection of scanning attacks on heterogeneous
networks with federated learning.
SIGMETRICS Perform. Eval. Rev.,
49(4):118–123, jun 2022.
[10]
Li Deng.
The mnist database of handwritten digit images for ma-
chine learning research. IEEE Signal Processing Magazine, 29(6):141–142,
2012.
[11] Christopher deRito and Sajal Bhatia.
Comparative analysis of open-
source vulnerability scanners for iot devices. In D. Jude Hemanth, Danilo
Pelusi, and Chandrasekar Vuppalapati, editors, Intelligent Data Commu-
nication Technologies and Internet of Things, pages 785–800, Singapore,
2022. Springer Nature Singapore.
[12] Paul Fremantle, Benjamin Aziz, Jacek Kopecký, and Philip Scott. Feder-
ated identity and access management for the internet of things. In 2014
International Workshop on Secure Internet of Things, pages 10–17, 2014.
[13] Anand Handa, Ashu Sharma, and Sandeep K. Shukla. Machine learning in
cybersecurity: A review. WIREs Data Mining and Knowledge Discovery,
9(4):e1306, 2019.
[14] Chaoyang He, Keshav Balasubramanian, Emir Ceyani, Carl Yang, Han Xie,
Lichao Sun, Lifang He, Liangwei Yang, Philip S. Yu, Yu Rong, Peilin Zhao,
Junzhou Huang, Murali Annavaram, and Salman Avestimehr. Fedgraphnn:
A federated learning system and benchmark for graph neural networks,
2021.
[15] Sharafaldin Iman, Habibi Lashkari Arash, and A. Ghorbani Ali. Toward
generating a new intrusion detection dataset and intrusion traffic charac-
terization. 1 2018.
[16] Kleomenis Katevas, Diego Perino, and Nicolas Kourtellis. Flaas - enabling
practical federated learning on mobile environments. In Proceedings of the
20th Annual International Conference on Mobile Systems, Applications and
Services, MobiSys ’22, page 605–606, New York, NY, USA, 2022. Associa-
tion for Computing Machinery.
[17] Ivan Kholod, Evgeny Yanaki, Dmitry Fomichev, Evgeniy Shalugin, Evgenia
Novikova, Evgeny Filippov, and Mats Nordlund. Open-source federated
learning frameworks for iot: A comparative review and analysis. Sensors,
21(1), 2021.
[18] Xiang Li, Kaixuan Huang, Wenhao Yang, Shusen Wang, and Zhihua Zhang.
On the convergence of fedavg on non-iid data, 2019.
==PAGE:85==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
77
[19] Yang Liu, Tao Fan, Tianjian Chen, Qian Xu, and Qiang Yang. Fate: An
industrial grade platform for collaborative learning with data protection.
J. Mach. Learn. Res., 22(1), jul 2022.
[20] Google LLC. Gboard - the google keyboard.
[21] Zonghao Lu. A case study about different network architectures in federated
machine learning (dissertation). 2020.
[22] Michal Marks Mateusz Krzysztoń. Simulation of watchdog placement for
cooperative anomaly detection in bluetooth mesh intrusion detection sys-
tem. Simulation Modelling Practice and Theory, 101:102041, 2020. Model-
ing and Simulation of Fog Computing.
[23] H. Brendan McMahan, Eider Moore, Daniel Ramage, Seth Hampson, and
Blaise Agüera y Arcas. Communication-efficient learning of deep networks
from decentralized data. 2016.
[24] Yair Meidan, Michael Bohadana, Yael Mathov, Yisroel Mirsky, Asaf Shab-
tai, Dominik Breitenbacher, and Yuval Elovici.
N-baiot—network-based
detection of iot botnet attacks using deep autoencoders. IEEE Pervasive
Computing, 17(3):12–22, 2018.
[25] Nour Moustafa and Jill Slay.
Unsw-nb15: a comprehensive data set for
network intrusion detection systems (unsw-nb15 network data set). In 2015
Military Communications and Information Systems Conference (MilCIS),
pages 1–6, 2015.
[26] George V. Neville-Neil. Whither sockets? high bandwidth, low latency, and
multihoming challenge the sockets api. Queue, 7(4):34–35, may 2009.
[27] Pinyarash Pinyoanuntapong, Prabhu Janakaraj, Ravikumar Balakrishnan,
Minwoo Lee, Chen Chen, and Pu Wang.
Edgeml: Towards network-
accelerated federated learning over wireless edge, 2021.
[28] Simone Raponi, Maurantonio Caprolu, and Roberto Di Pietro. Intrusion
detection at the network edge: Solutions, limitations, and future directions.
In Tao Zhang, Jinpeng Wei, and Liang-Jie Zhang, editors, Edge Computing
– EDGE 2019, Cham, 2019. Springer International Publishing.
[29] Valerian Rey, Pedro Miguel Sánchez Sánchez, Alberto Huertas Celdrán,
and Gérôme Bovet. Federated learning for malware detection in iot devices.
Computer Networks, 204:108693, 2022.
[30] Anastasia Shuba, Evita Bakopoulou, and Athina Markopoulou. Privacy
Leak Classification on Mobile Devices. In 2018 IEEE 19th International
Workshop on Signal Processing Advances in Wireless Communications
(SPAWC). IEEE, 2018.
==PAGE:86==
78
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[31] Anastasia Shuba, Athina Markopoulou, and Zubair Shafiq. NoMoAds: Ef-
fective and Efficient Cross-App Mobile Ad-Blocking. Proceedings on Pri-
vacy Enhancing Technologies, 2018(4), 2018.
[32] Zhaoping Xiong, Ziqiang Cheng, Chi Xu, Xinyuan Lin, Xiaohong Liu,
Dingyan Wang, Xiaomin Luo, Yong Zhang, Nan Qiao, Mingyue Zheng, and
Hualiang Jiang. Facing small and biased data dilemma in drug discovery
with federated learning. bioRxiv, 2020.
[33] Jie Xu, Benjamin S. Glicksberg, Chang Su, Peter Walker, Jiang Bian, and
Fei Wang. Federated learning for healthcare informatics, 2019.
[34] Timothy Yang, Galen Andrew, Hubert Eichner, Haicheng Sun, Wei Li,
Nicholas Kong, Daniel Ramage, and Françoise Beaufays. Applied federated
learning: Improving google keyboard query suggestions, 2018.
[35] Hao Zhang, Danfeng (Daphne) Yao, Naren Ramakrishnan, and Zhibin
Zhang. Causality reasoning about network events for detecting stealthy
malware activities. Computers Security, 58:180–198, 2016.
[36] Alexander Ziller, Andrew Trask, Antonio Lopardo, Benjamin Szymkow,
Bobby Wagner, Emma Bluemke, Jean-Mickael Nounahon, Jonathan
Passerat-Palmbach,
Kritika
Prakash,
Nick
Rose,
Théo
Ryffel,
Zarreen Naowal Reza, and Georgios Kaissis.
PySyft: A Library for
Easy Federated Learning, pages 111–139. Springer International Publish-
ing, Cham, 2021.
