==PAGE:1==
Botnet identification using Machine Learning
A sandbox approach for detecting botnet mal­
ware on a host level
Master Thesis
DTU Compute
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Botnet identification using Machine Learning
A sandbox approach for detecting botnet malware on a host level
Master Thesis
January, 2023
By
Renos Avraam
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus­
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Published by:
DTU, Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science, Build­
ing 324, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
https://www.compute.dtu.dk/
ISSN:
[0000­0000] (electronic version)
ISBN:
[000­00­0000­000­0] (electronic version)
ISSN:
[0000­0000] (printed version)
ISBN:
[000­00­0000­000­0] (printed version)
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This project has been prepared for five months at the Section of Cybersecurity Engineer­
ing, Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science DTU Compute, DTU,
in partial fulfilment for the requirements of acquiring the Master of Science in Computer
Science and Engineering, MSc Eng.
Renos Avraam ­ s203393
Signature
Date
ii
Botnet identification using Machine Learning
22/01/2023
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
The rising interconnectivity and reliance on the Internet have exposed us to several cyber
risks, including malware, phishing attacks, and botnets. Traditionally, botnet detection has
depended on signature­based techniques, which are ineffective at detecting new or novel
threats. Using machine learning techniques, we provide an alternate method for botnet
identification in this research. Our objective is to explore and identify natural language pro­
cessing (NLP) approaches that can be used to extract features from sandbox­generated
reports, develop datasets on which machine learning algorithms can train to detect botnet
malware, and evaluate the viability of employing NLP for this job. Our results demonstrate
that NLP approaches can be utilized effectively for feature extraction and that machine
learning algorithms, notably the XGboost classifier, has given high results in botnet de­
tection, with an accuracy of 99.17% and ROC/AUC of 0.9995.
Botnet identification using Machine Learning
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
I would like to thank my family for always being by my side, supporting me and motivating
me throughout my life and education.
I would like to thank my co­supervisors:
[Jens M, Pedersen], [Professor], [Cybersecurity Group, Aalborg University]
[Christian D. Jensen], [Associate Professor], [Cybersecurity Engineering, DTU]
For giving me the opportunity to work on this thesis. Special thanks to Dr. Jens for guiding
me since day one and always being willing to make time to review my progress and provide
helpful feedback.
I would also like to sincerely thank Muhammad Qasim, Doctoral researcher, for providing
me with part of his work and I being available at all times to provide assistance.
Last but not least, I would like to thank my friends, whether they are located in Denmark,
in Cyprus or anywhere in the world. I am truly lucky to have them in my life.
iv
Botnet identification using Machine Learning
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Motivation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Goal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.3
Structure
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2
Backround
3
2.1
Botnet . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
NLP . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.3
Machine Learning
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
3
Literature Review
15
3.1
Dbot . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
3.2
Alauthaman et al. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
3.3
Aswathi et al
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
3.4
Qasim et al. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
3.5
Summary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
4
Methodology
19
4.1
Data Collection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
4.2
Understanding the reports . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
4.3
Data Cleanse . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
4.4
Feature Extraction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
4.5
Feature Selection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
4.6
Machine Learning
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26
5
Results
30
5.1
Results from BoW approach . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30
5.2
Results from BERT approach . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 36
6
Discussion
41
6.1
BoW approach . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 41
6.2
BERT approach
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 43
6.3
General Discussion
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 43
7
Conclusion
44
Bibliography
45
Botnet identification using Machine Learning
v
==PAGE:8==
vi
Botnet identification using Machine Learning
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction
In recent years, the Internet has become an integral part of our daily lives, providing us
with a vast array of information, services, and opportunities. However, the increasing
connectivity and reliance on the Internet also exposes us to a variety of cyber threats,
such as malware, phishing attacks, and botnets.
Historically, botnet detection has relied on signature­based methods, which identify known
malicious traffic patterns. However, these techniques are ineffective at detecting unknown
or novel threats. In contrast, machine learning techniques can learn from data and iden­
tify patterns that may not be immediately apparent to humans. Consequently, machine
learning has the potential to significantly enhance the precision and effectiveness of bot­
net detection.
In this project, we present alternative methods to conventional feature selection methods,
used in other botnet related datasets, and use the emerging datasets to train machine
learning algorithms that can distinguish between benign and malicious files. The data
that we used were gathered from various antivirus vendors and were specifically selected
to derive from recent, active botnets and include a variety of attack variations. The bot­
net samples were analysed in a sandbox environment to produce detailed reports and
furthered utilized to produce datasets.
1.1
Motivation
Detecting and preventing the propagation of botnet malware is essential for maintaining
the security and integrity of online systems. Traditional techniques for detecting botnets,
such as network traffic analysis and signature­based detection, have proven inadequate
in the face of evolving and complex botnet threats[1]. The attackers are aware of the
techniques that are used to detect malware, and constantly update their arsenal to make
their malware able to evade detection. Machine Learning has gained a lot of popularity
in recent years, and that includes its application in botnet detection, where datasets are
created in order to train ML algorithms. Researchers find ways to create such datasets
based on what they think would be best by picking features based on traffic from packet
and flow levels, flow­based network traffic features[2] and so on. There are tools, called
sandboxes, that can be used to analyse malware within a controlled environment, and
generate reports that a human can read and further analyze. A researcher has already
utilized this sandbox approach to generate a dataset by extracting features that he as­
sumes to be relevant in the detection of the botnet malware[3]. We think it is worth ex­
ploring other techniques to extract features from such reports, more specifically, using
techniques used for NLP tasks.
1.2
Goal
The goal of our research, is to find techniques used in NLP that can be applied towards
extracting features from reports that are generated by a sandbox, construct datasets that
ML algorithms can train on to detect botnet malware, and assess the feasibility of using
NLP for this task. To achieve this objective, we will evaluate the performance of vari­
ous machine learning algorithms on the dataset that we created, while also investigating
methods for enhancing the robustness of our models.
Botnet identification using Machine Learning
1
==PAGE:10==
1.3
Structure
The rest of this report is organized as follows: Chapter 2 will introduce the reader with
information and terminology that might be needed to understand the rest of the report.
In Chapter 3 includes a small literature review of projects that are dealing with solving
a similar problem and we try to indicate potential limitation that those approaches might
have. In Chapter 4 all the details of the methodology are explained step by step so that
the project can be replicated. In Chapter 5 we present the result of each test we used to
evaluate the models, including numerous graphs and figures displaying the experiment’s
outcomes in a comprehensible manner. In Chapter 6, we reflect on the approaches we
followed and try to spot potential weaknesses and how we could improve them, things we
might have missed and generally discuss the project challenges. In the final Chapter , the
report is conlcuded.
2
Botnet identification using Machine Learning
==PAGE:11==
2
Backround
In this chapter we will provide the reader with the necessary context to understand the
rest of the project and provide relevant information for its replication. First, we will go
through the problem that we are addressing in this project and then explain the various
approaches, techniques, algorithms, and models that we will use to come up with an
answer to that problem.
2.1
Botnet
A botnet[2] is a network of infected private computers or devices that are controlled as a
group without the owners’ knowledge. Bots are referred to as machines that have been
infected with malware that allows connection to a malicious server, known as Command
and Control (C&C), or another infected machine that is commonly controlled by an entity.
These machines usually perform normally, as the malicious code remains hidden and
dormant until they receive a command to carry out an attack, or whatever the intentions
of the entity that has access to it are. So it is unlikely that a user might easily notice that
the machine is infected.
Botnets may consist of hundreds or thousands of compromised machines cooperating.
They are frequently governed by a single individual or group known as the ”botmaster.”
The botmaster can use the botnet to do a variety of criminal activities, such as sending
spam emails and performing distributed denial­of­service (DDoS) attacks, which flood a
website with traffic and render it inaccessible to visitors. People and businesses must
protect their devices from being taken over, because a botnet can only be made when
devices are compromised, and that happens when malware infects the machine.
There are numerous architectures that can be used to construct a botnet, each with its
own advantages and disadvantages. One reason that it is hard to shut down botnets, is
their topology, bots and servers could be located all around the world. Common botnet
architectures,illustrated in figure 2.1, include the following:
(a) Centralized botnet: All infected devices are connected to a central computer under
the direction of the botmaster. The server allows the botmaster to issue commands
to the bots and receive data from them. This form of botnet is simple to set up and
can be utilized for a variety of harmful purposes.
(b) Decentralized botnet: There is no central server or control point in a decentralized
botnet. Rather, the bots communicate directly with one another over a peer­to­peer
(P2P) network. As there is no single point of control that can be attacked, this sort
of botnet is more resistant to identification and disruption.
(c) Hybrid botnet: Incorporates aspects of both centralized and decentralized networks.
In this sort of botnet, there may be one or more central servers used to deliver
commands to the bots, but the bots also communicate directly with one another
through a P2P network. This sort of botnet is more resilient than centralized botnets
since it can continue to operate even if the central server is taken offline.
Botnet identification using Machine Learning
3
==PAGE:12==
Figure 2.1: Botnet architectures. Taken from [2]
There are multiple methods that Botmasters and malware developers utilize to evade
detection[2]. A few examples are:
1. Encrypting traffic between the bot and the CC may prevent systems that use network
inspection to identify the malicious traffic
2. Controlling the time that the botnet will carry out their activities to ”blend” in with
normal traffic and not raise any flags
3. General evation techniques used by malware detection on host level, like atacking
the process monitor
4. Using algorithms that change the IP and the domains that are used for communica­
tion in very small time intervals, making it very hard to blacklist them and backtrack
to the Botmaster.
Botnets are a growing threat to cyberspace, with reports suggesting that in the first half of
2022, the attack volume was higher than it was in the last four years. It was recorded that
the Mirai botnet was responsible for 7 million attacks, and the Mozi botnet was detected
more than 5 million times.[4].In June 2022, Cloudflare (a DDoS mitigation company) re­
ported that it mitigated a DDoS attack from a small botnet of 5,000 bots that peaked at
26 million HTTP requests/second [5]. Apart from the use of botnets to perform criminal
activity, such as DDoS, they are utilized for immediate monetary compensation, such a
botnet is LemonDuck[6]. This botnet seeks to make money off of its operations by run­
ning several active mining campaigns for cryptocurrencies, draining the resources of the
affected devices, and wreaking havoc to operations that are very resource­intensive.
Because of the aforementioned techniques that are used to evade detection and the topol­
ogy of the botnets, it is a challenging and time­consuming task to find and break botnets.
4
Botnet identification using Machine Learning
==PAGE:13==
To reduce their expansion and protect ourselves, we want to stop a new host from being
infected, and to do that, we need to detect the botnet malware before allowing it to enter
any system.
2.2
NLP
Natural language processing (NLP) is a field of artificial intelligence and computer science
that deals with the interaction between computers and human languages. NLP techniques
enable computers to understand, interpret, and generate human language.
2.2.1
Bag Of Words (BoW)
Bag of words is one of the most common and simplified techniques used in NLP. Basically,
we can describe it as a textual illustration of word occurrence in a document, without
paying attention to grammatical details or word order, we only keep track of word counts.
The model will not care where in the document known words appear; It only cares whether
they do, hence the term ”bag”. Text classification tasks, as well as image and video
classification, produce promising results and due to it’s simplicity, it is gaining popularity.
[7]
The technique follows these steps:
1. Remove punctuation, remove specific words and make all words lowercase.
It is crucial to remove punctuation, a word that has a dot at the end should not be
different than one that does not. E.G:”word” should not be different than ”word!”
Common words such as ”the” can occur multiple times, thus they can fill our feature
set with information we know we do not need. A custom dictionary can be created,
but generally it is a good idea to use one that already contains such words.
Same as punctuation, we do not want words that Have a capital letter to be recog­
nized as a different one.
2. Tokenize The document is broken up into individual words using a delimiter. The
delimiter defines the character we’ll use to mark a word’s start and finish, most com­
monly used, a space. After the strings are broken into words, those words are
assigned a token ID.
3. Count In this step, each occurrence of each of those tokens is counted.
The result of this process will be a matrix of token counts.
2.2.2
BERT model
BERT [8], short for Bidirectional Encoder Representations from Transformers, is a ML
model that was developed in 2018 by Google, and it is considered state of the art for
many NLP tasks, such as Sentiment analysis, Question Answering and Sentence Clas­
sification [9]. Soon after the model was published, the team open­sourced the model’s
code and made available for download versions of the model that had previously been
pre­trained on enormous datasets. Namely, BERT base and BERT large. BERT base
consists of 12 layers of Transformer encoder, 12 attention heads, a feedforward­networks
with 768 hidden units, and 110M parameters.BERT large consists of 24 layers of Trans­
former encoder,16 attention heads, a feedforward­networks with 1024 hidden units, and
340M parameters.
In the paper [10], Transformers were introduced, where the researchers presented an
architecture that consisted of 6 stacked encoders and 6 stacked decoders, and it was
proved to be a breakthrough in the NLP community as it managed to outperform and
Botnet identification using Machine Learning
5
==PAGE:14==
be trained much faster than previous architectures, such as Recurrent Neural Networks
(RNN) and Long Shot­Term Memory(LSTM). They introduced a mechanism called multi­
head self­attention, where the goal is to learn the weight of the relationship between all
the input sequences.For BERT, only encoders were used in the architecture to allow it to
pay attention to words both in a forward and a backwards way. The model was jointly pre­
trained on two unsupervised tasks, Masked Language Model(MLM) and Two­sentence
Task(NSP).
• In the MLM task, 15% of the words in the input sequence were randomly replaced
with a [MASK] token and the entire sequence is run through the model and the
model predicts the masked world based on the information it gained from the rest of
the sentence. The authors approached this with caution as this task would create
a problem for the pre­training process, it would be confusing for the model, and it
would end up fine­tuning it to this specific task and the model would only predict
[MASK] tokens. To overcome this, 80% of the time the randomly chosen world
would indeed be replaced with the token, 10% of the time it would not be replaced
and 10% of the time it would be replaced with a random token.
• In the NSP task, the model predicts if the two sequences are continuous or not,
meaning if sequence B is the sentence that comes after sequence A. When the
sentences are chosen for the pre­training, 50% of the time, the second sentence is
the actual sentence that follows and 50% of the time it is a random sentence from
the data.
BERT requires the input to be in a specific format, and it includes some special tokens.
The input must be tokenized and tokens must conform with the vocabulary of pre­defined
words and subwords that it was trained on, and each of these is assigned a unique token
ID. In case an input word is not in that vocabulary as a whole, it is broken down into
subwords that are included in the vocabulary or even single characters. As an example,
the word ‘embeddings’ would be broken down in four tokens: ‘em’, ‘##bed’, ‘##ding’,
‘##s’. The double hashes indicate that the token is not the beginning of the word. For a
given token, its input representation is constructed by summing the corresponding token,
segment, and position embeddings as shown in Figure2.2. Also, some special token must
be used:
• [CLS] token: Must be used at the start of a text sequence, and it is used for classifi­
cation tasks. The representation of the complete input sequence is the final­hidden
layer, corresponding to this token.
• [SEP] token: Must be used to separate two sequences (BERT can only take two
sequences as input). Even if the input is a single sequence, the Token must be used
at the end to indicate the end of the sentence.
• [MASK] token: Used in the pre­training phase, as described earlier.
• [PAD] token: The model must receive a predetermined sentence length. Typically,
the maximum sentence length depends on the data we are analysing and it can
be a maximum of 512 tokens. For sentences that are shorter than this maximum
length, paddings (empty tokens) will be added to make up the difference. In the
initial implementation, sentence paddings are represented by the token [PAD].
BERT outputs a numerical representation of the input text that captures its meaning and
context, referred to as word embedding/ sentence embedding. This numerical represen­
tation, also known as a feature vector, can then be used as input to another model or
6
Botnet identification using Machine Learning
==PAGE:15==
Figure 2.2: Input representation. Source of figure:[8]
algorithm for further processing or analysis. In case of classification, we can use the CLS
token as it captures the overall meaning and context of the input text.
2.3
Machine Learning
2.3.1
Supervised and Unsupervised learning
There are two fundamental techniques in machine learning: supervised learning and un­
supervised learning.
Supervised[11] learning is a technique in which an algorithm is trained with labeled data.
During training, the algorithm produces predictions based on the input data, and the output
labels are used to evaluate the accuracy of these predictions. The objective is to properly
predict the output labels for fresh, unseen data.There are two main types of supervised
learning, classification, where an algorithm (classifier) assigns test data into specific cat­
egories. The other main type is Regression, where an algorithm learns the relationship
between variables and predicts a continuous output value. Some common supervised
learning applications include picture classification, spam detection and weather forecast­
ing.
Unsupervised learning [11] is a technique in which an algorithm receives no labeled train­
ing data. Instead, the objective is to discover patterns or characteristics in the data, the
algorithm is permitted to find data structure on its own. There are two main types of su­
pervised learning, clustering, in which comparable examples are grouped together. The
other is dimensionality reduction, in which the goal is to reduce the amount of data features
while maintaining as much information as possible. A common unsupervised learning ap­
plications would anomaly detection and data compression.
Unsupervised learning can be more difficult than supervised learning because the algo­
rithm is not informed of the proper result. This can make evaluating the quality of the
learned patterns or features challenging. Also, the unsupervised learning technique re­
quire a large amount of data and usually, human intervention is needed to validate the
output variables.
For our project, we are going to use supervised learning, as our task is to classify between
malicious/benign samples and our data can be easily separated. We already know the
classes, and we want the algorithm to learn the differences between those two.
2.3.2
Cross­validation
Cross­validation[12] is a method for assessing the performance of machine learning mod­
els. It involves dividing the dataset into folds, typically between 5 and 10, and using one
fold as a validation set to evaluate the model. This procedure is repeated with each fold
Botnet identification using Machine Learning
7
==PAGE:16==
serving as the validation set, resulting in multiple model evaluations.  It allows the model
to be evaluated using all the data in the dataset, as opposed to a single split.
k­fold cross­validation is a type of cross­validation in which the data is divided into n folds,
with each fold serving as the validation set. In 5­fold cross­validation, for instance, the
data is divided into 5 folds, the model is trained and evaluated 5 times, and each fold
serves as the validation set once, as shown in Figure 2.3. N­fold cross­validation is a
widely employed technique in machine learning and is frequently used to tune the hyper­
parameters of a model and select the best candidate model from a set and  ensure that it
does not overfit to the training data.
Figure 2.3: Cross Validation split. Taken from [12]
2.3.3
Over­fitting
Overfitting[13] happens when a machine learning model becomes too specialized or too
”suited” to the training data and cannot generalize to additional data. If a model is trained
on a dataset with a lot of noise or outliers, for instance, it may learn to make predictions
based on these noise points rather than the underlying trend. Consequently, the model
will perform well with the training data but poorly with new data.Overfitting is problematic
in machine learning because it prevents the model from generalizing to new scenarios or
data. In other words, it will be incapable of making good predictions based on data it has
never seen before.
An indication that the model is overfitting would be If the model performs significantly
better on the training data than on the validation sets during cross­validation[14]. Using
a larger and more representative dataset, regularization techniques, and cross­validation
to modify the model’s hyperparameters are a few methods for preventing overfitting in
machine learning. By following these steps, it is possible to construct a model that can
generalize effectively to unobserved data and generate accurate predictions.
2.3.4
Machine Learning algorithms (Classifiers)
Logistic Regression
Logistic Regression[15] is a supervised classification algorithm that is mainly used for
binary classification tasks by predicting the probability of an event based on the input
features. An example for a LR model for 1 binary feature is build as shown in figure 2.4:
8
Botnet identification using Machine Learning
==PAGE:17==
Figure 2.4: Model Form for 1 binary feature[15]
As we can see, the linear predictor z is transformed by a sigmoid function in order to
make the values range from 0 to 1. That means that we can interpret those values as
probabilities, and by setting a threshold to separate the binary class we can have a class
prediction depending on whether or not the outcome falls over the threshold. We used
the implementation of this algorithm by Scikit­learn[16], which had a static threshhold of
0.5.
DecisionTree
A Decision Tree[17] is a ML algorithm creates a model with the structure of a tree that
comprises a root node, branches, internal nodes and leaf nodes and has a goal to learn
decision rules based on the data features. The data is classified into more ”complex”
subcategories, moving from the root node to an internal node and ends with a leaf node.
1. Root node: The node from which the graph begins and typically the feature that best
splits the data is located here.
2. Internal node: These nodes are where variables are assessed, however they are
not the ones where predictions are formed in the end.
3. Leaf node: The predictions of a class is are made at these last nodes of the tree
and they represent all possible classes.
4. Branch: Branches represent the possible alternatives or decision rule that can lead
to the next node and are mutually exclusive, meaning that if one path of the tree is
followed, the other is not.
A simple explanation of how the tree is created goes as such: It begins with the root node
that contains all the data, then the attribute with the highest score in the dataset is found
by using an attribute selection function, such as Information Gain, and the data is split
based on that, thus creating a new subset. This process is recursively done on each
subset until all attributes are exhausted and the tree has only leaf nodes at the end of
every sub­tree/branch.
The algorithm comes with several advantages and disadvantages[18]. Some of the ad­
vantages are that it requires little data preparation, it is capable of processing both numer­
ical and category input and statistical tests can be used to validate the model, allowing us
to account for the model’s reliability. Some of the disadvantages are that the tree can get
very complex, leading to overfitting. Another disadvantage is that the tree can be unstable
because little changes in the data can result in the generation of a completely new tree.
Additionally, the local optimal decisions that are made on every node does not guarantee
that the decision tree will be the actual global optimal.
For our project, we used the implementation by Scikit­learn[19]
Random Forest
Random Forest [20] is a ML algorithm that falls under the ensemble learning category,
or bagging ensemble, that are extensively used for classification tasks. Bagging is a
Botnet identification using Machine Learning
9
==PAGE:18==
learning method where a single machine learning algorithm is used to create multiple
models with different parts of the training dataset and then by voting or averaging each
of their predictions, a definitive prediction is made. A Random Forest is made of multiple
decision trees and apart from utilizing the bagging method, it utilizes feature randomness
that ensures low correlation between the decision trees by generating random subsets of
features. In contrast, a decision tree by itself will use all the possible features and split
them.
A major advantage over decision trees, is that the risk of overfitting is greatly reduced.
Another benefit of Random Forest, is that it makes it easy to determine feature importance.
In this project, we used the implementation by scikit­learn[21]
Multilayer Perceptron (MLP)
MLP[22] is an artificial neural network that can be utilized for supervised learning. It is
taught using a form of the backpropagation technique and consists of many layers of arti­
ficial perceptrons(neurons).They can learn nonlinear correlations between input attributes
and output, allowing them to represent complex, real­world data. It of an input layer, one
or more hidden layers, and an output layer in its design, but it depends on the parameters
that we set. The input layer takes the input data and transmits information to the hidden
layers, which change the data via weighted connections between the neurons. The out­
put layer generates the final class prediction.One disadvantage is that it requires tuning a
number of hyperparameters such as the number of hidden neurons, layers, and iterations.
In this project, we used the implementation by scikit­learn[23]
K­nearest neighbors (KNN)
KNearest Neighbor[24] is an algorithm in which the model generates predictions based
on the properties of the k­nearest neighbours of a particular data point in feature space.
An object is classified based on the majority vote of its neighbours, with the object being
allocated to the class having the highest frequency among its k nearest neighbours. The
value of ‘k’ is crucial for classifying the unlabelled data, and it can be decided by running
the classifier multiple times until the optimal is found, typically a small K is used. If k = 1,
the object is allocated the class of its single nearest neighbour. The distance between the
data points is calculated by the euclidean or manhattan distance
It requires minimal training because the model merely stores the training data and gener­
ates predictions based on the qualities of the nearest neighbours. Finding the k nearest
neighbours for a big dataset can be computationally expensive, which is a shortcoming
of the KNN classifier. In addition, the KNN classifier can be sensitive to the selection of k,
since a small value of k can result in a model that is too complicated and overfits the data,
while a large value of k can result in a model that is too simple and underfits the data.
In this project, we used the implementation by scikit­learn[25]
eXtreme Gradient Boosting (XGBoost)
XGBoost[26] is an ensemble learning technique that combines the predictions of several
weak models, such as decision trees, to create a robust model. It is a gradient boosting
approach, therefore it develops the model incrementally by adding one tree at a time and
modifying the weights of the trees based on their performance. It’s architecture comprises
of a collection of decision trees, each of which is a weak learner that generates predictions
based on a subset of the characteristics. Individual tree predictions are used to form the
final projection. In each training cycle iteration, XGBoost fits a new tree to the residual
errors of the preceding tree. The residual errors are the difference between the actual
labels and the labels predicted by the training set. By fitting the trees to the residual errors,
it is able to lower the model’s bias and increase its overall precision. One disadvantage
10
Botnet identification using Machine Learning
==PAGE:19==
is that it has a relatively long training time,
In this project, we used the implementation in xgboost library[27]
2.3.5
Metrics
In this section we will provide information about the metrics we will use in the later sections
and explain what they are. Acronyms and definitions that we will use:
• TP = True Positive
Prediction = 1, Real label = 1
• FP = False Positive
Prediction = ­1, Real label = 1
• TN = True Negative
Prediction = ­1. Real label = ­1
• FN = False Negative
Prediction = ­1, Real label = 1
Accuracy
The definition of accuracy[28] is the ratio of true positives and true negatives to true posi­
tives and true negatives plus false positives and false negatives, or total number of predic­
tions. It is appropriate to use the balanced accuracy as a metric in imbalanced datasets
(where one class has a greater number of data points than the other). This is because the
balanced accuracy gives equal weight to each class. Therefore, the false positives/neg­
atives of the class with fewer data will have a greater impact on the model’s overall accu­
racy.
Accuracy =
TP + TN
TP + TN + FP + FN
Recall
Recall[28], also known as True Positive Rate, is a common metric and it indicates how
many predictions, relative to the total number of positive predictions, have been labelled
as positive.
Recall =
TP
TP + FN
To make this metric more suitable for a dataset that is not balanced, we can use the Macro
average version of this metric so both classes are treated equally. In our case:
MacroAverageRecall = Recall_class1 + Recall_Class2
2
Precision
Precision[28] evaluates how many positive predictions were indeed labelled positive.
Precision =
TP
TP + FP
To make this metric more suitable for a dataset that is not balanced, we can use the Macro
average version of this metric so both classes are treated equally. In our case:
MacroAveragePrecision = Presicion_class1 + Precision_Class2
2
Botnet identification using Machine Learning
11
==PAGE:20==
F1­Score
F1­score[29][28] is the harmonic mean of Recall and Precision. Both metrics, Recall and
Precision, equally contribute to the score, meaning that if both of them are high, we get a
high f1­score, if both of them are low, we get a low f1­score, if one of them is low, we get
a medium f1­score. It is a good metric to get a general overview of the model.
F1 = 2 Precision ∗Recall
Precision + Recall
To make this metric more suitable for a dataset that is not balanced, we can use the Macro
average version of this metric so both classes are treated equally. In our case:
MacroAverageF1 = F1_class1 + F1_Class2
2
Matthews Correlation Coefficient(MCC)
MCC [30] takes into account true and false positives and negatives and is widely regarded
as a balanced metric that can be applied even when the class sizes vary greatly. As the
name suggest, the metric is a correlation coefficients that it’s value can only be between ­1
and +1. +1 indicates a perfect classifier, ­1 indicates a perfect predictor again, but inverse.
The closer the value is to 0, the more random, or bad our model is. In essence, it can be
interpreted as the correlation between the predicted classes and the actual classes.
MCC =
TP ∗TN −FP ∗FN
(TP + FP)(TP + FN)(TN + FN)(TN + FN)
[ROC/AUC]
AUC ­ ROC (Receiver Operating Characteristics / Aerea Under the Curve) [28][31] curve
is a performance metric for classification tasks with different threshold values. ROC is
a probability curve that determines the TPR and FPR for different threshold values and
shows the TPR versus the FPR and it can help determining the threshold for the model,
depending on the task. For example, we can if we only care about False Positives, we
can move the threshold to a value where the False Positive rate is very low, or even 0 and
disregard the fact that get plenty of False Negatives. The AUC is a measure or degree of
distinction. It indicates how well the model can differentiate across classes. By analogy,
the greater the AUC, the greater the model’s ability to identify between patients with and
without disease. The AUC values varies between ­1 and 1. 1 indicates a perfect classifier
that can distinguish the classes correctly and
This helps us visualize the overall performance of the model. The curve is plotted as
the True Positive Rate (Recall) on the y axis and the False Positive Rate on the x axis.
We calculate TPR and FPR for every possible threshold and plot it on the chart. We
are looking for a curve that pushes in the top left corner of the chart, as that will indicate
a lower FPR and higher TPR. A chart that has a straight line from the bottom left to to
right indicates a random model that can not tell the difference between the classes. In
the below made up ROC curve, the green line is what we are looking for, and we want it
as close to that, and the red curve illustrates the line we want to stay away from. False
positive rate is calculated as:
FPR =
FP
FP + TN
12
Botnet identification using Machine Learning
==PAGE:21==
Figure 2.5: ROC example
2.3.6
Detection Error Tradeoff Curve
The DET curve shows the trade­off between the false positives and false negatives on
different thresholds. On the x­axis is the false positive rate and on the y­axis the false
negative rate. If the false positive rate and false negative rate are comparable throughout
a range of operational points, it implies that the model is not biased toward one class and
that the training dataset is well­formed. Alternatively, if the DET curve reveals a large
discrepancy between the false positive rate and the false negative rate for a range of
operating points, this may indicate that the model is biased toward one class or that the
training dataset is not well­formed. It is possible to see how the model’s performance
changes as the threshold for classifying a case as positive or negative is varied, and
change the threshold according to the task and choose the FNR at the expense of the
FPR (or vice­versa).
Confusion Matrix
The confusion matrix of a model is a visually striking and simple­to­interpret diagram.
The confusion matrix is a two­by­two table that separates correct guesses from incorrect
predictions into positive and negative categories. A confusion matrix includes the number
of true positives and true negatives that correspond to the model’s correct predictions, as
well as the number of false positives and false negatives that correspond to the model’s
incorrect predictions.
Actual
Negative
TN
FP
Actual
Positive
FN
TP
Predicted
Negative
Predicted
Positive
Table 2.1: Confusion Matrix example
Botnet identification using Machine Learning
13
==PAGE:22==
14
Botnet identification using Machine Learning
==PAGE:23==
3
Literature Review
In this chapter, we’ll give a literature review that relates to the issue at hand. All the
methods presented in the literature are effective. Since other methodologies may differ
from our own, it is not always possible to make direct comparisons between the outcomes
of this study and those of others as some approaches strive for a different way to counter
botnets, like detection in network traffic, whereas we try to detect the malware itself. We’ll
wrap up this part with a summary table, so we can easily see how our methodology will
stacks up against others.
3.1
Dbot
DBot[32] describes a method for detecting and clustering botnets that utilize domain gen­
eration algorithms (DGAs) to interact with their command and control (C&C) servers. Bot­
nets can conceal their communication channels through the use of DGAs, which produce
a huge number of random domain names that the botnet can use as CC servers. The
DBod technique includes examining DNS traffic to find patterns that are typical of DGA­
based botnets, and it relies on the premise that the majority of domains in the candidate list
created by the DGA do not have a valid IP address, resulting in NXDomain(non existent
domain) answer when requested. The pipeline goes as follows:
1. Gather DNS messages in a specific time frame.
DNS traffic gathered: domain
queries, the hosts and the query times
2. Discard NXDomains that are whitelisted and keep the otherones as ”suspects”
3. Cluster the ”suspects” using the Chinese Wisper(CW) algorithm
4. Perform statistical analysis of the query time distribution and query count distribution
of the group and decide if the group is malicious if it exceeds a specified threshhold.
5. Output a list of compromised hosts
Figure 3.1: DBod architecture. Taken from [32]
The authors reported an average accuracy of 99.69% across four different datasets in
Botnet identification using Machine Learning
15
==PAGE:24==
their controlled environment evaluation. The high performance of this method does not
come without limitations. As suggested by the description of this method, it is limited to
the detection of botnets that use DGA. In real time scenarios, the bots are not active all
the time, and in addition to that, in order for this system to detect the existence of the
infected hosts, the active phase of the bot must overlap with the timeframe that the dns
messages are gathered. Moreover, the use of DGAs has become a fallback mechanism
and according to spamhaus[33] it saw a reduction of 71% of domain name registrations
for botnet CC hosting in 2019 from 2018 (latest we could find).
3.2
Alauthaman et al.
In this approach[34], the authors used two existing datasets to evaluate their approach,
namely ISOT[35] and ISCX[36].
• ISOT: Created by capturing network data from honeypots and other sources, and
it contains .PCAP files of actual HTTP botnet traffic.The dataset includes informa­
tion such as the source and destination IP addresses, port numbers, and packet
payloads. It includes traffic from two specific botnets as well as benigns traffic.
• ISCX: Contains network traffic information collected from a test­bed network in a
laboratory setting, and it is designed to mimic real­world network traffic with normal
and malicious traffic. The researches in this project only used the benign traffic for
the evaluation.
Figure 3.2: Block diagram of Alauthaman et al.
As shown in figure 3.2. First, the traffic was captured, which was done by replaying the
.PCAP files using TcpReplay1 to build an experimental dataset with P2P Botnet traffic and
typical genuine traffic and filtered to only contain TCP control packages. Then, the traffic
was recaptured, and 29 features were extracted. Those features were evaluated using a
Feature reduction algorithm, bringing the number of features down to 10. The dataset that
resulted after the feature reduction was used both to train and test a Multilayer Neural­
Network classifier, which outputted the class of the sample.
The authors reported an average detection rate of 99.08% with false positive rate of 0.75%
and 99.2% accuracy. Overall, the results high, but there are still a lot of limitations to this
approach. First, the datasets that were used were already outdated, 2010 for ISOT, which
was the dataset that contained the malicious traffic. Moreover, the project is not only
limited to P2P botnets, it is limited to TCP traffic and maybe the performance drops when
it comes to different families of P2P botnets. Also, encryption can be a highly effective
evading method against this detection scheme.
1open­source for altering and replaying previously collected network traffic.
16
Botnet identification using Machine Learning
==PAGE:25==
3.3
Aswathi et al
In this project, the authors utilized an existing dataset, namely the CTU­13[37] dataset.
This dataset paper was released in 2014, but the captures were done in 2011, and it con­
tains large captures of both real botnet traffic and normal/background traffic. The dataset
is split into 13 scenarios, each representing different types of attacks, such as distributed
denial­of­service (DDoS), port scanning, web­based attacks, and several different forms
of malware attacks. 7 different botnet families were used for the malicious traffic. The
dataset consists of 15 features such as source/destination IP addresses, port numbers,
and packet payloads. The dataset is considered vastly unbalanced in terms of malicious
and benign traffic, as background and normal flows comprise 90+% of the flows in every
scenario, although this might be a more accurate representation of a real network traffic
activity capture.
The first step in this project was to retrieve the files of this dataset, clean it of unnecessary
information and convert it to a .csv file. Then, a feature selection algorithm was used
and the number of features was reduced to 11 from 15. Also, the researches decided to
downsample the data and balance the number of benign and malicious data entries. The
remaining data was used to train and evaluate 5 classifiers: RandomForest, KNN, SVM,
KMeans and RNN. The classifier with the highest scores, RandomForest, reported 99.6%
Accuracy, 99% Precision and 99% Recall.
The results presented were very high, but the data used are more than a decade old
by now, botnets have evolved since then. In the paper [38], it was shown that slightly
modifying the network activity of the bots can highly affect the detection from classifiers
that were trained on data based on netflows, specifically in this paper the CTU­13 dataset
was used and there were instances that the detection rate dropped to 20% from 99%.
3.4
Qasim et al.
In this project[3], the authors goal is to create a new dataset with recent botnet samples.
The paper describes how these samples were collected, analyzed and how they were
used to extract features to create a dataset and then evaluated the effectiveness of the
dataset using various ML algorithms.
The samples were collected from a number of trusted antivirus vendors and those sam­
ples were detonated in a sandbox environment that generates a detailed report on all the
actions that happen on the system while that sample is being executed. The samples
that were collected only date back to 2019 and include a lot of botnet families and attack
variants. After the reports were gathered, features engineering was performed to extract
the significant features from those reports. A total 122 features were extracted, of which:
11 Static, 22 Network communication, 45 Behaviour, 5 Sandbox based, 32 Defence eva­
sion and 7 Memory based.Those features were extracted for each report and labelled
accordingly, creating the AUB01 dataset.
Both supervised and unsupervised ML algorithms were used to evaluate the efficacy of the
dataset. For unsupervised learning, K­means clustering was used and resulted to 0.936
Silhuette coefficient, and the accuracy can be calculated as 97.06%, but usually unsuper­
vised learning algorithms tend to need a lot more data to yield very high results. For the
supervised learning algorithms, 6 classifiers were used, and the results are concluded in
the following table, taken directly from the original paper:
Botnet identification using Machine Learning
17
==PAGE:26==
Figure 3.3: Performance matrix Results ­ AUB01 Dataset
Overall, Random Forest yields the highest results, reporting 98.61% accuracy, 99% Pre­
cision, Recall and F­1 score. A limitation for this approach could be that some botnet
malware are able to detect that they are being executed within a sandbox, and change
their behaviour, so some features from specific malware samples might not be completely
accurate.
3.5
Summary
In the table below, a summary of the above literature is summarized. The comparison
between the approaches is challenging, as they do not all have the exact same target or
the detection happens on different levels (e.g network or host).
Related work
Target
Category
Limitation
Best reported
Accuracy
Dbot
botnets that use DGA.
network
Highly specific to a type of
botnet.Bot activity must
overlap with monitoring
window frame
99.69%
Alauthaman et al.
P2P botnets
network
Limited to P2P botnets
and TCP traffic.
Weak against
encryption. Outdated datasets
99.2%
Aswathi et al
7 botnets families
network
Specific to network
activity patterns
that are included in
dataset. Outdated dataset.
99.6%
Qasim et al
Various types
of botnets
client
Possibility that malware
can detect the sandbox
environment.
98.61%
Table 3.1: Summary table from related work
18
Botnet identification using Machine Learning
==PAGE:27==
4
Methodology
This chapter presents all the information on the methodology that was used up until the
results were reported. The methodology’s phases are laid out so that anyone can follow
them and replicate all of the actions.
The methodology consists of these phases:
1. Data Collection
2. Understanding the reports
3. Data Cleanse
4. Feature Extraction
5. Feature Selection
6. Machine Learning
4.1
Data Collection
This phase includes the process of gathering the samples in their unprocessed original
form, as well as the process of generating the reports that result from said samples. This
process was already done by the author of the paper described in Section 3.4, so we will
only describe what he has done to gather the samples and the reports.Botnet malware
detection in files is a discrete result.In a file, botnet malware will either be present or not,
making the detection of botnet malware in files a binary problem. Consequently, files will
be divided into two groups, Benign and Malicious.
The collection of botnet samples in the real world would be a difficult, and maybe a dan­
gerous task, so various anti­virus companies were contacted to supply samples. The AV
vendors that were contacted are virus total[39], abuse.ch [40], and run­any [41] and the
samples that were provided were from 2019 to 2022. GitHub [42] was also utilized to
find samples. To make sure that all the samples were indeed botnet related, they were
filtered using VirusTotal reports with a python script. Regarding the benign samples, they
were collected from various system tools, Windows OS accessories, etc. (ask Qasim for
clarification on benign files)
After the collection of the samples, a virtual environment was set up by using an open­
source sandbox platform named Cuckoo [43]. The system employs a client­server ar­
chitecture in which the host acts as the controlling body and a Windows 10 guest virtual
machine is built for the execution of each botnet sample. Every sample is separately anal­
ysed, and the host keeps track of the sample activity, like file creation/deletion, network
communication, and the general behaviour of the sample for 300 seconds. After the sam­
ple is analysed by the sandbox, a report in JSON format is generated that includes all the
records. The virtual machine is set back to its clean state before submitting a new sample,
so that each piece of malware, or benign file, can work on its own in a clean environment.
The data that we ended up with after this process are:
1. Benign: 2724 reports
2. Malicious: 5231 reports
Botnet identification using Machine Learning
19
==PAGE:28==
3. Total: 7955 reports
4.2
Understanding the reports
In this section, we will go through the various elements in the reports, briefly explain what
information they provide, as there is no clear documentation about the reports that the
sandbox generates, and evaluate if the information is important to us or not. Each of the
following subsections will represent a single element that can be found in the report. Note
that a few elements that appear in the reports in rare occasions are not included in the
following subsections, but we think they could contain important information, so we did
not discard any of those.
4.2.1
Info
In the ‘info’ element, we can find information about the sandbox itself, the duration of the
analysis, a score for how suspicious the sample is, and other general information. Overall,
this object does not seem to have any information that we could use. A snapshot example
is shown below:
Figure 4.1: ‘Info’ object
4.2.2
network
In the ‘network’ element, we can find information about the network activity that happened
during the analysis of the sample, like details about udp/tcp connections, domains visited
and dns used. This object seems to have information that we could use.A snapshot ex­
ample is shown below:
20
Botnet identification using Machine Learning
==PAGE:29==
Figure 4.2: ‘network’ object
4.2.3
static
In the ‘static’ element, we can find information about the different sections of the sample,
the dll’s1 that were imported and what functions were called from them. This object seems
to have information that we could use. A snapshot example is shown below:
Figure 4.3: ‘static’ object
4.2.4
behavior
In the ‘behavior’ element, we can find information about the system calls, processes and
the process­tree, files, registry keys that were accessed, system modifications, or other
actions made by the sample, etc. It contains an easy­to­interpret description of each
pattern that was detected, along with a severity score and details that can be used to
follow up with the analysis. This object seems to have information that we could use. A
snapshot example is shown below:
1dll, or Dynamic­link library, are shared libraries used by the Windows OS
Botnet identification using Machine Learning
21
==PAGE:30==
Figure 4.4: ‘behavior’ object
4.2.5
signatures
In the ‘signatures’ element, we can find patterns that were defined by the developers of the
sandbox, like suspicious system modifications. actions that are known to be malicious,
etc. An interesting part in this object, is the key ”description”, it describes the signature
that was recognized in a brief sentence. This object seems to have information that we
could use. A snapshot example is shown below:
Figure 4.5: ‘signatures’ object
4.2.6
strings
In the ‘strings’ element, we can find all the strings that were extracted from the binary of
the analysed sample. There could potentially be some helpful information in this object.
4.2.7
debug
In the ‘debug’ element, we can find information about errors that occurred during the
analysis and logs of the analysing module.Overall, this object does not seem to have any
information that we could use, at least not for the algorithm. We can use this to detect if
the analysing of the sample was unsuccessful, therefore discard the report. A snapshot
example is shown below:
Figure 4.6: ‘debug’ object
22
Botnet identification using Machine Learning
==PAGE:31==
4.2.8
metadata
In the ‘metadata’ element, we can find the name and the hash of the .pcap file that was
analysed. Nothing in this object could be useful for us.
4.3
Data Cleanse
At this phase, we must clean up the reports that have been gathered. Additionally, we
must eliminate corrupted or duplicate reports because they may subsequently result in
a number of issues. We can check if there are any reports that are corrupted, simply
by using Python’s json [44] library that parses such files. Using the module, we load the
report and if it doesn’t throw any errors, the file is not broken.
Upon inspecting some reports, it was found that some of them did not contain a lot of infor­
mation, and it was rather weird. It was discovered that the executable did not run properly,
and the sandbox threw an error. We tried to remove as many as possible, if not all, and a
strong indication that there was a failure during the procedure is the ”duration” field in the
”info” object, as well as checking for errors in the ”debug” object. Reports that only had a
duration of under 2 seconds were manually inspected and discarded accordingly.
As explained in section 4.2, some of the content in the reports was really not suited for a
classification task as it only served a purpose to provide information about the report itself
and not the sample or it’s behaviour. The ‘info’, ‘debug’ and ‘metadata’ elements were
completely deleted from all the reports.
The data cleansing phase produced a set of reports that are all in scope, not corrupted,
contained actual information about the malware and were not duplicates. The dataset had
not been reduced significantly, we still have enough samples to proceed with the project.
The final dataset includes:
• Benign: 2652 reports
• Malicious: 5027 reports
• Total: 7679 reports
4.4
Feature Extraction
At this phase, we need to extract features that will be used for training and testing the
machine learning models that we will use for detection.The term feature extraction[45],
refers to the process of selecting and extracting useful characteristics from raw data. The
purpose of feature extraction is to represent the data in a compact and meaningful fashion
that is easy to work with and can be used by machine learning models. We followed two
different approaches for this:
1. Bag Of Words
2. BERT model to create word embeddings
We will have a dataset in Comma­Separated Values(CSV) file format by the end of this
phase, ready to feed into machine learning algorithms for training multiple models. Every
row in the CSV will represent a single report(sample) and the columns will represent all
the features that will extract, except the first one that will be the report’s class.
In order the get the class of each sample, either malicious or benign, we decided to append
a string that we can use to distinguish between them when we create the CSV. We append
a ‘_ben’, for benign, and ‘_mal’, for malicious, at the end of each files name and when we
proceed to our feature extraction process, we use this string to identify the class by the
Botnet identification using Machine Learning
23
==PAGE:32==
file name when reading it. Once we open a file to extract it’s features, we append ‘1’ to
an array when ‘_ben’ is in the name and ‘­1’ when ‘_mal’is in the name.
Figure 4.7: Example of how report names are structured
4.4.1
Bag of Words approach
In section 2.2.1 we explained how the Bag of Words technique works and now it is time
to use it to extract the features from our reports. First, we read the file and determine it’s
class, as explained previously, and then we proceed to remove any symbols and punctu­
ation marks from the text corpus, such as commas, parenthesis, quotation marks etc and
we merge all the text to make it one big sentence. We can do this because our approach
does not care about the contextual meaning and we just want to feed the text to the al­
gorithm. We used the CountVectorizer() [46] implementation provided by scikit­learn. We
set a parameter to only include the top 1000 most frequent features and used a built­
in stop word list for English to remove unnecessary words. We use the matrix of token
counts that we gain as a result, add it to a dataframe 2 along with the respective labels
we previously saved and then save the data in a CSV file for later use.
4.4.2
BERT approach
Equipment and environment preparation:
• Hardware: AMD 3700x CPU, RTX 2080s GPU, RAM 32GB.
• Environment: In order to be able to load the model on our GPU, we installed torch
1.8.1 [48] along with CUDA toolkit 11.2 [49] and cudnn 8.1[50]. The versions are
important as they are specific to each gpu model.
BERT model is a model that, in essence, can turn natural language sentences into a
vector representation. Since the model is trained to understand natural language, the
contextual meaning of the input is important, so we decided to utilize this model and use
the ‘description’ field that can be found under ‘signatures’ in our reports, more detailed
in Section (reference Understanding reports section). We decided to use BERT base
model[51], as our computational power is limited.
As a first step, we needed to further process the reports we currently have and obtain
what we need, so we locate those fields in each report and keep that part of the report.
Each report has multiple ‘description’ fields, so we merge all of them in a big string. As
discussed in Section 2.2.2, the input that is to be fed to the model must be in a specific
form. First we need to tokenize the input, so we use the BERT tokenizer provided by
the transformers library [52]. The tokenizer will divide the input text into tokens and add
special tokens, such as [CLS] and [SEP], to indicate the beginning and end of the input
sequence as well as add [PAD] (padding) where it is needed. The output of tokenizing
is a dictionary containing the input ids, they serve to index into a pre­trained matrix of
word embeddings to acquire the word embeddings for the input tokens, and the attention
mask, which indicates whether the token is a [PAD]. Using PyTorch, we convert the input
2A structure that efficiently organizes data into a 2D table, provided by pandas[47]
24
Botnet identification using Machine Learning
==PAGE:33==
sequence to a tensor3 as it is expected to be in this form by the model, and also it must
be in this form to utilize our GPU.
Now we are ready to use the pretrained model to extract the features. Since our memory
is limited, we break the data in batches and apply the BERT model to the input tensor and
append the CLS token from the last hidden layer, to a list and also append it’s correspond­
ing label to another list. Applying the BERT model to the input tensor entails sending the
input tensor through the encoder layers of the model and using the output to do the re­
quired task, in our case, we simply want to create the sentence embedding (CLS) and
save them to be fed to a classifier. Once all the inputs are fed into the model, we save
the labels and the CLS tokens in a CSV file.
4.5
Feature Selection
In this section, we will explain what we did to reduce the number of features and remove
insignificant features or potential features that negatively impact the performance of our
classifiers
4.5.1
Bag Of Words approach
For our BoW approach, we have 1000 features that we extracted, and we are unaware
which of them actually contribute into our main goal, identifying botnet malware.
Permutation Feature Importance
To reduce the number of features and find the important ones, we used the Permuta­
tion feature importance algorithm [53] and the Random Forest classifier.This approach
removes the link between the feature and the target, the decline in the model score indi­
cates how much the model is dependent on the feature. We chose to use the Random
Forest classifier because it is generally a model that performs well and does not overfit
easily. The find the feature importances using Permutation feature importance algorithm
goes as follows:
1. Train a model, a Random Forest in our case
2. Use test dataset to get the accuracy of the model and record it, or another preferred
metric.
3. Shuffle the column values of a single feature, then run all test samples through the
Random Forest to recalculate the accuracy.
4. The accuracy difference measures the importance of the variable you just shuffled.
5. Return data to original form and repeat the process from step 3 until all features are
iterated.
The formula to compute the importance ij for feature fj is prescribed as:
3Multidimensional arrays
Botnet identification using Machine Learning
25
==PAGE:34==
Figure 4.8: Feature importance formula for Permutation feature importance
Where s is the score(accuracy), K is the number of repetitions and j is the column index
After running this algorithm, we discarded any features whose importance metric was ei­
ther negative or zero. A negative importance means that when the column of that feature
was shuffled, the accuracy of the model went up, which means that feature is only con­
fusing the model as the accuracy should go down. A feature importance of zero means
that the specific feature does not impact the result. We ended up dropping 774 features,
leaving us with 226 out of the 1000 that we started with.
4.5.2
BERT approach
For this approach, it did not make sense to perform any feature selection, as we will be
using the CLS token as a whole feature.
4.6
Machine Learning
In this section of the methodology, we will refer to the machine learning part of the project.
Since the project is about detection of botnet malware using machine learning, we are
going to train various algorithms using the features that we extracted from the reports
after selecting the most important ones.The target variable is the sample’s label, which
ultimately indicates whether the file is malicious or benign, and hence what the models
will attempt to predict. The algorithms that we used to create our models are:
• Logistic Regression 2.3.4
• DecisionTree 2.3.4
• Random Forest 2.3.4
• Multilayer Perceptron 2.3.4
• Knearest neighbors 2.3.4
• XGBoost 2.3.4
As noted in Section 4.3, the total number of samples in the dataset is 7679, which includes
both benign and malicious samples. The first step into training the models, is to split the
dataset and then tune the hyperparameters of the models.
We split our dataset in two pieces, a training set and a test set. The training set will be
used in the hyperparameter tuning phase and the training phase, the test set will be held­
out and will only be used to test the model. During the hyperparameter tuning phase, the
training set will be furthered divided into training set and validation set since we will be
cross­validating. Data after splitting them:
• Training set: 5759 samples
26
Botnet identification using Machine Learning
==PAGE:35==
– 3740 Malicious
– 2019 Benign
• Test set: 1920 samples
– 1287 Malicious
– 633 Benign
For each of these algorithms, we applied BayesSearch Cross­Validation[54], except MLP
to which we applied GridSearch Cross­Validation [55]. These techniques are used to find
the best hyperparameters for a specific model, it takes time since the model must be
trained multiple times. Apart from using this technique to tune the hyperparameters, we
also take advantage of corss­validation to check for overfitting, more comprehensively
explained in Sections 2.3.2,2.3.3. A strong indication that the model is overfitting is if the
validation accuracy (result from each fold) varies more than slightly from the test accuracy.
When comparing those results, we did not notice any major difference, so we do not have
any strong indications that our models were not generalizing properly.
The Grid Search algorithm trains a model by exhausting all predetermined combinations of
values for the parameters, and will also cross validate the predictions. The predetermined
parameters are set by us, in a ‘grid’ as shown in figure 4.9 and we cross­validate 10­fold
for the aforementioned reason.
Figure 4.9: Example of grid we provided for MLP
As it can be seen in the grid we used for MLP, all the values are manually selected and
some empirical experience is needed for selecting relatively good values to test on. That
is the disadvantage of the grid search, if there is high uncertainty as to what parameters
to use, it is typical to use a high number of parameters, however this results in a time­
consuming and resource­intensive process. The reason we chose to use GridSearch for
this model is because the time that was needed to run BayesSearch was extremely high,
so we selected some parameters that we think that would perform well and tested on
them. We selected 6 different values for the hidden layer size, 3 for maximum number
of iterations, 2 different activation functions, 2 solvers, 2 values for alpha and 2 settings
for the learning rate. In total, 3 ∗3 ∗2 ∗2 ∗2 = 36 different combinations were tested.
If we multiply this amount by 10, which represents the 10 folds fitting, we get 360 model
trainings until the algorithm identifies the best parameter combination.
As mentioned earlier, for the rest of the models, we used the BayesSearchCV [54] method.
With this method, we do not exhaustively search to find the best parameters, instead we
optimize a probabilistic function with the ultimate goal to maximize the accuracy.We still
provide a list of parameters to be tested. This method considers previous evaluations
Botnet identification using Machine Learning
27
==PAGE:36==
when determining which hyperparameter set to examine next. By making intelligent pa­
rameter combinations, it is able to focus on those portions of the parameter space that it
believes will yield the most promising validation scores. This method usually requires less
repetitions to arrive at the ideal set of hyperparameter values. Most significantly, it ignores
those portions of the parameter space that it believes will not contribute anything[56].
In figure 4.10, one can see an example of the provided search space that we used, specifi­
cally for Random Forest. Instead of providing a few specific parameters to test, we provide
a range of parameters, where applicable, and the optimization method will search within
that range to find the best parameters.
Figure 4.10: Example of search space we provided for RF
Below is the list of the Classifiers that we used and their corresponding parameters that
we found to be optimal:
• KNeighborsClassifier(leaf_size=1, metric=’manhattan’, n_neighbors=3,
weights=’distance’)
• LogisticRegression(C=2.860760167238615, max_iter=4897,
tol=1.2441575953365077e­05, solver=’lbfgs’)
• DecisionTreeClassifier(max_depth=100, max_features=’auto’,
min_samples_leaf=2, min_samples_split=2 )
• RandomForestClassifier(bootstrap=False, max_depth=44,
min_samples_leaf=2,max_features=’auto’, min_samples_split=5,
n_estimators=1800, random_state=69)
• XGBClassifier(base_score=0.5, booster=’gbtree’,
colsample_bylevel=1,colsample_bynode=1, colsample_bytree=1,
gamma=0,learning_rate=0.0846542798609431, max_delta_step=0,
max_depth=3, min_child_weight=1, missing=1, n_estimators=1610,
n_jobs=­1, nthread=None, objective=’binary:logistic’
, random_state=42, reg_alpha=0, reg_lambda=1,
scale_pos_weight=1,seed=69,
silent=None,subsample=0.6672598578681597)
• MLPClassifier(activation=’tanh’, alpha= 0.0001,
hidden_layer_sizes= (200,),learning_rate= ’adaptive’,
28
Botnet identification using Machine Learning
==PAGE:37==
max_iter=100, solver= ’adam’)
Botnet identification using Machine Learning
29
==PAGE:38==
5
Results
In this chapter we will present the results from the machine learning algorithms
5.1
Results from BoW approach
The first experiment we ran was to train multiple machine learning models and extract the
best ones capable of predicting correct labels on botnet malware samples and accurately
determining whether a file is harmful malicious or not. In total, we trained six distinct
models based on the algorithms presented in Section 2.3. We used a 10­fold validation
method to Cross­Validate the models’ performance, and we attempted multiple parameter
combinations using Grid/Bayesian search. Section 4.6 contains further information on the
experiment.
Out of the 6 models, XGboost turned out to be the best with a 99.17% accuracy on the
test dataset and 99.06% score for Precision, Recall and F­1 score. Since our dataset
is imbalanced, taking accuracy as an absolute metric to evaluate our model might not
be the best option. Observing the ROC/AUC, the results are still impressive, scoring
0.9994, almost a perfect score and a MCC score of 0.9811. RandomForest performed
almost equally to XGboost, with a slight overall decrease in performance on all metrics.
All­encompassing values for the performance for our models found in Table 5.1. Overall,
most of our models produced comparatively good results, with the Logistic Regression
model showing the lowest performance. All of the models’ success may be attributed
to the creation of the dataset and the retrieved features. Good results on our models
indicate that the recovered features resulting from the BoW approach can detect malicious
patterns.
Macro Average
Classifier
Accuracy
Precision
Recall
F1­score
MCC
ROC/AUC
Xgbooster
0.9917
0.9906
0.9906
0.9906
0.9811
0.9995
RandomForest
0.9839
0.9819
0.9815
0.9817
0.9635
0.9985
KNN
0.9458
0.9406
0.9363
0.9384
0.8769
0.9606
DecisionTree
0.9375
0.9346
0.9229
0.9284
0.8573
0.9482
MLPclassifier
0.9333
0.9287
0.9194
0.9238
0.8479
0.9765
LR
0.8964
0.8798
0.8894
0.8842
0.7691
0.9391
Table 5.1: Metric results of models trained with BoW approach
A confusion matrix is a 2x2 matrix that provides a summary of the number of true positives,
true negatives, false positives, and false negatives. The confusion matrices for all the
models we used are shown below.
30
Botnet identification using Machine Learning
==PAGE:39==
Figure 5.1: Confusion matrices for models using the BoW approach
Botnet identification using Machine Learning
31
==PAGE:40==
In figure 5.2, we can see the ROC curve, where we can see that RF and XGboost almost
form a perfect ROC curve, which means our models performs very well.
Figure 5.2: ROC curve using the BoW approach
32
Botnet identification using Machine Learning
==PAGE:41==
In figure 5.3, we can see the the DET curves for our models. In our case we would not
mind seeing more False Negatives and less False Positives, as we care more about being
sure that a malicious sample is classified as benign, so if we were to test and optimize
the threshold, we could refer to this diagram. The curves seem to be close to normally
distributed, so we do not detect obvious bias.
Figure 5.3: DET curve using the BoW approach
Botnet identification using Machine Learning
33
==PAGE:42==
Calibration curves illustrate how closely the model’s projected probability correspond to
the actual probabilities of certain outcomes. If the model has been properly calibrated,
the calibration curve should be near to the diagonal line, suggesting that the predicted
probabilities correspond to the actual probabilities. If the curve deviates greatly from the
diagonal line, the model’s calibration may be inadequate. We can see that, even if our
models score very high accuracy, precision and recall etc, the predicted probabilities do
not match the actual probabilities. The reason may be because the model is overfitting,
bias towards a certain class or the decision threshold is not calibrated [57]. RandomForest
appears to be closer to the perfectly calibrated line, so this might suggest RF can be more
”trusted”
Figure 5.4: Calibration plot
34
Botnet identification using Machine Learning
==PAGE:43==
.
It is interesting to observe how different models treat features. In the figures 5.5 and 5.6
the top 20 features for XGboost and RandomForest (top performing models) are depicted
along with their importance value. We can see that for a human, those features do not
mean a lot, but machine learning algorithms can locate patterns that lead to accurate
predictions. For some reason the number 96 appears to be the top feature in both cases,
it might have something to do with the size of each report, but it is hard to pinpoint the
reason that this features appears to be so important. It is interesting how XGboost treats
the top feature with a lot more importance compared to the second, and the same goes
for the second feature against the third, but then the rest of the features appear to start
balancing out. Whereas, the RandomForest algorithm appears to have a more smooth
decrease of importance value from the top feature down the 20th. This difference in feature
handling could be the reason that RandomForest appears to be better calibrated than
XGboost.
Figure 5.5: Top 20 feature importances for RF
Figure 5.6: Top 20 feature importances for XGboost
Botnet identification using Machine Learning
35
==PAGE:44==
5.2
Results from BERT approach
In the second experiment we ran, we used the BERT model to extract contextual word
embeddings and use that vector as a feature that represents the meaning of the ”descrip­
tion” field under the ”signatures” element. Once we extracted that, we used the same ML
models as previously and observed the results.
This time, the results were not as high as the previous approach. The model with the
highest accuracy was Random forest with an accuracy of 85,6%, precision 83.9%, recall
84.2% and f1­score 84%. The worst model was Logistic Regression with scores around
75% across the board. From this we can infer that either the data that we tried to use was
not a good choice because the models can not differentiate properly between malicious
and benign. Or the BERT model does not provide accurate contextual numeric represen­
tations of the data that we provided, but the model was tested extensively and was proved
to work very well in the past.
Macro Average
Classifier
Accuracy
Precision
Recall
F1­score
MCC
ROC/AUC
RandomForestClassifier
0.8563
0.8389
0.8420
0.8404
0.6808
0.9237
DecisionTreeClassifier
0.8391
0.8202
0.8218
0.8209
0.6419
0.8708
XGBClassifier
0.8391
0.8230
0.8138
0.8180
0.6367
0.9146
KNeighborsClassifier
0.8164
0.7952
0.7948
0.7950
0.5900
0.8771
LogisticRegression
0.7832
0.7625
0.7384
0.7473
0.5003
0.8248
MLPClassifier
0.7943
0.7738
0.7559
0.7631
0.5293
0.8544
In the figure below, we can see the resulting confusion matrices. We can see that the
rate for True Negatives (malicious) is high, however, this is strongly connected to the fact
that our dataset has a higher number of reports from malicious samples than reports that
come from benign files.
36
Botnet identification using Machine Learning
==PAGE:45==
Figure 5.7: Confusion matrices for models using the BERT approach
Botnet identification using Machine Learning
37
==PAGE:46==
In the ROC curve analysis in Figure 5.8, we can see visually that the models are not
performing well, as they are very far from the top left corner of the figure. Simply by ob­
serving this figure, and the figure 5.2 in the BoW approach, we can see the vast difference
in performance.
Figure 5.8: ROC curve using the BERT approach
In the DET curve shown below, we can see that even if we change the threshold that a
particular model decides, the results will still be unacceptable. For example let’s look at
the RF graph, if we lower the False Negative rate to 5%, the False Positive rate will be
approximately 35%, in both cases the outcome is not ideal.
38
Botnet identification using Machine Learning
==PAGE:47==
Figure 5.9: DET curve using the BERT approach
Botnet identification using Machine Learning
39
==PAGE:48==
40
Botnet identification using Machine Learning
==PAGE:49==
6
Discussion
6.1
BoW approach
Regarding the method of feature selection, it is worth mentioning that if the model’s per­
formance is low, having low test results or low cross­validation score, features might be
marked as not important, but in reality they could be very important, we tackled this by
selecting a strong model that already yielded good results before performing any feature
selection. The results of this algorithm indicate the importance of the feature for this spe­
cific model, it could vary between other models. Something we should have thought about
and investigated more thoroughly earlier. Another thing that should have been taken into
consideration before choosing this method is that the values might be misleading in the
case where features are correlated, something that we did not check prior. Correlated fea­
tures will have their importance set low because even if one of the features is dropped or
has its values shuffled, the other, correlated, feature will still direct the model into the same
prediction as it would normally. To examine and correct this, we should have performed
hierarchical clustering on the Spearman rank­order correlations, selecting a threshold and
retaining a single feature from each cluster. Another thing that might have been a not so
good idea, is removing the features that their importance was found to be 0, it might have
been an indication that those features were correlated.
Other option: Use another feature selection method if possible: Information Gain, same
as ‘mutual_info_classif’ found on sklearn.
We have also taken a look at the feature importances of the top two performing models.
Some features in that list did not make any sense, and it would be worth exploring in more
depth why they are treated as important, as they could be falsely viewed as so important.
For example, one of the features is ”mqasim”, which is the name of the user profile on
the computer that hosts the sandbox, something that was not noticed in the cleaning
phase. The reason that it appears so many times in the reports it is because whenever
the sandbox would store an action, or a log, it would need to record the path of where that
would be saved, hence it appears a lot when there are a lot of actions going on. Further,
cleaning the reports could possibly enhance the performance of our models.
In the table below, we can see how our approach compares to the literature we previously
discussed. We can see that our results are very close to the rest of the literature, although
accuracy is not the absolute metric and should not be taken as such.
Botnet identification using Machine Learning
41
==PAGE:50==
Related work
Target
Category
Limitation
Best reported
Accuracy
Dbot
botnets that use DGA.
network
Highly specific to a type of
botnet.Bot activity must
overlap with monitoring
window frame
99.69
Alauthaman et al.
P2P botnets
network
Limited to P2P botnets
and TCP traffic.
Weak against
encryption.
Outdated datasets
99.2
Aswathi et al
7 botnets families
network
Specific to network
activity patterns
that are included in
dataset. Outdated dataset.
99.6
Qasim et al
Various types
of botnets
client
Possibility that malware
can detect the sandbox
environment.
98.61
Our project
Various types
of botnets
client
Possibility that malware
can detect the sandbox
environment.
99.17
42
Botnet identification using Machine Learning
==PAGE:51==
6.2
BERT approach
In Section 4.3 we mentioned that we deleted all the duplicated files. While that is true,
after running the experiment and getting disappointing results, we tried to find why that
was the result. We found out that even if the reports that we used were different, the data
that we selected was not unique. As a matter of fact, 6490 of reports were duplicated and
this happened because both the number of ”description” that the sandbox can provide is
limited, and the behaviour of those samples is similar. Not only were there a lot of reports
that had the same feature space and label, but there were instances that there was a
conflict of labels, meaning that they had the same ”description”, but different label. This
definitely affects the models performance in multiple ways, when there are samples with
same feature/label in the training set and in the test set, the model will be able to classify a
duplicated instance easily. The opposite can happen as well though, a sample in the test
set that has the same feature found in the training set, but contradicting label, it will result
in a wrong classification. There are also chances that two samples with contradicting label
will land in the training set, those ”confuse” the model. If we were to remove those, 6490
reports from the dataset, the remaining data would not be sufficient to train and test a ML
algorithm. This observation suggests that the data that we chose to use as our feature
vector was not appropriate, so maybe we could try to find other data in the reports that
we could utilize, but in our opinion nothing else could be used.
Figure 6.1: Samples with contradicting label
6.3
General Discussion
The whole project is based on reports that are generated by analyzing a sample using
Cuckoo sandbox. Malware developers are aware that such tools exists, and nowadays
malwares are equipped with techniques that check the execution environment to find out if
it is a virtual machine, a sandbox, a debugger, or whatever is an unwanted environment.
If such an environment is detected, the malware could behave differently than it would
normally do, or simply interrupt the process and do nothing. These techniques usually
involve checking registry keys or processes. Therefore, hardening the sandbox to counter
this should be taken into consideration to make this project more robust[58].
We focus exclusively on the detection of botnet malware, but in reality, the same or a very
similar approach could be used for other types of malware. After all, our ultimate goal is
to create a safer cyberspace.
Botnet identification using Machine Learning
43
==PAGE:52==
7
Conclusion
In this project we studied the detection of botnet malware utilizing machine learning. The
project aim to explore alternative methods for feature extraction, specifically from reports
produces from a sandbox. We came up with 2 methods, of which one yielded high results.
To achieve those high results, we created a dataset by creating a Bag of Words from all
the reports, discarding data that was deemed unnecessary. We reduced the number of
features utilizing a feature selection algorithm and fed the remaining dataset to multiple ML
algorithms, allowing them to learn and explore patterns within the dataset and generate
models that can determine whether or not a newly observed file is dangerous. The model
that yielded the highest accuracy was the XGboost classifier, hitting 99.17 and ROC/AUC
0.9995, although RandomForest was very slightly below with an accuracy of 98.38 and
ROC/AUC 0.9985. We discussed potential limitations and weaknesses, while providing
plausible improvements in the future.
44
Botnet identification using Machine Learning
==PAGE:53==
Bibliography
[1]
Gulbadan Khehra and Sanjeev Sofat. “Botnet Detection Techniques: A Review”.
eng. In: Proceedings of the 2nd International Conference on Intelligent Computing
and Control Systems, Iciccs 2018 (2019), pp. 1319–1326. DOI: 10.1109/ICCONS.
2018.8663082.
[2]
Matija Stevanovic and Jens Myrup Pedersen. “Machine learning for identifying bot­
net network traffic”. eng. In: (2013).
[3]
Muhammad Qasim et al. Generation of AUB01 Dataset with Botnets Ground truth
and Algorithmic Analysis. Unpublished. Author email: qasim.phd@students.mcs.edu.pk.
[4]
Claudio Ardagna et al. ENISA Thread Landscape 2022. Nov. 2022. URL: https:
//www.enisa.europa.eu/publications/enisa-threat-landscape-2022.
[5]
Omer Yoachimik. Mantis ­ the most powerful botnet to date. Nov. 2022. URL: https:
//blog.cloudflare.com/mantis-botnet/.
[6]
Microsoft Defender Threat Intelligence. When Coin Miners Evolve, part 1: Expos­
ing lemonduck and LemonCat, modern mining malware infrastructure. Aug. 2021.
URL: https://www.microsoft.com/en-us/security/blog/2021/07/22/when-coin-
miners-evolve-part-1-exposing-lemonduck-and-lemoncat-modern-mining-malware-
infrastructure/.
[7]
Wisam A. Qader, Musa M. Ameen, and Bilal I. Ahmed. “An Overview of Bag of
Words;Importance, Implementation, Applications, and Challenges”. In: 2019 Inter­
national Engineering Conference (IEC). 2019, pp. 200–204. DOI: 10.1109/IEC47844.
2019.8950616.
[8]
Jacob Devlin et al. BERT: Pre­training of deep bidirectional transformers for lan­
guage understanding. eng. 2018.
[9]
Papers with code ­ bert: Pre­training of deep bidirectional Transformers for language
understanding. URL: https://paperswithcode.com/paper/bert-pre-training-of-deep-
bidirectional.
[10]
Ashish Vaswani et al. “Attention Is All You Need”. und. In: (2017), p. 15.
[11]
Supervised vs. unsupervised learning: What’s the difference? URL: https://www.
ibm.com/cloud/blog/supervised-vs-unsupervised-learning.
[12]
Rahil Shaikh. Cross validation explained: Evaluating estimator performance. Nov.
2018. URL: https://towardsdatascience.com/cross-validation-explained-evaluating-
estimator-performance-e51e5430ff85.
[13]
Xue Ying. “An Overview of Overfitting and its Solutions”. eng. In: Journal of Physics:
Conference Series 1168.2 (2019), p. 022022. ISSN: 17426596, 17426588. DOI:
10.1088/1742-6596/1168/2/022022.
[14]
Stuti Singh. Overfitting: Detection amp; prevention. Feb. 2020. URL: https://medium.
com/analytics-vidhya/overfitting-detection-prevention-848e6adeabf8.
[15]
Erin Bugbee Wilber and Jared. Logistic regression. URL: https://mlu-explain.github.
io/logistic-regression/.
[16]
Sklearn.linearmodel.logisticregression. URL: https://scikit-learn.org/stable/modules/
generated/sklearn.linear_model.LogisticRegression.html.
[17]
What is a decision tree. URL: https://www.ibm.com/topics/decision-trees.
[18]
1.10. decision trees. URL: https://scikit-learn.org/stable/modules/tree.html.
[19]
Sklearn.tree.decisiontreeclassifier. URL: https://scikit-learn.org/stable/modules/
generated/sklearn.tree.DecisionTreeClassifier.html#sklearn.tree.DecisionTreeClassifier.
Botnet identification using Machine Learning
45
==PAGE:54==
[20]
By: IBM Cloud Education. What is Random Forest? URL: https://www.ibm.com/
cloud/learn/random-forest.
[21]
Sklearn.ensemble.randomforestclassifier. URL: https : / / scikit - learn . org / stable /
modules/generated/sklearn.ensemble.RandomForestClassifier.html.
[22]
scikit­learn developers. Supervised Neural Network Models. https://scikit- learn.
org/stable/modules/neural_networks_supervised.html.
[23]
scikit­learn developers. MLPClassifier. https://scikit- learn.org/stable/modules/
generated/sklearn.neural_network.MLPClassifier.html.
[24]
Kashvi Taunk et al. “A brief review of nearest neighbor algorithm for learning and
classification”. eng. In: 2019 International Conference on Intelligent Computing and
Control Systems, Iccs 2019 (2019), pp. 1255–1260. DOI: 10.1109/ICCS45141.2019.
9065747.
[25]
scikit­learn developers. KNeighborsClassifier. https://scikit-learn.org/stable/modules/
generated/sklearn.neighbors.KNeighborsClassifier.html.
[26]
Tianqi Chen and Carlos Guestrin. “XGBoost: A scalable tree boosting system”. eng.
In: Proceedings of the Acm Sigkdd International Conference on Knowledge Discov­
ery and Data Mining 13­17­ (2016), pp. 785–794. DOI: 10.1145/2939672.2939785.
[27]
Tianqi Chen and Carlos Guestrin. XGBoost. https://github.com/dmlc/xgboost.
2016.
[28]
Jakub Czakon. 24 evaluation metrics for binary classification. Nov. 2022. URL: https:
//neptune.ai/blog/evaluation-metrics-binary-classification.
[29]
Sklearn f1score. URL: https://scikit-learn.org/stable/modules/generated/sklearn.
metrics.f1_score.html.
[30]
Sklearn metrics mcc. URL: https://scikit- learn.org/stable/modules/generated/
sklearn.metrics.matthews_corrcoef.html.
[31]
Sarang Narkhede. Understanding AUC ­ roc curve. June 2021. URL: https : / /
towardsdatascience.com/understanding-auc-roc-curve-68b2303cc9c5.
[32]
Tzy Shiah Wang et al. “DBod: Clustering and detecting DGA­based botnets using
DNS traffic analysis”. eng. In: Computers and Security 64 (2017), pp. 1–15. ISSN:
18726208, 01674048. DOI: 10.1016/j.cose.2016.10.001.
[33]
URL: https://www.spamhaus.org/news/article/793/spamhaus-botnet-threat-report-
2019.
[34]
Mohammad Alauthaman et al. “A P2P Botnet detection scheme based on decision
tree and adaptive multilayer neural networks”. eng. In: Neural Computing and Ap­
plications 29.11 (2018), pp. 991–1004. ISSN: 14333058, 09410643. DOI: 10.1007/
s00521-016-2564-5.
[35]
Faculty of Engineering. URL: https://www.uvic.ca/ecs/ece/isot/assets/docs/isot-
datase.pdf.
[36]
Ali Shiravi et al. “Toward developing a systematic approach to generate bench­
mark datasets for intrusion detection”. eng. In: Computers and Security 31.3 (2012),
pp. 357–374. ISSN: 18726208, 01674048. DOI: 10.1016/j.cose.2011.12.012.
[37]
S. García et al. “An empirical comparison of botnet detection methods”. eng. In:
Computers and Security 45 (2014), pp. 100–123. ISSN: 18726208, 01674048. DOI:
10.1016/j.cose.2014.05.011.
[38]
Giovanni Apruzzese and Michele Colajanni. “Evading botnet detectors based on
flows and random forest with adversarial samples”. eng. In: Nca 2018 ­ 2018 Ieee
17th International Symposium on Network Computing and Applications (2018), p. 8548327.
DOI: 10.1109/NCA.2018.8548327.
[39]
Virustotal ­ online malware analysis platform. URL: https://www.virustotal.com/.
[40]
Figthing malware and botnets. URL: https://abuse.ch/.
46
Botnet identification using Machine Learning
==PAGE:55==
[41]
Interactive online malware sandbox. URL: https://any.run/.
[42]
github. GitHub. 2020. URL: https://github.com/.
[43]
Cuckoosandbox. URL: https://github.com/cuckoosandbox/cuckoo.
[44]
JSON ­ JSON encoder and decoder. URL: https://docs.python.org/3/library/json.
html.
[45]
Sorin Soviany and Cristina Soviany. “Feature Engineering”. eng. In: Principles of
Data Science (2020), pp. 79–103. DOI: 10.1007/978-3-030-43981-1_5.
[46]
CountVectorizer. URL: https://scikit-learn.org/stable/modules/generated/sklearn.
feature_extraction.text.CountVectorizer.html.
[47]
The pandas development team. pandas­dev/pandas: Pandas. Version latest. Feb.
2020. DOI: 10.5281/zenodo.3509134. URL: https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.3509134.
[48]
PyTorch team. PyTorch: An open source machine learning framework. https : / /
pytorch.org/. 2021.
[49]
NVIDIA Corporation. CUDA Toolkit 11.2. https://developer.nvidia.com/cuda-11.2.0-
download-archive. 2021.
[50]
NVIDIA Corporation. cuDNN. https://developer.nvidia.com/cudnn. 2021.
[51]
Hugging Face. BERT­base­uncased: Pre­trained English language model for natu­
ral language processing tasks. https://huggingface.co/bert-base-uncased. 2020.
[52]
Thomas Wolf et al. huggingface/transformers. URL: https://github.com/huggingface/
transformers.
[53]
permutation feature importance. URL: https://scikit- learn.org/stable/modules/
permutation_importance.html.
[54]
BayesSearchCV. URL: https://scikit-optimize.github.io/stable/modules/generated/
skopt.BayesSearchCV.html.
[55]
GridSearchCV. URL: https://scikit- learn.org/stable/modules/generated/sklearn.
model_selection.GridSearchCV.html.
[56]
Sayak Paul. Bayesian hyperparameter optimization. Jan. 2020. URL: https://wandb.
ai/site/articles/bayesian-hyperparameter-optimization-a-primer.
[57]
Chuan Guo et al. “On calibration of modern neural networks”. eng. In: 34th Interna­
tional Conference on Machine Learning, Icml 2017 3 (2017), pp. 2130–2143.
[58]
Daniel Martin. Hardening cuckoo sandbox against VM aware malware. URL: https:
//cybersecurity.att.com/blogs/labs-research/hardening-cuckoo-sandbox-against-vm-
aware-malware.
Botnet identification using Machine Learning
47
==PAGE:56==
The rising interconnectivity and reliance on the Internet have exposed us to several cyber risks, in­
cluding malware, phishing attacks, and botnets. Traditionally, botnet detection has depended on
signature­based techniques, which are ineffective at detecting new or novel threats. Using machine
learning techniques, we provide an alternate method for botnet identification in this research. Our
objective is to identify natural language processing (NLP) approaches that can be used to extract fea­
tures from sandbox­generated reports, develop datasets on which machine learning algorithms can
train to detect botnet malware, and evaluate the viability of employing NLP for this job. Our results
demonstrate that NLP approaches can be utilized effectively for feature extraction and that machine
learning algorithms, notably the XGboost classifier, has given high results in botnet detection, with
an accuracy of 99.17% and ROC/AUC of 0.9995.
Technical
University of
Denmark
Building 324
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
https://www.compute.dtu.dk/
