==PAGE:1==
Design, fabrication and characterization of
superwetting nanostructured surfaces
Master Thesis
DTU Nanolab
National Center for Nanofabrication and Characterisation
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Design, fabrication and characterization of superwetting nanostructured sur-
faces
Master Thesis
28. January 2023
By:
Mathias V. Adelmark
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus-
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title,
etc.
Cover photo:
Published by:
DTU, National Center for Nanofabrication and Characterisation, Ørsteds
Plads, Building 347 East, 2800 Kongens Lyngby Denmark
https://www.nanolab.dtu.dk
ISSN:
[0000-0000] (electronic version)
ISBN:
[000-00-0000-000-0] (electronic version)
ISSN:
[0000-0000] (printed version)
ISBN:
[000-00-0000-000-0] (printed version)
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over five months at DTU Nanolab, National Center for
Nanofabrication and Characterisation at the Technical University of Denmark, DTU, for
the degree Master of Engineering in Physics and Nanotechnology.
Author:
Mathias V. Adelmark
s166365
Signature
Date
ii
Master Thesis
28.01.2023
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
This master thesis is a sub-project of the Light Reconfigurable Nano-Fluidics project
(LiRN), which aims to explore open channel flow control for liquids on nanostructured
thin film metal-oxide surfaces[1]. This project focuses on fabrication options for nanopil-
lar structured surfaces using DUV-Lithography, Dry-Etching, Atomic Layer Deposition
(ALD) and Low-Pressure Chemical Vapor Deposition (LPCVD).
The substrate chosen for fabrication is based on a silicon wafer, where a photo-resist mask
is used for pattern transfer by etching silicon. In collaboration with the Master Thesis
Project of Jesper Navne[2], suitable metal-oxides were chosen based on ALD precursor
limitations and non-structured sample investigation. The two materials TiO2 and ZnO
were chosen for thin film deposition.
Through characterisation of the DUV-fabricated resist pattern, a choice was made for
reticle optimisation. The new design was chosen through simulations of aerial images,
NILS, bossung plots and process windows. Finally, a qualitative investigation of the new
reticle was made through a dose and focus test.
Scanning Electron Microscopy (SEM) was used throughout the fabrication to characterise
and evaluate the different steps. Further thin film deposition was investigated on the flat
samples using ellipsometry as an optical non-destructive solution to wafer cleaving.
The project concluded with a characterisation of patterned flow on structured samples.
This characterisation included a pre-established annealing process, a DUV exposure and
a zoom microscope to record droplet placement and evolution of hemiwicking- and surface
flow.
By exploring the fabrication options for patterned nanopillar structured surfaces, LiRN
is one step closer to the goal of open-channel flow for reusable microfluidics. The Next
step for fabrication option explorations is investigating a pillar diameter correction layer
deposited by low-pressure chemical vapour deposition and its effect on Photo-Induced
Hydrophilicity (PIH).
Master Thesis
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgement
I want to express my gratitude to Jesper Navne for his support throughout my Masters at
DTU. I am truly thankful to have met someone with whom I share many happy moments
and who always showed support in difficult times.
Thanks likewise to my supervisor Rafael Taboryski, for his continued participation in this
project. He would always be available for theoretical discussions and suggest multiple
experiments to perform.
My gratitude to supervisor Matthias Keil for introducing simulated and experimental DUV
exposure. To Rucha Anil Deshpande for sharing her knowledge regarding optical setups.
To Ada-Ioana for lending an ear to either frustration or excitement outbursts.
I thank all members of the Polymic group at DTU Nanolab for fruitful discussions and
ideas on how to commence my work.
Finally, I thank everyone at DTU Nanolab for processing information, equipment training
and general help inside the cleanroom.
iv
Master Thesis
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Approval
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgement
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Background and Motivation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Project overview . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2
Fabrication Overview
4
2.1
Initial process Flow . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.2
First change . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.3
Final process flow . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
3
Methods and Theory
7
3.1
Hemiwicking Flow Condition
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
3.2
Lithography . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
3.3
Etching
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
3.4
Thin Film Deposition
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3.5
Characterization
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
4
Results
22
4.1
Reticle design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
4.2
Simulations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
4.3
Dose Test . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
4.4
Reticle Comparison . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
4.5
Etch process . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
4.6
LPCVD deposition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
4.7
ALD 2 Deposition Rate
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
4.8
Thin Film Coverage
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
4.9
Flow characterisation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
5
Discussion
52
5.1
Reticle Simulations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
5.2
Lithography . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
5.3
Etching
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
5.4
Thin Film Deposition
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
5.5
Flow characterisation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
6
Conclusion
54
7
Outlook
54
8
Project plan
55
A Appendix: Process Flow
ii
B Appendix: Reticle Simulation
iii
C Appendix: Dose Test
vii
D Appendix: Extra figures
xi
Master Thesis
v
==PAGE:8==
==PAGE:9==
Introduction
1
Introduction
1.1
Background and Motivation
The world needs a shift towards greener and more sustainable solution to secure the
future life on earth[3]. Companies and organisations advance forward and wish to develop
and implement such changes[3][4].
The reduction of plastic is one of the more recent
discussions and many alternatives have been found in bamboo, paper and metal[5]. It
has been acknowledged that single use items should be reduced and materials should be
reusable.
Microfluidics is the science which studies the behavior of fluids through micro-channels and
refers to technology with manufactured micro-miniaturized devices containing capillaries
and compartments which geometrically restrain fluids flow[6]. The fluidics is linked to
the macro environment through holes with the purpose of injection and extraction to
the devise. Fluids are directed, mixed, separated or manipulated to attain multiplexing,
automation and high throughput. Such a channel system device must be accurate for
desired features such as lab-on-chip, DNA analysis, pathogen detection etc. to be obtained.
The fabrication of these requires either molding of[7] or engraving in[8] polymer for the
specific device, making them single use devices inflexible to changes.
Figure 1: A schematic showing a microfluidic chip with a micropillar
array. (a) denotes medium inlets, (b) denotes lateral channel, (c) denotes
waste reservoirs, (d) is the cell inlet and (e) denotes the cell culture
chamber, (f) is a micropillar and (g) denotes a mixture of cells and
extracellular matrix mimics. Image from Chinese Journal of Analytical
Chemistry[9].
Microfluidics has several benefits compared to a conventional sized system and exploits
the physical properties of fluids at a micro-scale[10]. Many operations can be co-executed
shortening the experiment time, while also reducing the use of chemicals, reagents and
samples to a minimum[11]. Microfluidics have a diverse set of asset: faster reaction time,
enhanced analytical sensitivity, enhanced temperature control, portability, easier automa-
tion and parallelization and integration of lab routines in one device. Furthermore, it does
not involve the use of various costly equipment[10][12].
Light Reconfigurable Nano-fluidics (LiRN-fluidics) aim to explore the possibilities for a
nanostructured reconfigurable surface which makes use of capillary actions triggered by
UV-light to drive an aqueous flow on the surface[1]. The channel footprint will be limited
only by the droplet reservoir size, light focusing and surface structure size. With the use of
nano-litter sputters it is anticipated that a 6’inch wafer may hold up to half a million foot-
prints[1]. The principle of pattern design by UV-illumination is founded in the material
properties of certain thin-film metal oxides, which may increase their hydrophilicity when
Master Thesis
1
==PAGE:10==
Introduction
exposed[13][14][15]. Opposite of conventional fluidics the induced pattern is not perma-
nent, as it has been proven that annealing may restore the initial surface wettability[15].
The patterned surface is composed of nano-pillars, initially placed in a rectangular array
but later changed to a hexagonal array for increased surface-area. Exposing the surface
to patterned UV-light introduce open-plate micro-channels to the surface able to control
fluids through hydrophilicity and hemiwicking flow prewetting driven by capillary forces.
This open-channel system will reduce the bulkiness of the traditional inlet and outlet
ports[1], and since the surface is reconfigurable through annealing, the else inflexible cap-
illary systems can be changed as needed.
Figure 2: a) exposure of UV-light in specific pattern on top of nanopil-
lar array for open channel definition to liquid deposited by a liquid
dispenser. b) s Surface flow in defined pattern allowing for flow control.
c) Close-up of hemiwicking flow by Laplace presure in the metasurface.
Image from Light Reconfigurable Nano-fluidics - LiRN-fluidics[1].
2
Master Thesis
==PAGE:11==
Introduction
1.2
Project overview
To comprehend the scope of this project it is important to have knowledge of the work
prior[16][17] and simultaneous investigations[2].
Hypothesis
The objective of this project can be summarised as an investigation for insight in the
following points.
• It is possible to design a nanostructured surface that will support superwetting for
a given material contact angle.
• The wetting properties may be supported by silicon wafers coated with ALD thinfilm
metal oxides
• The fabrication of the structured samples may be performed by DUV-lithography,
Dry-etch pattern transfer and thin film deposition by ALD
• Steps of thin film chemical vapor deposition may be used in the material stack.
• The different fabrication steps may be characterised by SEM and Ellipsometry.
• The simulation of a given retticle align with real life fabrication results.
• A change in reticle for DUV-Lithography may improve the fabrication of structured
samples.
• A functional characterization of nanopillar structured sample will show a photoin-
duced effect from UV-exposure which is comparable to non-structured sample with
similar thin film thickness.
Preliminary work
This project make use of theory and investigations made by Prof. Rafael Taboryski during
his doctor technices thesis[13]. His work describes the engineering of wetting properties
for solid surfaces and evolved into the LiRN-fludics project[1].
To investigate, reproduce and advance this work, two special courses have been made in
collaboration with J. Navne, investigating the photocatalytic surface wetting for a selection
of metaloxides deposited by ALD[16][17].
Both projects investigated the properties of
thinfilms on non-structured samples to lay a foundation for our master thesis. During
the courses the contact angle reduction of TiO2 and ZnO was deemed possible. Likewise
recovery by annealing was shown for TiO2.
Parallel work
This thesis is written in parallel with the master thesis of J. Navne, with focus on in-depth
characterisation of both structured and non-structured thin film metal oxide surfaces[2].
Results will be referenced throughout the sections, and I encourage any reader of this
thesis to read the thesis of J. Navne.
Master Thesis
3
==PAGE:12==
Fabrication Overview
2
Fabrication Overview
The entirety of this thesis is structured around the process flow for fabrication which
evolved throughout the project with the optimisation of processes.
2.1
Initial process Flow
The initial process flow was determined from unpublished preliminary work by Rucha Anil
Deshpande. The goal of the flow was a secure way of nanopillar fabrication, similar to
that of Maria Serra Gonz´alez during her Masters Thesis Project [18]. Figure 3 shows a
schematic of the process flow. This flow has three process steps: Lithography, Etching
and Thin Film Deposition.
Figure 3: The initial flow is divided into three main groups Lithography
(Blue), Etching (Red) and Thin Film Deposition (Green). Each picture
shown relates to a different process in the fabrication group.
During the lithography step, the acquired wafer is first spin-coated with a layer of DUV42s-
6, effectively functioning as a Backside Antireflective Coating (BARC). On top of this
coating, a spin-coating of KRF m230Y takes place, serving as the DUV resist.
After
resist coating, the wafer is loaded into the DUV stepper for patterned exposure using the
reticle NLAB11-HEXCROSS-340-350-360 (NL11). This processing step concludes with
development of the newly exposed pattern using TMAH[19].
The wafer is limited by size since the advanced silicon etch (ASE) tool only accepts wafers
of size 4’inch (100mm). The patterned 6’inch (150mm) wafer from lithography is first
cleaved into quarter wafers, where it is installed on a 4’inch carrier wafer using crystal
bonding. The carrier wafer was coated with a layer of SiO2 such that it would not interfere
with the dry etch process of silicon. The carrier wafer is then installed in the ASE, whereas
a BARC etch is performed, followed by the silicon etch. The process continues by detaching
the sample from the carrier wafer and concludes with a resist strip using remover 1165,
IPA and DI-water, followed by plasma ashing for resist removal[19].
4
Master Thesis
==PAGE:13==
Fabrication Overview
The thin film deposition group covers the metal oxide deposition using ALD[19]. The
layer thickness is determined from a theoretical point of view to obtain the best aspect
ratio[2]. After deposition, the nanostructured pattern is ready to be characterised.
2.2
First change
The first change occurred near the project’s start when the etching tool was changed from
ASE to pegasus 3. Since pegasus 3 handles 6’inch (150mm) wafers, the need for cleaving
and carrier wafers disappeared. Furthermore, then it was determined that the resist strip
had little effect, and the total resist removal was to be made by Plasma ashing. The
updated process flow can be seen in figure 4.
Figure 4: The secondary flow is divided into three main groups
Lithography (Blue), Etching (Red) and Thin Film Deposition
(Green). Each picture shown relates to a different process in
the fabrication group.
2.3
Final process flow
The final process flow, made changes to lithography and thin film deposition. The intro-
duction of a new pattern and reticle updated the DUV exposure step. The new reticle
used is named NLAB14-LIRN-HEXCROSS-360P140120 and makes for an optimised resist
pattern.
Thin film deposition includes an LPCVD deposition step of amorphous silicon to correct
the diameter of the silicon pillar.
This step is included just before ALD and requires
an additional RCA cleaning step due to restrictions from Nanolab for using the LPCVD
6’inch oven. The final process flow can be seen in figure 5.
Master Thesis
5
==PAGE:14==
Fabrication Overview
Figure 5:
The final flow is divided into three main groups
Lithography (Blue), Etching (Red) and Thin Film Deposition
(Green). Each picture shown relates to a different process in
the fabrication group.
6
Master Thesis
==PAGE:15==
Methods and Theory
3
Methods and Theory
This thesis assumes a basic knowledge of cleanroom condi-
tions and will only introduce and discuss the methods used
to fabricate a nano-structured surface. The fabrication is
split into three groups: lithography, etching and thin film
deposition.
Additionally, this chapter will conclude with an introduc-
tion to the underlying theory of the different tools and
methods used to characterise the surface both during and
after fabrication.
3.1
Hemiwicking Flow Condition
As mentioned, photo-induced hydrophilicity may be induced in metal oxides by exposure
to UV light[13][14][15].
A nano-pillar structured surface coated with metal-oxide may
feature a photo-induced provocation of hemiwicking flow between pillars. Depending on
the curvature, the hemiwicking flow is driven by Laplace pressure at the liquid front
menisci[20].
The spacing between pillars and the inherent contact angle between the
surface and liquid can control this curvature[1][13].
R1
d =
1
4
h
1 −
  a
d
2 −
  b
d
2i
cos θγ −b
d
(1)
R2
d =
  b
2d
2 +
  h
d
2
2h
d cos θγ −b
d sin θγ
(2)
Here the pitch (a), the pillar diameter (d), the height (h) and the distance between pillars
(b) are determined through fabrication. The condition for hemiwicking flow follows the
same principles as capillary flows in that it requires a negative Laplace pressure (∆P)[13].
This pressure can be calculated from the induced contact angle (θγ), the surface tension
for the liquid gas interface γ, and the liquid front meniscus curvature in the x-y plane (R1)
and z plane (R2).
∆P = γ
sin θγ
R1
−1
R2

(3)
The lines in figure 6 show the condition for dimension to the surface pillars, where flow is
theoretically possible for dimensions below lines of corresponding inherent contact angle.
In the case of pillars fabricated with parameters indicated by the grey area, the flow will
occur if the contact angle is lowered to below 40°, but for safety the goal is to decrease the
contact angle to below 35°. The figure also shows the impossibility of hemiwicking flow
for contact angles above 50°.
Master Thesis
7
==PAGE:16==
Methods and Theory
Figure 6: (a,b) Display of flow edge in hexagonal pillar array with in-
cluded parameter placement. The flow is determined by the Laplace
pressure becoming negative. The Laplace pressure is connected to the
pillar dimensions. (c) For a given contact angle Θγ, hemiwicking flow
will occur for the parameter space below the corresponding curve. Fig-
ure from Light Reconfigurable Nano-fluidics - LiRN-fluidics by Rafael
Taboryski[1].
Since the pillars will be placed in a hexagonal pattern with pitch 360nm, it can easily
be determined that the optimum pillar dimension comes with a diameter of d =
a
1.2 =
360 nm
1.2
= 300 nm and a height of h = d = 300 nm.
3.2
Lithography
At DTU Nanolab, four types of lithography are available for pattern transfer: UV, DUV,
E-beam, and Nano Imprint[19]. This project uses optical lithography and will not go into
detail on E-beam and Nano Imprint lithography.
Optical lithography uses UV lamps or UV laser to expose a pattern into resist through
a photomask. The practice is composed of 3 steps: Spin-coating, exposure and develop-
ment[21][22].
Spin-Coating
The first step of lithography is introducing a media to transfer the pattern, namely, resist.
A typical way of depositing is through spin-coating of a wet resist, figure 7. Here the wafer
is rotated at high speed, and the resist is poured into the middle. This creates a smooth
homogeneous coverage of the wafer[21][23], with the deposited thickness (t) dependent on
viscosity (η) and spin speed (ω)[22].
t ≈ηω−1
2
(4)
The wet resist contains three components: solvent, inactive resin and a photo-active com-
pound. After the spin-coating, the resist film has a residual solvent concentration of 10% -
15%, depending on film thickness and solvent choice[22]. Before the patterning can begin,
a soft bake is done to reduce the residual solvent content resulting in many benefices[24].
8
Master Thesis
==PAGE:17==
Methods and Theory
First, in the case of contact mask exposure, sticking to the mask is prevented, and con-
tamination is limited. It minimises the dark erosion occurring in positive resists during
development, prevents the evaporation bubbling and increases the softening point for sub-
sequent thermal processes. Finally, soft bake increases the resist adhesion to the wafer
and makes it such that multiple resists can be spun on top of each other without causing
damage. This is particularly important for this process since a BARC layer is introduced
before the DUV resist. The two resist layers were deposited on a Double-Side Polished
(DSP) 6’inch silicon wafer, as it have a lower surface roughness than Single-Side Polished
(SSP) 6’inch silicon wafers, found by Matthias Keil in unpublished results.
Figure 7: The four steps of the spin coating process. (Deposition) The
wafer is aligned to resist deposition in the centre. Slow rotation occurs
while resist is deposited. (Spin up) Acceleration from the slow rotation
during deposition preparing for a spin-off. (Spin-off) High rpm to create
a uniform thin layer of resist, where excess resist is flung off the wafer.
(Soft Bake) soft bake of the resist coating to remove solvent for harden-
ing.
The resist must be defect-free for the lithography process, especially when working with
micro- and nanoscale patterning. It is essential to run a test wafer before the process,
as possible defects from the resist, chuck, and process can be removed before sample
processing[19]. Multiple defects can occur, many of which can be prevented by optimising
and automating the spin coating process.
Comets may occur on the surface due to multiple circum-
stances, figure 8, such as high acceleration speed or fluid
deposition off-centre.
With an automated process, with
machinery aligning and optimising spin speeds, these can
be eliminated as the cause. Most commonly, comets oc-
cur when larger particles are present at the surface, as the
resist will experience drag during spin-off[24][25].
Figure 8:
Comet defects in resist il-
lustrated as white lines.
Master Thesis
9
==PAGE:18==
Methods and Theory
DUV Patterning
Figure 9 depict a schematic of the DUV patterning process of resist-coated silicon wafers.
The method is projection lithography, where DUV light is sent through a condenser lens
interfering with a mask, known as a reticle. The interfering causes diffraction into a far-
field shadow image off different orders. An objection lens corrects collected orders back
onto the wafer for the pattern transfer. A minimum of two orders, 0 and 1, must be
captured to transfer pattern dimensions. This method decreases the reticle pattern by a
factor of 5:1[23].
The different lenses represent an illumination system not necessarily containing a single
lens but rather a series of lens elements, either glass (Refractive), mirrors (reflective)
or other elements with the purpose of delivering light to a specific area with sufficient
intensity. The reticle is a transparent substrate with a pattern formed, often as an opaque
film[22][23].
Figure 9: DUV projection lithography setup, displaying the traveling
of light between source and wafer. At interference with reticle, light is
diffracted into different orders. The objective lens collects multiple of
these, and with it pattern dimension information.
Projection lithography can be described by Fraunhofer diffraction and evaluated by Fourier
optics. When the converged light from the condenser lens interferes with the mask, the E-
field transmittance can be mapped using a mathematical formula. This grating function,
G(x, y), will be the result of the transmitted light, tm, and the convoluted electric field
amplitude of incident light, Ei[23].
G(x, y) = Ei(x, y) · tm(x, y)
(5)
For a simple glass chrome mask, the transmittance will be tm = 1 for the glass and tm = 0
for the chrome. Letting x-y be the diffraction plane and z be the distance to the objective
lens, with the assumption of monochromatic light of wavelength λ, the resulting light can
10
Master Thesis
==PAGE:19==
Methods and Theory
be described using the Fraunhofer diffraction integral[23], equation 6.
Tm(fx, fy) =
Z
∞
−∞
Z
∞
−∞
dx dy G(x, y)e−2πi(fxx+fyy)
(6)
Where fx and fy is the spatial frequencies. This is a Fourier transformation of the incident
light. Hence the diffraction pattern is a Fourier transformation of the mask pattern trans-
mittance. The interference fringes become infinitely narrow for an infinitely propagating
pattern, creating very narrow diffraction points. The brightest spot is the 0th-order. Here
the light propagates directly from the mask to the objective lens and hence is not bent.
Next to it on both sides is the 1st-order diffraction, containing information regarding the
mask pitch and their relative positions, which will be used to reproduce the image of the
mask. At least two diffraction orders must be transferred to the objective lens to form a
true image of the mask. In addition to the first order, many higher orders exist, though
due to the distance between the mask and the objective lens, it is often only these two
orders with a low enough angle to hit the objective lens[23].
To reform the desired pattern, an inverse Fourier transform is needed. Luckily lenses are
designed to function in precisely that way. The final image can be described with the use of
this inverse Fourier transformation and the pupil function of the lens, P(fx, fy), equation
7. The pupil function is defined as the transmittance of the lens from the entrance pupil
to the exit pupil[23].
E(x, y) = F−1 {Tm(fx, fy) · Pm(fx, fy)}
(7)
Resolution may be defined as ”The smallest feature of a given type that can be printed with
acceptable quality and control,” i.e. resolution is often described as the smallest feature
of a given type that meets a given depth-of-focus requirement. The critical dimension is
defined as the size of a printed feature in resist measured at a specific height above the
substrate[23].
In real-world fabrication, the light source is hardly ideal, meaning that the incoming light
has multiple diffraction angles. This lighting gives a partially coherent illumination result
σ, translating to the source and lens diameter ratio.
It is defined as the sine of the
half-angle of the illumination cone divided by the numerical aperture[23].
σ = n sin θmax
NA
= Dsource
Dlens
(8)
Where NA is the numerical aperture of the objective lens, θmax is the maximum angle, and
n is the refractive index of the surrounding medium, typically air with n = 1. Since the
NA is defined as the sine of the maximum half-angle of diffracted light that can enter the
lens multiplied by the index of refraction of the surrounding medium, we may generalise
an approximate resolution expression[23][26].
R = k1
λ
NA
(9)
Where k1 =
1
2(σ+1) represents a scaling of the resolution since the wavelength, and numer-
ical aperture is defined by equipment.
Master Thesis
11
==PAGE:20==
Methods and Theory
Reticle Design
A simple way of improving resolution can be achieved by off-axis illumination, with the
three significant types being dipole, quadrupole and annular illumination[23]. This project
uses dipole off-axis illumination combined with a triple cross exposure reticle setup to
create nanopillars. Off-axis illumination using two-beam imaging is theoretically better at
obtaining resolution with the scaling factor reducing to merely k1 = 0.25.
R = 0.25 λ
NA
(10)
Throughout the project, two different reticles were used. Initially, the reticle designed
and used during the master thesis of Maria Serra Gonz´alez was used to fabricate the first
iteration of pillars[18]. As the intial reticle was optimized for small diameter pillars, a new
reticle was simulated and manufactured for the correct size and width of the pillars.
The simulated design was kept similar by only varying the linewidth and square size. The
lines running through each square are an assist feature necessary to the structure so as not
to create pyramid shapes in the resist. M. Keil found this result in a previous simulation,
and no further investigations were made in this project. An illustration of the pattern is
seen in figure 10 and figure 11.
Four criteria were used to evaluate the simulations of the new reticle design. The Aerial
image Contrast (AIC) describes the modulation degree in the aerial image when normalised
to 1. The image contrast is defined by determining the maximum and minimum light
intensity and then calculating the contrast[27]. An indication can be found in figure 12
AIC = Imax −Imin
Imax + Imin
(11)
Under ideal conditions, the maximum intensity should be much larger than the minimum
intensity giving a contrast approaching AIC = 1. AIC suffers from problems when applied
to lithography images since it is defined for only equal lines and spaces. Furthermore, the
AIC is only useful near the resolution limit since large features would, regardless of shape,
have a AIC = 1 and AIC is not directly related to practical metrics of lithography qual-
ity[23]. The slope of the edge region is essential from this AIC image, as this determines
the contrast between light and dark areas in the exposure. Hence the steeper the intensity
transition, the better the photo-resist edge will be defined.
12
Master Thesis
==PAGE:21==
Methods and Theory
Figure 10: Simulated pattern for reticle design. The three patterns (A),
(B) and (C) will be stacked for a triple-cross exposure, figure 11. On
each of the patterns, a denotes the linewidth, b denotes the square width
and c denotes the pitch. While a and b are varied c is kept at 360nm.
Figure 11: Tripple cross exposure pattern from reticle design in figure
10. The exposure stacking form an hexagonal array of pillars.
Master Thesis
13
==PAGE:22==
Methods and Theory
The second metric is the Normalised Image Log Slope (NILS). The normalisation is im-
portant, as one could double the light intensity improving the slope, while image quality
will not be improved. The position coordinate can likewise be normalised by multiplying
the log slope by the nominal linewidth w.
NILS = wd ln I
dx
(12)
NILS has proven to be a powerful tool for lithography simulations, and a high value
correlates to a large sidewall angle and large latitude in exposure dose, i.e. the dose range
that keeps the linewidth in a specific limit. Obtaining a good AIC and NILS correlates to
a flat curve when varying the focus during exposure. This is important as focus variations
occur depending on wafer spot exposure. Under perfect conditions, the pattern in the
centre of the wafer should be identical to the pattern at the edge of the wafer[23].
Figure 12: Aerial image obtained through simulations for pitch 360 nm,
square size 210 nm and linewidth 140. The coloured lines correspond
to a shift in focus from -1.5 to 0.0. The measurements of Aerial Image
Contrast (AIC) is indicated as the distance between the minimum and
maximum intensity. The Normalized Image Log Slope (NILS) is in this
case obtained for the slope at 240 nm.
14
Master Thesis
==PAGE:23==
Methods and Theory
The only way to judge whether the effect of focus depends on exposure dose is to simulate
these two simultaneously.
The corresponding plot is a Bossung plot, which describes
the change in critical dimension dependent on focus for various doses. In this plot, it is
essential to know that closely packed flat curves is the optimal result since it states that
the pattern after exposure has a low dependency on dose and focus[26][23].
Finally, a plot describing the process window is evaluated from the simulation. The process
window describes for which focus-exposure parameters results in acceptable patterns. For
a set critical dimension, the exposure dose vs focus is simulated for ±10% of CD. the
innermost rectangle is then fitted for the largest possible area with a dose variation of 3%.
Evaluation gives a range of the respective errors where the pattern can be expected to
provide the desired result[26][23].
Development
After exposure, the pattern is not yet ready to be developed.
First, a post-exposure
bake (PEB) must be initiated. The PEB completes the photo-reaction introduced during
exposure for a resist in which the photochemistry is a catalytic process.
Without it,
the resist film would develop very slowly or not. For a negative resist, the PEB carry
out the cross-linking, rendering the exposed areas insoluble in the developer. Skipping
or forgetting the PEB leads to the under-development of positive tone resists and full
development (no pattern) of negative tone resist[21][28].
The development of the exposed pattern functions by removing the most soluble part of
the resist while keeping the non-soluble part intact. Multiple effects can occur during de-
velopment, such as under-development, dark erosion and scumming. Under-development
is clearly seen by resist remains on the wafer. To combat this, development time or ex-
posure dose is increased. Dark erosion is where the developer attacks the pattern itself,
resulting in thinner resist, larger gaps and thinner lines. To reduce this effect, one should
minimize the development time, optimize the soft bake parameter for a positive resist or
increase the dose for a negative resist. Finally, scumming is seen as resist residue left of
the substrate, looking like a thin layer of scum. Scumming itself is entirely substrate and
developer dependent. [24]
Master Thesis
15
==PAGE:24==
Methods and Theory
3.3
Etching
Etching is a key technology in silicon fabrication and describes the art of removing material
following a specific lithography pattern. It is a combination of anisotropic and isotropic
processes, with a tendency to lean into one of the two categories more than the other.
This project uses anisotropically pattern transfer, forming strait pillars with no undercut.
Sidewall protection is included in the etching by performing an alternation between depo-
sition, removal and etching multiple times (DREM - the Bosch sequence). This protection
drastically improves the directionality of the etch process[22][29][30].
Bosch process
The Bosch process is a dry etch process, which improves the anisotropy by splitting the
process into multiple steps, which are cyclically repeated. The most basic of the Bosch
process is a two-step deposition and etching process. Research has improved the process
by splitting the etch process so that the deposited protective layer is removed near the
bottom before the etch starts. The process is known as the DREM process for Deposition,
Removal, and Etching multiple times, perfectly describing the cycle of the process[29][30].
Figure 13: The three steps included in the DREM cycle. (a) Deposition
of a passivisation layer showed by the thin green film.
(b) Removal
of horizontal protection with the use of SF6 and bias for acceleration.
(c) Etching of silicon by reaction between SF6 and exposed silicon. (d)
Repetition multiple times to isotropic etching.
16
Master Thesis
==PAGE:25==
Methods and Theory
The first step is depositing a passivisation layer on the sidewalls, bottom and surface of
the patterned wafer topside. Typically for etching in silicon fluorocarbon, C4F8, is used
as the deposition gas. The gas breaks down due to the plasma creating a thin layer of
CF2 on the surface of the structures.
The removal step opens up etch sites by removing the horizontal protection while keep-
ing sidewall protection intact. Typically the gas SF6 is accelerated towards the surface,
breaking down the passivisation layer to expose silicon. Gas acceleration requires a high
platen power to create a bias towards the surface.
The etching step likewise uses SF6 making it react with the surface to form SiF4 gas. The
reaction uses exposed silicon to create SiF4, effectively etching away at the surface. The
reaction product is then pumped out of the chamber. One can increase the SF6 flow to
increase the etch rate.
Since the last step involves a chemical reaction with a gas component, the etching will
occur at all sites, resulting in a slight undercut. However, with the proper parameter
settings, the developed scallops can be reduced such that they are almost invisible. By
repeating the passivisation step, a new layer of sidewall protection can be formed, creating
a very directional etch in Si, leading to high aspect ratio structures.
A further advancement of the process would be to include an ashing step in the DREM
cycle, creating the DREAM cycle. After each cycle, the ashing would remove the pas-
sivisation layer so that clogging near the wafer surface would not appear at a high cycle
count. However, it was not included since ashing would remove some of the resist-mask.
Since the etch is relatively short, the extra complication would not benefit the process
considerably[29][30].
Plasma Ashing
Plasma ashing is an etching process that removes organic matter, such as photoresist, from
a wafer surface. Where plasma etches involve ion bombardment to remove the material
with selectivity towards the substrate, plasma ash is selective towards the polymer on
top. The inorganic matter will produce a byproduct of water vapour and volatile carbon
oxides known as ash. Afterwards, byproducts are pumped away using the vacuum pump
in the plasma asher.
Another difference between etching and ashing is the operating
temperature. Etching processes occur at low temperatures (0°C), where plasma ashing
has a significantly higher temperature[19].
At DTU Nanolab, plasma ashing for photoresist removal is done using oxygen and nitrogen
as the reactive species. Typically oxygen plasma is used in this project to remove the DUV
resist from the dry etch process.
Another application of the asher is descumming. The power, gas flow and time are reduced
significantly to not damage the pattern but only remove the tiny remainder of resist in
the crevices.
Master Thesis
17
==PAGE:26==
Methods and Theory
3.4
Thin Film Deposition
Thin film deposition describes coating a substrate with a thin layer of material such as
metal, compounds and oxides. The thin film coating can be deposited to alter or improve
the performance of a substrate.
Different thin film deposition methods exist, and no
technique fits all applications, meaning the choice should be configured based on your
sample needs.
3.4.1
LPCVD
LPCVD is a thin film deposition technique that uses high temperature and low pressure
to deposit a thin film layer on top of the surface. The overall reaction can be described as
a gas species reacting with a heated surface in a vacuum chamber, causing the production
of a solid phase material. Gas is sent into the vacuum chamber, where it starts to react,
producing reactive species and by-products. The reactive species are transported to the
surface, where adsorption is begun. After some time, surface diffusion occurs, creating
the starting point for the thin film. The surface reaction likewise creates some volatile
reaction products, which, together with the gas reaction by-products, are pumped out of
the system[19][24][31].
Thin films deposited by LPCVD show a high purity level with easy-to-control composi-
tion and stoichiometry. Furthermore, a general advantage of Chemical Vapor Deposition
(CVD) is the excellent step coverage, ensuring that all structural directions are covered
evenly. For silicon deposition, the crystal structure and deposition rate can be controlled
by temperature. Below 600 °C, amorphous silicon will be deposited at around 2-4 nm
min,
above 600 °C the silicon instead takes the polycrystalline structure with a deposition rate
of 8-10 nm
min.
Multiple requirements have to be met for the LPCVD reaction to occur. Firstly, reactive
gases are necessary for reactive species to be available on the surface. A high temperature
is required to initiate the gas-phase reaction. Low pressure ensures good deposition uni-
formity and lowers the diffusion rate such that reactive species may approach the sample
surface more closely and decrease unwanted gas phase reactions.
3.4.2
ALD
Atomic layer deposition (ALD) is a chemically self-limiting process for thin film deposition.
The self-limitation is found in the molecules (Lipids) deposited onto the surface since these
will not react with each other and hence only bind to available surface sites. The excess
amount of gas is purged away using a non-reactant, typically nitrogen, after which the
secondary gas is introduced into the system. Because of this self-limitation, the process
deposits only a single layer of atoms each cycle[19][32][33].
By controlling the number of cycles, we then control the thickness of the deposited layer.
However, the growth rate is dependent on lipid size and deposition temperature. Larger
lipids will cover more of the surface than small lipids, making fever sites available with
each surface bond. With fewer bonds per cycle, full coverage of the first layer requires
extra iterations. Opposite, if the lipid is very small, fewer sites will be blocked, and a
more complete layer deposition is available, making the growth faster.
18
Master Thesis
==PAGE:27==
Methods and Theory
Figure 14: A representation of the steps in an ALD cycle. The exposures in the first
half-cycle (precursor) and second half-cycle (co-reactant) are self-limiting, meaning they
will only react with surface sites. The precursor and co-reactant are separated by purge
steps. The lower panels show the resulting coverage, as a function of exposure or time for
that particular step. Image from handbook of crystal growth[33].
When using ALD, operating in the ALD window is vital for optimal deposition. While
the growth rate may be higher at other temperature ranges, it is important to notice
whether these are due to Condensation at low or decomposition at high temperatures.
Opposite, then the growth rate can be impacted negatively by exiting the ALD window
by incomplete reactions at low or desorption/ loss of surface species at high temperatures.
Temperature also determines the growth type of the deposition. Lower temperatures result
in an amorphous orientation of the deposited atoms, while higher temperatures start to
order the atoms in a crystalline way called anatase growth[22][33].
Many thin film deposition methods exist, but the conformality of deposition is unique
to ALD. Due to the self-limiting gas-based precursors, the growth occurs on all surfaces
independent of orientation and performs a deposition in even the tiniest crevices and
features. Since this project uses nanopillars requiring perfect thickness on all sites, ALD
is ideal for metal-oxide deposition. This great conformality makes the process very slow,
as a maximum of one atomic layer is deposited per cycle.
Figure 15: The temperature window for ideal ALD processing, indicated as temperature
vs growth pr. cycle. The Window is indicated by the horizontal line centered in the figure.
While outside of the window ALD behavior is lost due to one of four effects: Condensation,
Low reactivity, Decomposition or Desorption. Image from handbook of crystal growth[33].
Master Thesis
19
==PAGE:28==
Methods and Theory
3.5
Characterization
Microscopy
In this project, Scanning Electron Microscopy (SEM) was the primary enhancement tech-
nique since imaging of the fabricated nanopillars needs an enhancement factor of 100.000x.
Optical microscopy was used for the characterisation of hemiwicking and surface flow.
Optical microscopy
Optical microscopy is used to observe structures down to 1 µm dimension. The Maximum
resolution is governed by the diffraction limit, giving a typical maximum magnification of
500x to 1000x. The magnification comes from the multiplication between the objective
and the eyepiece.
The eyepiece is typically fixed with a 10x lens, while the objective
lenses can be changed to range between 10x and 100x. This magnification can be further
enhanced by near-field scanning, however the maximum usefull magnification is often set
to 1000x as larger values ussually leads to image degradation[34].
SEM
Electrons are used in electron microscopy to provide a magnified surface image. SEM can
provide information on surface topography, crystalline structure, chemical composition
and electrical behaviour of the top 1 µm of the surface. This information gathering is
non-destructive but might lead to charging in scanned areas in weak- and non-conducting
materials. Electrons are typically accelerated to high energies between 2 keV and 40 keV
corresponding to wavelengths 0.027 nm to 0.0061 nm.
This smaller wavelength allows
higher magnification and better resolution than conventional optical microscopy. Under
optimum conditions, the resolution of SEM approaches 1 nm[35].
The most common way of accelerating electrons at the desired energy is by sending a
current through a tungsten hairpin filament, heating it to more than 2500 deg C. This
results in the thermal emission of electrons from its tip. The SEM at DTU, Zeiss Supra
SEM, uses Schottky field emission to further control the emitted electrons with an electric
field by lowering the required work function[19].
Many interactions are used to improve the image, beam shape, interaction volume and
charge control. For insulators, special precautions are necessary since the electron beam
will induce a charging of the sample. To counteract this, many coat their sample in a thin
layer of gold. An alternative way is lowering the scan energy to reduce the charging time
slightly[36].
Multiple interactions are possible, all corresponding to some scattering with the atom
leading to an output of electrons, x-rays and photons. For SEM imaging, a common use
is the detection of secondary electrons coming from the top layer of the surface.
Ellipsometry
Ellipsometry is used to measure the deposited thin film thickness dependent on available
data of the corresponding refractive index of the material. Data is obtained by sending
light towards a flat surface and measuring the change in the polarisation state of the
reflected light. Thickness measurements on the ellipsometer are done indirectly, meaning
that the obtained data is fitted towards a model. Data at multiple incident angles improve
the fit[19].
20
Master Thesis
==PAGE:29==
Methods and Theory
Drop Volume, Diameter and Contact Angle
For hydrophilic surfaces, the contact angle may be related to the Volume and diameter
through geometrical relations[37].
V = πd3
24
2 −3 cos θ + cos3 θ
sin3 θ

(13)
V is the Volume, d is the diameter, and θ is the contact angle. This will be used in liquid
flow characterisation experiments to determine the droplet volume for deposition and to
ensure that the sample is not overflown due to increased hydrophilicity.
Thin Film Metal Oxide Thickness
A dependency of the deposited thin film thickness was determined through theoretical
calculations of Fresnel curves by R. Taboryski. An experimetnal characterisation by J.
Navne[2] confirmed 30 nm of TiO2 to be a good thickness. The main result may be seen
of the characterisation may be seen in Figure 56.
Master Thesis
21
==PAGE:30==
Results
4
Results
4.1
Reticle design
A new reticle was designed during the project for improved pillar fabrication. Multiple
steps are involved in the design, most notably simulations and a following dose test.
4.2
Simulations
Aerial Image Contrast (AIC)
First in the simulations is the aerial image contrast (AIC) for the different pattern designs.
This goal is to get an expected contrast between light and dark areas in the pattern. AIC
is measured from the highest to the lowest point on the focal lines and can be seen in
table 1. From the figures, it is noted that both the maximum and minimum decrease as
the pattern covers more of the reticle with chrome.
Table 1: The measurement of Aerial Image Contrast (AIC)
of simulated triple cross exposure patterns. Simulated aerial
images is found in appendix B figure 48.
Normalized Image Log Slope (NILS)
NILS simulation aims to determine the pattern with the highest value at the targeted
width.
Since the desired pillar width is 240 nm, NILS data is collected for a critical
dimension of 240 nm. The simulations are summarized in table 2 for focus offset 0.00.
The chosen focus offset is the result of this being the curve with the largest NILS value,
as can be seen in all simulations in appendix B figure 49. It is clear from the simulation
that NILS increase with pattern size with the highest value obtained for line width 140
nm square wisth 210 nm.
Table 2: The measurement of Normalized Image Log Slope
(NILS) of simulated triple cross exposure patterns. All values
are subtracted from figures in appendix for a critical dimension
of 240 nm and a focus of 0. The simulations may be found in
appendix B figure 49.
22
Master Thesis
==PAGE:31==
Results
Bossung Curves
The Bossung describe the correlation between the dose focus and obtainable critical di-
mension (CD). The target for this simulation are lines placed around a CD of 240 nm. the
Bossung curve simulations are located in appendix B figure 50. Figure 16 include the two
best results of the simulation. we note that the flat line is note perfectly centered at 240
nm, however as indicated by dose 7
J
m2 for linewidth 120 nm and dose 8
J
m2 for linewidth
140 nm, then a slight focus offset will not yield any problems for fabrication of nanopillars
with desired CD.
Figure 16:
Bossung curves obtained through simulations for pitch
360 nm, square size 210 nm and linewidth 120 nm (left), linewidth 140
nm (right). The different coloured lines correspond to different doses
spanning from 5
J
m2 to 15
J
m2 . The best result is found near the flat line
in the centre, as size and shape will be less affected by a shift in focus.
The dependency on dose can be seen from the distances between lines,
where a small gap is desired.
Process Window
Finally, the process window was simulated appendix B figure 51. From the simulation,
a general tendency showed that the process window increased with the pattern, the best
being the two shown in figure 17. Both process windows indicate a small dependency on
focus for a the given dose. In this case the chosen dose is found for a CD of 240 nm. While
both are good, it is notable that the large pattern will be fabricated with higher accuracy
using linewidth 140 nm (right) rather than linewidth 120 nm (Left).
Master Thesis
23
==PAGE:32==
Results
Figure 17: The process window obtained through simulations for pitch
360 nm, square size 210 nm and linewidth 120 nm (left), linewidth 140
nm (right) is indicated by the red rectangle. As the simulation program
has a fixed dose variation of 3%, the interesting part is the stability
towards focus offset. Hence a large focus span is to be preferred.
Comparing the results, it is clear that the target diameter of 240 nm is challenging but
possible. The pattern for pitch 360 nm, linewidth 140 nm and square size 210 nm were
most fitting, with the flattest line being just above 200 nm. For the desired structures to
be obtained, a dose of 8
J
m2 should be used. Compared to the results, this would increase
the dependency on focus by a negligible amount.
4.3
Dose Test
The new reticle must be tested and compared to simulations before use. For this test,
the mask was used to produce the pattern with doses ranging from 7
J
m2 to 11.5
J
m2 in
increments of 0.5
J
m2 . Likewise, the focus was varied between -0.45 and 0.45 in steps of
0.15. After the first characterisation using SEM, the wafers were exposed to 20 cycles of
the DREM process in pegasus 3 and 50 minutes of resist strip in plasma asher 2 for silicon
pillar fabrication.
From the results found in this subsection, some general tendencies are noted: The exposed
pattern had resist pillar connection of higher doses than anticipated from the simulation.
However, with the dose offset in mind, the diameter (CD for pillars) of the pillars followed
a trend similar to that of the Bossung curves. SEM images indicated a tendency of larger
width than height in resist pillars, where the smallest offset was found for focus between
0.00 and 0.15.
After etching all, pillar diameters shrunk (will be further discussed in
section 4.5). The pillar pattern was not visible at low doses due to the connection of
pillars, while larger doses caused pillar breakage.
Finally, a connection between focus
offset and deformation direction was observed at lower doses.
As many similar results were obtained, the following four sections will be repetitive.
24
Master Thesis
==PAGE:33==
Results
Resist Pillars, Line width 120
Figure 18 contains 25 of the 70 SEM images collected during the dose test of resist pillars
made with reticle NL14 linewidth 120 nm. Measurements obtained through the program
ImageJ are described in figure 19. The graphs denote the width and height measurements
for non-connected pillars, with error bars correlating to 2x standard deviation. All related
SEM images can be found in appendix C figure 52.
As the exposure may fluctuate with up to 3% in dose during exposure, the limit for the
exposure from this test will be set at 80
J
m2 . In contrast, the absolute minimum dose before
connection occurs is dose 75
J
m2 at focus 0.00.
The trend mentioned for the deformation as dependent on focus change may be observed,
where the most circular pillars are located between focus 0.00 and 0.15.
Figure 18: SEM imaging of resist pillars fabricated for the dose test. A
selection of 25 images was taken from the 70 images total for the test of
reticle NL14 linewidth 120 nm. The left column display the difference
in dose spanning from 70
J
m2 to 90
J
m2 . The top row displays the change
in focus from -0.30 to 0.30. all scale bars in the bottom right corners
refer to a width of 250 nm. The full array is seen in appendix C figure
52.
Master Thesis
25
==PAGE:34==
Results
Figure 19: Measurements of resist pillars fabricated with reticle NL14 linewidth
120. The measured SEM images can be found in figure 52. The different data
is obtained by measuring all pillars not connected to the image border or other
pillars. The average widths and heights are plotted with 2x standard deviation.
Each block represents a measurement of a different dose varying from 75
J
m2 to
115
J
m2 . The x-axis shows the variation in focus from -0.45 and 0.45.
26
Master Thesis
==PAGE:35==
Results
Silicon Pillars, Linewidth 120
Figure 20 contains 25 of the 70 SEM images collected during the dose test of silicon pillars
made with reticle NL14 linewidth 120 nm. Measurements obtained through the program
ImageJ are described in figure 21. The graphs denote the width and height measurements
for non-connected pillars, with error bars correlating to 2x standard deviation. All related
SEM images can be found in appendix C figure 53.
As apparent from dose 75
J
m2 imaging before and after etch, then a small amount of resist
connection is able to be removed during DREM. This effect introduces uncertainty to the
shape of pillars, as one may notice a large deformation in shape.
The measurement for dose 90
J
m2 focus 0.15 indicate charging from SEM imaging. This
is clearly seen by the brighter image and slight widening compared to the surrounding
imaging.
Figure 20: SEM imaging of silicon pillars fabricated for the dose test. A
selection of 25 images was taken from the 70 images total for the test of
reticle NL14 linewidth 120 nm. The left column display the difference
in dose spanning from 70
J
m2 to 90
J
m2 . The top row displays the change
in focus from -0.30 to 0.30. all scale bars in the bottom right corners
refer to a width of 250 nm. The full array is seen in appendix C figure
53.
Master Thesis
27
==PAGE:36==
Results
Figure 21: Measurements of silicon pillars fabricated with Pegasus 3 DREM
process on resist pillars.
The measured SEM images can be found in figure
53. The different data is obtained by measuring all pillars not connected to the
image border or other pillars. The average width and height are plotted with 2x
standard deviation. Each square represents a measurement of a different dose
varying from 75
J
m2 to 115
J
m2 . The x-axis shows the variation in focus from -0.45
and 0.45.
28
Master Thesis
==PAGE:37==
Results
Resist Pillars, Linewidth 140
Figure 22 contains 25 of the 70 SEM images collected during the dose test of resist pillars
made with reticle NL14 linewidth 140 nm. Measurements obtained through the program
ImageJ are described in figure 23. The graphs denote the width and height measurements
for non-connected pillars, with error bars correlating to 2x standard deviation. All related
SEM images can be found in appendix C figure 54.
Comparing the results between dose 85
J
m2 and dose 90
J
m2 , it is apparent that a slight
shift in focus must have occurred between wafer exposure. From this effect, the exposure
limit will be set at 85
J
m2 . This likewise proves the importance of resistance to dose and
focus fluctuations.
Figure 22: SEM imaging of resist pillars fabricated for the dose test. A
selection of 25 images was taken from the 70 images total for the test of
reticle NL14 linewidth 140 nm. The left column display the difference
in dose spanning from 80
J
m2 to 100
J
m2 . The top row displays the change
in focus from -0.30 to 0.30. all scale bars in the bottom right corners
refer to a width of 250 nm. The full array is seen in appendix C figure
54.
Master Thesis
29
==PAGE:38==
Results
Figure 23: Measurements of resist pillars fabricated with reticle NL14 linewidth
140. The measured SEM images can be found in figure 54. The different data
is obtained by measuring all pillars not connected to the image border or other
pillars. The average width and height are plotted with 2x standard deviation.
Each square represents a measurement of a different dose varying from 85
J
m2 to
115
J
m2 . The x-axis shows the variation in focus from -0.45 and 0.45.
30
Master Thesis
==PAGE:39==
Results
Silicon Pillars, Linewidth 140
Figure 24 contains 25 of the 70 SEM images collected during the dose test of resist pillars
made with reticle NL14 linewidth 140 nm. Measurements obtained through the program
ImageJ are described in figure 25. The graphs denote the width and height measurements
for non-connected pillars, with error bars correlating to 2x standard deviation. All related
SEM images can be found in appendix C figure 55.
A major difference between the two wafers is present and is shown by the fluctuation in
pillar diameter for dose changes. Both wafers had received similar treatment, making this
the result of equipment uncertainty.
Figure 24: SEM imaging of silicon pillars fabricated for the dose test. A
selection of 25 images was taken from the 70 images total for the test of
reticle NL14 linewidth 140 nm. The left column display the difference
in dose spanning from 80
J
m2 to 100
J
m2 . The top row displays the change
in focus from -0.30 to 0.30. all scale bars in the bottom right corners
refer to a width of 250 nm. The full array is seen in appendix C figure
55.
Master Thesis
31
==PAGE:40==
Results
Figure 25: Measurements of silicon pillars fabricated with Pegasus 3 DREM
process on resist pillars.
The measured SEM images can be found in figure
55. The different data is obtained by measuring all pillars not connected to the
image border or other pillars. The average width and height are plotted with 2x
standard deviation. Each square represents a measurement of a different dose
varying from 85
J
m2 to 115
J
m2 . The x-axis shows the variation in focus from -0.45
and 0.45.
32
Master Thesis
==PAGE:41==
Results
4.4
Reticle Comparison
An evaluation between reticle NL14 (new) and reticle NL11 (old) was made, where the
pillar shape and diameter were investigated.
Shape
The shape refers to a 2D image of the top of the pillars, as seen from the dose test. With a
shift in focus, the pillars may distort to be oblong in one direction. SEM Supra 2 was used
to acquire images from the wafer centre and each of the four corners. Figure 26 depicts
the shape of the pillars, including the spot of acquisitions.
The picture on the left indicates a wafer produced with reticle NL11. The attached SEM
images note a difference in shape between the wafer centre and corners. Compared to the
pictures from the dose test, both oblong effects are seen as positive and negative shifts in
focus. This effect indicates high sensitivity to focus changes in reticle NL11.
The right picture indicates a wafer produced with the new reticle NL14 with the five
investigated spots marked. From the five SEM images, it is apparent that the placement
change does not significantly impact fabrication with the given dose. The cause of the
difference between reticles is found when looking at the initial designs for these. Reticle
NL11 was created to fabricate smaller diameter nanopillars than the new reticle.
As
indicated from the Bossung plots, by decreasing the dose, you quickly limit the range of
focus to operate normally.
Comparing the results, it is clear that the new reticles optimised for this specification of
nanopillars yield a much better result when exposed to possible focus fluctuations when
fabricating large-diameter pillars.
Figure 26: The scale on each SEM image in the bottom right corner equals 250
nm. (a) Image of a 6’inch wafer after fabrication using reticle NL11. Four SEM
images of silicon pillars and their corresponding placement are overlayed. A huge
difference in shape is noted depending on the wafer location. (b) Image of a 6’inch
wafer after fabrication using reticle NL14. Five SEM images of silicon pillars and
their corresponding placement are overlayed. Next to no shape difference is noted
as an effect of location.
Master Thesis
33
==PAGE:42==
Results
Diameter
The diameter of the pattern from the two reticles is compared after a Si etch on pegasus 3
and resist trip in plasma asher 2. The two structures are seen in figure 27. Both pictures
indicate the largest obtained diameter for the reticle. The leftmost image indicates the
diameter for NL11 and the right for NL14. While both have approximately the same size,
the new reticle has yet to be pushed to its limitations.
Figure 27: Sem image scalebar in the bottom left corresponds to 250nm.
(Left) SEM image of silicon pillars defined with reticle NL11. (Right)
SEM image of silicon pillars defined with reticle NL14.
No notable
difference is found by comparing the apparent diameter of the two silicon
pillars.
34
Master Thesis
==PAGE:43==
Results
4.5
Etch process
The etch process was not the main focus of this study, and a preexisting recipe was used
for the DREM process, where only the number of cycles was changed. Nevertheless, some
observations were made during the project.
Diameter change from etching
It was noted that the etch process differed across the wafer, with the centre being the
most affected. Figure 28 depicts this change, where the locations listed can be compared
to the image placement in figure 26. As indicated, a slight shrinkage occurs at the corners,
where a significant change occurs in the centre.
The process involved is a 20 cycles DREM process taken directly from Labadvisor and
an ashing step of 50 min. The difference exists in the plasma generation inside of pegasus
3. With the plasma being produced at the centre, this is also the place with the highest
intensity. This effect was seen on all wafers fabricated in Pegasus 3, though some were
more apparent than others.
Figure 28: The scale on each SEM image in the bottom right corner
equals 250 nm. The top row defines taken locations as shown in figure
26 right. The top images represent photoresist pillars defined by reticle
NL14.
The bottom images display the same pillars after 20 DREM
cycles on pegasus 3.
Etch rate
Etching depends on the available etch surface, resulting in different etch rates for different
patterns. Hence it was deemed necessary to run a test wafer first and measure the height
of the created pillars. Two different methods of height investigation were made, one at an
angle and one orthogonal to the wafer. Both of these methods have good and bad perks.
Figure 29 shows the difference between the two methods for the same pillar structures,
the angled on the left and the orthogonal on the right.
Master Thesis
35
==PAGE:44==
Results
Figure 29: The scale on each SEM image in the bottom right corner
equals 250 nm. (Left) angled image with height measurements to calcu-
late the silicon pillar height through geometry. (Right) Direct measure-
ment of silicon pillar height from an orthogonal point of view.
The angled view allows for a quick and dirty height view without cleaving the wafer. While
the viewed height slightly differs from the actual height, this method allows for continued
use of the wafer after measurement. For this sample, the height is calculated on the left
in equation 14 and equation 15.
h3 = H3
sin θ = 123.7 nm
sin 25
= 292.7 nm
(14)
h2 = H2
sin θ = 122.3 nm
sin 25
= 289.4 nm
(15)
The orthogonal method is used to measure the height more accurately. The measurement
is taken from the side, giving the full profile to measure. This method requires the wafer to
be cleaved but negates the use of trigonometry calculations. Furthermore, then it provides
a more accurate measurement. One may notice a charging in the image, seen from the
pillar being distorted to the left as the scanning commenced. A faster scan will result in
a more strait pillar, while a slower will result in a more leaning pillar.
A difference between the two measurements is seen. When measuring at an angle, it is
challenging to place the start of the foot due to the slight curve at the bottom. This
may add a little extra to the height calculations of the angled method. Furthermore, due
to charging effects the orthogonal image suffer from a diplacement, where the pillar shift
slightly. In this case, the orthogonal measured pillar is shifted slight down left, adding a
leaning effect and additional height.
36
Master Thesis
==PAGE:45==
Results
Ashing
Ashing is an important part of the process, removing the resist mask from the wafer
surface. It was found that nanopillars affect the ashing process, sheltering the pillar’s
middle. The effect is depicted on figure 30, for an ashing time of 0 min, 30 min and 50 min.
30 min is referenced as the normal time for a resist strip using plasma asher 2 and was
likewise the initial time used in this project.
From the first iteration of pillars, it became apparent that more time was needed for an
entire strip, and the time was increased to 50 min. As depicted on the rightmost picture
in figure 30 only a negligible amount is left for further fabrication.
Figure 30: The scale on each SEM image in the bottom right corner
equals 250 nm. (LEFT) Angled view of silicon pillar after 0 minutes of
ashing. It is seen that the full resist profile remains on top. (Middle)
Angled view of silicon after 30 minutes of ashing. A small amount of
photoresist remains in the pillar centre.
(Right) angled view of the
silicon pillar after 50 minutes of ashing. Only a negligible amount of
photoresist is left.
Master Thesis
37
==PAGE:46==
Results
4.6
LPCVD deposition
LPCVD was a trial on optimising the width of the silicon pillars. Before deposition, it
was necessary to do an RCA clean since the deposition oven is considered super clean.
The method chosen was for amorphous silicon, as the deposition rate is lower and easier
to control. Amorphous silicon likewise has a more smooth coverage due to the nature of
the crystallisation.
Figure 31 depicts the pillars after amorphous silicon deposition. The figure indicates that
the deposition rate on the surface is not dependent on the sample location on the wafer.
Figure 31: The scale on each SEM image in the bottom right corner
equals 250 nm. The top row indicates where the SEM image is taken, as
seen in figure 26. The top images show the pillar before the deposition
of amorphous silicon using LPCVD. The bottom SEM images show the
pillars from similar wafer positions after amorphous silicon deposition.
4.7
ALD 2 Deposition Rate
The ALD2 deposition rate was investigated by running X cycles, followed by a thickness
measurement using the ellipsometer. Previous experiments on ALD1 were used as a ref-
erence for which amount of cycles to pick. The shift to ALD2 came from the move of the
precursor for the deposition of ZnO from ALD1 to ALD2. It was determined that the
same tool should be used for similar coverage of the two thin film metal oxides.
The results of the investigation of TiO2 is shown in figure 32, with expected thicknesses
50 nm, 70 nm, 90 nm and 110 nm.
From the measurements, the expected thickness is
closely related to the actual thickness measured.
38
Master Thesis
==PAGE:47==
Results
Figure 32: Ellipsometer measurements of TiO2 thin film deposition by
ALD. The number of ALD cycles is indicated at the top of each mea-
surement. Thickness is indicated by colour with the scale shown on the
side in nm. A higher deposition is noted near the wafer centre.
Figure 33: (Left) The thickness measurements of figure 32, with the
error corresponding to the range of scale bar divided by 2. (Right) The
thickness measurements of figure 34, with the error corresponding to the
range of scale bar divided by 2.
Master Thesis
39
==PAGE:48==
Results
A similar test was made for ZnO, and the result is shown in figure 34. Here the number
of cycles was predetermined to 124, 174, 452 and 565.
Figure 34: Ellipsometer measurements of ZnO thin film deposition by
ALD. The number of ALD cycles is indicated at the top of each mea-
surement. Thickness is indicated by colour with the scale shown on the
side in nm. A higher deposition is noted at the left side of the wafer
The different results were plotted in figure 34. It is noteworthy that ZnO is deposited
much faster than TiO2 due to the nature of the precursor. The two calculated deposition
rates were used for the remaining depositions throughout the project.
40
Master Thesis
==PAGE:49==
Results
4.8
Thin Film Coverage
Figure 35 depicts the coverage of the different thin film depositions. At the bottom is a
grey layer showing the silicon wafer, which has been etched. On top of this is a thin dark
grey layer of a thickness ∼43 nm and the light grey layer on top is TiO2 of ∼30 nm. Note
that the cleaving through the pillars is not centred, as to why the amorphous silicon layer
seems much larger at the top of the pillar.
Figure 35: The scale on the SEM image placed in the bottom right
corner equals 250 nm. The image set of pillars with two thin film layers
deposited. The top layer consists of TiO2 deposited by ALD, while the
bottom layer is amorphous silicon deposited by LPCVD. Both layers
have a smooth, uniform coverage around the pillars.
Sample difference
Two sets of nanopillar structured samples were produced and measured during the project.
For the initial set, the old reticle NL11 with dose 80
J
m2 and focus 0.00, was used. The
etching process included 13 cycles of DREM in Pegasus 3 followed by 50 min of ashing.
Finally, a TiO2 layer of thickness 54 nm was deposited on top using ALD 2 at 300°C. The
result can be seen on the left in figure 36 and will be referenced as NL11 pillars.
The other sample was fabricated using dose 90
J
m2 with focus 0.00 with the new reticle
NL14 linewidth 140 nm followed by 20 cycles of DREM on pegasus 3 and 50 min of ashing.
Since the diameter was not quite right, an RCA cleaning was performed before LPCVD
deposition of 43 nm amorphous silicon. The fabrication concluded with the deposition of
30 nm TiO2 again deposited by ALD2 at 300°C. A side view of the result is shown on the
right in figure 36 and will be referenced as NL14 pillars.
From the images, the NL11 pillars have a more defined crystalline structure, seen by
hexagonal pillars. Meanwhile, the NL14 pillars on the right are much more rounded for
smooth coverage. The difference may be found in the deposited amorphous layer. Since
ALD will follow the preexisting crystal structure, crystalline silicon sites will be much more
defined. The amorphous layer having a more random position of surface sites influences
the deposition to this seemingly less crystalline deposition.
Master Thesis
41
==PAGE:50==
Results
Figure 36: The scale on each SEM image in the bottom right corner
equals 250 nm.
The sample difference is observed between TiO2 de-
position without amorphous silicon deposited beneath (Left) and with
amorphous silicon deposited beneath (Right). A difference in the crys-
tallinity of the deposited layer is observed by comparing the jagged edges
and the smooth coverage.
Dimensions
The pillar dimensions are summarized in table 3. While the diameter is relatable, the
height differs by approximately 100nm. Furthermore, the inclusion of amorphous silicon
is present in the NL14 pillars.
NL11
NL14
Height [nm]
180
281
Silicon diameter [nm]
90
135
ALD thickness [nm]
100
30
Amorphous silicon thickness [nm]
0
43
Total diameter [nm]
291
280
Table 3: Table with the dimension of the fabricated pillars indicated.
42
Master Thesis
==PAGE:51==
Results
4.9
Flow characterisation
The final test for the fabricated pillars is whether or not a flow would be produced, as the
theory suggests. The characterisation setup was determinedthrough previous experiments
and included two steps before flow characterisation, annealing and UV exposure[2]. The
setup is depicted in figure 4. For further explanation, please see the report made by him.
The following surface flow measurements were made in close collaboration with Jesper
Navne.
Table 4: The flow characterisation setup. (a) Annealing of sample for 1 hour on
105°C. (b) Patterned UV exposure of sample using chrome-glass mask and UV
light wavelength 365 nm. (c) Observation of placed droplets and corresponding
flow by microscopy.
Annealing
It was determined in a previous project that pre-annealing gave rise to a more stable
measurement.
The setup used in special course 2 was included here as well.
Schott
Instruments SLR Hotplate was used with an annealing block designed in the course and
milled by M. B. Petersen.
The annealing started with heating the aluminium block on setting 10 for 14 minutes
before switching to setting 4, where samples were loaded. A timer for annealing was set
for 1 hour. The stabilised temperature of the block was measured to 105 ± 5°C. It is to
mention that J. Navne ran setting 10 for 10 minutes instead of 14 minutes due to an error.
Opposite the previous project, the time was increased from 45 minutes to 1 hour due to
uncertainty about whether 45 minutes was enough[2].
UV-setup
The UV setup for this project went through an upgrade compared to previous special
courses.
The new UV source consisted of a LED lamp from Thorlabs of wavelength
365nm. The current supply was the T-cube LED driver, also provided by Thorlabs, and
a lens mounted to distribute the light. Rucha Anil Deshpande chose all parts.
To ensure the dose rate stayed the same, the diameter of the UV light on the surface
for sample placement was measured and set to 30mm. However, since the mask would
not fit beneath, this was increased to 33mm for patterned sample exposure. To ensure
the stability of the UV source, it was set to stabilise for 1 hour before use, conveniently
matching the annealing time.
Master Thesis
43
==PAGE:52==
Results
A power meter by Thorlabs was used with a photosensor to determine the dose rate of the
exposure. The LED source was measured just before exposure and right after exposure.
The mask for the exposure was designed by Jesper Navne using Clewin5, with a pattern
fitting either a 7x7 mm sample or a 14x14 mm sample. The pattern was the same with a
slight variation in linewidth from 100 µm to 900 µm in steps of 100 µm. Each site contains
four reservoirs such that a single sample may be measured four times (once pr. corner).
Microscope setup
To measure the hemiwicking flow, zooming into the surface from a top-down view is
necessary. The Zeiss zoom microscope was coupled with an Axiocam 105 colour, connected
to a nearby PC. The camera allowed for the recording of the droplet placement at specific
sites.
The drops were placed underneath the microscope and moved to a specific position for the
recording of droplet placement. The droplet is placed in the corner of the sample, where
the mask would ensure a reservoir has been exposed. Before measurements, a picture of a
ruler was taken, such that a scale was present for the experiment.
NL11 pillars
Figure 37: Image array of 5 samples fabricated using reticle NL11 coated with TiO2. All
samples received the same UV dose through a pattern with different linewidth. The re-
spective linewidth is located in the bottom right of each image. The final image represents
a ruler at the same magnification.
The NL11 pillars were tested as a proof of concept for hemiwicking flow on structured
surfaces.
The sample was given pre-annealing for 1 hour, followed by UV for 6 min,
corresponding to a dose of 5.73
J
cm2 . The microscope was set at 40x magnification with
44
Master Thesis
==PAGE:53==
Results
light and focus adjusted before each deposition. 1 µL of deionised water was deposited on
each corner, whereas the recording was analysed using ImageJ. In total five linewidth was
investigated, ranging from 100 µm to 900 µm in steps of 200 µm. A snapshot can be seen
in figure 37.
As mentioned, illumination formed a reservoir in each sample corner; hence with four
corners, four measurements were made. A human error showed during measurements,
where the reservoir often coupled to the sample edge. This means that aligning the mask
perfectly with the sample edge had difficulties, even when using alignment marks. Hence,
each reservoir could hold a different amount of liquid, resulting in a slight spread in results.
The measurements of the different flows are shown in figure 57. It is noteworthy that the
times to reach a steady state flow distance are consistent between the different linewidth.
This is shown in figure 38, where it is noticable that the steady flow distance is reached
within 2 seconds. It was expected that the expansion would continue linearly, and the
steady state might be caused by flow and evaporation balance.
A hemiwicking flow was seen in all channel widths, though the line width seemed to limit
the distance the flow travelled.
Figure 38: An example of flow measurement showing the rapid steady state approach by
both hemiwicking flow and surface flow. Both steady states are reached within 2 seconds
of droplet placement.
The steady-state distance was plotted together and compared to the channel width. Note
that an average of the four measurements and 2x standard deviation were included in
the plot. The result is seen in figure 39. The uncertainty dominates the measurements,
though a general trend is seen towards increasing linewidth, resulting in increased flow
distance. The difference in flow is plotted at the right side of figure 39 and shows that the
difference between the surface flows and hemiwicking flows share a similar trend, where it
grows with increased linewidth.
Note that data for linewidth 900 µm is excluded from the data due to error difficulties.
Time limitations caused this study not to be repeated, and it must be concluded that an
investigation using either a smaller mask or a larger sample must be made.
Master Thesis
45
==PAGE:54==
Results
Figure 39: Comparison of linewidth vs flow distance for measurements of hemiwicking
flow, surface flow, and the distance between the two. Large uncertainty follows as the
edge reservoirs contain different volumes from contact with sides. The sample used was
fabricated by reticle NL11 and coated with a layer of TiO2
The difference between the linewidth of the mask and the actual flow width was investi-
gated, with the results shown in figure 40.
Since the exposure was performed with a small distance between the mask and sample, it
was expected for the width to increase due to the spreading of light. This is also the trend
seen in the measurements except for width 500 µm, where it somehow shrinks. Opposite
to previous measurements for NL11, the flow width was consistent for all four corners.
Figure 40: Comparison between the flow’s measured linewidth and the pattern’s linewidth.
The expected width is plotted as a dashed line in grey for comparison. The sample used
was fabricated by reticle NL11 and coated with a layer of TiO2
46
Master Thesis
==PAGE:55==
Results
NL11 Varying Volume
The volume change was investigated using a similar method as described before for
linewidth 300 µm. The volume was varied for 0.2 µL, 0.5 µL, 1.0 µL, 1.5 µL and 3.0 µL.
Note that this was to show the change effect for extreme values, not to do a full charac-
terisation.
Figure 41 shows an array of different-size drops placed on the sample.
In the case of
a too-small-volume droplet, it is noted that the surface flow does not spread out of the
reservoir, though the hemiwicking flow fills up the reservoir and part of the channel. For
larger droplets, it is noted how the surface flow creeps out of the reservoir in the direction
of the channel.
The reason for the expansion past the reservoir is found in surface energy optimisation.
Since the droplet always tries to enter the state with the lowest surface energy. The liquid
gas interface increased due to the channel and overcame an energy barrier for a state
including an unexposed area. For the same reason, the droplet does not spread in all
directions, only towards the channel, as the surface droplet interface here has an energy
cost lower than the surrounding area.
Figure 41: An array of images depicting the flow at different drop volumes. The pattern
used was of linewidth 300 µm, and the sample was fabricated with reticle NL11 followed
by a coating of TiO2.
NL11 Varying Dose
The influence on dose was studied for these pillars, where a set of samples received half,
regular, and double doses of the previous experiment. The new times were, respectively,
3 min, 6 min and 12 min, corresponding to doses of 2.87
J
cm2 , 5.73
J
cm2 and 11.46
J
cm2 .
Figure 42: The image array shows a variation of dose from half on the left to double on the
right. The dose is depicted in minutes for exposure through a mask pattern of linewidth
300 µm. The sample used was fabricated with reticle NL11 and coated with TiO2
Master Thesis
47
==PAGE:56==
Results
An image array is again shown for the different doses in figure 42 for linewidth 300 µm.
Interestingly, the dose did not lower the contact angle enough to provoke hemiwicking or
surface flow. The High dose, as seen on the right, seems to have provoked an increased
surface flow but a similar hemiwicking flow.
NL14 TiO2 pillars
Figure 43: Image array of 5 samples fabricated using reticle NL14 linewidth 140 coated
with TiO2.
All samples received the same UV dose through a pattern with different
linewidth. The respective linewidth is located in the bottom right of each image. Note
that placement of designated volume on the sample with linewidth 900 µm moved the
droplet out of the observed camera area. The final image represents a ruler at the same
magnification.
A similar experiment was performed for the NL14 pillars coated with TiO2. While the
dimensions of these pillars were optimised compared to theory, the photoswitching was
not observed for the usual doses on these samples.
The advancing contact angle was
investigated and can be seen in figure 44. The contact angle starts higher for the pillars
but decreases faster than for flat samples.
This result made it necessary for the dose to be increased to perform the investigation.
The current limit of the LED controller was increased from 0.2 A to 0.7 A. This increased
the measured power output from 19 ± 1 mW to 169 ± 1 mW. Measurements for 5 and 10
min of exposure with the increased power did not provoke hemiwicking flow. Hence, out
of desperation, the time was increased to 30 minutes for testing if measurements could be
performed.
48
Master Thesis
==PAGE:57==
Results
Figure 44: The result of an investigation of NL14 structures coated with TiO2 on the
goniometer. A higher contact angle is observed compared to normal, and at normal dose
contact angle has not yet switched. Data was taken from J. Navne.
Figure 45: Comparison of linewidth vs flow distance for measurements of hemiwicking
flow, surface flow, and the distance between the two. Large uncertainty follows as the
edge reservoirs contain different volumes from contact with sides. The sample used was
fabricated by reticle NL14 and coated with a layer of TiO2
Luckily this huge dose was enough to provoke a flow, and the results can be seen in figure
58. The change of dose meant that the same method as for the NL11 pillars was used
Master Thesis
49
==PAGE:58==
Results
with an increase in dose from 5.73
J
cm2 to 264.20
J
cm2 . The volume of the droplet placed at
the corners was decreased from 1 µL to 0.8 µL.
As before, the reservoir allowed for a different amount of liquid, creating large uncertainties
in the results. Nevertheless, the tendency for a stable flow length to have formed after less
than 2 seconds was shown. Linewidth 900 µm was measured twice; both were provoking
too large of a flow, as observed in figure 43.
The difference between hemiwicking flow and surface flow was investigated, with the result
displayed in figure 46. Comparing the results, a trend is seen stating that the distance
travelled likewise increased with increased width. The same is said for the difference in
flow, where a tendency again shows an increased width.
Like before, this data is plotted as the mean value of the four measurements with error
bars from 2x standard deviation. The Error bars again dominate the data, and a study
using either larger samples or a smaller mask must be performed for further investigation.
The width of the channel flow was measured to determine the difference from light spread-
ing. A linear trend is found, where the difference increases with mask linewidth.
Figure 46: Comparison between the flow’s measured linewidth and the pattern’s linewidth.
The expected width is plotted as a dashed line in grey for comparison. The sample used
was fabricated by reticle NL14 and coated with a layer of TiO2
NL14 ZnO pillars
A final observation was made on NL14 pillars covered with ZnO. Like for the other NL14
pillars, the hydrophilic effect was drastically decreased. An investigation of the advancing
contact angle was made and can be seen in figure 47 showing the effect of wet exposure
on ZnO-covered reticle NL14 linewidth 140 samples.
J. Navne and R. A. Deshpande had previously determined that ZnO wet exposure is far
more effective than dry exposure. Exposing a sample to the same dose as for these pillars
coated with TiO2 showed no sign of hemiwicking flow.
50
Master Thesis
==PAGE:59==
Results
Figure 47: The result of an investigation of NL14 structures coated with ZnO on the
goniometer. A higher contact angle is observed compared to normal, and at normal dose
contact angle has not yet switched[2].
Master Thesis
51
==PAGE:60==
Discussion
5
Discussion
5.1
Reticle Simulations
Simulations for reticle NL14 showed that the fabrication of 240 nm diameter pillars was
an option and would include a significant focus span for the desired size. The simulation
showed a similarity in dose dependency between all patterns. A complete restructure of
the design is needed to decrease dose dependency further.
In hindsight, then additional simulations for larger patterns should have been investigated.
This is especially clear from the dose test showing a decrease in diameter after etching.
Hence the resist pillars should have been optimised for 260 nm rather than 240 nm.
Admittedly an error occurred during the simulation process. The reticle manufacturer had
a hard limit on critical dimensions of 100 nm, and through theoretical analysis, this left a
maximum pillar size of 260 nm. The error occurred in the thought process that a small
gap should be left, hence 240 nm, which was achieved with the largest simulated pattern.
A thought error combined the two numbers 210 nm and 140 nm to 240 nm, which was set
as the limit.
The dose test of this new reticle showed a difference from the simulation.
While the
simulated critical diameter was consistent, it required a much larger dose not to be limited
by the coupling of structures, decreasing the diameter.
5.2
Lithography
The new reticle was chosen based on SEM characterisation results from the pillar shape
of reticle NL11. A subgoal of the project was a similar fabrication across an entire wafer,
meaning the shape should be consistent with the sample position.
This consistency was investigated for pillars fabricated with reticle NL11 and reticle NL14.
A considerable improvement was found between the two, and reticle NL14 was deemed
more stable to focus changes at large diameters.
Spin-coating yielded good results throughout the project. This is the cause of standardised
processes and the use of dummy wafers before sample coating. Minor defects were found
in the dummy wafers such that suitable adjustments could be made. These defects mainly
included comets and edge effects from major flat. Both of which are sample-based, not
process based.
No complication was found with development.
5.3
Etching
The etching process was changed due to wafer size compatibility with the available equip-
ment. Since the DUV stepper required 6’inch wafers for fabrication, a cleaving was nec-
essary for the loading into ASE. This cleaving is problematic as it introduces uncertainty
to the etch step since the etch rate depends on exposed areas. Cleaving is done by hand,
and no two cleaving positions are equal, giving each quarter a slightly differing etch rate.
The change to Pegasus 3 made the fabrication faster and easier as the entire 6’inch wafer
was handled at once.
The DREM process on pegasus 3 showed a slight complication regarding anisotropy. With
52
Master Thesis
==PAGE:61==
Discussion
the plasma intensity higher in the centre of the wafer than the edge, a difference in pillar
diameter was observed using SEM. As mentioned, the process was not investigated further
as discussion with peers stated that this was common for the equipment.
A difference in results from the angled etch rate calculation to the orthogonal measure-
ment. Two possibilities regarding the uncertainty were mentioned; pillar foot and pillar
location. Note that characterisation equipment could also have an effect since slight angle
adjustments and measurements at different distances may affect the result from the angled
view. Nevertheless, this method is still preferred over the cleaving of a wafer.
Plasma ashing for resist removal was increased throughout the project to a fairly large
time compared to the norm. The pillars may have a sheltering effect on the centre. While
50min removes 99.5% of the resist, it reached a point of diminishing return where the
remains are negligible. Total removal is possible by RCA clean.
5.4
Thin Film Deposition
The inclusion of a diameter correction step was made to optimise the pillar dimensions of
the final fabrication. The hemiwicking flow depends on pitch, height and diameter, giving
rise to this inclusion. It was believed that the initial surface conditions would remain
similar with amorphous silicon deposited on silicon. This was far from the observations
made, as the inclusion of the layer triggered a very low PIH effect on the pillars.
The idea should not be disregarded entirely, as the layer may be changed from amor-
phous to polycrystalline, similar to the wafer substrate. By changing the structure, the
coefficients for absorption, transmission and reflection change and, with it, the surface
properties.
In the case of the deposited silicon layer functioning as BARC, the coupling to the substrate
should be investigated. While the deposition of polycrystalline silicon should only add to
the bulk, more data is needed to conclude anything.
Differences in the ALD layer were observed between the centre and the edge of the wafer.
While parameters could be adjusted for the possibility of better deposition, the main
issue is the placement of precursor gas lines. This is made clear from the consistency in
deposition seen of each material while differing between them.
5.5
Flow characterisation
Flow characterisation was made to prove that hemiwicking flow would appear at a low
contact angle for the fabricated pillars with the given material choice. By varying the
linewidth of the exposure pattern, the different flow profiles were measured for NL11
pillars and NL14 pillars, coated with TiO2.
The profile included measurements of hemiwicking flow, surface flow and linewidth, in-
cluding a study of varying volume and dose for NL11 pillars. Since NL14 pillars required a
much larger dose, only the hemiwicking flow, surface flow and linewidth were investigated.
The investigation of NL14 pillars coated with ZnO was disregarded.
No comparison between the two sets of pillars was made due to the dose change. However,
it was noted that NL14 pillars had a longer flow distance than NL11 pillars. This being
due to aspect ratio or increased flow, require a more thorough investigation.
Master Thesis
53
==PAGE:62==
Conclusion
6
Conclusion
This master thesis project investigated the fabrication process of nanopillar-structured
surfaces, characterising the different steps using SEM and ellipsometry. The final char-
acterisation of the hemiwicking and surface flow illustrated that sample fabrication was
successful and that the samples support superwetting and the photo-induced hydrophilic
effect. The fabrication was conducted on a standard double-side polished silicon surface,
functioning as a robust base for handling and pillar etching.
Fresnel curves by R. Taboryski and comparable tau measurements by J. Navne determined
the dimensions for fabrication. With a pitch of 360nm and a thin film metal oxide layer of
30 nm, the silicon pillars should have a diameter of 240nm. The fabrication using DUV,
DREM, and LPCVD achieved this diameter within a respectable margin.
The lithography process step was optimised for shape and diameter through reticle simu-
lations and design. The shape change dependency on wafer location and focus fluctuation
was resolved, while a similar diameter was achieved.
Etch processing step changes resolved from simplification and wafer handling optimisation.
By changing the dry etch tool from the advanced silicon etch to pegasus 3, wafer cleaving
and carrier wafers got eliminated for a smoother and more reproducible process. The
DREM cycle on pegasus 3 showed an increased etch in the was centre, resulting in a
difference in diameter between samples located on the wafer edge and the centre.
Including low-pressure chemical vapour deposition for diameter correction during thin
film deposition resulted in correct aspect ratio pillars and decreased the photo-induced
hydrophilic effect. It was not concluded whether the deposited amorphous silicon layer
caused this decrease.
7
Outlook
Further characterisation of a surface flow is paramount to the project, as standard de-
viations yielded untrustworthy results. As uncertainties appeared from the difference in
reservoir volume, the illumination of a smaller pattern with reservoirs placed further from
the edge should bed considered.
Regarding the effect on photo-induced hydrophilicity from amorphous thin film deposition,
an investigation is needed for inclusion as a pillar diameter correction step. Alternatives
include deposition on non-structured wafers and differentiating thicknesses.
Since the
wafer for fabrication is polycrystalline, a change may likewise be found in the crystallinity
of the deposited material, for possible bulk deposition rather than thin film.
The etch effect should be taken into account when determining the photo-resist mask. A
slight dose variation between the centre and edge would result in a diameter difference
in the resist pillars. Fabrication for larger diameter pillars close to the centre may be
considered for a more uniform wafer etch result.
In the event that more time was present in the project, the fabrication of nanopillars on
fused silica would be made. A transparent substrate would increase the knowledge of the
structured surfaces’ absorbance, transmission and reflection.
54
Master Thesis
==PAGE:63==
Project plan
8
Project plan
The beginning of the project followed the schedule closely, focusing on gaining access to
equipment for the fabrication of structured surfaces.
As with many projects, new challenges appear mid-way, and this project was no different.
While the fabrication of surface structures proceeded, an uphold in thin film choice was
found.
With the inclusion of reticle design for DUV-lithography, the time for functional charac-
terisation and wetting properties mapping was reduced, while the fabrication of improved
surface structures increased.
Master Thesis
55
==PAGE:64==
REFERENCES
References
[1]
R. Taboryski. “Application: Light Reconfigurable Nano-fluidics - LiRN-fluidics”. In:
(2021).
[2]
“Light-Induced Reconfigurable Hydrophilicity Effect in Metal Oxides”. In: (Jan.
2023).
[3]
UN. Goal 12: Ensure sustainable consumption and production patterns. 2022. url:
https://www.un.org/sustainabledevelopment/sustainable-consumption-production/.
(accessed: 25.01.2023).
[4]
K. Yanosek and D. G. Victor. How Big Business Is Taking the Lead on Climate
Change. 2022. url: https://www.mckinsey.com/capabilities/sustainability/our-
insights/sustainability- blog/how- big- business- is- taking- the- lead- on- climate-
change. (accessed: 25.01.2023).
[5]
T. Nadalin. 20 sustainable alternatives to single-use plastics. 2022. url: https://
www.racv.com.au/royalauto/sustainability/sustainable- living/reduce- plastic-
waste.html. (accessed: 12.11.2022).
[6]
Elveflow. Microfluidics: A general overview of microfluidics. 2022. url: https://
www.elveflow.com/microfluidic-reviews/general-microfluidics/a-general-overview-
of-microfluidics/. (accessed: 12.11.2022).
[7]
Simon M. Scott and Zulfiqur Ali. “Fabrication Methods for Microfluidic Devices:
An Overview”. In: Micromachines 12.3 (2021). issn: 2072-666X. doi: 10 . 3390 /
mi12030319. url: https://www.mdpi.com/2072-666X/12/3/319.
[8]
Yi-Je Juang and Yu-Jui Chiu. “Fabrication of Polymer Microfluidics: An Overview”.
In: Polymers 14.10 (2022). issn: 2073-4360. url: https://www.mdpi.com/2073-
4360/14/10/2028.
[9]
Jun-Shan LIU et al. “Design and Validation of a Microfluidic Chip with Micropil-
lar Arrays for Three-dimensional Cell Culture”. In: Chinese Journal of Analytical
Chemistry 45.8 (2017), pp. 1109–1114. issn: 1872-2040. doi: https://doi.org/10.
1016/S1872-2040(17)61029-6.
[10]
Aaron M. Streets and Yanyi Huang. “Chip in a lab: Microfluidics for next generation
life science research”. In: Biomicrofluidics 7.1 (2013), p. 011302. doi: 10.1063/1.
4789751.
[11]
George M. Whitesides. “The origins and the future of microfluidics”. In: Nature
442.7101 (July 2006), pp. 368–373. issn: 1476-4687. doi: 10.1038/nature05058. url:
https://doi.org/10.1038/nature05058.
[12]
Nidhi Verma and Alok Pandya. “Chapter Twelve - Challenges and opportunities
in micro/nanofluidic and lab-on-a-chip”. In: Micro/Nanofluidics and Lab-on-Chip
Based Emerging Technologies for Biomedical and Translational Research Applica-
tions - Part A. Ed. by Alok Pandya and Vijai Singh. Vol. 186. Progress in Molecular
Biology and Translational Science 1. Academic Press, 2022, pp. 289–302. doi: https:
//doi.org/10.1016/bs.pmbts.2021.07.016.
[13]
R. Taboryski. “Engineering of wetting properties for solid surfaces”. English. PhD
thesis. 2020. isbn: 978-87-94131-00-1.
[14]
Masahiro Miyauchi et al. “Photocatalysis and Photoinduced Hydrophilicity of Var-
ious Metal Oxide Thin Films”. In: Chemistry of Materials 14.6 (2002), pp. 2812–
2816. doi: 10.1021/cm020076p.
56
Master Thesis
==PAGE:65==
REFERENCES
[15]
Sasha Hoshian et al. “Amplified and Localized Photoswitching of TiO2 by Micro- and
Nanostructuring”. In: ACS Applied Materials & Interfaces 7.28 (2015), pp. 15593–
15599. doi: 10.1021/acsami.5b04309.
[16]
“Investigation of photocatalytic surface wetting of metal oxide thin films deposited
by ALD”. In: (Dec. 2021).
[17]
“Advanced investigation of photocatalytic surface wetting of metal oxide thin films
deposited by ALD”. In: (May 2022).
[18]
Maria Serra Gonzalez. “Design and nanofabrication of masters for mass-production
of plasmonic solar light absorbers, Design og nanofabrikation af forme til massepro-
duktion af plasmoniske sollys absorbere”. und. 2022.
[19]
DTU Nanolab. Labadviser. 2022. url: https://labadviser.nanolab.dtu.dk/index.
php?title=LabAdviser. (accessed: 26.01.2022).
[20]
Jungchul Kim, Myoung-Woon Moon, and Ho-Young Kim. “Dynamics of hemiwick-
ing”. In: Journal of Fluid Mechanics 800 (2016), pp. 57–71. doi: 10.1017/jfm.2016.
386.
[21]
“Optical Lithography”. In: Introduction to Microfabrication. John Wiley & Sons,
Ltd, 2010. Chap. 9, pp. 103–113. isbn: 9781119990413. doi: https://doi.org/10.
1002/9781119990413.ch9.
[22]
F. Jensen et. al. 10850 Advanced micro- and nanofabrication technology. DTU course.
spring. 2022.
[23]
C. Mack. “Fundamental Principles of Optical Lithography: The Science of Micro-
fabrication”. In: 2007, pp. 1–515. url: www.scopus.com.
[24]
Lithography Tool Package Training. DTU course. spring. 2022.
[25]
Prof. V.Krishnakumar. Introduction to Spin Coating. 2014. url: https : / / www .
slideshare.net/krishslide/spin-coating-39462865. (accessed: 26.01.2022).
[26]
“Advanced Lithography”. In: Introduction to Microfabrication. John Wiley & Sons,
Ltd, 2010. Chap. 10, pp. 115–126. isbn: 9781119990413. doi: https://doi.org/10.
1002/9781119990413.ch10.
[27]
“Optical Pattern Formation”. In: Principles of Lithography. Harry J. Levinson, 2019.
Chap. 2, pp. 7–52. isbn: 9781510627611. doi: https://doi-org.proxy.findit.cvt.dk/
10.1117/3.2525393.
[28]
MicroChemicals. Download:Post Exposure Bake. 2022. url: https://www.microchemicals.
com/downloads/application notes.html. (accessed: 26.12.2022).
[29]
Bingdong Chang et al. “DREM: Infinite etch selectivity and optimized scallop size
distribution with conventional photoresists in an adapted multiplexed Bosch DRIE
process”. In: Microelectronic Engineering 191 (2018), pp. 77–83. issn: 0167-9317.
doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.mee.2018.01.034.
[30]
Vy Thi Hoang et al Nguyen. “The CORE Sequence: A Nanoscale Fluorocarbon-Free
Silicon Plasma Etch Process Based on SF6/O2 Cycles with Excellent 3D Profile
Control at Room Temperature”. English. In: ECS Journal of Solid State Science
and Technology 9.2 (2020). issn: 2162-8769. doi: 10.1149/2162-8777/ab61ed.
[31]
Loren A. Chow. “6 - Equipment and Manufacturability Issues in CVD Processes”. In:
Handbook of Thin Film Deposition (Third Edition). Ed. by Krishna Seshan. Third
Edition. Oxford: William Andrew Publishing, 2012, pp. 127–178. isbn: 978-1-4377-
7873-1. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-1-4377-7873-1.00006-1.
Master Thesis
57
==PAGE:66==
REFERENCES
[32]
DTU Nanolab TPT: Thin Film. DTU course. autumn. 2022.
[33]
H.C.M. Knoops et al. “27 - Atomic Layer Deposition”. In: Handbook of Crystal
Growth (Second Edition). Ed. by Thomas F. Kuech. Second Edition. Handbook
of Crystal Growth. Boston: North-Holland, 2015, pp. 1101–1134. isbn: 978-0-444-
63304-0. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-444-63304-0.00027-5.
[34]
Michael W Davidson and Mortimer Abramowitz. “Optical microscopy”. In: Ency-
clopedia of imaging science and technology 2.1106-1141 (2002), p. 120.
[35]
K.D. Vernon-Parry. “Scanning electron microscopy: an introduction”. In: III-Vs Re-
view 13.4 (2000), pp. 40–44. issn: 0961-1290. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/S0961-
1290(00 ) 80006 - X. url: https : / / www . sciencedirect . com / science / article / pii /
S096112900080006X.
[36]
Ingrid Koch. Reduce Charging in SEM Using Low Voltage Imaging. 2022. url: https:
//www.nanoscience.com/applications/materials-science/reduce-charging-in-sem-
using-low-voltage-imaging/. (accessed: 26.01.2022).
[37]
Anders Kristensen and Rafael Taboryski. 10031 Introduction to Physics and Nan-
otechnology, document on Hydrodynamics on micro scale. DTU course. Nov. 2022.
58
Master Thesis
==PAGE:67==
REFERENCES
Master Thesis
i
==PAGE:68==
Appendix: Process Flow
A
Appendix: Process Flow
ii
Master Thesis
==PAGE:69==
Appendix: Reticle Simulation
B
Appendix: Reticle Simulation
AIC
Figure 48: AIC obtained through simulations for triple cross exposure patterning. The
coloured lines correspond to a shift in focus from -1.5 to 0.0. Each column represent a
different line width, while each row represent a different square width. Measurements is
summarized in table 1.
Master Thesis
iii
==PAGE:70==
Appendix: Reticle Simulation
NILS
Figure 49: NILS obtained through simulations for triple cross exposure patterning. The
coloured lines correspond to a shift in focus from -1.5 to 0.0. Each column represent a
different line width, while each row represent a different square width. Measurements for
critical dimension 240 nm at focus offset 0 is summarized in table 2.
iv
Master Thesis
==PAGE:71==
Appendix: Reticle Simulation
Bossung Curves
Figure 50: The different coloured lines correspond to different doses spanning from 5
J
m2
to 15
J
m2 . The best result is found near the flat line in the centre, as size and shape will be
less affected by a shift in focus. The dependency on dose can be seen from the distances
between lines, where a small gap is desired.
Master Thesis
v
==PAGE:72==
Appendix: Reticle Simulation
Process Windows
Figure 51: The process window obtained through simulations for triple cross exposure
patterning. As the simulation program has a fixed dose variation of 3%, the interesting
part is the stability towards focus offset. Hence a large focus span is to be preferred.
vi
Master Thesis
==PAGE:73==
Appendix: Dose Test
C
Appendix: Dose Test
Figure 52: SEM supra 2 imaging of resist pillars from pattern size 120 nm dose test
arranged in a 7 by 9 table. Focus on the x-axis ranging from -0.45 to 0.45 and dose on the
y-axis ranging from 70
J
m2 to 70
J
m2 . The scalebar on each image corresponds to 250 nm.
Master Thesis
vii
==PAGE:74==
Appendix: Dose Test
Figure 53: SEM supra 2 imaging of silicon pillars from pattern size 120 nm dose test
arranged in a 7 by 9 table. Focus on the x-axis ranging from -0.45 to 0.45 and dose on the
y-axis ranging from 70
J
m2 to 70
J
m2 . The scalebar on each image corresponds to 250 nm.
viii
Master Thesis
==PAGE:75==
Appendix: Dose Test
Figure 54: SEM supra 2 imaging of resist pillars from pattern size 140 nm dose test
arranged in a 7 by 9 table. Focus on the x-axis ranging from -0.45 to 0.45 and dose on the
y-axis ranging from 70
J
m2 to 70
J
m2 . The scalebar on each image corresponds to 250 nm.
Master Thesis
ix
==PAGE:76==
Appendix: Dose Test
Figure 55: SEM supra 2 imaging of silicon pillars from pattern size 140 nm dose test
arranged in a 7 by 9 table. Focus on the x-axis ranging from -0.45 to 0.45 and dose on the
y-axis ranging from 70
J
m2 to 70
J
m2 . The scalebar on each image corresponds to 250 nm.
x
Master Thesis
==PAGE:77==
Appendix: Extra figures
D
Appendix: Extra figures
Figure 56: (Black) Plotted theory for Fresnel curves of TiO2 by R. Taboryski compared
to thickness. (Red) Tau values obtained by fitting on modeled curves for experimental
parameters by J. Navne.
Master Thesis
xi
==PAGE:78==
Appendix: Extra figures
Figure 57: Rawdata of flow measurement of structures fabricated using reticle NL11 coated
with TiO2. The distance between the sample’s edge and the flow’s furthest point was
measured after droplet placement. The recorded flow was measured frame by frame, each
representing 0.2 s and analysed with ImageJ.
xii
Master Thesis
==PAGE:79==
Appendix: Extra figures
Figure 58: Rawdata of flow measurement of structures fabricated using reticle NL14 coated
with TiO2. The distance between the sample’s edge and the flow’s furthest point was
measured after droplet placement. The recorded flow was measured frame by frame, each
representing 0.2 s and analysed with ImageJ.
Master Thesis
xiii
