==PAGE:1==
Detection of mobile LoRa jammers
Master Thesis
DTU Compute
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Detection of mobile LoRa jammers
Master Thesis
February, 2023
By
Bartlomiej Jozef Bleszynski
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus­
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Published by:
DTU, Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science,
Richard Petersens Plads, Build. 324 , 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:4==
Summary
IoT networks based on LoRa are prone to intentional jamming. Even a simple jammer
based on LoRa transceiver can be used to disrupt LoRa transmission. Current research
related to LoRa jamming is focused mainly on stationary jammers.
In this project, I mainly focused on exploring the possibility of detecting mobile jammers
using various techniques. I focused on different physical relationships from which it could
be concluded whether a given jamming system is static or in motion.
In my master thesis, I will develop and compare two types of mobile jamming detection, the
first based on Digital Signal Processing and the second based on RSSI measurements.
The doppler­based analysis is designed to detect a moving object by small changes in
the frequency of the received signal.
Analysis based on the strength of the received signal (RSSI), was aimed at detecting the
movement of the object by analyzing the power received by the receiving stage of the
transceiver system of the Lora module.
Analysis based on the measurement of the received signal strength (RSSI) gave auspi­
cious results. It was possible to observe a significant difference in the RSSI readouts,
between static and mobile transmitters.
==PAGE:5==
Preface
This thesis has been prepared over six months at the Department of Applied Mathematics
and Computer Science, at the Technical University of Denmark, in fulfillment of the degree
Master of Science in Computer Science and Engineering.
The project was completed within 6 months, from August 11th, 2022 to February 1st, 2023
and is as equivalent to a workload of 35 ECTS points.
Bartlomiej Jozef Bleszynski ­ s182182
31 January 2023
Date
Signature
Detection of mobile LoRa jammers
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
I want to thank my supervisors, Xenofon Fafoutis and Charalampos Orfanidis for accept­
ing my thesis topic and allowing me engineering and creative freedom to conduct re­
search.
It was great to hear valuable feedback and advice from you, which helped me to fit in a
limited timeframe and create a thesis covering this novel research area.
iv
Detection of mobile LoRa jammers
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Summary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Research problem . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Structure
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
2
Background
2
2.1
LoRa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2.2
RSSI . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2.3
Jamming
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.4
Direction finding
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
3
State of The Art
4
3.1
Signal properties of LoRa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
3.2
Existing jamming techniques
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
3.3
Jamming countermeasures . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
4
Design and implementation
13
4.1
Embedded software . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
4.2
Post­processing software . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
5
Data Acquisition
18
5.1
Test setup . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
5.2
Data acquisition
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
6
Doppler detection of mobile jammers
25
6.1
Doppler based detection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
6.2
Simulation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
6.3
Experiment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 34
6.4
Conclusions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 36
7
RSSI­based detection of mobile jammers
37
7.1
RSSI detection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 37
7.2
Conclusion
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 43
8
Conclusions
45
8.1
Further work
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 45
Bibliography
46
Detection of mobile LoRa jammers
v
==PAGE:8==
vi
Detection of mobile LoRa jammers
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction
This thesis focuses on one important aspect of the security of the LoRa protocol ­ availabil­
ity. Availability is one of three elements of the cybersecurity triad, along with confidentiality
and integrity. In today’s world, the LoRa protocol is gaining more and more popularity due
to its long­range capabilities, resistance to radio noise, and simplicity of use.
Regardless of whether we are considering the usual physical layer of the LoRa protocol
(LoRa PHY) or higher­level implementations such as LoRaWAN ­ every one of them is at
risk of possible loss of availability in case of a jamming attack.
At this point, it should be noted that the Lora modulation itself is designed to eliminate in­
terference. LoRa is based on a patented technology developed by the Semtech company
that dramatically increases the resistance of transmission to interference by using the so­
called spread spectrum modulation with a chirp signal. This approach ensures that LoRa
is practically completely resistant to simple jamming with off­the­shelve jammers easily
available on the market and widely used to jam transmissions like GSM, WiFi, FM radio,
TV, etc., and most non­spread spectrum­based transmissions.
1.1
Research problem
Despite the fact that LoRa was designed as a very robust protocol, there is unfortunately a
very easy way to intentionally jam communications with a customized jammer. In practice,
it is enough to have a small transmitting module with the function of transmitting the LoRa
packet in order to largely render the communication ineffective. This is due to the fact that
LoRa is not inherently collision­proof, which means that in the case of two simultaneous
transmissions with identical modulation parameters and frequency, there will be a collision
and distortion of the received data. LoRa implements a mechanism to fight that problem,
called Channel Activity Detection (CAD), which senses LoRa preamble before starting
transmission. This feature in a cooperating network is important and helps to limit the
number of collisions. It is essential to mention, that jammers do not have to follow the
same protocol and will ignore that another transmission is in progress, which would be
indicated by the CAD flag.
This problem cannot be easily solved without an in­depth redesign of the LoRa protocol.
In such a situation, it is prudent to improve the jamming detection methods in order to
reliably determine who and how is performing the jamming. In my thesis, I will focus on
the ”how” part, to indicate whether the jammer is mobile or static to properly design a
search strategy when looking for a malicious jammer.
1.2
Structure
Every chapter is numbered and the sections inherit the chapter number followed by a dot
and a section number. Figures, equations, tables, etc. also inherit the chapter numbering.
Primary logical separation is made using chapters that divide the research process in a
way that provides the user with theoretical explanations, test strategies, experiments and
conclusions. Sections and subsections introduce additional ordering inside of chapters.
In the first part of the paper, the reader is familiarized with the theoretical background and
state of the art. In the latter chapters, readers can see how design, implementation, data
acquisition, and research tasks were conducted. The paper is concluded with a chapter
discussing results and findings.
Detection of mobile LoRa jammers
1
==PAGE:10==
2
Background
This chapter has a purpose to familiarize reader with concepts used in my research. It is
crucial that this section is read before proceeding to further chapters, as it explains a lot
of concepts widely used in this thesis.
2.1
LoRa
LoRa is a relatively new proprietary radio protocol. It has gained quite a lot of popularity
in the distributed networks of the Internet of Things. LoRa owes its popularity to high
noise immunity thanks to a special type of modulation based on Chirp Spread Spectrum
technique. This method is very effective when considering large distances between nodes
and the base station.
In practice, this allows user to have a small number of base stations that can cover quite
a large area ­ this means lower costs of creating and maintaining the infrastructure.
LoRa has gained popularity, among others, in remote temperature sensors, intelligent
farming, remote reading of water meters and in other areas where low power consumption
and long transmission range are important.
In practical solutions, LoRa mainly acts as one­way communication. Although most mod­
ules have the ability to receive and transmit in half duplex mode, for power­saving reasons
the sensors, especially those powered by batteries, are not constantly listening for incom­
ing transmissions. Most often it is the sensor that initiates communication with the base
station and only a moment after the transmission finishes, goes into the listening mode to
receive messages sent by the base station.
2.2
RSSI
RSSI, which is an abbreviation of ”Received Signal Strength Indicator”, is a parameter
that indicates a level of the signal received by the receiver chip. Received signal power is
expressed in decibel­milliwatts [dBm], which is a relative, logarithmic unit that is defined as
P[dBm] = 10log10
P[mW]
1mW . Most modern receiver integrated circuits have a special analog
circuitry, coupled with analog to digital converter and user­accessible register in memory
that contains the RSSI value. It can be read by the host microcontroller to estimate signal
strength in band to which receiver is tuned.
RSSI depends on factors such as for example the distance between the antennas, polar­
ization match of antennas, terrain structure, a gain of the antennas, a gain of the low noise
amplifier in the receiver and power amplifier in the transmitter and obstacles between the
transmitter and the receiver.
Friss equation 2.2 is a free­space, line­of­sight link budget formula, which estimates re­
ceived power (Prx) given gains of transmit antenna (Gtx) and receive antenna (Grx), trans­
mitter power (Ptx), distance between transmitter and receiver(d) and wavelength (λ).
Prx = PtxGtxGrx( λ
4πd)2
(2.1)
Prx = C 1
d2
(2.2)
2
Detection of mobile LoRa jammers
==PAGE:11==
2.3
Jamming
A jammer is a device that aims to interrupt communication or reduce its effectiveness.
Jammers do that by attacking different layers of communication protocols. Most popular
and straightforward jammers, attack physical layer of protocol and transmit either single
tone, linearly frequency modulated signal, or noise modulated FM or AM signals. Its goal
is to lower Signal To Noise Ratio (SNR) at the receiver and prevent the demodulator from
correctly interpreting incoming radio signals.
More elaborated jammers focus on attacking data link layer by transmitting forged fake
packets which are correctly received and demodulated by the victim receiver but are not
interpreted correctly on higher levels of communication protocol. It is an equivalent of a
popular DDoS attack in computer systems security.
LoRa is very resistant to noise and can’t be jammed with simple one­tone jammers or
those that generate a single frequency or radio noise in a given frequency band [1]. Un­
fortunately, in the case of LoRa, as in the case of Bluetooth, WiFi and Zigbee, the problem
is the coexistence of two transmissions encoded in the same way on the same frequency.
The receiving device cannot distinguish between two transmissions that are transmitted
simultaneously and have the same parameters. This causes a collision and the receiver
device is unable to decode any of coexisting transmissions. It may happen that the signal
is correctly interpreted by the demodulator, but when decoded, it turns out that the packet
was distorted, causing a CRC error.
This situation makes LoRa trivial to jamming. It is enough to know the parameters of
the transmission that we are trying to jam, such as carrier frequency (Fc), BW, SF, and
then transmit the signal with exactly the same parameters and random data. This type of
jammer can be created with the use of widely available Semtech radio modules and does
not require any specialized equipment for operation.
As a result, virtually anyone can easily build a very effective jammer from popular and
relatively cheap electronic modules available on the market. As for 2022 such a jammer,
based on ESP32 module with Semtech LoRa chip, costs approximately 50 Euro. With
additional high­gain Yagi directional antenna cost is approximately 120 Euro.
2.4
Direction finding
Direction finding is a technique allowing a user to locate the transmitter using either highly
directional antennas or digital signal processing methods which can locate approximate
bearing from which transmitter is transmitting. In case of a stationary transmitter it is
expected that the bearing will remain the same through the whole duration of measure­
ment and that the transmitter will be found at the spot estimated using the triangulation
approach. In case of a mobile transmitter following methodology will be rendered less
effective, as even if the bearing of the jammer would be estimated correctly, it is possible
that the jammer would be no longer there.
Detection of mobile LoRa jammers
3
==PAGE:12==
3
State of The Art
In this chapter, I describe the existing jamming methods, focusing in particular on jammer
architectures. A reader can also expect to find an analysis, of how different types of pop­
ular jamming signals influence LoRa physical layer. I will also present the newest findings
about LoRa signal characteristics, which were obtained using a reverse engineering ap­
proach, as LoRa physical layer is a proprietary signal design. In this section, a reader
can also expect an explanation of how jammer identification is done according to current
research.
3.1
Signal properties of LoRa
At the initial stage of LoRa’s popularity, it was a closed protocol that did not provide any
information that would allow it to be recreated with a digital signal processing approach
by end users. This meant that most users were only limited to hardware modules sold
by Semtech, the owner of the intellectual rights to the LoRa protocol and physical layer.
Fortunately, the aforementioned modulation has been reverse­engineered and presented
in papers [2], [3] and [4] which makes it possible to implement LoRa into a tool such as
GNUradio or to analyze the signal in Matlab. In my master’s thesis, the crucial element
was to learn about the spread spectrum method using the chirp signal (also called LFMS
­ Linear Frequency Modulated Signal), to de­spread LoRa and conduct further analysis.
The main parameters of the LoRa signal, necessary for its decoding, are the BW (band­
width) and the SF (spreading factor). These are the parameters required to generate
matching spectrum spreading and despreading sequences on both the transmitter and
receiver sides.
The primary purpose of LoRa is to transmit data in an efficient way. In the case of radio
protocols, their specification often operates on the concept of symbol. A symbol is the
smallest signal unit and symbol throughput, described as baud rate, is defined as the
number of signal changes per second. It is important to note, that the baud rate is not bit
rate. In fact, a single symbol can encode multiple bits. In case of LoRa, a number of bits
encoded by a single symbol is controlled by the SF (spreading factor). A relation between
bits and SF is defined as NBits = SF.
LoRa signal layer encodes symbols as frequency offsets. Equation 3.1 shows a relation
between LoRa signal bandwidth, spreading factor, and frequency offset for a given symbol
value. Frequency offsets are an exact parameter that carries information. SF parameter
affects the number of possible values coded by a single symbol. For example signal with
SF = 10, will have 210 = 1024 symbol values. That also means 1024 different frequency
shifts resulting in 1024 data symbol. Offsets are visible after despreading (mixing with
matching and synchronized linearly frequency modulated signal) and are presented as
an example in figure 3.1.
foffset = BW
2SF S where S ∈[0, 2SF −1] ∧S ∈N
(3.1)
4
Detection of mobile LoRa jammers
==PAGE:13==
Figure 3.1: Sample LoRa message with encoded ”Hello” without spreading.
SF=10,
BW=125kHz
Every symbol has to be transmitted for a certain amount of time called symbol duration
Ts, which is given by equation 3.2. Visually it is represented as a duration of a single
up­chirp presented for example in figure 3.2 or as a duration of a single frequency bin in
figure 3.1. Symbol duration is used to calculate slope parameter β of a chirp signal as
shown in equation 3.3.
Ts = 2SF
BW
(3.2)
β = BW
Ts
(3.3)
Equation 3.4 combines all above parameters into an instantaneous frequency equation.
The parameter dependent on the informational content of a message is foffset, defined
in equation 3.1.
f(t) = foffset + βt −BW
2
(3.4)
f(t) = d(ϕ(t))
dt
→ϕ(t) =
∫
f(t)dt
(3.5)
Detection of mobile LoRa jammers
5
==PAGE:14==
Instantaneous frequency of a signal is defined as 3.5. This formula shows that instanta­
neous frequency measures how fast the phase changes. In this context, it is an instan­
taneous phase that is required by further calculations. After integration of 3.4 we are left
with the formula 3.6 showing the instantaneous phase of generated chirp signal encoding
given symbol.
ϕ(t) = 2π(foffset −BW
2
t + β
2 t2))
(3.6)
When S = 0, foffset = 0 and the equation 3.8 becomes simplified into 3.9. It is the only
case when the chirp is continues. For every other value of S ∈[1, 2SF −1] ∧S ∈N,
chirp will be folded at tfold. The folding effect is clearly visible as a discontinuity in chirp,
presented in figure 3.2, starting from 100ms timestamp.
tfold = 2SF −S
BW
(3.7)
All the parameters presented above are necessary to derive the main equation describing
the LoRa signal shown in Equation 3.8. This equation is enough to generate complex
number samples of LoRa signal, which encode the given symbol S.
x(t) =
{
x(t) = exp (j2π(foffset−BW
2
t + β
2 t2))
for 0 ≤t ≤tfold
x(t) = exp (j2π(foffset−BW
2
t + 3β
2 t2))
for tfold ≤t ≤Ts
(3.8)
Figure 3.2: Sample LoRa message with encoded ”Hello”. SF=10, BW=125kHz
6
Detection of mobile LoRa jammers
==PAGE:15==
Equation 3.9 shows chirp in baseband (it is a simplified Equation 3.8), which is used to
generate complex spreading and despreading sequences.
x(t) = exp (j2π(−BW
2
t + β
2 t2))
(3.9)
Figure 3.3 shows the spectrogram of the signal described by Equation 3.9 for 10 consec­
utive symbols S = 0.
Figure 3.3: Sample chirp used as a despreading sequence. SF=10, BW=125kHz
3.2
Existing jamming techniques
As in most systems, also jammers have pre­defined architectures which can be treated
as backbones to build implementations of jamming devices. According to research and
literature review conducted in [5] a jamming event can occur because of one out of two
reasons. Communication can be interrupted due to a very high interference level which
deteriorates SNR parameter. Another reason for communication interruption caused by
jamming is when packet collisions occur. LoRa is by design very resistant to radio noise
and can operate with very low values of Signal to Noise Ratio.
We can identify four main groups of jammers :
• Constant jammer
• Deceptive jammer
• Random jammer
• Reactive jammer
Detection of mobile LoRa jammers
7
==PAGE:16==
3.2.1
Constant jammer
PREAMBLE
PAYLOAD
CRC
Legitimate
transmission
Time
Time
Jammer
Figure 3.4: Operation of constant jammer in time domain [5]
It is a relatively simple jamming technique that can be easily implemented using SDR
with Tx capabilities. A constant jamming signal is transmitted continuously on a given
radio channel. For instance, a jammer designed to disrupt communication on 868MHz
can be implemented as an RF sine wave generator with an 868MHz carrier without any
modulation or with AM or FM modulation with Gaussian noise. It is important to note that
a single­tone or noise jammers are often not enough to disrupt LoRa communication [1].
In this case, a chirp signal adjusted to specific BW and SF parameters would be a better
option than a single tone or noise jammer. Although it is the easiest method to implement,
it is also the easiest one to detect.
Research conducted in [6] provides results for jamming using constant jammers operating
in two modes ­ jamming using random Gaussian noise and jamming using chirp signals.
gaussian 
noise source
bandpass filter
RF amplifier
mixer
868MHz
local
oscillator
antenna
bandpass filter
Figure 3.5: Constant Gaussian noise jammer
Jamming using Gaussian noise can be applied to multiple protocols but not for LoRa,
because it uses CSS ­ chirp spread spectrum. Results of research conducted in [6] show
almost 100% PRR (packet received rate) with SNR = −2dB and around 80% with SNR =
−4dB. In this context SNR = −2dB means that the power of noise was 1.26 higher than
the signal and for ­4dB, the noise was 2.56 times more powerful at the receiver. It is clearly
visible that LoRa receiver is able to receive a signal below the noise level. The fact that
LoRa can resist interference is a valuable feature, owed to spread spectrum modulation.
It is clearly visible that increasing power of Gaussian noise jammer could at some point
disrupt communication for good and cause near­zero packet receive rate. Such jammer
8
Detection of mobile LoRa jammers
==PAGE:17==
would need to have significant RF output power which would be relatively easy to detect
either with SDR or with a spectrum analyzer.
RF amplifier
mixer
868MHz
local
oscillator
antenna
bandpass filter
chirp signal
Figure 3.6: Constant chirp jammer
In the case of jamming with a matching (channel, SF and BW) chirp signal it is possible
to achieve higher jamming efficiency. According to experimental results presented in [6] it
was possible to achieve jamming with SNR = −3dB. This is a situation in which jamming
signal is twice as powerful as a legitimate signal. It is worth noting that for SNR = 0dB, so
in situation when both legitimate and jamming signals have the same power, the receiver
can still recover the message with more than 96.5% efficiency.
3.2.2
Deceptive jammer
Legitimate
transmission
Time
Time
Jammer
PREAMBLE
PAYLOAD
CRC
PREAMBLE
PAYLOAD
CRC
PREAMBLE
PAYLOAD
CRC
PREAMBLE
Figure 3.7: Operation of deceptive jammer in time domain [5]
A deceptive jammer constantly transmits valid packets with a proper preamble, data and
CRC. For the receiver, there is no way to distinguish between legitimate transmission
and jamming transmission. It causes an equivalent of DDoS attack, as from a network
perspective it looks just like a busy radio channel. It is not possible for a network to easily
detect, that it is under attack.
Detection of mobile LoRa jammers
9
==PAGE:18==
legitimate
LoRa nodes
base station
jammer
Figure 3.8: Deceptive jammer
An example of such a system is shown on 3.8. It is composed of multiple legitimate nodes,
a base station and transmit only jammer. It is important to note that in this configuration,
a jammer is unaware of number of nodes, protocol and transmitted data. It is also not
aware of the status of transmission channel. It is only aware of transmission parameters
such as BW (bandwidth), frequency channel, and SF(spreading factor). It is transmitting
randomized data that is still received by the base station and is blocking it by means
of a denial of service. This kind of attack can cause additional harm to the receiving
devices where low power consumption is crucial for long­term operation. When a packet is
received, its validity can not be assessed by the receiver IC only. An application processor
has to be wakened up to analyze the contents of the payload. This caused increased
average current consumption by the device.
This type of jammer is implemented in my thesis, as it is suitable for experiments with
Doppler shift of carrier frequency as well as for detection using RSSI measurements.
3.2.3
Random jammer
PREAMBLE
PAYLOAD
CRC
Time
Time
Legitimate
transmission
Jammer
Figure 3.9: Operation of random jammer in time domain [5]
Random jammer [7] is similar to a constant jammer or deceptive jammer, but instead of
transmitting constant jamming signal it randomly switches jamming signal on and off. It is
a strategy, where the main goal is to save energy of the jamming device. It loops between
periods when jamming is on and off. The period of jamming and sleep can be set as
a fixed value or a randomized one. This type of jammer is less effective than constant,
deceptive, and reactive jammers as legitimate transmissions are not jammed during sleep
periods.
10
Detection of mobile LoRa jammers
==PAGE:19==
3.2.4
Reactive jammer
PREAMBLE
PAYLOAD
CRC
Legitimate
transmission
Time
Time
Jammer
preamble
detected
Figure 3.10: Operation of reactive jammer in time domain [5]
This type is a more complex jammer that works both as a transmitter and receiver. It lis­
tens for the preamble and only starts jamming when the preamble sequence is detected.
Implementation can vary, but the solution presented in [8] is a modular design with easy­
to­replicate software. It is easy to manufacture as it relies on widely available parts like
Semtech transceiver chip and Arduino. Semtech chip is set in RX mode on a particular
channel and with correct transmission parameters. It constantly intercepts ongoing trans­
missions. When software running on Arduino finds a packet of interest, a transceiver is
set in TX mode and starts sending jamming packets.
This type of jammer is significantly harder to detect as the jamming transmissions are only
triggered by legitimate transmissions.
legitimate
LoRa nodes
base station
jammer
Figure 3.11: Reactive jammer
An example of such a system is shown on 3.11. It is composed of multiple legitimate
nodes, a base station, and a more elaborated jammer with both RX and TX capabili­
ties. Jammer is constantly listening for transmissions and only starts to send a jamming
sequences if transmission occurred. In [9] authors suggest a jammer that listens for trans­
mission from a specific node. This approach is more precise and can target selected parts
of the network and can be aimed against specific node addresses which might cause a
selective denial of service. That might be significantly harder to detect, as from the per­
spective of a network administrator, it would look like a failure of a single node.
Detection of mobile LoRa jammers
11
==PAGE:20==
3.3
Jamming countermeasures
The main step in the implementation of a practically feasible Intrusion Detection System
for LoRa WAN network is a creation of detection technique that can identify an ongoing
attack and apply adequate countermeasures. My thesis focuses on finding identification
methods for whether the jammer is mobile or static. It also focuses on finding a method,
to identify whether packet originates from a jammer or from a legitimate transmitter by
assessing the entropy of data field in consecutive payloads. Due to the fact that types of
jammers differ significantly from each other, it is impossible to specify a single universal
method of jamming detection.
Based on research and surveys conducted in [10] and [7], it was possible to identify meth­
ods to restore communication in case of a jamming event. Early detection of a jamming
event may allow for a quick reaction such as:
• Re­routing of the network traffic to avoid jammed area
• Changing frequency channel
It is important to note, that system that is semi­resistant to jamming can be developed by
applying one of the following communication methods. Most of the methods listed below,
can not be applied to LoRaWAN, as it is limited to LoRa PHY layer specification.
• Frequency­Hopping Spread Spectrum eg. Bluetooth
• Regulated Transmitted Power
• Direct Sequence Spread Spectrum eg. LoRa
• Ultra Wide Band Technology
• Antenna Polarization
• Directional Transmission
In a typical Intrusion Detection System, it is valuable to store data about anomalous
events, like jamming. A quick and reliable detection method of jamming and its type
is crucial for the application of correct countermeasures.
I was also able to find an approach to the detection of a jamming event described in [11].
The presented solution is based on the calculation Hamming distance measurements be­
tween consecutive packets. It is a method that can be used in case of deceptive jammers.
This paper was an inspiration for my work described in section 7.1.3 which used different
indicator for resolving between legitimate and jamming packets, which in this case was
entropy.
It is worth noting that jamming detection can also be done with the use of less sophisticated
methods. An observation of the frequency spectrum with a spectrum analyzer with a
connected reference antenna can be used to manually detect a jamming event. This
method is rather only suitable against constant jammers.
12
Detection of mobile LoRa jammers
==PAGE:21==
4
Design and implementation
The entire project has been divided into three logical parts. Embedded software, software
for data analysis on a computer and hardware. In this section I will describe the issues
related to the software running on the ESP32 microcontroller and the general architecture
of the software processing data on the PC.
4.1
Embedded software
The embedded software was created in the Espressif IDF environment, which is an inte­
grated set of tools for ESP32 devices. Although there is a toolchain created for the Arduino
environment, software development in the IDF environment has a significant advantage
over Arduino, so as a programmer, I have much more control over the peripherals and
the execution of the program. The IDF environment is based on Eclipse software, which
additionally facilitates the development of microcontroller software. ESP32 and the IDF
environment support the development of software for the freeRTOS operating system by
default. It also includes various software modules that allow for reducing the program­
mer’s effort. The ESP32 API provides rich network functionality and allows access to the
peripherals of the microcontroller. It also conveniently increases the level of abstraction
during software development.
The software was written in C due to the fact that the SDK provided is based on FreeR­
TOS, which works best with this programming language. Uploading software to the ESP32
board is done via the UART interface and the default chip bootloader. This is a convenient
and fairly quick procedure, however, it also has the downside of lacking software debug­
ging functionality ­ it means that I could not execute the program instruction by instruction
or set breakpoints.
Hardware
Oled Driver
SX1276 Driver
FreeRTOS Kernel
FreeRTOS Libraries
Display status
Generate & send
random data
(a) Transmitter and Jammer stack
Hardware
Oled Driver
SX1276 Driver
LwIP
WiFi
FreeRTOS Kernel
FreeRTOS Libraries
UDP Client
Display status
Receive data
(b) Receiver stack
Figure 4.1: Software stacks of Transmitter, Jammer and Receiver
4.1.1
FreeRTOS
FreeRTOS is a popular microkernel operating system that is specially adapted to work
on small microcontrollers with limited hardware resources. The operating system itself
is a real­time system and has all the necessary components to create multi­threaded
software. The FreeRTOS operating system is equipped with the necessary elements
such as mutex, semaphore, but also convenient communication between threads in the
form of queues. FreeRTOS has a large community that is frequently updated and also
supported by manufacturers of automation, electronics, and software.
Detection of mobile LoRa jammers
13
==PAGE:22==
This system is used by the ESP32 chip by default. When opening a new project in the
ESP IDF environment, FreeRTOS is set as the default OS for a task management system.
This is the software that sufficiently met my needs of dividing the software into logical
segments and providing easier­to­implement parallelism.
FreeRTOS supports platforms such as [12], which only proves how popular it is among
big players in the semiconductor industry:
• STMicroelectronics
• Texas instruments
• NXP
• Cypress
• Espressif ­ a platform of my choice
• Infineon
• Mediatek
• Qualcomm
• Silicon Labs
• Xilinx
4.1.2
Application
It should be noted that although all applications, i.e. the transmitter, jammer, and receiver,
were written in the same set of libraries and in the same environment, they differ slightly.
Applications running on the transmitter and on the jammer are simpler than application
running on the receiver. The receiver application is more complex by the fact that it has
a network stack responsible for communication with the PC, to which data is sent.
The application of nodes only has a transmitting functionality (transmitter, jammer), and
has a simple structure in the producer­consumer architecture. The program has 2 threads,
one thread that produces data for the jammer or transmitter respectively, and the other
thread supports the presentation functionality on the OLED display. Both threads com­
municate using a queue through which information about the current broadcasting status
is transmitted.
Legitimate transmitter application
In the thread working on the transmitter, a frame is generated that resembles the LoRa
protocol frame. Due to the fact that it would be unnecessary to implement the full LoRa
protocol, the frame content was chosen to imitate the original LoRaWAN protocol frame,
imitating parameters such as random data, random CRC checksum content, static MAC
address, static frame parameters etc. Thanks to this, the transmitted data has the same
form as the LoRaWAN and is suitable for statistical tests without requiring the implemen­
tation of a full LoRaWAN protocol. The execution flow of this software is shown in picture
4.2.
14
Detection of mobile LoRa jammers
==PAGE:23==
Generate static parts of
LoRaWAN frame 
Generate dynamic parts of
LoRaWAN frame 
Transmit packet using
semtech chip and put
data to queue
static fields of LoRaWAN
Mac Header
Device Address
Frame Control
Frame Port
dynamic fields of LoRaWAN
Frame Counter
Frame Payload
MIC
communication queue
Display status on OLED
Figure 4.2: Software structure of the ”legitimate transmitter”
Jammer application
In the case of the jammer, the program structure is similar to the program structure of the
transmitter. An assumption was made that for jammer, the data payload will not resemble
the one of the LoRaWAN protocol, but will be randomly generated with a uniform probabil­
ity distribution for each byte. The jammer program also has a queue that communicates
with the producer’s thread generating the jamming signal with the consumer’s thread dis­
playing the current status on the display. The execution flow of this application is shown
in picture 4.3.
Generate dynamic LoRa
frame
Transmit packet using
semtech chip and put
data to queue
dynamic fields of LoRa frame
Frame Payload
communication queue
Display status on OLED
Figure 4.3: Software structure of the ”jammer”
Receiver application
The application running on the receiver was a bit more complex due to the fact that it
was required to communicate with the PC, to which the data from the received packets
were recorded. Communication took place via WiFi. The application had four separate
threads: one of them was a UDP client, the second was a WiFi hotspot, the third was the
thread responsible for presenting the data on the display, and the last one was a thread
responsible for receiving data from the SX1276 chip.
Detection of mobile LoRa jammers
15
==PAGE:24==
Initialize peripherials and
protocols (Wifi, UDP)
Wait for LoRa packet
Get RSSI
communication queue
Display status on OLED
Get RSSI, DATA
transmission queue
Send RSSI and DATA
throught UDP
Figure 4.4: Software structure of the ”receiver”
All threads communicated using queues. The first queue was similar to the previous im­
plementations (jammer and transmitter) with the status messages forwarded to the thread
responsible for the presentation. The next queue, much more important, was there to for­
ward the received data to the UDP client thread which sent it to the statically set IP address
of the UDP server running on the PC computer. The execution flow of this application is
shown in picture 4.4.
Thanks to a large amount of documentation provided by Espressif, and manufacturer’s
examples on GitHub, it was possible to implement all these functionalities without the
implementation of the UDP or WiFi protocols themselves. This approach allowed me
to focus more on the application layer rather than involve in time­consuming process of
writing a network connectivity stack from the scratch.
It is worth mentioning why the communication method via WiFi and UDP protocol was
chosen. The reason for this was the rather high complexity of UART as a communication
method from the Esp32 chip to the computer. Although UART is a very simple protocol by
itself, it would require the development of software that would be able to recognize UART
frames containing data out of deserialized data. In the case of the UDP protocol, all these
problems are already solved on the UDP transport layer in OSI model, so I don’t have
to worry about checking the integrity of the frame using a checksum, about cache on the
operating system side and other problems that would occur if UART would be used as a
communication protocol.
4.1.3
Drivers
Drivers were a necessary element connecting the hardware and software layers. The
device relies mainly on premade drivers in form of modules available both through the
ESP IDF environment and downloaded from GitHub.
The SX1276 system driver was based on an ESP­IDF module from the GitHub repository
[13]. OLED display driver was also downloaded as an ESP­IDF module and came from
the [14] repository. The rest of the drivers (for example WiFi, UDP, and ESP32 peripherals)
were provided by the manufacturer.
16
Detection of mobile LoRa jammers
==PAGE:25==
4.2
Post­processing software
Due to the fact that in this thesis I have planned two methods of recognizing moving ob­
jects, i.e. the method based on the measurement of the Doppler shift and the method
based on the RSSI measurement, different environments were used for data analysis.
Due to the more mathematical nature of Doppler analysis, I chose the Matlab environment
to simulate and process the signal acquired with SDR. In the case of the data obtained
from the RSSI measurement, these data sets were much smaller and could conveniently
be processed in Python. The sets from the RSSI measurements were also more diverse
because they contained geographic coordinates as well as velocities and also data pack­
ets that had to be further analyzed.
4.2.1
Matlab­based software
The software in Matlab has been created thanks to the theoretical knowledge recovered
by reverse engineering the LoRa protocol. The functions responsible for generating the
artificial LoRa signal used in the script, come from the publication [15] whose repository on
GitHub is available [16]. Finding an implementation of the LoRa protocol in Matlab made
it easy to test hypotheses and develop software due to the fact that it could be treated as
a ”golden standard” for testing detection algorithms.
I created software in Matlab in two ways simultaneously. The first way was based on an
artificial signal, to which a Doppler shift was added artificially and then analyzed by a mo­
tion detection algorithm. This approach made it possible to make sure that the algorithm
could work under ideal conditions.
Parallel with the version, based on an artificially generated signal, a version based on a
real radio signal recorded by SDR was developed. Due to the fact that the data set from
the SDR was very large, I analyzed only smaller sections of the recording.
Choosing this two­way approach was a good decision due to the much higher require­
ments for the robustness of algorithms and signal processing in the case of real­life record­
ings acquired from SDR, which was observed in earlier stages of development.
4.2.2
Python­based software
Four programs have been created in the Python language responsible for various stages
of data collection and presentation. Each of them could be integrated into one, but I found
that it would be more convenient to separate functionalities, and not repeat the processing
stages of raw data when only plotting of the data was required.
The first software module was there to create a UDP server that receives data from the
ESP32 module and writes them to a JSON file. Another program is used to correlate
data collected by the previous module (packet contents, RSSI) with data received from
GPS (geographical position, vehicle speed). The correlation between the two datasets
is performed based on timestamps, which are present bother in RSSI recordings and in
GPS recordings.
Subsequent software modules are designed to process and present the collected data
in form described in the following chapters. In these modules, for example, filtration,
description, and presentation of charts take place.
Detection of mobile LoRa jammers
17
==PAGE:26==
5
Data Acquisition
5.1
Test setup
The measurement system has been designed to be useful for all tests that were antici­
pated in the initial stage of project planning. The first type of test was to find the char­
acteristics of a moving jammer without additional LoRa network components such as a
legitimate LoRa transmitter. The test system also had to be useful for the second test sce­
nario involving measuring and testing the simulated LoRaWAN network under jamming.
In this scenario, a legitimate LoRa transmitter is present along with the base station and
jammer.
For this purpose, I decided to create a system consisting of two logical segments: the
mobile segment and the stationary segment.
The stationary part consists of a transmitter that stimulates a real LoRaWAN transmitting
node and a receiver consisting of an SDR radio and a Heltec module.
The mobile part was to be mounted on the vehicle and serve as a mobile jamming system.
It was also important to record the route and travel parameters for data post­processing.
5.1.1
Stationary segment
Receiver section
The receiving set is placed under the (55.783270, 12.525264) coordinates ­ a blue star
marked on map 5.5. The set consists of an SDR receiver and Heltek module with SX1276
chip, placed in a window with good visibility to the road shown on the map 5.5. The window
was kept open during the tests to reduce the potential influence of the window glass on
signal strength. Both devices were receivers so there was no interference between them.
Figure 5.1: Recorder setup. On the left side is the SX1276 LoRa module. On the right
side ­ the antenna is connected to RTL­SDR.
On photo 5.2, an SDR used for measurements is shown. It is repurposed USB DVBT
receiver. It is based on common baseband IC RTL2832 and IQ mixer Fitipower FC0012.
18
Detection of mobile LoRa jammers
==PAGE:27==
The most important parameters of this particular SDR are shown in table 5.1 and are
based on research conducted by Osmocom project[17].
Parameter
Value
Frequency span
22 ­ 948.6 MHz
Max. Sampling Rate
3.2 MS/s
Max. Sampling rate without sample loss
2.4 MS/s
ADC resolution
8bit I/Q
Table 5.1: RTL SDR receiver parameters
Figure 5.2: Photo of used SDR receiver compatible with RTL­SDR ecosystem
Figure 5.3 shows a legitimate LoRa transmitter. It is an integral part of the test, during
which a minimal network is running under jamming conditions. It is programmed with
firmware sending repeating patterns resembling the LoRaWAN frame.
Frame structure 5.1 is composed according to the general structure presented in paper
[18] and in greater detail in LoRaWAN Specification v1.1 [19].
1
2
typedef union{
3
struct __attribute__((__packed__)) {
4
uint8_t MAC_Header; //1 byte//constant value
5
uint32_t DeviceAddress; //4 bytes// constant value
6
uint8_t FrameControl; //1 byte//constant value
7
uint16_t FrameCounter;//2 bytes//incremented with every packet
8
uint8_t FramePort; //1 byte// for payload data = 0, for MAC commands it has
values <1,223>. Constant in transmission
9
uint8_t FramePayload[5]; //5 bytes//random
10
uint32_t MIC; //4 bytes//message integrity code - result os aes128_cmac -
random
11
};
12
13
uint8_t buffer[18]; //buffer to send overlapping memory region
14
15
}LoRaWANpacket_t;
Listing 5.1: Code used to generate LoRaWAN like packet structure in the legitimate
transmitter
Detection of mobile LoRa jammers
19
==PAGE:28==
Figure 5.3: Photo of Heltek radio module used as legitimate transmitter
5.1.2
Mobile segment
The jammer was the moving part of the test system. It was mounted on the windshield
of the car and was powered by a USB power bank. The jamming device was also based
on a Heltek module and was equipped with a stock antenna tuned to the transmitting
frequency of 915 MHz. The jamming device was located right next to the phone, the
function of which was to record the GPS position of the vehicle. The assumption was that
the mobile segment, i.e. the jammer and the GPS recorder, would move at a speed in
the range of 0 to 60 km per hour in order to detect possible Doppler shifts during tests
using digital signal processing. The setup used to transmit LoRa sequences and record
positions is shown in picture 5.4.
Figure 5.4: Photo of Mobile setup used for jamming. Jammer with an antenna on the left,
phone with GPS logger on the right.
5.1.3
Test route
To record the position of the car with the LoRa transmitter installed, the Ultra GPS Logger
[20] Android application was used, which recorded both geographic coordinates and GPS
speed every second. The route was recorded in the CSV format which allows for the
20
Detection of mobile LoRa jammers
==PAGE:29==
subsequent correlation of data from both the SDR and the Heltec module with the speed
and geographical position of the vehicle with an accuracy of +/­1 second.
Figure 5.5: Route followed by a car with jammer only during the tests. The blue star
indicates the position of the receiver setup presented in picture 5.4
Detection of mobile LoRa jammers
21
==PAGE:30==
Figure 5.6: Route followed by a car with jammer during the second test with a jammer
and legitimate transmitter
22
Detection of mobile LoRa jammers
==PAGE:31==
5.2
Data acquisition
In order to carry out the measurements, it was necessary to collect data with the use of
appropriate receivers. Due to the fact that in this thesis two detection attempts are carried
out, one based on the received signal strength and the other on the Doppler shift, the
signal acquisition techniques had to be different as they used different types of receivers
­ one based on SDR receiver and the other one based on Semtech chip.
5.2.1
Data acquisition with SDR device
In the first point, let’s focus on data acquisition for Doppler shift tests. The RTL­SDR radio
was used with the following parameters:
Parameter
Value
fcarrier
915MHz
fsampling
1MHz
Bandwith
1MHz
AGC
20dB
Datatype
IQ float
Table 5.2: SDR acquisition parameters
The software used to record the data is Gnu Radio [21]. The Gnu Radio Companion tool
was used to create a script diagram for recording the signal from the SDR radio. Scripts
let users easily modify parameters and allow them to observe different parameters of the
signal in real­time.
The script below has the ability to save the raw base­band signal as complex samples to
a binary file and display the spectrum in real­time on the computer display. The collected
data is quite large and the 21­minute test recording generated a file with a size of about
7 GB.
Figure 5.7: Gnu Radio script for recording data to a binary file which can be processed
offline
Detection of mobile LoRa jammers
23
==PAGE:32==
The recorded file is encoded as consecutive float numbers [22] and can be read using a
Matlab script. Its purpose is to parse binary data into complex numbers and it’s shown in
Listing 5.2.
1
dir = "C:\recorder\recording2_a_SF10_125k.bin";
2
f = fopen(dir, 'rb');
3
values = fread(f, Inf, 'float');
4
5
complex_v = values(1:2:end) + values(2:2:end).*1i;
Listing 5.2: Code used to parse binary file from GnuRadio to Matlab complex numbers
5.2.2
Data acquisition using SX1276 module
The second data set was recorded using the data received by the ”Heltec WiFi LoRa 32
V2” module [23]. It is a module that integrates the ESP32 microcontroller and the SX1276
transceiver on a single PCB. The module can be connected via WiFi and via LoRa. The
range of supported frequencies is from 868 MHz to 915 MHz. The module also integrates
an OLED display, which allows users to read device parameters in real­time. This is
especially useful for initial device debugging and setup.
Although the module allows users to send data via the USB connector through the virtual
COM port, it is not a convenient method because reading the data on the computer side
causes a lot of complications. To avoid problems related to parsing UART frames on the
PC side, I decided that the connectivity will be done through WiFi.
ESP32 provides very good support to the FreeRTOS operating system so it lets me easily
split the software into logical components. I decided to run the Wi­Fi Hotspot task on the
ESP32 module in conjunction with the UDP client task. The computer was connected to
Hotspot and it run the UDP server to which the ESP32 module was sending data as a
client.
On the PC side, the data was saved to a CSV file in real­time. The CSV format was
chosen because of the convenience when processing data in python.
24
Detection of mobile LoRa jammers
==PAGE:33==
6
Doppler detection of mobile jammers
6.1
Doppler based detection
Any radio signal that is transmitted from a moving transmitter or received by a moving
receiver is susceptible to the effect called Doppler shift. This phenomenon is more visible
when the carrier frequency is relatively high in the VHF or UHF range. High frequencies
are used in radiolocation to make the Doppler effect more distinctive and by that to de­
termine whether a signal is reflecting off a static or moving object. In the case of LoRa
transmissions, which are mostly limited to the sub­GHz band, the effect is still present but
less visible. A similar principle based on the Doppler shift can be applied to the detection
of mobile LoRa jammers.
In a real­world situation, it is not possible to determine the exact frequency on which the
jamming system transmits (unknown exact channel frequency, drift of crystal oscillator in
jammer). This causes the problem that theoretically it cannot be said what is the exact
Doppler shift from carrier frequency for moving jammer. It is not possible to know the ab­
solute value of speed for such a target so a slightly different approach to problem definition
is required.
The assumption I make in my thesis is that if the jamming device is mounted on a mobile
platform, such as a car, it is expected that the vehicle will accelerate or decelerate during
its movement thus changing its speed. In such a situation, it is admittedly impossible
to determine the absolute speed of the vehicle (for this it would be necessary to know
precisely the carrier frequency of the jammer).
Hypothesis:
It is possible to determine the relative change of the Doppler frequency over time,
which will correspond to the change in speed of the vehicle with the jamming sys­
tem installed. For static jammers, there would be no change in Doppler frequency.
Such an approach allows for determining whether the jamming system is stationary or
mobile, by determining the variability of the Doppler frequency.
6.1.1
Theoretical model of jammer signal mounted on moving vehicle
Before creating software, it is necessary to first develop a mathematical model of a jammer
installed in a moving object. It is known that every radio signal from a moving transmitter
is frequency shifted by the Doppler effect.
Formula 6.1 shows what Doppler frequency is expected for moving transmitter. Vobject is a
radial speed of a jammer toward a receiver, c0 is the speed of light and fcarrier = 915MHz.
Carrier frequency is dictated by the hardware specification of Heltec ESP32 LoRa nodes.
fdoppler = Vobject
c0
fcarrier
(6.1)
In figure 6.1 a Doppler shift frequency is plotted as a function of speed. It is linearly
dependent on the speed of the jamming transmitter.
Detection of mobile LoRa jammers
25
==PAGE:34==
Figure 6.1: Doppler frequency for jammer moving from 0 to 150 km/h, transmitting at a
central frequency of 915MHz
In table 6.1 there are shown Doppler shift frequencies for some of the common vehicle
speeds.
speed [km
h ]
fdoppler [Hz]
30
25.4
50
42.4
60
50.9
80
67.8
100
84.78
Table 6.1: Doppler shift frequencies fcarrier = 915MHz
After observing Figure 6.1 and Table 6.1, it can be concluded that the Doppler frequency
for speeds, common in urban traffic, is quite low. It is important to note that we need to
detect that small change in the carrier frequency, which is two orders of magnitude greater.
The Doppler frequency corresponding to common speed in the urban area (50km/h) is a
change of 45Hz around 915 ∗106Hz carrier frequency. That gives a relation of 4.6 ∗106
percent between the Doppler frequency and the carrier frequency.
Looking at formula 3.8 from Section 3.1, we can see that this is a signal in the baseband.
That means that it is downconverted and centered around fcarrier = 0Hz. In the further
analysis, I will analyze the preamble chirp signal (foffset = 0Hz) in the same form as in
equation 3.9, but modified by Doppler frequency and operating on non­zero fcarrier.
Instantaneous frequency is given by 6.2. As we are considering a preamble, fcarrier =
0Hz.
f(t) = βt −BW
2
+ (fcarrier + fdoppler)
(6.2)
26
Detection of mobile LoRa jammers
==PAGE:35==
By knowing the relation between instantaneous phase and instantaneous frequency given
by 3.5 it was possible to calculate 6.3 as an integral of frequency over time.
ϕ =
∫
f(t)dt = β
2 t2 −BW
2
t + (fcarrier + fdoppler)t
(6.3)
All operations are performed on complex numbers because the collected samples are in
the IQ format, which means that each sample consists of a real and an imaginary part,
which also implies that the theoretical representation shown below must be calculated in
the domain of the complex numbers.
The instantaneous phase corresponding to the Doppler­shifted LoRa signal is substituted
into the complex harmonic signal formula into the exponent. This is shown in formula 6.4.
x(t) = ejϕt = exp (j2π(−BW
2
t + β
2 t2 + (fcarrier + fdoppler)t))
(6.4)
Then, for the purpose of visualization, the parameters of the exponent are separated.
In Formula 6.5, the components responsible for the carrier frequency, the Doppler shift
frequency, and the component responsible for producing the Chirp signal are separated.
x(t) = exp (j2πfcarriert) exp (j2πfdopplert) exp (j2π(−BW
2
t + β
2 t2))
(6.5)
The next step is presented in Equation 6.5. It has shifts in frequency, caused by carrier :
exp (j2πfcarriert) and by Doppler: exp (j2πfdopplert). The Carrier component is removed
during downconversion in SDR radio, so only Doppler shift and chirp signal are present
in the resulting Equation 6.6.
x(t) = exp (j2πfdopplert) exp (j2π(−BW
2
t + β
2 t2))
(6.6)
The experiment was carried out in Matlab due to the availability of mathematical func­
tions and its good computational performance. The processed data was large in size
and required considerable computing power. Two experiments of motion detection by the
Doppler frequency shift were performed. The first was about the ideal, theoretical signal
without any interference to check if the mathematical model was working. The second
experiment worked on real data collected with the SDR radio.
6.2
Simulation
Before I started testing my hypothesis on a real signal, I first wanted to make sure that
the algorithms would work on the perfect, artificial signal generated on the PC. For this
purpose, I found a publication [15] and a corresponding repository on GitHub [16] which
implements a LoRa signal generating function for given protocol parameters such as SF
and BW and data contained in the payload. Thanks to this, it was possible to build a
theoretical model of a Doppler­based motion detector without using real data from the
SDR radio.
Detection of mobile LoRa jammers
27
==PAGE:36==
6.2.1
Cross correlation
Cross­correlation measures how similar are two signals. The general formula for discrete­
time correlation is shown in equation 6.7
Rxy[k] =
L
∑
n=L
x[m]y[m −k]
(6.7)
Cross­correlation produces an output vector twice the length (2L) of the input vector (L).
On the negative side of zero, there are negative shifts of the pattern signal relative to the
correlated signal. On the right, there are positive shifts in the pattern in relation to the
correlated signal.
The cross­correlation has the greatest value for the time offset on which the signals are
most similar to each other. Visually, in the cross­correlation plot, this means the peak
at the shift of the highest similarity of the two signals ­ the pattern signal and the signal
subjected to correlation.
Most of the graphs seen in this thesis are presented in the frequency domain. This is on
purpose, as it is easier for a reader to recognize features of frequency modulation in the
frequency domain, for instance, Figure 6.3 clearly shows the linearity of the modulation in
the chirp signal.
However, in the case of correlation, it is also important to be aware how what the time
domain signal looks like. This is the form that is subject to the cross­correlation process.
Figure 6.2 shows the cutout of the pattern signal which is used to detect the preamble
start of a single LoRa frame.
Figure 6.2: A short cutout from detection pattern representing a real component of chirp
signal. The horizontal axis is scaled in samples.
28
Detection of mobile LoRa jammers
==PAGE:37==
Figure 6.2 is a subset of a signal which corresponds to the spectrogram shown in Figure
6.3.
The time domain signal is less readable if it presents the entire detection pattern used for
cross­correlation. It is for this reason that the graph shown in Figure 6.3 is represented in
the frequency domain.
In figure 6.3, the first 8 chirps (orange box) correspond to the symbols coding binary ones
[1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1]. The next two symbols (blue box) correspond to the encoded zeros
[0, 0]. The next two (green box) chirps, present time ”mirrored” signals, correspond to two
symbols [0, 0] which have been conjugated.
Figure 6.3: Detection pattern ­ an ideal preamble used for correlation for given LoRa
parameters BW=125kHz, SF=10
In this thesis, it is very important to accurately determine the start of the LoRa packet.
Data that the SDR radio receives and records are composed of single packets separated
by periods of radio silence. Doppler shift detection algorithms require very precise infor­
mation about the exact beginning of a single LoRa packet. Error in process of determining
the beginning of the packet causes the algorithms to have very poor performance. This
makes cross­correlation an important stage in the whole signal chain.
Detection of mobile LoRa jammers
29
==PAGE:38==
Figure 6.4: A train of LoRa packets. The vertical red line on the spectrogram indicates
the beginning of a packet which is detected in the time domain using cross correlation
The graph 6.4 shows a spectrogram of a LoRa signal generated artificially by a Matlab
script. These are three successive transmissions of LoRa. Dark blue gaps are periods of
radio silence. Red lines indicate the beginning of a single packet in the frequency domain,
but it is important to remember that the detection takes place using cross­correlation in
the time domain.
6.2.2
Packet splitting
Due to the fact that the entire recording is usually quite long, I decided to split such a long
recording into smaller parts. This is because the correlation algorithm is not very good at
dealing with long data. The correlation algorithm has an O(N2) computational complexity.
Breaking down the problem into smaller parts results in a dramatic increase in produc­
tivity and is good practice. In this paper, I have made a fairly simple assumption of how
the whole recording will be broken down into smaller parts. Knowing the frequency of
incoming LoRa packets, I was able to determine what is the period they are transmitted.
Knowing that there is a period of radio silence between the LoRa packets, it was easy to
extract parts of the signal containing LoRa packet without worrying that the signal could
be clipped. With this knowledge, I was able to split the long signal into shorter ones, every
containing one LoRa packet. As a result, that created an array of vectors, where each
vector contained a single LoRa packet. These packets were then synchronized with the
correlation algorithm to estimate a precise start of a preamble.
30
Detection of mobile LoRa jammers
==PAGE:39==
PACKET 1
PACKET 2
PACKET 3
PACKET 4
Figure 6.5: LoRa packets splitting during periods of ”radio silence”
PACKET 1
PACKET 2
PACKET 3
PACKET 4
Figure 6.6: LoRa packets split incorrectly. It caused part of the packet (preamble) to be
clipped.
6.2.3
Artificially apply Doppler shift
The signal that was generated with the script described in publication [15] is a pure signal,
free from any distortions such as, for example, a Doppler shift. In order to test whether
it is possible to detect Doppler shifted signals at all using the correlation method, it was
necessary to artificially distort the ideal signals generated in Matlab by applying Doppler
shift in simulation.
For this purpose, I applied the Fourier Transform property known as Frequency Domain
Shift. It is a simple operation that is calculated in the time domain on complex samples
and causes the spectrum of the signal in the frequency domain to be shifted by an angular
frequency defined as ω0. The formula showing this property is presented in Equation 6.8.
x(t)ejω0t <=> X(ω −ω0)
(6.8)
However, in Equation 6.8, the continuous­time domain form is shown. Continuous­time
formulas must be transformed adequately to the discrete­time domain because the entire
script operates on samples that are collected at the sampling rate fs. The converted
formula is shown in equation 6.9.
x[n]ej2πf0 1
fs n
(6.9)
Listing 6.1 shows how a Doppler shift is added to the signal. First, a vector representing
time points is created, then a vector that contains consecutive Doppler shifts in hertz. The
last step in this process is putting the above two tables back into a formula which is the
equivalent of equation 6.9.
Detection of mobile LoRa jammers
31
==PAGE:40==
1
tm = 0:1/Fs:((length(complex_v)-1)/Fs);
2
fshift = linspace(0,50,length(tm));
3
complex_v = (complex_v ' .* exp(1i .* 2 .*pi .*fshift .* tm))';
Listing 6.1: Code used to apply arbitrary Doppler shift to the whole signal
6.2.4
Signal mixing
An important part of LoRa signal processing is mixing it in a synchronized manner with a
reference signal (chirp encoding [0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0] ­ 12 consecutive zeros). Mixing
in this context is just multiplying two vectors of complex samples (measured signal and
reference one) by each other. One vector has to be conjugated, for example, a reference
signal.
This operation makes it possible to obtain an output signal with a distinctive frequency,
the so­called beat frequency, which has a value equal to the Doppler shift frequency. This
operation is presented in the Equation 6.10 and signal path is presented on Figure 6.8.
y(t) = exp (j2πfdopplert) exp (j2π(−BW
2
t + β
2 t2))conj(exp (j2π(−BW
2
t + β
2 t2))) =
= exp (j2πfdopplert) exp (j2π(−BW
2
t + β
2 t2)) exp (j2π(BW
2
t −β
2 t2))
= exp (j2πfdopplert) exp (j2π(−BW
2
t + β
2 t2) + j2π(BW
2
t −β
2 t2))
= exp (j2πfdopplert)
(6.10)
Two signals that would be mixed together, i.e. the chirp reference signal and the measured
signal (having no Doppler shift), would result in a resultant frequency of 0 hertz. Whether
this frequency is 0 Hertz depends on how well we synchronize to the beginning of the
LoRa frame ­ In other words, whether there is a phase shift between the reference signal
and the analyzed signal.
If the synchronization between the two non­Doppler shifted signals is imperfect then a
slight frequency shift occurs which is constant for the entire packet. It is very important to
point out that the synchronization should be as good as possible, or at least repeatable
between packets so that the possible phase shift between the reference signal and the
analyzed signal is equal to 0 or it is constant between consecutive LoRa frames.
The problem with non­perfect synchronization is visualized in Figure 6.7. The red arrow
indicates time/phase shift between periodic signals, which in the following Figure is not
equal to zero. Such phase shift causes a non­zero offset in frequency, represented by
a green arrow. This offset has a constant value over the whole packet and should also
have the same constant value or zero for all consecutive processed packets. That’s why
a very good or very consistent synchronization is needed.
32
Detection of mobile LoRa jammers
==PAGE:41==
Δt
Δf
Figure 6.7: Effect of frequency bias for not aligned signal pattern and measured signal.
Vertical axis ­ frequency, horizontal axis ­ time.
6.2.5
Beat frequency detection
After the signal passes through pre­processing chain(synchronization and mixing), it is
necessary to detect and determine specific frequencies of Doppler shifts. For this pur­
pose, an operation called FFT is used, which quickly allows identification of frequency
components in a given signal. The input signal to the FFT transform is a complex signal
coming from the mixer, which multiplied the reference signal with the synchronized mea­
sured signal. It uses the built­in Matlab function that performs the FFT function on the
complex samples vector. The result of the FFT transform is also a complex sample vector
that contains information both about the signal’s amplitude and the phase characteristics.
In this case, I am not interested in the phase characteristic, but only in the amplitude one.
For this, the absolute value is calculated from the output of the FFT transform. After this
operation, all vector samples are real and greater than 0.
Next, this amplitude characteristic is given as an argument to a Matlab built­in function
finding the maximum value. In this context, it is not important what is the maximum value
but for what frequency it occurs.
Detection Pattern
complex chirp
encoding vector of
12 zeros
synchronized input
signal
conjugate
FFT
ABS
MAX
Figure 6.8: Signal path of Doppler detection methodology. Combines mathematical meth­
ods described in sections 6.2.4 and 6.2.5
6.2.6
Simulation results
For the test, samples containing the artificially generated LoRa packets (200 repeated
packets assembled in one, separated with radio silence periods), mentioned in subsection
6.2.1 were prepared. Then the samples were Doppler­shifted during the frequency shift
operation mentioned in subsection . After this procedure samples were complex­mixed
with the synchronized de­spreading sequence. Then the output of the previous step has
been subjected to Fourier transformation, described in section 6.2.5, to obtain the beat
frequency (in this context, same as Doppler shift frequency). Then the beat frequency
Detection of mobile LoRa jammers
33
==PAGE:42==
information was appended to a table and displayed on a graph to verify the validity of the
hypothesis in Figure 6.9.
Figure 6.9: Detected Doppler shifts
For purpose of the test, the Doppler distortion ranged from 0 to 50 Hz. This corresponds
roughly to a speed of 0 to 60 km/h. It is a reasonable speed in residential areas and
allowed for empirical determination of the effectiveness of the detection algorithm in a
real environment, where a vehicle with a jamming system would operate.
At this point, it is worth noting that the graph shows steps on the frequency axis. This is
due to the limited frequency resolution of the Fourier transform, which is sometimes called
a ”frequency bin”.
Additionally, a valuable observation is that for zero velocity, i.e. looking from the left side
on Figure 6.9, the most extreme sample is not equal to 0 hertz but approximately ­245Hz.
This is due to the aforementioned shortcomings in the synchronization of the reference
signal with the measured signal. As long as the error is repeatable between frames, this
is absolutely not a problem because as mentioned in the previous sections, we are not
interested in the exact Doppler frequency but a change of Doppler frequency. Therefore,
for example in Figure 6.9, the observed change is from the lowest point (­245 Hz) to the
highest point (­192 Hz) equal to 53 Hz which corresponds roughly to the artificially added
shift of 50 Hz.
6.3
Experiment
Having determined that it is possible to theoretically simulate and detect a moving LoRa
signal jammer, I decided to perform tests on a real signal obtained during the experi­
ment presented in 5.5. The signal was collected and stored on disk using the technique
presented in section 5.2. Then the signal was passed to a Matlab program for further
post­processing. It was mostly based on the script used in section 6.2.6 which previously
operated on an artificially generated signal.
34
Detection of mobile LoRa jammers
==PAGE:43==
6.3.1
Results
Results of the experiment are presented in Figure 6.10. It shows the first 200 jamming
packets which were recorded during the stage when the jammer was near the receiver and
moved with a relatively low velocity of 0 to 5km/h. It was the stage of an experiment when
the jammer was carried from the place of recording to the vehicle. It is a good reference
to judge whether it is possible to detect movement just by observation of Doppler shift for
a real signal recorded by SDR. In the case of positive results, a graph would present a
relatively flat line with a small or non­existent deviation.
0
50
100
150
200
packet
-500
-400
-300
-200
-100
0
100
200
300
400
doppler frequency
Figure 6.10: Detected Doppler shifts for real­life measurements for first 200 packets
Figure 6.10, shows results with a high standard deviation of ˆσ = 160Hz and with span
from minimal to maximal value of around fspan = 800Hz. This, put in comparison with
Figure 6.11 which shows speed in relation to an intercepted LoRa packet, leads to the
conclusion that the expected Doppler shift should be in a range from fdoppler = 0Hz to
fdoppler = 6Hz based on figure 6.1.
Detection of mobile LoRa jammers
35
==PAGE:44==
0
250
500
750
1000
1250
1500
1750
sample
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
km/h
Figure 6.11: GPS recorded speed during a real­life experiment. The horizontal axis shows
the packet number, corresponding with Figure 6.10.
6.4
Conclusions
Although in the case of results obtained in the simulation, it has been proven that the al­
gorithm works and it is theoretically possible to detect the Doppler shift in the LoRa signal,
in case of the same algorithm running on real data containing noise and potentially other
artifacts such as signal clipping or other distortions like instability of the carrier frequency
of a signal, caused that the results were not positive.
Further work should be aimed at improving the algorithm that searches for the beginning
of the LoRa frame with the greatest possible precision. The correlation algorithm is a good
starting point but it is possible that a better preamble detection method would be found in
further research.
The theoretical results presented in my research are a good starting point that can be
used to verify experimental data and be a mathematical proof that allows for further im­
provement of the algorithm for detecting the beginning of the LoRa packet.
36
Detection of mobile LoRa jammers
==PAGE:45==
7
RSSI­based detection of mobile
jammers
7.1
RSSI detection
The main objective of this experiment was to check whether mobile jamming systems can
be detected by analyzing received signal strength (RSSI). It was carried out using data
received from the Semtech module and GPS coordinates only (it was not relying on data
from SDR).
I collected data using the UDP server running in python script on PC and UDP client
running on ESP32 chip, mentioned in section 5.1. Data received from the Heltec module
was saved by the server to a CSV file locally on the PC for further processing.
The CSV file contained fields such as timestamp, RSSI, and the data packet received
by the Semtech module.
In parallel to this, when driving a car with an installed jamming device, the GPS data were
also recorded with such parameters as timestamp, vehicle speed, and its geographical
coordinates.
It is important to notice that these two separate recordings were only related by timestamp,
so they had to be joined together to form a resulting data set that can be analyzed.
For this purpose, a special script written in Python was created, which purpose was to
integrate both data sets based on the time stamp so that the resulting data set had in­
formation about timestamp, RSSI, the data packet received by the module, geographic
coordinates, speed, and the distance between the jammer and receiver, which was cal­
culated based on the difference between the geographical coordinates of vehicle and
stationary recording station.
Two separate hypotheses were tested in this section:
The first hypothesis is related to separating out rogue packets from legit packets and it is
as follows:
By observing the entropy of individual bytes in LoRa packets, it can be determined
whether the signal comes from the jammer or comes from the LoRaWAN network
node
The second hypothesis concerns the actual detection of moving objects and is as follows:
By observing the RSSI value of received packets, it can be determined whether a
given transmitter is in motion or is stationary
The combination of these two hypotheses gives a fairly usable intrusion detection system
prototype that is able to distinguish in the first step whether the signal is a jamming signal
or the desired signal. And in the next step, it is able to determine whether a given signal
is a signal coming from a moving or stationary transmitter.
7.1.1
Entropy of signal
An information­theoretical measure of the degree of indeterminacy of a random variable
is called entropy. It is defined by a formula 7.1 proposed by Shannon [24]
Detection of mobile LoRa jammers
37
==PAGE:46==
H = K
n
∑
i=1
pilog2(pi)
(7.1)
In terms of further considerations, it is easier to present it in the form shown in the formula
7.2 suggested in [25]. This form incorporates histogram operation in a clearer form. In this
formula, counti is the number of occurrences of a given value and N is the total amount
of all values.
H = K
n
∑
i=1
(counti
N
)log2(counti
N
)
(7.2)
In Python, in the scipy environment, there is a function that calculates entropy based on
a vector containing the probabilities of given symbols (which can also be interpreted as
values of a given byte).
In this context, entropy will show how much information is contained in a given bit series.
The fact is that for a purely random sequence, the entropy will be high and for a sequence
containing constant values the entropy will be 0.
7.1.2
Histogram as discrete distribution estimator
A histogram can be used as a distribution density estimator to determine the probability
of a given symbol or value in a data vector. The histogram is a popular function used to
display data as a bar graph. In this context, the part responsible for the graphic presenta­
tion is not used ­ only the part that signifies the number of occurrences of a given symbol
in the vector is used. This approach allows for a significant simplification of the program
through the use of built­in mathematical functions.
The histogram is defined in formula 7.3, where n is the number of observations (length of
data vector), mi is the number of observations in a given bin and k is a number of bins.
n =
k
∑
i=1
mi
(7.3)
As previously mentioned in the section on entropy 7.1.1 , by cleverly using the values
returned by the histogram, one can easily calculate the entropy as represented by the
formula 7.2.
It is worth noting that the histogram bin size in this experiment is equal to one.
Data preparation for statistical test
In order to understand further processing it is important to present how the data was
prepared for further statistical processing.
A single packet received by LoRa was treated as a single horizontal vector of a two­
dimensional array containing N bytes. The second dimension of the array consisted of
successive vectors in time. This is shown graphically in figure 7.1.
38
Detection of mobile LoRa jammers
==PAGE:47==
BYTE 0
BYTE 1
BYTE 3
BYTE 4
BYTE N-1
N - byte LoRa packet
BYTE 0
BYTE 1
BYTE 3
BYTE 4
BYTE N-1
BYTE 0
BYTE 1
BYTE 3
BYTE 4
BYTE N-1
P - number of packets
Packet 1
Packet 2
Packet P
H1
H2
Hn
Figure 7.1: Data organization for statistical processing. H1, H2 to Hn are histograms
calculated over columns (dotted rectangles)
Histograms are calculated for each vertical vector outlined in Figure 7.1 with dashed rect­
angles. Vertical vectors are created for zero bytes and every subsequent byte up to N­1.
That is, each histogram is counted for P number packets
It is the histograms that are the basis for calculating the entropy in the next steps.
0
50
100
150
200
250
byte[0] values
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
occurences
Histogram byte[0] values for random packets
Figure 7.2: Histogram of byte[0] values for multiple packets sent by jammer sending ran­
dom packets
Such an exemplary histogram is shown in Figure 7.2, which is computed for all values
of the zero byte. The histogram now plays the role of an approximated probability den­
Detection of mobile LoRa jammers
39
==PAGE:48==
sity distribution of a discrete random variable. You can see it quite well on the graph,
there is a lot of randomness of values on byte zero. Visually this distribution resembles
a uniform distribution. This is in line with theoretical expectations because the jamming
signal byte values transmitted by the ESP32­SX1276 Heltek module used for jamming
were generated by the rand() function.
7.1.3
Entropy and histogram
In order to calculate the entropy, a special script in Python was written which, working
on previously processed and prepared measurement data collected by the ESP­Heltek
module, was able to first calculate the histograms for each byte of the data packet and
then calculate the entropies from every one of them.
It should be noted here that the splitting of packets into jamming packets and packets with
a legitimate transmitter was done manually. The jamming packet length (10 bytes) and
the legitimate transmitter packet length (18 bytes) were known.
Therefore, by observing the length of the packet, it was possible to judge whether the
packet came from a jammer or from a legitimate transmitter. Such mixed transmission
took place only in test 2 (depicted in Figure 5.6), which was discussed in section 5.1 of
Chapter 5.
By applying the entropy calculation to the previously calculated histogram according to the
formula shown in equation 7.2, the following graphs can be generated which clearly illus­
trate the differences in the randomness of the data contained in the packets. It is important
to note here that the entropy has been computed for each byte position separately.
Figure 7.3 was created using data obtained only from the jammer. Entropy is relatively
high at each byte position. Entropy is approximately 5.5 with little variation which is hard
to see on the figure but is approximately +/­0.2. The maximum possible entropy would be
8, but the use of a non­ideal source of randomness (rand() C function), causes entropy to
be lower.
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
Packet slot
0
1
2
3
4
5
Entropy
Entropy as a function of byte in message
Figure 7.3: Entropy calculated for all 10 bytes of a jammer data packet. Entropy is com­
parable and it’s relatively high in a range of 5.5. The maximum achievable entropy, in this
case, would be 8.
40
Detection of mobile LoRa jammers
==PAGE:49==
In the case of Figure 7.4, it was created based on the data obtained only from the legit
transmitter, which broadcast sequences similar to the characteristics of LoRaWAN trans­
missions. The graph shows sections in which the data has zero entropy, which means
that there is no randomness in them, in other words, they are constant values. Such an
example is, the value of the address field of the transmitter or receiver.
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17
Packet slot
0
1
2
3
4
5
Entropy
Entropy as a function of byte in message
Figure 7.4: Entropy calculated for all 18 bytes of the legitimate transmitter. Entropy varies
and is low for parts of a packet that are constant
There are also sections in this package that show a lot of randomnesses, for example,
sections responsible for encrypted data or sections responsible for the CRC checksum.
7.1.4
RSSI of mobile jammer
The result of the first test was to determine the baseline for the second experiment. It was
a drive with a mobile jammer mounted in the car. It was the only signal that was received
by the receiving station so the registered RSSI signals come only and exclusively from
the mobile jammer device.
The graphs shown in Figure 7.5 are taken from the above measurement. It is composed
of four subplots that show (starting from the top one): raw RSSI, denoised RSSI, the
distance between the jammer and receiver station, and the GPS speed of the jammer.
It is worth noting here that the first graph in figure 7.5, showing raw values of RSSI, is very
noisy. This is due to fluctuations in the measured RSSI, which is influenced by various
factors and additive noise in the radio channel. To remove the noise, it was necessary to
apply filtering which keeps the overall trend of the signal well. The usual low­pass FIR filter
could not be used because it would remove too much signal information without keeping
the overall trend. An example of such an undesirable effect is the smoothing of peaks
when a low­pass filter is used. The filter that turned out to be ideal for this application is
the Savitzky­Golay filter [26]. This special type of filter is included in Scipy Python package
and is ideal for the presentation purpose of smoothing RSSI data set.
Detection of mobile LoRa jammers
41
==PAGE:50==
0
250
500
750
1000
1250
1500
1750
120
100
80
60
(1)
dB
0
250
500
750
1000
1250
1500
1750
120
100
80
60
(2)
dB
0
250
500
750
1000
1250
1500
1750
0
500
1000
(3)
m
0
250
500
750
1000
1250
1500
1750
sample
0
20
40
60
(4)
km/h
Figure 7.5: 1.) Raw RSSI, 2.) Filtered RSSI with Savitzky­Golay filter, 3.)Distance be­
tween jammer and receiver, 4.) Speed of vehicle with installed jammer
Strong variation of RSSI parameter is clearly visible here on the second graph shown
in Figure 7.5. The correlation is clearly visible between the decrease of RSSI with an
increase in distance between the receiver and jammer.
7.1.5
Comparative RSSI analysis of Jammer and Transmitter
A second comparative test based on the data collected during the trip shown in Figure
5.6 comes from the jammer and legitimate transmitter. The raw RSSI data from the mea­
surement was also filtered to remove random noise but retain the overall trend of the
signal.
The significant difference with the previous experiment is that here the signals from the
transmitter and jammer were separated based on the characteristics of individual packets.
It is worth mentioning here that the division of packets was not based on their statistical
parameters (as discussed in subsection 7.1.4) but on the packet length. The legitimate
transmitter packets were longer (18 bytes) than the jammer packets (10 bytes). This
feature was used to distinguish RSSI from a legitimate transmitter and jammer. This was
42
Detection of mobile LoRa jammers
==PAGE:51==
a substitute for an automatic classification system, which wasn’t the scope of my research.
The first graph in Figure 7.6 is from a legitimate transmitter. The second chart is based on
RSSI of received jamming packets. The third graph shows the distance from the jammer
to the measuring receiver
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
800
100
50
(1)
dB
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
100
50
(2)
dB
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
sample
0
500
1000
(3)
m
Figure 7.6: 1.) Filtered RSSI from a legitimate transmitter, 2.) Filtered RSSI form jamming
transmitter, 2.) Distance between jammer and receiver
The first plot in Figure 7.6 shows a flat line with slight fluctuations in the RSSI which
did not affect the overall constant value of the RSSI around level of ­75dB. This is an
expected observation because the distance between the legitimate transmitter and the
measurement receiver is constant, so the received signal strength remains the same.
The second graph shows clearly, that fluctuations correlate with changes in the distance
between the jamming transmitter and the measuring receiver in an almost inversely pro­
portional way. This is a very similar graph to the RSSI measurements collected solely
from the jamming transmitter presented in Figure 7.5.
This proves that after successfully separating the candidates for the jamming signal and
the useful signal, it is possible to assess the nature of the transmitter ­ whether it was
stationary or mobile ­ by observing variations of received RSSI values which are closely
correlated with distance. Because of that, they are at the same time correlated both with
radial speed (v = ds
dt) and with radial acceleration (a = d2v
dt2 ) of a vehicle carrying jammer.
7.2
Conclusion
The detection of a moving transmitter using the RSSI value seems to be an exceptionally
good method of detecting the movement of the jamming device. This is a method that is
based on a parameter that does not require any additional hardware, but only an additional
Detection of mobile LoRa jammers
43
==PAGE:52==
module in the software. This allows for a significant simplification of the base station by not
adding any additional hardware­based intrusion detection system. Each module based
on the LoRa transceiver can act as an RSSI meter and send the measured values to the
application processor.
This allows for significant energy savings because no additional hardware is used, and
packets that go to the base station would still be analyzed by the network layer or appli­
cation layers, so they would still require additional computing power. In this case, adding
an additional layer that acts as an IDS system whose role is to assess whether there is a
DoS attack on the network, does not require significant costs and energy.
A promising intrusion detection system can be based on the findings of this chapter. Sim­
ple RSSI­based system is shown in Figure 7.7 which, by evaluating the level of the re­
ceived signal, can determine whether it deviates from the norm (whether it is too high or
too low). It would be expected that between a static LoRa network node and a static base
station, the RSSI would remain unchanged over time. So it is enough to determine the
expected level of RSSI from a legitimate node (with some error range) so that the user
can simply use RSSI as an initial classifier of whether a given packet is trustworthy or
suspicious. Then, the procedure of assessing whether the classified packets are coming
from the jamming system or whether they are legitimate packets should be carried out, as
shown in Figure 7.7. However, I would like to point out here that the IDS system is only a
suggestion of the next steps that can be performed on the basis of the presented results.
The fully working system could in principle detect jamming attacks.
Get RSSI of packet
RSSI ∈ 
<LOW_RSSI, HIGH_RSSI>
Y
N
Packet marked as
legitimate
Packet marked as
suspicious
store in
database
calculate entropies
E>Eth
Attack detected
No attack detected
N
Y
Figure 7.7: Simple Intrusion Detection System based on RSSI and entropy detection
44
Detection of mobile LoRa jammers
==PAGE:53==
8
Conclusions
In this project, I mainly focused on exploring the possibility of detecting mobile jammers
using various techniques. I focused on various physical signal properties which could
be used to conclude whether a given jamming system is static or in motion. The work
also contains a signal analysis of the LoRa system, which greatly facilitates the reader’s
understanding of the created algorithms and methods used to conduct this research.
Analysis based on Doppler detection works in theory, which has been proven by mathe­
matical proof and by an experiment based on a signal generated artificially in Matlab. In
the case of measurements based on a real signal, i.e. one that was recorded using the
SDR radio, the effects were negative.
Analysis based on the measurement of the received signal strength (RSSI) was a great
success. I managed to observe a significant difference in the RSSI trace, between static
and mobile transmitters. The RSSI­based method has a very high potential to be used in
practice due to the considerable ease of implementation and low computational require­
ments.
In this work, I also focused on the method of detecting whether the received data comes
from a jamming transmitter or a legitimate transmitter. Differentiation was done by eval­
uating the entropy for each byte of each packet collected. The method proved to be
very effective for jamming packets containing random data values as payload to be dis­
tinguished from simulated LoRaWAN packets.
The results of my work clearly show that it is possible to find an appropriate method to
detect whether the jamming transmitter is in motion or static, which allows the use of
appropriate methods to eliminate threats to network availability.
8.1
Further work
Further efforts should be made toward finding better methods for the approach based
on the Doppler effect. Finding a better and more reproducible method of identifying the
beginning of the frame is crucial for the accuracy and repeatability of the method based
on the Doppler effect.
The Doppler method has some advantages compared to the RSSI­based method be­
cause its effectiveness is essentially independent of the distance between the receiver
and the jamming transmitter.
Additional efforts could be made to create methods to dynamically detect whether a re­
ceived packet is a candidate for a jamming packet or a candidate for a legitimate packet.
It is a crucial part of the IDS system, which should be integrated to reliably categorize
incoming packets. This is important, as the algorithm for detecting the movement of the
jamming transmitter, depends on that element of the IDS system.
Detection of mobile LoRa jammers
45
==PAGE:54==
Bibliography
[1]
Clément Demeslay et al. Band amp; Tone Jamming Analysis and Detection on LoRa
signals. 2021. DOI: 10.48550/ARXIV.2107.07782. URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2107.
07782.
[2]
Complete Reverse Engineering of LoRa PHY. https://www.epfl.ch/labs/tcl/wp-
content/uploads/2020/02/Reverse_Eng_Report.pdf.
[3]
Matthew Knight and Balint Seeber. “Decoding LoRa: Realizing a Modern LPWAN
with SDR”. In: Proceedings of the GNU Radio Conference 1.1 (2016). URL: https:
//pubs.gnuradio.org/index.php/grcon/article/view/8.
[4]
Carolynn Bernier, François Dehmas, and Nicolas Deparis. “Low Complexity LoRa
Frame Synchronization for Ultra­Low Power Software­Defined Radios”. In: IEEE
Transactions on Communications 68.5 (2020), pp. 3140–3152. DOI: 10.1109/TCOMM.
2020.2974464.
[5]
Chin­Ya Huang et al. “Experimental Evaluation of Jamming Threat in LoRaWAN”. In:
2019 IEEE 89th Vehicular Technology Conference (VTC2019­Spring). 2019, pp. 1–
6. DOI: 10.1109/VTCSpring.2019.8746374.
[6]
Ningning Hou, Xianjin Xia, and Yuanqing Zheng. “Jamming of LoRa PHY and Coun­
termeasure”. In: IEEE INFOCOM 2021 ­ IEEE Conference on Computer Commu­
nications. 2021, pp. 1–10. DOI: 10.1109/INFOCOM42981.2021.9488774.
[7]
Kanika Grover, Alvin Lim, and Qing Yang. “Jamming and Anti­Jamming Techniques
in Wireless Networks: A Survey”. In: Int. J. Ad Hoc Ubiquitous Comput. 17.4 (Dec.
2014), pp. 197–215. ISSN: 1743­8225. DOI: 10.1504/IJAHUC.2014.066419. URL:
https://doi.org/10.1504/IJAHUC.2014.066419.
[8]
Toni Perković et al. “Low­Cost Implementation of Reactive Jammer on LoRaWAN
Network”. In: Electronics 10.7 (2021). ISSN: 2079­9292. DOI: 10.3390/electronics10070864.
URL: https://www.mdpi.com/2079-9292/10/7/864.
[9]
Emekcan Aras et al. “Selective Jamming of LoRaWAN Using Commodity Hard­
ware”. In: Proceedings of the 14th EAI International Conference on Mobile and
Ubiquitous Systems: Computing, Networking and Services. MobiQuitous 2017. Mel­
bourne, VIC, Australia: Association for Computing Machinery, 2017, pp. 363–372.
ISBN: 9781450353687. DOI: 10.1145/3144457.3144478. URL: https://doi.org/10.
1145/3144457.3144478.
[10]
Aristides Mpitziopoulos et al. “A Survey on Jamming Attacks and Countermeasures
in WSNs”. In: Communications Surveys Tutorials, IEEE 11 (Jan. 2009), pp. 42–56.
DOI: 10.1109/SURV.2009.090404.
[11]
Syed Danish et al. “Network Intrusion Detection System for Jamming Attack in Lo­
RaWAN Join Procedure”. In: May 2018, pp. 1–6. DOI: 10.1109/ICC.2018.8422721.
[12]
FreeRTOS supported chips. https://www.freertos.org/partners/semiconductor.html.
[13]
SX1276 library module for ESP IDF. https://github.com/Inteform/esp32-lora-library.
[14]
OLED library module for ESP IDF. https://github.com/TaraHoleInIt/tarablessd1306.
[15]
Bassel Al Homssi et al. “IoT Network Design Using Open­Source LoRa Coverage
Emulator”. In: IEEE Access 9 (2021), pp. 53636–53646. DOI: 10.1109/ACCESS.
2021.3070976.
[16]
Repository with Matlab implementation of LoRa. https : / / github . com / bhomssi /
LoRaMatlab.
[17]
RTL SDR project website. https://osmocom.org/projects/rtl-sdr/wiki/Rtl-sdr.
46
Detection of mobile LoRa jammers
==PAGE:55==
[18]
Dmitry Bankov, Evgeny Khorov, and Andrey Lyakhov. “On the Limits of LoRaWAN
Channel Access”. In: 2016 International Conference on Engineering and Telecom­
munication (EnT). 2016, pp. 10–14. DOI: 10.1109/EnT.2016.011.
[19]
LoRaWAN Specification v1.1. https:// lora- alliance.org/resource_hub/lorawan-
specification-v1-1/.
[20]
GPS logger Android application. https://ultragpslogger.com/.
[21]
Gnu Radio project. https://www.gnuradio.org/.
[22]
Gnu Radio Wiki ­ ”file sink” data format. https://wiki.gnuradio.org/index.php/File_
Sink.
[23]
Heltec ­ manufacturer of ESP32 LoRa V2 module. https://heltec.org/.
[24]
C. E. Shannon. “A Mathematical Theory of Communication”. In: Bell System Tech­
nical Journal 27.3 (1948), pp. 379–423. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1002/j.1538-
7305.1948.tb01338.x. eprint: https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/pdf/10.1002/j.1538-
7305.1948.tb01338.x. URL: https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1002/j.1538-
7305.1948.tb01338.x.
[25]
Numerical implementation of entropy calculation. https : / / rosettacode . org / wiki /
Entropy.
[26]
Ronald W. Schafer. “What Is a Savitzky­Golay Filter? [Lecture Notes]”. In: IEEE
Signal Processing Magazine 28.4 (2011), pp. 111–117. DOI: 10.1109/MSP.2011.
941097.
Detection of mobile LoRa jammers
47
==PAGE:56==
48
Detection of mobile LoRa jammers
==PAGE:57==
Detection of mobile LoRa jammers
49
==PAGE:58==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Richard Petersens Plads, Build. 324
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.compute.dtu.dk
