==PAGE:1==
Data centre cooling storage optimization:
Modelling improved data centre energy
systems in various electricity market price
conditions
Master Thesis, February 2023
Technical University of Denmark
by:
Adam Kerek
supervised by:
Claire Bergaentzlé
Juan Jesús Jerez Monsalves
==PAGE:2==
Abstract
This thesis analysis the business case of different data centre flexibility solutions
in various electricity market price conditions within Denmark in short term, using
one year as a time period of the research. As a result of the rapid data centre
capacity growth forecasted for the following years, the electricity demand of these
facilities will grow significantly, however, the inflexibility and cooling effectiveness
of the systems leave considerable possibilities for improving energy efficiency and
carbon intensity of the facilities. Adapting data centres cooling technology to the
growing demand would help the green transition and would result in both societal
and private gains. The operation of a data centre cooling system is modelled using
GAMS and further optimized taking into account available demand forecast, dif­
ferent equipment specifications and uncertainties. Various electricity market price
scenarios are developed and different scenarios are modelled and benchmarked
against the base case scenario. The capital and operational expenditure of tech­
nologies are calculated and finally, the impact of more flexible consumption on
carbon footprint is assessed.
Data centre cooling storage optimization
ii
==PAGE:3==
Acknowledgements
Adam Kerek, Master of Science in Sustainable Energy, Energy Systems Analy­
sis, DTU
Dear reader,
First and foremost, I would like to express my deepest gratitude to my supervisors,
Claire Bergaentzlé and Juan Jesús Jerez Monsalves, for their unwavering support
and guidance throughout my journey in completing this thesis. Their invaluable in­
sights, expertise, and encouragement have been a constant source of inspiration
and motivation, and I could not have accomplished this without their help.
I would also like to extend my thanks to my family and friends for their uncondi­
tional love and support throughout the many ups and downs of this period. Their
encouragement and understanding have been a true source of strength and inspi­
ration, and I am blessed to have them in my life.
Thank you all for your support and for playing such an important role in helping
me to complete this thesis.
Data centre cooling storage optimization
iii
==PAGE:4==
Contents
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
List of figures . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
List of tables
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
vi
List of abbreviations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
viii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
History . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.3
The data center industry . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.4
Danish data centers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.5
Aim of the project . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2
Literature review
5
2.1
Data center technology
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
Cooling technologies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.3
System modelling
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3
Methodology
17
3.1
Starting conditions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3.2
Technology scenarios
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
3.3
GAMS model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
3.4
Analysis steps
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
4
Results and Discussion
36
4.1
Annual results
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
4.2
Optimized scenario analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
4.3
Technology comparison . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
4.4
Sensitivity analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
5
Conclusion
48
6
Appendices
50
Bibliography
75
Data centre cooling storage optimization
iv
==PAGE:5==
List of Figures
1.1
CO2 emissions and energy consumption distribution . . . . . . . .
3
2.1
Electrical components in a data center [13]
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
Server temperatures in case of cooling outage
. . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.3
Absorption chiller system flowchart . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.4
CRAH and CRAC technology differences [22]
. . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.5
Free cooling system [25]
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.6
Water­side economizer [26] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.7
Cooling tower mechanics [27]
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.8
Air and liquid cooling room temperatures [21] . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3.1
Yearly ambient temperature in Copenhagen [28]
. . . . . . . . . .
18
3.2
Historical electricity price data
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3.3
Weekly electricity forecast results for high and low price scenarios
20
3.4
Weekly average electricity price volatility from historical data
. . .
20
3.5
High and volatile price scenario yearly electricity price . . . . . . .
21
3.6
Constructed hourly data for the volatility price scenario . . . . . . .
21
3.7
Carbon intensity of electricity historical data . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
3.8
Historical gas price in Denmark [34]
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
3.9
Natural gas price prediction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
3.10 Systems architecture . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
4.1
Cost comparison of cost optimizations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
4.2
Emissions comparison of cost optimizations . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
4.3
Cost comparison of emissions optimizations . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
4.4
Emissions comparison of emissions optimizations
. . . . . . . . .
39
4.5
PUE of scenarios . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
4.6
Hourly storage utilization and carbon intensity in scenario WFC+S
beside high electricity price and emissions optimization
. . . . . .
41
4.7
Hourly cooling energy supply breakdown in scenario WFC+S be­
side high electricity price and emissions optimization . . . . . . . .
41
4.8
Hourly emissions and carbon intensity of electricity in scenario WFC+S
beside high electricity price and emissions optimization
. . . . . .
42
4.9
Hourly cooling supply of air­side and water­side free cooling sys­
tems in scenario AFC+s and WFC+S beside high electricity price
and emissions optimization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
4.10 Hourly cooling supply of electric chiller in scenario AFC+s and WFC+S
beside high electricity price and emissions optimization
. . . . . .
44
4.11 Hourly storage utilization of scenario WFC+S beside cost optimiza­
tion for all price scenarios . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
4.12 Hourly energy expenditures of scenario WFC+S, AFC+S and S be­
side cost optimization and high price scenario
. . . . . . . . . . .
45
Data centre cooling storage optimization
v
==PAGE:6==
4.13 Sensitivity analysis results for cost optimization . . . . . . . . . . .
46
4.14 Sensitivity analysis results for emission optimization . . . . . . . .
47
6.1
Data decomposition of SARIMAX forecasting for electricity price
.
51
6.2
Data decomposition of SARIMAX forecasting for gas price . . . . .
51
6.3
Annual cost curves of the base case scenarios . . . . . . . . . . .
58
6.4
Annual emission curves of the base case scenarios
. . . . . . . .
58
6.5
Hourly cooling energy supply breakdown in scenario WFC+S be­
side high electricity price and cost optimization . . . . . . . . . . .
59
6.6
Hourly emissions and carbon intensity of electricity in scenario WFC+S
beside high electricity price and cost optimization . . . . . . . . . .
59
6.7
Hourly storage utilization and carbon intensity in scenario WFC+S
beside high electricity price and cost optimization . . . . . . . . . .
60
6.8
Storage utilization beside different objective functions
. . . . . . .
60
6.9
Hourly energy expenditures beside cost optimization in scenarios
without cooling storage . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
61
Data centre cooling storage optimization
vi
==PAGE:7==
List of Tables
3.1
Base case scenarios technology availabilities . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
3.2
Optimized case scenario technology availabilities . . . . . . . . . .
28
6.1
Summary of data center thermal loads and temperature limits [2] .
50
6.2
Boiler attributes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
6.3
Gas turbine attributes
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
6.4
Absorption chiller attributes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
6.5
Electric chiller attributes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
6.6
Air­side direct free cooling system attributes . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
6.7
Water­side cooling tower free cooling system attributes
. . . . . .
54
6.8
Cooling storage attributes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
Data centre cooling storage optimization
vii
==PAGE:8==
List of abbreviations
Attribute
Unit
Explanation
Dall
kW
hourly maximum cooling demand
Lserver(t)
%
cooling demand load factor
Hgas
kWh/m3
energy content of natural gas
Eel(t)
g/kWh
carbon intensity of electricity
Eboiler
g/kWh
emissions of boiler
Eturbine
g/kWh
emissions of gas turbine
Pboiler
kW
nominal power of boiler
Pturbine
kW
nominal power of gs turbine
PAC
kW
nominal power of absorption chiller
PEC
kW
nominal power of electric chiller
PAFC
kW
nominal power of air­side free cooling
PWFC
kW
nominal power of water­side free cooling
mAFC
m3/h
nominal volume flow of air­side free cooling
mWFC
m3/h
nominal volume flow of water­side free cooling
xboiler
­
maximum utilization of boiler
xturbine
­
maximum utilization of gas turbine
xAC
­
maximum utilization of absorption chiller
xEC
­
maximum utilization of electric chiller
xAFC
­
maximum utilization of air­side free cooling
xWFC
­
maximum utilization of water­side free cooling
xS
­
maximum utilization of cooling storage
nboiler
%
efficiency of boiler
nturbine
%
efficiency of gas turbine
nAC
%
efficiency of absorption chiller
nEC
%
efficiency of electric chiller
nAFC
%
efficiency of air­side free cooling
nWFC
%
efficiency of water­side free cooling
nht
%
efficiency of air­side free cooling heat transfer
nCT
%
efficiency of cooling tower heat transfer
COPAC
­
coefficient of performance of absorption chiller
COPEC
­
coefficient of performance of electric chiller
Atemp(t)
◦C
ambient temperature
Ahum(t)
◦C
ambient humidity
Wbtemp(t)
◦C
wet bulb temperature
Stemp
◦C
required server room temperature
CTrange(t)
◦C
cooling tower range
CTapproach(t)
◦C
cooling tower approach
Cp
kJ/kg K
specific heat of air
ρ
kg/m3
density of air
Qgrid_to_EC(t)
kWh
power flow from the grid to electric chiller
Qgrid_to_AFC(t)
kWh
power flow from the grid to air­side free cooling
Qgrid_to_WFC(t)
kWh
power flow from the grid to water­side free cooling
continued …
Data centre cooling storage optimization
viii
==PAGE:9==
Attribute
Unit
Explanation
Qgas_to_boiler(t)
kWh
power flow from the gas supply to the boiler
Qgas_to_turbine(t)
kWh
power flow from the gas supply to the gas turbine
Qboiler_to_AC(t)
kWh
power flow from the boiler to the absorption chiller
Qturbine_to_AC(t)
kWh
power flow from the turbine to the absorption chiller
Qturbine_to_EC(t)
kWh
power flow from the turbine to the electric chiller
QAC_to_S(t)
kWh
power flow from the absorption chiller to the storage
QEC_to_S(t)
kWh
power flow from the electric chiller to the storage
QAFC_to_S(t)
kWh
power flow from the air­side free cooling to the storage
QWFC_to_S(t)
kWh
power flow from the water­side free cooling to the storage
QS_to_IT(t)
kWh
power flow from the storage to the cooling demand
Vgas_to_boiler(t)
m3
volume flow from gas grid to boiler
Vgas_to_turbine(t)
m3
volume flow from gas grid to gas turbine
mAFC_to_S(t)
m3
volume flow used for air­side free cooling
mWFC_to_S(t)
m3
volume flow used for water­side free cooling
QS(t)
kWh
cooling storage capacity
SOCS_max
%
maximum state of charge of cooling storage
SOCS_min
%
minimum state of charge of cooling storage
SOCS_initial
%
initial state of charge of cooling storage
CHS_max
kW
maximum charging capacity of cooling storage
DCHS_max
kW
maximum discharging capacity of cooling storage
Cgas(t)
EUR
hourly price of gas supply
Cel(t)
EUR
hourly price of electricity supply
tCgas(t)
EUR
hourly energy expenditures from gas supply
tCel(t)
EUR
hourly energy expenditures from electricity supply
C(t)
EUR
hourly total energy expenditures
Cgas_total
M EUR
annual energy expenditures from gas supply
Cel_total
M EUR
annual energy expenditures from electricity supply
Ctotal
M EUR
annual total energy expenditures
Emel(t)
g
hourly emissions from electricity consumption
Emboiler(t)
g
hourly emissions from boiler
Emturbine(t)
g
hourly emissions from gas turbine
Em(t)
g
hourly total emissions
Emel_total
tonnes
annual emissions from electricity consumption
Emboiler_total
tonnes
annual emissions from boiler
Emturbine_total
tonnes
annual emissions from gas turbine
Emtotal
tonnes
annual total emissions
Data centre cooling storage optimization
ix
==PAGE:10==
1
Introduction
1.1
Introduction
In 2021 data centers of the world have consumed approximately 3% of the total
electricity of the world, and the industry expects the share to grow as high as 20%
by 2025 [1][2]. Currently, the global data center market is expected to be 62.3
billion USD, which has doubled in the last five years, since the 2017 value has
been estimated to be 31.5 billion USD. According to forecasts, it is projected to
reach 143 billion USD by 2027. It can be seen that the industry is experiencing
rapid growth both in technological improvements and in demand. The digitaliza­
tion of the world, the availability of technology and the storage and computational
power requirements of the modern technology solutions together are leading to
this rapid demand growth. As data centers become one of the biggest industries
of the world, it is more and more clear that the economic and environmental rel­
evance of the sector requires both the industry and policymakers to focus on the
area [1]. A data center facility itself might not have significant environmental im­
pacts to create, but operating the facilities is really energy demanding, that has to
come from some source, what might be harmful for the environment. There are
ongoing developments for energy efficiency improvements and the new genera­
tion of technology is coming, however the existing facilities are often non­flexible
and old.
From the facts that data centers are non­flexible, but rapidly growing, it can be
concluded that improving the sector is essential in order to minimise environmen­
tal impacts. The 3 % share itself is big enough to research possible improvements
for energy efficiency solutions, one can imagine, that with 20% share, the modern­
ization of the industry can have significant effects on the world’s carbon emissions
and electricity consumption. For flexibility improvements, data centers have three
options. To participate in the wholesale market to get electricity cheaper, to use
reserve markets to sell it’s flexibility, and to optimize it’s consumption to adapt to
market opportunities through an improved supply system [3]. In this document the
third option will be investigate by installing a storage unit to the above illustrated
system in order to provide additional freedom for the electricity supply charac­
teristics.The new updated solution will be benchmarked against a base scenario
representing the actual data center technologies within the scope of the project.
1.2
History
A data center, or a mainframe, how it’s been called in th 1950’s and 60’s is a ded­
icated room, building, or group of buildings with the function of storing IT equip­
ment such as computer systems, telecommunications components and storage
units. The journey started in the 1940s, when the United States army designed the
Data centre cooling storage optimization
1
==PAGE:11==
first programmable computer for defense purposes called ENIAC, the Electronic
Numerical Integrator and Computer.[4] The new technology had great potential, in
the early years especially in the defense sector. The first data center were incred­
ibly complex with high space and energy requirements, containing long wirings,
tubes and vents for proper cooling. They were labour demanding and unreliable.
In the 1960’s and 1970’s the IT sector skyrocketed and the technology started
to spread across the civil sector and in the 1980’s, computers became available
for personal use as well. Among with the rapid growth of telecommunication and
internet usage, the need for data centers and technology improvements also in­
creased. In 2000, during the dotcom disaster, there were 27 pan­European data
centre players, and 17 of them went out of business in the wake. During the global
economic crisis, corporations cut costs, and outsourced IT requirements, which
have helped the growth of the data center providers.[5] Since then can we talk
about data and analytics service providers. Nowadays, data centers are known
as remote storage facilities in secure locations around the world, with the respon­
sibility of ensuring the operation of the internet and stability of data storage with­
out compromises or limits. Data centre flexibility and sustainability however have
never been in focus until the past decade, which leaves a lot of room for improve­
ment. There is pressure from both the public and authority sector to contribute to
the green transition in the data centre industry too.
1.3
The data center industry
Regarding geographical advantages, the Nordic countries and Northern America
is the best place for data center investments. According to Investment Monitor’s
study [6], the Nordics is the best place in the world for data centers based on a
measurement of 29 benchmarks, covering security, IT, energy infrastructure and
business environment. With an overall score of 78.7, Denmark tops the rank­
ing, ahead of Sweden and the United States. With the fastest average download
speeds, 277,134 secure servers per million people, the low number of cyberat­
tacks and high internet privacy Denmark is deservedly on top of the list [1].
Concentrating on individual data center performance, instead of the global trends
is also essential for our study. As mentioned before, a data center is a dedicated
room for IT equipment including servers, racks, network connectivity infrastruc­
tures, security appliances, monitoring structures, cooling systems and the storage
blocks. All of these are essential elements of a facility. Beside all of these, flexi­
ble components, climate control, backup power options, advanced air flow system
and layered security protocols can further improve the performance and reliability
of a data center.
From figure 1.1, the emission and consumption contributions of data center ap­
pliances can be seen. However the servers including cooling system are only
responsible for 23% of the total emissions, the cooling system is consuming 40 to
50 % of the total used electricity in an average facility. Since the IT demand and
cooling demand of a facility is highly correlated, the required cooling supply can
be calculated from a nominal server power.[7][8]. Since the field of the study is the
Data centre cooling storage optimization
2
==PAGE:12==
cooling process optimization, in the followings the specifications and fundamen­
tals of the cooling systems will be discussed more deeply, while other relevant
aspects will be covered with research based assumptions, in order to realistically
determine necessary model parameters. More detail from a server specifications
can be seen in Appendix A.
Figure 1.1: CO2 emissions and energy consumption distribution
1.4
Danish data centers
Danish data center industry is one of the most advanced and competitive in the
world, and is home to a number of leading data center operators and service
providers. It is characterized by a high degree of innovation and sustainability,
with a strong focus on energy efficiency and environmental responsibility. Den­
mark has a well­developed electricity grid and a large renewable energy sector,
which makes it an attractive location for data centers. It also has a highly skilled
and educated workforce, which is a key factor in the success of the data center
industry.
The data center market in Denmark was valued at approximately USD 1.31 billion
in 2021 with a total installed capacity of 33MW and is expected to reach USD
3.02 billion by 2027, with a compound annual growth rate of 14.97% during the
forecast period[9]. Copenhagen is a popular location for data center investments
in Denmark due to its strong fiber connectivity, 5G network services, and well­
developed power utility infrastructure. Denmark is home to several submarine
deployments, including Havhingsten, which was launched by Meta in partnership
with Aqua Comm and Bulk Fibre[10][11]. The country’s cold climate conditions
allow for free cooling of data centers, which helps reduce energy consumption by
around 50%. Denmark’s 5G coverage is reportedly 99.3%, according to the Dan­
ish Technological Institute, with major telecom operators such as Telenor Group,
Hi3G Denmark, and Telia providing 5G services in cities including Odense, Copen­
hagen, and Aalborg. Around 80% of Denmark’s power is generated from renew­
able energy sources, and colocation operators such as GlobalConnect, Digital
Realty, Colt Data Centre Services, and STACK Infrastructure (DigiPlex) are using
renewable energy sources to power their facilities.
Overall, the data center industry in Denmark is an important contributor to the
country’s economy and plays a vital role in supporting the operation of many busi­
Data centre cooling storage optimization
3
==PAGE:13==
nesses and organizations. It is an area of active research and development, and
is expected to continue to grow and evolve in the coming years. [12]
1.5
Aim of the project
The general aim of the study is to find the optimal flexibility potential of data cen­
ters that can be implemented using additional short term cooling storage units and
free cooling solutions to the base case scenario that already includes electric and
absorption chillers for cooling purposes, and would significantly but affordably re­
duce emissions in long term. Throughout the project, the a base case scenario
will be benchmarked against the optimized ones and will be compared both in en­
ergy expenditures and emissions reduction. Additionally, the following points are
covered within the project.
• Collection of available technologies for data centre cooling
• Possible implementation of technologies to systems
• Input data forecasting for the model
• Detailed optimization model description
• Energy expenditures and emissions comparison
Data centre cooling storage optimization
4
==PAGE:14==
2
Literature review
2.1
Data center technology
As discussed, data centers are computer warehouses with the requirement of stor­
ing a large amount of data for various organisations. It’s a collection of different
servers and network infrastructures. Servers are collecting data and network in­
frastructures are used to utilize, keep and update the data of the servers. By the
network users can access the servers. IT components might be the hearth of data
centers, from figure 2.1 it can be seen, that they are only one part of the facilities.
Facilities can be divided into two main components, Computing equipment that in­
cludes the processor, server power supply and the servers which is the IT service,
and the Support systems such as cooling system, lightning, switch gear, power
distribution units and uninterruptible power supplies that ensures continuous op­
eration.
Figure 2.1: Electrical components in a data center [13]
The IT equipment such as computer systems, telecommunications components
and storage units have a 15­100 times higher power density per floor area than
Data centre cooling storage optimization
5
==PAGE:15==
commercial buildings [14]. The energy consumption of data centers can be di­
vided into two main categories.
Computing resource and physical resources.
Studies show that computing resources are responsible for 50% of the total elec­
tricity consumption, the cooling takes 40% and the remaining part is consumed by
the communications equipment [15][13]. Because of the continuous demand and
not flexible systems, data center show constant load pattern.
The cooling system is the other main element beside the IT equipment in facilities.
It can be based on various approaches, many technologies are available including,
chillers, air­side free cooling, water­side free cooling, liquid cooling systems, one
or two phase cooling systems. Since it is the main topic of the thesis, technologies
will be discussed more deeply in the next section.
2.2
Cooling technologies
The cooling systems in facilities are mandatory in order to maintain the neces­
sary operational temperature and relative humidity for the IT equipment in order
to keep the services reliable, safe and efficient. The thermal management can be
done through many different approaches, taking into account expenses, weather
and the numerical requirements of the specific task. Many studies have been
analysed different technologies to improve energy efficiency and reduce emis­
sions and electricity consumption. The most promising technologies are capable
of efficient performance and significant energy savings [16]. In this section these
technologies will be introduced and compared.
If data center cooling is not working properly, it can lead to a number of serious
problems. The most immediate concern is that the temperature inside the data
center will rise, which can cause the servers and other equipment to overheat, just
as it can be seen from figure 2.2[17]. This can lead to system failures, data loss,
and other problems that can disrupt the operation of the data center. Additionally,
high temperatures can affect the reliability and performance leading to reduced ef­
ficiency and productivity.[18] if the system is not properly maintaining the humidity
levels in the data center, it can lead to corrosion or the two factors together can
lead to fire .
There are several different cooling technologies used in data centers, including air
cooling, liquid cooling, and evaporation cooling. Air cooling is the most common
method, and involves the use of air conditioning units or computer room air con­
ditioners (CRACs) to cool the air inside the data center. Liquid cooling involves
the use of a liquid, such as water or a refrigerant, to transfer heat away from the
electronic equipment and dissipate it. Evaporation cooling is a newer technology
that uses the evaporation of a liquid, such as water, to remove heat from the data
center.
Each of these cooling technologies has its own advantages and disadvantages,
and the most suitable option for a particular data center will depend on factors
such as the size and location of the data center, the type and amount of equip­
ment it houses, and the ambient temperature and humidity conditions. In recent
Data centre cooling storage optimization
6
==PAGE:16==
Figure 2.2: Server temperatures in case of cooling outage
years, there has been a growing focus on developing more energy­efficient and
environmentally friendly cooling technologies for data centers, as the energy con­
sumption of data centers has become a major concern.
2.2.1
Electric and Absorption chiller
Chiller cooling systems are mechanical systems that use a refrigerant cycle to
produce cooling for buildings or other spaces and they are commonly used in
heating, ventilation, and air conditioning systems to provide cooling for a wide
range of applications.
Electric chillers use electricity as their primary energy source and they consist of
a compressor, a condenser, and an evaporator, and use the refrigeration cycle to
transfer heat from one location to another. They are typically more efficient and
have a higher cooling capacity than absorption chillers, but they are also more
expensive to operate due to the cost of electricity.
Absorption chillers, on the other hand, use a secondary energy source, such as
natural gas or steam, to power the refrigeration cycle. They work by using a re­
frigerant that absorbs heat in the evaporator and releases it in the condenser.
Absorption chillers are generally less efficient than electric chillers, but they can
be a good option for applications where electricity is not readily available or is too
expensive. Absorption chillers have worse coefficient of performance, around 0.5­
0.9 compared to the electric ones with 0.8 to 1. Absorption chillers also requires
50% more space, however also 50% less expensive. [19] Chillers can also be
water cooled or air cooled. Free cooling can be used in both options, however the
water cooled chillers must be equipped with a cooling tower. It is more efficient
than air cooled systems, however more expensive and more space consuming
too. Air cooled systems contain an evaporator, compressor, condenser and an
Data centre cooling storage optimization
7
==PAGE:17==
expansion valve. The technologies are discussed more deeply in the free cool­
ing sections, since they are both rely on the ambient temperature and humidity
[20]. On figure 2.3 the system of an absorption chiller can be seen with its main
elements.
Both electric and absorption chillers have their own advantages and disadvan­
tages, and the most suitable option for a particular application will depend on
factors such as the cooling capacity required, the energy source availability and
cost, and the operating and maintenance requirements.
Figure 2.3: Absorption chiller system flowchart
2.2.2
CRAH, CRAC
Computer Room Air Conditioning (CRAC) units and Computer Room Air Handling
(CRAH) units are two types of cooling systems that are commonly used in data
centers and other IT environments to maintain the temperature and humidity of
the air within a specified range.
CRAC units are stand­alone air conditioning units that are designed to cool and
circulate the air within a data center or other IT environment. They use a com­
pressor, a condenser, and an evaporator to transfer heat from the air inside the
data center to the outside air. CRAC units are typically more energy­efficient than
traditional air conditioning units, and are specifically designed to meet the cooling
needs of data centers and other IT environments.
CRAH units, on the other hand, are air handling systems that are used to condition
and circulate the air within a data center or other IT environment. They consist of
a filter, a fan, and a cooling coil, and work by drawing in outside air, filtering it, and
then cooling it before it is circulated back into the data center. CRAH units are
typically more energy­efficient than CRAC units, but they require a larger initial
investment and have a higher installation and maintenance cost.
In these systems the floor is raised, the server racks are faced face to face to each
other, and passageways for cold and warm air are created at the front and back
Data centre cooling storage optimization
8
==PAGE:18==
sides of the racks. The cold air comes through the floor and the warm are can
return through the ceiling. The chilled air passes through the IT equipment. The
air conditioning is responsible for the cooling of the used air.[21] From figure 2.4
the principle of the systems can be seen. The units include an electric chiller func­
tioning as the air conditioner itself. The CRAC is similar to a home air conditioner,
it has a direct expansion refrigeration cycle. Unlike the CRAC, the computer room
air handler is using a water chiller system to remove heat. When the ambient out­
side temperature is within a certain threshold, that will be discussed in another
section, an air­side economizer can be used to handle the air into the facility and
the air goes through the facility like from the air conditioner. In this case air­side
free cooling happens.
Figure 2.4: CRAH and CRAC technology differences [22]
2.2.3
Air­side free cooling
Air­side free cooling is a cooling technique that uses the natural cooling properties
of outside air to cool a building or data center. It is an energy­efficient and cost­
effective alternative to traditional mechanical cooling systems, which use electric­
ity to power compressors, fans, and other mechanical components to cool the air
inside a building or data center. It works by drawing in outside air through a filter
and then passing it over a cooling coil or through a heat exchanger. The outside
air is cooled as it passes over the cooling coil or through the heat exchanger, and
the cooled air is then circulated back into the building or data center to cool the
space.
The systems are typically most effective when the ambient temperature outside
is lower than the desired temperature inside the building or data center. They
are also most effective in environments with low humidity, as high humidity can
reduce the cooling capacity of the system. Can be a good option for buildings and
data centers that are located in temperate climates with moderate temperature
and humidity conditions, and can be used to supplement or replace traditional
mechanical cooling systems [23].
Data centre cooling storage optimization
9
==PAGE:19==
An air­side economizer is using free­cooling option as well as a heat excahger.
Depending on the ambient temperature it can use a mixture of outside air and
the return air from the server room together through the heat exchanger, or if it
is cold enough, it can use only the outside air directly to cool the servers, in that
case the hot air will be just released outside. It can control the input flows with
damper, to control the mixture of the ambient and return air. This solution can be
beneficial for countries with hot climate too, since data centers must be cooled all
day, during nights too. If the outside temperature can be used for only a few hours,
the system can decrease electricity or gas consumption significantly, depending
on the type of the chillers [24].
Figure 2.5: Free cooling system [25]
2.2.4
Water­side free cooling
Water side free cooling systems work by passing a cooled water loop through
a heat exchanger, which transfers heat from the hot water loop that is used to
cool the building or data center to the cooled water loop. The cooled water loop
is then passed through a cooling tower or other cooling device, which uses the
natural cooling properties of water to dissipate the heat. The cooled water is then
circulated back through the heat exchanger to continue the cooling process.
In most cases an air­side economizer is preferred because it can save more en­
ergy, however in special cases, when the energy required for humidification is
high, or the air is contaminant, there is an option for water­side economizers too.
There are integrated and non­integrated solutions, the main difference is that the
integrated can operate at times when the economizer itself can’t supply the entire
Data centre cooling storage optimization
10
==PAGE:20==
cooling load. In this case it supports the chiller and reduces some load on the
chiller by pre­cooling the water before it enters the chiller [26] [23].
Figure 2.6: Water­side economizer [26]
On figure 2.6 a cooling system with integrated water­side economizer can be seen.
As it can be seen, the chiller including the condenser and evaporator is still the
main cooling solution that can be used any time, however the cooling tower and
the heat exchanger can support it’s load or even take it over completely if the
circumstances allow it.
For this solution however a cooling tower is also required. They are a special type
of heat excahangers that exchanges heat between air and water in order to lower
the temperature of the hot water. Some volume of water evaporates, lowering the
temperature of the water circulating through the tower, as it can be seen on figure
2.7
2.2.5
Cooling tower
Cooling towers are mechanical systems that are commonly used in data centers
and other large buildings to dissipate heat and maintain the temperature and hu­
midity of the air within a specified range. It works by circulating a cooled water
loop through a heat exchanger, which transfers heat from the hot water loop that
Data centre cooling storage optimization
11
==PAGE:21==
Figure 2.7: Cooling tower mechanics [27]
is used to cool the data center to the cooled water loop. The cooled water loop is
then passed through the cooling tower, which uses the natural cooling properties
of water to dissipate the heat. The cooled water is then circulated back through the
heat exchanger to continue the cooling process. They come in a variety of sizes
and configurations, and can be either air­cooled or water­cooled. Air­cooled cool­
ing towers use ambient air to cool the water, while water­cooled cooling towers
use a separate water supply to cool the water. Cooling towers are a key compo­
nent of many data center cooling systems, and are typically used in conjunction
with other cooling technologies, such as air conditioning units or computer room
air conditioners (CRACs).
It is an important factor to consider in the design and operation of data centers, as
they can have a significant impact on the energy efficiency and cost of the data
center. Properly designed and maintained cooling towers can help reduce energy
consumption and operating costs, and ensure the reliable and efficient operation
of the data center [27][23].
2.2.6
Liquid cooling
There are several different types of liquid cooling systems used in data centers,
including direct­to­chip cooling, immersion cooling, and chilled water systems.
Direct­to­chip cooling involves the use of a liquid coolant that is in direct con­
tact with the electronic components of the equipment, while immersion cooling
involves the complete immersion of the equipment in a liquid coolant. Chilled wa­
ter systems use a chilled water loop to remove heat from the electronic equipment,
and are typically used in larger data centers.
Liquid cooling systems offer several benefits over traditional air cooling systems,
including higher cooling efficiency, lower noise levels, and the ability to handle
Data centre cooling storage optimization
12
==PAGE:22==
higher heat loads. However, they also have some challenges, such as the need
for specialized equipment and maintenance, and the risk of leaks or other system
failures.
Overall, liquid cooling is a promising technology for data centers and other high­
performance computing environments, and is an area of active research and de­
velopment. It has the potential to significantly improve the energy efficiency and
performance of data centers and other computing environments, and may play a
key role in meeting the growing demand for computing power in the future.
Liquids have better thermal properties like conductivity, density and specific heat
that make the heat exchange easier. The surface area that is necessary for heat­
ing is a lot smaller. In this case the electronic devices are mounted to steel plates.
In those liquid is circulating and the heat generated by the IT equipment is trans­
ferred by the coolant to the excahnger. There are single­phase and two­phase
solutions too within liquid cooling, that will be explained in the next section. As
it can be seen from figure2.8, the thermal interaction with the room is eliminated
and the layout of the racks can be designed accordingly, which opens more op­
portunity for space saving and considering other requirements during designing
like maintenance possibilities.
Figure 2.8: Air and liquid cooling room temperatures [21]
2.2.7
Two­phase cooling
Two­phase cooling is a cooling technology that uses the phase change of a refrig­
erant to remove heat from electronic equipment and dissipate it more efficiently
than traditional air or liquid cooling methods. Two­phase cooling systems work
by vaporizing a refrigerant, such as water or a hydrofluorocarbon (HFC), at a low
Data centre cooling storage optimization
13
==PAGE:23==
temperature and pressure, and then allowing the vapor to expand and cool as it
passes through a heat exchanger or other cooling device.
There are several different types of two­phase cooling systems used in data cen­
ters and other high­performance computing environments, including vapor com­
pression systems, spray cooling systems, and jet impingement systems. Vapor
compression systems use a compressor to vaporize the refrigerant and circulate
it through the system, while spray cooling systems use a spray nozzle to vapor­
ize the refrigerant and cool the equipment. Jet impingement systems use a jet of
refrigerant vapor to cool the equipment directly.
Two­phase cooling systems offer several benefits over traditional air and liquid
cooling systems, including higher cooling efficiency, lower noise levels, and the
ability to handle higher heat loads. However, they also have some challenges,
such as the need for specialized equipment and maintenance, and the risk of
leaks or other system failures.
Overall, two­phase cooling is a promising technology for data centers and other
high­performance computing environments, and is an area of active research and
development. It has the potential to significantly improve the energy efficiency and
performance of data centers and other computing environments, and may play a
key role in meeting the growing demand for computing power in the future.
2.2.8
Cooling storage
Cooling storage is a technology that is used in data centers and other large build­
ings to improve the energy efficiency and performance of the cooling system. Cool­
ing storage systems work by storing excess cooling capacity during periods of low
demand, and then using that stored cooling capacity to meet peak cooling demand.
This can help reduce the need for mechanical cooling systems to operate at full
capacity at all times, which can save energy and reduce operating costs.
There are several different types of cooling storage systems used in data centers,
including ice storage, chilled water storage, and air­based storage systems. Ice
storage systems use a tank of water that is frozen overnight, when the cooling
demand is typically low, and then used to cool the data center during the day,
when the demand is typically high. Chilled water storage systems use a tank of
water that is chilled overnight and then circulated through the data center to cool
the space during the day. Air­based storage systems use a large volume of air
that is cooled overnight and then circulated through the data center to cool the
space during the day.
Cooling storage systems can help data centers and other large buildings reduce
their energy consumption and operating costs, and improve the reliability and per­
formance of the cooling system. They are an important consideration in the design
and operation of data centers and other large buildings, and can play a significant
role in meeting the growing demand for cooling in an increasingly interconnected
and data­driven world.[23]
Data centre cooling storage optimization
14
==PAGE:24==
2.2.9
Ambient temperature and humidity
The ambient temperature in Denmark can vary significantly depending on the
time of year and the location within the country. Denmark is located at a high
latitude, which means that it experiences large variations in daylight and temper­
ature throughout the year.In the summer months, the ambient temperature can
reach highs of around 25◦C in the south of the country and around 20◦C in the
north. During the winter months, it can drop to lows of around ­5 in the south and
around ­10 in the north. The coastal areas tend to have a more moderate climate
than the inland areas, with milder winters and cooler summers[28].
The ambient temperature of a data center is the temperature of the air surround­
ing the servers and other equipment. The server temperature, on the other hand,
is the temperature of the internal components of the server, such as the proces­
sors, memory, and storage. The ambient temperature can have an impact on the
server temperature, as the server must dissipate heat generated by its internal
components to the surrounding air in order to maintain a safe operating temper­
ature. If the ambient temperature is too high, it can make it more difficult for the
server to dissipate heat, which can lead to an increase in the server temperature,
so the difference between the ambient and desired server temperature is the main
driving factor of data center cooling. If it is lower, it allows using free cooling.
Beside temperature, humidity is also an important factor in cooling systems. The
humidity of the air surrounding a cooling tower can have an impact on the perfor­
mance of the cooling tower. Cooling towers work by using fans to blow air over a
surface of water, which absorbs heat from the surrounding air and cools it. The
cooled air is then returned to the data center to cool the servers and other equip­
ment. If the humidity of the air is high, it can make it more difficult for the cooling
tower to effectively cool the air. This is because high humidity air has a higher
specific heat capacity, which means that it requires more energy to heat or cool
it. As a result, the cooling tower may need to work harder to cool the air, which
can reduce its efficiency and increase energy consumption. On the other hand, if
the humidity of the air is low, it can be easier for the cooling tower to cool the air,
as low humidity air has a lower specific heat capacity and requires less energy
to heat or cool. This can improve the efficiency of the cooling tower and reduce
energy consumption. Overall, it is important to maintain an appropriate humidity
level in the air surrounding a cooling tower in order to ensure that it can operate
effectively and efficiently. This typically involves using a humidifier or dehumidifier
to regulate the humidity level and prevent it from becoming too high or too low.
2.3
System modelling
In this section literature concentrating on system modelling of data centres energy
efficiency. A study from 2020 [29] analyses a two­stage energy management
model with the goal of cost optimization. The system is modelled with a gas boiler
and gas turbine responsible for heating, while solar panels and the electricity grid
responsible for electricity supply. The model is equipped with both absorption
and electric chiller and an electricity battery. The model is two­staged, because
Data centre cooling storage optimization
15
==PAGE:25==
it is optimizing both the day­ahead and real time markets. In the models scope
demand response and combined cooling, heating and power, rather than storage
optimization. The paper concludes and energy saving of 22.01% cost saving for
the best case,
A paper from 2021 [30] also investigates cost optimization in data centre cooling
systems. The system takes into account an electric and absorption chiller, electric
storage, electricity grid and wind energy, as well as a thermal storage. The system
serves workloads, electrical, thermal, and cooling loads. Beside the technologies
it is using forecasted energy demand, wind power and electricity and gas price.
Within the expected results there are the operation costs, the energy dispatch
and the amount of energy trade with energy markets. According to the results,
the storage provided 5.72% energy savings and concludes good performance in
uncertainty handling.
A study from 2017 [31] analyses four different free cooling setup for electricity
consumption optimization purposes. States, that direct fresh air cooling is having
the biggest potential. The system is not using a diverse portfolio of technologies,
it is using only an electric chiller beside the free cooling options. Direct fresh air
cooling, rotating wheel heat exchanger, heat pipe back rack and water free cooling
system are studied. It is analysing the yearly ambient conditions and possibilities
of free cooling. With direct free cooling the system reach a PUE as low as 1.08,
while the water free cooling system is resulting in 1.35. The significant free cooling
contributions main driving factor is the low ambient temperature of the studied
facility of Huawei data centre, located in Langfang, northern China.
A study from 2017 [16] evaluates the sources of inefficiencies and methods for im­
proving the performance of air­cooled data centers at various levels, starting from
rack level up to systems level. It reviews advanced techniques in thermal model­
ing and energy optimization, as well as compares various cooling methods such
as free cooling, heat pipe cooling and liquid cooling. The paper also discusses
the use of free cooling as an energy­saving method and evaluates the advance­
ments in air­side and water­side economizers. The paper explains the system
setups and advantages of different solutions, however no optimization is done.
The paper concludes that free cooling of data centers is a method of utilizing nat­
ural cold sources to reduce dependence on the vapor­compression refrigeration
cycle, which can be accomplished through the use of air­side and/or water­side
economizers, resulting in a reduction in power consumption and a more sustain­
able, renewable way of cooling, however no numerical comparison have been
shown.
Most of the other papers related to energy efficiency optimization are related to ei­
ther the rack optimization introducing technologies like liquid cooling, or analysing
air­flow and room efficiencies through CFD system. Analysing the cooling system
separately is also not common. It is, at least based on the findings of the author,
a research gap to analyse the possibilities of cooling storage and free cooling in­
stallment to data centre cooling performance, especially with a scope of an entire
year on the danish weather and market conditions.
Data centre cooling storage optimization
16
==PAGE:26==
3
Methodology
To address the research question, several steps must be taken. The first step
is defining the scope of the project, which was previously established in the in­
troduction section. It is important to have a basic understanding of the modeling
capabilities in order to determine which attributes to include in the GAMS model
and what is necessary for accuracy. Once the input and output parameters of the
model have been finalized, the next steps are to gather input data, define initial
conditions, and document assumptions. At the same time, time­series data for rel­
evant variables can be collected or constructed. The SARIMAX model was used
to forecast different electricity price scenarios. The GAMS model can then be
constructed, including all technology options that will be used in various iterations
during the optimization process. With a limited scope, the base case scenario
can be validated at this point. Running the full scope of the base case scenario
will serve as a benchmark for comparison with all other scenarios. The different
technology scenario options can then be constructed and modeled into the code,
resulting in optimized scenarios. These scenarios can be run through the same
model to gather results for comparison and analysis. During the results discus­
sion, sensitivity analysis will be conducted on certain attributes.
The scope of the study is Denmark and the time of the decision and calculations
is 2022, for a period of 1 year and time steps of one hour.
3.1
Starting conditions
In this section the initial input data will be introduced what have been gathered
or developed for the model including the required cooling load throughout the
year, the attributes of the different technologies, time­series data for the outside
temperature, humidity, gas and electricity price and carbon intensity of electricity.
3.1.1
General Data Centre attributes
Aligning with the scope of the research the required load have been determined
based on the usual danish data centre sizes. Assuming a 20 MW facility with
a 50% cooling requirement ratio, the initial cooling load what have been used is
10 MW. From the website of Baxtel danish data centre overview can be seen
[32]. Due to not taking into account different efficiencies or systems properties for
the size of the technologies, the main cooling load is more of a theoretical value
representing than a significantly important input measure. Changing the total load
only decreasing or increasing the supply and demand values without having an
effect on the relative behaviour of the system.
To model the daily load variance of the system, a 24 hour relative load factor curve
have been applied to adjust the characteristics to the real life trends between 80
Data centre cooling storage optimization
17
==PAGE:27==
and a 100% loads [28]. beside a required server room temperature for operation
which is 21◦C
3.1.2
Ambient conditions
For free cooling and cooling tower calculations the wet bulb temperature need to
be calculated which takes into account the humidity of the air. It is often used
in the cooling calculations of buildings and industrial processes, such as data
centers, as it is a more accurate measure of the humidity of the air than the dry bulb
temperature alone. It is the temperature that a wet thermometer would read if it
were placed in a current of air and the thermometer’s bulb was kept wet with water.
The wet bulb temperature is lower than the dry bulb temperature (the temperature
read by a normal thermometer) because the evaporation of water from the wet
bulb absorbs heat from the air, which cools it down.
Figure 3.1: Yearly ambient temperature in Copenhagen [28]
3.1.3
Electricity price scenarios
3.1.3.1
SARIMAX model
The SARIMAX (Seasonal Autoregressive Integrated Moving Average with eXoge­
nous regressors) model is a type of statistical model used for time series analysis.
It is an extension of the basic ARIMA (Autoregressive Integrated Moving Aver­
age) model, which is no taking into account seasonal characteristics. The model
allows for the inclusion of additional explanatory variables, or exogenous regres­
sors in addition to the time series data itself. The model can be used to model
and forecast a wide range of time series data, including data on electricity prices,
economic indicators, and weather data. It is a flexible model that can be adjusted
to account for various patterns and trends in the data, such as seasonality, trend,
and autocorrelation [33].
Data centre cooling storage optimization
18
==PAGE:28==
Overall, the model is a useful tool for analyzing and forecasting time series data,
particularly when there are additional explanatory variables that may be influenc­
ing the behavior of the data.
3.1.3.2
Input data
For the forecast hourly price data have been used from the site energidataser­
vice.dk from the day­ahead market DK1 price zone. The data used as an input for
the forecast is covering 3 years of electricity price, starting from 01/12/2019. As it
can be seen from figure 3.2, both the market average and the price volatility have
been increasing from 2021 summer and a huge drop can be seen in August of
2022. This unusual trend is making the future price less predictable. Because of
the large dataset and the theoretical and computational limitations of the model,
weekly average prices have been used for the scenario prediction.
Figure 3.2: Historical electricity price data
3.1.3.3
Prediction and scenarios
On figure 3.3, the results of the prediction process can be seen in addition to
the historical data. there are two scenarios present simulating different overall
electricity price characteristics. On of them is expecting to follow the average
increasing level of 2022 and in average is going up with the same margins, while
the other is modelling a normalized electricity price condition where the 2023 end
of year price is still on the same level as the beginning, modelling a stable market.
Data centre cooling storage optimization
19
==PAGE:29==
Figure 3.3: Weekly electricity forecast results for high and low price scenarios
As only weekly average data have been used so far due to computational rea­
sons, the hourly price distribution is yet to be concluded based on the available
data. From figure 3.4 the weekly average volatility can be seen as a result of
the decomposition of the entire hourly time­series data. By adding together the
weekly forecast and the hourly volatility the hourly time­series prediction can be
constructed, however it still does not take into account different weekly distribu­
tions. For that on top of the volatility from figure 3.4, a random parameter have
been introduced for every hour of +­ 0 to 10 EUR, but it still does not change char­
acteristics. It makes the data more diverse across the weeks. The used weekly
volatility data is only coming from the decomposition analysis, what can be seen
in Appendix B. The volatility is way higher in 2022 than in 2020. To take this into
account a third scenario have been introduced with adjusted volatility.
Figure 3.4: Weekly average electricity price volatility from historical data
On figure 3.5 the previously introduced high price scenario and the new, high
volatility scenario can be seen. Both of them have been built on top of the high
price scenario. The new methodology includes a peak conversion, which takes the
daily moving average of the forecast and is correcting the peak by multiplying with
1.8 the difference of the hourly point and the moving average. By this the same
overall characteristics can be modelled with a streched, higher volatility simulating
the 2022 trends and the peaks will not change direction, just grow accordingly.
Data centre cooling storage optimization
20
==PAGE:30==
Figure 3.5: High and volatile price scenario yearly electricity price
After all the calculations, the hourly distribution for the year 2023 is set. On figure
3.6 the high price, high volatility scenario can be seen on top of the historical data,
making the scope of the chart 4 years from 01/12/2019 to 01/12/2023.
Figure 3.6: Constructed hourly data for the volatility price scenario
In the end there have been defined three scenario option for GAMS modelling
input which are the followings:
• normalized price scenario: A price scenario with the average volatility of
the entire scope of 3 years and a normalized average price.
• high price, low volatility scenario: An average price following the rising
trend of 2022 and a volatility of the entire scope of 3 years which is lower
than the 2022 volatility.
• high price, high volatility scenario: An average price following the rising
trend of 2022 and an adjusted volatility to match the 2022 trends, which is
80% higher than the volatility of the scope of 3 years.
Data centre cooling storage optimization
21
==PAGE:31==
Since the low price scenario is already more economically and environmentally
friendly than using the system with absorption chiller and gas prices, modelling
even lover electricity prices are not having additional value to the analysis and not
going to change the behaviour of the system. However the absolute expenditures
would be lower, nothing else would change in the results.
3.1.4
Carbon intensity of electricity
The carbon intensity of electricity can vary significantly depending on the source of
the electricity. Electricity generated from fossil fuels, such as coal and natural gas,
tends to have a higher carbon intensity due to the emissions associated with burn­
ing these fuels. On the other hand, electricity generated from renewable sources,
such as solar, wind, and hydro, tends to have a lower carbon intensity, as these
sources do not emit greenhouse gases during electricity production. However,
due to various reasons it is hard to predict carbon intensity of the future energy
mix. It would require good estimations of the technology mix and weather to de­
termine accurately CO2 intensity, what is out of the scope of the project. As it
can be seen from figure 3.7 the mean of the carbon intensity of the last available
data is not as volatile as the electricity price. The missing data from 2022, the low
volatility and hard prediction methodology results in the assumption of using data
from 2021 for the simulation.
Figure 3.7: Carbon intensity of electricity historical data
3.1.5
Natural gas price
The Danish natural gas market is characterized by a high degree of integration
with the rest of Europe, with natural gas being imported from a variety of sources,
including Norway, the Netherlands, and Russia. The country’s natural gas infras­
tructure is also well­developed, with a network of pipelines and storage facilities
that ensure a reliable supply of gas throughout the year. However, from figure 3.8
it can be seen that gas prices have been skyrocketed since the first half of 2021.
Data centre cooling storage optimization
22
==PAGE:32==
Figure 3.8: Historical gas price in Denmark [34]
Investigating the last available consecutive dataset from the danish market which
is from 31/10/2021 to 31/10/2022 however can result in usable predicted data. As
the prediction of the worlds political and economical situation is not easy nor within
the scope of the project, and the focus of details are on electricity price scenarios,
in the case of natural gas it is enough to use only one scenario. The input shown
on figure 3.9 have been determined using the same SARIMAX methodology as
the electricity price scenario modelling shown before.
Figure 3.9: Natural gas price prediction
Data centre cooling storage optimization
23
==PAGE:33==
3.1.6
System elements
On figure 3.10 the systems mapping can be seen including all elements that can
be used within the analysis and is built into the model. It contains five different
type of technologies. Supply elements modelling the actual connection between
the energy market of Denmark and the data center facility, conversion elements
representing energy form transformation, cooling elements for generating heat
energy by cooling down materials, a storage element for heat storage purposes
and the demand element itself what is simulating the energy requirements of the
system.
As a general approach the system attributes have been determined using reverse
engineering from the required load. Since at this point of the analysis it can’t be
known what contributions will the system elements add to the cooling, it is not
possible to determine the ideal size of the technologies. In order not to limit the
technologies capabilities in the modelling, all of them have to be able to cover all
requirements by itself. This way the technology sizes will not affect the behaviour
of the model. It is important to mention that a single technology size by itself
mean nothing, since the power flow is going through multiple technologies until it
reaches the cooling phase. Under sizing one technology of the flow will reduce
the capabilities of the entire flow.
In Appendix C the input parameters for each technology can be seen what have
been used for the modelling.
Data centre cooling storage optimization
24
==PAGE:34==
Figure 3.10: Systems architecture
Data centre cooling storage optimization
25
==PAGE:35==
3.2
Technology scenarios
In this section all the technology combinations, in other word scenarios will be intro­
duced what have been used through the analysis. First, instead of one base case
scenario, three have been investigated to understand the characteristics and out­
comes of the different chiller options, and compare the expenditures and carbon
footprints of the base case scenario technologies, then five new scenarios have
been introduced to model the new technology options in various combinations.
3.2.1
Base case scenarios
Since using gas supply with absorption chiller and electricity supply with electric
chiller can be significantly different regarding emissions and expenditures, it is
an important step to analyse system element characteristics before introducing
the new technologies. Behaviour change in the base options can lead to wrong
conclusions of the optimised scenarios. So first, the three possible combination
of the two chillers have been analysed through the following scenarios.
• base A ­ only absorption chiller usage for cooling
In this scenario the absorption chiller is responsible for 100% of the cooling
supply without using electricity at all. This is a very unlikely scenario with
no usage in the market, however a good way to gain understanding on the
behaviour and output of the absorption chiller technology.
• base E ­ only electric chiller usage for cooling
This scenario is the opposite of the previous one, with only electric chiller
availability. For emission optimization, it is of course the best solution, and
is a more frequent solution.
• base AE ­ absorption and electric chiller usage for cooling
Using both absorption and electric chiller is the most important base case
scenario which not only models the technology usage but makes the electric­
ity price scenarios important for the first time. This case, the price volatility
can have significant effect on both emissions and expenditures, and adds
flexibility into the system. Relying on multiple source of energy makes all
systems less dependent on unpredictable market conditions.
Data centre cooling storage optimization
26
==PAGE:36==
base A
base E
base AE
boiler
1
0
1
turbine
1
0
1
absorption chiller
1
0
1
electric chiller
0
1
1
air­side free cooling
0
0
0
water­side free cooling
0
0
0
cooling storage
0
0
0
Table 3.1: Base case scenarios technology availabilities
3.2.2
Optimized scenarios
After analysing the base case scenario technologies the additional flexibility op­
tions can be examined in different combinations. The two main additional systems
are the free cooling option and the cooling storage. To understand the effects on
the system they have to be analysed both one by one and combined just like with
the base case scenarios. Since the pressure is on the new technologies and the
free cooling is an additional flexibility option for energy supply beside electricity
and gas, the absorption chiller can be discarded in most of the scenarios. Also,
using air­side and water­side free cooling at the same time do not have any ad­
ditional value to the analysis, and is not a usual practice, they will not appear
together in any scenarios. Below five new flexible scenarios can be seen what
have been analysed, all scenarios are using the baseE scenario as an initial sys­
tem, unless described otherwise.
• S ­ only cooling storage added
In this scenario the only additional technology is the cooling storage. It adds
significant flexibility to the operation which makes it possible to utilize re­
sources the best way according to needs in short term without the need of
supplying exactly the same amount of load as the demand in each time slot.
Analysing it differently truly enables technology comparison.
• AFC + S ­ added air­side free cooling and storage
On top of the previous scenario, here the air­side free cooling is introduced
having both types of the additional technology options. This way the system
takes advantage of the winter months more.
• WFC + S ­ added water­side free cooling and storage
Compared to the scenario AFC + S this one is using a more efficient free
cooling option including a heat exchanger and a cooling tower. The ambient
conditions are the same, but this case the humidity is taken into account too,
with a higher overall efficiency.
Data centre cooling storage optimization
27
==PAGE:37==
• WFC ­ only water­side free cooling added
As discussed with the storage already, analysing technologies separately is
key. Since the water­side free cooling is more efficient than the air­side one,
it will be used for this scenario.
• All ­ all technology expect air­side free cooling
All previously mentioned optimized scenarios are using only electric chillers
without absorption ones. It makes comparison easier, and also the flexible
technology options make multiple chiller options less important and useful
both regarding emissions and costs optimizations. In this scenario however
both options are available with additional water­side free cooling and cooling
storage.
S
AFC + S
WFC + S
WFC
All
boiler
0
0
0
0
1
turbine
0
0
0
0
1
absorption chiller
0
0
0
0
1
electric chiller
1
1
1
1
1
air­side free cooling
0
1
0
0
0
water­side free cooling
0
0
1
1
1
cooling storage
1
1
1
0
1
Table 3.2: Optimized case scenario technology availabilities
3.3
GAMS model
In this section the mathematical modelling will be introduced to understand the
core part of the analysis including the objective function, the constraints, the side­
calculations and the output analysis. Beside the main model equations, free cool­
ing calculations can be seen in Appendix D, summary calculations for expendi­
tures and emissions in Appendix E and the GAMS code in Appendix J.
3.3.1
Objective function
During the analysis of the system two objective functions will be used. The main
analysis will aim to minimize energy costs, while the second one the total emis­
sions from the energy usage. Since the goal of the project is to find the best
price­case scenario for different electricity price scenarios, comparing the total
emissions is also an important factor during carbon intensity discussions. There
is no better way to find the least carbon impact solution than to modify the objec­
tive function. No other equation need to be adjusted in order to optimize another
attribute.
Data centre cooling storage optimization
28
==PAGE:38==
Objective function of carbon intensity minimization:
Z =
∑
t
(Emel(t) + Emboiler(t) + Emturbine(t))
∀t
(3.1)
Objective function of cost minimization:
Z =
∑
t
(tCgas(t) + tCel(t))
∀t
(3.2)
3.3.2
Power maximums
Before defining the actual power flow equations, the boundaries of the technolo­
gies have to be determined. In this part of the modelling the power maximums will
be set in order to match the initial input parameters.
The different scenario options will also be modelled in this part. Adjusting the
maximum utilization factor of x for all technologies can switch off the availability of
the given technology entirely. Modifying the maximum available power is also a
possible way of adjusting the weight of a technology within the system, however
having a standardized option for technology implementation to scenarios ensures
visibility both in the model and in documentation.
The boiler power maximum times the maximum utilization and efficiency always
need to be higher than the actual power flow from the gas supply to the boiler.
Pboiler · xboiler · nboiler
100
≥Qboiler_to_AC(t)
∀t
(3.3)
The turbines power maximum is calculated for every time­step, from the maximum
utilization value and the available power. The total power output per hour delivered
to the electric chiller and the absorption chiller need to be lower or equal than the
available.
Pturbine · xturbine ≥Qturbine_to_EC(t) + Qturbine_to_AC(t)
∀t
(3.4)
For the absorption chiller, the maximum available power times the technology
availability must be higher or equal than the actual hourly power flow from the
chiller to the cooling storage.
PAC · xAC · COPAC ≥QAC_to_S(t)
∀t
(3.5)
For the electric chiller, the maximum available power times the technology avail­
ability must be higher or equal than the actual hourly power flow from the chiller
to the cooling storage, just like in the absorption chiller.
Data centre cooling storage optimization
29
==PAGE:39==
PEC · xEC · COPEC ≥QEC_to_S(t)
∀t
(3.6)
The maximum power limitation for the air­side free cooling is calculated the same
way as the chillers but using mass flow instead of power flow.
mAFC · xAFC ≥mAFC_to_S(t)
∀t
(3.7)
The water side free cooling system power maximum is calculated the same way
as the air­side free cooling system.
mWFC · xWFC ≥mWFC_to_S(t)
∀t
(3.8)
3.3.3
Node equilibriums
For all the system elements expect the cooling storage the incoming and outgoing
power flow need to be the same in order to keep the energy balance of the nodes.
For system boundaries like the electricity grid and natural gas supply there is no
need to introduce a separate node, it is enough to summarize usage within the
results analysis, however for the others it is necessary.
For energy conversion elements, the two side of the equation represents the for­
mer and the present energy form and content. For the boiler node, the energy
content of the natural gas, the volume flow of the time slot and the efficiency mul­
tiplication need to be the same as the power flow from the boiler to the absorption
chiller in each slot.
Hgas · Vgas_to_boiler(t) · nboiler
100
= Qboiler_to_AC(t)
∀t
(3.9)
The gas turbine node is somewhat similar to the boiler, however the it takes into
account the ratio between the energy form generated by the turbine. Some of the
energy is transformed into heat and the other part into electricity. The heat can
be utilized in the absorption chiller while the electricity in the electric one. In some
edge cases waste heat can also be created to optimize costs.
Hgas · Vgas_to_turbine(t) · nturbine
100
· el_rateturbine
100
= Qturbine_to_EC(t)
∀t
(3.10)
Hgas · Vgas_to_turbine(t) · nturbine
100
· 1 −el_rateturbine
100
=
= Qturbine_to_AC(t) + Qturbine_loss(t)
∀t
(3.11)
The node of the absorption chiller is using the heat input from both the boiler and
the gas turbine and after taking into account the coefficient of performance, for
Data centre cooling storage optimization
30
==PAGE:40==
each time slot the output heat must be the same which is flowing to the cooling
storage.
(Qturbine_to_AC(t) + Qboiler_to_AC(t)) · COPAC = QAC_to_S(t)
∀t
(3.12)
The electric chiller node is similar to the absorption one, but the input energy can
come from directly the electricity grid or from the gas turbine.
(Qgrid_to_EC(t) + Qturbine_to_EC(t)) · COPEC = QEC_to_S(t)
∀t
(3.13)
However the cooling power usage of the air­side free cooling is dependent on
the relative mass flow assuming a linear power usage as a function of mass flow
utilization.
Qgrid_to_AFC(t) = mAFC_to_S(t)
mAFC
· PAFC · nAFC
100
(3.14)
The water side free cooling is the same as the air side one. Energy input is calcu­
lated based on the relative mass flow assuming a linear power input curve.
Qgrid_to_WFC(t) = mWFC_to_S(t)
mWFC
· PWFC · nWFC
100
(3.15)
The cooling storage node is the most complex since it is the only one capable of
storing energy which means that the incoming and outgoing energy is not nec­
essarily equal. In this case the comparison is happening between two time slots
instead of the energy flows. For each slot the energy content of the storage must
be equal to the energy content in the previous slot plus all the incoming energy
from the two chillers and free cooling minus the outgoing energy towards the IT
equipment. An important assumption here is that the storage modelling does not
take into account the cooling losses due to time.
QS(t) = QS(t −1) + QAC_to_S(t) + QEC_to_S(t)+
+QWFC_to_S(t) + QAFC_to_S(t) −QS_to_IT(t)
∀t
(3.16)
The IT equipment node is making sure that the cooling demand, which is the
multiplication by the overall server capacity and the utilization curve of the servers
is the same as the cooling supply that is coming only from the cooling storage.
Dall · Lserver(t) = QS_to_IT(t)
∀t
(3.17)
Data centre cooling storage optimization
31
==PAGE:41==
3.3.4
Cooling storage constraints
Since the cooling storage node is not working the same way as the others, more
constraints need to be added to model the system properly. The initial and ending
utilization and the power flow limitations.
The first equation is referring to the maximum and minimum state of charge which
means the maximum capacity that the system allows to use compared to the nom­
inal capacity of the storage and the minimum capacity that must remain in the
storage at any time.
QS(t) ≤SOCS_max
∀t
(3.18)
QS(t) ≥SOCS_min
∀t
(3.19)
The next two equations are referring to the boundaries of the system, the starting
and the ending charge of the storage. Ideally it is the same to avoid using initially
available free cooling load, but the initial charge can also lead to differences due
to the capacity availability at the beginning of the analysis. In case of high cycle
numbers like in the scope of a year it is not significant.
QS(′1′) = SOCS_initial
(3.20)
QS(′last′) = SOCS_initial
(3.21)
Two equations are limiting the charging and discharging capacity for every hour.
Technological inputs are determining the values and it is making sure the model
the cooling storage behaviour realistic, not letting it charge or discharge entirely
in a single time slot.
QAC_to_S(t) + QEC_to_S(t) ≤CHS_max
∀t
(3.22)
QS_to_IT(t) ≤DCHS_max
∀t
(3.23)
And the last equation is closing the cooling storage option in scenarios where it is
not used by fixing the charging and discharging to the same value for each time
step.
QS_to_IT(t) = QAC_to_S(t) + QEC_to_S(t) + QAFC_to_S(t) + QWFC_to_S(t)
∀t
(3.24)
Data centre cooling storage optimization
32
==PAGE:42==
3.4
Analysis steps
3.4.1
Annual results
First, all four combination of objective function and main result parameter will be
presented. Annual costs and emissions for the cost optimization, and the same
parameters for the emissions optimization. The annual PUE (power usage effec­
tiveness) will be also compared for the scenarios.
PUE = Annual consumption
IT load
= non­cooling + cooling consumption
IT load
(3.25)
3.4.2
Scenario analysis
With all the electricity price scenarios, technology scenarios and systems intro­
duction, the methodology of the analysis itself can be discussed. Having three
electricity price scenario, eight technology scenario and two objective functions,
the model have been ran 48 times with the detailed output documentations. The
breakdown of the three main variable of the model can be seen below.
• Electricity price
The different electricity price scenarios are modelled and analysed to com­
pare system behaviour during cost optimization, since it has no effect on
emissions optimization. The price differences can end up in different tech­
nology usage and storage characteristics.
• Technology scenarios
The different technology scenarios however can have significant effect on
both the cost and the emissions optimizations. Analysing these variations
are the main goal of the project and is aiming for gaining understanding
on both the costs and emissions reduction effects of the different technolo­
gies and combinations. Significant energy efficiency improvements are pre­
dicted.
• Objective functions
Having a third main variable in the form of multiple objective functions help
to understand properly the business case with comparing the above men­
tioned scenarios in possible cost and emissions reductions. It is important
to mention, that while the electricity price is an independent time series data
from the data centre perspective, and the technology pool is a long term deci­
sion well in advance of the operation, the real life connection of the objective
functions is the operation and business case itself. Optimizing for emissions
or costs can be a daily decision of the operator and can be changed quickly.
3.4.3
Sensitivity analysis
In this section the methodology of the sensitivity analysis will be introduced. The
goal of the analysis itself is to find the effect of a single technology size modification
Data centre cooling storage optimization
33
==PAGE:43==
on the behaviour of the model and on the high level results. One or more attributes
of a single technology will be changed with a range from minus 100% to plus 100%,
so basically from removing the technology completely to doubling its attribute. The
analysis will be carried out on a single scenario, on the WFC + S one equipped
with both cooling storage and water­side free cooling. The following attributes will
be analysed:
• Storage size
Since the initial storage size have been the only attribute what have not
been determined with reverse engineering, it is especially important to have
a look at the sensitivity of this attribute. As mentioned before, the scope of
the analysis is from minus 100% to plus 100%.
• Storage charging capacity
The charging capacity is the second least validated input data, which also
makes it important to analyses its sensitivity. Adjusting the discharging too is
not necessary as the cooling load requirement is not varying much, however
allowing faster charging might result in better characteristics of the storage
usage.
• Storage size and charging capacity
On or the other attribute might not have a lot to add to the system by them­
selves, it is interesting to look into the combination of the two, and see what
would happen with modifying both attributes of the storage.
• Water­side free cooling capacity
Beside the cooling storage, technology size adjusting of the free cooling
might also result in significantly different output.
3.4.4
Limitations
Overall, it can be seen that the three varying input properties are covering the
biggest cooling related decision and circumstances options. However it is impor­
tant to mention the limitations of the modelling. Below in a list format the biggest
limitations and assumptions can be seen from modelling perspective, sorted based
on importance starting with the higher inaccuracies.
• Knowledge inaccuracy
One of the biggest limitation and inaccuracy is that the model knows exactly
all the input data for the entire scope, however in real life the forecasts can
vary from reality especially with deep frequencies like daily, or hourly data.
This makes the model performing better than it could in reality, even if the
forecasting is 100% correct. The results shown in the next sections are the
best possible cases, the inaccuracy is purely one sided.
• Forecasting inaccuracy
Another important assumptions are the forecasts. Electricity and gas price
are the highest possible mistake sources, while weather data and carbon
intensity of electricity are more precise assumptions.
Data centre cooling storage optimization
34
==PAGE:44==
• Technology simplifications
Technologies are highly simplified with assumptions. They are able to vary
utilization freely in every hour, however in a real case it takes time for turning
on and off these technologies with possible maintenance and expenditure
problems. Using them this way is also a one sided limitation what can only
make the model performing better than what is achievable.
Data centre cooling storage optimization
35
==PAGE:45==
4
Results and Discussion
In order to properly analyse the detailed results data, the main goal of the project
need to be followed. As the aim is still to compare the business case of the sce­
narios regarding energy expenditures and emissions, and find the best flexibility
solution for data centres to reach that goal, mainly these variables and the driving
factors behind them will be analysed. The following steps have been carried out
in the section.
• Annual results comparison
First, for all scenarios the annual energy expenditures and annual emissions
have been compared including electricity price, technology and objective
function scenarios. This gives a basic understanding on the performance
of the scenarios and makes it possible to determine where to focus further
detailed analysis.
• Optimized scenario analysis
As a result of the annual analysis, scenario WFC +S have been chosen for
the detailed analysis since it is the second best performing configuration in
expenditures optimization and the first in emissions optimization. Regarding
objective function, the emissions optimization have been used, beside the
high electricity price scenario. Optimizing emissions is a bigger challenge for
the project, while price does not have an effect on the scenario since it is not
having gas usage. Storage performance, Charging technology distribution
and carbon footprint will be shown.
• Technology comparisons
After having an understanding on the best performing scenario details, it
can be analysed how technologies behave in different scenarios. Free cool­
ing, electric chiller and the storage have been compared to understand the
difference of free cooling technologies and the effect of price scenarios on
storage utilization.
• Sensitivity analysis
Finally, a sensitivity analysis have been carried out to determine the ideal
attributes of technologies.
4.1
Annual results
First of the results analysis methods a basic, annual scenario analysis and com­
parison need to be carried out to understand the annual outcome and main find­
ings of the scenarios. On figure 4.1 4.3 4.2 and 4.4 a comparison can be seen
for both the total costs optimization and the total emissions optimization. Beside
comparing costs and emissions the Power usage effectiveness will be compared.
Data centre cooling storage optimization
36
==PAGE:46==
On figure 4.1 the total price comparisons can be seen for the cost optimizations.
As in the base case scenarios using gas is more expensive than using electricity
for running chillers, it can be seen that the most expensive scenario is baseA, also
it is not dependent on electricity price. In baseA scenario the high price analysis
results are 23% higher than the low price. The volatility of price does not have
significant effect on the results. Combining both technologies in scenario baseAE
utilize the price differences and optimize accordingly. For the low price case, ab­
sorption chiller does not have significant value, however the usage of it makes it
slightly possible to tackle volatility issue. In the volatile case the system can utilize
the low­peaks and turn on the absorption chiller in high­peak hours resulting in 4%
savings. Using only a storage of the new technologies have an average saving
of 12% which is significant already. The storage is working the same way as the
absorption chiller in the baseA scenario and blocks high price hour consumption.
Using free cooling and storage together is the best option for saving, with 23% of
saving using air­side free cooling in scenario AFC + S and 39% using water­side
in scenario WFC + S. It can already be seen that using water­side free cooling
is significantly more effective than air­side cooling. Not using a storage, but using
free cooling results in a saving of 24% which makes the water­side free cooling
the biggest contributor to cutting expenditures. Using both electric and absorption
chiller in scenario All makes no big difference compared to WFC +S having only
3% of addition savings.
Figure 4.1: Cost comparison of cost optimizations
On figure 4.2 the annual emissions can be seen for cost optimizations. However
these simulations optimized expenditures, the technology improvements alone re­
sulted in significant reduction in the carbon footprint. Comparing the base case
scenarios the technology variations means a more than regarding expenditures.
Pure electric chiller usage is 80% less carbon intense than pure absorption chiller.
Using the mix of the two in the baseAE scenario is the most frequently used op­
tion in the market and in the analysis is 37­55% less carbon intense depending
on the electricity price scenario. Scenario All is similar in average compared to
the pure electric base case scenario, the advantage of that configuration is the
low expenditures and bigger technology flexibility. Air­side free cooling can have
Data centre cooling storage optimization
37
==PAGE:47==
up to 16% emissions reduction, while water­side free cooling up to 45%. It is a
very strong argument beside thee technologies that they both provide flexibility,
emissions reduction and savings.
Figure 4.2: Emissions comparison of cost optimizations
On figure 4.3 the annual expenditures can be seen from the emissions optimiza­
tions. Since it is not optimizing costs, the driving factor behind the savings is
the flexibility and the advanced technology attributes. baseA, baseE and baseAE
scenarios have the same results beside high and volatile electricity prices, how­
ever for low electricity price the scenarios equipped with electric chiller are 20%
cheaper. The storage option does not contribute significantly to cost reductions,
since the driving actor behind its usage is emission. The difference between the
free cooling technologies however are not theoretical decisions like the storage
question discussed, but cooling efficiency. The WFC + S configuration is 22%
less expensive due to the fact that is producing more free cooling. Air­side free
cooling even with installed storage is not as cheap as the water­side free cool­
ing by itself. Allowing natural gas utilization while optimizing emissions have no
difference, scenario All and WFC + S are the same.
Figure 4.3: Cost comparison of emissions optimizations
Data centre cooling storage optimization
38
==PAGE:48==
On figure 4.4 the annual emissions can be seen for scenarios beside emissions
optimization. To have better visibility, baseA scenario is not included sine it has
an annual 12.03 tonnes emission which is the same as in cost optimization due to
the technology limitations. It can be seen, that even if scenarios have absorption
chiller, it is not used a single time since the relative emission of gas consumption
is higher than for electricity. It can also be seen that the price scenarios have no
effect on emissions. Only water­side free cooling installed scenario called WFC
have 30% less emissions than the base case scenarios with its 2.26 tonnes an­
nually, while scenario S installed with only storage have an emission reduction of
37% making it a more effective technology for emissions reduction. Using both
have an 53% reduction with 1.39 tonnes annually. It can be seen that using both
technologies do not add their benefits together completely, but still having signifi­
cant additional value.
Figure 4.4: Emissions comparison of emissions optimizations
In figure 4.5 the annual PUE can be seen for the scenarios beside high electricity
price. It can be seen, that scenarios without absorption chiller are performing
good both in the emissions and cost optimizations, with WFC + S being the most
promising one. A PUE as low as 1.1 can be reached theoretically, however it
is important to mention again the limitations. It can also be seen again, that no
matter what objective function the model is using, with the new technologies both
emissions and costs are decreasing.
4.2
Optimized scenario analysis
In this section the scenario equipped with electric chiller, cooling storage and
water­side free cooling is analysed beside emissions optimization and high elec­
tricity price scenario. Since emissions are optimized, the scenario called WFC+S
is the same as scenario All which has an additional absorption chiller.
From the annual analysis it can be seen that the scenario is ending in a total of
5.58 million EUR annual energy expenditures beside 1389 tonnes of emissions.
Data centre cooling storage optimization
39
==PAGE:49==
(a) Cost optimization
(b) Emission optimization
Figure 4.5: PUE of scenarios
It is 12% more expensive than the same technology configuration beside cost
optimization, however emissions are 33% lower.
On figure 4.6 the utilization of the storage can be seen in green, while the carbon
intensity of electricity can be seen in blue. There is a clear correlation between
the two, especially during the summer months. Whenever electricity supply is
greener, he system utilizes the storage and is charging , however in cases when it
is carbon dense, the data centre is using the storage as primary source of cooling.
The correlation is less significant during the winter, since then the free cooling
system is used which is less carbon intense. It can also be seen that peaks are
followed by variance up to 20% of storage capacity for a few days meaning that
the storage can benefit from both hourly carbon intensity variance, however the
significant charging and discharging periods are following each other in a weekly
basis. It can also be validated that a short term storage can not supply long term
needs, otherwise significant discharging and charging would only happen a few
times through the year.
Data centre cooling storage optimization
40
==PAGE:50==
Figure 4.6: Hourly storage utilization and carbon intensity in scenario WFC+S
beside high electricity price and emissions optimization
For analysing the water­side free cooling technology, the storage charging contri­
bution of the free cooling system and the electric chiller will be compared. From
figure 4.7 the chiller can be seen in orange, while the free cooling in blue through­
out the year. From the weekly moving average it can be seen, that from November
until April, the electric chillers overall contribution is under 2% which really high­
lights the joint benefits of the cooling storage and the free cooling. The short term
cooling storage is capable of providing enough time flexibility for the free cooling
to overcome the differences from daily weather changes. From figure 4.6 and 4.6
together it can be seen that The total charging of the two technologies are not
covering exactly the same path as the storage utilization, since that is reflecting
the difference between the charging and discharging in every time stamp. From
June to September however, the free cooling technology can’t be used and the
system purely rely on the electric chiller. In total 62% of the annual energy needs
can be covered with free cooling. It can also be concluded, that the weather can
be better forecasted than the price of electricity or gas, therefor the usage of free
cooling is providing stability and predictability to the operation.
Figure 4.7: Hourly cooling energy supply breakdown in scenario WFC+S beside
high electricity price and emissions optimization
Data centre cooling storage optimization
41
==PAGE:51==
Th total emissions analysis is resulting in the most clear correlation to the carbon
intensity of the electricity supply. On figure 4.8 the total emissions and the carbon
intensity can be seen. It is obvious that whenever the supply is carbon dense,
the system is avoiding electricity usage, and rather utilize storage and water.side
free cooling. For this reason the higher emissions hours are the ones with the
lowest carbon intensity. It is also important to pressurize the biggest contributor
to the carbon footprint reduction, the free cooling. As it can be seen from figure
4.7, during the winter months the electric chiller usage is negligible, therefor the
main consumer is the free cooling with significantly less demand. Emissions from
October to April are 20% lower compared to the summer months.
Figure 4.8: Hourly emissions and carbon intensity of electricity in scenario WFC+S
beside high electricity price and emissions optimization
Overall, it can be concluded that using both free cooling and cooling storage on top
of the electric chiller is having significant benefits in both emissions reduction and
cost optimization. Free cooling creates big characteristics gap between the cold
and warm months, whit its disadvantages and advantages. It is easier to maintain
the equipment during the months when it is not contributing to operations much,
however a stable, constant work load is preferred in all mechanical appliances to
utilize capital expenditures and reduce complexity. The benefits however in this
situation are clearly overcoming the difficulties, and the investment needs are the
only remaining significant bottlenecks for the system. It can also be mentioned,
that during the summer months, flexibility is not there, and keeping the absorption
chiller as a backup cooling supply should still be considered.
To understand the benefits of the carried out scenario analysis, additional results
can be seen in the appendices. In Appendix F the base case scenarios are com­
pared, while in Appendix G the same scenario analysis can be seen for WFC +S
beside high electricity price and cost optimization.
4.3
Technology comparison
Next, a comparison will be shown between air­side free cooling and water­side
free cooling. The cooling contributions will be analysed and the electric chiller
Data centre cooling storage optimization
42
==PAGE:52==
usage beside them will be added. The cooling storage utilization beside cost
optimization will also be carried out to see how different price scenarios affect the
performance and characteristic of the cooling storage.
Beside the analysis below, in Appendix H a storage utilization comparison for the
different objective functions can be seen, while in Appendix I, the energy expen­
ditures are compared for scenarios not equipped with storage.
4.3.1
Free cooling technology comparison
On figure 4.9 the comparison of the free cooling systems can be seen. From
December until February the two curves are running on top of each other, which
means that the limitation is coming from the storage side and not from free cool­
ing side, as the water­side free cooling is much more efficient. From February
however the efficiency which is coming from mostly the temperature differences
drops a lot and the true differences between the two systems appears. The air­
side free cooling system produces 32% less cooling annually than the water­side,
with bigger and bigger relative differences in warm times. For the same reason the
water­side appliance can operate for a total of one month more than the air­side.
Regarding characteristics there are no differences, only in production.
Figure 4.9: Hourly cooling supply of air­side and water­side free cooling systems
in scenario AFC+s and WFC+S beside high electricity price and emissions opti­
mization
Comparing the electric chiller performance beside different free cooling systems
results in the opposite conclusion than the free cooling. Since in both configura­
tions only the chiller and the free cooling produce cooling, all remaining load what
can’t be produced by the free cooling must be delivered by the chiller. There­
for, the curves are completely the opposite as before, with the chiller in scenario
WFC +S to produce 32% less cooling. It can also be seen that the electric chiller
need to contribute during the winter period too, which is not particularly bad, but
can mean that the system is undersized.
Data centre cooling storage optimization
43
==PAGE:53==
Figure 4.10: Hourly cooling supply of electric chiller in scenario AFC+s and
WFC+S beside high electricity price and emissions optimization
4.3.2
Storage comparison
Comparing the storage characteristics beside different electricity price scenarios
do not lead to multiple findings, but one important one. On figure 4.11 the storage
utilization can be seen for all electricity price scenarios. In the case of low and
high price everything is true what have been discussed before, meaning that the
storage is utilizing energy for both hourly differences and for daily storing tasks.
However the high volatility price scenario tend to contribute more to tackle hourly
volatility than to store for multiple days. With some of the peaks being 20% less
utilized than in the other scenarios, it is more useful for tackling the volatility of
price, however the long term characteristics are still exactly the same as in the
others. This conclusion together with the annual price and emission results leads
to the fact, that installing a short term cooling storage makes the system com­
pletely independent from the electricity volatility.
Figure 4.11: Hourly storage utilization of scenario WFC+S beside cost optimiza­
tion for all price scenarios
Data centre cooling storage optimization
44
==PAGE:54==
4.3.3
Price scenarios comparison
In the section of cost time series comparison the technology scenarios with in­
stalled cooling storage will be compared separately than the ones without. On
figure 4.12 the scenarios with storage can be seen. The first conclusion is that
in days where weather conditions are too warm and free cooling is not an option
all three curves are running together without differences. Price is completely de­
pendent on electric chiller usage. As discussed in the annual results section, the
air­side free cooling option in scenario AFC +S is 13% cheaper than the one with
only storage, while scenario WFC + S is 31% cheaper. It can also be seen that
expenditure volatility, therefor electricity usage volatility is way higher than in the
scenarios without cooling storage.
Figure 4.12: Hourly energy expenditures of scenario WFC+S, AFC+S and S be­
side cost optimization and high price scenario
4.4
Sensitivity analysis
In the sensitivity analysis the size of the technologies have been modified to see
output and behaviour changes. Instead of analysing the technologies, the output
will be compared when modifying different attributes. On sub­figure A from figure
4.13 the expenditures can be seen beside cost optimization. First it need to be
mentioned that minus 100% technology sizing means removing the technology
completely. First, the attribute reductions will be analysed. It can be seen that the
curves act more or less similarly, however the storage size reaches significant
results way sooner than the other attributes, meaning that 50% less storage ca­
pacity results in only 3% higher annual expenditures than the initial scenario size,
compared to the 18% if removed completely. It can also be seen that the charg­
ing capacity is less flexible, since reducing it with 50% leads to an expenditure
increase of 12% compared to the 3% in the case of storage capacity. The free
cooling removal is acting linearly, as it is independent from other attributes, and as
long as there is demand to supply, is going to provide savings. However, switch­
ing to increased capacities, it can be seen that all the technology changes are
Data centre cooling storage optimization
45
==PAGE:55==
providing between 2% and 3% additional savings even when doubling their sizes.
The reason behind the free cooling is that its initial size have been calculated by
reverse engineering to meet the demand but do not oversize it, which means that it
is just enough to cover the needs during preferred weather conditions, and adding
more capacity might help for a few days on the boundary of summer and winter
months, but there is no demand to utilize the additional capacity. Regarding stor­
age, the reason is the same. Since it is only a long term storage, adding 8 days
of capacity only helps for approximately a week during the mentioned transition.
On sub­figure B from figure 4.13 the annual emissions can be seen beside cost
optimizations. The most interesting finding is that reducing storage size actually
benefit for emission reductions, however only 1%. The reason behind this is that
cost is being optimized, what can be done in a better way with additional storage
flexibility. In the entire range of the sensitivity analysis emissions are within a
10% window between 2.26 and 2.05 tonnes annually, which means that it is not
changing significantly during cost optimizations.
(a) Costs
(b) Emissions
Figure 4.13: Sensitivity analysis results for cost optimization
On sub­figure A from figure 4.14 the emissions of the emission optimization sce­
nario can be seen. It has a somewhat similar trend than the costs in cost opti­
mization, meaning that both the storage and the fee cooling size is reduceable
without significant performance losses. In numbers, 50% less storage capacity
only increases the emissions by 4% while the the same reduction in free cooling
by 11%. These technologies contribute most to the emission savings. Reducing
the charging capacity however is ending in significant emissions increases with
43%. With increasing the sizes of any of the attributes have higher impact on emis­
sions reduction that the same changes in the costs analysis, however still only up
to 5% beside 100% capacity increase for charging capacity, and even less, 3%
for the storage size and free cooling.
Data centre cooling storage optimization
46
==PAGE:56==
(a) Emissions
(b) Costs
Figure 4.14: Sensitivity analysis results for emission optimization
The annual costs beside emissions optimization that can be seen on sub­figure
B from figure 4.14 act the least similar way to the others. As before, storage re­
duction by 50% is not having significant changes in the costs either. Free cooling
reduction however increases the costs by 4%. Still not significant compared to the
fact that not the costs are optimized. Charging capacity reduction is not significant
either with 2% price increase for the ­50% case. Increasing charging capacity how­
ever is resulting in 4% expenditures increase due to the fact that emissions can
be optimized more flexibly. Since the two optimization models are not combined,
even for the slightest emissions reduction the model would pay infinite amount of
extra expenditures. Using more free cooling and storage size of course have no
negative effect on the energy expenditures.
Based on all four analysis the storage size could be removed significantly, up to
minus 50% without experiencing more than 5% increase in either the electricity
costs or the emissions. This means that the optimal short term storage size is en­
ergy capacity equal to 4 days of operational needs. The storage charging capacity
however is really sensitive and can’t be reduced with the storage size. It clearly
drives the sensitivity scenario of both storage attribute reduction, which means
that the performance drop is due to charging limitations, not size limitations. In­
creasing charging capacity however have no significant value added, meaning
that the optimal charging capacity is 2 times the cooling energy requirement. The
free cooling is constantly increasing performance until the point that it is capable
of completely overtaking the supply from the chiller during cold months, and after
that it has no significant added value either. The optimal size need o be calculated
separately for systems.
Data centre cooling storage optimization
47
==PAGE:57==
5
Conclusion
In this report a mid­sized data centre cooling system have been optimized with
introducing additional flexibility solutions beside the danish market and weather
conditions. 3 base case and 5 optimized technology scenario have been anal­
ysed for both energy expenditures optimization and emissions optimization, for 3
different electricity price scenarios. All scenarios using any of the two introduced
technology, the free cooling and the cooling storage are performing significantly
better in both optimizations. The best performing scenario, using water­side free
cooling, cooling storage and both electric and absorption chiller is having 39% less
annual energy expenditures, and 81% less emissions compared to the related
base case scenario with both absorption and electric chiller. The same configu­
rations in emissions optimization are having a saving of 30% in costs, and 57%
in emissions. The emission savings are lower due to the lower emissions in the
base case scenario too, however comparing only the two mentioned optimized
scenarios, emissions optimization is 32% less carbon intense during emission
optimization. Costs are only 16% lower in the case of cost optimization than in
emission optimization.
It is well proven that the two additional technologies are working best together,
still they have significant effect on the systems one by one too. Regarding cooling
storage, the capacity recommended for achieving the best cost­performance ratio
is 4 days of cooling energy requirement. As low as that is enough to significantly
reduce the inefficiencies coming from the energy price volatility and the carbon
intensity differences. For long term efficiency improvements, not even a storage
capacity equivalent to 16 days of energy usage have been enough. Since the long
term differences are coming from weather change throughout the year, without
free­cooling it is even less of a considerable investment. The performance is a lot
more sensitive to the charging capacity, with an optimum of 2 times the average
demand. Using less is significantly decreasing performance, while using more is
not having significant gains. Another finding is, that the cooling storage can adapt
to any kind of systems without modifications in the size of the other elements,
however without available charging capacity, its benefits can be a lot less than
the possibilities provided by the technology. It can be said however, that a system
without storage need to be sized to the peak of demand.
Free cooling by itself is providing more savings both in energy expenditures and
in emissions than the storage, and is a very good solution in danish weather con­
ditions. Water­side free cooling can provide 32% more cooling than air­side be­
side the same nominal capacity due to the efficiency differences. With a storage
equipped for more than 6 months during the year it can be either the only cooling
supply or the highest contributor with supplying 62% of the annual demand. Com­
paring to the storage option it can be installed into any kind of system in addition,
with the air­side free cooling option even without connecting it tho the same sys­
Data centre cooling storage optimization
48
==PAGE:58==
tem. Free cooling supply is growing linearly with increasing size until it cover 100%
of the winter month demand. Above that, it can’t utilize the nominal capacity.
Regarding price scenarios, it can be concluded that the main driving factor beside
technology usage is the difference between gas and electricity prices. With the low
electricity price scenario it is less important to use an absorption chiller beside the
electric one, however with high electricity prices 32% of the energy expenditures
are coming from gas usage. With gas usage, emissions are exponentially growing.
After all it can be said, that with the current economic conditions it is hard to predict
either electricity or natural gas prices accurately, and using both an absorption and
an electric chiller provides significant flexibility what can result in huge market
advantage.
Comparing the cost and emissions optimizations, it can be said that that with the
additional technologies none of the models have negative effect on either the emis­
sions or on the expenditures. Installing flexibility solutions are having advantages
in both emissions and expenditures, and can reduce the dependency on the nat­
ural gas and electricity prices.
As a final conclusion it can be said, that both options are promising in both emis­
sions and energy expenditures reduction beside all market conditions it provides.
The results can be compared with individual system implementation investment
costs for data centres, and can be a good starting point for feasibility studies.
Data centre cooling storage optimization
49
==PAGE:59==
6
Appendices
Appendix A: Server specifications
Table 6.1: Summary of data center thermal loads and temperature limits [2]
Power loads
Component
Value
Unit
Processors
60­75
W
DIMM
6
W
Auxiliary power per
server
150­250
W
Total power per server
300­400
W
Total rack power
13­26
kW
Racks per data center
250
­
Total power per data
center
3.2­6.5
MW
Temperature limits
Component
Value
Unit
Processor
85
°C
DIMM
85
°C
Disk drive
45
°C
The appliances to be cooled are called racks. A rack is a standardised metal
frame responsible for holding the ICT modules horizontally. A standard rack is
2m high, 0.6m wide and 0.75m long.The height of the modular asset can be dif­
ferent, but typically 42 modules can be found in a rack. It is not unusual to have
thousands of racks in a single facility. A single racks power consumption is 7 to
15 kW depending on the server performance, however blade servers can reach
21 kW. Regarding area, it means that the energy flux of a traditional data center
is in the range of 430­860 W/m2, and the newer generation facilities can reach a
Data centre cooling storage optimization
50
==PAGE:60==
10 time higher, 10,000 W/m2 energy flux[2]. In order to design an optimal cooling
system, knowing the temperature limits and thermal loads of the racks are essen­
tial . From table 6.1[15] the average thermal performance of data centers can be
seen including power loads and temperature limitations.
Appendix B: Decomposition of price and gas data
The forecast decomposition can be seen, with weekly average data used. As a
limitation of the model, it can be seen, that the residuals of electricity forecast are
not stable for the last part of the dataset.
Figure 6.1: Data decomposition of SARIMAX forecasting for electricity price
Figure 6.2: Data decomposition of SARIMAX forecasting for gas price
Data centre cooling storage optimization
51
==PAGE:61==
Appendix C: Technology attributes
The conversion elements are having a usual 75% which affects both relative emis­
sions and expenditures. As a power maximum the model is using 20 MW which
is way higher than the cooling load, but taking into efficiency and the additional
power requirement to storage filling, it is a reasonable attribute selection. The
gas turbine is only different to the boiler in energy conversion, it both produces
electricity and heat in a 30­70% distribution.
Attribute
­
Unit
Value
max utilization
xboiler
­
1
max power
Pboiler
kW
2000
efficiency
nboiler
%
75
Table 6.2: Boiler attributes
Attribute
­
Unit
Value
max utilization
xturbine
­
1
max power
Pturbine
kW
2000
efficiency
nturbine
%
75
Table 6.3: Gas turbine attributes
If the absorption chiller is having the same power maximum than the previous
system elements than it will not have limitations. Due to the same reasons as
the boiler and the gas turbine, which is the additional load requirement for cooling
storage charging, it is also over­sized compared to the required cooling load. As
a coefficient of performance, a usual 1.2 have been used.
Attribute
­
Unit
Value
max utilization
xAC
­
1
max power
PAC
kW
2000
coefficient of performance
COPAC
­
1.2
Table 6.4: Absorption chiller attributes
The biggest difference of the electric and absorption chiller is the coefficient of
performance. Since it is more then 2 times higher than in the absorption chiller,
the total power can be much lower.
Data centre cooling storage optimization
52
==PAGE:62==
Attribute
­
Unit
Value
max utilization
xEC
­
1
max power
PEC
kW
1000
coefficient of performance
COPEC
­
3.5
Table 6.5: Electric chiller attributes
Determining the initial size of the free cooling technologies can’t be carried out
with the same reverse engineering methodology, however it is a bit different as
the previous ones, since it is highly dependent on ambient weather conditions and
the variance of output power is much higher. In the case of the air­side free cool­
ing an existing technology have been chosen from a provider. The DCF099TX­
21HWWW air­side free cooling system from Airedale have been used as reference
and have been scaled up to meet the requirements [35].
Attribute
­
Unit
Value
max utilization
xAFC
­
1
density of air
ρ
kg/m3
1.225
specific heat of water
Cp
%
4.186
max mass flow
mAFC
m3/h
4000000
max power
mAFC
m3/h
3240
efficiency of technology
nAFC
%
90
efficiency of heat transfer
nht
%
60
Table 6.6: Air­side direct free cooling system attributes
Regarding water­side free cooling, the same power have been used as with the
air­side free cooling, assuming similar characteristics, making the efficiency the
only difference that is coming from the fact that it is using a cooling tower and
different heat transfer method making it more efficient. The performance is cal­
culated from the wet­bulb temperature, an input ambient temperature taking into
account humidity.
Data centre cooling storage optimization
53
==PAGE:63==
Attribute
­
Unit
Value
max utilization
xWFC
­
1
density of air
PWFC
kW
3240
efficiency
nAFC
%
90
Table 6.7: Water­side cooling tower free cooling system attributes
Since the cooling storage is not a system element for continuously meet demand
requirements, calculating with reverse engineering the necessary size is not pos­
sible. Assuming a size and charging capability is more like an option that can be
challenged and modified in later part of the analysis during the sensitivity mod­
ellings. As a short term initial setup a 2000 MWh storage have been used what is
enough for roughly 9 days of operation. A charging of 20 MW is assumed which
is double than the load needed for cooling. As a usual practice the state of charge
can’t go lower than 10% and higher than 95%. In this case, it is basically just a
capacity adjustment reducing the storage capabilities to 8 days. The initial state
of charge is 50% just like in the last time­slot.
Attribute
­
Unit
Value
max utilization
xS
­
1
max charge
Q_Smax
MWh
20000
max state of charge
SOC_Smax
%
95
min state of charge
SOC_Smin
%
10
initial state of charge
SOC_Sinitial
%
50
max charging
CH_Smax
kW
20000
max discharging
CH_Smax
kW
20000
Table 6.8: Cooling storage attributes
Appendix D: Free cooling constraints in the
mathematical model
Since the cooling output of the free cooling systems are highly dependent on the
properties of the ambient air are, including energy availability in the modelling is
essential both for air­side free cooling and water­side free cooling.
Data centre cooling storage optimization
54
==PAGE:64==
In the first equation the wet­bulb temperature can be seen which is the minimum
temperature that air can attain through evaporation. When water is evaporated
from a portion of air. When the humidity of the air is 100%, the wet bulb temper­
ature is equal to the normal temperature of the air. However, as the humidity in
the air decreases, the wet bulb temperature will be lower than the normal temper­
ature. Knowing it is important due to cooling tower technological boundaries, and
therefor is having an effect on the efficiency on the water­side free cooling. The
calculation takes into account the humidity and the ambient temperature of the air,
and coming from an explanation by PhysiscCalc [36].
Wbtemp(t) = Atemp(t) · arctan(0.151977 ·
√
Ahum(t) + 8.313659)+
+ arctan(Atemp(t) + Ahum(t)) −arctan(Ahum(t) −1.676331)+
+0.00391838 ·
√
Ahum(t)3·
· arctan(0.023101 ∗Ahum(t)) −4.686035
(6.1)
the cooling tower range is calculated by subtracting the tower’s outlet water tem­
perature from the hot water temperature at the inlet of the cooling tower.
CTrange(t) = Stemp −Atemp(t)
∀t
(6.2)
The cooling tower approach is the difference between the cold water temperature
at the outlet of the tower and the ambient wet­bulb temperature. This measure is
one of the important factors contributing to the cooling tower efficiency.
CTapproach(t) = Atemp(t) −Wbtemp(t)
∀t
(6.3)
By calculation of the cooling tower range and approach, the cooling tower effi­
ciency can be given. The efficiency equals to the percentage of water tempera­
ture cool down against the difference between the hot water temperature and the
ambient wet­bulb temperature.
nCT(t) =
CTrange(t)
CTapproach(t) + CTrange(t)
∀t
(6.4)
The air­side free cooling power capacity is coming from the mass flow, the specific
heat of the air and the range of the temperatures.
QAFC_to_S(t) = mAFC_to_S(t) · Cp · CTrange(t) · ρ · nht
3600 · 100
∀t
(6.5)
Like the air­side free cooling power capacity, water­side is also coming from the
mass flow, the specific heat of the air, the density and the range of the tempera­
tures, also taking into account the heat transfer efficiency.
QWFC_to_S(t) = mWFC_to_S(t) · Cp · CTrange(t) · ρ · nCT
3600 · 100
∀t
(6.6)
Data centre cooling storage optimization
55
==PAGE:65==
Appendix E: Emission and cost summaries in the
mathematical model
For the analysis it is essential to have both time­series and summarized data on
the emissions of the system throughout the analysis. The first three equations
in the sections are calculating the technology based emissions where the carbon
intensity of the electricity consumption is coming from the defined time­series data
while the natural gas cased emissions are coming from a constraint.
Eel(t) · Qgrid_to_EC(t) = Emel(t)
∀t
(6.7)
Eboiler · Qboiler_to_AC(t) = Emboiler(t)
∀t
(6.8)
Eturbine · Vgas_to_turbine(t) = Emturbine(t)
∀t
(6.9)
The yearly emissions of the technologies are coming from summarizing data over
the scope of the project, converted into tonnes.
∑
t Emel(t)
1000000
= Emel_total
(6.10)
∑
t Emboiler(t)
1000000
= Emboiler_total
(6.11)
∑
t Emturbine(t)
1000000
= Emturbine_total
(6.12)
In the last section the time­series output of the overall emissions and the summa­
rized final yearly emission can be seen.
Emel(t) + Emboiler(t) + Emturbine(t) = Em(t)
∀t
(6.13)
Emel_total + Emboiler_total + Emturbine_total = Emtotal
(6.14)
6.0.1
Cost calculations
In this section the calculations related to costs are closing the model.
In the
first equation a summary of the hourly gas price can be seen. The price is in
EUR/kWh therefor the total volume need to be multiplied with the energy con­
tent too.
Data centre cooling storage optimization
56
==PAGE:66==
Hgas · (Vgas_to_boiler(t) + Vgas_to_turbine(t)) · Cgas(t) = tCgas(t)
∀t
(6.15)
Just like with the gas, in the second equation the total electricity price is calculated
for each time slot.
(Qgrid_to_EC(t) + Qgrid_to_AFC(t) + Qgrid_to_WFC(t)) · Cel(t) = tCel(t)
∀t
(6.16)
In the next output, the total costs are calculated on an hourly basis.
tCgas(t) + tCel(t) = C(t)
∀t
(6.17)
After all, in the last three equations the hourly costs are summarized for the entire
year for both the gas price, the electricity price and for the combination which is
the total energy expenditures throughout the year.
∑
t
tCel(t) = Cel_total
(6.18)
∑
t
tCgas(t) = Cgas_total
(6.19)
∑
t
C(t) = Ctotal
(6.20)
Appendix F: Base case scenarios comparison
In this section the costs and emissions of the different base case scenarios will
be discussed. The behaviour of the models are predictable, since there are not
other technologies beside them to add complexity. Whenever we optimize price,
the currently cheaper option is used, whenever emissions are being optimized,
electricity consumption is preferred. On figure 6.3 the hourly expenditures of the
three base case scenario can be seen. Whichever curve is going lower at a single
time step is cheaper, and therefor no storage option is installed in these scenarios,
it is predictable that baseAE scenario using both absorption and electric chiller is
fitting the lower points throughout the year. From figure ?? it can be seen that the
total costs of scenario baseAE for the high electricity price scenario is 5% cheaper
than the absorption chiller scenario, and 3% cheaper than the absorption chiller
scenario. The difference is not significant, the main reason behind using both
chillers is flexibility, it allows data centres to prepare for economic changes, and
reduces the dependency on a single energy source.
Data centre cooling storage optimization
57
==PAGE:67==
Figure 6.3: Annual cost curves of the base case scenarios
On figure 6.4 the hourly emissions can be seen for the three base case scenarios.
It can be seen that the absorption chiller scenario is not only constant but also
way higher than the electric chiller scenario, varying only between 1.22 and 1.53
tonnes an hour depending on the demand. I can also be seen that the electric
chiller scenario is only dependent on the CO2 intensity of the electricity supply.
Analysing scenario baseAE is a lot different while optimizing expenditures. From
the chart it can be seen that emissions are significantly higher while using absorp­
tion chiller. From figure 4.2 it can be seen that the emissions of the scenario is
120% higher for the high price scenario than in scenario baseE.
Figure 6.4: Annual emission curves of the base case scenarios
Taking into account both the expenditures and emissions factors of the three base
case scenario it can be concluded that emission reduction is a lot more significant
benefit of the electric chiller than the cost reduction. The reason behind both
chillers is to reduce energy source dependency for the data center, however as it
will be discussed in the next section, using free cooling can contribute a lot to this
dependency reduction what can make absorption chiller installation unnecessary
for optimized scenarios.
Data centre cooling storage optimization
58
==PAGE:68==
Appendix G: Scenario analysis for cost optimization
In this section scenario WFC + S will be analysed beside high electricity prices
and cost optimization. From figure 6.5 the charging curves of the electric chiller
and water­side free cooling can be seen. Comparing with figure 4.7 the result
is clear, that in short term the optimization matters, different hours are used for
charging with both technologies, however long term still the weather conditions,
therefor the available free cooling is the main driving factor behind charging.
Figure 6.5: Hourly cooling energy supply breakdown in scenario WFC+S beside
high electricity price and cost optimization
From figure 6.6 the carbon intensity of electricity and the hourly emission curve is
compared. It can be seen that the long term characteristics are the same, how­
ever there are no short term connections like in figure 4.8 beside the emissions
optimizations.
Figure 6.6: Hourly emissions and carbon intensity of electricity in scenario WFC+S
beside high electricity price and cost optimization
Finally, the storage utilization curve of the scenario can be seen, beside the high
electricity price scenario. There are no short term differences compared to any
Data centre cooling storage optimization
59
==PAGE:69==
other scenario, however the electricity price of course is driving the charging char­
acteristics, ending up in different long term curve.
Figure 6.7: Hourly storage utilization and carbon intensity in scenario WFC+S
beside high electricity price and cost optimization
Appendix H: Storage utilization comparison for
different objective functions
From figure 6.8 the storage utilization curves can be seen for the emission and
price utilization beside scenario WFC + S, and high prices. The characteristics
of the curves are similar, the way how the storage is used is not different, how­
ever the peak times are not matching. The difference is coming from the different
objectives, the electricity price and its carbon intensity curves can also be seen,
what are the driving attributes behind the storage charging.
Figure 6.8: Storage utilization beside different objective functions
Data centre cooling storage optimization
60
==PAGE:70==
Appendix I: Energy expenditures beside scenarios
without storage option
From figure 6.9 scenario baseE equipped wit only electric chiller and scenario
WFC with additional water­side free cooling are compared in energy expenditures
beside high electricity prices and cost optimization. Since there are no storage,
the need of continuous energy supply is there, which makes no difference during
the summer months when free cooling is not available. In the cold period however
the linearly increasing saving to a total of 17% annually.
Figure 6.9: Hourly energy expenditures beside cost optimization in scenarios with­
out cooling storage
Appendix J: GAMS model
In this section the GAMS code of the optimization can be seen. From the input
section the input excel file format can be recreated. Objective functions are mod­
ified in the objective function section, technology scenarios in the Technologies
section, while electricity price scenarios depend on which column do the model
include from the input file.
1
2
*---------------------------------------------------------------------------
3
* Input from Excel File
4
*---------------------------------------------------------------------------
5
$onEps
6
$ontext
7
$call =xls2gms
r="v1"!A2:A8671
i=input.xlsx
o=set_tt.inc
8
$call =xls2gms
r="v1"!A3:A8671
i=input.xlsx
o=set_tt2.inc
9
$call =xls2gms
r="v1"!A2:B8671
i=input.xlsx
o=par_co2.inc
10
$call =xls2gms
r="v1"!K2:L8671
i=input.xlsx
o=par_eprice_low.inc
11
$call =xls2gms
r="v1"!M2:N8671
i=input.xlsx
o=par_eprice_high.inc
12
$call =xls2gms
r="v1"!O2:P8671
i=input.xlsx
o=par_eprice_volatile.inc
13
$call =xls2gms
r="v1"!C2:D8671
i=input.xlsx
o=par_servertemp.inc
14
$call =xls2gms
r="v1"!E2:F8671
i=input.xlsx
o=par_ambienttemp.inc
Data centre cooling storage optimization
61
==PAGE:71==
15
$call =xls2gms
r="v1"!G2:H8671
i=input.xlsx
o=par_serverload.inc
16
$call =xls2gms
r="v1"!I2:J8671
i=input.xlsx
o=par_humidity.inc
17
$call =xls2gms
r="v1"!Q2:R8671
i=input.xlsx
o=par_gprice.inc
18
$offtext
19
set t
20
/
21
$include set_tt.inc
22
/;
23
set t2(t)
24
/
25
$include set_tt2.inc
26
/;
27
parameter E_el(t)
28
/
29
$include par_co2.inc
30
/;
31
parameter C_el(t)
32
/
33
$include par_eprice_high.inc
34
/;
35
parameter C_gas(t)
36
/
37
$include par_gprice.inc
38
/;
39
parameter S_temp(t)
40
/
41
$include par_servertemp.inc
42
/;
43
parameter A_temp(t)
44
/
45
$include par_ambienttemp.inc
46
/;
47
parameter L_server(t)
48
/
49
$include par_serverload.inc
50
/;
51
parameter A_hum(t)
52
/
53
$include par_humidity.inc
54
/;
55
56
*---------------------------------------------------------------------------
57
* General
58
*---------------------------------------------------------------------------
59
Variables
60
Em(t)
61
Em_total
62
C(t)
63
C_total
64
Z
65
Qall
66
;
67
68
*---------------------------------------------------------------------------
69
* Technologies
70
*---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Data centre cooling storage optimization
62
==PAGE:72==
71
Scalars
72
x_boiler
-
/0/
73
x_turbine
-
/0/
74
x_AC
-
/1/
75
x_EC
-
/1/
76
x_AFC
-
/1/
77
x_WFC
-
/1/
78
x_S
-
/1/
79
;
80
81
*---------------------------------------------------------------------------
82
* Electricity grid
83
*---------------------------------------------------------------------------
84
Positive variables
85
S_el(t)
kWh
86
Q_grid_to_EC(t)
kWh
87
Q_grid_to_IT(t)
kWh
88
Q_grid_to_AFC(t)
kWh
89
Q_grid_to_WFC(t)
kWh
90
Em_el(t)
g
91
Em_el_total
tonnes
92
tC_el(t)
93
C_el_total
94
;
95
96
*---------------------------------------------------------------------------
97
* Gas grid
98
*---------------------------------------------------------------------------
99
Scalars
100
H_gas
kWh\m3
/10.8/
101
;
102
103
Positive variables
104
S_gas(t)
m3
105
V_gas_to_turbine(t)
m3
106
V_gas_to_boiler(t)
m3
107
tC_gas(t)
108
C_gas_total
109
;
110
111
*---------------------------------------------------------------------------
112
* Boiler
113
*---------------------------------------------------------------------------
114
Scalars
115
P_boiler
kW
/20000/
116
n_boiler
\%
/75/
117
E_boiler
g\kWh
/215/
118
C_boiler
EUR
//
119
l_boiler
years
//
120
;
121
122
Positive variables
123
Q_boiler_to_AC(t)
kWh
124
EM_boiler(t)
g
125
Em_boiler_total
tonnes
126
;
Data centre cooling storage optimization
63
==PAGE:73==
127
128
*---------------------------------------------------------------------------
129
* Gas turbine
130
*---------------------------------------------------------------------------
131
Scalars
132
P_turbine
kW
/20000/
133
n_turbine
\%
/90/
134
E_turbine
g\kWh
/300/
135
C_turbine
EUR
136
l_turbine
years
137
el_rate_turbine
\%
/30/
138
;
139
140
Positive variables
141
Q_turbine_to_AC(t)
kWh
142
Q_turbine_to_EC(t)
kWh
143
Q_turbine_loss(t)
kWh
144
EM_turbine(t)
g
145
Em_turbine_total
tonnes
146
;
147
148
*---------------------------------------------------------------------------
149
* Absorption chiller
150
*---------------------------------------------------------------------------
151
Scalars
152
P_AC
kW
/20000/
153
COP_AC
-
/1.4/
154
;
155
156
Positive Variables
157
Q_AC_to_S(t)
kW
158
;
159
160
*---------------------------------------------------------------------------
161
* Electric chiller
162
*---------------------------------------------------------------------------
163
Scalars
164
P_EC
kW
/20000/
165
COP_EC
-
/3.5/
166
;
167
168
Positive variables
169
Q_EC_to_S(t)
kW
170
;
171
172
*---------------------------------------------------------------------------
173
* Airside direct free cooling system
174
*---------------------------------------------------------------------------
175
Scalars
176
Rho
kg\m3
/1.225/
177
C_p_air
KJ\kg
/1.012/
178
m_AFC
m3\h
/4000000/
179
n_AFC
%
/90/
180
n_ht
/60/
181
P_AFC
kW
/3240/
182
;
Data centre cooling storage optimization
64
==PAGE:74==
183
184
Positive variables
185
m_AFC_to_S(t)
m3
186
Q_AFC_to_S(t)
kW
187
;
188
189
*---------------------------------------------------------------------------
190
* Waterside cooling tower free cooling system
191
*---------------------------------------------------------------------------
192
Scalars
193
P_WFC
/3240/
194
n_WFC
\%
/90/
195
m_WFC
m3\h
/4000000/
196
C_p_water
KJ\kg
/4.186/
197
;
198
199
Positive variables
200
Q_WFC_to_S(t)
kW
201
m_WFC_to_S(t)
202
;
203
204
Parameters
205
Wb_temp(t)
206
CT_range(t)
207
CT_approach(t)
208
n_CT(t)
209
;
210
211
Wb_temp(t) =
A_temp(t) * arctan(0.151977 * sqrt(A_hum(t) + 8.313659)) + arctan(A_temp(t
) + A_hum(t) ) - arctan(A_hum(t) - 1.676331) + 0.00391838 *sqrt(A_hum(t)*A_hum(t)*
A_hum(t)) * arctan(0.023101 * A_hum(t)) - 4.686035
212
;
213
CT_range(t)
= S_temp(t) - A_temp(t)
214
;
215
CT_approach(t) = A_temp(t) - Wb_temp(t)
216
;
217
CT_range(t) $ ( S_temp(t) - A_temp(t) < 0 ) = 0
218
;
219
n_CT(t) =
CT_range(t) / ( CT_approach(t) + CT_range(t) )
220
;
221
222
*---------------------------------------------------------------------------
223
* Cooling storage
224
*---------------------------------------------------------------------------
225
Scalars
226
Q_S_max
kWh
/2000000/
227
SOC_S_max
\%
/98/
228
SOC_S_min
\%
/10/
229
SOC_S_initial
\%
/50/
230
CH_S_max
kW
/20000/
231
DCH_S_max
kW
/20000/
232
l_S
\%\h
233
;
234
235
Positive variables
236
Q_S(t)
kWh
Data centre cooling storage optimization
65
==PAGE:75==
237
Q_S_to_IT(t)
kWh
238
SOC_S(t)
\%
239
;
240
241
*---------------------------------------------------------------------------
242
* IT equipment
243
*---------------------------------------------------------------------------
244
Scalars
245
D_all
kWh
/10000/
246
D_fixed
kWh
247
;
248
249
Positive variables
250
Server_load(t)
\%
251
D_IT(t)
kWh
252
D_cooling(t)
kWh
253
;
254
255
*---------------------------------------------------------------------------
256
* Equations
257
*---------------------------------------------------------------------------
258
Equations
259
260
*---------------------------------------------------------------------------
261
* Objective funcion
262
*---------------------------------------------------------------------------
263
obj
objective function
264
265
*---------------------------------------------------------------------------
266
* Power transformation
267
*---------------------------------------------------------------------------
268
max_boiler(t)
269
max_turbine(t)
270
max_AC(t)
271
max_EC(t)
272
max_AFC(t)
273
max_WFC(t)
274
275
*---------------------------------------------------------------------------
276
* Node equilibriums
277
*---------------------------------------------------------------------------
278
eq_boiler(t)
boiler
279
eq_turbine_el(t)
gas turbine
280
eq_turbine_h(t)
gas turbine
281
eq_AC(t)
absorption chiller
282
eq_EC(t)
electric chiller
283
eq_S(t)
cooling storage
284
eq_IT(t)
demand
285
eq_AFC(t)
cooling storage
286
eq_WFC(t)
demand
287
288
*---------------------------------------------------------------------------
289
* Free cooling calculations
290
*---------------------------------------------------------------------------
291
qafc(t)
292
qwfc(t)
Data centre cooling storage optimization
66
==PAGE:76==
293
294
*---------------------------------------------------------------------------
295
* Cooling storage constraints
296
*---------------------------------------------------------------------------
297
s_max(t)
maximum state of charge
298
s_min(t)
min state of charge
299
s_initial
300
s_closure
301
s_ch(t)
302
s_dch(t)
303
*s_fix(t)
304
305
*---------------------------------------------------------------------------
306
* CO2 related calculations
307
*---------------------------------------------------------------------------
308
co2_grid(t)
co2 from electricity usage
309
co2_boiler(t)
co2 from boiler
310
co2_turbine(t)
co2 from gas turbine
311
co2_el_all
total co2 from grid
312
co2_boiler_all
total co2 from boiler
313
co2_turbine_all
total co2 from turbine
314
co2_t(t)
co2 at given t slot
315
co2_all
total co2 from all
316
317
*---------------------------------------------------------------------------
318
* Total cost summaries
319
*---------------------------------------------------------------------------
320
cost_gas(t)
321
cost_el(t)
322
c_t(t)
323
cost_all
324
c_el_all
325
c_gas_all
326
327
Q_all
328
;
329
330
*---------------------------------------------------------------------------
331
* Objective funcion
332
*---------------------------------------------------------------------------
333
334
obj
..
Z =e= sum(t, Em_el(t) + Em_boiler(t) + Em_turbine(t) ) / 1000000
335
*obj
..
Z =e= sum(t, tC_gas(t) + tC_el(t))
336
;
337
338
339
*---------------------------------------------------------------------------
340
* Power maximums
341
*---------------------------------------------------------------------------
342
max_boiler(t)
..
P_boiler * x_boiler * n_boiler /100 =g= Q_boiler_to_AC(t)
343
;
344
345
max_turbine(t)
..
P_turbine * x_turbine * n_turbine /100 =g= Q_turbine_to_EC(t) +
Q_turbine_to_AC(t)
346
;
347
Data centre cooling storage optimization
67
==PAGE:77==
348
max_AC(t)
..
P_AC * x_AC * COP_AC =g= Q_AC_to_S(t)
349
;
350
351
max_EC(t)
..
P_EC * x_EC * COP_EC =g= Q_EC_to_S(t)
352
;
353
354
max_AFC(t)
..
m_AFC * x_AFC =g= m_AFC_to_S(t)
355
;
356
357
max_WFC(t)
..
m_WFC * x_WFC =g= m_WFC_to_S(t)
358
;
359
360
*---------------------------------------------------------------------------
361
* Node equilibriums
362
*---------------------------------------------------------------------------
363
eq_boiler(t)
..
H_gas * V_gas_to_boiler(t) =e= Q_boiler_to_AC(t)
364
;
365
366
eq_turbine_el(t)
..
H_gas * V_gas_to_turbine(t) * el_rate_turbine / 100 =e=
Q_turbine_to_EC(t)
367
;
368
369
eq_turbine_h(t)
..
H_gas * V_gas_to_turbine(t) * (1 - el_rate_turbine) / 100 =e=
Q_turbine_to_AC(t) + Q_turbine_loss(t)
370
;
371
372
eq_AC(t)
..
(Q_turbine_to_AC(t) + Q_boiler_to_AC(t)) * COP_AC =e= Q_AC_to_S(t
)
373
;
374
375
eq_EC(t)
..
(Q_grid_to_EC(t) + Q_turbine_to_EC(t)) * COP_EC =e= Q_EC_to_S(t)
376
;
377
378
eq_AFC(T)
..
Q_grid_to_AFC(t) =e= m_AFC_to_S(t) / m_AFC * P_AFC * n_AFC / 100
379
;
380
381
eq_WFC(T)
..
Q_grid_to_WFC(t) =e= m_WFC_to_S(t) / m_WFC * P_WFC * n_WFC / 100
382
;
383
384
eq_S(t)$t2(t)
..
Q_S(t) =e= Q_S(t-1) + Q_AC_to_S(t) + Q_EC_to_S(t) + Q_WFC_to_S(t)
+ Q_AFC_to_S(t) - Q_S_to_IT(t)
385
;
386
387
eq_IT(t)
..
D_all * L_server(t) =e= Q_S_to_IT(t)
388
;
389
390
*---------------------------------------------------------------------------
391
* Free cooling calculations
392
*---------------------------------------------------------------------------
393
qafc(t)
..
Q_AFC_to_S(t) =e= m_AFC_to_S(t) * C_p_air * CT_range(t) * Rho /
3600 * n_ht /100
394
;
395
396
qwfc(t)
..
Q_WFC_to_S(t) =e= m_WFC_to_S(t) * C_p_air * CT_range(t) * Rho /
3600 * n_CT(t)
397
;
Data centre cooling storage optimization
68
==PAGE:78==
398
399
*---------------------------------------------------------------------------
400
* Cooling storage constraints
401
*---------------------------------------------------------------------------
402
s_max(t)
..
Q_S(t) =l= SOC_S_max / 100 * x_S * Q_S_max
403
;
404
405
s_min(t)
..
Q_S(t) =g= SOC_S_min / 100 * Q_S_max
406
;
407
408
s_initial
..
Q_S('1') =e= SOC_S_initial /100 * Q_S_max
409
;
410
411
s_closure
..
Q_S('8670') =e= SOC_S_initial /100 * Q_S_max
412
;
413
414
s_ch(t)
..
(Q_AC_to_S(t) + Q_EC_to_S(t) + Q_WFC_to_S(t) + Q_AFC_to_S(t)) *
x_S =l= CH_S_max
415
;
416
417
s_dch(t)
..
Q_S_to_IT(t) * x_S =l= DCH_S_max
418
;
419
420
*s_fix(t)
..
Q_S_to_IT(t) =e= Q_AC_to_S(t) + Q_EC_to_S(t) + Q_WFC_to_S(t) +
Q_AFC_to_S(t)
421
*;
422
423
*---------------------------------------------------------------------------
424
* CO2 related calculations
425
*---------------------------------------------------------------------------
426
co2_grid(t)
..
E_el(t) * ( Q_grid_to_EC(t) + Q_grid_to_AFC(t) + Q_grid_to_WFC(t)
) =e= Em_el(t)
427
;
428
429
co2_boiler(t)
..
E_boiler * Q_boiler_to_AC(t) =e= Em_boiler(t)
430
;
431
432
co2_turbine(t)
..
E_turbine * V_gas_to_turbine(t) =e= Em_turbine(t)
433
;
434
435
co2_el_all
..
sum( t, Em_el(t) )/1000000 =e= Em_el_total
436
;
437
438
co2_boiler_all
..
sum( t, Em_boiler(t) )/1000000 =e= Em_boiler_total
439
;
440
441
co2_turbine_all
..
sum( t, Em_turbine(t) )/1000000 =e= Em_turbine_total
442
;
443
444
co2_t(t)
..
Em_el(t) + Em_boiler(t) + Em_turbine(t) =e= Em(t)
445
;
446
447
co2_all
..
Em_el_total + Em_boiler_total + Em_turbine_total =e= Em_total
448
;
449
450
*---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Data centre cooling storage optimization
69
==PAGE:79==
451
* Total cost summaries
452
*---------------------------------------------------------------------------
453
454
cost_gas(t)
..
H_gas * ( V_gas_to_boiler(t) + V_gas_to_turbine(t) ) * C_gas(t)
/1000000 =e= tC_gas(t)
455
;
456
cost_el(t)
..
( Q_grid_to_EC(t) + Q_grid_to_AFC(t) + Q_grid_to_WFC(t) ) * C_el(
t)/1000000 =e= tC_el(t)
457
;
458
c_t(t)
..
(tC_gas(t) + tC_el(t)) =e= C(t)
459
;
460
cost_all
..
sum(t, C(t)) =e= C_total
461
;
462
c_el_all
..
sum(t, tC_el(t))
=e= C_el_total
463
;
464
c_gas_all
..
sum(t, tC_gas(t)) =e= C_gas_total
465
;
466
Q_all
..
sum(t, Q_grid_to_EC(t) + V_gas_to_boiler(t)*10.8)/1000000 =e=
Qall
467
;
468
469
470
*---------------------------------------------------------------------------
471
* Solving the model
472
*---------------------------------------------------------------------------
473
Model v_01 /all/
474
;
475
Solve v_01 using MIP minimizing Z
476
;
477
478
*---------------------------------------------------------------------------
479
* Display results
480
*---------------------------------------------------------------------------
481
display Z.l
482
;
483
display C_el_total.l
484
;
485
display C_gas_total.l
486
;
487
display C_total.l
488
;
489
display Em_total.l
490
;
491
display Qall.l
492
;
493
*$ontext
494
495
Parameters
496
497
Q_grid_to_EC_out(t)
498
Q_grid_to_AFC_out(t)
499
Q_grid_to_WFC_out(t)
500
V_gas_to_boiler_out(t)
501
V_gas_to_turbine_out(t)
502
Q_boiler_to_AC_out(t)
503
Q_turbine_to_AC_out(t)
Data centre cooling storage optimization
70
==PAGE:80==
504
Q_turbine_to_EC_out(t)
505
Q_AC_to_S_out(t)
506
Q_EC_to_S_out(t)
507
Q_WFC_to_S_out(t)
508
Q_S_to_IT_out(t)
509
Q_AFC_to_S_out(t)
510
Em_boiler_out(t)
511
Em_turbine_out(t)
512
Em_el_out(t)
513
Em_out(t)
514
SOC_S_out(t)
515
Q_S_out(t)
516
Wb_temp_out(t)
517
n_CT_out(t)
518
C_gas_out(t)
519
C_el_out(t)
520
C_out(t)
521
;
522
523
Q_grid_to_EC_out(t) = Q_grid_to_EC.L(t) +EPS
524
;
525
Q_grid_to_AFC_out(t) = Q_grid_to_AFC.L(t) +EPS
526
;
527
Q_grid_to_WFC_out(t) = Q_grid_to_WFC.L(t) +EPS
528
;
529
V_gas_to_boiler_out(t) = V_gas_to_boiler.L(t) +EPS
530
;
531
V_gas_to_turbine_out(t) = V_gas_to_turbine.L(t) +EPS
532
;
533
Q_boiler_to_AC_out(t) = Q_boiler_to_AC.L(t) +EPS
534
;
535
Q_turbine_to_AC_out(t) = Q_turbine_to_AC.L(t) +EPS
536
;
537
Q_turbine_to_EC_out(t) = Q_turbine_to_EC.L(t) +EPS
538
;
539
Q_AC_to_S_out(t) = Q_AC_to_S.L(t) +EPS
540
;
541
Q_EC_to_S_out(t) = Q_EC_to_S.L(t) +EPS
542
;
543
Q_WFC_to_S_out(t) = Q_WFC_to_S.L(t) +EPS
544
;
545
Q_S_to_IT_out(t) = Q_S_to_IT.L(t) +EPS
546
;
547
Q_AFC_to_S_out(t) = Q_AFC_to_S.L(t) +EPS
548
;
549
Em_boiler_out(t) = Em_boiler.L(t) +EPS
550
;
551
Em_turbine_out(t) = Em_turbine.L(t) +EPS
552
;
553
Em_el_out(t) = Em_el.L(t) +EPS
554
;
555
Q_S_out(t) = Q_S.L(t) +EPS
556
;
557
n_CT_out(t) = n_CT(t) + EPS
558
;
559
C_gas_out(t) = tc_gas.L(t) + EPS
Data centre cooling storage optimization
71
==PAGE:81==
560
;
561
C_el_out(t) = tc_el.L(t) + EPS
562
;
563
C_out(t) = c.L(t) + EPS
564
;
565
Wb_temp_out(t) = Wb_temp(t) + EPS
566
;
567
568
display Z.l
569
;
570
571
*---------------------------------------------------------------------------
572
* Export time series data
573
*---------------------------------------------------------------------------
574
575
execute_unload "resultsv1.gdx"
Q_grid_to_EC_out
576
V_gas_to_boiler_out
577
V_gas_to_turbine_out
578
Q_boiler_to_AC_out
579
Q_turbine_to_AC_out
580
Q_turbine_to_EC_out
581
Q_AC_to_S_out
582
Q_EC_to_S_out
583
Q_WFC_to_S_out
584
Q_S_to_IT_out
585
Q_AFC_to_S_out
586
Em_boiler_out
587
Em_turbine_out
588
Em_el_out
589
Em.L
590
SOC_S.L
591
Q_S_out
592
E_el
593
n_CT_out
594
Wb_temp_out
595
C_gas_out
596
C_el_out
597
C_out
598
Q_grid_to_AFC_out
599
Q_grid_to_WFC_out
600
601
$ontext
602
;
603
execute 'gdxxrw.exe
resultsv1.gdx o=results_opt.xlsx par=Q_grid_to_EC_out rng=a3 rdim=1
cdim=0 '
604
;
605
execute 'gdxxrw.exe
resultsv1.gdx o=results_opt.xlsx par=V_gas_to_boiler_out rng=c3
rdim=1 cdim=0 '
606
;
607
execute 'gdxxrw.exe
resultsv1.gdx o=results_opt.xlsx par=V_gas_to_turbine_out rng=e3
rdim=1 cdim=0 '
608
;
609
execute 'gdxxrw.exe
resultsv1.gdx o=results_opt.xlsx par=Q_boiler_to_AC_out rng=g3 rdim
=1 cdim=0 '
610
;
611
execute 'gdxxrw.exe
resultsv1.gdx o=results_opt.xlsx par=Q_turbine_to_AC_out rng=i3
Data centre cooling storage optimization
72
==PAGE:82==
rdim=1 cdim=0 '
612
;
613
execute 'gdxxrw.exe
resultsv1.gdx o=results_opt.xlsx par=Q_turbine_to_EC_out rng=k3
rdim=1 cdim=0 '
614
;
615
execute 'gdxxrw.exe
resultsv1.gdx o=results_opt.xlsx par=Q_AC_to_S_out rng=m3 rdim=1
cdim=0 '
616
;
617
execute 'gdxxrw.exe
resultsv1.gdx o=results_opt.xlsx par=Q_EC_to_S_out rng=o3 rdim=1
cdim=0 '
618
;
619
execute 'gdxxrw.exe
resultsv1.gdx o=results_opt.xlsx par=Q_WFC_to_S_out rng=q3 rdim=1
cdim=0 '
620
;
621
execute 'gdxxrw.exe
resultsv1.gdx o=results_opt.xlsx par=Q_S_to_IT_out rng=s3 rdim=1
cdim=0 '
622
;
623
execute 'gdxxrw.exe
resultsv1.gdx o=results_opt.xlsx par=Q_AFC_to_S_out rng=u3 rdim=1
cdim=0 '
624
;
625
execute 'gdxxrw.exe
resultsv1.gdx o=results_opt.xlsx par=Em_boiler_out rng=w3 rdim=1
cdim=0 '
626
;
627
execute 'gdxxrw.exe
resultsv1.gdx o=results_opt.xlsx par=Em_turbine_out rng=y3 rdim=1
cdim=0 '
628
;
629
execute 'gdxxrw.exe
resultsv1.gdx o=results_opt.xlsx par=Em_el_out rng=aa3 rdim=1 cdim
=0 '
630
;
631
execute 'gdxxrw.exe
resultsv1.gdx o=results_opt.xlsx var=Em.L rng=ac3 rdim=1 cdim=0 '
632
;
633
execute 'gdxxrw.exe
resultsv1.gdx o=results_opt.xlsx par=E_el rng=ai3 rdim=1 cdim=0 '
634
;
635
execute 'gdxxrw.exe
resultsv1.gdx o=results_opt.xlsx par=n_CT_out rng=ak3 rdim=1 cdim=0
'
636
;
637
execute 'gdxxrw.exe
resultsv1.gdx o=results_opt.xlsx par=Wb_temp_out rng=am3 rdim=1
cdim=0 '
638
;
639
execute 'gdxxrw.exe
resultsv1.gdx o=results_opt.xlsx par=C_gas_out rng=ao3 rdim=1 cdim
=0 '
640
;
641
execute 'gdxxrw.exe
resultsv1.gdx o=results_opt.xlsx par=C_el_out rng=aq3 rdim=1 cdim=0
'
642
;
643
execute 'gdxxrw.exe
resultsv1.gdx o=results_opt.xlsx par=C_out rng=as3 rdim=1 cdim=0 '
644
;
645
execute 'gdxxrw.exe
resultsv1.gdx o=results_opt.xlsx var=SOC_S.L rng=ae3 rdim=1 cdim=0
'
646
;
647
648
execute 'gdxxrw.exe
resultsv1.gdx o=results_opt.xlsx par=Q_S_out rng=ag3 rdim=1 cdim=0
'
649
;
650
execute 'gdxxrw.exe
resultsv1.gdx o=results_opt.xlsx par=Q_grid_to_AFC_out rng=au3 rdim
=1 cdim=0 '
Data centre cooling storage optimization
73
==PAGE:83==
651
;
652
execute 'gdxxrw.exe
resultsv1.gdx o=results_opt.xlsx par=Q_grid_to_WFC_out rng=aw3 rdim
=1 cdim=0 '
653
;
654
655
$offtext
656
657
$offEps
Listing 6.1: GAMS optimization model
Data centre cooling storage optimization
74
==PAGE:84==
Bibliography
[1]
Merima Dzanic. Data center conference to focus on sustainability. 2019.
URL: https://datacenterindustrien.dk/data-centers-denmark/.
[2]
Amy S. Fleischer Khosrow Ebrahimi Gerard F.Jones. A review of data center
cooling technology, operating conditions and the corresponding low­grade
waste heat recovery opportunities. 2014. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.
com/science/article/abs/pii/S1364032113008216.
[3]
Sonja Klingert; Sebastian Szilvas. Spinning gold from straw ­ evaluating the
flexibility of data centres on power markets. 2020. URL: https://energyinformatics.
springeropen.com/track/pdf/10.1186/s42162-020-00110-y.pdf.
[4]
Nathan Oakley. The Evolution of Data Centers, Tracing the centralization of
data infrastructure back to the source. 2021. URL: https://storymaps.arcgis.
com/stories/a21d93abf29d4b6990370cfcba143cd9.
[5]
Caroline Donnelly. The changing face of the datacentre over the past 50
years. 2016. URL: https://www.computerweekly.com/feature/CW50- The-
changing-face-of-the-datacentre.
[6]
Georges Corbineau Matthew Gooding. Why the Nordics are the best place
in the world to put a data centre. 2020. URL: https://techmonitor.ai/data-
centre/best-place-data-centre-denmark-google.
[7]
R. Rahmani; I. Moser; M. Seyedmahmoudian. A Complete Model for Mod­
ular Simulation of Data Centre Power Load. 2017. URL: https://arxiv.org/
pdf/1804.00703.pdf.
[8]
Lakshmi Ganesh. Data center energy management. 2012.
[9]
Denmark Data Center Market ­ Investment Analysis Growth Opportunities
2022­2027. URL: https://www.arizton.com/market-reports/denmark-data-
center-market-investment-analysis.
[10]
Denmark Data Center Market Size by Investment to Reach USD 2.08 Billion
by 2026 ­ Arizton. URL: https://www.prnewswire.com/news-releases/denmark-
Data centre cooling storage optimization
75
==PAGE:85==
data-center-market-size-by-investment-to-reach-usd-2-08-billion-by-2026--
arizton-301327179.html.
[11]
Danish colocation datacenters will quadruple capacity over the next four
years, hyperscalers will double. URL: https://www.datacenter-forum.com/
danish - data - center - industry / danish - colocation - datacenters - will - quadruple -
capacity-over-the-next-four-years-hyperscalers-will-double.
[12]
Denmark data center market. URL: https://baxtel.com/data-center/denmark.
[13]
Jinkyun Choa; Taesub Limb; Byungseon Sean Kimb. Viability of data center
cooling systems for energy efficiency in temperate or subtropical regions:
Case study. 2012. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/abs/
pii/S0378778812004161.
[14]
Md Abu Bakar Siddik; Arman Shehabi; Landon Marston. The environmental
footprint of data centers in the United States. 2021. URL: https://iopscience.
iop.org/article/10.1088/1748-9326/abfba1/pdf.
[15]
Optimizing energy consumption for data centers. 2016. URL: https://www.
sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1364032115016664.
[16]
Chayan Nadjahia; Hasna Louahliaa; Stéphane Lemassonb. A review of ther­
mal management and innovative cooling strategies for data center. 2018.
URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/abs/pii/S2210537917304067.
[17]
Michael K Patterson. The Effect of Data Center Temperature on Energy
Efficiency.
[18]
Paul Lin; Simon Zhang; Jim VanGilder. Data Center Temperature Rise Dur­
ing a Cooling System Outage. 2017. URL: http://52.2.195.45/images/
temperature_rise_cooling_outage.pdf.
[19]
Difference between HVAC Absorption Chillers and Electric Chillers. URL:
https://instrumentationtools.com/difference-between-hvac-absorption-chillers-
and-electric-chillers/.
[20]
T.T. Chow; G.Q. Zhang; Z. Lin; C.L. Song. Global optimization of absorption
chiller system by genetic algorithm and neural network. 2002. URL: https:
//www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0378778801000858.
Data centre cooling storage optimization
76
==PAGE:86==
[21]
Zhen Li; Satish G. Kandlikar. Current Status and Future Trends in Data­
Center Cooling Technologies. 2018. URL: https://www.tandfonline.com/doi/
pdf/10.1080/01457632.2014.939032?needAccess=true.
[22]
Precision Air Conditioning vs Comfort Cooling. URL: https://www.dataaire.
com/precision-vs-comfort-cooling/.
[23]
Hainan Zhang; Shuangquan Shao; Hongbo Xu; Huiming Zou; Changqing
Tian. Free cooling of data centers: A review. 2014.
[24]
Livin Jose. Data center Cooling Infrastructure. 2019. URL: https://dc.mynetworkinsights.
com/data-center-cooling-infrastructure/.
[25]
Jimil M Shah. Reliability challenges in airside economization and oil im­
mersion cooling. 2016. URL: https : / / www . researchgate . net / publication /
315726572_Reliability_challenges_in_airside_economization_and_oil_immersion_
cooling.
[26]
Sang­WooHam; Jae­WeonJeong. Impact of aisle containment on energy
performance of a data center when using an integrated water­side econ­
omizer. 2016. URL: https : / / www . sciencedirect . com / science / article / pii /
S1359431115005268.
[27]
Elie Tawil. Cooling Tower Key Components and How to Improve Water Ef­
ficiency. 2011. URL: https://www.cedengineering.com/userfiles/Cooling%
20Tower%20Key%20Components%20and%20How%20to%20Improve%20Water%
20Efficiency%20R1.pdf.
[28]
Rish Ghatikar; K. Sydny Fujita; M. A. Piette; Aimee Mckane. Demand Re­
sponse and Open Automated Demand Response Opportunities for Data
Centers. 2010. URL: https://www.researchgate.net/publication/255215593.
[29]
Dongxiao Wang; Changhong Xie; Runji Wu; Chun Sing Lai; Xuecong Li;
Zhuoli Zhao; Xueqing Wu; Yi Xu; Loi Lei Lai; Jinxiao Wei. Optimal Energy
Scheduling for Data Center With Energy Nets Including CCHP and De­
mand Response. 2020. URL: https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/stamp/stamp.jsp?
arnumber=9312606.
Data centre cooling storage optimization
77
==PAGE:87==
[30]
Qiannan Tian; Qun Guo; Sayyad Nojavan; Xianke Sun. Robust optimal en­
ergy management of data center equipped with multi­energy conversion
technologies. 2021. URL: https://reader.elsevier.com/reader/sd/pii/S095965262103794X.
[31]
Yin Zhang; Zhiyuan Wei; Mingshan Zhangc. Free cooling technologies for
data centers: energy saving mechanism and applications. 2017. URL: https:
//reader.elsevier.com/reader/sd/pii/S1876610217364676.
[32]
Denmark data center market. URL: https://baxtel.com/data-center/denmark.
[33]
Tina Jakaša; Ivan Andročec; Petar Sprčić. Electricity price forecasting –
ARIMA model approach. 2011.
[34]
Historical gas price in Denmark. URL: https://www.statista.com/statistics/
1271525/denmark-monthly-wholesale-electricity-price/.
[35]
Airedale air­side free cooling systems. URL: https://www.airedale.com/wp-
content/uploads/2020/01/TM_DELTACHILL_DCC_DCF_510- 1000kW_-
7267818_V2.5_05_2022.pdf.
[36]
Wet Bulb Calculations. URL: https : / / physicscalc . com / physics / wet - bulb -
calculator/.
Data centre cooling storage optimization
78
==PAGE:88==
Data centre cooling storage optimization
79
==PAGE:89==
Technical
University of
Denmark
2023
www.dtu.dk
