==PAGE:1==
PlasticScanner
Development and product realisation of a NIR polymer scanner
Master Thesis
DTU Management
Departmentof Technology, Management and Economics
==PAGE:2==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over six months at the Department 
of Technology, Management and Economics, at the Technical Uni­
versity of Denmark, DTU, in partial fulfilment for the degree Master 
of Science in Engineering (Design and Innovation), MSc Eng.
It is assumed that the reader has a basic knowledge in the areas of 
product development, Plastics design and electronics design.
Markus Glavind - s175046
Signature
Date
Gustav Brandt Gregersen - s153930
Signature
Date
Gustav
Markus
Introduction
X
X
Theory and methods
X
X
Development
X
X
Discussion
X
X
Conclusion
X
X
Future work
X
X
Table 1: Distribution of work
13-02-2023
13-02-2023
==PAGE:3==
3
Acknowledgements
We would like to express our gratitude to all of those, who have 
supported us during this master thesis. We would especially like to 
thank our supervisor Tobias Eifer for his feedback, guidance and 
openness towards our project goals. We would also like to express 
our gratefulness to Jerry de Vos, for his financial support to the 
project, sharing of knowledge, feedback and continued support 
throughout the project. 
Our appreciation extends to Plastix for their sharing of knowledge, 
company tour and enthusiasm towards the project. We would to 
thank the open source PlasticScanner community, especially Law­
rence “Loki” Kincheloe for his feedback and sharing his knowledge 
in hardware development, and “Dataworm” for sparring on data 
quality. 
Finally, we would like to extend our gratitude to our friends and 
family for their unwavering support and encouragement. Their 
feedback, participation in testing and inquiries about the project 
were invaluable and kept us motivated throughout the entire pro­
cess.
==PAGE:4==
Abstract
In this thesis, a handheld plastic identification tool has been devel­
oped to a state, where the physical and electronic hardware is man­
ufacturable and functional. The plastic identification tool aims to 
help solve the global challenges of plastic sorting, by making identi­
fication of polymers more accessible.
Research indicates that a range of companies and individuals are 
working with sorting plastic, but the main focus of current solutions 
is industrial equipment or niche scientific purposes. The current 
market for handheld plastic identification is domi- nated by products 
that are inaccessible in most use cases due to the price range.
This thesis builds on the source project called ”PlasticScanner”, and 
aims to further develop and mature the existing design. The thesis 
researches the concept of open source hardware (OSH), the effect 
that open source has on a development project, and highlights chal­
lenges associated with OSH as a business model. The research 
identifies key aspects affecting success and replicability on OSH 
projects, and the findings are used to drive decisions in the develop­
ment process, and recommenda- tions for future work.
A double diamond development process is applied to the develop­
ment process, aiming to create a handheld and pilot production 
ready PlasticScanner.
The thesis propose a new modular design of electronics and hard­
ware, that fits the use case of both commercial and open source 
community. The design has been tested and accompanying soft­
ware has been developed in order to test the scanning performance 
of the solution.
The developed PlasticScanner is a solution enabling a wide range of 
users to more effectively handle an increasing level of plastic waste. 
By designing a development kit for the community and makers, the 
PlasticScanner lays the groundwork for future development within 
the project and enables other individuals to create new innovations.
The master thesis indicates the feasibility of creating a low cost 
plastic scanner, that highlights a potential for easy and accessible 
plastic identification. The design has reached 90 % accuracy when 
comparing two plastic types. The physical and electronic designs 
are validated and ready for pilot production. Furthermore, the thesis 
identifies two main use cases and propose a business case and a 
roadmap for the first year of business. In conclusion, the thesis indi­
cates a strong case for continuing the project of delivering an open 
source handheld plastic identification tool, both as a commercial 
product and as an open source hardware offering, that can make 
plastic identification accessible to more people.
==PAGE:5==
5
1.	 Introduction...................................... 7
2.	 Theory & Methods............................ 11
Open source.............................................12
Engineering aspects................................19
Technology...............................................21
3.	 Development..................................... 23
Final product.............................................24
Development process.............................26
Discover....................................................26
Define........................................................35
Develop.....................................................40
Deliver.......................................................65
4.	 Discussion......................................... 71
5.	 Conclusion........................................ 77
6.	 Future development.......................... 80
B.	 References........................................ 84
A.	 Appendix........................................... 91
Table of contents
==PAGE:6==
6
﻿__
﻿__
==PAGE:7==
1.	 Introduction
==PAGE:8==
8
Introduction__
﻿__
Context
Plastic is an amazing material. It can be 
shaped and reshaped into an almost unlim­
ited number of complex shapes, it is afford­
able, and it does not require a lot of energy 
to manufacture compared to steel or glass. 
It is durable, it is re-shapable and it can last 
an eternity.
The low price and easy manufacturing has 
made plastics the perfect material for sin­
gle-use items. Items that could be used 
several times, but are designed to only last 
once. This results in our beaches, oceans, 
parks, and landfill filling up with plastic 
products that are not given a second 
chance. And the reason is simple. The sec­
ond we mix a polymer with other unknown 
plastics, the valuable and reusable material 
is transformed into waste, because the 
best we can do is to use it as fossil fuel for 
the incineration plant.
The solution sounds simple: We need to 
sort plastic, so we can reuse the material 
for new products. But the reality is a lot 
more complicated. While the resource in­
dustry is trying to solve the challenge of 
sorting household waste, there is another 
strategy as well. Focusing on a relatively 
confined and consistent source makes it 
easier to have a consistent output. Around 
Europe, several companies have emerged 
working on this: Plastix in Lemvig, Denmark 
focuses on turning used fishing nets and 
ropes into pellets, BessTrade is focusing on 
PVC flooring to have a consistent output of 
PVC, and Matras Recycling Europe is recy­
cling the various parts of the mattress. They 
all have one thing in common: a large, con­
sistent source of the material that requires 
rough sorting.
Project description
In this project, the physical artefacts for a 
handheld plastic scanner is developed with 
the goal of making plastic identification 
more accessible, enabling individual and 
commercial users to identify and sort plas­
tic waste.
This includes developing a plastic shell and 
accompanying electronics ready for pro­
duction. Additionally, an initial set of soft­
ware is created to verify the functionality of 
the designed hardware. The core principle 
used for polymer identification is the rela­
tive reflectance of light in the near-infrared 
(NIR) spectrum from different polymer 
types, which is determined through the use 
of discrete near-infrared spectroscopy, as 
described in section 2.3 and 3.3.1.
The project is completed at the Technical 
University of Denmark and is based on the 
open source project called “the PlasticS­
canner project” created by Jerry de Vos in 
2021. Furthermore, this project builds upon 
the industrial design concept for the Plas­
ticScanner project, developed by a group 
of students at TU Delft during spring 2022.
The PlasticScanner project is an open 
source project which affects the develop­
ment process of this project. The subject of 
open source as a development strategy is 
researched and described, including a re­
view of pros and cons of this method. The 
best-practices for successfully developing 
an open source project are reviewed. An 
emphasis is put on reviewing the challeng­
es and strategies associated with open 
source hardware development driven by a 
community. The development process fol­
lows the Double Diamond process model 
and incorporates open source elements in 
the development process by continuously 
sharing work with the community and re­
views of the development by the PlasticS­
canner community.
==PAGE:9==
9
The main focus of the work done within this 
project is to complete the necessary hard­
ware for a functional and manufacturable 
plastic scanner, as described in the next 
section. The report furthermore describes 
gathering of data and training of a machine 
learning model. This work is included to 
provide an preliminary proof-of-concept for 
the hardware capabilities. Furthermore, ba­
sic principles of NIR spectroscopy is ap­
plied to argue for implementation and 
methods previously developed by the Plas­
ticScanner project. The project thus focus­
es on applying proven principles in a rele­
vant context.
Problem Statement
The Plastic Scanner is an open source-
based project, developing a discrete NIR 
polymer identification tool. To generate in­
come for further development, the Plas­
ticScanner project wants to develop a com­
mercial 
version 
targeting 
European 
commercial customers. Currently, the scan­
ner is at a Technology Readiness Level 
(TRL) 5 with working prototypes of various 
parts of the project tested.
In parallel to the continuous use as an open 
source concept, the aim of this master the­
sis is to further develop the technology and 
the current design towards use as a com­
mercial scanner. It includes aspects such as 
the definition of markets and business 
models, alignment with open source strate­
gy, as well as the further development of 
the current proof-of-concept prototype 
into a production-ready state. Key tasks 
are:
Review and apply relevant literature in the 
field of open source development.
1.	 Define target users and target use cas­
es, develop and refine the business 
model, and define product require­
ments.
2.	 Evaluate the current state of the plastic 
scanner, and develop the physical and 
hardware aspects of the design to a 
higher TRL.
3.	 Analysis of current product and re-de­
sign towards the defined target use 
case(s).
4.	 Functional testing of designed proto­
types.
5.	 Design for manufacturing analysis and 
evaluation of individual components for 
design refinements.
==PAGE:10==
10
Introduction__
﻿__
Reading the report
The thesis starts by introducing the theory and methods used through­
out the report. After this comes the development section, which starts 
with a presentation of the final product to make the rest of the report 
easier to follow. The remaining sections in development follow the dou­
ble diamond approach: discover, define, develop, deliver.
In the discover section, the problem space, user needs and NIR identi­
fication method is explored.
The define section builds on the learnings from the discover phase to 
describe the exact problem, market, requirements, and possible busi­
ness model.
The define phase guides the development phase, where the iterative 
process of developing and testing the physical design, electronics and 
accompanying software is described.
Finally, the deliver phase reviews the developed product and open 
source process, and proposes a development roadmap for 2023.
The effects of design decision, error sources, business case and open 
source development are then discussed. Lastly, proposals for future 
development are described.
The report is set up as a two-page document, with an inner binding. 
Figures and test is therefore setup to best accommodate this view, but 
can be read as a single page document as well.
To highlight the development, decisions, and actions made by the au­
thors of the master thesis project, the term “the team” will be used 
throughout the report. The development, previously done within the 
PlasticScanner community, is referred to, as done by “the PlasticScan­
ner Project”.
To ease the reading experience, a list of abbreviations, a list of figures 
and a list of tables are attached in the appendix. See appendix A.1
References are styled according to IEEE standard.
==PAGE:11==
2.	 Theory & 
Methods
==PAGE:12==
12
Theory & Methods__
Open source__
2.1	Open source
2.1.1	Introduction to Open 
source
Open Source development, also known as 
the Open Source model, is a way of devel­
oping products while publishing the associ­
ated design documents, blueprints, source 
code etc. The word open source can be un­
derstood as a river. Everyone is free to fol­
low the stream to the spring where it starts, 
study it, make adjustments and grab water 
to start another stream. In this analogy, free 
software would be to make it free to drink 
from the river, but not to create new streams 
or study the stream, or commercial soft­
ware where it might cost resources to gain 
access to the stream. The term open source 
does not describe the quality of the source, 
but only defines the access and possible 
actions [1], [2].
The open source model has its roots in the 
early days of software at Bell Labs UCL 
Berkley. At that time there was a culture of 
software being shared among researchers. 
The Berkley team developed a set of add-
ons to the UNIX operating system devel­
oped by Bell labs as Berkeley Software Dis­
tribution (BSD). This turned into a lawsuit, 
which sparked Richard Stallman to start the 
GNU (for Gnu’s Not Unix) project. He justi­
fied the existence of the project as: “So 
that I can continue to use computers with­
out violating my principles, I have decided 
to put together a sufficient body of free 
software so that I will be able to get along 
without any software that is not free” [3].
The term “free software”, had the vulnera­
bility that people intuitively related to the 
price, where it should be understood as 
“the word free as in Freedom and not Free 
beer”. To clarify the term, Christine Peter­
son coined the term “Open source” in 1998 
while working as executive director of the 
Foresight Institute [3], [4].
Today, The Open Source Model is widely 
used in software, where it has its roots. It is 
estimated that over 96,4% of the top 1 mil­
lion web servers’ operating systems are Li­
nux, and operating systems like Android are 
based on Linux that started the open source 
movement, and still, today depends on a 
vast amount of open source software com­
ponents [5]. A survey by McKinsey sug­
gests “that the prospects for open innova­
tion will only improve, as many executives 
expect a further blurring of boundaries be­
tween employees and people outside the 
enterprise” [6]. Both professional and 
non-professional organisations are picking 
up on OSS, and hardware is also on its way.
Open source Software (OSS) itself is de­
fined by the open-source organisation as:
“Open source software is software with 
source code that anyone can inspect, 
modify, and enhance” [7].
OSS allows other interested parties to con­
tribute to the proposed solution, thereby 
speeding up development and adding func­
tionality needed by the contributor. More 
recently, the OS movement is spreading 
from community-driven software to the 
scene of hardware projects, and even into 
companies and major organisations.
2.1.2	
Open source 
Hardware
To talk about open source hardware, we 
first need to take a step back and define 
the term “hardware”. The DIN 3105 stan­
dard for open source hardware defines a 
piece of hardware as “any discrete (i.e. 
countable) physical artefact”, meaning that 
a piece of hardware is not limited to the 
classic idea of hardware: an electronic cir­
cuit board, but instead, a more general term 
for tangible physical objects [8]. Further­
more, specifying what an open source ver­
sion of hardware is, is described by the 
Open Source Hardware Foundation (OSHF) 
as “A term for tangible artefacts — ma­
chines, devices, or other physical things, 
whose design has been released to the 
public in such a way that anyone can make, 
modify, distribute, and use those things”. 
This definition further includes that a piece 
of open source hardware does not appear 
out of the blue, but is the outcome of a de­
sign process that anyone can get involved 
in, which requires the process to be open.
==PAGE:13==
13
While OSS has a long and established his­
tory of successful development and busi­
ness operation, open source hardware 
(OSH) is a more recent operating model 
which is defined by the OSHF in DIN SPEC 
3105-1 as:
“Open source hardware is hardware 
whose design is made publicly avail­
able so that anyone can study, modify, 
distribute, make, and sell the design or 
hardware based on that design” [8]
The standard creates a frame for the docu­
mentation of OSH projects and introduces 
a community-based assessment for proj­
ects to be certified in order to be labelled 
as OSH[9]. The OSH movement has gained 
significant momentum over the past 10 
years with popular projects like the Arduino 
microcontroller, Adafruit and Sparkfun pro­
totyping electronics, and 3D printers by 
Prusa research and the RepRap community 
[10]. Projects like Arduino have grown from 
relatively unstable and small scale, to ac­
tively challenging the industrial PLC market, 
and play a major role in prototype develop­
ment of IoT solutions [11].
Through the teams research, is has been 
found that despite new standards, and an 
increasing number of publications address­
ing open source design, the application of 
OSH in the community is often looking un­
organised and unstandardised. Since the 
contributors typically commit changes vol­
untarily, it appears as if documentation is 
not the part of the development typical 
OSH contributors find the most fulfilling to 
perform. This dynamic is showcased by 
how varying the level of documentation is 
on different projects. But the lack of docu­
mentation on some projects, sparks a ques­
tion for future research: How much docu­
mentation is needed and what type of 
documentation is needed for new contribu­
tors to join?
Balka et al. found that the involvement of 
actors in an open source hardware commu­
nity is driven by the transparency, accessi­
bility, and replicability of a project. The bet­
ter the actor finds the above-mentioned 
criteria, the more it contributes to the per­
ceived openness of the project, thereby in­
creasing the chance of an actor using or 
contributing to a project. [12]. Transparen­
cy, accessibility, and replicability can be 
seen as three tiers of openness. Transpar­
ency relates to the possibility to look at the 
design, and see and understand the deci­
sions made during the development pro­
cess. Accessibility is related to the possibil­
ity to access and modify the available 
information. This means using generally 
used formats of digital content. Especially 
for open source hardware, replicability is a 
major factor in the success of an OSH proj­
ect [13]. For example, in an OSS project, the 
user just needs a computer to run a piece 
of code and thereby actively participate in 
the project. However, in open source hard­
ware projects, the user needs the physical 
artefact to participate. This could be the 
need to order a custom PCB, 3D print or la­
ser cut a number of CAD models and as­
semble everything together without feed­
back. This either requires the new actors to 
have a range of tools and machines avail­
able through ownership or membership in a 
community workspace or makerspace, and 
if not to pay a third party to create the arte­
facts. Additionally, the lack of scale has a 
significant impact on the cost to create an 
item, especially for electronic components. 
These factors create a financial hurdle, 
which new actors have to pass without a 
guarantee that the end product will work as 
expected, essentially requiring the actor to 
take a risk.
2.1.3	
Replicability, 
Openness, and source 
quality
Antoniou et al. describe a process diagram 
to determine whether an OSH is replicable. 
The diagram can be seen on figure 2.1. Their 
findings were that the first step is to find 
and identify a project, hence the necessity 
to be available on a well-used platform, 
with sufficient information on specifications 
and documentation overview in order for 
the actor to assess if the project matches 
their requirements. When the project is 
identified, the actor then needs to read the 
documentation, to assess if it is possible for 
the actor to source, manufacture and as­
semble the parts. In this phase, the actor 
might already have initiated the manufac­
turing process to some degree, even though 
==PAGE:14==
14
Theory & Methods__
Open source__
it can be hard for the actor to know if the 
project is replicable, which is not possible 
to fully determine before the project is fully 
assembled [14].
Bonvoisin et al. proposes an “open-o-
meter” in an article from 2018. The open-o-
meter is intended to output a value based 
on 
product 
openness 
and 
process 
openness. The product openness criteria 
align well with the factors affecting 
reproducibility described by Antoniou et al. 
regarding design files, assembly instructions 
and original files, but Bonvoisin further adds 
an OSH-compatible licence and a metric for 
process openness. By having an open 
version control system, contribution guide 
and issue tracking, which includes the 
development process as a part of OSH. The 
proposed 
criteria 
aligns 
with 
the 
requirements put forward by the DIN 
standard.
In 2020 the open source community stan­
dardised OSH with a DIN standard DIN 3105 
[8], and in 2019 EU funded the OPEN!NEXT 
programme 
to 
transform 
collaborative 
product creation via the open source mod­
el, based on the acknowledgement that 
open source software created a billion-eu­
ro economy by making software open, and 
according to OPEN!NEXT it “showed us 
that proprietary ownership often precludes 
innovation and that things move a lot fast­
er when you don’t have to wait for patent 
lawyers.” [15]
2.1.4	
Elements in an 
open source project
The development of open source hardware 
projects can start in a variety of ways. It can 
range from an individual actor publishing a 
project that after completion, to large com­
munities co-developing towards a shared 
goal. Typically, projects contain the follow­
ing elements [16]:
	‐
(Electronic) hardware design
	‐
Software or firmware
	‐
Mechanical design
	‐
Documentation
	‐
Community
The documentation has the goal of making 
the project easy to identify, and asses if the 
project fits ones needs and the chances of 
success with a possible quest of replication 
of electronic hardware, software and me­
chanical design. Additionally, there are 
three important properties of open source 
projects for them to succeed:
Figure 2.1: OSH replicability flowchart by Antoniou et al. [14]
==PAGE:15==
15
	‐
Discoverability, i.e. the ability to find the 
documentation regardless of where it 
resides on the internet, in part through 
making documentation accessible to 
web crawlers.
	‐
Portability, i.e. the ability to share docu­
mentation on different platforms or to 
transfer it from one platform to another.
	‐
Platform interoperability, i.e. the ability 
to update, relate and join documenta­
tion across different online repositories 
and documentation formats.
Organizing the collaboration
For an open source project to work, it needs 
a place to share, track, distribute, commu­
nicate and educate the continuously evolv­
ing design. In order to make it accessible to 
individuals all over the world, online ser­
vices are often used to accomplish these 
things.
Various messaging and calling services 
such as Discord and Zoom are used to 
communicate on more developer-focused 
issues and subjects. By creating specific 
channels and threads based on the sub­
ject, for example, electronics, developers 
can contribute to the channels where they 
have expertise while still having access to 
the ideas and decisions in different chan­
nels with different subjects.
The project files are hosted on an online 
service, where the files are accessible to 
anyone, changes can be tracked, approved 
and documented, and developer-focused 
introductions can be made. One of the most 
popular services used to host projects is 
GitHub, where open source projects can 
host and collaborate for free, based on the 
Git framework for version control. This is 
also the service used by the PlasticScanner 
project.
2.1.5	
Value creation of 
OSHW and associated 
challenges
Traditional businesses that sell or provide 
technical products often use a business 
model where their proprietary technology, 
business secrets and patents protect their 
ability to sell a unique product or service 
[17], [18]. An Open Source Hardware com­
pany has to consider how to protect or en­
sure its ability to generate revenue. There is 
a wide range of business models to consid­
er, with a range of benefits and drawbacks. 
This section will explore a set of these busi­
ness models and how they could affect the 
Plastic Scanner project and product. As 
Open Source Hardware is a very new phe­
nomenon, only starting to gain traction as 
of 2012, the operating model is new to the 
industry. As a result, three main character­
istics can increase the difficulty of gaining 
funding and market entry[19]:
Limited funding:
Investors are new to open source business 
models and how they can be an advantage. 
Typically, patents and other proprietary 
technology are seen as a good way for 
companies to protect their ability to make 
money and thereby the investor making a 
return[19].
Lack of exposure:
Open source hardware is not very wide­
spread and known, leading to people look­
ing for more conventional products. In some 
business areas, a long and proven track re­
cord is very important when purchasing 
equipment, for example in scientific work. 
Furthermore, open source hardware can 
require the user to do some manufacturing, 
assembly or calibration themselves, there­
by turning away customers who might be­
lieve they are not able to do this. This means 
that the potential advantages of open 
source are less known in the industry, while 
the risk of copy-cats as a result of no de­
sign protections such as patents appears 
more obvious [19].
Advantages of the open source model 
(OSM)
According to Li Z. et al., there is a range of 
advantages to utilising an open-source 
model:
	‐
Reduce risk, as more people will vali­
date your design before entering manu­
facturing.
	‐
Free advertising.
	‐
Potentially a great way to hire people, 
as contributors have shown their abili­
==PAGE:16==
16
Theory & Methods__
Open source__
ties in realising work on the project.
	‐
Faster time to market – individuals 
around the world contribute to the de­
sign. For free!
	‐
Instant feedback from the community.
This allows projects to directly provide the 
value that customers are actually asking 
for. A wider network gives the project a 
larger reach, as participants such as men­
tors and developers can help the company 
or project get in touch with beneficial re­
sources or alike [10]. These benefits mostly 
originate from the same source: Communi­
ty, community, community! Community is 
absolutely key and is seen as one of the 
primary benefits of open source. The com­
munity can lead to a range of benefits, from 
simply giving customers a higher perceived 
value to reducing development and sales 
expenses, shortening development time 
and increasing the knowledge available in 
the extended team [10].
Bankruptcy and vendor lock-in
In a modern, digitised world, an increasing 
number of connected products are made 
every year. In the industry of the Internet Of 
Things (IoT), it is currently an increasing 
concern for customers, as they are at the 
mercy of the company continuing to sup­
port their products. Major companies like 
the tech-giant Google have shown a great 
willingness to shut down online services 
and even services which support physical 
products. In 2016, Google-owned Nest shut 
down the service supporting their “Revolv” 
product line [20]. This meant customers 
were left with non-functional hardware, es­
sentially e-waste, with no way of re-pur­
posing the product or hosting their own 
service. The problem with Google shutting 
down services and products has become 
such a big problem that an entire website is 
being run to keep track of it [21] and a prob­
lem for their brand in its entirety [22]. And 
this problem is not limited to just Google.
Pearce is arguing that when choosing a 
product, a company is increasingly assess­
ing the risks associated with implementing 
the product, and here vendor lock-in is a 
major concern, which is often overlooked 
[19]. Going open source is a way to mini­
mise risk [23].
The research institute CERN has estab­
lished a 3-year project called MALT, to 
avoid vendor lock-in, and to hopefully re­
duce the cost of software by demanding 
suppliers to deliver open source documen­
tation wherever possible, and actively 
choosing open source products over pro­
prietary if possible. This is done to avoid 
the end of a supplier company can result in 
the end to a research project [23]. In the 
same way, This can provide security for 
customers that their product will continue 
to work, can be updated by the community 
or get parts, even if the company stops.
Risks related to open source develop­
ment
The above section describes potential ben­
efits for both the company and the end 
user. However, choosing an open source 
strategy also includes risks and makes 
some traditional business models unsuit­
able. One of the major risks from open 
sourcing technology is the potential imita­
tion from competitors, which is significantly 
easier and can be critical in especially ear­
lier stages of development [10].
However, the success of open Source hard­
ware projects has been varied, with Ardui­
no still being successful, but projects like 
RepRap having shut down in 2016. One of 
the challenges RepRap faced as a commer­
cial company was the significant range of 
3rd party variations and offerings, based on 
their printer design. While RepRap is the 
most widely used 3d printing platform, the 
commercial aspect of the project was un­
able to compete with other low-cost com­
panies selling printers, sometimes even 
based on the design of RepRap, thereby 
underlining the difficulty in remaining open 
source while offering a unique technical 
value proposition to the end customer [24].
OSH projects might have a competitive ad­
vantage over OSS since the nature of hard­
ware requires sourcing, manufacturing and 
assembly. Running a larger production will 
give the manufacturer the benefit from 
economy of scale, which is not possible for 
an individual. At the same time, the ease of 
ordering a ready-to-go product will save 
hours of work. For a company, the latter will 
be a measurable expense, but for a private 
individual doing the project outside of work, 
==PAGE:17==
17
time is “free” and might be part of the moti­
vation for doing the project. This offers a 
potential revenue source for the open 
source company, as the company can sell 
finished boards and parts, thereby allowing 
individuals to both use the product, but 
also experiment with the design, as the 
schematics are available. This is not a pos­
sibility in the same way for OSS, since the 
user probably already has everything they 
need to try the OSS out: A computer.
Furthermore, relying on external open 
source products without support or ser­
vice, which the enterprise is not in control 
of, is not an ideal situation for many enter­
prises. The risk associated with downtime 
of services can be substantial, which is why 
risk assessment is a part of product as­
sessment for purchasing enterprises [19], 
and service and managed solutions are the 
basis of the business model of several large 
OSS companies like GitHub and RedHat.
Li Z. et al argues that “In order for a busi­
ness to thrive as an open source business, 
it must leverage the advantages of being 
open source to stay ahead of the competi­
tion trying to imitate the product” [10]. For 
Arduino, that advantage has been its name, 
IDE and community. Having a platform of 
boards, firmware, guides, and an IDE that 
all work together seamlessly, makes it eas­
ier to start using the Arduino ecosystem for 
newcomers. This makes it easier for com­
petitors to develop products that fit the Ar­
duino ecosystem than to create their own 
ecosystem. This is amplified by Arduino’s 
trademark for the name “Arduino”, leading 
to most breakout boards being marketed 
for consumers as “Arduino compatible”. This 
indicates that customers value the original 
Arduino brand over third-party remakes, 
partly as a result of the complete and sup­
ported ecosystem. Lastly, it indicates that 
it is easy for individuals and small-scale 
manufacturers to replicate and remix the 
design and fit into the ecosystem, while still 
making room for the brand Arduino to suc­
ceed commercially.
Where the Arduino team leverages the 
community for development, is by welcom­
ing new ideas and crowd-sourced develop­
ment. The team argue that an OSH project 
with very high costs (e.g. a car) would not 
get the same effect from going open 
source, since the only ones capable of us­
ing, trying and testing the design are their 
existing competitors, and it would be hard 
to create a community, due to the large 
barrier of entry from cost alone. What they 
could do is take a smaller part of the prod­
uct, like the infotainment system and make 
that part open source, and make it possible 
to buy a development kit, and thereby 
leverage on an OS Community on their 
weak areas. In this way, they open up for 
users to engage and contribute to a part of 
the project, which could drive sales, with­
out giving away the design for manufactur­
ing know-how. This would make it possible 
to remix the infotainment system, but you 
would still need to assemble a complete car 
to fully take advantage of it.
==PAGE:18==
18
Theory & Methods__
Open source__
2.1.6	
Strategic ap­
proaches for open source 
hardware development
The OPEN!NEXT project set off to discover 
how OSH companies gained momentum and 
became a success. They discovered that the 
OSH projects typically used a combination of 
six strategic approaches to develop it from 
an OSH concept for early adopters to a fully 
developed product for the mainstream mar­
ket.
Leverage through communities
As previously mentioned by [10], the commu­
nity is the heart that drives an open-source 
hardware project. The community serves as 
development help during the startup phase, 
while at the same time spreading the mes­
sage about the project and creating publicity. 
When the product reaches the mainstream 
market, they might continue as customers as 
well [15].
Platforming
Companies like Sparkfun and Arduino have 
created online platforms for the sales and 
distribution of their products by connecting 
directly to their customer. Their sites com­
bine hardware sales with well-document 
guides and inspiration, and a common ground 
for the community to share progress and 
ideas. This makes their websites a one-stop 
website, with everything needed to make 
OSH projects [15].
Crowd- and third-party funding
Compared to OSS, OSH has the challenge 
that physical manufacturing requires sub­
stantial financing, which is challenging to ob­
tain without investors, public funding or 
grants. Another strategy is financing through 
small private donations and crowd-funding, 
where customers and community members 
alike pay upfront for your product and service 
[15].
Ecosystem infrastructure
Another strategy is to develop a whole eco­
system of products or services relevant to an 
ecosystem or one or more specific industries. 
This relates to building a platform of prod­
ucts, but is even more invested in a specific 
ecosystem [15].
Selling hardware
The basic idea of selling the hardware is de­
veloped by the OSH community. This makes 
OSH more accessible to less technical peo­
ple, and can even make it cheaper to obtain a 
working product, due to economies of scale 
[15].
Consulting services
Another strategy is to have the whole project 
open source, but offer support, implementa­
tion, workshops or technical consulting ei­
ther ad-hoc or on a subscription basis, and 
offer enterprise solutions for companies that 
want the product, but are not willing to invest 
the resources in building the product by 
themselves [15].
2.1.7	
Strategies over 
time
OSH projects often start with individuals or 
small groups working on an idea and can de­
velop into full-scale enterprises. The strate­
gic approach and the product offered and 
needed will most likely change over time, as 
actors in the OSH project change from indi­
vidual makers to large enterprises.
The OPEN!NEXT project identified three 
stages, that OSH projects typically have, that 
correspond to the first stages of the “Diffu­
sion of Innovations” model proposed by Ever­
ett M. Rogers [25].
Innovators
The early innovators are the ones willing to 
co-create and build on top of the offering 
that the OSH project offers. They often play a 
role in the development of the project and 
community and are typically motivated by 
the goals of the OS project, and not for com­
mercial reasons [15], [26].
Early adopters
Early market adopters accept the faults and 
missing aspects of the project, because they 
believe in the project, and have a need, for 
which the OSH product is a viable solution.
Mainstream market
The mainstream market is for everyone who 
sees an idea in the product, but values prov­
en and polished offerings that they can trust, 
which early OSH projects cannot deliver.
==PAGE:19==
19
2.2	
Engineering aspects
2.2.1	
Ergonomics
Working with a handheld, portable device, 
it is important to consider the ergonomics 
and the fit for the user. The design of the 
device should make it easy to hold and op­
erate comfortably for extended periods of 
time. If a device is used in a working con­
text with varying tasks, the risk of a repeti­
tive strain is less of a risk, compared to a 
scenario where a worker would use it con­
tinuously at a conveyor belt. Nevertheless, 
it remains important to create a design, 
where the risk of repetitive strain is mini­
mised and general comfort is prioritised.
There are multiple design considerations to 
be had, in order to achieve an ergonomic 
device. This includes considerations re­
garding weight, weight distribution, size, 
and shape of the handle, angle of scanner 
element, reducing bends of joints, length of 
the handle and material choices [27].
Weight and weight distribution
While using a one-handed tool away from 
the body, the weight should not surpass 
2,3 kg. If the device is to be used in more 
accuracy-driven applications, the weight 
should reside below 0,4 kg. Additionally, 
the centre of gravity should be aligned with 
the centre of gravity of the hand [27].
In order to be easy to hold and easily and 
precisely place and angle, a device should 
aim to minimise weight. The weight of the 
enclosure will also be a compromise in of­
fering sturdy and durable parts, without in­
creasing the weight excessively. A lower 
weight can also offer more flexibility in the 
physical design, as the exact shape is less 
critical in reducing the strain on the wrist in 
a normal grip situation.
Size and shape of handle
The size of a handle on a handheld tool is 
recommended to be 30-50 mm in diameter 
Ecosystem 
Infrastructure
Platforming
Selling 
Hardware 
Products
Crowd- & 
Third Party 
Funding
Consulting 
Services
Leverage 
through
Communities
Strategic
approaches
model
Date: 08-01-2023
Figure 2.2: Strategic approaches for OSH development [15]
==PAGE:20==
20
Theory & Methods__
Engineering aspects__
with 40mm being typical while being at 
least 100 mm in length to ensure a comfort­
able grip around the handle, while the han­
dle extends to the full length of the palm. 
Selecting a handle diameter outside the 
recommended range will make it more diffi­
cult for most users to comfortably grip. A 
bad grip will be more straining for the user 
and result in less stability. Additionally, if 
the handle is too short, it can result in ex­
cessively compressing the middle of the 
palm [27].
The shape of a handle is also important to 
consider, as this can also affect the grip 
significantly. A cylindrical shape is practical 
to implement and widely used in a wide 
range of products. Adjusting the circle to an 
elliptical shape with a width-to-length ratio 
of 1:1.25 can lead to a better grip for users 
(see figure 2.4). Depending on the use 
case, various adjustments to the handle 
design can be made to best suit the situa­
tion[28]. It is also important to consider the 
aesthetics of the handle, as the affordance 
[29] of the product should guide the user to 
grip the scanner correctly without instruc­
tions.
Reducing bends in joints
One of the most important aspects of ergo­
nomic design is to reduce bends of the 
joints of the hand. As far as possible, the 
wrist should be in its natural state [27]. A 
design should therefore attempt to reduce 
any need for the user to tip or flex their 
wrists when scanning a piece of plastic.
Material choice
The material choices of a product influence 
everything from the perceived quality to 
how good the grip on the handle is. Ensur­
ing a good grip, even with sweaty hands, is 
affected significantly by the material choice 
[27]. By defining fitting surface friction and 
texture for manufacturing, a good grip can 
in many situations be achieved. If the mate­
rial is too smooth or with too little friction, 
the tool is more likely to slip out of hand or 
move in the hand when pressing against 
something. Not only does this result in a 
frustrating user experience, but it also forc­
es the user to flex their wrist, which should 
be avoided.
The default grip angle of the hand
The grip line of an average human hand is 
12 degrees. This is the forward angle from 
vertical at which an item is held naturally in 
the hand. A design should consider this 
natural angle of the tool held [30]. An ex­
ample of this can be seen in figure 2.3.
2.2.2	
Think aloud pro­
tocol for user testing
During user testing in this project, the test­
ing protocol “think aloud protocol” was used 
as described by Steve Portigal in “Rocket 
Surgery Made Easy”. The think-aloud pro­
tocol is a user testing method to test every­
thing from a website to a physical product 
[31]. It is applied by instructing the infor­
mant to complete a series of tasks, where 
Figure 2.3: Illustration of the 12 degrees angle
Figure 2.4:  Illustration of optimal grip shape for hand tools [28]
==PAGE:21==
21
they are instructed to say what comes into 
their mind during testing. These thoughts 
are not limited to just practical consider­
ations, but can also include emotions when 
using the product, aesthetic opinions or 
just describing what they think they should 
do before doing it[31]. This method was 
chosen, as it allows for gathering a wide 
range of insights from just a few informants. 
Additionally, it allows for a more explorative 
process, where the interviewer can ask fol­
low-up questions or simply perform obser­
vations of what the informant is doing.
2.2.3	
Net Promoter 
Score
The Net Promoter Score (NPS) is a tool typ­
ically used to evaluate customers’ satisfac­
tion with a product, and thereby their loyal­
ty as customers [32] and potentially predict 
growth. The fundamental idea is to ask 
customers “How likely is it that you would 
recommend *brand* to a friend or col­
league?” on a scale from 0-10 where 0 is 
“Not at all likely” and 10 is “Extremely like­
ly”[33].
Customers are then grouped into one of 
the following three groups depending on 
their answer, which aims to describe their 
characteristics as customers [33]:
	‐
Promoters (9-10): Likely to purchase for 
the company again and promote it to 
others.
	‐
Neutral (6-8): Satisfied with the prod­
uct, but not loyal to the company or 
product.
	‐
Detractor (0-6): Dissatisfied customers 
who are not expected to return and who 
can damage the brand through word-
of-mouth.
With data from a range of customers, the 
Net Promoter Score itself can be calculated 
as NPS = %ofPromoters − %ofDetractors, 
resulting in a score from -100 to 100 with 
100 being the best. In this project, the idea 
of the NPS system is used to evaluate pro­
totypes. By asking users to rate different 
aspects from 0-10 and then using the NPS 
formula, specific aspects can be quantita­
tively compared.
2.3	
Technology
The main technology used within the proj­
ect is near-infrared (NIR) spectroscopy via 
discrete specific wavelength emitters and a 
broad spectrum sensor. Therefore, the 
coming section describes the principle of 
discrete NIR.
2.3.1	
Polymer identifi­
cation via NIR spectros­
copy
The method of NIR spectroscopy used in 
the project, is based on measurements of 
the relative light intensity from a material 
caused by molecular overtones and vibra­
tions of the material when exposed to elec­
tromagnetic radiation with a wavelength of 
780 nm to 2500 nm. The typical molar ab­
sorbance is significantly weaker within the 
NIR spectrum than in the Midrange infrared 
(MIR) spectrum from 2500–25.000nm [34]. 
On figure 2.5, a full NIR spectrum scan is 
displayed with the specific wavelengths 
used by the PlasticScanner highlighted. 
These wavelength are selected based on a 
combination of specific polymer reflec­
tance at certain wavelengths, general avail­
ability of LEDs with the wavelengths, es­
tablished wavelength ratios and to conver a 
wide area of NIR.
The PlasticScanner concept uses relative 
reflectance, i.e. the ratio between absolute 
reflectance of two wavelengths measure­
ments of the same environment, to esti­
mate the material. This is based on 
Beer-Lamberts law.
900
1,000
1,100
1,200
1,300
1,400
1,500
1,600
1,700
1,800
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Wavelength in nm
Normalised value
PET
PC
PP
PS
PVC
Figure 2.5: Spectroscopy plot, with PlasticScanner wavelengths (red lines).
==PAGE:22==
22
Theory & Methods__
Technology__
Beer-Lambert Law
When light passes through an absorbing 
material, the intensity of the light emerging 
from the absorbing material is reduced. The 
incoming light intensity of monochromatic 
radiation is I0 and the emitted radiation is I. 
If the material is absorbing the radiation 
I0 > I The transmittance (T) of a material 
exposed to a specific radiation, is described 
by the fraction of the original light emitted 
by the material [35]:
T remains relatively constant even if I0 
changes, because the emitted radiation is I 
will increase relatively proportional to I0. 
Therefore, the transmittance is indepen­
dent of the actual intensity of the incoming 
radiation I0, but rather a material constant 
that can be measured from the ratio of the 
input and output [35]. The absorbance of a 
material is the opposite of transmittance, 
and is described by[35]: 
The Beer-Lambert Law describes the ab­
solute absorbance of a material A is direct­
ly dependent on sample thickness b, the 
absorptivity a and the concentration of the 
absorbent c, expressed as: [35]
Beer’s law shows that there is a linear rela­
tionship between absolute absorbance of a 
material A, the absorptivity a and the con­
centration of the absorbent c, if the thick­
ness and radiation wavelength is constant. 
Furthermore, by using the relative absor­
bance between measurements, the trans­
mission through a finite thickness of partic­
ulate material does not formally represent 
reflectance due to extinction, as a result of 
both transmission and reflection being as a 
function of the thickness [35], [36]. This 
enables the scanner to use the relative 
transmittance to identify polymers based 
on the material specific molar extinction a 
and the concentration of the absorbent 
[37], [38].
Related work
In 1995 D.M. Scott proposed a technique 
for distinguishing PET from PVC, by that 
PET may be distinguished from PVC due to 
the first overtone of C-H stretching. This 
makes it possible to distinguish the materi­
als based on the ratio of reflectance at 1716 
nm to that at 1660 nm [39].
In the same way, M.K. ALAM proposed that 
it was possible to use a few strategically 
chosen wavelengths in combination with 
neural networks, to successfully identify 
polymer resins, without the need for the 
whole spectrum, enabling identification 
through multivariate instead of the more 
costly hypervariate spectroscopy [40], and 
similar results have been obtained by a re­
search team led by D. Wienke [41].
Masoumi et.al. further proved that it is pos­
sible to identify the five most common 
types of plastic, based on spectroscopy in 
combination with machine learning, and 
normalisation and data processing via 
Beer-Lambert law. While the team obtained 
a success rate of 90%, using NIR, the use of 
NIR which means that it is not possible to 
scan transparent and black plastics since 
the material absorbs all or nothing [42].
==PAGE:23==
3.	 Development
==PAGE:24==
24
Development__
Final product__
This section first introduces the final prod­
uct, and then describes the development 
process of the project, the decisions, the 
challenges and the found solutions.
3.1	Final product
The developed product is an affordable 
handheld plastic scanner, capable of gath­
ering and processing the data necessary to 
identify a polymer type. 
This enables users to easily identify and 
sort plastic waste. It includes three main 
physical artifacts and an accompanying 
firmware package. 
The physical shape is a shell design con­
sisting of two pieces for easy manufactur­
ing and assembly, while including ingress 
protection. 
The shape is designed and tested to en­
sure both comfort and functionality. 
The electric functionality is driven by two 
separate modular PCBs: one for collecting 
data (called the scanner PCB) and one for 
computation and controlling the hardware 
(called the controller PCB). 
==PAGE:25==
25
8 NIR emitting LED’s
Qwiic connector
Two InGaAs sensors
NAU7802 24bit ADC
Pins for debugging
ESP32 Feather board
Screen 
connector
14155 Battery 
holder
Latching cirquit
Button connector
USB-C
Qwiic Connector
==PAGE:26==
26
Development__
Development process__
3.2	
Development process
The development process follows the Dou­
ble Diamond process, proposed by the Brit­
ish Design Council in 2005 [43], [44]. The 
Double Diamond process consists of four 
phases. Two phases are focusing on the 
process of exploring an issue or problem 
space (divergent thinking), and the other 
two phases are focusing on taking action 
and deciding on solutions (convergent 
thinking)[43], [44].
Since the development process followed 
this structure, it makes sense to structure 
of the development section to help the 
reader understand the process and pro­
gression in the same way as the actual de­
velopment.
Discover
The discover phase is about discovering 
the context, the user, the user needs, and 
the problem. It requires interacting with the 
user and other people affected by the 
scope of the project.
Define
Based on the findings of the discover 
phase, the define phase is focusing on nar­
rowing down the scope of the project, to a 
manageable problem space. The output 
should be a clearly defined problem, that 
should be sought to solve in the second di­
amond.
Develop
The development phase should explore the 
solution space and develop solutions to the 
clearly defined problem. This includes test­
ing, prototyping and trying various solu­
tions.
Deliver
The deliver phase is about shaping the de­
veloped solutions into a single output, that 
is tested, documented and made ready for 
implementation, and relevant reflections on 
improvement has been made.
Of course the process is not as linear as 
outlined above. A team will go back and 
forth. Findings of underlying problems can 
send a team back to start, or developed 
prototypes can indicate misunderstood 
user needs. The phases can be understood 
as mindsets and give the project team a 
common language to describe what kind of 
phase the team is in at a given time.
3.3	
Discover
As this project is building upon previous 
work in both commercial and non-commer­
cial directions, there has already been put 
in a lot of work into understanding the user, 
the needs and how a PlasticScanner prod­
uct might solve these needs – and which 
functions a product should have. In this 
section we will take a step back, and try to 
explore the user context again, to see if the 
findings correlate with previous work within 
the PlasticScanner project. Furthermore, 
the section covers the process of exploring 
the problem space, describe and discuss 
the findings regarding the context, the user, 
their needs and the underlying problems 
found through the process.
3.3.1	
Problem space
In 1997 the European Commission created 
a standard for voluntarily marking the resin 
type of polymer with a physical symbol on a 
product [45]. The standard was inspired by 
and compatible with the American RIC sys­
tem, developed by the American Society of 
the Plastics Industry in 1988 [46]. The stan­
dards both agree on the symbol for the 
most commonly used consumer plastics: 
PET, HDPE, PVC, LDPE, PP, PS and “other”. 
The symbols have since become the indus­
try standard for sorting thermoplastics, 
since the 6 types of plastic covers about 
87% of the global plastic waste [47]. The 
standard does not describe the additives of 
the polymers in question. Most commercial 
polymers contain added fillers or additives 
==PAGE:27==
27
to customise the mechanical properties of 
the material or use a secondary material as 
filler for economical or mechanical purpos­
es. This further adds to the complexity of 
plastic recycling, because even if a tonne of 
items is all labelled with a triangle with the 
number 5 inside for polypropylene, it is not 
necessarily good to mix them. Some items 
might contain chalk for giving a white co­
lour, others bromide as a flame retardant 
and some a UV-stabilising additive, making 
it is hard to mix the unknown combinations 
in a way, that results in a relatively consis­
tent output.
The chief quality engineer at Plastix com­
pares their process to a whisky distillery 
with varying quality. In order to output a 
consistent output, they blend the various 
batches and even out the good and bad 
batches. The key to success is being good 
at blending, and knowing which parameters 
to blend.
Sorting strategies
There are two main strategies for sorting 
plastic in large quantities. The first is batch 
sorting, where the recycler has a diverse 
unknown batch of plastic as income, breaks 
down the incoming items into smaller parts, 
which are washed and dried before using a 
series of tests to separate one type of plas­
tic at a time, via e.g. density/flotation, cen­
trifugation, electrostatic sorting or laser 
aided separation [48], [49].
The other method is “in-line”, where each 
incoming plastic item is identified based on 
sensors, skill or visual marking. This meth­
od can either be done manually by hand or 
automated via process lines combined with 
robot arms, actuators or other means of 
separation [48], [49].
The automated in-line systems are com­
monly seen in modern recycling installa­
tions handling household and municipal 
waste, whereas the manual and handheld 
approach more often is used in research 
applications & quality assurance, due to the 
ease of implementation. Automated inline 
systems have a clear advantage when the 
input items are small and diverse in type, 
whereas manual identification and sorting 
have an advantage when applied in a con­
text with items too large to enter process 
lines, or batches known to be equal, but un­
known type. Furthermore, the movable de­
sign will have an advantage if the place of 
identification is not static, but subject to 
change.
Near-infrared spectroscopy
A popular identification method is NIR 
spectroscopy. Different companies use 
specialised equipment within various wave­
bands, in order to get the best results for 
their application. Several companies use 
the mid-infrared (MIR) waveband, where 
several atomic bonds have overtones, and 
therefore can be used for the characterisa­
tion of molecules.
There are two strategies for NIR spectros­
copy. One is multivariate spectroscopy, 
where one measures a small series of stra­
tegically chosen wavelengths. The other is 
Hypervariate where one aims to minimise 
the difference in wavelengths between 
data point, making the spectroscopy graph 
as close to continuous as possible [40].
NIR emitting and metadata point
An often-used strategy in the industry is 
broad spectrum emittance, using e.g. 
quartz halogen light bulbs that emit a broad 
spectrum of wavelengths, which makes it 
necessary to use a selective wavelength 
sensor to get data on multiple wavelengths. 
Another strategy is to use specific wave­
length LEDs and measure the intensity of 
the reflected light emitted by a specific 
emitter. The LEDs can both be produced as 
arrays or as individual LEDs. The broad 
spectrum strategy is often used in industri­
al settings, and with relatively high power 
consumption, but also a high light output 
making it possible to get lower noise levels 
on readings. The specific wavelength LEDs 
cost from 0,5-18 € depending on the wave­
length, whereas tungsten halogen lamps 
are significantly more expensive [49], [50].
To measure the light intensity, there are 
various strategies as well. For single data 
point solutions, it is possible to have an In­
GaAs sensor capable of measuring the 
waveband from about 800-1800 nm, de­
pending on the sensor. The InGaAs sensor 
will output one signal for the sum of inten­
sity across the spectrum. To measure a 
==PAGE:28==
28
Development__
Discover__
specific wavelength, it is necessary to only 
emit the specified wavelength, or add a 
variable filter on top of the sensor, to only 
control which wavelengths are passed 
through the filter into the sensor. This is 
called a MEMS sensor.
Companies like ST microelectronics and 
Sony have developed digital camera-style 
sensor arrays, enabling camera-like out­
puts, as used in e.g. PolySort. These cam­
eras have a price of about 10k$ USD [51], 
whereas a single MEMS sensor unit has a 
price of around €3000 [52], and a single In­
GaAs sensor costs €7 [53].
Current market
According to a report developed for COWI, 
the financially viable automated plastic 
sorting facilities have an estimated input 
capacity of 1-3t/hr, and costs for a plant are 
in the range of 2-4M €/(t/hr), with the 
smallest proposed setup being priced at 
3M € for a 1.2t/hr setup and a 80% recovery 
rate of plastics [49]. A smaller setup has 
been proposed by The Danish Environmen­
tal Protection Agency as a part of the Poly­
Sort Project. The project utilises SWIR in 
combination with MIR and smaller conveyor 
belts. The test setup proved capable of 
90% recovery and an input capacity of 0,2t/
hr. The price is not disclosed, but based on 
price vs. input capacity tendency from [49], 
the price might be around 0,5M €. The 
PolySort project has not been continued, to 
the knowledge of the authors of this thesis.
A mobile manual identification device will 
not be able to identify as many items per 
hour as an automated setup, and the use of 
manual labour in high-wage countries will 
possibly make the running costs of manual 
identification not financially viable for sort­
ing household waste. On the other hand, a 
machine with an input capacity of 1t and a 
price tag of 3M€ would need to be utilised 
fully, in order to make a sustainable busi­
ness case, if the financial gain of 1t plastic 
is roughly €500, before considering main­
tenance, manual labour, service, or energy 
consumption or transport [48], [49].
The EU directive on single-use plastics, 
states that all member states must initiate 
plans for reducing the environmental im­
pact of specific plastic products [54]. This 
has made European governments introduce 
legislation, requiring manufacturers of spe­
cific plastic products including fishing gear 
to cover costs associated with information 
measures, collection of end-of-life fishing 
gear and subsequent transport and treat­
ment of the waste, as well as the costs as­
sociated with the collection and reporting 
of data [54], [55], which has been approved 
by the Danish government as of August 
2022 [56]. This makes produces of ropes 
responsible for developing ways to get the 
ropes recycled, and it makes harbours re­
sponsible for rough sorting plastics on lo­
cation in EU.
With fishing gear being a relatively consis­
tent product, sorting a whole net, based on 
a few scans with a handheld scanner, might 
be more efficient than chopping the whole 
net into manageable chunks to run it 
through an automated sorting machine. 
Furthermore, it will only be possible for very 
large machines to handle a net. One net 
could weigh several tonnes [55], making 
one fishing net take up the sorting capacity 
of a small machine for hours.
Handheld scanners have been on the mar­
ket for some time, with the Thermo Fisher 
being the industry standard for handheld 
spectroscopy. The price tag for a microP­
HAZIR is €30.000, making it difficult for 
small and medium-sized companies and 
startups to afford a scanner. Other Kick­
starter projects and smaller startups have 
made their way to the general market, but 
are often characterised by a very specific 
application and unproven performance.
3.3.2	
User research
Experience from BessTrade
Previous work in the PlasticScanner project 
includes a visit to Dutch PVC recycler 
BessTrade. During a visit to the company’s 
site, their challenges with performing rough 
sorting were presented to the team. Cur­
rently, the team uses a worn miRoGun4.0 to 
scan plastics [57]. However, BessTrade ex­
perience that the miRoGun is heavy at 1,3 
kg, cumbersomely designed, more ad­
vanced than what they need and too ex­
pensive at +€15.000. As a result of these 
drawbacks, the scanner was not used as 
==PAGE:29==
29
much as they wanted. BessTrade described 
how a more accessible scanner would be 
desirable, in order to better fit the employ­
ees sorting material on the production floor. 
Additionally, an accessible scanner would 
also allow them to better help their suppli­
ers in providing BessTrade with actual PVC, 
as it can be difficult for some suppliers to 
know the types of plastic they have. For 
BessTrade, a scanner should be durable, 
water-resistant, easy to use and inexpen­
sive [57].
Online meeting with Plastix
Plastix in Lemvig, Denmark, is a company 
that specialises in recycling post consumer 
fishing nets and other types of rope prod­
ucts, by turning the ropes into plastic gran­
ulates, sold for production of new products. 
In order to gain a better understanding of 
the needs of plastic recyclers, an online in­
terview was conducted on the 9th of Sep­
tember 2022 with Henrik Adam, who is 
head of quality at Plastix. As head of the 
quality, Henrik’s main responsibility is en­
suring Plastix create high-quality plastic, 
which can be sold to customers. This can 
be a challenge, as every delivery of rope is 
different, often with a wide span in fibre co­
lours, materials, quality and mixes between 
multiple fibre types in one rope. Each time a 
new batch of material arrives at Plastix, 
they have to analyse the material to be able 
to create a consistent product. For Plastix, 
it is extremely beneficial to know what poly­
mer type, e.g. PP, they are expecting to re­
ceive, as it enables them to easier find the 
required properties in the stock of ropes. If 
Plastix cannot reliably know what plas­
tic-type they are expecting to receive, they 
risk purchasing material they cannot use, 
essentially waste they now have to handle.
Their current initial rough sorting system 
relies heavily on manual labour, experience 
and a polymer scanner. Once the rough 
sorting is done, Plastix has industrial pro­
cess equipment for preparing the rope for 
recycling, and manufacturing pellets. The 
details of this process are kept as a trade 
secret.
Plastix site visit
As part of this thesis project, the group vis­
ited Plastix on the 20th of December 2022 
to see their operation, better understand 
their needs and explore how a low-cost 
plastic scanner could be relevant for them. 
During the visit, the group spoke with Hans 
Axel Kristensen who is co-founder and 
CEO, and with Henrik Adam who is head of 
the laboratory.
During the visit, the need for a cheaper and 
more flexible plastic scanner became very 
clear. Plastix currently uses a Thermo Fish­
er Scientific microPHAZIR to identify poly­
mers. This scanner is a handheld device 
weighing 1.2 kg. While it does provide Plas­
tix with good results, it is cumbersome to 
use and takes up to 10 minutes for the light 
source to warm up. Furthermore, their 
scanner is getting worn, and a replacement 
costs €30.000. The steep price simply lim­
its Plastix to acquiring just one scanner[58].
The material Plastix receives typically ar­
rives in mixed batches with a range of types 
of ropes. The ropes often consist of multi­
ple types of polymers to give the ropes the 
specific properties needed. The first step 
in Plastix’s recycling process is to do a 
rough sorting of the ropes, where the plas­
tic types of the various ropes are identified 
and sorted accordingly. This identification 
is typically done with their microPHAZIR 
scanner, or a smaller sample is taken back 
to the laboratory for further analysis. This 
rough sorting is key for Plastix to create 
their PP and HDPE granulates. Hans de­
scribed the urgent need for lower cost and 
simpler plastic identifying devices in the 
fishing industry, as a new EU directive is 
going into effect in 2025, where harbours 
are required to do a pre-sorting of all plas­
tics they bring back [58]. Hans suggested 
3.1 Visit at Plastix
==PAGE:30==
30
Development__
Discover__
Thermo Fisher should lease their scanners 
to harbours, as the up-front price was too 
high, but they were not interested. Further­
more, Hans describes how employees at 
harbours do not have the expertise to ef­
fectively use a microPHAZIR due to its more 
complex interface and functionality. And 
even if they had the expertise, the price 
makes it so that people do not want to bring 
the microPHAZIR with them [58]. When in­
troduced to the handheld version of the 
PlasticScanner project, the enthusiasm and 
need in the industry were clear:
“I think we should buy one in the begin­
ning of the new year, and then you can 
just deliver it when it’s ready”. — Hans 
Axel Kristensen
“We could get it to (harbours, red.) Nor­
way tomorrow. They are desperate!” — 
Hans Axel Kristensen
For Plastix, receiving material that has al­
ready been pre-sorted would improve their 
ability 
to 
quickly 
manufacture 
new 
high-quality materials. And with customers 
such as BMW and Rema1000 needing a 
continuously increasing amount of material, 
anything which allows Plastix to increase 
production is beneficial. When presented 
with a price estimate of €1000-€2000, 
Hans described that: “€2000 would NOT 
disrupt any business case for Plastix”.
3.3.3	
The PlasticScan­
ner ecosystem
OSH Considerations
The goal of the Plastic Scanner is to enable 
individuals, organisations and companies to 
better identify plastic types and thereby 
enable them to implement the knowledge 
in their situation, process, or product. As 
described in the Requirements section, dif­
ferent types of customers have a wide 
range of requirements and needs for the 
plastic scanner. It is important to recognise 
that customers also have requirements for 
the business and that the various needs of 
the customer types will influence the busi­
ness model of the Plastic Scanner. For ex­
ample, an individual at home might prefer 
the product to be hackable, have a low 
price and be available as a do-it-yourself 
(DIY) kit. Meanwhile, a business customer 
might rely on the Plastic Scanner as part of 
their operations and therefore value the re­
liability of purchasing through a company 
that offers official support, availability of 
finished products and repair services.
In its current form, the PlasticScanner proj­
ect operates on an open source volunteer 
basis, with individuals who contribute to 
the design and development of the Plas­
ticScanner. However, it is important to con­
sider expenses for tools, parts, licences, 
prototyping and so on, which the project 
currently relies on grants for.
For the PlasticScanner organisation to offer 
services such as official support and repair 
services reliably to customers, the Plas­
ticScanner needs to consider the business 
model and generate revenue to support 
employees, manufacturing, and develop­
ment of future iterations. This way, the 
PlasticScanner organisation can keep sup­
plying support, spare parts, repairs, new 
scanners, improvements and so on. At the 
same time, the PlasticScanner is an open 
source project and most, if not all, files to 
replicate the scanner will be available on­
line. Considerations must be done regard­
ing how to avoid another party copying the 
product and simply undercutting the Plas­
ticScanner offering for the project to be 
sustainable. Thus, the strategy is to provide 
enterprises with a full stack from hardware, 
firmware, libraries and accessories to en­
able scaling from prototype to production 
seamlessly.
==PAGE:31==
31
3.3.4	
Open source 
hardware ecosystem
Through the teams research on value cre­
ation of open source hardware projects, 
one thing comes up repeatedly: community 
is everything [10], [59], [60] To find out how 
to design the business model for the 
PalsticScanner project, it made sense to 
not focus solely on the business model, but 
rather take a holistic approach, and look at 
the 
OSH 
ecosystem. 
As 
a 
part 
of 
OPEN!NEXT, the Danish Design Centre de­
veloped a framework for designing OSH 
ecosystems, which the team will use to lay 
out a strategy for the PlasticScanner Eco­
system.
Customer exploration
The first question to ask is “Who is the cus­
tomer?”. Next up is the question: what they 
want to do with the project, and what they 
want to achieve by using it. Lastly: How can 
the PlasticScanner OSH offering help them 
achieve this?
Based on the list, the team assessed where 
in the life-cycle of the PlasticScanner proj­
ect the proposed customers would inter­
vene, and mapped it in model 3.2. Here, 
makers, students, and maker spaces are 
listed as the early adopters. Potential com­
mercial customers as mainstream custom­
ers and specific actors who need the tech­
nology to a degree, that makes them willing 
to compromise on maturity and accuracy 
are placed in the middle as early adopters.
The PlasticScanner has an online commu­
nity, that engages through a messaging 
server on a service called Discord. When 
looking at who is active and contributing on 
the discord server, a pattern can be ob­
served of individuals with a high level of in­
terest in making a plastic identification tool 
themselves, and not necessarily for a spe­
cific or commercial application. Several of 
the contributors seem to have an interest 
or an involvement in maker communities. Of 
the contributors, several have publicly 
starred or forked several maker projects via 
their GitHub profile, which makes us classi­
fy them as “makers”.
The CEO and Chief Quality engineer at 
Plastix both agree that they need a product 
like the PlasticScanner yesterday, and they 
made it clear that they are willing to put 
down the money now, even though it was 
made clear to them, that the maturity and 
scan quality of the scanner is not ready yet.
“We need it operational and quickly.” 
“Then we can go from there”. -Hans Axel 
Kristensen
The full list of potential customers can be 
seen in the appendix A.2.
OSH Offerings
From the customer mapping, the team 
mapped out what OSH offerings the early 
innovators, early adopters and the main­
stream market are interested in, and which 
early innovators might be willing to contrib­
ute to which offerings.
Students
Customer
Makers
Customer
Maker
space
Customer
Recycling
startups
Customer
Recycling 
community
Customer
Cleanup 
initiatives
Customer
Closed 
loop 
recycling
Customer
Prodduct 
developer
Customer
Logistics 
operator
Customer
Quality 
management
Customer
Plastic 
Recyclers
Customer
For fun & 
interest 
(mostly)
Customer
To 
develop
Customer
To use
Customer
3.2 Customer mapping over time
==PAGE:32==
32
Development__
Discover__
Offering
Channels and Partners
Customer / Users
Plastic
Scanner
People
Corporate 
customer
Organisation
YouTube
Channel
User 
Community
Customer
Website
Channel
Github
Channel
Progress
Community
building
Open-Source Element
Documentation
Open-Source Element
EU 
harbours
Organisation
Plastix
Organisation
Webshop
Channel
Scanner 
assembly
(Oﬀ the shelf)
Open-Source Element
Scanner 
assembly
(Oﬀ the shelf)
Open-Source Element
Breakout
board
Open-Source Element
Development 
commits, fast 
feedback, 
specialized 
knowledge
Revenue
Revenue
Revenue
to plastic
scanner
Manufacturing
Distribution
Manufacturing
Distribution
Manufacturing
Distribution
Community
Community
building
Open-Source Element
Fast 
feeback
Time & 
eﬀort
Manufacturing
help
Initial 
ﬁnding?
Developing 
community
Organisation
Electronic
hobbyist
Customer
Online 
maker 
community
Organisation
Students
Organisation
Electronic
hobbyist
Customer
Online 
maker 
community
Organisation
Students
Organisation
Depending on the role
they choose to play
Discord
Channel
General 
public
Organisation
Community
Time & 
eﬀort
Compelling 
information
Open-Source Element
Good 
documentation
Open-Source Element
Low barrier
of entry
High 
replicability
3.4 Ecosystem mapping
In figure 3.3 main OSH offerings are mapped 
for the early innovators as being a develop­
ment board, good documentation and a 
community.
Offering
It was found that the development board is 
an offer directed at makers, students, and 
maker spaces. It is a tool to break down the 
barrier of entry, by making it something you 
can buy and tinker with, just like a tempera­
ture sensor or 8-digit screen off Sparkfun.
com. It will enable the PlasticScanner proj­
ect to make an educational kit, with guides, 
tasks, and ideas for further development.
Infrastructure
To get the offering out to the customers, 
infrastructure is needed. Here the commu­
nity is again a key factor, which the project 
revolves around. By creating an indepen­
dent sales channel or using an existing ex­
ternal one, the PlasticScanner project make 
it possible to get hands on the board and 
get information on how to use it via online 
documentation on the website and GitHub 
repository.
Value exchange
To have a populated development board 
that works, would cost resources for devel­
opment, manufacturing, marketing, and 
distribution. But it will make the barrier of 
entry a lot lower, and thereby make the 
technology more accessible. It will make it 
easier to attract heavy contributors within 
software and data analysis, when electron­
ics is not a necessary skill to master to 
make a board. Furthermore, it will become 
easier to just buy the board and implement 
it in other use cases, but in any case, gen­
erate sales revenue for the PlasticScanner 
project.
2. Which Early Innovator might 
contribute to that offering?
1. What is an open- source element with 
your offering?
3. Channels for Exchange
What channels (virtual & physical) might 
you use for your offering?
6. How you benefit
How do you and your offering benefit 
from customers contributions?
7. Revenue Extraction 
What income- source could these 
contributions enable?
4. Possible collaborators
Who might you need to collaborate with 
in order to establish  interaction 
between you and your customer?
5. Possible Investment
What do you have to invest to encourage 
community participation?
Development
board
Open-Source Element
Website
Channel
Pay for 
development
Faster 
development
Revenue
from 
sales
WHAT IS OS AND FOR WHO?
INFRASTRUCTURE
VALUE EXCHANGE
1. What is open- source with your 
offering?
Write down one or more elements in your 
offering that you wish to open- source.
3. Channels for Exchange
What channels (virtual & physical) might 
you use for your offering?
6. How you benefit
How do you benefit from your customers 
contributions to your offering?
7. Revenue Extraction 
What income- source could these 
contributions enable?
4. Possible collaborators
Who might you need to collaborate with 
in order to establish  interaction 
between you and your customer?
5. Possible Investment
What do you have to invest to encourage 
community participation?
Good 
documentation
Open-Source Element
Time to
develop
1. What is open- source with your 
offering?
Write down one or more elements in your 
offering that you wish to open- source.
2. Which Early Innovator might 
contribute to your offering?
3. Channels for Exchange
What channels (virtual & physical) might 
you use for your offering?
6. How you benefit
How do you benefit from your customers 
contributions to your offering?
7. Revenue Extraction 
What income- source could these 
contributions enable?
4. Possible collaborators
Who might you need to collaborate with 
in order to establish  interaction 
between you and your customer?
5. Possible Investment
What do you have to invest to encourage 
community participation?
Partially 
inhabited 
Development
board
Open-Source Element
2. Which Early Innovator might 
contribute to your offering?
1. What is open- source with your 
offering?
Write down one or more elements in your 
offering that you wish to open- source.
2. Which Early Innovator might 
contribute to your offering?
3. Channels for Exchange
What channels (virtual & physical) might 
you use for your offering?
6. How you benefit
How do you benefit from your customers 
contributions to your offering?
7. Revenue Extraction 
What income- source could these 
contributions enable?
4. Possible collaborators
Who might you need to collaborate with 
in order to establish  interaction 
between you and your customer?
5. Possible Investment
What do you have to invest to encourage 
community participation?
Development
community
Open-Source Element
Students
Customer
Makers
CustomerMaker
space
Customer
Students
Customer
Makers
CustomerMaker
space
Customer
Students
Customer
Makers
Customer
Students
Customer
Makers
Customer
Webshop 
(Internal or 
External)
Channel
Github
Channel
Discord
Channel
Manufacturing
Organisation
Sparkfun
/adafruit
Organisation
Dev. 
Community
Organisation
Marketing
challenge
Organisation
Sparkfun
/adafruit
Organisation
Online 
makers
Organisation
Random 
nerd 
tutorials
Organisation
Maker 
YouTubers
Organisation
Time/work
to Spread 
the word
Manufacturing
Distribution
Instant 
feedback
Promotion
Github
Channel
Discord
Channel
Dev. 
Community
Organisation
Online 
makers
Organisation
Random 
nerd 
tutorials
Organisation
Maker 
YouTubers
Organisation
Website
Channel
Pay for 
development
Faster 
development
Revenue
from 
sales
Webshop 
(Internal or 
External)
Channel
Github
Channel
Discord
Channel
Manufacturing
Organisation
Sparkfun
/adafruit
Organisation
Dev. 
Community
Organisation
Marketing
challenge
Organisation
Sparkfun
/adafruit
Organisation
Online 
makers
Organisation
Random 
nerd 
tutorials
Organisation
Maker 
YouTubers
Organisation
Time/work
to Spread 
the word
Manufacturing
Distribution
Instant 
feedback
Promotion
Github
Channel
Discord
Channel
Dev. 
Community
Organisation
Online 
makers
Organisation
Random 
nerd 
tutorials
Organisation
Maker 
YouTubers
Organisation
Time to
develop
Faster 
development
Instant 
feedback
Faster 
development
Instant 
feedback
3.3 Ecosystem building
==PAGE:33==
33
Ecosystem mapping
The team mapped the various offerings, 
partners, channels, and customers in an 
ecosystem map, which can be seen in fig­
ure 3.4. Here it becomes clear, that the dis­
cord and GitHub channels are the main val­
ue creators for the developer community, 
but the YouTube channel and website are 
what attracts the public into our ecosys­
tem, from where good documentation and 
community knowledge can lower the barri­
er of entry from going from the public, to 
the user community and then to the devel­
oper community.
The sale of scanner PCB’s online is a key 
channel to bring in revenue for the project. 
By initially selling development boards to 
the community, the PlasticScanner project 
can drastically lower the barrier of entry, 
and help the community to grow. When the 
scan unit matures over time, the natural ex­
pansion is to off-the-shelf scanners with 
support and potentially custom enterprise 
products as well. Here Plastix can be a main 
partner, making the connection to EU har­
bours who are required by EU law to per­
form rough sorting in 2025[58].
3.3.5	
User journey
The OSH ecosystem mapping indicated 
two key user types. The commercial users 
and the community. In this section, the 
team will further explore how the users act, 
what their needs are and how a PlasticS­
canner can address those needs.
Small scale, specific source 
recycler
User journey: Plastix
An example of a commercial user is Plastix. 
They not only sort plastic post consumer 
waste, but also manufacture new material 
from the waste. An important part of Plas­
tix’ operation is the rough sorting performed 
of newly received material [61]. This rough 
sorting is a key area, where better process 
can improve the experience for Plastix, as 
they are limited by their current scanning 
solution. The scanning steps in the rough 
sorting task are highlighted on the user 
journey map on figure 3.5
Plastix face multiple challenges with their 
current scanner used in the rough sorting 
process. Firstly, new users have to receive 
training in using the device. While the mi­
croPHAZIR scanner is simple to use when 
the correct scanning mode has been se­
lected, the path to getting there is not intu­
itive. It involves a login system, instructing 
the lamp to heat up, and selecting the spe­
cific scan mode the user wants to use. The 
steps are visualised on figure 3.6.
The current scanner experience and use is 
overall slow or unresponsive. Not only does 
it take a long time to boot and warm up the 
scanner, but the user experience when 
navigating and awaiting scan results can 
also be experienced as unresponsive[58]. 
Amplifying the challenge is the very high 
Supplier contacts Plastix to 
sell nets. Supplier and 
Plastix discuss circularity.
Material is transported to 
Plastix.
The material is inspected and 
registered.
The material is fractioned and 
a rough cleaning is done.
Fractioning is performed 
through a combination of 
scanning, visual inspection 
and employee experience.
Sort the plastic by type and 
colour.
Take small samples for 
laboratory testing.
Chop up material.
Wash, dry and separate fibers.
Extrude new material.
The exact combination of 
fibers are determined based on 
proprietary knowledge and lab 
data.
Any further automated 
sorting is kept as a trade 
secret, but Plastix is 
working with Aalborg 
University to implement 
Terahertz cameras.
Plastix would love 
if suppliers could 
tell them the 
material ahead of 
time.
Current intervention
point
Future business case
User journey - Plastix full cycle
3.5 User journey map for key activities at Plastix
Boot microPHAZIR scanner.
Log in with username and 
password.
Wait for the tungsten lamp to 
heat up (up to 12 minutes).
Isolate one fiber type from 
the rope if it consist of a 
mix of fibers.
Place the sample against the 
scanner, making sure to conver 
the scanning surface.
Activate the scanner.
Wait for the scanner to 
process the results (~10 
seconds).
Read result.
Repeat for the remaining fiber 
types in the rope.
Navigate to the desired 
scanning mode and comparison 
data set.
User journey - solution space
3.6 User journey map for Plastix identification process 
==PAGE:34==
34
Development__
Discover__
price of the scanner, thereby limiting how 
many employees can effectively sort mate­
rial at the same time. New sorting employ­
ees are more likely to need the scanner of­
ten, as they might not have the plastic fibre 
experience necessary to identify through a 
combination of experience, visual inspec­
tion and the feel of the fibres. And even ex­
perienced sorting employees often use the 
scanner regardless to ensure their sorting 
is correct [58].
Importantly, if Plastix could move the ma­
jority of the plastic identification from in-
house after receiving the material to be 
done by the supplier, Plastix could benefit 
from increased flexibility with the additional 
knowledge of material expected to be de­
livered. It would allow Plastix to better pre­
dict future deliveries and thereby better 
plan production. While it would require the 
suppliers to perform a rough sorting, a sys­
tem for documentation and checks be­
tween the source and Plastix would still 
need to be developed, to ensure that the 
plastic documented is also the plastic that 
is sent and received.
During the team’s visit to Plastix, they ex­
pressed an interest in incorporating the 
PlasticScanner themselves, but were also 
prepared to require their suppliers to use 
the PlasticScanner devices: “We could go 
out and support you by requiring our sup­
pliers to use this, easily” -Hans Axel Kris­
tensen[58].
The need for an early identification method 
is also noted by the recycler BessTrade, 
who require potential suppliers to ship a 
sample to them for analysis before receiv­
ing any more material. If BessTrade or Plas­
tix end up receiving another material than 
they were expecting, they essentially end 
up with waste they now have to find a way 
to dispose of.
These challenges are key areas where the 
PlasticScanner function as a remedy, by 
significantly reducing the time it takes from 
picking up the scanner, until the first results 
are displayed to the user. An affordable 
scanner would furthermore offer Plastix 
more flexibility, by simply allowing them to 
purchase additional scanners and thereby 
equipping more employees with scanners 
for reduced overhead in picking up the 
scanner and rotating between users.
User journey: Individuals
There are multiple individuals in various in­
dustries and situations who need to identi­
fy the type of plastic more occasionally. 
Currently, if a part is not labelled with the 
plastic type, the individual needs to per­
form a series of tests, including a float test 
and burn test to attempt to identify the ma­
terial [62]. By considering the user journey 
for identifying a polymer and applying the 
knowledge to the required area, as seen on 
figure 3.7 , it becomes clear that the need 
to identify a polymer can quickly block a 
specific process, leaving the individual 
without a solution. Instead of relying on ex­
tensive polymer experience or complicated 
identification flowchart processes, the 
PlasticScanner allows these users to quick­
ly and confidently identify the plastic type.
Easy and cheap polymer identification 
opens up the user journey for more possi­
bilities for the individuals, allowing them to 
further develop their business or innovate 
new areas.
Makers and home users
Engineers - e.g. product 
development
Plastic startup companies
Identify or sort low to low- 
medium quantities of plastic.
Sort, learn or select small 
quantities of plastic.
Review receives samples, 
analyze competitors or sort 
items.
Look for identifying labeling.
Read product or material data 
sheet.
Discard / dispose the item.
No ID
Potential identiﬁcation 
methods at disposal
Individual task
Contact manufacturer.
Melting, floating and burn 
tests.
No ID
No ID
No ID
Apply gained knowledge in use 
case.
Feel and visual 
identification.
No ID
User journey - individual users
3.7 User journey for individuals needing to identify plastic
==PAGE:35==
35
3.3.6	
User needs
To understand the user of a proposed 
handheld scanner, a persona, or user defi­
nition, has been developed. As mentioned 
in section 3.3.5, the user of an open source 
handheld scanner can take two forms. A 
professional person, and a private person. 
The two personas are based on the teams’ 
interaction with Plastix, BessTrade, other 
professionals and the interactions with the 
online community of PlasticScanner.
User A: A sorting professional
The user A is a sorting professional at an 
industrial resource facility.
Needs:
The user needs to identify the polymer in 
order to determine if the material can be 
used, and in the case of a possible use – 
how to handle the material.
Pains:
The user is lacking knowledge on what the 
type of polymer a given object is made of. 
The user want to obtain that knowledge 
because it enables the user to determine 
how to best utilise the material, and create 
as much value as possible for the company.
The barrier currently holding the user back 
from obtaining this knowledge is access to 
utilities, which are limited due to size and 
high price, which is not to allocated by the 
company for the user’s tasks.
The product needs to make a shift from 
making plastic identification inaccessible to 
being a natural part of the user’s routine.
User B: An individual maker.
The user B is a hobby maker. The user is 
interested in tinkering and programming of 
electronics, and finds the topic of solving 
environmental problems with technology 
interesting.
Needs:
The user need is not as present as the need 
of the professionals. The user needs are re­
lated to the interaction with the project, 
here the user need clear documentation, an 
overview of what to do and how to replicate 
the project. Furthermore, the user values 
an active community, where their opinions 
are heard.
Pains:
The user has previous experience with 
faulty or missing documentation. The user 
finds the barrier of entry high, due to the 
high cost and complexity of the project.
3.4	
Define
In this section the findings of the discover 
phase, is processed, weighed and sought 
narrowed down to a clearly stated problem 
and a possible business case for a plastic 
scanner concept, to be developed in the 
next diamond (development and deliver).
3.4.1	
Problem defini­
tion
With the current market of industrial sorting 
machines already using NIR spectroscopy 
with more advanced InGaAs image sensors, 
and combinations of NIR and MIR spectrum 
sensors, the assumption of the team is that 
the production volume of scanners for au­
tomated sorting facilities is rather low, and 
high precision and flow is required. MEMS 
sensors or variable filters have the benefit 
of enableling a single sensor, to filter out 
specific wavelengths, where a typical In­
GaAs sensor or image sensors let all infra­
red light within the specific spectrum, and 
the source or filter therefore need to be put 
in place to enable measurement of a single 
wavelength.
The current technology of the PlasticScan­
ner Project is an ultra-low-cost discrete 
multivariate NIR spectroscopy, which utilis­
es only off-the-shelf components. To ob­
tain low noise reading with a high light in­
tensity within the NIR waveband, it is 
necessary to get the sensor and emitting 
LED as close as possible to the subject as 
==PAGE:36==
36
Development__
Define__
possible and block environment light as 
much as possible [38]. This requires the 
scanner to be physically moved to within 
1 cm of the subject, and have a solution for 
environment light blocking. To scale up the 
PlasticScanner technology, to a fully auto­
mated setup, one would need to find a 
solution for identifying surfaces, moving 
the scanner and afterwards moving the 
subject based on the scan results. The 
team does not consider the existing tech­
nology of the PlasticScanner project to be 
competitive within the scope of in-line au­
tomated plastic sorting described in sec­
tion 3.3.1 The sourcing of hardware of 
MEMS sensors is “on-demand”, with prices 
being presented “on request”, and typically 
with prices for components alone ranging 
from €1000 for a very limited wavelength 
spectrum, and upwards if the spectrum 
should match the current 850-1700  nm 
[52]. This makes the project inaccessible 
for an open-source hardware community, 
which does not have the financial capabili­
ties to buy MEMS sensors for several thou­
sand euros, and the barrier of entry is sig­
nificantly raised, even for companies 
pursuing OSH projects, when the start-up 
costs are at the high end. Furthermore, the 
typical application of InGaAs image sensors 
seem to be focused on broad spectrum 
measurements, e.g. the sum of sensor re­
sponse across the sensor spectrum, or in 
combination with a specific wavelength fil­
ter [63].
When analysing the user journey of a small-
scale recycler with a focused source such 
as Plastix, it is clear that there is a challenge 
regarding measuring and documenting the 
input quality, which is affecting the effec­
tiveness of the supply chain of input mate­
rial, and the utilisation of the input material 
by Plastix. The current price of the major 
competitor of the Thermo Fisher microP­
HAZIR is astronomical, compared to the 
component prices of the previous work of 
the PlasticScanner project. Users like Plas­
tix and Besstrade have both expressed that 
the price of the current handheld scanners, 
is making handheld scanning inaccessible. 
Furthermore, the current and upcoming 
legislation due to the EU directive on ex­
tended manufacturer responsibility and na­
tional implementations of this requires har­
bours to rough sort all plastic waste, but 
the harbours do not have an input volume 
large enough to sustain an automated set­
up [49], [55]. A handheld scanner for rough 
sorting would enable them to document 
the plastic type, thus enabling them to sell 
the material to plastic recycling plants, who 
in general require the input plastic-type to 
be known, like the largest plastic recycler in 
Denmark, AVL A/S [64].
Based on the findings in the Discover and 
Define sections, the team is of the impres­
sion, that the best application of the exist­
ing technology of the PlasticScanner proj­
ect, is to further develop a price-competitive 
handheld plastic identification tool, that 
aims to make plastic identification accessi­
ble for most applications, with components 
that are accessible for regular consumers.
3.4.2	
Usecases
Based on the problem definition, and the 
findings of the discover section, the intend­
ed use of the handheld scanner has been 
synthesised into two main use cases for a 
handheld scanner to fit into:
The screening process
During the screening process, recycling 
companies have multiple situations where 
they have to determine the type of material. 
The first one is if a sample has shipped to 
the recycler, where the plastic type of the 
sample now has to be verified to be the ex­
pected type. Some samples might contain 
multiple parts, containing multiple types of 
plastic, which all need to be identified.
Secondly, a harbour or other material 
source has to identify the material of an ob­
ject, to be able of communicating the type 
of plastic, to arrange further recycling or 
material handling by a partner company. Fi­
nally, when the product is ready to be recy­
cled, it arrives in large quantities at the re­
cycler. The recycler then need to verify the 
product is as expected and identify poten­
tial additional parts which have been in­
cluded or are mounted to the main parts.
Maker space
The maker space are typically either private 
individuals or smaller institutions interested 
in creating artefacts themselves. Their 
==PAGE:37==
37
plastic often comes from 3D-printed parts, 
samples, or parts purchased with no plastic 
type indicator included.
3.4.3	
Interest from the 
market
While the previous three use cases present 
the main customer segments, there are 
other industries who are interested in utilis­
ing the PlasticScanner. For these compa­
nies, the PlasticScanner presents a value 
proposition to improve various parts of their 
business. From the original open source 
PlasticScanner project, a wide range of 
companies, NGOs, and government institu­
tions have expressed interest in purchasing 
one or more PlasticScanners. In total, 67 
actors from 17 different industries ex­
pressed interest with the majority being 
companies working in the plastic recycling 
industry (36 %), with general recycling (15 
%), NGOs (9 %) and product manufacturers 
(8 %) following. The full breakdown can be 
seen on figure 3.8.
3.4.4	
Requirements
Based on the insights generated during the 
discover phase by talking to potential users 
like Plastix, BessTrade and the online Plas­
ticScanner OSH community, a list of re­
quirements was put together for the Plas­
ticScanner. The requirements are ranked in 
importance from 1-5 for the scanner and 
categorised by area and topic. The require­
ment areas are: Electronics, software, 
physical design, business model, user ex­
perience and documentation. Some of the 
most critical requirements are now present­
ed, with the full list of in appendix A.5.
Requirement no. 1: Can identify the 
5 types of plastic with 90% accuracy 
when scanning virgin materials with a 
cross-section larger than 30 mm.
For the scanner to have a use case, it needs 
to enable the user to identify at least the 
five most common types op plastic. For 
makers, adding the typically FDM printer fil­
ament materials PLA, PETG and ABS, would 
be a great market opener for maker spaces 
as well, but it is not relevant for commercial 
customers.
Requirement no. 34: The product should 
enable use with gloves.
This requirement fits the use case of rough 
sorting on location, for example at har­
bours, BessTrade or Plastix all require the 
user so be able to use gloves, which are 
commonly used by sorting workers.
Requirement no. 16: The product should 
have a RRP lower than €2000.
The price tag is in the low end for a com­
mercial customer, but for a maker space or 
developer, it is a high price to pay. To aim 
for a retail price of €2000 before VAT, is 
forcing the development process to be cost 
aware, which should help make sure the 
product finds a reasonable price. The price 
is a balance of precision and price, but in­
creasing the retail price, would mean loos­
ing non-commercial customers. Additional­
ly, ensuring a low hardware manufacturing 
cost would allow PlasticScanner to offer an 
affordable development kit.
Requirement no. 44: The product should 
be easily recyclable by avoiding glue 
or permanent joining of components of 
different materials.
To have a product which goal is to fight the 
current plastic problems, also requires the 
design of the product itself to be designed 
for recycling. This means prioritising solu­
tions without adhesives, thermosets and 
permanent joining of different materials like 
two-cavity injection moulding.
Other
1,5%
E-waste recycling
3,0%
Education
7,6%
Product manufacturer
7,6%
NGO
9,1%
General recycling
15,2%
University
1,5%
Ocean plastic
4,5%
Plastic recycling
36,4%
Recycling intitute
1,5%
Plastic production
3,0%
Interested companies by industry
3.8 Companies interested in the PlasticScanner by industry. 
==PAGE:38==
38
Development__
Define__
3.4.5	
Business model
Going open source is typically something 
that makes investors turn your project 
down[65]. In recent years, companies like 
Arduino have managed to achieve series B 
investments while staying open [66]. In this 
subsection, it is described how a business 
model can be designed to fit the OSH Plas­
ticScanner ecosystem.
3 main strategies has been identified for 
moving forward:
	‐
Full open-source
	‐
Royalty-based manufacturing
	‐
Full value chain in-house
Full open source
The first option is to keep the PlasticScan­
ner as a purely open source communi­
ty-driven project. This way, anyone who 
wants a PlasticScanner would have to ei­
ther manufacture the necessary parts, both 
in terms of the plastic shell and the elec­
tronic PCBs. This requires knowledge in 
several fields, everything from 3D printing, 
PCBs, soldering, assembling, loading firm­
ware and so on. This creates a high barrier 
of entry to creating a functional Plastic 
Scanner.
The project would rely on grants and dona­
tions to cover expenses for future develop­
ment, however, this would not guarantee 
stable and consistent future development, 
as the project remains a community-driven 
project. This means the project could be 
seen as vulnerable by companies, poten­
tially making companies hesitant to invest 
the time and resources into getting the 
PlasticScanner made. On the other hand, if 
a company has the necessary resources, 
the company can simply fork (create their 
version) the project and ensure future de­
velopment for their needs. This business 
model essentially leaves all primary activi­
ties and all supporting activities but com­
munity management and technology devel­
opment to be grabbed by another party.
Royalty based manufacturing
The core of the PlasticScanner project is 
the community and data analysis for poly­
mer identification. Therefore, it could make 
sense to outsource the hardware manufac­
turing and distribution to an external part­
ner like Sparkfun or Adafruit. In this ar­
rangement, the PlasticScanner project 
would send production files to the partner, 
and the partner handles manufacturing, lo­
gistics and distribution via their existing 
platform.
Building upon the full open source business 
model, the PlasticScanner project could 
choose to corporate with a manufacturer in 
a royalty-based agreement, where the 
manufacturer would be responsible for all 
primary value chain activities and support 
activities such as procurement and infra­
structure. Furthermore, the existing plat­
forms will work as a marketing channel for 
the PlasticScanner project, because the 
breakout board is placed where makers find 
inspiration and hardware components for 
potential projects.
The Royalty based model gives the advan­
tage that the PlasticScanner project gets 
the revenue from sales without the cost of 
a production batch before sales. Partners 
like Adafruit and SparkFun are great options 
for breakout boards, which both companies 
specialise in. For sale of the full commercial 
handheld product, the project will either 
need to partner with an existing channel for 
selling products, or create a PlasticScanner 
webshop, to better targets commercial 
customers.
Full value chain in-house
The last option is to have the full value chain 
in-house, meaning that the PlasticScanner 
project handles the manufacturing, logis­
tics and distribution of the scanners, and 
has full control of the whole value chain. 
This has the advantage that the project has 
full control of the hardware and distribu­
tion, and receives the full revenue. Having a 
self-hosted webshop will make it easier to 
handle the distribution and support for the 
off-the-shelf handheld scanner. On the 
other side, this strategy will introduce high­
er costs related to hosting, manufacturing 
investments, and possibly higher shipping 
prices compared to higher volume web­
shops, and the project would need to find 
marketing channels to drive customers into 
the PlasticScanner project. Furthermore, 
the PlasicScanner project will need to han­
dle customer service, warranty etc.
==PAGE:39==
39
Proposed business model
A business model canvas is used to sum­
marise the proposed business model for 
the PlasticScanner as a company (Figure 
3.9). The key partners are especially the 
community and recycling companies such 
as Plastix or BessTrade. Key activities and 
key resources focus around data science, 
product development and community man­
agement. In terms of key propositions, the 
PlasticScanner main focus is a very com­
petitive price, great user experience and 
flexible solution. The PlasticScanner com­
pany communications and customer rela­
tions are split in two to best fit the commu­
nity 
and 
the 
commercial 
customers. 
Community communications are mainly 
through wider forums, chats and online 
workshops. Company customers are com­
municated with through more direct com­
munications and occasional customer vis­
its.
The primary revenue stream is the sale of 
products. Additional revenue will come from 
custom identification model training, online 
services and custom integrations. Associ­
ated expenditures are standard costs of 
development, manufacturing, and opera­
tions. Additional funds are to be spent on 
ensuring the community is cared for through 
hardware for active members and alike.
Community / Partners
Key activities
What are the key steps to 
move ahead to your 
customers?
Cost Structure
How much are you planning to spend
on the product development and
marketing for a certain period?
Key resources
What resources do you need 
to make your idea work?
Key partners
What are your key partners 
to get competitive 
advantage?
Key propositions
How will you make your 
customers' life happier?
Customer relationships
How often will you interact 
with your customers?
Channels
How are you going to reach 
your customers?
Customer segments
Who are your customers? 
Describe your target 
audience in a couple of 
words.
Revenue Streams
How much are you planning
to earn in a certain period?
Compare your costs and revenues.
Occasional
on- site 
visits
Github
Businesses 
creating 
value of 
plastic waste
Plastix
PlasticScanner 
dev members
Product 
development 
and supporting 
community devs
Dev 
community 
management
The ML
model
The Business Model Canvas
Reduced 
polymer 
identiﬁcation 
cycletime
Very 
accessible 
product 
(price)
Precious
Plastics
Product 
development
Data 
science
Open source 
product 
ensures 
longevity
Developing 
community
Discord
Often with 
colab. 
partners
Website
Webshop
Collaboration
with 
companies
BessTrade
Development
Community
Excellent 
user 
experience
Great reference 
selection of 
annotated 
plastic samples
Custom 
identiﬁcation 
model 
training
Sale of 
breakout
board
Customer 
integrations
Support
Open and
powerfull 
APIs
API 
calls
Utilize 
community and 
collaborting 
companies for 
marketing
Students and 
makers 
learning about
spectroscopy
Material 
database
Sale of 
scanner
Collaboration
workshop 
and online 
meetings
Commnity
Daily with 
community
online
Rarely with 
"just 
scanner" 
customers
Commercial:
Phone and 
email
3.9 Business Model Canvas 
==PAGE:40==
40
Development__
Develop__
3.5	
Develop
The following section covers the develop­
ment of the scanner. The development can 
be seen as three tracks, which interacts 
with each other, but are mostly running in 
parallel:
	‐
The physical development of the scan­
ner, focusing on aesthetics, design, me­
chanics, and manufacturing.
	‐
The hardware development covers the 
electronics of the product, including the 
scanner module and the controller unit, 
and considerations regarding compo­
nent choice, layout, and design.
	‐
The last track is the software develop­
ment, which covers the firmware con­
trolling the hardware, and a proposed 
first draft of a machine learning model 
for polymer identification.
3.5.1	
Physical devel­
opment
The project builds upon two projects. First­
ly, the original PlasticScanner project that 
aims to explore the functionality of an af­
fordable plastic scanning unit, and second­
ly the industrial design concept of a com­
mercial scanner, as described in the 
introduction. The original project focused 
on functionality, getting the electronics and 
software to work together, and printing val­
ues to a computer for manual processing. 
The industrial design concept focused on 
the industrial design of the exterior, and 
how the product could fit into a commercial 
context. This master thesis project aims to 
combine the hardware and functionality of 
the original project with the industrial de­
sign direction of the commercial project, 
and develop and mature the product as 
close as possible to a readiness level suffi­
cient for pilot production. This section will 
cover the development of the physical and 
mechanical design of the proposed Plas­
ticScanner.
Scope
A major problem with recycling plastics is 
plastic parts with more than one material. 
Multi cavity injection moulding makes it 
possible to have a part of rigid plastic with 
soft rubber features, making the product 
stiff where needed structurally, and soft 
with good grip where needed as well. The 
technology is well-used in consumer prod­
ucts like toothbrushes where a secure and 
firm grip is required, or for adding robust­
ness to products meant for harsh condi­
tions. The use of two cavity injection mould­
ing was a part of the industrial design 
concept from the Delft report as well. The 
downside to the technology is, that it is (al­
most) impossible to recycle, as it can be 
very hard to effectively separate the two 
materials. To have a plastic scanner, made 
for recycling plastic, that cannot be easily 
recycled seems counterintuitive. Further­
more, 3D printing with soft plastics like TPU 
or creating moulds for casting PUR or sili­
cone will increase the difficulty of making a 
plastic scanner at home. Therefore, this 
project aims for using one single material 
for the enclosure.
C (v2)
F (v3)
G (v4)
Back
Prototype 1
Prototype 2
Prototype 4
A
B (v1)
D
E
Prototype 3
Generation 1
Generation 2
Generation 3
Master
Body
Front
Front
Back
Assembly
Assembly
3.10 Overview of the physical design iterations
==PAGE:41==
41
Scanner Shell
The development of the scanner shell is di­
vided into three generations. The goal of 
the first generation was to develop the 
general shape of the scanner. The goal of 
the second generation was to mature and 
tune the physical shape of the scanner, and 
develop a master body for further design. 
The third generation was focused on de­
signing the mechanical design of the in­
sides, based on the master body. An over­
view of the physical design process can be 
seen on figure 3.10. A printed version was 
then used for sketching on top of..
Mood board
Mood boards were used to draw inspiration 
from products, designs and for the scanner. 
This included not only aesthetics, but also 
tactile details, user experiences, features, 
and potential scanner shapes and imple­
mentations. Two mood boards were creat­
ed, as seen on figure 3.11 and 3.12, and later 
used for inspiration and perspective in both 
sketching and initial CAD models.
Sketching
The physical design 
exploration 
started 
before the electron­
ics that should fit in­
side had been de­
signed, thus creating 
the dilemma: How to design for something 
that is not designed yet?
A method called bounding box design, is 
often used in the automotive industry [67], 
and allows the engineering team to set 
rough bounding boxes that the engineers 
and designers agree on, which enables 
both parties to respectively within and 
around those boxes. Therefore, the size 
and shape of key components were identi­
fied for both PCB and controller, and a 
rough 3D assembly containing the models 
were created. Afterwards, printed screen­
shots from various angles as backgrounds 
were used for sketching. This enabled the 
team to take the physical aspects of the 
envisioned components into account from 
the first sketch.
3.13 Overview of design sketches
Feel and sound
3.11 Moodboard 1 
3.14 Component Mockup as underlay for sketching
3.12 Moodboard 2
==PAGE:42==
42
Development__
Develop__
First generation
The goal of the first generation was to test 
if the overall shape of the scanner, present­
ed in the Delft industrial design report 
[68], was still aligning with user needs. 
The scanner presented in the report 
is characterised by a rounded handle 
extending towards a circular scan head 
at the top, containing the scanner and 
screen (see figure 3.15). The full evalu­
ation of the Delft design is attatched 
as Appendix A.25.
To test whether the overall design 
concept was fitting the user needs, a 
series of alternative design concepts 
was developed and tested with users. 
These designs are shown on figure 3.16.
User test setup
The tests have been set up as semi-struc­
tured tests, based on the semi structured 
interview method, utilising the think aloud 
protocol (see section 2.2.2). The test per­
son is first given the model being tested, 
without being explained how the product is 
intended to be used, in order to get the test 
subjects’ intuitive idea of how the product 
is meant to be used. After asking for the im­
mediate experience holding the unit, the 
interviewee was explained the functionality 
and intended use of the product. After­
wards, the interviewee was asked to try 
scanning a small object both standing by a 
table and sitting, to give the interviewee an 
idea of the experience of the intended con­
text. Lastly, the interviewee is questioned 
about their experience both standing and 
sitting and their general idea of the prod­
uct. The relatively open structure of the in­
terview/test is intended to enable the con­
versation to flow freely and to follow insights 
given by the interviewee. This helps the 
interviewer to better understand the rea­
soning of the interviewee’s answers, in­
stead of following a strict interview guide 
that might not give the right insights to un­
derstand the whole picture. The downside 
of the interview strategy is, that it makes it 
hard to replicate the insights from the open 
part of the interview.
Finally, the interviewee is asked to rate how 
comfortable the scanner is to hold and use, 
followed by how good their grip of the de­
vice is, both on a scale from 0-10, where 0 
is bad and 10 is great. The scoring builds 
upon the Net Promoter Score method to 
quantify the interviewee’s satisfaction with 
the product (see section 2.2.3 for more 
info).
Learnings from the first generation
Based on our tests, concept c obtained an 
NPS score of 65, whereas the other con­
cepts scored significantly lower, obtaining 
an average of about -40 across comfort 
and grip.
The overall comments and learnings from 
the first generation of prototypes indicate 
that the round scan head should be angled, 
but only with an angle of 10–20 degrees 
away from the user making the scan area 
easier to target, while also tilting the screen 
towards the user, making it easier to see. 
Furthermore, the interviews indicate that 
the handle shape should have a flat surface 
for the thumb and a curved face for the re­
maining fingers to comfortably grip around. 
The full testing notes can be seen in ap­
pendix A.8.
A
B
C
D
-50
0
50
Net Promoter Score (NPS)
Comfort
Grip security
3.17 First generation test
A
B
D
E
3.16 Overview of the first generation designs
3.15 Scanner concept from Delft
==PAGE:43==
43
Second generation
Goals for the second generation
The intention of the second generation is to 
further ideate and develop a design of the 
physical shell, based on the insights from 
the first generation. The goal is to have de­
tailed learnings regarding the outside shell 
based on tests, which a master shape for 
future development can be based on.
Design possibilities
Building upon the design of concept c, a 
set of adjustments have been made to 
shape of the Angled scanner v3 (on figure 
3.18). The angle between the screen face 
and handle axis has been reduced to 12 de­
grees, based on the typical angle between 
the grip line and the wrist axis of the human 
body [30], thus matching the natural grip 
angle and making the screen more com­
fortable to look at. The Angled scanner v3 
(figure 3.18) introduced a more rounded 
cross-section than v2. The edge from the 
flat top to the curved sides was given a 
larger rounding radius and the circumfer­
ence was reduced. Furthermore, the han­
dle length was increased, to give the same 
good gripping area, with a smooth fade out 
towards the end. Lastly, design v3 was de­
veloped (figure 3.18). The design has a 
shorter handle, and even smother transi­
tion than v3, to explore the effects of mak­
ing the handle as small as possible while 
maintaining space enough for electronics.
Leanings from the second generation
The tests indicate that v3 is significantly 
more comfortable to hold and use than v2. 
The reduced angle from 20 to 12 is improv­
ing the user experience. The cross-subsec­
tion of the handle is slightly too large. The 
tests gave positive feedback on the button 
placement on the flat thumb face, close to 
the screen. The informants mentioned that 
the angle, rounded edges and oval shape 
of v3, are factors giving an overall positive 
response to this design of v3. The infor­
mants found the angle and grip geometry 
nice and found the strain on the wrist joint 
reduced, compared to the non-angled ver­
sions. For the last concept g (v4), the infor­
mants indicated that the shape was a 
slightly too small at the end, making it less 
comfortable and harder to have a secure 
grip of the scanner.
The tests indicated that concepts F (v3) 
and G (v4) have similar comfort, but the 
length and narrowing toward the handle 
end on concept G, gave it a lower score on 
grip security.
Based on the tests results (see figure 3.19), 
it is seen that the new concepts got a lower 
NPS score than the concept C that they 
were based on. Based on the negative 
feedback on the length of concept G and 
edge rounding of concept F, it is suggested 
to decrease edge rounding while keeping 
the radii of the edges above 6 mm for the 
final model, and maintaining a longer pro­
file, but reduce the narrowing towards the 
end, resulting in a circumference of about 
40 mm, at a distance of 190 mm from the 
scan head, compared to the 35 mm in con­
cept G. Finally, it is concluded that the but­
ton size and placement are intuitive and 
comfortable for the user.
E
F
G
-40
-20
0
20
40
60
Net Promoter Score (NPS)
Comfort
Grip security
3.19 Second generation test
3.18 Overview of the second generation designs 
==PAGE:44==
44
Development__
Develop__
Third generation: Design for 
manufacturing
The focus of the third generation was to 
decide on the outer perimeter of the scan­
ner, create a parent shell and develop an 
easily manufacturable shell, based on the 
shell model. The scope of the third genera­
tion is therefore a transition from the con­
ceptual and industrial design of the Plas­
ticScanner, to design for manufacturing 
and product realisation.
A parent CAD model was developed in 
SolidWorks, using the “Master Model” (MM) 
Technique, where a part consisting of sur­
face bodies, acts as the parent shape. The 
Master Model in SolidWorks can be seen on 
figure 3.20. The parent is imported to e.g. 
the top and bottom shell, where the de­
tailed design is developed [69], [70]. This 
way of designing the CAD process gives 
the flexibility to change the parent shape, 
and the child models will follow along. The 
key to a good MM setup is to have as basic 
as possible information in the parent, while 
still fully defining the outer perimeter and 
other key design features. The following 
subsection will therefore be divided into 
sections related to the specific design fea­
tures in the third generation and iterations 
thereof.
Mounting features
The goal is to have the components and 
the shells firmly fastened with a minimum 
of manual labour, without making the 
mould overly complicated. In general this 
is obtained by using as few screws as 
possible and by using in-mould features 
instead of manual assembly. The various 
considerations for placement and mount­
ing of the different components are now 
discussed.
Scanner PCB
The custom PCB design of the team made 
it possible to shape the PCB into an ideal 
shape for the PlasticScanner shell. After 
several iterations, the simplest design was 
developed using two screws, and three 
platforms guiding the PCB into place in the 
Z direction. Two parallel platforms also 
guide the PCB into place, with the two 
screws locking the remaining directions. A 
design with four holes in the PCB (instead 
of the final two holes), where two were for 
screws, and two were for a pin-hole align­
ment has also been tested. The physical 
size of the PCB made it a challenge to 
palace the holes in the electronics design, 
where it was optimal for the mechanical 
design. Furthermore, the mechanical 
design of very thin pin towers (ø2mm, 
h25mm) was conflicting with good design 
practices for plastic injection moulding. As 
a result, the other design was chosen.
An easy way to remove undercuts, is to 
make a hole below the undercut surface 
(See figure 3.22-2), making it possible to 
expand the mould to fill the space and 
thus avoid the undercut. Because the 
scanner should be environmentally sealed 
to align with requirements, it is not possi­
ble to remove undercuts by creating a hole 
to fill the undercut with mould material 
from the opposite side.
Therefore, a snap-fit to hold the PCB down 
would result in multiple inserts or holes 
and therefore drive mould costs up. In­
stead, self-tapping screws for fastening of 
the scan PCB seem to 
be the easiest 
solution, 
despite 
extra 
running 
costs for 
screws 
and manu­
al labour. 
The mount­
ing system 
for the scanner 
3.22 Undercut from snap-fit and possible solution
3.20 A view of the Master Model in SolidWorks
3.21 Close-up of the scanner PCB mount 
==PAGE:45==
45
PCB can be seen 
on figure 3.21, 
with screws.
Screen
The screen is 
an off-the-
shelf compo­
nent, leaving 
little room for 
developing smart 
fastening methods. 
The components come 
with four mounting holes and a rough 
placement of the actual screen glass. A 
solution using the screen module to hold 
the protective glass in place, together with 
a circular indent in the top shell part, was 
developed. The solution was combined 
with an o-ring between the glass and 
enclosure for weather sealing of the as­
sembly, held in place by the screen and 
fastened by self-tapping screws. The 
display mount is showed on figure 3.23 . 
The stacked thickness of the screen and 
glass is only 5mm, which is just too short 
for using the proposed ø2.2mm l6mm 
self-tapping screws. To offset the screw 
interface place, standard spacers on the 
back of the PCB were added, making the 
stacked distance longer, and thereby 
enabling the use of only one type of screw 
throughout the assembly.
Controller PCB
The controller PCB is shaped by the inner 
boundary of the enclosure and the vertical 
placement is dictated by the 
height of the battery 
holder and microcon­
troller. This leaves 
little space left 
for the 
place­
ment of 
the control­
ler PCB. The 
tight space forces 
the screw towers for 
enclosure fastening to go 
through the PCB. Furthermore, 
the USB connector’s gasket at the 
end of the PCB needs to be forced to­
wards the end chassis, in 
order to seal the assem­
bly off. The PCB uses 
the sides of the 
enclosure screw-tow­
er to orient in the x-y 
plane and is guided 
and pushed towards 
the gasket when put 
in place, by two an­
gled towers. Lastly, 
three screws fasten the 
PCB in all directions, 
leaving the long a little over 
constrained, but pushed to­
wards the gasket. As with the screen PCB, 
self-tapping screws can help reduce the 
initial cost for mould design. Alternatively, 
the PCB could mechanically snap into 
place, and use the gasket-enclosure 
interface as a guiding face. Here, the 
undercut holes could be sealed by the 
adhesive for the soft ambient light blocker. 
This option has been depreciated, in order 
to avoid reliance on non-recyclable adhe­
sives.
Shells
The shells are challenging to fasten properly 
as a result of their size, thickness, required 
split line consistency and sealing of the 
internal components from the outside 
environment. Furthermore, the design of 
the fastening has a direct effect on the 
visual and aesthetic of the exterior and 
therefore the perceived quality of the 
product. The first iteration used only 
screws, to keep the initial costs down. This 
resulted in a design with one screw towards 
the USB end, one at the head and two on 
the grip just before the head.
This resulted in a large screw hole on the 
outside of the bottom shell at the head, to 
give room for insertion of a screw to inter­
face the top shell. Furthermore, the screw 
tower took up space on the inside, thus 
forcing a redesign of the scanner PCB. To 
explore other options, the team went to get 
feedback on the design from Guido Tusel­
lo, an injection moulding tool design 
specialist at DTU, who suggested pur­
suing a design with a snap-fit at the 
head replacing a screw, resulting in a more 
even wall thickness in the front, and better 
3.23 Close-up view of the display mount
3.24 Rendering of screw in front
==PAGE:46==
46
Development__
Develop__
aesthetics of the exterior overall, without 
excessively adding complexity. Based on 
this recommendation, a snap-fit solution 
was designed. To guide the shells into the 
correct position, a boss around the indent­
ed screw tower on the lower part was cre­
ated. This makes the screw tower of the 
top part fit into an indent at the lower part, 
guiding the shells correctly together, and 
positioning the groove-lip seal along the 
edge of the shells. This could also have 
been obtained by creating guide pins and 
corresponding guide holes. This would 
have added at least two extra features to 
each part. Furthermore, the insides were 
already getting filled up with electronics. 
Combining the screw tower with guide 
holes enabled the team to add guiding fea­
tures without taking away more space from 
the cross-subsection of the x-y plane, and 
making the number of faces with high-im­
pact tolerances low.
Fastening in general
The choice of fastening method in the Plas­
ticScanner is a compromise between fea­
tures that work well for injection moulded 
parts and FDM 3D printed parts. FDM 3D 
printing is commonly done with PLA or 
PETG, which results in a brittle printed 
model, making self-tapping screws hard to 
gain success with. The same goes for snap-
fits, due to the uneven strength (especially 
in the z-direction) of the layered manufac­
turing method of FDM printing. A common 
solution is to use regular bolts instead of 
screws, and design with shorter interfer­
ence in the hole design than one would 
with injection moulded parts or SLS printed 
parts. Another strategy is to use threaded 
inserts, applied with heated tools after 
printing, or pausing prints and adding in 
nuts specifically designed gaps during 
printing. The team experimented with FDM 
printing and threaded inserts with mixed 
results due to the low precision of place­
ment. The advantage of nuts and inserts is 
the longevity of the thread, making it possi­
ble to re-tighten the bolt more times than 
with self-tapping screws. The disadvan­
tage is that it has higher initial and running 
costs financially due to an added part and 
expensive mould. Furthermore, the brass 
inserts increase the environmental footprint 
compared to self-tapping screws, if the 
product is not required to be opened and 
closed many times but only a few. Based on 
the above, the team considers using 
self-tapping screws in combination with a 
single snap-fit to be the best option in bal­
ancing the quality of assembled product 
and costs. To make it possible for makers to 
decide themselves, if they would rather use 
threaded inserts or self-tapping screws, 
the screw tower design is designed para­
metrial, making it easy to adjust the screw 
tower dimensions for specific inserts or 
screws, and upload 3D printable files for 
each solution.
Environmental protection
The intended environment of the PlasticS­
canner can be pictured as a windy and rainy 
day at an industrial fishing harbour on the 
west coast of Denmark. This sets require­
ments for the environmental protection the 
scanner needs to withstand the elements. 
The scanner has five possible points of en­
try for water or dust:
	‐
The seam between the shells
	‐
The screen glass
	‐
The Scanner glass
	‐
The USB
	‐
The button
Sealing of shell seam
The seam between the shells has been 
designed with a groove in the bottom 
shell, for a 1mm o-ring string to be placed 
within, and pushed down in place by a lip 
feature in the top part. The lip is pushed 
down when the screws are tightened and 
the space between the lip and groove is 
designed for the specifications for com­
pression of the o-ring-string. This adds 
flexibility to the tolerance of the seam gap, 
resulting in more relaxed tolerances. 
Furthermore, the shells have screws 
connecting the two parts, which could not 
be placed on the outside of the lip-groove 
feature, therefore a small silicone washer 
is put in place, to seal the screw joint off 
from the inside of the shells. The design 
has been reviewed by Bo Larsen, an 
injection moulding tool designer at DTU, 
who deemed it manufacturable, and 
suggested implementing a deformation rib 
(also called crush-rib) in the shell design. 
==PAGE:47==
47
Close up of USB gasket and hole placement
This would re­
duce the need for 
o-rings or gaskets 
between the 
shells, but it would 
not be possible to en­
sure proper sealing if 
the product has been 
disassembled, and put back 
together. Therefore, it has been 
decided to use traditional gasket solu­
tions for longevity.
Sealing off-the-shelves components
The sealing of the USB and button has 
been managed by choosing components 
with IP-rated seals and technical specifica­
tions on interface design, to ensure IP rat­
ing, which has been followed. The design 
was challenging to implement, because the 
hole for the USB needed to not cause un­
dercuts, and therefore had to be placed in 
the seam between the two shells. This fur­
ther created challenges with creating a 
face for the USB gasket to interface prop­
erly, according to the specifications.
Sealing of glass components
The two pieces of glass protecting the 
screen and NIR LEDs have been sealed by 
an o-ring, as a part of the fastening of the 
component, adding flexibility to the assem­
bly. The potential for using adhesive mate­
rial to fix the pieces of glass in place has 
also been researched. This would make it 
easy to make the design sleeker, and re­
move features in the shell design. A disad­
vantage of adhesives is the negative effect 
on the recallability of the product. The 
screen glass could help as a spacer for the 
screen, while the o-ring is fastened by 
pushing the glass towards the o-ring with 
the screen fastening instead of glue, thus 
making glue unnecessary.
For the scan-led glass, the team has cho­
sen to use adhesives to bond the glass to 
the shells. The development of this specific 
feature has been deprecated by the team, 
due to the PlasticScanner project currently 
undergoing research into the development 
of reflector and optics design for the scan­
ner, which is to be implemented when the 
research is finished.
Selection of manufacturing 
method
With a goal of reaching a production vol­
ume of 500–1000 units (see 3.4.4), the 
chosen manufacturing process need to ful­
fil the requirements, while minimising costs 
as relatively low production volumes. There 
are a number of possible manufacturing 
methods for small plastic enclosures, which 
are compared in the graph on figure 3.25.
Manufacturing method
The estimate of production costs for CNC, 
FDM and SLS print is based on the price to 
make a single set of parts (Top + bottom 
shell). The injection moulding in an SLA 
printed mould is rated for 100 cycles per 
mould, Aluminium mould for 1000 cycles 
and steel moulds for 50.000 cycles. The 
price estimates for FDM are based on a 
model developed by Prusa research, and 
SLS printing is based on a concrete offer 
from a manufacturer. The same goes for 
the two injection moulding price estimates. 
If only 1000pcs of the plastic scanner is 
needed, and the price per piece is adjusted 
to cover the tool cost for the steel mould 
capable of 50k cycles, the price jumps from 
€1,3 to €20,95. CNC tooling and resin-print­
ed mould design seem to be the most ex­
pensive options and are therefore ruled out. 
FDM and SLS printing have the benefit of 
having very low startup costs, but SLS has 
significantly higher running costs – but a 
much better finish, enhancing user experi­
ence. FDM printing seems price competi­
tive if done in-house. If outsourced, the 
price is closing in on SLS print. The product 
finish of FDM printed items are not at level 
CNC
FDM
SLS
IM (SLA)
IM (Alu)
IM (Steel)
0
10
20
30
price pr product in €
Tool
Labour
Material
3.25 Manufacturing estimate
==PAGE:48==
48
Development__
Develop__
with injection moulded parts. SLS printed 
parts have an even and semi-rough finish 
from the powder, which resembles in-mould 
finishes (e.g. SPI D2 or D3 [71]) in consider­
ation for the outside surface of the scanner, 
thus living up to the UX requirements for 
commercial customers. Injection moulding 
in aluminium seems like a viable option, 
which would result in a price from €5,98 to 
€2,94 for a volume of 500 to 1.000 sets of 
parts. If the plastic scanner was more ma­
ture, and the production volume was sur­
passing 5000 units, the steel tools for IM 
would be the better choice. For production 
volumes of less than 100pcs, with require­
ments for aesthetics, SLS is recommended, 
and could be challenged by FDM printing in 
combination with post-processing for bet­
ter finish. For all calculations, sources and 
estimates, see the appendix A.9
Design for Injection moulding
The development of the shell parts took 
advantage of the parent shell of the Master 
model setup only defining the outer faces, 
thus ensuring an even thickness of the ma­
terial, and easy changing of the wall thick­
ness to the specifications of the chosen 
material. All screw towers and stand-off 
walls have been designed to be 0.8x wall 
thickness to minimise sink marks on the 
outside, and are parametrically defined for 
easy adjustment. Furthermore, drafts of 
1-3% has been added on all features from 
the start, ensuring easily removal from the 
mould. Lastly, flow, fill, shrink, and warp 
simulations has been done to validate the 
mouldability of the parts . The simulations 
have been done based on specifications for 
the OceanicX rPP material, and the simula­
tion results are attached in the A.6.
The screw towers will cause minor sink 
marks on the front, which a surface treat­
ment of SPI D-3 should hide sufficiently.
The part does have overhangs at intended 
areas, due to the use of snap-fits at specif­
ic places. These undercuts have received 
feedback from toolmakers, and should not 
be complex to make according to them. 
Furthermore, the team has requested of­
fers for production from three companies, 
all stating that the parts are manufactur­
able at a reasonable complexity.
The technical description of assembly, 
drawings, surface finish and other relevant 
information will be described in the techni­
cal design package of section 3.6.2.
Direction of pull
The angled scan head, turned out to cause 
challenges when designing for injection 
moulding. As shown on figure 3.28, the fas­
tening features had to not cause overhangs, 
and holes and walls therefore needed to be 
parallel with the direction of pull. To have 
the two shells mate together, further re­
quired both shapes to have a direction of 
pull, where the axis of the mounting fea­
tures are parallel.
The design that proved to be the simplest 
solution, was to angle the direction of pull 
to be parallel with the revolve axis of the 
round scan head, as shown on figure 3.29. 
This does have the downside that the cen­
tre axis of the screws fastening the control­
PCB
Skerm
Direction of pull
Screw tower
Guide pin
Challenge
Challenge
3.28 Challanges regarding direction of pull and fastening features
3.27 Mid-cycle image from fill simulation 
3.26 Sink mark analysis of the top shell
==PAGE:49==
49
ler PCB are not perpendicular to the sur­
face of the controller PCB, which can cause 
the PCB to be misaligned while fastening.
Design for 3d print
The open source hardware nature of the 
project, makes it necessary to have a shell 
which can be produced by makers in low 
quantities. Therefore, the CAD design has 
two possible configurations. One for injec­
tion moulding, and one for 3D printing via 
FDM, which has larger holes for replacing 
the self-tapping screws with M2 threaded 
inserts. FDM printing has been used by the 
team for prototyping throughout the proj­
ect, including experimentation with various 
printing alignments, materials and support 
structures, in order to get stable results.
The team found that FDM printing the two 
enclosure parts in one print, with the parts 
standing upright but tilted 12 degrees for­
ward, gives the best results, as it leaves 
only the exterior USB face as a supported 
face. Additionally, the layer direction is op­
timal for using the screw towers for guid­
ance and keeping both the groove and lip 
free of support and layer-seams. This has 
the downside that the scanner is too tall for 
Prusa printers, but fits perfectly in the Ulti­
maker and Creality Ender 3 printers.
A final print has been done with the SLS 
method to obtain a higher fidelity prototype 
of an injection moulded part for verifying 
screw towers and interfaces.
Material selection
The general requirements for the material is 
to be suitable for injection moulding, snap-
fits, self-tapping screws, have good impact 
strength and good resistance to salty envi­
ronments, sunlight, and fuel. Lastly, the 
material should have a fairly low price. The 
general material that all fulfilled these re­
quirements was PP, PE, PVC and ABS, with 
PP having the best score based on [72]. 
The team researched for specific polymers 
to use for injection moulding, and circled 
back to Oceanix rPP from Plastix, which is a 
PP material in the iconic forest green made 
from recycled fishing nets and ropes. Be­
sides fulfilling the general material require­
ments, using the Oceanix rPP will be a sym­
bol of what can be achieved with a 
PlasticScanner, right there in your hand. 
The Oceanix has a slightly higher market 
price than regular PP, but it comes with 
“colourants”, meaning the colour from the 
input of used ropes and nets. For the full 
material selection matrix, see A.6.
3.5.2	
Hardware design
To enable the industrial design of the scan­
ner to have working plastic identification 
electronics inside, the team has developed 
two pieces of electronics, based on previ­
ous work of the PlasticScanner community. 
This section describes the work, challeng­
es, and solutions developed for the pro­
posed PlasticScanner.
Modular design
One of the great successes of open source 
hardware is the world of breakout boards. 
The breakout boards are PCBs designed 
with a specific purpose, with clear contact 
labelling and documentation, extending the 
functionality of a microcontroller. Compa­
nies like Adafruit and SparkFun have made 
a business out of designing and selling 
open source breakout boards and creating 
ecosystems that lower the bar of entry into 
making prototyping and tinkering accessi­
ble to more people. The idea is that the 
user buys a breakout board that can e.g. 
measure temperature or show information 
on an OLED screen and control it with what­
ever microcontroller the user has already. 
Furthermore, the user can combine various 
PCB
Screw tower
Rubber ring
Direction of pull
Guide pin
PCB
3.29 Proposed direction of pull and fastening features
==PAGE:50==
50
Development__
Develop__
breakout boards to design custom setups 
that fit a specific purpose, without design­
ing a new PCB from scratch. An example of 
these breakout boards in use can be seen 
on figure 3.30, where multiple breakout 
boards are connected to a microcontroller.
From a systems point of view, the modular­
ity can enhance the robustness of a design, 
by separating the functionality into physi­
cally separated boards, thus enabling sep­
arate development timelines and versioning 
frequency of the boards, and thus help mit­
igate the risk of PCB’s with design flaws. 
For example, it would be possible to keep 
the scanner PCB, but change the design of 
a battery management system for the mi­
crocontroller, if a design flaw was discov­
ered or a better design was developed for a 
new generation. In a complete scanner, the 
modular design could enable the customer 
to upgrade or repair part of their scanner, 
thereby offering additional value.
Furthermore, it would enable the PlasticS­
canner project to sell the scanner as a 
breakout board with the bare minimum of 
components, have the computing, control 
and connectivity functionality located on a 
board made for the handheld scanner and 
have another for desktop use. The disad­
vantage of a modular design is that more 
fastening is needed, which drives costs, 
and cabling between boards needs to with­
stand general use, and cables and connec­
tors are an extra cost as well. Lastly, main­
taining multiple PCBs require more logistics 
and handling than a single PCB, and the 
cost of two PCBs might be higher than one, 
even though the surface area is the same.
Based on the argumentation above and 
discussions with the OSH community via 
discord, the team decided to try to design a 
small round PlasticScanner PCB, that could 
fit into a number of applications. Several 
users on the discord server of the PlasticS­
canner community argue that a small break­
out board would make it easier for them to 
start prototyping scan setups and that a 
breakout board might be a better OSH 
product for a lot of makers, than a handheld 
scanner.
Scanner PCB
The idea of a dedicated scanner PCB is to 
have a small PCB, containing the IR LEDs, 
the InGaAs sensor, an Analogue to Digital 
Converter (ADC) for reading measure­
ments, and a connector to communicate 
with a controller. Reducing the form factor 
would give the physical design greater 
freedom in placing the scan PCB within the 
scan head. Furthermore, the existing de­
sign used different protocols for the ADC, 
screen and LED driver, which was causing 
problems with the amount of physical pins 
needed, and several smaller design flaws 
which the new compact modular design 
aim to solve.
The original LED and sensor setup was 
kept, to align the data output with the ex­
isting scanners and build on a verified con­
figuration. The choices of the surrounding 
components were reevaluated. Further­
more, there had been discussions in the 
PlasticScanner OS community of a colour 
sensor that could help enhance the scan 
results by adjusting for the colour of the 
material, and a colour sensor was therefore 
implemented as a test. More detailed infor­
mation on the various improvements and 
design considerations are covered below.
Sensor reading
The previously used ADC ADS1256 was 
causing problems when using other con­
trollers than an Arduino UNO, was not well 
documented and used SPI instead of I2C. 
The routing design additionally had a flaw 
3.30 Example of daisy-chaining via Qwiic I2C 
==PAGE:51==
51
that blocked all other SPI communication 
by populating the CS wire. SPI is character­
ised by a dedicated Chip-Select (CS) wire 
used for initiating communication to and 
from the controller to the peripherals via 
the two wires CIPO and COPI combined 
with a clock on SCL, resulting in the number 
of wires being 3 + ncomponents. This means 
that for each component using SPI, a dedi­
cated CS attached pin would be required 
on the controller board. The LED driver al­
ready used I2C, which uses a hardware ad­
dress instead of a dedicated physical wire 
to address components, allowing for multi­
ple components on the same wires. As a 
result, the number of components would 
not affect the number of wires, as long as 
they have different addresses. Therefore, 
the team searched for a well-documented 
ADC with a similar resolution of 24bit, and 
found that both Adafruit and Sparkfun sell a 
breakout board with a NAU7802 ADC con­
trolled via I2C. The chip is widely used 
commercially for kitchen scales, and there 
are numerous OSH projects using the chip 
for weight-related applications.
Both Adafruit and Sparkfun distribute all 
documentation as open source, allowing for 
easy prototyping and testing of the setup 
with their breakout boards, before using 
their schematic as inspiration for imple­
menting the ADC in the PlasticScanner 
electronics design.
As for the colour sensor, the OSH commu­
nity proposed the use of the AS7341 colour 
sensor. The sensor is available as a I2C 
connected module from Adafruit with ac­
companying open source schematics, al­
lowing for easier implementation.
Connectivity
Adafruit and Sparkfun both use a JST SH4 
connector with a standard for pin assign­
ment, which they respectively call Stem­
ma-QT and Qwiic. Both standards have the 
same pin arrangement made for I2C com­
munication and allow daisy-chaining of 
breakout boards. The standard connectors 
are used in most new microcontroller de­
signs from both companies, which enables 
tapping into their existing OSH ecosystem 
of products with full compatibility. Figure 
3.30 shows an example of daisy-chaining, 
where various breakout boards for compo­
nents used in this project are connected to 
the microcontroller used, as well as a de­
velopment board from the original PlasticS­
canner project. The used Qwiic connector 
is highlighted on figure 3.31.
Version 0 - existing design
The existing PCB had a single board layout, 
with an ESP32-devkit-C microcontroller 
soldered on via through-hole soldering. 
The Devkit-c does not have a battery man­
agement system (BMS), meaning that an 
external off-the-shelf BMS was also mount­
ed within the case. This made the design 
practically a PCB relying on two external 
designs, where only the BMS from Adafruit 
was open source. Furthermore, the devkit-c 
has been marked with “not for new design” 
due to upcoming end-of-life, and the pro­
posed replacement from the manufacturer 
has a inconsistent pinout design, and thus 
new generations will not fit the board. The 
microcontroller, therefore, needed to be re­
placed. The recommendation from the Delft 
report [68] was to move to a SOC version of 
the ESP32 based on open-source designs 
and move away from external components. 
As described earlier, the ADC of the previ­
ous design was causing problems by occu­
pying the SPI communication lines. There­
fore, a solution to fix the ADC was needed. 
Lastly, the one-board design made it im­
possible to have the scan direction at an 
angle to the handle direction. Tests of over­
all shapes, and academic research indicat­
ed that the angled scan head was increas­
ing ergonomics and user perception of the 
product, thus a new design is needed.
3.31 Qwiic connector on an ESP32 Feather
==PAGE:52==
52
Development__
Develop__
Version 1 - Circular
The first iteration of the circular design 
aimed to get all scan-related components 
to fit on a circular ø50mm PCB and inte­
grate a new I2C-supported ADS and colour 
sensor on the board. The approach was to 
use only the LED, power and sensor layout 
from the existing design, leaving out the 
ADC and controller design, and then com­
bine it with the schematic of the AS7341 
colour sensor from Adafruit [73], 
and 
the 
I2C-supported 
NAU7802 ADC design by Ada­
fruit [74]. To be able to fit all 
components into the circular 
design, it was decided to switch 
the size of passive components 
(resistors and capacitors) from 
a 1206 to a 0603 footprint. This 
change makes it harder, but still 
possible, to hand solder the 
components, but made it pos­
sible to fit all components on 
the PCB.
The board was presented for feedback and 
review of the online community. The com­
munity identified two design flaws con­
cerning four duplicate pull-up resistors and 
a pin that was connected to the ground 
mistakenly. Without the feedback of the 
community, the board would not be func­
tional.
Based on the recommendation from the 
community and general cleanup of tracing, 
the board was ordered with component as­
sembly by the manufacturer. The board 
was working after an incorrectly dimen­
sioned resistor was discovered by the com­
munity and therefore replaced, and the 
board has been delivering promising scan 
results.
Version 2 - Circular with indent and Four 
layers
The development of the third generation of 
the physical enclosure made it clear that 
the fastening of the shells to each other re­
quired room, which the scanner PCB was 
blocking. Therefore, it was necessary to 
further compact the component placement 
of the scanner PCB. A community member 
suggested changing the arrangement of 
the LEDs to a more compact design instead 
of the current circular design, to 
save space. The existing routing 
was removed, components rear­
ranged and re-routed, and the team 
managed to fit the components on a 
slightly smaller PCB, with a horizon­
tal cut-off in the top, to make room 
for fastening features in the physical 
design.
The reduced footprint of the second 
version made the routing traces be­
come very thin and close together. 
For high-precision signals such as 
the signal from the sensor to the 
ADC, this has the potential to create 
signal noise. During a discussion at 
an online developers meeting, the 
opportunity of switching from a 2 
layer (front and back) PCB design to 
a four-layer design was proposed, 
enabling the possibility of a signal 
layer and a 3.3v layer, thus giving 
room for wider traces and better 
separation of signal types via dedi­
cated layers, which should reduce 
the signal to noise ratio.
The hole layout of the first genera­
tion was purely based on where it 
was possible to place plated holes 
when the routing 
was done. This re­
sulted in a rather 
random placement 
of holes. In the sec­
ond 
version, 
the 
hole placement was 
simplified 
to 
two 
holes, 
diagonally 
placed, in favour of 
the 
existing 
four 
holes. The four-layer 
PCB design is slightly 
thicker 
than 
a 
two-layer design and does have a 
slightly higher cost. A quick estimate 
via JLCPCB found that the price of 
1000 units changes from €0,19 to €0,27 
per board when adding two layers.
Version 3
After the second PCB was ordered, the 
team found minor errors in the design 
primarily related to routing and potential 
improvements. Temporarily workaround 
Controller P
First PCB being sol­
dered
Second generation PCB 
with solderpaste 
==PAGE:53==
53
did solve the problems, but changes 
are required in the design for a pol­
ished and release-ready design. 
Therefore the whole PCB was re­
viewed, and minor changes to the 
connector routing and placement 
were made, to make cabling easier, 
and less strain on the cables. Addi­
tionally, an oscillating crystal was 
added to improve the accuracy of 
the ADC. Lastly, the team tried to 
find European manufacturers to cut 
down on shipping time, while keep­
ing costs down and managed to 
find a partner called AISLER B.V 
with the potential to be a future 
partner 
for 
small-scale 
manufacturing of up to 
500 units, including as­
sembly at prices competi­
tive to east-Asian compet­
itors.
Controller PCB
The modular design intro­
duced the scanner PCB 
and the controller PCB. 
The role of the controller 
PCB is to connect the different 
electronic parts of the PlasticScan­
ner, and based on inputs from these 
perform various actions required for 
the scanner to function. Two ver­
sions of the controller PCB were de­
signed and manufactured.
Version 1
The first version of the controller 
PCB houses the ESP32 microcon­
troller (MCU), interconnects for dis­
play and scanner PCB (JST SR and 
QWIIC connector), button connector, 
power switch solder pads, 14500 lith­
ium-ion battery mount and USB-C 
connector for charging. In the follow­
ing section, the major design aspects 
of the controller board is described, 
argumentation for the choice is dis­
cussed.
ESP32
The ESP32 is a low-power system-on-
a-chip microcontroller with built-in WiFi 
capabilities. The ESP32 exists in various 
configurations with two of the newer mod­
els being the S2 and S3 variants. The S2 
variant is focused on keeping the power 
consumption as low as possible by offering 
less computational power and no built-in 
Bluetooth capabilities. The S3 variant dou­
bles the number of processing cores to 
two, and includes Bluetooth, more SRAM 
and AI-acceleration vector instructions 
[75], however at the cost of higher power 
consumption and 50 % price increase for a 
module with a built-in antenna [76], [77]. 
The controller PCB implements an ESP32 
developer board from Adafruit called Feath­
er. The Feather design from Adafruit is a 
family of boards, with the same footprint 
and pinout, with several generations and 
variations of microcontrollers. This en­
ables the controller board to change 
feather board, and thus gain Bluetooth, 
lower power consumption or use a board 
with cellular connectivity in the future, 
without changing the controller design. all 
newer feather boards use a USB-C port 
to connect to a computer for program­
ming and power.
The AI acceleration features are benefi­
cial as the plastic identification model in­
creases in size. By utilizing the vector in­
structions and accompanying library, a 
2.5-6.25x performance improvement can 
be expected compared to the S2 [78]. As 
the microcontroller in the device, the ESP32 
also controls the other integrated circuits 
such as the LED controller and colour sen­
sor and receives inputs from the buttons, 
InGaAs sensor analogue-to-digital convert­
er (ADC) and colour sensor ADC.
On version 1 of the controller board, the S2 
variant was used, however, the two variants 
are physically interchangeable and as the 
features of the scanner are expanded, the 
additional performance of the S3 makes it 
an obvious choice to upgrade to. All vari­
ants of the ESP32 can largely run the same 
software with only some custom libraries 
requiring compatibility improvements. This 
enables an easy upgrade path and ensures 
modularity.
PCB design
Third generation 
PCB with solder 
stencil
==PAGE:54==
54
Development__
Develop__
Battery and power consumption
The device has to be able to run without 
being plugged in. For this reason, he team 
has implemented a 14500 lithium-ion bat­
tery. the battery has a smaller form factor 
than the widely used 18650, and closely re­
sembles a regular type AA battery in size. 
Due to the compact design of the handle, 
the 14500 battery better fits the scanner. 
As the electronics in the PlasticScanner are 
low-power devices with a combined peak 
draw of 1.3 W, it is not as important to con­
sider the possible discharge rate of the cell, 
as it is selecting a cell with a high capacity. 
The highest power capacity cells in the 
14500 form factor have 1100 mAh at 3.7 
=  4 Wh of power. While the power draws 
peaks at 1.3 W, this is only expected at most 
10 % of the time while the device is on. The 
power consumption of the scanner de­
pends on the parts connected and their 
state. For example, connecting the scanner 
PCB not only adds new components but 
also increases the load on the ESP32 
Feather. This results in the following levels 
of power consumption, measured with a 
TC66C for the full system power:
Controller PCB idle: 0.134 W
1.	 Controller with Scanner PCB connected 
idle: 0.39 W
2.	 Controller with scanner and display 
connected idle: 0.57 W
3.	 Controller with scanner and display 
connected scanning: 1.3 W
Assuming an idle state 90 % of the time and 
10 % scanning, the expected battery life is 
5-6 hours, where 10 % of the battery ca­
pacity is unused for battery health. Howev­
er, this battery life calculation assumes the 
current state of the scanner without imple­
menting further battery-saving measures. 
The ESP32 is designed for ultra-low power 
IoT applications and has a range of ways to 
reduce its power consumption, for example 
by entering a sleep state. In this state, the 
power draw can fall to just 20 mA at 3.3 V = 
0.066 W. Further battery optimisations in­
clude turning off I2C power to the scanner 
PCB, thereby dropping the consumption by 
0.256 W to state 1, or dimming the display 
when idle.
The final option to increase the battery time 
is by changing the battery to a pouch cell 
design to better utilise the width of the 
scanner. However, pouch cells are more 
fragile and typically glued to the device 
they are used in. The 14500 cells in the 
scanner is mounted in a standard battery 
mount, allowing for easy replacement 
should it wear out, potentially leading to a 
longer device life.
Buttons and connectors
The controller board includes multiple con­
nectors for various components.
	‐
As the final location of the button in the 
physical design could change, it was 
decided to create solder pads, where 
connectors from the button could be 
attach with wires. This allows for flexi­
bility in incorporating the button into the 
design and allows for easy replacement 
if it should e.g. break.
	‐
The display connector was placed at 
the top of the board to reduce the 
length of the cable run. As the display 
cables are larger than other connectors, 
this would also reduce potential ob­
struction from other components.
	‐
The final method of turning the scanner 
on and off had not yet been decided on. 
The initial idea was to implement a slid­
ing switch on the side of the scanner to 
achive this. However, as the options 
were still explored simple solder pads 
were created for connecting a switch.
	‐
The JST Qwiic connector for connect­
ing to the scanner PCB located further 
down on the PCB to spread out compo­
nents. This did result in a slightly longer 
cable run and had left considerations 
for the second revision.
Size and shape
The hollow handle of the scanner allows for 
a long, thin PCB at 25mm wide and 125 mm 
long. The USB-C port is located at the bot­
tom of the handle and serves as the exter­
nal power source to charge the Plastic 
Scanner. To simplify the design, the PCB 
was extended to the bottom of the scan­
ner, allowing the port to be mounted direct­
ly on the PCB.
It was initially considered to also mount a 
push-button directly on the PCB. The idea 
was dismissed, as it increased the com­
==PAGE:55==
55
plexity of the mounting system, design of 
the shell and required a custom button de­
sign to reach a state of some water resis­
tance. From an economic standpoint, the 
cost of manufacturing additional parts for 
this button were also not considered viable 
for a smaller production run.
The width of the PCB was determined 
based on the space available in the handle, 
as well as the width of the ESP32 Feather 
board, leading to a PCB that is only slightly 
wider than the ESP32 Feather itself. An im­
portant aspect of the PCB design is the 
mounting system, which has to fit the an­
gled plastic shell screw towers. For this to 
fit, the necessary screw towers were de­
signed and marked on a dummy PCB in 
CAD. The dummy PCB could then be ex­
ported as a drawing and imported into the 
PCB design, thereby providing accurate 
mounting and through holes.
Testing
Connecting the display to the controller 
PCB worked as intended. The display 
showed the expected colours, refresh rate 
and brightness. With the dis­
play connected, the vertical 
display 
connector 
itself 
proved to interfere with the 
USB-C port on the ESP32 
Feather, making it difficult to 
connect a USB-C cable while 
the display was plugged in. 
Furthermore, 
the 
vertical 
mount of the connector also 
meant the display cables 
would press against the shell, 
a 
sub-optimal 
situation, 
which could result in failure 
over time or if assembled 
without care.
The USB-C port mounted 
on the controller PCB itself 
is only meant to provide 
power for the PlasticScan­
ner, as the ESP32 Feather 
has no USB serial pins. As a 
result of missing 5.1 k resis­
tors for the USB-C port [79], 
charging via this port only 
worked sporadically. A com­
munity member introduced 
the group to the need for 
these resistors upon re­
viewing the design, allowing 
the issue to be fixed quickly. 
Connecting to the USB-C port on the 
ESP32 Feather worked without problem, 
and successfully charged the battery. With 
the battery charged, the scanner also ran 
on battery power.
The location of the I2C interconnect port 
for the scanner module was far from the 
module itself, leading to a long wire run. 
While the I2C signal integrity is expected to 
be fine [80], the cable would require addi­
tional fixation to not rattle around the case.
Version 2
Version two of the controller PCB included 
a range of improvements and a few new 
features. The schematic can be seen on 
figure 3.32. To get a better fit and easier 
connection, the ESP32 was turned 180 de­
grees and moved slightly. The battery 
mount was only moved slightly to fit minor 
changes in the casing. The necessary 5.1k 
resistors were added to the USB-C port to 
allow for charging. The vertical display con­
nector was swapped for an an­
gled connector to better fit in­
side the casing. The I2C Qwiic 
JST connector was moved to 
the top of the board to reduce 
the cable run. In order to make 
space for this, the button con­
nector was moved to below the 
ESP32 Feather.
Implementing a dedicated pow­
er switch in the physical design 
would require an additional in­
sert or new shell shape when 
injection moulding. Furthermore, 
the opening would make anoth­
er way for water to enter the de­
3.32 Schematic of controllerboard V2
Controller PCB being test­
ed withh Scanner PCB
Full test of electronics
==PAGE:56==
56
Development__
Develop__
vice, creating a requirement for additional 
water ingress protection. This would in­
crease the cost and complexity of the de­
vice. By replacing the dedicated power 
button with a latching circuit connected to 
the main button, the additional opening can 
be avoided. The latching circuit works by 
latching a power mosfet to a connected po­
sition after holding the button for a short 
moment. The mosfet is kept on by powering 
it from a pin on the ESP32, which can be 
set to high when the device powers on, 
thereby latching the circuit. The same pin 
on the ESP32 can then be turned low after 
holding the button for a programmed dura­
tion, leading to the mosfet and device turn­
ing off. This ensures the device can be 
completely turned off with no power con­
sumption. Compared to the Thermo Fisher 
Scientific microPHAZIR plastic scanner, 
which requires 20 seconds to boot, the 
user to login and 10 minutes for the light 
source to power up, the PlasticScanner is 
ready to scan in less that 5 seconds [58]. 
As a result, turning on and off the PlasticS­
canner is not hastle for the user, allowing 
them to easily conserve power.
Price estimate
To estimate the price of the whole product, 
the product was cut down into individual 
parts, for which realistic prices were identi­
fied. To compare the price of various pro­
duction volumes for the various cost driv­
ers, a series of examples were calculated; 
for an individual making 1 scanner, a group 
making 10 scanners and commercial batch­
es of 100-10.000 scanners.
Scanner PCB
For the estimated PCB cost, an online in­
stant quote tool build into JLCPCB and 
Aisler PCB was used. For 1-100 pcs, the Eu­
ropean company Aisler was competitive, 
but on higher production volumes, the Chi­
nese companies like PCBway and JLCPCB 
pulled ahead. For the price of the compo­
nents, a tool build into the major compo­
nent supplier called Digikey was used. The 
majority of components used in this project 
were ordered from Digikey, as they offer 
relatively low shipping costs and had all 
components required - except specific 
components that are out of stock globally, 
due to the ongoing chip shortage.
The major cost of our design, as seen on 
figure 3.33, is clearly the components, 
which account for 78% of the cost of a sin­
gle PCB, and +95% when the production 
volume goes above 1000 units. It is clear 
that the costs of small batches are signifi­
cantly higher than the larger quantities, 
which underlines the potential of buying 
large batches of PCBs to sell at a lower 
price than an individual would be able to 
produce a single board for, cutting the 
sourcing and self-assembly price in half, al­
ready at 100pcs.
The major driver of cost for the scanner 
PCB is the NIR emitting LEDs, the InGaAs 
sensor including ADC and colour sensor, 
which in total take up 86% of the compo­
nent costs.
1pcs
10pcs
100pcs
1000pcs
10.000pcs
60
80
100
120
140
price pr pcb in €
Components
PCB
Assembly
Shipping
3.33 Scanner PCB Price estimate
==PAGE:57==
57
Controller PCB
The components of the controller PCB are 
significantly lower, but the shipping costs 
and assembly take up a higher percentage. 
Again, a tendency of very high prices for 
low production volumes is observed in fig­
ure 3.34, and a significant decrease in price 
as volumes go up. Where component costs 
for the scanner PCB drove the price drop, 
the drop for the controller board is an equal­
ly cost reduction due to bulk shipping and 
assembly-related costs. The prices do not 
fall as drastically as with the scanner PCB. 
This is in part due to one component: The 
Adafruit ESP32-S3 feather board, which 
costs €16 and does not fall significantly in 
price as volume increases.
For production volumes of more than 100, it 
could make sense to move away from the 
Adafruit development board, and create an 
ESP32-S3 microcontroller design directly 
on the controller board. This will reduce 
cost, but at the same time close the sys­
tem, because the microcontroller cannot 
be switched, without changing the PCB de­
sign. This will make it easier to do quality 
control, eliminate manual errors and prob­
lems relating to un-tested or unknown 
hardware, which is well suited for commer­
cial applications. It is however a step away 
from the open hardware community, mak­
ing the board less accessible to tinker with 
for experienced makers, but at the same 
time making it more “plug-n-play” which is 
a plus for newcomers.
It is also an option to sell the controller PCB 
without the Feather board, thereby further 
reducing cost.
1pcs
10pcs
100pcs
1000pcs
10.000pcs
20
30
40
50
60
price pr pcb in €
Components
PCB
Assembly
Shipping
3.34 Controller PCB Price estimate
==PAGE:58==
58
Development__
Develop__
3.5.3	
Software
The hardware of the scanner needs firm­
ware to control peripherals, get data from 
the ADC and process the data in order to 
output a user-understandable result. This 
section is covering of the firmware design 
of the scanner and discusses the choices 
made during the development of the firm­
ware and training of a test machine learning 
model for polymer identification
Scanner firmware
The ESP32 is programmed in C++ using the 
Arduino framework. The firmware of the 
scanner utilises a range of open-source li­
braries, for easier and previously tested in­
terfacing with the implemented compo­
nents, described in the hardware section 
3.5.2. The team does not have a back­
ground in electronics nor embedded soft­
ware engineering, and the community 
around the used libraries has been an in­
valuable help to get the firmware up and 
running smoothly. A list of all used libraries 
used is added as appendix A.4.
Development process
The software development has been run­
ning in parallel with the hardware design. 
From the first hardware prototype, where 
breakout boards were put together in se­
ries with Qwiic connectors, The team first 
got each component running alone with an 
ESP32. When software for a component 
was working, it was merged into the main 
sketch and tested. the software for each 
component was added one by one, incre­
mentally moving towards a fully working 
software sketch, controlling and retrieving 
data from the components.
The software, running the plastic scanner, 
is based on libraries intended for interfac­
ing the breakout boards used for prototyp­
ing. Since the hardware design of the used 
breakout boards is used as the basis for the 
hardware design of the proposed scanner, 
the software should therefore also work in 
theory. After some minor changes, the soft­
ware in general did work in practice.
The transition from off-the-shelves break­
out boards to custom-designed PCBs, 
posed a challenge, due to the I2C address­
es of the components can be changed by 
changing the resistor setup, which acci­
dentally happened during hardware design. 
This posed a challenge as I2C addresses 
are the basis of all communication with 
components. In the later iterations, the 
hardware bugs were fixed with help from 
the community, and the software imple­
mentation in the newer generations went 
smoother.
The implementation of the machine learn­
ing model, used for processing scan results, 
was not a part of the scope of the project. 
However, when the team managed to get 
all software and hardware working togeth­
er, and therefore decided to integrate the 
machine learning model and extend com­
putational possibilities, which would enable 
the handheld scanner to identify polymers, 
thus getting one step closer to a working 
product ready for commercialisation.
Boot
Ready to scan
Scanning
Load and deﬁne 
libraries.
Turn on NEO LED 
and set it to red to 
indicate the scanner 
is booting.
Turn on the display 
and display 
"PlasticScanner".
Initialize and 
conﬁgure NAU7802.
Initialize and 
conﬁgure AS7341.
Load and verify 
TensorFlow ML 
model.
Update display text 
to "Ready" to 
indicate the scanner 
is ready
Update NEO LED to 
yellow to indicate 
setup is complete.
Update NEO LED to 
green to indicate 
scanner is ready.
Is the button 
pressed?
Load unit testing 
and call scan 
function.
Yes
No
Update NEO LED to 
blue to indicate a 
scan is being 
performed.
Update the text on 
the display to 
"Scanning".
Perform an InGaAs 
sensor reading from
NAU7802 with no 
LEDs on. 
Add the results to an
array
Turn on IR LED #i
Has all 8 
measurement
s been taken?
Perform an InGaAs 
sensor reading from
NAU7802 and add to
array. 
No, increase i by 1
Turn on white LED 
at 30 mA.
Yes
Take a reading from 
the as7341
Combine IR and 
colour readings in 
one array, skipping 
two duplicates.
Calculate 
wavelength result 
ratios according to 
Beer's Law.
Calculate max and 
min values.
Calculate 
normalized values 
for all readings.
Pass normalized 
array to TensorFlow 
model. 
Determine plastic 
type based on 
output. 
Print the result on 
the screen.
On button press.
3.35 Scanner firmware flowchart
==PAGE:59==
59
Firmware structure
The firmware itself has three main stages: 
boot, ready to scan and scanning. The most 
important functions are described in this 
section, while the full flow of actions can be 
seen in figure 3.35. During the boot stage, 
the pin for the latching circuit is pulled high, 
the various libraries are loaded, connec­
tions to components are checked, some 
settings are configured and the display is 
turned on. Importantly, the size of the Ten­
sorFlow arena is also defined and initialized 
in the library. The size of the model is fur­
ther described in the next section.
Following the boot sequence, the scanner 
enters a waiting state listening for input on 
from the button. When the button is 
pressed, the scanner starts a scan. The 
scanner first updates the display to show 
the status to the user and then instructs 
the TLC59208 to turn on one infrared LED 
at a time, a reading from the InGaAs sensor 
is taken through the NAU7802 ADC, while 
each LED is on individually.
The scanner takes a reading for each spe­
cific wavelength LED, one by one. The LED 
is given 10ms from turn on to get “warmed 
up”, to ensure stable output, before taking a 
reading. Afterwards the LED is turned off, 
and the next LED on. Additionally, the scan­
ner takes a baseline reading before and af­
ter the loop scanning for all LEDs wave­
length. the baseline reading indicates the 
amount of environment noise affecting the 
scanner, and what levels of NIR light inten­
sity the scanner should expect. The base­
line is used for two things in the software. 
Firstly the value is used normalising the 
data, together with a calibration scan of the 
material spectralon, which has the charac­
teristic that is has a very high reflectance. 
this enables us to normalise the data based 
on the maximum light intensity of spec­
tralon, and the baseline background read­
ing, for each LED. Secondly, the baseline 
reading before and after can be used to 
test if the light environment has changes 
significantly during the scanning, which 
can affect the data quality.
When all eight readings have been read 
from the ADC, the scanner has acquired 
the data necessary to identify the plastic 
type and thereby the scoped goal of this 
project. Following the NIR readings, a white 
LED is turned on to allow the colour sensor 
to take a reading. The NIR and colour read­
ings are combined in an array. The array 
containing all 17 raw values for each 
scanned sample is stored locally on the 
ESP32, which fulfils the initial goal of the 
project: to build a handheld Plastic scanner, 
that outputs relevant sensor data. As an ex­
ample, the sample of white PP has the fol­
lowing values read from the ADC:
To further develop the plastic scanner to­
wards a production ready product, the team 
decided to put more research into develop­
ing the data processing and explore oppor­
tunities for data infrastructure.
To prepare the data for the trained model, 
Beer-Lamberts law is first applied, followed 
by normalisation. This data process is de­
scribed further in the section 2.2 on data 
processing. When the data is normalised, it 
is now in the same format used when train­
ing the machine learning model as de­
scribed in section 2.2 and can then be used 
as input in the model, to try to determine 
the plastic which is scanned. Depending on 
the output of the model, the determined 
plastic or error is displayed on the display.
Data processing and recogni­
tion model training
The Plastic Scanner identifies plastic 
through pattern recognition in the readings 
from the InGaAs sensor and the spectral 
colour sensor. With the project succeeding 
in developing a working sensor module, 
controller PCB and firmware, the team 
chose to develop an initial version of a ma­
chine-learning model for testing. The mod­
el enables the team to test if the scan data 
is of sufficient quality to train a model, and 
potentially highlight new challenges for the 
development. This section covers the initial 
attempt to create a plastic recognition 
model with a very limited data set and the 
accompanying results, retrieved by using 
the developed scanner to scan known plas­
tics. The process builds on an open source 
guide for implementation of TensorFlowLite 
for Arduino by Sandeep Mistry and Don 
Table 3.1: A Sample reading of PP
850nm
940nm
1050nm
1200nm
1300nm
1450nm
1550nm
1650nm
3481180
3481377
6975238
5914975
3477298
5367029
5382992
7027341
==PAGE:60==
60
Development__
Develop__
Coleman [82], and its PlasticScanner adap­
tation by Jerry de Vos [83].
Creating a data set
As plastic can have wide range of proper­
ties from the type, colour to surface finish 
and additives, a large data set is required to 
effectively recognise patterns and thereby 
predict the plastic type. Machine learning 
models generally increase in accuracy as 
more data is added, until a point of dimin­
ishing return is reached[84]. The developed 
machine learning model is trained with 17 
different data inputs, of which 1 is a base­
line reading, 7 are discrete infrared read­
ings from the InGaAs sensor and the re­
maining readings from the AS7341 spectral 
colour sensor, including 8 colour readings 
between 415 nm and 680 nm, an IR reading 
at  950 nm and a clear general light intensi­
ty measurement within the span of 350 nm 
to 1000 nm. The baseline reading aims to 
compensate for the varying levels of light 
bleed in the scanning chamber, by reading 
the data from the InGaAs sensor with no 
LEDs enabled. Additionally, the data set 
contains a reading of a reference material. 
This reference material is either smooth 
PTFE (called Spectralon) or a polished 
piece of aluminium, as these are very re­
flective materials and therefore would re­
turn the highest value to expect from the 
sensor.
As the number of input parameters in­
crease, the number of samples required 
also increase. While there is no predeter­
mined amount of samples required for ma­
chine learning, to the knowledge of the 
team, a rule of thumb is to use 10 times the 
amount of samples as you have parame­
ters, suggesting the Plastic Scanner model 
should use at least 80 samples if using just 
the IR data or 170 if training the model with 
all colour readings included as well [85]. As 
the model increases in complexity and size 
such as increased polymer types attempt­
ing to identify, additional data will be re­
quired. Furthermore, the samples gathered 
need to be of consistent quality, as bad or 
wrong readings can throw the model off. In 
machine learning, a common phrase is gar­
bage in, garbage out [86].
Consistent process for data collection 
and data quality
For the Plastic Scanner to avoid gathering 
garbage data and thereby train a garbage 
model, a consistent and systematic pro­
cess for gathering data was used. One data 
set should only contain data from the same 
scanner PCB generation, scanner environ­
ment and scanner housing. Each sample 
was labelled for future reference, to enable 
comparison of data sets with different set­
ups, but with scans of the same samples. 
Each data set only contains data from a 
scanner PCB of the same generation, scan­
ner environment and scanner housing. Each 
sample was labelled for future reference, to 
enable comparison of data sets with differ­
ent setups, but with scanning of the same 
samples. Each sample is scanned one time 
and added to the data set. Care was taken 
to ensure the scanner head sat flush against 
the sample to reduce light bleed.
For the data set used in the project, data 
was gathered in real-world scenarios by 
taking measurements in a lit room. Another 
option would be to scan the samples in a 
dark box, thereby ensuring the sensors only 
saw the light from the built-in LEDs. How­
ever, this would create a data set, which 
would not reflect the real-world usage sce­
narios, potentially leading to a lower suc­
cess rate of scans with the finished prod­
uct. The choice to gather data in a more 
realistic use case did come with the risk of 
increased light bleed, resulting in noise in 
the data set. A number of mitigations can 
be done to lower this risk and reduce the 
effects of environmental variables when 
taking readings. These mitigations include 
both physical and software considerations 
and are discussed in section 3.5.3
Relative reflectance
Based on Beer-Lambers law, described in 
section 2.3.1, the data is processed, for the 
machine learning model. The rarios used 
for polymer identification is based on previ­
ous research. Masoumi et.al, propose to 
use the ratio of reflectance at 1650nm and 
1720nm, to identify PET, PS, PVC, PP and 
HDPE. The authors reported reasonable re­
sults, but expressed concerns regarding 
the cost, due to high cost of optical and NIR 
components. [87] proposes a more cost 
==PAGE:61==
61
friendly alternative with the ReReMeter. 
[87] Proposes the use of the three ratios:
When scanning a sample, the absorbance 
of the sample and the absorbance of the 
photodiode or system itself cannot be sep­
arated in a single measurement by the sys­
tem. Furthermore, some radiation in the NIR 
spectrum is typically present due to, e.g. 
lightbulbs and sunlight. Therefore [87] pro­
poses a correction with a baseline mea­
surement of the scanner, without LED’s 
turned on, before and after the measure­
ments as mentioned earlier. This enables 
the scanner to measure the relative reflec­
tance caused by the LED’s emittance, thus 
removing noise from the measurements.
Preparation for machine learning
The PlasticScanner project has developed 
a method for model training, which uses 
the tensor flow framework [88], which is a 
continuation of the development of Re­
ReMeter [89]. Since development of a Ma­
chine learning model is not within the scope 
of this project, the project will follow this 
methodology.
The method is using normalisation to better 
compare the different readings on a re­
duced scale, which is recommended by the 
TensorFlow documentation [90]. When 
data is min-max normalised, all data points 
are scaled to be in between 0 and 1. This is 
done 
through 
the 
following 
formula, 
x´ = (x−xmin)/(xmax−x−min) which is done 
in the model training scrip by the following 
script
The normalisation of data furthermore 
makes the scanning results from different 
scanners possible, since the baseline and 
spectralon scan in combination with min-
max normalisation will make all scanners 
output data within the same range [87], 
[91].
Data infrastructure and addi­
tional features
In order to verify the intended capabilities 
of the ESP32 and especially surrounding 
software, multiple additional experiments 
have been performed. Especially function­
ality concerning moving data to various 
cloud services. Research has been done to 
understand the options for wireless user 
configuration of the scanner and assessing 
functionality to perform over-the-air up­
dates.
To test the data transfer options, the ESP32 
Wi-Fi capabilities were used to connect to a 
local Wi-Fi network. From here, the scanner 
was programmed to transfer the resulting 
data from a scan to services such as Goo­
gle Sheets, Firebase, MQTT and Blynk. 
While the different online services have dif­
ferent advantages and disadvantages, they 
all performed well.
Some functions were researched to ensure 
the proposed functionality of the PlasticS­
canner were possible, but not implemented 
in this project. This includes the two follow­
ing.
Utilising the library AutoConnect [92], a Wi-
Fi hotspot could be created from the ESP32, 
where a captive portal and web server 
would be implemented. This allows for an 
easy user experience to connect to the 
scanner and configure settings directly, 
such as a custom recognition model, loca­
tion or any other metadata a company could 
need. It would also allow a companion app 
to utilise a smartphone cellular connection 
to send data to an online data store.
Both Blynk and AutoConnect also allows for 
over-the-air firmware upgrades[93], [94], 
ensuring the scanner is easy to keep up to 
date with improved features and recogni­
tion models. MQTT is a lightweight proto­
col, and cannot contain packets large 
enough to contain a firmware update in 
one. The Blynk software is a paid propri­
etary service, with a free tier, where MQTT 
is an open source protocol. For an initial 
community system, a MQTT server would 
be a recommendation, where Blynk could 
be a future partner for a commercial scan­
ner.
1
for i in range(17):
2
max.append(np.max(law[0::, i]))
3
min.append(np.min(law[0::, i]))
4
item_normalized += [
5
(law[i][0]- min[0])/(max[0]- min[0])
6
..
7
]
Listing 3.1: Normalizing of data
==PAGE:62==
62
Development__
Develop__
Scanned results
To test the scanner PCB, a series of sam­
ples has been scanned. The test data set 
consist of 77 unique samples spread across 
6 types of plastic and 1 Spectralon refer­
ence sample. The individual number of the 
plastic samples can be seen in table 3.2.
The samples have a range of different co­
lours and surface finishes. In order to better 
compare them graphically, only white sam­
ples are used in the plot on figure 3.36. The 
following two 3D plots use data from all 
samples, as some plastic types had very 
few white readings, making it difficult to 
identify potential patterns The plots look at 
the primary identification data from the in­
frared LEDs, where the colour sensor is in­
tended to assist in compensating for the 
colour of the plastic.
From figure 3.36, some differences be­
tween the different samples are noticeable. 
For example the PP sample being easy to 
discern from the PS sample, due to the ra­
tio of the 1050 nm and 1200 nm reading, 
and the ratio of the 1550 nm and 1650 nm 
reading.
By plotting the ratio between the specific 
wavelengths as mentioned earlier, the re­
flectance is expected to differ between 
plastics, hence a grouping of the specific 
plastics would also be expected. When as­
sessing the plot on figure 3.37, the data 
seem cluttered, with no clear groupings.
Reducing the displayed samples to PP and 
PS does indicate a grouping between the 
individual plastic types. This can be seen 
on figure 3.38. While the sample size is 
low, a PP/PS identification model appears 
possible.
The results of the scans, especially some 
plastics, vary significantly, indicating that 
the data quality would benefit from addi­
tional noise mitigations in the future and 
additional verification of scan quality. Fur­
ther work into the effects of surface finish 
also needs to be done.
3900000
4400000
4900000
5400000
5900000
6400000
6900000
7400000
7900000
8400000
8900000
Green LED
950nm
1050nm
1200nm
1300nm
1450nm
1550nm
1650nm
Raw value from ADC
Wavelength of LED  illuminating
Raw data plot
Reference
PET
HDPE
PVC
LDPE
PP
PS
3.36 Comparison of raw scan data for 1 white sample per plastic type
3.38 PP and PS 3D plot
3.37 3D plot of all samples in selected ratios
Table 3.2: No. of plastic scan samples
Reference
PET
HDPE
PVC
LDPE
PP
PS
1
7
19
6
7
29
8
==PAGE:63==
63
Training the model using Ten­
sorFlow
Based on the data from the test scans, a 
test recognition model is trained using Ten­
sorFlow, – a deep learning software library 
by Google. The normalized data set is split 
in three parts: 60 % for training, 20 % for 
testing during training and 20 % for verifi­
cation of the trained model.
When defining, there are is a series of vari­
ables to adjust including:
	‐
Number of layers
	‐
Number of “neurons” in each layer
	‐
Activation function in each layer
	‐
Choice of optimiser
	‐
Number of possible outcomes
A high ratio of outcomes per samples, will 
potentially introduce noise to the recogni­
tion of plastic types [95]. Finding the best 
balance of the different variables requires a 
combination of experience, guidelines, and 
trial and error[96]. As the team is not deep­
ly experienced in machine learning, the 
training done rely more on experimentation 
and trial and error, than thorough experi­
ence.
The trained model has 4 layers with 30, 30, 
15 “neurons” and a output space of 2 to 6, 
equal to the number of plastic types the 
model includes. The first three layers use 
ReLU as their activation function, which is a 
mathematical operation defining what the 
neuron should do and is a common activa­
tion function for hidden layers [97].
The final layer uses the softmax activation 
function to give the probability of how likely 
the input data fits each of plastic types. For 
example, if the output space is 2, trying to 
identify PP and PS, the output of the soft­
max layer could be 0.7 (70 %) for PP and 0.3 
(30 %) for PS. The probabilities will always 
sum to 1. This probability is what is used for 
determining if the accuracy is high enough 
and what to tell the user. Increasing the 
number of layers and the output space typ­
ically creates a more powerful model, but at 
the requirement of additional data to train 
the model effectively [97]. As the layers in­
crease in number and size, the trained 
model also increase in size. As the model 
has to run on an ESP32-S2, the model is 
limited in size to the amount of 4 MB of 
memory on the device and just 2 MB of 
PRAM [98]. To reduce the size of the mod­
el, another option is decreasing the number 
of neurons in the hidden layers. Having too 
few neurons in each hidden layer reduces 
the accuracy and success rate. At the same 
time, a too high number of neurons will like­
ly result in low success rates as well, due to 
overfitting [99]. Therefore, a compromise 
between size and accuracy has to be made. 
The team found that decreasing the num­
ber of neurons from 64 to 30 in the two 
middle layers maintained a success rate of 
7/7 with a required 90% accuracy, while de­
creasing the file size from 172.418 bytes to 
64.058 bytes.
Another factor in training a machine learn­
ing model is the selected epoch number. An 
epoch is when all data from the training set 
has been used once, and the amount of ep­
ochs define the number of iterations where 
the data is used in training the model [100]. 
Adjusting the epoch rate aims to find the 
spot where the model has the lowest error, 
without overfitting as a result of repeating 
the data too much. The results presented 
are with a very high epoch rate of 1200 and 
the model is getting some overfitting, as 
the validation loss is staring to increase. 
However, decreasing epochs to 800 de­
creases the accuracy from 9/9 to 8/9. All 
tests were done with SGD as the optimizer, 
mse for loss and mae as the metric. Using 
RMSProp as the optimizer could allow for 
reducing the amount of epochs, as RM­
Sprop can adapt the learning rate continu­
ously while training. However, in testing the 
team saw worse results using RMSProp 
that SGD [101].
The attempt to train a model based on the 
training method by the PlasticScanner Proj­
ect, including all six different plastic types, 
based on a dataset of unique 77 samples, 
turned out more difficult than anticipated, 
and the model only reached a success rate 
of 3/15 with at least 90% probability. The 
training of models with fewer plastic types 
samples did result in good results that looks 
very promising, but require further investi­
gation. One possible reason for the low 
success rate of the full model, could be the 
lack of data. As mentioned earlier, the ratio 
of possible outputs and the number of sam­
==PAGE:64==
64
Development__
Develop__
ples used for training is low, due to the low 
number of samples. The data plot on figure 
3.36 also shows a lack of clear grouping, 
indicating a need to review the quality of 
scanning results. Furthermore, the impact 
of the colour sensor readings should be re­
searched further to see if some readings 
only add noise to the model.
On-device execution of model
The machine learning model is converted 
to run on the ESP32-S2 using tf_porter and 
loaded on the device as a header file. When 
an item is scanned, the data is prepared the 
same way as when training the model, 
thereby allowing the data to run in the mod­
el. However, getting the model to function 
the same way as on a computer has proven 
difficult, with the model only outputting one 
number, instead of an array of probabilities. 
Running the PP/PS model on the ESP32-S2 
and piping new readings of either plastic 
has the results leaning heavily towards just 
one type of plastic. However, piping a PP 
and a PS reading from the training data set 
succesfully returns a value close to 0 or 1, 
respectively of the plastic, indicating the 
model recognises these readings. In order 
to get the PlasticScanner to work as a de­
vice, the model needs to return the array of 
probabilities as with the Python program 
for the device to effectively tell the user 
what type of plastic the user is scanning. 
This is one of the key parts missing for the 
scanner to work completely.
Noise mitigations
There are several potential options of im­
proving the scan results and reducing ex­
ternal noise factors, through changes to 
the scanner itself. Physical considerations 
mainly concerns reducing light bleed and 
making it easier for the user to correctly 
place the scanner against the sample. This 
could be done through ensuring no light is 
able to penetrate the scanner shell and by 
improving the material used to seal the in­
terface between the sample and scanner. 
These are further explored in the physical 
development section.
How the scanner software is implemented 
can also help mitigate the effects of light 
bleed. The first way is to determine the av­
erage of a number readings. Currently, a 
scan has two parts with the first being the 
infrared readings, which takes 80 millisec­
onds to complete. Following this is the co­
lour sensor readings, which take  600 milli­
seconds to complete, resulting in a scan 
time of around 700 ms. This time does not 
include data processing or displaying.
Building on the idea of using multiple read­
ings, a self-adapting algorithm could be im­
plemented to continuously take readings, 
until stable set of values are determined 
within a specified confidence interval. Us­
ing a self adapting algorithm could increase 
the total scan time if the accuracy require­
ment is set too high or the gathered data 
has an unpredictable distribution. In order 
to ensure the user experience remains 
great, the total scan time must be kept be­
low a few seconds.
More work should be done to understand 
the variability of the infrared readings and 
the colour readings. The LED used to elu­
minate the sample for the colour sensor is 
significantly brighter than the infrared 
LEDs, potentially making the reading more 
resistant to background light bleed. As the 
colour sensor reading takes 7.5 times as 
long as the infrared reading, it would offer 
increased flexibility for a self adapting algo­
rithm to run under a 2 second max scan 
time.
Finally, a more controlled approach to add­
ing and handling noise in the data set could 
be a way to improve the final identification 
model. By scanning the training samples in 
a box where all light sources can be con­
trolled, it could be possible to better teach 
the scanner what different plastics would 
look like at different levels of surrounding 
light. The dark reading would further guide 
the identification model.
The importance of a repeatable data set
While light bleed is a significant noise fac­
tor, there are other variables to consider in 
the design, ranging from the configured 
ADC gain, distance to the object scanned, 
layout of LEDs and so on. Changing any of 
these variables makes the previous data 
set incompatible with new scans. As a re­
sult, the data gathered was performed as 
late a possible in the development. Howev­
==PAGE:65==
65
er, it underlined a need for future develop­
ment, where the PlasticScanner project 
should aim to create a large collection of 
plastic items of different plastic types in or­
der to quickly and consistently be able to 
recreate the data set when changes are 
made to any of the variables described. 
The PlasticScanner project has created a 
calibration/verification box with a small set 
of different plastics, that are from the same 
larger piece. This means a scan of a specif­
ic sample should result in very closely the 
same values between boxes, and thereby 
allow newly created scanners to be verified 
against the plastics in the box. This is ex­
tremely important in order to ensure data 
from various scanners can be compared 
and thereby used in for further recognition 
model training and to simply help communi­
ty members know they replicated the scan­
ner successfully. As described in the open 
source theory section, replicability is key to 
the success of an open source project, as 
well as ensuring the community is well tak­
en care of. If community members cannot 
easily verify their replication of the scanner, 
the project risks losing the interest of the 
members very quickly, and thereby ending 
up worsening the paramount community of 
the open source project.
While we had the reference box with some 
plastic samples, we needed a significantly 
more samples attempt to train a functional 
recognition model. In order to gather close 
to the data necessary, we visited hardware 
stores to scan a range of products. While 
this served as an easy way to gather data 
for training a model, replicating the data set 
with an updated scanner to compare 
against is not possible as the products in 
the hardware store keeps changing. The 
difficulty of reaching 170 samples under­
lined the importance of creating a repeat­
able scanning and training setup. For our 
final model, we had 88 unique sample read­
ings, spread across 6 different plastics, 
with more than half being either PP or 
HDPE. For LDPE, PET and PVC, we had be­
tween 7-8 readings, it will be difficult to at­
tempt to predict these types of plastics, 
especially if all the plastic types are in the 
same model. For PS plastic, we also just 
had 8 readings. However, PS plastic exhib­
its very different infrared responses com­
pared to PP, meaning we potentially should 
be able to separate these two types of 
plastic. For PP and HDPE which we have 
the most readings of, we also have a 
chance, despite these exhibiting closer be­
haviour than PS/PP. PS
==PAGE:66==
66
Development__
Deliver__
3.6	
Deliver
This section covers the deliver phase, fo­
cusing on finalising the proposed solution 
to the problem. The section covers the 
community engagement, a technical design 
package and proposes a roadmap for the 
coming year, pointing towards the “future 
development” section.
3.6.1	
Review of re­
quirements
The requirements described in section 
3.4.4 are now evaluated if they have been 
achieved. Out of the 44 requirements, 32 
were fulfilled. 11 were partly fulfilled and 3 
were not fulfilled. Only one of the require­
ments not fulfilled was rated at the highest 
in importance. This was:
Reqmt 45: The system should be able to 
communicate machine learning models 
to the sold scanners.
The primary goal of this project has been 
the physical and electric design, combined 
with initial software to verify the electric 
design. Identification, online infrastructure 
and more advanced software have been 
out of scope. This means the prerequisites 
for functions such as the one described in 
requirement 45 have been created, allow­
ing for easier development from community 
members or alike.
Requirement 46 describes the need for 
good online documentation and guides to 
replicate the scanner and has been partial­
ly fulfilled. This means that while the nec­
essary design files and initial software are 
available on GitHub, additional surrounding 
documentation and guides would benefit 
the replicability and accessibility of the 
scanner. As the majority of requirements 
have been fulfilled, the PlasticScanner de­
sign is expected to satisfy the usecases of 
the customers and be ready to be manu­
factured in a small scale for community de­
velopers, allowing for development on the 
final requirements, especially in software 
and data science.
3.6.2	
Technical design 
package
This section gives a short overview of the 
required knowledge to create and manu­
facture a PlasticScanner with the current 
design. This includes details regarding both 
the electric and physical components. This 
design is at a TRL level 6 and close to 7, 
meaning the technology is demonstrated in 
the relevant environment.
The full design and firmware is available on 
the the PlasticScanner Repository (link).
Electronics and firmware
The schematics of the scanner and control­
ler PCB is included in the appendix, see 
A.18. On GitHub, the required files are lo­
cated in the “Hardware” folder, where de­
sign files, libraries and bill of materials for 
both the controller board and scanner PCB 
can be found. The designs are created in 
KiCad and it is recommended to use this for 
viewing and editing the files.
The firmware created for controlling the 
scanner is found in the folder called “Firm­
ware”. Again, the main program is included 
with accompanying custom libraries. The 
remaining libraries required are download­
ed through the built-in library manager in 
either Platform.io or Arduino IDE.
Physical shell CAD model
The full physical design is available in the 
CAD folder on GitHub. The CAD folder con­
tains the shell designed in SolidWorks for 
the handheld scanner, as well as a com­
plete assembly with 3D files for all compo­
nents used in the handheld scanner. STL 
files for both parts of the shell are available 
for easy 3D-printing. Finally, the performed 
injection moulding simulation can be 
viewed.
==PAGE:67==
67
Assembly
The whole assembly uses 12 6x2.2mm 
screw in total. The assembly order is done 
in main steps. One for the top assembly, 
one for the bottom assembly and lastly a 
joining of the two subassemblies.
A: Top shell assembly
Place controller PCB in place.
4.	 3x screws for controller fastening
5.	 Insert and fasten Push button
6.	 Place Screen o-ring
7.	 place Screen module
8.	 4xScrew to fasten screen module
9.	 Connect screen to main board
B: Bottom Shell assembly
Place scanner PCB
10.	2x screws to fasten scanner PCB
11.	 Place scanner glass after removing ad­
hesive protector
12.	Place o-ring string in groove
C: Full assembly
Align bottom and top shell assemblies
13.	Snap parts in place
14.	3x screws for fastening
Based on the teams experience from tests 
on prototypes, a full assembly and test if 
everything is placed correct takes less than 
5 minutes. Figure 3.42 shows an exploded 
view of the assembly, with lines for illus­
trating the line of assembly.
Manufacturing
The design has been sent to Idé-Pro, a 
manufacturer of plastic and light metal 
parts. The manufacturer has evaluated the 
design, and assessed the need for further 
design for manufacturing. The manufactur­
er has returned a sketch of the proposed 
layout of the aluminium mould.
The manufacturer estimates the tool cost 
to be 77.625,00 DKK, with 3.900,00 DKK 
needed for further DFM and 2.160,00 DKK 
for startup costs and a trial run of 20 units 
for approval by the PlasticScanner team. 
This adds up to 83.685 DKK or €11.237,44 
in tooling, including surface treatment of 
aesthetic surfaces. Running costs will be 
€0,67 per top shell and €1,07 per bottom 
shell, including the Oceanix rPPC material 
and packaging. The offer is included in ap­
pendix A.14. The surface treatment is spec­
ified as SPI D2 or D3 and has been chosen 
to enhance the user experience, and en­
hance the grip performance for better er­
gonomics.
3.40 Mould layout sketch from manufacturer, with markings of mould insert
andpull-outdirection
3.39 Exploded view of PlasticScanner assembly
==PAGE:68==
68
Development__
Deliver__
3.6.3	
Buisness case
A short business case is now described for 
the PlasticScanner as a commercial com­
pany. The total cost of a commercial hand­
held scanner from a production batch of 
1000 units is €223,56, including marketing, 
distribution, packaging, and labour. The re­
quirements states a minimum of 40% price 
margin, which results in a scanner price of 
€312,98, which after VAT is a retail price of 
minimum €391,22. It should be noted that 
the numbers are estimates, and thus a mar­
gin of error has to be re­
membered.
The comments from com­
panies 
like 
Plastix 
and 
BessTrade, 
regarding 
a 
suggested retail price of 
€2000 excluding VAT as a 
low price for them, indi­
cates that a retail price of 
€2500 plus VAT would be a 
viable business case. This 
would result in a profit of 
€1.776,44 per sold scanner, 
or a profit margin of 795%. 
Below is a draft of the first 12 months, after 
the launch of a commercial Plastic scanner. 
The price estimate is freezing the design in 
month 1, and order injection moulding 
during month 2. Since the PCB prices are 
very high, the team proposes to order 
smaller batches, resulting in higher prices, 
but minimises up-front costs, and enables 
the team to make adjustments along the 
way.
The sales numbers are rough estimates, 
based on the length of the list of interested 
companies the PlasticScanner proj­
ect currently has, and the type of 
customers. e.g. large sorting com­
panies might need more than one. 
Furthermore, the number of com­
mercial ports within the EU is 1200 
[102]. In total, this would result in a 
PlasticScanner business case, that 
reaches break even after 8 months, 
but has to find funding to cover the 
expenses related to future develop­
ment, tools for injection moulding, 
and the first batches, for a total of 
€130.000. The full calculation is 
added as appendix A.9.
Batch price
1000
Development
€100.000
Material
€88.984
Labour
€3.333
Tooling
€11.237
Marketing
€10.000
Distribution
€10.000
Total
€223.555
Unit price
1
Development
€100,00
Material
€88,98
Labour
€3,33
Tooling
€11,24
Marketing
€10,00
Distribution
€10,00
Total
€223,56
Minimum Retail Price for Scanner
Cost price
€223,56
Mark up
40%
Net price
€312,98
ǅat Մ25%Յ
€78,24
Retail price
€391,22
Maximium profit
Cost price
€223,56
Retail price
€2.500,00
Net Price
€2.000,00
Profit
€1.776,44
Profit Margin
795%
3.41 Price estimation
-€200.000
-€100.000
€0
€100.000
€200.000
Month 1
Month 2
Month 3
Month 4
Month 5
Month 6
Month 7
Month 8
Month 9
Month 10
Month 11
Month 12
Revenue
Costs
Balance
Balance
3.42 Draft of yearly balance
==PAGE:69==
69
3.6.4	
Roadmap for 
2023
The development of hardware, firmware 
and physical shape of the PlasticScanner is 
at a point, where it make sense to spend 
the money on shipping development kits to 
active community members. The proposed 
roadmap for 2023 is displayed in figure 
3.43. It is viewed as critical to get hardware 
into the hands of the other developers in 
the community, in order to accelerate the 
development of the manufacturing ready 
scanner. While the community member 
nicknamed “LoKi” has assisted the team 
when challenges arose, he was ultimately 
limited in some of his contributions by the 
unavailability of assembled hardware. For 
open source hardware projects to succeed, 
accessibility and easy replicability of hard­
ware is key.
The hardware development part of the 
roadmap is more focused on minor revi­
sions and improvements, while the design 
is validated in quality and for production. 
The modular design and ESP32 Feather al­
lows for a more flexible approach to swap­
ping hardware or updating firmware.
Software, data set and machine learning is 
one of the significant activities in the road­
map. This includes gathering a broad range 
of samples to compile the data set from, 
improving the machine learning model and 
improving the surrounding software. This 
process is seen as a continuous and itera­
tive process running throughout the year.
Another important activity is ensuring the 
open source community is cared for, ex­
panded and to facilitate collaboration. En­
suring this is expected to accelerate the 
overall development.
From Q3, more focus is put on developing 
and executing a funding strategy to fund 
full time employees and manufacturing 
costs. Additionally, this is where focus on 
creating a commercially viable product is 
gaining priority. This includes manufactur­
ing, business operations and final end-user 
feature considerations. The goal is to deliv­
ery a handheld scanner from a pilot pro­
duction at the end for Q4 or beginning of 
Q1 2024.
Q1
2023 PLASTICSCANNER ROADMAP
Q2
Q3
Q4
HARDWARE IN HAND
ITERATION
VALIDATION
PRE- PRODUCTION
Active community members 
get shipped a free V1 
prototype development kit.
Hardware
Software & data
Community & business
A small dataset is created and used 
to verify devkits.
ML model is trained on data set.
ML runs on scanner 
hardware.
Loop of dataset improvement 
and ML improvement.
More OS developers are recruited.
Time is spent on facilitating 
workshop for members to work 
together.
Full revision of scanner PCB is completed 
based on learnings from Q1.
New dev kit (V2) is assembled and 
delivered to community members. 
Signiﬁcant work is put into expanding the sample 
set, data set and iterating on the ML model.
User interface is improved 
for end- user testing
Initiate collaboration with 
companies (e.g. Plastix) to test 
out the scanner.
Expand list of interested 
companies and letter- of- intents.
Apply for development grants 
and go full time.
Assembled scanner from devkit 2 
is validated to be identifying 
plastic with a goal of an accuracy 
of 90 %.
Collaboration companies get 
hardware delivered for testing.
Final changes to hardware are 
done and design is locked for 
production.
Continues improvement to the 
sampleset, dataset and ML 
model reach shipment ready. 
Decide on funding strategy for 
manufacturing and execute. 
Expand full time 
team.
Thesis 
ﬁnished
1st pilot 
shipment
Final hardware is shipped to 
community members for 
validation.
Manufacturing partners and 
prices are decided on. 
Receive ﬁrst pilot- production 
samples and deliver to 
community members. 
Design API 
functionality.
Implement ﬁnal changes 
to user experience. 
Implement noise mitigating 
algorithms. 
Manufacturing validation and 
improvement
Sell PCB V2 as devkit on 
Tindie to other makers.
Recruit data scientist for core team
Figure 3.43: PlasticScanner roadmap 2023
==PAGE:70==
70
Development__
Deliver__
==PAGE:71==
4.	 Discussion
==PAGE:72==
72
Discussion__
﻿__
This section will summarise the key find­
ings, decisions, conclusions, and implica­
tions of the thesis, along with a critical 
evaluation of the research methodology 
and the impact of any limitations encoun­
tered during the thesis.
Quality of data
One of the main takeaways from section 
3.5.3 on software development is the cur- 
rent challenges with quality of data for ma­
chine learning. The issue of data quality is a 
challenge across several parts of the de­
sign, including electronics, software and 
physical design. The current size of the 
data set is relatively small and the continu- 
ous development of the scanner PCB, in 
combination with changes from earlier work 
by the PlasticScanner project, results in a 
disorganised data arrangement. While the 
goal of the project was not to perform ex­
tensive data analysis and ML training, do- 
ing additional data analysis and testing 
could have better clarified the quality of the 
data. A better understanding of the data 
could be used to guide a range of exper- 
iments to improve data quality through 
more optimal designs. However, additional 
experiments and changes to both physical 
and electric design would have delayed the 
primary goals of the project without cer­
tainty for a significant change in data per­
formance, and as such were considered 
more relevant for future work.
Effect of software 
design
The current machine learning model is 
based on results from scanning known 
plas- tics with the developed plastic scan­
ner design. Evaluating the data quality has 
not been in scope for the project, but com­
paring the results from the developed scan­
ner with scientific/commercial spectrome­
ter measurements of the same samples 
could help understand how to tune the de­
sign. This would also make it possible to 
eval- uate the performance of an identifica­
tion model based on the current eight 
wave- length measurements to models 
based on more wavelengths by using sub­
sets of a high precision hypervariate data­
set. The scanner currently takes in all eight 
wave- lengths and uses a model to process 
the information and guess the type of plas­
tic. Previous work done by D. M. Scott suc­
ceeded in separating PET and PVC without 
the use of machine learning and based only 
on the difference in the normalised re- flec­
tance of the materials [39]. It might be pos­
sible to rule out specific types before ap­
plying the ML model, thus narrowing the 
solution space of the model and then spe­
cialise the model on the remaining types of 
plastics and maybe obtain a higher success 
rate.
Effect of electronics 
design
The new electronics design for the scanner 
introduced a switch from the ADS1258 sen­
sor of the previous generations to a 
NAU78903 and changed some resistors for 
the NIR emitter LEDs. This can make it hard 
to compare the new scanner to the pre- vi­
ous designs and their respective datasets. 
The data gathered during development in­
dicates that the data is compatible and can 
be used across generations due to the use 
of normalisation. For further data infra­
structure design, a method for identify- ing 
the scanner board and using that informa­
tion to tune the model might need to be in­
troduced to gain higher precision. The 
scanner PCBs developed during this proj­
ect has implemented a colour sensor which 
previous work has indicated might help en­
hance the quality of data and thus enhance 
the models’ ability to identify plastics. A 
test model has been trained both with and 
without including the data from the colour 
sensor. As mentioned in section 3.5.3 on 
software, the success rate of the two mod­
els were not significantly different. This 
suggests that the use of colour sensor data 
has not been utilised in an optimal way or 
that the implemen- tation of a colour sen­
sor is introducing more noise into the data­
set than it improves the recognition, thus 
increasing costs without improving the 
identification perfor- mance. The full ef­
fects of the implementation of the colour 
sensor are not known and therefore more 
research is required to assess the impact 
and opportunities of the colour sensor.
==PAGE:73==
73
Effect of physical 
design
The physical shape of the scan head can 
be a source of noise. The distance from the 
scanner PCB to the subject can influence 
the noise from readings, as described in 
section 3.4.1. Currently, the scan head is 
made of plastic which can influence the 
scanner readings of a given material by ab­
sorbing other wavelengths than the given 
sample, thus resulting in a multi material 
spectroscopy. The design proposed by Re­
remeter does indicate that a design similar 
to the proposed design is possible. The 
team does not have enough test data to 
compare the designed scan head with de­
signs with a reflector or absorber built in. 
Furthermore, the choice of protective glass 
needs to be researched further to ensure 
that the protective glass has a suffi- cient 
translucency for the given IR spectrum and 
that the optical design of the glass is suffi­
cient for the current application. Testing of 
this has not been within the scope of this 
project, but it is a running topic within the 
PlasticScanner community which an up­
coming project will work on.
Precision versus price
The current scanner design is limited by the 
availability of specific NIR emitters for sur­
face mounting, since all the various specific 
wavelength NIR emitters available from ma­
jor component resellers, are already in use 
in the design. The only solu- tion enabling 
more wavelengths is to change the sensor 
setup to a broad spectrum light source, in 
combination with a sensor enabling selec­
tive wavelength measure- ments. As de­
scribed earlier, the price hike from specific 
wavelength emitters to specific wavelength 
sensor setups drastically increases prices. 
The current state of the polymer identifica­
tion model clearly indicates, that it is possi­
ble to obtain promising results for polymer 
identification based on the reflectance at 
eight spe- cific wavelengths. The current 
success rate seems limited by the size of 
the data set and to some degree the quality 
of data. Looking at our data plots, it is diffi­
cult to discern patterns from just the plots. 
Previous work done by Straller and Gessler 
on the ReReMeter [87] suggests that it is 
possible to have a higher success rate 
across all the five most common types of 
plastic. The tests undertaken during this 
project indicate that it is possible, but it has 
not been fully tested in this project. Fur­
ther- more, it is not known how many types 
of plastic it is possible to include in the 
model, and the team has not tested the in­
clusion of e.g. PLA or PETG in the model. 
The question is therefore whether the cur­
rent setup optimally balances price and 
pre- cision. And can the product have one 
optimal balance point, covering profession­
al and non-professional users? The CEO of 
Plastix made it clear that a retail price of 
€2000 was too low to cause problems for 
their business case. On the other hand, the 
PlasticScanner community is full of people 
who do not dare to start prototyping yet. 
Community members do not feel certain 
enough that they can get the scanner work­
ing well enough for them to absorb the cost 
of making one. While the price for the scan­
ner in this project has been accepted by 
the commercial customers, only limited 
knowledge on the maximum price for maker 
spaces has been gained. A bet- ter under­
standing of their price willingness is need­
ed to price the development PCB correctly. 
At the same time, users like Plastix and 
BessTrade are asking to know if the scan­
ner can help detect additives, filler materi­
als or plastic blends. This again indicates 
that the two user groups share some needs 
and requirements, but also have further 
wishes that greatly differ. The proposed 
2023 plan is trying to take this duality into 
account by planning a stepwise rollout, 
starting with maker ready PCBs that help 
generate data and verify the design. After­
wards, the PlasticScanner developed in this 
project should be introduced and later on a 
“Pro” version which is described further in 
section 6 on future development. This 
would enable the PlasticScanner project to 
work intensively on maturing the hardware 
and identification software with makers 
and test how high a precision it is possible 
to obtain.
==PAGE:74==
74
Discussion__
﻿__
Concept and use case
The discussion regarding plastic recycling 
frequently returns to the need for a large, 
automated system to sort mixed plastic 
waste. These systems are huge, costly, and 
often beyond the reach of many compa­
nies. While there are smaller handheld solu­
tions available on the market, they are also 
expensive and for either solution, it is 
closed source. The research performed in­
dicate that cheaper and more flex- ible 
solutions are not a priority by current origi­
nal equipment manufacturers, but when 
speaking to the commercial recyclers, the 
demand for an accessible hand- held scan­
ner is urgent. Recyclers are in huge need of 
a better tool, which can allow their employ­
ees to effectively batch sort plastic. Effec­
tive batch sorting is expected to result in a 
higher sorting rate compared to processing 
a batch through an auto- mated sorting 
system, and thereby enable recyclers to 
continuously supply their customers with 
recycled material. In addition, the research 
and comparison of the various sorting 
strategies indicates that there are several 
good solutions on the market for large in­
dustrial installation, but there are currently 
no accessible scan- ners on the market—
only handheld scanners at an astronomical 
price level. Lastly, the research indicate 
that the current NIR spectroscopy strategy 
used in the Plas- ticScanner, will not be 
able to outperform industrial setups, due to 
the limitations on emittance and required 
size of scan area by the current electronics.
All indications from the PlasticScanner 
community points towards a desire among 
makers to make a difference in addressing 
plastic waste, forming a business case fo­
cused on individuals and makers. By pro­
viding accessible kits and documentation, 
the PlasticScanner project can enable com­
munities to create scanners or other cus- 
tom solutions fitting in their exact context. 
The open source nature of the project pro­
vides an opportunity for communities to 
create value near them. For companies, an 
open and affordable product makes it more 
accessible to identify and document poly­
mer types. For both individuals and compa­
nies, the PlasticScanner enables an im­
proved 
approach 
to 
addressing 
the 
environmental plastic challenges, which are 
not offered by the current solutions existing 
on the market.
Physical design
The proposed design of the PlasticScanner 
is tested and designed through a series of 
methods that should help the team obtain a 
useful outcome of the design process. The 
PlasticScanner proposed by this project 
can be seen as an extension of the Plas­
ticScanner proposed by the Delft project 
[68]. With one team member being a part of 
both project teams, it is possible that the 
problem and solution space are being nar­
rowed down by decisions made by the Delft 
team. A series of steps have been put in 
place to avoid this, such as performing a 
fresh individual sketching session, mood 
boards and CAD designs. The physical de­
sign was primarily user tested earlier in the 
project to determine a good shape and ex­
pected placement of key interfaces, such 
as the button. While both qualitative and 
quantitative tests were performed, it can 
be discussed whether the adapted NPS 
method is fitting for evaluating a physical 
product as the research for the NPS meth­
od is aimed more at overall satisfaction. 
However, the results from the qualitative 
user tests fit well with the results of the 
NPS score. In some cases users first gave a 
lower rating to the two questions regarding 
the shape, but then expressed that they 
preferred that shape. It is reasonable to ex­
pect the informants to consider more de­
tails in their overall assessment compared 
to the two specific questions in the NPS 
method.
Manufacturing and 
Open Source
To enable makers to create a product that 
resembles a commercial product as close 
as possible, the team has chosen to think 
3D printing on a FDM printer into the de- 
sign to make it 3D printable. The finished 
model is both 3D printable and ready for 
mass production via injection moulding. 
This design enables the unique option for 
the PlasticScanner to be produced in any 
==PAGE:75==
75
quantity for two separate user types. It is 
possible to create a separate variant of the 
design, more optimised for 3D printing with 
less overhang, although at the expense of 
ergonomics. The team has focused on 
making it possible to 3D print, although the 
upright printing position described in sec­
tion 3.5.1 is more difficult for a new user to 
get perfect. The upright print orientation is 
necessary to obtain an aesthetic outer sur­
face which a surface with support would 
not result in, based on our tests. Further­
more, the current print takes about 26 hours 
to print with 40% support material which is 
a long print with a large proportion of sup­
port material. Creating a new design with­
out overhangs or a bare minimum of over­
hangs would make it easier and faster to 
print, thus making it more accessible for 
makers. But it is not possible to have the 
same design freedom and it would be hard­
er if not impossible to convey an experience 
of a sturdy and com- mercial product 
through FDM 3D print optimised parts. This 
raises the question whether it makes sense 
to have a 3D printed plastic scanner design 
or if it would be more optimal to have a 
commercial version and an easier 3D print­
ed design for the community version. Doing 
this would allow the community to have an 
easily printable shell suited for prototyping, 
and the commercial version would still have 
full design freedom (within the limits of 
mass production).
Open Source
Open source is at the heart of the PlasticS­
canner Project. The original Plastic scan- 
ner concept focused on creating a low cost 
and open source scanner on the market to 
be deployed in low-income countries as a 
socio-economic project. The concept has 
then grown into an open source community 
and attracted interest from commer- cial 
potential customers as well. Along the way 
from concept to product, challenges have 
arisen regarding the scan performance 
while keeping prices at an absolute min- 
imum. Increasing the precision of the scan 
results would require the scanner PCB to 
gain more precise and therefore signifi­
cantly more expensive components. The 
questions rise: How expensive is an open 
source project allowed to be while con- 
tinuing to have a growing community? Will a 
high price drive community members away? 
How to run Open source development when 
the community does not have funding for 
creating their own artefacts? These ques­
tions are important to consider when mak­
ing future decisions about the technical de­
sign and the accompanying impacts.
Replicability
The hardware design proposed in section 
3.5.2 uses surface mounted components 
with the standard 0603 footprints. While 
this footprint size does enable soldering by 
hand, it is hard due to the component size 
of 1.6 mm × 0.8 mm. This change was nec­
essary for the hardware design of the scan­
ner PCB to fit inside the scanner head. The 
downside of the use of 0603 components 
is that it makes it harder to make the PCB at 
home. One discord member stated: “The 
most intimidating part for me is SMD sol­
dering”[103]. It should be noted that the 
existing designs are based on SMD compo­
nents as well. Using smaller SMD compo­
nents will make the barrier of entry higher, 
thus only enabling experienced makers to 
replicate the design. A version based on 
mostly through-hole or larger SMD compo­
nents could be devel- oped to help the 
community better make boards. However, 
this change will drive up the cost of PCBs 
and components and might influence the 
performance of the board. The literature on 
replicability by Balka, Raasch, and Herstatt 
indicates that a major influencing factor is 
the users’ ability to source the necessary 
components [12]. To implement a design 
that includes MEMS sensors, or specialised 
compo- nents not available through major 
component resellers, will significantly de­
crease the replicability of the scanner, thus 
making it harder for the community to grow. 
Oppositely, the use of specialised compo­
nents as part of an open hardware devel- 
opment project can make the components 
accessible if the OSH project acts as a re­
seller. This could be done by either selling 
the components as kits for the user to sol­
der on or as finished boards, thus making 
==PAGE:76==
76
Discussion__
﻿__
specialised components available for mak­
ers. Another strategy could be to have a 
low-cost simple scanner for the community 
and a more specialised version for com­
mercial customers, as described in section 
3.6.4.
Documentation
This project could benefit from further im­
plementation guides and thorough online 
documentation. This is expected to lower 
the bar to get started on the hardware, al­
though the exact effectiveness has not 
been evaluated. Replicability is absolutely 
key [14] for a successful OSH project, and 
in this project the focus has been on creat­
ing a balance between replicability and 
commercial viability. The community mem­
bers’ understanding of this project has not 
been thoroughly evaluated, how- ever on­
line meetings and chats indicate an internal 
community understanding. As a result, new 
community members might require addi­
tional introduction to get started. The full 
content of the report, including thorough 
documentation for the electron- ics and 
software design, is to be published on the 
official PlasticScanner GitHub repository as 
a project delivery to the PlasticScanner 
project. This leaves a solid base for com­
munity members to contribute their knowl­
edge to the documentation and further 
lower the bar of entry. This would make it 
more accessible to scan and identify plas­
tics for more people, and hopefully make 
the world a better place, one piece of plas­
tic at a time.
==PAGE:77==
5.	 Conclusion
==PAGE:78==
78
Conclusion__
﻿__
In the thesis, a handheld plastic identifica­
tion tool has been developed to a state, 
where the physical and electronic hardware 
is manufacturable and functional. The ac­
companying software verifies the capability 
of the hardware and lays the groundwork 
for future refinements, additional features, 
and a fully developed polymer recognition 
model. 
Through the thesis, the current state of 
open source hardware has been described 
and discussed. It is concluded that there 
are several factors contributing to the suc­
cess of open source hardware projects. 
Several factors that are typically not con­
sidered significant for regular development 
projects, but are considered to have high 
impact on a OSH project. 
A major factor for success is the replicabili­
ty of a project. The research performed in­
dicates that key strategies for enhancing 
replicability is to create easily understand­
able documentation for all aspects of the 
product. Furthermore, the OSH actor needs 
to be able to source, manufacture and as­
semble the hardware. The thesis has 
worked on developing a good compromise 
between an OSH product that enables the 
user to easily make it themselves, enhanc­
ing the performance of the scanner, and 
creating good documentation, thereby en­
hancing the replicability of the project. 
Based on the research undertaken buy this 
thesis, this compromise positively contrib­
utes to the success of the project, by low­
ering the bar of entry for the community, 
while delivering a well performing product.
The thesis also highlights challenges asso­
ciated with OSH as a business model. A 
major challenge is the risk of copy-cats. 
However, OSH benefits of community con­
tributions, free advertising, and instant 
feedback, which (if properly utilised) can 
accelerate product development and thus 
give a competitive advantage. 
Furthermore, research indicates that being 
an open source hardware project has a 
competitive advantage for some customers 
due to a reduced risk of vendor bankruptcy 
or lock-in. 
Based on the findings from the research, as 
well as experience with feedback and de­
velopment through the online community 
throughout the project, the team finds the 
application of OSH an advantage for the 
development process of this project.
The team has focused on understanding 
the user, the use cases and the context of 
the PlasticScanner project. 
Two main segments of target users of the 
PlasticScanner has been identified: Individ­
ual makers and commercial recycling com­
panies. These two customer segments 
largely require the same hardware and soft­
ware, but the situation and intensity of 
which the device is used, differs. 
The team has identified key requirements 
based on the necessary requirements for a 
scanner fitting the more challenging use 
case of a commercial recycler, such as 
identification accuracy, use with gloves, 
price, and recallability. Furthermore, the re­
quirements of a community version for indi­
vidual makers have been developed. These 
two main target groups have formed the 
basis for the development of the plastic 
scanner.
Based on the use cases and developed de­
sign, an appropriate business model has 
been developed to fit both customer seg­
ments. The primary company activities and 
revenue sources stem from two sources. 
The first is the development and sale of 
manufactured development boards and 
complete PlasticScanners. The second is a 
data science and software unit, developing 
the recognition model and selling custom 
data services and model training. By offer­
ing commercial customers cheap and easy 
access to a scanner, it allows them to rough 
sort large batches of the same material 
rapidly. With the goal of increasing recy­
cling rates, this is expected to be where the 
PlasticScanner has the highest impact, 
compared to other use cases. Compared to 
implementing an automated system for in­
dividual processing, the PlasticScanner of­
fers a significantly faster and cheaper way 
to sort batches. The flexibility in software 
offers further advantages in the specific 
use cases of both individuals and commer­
cial users. 
The design from the TU Delft project has 
been reviewed, highlighting a functional 
==PAGE:79==
79
design with good considerations for the 
use cases. A range of areas for improve­
ment have also been identified, such as 
cost of repairability, ergonomic consider­
ations, electronics design, and maturing of 
the physical design including design for 
manufacturing and assembly.
The physical design has been redesigned 
from the ground up to ensure the previous 
design had not become fixated, and en­
abled the team to explore new options and 
ensure a performant design. The design 
has been tested by the users, and design 
choices has been made based on user 
feedback. Through a range of prototyping 
methods, three major iterations and ac­
companying tests have been completed to 
ensure the new scanner design fulfils the 
necessary requirements. 
The design has been optimised for manu­
facturing by injection moulding, and initial 
simulations for injection moulding perfor­
mance has been undertaken. Furthermore, 
the design has been assessed and verified 
by three manufacturing companies to be 
injection moulding ready, with only mould 
design and minor changes required.
Through these processes, it has been en­
sured that the design fits e.g.:the required 
electronics, provides a comfortable and se­
cure grip, is designed for water resistance 
and displays affordance for gripping cor­
rectly.
Based on existing designs from the Plas­
ticScanner project and open source reposi­
tories, the electronic design of the scanner 
has been redesigned to fit a smaller foot­
print, as well as a modular design with two 
new separate PCBs has been introduced. 
The modular design consists of a scanner 
PCB containing the sensors, ADC and NIR 
emitting LEDs, and a controller PCB hous­
ing the microcontroller, computation and 
power circuitry.
The modular design allows for easy hard­
ware upgrades or repairs, and it gives the 
community more options for custom imple­
mentation in their specific configuration. 
The hardware has been upgraded and 
adapted to include a spectral colour sensor 
and use components with wider availability 
to ensure replicability and volume manu­
facturing. 
The electronic design was undertaken in 
three major iterations and testing. The open 
source community members have continu­
ously verified the design and contributed 
with changes and feedback. 
To further develop the scanner and verify 
that the hardware capabilities can satisfy 
the requirements, a firmware for the micro­
controller was created. The firmware can 
successfully control all necessary compo­
nents, read data from these, transfer data 
via networks and execute a compiled neu­
ral network and render images for the dis­
play, as well as other smaller functions. 
Finally, data from scanning a range of plas­
tic samples are presented and compared 
through application of Beers Law. The data 
analysis shows that some plastic types can 
be partly grouped, while others are difficult 
to discern. The data is further normalised 
and used to train a polymer recognition 
model through machine learning. Testing 
showed some variation in NIR readings, 
which it has not been possible to compen­
sate for through software. Therefore, fur­
ther research on factors impacting the 
scan, possible compensation or calibration 
methods for future implantation would ben­
efit the project. 
The variation in data quality is expected to 
have impacted the polymer recognition 
model. The trained machine learning model 
does not achieve a 90 % accuracy when 
training for recognising five main types of 
plastic. However, the model reaches ~90-
100 % accuracy when only testing between 
two polymers. Increasing the size of the 
data set and further verifying the data qual­
ity is expected to improve the accuracy 
across multiple polymer types, leading to 
the full completion of a demanded product.
In conclusion, team behind this master the­
sis has developed an open source NIR 
based handheld polymer identification tool, 
of which the hardware and physical design 
is tested and ready for pilot production. An 
accompanying specific use case for the 
project leads to a presented business case 
with a future roadmap for the final realisa­
tion of the handheld PlasticScanner.
==PAGE:80==
80
Conclusion__
﻿__
==PAGE:81==
6.	 Future 
development
==PAGE:82==
82
Future development__
﻿__
This section covers recommendations for 
future development, and discusses ideas or 
directions that could have been taken 
during this project, and how they could 
have progressed the project in other direc­
tions.
Scanner PCB
The scanner PCB has been developed and 
tested in several iterations, but there are 
still more development to be done, if the 
scanner should be further enhanced. Com­
munity members on discord has raised 
concerns regarding the signal-to-noise ra­
tio of the current scanner. Further test and 
development should be put into the hard­
ware design of the scanner, in order to mi­
nimise noise for optimal scan results. The 
team has discussed an idea of having the 
LED’s and sensor on a separate board avail­
able for purchase, making the rest of the 
board inexpensive to make. This could also 
allow multiple LED/sensor setups, and en­
able the user to swap the LED child board, 
to gain new scanning opportunities. The 
LED’s and sensor are the most expensive 
components, and take up 50% of the total 
cost of the product. Research has also been 
put into sourcing a custom component, 
combining the emitters and sensor into one 
component that is sealed off with protec­
tive glass. A custom sensor like this could 
(if ordered in high enough quantities) be fi­
nancially feasible, and give a competitive 
advantage, if specific wavelengths are 
added, that currently is not available on the 
“off-the-shelf” market, but only by custom 
order. Furthermore, competitors would 
have to source the part first, in order to be 
able to directly copy the PlasticScanner 
design, or buy the components through the 
PlasticScanner project. Lastly, more re­
search and testing of the scanner and ma­
chine learning model is required, and a larg­
er dataset is needed. This should be on the 
top of the list for future development.
MCU PCB
The proposed controller PCB is based on 
an external ESP feather development board 
by Adafruit. This allows for easy upgrade of 
the microcontroller unit for development 
purposes. The development board by Ada­
fruit is open source, which enabled the 
PlasticScanner project to produce the 
boards if Adafruit stopped production. An 
integrated PCB would allow us to reduce 
the size of the PCB and create a more tight­
ly integrated design. For a commercial ver­
sion of the controller unit, a solution with an 
ESP32 SOC integrated in the design is nec­
essary to keep costs down, and have full 
control of the design. The integrated solu­
tion would enable the use of USB-C port for 
communication with the ESP, where the 
current use is limited to power only. The 
team therefore recommend developing an 
integrated solution. Another feature to add 
in a new design of the controller unit, is to 
enable a larger 18650 battery, and thus sig­
nificantly increase battery life. Customers 
like Plastix indicate that data for documen­
tation is what delivers value to them. Hans 
Axel from Plastix described how data is ab­
solutely key to their business. “What drives 
us is data. Data, data, data … for Transpar­
ency, and documentation”. Future hard­
ware development could include incorpo­
rating a small macro camera, GPS and a 
cellular modem to improve the data deliv­
ery capabilities even more. This would 
make it possible for Plastix to document 
when and where an item was scanned, and 
exactly how it looked, and thereby assess if 
the material they receive match the docu­
mentation. Lastly, the current design builds 
upon an external screen development 
board, which has very few components, 
but a large connector. In a future version, 
the team would recommend developing a 
better screen design. The team recom­
mends using the same TFT screen compo­
nent, but integrate the screen connection 
in the PlasticScanner design. This could be 
done by integrating it into the controller 
board, or maintain the modular design by 
designing a screen board with mounting 
features optimal for interfacing the top-
shell of the PlasticScanner.
Digital infrastructure
The current state of the handheld scanner 
proposed in this report has the hardware 
required to connect to Wi-Fi or Bluetooth 
devices, allowing the scanner to directly 
submit material data to a database, thereby 
making the data more available to custom­
==PAGE:83==
83
ers who need it, such as Plastix. But the de­
sign lacks the digital infrastructure for cen­
tralised data gathering and ML training, as 
the software side of the PlasticScanner 
was not in scope for this project. The scan­
ner need a platform for handling plastic 
scan data generated by the community, 
and by the PlasticScanner project. Gather­
ing data though a community of plastic 
scanners pose a dimension of challenges, 
regarding handling and creation of metada­
ta for the user generated data. Further­
more, user-generated data also poses new 
legal and privacy related challenges, that 
need to be dealt with. Finally, a process is 
needed to verify the quality of data re­
ceived from community scanners. A cen­
tralised training of models would also re­
quire the proposed digital platform to 
enable update of the firmware over-the-air 
(OTA), thus enabling a plastic scanner to 
become better over time, by enhancing 
only the firmware.
The digital User experience of the proposed 
handheld PlasticScanner, is not fully devel­
oped, and require further work to be cus­
tomer ready. The Delft team proposed a UX 
design, and it could be ideal to incorporate 
their findings on UX design into a final de­
sign. A UX design should be customisable, 
meaning that a given scanner can be cus­
tomised into giving the user feedback like 
“PP” on a green background or “Not PP” on 
a red background for easy sorting of a sin­
gle type of plastic, or “PP -> container 3” or 
customise the colour feedback for the vari­
ous outputs, thus for making it easy for a 
sorting worker to perform the job correct. 
The controller board does enable BLE, Wi-
Fi and mesh communication, and a cellular 
connected board could easily be imple­
mented also. Developing a companion app, 
controlled either via BLE, Wi-Fi, or the inter­
net via cellular would be an ideal next step 
for the development, as it would enable the 
user to control and customise the scanner 
on the go. Lastly, the digital infrastructure 
need to enable the user to share and dis­
tribute scan data easily. E.g. a harbour need 
to store scan data for all items sorted in a 
specific bin, to be able to document that a 
given sample is scanned to be e.g. 100 % 
PP.
Product roadmap
A future set of product offerings from Plas­
ticScanner include both physical products 
and custom data services. The roadmap 
can be seen on figure 6.1. Four different 
physical products are proposed with differ­
ent features:
	‐
Devkit: Ensuring a continuously updat­
ed and accessible development plat­
form for the OS community and makers 
is important for development, feedback, 
and innovation. The devkit can also be 
used by more traditional companies to 
integrate in a custom process of theirs.
	‐
MVP version: A scanner with an ex­
tremely competitive entry price is the 
focus for this version, which is the ver­
sion developed in this report. The de­
vice has the goal to help sort plastic 
into the main fractions, while keeping 
the price low. The platform from the 
controller board allows for great flexibil­
ity in software and an upgrade path.
	‐
Pro version: This version aims to offer 
even greater accuracy in identification 
and to identify combinations of poly­
mers, for example in fishing nets. Re­
search needs to be done to understand 
if a MEMS sensor is required to reach 
these features, or if it can be achieved 
through additional InGaAs sensors and 
IR LEDs. Like the MVP model, the Pro 
model aims to significantly undercut 
other scanners capable of this, even if a 
MEMS sensor is required.
	‐
Specialist version: This scanner aims 
to offer an expanded level of recogni­
tion features, including specific resins 
and polymer compositions. A MEMS 
sensor is expected to be required to of­
fer these features, and potentially addi­
tional sensors such as a Raman module. 
The pitch for this model is to compete 
with current laboratory processes, such 
as desktop spectroscopy devices. While 
this is expected to be the most expen­
sive device offered, it is seen as key to 
select components strategically and 
combining with clever software to offer 
a very competitive price.
Finally, an additional software offering is 
planned. Companies can have very specific 
items they need to identify (ML training) or 
==PAGE:84==
84
Future development__
﻿__
need specific data transferred to a system 
of theirs. By creating a framework and pro­
cess for the typical custom requests, the 
flexible hardware platform allows PlasticS­
canner to offer a set of additional software 
services.
Other applications
The applications of NIR spectroscopy can 
seem endless. So far the team has found 
applications for sorting of coffee beans, 
quality assessment of silk, rugs, cigars, 
fruits, cereals, textiles, and bowling lanes 
[91]. NIR is widely used because it enables 
non-intrusive testing [91]. This means that 
the business case for using the PlasticS­
canner is not limited to plastic identifica­
tion, but extends to e.g. textile identifica­
tion tool. Great amounts of research has 
gone into NIR spectroscopy of fruit sugar 
content measurements [91], or determining 
the type of meat in a sample based on the 
NIR reflectance of the fat [104]. A last ex­
ample is the use of NIR for identification of 
counterfeit medicine [91]. Customising the 
proposed PlasticScanner to a new purpose 
would only require the training of a new 
model to fit a specific purpose, and possi­
bly changing LEDs to fit the specific pur­
pose. The plastic scanner design can easily 
be adopted for new spectroscopy applica­
tions, and thus broadening the use case of 
the PlasticScanner from plastic only, to a 
general Open NIR Scanner, enabling mak­
ers to apply NIR spectroscopy more easily.
MVP: Low- cost discrete 
spectroscopy scanner for main 
fractions.
Pro version: Entry MEMS sensor 
equipped scanner for great 
accuracy and polymer mixes.
Specialist: Resin and polymer 
composition identiﬁcation capable 
scanner (pitch: skip the lab).
Time
MVP V2: Update LEDs and InGaAs 
sensor to ensure competitiveness. 
Software > hardware.
Product oﬀerings
Devkit V1
Devkit V2
Devkit V3
Pro devkit V1
Pro devkit V2
Pro devkit V3
Specialist devkit v1
Specialist devkit v2
Custom functions: Oﬀer custom 
functions, such as speciﬁc ML 
models, integrations or validation.
Figure 6.1: Proposed product roadmap
==PAGE:85==
References
==PAGE:86==
86
References__
﻿__
[1] F. Hannig and J. Teich, “Open Source 
Hardware,” vol. 54. IEEE Computer 
Society, pp. 111–115, Oct. 2021. doi: 
10.1109/MC.2021.3099046.
[2] Open Hardware academy, “Introduction 
to Open Hardware.” Available: https://
hackmd.io/k3uEA4e_SAG1fw5R7p­
m G M Q ? v i e w # I n t r o d u c ­
tion-to-Open-Hardware
[3] G. Haff, How open source ate software: 
Understand the open source move­
ment and so much more. Apress Me­
dia 
LLC, 
2018, 
pp. 
1–180. 
doi: 
10.1007/978-1-4842-3894-3.
[4] C. Peterson, “How I coined the term 
’open source’ | Opensource.com.” 
2018. Available: https://opensource.
com/article/18/2/coining-term-open-
source-software
[5] Wikipedia contributors, “Open source.” 
Available: 
https://en.wikipedia.org/
wiki/Open_source
[6] Jacques Bughin, “wiring the open 
source enterprise,” McKinsey Quar­
terly, vol. January, Jan. 2012.
[7] 
Opensource.com, 
“What 
is 
open 
source? | Opensource.com.” Available: 
https://opensource.com/resources/
what-open-source
[8] “DIN_SPEC_3105-1.”
[9] “DIN_SPEC_3105-2.”
[10] Z. Li and W. Seering, “Does open 
source hardware have a sustainable 
business model?” Proceedings of the 
International Conference on Engi­
neering Design, ICED, vol. 2019–Au­
gust, pp. 2239–2248, 2019, doi: 
10.1017/dsi.2019.230.
[11] Brian Heater, “Arduino sets its sights 
on enterprise applications with new 
funding round.” Jul. 2022. Available: 
https://tcrn.ch/3zo9i1g
[12] K. Balka, C. Raasch, and C. Herstatt, 
“The effect of selective openness on 
value creation in user innovation com­
munities,” Journal of Product Innova­
tion Management, vol. 31, no. 2, pp. 
392–407, 2014, doi: 10.1111/jpim.12102.
[13] J. Bonvoisin, R. Mies, and J.-F. Boujut, 
“Seven observations and research 
questions about Open Design and 
Open Source Hardware,” doi: 10.1017/
dsj.2021.14.
[14] R. Antoniou, R. Pinquié, J. F. Boujut, A. 
Ezoji, and E. Dekoninck, “Identifying 
the factors affecting the replicability 
of open source hardware designs,” in 
Proceedings of the design society, 
2021, vol. 1, pp. 1817–1826. doi: 
10.1017/pds.2021.443.
[15] The Open Next team @ DDC - Danish 
Design Center, “Show me the damn 
money!” 2022.
[16] M. Moritz, T. Redlich, and J. Wulfsberg, 
“Best practices and pitfalls in open 
source hardware,” in Advances in in­
telligent systems and computing, 
2018, vol. 721, pp. 200–210. doi: 
10.1007/978-3-319-73450-7{\_}20.
[17] Marks & Clerk, “How Can Patents Help 
Your Business - Lexology.” Mar. 2019. 
Available: https://www.lexology.com/
library/detail.aspx?g=1d2d622d-
d097-43ca-ba53-986699ca4069
[18] RJ Bardsley, “Arduino Empowers Gen Z 
to Transform the Enterprise World | 
Business Wire.” Jun. 2022. Available: 
https://www.businesswire.com/news/
home/20220607005327/en/Ardui­
no-Empowers-Gen-Z-to-Transform-
the-Enterprise-World
[19] J. M. Pearce, “Emerging Business 
Models for Open Source Hardware,” 
Journal of Open Hardware, vol. 1, no. 
1, Mar. 2017, doi: 10.5334/joh.4.
[20] M. Cruickshank, “Nest shutdown a key 
problem for the Internet of Things.” 
Apr. 2016. Available: https://www.
themanufacturer.com/articles/nest-
product-shutdown-shows-a-key-
problem-for-the-internet-of-things/
[21] “Google Graveyard - Killed by Google.” 
Available: https://killedbygoogle.com/
[22] R. Amadeo, “Google’s constant prod­
uct shutdowns are damaging its brand 
| Ars Technica.” Apr. 2019. Available: 
https://arstechnica.com/gad­
gets/2019/04/googles-constant-
product-shutdowns-are-damaging-
its-brand/
[23] C. Dussutour, “CERN, an international 
==PAGE:87==
87
organisation paving the way for the 
use of open source software in re­
search | Joinup.” Sep. 2020. Available: 
https://joinup.ec.europa.eu/collec­
tion/open-source-observatory-osor/
document/cern-international-organi­
sation-paving-way-use-open-
source-software-research
[24] RepRap contributors, “RepRap - 
RepRap.” 
Available: 
https://reprap.
org/wiki/RepRap
[25] E. M. Rogers, “Diffusion of Innovations, 
5th Edition (Google eBook),” p. 576, 
2003, Available: https://books.google.
com/books/about/Diffusion_of_Inno­
vations_5th_Edition.html?id=9U1K5L­
jUOwEC
[26] Danish Design Center, “User guide to 
the Open Source Ecosystem Toolkit.” 
Available: https://ddc.dk/tools/open-
source-hardware/
[27] CCOHS, “Hand Tool Ergonomics - Tool 
Design : OSH Answers.” Available: 
https://www.ccohs.ca/oshanswers/
ergonomics/handtools/tooldesign.
html
[28] C.-Y. Wang and D.-C. Cai, “Hand tool 
handle design based on hand mea­
surements,” 2017.
[29] IDF, “What are Affordances? | IxDF.” 
Available: 
https://www.interac­
tion-design.org/literature/topics/af­
fordances
[30] A. R. Tilley and Henry Dreyfuss Asso­
ciates., The measure of man and 
woman : human factors in design. 
2001.
[31] Steve. Krug, “Rocket surgery made 
easy : the do-it-yourself guide to find­
ing and fixing usability problems,” p. 
161, 2010.
[32] F. F. Reichheld, “The One Number You 
Need to Grow.” 2003. Available: 
https://hbr.org/2003/12/the-one-
number-you-need-to-grow
[33] “What Is Net Promoter?” Available: 
https://www.netpromoter.com/know/
[34] Wikipedia contributors, “Near-infrared 
spectroscopy.” 
Available: 
https://
en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Near-infrared_
spectroscopy
[35] J. WRobinson, E. MSkelly Frame, and 
G. I. MFrame, “Undergraduate Instru­
mental Analysis, Sixth Edition,” 2005.
[36] D. Aiken, S. Ramsey, T. Mayo, S. G. 
Lambrakos, and J. Peak, “Beer-Lam­
bert-Law Parametric Model of Reflec­
tance Spectra for Dyed Fabrics,” 2016.
[37] H. Masoumi and S. M. Safavi, “Identifi­
cation and classification of plastic 
resins using near infrared reflectance 
spectroscopy.” 
Available: 
https://
www.researchgate.net/publica­
tion/285330830
[38] S. Zhu, H. Chen, M. Wang, X. Guo, Y. 
Lei, and G. Jin, “Plastic solid waste 
identification system based on near 
infrared spectroscopy in combination 
with support vector machine,” Ad­
vanced Industrial and Engineering 
Polymer Research, vol. 2, no. 2, pp. 
77–81, Apr. 2019, doi: 10.1016/J.
AIEPR.2019.04.001.
[39] D. M. Scott, “A two-colour near-infra­
red sensor for sorting recycled plastic 
waste Comparative Study of the 
Chemical Compositions of Liquid Fuel 
from Thermal Cracking of Low and 
High-Density 
Polyethylene 
Plastic 
Waste,” Meas. Sci. Technol, vol. 6, p. 
156, 1995.
[40] M.K. ALAM, “Near-infrared spectros­
copy and neural networks for resin 
identification,” Spectroscopy, vol. 9, 
no. 2, pp. 30–40, Feb. 1994.
[41] W. H. A. M. Van Den Broek, E. P. P. A. 
Derks, E. W. Van De Ven, D. Wienke, P. 
Geladi, and L. M. C. Buydens, “Plastic 
identification 
by 
remote 
sensing 
spectroscopic NIR imaging using ker­
nel partial least squares (KPLS),” Che­
mometrics and Intelligent Laboratory 
Systems, vol. 35, no. 2, pp. 187–197, 
Dec. 
1996, 
doi: 
10.1016/S0169-
7439(96)00056-1.
[42] Hamed Masoumi, Seyed Mohsen Sa­
favi, and Zahra Khani, “Identification 
and classification of plastic resins us­
ing near infrared reflectance spec­
troscopy,” International Scholarly and 
Scientific Research & Innovation, vol. 
6, no. 5, pp. 877–884, 2012.
[43] British Design Council, “Eleven les­
==PAGE:88==
88
References__
﻿__
sons: managing design in eleven glob­
al brands,” British Design Council, 
2005, Available: www.designcouncil.
org.uk
[44] British Design Council, “Framework 
for 
Innovation: 
Design 
Council’s 
evolved Double Diamond.” Available: 
https://www.designcouncil.org.uk/
our-work/skills-learning/tools-frame­
works/framework-for-innovation-de­
sign-councils-evolved-double-dia­
mond/
[45] European Parliament and Council, 
“Establishing the identification sys­
tem for packaging materials,” 1997.
[46] ASTM, “Standard Practice for Coding 
Plastic Manufactured Articles for Res­
in Identification.” Jan. 2022. Available: 
https://compass.astm.org/docu­
m e n t / ? c o n t e n t C o d e = A S T ­
M
%
7
C
D
7
6
1
1
_
D 76 1 1 M -2 1 % 7 C e n - U S & p rox y ­
cl=https%3A%2F%2Fsecure.astm.
org&fromLogin=true
[47] R. Geyer, J. R. Jambeck, and K. L. Law, 
“Production, use, and fate of all plas­
tics ever made,” Science Advances, 
vol. 3, no. 7, Jul. 2017, doi: 10.1126/
S C I A D V.1 7 0 0 7 8 2 / S U P P L { \ _ }
FILE/1700782{\_}SM.PDF.
[48] P. T. Tang, “Slutrapport, PolySort og 
PolySort PLUS Fleksibel sortering af 
plastaffald,” 2018.
[49] Michael Pinkel, Jürgen Deditz, and 
Renato Sarc, “Study about Plastic 
Sorting and Recycling,” 2019.
[50] Markus Glavind, “PlasticScanner Sen­
sor board – myLists | DigiKey.” Avail­
able: https://www.digikey.dk/da/myl­
ists/list/Y1S1ANYGRS
[51] C. L. Tan and H. Mohseni, “Emerging 
technologies for high performance in­
frared detectors,” vol. 7. Walter de 
Gruyter GmbH, pp. 169–197, Jan. 
2018. 
doi: 
10.1515/
NANOPH-2017-0061/HTML.
[52] Digikey, “0090-3111-185 Advanced 
Photonix | Sensorer, transducere | 
DigiKey.” 
Available: 
https://www.
digikey.dk/da/products/detail/ad­
v
a
n
c
e
d
-
p
h
o
t
o
­
nix/0090-3111-185/13165774
[53] Europa-parlementet og rådet, “EU Di­
rektiv 2019/904 - Reduktion af visse 
plastproduktioners 
miljøpåvirkning.” 
Europa parlementet og europa rådet, 
Jun. 2019. Available: http://data.euro­
pa.eu/eli/dir/2019/904
[54] Thygesen and Johan, “Udvidet produ­
centansvar på fiskeredskaber Anal­
yse af mulige organiserings-modeller i 
Danmark,” Miljøstyrelsen, Apr. 2020.
[55] Regeringen,“ Udvidet producentans­
var for emballage og engangsplast­
produkter.” Regeringen, Jan. 2022. 
Available: 
https://mim.dk/me­
dia/231679/aftale-om-udvidet-pro­
ducentansvar-for-emballage-og-en­
gangsprodukter.pdf
[56] M. Glavind and J. De Vos, “BessTrade 
interview and visit.” 2022.
[57] M. Glavind and G. Brandt Gregersen, 
“Plastix visit and interview.” Dec. 
2022.
[58] Danish Design Center, “Open source: 
Giving your product away is the best 
idea you’ve never had.” Sep. 2021. 
Available: https://ddc.dk/giving-your-
product-away-for-free-is-the-best-
idea-youve-never-had/
[59] R. Mies, J. Bonvoisin, and R. Jochem, 
“Harnessing the Synergy Potential of 
Open Source Hardware Communi­
ties,” 
pp. 
129–145, 
2019, 
doi: 
10.1007/978-3-319-97788-1{\_}11.
[60] PlastiX, “How we do it - Plastix.” Avail­
able: https://plastixglobal.com/how­
wedoit/
[61] Stanmech, “Plastics Identification Flow 
Chart - Articles - STANMECH Tech­
nologies Inc.” Sep. 2019. Available: 
https://www.stanmech.com/articles/
plastics-identification-flow-chart
[62] Sony, “SWIR image sensor Specifica­
tions, Device structure Imaging char­
acteristics,” 2022. Available: https://
www.sony.net/swir-tech
[63] Aage vestergaard Larsen A/S, “What 
do we buy?” Available: https://avl.dk/
en/procurement/hvad-koeber-vi/
[64] D. Buytaert, “Investing in Open Source 
==PAGE:89==
89
startups | Underscore VC.” Available: 
https://underscore.vc/blog/investing-
in-open-source-startups/
[65] B. Heater, “Arduino sets its sights on 
enterprise 
applications 
with 
new 
funding round | TechCrunch.” Avail­
able: 
https://techcrunch.
com/2022/06/07/arduino-sets-its-
sights-on-enterprise-applications-
with-new-funding-round/
[66] Wouter Kets, “How do you design an 
Audi.” 2016.
[67] M. Glavind, J. Piersma, J. Motuzaité, D. 
Verkerk, and G. Bouman, “Plastic 
scanner 2.0,” TU Delft, Delft, Jun. 
2022.
[68] C. M. Hoffman and R. Joan-Arinyo, 
“CAD and the product master model,” 
1998.
[69] CAD2M, “The Master Model Tech­
nique.” Jul. 2017. Available: https://
blogs.solidworks.com/tech/2017/07/
become-solidworks-master-mas­
ter-model-technique.html
[70] Hubs, “What’s the best SPI surface 
finish for your injection molded part?” 
Available: 
https://www.hubs.com/
knowledge-base/injection-mold­
ing-spi-surface-finishes/
[71] Erik M. Kjær, How to select the right 
plastics material, 2nd ed. 2006.
[72] Adafruit, “Adafruit AS7341 10-Channel 
Light / Color Sensor Breakout [STEM­
MA QT / Qwiic] : ID 4698 : $15.95 : 
Adafruit Industries, Unique & fun DIY 
electronics and kits.” Available: https://
www.adafruit.com/product/4698
[73] Adafruit, “Adafruit NAU7802 24-Bit 
ADC - STEMMA QT / Qwiic : ID 4538 : 
$5.95 : Adafruit Industries, Unique & 
fun DIY electronics and kits.” Avail­
able: https://www.adafruit.com/prod­
uct/4538
[74] “Announcing ESP32-S3 for AIoT Appli­
cations | Espressif Systems.” Dec. 
2020. Available: https://www.espres­
sif.com/en/news/ESP32_S3
[75] “ESP32-S2-WROOM-I-N4 Espressif 
Systems | RF/IF and RFID | DigiKey.” 
Available: https://www.digikey.dk/en/
products/detail/espressif-systems/
ESP32-S2-WROOM-I-N4/11613167
[76] “ESP32-S3-WROOM-1-N4 Espressif 
Systems | RF/IF and RFID | DigiKey.” 
Available: https://www.digikey.dk/en/
products/detail/espressif-systems/
ESP32-S3-WROOM-1-N4/16162639
[77] J.-L. Aufranc, “Leverage ESP32-S3 AI 
capabilities with the ESP-DL library - 
CNX Software.” Aug. 2021. Available: 
h t t p s : / / w w w. c n x - s o f t w a r e .
com/2021/08/29/esp32-s3-ai-capa­
bilities-esp-dl-library/
[78] A. Voronova, “All About USB-C: Resis­
tors And Emarkers | Hackaday.” 2023. 
Available: 
https://hackaday.
com/2023/01/04/all-about-usb-c-re­
sistors-and-emarkers/
[79] “I2C Bus Range and Electrical Specifi­
cations, 
Freescale 
9S12 
HCS12 
MC9S12 I2C Hardware.” Available: 
http://www.mosaic-industries.com/
e m b e d d e d - s y s t e m s / s b c - s i n ­
gle-board-computers/freescale-
hcs12-9s12-c-language/instru­
ment-control/i2c-bus-specifications
[80] J. de Vos, “DB2.x-Firmware/main.cpp 
at 
main 
 
Plastic-Scanner/
DB2.x-Firmware.” 
2022. 
Available: 
https://github.com/Plastic-Scanner/
DB2.x-Firmware/blob/main/app/main.
cpp
[81] S. Mistry and D. Coleman, “arduino_ti­
nyml_workshop.ipynb - Colaborato­
ry.” Available: https://colab.research.
google.com/github/arduino/Ardu­
inoTensorFlowLiteTutorials/blob/mas­
ter/GestureToEmoji/arduino_tinyml_
workshop.ipynb
[82] J. De Vos, “Plastic Scanner - Training 
model.ipynb - Colaboratory.” Avail­
able: 
https://colab.research.google.
com/drive/1mmC0EGNghU0gmHd­
P a k f aT 9 7 0 c u B Z b C d o # s c r o l l ­
To=-37xTor5cltH
[83] Eugene Dorfman, “How Much Data Is 
Required for Machine Learning? - 
PostIndustria.” Mar. 2022. Available: 
https://postindustria.com/how-much-
data-is-required-for-machine-learn­
ing/
[84] R. S. Geiger et al., “‘Garbage in, gar­
==PAGE:90==
90
References__
﻿__
bage out’ revisited: What do machine 
learning application papers report 
about human-labeled training data?” 
Quantitative Science Studies, vol. 2, 
no. 3, pp. 795–827, Nov. 2021, doi: 
10.1162/QSS{\_}A{\_}00144.
[85] A. Straller and B. Gessler, “Identifica­
tion of Plastic Types Using Discrete 
Near Infrared Reflectance Spectros­
copy,” 2012. Available: https://www.
r e s e a r c h g a t e . n e t / p u b l i c a ­
tion/337868860
[86] PlasticScanner Project, “Training mod­
el.” Available: https://colab.research.
google.com/drive/1mmC0EGNg­
hU0gmHdPakfaT970cuBZbCdo
[87] Armin Straller, “ReReMeter GitHub re­
pository.” 2019. Available: https://
github.com/arminstr/reremeter
[88] Google Developers, “Normalization.” 
Available: https://developers.google.
com/machine-learning/data-prep/
transform/normalization
[89] E. W. C. Donald A. Burns, “Handbook 
of Near-Infrared Analysis, Practical 
Spectroscopy,” p. 836, 2007.
[90] H. Ikasamo, “Hieromon/AutoConnect: 
An Arduino library for ESP8266/ESP32 
WLAN configuration at runtime with 
the Web interface.” 2023. Available: 
https://github.com/Hieromon/Auto­
Connect
[91] Blynk, “OTA: Firmware Over-The-Air 
updates - Blynk Documentation.” 
2023. Available: https://docs.blynk.io/
en/getting-started/updating-devic­
es-firmwares-ota
[92] H. Ikasamo, “OTA Updates - AutoCon­
nect 
for 
ESP8266/ESP32.” 
2023. 
Available: https://hieromon.github.io/
AutoConnect/otaupdate.html
[93] Tensor Flow documentation, “Custom 
training: walkthrough   |.” Available: 
https://www.tensorflow.org/tutorials/
customization/custom_training_walk­
through
[94] Adafruit, “Adafruit ESP32-S2 Feather.” 
Available: https://learn.adafruit.com/
adafruit-esp32-s2-feather
[95] “Training and Validation Loss in Deep 
Learning | Baeldung on Computer Sci­
ence.” Nov. 2022. Available: https://
www.baeldung.com/cs/training-vali­
dation-loss-deep-learning
[96] Simplilearn, “What is Epoch in Machine 
Learning? | Simplilearn.” 2023. Avail­
able: https://www.simplilearn.com/tu­
torials/machine-learning-tutorial/
what-is-epoch-in-machine-learning
[97] “CS231n Convolutional Neural Net­
works for Visual Recognition.” Avail­
able: 
https://cs231n.github.io/neu­
ral-networks-3/
[98] European Commission, “Europe’s Sea­
ports 2030: Challenges Ahead.” 2013. 
Available: https://ec.europa.eu/com­
mission/presscorner/detail/en/
MEMO_13_448
[99] N. Prieto, R. Roehe, P. Lavín, G. Batten, 
and S. Andrés, “Application of near in­
frared reflectance spectroscopy to 
predict meat and meat products qual­
ity: A review,” Meat Science, vol. 83, 
pp. 175–186, doi: 10.1016/j.meats­
ci.2009.04.016.
[100] Simplilearn, What is Epoch in Ma­
chine Learning? | Simplilearn, 2023. 
[Online]. Available: https://www.sim­
plilearn.com/tutorials/machine-learn­
ing-tutorial/what- 
is-epoch-in-ma­
chine-learning.
[101] CS231n Convolutional Neural Net­
works for Visual Recognition. [Online]. 
Avail- able: https://cs231n.github.io/
neural-networks-3/.
[102] European Commission, Europe’s Sea­
ports 2030: Challenges Ahead, 2013. 
[Online]. Available: https://ec.europa.
eu/commission/presscorner/detail/
en/ MEMO_13_448.
[103] M. Glavind and A. Bryant, Discord: 
How can we better help each other 
make working Scanners? 2023.
[104] N. Prieto, R. Roehe, P. Lavín, G. Bat­
ten, and S. Andrés, “Application of 
near infrared reflectance spectrosco­
py to predict meat and meat products 
quality: A review,” Meat Science, vol. 
83, pp. 175–186, DOI: 10.1016/j.meats­
ci.2009.04. 016.
==PAGE:91==
Appendix
==PAGE:92==
A.1
List of abbreviations
Abbreviation
Description
ADC
Analogue to digital converter
CAD
Computer-aided Design
DIN
German Institute for Standardisation
FDM
fused deposition modelling 3D print
HDPE
High-density Polyethylene
IDE
Integrated Development Environment
IM
Injection Moulding
LDPE
Low-density Polyethylene
MEMS
Micro Electro-Mechanical Systems
MIR
Mid-infrared
NIR
Near-infrared
OS
Open-Source
OSH
Open-Source Hardware
OSS
Open-Source Software
PCB
Printed Circuit board
PE
Polyethylene
PET
Polyethylene terephthalate
PETG
Glycol Modified version of PET for 3D printing
PLA
Poly
PS
Polystyrene
PVC
Polyvinyl chloride
SLA
Stereolithography 3D print
SLS
Selective laser sintering 3D print
SWIR
Short wavelength infrared Light
TPU
Thermoplastic Polyurethane
Table A.1: Abbreviations used in the report
App. 2
PlasticScanner
==PAGE:93==
List of Figures
1
Scientific polymer spectroscopy plot, with PlasticScanner wavelengths
as red lines.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
2.1
OSH replicability flowchart by Antoniou et al.[14] . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.2
Strategic Approaches Model [15] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
2.3
Illustration of optimal grip shape for hand tools [28]
. . . . . . . . . . .
17
2.4 Illustration of the 12 degree angle. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3.1
Visit at Plastix . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
3.2
Customer mapping over time . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
3.3
Ecosystem building . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30
3.4 Ecosystem mapping
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
3.5
User journey map for key activities at Plastix . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 32
3.6
User journey map for Plastix identification process . . . . . . . . . . . . 32
3.7
User journey for individuals needing to identify plastic . . . . . . . . . . 33
3.8
Companies interested in the PlasticScanner by industry. . . . . . . . . . 38
3.9 Business Model Canvas . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 40
3.10 Overview of the physical design iterations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 42
3.11 Mood board 1
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 42
3.12 Mood board 2 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 42
3.13 Overview of design sketches . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 43
3.14 Component Mockup as underlay for sketching . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 43
3.15 Scanner concept from Delft . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 43
3.16 Overview of the first generation designs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 44
3.17 first generation test . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 45
3.18 Overview of the second generation designs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 46
3.19 Second generation test
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 46
3.20 A view of the Master Model in SolidWorks
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 47
3.21 Close-up of the scanner PCB mount.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 47
3.22 Undercut from snap-fit and possible solution
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 48
3.23 Close-up view of the display mount. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 49
3.24 Rendering of screw in front . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 49
3.25 Manufacturingestimate . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 52
3.26 Sink mark analysis of the top shell . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 53
3.27 Mid-cycle image from fill simulation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 53
3.28 Challanges regarding direction of pull and fastening features . . . . . . 54
3.29 Proposed direction of pull and fastening features . . . . . . . . . . . . . 54
3.30 Example of daisy-chaining via Qwiic I2C
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 55
3.31 Qwiic connector on an ESP32 Feather . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
3.32 Schematic of controller board V2 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 62
3.33 Scanner PCB Price estimate . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 63
3.34 Controller PCB Price estimate . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 64
3.35 Scanner firmware flowchart.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 66
3.36 Comparison of raw scan data for 1 white sample per plastic type. . . .
70
3.37 3D plot of all samples in selected ratios.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
71
3.38 PP and PS 3D plot. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
71
3.39 Exploded view of PlasticScanner assembly . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
76
PlasticScanner
App. 3
==PAGE:94==
3.40Mould layout sketch from manufacturer, with markings of mould insert
and pull-out directions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
77
3.41 Price estimation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
78
3.42 Draft of yearly balance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
79
3.43PlasticScanner roadmap 2023
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 80
6.1
Proposed product roadmap. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 94
App. 4
PlasticScanner
==PAGE:95==
List of Tables
1
Distribution of work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
3.1
A Sample reading of PP
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 67
3.2
No. of plastic scan samples . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
70
A.1
Abbreviations used in the report . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . App. 2
PlasticScanner
App. 5
==PAGE:96==
Custom database 
possible. Enables 
custom intergration - 
add features. Lifecycle 
robustness of product 
through open ﬁrmware.
Faster RoI due to lower 
cost.
Open and custom 
database possible. 
Enables custom 
intergration - add GPS 
features. Lifecycle 
robustness of product 
through open ﬁrmware.
Open and custom 
database possible. 
Enables custom 
intergration. Lifecycle 
robustness of product 
through open ﬁrmware.
Faster RoI due to lower 
cost. Open and custom 
database possible. 
Enables custom 
intergration. Lifecycle 
robustness of product 
through open ﬁrmware.
Open Source 
documentation for 
projects, Low price, 
enables custom 
integrations.
Open Source 
documentation for 
projects, Low price, 
enables custom 
integrations.
Faster RoI due to lower 
cost. Open and custom 
database possible. 
Enables custom 
intergration. Lifecycle 
robustness of product 
through open ﬁrmware.
Faster RoI due to lower 
cost. Open and custom 
database possible. 
Lifecycle robustness of 
product through open 
ﬁrmware.
Create awareness 
through data collection 
and use of collected 
materials
Low price Oﬀ the shelf 
product, Higher 
ﬂexibility & 
Customisation. Lifecycle 
robustness of product 
through open ﬁrmware.
Low price, Good & open 
documentation on 
functionality, hard- & 
ﬁrmware, high 
replicability
to sort and reuse in own 
production
Identify polymers from 
operations
To give trash 
(wrap/packaging) value, 
to enable 
reselling/recycling
Sort incoming plastic 
packaging (or similar)
Identify polymers
have a sustainable 
business case
implement NIR 
spectroscopy as a part 
of a business case
Achieve individual goals 
like: Having succes by 
developing something 
by yourself, develop a 
speciﬁc thing to cover an 
individual need
identify plastic and learn 
by doing development
To create interest and 
value in the community 
and create interest in 
technical problem 
solving
Help and inspire 
startups and curious 
individuals to make 
things.
To ensure consistent 
quality
To take informed 
choices that enable 
better product 
development
To quickly prototype 
setups that identify 
materials
To sell material as 
commodity
Identify plastic type
implement NIR 
spectroscopy in 
prototype/project
Internal closed loop 
recycling
Logistics operators
Cleanup initiatives
Recycling community
Recycling startup
Maker & enthusiasts 
(individual)
Maker space / 
innovation hub
Test materials based on 
known speciﬁc materials
Production quality 
manager
get knowledge on 
previously used 
materials
Product developer
Plastic Recycler
Students (as a part of 
their studies)
How can your open- 
source oﬀering help me 
achieve this?
... so I can
[achieve some goals]
... I want to ...
[perform some task]
As a ...
[type of customer]
CC- BY- SA 4.0, DDC, 2022 (etc)
"Who might benefit from 
your offering and why?"
1. Customer Exploration
Get better data on 
collected items
Create awareness
A.2
Customer Exploration
App. 6
PlasticScanner
==PAGE:97==
A.3
Shape development
Concept A: The Salt Grinder
The shape
With the Salt Grinder, the goal was to create a circular shape, that was designed to fit
the PCB at the bottom. The circular design is intended to be comfortable to handle
and has a slightly continuously increasing circumference. The button is located on
the top of the side of the handle, while the display is placed at the top on an angled
surface facing the user. At the bottom, the handle smoothly transitions to a wider
section, where the scanner module is located. The design takes some inspiration
from the design of a handheld immersion blender.
Gained insights:
The test indicates that the circular shape does not communicate an ideal way to
grab the product, resulting in the user not intuitively holding the scanner as intended.
Test subjects tried to hold the scanner as a torch, instead of the intended way: as
a stamper. some users preferred holding the scanner as a torch over the intended
way, leaving the screen out of view under the arm. Other informants expressed
that the prototype felt like an item for stamping, and experienced it as ”difficult to
be precise with”. Overall the diameter was experienced as okay, but informants
suggested including indents to guide fingers and create a steady grip.
Concept B: The Angled Scanner v1
The shape
The idea with the angled scanner is to adjust the angle of the scan head, to the
natural angle of the wrist, in order to enable ergonomically correct scanning of an
object. On the angled scanner v1, there is a 20-degree angle between the handle
and the scanner head. The angled head is made to angle the display towards the
top of the head of the user while being ergonomically comfortable. At the bottom
of the scanner head is the scanner PCB itself. The handle is rounded on the bottom
to give the user a comfortable and natural grip, while the top of the handle is flatter
to create a good surface for the button and to fit the sharper angle the hand makes
when closing the hand. The button is meant to be operated by the thumb. The
handle aims to have an ergonomic circumference for the average hand.
Gained insights
The tests indicated that the handle is too large, and the edges from the top face to
the sides are too sharp. informants expressed uncomftability and were struggling
to get a firm grip on the scanner. The test informants did respond positively on the
angled screen and scan head.
Concept D:
The shape
The idea of the torch prototype is to create a soft transition between the handle
and the scanner head. The shape of the scanner head is designed to mimic the
way a flashlight is spreading from the source, guiding the user on how to point the
scanner. The activation button is placed at the top of the handle, at the transition
to the scanner head and is operated by the thumb. Moving further up the scanner
PlasticScanner
App. 7
==PAGE:98==
head is where the display is located. At the very end of the scanner head is the
scanner PCB itself.
Gained insights
The tests indicate that a scanning face angled away from the user is creating un-
necessary stress on the wrist while holding the unit. The informant’s initial grip on
the scanner is as far from the head as possible, making the issue worse.
The tests furthermore indicate that the handle shape is comfortable to hold, but the
scanning angle and screen placement are not ideal.
Concept E:
The shape
The flashlight has a circular handle for a comfortable holding experience. At the
top is a recessed, flat surface for a display to be, along with a button just before
the display. The button is meant to be operated by the thumb. The bottom of the
handle has a small flat surface at the full length of the handle to stop the scanner
from rolling when putting it down. At the end of the handle is a negative 45-degree
angle wherein the scanner module is meant to be placed, creating a scanner head
that is part of the handle itself. The goal of incorporating the scanner module into
the handle is to reduce the amplification of motion when pressing it against an item
to scan, thereby attempting to reduce the use of smaller muscles for fine motor
skills.
Gained insights
The tests indicate that the angle between the handle axis and the scan axis, is
too large, causing the wrist to be flexed to an extent that is not comfortable. The
informants did respond positively to the circular shape of the handle and the indent
for thumb placement but experienced the handle diameter as slightly too large.
App. 8
PlasticScanner
==PAGE:99==
A.4
Arduino libraries
Library
Function
tlc59208.h
PlasticScanner community library to interface with the
TLC59208 LED Controller.
Wire.h
Library by Arduino to enable the use of the I2C protocol for
components such as the TLC59208 and NAU7802.
Arduino.h
Defining a range of functionalities for the Arduino develop-
ment environment.
unity.h
Used for unit testing in C.
SparkFun_Qwiic
_Scale_NAU7802
_Arduino_Library.h
Library by SparkFun to take readings from the NAU7802
analogue-to-digital converter.
Adafruit_NeoPixel.h
Used to control the RGB LED on the ESP32 Feather.
SPI.h
Creates support for communicating via SPI for the display.
TFT_eSPI.h
Hardware library for generating and outputting images on
SPI-connected displays.
math.h
Library to extend the built-in math capabilities of C++.
WiFi.h
Used to control the WiFi module on the ESP32.
EloquentTinyML.h
Machine learning compatibility library for microcontrollers.
tensorflow.h
TensorFlow machine learning implementation for micro-
controllers.
barbie.h
The plastic identification ML model for the ESP32.
PlasticScanner
App. 9
==PAGE:100==
List of Requirements
Req. No.
Area
Topic
Need
Importance
Fulfilled
1
Electronics, 
Software
Performance Can identify the 5 types of plastic with 90% accuracy when 
scanning virgin materials
5
Yes
2
Electronics, 
Software
Performance Can identify the 5 types of plastic with 75% accuracy when 
scanning heavily decayed materials
5
Partially
3
Electronics
Performance Needs to be able to identify plastic samples that are 4 cm or 
larger
5
Yes
4
Electronics
Performance Store up to 1000 samples
2
Yes
5
Electronics, 
Software
Performance Enable sharing and import of data to device
4
Yes
6
Physical design
Environment
Block 95% of all surrounding light, outside at mid-day at equator
4
Partially
7
Physical design, 
Electronics
Environment
Needs to work in environments ranging from ՞20 ՞ 50 *C
4
Partially
8
Physical design
Environment
Needs to withstand water and dust. Have a rating of IP65
4
Yes
9
Physical design
Environment
Needs to withstand drop from 2 meters. 
2
No
10
Electronics
Community
Work with full functionality for at least 8 hours before need for 
charging.
5
Partially
11
Electronics, 
Software
Performance Deliver results within 5 seconds
4
Partially
12
Electronics
Performance Charge from 10%՞90% in less than 2 hours
2
Yes
13
Physical design
Performance Product must have option to be secured to operator and be 
handheld.
3
No
14
Physical design
Maintenence The product needs to be disassembled with one widely used 
screwdriver
2
Yes
15
Physical design
Maintenence The product must be able to be disassembled by the customer 
within 5 minutes.
2
Yes
16
Business model
Commercial
The product should have a RRP lower then 2000 euros.
5
Yes
17
Business model
Community
The Community Scanner PCB hould be as cheap as possible
4
Yes
18
Business model
Commercial
The product should have a profit margin of at least 40%
4
Yes
20
Physical design
Commercial
The design is ready for a first pilot production of 100 units. 
4
Yes
21
Physical design
Commercial
The design is prepared for a production volume of 2000 units
4
Yes
22
Physical design
Performance Maximum weight of 1kg
5
Yes
23
User Experience
Design
The product should provided more elborate insights and 
information when needed
4
Partially
24
User Experience
Design
The product should be made from plastic that can be recycled. 
4
Yes
25
User Experience
Design
The product should provide guiding feedback during the process.
4
Partially
26
User Experience
Design
The product should have a multicolour screen.
1
Yes
27
User Experience
Design
Visible parts and features should be integrated with a coherent 
style in which main product looks as one part.
3
Yes
28
User Experience
Design
The grip should have an NPS score above 50
4
Yes
29
Physical design
Enviroment
The product materials should be as sustainable as possible, 
create minimal CO2 emissions.
3
Yes
30
Physical design
Enviroment
The material should contain the least amount of toxic materials in 
electronics and enclosure components. 
3
Partially
31
Physical design
Enviroment
At least 60% of the product parts should be able to be recycled 
at end-of life. 
4
Yes
32
Physical design
Enviroment
The enclosure should not be made from black plastic or materials 
which do not have elaborated recycling streams.
4
Yes
33
Physical design
Enviroment
The use of thermosets and other materials which cannot be 
recycled should be avoided as much as possible
3
Partially
34
Physical design
Ergonomics
The product should enable use with gloves
5
Yes
35
Physical design
Ergonomics
The product has optimal shape for ergonomic comfort
4
Yes
36
Physical design
Ergonomics
The buttons of the product are in optimal placement that do not 
create strain on the wrist/hand
4
Yes
37
Physical design
Ergonomics
The product should fit the hand size of the average population
4
Yes
38
Software, Physical 
design, Electronics
Design
The feedback should be understood in loud factory environments 
and while wearing gloves. 
5
Partially
39
Physical design, 
Electronics
Design
The scanner should have input controls that can be operated 
while wearing gloves.  
4
Yes
40
Software
Design
The text size of displayed text should be at least 4 mm in height.  
2
Yes
41
Physical design
Ergonomics
The product should have a centre of mass that is as close as 
possible to the wrist joint.  
2
Yes
42
Software
Design
The information on the screen should be presented in a clear, not 
too crowded way.  
3
Yes
43
Physical design
Design
The product design should facilitate component repairs.
3
Yes
44
Physical design
Design
The product should be easily recyclable by avoiding glue or 
permanent joining of two different materials.
5
Yes
45
Software
Design
The system should be able to communicate machine learning 
models to the sold scanners.
5
No
46
Documentation
Community
Good, easy understandable and thurrough documentation and 
guidance for creation a scanner PCB available on GitHub
5
Partially
47
Electronics
Comunity
The community scanner pcb should require only parts available 
online from major component resellers
5
Yes
A.5
List Of Requirements
App. 10
PlasticScanner
==PAGE:101==
Plastic picker tool
Ark1
10/02/2023 10.33.20
In design
PS
ABS
SB/SAN
PVC
PMMA
PPO/PS
PC
PE
PP
POM
PA
PBTP
PTFE
Points
2
9
4
9
-1
2
9
9
11
5
7
9
5
Red flags
2
0
1
0
2
2
1
0
0
2
2
1
1
Type
Amorphous
Weight
Amorphous
Amorphous
Amorphous
Amorphous
Amorphous
Amorphous
Amorphous
Crystallite
Crystallite
Crystallite
Crystallite
Crystallite
Crystallite
Forming Process
Injection Moulding
1
2
2
2
1
1
1
1
2
2
2
2
1
1
Compression Moulding
1
-2
-2
-2
-2
-2
-2
-2
-2
-2
-2
-2
-2
-2
Laminating
1
-2
-2
-2
-2
-2
-2
-2
-2
-2
-2
-2
-2
-2
Extrusion
1
1
1
1
2
2
1
1
2
2
1
1
1
1
Blow Moudling
1
1
1
1
2
-1
-2
1
2
2
-2
1
-1
-2
Themoforming
1
2
2
2
2
1
-2
1
1
1
-2
-2
-2
-2
Assembly
Snap Conncection
1
-1
1
1
1
0
1
1
-1
1
2
2
2
0
Ultrasonic welding
1
1
1
1
0
1
0
0
0
0
1
0
1
-1
Hot welding
1
0
1
1
1
0
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
0
Friction Welding
1
0
1
1
1
0
1
0
1
1
1
1
1
0
Gluing
1
2
0
0
0
2
1
2
0
0
0
0
0
-1
Self Cutting Screws
1
-1
1
1
0
-1
1
1
0
1
2
2
2
0
Optics and surface
Crystal Clear
1
2
-2
-2
2
2
-2
2
-2
-2
-2
0
0
-2
Transparent
1
2
1
1
2
2
-2
2
2
2
1
0
0
2
Bright colors
1
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
Electroplating
1
-2
2
-2
2
-2
2
-2
2
2
-2
-2
-2
-2
Vapor deposit
1
2
2
2
-2
-2
2
2
-2
-2
-2
2
2
2
Lacquer
1
2
2
-2
-2
2
2
2
-2
-2
-2
2
2
2
UV Ressistance
Unstabelized
1
-2
-2
-2
-2
2
2
-2
-2
-2
-2
-2
0
2
Stabilized
1
0
0
0
0
2
2
0
0
0
0
0
2
2
Physiological
Contact to foodstuff
1
2
2
2
1
1
1
2
2
2
1
2
2
0
Use in medicine
1
2
2
2
1
1
1
1
2
2
1
2
1
2
Implantates
1
0,5
0,5
0,5
-1
1
1
1
2
2
1
-1
2
2
Floating
1
-2
-2
-2
-2
-2
-2
-2
1
2
-2
-2
-2
-2
Relative impact strength
-2
1
0
0
-2
2
2
2
1
0
1
0
2
Chemical ressistance (20C)
Ketoner (acetone)
-2
-2
-2
-2
-2
-2
-2
2
2
2
2
2
2
Alkoholer
2
2
2
2
0
0
2
2
2
2
2
-2
2
Aromatiske opløsningsmidler
-2
-2
-2
-2
-2
-2
0
-2
2
2
2
2
2
Chlor
-2
-2
-2
-2
-2
-2
-2
-2
-2
2
2
0
2
Eddike (Ethylacetat)
-2
-2
-2
-2
-2
-2
-2
0
0
2
2
2
2
Benzin
-2
0
-2
2
2
-2
2
0
0
2
2
2
2
Vegetabilsk fedt
0
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
Amoniak
2
2
-2
2
2
2
-2
2
2
2
2
0
2
Natriumhydroxid (10%)
2
2
2
2
2
2
-2
2
2
2
2
0
2
Saltsyre (30%)
2
2
0
2
0
0
2
2
2
-2
-2
2
2
Sulphuric acid (10%)
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
-2
-2
2
2
Price
1
2
0
2
-2
-2
-2
2
2
-2
-2
-2
-2
A digital tool for plastic selection made by Markus Glavind, based onthe polymer material selection guide, by Erik M. Kjær (2003)
"How to select the right polymer," by Erik M. Kjær (2003)
A.6
Material Selection matrix
PlasticScanner
App. 11
==PAGE:102==
A.7
Injection moulding results
The results are posted on the public PlaticScanner GitHub for this project, because
the files are easier to analyse in a format not compatible with a PDF.
Link to PlaticScanner GitHub
App. 12
PlasticScanner
==PAGE:103==
Scale of 0-10
Angled scanner 
v1
Angled scanner 
v2
Angled scanner 
v3 (v11)
Angled scanner 
v4 (v12)
sitting/standing
A
B
C
D
E
F
G
Test ID
Comfort
Grip security
Comfort
Grip security
Comfort
Grip security
Comfort
Grip security
Comfort
Grip security
Comfort
Grip security
Comfort
Grip security
Ranking
Button placement
Display placement
1
5
6
7
7
9
9
6
6
5
7
7
8
7
7
C+F voted best for most situations,
Prefer thumb for controlling the 
button on C/F
Depends on if you stand or sit. D,E 
is angled a bit wrong when 
standing. Angled Scanner display 
makes sense, requires it to be a 
good display to be visible from an 
angle. 
2 Siddende
5
3
8
8
9
9
3
5
4
5
9
9
9
9
G (men lidt smallere)
Prefer thumb for controlling the 
button on C/F
2 Stående
7
3
8
8
9
9
7
5
9
8
9
9
9
9
G
3 Siddende
8
8
5
6
7
9
4
7
8
8
9,5
9,0
9
8
F in the length of G (B has too sharp edges)
3 Stående
5
6
8
8
9
9
9
7
8
8
9,5
9,0
9
8
F in the length of G (B has too shar Trigger on front
4 Siddende
7
9
7
9
10
9
6
7
8
9
10,0
9,5
10,0
9,5
G
4 Stående
7,0
9,0
7,0
9,0
10,0
9,0
6,0
7,0
8,0
9,0
10,0
9,5
10,0
9,5
G
5 Siddende
6,5
8,0
2,0
4,0
3,0
6,0
3,0
10,0
3,0
7,0
4,0
8,0
4,0
7,0
F or E
Det er mere intuitivt at trykke 
med tomlen. Du kan se det du 
trykker på.
5 Stående
6,0
7,0
6,0
3,0
9,0
8,0
4,0
10,0
6,0
8,0
9,0
9,0
9,0
9,0
F or E
10 Siddende
7
9
6
6
9
9
5
8
8
8
8
8
8
8
G
10 Stående
4
5
8
8
9
9
5
7
9
9
8
8
8
8
G
11 Siddende
7
7
5
4
7
7
3
7
5
6
6
7
6
6
F, Kan bedre lide længden af G
11 Stående
7
6
7
5
7
7
5
8
8
8
8
7
8
7
F
12 Siddende
2
10
5
7
10
10
3
10
4
4
9
10
10
10
G
12 Stående
2
9
8
7
10
10
10
8
5
4
10
10
10
10
G
13 Siddende
3
4
5
5
8
8
2
4
2
6
6
8
4
7
F
Foretrækker pegefinger (små 
hænder)
13 Stående
1
3
6
4
9
9
4
4
3
5
9
9
10
10
G
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
Average
5
7
6
6
8
9
5
7
6
7
8
9
8
8
"Promoters"
0
5
0
2
12
12
2
3
2
3
10
10
10
8
"Neutral"
7
4
9
7
4
4
1
9
6
8
4
7
4
8
"Detractors"
9
8
8
8
1
1
14
5
9
6
3
0
3
1
Total
16
17
17
17
17
17
17
17
17
17
17
17
17
17
NPS calculation
-56
-18
-47
-35
65
65
-71
-12
-41
-18
41
59
41
41
Final score
-37
-41
65
-41
-29
50
41
Det kan være let at få en vinkel hvoDen er for lang. Det smalle skal læ Den må gerne være lidt smallere
A
B
C
D
E
F
G
Du har ikke en pejling af hvad vandret er , som man har i de vinklede Den er for bred
Comfort
-56
-47
65
-71
-41
41
41
Grip security
-18
-35
65
-12
-18
59
41
Comfort
Grip security
Comfort
Grip security
  Comfort  Grip security
A
-56
-18
E
-41
-18
E  -41,1764705882353  -17,6470588235294
B
-47
-35
F
41
59
F  41,1764705882353  58,8235294117647
C
65
65
G
41
41
G  41,1764705882353  41,1764705882353
D
-71
-12
E
-41
-18
F
41
59
Button placement
Display placement
G
41
41
A.8
Test of shapes
PlasticScanner
App. 13
==PAGE:104==
Method
Units
CNC
FDM
SLS
Injection 
molding
Injection 
molding
Injection 
molding
Tool
Tool material
None
None
None
SLA
Aluminium
Steel
Production volume
pcs.
1
1
10
100
2500
10000
Number of tools
0
0
0
2
1
1
Tool cost
€
€0,00
€0,00
€0,00
€1.500,00
€10.000,00
€20.000,00
Tool Total
€
€0,00
€0,00
€0,00
€3.000,00
€10.000,00
€20.000,00
Tool p.p.
€
€0,00
€0,00
€0,00
€30,00
€4,00
€2,00
Labour
Labour cost
€/hr
€20,00
€20,00
€20,00
€20,00
€20,00
€20,00
Labour setup
min
60
2
60
60
120
160
Labour Pre
min/p.p.
2
1
1
1
0
0
Labour Post
min/p.p.
2
2
2
2
0
0
Labour cost Total
€
€21,33
€1,67
€30,00
€120,00
€40,00
€53,33
Labour cost p.p.
€
€21,33
€1,67
€3,00
€1,20
€0,02
€0,01
Material
Material
POM
PETG
Nylon
PP
PP
PP
Volume
cm3
83,124
83,124
83,124
83,124
83,124
83,124
Support
g
136
Density
g/cm3
1,4
1,27
1,52
0,9
0,9
0,9
Weight
g
116,3736
241,56748
126,34848
74,8116
74,8116
74,8116
Material cost
€/kg
€15,00
€20,00
€100,00
€12,00
€12,00
€12,00
€1,75
€4,83
€12,63
€0,90
€0,90
€0,90
Units
CNC
FDM
SLS
IM (SLA)
IM (Alu)
IM (Steel)
Tool
€
€0,00
€0,00
€0,00
€30,00
€4,00
€2,00
Labour
€
€21,33
€1,67
€3,00
€1,20
€0,02
€0,005
Material
€
€1,75
€4,83
€12,63
€0,90
€0,90
€0,90
Total
€
€23,08
€6,50
€15,63
€32,10
€4,91
€2,90
https://blog.prusa3d.com?read-calc=NzQ1NDQ=
Tool
Labour
Material
Total
Units
€
€
€
€
CNC
€0,00
€21,33
€1,75
€23,08
FDM
€0,00
€1,67
€4,83
€6,50
SLS
€0,00
€3,00
€12,63
€15,63
IM (SLA)
€30,00
€1,20
€0,90
€32,10
IM (Alu)
€4,00
€0,02
€0,90
€4,91
IM (Steel)
€2,00
€0,005
€0,90
€2,90
A.9
Manufacturing cost calculation
App. 14
PlasticScanner
==PAGE:105==
Production Volum
1 pcs
10 pcs
100 pcs
1000 pcs
10000 pcs
Scanner
Components
€117,34
€86,96
€70,20
€58,27
€56,92
PCB
€1,28
€0,64
€0,58
€0,19
€0,15
Assembly
€10,00
€10,00
€4,00
€2,00
€1,50
Shipping
€20,43
€2,04
€0,28
€0,11
€0,05
Total
€149,05
€97,81
€74,79
€60,46
€58,62
78,72%
88,91%
93,87%
96,38%
97,10%
Controller
1 pcs
10 pcs
100 pcs
1000 pcs
10000 pcs
Components p.b
€30,66
€28,69
€26,56
€24,45
€23,73
PCB
€0,99
€0,62
€0,23
€0,16
€0,15
Assembly p.b
€10,00
€10,00
€4,00
€2,00
€1,50
Shipping p.b.
€20,43
€2,04
€0,38
€0,18
€0,10
Total
€62,08
€41,36
€31,17
€26,79
€25,48
Controller
Components p.b PCB
Assembly p.b
Shipping p.b.
Total
1 pcs
€30,66
€0,99
€10,00
€20,43
€62,08
10 pcs
€28,69
€0,62
€10,00
€2,04
€41,36
100 pcs
€26,56
€0,23
€4,00
€0,38
€31,17
1000 pcs
€24,45
€0,16
€2,00
€0,18
€26,79
10000 pcs
€23,73
€0,15
€1,50
€0,10
€25,48
A.10
Manufacturing cost calculation
PlasticScanner
App. 15
==PAGE:106==
Batch price
1000
Development
€100.000
Material
€88.984
Labour
€3.333
Tooling
€11.237
Marketing
€10.000
Distribution
€10.000
Total
€223.555
Unit price
1
Development
€100,00
Material
€88,98
Labour
€3,33
Tooling
€11,24
Marketing
€10,00
Distribution
€10,00
Total
€223,56
Minimum Retail Price for Scanner
Cost price
€223,56
Mark up
40%
Net price
€312,98
Vat Մ25%Յ
€78,24
Retail price
€391,22
Maximium profit
Cost price
€223,56
Retail price
€2.500,00
Net Price
€2.000,00
Profit
€1.776,44
Profit Margin
795%
A.11
Manufacturing cost calculation
App. 16
PlasticScanner
==PAGE:107==
Income
Month 1
Month 2
Month 3
Month 4
Month 5
Month 6
Month 7
Month 8
Month 9
Month 10
Month 11
Month 12
Total
Scanners sold
10
15
20
20
20
20
20
20
20
165
PCBs sold
30
25
10
15
20
25
30
30
30
30
30
275
Total Revenue
€0
€5.565
€4.638
€26.855
€40.283
€53.710
€54.638
€55.565
€55.565
€55.565
€55.565
€55.565
€463.513
Costs
Month 1
Month 2
Month 3
Month 4
Month 5
Month 6
Month 7
Month 8
Month 9
Month 10
Month 11
Month 12
Total
Development
€30.000
€30.000
€10.000
€10.000
€10.000
€10.000
€10.000
€10.000
€10.000
€10.000
€10.000
€10.000
€160.000
Scanners
100
100
100
300
PCB Kits
50
100
100
100
100
450
Sourcing
€5.300
€10.600
€22.356
€0
€0
€10.600
€22.356
€0
€10.600
€0
€10.600
€22.356
€114.767
tooling
€80.000
€80.000
Total cost
€35.350
€120.700
€32.456
€10.000
€10.000
€20.700
€32.456
€10.000
€20.700
€10.000
€20.700
€32.456
€355.517
Balance
Month 1
Month 2
Month 3
Month 4
Month 5
Month 6
Month 7
Month 8
Month 9
Month 10
Month 11
Month 12
Total
Revenue
€0
€5.565
€4.638
€26.855
€40.283
€53.710
€54.638
€55.565
€55.565
€55.565
€55.565
€55.565
Costs
՞€35.350
՞€120.700
՞€32.456
՞€10.000
՞€10.000
՞€20.700
՞€32.456
՞€10.000
՞€20.700
՞€10.000
՞€20.700
՞€32.456
Balance
՞€35.350
՞€150.485
՞€178.303
՞€161.448
՞€131.166
՞€98.156
՞€75.974
՞€30.409
€4.456
€50.021
€84.886
€107.996
€107.996
Inventory
Scanners
0
0
100
90
75
55
135
115
95
75
55
135
PCB kits
50
120
95
85
70
150
125
95
165
135
205
175
Statics
PCB Retail price
€185,50
PCB Cost p.b.
€106,00
Scanner retail price
€2.500,00
Scanner Cost
€223,56
A.12
Manufacturing cost calculation
PlasticScanner
App. 17
==PAGE:108==
Indeks
Producentens va Producentens na Beskrivelse
Tilgængelighed
Stock Status
Enheder
Ønsket mængde Pakkemængde 1 Pakketype 1
Digi-Keys varenumEnhedspris 1
Udvidet pris 1
Minimum ordrea Kundereference Ønsket varenummReferencebetegnVarestatus
1 AS7341-DLGT
ams OSRAM
SENSOR AMBIEN
27.56.00 På lager
10
1
10 Cut Tape (CT)
AS7341-DLGTCT-
8,337
€83,37
1 U6
AS7341-DLGTCT-ND
Aktiv
Sensor
2 AP7312-1833W6 Diodes IncorporaIC REG LINEAR 1.
25.17.00 På lager
10
1
10 Cut Tape (CT)
AP7312-1833W6
0,541
€5,41
1 U7
AP7312-1833W6-7DICT-ND
Aktiv
Power
Sensor
23%
202,95 23,33/Sensor
3 TLC59208FIPWR Texas Instrument IC LED DRVR LIN 
0 Normally Stockin
10
1
10 Cut Tape (CT)
296-36508-1-ND
1,665
€16,65
1 U5
296-36508-1-ND
Aktiv
Power
Power
8%
71,78 8,25/Power
4 BSS138DW-7-F
Diodes IncorporaMOSFET 2N-CH 5
50.35.00 På lager
10
1
10 Cut Tape (CT)
BSS138DW-FDICT
0,367
€3,67
1 Q1
BSS138DW-FDICT-ND
Aktiv
Power
Passive
5%
43,86 5,04/Passive
5 EAHC2835WD6
Everlight ElectronLED COOL WHITE
24.28.00 På lager
10
1
10 Cut Tape (CT)
1080-1461-1-ND
0,245
€2,45
1 D3
1080-1461-1-ND
Aktiv
Passive
NIR LED
63%
551,04 63,36/NIR LED
6
5000 Adafruit IndustrieESP32-S2 FEATHE
390 På lager
10
Controller
1528-5000-ND
Aktiv
0
7 USB4715-GF-A-K GCT
USB TYPE C HORZ
639 På lager
10
Controller
2073-USB4715-GF-A-KIT-ND
Aktiv
0
8 CC0603MRX5R8BYAGEO
CAP CER 10UF 25
29.17.00 På lager
10
3
30 Cut Tape (CT)
311-3494-1-ND
0,47
€14,10
1 C14, C15, C19
CC0603MRX5R8BB106
Aktiv
Passive
0
9 CC0603MRX5R6BYAGEO
CAP CER 22UF 10
54.40.00 På lager
10
1
10 Cut Tape (CT)
311-1819-1-ND
0,452
€4,52
1 C17
CC0603MRX5R6BB226
Aktiv
Passive
0
0
10 CC0603JRNPO9B YAGEO
CAP CER 51PF 50
33.02.00 På lager
10
4
40 Cut Tape (CT)
311-3358-1-ND
0,058
€2,32
1 C2, C3, C12, C21 CC0603JRNPO9BN510
Aktiv
Passive
869,63
23,33
11 CC0603KRX7R9B YAGEO
CAP CER 0.047UF
549.05.00 På lager
10
2
20 Cut Tape (CT)
311-1427-1-ND
0,043
€0,86
1 C4, C22
CC0603KRX7R9BB473
Aktiv
Passive
8,25
12 CC0603JRNPO9B YAGEO
CAP CER 100PF 5
09.57.23 På lager
10
2
20 Cut Tape (CT)
311-1069-1-ND
0,032
€0,64
1 C5, C23
CC0603JRNPO9BN101
Aktiv
Passive
5,04
13 CC0603KRX5R8B YAGEO
CAP CER 1UF 25V
07.40.53 På lager
10
1
10 Cut Tape (CT)
311-1445-1-ND
0,07
€0,70
1 C6
CC0603KRX5R8BB105
Aktiv
Passive
63,36
14 CC0603KRX7R9B YAGEO
CAP CER 0.1UF 50
11.04.44 På lager
10
10
100 Cut Tape (CT)
311-1344-1-ND
0,0229
€2,29
1 C1, C7, C8, C9, C1CC0603KRX7R9BB104
Aktiv
Passive
0
15 LG R971-KN-1
OSRAM Opto (amLED GREEN DIFFU
225.07.00 På lager
10
1
10 Cut Tape (CT)
475-1410-1-ND
0,155
€1,55
1 D2
475-1410-2-ND
Aktiv
Passive
0
16 SM04B-SRSS-TB( JST Sales AmericaCONN HEADER S
186.39.00 På lager
10
2
20 Cut Tape (CT)
455-1804-1-ND
0,487
€9,74
1 J2, J3
SM04B-SRSS-TB(LF)(SN)
Aktiv
Passive
99,98
17 RC0603FR-07240YAGEO
RES 240K OHM 1
270.03.00 På lager
10
4
40 Cut Tape (CT)
311-240KHRCT-N
0,018
€0,72
1 R1, R2, R9, R10
RC0603FR-07240KL
Aktiv
Passive
18 RC0603FR-07150YAGEO
RES 150 OHM 1%
14.48.30 På lager
10
1
10 Cut Tape (CT)
311-150HRCT-ND
0,018
€0,18
1 R16
RC0603FR-07150RL
Aktiv
Passive
19 RC0603FR-071KL YAGEO
RES 1K OHM 1% 
45.34.54 På lager
10
2
20 Cut Tape (CT)
311-1.00KHRCT-N
0,018
€0,36
1 R18, R24
RC0603FR-071KL
Aktiv
Passive
20 RC0603FR-0756RYAGEO
RES 56 OHM 1% 
315.50.00 På lager
10
1
10 Cut Tape (CT)
311-56.0HRCT-ND
0,018
€0,18
1 R25
RC0603FR-0756RL
Aktiv
Passive
21 RC0603FR-0762RYAGEO
RES 62 OHM 1% 
120.42.00 På lager
10
1
10 Cut Tape (CT)
311-62.0HRCT-ND
0,019
€0,19
1 R26
RC0603FR-0762RL
Aktiv
Passive
22 RC0603FR-0775RYAGEO
RES 75 OHM 1% 
06.55.40 På lager
10
4
40 Cut Tape (CT)
311-75.0HRCT-ND
0,018
€0,72
1 R28, R29, R30, R3RC0603FR-0775RL
Aktiv
Passive
23 RC0603FR-07301YAGEO
RES 301 OHM 1%
230.23.00 På lager
10
4
40 Cut Tape (CT)
311-301HRCT-ND
0,018
€0,72
1 R3, R4, R13, R14 RC0603FR-07301RL
Aktiv
Passive
24 RC0603FR-0782RYAGEO
RES 82 OHM 1% 
688.40.00 På lager
10
1
10 Cut Tape (CT)
311-82.0HRCT-ND
0,018
€0,18
1 R32
RC0603FR-0782RL
Aktiv
Passive
25 RC0603FR-0751RYAGEO
RES 51 OHM 1% 
761.54.00 På lager
10
4
40 Cut Tape (CT)
311-51.0HRCT-ND
0,018
€0,72
1 R5, R6, R15, R17 RC0603FR-0751RL
Aktiv
Passive
26 RC0603FR-0710KYAGEO
RES 10K OHM 1%
50.20.18 På lager
10
4
40 Cut Tape (CT)
311-10.0KHRCT-N
0,018
€0,72
1 R7, R8, R11, R12 RC0603FR-0710KL
Aktiv
Passive
27 NAU7802SGI
Nuvoton Technol IC ADC 24BIT SIG
119.20.00 På lager
10
1
10 Tube
NAU7802SGI-ND
1,448
€14,48
1 U2
NAU7802SGI-ND
Aktiv
Sensor
28 LM385BD-2.5R2Gonsemi
IC VREF SHUNT 1
16.26 På lager
10
1
10 Cut Tape (CT)
LM385BD-2.5R2G
0,779
€7,79
1 U3
LM385BD-2.5R2GOSTR-ND
Aktiv
Power
29 MCS-16-NO00A1 SCHURTER Inc.
MCS 16, METAL S
555 På lager
10
Controller
486-MCS-16-NO00A12-Z0NCZ0NCWAktiv
30 ECS-2520MVLC-0ECS Inc.
XTAL OSC XO 4.91
35.03.00 På lager
10
1
10 Cut Tape (CT)
50-ECS-2520MVL
1,202
€12,02
1 Q1
50-ECS-2520MVLC-049-BN-CT-ND Aktiv
Power
31 0090-3111-185
Advanced PhotonPHOTODIODE 80
13.57 På lager
10
2
20 Cut Tape (CT)
209-0090-3111-1
5,255
€105,10
1 D1, D12
209-0090-3111-185CT-ND
Aktiv
Sensor
32 HIR-C19D-1N90/ Everlight ElectronIR EMITTER 855N
306 På lager
10
1
10 Cut Tape (CT)
1080-HIR-C19D-1
2,915
€29,15
1 D4
1080-HIR-C19D-1N90/L558-P03/CTAktiv
NIR LED
33 IR26-21C/L110/T Everlight ElectronEMITTER IR 940N
156.35.00 På lager
10
1
10 Cut Tape (CT)
1080-1357-1-ND
0,284
€2,84
1 D5
1080-1357-1-ND
Aktiv
NIR LED
34 MTSM5010-843- Marktech Optoel SWIR EMITTER 10
73 På lager
10
1
10 Bulk
1125-1359-ND
12,681
€126,81
1 D6
1125-1359-ND
Aktiv
NIR LED
35 MTSM0013-844- Marktech Optoel SWIR EMITTER 13
507 På lager
10
1
10 Cut Tape (CT)
1125-MTSM0013
8,298
€82,98
1 D7
1125-MTSM0013-844-IRCT-ND
Aktiv
NIR LED
36 MTSM6014-844- Marktech Optoel SWIR EMITTER 14
266 På lager
10
1
10 Cut Tape (CT)
1125-MTSM6014
8,298
€82,98
1 D8
1125-MTSM6014-844-IRCT-ND
Aktiv
NIR LED
37 MTSM5016-843- Marktech Optoel SWIR EMITTER 16
48 På lager
10
1
10 Bulk
1125-1362-ND
14,33
€143,30
1 D10
1125-1362-ND
Aktiv
NIR LED
38 MTSM5015-194- Marktech Optoel SWIR EMITTER 15
761 På lager
10
1
10 Cut Tape (CT)
1125-MTSM5015
8,298
€82,98
1 D9
1125-MTSM5015-194-IRCT-ND
Aktiv
NIR LED
39 OPA2376AID
Texas Instrument IC OPAMP GP 2 C
0 Normally Stockin
10
1
10 Tube
296-26263-5-ND
2,624
€26,24
1 U1, U4
296-26263-5-ND
Aktiv
Power
40 PCA9551PW,118 NXP USA Inc.
IC LED DRVR PS P
27.00.00 På lager
10
Alternative U5
568-11913-1-ND
Aktiv
41 FDG6301N
onsemi
MOSFET 2N-CH 2
137.58.00 På lager
10
Alternative Q1
FDG6301NCT-ND
Aktiv
42 TLV2376IDR
Texas Instrument IC CMOS 2 CIRCU
19.37 På lager
10
Alternative U1, U296-45053-1-ND
Aktiv
A.13
Manufacturing cost calculation
App. 18
PlasticScanner
==PAGE:109==
Att.:
Skive den
Prototypeværktøj
Til:
Top Shell+Bottom Shell
Plastic Scanner
Tilbud på:
Markus Glavind
I henhold til Deres forespørgsel fremsendes hermed tilbud.
9.februar 2023
Generelt vedr. aluminiumsværktøjer/prototypeværktøjer-
Værktøjet består af indsatse fremstillet i en velegnet aluminiumslegering.
Tolerancer og placering i tolerancer aftales mellem kunde og Idé-Pro Skive A/S.
Værktøjsindsatsene fremstilles i henhold til godkendt 3D dokumentation med en tolerance på plus/minus 
0,1 mm.
Vejledende støbetolerance Din 16 742.
Hvis ikke andet er aftalt, er kvaliteten baseret på visuel kontrol samt kundens godkendelse af 
udfaldsemne. 
Evt. specialmateriale faktureres særskilt ved indkøb.
Idé-Pro Skive A/S
Skyttevej 15
DK-7800 Skive
T: +45 9615 3200
ide-pro@ide-pro.dk
www.ide-pro.dk
VAT no.  DK17607839
Sydbank A/S
Account no.: 7118 000 1067 761
IBAN no.: DK69 7118 000 1067 761
BIC-kode: SYBKDK22
Side 1/4
A.14
Manufacturing offer from IdePro
PlasticScanner
App. 19
==PAGE:110==
Idé-Pro Skive A/S
Skyttevej 15
DK-7800 Skive
T: +45 9615 3200
ide-pro@ide-pro.dk
www.ide-pro.dk
Top Shell+Bottom Shell
DKK
3.900,00
      
DKK
77.625,00
    
1+1
20 sæt
DKK
2.160,00
      
DKK
5,00
            
DKK
8,00
            
DKK
1.900,00
      
83,0
cm3
77,2
gram
PP - OceanIX rPPC 210-001 green
Glasblæst IP 27
Direkte indløb
Indløb- Klippes af
Bottom Shell
Værktøjspris:
Emnepris:
Opstartsomkostninger:
Indløb type:
Emnevolumen:
Pakkes med foam og mellemlægspap
Inkl. opstartsomkostning
Antal udfaldsprøver:
kavitet værktøj
DFM emnemodning
Top Shell
Inkl. Materiale
Inkl. Materiale
Emnepriserne tillægges 3,5% i energitillæg ved fakturering.
Emnevægt:
Synlig overflade:
pr. serie
Materiale:
Emballering:
Under cut has to be matured for tooling
tool price based on up & down tool solution.
VAT no.  DK17607839
Sydbank A/S
Account no.: 7118 000 1067 761
IBAN no.: DK69 7118 000 1067 761
BIC-kode: SYBKDK22
Side 2/4
A.15
Manufacturing offer from IdePro
App. 20
PlasticScanner
==PAGE:111==
Idé-Pro Skive A/S
Skyttevej 15
DK-7800 Skive
T: +45 9615 3200
ide-pro@ide-pro.dk
www.ide-pro.dk
Betalings- og leveringsbetingelser:
1 arbejdsuger fra ordre.
Alle priser er ekskl. moms, fragt og emballage.
Vi håber, at ovenstående tilbud har Deres interesse, og vi ser frem til at høre fra Dem. 
Med venlig hilsen
Idé-Pro Skive A/S
Morten K. Frandsen
+(45) 96 15 32 16
mkf@ide-pro.dk
Betalingsbetingelser 
produktionsemner: 
Vejledende Leveringstid 
værktøjer: 
5 arbejdsuger fra ordre og levering af godkendt 3D CAD-dokumentation 
med slip og radier.
Vejledende leveringstid
konstruktion: 
50 % ved ordre og 50 % ved levering af udfaldsprøver.
Generelt vedr. DFM 
emnekonstruktion.
Kunden godkender konstruktionen før opstart af værktøjer, og evt. 
ændringer af konstruktion, og deraf følgende ændring af værktøjet 
foretages for kundes regning.
Ved levering af emner - 14 dage netto kontant
Betalingsbetingelser 
værktøj/udfaldsprøver: 
14 dage netto kontant.
VAT no.  DK17607839
Sydbank A/S
Account no.: 7118 000 1067 761
IBAN no.: DK69 7118 000 1067 761
BIC-kode: SYBKDK22
Side 3/4
A.16
Manufacturing offer from IdePro
PlasticScanner
App. 21
==PAGE:112==
Idé-Pro Skive A/S
Skyttevej 15
DK-7800 Skive
T: +45 9615 3200
ide-pro@ide-pro.dk
www.ide-pro.dk
Salgs- og leveringsbetingelser
Levering og leveringstid.
Forsendelsen er ab fabrik, og ordren betragtes leveret fra det øjeblik, varen er overgivet til fremmed fragtfører. 
Enhver bestilling udføres under forbehold af strejke, lockout, force majeure eller uheld ved støbning eller under transport, som på 
indgribende måde bevirker en standsning i arbejdet, hindrer erhvervelsen af det nødvendige materiale eller forsinker forsendelsen 
af leverancer eller materialer til denne. Disse forhold gælder såvel vor egen fabrik som leverandøren. Vi er dog forpligtet til så 
hurtigt som muligt at gøre køberen bekendt med sådanne forholds indtræden. 
Leverancer omfatter kun de i tilbud og ordrebekræftelse nævnte dele og præstationer. De opgivne leveringstider gælder kun 
tilnærmelsesvis, når der ikke foreligger særlige aftaler. Alle indgående ordrer ekspederes så vidt muligt i rækkefølge. Vi er ikke 
forpligtet til at erstatte tab som følge af overskredet leveringstid.
Pris.
Prisen er kun bindende for os, såfremt vi ved modtagelsen af endelig specificeret ordre har eller kan fremskaffe varerne til de 
priser, kurser, leveringstider og andre betingelser, som vi har kalkuleret med og lagt til grund for tilbudet, respektive salget. I 
øvrigt er de nævnte priser kun gældende, såfremt fremstillingsomkostningerne ikke forøges væsentligt inden leveringen, også ved 
forsinkelser, der hidrører fra ovennævnte forbehold.
Antal og vægt.
Af hensyn til fabrikationen forbeholder vi os ret til ved levering af det beordrede stykantal at forøge eller formindske dette med 
indtil 10%. Skulle en kunde reklamere over stk.- eller vægtopgivelser, må partiet optælles, når repræsentanter for begge parter er 
til stede, eller vejes på autoriseret vægt, og den tabende part betaler alle udgifter herved.
Betalingsvilkår.
Betaling må finde sted til den i tilbud eller ordrebekræftelse fastsatte tid. Vekselomkostninger betales af køberen.
Emballage.
Emballagen faktureres, og tages ikke retur, med mindre særlig aftale foreligger.
Reklamationer.
Eventuelle reklamationer må finde sted senest 8 dage efter modtagelse af vare eller faktura. Varer, der på grund af fabrikationsfejl 
skulle vise sig ubrugelige, bringes i orden eller ombyttes uden beregning, når de defekte dele straks returneres. Yderligere 
erstatning for udgifter i forbindelse med reklamation kan vi ikke påtage os.
Værktøj.
Værktøjer, der helt eller delvist debiteres, henligger på Idé-Pro Skive’s lager og udleveres ikke, men anvendes kun til kundens 
ordrer.
Produktion vil først finde sted når værktøjet er fuldt betalt af kunden.
Produktansvar.
Af hensyn til udvidelse af vor produktansvarsforsikring vil vi fra dags dato supplere vore generelle salgs- og leveringsbetingelser 
med §36 i “Almindelige leveringsbetingelser NL92”, hvis ordlyd er som følger:
Ansvar for tingskade, forvoldt af materiellet  (produktansvar).
Køberen skal holde sælgeren skadesløs i den udstrækning, sælgeren pålægges ansvar overfor tredjemand for sådan skade og 
sådant tab, som sælgeren efter dette punkts andet og tredje afsnit ikke er ansvarlig for overfor køber.
Sælgeren er ikke ansvarlig for skade, forvoldt af materiellet:
a. på fast ejendom eller løsøre, som indtræder, medens materiellet er i køberens besiddelse.
b. på produkter, der er fremstillet af køberen, eller på produkter, hvori disse indgår, eller for skade på fast  ejendom eller løsøre, 
som disse produkter som følge af materiellet forårsager.
I intet tilfælde er sælgeren ansvarlig for driftstab, tabt fortjeneste eller andre økonomiske konsekvenstab. De nævnte 
begrænsninger i sælgerens ansvar gælder ikke, hvis han har gjort sig skyldig i grov uagtsomhed. Hvis tredjemand fremsætter krav 
mod en af parterne om erstatningsansvar i henhold til dette punkt, skal denne part straks underrette den anden herom.
Sælger og køber er gensidigt forpligtet til at lade sig sagsøge ved den domstol eller voldgiftsret, som behandler erstatningskrav, 
der er rejst mod en af dem på grundlag af en skade eller et tab, som påstås forårsaget af materiellet. Det indbyrdes forhold 
mellem køber og sælger skal dog altid afgøres ved voldgift i henhold til punkt 40.
VAT no.  DK17607839
Sydbank A/S
Account no.: 7118 000 1067 761
IBAN no.: DK69 7118 000 1067 761
BIC-kode: SYBKDK22
Side 4/4
A.17
Manufacturing offer from IdePro
App. 22
PlasticScanner
==PAGE:113==
A.18
Schematics of the Scanner PCB
PlasticScanner
App. 23
==PAGE:114==
A.19
Schematics of the Scanner PCB
App. 24
PlasticScanner
==PAGE:115==
A.20
Schematics of the Scanner PCB
PlasticScanner
App. 25
==PAGE:116==
A.21
Schematics of the Scanner PCB
App. 26
PlasticScanner
==PAGE:117==
A.22
Schematics of the Scanner PCB
PlasticScanner
App. 27
==PAGE:118==
A.23
Schematics of the Scanner PCB
App. 28
PlasticScanner
==PAGE:119==
A.24
Schematics of the controller PCB
PlasticScanner
App. 29
==PAGE:120==
A.25
Evaluation of design from Delft report
The project has made an evaluation of the design proposed by the student team at
TU Delft
The goal was to identify and describe key aspects of current design that needs to
be redesigned in order to have a better product. The assessment is based on the
following points:
• Usability
• Ergonomic experience
• User experience
• Repairability
• Durability (harsh environments)
• Upgradeability
• Manufacturability
• Functionality
• Cost
• Aesthetics
The full review with subpages for the Firmware, PCB, Screen and physical design
can be found via the following line: Link to evaluation.
App. 30
PlasticScanner
==PAGE:121==
PlasticScanner
App. 31
==PAGE:122==
Shout-out to ChatGPT for this masterpiece! Verse 1:
With a light so bright and a sample in sight
We shine it through, what a beautiful sight
Every wavelength, every vibration
We gather data with precision
Chorus:
NIR spectroscopy, NIR spectroscopy
Identifying plastic types, so easily
No more guessing, no more lies
NIR spectroscopy, our ultimate prize
Verse 2:
Polyethylene, polypropylene
PET and PVC, we can tell them apart
From packaging to bottles and more
NIR helps us keep track of the store
Chorus:
NIR spectroscopy, NIR spectroscopy
Identifying plastic types, so easily
No more guessing, no more lies
NIR spectroscopy, our ultimate prize
Bridge:
It’s quick, it’s accurate, it’s eco-friendly too
Making sure that our planet stays blue
With NIR, we can make a change
Reducing waste, it’s a win-win game
Chorus:
NIR spectroscopy, NIR spectroscopy
Identifying plastic types, so easily
No more guessing, no more lies
NIR spectroscopy, our ultimate prize
Outro:
NIR, NIR, our hero
Making our world a better zero
Spectroscopy, the way to go
Saving the planet, don’t you know?
Technical
University of
Denmark
Akademivej, Building 358
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.dtu.dk
