==PAGE:1==
Minimal web­representation of tall building
structural analysis
Master Thesis
Marco Lombardo
29th January, 2023
DTU Architectural Engineering
Department of Civil and Mechanical Engineering
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Minimal web­representation of tall building structural analysis
Master Thesis 30 ECTS
29th January, 2023
By
Marco Lombardo s210384
Supervisor:
Tim Pat McGinley, Head of Studies, Associate Professor, Depart­
ment of Civil and Mechanical Engineering, Design and Processes,
DTU [timmc@dtu.dk]
External supervisor:
Konstantinos Koutsoupakis, Structural Engineer, BIG [konstanti­
nosk@big.dk]
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the
customary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report
title, etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Published by:
DTU, Department of Civil and Mechanical Engineering, Brovej,
Building 118, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
==PAGE:4==
Preface
This master thesis was prepared at the Department of Civil and Mechanical Engineering
at the Technical University of Denmark in fullfilment of the requirements for acquiring a
Msc. Degree of Architectural Engineering. This thesis represents 30 ETCS points, the
project period started 29th of August 2022 and finished 29th of January 2023.
The project was conducted under supervision from Tim McGinley, Associate Professor at
the Department of Civil and Mechanical Engineering at the Technical University of Den­
mark.
The thesis studies the analysis of structural guidance offered in early design phase to
identify the key issues that affect the design of the structural system in tall buildings.
Investigation of the needs of the architects when interacting with structural engineers in
this process. Investigation of the potential of HTML5 (HTML, JS and CSS) to minimally
represent this analysis. Development and evaluation of a simple tool to test this idea.
Marco Lombardo ­ s210384
Signature
Date
ii
Minimal web­representation of tall building structural analysis
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
The goal of this master thesis was to create a minimal web­representation of the core
element structural analysis in a tall building, in order to improve the conceptual design
phase process in complex projects.
The thesis begins analysing the key issues that affect the design of the structural core el­
ement in tall buildings during the early stages of the design process. The main problems
identified through several research papers are: the lack of collaboration between architec­
tural and engineering teams during the conceptual design phase; the vertical separation
of the discipline studies causing lack of knowledge of the other disciplines; and the lack
of a tool that can incorporate the discipline­specific requirements of an element, in the
specific case the core element. These problems do not permit an optimal synergy of
the disciplines during the conceptual design process collaboration, which translates into
delays and cost overruns. Adding to these problems, the discipline clashes and the col­
laboration hotspots such as placement, size and openings in the core start too late in the
project.
Using the DSRM methodology as basis for the master thesis, it was possible to define the
objectives of a solutions that could solve the problem. These objectives were: to adopt a
minimal representation of the building model; to increase knowledge of other disciplines;
to create a platform to share discipline­specific requirements of an element of the building;
to reduce the amount of clashes already during the conceptual design phase; and to make
more fact­based design choices.
Once the objectives and requirements of the tool were defined, the design and devel­
opment of the tool begun. The purpose of the project was identified in the creation of a
simple, standardised and easily editable tool which could be used by the different disci­
plines involved on the design of the core element to help the collaboration between the
stakeholders.
The chosen approach was the creation of a web­based tool based on HTML5, a markup
language used to create web pages. HTML5 combines HTML, CSS and JS to create an
interactive and user­friendly platform. HTML is the structure of the website, and during
the previous version it has embedded CSS (Cascading Style Sheet), a tool that helps
creating the layout of the web pages, and JS (JavaScript) which helps creating vector
graphics and analyse them in real time without the need to access to the Internet.
The evaluation of the tool was done through case studies and based on the objectives of
the solution defined through DSRM. It was observed that the tool could overall meet the
objectives but due to coding limited knowledge it is not yet ready for real implementation
in projects. However, the tool demonstrates to be flexible and to have the potential to be
expanded towards various directions, for example incorporating more disciplines (besides
structural engineering) or by having a more extensive results panel.
Minimal web­representation of tall building structural analysis
iii
==PAGE:6==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Nomenclature
1
1
Introduction
2
1.1
Problem statement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.2
Purpose of the research . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
1.3
Thesis structure
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2
Background
7
2.1
Design phases . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.2
Design in multidisciplinary collaboration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.3
Definition of tall buildings
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
2.4
Core element as multidisciplinary object . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.5
AEC collaboration
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
2.6
BIM
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
2.7
IFC entities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
2.8
Introduction to HTML5 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
2.9
Gaps in the literature . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
3
Method
21
3.1
Design Science Research Methodology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
3.1.1
Identification of the problem and motivation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
3.1.2
Define objectives of a solution
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
3.1.3
Design and development
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
3.1.4
Demonstration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
3.1.5
Evaluation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
3.1.6
Communication . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
4
Define objectives of a solution
24
4.1
Objectives of the solution
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
4.2
Requirements of the tool . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
5
Design and development
28
5.1
Tool requirements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30
5.2
Features of the tool . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31
5.3
Description of the web­based tool . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 32
6
Demonstration
37
6.1
Case studies and limitations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 38
6.1.1
Case study 1: Section view and user interface
. . . . . . . . . . . . 39
6.1.2
Case study 2: floor plan view and user interface
. . . . . . . . . . . 46
6.1.3
Case study 3: Dynamic wind load simulations and analysis of the
results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 49
7
Evaluation
55
7.1
Future developments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 56
iv
Minimal web­representation of tall building structural analysis
==PAGE:7==
8
Conclusion
58
Bibliography
59
A Wind load
64
B HTML script
71
C CSS script
78
D JS script
85
Minimal web­representation of tall building structural analysis
v
==PAGE:8==
Nomenclature
2D
Two­dimensional
AEC
Architecture, Engineering and Construction
BCF
BIM Collaboration Format
BIM
Building Information Model
bSDD
BuildingSMART Data Dictionary
CAD
Computer Aided Design
CSS
Cascading Style Sheet
DSRM
Design Science Research Methodology
HTML
Hyper Text Markup Language
IDM
Information Delivery Manuals
IdS
Information Delivery Specification
IFC
Industry Foundation Classes
IT
Information Technology
JS
JavaScript
MEP
Mechanical, Electrical and Plumbing
MVD
Model View Definitions
PHP
Hypertext Preprocessor
PM
Project Manager
UI
User Interface
Minimal web­representation of tall building structural analysis
1
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction
The biggest problem affecting the design of a tall building in a multi­disciplinary environ­
ment is the lack of communication between the teams involved in the project, especially
during the so­called conceptual design phase, which is the initial phase of the design
process. During this phase, the architectural team is often the leader [1]; they start to
draw their first design ideas, without worrying much about the engineering requirements
needed to achieve the final design of the building. The initial design is based on the clients’
requirements and architects design the building based on different parameters such as
usage, footprint area, building volume, materials, and cost.
Usually, the engineers start to collaborate only when the conceptual design phase is termi­
nated. As stated by Luyten [2], the optimal design solutions are not guaranteed because
the engineering team advice is evaluated too late. Even if the collaboration starts during
the conceptual design phase, the vertical separation of their entire studies [3] influences
the collaboration. As a matter of fact, the different teams involved have different ways of
thinking [4, 1]: architects based on sketches and engineers based on numbers. It is also
specified by Emmitt and Gorse [5], that to perform optimal design solutions and succeed
in the design communication, architects and engineers should have mutual knowledge of
the other disciplines. This educational division is easy to observe going through a multi­
disciplinary project, where a high level of communication is needed but each expert is not
ready or enough prepared to collaborate on the key issues and/or collaboration hot­spots.
Therefore, the clashes among disciplines and the collaboration hot­spots in the design of a
tall building (such as placement, size, openings in the core, and the design of other impor­
tant elements) are identified too late in the project. This separation discourages architects
and engineers from understanding the relationship among the problematic aspects and
components. Moreover, due to the complexity of the BIM models and the specific soft­
ware used by each discipline, it becomes difficult and time­consuming to make changes
to the project once these models are developed. As an example, in case of a problem
in the structural calculations, the structural engineer shall resize the structural elements
trying to avoid changes in the architectural model, in order not to drastically modify the
BIM 3D model.
To facilitate the collaboration among disciplines in the Architecture, Engineering and Con­
struction (AEC) industry, many software have been designed to support task coordination,
information sharing, conflict solution [6]. The most used technology by the AEC industry
is BIM, which enables a physical and functional digital representation of an object [2].
Even if BIM is the strongest tool to represent and share data information for large build­
ings, it does not capture fully the complexity of a multidisciplinary project. As stated by
[2], which was found going through the research papers of Frutcher and Rosenman [7,
8, 9]: ”The representation of a single object is not a sufficient tool for the multidisciplinary
collaboration. The reason why is because each discipline understands the design ob­
ject differently. For this reason, the object should be visualized following the different
disciplines­specific understandings.”
The specific case addressed in this master thesis is the relationship between the disci­
plines involved In the design of the core element of a tall building. In fact, even if the core
is one of the most common elements of study for many disciplines, it is not studied as a
singular concept by any IFC/Open BIM model. This means that all the teams involved are
2
Minimal web­representation of tall building structural analysis
==PAGE:10==
forced to modulate the core design based on their different requirements, which in most
cases are dependent from other disciplines, using different tools and analysing separately
possible design solutions. Only after the discipline­specific analysis is finalized, the infor­
mation is shared and needs to fulfill all the requirements before moving to the next design
phase.
The stakeholders involved in the design of the core element of a tall building are:
• Architectural team
• Structural team
• MEP team
• Fire Safety team
• Project Management team
For each of these disciplines, there are several aspects that influence the design of the
core; just as an example, the fire safety team will simulate an evacuation during a fire
and the core is the connecting element between each floor and the first safe spot. On
the other hand, the architectural team does not have as a first priority to modulate the
density of people in each specific floor. It is clear from this simple case that collaboration
is needed among the teams, as they all look at different design aspects.
This master thesis focuses on the relationship between the architectural team and the
structural team in the specific case of a tall building core design. The idea is to simplify
the sharing of complex data, using a very simple data visualization system. Seeking in
this way to improve the understanding of these data by experts from other disciplines, but
most importantly to spark the interest to understand the problems and the constraints of
the other stakeholders.
1.1
Problem statement
The traditional design framework used by AEC is defined in fig. 1.1. It represents the
design procedure used to develop the design of a project using a BIM­based collaboration.
Figure 1.1: Traditional design procedure in AEC inspired by [10]
Minimal web­representation of tall building structural analysis
3
==PAGE:11==
As said by [1], the main issue experienced by the experts involved on the project of a tall
building is that usually engineers are called too late into the design process. This affects
the performance of the collaboration, because the lack of input from all the other teams
in the early design process leads to problems much further down the road. This results in
more time needed to design an optimal solution or in expensive changes in the design.
The conceptual design phase is based on a strict collaboration between the client and, in
most cases, the architect. During this early phase, the client and the architectural team
need to agree on a particular model to use [10].
Following the traditional design, the conceptual phase is characterized by the use of
sketches and 2D drawings [11], first due to the limited amount of time allocated to this
phase, and secondly due to the initial building information that need to be addressed
and clarified (building function, form, dimensions, type of structural system, for example).
These representations are not always well­understood by the engineering teams during
the next phases [12]. As a matter of fact, the conceptual design phase is mostly based
on intuition and experience of the architectural team [13].
Only after the client has approved the model, the collaboration between architectural team
and engineering teams can start. This means that the architectural team shares the BIM
model and the information related to the project, such as shape, size, location, with all
the involved stakeholders. The engineering teams extrapolate the information needed
to start their own design and optimization using different software. Due to the project’s
complexity and interrelations of large numbers of components [14], and the need of sev­
eral intellectual resources working as a team [15], a strict connection and collaboration
between teams and experts is necessary.
As expected, the preliminary design stage is usually the stage where the interference
between the disciplines are found. Working with a multi­disciplinary method, each expert
involved in the project is optimizing the architectural design thanks to the use of design
parameters, mathematical relationships, and numerical evaluation of the design result
[16].
The outcome of the conceptual design, based often only on the client requirements and
architectural team ideas, is in most cases in contrast with the engineering requirements.
On top of this first issue, all the disciplines are interacting without having a central data
system used to share important information and make analysis based on local standard
codes; only at the end of their analysis, they share the results with the architects and the
other teams.
Using this traditional AEC method, the cost and the optimization of the project are not
always certain. It is well known that most companies fail to deliver on time and on budget,
when it comes to large and impactful projects. The reason why these delays and con­
sequent cost overruns are happening is due to the inadequacies in the implementation
processes, caused by project mismanagement [17, 18].
As said by Frutcher et al 1996 [7]: “The communication leads to an impact upon the quality
of the final design and the time required to reach the result”.
The right quantity and the right quality of information might be shared, not too much and
not too little. It is vital to achieve a common understanding based on a minimalist but
effective communication.
The research scope is to find an answer to specific questions such as: Why has the con­
ceptual design phase not developed a universal process tool? Why does each discipline
4
Minimal web­representation of tall building structural analysis
==PAGE:12==
not consider the other disciplines requirements until it will be too late? How can a tool
increase the knowledge about the relationship between the disciplines involved in the
design?
1.2
Purpose of the research
As previously elaborated, during the conceptual design phase of a tall building architects
are used to design considering only the constraints of the client and using their (sometimes
limited) knowledge about other technical disciplines. However, a detailed engineering
knowledge is fundamental to the architectural design team during this early phase.
As a matter of fact, the lack of communication and lack of details shared between the
teams does not allow a linear flow during the design process. This often translates into
delays and possibly underestimation of important aspects of the building design.
The purpose of this thesis research is to study an important element of multidisciplinary
practice, which is the core element design in tall buildings. As already said, multiple disci­
plines are involved in the design of the core element and all of them have different specific
requirements which must be fulfilled. The main problem related with the core element is
that there is no specific tool which helps the collaboration during the initial design of it.
even if there are several studies which focused their attentions on the importance of the
core element and its need of multi­disciplinary collaboration [19].
For this reason, the aim of the research is the development of a tool which will merge
the various disciplines needed to design the core element already into the conceptual
design phase of the building (see fig. 1.2). Following specific criteria and mapping out the
connection between all the disciplines, which will be explained later in the project thesis,
the tool will reduce the misunderstandings between the various disciplines in a complex
project. It will help the communication between the stakeholders creating an easy and
intuitive platform able to describe with a minimal representation what are the different
requirements, and how they must be fulfilled from each discipline perspective.
Figure 1.2: Ideal design procedure [10]
Minimal web­representation of tall building structural analysis
5
==PAGE:13==
The use of the tool will surely enrich the knowledge of architects about the static system
of the core and how the location of the core affects the requirements of the other teams.
At a later stage, the tool can be further developed to include the design of other elements,
becoming more flexible and useful for all disciplines; some examples could be cost es­
timation of the building materials or simulation of a fire safety evacuation. Reducing the
number of issues and interference during the initial collaboration between the experts,
this tool will guarantee a better collaboration interface and most importantly it will give the
possibility to focus directly on the optimization of the project.
1.3
Thesis structure
Figure 1.3: Representation of the thesis structure
6
Minimal web­representation of tall building structural analysis
==PAGE:14==
2
Background
This chapter is written to give a background knowledge to the reader about the three
design phases followed in projects based on BIM collaboration, introducing the multidis­
ciplinary collaboration and an example of where this is applied: complex projects such
as tall buildings. Focus is on the core element of tall buildings, being it the most multi­
disciplinary element. Afterwards, an introduction to the AEC industry and its software de­
velopment along the years is done, introducing: BIM, IFC entities and HTML5. BIM and
IFC are currently used in complex projects where a multidisciplinary approach is needed.
HTML5, instead, is an external software which can possibly connect the various discipline
requirements. Finally, an excursus of the current gaps in literature is done.
2.1
Design phases
The design phases based on BIM­collaboration can be classified in three stages: con­
ceptual design, preliminary design, and detailed design [20].
Figure 2.1: Bim­based collaboration [10]
The conceptual design phase is characterized by the designer­client collaboration. Dur­
ing this stage the architectural team conceptualizes the requirements of the client sharing
possible alternatives and model solutions, on which the client must agree [16].
The key decisions for the design of a tall building at this stage are:
• Orientation and external form of building to ensure minimum wind loads
• Floor system
• Lateral load resisting system
• Constructability
• Approximate cost of construction
Minimal web­representation of tall building structural analysis
7
==PAGE:15==
During this phase, the architectural team prepares the initial design, exploring possible
solutions using sketching, schematic drawings, and mock­ups [21].
The next phase if the preliminary design phase, where the model is shared among
the disciplines involved in the project using a central platform [16]. During this phase, a
detailed 3D view and documentation of the project are needed. The use of software such
as Robot or SAP2000, for example, are used by structural engineers to make simulations
and analysis of the horizontal loads [22].
The last stage, or detailed design phase, is the final stage of the design, during which
the clashes are detected, and the last analysis are performed. During this phase, the
building project is well presented by drafting, detailed drawings and 3D modelling [21].
As can be seen in fig. 2.1, only during the preliminary design phase the engineering teams
are involved in the project, even if during the conceptual design phase important decisions
which will have an impact on the final design and on the costs of the project are taken.
Complex projects, such as large infrastructures or tall buildings, must adopt a multi­
disciplinary collaboration due to the various exchanged information and communication
needed between all the stakeholders involved in the project.
2.2
Design in multidisciplinary collaboration
As said by Engel and Rapson in 1967, ”the necessity of working in a teamwork is an impor­
tant aspect during the design phases of building projects” [23]. When a complex building
needs to be designed, many criteria should be considered (function, size, environment,
cost) [16]. Thanks to BIM models, the specialised knowledge and competence of each
expert can be shared in a multi­disciplinary design process. A multidisciplinary team is
based on shared and centred processes where each expert can work independently, hav­
ing at the same time a full overview of the work done by all the other stakeholders involved.
Although there is a shared environment and disciplines can provide a description of their
specific needs and requirements, this information is not always understandable for the
entire multidisciplinary team [24]. For this reason, architects and engineers must work
together early in the design process [16].
What are the issues related to the multidisciplinary methodology?
When architectural team and engineering teams do not work together since the beginning
of the design, the level of knowledge of other disciplines and their attitude to increase
their knowledge is not always certain. One of the most important issues is the attitude to
communicating and sharing needs and requirements between the teams. For this reason,
collaboration must be well organized having a strong and detailed communication. It is
also important that the teams involved have enough knowledge of the different fields [16].
Working since the early stages in a multi­disciplinary team is beneficial for the costs and
optimization of the project. As it possible to see in fig. 2.2, the potential design changes
can be tackled at the beginning of the project decreasing the time needed to solve them
and consequently the cost. On the contrary, later the experts are involved, larger are the
expenses needed to make changes [25, 26].
As suggested by Luyten [16], to solve these problems it is important to create a sort of filter
through the initial collaboration of the teams. This filter is adopted to reduce the number
of unnecessary information and to be aware and focused on what matters for the other
disciplines.
8
Minimal web­representation of tall building structural analysis
==PAGE:16==
Figure 2.2: Effort/Effect ­ Time Plot [27]
Multidisciplinary methodology requires an integrated effort from the whole design team.
Many experts are needed in the design, analysis, and construction of buildings [28]. Sev­
eral studies are trying to integrate the exchange of data between disciplines, using third­
party platforms [29] to incorporate the discipline requirements of a specific object in order
to improve the exchange of information and understanding of the relationships between
the object and the disciplines. Despite all the efforts, there are few improvements and the
interoperability in AEC enhances slowly [30].
Figure 2.3: Diagram of the representation of the conceptual design proposition [16]
Communication gap
A good communication is based on the process of sharing information creating a com­
Minimal web­representation of tall building structural analysis
9
==PAGE:17==
mon understanding, using the right channel to communicate from one person to another
[31]. In a multidisciplinary environment, it is vital to have a platform where the information
exchanged are based on a good communication, because the communication and the
mutual understanding between the disciplines influences the success of a design [32].
This means that the information must be understood correctly to reach the goal [33].
Going through several important papers, it is possible to define four different factors af­
fecting an effective communication: firstly, Cheung et al. [34] affirms that the problem is
the clarity of information. Secondly, Kliem [35] says that the choice of the right media to
share the information is important, a clear message for a person can be ambiguous for
another. Thirdly, Tipili and Ojeba [36] confirm that the choice of the media and the clarity
are fundamental. And lastly, Ean [37] supports that to have an effective communication
the media or channels are important.
During the design phases of a project, communication can vary from verbal, through
computerized digital technologies, virtual prototyping, two­dimensional drawings, three­
dimensional volumetric renderings, and the notable walking­through architectural tech­
nologies. It is not easy to define which method is the most effective, because most of the
times a method can be powerful in a specific situation and unsuitable for another.
One of the most important challenges, in fact, is the clear definition of responsibilities and
the ability to exchange data at the disciplinary interfaces [28]. During the early design
phase of a project, a communication plan needs to be done and different schemes about
the most important elements of the project need to be explained and shared with all teams.
The multidisciplinary approach is focusing on the relationships between the various disci­
plines involved in the project, and how they are communicating and sharing important and
relevant information about the project design. Considering building projects, tall buildings
are surely one of the most complex multidisciplinary projects, and therefore, are studied
in this thesis.
2.3
Definition of tall buildings
As defined by the CTBUH, Council on Tall Building and Urban Habitat, the definition of a
tall building depends on multiple factors such as context, proportion etc [38].
A tall building is defined as such if at least one of the following characteristics is verified:
• Height relative to context: different cities have different urban designs and different
urban norms that should be followed. A 20­story building has different perspective
if you see it in Denmark or in the US.
• Proportion: the definition of tall building is not only related to its height. The width
of the building is also an important aspect. Not particularly high but very slender
buildings or very high buildings with a large footprint can appear and be defined as
tall buildings or not, depending on their size/floor area proportion.
• Embracing technologies relevant to tall building: all tall buildings need to have spe­
cial attention to the elements which have a strict correlation with the term tall. This
means for example, vertical transportation, structural components against the wind,
etc.
The above definition highligths, as also affirmed by [38], that due to the high possibility of
having multiple functions with a different floor­to­floor height, tall buildings cannot have as
a good criterion the number of floors to give an exact definition of tall buildings. However,
10
Minimal web­representation of tall building structural analysis
==PAGE:18==
it is usually possible to start affirming that a building is tall with more than 14 stories (50
meters).
Considering only the structural perspective, a building can be defined as ”tall” if the lateral
loads are relevant and affect the structural design [39]. The distribution of the structural
elements which are used to support against the primary lateral load defines the type of
structural design.
Figure 2.4: Classification of tall building concrete structural systems by Fazlur Khan [40]
As said by Ali and Moon [40], it is possible to divide the structure in interior and exterior
structure. In the case of interior structures, the service core is one of the commonalities
between all the different structures as it is possible to see from fig. 2.4. Tall buildings, in
fact, are mostly designed with a core wall system, which usually is located at the center
of the building, and are used also to accommodate the vertical circulation of the building
[41].
Historically, the development of tall buildings has been dependent on technological ad­
vancements [42]. As the height increases, service core becomes a challenge for the
designer mainly because tall buildings are required to be more efficient in terms of space
use than any other building type. This is primarily due to the adverse effect of height on
usable space as service core expands to satisfy the requirements of vertical circulation,
and in some cases, resistance to lateral loads [43].
Due to the complexity of the project, tall buildings design needs a multi­disciplinary ap­
proach to develop an efficient design of the core element, following the relation between
the disciplines involved in the project.
2.4
Core element as multidisciplinary object
The importance of the core element is showed by Trabucco [44] in his research, where it
is affirmed that the success of a skyscraper design depends on the core element design.
It is also remarked in [45], that the time spent in the core design will be translated in a
more efficient building.
The important characteristics of the core design are: shape of the core, number of cores,
location of cores, geometry of building as generator of core form.
Minimal web­representation of tall building structural analysis
11
==PAGE:19==
Several studies studied the advantages and disadvantages of the location of the core.
Grondzik, Kwok, Stein and Reynolds [46] defined six possible design choices, explained
in fig. 2.5. These criteria are relevant for both architectural and engineering teams. The
central core and the two cores are ranked as the best possible solutions.
Figure 2.5: Configuration and comparison of core locations [46]
The advantages of a central core are: a convenient access to the levels; windows and
perimeter spaces are totally utilized; simplified area division and good flexibility of tenants
distribution; utilities are equidistant from the core; the structure is flexible for office layout.
The disadvantages of a central core are: corridor around the perimeter; limited depth of
the office areas; no daylight inside the service core.
The core element can be defined as a space and it is a focus for different disciplines [28]:
structural engineers, architects, fire safety engineers, and MEP engineers.
Initially, the core of the building is designed by the structural engineer who will analyse
the size of the building received from the architect and will calculate the optimal size
designed to safely transfer all the horizontal loads to the foundation. The outputs are
the location, the volume and the material, which are the main characteristics needed by
the other discipline experts. In fact, focus is then on the facilities, elevators, corridors,
entrance, secure spaces, toilets, etc. which are most important for the architectural team
and the fire safety team. Third, the MEP team comes in the picture because the pipes,
ducts and other sub­services are located in the service room inside the core element.
The fact that all these disciplines give inputs to the design of the core element leads to
the possible modification of the initial idea for the project.
Once the architectural team has prepared the design in a shared platform, the initial design
is analysed by all the other experts involved on the project.
12
Minimal web­representation of tall building structural analysis
==PAGE:20==
The core element is totally designed by the structural engineering team, but the location
and the shape of the element are strictly related to other disciplines and specific require­
ments should be considered.
In the case of a tall building design, the core element is the common structural element
used to transmit the horizontal load to the basement. The wind load simulation is one of
the most important calculations design for a structural engineer during the design of a tall
building. Once the initial design of the structural building is done, the other disciplines
such as MEP and the architectural team can start designing the internal functions and
elements of the core.
Each discipline starts the design using their own model based on different software and
following specific standards and regulations. As soon as the structural team receives
information about the building, it is possible to start idealizing the best structural solution
for the specific case.
Figure 2.6: Description of the disciplines involved in the core design
The architectural team is the first team involved, who needs to take care of the use of
the building and possible needs for the service area. As previously explained, the location
of the core is important for many reasons.
The structural team designs the core as load­bearing element to transmit all the hori­
zontal loads and possible part of the vertical loads to the foundation. For this reason, it
is important to evaluate the suggested design of the architectural team and design the
structural element following the regulations.
The MEP service team uses the core as a service room: all the facilities will pass through
the core and spread from there towards all the directions. When the core is designed, the
MEP team can start their design and the location defines the meters of ducts and pipes
used in the building project.
The fire safety team needs the location of the core and its design to prepare the simu­
lation of an evacuation during a fire. The core is an important element because it is the
connecting element between the floors and a safe place. The first information needed
is the distances between the rooms and the core, but also details about corridors width,
doors width, staircases, n. of elevators etc. are relevant.
The PM team uses the volumetric dimensions of the core to extrapolate the cost for the
Minimal web­representation of tall building structural analysis
13
==PAGE:21==
concrete and steel needed, and the location of the core to organize the construction time­
line and management.
Initial structural core analysis
One of the most important analysis which must be done by the structural engineering team
in a tall building is related with the horizontal loads and how the building structure will be
able to support them.
Increasing the height of the building, the wind speed increases parabolically [47] causing
larger vertical and lateral loads. Achieving 10 to 15 floors the wind forces become the
dominant design criterion and a central concern of the structural performance. Tall build­
ings are moving laterally by significant amounts, due to wind loads, and this excessive
movement should be analysed during the design. The effect of the wind loads depends
on many criteria: location of the building, density and flow of air, shape of the building
etc., and the calculations to be performed depend on the height. If the height is less than
200 m, a static approach is used; if it is higher than 200 m, dynamic calculations and
wind tunnel simulations are needed. The Eurocode followed for this study research is
EN1991­1­4 [48].
Figure 2.7: Interior structure [40]
As shown in fig. 2.7, depending on the building height there are different needs for the
structural frame. Smaller buildings are preferred to be designed with a frame structure,
while for tall buildings the structure is defined by a rigid frame and a core element. The
frame is used to support the vertical load and transmit the horizontal load to the structural
core element, which leads it to the foundation.
The initial requirements needed to start the analysis of the core element are: location
of the project, geometry of the building (height, width, length), materials and functional­
14
Minimal web­representation of tall building structural analysis
==PAGE:22==
ity. Knowing these initial characteristics, it is possible to define the initial idea about the
structural elements, and in particular the core element.
The method used to calculate the optimal structure resisting to the wind load is shown in
appendix A.
After having defined the design phases and what is important to know and study about
the core element of a tall building, the next section will analyse what AEC has done to
define and solve the gap of relationships among the various disciplines and the elements.
2.5
AEC collaboration
AEC (Architecture, Engineering and Construction) industry, since the new era of digital­
ization and industrialization, has totally transformed its way of working [49]. The design
and documentation of a project have drastically changed since the adoption of the BIM
model, and it is continuously evolving. The research done by Froese [50, 51], explains
how it is possible to divide the IT innovations that shaped the AEC sector into three eras.
Figure 2.8: Evolution of AEC technology [52]
The first era was defined by a radical improvement of software such as CAD (Computer
Aided Design), and other discipline­specific software, which did not have any relationships
with other disciplines, but were important tools used to optimize the single disciplines. The
design was totally planned and sketched using a 2D (two­dimensional) representation.
The second era was mainly characterized by the use of communication tools and docu­
ment management systems (email, web­based messaging etc.).
The third era is the one which is characterizing nowadays the AEC industry. In fact, the
final goal is to find a way to merge the software from the previous two eras into a common
Minimal web­representation of tall building structural analysis
15
==PAGE:23==
platform where the teams collaborate to produce a virtual model of all aspects of the
construction project [50, 51].
As a result, BIM has been identified as the tool used by AEC to merge the visualization
and communication of a project, increasing the collaboration between the various team
members involved.
2.6
BIM
Building Information Modelling (BIM) has been defined as “the act of creating an elec­
tronic model of a facility for the purpose of visualization, engineering analysis, conflict
analysis, code criteria checking, cost engineering, as­built product, budgeting and many
other purposes” [53].
It is an important tool which helps creating a better communication between multi­disciplinary
teams and a better synchronization of the intended goals and project results. BIM is not
only a 3D representation of a project, but it also contains multiple important information
useful to improve the productivity and the quality of each team involved in the project [54].
Thanks to the introduction of this digital software, it is possible to fully explore the de­
sign of a building, varying shapes, dimensions, materials, among others. It is possible
to dynamically define and create new information and data about materials, load bearing
structures, costs, lifecycle, etc. and it conveys them in a centred model, where one can
have a complete overview of the entire project, through the whole life cycle [55].
Complex building projects are nowadays, in most cases, based on BIM collaboration, as
it is a powerful tool used to merge the discipline project design during the detailed design
phase. This approach allows to check, for example, if there are clashes between the
various disciplines on the project, as researched by the authors of these two research
papers [54, 56].
BIM models are used by a variety of disciplines and the need of an easy and standard­
ized way of interconnecting them was satisfied by the OpenBIM tool created by BuildingS­
MART.
BuildingSMART’s research focuses on how to implement the exchange of information be­
tween different software using BIM models. OpenBIM is the process which has as a cen­
tral role the improved interoperability between different software platforms [57]. It is based
on 6 principles, which are supported by 6 core standards and guidelines, namely: IFC
(Industry Foundation Classes), IDM (Information Delivery Manuals), MVD (Model View
Definitions), BCF (BIM Collaboration Format), bSDD (BuildingSMART Data Dictionary),
and IdS (Information Delivery Specification) [57].
The most important standard for the AEC industry is IFC. It is an open file standard used
to exchange data through different software. Inside an IFC file, there is a full description
of the building environment [57].
IFC allows to inter­exchange data from a range of different software and platforms without
any loss or distortion of the model data, enhancing the integration among the teams [58].
For example, each expert can run simulations and analysis, such as a structural analysis
using Robot or a detailed cost estimation using Solibri. The scope of IFC is to reduce the
errors during the design phase, which will directly translate into cost reduction and time
saving during the following phases.
16
Minimal web­representation of tall building structural analysis
==PAGE:24==
2.7
IFC entities
The IFC schema contains several classes which are defined as entities and are needed to
describe building information. Based on the IFC schema (see example in fig. 2.9), there
are three possible types of entities depending on whether the entities represent properties,
objects, or relationships. As defined by Theiler [59]:
• Objects are the representation of anything that can be described semantically (If­
cObjectDefinition). The IfcObject can be divided into six important concepts: IfcProd­
uct, IfcResourse, IfcProcess, IfcControl, IfcActor. The construction elements are de­
fined inside the IfcProduct. They can be divided into spatial and physical elements.
Some spatial elements are: IfcSite, IfcBuilding, IfcSpace; some physical elements
are: IfcWall, IfcBeam.
• Properties are defined as the characteristics of the objects (IfcPropertyDefition).
IfcRelationship can be divided into five types: IfcRelConnects, IfcRelAssociates,
IfcRelDecomposes, IfcRelDefines, IfcRelAssigns. These can be further divided into
sub­types.
• Relationships are the relationship between entities (IfcRelationship). IfcPropertiy­
Definition can be divided into three types of properties: IfcPropertySetDefinition,
IfcPropertySet, IfcProperty. IfcProperty can be further divided into IfcComplexProp­
erty and IfcSimpleProperty.
Figure 2.9: IFC schema relevant to monitoring information modeling [60]
The integration of BIM and IFC standards created a new way of collaboration through
the life cycle of the building projects. It is possible to transfer the characteristics, the 3D
representation and the information of an element, using a multitude of software, without
having any distortion of the element. But still, the collaboration between the teams and
the visualization of models is not always understandable: either does not include all the
Minimal web­representation of tall building structural analysis
17
==PAGE:25==
information wanted, or the contrary, includes too much information.
What is missing at the moment in the AEC industry, is a tool which can analyse the re­
quirements and relations of the disciplines involved in the design of an element. Most
importantly, there are no studies about the design of a web­based tool to incorporate the
discipline requirements using only HTML5 as the mark up language.
2.8
Introduction to HTML5
Hyper Text Markup Language (HTML) is a markup language, also defined as an open
standard [61], used to design web pages [62] providing the structure of the web page.
The HTML is the main document script, it is the foundation of what appears on the web­
page [63]. It ensures the correct formatting of text and images, so that the browser can
display them in their correct form. Without HTML, a browser could not display text or load
any other element.
Initially, HTML was developed to display static pages. During the last 30 years, web de­
velopers started to search for ways to make the web pages more engaging and dynamic,
and one of the most important steps in this direction was the introduction of JavaScript
[64].
The layout of the web page is defined by CSS. CSS (Cascading Style Sheet) modifies the
appearance and the structure visualization of the elements inside the web page. CSS is
basically the stylist of the web page, it defines the rules used by the HTML elements. It is
used to define the margins, padding, dimensions and colors of the elements, font of the
characters [65].
The combination of HTML, JS and CSS3 defines the structure of HTML5, and it can be
seen as an alternative to Java. This programming languages are combined to design
web­pages or apps [66]. As said by Rajesh and Srikanth [67], HTML5 was created to
develop collaboration in real­time, and thanks to the use of and functions of HTML5 it is
possible to create standards which can be accessed from everywhere and also without
connection.
HTML5 is an important markup language which is supported by all the web browsers,
which display the web page following the structure of the script.
The simplest HTML code is shown below. The design of the script is based on tag el­
ements; there are always two tags, one to start (<...>) and one to end (</...>), for each
functionality.
1
<!DOCTYPE html>
2
<html>
3
<head>
4
<title> Title </title>
5
</head>
6
<body>
7
</body>
8
</html>
Explanation of the basic tags:
• <!DOCTYPE html>: this tag is used to define that the whole document is an HTML5
document
18
Minimal web­representation of tall building structural analysis
==PAGE:26==
• <html>: this tag is used to delimit the HTML document. It can have three attributes:
dir, lang, version. And it contains the head_tag, body_tag, frames
• <head>: this tag defines the meta information about the HTML page
• <title>: this tag defines the document title of the HTML page
• <body>: this tag defines the document’s body. All the visible contents are defined
inside the body container, for example tables, lists etc.
Furthermore, there can be also attributes, classes, id which are not represented in the
simple script defined above. A more detailed explanation is given in chapter 5.
When a CSS script (which is an external sheet) is imported in an HTML document, inside
the head tag there must be a link where is specified the ’rel’ and ’href’ attributes, used to
specify the relationship between the document and the CSS document and the link of the
CSS document, respectively. Below is shown an example:
1
<!DOCTYPE html>
2
<html>
3
<head>
4
<title> Title </title>
5
<link rel="stylesheet" href="main.css">
6
</head>
7
<body>
8
</body>
9
</html>
JS (Java Script) is an object­oriented programming language, that is used to create vector
graphics and analyse them in real time without the need to access to the Internet. JS uses
objects which are mapping from strings to values; the values can be converted from a type
to another, while the variables can be simply created [68]. It is a programming language
that needs an HTML document to manipulate the web­page elements. It is used to create
an interface between the users and the web­page.
A JS document can be defined inside the HTML document or imported as script tag in the
head tag, as for the CSS import, using ’src’ as attribute. Below an example:
1
<!DOCTYPE html>
2
<html>
3
<head>
4
<title> Title </title>
5
<link rel="stylesheet" href="main.css">
6
<script src="main.js">
7
</head>
8
<body>
9
</body>
10
</html>
2.9
Gaps in the literature
While researching about design processes and conceptual design phase, it has been
found that there are several gaps in the literature that shall be addressed. They are
related to the following aspects:
Minimal web­representation of tall building structural analysis
19
==PAGE:27==
• Lack of interoperability, limited contribution to a common platform [69].
The first gap defines the lack of a common platform and interface needed to incorpo­
rate requirements during the conceptual design phase and project ideas of specific
elements during the design of complex buildings.
• No IFC standards representing the core element as multidisciplinary element.
The second gap is identified in the lack of IFC entities objects of the core element.
This is a relevant obstacle, because IFC is the common platform which is used by
AEC industry to share design models, and it does not integrate one of the most
important elements for the multidisciplinary environment.
• No studies about interpretation of a BIM model with HTML5
There is no research about the use of only HTML5 to represent building design
model. Most of the research papers based their studies around other types of pro­
gramming languages, such as C++, C# or Java.
• No technology for automatic code­checking procedures of structural elements in a
common platform [69].
The structural performance of a structure or element is done using specific software
such as SAP2000 or Robot. Most of the calculations are done by hand, or using
software such as Matlab or Matcad, and only the relevant results are elaborated and
shared into the documents by the structural engineering team.
• There are no studies about the validation of models or adopting engineering analysis
during the conceptual design phase.
The validation is done only during the detailed design process, and it is a manual
check which is often time­consuming and error­prone [70].
20
Minimal web­representation of tall building structural analysis
==PAGE:28==
3
Method
The methodology adopted in this thesis is the DSRM (Design Science Research Method­
ology), a useful research method defining a comprehensive process to carry out a scien­
tific study.
In this chapter, the six steps of the DSRM are explained in detail and a short description
of how they are developed through this thesis is given. In the following chapters, all the
steps will be analyzed more in detail.
3.1
Design Science Research Methodology
Figure 3.1: DSRM Process Model [71]
The DSRM method is based on six different activities, used to carry out the steps needed
to design a solution of an initial human problem [71]. Even if the process is organized in a
sequential way as it can be seen in fig. 3.1, there is no expectation to follow this sequential
process to conduct a research [72].
The focus of the thesis is the research of a motivated problem and a possible solution
through the development of an artifact used to demonstrate and evaluate the objectives
of the solution. All the steps in fig. 3.1 will be explained in detail in the next chapters, as
the methodology is applied to the master thesis. Below, a detail explanation of each step
is given.
3.1.1
Identification of the problem and motivation
The identification of the problem is the step where a specific problem in a specific field is
identified. The problem needs to have a great importance to the field. It is also important
to strongly motivate and justify the reasons behind the study research and the solution
needed to solve the problem [72].
As defined in chapter 1, the lack of collaboration between engineers and architects during
the conceptual design phase of the core element design of a tall building is the main
problem identified; moreover, as explained in section 2.9, multiple gaps in the literature
are found and analysed.
Minimal web­representation of tall building structural analysis
21
==PAGE:29==
3.1.2
Define objectives of a solution
This step consists in finding a possible solution to the problem previously identified and
defining the goals it should achieve. It is crucial that the solution is found based on the
objectives it must achieve, and not viceversa.
There are two possible types of objectives, quantitative objectives if they describe how the
solution can be better than the ones already developed, and qualitative objectives which
describe how a new solution can solve the defined problem [72].
The solution objectives for this thesis are based on the problem statement defined in
chapter 1 and the gaps in the literature explained in section 2.9. The definition of the
objectives of the solution for this master thesis study are explained in detail in chapter 4.
The solution researched and proposed is a web­based tool able to transfer all the disci­
pline requirements about a specific building element and use the geometrical information
of the building in simulations. In this way, it is possible to help architects understanding
how a possible solution can affect a single or many disciplines and what are the benefits
of adopting a specific design element solution rather than another.
3.1.3
Design and development
During the design and development stage, the initial problems are used to design an
artifact which is based on the defined objectives of the solution. Specific knowledge of
theoretical background is needed to strengthen the design of the tool; for this reason, it
is important to define the requirements that need to be followed to design a useful tool
that will realize the objectives previously defined. Furthermore, the development of the
tool will be used to determine the functionalities that are helpful for the realization of the
solution objectives [72].
The design and development of the tool developed in this thesis is explained in chapter 5.
3.1.4
Demonstration
The demonstration step consists of various activities done to understand whether the
chosen solution can solve one or more instances of the problem. It can involve simulation,
case study, proof, or other methods. To demonstrate the validity of the tool, it is crucial to
have an effective knowledge of how the tool can be used to solve the problem [72].
The demonstration of the validity of the proposed web­based tool is done through the
analysis of the case studies (defined in chapter 4). In chapter 6, the case studies results
and how the tool works are shown in detail.
3.1.5
Evaluation
The fifth step of the methodology is the evaluation of the tool in support of the solution [72].
After the design of the tool and the demonstration of the results, it is necessary to evaluate
the results. After the evaluation of the results, the researcher can decide between iterating
again the design and development of the tool to improve it or continuing with the last step,
therefore communicating what can be done to improve the tool in future researches [72].
The evaluation of the tool is done in chapter 7. It is important in this chapter to evaluate
what has been done and if the tool satisfied the requirements of the thesis. It is vital to
explain the positive and negative aspects of the results.
3.1.6
Communication
The last step of the DSRM is the communication stage: it consists in sharing the outcome
of the studies through scholarly or professional publications.
22
Minimal web­representation of tall building structural analysis
==PAGE:30==
In this thesis, the conclusion is done communicating the outcomes of the research project.
The communication of the results is done showing whether the tool is achieving something
that is not existing yet and if it is attractive for the industry. Most importantly, it is important
to communicate if the tool is aligned with the requirements previously identified. Once, the
results of the thesis research are communicated, the last step is the analysis of the future
development. Furthermore, an analysis of how the tool can be developed introducing
new disciplines requirements to improve the needs of the stakeholders is defined. The
communication and conclusion of this master thesis project are explained in chapter 8.
The methodology structure of this master thesis project is explained in fig. 3.2.
Figure 3.2: Structure of DSRM methodology of the master project
Minimal web­representation of tall building structural analysis
23
==PAGE:31==
4
Define objectives of a solution
Figure 4.1: DSRM Process Model (stage 2 highlighted) [71]
What is found going through several studies and research is that the key issue that affects
the design of the structural system in tall buildings (and in particular the core element,
being one the most multidisciplinary elements) is the lack of collaboration during the initial
design of the building. This leads to an adaptation of the structural engineer team, and as
previously explained, also the other engineering teams, to the initial architectural design.
For this reason, it was decided to create a tool which incorporates engineering knowledge,
information and analysis of an element at the beginning of the project, assisting the archi­
tectural team proposing more accurate design solutions to the client besides improving the
future collaboration among teams because initial clashes and possible multi­disciplinary
requirements can be analysed. As written in [73], the client is more inclined to dismiss
a better but more expensive aesthetic solution designed by the architectural team, while
they can accept a more expensive technical solution, because it involves a different level
of responsibility.
The tool should be based on multiple objectives and factors that are important to solve
the problem. The objectives of the solutions are based on the problem defined in chap­
ter 1 and the investigation made about the design process and requirements explained in
section 2.9.
In this chapter, the second step of the DSRM is explained. The objectives of a solution to
solve the already identified problem are outlined, together with the requirements that this
solution shall fulfill to be effective. Finally, a summary table is shown.
4.1
Objectives of the solution
In order to identify a possible solution to the problems and gaps previously defined, the
objectives of the solution must be defined and described.
The objectives are listed below and immediately after explained in details.
1. To adopt a minimal and effective representation of the model of the building
24
Minimal web­representation of tall building structural analysis
==PAGE:32==
2. To increase knowledge of other disciplines
3. To create a platform used to share discipline­specific requirements of an element of
the building
4. To reduce the amount of clashes already during the conceptual design phase
5. To make more fact­based design choices
1. To adopt a minimal and effective representation of the model of the building
The lack of detailed knowledge about other disciplines, the limited time allocated to the
conceptual design phase and the uncertainty in the client requirements are all typical prob­
lems when designing a tall building. As a consequence, having a minimal and effective
visualization both of the view model and result model is identified as one of the goals.
2. To increase knowledge of other disciplines
The complete separation of architectural and engineering studies is a long­standing prob­
lem which affects most of the design processes. The reasons for a specific choice and
design solution are not always understandable by the two parties (this is also happen­
ing between engineering team of other disciplines, of course). The proposed solution
must therefore be able to facilitate and improve the understanding of model results for
non­experts.
3. To create a platform used to share discipline­specific requirements of the build­
ing
There is the need of creating a common platform where it is possible to study the re­
lationships among disciplines about a building element. There is no tool used to study
how a change of location or dimension is affecting the model and design values of each
discipline.
4. To reduce the amount of clashes already during the conceptual design phase
Since the conceptual design phase is defined as a client­architectural team collaboration,
the design is based only on the client requirements and the ability and knowledge of the
architectural team to meet the requirements adopting design solutions that will work also
for the other teams. This approach could lead to various clashes later in the process. To
tackle this, the proposed solution must have a platform where it is possible to understand
if the solution designed is working for the other disciplines.
5. To make more fact­based design choices
The conceptual design phase is the phase where all the information about time­schedule,
cost, definition of the multidisciplinary relation between disciplines are based only on sim­
ple assumptions and are not supported by detailed data and information. Adopting certain
solutions based on detailed studies and regulation checks, can surely support architec­
tural design solutions for a better final design but also to enrich and having fact­based
reasons behind design solutions, useful also when meeting the client.
4.2
Requirements of the tool
Once the objectives of the solution are defined, it is time to start thinking about the possible
solution design. In order to do that, it is important to define the requirements that the tool
must follow to meet the various objectives previously explained.
The requirements are the following:
Minimal web­representation of tall building structural analysis
25
==PAGE:33==
1. The system should be able to represent the required information in 2D
2. User interface where the users can add and edit basic information about the building
3. Dynamic adaptation of the views and the simulation results importing the information
added into the user interface
4. Communication of the results in a format that is easy to understand for the users
5. The results should be based on the Eurocode or on regulations
1. The system should be able to represent the required information in 2D
The tool must support a simple representation of the building in order to be more effec­
tive when a change is done, helping to understand what it is happening and why it is
happening.
2. User interface where the users can add and edit basic information about the
building
The tool must be used by users during the conceptual design phase, this means that
multiple solutions are studied by the architectural team. For this reason, it is important
that the user can make any dimensional changes inside the building design, following
both the client requirements and the architectural idea.
3. Dynamic adaptation of the views and the simulation results importing the infor­
mation added into the user interface
The tool must be able to follow the input values given by the users, adapting the views
and performing new calculations every time an information is changed. This is necessary
to give an explanation of what is happening to the element performance when a data is
changed and how this change is affecting the results.
4. Communication of the results in a format that is easy to understand for the users
The tool must represent what the engineering teams are looking into in the initial design,
specifically the structural engineering team. The tool must be able to share if the structure
is well­designed or not and also what the changes are. For this reason, it is vital to explain
the results in the simplest way as possible. The tool must support the visualization of the
results and the explanation must the both graphic and written.
5. The results should be based on the Eurocode or on regulations
To support the results and the analysis done, the tool must design the element based on
Eurocode or other National regulations. This is needed to support with facts the analysis
and simulations done, and to give more concrete solutions to the architectural design
based on engineering calculations and results. To define the best solution for the design
case, it is needed that the design and the tool are following the simulation of engineering
performance.
26
Minimal web­representation of tall building structural analysis
==PAGE:34==
Problems
Objectives
Requirements
Lack of time and uncertainty
of the client requirements.
To adopt a minimal and
effective representation of
the model of the building
The system should be
able to represent the
required information
in 2D
Lack of knowledge about
other disciplines, and lack
of initial collaboration
To increase knowledge
of other disciplines
User interface where
the users can add and
edit basic information
about the building
Lack of a tool used to check
the multi­disciplinary
requirements of the
core element
To create a platform used
to share discipline­specific
requirements of an element
of the building
Dynamic adaptation
of the views and the
simulation results
importing the information
added into the user interface
The clashes are checked
only at the last stage
of the design, there
are not software able to
read the multidisciplinary
relationships of the
core element
To reduce the amount
of clashes already
during the conceptual
design phase
Communication of the
results in a format that
is easy to understand
for the users
The conceptual design phase is
defined only by the knowledge
of the architectural team
To make more fact­based design choices
The results should be
based on the Eurocode
or on regulations
Table 4.1: Summary of the objectives and requirements of the solution
Minimal web­representation of tall building structural analysis
27
==PAGE:35==
5
Design and development
Figure 5.1: DSRM Process Model (stage 3 highlighted) [71]
This chapter illustrates the third step of the DSRM methodology explained in chapter 3.
To solve the problems and the gaps in the literature, which are identified, respectively, in
chapter 1 and section 2.9, a solution must be designed and developed. The solution is
based on the objectives defined in section 4.1 and follows the requirements defined in
section 4.2.
Initially, a background on the process leading to the idea of the web­based tool is given.
Secondly, the requirements this tool shall fulfil are outlined. And lastly, it is explained in
detail how the tool is built and meant to be used.
Since the beginning of the master thesis project, the main idea was related with sharing
information among teams and visualization of building projects through a web­page. The
idea was to represent important engineering information and data of a project (such as
frame structure, pipe distribution, cost estimation, etc.) importing IFC models in a HTML5
web­page, from which this information could easily be shared with the other teams.
Initially, it was investigated how the existing gaps and problems could be solved following
the design phases of a multidisciplinary design of tall buildings. It was underlined how
the communication is vital and how possible design solutions can affect the design and
collaboration of the different disciplines involved in the project.
Going through the case studies of the subject 11080 Advanced Building Design and after
reading several research papers, the core element of a tall building was identified as
the main element of study. As a matter of fact, the core element is one of the most
important elements of the multidisciplinary process. During all the design phases, many
disciplines are involved or are affected by the design of this element: starting from the
client expectations, the various teams (such as, structural engineering team, architectural
engineering team, fire safety team, MEP team and also project management team) have
all a specific and fundamental role in the design of the core element.
The solution explored was to develop a web­based tool that could incorporate both the
visualization of the tall building and the engineering results and solutions.
28
Minimal web­representation of tall building structural analysis
==PAGE:36==
Figure 5.2: 2D design process model [74]
The fig. 5.2 explains how the traditional design procedure of building core design phases
is structured, and how the discipline design is divided in steps.
As explained in section 2.4, considering nowadays design process (an example is shown
in fig. 5.2), the core element plays an important role for many disciplines, but a specific
order is followed during the design and the relations between the teams and the elements
are initially not taken into account. It is also noted that the overview of all the design
requirements is done only at the end of the design process, while, as previously said, it is
fundamental to have an overview of the different discipline’s requirements directly at the
initial phase of the design.
All the teams need to collaborate during the design process of the core and all of them
work with different software; most of them can read the project thanks to IFC, but this can
actually happen only when the design is already quite detailed. As defined also in the
section 2.9, currently there are no tools that can be used to describe the multidisciplinary
collaboration needed to have a well­designed core element for each of the disciplines and,
most importantly, there is no information that can be used to identify the core object inside
an IFC model. For this reason, the tool should address the specific information needed
by the single discipline and use them to run the simulations to find the optimal solutions.
Due to the limited amount of time allocated to the master thesis, it is opted to analyse only
one of the multiple subjects. The main subject for the study was identified in the structural
engineering discipline, which defines the feasibility of the core element and its final shape
and location.
After having decided the element of study and the discipline for the master project, it was
necessary to understand which platform could have been used to create this universal
tool where the disciplines could incorporate their requirements.
Going through research and journal papers that studied the lack of interoperability and a
multidisciplinary tool representing the core element during the conceptual design phase,
it was also pointed out that there were no research about a comprehensive use of HTML5
Minimal web­representation of tall building structural analysis
29
==PAGE:37==
in the AEC industry. Different papers studied the use of different coding platforms such
as C++, Java, but there were no studies about the use of HTML5 only. The reason is
hard to understand, because as described by [75], the skills to create a good multidis­
ciplinary environment are: modelling, simulation, engage visualization and evaluation of
the analysis. As shown in fig. 5.3, HTML5 can potentially fulfill all these aspects.
Figure 5.3: Possibility of creating a multiple views using HTML5 [76]
Evaluated the requirements adopted to design the tool, it is decided to use HTML5 as
platform to satisfy all the requirements and to meet the objectives, creating a powerful
tool. An initial definition of HTML5 is done in section 2.8 and later in this chapter it will be
explained in detail, defining which features are adopted to design the web­based tool.
5.1
Tool requirements
The requirements of a solution are initially defined in section 4.2. In this subsection, these
requirements are applied in detail to the web­based tool object of this thesis.
1. The system should be able to represent the required information in 2D
From the research papers it is found how the visualization of the building view is a vital
aspect to have a common understanding of the building project. The conceptual design
phase is based on 2D visualizations and sketches. The reason why it is preferred to have
a 2D visualization is due to the uncertainty of the client requirements, the limited time
allocated to the design phase and the need to fast adapt to the changes. The users which
will use the tool are strictly the architectural team but it can be used also by the client
and also by other engineering teams. For this reason, the tool and its visualization must
be easy and intuitive and be able to represent what exactly is happening to the building
design and the core design when a change is done. Using a 2D visualization unified with
the description of the model will help the user understanding the relation between the core
element and the building model.
2. User interface where the users can add and edit basic information about the
building
30
Minimal web­representation of tall building structural analysis
==PAGE:38==
The tool is meant to be used by the users during the conceptual design phase. Companies
have different approaches to this design phase: some companies prefer having only the
architectural team working on the conceptual design phase and other companies prefer
having a multidisciplinary environment since the beginning, but also in this case the leader
of this design phase is usually the architectural team.
For this reason, it is important that the tool guarantees a simple user interface where the
user can add the initial requirements from the client, which are height, width and length of
the building. The user must be able to add the core element geometries. Once the user
interface has its static system, it must be able to modify these values in order to simulate
different design solutions and understand which one is the best fit for the architectural
design.
3. Dynamic adaptation of the views and the simulation results importing the infor­
mation added into the used interface
The tool must be able to adapt the visualization and the analysis based on the user in­
terface inputs. This is an important requirement which must be followed to increase the
understanding and knowledge of the users about what is happening when a change is
done. For this reason, the tool must be able to collect the information from the user in­
terface and change accordingly several aspects: the data used to visualize the building;
the data used to run the calculations; the data used to plot the graph results; and the text
used to share the results. This is important also to represent how the results are chang­
ing when an information is changed and how this change is affecting the design of the
building.
4. Communication of the results in a format that is easy to understand for the users
The results of the simulations and analysis must be communicated. The communication
must not lead to uncertainty or misunderstandings and it must represent what is important
to the structural engineering team, representing the best solution and important informa­
tion to the architectural team and design model.
In order to achieve this requirement, the tool must represent the results with a clear visu­
alization diagram and an explanation of what is happening. This means that a check of
the deflection of the core must be defined both in the diagram and in the text, in order to
be able to communicate the reason behind the changed results.
5. The results should be based on the Eurocode or on regulations
As mentioned already, the client is more encouraged to increase the budget or change
some requirements if the solutions are based on engineering assumptions and solutions.
For this reason, it is important that the tool can support mathematical solutions based on
the national regulations or the Eurocode. The check done on the core is the deflection
due to the wind load. The Eurocode has a specif paragraph where it explains how the
calculations are performed and what the information needed to analysis the feasibility of
the element is. This calculation must be followed by the tool in order to assess if the
solution for the core design is well­designed or not. Most importantly, the tool must be
able to modify this information importing the value added or changed by the users and
run a new simulation in real time.
5.2
Features of the tool
It is possible to specify 5 different features inside this tool, 4 of them are represented in
fig. 5.4 while the fifth is the dynamism of the tool.
Minimal web­representation of tall building structural analysis
31
==PAGE:39==
Figure 5.4: Four features of the tool
1. User interface
The user interface is define on the right top corner of the tool. It is a table with different
input for the user. It is divided based on the order of geometries needed. The geometrical
data that can be modified are: length of the building, width of the building, thickness of
the wall, length of the core, width of the core, X location of the core, Y location of the core,
height of the floor, number of floors and total height of the building.
2. 2D floor plan
The building is shown with a 2D representation, for this reason in the column on the left
are represented the plan and the section. The floor plan is basically a dynamic rectangle
and as it possible to see it has information inside it, which refer to the information defined
in the section view.
3. 2D section
The section is defined by different levels, starting from the project information, the site,
the underground levels, the ground level, various possible middle levels and the roof. As
already said all the information defined inside the section can be visualized inside the floor
plan view.
4. Results plot
The right bottom side of the tool is the result section. It is defined by a simple plot and a
curve which express the mean wind value, based on the values of the user interface can
change results when the user change the data.
5. Dynamism
The dynamism is a feature which is not include inside the tool visualization, but it is how the
tool can work. The dynamism of the tool is needed in order to perform as many solutions
as possible and the need of real time results is also an important step for the research.
5.3
Description of the web­based tool
The aim of the tool is to meet the objectives defined, creating a solution which can solve
the problems found. In order to have a full overview of the element an integration of the
32
Minimal web­representation of tall building structural analysis
==PAGE:40==
disciplines specific­requirements, as explained previously, is needed.
The tool is created to give the initial understanding of what the geometrical requirements
of the structural engineering team are in the case of tall buildings design and specifically
in the design of the core element, explaining how changing this geometrical information
affects the calculations and results of the analysis, and subsequently the design of the
building. For this reason, it is pointed out that a common platform where all the disciplines
can define their requirements is needed, and where the architectural team can understand
how changing a geometrical dimension, or the location of the core can affect the other
disciplines.
The proposed solution is the creation of a web­tool which will help the figure of the architect
dealing with early engineering analysis and simulation. The solution studied is the minimal
representation of the initial investigation done by the structural engineers on the structural
core, based on the satisfaction of the regulations. The idea is to share in real time the
results of the simulation of a wind load scenario through the use of only HTML5.
Figure 5.5: Initial sketch of the tool idea
The fig. 5.5 represent an initial sketch of the tool representation and division. One side
with a geometrical representation of the building, floor plan and section, and on the other
side a user interface on the top and the simulations and analysis results on the bottom.
The tool is defined by a simple representation of the 2D building and user interface table
used to change information about the building. The result shows the simulation analysis of
Minimal web­representation of tall building structural analysis
33
==PAGE:41==
the wind load acting on the building. The idea is to be able to analyse the optimal solution
for the core element using the requirements of the structural engineering team. The key
of the tool is the user interface and how it can communicate with the other parts. The
thought is to update the simulation moving the core element on the floor plan, and with
also the possibility of adding and deleting floors elements. Knowing the exact location of
the core and its dimensions helps all the other disciplines, because they can start their
design in the case of the architectural and MEP team, or in the case of the fire engineer
can initialize the information to simulate a fire safety evacuation for example.
The initial explanation about the HTML5 structure is explained before, and it is possible
to see the full code in appendix B, also how the code is utilized will be explained in detail
later in chapter 6, in this chapter, it will be only presented in its structure.
The web­page is defined by an HTML container, which is used to incorporate four sub­
containers needed to divide the screen in four sections. The structure of the code works
as in fig. 5.6 The code has at the beginning a loading function of JS. The containers styles
and dimensions are defined by a CSS script.
The first sub­container in figure is the plan.The floor plan view, is defined by a simple
representation 2D of the building, the visualization of the initial plan view is defined by CSS
script. The plan view has inside some basics of CSS and JS used to create interactions
between the other containers. It is interacting with the UI and it is able to change the
visualization thanks to the use of a JS script. Another JS script is used to represent the
important information defined in the section view, into the floor plan view.
The second is the UI, User Interface. The box is designed to contain the main values
used to perform the simulations of the wind load. The table is interacting with the other
containers using the dimensions which are added by the users, this must be done by a
JS script, while the changes of the geometries must be supported also by CSS.
The section view, is the third sub­container and it is where most of the information about
the building are defined inside the script. The section is define by a good HTML orga­
nization and basics CSS and JS which are used as for the All of this characteristics are
designed by a CSS script, which is used to define the initial visualization of the building.
Also in this case, the section view is interacting with the UI thanks to a JS script, which is
used to transform the view, representing the view defined by the users.
The last sub­container, which is the most important is the results container. It is strictly
defined by a JS script. The plot utilized is defined by Plotly, the JS script is based on the
calculation defined by the Eurocode, using a JS script the geometrical values needed to
perform the simulation are imported from the UI.
34
Minimal web­representation of tall building structural analysis
==PAGE:42==
Figure 5.6: First studies about HTML5
The fig. 5.7 shows one of the initial test done in order to evaluate the tool. As it is possible
to see, all the containers have their own criteria defined: there is the table for the users,
the floor plan and section are drawn and a plot in the container of the results share the
calculations results. Still the tool is not working as expected. At this stage, the user
interface is not interacting with the other containers, it means that is possible to add values
inside the User Interface but these changes are not involving any changes on the views
or results.
In the following chapter, the study cases will affront the coding explanation and the rela­
tions between the containers in order to achieve the results wanted.
Figure 5.7: Example of the tool
The web­page is defined by the HTML container, which is used to incorporate the single
containers (HTML works with a specific structure, this means that the class must corre­
spond to the order wanted to be visualized).
Minimal web­representation of tall building structural analysis
35
==PAGE:43==
The first container defined is the UI, User Interface. The box is designed to contain the
main values used to perform the simulations of the wind load. The container is defined
by a table, where geometrical values are defined by an input value, the button, which
is interacting with JS to translate the values, first into the building view, both floor plan
and section view and also into the calculations needed to perform the simulation. The
dimensions of the container and the properties inside are defined by the CSS script.
The floor plan view, is defined by a simple representation 2D of the building, the visual­
ization of the initial plan view is defined by CSS script. The plan view is interacting with
the UI and it is able to change the visualization thanks to the use of a JS script. Another
JS script is used to represent the important information defined in the section view, into
the floor plan view.
The section view, is the container where most of the information about the building is
defined. Starting with the name of the project, the site, the division of the floors, the
number of elevation and the value of the elevation. All of this characteristics are designed
by a CSS script, which is used to define the initial visualization of the building. Also in
this case, the section view is interacting with the UI thanks to a JS script, which is used
to transform the view, representing the view defined by the users.
The last container, which is the most important is the results container. It is strictly defined
by a JS script. The plot utilized is defined by Plotly, the JS script is based on the calculation
defined by the Eurocode, using a JS script the geometrical values needed to perform the
simulation are imported from the UI.
36
Minimal web­representation of tall building structural analysis
==PAGE:44==
6
Demonstration
Figure 6.1: DSRM Process Model (stage 4 highlighted) [71]
After having designed and developed the tool, the next step is the demonstration of the
uses of the tool. This step is needed to understand if the objectives are able to solve one
or more instances of the problem.
This master project have based the demonstration chapter in three study cases, they are
done to demonstrate how the tool can be used. The case studies are based on the five
requirements identified in chapter 4 and chapter 5 which are used to meet the objectives
defined.
Figure 6.2: User interface input relations
The structure of the web­page must follow the flow defined in fig. 6.2, the main object of
study is the User Interface because, the users must be able to add or change numerical
Minimal web­representation of tall building structural analysis
37
==PAGE:45==
values inside the tool in order to understand the changes in the design and evaluate the
possible optimal design solution. The relevant changes for each other sub­container are
described in the figure and they will be explained later.
This is done to investigate the potential of HTML5 integrating mathematical calculations,
based on Eurocode, and representing the structural engineering possible solutions for the
correct design of the dimensions of the core element.
In the specific case of this master thesis, taking into account the objectives defined the
main questions which will be addressed and answered through the thesis are:
­ How can the conceptual design phase be improved?
­ Is it possible to transmit any knowledge without changing any step of the collab­
oration?
The important factors used as main points of the thesis are three:
­ Is it possible that a minimal representation of the project can also simplify the
understanding of the element information and/or requirement?
­ Is it the possible to improve the knowledge of other disciplines using a tool?
­ Is it possible to merge and share all the disciplines requirement and representation
about a specific element using an external tool, HTML5?
­ Is it possible to reduce the numbers of errors during the conceptual design phase?
­ Is it possible to incorporate more fact­based design choices?
6.1
Case studies and limitations
Since the beginning of the project, multiple problems started to appear. The first one is
defined by the lack of a programming language inside HTML5, able to import IFC model
information. The only possible solution for that was the use of PHP, Hypertext Prepro­
cessor, which is another type of programming language. For this reason there were only
two possibilities to design a tool able to solve the problem found.
The ideal solution was to describe the relation between all the disciplines involved in the
design process of the core element. The reason why it was not adopted is the lack of
time and the limited knowledge of HTML. The only possible solution was the definition
of a static model inside the web­page, which was going against both the objectives and
the requirements. The second solution, which is the one adopted, is the study of a single
discipline, in this case the structural engineering discipline, used to describe a dynamic
view of the web­page and dynamic simulations of possible solutions.
This chapter is based on the demonstration of how the tool can solve the problems found.
It is important to prove that the tool can achieve the objectives defined in chapter 4, fol­
lowing the requirements described in section 4.2. This is done to investigate the potential
of HTML5 integrating mathematical calculations, based on Eurocode, and representing
the structural engineering possible solutions for the correct design of the core element.
As it is possible to see from the appendix A, there are different variables which must
be considered, this values can be determined as soon as the location of the building is
defined, but are important in order to be able to start the calculations of the wind load. For
simplicity, and because most of these values are common in different design projects, it
has been decided to use them as constraints of the study, focusing only on the geometrical
dimensions needed to perform the wind load analysis.
38
Minimal web­representation of tall building structural analysis
==PAGE:46==
The study cases are not defined to meet the requirements directly at the first attempt.
Considering the small amount of initial knowledge about HTML5, it was preferred to de­
fine the study cases in a more practical way. Having defined the static containers inside
the web­based tool it was important to build the connection between them, in order to
create the dynamic view and calculation needed to visualize correctly the building view
and to perform correctly the analysis. The initial structure of the HTML is defined as in
the previous chapter by the following code:
1
<!DOCTYPE html>
2
<html>
3
<head>
4
<title> Title </title>
5
<link rel="stylesheet" href="main.css">
6
<script src="main.js">
7
script src='https://cdnjs.cloudflare.com/ajax/libs/jquery/3.6.0/jquery.js
'></script>
8
<script src="https://cdn.plot.ly/plotly-latest.min.js"></script >
9
</head>
10
<body onload="main()">
11
<div class="container -">
12
<plan ->...</plan->
13
<props ->...</props->
14
<section ->...</section ->
15
<result ->...</result->
16
</div>
17
</body>
18
</html>
Listing 6.1: Structure of HTML5
In the next paragraphs the single sub­containers are explained and the relationships be­
tween them are defined. The case studies are using almost the same criteria in the first
two study cases which are: the connection between the section view and the user inter­
face, and the connection between the floor plan view and the user interface. The third
study case, represent instead the simulation of the analysis done following the user inter­
face and a script which is following the Eurocode regulation.
There are several limitations which did not allow to perform the demonstration as it was
expected, all of them are defined at the end of each case study. What is real important
for the project is the mapping of the design phase of the core element and how it can
be visualized and evaluated in the web­tool. As Architectural Engineer the most impor­
tant challenge studied was the interpretation of the relationship between the disciplines
involved in the design of the core element and how their design is affecting the design of
other disciplines and the final result. As already said, the knowledge of HTML5 or other
different IT tools is not enough to perform the ideal study defined in the master thesis.
The basic knowledge of HTML5 was adopted to perform and visualize structural analysis
of the core element. Surely, having an IT who could help me with the script, it could have
made the difference, and how it will be explained in the evaluation and conclusion, several
IT problems and challenges are identified and explained for further development of the
web­tool.
6.1.1
Case study 1: Section view and user interface
The fig. 6.3 and fig. 6.4 explain what is possible to do in the web­page using as case study
the relation between the two sub­containers user interface and the section view.
Minimal web­representation of tall building structural analysis
39
==PAGE:47==
Figure 6.3: Screenshot of tool just opened
Figure 6.4: Screenshot when the number of floors changes
The HTML initial code structure is explained in the next code.
The first case of study is based on the integration of the vertical dimensions, needed by the
structural engineering team to start the calculation about the wind load analysis and the
user interface, and the possibility to make the design visualization of the section dynamic.
The useful dimensions needed are the following: length, width and height of the building,
length and width of the core element, thickness of the core element.
The first code explains the HTML structure of the section, the second explains the HTML
structure of the User interface.
Defined the initial structure in 6.1, the code is going inside the two tags <props­> and
<section­>.
1
<props->
2
<div style="overflow -x: auto;">
3
<form id="new-floor-form">
40
Minimal web­representation of tall building structural analysis
==PAGE:48==
4
Number of floors:
5
<input type="number"
6
id="new-floor-input" />
7
<input id="new-floor-submit"
8
type="submit"
9
value="Add floor" />
10
</form>
11
<!--In the second area is located a table where it is possible to
modify important information about the design -->
12
<table>
13
<tr>
14
<td>
15
Length of the building:
16
<input type="number"
17
style="width:60px"
18
name="LengthBuilding"
19
id="LengthBuilding">
20
<input type="button"
21
value="Submit"
22
onclick="LengthBuilding()">
23
</>
24
</td>
25
<td>
26
Width of the building:
27
<input type="number"
28
style="width:60px"
29
name="WidthBuilding"
30
id="WidthBuilding">
31
<input type="button"
32
value="Submit"
33
onclick="WidthBuilding()">
34
</>
35
</td>
36
</tr>
37
<tr>
38
<td>
39
Thickness of the wall:
40
<input type="number"
41
style="width:60px"
42
name="Thicknessofthewall"
43
id="Thicknessofthewall">
44
<input type="button"
45
value="Submit"
46
onclick="Thicknessofthewall()">
47
</>
48
</td>
49
<td>
50
Length of the core:
51
<input type="number"
52
style="width:60px"
53
name="Lengthofthecore"
54
id="Lengthofthecore">
55
<input type="button"
56
value="Submit"
57
onclick="Lengthofthecore()">
58
</>
59
</td>
60
</tr>
61
<tr>
62
<td>
63
Width of the core:
64
<input type="number"
Minimal web­representation of tall building structural analysis
41
==PAGE:49==
65
style="width:60px"
66
name="Widthofthecore"
67
id="Widthofthecore">
68
<input type="button"
69
value="Submit"
70
onclick="Widthofthecore()">
71
</>
72
</td>
73
<td>
74
X Location of the core:
75
<input type="number"
76
style="width:60px"
77
name="XLocationofthecore"
78
id="XLocationofthecore">
79
<input type="button"
80
value="Submit"
81
onclick="XLocationofthecore()">
82
</>
83
</td>
84
</tr>
85
<tr>
86
<td>
87
Y Location of the core:
88
<input type="number"
89
style="width:60px"
90
name="YLocationofthecore"
91
id="YLocationofthecore">
92
<input type="button"
93
value="Submit"
94
onclick="YLocationofthecore()">
95
</>
96
</td>
97
<td>
98
Height of the floor:
99
<input type="number"
100
style="width:60px"
101
name="Heightofthefloor"
102
id="Heightofthefloor">
103
<input type="button"
104
value="Submit"
105
onclick="Heightofthefloor()">
106
</>
107
</td>
108
</tr>
109
110
<tr>
111
112
<td>
113
Total height of the building:
114
<input type="number" style="width:60px" name="
totalheightofthebuilding" id="totalheightofthebuilding"
115
min="1"
116
max="200">
117
<input type="button" value="Submit" onclick="
totalheightofthebuilding()">
118
</>
119
</td>
120
</tr>
121
</table>
122
</div>
123
</props->
42
Minimal web­representation of tall building structural analysis
==PAGE:50==
In this first code, it is possible to see a first <div> tag used to define the structure of the
table. Immediately after it is defined a <form> tag where the first data used to make the
section dynamic is defined. The number of floors is defined by two input values, in the first
it is possible to write number values, while with the second it is possible to add a floor on
the section view, this input are integrated in JS in order to make dynamic the visualization
of the building. The table is defined by the tag <td> and <tr>. Using tr tag it is possible
to define the line which will appear in the view, while <td> is used to define the single
element inside the table, all of them.
1
<section ->
2
<project - name="Duplex Apartment">
3
<site- lat="(41, 52, 27, 840000)" long="(-87, -38, -21, -839999)" elev
="-0.0">
4
<building ->
5
<roof-
6
class="floor_roof"
7
name='Roof'
8
level='9'
9
elev="27.000000000000" >
10
Roof<span
11
class="floor_stats">
12
27.0</span>
13
</roof->
14
<div id="floor-middle"></div>
15
<!--<div id="floor" name="floor" ><span class="floor_stats">trial
</span></div>-->
16
<floor-
17
class="floor_upper"
18
name='Level 8'
19
level='7'
20
elev="21.100000000000378" >
21
Level 8<span
22
class="floor_stats">
23
21.1</span>
24
</floor->
25
<!--<core-></core->
26
</floor->
27
<floor- class="floor_ground" name='Level 1'
level='0' elev="0.0"
>Level 1<span class="floor_stats">0.0</span> </floor->
28
<ground -></ground->
29
<core-></core->-->
30
<underground -
31
class="underground_lower"
32
name='T/FDN'
33
level='-1'
34
elev="-1.25" >
35
T/FDN<span
36
class="underground_stats">
37
-1.25</span>
38
</underground ->
39
</building ->
40
</site->
41
</project ->
42
</section ->
Minimal web­representation of tall building structural analysis
43
==PAGE:51==
The second script define the structure of the section sub­container. The section has a
structure who is following the IFC structure.
The first tag is <project­> inside the tag the name of the project is defined.
The second is the <site­>, this tag is used to define the topography of the location. Lati­
tude, Longitude and Elevation of the building.
The <building­> tag is used to define the building structure. Inside this tag are define three
different floor levels. The <roof­> tag, a <div> tag used to insert the new floors, <floor­>
tag used to define the ground floor and <underground­> which is used to define all the
underground levels.
As it is explained in fig. 6.3 fig. 6.4, the relationships between the section view and the
user interface are identified in: height, length, width, number of floors. The visualization
of the web­page is defined by an CSS script which is possible to see in appendix C.
While the relationship between the two sub­containers is expressed shortly, and focusing
specifically into the important function for the study case here and in detail in appendix D.
1
function numberoffloors() {
2
var num = document.getElementById("numberoffloors").onclick = numberoffloors()
;
3
4
window.addEventListener('load', () => {
5
const form = document.querySelector("#new-floor-form");
6
const list_el = document.querySelector("#floor-middle");
7
8
form.addEventListener('submit', (e) => {
9
e.preventDefault();
10
11
const floor_el = document.createElement("div");
12
floor_el.classList.add("floor");
13
14
const floor_content_el = document.createElement("div");
15
floor_content_el.classList.add("content");
16
17
floor_el.appendChild(floor_content_el);
18
19
const floor_input_el = document.createElement("input");
20
floor_input_el.classList.add("text");
21
floor_input_el.type = "text";
22
23
floor_input_el.setAttribute("readonly", "readonly");
24
25
floor_content_el.appendChild(floor_input_el);
26
27
const floor_actions_el = document.createElement("div");
28
floor_actions_el.classList.add("actions");
29
30
const floor_delete_el = document.createElement("button");
31
floor_delete_el.innerHTML = "Delete";
32
floor_actions_el.appendChild(floor_delete_el);
33
34
floor_el.appendChild(floor_actions_el);
35
36
list_el.appendChild(floor_el);
37
38
39
floor_delete_el.addEventListener('click', () => {
40
list_el.removeChild(floor_el);
41
});
44
Minimal web­representation of tall building structural analysis
==PAGE:52==
42
});
43
});
The first function is used to read and use the value inserted on the table. The second
function is used to modify the section view adding or deleting intermediary floors.
A jQuery function is also studied to share important properties and information. The JS
code is the following:
1
function plan(text) {
2
jQuery('<div>', {
3
id: 'plan',
4
class: 'plan',
5
title: 'click a floor to see the plan',
6
html:text
7
}).appendTo('plan-');
8
9
}
10
11
// this function is used to change the information inside the plan when the
section floor is clicked
12
function changePlan(text) {
13
$('#plan').html(text);
14
}
The demonstration is based on the capabilities of the user to write the values inside the
user interface and use them to modify the view of the building.
The requirements which should specifically be used are:
1. User interface where the users can add and edit basic information about the
building
The tool is built with a user interface where the users can define the values that want to
use for the design simulation.
2. The system should be able to represent the required information in 2D
The section view is represented by the design values and it is represented in 2D.
3. Dynamic adaptation of the views and the simulation results importing the infor­
mation added into the user interface
The section view started to be dynamic, the value which is possible to change is the
number of floors, due to the time it was not possible to create a script where the dimensions
of the building can change when the users are changing the dimensions.
4. The results should be based on the Eurocode or on regulations
During this stage it was not performed any simulation.
5. Communication of the results in a format that is easy to understand for the users
During this stage it was not performed any simulation.
The first case of study results are defined on the possibility to add and remove floors by the
users, having a dynamic interpretation of the user changes. This means that it is possible
Minimal web­representation of tall building structural analysis
45
==PAGE:53==
to manipulate the user interface input and change the visualization of the building, but the
lack of time and knowledge did not permit to present all the possible dynamic functions.
Limitations
As it is possible to understand from fig. 6.3 and fig. 6.4, some requirements were met,
but the tool is not working as it was expected. The scripting of HTML5 is not easy and
intuitive, to perform this test were used more than 3 weeks. The challenges identified are
the defined by:
The section view is not totally following the user interface, as said already it is possible to
change the number of floors but the users cannot see changes on the visualization of the
building using the other inputs of the user interface table. Even if using the JS script it is
possible to inspect the values imported by the users, the script done is not strong enough
to manipulate the values imported in the UI changing the 2D representation of the building
defined by the CSS script.
6.1.2
Case study 2: floor plan view and user interface
The second case of study is based on the integration of the horizontal dimensions needed
by the structural engineering team to start the calculation about the wind load analysis and
the user interface, and the possibility to make the design visualization of the floor plan
dynamic. The fig. 6.5 and fig. 6.6 explain what is possible to do in the web­page using the
relation between the user interface and the floor plan view.
As for the first case study, the structure of the code will start from the <section­> tag, and
the initial structure will not be included here.
Figure 6.5: Screenshot of tool just opened
46
Minimal web­representation of tall building structural analysis
==PAGE:54==
Figure 6.6: Screenshot when the length and width of the building change
1
<section ->
2
<project - name="Duplex Apartment">
3
<site- lat="(41, 52, 27, 840000)" long="(-87, -38, -21, -839999)" elev
="-0.0">
4
<building ->
5
<roof-
6
class="floor_roof"
7
name='Roof'
8
level='9'
9
elev="27.000000000000" >
10
Roof<span
11
class="floor_stats">
12
27.0</span>
13
</roof->
14
<div id="floor-middle"></div>
15
<!--<div id="floor" name="floor" ><span class="floor_stats">trial
</span></div>-->
16
<floor-
17
class="floor_upper"
18
name='Level 8'
19
level='7'
20
elev="21.100000000000378" >
21
Level 8<span
22
class="floor_stats">
23
21.1</span>
24
</floor->
25
<!--<core-></core->
26
</floor->
27
<floor- class="floor_ground" name='Level 1'
level='0' elev="0.0"
>Level 1<span class="floor_stats">0.0</span> </floor->
28
<ground -></ground->
29
<core-></core->-->
30
<underground -
31
class="underground_lower"
32
name='T/FDN'
33
level='-1'
34
elev="-1.25" >
35
T/FDN<span
36
class="underground_stats">
Minimal web­representation of tall building structural analysis
47
==PAGE:55==
37
-1.25</span>
38
</underground ->
39
</building ->
40
</site->
41
</project ->
42
</section ->
The user interface HTML structure, is the same used in section 6.1.1, the information
studied are the length and width of the building to understand if the view can become
dynamic.
The JS script used is:
1
function LengthBuilding() {
2
var lengthbuilding = document.getElementById("LengthBuilding").value;
3
document.getElementById("plan").style.height
= lengthbuilding;
4
console.log(LengthBuilding);
5
}
6
// this function define the width of the building in the plan view getting the
value from the table box. The idea is to change the dimensions also in
the section box ( I do not know how to do it)
7
function WidthBuilding() {
8
var widthbuilding = document.getElementById("WidthBuilding").value;
9
document.getElementById("plan").style.width
= widthbuilding;
10
console.log(WidthBuilding);
11
}
Using this function it is possible to modify the visualization of the building geometries as
shown in fig. 6.5 fig. 6.6. Based on the requirements:
The user must be able to write the values inside the section of the user interface and use
them to modify the view of the building. Specifically using:
1. User interface where the users can add and edit basic information about the
building
The tool is defined by a user interface where the users can define the values that want
you use for the design simulation.
2. The system should be able to represent the required information in 2D
The floor plan view is represented by the design values and it is represented in 2D.
3. Dynamic adaptation of the views and the simulation results importing the infor­
mation added into the user interface
The view is changing when the users are changing the dimensions.
4. The results should be based on the Eurocode or on regulations
During this stage it was not performed any simulation.
5. Communication of the results in a format that is easy to understand for the users
During this stage it was not performed any simulation.
The floor plan view is changing the values of length and width of the building from the user
interface, this guarantee the possibility to represent the possible dynamic changes of the
48
Minimal web­representation of tall building structural analysis
==PAGE:56==
tool. As following, several limitations are defined and explained in order to represent the
possible future challenges of the tool.
Limitations
The limitations found in this case of study are identified only on the lack of time, the building
inputs are working which means it is possible to do the same also with the other inputs.
Having a person with advanced knowledge of HTML5 close to me could have boosted
the calculation performance.
The limits are represented by the script structure of the sub­container in CSS and its
connection with the JS script. In fact, inspecting the tool it is possible to understand that
with JS it is possible to read the defined values from the user interface but is not able to
manipulate these values and modify the requested values in the 2D representation.
6.1.3
Case study 3: Dynamic wind load simulations and analysis of the
results
The third case of study is based on the integration of the structural engineering team
information into the code that is used to run the wind load analysis. The useful dimen­
sions needed are the following: length, width of the building, length and width of the core
element, thickness of the core element. As it is already explained in chapter 5 and in
appendix A, the calculations are done based on the Eurocode regulations [48]. The sim­
ulation of the core deflection is what needs to be demonstrated.
Figure 6.7: Screenshot height defined at 1 meter
Minimal web­representation of tall building structural analysis
49
==PAGE:57==
Figure 6.8: Screenshot height defined at 115 meter
The fig. 6.7 and fig. 6.8 show how a plot is imported when the user changes the total
height of the building. The following code explains the HTML structure of the result sub­
container, while the user interface is already defined in section 6.1.1.
1
<result->
2
<myPlot- id="myPlot" name="Wind load simulation" type="text/javascript
"></myPlot->
3
4
<!--The idea is to import the check needed from the Eurocode , and analyse if
the design is following the requirements -->
5
<Eurocodecheck - id="Eurocodecheck -" name="Eurocode check" type="text/
javascript" ></Eurocodecheck ->
6
7
<!--The idea is to divide the box with another column where it might be
possible to design a LCA of the structure and share important information
such as, cost and hours needed + the CO2 emissions -->
8
9
<script type="text/javascript">
10
11
function totalheightofthebuilding() {
12
var z = document.getElementById("totalheightofthebuilding").value;
13
14
15
qp = [];
50
Minimal web­representation of tall building structural analysis
==PAGE:58==
16
y = [];
17
/* At the moment I am not able to get the information I need to continue the
simulation. I am not able to get the value of the total height of the
building and insert it inside the for loop.
18
If I will be able to do that, the first step of the analysis will be done,
and ideally I might need to repeat the same script in order to get
information about the width and the length of the building and the core
from the table.*/
19
20
21
22
if (z < 200, z > 0) {
23
24
for (var i = 1; i <= z; i++) {
25
qp.push(i);
26
/*z0 depends on the terrain category. There are 5 different terrain category.
27
0: Sea or costal area exposed to the open sea. z0=0,003 ; zmin=1
28
I: Lakes or flat horizontal area with negligible vegetation and without
obstacles. z0=0,01 ; zmin=1
29
II: Area with low vegetation such as grass and isolated obstacles
30
(trees, buildings) with separations of at least 20 obstacle height. z0=0,05
; zmin=2
31
III: Area with regular cover of vegetation or buildings or with isolated
32
obstacles with separations of maximum 20 obstacle heights
33
(such as villages , suburban terrain , permanent forest). z0=0,3 ; zmin=5
34
IV: Area in which at least 15 % of the surface is covered with buildings
35
and their average height exceeds 15 m. z0=1,0 ; zmin=10
36
*/
37
// Vb is the basic wind velocity: it is function of Vb,0 Cdir and
Cseason
38
// for this script they are the recommended value from the
Eurocode
39
Vb = 24; // this value is taken from the NA
40
c0z = 1; // orography factor , this value is taken from the NA
41
z0III = 0.3; // terrain category III
42
kr = 0.19 * (z0III / 0.05) ** 0.07; // terrain factor depending on
the roughness length z0
43
crz = kr * Math.log(i / z0III); // roughness factor the value is
based on a logarithmic velocity profile
44
//two different formulas it depends on the z as a function of zmin
and zmax
45
Vm = crz * Vb * c0z; // mean wind velocity at the height of z
46
kl = 1; // turbulence factor, taken from the Eurocode
47
Iv = kl / (c0z * Math.log(i / z0III)); // turbulence intensity at
the height of z
48
// peak velocity pressure
49
rho = 1.25; // air density , it depends on the altitude , temperature ,
and barometric pressure during wind storms
50
qp[i] = ((1 + 7 * Iv) * 0.5 * rho * Vm ** 2) / 1000;
51
y[i] = i;
52
console.log(qp[i])
53
// Hp rectangular plan of tall buildings where 1 < H/d < 5
54
// Initial calculation based on project 11080_2022
55
// wind profile acting on longer wall ZONE D
56
Cpe10D = 0.8
57
wd = qp[i] * Cpe10D // wind pressure acting on the external surfaces
58
console.log(wd)
59
// wind profile acting on longer wall ZONE E
60
Cpe10E = -0.5 + (-0.7 - ( -0.5 ) ) / ( 5 - 1 ) * ( 98.8 / 24.5 )
61
we = qp[i] * Cpe10E // wind pressure acting on the external surfaces
62
console.log(we)
Minimal web­representation of tall building structural analysis
51
==PAGE:59==
63
// wind profile acting on shorter wall ZONE A
64
Cpe10A = -1.2
65
wa = qp[i] * Cpe10A // wind pressure acting on the external surfaces
66
//console.log(wa)
67
// wind profile acting on shorter wall ZONE B
68
Cpe10B = -0.8
69
wb = qp[i] * Cpe10B // wind pressure acting on the external surfaces
70
//console.log(wb)
71
hp = 0.5
// height of the parapet
72
// hp / 24.5
73
// wind profile acting on flat roof ZONE F
74
Cpe10F = -1.6
75
wf = qp[i] * Cpe10F // wind pressure acting on the external surfaces
76
//console.log(wf)
77
// wind profile acting on flat roof ZONE G
78
Cpe10G = -1.1
79
wg = qp[i] * Cpe10G // wind pressure acting on the external surfaces
80
//console.log(wg)
81
// wind profile acting on flat roof ZONE H
82
Cpe10H = -0.7
83
wh = qp[i] * Cpe10H // wind pressure acting on the external surfaces
84
//console.log(wh)
85
// wind profile acting on flat roof ZONE I1
86
Cpe10I1 = -0.2
87
wi1 = qp[i] * Cpe10I1 // wind pressure acting on the external
surfaces
88
//console.log(wi1)
89
// wind profile acting on flat roof ZONE I2
90
Cpe10I2 = 0.2
91
wi2 = qp[i] * Cpe10I2 // wind pressure acting on the external
surfaces
92
//console.log(wi2)
93
// weighted average for wind load acting on longer wall
94
W1 = (wd - we)
95
console.log(W1)
96
}
97
}
98
99
var xArray = qp;
100
var yArray = y;
101
var data = [{
102
x: xArray,
103
y: yArray,
104
type: 'line',
105
106
}];
107
108
var layout = {
109
xaxis: {range: [0, 2]}, //title: "peak velocity pressure"},
110
yaxis: {range: [0, 200]}, //title: "Height of the building",
111
//title: "peak velocity vs. Height of the building"
112
margin: {
113
l: 50,
114
r: 10,
115
b: 60,
116
t: 20,
117
pad: 8
118
},
119
};
120
121
Plotly.newPlot('myPlot', data, layout);
122
}
52
Minimal web­representation of tall building structural analysis
==PAGE:60==
123
</script>
124
125
</result ->
The code used to define the calculations is written inside the HTML structure, while a JS
script is used to import the values from the UI to the result sub­container.
1
function totalheightofthebuilding() {
2
var totalheightofthebuilding = document.getElementById("
totalheightofthebuilding").value;
The script is able to read the imported value of the building height, which means it is
possible to do the same with all the other important data needed.in this script. The final
design of this study case is based on the following requirements:
The user must be able to write the values inside the section of the user interface and use
them to modify the view of the building. Specifically using:
1. User interface where the users can add and edit basic information about the
building
The tool is defined by a user interface where the users is able to change the geometrical
values, performing simulations in real time.
2. The system should be able to represent the required information in 2D
The results of the analysis are represented by a simple plot in 2D, where the the design
values results of the analysis are explained by a vector plot.
3. Dynamic adaptation of the views and the simulation results importing the infor­
mation added into the user interface
The results are changing in real time when the user define and submit another height
value.
4. The results should be based on the Eurocode or on regulations
The tool presents a script based on the Eurocode calculations of the wind load, due to
lack of knowledge on the HTML5 it was not possible to represent the complete calculation
needed to check the deflection of the core element.
5. Communication of the results in a format that is easy to understand for the users
The results are communicated using a plot where important structural calculations. The
tool is able to represent the results based on the height defined by the users in the user
interface, this is already a good results, but in order to have a precise result the calcula­
tions need to be based on the Eurocode regulation, which was not easy to interpret due
to the lack of IT knowledge.
Limitations
The last study case is the one where most of the project time was used. Multiple coding
problems are identified in order to successfully represent the results using a full interpre­
tation of the geometrical values needed to perform the analysis based on the Eurocode
Minimal web­representation of tall building structural analysis
53
==PAGE:61==
regulation, the lack of knowledge of HTML5 scripts, did not allow to perform the case
study as expected.
The limits of HTML5 scripting knowledge are represented since the beginning due to the
initial need of constraints which were needed to reduce the amount of information not
known, helping the focus on a single location for the case of study. as defined in ap­
pendix A. They are represented by the terrain category, the orography factor, the rough­
ness length, the location of the building and its following design values used to define the
Basic values of the wind and the Mean wind.
In fact, it is surely possible to interpret the constraints inside the tool, creating a small
section where this constraints could have been defined by the users, using these values
to perform different and more precise simulations.
After the initial constraints problems, one of the most important problem which affected
the results of this case of study was how the Eurocode defines the steps needed to check
the deflection of the core element. In fact, the first geometry needed is the height, used
to define the peak velocity pressure. Following the Eurocode, one of the requisite of the
analysis is to divide the building height in multiple layers. The creation of the dynamic
system could have been done with something similar to a for loop, where the total height
of the building is divided into two quarters which are respectively one quarter at the bottom
and the other at the top part of the building while the middle layers are divided in small
layers depending on the other two quarters which are remaining.
Once these layers are defined, it is possible to calculate the different wind load cases:
perpendicular to the longitudinal wall, perpendicular to the gable wall and flat roof, defining
the external wind pressure, used to define the wind load profiles in each zone and find
the value of the load acting per 1 meter of wall.
Having these values calculated it is possible to calculate the maximum moment of inertia,
and check it with the resisting moment of inertia of the core element, in order to verify if the
deflection of the building designed is minor of the maximum allowable, see appendix A.
54
Minimal web­representation of tall building structural analysis
==PAGE:62==
7
Evaluation
Figure 7.1: DSRM Process Model (stage 5 highlighted) [71]
This chapter consists on the evaluation of the case studies and the analysis of how these
case studies results can be effectively useful to solve the problem defined in the problem
statement and gaps of the literature.
The evaluation is done comparing the results observed in the study cases with the solution
objectives defined in chapter 4. The explanation of the results begins with the descrip­
tion of the current tool’s features and limitations, and continues with depicting the future
possible development to make the tool more multidisciplinary, more fact­based and more
user friendly.
Objectives of the Solution
Requirements
Features
Results of the demonstration
To adopt a minimal and
effective representation
of the model of the building
The system should
be able to represent
the required information
in 2D
2D
visualization,
Dynamism
It is possible to dynamically
represent the building design
and the results using
a simple 2D representation
To increase knowledge
of other disciplines
User interface where the
users can add and edit
basic information about
the building
User Interface,
2D visualization,
Dynamism,
Results plot,
It is possible to change
geometrical values and run
the simulations
To create a platform used
to share discipline­specific
requirements of an element
of the building
Dynamic adaptation of
the views and the simulation
results importing the information
added into the user interface
User Interface,
Dynamism,
Results plot
It is possible to evaluate possible
design solutions changing the
information in the user interface
To reduce the amount of
clashes already during the
conceptual design phase
Communication of the results in
a format that is easy to understand
for the users
2D visualization,
Results plot
The results are shared in a simple
format, adding only the important
information needed in order to
be understandable by the users
To make a more fact­based
design choices
The results should be based on
the Eurocode or on regulations
Results plot
The regulations are based on the
Eurocode
Table 7.1: Table summarizing the results of the demonstration
As it is possible to see from table 7.1, the master thesis project and the tool are completely
following and fulfilling the DSRM. The tool and its features, in fact, are clearly based on
the requirements needed to meet the objectives of the solution.
Minimal web­representation of tall building structural analysis
55
==PAGE:63==
As it is also explained in chapter 6, several IT limitations did not allow to design and
develop the tool to the desired level of interactions and functionalities. However, the
concept at the basis of the tool is valid and therefore, the potential of such a tool is high.
7.1
Future developments
As previously explained, the first step towards making the tool more functional would be to
overcome the limitations of the current code. Once this is done, there are several aspects
that could make this web­based tool a useful help for companies designing the core of tall
buildings. The most important developments that have been identified are the following:
• creating different pages in the tool for the specific disciplines, to ensure that all inputs
for the core design are included
• creating a script to check the fulfillment of all discipline’s requirements following the
users changes
• adding Eurocode or international standards for all disciplines, with a ”pass/not pass”
result followed by a written explanation
• making the user interface more attractive and intuitive
• improving the result plot to make the visualization of the results clearer
• PDF and/or excel sheets export of results for a fact­based knowledge sharing
• integrating the tool with BIM and IFC structure in order to be able to import the
changes in BIM.
• adding material and volumes to create a simple but accurate cost estimation
• adding LCA analysis
At a later stage, the tool could be further expanded to account more multidisciplinary
elements, besides the core. Another direction to develop the tool could be integrate the
next design phases, translating the initial 2D view to a more detailed view (3D) based on
more detailed information from the different disciplines.
Testing evaluation:
1. To adopt a minimal and effective representation of the model of the building Yes
2. To increase knowledge of other disciplines Partly
3. To create a platform used to share discipline­specific requirements of an element of
the building Partly
4. To reduce the amount of clashes already during the conceptual design phase Partly
5. To make more fact­based design choices Partly
To adopt a minimal and effective representation of the model of the building
The minimal visualization of the building information is defined by the use of a 2D visual­
ization of the building and the result plot which is defined by a vector graph.
To increase knowledge of other disciplines
The knowledge of the other disciplines in conceptual design phase is introduced by the
ability to use the user interface, having a dynamic tool it is possible to understand what is
happening to the design and also to the specific discipline design values.
56
Minimal web­representation of tall building structural analysis
==PAGE:64==
To create a platform used to share discipline­specific requirements of an element
of the building
The platform is the tool in itself, it is used to visualize important information about the
discipline requirement and analysis results of the core element and the building design.
The thesis example share the structural information, this process could have been done
using also other discipline requirements.
To reduce the amount of clashes already during the conceptual design phase
Having a tool which represents all the discipline requirements and design values of a spe­
cific element, surely can help reducing multi­disciplinary errors which can affect multiple
discipline’s design.
To make more fact­based design choices
The tool and the analysis done must follow the regulations about the specific discipline.
Minimal web­representation of tall building structural analysis
57
==PAGE:65==
8
Conclusion
Following the Design Science Research Methodology (DSRM), this master thesis project
identified and motivated the problem found of the lack of initial collaboration and the lack
of a shared tool able to integrate the discipline requirements and design values of a
specific element, identified in this study in the core element of tall buildings. Having a
well­structured problem identification and its motivation was a challenging process that
branched out starting from the already mentioned lack of collaboration, to the identifica­
tion of the core as a multidisciplinary element and, finally, to the discovery of the lack of a
multidisciplinary tool for its design.
The aim of the research were the design and development of a tool able to merge the
various disciplines needed to design the core element already into the conceptual de­
sign phase of the building, following the objectives and requirements of the tool specified
respectively in section 4.1 and section 4.2.
It was necessary to use an external coding language to provide for this lack of tool, and
HTML5 was chosen. The use of HTML5 was challenging for a student with limited IT
knowledge, but considering that there were no research around HTML5 and building
projects, it was interesting to explore what functionalities were possible and not possi­
ble with it.
The main challenge during the design of the tool was, in fact, the lack of advanced knowl­
edge in HTML5, which was translated in a lack of time needed to perform a structured
script where all the assumptions could be used to guarantee a good operation of the tool
following the requirements and objectives, while only few separated inputs and results
are possible to be visualized. On top of this, the integration of HTML5 and IFC was not
trivial. In fact, it is not possible to import IFC models inside the tool using HTML5 only,
but it was necessary to use a PHP language. Also, there was no finding about a possible
way of saving the changes done, even if the IFC was imported inside the tool.
Despite the limited programming knowledge and time, causing the tool to be not fully
functional, the objectives of the solution initially defined were overall reached. As a matter
of fact, the tool is adopting a minimal and effective 2D representation of the building model;
it increases the architects’ knowledge of the core reaction to wind loads in a tall building;
it guarantees a sharing web­page where the disciplines requirements and design­values
can be shared and analysed; it reduces the amount of clashes because the design can be
supported by engineering knowledge about the element of study; it supports the architect
with fact­based design decisions.
For this reason, it is possible to conclude that the tool has high potential to solve the
information exchange problem during the initial design phase. However, it should be
discussed whether HTML5 is the most suitable IT language for this purpose.
58
Minimal web­representation of tall building structural analysis
==PAGE:66==
Bibliography
[1]
Yonca Hurol. “Ethical Considerations for a Better Collaboration Between Architects
and Structural Engineers: Design of Buildings with Reinforced Concrete Frame Sys­
tems in Earthquake Zones”. In: Science and engineering ethics 20 (May 2013). DOI:
10.1007/s11948-013-9453-4.
[2]
Laurens Luyten. “CAAD and Conceptual Design Collaboration between Architects
and Structural Engineers”. In: Real Time­Proceedings of the 33rd eCAADe Con­
ference. Vol. 2. Education and Research Computer Aided Architectural Design Eu­
rope; Brussels. 2015, pp. 215–224.
[3]
Building Arts Forum. “Bridging the gap : rethinking the relationship of architect and
engineer : the proceedings of the Building Arts Forum/New York Symposium, held
in April of 1989 at the Guggenheim Museum”. In: 1991.
[4]
U. Pfammatter. The Making of the Modern Architect and Engineer: The Origins and
Development of a Scientific and Industrially Oriented Education. Birkhäuser, 2000.
ISBN: 9783764354732. URL: https://books.google.dk/books?id=D-tPAAAAMAAJ.
[5]
Stephen Emmitt and Christopher A. Gorse. Construction Communication. English.
Blackwell, 2003. ISBN: 9781405100021.
[6]
Lihui Wang et al. “Collaborative conceptual design—state of the art and future trends”.
In: Computer­Aided Design 34.13 (2002), pp. 981–996. ISSN: 0010­4485. DOI:
https://doi.org/10.1016/S0010-4485(01)00157-9. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.
com/science/article/pii/S0010448501001579.
[7]
Renate Fruchter et al. “Interdisciplinary communication medium for collaborative
conceptual building design”. In: Advances in Engineering Software 25.2 (1996).
Computing in Civil and Structural Engineering, pp. 89–101. ISSN: 0965­9978. DOI:
https://doi.org/10.1016/0965-9978(95)00106-9. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.
com/science/article/pii/0965997895001069.
[8]
Michael A Rosenman and John S Gero. “Modelling multiple views of design ob­
jects in a collaborative CAD environment”. In: Computer­aided design 28.3 (1996),
pp. 193–205.
[9]
M.A. Rosenman et al. “Multidisciplinary Design in Virtual Worlds”. In: Computer
Aided Architectural Design Futures 2005. Ed. by Bob Martens and Andre Brown.
Dordrecht: Springer Netherlands, 2005, pp. 433–442. ISBN: 978­1­4020­3698­9.
[10]
Danfulani Babangida Idi and Khairul Anwar Mohamed Khaidzir. “Critical perspective
of design collaboration: A review”. In: Frontiers of Architectural Research 7.4 (2018),
pp. 544–560. ISSN: 2095­2635. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.foar.2018.10.002.
URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S2095263518300633.
[11]
Chin­Yi Cheng Spyridon Ampanavos Mehdi Nourbakhsh. “Structural Design Rec­
ommendations in the Early Design Phase using Machine Learning”. In: (June 2021).
DOI: 10.1007/978-981-19-1280-1_12.
[12]
Paul A. Rodgers, Graham Green, and Alistair McGown. “Using concept sketches
to track design progress”. In: Design Studies 21 (2000), pp. 451–464.
[13]
Steven Fenves, Hugues Rivard, and Nestor Gomez. “SEED­Config: A tool for con­
ceptual structural design in a collaborative building design environment”. In: Artifi­
cial Intelligence in Engineering 14 (July 2000), pp. 233–247. DOI: 10.1016/S0954-
1810(00)00018-2.
[14]
David C. Sharpe and Sang Min Park. “Tall building form generation by parametric
design process”. In: 2005.
Minimal web­representation of tall building structural analysis
59
==PAGE:67==
[15]
Gerry Stahl. Group Cognition: Computer Support for Building Collaborative Knowl­
edge. The MIT Press, Mar. 2006. ISBN: 9780262257022. DOI: 10.7551/mitpress/
3372.001.0001. URL: https://doi.org/10.7551/mitpress/3372.001.0001.
[16]
Laurens Luyten. “Architect and structural engineer communicating in multi­disciplinary
creativity”. In: 2010.
[17]
Lavagnon A. Ika. “Project Management for Development in Africa: Why Projects are
Failing and What Can be Done about It”. In: 43 (Aug. 2012), pp. 27–41.
[18]
Lavagnon A. Ika. “Project Success as a Topic in Project Management Journals”. In:
40 (Dec. 2009), pp. 6–19.
[19]
Beste Fakıoğlu and Bekir Ay. “Evaluation of the Effects of Service Core Reduc­
tion on Tall Building Structures”. In: IOP Conference Series: Materials Science and
Engineering 603 (Sept. 2019), p. 052039. DOI: 10.1088/1757-899X/603/5/052039.
[20]
Richard Garber. “BIM Design: Realising the Creative Potential of Building Informa­
tion Modelling”. In: 2014.
[21]
S. Pranovich. “Structural sketcher : a tool for supporting architects in early design”.
English. PhD thesis. Mathematics and Computer Science, 2004. ISBN: 90­386­
0872­1. DOI: 10.6100/IR576067.
[22]
Mohammad Alhassan and James Welch. “Incorporating Very Powerful Structural
Analysis And Design Software Packages Into Civil Engineering Courses”. In: June
2010. DOI: 10.18260/1-2--16967.
[23]
H. Engel and H. Bandel. Tragsysteme: Structure systems. Deutsche Verlags­Anstalt,
1967. URL: https://books.google.dk/books?id=mUhSAAAAMAAJ.
[24]
Mieke Haesen et al. “Supporting Multidisciplinary Teams and Early Design Stages
Using Storyboards”. In: Human­Computer Interaction. New Trends. Ed. by Julie A.
Jacko. Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2009, pp. 616–623. ISBN:
978­3­642­02574­7.
[25]
Construction Users Roundtable (Firm). Collaboration, Integrated Information and
the Project Lifecycle in Building Design, Construction and Operation. Construction
Users Roundtable, 2004. URL: https://books.google.dk/books?id=xUbjtgAACAAJ.
[26]
Paulson. “DESIGNING TO REDUCE CONSTRUCTION COSTS”. In: Journal of the
Construction Division 102 (1976), pp. 587–592.
[27]
The Construction Users Roundtable (CURT). Collaboration, integrated information,
and the project lifecycle in building design, construction and operation. The Con­
struction Users Roundtable (CURT), 2004.
[28]
Tim McGinley and Thomas Krijnen. “A framework for meta­disciplinary building
analysis”. In: Sept. 2022.
[29]
Goran Sibenik and Iva Kovacic. “Assessment of model­based data exchange be­
tween architectural design and structural analysis”. In: Journal of Building Engi­
neering 32 (2020), p. 101589. ISSN: 2352­7102. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/
j . jobe . 2020 . 101589. URL: https : / / www . sciencedirect . com / science / article / pii /
S2352710220302448.
[30]
Tomo Cerovsek. “A review and outlook for a ‘Building Information Model’ (BIM):
A multi­standpoint framework for technological development”. In: Advanced Engi­
neering Informatics 25.2 (2011). Information mining and retrieval in design, pp. 224–
244. ISSN: 1474­0346. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.aei.2010.06.003. URL: https:
//www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1474034610000479.
[31]
Akua Adu­Oppong. “COMMUNICATION IN THE WORKPLACE: GUIDELINES FOR
IMPROVING EFFECTIVENESS”. In: Global Journal of Commerce & Management
Perspectives G.J.C.M.P. (Sept. 2014), pp. 208–213.
60
Minimal web­representation of tall building structural analysis
==PAGE:68==
[32]
Mohammad Hussaini Wahab, Hala Al­Mayahi, and Syuhaida Ismail. “Communica­
tion Management Between Architects and Clients”. In: Jan. 2017.
[33]
Nima Norouzi et al. “The Architect, the Client and Effective Communication in Archi­
tectural Design Practice”. In: Procedia ­ Social and Behavioral Sciences 172 (2015).
Contemporary Issues in Management and Social Science Research., pp. 635–642.
ISSN: 1877­0428. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.sbspro.2015.01.413. URL: https:
//www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1877042815004504.
[34]
Sai On Cheung, Tak Wing Yiu, and Man Chung Lam. “Interweaving Trust and Com­
munication with Project Performance”. In: Journal of Construction Engineering and
Management 139.8 (2013), pp. 941–950. DOI: 10.1061/(ASCE)CO.1943- 7862.
0000681. eprint: https://ascelibrary.org/doi/pdf/10.1061/\%28ASCE\%29CO.1943-
7862.0000681. URL: https://ascelibrary.org/doi/abs/10.1061/%5C%28ASCE%5C%
29CO.1943-7862.0000681.
[35]
R.L. Kliem. Effective communications for project management. Jan. 2007, pp. 1–
219.
[36]
Luka Goji Tipili, Patricia Oyiza Ojeba, and Muhammad Sa ’adiya Ilyasu. “Evaluating
the effects of communication in construction project delivery in Nigeria”. In: 2014.
[37]
Lee Cheng Ean. “Computer­Mediated Communication and Organisational Commu­
nication: The Use of New Communication Technology in the Workplace”. In: 2011.
[38]
Council on Tall Buildings and Urban Habitat (CTBUH). “CTBUH Height Criteria for
Measuring & Defining Tall Buildings”. In: ().
[39]
Feng Fu. “Chapter Two ­ Fundamentals of Tall Building Design”. In: Design and
Analysis of Tall and Complex Structures. Ed. by Feng Fu. Butterworth­Heinemann,
2018, pp. 5–80. ISBN: 978­0­08­101018­1. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-
0-08-101018-1.00002-2. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
B9780081010181000022.
[40]
Mir Ali and Kyoung Moon. “Structural Developments in Tall Buildings: Current Trends
and Future Prospects”. In: Architectural Science Review 50 (Sept. 2007). DOI: 10.
3763/asre.2007.5027.
[41]
Feng Fu. “Chapter Three ­ Shear Wall, Core, Outrigger, Belt Truss, and Buttress
Core System for Tall Buildings”. In: Design and Analysis of Tall and Complex Struc­
tures. Ed. by Feng Fu. Butterworth­Heinemann, 2018, pp. 81–107. ISBN: 978­0­
08­101018­1. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-08-101018-1.00003-4. URL:
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/B9780081010181000034.
[42]
Görkem Kilinç, Ayşin Sev, and Mimar or Sinan. “A Review of Parametric Design of
Tall Buildings”. In: CITFCT­18, LBHESS­18 & LABEMS­18 Dec. 17­19, 2018 Lisbon
(Portugal) (2018).
[43]
Zeynep Keskin. “Planning considerations of tall buildings : service core configura­
tion and typologies”. MA thesis. Middle East Technical University, 2012.
[44]
Dario Trabucco. “An analysis of the relationship between service cores and the
embodied/running energy of tall buildings”. In: The Structural Design of Tall and
Special Buildings 17 (Dec. 2008), pp. 941–952. DOI: 10.1002/tal.477.
[45]
Mir Meher Ali and Paul J. Armstrong. “Overview of Sustainable Design Factors in
High­Rise Buildings”. In: 2008.
[46]
W.T. Grondzik et al. Mechanical and Electrical Equipment for Buildings. CourseS­
mart. Wiley, 2011. ISBN: 9781118039403. URL: https://books.google.dk/books?id=
ZIdvdyPMhI8C.
[47]
Aya EL­Tawab. “Comparing the structural system of some contemporary high rise
building form”. In: Fayoum University Journal of Engineering 1 (July 2018), pp. 91–
109. DOI: 10.21608/fuje.2018.22359.
Minimal web­representation of tall building structural analysis
61
==PAGE:69==
[48]
Eurocode. “Eurocode 1: Actions on structures ­ Part 1­4: General actions ­ Wind
actions”. In: (2005).
[49]
Hala Nassereddine, Makram Bou Hatoum, and Awad Hanna. “Overview of the
State­of­Practice of BIM in the AEC Industry in the United States”. In: July 2022.
DOI: 10.22260/ISARC2022/0074.
[50]
Thomas M Froese. “Impact of emerging information technology on information man­
agement”. In: Computing in Civil Engineering (2005). 2005, pp. 1–10.
[51]
Thomas Froese. “The impact of emerging information technology on project man­
agement for construction”. In: Automation in Construction 19 (Aug. 2010), pp. 531–
538. DOI: 10.1016/j.autcon.2009.11.004.
[52]
Anas Bataw, Richard Kirkham, and Eric Lou. “The Issues and Considerations As­
sociated with BIM Integration”. In: MATEC Web of Conferences 66 (July 2016),
p. 00005. DOI: 10.1051/matecconf/20166600005.
[53]
National BIM Standard Project Committee et al. “National building information mod­
eling standard, version 1, Part 1: Overview, principles, and methodologies”. In: Na­
tional Institutute of Building Sciences (2007).
[54]
Hala Nassereddine, Makram Bou Hatoum, and Awad Hanna. “Overview of the
State­of­Practice of BIM in the AEC Industry in the United States”. In: July 2022.
DOI: 10.22260/ISARC2022/0074.
[55]
Sepehr Alizadehsalehi, Ahmad Hadavi, and Joseph Chuenhuei Huang. “From BIM
to extended reality in AEC industry”. English (US). In: Automation in Construction
116 (Aug. 2020). Publisher Copyright: © 2020 Elsevier B.V. ISSN: 0926­5805. DOI:
10.1016/j.autcon.2020.103254.
[56]
Jung­Ho Seo et al. “Collaborative Process to Facilitate BIM­based Clash Detection
Tasks for Enhancing Constructability”. In: Journal of the Korea Institute of Building
Construction 12 (June 2012). DOI: 10.5345/JKIBC.2012.12.3.299.
[57]
Tim Pat McGinley et al. “An OpenBIM workflow to support collaboration between
Acoustic Engineers and Architects”. In: Journal of Physics: Conference Series 2069.1
(Nov. 2021), p. 012164. DOI: 10.1088/1742- 6596/2069/1/012164. URL: https:
//dx.doi.org/10.1088/1742-6596/2069/1/012164.
[58]
Chi Zhang, Jakob Beetz, and Matthias Weise. “Interoperable validation for IFC
building models using open standards”. In: Electronic Journal of Information Tech­
nology in Construction 20 (Jan. 2015), pp. 24–39.
[59]
Michael Theiler and Kay Smarsly. “IFC Monitor ­ An IFC schema extension for mod­
eling structural health monitoring systems”. In: Advanced Engineering Informatics
37 (May 2018), pp. 54–65. DOI: 10.1016/j.aei.2018.04.011.
[60]
Michael Theiler and Kay Smarsly. “IFC Monitor ­ An IFC schema extension for mod­
eling structural health monitoring systems”. In: Advanced Engineering Informatics
37 (May 2018), pp. 54–65. DOI: 10.1016/j.aei.2018.04.011.
[61]
Danny Goodman. Dynamic HTML: The definitive reference: A comprehensive re­
source for HTML, CSS, DOM & JavaScript. ” O’Reilly Media, Inc.”, 2002.
[62]
Aakanksha Sharma. “Introduction to HTML (Hyper Text Markup Language) ­ A Re­
view Paper”. In: International Journal of Science and Research (IJSR) 7 (May 2018),
pp. 1337–1339.
[63]
David R Brooks. Guide to HTML, JavaScript and PHP: for scientists and engineers.
Springer Science & Business Media, 2011.
[64]
Antony JR Meyn. “Browser to Browser Media Streaming with HTML5”. In: Kongens
Lyngby: DTU, IMM­M.Sc.­2012­55 (2012).
[65]
Bruce Lawson and Remy Sharp. Introducing HTML5. New Riders, 2011.
62
Minimal web­representation of tall building structural analysis
==PAGE:70==
[66]
Stian Reimers and Neil Stewart. “Presentation and response timing accuracy in
Adobe Flash and HTML5/JavaScript Web experiments”. In: Behavior Research Meth­
ods 47 (2014), pp. 309–327.
[67]
Preeti Ms.Rajwant kaur Ms.Kawaljit Kaur. “Research on HTML5 in Web Develop­
ment”. In: International Journal of Advanced Science and Technology 29.10s (May
2020), pp. 2412–2418. URL: http://sersc.org/journals/index.php/IJAST/article/
view/16878.
[68]
Simon Holm Jensen, Anders Møller, and Peter Thiemann. “Type Analysis for JavaScript”.
In: Proc. 16th International Static Analysis Symposium (SAS). Vol. 5673. LNCS.
Springer­Verlag, Aug. 2009.
[69]
Satinder Khattra, Hardeep Rai, and Jagbir Dhillon. “Towards Automated Structural
Stability Design of Buildings—A BIM­Based Solution”. In: Buildings 12 (Apr. 2022),
p. 451. DOI: 10.3390/buildings12040451.
[70]
Cornelius Preidel and Andre Borrmann. “Refinement of the Visual Code Checking
Language for an Automated Checking of Building Information Models Regarding
Applicable Regulations”. In: June 2017, pp. 157–165. DOI: 10.1061/9780784480823.
020.
[71]
Salvatore T. March and Gerald F. Smith. “Design and natural science research on
information technology”. In: Decision Support Systems 15.4 (1995), pp. 251–266.
ISSN: 0167­9236. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/0167- 9236(94)00041- 2. URL:
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/0167923694000412.
[72]
Ken Peffers et al. “The design science research process: A model for producing
and presenting information systems research”. In: Proceedings of First International
Conference on Design Science Research in Information Systems and Technology
DESRIST (Feb. 2006).
[73]
E. Happold E. / Villefrance. “Interaction between architect and structural engineer”.
In: IABSE journal = Journal AIPC = IVBH Journal (1982).
[74]
Ping Yung et al. “A BIM­enabled MEP coordination process for use in China”. In: J.
Inf. Technol. Constr. 19 (2014), pp. 383–398.
[75]
John A Sokolowski and Catherine M Banks. Principles of modeling and simulation:
a multidisciplinary approach. John Wiley & Sons, 2011.
[76]
Patrik Lundblad and Mikael Jern. “Geovisual Analytics and Storytelling Using HTML5”.
In: July 2013, pp. 263–271. DOI: 10.1109/IV.2013.35.
[77]
İsa Yüksel. “An Overview on Tall Buildings from The Point of Structural Engineering”.
In: Journal of Innovative Science and Engineering (JISE) 3 (Feb. 2020). DOI: 10.
38088/jise.590738.
Minimal web­representation of tall building structural analysis
63
==PAGE:71==
A
Wind load
The structural system is designed as a multi functional structure with an internal core
(shear walls), casted in­situ, which is connected by simple supports with the rest of the
structural elements (usually prefabricated elements). This assumption is made to avoid a
rigid structure and to increase the flexibility of the structural model.
The wind loads are transferred from the façade to the core through slabs and from there,
ultimately into the foundation. The external shape of the building plays an important role
on the effects of wind forces, because the wind pressure increases incrementally as the
wind velocity increases.
It is possible to divide the wind load in two types of loads, static and dynamic, and they
differ for the period of loading. Short periods of wind load are defined as a dynamic load
while long periods are defined as a static load. Typically, the wind load is accepted as a
static load in low­ or medium­rise structures, while it should be considered as a dynamic
load for tall structures. The wind load can also induce the phenomenon of resonance
related to the natural frequency of the structure, depending on the height and the slen­
derness ratio of the building.
Figure A.1: Wind­induced forces on a building cross section [77]
The wind load is represented by a simplified set of pressures or forces defined and cal­
culated base on the EN 1991­1­4 [48]
The response of structures should be calculated, from the peak velocity pressure, qp, at
the reference height in the undisturbed wind field, the force and pressure coefficients and
the structural factor cs ∗cd. qp depends on the wind climate, the terrain roughness and
orography, and the reference height.
64
Minimal web­representation of tall building structural analysis
==PAGE:72==
qp = the peak velocity pressure plus a contribution from short­term pressure fluctuations.
Here there are some understandings of the wind load calculation taken from the Eurocode
which was used for all calculations related with the master thesis.
The wind velocity and the velocity pressure are composed of a mean and a fluctuating
component.
The mean wind velocity Vm should be determined from the basic wind velocity Vb which
depends on the wind climate and the height variation of the wind determined from the
terrain roughness and orography.
Basic values
vb = cdir ∗cseason ∗vb,0
cdir: directional factor, based on Eurocode ­ recommended value = 1
cseason: seasonal factor, based on Eurocode ­ recommended value = 1
vb,0: fundamental value of the basic wind velocity ­ recommended value = 24 m/s
vb: basic wind velocity, function of wind direction, time of the year and terrain category
Mean wind
vm(z) = cr(z) ∗c0(z) ∗vb
cr(z): roughness factor, it depends on the height z of the building and the terrain category
c0(z): orography factor ­ recommended value = 1.0
The value of cr(z) is based on a logarithmic velocity profile:
cr(z) = kr ∗ln(z/z0) for zmin <= z <= zmax where:
z0: roughness length
kr: terrain factor calculated:
kr = 0.19 ∗(z0/z0,III)0.07
z0,III: 0.3 m it depends on the terrain category
zmin: 5 m it depends on the terrain category
zmax: 200 m
The multiple possible terrain categories and terrain parameters, are identified by fig. A.2.
During the calculations are specified as constraints following the values of terrain category
III.
Minimal web­representation of tall building structural analysis
65
==PAGE:73==
Figure A.2: terrain categories and terrain parameters [48]
Wind turbulence
The turbulence intensity Iv(z) can be defined as the standard deviation of the turbulence
divided by the mean wind velocity.
Iv(z) = kl/c0(z) ∗ln(z/z0) for zmin <= z <= zmax
kl: turbulence factor ­ recommended value = 1.0
c0: orography factor
z0: roughness length
Peak velocity pressure:
qp(z) = [1 + 7 ∗Iv(z)] ∗1/2 ∗ρ ∗v2
m(z)
ρ: air density
Wind pressure on surfaces
An appropriate external pressure coefficient, cpe10, must be determined. It is used for the
design of the load bearing and are values taken from the Eurocode for areas bigger than
10 m2.
66
Minimal web­representation of tall building structural analysis
==PAGE:74==
Figure A.3: reference height depending on hand b, and the corresponding velocity pres­
sure profile [48]
The figure represents the possible velocity pressure. In the case of tall buildings the
structure utilized is the last section.
Three different cases are calculated and design following Eurocode.
1. Wind load perpendicular to the longitudinal wall
2. Wind load perpendicular to the gable wall
Minimal web­representation of tall building structural analysis
67
==PAGE:75==
3. Flat roof
Figure A.4: recommended external pressure coefficients for vertical walls [48]
Depending on the zone, which are explained in the previous paragraph, it is possible to
define the velocity pressure profile on a structure.
Figure A.5: key for vertical walls [48]
68
Minimal web­representation of tall building structural analysis
==PAGE:76==
On the case studied where h > 2b, the ratio of h/d is bigger than 5. It is possible to calcu­
late the wind profile multiplying the peak velocity pressure, qp, for the external pressure
coefficients, cpe10.
In order to design the wind load action as in the picture it is important to design the division
of the profile as it is represented above. It means that the profile is divided into 3 sections,
the bottom and the top have the same height, b, which is also the building base, and the
rest are divided in uniform strip.
Once the three case of studies are calculated and the different zones are evaluated it is
time to start designing the core structural element.
For this reason it is necessary to know the material data for concrete. The important
dimensions needed to perform the analysis are: total height of the building + underground,
total height where the wind load is acting, building width and length, core width and length,
core thickness.
First, it is necessary to define the maximum deflection: u = htot/500
After having calculated the wind profiles acting on the longer and shorter wall, it is nec­
essary to calculate the weighted average for wind load, W1, and W2, which are based on
the average of the wind profile layer’s division.
Once the wind profile are found, it is possible to calculate the value of the load acting per
1m height of the longer wall, QL, and the shorter wall, QT .
Qt = W1 ∗l
Qt = W2 ∗b
Using the assumption that the core is cantilever, the equation of cantilever deflection is:
u = (Q ∗h4)/(8 ∗E ∗I)
I = (Q ∗h4)/(8 ∗E ∗u)
u = htot/500
Longitudinal moment of inertia: IL = Ql ∗h4/8 ∗Ecm ∗u
Transverse moment of inertia: IT = Qt ∗h4/8 ∗Ecm ∗u
Knowing the geometry of the core, it is possible to check if the moment of inertia of the
structural core can resist to the wind load.
Longitudinal moment of inertia example from previous studies.
wc = width of the core ; dc = depth of the core ; tc = thickness of core wall
Ix = (wc ∗d3
c)/12–1/12 ∗(wc–2 ∗tc) ∗(dc–tc)3
Iy = (dc ∗w3
c)/12 −1/12 ∗(dc–2 ∗tc) ∗(wc–tc)3
Ix > IL ; Iy > IT
Maximum deflection of the system:
δmax = hb/500
δmax(x) = (QT ∗h4
tot)/(8 ∗Ecm ∗Ix) < δmax
δmax(y) = (QL ∗h4
tot)/(8 ∗Ecm ∗Iy) < δmax
Minimal web­representation of tall building structural analysis
69
==PAGE:77==
If the check for the deflection respects these formulas, it means that the maximum deflec­
tion allowed by the structure is bigger than the deflection due to the wind load. In other
words, the core structure is designed in the correct way, otherwise it is needed to change
some data in the geometry, usually it is the thickness of the wall, and check again.
70
Minimal web­representation of tall building structural analysis
==PAGE:78==
B
HTML script
The link to the GitHub platform is: HTML script used to design the tool
1
<html>
2
3
<head>
4
<!--inside the head are located all the links which will be used inside the
script , such as, CSS script and JS script -->
5
<link rel='stylesheet ' href='C:\Users\Admin\Desktop\finalview\trial\main.css
'></link>
6
<script src='C:\Users\Admin\Desktop\finalview\trial\main.js'></script >
7
<script src='https://cdnjs.cloudflare.com/ajax/libs/jquery/3.6.0/jquery.js
'></script>
8
<script src="https://cdn.plot.ly/plotly-latest.min.js"></script >
9
</head>
10
<!--The body starts loading the first function of the JS script called main()
-->
11
<body onload="main()">
12
<!--the first div is used in order to divide the screen in four different
containers: plan, props, section and results -->
13
<div class="container -">
14
<!--The first box, plan, has inside a js script which is used to get
information about the floor and display this information inside the plan.
15
It has also another JS script which helps to modify the width and the height
of the plan-->
16
<plan->
17
<div id="plan-core">
18
<div id="core"></div>
19
</div>
20
</plan->
21
<!--The props box, is divided in two different areas. The first area is a JS
script which shares important information about the project and a form is
created to modify the section view adding and deleting floors.-->
22
<props->
23
<div style="overflow -x: auto;">
24
<form id="new-floor-form">
25
Number of floors:
26
<input type="number"
27
id="new-floor-input" />
28
<input id="new-floor-submit"
29
type="submit"
30
value="Add floor" />
31
</form>
32
<!--In the second area is located a table where it is possible to
modify important information about the design -->
33
<table>
34
<tr>
35
<td>
36
Length of the building:
37
<input type="number"
38
style="width:60px"
39
name="LengthBuilding"
40
id="LengthBuilding">
41
<input type="button"
42
value="Submit"
43
onclick="LengthBuilding()">
44
</>
Minimal web­representation of tall building structural analysis
71
==PAGE:79==
45
</td>
46
<td>
47
Width of the building:
48
<input type="number"
49
style="width:60px"
50
name="WidthBuilding"
51
id="WidthBuilding">
52
<input type="button"
53
value="Submit"
54
onclick="WidthBuilding()">
55
</>
56
</td>
57
</tr>
58
<tr>
59
<td>
60
Thickness of the wall:
61
<input type="number"
62
style="width:60px"
63
name="Thicknessofthewall"
64
id="Thicknessofthewall">
65
<input type="button"
66
value="Submit"
67
onclick="Thicknessofthewall()">
68
</>
69
</td>
70
<td>
71
Length of the core:
72
<input type="number"
73
style="width:60px"
74
name="Lengthofthecore"
75
id="Lengthofthecore">
76
<input type="button"
77
value="Submit"
78
onclick="Lengthofthecore()">
79
</>
80
</td>
81
</tr>
82
<tr>
83
<td>
84
Width of the core:
85
<input type="number"
86
style="width:60px"
87
name="Widthofthecore"
88
id="Widthofthecore">
89
<input type="button"
90
value="Submit"
91
onclick="Widthofthecore()">
92
</>
93
</td>
94
<td>
95
X Location of the core:
96
<input type="number"
97
style="width:60px"
98
name="XLocationofthecore"
99
id="XLocationofthecore">
100
<input type="button"
101
value="Submit"
102
onclick="XLocationofthecore()">
103
</>
104
</td>
105
</tr>
106
<tr>
72
Minimal web­representation of tall building structural analysis
==PAGE:80==
107
<td>
108
Y Location of the core:
109
<input type="number"
110
style="width:60px"
111
name="YLocationofthecore"
112
id="YLocationofthecore">
113
<input type="button"
114
value="Submit"
115
onclick="YLocationofthecore()">
116
</>
117
</td>
118
<td>
119
Height of the floor:
120
<input type="number"
121
style="width:60px"
122
name="Heightofthefloor"
123
id="Heightofthefloor">
124
<input type="button"
125
value="Submit"
126
onclick="Heightofthefloor()">
127
</>
128
</td>
129
</tr>
130
131
<tr>
132
133
<td>
134
Total height of the building:
135
<input type="number" style="width:60px" name="
totalheightofthebuilding" id="totalheightofthebuilding"
136
min="1"
137
max="200">
138
<input type="button" value="Submit" onclick="
totalheightofthebuilding()">
139
</>
140
</td>
141
</tr>
142
</table>
143
</div>
144
</props->
145
<!--The section box is a section view of the project , it share information
about all the floor, belove and above ground. The skeleton of the section
is designed as a BIM project.
146
Starting with the project site, and finishing with information about the
single element such as different floors and core design -->
147
<section ->
148
<project - name="Duplex Apartment">
149
<site- lat="(41, 52, 27, 840000)" long="(-87, -38, -21, -839999)" elev
="-0.0">
150
<building ->
151
<roof-
152
class="floor_roof"
153
name='Roof'
154
level='9'
155
elev="27.000000000000" >
156
Roof<span
157
class="floor_stats">
158
27.0</span>
159
</roof->
160
<div id="floor-middle"></div>
161
<!--<div id="floor" name="floor" ><span class="floor_stats">trial
</span></div>-->
Minimal web­representation of tall building structural analysis
73
==PAGE:81==
162
<floor-
163
class="floor_upper"
164
name='Level 8'
165
level='7'
166
elev="21.100000000000378" >
167
Level 8<span
168
class="floor_stats">
169
21.1</span>
170
</floor->
171
<!--<core-></core->
172
</floor->
173
<floor- class="floor_ground" name='Level 1'
level='0' elev="0.0"
>Level 1<span class="floor_stats">0.0</span> </floor->
174
<ground -></ground->
175
<core-></core->-->
176
<underground -
177
class="underground_lower"
178
name='T/FDN'
179
level='-1'
180
elev="-1.25" >
181
T/FDN<span
182
class="underground_stats">
183
-1.25</span>
184
</underground ->
185
</building ->
186
</site->
187
</project ->
188
</section ->
189
<!--The result box has inside a plotly script which is used to share
information about the wind load and the maximum deflection allowed by the
regulations.-->
190
<result->
191
<myPlot- id="myPlot" name="Wind load simulation" type="text/javascript
"></myPlot->
192
193
<!--The idea is to import the check needed from the Eurocode , and analyse if
the design is following the requirements -->
194
<Eurocodecheck - id="Eurocodecheck -" name="Eurocode check" type="text/
javascript" ></Eurocodecheck ->
195
196
<!--The idea is to divide the box with another column where it might be
possible to design a LCA of the structure and share important information
such as, cost and hours needed + the CO2 emissions -->
197
198
<!--Inside the html script there is also part of my calculation done. I need
to understand how to remove it from here and create just a onload function
which will have this script inside-->
199
200
201
202
203
<script type="text/javascript">
204
205
function totalheightofthebuilding() {
206
var z = document.getElementById("totalheightofthebuilding").value;
207
208
209
qp = [];
210
y = [];
211
/* At the moment I am not able to get the information I need to continue the
simulation. I am not able to get the value of the total height of the
building and insert it inside the for loop.
74
Minimal web­representation of tall building structural analysis
==PAGE:82==
212
If I will be able to do that, the first step of the analysis will be done,
and ideally I might need to repeat the same script in order to get
information about the width and the length of the building and the core
from the table.*/
213
214
215
216
if (z < 200, z > 0) {
217
218
for (var i = 1; i <= z; i++) {
219
qp.push(i);
220
/*z0 depends on the terrain category. There are 5 different terrain category.
221
0: Sea or costal area exposed to the open sea. z0=0,003 ; zmin=1
222
I: Lakes or flat horizontal area with negligible vegetation and without
obstacles. z0=0,01 ; zmin=1
223
II: Area with low vegetation such as grass and isolated obstacles
224
(trees, buildings) with separations of at least 20 obstacle height. z0=0,05
; zmin=2
225
III: Area with regular cover of vegetation or buildings or with isolated
226
obstacles with separations of maximum 20 obstacle heights
227
(such as villages , suburban terrain , permanent forest). z0=0,3 ; zmin=5
228
IV: Area in which at least 15 % of the surface is covered with buildings
229
and their average height exceeds 15 m. z0=1,0 ; zmin=10
230
*/
231
// Vb is the basic wind velocity: it is function of Vb,0 Cdir and
Cseason
232
// for this script they are the recommended value from the
Eurocode
233
Vb = 24; // this value is taken from the NA
234
c0z = 1; // orography factor , this value is taken from the NA
235
z0III = 0.3; // terrain category III
236
kr = 0.19 * (z0III / 0.05) ** 0.07; // terrain factor depending on
the roughness length z0
237
crz = kr * Math.log(i / z0III); // roughness factor the value is
based on a logarithmic velocity profile
238
//two different formulas it depends on the z as a function of zmin
and zmax
239
Vm = crz * Vb * c0z; // mean wind velocity at the height of z
240
kl = 1; // turbulence factor, taken from the Eurocode
241
Iv = kl / (c0z * Math.log(i / z0III)); // turbulence intensity at
the height of z
242
// peak velocity pressure
243
rho = 1.25; // air density , it depends on the altitude , temperature ,
and barometric pressure during wind storms
244
qp[i] = ((1 + 7 * Iv) * 0.5 * rho * Vm ** 2) / 1000;
245
y[i] = i;
246
console.log(qp[i])
247
// Hp rectangular plan of tall buildings where 1 < H/d < 5
248
// Initial calculation based on project 11080_2022
249
// wind profile acting on longer wall ZONE D
250
Cpe10D = 0.8
251
wd = qp[i] * Cpe10D // wind pressure acting on the external surfaces
252
console.log(wd)
253
// wind profile acting on longer wall ZONE E
254
Cpe10E = -0.5 + (-0.7 - ( -0.5 ) ) / ( 5 - 1 ) * ( 98.8 / 24.5 )
255
we = qp[i] * Cpe10E // wind pressure acting on the external surfaces
256
console.log(we)
257
// wind profile acting on shorter wall ZONE A
258
Cpe10A = -1.2
259
wa = qp[i] * Cpe10A // wind pressure acting on the external surfaces
260
//console.log(wa)
Minimal web­representation of tall building structural analysis
75
==PAGE:83==
261
// wind profile acting on shorter wall ZONE B
262
Cpe10B = -0.8
263
wb = qp[i] * Cpe10B // wind pressure acting on the external surfaces
264
//console.log(wb)
265
hp = 0.5
// height of the parapet
266
// hp / 24.5
267
// wind profile acting on flat roof ZONE F
268
Cpe10F = -1.6
269
wf = qp[i] * Cpe10F // wind pressure acting on the external surfaces
270
//console.log(wf)
271
// wind profile acting on flat roof ZONE G
272
Cpe10G = -1.1
273
wg = qp[i] * Cpe10G // wind pressure acting on the external surfaces
274
//console.log(wg)
275
// wind profile acting on flat roof ZONE H
276
Cpe10H = -0.7
277
wh = qp[i] * Cpe10H // wind pressure acting on the external surfaces
278
//console.log(wh)
279
// wind profile acting on flat roof ZONE I1
280
Cpe10I1 = -0.2
281
wi1 = qp[i] * Cpe10I1 // wind pressure acting on the external
surfaces
282
//console.log(wi1)
283
// wind profile acting on flat roof ZONE I2
284
Cpe10I2 = 0.2
285
wi2 = qp[i] * Cpe10I2 // wind pressure acting on the external
surfaces
286
//console.log(wi2)
287
// weighted average for wind load acting on longer wall
288
W1 = (wd - we) /
289
console.log(W1)
290
}
291
}
292
293
var xArray = qp;
294
var yArray = y;
295
var data = [{
296
x: xArray,
297
y: yArray,
298
type: 'line',
299
300
}];
301
302
var layout = {
303
xaxis: {range: [0, 2]}, //title: "peak velocity pressure"},
304
yaxis: {range: [0, 200]}, //title: "Height of the building",
305
//title: "peak velocity vs. Height of the building"
306
margin: {
307
l: 50,
308
r: 10,
309
b: 60,
310
t: 20,
311
pad: 8
312
},
313
};
314
315
Plotly.newPlot('myPlot', data, layout);
316
}
317
</script >
318
319
</result ->
320
76
Minimal web­representation of tall building structural analysis
==PAGE:84==
321
</div>
322
</body>
323
</html>
Minimal web­representation of tall building structural analysis
77
==PAGE:85==
C
CSS script
The link to the GitHub platform is: CSS script used to design the tool
1
body {
2
margin: 0px;
3
height: 100vh;
4
width: 100vw;
5
}
6
/* The container is divided in 4 different views: plan, table, section and
results */
7
.container - {
8
display: grid;
9
height: 100vh;
10
width: 100vw;
11
grid-template -columns: auto auto;
12
grid-template -rows: auto auto;
13
}
14
15
/* the plan contains important information about itself , as location , width
and length of building and core. */
16
plan- {
17
display: grid;
18
height: 40vh;
19
width: 50vw;
20
justify -content: center;
21
align-content: center;
22
background -color:#ddd;
23
/*border: solid black;
24
border-color: #1b1b1b;*/
25
}
26
/* plan - this contains a plan of the currently selected floor*/
27
.plan {
28
display:auto;
29
background -color:#fff;
30
margin:auto;
31
margin-top:5%;
32
margin-bottom:5%;
33
height:100px;
34
width: 200px;
35
color:#1b1b1b;
36
/*border -top: 4px solid black;*/
37
min-height: 20px;
38
border: 3px solid black;
39
justify -content: center;
40
align-content: center;
41
}
42
/*the plan-core and also the core are design in order to understand the ideal
view, but at the moment they are not working inside the script. I might
need to understand how they can work while the information on the table
change*/
43
#plan-core {
44
display:flex;
45
background -color:#fff;
46
position: relative;
47
padding:2px;
48
margin:auto;
49
color:#1b1b1b;
78
Minimal web­representation of tall building structural analysis
==PAGE:86==
50
/*border-top: 4px solid black;*/
51
height:100px;
52
width: 200px;
53
border: 3px solid black;
54
justify -content: center;
55
align-items: center;
56
}
57
#core {
58
height:50px;
59
width: 30px;
60
border: 3px solid black;
61
}
62
63
64
/* The table can have to possible output.
65
1. a dynamic table which will read the value and transform the order views.
66
2. A table which will get different important information about the project
after the project is uploaded as a html5 script. */
67
props- {
68
display: grid;
69
height: 40vh;
70
width: 50vw;
71
background -color:#ddd;
72
/*justify -content: center;
73
align-content: center;
74
border-style: solid;
75
border-color: #1b1b1b;*/
76
}
77
78
/*.props {
79
display:auto;
80
background -color:#fff;
81
margin:auto;
82
margin-top:5%;
83
margin-bottom:5%;
84
height:100px;
85
width: 200px;
86
color:#1b1b1b;
87
border-top: 4px solid black;
88
min-height: 20px;
89
}*/
90
table{
91
width: 90%;
92
93
}
94
95
table, td {
96
border: 1px solid black;
97
/*width: 100%;
98
height: 60%;*/
99
}
100
/*td {
101
height: 20px;
102
text-align: left;
103
104
}*/
105
/* The section gives important information about the height and the number of
floors inside the project.*/
106
107
section - {
108
display: grid;
109
height: 60vh;
Minimal web­representation of tall building structural analysis
79
==PAGE:87==
110
width: 50vw;
111
justify -content: center;
112
align-content: center;
113
background -color:#ddd;
114
/*border -style: solid;
115
border-color: #1b1b1b;*/
116
}
117
118
/* The result share structural information about the core and information
important for the architect and the PM */
119
result- {
120
display: grid;
121
height: 60vh;
122
width: 50vw;
123
/*justify -content: center;
124
align-content: center;*/
125
background -color:#ddd;
126
/*border -style: solid;
127
border-color: #1b1b1b;*/
128
}
129
/*This css is used to create a good overview of the Plotly line graph*/
130
h1 {
131
display: block;
132
margin: 0;
133
font-size: 20px;
134
}
135
myPlot- {
136
display: grid;
137
margin:0;
138
width: 50%;
139
height: 95%;
140
background -color:#ddd;
141
}
142
143
144
/* The section follows the hiercarchy of the bim model
145
It starts with the project , site, building , floor */
146
147
/* ifcProject*/
148
project - {
149
width: auto;
150
padding:5px;
151
font-family: Arial, Helvetica , sans-serif;
152
font-size:12px;
153
background -color:#ccc;
154
border:none;
155
color:#1b1b1b;
156
margin:auto;
157
padding -bottom:50px;
158
}
159
160
/*ifcSite */
161
site- {
162
display:auto;
163
margin-top: 20px;
164
}
165
166
/* This is not normally used but has uses */
167
/*core- {
168
display:block;
169
background -color:black;
170
position:relative;
80
Minimal web­representation of tall building structural analysis
==PAGE:88==
171
padding:2px;
172
left:100px;
173
margin-bottom:0px;
174
border-color: #000;
175
width:30px;
176
height: 200px;
177
margin:auto;
178
color:#1b1b1b;
179
overflow: hidden;
180
}*/
181
182
/*ifcBuilding */
183
building - {
184
display:block;
185
background -color:#ddd;
186
padding:0px;
187
margin:5px;
188
border-color: #000;
189
width:270px;
190
color:#1b1b1b;
191
/*border-top: 4px solid black;*/
192
min-height: 20px;
193
overflow: hidden;
194
margin:auto;
195
}
196
197
/* This could also be zone
198
it is container for a block of floors */
199
/*segment - {
200
display:block;
201
background -color:#fff;
202
border-style: dotted;
203
position:relative;
204
border-color: #000;
205
left:-100px;
206
margin: auto;
207
padding:2px;
208
width:225px;
209
margin-top:2px;
210
color:#1b1b1b;
211
}
212
213
/* ifcBuildingStorey */
214
floor- {
215
display:flex;
216
background -color:#fff;
217
position:relative;
218
padding:2px;
219
padding -left:10px;
220
width:230px;
221
margin:auto;
222
margin-top:2px;
223
color:#1b1b1b;
224
border-bottom: 4px solid black;
225
border-left: 2px dashed black;
226
border-right: 2px dashed black;
227
}
228
/*this tag is used for the middle floors , the floors which are added and
deleted from the props box
229
What can be necessary here is the way of define the height of the floor and
the thickness of the wall*/
230
#floor-middle .floor{
Minimal web­representation of tall building structural analysis
81
==PAGE:89==
231
background -color:#fff;
232
width: 90%;
233
display: inline-block;
234
display:flex;
235
margin:0 auto;
236
margin-top:2px;
237
color:#1b1b1b;
238
border-bottom: 4px solid black;
239
border-left: 2px dashed black;
240
border-right: 2px dashed black;
241
}
242
243
244
#floor {
245
width: 50px;
246
float: right;
247
margin:0 auto;
248
color:#1b1b1b;
249
border-bottom: 4px solid black;
250
border-left: 2px dashed black;
251
border-right: 2px dashed black;
252
}
253
254
#floor-middle .floor .content .text {
255
display: inline-block;
256
background -color:#fff;
257
padding -left:10px;
258
width:30px;
259
260
margin:auto;
261
color:#1b1b1b;
262
border-left: 2px dashed black;
263
border-right: 2px dashed black;
264
transition: 0.4s;
265
}
266
.floor .actions button {
267
margin: 0;
268
font-size: 10px;
269
font-weight: 700;
270
text-transform: uppercase;
271
transition: 0.4s;
272
}
273
274
/*The roof is the last floor of the building it is important because it gives
the final height of the building*/
275
roof- {
276
display:block;
277
background -color:#fff transparent;
278
position:relative;
279
padding:2px;
280
padding -left:10px;
281
width:230px;
282
margin:auto;
283
margin-top:2px;
284
color:#1b1b1b;
285
border-bottom: 4px solid black;
286
}
287
288
/* VIEW DEFINITIONS...
289
/* plan - this contains a plan of the currently selected floor*/
290
291
82
Minimal web­representation of tall building structural analysis
==PAGE:90==
292
/* properties - this contains the calculated properties*/
293
294
295
/* MEP stuff is in this floor */
296
297
298
/* ground line */
299
ground -{
300
display:block;
301
margin: auto;
302
overflow: auto;
303
padding -top:0px;
304
padding:2px;
305
padding -left:10px;
306
width:450px;
307
border-top: 6px solid black;
308
309
}
310
311
underground - {
312
display:flex;
313
background -color:#fff;
314
position:relative;
315
padding:2px;
316
padding -left:10px;
317
width:230px;
318
margin:auto;
319
margin-top:2px;
320
color:#1b1b1b;
321
border-bottom: 4px solid black;
322
border-left: 2px dashed black;
323
border-right: 2px dashed black;
324
}
325
326
/* STYLING */
327
328
/* floor styling */
329
.floor_name {
330
float:left;
331
padding -left:20px;
332
}
333
334
/* floor styles (based on elevation) */
335
.floor_upper {
336
border-left: 2px dashed black;
337
border-right: 2px dashed black;
338
}
339
.floor_ground {
340
background -color: #eee;
341
border-left: 2px dashed gray;
342
border-right: 2px dashed gray;
343
border-bottom: none;
344
}
345
.underground_lower {
346
background -color: #ddd;
347
border-left: 2px solid brown;
348
border-right: 2px solid brown;
349
350
}
351
352
.floor_stats {
353
Minimal web­representation of tall building structural analysis
83
==PAGE:91==
354
float:right;
355
padding:0px;
356
font-style: italic;
357
border-radius:5px;
358
background -color:#fff;
359
margin-right:10px;
360
margin-top:0px;
361
362
}
363
.underground_stats {
364
365
float:right;
366
padding:0px;
367
font-style: italic;
368
border-radius:5px;
369
background -color:#fff;
370
margin-right:10px;
371
margin-top:0px;
372
373
}
84
Minimal web­representation of tall building structural analysis
==PAGE:92==
D
JS script
The link to the GitHub platform is: JS script used to design the tool
1
function main() {
2
3
// calculate the floors
4
const floors = document.getElementsByTagName("floor -");
5
let num_floors = floors.length;
6
console.log(num_floors);
7
8
// add data about the model to the properties box
9
$('props -').prepend('number of floors is '+num_floors);
10
$('props -').prepend('site elevation is '+$('site-').attr('elev ')+'<br>');
11
12
// read the roof elevation of the building
13
$('props -').prepend('roof elevation is '+$('roof-').attr('elev ')+'<br>');
14
15
// get the project name in the project tag
16
const project = document.getElementsByTagName("project -");
17
$('project -').prepend('<h1>'+$(project).attr('name ')+'</h1><hr>');
18
19
// get the simulation name in the project tag
20
const myPlot = document.getElementsByTagName("myPlot -");
21
$('myPlot -').prepend('<h1>'+$(myPlot).attr('name ')+'</h1>');
22
23
// get the check from the Eurocode and see if the project is ok
24
const Eurocodecheck = document.getElementsByTagName("Eurocodecheck -");
25
$('Eurocodecheck -').prepend('<h1>'+$(Eurocodecheck).attr('name ')+'</h1>');
26
27
// load the plan so we can edit it
28
plan('happy ');
29
30
31
32
33
// The .each() method is unnecessary here:
34
$( 'floor-' ).each(function() {
35
console.log($(this)[0].innerHTML);
36
$( this ).on("click", function(){
37
//$('plan-').css("background -color","black");
38
39
changePlan($(this).attr('name ')+':'+$(this).attr('elev '));
40
//$( this ).innerHTML
41
});
42
});
43
44
}
45
46
47
// this function is used to creat the plan view inside the plan box
48
49
function plan(text) {
50
jQuery('<div>', {
51
id: 'plan',
52
class: 'plan',
53
title: 'click a floor to see the plan',
54
html:text
Minimal web­representation of tall building structural analysis
85
==PAGE:93==
55
}).appendTo('plan-');
56
57
}
58
59
// this function is used to change the information inside the plan when the
section floor is clicked
60
function changePlan(text) {
61
$('#plan ').html(text);
62
}
63
64
// this function define the length of the building in the plan view getting
the value from the table box. The idea is to change the dimensions also in
the section box ( I do not know how to do it)
65
function LengthBuilding() {
66
var lengthbuilding = document.getElementById("LengthBuilding").value;
67
document.getElementById("plan").style.height
= lengthbuilding;
68
console.log(LengthBuilding);
69
}
70
// this function define the width of the building in the plan view getting the
value from the table box. The idea is to change the dimensions also in
the section box ( I do not know how to do it)
71
function WidthBuilding() {
72
var widthbuilding = document.getElementById("WidthBuilding").value;
73
document.getElementById("plan").style.width
= widthbuilding;
74
console.log(WidthBuilding);
75
}
76
// this function define the thickness of the core wall but it is not working
both in the plan view and also in the section view ( I do not know how to
do it)
77
function Thicknessofthewall() {
78
var Thicknessofthewall = document.getElementById("Thicknessofthewall").value;
79
/*document.getElementById("outputnew2").innerHTML
= Thicknessofthewall;*/
80
console.log(Thicknessofthewall);
81
}
82
// this function define the length of the core in the plan view getting the
value from the table box. This is not working and the idea is always to be
able to change the dimensions also in the section box ( I do not know how
to do it)
83
function Lengthofthecore() {
84
var Lengthofthecore = document.getElementById("Lengthofthecore").value;
85
/*document.getElementById("outputnew3").innerHTML
= Lengthofthecore;*/
86
console.log(Lengthofthecore);
87
}
88
// this function define the width of the core in the plan view getting the
value from the table box. This is not working and the idea is always to be
able to change the dimensions also in the section box ( I do not know how
to do it)
89
function Widthofthecore() {
90
var widthofthecore = document.getElementById("Widthofthecore").value;
91
/*document.getElementById("plan").style.width
= widthofthecore;*/
92
console.log(widthofthecore);
93
}
94
function XLocationofthecore() {
95
var XLocationofthecore = document.getElementById("XLocationofthecore").value;
96
/*document.getElementById("outputnew5").innerHTML
= XLocationofthecore;*/
97
console.log(XLocationofthecore);
98
}
99
function YLocationofthecore() {
100
var YLocationofthecore = document.getElementById("YLocationofthecore").value;
101
/*document.getElementById("outputnew6").innerHTML
= YLocationofthecore;*/
102
console.log(YLocationofthecore);
103
}
86
Minimal web­representation of tall building structural analysis
==PAGE:94==
104
// this function can define the F2F height and it might be relevant to have it
in order to have a good section view, and together with the number of
floors it represents partially the total height of the building
105
function Heightofthefloor() {
106
var Heightofthefloor = document.getElementById("Heightofthefloor").value;
107
/*document.getElementById("outputnew7").innerHTML
= Heightofthefloor;*/
108
console.log(Heightofthefloor);
109
}
110
// this function define the number of floors which are really important during
the simulations in order to understand amount of material and cost
related with it and also the time needed to build the core.
111
function numberoffloors() {
112
var num = document.getElementById("numberoffloors").onclick = numberoffloors()
;
113
/*var section = document.getElementById("floor");
114
//document.querySelector("button").addEventListener("click", appendnum);
115
//function appendnum() {
116
//newnum = document.createElement("num");
117
//newnum.id = "num" + i++;
118
//document.body.appendChild(newnum);
119
//}
120
//}
121
//const floor = document.getElementById("floor_upper") = numberoffloors;
122
document.getElementById("floor").style = num;*/
123
console.log(num);
124
}
125
// this function is the value which is needed to start the wind load analysis.
The idea is always to get this value from the table to the plotly line
script in order to run all the simulation needed.
126
function totalheightofthebuilding() {
127
var totalheightofthebuilding = document.getElementById("
totalheightofthebuilding").value;
128
/*document.getElementById("myPlot -").style.value
= Totalheightofthebuilding;
129
console.log(totalheightofthebuilding);*/
130
}
131
132
//this add eventListener window is used to create the realtionship betweeen
the table and the section view. It gives the possiblity to add and delete
middle floor from the view.
133
window.addEventListener('load', () => {
134
const form = document.querySelector("#new-floor-form");
135
const list_el = document.querySelector("#floor-middle");
136
137
form.addEventListener('submit', (e) => {
138
e.preventDefault();
139
140
const floor_el = document.createElement("div");
141
floor_el.classList.add("floor");
142
143
const floor_content_el = document.createElement("div");
144
floor_content_el.classList.add("content");
145
146
floor_el.appendChild(floor_content_el);
147
148
const floor_input_el = document.createElement("input");
149
floor_input_el.classList.add("text");
150
floor_input_el.type = "text";
151
152
floor_input_el.setAttribute("readonly", "readonly");
153
154
floor_content_el.appendChild(floor_input_el);
155
Minimal web­representation of tall building structural analysis
87
==PAGE:95==
156
const floor_actions_el = document.createElement("div");
157
floor_actions_el.classList.add("actions");
158
159
const floor_delete_el = document.createElement("button");
160
floor_delete_el.innerHTML = "Delete";
161
floor_actions_el.appendChild(floor_delete_el);
162
163
floor_el.appendChild(floor_actions_el);
164
165
list_el.appendChild(floor_el);
166
167
168
floor_delete_el.addEventListener('click', () => {
169
list_el.removeChild(floor_el);
170
});
171
});
172
});
173
174
175
176
// HTML-Build DOM
177
178
// shoulds include...
179
/*
180
*/
181
182
183
// ---------------------------------------------------------------------
184
//
model
|
view
185
//
'-> project
|
'-> plan
186
//
'-> site
|
this shows a floor in plan
|
187
//
'-> building
|
|
188
// #section
|
'-> props
|
189
// this shows the floors
|
this shows the selected properties |
190
// in section
|
|
191
//
<floor...->
|
|
192
//
|
|
193
// ---------------------------------------------------------------------
88
Minimal web­representation of tall building structural analysis
==PAGE:96==
Minimal web­representation of tall building structural analysis
89
==PAGE:97==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Brovej, Building 118
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.byg.dtu.dk
