==PAGE:1==
Linking Warm and Cold Days in Denmark
to Large-Scale Atmospheric Circulation
and Temperature Patterns: A Dynamical
Systems Approach
Ane Carina Reiter - s155986
M.Sc. in Mathematical Modelling and Computation
Technical University of Denmark - DTU
February, 2023
==PAGE:2==
Abstract
The physical mechanisms behind extreme weather and climate extremes are complex,
and often these events are the results of interactions between many diﬀerent climate
drivers. Classical multivariate statistical approaches to study such interactions are gen-
erally limited by a lack of data, thus having to extrapolate heavily on the tails of the
distributions. In this study, we use a novel multivariate method from dynamical systems
theory, building on chaos theory and extreme value theory, to explore the link between
warm and cold extremes in Denmark and the large-scale patterns of atmospheric cir-
culation and temperature. Using sea level pressure (SLP) and 2m temperature (T2M)
variables as input, we compute for each time step three dynamical systems metrics in
a larger domain in northern Europe: The local dimension d, the inverse persistence
θ−1 and the co-recurrence ratio α. Considering anomalies of these metrics, we explore
how they deviate from normal winter and summer days, when conditioned on extreme
warm or cold days in Denmark. We also explore the opposite link, whether it is possi-
ble to recover extreme temperatures by conditioning on extreme coupling. The results
show: (i) The relations between the diﬀerent metrics are highly complex and can be
explained by diﬀerent seasonal cycles; (ii) In the winter, extreme warm days show
higher-than-normal coupling, and extreme cold days show lower-than-normal coupling.
Both warm and cold days are, however, associated with a coherent large-scale SLP and
T2M pattern. In the summer, the metrics are to a high degree insensitive to extreme
temperatures, although a small higher-than-normal coupling is seen for both warm and
cold days. (iii) By conditioning on extreme coupling, warm and cold days in Denmark
can be recovered to some degree in the winter, although these coupling values lead to
more extreme temperatures in other parts of northern Europe. In the summer, we do
not recover extreme temperatures when conditioning on extreme coupling.
i
==PAGE:3==
Acknowledgements
This study would not have been possible without the assistance and support of a number
of people, to whom I am truly grateful. I would like to thank my supervisors Martin
Drews and Morten Brøns for your guidance and inspiration throughout the last months.
Although the topic is new to both of you, you have taken the time to familiarise
yourself with it and helped me ﬁnding the right direction.
Gratitude also goes to
Davide Faranda for taking time to answering my many questions and providing me
with further perspectives and to Morten Andreas Dahl Larsen for providing me with
thoughtful feedback on my results. Finally, I would like to thank my family and friends
and, not least, Mat´ıas for your support throughout this thesis process.
ii
==PAGE:4==
Contents
Abstract
i
Acknowledgements
ii
Contents
iii
List of Abbreviations
v
List of Figures
vi
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Thesis Outline . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2
Mathematical Framework
4
2.1
Dynamical Systems and Ergodic Theory
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.1.1
Measure-Preserving Dynamical Systems
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.1.2
Ergodicity and Observables
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.1.3
Chaos Theory and Sinai-Bowen-Ruelle Measures . . . . . . . . .
8
2.2
Extreme Value Theory . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.2.1
Independent and Identically Distributed Variables . . . . . . . .
12
2.2.2
Extremal Index and Correlated Processes . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
2.2.3
Extreme Value Law for Dynamical Systems
. . . . . . . . . . .
16
2.3
Local Dynamical Indicators
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
2.3.1
Local Dimension
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
2.3.2
Local Persistence . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
2.3.3
Peaks over Threshold Approach for Dynamical Systems . . . . .
18
2.3.4
Local Co-Recurrence Ratio . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
3
Methodological Framework
22
3.1
Study Area and Data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
3.2
Computation of Dynamical Systems Metrics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
3.2.1
Logarithmic Return . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
3.2.2
Joint Logarithmic Return
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
3.2.3
Local Dimension
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
3.2.4
Local Inverse Persistence . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
3.2.5
Local Co-Recurrence Ratio . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
3.3
Heat Advection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
3.3.1
Average Baroclinic Vector . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
3.4
Deﬁnition of Extremes and Anomalies
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
3.4.1
Extreme Warm and Cold Temperature . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
3.4.2
Anomalies of Metrics and Variables . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
iii
==PAGE:5==
4
Results
34
4.1
Local Dynamical Systems Metrics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
4.1.1
Correlations between Metrics
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
4.1.2
Seasonal Cycle of Metrics
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
4.2
Temperature Extremes in Winter . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
4.2.1
Warm Extremes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
4.2.2
Cold Extremes
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
4.3
Temperature Extremes in Summer
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
4.3.1
Warm and Cold Extremes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
5
Discussion
50
5.1
Atmospheric Circulation and Temperature Extremes
. . . . . . . . . .
50
5.2
Theoretical Assumptions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
5.3
Future Research . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
6
Conclusion
55
References
57
A Python Code
61
A.1 Dynamical Systems Metrics
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
61
A.2 Implementation in Northern Europe . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
66
A.3 Co-Recurrence Ratio for Gaussian Copula Distributions . . . . . . . . .
90
iv
==PAGE:6==
List of Abbreviations
BM
Block Maxima
DJF
December, January, February
EVL
Extreme Value Law
GEV
Generalized Extreme Value
GPD Generalized Pareto Distribution
IPCC Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change
JJA
June, July, August
NAO North Atlantic Oscillation
POT
Peaks Over Threshold
SLP
Sea Level Pressure
SRB
Sinai-Ruelle-Bowen
T2M
2m Temperature
v
==PAGE:7==
LIST OF FIGURES
List of Figures
1
Recurrences in phase space . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
2
Co-recurrence ratio for Gaussian copula distributions . . . . . . . . . .
22
3
Study area . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
4
Histograms of exceedances . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
5
Scatter plots of the dynamical systems metrics . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
6
Scatter plot of the dynamical systems metrics for SLP with NAO index
37
7
Seasonal cycles of the dynamical systems metrics
. . . . . . . . . . . .
40
8
Minima and maxima of bivariate metrics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
9
Deviations of metrics from seasonal cycle - winter (DJF)
. . . . . . . .
45
10
Composite anomalies for extreme temperatures - winter (DJF) . . . . .
46
11
Composite anomalies for extreme coupling - winter (DJF)
. . . . . . .
46
12
Deviations of metrics from seasonal cycle - summer (JJA) . . . . . . . .
48
13
Composite anomalies for extreme temperatures - summer (JJA) . . . .
49
14
Composite anomalies for extreme coupling - summer (JJA) . . . . . . .
49
Page vi of 91
==PAGE:8==
1
INTRODUCTION
1
Introduction
Extreme weather and climate events are generally the results of complex interactions
between many diﬀerent climate variables. In order to prepare for and better adapt
to climate change in the future, we need to have a sound knowledge basis on hazard
risks, requiring a better understanding of the physical processes, driving these extremes.
When multiple climate drivers in their combination cause an extreme impact on so-
ciety, the variables may not necessarily be extreme on their own but be ampliﬁed by
their joint occurrences. An extreme event, caused by multiple drivers, is an example of
a so-called compound event, ﬁrst introduced in 2012 by the Intergovernmental Panel
on Climate Change (IPCC) in their special report on the risks of extreme events and
disasters (SREX)[26]. The working deﬁnition today of a compound weather and cli-
mate event is, in the Sixth Assessment Report by IPCC, that it is ”a combination of
multiple climate drivers and/ or hazards that contribute to societal or environmental
risk”, adopted from the review article by Zscheischler et al. (2018) [49].
Compound extremes are usually studied, using multivariate statistical methods, by
modelling the correlation between variables in multivariate distribution functions. The
most dominant approaches are copula-based, in which the modelled dependence struc-
ture can be asymptotically focused on the tails of the marginal distributions. However,
compound extremes are by deﬁnition rare, and a limitation to pure statistical methods
is a lack of data when studying the tails of the multivariate distributions. Observations
of extreme values of multiple climate variables jointly are even more sparse than extreme
observations in the univariate case, and thus we need to extrapolate heavily on the tails.
In this thesis, we will apply an alternative multivariate approach to studying the interac-
tion of multiple climate drivers, relying on a recently-developed method from dynamical
systems theory. The approach builds upon extensive research on extreme value theory
for dynamical systems, taking its starting point in ergodic theory and chaos theory.
Exploring the chaotic nature of the atmosphere, the method computes local dynam-
ical properties in phase space of the underlying chaotic attractor, which also in the
univariate setting can be linked to extreme weather and climate patterns [15]. In this
approach, the dependence between diﬀerent climate variables is measured through a co-
recurrence measure, which can be computed for each local state in phase space. Hence,
the co-recurrence measure is unique for diﬀerent value combinations of the diﬀerent
variables, and thus it diﬀers from statistical dependence measures, computed as overall
measures for the multivariate distribution function. The method relies on extreme value
theory, and so the method also requires suﬃcient data to compute the local metrics.
However, as no multivariate distribution is ﬁtted, some of the limitations from the pure
multivariate statistical approach are overcome. A further motivation for the use of this
approach is the potential of exploring the links between diﬀerent dynamical measures in
phase space such as the local dimension, interpreted as the degrees of freedom around a
Page 1 of 91
==PAGE:9==
1
INTRODUCTION
state on the attractor, and the local persistence, interpreted as the average time around
that same state.
The methodology was ﬁrst proposed in a multivariate setting by Faranda et al. (2020)
[18] and has later been adopted in other studies of compound events [10, 11]. This
thesis takes its oﬀset in the article by Faranda et al. (2020) which serves as a proof of
concept of the methodology. The article investigates the link between warm and cold
extreme temperatures in North America in the boreal winter and summer respectively
and the large-scale patterns of atmospheric circulation and temperature. The aim of
this thesis is to explore this link in a northern European setting.
Extreme temperatures pose a signiﬁcant risk to society, especially over a persistent
time period, when temperature stress will constitute a critical factor in human health.
Extreme weather is closely governed by large-scale atmospheric circulation patterns,
although also local low-scale factors can be attributed to extremes. The atmospheric
weather patterns in the regions of North America and northern Europe are inherently
diﬀerent, and we will therefore not expect the same results for the two regions.
We will focus our attention to extreme temperatures in Denmark and large-scale pat-
terns in all of northern Europe. In the greater region, we will compute three dynamical
systems metrics: the local dimension d, the local persistence θ−1, and the local co-
recurrence ratio α. All three metrics will be computed in the bivariate case for sea level
pressure and temperature as variables, whereas the two metrics d and θ−1 also will be
calculated in the univariate case for each of the two variables individually.
On this background, the thesis seeks to answer the following three research questions:
• How do the dynamical systems metrics relate in northern Europe, and which
inﬂuence does seasonality have on these relations?
• How do the dynamical systems metrics deviate from their seasonal cycles for ex-
treme warm and cold temperatures in Denmark in the boreal winter and summer,
and what is the physical interpretation of these links?
• By conditioning on extreme high and low re-recurrence values in northern Europe
in the boreal winter and summer respectively, is it possible to recover extreme
temperatures in Denmark?
1.1
Thesis Outline
The structure of the thesis is as follows:
• In Chapter 2, the mathematical foundations of dynamical systems theory for ex-
treme events will be presented, on which the methodology of the thesis is based.
Page 2 of 91
==PAGE:10==
1
INTRODUCTION
The connection between ergodic theory and chaos will be explored, and it will
be argued why we can use ergodic results to study the chaotic behaviour of the
atmosphere. Further, results from extreme value theory are introduced, and ﬁ-
nally local properties of a chaotic attractor will be introduced and connected to
extreme value theory.
• In Chapter 3, the data, study area, and methodology are presented. The algo-
rithms to compute the dynamical metrics will be presented, and the procedures
to deﬁne extremes and anomalies are outlined.
• In Chapter 4, we present the results for our case in northern Europe/ Denmark,
answering the three given research questions.
• In Chapter 5, the results and the applied method will be discussed, and we will
furthermore present perspectives for future research.
• In Chapter 6, the conclusions of the thesis will be summarized.
• In Appendix A, Python code will be provided.
Page 3 of 91
==PAGE:11==
2
MATHEMATICAL FRAMEWORK
2
Mathematical Framework
In this chapter, we will present the mathematical foundations of dynamical systems
theory for extreme events, on which our methodology to study compound events is
based.
First, we will explore dynamical systems and chaos theory from the point
of view of ergodic theory, allowing us to study deterministic systems using statistics.
Next, we will review some important results from extreme value theory ﬁrst from a
classical setting and subsequently from a dynamical setting. Lastly, a method to study
local properties of a dynamical attractor is presented for a speciﬁc class of dynamical
systems, Axiom A systems, which has shown to be useful for the characterization of
extreme climate events.
2.1
Dynamical Systems and Ergodic Theory
Dynamical systems theory is the mathematical formalization of the study of the be-
haviour of a system over time. Any man-made or natural system, subject to change,
can be described as a dynamical system, and therefore dynamical systems play a vital
role in predicting real-world situations. A dynamical system consists of a phase space,
in which all possible states are represented as points, and a rule, determining all fu-
ture states either deterministically or stochastically [27]. In the continuous case, the
dynamical rule is usually described by diﬀerential equations, while in the discrete case,
the next iteration of a state is described by a mapping rule.
Atmospheric circulation is chaotic by nature, and the general assumption is that the
dynamics of climate data will settle on a strange chaotic attractor [32]. In a chaotic
system, the long-term behaviour is impossible to determine from an initial value due to
sensitivity to initial conditions. However, using ergodic theory, which is concerned with
the statistical behaviour of a dynamical system over a long time-period, it is possible
to predict the average behaviour. Originally, ergodic theory and chaos theory emerged
independently as two diﬀerent ﬁelds, with a focus on respectively the topological prop-
erties and the statistical properties of dynamical systems. However, the two ﬁelds have
converged over the years, creating fruitful results for both mathematicians and physi-
cists to study the atmosphere.
Chaos theory is the study of certain deterministic dynamical system that show appar-
ent random behaviour in the long run. The ﬁrst pioneer in chaos theory was Henri
Poincar´e, who in the late 1900’th century found that even the smallest changes in his
initial conditions in the three body problem would lead to vastly diﬀerent trajectories
[41]. However, the phenomenon of chaotic behaviour did not get its oﬃcial name until
much later in the 1960’s when Edward Lorenz discovered chaos in his model for weather
forecasting [31]. He demonstrated that diﬀerences in his initial values would amplify
in an exponential manner, contradicting the until then accepted assumption that small
diﬀerences in initial conditions lead to small diﬀerences in the results. Lorenz, further-
Page 4 of 91
==PAGE:12==
2
MATHEMATICAL FRAMEWORK
more, discovered that all trajectories in his system would ultimately settle on a strange
geometrical structure in phase space, imitating a butterﬂy pattern.
Ergodic theory has its roots in the statistics of thermodynamics and was ﬁrst introduced
by Ludwig Boltzmann in 1909 with his hypothesis that the time a particle spends in
some region in phase space will in the long run be proportional to the volume that this
region occupies in phase space [6]. The mathematical foundations of ergodic theory is
usually ascribed to George Birkhoﬀand John von Neumann that almost simultaneously
in the 1930’s proved slightly diﬀerent versions of the celebrated ergodic theorem, based
on the study of measure-preserving dynamical systems [5, 40]. As ergodic theory has
evolved from thermodynamics, originally the theory has been applied to the study of
conservative systems, i.e. volume-preserving systems of phase space. However, with the
introduction of the Sinai-Ruelle-Bowen (SRB) measure [14], ergodic theory has shown
to also have physical relevance for certain chaotic and dissipative, i.e. non-conservative,
systems such as the atmosphere.
Ergodic theory takes its starting point in measure theory. A measure-theoretic approach
to deterministic dynamical systems will therefore be adopted.
2.1.1
Measure-Preserving Dynamical Systems
In ergodic theory, a dynamical system is a probability space equipped with a measure-
preserving transformation. We have the following deﬁnition [3].
Deﬁnition 2.1. A dynamical system is a quartet (X, B, µ, T) where
• X is a non-empty set, called the phase-space.
• B is a σ-algebra on the set X.
• µ : B →[0, ∞) is a probability measure on (X, B), i.e. µ(X) = 1.
• T : X →X is a measurable function, i.e. A ∈B ⇒T −1(A) ∈B, such that the
measure µ is invariant under T, i.e. µ(T −1(A)) = µ(A) for all A ∈B.
In the denotion of a dynamical system, we may omit the σ-algebra B and write the
system as a triplet (X, µ, T).
The measurable function T will be interpreted as the evolution rule, determining the
position in phase space of an initial value ω ∈X after one time unit. Thus, T i(ω) is the
position after time i. The probabilistic interpretation of the measure µ of a measurable
subset A ∈B is that it is the probability with which the trajectories in phase space
visit A. The requirement of µ being T-invariant ensures that the probability of an event
does not depend on the time step. Indeed, the T-invariance implies that the probability
of an event A ∈B at the initial time, µ(A), is the same as the probability at time i,
Page 5 of 91
==PAGE:13==
2
MATHEMATICAL FRAMEWORK
namely µ(T −i(A)) = µ({ω ∈X | T i(ω) ∈A}).
An important result from ergodic theory is the Poincar´e Recurrence Theorem. Using
the T-invariance of µ, the theorem ensures that almost all trajectories will return to a
state close to their starting point inﬁnitely often [3].
Theorem 2.1. (Poincar´e Recurrence Theorem) Let (X, µ, T) be a dynamical system,
and let A ∈B with µ(A) > 0. Then almost every point ω ∈A will return to A inﬁnitely
often.
Proof. We will show that there exists a set B ⊆A such that µ(A) = µ(B) and if ω ∈B
then there exists a sequence of natural number 0 < n1 < n2 < · · · such that ω returns
to A after ni iterations of T for all i ∈N.
First we deﬁne AN = S∞
n=N T −nA for each natural number N ≥0. We observe that if
ω ∈T∞
N=0 AN, then ω must hit A inﬁnitely often. Indeed, it follows that ω ∈A1, and
thus there exists n1 > 0 such that T n1(ω) ∈A. Furthermore, for some N2 > n1 we also
have ω ∈AN2, and thus there exists n2 > n1 such that T n2(ω) ∈A. Proceeding this
way, we ﬁnd an inﬁnite sequence 0 < n1 < n2 < · · · such that T ni(ω) ∈A for all i.
Letting B = A ∩(T∞
N=0 AN), we have obtained a subset B ⊆A such that each element
in B returns to A inﬁnitely often.
To show that A and B are equal almost everywhere, we ﬁrst note that T −1(AN) = AN+1.
So by the measure-preserving property of T, we have µ(AN) = µ(AN+1), and thus
µ(AN) = µ(A0) for any N ≥0. Since we furthermore have A ⊆A0 and A0 ⊇A1 ⊇
A2 ⊇· · · , we get
µ
 
A \
∞
\
N=0
AN
!
≤µ
 
A0 \
∞
\
N=0
AN
!
= µ
 ∞
[
N=0
A0 \ AN
!
≤
∞
X
N=0
µ(A0 \ AN) =
∞
X
N=0
µ(A0) −µ(AN) = 0.
Hence, µ(A \ B) = µ (A \ T∞
N=0 AN) = 0.
The Poincar´e Recurrence Theorem may be useless if the measure µ is without physical
meaning. An example of such an invariant measure is the Dirac measure for a ﬁxed
point ω, i.e. T(ω) = ω, given by
δω(A) =
(
1,
ω ∈A
0,
ω /∈A
with A ∈B. As all sets, not containing ω, will have measure zero with respect to this
measure, the Poincar´e Recurrence Theorem does not reveal any interesting information
Page 6 of 91
==PAGE:14==
2
MATHEMATICAL FRAMEWORK
on the recurrence properties.
For conservative systems, the natural invariant measure to be considered is explicitly
given in relation to the Lebesgue measure of phase space. We will see that for the
special class of dynamical systems with the so-called Axiom A property, the measure
can also be related to the Lebesgue measure.
2.1.2
Ergodicity and Observables
The intuition behind an ergodic system is that we cannot compose the system into
multiple parts.
If trajectories in the system stay within some subset of the phase
space, then this subset must equal the total phase space almost everywhere or have
zero measure. We can formalize this with the following deﬁnition.
Deﬁnition 2.2. For a dynamical system (X, µ, T), we say that T is ergodic with respect
to the measure µ if for every A ∈B,
T −1(A) = A ⇒µ(A) = 0 ∨µ(A) = 1.
If a dynamical system is not ergodic, it can by deﬁnition be decomposed into several
diﬀerent invariant parts of phase space. A non-ergodic system might therefore be inter-
preted as a ”superposition” of ergodic measures, and we might therefore assume that
a system is ergodic [14].
Together with the Poincar´e Recurrence Theorem, the following result ensures that, for
an ergodic dynamical system, almost all ω ∈X will hit every set A ∈B with µ(A) > 0
inﬁnitely often.
Theorem 2.2. If (X, µ, T) is ergodic and µ(A) > 0 for some A ∈B, then almost every
trajectory will hit A.
Proof. Let B ∈B be the set of all trajectories, following initial values both forward
and backward in time, such that B ∩A = ∅. We wish to show that µ(B) = 0. Clearly,
T −1(B) = B, so by the ergodicity of the system, either µ(B) = 0 or µ(B) = 1. If
µ(B) = 1, then since A and B are assumed disjoint, we have µ(A ∪B) = 1 + µ(A) > 1
by the σ-additivity of the measure. This is a contradiction since µ is a probability
measure. Hence, µ(B) = 0.
An important advantage of ergodic theory is that we can perceive a deterministic dy-
namical system as a generator of random variables. To formalize this, we need the
deﬁnition of an observable function.
Deﬁnition 2.3. An observable of a dynamical system (X, µ, T) is a measurable function
φ : X →R ∪{∞} such that φ ∈L1(µ), i.e.
R
X |φ|dµ < ∞.
Page 7 of 91
==PAGE:15==
2
MATHEMATICAL FRAMEWORK
For a given observable φ, we will consider a stochastic process given by the sequence
Xi = φ ◦T i. Recalling the deﬁnition of a random variable, the probability of an event
E ⊆R ∪{∞} is given by
P(Xi ∈E) = µ
 
ω ∈X | φ ◦T i(ω) ∈E
	
.
We note that the invariance of T ensures that the process is identically distributed and
stationary.
A key result for ergodic systems is Birkholﬀ’s Ergodic Theorem [5] which guarantees
that the time-average of an observable tends to the space-average of the observable as
we let time run to inﬁnity. The theorem is thus the equivalence of the law of large
numbers for dynamical systems.
Theorem 2.3. (Birkhoﬀ’s Ergodic Theorem) Let (X, µ, T) be an ergodic dynamical
system and φ : X →R ∪{∞} an observable function. Then for almost every ω ∈X,
we have
1
n
n
X
i=1
φ ◦T i(ω) −−−→
n→∞
Z
φ dµ.
(2.1)
Although Birkhoﬀ’s Ergodic Theorem ensures convergence to the mean, it does not
inform on other statistical properties of the random variables Xi. Later in this thesis,
certain dependence conditions will be presented, guaranteeing a so-called extreme value
law (EVL) to study extremal statistics of Xi.
2.1.3
Chaos Theory and Sinai-Bowen-Ruelle Measures
The deﬁnition of chaotic behaviour of a deterministic dynamical system is not unique.
However, certain properties are generally understood to be fulﬁlled for a chaotic system.
We will adopt a topological approach to the deﬁnition of a chaotic system [12], and for
this reason we will in the following omit the measure µ in the denotion of a dynamical
system.
Deﬁnition 2.4. A dynamical system (X, T) is said to be chaotic if the following three
properties hold:
• Sensitive dependence on initial conditions
T : X →X has sensitive dependence on initial conditions if there exists δ > 0
such that, for any ω ∈X and any neighbourhood U of ω, there exists η ∈X and
n ≥0 such that |T n(ω) −T n(η)| > δ.
• Topological transitivity
T : X →X is topologically transitive if, for any open sets U, V ⊂X, there exists
an n > 0 such that T n(U) ∩V ̸= ∅.
Page 8 of 91
==PAGE:16==
2
MATHEMATICAL FRAMEWORK
• Density of periodic points
The set P ⊂X of periodic points is dense in X if for any ω ∈X and any
neighbourhood U of ω, U ∩P ̸= ∅.
Sensitive dependence to initial conditions is probably the condition most often associ-
ated with chaotic behaviour. It means that for any given initial condition, it is possible
to ﬁnd another initial condition arbitrarily close, such that the trajectories will diﬀer
with a certain amount in the future. Hence, the trajectories will diverge from each
other, thus making it impossible to predict future states accurately after a certain time
horizon with just small errors in initial states. The second property, topological tran-
sitivity, means that any open set will visit any other open set in phase space. Thus,
points will not stay local but will be ﬂung out to all other areas in phase space. Finally,
the last condition that periodic points should be dense in phase space implies that for
any point in phase space, there is a periodic point arbitrarily close to it. Although it
might seem contradictory, this element of regularity results in a lot of aperiodic be-
haviour in phase space since any point will be surrounded by inﬁnitely many unstable
periodic points.
The geometrical butterﬂy structure that Lorenz discovered is an example of a strange
attractor. The attractor of a dynamical system is the set in phase space towards the
trajectories tend to settle. The attractor of a chaotic system is often a strange geo-
metric structure on which the dynamics seem to happen randomly. Although the term
”strange attractor” was originally introduced to denote an attractor with fractal struc-
ture, the term is today generally considered to denote any attractor of a chaotic system
[43, 1].
As the climate system is a chaotic system with non-conservative forces, we are in this
thesis not concerned with attractors of conservative systems.
On the contrary, the
focus will be on attractors of dissipative systems, where the volume in phase space,
with respect to the Lebesgue measure, is contracted over time. Speciﬁcally, we are
interested in whether it is possible to ﬁnd an invariant probability measure, supported
on the chaotic attractor, with physical meaning. This leads us to the following deﬁnition
of a Sinai-Ruelle-Bowen measure [14, 2].
Deﬁnition 2.5. We say that an ergodic measure µ is physical or a Sinai-Ruelle-Bowen
(SRB) measure if there exists a set S ⊂X with Lebesgue measure λ(S) > 0 such
that for all initial values ω ∈S, the time average of an observable function φ equals
asymptotically the space average,
1
n
n
X
i=1
φ ◦T i(ω) −−−→
n→∞
Z
φ dµ.
(2.2)
As already exempliﬁed with the Dirac measure in Section 2.1.1, there are many in-
variant measures which are not of physical relevance. We note that Equation (2.2) is
Page 9 of 91
==PAGE:17==
2
MATHEMATICAL FRAMEWORK
identical to Equation (2.1) in Birkhoﬀ’s Ergodic Theorem. However, the theorem is not
suﬃcient to guarantee that there exists a positive Lebesgue measure set S ⊂X such
that the equality holds for all elements of S. Indeed, for a singular invariant probability
measure µ with respect to the Lebesque measure λ, i.e. there exist A, B ∈B such that
A = X\B and µ(A) = λ(B) = 0, the equality holds for almost every ω ∈X if it holds
for all ω ∈B since B = X\A and µ(A) = 0. However, B is of Lebegue measure zero,
λ(B) = 0.
The existence of an SRB measure is hard to prove in practice, and it is in general not
known whether such a measure exists. However, for so-called Axiom A systems, it has
been proved that there is a unique SRB measure, supported on the attractor [14]. To
deﬁne an Axiom A dynamical system, we need the notions of a wandering point and
hyperbolicity of a set. In the following, we will consider phase space X in a dynamical
system (X, µ, T) to be a compact manifold.
Deﬁnition 2.6. Given a compact manifold X with T : X →X, we say that a point
ω ∈X is wandering if there is a neighbourhood U of ω such that U ∩T kU = ∅for all
k large enough. The set of points that are not wandering is called the non-wandering
set and denoted by Ω(T).
We note that the non-wandering set Ωconsists of all points that will return to a small
neighbourhood of itself inﬁnitely often. These points are interesting since the measure
µ is supported on Ω. Indeed, by Poincar´e Recurrence Theorem, a measure-preserving
dynamical system cannot have wandering sets of positive measure, and so the set of all
wandering points Ωhas measure zero, µ(Ω) = 0. Hence, µ(Ω) = 1.
The deﬁnition of a hyperbolic set generalizes the deﬁnition of a hyperbolic ﬁxed point,
which is a ﬁxed point with no center manifold and only a stable and an unstable
manifold.
We can also deﬁne stable, unstable and center manifolds for points that
are not ﬁxed points [14]. A hyperbolic set can intuitively be understood as a set of
points with tangent spaces that can be split into a contracting stable manifold and an
expanding unstable manifold that vary continuously. To deﬁne a hyperbolic set, we
need the notion of the tangent map DωT from the tangent space at ω to the tangent
space at T(ω), which is a linear approximation of the ﬂow near ω. For X = Rn, the
tangent map is the Jacobian linearization.
Deﬁnition 2.7. Let Λ ⊂X be closed and T-invariant. We say that Λ is a hyperbolic
set if for all ω ∈Λ, the tangent space at ω can be split into a stable linear subspace E−
ω
and an unstable linear subspace E+
ω , depending continuously on ω and preserved under
the tangent map, DωTE−
ω = E−
Tω and DωTE+
ω = E+
Tω, such that there exist constants
C > 0 and Θ > 1 such that the following holds
• ∥DωT nη∥≤CΘ−n∥η∥for all η ∈E−
ω and n ≥0,
• ∥DωT −nη∥≤CΘ−n∥η∥for all η ∈E−
ω and n ≥0.
Page 10 of 91
==PAGE:18==
2
MATHEMATICAL FRAMEWORK
With these two deﬁnitions, we are ﬁnally ready to deﬁne an Axiom A dynamical system.
Deﬁnition 2.8. We say that a dynamical system (X, µ, T) is an Axiom A dynamical
system if the non-wandering set Ω(T) is hyperbolic and if the periodic points of T are
dense in Ω(T).
Gallavotti and Cohen proposed in 1995 the hypothesis that chaotic dynamical systems
with many degrees of freedom behave essentially as Axiom A systems [23]. Therefore,
atmospheric systems are generally assumed to be Axiom A systems with a unique SRB
measure, supported on the chaotic attractor [13, 34]. Our methodology will be based
on this assumption, and we will later in the thesis consider a stochastic process to be
generated by the atmosphere as a dynamical system with a SRB measure and a given
observable.
2.2
Extreme Value Theory
This subsection is largely inspired by the textbook on extremes in dynamical systems
by Lucarini et al. (2016) [36].
In order to study extremes, we ﬁrst need to clarify what we mean by an extreme event.
Given a random variable X, we will say that an event A is extreme when it is large and
has a low probability P(A). We note that by changing the sign of X, this deﬁnition
is equivalent to extremes being events with small values and low probability. We will
study extremes by considering the tail of the distribution of a random variable X.
The two dominant approaches to studying extremes in the classical extreme value the-
ory are the block maxima (BM) method and the peaks over threshold (POT) method.
We consider a stochastic process X0, X1, . . . of identically distributed random variables
and deﬁne a new random variable as the maximum of the ﬁrst n variables for n ﬁxed,
Mn = max{X0, · · · , Xn−1}.
The BM method is the method of ﬁtting the distribution of Mn for large n by dividing
a long time series into k blocks of length n and taking the maximum of each block. How
does such a distribution look? In order to answer this question, we want to examine
whether we can normalize Mn in such a way that the normalized process has a limit
distribution for n →∞. This leads to the following deﬁnition.
Deﬁnition 2.9. We say that we have an extreme value law (EVL) if there is a contin-
uous function H : R →[0, 1] with H(0) = 0, so that for each τ > 0 there is a sequence
un(τ), such that the following two conditions are satisﬁed:
• nP(Xi > un(τ)) −−−→
n→∞τ
(2.3)
Page 11 of 91
==PAGE:19==
2
MATHEMATICAL FRAMEWORK
• P(Mn ≤un(τ)) −−−→
n→∞H(τ)
(2.4)
where H(τ) = 1 −H(τ) is the complementary cumulative distribution function of τ.
In the POT method, extremes are studied by considering the conditional distribution
of X given that X exceeds a high threshold T. For i.i.d random variables, we will see
that the BM method and the POT method are equivalent. The classical approach to
studying extreme events is of pure statistical nature. Although we will perceive the
atmosphere as a deterministic dynamical system, we will see that the classical results
from extreme value theory to a large extent can be applied to a stochastic process,
generated by the atmospheric system.
2.2.1
Independent and Identically Distributed Variables
When considering a stochastic process, generated by a deterministic dynamical system,
as introduced in Section 2.1.2, it is clear that the random variables will not be inde-
pendent. Indeed, Xi+1 can be determined deterministically from Xi by the evolution
rule T. However, we will start by considering the classical theory for an independent
and identically distributed (i.i.d.) process.
We assume that X0, X1, . . . are i.i.d. Thus, if an EVL exists, the following holds:
P(Mn ≤un(τ)) = P(Xi ≤un(τ))n = (1 −P(Xi > un(τ)))n ∼

1 −τ
n
n
−−−→
n→∞e−τ.
Hence, H(τ) = 1 −e−τ is the cumulative exponential distributional function.
To ﬁnd a family of limit distribution in the i.i.d. case, we let the normalizing sequence
un be of the form
un = y
an
+ bn,
(2.5)
where an and bn are normalizing sequences with an > 0 for all values of n and y ∈R.
Thus, we can write P(Mn ≤un(τ)) as P(an(Mn −bn) ≤y).
The Extremal Types
Theorem, due to Fischer and Tippet [19], states that if an EVL exists with normalizing
sequences given in this way, then the limit distribution must be either a Gumbel, Fr´echet
or Weibull distribution.
Theorem 2.4. (Extremal Types Theorem) If X0, X1, . . . are i.i.d. stochastic variables,
then if there exist normalizing sequences an, bn with an > 0 such that
P(an(Mn −bn) ≤y) −−−→
n→∞G(y),
the distribution G must be on the form G(y) = e−τ(y) with τ(y) given as one of the
three following types:
Page 12 of 91
==PAGE:20==
2
MATHEMATICAL FRAMEWORK
• Type 1 (Gumbel):
τ1(y) = e−y, y ∈R
• Type 2 (Fr´echet):
τ2(y) = y−β, y > 0
• Type 3 (Weibull):
τ3(y) = (−y)γ, y ≤0
where β, γ > 0 are parameters.
The three distribution types can be combined into one distribution called the General-
ized Extreme Value (GEV) distribution, deﬁned as
GEVξ(y) =
(
e−(1+ξy)−1/ξ,
1 + ξy > 0,
if ξ ̸= 0
e−ey,
y ∈R,
if ξ = 0.
(2.6)
The parameter ξ is called the shape parameter, and determines the shape of the tail
of the distribution. When ξ = 0, we have a Gumbel distribution which is exponential
tailed. When ξ is positive, we have a Fr´echet distribution which is heavy tailed, and
ﬁnally when ξ is negative, we have a Weibull distribution which is upper bounded.
We note that for n large enough, the distribution of the maximum follows asymptotically
a GEV distribution. We write
P(Mn ≤y) −−−→
n→∞GEVξ
y −β(n)
σ

(2.7)
where β(n) ∈R is a location parameter, depending on the value of n, and σ > 0 is a
scale parameter.
The BM method is a very data-consuming approach to studying extreme values, and in
many cases the POT approach is preferred when data is not very clustered. Although
the BM and POT methods do not lead to the same probability distributions at the
limit, the following result shows that in the i.i.d.
case, the limit distributions are
directly related.
Theorem 2.5. Assume that X0, X1, . . . are i.i.d., and let F be the cumulative dis-
tribution function of X0. Then Mn follows a GEV distribution with shape parameter
ξ and scale parameter σ if and only if for T →sup{s : F(s) < 1}, we have that
Page 13 of 91
==PAGE:21==
2
MATHEMATICAL FRAMEWORK
FT(y) = P(X0 −T ≤y | X0 > T) converges uniformly to the Generalized Pareto
Distribution (GPD), given by
GPDξ
y
σ

= 1 + log

GEVξ
y
σ

=
(
1 −
 1 + ξy
σ
−1/ξ ,
y ≥0, 1 + ξy
σ > 0,
if ξ ̸= 0
1 −e−y
σ ,
y ≥0,
if ξ = 0.
We note that the GPD does not have a location parameter β(n) since it is the distri-
bution of the exceedances of the threshold T, i.e. T is subtracted from the random
variable X0.
2.2.2
Extremal Index and Correlated Processes
We will now consider a stationary stochastic process of random variables that are not
necessarily independent. For a dependent process, an EVL will still exist under some
good dependence structure, assuring asymptotic dependence and control of the degree
of clustering. Leadbetter ﬁrst proposed two conditions D(un) and D′(un), guaranteeing
an EVL of the same form as in the i.i.d. settings [29]. Later, the second condition has
been weakened by Chernick et al. [7] with the condition Dm(u), introducing a so-called
extremal index in the EVL.
We ﬁrst introduce the concept of an extremal index, quantifying the tendency of a
stationary process to form clusters, i.e. multiple large events occurring consecutively.
Deﬁnition 2.10. We say that a stationary stochastic process X0, X1, . . . has an ex-
tremal index, 0 ≤θ ≤1 if the process has an EVL with limit distribution H(τ) = e−θτ.
When the extremal index θ is close to 0, then the clustering intensity of the process is
high. On the other hand, the closer θ is to 1, the lower will the memory of the system
be, and almost no clusters will be observed.
We will now deﬁne the two mixing conditions D(u) and Dm(u) on asymptotic inde-
pendence and the intensity of clustering respectively. In the following, we denote by
Fi1,...,ip(u) the joint distribution of the stochastic variables Xi1, . . . , Xip where we let
Fi1,...,ip(u) = Fi1,...,ip(u, . . . , u).
Deﬁnition 2.11. We say that the condition D(un) is satisﬁed for the stationary process
X0, X1, . . . if for all p, q ∈N and i1 < · · · < ip < j1 < · · · < jq with j1 −ip > t and all
n ∈N suﬃciently large,
|Fi1,··· ,ip,j1,··· ,jq(un) −Fi1··· ,ip(un)Fj1,··· ,jq(un)| ≤α(n, t)
where α(n, tn) →0 for some sequence tn, satisfying tn = O(n).
Page 14 of 91
==PAGE:22==
2
MATHEMATICAL FRAMEWORK
Deﬁnition 2.12. Let M1,m−1 = max{X1, · · · Xm−1} if m > 1, and M1,m−1 = −∞
if m = 1. We say that the condition D(m)(un) is satisﬁed for the stationary process
X0, X1, . . . if there exist sequences {kn}n∈N and {tn}n∈N with kn →∞, limn→∞knα(n, tn) =
0 and kntn = O(n) for α(n, t) as in Deﬁnition 2.11, such that
lim
n→∞n
⌊n
kn ⌋
X
j=m+1
P(X0 > un ≥M1,m−1, Xj−1 > un) = 0.
When m = 1, the condition is equivalent to Leadbetter’s second condition, and we de-
note it by D′(un). In this special case, the stochastic process does not show any cluster
pattern.
With the two mixing conditions deﬁned, we are ready to state the theorem that an
EVL with an extremal index exists under these conditions [7].
Theorem 2.6. Suppose that for some m ≥1, D(un) and D(m)(un) are satisﬁed for a
sequence {un}n∈N as in equation (2.3). Then, Mn satisﬁes an EVL with H(τ) = 1−e−θτ
and the extremal index θ is given by O’Brien’s formula,
θ = lim
n→∞
µ(X0 ≥un, maxi=1,...,m Xi < un)
µ(X0 ≥un)
.
We note that when the process does not produce clusters, i.e. when θ = 1, then the
equivalence of the two methods BM and POT given in Theorem 2.5 is still valid. How-
ever, when θ < 1 this is not generally true.
Finally, we note that the Extremal Types Theorem also applies to a stationary stochas-
tic process, fulﬁlling the conditions D(un) and D(m)(un). Indeed, if G⋆(y) is the limit
distribution in the EVL for the i.i.d. sequence X⋆
0, X⋆
1 . . . with the same parent distri-
bution as X0, X1, . . . , then the limit distribution of the EVL for X0, X1, . . . is given as
G(y) = (G⋆(y))θ [30]. Hence, the maximum random variable Mn also follows a GEV
distribution asymptotically when an extremal index exists. For example, for type 1 in
Theorem 2.4, corresponding to a Gumbel distribution, we obtain G(y) = e−θe−y. Notic-
ing that θe−y = e−(y−log θ), we see that this corresponds to evaluating τ1 at y −log θ.
So letting β and σ be the location and scale parameters in the dependent case with an
extremal index, equation (2.7) implies
P(Mn ≤y) −−−→
n→∞GEVξ=0
y −β
σ
−log θ

= GEVξ=0
y −(β + σ log θ)
σ

.
If β⋆and σ⋆denote the parameters in the i.i.d case, we obtain the relations β⋆=
β + σ log θ and σ⋆= σ for ξ = 0. Similar relations can be obtained for the Frechet and
Weibull types distributions when ξ ̸= 0.
Page 15 of 91
==PAGE:23==
2
MATHEMATICAL FRAMEWORK
2.2.3
Extreme Value Law for Dynamical Systems
We will now move away from the classical setting of extreme value theory and consider
a stochastic process X0, X1, . . . , generated by a deterministic dynamical system and a
given observable.
The condition D(un) deﬁned in Deﬁnition 2.11 is hard to verify for dynamical systems.
Freitas and Freitas [20] have therefore proposed an alternative condition D2(un) based
on the work of Collet [8], imposing a weaker uniformity requirement which is easier
to verify for dynamical systems. Together with the condition D′(un), this condition
ensures an EVL with no clustering. These conditions have been further developed for
stationary processes with clustering, and in [36], Lucarini et al. present two conditions,
Dq(un) and D′
q(un), that guarantee an EVL with an extremal index.
For a stochastic process, generated from a deterministic dynamical system, we do not
always expect an EVL to exist with a GEV distribution at the limit. This is, indeed,
generally not the case for systems, showing periodic or quasi-periodic behaviour [35].
To obtain the desired GEV distribution, we also need to make certain assumptions on
the considered observable. For a ﬁxed state ζ in phase space, we will consider distance
observables φζ : X →R ∪{∞} on the form:
φζ(ω) = g(dist(ω, ζ)),
where dist(·, ·) is a metric on X and g : [0, ∞) →R ∪{∞} is a strictly decreasing
bijection with maximum at dist(ω, ζ) = 0, i.e. when ω = ζ.
We will only consider three classes of observables gi, i = 1, 2, 3, deﬁned to correspond to
suﬃcient and necessary conditions for when a GEV distribution is a Gumbel, Fr´echet
or Weibull distribution respectively [36]. Common examples of the three types are:
g1(r) = −log r,
(2.8)
g2(r) = r−1/α,
α > 0,
(2.9)
g3(r) = D −r1/α,
D ∈R, α > 0.
(2.10)
In the case of an Axiom A system, the conditions Dq(un) and D′
q(un) are fulﬁlled for
each of these three observables, and consequently we can assume that the maximal
random variable Mn in a stochastic process, generated by the atmospheric dynamics
and one of these observables for a ﬁxed state ζ, will follow a GEV distribution at the
limit.
Building on ergodic theory, Freitas et al. [21, 22], have shown that, instead of con-
sidering the conditions Dq(un) and D′
q(un), an alternative approach to the existence of
an EVL is to study hitting time statistics (HTS). We recall from Section 2 that, in an
ergodic system, almost all ω ∈X will hit all events with non-zero measure at some
Page 16 of 91
==PAGE:24==
2
MATHEMATICAL FRAMEWORK
point in forward time, by theorem 2.1 and theorem 2.2. This leads us to the following
deﬁnition.
Deﬁnition 2.13. Let (X, µ, T) be an ergodic dynamical system. For A ∈B, we deﬁne
the ﬁrst hitting time statistics of A, rA : X →N ∪{∞} as the ﬁrst hitting time to A
by the point ω, i.e.
rA(ω) := inf{n ∈N | T n(ω) ∈A}.
We say that the dynamical system has Hitting Time Statistics (HTS) if, for some se-
quence of sets {Un}n∈N with µ(Un) →0, the hitting times rUn converges in distribution
to a non-degenerate distribution function G under some suitable normalization.
Freitas et al. [21] proved that a dynamical system has an EVL for one of the observables
gi, i = 1, 2, 3 if and only if an exponential HTS G exists.
For certain types of dynamical systems, including Axiom A systems, HTS are known
to be exponential around almost every point. Thus, HTS statistics provide another
argument for why we can assume that an EVL exists for the climate system with a
GEV limit distribution.
The conditions Dq(un) and D′
q(un) as well as the connection between an EVL and
HTS statistics provide an argument for the BM approach to the study of extremes.
In the classical extreme value theory for i.i.d random variables, we have established
an equivalence between the GEV distribution and the GPD, using the BM and POT
approaches respectively. Such an equivalence is also valid for Axiom A systems, and
thus we will also be allowed to use the POT method for climate systems. In order to
establish this result, we will need the notion of the local dimension which will be deﬁned
in the following section.
2.3
Local Dynamical Indicators
When studying atmospheric dynamics, local properties rather than global properties
of the dynamical attractor have shown to be of importance in the characterization of
certain weather patterns linked to extreme climate events [46, 15]. The local properties
of a state ζ on the underlying attractor are determined by the indicators: the local
dimension d(ζ) and the local persistence θ−1(ζ). In the multivariate case, we will also
consider a third indicator, the local co-recurrence ratio α.
In the previous section, we have presented criteria for when the BM approach to ex-
tremes is justiﬁed for dynamical systems.
For a large class of dynamical systems,
including systems with a hyperbolic measure, the POT approach can also be applied,
considering distance observables [36]. Interestingly, these systems do not necessarily
comply with the conditions Dq(un) and D′
q(un) nor have an exponential HTS. Thus, it
Page 17 of 91
==PAGE:25==
2
MATHEMATICAL FRAMEWORK
is sometimes possible to use the POT approach in cases where there is no EVL. The
BM approach to studying extremes in dynamical systems reveals information on the
global dynamics on the attractor. Using the POT method instead, we generally loose
some global information of the dynamics on the attractor since we restrict ourselves to
the neighbourhood of a given state ζ [36]. On the contrary, the POT approach provides
a way of computing local properties of the attractor [35]. However, when the conditions
of an EVL are met and the POT approach is valid, the GPD and GEV distributions
are equivalent as in the classical i.i.d. setting. We will see that for systems with the
Axiom A property, we will indeed obtain a GPD for the exceedances of a high threshold.
In the following, we will consider distance observables given by Equations (2.8)-(2.10).
2.3.1
Local Dimension
The local dimension of the attractor of a dynamical system, ﬁrst introduced by Young
[48], can be interpreted as the number of active degrees of freedom around the given
state ζ. It is an indicator of the local predictability of the system.
Deﬁnition 2.14. At at state ζ ∈X on the attractor, we deﬁne the local dimension
d(ζ) of the measure µ as the following limit:
d(ζ) = lim
r→0
log µ(Br(ζ))
log r
,
where Br(ζ) is the open ball around ζ with radius r.
For a physical measure, the local dimension is a scaling of the measure of a ball as the
radius r goes to 0. We note that for all states ζ, the local dimension is bounded by the
dimension of phase space X.
2.3.2
Local Persistence
In Deﬁnition 2.10, the extremal index 0 ≤θ ≤1 was introduced. As already noted,
the extremal index is close to 0 when the intensity of clustering is high and close to 1
when it is low. Therefore, when considering distance observables, we can interpret the
extremal index as the inverse persistence of the state ζ, i.e. the average residence time
of a trajectory around ζ. The local persistence is an indicator of the local stability of
the system.
Deﬁnition 2.15. The local persistence at a state ζ ∈X on the attractor, is given as
the inverse extremal index θ−1(ζ).
2.3.3
Peaks over Threshold Approach for Dynamical Systems
For a random variable X, we deﬁne an exceedance z = X −T > 0, measuring how
much X exceeds a given threshold T. For a stochastic process of i.i.d. random variables,
Page 18 of 91
==PAGE:26==
2
MATHEMATICAL FRAMEWORK
Figure 1: Recurrences in phase space
Illustration of the POT approach for a simple chaotic dynamical system with a distance
observable, zooming in on two diﬀerent states. The red circle is determined by the considered
threshold, and the red points on the trajectory sections within the circle are the exceedances.
Source: Comou & De Luca (2020) [9].
the exceedances z will follow a GPD at the limit T →∞if an EVL exists, according
to Theorem 2.5. Lucarini et al. [35] have shown that it is also possible to obtain a
GPD for the exceedances in a process, generated by a dynamical system with one of
the considered distance observables, under certain assumptions on the measure. This
result holds even for systems that do not satisfy suﬃcient mixing conditions to have an
EVL.
In these settings, we have T = g(r⋆) for some unique r⋆> 0, using that g is a bijection.
For r > 0, then g(r) −g(r⋆) > 0 if and only if r < r⋆since g is strictly decreasing,
and thus all exceedances z = g(r) −T are the states within the open ball around ζ
with radius r⋆. For our stochastic process, generated by a dynamical system, we have
an exceedance whenever the distance between the state ζ and the state after time i is
less than r, i.e. when g(dist(T i(ω0), ζ)) −T > 0 for an initial value ω0. The setup is
illustrated in Figure 1 for a simple chaotic system, zoomed in on two diﬀerent states.
All the trajectory segments belong to one long trajectory, and the exceedances are the
red points on the trajectory, within the red ball around ζ. In the zoom-in to the left,
the system can evolve in many diﬀerent directions, and thus the local dimension is high,
whereas the local dimension in the zoom-in to the right is low as the surrounding trajec-
tories evolve in the same direction. We observe, furthermore, that the local persistence
is higher in the zoom-in to the right than in the one to the left, as the dynamics within
the ball evolve slower in this zoom-in.
The cumulative distribution function of an exceedance z is equal to the probability of
X0 being less than or equal to z + T, given that X0 is greater than T. Thus, by Bayes
Page 19 of 91
==PAGE:27==
2
MATHEMATICAL FRAMEWORK
Theorem, the complementary cumulative distribution function of exceedances is
P(X0 > T + z | X0 > T) = P(r < g−1(T + z) | r < g−1(T)) = P(r < g−1(T + z))
P(r < g−1(T))
.
Denoting the complementary cumulative distribution function of the exceedances by
Fg,T(z), we have in terms of the probability measure µ that
Fg,T(z) = µ(Bg−1(T+z)(ζ))
µ(Bg−1(T)(ζ)) .
(2.11)
For Axiom A systems, we can assume that
µ(Br(ζ)) = fζ(r)rd
(2.12)
where fζ(r) is a function such that limr→0
fζ(sr)
fζ(r) = 1 for s suﬃciently small [36]. Letting
s = g−1(T+z)
g−1(T) , we have s ≤1 for all values of T and z. Inserting the expression from
equation (2.11) into equation (2.12), we thus get for a high threshold T,
Fg,T(z) = fζ(sg−1(T))
fζ(g−1(T))
g−1(T + z)
g−1(T)
d
∼
g−1(T + z)
g−1(T)
d
.
By choosing g as one of the distance observables gi, i = 1, 2, 3, we obtain a GPD.
Speciﬁcally, for the observable g1(r) = −log r, we have the inverse function g−1
1 (u) =
e−u. Thus,
Fg,T(z) = 1 −
e−z−T
e−T
d
= 1 −e−dz,
which is exactly a GPD with parameters ξ = 0 and σ = 1
d, i.e. an exponential distri-
bution.
Assuming that the distribution has an extremal index, we recall from Section 2.2.2 that
the scale parameter σ is equal to the scale parameter σ⋆when the distribution does not
have an extremal index. Hence, we can estimate the local dimension, d, by estimating
the scale parameter σ in an exponential distribution. The extremal index θ, that is the
inverse persistence of the state ζ, can also be computed by the POT method, using the
S¨uveges estimator [45].
2.3.4
Local Co-Recurrence Ratio
To deﬁne the local co-recurrence ratio, we will consider two variables with k1 and k2
components respectively as part of a larger dynamical system, such that a state in
phase space is a vector of k > k1 + k2 components. We can deﬁne two observables as a
distance observable on the projection to the space, spanned by each of the two variables
respectively. Let x1, x2, . . . , xn and y1, y2, . . . , yn be realizations of stochastic processes
deﬁned from such projections around ζx and ζy respectively in the dynamical system.
We introduce the bivariate co-recurrence ratio in the following way [18].
Page 20 of 91
==PAGE:28==
2
MATHEMATICAL FRAMEWORK
Deﬁnition 2.16. The co-recurrence ratio 0 ≤α(ζ) ≤1 of a state ζ = {ζx, ζy} is deﬁned
as
α(ζ) =
Pn
i=1 1{xi>sx,yi>sy}
Pn
i=1 1{xi>sx}
,
(2.13)
where the thresholds sx and sy are large q’th quantiles of the distributions of X0
and Y0 respectively. Since q is equal for the two variables, we have Pn
i=1 1{xi>sx} =
Pn
i=1 1{yi>sy} = qn, and thus the deﬁnition of α does not depend on the order of the x-
and y-variables.
We can interpret the co-recurrence ratio as the probability of an event close to ζx in the
ﬁrst variable given an event close to ζy in the second variable (or opposite). Indeed, by
the deﬁnition of conditional probability, we have
P(Y0 > sy | X0 > sx) = P(Y0 > sy, X0 > sx)
P(X0 > sx)
≈
Pn
i=1 1{xi>sx,yi>sy}
Pn
i=1 1{xi>sx}
.
(2.14)
Hence, we will interpret the local co-recurrence ratio as a dynamical coupling between
the two variables. Due to the local nature of α in phase space, we cannot directly
compare the metric with classical statistical dependence. Instead, it is a measure of the
dependence of the two variables at a speciﬁc point in time at the state ζ. As in Faranda
et al. (2020) [18], we illustrate this in Figure 2 by plotting realizations of four Gaussian
bivariate copula distribution with diﬀerent correlations between the two variables. For
each of the realizations in all four plots, the co-recurrence ratio α is computed and in-
dicated by colour. In the copula-based approach, we would only obtain one correlation
for each plot, whereas by using the dynamical systems approach, we obtain an estimate
for the dependence between the two variables at each point. We see that in the two
ﬁrst subplots for low values of the correlation coeﬃcient (ρ = 0.5 and ρ = 0.75), the
co-recurrence ratio is close to zero everywhere. For the stronger correlation in the third
subplot (ρ = 0.9992), the co-recurrence ratio is very strong near the points (0, 0) and
(1, 1) and weaker in the center around (0.5, 0.5) where the points vary more. In the
fourth subplot with perfect dependence (ρ = 1), we obtain co-recurrence ratios equal
to 1 everywhere.
We note that the deﬁnition of the co-recurrence ratio easily can be extended to more
than two variables, although it has been deﬁned as a bivariate metric for the purpose
of this thesis.
Page 21 of 91
==PAGE:29==
3
METHODOLOGICAL FRAMEWORK
Figure 2: Co-recurrence ratio for Gaussian copula distributions
The plots show realizations of four Gaussian copula distributions. They are all constructed
from a bivariate multivariate normal distribution with mean vector µ = (0, 0)T and co-variance
matrix Σ =
1
ρ
ρ
1

, with correlation ρ = 0.5, ρ = 0.75, ρ = 0.992, and ρ = 1.0 diﬀerent in
each plot. The co-recurrence ratio α is indicated by the colour for each point.
3
Methodological Framework
In this chapter, we will ﬁrst introduce the data and study area. Thereafter, the method-
ology will be presented and referenced to the theory in Section 2, and algorithms for
computing the local dynamical metrics will be provided. Then we will introduce a phys-
ical measure, the average baroclinic vector, in order to put the analysis into a physical
context, and ﬁnally the procedures to deﬁne extremes and anomalies will be outlined.
3.1
Study Area and Data
In this thesis, we link the occurrences of extreme warm and cold days in Denmark to
the larger-scale dynamical features of atmospheric circulation and temperature. There-
fore, the dynamical system metrics are computed for a larger domain in northern Eu-
rope, whereas days with extreme warm or cold temperatures are determined from a
smaller domain, spanning most of Denmark except for the island of Bornholm. The
two considered regions are highlighted in Figure 3.
The larger domain is given by
28◦W ≤long. ≤50◦E, 50◦N ≤lat. ≤72◦N and spans all of Norway, Sweden and
Page 22 of 91
==PAGE:30==
3
METHODOLOGICAL FRAMEWORK
Figure 3: Study area
The map shows the region studied in this thesis. The blue box indicates the larger domain,
in which the dynamical metrics are computed. The smaller red box indicates the domain, in
which cold and warm extremes are deﬁned.
Finland to the north, Iceland to the west, Great Britain and the northern part of Ger-
many to the south and the western part of Russia to the east. The smaller domain for
Denmark is given by 7.75◦E ≤long. ≤13◦E, 54.5◦N ≤lat. ≤59◦N.
To calculate the metrics, we use the dataset ERA5 from the European Centre for
Medium-Range Weather Forecasts, over the years 1959-2021, with a spatial resolution
of 0.25◦. The large-scale movement of air is mainly determined by diﬀerences in at-
mospheric pressure, and to quantify atmospheric circulation, we therefore consider the
variable sea level pressure (SLP). As a variable for temperature, we consider the vari-
able 2m temperature (T2M), which is the air temperature at 2 meters above the surface
of land, sea or inland waters. ERA5 data provides hourly estimates for each variable.
As we are interested in only one estimate for each day for both of the variables, we will
adopt the variable estimates at 12:00 pm as the daily values.
Finally, daily data for the North Atlantic Oscillation (NAO) index has been downloaded
from the website of the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration Climate
Prediction Center.
Data covers the same period as for the ERA5 reanalysis data,
namely the years 1959-2021.
Page 23 of 91
==PAGE:31==
3
METHODOLOGICAL FRAMEWORK
3.2
Computation of Dynamical Systems Metrics
From the ERA5 dataset, we are provided with two time series of grid points for daily
SLP and daily T2M data respectively. Reorganizing both of these time series into a
vector time series with each grid point as an entry, we will consider the pair of time
series as a trajectory in phase space of a dynamical system. Adopting the terminology
from Section 2, the trajectory can be denoted as T i({ωx,0, ωy,0}). The function T is the
evolution rule, determining the position in phase space after one time unit, which for
our data is one day.
By composing the evolution rule T with an observable, we obtain a stochastic process
as described in Section 2.1.2. We can consider SLP and T2M on a ﬁxed day as a ﬁxed
state ζ = {ζx, ζy} in phase space on the underlying chaotic attractor. First, we will
consider a distance observable around ζ, deﬁned on the projection to the space, spanned
by each of the variables, as we did in the deﬁnition of the local co-recurrence ratio in
Section 2.3.4. Thus, by evaluating the distance observable on each of the time series, we
will interpret the result as a realization of two stochastic processes. We will use these
evaluations to compute the local dimensions d and the local persistences θ−1 separately
for the two variables for each time step. We call these metrics the univariate metrics.
In addition to the univariate metrics, we will also use these evaluations to compute the
local co-recurrence ratio α, which by nature is a bivariate metric.
Next, we will evaluate the distance observable on the paired time series to obtain a
realization of a stochastic process, dependent on both variables. From the evaluations,
we will compute the local co-dimension d and the local co-persistence θ−1, which are
bivariate metrics. As we do not want the bivariate metrics to be dependent on the
considered unit of SLP and T2M, we will for each ﬁxed state ζ = {ζx, ζy} normalize the
x- and y-components by dividing with a norm, depending on the distances to ζx and ζy
respectively.
For simplicity, we will in the following not use the evolution rule T of an initial state
ω0 in our notation. Instead, we will denote the time series of SLP by x(t), the time
series of T2M by y(t) and the combined time series as {x(t), y(t)} for discrete time
t = 1, 2, . . .
3.2.1
Logarithmic Return
To compute the realizations of the stochastic processes that will be used to compute
the univariate metrics and the co-recurrence ratio, we consider the time series x(t) in
the following. Without loss of generality, the method can be transferred to y(t).
For each day, we ﬁx the state ζ = {ζx, ζy} on the attractor. We deﬁne the projected
distance observable g, for the variable x, as g1 in equation (2.8), reintroduced again
Page 24 of 91
==PAGE:32==
3
METHODOLOGICAL FRAMEWORK
here as the logarithmic return,
g(x(t), ζx) = −log(dist(x(t), ζx)).
(3.1)
We use the Euclidean distance function to compute distances. We note that if we change
the unit of the time series by multiplying with a constant c, then we will obtain the
new g function, gnew as the original gorig function subtracted the term log(c). Indeed,
gnew(x(t), ζx) = −log(dist(cx(t), cζx))
= −log(cdist(x(t), ζx))
= −log(c) −log(dist(x(t), ζx))
= −log(c) + gorig(x(t), ζx).
Hence, the distribution of the evaluations of the observable will be equal up to diﬀerent
location for diﬀerent units. Speciﬁcally, if the POT method is used to study extremes,
we will obtain the same distribution since the GPD does not have a location parameter.
For computational eﬃciency, we do not compute the g-values in a for-loop for each ﬁxed
ζx but by using matrix computation. Indeed, if we let X = (xtj) be the matrix where
the entry xtj is the j’th component of x(t), we want to compute the distance between
each row in X. We note that if k is the number of components of x(t) and t1 and t2
are two diﬀerent time steps, then
dist(x(t1), x(t2))2 =
k
X
j=1
(xt1,j −xt2,j)2 =
k
X
j=1
x2
t1,j −2
k
X
j=1
xt1,jxt2,j +
k
X
j=1
x2
t2,j.
These three sums are all dot products that can be obtained from the matrix XXT as
the t1’th diagonal element, the entry in the t1’th row and t2’th column, and the t2’th
diagonal element respectively. Hence, the matrix ∆= (δt1t2) with the distance between
the t1’th and t2’th rows in X as the entrance δt1t2, is given by
∆=
q diag
 XXT
· · · diag
 XXT
−2XXT +
 diag
 XXT
· · · diag
 XXTT,
where diag
 XXT
is the vector of diagonal elements of XXT and the square root is
taken at each entry.
Finally, the diagonal elements of the distance matrix ∆are removed such that we do
not consider distances between same states. The resulting matrix provides in each row
the distances from a ﬁxed ζx to all other vectors in the time series.
Page 25 of 91
==PAGE:33==
3
METHODOLOGICAL FRAMEWORK
The algorithm to compute the g-values in the univariate case is outlined in Algorithm 1.
Algorithm 1: Computation of observable g for univariate metrics
Data: Matrix X with each vector in the time series in a row
Result: Matrix g with evaluations of the logarithmic return for ﬁxed ζ in each
row and all other vectors in the time series in each column
Compute the matrix, diag1, with each diagonal element of XXT in each row,
repeated in n columns, where n is the number of time steps;
Compute the matrix, diag2, with each diagonal element of XXT in each
column, repeated in n rows, where n is the number of time steps;
Let ∆= diag1 + XXT + diag2;
Remove diagonal elements of ∆;
Compute g = −log(∆);
3.2.2
Joint Logarithmic Return
To compute the local co-dimension and the local inverse co-persistence in the bivariate
case, we will for a ﬁxed state ζ = {ζx, ζy} deﬁne the norm ∥x∥ζx as the Euclidean norm
of the distances from ζx to all the points of the time series, projected on to the space
spanned by the x-variables. That is,
∥x∥ζx =
v
u
u
t
n
X
t=1
dist(x(t), ζx)2,
where n is the number of time steps in the time series.
We consider the normed time series
n
x(t)
∥x∥ζx ,
y(t)
∥y∥ζy
o
and deﬁne the joint logarithmic return
similar to the univariate case,
g({x(t), y(t)}, ζ) = −log

dist
 x(t)
∥x∥ζx
, y(t)
∥y∥ζy

,

ζx
∥x∥ζx
,
ζy
∥y∥ζy

= −log
 dist(x(t), ζx)
∥x∥ζx
2
+
dist(y(t), ζy)
∥y∥ζy
2!
.
As for the univariate case, we compute the joint logarithmic returns by using matrix
computation. We ﬁrst compute the distance matrices for x(t) and y(t) individually,
and then divide by the respective Euclidean norm of the distances to ζx and ζy for each
row in both of the matrices. The algorithm is outlined in Algorithm 2.
Page 26 of 91
==PAGE:34==
3
METHODOLOGICAL FRAMEWORK
Algorithm 2: Computation of observable g for multivariate metrics
Data: Matrices X and Y with each vector in each of the time series in a row.
Result: Matrix g with evaluations of the joint logarithmic return for ﬁxed ζ in
each row and all other vectors in the time series in each column
for M = X and M = Y do
Compute the matrix, diag1, with each diagonal element of MM T in each
row, repeated in n columns, where n is the number of time steps;
Compute the matrix, diag2, with each diagonal element of MM T in each
column, repeated in n rows, where n is the number of time steps;
Let ∆M = diag1 + MM T + diag2;
Compute vector Mnorm of Euclidean norms of the rows in ∆M;
Compute ∆M,norm as each row in ∆M divided element-wise by Mnorm;
Remove diagonal elements of ∆M,norm;
end
Compute g = −log(
q
∆2
X,norm + ∆2
Y,norm);
3.2.3
Local Dimension
For all of the three computed g matrices (the univariate cases for SLP and T2M and
the multivariate case), we will denote by gt,ζ the evaluation of the logarithmic return
at time step t with the state ζ ﬁxed.
In Section 2.3.3, we have shown that for a high threshold Tζ, the exceedances z(t, ζ) =
gt,ζ −Tζ, with gt,ζ > Tζ, follow approximately a GPD with shape parameter ξ = 0 and
scale parameter σ = 1
d, i.e. an exponential distribution, where d is the local dimension
at the state ζ. We will choose Tζ = s(q, ζ) to be a large q’th quantile. Other studies
have shown that a quantile q = 0.98 is suﬃciently large to provide good estimates of
the local metrics, while also ensuring a suﬃciently large sample of exceedances [11].
Obviously, the number of exceedances depends on the number of time steps in the time
series, and thus a quantile q = 0.98 will not always provide a large sample. However,
our considered time period is comparable with other studies, and thus we will consider
q = 0.98. In Figure 4, three histograms of exceedances are provided for three random
values of ζ for each of the three computed logarithmic returns g. Each of the plots are
ﬁtted to an exponential distribution which seems to ﬁt the data well.
We can estimate the local dimension of a state ζ on the attractor as the reciprocal of
the scale parameter σ. The maximum likelihood estimator of the scale parameter in
the exponential distribution is the sample mean, so we estimate d as the reciprocal of
the sample mean of the exceedances. An algorithm is provided in Algorithm 3.
Page 27 of 91
==PAGE:35==
3
METHODOLOGICAL FRAMEWORK
Figure 4: Histograms of exceedances
The histograms show exceedances gζ −s(q, ζ), with the quantile q = 0.98, for three random
ζ-values, corresponding to diﬀerent days in each subplot column. The plots at the top and
the middle correspond to g-evaluations for the variables SLP and T2M respectively, whereas
the plots at the bottom correspond to g-evaluations in the multivariate case. All plots are
ﬁtted with an exponential distribution, corresponding to a GPD with shape parameter ξ = 0.
Algorithm 3: Computation of local dimensions
Data: Matrix G with evaluations of the logarithmic return for ﬁxed ζ in each
row and all other vectors in the time series in each column, a quantile q
Result: Vector d with local dimension for each ﬁxed ζ
for each row in G do
Compute q’th quantile s;
Extract values g > s;
Compute exceedances of extracted values z = g −s;
Compute scale parameter σ = mean(z);
Compute local dimension d = 1/σ;
end
Page 28 of 91
==PAGE:36==
3
METHODOLOGICAL FRAMEWORK
3.2.4
Local Inverse Persistence
As deﬁned in Section 2.3.2, the inverse persistence at a state ζ is the extremal index
θ(ζ). We will again consider the quantile q = 0.98. The extremal index will be estimated
by S¨uveges’ maximum likelihood estimator [45], given by,
ˆθ(ζ) =
PN−1
i=1 (1 −q)Si + N −1 + NC −
rPN−1
i=1 (1 −q)Si + N −1 + NC
2
−8NC
PN−1
i=1 (1 −q)Si
2 PN−1
i=1 (1 −q)Si
,
where N is the number of exceedances, Si is the gap between the i’th and (i + 1)’th
exceedances, NC is the number of clusters, and q is the quantile, deﬁning the threshold.
The algorithm to compute the local inverse persistence is given in Algorithm 4.
Algorithm 4: Computation of local inverse persistence
Data: Matrix G with evaluations of the logarithmic return for ﬁxed ζ in each
row and all other vectors in the time series in each column, a quantile q
Result: Vector θ with local dimension for each ﬁxed ζ
for each row in G do
Compute q’th quantile s;
Find indices of {j : gj > s};
Compute vector T of inter-exceedance times ji+1 −ji;
Compute vector of gaps S = T −1;
Compute number of exceedances N;
Compute number of clusters NC = PN−1
i=1 I(Si ̸= 0);
Compute K = (1 −q) P Si;
Compute inverse persistence θ =
K+N−1+Nc−√
(K+N−1+Nc)2−8NCK
2K
;
end
3.2.5
Local Co-Recurrence Ratio
As for the local dimension and the local inverse persistence, we will use the quan-
tile q = 0.98. The co-recurrence ratio is computed by using Deﬁnition 2.16 directly,
with the evaluations of the logarithmic return on the SLP variable and T2M variable as
input. The algorithm to compute the local co-recurrence ratio α is given in Algorithm 5.
Page 29 of 91
==PAGE:37==
3
METHODOLOGICAL FRAMEWORK
Algorithm 5: Computation of the local co-recurrence ratio
Data: Matrices Gx, Gy with evaluations of the logarithmic return for ﬁxed ζx
respectively ζy in each row and all other vectors in the time series in
each column, a quantile q
Result: Vector α with local co-recurrence ratio for each ﬁxed ζ = {ζx, ζy}
for each row in {Gx, Gy} do
Compute q’th quantiles sx and sy;
Compute number of exceedances of sx, D;
Compute number of joint exceedances of sx and sy, N;
Compute α = N/D;
end
3.3
Heat Advection
In meteorology, heat advection refers to the transport of warm or cold air by wind. In
order to interpret the dynamical systems metrics in a physical sense, we will for each
time step also compute a measure for the average degree of advection. We call this
measure the average baroclinic vector.
3.3.1
Average Baroclinic Vector
If we let u be the wind vector at a grid point, then the heat advection at that grid point
is given by the advection equation as
−u · ∇(T2M),
(3.2)
where · denotes the dot product.
When the angle between the wind vector u and
the negative temperature gradient −∇(T2M) is less than 90◦, the wind blows from a
warmer region to a colder region, corresponding to warm advection. This is true exactly
when the dot product in Equation (3.2) is positive. Similarly, when the dot product is
negative, the angle between u and −∇(T2M) is greater than 90◦, and the wind blows
from a colder to a warmer region, corresponding to cold advection.
In the Northern Hemisphere, the winds of a low pressure system spirals in an anticlock-
wise direction around the pressure ﬁeld, and thus the direction of the wind vector u is
90◦anticlockwise from that of the pressure gradient ∇(SLP). Assuming for simplicity
that the length of u and ∇(SLP) are equal, we obtain from Equation (3.2) a measure
for the advection at a grid point as
−u · ∇(T2M) = −|∇(SLP)||∇(T2M)| cos

θ + 1
2π

= −|∇(SLP)||∇(T2M)| sin(θ)
= −∇(SLP) × ∇(T2M),
(3.3)
Page 30 of 91
==PAGE:38==
3
METHODOLOGICAL FRAMEWORK
where θ is the angle between the two gradients ∇(SLP) and ∇(T2M), and × denotes
the cross product of two vectors.
We will call the term in Equation (3.3) the baroclinic vector and deﬁne the average
baroclinic vector B as an area-weighted mean over all grid points in the large blue
domain in Figure 3. Letting blat,lon be the baroclinic vector at a grid point with latitude
and longitude given, we compute the area-averaged mean as
B = −∇(SLP) × ∇(T2M) =
P
lat,lon wlatblat,lon
P
lat,lon wlat
,
where the weights are given as wlat = cos
  lat
180π

.
When B < 0, the domain is characterized by negative advection on average in the
domain, whereas B > 0 implies positive advection on average. An average baroclinic
vector close to zero corresponds to the isolines of SLP and T2M being aligned, and thus
advection will be limited.
The algorithm to compute the average baroclinic vector is given in Algorithm 6.
Algorithm 6: Computation of average baroclinic vector
Data: 3d array SLP and 3d array T2M with time steps in ﬁrst dimension,
latitude in second dimension and longitude in third dimension, vector of
latitudes lat.
Result: Vector B with the average baroclinic vector for each time step
for each time step do
for each grid point do
Compute gradient ∇(SLP) and gradient ∇(T2M);
Compute blat,lon = −∇(SLP) × ∇(T2M);
end
Compute vector of weights w = cos
  lat
180π

;
Compute B =
P
lat,lon wlatblat,lon
P
lat,lon wlat
;
end
3.4
Deﬁnition of Extremes and Anomalies
To answer the research questions, we need to deﬁne what an extreme warm or cold day
in Denmark is, and further how the dynamical metrics and the variables SLP and T2M
deviate from their respective seasonal cycles. In the following, we will ﬁrst consider
extreme temperatures in the smaller domain, and next we will again zoom out to the
larger domain to deﬁne anomalies.
Page 31 of 91
==PAGE:39==
3
METHODOLOGICAL FRAMEWORK
3.4.1
Extreme Warm and Cold Temperature
In the smaller domain, we deﬁne cold and warm extremes relative to a daily climatol-
ogy, using a procedure similar to Messori et al. [39]. We ﬁrst ﬁnd anomalies for each
grid point, and then take an area-weighted average to obtain anomalies for the whole
domain. Due to the high heat capacity of water compared to land, the air temperature
over bodies of water is much diﬀerent from air temperature over land. As we are con-
cerned with extreme temperatures over land, we will only include grid points on land
in the computation of the area-averaged anomalies.
The temperature in the region has experienced an increasing trend in the considered
time period due to climate change. In order to not only consider cold extremes in the
ﬁrst part of the period and warm extremes in the last part of the period, we therefore
compute the daily climatology in a 9-year running window. E.g., for the 1st of January
2000, we obtain a climatological value at a grid point as the average value at that grid
point for every 1st of January from 1996 to 2004. For the ﬁrst 9 years of the consid-
ered period, we ﬁx the window and compute the climatological values as the seasonal
average over the ﬁrst 9 years. In a similar manner, we ﬁx the window in the last 9
years of the period. Finally, the daily climatology for each grid point is smoothed with
a 21-day running mean. Again using the 1st of January 2000 as an example, we obtain
the smoothed climatology at a grid point as the average value of the non-smoothed
climatology every day in the period 22nd of December 1999 to the 10th of January
2000. For each day, the temperature anomalies at each grid point is then computed
as the temperature on that speciﬁc day subtracted its smoothed climatology. We note
that for simplicity, all leap days, the 29th of February, are excluded from the analysis.
To compute the anomalies for the whole domain, we weight the grid point anomalies
by area since the distance between the grid points decreases with the latitudes, the
further north or south we move from equator. We compute the area-averaged mean of
the temperature anomalies similarly to the average baroclinic vector, namely as
xlat,lon =
P
lat,lon wlatxlat,lon
P
lat,lon wlat
,
where the weights are given as wlat = cos
  lat
180π

, and xlat,lon is the temperature anomaly
at a ﬁxed land grid point.
We deﬁne an extreme temperature according to the distribution of the area-averaged
anomalies in the boreal summer (June, July, August - JJA) and in the boreal winter
(December, January, February - DJF) respectively. Given a high quantile ψ, we deﬁne
warm extremes as values above ψ and cold extremes as values below 1 −ψ. In the
analysis, we will vary the degree of extremeness by varying the quantile ψ.
Page 32 of 91
==PAGE:40==
3
METHODOLOGICAL FRAMEWORK
3.4.2
Anomalies of Metrics and Variables
The dynamical metrics and the average baroclinic vector are computed for each day in
the considered period. In order to study how they diﬀer on days with extreme warm
or cold temperature in Denmark, we will compute the anomalies as deviations from
their respective seasonal cycle. The seasonal cycle of a metric or the average baroclinic
vector is obtained as the average over all years in the period, keeping days over the year
ﬁxed. As for the computation of temperature anomalies, we note that we omit leap days.
In the results, we will present geographical plots of the composite SLP anomalies and
composite T2M anomalies respectively, both in the summer and in the winter months.
These plots will be computed as anomaly means in each grid point, in the larger domain
in northern Europe, for days with extreme co-recurrence values or extreme temperature
values. Days with extreme temperature correspond to days with the 10% warmest and
10% coldest days in Denmark, as deﬁned above in Section 3.4.1, whereas extreme co-
recurrences correspond to the 10% highest and 10% lowest deviations of the α-value
from its seasonal cycle. As for the metrics, the anomalies of SLP and T2M at each
grid point are computed as deviations from their seasonal cycle, with the seasonal
cycle obtained by averaging over all years. Thus, we do not de-trend and smooth the
climatology as in the deﬁnition of extreme temperatures in Denmark. This is in order to
keep the large-scale SLP and T2M anomalies in coherence with the dynamical systems
metrics that have been computed from the raw data time series.
Page 33 of 91
==PAGE:41==
4
RESULTS
4
Results
In this chapter, we present our results on the link between warm and cold days in
Denmark and the dynamical coupling of large-scale atmospheric circulation and tem-
perature in northern Europe. The implementation in Python can be found in Appendix
A.1 and Appendix A.2.
4.1
Local Dynamical Systems Metrics
To answer our ﬁrst research question, we will initially not focus our attention on extreme
temperatures in Denmark but instead on the large-scale dynamical features of the
atmospheric circulation and temperature in northern Europe. In the large domain, we
have for each day computed the local dimension and the local inverse persistence for
each of the two variables SLP and T2M and the two variables combined as well as
the co-recurrence ratio between the two variables. In the following, we will examine
the relations between these dynamical systems metrics, and how they change over the
seasons of the year.
4.1.1
Correlations between Metrics
Throughout the analysis period, all of the computed local metrics are subject to vari-
ability. In Figure 5, the local dimension d is plotted against the inverse local persistence
θ in a scatter plot for each of the variables SLP and T2M as well as the joint variables.
We see that the patterns look very similar for SLP and the joint variables, where d
ranges from respectively 4.6 and 5.6 up to 16.5 at the highest for both of them, and
θ ranges from respectively 0.34 and 0.29 up to respectively 0.89 and 0.80. For T2M,
the local dimension d is, in general, slightly larger, ranging from 6.0 up to 18.9 at the
highest. The inverse persistence θ is, on the other hand, generally smaller with lower
variability, ranging from 0.25 up to 0.67. Each point in the scatter plots are coloured
according to the co-recurrence ratio α between SLP and T2M at that speciﬁc state.
The values of α range from 0, i.e. no co-recurrence at all, up to 0.29.
In all three plots in Figure 5, a positive correlation between d and θ is present, which is
in correspondence with other previous studies [15, 18]. Indeed, for a high local dimen-
sion at a state ζ, the system can evolve in many diﬀerent directions. We will therefore
not expect the trajectory to be close to ζ for a long time, corresponding to a very
unstable state, i.e. a low local persistence. Equally, for a low local dimension at ζ,
the trajectory has limited directions in which to evolve, and we will therefore gener-
ally expect it to reside close to ζ for a longer time period. Although, we see a clear
linear dependence between the two metrics, the plots for SLP and the two variables
combined reveal an increasing variability of d as we increase θ, which is in contrast to
other studies. Faranda et al. (2017) [15] have shown that, when considering the North
Atlantic and Europe, we can associate well-known large-scale circulation phenomena to
Page 34 of 91
==PAGE:42==
4
RESULTS
speciﬁc conﬁgurations of d and θ for SLP. Speciﬁcally, low values of d and high values
of θ correspond to the NAO being in a positive phase, whereas high values of d and low
values of θ correspond to a negative phase of NAO [15, 10]. The large domain, in which
we have computed the dynamical systems metrics, is smaller than the considered area
in the study by Faranda et al. (2017). Indeed, our domain only covers the low pressure
zone of the NAO in the high latitudes of the North Atlantic Ocean near Greenland
and Iceland and not the high pressure zone near the Azores. To examine whether the
same link between the NAO and the scatter plot for dSLP and θSLP applies to our do-
main, and whether this can explain the unequal variance, we show the SLP scatter plot
again in Figure 6, with points coloured according to the NAO index. For states with
metrics values over a certain level, we capture the same link to the NAO. However, for
the smallest values of both dSLP and θSLP, corresponding to when we observe a small
variance, we associate the states to the negative NAO, indicating that the lowest values
of dSLP do not correspond to the positive NAO. This suggests that our domain does
not capture the full dynamical picture of the atmospheric circulation due to the NAO,
and thus the size of the domain plays a vital role in the values of our dynamical metrics.
Returning to Figure 5, we observe a negative correlation between the co-recurrence
ratio α and the two other metrics in the plot for SLP and the plot for both variables.
Low d and high θ−1 links to a high predictability level in phase space [17], so we infer
that for strong coupling, future states of SLP as well as the joint variables are more
predictable than for weak coupling. For the T2M scatter plot on the contrary, we do
not observe any relation between α and the other metrics. Indeed, the α-values appear
to be scattered around more randomly.
4.1.2
Seasonal Cycle of Metrics
The magnitude and variability of local dynamical system metrics have shown to be
controlled by seasonal change [16]. In order to understand better the relations between
the metrics, observed in Figure 5, we will therefore examine how the computed metrics
vary over the year. Figure 7 shows the seasonal cycle of the respective metrics, with
one standard deviation intervals indicated for the bivariate metrics, and Figure 8 shows
the number of days for each month among the 10% highest respectively 10% lowest of
the bivariate metrics values.
The upper plot in Figure 7, showing the co-recurrence ratio α, depicts a strong peak in
the summer months around day 150-240, thus implying that most of the highest coupled
states occur during this season, cf. Figure 8. Although much lower than in the summer-
time, the coupling is also relatively strong on average in the winter months around day
335-365 and day 1-60. As the variance is at its highest in the winter months, we see that
also some of the states with highest coupling are found in the winter. During spring
and autumn, both the average magnitude and variability of α are lower than the rest
of the year. Thus, a large share of the α minima are found in these seasons, although
Page 35 of 91
==PAGE:43==
4
RESULTS
Figure 5: Scatter plots of the dynamical systems metrics
Scatter plots of the local dimension d and the inverse local persistence θ for SLP in the top
plot, T2M in the middle plot and the joint variables in the bottom plot. The colours indicate
the co-recurrence ratio of the two variables.
Page 36 of 91
==PAGE:44==
4
RESULTS
Figure 6: Scatter plot of the dynamical systems metrics for SLP with NAO index
Scatter plot of the local dimension d and the inverse local persistence θ for SLP. The colours
indicate the NAO index.
an equal share is found for the winter season due the large variance. The larger cou-
pling between atmospheric circulation and temperature during the summer and winter
seasons could be explained as follows. In the boreal summer, subtropical anticyclones
dominate the atmospheric circulation pattern over the North Atlantic, causing weaker
storm tracks and causing persistent high temperatures [25]. During the boreal winter
months, these anticyclones weaken, and Europe’s climate is predominantly inﬂuenced
by the NAO pattern. The westerly ﬂows of wind during the winter are however highly
variable, causing a greater variation in α during this season.
For the SLP variable, both of the univariate metrics dSLP and θSLP demonstrate some-
what opposite patterns from that of the co-recurrence ratio α in Figure 7. Although the
seasonal change over the year is relatively weak, compared to the other metrics, a small
dip is observed in the summer season for dSLP and θSLP, and the maximum average
values are observed in the autumn and spring seasons. This is in accordance with the
correlation patterns in the scatter plot for SLP in Figure 5. As for α, the seasonal
cycle of θSLP can be explained by the dominant circulation patterns during the boreal
summer and boreal winter. The pressure is most persistent during the summer when
the mid-latitude storm tracks are weak, and less persistent during the autumn, winter
and spring when the wind ﬂows are highly variable. For dSLP, Faranda et al. (2017)
[16] suggest that the maxima in the spring and autumn seasons might be explained by
the existence of two chaotic attractors in the winter and summer respectively, between
which the ﬂow will jump in the spring and the autumn.
As for the SLP variable, the T2M variable also demonstrates a similar pattern for the
two univariate metrics, dT2M and θT2M, in Figure 7.
However, the picture is more
Page 37 of 91
==PAGE:45==
4
RESULTS
complicated and diﬀerent from that of SLP. In the early summer, the local dimension
reaches a clear maximum, and while the inverse persistence also peaks, it does not reach
its maximum. As summer progresses, both metrics decrease until they reach a clear
minimum in early fall, after which they increase again and peak in early winter, with
the inverse persistence exceeding the peak in summer. In the rest of the winter months
and spring, the average metrics are almost constant, though with a small decrease in
spring. The pattern for the dT2M and θT2M is overall similar to the pattern for the
co-recurrence ratio α. However, the peak in the summer occurs slightly later for α, the
dip in early fall is more extreme for the univariate metrics than for α, and the winter
peaks are relatively higher for θSLP and dSLP than for α, compared to the peaks in the
summer. As a consequence, the relation between the univariate metrics for T2M and
the co-recurrence ratio is not clear, explaining why the colours seem randomly scattered
in the scatter plot in Figure 5. A plausible explanation for the increasing persistence
of T2M over the summer is that a large part of the considered domain is ocean. Water
has a high heat capacity, and therefore the ocean heats slower than land surface during
the summer, resulting in more persistent air temperatures over the ocean and coastal
areas. As the ocean heats up over the summer, the warm summer temperatures become
increasingly persistent. We hypothesize that this is also linked to the decrease in the
active number of degrees of freedom of T2M, as the persistence and the local dimension
are generally correlated.
Finally, the bivariate metrics dSLP,T2M and θSLP,T2M demonstrate an overall opposite
pattern to that of the co-recurrence ratio α and similar to that of the univariate metrics
for SLP in Figure 7. This explains why the scatter plots in Figure 5 indicate similar
correlations for the SLP metrics and the metrics for the joint variables. For θSLP,T2M,
the seasonal cycle pattern diﬀers, however, to some degree from that of θSLP as the
peaks in the spring and autumn seasons are very small and exceeded by small peaks
in the winter months. The variance of the local persistence is stable over the year, and
in Figure 8 we see that the distribution of states with the highest and lowest local di-
mension is approximately in accordance with the pattern of the seasonal cycle. Indeed,
minima in dSLP,T2M tend to occur during the winter, late autumn and early spring, but
also some few occurrences are observed during the late summer. Maxima in dSLP,T2M
occur mostly during the spring, early summer and autumn. For the inverse persistence,
the variance is largest during the winter, where we also see the highest mean, and thus
maxima in θSLP,T2M occur primarily in the winter, late autumn and early spring. The
minima in θSLP,T2M are spread out over all the months of the years, corresponding to
low mean values of the metric during the spring, summer and autumn and a higher
variance in the winter season.
The magnitude of the metrics for each of the two variable and the bivariate metrics are
vastly diﬀerent in Figure 7. As already noted from Figure 5, the local inverse persistence
of T2M is generally lower than the local inverse persistence of SLP. This is also seen
in their respective seasonal cycles, with θT2M lower than θSLP through all the seasons
Page 38 of 91
==PAGE:46==
4
RESULTS
of the year. In Europe, the atmospheric circulation pattern is highly dominated by the
westerlies and shifting wind patterns, explaining the lower persistence of pressure. At
the same time, the temperature in northern Europe is, in most parts, generally very
mild and not dominated by extremely warm summers and extremely cold winters. This
is because the low heat capacity of water inﬂuences the coastal climate, resulting in a
higher temperature persistence [25]. As the bivariate inverse persistence θSLP,T2M is a
weighted average of the two univariate inverse persistences [18], the joint persistence
lies in between θSLP and θT2M throughout the whole seasonal cycle. The general larger
dimensionality of T2M than of SLP is also observed from the seasonal cycles, since the
average of dT2M is higher than the average of dSLP during most of the year. However,
seasonal change is more signiﬁcant for the T2M variable, and in early fall the local
dimension for T2M dives under that for SLP. The seasonal cycle of the co-dimension
dSLP,T2M lies mostly in between the seasonal cycles for dSLP and dT2M, but it also
exceeds both of them as dT2M decreases. We note, however, that the co-dimension is
always greater than the minimum of the dimensions of the single variables and lower
than the sum of those dimensions, as we would expect by the deﬁnition.
4.2
Temperature Extremes in Winter
We will now link the large-scale dynamical patterns of atmospheric circulation and tem-
perature to warm and cold extremes in Denmark, starting out with the winter season.
To answer the second research question, we will examine how the the large-scale metrics
anomalies change, when we condition on warm and cold days in Denmark, and place
these results into a physical context by considering the average baroclinic vector and
composite SLP and T2M maps, associated with extreme temperatures. To answer the
third question, we will explore the inverse link, whether we can recover extreme tem-
peratures in Denmark when conditioning on extreme low and high coupling between
large-scale SLP and T2M. For this purpose, we will consider composite SLP and T2M
maps, associated with the highest and lowest α values.
In order to be able to compare the ﬁgures in the following two sections, we note that all
similar plots or maps share the same axis or colour bar limits, ﬁxed as to ﬁt all values.
4.2.1
Warm Extremes
Figure 9 shows the anomaly means of the dynamical systems metrics and of the aver-
age daily baroclinic vector, conditioned on extreme warm and cold days in the winter
season, with increasing degree of extremeness from right to left. To the far right, all
winter days are included, thus resulting in an anomaly mean of 0 for all metrics and B.
To the far left, only the 1% warmest respectively coldest days are included. The red
lines correspond to warm extremes.
Beginning with the bivariate metrics, we observe weak and almost negligible positive
Page 39 of 91
==PAGE:47==
4
RESULTS
Figure 7: Seasonal cycles of the dynamical systems metrics
The co-recurrence ratio α in the upper plot, the local dimension d in the middle plot and the
inverse local persistence θ in the lower plot. The dashed lines indicate one standard deviation
above and below the bivariate metrics.
Page 40 of 91
==PAGE:48==
4
RESULTS
Figure 8: Minima and maxima of bivariate metrics
Number of days for each month over the year among the 10% lowest values of the bivariate
metrics (upper plot) and the 10% highest values of the bivariate metrics (lower plot).
deviations from their seasonal cycles in both dSLP,T2M and θSLP,T2M for extreme warm
days. Indeed, for the 1% warmest days, non of the two mean deviations are signiﬁcant
on a 5% level, cf. the conﬁdence intervals. For α, we observe a strong and signiﬁcant
positive deviation. A typical extreme warm day during the winter is therefore charac-
terized by a strong large-scale coupling between SLP and T2M and a lower, or at least
not higher, persistence than usual for the season. Heat waves, characterized by several
days of extreme warm temperatures, are rare in Denmark during the winter time, and
it is therefore reasonable that states of SLP and T2M combined are not more persistent
on extreme warm days than on any other days during the winter.
In Figure 10, the upper maps show composite SLP and T2M anomalies, constrained to
the 10% warmest days in Denmark in the winter season. As those days are more cou-
pled on average, we expect to see strong signals and similar large-scale patterns in these
two maps. Indeed, we see relatively strong anomaly means in both maps. We identify
the large-scale pattern as a positive phase of the NAO, with lower-than-normal pres-
sure over Iceland and higher-than-normal pressure over the Azores, reﬂecting warmer
temperatures in Europe, speciﬁcally in Denmark, and colder temperatures in the Arc-
tic. During a positive phase of the NAO, the high pressure diﬀerence between the two
pressure ﬁelds will enhance the Atlantic meridional pressure gradient, thus resulting
in stronger-than-average westerlies, transporting mild air from the Atlantic to Europe
Page 41 of 91
==PAGE:49==
4
RESULTS
[25]. For positive NAO patterns, we would therefore expect to see anomalously strong
warm advection. This is indeed reﬂected by the average baroclinic vector in Figure 9,
as we see a strong positive deviation in B for extreme warm days in Denmark.
Since warm winter days are more coupled on average than other days in the season, we
expect to recover warm days in Denmark when conditioning on extreme coupling. In
the upper maps in Figure 11, composited SLP and T2M anomalies for the 10% highest
α values are shown, and indeed we do observe positive T2M anomaly means over Den-
mark. However, the signal is not as strong in Denmark as in northern Sweden, Finland
and Russia. Temperatures are generally anomalously higher in the northeast towards
Siberia, whereas temperatures are anomalously lower to the southwest towards the
North Atlantic Ocean. In the composite SLP map, we observe a matching large-scale
pressure pattern as expected, with a pressure dipole with an axis across western Eu-
rope from south of Great Britain northeastward to Scandinavia. The lower-than-normal
pressure is centred around Iceland, whereas the higher-than-normal pressure is centred
around Ukraine and western Russia. This large-scale atmospheric pattern is similar
to that of a positive phase of the NAO but with a high pressure system further east
than the Azores High, resulting in warm advection of air from southern Europe and the
North Atlantic Ocean to the northeastern part of Europe. We conclude that, although
extreme warm temperatures in Denmark during the winter tend to have higher large-
scale coupling between SLP and T2M, those days are not the strongest coupled days.
Whereas we identify a positive NAO pattern during warm days in Denmark, we asso-
ciate the highest α-values with a dipole pattern with a high pressure center further east.
Finally, we consider the univariate metrics anomalies in Figure 9, as we condition
on extreme warm days. For the inverse persistence, we observe a similar behaviour
to that of the bivariate metric θSLP,T2M, with a small and almost negligible positive
deviation in both θSLP and θT2M.
For the local dimension, the anomalies of dT2M
are similar to dSLP,T2M with a small positive deviation, while dSLP shows a moderate
negative deviation. The fact that the local dimension for SLP shows a deviation from
the seasonal cycle with opposite sign than for the co-dimension points to a complex
relationship between the individual metrics. We have identiﬁed a pattern of the NAO
in its positive phase for extreme warm temperatures in Denmark. Hence, we propose
that the directions in which the dynamics of the pressure can evolve from a positive
NAO is decreased for extreme warm winter days, whereas the temperature can evolve
in as many, or even more, directions than usual.
4.2.2
Cold Extremes
In Figure 9, the blue lines illustrate the anomaly means for cold extremes in the winter.
Again beginning with the bivariate metrics, we observe a weak negative deviation in
dSLP,T2M, a strong negative deviation in θSLP,T2M and a moderate negative deviation
in α from their seasonal cycles. On a 5% level, the weak deviation in the local di-
Page 42 of 91
==PAGE:50==
4
RESULTS
mension is not signiﬁcant, while the stronger negative deviations in the other metrics
are signiﬁcant. For an extreme cold day to occur during the winter, we will therefore
typically expect a lower coupling between the large-scale SLP and T2M conﬁgurations
but a higher persistence.
The lower maps in Figure 10 show SLP and T2M anomalies, constrained to the 10%
coldest days in Denmark in the winder. The large-scale maps show strong signals and
demonstrate an opposite pattern to that seen for extreme warm days. We identify the
pattern as the NAO in a negative phase with a weakened pressure diﬀerence between
the Icelandic Low and the Azores High, reﬂected as an anomalously high pressure over
Iceland and an anomalously low pressure over the Azores. During a positive NAO, the
meridional pressure gradient will be less strong, and therefore the westerlies will be
less dominant than usual, allowing easterly winds from Siberia to transport cold air to
Europe [25]. Consequently, the temperatures will be colder than normal in mainland
Europe and warmer than normal in the Arctic, as reﬂected in the T2M composite map.
Because of the cold advection from Siberia, we would expect to see negative anomalies
of the average baroclinic vector for a negative phase of NAO, which is indeed reﬂected
in Figure 9 as a strong negative deviation in B.
The negative NAO pattern for wintertime cold days in Denmark demonstrates that it
is possible to observe a large-scale SLP and T2M pattern, reﬂecting a clear relation-
ship between pressure and temperature, although the co-recurrence ratio is lower than
usual. Indeed, a lower coupling than usual does not imply no coupling at all. Thus,
the interpretation of our results might be that cold days are controlled by a negative
phase of the NAO, but that the negative NAO pressure pattern generally couples less
with temperature than other atmospheric circulation patterns.
As we have observed lower-than-usual coupling for cold days in the winter, we examine
whether we can recover cold temperatures in Denmark by conditioning on extreme low
large-scale coupling between SLP and T2M. In Figure 11, the lower maps show com-
posite SLP and T2M anomalies, constrained to the 10% lowest α values. Similar to
the composite maps, constrained to extreme temperature, the pattern is inverse to the
corresponding composite maps for extreme high coupling. Hence, the anomaly means
over Denmark are negative, although not as strongly negative as further northeast, and
a pressure dipole is observed with a higher-than-normal pressure center around Iceland
and a lower-than-normal pressure center around western Russia.
It might seem contradicting that we obtain a relatively strong large-scale pattern with a
corresponding T2M map for the least coupled states. In Faranda et al. (2020) [18], they
ﬁnd similarly for North America that low α values in the winter are associated with a
strong large-scale anomalous atmospheric pattern, coherent with a corresponding tem-
perature pattern, favouring warm extremes. Two possible explanations are suggested.
First, since we are averaging over anomalies, the composite maps do not inform directly
Page 43 of 91
==PAGE:51==
4
RESULTS
on the correspondence between the SLP and T2M anomalies, included in the computa-
tion of the mean. Indeed, in Figure 11 for low α it is possible that the averaged T2M
anomaly maps vary signiﬁcantly, whereas the SLP pattern is more stable across the
averaged anomaly maps. Second, the dynamical systems metrics are computed based
on absolute values of SLP and T2M rather than on anomalies. This might introduce
a disagreement when analysing anomalously extreme coupling, taking into account the
sensitivity of α to the seasonal cycle.
Similarly to warm extremes, we conclude that although large-scale coupling between
SLP and T2M is generally lower-than-normal on extreme cold days in Denmark, these
days are not the least coupled days. For cold days in Denmark, we associate the large-
scale atmospheric circulation pattern to the NAO in its negative phase, whereas we for
the least coupled states observe a similar pattern but with a lower-than-normal pressure
center further east. A coherent large-scale SLP pattern, associated with cold extremes,
might seem ambiguous for low α. However, two possible explanations are suggested,
which should be further analysed in order to obtain a full picture of the interpretation.
Finally, we return to Figure 9 to examine the behaviour of the univariate metrics. Neg-
ative deviations in θSLP and θT2M are observed, and thus the univariate inverse persis-
tences are consistent with the co-persistence θSLP,T2M in terms of sign of deviation. The
magnitude of the deviations vary moderately, however. For the local dimension, we see
strong deviations in dSLP and dT2M in a positive respectively negative direction. These
deviations diﬀer from the small and almost negligible negative deviation in dSLP,T2M.
We propose that the greater discrepancy between the metrics deviations for cold days
than for warm days are linked to the fact that the coupling is deviating negatively on
cold days and positively on warm days.
4.3
Temperature Extremes in Summer
We will now answer the second and third research questions for extremes in the sum-
mer season. As for the winter season, we will examine anomalies of the metrics and
the average baroclinic vector for extreme warm and cold days in Denmark as well as
composite SLP and T2M maps, conditioned on respectively extreme temperatures and
extreme co-recurrence ratio values. As opposed to the previous section for the winter
season, we will in the following treat warm and cold days together.
4.3.1
Warm and Cold Extremes
In Figure 12, we see the anomaly means of the dynamical systems metrics and the
average daily baroclinic vector as a function of the degree of extremeness of cold and
warm summer days in Denmark. The red lines indicate warm extremes, whereas the
blue lines indicate cold extremes.
Page 44 of 91
==PAGE:52==
4
RESULTS
Figure 9: Deviations of metrics from seasonal cycle - winter (DJF)
Anomaly means of the metrics for days with cold and warm temperature extremes in Denmark
during the winter months (DJF). The x-axis indicates the degree of extremeness in terms of
the quantile ψ of the distribution of temperature anomalies in those months. A warm extreme
is a temperature anomaly above the ψ quantile, and a cold extreme is a temperature anomaly
below the 1−ψ quantile, such that for 1−ψ = 100 all days are included and for 1−ψ = 10−2
only days with the 1% most extreme warm or cold temperatures are included. The error bars
indicate a 95% conﬁdence interval of the mean for the bivariate metrics.
The pattern in the plots is completely diﬀerent from that for the winter season, as all
metrics, except dT2M, remain close to their respective seasonal cycles for both warm and
cold extremes. Indeed, for the bivariate metrics hardly no change is seen for dSLP,T2M
nor θSLP,T2M, as we vary the quantile ψ. On a 5% level, there are no signiﬁcant devi-
ations in dSLP,T2M for both the 1% warmest and 1% coldest days. For θSLP,T2M, the
deviation is not signiﬁcant for cold days. However, for warm days a very weak and
almost invisible signiﬁcant negative deviation is observed. For α, we see a weak and
signiﬁcant positive deviation for both warm and cold days, however much lower than
the deviations in the winter season. A typical warm or cold summer day in Denmark is
therefore not more or less persistent than usual but tend to be characterized by a weak
anomalously large-scale coupling between SLP and T2M.
Page 45 of 91
==PAGE:53==
4
RESULTS
Figure 10: Composite anomalies for extreme temperatures - winter (DJF)
SLP anomaly means (left) and T2M anomaly means (right) for days with the 10% highest
T2M anomalies (top) and 10% lowest T2M anomalies (bottom) in Denmark during the winter
months (DJF).
Figure 11: Composite anomalies for extreme coupling - winter (DJF)
SLP anomaly means (left) and T2M anomaly means (right) for days with the 10% highest α
anomalies (top) and 10% lowest α anomalies (bottom) during the winter months (DJF).
Page 46 of 91
==PAGE:54==
4
RESULTS
In Figure 13, the maps show composite SLP and T2M anomalies, constrained to the
10% warmest days in Denmark in the upper maps and the 10% coldest days in the lower
maps. The signals in all maps are relatively strong, although weaker than for winter.
Furthermore, both pair of maps provide a coherent pattern of large-scale SLP and T2M,
as expected with an anomalously higher coupling, demonstrating opposite patterns for
warm and cold days. We observe an anomalously high respectively low pressure ﬁeld
over northern Europe for extreme warm and cold days, reﬂected in the composite T2M
maps as higher-than-normal respectively lower-than-normal temperatures. The summer
climate in northern Europe is dominated by subtropical anticyclones, causing persis-
tent high temperatures. We identify the large-scale SLP and T2M patterns for extreme
temperatures in Denmark to be an anticyclone with center in Scandinavia, stronger-
than-normal for warm days and weaker-than-normal for cold days. Anticyclones in the
summer season in northern Europe cause weaker mid-latitude storm tracks, explaining
why the average baroclinic vector B does not vary signiﬁcantly from its seasonal cycle
for both warm and cold extremes in Figure 12.
The insensitivity of the metrics anomalies to extreme temperatures indicates that both
warm and cold days in Denmark are, to a high degree, unrelated to the large-scale
dynamical conﬁgurations of SLP and T2M combined. This suggests that local factors,
such as local soil moisture, precipitation, and local sensible heat ﬂuxes, are the main
contributors to extreme temperature events during the summer in Denmark, although
a speciﬁc anticyclonic atmospheric circulation pattern also seems to have some inﬂuence.
Since we have observed a slightly stronger coupling for both warm and cold summer
days, we do not expect to be able to recover extreme temperatures in Denmark, when
conditioning on extreme high coupling. In Figure 14, composited SLP and T2M anoma-
lies for the 10% highest α values are shown in the upper maps. Indeed, we only see a
weak signal, and there is no apparent link between the SLP and T2M maps. We suppose
that the anomalies, over which we are averaging to obtain the composited maps, are
signiﬁcantly diﬀerent for both SLP and T2M. In the lower maps, where we condition on
the 10% lowest α-values, we see an opposite pattern to that for strong coupling, with
weak signals and no coherence between SLP and T2M. Indeed, we do not expect to
recover extreme temperatures in Denmark for low coupling since neither warm nor cold
days are characterized by a lower-than-normal co-recurrence ratio. Also for α minima,
we suppose that the composited maps are computed from vastly distinct anomaly maps.
In Figure 12, the only univariate metric, diﬀering from the seasonal cycle, is the local
dimension for T2M, namely dT2M, when conditioning on warm days. As we vary the
quantile ψ to increase the extremeness condition, a strong negative deviation in dT2M
emerges. The fact that we do not observe a corresponding decrease in the inverse per-
sistence θT2M once again emphasize the complex relations between the metrics. We
suggest that the lower local dimension of T2M during warm summer days can be ex-
Page 47 of 91
==PAGE:55==
4
RESULTS
Figure 12: Deviations of metrics from seasonal cycle - summer (JJA)
Anomaly means of the metrics for days with cold and warm temperature extremes in Denmark
during the summer months (JJA). The x-axis indicates the degree of extremeness in terms of
the quantile ψ of the distribution of temperature anomalies in those months. A warm extreme
is a temperature anomaly above the ψ quantile, and a cold extreme is a temperature anomaly
below the 1−ψ quantile, such that for 1−ψ = 100 all days are included and for 1−ψ = 10−2
only days with the 1% most extreme warm or cold temperatures are included. The error bars
indicate a 95% conﬁdence interval of the mean for the bivariate metrics.
plained by a limited number of directions on the attractor, in which extreme warm
temperatures can evolve towards even more extreme warm temperatures.
Page 48 of 91
==PAGE:56==
4
RESULTS
Figure 13: Composite anomalies for extreme temperatures - summer (JJA)
SLP anomaly means (left) and T2M anomaly means (right) for days with the 10% highest T2M
anomalies (top) and 10% lowest T2M anomalies (bottom) in Denmark during the summer
months (JJA).
Figure 14: Composite anomalies for extreme coupling - summer (JJA)
SLP anomaly means (left) and T2M anomaly means (right) for days with the 10% highest α
anomalies (top) and 10% lowest α anomalies (bottom) during the summer months (JJA).
Page 49 of 91
==PAGE:57==
5
DISCUSSION
5
Discussion
In this chapter, the results and method are discussed. First, we will discuss how the
applied method illustrates the link between extreme temperature events and large-scale
atmospheric circulation. Next, we will discuss theoretical assumptions, and ﬁnally we
will present further perspectives for future research.
5.1
Atmospheric Circulation and Temperature Extremes
In the present thesis, we have investigated the link between extreme temperature events
in Denmark and the large-scale coupling between atmospheric circulation and temper-
ature, using local dynamical systems metrics. We have found that the degree, to which
atmospheric circulation is a driver of local extreme temperature, is highly dependent
on the seasons of the year.
In the winter season, the NAO is the most dominant mode of atmospheric variability
over Europe [25], and previous studies have shown that the NAO has an eﬀect not only
on the regional mean annual temperature but also on extremes of daily temperatures
[28, 47]. It is therefore encouraging that our study leads to similar ﬁndings. Indeed,
Kenyon and Hegerl (2008) [28] ﬁnd a strong statistically signiﬁcant increase in extreme
warm and cold days for the NAO in its two phases, peaking around Scandinavia, which
is in accordance with our identiﬁcation of typical extreme winter temperatures in Den-
mark as NAO events. In the summer season, our ﬁndings point to local factors as the
main drivers of warm and cold extremes in Denmark, although anticyclonic patterns
also have an important role. This result is also in alignment with multiple other studies,
identifying the two main drivers of heat extremes in Europe as local thermodynamical
eﬀects of moisture limitation and large-scale anticyclones. However, it is generally un-
clear which of these drivers is strongest, and diﬀerent studies point to diﬀerent results
[44, 42, 37].
Our dynamical systems approach provides a further perspective to this relation between
atmospheric circulation and temperatures, as we for each day aﬃliate the large-scale
patterns to dynamical conﬁgurations on the chaotic attractor. The change of these
metrics can be studied for speciﬁc types of extremes locally, thus elucidating the real
advantage of the method. In addition to the co-recurrence ratio α, which we consider
as a measure for the dependence between SLP and T2M, we have also linked extreme
temperatures in Denmark to the local dimension d as well as the inverse local persis-
tence θ, informing on the intrinsic predictability of the atmospheric system.
Using a dynamical systems approach to study drivers of extremes is, however, not always
simple which our results demonstrate for extreme winter temperatures in Denmark. For
warm winter days, we ﬁnd stronger coupling than normal, and for cold winter days we
ﬁnd weaker coupling than normal. A natural conclusion to draw for warm days is that
Page 50 of 91
==PAGE:58==
5
DISCUSSION
atmospheric circulation, speciﬁcally the NAO pattern in its positive phase, is a strong
driver. For cold temperatures, the meaning of the deviation in α is more ambiguous.
The fact that the SLP and T2M variables are less coupled on cold days implies that
other circulation patterns have a greater eﬀect on the temperature in northern Europe,
but that these temperatures are, however, not extreme in Denmark. Naturally, this
leads to the question whether we can say that cold winter days in Denmark are driven
by a negative NAO atmospheric circulation pattern. We suggest two approaches to
investigate the answer to this question.
In the composite maps in our analysis, anomaly maps of SLP and T2M have been aver-
aged, conditioned on extreme temperature in Denmark respectively extreme coupling.
Hence, the composite maps only provide information on the mean, and not on whether
the individual maps demonstrate similar patterns. Therefore, our ﬁrst suggestion is to
examine the coherence of the patterns of the averaged anomaly maps. One approach,
inspired by the North American study by Faranda et al.(2020) [18], is to indicate areas
in the maps where a large part of the composited anomalies have the same sign. In the
composite maps, conditioned on extreme temperature in Denmark, we obviously expect
sign agreement in T2M over Denmark. If large areas in the SLP map, capturing the
pattern of a negative phase of the NAO, also show sign agreement, we will conclude that
such a circulation pattern to a high degree drives extreme cold winter temperatures in
Denmark. We suppose that a lower coupling between SLP and T2M therefore must be
explained by lower coupling to temperatures in other areas of the large-scale domain in
northern Europe.
The oﬀset of this thesis is the study by Faranda et al. (2020), investigating the link
between extreme temperatures in the eastern part of North America with large-scale
SLP and T2M patterns. In accordance with their study, the dynamical systems metrics
have therefore been computed for both SLP and T2M in a larger domain, in order to
study extremes in Denmark. However, their study serves as a proof of concept of the
methodology which is not restricted to variables covering the same area. Our second
suggestion is to compute the metrics, based on SLP data in the large domain and T2M
data in the small domain in Denmark. Thus, the co-recurrence ratio serves as a measure
for the coupling between large-scale atmospheric circulation and local temperatures in
Denmark. If the NAO in its negative phase is a strong driver for extreme cold tem-
peratures in Denmark, we would suppose that winter time cold extremes would occur
in higher-than-normal coupling conditions instead of lower-than-normal coupling con-
ditions.
When exploring the inverse link, whether we can recover extreme temperatures from
extreme coupling, we see a similar ambiguity between coherent large-scale composite
maps and a lower coupling for cold winter days. This apparent contradiction could also
be examined by analysing the sign agreement of composited maps. In the study for
North America [18], similar challenges have been found for warm winter days, thus eluci-
Page 51 of 91
==PAGE:59==
5
DISCUSSION
dating the complexity of interpreting the dynamical metrics in a physical sense. Indeed,
the atmosphere is complex, and thus climate data does not fully meet the theoretical
assumptions on which the method relies. The applied method provides results that we
would expect for extreme temperatures in Denmark, and further providing information
on locality of coupling and predictability in time, thus arguing for the suitability of
the method. However, further studies should be carried out to fully understand the
outlined challenges.
5.2
Theoretical Assumptions
Using dynamical systems theory to describe the atmosphere highlights a complex inter-
play between mathematics and physics. Mathematics relies on the deductive method,
only accepting strict results that can be proved formally. The atmosphere is, however,
of a complex size and cannot fully be described by rigorous mathematics, and we thus
have to rely on a number of assumptions. This interplay between the two disciplines
create fruitful results which we have seen exempliﬁed in the present thesis. Eckmann
and Ruelle (1985) [14] put it in the following way:
”One might thus be tempted either to disregard rigorous mathematics and
go ahead with the physics, or on the contrary to wait until the mathematical
situation is suﬃciently clariﬁed before going ahead with the physics. Both
attitudes would be unfortunate.
We believe in the value of the interplay
between mathematics and physics, although either discipline oﬀers only in-
complete results.” (p. 621)
In the thesis, we have silently assumed that the atmospheric dynamics are stationary.
Subscribing to the chaotic hypothesis by Gallavotti and Cohen (1995) [23], we assume
that chaotic systems with many degrees of freedom behave essentially as Axiom A sys-
tems. Thus, we perceive the atmosphere as having the Axiom A property, considering
it as an autonomous and ergodic system. However, in reality the forcing of the climate
system is not constant, and the atmosphere should be viewed as a non-autonomous
dynamical system. Indeed, the external conditions are highly time-dependent, both on
short time scales such as seasonality and long time scales such as decadal variability of
sun radiation and slow-evolving anthropogenic climate change.
The results in this thesis support the fact that the atmosphere is indeed not Axiom
A. For ergodic systems, Young [48] has proved the result that the local dimension of
almost all states in phase space is constant and equal to the average value D. We
obtain, however, a distribution of local dimensions, highly dependent on the seasons of
the year, contradicting that the system should be ergodic. One might raise the question
if it is thus reasonable at all to apply the proposed method for climate data.
Page 52 of 91
==PAGE:60==
5
DISCUSSION
As seen in the present study, it is the variation in the local metrics rather than the
average value which is of interest when studying extremes. Furthermore, computa-
tions of the average dimension D have shown to be unreliable for systems with many
degrees of freedom, speciﬁcally for atmospheric dynamics [24, 33]. Multiple other stud-
ies have conﬁrmed the eﬀectiveness of computing local dynamical metrics in order to
study climate extremes, demonstrating that atmospheric dynamics seem to lie on a
non-stationary attractor, changing with the seasons [18, 17, 15, 16, 38, 10, 11]. The
applied method relies on the recurrences of states, and although the atmosphere is not
Axiom A, diﬀerent weather patterns do return to similar patterns over time. We might
say that non-stationarities of the atmosphere are weak in the sense that the dynamics
are not too far away from a stationary attractor. We do not obtain constant values
for the local dimensions, but we do however get distributions that are centered around
stable values in time. Under long-time scale forcing, such as anthropogenic climate
change, these central values change [17]. The drifts in time are, however, small, and
as long as the non-stationarities do not lead to bifurcations, we may assume that the
dynamics are close to an Axiom A system. Thus, the computed local dynamical metrics
might be meaningful, although not in a mathematical strict sense.
On a ﬁnal note, another important theoretical assumption which deserves to be dis-
cussed is the normalization of the variables in the joint logarithmic return, introduced in
Section 3.2.2. The norm used in the present thesis is distanced-based, deﬁned for each
ﬁxed state {ζx, ζy} and chosen to be in accordance with the study for North America
[18]. Hence, we subscript the norm by the ﬁxed state, i.e. ∥x∥ζx. However, we could also
have considered an absolute-value-based norm, such as the average root mean square
norm, not depending on the distance to a ﬁxed state {ζx, ζy}. In such case, the norm
would be the same for each observable, and we would write ∥x∥, not subscripting by
a ﬁxed state. It might be argued that it is more natural to remove physical units by
normalizing before introducing observables. However, a norm not depending on the
ﬁxed state, would give greater weight to the variable with highest variance in the joint
logarithmic return, and thus the computed co-dimension d and inverse co-persistence θ
would follow a pattern closer to that variable. This shows that the choice of norm has
the potential to aﬀect the computed values of the metrics. There is no universal way
to handle normalization in a dynamical system. However, the fact that diﬀerent norms
can lead to diﬀerent results elucidates the importance of making such choices carefully.
5.3
Future Research
Compound events may be divided into four types: preconditioned, multivariate, tempo-
rally compounding and spatially compounding [49]. The compoundness in this study is
debatable as we only consider one driver, namely atmospheric circulation, for extreme
temperature events. However, the categorization of compound events is not strict, and
as we study large-scale co-occurrences of SLP and T2M, we might argue that we study
multivariate events, characterized by multiple drivers and/ or hazards occurring in the
Page 53 of 91
==PAGE:61==
5
DISCUSSION
same geographical region. The dynamical systems approach is not limited to the study
of interactions between two variables, mutual consistent in both time and geographic
location. Indeed, the potential for the method extends beyond multivariate compound
events to all types of compound events. Preconditioned events, characterized by pre-
existing conditions, and temporally compound events, characterized by a cascade of
hazards, can be studied by introducing a time-lag between the considered variables.
For example, warm temperatures in autumn and wet conditions in the following spring
is an emerging type of compound event with severe consequences for agriculture [4].
These types of extremes could be examined from a dynamical systems perspective by
coupling temperature and precipitation with a lag of some few months and relating the
coupling to the persistence of both variables. Finally, we can study concurrent extreme
events in diﬀerent geographical locations, spatially compound events, by deﬁning dif-
ferent domains of the diﬀerent variables. Large-scale atmospheric circulation can cause
diﬀerent weather patterns in diﬀerent locations such as heavy precipitation events and
wind extremes. By coupling pressure, precipitation and wind, deﬁned in three diﬀerent
regions, these relations can be examined.
In addition to studying other types of compound events, the deﬁnition of extremeness
could furthermore be adapted in future studies. To link large-scale atmospheric circula-
tion and temperature to extreme temperature events in Denmark, we have in this thesis
deﬁned extremes on a daily basis. Often, we are, however, more interested in clusters
of extremes such as extreme warm temperatures over an extended period of time. In
such case, the selection procedure of extremes should be accommodated such that only
consecutively extreme days are selected. Yet another approach to the deﬁnition of ex-
tremeness is to deﬁne extreme values for each grid point in the large domain instead
of deﬁning overall extremes from area-averaged anomalies locally. This approach does
not allow us to compute plots of the anomaly means of the metrics as a function of the
degree of extremeness as in Figure 9 and Figure 12. Instead, composite maps of the
metrics anomalies could be computed, conditioned on extreme temperatures in each
grid point. Such maps would provide local information, in the whole domain, on how
extreme days dynamically deviate from average days.
Finally, the changes in driving mechanisms of extreme events under anthropogenic
forcing could be studied. In continuation of the present study, an interesting future
aspect would be to use climate model data to examine whether the link between extreme
temperatures locally and large-scale patterns will change in a future climate.
Page 54 of 91
==PAGE:62==
6
CONCLUSION
6
Conclusion
In order to better prepare for and adapt to extreme weather and climate events, a
better understanding of the driving mechanisms is needed. For this purpose, pure sta-
tistical approaches are usually applied, studying the tails of multivariate distributions.
However, extreme events are by deﬁnition rare, and thus data limitation forces such
methods to extrapolate heavily on the tails. In this thesis, we have applied an alter-
native multivariate approach from dynamical systems theory, combining chaos theory
with extreme value theory, to study the link between warm and cold temperatures in
Denmark and the large-scale patterns of SLP and T2M. Three local dynamical systems
metrics have been computed for each day in the data period, revealing instantaneous
information on the dynamical properties of the atmosphere. The local dimension d
is a measure for the active number of degrees of freedom on the underlying chaotic
attractor, the persistence θ−1 informs on the stability, and the co-recurrence ratio α
is a dependence measure. The metrics d and θ−1 have been computed for both SLP
and T2M individually and for the two variables jointly. The metric α has only been
computed for the joint variables as it is bivariate by deﬁnition.
Examining the relations between the computed dynamical systems metrics, we have
found that d and θ show a positive correlation for both univariate and bivariate met-
rics. However, for SLP as well as joint SLP and T2M we have found an increasing
variance for increasing metrics values, which is in contrast to other studies. We suggest
that this is due to a large-scale pattern, not capturing the complete region of the NAO.
The relations between the metrics can be complex, and while α is negatively correlated
with d and θ for SLP and the joint variables, the α values seem randomly distributed
according to d and θ for T2M. We have found that the complex links between the met-
rics can be explained by very diﬀerent seasonal cycles.
Considering anomalies of the dynamical system metrics, restricted to extreme warm
and cold days in Denmark, we have examined how these days diﬀer dynamically from
other days in the same season. Our ﬁndings suggest that a typical warm winter day
occurs when SLP and T2M are strongly coupled, and the persistence is lower, or at
least not higher, than normal, and furthermore that a typical cold winter day occurs
under lower coupling and higher persistence than normal. We associate warm and cold
winter days with the NAO pattern in its positive and negative phase respectively. There
is an undeniable ambiguity in a coherent large-scale SLP and T2M pattern together
with a lower-than-normal coupling for cold winter days. This might be interpreted as a
negative NAO being a driver for cold days, but that other circulation patterns generally
have a greater coupling to T2M, although not resulting in extreme cold temperatures
in Denmark. In the summer season, we have found that the metrics anomalies are
generally highly insensitive to temperature extremes, although the coupling of SLP and
T2M is slightly higher than normal for both cold and warm days. This points to local
factors as the main drivers for extreme temperature events in the summer, although
Page 55 of 91
==PAGE:63==
6
CONCLUSION
large-scale anticyclonic behaviour also seems to have an inﬂuence.
Finally, conditioning on extreme high and low coupling between SLP and T2M, we
recover warm and cold days in Denmark to some degree in the winter. However, these
strong and weak couplings lead to more extreme temperatures further northeast from
Denmark.
Hence, although the coupling is lower and respectively higher than nor-
mal for warm and cold days in Denmark, these days are not the strongest respectively
weakest coupled days. We associate days with most extreme coupling with a dipole
pattern, similar to that for the NAO, though with a high pressure center further east.
Again, we see an apparent contradiction in associating a lower-than-normal coupling
with coherent large-scale patterns. In order to understand this ambiguity better, it is
suggested to not only examine the mean of the SLP and T2M anomalies in composite
maps but also the sign agreement between these anomalies. In the summer season, we
do not recover extreme warm nor cold days in Denmark when conditioning on extreme
high and low coupling. This is indeed as expected since the coupling is slightly higher
than normal for both warm and cold summer days.
This study has highlighted that linking results from dynamical systems theory to phys-
ical interpretation is not always an easy endeavour. Indeed, the atmosphere is complex,
and thus the applied method relies on a number of assumptions which are not fully met
by the climate system. Subscribing to the chaotic hypothesis, we have assumed that
the atmosphere behaves like an Axiom A system, provided with an SRB measure. Since
the atmospheric dynamics are non-stationary due to e.g., seasonality and anthropogenic
forcing, this is clearly not true. However, the method relies on recurrences of states on
the underlying attractor, and though the atmosphere is not Axiom A, diﬀerent weather
patterns do return to similar patterns over time. Although not strict in a mathematical
sense, the applied method might therefore be meaningful in a physical sense. Indeed,
this study has shown that it is the variation in the dynamical systems metrics that allow
us to study weather extremes, which is in contrast to a constant local dimension in a
true Axiom A system. Instantaneous dynamical conﬁgurations provides us with daily
information on the coupling between variables and the internal predictability, which we
link to speciﬁc weather patterns.
The applied method in this study is not restricted to multivariate events but could
be extended to other types of compound events. Indeed, in future studies diﬀerent
geographic regions could be studied or a time-lag between the variables could be in-
cluded.
Finally, changes in the dynamical conﬁgurations could be examined under
anthropogenic forcing, in order to map changes in the driving physical processes of
extreme climate events.
Page 56 of 91
==PAGE:64==
REFERENCES
References
[1] Anosov, D. V. (2012), Dynamical Systems IX: Dynamical Systems with Hyperbolic
Behaviour, Springer.
[2] Ara´ujo, V. & Paciﬁco, M.J. (2010), Three-Dimensional Flows, Springer.
[3] Barreira, L. & Valls, C. (2019), Ergodic Theory, In L. Barreira & Valls, C. (Ed.),
Dynamical Systems by Example (pp. 57-67), Springer.
[4] Ben-Ari, T., Bo´e, J., Ciais, P., Lecerf, R. Van der Velde, M. & Makowski, D. (2018),
Causes and implications of the unforeseen 2016 extreme yield loss in the breadbasket
of France, Nature Communications, 9(1627).
[5] Birkhoﬀ, G.D. (1931), Proof of the Ergodic Theorem, Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences of the United States of America, 17(12), pp. 656-660.
[6] Boltzmann, L. (1887), ¨Uber die mechanischen Analogien des zwiten Hauptsatzes
der Thermodynamik, Journal f¨ur die reine und angewandte Mathematik, 100, pp.
201-212.
[7] Chernick, M.R, Hsing, T. & McCormick, W.P (1991), Calculating the extremal
index for a class of stationary sequences, Advances in Applied Probability, 23(4), pp.
835-850.
[8] Collet, P. (2001), Statistics of closest return for some non-uniformly hyperbolic
systems, Ergodic Theory and Dynamical Systems, 21(2), pp. 401-420.
[9] Comou, D. & De Luca, P. (2020), Global warming makes weather in boreal summer
more persistent, Weather and Climate Dynamics Discussion, preprint.
[10] De Luca, P., Messori, G., Pons, F.M.E., Faranda, D. (2020a), Dynamical systems
theory sheds new light on compound climate extremes in Europe and Eastern North
America, Quarterly Journal of the Royal Meteorological Society, 146(729), pp. 1636-
1650.
[11] De Luca, P., Messori, G., Faranda, D., Ward, P.J. & Comou, D. (2020b), Com-
pound warm-dry and cold-wet events over the Mediterranean, Earth System Dynam-
ics, 11, pp. 793-805.
[12] Devaney, R.L. (1986), An Introduction to Chaotic Dynamical Systems, The Ben-
jamin/ Cummings Publishing Company.
[13] Dutton, J.A. (1982), Fundamental Theorems of Climate Theory - Some Proved,
Some Conjectured, SIAM Review, 24(1), pp. 1–33.
[14] Eckmann, J.P. & Ruelle, D. (1985), Ergodic theory of chaos and strange attractors,
Reviews of Modern Physics, 57(3), pp.617-656.
Page 57 of 91
==PAGE:65==
REFERENCES
[15] Faranda, D., Messori, G. & Yiou, P. (2017a), Dynamical proxies of North Atlantic
predictability and extremes, Scientiﬁc Reports, 7.
[16] Faranda, D., Messori, G., Alvarez-Catro, M.C. & Yiou, P. (2017b), Dynamical
properties and extremes of Northern Hemisphere climate ﬁelds over the past 60 years,
Nonlinear Processes in Geophysics, 24, pp. 713-725.
[17] Faranda, D., Alvarez-Castro, M.C., Messori, G., Rodrigues, D. & Yiou, P. (2019),
The hammam eﬀect or how a warm ocean enhances large scale atmospheric pre-
dictability, Nature Communications, 10(1316).
[18] Faranda, D., Messori, G. & Yiou, P. (2020), Diagnosing concurrent drivers of
weather extremes: application to warm and cold days in North America, Climate
Dynamics, 54, pp. 2187-2201.
[19] Fisher, R.A. & Tippett, L.H.C. (1928), Limiting forms of the frequency distribution
of the largest and smallest member of a sample, Mathematical Proceedings of the
Cambridge Philosophical Society, 24(2), pp. 180-190.
[20] Freitas, A.C.M. & Freitas, J.M. (2007), On the link between dependence and in-
dependence in extreme value theory for dynamical systems, Statistics & Probability
Letters, 78(2008), pp. 1088-1093.
[21] Freitas, A.C.M, Freitas, J.M. & Todd, M. (2010), Hitting Time Statistics and
Extreme Value Theory, Probability Theory and Related Fields, 147(3), pp. 675-710.
[22] Freitas, A.C.M, Freitas, J.M. & Todd, M. (2012), Extremal Index Hitting Time
Statistics and Periodicity, Advances in Mathematics, 231(5), pp. 2626-2665.
[23] Gallavotti, G. & Cohen, E.G.D. (1995), Dynamical Ensembles in Stationary States,
Journal of Statistical Physics, 80, pp. 931-970.
[24] Grassberger, P. (1986), Do climate attractors exist?, Nature, 323, pp. 609-612.
[25] Hurrell, J.W., Kushnir, Y., Ottersen, G. & Visbeck, M. (2003), An Overview of
the North Atlantic Oscillation, In J.W. Hurrell, Y. Kushnir, G. Ottersen & M. Vis-
beck (Ed.), The North Atlantic Oscillation: Climatic Signiﬁcance and Environmental
Impact (pp. 1-36), American Geophysical Union.
[26] Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) (2012), Managing the risks
of extreme events and disasters to advance climate change adaptation, Cambridge
University Press.
[27] Katok, A. & Hasselblatt, B. (1997), Introduction to the Modern Theory of Dynam-
ical Systems, Cambridge University Press.
[28] Kenyon, J. & Hegerl, G.C. (2008), Inﬂuence of Modes of Climate Variability on
Global Temperature Extremes, Journal of Climate, 21(15), pp. 3872-3889.
Page 58 of 91
==PAGE:66==
REFERENCES
[29] Leadbetter, M.R. (1974), On Extreme Values in Stationary Sequences, Zeitschrift
f¨ur Wahrscheinlichkeitstheorie und verwandte Gebiete, 28(4), pp. 289-303.
[30] Leadbetter, M.R., Lindgren, G. & Rootz´en, H. (1983), Extremes and Related Prop-
erties of Random Sequences and Processes, Springer.
[31] Lorenz, E.N. (1963), Deterministic nonperiodic ﬂow, Journal of the Atmospheric
Sciences, 20(2), pp. 130-141.
[32] Lorenz, E.N. (1980), Attractor Sets and Quasi-Geostrophic Equilibrium, Journal
of the Atmospheric Sciences, 37(8), pp. 1685-1699.
[33] Lorenz, E.N (1991), Dimension of weather and climate attractors, Nature, 353, pp.
241-244.
[34] Lucarini, V. & Sarno, S. (2011), A statistical mechanical approach to the compu-
tation of the climate response to general forcings, Nonlinear Processes in Geophysics,
18, pp. 7-28.
[35] Lucarini, V., Faranda, D. & Wouters, J. (2012), Universal Behaviour of Extreme
Value Statistics for Selected Observables of Dynamical Systems, J Stat Phys, 147(1),
pp. 63-73.
[36] Lucarini, V., Faranda, D., Freitas A.C.M., Freitas, J.M., Holland, M., Kuna, T.,
Nicol, M., Todd, M. & Vaienti, S. (2016), Extremes and Recurrences in Dynamical
Dystems, Wiley.
[37] Meehl, G.A. & Tebaldi, C. (2004), More Intense, More Frequent, and Longer
Lasting Heat Waves in the 21st Century, Science, 305(5686), pp. 994-997.
[38] Messori, G., Caballero, R. & Faranda, D. (2017), A dynamical systems approach
to studying midlatitudes weather extremes, Geophysical Research Letters, 44(7), pp.
3346-3354.
[39] Messori, G., Woods, C. & Caballero, R. (2018), On the Drivers of Wintertime
Temperature Extremes in the High Arctic, Journal of Climate, 31(4), pp. 1597-1618.
[40] Neumann, J.V. (1932), Proof of the Quasi-Ergodic Hypothesis, Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America, 18(1), pp. 70-82.
[41] Poincar´e, H. (1899), Les m´ethodes nouvelles de la m´ecanique c´eleste, Nuovo Cim,
10, pp. 128-130.
[42] Seneviratne, S.I., L¨uthi, D., Litschi, M. & Sch¨ar, C. (2006), Land-atmosphere
coupling and climate change in Europe, Nature, 443, pp. 205-209.
[43] Strogatz, S.H. (2015), Nonlinear Dynamics and Chaos:
with applications to
physics, biology, chemistry and engineering, Westview Press.
Page 59 of 91
==PAGE:67==
REFERENCES
[44] Suarez-Gutierrez, L., M¨uller, W.A. & Marotzke, J. (2020), Dynamical and ther-
modynamical drivers of variability in European summer heat extremes, Climate Dy-
namics, 54, pp. 4351-4366.
[45] S¨uveges, M. (2007), Likelihood estimation of the extremal index, Extremes, 10, pp.
41-55.
[46] Vautrad, R. & Ghil, M. (1989), Singular Spectrum Analysis in Nonlinear Dynam-
ics, with Applications to Paleoclimatic Time Series, Physica D, 35, pp. 395-424.
[47] Yiou, P. & Nogaj, M. (2003), Extreme climate events and weather regimes over
the North Atlantic: When and where?, Geophysical Research Letters, 31(7).
[48] Young, L.S. (1982), Dimension entropy and Lyapunov exponents, Ergodic Theory
and Dynamical Systems, 2, pp. 109-124.
[49] Zscheischler, J., Martius, O., Westra, S., Bevacqua, E., Raymond, C., Horton,
R.M, van den Hurk, B., AghaKouchak, A., J´ez´eguel, A., Mahecha, M.D., Maraun,
D., Ramos, A.M, Ridder, N.N, Thiery, W. & Vignotto, E. (2020), A typology of
compound weather and climate events, Nature Reviews Earth & Environment, 1, pp.
333-347.
Page 60 of 91
==PAGE:68==
A
PYTHON CODE
A
Python Code
A.1
Dynamical Systems Metrics
import numpy as np
############### g functions
f o r
one
variable
( logarithmic
return )
##### When the
state
i s 1−dimensional
def
g func (x) :
# Input :
# x : Time
s e r i e s
# Output :
# g
:
Matrix with g values
between
s t a t e s .
Note # col = # row −1
since g values
between same points
are removed .
# Calculate
distances
d i s t = abs (np . subtract . outer (x , x) )
# Remove distance
between same
s t a t e s
d i s t = d i s t [˜ np . eye ( d i s t . shape [ 0 ] , dtype=bool ) ] . reshape ( d i s t . shape
[0] , −1)
# Calculate g
f or
a l l
s t a t e s
g = −np . log ( d i s t )
return ( g )
##### When the
state
i s
multidimensional
# This
version
only works when there
are no
s t a t e s
with
extremely
small
distances
due to
rounding
e r r r o s .
def
g func mult (x) :
# Input :
# x :
Matrix with
vector
state
in a row f o r
each time
step
# Output :
# g
:
Matrix with g values
between
s t a t e s .
Note # col = # row −1
since g values
between same points
are removed .
# Calculate
distance
x dot = np . matmul(x , x .T) # Dot product
of
each row with
a l l
other
rows
d i s t = np . sqrt (np . diagonal ( x dot ) . reshape ( −1 ,1)−2∗x dot+np . diagonal (
x dot ) )
# Remove distance
betweeen same
s t a t e s
d i s t = d i s t [˜ np . eye ( d i s t . shape [ 0 ] , dtype=bool ) ] . reshape ( d i s t . shape
[0] , −1)
# Calculate g
f or
a l l
s t a t e s
g = −np . log ( d i s t )
return ( g )
Page 61 of 91
==PAGE:69==
A
PYTHON CODE
##### When the
state
i s
multidimensional
# This
version
only works when the
s i z e
of
the data
i s
not too
big .
def
g func mult2 (x) :
# Input :
# x :
Matrix with
vector
state
in a row f o r
each time
step
# Output :
# g
:
Matrix with g values
between
s t a t e s .
Note # col = # row −1
since g values
between same points
are removed .
# Calculate
distance
x sub = x [ : , None]−x [ None , : ] # Subtract
each row in x from
a l l
other
rows
in x ( r e s u l t
i s 3−dim)
d i s t = np . l i n a l g . norm( x sub , axis =2)
# Remove distance
betweeen same
s t a t e s
d i s t = d i s t [˜ np . eye ( d i s t . shape [ 0 ] , dtype=bool ) ] . reshape ( d i s t . shape
[0] , −1)
# Calculate g
f or
a l l
s t a t e s
g = −np . log ( d i s t )
return ( g )
############### g functions
f o r two
v a r i a b l e s
( j o i n t
logarithmic
return )
##### When the
state
i s 1−dimensional
def
g func co (x , y) :
# Input :
# x , y : Time
s e r i e s
# Output :
# g
:
Matrix with g values
between
s t a t e s .
Note # col = # row −1
since g values
between same points
are removed .
# Calculate
distances
d i s t x = abs (np . subtract . outer (x/np . mean(x) ,x/np . mean(x) ) )
d i s t y = abs (np . subtract . outer (y/np . mean(y) ,y/np . mean(y) ) )
# Remove distance
bewteen same
s t a t e s
d i s t x = d i s t x [˜ np . eye ( d i s t x . shape [ 0 ] , dtype=bool ) ] . reshape ( d i s t x .
shape [0] , −1)
d i s t y = d i s t y [˜ np . eye ( d i s t y . shape [ 0 ] , dtype=bool ) ] . reshape ( d i s t y .
shape [0] , −1)
# Calculate g
f or
a l l
s t a t e s
g = −np . log (np . sqrt ( d i s t x ∗∗2+ d i s t y ∗∗2) )
return ( g )
##### When the
state
i s
multidimensional
# Normalize by distance
vector
f o r
each
state
zeta
def
g func co mult (x , y) :
# Input :
# x , y :
Matrices
with
vector
state
in a row f o r
each time
step
# Output :
Page 62 of 91
==PAGE:70==
A
PYTHON CODE
# g
:
Matrix with g values
between
s t a t e s .
Note # col = # row −1
since g values
between same points
are removed .
# Calculate
distance
f or x
x dot = np . matmul(x , x .T) # Dot product
of
each row with
a l l
other
rows
d i s t x = np . sqrt (np . diagonal ( x dot ) . reshape ( −1 ,1)−2∗x dot+np . diagonal
( x dot ) )
# Calculate
distance
f or y
y dot = np . matmul(y , y .T) # Dot product
of
each row with
a l l
other
rows
d i s t y = np . sqrt (np . diagonal ( y dot ) . reshape ( −1 ,1)−2∗y dot+np . diagonal
( y dot ) )
# Normalize
dist x norm = d i s t x /np . l i n a l g . norm( dist x , axis =1) . reshape ( −1 ,1)
dist y norm = d i s t y /np . l i n a l g . norm( dist y , axis =1) . reshape ( −1 ,1)
# Remove distance
bewteen same
s t a t e s
dist x norm = dist x norm [˜ np . eye ( d i s t x . shape [ 0 ] , dtype=bool ) ] .
reshape ( dist x norm . shape [0] , −1)
dist y norm = dist y norm [˜ np . eye ( d i s t y . shape [ 0 ] , dtype=bool ) ] .
reshape ( dist y norm . shape [0] , −1)
# Calculate g
f or
a l l
s t a t e s
g = −np . log (np . sqrt ( dist x norm∗∗2+dist y norm ∗∗2) )
return ( g )
##### When the
state
i s
multidimensional
# Normalize by average
root mean square
# This
version
only works when there
are no
s t a t e s
with
extremely
small
distances
due to
rounding
erros .
def
g func co mult2 (x , y) :
# Input :
# x , y :
Matrices
with
vector
state
in a row f o r
each time
step
# Output :
# g
:
Matrix with g values
between
s t a t e s .
Note # col = # row −1
since g values
between same points
are removed .
# Calculate
the
average
root mean square norm of x
x rms = np . sqrt (np . mean(x∗∗2 , axis =1))
x norm = np . mean( x rms )
# Calculate
the
average
root mean square norm of y
y rms = np . sqrt (np . mean(y∗∗2 , axis =1))
y norm = np . mean( y rms )
# Calculate
distance
f or x
x dot = np . matmul(x , x .T) # Dot product
of
each row with
a l l
other
rows
d i s t x s q = np . diagonal ( x dot ) . reshape ( −1 ,1)−2∗x dot+np . diagonal (
Page 63 of 91
==PAGE:71==
A
PYTHON CODE
x dot )
dist x sq norm = d i s t x s q /x norm∗∗2
# Calculate
distance
f or y
y dot = np . matmul(y , y .T) # Dot product
of
each row with
a l l
other
rows
d i s t y s q = np . diagonal ( y dot ) . reshape ( −1 ,1)−2∗y dot+np . diagonal (
y dot )
dist y sq norm = d i s t y s q /y norm∗∗2
# Remove distance
bewteen same
s t a t e s
dist x sq norm = dist x sq norm [˜ np . eye ( dist x sq norm . shape [ 0 ] , dtype
=bool ) ] . reshape ( dist x sq norm . shape [0] , −1)
dist y sq norm = dist y sq norm [˜ np . eye ( dist y sq norm . shape [ 0 ] , dtype
=bool ) ] . reshape ( dist y sq norm . shape [0] , −1)
# Calculate g
f or
a l l
s t a t e s
g = −np . log (np . sqrt ( dist x sq norm+dist y sq norm ) )
return ( g )
##### When the
state
i s
multidimensional
# Normalize by average
root mean square
# This
version
only works when the
s i z e
of
the data
i s
not too
big .
def
g func co mult3 (x , y) :
# Input :
# x , y :
Matrices
with
vector
state
in a row f o r
each time
step
# Output :
# g
:
Matrix with g values
between
s t a t e s .
Note # col = # row −1
since g values
between same points
are removed .
# Calculate
the
average
root mean square norm of x
x rms = np . sqrt (np . mean(x∗∗2 , axis =1))
x norm = np . mean( x rms )
# Calculate
the
average
root mean square norm of y
y rms = np . sqrt (np . mean(y∗∗2 , axis =1))
y norm = np . mean( y rms )
# Calculate
distance
f or x
x sub = x [ : , None]−x [ None , : ] # Subtract
each row in x from
a l l
other
rows
in x ( r e s u l t
i s 3−dim)
d i s t x = np . l i n a l g . norm( x sub , axis =2)
dist x norm = d i s t x /x norm
# Calculate
distance
f or y
y sub = y [ : , None]−y [ None , : ] # Subtract
each row in x from
a l l
other
rows
in x ( r e s u l t
i s 3−dim)
d i s t y = np . l i n a l g . norm( y sub , axis =2)
dist y norm = d i s t y /y norm
# Remove distance
bewteen same
s t a t e s
dist x norm = dist x norm [˜ np . eye ( dist x norm . shape [ 0 ] , dtype=bool ) ] .
Page 64 of 91
==PAGE:72==
A
PYTHON CODE
reshape ( dist x norm . shape [0] , −1)
dist y norm = dist y norm [˜ np . eye ( dist y norm . shape [ 0 ] , dtype=bool ) ] .
reshape ( dist y norm . shape [0] , −1)
# Calculate g
f or
a l l
s t a t e s
g = −np . log (np . sqrt ( dist x norm∗∗2+dist y norm ∗∗2) )
return ( g )
############### Co−reccurence
r a t i o
##### Compute co−reccurence
value
def
co recur ( g x , g y , q) :
#def
co recur (a , q) :
# Input :
# g x ,
g y
:
Matrices
with
logarithmic
return
values
f o r x resp . y
# q :
Quantile
s p e c i f i c i a t i o n
# Output :
# alpha
:
Vector with co−recurrence
value
f o r
a l l
s t a t e s
# Compute quantiles
f or
a l l
points
(x and y resp . )
s x = np . quantile ( g x , 0 . 9 8 ,
axis =1)
s y = np . quantile ( g y , 0 . 9 8 ,
axis =1)
# Calculate
alpha
f or
a l l
points
denom = np . count nonzero ( g x > s x [ : , None ] ,
axis =1)
num = np . count nonzero (( g x > s x [ : , None ] ) & ( g y > s y [ : , None ] ) ,
axis =1)
alpha = num/denom
return ( alpha )
############### Local
dimension
##### Compute l o c a l
dimension
def
d loc (g , q) :
# Input :
# g
:
Matrix with
logarithmic
return
values
# q :
Quantile
s p e c i f i c a t i o n
# Output :
# d :
Vector with
l o c a l
dimension
of
a l l
points
# Allocate memory
d = np . empty (( len ( g ) ) )
# Calculate
quantile and d
s = np . quantile (g , q ,
axis =1)
f o r
i ,
row in
enumerate ( g ) :
g extreme = row [ row > s [ i ] ]
exceedance = g extreme −s [ i ]
sigma = np . mean( exceedance )
d [ i ] = 1/sigma
return (d)
Page 65 of 91
==PAGE:73==
A
PYTHON CODE
############### Extremal index /
l o c a l
p e r s i s t e n c e
##### Suveges
def
extr index (g , q) :
# Input :
# g
:
Matrix with
logarithmic
return
values
# q :
Quantile
s p e c i f i c a t i o n
# Output :
# d :
Vector with
l o c a l
dimension
of
a l l
points
# Allocate memory
theta = np . empty (( len ( g ) ) )
# Compute quantile
s = np . quantile (g , q , axis =1)
# Calculate
inverse
p e r s i s t e n c e
i t e r a t i v e l y
f o r
i ,
row in
enumerate ( g ) :
extr idx = np . where ( row > s [ i ] ) [ 0 ]
T = np . d i f f ( extr idx )
S = T−1
N = len ( extr idx )
NC = np . count nonzero (S)
numerator = (1−q) ∗sum(S)+N−1+NC−np . sqrt (((1 −q) ∗sum(S)+N−1+NC)
∗∗2−8∗NC∗(1−q) ∗sum(S) )
denominator = 2∗(1−q) ∗sum(S)
theta [ i ] = numerator/denominator
return ( theta )
A.2
Implementation in Northern Europe
import numpy as np
import os
import
xarray
as xr
import netCDF4 as nc
import Func DS metrics as metr
import
matplotlib . pyplot
as
plt
from datetime
import datetime
import pandas as pd
import
cartopy . crs
as
ccrs
import
cartopy . feature
as
cfeature
from
matplotlib .cm import ScalarMappable
from global land mask
import
globe
from shapely
import geometry
from
scipy
import
s t a t s
as
st
###############
Page 66 of 91
==PAGE:74==
A
PYTHON CODE
# Set home directory
os . chdir ( ’C:/ Users /Ane/Documents/DTU Mathematical Modelling 2020−2022/
Master
t h e s i s /Data/Northern Europe ’ )
############### Load and format data
# Open a l l
grib
f i l e s
in one
dataset
ERA5 grib = xr . open mfdataset ( ” ∗. grib ” , engine=” c f g r i b ” , concat dim=”time” ,
combine=” nested ” )
# Convert
dataset
to a netcdf
f i l e
ERA5 grib . to netcdf ( ’ ERA5 netcdf ’ )
# Open netcdf
f i l e
ds = nc . Dataset ( ’ ERA5 netcdf ’ )
# Get
f i l e
information
print ( ds ) # Metadata
ds . dimensions . values () # Dimensions
ds . v a r i a b l e s . values () # Variables
# Load the
v a r i a b l e s
dlon = ds [ ’ longitude ’ ] [ : ]
dlon = np .ma. getdata ( dlon ) # Unmask
dlat = ds [ ’ l a t i t u d e ’ ] [ : ]
dlat = np .ma. getdata ( dlat ) # Unmask
dtime = ds [ ’ time ’ ] [ : ] # Days since 1959−01−01 12:00:00
dtime = np .ma. getdata ( dtime ) # Unmask
slp = ds [ ’ msl ’ ] [ : ] # Mean sea
l e v e l
pressure
in Pa
slp = np .ma. getdata ( slp ) # Unmask
temp = ds [ ’t2m ’ ] [ : ] # Sea
surface
temperature
in K
temp = np .ma. getdata (temp) # Unmask
# Sort
the
v a r i a b l e s
va r s or t = sorted ( zip ( dtime , slp , temp) )
dtime = np . asarray ( l i s t ( zip (∗var sort ) ) [ 0 ] )
slp = np . asarray ( l i s t ( zip (∗var sort ) ) [ 1 ] )
temp = np . asarray ( l i s t ( zip (∗var sort ) ) [ 2 ] )
# Get year and month
dtime date = [ datetime . fromordinal ( ordinal +715145)
f or
ordinal
in
dtime ]
year = np . asarray ( [ dtime date [ i ] . year
fo r
i
in
range ( len ( dtime date ) ) ] )
month = np . asarray ( [ dtime date [ i ] . month f or
i
in
range ( len ( dtime date ) ) ] )
# Remove leap
days from
v a r i a b l e s
leap day idx = [ ]
f o r
i
in
range ( len ( dtime date ) ) :
i f
dtime date [ i ] . month == 2 and dtime date [ i ] . day == 29:
leap day idx += [ i ]
yday noleap = np . t i l e (np . arange (1 ,366) , year [−1]−year [0]+1)
year noleap = np . delete ( year , leap day idx )
Page 67 of 91
==PAGE:75==
A
PYTHON CODE
month noleap = np . delete (month , leap day idx )
temp noleap = np . delete (temp , leap day idx , axis =0)
slp noleap = np . delete ( slp , leap day idx , axis =0)
############### Calculate
metrics
# Define
the
state
of
slp and temp as a vector
in which each
entry
i s
the
slp and temp resp .
at a point
of
the
grid
s l p v e c t o r = slp . reshape ( len ( dtime ) , len ( dlat ) ∗len ( dlon ) )
temp vector = temp . reshape ( len ( dtime ) , len ( dlat ) ∗len ( dlon ) )
# Quantile
q = 0.98
# Calculate
the
observable g
g s l p = metr . g func mult ( s l p v e c t o r )
g temp = metr . g func mult ( temp vector )
g slp temp = metr . g func co mult ( slp vector , temp vector )
# Calculate
l o c a l
dimension
d slp = metr . d loc ( g slp , q)
d temp = metr . d loc ( g temp , q)
d slp temp = metr . d loc ( g slp temp , q)
# Calculate
inverse
p e r s i s t e n c e
theta
t h e t a s l p = metr . extr index ( g slp , q)
theta temp = metr . extr index ( g temp , q)
theta slp temp = metr . extr index ( g slp temp , q)
# Calculate co−recurrence
rate
alpha = metr . co recur ( g slp , g temp , q)
############### Plot
histogram
of
exceedances
f or
three
d i f f e r e n t
days
# Get idx
f or
3 random days
idx = np . random . choice ( len ( g s l p ) ,3 , replace=False )
bins = 50
# Plot
fig ,
axs = plt . subplots ( nrows=3, ncols =3, f i g s i z e =(14 ,12) )
f o r
i
in
range (3) :
s = np . quantile ( g s l p [ idx [ i ] , : ] , 0 . 9 8 )
exceed = g s l p [ idx [ i ] , : ] [ g s l p [ idx [ i ] ,:] > s]−s
e x c e e d f i t = np . linspace ( exceed . min () , exceed .max() ,100)
scale exp = np . mean( exceed )
dist exp = st . expon . pdf ( ex ce e d f it , s c a l e=scale exp )
axs [0 , i ] . h i s t ( exceed , bins )
axs [0 , i ] . plot ( ex c ee d fi t , dist exp ∗len ( exceed ) ∗( exceed .max()−
exceed . min () ) / bins , linewidth =2.5)
axs [0 , i ] . s e t t i t l e ( ”SLP −” + dtime date [ idx [ i ] ] . s t r f t i m e ( ”%m/%d/%Y” )
, f o n t s i z e =20)
Page 68 of 91
==PAGE:76==
A
PYTHON CODE
axs [0 , i ] . s e t x l a b e l ( r ” $g \ zeta−s (q ,\ zeta ) $” , f o n t s i z e =18)
axs [0 , i ] . tick params ( labelbottom=True , axis=”both” , l a b e l s i z e =18)
axs [0 , i ] . legend ( [ ” Exponential
f i t ” ] , f o n t s i z e =18, loc=”upper
right ” )
s = np . quantile ( g temp [ idx [ i ] , : ] , 0 . 9 8 )
exceed = g temp [ idx [ i ] , : ] [ g temp [ idx [ i ] ,:] > s]−s
e x c e e d f i t = np . linspace ( exceed . min () , exceed .max() ,100)
scale exp = np . mean( exceed )
dist exp = st . expon . pdf ( ex ce e d f it , s c a l e=scale exp )
axs [1 , i ] . h i s t ( exceed , bins )
axs [1 , i ] . plot ( ex c ee d fi t , dist exp ∗len ( exceed ) ∗( exceed .max()−
exceed . min () ) / bins , linewidth =2.5)
axs [1 , i ] . s e t t i t l e ( ”T2M −” + dtime date [ idx [ i ] ] . s t r f t i m e ( ”%m/%d/%Y” )
, f o n t s i z e =20)
axs [1 , i ] . s e t x l a b e l ( r ” $g \ zeta−s (q ,\ zeta ) $” , f o n t s i z e =18)
axs [1 , i ] . tick params ( labelbottom=True , axis=”both” , l a b e l s i z e =18)
axs [1 , i ] . legend ( [ ” Exponential
f i t ” ] , f o n t s i z e =18, loc=”upper
right ” )
s = np . quantile ( g slp temp [ idx [ i ] , : ] , 0 . 9 8 )
exceed = g slp temp [ idx [ i ] , : ] [ g slp temp [ idx [ i ] ,:] > s]−s
e x c e e d f i t = np . linspace ( exceed . min () , exceed .max() ,100)
scale exp = np . mean( exceed )
dist exp = st . expon . pdf ( ex ce e d f it , s c a l e=scale exp )
axs [2 , i ] . h i s t ( exceed , bins )
axs [2 , i ] . plot ( ex c ee d fi t , dist exp ∗len ( exceed ) ∗( exceed .max()−
exceed . min () ) / bins , linewidth =2.5)
axs [2 , i ] . s e t t i t l e ( ”SLP/T2M −” + dtime date [ idx [ i ] ] . s t r f t i m e ( ”%m/%d
/%Y” ) , f o n t s i z e =20)
axs [2 , i ] . s e t x l a b e l ( r ” $g \ zeta−s (q ,\ zeta ) $” , f o n t s i z e =18)
axs [2 , i ] . tick params ( labelbottom=True , axis=”both” , l a b e l s i z e =18)
axs [2 , i ] . legend ( [ ” Exponential
f i t ” ] , f o n t s i z e =18, loc=”upper
right ” )
f i g . t i g h t l a y o u t ()
f i g . show ()
############### Plot
metrics
# Scatter
plot
of d vs
theta
f or
temperature with
c o l o r s
according
to
alpha
fig ,
( ax1 , ax2 , ax3 ) = plt . subplots (3 , sharex=True , sharey=True , f i g s i z e
=(12 ,16) )
scat = ax1 . s c a t t e r ( d slp , theta slp , s =10,c=alpha , cmap=” gnuplot r ” ,vmin=0,
vmax=0.3)
ax1 . s e t t i t l e ( ”Sea Level
Pressure ” , f o n t s i z e =25)
ax1 . s e t x l a b e l ( r ”$d {SLP}$” , f o n t s i z e =20)
ax1 . s e t y l a b e l ( r ”$\ theta {SLP}$” , f o n t s i z e =20)
ax1 . tick params ( labelbottom=True , axis=”both” , l a b e l s i z e =20)
ax2 . s c a t t e r ( d temp , theta temp , s =10,c=alpha , cmap=” gnuplot r ” ,vmin=0,vmax
=0.3)
ax2 . s e t t i t l e ( ”Temperature” , f o n t s i z e =25)
Page 69 of 91
==PAGE:77==
A
PYTHON CODE
ax2 . s e t x l a b e l ( r ”$d {T2M}$” , f o n t s i z e =20)
ax2 . s e t y l a b e l ( r ”$\ theta {T2M}$” , f o n t s i z e =20)
ax2 . tick params ( labelbottom=True , axis=”both” , l a b e l s i z e =20)
ax3 . s c a t t e r ( d slp temp , theta slp temp , s =10,c=alpha , cmap=” gnuplot r ” ,vmin
=0,vmax=0.3)
ax3 . s e t t i t l e ( ”Sea Level
Pressure −Temperature” , f o n t s i z e =25)
ax3 . s e t x l a b e l ( r ”$d {SLP,T2M}$” , f o n t s i z e =20)
ax3 . s e t y l a b e l ( r ”$\ theta {SLP,T2M}$” , f o n t s i z e =20)
ax3 . tick params ( labelbottom=True , axis=”both” , l a b e l s i z e =20)
f i g . t i g h t l a y o u t ()
cbar = f i g . colorbar ( scat , ax=(ax1 , ax2 , ax3 ) , shrink =0.5 , lo c at io n=” right ” )
cbar . ax . tick params ( l a b e l s i z e =20)
cbar . ax . s e t t i t l e ( r ”$\ alpha$ ” , f o n t s i z e =20)
plt . show ()
############### Calculate mean metrics
over
the days
of
the
year
(
seasonal
cycle )
# Remove metrics
f o r
leap
days
alpha noleap = np . delete ( alpha , leap day idx )
d slp noleap = np . delete ( d slp , leap day idx )
d temp noleap = np . delete ( d temp , leap day idx )
d slp temp noleap = np . delete ( d slp temp , leap day idx )
th et a s lp noleap = np . delete ( theta slp , leap day idx )
theta temp noleap = np . delete ( theta temp , leap day idx )
theta slp temp noleap = np . delete ( theta slp temp , leap day idx )
# Create panda dataframe with day of
the
year and
a l l
metrics
d f m e t r i c s y r = pd . DataFrame( data=[yday noleap , alpha noleap , d slp noleap ,
d temp noleap , d slp temp noleap , theta slp noleap , theta temp noleap ,
theta slp temp noleap ] ) .T
d f m e t r i c s y r . columns=[”Yday” , ”Alpha” , ” d slp ” , ”d temp” , ” d slp temp ” , ”
t h e t a s l p ” , ” theta temp ” , ” theta slp temp ” ]
# Find mean and standard
deviation
f o r
metrics
grouped by day of
the
year
alpha sc = d f m e t r i c s y r . groupby ( ”Yday” ) [ ”Alpha” ] . mean ()
alpha sc std = d f m e t r i c s y r . groupby ( ”Yday” ) [ ”Alpha” ] . std ()
alpha sc upper = alpha sc + alpha sc std
alpha sc lower = alpha sc −alpha sc std
d s l p s c = d f m e t r i c s y r . groupby ( ”Yday” ) [ ” d slp ” ] . mean ()
d temp sc = d f m e t r i c s y r . groupby ( ”Yday” ) [ ”d temp” ] . mean ()
d slp temp sc = d f m e t r i c s y r . groupby ( ”Yday” ) [ ” d slp temp ” ] . mean ()
d slp temp sc std = d f m e t r i c s y r . groupby ( ”Yday” ) [ ” d slp temp ” ] . std ()
d slp temp sc upper = d slp temp sc + d slp temp sc std
d slp temp sc lower = d slp temp sc −d slp temp sc std
t h e t a s l p s c = d f m e t r i c s y r . groupby ( ”Yday” ) [ ” t h e t a s l p ” ] . mean ()
theta temp sc = d f m e t r i c s y r . groupby ( ”Yday” ) [ ” theta temp ” ] . mean ()
Page 70 of 91
==PAGE:78==
A
PYTHON CODE
theta slp temp sc = d f m e t r i c s y r . groupby ( ”Yday” ) [ ” theta slp temp ” ] . mean
()
theta slp temp sc std = d f m e t r i c s y r . groupby ( ”Yday” ) [ ” theta slp temp ” ] .
std ()
theta slp temp sc upper = theta slp temp sc + theta slp temp sc std
theta slp temp sc lower = theta slp temp sc −theta slp temp sc std
############### Plot mean metrics
over
the days
of
the
year
fig ,
( ax1 , ax2 , ax3 ) = plt . subplots (3 , sharex=True , f i g s i z e =(12 ,16) )
ax1 . plot ( alpha sc , l a b e l=r ”$\ alpha$ ” , color=”tab : blue ” , linewidth =2.5)
ax1 . plot ( alpha sc lower , ’−−’ , color=”tab : blue ” , linewidth =1)
ax1 . plot ( alpha sc upper , ’−−’ , color=”tab : blue ” , linewidth =1)
ax1 . s e t t i t l e ( ”Co−recurrence
Ratio” , f o n t s i z e =25)
ax1 . s e t x l a b e l ( ”days” , f o n t s i z e =20)
ax1 . s e t y l a b e l ( r ”$\ alpha$ ” , f o n t s i z e =20)
ax1 . tick params ( labelbottom=True , axis=”both” , l a b e l s i z e =20)
ax1 . legend ( [ r ”$\ alpha$ ” ] , f o n t s i z e =20, bbox to anchor =(1.175 ,0.5) , loc=”
center
right ” )
ax2 . plot ( d slp sc , l a b e l=r ”$d {SLP}$” , color=”tab : orange ” , linewidth =2.5)
ax2 . plot ( d temp sc , l a b e l=r ”$d {TEMP}$” , color=”tab : green ” , linewidth =2.5)
ax2 . plot ( d slp temp sc , l a b e l=r ”$d {SLP,TEMP}$” , color=”tab : blue ” , linewidth
=2.5)
ax2 . plot ( d slp temp sc lower , ’−−’ , color=”tab : blue ” , linewidth =1)
ax2 . plot ( d slp temp sc upper , ’−−’ , color=”tab : blue ” , linewidth =1)
ax2 . s e t t i t l e ( ” Local Dimension” , f o n t s i z e =25)
ax2 . s e t x l a b e l ( ”days” , f o n t s i z e =20)
ax2 . s e t y l a b e l ( r ”$d$” , f o n t s i z e =20)
ax2 . tick params ( labelbottom=True , axis=”both” , l a b e l s i z e =20)
ax2 . legend ( [ r ”$d {SLP}$” , r ”$d {T2M}$” , r ”$d {SLP,T2M}$” ] , f o n t s i z e =20,
bbox to anchor =(1.3 ,0.5) , loc=” center
right ” )
ax3 . plot ( t h e t a s l p s c , l a b e l=r ”$\ theta {SLP}$” , color=”tab : orange ” ,
linewidth =2.5)
ax3 . plot ( theta temp sc , l a b e l=r ”$\ theta {TEMP}$” , color=”tab : green ” ,
linewidth =2.5)
ax3 . plot ( theta slp temp sc , l a b e l=r ”$\ theta {SLP,TEMP}$” , color=”tab : blue ” ,
linewidth =2.5)
ax3 . plot ( theta slp temp sc lower , ’−−’ , color=”tab : blue ” , linewidth =1)
ax3 . plot ( theta slp temp sc upper , ’−−’ , color=”tab : blue ” , linewidth =1)
ax3 . s e t t i t l e ( ” Local
Inverse
Persistence ” , f o n t s i z e =25)
ax3 . s e t x l a b e l ( ”days” , f o n t s i z e =20)
ax3 . s e t y l a b e l ( r ”$\ theta$ ” , f o n t s i z e =20)
ax3 . tick params ( labelbottom=True , axis=”both” , l a b e l s i z e =20)
ax3 . legend ( [ r ”$\ theta {SLP}$” , r ”$\ theta {T2M}$” , r ”$\ theta {SLP,T2M}$” ] ,
f o n t s i z e =20, bbox to anchor =(1.3 ,0.5) , loc=” center
right ” )
f i g . t i g h t l a y o u t ()
plt . show ()
Page 71 of 91
==PAGE:79==
A
PYTHON CODE
############### Calculate number of minima and maxima of
the
b i v a r i a t e
metrics
over
the months of
the
year
# Create panda dataframe with month and
a l l
b i v a r i a t e
metrics
df metrics month = pd . DataFrame( data=[month , alpha , d slp temp ,
theta slp temp ] ) .T
df metrics month . columns=[”Month” , ”Alpha” , ”d” , ” theta ” ]
# Define low
quantile and high
quantile
fo r minima and maxima
q1 = 0.1
q2 = 0.9
# Get quantiles
f or
a l l
b i v a r i a t e
metrics
s alpha low = np . quantile ( df metrics month [ ”Alpha” ] , q1 )
s alpha high = np . quantile ( df metrics month [ ”Alpha” ] , q2 )
s d low = np . quantile ( df metrics month [ ”d” ] , q1 )
s d high = np . quantile ( df metrics month [ ”d” ] , q2 )
s theta low = np . quantile ( df metrics month [ ” theta ” ] , q1 )
s theta high = np . quantile ( df metrics month [ ” theta ” ] , q2 )
# Find number of minima and maxima of
a l l
the
b i v a r i a t e
metrics
fo r
each
month
alpha min = df metrics month . groupby ( ”Month” ) [ ”Alpha” ] . apply ( lambda x :
(x
< s alpha low ) . sum() ) . r e s e t i n d e x (name=”count” )
alpha max = df metrics month . groupby ( ”Month” ) [ ”Alpha” ] . apply ( lambda x :
(x
> s alpha high ) . sum() ) . r e s e t i n d e x (name=”count” )
d min = df metrics month . groupby ( ”Month” ) [ ”d” ] . apply ( lambda x :
(x <
s d low ) . sum() ) . r e s e t i n d e x (name=”count” )
d max = df metrics month . groupby ( ”Month” ) [ ”d” ] . apply ( lambda x :
(x >
s d high ) . sum() ) . r e s e t i n d e x (name=”count” )
theta min = df metrics month . groupby ( ”Month” ) [ ” theta ” ] . apply ( lambda x :
(x
< s theta low ) . sum() ) . r e s e t i n d e x (name=”count” )
theta max = df metrics month . groupby ( ”Month” ) [ ” theta ” ] . apply ( lambda x :
(x
> s theta high ) . sum() ) . r e s e t i n d e x (name=”count” )
############### Plot number of minima and maxima of
the
b i v a r i a t e
metrics
over
the months
barWidth = 0.25
br1 = np . arange(1−barWidth ,12)
br2 = np . arange (1 ,13)
br3 = np . arange(1+barWidth ,13)
fig ,
( ax1 , ax2 ) = plt . subplots (2 , f i g s i z e = (12 ,10) , sharey=True )
ax1 . bar ( br1 , alpha min [ ”count” ] , color=”tab : red ” , width=barWidth , l a b e l=r ”$\
alpha$ ” )
Page 72 of 91
==PAGE:80==
A
PYTHON CODE
ax1 . bar ( br2 , d min [ ”count” ] , color=”tab : purple ” , width=barWidth , l a b e l=”d” )
ax1 . bar ( br3 , theta min [ ”count” ] , color=”tab : o l i v e ” , width=barWidth , l a b e l=r ”$
\ theta$ ” )
ax1 . s e t x t i c k s (np . arange (1 ,13) )
ax1 . s e t t i t l e ( ”Minima of
Bivariate
Metrics ” , f o n t s i z e =25)
ax1 . s e t x l a b e l ( ”Month” , f o n t s i z e =20)
ax1 . s e t y l a b e l ( ”Number of
days” , f o n t s i z e =20)
ax1 . tick params ( labelbottom=True , axis=”both” , l a b e l s i z e =20)
ax1 . legend ( [ r ”$\ alpha$ ” , r ”$d {SLP,T2M}$” , r ”$\ theta {SLP,T2M}$” ] , f o n t s i z e
=20, bbox to anchor =(1.3 ,0.5) , loc=” center
right ” )
ax2 . bar ( br1 , alpha max [ ”count” ] , color=”tab : red ” , width=barWidth , l a b e l=r ”$\
alpha$ ” )
ax2 . bar ( br2 , d max [ ”count” ] , color=”tab : purple ” , width=barWidth , l a b e l=”d” )
ax2 . bar ( br3 , theta max [ ”count” ] , color=”tab : o l i v e ” , width=barWidth , l a b e l=r ”$
\ theta$ ” )
ax2 . s e t x t i c k s (np . arange (1 ,13) )
ax2 . s e t t i t l e ( ”Maxima of
Bivariate
Metrics ” , f o n t s i z e =25)
ax2 . s e t x l a b e l ( ”Month” , f o n t s i z e =20)
ax2 . s e t y l a b e l ( ”Number of
days” , f o n t s i z e =20)
ax2 . tick params ( labelbottom=True , axis=”both” , l a b e l s i z e =20)
ax2 . legend ( [ r ”$\ alpha$ ” , r ”$d {SLP,T2M}$” , r ”$\ theta {SLP,T2M}$” ] , f o n t s i z e
=20, bbox to anchor =(1.3 ,0.5) , loc=” center
right ” )
f i g . t i g h t l a y o u t ()
plt . show ()
############### Extract
smaller
area
f o r
a n a l y s i s
of
extremes
# Define new area
dlon new min = 7.75
dlon new max = 13
dlat new min = 54.5
dlat new max = 58
dlon new min idx = np . where ( dlon == dlon new min )
dlon new max idx = np . where ( dlon == dlon new max )
dlat new min idx = np . where ( dlat == dlat new min )
dlat new max idx = np . where ( dlat == dlat new max )
i f
dlon new min idx < dlon new max idx :
dlon new idx1 = dlon new min idx
dlon new idx2 = dlon new max idx
e l s e :
dlon new idx1 = dlon new max idx
dlon new idx2 = dlon new min idx
i f
dlat new min idx < dlat new max idx :
dlat new idx1 = dlat new min idx
dlat new idx2 = dlat new max idx
e l s e :
Page 73 of 91
==PAGE:81==
A
PYTHON CODE
dlat new idx1 = dlat new max idx
dlat new idx2 = dlat new min idx
dlon new = dlon [ dlon new idx1 [ 0 ] [ 0 ] : ( dlon new idx2 [ 0 ] [ 0 ] + 1 ) ]
dlat new = dlat [ dlat new idx1 [ 0 ] [ 0 ] : ( dlat new idx2 [ 0 ] [ 0 ] + 1 ) ]
temp new = temp noleap [ : , dlat new idx1 [ 0 ] [ 0 ] : ( dlat new idx2 [ 0 ] [ 0 ] + 1 ) ,
dlon new idx1 [ 0 ] [ 0 ] : ( dlon new idx2 [ 0 ] [ 0 ] + 1 ) ]
# Compute extension
of
l a t i t u d e
and longitude
( t o t a l
area )
dlon ext = np .max( dlon )−np . min( dlon )
d l a t e x t = np .max( dlat )−np . min( dlat )
# Extent
of
plot
extent = [ np . min( dlon ) −0.1∗dlon ext , np .max( dlon ) +0.1∗dlon ext , np . min( dlat
) −0.1∗dlat ext , np .max( dlat ) +0.1∗d la t e xt ]
# Plot map with boxes
of
study
area and area
f o r
extremes
plt . f i g u r e ( f i g s i z e =(14 ,14) )
ax = plt . axes ( projection=ccrs . Mercator () )
ax . s e t e x t e n t ( extent , crs=ccrs . PlateCarree () )
dlat min = np . min( dlat )
dlat max = np .max( dlat )
dlon min = np . min( dlon )
dlon max = np .max( dlon )
dlat min ext = np . min( dlat new )
dlat max ext = np .max( dlat new )
dlon min ext = np . min( dlon new )
dlon max ext = np .max( dlon new )
geom1 = geometry . polygon . Polygon ( ( ( dlon min , dlat min ) ,( dlon min , dlat max )
,( dlon max , dlat max ) ,( dlon max , dlat min ) ,( dlon min , dlat min ) ) )
geom2 = geometry . polygon . Polygon ( ( ( dlon min ext , dlat min ext ) ,(
dlon min ext , dlat max ext ) ,( dlon max ext , dlat max ext ) ,( dlon max ext ,
dlat min ext ) ,( dlon min ext , dlat min ext ) ) )
ax . c o a s t l i n e s ()
ax . add feature ( cfeature .LAND)
gl = ax . g r i d l i n e s ( l i n e s t y l e=’−−’ , draw labels=True )
gl . x l a b e l s t y l e ,
gl . y l a b e l s t y l e = { ’ f o n t s i z e ’ :20} ,{ ’ f o n t s i z e ’ :20}
gl . xlabels top ,
gl . y l a b e l s r i g h t = False ,
False
ax . add geometries ( [ geom1 ] , crs=ccrs . PlateCarree () , f a c e c o l o r=’None ’ ,
edgecolor=’ blue ’ ,
linewidth =2.5)
ax . add geometries ( [ geom2 ] , crs=ccrs . PlateCarree () , f a c e c o l o r=’None ’ ,
edgecolor=’ red ’ ,
linewidth =2.5)
plt . show ()
############### compute anomalies
of temp
# Coordinates on land
dlon grid ,
d l a t g r i d = np . meshgrid ( dlon new , dlat new )
land coord = globe . i s l a n d ( dlat grid , dlon grid )
# Allocate memory of
climatology
arrays
c l i m a t o l f i r s t 9 y r = np . empty ((365 , len ( dlat new ) , len ( dlon new ) ) )
Page 74 of 91
==PAGE:82==
A
PYTHON CODE
c l i m a t o l l a s t 9 y r = np . empty ((365 , len ( dlat new ) , len ( dlon new ) ) )
climatol = np . f u l l l i k e ( temp new , 0 )
climatol smooth = np . f u l l l i k e ( temp new , 0 )
# Compute mean temperature
f or
the
f i r s t
resp .
l a s t
9 years
f o r
each date
f o r
i
in np . arange (365) :
i d x f i r s t = np . arange ( i ,365∗9 ,365)
i d x l a s t = i d x f i r s t + len ( yday noleap ) −365∗9
t e m p 9 y r f i r s t = temp new [ i d x f i r s t , : , : ]
temp 9yr last = temp new [ i d x l a s t , : , : ]
c l i m a t o l f i r s t 9 y r [ i , : , : ] = np . mean( temp 9yr first , axis =0)
c l i m a t o l l a s t 9 y r [ i , : , : ] = np . mean( temp 9yr last , axis =0)
climatol [ : 3 6 5 ∗9 , : , : ] = np . t i l e ( c l i m a t o l f i r s t 9 y r , ( 9 , 1 , 1 ) )
climatol [ −3 6 5 ∗9 : , : , : ] = np . t i l e ( c l i m a t o l l a s t 9 y r , ( 9 , 1 , 1 ) )
# Compute mean temperature
f or 9−year
running window
f o r
i
in np . arange (365∗9 , len ( temp new ) −365∗9) :
idx = np . arange ( i −365∗4, i +365∗4+1,365)
temp 9yr = temp new [ idx , : , : ]
climatol [ i , : , : ] = np . mean( temp 9yr , axis =0)
# Compute temperature
climatology
with a smoothihng
of a 21−day running
mean
climatol smooth [ : 2 1 , : , : ] = np . t i l e (np . mean( climatol [ : 2 1 , : , : ] , axis =0)
,(21 ,1 ,1) )
climatol smooth [ −2 1 : , : , : ] = np . t i l e (np . mean( climatol [ −2 1 : , : , : ] , axis =0)
,(21 ,1 ,1) )
f o r
i
in np . arange (21 , len ( temp new ) −21) :
climatol smooth [ i , : , : ] = np . mean( climatol [ i −10: i + 11 , : , :] , axis =0)
# Compute temperature
anomalies
temp anom = temp new −climatol smooth
# Extract
temperature
anomalies
fo r
land
points
temp anom land = temp anom ∗land coord
# Compute weights
f or
l a t i t u d e s
W = np . cos (np . pi /180∗dlat new )
# Compute weighted
average
temp anom lon sum = np . sum( temp anom land , axis =2)
temp anom lon sum w = np . matmul( temp anom lon sum ,W)
land coord lon sum = np . sum( land coord , axis =1)
land coord lon sum w = np . matmul( land coord lon sum ,W)
temp anom mean = temp anom lon sum w/ land coord lon sum w
############### Compute variable
anomalies
fo r
complete
grid and fo r
metrics
Page 75 of 91
==PAGE:83==
A
PYTHON CODE
# Compute anomalies
f or SLP and temp .
f o r
grid maps
s l p s c = np . mean( slp noleap . reshape ( int ( len ( slp noleap ) /365) ,365 , len ( dlat
) , len ( dlon ) ) , axis =0)
temp sc = np . mean( temp noleap . reshape ( int ( len ( temp noleap ) /365) ,365 , len (
dlat ) , len ( dlon ) ) , axis =0)
s l p s c r e p = np . t i l e ( slp sc , ( int ( len ( yday noleap ) /365) ,1 ,1) )
temp sc rep = np . t i l e ( temp sc , ( int ( len ( yday noleap ) /365) ,1 ,1) )
slp anom grid = slp noleap −s l p s c r e p
slp anom grid = slp anom grid /100 # From Pa to hPa
temp anom grid = temp noleap −temp sc rep
# Repeat
seasonal
cycle
f o r
metrics
each year
d s l p s c r e p = np . t i l e (np . asarray ( d s l p s c ) , int ( len ( yday noleap ) /365) )
d temp sc rep = np . t i l e (np . asarray ( d temp sc ) , int ( len ( yday noleap ) /365) )
d slp temp sc rep = np . t i l e (np . asarray ( d slp temp sc ) , int ( len ( yday noleap
) /365) )
t h e t a s l p s c r e p = np . t i l e (np . asarray ( t h e t a s l p s c ) , int ( len ( yday noleap )
/365) )
theta temp sc rep = np . t i l e (np . asarray ( theta temp sc ) , int ( len ( yday noleap
) /365) )
theta slp temp sc rep = np . t i l e (np . asarray ( theta slp temp sc ) , int ( len (
yday noleap ) /365) )
alpha sc rep = np . t i l e (np . asarray ( alpha sc ) , int ( len ( yday noleap ) /365) )
# Compute anomalies
f or
metrics
d slp anom = d slp noleap −d s l p s c r e p
d temp anom = d temp noleap −d temp sc rep
d slp temp anom = d slp temp noleap −d slp temp sc rep
theta slp anom = theta slp noleap −t h e t a s l p s c r e p
theta temp anom = theta temp noleap −theta temp sc rep
theta slp temp anom = theta slp temp noleap −theta slp temp sc rep
alpha anom = alpha noleap −alpha sc rep
############### Get
i n d i c e s
f or summer and winter months
# Get index
of summer and winter months
sum idx = np . where (( month noleap == 6)
|
( month noleap == 7)
|
(
month noleap == 8) )
win idx = np . where (( month noleap == 12)
|
( month noleap == 1)
|
(
month noleap == 2) )
# Boolean
i n d i c e s
sum idx bool = np . f u l l l i k e ( month noleap ,0 , dtype=bool )
sum idx bool [ sum idx ] = 1
win idx bool = np . f u l l l i k e ( month noleap ,0 , dtype=bool )
win idx bool [ win idx ] = 1
############### Compute composite
anomalies
f or
10 % highest and lowest
values
of
alpha anom .
resp . temp . anom .
fo r
both summer and winter
Page 76 of 91
==PAGE:84==
A
PYTHON CODE
# Low and high
quantiles
q1 = 0.1
q2 = 0.9
# Get alpha anom .
fo r summer resp .
winter months
alpha anom sum = alpha anom [ sum idx ]
alpha anom win = alpha anom [ win idx ]
# Get temp . anom .
fo r summer resp .
winter months
temp anom sum = temp anom mean [ sum idx ]
temp anom win = temp anom mean [ win idx ]
# Get quantiles
f or
extreme alpha
values
s alpha low sum = np . quantile ( alpha anom sum , q1 )
s alpha high sum = np . quantile ( alpha anom sum , q2 )
s alpha low win = np . quantile ( alpha anom win , q1 )
s alpha high win = np . quantile ( alpha anom win , q2 )
# Get quantiles
f or
extreme temperature
s temp low sum = np . quantile ( temp anom sum , q1 )
s temp high sum = np . quantile ( temp anom sum , q2 )
s temp low win = np . quantile ( temp anom win , q1 )
s temp high win = np . quantile ( temp anom win , q2 )
# Indices
of
extreme alpha
values
idx alpha low sum = np . where (( alpha anom < s alpha low sum ) & (
sum idx bool ) )
idx alpha high sum = np . where (( alpha anom > s alpha high sum ) & (
sum idx bool ) )
idx alpha low win = np . where (( alpha anom < s alpha low win ) & (
win idx bool ) )
idx alpha high win = np . where (( alpha anom > s alpha high win ) & (
win idx bool ) )
# Indices
of
exteme temp .
values
idx temp low sum = np . where (( temp anom mean < s temp low sum ) & (
sum idx bool ) )
idx temp high sum = np . where (( temp anom mean > s temp high sum ) & (
sum idx bool ) )
idx temp low win = np . where (( temp anom mean < s temp low win ) & (
win idx bool ) )
idx temp high win = np . where (( temp anom mean > s temp high win ) & (
win idx bool ) )
# Extract
slp and temp . anom .
f o r
extreme alpha
values
slp anom alpha low sum = slp anom grid [ idx alpha low sum ]
slp anom alpha high sum = slp anom grid [ idx alpha high sum ]
slp anom alpha low win = slp anom grid [ idx alpha low win ]
slp anom alpha high win = slp anom grid [ idx alpha high win ]
temp anom alpha low sum = temp anom grid [ idx alpha low sum ]
Page 77 of 91
==PAGE:85==
A
PYTHON CODE
temp anom alpha high sum = temp anom grid [ idx alpha high sum ]
temp anom alpha low win = temp anom grid [ idx alpha low win ]
temp anom alpha high win = temp anom grid [ idx alpha high win ]
# Extract
slp and temp . anom f or
extreme temperature
slp anom temp low sum = slp anom grid [ idx temp low sum ]
slp anom temp high sum = slp anom grid [ idx temp high sum ]
slp anom temp low win = slp anom grid [ idx temp low win ]
slp anom temp high win = slp anom grid [ idx temp high win ]
temp anom temp low sum = temp anom grid [ idx temp low sum ]
temp anom temp high sum = temp anom grid [ idx temp high sum ]
temp anom temp low win = temp anom grid [ idx temp low win ]
temp anom temp high win = temp anom grid [ idx temp high win ]
# Get mean values
of
anomalies
f or
extreme alpha
values
slp anom alpha low sum mean = np . mean( slp anom alpha low sum , axis =0)
slp anom alpha high sum mean = np . mean( slp anom alpha high sum , axis =0)
slp anom alpha low win mean = np . mean( slp anom alpha low win , axis =0)
slp anom alpha high win mean = np . mean( slp anom alpha high win , axis =0)
temp anom alpha low sum mean = np . mean( temp anom alpha low sum , axis =0)
temp anom alpha high sum mean = np . mean( temp anom alpha high sum , axis =0)
temp anom alpha low win mean = np . mean( temp anom alpha low win , axis =0)
temp anom alpha high win mean = np . mean( temp anom alpha high win , axis =0)
# Get mean values
of
anomalies
f or
extreme temperature
slp anom temp low sum mean = np . mean( slp anom temp low sum , axis =0)
slp anom temp high sum mean = np . mean( slp anom temp high sum , axis =0)
slp anom temp low win mean = np . mean( slp anom temp low win , axis =0)
slp anom temp high win mean = np . mean( slp anom temp high win , axis =0)
temp anom temp low sum mean = np . mean( temp anom temp low sum , axis =0)
temp anom temp high sum mean = np . mean( temp anom temp high sum , axis =0)
temp anom temp low win mean = np . mean( temp anom temp low win , axis =0)
temp anom temp high win mean = np . mean( temp anom temp high win , axis =0)
############### Plot
composite
anomalies
fo r
alpha
extremes
(summer)
fig ,
axs = plt . subplots ( nrows=2, ncols =2, subplot kw={ ’ projection ’ :
ccrs .
Mercator () } , f i g s i z e =(14 ,10) )
axs [ 0 , 0 ] . c o a s t l i n e s ( l i n e s t y l e=’−−’ )
qcs1 = axs [ 0 , 0 ] . contour ( dlon , dlat , slp anom alpha high sum mean ,20 ,
transform=ccrs . PlateCarree () ,cmap=”coolwarm” ,vmin=−15,vmax=15)
axs [ 0 , 0 ] . g r i d l i n e s ()
axs [ 0 , 0 ] . s e t t i t l e ( r ”Composite SLP −high $\ alpha$
extremes ” , f o n t s i z e =25)
axs [ 0 , 1 ] . c o a s t l i n e s ( l i n e s t y l e=’−−’ )
qcs2 = axs [ 0 , 1 ] . contourf ( dlon , dlat , temp anom alpha high sum mean ,60 ,
transform=ccrs . PlateCarree () ,cmap=”coolwarm” ,vmin=−10,vmax=10)
axs [ 0 , 1 ] . g r i d l i n e s ()
Page 78 of 91
==PAGE:86==
A
PYTHON CODE
axs [ 0 , 1 ] . s e t t i t l e ( r ”Composite T2M −high $\ alpha$
extremes ” , f o n t s i z e =25)
axs [ 1 , 0 ] . c o a s t l i n e s ( l i n e s t y l e=’−−’ )
qcs3 = axs [ 1 , 0 ] . contour ( dlon , dlat , slp anom alpha low sum mean ,20 ,
transform=ccrs . PlateCarree () ,cmap=”coolwarm” ,vmin=−15,vmax=15)
axs [ 1 , 0 ] . g r i d l i n e s ()
axs [ 1 , 0 ] . s e t t i t l e ( r ”Composite SLP −low $\ alpha$
extremes ” , f o n t s i z e =25)
axs [ 1 , 1 ] . c o a s t l i n e s ( l i n e s t y l e=’−−’ )
qcs4 = axs [ 1 , 1 ] . contourf ( dlon , dlat , temp anom alpha low sum mean ,60 ,
transform=ccrs . PlateCarree () ,cmap=”coolwarm” ,vmin=−10,vmax=10)
axs [ 1 , 1 ] . g r i d l i n e s ()
axs [ 1 , 1 ] . s e t t i t l e ( r ”Composite T2M −low $\ alpha$
extremes ” , f o n t s i z e =25)
f i g . t i g h t l a y o u t ()
cbar1 = f i g . colorbar ( ScalarMappable (norm=qcs1 . norm , cmap=qcs1 . cmap) , t i c k s
=range (−15, 20 ,
5) , ax=(axs [ 0 , 0 ] , axs [ 1 , 0 ] ) , shrink =0.7 , lo c at i on=” right ” )
cbar1 . ax . tick params ( l a b e l s i z e =20)
cbar1 . s e t l a b e l ( r ”SLP in hPa” , f o n t s i z e =20, rotation =270)
cbar2 = f i g . colorbar ( ScalarMappable (norm=qcs2 . norm , cmap=qcs2 . cmap) , t i c k s
=range (−10, 12 ,
2) , ax=(axs [ 0 , 1 ] , axs [ 1 , 1 ] ) , shrink =0.7 , lo c at i on=” right ” )
cbar2 . ax . tick params ( l a b e l s i z e =20)
cbar2 . s e t l a b e l ( r ”T2M in K” , f o n t s i z e =20, rotation =270)
f i g . s u p t i t l e ( ”Summer (JJA) ” , f o n t s i z e =32)
plt . show ()
############### Plot
composite
anomalies
fo r
alpha
extremes
( winter )
fig ,
axs = plt . subplots ( nrows=2, ncols =2, subplot kw={ ’ projection ’ :
ccrs .
Mercator () } , f i g s i z e =(14 ,10) )
axs [ 0 , 0 ] . c o a s t l i n e s ( l i n e s t y l e=’−−’ )
qcs1 = axs [ 0 , 0 ] . contour ( dlon , dlat , slp anom alpha high win mean ,20 ,
transform=ccrs . PlateCarree () ,cmap=”coolwarm” ,vmin=−15,vmax=15)
axs [ 0 , 0 ] . g r i d l i n e s ()
axs [ 0 , 0 ] . s e t t i t l e ( r ”Composite SLP −high $\ alpha$
extremes ” , f o n t s i z e =25)
axs [ 0 , 1 ] . c o a s t l i n e s ( l i n e s t y l e=’−−’ )
qcs2 = axs [ 0 , 1 ] . contourf ( dlon , dlat , temp anom alpha high win mean ,60 ,
transform=ccrs . PlateCarree () ,cmap=”coolwarm” ,vmin=−10,vmax=10)
axs [ 0 , 1 ] . g r i d l i n e s ()
axs [ 0 , 1 ] . s e t t i t l e ( r ”Composite T2M −high $\ alpha$
extremes ” , f o n t s i z e =25)
axs [ 1 , 0 ] . c o a s t l i n e s ( l i n e s t y l e=’−−’ )
qcs3 = axs [ 1 , 0 ] . contour ( dlon , dlat , slp anom alpha low win mean ,20 ,
transform=ccrs . PlateCarree () ,cmap=”coolwarm” ,vmin=−15,vmax=15)
axs [ 1 , 0 ] . g r i d l i n e s ()
axs [ 1 , 0 ] . s e t t i t l e ( r ”Composite SLP −low $\ alpha$
extremes ” , f o n t s i z e =25)
Page 79 of 91
==PAGE:87==
A
PYTHON CODE
axs [ 1 , 1 ] . c o a s t l i n e s ( l i n e s t y l e=’−−’ )
qcs4 = axs [ 1 , 1 ] . contourf ( dlon , dlat , temp anom alpha low win mean ,60 ,
transform=ccrs . PlateCarree () ,cmap=”coolwarm” ,vmin=−10,vmax=10)
axs [ 1 , 1 ] . g r i d l i n e s ()
axs [ 1 , 1 ] . s e t t i t l e ( r ”Composite T2M −low $\ alpha$
extremes ” , f o n t s i z e =25)
f i g . t i g h t l a y o u t ()
cbar = f i g . colorbar ( ScalarMappable (norm=qcs1 . norm , cmap=qcs1 . cmap) , t i c k s=
range (−15, 20 ,
5) , ax=(axs [ 0 , 0 ] , axs [ 1 , 0 ] ) , shrink =0.7 , lo c at i on=” right ” )
cbar . ax . tick params ( l a b e l s i z e =20)
cbar . s e t l a b e l ( r ”SLP in hPa” , f o n t s i z e =20, rotation =270)
cbar = f i g . colorbar ( ScalarMappable (norm=qcs2 . norm , cmap=qcs2 . cmap) , t i c k s=
range (−10, 12 ,
2) , ax=(axs [ 0 , 1 ] , axs [ 1 , 1 ] ) , shrink =0.7 , lo c at i on=” right ” )
cbar . ax . tick params ( l a b e l s i z e =20)
cbar . s e t l a b e l ( r ”T2M in K” , f o n t s i z e =20, rotation =270)
f i g . s u p t i t l e ( ”Winter (JJA) ” , f o n t s i z e =32)
plt . show ()
############### Plot
composite
anomalies
fo r
temperature
extremes
(summer
)
fig ,
axs = plt . subplots ( nrows=2, ncols =2, subplot kw={ ’ projection ’ :
ccrs .
Mercator () } , f i g s i z e =(14 ,10) )
axs [ 0 , 0 ] . c o a s t l i n e s ( l i n e s t y l e=’−−’ )
qcs1 = axs [ 0 , 0 ] . contour ( dlon , dlat , slp anom temp high sum mean ,20 ,
transform=ccrs . PlateCarree () ,cmap=”coolwarm” ,vmin=−15,vmax=15)
axs [ 0 , 0 ] . g r i d l i n e s ()
axs [ 0 , 0 ] . s e t t i t l e ( ”Composite SLP −Warm extremes ” , f o n t s i z e =25)
axs [ 0 , 1 ] . c o a s t l i n e s ( l i n e s t y l e=’−−’ )
qcs2 = axs [ 0 , 1 ] . contourf ( dlon , dlat , temp anom temp high sum mean ,60 ,
transform=ccrs . PlateCarree () ,cmap=”coolwarm” ,vmin=−10,vmax=10)
axs [ 0 , 1 ] . g r i d l i n e s ()
axs [ 0 , 1 ] . s e t t i t l e ( ”Composite T2M −Warm extremes ” , f o n t s i z e =25)
axs [ 1 , 0 ] . c o a s t l i n e s ( l i n e s t y l e=’−−’ )
qcs3 = axs [ 1 , 0 ] . contour ( dlon , dlat , slp anom temp low sum mean ,20 , transform
=ccrs . PlateCarree () ,cmap=”coolwarm” ,vmin=−15,vmax=15)
axs [ 1 , 0 ] . g r i d l i n e s ()
axs [ 1 , 0 ] . s e t t i t l e ( ”Composite SLP −Cold extremes ” , f o n t s i z e =25)
axs [ 1 , 1 ] . c o a s t l i n e s ( l i n e s t y l e=’−−’ )
qcs4 = axs [ 1 , 1 ] . contourf ( dlon , dlat , temp anom temp low sum mean ,60 ,
transform=ccrs . PlateCarree () ,cmap=”coolwarm” ,vmin=−10,vmax=10)
axs [ 1 , 1 ] . g r i d l i n e s ()
axs [ 1 , 1 ] . s e t t i t l e ( ”Composite T2M −Cold extremes ” , f o n t s i z e =25)
Page 80 of 91
==PAGE:88==
A
PYTHON CODE
f i g . t i g h t l a y o u t ()
cbar = f i g . colorbar ( ScalarMappable (norm=qcs1 . norm , cmap=qcs1 . cmap) , t i c k s=
range (−15, 20 ,
5) , ax=(axs [ 0 , 0 ] , axs [ 1 , 0 ] ) , shrink =0.7 , lo c at i on=” right ” )
cbar . ax . tick params ( l a b e l s i z e =20)
cbar . s e t l a b e l ( r ”SLP in hPa” , f o n t s i z e =20, rotation =270)
cbar = f i g . colorbar ( ScalarMappable (norm=qcs2 . norm , cmap=qcs2 . cmap) , t i c k s=
range (−10, 12 ,
2) , ax=(axs [ 0 , 1 ] , axs [ 1 , 1 ] ) , shrink =0.7 , lo c at i on=” right ” )
cbar . ax . tick params ( l a b e l s i z e =20)
cbar . s e t l a b e l ( r ”T2M in K” , f o n t s i z e =20, rotation =270)
f i g . s u p t i t l e ( ”Summer (JJA) ” , f o n t s i z e =32)
plt . show ()
############### Plot
composite
anomalies
fo r
temperature
extremes
( winter
)
fig ,
axs = plt . subplots ( nrows=2, ncols =2, subplot kw={ ’ projection ’ :
ccrs .
Mercator () } , f i g s i z e =(14 ,10) )
axs [ 0 , 0 ] . c o a s t l i n e s ( l i n e s t y l e=’−−’ )
qcs1 = axs [ 0 , 0 ] . contour ( dlon , dlat , slp anom temp high win mean ,20 ,
transform=ccrs . PlateCarree () ,cmap=”coolwarm” ,vmin=−15,vmax=15)
axs [ 0 , 0 ] . g r i d l i n e s ()
axs [ 0 , 0 ] . s e t t i t l e ( ”Composite SLP −Warm extremes ” , f o n t s i z e =25)
axs [ 0 , 1 ] . c o a s t l i n e s ( l i n e s t y l e=’−−’ )
qcs2 = axs [ 0 , 1 ] . contourf ( dlon , dlat , temp anom temp high win mean ,60 ,
transform=ccrs . PlateCarree () ,cmap=”coolwarm” ,vmin=−10,vmax=10)
axs [ 0 , 1 ] . g r i d l i n e s ()
axs [ 0 , 1 ] . s e t t i t l e ( ”Composite T2M −Warm extremes ” , f o n t s i z e =25)
axs [ 1 , 0 ] . c o a s t l i n e s ( l i n e s t y l e=’−−’ )
qcs3 = axs [ 1 , 0 ] . contour ( dlon , dlat , slp anom temp low win mean ,20 , transform
=ccrs . PlateCarree () ,cmap=”coolwarm” ,vmin=−15,vmax=15)
axs [ 1 , 0 ] . g r i d l i n e s ()
axs [ 1 , 0 ] . s e t t i t l e ( ”Composite SLP −Cold extremes ” , f o n t s i z e =25)
axs [ 1 , 1 ] . c o a s t l i n e s ( l i n e s t y l e=’−−’ )
qcs4 = axs [ 1 , 1 ] . contourf ( dlon , dlat , temp anom temp low win mean ,60 ,
transform=ccrs . PlateCarree () ,cmap=”coolwarm” ,vmin=−10,vmax=10)
axs [ 1 , 1 ] . g r i d l i n e s ()
axs [ 1 , 1 ] . s e t t i t l e ( ”Composite T2M −Cold extremes ” , f o n t s i z e =25)
f i g . t i g h t l a y o u t ()
cbar = f i g . colorbar ( ScalarMappable (norm=qcs1 . norm , cmap=qcs1 . cmap) , t i c k s=
range (−15, 20 ,
5) , ax=(axs [ 0 , 0 ] , axs [ 1 , 0 ] ) , shrink =0.7 , lo c at i on=” right ” )
cbar . ax . tick params ( l a b e l s i z e =20)
Page 81 of 91
==PAGE:89==
A
PYTHON CODE
cbar . s e t l a b e l ( r ”SLP in hPa” , f o n t s i z e =20, rotation =270)
cbar = f i g . colorbar ( ScalarMappable (norm=qcs2 . norm , cmap=qcs2 . cmap) , t i c k s=
range (−10, 12 ,
2) , ax=(axs [ 0 , 1 ] , axs [ 1 , 1 ] ) , shrink =0.7 , lo c at i on=” right ” )
cbar . ax . tick params ( l a b e l s i z e =20)
cbar . s e t l a b e l ( r ”T2M in K” , f o n t s i z e =20, rotation =270)
f i g . s u p t i t l e ( ”Winter (DJF) ” , f o n t s i z e =32)
plt . show ()
############### Compute average
daily
b a r o c l i n i c
vector
# Compute gradients
of SLP and temp .
resp .
slp grad = np . gradient ( slp , axis =(1 ,2) )
temp grad = np . gradient (temp , axis =(1 ,2) )
temp grad stack = np . stack (( temp grad [ 0 ] , temp grad [ 1 ] ) )
s l p g r a d stack = np . stack (( slp grad [ 0 ] , slp grad [ 1 ] ) )
# Compute b a r o c l i n i c
vector and area−average
baroclin = −np . cross ( slp grad stack , temp grad stack , axis =0)
W = np . cos (np . pi /180∗dlat ) # Latitude
weights
baroclin lon sum = np . sum( baroclin , axis =2)
baroclin lon sum w = np . matmul( baroclin lon sum ,W)
baroclin mean = baroclin lon sum w /( len ( dlon ) ∗sum(W) )
# Seasonal
cycle
baroclin noleap = np . delete ( baroclin mean , leap day idx )
b a r o c l i n s c = np . mean( baroclin noleap . reshape ( int ( len ( baroclin noleap )
/365) ,365) , axis =0)
b a r o c l i n s c r e p = np . t i l e (np . asarray ( b a r o c l i n s c ) , int ( len ( yday noleap )
/365) )
# Barcolinic
vector
average
anomalies
baroclin anom = baroclin noleap −b a r o c l i n s c r e p
############### Compute mean and 95% conf .
i n t e r v a l
of
metrics
anomalies
as
function
of
quantiles
# Define
quantiles
p s i l o g s = np . logspace ( s t a r t =0, stop=−2,num=10)
# Allocate memory
d slp anom low sum mean = np . empty( len ( p s i l o g s ) )
d slp anom high sum mean = np . empty( len ( p s i l o g s ) )
d slp anom low win mean = np . empty( len ( p s i l o g s ) )
d slp anom high win mean = np . empty( len ( p s i l o g s ) )
Page 82 of 91
==PAGE:90==
A
PYTHON CODE
d temp anom low sum mean = np . empty( len ( p s i l o g s ) )
d temp anom high sum mean = np . empty( len ( p s i l o g s ) )
d temp anom low win mean = np . empty( len ( p s i l o g s ) )
d temp anom high win mean = np . empty( len ( p s i l o g s ) )
d slp temp anom low sum mean = np . empty( len ( p s i l o g s ) )
d slp temp anom high sum mean = np . empty( len ( p s i l o g s ) )
d slp temp anom low win mean = np . empty( len ( p s i l o g s ) )
d slp temp anom high win mean = np . empty( len ( p s i l o g s ) )
theta slp anom low sum mean = np . empty( len ( p s i l o g s ) )
theta slp anom high sum mean = np . empty( len ( p s i l o g s ) )
theta slp anom low win mean = np . empty( len ( p s i l o g s ) )
theta slp anom high win mean = np . empty( len ( p s i l o g s ) )
theta temp anom low sum mean = np . empty( len ( p s i l o g s ) )
theta temp anom high sum mean = np . empty( len ( p s i l o g s ) )
theta temp anom low win mean = np . empty( len ( p s i l o g s ) )
theta temp anom high win mean = np . empty( len ( p s i l o g s ) )
theta slp temp anom low sum mean = np . empty( len ( p s i l o g s ) )
theta slp temp anom high sum mean = np . empty( len ( p s i l o g s ) )
theta slp temp anom low win mean = np . empty( len ( p s i l o g s ) )
theta slp temp anom high win mean = np . empty( len ( p s i l o g s ) )
alpha anom low sum mean = np . empty( len ( p s i l o g s ) )
alpha anom high sum mean = np . empty( len ( p s i l o g s ) )
alpha anom low win mean = np . empty( len ( p s i l o g s ) )
alpha anom high win mean = np . empty( len ( p s i l o g s ) )
B anom low sum mean = np . empty( len ( p s i l o g s ) )
B anom high sum mean = np . empty( len ( p s i l o g s ) )
B anom low win mean = np . empty( len ( p s i l o g s ) )
B anom high win mean = np . empty( len ( p s i l o g s ) )
d slp temp anom low sum conf = np . empty( len ( p s i l o g s ) )
d slp temp anom high sum conf = np . empty( len ( p s i l o g s ) )
d slp temp anom low win conf = np . empty( len ( p s i l o g s ) )
d slp temp anom high win conf = np . empty( len ( p s i l o g s ) )
theta slp temp anom low sum conf = np . empty( len ( p s i l o g s ) )
theta slp temp anom high sum conf = np . empty( len ( p s i l o g s ) )
theta slp temp anom low win conf = np . empty( len ( p s i l o g s ) )
theta slp temp anom high win conf = np . empty( len ( p s i l o g s ) )
alpha anom low sum conf = np . empty( len ( p s i l o g s ) )
alpha anom high sum conf = np . empty( len ( p s i l o g s ) )
alpha anom low win conf = np . empty( len ( p s i l o g s ) )
alpha anom high win conf = np . empty( len ( p s i l o g s ) )
B anom low sum conf = np . empty( len ( p s i l o g s ) )
B anom high sum conf = np . empty( len ( p s i l o g s ) )
Page 83 of 91
==PAGE:91==
A
PYTHON CODE
B anom low win conf = np . empty( len ( p s i l o g s ) )
B anom high win conf = np . empty( len ( p s i l o g s ) )
# Define
l i s t
fo r
i n d i c e s
idx low sum = [ ]
idx high sum = [ ]
idx low win = [ ]
idx high win = [ ]
# Compute mean and std
f or
a l l
quantiles
f o r
i , psi comp
in
enumerate ( p s i l o g s ) :
# Quantile
s low sum = np . quantile ( temp anom sum , psi comp )
s high sum = np . quantile ( temp anom sum,1−psi comp )
s low win = np . quantile ( temp anom win , psi comp )
s high win = np . quantile ( temp anom win ,1−psi comp )
# Indices
of
extreme temp .
idx low sum . append (np . where (( temp anom mean < s low sum ) & (
sum idx bool ) ) )
idx high sum . append (np . where (( temp anom mean > s high sum ) & (
sum idx bool ) ) )
idx low win . append (np . where (( temp anom mean < s low win ) & (
win idx bool ) ) )
idx high win . append (np . where (( temp anom mean > s high win ) & (
win idx bool ) ) )
# Metrics
anomalies
d slp anom low sum = d slp anom [ idx low sum [ i ] [ 0 ] ]
d slp anom high sum = d slp anom [ idx high sum [ i ] [ 0 ] ]
d slp anom low win = d slp anom [ idx low win [ i ] [ 0 ] ]
d slp anom high win = d slp anom [ idx high win [ i ] [ 0 ] ]
d temp anom low sum = d temp anom [ idx low sum [ i ] [ 0 ] ]
d temp anom high sum = d temp anom [ idx high sum [ i ] [ 0 ] ]
d temp anom low win = d temp anom [ idx low win [ i ] [ 0 ] ]
d temp anom high win = d temp anom [ idx high win [ i ] [ 0 ] ]
d slp temp anom low sum = d slp temp anom [ idx low sum [ i ] [ 0 ] ]
d slp temp anom high sum = d slp temp anom [ idx high sum [ i ] [ 0 ] ]
d slp temp anom low win = d slp temp anom [ idx low win [ i ] [ 0 ] ]
d slp temp anom high win = d slp temp anom [ idx high win [ i ] [ 0 ] ]
theta slp anom low sum = theta slp anom [ idx low sum [ i ] [ 0 ] ]
theta slp anom high sum = theta slp anom [ idx high sum [ i ] [ 0 ] ]
theta slp anom low win = theta slp anom [ idx low win [ i ] [ 0 ] ]
theta slp anom high win = theta slp anom [ idx high win [ i ] [ 0 ] ]
theta temp anom low sum = theta temp anom [ idx low sum [ i ] [ 0 ] ]
theta temp anom high sum = theta temp anom [ idx high sum [ i ] [ 0 ] ]
theta temp anom low win = theta temp anom [ idx low win [ i ] [ 0 ] ]
theta temp anom high win = theta temp anom [ idx high win [ i ] [ 0 ] ]
Page 84 of 91
==PAGE:92==
A
PYTHON CODE
theta slp temp anom low sum = theta slp temp anom [ idx low sum [ i ] [ 0 ] ]
theta slp temp anom high sum = theta slp temp anom [ idx high sum [ i
] [ 0 ] ]
theta slp temp anom low win = theta slp temp anom [ idx low win [ i ] [ 0 ] ]
theta slp temp anom high win = theta slp temp anom [ idx high win [ i
] [ 0 ] ]
alpha anom low sum = alpha anom [ idx low sum [ i ] [ 0 ] ]
alpha anom high sum = alpha anom [ idx high sum [ i ] [ 0 ] ]
alpha anom low win = alpha anom [ idx low win [ i ] [ 0 ] ]
alpha anom high win = alpha anom [ idx high win [ i ] [ 0 ] ]
B anom low sum = baroclin anom [ idx low sum [ i ] [ 0 ] ]
B anom high sum = baroclin anom [ idx high sum [ i ] [ 0 ] ]
B anom low win = baroclin anom [ idx low win [ i ] [ 0 ] ]
B anom high win = baroclin anom [ idx high win [ i ] [ 0 ] ]
# Mean of
anomalies
d slp anom low sum mean [ i ] = np . mean( d slp anom low sum )
d slp anom high sum mean [ i ] = np . mean( d slp anom high sum )
d slp anom low win mean [ i ] = np . mean( d slp anom low win )
d slp anom high win mean [ i ] = np . mean( d slp anom high win )
d temp anom low sum mean [ i ] = np . mean( d temp anom low sum )
d temp anom high sum mean [ i ] = np . mean( d temp anom high sum )
d temp anom low win mean [ i ] = np . mean( d temp anom low win )
d temp anom high win mean [ i ] = np . mean( d temp anom high win )
d slp temp anom low sum mean [ i ] = np . mean( d slp temp anom low sum )
d slp temp anom high sum mean [ i ] = np . mean( d slp temp anom high sum )
d slp temp anom low win mean [ i ] = np . mean( d slp temp anom low win )
d slp temp anom high win mean [ i ] = np . mean( d slp temp anom high win )
theta slp anom low sum mean [ i ] = np . mean( theta slp anom low sum )
theta slp anom high sum mean [ i ] = np . mean( theta slp anom high sum )
theta slp anom low win mean [ i ] = np . mean( theta slp anom low win )
theta slp anom high win mean [ i ] = np . mean( theta slp anom high win )
theta temp anom low sum mean [ i ] = np . mean( theta temp anom low sum )
theta temp anom high sum mean [ i ] = np . mean( theta temp anom high sum )
theta temp anom low win mean [ i ] = np . mean( theta temp anom low win )
theta temp anom high win mean [ i ] = np . mean( theta temp anom high win )
theta slp temp anom low sum mean [ i ] = np . mean(
theta slp temp anom low sum )
theta slp temp anom high sum mean [ i ] = np . mean(
theta slp temp anom high sum )
theta slp temp anom low win mean [ i ] = np . mean(
theta slp temp anom low win )
theta slp temp anom high win mean [ i ] = np . mean(
theta slp temp anom high win )
Page 85 of 91
==PAGE:93==
A
PYTHON CODE
alpha anom low sum mean [ i ] = np . mean( alpha anom low sum )
alpha anom high sum mean [ i ] = np . mean( alpha anom high sum )
alpha anom low win mean [ i ] = np . mean( alpha anom low win )
alpha anom high win mean [ i ] = np . mean( alpha anom high win )
B anom low sum mean [ i ] = np . mean( B anom low sum )
B anom high sum mean [ i ] = np . mean( B anom high sum )
B anom low win mean [ i ] = np . mean( B anom low win )
B anom high win mean [ i ] = np . mean( B anom high win )
# 95 % confidence
i n t e r v a l
d slp temp anom low sum conf [ i ] = st . norm . ppf (0.975) ∗np . std (
d slp temp anom low sum ) /np . sqrt (np . s i z e ( d slp temp anom low sum ) )
d slp temp anom high sum conf [ i ] = st . norm . ppf (0.975) ∗np . std (
d slp temp anom high sum ) /np . sqrt (np . s i z e ( d slp temp anom high sum
) )
d slp temp anom low win conf [ i ] = st . norm . ppf (0.975) ∗np . std (
d slp temp anom low win ) /np . sqrt (np . s i z e ( d slp temp anom low win ) )
d slp temp anom high win conf [ i ] = st . norm . ppf (0.975) ∗np . std (
d slp temp anom high win ) /np . sqrt (np . s i z e ( d slp temp anom high win
) )
theta slp temp anom low sum conf [ i ] = st . norm . ppf (0.975) ∗np . std (
theta slp temp anom low sum ) /np . sqrt (np . s i z e (
theta slp temp anom low sum ) )
theta slp temp anom high sum conf [ i ] = st . norm . ppf (0.975) ∗np . std (
theta slp temp anom high sum ) /np . sqrt (np . s i z e (
theta slp temp anom high sum ) )
theta slp temp anom low win conf [ i ] = st . norm . ppf (0.975) ∗np . std (
theta slp temp anom low win ) /np . sqrt (np . s i z e (
theta slp temp anom low win ) )
theta slp temp anom high win conf [ i ] = st . norm . ppf (0.975) ∗np . std (
theta slp temp anom high win ) /np . sqrt (np . s i z e (
theta slp temp anom high win ) )
alpha anom low sum conf [ i ] = st . norm . ppf (0.975) ∗np . std (
alpha anom low sum ) /np . sqrt (np . s i z e ( alpha anom low sum ) )
alpha anom high sum conf [ i ] = st . norm . ppf (0.975) ∗np . std (
alpha anom high sum ) /np . sqrt (np . s i z e ( alpha anom high sum ) )
alpha anom low win conf [ i ] = st . norm . ppf (0.975) ∗np . std (
alpha anom low win ) /np . sqrt (np . s i z e ( alpha anom low win ) )
alpha anom high win conf [ i ] = st . norm . ppf (0.975) ∗np . std (
alpha anom high win ) /np . sqrt (np . s i z e ( alpha anom high win ) )
B anom low sum conf [ i ] = st . norm . ppf (0.975) ∗np . std ( B anom low sum ) /np
. sqrt (np . s i z e ( B anom low sum ) )
B anom high sum conf [ i ] = st . norm . ppf (0.975) ∗np . std ( B anom high sum ) /
np . sqrt (np . s i z e ( B anom high sum ) )
B anom low win conf [ i ] = st . norm . ppf (0.975) ∗np . std ( B anom low win ) /np
. sqrt (np . s i z e ( B anom low win ) )
B anom high win conf [ i ] = st . norm . ppf (0.975) ∗np . std ( B anom high win ) /
Page 86 of 91
==PAGE:94==
A
PYTHON CODE
np . sqrt (np . s i z e ( B anom high win ) )
############################### Plot mean and std
of
metrics
anomalies
as
function
of
quantiles
(summer)
fig ,
axs = plt . subplots ( nrows=2, ncols =2, sharex=True , f i g s i z e =(14 ,10) )
axs [ 0 , 0 ] . errorbar ( p s i l o g s , d slp anom low sum mean , marker=’ o ’ , l i n e s t y l e=”
dashed” , color=”tab : blue ” , l a b e l=”SLP −cold ” )
axs [ 0 , 0 ] . errorbar ( p s i l o g s , d slp anom high sum mean , marker=’ o ’ , l i n e s t y l e=
”dashed” , color=”tab : red ” , l a b e l=”SLP −warm” )
axs [ 0 , 0 ] . errorbar ( p s i l o g s , d temp anom low sum mean , marker=’ o ’ , l i n e s t y l e=
” dotted ” , color=”tab : blue ” , l a b e l=”T2M −cold ” )
axs [ 0 , 0 ] . errorbar ( p s i l o g s , d temp anom high sum mean , marker=’ o ’ , l i n e s t y l e
=” dotted ” , color=”tab : red ” , l a b e l=”T2M −warm” )
axs [ 0 , 0 ] . errorbar ( p s i l o g s , d slp temp anom low sum mean , yerr=
d slp temp anom low sum conf , marker=’ o ’ , l i n e s t y l e=” s o l i d ” , color=”tab :
blue ” , l a b e l=”SLP and T2M −cold ” )
axs [ 0 , 0 ] . errorbar ( p s i l o g s , d slp temp anom high sum mean , yerr=
d slp temp anom high sum conf , marker=’ o ’ , l i n e s t y l e=” s o l i d ” , color=”tab :
red ” , l a b e l=”SLP and T2M −warm” )
axs [ 0 , 0 ] . set ylim (( −2.5 ,2.5) )
axs [ 0 , 0 ] . s e t x s c a l e ( ” log ” )
axs [ 0 , 0 ] . s e t t i t l e ( ” Local Dimension” , f o n t s i z e =25)
axs [ 0 , 0 ] . s e t x l a b e l ( r ”$1−\psi$ ” , f o n t s i z e =20)
axs [ 0 , 0 ] . s e t y l a b e l ( r ”$d$ anomalies ” , f o n t s i z e =20)
axs [ 0 , 0 ] . tick params ( labelbottom=True , axis=”both” , l a b e l s i z e =20)
axs [ 0 , 1 ] . errorbar ( p s i l o g s , theta slp anom low sum mean , marker=’ o ’ ,
l i n e s t y l e=”dashed” , color=”tab : blue ” )
axs [ 0 , 1 ] . errorbar ( p s i l o g s , theta slp anom high sum mean , marker=’ o ’ ,
l i n e s t y l e=”dashed” , color=”tab : red ” )
axs [ 0 , 1 ] . errorbar ( p s i l o g s , theta temp anom low sum mean , marker=’ o ’ ,
l i n e s t y l e=” dotted ” , color=”tab : blue ” )
axs [ 0 , 1 ] . errorbar ( p s i l o g s , theta temp anom high sum mean , marker=’ o ’ ,
l i n e s t y l e=” dotted ” , color=”tab : red ” )
axs [ 0 , 1 ] . errorbar ( p s i l o g s , theta slp temp anom low sum mean , yerr=
theta slp temp anom low sum conf , marker=’ o ’ , l i n e s t y l e=” s o l i d ” , color=”
tab : blue ” )
axs [ 0 , 1 ] . errorbar ( p s i l o g s , theta slp temp anom high sum mean , yerr=
theta slp temp anom high sum conf , marker=’ o ’ , l i n e s t y l e=” s o l i d ” , color=”
tab : red ” )
axs [ 0 , 1 ] . set ylim (( −0.16 ,0.16) )
axs [ 0 , 1 ] . s e t x s c a l e ( ” log ” )
axs [ 0 , 1 ] . s e t t i t l e ( ” Local
Inverse
Persistence ” , f o n t s i z e =25)
axs [ 0 , 1 ] . s e t x l a b e l ( r ”$1−\psi$ ” , f o n t s i z e =20)
axs [ 0 , 1 ] . s e t y l a b e l ( r ”$\ theta$
anomalies ” , f o n t s i z e =20)
axs [ 0 , 1 ] . tick params ( labelbottom=True , axis=”both” , l a b e l s i z e =20)
axs [ 1 , 0 ] . errorbar ( p s i l o g s , alpha anom low sum mean , yerr=
alpha anom low sum conf , marker=’ o ’ , color=”tab : blue ” )
axs [ 1 , 0 ] . errorbar ( p s i l o g s , alpha anom high sum mean , yerr=
Page 87 of 91
==PAGE:95==
A
PYTHON CODE
alpha anom high sum conf , marker=’ o ’ , color=”tab : red ” )
axs [ 1 , 0 ] . set ylim (( −0.08 ,0.08) )
axs [ 1 , 0 ] . s e t x s c a l e ( ” log ” )
axs [ 1 , 0 ] . s e t t i t l e ( ”Co−recurrence
Ratio” , f o n t s i z e =25)
axs [ 1 , 0 ] . s e t x l a b e l ( r ”$1−\psi$ ” , f o n t s i z e =20)
axs [ 1 , 0 ] . s e t y l a b e l ( r ”$\ alpha$
anomalies ” , f o n t s i z e =20)
axs [ 1 , 0 ] . tick params ( labelbottom=True , axis=”both” , l a b e l s i z e =20)
axs [ 1 , 1 ] . errorbar ( p s i l o g s , B anom low sum mean , yerr=B anom low sum conf ,
marker=’ o ’ , color=”tab : blue ” )
axs [ 1 , 1 ] . errorbar ( p s i l o g s , B anom high sum mean , yerr=B anom high sum conf
, marker=’ o ’ , color=”tab : red ” )
axs [ 1 , 1 ] . set ylim (( −1.6 ,1.6) )
axs [ 1 , 1 ] . s e t x s c a l e ( ” log ” )
axs [ 1 , 1 ] . s e t t i t l e ( ” Baroclinic
Vector” , f o n t s i z e =25)
axs [ 1 , 1 ] . s e t x l a b e l ( r ”$\ psi$ ” , f o n t s i z e =20)
axs [ 1 , 1 ] . s e t y l a b e l ( ”B anomalies ” , f o n t s i z e =20)
axs [ 1 , 1 ] . tick params ( labelbottom=True , axis=”both” , l a b e l s i z e =20)
f i g . t i g h t l a y o u t ()
f i g . subplots adjust ( top =0.88)
handles ,
l a b e l s =axs [ 0 , 0 ] . g e t l e g e n d h a n d l e s l a b e l s ()
f i g . legend ( handles , labels , f o n t s i z e =20, ncol =3, bbox to anchor =(0.5 , −0.1) ,
loc=” lower
center ” )
f i g . s u p t i t l e ( ”Summer (JJA) ” , f o n t s i z e =32)
plt . show ()
############################### Plot mean and std
of
metrics
anomalies
as
function
of
quantiles
( winter )
fig ,
axs = plt . subplots ( nrows=2, ncols =2, sharex=True , f i g s i z e =(14 ,10) )
axs [ 0 , 0 ] . errorbar ( p s i l o g s , d slp anom low win mean , marker=’ o ’ , l i n e s t y l e=”
dashed” , color=”tab : blue ” , l a b e l=”SLP −cold ” )
axs [ 0 , 0 ] . errorbar ( p s i l o g s , d slp anom high win mean , marker=’ o ’ , l i n e s t y l e=
”dashed” , color=”tab : red ” , l a b e l=”SLP −warm” )
axs [ 0 , 0 ] . errorbar ( p s i l o g s , d temp anom low win mean , marker=’ o ’ , l i n e s t y l e=
” dotted ” , color=”tab : blue ” , l a b e l=”T2M −cold ” )
axs [ 0 , 0 ] . errorbar ( p s i l o g s , d temp anom high win mean , marker=’ o ’ , l i n e s t y l e
=” dotted ” , color=”tab : red ” , l a b e l=”T2M −warm” )
axs [ 0 , 0 ] . errorbar ( p s i l o g s , d slp temp anom low win mean , yerr=
d slp temp anom low win conf , marker=’ o ’ , l i n e s t y l e=” s o l i d ” , color=”tab :
blue ” , l a b e l=”SLP and T2M −cold ” )
axs [ 0 , 0 ] . errorbar ( p s i l o g s , d slp temp anom high win mean , yerr=
d slp temp anom high win conf , marker=’ o ’ , l i n e s t y l e=” s o l i d ” , color=”tab :
red ” , l a b e l=”SLP and T2M −warm” )
axs [ 0 , 0 ] . set ylim (( −2.5 ,2.5) )
axs [ 0 , 0 ] . s e t x s c a l e ( ” log ” )
axs [ 0 , 0 ] . s e t t i t l e ( ” Local Dimension” , f o n t s i z e =25)
axs [ 0 , 0 ] . s e t x l a b e l ( r ”$1−\psi$ ” , f o n t s i z e =20)
axs [ 0 , 0 ] . s e t y l a b e l ( r ”$d$ anomalies ” , f o n t s i z e =20)
Page 88 of 91
==PAGE:96==
A
PYTHON CODE
axs [ 0 , 0 ] . tick params ( labelbottom=True , axis=”both” , l a b e l s i z e =20)
axs [ 0 , 1 ] . errorbar ( p s i l o g s , theta slp anom low win mean , marker=’ o ’ ,
l i n e s t y l e=”dashed” , color=”tab : blue ” )
axs [ 0 , 1 ] . errorbar ( p s i l o g s , theta slp anom high win mean , marker=’ o ’ ,
l i n e s t y l e=”dashed” , color=”tab : red ” )
axs [ 0 , 1 ] . errorbar ( p s i l o g s , theta temp anom low win mean , marker=’ o ’ ,
l i n e s t y l e=” dotted ” , color=”tab : blue ” )
axs [ 0 , 1 ] . errorbar ( p s i l o g s , theta temp anom high win mean , marker=’ o ’ ,
l i n e s t y l e=” dotted ” , color=”tab : red ” )
axs [ 0 , 1 ] . errorbar ( p s i l o g s , theta slp temp anom low win mean , yerr=
theta slp temp anom low win conf , marker=’ o ’ , l i n e s t y l e=” s o l i d ” , color=”
tab : blue ” )
axs [ 0 , 1 ] . errorbar ( p s i l o g s , theta slp temp anom high win mean , yerr=
theta slp temp anom high win conf , marker=’ o ’ , l i n e s t y l e=” s o l i d ” , color=”
tab : red ” )
axs [ 0 , 1 ] . set ylim (( −0.16 ,0.16) )
axs [ 0 , 1 ] . s e t x s c a l e ( ” log ” )
axs [ 0 , 1 ] . s e t t i t l e ( ” Local
Inverse
Persistence ” , f o n t s i z e =25)
axs [ 0 , 1 ] . s e t x l a b e l ( r ”$1−\psi$ ” , f o n t s i z e =20)
axs [ 0 , 1 ] . s e t y l a b e l ( r ”$\ theta$
anomalies ” , f o n t s i z e =20)
axs [ 0 , 1 ] . tick params ( labelbottom=True , axis=”both” , l a b e l s i z e =20)
axs [ 1 , 0 ] . errorbar ( p s i l o g s , alpha anom low win mean , yerr=
alpha anom low win conf , marker=’ o ’ , color=”tab : blue ” )
axs [ 1 , 0 ] . errorbar ( p s i l o g s , alpha anom high win mean , yerr=
alpha anom high win conf , marker=’ o ’ , color=”tab : red ” )
axs [ 1 , 0 ] . set ylim (( −0.08 ,0.08) )
axs [ 1 , 0 ] . s e t x s c a l e ( ” log ” )
axs [ 1 , 0 ] . s e t t i t l e ( ”Co−recurrence
Ratio” , f o n t s i z e =25)
axs [ 1 , 0 ] . s e t x l a b e l ( r ”$1−\psi$ ” , f o n t s i z e =20)
axs [ 1 , 0 ] . s e t y l a b e l ( r ”$\ alpha$
anomalies ” , f o n t s i z e =20)
axs [ 1 , 0 ] . tick params ( labelbottom=True , axis=”both” , l a b e l s i z e =20)
axs [ 1 , 1 ] . errorbar ( p s i l o g s , B anom low win mean , yerr=B anom low win conf ,
marker=’ o ’ , color=”tab : blue ” )
axs [ 1 , 1 ] . errorbar ( p s i l o g s , B anom high win mean , yerr=B anom high win conf
, marker=’ o ’ , color=”tab : red ” )
axs [ 1 , 1 ] . set ylim (( −1.6 ,1.6) )
axs [ 1 , 1 ] . s e t x s c a l e ( ” log ” )
axs [ 1 , 1 ] . s e t t i t l e ( ” Baroclinic
Vector” , f o n t s i z e =25)
axs [ 1 , 1 ] . s e t x l a b e l ( r ”$\ psi$ ” , f o n t s i z e =20)
axs [ 1 , 1 ] . s e t y l a b e l ( ”B anomalies ” , f o n t s i z e =20)
axs [ 1 , 1 ] . tick params ( labelbottom=True , axis=”both” , l a b e l s i z e =20)
f i g . t i g h t l a y o u t ()
f i g . subplots adjust ( top =0.88)
handles ,
l a b e l s =axs [ 0 , 0 ] . g e t l e g e n d h a n d l e s l a b e l s ()
f i g . legend ( handles , labels , f o n t s i z e =20, ncol =3, bbox to anchor =(0.5 , −0.1) ,
loc=” lower
center ” )
f i g . s u p t i t l e ( ”Winter (DJF) ” , f o n t s i z e =32)
Page 89 of 91
==PAGE:97==
A
PYTHON CODE
plt . show ()
############### NAOI index
# Load data
df NAO idx = pd . read csv ( ”norm . daily . ao . cdas . z1000 .19500101 current . csv ” )
df NAO idx = df NAO idx . loc [ df NAO idx [ ” year ” ] >= 1959]
df NAO idx = df NAO idx . loc [ df NAO idx [ ” year ” ] <= 2021]
NAO idx = df NAO idx [ ” ao index cdas ” ] . to numpy ()
# Scatter
plot
of d vs
theta
f or SLP with
c o l o r s
according
to NAO index
plt . f i g u r e ( f i g s i z e =(14 ,6) )
plt . s c a t t e r ( d slp , theta slp , s =10,c=NAO idx , cmap=”coolwarm” ,vmin=−2,vmax
=2)
plt . t i t l e ( ”Sea Level
Pressure ” , f o n t s i z e =25)
plt . xlabel ( r ”$d {SLP}$” , f o n t s i z e =20)
plt . ylabel ( r ”$\ theta {SLP}$” , f o n t s i z e =20)
plt . tick params ( axis=”both” , l a b e l s i z e =20)
cbar = plt . colorbar ()
cbar . ax . tick params ( l a b e l s i z e =20)
cbar . ax . s e t t i t l e ( ”NAOI” , f o n t s i z e =20)
plt . show ()
A.3
Co-Recurrence Ratio for Gaussian Copula Distributions
import numpy as np
import
matplotlib . pyplot
as
plt
from
scipy . s t a t s
import norm
import Func DS metrics as metr
# Parameters
n = 1000 # Number of
generated
points
mean = (0 ,0) # Mean in
d i s t r i b u t i o n
cov = np . array ( [ 0 . 5 , 0 . 7 5 , 0 . 9 9 9 2 , 1 ] ) # Array
of
covariances
q = 0.98
# Allocate memory
cov mat = np . empty (( len ( cov ) ,2 ,2) )
z = np . empty (( len ( cov ) ,n , 2 ) )
u = np . empty (( len ( cov ) ,n , 2 ) )
alpha = np . empty (( n , len ( cov ) ) )
# Draw values
from Gaussian
b i v a r i a t e
copula
d i s t r i b u t i o n
f o r
i ,
rho
in
enumerate ( cov ) :
cov mat [ i , : , : ] = [ [ 1 , rho ] , [ rho , 1 ] ] # Define
covariance
matrix
Page 90 of 91
==PAGE:98==
A
PYTHON CODE
z [ i , : , : ] = np . random . multivariate normal (mean , cov mat [ i , : , : ] , n) #
Simulate
values
from
multivariate
normal
d i s t
u [ i , : , : ] = norm . cdf ( z [ i , : , : ] ) # Evaluate
cdf
at
simulated
values
(
uniformly
d i s t r i b u t e d )
# Calculate co−recurrence
ratio ,
alpha ,
f or
each
point
f o r
i ,
a in
enumerate (u) :
g x = metr . g func ( a [ : , 0 ] )
g y = metr . g func ( a [ : , 1 ] )
alpha [ : , i ] = metr . co recur ( g x , g y , q)
# Plot
fig ,
axes = plt . subplots ( nrows=2, ncols =2, f i g s i z e =(14 ,8) )
f o r
i ,
ax in
enumerate ( axes . ravel () ) :
#ax . plot (u [ i , : , 0 ] , u [ i , : , 1 ] , ’ o ’)
points = ax . s c a t t e r (u [ i , : , 0 ] , u [ i , : , 1 ] , c=alpha [ : , i ] , s =20,cmap=”plasma”
,vmin=0,vmax=1)
ax . s e t t i t l e ( r ”$\rho=$” + s t r ( cov [ i ] ) , f o n t s i z e =25)
ax . tick params ( labelbottom=True , axis=”both” , l a b e l s i z e =18)
f i g . t i g h t l a y o u t ()
cbar = f i g . colorbar ( points , ax=axes , shrink =0.5 , l oc a ti o n=” right ” )
cbar . ax . tick params ( l a b e l s i z e =18)
cbar . ax . s e t t i t l e ( r ”$\ alpha$ ” , f o n t s i z e =18)
plt . show ()
Page 91 of 91
