==PAGE:1==
Master thesis
Structure-based Prediction of
TCRpMHC Interaction Using Graph
Neural Networks
Authors
Charlotte Würtzen - s174564
Julie Maria Johansen - s174595
Supervisor
Professor Morten Nielsen
Group of Immunoinformatics and Machine-Learning
Department of Health Technology
Technical University of Denmark
Kgs. Lyngby 2800, Denmark
February 5, 2023
==PAGE:2==
Preface
English title: Structure-based prediction of TCRpMHC interaction using
Graph Neural Networks
Danish title: Struktur-baseret forudsigelse af TCRpMHC interaktion ved
brug af graf neurale netværk
Project period: September 5, 2022 - February 5, 2023
Date of submission: 5th of February 2023
ECTS points: 30
Authors:
Charlotte Würtzen - s174564 (s174564@student.dtu.dk)
Julie Maria Johansen - s174595 (s174595@student.dtu.dk)
Study programme: M.Sc Eng. Bioinformatics and Systems Biology
Department: Department of Health Technology
Research group: Immunoinformatics and Machine-Learning
Supervisors:
Morten Nielsen (morni@dtu.dk)
Co-supervisor:
Magnus Haraldson Høie (maghoi@dtu.dk)
Code:
Code and data for this project is available at this GitHub repository.
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
T-cells are key components in our adaptive immune response that fight off pathogens and
tumor cells while also being involved in autoimmune diseases. The T-cell response initi-
ates upon its receptor (TCR) binding to peptide-bound major histocompatibility complex
(pMHC), together forming a TCRpMHC complex. Being able to predict the TCRpMHC in-
teraction would create great advancements within fields such as development of T-cell based
vaccines, cancer immunotherapies and treatment of autoimmune diseases. However, due to
limited data availability along with the large diversity in TCR sequences and TCRpMHC
interface structure, predicting this interaction is a difficult task.
Prediction approaches can both be sequence- and structure-based and we have in this thesis
attempted to predict the TCRpMHC interaction using structures of these complexes. To
do so, we generated modeled structures using the TCRpMHC-specific and template-based
protein structure modeling tool, TCRpMHCmodels [1]. Using this tool, we put restrictions
upon template selection to create fair modeling between positive and negative complexes
in hope of predicting interactions for unseen peptides. We furthermore utilized predicted
amino acid likelihoods from the pretrained Evolutionary Scale Modeling Inverse Folding 1
(ESM-IF1) model [2] for scoring TCRpMHC complexes. Variations of score functions were
carried out along with binary logistic regression models and modifications of these.
In conclusion, our baseline model comprising a simple peptide score function was the best
performing model. However, completely generalizable predictions could not be reached as
the model obtained low performances for unseen peptides with AUCs between 0.503 and
0.62. This was caused by modeled structures having non-native-like conformation of the
TCRpMHC docking site which resulted in low signal catched by ESM-IF1. ESM-IF1 still
demonstrates strong potential for recovery of experimentally solved peptides and proposes
qualification for classifying binder status on unseen peptides in TCRpMHC complexes. How-
ever, improved modeling of TCRpMHC structures is needed.
i
==PAGE:4==
Acknowledgements
We would like to give a great thank you to Morten Nielsen for valuable supervision, in-
spiration and guidance throughout this project. A big thanks to Magnus Haraldson Høie
for helpful inputs and insights on ESM-IF1 for this project. We would also like to thank
Mathias Fynbo Jensen for providing us with the sequence data.
A great thank you to
Kamilla Kjærgaard Munk for assisting and guiding in the structure modeling process using
the TCRpMHCmodels tool. To Jeppe Nygård Samuelsen, thank you for good collabora-
tion on the generation of these structure models. Lastly, we are also grateful for all the
nice feedback from the entire group of "Immunoinformatics and Machine learning" at the
Department of Health Technology, DTU.
ii
==PAGE:5==
Abbreviation List
Abbreviation List
AUC Area under the ROC curve
CDR Complementary-determining regions
ESM-IF1 Evolutionary Scale Modeling Inverse Folding 1
FPR
False positive rates
GGYN Dataset of complexes with the GIL-, GLC-, YLQ-, and NLV-complexes
GIL
GILGFVFTL peptide
GLC GLCTLVAML peptide
GNN Graph neural network
GVP Geometric vector perceptron
HLA Human leukocyte antigen
HMM Hidden Markov Model
MCC Matthew's correlation coefficient
MHC Major Histocompatibility Complex
NLP
Natural language processing
NLV
NLVPMVATV peptide
PCC Pearson correlation coefficient
RMSD Root mean square deviation
ROC Receiver operator characteristic
SW
Swapped negatives
TCR T-cell Receptor
TCRpMHC TCR-peptide-MHC complex
TPR True positive rates
WT
Wildtype positives
YLQ YLQPRTFLL peptide
iii
==PAGE:6==
Contents
Abstract
i
Acknowledgement
ii
Abbreviation list
iii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Aim of Project
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
2
Background
2
2.1
The Role of T-cells in the Adaptive Immune System . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2.2
Prediction of TCRpMHC Interaction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.2.1
Approaches for Predicting TCRpMHC Binding
. . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.3
Modeling of TCRpMHC Structures . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.3.1
Structural Modeling Approaches . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.3.2
Measuring Quality of Structural Models
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.3.3
Structural Modeling Tools . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.4
Machine Learning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.4.1
Protein Sequence Design using Graph Neural Networks . . . . . . . .
7
2.4.1.1
Inverse Folding . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.4.1.2
Evolutionary Scale Modeling Inverse Folding 1 . . . . . . . .
8
2.4.2
Binary Classification with Logistic Regression Models . . . . . . . . .
10
2.4.3
Techniques to Prevent Overfitting . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.5
Performance Measures
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.6
Sequence Motifs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3
Methods
15
3.1
TCRpMHC Sequences for the Small Benchmark Datasets . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3.2
TCRpMHC Sequences for the Large Datasets
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
3.3
Modeling of TCRpMHC Structures from Sequences . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3.4
Extracting ESM-IF1 Representations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3.4.1
Inverse Folding of the Peptide . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3.4.2
Acquiring Structural CDR3 Information
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3.5
Prediction Models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
3.5.1
Simple Peptide Score Function . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
iv
==PAGE:7==
Contents
3.5.2
Logistic Regression Models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
4
Results
24
4.1
Bias in ESM-IF1 Predictions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
4.2
Quality Assessment of Modeled Structures . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
4.3
Differentiating Wildtype Binders from Swapped Negatives
. . . . . . . . . .
33
4.4
Extended Investigation of Prediction Models on Upscaled Dataset . . . . . .
35
4.4.1
Baseline Model: Simple Score Function . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
4.4.1.1
Structure Model Quality Assessed by Sequence Similarity
.
37
4.4.2
Variations of the Simple Score Function Gives No Performance Boost
41
4.4.2.1
Distribution of Peptide Position Scores
. . . . . . . . . . .
41
4.4.2.2
Investigating Interfacing CDR3 Residues
. . . . . . . . . .
43
4.4.2.3
Performance of Score Functions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
4.4.3
Performances of Logistic Regression Models
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
5
Discussion
50
5.1
Structure Models Introduce Bias in ESM-IF1 Predictions . . . . . . . . . . .
50
5.2
Complications of Structure Modeling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
5.3
Performances of Binding Classification Models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
5.4
Future Perspectives . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
6
Conclusion
55
References
I
Supplementary Figures
VIII
v
==PAGE:8==
1
Introduction
T-cells constitute an essential part of the adaptive immune system as the specificity of their
receptors (TCR) for peptides presented on major histocompatibility complexes (pMHC)
drives specialized responses to combat various pathogens or tumor cells [3]. Being able to
understand and computationally predict activation of these immune cells is of high interest
in order to advance therapeutic strategies including vaccine development and immunother-
apies. High sequence and structural diversity in the receptors of the T-cells complicates
the task of predicting the binding specificity and distinguishing binding from non-binding
TCRpMHC complexes.
Several studies have shown development of deep neural network models able to predict these
interactions for well-studied peptides using sequence data [4, 5, 6]. However, these models
fall short when attempting to generalize predictions to complexes having unseen and dis-
similar peptides [7]. This extension to also predict binding for novel epitopes comes with
various challenges such as bias towards more studied epitopes and the problem of creating
fair negative data [8].
Structure-based approaches might provide crucial information on specific residue-residue
interactions at the binding-site to help this generalization. However, these are restricted by
a very limited availability of experimentally solved TCRpMHC structures. To accommodate
the data scarcity, structural modeling of TCRpMHC complexes could be a solution.
1.1
Aim of Project
The main objective in this thesis is to predict interaction between modeled TCRpMHC com-
plexes with unseen peptides using a structure-based approach. This includes the application
of the pretrained Evolutionary Scale Modeling Inverse Folding 1 (ESM-IF1) model, on pre-
dicted structures to extract amino acid likelihoods reflecting the binding energy between the
pMHC and TCR.
Page 1 of 55
==PAGE:9==
2
Background
2.1
The Role of T-cells in the Adaptive Immune System
The human body is protected against disease from pathogens and tumors cells through the
immune system. This system encompasses a large complex network of processes mediated
by effector cells and molecules. An important part of the immune system is the adaptive
immune response that is characterized by its high specificity and memory, making it respon-
sible for very strong and efficient responses. Some of the main contributors to this adaptive
response are the cytotoxic T-cells, also known as CD8+ T-cells. These cells play a more
destructive role in the immune system by killing infected or tumor cells. Activation of these
T-cells occurs by binding of its receptor (TCR) to peptides known as antigens, presented
on major histocompatibility complexes (MHC) of class I found on antigen-presenting cells
(see Figure 1). The interaction between TCR and peptide-bound MHC together form a
TCRpMHC complex and this interaction specificity will be the focus of this thesis.
The MHC class I molecule consists of an α chain of 3 domains whereof folding of domains
1 and 2 constitute a binding cleft for the peptide. The α3 domain and a β2-microglobulin
chain make up the rest of the molecule. Most commonly, the MHC class I molecules bind
peptides that are 8-10 amino acids long and this binding occurs in the two ends of the pep-
tide, known as anchor positions [9] . For 9-mer peptides, these anchor residues are often
found at position 2 and 9 [10]. The MHC molecules are polymorphic causing diversity in
the gene expression throughout a population. These different MHC alleles create diverse
conformations of the peptide binding grooves together with the binding between the MHC
and TCR. This creates different binding patterns that are dependent on the MHC allele. In
humans, MHC molecules are known as human leukocyte antigen (HLA) [3].
A conventional α:β T-lymphocyte has TCRs consisting of an α and a β chain. Each of
these chains contains both a constant and a variable region where the antigen-binding-site is
found in the latter. Zooming into this binding-site, you will find segments where the sequence
variability is especially heightened. These regions are known as complementary-determining
regions (CDRs) and form the loop structures directly interacting with the peptide:MHC
complex. Three of such hypervariable segments are found in each of the TCR chains. The
highest variability is found in the CDR3 that is found in the center of the binding-site inter-
acting with the peptide, seen in Figure 1. The CDR1 and CDR2 loops carry less variation
Page 2 of 55
==PAGE:10==
2.1
The Role of T-cells in the Adaptive Immune System
and interact with the relatively conserved MHC. These structural differences in the inter-
acting TCR loops arise from genetic rearrangement in the generation of the receptor during
T-cell development. This involves different recombination processes of the variable (V), di-
versity (D) and joining (J) segments of the receptor gene. The high diversity in the receptors
stem from the combinations of the different segments, along with deletions and insertions
associated with the joining of these [11]. The created variation in TCR loops drive very
specialized immune responses that are thereby also intricate to understand and predict.
In this thesis, we will investigate this binding-site between the TCR and the pMHC complex
by using the structural information that is highly determined by variable receptor sequences
affecting structural conformations and thereby function.
Figure 1: Structure of interaction between CD8+ T-cell and peptide presented on MHC
class I on an antigen-presenting cell. A) Figure adapted from Leem et al (2017) [12]. B)
Closer view of the TCRpMHC complex with indicated complementary determining regions
(CDRs). Figure from La Gruta et al (2018) [13].
Page 3 of 55
==PAGE:11==
2.2
Prediction of TCRpMHC Interaction
2.2
Prediction of TCRpMHC Interaction
Due to the important immune functions T-cells have in the response to disease, it is of
great interest to predict the interaction between TCR and peptide-bound MHC. Regarding
CD8+ T-cells, finding which peptides are presented on MHC class I is an already reasonably
solved problem with tools such as NetMHCpan-4.1 [14]. However, discovering whether the
peptide presented on MHC is immunogenic, and thereby will elicit a T-cell response, is
the bigger problem. Determining this binding between TCR and pMHC is a challenging
task primarily due to limited availability of experimental data, poor data quality and high
sequence variability driving the TCR binding specificity [4]. Besides, the few available data
are also highly biased, with many data points for some well-studied peptides and few to
none for others. Additionally, experimentally testing the binding between TCR and pMHC
is expensive, challenging and time-consuming [15]. For that reason, it is beneficial to predict
the interaction between TCR and pMHC in a time-efficient, resource limited, and less costly
manner as with in-silico methods.
2.2.1
Approaches for Predicting TCRpMHC Binding
Prediction methods for TCRpMHC binding can both be based on sequence or structure.
The sequence-based approaches utilize the amino acid sequence for predictions and is an
attractive approach due to significantly higher data availability and allowing simpler com-
putations.
On the other hand, the structure-based approach uses the three-dimensional
structure of a protein complex providing conformational and relational information, how-
ever there is a severe lack of data given a minimal amount of experimentally determined
complexes. Gaining more TCRpMHC structure data through experimental crystallization
or structural resolution is both costly and time-consuming [16, 17].
Various tools have attempted to predict the TCRpMHC binding both using sequence and
structure-based approaches. Some of the state-of-the-art prediction tools include the sequence-
based tools, NetTCR-2.1 and ERGO-II, that through machine learning models utilize CDR
sequences for prediction while obtaining high accuracy [4, 6]. While many of these deep
learning based state-of-the-art prediction tools achieve high test performances when trained
on similar data, they fail to generalize and perform poorly on unseen peptides dissimilar to
the training dataset [7].
Page 4 of 55
==PAGE:12==
2.3
Modeling of TCRpMHC Structures
For structural prediction approaches, incorporation of structure in the form of molecular
modeling and energetic force-field terms has been performed by Lanzarotti et al (2018) for
TCR and peptide-bound MHC class II, where FoldX and Rosetta were used for mimicking
the molecular interactions and chemical properties in a TCRpMHC interaction [18]. This
approach highlighted the potential for including energetic force-field terms for predictions
but better structure models were needed.
The structure-based approach might help the problem of generalization but due to the data
scarceness it will require alternative ways of gathering data.
2.3
Modeling of TCRpMHC Structures
2.3.1
Structural Modeling Approaches
A way to obtain more data is through structural modeling of TCRpMHC complexes. This
can be done in several ways with different structural modeling approaches which typically
fall into three categories; template-based homology modeling, fold recognition (also known
as threading) and template-free, ab initio modeling.
Homology modeling is a method that draws on the common biological concept of proteins
that are similar in sequence, are similar in structure and possess similar functions [19, 20].
Homology modeling, also called comparative modeling, is therefore reliable on one or more
templates with known protein structures that have sequence similarity above 50%. Thread-
ing can be used when the sequence similarity is too low for homology modeling by using
structural templates from a protein structure database and scoring the sequence-structure
alignments. When no suitable templates exist, ab initio modeling can be used. This method
predicts the protein structure from its sequence by finding the low energy and stable confor-
mations using physics- and/or knowledge-based energy functions [21, 22]. The inaccuracy of
the ab initio method is however shown by its inability to outperform template-based mod-
eling when similar templates exist [23].
The field of protein structure modeling using deep learning models has been advancing
greatly in recent years. These models are build on similar concepts by learning from ho-
mologous data and multiple sequence alignments in order to predict unknown structures
[22].
Page 5 of 55
==PAGE:13==
2.3
Modeling of TCRpMHC Structures
2.3.2
Measuring Quality of Structural Models
It is of great importance to evaluate the discrepancies between a protein structure model
and its experimentally solved structure. The quality of a protein model can be assessed
through various methods. One of these measures include the root-mean-square-deviation
(RMSD), which measures the average distance between atoms (usually Cα of the backbone)
of aligned proteins [24]. RMSD values range from 0 to infinity. In general, an RMSD below 3
Ångstrøm is considered a good structural model with high similarity to the solved structure
[25]. Other measures exist as well, but for this thesis we will be using RMSD as structural
quality measure.
2.3.3
Structural Modeling Tools
Deep learning-based structural modeling approaches have become attractive lately with Al-
phaFold2 transforming the field of protein structure prediction gaining almost experimen-
tal accuracy on single chain proteins [26].
AlphaFold2 has since then been extended to
AlphaFold-Multimer able to predict protein complex structures with high accuracy [27].
Multiple other tools have accompanied AlphaFold2 and AlphaFold-Multimer in predicting
protein structures computationally such as ESMFold and RoseTTaFold. Similar for all these
tools is, that they to some extend are limited to single chains or homomeric interfaces [28,
29, 30].
For modeling of asymmetrical heteromeric complexes, the accuracy of available tools is more
minimal, especially for interacting complexes such as antibody-antigen complexes. The devel-
opers from AlphaFold-Multimer mention that modeling of antibody-antigen performs poorly,
which is a similar modeling problem faced in this project.
TCRpMHCmodels is a template-based structural modeling tool specifically designed for the
task of predicting TCRpMHC complexes. The tool generates structure models with a median
Cα RMSD of 2.31 Å using on average 2 minutes per structure. From input sequences of
MHC, peptide, TCRα and TCRβ, the tool generates their protein structures based on other
protein modeling tools. For generation of TCR structures, the tool LYRA [31] is applied
using templates from a TCR database. LYRA works by firstly finding framework templates
for the α and β chains of the TCR. Subsequently, canonical structures of CDR templates
are grafted onto these frameworks. Sidechains are then repacked resulting in a final TCR
model [31].
Page 6 of 55
==PAGE:14==
2.4
Machine Learning
The tool MODELLER [32] is used for modeling of the pMHC structure from a pMHC
database. It predicts the three-dimensional structure of the input pMHC sequence based on
an alignment to selected templates. Afterwards, it extracts spatial features from the tem-
plates as restraints and transfers it to the target as good as possible [32]. MODELLER is
furthermore used for assembling of the TCRpMHC complex using a TCRpMHC database.
Figure 2 shows the pipeline of TCRpMHCmodels.
Figure 2: TCRpMHCmodels modeling pipeline. Given input sequences of TCRα, TCRβ,
MHC and the peptide chains, the tool models the chains in different steps following an
assembly of the complex. A) The TCR chains are modeled with LYRA from a TCR database.
B) The pMHC structure is modeled using MODELLER from a pMHC database. C) Finally,
docking of TCR and pMHC is done with MODELLER using a TCRpMHC database. Figure
from Kjærgaard et al (2019) [1].
2.4
Machine Learning
2.4.1
Protein Sequence Design using Graph Neural Networks
The three-dimensional folding of the protein is crucial for protein interaction and thus de-
termining protein function. For many sequence-based predictors, this geometric information
may however be a missing link in the predictions of binding or other functional features.
With this assumption, we expect that structural coordinates hold additional information
that cannot be extracted from the amino acid sequence alone.
To represent structural information, the three-dimensional coordinates of a protein can be
collapsed onto a static graph that shows the connectivity between the amino acids in the
Page 7 of 55
==PAGE:15==
2.4
Machine Learning
structure [33]. In such a graph, each node holds a numeric representation of an amino acid
while edges between nodes hold numeric representations of distances between interacting
amino acids. Furthermore, the protein can be described in a global context using a third
vector and the overall connectivity of the graph can for instance be described using an ad-
jacency matrix [34]. These vectors are then able to contain various biochemical information
such as polarity, hydrophobicity and more.
A graph can be a very flexible and efficient way of storing the geometric information and is
more suitable for the complexity compared to regular two-dimensional matrices. In graph
neural networks (GNN), these numeric vectors are gradually updated during training. In
each layer, message passing is used to communicate messages from adjacent nodes and edges
to update the node embeddings at each graph propagation step [34]. Finally, the resulting
representations can be extracted as the so-called sequence embeddings.
2.4.1.1
Inverse Folding
Graph-based neural networks can be used for designing protein sequences that will fold to the
inputted three-dimensional structures, a concept known as inverse folding [2, 35]. In inverse
folding models, coordinates of the structure are masked to learn relational information. This
is inspired by the masking of words in natural language processing (NLP) problems or of
residues in sequences for protein language models. Different to traditional language models,
inverse folding models require the availability of either experimentally solved or predicted
structures as input.
Even though the graph structure is efficient, training of large graph-based models can be
computationally intensive and performance might be very limited if only using structure data
relevant for a particular task. In that case, it might be effective to use a pretrained model
that is fitted on a very large dataset of protein structures and not just trained specifically
for one data type such as TCRpMHC complexes. Using a pretrained model can help extract
general geometric and biochemical information that subsequently can be used for predicting
more specific problems like binding.
2.4.1.2
Evolutionary Scale Modeling Inverse Folding 1
An example of a pretrained graph-based inverse folding model is the Evolutionary Scale
Modeling Inverse Folding 1 (ESM-IF1) transformer model [2]. ESM-IF1 is trained on both
Page 8 of 55
==PAGE:16==
2.4
Machine Learning
experimentally solved structures and augmented structure data predicted using AlphaFold2.
As input, the model takes in the structure in form of the backbone atom coordinates and
outputs learned sequence embeddings. The model consists of an encoder with an architecture
using geometric vector perceptron (GVP) layers combined with GNN layers.
The GVP
layers enable the GNN to capture both the relational but also geometric features from
the structure. Following the GVP-GNN encoder comes a common autoregressive encoder-
decoder transformer that processes the extracted geometric features. The architecture of
the GVP-GNN transformer is illustrated in Figure 3. From the model, predictions can be
extracted as logits which are non-normalized measures of likelihood that can be converted
to probabilities using a softmax function.
Figure 3: Architecture of ESM-IF1 model using a GVP-GNN transformer structure. The
inverse folding model is trained on both experimentally solved structures and augmented
structure data from AlphaFold2 predicted structures [2].
When using the pretrained model, output probabilities of all 20 amino acids can be extracted
for each position of the sequence. In Hsu et al (2022), the model is evaluated on its ability
to recover native sequences. Using this measure they show that residues found in the core
of the protein generally achieve better sequence recovery opposed to residues found on the
surface. With regards to multichain complexes, they find that the model is able to generalize
and actually perform better when provided with coordinates from all chains [2].
In the context of utilizing the ESM-IF1 model on the binding-site of TCRpMHC structures,
we will therefore expect more tightly and correctly bound complexes to achieve better scores
in this region. This approach could be promising as ESM-IF1 has also previously shown a
correlation between sequence recovery and binding affinity [2].
Page 9 of 55
==PAGE:17==
2.4
Machine Learning
2.4.2
Binary Classification with Logistic Regression Models
With the goal of distinguishing binding from non-binding complexes, simple binary classifi-
cation models might provide an easy computation to achieve this while still avoiding fitting
too specifically to known peptides seen during model training.
A well known binary classification model is the logistic regression which is similar to the
linear regression but predicts a categorical variable to be true or false in the form of proba-
bilities. The independent variables can be either continuous or categorical where a logistic
regression classifier makes use of these to predict the class of the target variable. Accordingly,
a binary logistic regression predicts the likelihood of a binary outcome as a function of the
values of our independent values. In the binary logistic regression model, the logits of the
dependent variable is modeled as a linear combination of the independent variables. The
purpose of this classifier is to fit the best and simplest model that describes the relationship
between the target and the predictors while also providing the accuracy of the classifier [36].
Applying all the parameters, the model is fitted using a logistic function. The predicted
probabilities of the two dependent categories range from 0 to 1, where the likelihood given
as logits of the positive class is predicted given the features using the following equation 1
[37]. Here, P is the probability of the positive class, Xi the features, β0 the bias or intercept
term, and βi the feature coefficients and k the number of features.
ln

P
1 −P

= β0 + β1X1 + β2X2 + ... + βkXk
(1)
2.4.3
Techniques to Prevent Overfitting
Upon fitting models, we can risk stumbling into the problem of a predictor not generalizing
well from observed data to unseen data. This is a common issue called overfitting. In cases
of overfitting, a model can perform perfectly on training data and poorly on a test set. Here
the model tends to memorize all the training data including its noise instead of capturing
the signal behind the data. Overfitting can happen in cases of small or redundant training
data, not representing all possible inputs or when a model is too complex. Oppositely, a
too simple model can result in underfitting, not learning the underlying relationship of the
data. For a linear regression model, overfitting can occur when a model has a large number
of parameters in comparison to training data [38].
Page 10 of 55
==PAGE:18==
2.5
Performance Measures
Different techniques exist for prevention of overfitting, and some of these include acquiring
more training data, which can be complicated and expensive, data augmentation, cross-
validation and regularization [39]. A way to ensure stability of the trained model and detect
potential overfitting is by using a cross-validation setup. This can for instance be done with
k-fold cross-validation where the data is divided into k partitions. One partition is left out
for validation while the remaining partitions are used for fitting a model in each fold, using
a new partition for validation each time. This produces k models that can be concatenated
to an ensemble model for subsequent evaluation using an external test set.
Another way to add stability to a prediction model is by including regularization to the
model. Regularization techniques are applied to minimize the cost and avoid overfitting
by adding a penalty term, called a regularization term, to the loss function. A too high
regularization rate can lead to underfitting and oppositely a too low regularization rate can
lead to overfitting. An example of an regularization technique is the L2 regularization. For
the penalty term in L2, the coefficients are kept small at high regularization rates without
removing variables [40].
In biology, we often encounter imbalanced data which can be troublesome if a classifier tends
to predict towards the majority class. Different sampling strategies deal with such imbal-
ances through either undersampling of the majority class or oversampling of the minority
class. Disadvantages of undersampling can be loss of useful information by removal of data
points while for oversampling we might risk overfitting [41]. In regards to imbalance due
to redundant data, sampling strategies may also be useful to avoid overfitting to majority
groups of the data. Specialized data redundancy reduction algorithms have been developed
to counteract this redundancy, such as the Hobohm 1 algorithm for proteins described by
Hobohm et al (1992) [42].
2.5
Performance Measures
To evaluate the performance of binary classifier models, the receiver operator characteristic
(ROC) curve together with the area under the curve (AUC) are commonly known methods.
A ROC curve plots the true positive rates (TPR) against false positive rates (FPR) for
different classification thresholds. The AUC is thereby a performance measure taking all
thresholds into account. A random predictor will obtain an AUC of 0.5, an AUC of 1.0
indicates a perfect classifier, and predicting everything incorrectly achieves an AUC of 0.0
Page 11 of 55
==PAGE:19==
2.5
Performance Measures
[43]. The F1 score and Matthew's correlation coefficient (MCC) are two other performance
metrics which are particularly good for imbalanced datasets. These measures are threshold-
dependent and calculated from a confusion matrix holding the predicted true positives (TP),
true negatives (TN), false positive (FP), and false negatives (FN) as can be seen in Figure
4.
Figure 4: Illustration of a confusion matrix. Rows indicate the true labeling of the data
and columns show the predicted classes. True negatives, false positives, false negatives and
true positives are denoted TN, FP, FN, and TP, respectively. Figure from [44].
From the confusion matrix, all four categories are utilized to calculate the MCC as can be
seen in Equation 2. The MCC metric ranges from -1 to 1 whereof 1 is a perfect correlation,
0 is a random prediction, and -1 indicates an opposite correlation between prediction and
true label. The measure considers the imbalance between the true labels in the dataset as
all four classes are taken into account.
MCC =
TP · TN −FP · FN
p
(TP + FP)(TP + FN)(TN + FP)(TN + FN)
(2)
The F1 score is calculated from the precision and recall measures by Equation 3. This mea-
sure ranges from 0 to 1 whereof 1 is best and 0 is worst. As the confusion matrix and thereby
the MCC and F1 scores are threshold dependent, the ROC curve can be utilized to ensure
the most optimal threshold for discrimination between false positives and true negatives and
also between false negatives and true positives. This optimal threshold is found where there
is a maximum difference between the TPR and FPR in the ROC curve[45].
F1 score = 2 · Precision · Recall
Precision + Recall =
2 · TP
2 · TP + FP + FN
(3)
Page 12 of 55
==PAGE:20==
2.6
Sequence Motifs
To capture linear relationships between variable pairs, a Pearson’s correlation coefficient
(PCC) can be calculated from the variables’ standard deviations and covariance (see Equa-
tion 4) [46]. The PCC ranges from -1 to 1, where -1 indicates a negatives correlation between
the two variables, 1 indicates a positive correlation, and 0 means there is no relation between
the two.
PCC = ρxy = Cov(x, y)
σxσy
(4)
2.6
Sequence Motifs
In this project, we attempt to predict TCRpMHC binding interactions utilizing the ESM-IF1
model that outputs probabilities for all 20 amino acids for each position in the sequence. A
way of visualizing these predictions is through a sequence motif.
A sequence motif is a representation of sequences showing the conservation and variability
of each position. Protein motifs can be represented in matrix format as probability, log-
odds ratio and information content.
A probability matrix carries information about the
probability of finding each of the possible 20 amino acids at each position in the peptide
which can be based on a set of sequences or predicted values. The probability of observing a
given sequence can then be calculated by taking the product of the position-specific amino
acid probabilities (see Equations 5), where p is the position and ap the position-specific
amino acid.
Y
p
P(ap, p)
(5)
The probabilities can be regulated according to a background model containing background
frequencies for all amino acids per position or non-position-wise. From here, an odds ratio,
O, between the probabilities, P, and background frequencies, q, can be used for predicting
binding likelihood of a protein (see Equation 6). In this equation, ap is the amino acid at
position p and the background model q(ap) are non-position specific frequencies.
O =
Q
p P(ap, p)
Q
p q(ap)
=
Y
p
P(ap, p)
q(ap)
(6)
For interpretable values it can be beneficial to log-transform the odds ratio called the log-
odds ratio. The matrix containing the log-odds ratios is known as a position-specific scoring
Page 13 of 55
==PAGE:21==
2.6
Sequence Motifs
matrix. Thence, a score, S, of a peptide sequence against a motif can be calculated which
normally is done by taking the logarithm to the product of odds ratios as seen in Equation
7. Here, ap is the amino acid at position p and the background model q(ap) are non-position
specific frequencies. logk is the logarithm with base k.
S = logk
 Y
p
P(ap, p)
q(ap)
!
=
X
p
logk
P(ap, p)
q(ap)

(7)
The score can be used for assessing how well the given sequence matches a sequence motif.
Positive scores mean that the sequence probability is higher than the background probability
and negative scores indicate the probability of the sequence is lower than the background.
The choice of background model can be different. Often it is generated from a large database
of protein sequences. In binary classification problems, P can also be the distribution for
the positive class and q for the negative class.
From the probability matrix, calculations can be performed to characterize the motif. One
quantity is the information content which is able to capture the level of conservation or
enrichment. Information content describes the probability of a motif occurring from either
a random variable, called the entropy or Shannon information, or how different the distri-
bution is from a background model known as relative entropy or Kullback-Leibler distance.
The Shannon entropy, H, measures the amount of information required to describe a random
variable. For amino acids, the maximum information value is log2(20) ≃4.3 where a value
of 0 means no conservation and 4.3 full conservation. On the other hand, the relative en-
tropy, D, is the distance between two probability distributions that measures the difference
in distribution between the amino acid frequencies, P, and the background frequencies, q.
The information content for each position in a protein can be visualized through a sequence
logo either using Shannon information or as Kullback-Leibler logo. The unit of information
content is often given in bits [47].
Page 14 of 55
==PAGE:22==
3
Methods
In this project, we worked with three types of datasets. One dataset, which we will call
the solved-modeled dataset, comprised experimentally solved positive complexes and their
structurally modeled counterparts. The second dataset consisted of structurally modeled
complexes where each positive complex had a negative equivalent with a swapped peptide.
We will call this dataset the WT-SW (wild-type/swapped) dataset. Finally, the third dataset
was a large dataset consisting of both positive and negative structurally modeled complexes
consisting of the four different peptides; GILGFVFTL, GLCTLVAML, YLQPRTFLL, and
NLVPMVATV. We will denote this dataset the GGYN dataset. The details on the curation
of these datasets are explained in the following sections.
Furthermore, the overall workflow of the methods applied in this project is visualized in Fig-
ure 5. This workflow included modeling of structures from sequences, extraction of predic-
tions from the ESM-IF1 model and followingly conversion to scores for binding classification
of complexes.
3.1
TCRpMHC Sequences for the Small Benchmark Datasets
The availability of solved TCRpMHC structures is sparse which led us to structure modeling.
To evaluate the quality of this modeling we first created the solved-modeled dataset which
is a small benchmark data set consisting of a set of known crystal structures and a matching
modeled structure for each of these.
From the IEDB database [48], we extracted all known human TCRpMHC structures that
were 9-mers, having HLA allele HLA-A*02:01, paired TCR chains, and available crystal
structures. These structures were downloaded from the RCSB protein data bank [49] where
after they were cleaned and compressed to only include the peptide chain, the TCR chains
and the α1 and α2 domains of the MHC sequence.
In this process, the MHC sequence was firstly found by aligning against an MHC class I
Hidden Markov Model (HMM) profile. Then, the peptide chain was identified using the
sequence length and distance to the MHC chain. Lastly, the TCR chains were identified
by aligning to their respective HMM profiles obtained from LYRA [31]. All sequences were
cleaned by excluding non-residue atoms and used for constructing a fasta file for each com-
Page 15 of 55
==PAGE:23==
3.2
TCRpMHC Sequences for the Large Datasets
plex. The sequences aligned to the HMM-profiles together with the peptide sequence were
mapped onto the original structure to extract the coordinates for the new and cleaned struc-
ture. These cleaned structures were used as our experimentally solved complexes for quality
assessment of the modeled structures. The aforementioned fasta files were used as input
for TCRpMHCmodels to create modeled versions of the solved structures for this pairwise
comparison. The structure modeling will be described in more detail in section 3.3. These
known crystal structures and equivalent models comprise the solved-modeled dataset that
thereby only consists of true binders.
To create the WT-SW dataset, the same modeled wildtype binders were used. Furthermore,
artificial non-binders were also modeled by swapping the peptide sequences of the binder
complexes. Swapped fasta files were made by switching the binder peptide sequence to a
different 9-mer peptide from another known TCRpMHC complex with a maximum peptide
sequence identity of 6/9 ∼67% while the MHC and TCR sequences were kept the same.
These swapped fasta files were then inputted to TCRpMHCmodels to model a non-binder
counterpart for each modeled binder so we could do an initial test of a binder-prediction
model.
For this WT-SW dataset, the wildtype binders will be denoted (WT) and the
swapped negatives/non-binders will be denoted (SW).
3.2
TCRpMHC Sequences for the Large Datasets
The GGYN dataset used for this thesis is based on TCRpMHC sequence data generated by
Mathias Fynbo Jensen [50]. Prior to structural modeling, the TCRpMHC sequences were
obtained as follows.
The interacting TCRpMHC complexes, which will be denoted as the positive data, were
initially retrieved from the Immune Epitope Database (IEDB) [48] and the VDJ database
(VDJdb) [51] through suitable query filtering. In IEDB, only human TCRs containing both
the α and β chains were selected containing epitopes from any disease but restricted to MHC
class I. In VDJdb, the CDR3 sequence from human TCRs containing both α and β chain
data were selected. Subsequently, the positive data was undergoing additional filtering to
avoid data with missing information or misannotations. An additional pre-processing step
included filtering for MHC alleles, 10x obtained sequences and V and J genes. For retrieval
of full TCRα and TCRβ sequences, the tool StitchR [52] was used which required specific
nomenclature for input CDR3 sequences and V and J gene annotations. To subsequently
identify CDR1, CDR2 and CDR3 sequences, the tool ANARCI was utilized [53].
Page 16 of 55
==PAGE:24==
3.3
Modeling of TCRpMHC Structures from Sequences
Non-redundant data was ensured with a redundancy reduction pipeline. Here the CDR3
sequences were BLOSUM62-encoded and divided into groups by the peptide types, where-
after the Hobohm 1 algorithm [42] was applied separately on each group with a similarity
threshold of 95%. The redundant data exceeding this threshold was excluded. Furthermore,
generation of negative data points were created by substituting TCR-pairs randomly be-
tween peptides that were dissimilar. Here peptides with a Levenshtein distance above 3 was
a criteria set for swapping peptides. The negative data points were created so that a positive
to negative ratio of around 1:5 was obtained.
For the purpose of training models using cross-validation, each peptide group of the dataset
was divided into 5 partitions randomly since the data was already filtered for redundancy
previously. This process was done separately for positives and negatives to maintain the 1:5
ratio. This resulted in 5 partitions with equally distributed peptide types and equal positive
to negative ratios with a total number of 37,951 TCRpMHC sequences.
From the TCRpMHC sequence data generated as explained above, we have for this thesis
decided to focus on 9-mers binding to the HLA-A*02:01 allele. Furthermore, we narrowed
down the data set to be the GILGFVFTL, GLCTLVAML, YLQPRTFLL, and NLVPMVATV
peptides. We will in the forthcoming sections shorten these to GIL, GLC, YLQ and NLV. The
filtering resulted in 10,045 sequences whereof 6,415 were GIL-peptide complexes with 1,159
being positives and 5,256 being negatives, 1,278 GLC-peptide complexes with 213 positives
and 1,065 negatives, 372 YLQ-peptide complexes with 62 positives and 310 negatives, and
1,980 were NLV-peptide complexes with 330 being positives and 1,650 being negatives.
3.3
Modeling of TCRpMHC Structures from Sequences
As the ESM-IF1 transformer model required protein structures, the sequences obtained for
the solved-modeled, WT-SW and GGYN datasets were modeled into structures using the
TCRpMHCmodels tool. Using this tool, we had the benefit of being able to explicitly control
the template selection step.
For each TCRpMHC complex, a fasta file was generated containing the sequences from MHC,
TCRα, TCRβ and peptide chain. For the GGYN dataset, the MHC sequence was found
from the IPD-IMGT/HLA database [54], and as we only looked at HLA-A*02:01, the same
sequence was inserted into each file. For the WT-SW dataset, fasta files for WT positives
and SW negatives were created as mentioned in section 3.1 and likewise used for structure
modeling.
Page 17 of 55
==PAGE:25==
3.4
Extracting ESM-IF1 Representations
As described in Kjærgaard et al (2019), a MultiWeighted method using multiple templates
chosen with a weighted sequence identity score has shown to produce the most accurate
structure models. We therefore used these default settings with 2/6 weight on the peptide,
2/6 weight om MHC and 1/6 on each of the TCR chains for calculation of the template
identity score.
To avoid any bias towards known structures from the existing databases, we added additional
filters to make sure perfect matches were not chosen as templates. These filters consisted of
a maximum 6/9 similarity threshold between input and template on the peptide sequence
and maximum 95% similarity threshold on each of the TCR chains. These restrictions were
applied both when choosing templates for modeling of the pMHC structure, for the LYRA
tool modeling the TCR and for the final template selection for modeling of the total complex.
No restrictions were made for the MHC sequence. With these additional filtering thresholds,
we ran the tool on all created fasta files. For some complexes, LYRA was unable to find
proper templates for certain CDR loops making the modeling of the TCR infeasible.
As some complexes could not be modeled, the modeling pipeline resulted in 36 structure
models for the solved-model dataset. The same 36 structures were used as the positives
in our WT-SW dataset while all 36 swapped negatives could be modeled as well. For the
GGYN dataset 5267 GIL, 1028 GLC, 295 YLQ, and 1595 NLV structures could be modeled
with the modeling pipeline, still maintaining the 1:5 positive to negative ratios. Predicted
structures were outputted by the TCRpMHCmodels tool.
For each complex, a file was
generated containing sequence similarities between the chosen templates during modeling of
the TCRpMHC complex. These similarity measures included identities between template
and input sequences for the individual chains together with a weighted total identity score.
We later used the identity-files containing the complex templates’ sequence similarity for
evaluation of structure model qualities.
3.4
Extracting ESM-IF1 Representations
3.4.1
Inverse Folding of the Peptide
For the purpose of predicting the interaction between TCR and pMHC, we have chosen to
use the inverse folding model, ESM-IF1. For each of the modeled TCRpMHC structures we
extracted the log-likelihood of the protein sequence predicted by the ESM-IF1 model.
Page 18 of 55
==PAGE:26==
3.4
Extracting ESM-IF1 Representations
To do this, we firstly extracted the backbone atom coordinates along with the protein se-
quence for all chains of the protein structure. We padded the peptide sequence and structure
with one residue in both the beginning and the end of the peptide by adding ’X’s to the
sequence and NaN coordinates to the structure. The coordinates of all chains, including the
padded peptide chain, were concatenated into one complex which afterwards was fed to the
pretrained inverse folding model.
The output logits from the model were extracted for the peptide. Due to padding of the
peptide, we discarded the first and last position in the output. From the outputted logits we
extracted values for the 20 amino acids for each position in the peptide. This was followed
by a conversion into amino acid probabilities by sending these through a softmax function.
This resulted in a matrix of dimensions 9x20 containing the probability of all 20 amino acids
for each position in the peptide.
To counteract an emerged bias from the ESM-IF1 predictions, we generated background
frequency matrices.
These matrices were obtained by averaging the ESM-IF1 predicted
position-wise amino acid probabilities across the whole data set. When evaluating on one
peptide type e.g. the GIL-peptide, the background frequency matrix was generated from
the other three peptides, here the GLC-, YLQ- and NLV-peptides. This was performed
regardless of binder status.
For the small WT-SW dataset, the background matrix was
created from all the TCRpMHC complexes in the large GGYN dataset. For the solved-
modeled dataset, a uniform background of 0.05 for all amino acids regardless of positions
was used as background. These backgrounds were used for scoring our peptides which will
be described in detail in Section 3.5.1.
3.4.2
Acquiring Structural CDR3 Information
Besides the ESM-IF1 representation of the peptide, we also decided to acquire some infor-
mation about CDR3 residues of the TCR as we believed this information was relevant for
predicting the interaction. These CDR3 residues were defined as amino acids in either of the
TCR chains found within 4 Ångstrøm of the peptide. For each position in the peptide, the
neighboring CDR3α and β residues were found along with the ESM-IF1 predicted probabil-
ities. This information was saved together with the amino acid name of the CDR3 and the
peptide position.
Page 19 of 55
==PAGE:27==
3.5
Prediction Models
As for the peptide, we wished to reduce bias from the ESM-IF1 predictions for amino acids
in CDR3 as well. To do so, we generated two background frequency matrices for the neigh-
boring CDR3α and β residues, respectively. These backgrounds were based on the ESM-IF1
predictions across all complexes in the GGYN dataset regardless of binder status. We did
this by averaging the predicted amino acid probabilities among all positions resulting in a
probability vector with dimensions 1x20 which then were averaged per amino acid across all
the complexes. As for the peptide background, when evaluating on one peptide type, the
background frequency matrix was made from the three others. Using the ESM-IF1 predic-
tions and background model, CDR3 scores were calculated as will be described in Section
3.5.1.
TCRpMHCmodels
>A
MWGVFLLYV…
>B
MLLLLLLLG…
>P
GILGFVFTL
>M
MAVMAPRTL…
[Lx20] AA probabilities
ESM-IF1
Peptide 
1. Input 
sequence
2. Structural 
modeling
3. Inverse folding 
prediction
4. Convert logits to 
probabilities
5. Counteract 
bias
6. Binding 
classification
Figure 5: Workflow overview of methods executed in this thesis. Firstly, from input se-
quences, structural modeling of TCRpMHC complexes was performed with TCRpMHCmod-
els. The coordinates of these structures were collapsed onto static graphs in the ESM-IF1
inverse folding model, resulting in predictions in the form of logits. These logits were con-
verted to amino acid probabilities where after an emerged bias was accounted for using a
background model and log2-transformation. Lastly, prediction models were used for binding
classification.
3.5
Prediction Models
With the goal of predicting interaction between TCR and pMHC for complexes with unseen
peptide sequences, we investigated different types of models, starting simple and increasing
model complexity. The input for all models were log-odds ratios between the predicted amino
acid probabilities and the background frequencies calculated as described in Section 3.4.
Page 20 of 55
==PAGE:28==
3.5
Prediction Models
3.5.1
Simple Peptide Score Function
For our simplest models, we wanted to create a function calculating a single peptide binding
score reflecting the binding energy found in the peptide area of the given complex. Since
the amino acids of the true peptide sequences were known, we could use the ESM-IF1
probabilities of the native amino acids to score each peptide based on general assumptions
described in Sections 2.6. For each position in the peptide, a position score (Sp) was equal to
the log-odds ratio calculated from the ESM-IF1 probability of correct amino acid ap found
at position p in the peptide sequence (P(ap, p)) and a background frequency of the same
amino acid at same position (q(ap, p)) (see Equation 8). A peptide score (Speptide) could then
be calculated from the sum of the 9 position scores (see Equation 9).
Sp = log2
P(ap, p)
q(ap, p)

(8)
Speptide =
9
X
p=1
Sp =
9
X
p=1
log2
P(ap, p)
q(ap, p)

(9)
This peptide score constituted our baseline model which we would compare against for al-
ternative prediction models.
We tested our baseline model on the WT-SW dataset and
the GGYN dataset, where we for the WT-SW dataset evaluated the baseline performance
using AUC and for the GGYN dataset evaluated the baseline performance using the perfor-
mance measures AUC, MCC, F1 score and the confusion matrix. The 3 latter measures are
threshold-dependent, so we determined the optimal threshold using the ROC-curve. This
threshold was then used to convert the continuous predictions to binary values.
We furthermore generated variations of our baseline model where our second version of the
score function incorporated CDR3 information. For each TCR chain, a CDR3 score was
calculated by averaging scores of all neighbors found within 4 Å of each peptide residue.
This meant that if a residue in a TCR chain was found as neighbour for multiple positions
in the peptide, the neighbour residue was also accounted for multiple times. Each neighbor
score (Sn) was equal to the log-odds ratio between the ESM-IF1 probability of the correct
amino acid of that neighbor (an) and the background frequency of the same amino acid (qa)
(see Equation 10). The average CDR3 score for a TCR chain can thereby be described by
Equation 11, where an is the correct amino acid of neighbor n and N is the total number
of neighbors in the given TCR chain. By adding the CDR3α and the CDR3β scores to the
original peptide score, our second score function variation was achieved (see Equation 12).
Page 21 of 55
==PAGE:29==
3.5
Prediction Models
For our third variation of the score function, we excluded position scores for position 1, 2 and
9 from the baseline peptide score resulting in Equation 13. These score function variations
were only tested on the GGYN dataset.
Sn = log2
P(an)
q(an)

(10)
SCDR3 =
PN
n=1 log2

P(an)
q(an)

N
(11)
Speptide = SCDR3α + SCDR3β +
9
X
p=1
Sp
(12)
Speptide =
8
X
p=3
Sp
(13)
3.5.2
Logistic Regression Models
Extending our models a bit, we wanted to know if a linear combination fitted on our data
would be able to predict better while still generalizing to new peptides and also being an
easy computation. Firstly, we wished to investigate the predictive power on each peptide
type of the GGYN dataset to ensure that a signal could be seen before we then attempted
to predict on unseen peptides or created combined models fitted on multiple peptide types.
To examine the importance of the different features extracted using ESM-IF1, we fitted
several logistic regression models with different feature combinations. Firstly, a model was
trained on only the 9 position scores (see Equation 8) of the peptide sequence. In a second
model, log-odds values for all 20 amino acids were included for all positions giving a total
of 180 features. These first two models were afterwards extended with a CDR3α score and
CDR3β score (see Equation 11). If no neighbors were found for the entire peptide, the CDR3
score was set to 0. The two CDR3 scores were then added to the aforementioned peptide
features. This resulted in the third model being fitted on 11 features and the fourth model
being fitted on 182 features. Furthermore, a fifth logistic regression model was fitted on only
position scores from position 3 to 8 of the peptide sequence. This was then extended to
the sixth model fitted on log-odds values for all 20 amino acids for these 6 middle positions
giving 120 features.
Page 22 of 55
==PAGE:30==
3.5
Prediction Models
Using the premade partitions of the data we left out one of the partitions for testing and used
the remaining for fitting the models with the Scikit-learn python library [55]. This training
was done on each of the peptide groups for the GGYN dataset using 4-fold cross-validation.
Subsequently, the models were tested as an ensemble of the models on the left out partition
with the same peptide type as trained on. Out of the 6 different model types trained and
tested separately on the four different peptide groups, we picked out the ones performing
best overall. For each of the GIL, GLC, YLQ, and NLV fitted models, the performances
were then evaluated on the remaining three peptide groups.
We attempted to improve generalization by also fitting three logistic regression models on
combined data of both the GIL and GLC complexes. The models were fitted on either the
180 features from position 1 to 9 of the peptide, the same peptide features together with the
two CDR3 scores or lastly, the 120 features from position 3 to 8 of the peptide.
These three models were likewise fitted using 4-fold cross-validation and subsequently tested
as an ensemble-model on a left-out GIL and GLC-partition. Furthermore, performance of
the model was tested on the YLQ peptides that were not seen during training. For different
variations of the model with 180 peptide features, we followed the same procedure but with
downsampling of the majority peptide, namely GIL, to balance out the two groups. This
downsampling was done by randomly selecting a number of the GIL complexes in each fold,
testing the different sampling numbers 1500, 100, 600, and 400.
For all logistic regression models, L2 regularization was applied together with a maximum
of 1000 iterations and the probability estimates were used as predictions. All models were
evaluated using the AUC performance metric.
Page 23 of 55
==PAGE:31==
4
Results
Throughout the following results, we will investigate the potential in using the ESM-IF1
model to differentiate between positive and negative TCRpMHC structures. Here, posi-
tive structures are defined either from known crystal structures or structures modeled from
known positive TCRpMHC triads. Contrarily, negative structures are defined from struc-
tural models of TCRs with mispaired pMHCs.
With the hope of achieving the main objective of this project, we will conduct experiments
on our three different datasets, the solved-modeled, WT-SW, and GGYN datasets. Firstly,
we will assess the bias that seems to appear when looking at how the inverse folding model
predicts on average. Secondly, we use our solved-modeled dataset to assess the qualities of
our modeled complexes by looking into structural variations between experimentally solved
and predicted structures. We will then perform an initial test on our small WT-SW dataset
to distinguish binder (WT) and non-binder (SW) TCRpMHC triads with our simple ESM-
IF1-based peptide score function.
Lastly, we test our binding status classifiers and how
inclusion of different features affect performances on the larger GGYN dataset.
Throughout these analyses we will show that all of our experiments point toward the struc-
tural modeling driving poor predictions.
4.1
Bias in ESM-IF1 Predictions
First off, we have in Figure 6 shown how the ESM-IF1 predicted amino acid scores are
distributed across peptide positions between solved and modeled complexes. In Figure 6a,
the scores are shown for the experimentally solved complexes and in Figure 6b, for the
TCRpMHCmodels modeled complexes.
The amino acids’ scores are equivalent to the position score calculated as in Equation 8
using the ESM-IF1 predicted amino acid probabilities and a uniform background amino acid
frequency of 0.05. In Figure 6a showing the experimentally solved complexes, we see that
the mean values are negative for position 1 and 9 in the outer regions of the peptide, and
positive for the remaining positions in the middle of the peptide. These positive scores at
the center of the peptide indicate a higher than random probability. This is an exciting
tendency for the purpose of predicting the interaction to TCR as these are positions with
Page 24 of 55
==PAGE:32==
4.1
Bias in ESM-IF1 Predictions
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
Position
8
6
4
2
0
2
4
Score
Solved
Score
(a)
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
Position
8
6
4
2
0
2
4
Score
Modeled
(b)
Figure 6: Distribution for the position scores obtained from the ESM-IF1 predictions on
the solved-modeled dataset of 36 positive TCRpMHC complexes. All position scores were
calculated by Equation 8 using the ESM-IF1 predicted probability of the native amino acid
and a background model with fixed frequency of q(ap) = 0.05 for all amino acids. Average
position scores are shown with green triangles. Scores above 0 indicate that the prediction
is better than random while scores below 0 indicate predictions worse than random. The
maximum position score possible is log2( 1.0
0.05) ∼4.3 shown by the top blue line. (a) Score
distributions for the experimentally solved TCRpMHC structures. (b) Score distributions
for TCRpMHC structures modeled using TCRpMHCmodels.
peptide residues facing towards the TCR. The higher probabilities at the core positions also
indicate that the close proximity between amino acids in the peptide and TCR has great
influence on the amino acid predictions. The predominantly negative values on position 1
and 9 are acceptable as these are faced away from TCR and not as influential for binding
thereto. Furthermore, we see a high score for position 2 which is an anchor for binding to
HLA-A*02:01 [10] and is therefore not important for the interaction with TCR. However, it
is reassuring to observe the inverse folding model capable of also predicting this interaction
with high certainty.
For the modeled structures in Figure 6b, we observe that scores decrease drastically for
all positions except position 1, 2 and 9. Overall, position 1 and 9 get less negative values
closer to zero meaning their frequencies are closer to the background frequency. Position
2 decreases a bit in average position score but generally achieves the highest scores of all
positions. Unfortunately, these outer positions in the peptide are not as important for the
binding to TCR. The overall decrease of the values for the core positions suggests that the
Page 25 of 55
==PAGE:33==
4.1
Bias in ESM-IF1 Predictions
ESM-IF1 model declines in predictive power when we input the modeled structures compared
to the experimentally determined structures. Even though the predictions of the TCR-facing
positions drop in certainty, we still observe a slight positive signal on position 5, 6 and 7 for
50% of the complexes. Furthermore, with the high variability in scores between complexes,
some yet score better than random on certain positions which hints that the inverse folding
model still might be able to capture some correct information from these modeled structures.
Solved
Modeled
(a)
(b)
Figure 7: Average Kullback-Leibler logo plots for interacting TCRpMHC complexes using
the biological amino acid frequencies as background (default in Seq2Logo-2.0). The sequence
logos are grouped by datasets. (a) Average sequence logo plots for the small solved-modeled
dataset shown with experimentally solved structures (top) and modeled (bottom). (b) Aver-
age sequence logos a shown for each peptide type in the large GGYN dataset. GIL-peptide
shown in the top left, GLC-peptide in the top right, YLQ-peptide in the lower left corner
and NLV-peptide in the lower right. The logo plots are visualized using Seq2Logo [56].
To investigate how this information is captured across the 20 different possible amino acids,
we have calculated an average probability matrix across all the positive TCRpMHC com-
plexes. This was done separately for the experimentally solved and modeled complexes across
different peptide sequences (Figure 7a) as well as for each of the peptide types in the GGYN
data set (Figure 7b). The sequence motifs are visualized as Kullback-Leibler logos using a
background model of the biological amino acid frequencies used by default in Seq2Logo-2.0
Page 26 of 55
==PAGE:34==
4.1
Bias in ESM-IF1 Predictions
[56]. In Figure 7, we see that regardless of different peptide sequences and TCRs, the se-
quence logos look very similar with histidine at position 1, leucine at position 2, glycine at
position 4 and either a leucine or proline at position 8 and 9. This is quite unexpected, at
least for the modeled GIL, GLC, NLV and YLQ-peptides, as these should have sequence
motifs very specific to their one true peptide. These motifs do however look quite similar
to the binding motif of HLA-A*02:01 with the more conserved leucine at anchor position 2
and a hydrophobic amino acid at anchor position 9 as observed in the motifviewer feature of
the NetMHCpan-4.1 webserver [57]. Nevertheless, in our figure, we still see some variation
from position 3 to 8 between the logo plots and despite low probabilities these are yet faced
towards the highly variable CDR3s of the TCR which might be favorable for determining
the interaction.
We furthermore see that the sequence motif for the solved structures is slightly different from
all the motifs of the modeled structures as more positions achieve relatively high information
contents. This might also be connected to the tendency seen in Figure 6 showing generally
higher scores for solved compared to modeled structures.
To uncover whether there is a bias in the predictions from ESM-IF1, we have in Figure 8
shown the correlation between positives, negatives and peptide types for average probability
matrices. These correlations were found by calculating the PCC values between two 180-
features long vectors, each including 20 average amino acid ESM-IF1 predictions for each of
the 9 peptide positions.
In the first row and column of the heatmap, we show the correlation between all the groups
of modeled complexes and the experimentally solved structures. In the heatmap, PCC val-
ues are shown between the average probability matrices with coefficients only spanning from
0.82 to 1.0 for modeled complexes demonstrating high correlations. These great correla-
tions signify that the predicted amino acids probabilities are highly similar for all complexes
independent of TCR, peptide sequence, and whether the TCRpMHC triad is positive or
negative. This was also seen in the average logo plots generated from modeled complexes
in Figure 7, highlighting a bias in the predictions in our dataset. For experimentally solved
complexes, the correlation is lower compared to modeled complexes with PCC values ranging
from 0.60 to 0.74. This might seem a bit high but here it should be noted that sequences
and complexes are recurrent between solved and modeled complexes.
Page 27 of 55
==PAGE:35==
4.1
Bias in ESM-IF1 Predictions
From the literature, we know that the pretrained model, ESM-IF1, provides competent
predictions and achieves adequate sequence recovery also for complexes [2]. So the bias we
observe in Figure 7 and Figure 8 does not arise from the inverse folding model in general
but applies to the peptide environment of these modeled structures. However, it is difficult
to pinpoint what the observed bias stems from exactly but we see a clear indication of the
predictions possibly being MHC driven, especially on the structural protein models as seen
in the average logoplots (see Figure 7) with motifs similar to HLA-A*02:01 binders [57].
Solved
WT
SW
GIL (+)
GIL (-)
GLC (+)
GLC (-)
YLQ (+)
YLQ (-)
NLV (+)
NLV (-)
All modeled (+)
All modeled (-)
All modeled
Solved
WT
SW
GIL (+)
GIL (-)
GLC (+)
GLC (-)
YLQ (+)
YLQ (-)
NLV (+)
NLV (-)
All modeled (+)
All modeled (-)
All modeled
1
0.7
0.73
0.74
0.72
0.63
0.65
0.67
0.69
0.61
0.6
0.7
0.71
0.7
0.7
1
0.95
0.89
0.9
0.94
0.95
0.87
0.88
0.93
0.93
0.97
0.96
0.97
0.73
0.95
1
0.87
0.88
0.92
0.94
0.89
0.89
0.87
0.87
0.94
0.95
0.95
0.74
0.89
0.87
1
0.99
0.9
0.91
0.92
0.94
0.83
0.82
0.95
0.95
0.95
0.72
0.9
0.88
0.99
1
0.91
0.93
0.93
0.94
0.84
0.83
0.96
0.96
0.96
0.63
0.94
0.92
0.9
0.91
1
0.99
0.88
0.9
0.94
0.94
0.97
0.97
0.97
0.65
0.95
0.94
0.91
0.93
0.99
1
0.9
0.91
0.94
0.93
0.98
0.98
0.98
0.67
0.87
0.89
0.92
0.93
0.88
0.9
1
0.99
0.83
0.82
0.94
0.95
0.95
0.69
0.88
0.89
0.94
0.94
0.9
0.91
0.99
1
0.85
0.84
0.95
0.96
0.96
0.61
0.93
0.87
0.83
0.84
0.94
0.94
0.83
0.85
1
1
0.95
0.94
0.94
0.6
0.93
0.87
0.82
0.83
0.94
0.93
0.82
0.84
1
1
0.94
0.94
0.94
0.7
0.97
0.94
0.95
0.96
0.97
0.98
0.94
0.95
0.95
0.94
1
1
1
0.71
0.96
0.95
0.95
0.96
0.97
0.98
0.95
0.96
0.94
0.94
1
1
1
0.7
0.97
0.95
0.95
0.96
0.97
0.98
0.95
0.96
0.94
0.94
1
1
1
0.60
0.65
0.70
0.75
0.80
0.85
0.90
0.95
1.00
Figure 8: Heatmap showing the correlation (using PCC) between positives and negatives
for each peptide type in the large GGYN dataset, between positives and negatives in the
small WT-SW data set, between combined positive and negative modeled structures and for
solved structures from the solved-modeled dataset. Each set constitutes average predicted
probabilities for all amino acids per position.
Page 28 of 55
==PAGE:36==
4.2
Quality Assessment of Modeled Structures
As we see different tendencies between solved complexes and all the modeled complexes (seen
in Section 4.1), structural changes occurring when modeling the structures could maybe be
influencing the ESM-IF1 predictions.
This may be explained by investigating structure
model qualities.
4.2
Quality Assessment of Modeled Structures
To evaluate structure model quality, we firstly calculate RMSD values between predicted
structures and their true experimentally solved structures and compare these to template
sequence similarities. In another small example, we study how average peptide RMSD’s
change when going from solved to modeled complexes. Lastly, we investigate the quality by
looking into differences in the number of TCR residues in close proximity of the peptide chain.
After adding extra restrictions to the template-selection in the structure modeling, we wished
to make sure the general tendency of the model quality was not highly influenced. In Figure
9, the RMSD between the 36 experimentally solved structures and their modeled counter-
parts from the small solved-modeled dataset is plotted against the total sequence identity
score for the top chosen templates. Despite the extra restrictions in the template selection,
the plot still shows tendencies similar to Chothia-Lesk plots in Kjærgaard et al (2019) [1].
RMSD values are low (<1 Å) for both peptide and pMHC and higher when looking at the
total complex while the total sequence identity only has a maximum value of ∼68%.
With a PCC value of -0.702, the RMSD seems to be decreasing for the total complex as the
total sequence identity score becomes higher which reflects that the structure model quality
is very dependent on the sequence similarity found in the template databases. Looking at
only the peptide chain, a slight negative correlation also indicates that a higher total iden-
tity score might be connected to a more accurate peptide structure. The Figure furthermore
suggests that the identity scores of the templates chosen for the structure modeling can to
some extent be an indicator of the final structure model quality.
Other than the structural difference between the pairwise solved and modeled structures,
we can also dive into how similar all these models become compared to what is naturally
seen between the experimentally solved structures. Logo plots of the average predictions
by ESM-IF1 (see Figure 7) showed that sequence motifs for modeled complexes were much
more similar to each other than to motifs for solved ones. Furthermore, high correlations
Page 29 of 55
==PAGE:37==
4.2
Quality Assessment of Modeled Structures
56
58
60
62
64
66
68
Sequence similarity to top template (%)
1
2
3
4
5
6
RMSD
RMSD(solved, model) vs. similarity to top template
TCR-pMHC RMSD, PCC: -0.702, p-val: 0.000
pMHC RMSD, PCC = 0.047, p-val: 0.786
peptide RMSD, PCC = -0.187, p-val: 0.276
Figure 9: RMSD accuracy between 36 solved TCRpMHC structures and their modeled
counterparts against the total sequence identity score for the best template. RMSD values
are calculated for the total complex (blue), the pMHC (orange) and the peptide chain (green).
between average predictions for binding and non-binding structures could hint that these
are modeled very similarly.
We therefore wanted to investigate the change in structure of the models’ binding-interface
compared to native conformations. We did this using the RMSD measure. In Table 1, we
show how much peptide structures are expected to vary compared to how they actually vary
for a small example. In this example, we show the true structural variation by calculating
peptide RMSD values between solved complexes both with the same and different peptide
sequence. This test was then done for the modeled versions of the same example struc-
tures. These solved and modeled structures included 5 complexes with the GILGFVFTL-
peptide (PDB ids: 1OGA, 2VLR, 5E6I, 5ISZ, 5TEZ) and 5 complexes with peptide sequences
LLFGYPVYV, SLLMWITQC, NLVPMVATV, SLYNTVATL, and YLEPGPVTV (PDB ids:
1AO7, 2BNR, 3GSN, 5NME, and 5EU6).
From Table 1, we see that the peptide RMSD on average is 0.338 Å across 5 different ex-
perimentally solved GIL structures. Despite the small sample size, we will assume this is
reflecting the actual structural difference between TCR-GIL-MHC complexes, only varying
in TCR. For the same 5 GIL complexes, their modeled structures were compared as well. The
Page 30 of 55
==PAGE:38==
4.2
Quality Assessment of Modeled Structures
average peptide RMSD across the 5 modeled GIL-complexes is 0.243 Å. The RMSD is lower
for these modeled structures compared to the same solved structures indicating the modeled
peptide structures might have too similar conformations. The same is observed when com-
paring 5 solved GIL complexes to 5 solved non-GIL complexes which differ more structurally
(RMSD = 0.813 Å) than when comparing the same 5 modeled GIL complexes to the same
modeled non-GIL complexes (RMSD = 0.341 Å). It is quite disturbing that there seems to
be approximately the same structural variation between the modeled peptide structures with
different peptide sequences as there is between known GIL-peptide structures. Additionally,
the Table shows that standard deviations are also lowered for the modeled complexes, high-
lighting that variations are limited between the peptide chains of these models.
What is interesting about this is that more similar structures will likely also give more similar
outputs by the inverse folding model as it predicts using only backbone coordinates. This
could explain the high resemblance between average predictions of modeled complexes with
different peptides (see Figure 7 and 8).
Table 1: Average peptide RMSD measured between examples structures (5 GIL solved
and modeled: 1OGA, 2VLR, 5E6I, 5ISZ, 5TEZ. 5 solved and modeled non-GIL complexes:
1AO7, 2BNR, 3GSN, 5NME, 5EU6). Average peptide RMSD’s were measured between 1) all
solved GIL complexes, 2) all modeled GIL complexes, 3) all solved GIL and solved non-GIL
complexes, and 4) all modeled GIL and modeled non-GIL complexes. RMSD values were
calculated pairwise between peptide chains using PyMOL by its superimpose function [58].
Mean RMSD values are given with stated standard deviation in the table (µRMSD ± σ).
Solved vs. solved
Modeled vs. modeled
GIL vs. GIL
0.338 ± 0.172
0.243 ± 0.0685
GIL vs. non-GIL
0.813 ± 0.223
0.341 ± 0.0889
Still, the changes in peptide RMSD values might not necessarily be the sole reason for the
drop in position scores when going from solved to modeled structures as seen in Figure 6.
To continue the search for reason, we have investigated the number of residues in the TCRα
and β chains that the peptide could be interacting with. These neighboring amino acids are
important for the inverse folding model to predict the sequence of the peptide.
In this analysis, interacting residues were assumed to be TCR residues found within 4 Å
from each position of the peptide chain. Figure 10a shows the average number of neighbors
for each position in the peptide found for the 36 complexes of the solved-modeled dataset.
Page 31 of 55
==PAGE:39==
4.2
Quality Assessment of Modeled Structures
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
Position
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
Average AA count
CDR3 of solved-modeled dataset
Solved
Modeled
Shared
(a)
(b)
Figure 10: (a) Average neighbor counts for the solved and modeled versions of the small
benchmark dataset shown in blue and green, respectively. Orange bars show the average
count of neighbors shared for both the solved and modeled versions, meaning that the same
residue was defined as a neighbor for both. Neighbors are defined as residues of the TCRα
or β chain found within 4 Å of the peptide chain. Standard deviations are shown as error
bars in the figure having non-significant difference between solved and modeled complexes
(p-value=0.377 using paired t-test). (b) The peptide and TCR for complex 3PWP is shown
as its solved structure (top) and modeled structure (bottom) (total RMSD=1.656 Å). TCR
is colored in gray while the peptide chain is shown as a line in blue for solved and green for
modeled. The amino acids of TCR within 4 Å of the peptide are shown as sticks and colored
blue for solved and green for modeled. The neighbor amino acids in TCR shared between
solved and modeled is shown as sticks and colored orange. (Visualizations are created using
PyMOL [58]).
In the Figure, it is observed that the experimentally solved structures had an average neigh-
bor count that was higher on all positions compared to the same structures in modeled
forms. Orange bars show the average number of residues that were found as neighbors in
both the solved and modeled complex. On all positions, neighbors were found in the modeled
complexes that were not present in the solved ones and only few were shared. This could
demonstrate that the arrangement of the peptide chain or TCR CDR3 loops are changed
significantly when modeling the structures affecting the interaction site. The standard de-
viations are furthermore displayed as error bars in Figure 10a, showing these variations are
similar for solved and modeled CDR3 residues.
Page 32 of 55
==PAGE:40==
4.3
Differentiating Wildtype Binders from Swapped Negatives
In Figure 10b, we explore the CDR3 loop rearrangement for an example structure with a
low total RMSD of 1.656 Å between solved and modeled structure (PDB id: 3PWP). In the
Figure, the two structures are aligned and TCR residues within 4 Å of the peptide chain are
colored blue for the solved and green for the modeled structure while neighbor residues that
are shared are coloured orange. In the TCRα chain, one loop is flipped which rearranges the
interaction site and the neighboring amino acids.
On average, the decreased neighbor count for modeled structures creates a disadvantage for
the ESM-IF1 model. It means that adjacent residues are further away making it difficult for
the model to learn the sequence of the peptide chain. Only at anchor positions, the tight
grooves of the MHC allows the models to collect proper information and thereby higher
probabilities. However, the interaction between peptide and TCR remains challenging to
decipher.
The different tests of model qualities indicate that changes occur in the TCRpMHC inter-
face when going from experimentally solved to structures modeled with TCRpMHCmodels.
Nevertheless, we will investigate if it is still possible to collect enough information to be able
to distinguish binding from non-binding complexes using the ESM-IF1 model.
4.3
Differentiating Wildtype Binders from Swapped Negatives
In the following section, we will assess the possibility of differentiating between binder and
non-binder scores for the WT-SW dataset using uniform or ESM-IF1 based background fre-
quencies for our simple ESM-IF1 peptide score function (see Equation 9). Furthermore, we
will consider whether an ESM-IF1 based background model can counteract the bias observed
in Section 4.1.
For the small WT-SW dataset, structures were modeled for both the wildtype complexes
(WT) and their corresponding swapped negative complexes (SW) with differing peptide se-
quence. For each complex, we used our baseline score function from Equation 9 on the
predicted ESM-IF1 residue probabilities and either a uniform background frequency model
(q(ap) = 0.05) or a background frequency matrix computed from the average ESM-IF1 pre-
dictions of the GGYN dataset as described in section 3.4. In Figure 11, the distribution of
these scores are shown for both the WT and SW versions of the complexes. A peptide score
of 0 means the peptide is predicted to bind with the same likelihood as a background model
peptide.
Page 33 of 55
==PAGE:41==
4.3
Differentiating Wildtype Binders from Swapped Negatives
For the peptide score using equal background frequencies (Figure 11a), a paired t-test showed
a p-value of 0.032 when comparing binder and non-binder scores, meaning that the difference
in average score was significant. The same test resulted in an even lower p-value of 0.006
for the scores calculated with background frequencies from the GGYN dataset implying a
better distinction. The Figure furthermore shows the pairwise difference in WT and SW
score whereof blue lines indicate that the binder version of the complex scored higher and
red lines show that the non-binder was better.
The differences in average score (∆WT −SW) are very comparable between the two back-
ground approaches. Furthermore, the number of times the SW scores higher than its WT
counterpart is the same no matter the applied background model. Although this pairwise
comparison of WT and SW scores does not suggest a clear distinction between binders and
non-binders, it could seem that the binders score slightly higher in general when looking at
the boxplots and calculated p-values indicating significant distinction (Figure 11). Further-
more, scores calculated with either of the two background models achieve reasonable AUCs
of 0.625 and 0.663 using the uniform and GGYN backgrounds, respectively.
Despite significant p-values, it should however be noted that there is a large overlap be-
tween the WT and SW interquartile ranges (IQR) using both background approaches. This
complicates setting the best threshold for our binary classification, ultimately affecting the
precision and sensitivity of our predictions. Based on the performance, p-values and espe-
cially the medians suggest that the ESM-IF1 background might be a better choice.
Although this test is only done on a small WT-SW dataset, the use of a simple scoring
function for general predictions of TCRpMHC binding could be promising based on this
small initial test.
Page 34 of 55
==PAGE:42==
4.4
Extended Investigation of Prediction Models on Upscaled Dataset
WT
SW
20
15
10
5
0
5
10
Peptide score
Delta avg.: 3.55, p-value: 0.032, AUC: 0.625
WT and SW scores using uniform background
(a)
WT
SW
20
15
10
5
0
5
10
Peptide score
Delta avg.: 3.44, p-value: 0.006, AUC: 0.663
WT and SW scores using GGYN background
(b)
Figure 11: Distribution of binder and non-binder peptide scores for the WT-SW dataset.
Lines connect binder (WT) and non-binder (SW) pairs of the same complex whereof blue
lines indicate that the WT scores higher and red lines the opposite. Delta avg. is the average
difference in the paired WT and SW score. The p-value is calculated from a dependent t-test
for paired samples. (a) Peptide scores calculated with uniform background frequencies for all
amino acids (q(ap) =
1
20 = 0.05). (b) Peptide scores calculated using background frequencies
based on binder and non-binder ESM-IF1 predictions of the GGYN dataset.
4.4
Extended Investigation of Prediction Models on Upscaled Dataset
Based on the hints of a possible distinction between binder and non-binder scores seen for
the WT-SW dataset (Figure 11 from Section 4.3), we decided to move on to test the scor-
ing function and extended models on the much larger GGYN dataset consisting of modeled
TCRpMHC structures with positive (binding) and negative (non-binding) TCRs to four
different peptides (GILGFVFTL, GLCTLVAML, YLQPRTFLL, and NLVPMVATV). Due
to better distinction on the WT-SW dataset, we will be using ESM-IF1 based background
models from now on.
Firstly, we will assess the performance of our simple peptide score function as a baseline.
Furthermore, we will show the structure qualities using sequence identities of the templates
chosen for the modeling as quality measure.
With these calculated scores and template
identities, we will explore possible relationships between these to try and explain differences
in scores.
Page 35 of 55
==PAGE:43==
4.4
Extended Investigation of Prediction Models on Upscaled Dataset
4.4.1
Baseline Model: Simple Score Function
The calculation of summed log-odds scores constituted our simplest model (see Equation 9).
These scores were computed for both binders and non-binders for all four groups of our large
TCRpMHC dataset and their distribution can be seen in Figure 12a. T-tests of independent
samples showed that the mean scores were significantly different between binders and non-
binders for the GIL, GLC and YLQ peptides but non-significant for NLV. The AUCs for
the GIL, GLC, YLQ and NLV peptides were 0.593, 0.551, 0.62 and 0.503, respectively and
can be seen in Table 2 and in Figure 12b. These show that three of the four peptides were
able to obtain performances above a random classifier while the NLV peptides were more
difficult to classify. MCC values, F1-scores and the confusion matrices were also computed
and can be seen in Table 2. All MCCs were relatively low but above random ranging from
0.036 to 0.195 with the model performing worst for the NLV and GLC peptides. F1-score
were however below random ranging from 0.256 to 0.358 whereof the lowest performances
were likewise obtained testing on NLV and GLC.
GIL
GLC
YLQ
NLV
30
20
10
0
10
Peptide score
*
****
*
ns
binder
1
0
(a)
GIL
GLC
YLQ
NLV
0.450
0.475
0.500
0.525
0.550
0.575
0.600
0.625
0.650
AUC
0.593
0.551
0.62
0.503
(b)
Figure 12: Performance of baseline score function on the peptides from the GGYN dataset.
(a) Distribution of peptide scores shown for the GILGFVFTL, GLCTLVAML, YLQPRT-
FLL, and NLVPMVATV peptides. Peptide scores are stratified by binder status (binder:
1, non-binder: 0).
Scores are calculated with Equation 9 using background frequencies
based on average ESM-IF1 probabilities for all peptide types (binders and non-binders) but
excluding the test peptide. Mean scores are shown in green triangles. Stars indicate signifi-
cant difference in mean scores assessed by the p-value calculated from an independent t-test
(ns : 5.0 · 10−2 < p ≤1.0, ∗: 1.0 · 10−2 < p ≤5.0 · 10−2, ∗∗: 1.0 · 10−3 < p ≤1.0 · 10−2, ∗∗∗:
1.0 · 10−4 < p ≤1.0 · 10−3, ∗∗∗∗: p ≤1.0 · 10−4), where p here is the p-value. (b) AUCs
using the peptide score function as binder status predictor.
Page 36 of 55
==PAGE:44==
4.4
Extended Investigation of Prediction Models on Upscaled Dataset
Looking at the confusion matrices, there is a large amount of complexes misclassified as
positives when they are actually labeled as negatives. Along with this, approximately half or
more of the labeled positives are classified as non-binders. The amount of misclassification is
however also expected considering the large overlap between binder and non-binder boxplots
in Figure 12a.
Table 2:
Performance measures for the four different complex groups using the simple
peptide score function (baseline function from Equation 9). Performance metrics include
the AUC, MCC, F1-score and the confusion matrix. The MCC, F1-score and confusion
matrix are calculated using an optimal threshold found by the ROC-curve, at the point
where the difference between the true positive rate (TPR) and false positive rate (FPR) is
maximized. In the confusion matrix, the first row shows labeled negatives and the second
row shows labeled positives, while first column shows predicted negatives and the second
column predicted positives.
AUC
MCC
F1-score
Confusion matrix
GILGFVFTL
0.593
0.116
0.309
2975
1390
483
419

GLCTLVAML
0.551
0.075
0.256
579
300
83
66

YLQPRTFLL
0.62
0.195
0.358
185
60
26
24

NLVPMVATV
0.503
0.036
0.266
733
596
134
132

For our simple ESM-IF1 score function, we are not seeing a perfect distinction between
positives and negatives for the GGYN complexes. With hints of the difficult distinction being
caused by structural differences in modeled structures seen for our solved-modeled dataset
affecting ESM-IF1 predictions negatively, we will in a similar way investigate further if the
prediction score depends on the quality of the structure model. However, since we cannot
compare the structural models in the GGYN dataset with their true solved conformation,
we can only use sequence identity to template as structural quality measure.
4.4.1.1
Structure Model Quality Assessed by Sequence Similarity
To investigate the effect of template sequence similarity on the predictions, we will first take
a look at the distribution of template sequence identities between binder and non-binders
for all four peptides, GIL, GLC, YLQ and NLV. Secondly, we will examine the correlation
between sequence similarity and peptide score.
Page 37 of 55
==PAGE:45==
4.4
Extended Investigation of Prediction Models on Upscaled Dataset
Figure 13 shows the sequence similarity of the best scoring template chosen for each complex.
Identities are visualized for each of the chains in the complexes together with the weighted
total sequence identity score. Moreover, the identities are stratified by binder status showing
that templates were generally chosen with slightly higher identity scores for the non-binders
compared to binders. This minor favoritism of the non-binders is important as we wish
to avert any bias towards the binders in the structure modeling step. It is however not
clear but interesting what could be driving this trend. It is worth mentioning that favoring
non-binders in the modeling could increase the risk of complicating the distinction between
positives and negatives.
This Figure furthermore compares the different peptide groups demonstrating that the pep-
tide sequences have higher peptide template similarity for the GLC and NLV peptides, also
increasing their total identity score compared to the other peptide groups. The remaining
sequences acquire comparable identity scores and as the TCR chains are weighted 1/3 in the
final score, these do not seem to have a larger effect on the total identity score. Template
sequence identities were generally very high for the MHC chain which is likely due to the
fact that no maximum threshold was used for filtering these templates and there was a high
weight of 2/6 on the MHC in the template selection.
As we saw in Figure 9, a higher total identity score likely means a lower and better RMSD
which could suggest that complex structures with the GLC and NLV peptides are modeled
slightly better. Since we did a multi-template modeling, it is important to keep in mind
that only looking at the top scoring template does not give the full image. Average identity
scores for all selected templates can be seen in Supplementary Figure S1 .
Previously, we have seen that the structure modeling caused ESM-IF1 predictions to decrease
for the native peptide sequence (Figure 6). Furthermore, average predictions for the solved
dataset stood out the most with a sequence motif different from those of all the modeled
structures (Figure 7 and 8). We therefore wanted to investigate whether a cause could be
traced back to specific steps in the modeling process, namely the template selection. For that
reason, we have looked into possible correlations between the peptide scores and template
sequence similarities for the MHC, peptide, TCRα, TCRβ chains and the weighted total
identity score.
Page 38 of 55
==PAGE:46==
4.4
Extended Investigation of Prediction Models on Upscaled Dataset
GIL
GLC
YLQ
NLV
50
55
60
65
70
75
80
85
Total identity (%)
****
****
ns
**
Total identity
binder
1
0
(a)
GIL
GLC
YLQ
NLV
0
10
20
30
40
50
Sequence identity (%)
*
***
***
ns
Peptide
1
0
GIL
GLC
YLQ
NLV
70
75
80
85
90
95
100
105
Sequence identity (%)
ns
***
ns
ns
MHC
1
0
GIL
GLC
YLQ
NLV
20
40
60
80
100
Sequence identity (%)
*
****
***
****
TCR
1
0
GIL
GLC
YLQ
NLV
20
40
60
80
100
Sequence identity (%)
****
***
ns
ns
TCR
1
0
(b)
Figure 13:
(a) Distribution of the weighted total sequence identity score for the best
scoring template per complex stratified by binder status (binder: 1, non-binder: 0) for the
four different peptide groups (GILGFVFTL, GLCTLVAML, YLQPRTFLL, NLVPMVATV).
(b) The peptide, MHC, TCRα and TCRβ sequence identity to best scoring template for the
four peptide groups. Red triangles show mean sequence identities. Stars indicate significant
difference in mean scores assessed by the p-value calculated from an independent t-test
(ns : 5.0 · 10−2 < p ≤1.0, ∗: 1.0 · 10−2 < p ≤5.0 · 10−2, ∗∗: 1.0 · 10−3 < p ≤1.0 · 10−2, ∗∗∗:
1.0 · 10−4 < p ≤1.0 · 10−3, ∗∗∗∗: p ≤1.0 · 10−4), where p here is the p-value.
Page 39 of 55
==PAGE:47==
4.4
Extended Investigation of Prediction Models on Upscaled Dataset
Outcomes of this investigation can be seen in Figure 14 between binders and non-binders
and in Supplementary Figure S3 stratified further by peptide-type. In the left-most plot of
Figure 14, we first of all see that total identities are mainly found below 70% due to the
restrictions put on the peptide and TCR templates. This makes it difficult to do a proper
correlation analysis as the full span of possible similarities is not exploited. Testing the
connection to the total identity for the negative complexes, we obtain a PCC value of 0.01
with a p-value of 0.59 indicating that the alternative hypothesis of a positive or negative
correlation is rejected. For all other PCC values, p-values are on the other hand found to be
significant (p-value < 0.05). Looking at the identities of the individual chains, it seems that
there could be a connection between high peptide identities and high peptide scores and an
opposite effect for the MHC and TCRβ identities. This could suggest that templates are
maybe chosen with high identities for one chain at the cost of a lower identity on another
as this is the only way chain templates with low similarity can achieve a high total identity
required for selection.
When stratifying by the four different peptide types (see Supplementary Figure S3), it how-
ever becomes clear that trends are varying a lot across different peptides and it is therefore
important to be careful with drawing any conclusions regarding these correlations. In this
test, only four different peptide types have been investigated and restricting thresholds have
been put on the peptide and TCR templates which mean that correlations cannot be evalu-
ated for the full range of possible identities.
Ultimately, it is difficult to deduce any direct effect of the different sequence similarities as
these are confounding variables and the peptide-specific correlations do not agree well. These
are indications that the potential effect the template-based modeling has on the peptide score
is more complicated than we initially thought and has yet to be resolved. The investigation
might however propose that the weighting of the different chains and the harsh restrictions
put on the template selection could have had a large impact on the binding-site diversities
between solved and modeled structures (seen in Section 4.2).
Page 40 of 55
==PAGE:48==
4.4
Extended Investigation of Prediction Models on Upscaled Dataset
Figure 14: Peptide scores against average sequence similarities of templates chosen for
structure modeling of the GGYN dataset. Similarity measures include the total, peptide,
MHC, TCRα and TCRβ identity from left to right. Correlations are calculated separately for
negatives (blue) and positives (orange) complexes using the Pearson’s correlation coefficient.
All PCC values have significant p-values below 0.05 except the correlation between peptide
score and total identity for negative complexes which has a p-value of 0.59. The p-value
is obtained through a two-tailed t-test testing non-correlation, thus a significant p-value
indicates that the correlation can be negative or positive.
4.4.2
Variations of the Simple Score Function Gives No Performance Boost
With implications of model quality affecting peptide scores, we still want to investigate if
positive and negative complexes can be distinguished by improving the current binding clas-
sifier. To possibly improve our simple score function or create more complex and better
prediction models, we investigate the distribution of scores for the individual peptide posi-
tions together with the distribution of ESM-IF1 predictions for nearby TCR residues. This
is done with the hopes that extending the feature space will provide more information for
our models, important for the binding.
4.4.2.1
Distribution of Peptide Position Scores
In Figure 15, we have shown the distribution for the position scores of the modeled TCRpMHC
complexes across the four different peptides. The scores were calculated with Equation 8
using the 9 ESM-IF1 predicted probabilities and the background frequencies generated from
3 out of 4 peptides as described in Section 3.4.
For all positions, distributions for binder and non-binder complexes behave rather similarly
which could insinuate a difficult distinction between the two groups in a combined score as
seen in the previous section (Section 4.4.1). For the NLV-peptide, differences in binder and
Page 41 of 55
==PAGE:49==
4.4
Extended Investigation of Prediction Models on Upscaled Dataset
non-binder scores are non-significant for all positions which explains the poor performance
using our simple scoring function. Only position 3 or outer positions 1 or 2 show a significant
difference for the GLC and YLQ peptides which is quite disappointing as we wish to also
drive the predictions using positions 3-8. On the contrary, the GIL-peptide shows significant
differences on multiple positions.
Ideally, this tendency should be shared among several
peptide types for a good generalizing model.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10.0
7.5
5.0
2.5
0.0
2.5
5.0
Score
ns
****
****
ns
***
****
ns
****
*
GILGFVFTL
1
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10.0
7.5
5.0
2.5
0.0
2.5
5.0
Score
****
ns
ns
*
ns
ns
ns
ns
ns
GLCTLVAML
1
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10.0
7.5
5.0
2.5
0.0
2.5
5.0
Score
ns
ns
*
ns
ns
ns
ns
ns
ns
YLQPRTFLL
1
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10.0
7.5
5.0
2.5
0.0
2.5
5.0
Score
ns
ns
ns
ns
ns
ns
ns
ns
ns
NLVPMVATV
1
0
Figure 15:
Distribution of peptide position scores for the correct amino acids in the
GILGFVFTL, GLCTLVAML, YLQPRTFLL, and NLVPMVATV peptides.
Positions are
shown on the x-axis and scores are stratified by binder status (binder: 1, non-binder: 0).
Scores are calculated with Equation 8. Mean scores are shown by green triangles. Stars
indicate significant difference in mean scores assessed by the p-value calculated from an in-
dependent t-test (ns : 5.0 · 10−2 < p ≤1.0, ∗: 1.0 · 10−2 < p ≤5.0 · 10−2, ∗∗: 1.0 · 10−3 <
p ≤1.0 · 10−2, ∗∗∗: 1.0 · 10−4 < p ≤1.0 · 10−3, ∗∗∗∗: p ≤1.0 · 10−4), where p here is the
p-value.
All peptides achieve position scores centered around 0, meaning the amino acids are predicted
with the same likelihood as the chosen background frequency model. However, the range
wherein the scores vary seems larger for middle positions compared to positions 1 and 2. This
means that the predicted ESM-IF1 probability is more consistently close to the background
Page 42 of 55
==PAGE:50==
4.4
Extended Investigation of Prediction Models on Upscaled Dataset
model for these outer positions which could be due to a more confident modeling of the
pMHC complex compared to the CDR loops of the TCR chains. In TCR-facing positions,
many of the complexes score below 0 indicating a depletion compared to the average ESM-
IF1 probabilities. This could be highlighting a wrongfully defined background model or a
loss of information crucial for the binding between peptide and TCR.
4.4.2.2
Investigating Interfacing CDR3 Residues
As we saw a lot of bias in the ESM-IF1 probabilities for the peptide sequences, a similar
analysis was conducted on the CDR3 residues. For each peptide-type, we generated non-
position-specific average matrices containing 20 amino acid probabilities for all neighboring
CDR3 residues found within 4 Å.
Correlations between the average predictions were very high with PCC values ranging from
0.91-1.0 (see Supplementary Figure S4b and S4d), so we tried to counteract this bias by
using these average CDR3 matrices as background frequencies. The average CDR3 matrices
were generated from 3 out of 4 of the peptide-types, leaving out the group being evaluated
on (described in Section 3.4.2.
To investigate a possible distinction between binder and non-binder, CDR3 scores calculated
using Equation 11 are shown in Figure 16. Here it can be seen that the difference between
binder and non-binder predictions are highly inadequate for most of the peptide groups.
There is only a significant difference between binders and non-binders for the YLQ dataset
in the TCRα chain and for the GIL and GLC datasets in the TCRβ chain, whereof it is
the non-binders that score significantly higher for the GLC peptide complexes. The possible
distinction in these cases might help a prediction model for these peptides but in GLC’s
case, better predictions will most likely be built on a misleading foundation.
The generally poor distinctions between binders and non-binders could be due to there
being a minimal signal left when utilizing background frequencies with such high correlation.
However, the class distinction in CDR3 seen for some of the peptides might yet be helpful
for a classifier when we extend our prediction models.
Page 43 of 55
==PAGE:51==
4.4
Extended Investigation of Prediction Models on Upscaled Dataset
GIL
GLC
YLQ
NLV
8
6
4
2
0
2
4
6
Score
ns
ns
*
ns
binder
1
0
CDR3
(a)
GIL
GLC
YLQ
NLV
6
4
2
0
2
4
Score
**
*
ns
ns
binder
1
0
CDR3
(b)
Figure 16: Distribution of CDR3 scores calculated with Equation 11 using background
frequencies calculated from average ESM-IF1 predictions for CDR3 of all peptide types
except the tested peptide. Scores are stratified by binder status (binder: 1, non-binder: 0).
Mean scores are shown with green triangles. Stars indicate significant difference in mean
scores assessed by the p-value calculated from an independent t-test (ns : 5.0 · 10−2 < p ≤
1.0, ∗: 1.0 · 10−2 < p ≤5.0 · 10−2, ∗∗: 1.0 · 10−3 < p ≤1.0 · 10−2, ∗∗∗: 1.0 · 10−4 < p ≤
1.0 · 10−3, ∗∗∗∗: p ≤1.0 · 10−4), where p here is the p-value.
4.4.2.3
Performance of Score Functions
In Figure 17, we have shown how different variations of our score function perform on the
GIL-, GLC-, YLQ- and NLV-peptide complexes of the GGYN dataset. For all three models,
the score includes the summed log-odds ratio between the ESM-IF1 predicted probability
of the correct amino acid and a position-wise background model generated from the three
peptide classes that are not evaluated on. In the left group, we have our baseline model
(Equation 9) for reference.
In the middle group of the figure, we tried to extend the score function for all 9 positions of
the peptide to include a score for the neighboring CDR3 amino acids of both the TCRα and
TCRβ chain as calculated with Equation 11. Including CDR3 neighbors resulted in AUCs
of 0.591, 0.537, 0.639 and 0.512 for the GIL-, GLC-, YLQ- and NLV-peptide, respectively.
Not surprisingly, this did not change the performance of the score function drastically which
might be explained by the difficult distinction between positives and negatives in CDR3 as
observed previously (see Figure 16). The AUC for the NLV- and YLQ-peptide complexes
improved a bit which for YLQ can possibly be explained by the CDR3α scores having a
significant difference in mean between positives and negatives. Despite the GIL-peptide also
having a significant difference in CDR3β, the AUC remains the same as when excluding
CDR3 in the score function. For GLC complexes, the decline in performance could likely be
due to the non-binders scoring higher in the CDR3β.
Page 44 of 55
==PAGE:52==
4.4
Extended Investigation of Prediction Models on Upscaled Dataset
Pos1-9
Baseline model
Pos1-9 + CDR3
Pos3-8
0.35
0.40
0.45
0.50
0.55
0.60
0.65
0.70
AUC
0.59
0.59
0.58
0.55
0.54
0.50
0.62
0.64
0.45
0.50
0.51
0.50
AUCs for variations of the score function
GIL
GLC
YLQ
NLV
Figure 17: Performance in AUC of score functions evaluated on GIL-, GLC-, YLQ- and
NLV-peptide complexes from the GGYN dataset shown in blue, yellow, green and red,
respectively and grouped by score function variation. In the left group, the score function
is our baseline model (see Equation 9) that includes all 9 positions in the peptide. In the
middle group, the score function includes all 9 positions in the peptide including scores for
both CDR3α and CDR3β (Equation 12). In the right group, the score function only includes
position 3 to 8 in the peptide (Equation 13).
In the right-most group of Figure 17, we tried to exclude the non-TCR-facing positions from
the score function, namely position 1, 2 and 9 using Equation 13. Unluckily, this resulted
in a reduction in AUC for all peptides. Especially for GLC and YLQ, we see a major drop
in performance to below random when excluding the MHC anchoring positions. The GIL
performance did not decrease as much which might be caused by position 4, 5 and 7 being
important for binder differentiation as seen when we stratify scores by position in Figure 15.
However, the generally observed performance-drop when discarding the anchor positions is
an unfavorable trend since we know the TCR-facing peptide residues are essential for the
interaction to TCR. Based on Figure 17 showing the different score functions’ performances,
we can confirm that the baseline model is the better score function of the three.
Page 45 of 55
==PAGE:53==
4.4
Extended Investigation of Prediction Models on Upscaled Dataset
4.4.3
Performances of Logistic Regression Models
Following our score function, we then wanted to see how an expanded model was able to
predict the interaction from the ESM-IF1 predicted amino acid probabilities. In Figure 18,
we see the performances for logistic regression models fitted on different features for the
peptides in the GGYN dataset. The models were fitted on the log-odds values using the
leave-one-peptide-out setup as background. In Figure 18a, the different input features shown
from left to right in the figure are: FA) the correct amino acid for all 9 positions in the pep-
tide, FB) all 20 amino acids for all 9 positions in the peptide, FC) the correct amino acid
for all 9 positions including average scores for CDR3α and CDR3β neighbor amino acids,
FD) all 20 amino acids including CDR3α and CDR3β scores, FE) the correct amino acid for
position 3 to 8 in the peptide, and FF) all 20 amino acids for position 3 to 8 in the peptide.
Each bar in the figure represents one model fitted using cross-validation on four partitions
of one peptide type and tested on the left out fifth partition of the same peptide.
From Figure 18, we see that by extending the linear model from fitting on the correct amino
acid to all 20 amino acids, the AUC values improve in all cases for the GIL-, YLQ- and GLC-
peptides. When including CDR3 scores, the AUC of the GIL- and NLV-peptide complexes
remain more or less the same while it improve the performance for the YLQ and GLC. This
increase is minimal when using all 20 amino acids and higher when using the score of the 9
peptide amino acids. The increase in YLQ performance could be caused by its significant
difference in CDR3α seen in Figure 16.
Excluding the anchor position of the peptide, reduced the performance a lot for all pep-
tides when only looking at the correct amino acid. However, when we excluded the outer
positions for the 20 amino acids scores, the performance remained more or less the same
except for the YLQ-complexes where the AUC actually increased. Keeping the performance
while excluding position 1, 2 and 9 is a very positive trend indicating the importance of
the TCR-facing positions for predicting binding of the peptide to TCR. For all NLV-specific
logistic regression models, shown in red bars of Figure 18a, we obtained AUCs of around 0.5
no matter the input features indicating abnormalities around the NLV-peptide that does not
provide us with the same predictive information compared to the other three peptides.
We furthermore tested the models fitted on all 20 log-odds ratios per position (9x20), per
position and including CDR3 (9x20+CDR3), and only for position 3 to 8 (6x20) on unseen
Page 46 of 55
==PAGE:54==
4.4
Extended Investigation of Prediction Models on Upscaled Dataset
peptides. For each peptide-specific-fitted model, the performance was evaluated on the other
three peptides. The results from this can be seen in Figure 18b. Unfortunately, the 12 fit-
ted models were indeed peptide-specific and not able to generalize to new peptides as AUC
values were around or below 0.5.
FA)
9x1
FB)
9x20
FC)
9x1 + CDR3
FD)
9x20 + CDR3
FE)
6x1
FF)
6x20
0.40
0.45
0.50
0.55
0.60
0.65
0.70
0.75
0.80
AUC
GIL
GLC
YLQ
NLV
(a) Fit and test on same peptide
FB)
9x20
FD)
9x20 + CDR3
FF)
6x20
0.40
0.45
0.50
0.55
0.60
0.65
0.70
0.75
0.80
UC
GIL
GLC
YLQ
NLV
(b) Fit and test on different
peptides
Figure 18: Performance in AUC of logistic regression models fitted on different features
for the GIL-, GLC-, YLQ- and NLV-peptide complexes from the GGYN dataset shown in
blue, yellow, green and red, respectively and grouped by input features. (a) The models are
tested on a left out partition of the same peptide as fitted on. The different input features
displayed from left to right are: FA) the 9 position scores called 9x1 in figure, FB) the log-
odds values for all 20 amino acids for all 9 positions called 9x20 in figure, FC) the 9 position
scores including CDR3α and CDR3β scores called 9x1+CDR in figure, FD) the log-odds
ratios for all 20 amino acids for all 9 positions also including CDR3α and CDR3β scores
called 9x20+CDR in figure, FE) the positions scores for position 3 to 8 called 6x1 in figure,
and FF) the log-odds values for all 20 amino acids for position 3 to 8 in the peptide called
6x20 in figure. (b) Test AUCs of the best models; FB) 9x20, FD) 9x20+CDR3 and FF)
6x20, fitted on one peptide while tested on the three others.
Next, we wished to see if a logistic regression model fitted on two peptides (GIL and GLC)
could generalize to a third unseen peptide (YLQ). Based on previous results (Figure 18),
we decided to discard the NLV-peptide from the model as we saw that even when fitting an
NLV-specific model, the performance stayed around random or worse when testing on NLV.
Page 47 of 55
==PAGE:55==
4.4
Extended Investigation of Prediction Models on Upscaled Dataset
9x20
9x20
+ CDR3
6x20
9x20
DS=1500
9x20
DS=1000
9x20
DS=600
9x20
DS=400
0.40
0.45
0.50
0.55
0.60
0.65
0.70
0.75
0.80
AUC
0.71
0.71
0.70
0.69
0.66
0.62
0.60
0.46
0.46
0.44
0.51
0.51
0.54
0.56
0.53
0.53
0.45
0.56
0.59
0.55
0.53
GIL
GLC
YLQ
Figure 19: Logistic regression models fitted on 4 partitions of the GIL and GLC peptide
using cross-validation. The models were tested on a left out fifth partition of GIL and GLC
and also tested on the YLQ-peptide. All models were fitted on the log-odds values for all 20
amino acids. The models called 9x20 (first and four last groups from left to right) were fitted
on all 9 positions in the peptide. The second group in the plot, called 9x20+CDR3, was
fitted on the same 9 positions including CDR3α and CDR3β scores. The third group from
the left, called 6x20, was fitted on position 3 to 8 in the peptide. The four models to the right
of the figure, denoted DS for downsampling, included downsampling of the GIL-peptide in
each fold to 1500, 1000, 600 or 400 complexes.
In Figure 19, we show logistic regression models fitted on four partitions of GIL- and GLC-
peptides using cross-validation. The model performances were evaluated on a left out fifth
partition of GIL and GLC and also a peptide (YLQ) not seen by the model during training.
All 20 amino acid log-odds values were used as input features for the different models. The
first model was fitted on all 9 peptide positions, the second on all peptide positions together
with CDR3α and β scores, and the third model on only peptide positions 3 to 8.
From the figure, we see that the GIL test set has a decent AUC of 0.715 while it for the GLC
test partition is below random with an AUC value of 0.462 when fitting on all 9 positions.
For the unseen peptide (YLQ), the performance is just above random with an AUC of 0.530.
Adding the average CDR3 scores does not affect the performance for any of these models
Page 48 of 55
==PAGE:56==
4.4
Extended Investigation of Prediction Models on Upscaled Dataset
which may be explained by the poor distinction seen in Figure 16 providing a minimal in-
fluence in such a large features space. Even though excluding the positions 1, 2 and 9 from
the input features show to still maintain performances for the 6x20 models in Figure 18, the
combined GIL-GLC model (6x20) is not able to generalize to the unseen YLQ-peptide (see
Figure 19).
Due to the large performance gap between GIL and GLC, we tried balancing out the group
sizes using downsampling. We did this for the model fitted on all 9 positions of the pep-
tide. Here we tried downsampling the majority group, GIL, by selecting a random subset
of different sizes; 1500, 1000, 600 and 400, for each fold. In Figure 19, we see that when
decreasing the number of GIL samples, the AUC of the GIL test set declines. Meanwhile
the performance of GLC and YLQ slightly increases to just above random, the more we
downsample GIL. However, we still do not get admirable AUCs for any of the test peptides
and compromise the performance for GIL compared to the small gain of others when using
downsampling. Interestingly enough, when we downsample GIL to 400 peptides making
GLC the majority group by around 1.5 times the size, the performance is still higher for GIL
with an AUC of 0.60 while the AUC for GLC is 0.56. This might be an indication of GIL
being an easier predictable peptide compared to others.
In general, we do not get accurate prediction models able to distinguish binder from non-
binder for new unseen peptides. In fact, our best model is the baseline model which only
achieves AUCs between 0.503 to 0.62 for our four peptides. These low performances are
quite curious which we will discuss the reason for in the forthcoming section.
Page 49 of 55
==PAGE:57==
5
Discussion
5.1
Structure Models Introduce Bias in ESM-IF1 Predictions
Throughout our results, we observed that there was an unwanted bias on the ESM-IF1 pre-
dictions for the TCRpMHC complexes in our datasets. As shown by Hsu et al (2022) [2],
the sequence recovery of the ESM-IF1 model is generally high which means that the bias
does not originate from the inverse folding model itself but is something that is acquired in
the peptide environment of these models.
The observed bias might stem from MHC-directed predictions which we also saw in Figure
7 with a distinct HLA-A*02:01 binding motif visible in the sequence logos. This especially
applied to the structurally modeled complexes with very high predicted probabilities at the
anchor positions 2 and 9. This native-like MHC binding motif might originate from the
structural modeling step with higher weight put on the MHC and peptide chains compared
to TCR when selecting templates. Presumably, this will favor complex templates more suit-
able for the pMHC compared to the TCR when doing the docking of these two complexes
and perhaps result in more accurate amino acid predictions for the MHC-facing residues
in the peptide compared to TCR-facing. Furthermore, the tight enclosed binding between
peptide and MHC class I, kept with more accurate modeling, is also a favorable prerequisite
for ESM-IF1 as it achieves better performance in the core of proteins.
While it is nice to see that ESM-IF1 can give good predictions for MHC-facing amino
acids, this is not as interesting because accurate MHC-binding prediction tools such as
NetMHCpan-4.1 already exist [14]. Consequently, this MHC-driven bias is a disadvanta-
geous condition for prediction of TCR interaction as we get worse TCR signals like seen in
Figure 6.
When we look at the distributions of the position-wise scores for both the WT-SW and
GGYN datasets (Figure 6b and 15), we see that amino acids of the native peptide sequence
often score around or below 0 indicating a depletion compared to the background. This
means that they score similar or worse than what ESM-IF1 predicts on average for the same
amino acids. This tendency is especially seen at TCR-facing positions which could suggest
that there is either a lack of TCR-driven signal or that the signal is removed with the applied
background model. The left-over signal after using the background could potentially also be
heavily dominated by noise.
Page 50 of 55
==PAGE:58==
5.2
Complications of Structure Modeling
The same applies for the neighboring CDR3 residues, where many of these also were get-
ting scores of 0 or worse (see Figure 16). This missing signal in CDR3 might be caused
by our background frequency model definition as this was generated from the neighboring
TCR residues. Falsely, when no neighbor was observed, the residue score would demonstrate
otherwise due to the choice of background, meaning a score of 0 suddenly will indicate a
neighbor. Furthermore, the inclusion of recurring CDR3 residues for different positions in
the same peptide might be misleading the background model even further. This highlights
the need for additional investigation of average predictions in TCR residues to generate bet-
ter CDR3 background models.
All background frequencies were based on ESM-IF1 predictions for both binding and non-
binding complexes and here it could be argued whether some signal was included with
the binders. However, as the heatmaps in Figure 8 and Supplementary Figure S4b and S4d
showed, there were significantly high correlations between binder and non-binder predictions
which could justify that this would only make a minimal difference. These high correlations
do however imply that ESM-IF1 generally struggled with spotting structural differences
between positives and negatives for the modeled structures. This clearly suggests that a
more optimal background would most likely require better structure quality.
5.2
Complications of Structure Modeling
In section 4.2, we investigated how models differed from their native conformation by com-
paring experimentally solved structures to their equivalent models. We observed for a small
example that structures across different modeled complexes varied less structurally as op-
posed to experimentally solved complexes (Table 1) which indicated alarmingly similar pep-
tide structures for these models. A similar experiment was carried out on the TCR side
of the docking-site, where we observed that these TCR interface residues changed in the
models compared to their native structure (Figure 10). However, the similar standard devi-
ation between solved and modeled CDR3 residues might suggest that the CDR3 loops are
not modeled as identically across complexes as first anticipated based on peptide RMSD
results (see Table 1). The modeled CDR3 residues diverging from the native CDR3 residues
might be caused by the docking process as we see in Kjærgaard et al (2019) where 50% or
more of native residue-residue interactions at the binding site often are lost using this tool [1].
Page 51 of 55
==PAGE:59==
5.2
Complications of Structure Modeling
Both the fairly uniform peptide structures and predominant shift in CDR3 residues of these
modeled structures demonstrate a deviation from their true TCR-peptide interface. These
deviations unluckily occur in the exact area we are interested in understanding. Moreover,
we see that the ESM-IF1 predictions are much better for solved complexes than for modeled
complexes (see Figure 6). It therefore seems that these diverging structures are most likely
the main cause of ESM-IF1 giving incorrect predictions, highlighting the accuracy of the
ESM-IF1 prediction relying on structural modeling quality.
Diving into the modeling process, the docking of the pMHC and TCR chains depend on
complex templates chosen using a weighted identity score with a higher weight on the MHC
and peptide chains compared to the two TCR chains. This might not have been the most
optimal weighting since it most likely resulted in the higher sequence recovery on anchor
positions and lower accuracy of TCR loop structures. As a result of this, it decreased the
peptide sequence recovery in TCR-facing positions of the peptide. Basing the template se-
lection on the weighted score alone, we also risk choosing templates with high similarity for
one chain at the expense of poor similarity on another chain.
In addition to the low weights on TCR chains, we applied strict filtering thresholds to the
peptide and TCR chains in the template-selection. This was done to avert bias towards
known binders and to hopefully be able to generalize to non-similar peptides. These harsh
restrictions might however have resulted in a backlash and could potentially mean that the
docking site was modeled even worse than what has previously been reported [1]. In fact,
docking of the pMHC and TCR resulted in 3 odd, clashing structures with a long CDR3
loop structure found wrapped around the peptide chain as seen in Supplementary Figure S2.
These modeled binding-sites perhaps become too different from biological truth making the
prediction task very challenging for ESM-IF1. It could be interesting to investigate whether
easing the restrictions in the template selection would improve the sequence recovery of the
peptide and the binding predictions. If so, this could however complicate the generalization
to dissimilar peptides even further.
With template selection being driven by both the weighting of different chain templates and
our harsh maximum thresholds, it is also complicated to identify the exact effect the different
similarity measures have on the peptide scores. Additionally, the restricting thresholds on
sequence identity force the similarities to mainly lie within a small interval and correlations
can therefore not be measured for the full range of possible values. Co-dependencies for the
Page 52 of 55
==PAGE:60==
5.3
Performances of Binding Classification Models
different similarities and conflicting tendencies between the different peptide types further
prevents any conclusions on clear connections to the template-based modeling.
When doing template-based modeling, a great limitation is also the dependency on moderate
similarities in the database which is troublesome when dealing with such low data availability.
The small size of the TCRpMHC database in the modeling tool is not very representative of
the large diversity occurring between these complexes naturally. This might result in these
highly similar modeled structures that are difficult to distinguish in regards to binder status.
5.3
Performances of Binding Classification Models
Structural modeling with low homology to templates complicated the predictions for the
inverse folding model, ESM-IF1, which resulted in poor distinction between positives and
negatives. Our best performing predictor was our baseline model, a simple score function
using the ESM-IF1 predicted probabilities for the 9 correct amino acids in the peptide. This
baseline model only achieved quite low performances between 50-62% in AUC for the pep-
tides in the GGYN dataset. Despite trying out different variations of the score function, our
baseline model was still the best. Incorporating CDR3 residues to the score did not change
the performance, due to the low signal seen in CDR3 (Figure 16). Neither did focusing only
on TCR-facing residues of the peptide help, since the high weight put on peptide and MHC
during template selection in the modeling step lowered the importance on the TCR region
of the docking site.
We also tried advancing our predictor by fitting binary logistic regression models which gen-
erated peptide-specific models not capable of generalizing to unseen peptides. The same was
observed when we fitted a combined GIL and GLC model where the model overfitted to the
majority group, the GIL peptide. We anticipate that overfitting also would occur favoring
train set peptides if advancing the model further with neural networks also given few pep-
tide types. To avoid overfitting, we tried balancing out the peptide groups using random
downsampling of GIL. This evened out the performance between the peptide-types however
at high cost of the GIL performance. Furthermore, due to the random sampling of GIL, the
performance differed depending on the selected data points suggesting that the model was
highly unstable. Instead of removal of valuable data points using downsampling, upsampling
would be an interesting approach to pursue, possibly generating more stable performances.
Page 53 of 55
==PAGE:61==
5.4
Future Perspectives
Models generally performed randomly for the NLV complexes despite them being the ones
modeled with highest template identities. Poor performance has also been observed for the
NLV peptide in other cases such as in NetTCR-2.1. Here, it was suggested that it could
have something to do with a higher diversity in CDR1 and CDR2 sequences [4]. For the GIL
and YLQ complexes, models typically performed the best although they had lowest identity
scores. Also for our simple score function, the different peptide types achieved scores in
very different ranges. This is not necessarily an issue if we are only interested in comparing
different TCRs against the same peptide.
Our purpose was not to train peptide-specific models as multiple studies have already been
successful in this [4, 6].
Instead we wanted to define a model able to compare binding
potential for different TCRs for even an unseen peptide. This is an ambitious task that is
greatly challenged by limited data availability and poor structure model qualities as shown in
this thesis. Using structural information for this task could however be promising as ESM-
IF1 showed positive signals for experimentally solved structures and a slight distinction
between positive and negative modeled complexes which could potentially be improved with
better structure qualities.
5.4
Future Perspectives
In order to get more accurate ESM-IF1 predictions, improvements would need to happen
in the field of protein structure modeling in regards to docking of complexes. Only few
alternatives exist for protein complex modeling such as AlphaFold-Multimer. In an attempt
to use this tool, we saw cases of misplaced peptides in the TCRpMHC assembly found far
outside the MHC groove, very unnatural to native conformations. A very recent publication
by Bradley in 2023 [59] proposes a new tool that finetunes AlphaFold-multimer to model
TCRpMHC complexes specifically. They claim to outperform TCRpMHCmodels by improv-
ing docking geometries in particular. They furthermore show that these predicted structures
can be utilized for peptide-specific binding prediction models but fail to reach generalizable
predictions of interaction specificity. Based on the potential ESM-IF1 has shown in this
thesis, it would be interesting to see whether binding predictions generalized to dissimilar
peptides could be achieved using these structures with improved modeling of the docking-
site.
Page 54 of 55
==PAGE:62==
6
Conclusion
In this thesis, we aimed for predicting TCRpMHC interactions using the inverse fold-
ing model, ESM-IF1, on structural models.
These models were constructed using the
TCRpMHCmodels tool with strict filtering thresholds put on template selection for pep-
tide and TCR chains to persue generalized predictions and ensure a fair comparison between
binding and non-binding complexes. Utilizing ESM-IF1, we obtained predictions that were
highly similar for all modeled complexes despite a known large variation in the binding-site
of experimentally solved structures. This stems from the modeling process that likely had
too high weight on the pMHC complex and template restrictions that were too harsh for
accurate docking of the peptide and TCR which TCRpMHCmodels already struggles to
achieve.
The non-native-like structures of these models resulted in low signal from ESM-IF1, high-
lighting the importance of proper interface modeling for this inverse-folding transformer.
This furthermore resulted in difficulties for class prediction models tested out in this project.
Here, our best performing model was our simple peptide score function achieving AUCs be-
tween 50-62% for our tested peptides.
Although these results seem rather unsatisfying,
models could still capture slight signals and outperform a random classifier for 3 out of 4
peptide types without any peptide-specific fitting involved.
ESM-IF1 shows great potential in recovering peptides of solved complexes and suggests an
ability to score unseen peptides for binder and non-binder distinguishment. However, the
limitations in TCRpMHC structure predictions remain to be solved.
Page 55 of 55
==PAGE:63==
References
References
[1]
Kamilla Kjærgaard Jensen et al. “TCRpMHCmodels: Structural modelling of TCR-
pMHC class I complexes”. In: Scientific Reports 9.1 (2019), p. 14530. issn: 2045-2322.
doi: 10.1038/s41598-019-50932-4. url: https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-019-
50932-4.
[2]
Chloe Hsu et al. “Learning inverse folding from millions of predicted structures”. In:
bioRxiv (2022). doi: 10.1101/2022.04.10.487779.
[3]
K. Murphy and C. Weaver. Janeway’s Immunobiology. Garland Science, 2016. isbn:
9781315533247. url: https://books.google.dk/books?id=GmPLCwAAQBAJ.
[4]
Alessandro Montemurro, Leon Eyrich Jessen, and Morten Nielsen. “NetTCR-2.1:
Lessons and guidance on how to develop models for TCR specificity predictions”.
In: Frontiers in Immunology (2023). issn: 1664-3224. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2022.
1055151.
[5]
Sofie Gielis et al. “Detection of Enriched T Cell Epitope Specificity in Full T Cell
Receptor Sequence Repertoires”. In: Frontiers in Immunology 10 (2019). issn: 1664-
3224. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2019.02820. url: https://www.frontiersin.org/
articles/10.3389/fimmu.2019.02820.
[6]
Ido Springer, Nili Tickotsky, and Yoram Louzoun. “Contribution of T Cell Receptor
Alpha and Beta CDR3, MHC Typing, V and J Genes to Peptide Binding Prediction”.
In: Frontiers in Immunology 12 (2021). issn: 1664-3224. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2021.
664514. url: https://www.frontiersin.org/articles/10.3389/fimmu.2021.
664514.
[7]
Filippo Grazioli et al. “On TCR binding predictors failing to generalize to unseen
peptides”. In: Frontiers in Immunology 13 (2022). issn: 1664-3224. doi: 10.3389/
fimmu.2022.1014256. url: https://www.frontiersin.org/articles/10.3389/
fimmu.2022.1014256.
[8]
Pieter Moris et al. “Current challenges for unseen-epitope TCR interaction prediction
and a new perspective derived from image classification”. In: Briefings in Bioinfor-
matics 22.4 (Dec. 2020). issn: 1477-4054. doi: 10.1093/bib/bbaa318. url: https:
//doi.org/10.1093/bib/bbaa318.
I
==PAGE:64==
References
[9]
Lan Huang, Matthew C Kuhls, and Laurence C Eisenlohra. “Hydrophobicity as a
driver of MHC class I antigen processing”. In: 30.8 (2011), pp. 1634–1644. doi: 10.
1038/emboj.2011.62.
[10]
Philippe Guillaume et al. “The C-terminal extension landscape of naturally presented
HLA-I ligands”. In: Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 115.20 (2018),
pp. 5083–5088. doi: 10.1073/pnas.1717277115. url: https://www.pnas.org/doi/
abs/10.1073/pnas.1717277115.
[11]
Magdalena L Russell et al. “Combining genotypes and T cell receptor distributions to
infer genetic loci determining V(D)J recombination probabilities”. In: eLife 11 (Mar.
2022). Ed. by Benny Chain et al., e73475. issn: 2050-084X. doi: 10.7554/eLife.
73475. url: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.73475.
[12]
Jinwoo Leem et al. “STCRDab: the structural T-cell receptor database”. In: Nucleic
Acids Research 46.D1 (Oct. 2017), pp. D406–D412. issn: 0305-1048. doi: 10.1093/
nar/gkx971. url: https://doi.org/10.1093/nar/gkx971.
[13]
Nicole L La Gruta et al. “Understanding the drivers of MHC restriction of T cell
receptors”. In: Nature reviews. Immunology 18.7 (July 2018), pp. 467–478. issn: 1474-
1733. doi: 10.1038/s41577-018-0007-5. url: https://doi.org/10.1038/s41577-
018-0007-5.
[14]
Birkir Reynisson et al. “NetMHCpan-4.1 and NetMHCIIpan-4.0: improved predictions
of MHC antigen presentation by concurrent motif deconvolution and integration of MS
MHC eluted ligand data”. In: Nucleic Acids Research 48.W1 (May 2020), W449–W454.
issn: 0305-1048. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkaa379. url: https://doi.org/10.1093/nar/
gkaa379.
[15]
Tianshi Lu et al. “Deep learning-based prediction of the T cell receptor antigen binding
specificity”. In: Nature Machine Intelligence 3 (Oct. 2021), pp. 1–12. doi: 10.1038/
s42256-021-00383-2.
[16]
Thomas Peacock and Benny Chain. “Information-Driven Docking for TCR-pMHC
Complex Prediction”. In: Frontiers in Immunology 12 (2021). issn: 1664-3224. doi:
10.3389/fimmu.2021.686127. url: https://www.frontiersin.org/articles/10.
3389/fimmu.2021.686127.
[17]
Andras Fiser. “Protein structure modeling in the proteomics era”. In: Expert Review of
Proteomics 1.1 (2004). PMID: 15966803, pp. 97–110. doi: 10.1586/14789450.1.1.97.
url: https://doi.org/10.1586/14789450.1.1.97.
II
==PAGE:65==
References
[18]
Esteban Lanzarotti, Paolo Marcatili, and Morten Nielsen. “Identification of the cog-
nate peptide-MHC target of T cell receptors using molecular modeling and force field
scoring”. In: Molecular Immunology 94 (2018), pp. 91–97. issn: 0161-5890. doi: https:
//doi.org/10.1016/j.molimm.2017.12.019. url: https://www.sciencedirect.
com/science/article/pii/S0161589017306211.
[19]
Michael Heinzinger et al. “Contrastive learning on protein embeddings enlightens mid-
night zone”. In: NAR Genomics and Bioinformatics 4.2 (June 2022). issn: 2631-9268.
doi: 10.1093/nargab/lqac043. url: https://doi.org/10.1093/nargab/lqac043.
[20]
Cyrus Chothia and Arthur M. Lesk. “The relation between the divergence of sequence
and structure in proteins.” In: The EMBO Journal 5 (1986).
[21]
Chhedi Gupta, Salman Akhtar, and Preeti Bajpai. “In Silico protein modeling: Possi-
bilities and limitations”. In: EXCLI Journal 13 (May 2014), pp. 513–515.
[22]
Alessia David et al. “The AlphaFold Database of Protein Structures: A Biologist’s
Guide”. In: Journal of Molecular Biology 434.2 (2022), p. 167336. issn: 0022-2836.
doi: https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . jmb . 2021 . 167336. url: https : / / www .
sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0022283621005738.
[23]
Robin Pearce et al. “Fast and accurate Ab Initio Protein structure prediction using
deep learning potentials”. In: PLOS Computational Biology 18.9 (Sept. 2022), pp. 1–22.
doi: 10.1371/journal.pcbi.1010539. url: https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.
pcbi.1010539.
[24]
Kliment Olechnovič et al. “Comparative analysis of methods for evaluation of protein
models against native structures”. In: Bioinformatics 35.6 (Aug. 2018), pp. 937–944.
issn: 1367-4803. doi: 10.1093/bioinformatics/bty760. url: https://doi.org/
10.1093/bioinformatics/bty760.
[25]
Boris A Reva, Alexei V Finkelstein, and Jeffrey Skolnick. “What is the probability of a
chance prediction of a protein structure with an rmsd of 6 å?” In: Folding and Design
3.2 (1998), pp. 141–147. issn: 1359-0278. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/S1359-
0278(98)00019-4. url: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
S1359027898000194.
[26]
John M. Jumper et al. “Highly accurate protein structure prediction with AlphaFold”.
In: Nature 596 (2021), pp. 583–589.
III
==PAGE:66==
References
[27]
Richard Evans et al. “Protein complex prediction with AlphaFold-Multimer”. In: bioRxiv
(2022). doi: 10.1101/2021.10.04.463034. url: https://www.biorxiv.org/
content/early/2022/03/10/2021.10.04.463034.
[28]
Brennan Abanades et al. “ImmuneBuilder: Deep-Learning models for predicting the
structures of immune proteins”. In: bioRxiv (2022). doi: 10.1101/2022.11.04.
514231. url: https://www.biorxiv.org/content/early/2022/12/15/2022.11.
04.514231.
[29]
Zeming Lin et al. “Evolutionary-scale prediction of atomic level protein structure with
a language model”. In: bioRxiv (2022). doi: 10.1101/2022.07.20.500902. eprint:
https://www.biorxiv.org/content/early/2022/12/21/2022.07.20.500902.
full.pdf. url: https://www.biorxiv.org/content/early/2022/12/21/2022.07.
20.500902.
[30]
Minkyung Baek et al. “Accurate prediction of protein structures and interactions using
a three-track neural network”. In: Science 373.6557 (2021), pp. 871–876. doi: 10.1126/
science.abj8754. eprint: https://www.science.org/doi/pdf/10.1126/science.
abj8754. url: https://www.science.org/doi/abs/10.1126/science.abj8754.
[31]
Michael Schantz Klausen et al. “LYRA, a webserver for lymphocyte receptor structural
modeling.” English. In: Nucleic Acids Research 43.W1 (2015), W349–W355. issn: 0305-
1048. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkv535.
[32]
Benjamin Webb and Andrej Sali. “Comparative Protein Structure Modeling Using
MODELLER”. In: Current protocols in bioinformatics 54 (2016), pp. 5.6.1–5.6.37. doi:
10.1002/cpbi.3.
[33]
Romanos Fasoulis, Georgios Paliouras, and Lydia E. Kavraki. “Graph representation
learning for structural proteomics”. In: Emerging Topics in Life Sciences 5.6 (Oct.
2021), pp. 789–802. issn: 2397-8554. doi: 10.1042/ETLS20210225. url: https://
doi.org/10.1042/ETLS20210225.
[34]
Benjamin Sanchez-Lengeling et al. “A Gentle Introduction to Graph Neural Networks”.
In: Distill (2021). https://distill.pub/2021/gnn-intro. doi: 10.23915/distill.00033.
[35]
Alexey Strokach et al. “Fast and Flexible Protein Design Using Deep Graph Neural
Networks”. In: Cell Systems 11.4 (2020), 402–411.e4. issn: 2405-4712. doi: https:
//doi.org/10.1016/j.cels.2020.08.016. url: https://www.sciencedirect.
com/science/article/pii/S2405471220303276.
IV
==PAGE:67==
References
[36]
Mike Fritz and Paul D. Berger. “Chapter 11 - Will anybody buy? Logistic regression”.
In: (2015). Ed. by Mike Fritz and Paul D. Berger, pp. 271–304. doi: https://doi.
org/10.1016/B978-0-12-800635-1.00011-2. url: https://www.sciencedirect.
com/science/article/pii/B9780128006351000112.
[37]
Fabian Pedregosa et al. “Scikit-learn: Machine Learning in Python”. In: Journal of
Machine Learning Research 12 (2011), pp. 2825–2830.
[38]
Xue Ying. “An Overview of Overfitting and its Solutions”. In: Journal of Physics:
Conference Series 1168.2 (Feb. 2019), p. 022022. doi: 10.1088/1742-6596/1168/2/
022022. url: https://dx.doi.org/10.1088/1742-6596/1168/2/022022.
[39]
Kumar K Dheeraj. The problem of Overfitting in Regression and how to avoid it? 2020.
url: https://medium.datadriveninvestor.com/the-problem-of-overfitting-
in-regression-and-how-to-avoid-it-dac4d49d836f (visited on 02/02/2023).
[40]
Anuja Nagpal. L1 and L2 Regularization Methods. 2017.
URL: https://towardsdatascience.com/l1-and-l2-regularization-methods-
ce25e7fc831c. (Visited on 01/22/2023).
[41]
Shaza M. Abd Elrahman1 and Ajith Abraham. “A Review of Class Imbalance Prob-
lem”. In: Journal of Network and Innovative Computing 1 (2013), pp. 332–340. issn:
2160-2174.
[42]
Uwe Hobohm et al. “Selection of representative protein data sets”. In: Protein Science
1.3 (), pp. 409–417. doi: https://doi.org/10.1002/pro.5560010313. url: https:
//onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1002/pro.5560010313.
[43]
Classification: ROC Curve and AUC. 2022. url: https://developers.google.
com/machine-learning/crash-course/classification/roc-and-auc (visited on
01/11/2023).
[44]
“Confusion Matrix”. In: (). url: https : / / subscription . packtpub . com / book /
big - data - and - business - intelligence / 9781838555078 / 6 / ch06lvl1sec34 /
confusion-matrix (visited on 12/27/2022).
[45]
Chang Cao, Davide Chicco, and Michael M. Hoffman. “The MCC-F1 curve: a per-
formance evaluation technique for binary classification”. In: (2020), pp. 1–17. doi:
https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2006.11278.
[46]
Pinar Ersoy. Types of Correlation Coefficients. 2021.
URL: https://towardsdatascience.com/types-of-correlation-coefficients-
db5aa9ea8fd2. (Visited on 02/05/2023).
V
==PAGE:68==
References
[47]
Ole Lund et al. “Immunological Bioinformatics”. In: 2005. Chap. 4:Methods Applied
in Immunological Bioinformatics. isbn: 9780262323338. doi: https://doi.org/10.
7551/mitpress/3679.003.0005.
[48]
Randi Vita et al. “The Immune Epitope Database (IEDB): 2018 update”. In: Nucleic
Acids Research 47.D1 (Oct. 2018), pp. D339–D343. issn: 0305-1048. doi: 10.1093/
nar/gky1006. url: www.iedb.org.
[49]
Helen M. Berman et al. “The Protein Data Bank”. In: Nucleic Acids Research 28.1
(Jan. 2000), pp. 235–242. issn: 0305-1048. doi: 10.1093/nar/28.1.235. url: www.
rcsb.org.
[50]
Mathias Fynbo Jensen. Investigation of data generation pipelines and machine learning
architectures for improved prediction of TCR specificity. 2023.
[51]
Mikhail Shugay et al. “VDJdb: a curated database of T-cell receptor sequences with
known antigen specificity”. In: Nucleic Acids Research 46 (D1 2018), pp. D419–D427.
doi: 10.1093/nar/gkx760.
[52]
James M Heather et al. “Stitchr: stitching coding TCR nucleotide sequences from
V/J/CDR3 information”. In: Nucleic Acids Research 50.12 (Mar. 2022), e68–e68. issn:
0305-1048. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkac190. url: https://doi.org/10.1093/nar/
gkac190.
[53]
James Dunbar and Charlotte M. Deane. “ANARCI: antigen receptor numbering and
receptor classification”. In: Bioinformatics 32.2 (Sept. 2015), pp. 298–300. issn: 1367-
4803. doi: 10.1093/bioinformatics/btv552. url: https://doi.org/10.1093/
bioinformatics/btv552.
[54]
James Robinson et al. “IPD-IMGT/HLA Database”. In: Nucleic Acids Research 48.D1
(Oct. 2019), pp. D948–D955. issn: 0305-1048. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkz950. url: https:
//doi.org/10.1093/nar/gkz950.
[55]
Lars Buitinck et al. “API design for machine learning software: experiences from the
scikit-learn project”. In: ECML PKDD Workshop: Languages for Data Mining and
Machine Learning. 2013, pp. 108–122.
[56]
Martin Christen Frølund Thomsen and Morten Nielsen. “Seq2Logo: a method for con-
struction and visualization of amino acid binding motifs and sequence profiles includ-
ing sequence weighting, pseudo counts and two-sided representation of amino acid
enrichment and depletion.” In: Nucleic acids research 40 (2012), W281–7. doi: doi:
10.1093/nar/gks469.
VI
==PAGE:69==
References
[57]
Birkir Reynisson, Alvarez Bruno, and Morten Nielsen. 2020. url: https://services.
healthtech.dtu.dk/service.php?NetMHCpan-4.1 (visited on 01/07/2023).
[58]
LLC Schrödinger and Warren DeLano. PyMOL. Version 2.4.0. May 20, 2020. url:
http://www.pymol.org/pymol.
[59]
Philip Bradley. “Structure-based prediction of T cell receptor:peptide-MHC interac-
tions”. In: eLife 12 (Jan. 2023). Ed. by Michael L Dustin, Tadatsugu Taniguchi, and
Michael L Dustin, e82813. issn: 2050-084X. doi: 10.7554/eLife.82813. url: https:
//doi.org/10.7554/eLife.82813.
VII
==PAGE:70==
Supplementary Figures
Supplementary Figures
GIL
GLC
YLQ
NLV
0.50
0.55
0.60
0.65
0.70
0.75
0.80
0.85
Avg. total identity (%)
****
****
*
**
Total identity
binder
1
0
(a)
GIL
GLC
YLQ
NLV
0.15
0.20
0.25
0.30
0.35
0.40
0.45
Avg. sequence identity (%)
ns
ns
ns
*
Peptide
1
0
GIL
GLC
YLQ
NLV
0.85
0.90
0.95
1.00
1.05
Avg. sequence identity (%)
*
****
ns
*
MHC
1
0
GIL
GLC
YLQ
NLV
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Avg. sequence identity (%)
**
****
*
**
TCR
1
0
GIL
GLC
YLQ
NLV
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1.0
Avg. sequence identity (%)
****
ns
ns
ns
TCR
1
0
(b)
Figure S1:
(a) Distribution of the average total sequence identity score stratified by
binder status (binder: 1, non-binder: 0) for the four different peptide groups (GILGFVFTL,
GLCTLVAML, YLQPRTFLL, NLVPMVATV). (b) The peptide, MHC, TCRα and TCRβ
template sequence identity for the four peptide groups. Red triangles show mean sequence
identities. Stars indicate significant difference in mean scores assessed by the p-value calcu-
lated from an independent t-test (ns : 5.0 · 10−2 < p ≤1.0, ∗: 1.0 · 10−2 < p ≤5.0 · 10−2, ∗∗:
1.0 · 10−3 < p ≤1.0 · 10−2, ∗∗∗: 1.0 · 10−4 < p ≤1.0 · 10−3, ∗∗∗∗: p ≤1.0 · 10−4)).
VIII
==PAGE:71==
Supplementary Figures
Figure S2:
Example of clashing structure (complex_12478) modeled oddly using the
TCRpMHCmodels tool with added restrictions on template selection. The MHC, peptide,
TCRα and β chains are coloured pink, yellow, green and blue, respectively.
Figure S3:
Peptide scores against average sequence identities of templates chosen for
structure modeling. The different identity measures are found by columns (Total, peptide,
MHC, TCRα, TCRβ). Binding and non-binding complexes are separated by rows (first
row: binders, second row: non-binders). Each dot represents one complex from one of the
four peptide groups (Blue: GIL, Red: NLV, Yellow: GLC, Green: YLQ). Correlations are
shown by PCC values with added p-value testing non-correlation, thus a significant p-value
(p −value < 0.05) indicates that the correlation could be negative or positive.
IX
==PAGE:72==
Supplementary Figures
A
C D
E
F
G H
I
K
L
M N
P
Q R
S
T
V W Y
0.000
0.025
0.050
0.075
0.100
0.125
0.150
0.175
Avg. score
GIL
A
C D
E
F
G H
I
K
L
M N
P
Q R
S
T
V W Y
0.000
0.025
0.050
0.075
0.100
0.125
0.150
0.175
Avg. score
GLC
A
C D
E
F
G H
I
K
L
M N
P
Q R
S
T
V W Y
0.000
0.025
0.050
0.075
0.100
0.125
0.150
0.175
Avg. score
YLQ
A
C D
E
F
G H
I
K
L
M N
P
Q R
S
T
V W Y
0.000
0.025
0.050
0.075
0.100
0.125
0.150
0.175
Avg. score
NLV
CDR3  (Binders)
(a)
GIL (+)
GIL (-)
GLC (+)
GLC (-)
YLQ (+)
YLQ (-)
NLV (+)
NLV (-)
All (+)
All (-)
All
GIL (+)
GIL (-)
GLC (+)
GLC (-)
YLQ (+)
YLQ (-)
NLV (+)
NLV (-)
All (+)
All (-)
All
1
0.99
0.91
0.95
0.94
0.96
0.96
0.97
0.97
0.97
0.97
0.99
1
0.94
0.97
0.95
0.98
0.98
0.98
0.98
0.99
0.99
0.91
0.94
1
0.99
0.93
0.98
0.98
0.98
0.97
0.98
0.98
0.95
0.97
0.99
1
0.95
0.99
0.99
1
0.99
1
0.99
0.94
0.95
0.93
0.95
1
0.95
0.97
0.95
0.98
0.96
0.97
0.96
0.98
0.98
0.99
0.95
1
0.99
0.99
0.99
1
0.99
0.96
0.98
0.98
0.99
0.97
0.99
1
0.99
1
0.99
1
0.97
0.98
0.98
1
0.95
0.99
0.99
1
0.99
1
1
0.97
0.98
0.97
0.99
0.98
0.99
1
0.99
1
0.99
1
0.97
0.99
0.98
1
0.96
1
0.99
1
0.99
1
1
0.97
0.99
0.98
0.99
0.97
0.99
1
1
1
1
1
0.90
0.92
0.94
0.96
0.98
1.00
(b)
A
C D
E
F
G H
I
K
L
M N
P
Q R
S
T
V W Y
0.00
0.05
0.10
0.15
0.20
0.25
Avg. score
GIL
A
C D
E
F
G H
I
K
L
M N
P
Q R
S
T
V W Y
0.00
0.05
0.10
0.15
0.20
0.25
Avg. score
GLC
A
C D
E
F
G H
I
K
L
M N
P
Q R
S
T
V W Y
0.00
0.05
0.10
0.15
0.20
0.25
Avg. score
YLQ
A
C D
E
F
G H
I
K
L
M N
P
Q R
S
T
V W Y
0.00
0.05
0.10
0.15
0.20
0.25
Avg. score
NLV
CDR3  (Binders)
(c)
GIL (+)
GIL (-)
GLC (+)
GLC (-)
YLQ (+)
YLQ (-)
NLV (+)
NLV (-)
All (+)
All (-)
All
GIL (+)
GIL (-)
GLC (+)
GLC (-)
YLQ (+)
YLQ (-)
NLV (+)
NLV (-)
All (+)
All (-)
All
1
1
0.99
0.99
0.99
0.99
0.99
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
0.99
0.99
1
1
1
1
1
0.99
1
1
1
1
0.99
1
0.99
1
1
1
0.99
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
0.99
0.99
1
1
1
1
0.99
0.99
1
1
1
0.99
0.99
0.99
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
0.99
1
1
1
0.99
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
0.99
1
0.99
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
0.90
0.92
0.94
0.96
0.98
1.00
(d)
Figure S4: Average ESM-IF1 predictions for all 20 amino acids for the neighbors found in
the TCR chains (a: TCRα, c: TCRβ). Average is made across all binding complexes for
the GIL, GLC, YLQ, and NLV groups respectively. b+d) Correlation matrices of pairwise
calculated PCC's between average probability matrices made for neighbors in the TCR chains
(b: TCRα, d: TCRβ).
X
