==PAGE:1==
Posterior refinement for Bayesian neural net­
works via normalizing flows
Msc. Mathematical Modelling and Computation
Master Thesis
DTU Compute
Section of Cognitive Systems
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Posterior refinement for Bayesian neural networks via normalizing flows
Msc. Mathematical Modelling and Computation
Master Thesis
February, 2023
By
Clément Erup Larsen
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus­
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Published by:
DTU, Section of Cognitive Systems, Richard Petersens Plads , Building
324, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
www.compute.dtu.dk
ISSN:
[0000­0000] (electronic version)
ISBN:
[000­00­0000­000­0] (electronic version)
ISSN:
[0000­0000] (printed version)
ISBN:
[000­00­0000­000­0] (printed version)
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over five months at the Section for Cognitive Systems,
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science, at the Technical University
of Denmark, DTU, in partial fulfilment for the degree Master of Science in Engineering,
MSc Eng.
It is assumed that the reader has basic knowledge in the areas of linear algebra, calculus,
probability theory, statistics, and machine learning hereunder deep learning.
Clément Erup Larsen ­ s163669
Signature
Date
ii
Posterior refinement for Bayesian neural networks via normalizing flows
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
Bayesian neural networks are getting increasingly popular due to the promise of uncer­
tainty quantification and better calibrated models. However, the Bayesian paradigm typi­
cally leads to significant computational challenges due to the large­scale nature of modern
neural networks. To alleviate these problems, a recent research direction focuses on ap­
proximate Bayesian inference of the last layer(s) of the network to dramatically reduce
the dimensionality of the posterior distribution of the network. A Laplace approximation
for the very last layer is a common choice due to its simplicity. Very recent work (2022),
has shown that substantial improvements to the Laplace approximation can be achieved
by allowing more flexible distributions via normalizing flows and that using a Laplace ap­
proximation as a base distribution for radial flows leads to faster convergence with shorter
flows than a standard Gaussian distribution. We therefore experiment with this so called
posterior refinement technique, changing the flow type, flow length and posterior approx­
imation for the base distribution. We empirically find that the quality of the posterior ap­
proximation used for the refinement seems to greatly matter and that planar flows of length
1 can perform very well for this task, if one is only interested in accuracy, expected cal­
ibration error and negative log­likelihood. We moreover demonstrate that this posterior
refinement method works well for a low amount of training data and can be competitive
with Hamiltonian Monte Carlo.
Posterior refinement for Bayesian neural networks via normalizing flows
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
Michael Riis Andersen, Associate Professor, Department of Applied Mathematics and
Computer Science Cognitive Systems ­ Technical University of Denmark
Thank you to Michael, for spiking my interest for Bayesian machine learning about 2 years
ago in the course 02477 Bayesian machine learning, which was without a doubt one of the
best courses I have taken during my university education. This left me with little doubts
about a potential field and supervisor for my master thesis! Thank you likewise for the
unsurprisingly good supervision during the course of this project.
iv
Posterior refinement for Bayesian neural networks via normalizing flows
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
1
2
Theoretical Background
3
2.1
Bayesian Inference . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
Laplace Approximation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.3
Stochastic Weight Averaging­Gaussian
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.4
Markov Chain Monte Carlo
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
2.5
Hamiltonian Monte Carlo
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
2.6
Variational Inference . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26
2.7
Normalizing Flows . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 28
3
Methodology
35
3.1
Datasets . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 35
3.2
Base Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 36
3.3
Laplace Approximation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 36
3.4
Hamiltonian Monte Carlo
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 37
3.5
Posterior Refinement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 37
3.6
Stochastic Weight Averaging ­ Gaussian (SWAG) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 39
3.7
Performance Metrics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 40
4
Experiments
43
4.1
Reproduction of the Results in Posterior Refinement Improves Sample Ef­
ficiency in Bayesian Neural Networks
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 43
4.2
Variation of Flow Type for Posterior Refinement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 45
4.3
SWAG and SWAG­diag with Posterior Refinement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 49
4.4
Experimentation with a diagonal Gaussian base distribution centered at MAP 55
4.5
Effect of the Training Set Size on Posterior Refinement
. . . . . . . . . . . 58
5
Discussion
63
6
Conclusion
67
Bibliography
69
A HMC with No­U­Turn­Sampling (NUTS)
73
B Extra results for SWAG grid­search
75
C Pull request to Pyro
77
D Performance plots on test set for WideResNet­16­4 trained on CIFAR10 train­
ing sets containing 50%, 25% and 10% of the data respectively.
78
D.1 50% of CIFAR10 training set. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 78
D.2 25% of CIFAR10 training set. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 80
Posterior refinement for Bayesian neural networks via normalizing flows
v
==PAGE:8==
D.3 10% of CIFAR10 training set. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 82
vi
Posterior refinement for Bayesian neural networks via normalizing flows
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction
Machine learning models are practically used to make decisions. The normalization of
their use to help us with day to day tasks is increasing. This also means that they grad­
ually start being used for more critical applications. As much as it may not be a big deal
to miss­classify an image of a cat, making a wrong prediction for a medical diagnosis, for
example by classifying a picture of a cancerous tumor as being healthy tissue can have
severe consequences. The representation of predictive uncertainty for decision making
in machine learning is therefore crucial [1]. In the case of classifiers, we want the model
reported probabilities to be calibrated to actually bear some meaning. What is meant by
this, is that the predicted frequency should also match the observed occurrence frequency
[2], if we predict the probability of a class to be 50% for several observations then around
50% of these should also be of that exact class in reality. Neural networks often lack a
representation of the predictive uncertainty, and give overconfident and miscalibrated pre­
dictions [3, 4, 5, 6]. Bayesian methods offer a probabilistic framework for representing un­
certainty in neural networks, providing a natural and intuitive way to handle uncertainty [7,
8, 9]. Bayesian inference in neural networks results in so called Bayesian neural networks
(BNNs), which are typically considered to be the most principled approach for uncertainty
quantification in neural networks [10, 11, 12]. In practice Bayesian inference of the pos­
terior over the weights of a neural network is intractable, approximate posterior inference
techniques therefore need to be used [7, 13]. The current golden standard for these
approximations is the full­batch Hamiltonian Monte Carlo [14]. In Posterior Refinement
Improves Sample Efficiency in Bayesian Neural Networks [14], Kristiadi et al. introduce a
new post­hoc method for approximating the posterior over the weights of neural networks
based on the idea of ”refining” a Gaussian approximate posterior with normalizing flows.
The idea of using normalizing flows to approximate the true posterior had already been
used by Izmailov et al. [15] where normalizing flows were applied on top of a standard
Gaussian distribution N(0, I). In their work Kristiadi et al. use the Gaussian distribution
resulting from a Laplace approximation as a base distribution for the normalizing flows.
Instead of doing posterior inference over the weights of entire neural networks, they limit
themselves to the last­layer weights, due to the competitiveness that last­layer BNNs were
shown to have over their all­layer counterparts [13]. Doing Bayesian inference only on a
subsection of the neural network was also shown in later work by Sharma et al. [16] to
sometimes match or even outperform Bayesian inference over the entire network. The
work from Kristiadi et al. shows that radial normalizing flows with a Laplace approximation
as base distribution seem to converge faster and with shorter flows than radial normal­
izing flows with a standard Gaussian as a base distribution. For the above reasons, we
decided to explore the posterior refinement technique described in Posterior Refinement
Improves Sample Efficiency in Bayesian Neural Networks [14] for last­layer BNNs. We
fist aimed at reproducing part of the results from Kristiadi et al. to validate our posterior
refinement implementation and proceeded with experimenting with the flow types, flow
length and approximate base distributions of the normalizing flows comparing the per­
formances of the different posterior refinement models to those of the golden­standard
baseline Hamiltonian Monte Carlo.
Posterior refinement for Bayesian neural networks via normalizing flows
1
==PAGE:10==
2
Posterior refinement for Bayesian neural networks via normalizing flows
==PAGE:11==
2
Theoretical Background
We will start off by defining key concepts required to understand Bayesian neural net­
works, as well as one of the main challenges in Bayesian neural networks, the so called
problem of approximate inference. Following this, we will present different workarounds to
this problem and the theory behind them. This will serve as a foundation for understanding
posterior refinement and the contributions of this thesis.
2.1
Bayesian Inference
An important concept in recognizing patterns and trends in data is that of uncertainty. Un­
certainty among others arises from the finite size of data sets as well as through noise on
measurements. A key concept to deal with uncertainty is that of probability. Probability
theory provides a framework to both quantify and manipulate uncertainties, making it a
great tool for pattern recognition [17]. Probability theory as a stand alone, does however
not lead to decisions. This is where the field of decision theory comes into the picture.
Decision theory is concerned with decision­making. Combining probability and decision
theory thus gives a tool to make optimal prediction under uncertainty, given only the avail­
able information [17]. Bayesian inference helps us do exactly that.
2.1.1
Bayes’ Theorem
As a starting point, let’s look at the foundation for Bayesian inference and methods; Bayes’
theorem. We will begin by introducing some basic probability rules, which will allow us to
derive Bayes’ theorem. This will be done for both the discrete and the continuous case.
Discrete Random Variables
We will start out with the simplest case, the discrete case. From basic probability rules,
we know the sum rule and the product rule for discrete random variables which are given
as
sum rule
p(E) =
X
H
p(E, H),
(2.1)
product rule
p(E, H) = p(H|E)p(E).,
(2.2)
where E and H are two random variables.
p(E) is the marginal probability, i.e.
the
probability of E. p(H|E) is a conditional probability in words, ”the probability of H given
E” and p(E, H) is the joint probability i.e. the ”probability of E and H”. We have that
p(E, H) = p(H, E), which makes sense intuitively, as ”the probability of E and H” must
be the same as ”the probability of H and E”. This equality can be rewritten using the
product rule (2.2) and rearranging the resulting equation,
p(E, H) = p(H, E)
p(H|E)p(E) = p(E|H)p(H)
p(H|E) = p(E|H)p(H)
p(E)
.
This leads us to Bayes’ theorem, which is at the center of Bayesian machine learning,
Posterior refinement for Bayesian neural networks via normalizing flows
3
==PAGE:12==
p(H|E) = p(E|H)p(H)
p(E)
.
(2.3)
Note here that the marginal probability in Bayes’ theorem can be rewritten using the sum
rule (2.1) followed by the product rule (2.2) to express it in terms of the quantities appearing
in the numerator (2.3), which yields the variant of the theorem,
p(H|E) =
p(E|H)p(H)
P
H p(E|H)(H).
(2.4)
Continuous Random Variables
We will now introduce the equivalent for the continuous case. For continuous random
variables the sum rule and product rule take the following form,
sum rule
p(e) =
Z
p(e, h)dh
(2.5)
product rule
p(e, h) = p(h|e)p(e),
(2.6)
where e and h are two continuous random variables. Using the same derivations as for
the discrete case we get Bayes’ theorem for the continuous case,
p(h|e) = p(e|h)p(h)
p(e)
.
(2.7)
p(e) is here called the marginal probability density, p(h|e) is a conditional probability den­
sity, and p(e, h) is called the joint probability density. Rewriting (2.7) using the sum rule
(2.5) and the product rule (2.6) for the continuous case we get the variant of Bayes’ the­
orem,
p(h|e) = p(e|h)p(h)
R
p(e, h)dh.
(2.8)
2.1.2
Bayesian Machine Learning
Now that we have defined the foundation for Bayesian inference, namely Bayes’ theorem,
we will look into why this relatively simple formula is of such great interest and see that it
can be used for more than just computing conditional event probabilities from probabilities
obtained with a so called frequentist/classic approach as in (2.3) and (2.7). In a frequen­
tist approach, probabilities represent the limiting value of the number of successes in a
sequence of trials,
PA = lim
N→∞
NA
N
(2.9)
where NA is the number of successes and N the number of trials [18][17]. This is fine
as long as the events are repeatable, some events however aren’t [17]. So what if the
event is uncertain and has never happened before? This is for instance the case for the
probability that remote work will become the norm by 2030. Using a frequentist approach,
we cannot get a probability for that event. With so called Bayesian probabilities on the
4
Posterior refinement for Bayesian neural networks via normalizing flows
==PAGE:13==
other hand, we can do so, as they express a degree of belief. They are a subjective in­
terpretation of probabilities [17]. Getting back to our beliefs about remote work becoming
the norm by 2030. Say we now obtain data from a few companies about the amount of
employees working remotely over the past few years, posterior to getting the informa­
tion we might revise our opinion on the probability that remote work becomes the norm by
2030. In these situations we would like to be able to quantify our expression of uncertainty,
make accurate adjustments to it based on new information and be able to take optimal ac­
tions or decisions as a consequence [17]. We can achieve this using Bayesian methods.
Bayesian methods rely on Bayesian probabilities; unknown quantities are used to model
all sources of uncertainty [19], and inference is made using Bayes’ theorem (2.7). In that
way Bayesian methods aim at quantifying uncertainty using probability distributions. For
equation (2.3) for instance if we say that H is our hypothesis with p(H) some probability
that we assign to it based on our beliefs and E an event that we observe, where p(E | H)
is the likelihood of the event given that hypothesis, then our revised probability after ob­
serving the event E is p(H | E). Looking at this in the context of machine learning now;
say we want a model that predicts something based on some observed data D, the model
has the parameters θ to which we assign an original probability distribution p(θ) that we
believe it to have. Using Bayes’ rule we get,
p(θ | D) = p(D | θ)p(θ)
p(D)
.
(2.10)
The probability distribution p(θ) is here called the prior, it represents our prior beliefs about
the parameters θ before seeing the data. The term p(D | θ) is called the likelihood and
represents the contribution of our data D. The posterior p(θ | D) is a weighting of the
available information about θ from the two previous terms, in the form of a new revised
probability distribution over the parameter θ. Lastly, the denominator in (2.10) is called
the marginal likelihood, it plays the role of a normalization constant and ensures that the
posterior distribution on the left­hand side of the equation is a valid probability distribution
and integrates to 1 [17]. We can therefore write Bayesian inference in words as [17],
posterior ∝likelihood × prior.
The goal of knowing the posterior is very often to be able to make predictions that incor­
porate some form of uncertainty for new unobserved data. In Bayesian machine learning,
this is done using the posterior predictive distribution [17],
p(y∗| x∗, D) =
Z
p(y∗| x∗, θ)p(θ | D)dθ,
(2.11)
for (y∗, x∗) a new data point where y∗is what we want to predict based on the features of
x∗. The integral in (2.11) can be viewed as an expectation over the posterior distribution
p(θ | D). This marginalization over the model parameters to form a predictive distribution
is called Bayesian model averaging [20].
2.1.3
The Problem of Approximate Inference
From what we have just seen, Bayesian inference sounds like a very promising and rel­
atively easy way to handle and quantify uncertainties. Things are sadly not as easy as
they seem. We will now introduce the problem of approximate inference, which the rest
of this chapter will be concerned with trying to solve.
Posterior refinement for Bayesian neural networks via normalizing flows
5
==PAGE:14==
For D a set of observed data and θ = θ1:m a set of parameters, with joint density p(D, θ)
as in the previous subsection. The inference problem is about computing the conditional
density of the parameters given the observations, p(θ | D). This conditional can have
many uses, such as forming predictive densities of new data for instance [17]. It can be
written as in (2.10).
As we saw, the denominator in (2.10) is the marginal density of the observations, p(D),
also called the evidence. It can be calculated by marginalizing out the latent variables i.e.
the parameters from the joint density as follows,
p(D) =
Z
p(θ, D)dθ.
(2.12)
For many models, the evidence integral in (2.12) does not have a closed form or requires
exponential time to be computed [21]. In these cases the evidence is what we need to
compute the posterior, which is why inference is hard for such models. Particularly in the
case of neural networks for instance, we generally cannot compute the integral in (2.12)
[22, 17, 20]. We therefore often have to rely on approximation methods to compute an
approximate posterior instead.
2.2
Laplace Approximation
The first technique to approximate the posterior density that we will present is the Laplace
approximation (LA). The aim of Laplace approximation is to locally approximate a probabil­
ity density over a set of continuous variables with a Gaussian distribution. This technique
does for instance come in handy to approximate posteriors, when integrals over their vari­
able do not have a closed form or when we cannot parameterize the distribution, which
is exactly the problem that we were just presented with. Despite only being local, the ap­
proximation is sometimes sufficient for certain applications where we are only interested
in the distribution locally at one of its modes. We will start by deriving and introducing
Laplace approximation in one dimension to build up our understanding, after what we will
move on to the multi­dimensional case.
2.2.1
One­dimensional Case
Beginning with the one dimensional case, say we have a distribution p(z), with z ∈R
defined as
p(z) = 1
Z f(z),
(2.13)
where f : R →R+ and Z =
R
f(z)dz is a normalization constant. Our goal is to find a
Gaussian approximation q(z) centered at a mode of p(z), i.e. at a point z0 such that:
dp(z)
dz

z=z0
= 0 ⇔d 1
Z f(z)
dz

z=z0
= 0 ⇔1
Z
df(z)
dz

z=z0
= 0 ⇔df(z)
dz

z=z0
= 0.
This is illustrated in Figure 2.1.
6
Posterior refinement for Bayesian neural networks via normalizing flows
==PAGE:15==
6
4
2
0
2
4
6
15.0
12.5
10.0
7.5
5.0
2.5
Log target p
Log approx. q
6
4
2
0
2
4
6
z
0.00
0.05
0.10
0.15
0.20
0.25
0.30
0.35
Target p
Approx. q
Figure 2.1: The left figure shows a Gaussian approximation q of an unknown distribution
p fitted using Laplace approximation. The right figure shows that same approximation
around the mode z0 of the distribution p on a log­scale. Figure adapted from [23].
It is known that the logarithm of a Gaussian distribution is a quadratic function of its vari­
ables [17]. We also know that a second order Taylor approximation is a quadratic function.
Taking the second order Taylor approximation of the logarithm of the function f at a point
z0 yields,
ln f(z) ≃ln f (z0) + d
dz ln f(z)

z=z0
(z −z0) + 1
2
d2
dz2 ln f(z)

z=z0
(z −z0)2 .
(2.14)
For any z0 a mode, we have that
d
dzf(z)

z=z0 = 0 since the logarithm function is monoton­
ically increasing df(z)
dz

z=z0 = 0 implies that
d
dz ln f(z)

z=z0 = 0. Hence for a second order
Taylor approximation centered at a mode of p(z) and hence at a mode of f(z) we have
that the Taylor expansion (2.14) becomes
ln f(z) ≃ln f (z0) −1
2A (z −z0)2 ,
A = −d2
dz2 ln f(z)

z=z0
.
(2.15)
Taking the exponential of the Taylor approximation in (2.15) yields the Gaussian function
f(z) ≃f (z0) exp

−1
2A (z −z0)2

.
(2.16)
It is known that
Z ∞
−∞
e−a(x+b)2dx =
rπ
a,
∀a, b ∈R,
(2.17)
which implies that,
Z ∞
−∞
ra
πe−a(x+b)2dx = 1,
∀a, b ∈R.
(2.18)
Posterior refinement for Bayesian neural networks via normalizing flows
7
==PAGE:16==
Using this result we thus have that the normalized Gaussian function (2.16) is given as
q(z) =
 A
2π
1/2
exp

−A
2 (z −z0)2

,
(2.19)
which is the standardized result for the normalization of a Gaussian distribution.
In the one dimensional case, the Gaussian distribution is given as
N
 x | µ, σ2
=
1
(2πσ2)1/2 exp

−1
2σ2 (x −µ)2

.
(2.20)
The mean and standard deviation of the Gaussian distribution in (2.19) are thus z0 and
q
1
A respectively, (A therefore represents the precision of the distribution).
2.2.2
Multi­dimensional Case
The Laplace method can also be extended to the multi­dimensional case [17]. If we as­
sume that we now have a multi­dimensional distribution p(z), with z ∈RM such that:
p(z) = 1
Z f(z).
(2.21)
Where f : RM →R and where Z =
R
f(z)dz. We here again want to find a mode of p(z),
i.e. a point z0 such that:
∇f(z0) = 0
(2.22)
By the same derivations as for the one dimensional case in subsection 2.2.1, we get that
the 2nd order Taylor expansion at such a stationary point is given by
ln f(z) ≃ln f (z0) −1
2 (z −z0)T A (z −z0) ,
(2.23)
where A represents the M × M Hessian matrix defined as
A = −∇² ln f(z)|z=z0 .
(2.24)
Taking the exponential of (2.23) yields
f(z) ≃f (z0) exp

−1
2 (z −z0)T A (z −z0)

.
(2.25)
Using (2.25) we can rewrite Z as
Z ≃f (z0)
Z
exp

−1
2 (z −z0)T A (z −z0)

dz.
(2.26)
Using the analytic solution of the Multivariate Gaussian integral to rewrite (2.26) gives [13]
8
Posterior refinement for Bayesian neural networks via normalizing flows
==PAGE:17==
Z ≃f (z0) (2π)M/2
|A|1/2 .
(2.27)
Substituting the obtained approximation (2.27) for Z and (2.25) for f(z) into (2.21) and
rearranging the equation yields
p(z) ≈
1
(2π)M/2
1
|A|1/2 exp

−1
2 (z −z0)T A (z −z0)

.
(2.28)
For an M­dimensional vector x the expression of the multivariate Gaussian distribution is
[17]
N(x | µ, Σ) =
1
(2π)M/2
1
|Σ|1/2 exp

−1
2(x −µ)TΣ−1(x −µ)

,
(2.29)
where µ is an M­dimensional vector, Σ an M × M covariance matrix and |Σ| represents
the determinant of Σ.
By identification, we can thus see that (2.28) is a multivariate Gaussian distribution with
mean z0 ∈RM and covariance matrix A−1 ∈RM×M (i.e. precision A ∈RM×M). Drawing
a parallel with our inference problem presented in subsection 2.1.3, if we here replace f(z)
by the joint density p(θ, D) in the above equations then we get that p(z) is our posterior
density p(θ | D) and the multivariate Gaussian approximation for p(z) an approximation
for our posterior. We will see this more in details in the next chapter.
2.3
Stochastic Weight Averaging­Gaussian
Another technique for approximating the posterior distribution is stochastic weight averaging­
Gaussian. Unlike Laplace approximation, this technique requires running an optimization
with stochastic gradient descent to obtain different iterates (sets of the optimized param­
eter values), to which a Gaussian distribution is then fitted.
Stochastic Weight Averaging ­ Gaussian known as SWAG is a method for uncertainty
representation and calibration in deep learning [20]. Its goal is to form an approximate
posterior distribution over neural network weights, in the form of a Gaussian distribution
fitted to some stochastic gradient descent iterates located around a local minimum of
the loss landscape for the objective used to train the neural network [20]. The method
uses the same base idea as Stochastic Weight Averaging (SWA) [24]. SWA is a method
that consists in computing the first moment of stochastic gradient descent iterates with a
modified learning rate schedule [24]. The first moment for T epochs is given by:
θSWA = 1
T
T
X
i=1
θi,
(2.30)
where θi represents the weights of the network obtained after epoch i. The weights of the
network whose values during training represent the iterates, are then set to the values of
that first moment instead, leading to better generalization and higher accuracy. In SWAG
we also compute the second moment, which is given as
θ2 = 1
T
T
X
i=1
θi ⊙θi,
(2.31)
Posterior refinement for Bayesian neural networks via normalizing flows
9
==PAGE:18==
where ⊙represents the Hadamard product (element­wise multiplication). This allows us
to get an estimated low rank plus diagonal covariance matrix for the network weights. The
diagonal covariance is obtained as [20]
Σdiag = diag

θ2 −θSWA ⊙θSWA

,
(2.32)
while the low­rank approximation of the covariance is approximated as
Σ ≈
1
T −1
T
X
i=1
 θi −¯θi
  θi −¯θi
⊤,
(2.33)
where ¯θi is the running estimate of the weigths’ first moment obtained from the first i
network weight samples. This can be written in a vectorized way as Σ ≈
1
T−1DD⊤
where D is the deviation matrix whose columns are Di = (θi −¯θi) [20].
To limit the rank of the estimated covariance matrix only the last K possible Di vectors
are contained in D, i.e. all the ones such that i = T −K + 1, ..., T that correspond to
the last K epochs. These are stored in a matrix b
D, yielding the approximation for the
low­rank covariance matrix [20],
Σlow­rank =
1
K −1 · b
D b
D
⊤.
(2.34)
Doing so, we can fit a Multivariate Gaussian distribution over the weights of the network
with mean given by that first moment and covariance given as a weighted sum of the
computed covariance matrices,
p(θ|D) ≈N

θSWA, 1
2 ·
 Σdiag + Σlow­rank

,
(2.35)
where D represents the data the neural network was trained on. The fitted Multivariate
Gaussian distribution then represents an approximate posterior distribution for the weights
of the network. Once the distribution is obtained, we can do Bayesian model averaging
by simply sampling from it. Instead of sampling directly from the full­rank Gaussian dis­
tribution, we can also sample a set of weights as in (2.36), where d is the number of
parameters of the network and Ix represents an identity matrix of rank x.
θs = θSWA + 1
√
2 · Σ
1
2
diag z1 +
1
p
2(K −1)
b
Dz2,
where z1 ∼N (0, Id) , z2 ∼N (0, IK)
(2.36)
2.4
Markov Chain Monte Carlo
There is essentially two classes of posterior approximation schemes, the deterministic
scheme and the stochastic scheme [17]. The two previously presented approximation
schemes were deterministic. We will now present some stochastic ones. This class of
approximations can be used when the posterior distribution isn’t of direct interest in itself,
but just a mean to evaluate expectations such as the one for the posterior predictive
distribution in (2.11). We will begin by looking into Markov Chain Monte Carlo, which
10
Posterior refinement for Bayesian neural networks via normalizing flows
==PAGE:19==
we will introduce by first shedding light onto Monte Carlo methods and Markov Chains
separately.
2.4.1
Monte Carlo Methods
Monte Carlo methods are a range of stochastic numerical sampling methods to obtain
numerical results [17]. For many stochastic problems of interest, it is not feasible to use
exact inference as they are difficult to analyze deterministically, their results thus need to
be approximated. One of the most common applications of Monte Carlo methods is the
evaluation of expectations [25]. Say we have a function f defined on an n­dimensional
space Rn and want to find its expectation with respect to a probability distribution p(θ)
with θ ∈Rn,
E[f] =
Z
f(θ)p(θ)dθ.
(2.37)
In many cases this integral over the region Rn is intractable [17, 25]. Monte Carlo methods
provide a way to approximate the integral by evaluating the function f at multiple points
randomly sampled from the distribution p(θ) and averaging the results [17, 25]. Say we
sample a set of N random points θi ∼p(θ) over the region Rn, where i = 1, 2, ..., N. We
can then approximate the integral by:
Z
f(θ)p(θ)dθ ≈1
N
N
X
i=1
f(θi)
(2.38)
Note here that we make the assumption that the random points θi, ∀i = 1, 2, ..., N are
independent. If the samples are not fully independent, the effective sample size gets
much smaller than the apparent sample size. As N gets larger, this approximation gets
more and more accurate. If we denote E[f] = µf where µf ∈Rn is the true value of the
expectation, then by the law of large numbers, we have [25, 18],
lim
N→∞
1
N
N
X
i=1
f(θi) = µf.
(2.39)
We now need to find a principled way to sample points from our distribution p(θ). Sampling
every point independently at random from Rn would yield many points θi with an extremely
low density p(θi) and essentially be a waste of computation and time. We thus need to find
a way to methodically explore the space to mainly sample from regions of high density.
2.4.2
Markov Chains
One way to explore the space in a methodical way is using Markov Chains. A Markov
chain is a mathematical system that undergoes transitions from one state to another ac­
cording to certain probabilistic rules. A first order Markov chain is defined as a sequence
of random variables θ(1), ..., θ(M) such that the first order Markov property holds, i.e. the
conditional independence property [17],
p(θ(m+1) | θ(1), ..., θ(m)) = p(θ(m+1) | θ(m)),
∀m ∈{1, ..., M −1}.
(2.40)
In words, the defining characteristic of a Markov chain is that the probability of transitioning
to any particular state depends only on the current state and time elapsed. Put differently,
the probability of transitioning to a state s at time t depends only on the state at time t−1,
Posterior refinement for Bayesian neural networks via normalizing flows
11
==PAGE:20==
and not on any of the states that may have occurred before time t−1. A Markov chain can
be represented as a directed graph, where the vertices are the states and the edges are
the transitions. The probability of transitioning from one state to another is represented
by the weight of the corresponding edge.
2.4.3
Markov Chain Monte Carlo
Now that we are familiar with Monte Carlo methods and Markov Chains, we will delve into
the combination of the two.
Markov Chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) is a technique for approximating complex probability
distributions by generating a sequence of samples from the distribution. The samples are
generated by a Markov chain, a random process that transitions from one state to another
according to certain probability rules. By running the Markov chain for a long time, the
samples generated by the chain will converge to the desired distribution.
One of the most popular MCMC algorithms is the Metropolis­Hastings algorithm [26, 27],
which is shown in Algorithm 1. The basic idea of the Metropolis­Hastings algorithm is to
define a proposal distribution that generates candidate samples, and then accept or reject
these samples according to the Metropolis­Hastings acceptance criterion.
Algorithm 1 Metropolis­Hastings
Initialize θ0
for t = 1 to T do
θcand ∼q(θcand|θt−1)
▷Generating candidate sample
α = min

1, p(θcand)∗q(θt−1|θcand)
p(θt−1)∗q(θcand|θt−1)

▷Computing acceptance probability
u ∼U (0, 1)
▷Generating a random number
if u < α then
▷Accept sample with probability α
θt = θcand
▷Accept sample
else
θt = θt−1
▷Reject sample
Given an initial state θ0, a target density p(θ) and a proposal distribution q(θcand|θt−1),
where θt−1 represents the current state, the algorithm recursively generates a candidate
sample θcand from the proposal distribution. Computes the acceptance probability
α = min(1, p(θcand)∗q(θt−1|θcand)
p(θt−1)∗q(θcand|θt−1) ) and accepts the candidate sample with that probability.
This is repeated a total of T times. Here, θcand represents a candidate point/state, while θt
represents the point/state at time t where t ∈1, 2..., T. T thus corresponds to the amount
of samples generated. By doing so, the generated Markov chain explores the space
favoring high density regions of the target density p(θ) to which it in theory eventually
converges [26, 27]. The samples θ1, θ2, ..., θT are the output of the algorithm. The ones
sampled before the chain has converged are not representative of the desired distribution
p(θ) and need to be discarded. This is called the burn­in phase, sometimes also warm­
up phase [25]. The distribution of the remaining samples converges to p(θ) as t goes to
infinity. The convergence of the Markov chain to stationarity is called the mixing of the
Markov chain [28]. An important thing to note, is that the acceptance criterion does not
require knowledge of the normalizing constant C of probability distributions of the form
p(θ) = f(θ)/C where f(θ) is an unnormalized probability density. This comes in handy
when exploring a posterior distribution (as in (2.10)) since the joint distribution suffices to
do so!
12
Posterior refinement for Bayesian neural networks via normalizing flows
==PAGE:21==
2.5
Hamiltonian Monte Carlo
With Markov Chain Monte Carlo, we have introduced the most common and well­known
stochastic scheme for posterior approximation. Markov Chain Monte Carlo methods often
work very well and have been the go­to sampling methods for some years, they however
do not perform very well in very high dimensions, as we will see in this section [29]. This
might become a problem when used for approximating the posterior distribution over the
weights of neural networks for instance as we usually have many dimensions. We will
therefore explore a new (partly) stochastic posterior approximation scheme, that copes
with this issue [29] and is considered to be the golden standard for posterior approximation
[14], namely Hamiltonian Monte Carlo (HMC).
2.5.1
Motivation of HMC
One of the drawbacks of traditional Markov Chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) methods is its
random walk behavior [17, 29]. Random walk behavior refers to the characteristic of a
process where the next step or position is determined randomly, with no regard for the
current position or previous steps. This can lead to a situation where the process wanders
aimlessly without any clear direction or pattern [29]. In the context of Markov Chain Monte
Carlo methods, random walk behavior refers to the behavior of traditional MCMC sampling
methods, such as the Metropolis­Hastings algorithm, where the proposed new samples
are based solely on the current sample and a randomly chosen proposal distribution,
regardless of the shape of the target distribution. This can result in a slow mixing of the
Markov chain, with many steps needed to explore the whole space of the target distribution
[29]. In contrast, Hamiltonian Monte Carlo (HMC) uses gradient information to reduce the
random walk behavior by proposing new samples based on the direction of the gradient
of the target distribution [29].
In high dimensional spaces the neighborhood immediately around the mode of a distribu­
tion features high densities, but its low volume prevents it from having much contribution
to any expectation (due to the integration).
δ
δ
(a)
δ
δ
(b)
δ
δ
(c)
Figure 2.2: The dominance of volume away from any point in parameter space can be
seen from a spherical perspective, if we consider the volume contained a radial distance
δ both interior to and exterior to a D­dimensional spherical shell, shown by the dashed
lines. (a) In a one dimensional space, the spherical shell is a line and volumes interior
and exterior are equivalent. (b) In a two dimensional space, the spherical shell becomes
a circle and more volume is concentrated right outside of the shell than right inside. (c)
In a three dimensional space, the exterior volume grows even larger relative to the inte­
rior volume. The spherical shell is now the surface of a sphere. In fact, with increasing
dimension the exterior volume grows exponentially large relative to the interior volume.
The volume around the mode very quickly gets dominated by the volume away from the
mode. Figure taken from [29]
Posterior refinement for Bayesian neural networks via normalizing flows
13
==PAGE:22==
The neighborhood far away from the mode does on the other hand have high volumes,
but there it is the vanishing densities that likewise lead to negligible contributions to the
expectations [29]. An illustration providing an intuition for the ”displacement” of the ma­
jority of the volume of the space away from the mode with the increase in dimensions of
the space can be seen in Figure 2.2.
According to Betancourt, the only significant contributions thus come from the region be­
tween these two regions (very close to the mode and far away from it), which he defines
as the typical set [29]. This is illustrated in Figure 2.3.
Typical
Set
p(θ)
dθ
p(θ) dθ
|θ - θMode|
Figure 2.3: In a high­dimensional space, a probability density, p(θ) will concentrate around
its mode, while the volume over which we integrate that density, dθ, will be much larger
away from the mode. Contributions to any expectation are determined by the product
of the density and volume, p(θ)dθ, which concentrates in a nearly­singular neighborhood
called the typical set (represented by the greyed area). Figure adapted from [29].
Still according to Betancourt, as the dimension of the parameter space increases, the
region in which volume and density are large enough to yield a significant contribution to
the expectation gets narrower. Hence the only significant contributions to any expectation
come from the typical set and evaluating integrands of the expectations outside of it is a
waste of computational resources as it has an insignificant effect on the expectations. It is
therefore not necessary to estimate expectations by averaging over the whole parameter
space, as doing so over the typical set suffices to produce a good estimate [29]. The
narrower the typical set, the slower it becomes for the Metropolis algorithm to explore it,
as many proposals are made outside of the typical set. A way to cope with this would be
to reduce the variance of the proposal distribution, which would however result in an even
slower exploration of the typical set, leading to a higher autocorrelation of the samples and
thus more imprecise estimators. Another thing to account for, is that in high­dimensional
spaces there is an exponential number of directions in which the proposal distribution
can make guesses but only a small fraction of them lay in the typical set and will actually
get accepted, giving a very high rejection rate. The motivation for Hamiltonian Monte
Carlo is rather lengthy to explain, a more extensive one can be found in A Conceptual
Introduction to Hamiltonian Monte Carlo by Betancourt [29]. One way to make ”large
jumps” away from the initial point and into newly unexplored regions of the typical set
could be to exploit information about its geometry [29]. The goal is to find a way to make
14
Posterior refinement for Bayesian neural networks via normalizing flows
==PAGE:23==
transitions from one sample to the next while staying within the region of high probability
mass represented by the typical set. This is exactly what Hamiltonian Monte Carlo aims
to do.
A way to encode direction information geometrically in space is vector fields. We here in
particular want to find a vector field aligned with the typical set, as this would serve as
a guide through the neighborhood of highest target probability, allowing us to get from
one point to the next by simply following the vector at that point. This would allow us to
effectively move away from the initial point and into unexplored regions of the typical set
fairly fast.
To do so, we need to explore the differential structure of the target distribution, which
we can obtain from the gradient of the target probability density. This does however not
suffice, as following that gradient will pull us away from the typical set and towards the
mode of the distribution. We therefore need to find a way to twist the gradient to align
with the typical set. The later can be done with differential geometry. The differential ge­
ometry needed to correct the density gradients is the same mathematics as the one that
describes classical physics.
The solution to the problem can be found in the world of physics, by thinking of our prob­
abilistic system as a physical system, which is more intuitive to work with [29].
To give the reader a better intuition, Betancourt draws a parallel between the mode, a
gradient and a typical set on one side and a planet, a gravitational field and an orbit on
the other side. In this new framework, our problem corresponds to wanting to place a
satellite in a stable orbit around the hypothetical planet.
A satellite placed in space at rest will fall into the gravitational field and crash into the
surface of the planet the same way naive gradient driven trajectories would crash into the
mode of the target density.
We know that in the case of a satellite, we can maintain it in a stable orbit by giving it some
momentum. The amount of supplied momentum nevertheless needs to be just right to
maintain the satellite in its orbit, if it has too little it will still crash on the surface of earth,
while if it on the other hand has too much, it will fly out of the desired orbit and away from
the planet as the gravitational field will be too weak to trap it.
When the amount of momentum is just right to exactly balance against the gravitational
force, we say that the dynamics of the system are conservative.
Going back to our probabilistic system, we now hold the key to being able to twist the
gradient for it to align with the typical set, namely, we need to add auxiliary momentum
parameters to our original probabilistic system. The momentum parameters can however
not be chosen arbitrarily, as they need to ensure conservative dynamics.
2.5.2
Derivation of HMC
In physical systems conservative dynamics requires that volumes are exactly preserved.
Therefore, as the system evolves, any changes in the position space, such as compres­
sion or expansion, must be counterbalanced by corresponding changes in momentum
space in order to preserve the volume of any region in the position­momentum phase
space. A graphical illustration is shown in Figure 2.4.
Posterior refinement for Bayesian neural networks via normalizing flows
15
==PAGE:24==
r
θ
r
θ
Figure 2.4: Example of a preservation of volume from conservative dynamics in position­
momentum phase space. If the dynamics compress the volume in position space, then
the corresponding volume in momentum space compensates by expanding, for the total
volume in phase space to be invariant. Figure adapted from [29].
To model the behavior in our probabilistic system, we have to introduce auxiliary mo­
mentum parameters rn, to complement each dimension of our position space (target
parameter space) with position parameters θn, which expands the D­dimensional posi­
tion space into a 2D­dimensional phase space according to the following transformation
θn →(θn, rn). One extra constrain is that the momenta need to be dual to the target
parameters such that any transformation in the momenta space is compensated in the
position space for the phase space volumes to be invariant [29]. With the expansion of
the target parameter space into the phase space, we get a joint probability distribution on
phase space called the canonical distribution. Since our momentum depends on position
our joint distribution is given as,
p(r, θ) = p(r | θ)p(θ).
(2.41)
Note that if we marginalize out the momentum, we directly recover our target distribution,
(i.e. the one in position space). This implies that trajectories exploring the typical set in
the phase space distribution can be projected to trajectories exploring the typical set of
the target distribution. This is illustrated in Figure 2.5 for a two dimensional phase space.
Due to the duality, of the position parameters and the auxiliary momentum parameters, we
have a negative correlation of the corresponding probability densities. If one increases,
the other one decreases and conversely. Furthermore, the canonical density p(θ, r) is
independent of a specific parametrization, we can therefore write it in terms of an invariant
Hamiltonian function, H(θ, r) as
p(θ, r) = e−H(θ,r),
(2.42)
which captures the invariant probabilistic structure of the phase space distribution and
most importantly the geometry of the typical set. At any point in phase space, the value
of the Hamiltonian is given by
H(θ, r) ≡−log p(θ, r)
(2.43)
and is called the energy at that point, due to the parallel drawn with physics. Using the
properties of the logarithm, we can decompose the Hamiltonian into two terms,
16
Posterior refinement for Bayesian neural networks via normalizing flows
==PAGE:25==
Figure 2.5: The joint distribution on phase space (2.41) marginalizing to the target dis­
tribution, p(θ), ensures that the typical set in phase space projects to the typical set in
the space of the target distribution. This is here illustrated for a 2 dimensional position­
momentum phase space. The red circular region represents the typical set in the target
space, the black arrow a trajectory in the typical set of the phase space and the green
arrow its projection on the typical set of the target space. Figure from [29].
H(θ, r) = −log p(r | θ) −log p(θ)
≡K(r, θ) + V (θ).
(2.44)
Still using the analogy to physics we have that −log p(r | θ) represents the kinetic energy
of the system K(r, θ) and is fully determined by the target distribution, while −log p(θ)
represents the potential energy of the system V (θ), which is unconstrained and must be
specified in the implementation. Note that we do know the target distribution but need to
choose the auxiliary momentum distribution. Since the Hamiltonian captures the geometry
of the typical set it can generate a vector field aligned with the typical set of the canonical
distribution, i.e. a vector field that could be used to generate the desired trajectories [29].
This vector field can be generated from a given Hamiltonian using Hamilton’s equations,
dθ
dt = +∂H
∂r = ∂K
∂r
dr
dt = −∂H
∂θ = −∂K
∂θ −∂V
∂θ .
(2.45)
If we look at the second equation in (2.45) we see that we get what we were out after.
The term −∂V
∂θ represents the gradient of the logarithm of the position distribution, while
−∂K
∂θ gives us the momentum component we were looking for to stay in the typical set.
Hamiltonian’s equations therefore twist the differential information to align with the typical
set of the canonical distribution [29]. This therefore allows us to rapidly explore the typical
set in phase space and project the obtained trajectory onto the target parameter space
to obtain samples from our original distribution located in its typical set. Furthermore we
can now verify volume invariance mathematically. The flow field in phase space is given
by,
V =
dθ
dt, dr
dt

.
(2.46)
Posterior refinement for Bayesian neural networks via normalizing flows
17
==PAGE:26==
Computing the divergence of the field, we get:
div V = ∂
∂θ
dθ
dt + ∂
∂r
dr
dt
= −∂
∂θ
∂H
∂r + ∂
∂r
∂H
∂θ = 0.
(2.47)
Since the divergence of the field V is 0 we have proven that we have volume invariance
in phase space.
Likewise, it can easily be proven that the value of the Hamiltonian is constant during the
evolution of the dynamical system (2.45):
dH
dt = ∂H
∂θ
dθ
dt + ∂H
∂r
dr
dt
= ∂H
∂θ
∂H
∂r −∂H
∂r
∂H
∂θ = 0.
(2.48)
From these two results of conservation of volume and conservation of the Hamiltonian
function H, it follows that the Hamiltonian dynamics will leave p(r, θ) invariant [17].
We are now missing a way to go from parameter space (i.e. position space) to phase
space and need to ensure ergodic sampling. Ergodicity is the property that a point in a
moving system, either a dynamical system or a stochastic process, will eventually explore
all regions of the space that the system moves through, in a uniform and random way [30].
This implies that a large enough set of random samples from a process can accurately re­
flect the average statistical properties of the entire process. For a Markov Chain, ergodic
sampling ensures that the long­term behaviour of the Markov chain is representative of
the target distribution. Having one single starting momentum does not suffice to sample
ergodically from p(r, θ) as the value of the Hamiltonian remains constant under Hamilto­
nian dynamics [17]. The introduction of additional moves in phase space changing the
value of the Hamiltonian while leaving p(r, θ) invariant will therefore allow for an ergodic
sampling scheme [17]. Luckily, solving this is rather straightforward, as we can simply
sample a momentum r from the conditional distribution over the momentum p(r | θ). If
the initial point in parameter space happens to be in the typical set of that space, then we
are guaranteed that the obtained point in phase space (θ, r) resulting from the sample of
the momentum from the conditional distribution will fall into the typical set in phase space.
Once on phase space, we can explore its typical set by integrating Hamilton’s equations
(2.45) for some time. After having done so, we can simply get back to the position space
by projecting away the momentum. A graphical illustration of these three steps is shown
in Figure 2.6.
Executing these three steps in the given order, yields a Hamiltonian Markov transition
made up of random trajectories that efficiently explore the target distribution as intended
[29]. If we now perform Hamiltonian Markov transitions repeatedly, we each time get a
new value for the Hamiltonian, and can move on the corresponding level set, allowing for
the ergodic sampling we were looking for. The resulting sampling procedure is illustrated
in Figure 2.7 for a 2­dimensional phase space.
18
Posterior refinement for Bayesian neural networks via normalizing flows
==PAGE:27==
θ
r
Figure 2.6: Hamiltonian Markov transition in a 2­dimensional phase space. We start with
a point in position space (target space), which gets ”lifted up” into phase space through
the sampling of a momentum r (pink arrow pointing upwards). Once in phase space we
get a Hamiltonian trajectory through phase space (red arrow). Finally, we project our point
in phase space back into target space (pink arrow pointing downwards). Figure adapted
from [29].
θ
r
(a)
θ
r
(b)
Figure 2.7: (a) Each Hamiltonian Markov transition ”lifts” a state on position space onto
a random level set of the Hamiltonian, which can be explored with a Hamiltonian tra­
jectory before projecting back down to the original space. (b) If we consider the projec­
tion and random ”lift” onto a level set to be a single momentum resampling step, we can
consider that the Hamitlonian Markov chain alternates between deterministic trajectories
along these level sets and a random walk across the level sets. The level sets are here
shown in grey, while the random walk between level set is shown in pink and the deter­
ministic trajectories across these sets in red. Figure adapted from [29].
In the tails of the target distribution, the momentum sampling and projection steps enable
the resulting Markov chain to quickly converge towards the typical set of the distribution.
Once the chain has reached the typical set, the Hamiltonian trajectories guarantee an
extremely efficient exploration.
2.5.3
Implementation and No­U­Turn sampler
Now that we have motivated the use of HMC and derived it, we will look into its imple­
mentation. As previously mentioned, our target distribution p(θ) is already given, as it
is the one we want to sample from. The conditional distribution p(r | θ) however, can
be freely chosen, as long as it guarantees that the joint distribution p(r, θ) is invariant
[17]. A common choice for it is that of a Gaussian distribution centered at 0 [29]. We
also need to address the problem of performing the integration of Hamilton’s equations
Posterior refinement for Bayesian neural networks via normalizing flows
19
==PAGE:28==
(2.45). The integration needs to be performed numerically as we cannot solve Hamilton’s
equations exactly [29]. This raises the problem of numerical inaccuracies, as they can
compromise even the most fine­tuned Hamiltonian transition’s benefit [29]. Most numer­
ical integrators drift, in the sense that the coherent addition of the numerical error in the
solvers push the approximate trajectories away from the true trajectory. Luckily there ex­
ists a powerful family of numerical solvers called simplectic integrators [31] that make use
of the geometry of phase space and are robust to phenomena like drift, allowing for high­
performance implementations of the Hamiltonian Monte Carlo method. These integrators
are powerful because the numerical trajectories they generate exactly preserve phase
space volume, just like the Hamiltonian trajectories they are approximating, which limits
the extent to which the error in the numerical trajectory make it deviate from the energy
of the exact trajectory [29]. Instead of drifting away from the exact energy level set the
numerical trajectories instead oscillate near it [29]. The most common simplectic integra­
tor for Hamiltoninan dynamics is the leapfrog integrator, which requires the probabilistic
distribution of the momentum to be independent of position. The leapfrog step consists
of the following updates:
Update the momentum:
rn+ 1
2 = rn −ϵ
2
∂V
∂θ (θn)
(2.49)
Update the position:
θn+1 = θn + ϵrn+ 1
2
(2.50)
Update the momentum again:
rn+1 = rn+ 1
2 −ϵ
2
∂V
∂θ (θn+1),
(2.51)
where ϵ is the step size of the leapfrog step, and the subscripts indicate the step at which
the position and momentum are. The error induced by the leapfrog integrator goes to 0 if
the step size ϵ goes to 0. This is however not feasible in practice as it needs to be non­zero,
some errors will thus remain [17]. These errors can be eliminated by the HMC algorithm
developped by Duane et al. [32]. The HMC algorithm starts by initializing the position
and momentum according to some distribution, and then repeatedly taking leapfrog steps
and accepting or rejecting the proposed position according to the Metropolis­Hastings
acceptance criterion based on the value of the Hamiltonian.
Algorithm 2 Hamiltonian Monte Carlo [33]
Given r0, ϵ, L, V, H, M:
for m = 1 to M do
Sample r0 ∼N (0, I)
Set θm ←θm−1, ˜θ ←θm−1, ˜r ←r0
for i = 1 to L do
Set ˜θ, ˜r ←Leapfrog(˜θ, ˜r, ϵ)
With probability α = min

1,
exp{−H(˜θ,˜r)}
exp{−H(θm−1,r0)}

set θm ←˜θ, rm ←−˜r
function Leapfrog(θ, r, ϵ)
Set ˜r ←r −ϵ
2
∂V
∂θ (θ)
Set ˜θ ←θ + ϵ˜r
Set ˜r ←˜r −ϵ
2
∂V
∂θ (˜θ)
return ˜θ, ˜r
For an initial state (θ, r), a candidate state obtained after leapfrog integration gets ac­
20
Posterior refinement for Bayesian neural networks via normalizing flows
==PAGE:29==
cepted with probability min (1, exp {H(θ, r) −H (θ⋆, r⋆)}), where H(θ, r) = 1
2r·r−log(p(θ))
(Due to the fact that we can rewrite the Kinetic energy term when p(r | θ) is a Gaussian
distribution, see [29] for more details). The full HMC algorithm is shown in Algorithm 2,
where L represents the number of steps, and M the number of samples to draw. One
drawback of Hamiltonian Monte Carlo, is that its performance is sensitive to user­specified
parameters, namely the step size ϵ and the number of steps L. L being too large results
in a waste of computation, while L being too small makes the algorithm exhibit random
walk behavior [33]. As for ϵ, if it is too large, the simulation will be inaccurate and yield low
acceptance rates, while a too small ϵ results in a waste of computation spent on taking
many small steps [33]. The No­U­Turn Sampler (NUTS) was introduced by Hoffman and
Gelman [33] to eliminate the need to specify the number of steps L and the step size ϵ for
the leapfrog algorithm.
Let’s first look into how to eliminate the need to specify the number of Leapfrog steps L.
To do this Hoffman and Gelman [33] proposed to use a recursive algorithm resembling
the doubling procedure invented by Neal [34] for slice sampling [33]. In short, in slice
sampling, we aim at only sampling from a ”slice” (region) of an unnormalized probability
density function f [17]. This is done by first taking a point x from the distribution of interest
and then sampling a so called slice variable from a uniform distribution on the interval
[0, f(x)]. The slice of the probability density function is then represented by the set of
points in the space on which the probability density function is defined, whose likelihood
is greater than or equal to the value of the slice variable [34][17]. By only accepting points
satisfying this requirement, slice sampling then allows to make sure we only sample from
that subset of points and hence only from the corresponding ”slice” of the distribution
[34][17]. For NUTS, we first define a slice variable u with conditional distribution
p(u | θ, r) = U
 0, exp

V (θ) −1
2r · r
	
, which hence yields the conditional distributions
p(θ, r | u) = U

θ′, r′ | exp

V (θ) −1
2r · r
	
≥u
	
, where θ′ and r′ are proposal samples
[33].
Figure 2.8: Example of the steps taken by the leapfrog integrator with repeated doubling
of the leapfrog steps. The black point represents the initial state. The leapfrog integrator
takes 2j leapfrog steps at the time, where j is the number of previous doublings, each
time choosing a new direction (forward or backward) uniformly at random. The top part of
the figure shows the step­wise evolution of the trajectory, while the bottom part shows the
corresponding binary trees. (In the above example, we first took one step forward, two
steps backwards, four steps backwards and eight steps forward.) Figure from [33]
Posterior refinement for Bayesian neural networks via normalizing flows
21
==PAGE:30==
We now define a finite set C which is the set of position­momentum candidate points to
which we can transition without violating detailed balance and a finite set B such that
C ⊆B.
The set B is constituted of the position­momentum states traced out by the leapfrog inte­
grator for one iteration of NUTS. For one iteration of NUTS, we start out with an initial state
(θ0, r0), we then take one single leapfrog step either forward or backward in the imaginary
time of the system. Next we recursively repeat this, doubling the number of taken leapfrog
steps every time and choosing their time direction (forward or backward) uniformly at ran­
dom. The new steps are either taken from the most forward sample produced so far if
sampling forward in imaginary time or from the most backward one if sampling backward
in time [33].
From the first leapfrog state taken from the initial state, a balanced binary tree is being
built whose leaves correspond to the position­momentum states produced by the leapfrog
integrator during the NUTS integration [33]. The described procedure is illustrated in Fig­
ure 2.8. Whether to move forward or backward is decided by sampling from the uniform
distribution U{−1, 1}.
Summing things up in more mathematical terms; for each doubling of the amount of steps,
we start by choosing a random direction vj ∼U{−1, 1} and then take 2j leapfrog steps
of size vjϵ, where j is the number of previous doublings, which also corresponds to the
current height of the binary tree [33]. If vj = 1 (i.e. we move forward) then the left half
of the binary tree is the old tree and the right half a balanced binary tree with 2j leaves
representing the 2j position­momentum states visited by the new leapfrog trajectory and
conversely for vj = −1.
At this stage we know how to move in space, but are still missing one or more stopping
criteria, as the described procedure would otherwise go on forever, defeating the purpose
of the No­U­Turn Sampler. As indicated by the name of the algorithm, we want to stop
when one end of the trajectory starts making a ”U­turn”, i.e. moves back in the direction of
previously explored states laying on the current trajectory. This is simply due to the fact
that doing so would be wasteful as the simulation would then retrace its steps, visiting
states in parameter space close to the ones already visited [33]. Likewise we also want
the simulation to end if the error in the simulation becomes very large as states discovered
by letting it run instead will likely have an extremely low probability. As far as the error
part goes, if the binary tree includes a leaf node with a state θ and r that meets the criteria
of,
V (θ) −1
2r · r −log u < −∆max,
(2.52)
for ∆max > 0 we stop doubling [33]. As for avoiding U­turns, to determine if we need
to stop doubling the tree at height j the NUTS algorithm looks at 2j −1 balanced binary
subtrees of the current tree that have height greater than 0. The doubling stops when for
any of these subtrees the states θ−, r−corresponding to the leftmost leaf of a considered
subtree and θ+, r+ associated with the rightmost leaf of that same subtree satisfy [33]
(θ+ −θ−) · r−< 0
or
(θ+ −θ−) · r+ < 0.
(2.53)
Where the first part in (2.53) is for the progression of the simulation in the backward part
of the trajectory and the second for the forward part. In words, the condition verifies if the
angle between the vector going from a previous point on the trajectory to the current point
with the momentum vector of the current point is smaller than 90°, because if it isn’t, it
22
Posterior refinement for Bayesian neural networks via normalizing flows
==PAGE:31==
means that our next sampled point will move back towards one of our previous points and
reduce the distance between θ−and θ+ [33]. An example of a NUTS iteration illustrating
this, is shown in Figure 2.9.
−0.1
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
−0.1
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
Figure 2.9: Example of an iteration of NUTS that is run until a stopping criterion is met.
The blue ellipse is the contour of the target distribution. The black solid circle represents
the initial state/point from which the iteration of NUTS is run, all other circles are the
positions θ traced out by the leapfrog integrator. The red solid circles are states that
must be excluded from the set C because their joint probability is below the slice variable
u, while the circles with a red cross centered on them must also be excluded from C to
satisfy detailed balance. The blue arrow is a vector going from the position of the leftmost
leaf of a height­3 binary subtree (with 2³ leafs) to the rightmost leaf of that same tree, and
the magenta arrow the (normalized) momentum vector at the final state in the trajectory.
The doubling process is stopped at this stage, because the angle between the blue and
magenta arrow is more than 90 °, which translates to a negative dot product between
the two vectors they represent and meeting the stopping criterion in (2.53). The circles
marked with a red cross must thus be ignored when choosing the next sample as they
are part of the current doubling process. Figure from [33]
When one of the stopping criteria is met in (2.52) or (2.53) then the states generated
by the current doubling process get excluded from the set C [33]. Say we started the
NUTS iteration from a state θm, we then sample the next state (θm+1, r) of our HMC
sampling from the set C [33]. The algorithm described is shown in Algorithm 3. Some more
details and derivations can be found in [33]. The paper also presents a computationally
Posterior refinement for Bayesian neural networks via normalizing flows
23
==PAGE:32==
more efficient version of the algorithm which is shown in Algorithm 6 in Appendix A, the
underlying principals however remain the same.
Algorithm 3 Basic No­U­Turn Sampler [33]
Given θ0, ϵ, V, M :
for m = 1 to M do
Resample r0 ∼N(0, I).
Resample u ∼Uniform
 
0, exp

V
 θm−1 −1
2r0 · r0	
Initialize θ−= θm−1, θ+ = θm−1, r−= r0, r+ = r0, j = 0, C =
 θm−1, r0	
, s = 1.
while s = 1 do
Choose a direction vj ∼Uniform({−1, 1}).
if vj = −1 then
θ−, r−, −, −, C′, s′ ←BuildTree (θ−, r−, u, vj, j, ϵ)
else
−, −, θ+, r+, C′, s′ ←BuildTree (θ+, r+, u, vj, j, ϵ)
if s′ = 1 then
C ←C ∪C′
s ←s′I [(θ+ −θ−) · r−≥0] I [(θ+ −θ−) · r+ ≥0]
j ←j + 1.
Sample θm, r uniformly at random from C.
function BuildTree (θ, r, u, v, j, ϵ)
if j = 0 then
▷Base case −take one leapfrog step in the direction v.
θ′, r′ ←Leapfrog(θ, r, vϵ).
C′ ←
(
{(θ′, r′)}
if u ≤exp

V (θ′) −1
2r′ · r′	
∅
else
s′ ←I

u < exp

∆max + V (θ′) −1
2r′ · r′	
.
return θ′, r′, θ′, r′, C′, s′.
else
▷Recursion −build the left and right subtrees.
θ−, r−, θ+, r+, C′, s′ ←BuildTree(θ, r, u, v, j −1, ϵ).
if v = −1 then
θ−, r−, −, −, C′′, s′′ ←BuildTree (θ−, r−, u, v, j −1, ϵ)
else
−, −, θ+, r+, C′′, s′′ ←BuildTree (θ+, r+, u, v, j −1, ϵ)
s′ ←s′s′′I [(θ+ −θ−) · r−≥0] I [(θ+ −θ−) · r+ ≥0]
C′ ←C′ ∪C′′
return θ−, r−, θ+, r+, C′, s′
Now that we have seen how to not have to specify the number of steps L of the leapfrog
integrator, we will look at how to automatically select the step size, i.e. the value of ϵ.
Let’s say we have a statistic Ht describing some aspect of the behaviour of an MCMC
algorithm at iteration t ≥1, and that we define its expectation h(x) as [33]
h(x) ≡Et [Ht | x] ≡lim
T→∞
1
T
T
X
t=1
E [Ht | x] ,
(2.54)
for x ∈R a tunable parameter of the MCMC algorithm. Under certain conditions given in
24
Posterior refinement for Bayesian neural networks via normalizing flows
==PAGE:33==
[35] hereunder boundedness of the iterates of xt and h being a non­decreasing function
of x, the update rule
xt+1 ←xt −ηtHt
(2.55)
guarantees that h(xt) converges to 0 as long as the step size schedule ηt satisfies the
conditions
X
t
ηt = ∞;
X
t
η2
t < ∞.
(2.56)
The conditions (2.56) are satisfied for schedules of the form ηt ≡t−κ with κ ∈(0.5, 1].
The optimal parameter values of an MCMC are different during the burn­in phase and the
stationary phase [33]. The ideal would thus be for those to shift quickly as we transition
from the sampler’s initial, transient regime to its stationary regime. What we have seen in
(2.55) with the conditions in (2.56) puts a very high weight on early iterations. One way to
cope with this is to use the dual averaging scheme of Nesterov [36]. Dual averaging can
be adapted to the problem of MCMC adaptation by replacing stochastic gradients with the
statistics Ht [33]. Assuming we still want to find x ∈R such that h(x) ≡Et [Ht | x] = 0,
from dual averaging, we can apply the updates
xt+1 ←µ −
√
t
γ
1
t + t0
t
X
i=1
Hi;
¯xt+1 ←ηtxt+1 + (1 −ηt) ¯xt,
(2.57)
where µ is an arbitrarily selected point that the iterates xt are shrinking towards, γ > 0 is
a free parameter controlling the extent of shrinkage towards µ, t0 ≥0 is a free parameter
that ensures stability during the initial iterations of the algorithm, η ≡t−κ is a step size
schedule that satisfies the conditions specified in (2.56), and ¯x1 = x1 [33]. For large
values of t we have
xt+1 −xt = O(−Htt−0.5),
(2.58)
that clearly goes to 0 if the statistic Ht is bounded [33]. The parameters t0 and κ are an
addition to the update scheme of Nesterov [36], the first one improves stability for the first
iterates, while having κ ∈(0.5, 1] allows to put more weight on recent iterates and quickly
forget the iterates produced by the burn­in stage. For the NUTS algorithm, we define the
statistic
HNUTS
t
≡
1
|Bfinal
t
|
X
θ,r∈Bfinal
t
min

1,
p(θ, r)
p(θt−1, rt,0)

;
hNUTS ≡Et

HNUTS
t

,
(2.59)
where Bfinal
t
is a set of all states explored during the last doubling step of iteration t in the
Markov chain, and θt−1 and rt,0 represent the starting position and resampled momentum
for the t­th iteration of the Markov chain, respectively [33]. We can view HNUTS as the
average acceptance probability that HMC would assign to the position­momentum states
explored during the final doubling iteration. If we assume that HNUTS is non increasing in
ϵ the updates in (2.57) can be used with Ht ≡δ−HNUTS and x ≡log ϵ to have hNUTS = δ
Posterior refinement for Bayesian neural networks via normalizing flows
25
==PAGE:34==
for any δ ∈(0, 1) [33]. The incorporation of this step size selection scheme can be seen
in the optimized implementation of NUTS in Algorithm 6 in Appendix A. Starting from a
good initial value of ϵ unsurprisingly speeds up convergence, a heuristic for doing so can
be found in Algorithm 5 in Appendix A.
2.6
Variational Inference
We will now present two more methods for approximating the posterior distribution, the
second one is called normalizing flows and will be a central part of the upcoming work. For
normalizing flows to approximate a distribution we need to use variational inference, which
we will therefore define in this section. Variational inference is an important technique
for the approximation of complicated probability distributions, and does as a standalone
without normalizing flows also allow to approximate posterior distributions, which is what
we will see now.
2.6.1
Introduction and prerequisites
Let’s start by introducing the concept of a functional. A functional is defined as a mapping
that takes a function as an input and returns the value of the functional as an output
[17]. The same way a function takes the value of a variable as an input and returns the
corresponding value of the function for the given value as an output. One such example
is the entropy functional H[p], which takes a probability density function p(θ) as an input
and returns the quantity
H[p] = −
Z
p(θ) ln p(θ)dθ.
(2.60)
Just like for functions, some problems can be formulated as the optimization problems
where the optimized quantity is a functional. Solutions are found by searching through
all possible input functions to find the one yielding a minimization or maximization of the
functional. This type of optimization is called variational optimization and is exactly what
is used in variational inference (VI). The definition of variational inference is rather vague,
but according to Wainwright and Jordan [37], any procedure using optimization to approx­
imate a density can be termed “variational inference”. The main idea behind variational
inference is to approximate some distribution (often posterior distribution) using a fam­
ily of simpler distributions known as the variational family and then find the member of
that family that is closest to the target [21]. This closeness is often measured by the
Kullback–Leibler divergence. The Kullbach­Leibler divergence measures how different
two probability distributions are. It is defined as follows [38]:
KL(p∥q) = −
Z
p(θ) log
q(θ)
p(θ)

dθ
(2.61)
It can be derived from the difference between the cross­entropy of p and q and the entropy
of p. Some important properties of the KL­divergence are shown in (2.62).
Property 1:
KL(p∥q) ̸≡KL(q∥p), ∀p, q where p ̸= q.
Property 2:
KL(p∥q) ≥0, ∀p, q.
Property 3:
KL(p∥q) = 0 if and only if p = q.
(2.62)
26
Posterior refinement for Bayesian neural networks via normalizing flows
==PAGE:35==
2.6.2
The Evidence Lower Bound
As previously mentioned, in variational inference we start by specifying a family of prob­
ability densities Q. Where each member of the set of distributions q ∈Q is a candidate
approximation for the conditional distribution. Our goal is to find the best member of the
set q∗as defined by the KL­divergence, i.e. the one closest in KL­divergence to the ex­
act conditional [21]. Since we want to approximate the posterior from (2.10) this is hence
equivalent to solving the following optimization problem:
q∗(θ) = arg min
q∈Q
KL(q(θ)∥p(θ | D)).
(2.63)
Sadly, this objective is not computable, since it requires to be able to compute the evidence
(2.12) as we need log p(D). This can be seen if we write out the KL­divergence,
KL (q(θ)∥p(θ | D)) = −
Z
q(θ) log
p(θ | D)
q(θ)

dθ
= −
Z
q(θ) (log p(θ | D) −log q(θ)) dθ
=
Z
q(θ) log q(θ)dθ −
Z
q(θ) log p(θ | D)dθ
= Eθ∼q(θ)[log q(θ)] −Eθ∼q(θ)[log p(θ | D)]
= Eθ∼q(θ)[log q(θ)] −Eθ∼q(θ)

log p(θ, D)
p(D)

= Eθ∼q(θ)[log q(θ)] −Eθ∼q(θ) [log p(θ, D)] + Eθ∼q(θ) [log p(D)]
(2.64)
leading to,
KL (q(θ)∥p(θ | D)) = Eθ∼q(θ)[log q(θ)] −Eθ∼q(θ) [log p(θ, D)] + log p(D).
(2.65)
In the expression we derived in (2.65), we see that log p(D) is constant when optimizing
the objective with respect to q(θ). We can hence optimize the objective Eθ∼q(θ)[log q(θ)]−
Eθ∼q(θ) [log p(θ, D)] instead as it is equivalent to the KL­divergence up to some constant.
If we now change our minimization problem into a maximization problem, we can rewrite
this new objective as,
ELBO(q) = Eθ∼q(θ) [log p(θ, D)] −Eθ∼q(θ)[log q(θ)].
(2.66)
The function in (2.66) is called the Evidence Lower BOund (ELBO). We have now arrived
to the fact that maximizing the ELBO is equivalent to minimizing the KL­divergence. We
can further rewrite the ELBO as shown,
Posterior refinement for Bayesian neural networks via normalizing flows
27
==PAGE:36==
ELBO(q) = Eθ∼q(θ) [log p(θ, D)] −Eθ∼q(θ)[log q(θ)]
= Eθ∼q(θ) [log p(D | θ)p(θ)] −Eθ∼q(θ)[log q(θ)]
= Eθ∼q(θ) [log p(θ)] + Eθ∼q(θ) [log p(D | θ)] −Eθ∼q(θ)[log q(θ)]
= Eθ∼q(θ) [log p(D | θ)] +
Z
q(θ) log p(θ)dθ −
Z
q(θ) log q(θ)dθ
= Eθ∼q(θ) [log p(D | θ)] +
Z
q(θ) log
p(θ)
q(θ)

dθ,
(2.67)
which gives us the final result:
ELBO(q) = Eθ∼q(θ) [log p(D | θ)] + KL (q(θ)∥p(θ)) .
(2.68)
We now get that the ELBO is the difference of the expected log­likelihood of the data
and the KL­divergence between the prior p(θ) and the variational distribution q(θ). The
expected likelihood term favours probability distributions q(θ) that place their mass on
configurations of the latent variables that explain the observed data D, while the negative
KL­divergence term favours the ones that are close to the prior (due to Property 2 and
Property 3 in (2.62)). Note that the ELBO when used as an objective therefore reflects
the usual balance between likelihood and prior [21] that the posterior also expresses. This
isn’t all, the ELBO also represents a lower bound on the log evidence, which we can see
by combining (2.65) and (2.68),
KL (q(θ)∥p(θ | D)) = Eθ∼q(θ)[log q(θ)] −Eθ∼q(θ) [log p(θ, D)] + log p(D)
= −ELBO(q) + log p(D),
(2.69)
rearranging the terms yields:
log p(D) = ELBO(q) + KL (q(θ)∥p(θ | D))
(2.70)
From (2.70) and Property 2 in (2.62) we hence have log p(D) ≥ELBO(q).
2.7
Normalizing Flows
Now that we have defined variational inference, we can look into how to do posterior ap­
proximation with normalizing flows. Normalizing flows is one of the newer techniques that
can be used for posterior approximation and the last one we will present in this chapter.
2.7.1
Introduction and Motivation
Say we have some data x that follows a known parametric probability distribution p(x).
Knowing the distribution function allows us to do interesting things such as sampling, i.e.
generating new data samples xi following the distribution p(x), or density estimation, i.e.
given any point xi be able to compute the probability density at that point p(xi).
This is however mainly feasible for simple distributions, yet those are not the only ones we
would like to be able to sample and do density estimation from. The goal of Normalizing
Flows (NF) is to be able to model more complex/flexible distributions such that we can do
data sampling and density evaluation from them. The way normalizing flows achieve this
28
Posterior refinement for Bayesian neural networks via normalizing flows
==PAGE:37==
Transformation 
𝑓(⋅)
Simple distribution
𝑝1(𝑍)
Complex distribution
𝑝2(𝑋)
Figure 2.10: Transformation of a simple distribution into a more complex distribution
through some function f. As per the idea of normalizing flows. Figure adapted from
[39]
is by starting from a simple distribution that can be modeled and apply transformations on
it to be able to model complex distributions. This is illustrated in Figure 2.10.
Before we dive in to the real meat of normalizing flows let’s look at a little 1­dimensional
example of distribution transformation to help build up some intuition for it. Take the one
dimensional functions p1(z) and f(z) defined as follows:
p1(z) = Unif([0, 1]),
f(z) = 2z + 1 = x.
Say our function f transforms our probability distribution p1(z) into a probability distribution
p2(x) as shown in Figure 2.11 (note the change of variable). We want the probability in
the input space to be the same as in the output space, with a little abuse in notation, we
can write this as p1(z)∂z = p2(x)∂x. What is meant by this notation is that we want the
probability of an infinitesimally small interval in the input space to be the same as the
corresponding one in the output space. Still abusing the notation, we can write
p2(x) = p1(z)| ∂z
∂x|, where the term | ∂z
∂x| renormalizes the probability distribution in the
output space.
𝑝₁  𝑧
𝑧
1
0
𝑝₂  𝑥
𝑥
1
3
2
4
𝑓
1
0.5
Figure 2.11: Transformation of a uniform probability distribution on the interval [0, 1]
Unif([0, 1]), p1(z), into a probability distribution p2(x) through a function f defined as
f(z) = 2z + 1. Figure from [39]
Note that we have | ∂z
∂x| = |
∂z
∂f(z)| = 1
2 meaning that any value of p2(x) is the corresponding
value for p1(z) scaled by a factor of 1
2, which matches the drawing in Figure 2.11. Since
the function f is a 1­dimensional strictly monotonic function taking 1­dimensional inputs,
its inverse f−1 exists. We hence also have | ∂z
∂x| = |∂f−1(x)
∂x
|, meaning that the scaling
factor is equal to the absolute value of the derivative of the inverse function.
Posterior refinement for Bayesian neural networks via normalizing flows
29
==PAGE:38==
2.7.2
Theory of Normalizing Flows
Now that we have motivated the use of normalizing flows and given a little intuition about
the mathematics behind it, what they need to ensure and how they can do so, we will dive
into the theory of normalizing flows.
Given a random variable Z ∈RD having a known and tractable probability density function
pz : RD →R and given f : RD →RD an invertible and differentiable function, with
X = f(Z). Using the change of variable formula, we can compute the probability density
function of the random variable X as in (2.71) [40].
pX(x) = pZ(z) ·
det
∂f(z)
∂z

−1
with
z = f−1(x)
(2.71)
Where the term ∂f(z)
∂z
is the Jacobian of the function f. The absolute value of its deter­
minant quantifies the relative change of volume of a small neighborhood around z due
to f [40]. To draw a parallel with our ”intuition providing example” from section 2.7.1 if
we take dz and dx to be infinitessimally small neighbourhoods around z and x respec­
tiely, where dx is the neighbourhood that dz maps to through f. We then have that
det

∂f(z)
∂z
 ≈Vol(dx)
Vol(dz), i.e. the absolute value of the determinant of the Jacobian of f at
the point z is approximately equal to the volume of dx divide by the volume of dz [40]. We
know that for an invertible square matrix A the inverse of the determinant of A is equal
to the determinant of the inverse matrix of A i.e. det (A)−1 = det
 A−1
. Additionally,
from the inverse function theorem, we know that the inverse of the Jacobian matrix of an
invertible function is the Jacobian matrix of the inverse function. From this we can rewrite
(2.71) into (2.72).
pX(x) = pZ
 f−1(x)

·
det
∂f−1(x)
∂x

(2.72)
Invertible and differentiable functions have the property of being composable. This means
that the composition of two or more such functions is also invertible and differentiable [41].
Mathematically, we have that for all invertible and differentiable fi, i = 1..N, with f defined
as
f = f1 ◦f2 ◦· · · ◦fK−1 ◦fK,
(2.73)
the function f is also invertible and differentiable. This implies that we can create normal­
izing flows with chained transformations, where each fi transforms zi−1 into zi, assuming
that z0 = z and zK = x. This is illustrate in Figure 2.12. The word ”flow” refers to the
trajectory that samples from the base distribution follow. The number of chained transfor­
mations is called the flow length.
Using the change of variables formula for a flow length of K, as shown in Figure 2.12, we
get that the probability density function of the random variable X is now given by,
pK(x) = p0 (z0)
K
Y
i=1
det
∂f−1
i
(zi)
∂zi
 .
(2.74)
30
Posterior refinement for Bayesian neural networks via normalizing flows
==PAGE:39==
Figure 2.12: Normalizing flow with flow length K. Each function fi maps the distribution
pi−1(zi−1) into a distribution pi(zi). This proceeds until we reach our approximation for
the target distribution pX(x) (i.e. pK(zK)). Figure from [42]
It has been formally proven [43, 44], that if a transformation can be arbitrarily complex,
then any distribution pX can be generated from any base distribution pZ under reasonable
assumptions.
If we now want to sample from our target distribution pX we can sample from our base
distributions pZ and transform the sample with the transformation f defined as in (2.73)
∀K ∈N, this is termed forward parametrization. If we on the other hand want the density
of a point x we can simply evaluate it using (2.74), this is called reverse parametrization.
2.7.3
Training of Normalizing flows
The previous section treated the definition and basics of normalizing flows. It however
omitted details about how to find optimal function parameters for a given type of invertible
and differential functions, to obtain an optimal mapping. We somehow need to force our
function to map the base distribution into the target distribution and conversely for its
inverse. The employed method essentially depends on the problem at hand. Say that the
flow based model’s parameters are α = {ψ, ϕ}, where ψ represents the parameters of
our base distribution and ϕ are the parameters of the transformation function. If we have
some set of observed data {xn}N
n=1 from some complex distribution pX(x) and want to
be able to evaluate the target density pX(x), then we can minimize the following forward
KL­divergence between the target distribution pX(x) and the flow­based model pK(x | α)
[40]:
L(α) = KL [pX(x)∥pK(x | α)]
= −Ex∼pX(x) [log pK(x | α)] + const
= −Ex∼pX(x)

log pZ
 f−1(x | ϕ) | ψ

+ log
det ∂f−1
∂x (x | ϕ)


+ const
(2.75)
The expectation over pX(x) can then simply be evaluated by Monte Carlo. If we on the
other hand are able to evaluate the target density pX(x), but aren’t able to sample from it,
then we can fit the flow­based model by minimizing the reverse KL­divergence instead.
In such a case our objective would be given by [40]:
Posterior refinement for Bayesian neural networks via normalizing flows
31
==PAGE:40==
L(α) = KL [pK(x | α)∥pX(x)]
= Ex∼pK(x|α) [log pX(x | α) −log pX(x)]
= Ez∼pZ(z|ψ)

log pz(z | ψ) −log
det ∂f
∂z (z | ϕ)
 −log pX(f(z | ϕ))

(2.76)
It is in fact sufficient to be able to evaluate the target density pX(x) up to a normalizing
constant C. If we suppose that pX(x) = ˜pX(x)/C with ˜pX(x) being tractable but
C =
R
˜pX(x)dx being intractable, we can rewrite (2.76) as:
L(α) = Ez∼pZ(z|ψ)

log pz(z | ψ) −log
det ∂f
∂z (z | ϕ)
 −log pX(f(z | ϕ))
C

= Ez∼pZ(z|ψ)

log pz(z | ψ) −log
det ∂f
∂z (z | ϕ)
 −log pX(f(z | ϕ)) −log C

= Ez∼pZ(z|ψ)

log pz(z | ψ) −log
det ∂f
∂z (z | ϕ)
 −log pX(f(z | ϕ))

+ const
(2.77)
Since C does not depend on α we can simply treat log C as a constant and hence being
able to only evaluate ˜pX(x) suffices. As for the previous case we can simply evaluate the
expectation over the base distribution pZ(z | ψ) using Monte Carlo.
2.7.4
Types of Flows
We will here present a few flow types that will be relevant for later work.
Radial Flow
Radial flows were introduced by Rezende and Mohamed [45]. They are defined as the
family of functions taking the following form:
f(z) = z +
β
α + ∥z −z0∥(z −z0)
(2.78)
where z0 ∈RD is a reference point around which the distribution is distorted, α ∈R∗+
and β ∈R are free parameters. These three parameters are the ones we optimize over
when training radial flows. The flow applies radial contractions and expansions around
the reference point z0 [45].
Planar Flow
Just like radial flows, planar flows were also introduced in [45]. They are defined as the
family of functions taking the following form:
f(z) = z + uh

w⊤z + b

(2.79)
where w ∈RD, u ∈RD and b ∈R are free parameters and h : R →R is a smooth non­
linear function. They expand and contract the distribution in the direction perpendicular
to the hyperplane w⊤z + b = 0 [40].
32
Posterior refinement for Bayesian neural networks via normalizing flows
==PAGE:41==
Rational Spline Flow
Rational splines as flows were introduced by Durkan et al. [46]. The idea is to map an
interval [−B, B] to an interval [−B, B], while using an identity mapping for inputs located
outside the interval. The input interval [−B, B] is then fractioned into K bins constituted by
a set of K + 1 coordinates

x(k), y(k)	K
k=0, where the knot values monotonically increase
between the points
 x(0), y(0)
and
 x(k), y(k)
. Each pair of two consecutive knots make
up a bound for some rational nth­degree polynomial passing through the two points. One
such function is shown in (2.80) for the k­th segment, where α(k) and β(k) are nth­degree
polynomials.
y(x) = α(k)(x)
β(k)(x)
(2.80)
As for the derivatives of those K functions, the boundary derivatives are set to δ0 = δk = 1
while the remaining

δk	K−1
k=1 are given arbitrary positive values. When doing this for a
multi­dimensional input, the procedure is simply applied element­wise for each dimension.
Rational splines have a high functional flexibility while maintaining a numerically stable
inverse [46, 47]. More details can be found in [46] and [47].
Posterior refinement for Bayesian neural networks via normalizing flows
33
==PAGE:42==
34
Posterior refinement for Bayesian neural networks via normalizing flows
==PAGE:43==
3
Methodology
We first aimed at reproducing the part of the results of Posterior Refinement Improves
Sample Efficiency in Bayesian Neural Networks [14] dealing directly with posterior refine­
ment using normalizing flows (which will be defined later in this section). More specifi­
cally we aimed at reproducing the results in Table 3 of the paper for the CIFAR10 dataset.
Those results and the required implementations were first reproduced as well as possi­
ble, using exclusively the information at hand. Once we had obtained results validating
the correctness of the implementation, we moved on to experimenting with the posterior
refinement procedure proposed by the paper. All implementations were made in Python
3.9.11. The code can be found on github https://github.com/S163669/Thesis.
3.1
Datasets
We carried out all the experiments on the CIFAR10 dataset [48]. It contains 60000 32x32
color images of 10 different classes. 50000 of those images make up the training data
while the remaining 10000 make up the test data. The classes are perfectly balanced,
such that we have 5000 images of each class in the training data and 1000 in the test
data. Some image samples from the dataset can be seen in Figure 3.1.
ship
cat
deer
horse
horse
bird
truck
truck
truck
cat
bird
frog
deer
cat
frog
frog
bird
frog
cat
dog
deer
airplane
airplane
truck
automobile
cat
deer
airplane
cat
horse
Figure 3.1: Image samples from the CIFAR10 dataset. Each of the 10 classes of the
dataset is represented at least once.
Posterior refinement for Bayesian neural networks via normalizing flows
35
==PAGE:44==
Little information about the data pre­processing used in Posterior Refinement Improves
Sample Efficiency in Bayesian Neural Networks [14] is available in the paper. We how­
ever found out that it is based on the paper Laplace Redux ­ Effortless Bayesian Deep
Learning [13] from the same research group for which code is available on github [49].
We therefore chose to use the function pre­processing the data and returning dataload­
ers in Pytorch for the training, validation and test set from that code as a base to make
a data pre­processing function. We did this under the assumption that the same or a
similar data preprocessing and data splits had been used in [14]. As both mentioned by
Kristiadi et al. [14] and present in the code of Laplace Redux ­ Effortless Bayesian Deep
Learning [13] data augmentation was applied on the training set. It is not specified in [14]
what type of data transformation was employed, we thus used the same as the one in the
code of [13, 49]. Consequently, a horizontal flip of each image was first performed with a
probability of 0.5 followed by a padding of each side of the image with 4 pixels (giving a
40x40 image) and a random crop of the resulting image into a 32x32 image (to get back
to the original dimensions of the training set and match those of the test set). No normal­
ization was mentioned in [14] nor in [13], yet normalization is being applied in the code
of [13], we thus decided to normalize the train and test data accordingly. The normaliza­
tion was made with means of 125.3/255, 123.0/255, 113.9/255 and standard deviations of
63.0/255, 62.1/255, 66.7/255 for each RGB channel respectively. Once this preprocess­
ing was done, we performed a split of the test set into a new test set of size 8000 and a
validation set of size 2000, using a set seed for the split to remain the same accross the
various experiments. We later discovered after the publication of the code of [14] that no
normalization had been used, the reproduction of the results of the paper was thus recon­
ducted with unnormalized data instead. All experiments conducted after the reproduction
of the results were therefore conducted on unnormalized data.
3.2
Base Model
We first trained a Wide Residual Network (WideResNet) with depth 16 and width factor 4
[50] to classify the CIFAR10 dataset. The implementation we used for the neural network
was found in several repositories of the paper’s main author’s github [51]. The assump­
tion being, that the same one had certainly been used to produce the results of Posterior
Refinement Improves Sample Efficiency in Bayesian Neural Networks [14]. The network
and its training were implemented in Pytorch 1.12.1 with cuda 11.6. We trained the
model for 100 epochs using Stochastic Gradient Descent (SGD) with a batch size of 128
[52], cosine annealing [53], a Nesterov momentum of 0.9 and a cross entropy loss. The
weight decay was set to 5e−4 and the initial learning rate to 0.1 following Kristiadi et al [14].
No value was given for the minimum learning rate, it was therefore set to the default of
the Pytorch implementation CosineAnnealingLR, namely 0. We conducted a little exper­
imentation with that parameter but none seemed to yield better negative log­likelihoods
than the value 0, which we therefore used in all of the following work. From the above
optimization, we obtained a Maximum A Posteriori (MAP) solution for the weights of the
the network denoted θMAP, in other words the mode of the posterior distribution p(θ | D)
where D represents the data. This map solution was used as a form of performance
baseline, on which we applied post­hoc methods to try to improve its results.
3.3
Laplace Approximation
One such post­hoc method is the Laplace approximation. We conducted a Laplace ap­
proximation over the weights of the last layer of the WideResNet from the MAP solu­
tion obtained after training. Say D represents the data, θ ∈RL the weights of a subset
of the network, and θMAP ∈RL the weights corresponding to that same subset for the
36
Posterior refinement for Bayesian neural networks via normalizing flows
==PAGE:45==
MAP solution. If we replace the function f(z) in (2.21) by the likelihood p(D | θ) mul­
tiplied by a prior p(θ) on the subset of weights (i.e. the joint probability) and replace
the stationary point z0 in (2.28) by θMAP (Z then represents the marginal p(D)), the ob­
tained Laplace approximation would then represent a gaussian distribution of the form
N
 θ | θMAP, P −1
, which would be an approximation for the posterior p(θ|D). Where
P = −∇² log p (D | θMAP) p (θMAP).
The approximation was made in practice using the python package laplace-torch [54]
presented in Laplace Redux ­ Effortless Bayesian Deep Learning [13] and used by Kris­
tadi et al. to produce the results in Posterior Refinement Improves Sample Efficiency in
Bayesian Neural Networks [14]. Following [14], we fitted the approximation for CIFAR­10
utilizing the full hessian and a prior precision tuned with post­hoc marginal likelihood max­
imization [13]. The prior was given a mean of 0 and an initial precision of 1. In practice
the precision matrix was computed as,
P = −
N
X
n=1
∇2
θ log p(Dn | θ)|θMAP + ∇2
θ log p(θ)|θMAP ,
(3.1)
for Dn an observation in the training data D and N the total number of training observa­
tions. In laplace-torch the prior is assumed to be Gaussian and therefore we have the
simple form,
∇2
θ log p(θ)|θMAP = P0.
(3.2)
In our case we assume a scalar prior precision p0 we therefore have P0 = Ip0 where I is
and identity matrix of the same size as P0.
3.4
Hamiltonian Monte Carlo
In order to get an accurate approximation of the posterior over the weights of the last
layer of the WideResNet network, we use Hamiltonian Monte Carlo as a golden standard
baseline representing a proxy to the true posterior, just like Kristadi et al. . Following their
work [14], we used the implementation of the NUTS algorithm from the library Pyro. We
set the prior to be a Multivariate­Gaussian distribution centered at 0 with a precision of 40
as that was the precision chosen by the authors. In accordance with the paper we used
a burn­in phase (warm­up phase) of 300 samples, after which drew a total of 600 samples
from the posterior, value that we chose ourselves as none was specified in the paper. We
experienced a bit with the precision of the prior as we thought that slight differences in our
implementation of the parts HMC depends on could maybe result in a different optimal
prior precision. To do so, we ran a grid search for the prior precision trying values in the
range [0.5, 60] where we defined the optimal prior to be the one yielding the lowest average
NLL on our validation set for the obtained last layer weight samples. We discovered that
slight changes to the prior could make a big difference on the NLL obtained and got values
around 40 to be optimal, we hence sticked to that value in agreement with the paper.
3.5
Posterior Refinement
Once we have made the Laplace approximation of the posterior and run HMC with NUTS
to obtain some posterior samples, we perform posterior refinement using normalizing
flows, i.e. we set the Laplace approximation q0(θ) = N(θ | µ, Σ) to be our base dis­
tribution and the true posterior p(˜θ | D) to be our target distribution that our normalizing
Posterior refinement for Bayesian neural networks via normalizing flows
37
==PAGE:46==
flow should map our base distribution to. Our goal is here to be able to sample from the
posterior distribution. As we saw in subsection 2.7.3, we can therefore train the flow by
minimizing the reverse KL­divergence to the true posterior. From this same subsection,
we also know that being able to evaluate the target distribution up to a normalizing con­
stant is sufficient. This comes in handy, since the posterior p(˜θ | D) is untractable, we
can however obtain the joint distribution p(˜θ, D), which we know from equations (2.10)
and (2.6) is simply the posterior distribution up to a normalizing constant given by the
marginal likelihood. Let fϕ be a normalizing flow of length K, given as in (2.73) repre­
senting a composition of functions such that,
fϕ := fϕK ◦· · · ◦fϕ1 and ϕ := (ϕi)K
i=1
(3.3)
where ϕ represents the parameters of the normalizing flow. Following (2.71) we get the
transformed distribution1,
qϕ(˜θ) = q0 (θ)
K
Y
i=1
det
 
∂f−1
ϕi (θi)
∂θi
!
with
θi−1 = f−1
ϕi (θi)
∀i = 1..K
and
θ0 = θ, θK = ˜θ.
(3.4)
From the reverse KL­divergence to the target distribution in (2.76) we have,
L(˜θ) = KL
h
qϕ(˜θ)∥p(˜θ | D)
i
= E˜θ∼qϕ(˜θ)
h
log q(˜θ) −log p(˜θ | D)
i
= E˜θ∼qϕ(˜θ)
"
log qϕ(˜θ) −log p(D | ˜θ)p(˜θ)
p(D)
#
= −E˜θ∼qϕ(˜θ)
h
log p(D | ˜θ) + log p(˜θ)
i
−log p(D) + E˜θ∼qϕ(˜θ)
h
log qϕ(˜θ)
i
.
(3.5)
We hence need to minimize the quantity L(˜θ) for the parameters ϕ,
ϕ∗= arg min
ϕ
−E˜θ∼qϕ(˜θ)
h
log p(D | ˜θ) + log p(˜θ)
i
+ E˜θ∼qϕ(˜θ)
h
log qϕ(˜θ)
i
.
(3.6)
Turning (3.6) into a maximization problem we get,
ϕ∗= arg max
ϕ
E˜θ∼qϕ(˜θ)
h
log p(D | ˜θ) + log p(˜θ)
i
+ H [qϕ] ,
(3.7)
which is the same objective as the one used in [14], where H is the differential entropy
functional (see (2.60)). This corresponds to a maximization of the ELBO (cf. (2.66)).
After training the normalizing flow with the objective in (3.7) we obtain the refined posterior
qϕ∗(˜θ). The predictive distribution for a test point x∗is given in closed form by
1Note that the corresponding equation in Posterior Refinement Improves Sample Efficiency in Bayesian
Neural Networks [14] (equation (3)) contains an error. The Jacobian should be taken for F −1
ϕ
and not Fϕ.
38
Posterior refinement for Bayesian neural networks via normalizing flows
==PAGE:47==
p(y∗| x∗, D) =
Z
p(y∗| ˜θ, x∗)p(˜θ | D)d˜θ.
(3.8)
The true posterior is however still unknown, we can nevertheless obtain an approximation
of it by replacing the true posterior with the refined posterior.
p(y∗| x∗, D) ≈
Z
p(y∗| ˜θ)qϕ∗(˜θ)d˜θ.
(3.9)
This does however still not suffice as we cannot compute the integral in (3.9) in closed
form. We thus obtain an approximation with Monte Carlo integration [14], yielding
p(y∗| x∗, D) ≈1
S
S
X
s=1
p(y∗| ˜θs); where ˜θs = fϕ∗(θs); θs ∼q0(θ) ∀s = 1, ..., S.
(3.10)
The normalizing flows are implemented in Pyro. They were trained by maximizing (3.7)
(i.e. maximizing the ELBO) for 20 epochs using the Adam optimizer [55] with cosine
learning rate decay [53] and an initial learning rate of 1e−3. The training was performed
without data augmentation on the same training set as the one used to train the WideRes­
Net.
No indications were given in [14] as to whether or not a form of mini­batch [52] was used
for training, the authors however write that having to be used with full­batch data is an
inconvenience of HMC, it would thus appear strange if they were also using full­batch
data to train the normalizing flows. We hence decided to use mini­batch for which we
chose a batch size of 128, as this was the batch size used for training the WideResNet.
We later found it to be the correct value after the authors had made the code used for the
experiments in the paper available [56]. Three types of flows were used for the posterior
refinement. Radial flows in accordance with the paper and planar and rational linear spline
flows. The two later ones were chosen due to their simplicity over other types of flows. A
prior precision of 40 was chosen to train the normalizing flow in accordance with the value
used for HMC.
3.6
Stochastic Weight Averaging ­ Gaussian (SWAG)
We tested SWAG as a method to get an approximate posterior over the weights of the
network.
To do so, we created an implementation of SWAG inspired by Algorithm 1
in the original paper of SWAG [20], which is shown in Algorithm 4.
We created the
implementation as a SWAG class whose __init__ function takes as an input a pre­
tained Pytorch model where all weights that SWAG should not be performed on are
frozen, a number of parameters corresponding to the number of weights SWAG is com­
puted for, the device to make the computations on, the rank K of the lower rank ma­
trix and a flag indicating whether to perform SWA or SWAG. From those parameters
the class then initializes the first and second moment vectors for the unfrozen model
weights and an empty (K × number of paramters)­matrix to store the values of b
Di, ∀i ∈
T −K +1, ..., T (depending on the flag value). The class contains four methods fit_swag,
sample, swag_inference and get_distribution_parameters. The fit_swag method
takes as an input a train loader, learning rate, number of epochs, a number indicating how
often to store the SGD iterations and a flag indicating whether to only use the diagonal co­
variance matrix or the diagonal with the low­rank; it performs the Train loop in Algorithm 4.
Posterior refinement for Bayesian neural networks via normalizing flows
39
==PAGE:48==
The sample method takes a number of samples as an input and returns the corresponding
number of samples sampled according to equation (2.36). The swag_inference method
takes a data loader as an input as well as a number of samples and does inference by per­
forming the Test loop in Algorithm 4. Finally, the get_distribution_parameters method,
returns the parameters of the fitted distribution in a dictionary.
Algorithm 4 Bayesian Model Averaging with SWAG [20]
θ0 : pretrained weights; η : learning rate; T : number of steps; c : moment update
frequency; K : maximum number of columns in deviation matrix; S : number of samples
in Bayesian model averaging
Train SWAG
¯θ ←θ0, θ2 ←θ2
0
▷Initialize moments
for i ←1, 2, ..., T do
θi ←θi−1 −η∇θL (θi−1)
▷Perform SGD update
if MOD(i, c) = 0 then
n ←i/c
▷Number of models
¯θ ←n¯θ+θi
n+1 , θ2 ←nθ2+θ2
i
n+1
▷Moment
if NUM_COLS( bD) = K then
REMOVE_COL( bD[:, 1])
APPEND_COL

bD, θi −¯θ

▷Store deviation
return θSWA = ¯θ,
Σdiag = θ2 −¯θ2,
bD
Test Bayesian Model Averaging
for i ←1, 2, ..., T do
Draw eθi ∼N

θSWA, 1
2Σdiag +
b
D b
D⊤
2(K−1)

Update batch norm statistics with new sample.
p(y∗| Data)+ = 1
S p(y∗| eθi)
return p(y∗| Data)
Despite not being used in their theoretical work, Maddox et al. [20] do mention using mo­
mentum for performing stochastic gradient descent. We thus chose to use a momentum
of 0.9 as was done in the experiments in [20]. SWAG comes with a few hyper­parameters,
namely the number of epochs, the maximum number of columns K in the deviation ma­
trix, the learning rate, and the moment update frequency. We narrowed this list down
to the first three and performed a form of grid­search to tune those hyper­parameters,
once performed, we tested the obtained approximate posterior for the weights of the last
layer of our WideResNet model both as a stand alone and after posterior refinements
with different flow lengths, i.e. we tried to use it as a base distribution for our normaliz­
ing flows instead of the Laplace approximation. We then repeated the experiment with
SWAG­diagonal.
3.7
Performance Metrics
We used four forms of metrics to evaluate our results, accuracy (ACC), the negative log­
likelihood (NLL), the expected calibration error (ECE) [57] and the maximum­mean dis­
crepancy (MMD) [58]. These metrics are also the ones used in [14]. The accuracy is the
number of correct class predictions divided by the total number of predictions N,
40
Posterior refinement for Bayesian neural networks via normalizing flows
==PAGE:49==
ACC =
PN
i=1 I[ˆyi = yi]
N
,
(3.11)
where ˆyi is the predicted class of observation i and yi the true class of observation i, the
higher the value the better.
The negative log­likelihood is given as the negative of the log­likelihoods that the model
assigns to all the true classes,
NLL = −log p(D | θ) = −
N
X
i=1
(yi log ˆyi + (1 −yi) log (1 −ˆyi)) ,
(3.12)
the lower the value the better.
The expected calibration error is computed by first grouping the predictions of the model
into M equally sized bins over the interval [0 ,1], after what it is computed as follows
ECE =
M
X
i=1
Pi · |oi −ei| ,
(3.13)
where oi is the accuracy for the elements in bin i (i.e. number of correctly predicted
elements in the bin divided by total number of elements in the bin), ei is the mean of the
predictive values (representing probabilities) of the elements in bin i and Pi the fraction
of all the instances that fall into bin i [57]. The lower the value the better.
The maximum­mean discrepancy is a measure to compare samples from two distinct
probability distributions [58]. For a Euclidean space an empirical estimation of MMD using
a radial basis function kernel is defined as,
MMD = 1
m2
m
X
i,j=1
e
 
−∥xi−xj∥
2
2σ2
!
+ 1
n2
n
X
i,j=1
e
 
−∥yi−yj∥
2
2σ2
!
−2
mn
m,n
X
i,j=1
e
 
−∥xi−yj∥
2
2σ2
!
, (3.14)
where X and Y are two sets of samples to be compared, with X = {xi}m
i=1 and
Y = {yi}n
i=1. The parameter σ of the radial basis function kernel was chosen to be the
median of the euclidean distances between the first 50 points of each of the sets X and
Y . The definition of the MMD used in [14] is not given by the authors, we discovered it
in a github repositories of some of the authors of the paper [51]. The lower the MMD the
better.
Posterior refinement for Bayesian neural networks via normalizing flows
41
==PAGE:50==
42
Posterior refinement for Bayesian neural networks via normalizing flows
==PAGE:51==
4
Experiments
Unless specified otherwise, these experiments were carried out with 10 WideResNet­
16­4 models trained on the training set with different weight initializations allowing us to
compute a mean and standard error for each of the metrics used. Note that all flows were
trained on the training set for each such obtained MAP solution and that all MMDs are
with respect to HMC samples. If not specified otherwise, all results shown are the results
obtained on the test set.
4.1
Reproduction of the Results in Posterior Refinement
Improves Sample Efficiency in Bayesian Neural Networks
We started out by trying to reproduce the results of Table 3 of Posterior Refinement Im­
proves Sample Efficiency in Bayesian Neural Networks [14] for CIFAR10, which can be
seen in Table 4.1. Due to the lack of information about the normalization of the data
prior to the publication of the code of [14], we tried to reproduce these results with both
normalized and unnormalized data, the later being the one used by the authors as was
discovered posterior to the code publication. For both versions we also added results for
flow refinements of length 15, 20 and 25 not present in the original Table in [14] as seen
in Table 4.1. The version with unnormalized data can be seen in Table 4.2.
Table 4.1: Results from Table 3 in Posterior Refinement Improves Sample Efficiency in
Bayesian Neural Networks.
CIFAR­10
Methods
MMD ↓
NLL ↓
MAP
0.438 ± 0.001
0.1698 ± 0.0009
LA
0.299 ± 0.001
0.1672 ± 0.0009
LA­Refine­1
0.346 ± 0.000
0.1616 ± 0.0007
LA­Refine­5
0.290 ± 0.000
0.1582 ± 0.0007
LA­Refine­10
0.130 ± 0.001
0.1577 ± 0.0008
LA­Refine­30
0.002 ± 0.000
0.1581 ± 0.0008
HMC
−
0.1581 ± 0.0008
Table 4.2: Reproduction of results in Table 4.1 with unnormalized data.
CIFAR­10
Methods
MMD ↓
NLL ↓
MAP
0.4278 ± 0.0005
0.1731 ± 0.0011
LA
0.3424 ± 0.0007
0.1655 ± 0.0010
LA­Refine­1
0.3319 ± 0.0003
0.1609 ± 0.0009
LA­Refine­5
0.2506 ± 0.0005
0.1583 ± 0.0008
LA­Refine­10
0.0604 ± 0.0007
0.1584 ± 0.0007
LA­Refine­15
0.0038 ± 0.0000
0.1585 ± 0.0007
LA­Refine­20
0.0035 ± 0.0000
0.1585 ± 0.0007
LA­Refine­25
0.0035 ± 0.0000
0.1585 ± 0.0007
LA­Refine­30
0.0035 ± 0.0000
0.1585 ± 0.0007
HMC
−
0.1584 ± 0.0007
Posterior refinement for Bayesian neural networks via normalizing flows
43
==PAGE:52==
Overall we see that the results with unnormalized data match the ones of [14] rather well.
The results for MAP indicate that we may be starting with slightly worse MAP solutions in
terms of NLL, as our NLL result with standard error lays outside of the range for MAP in
Table 4.1, our MAP solutions however obtain a slightly lower MMD to the HMC samples.
Our versions of LA on the other hand do seem to perform better for NLL, with an MMD
however being higher, which is rather interesting given that we started with worse MAP
solutions. Other than the MMDs which are then generally lower for our refined Laplace
approximations, the corresponding NLLs hit sensibly similar values. This validates the
correctness of our implementation. The additional results for flow refinements of lengths
15, 20 and 25 in Table 4.2 also show that a flow of length 15 to 20 suffices to obtain the
same performance as a flow of length 30, which amounts to roughly half the amount of
flows and trainable parameters for equivalent NLL and MMD performance. Looking at
the results in Table 4.3 for normalized data, we see that the MMD results are sensibly the
same as the ones in Table 4.2, the NLL is however higher than in both Table 4.2 and Table
4.1 and has a slightly higher standard error overall.
Table 4.3: Reproduction of results in Table 4.1 with normalized data.
CIFAR­10
Methods
MMD ↓
NLL ↓
MAP
0.4289 ± 0.0004
0.1781 ± 0.0015
LA
0.3433 ± 0.0007
0.1696 ± 0.0014
LA­Refine­1
0.3325 ± 0.0002
0.1651 ± 0.0012
LA­Refine­5
0.2514 ± 0.0005
0.1623 ± 0.0011
LA­Refine­10
0.0612 ± 0.0007
0.1623 ± 0.0011
LA­Refine­15
0.0039 ± 0.0000
0.1625 ± 0.0011
LA­Refine­20
0.0036 ± 0.0000
0.1625 ± 0.0011
LA­Refine­25
0.0035 ± 0.0000
0.1625 ± 0.0011
LA­Refine­30
0.0035 ± 0.0000
0.1625 ± 0.0011
HMC
−
0.1623 ± 0.0010
If we now turn our attention to Table 4.4, showing the absolute difference between our
MAP solution and post­hoc methods for MMD and NLL. We see that the absolute differ­
ence for MMD is overall higher for our experiments on both normalized and unnormalized
data, except for the Laplace approximation, where the results in the paper have a higher
absolute increase in performance.
Table 4.4: Absolute difference between post­hoc methods and MAP from the results of
Tables 4.2, 4.3 and 4.1 for MMD and NLL.
CIFAR­10 ­ Unnormalized
CIFAR­10 ­ Normalized
CIFAR­10 ­ Paper
Methods
MMD ↑
NLL ↑
MMD ↑
NLL ↑
MMD ↑
NLL ↑
LA
0.0854
0.0076
0.0856
0.0085
0.139
0.0026
LA­Refine­1
0.0959
0.0122
0.0964
0.0130
0.092
0.0082
LA­Refine­5
0.1772
0.0148
0.1775
0.0158
0.148
0.0116
LA­Refine­10
0.3674
0.0147
0.3677
0.0158
0.308
0.0121
LA­Refine­15
0.4240
0.0146
0.4250
0.0156
−
−
LA­Refine­20
0.4243
0.0146
0.4253
0.0156
−
−
LA­Refine­25
0.4243
0.0146
0.4254
0.0156
−
−
LA­Refine­30
0.4243
0.0146
0.4254
0.0156
0.436
0.0117
HMC
−
0.0147
−
0.0158
−
0.0117
44
Posterior refinement for Bayesian neural networks via normalizing flows
==PAGE:53==
As for the absolute difference in NLL, it is always higher than for the results in the paper
and this despite the plain NLL values being slightly higher (worse) overall than the ones
obtained in the paper. We also note that the absolute difference is slightly higher for our
normalized version of CIFAR10 than for the unnormalized one. Comparing the absolute
differences can be slightly misleading as numbers with a higher magnitude will often have
higher absolute differences between each­other than numbers with a lower magnitude.
We hence decided to also compute the relative difference, the results of which are shown
in Table 4.5.
Table 4.5: Relative difference between post­hoc methods and MAP from the results of
Tables 4.2, 4.3 and 4.1 for MMD and NLL.
CIFAR­10 ­ Unnormalized
CIFAR­10 ­ Normalized
CIFAR­10 ­ Paper
Methods
MMD ↓
NLL ↓
MMD ↓
NLL ↓
MMD ↓
NLL ↓
LA
−20.0%
−4.4%
−20.0%
−4.8%
−31.7%
−1.5%
LA­Refine­1
−22.4%
−7.1%
−22.5%
−7.3%
−21.0%
−4.8%
LA­Refine­5
−41.4%
−8.6%
−41.4%
−8.9%
−33.8%
−6.8%
LA­Refine­10
−85.9%
−8.5%
−85.7%
−8.9%
−70.32%
−71%
LA­Refine­15
−99.1%
−8.4%
−99.1%
−8.8%
−
−
LA­Refine­20
−99.2%
−8.4%
−99.2%
−8.8%
−
−
LA­Refine­25
−99.2%
−8.4%
−99.2%
−8.8%
−
−
LA­Refine­30
−99.2%
−8.4%
−99.2%
−8.8%
−99.54%
−6.9%
HMC
−
−8.5%
−
−8.9%
−
−6.9%
The results essentially draw the same picture. We see that the relative difference is overall
higher for the values we obtained for MMD and NNL for both the normalized and unnor­
malized version of CIFAR10 as for the ones obtained in the paper, the MMDs for the
Laplace approximation and the refined Laplace approximation from a radial flow of length
30 being the only exceptions. We here again see that the improvement of the NLL is
slightly higher for the normalized version of CIFAR10 than for the unnormalized one. We
cannot draw any conclusion from this as it does not provide sufficient evidence, but it does
seem as if the used post­hoc methods can yield a greater improvement in terms of NLL
for MAP solutions with a worse NLL.
4.2
Variation of Flow Type for Posterior Refinement
After having tested the correctness of the implementation with the same experimental
setup as in [14], we decided to try out different flow types. We here limited ourselves
to radial, planar and rational linear spline flows. The planar and linear rational spline
flows were chosen for their rather low complexity. Experiments were also carried out
with quadratic rational splines, we however decided to leave those results out as they
were essentially almost the same as the ones obtained for the linear rational splines. The
accuracy for these three flow types is shown in Figure 4.1 as a function of flow length,
together with the accuracy for MAP, LA and HMC, which are represented by straight lines
with constant values, as they are independent of flow length. We here see that the post­
hoc methods LA and HMC do not yield an increase in accuracy. The accuracy on the
other hand decreases as a function of the flow length when using linear rational spline
flows, while the radial and planar flows yield a slight increase in accuracy. It is however
important to consider the scale of the y­axis. When doing so, we see that the mentioned
changes are marginal.
Posterior refinement for Bayesian neural networks via normalizing flows
45
==PAGE:54==
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
Length of normalizing flow
0.9480
0.9485
0.9490
0.9495
0.9500
0.9505
ACC.
radial
planar
spline
map
la
hmc
Figure 4.1: Accuracy for MAP and different post­hoc methods. The shown values are the
average with standard error for 10 different weight initializations of our WideResNet model.
The values for MAP, LA and HMC are the same independently of the flow length. The
three types of normalizing flows are run with the Gaussian distribution from the Laplace
approximation as a base distribution and the spline is here a linear rational spline.
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
Length of normalizing flow
0.0050
0.0075
0.0100
0.0125
0.0150
0.0175
0.0200
0.0225
ECE.
radial
planar
spline
map
la
hmc
Figure 4.2: Expected calibration error for MAP and different post­hoc methods.
The
shown values are the average with standard error for 10 different weight initializations
of our WideResNet model. The values for MAP, LA and HMC are the same indepen­
dently of the flow length. The three types of normalizing flows are run with the Gaussian
distribution from the Laplace approximation as a base distribution and the spline is here
a linear rational spline.
46
Posterior refinement for Bayesian neural networks via normalizing flows
==PAGE:55==
Looking at the expected calibration error now in Figure 4.2, we see that all post­hoc meth­
ods reduce the ECE of MAP. The ECE from the radial flows slowly converges to the one of
HMC as the length of the flow increases, while the one for the planar flows is consistently
lower than that of HMC. It appears as if the length of the planar flow would not have an
impact on the expected calibration error and that a flow of length 1 more or less suffices to
obtain the optimal ECE achievable with this type of flow. The spline flow seems to again
give more unstable results which other than from the profile of its curve, can be seen from
the standard error on its point comparatively to that of the other flows. In order to see
how big of an improvement of the expected calibration MAP and the post­hoc methods
yielded, we computed a baseline for ECE. The baseline was computed using a Dirich­
let distribution with one concentration parameter of value 1 per class. As many samples
were drawn as there is elements in the test set, to have one probability vector per data
point. The procedure was repeated 10 times leading to an ECE of 0.1947 ± 0.0009. All
the obtained ECEs in Figure 4.2 are thus much lower than this baseline, confirming the
increase in performance brought by the model.
Turning our attention to the results for maximum­mean discrepancy now depicted in Figure
4.3, it is again clear that the post­hoc methods reduce the maximum­mean discrepancy
to the HMC samples.
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
Length of normalizing flow
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
MMD.
radial
planar
spline
map
la
hmc
Figure 4.3: Maximum­mean discrepancy for MAP and different post­hoc methods. The
shown values are the average with standard error for 10 different weight initializations of
our WideResNet model. The values for MAP, LA and HMC are the same independently of
the flow length. The three types of normalizing flows are run with the Gaussian distribution
from the Laplace approximation as a base distribution and the spline is here a linear
rational spline. ”hmc” here represents the mean and standard error of the MMDs between
the 10 sets of HMC samples (for each MAP solution).
We must specify here that the values for MAP were computed by replicating each MAP
solution as many times as there was HMC samples, as for the HMC line on the plot,
it represents the mean and standard error of the MMDs between the 10 sets of HMC
Posterior refinement for Bayesian neural networks via normalizing flows
47
==PAGE:56==
samples (for each MAP solution, i.e. 45 possible combinations). Planar flows do not
appear to reduce the MMD for the LA in other words, its samples have the same MMD to
the HMC samples as the ones of its base distribution. The Radial flows perform very well
with a steady reduction of the MMD with increasing flow length, reaching a value of almost
0 from 15 flows and onwards, which is also confirmed by the results in Table 4.2. The linear
rational spline flows again exhibit inconsistent behaviors as a function of flow length, with
high standard errors compared to its counterparts. The mean for the MMD across HMC
samples shows that we are most likely getting different posteriors for each MAP solution.
This makes intuitive sense, since we are only fitting a posterior distribution on the last
layer of the neural network, the values of weights of that layer thus depend on the values
of the weights of the preceding layers of the MAP solution, which are likely different for
every MAP solution. Fitting a posterior distribution on the weights of the entire network,
we would certainly obtain a much lower MMD for the corresponding HMC samples.
Moving on to the negative log­likelihood, a plot of it for MAP and the post­hoc methods
is visible in Figure 4.4. The figure shows that all post­hoc methods again lead to an
improvement of the NLL. The radial flows again perform very well, they reduce the NLL
with one single flow, making it match the one for HMC for flow lengths of 5 and more.
The planar flows here perform even better, with a flow of length 1 already being sufficient
to almost exactly match the NLL for HMC and flows of a higher length not yielding any
significant changes. Lastly the NLL of the linear rational spline flows rises as a function
of flow length.
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
Length of normalizing flow
0.1575
0.1600
0.1625
0.1650
0.1675
0.1700
0.1725
0.1750
NLL.
radial
planar
spline
map
la
hmc
Figure 4.4: Negative log­likelihood for MAP and different post­hoc methods. The shown
values are the average with standard error for 10 different weight initializations of our
WideResNet model. The values for MAP, LA and HMC are the same independently of the
flow length. The three types of normalizing flows are run with the Gaussian distribution
from the Laplace approximation as a base distribution and the spline is here a linear
rational spline.
Summing up, we see that radial flows perform better overall, if we however disregard the
MMD, the planar flows surpass its performance on the remaining metrics, a flow length of
48
Posterior refinement for Bayesian neural networks via normalizing flows
==PAGE:57==
1 being sufficient to reach optimal performance.
4.3
SWAG and SWAG­diag with Posterior Refinement
After trying to change the employed flow type, we tried to change the base distribution of
our normalizing flows. Inline with this, we tried to fit a Gaussian distribution to the weights
of the last layer of our neural network using Stochastic Weight Averaging ­ Gaussian,
SWAG and Stochastic Weight Averaging ­ Gaussian diagonal (SWAG­diag) instead of
the until yet used Laplace approximation. To do so we first did some hyper­parameter
tuning on SWAG, where we limited ourselves to the number of epochs, learning rate, an
maximum number of columns K in the deviation matrix. Subsequent to a few random
tries with varying hyper­parameter magnitudes and combinations, we limited ourselves to
the following sets for each parameter,
• number of epochs
: {50, 100, 250, 500, 750, 1000},
• learning rate
: {1e­2, 1e­3, 1e­4},
• K
: {25, 50, 100, 200, 400, 600},
for which we ran a grid search. Each time training on the non­augmented training set
and testing on the validation set, drawing 600 weights samples for the last layer from the
fitted Gaussian distribution and averaging the predictions from the sets of weight values.
(Note that we only tested combinations of the number of epochs and K for which K
was smaller than the number of epochs). We chose to set the selection criteria to be
the NLL (i.e. chose the combination of hyper­parameter values yielding the lowest NLL).
Finding a way to present the results was slightly challenging given that we need to show
4­dimensions, namely the 3 hyper­parameters and the performance metric. We hence
came up with a plot of the number of epochs against the performance metric where the
color of the line indicates the value of K, while its type indicates the learning rate used.
The optimal combination was marked with a blue star.
200
400
600
800
1000
number of epochs
0.20
0.25
0.30
0.35
0.40
0.45
0.50
0.55
0.60
NLL.
K=25, lr=0.01
K=25, lr=0.001
K=25, lr=0.0001
K=50, lr=0.01
K=50, lr=0.001
K=50, lr=0.0001
K=100, lr=0.01
K=100, lr=0.001
K=100, lr=0.0001
K=200, lr=0.01
K=200, lr=0.001
K=200, lr=0.0001
K=400, lr=0.01
K=400, lr=0.001
K=400, lr=0.0001
K=600, lr=0.01
K=600, lr=0.001
K=600, lr=0.0001
optimum
Figure 4.5: NLL for the predictions from 600 last­layer weight samples from a Gaussian
distribution fitted running SWAG for various hyper­parameter values. The blue star indi­
cates the point with the lowest NLL.
Posterior refinement for Bayesian neural networks via normalizing flows
49
==PAGE:58==
This is illustrated in Figure 4.5 for the NLL. Similar plots for the other performance metrics
can be found in Appendix B. Running SGD for less than 200 epochs appears to yield
the best results in general, independently of the used learning rate. It also seems as if
lower values of K yield better results overall, which makes some sense as high values
of K can only be used for a high number of epochs and high epoch numbers seem to
yield worse performance. We found the optimal set of hyper­parameters to be 50 epochs
with a learning rate of 1e−4 and K = 50, and therefore moved on with using those val­
ues for SWAG for fitting a Gaussian distribution on the last­layer weights to do posterior
refinement on. (One could argue that a lower number of epochs should have been used
for our grid search since the optimal number of epochs obtained is also the lowest one
from its set. We therefore tried to use SWAG as above with 25 epochs, K = 25 and all
the previously selected learning rates, the results are shown in Table B.1 in Appendix B
and validate the found optimal point). We here also decided to do the refinement with the
two best performing types of flows used in the previous section, to see if a change in the
base distribution would make a difference. The results are shown in Figure 4.6 for the
accuracy.
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
Length of normalizing flow
0.936
0.938
0.940
0.942
0.944
0.946
0.948
0.950
ACC.
radial
planar
swag
map
la
hmc
Figure 4.6: Accuracy for MAP and different post­hoc methods. The shown values are
the average with standard error for 10 different weight initializations of our WideResNet
model. The values for MAP, LA, HMC and SWAG are the same independently of the flow
length. The three types of normalizing flows are run with the Gaussian distribution from
SWAG as a base distribution and the spline is here a linear rational spline.
We see that the accuracy obtained by SWAG is relatively much lower than the ones ob­
tained by all the other methods. The radial and planar flow with the SWAG Gaussian
as a base distribution however almost allow to get the same accuracy as MAP, LA and
HMC. With the planar flow almost obtaining its best performance with a flow length of 1
and providing similar accuracies faster than the radial flows. Looking at the ECE now
in Figure 4.7, indicates that SWAG again performs worse than its counterparts on this
metric. The radial flow gradualy lowers the ECE as a function of its length, without ever
reaching the ECE of HMC as it was the case when using the Gaussian distribution from
the Laplace approximation as a base distribution. As for the planar flows, one single flow
already yields great improvements, with a flow length of 5 already allowing to reach the
ECE of HMC.
50
Posterior refinement for Bayesian neural networks via normalizing flows
==PAGE:59==
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
Length of normalizing flow
0.005
0.010
0.015
0.020
0.025
0.030
ECE.
radial
planar
swag
map
la
hmc
Figure 4.7: Expected calibration error for MAP and different post­hoc methods.
The
shown values are the average with standard error for 10 different weight initializations
of our WideResNet model. The values for MAP, LA; HMC and SWAG are the same in­
dependently of the flow length. The three types of normalizing flows are run with the
Gaussian distribution from SWAG as a base distribution and the spline is here a linear
rational spline.
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
Length of normalizing flow
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
MMD.
radial
planar
swag
map
la
hmc
Figure 4.8: Maximum­mean discrepancy for MAP and different post­hoc methods. The
shown values are the average with standard error for 10 different weight initializations of
our WideResNet model. The values for MAP, LA, HMC and SWAG are the same indepen­
dently of the flow length. The three types of normalizing flows are run with the Gaussian
distribution from the SWAG as a base distribution and the spline is here a linear rational
spline. ”hmc” here represents the mean and standard error of the MMDs between the 10
sets of HMC samples (for each MAP solution).
Figure 4.8 provides the results for the mean­maximum discrepancy.
One more time
SWAG does worse than the other post­hoc models and than MAP itself having an MMD
Posterior refinement for Bayesian neural networks via normalizing flows
51
==PAGE:60==
value of around double of that of MAP (which it is supposed to improve). The radial flows
do reduce the MMD considerably, but converge to a higher MMD value than when using
Laplace approximation as a baseline and need a higher flow length to reach convergence
(which could make sense given that we start from an MMD that is more of the double of
what it was before). Unlike when having the Laplace approximation as a base distribu­
tion as in Figure 4.3, we here see that the planar flows give a reduction in MMD from the
one obtained for SWAG. It is also interesting to note that despite not getting to a lower
MMD than LA in Figure 4.3, the planar flows here actually manage to even do better than
the LA. Lastly turning our attention to the negative log­likelihood in Figure 4.9, it is clear
that SWAG also performs the worst. The radial flow steadily makes the NLL converge
towards that of HMC, getting reasonably close to it for a flow length of around 20, while
planar flows achieve the same already from a flow length of 1.
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
Length of normalizing flow
0.16
0.18
0.20
0.22
0.24
NLL.
radial
planar
swag
map
la
hmc
Figure 4.9: Negative log­likelihood for MAP and different post­hoc methods. The shown
values are the average with standard error for 10 different weight initializations of our
WideResNet model. The values for MAP, LA; HMC and SWAG are the same indepen­
dently of the flow length. The three types of normalizing flows are run with the Gaussian
distribution from SWAG as a base distribution and the spline is here a linear rational spline.
Repeating the experiment with SWAG diagonal (SWAG­diag) where the parameters of
the SWAG diagonal were from the same runs as their full­SWAG counterpart, we see in
Figure 4.10 that the accuracy is still worse than for the other methods and MAP, as can
also be seen in Figure 4.11, Figure 4.12 and Figure 4.13 for the ECE, MMD and NLL
respectively. The flow performances and behaviors remain roughly the same for all four
performance metrics.
52
Posterior refinement for Bayesian neural networks via normalizing flows
==PAGE:61==
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
Length of normalizing flow
0.9470
0.9475
0.9480
0.9485
0.9490
0.9495
0.9500
0.9505
ACC.
radial
planar
swag-diag
map
la
hmc
Figure 4.10: Accuracy log­likelihood for MAP and different post­hoc methods. The shown
values are the average with standard error for 10 different weight initializations of our
WideResNet model. The values for MAP, LA; HMC and SWAG­diag are the same in­
dependently of the flow length. The three types of normalizing flows are run with the
Gaussian distribution from SWAG­diag as a base distribution and the spline is here a
linear rational spline.
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
Length of normalizing flow
0.005
0.010
0.015
0.020
0.025
ECE.
radial
planar
swag-diag
map
la
hmc
Figure 4.11: Expected calibration error for MAP and different post­hoc methods. The
shown values are the average with standard error for 10 different weight initializations of
our WideResNet model. The values for MAP, LA; HMC and SWAG­diag are the same
independently of the flow length. The three types of normalizing flows are run with the
Gaussian distribution from SWAG­diag as a base distribution and the spline is here a
linear rational spline.
Posterior refinement for Bayesian neural networks via normalizing flows
53
==PAGE:62==
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
Length of normalizing flow
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
MMD.
radial
planar
swag-diag
map
la
hmc
Figure 4.12: Maximum­mean discrepancy for MAP and different post­hoc methods. The
shown values are the average with standard error for 10 different weight initializations of
our WideResNet model. The values for MAP, LA, HMC and SWAG­diag are the same
independently of the flow length. The three types of normalizing flows are run with the
Gaussian distribution from the SWAG­diag as a base distribution and the spline is here a
linear rational spline. ”hmc” here represents the mean and standard error of the MMDs
between the 10 sets of HMC samples (for each MAP solution).
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
Length of normalizing flow
0.16
0.18
0.20
0.22
0.24
NLL.
radial
planar
swag-diag
map
la
hmc
Figure 4.13: Negative log­likelihood for MAP and different post­hoc methods. The shown
values are the average with standard error for 10 different weight initializations of our
WideResNet model. The values for MAP, LA; HMC and SWAG­diag are the same in­
dependently of the flow length. The three types of normalizing flows are run with the
Gaussian distribution from SWAG­diag as a base distribution and the spline is here a
linear rational spline.
We spent a substantial amount of time on a positive definiteness of the covariance matrix
54
Posterior refinement for Bayesian neural networks via normalizing flows
==PAGE:63==
error thrown by the MultivariateNormal class from Pyro when using the covariance
matrix from SWAG. The use of it was needed to be able to perform the posterior refinement
in Pyro. The problem was not occurring when using the PyTorch implementation of the
same class without the import of Pyro, a simple import of it without using it, would however
also make the PyTorch implementation throw the same error. We tested our covariance
matrix manually and found out that it was indeed positive definite as intended. After doing
some debugging, we figured out that the problem was due to the difference in the way
positive definiteness was verified in the two packages. The PyTorch function for checking
positive definiteness of matrices was doing the verification by checking the feasibility of the
cholesky factorization on the matrix, while the corresponding Pyro function would check if
all the eigenvalues of the matrix were positive. The reason why the simple import of Pyro
would make the positive definiteness fail for PyTorch was that it would come with some
kind of patch for PyTorch, replacing some of the PyTorch functions on a single import.
We reported this to the Pyro development team and fixed the issue in their development
branch by making a pull request which can be seen in Appendix C.
4.4
Experimentation with a diagonal Gaussian base
distribution centered at MAP
From the results obtained with LA, SWAG, and SWAG­diag, it seemed as if the Gaussian
distribution centered at MAP (LA) performs best. As we saw in section 2.7 normalizing
flows can in theory approximate any density [40, 43, 44]. To approximate our posterior
density over the weights of the neural network, we can therefore simply use normalizing
flows with a standard Gaussian distribution as a base distribution, as was done by Izmailov
et al. [15]. Kristiadi et al. however proved that using an approximate posterior as a base
distribution, was more cost effective and needed less complex flows to approximate the
true posterior. Furthermore, we know from subsection 2.7.4 about the types of flows, that
radial flows perform expansion and contraction around a reference point z0, which is a
trainable parameter and that planar flows do the same with respect to a hyperplane. In
this regard it does make intuitive sense for the distribution to already more or less be cen­
tered at the same location as the true posterior distribution, if we want faster convergence
and with shorter flows. Following this idea, we decided to look into how well a simple
diagonal Gaussian distribution centered at MAP would perform both before and after flow
refinement. To do so we hence needed to find an estimate for the variance of each of
our weights. When training our network, we use a weight decay of 5e−4 which keeps the
weights small by shrinking the values of the weights towards 0 [59]. Furthermore, since
we only look at the posterior over the last­layer weights, one could expect the points of
high density to not deviate much from the MAP solution since all the previous weights
are ”frozen” giving less options for last­layer weight combinations yielding good perfor­
mance. Under the crude assumption that these two things more or less limit the value of
the weights to a small range, we define the standard deviation of all the weights for our
Gaussian to be the standard deviation across the weight values of our MAP solution. I.e.
we define our base distribution as follows,
p0(θ) = N (θMAP, I var(θMAP)) ,
(4.1)
where var(θMAP) represents the variance across the elements in θMAP. For simplicity,
we will now refer to this ”post­hoc method” as WSTATS. We tested the performance of
WSTATS through Bayesian model averaging from weight samples drawn from its Gaus­
sian distribution, as well as when using it as a base distribution for radial and planar flows.
Posterior refinement for Bayesian neural networks via normalizing flows
55
==PAGE:64==
Figure 4.14 shows the accuracy for these three variants together with those of MAP, LA
and HMC.
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
Length of normalizing flow
0.9490
0.9492
0.9494
0.9496
0.9498
0.9500
0.9502
ACC.
radial
planar
wstats
map
la
hmc
Figure 4.14: Accuracy for MAP and different post­hoc methods. The shown values are
the average with standard error for 10 different weight initializations of our WideResNet
model. The values for MAP, LA; HMC and WSTATS are the same independently of the
flow length. The three types of normalizing flows are run with the Gaussian distribution
from WSTATS as a base distribution and the spline is here a linear rational spline.
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
Length of normalizing flow
0.0050
0.0075
0.0100
0.0125
0.0150
0.0175
0.0200
0.0225
ECE.
radial
planar
wstats
map
la
hmc
Figure 4.15: Expected calibration error for MAP and different post­hoc methods. The
shown values are the average with standard error for 10 different weight initializations
of our WideResNet model. The values for MAP, LA; HMC and WSTATS are the same
independently of the flow length. The three types of normalizing flows are run with the
Gaussian distribution from WSTATS as a base distribution and the spline is here a linear
rational spline.
56
Posterior refinement for Bayesian neural networks via normalizing flows
==PAGE:65==
Its performance in terms of accuracy is the same as those of the other methods, with its
refinement with radial and planar flows only giving a neglectable change in accuracy. For
the expected calibration error, we see in Figure 4.15, that WSTAT has the same perfor­
mance as LA. Just like when using LA as a base distribution (see Figure 4.2), planar flows
still do better than HMC on that front for a flow length of 1 and more, it again does not
require a flow length of more than 1 to obtain optimal performance. A notable difference
here however, is that the radial flows now also do better than HMC from a flow length of 1,
unlike when using LA as a base distribution, where the radial flows were slowly converg­
ing towards the value of HMC as a function of flow length. Looking at maximum­mean
discrepancy in Figure 4.16 shows even more interesting results.
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
Length of normalizing flow
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
MMD.
radial
planar
wstats
map
la
hmc
Figure 4.16: Maximum­mean discrepancy for MAP and different post­hoc methods. The
shown values are the average with standard error for 10 different weight initializations
of our WideResNet model. The values for MAP, LA, HMC and WSTATS are the same
independently of the flow length. The three types of normalizing flows are run with the
Gaussian distribution from the WSTATS as a base distribution and the spline is here a
linear rational spline. ”hmc” here represents the mean and standard error of the MMDs
between the 10 sets of HMC samples (for each MAP solution).
WSTATS here achieves a MMD of 0.0362 ± 0.0001, which is more than 9 times lower than
LA which achieves a MMD of 0.3424 ± 0.0007 (cf Table 4.2), while the radial flows and
planar flows reach values of around 0.0110 ± 0.0001 and 0.0066 ± 0.0001 respectively with
a flow length of 1. For the standard deviation of the Gaussians from WSTATS for each
of the 10 model initializations, we get 0.1624 ± 0.0001, meaning that our variance on the
last layer weights seems to be more or less constant independently of our initial weight
initializations prior to training. A plausible reason for the high performance of WSTATS as
a standalone could be that most of the Gaussian distribution that we obtain with WSTATS
is probably contained in the true posterior in a region of high density as it is centered at the
maximum a posteriori and likely has a low variance. In other words many of the samples
from WSTATS would be in high density regions of the true posterior distribution.
This theory could also be validated by the good performance of WSTATS for NLL, which is
Posterior refinement for Bayesian neural networks via normalizing flows
57
==PAGE:66==
shown in Figure 4.17. WSTATS here once again performs better than LA, with radial and
planar flows reaching optimal performance for a flow length of 1 and performing slightly
better than HMC. Note however that planar flows and HMC remain within each others’
standard errors, we can thus not conclude with certainty that planar flows yield a lower
NLL.
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
Length of normalizing flow
0.1550
0.1575
0.1600
0.1625
0.1650
0.1675
0.1700
0.1725
0.1750
NLL.
radial
planar
wstats
map
la
hmc
Figure 4.17: Negative log­likelihood for MAP and different post­hoc methods. The shown
values are the average with standard error for 10 different weight initializations of our
WideResNet model. The values for MAP, LA; HMC and wstats are the same indepen­
dently of the flow length. The three types of normalizing flows are run with the Gaussian
distribution from wstats as a base distribution and the spline is here a linear rational spline.
4.5
Effect of the Training Set Size on Posterior Refinement
We next decided to look into the feasibility of posterior refinement as a function of the
amount of data available for training and how its performance would evolve accordingly.
To do so, we varied the size of our CIFAR10 training set. We chose to look at the per­
formances in terms of our current metrics, for 10%, 25%, 50% and 100% of the training
data. For each taken percentage of the training set, we ensured perfect class balance,
for the obtained performances to be comparable, given that the full dataset is perfectly
balanced as we saw in the Datasets subsection (subsection 3.1). We then trained 10
WideResNet­16­4 models with different weight initializations for each of these subsets of
the CIFAR10 dataset, using the exact same data preprocessing and training parameters
as we did for the full training set and computed the accuracy, expected calibration error,
maximum­mean discrepancy and negative log­likelihood of the obtained MAP solutions
as well as the post­hoc methods Hamiltonian Monte Carlo, Laplace approximation, and all
the three Laplace approximation based flow types we looked into so far, i.e. radial, planar
and linear rational spline for the same flow length variations. A plot of the performances
of these methods as a function of flow length for our four metrics can be seen in Appendix
D for the 10%, 25% and 50% of the CIFAR10 training set, while we refer to section 4.2 in
this chapter for the 100% i.e. the full training set. In the following we decided to only show
results for MAP, LA, HMC and radial and planar flows with flow lengths of 1 and 30. The
first three because we need to compare them with our flow performances and the flows
58
Posterior refinement for Bayesian neural networks via normalizing flows
==PAGE:67==
because those appeared to be the most interesting ones to look at from our prior work.
The decision allowing for clearer plots. The accuracy of the methods as a function of the
percentage of the full­training data is depicted in Figure 4.18. We see that the accuracies
of our methods get closer the more data they are trained on. It is hardly visible on this
figure, but if we look at Figure D.9 in Appendix D we see that the planar flows of length 1
and 30, as well as the radial flow of length 30 lift the accuracy of the Laplace approxima­
tion (which is very similar to MAP here) to that of HMC, which is slightly higher than the
two others. This is still the case for 25% and 50% of the training set (cf. Figure D.5 and
Figure D.1 in Appendix D), it is just less visible in Figure 4.18 because the accuracies of
MAP and LA get closer to that of HMC the relative and absolute gains are thus lower.
20
40
60
80
100
Percentage of training data
0.78
0.80
0.82
0.84
0.86
0.88
0.90
0.92
0.94
ACC.
ref_la_nf_radial_1
ref_la_nf_radial_30
ref_la_nf_planar_1
ref_la_nf_planar_30
map
la
hmc
Figure 4.18:
Accuracy of MAP and a range of post­hoc methods as a func­
tion of the percentage of the CIFAR10 training set used.
Labels of the form
ref_<base_distribution>_nf_<flow_type>_<flow_length> correspond to posterior refine­
ments
using
normalizing
flows,
where
the
base
distribution
is
written
in
the
<base_distribution> place holder, the flow type in the <flow_type> place holder and the
flow length in the <flow_length> place holder.
For instance ref_la_nf_radial_1 corre­
sponds to posterior refinement using radial flows with a Laplace approximation as base
distribution and a flow length of 1.
Casting an eye on Figure 4.19, we again notice that the gap between the ECE of MAP
and LA on one hand and HMC on the other hand, seems to decrease exponentially as we
get to train on more data. We see that the planar flows of lengths 1 and 30 reach the ECE
values of HMC independently of the percentage of the training set used, i.e. one single
planar flow of length 1 suffices to close the ECE performance gap between LA and HMC.
The radial flow of length 1 does not increase the performance by much while the radial
flow of length 30 does, it however needs to be trained with at least 50% of the training
data to perform as good as HMC.
Posterior refinement for Bayesian neural networks via normalizing flows
59
==PAGE:68==
20
40
60
80
100
Percentage of training data
0.00
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
0.10
0.12
ECE.
ref_la_nf_radial_1
ref_la_nf_radial_30
ref_la_nf_planar_1
ref_la_nf_planar_30
map
la
hmc
Figure 4.19:
Expected calibration error of MAP and a range of post­hoc meth­
ods as a function of the percentage of the CIFAR10 training set used.
Labels of
the form ref_<base_distribution>_nf_<flow_type>_<flow_length> correspond to poste­
rior refinements using normalizing flows, where the base distribution is written in the
<base_distribution> place holder, the flow type in the <flow_type> place holder and the
flow length in the <flow_length> place holder.
For instance ref_la_nf_radial_1 corre­
sponds to posterior refinement using radial flows with a Laplace approximation as base
distribution and a flow length of 1.
Table 4.6: Relative difference in metric value between MAP and post­hoc methods for
different training set sizes of CIFAR10.
Dataset
CIFAR10
%
10
25
50
100
Methods
MMD ↓
NLL ↓
MMD ↓
NLL ↓
MMD ↓
NLL ↓
MMD ↓
NLL ↓
LA
−47.1%
−3.2%
−36.6%
−3.0%
−32.6%
−2.3%
−20.0%
−4.4%
LA­Refine­1
−48.0%
−8.6%
−37.2%
−7.0%
−34.2%
−8.3%
−22.4%
−7.1%
LA­Refine­5
−53.7%
−23.5%
−42.4%
−16.5%
−47.3%
−16.9%
−41.4%
−8.6%
LA­Refine­10
−61.9%
−33.6%
−50.6%
−21.8%
−69.3%
−16.2%
−85.9%
−8.5%
LA­Refine­15
−69.8%
−35.0%
−60.0%
−21.4%
−89.5%
−16.1%
−99.1%
−8.4%
LA­Refine­20
−77.0%
−34.7%
−70.1%
−20.5%
−96.8%
−16.3%
−99.2%
−8.4%
LA­Refine­25
−83.2%
−34.5%
−79.9%
−20.2%
−97.8%
−16.4%
−99.2%
−8.4%
LA­Refine­30
−87.9%
−34.6%
−87.6%
−20.3%
−98.0%
−16.5%
−99.2%
−8.4%
HMC
­
−35.9%
­
−21.8%
­
−16.7%
­
−8.5%
Looking at MMD now in Figure 4.20, we interestingly see that MAP and LA gradually get
closer to the same value as we train on more data. This also means that the benefit of
using LA in terms of lowering the MMD relative to the original MMD from MAP is higher
when we have less training data. This can also be verified in Table 4.6 which shows the
relative performance difference with MAP in terms of MMD and NLL for 10%, 25%, 50%
60
Posterior refinement for Bayesian neural networks via normalizing flows
==PAGE:69==
and 100% of the training data of CIFAR10.
20
40
60
80
100
Percentage of training data
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
MMD.
ref_la_nf_radial_1
ref_la_nf_radial_30
ref_la_nf_planar_1
ref_la_nf_planar_30
map
la
hmc
Figure 4.20:
Maximum­mean discrepancy of MAP and a range of post­hoc meth­
ods as a function of the percentage of the CIFAR10 training set used.
Labels of
the form ref_<base_distribution>_nf_<flow_type>_<flow_length> correspond to poste­
rior refinements using normalizing flows, where the base distribution is written in the
<base_distribution> place holder, the flow type in the <flow_type> place holder and the
flow length in the <flow_length> place holder.
For instance ref_la_nf_radial_1 corre­
sponds to posterior refinement using radial flows with a Laplace approximation as base
distribution and a flow length of 1. ”hmc” here represents the mean and standard error of
the MMDs between the 10 sets of HMC samples (for each MAP solution).
Table 4.7: Absolute difference in metric value between MAP and post­hoc methods for
different training set sizes of CIFAR10.
Dataset
CIFAR10
%
10
25
50
100
Methods
MMD ↑
NLL ↑
MMD ↑
NLL ↑
MMD ↑
NLL ↑
MMD ↑
NLL ↑
LA
0.2704
0.030
0.1768
0.0132
0.1479
0.0063
0.0854
0.0076
LA­Refine­1
0.2755
0.0802
0.1797
0.0308
0.1550
0.0228
0.0959
0.0122
LA­Refine­5
0.3081
0.2203
0.2051
0.0730
0.2146
0.0446
0.1772
0.0148
LA­Refine­10
0.3552
0.3145
0.2446
0.0962
0.3142
0.0446
0.3674
0.0147
LA­Refine­15
0.4010
0.3279
0.2903
0.0945
0.4058
0.0444
0.4240
0.0146
LA­Refine­20
0.4420
0.3244
0.3390
0.0906
0.4389
0.0449
0.4243
0.0146
LA­Refine­25
0.4776
0.3233
0.3867
0.0893
0.4438
0.0452
0.4243
0.0146
LA­Refine­30
0.5044
0.3237
0.4238
0.0895
0.4445
0.0454
0.4243
0.0146
HMC
­
0.3358
­
0.0960
­
0.0462
­
0.0147
This could potentially mean that the density of the posterior gets more concentrated
Posterior refinement for Bayesian neural networks via normalizing flows
61
==PAGE:70==
around MAP, the more data we train on. The planar flows again match the MMD of the
Laplace approximation, as it was already the case for the full dataset, while the radial flow
of length 30 significantly reduces the MMD of the Laplace approximation, with a perfor­
mance increasing as a function of the amount of the training data used. The later can
be verified for the decrease in MMD relative to MAP in Table 4.6 as well as the absolute
difference in MMD to MAP in Table 4.7.
Lastly, the NLL is shown in Figure 4.21. We again observe the same performance gap
between MAP and LA on one side and HMC, planar flows, and radial flow of length 30 on
the other side, as observed for ACC and ECE, which again gets smaller as we get more
data. Both the absolute and relative difference between the NLL of the flows and that of
MAP is highest for 10% of data, i.e. for the lowest amount of data trained on as can be
seen in Table 4.6 and Table 4.7. Just like for ECE, planar flows reach the NLL values of
HMC independently of the percentage of the training set used, anew we see that a planar
flow of length 1 suffices to do so.
20
40
60
80
100
Percentage of training data
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
NLL.
ref_la_nf_radial_1
ref_la_nf_radial_30
ref_la_nf_planar_1
ref_la_nf_planar_30
map
la
hmc
Figure 4.21:
Negative log­likelihood of MAP and a range of post­hoc methods
as a function of the percentage of the CIFAR10 training set used.
Labels of
the form ref_<base_distribution>_nf_<flow_type>_<flow_length> correspond to poste­
rior refinements using normalizing flows, where the base distribution is written in the
<base_distribution> place holder, the flow type in the <flow_type> place holder and the
flow length in the <flow_length> place holder.
For instance ref_la_nf_radial_1 corre­
sponds to posterior refinement using radial flows with a Laplace approximation as base
distribution and a flow length of 1.
62
Posterior refinement for Bayesian neural networks via normalizing flows
==PAGE:71==
5
Discussion
From our experiment aiming at reproducing the results in Table 3 of Posterior Refine­
ment Improves Sample Efficiency in Bayesian Neural Networks [14], we noted that our
results were overall very much similar to the ones in [14], specifically for NLL where the
difference was minimal. For MMD however, our results for the posterior refinements were
better without being too close to the ones of [14] for all but the radial flow of length 30.
Other than the differences in the weight initialization of the models, this could also maybe
be explained by the fact that we drew 600 samples from our trained flows to both do our
predictions and compute the MMD to the HMC samples. It is not known how many sam­
ples were used by Kristiadi et al. [14], but in case that number is lower, an explanation for
the difference could be that for a higher number of samples, more get drawn from regions
of higher density and hence, outweigh the contribution to the MMD of samples drawn from
regions of lower density due to the averaging of the distances, which can be seen in the
formula for estimating MMD empirically in equation (3.14). The original formula of MMD
is based on expectations, the empirical formula makes use of Monte Carlo to estimate
these expectations, we therefore get more precise estimates the more samples we have.
The difference in the precision of our estimates of the expectations therefore results in a
difference in the precision of the empirical MMD and in turn the difference of our results
for MMD with those of Kristiadi et al [14].
Another interesting thing that we highlighted several times for our experiments, is the fact
that planar flows have a performance generally similar, often almost equal, to that of the
Laplace approximation in terms of MMD to the HMC samples, despite having a NLL and
expected calibration error reaching the same performances as HMC. This could maybe
be explained by the fact that the refined posteriors from planar flows are contained in high
density regions of the true posterior, without covering all regions of relatively high density.
This would indeed result in a good ECE and NLL since all the drawn samples would be
from a high density region of the true posterior, but not in a high MMD to the HMC samples,
since unlike the samples of the refined posterior, those would be drawn from all the regions
of high density, some of which could be located at a high radial distance from the samples
of the refined posterior. As for the Laplace approximation it would be located roughly in the
same position in space as the refined posteriors of the planar flows, explaining its similar
MMD, but cover regions of lower density of the true posterior explaining why it performs
worse in terms of NLL and ECE.
On the same note, when looking at the MMD of MAP and the post­hoc methods as a
function of the amount of training data, we noticed that the MMD of MAP was slowly
decreasing as a function of the amount of data, while that of LA was increasing. The
decrease could be explained by the fact that the true distribution of the posterior might
get narrower when the amount of data trained on increases. This would intuitively make
sense since an increase in the amount of data trained on has a regularizing effect on the
weights of the network, meaning that the range of possible weight value combinations
yielding good results would decrease. Effect that would be furthermore increased by the
fact that we are only looking at the last­layer weights, with all the other weights of the neural
network being frozen. This narrowing could also be backed up by the slight increase of
the LA, as more of its high density region would then lie in regions of lower density of the
true posterior.
Continuing on this idea, the true posterior being narrow is also backed up by the results
Posterior refinement for Bayesian neural networks via normalizing flows
63
==PAGE:72==
obtained for WSTATS. We do know that the variance of WSTATS is very small in all di­
rections and as we saw in Figure 4.16 its MMD to the HMC samples is surprisingly low,
meaning the average radial distance of its samples to the HMC samples is small. This
could also explain the generally high performance of WSTATS for almost all metrics.
Regarding the results obtained for posterior refinement when using SWAG and SWAG­
diag as base distributions, we saw that the plain SWAG and SWAG diagonal performed
worse than MAP for all metrics despite the computational time and power spent on per­
forming grid search over their hyper­parameters, while their refinements with radial and
planar flows didn’t really have as good performances as HMC and if so, mainly for radial
flows of length 30. Considering the time spent on hyper­parameter tunning for SWAG and
the obtained results after refinement, one might as well run HMC instead of SWAG as do­
ing that does by itself take a lot less time than doing grid search for SWAG and yields
much better results. For HMC with NUTS we only need to tune one hyper­parameter
namely the prior precision versus 4 to 5 hyper­parameters for SWAG, which takes a lot
less time.
From the results we obtained using our four posterior approximation methods, LA, SWAG,
SWAG­diag and WSTATS, the choice of the base distribution for the posterior refinement
with normalizing flows appears to be crucial for converging faster, with a low flow length
and obtaining good results overall. This is inline with the findings of Kristiadi et al. [14]
As previously mentioned, radial flows perform better overall, if we however disregard the
MMD to the HMC samples, planar flows are definitely competitive and do better than radial
flows for much lower flow lengths. A planar flow of length 1 seems to practically suffice
to reach optimal or almost optimal performance for ACC, ECE and NLL. If one is only
interested in those metrics for a given application, using planar flows would certainly be
a go to method. Training a planar flow of length 1 for 20 epochs with Adam on the full
CIFAR10 dataset takes us a bit less than a minute, while doing the same for a flow length
of 5 takes under 2 minutes (less than 2.5 minutes for a flow length of 10). Doing Laplace
approximation on the MAP solution with the Laplace-torch package takes around 10
seconds. Bringing us to a total computation time of a little over a minute for a posterior
refinement with a Laplace approximation as a base distribution and a planar flow of length
1. As for a radial flow of length 30 with LA as a base distribution trained under the same
conditions, training takes around 6 minutes. HMC using NUTS takes just about 10 minutes
to run to draw 600 samples with a burn­in phase of 300 samples, prior to doing so we
however need to tune the prior precision of the weights for HMC and the normalizing flows
(since the joint distribution is required for training), which definitely would take longer to do
for HMC as running it takes more time than training the normalizing flows, this gets worse
if only one machine is available for running HMC and runs can’t be made in parallel. This
shows the competitiveness of posterior refinement using Laplace as a base distribution
and radial or planar flows. We also showed that posterior refinement seems to overall yield
a better absolute and relative difference to MAP for smaller CIFAR10 training sets. This
appears as some sign of robustness of the posterior refinement method to the size of the
training dataset, which is interesting to know since the flow itself needs to be trained using
the training data. This could simply be due to the relatively low amount of parameters of
the flows compared to the neural network trained for MAP as can be seen in section 2.7.4.
Posterior refinement with a good posterior approximation could therefore be a great post­
hoc tool to easily increase performance without needing to collect more data.
HMC has been defined as the golden standard for posterior approximation [14], yet we
see that refined posterior approximations obtained with a Laplace approximation as a
64
Posterior refinement for Bayesian neural networks via normalizing flows
==PAGE:73==
base distribution and radial flows of lengths 20 and onwards can perform almost as good
for accuracy, expected calibration error, negative log­likelihood and maximum­mean dis­
crepancy. Some advantages of the later method being that it does not require full­batches
of data and the storage of many copies of the network parameters in the form of samples.
All that needs to be stored is the parameters of the Gaussian distribution from the Laplace
approximation and the trained weights of the normalizing flow, after what we can easily
sample from the obtained approximated posterior as much as desired. Running HMC re­
quires full batches of data [22, 20], which could be inconvenient when dealing with mas­
sive datasets, the introduced posterior refinement method on the other hand can be used
with mini­batching. Furthermore HMC and more so HMC with NUTS is much harder to
understand than posterior refinement as could be seen from the Theoretical Background
chapter, which also makes it harder to implement if not using pre­implemented solutions.
We nevertheless need to take into account that all these results are only achieved on a
single dataset, all the above results and assumptions would thus have to be verified on
other datasets to get more evidence for the above points.
Posterior refinement for Bayesian neural networks via normalizing flows
65
==PAGE:74==
66
Posterior refinement for Bayesian neural networks via normalizing flows
==PAGE:75==
6
Conclusion
We managed to implement posterior refinement with Laplace approximation as a base dis­
tribution as described in Posterior Refinement Improves Sample Efficiency in Bayesian
Neural Networks by Kristiadi et al. [14] and obtain the same results as the ones obtained
in Table 3 of the paper on CIFAR10.
Doing so for more flow lengths for radial flows as the ones used in [14] where no results
on flow lengths between 10 and 30 were reported, we discovered that flow lengths of 15
to 20 suffice for optimal performance and that using higher flow lengths does not yield any
improvements for the used metrics (but improves complexity).
After experiencing with radial, planar, and linear rational spline flows we found out that
radial flows were performing best in terms of maximum­mean discrepancy to the HMC
samples.
We also discovered that if only considering accuracy, expected calibration error and nega­
tive log­likelihood, a planar flow of length 1 should be considered as it gives performances
comparable to those of HMC for those metrics and increasing its flow length won’t improve
performance.
Despite a poorly performing SWAG being worse than MAP, when used as a base distri­
bution for planar flows, these managed to reduce the ECE and NLL to the same values
as HMC with a flow length of just 1. Rational linear splines were on the other hand shown
to not be a good choice for posterior refinement on CIFAR10.
SWAG and SWAG diagonal were found to yield poor performance for approximating the
posterior of the last layer of our WideResNet­16­4 and therefore also to be bad base distri­
butions for posterior refinement, which together with the uses of LA and WSTATS as base
distributions highlighted the importance of a good posterior approximation as poitned out
by Kristiadi et al. [14].
We also made the interesting finding that posterior refinement leads to overall better im­
provements on smaller CIFAR10 training sets when considering both the absolute and rel­
ative improvement of ACC, ECE, NLL and MMD, which seems to indicate that they could
be a great post­hoc tool to easily increase performance without having to collect more
data. This at the same time shows the robustness of the method for smaller datasets.
Planar flows here seem to have the same performance as HMC for ACC, ECE and NLL
independently of the training size of CIFAR10.
Overall, we see that for a good base distribution, the right flow types and flow lengths,
posterior refinement can compete with HMC with NUTS in terms of accuracy, expected
calibration error, negative log­likelihood and maximum­mean discrepancy. Not only does
it compete with HMC in terms of these performance metrics, it also needs less time to
yield a good posterior approximation than HMC, allows for training with mini­batches un­
like HMC which requires full batches of data and does not require to store many copies
of the weights of the neural network from the posterior to have an approximation of the
posterior as HMC does.
Building upon the results of this study, future work could focus on conducting the above
experiments with different neural network models and datasets, to confirm the above find­
ings, hereunder transformer architectures as they are becoming the state of the art archi­
tectures for many deep learning applications. Trying non­Gaussian base distributions for
the normalizing flows and comparing the method for last­layer BNNs to multi­layer BNNs
could also be new directions of great interest.
Posterior refinement for Bayesian neural networks via normalizing flows
67
==PAGE:76==
68
Posterior refinement for Bayesian neural networks via normalizing flows
==PAGE:77==
Bibliography
[1]
Alexander A. Alemi, Ian Fischer, and Joshua V. Dillon. Uncertainty in the Variational
Information Bottleneck. 2018. DOI: 10.48550/ARXIV.1807.00906. URL: https://arxiv.
org/abs/1807.00906.
[2]
Glenn W. Brier. “Verification of Forecasts Expressed in Terms of Probability”. In:
Monthly Weather Review 78.1 (Jan. 1950), p. 1. DOI: 10.1175/1520- 0493(1950)
078<0001:VOFEIT>2.0.CO;2.
[3]
Chuan Guo et al. “On Calibration of Modern Neural Networks”. In: Proceedings of
the 34th International Conference on Machine Learning. Ed. by Doina Precup and
Yee Whye Teh. Vol. 70. Proceedings of Machine Learning Research. PMLR, Aug.
2017, pp. 1321–1330. URL: https://proceedings.mlr.press/v70/guo17a.html.
[4]
Alex Kendall and Yarin Gal. What Uncertainties Do We Need in Bayesian Deep
Learning for Computer Vision? 2017. DOI: 10 . 48550 / ARXIV . 1703 . 04977. URL:
https://arxiv.org/abs/1703.04977.
[5]
Anh Nguyen, Jason Yosinski, and Jeff Clune. Deep Neural Networks are Easily
Fooled: High Confidence Predictions for Unrecognizable Images. 2014. DOI: 10.
48550/ARXIV.1412.1897. URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/1412.1897.
[6]
Matthias Hein, Maksym Andriushchenko, and Julian Bitterwolf. Why ReLU networks
yield high­confidence predictions far away from the training data and how to mitigate
the problem. 2018. DOI: 10.48550/ARXIV.1812.05720. URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/
1812.05720.
[7]
Charles Blundell et al. Weight Uncertainty in Neural Networks. 2015. DOI: 10.48550/
ARXIV.1505.05424. URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/1505.05424.
[8]
Tianqi Chen, Emily B. Fox, and Carlos Guestrin. Stochastic Gradient Hamiltonian
Monte Carlo. 2014. DOI: 10.48550/ARXIV.1402.4102. URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/
1402.4102.
[9]
Diederik P. Kingma, Tim Salimans, and Max Welling. Variational Dropout and the
Local Reparameterization Trick. 2015. DOI: 10.48550/ARXIV.1506.02557. URL:
https://arxiv.org/abs/1506.02557.
[10]
Moloud Abdar et al. “A review of uncertainty quantification in deep learning: Tech­
niques, applications and challenges”. In: Information Fusion 76 (Dec. 2021), pp. 243–
297. DOI: 10.1016/j.inffus.2021.05.008. URL: https://doi.org/10.1016%5C%2Fj.
inffus.2021.05.008.
[11]
Andrew Gordon Wilson. The Case for Bayesian Deep Learning. 2020. DOI: 10.
48550/ARXIV.2001.10995. URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2001.10995.
[12]
D.J.C. MacKay, J.J. Hopfield, and California Institute of Technology. Division of Bi­
ology. Bayesian Methods for Adaptive Models. CIT theses. California Institute of
Technology, 1992. URL: https://books.google.dk/books?id=-8iHNQAACAAJ.
[13]
Erik Daxberger et al. “Laplace Redux ­ Effortless Bayesian Deep Learning”. In:
CoRR abs/2106.14806 (2021). arXiv: 2106.14806. URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/
2106.14806.
[14]
Agustinus Kristiadi, Runa Eschenhagen, and Philipp Hennig. Posterior Refinement
Improves Sample Efficiency in Bayesian Neural Networks. 2022. DOI: 10.48550/
ARXIV.2205.10041. URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2205.10041.
[15]
Pavel Izmailov et al. Subspace Inference for Bayesian Deep Learning. 2019. DOI:
10.48550/ARXIV.1907.07504. URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/1907.07504.
Posterior refinement for Bayesian neural networks via normalizing flows
69
==PAGE:78==
[16]
Mrinank Sharma et al. Do Bayesian Neural Networks Need To Be Fully Stochastic?
2022. DOI: 10.48550/ARXIV.2211.06291. URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2211.06291.
[17]
Christopher M. Bishop. Pattern Recognition and Machine Learning (Information Sci­
ence and Statistics). Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer­Verlag, 2006. ISBN: 0387310738.
[18]
A. Papoulis and S.U. Pillai. Probability, Random Variables, and Stochastic Pro­
cesses. McGraw­Hill series in electrical engineering: Communications and signal
processing. Tata McGraw­Hill, 2002. ISBN: 9780070486584. URL: https://books.
google.dk/books?id=g6eUoWOlcQMC.
[19]
Maurice J. Dupré and Frank J. Tipler. “New axioms for rigorous Bayesian probabil­
ity”. In: Bayesian Analysis 4.3 (2009), pp. 599–606. DOI: 10.1214/09-BA422. URL:
https://doi.org/10.1214/09-BA422.
[20]
Wesley Maddox et al. A Simple Baseline for Bayesian Uncertainty in Deep Learning.
2019. DOI: 10.48550/ARXIV.1902.02476. URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/1902.02476.
[21]
David M. Blei, Alp Kucukelbir, and Jon D. McAuliffe. “Variational Inference: A Review
for Statisticians”. In: Journal of the American Statistical Association 112.518 (Apr.
2017), pp. 859–877. DOI: 10.1080/01621459.2017.1285773. URL: https://doi.org/
10.1080%5C%2F01621459.2017.1285773.
[22]
Pavel Izmailov et al. “What Are Bayesian Neural Network Posteriors Really Like?”
In: CoRR abs/2104.14421 (2021). arXiv: 2104.14421. URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/
2104.14421.
[23]
Michael Riis Andersen. “Bayesian Machine learning”. In: Bayesian classification and
Laplace approximations. Technical University of Denmark, 2020.
[24]
Pavel Izmailov et al. Averaging Weights Leads to Wider Optima and Better Gener­
alization. 2018. DOI: 10.48550/ARXIV.1803.05407. URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/1803.
05407.
[25]
Sergios Theodoridis. “Chapter 14 ­ Monte Carlo Methods”. In: Machine Learning
(Second Edition). Ed. by Sergios Theodoridis. Second Edition. Academic Press,
2020, pp. 731–769. ISBN: 978­0­12­818803­3. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-
0-12-818803-3.00026-X. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
B978012818803300026X.
[26]
Nicholas Metropolis et al. “Equation of State Calculations by Fast Computing Ma­
chines”. In: The Journal of Chemical Physics 21.6 (1953), pp. 1087–1092. DOI:
10 . 1063 / 1 . 1699114. eprint: https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1063 / 1 . 1699114. URL: https :
//doi.org/10.1063/1.1699114.
[27]
W. K. Hastings. “Monte Carlo Sampling Methods Using Markov Chains and Their
Applications”. In: Biometrika 57.1 (1970), pp. 97–109. ISSN: 00063444. URL: http:
//www.jstor.org/stable/2334940 (visited on 01/13/2023).
[28]
David A. Levin and Yuval Peres. Markov Chains and Mixing Times. second edition.
2017. ISBN: 978­1­4704­2962­1.
[29]
Michael Betancourt. A Conceptual Introduction to Hamiltonian Monte Carlo. 2017.
DOI: 10.48550/ARXIV.1701.02434. URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/1701.02434.
[30]
L. Boltzmann. Vorlesungen über Gastheorie: Th. Theorie van der Waals’; Gase mit
zusammengesetzten Molekülen; Gasdissociation; Schlussbemerkungen. Vorlesun­
gen über Gastheorie. J. A. Barth, 1898. URL: https://books.google.dk/books?id=
99IEAAAAYAAJ.
[31]
Ernst Hairer, Christian Lubich, and Gerhard Wanner. Geometric numerical integra­
tion. Second. Vol. 31. Springer Series in Computational Mathematics. Structure­
preserving algorithms for ordinary differential equations. Springer­Verlag, Berlin,
2006, pp. xviii+644. ISBN: 978­3­642­05157­9.
70
Posterior refinement for Bayesian neural networks via normalizing flows
==PAGE:79==
[32]
Simon Duane et al. “Hybrid Monte Carlo”. In: Physics Letters B 195.2 (Sept. 1987),
pp. 216–222. DOI: 10.1016/0370-2693(87)91197-X.
[33]
Matthew D. Hoffman and Andrew Gelman. The No­U­Turn Sampler: Adaptively Set­
ting Path Lengths in Hamiltonian Monte Carlo. 2011. DOI: 10.48550/ARXIV.1111.
4246. URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/1111.4246.
[34]
Radford M. Neal. “Slice sampling”. In: The Annals of Statistics 31.3 (2003), pp. 705–
767. DOI: 10.1214/aos/1056562461. URL: https://doi.org/10.1214/aos/1056562461.
[35]
C Andrieu and J Thoms. “A tutorial on adaptive MCMC”. English. In: Statistics and
Computing 18, issue 4 (Dec. 2008). Publisher: Springer Netherlands, pp. 343–373.
ISSN: 0960­3174. DOI: 10.1007/s11222-008-9110-y.
[36]
Yurii Nesterov. “Primal­dual subgradient methods for convex problems”. In: Mathe­
matical Programming 120 (2005), pp. 221–259.
[37]
Martin J. Wainwright and Michael I. Jordan. “Graphical Models, Exponential Fami­
lies, and Variational Inference”. In: Foundations and Trends® in Machine Learning
1.1–2 (2008), pp. 1–305. ISSN: 1935­8237. DOI: 10.1561/2200000001. URL: http:
//dx.doi.org/10.1561/2200000001.
[38]
S. Kullback and R. A. Leibler. “On Information and Sufficiency”. In: The Annals of
Mathematical Statistics 22.1 (1951), pp. 79–86. DOI: 10.1214/aoms/1177729694.
URL: https://doi.org/10.1214/aoms/1177729694.
[39]
Stephan Günnemann. “Deep Generative Models ­ Normalizing flows”. In: Machine
Learning for Graphs and Sequential Data. Technical University of Munich, 2022.
[40]
George Papamakarios et al. “Normalizing Flows for Probabilistic Modeling and In­
ference”. In: (2019). DOI: 10.48550/ARXIV.1912.02762. URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/
1912.02762.
[41]
Ivan Kobyzev, Simon J.D. Prince, and Marcus A. Brubaker. “Normalizing Flows:
An Introduction and Review of Current Methods”. In: IEEE Transactions on Pattern
Analysis and Machine Intelligence 43.11 (Nov. 2021), pp. 3964–3979. DOI: 10.1109/
tpami.2020.2992934. URL: https://doi.org/10.1109%5C%2Ftpami.2020.2992934.
[42]
Lilian Weng. “Flow­based Deep Generative Models”. In: lilianweng.github.io (2018).
URL: https://lilianweng.github.io/posts/2018- 10- 13- flow- models/. (accessed:
27.01.2023).
[43]
C. Villani. Topics in Optimal Transportation. Graduate studies in mathematics. Amer­
ican Mathematical Society, 2003. ISBN: 9780821833124. URL: https : / / books .
google.dk/books?id=idyFAwAAQBAJ.
[44]
Vladimir I. Bogachev, Alexander V. Kolesnikov, and Kirill Medvedev. “Triangular
transformations of measures”. In: Sbornik Mathematics 196 (2005), pp. 309–335.
[45]
Danilo Jimenez Rezende and Shakir Mohamed. Variational Inference with Normal­
izing Flows. 2015. DOI: 10.48550/ARXIV.1505.05770. URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/
1505.05770.
[46]
Conor Durkan et al. “Neural Spline Flows”. In: Advances in Neural Information Pro­
cessing Systems. Ed. by H. Wallach et al. Vol. 32. Curran Associates, Inc., 2019.
URL: https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper/2019/file/7ac71d433f282034e088473244df8c02-
Paper.pdf.
[47]
Hadi M. Dolatabadi, Sarah Erfani, and Christopher Leckie. Invertible Generative
Modeling using Linear Rational Splines. 2020. DOI: 10.48550/ARXIV.2001.05168.
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2001.05168.
[48]
Alex Krizhevsky. “Learning Multiple Layers of Features from Tiny Images”. In: 2009.
[49]
Runa Eschenhagen. Code for Laplace Redux ­ Effortless Bayesian Deep Learning.
URL: https://github.com/runame/laplace-redux. (accessed: 21.12.2022).
Posterior refinement for Bayesian neural networks via normalizing flows
71
==PAGE:80==
[50]
Sergey Zagoruyko and Nikos Komodakis. “Wide Residual Networks”. In: CoRR
abs/1605.07146 (2016). arXiv: 1605.07146. URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/1605.07146.
[51]
Augustinus Kristiadi. Github page of main author of Posterior Refinement Improves
Sample Efficiency in Bayesian Neural Networks. URL: https://github.com/wiseodd.
(accessed: 21.12.2022).
[52]
Sebastian Ruder. An overview of gradient descent optimization algorithms. 2016.
DOI: 10.48550/ARXIV.1609.04747. URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/1609.04747.
[53]
Ilya Loshchilov and Frank Hutter. SGDR: Stochastic Gradient Descent with Warm
Restarts. 2016. DOI: 10.48550/ARXIV.1608.03983. URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/1608.
03983.
[54]
Alexander Immer. laplace­torch. URL: https://aleximmer.github.io/Laplace/ (visited
on 01/31/2023).
[55]
Diederik P. Kingma and Jimmy Ba. Adam: A Method for Stochastic Optimization.
2014. DOI: 10.48550/ARXIV.1412.6980. URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/1412.6980.
[56]
Augustinus Kristiadi. Code for Posterior Refinement Improves Sample Efficiency in
Bayesian Neural Networks. URL: https://github.com/runame/laplace-refinement.
(accessed: 05.02.2023).
[57]
Mahdi Pakdaman Naeini, Gregory Cooper, and Milos Hauskrecht. “Obtaining Well
Calibrated Probabilities Using Bayesian Binning”. In: Proceedings of the AAAI Con­
ference on Artificial Intelligence 29.1 (Feb. 2015). DOI: 10.1609/aaai.v29i1.9602.
URL: https://ojs.aaai.org/index.php/AAAI/article/view/9602.
[58]
Arthur Gretton et al. “A Kernel Two­Sample Test”. In: Journal of Machine Learning
Research 13.25 (2012), pp. 723–773. URL: http://jmlr.org/papers/v13/gretton12a.
html.
[59]
Arthur E. Hoerl and Robert W. Kennard. “Ridge Regression: Biased Estimation
for Nonorthogonal Problems”. In: Technometrics 12.1 (1970), pp. 55–67. ISSN:
00401706. URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/1267351 (visited on 02/09/2023).
72
Posterior refinement for Bayesian neural networks via normalizing flows
==PAGE:81==
A
HMC with No­U­Turn­Sampling (NUTS)
Algorithm 5 Heuristic for choosing an initial value of ϵ [33]
function FindReasonableEpsilon (θ)
Initialize ϵ = 1, r ∼N(0, I).
Set θ′, r′ ←Leapfrog(θ, r, ϵ).
a ←2I
h
p(θ′,r′)
p(θ,r) > 0.5
i
−1.
while

p(θ′,r′)
p(θ,r)
a
> 2−a do
ϵ ←2aϵ
Set θ′, r′ ←Leapfrog(θ, r, ϵ)
return ϵ
Posterior refinement for Bayesian neural networks via normalizing flows
73
==PAGE:82==
Algorithm 6 Optimized No­U­Turn Sampler [33]
Given θ0, δ, V, M, M adapt :
Set ϵ0 = FindReasonableEpsilon (θ), µ = log (10ϵ0) , ¯ϵ0 = 1, ¯H0 = 0, γ = 0.05, t0 =
10, κ = 0.75.
for m = 1 to M do
Sample r0 ∼N(0, I).
Resample u ∼Uniform
 
0, exp

V
 θm−1 −1
2r0 · r0	
Initialize θ−= θm−1, θ+ = θm−1, r−= r0, r+ = r0, j = 0, θm = θm−1, n = 1, s = 1.
while s = 1 do
Choose a direction vj ∼Uniform({−1, 1}).
if vj = −1 then
θ−, r−, −, −, θ′, n′, s′, α, nα ←BuildTree
 θ−, r−, u, vj, j, ϵm−1θm−1, r0
.
else
−, −, θ+, r+, θ′, n′, s′, α, nα ←BuildTree
 θ+, r+, u, vj, j, ϵm−1, θm−1, r0
.
if s′ = 1 then
With probability min
n
1, n′
n
o
, set θm ←θ′.
n ←n + n′.
s ←s′I [(θ+ −θ−) · r−≥0] I [(θ+ −θ−) · r+ ≥0].
j ←j + 1
if m ≤Madapt then
Set ¯Hm =

1 −
1
m+t0

¯Hm−1 +
1
m+t0

δ −α
nα

.
Set log ϵm = µ −
√m
γ
¯Hm, log ¯ϵm = m−κ log ϵm + (1 −m−κ) log ¯ϵm−1.
else
Set ϵm = ¯ϵMadapt .
function BuildTree
 θ, r, u, v, j, ϵ, θ0, r0
if j = 0 then
▷Base case­take one leapfrog step in the direction v.
θ′, r′ ←Leapfrog (θ, r, vϵ).
n′ ←I

u ≤exp

V (θ′) −1
2r′ · r′	
.
s′ ←I

u < exp

∆max + V (θ′) −1
2r′ · r′	
.
return θ′, r′, θ′, r′, θ′, n′, s′, min

1, exp

V (θ′) −1
2r′ · r′ −V
 θ0
+ 1
2r0 · r0		
, 1.
else
▷Recursion­implicitly build the left and right subtrees.
θ−, r−, θ+, r+, θ′, n′, s′, α′, n′
α ←BuildTree
 θ, r, u, v, j −1, ϵ, θ0, r0
.
if s′ = 1 then
if v = −1 then
θ−, r−, −, −, θ′′, n′′, s′′, α′′, n′′
α ←BuildTree
 θ−, r−, u, v, j −1, ϵ, θ0, r0
.
else
−, −, θ+, r+, θ′′, n′′, s′′, α′′, n′′
α ←BuildTree
 θ+, r+, u, v, j −1, ϵ, θ0, r0
.
With probability
n′′
n′+n′′ , set θ′ ←θ′′.
Set α′ ←α′ + α′′, n′
α ←n′
α + n′′
α.
s′ ←s′′I [(θ+ −θ−) · r−≥0] I [(θ+ −θ−) · r+ ≥0]
n′ ←n′ + n′′
return θ−, r−, θ+, r+, θ′, n′, s′, α′, n′
α.
74
Posterior refinement for Bayesian neural networks via normalizing flows
==PAGE:83==
B
Extra results for SWAG grid­search
200
400
600
800
1000
number of epochs
0.930
0.932
0.934
0.936
0.938
0.940
ACC.
K=25, lr=0.01
K=25, lr=0.001
K=25, lr=0.0001
K=50, lr=0.01
K=50, lr=0.001
K=50, lr=0.0001
K=100, lr=0.01
K=100, lr=0.001
K=100, lr=0.0001
K=200, lr=0.01
K=200, lr=0.001
K=200, lr=0.0001
K=400, lr=0.01
K=400, lr=0.001
K=400, lr=0.0001
K=600, lr=0.01
K=600, lr=0.001
K=600, lr=0.0001
optimum
Figure B.1: ACC for the predictions from 600 last­layer weight samples from a Gaus­
sian distribution fitted running SWAG for various hyper­parameter values. The blue star
indicates the point with the lowest NLL.
Posterior refinement for Bayesian neural networks via normalizing flows
75
==PAGE:84==
200
400
600
800
1000
number of epochs
0.05
0.10
0.15
0.20
0.25
0.30
0.35
ECE.
K=25, lr=0.01
K=25, lr=0.001
K=25, lr=0.0001
K=50, lr=0.01
K=50, lr=0.001
K=50, lr=0.0001
K=100, lr=0.01
K=100, lr=0.001
K=100, lr=0.0001
K=200, lr=0.01
K=200, lr=0.001
K=200, lr=0.0001
K=400, lr=0.01
K=400, lr=0.001
K=400, lr=0.0001
K=600, lr=0.01
K=600, lr=0.001
K=600, lr=0.0001
optimum
Figure B.2: ECE for the predictions from 600 last­layer weight samples from a Gaus­
sian distribution fitted running SWAG for various hyper­parameter values. The blue star
indicates the point with the lowest NLL.
Table B.1: SWAG for 25 epochs for different hyper­parameters values of K and the learn­
ing rate.
K
25
12
lr
1e­2
1e­3
1e­4
1e­2
1e­3
1e­4
ACC.
94.0%
94.2%
94.1%
94.0%
94.2%
93.8%
ECE.
1.4%
2.9%
3.3%
4.2%
2.5%
1.7%
NLL.
0.2678
0.2667
0.2586
0.2616
0.2591
0.2439
76
Posterior refinement for Bayesian neural networks via normalizing flows
==PAGE:85==
C
Pull request to Pyro
As described in details at the very end of section 4.3, we found an error with the Pyro im­
plementation of the function _PositiveDefinite_check, which we reported to the devel­
oppment team of Pyro and fixed with a pull request. The Pyro pull request was assigned
number #3174 and can be found on github on the development branch of Pyro.
Figure C.1: Pyro pull request to fix positive definiteness error.
Posterior refinement for Bayesian neural networks via normalizing flows
77
==PAGE:86==
D
Performance plots on test set for
WideResNet­16­4 trained on CIFAR10
training sets containing 50%, 25% and
10% of the data respectively.
D.1
50% of CIFAR10 training set.
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
Length of normalizing flow
0.9200
0.9205
0.9210
0.9215
0.9220
0.9225
0.9230
0.9235
0.9240
ACC.
radial
planar
spline
map
la
hmc
Figure D.1: Accuracy for MAP and different post­hoc methods after training on 50% of
the CIFAR10 training data. The shown values are the average with standard error for 10
different weight initializations of our WideResNet model. The values for MAP, LA and HMC
are the same independently of the flow length. The three types of normalizing flows are
run with the Gaussian distribution from the Laplace approximation as a base distribution
and the spline is here a linear rational spline.
78
Posterior refinement for Bayesian neural networks via normalizing flows
==PAGE:87==
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
Length of normalizing flow
0.005
0.010
0.015
0.020
0.025
0.030
0.035
ECE.
radial
planar
spline
map
la
hmc
Figure D.2: Expected calibration error for MAP and different post­hoc methods after train­
ing on 50% of the CIFAR10 training data. The shown values are the average with standard
error for 10 different weight initializations of our WideResNet model. The values for MAP,
LA and HMC are the same independently of the flow length. The three types of normaliz­
ing flows are run with the Gaussian distribution from the Laplace approximation as a base
distribution and the spline is here a linear rational spline.
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
Length of normalizing flow
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
MMD.
radial
planar
spline
map
la
hmc
Figure D.3: Maximum­mean discrepancy for MAP and different post­hoc methods after
training on 50% of the CIFAR10 training data. The shown values are the average with
standard error for 10 different weight initializations of our WideResNet model. The values
for MAP, LA and HMC are the same independently of the flow length. The three types of
normalizing flows are run with the Gaussian distribution from the Laplace approximation
as a base distribution and the spline is here a linear rational spline. ”hmc” here represents
the mean and standard error of the MMDs between the 10 sets of HMC samples (for each
MAP solution).
Posterior refinement for Bayesian neural networks via normalizing flows
79
==PAGE:88==
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
Length of normalizing flow
0.23
0.24
0.25
0.26
0.27
NLL.
radial
planar
spline
map
la
hmc
Figure D.4: Negative log­likelihood for MAP and different post­hoc methods after training
on 50% of the CIFAR10 training data. The shown values are the average with standard
error for 10 different weight initializations of our WideResNet model. The values for MAP,
LA and HMC are the same independently of the flow length. The three types of normalizing
flows are run with the Gaussian distribution from the Laplace approximation as a base
distribution and the spline is here a linear rational spline.
D.2
25% of CIFAR10 training set.
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
Length of normalizing flow
0.879
0.880
0.881
0.882
0.883
0.884
0.885
0.886
ACC.
radial
planar
spline
map
la
hmc
Figure D.5: Accuracy for MAP and different post­hoc methods after training on 25% of
the CIFAR10 training data. The shown values are the average with standard error for 10
different weight initializations of our WideResNet model. The values for MAP, LA and HMC
are the same independently of the flow length. The three types of normalizing flows are
run with the Gaussian distribution from the Laplace approximation as a base distribution
and the spline is here a linear rational spline.
80
Posterior refinement for Bayesian neural networks via normalizing flows
==PAGE:89==
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
Length of normalizing flow
0.01
0.02
0.03
0.04
0.05
0.06
ECE.
radial
planar
spline
map
la
hmc
Figure D.6: Expected calibration error for MAP and different post­hoc methods after train­
ing on 25% of the CIFAR10 training data. The shown values are the average with standard
error for 10 different weight initializations of our WideResNet model. The values for MAP,
LA and HMC are the same independently of the flow length. The three types of normaliz­
ing flows are run with the Gaussian distribution from the Laplace approximation as a base
distribution and the spline is here a linear rational spline.
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
Length of normalizing flow
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
MMD.
radial
planar
spline
map
la
hmc
Figure D.7: Maximum­mean discrepancy for MAP and different post­hoc methods after
training on 25% of the CIFAR10 training data. The shown values are the average with
standard error for 10 different weight initializations of our WideResNet model. The values
for MAP, LA and HMC are the same independently of the flow length. The three types of
normalizing flows are run with the Gaussian distribution from the Laplace approximation
as a base distribution and the spline is here a linear rational spline. ”hmc” here represents
the mean and standard error of the MMDs between the 10 sets of HMC samples (for each
MAP solution).
Posterior refinement for Bayesian neural networks via normalizing flows
81
==PAGE:90==
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
Length of normalizing flow
0.34
0.36
0.38
0.40
0.42
0.44
NLL.
radial
planar
spline
map
la
hmc
Figure D.8: Negative log­likelihood for MAP and different post­hoc methods after training
on 25% of the CIFAR10 training data. The shown values are the average with standard
error for 10 different weight initializations of our WideResNet model. The values for MAP,
LA and HMC are the same independently of the flow length. The three types of normalizing
flows are run with the Gaussian distribution from the Laplace approximation as a base
distribution and the spline is here a linear rational spline.
D.3
10% of CIFAR10 training set.
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
Length of normalizing flow
0.7775
0.7800
0.7825
0.7850
0.7875
0.7900
0.7925
0.7950
0.7975
ACC.
radial
planar
spline
map
la
hmc
Figure D.9: Accuracy for MAP and different post­hoc methods after training on 10% of
the CIFAR10 training data. The shown values are the average with standard error for 10
different weight initializations of our WideResNet model. The values for MAP, LA and HMC
are the same independently of the flow length. The three types of normalizing flows are
run with the Gaussian distribution from the Laplace approximation as a base distribution
and the spline is here a linear rational spline.
82
Posterior refinement for Bayesian neural networks via normalizing flows
==PAGE:91==
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
Length of normalizing flow
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
0.10
0.12
ECE.
radial
planar
spline
map
la
hmc
Figure D.10: Expected calibration error for MAP and different post­hoc methods after
training on 10% of the CIFAR10 training data. The shown values are the average with
standard error for 10 different weight initializations of our WideResNet model. The values
for MAP, LA and HMC are the same independently of the flow length. The three types of
normalizing flows are run with the Gaussian distribution from the Laplace approximation
as a base distribution and the spline is here a linear rational spline.
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
Length of normalizing flow
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
MMD.
radial
planar
spline
map
la
hmc
Figure D.11: Maximum­mean discrepancy for MAP and different post­hoc methods after
training on 10% of the CIFAR10 training data. The shown values are the average with
standard error for 10 different weight initializations of our WideResNet model. The values
for MAP, LA and HMC are the same independently of the flow length. The three types of
normalizing flows are run with the Gaussian distribution from the Laplace approximation
as a base distribution and the spline is here a linear rational spline. ”hmc” here represents
the mean and standard error of the MMDs between the 10 sets of HMC samples (for each
MAP solution).
Posterior refinement for Bayesian neural networks via normalizing flows
83
==PAGE:92==
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
Length of normalizing flow
0.60
0.65
0.70
0.75
0.80
0.85
0.90
0.95
NLL.
radial
planar
spline
map
la
hmc
Figure D.12: Negative log­likelihood for MAP and different post­hoc methods after training
on 10% of the CIFAR10 training data. The shown values are the average with standard
error for 10 different weight initializations of our WideResNet model. The values for MAP,
LA and HMC are the same independently of the flow length. The three types of normalizing
flows are run with the Gaussian distribution from the Laplace approximation as a base
distribution and the spline is here a linear rational spline.
84
Posterior refinement for Bayesian neural networks via normalizing flows
==PAGE:93==
Posterior refinement for Bayesian neural networks via normalizing flows
85
==PAGE:94==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Richard Petersens Plads , Building 324
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.compute.dtu.dk
