==PAGE:1==
Uncertainty in Life Cycle Assessment:
A
Comparative Study
Master Thesis
DTU Chemical Engineering
Department of Chemical Engineering
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Uncertainty in Life Cycle Assessment: A Comparative Study
Master Thesis
February, 2023
By
Bjarni Kristinn Bjarnason
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include
the customary bibliographic citation, including author attribution,
report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over five months at the Department of Chemical
Engineering, at the Technical University of Denmark, DTU, in partial fulfilment for
the degree Master of Science in Engineering, MSc Eng.
It is assumed that the reader has a basic knowledge in the areas of chemical
engineering
Bjarni Kristinn Bjarnason ­ s165149
Signature
Date
ii
Uncertainty in Life Cycle Assessment: A Comparative Study
01/02/2023
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
In this project the uncertainty in life cycle assessment (LCA) due to choice of
life cycle impact assessment (LCIA) method is studied. This is achieved by cre­
ating a benchmark results and then conducting a one­at­a­time type sensitivity
analysis where multiple LCIA methods are used and compared to the benchmark
method. The methods include, Recipe (the benchmark), TRACI, CML­IA and Im­
pact World+ This analysis is done for three different products, Xylitol, Cumene
and biodiesel and the results from each one are compared to one another. The
benchmark results for Xylitol and Cumene showed the most significant environ­
mental impacts being freshwater and marine ecotoxicity and human carcinogenic
toxicity. As for biodiesel the most significant impact were freshwater eutrophi­
cation and human carcinogenic toxicity. The global warming potential of Xylitol,
Cumene and biodiesel was found to be 15, 3.21 and 4.39 kg CO2 −eq respec­
tively per kg product. The sensitivity analysis on these products showed that the
most variance compared to the benchmark was seen in the Impact World+ and
CML­IA methods. Furthermore, out of the impact categories being studied, fresh­
water ecotoxicity was found to be the one that varied the most between methods,
while the global warming effect showed very little difference in results regardless
of LCIA method.
Uncertainty in Life Cycle Assessment: A Comparative Study
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
Carina Loureiro da Costa Lira Gargalo, Postdoc, PROSYS
I would like to thank you very much for your time, help and feedback during my
masters thesis
Gürkan Sin, Professor, PROSYS
I would like to thank you for sparking my interest in the subject of LCA in your
class, and your help with making this master thesis happening
iv
Uncertainty in Life Cycle Assessment: A Comparative Study
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
1
2
Literature Review
3
2.1
Life Cycle Assessment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
Strengths and limitations of LCA studies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.3
LCA in the industry . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.4
Usage of different methods in Life Cycle Assessment
. . . . . . .
13
3
Methodology
16
4
Results and discussion
18
4.1
Xylitol production from wheat straw . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
4.2
Cumene production
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
4.3
FAME Biodiesel production using palm oil . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
4.4
Comparing results across case studies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
5
Conclusion, recommendations & future perspectives
48
Bibliography
50
A Characterisation results from the Xylitol case study
53
B Characterisation results from the Cumene case study
61
C Characterisation results from the biodiesel case study
71
Uncertainty in Life Cycle Assessment: A Comparative Study
v
==PAGE:8==
vi
Uncertainty in Life Cycle Assessment: A Comparative Study
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction
In today’s world one of the most discussed topics is the issue of sustainability.
To put sustainability in simple words, it can be described as the mankind meet­
ing it’s own needs without compromising the ability of future generations to meet
their own needs [1]. This can be in regards to natural, social and economical re­
sources.
Some of most pressing issues regarding natural resources are for example ocean
acidification and the change in earths climate.
Earths climate has been ever
changing throughout its history, but the changes that are happening today have
not been seen for over 10,000 years [2], and in the beginning of January 2023
the CO2 PPM was at 418, which is the highest it has been in over 4 million years.
As the amount of CO2 released into the earths atmosphere, the ocean is greatly
affected as it absorbs about 30% of the emitted CO2 [3]. These changes can
have catastrophic for the earth with constantly rising temperatures, increasing de­
forestation, melting ice sheets, irreversible changes in marine habitat quality and
much more [3].
This worrying change, and change in regulations, has led to many large busi­
nesses that have been driven with the intent to maximise profit, to change their
policy and become more environmentally responsible. These companies can also
then be said to be following the idea of Corporate Social Responsibility (CSR),
where the business has a responsibility to the society around it [4].
For companies that are trying to be more responsible towards the environment it
is important to be able to quantify these environmental impacts that might arise
from their processes/products. One of the ways companies can be transparent
about their CSR, and push to reduce their environmental impact on society is to
use the life cycle assessment (LCA) method. LCA can be defined as a systematic
analysis of the potential environmental impacts that arise from a products whole
life cycle [5]. Here all relevant material inputs and outputs in a products life cycle
are quantified and the potential environmental impact of these material flows are
specified. Some of the environmental impacts considered in a LCA analysis are
for example, climate change, acidification, ozone depletion and much more [5].
By using LCA, companies can identify environmental impacts of their product­
s/processes, and find the hot spots where the most damage is done. Knowledge
of this can then lead to possible changes to be made to reduce the environmen­
tal impact of said products/processes. If companies use this method the trans­
parency between them and the stakeholders can be improved drastically, and the
environmental impacts reduced [6].
The LCA method does however come with it’s limitations, that has led to some
doubting the reliability of the method. This can be caused by the fact that any LCA
analysis will include many assumptions and multiple choices that can be made
during the process of the analysis, that for example can lead to two studies on the
same product having different results in some impact categories. Furthermore,
Uncertainty in Life Cycle Assessment: A Comparative Study
1
==PAGE:10==
there is also a large amount of data needed, and therefore the process can be
very time consuming and therefore expensive. There are also multiple accepted
methods that can be used to conduct a LCA study, where the results can vary from
method to method when analysing the same product [7]. All these limitations lead
to the fact that any LCA will have some uncertainty to it’s results.
This issue has been studied increasingly in literature [8], where numerous sources
of uncertainties within the LCA framework have been identified and analysed.
Most of the existing literature on uncertainty within the LCA framework deals with
uncertainty in model parameters, while less attention has been paid to analyse the
variability that methodological choices have on LCA results. This latter source of
uncertainty will be the main focus of this project.
To better understand the uncertainty that comes with different methodological
choices three case studies will be presented in this project where different life
cycle impact assessment (LCIA) methods will be used. These case studies in­
clude Xylitol, a food product typically used as a sweetener [9], Cumene, a organic
compound used to produce other chemicals such as acetone and phenol [10], and
biodiesel which is a renewable fuel typically made from vegetable oils or animal
fat [11]. By including three very different product types it will give an insight into
the uncertainty of each one. And in order to get a comparison between these dif­
ferent products being studied and how the choice of LCIA method affects results,
the same methodology will be used in each one. First the results from each case
will be looked at individually and it will then be followed up by comparing the re­
sults across case studies and the uncertainty trends will be analysed.
The goal is to analyse how the choice of LCIA method impacts the LCA results
and compare it to what has already been studied in literature.
The following sections in the project are built up in the following way: Section 2 is
a literature review of the LCA method and case studies that have been published
with a focus on uncertainty.
Section 3 will introduce the methodology that was applied in this project and how
the results are created.
In section 4 the results will be presented and discussed and compared to results
from literature.
Section 4 is the conclusion where the work will be summarised and possible future
perspectives discussed.
2
Uncertainty in Life Cycle Assessment: A Comparative Study
==PAGE:11==
2
Literature Review
The first chapter of this project will include the theory about the life cycle assess­
ment methodology and it’s uses, as well as a review of real life cases.
2.1
Life Cycle Assessment
The LCA methodology is defined according to the ISO 14040:2006 standards as a
compilation and evaluation of the inputs, outputs and the potential environmental
impacts of a product system throughout its life cycle [12]. An LCA study is split
into four phases which are:
• Goal and scope definition
• Inventory analysis
• Impact assessment
• Interpretation
The relationship between these phases can be seen below in figure 2.1.
Figure 2.1: The four phases of a life cycle assessment [12]
As it can be seen from figure 2.1 the four phases are constantly interacting, and it
is important to continuously evaluate each phase in order to achieve a successful
Uncertainty in Life Cycle Assessment: A Comparative Study
3
==PAGE:12==
LCA study. These four phases all consist of multiple tasks which need to com­
pleted for the LCA to be successful.
To better understand these phases and what the goals are in each one, they will
be explained in the following sections.
2.1.1
Goal and Scope Definition
Any LCA study should start with a clear definition of the goals and scope. The
definition of the goals sets the context of the study, which will then be the founda­
tion for the definition of the scope. However the goals should always be evaluated
continuously during the whole LCA process as it might need to change, if for ex­
ample there are unforeseen obstacles in gathering the relevant data [13].
In the definition of goals the purpose of the study is stated and described. These
chosen goals will then greatly influence the LCA as all decisions later on must be
made with these defined goals in mind.
The goals definition phase is divided into six aspects in the ISO standard require­
ments, these are:
1. Intended applications of the results
2. Limitations due to methodological choices
3. Decision context and reasons for carrying out the study
4. Target audience
5. Comparative studies to be disclosed to the public
6. Commissioner of the study and other influential actors
These six aspects must be considered when performing an LCA study. Aspects
one and three are especially important as they have a great influence on decisions
made in later phases, while the remaining four phases are mainly there to define
how the results of the LCA will be communicated to the relevant parties [14].
After the goals have been identified for the LCA study the scope must be defined.
In this step the scope of what product systems will be assessed and how it will
take place. The scope definition consists of the following nine aspects according
to the ISO standard requirements [12]:
1. Deliverables
2. Object of the assessment
3. LCI modelling framework and handling of multi functional processes
4. System boundaries and completeness requirements
5. Representativeness of LCI data
6. Preparation of the basis for the impact assessment
7. Special requirements for system comparisons
8. Need for critical review
4
Uncertainty in Life Cycle Assessment: A Comparative Study
==PAGE:13==
9. Planning reporting of results
These nine aspects must be considered when performing an LCA study. Similarly
to the goal aspects there are some aspects which are more important then the
other as they have an influence on decisions made later in the LCA study. In this
case it is aspects 2­6, whereas the rest of the aspects relate to the reporting and
communicating of the results [15].
Some of the most important decisions in the goal and scope phase are the system
boundaries, functional unit and the choice of allocation.
The definition of the system boundary relates to how much of the products life
cycle will be assesses in the study. Some of the most commonly used system
boundaries are cradle­to­gate, cradle­to­grave, cradle­to­cradle and gate­to­gate
[16].
• Cradle­to­gate
Assesses the product from the manufacturing of it, until the product is fin­
ished. Therefore when using this definition the usage and disposal of the
product are not considered in the LCA.
• Cradle­to­grave
Assesses the full life cycle of the product. The assessment starts at the man­
ufacturing level and continues through the use phase and finally disposal.
Here all in­ and outputs are considered for every phase in the life cycle.
• Cradle­to­cradle
Is similar to the cradle­to­grave definition, but here the disposal step for the
product is a recycling process. From the recycling process a new identi­
cal product then originates. This could for example be creating aluminium
drinking cans from recycled cans.
• Gate­to­gate
Only assesses what happens in the manufacturing process, i.e from the
moment the raw material enters the factory until it exits
The definition of the functional unit is used as a reference through the whole LCA
study. Therefore all inputs and outputs will be normalised according to the cho­
sen functional unit [12]. This can also be looked at as the amount of the specific
product being investigated.
Allocation of flows in a production process for the studied product must be con­
sidered. This is caused by the the fact that few industrial processes are a single
output process, and most processes result in more then one product. Therefore
when doing a LCA study on a product it is important to consider if there is a by­
product, and how the in­ and outputs should be allocated between the multiple
products [12]. This can for example be done according to the prices of the prod­
ucts, their mass, and etc.
When the goals and scope have been fully defined for the LCA study the next
phase can be started which is the inventory analysis.
Uncertainty in Life Cycle Assessment: A Comparative Study
5
==PAGE:14==
2.1.2
Inventory Analysis
The life cycle inventory analysis, which is guided by the goal and scope definition,
is often considered to be the most time consuming phase of an LCA study. The
main part of the inventory analysis is the collection of data on all input and output
flows from the process being studied. This phase consists of six aspects according
to the ISO standard requirements, which are: [17]
1. Identifying processes for the LCI model
2. Planning and collecting data
3. Constructing and quality checking unit processes
4. Constructing LCI model and calculating LCI results
5. Preparing the basis for uncertainty management and sensitivity analysis
6. Reporting
The inventory analysis is also a iterative process. As more data and knowledge
is gathered about the system being studied, new requirements might be identified
which requires a change in the data collection. This phase can also sometimes
lead to a change in the goals and scope, as there might be some issues with
the data gathering that make it impossible to fulfill the already defined goals and
scope of the study [12].
A helpful tool in this phase of a LCA study is to create a flow diagram of mapping
the inputs and outputs of a process. This helps in building a clear picture of what
the process looks like [18].
When all the data such as input and outputs flows have been collected, the impact
assessment can be started.
2.1.3
Impact Assessment
In this phase the information from the life cycle inventory is translated into their
environmental impact scores. The elements of the life cycle impact assessment
(LCIA) phase can be seen in figure 2.2 below:
6
Uncertainty in Life Cycle Assessment: A Comparative Study
==PAGE:15==
Figure 2.2: The elements of the Life Cycle Impact Assessment phase [12]
The characterisation factors are derived and they will then give the impact scores.
These characterisation factors are primarily found using LCA software such as
Simapro or Gabi, which will generate the results based on the inventory data.
The results from the characterisation factors can then by normalised relative to
reference information if desired. The impact categories however, can be differ­
ent based on which impact assessment method is used, for example, ReCiPe,
TRACI, Impact etc. each have their own set of impact categories [12].
The impact assessment phase does however only address the environmental is­
sues that have been identified in the goal and scope phase. Therefore there are
some limitations, as this will not be a complete environmental assessment of every
factor for the product being studied. Furthermore, there is also some uncertainty
in this phase as there is a lack of spatial and temporal dimensions in the impact
assessment [12].
As for the choice of choice of LCIA methods in current LCA studies, there is no
generally accepted method for consistently and accurately associating inventory
data with specific potential environmental impacts, as models for impact cate­
gories are in different development stages [12]. Because of this, this phase usu­
ally contains lead to uncertainty in the LCA results
When the data has been found and environmental impact calculated the next and
final step is to interpret these results.
2.1.4
Interpretation
In the interpretation phase the findings of the inventory analysis and the impact
categories are considered and reflected upon. Here it should be considered that
Uncertainty in Life Cycle Assessment: A Comparative Study
7
==PAGE:16==
the results from the impact assessment are based on a relative approach, and
that they indicate potential environmental effects. The results should then provide
a easily understandable presentation of the LCA study, which is consistent with
the goals and scope that had been defined [12]. To fully complete a life cycle
interpretation three important elements should be in place [18].
1. Identifying the significant issues
2. Complete a sensitivity, consistency and completeness checks on the study
3. Conclude on the study and state limitations and further recommendations
2.2
Strengths and limitations of LCA studies
LCA is a tool that is viable to use in many different products and processes. This
makes it an attractive method to use to analyse the environmental effect of what­
ever product or process is in question, and it is often considered suitable to support
decision making in any product/process development [19]. By using this tool the
environmental impact of a products total life cycle, from raw material acquisition,
to waste management, and the most critical environmental impacts can be iden­
tified [20]. Furthermore, the ISO standards have defined a clear definition of the
LCA methodology, which mean that there is a structured way as to how the as­
sessment should be conducted [20].
The LCA tool does however come with some limitations that are still very present
today. As presented in the literature review section, there are many decisions that
need to be taken in the LCA phases which affect the results. Even though ISO
has defined a structured approach to the LCA, there are still many aspects of it
that are left to interpretation. Furthermore, it has been shown that this can lead
to LCA studies producing different results when analysing the same product or
process [20]. As there is no right way to conduct a LCA study, and because of
the many different routes a LCA practitioner can take when conducting the study,
there will always be some uncertainty to the results that must be considered. This
uncertainty is one of the biggest limitations of the LCA tool and the treatment of
uncertainty is therefore a vital part to increase the credibility and reliability of any
LCA. To do this the uncertainties must be identified and characterised to properly
deal with them [21]. This will be presented in the following section.
2.2.1
Uncertainty in LCA
Uncertainty in LCA studies are many and can be significant. Therefore when LCA
is used these uncertainties must be identified and considered. The sources of
uncertainty in a LCA study can be characterised in multiple ways according to
where they occur within the LCA model. According to studies done on uncertainty
in LCA, there are six sources of uncertainty that will be discussed [21][22]. These
are:
• Quantity
• Model structure
• Context
• Spatial
8
Uncertainty in Life Cycle Assessment: A Comparative Study
==PAGE:17==
• Temporal
• Variability between sources and objects
The quantity uncertainty relates to parameters such as inputs and outputs in the
studied product or process. The model structure uncertainty relates to the mis­
match between the modeled relationships and the real causal structure of a sys­
tem. The context uncertainty can be linked to the person conducting the LCA study
and all the various decisions made by said person. This is for example the choice
of functional unit, allocation method, system boundaries etc. [21]. The spatial un­
certainty relates, for example, to the regional differences in emission inventories
and environmental sensitivity. The temporal uncertainty relates, for example, to
difference in yearly emission inventories. The last source of uncertainty, variabil­
ity between sources and objects relate to the fact that different technologies might
exist in factories that produce the same product [22].
These six groupings of uncertainty can contain a very high number of various un­
certainties. However, it is clear that not all have a significant effect on results.
Barahmand and Eikeland [8], reviewed over 90 articles on uncertainty in LCA to
identify the most significant sources of uncertainty. They came to the conclusion
that the most significant sources of uncertainty were in the model and process pa­
rameters, data variability, and in the use of different methodologies and databases
[8]. Therefore these sources of uncertainty will be the main focus of this review.
Model and process parameters
The model parameters that can cause some uncertainty are mostly the character­
isation factors. These factors, which are typically derived from the software used
to conduct the LCA study, contain some uncertainty as they are usually computed
using a simplified environmental model [22]. And as the results from an LCA study
come from these characterisation factors, that uncertainty is also present in the
LCA.
To deal with this uncertainty there have been many methods discussed and re­
searched, for example, fuzzy logic or Gaussian formulas. However, multiple stud­
ies [21],[22],[8], have suggested that a Monte Carlo Simulation is the most effec­
tive method to fully account for this source of uncertainty.
Data variability
Data variability in LCA includes temporal variability, spatial variability and variabil­
ity between objects and sources. Temporal variability can for example be variation
in wind speed and temperature as they are used when computing the characteri­
sations factors, while spatial variability is caused by a difference between regions
in emission inventories [22].
Lastly, the variability between objects and sources can occur as there might exist
a difference in the technologies used by factories producing the same product.
Therefore there might be some uncertainty when using data which was derived
using a different technique then the one examined in a LCA [22]. According to the
study by Barahmand and Eikeland [8], these uncertainties were most effectively
dealt with by using a Monte Carlo simulation.
Uncertainty in Life Cycle Assessment: A Comparative Study
9
==PAGE:18==
Use of different methodologies and databases
As there are multiple softwares, and databases that can be used in a LCA study,
there will always be some difference between each one. Furthermore, each method
has their own set of characterisation factors that are used to evaluate the impact
of a given process. Multiple studies, [23],[24], compared different LCIA methods
by analysing the same process/product with each method. These studies showed
some differences between the methods, and how they represented the environ­
mental impact.
To fully understand this type of uncertainty a one­at­a­time type sensitivity anal­
ysis is suggested [24]. In doing this a benchmark method is chosen, and then
multiple methods and databases are tried, one at a time, and the difference from
the benchmark is evaluated.
As stated above the sources of uncertainty can be many and might can make the
life of any LCA practitioner difficult. To better understand the uncertainties in LCA
it has been suggested by Igos et.al [21] and Hujbregts [22], that an uncertainty
matrix should be set up. By doing this it makes the process of identifying the
uncertainties and handling them much easier. An example of an uncertainty matrix
based off the findings of Igos et.al [21] and Hujbregts [22] can be seen below in
table 2.1
Table 2.1: Example of an uncertainty matrix for life cycle assessment
List of uncertainties
Uncertainty type
Action
LCA Stage
Uncertainty
Quantity
Model
Context
Spatial
Variability
Temporal
Variability
Variability
between objects
Goal and scope
Choice of system boundery
x
Scenario analysis
Choice of functional unit
x
Scenario analysis
Inventory analysis
Difference in yearly emission factors
x
Monte Carlo
Regional differences in emission factors
x
Monte Carlo
Differences in technology between factories which
produce the same product
x
Monte Carlo
Inaccurate, non­represantative or no inventory data
x
Monte Carlo
Choice of allocation methods
x
Scenario analysis
Choise of LCA method
x
Differences in yearly emission inventories
x
Monte Carlo
Choice of impact categories and
classification
Inconsistent time horizons between impact categories
x
Monte Carlo
Regional differences in relevance of an impact
category
x
Monte Carlo
Differences among technologies in relevance of
an impact category
x
Monte Carlo
Impact categories are not known
x
Find and compare from litterature
Characterisation
Time horizon or change in environmental
characteristics over time
x
Monte Carlo
Regional differences in environmental ecological
sensitivity or characteristics
x
Monte Carlo
Differences in environmental, ecological and human
characteristics
x
Monte Carlo
Uncertainty in lifetime of substances
x
Monte Carlo
Choice of characterisation methods
x
Scenario analysis
Weighting and normalisation
Change of social preference over time
x
Monte Carlo
Regional differences in distance to political targets
x
Monte Carlo
Differences in individual preferences when using a
panel method
x
Monte Carlo
Inaccurate normalisation data
x
Monte Carlo
Weighting criteria are not operational
x
Monte Carlo
Choice of normalisation reference system or
weighting method
x
Scenario analysis
It can be seen in table 2.1 above that the sources of uncertainty can be many. But
by setting up this uncertainty matrix all the possible uncertainties have been char­
acterised and their location within the LCA framework identified. Furthermore, by
setting up this table, a possible action to account for the uncertainty should also
be suggested. But it is also important to understand what uncertainties are signif­
icant, and worthy of spending time on analysing further.
10
Uncertainty in Life Cycle Assessment: A Comparative Study
==PAGE:19==
For this project, the uncertainty being analysed can be characterised as a uncer­
tainty due to choices, and the uncertainty itself is the choice of LCIA method.
2.3
LCA in the industry
LCA can be used in a variety of industries to analyse the environmental impact
of some products or processes. As this project will be looking at three products,
Xylitol, Cumene and Biodiesel, previous LCA’s that have been conducted on these
products will be reviewed.
2.3.1
Literature review on LCA of a Xylitol production
A life cycle assessment of the production of Xylitol can be found in existing liter­
ature. Dasgutpa et al, [25] performed a LCA on the production of Xylitol using
corncob as a feedstock. The boundaries for their analysis were set as cradle­
to­gate and the goal was to quantify the environmental impact of Xylitol, and the
scope was to estimate the emission of greenhouse gases and the contribution of
other environmental burdens from the overall process. Simapro was used to con­
duct the LCA, using the Ecoivent database and the CML­IA method. They found
that for the production of 0.502 kg of Xylitol crystals, 8.68 kg CO2 −eq is emitted.
This can be put into other words as per 1 kg of Xylitol produced, approximately 17
kg of CO2 −eq is emitted.
This article by Dasgutpa et al, [25] also looked at the uncertainty in the results.
This was done using one the Monte Carlo uncertainty analysis which has been
shown to be the most effective way of handling uncertainty [22], [8], [24]. This
uncertainty analysis showed that the impact categories abiotic depletion, global
warming potential, terrestrial ecotoxicity and photochemical oxidation had a sym­
metrical distribution, and that the uncertainty was deemed non­significant. How­
ever, for the impact categories eutrophication, marine aquatic ecotoxicity and hu­
man toxicity the results were much more skewed and a significant uncertainty
was noted. These uncertainties were mainly attributed to variability in the inven­
tory data, which is consistent with what Barahmand and Eikeland [8] found to be
true.
Another article studying the environmental impact of the production of Xylitol looks
at a biorefinery which utilises wheat straw as a feedstock [26]. As in the previous
literature, the goal was to analyse the environmental impact of a Xylitol biorefinery
with the scope set as cradle­to­gate. Here the same database as in the previous
article, Ecoivent was used, but a different method in Recipe. This biorefinery had
a slightly lower global warming effect, with 1 kg of Xylitol produced leading to a
CO2 −eq emission of 12.3 kg.
Lastly a life cycle assessment done on Xylitol produced with a company called
DuPont. In this paper [27] two productions ways of Xylitol are compared. One
uses corncob as a feedstock, while the other is a DuPont wood based concept
where the Xylitol producing facility is integrated with a pulp and paper plant. Their
LCA showed that the DuPont wood based concept showed a significantly lower
environmental impact in all impact categories. For example the global warming
effect of the corncob process was shown to be 38.6 kg CO2 −eq per kg of Xylitol,
Uncertainty in Life Cycle Assessment: A Comparative Study
11
==PAGE:20==
while the Dupont wood based concept had a CO2 −eq emission of 3.59 kg per kg
of Xylitol.
It is clear from these different LCA cases for Xylitol that the production method
can have a big impact on the environmental impact. And even though some pro­
ductions use the same feedstock, as seen in the two examples where corncob
was used as a feedstock, the difference in global warming effect was still around
50%.
2.3.2
Literature review on LCA of a Cumene production
Cumene is a commodity chemical that is mostly used to produce other products
such as phenol and acetone. The annual production of Cumene in 2020 was 15.1
Mt [28].
The environmental impact of the production of Cumene from benzene and propy­
lene has been studied in literature. According to the findings of Isella et al. [28],
the global warming effect of the production of Cumene using a gate­to­gate scope
is 0.12 kg CO2 −eq per kg Cumene. This is a finding suuported by the work of
Junqueira et al [29], where the global warming effect of Cumene was found to be
0.17 kg CO2 −eq per kg of Cumene.
As for the uncertainty in the life cycle assessment of Cumene, no good sources
have been found where this topic has been reviewed.
2.3.3
Literature review on LCA of a biodiesel production
As biodiesel is a growing demand in order to reduce the global warming effect
in the world by replacing fossil fuels with cleaner energies and biofuels, [30], the
environmental impact of biodiesel have been studied for a long time.
A study by Paminto et al. [31], the potential environmental impact of biodiesel
production from palm oil was researched. They found that the the production of
1 ton of biodiesel, the global warming potential was 2762 kg CO2 −eq, or 2,7 kg
CO2 −eq per kg biodiesel. Furthermore, they showed that the burning of palm oil
biodiesel emits 38% less CO2 per liter then petroleum derived diesel, and if the
whole life cycle is looked at with production and combustion, the palm oil biodiesel
has a global warming potential that is 2.6 times less then petroleum diesel.
The uncertainty in the comparison between biodiesel and non­renewable energy
source has been studied by Hong [32]. Here a analytic approach using taylor
series, showed that the probability of biodiesel having a lower global warming
then petroleum diesel was 92.3%.
Lastly a life cycle assessment of a biodiesel production from rapeseed oil has
been studied by Gupta et al. [33]. They conducted a cradle­to­gate analysis
on the environmental impact of biodiesel. They studied both a centralised large
scale and a localised small scale biodiesel production which had a global warming
potential of 2.63 kg CO2 −eq and 2.88 kg CO2 −eq per kg biodiesel. This is in line
with the results found by Paminto et al. [31].
12
Uncertainty in Life Cycle Assessment: A Comparative Study
==PAGE:21==
2.4
Usage of different methods in Life Cycle
Assessment
As the project will focus on the usage of different life cycle impact assessment
methods, these methods will be presented in this chapter. These methods all
have the same goal which is to assess the environmental impact of a given pro­
cess/product. But they do however not all have the same set of impact categories
or time horizon.
Recipe Midpoint (H)
This is the benchmark method that will be used to compare the results from the
other methods. This method assumes a hierarchist perspective which is based on
scientific consensus with regard to the time frame and plausibility of impact mech­
anisms, where the time frame is 100 years [34]. The Recipe Midpoint method
considers the following impact categories, which are the same for every Recipe
Midpoint method. These impact categories can be seen in table 2.2 below.
Table 2.2: Impact categories in the Recipe Midpoint method
Impact Category
Unit
Abbreviation
Global warming
kg CO2 eq
GW
Stratospheric ozone depletion
kg CFC ­ 11 eq
OD
Ionizing radiation
kBq Co ­ 60 eq
IR
Ozone formation, Human Health
kg NOx eq
OH
Fine particular matter formation
kg PM2.5 eq
FP
Ozone formation, Terrestrial ecosystems
kg NOx eq
OT
Terrestrial acidification
kg SO2 eq
TA
Freshwater eutrophication
kg P eq
FT
Marine eutrophication
kg N eq
MT
Terrestrial ecotoxicity
kg 1,4­DCB
TE
Freshwater ecotoxicity
kg 1,4­DCB
FE
Marine ecotoxicity
kg 1,4­DCB
ME
Human carcinogenic toxicity
kg 1,4­DCB
HC
Human non­carcinogenics toxicity
kg 1,4­DCB
HN
Land use
m2a crop eq
LU
Mineral resource scarcity
kg Cu eq
MR
Fossil resource scarcity
kg oil eq
FR
Water consumption
m3
WC
Recipe Midpoint (I)
This method is based on a short­term interest and impact types that are undis­
puted and technical optimism with regard to human adaptation. The time frame
for this perspective is 20 years [34]. This perspective has the same impact cate­
gories as the benchmark method.
Recipe Midpoint (E)
This method is based on the egalitarian perspective which is the most precaution­
ary of the three. here the time frame is the longest of them all at 1000 years [34].
Uncertainty in Life Cycle Assessment: A Comparative Study
13
==PAGE:22==
This perspective has the same impact categories as the benchmark method.
TRACI
TRACI, or the tool for the reduction and assessment of Chemical and other en­
vironmental impacts is another environmental impact assessment tool. It has the
same time frame as the benchmark, 100 years, but only has 10 impact categories
[35]. These impact categories can be seen in table 2.3 below:
Table 2.3: Impact categories in the TRACI method
Impact Category
Unit
Ozone Depletion
kg CFC­11 eq
Global Warming
kg CO2 eq
Smog
kg O3 eq
Acidification
kg SO2 eq
Eutrophication
kg N eq
Carcinogenics
kg CTUh
Non Carcinogenics
CTUh
Respiratory effects
kg PM2.5 eq
Ecotoxicity
CTUh
Fossil Fuel Depletion
MJ surplus
Impact World+ Midpoint
Impact World+ Midpoint is a midpoint damage framework used for LCA. It has
both a midpoint and a endpoint viewpoint, but for the case studies, only the mid­
point viewpoint will be used. The Impact World+ method differs from all the other
methods as it considers an infinite time frame [36].
The midpoint viewpoint has 18 impact categories, which can be seen below in
table 2.4
14
Uncertainty in Life Cycle Assessment: A Comparative Study
==PAGE:23==
Table 2.4: Impact categories in the Impact World+ Midpoint method
Impact Category
Unit
Climate Change short term
kg CO2 eq
Climate Change long term
kg CO2 eq
Ozone Layer depletion
kg CFC­11 eq
Freshwater acidification
kg SO2
Terrestrial Acidification
kg SO2
Particular matter formation
kg PM2.5 eq
Freshwater ecotoxicity
CTUe
Fossil and nuclear energy use
MJ deprived
Marine eutrophication
kg N eq
Human toxicity cancer
CTUh
Human toxicity non cancer
CTUh
Mineral resource use
kg deprived
Photochemical oxidant formation
kg NMVOC
Freshwater eutrophication
kg PO4
Ionizing radiation
Bq C­14 eq
Land transformation, biodiversity
m2 year arable
Land occupation, biodiversity
m2 year arable
Water scarcity
m3 world eq
CML­IA Baseline
CML­IA is another database that contains characterisation factors used for LCA
studies. It has the same time frame as the benchmark, 100 years, but only has
11 impact categories [37].
The impact categories can be seen in table 2.5 below.
Table 2.5: Impact categories in the CML­IA baseline method
Impact Category
Unit
Abiotic depletion
kg Sb eq
Abiotic depletion fossil fuels
MJ
Global warming
kg CO2 eq
Ozone layer depletion
kg CFC­11 eq
Human Toxicity
kg 1,4­DCB eq
Fresh water aquatic ecotoxicity
kg 1,4­DCB eq
Marine aquatic ecotoxicity
kg 1,4­DCB eq
Terrestrial ecotoxicity
kg 1,4­DCB eq
Photochemical oxidation
kg C2H4 eq
Acidification
kg SO2 eq
Eutrophication
kg PO4 eq
These methods will be the main focus in the three case studies and how the results
from each one varies compared to the benchmark method.
Uncertainty in Life Cycle Assessment: A Comparative Study
15
==PAGE:24==
3
Methodology
In this chapter the methodology for the thesis will be introduced.
The first step of is gathering information from literature on the the LCA method,
and the three products being studied. This is done to gain knowledge about LCA,
and what has already been written in literature on the subjects of this thesis.
The next step is gathering inventory data from the three products. For the Xylitol
case study, this is found in a article by Vollmer et al. [26]. For the Cumene and
biodiesel cases the data is found from simulation data in Aveva. The simulations
that are used are existing simulations that are in the Aveva database.
Once the inventory data has been found for each case study, each inventory unit
is found in the Simapro software, and the corresponding characterisation factors
are derived.
First the characterisation factors are found using the Recipe Midpoint H V.1.07.
method. These characterisation factors are then used to calculate the environ­
mental impacts of the three products being studied. The environmental impact
results will be interpreted and analysed further by normalising the results and look­
ing at the impact of each inventory unit on the environment.
These characterisation results will then serve as a benchmark for the next step
which is using multiple different LCIA methods.
The analysis of the uncertainty due to methodological choices will be done using
a one­at­a­time type sensitivity analysis. In this step the LCIA method will be
changed, and the characterisation factors derived, and the characterisation results
created. This will be done for each methods presented in the literature review.
Along with analysing the different LCIA methods, a change in electricity source,
alternating the amount of feedstock and different locations will also be analysed.
When all of these results have been derived, the difference between methods
will be analysed. This will first be done individually for each case, where the
difference will be analysed. Lastly the difference between the methods will be
summarised across the three case studies to see if the difference in results is
consistent regardless of the product being analysed.
As all the methods that will be analysed don’t have all the same impact categories,
not all impact categories can be compared between methods. Furthermore, some
of the methods have different units for the same environmental impact. Therefore,
based on the impact categories that are present in each method, and which ones
can be compared, these following five impact categories will be examined.
• Global Warming
The global warming potential is a measure of the emissions of greenhouse
gases to air [38]. It is measured in kg of CO2 emitted.
• Stratospheric Ozone Depletion
Stratospheric ozone depletion can be defined as the reduction in the ozone
16
Uncertainty in Life Cycle Assessment: A Comparative Study
==PAGE:25==
concentration in the stratosphere. This reduction can have serious effects
on the life on earth for plants, animals and humans. For humans this can
for example be in the form of skin cancer, reduced immune defence etc. To
quantify this impact category, the amount of CFC11, which is a potent ozone
depleting substance is emitted [39].
• Terrestrial Acidification
Terrestrial acidification can be characterised by changes in the chemical
properties in soil. These changes occur following the deposition of nutri­
ents in acidifying forms. This increase in acidifying nutrients in soil can lead
to a decline in soil fertility [40]. This is measured by looking at how much
SO2 is deposited into soil.
• Freshwater ecotoxicity
Freshwater ecotoxicity is a measure of the impact on freshwater organisms
from the emission of toxic substances [38]. It is measured in the amount of
1,4 dichlorobenzene emitted.
• Freshwater Eutrophication
Freshwater eutrophication in an indicator of the enrichment of the fresh wa­
ter ecosystem with nutritional elements. This is caused by the emission
of nitrogen or phosphor containing compounds [38]. It is measured in the
amount of PO4 emitted.
This methodology presented in this chapter will be put to use in the three case
studies that will be presented in the next chapter.
Uncertainty in Life Cycle Assessment: A Comparative Study
17
==PAGE:26==
4
Results and discussion
In this chapter the results from the presented methodology will be presented. This
will be done individually for each case before summarising and comparing results
across cases.
4.1
Xylitol production from wheat straw
In this section a benchmark analysis will done on a previous life cycle assessment.
The study in question is a life cycle assessment of an integrated Xylitol biorefinery
with value­added co­products (Succininc Acid). Xylitol is a sugar alcohol that is
mostly used as an artificial sweetener. It can both be found naturally, or as in this
case, produced using wheat straw. As Xylitol is an artificial sweetener it also has
positive health related impacts as it used in stead of sugar and can therefore be
helpful for example people with diabetes [9].
An LCA analysis will be performed on the production of Xylitol from wheat straw
and the environmental impacts of that production interpreted. These initial results
will be a re­creation from a paper from Vollmer et.al [26]. When these results have
been established, some of the decisions made within the LCA framework will be
changed and the LCA analysis will be done again. This will show the sensitivity
of the LCA results to changes within the LCA framework.
4.1.1
Benchmark results
In order to analyse the results and perform sensitivity analysis the results have
been re­created. These results are generated using the same methodology as in
the paper by Vollmer et al. [26]. The goal of the study was to assess the envi­
ronmental impact of a Xylitol biorefinery and compare it to the current chemical
production process of Xylitol. The reference flow was set as 1 ton of the feed­
stock, which is wheat straw and the scope is set as cradle­to­gate. The life cycle
inventory of the process can be seen in table 4.1 below.
18
Uncertainty in Life Cycle Assessment: A Comparative Study
==PAGE:27==
Table 4.1: Life cycle inventory for a Xylitol biorefinery
Inputs from technosphere
Output to technosphere
Materials
Products
Wheat straw (dry)
150,000
t
Xylitol
12,186
t
Sulfuric acid
17,756
t
Succinic acid
19,220
t
Enzymes
2591
t
Ammonium sulfate
13
t
Sodium hydroxide
827
t
Process water
21,419
t
Ethanol
2592
t
CO2 Fossil
1551
t
Transport
Waste
To plant
15,000,000
t · km
Waste brine
59,576
t
Ashes
911
t
Energy
Emission
Steam (MP)
1,611,300
t
CO2 biogen
523
t
Electricity
78,732,000
MJ
Cooling water
2,407,300
t
Chilling water
6.77
t
The characterisation factor for each item in the inventory list is found in Simapro
using the Ecoivent database. The items that are used from that database can be
seen in table 4.2 below:
Table 4.2: Items from the Ecoivent database used in the Xylitol biorefinery case
Item from ecoivent
Unit
Wheat Straw at Farm/DK
kg
Sulfuric Acid RER ­ Production ­ Cut­Off ­ S
kg
Novozymes Celluclast
kg
Ammonium Sulfate (RER), ammonium sulfate production cut­off (S)
kg
Sodium hydroxide, without water, in 50% solution state RER| chloralkali electrolysis, diaphragm cell | Cut­off, S
kg
Water, deionised Europe without Switzerland| market for water, deionised | Cut­off, S
kg
Ethanol, without water, in 99.7% solution state, from ethylene RER| ethylene hydration | Cut­off, S
kg
Carbon dioxide, liquid RER| production | Cut­off, S
kg
Sodium chloride, brine solution RER| production | Cut­off, S
kg
Ash, from combustion of bagasse from sugarcane GLO| market for ash, from combustion of bagasse from sugarcane | Cut­off, S
kg
Transport, freight, lorry >32 metric ton, EURO4 RER| transport, freight, lorry >32 metric ton, EURO4 | Cut­off, S
t*km
Steam, in chemical industry RER| production | Cut­off, S
kg
Electricity, high voltage DK| electricity production, wind, >3MW turbine, onshore | Cut­off, S
MJ
Tap water RER| market group for | Cut­off, S
kg
These items from the Ecoivent database are then used to calculate the environ­
mental impact of the production of Xylitol. The results, before normalisation, can
be seen in figure 4.1 below, where the environmental impact per kg of Xylitol pro­
duced is shown. It is noted that all these impact categories have different units
and therefore the units are not displayed in the following figure.
Uncertainty in Life Cycle Assessment: A Comparative Study
19
==PAGE:28==
Figure 4.1: characterisation results: Benchmark results for the Xylitol biorefinery
It is clear from figure 4.1 above that terrestrial ecotoxicity has the highest impact
score. However, as mentioned above, it is difficult to compare all of these impact
categories in one graph as they have different units.
Another way to analyse the results before they are normalised is to look at which
items from the life cycle inventory are contributing to each impact category. Vollmer
et.al [26], came to the conclusion that only six of the units had a significant impact
on the impact categories. This was also seen during the recreation of the results,
and therefore only these six units will be presented. These results can be seen
below.
Figure 4.2: characterisation results: The contribution of units to each impact cat­
egory
In figure 4.2 above the six units, wheat straw, transport, electricity, waste brine,
20
Uncertainty in Life Cycle Assessment: A Comparative Study
==PAGE:29==
steam and cooling water can be seen and how they contribute to each impact
category. Here it can be seen that the use of electricity is a big factor in the
environmental impact of the Xylitol production. It is also noted that the transport
of the wheat straw to the farm is a big factor, and is, for example, the biggest factor
in the global warming effect.
A last step in analysing the results from an LCA case study is to normalise them.
This is not necessary according to the ISO standards on LCA, but can be a useful
measure in trying to fully understand and compare the significance of each impact
category.
The normalised results for the Xylitol LCA case can be seen in figure 4.3.
Figure 4.3: Normalisation results: Normalised results for the Xylitol case study
From the normalisation scores it can be seen that the biggest environmental im­
pacts come from freshwater ecotoxicity, marine ecotoxicity and human carcino­
genics.
4.1.2
Interpretation of benchmark results
When analysing these results one of the first things that will be looked at is the
global warming effect. In this instance, the production of 1 kg Xylitol leads to
an emission of approximately 15 kg kg of CO2 −eq, which is similar to the results
found in literature. To put this number into perspective it can be compared to other
food products. For example the average footprint of beef is about 36 kg CO2 −eq
per kg beef, and chocolate is around 34 kg CO2 −eq per kg chocolate. The
global warming effect of Xylitol is therefore much lower then these food products.
Products that are similar to the Xylitol global warming effect are for example lamb
and goat, which have a global warming effect of 14 kg CO2 −eq per kg product
[41].
For the freshwater and marine ecotoxicity it can be can be analysed further by
looking at figure 4.2. There it can be seen that for the freshwater and marine
ecotoxicity, electricity accounts for over 90% of the environmental impact. In this
Uncertainty in Life Cycle Assessment: A Comparative Study
21
==PAGE:30==
case the electricity source is wind power. This can be explained by the fact that
wind turbines use a significant amount of copper to conduct the electricity [42], and
studies have shown that the mining of copper can have severe impact on water
quality [43], which lead to marine and freshwater ecotoxicity being the biggest
environmental factors.
These results from the Xylitol LCA study will now be used as a benchmark for
further LCA studies, where the main focus will be on analysing how different LCIA
methods affect the results.
4.1.3
Sensitivity analysis on uncertainty due to choices
In this section a sensitivity analysis will be performed on the Xylitol LCA study.
This will be done by changing some of the decisions made within the LCA frame­
work and the results compared to the benchmark. As seen in literature [8], [22],
there are multiple sources of uncertainty in any LCA study that can affect the re­
sults. One of the more significant factors is the choice of LCIA methods. This will
therefore be analysed in this section. Along with changing the LCIA method, the
location of the production plant will also be changed, and the source of electricity.
This will be done in a one­at­a­time type analysis, where only one thing will be
changed from the benchmark, and the results compared. These changes can be
seen summarised in the following table.
Table 4.3: Decision matrix for the Xylitol case study
Case Number
LCA Method
Location
Impact Horizon
Source of electricity
1
ReCiPe 2016 Midpoint (H)
Denmark
100 years
On­shore windmills
2
ReCiPe 2016 Midpoint (I)
Denmark
20 years
On­shore windmills
3
ReCiPe 2016 Midpoint (E)
Denmark
1000 years
On­shore windmills
4
TRACI
Denmark
100 years
On­shore windmills
5
Impact World+ Midpoint
Denmark
Infinite
On­shore windmills
6
CML­IA Baseline
Denmark
100 years
On­shore windmills
7
ReCiPe 2016 Midpoint (H)
Rest of the world
100 years
On­shore windmills
8
ReCiPe 2016 Midpoint (H)
Denmark
100 years
Oil
The results from all of the Xylitol case studies that are shown in table 4.3 can be
seen in table 4.4 below.
Table 4.4: Sensitivity analysis results: Results from the application of different
LCIA methods in the Xylitol case study
LCIA Method
Climate Change
Ozone Depletion
Acidification
Ecotoxicity
Eutrophication
% of benchmark
% of benchmark
% of benchmark
% of benchmark
% of benchmark
Recipe (H)
15,40
­
9,36e­6
­
0,06
­
6,64
­
0,02
­
Recipe (I)
16,33
6,03 %
6,89e­6
­26,41 %
0,06
0,00 %
5,94
­10,56 %
0,02
0,00 %
Recipe (E)
14,68
­4,66 %
1,32e­5
41,34 %
0,06
0,00 %
6,68
0,64 %
0,02
0,00 %
CML
15,16
­1,56 %
1,49e­5
59,08 %
0,08
24,97 %
50,69
663,87 %
0,02
24,06 %
Impact
15,40
0,01 %
2,33e­5
149,00 %
1,57e­4
­99,75 %
17,81
168,43 %
4,61e­4
­97,45 %
TRACI
14,95
­2,92 %
2,50e­1
­68,10 %
0,08
28,01 %
2,29
­65,44 %
0,02
­6,17 %
ROW
18,38
19,34 %
1,03e­5
9,77 %
0,08
34,73 %
11,17
68,24 %
0,03
61,94 %
Oil
188,24
1122,40 %
8,94e­5
855,34 %
2,17
3368,54 %
0,55
­91,69 %
0,08
328,02 %
From table 4.4 above it can be seen that the difference in environmental impact
can vary significantly. Some of the impact categories are very similar across meth­
ods, while others are significantly different. The biggest differences that lay at
around 100% from the benchmark have been highlighted in red.
22
Uncertainty in Life Cycle Assessment: A Comparative Study
==PAGE:31==
These difference can be analysed further across the different LCIA methods by
looking at each impact category closer.
The most discussed impact category, global warming does not change much
across methods. This difference can be seen in more detail in figure 4.4 below.
Figure 4.4: Global Warming results: Results from different LCIA methods in the
Xylitol case study
Here it is noted that the highest value is from the Recipe method with individualistic
perspective, where the impact horizon is much shorter than in the other methods,
which is just about 6% higher then the benchmark.
The next impact category, Ozone depletion can be seen in figure 4.5 below:
Uncertainty in Life Cycle Assessment: A Comparative Study
23
==PAGE:32==
Figure 4.5: Ozone depletion results: Results from different LCIA methods in the
Xylitol case study
Here a greater variation is noticed, with the biggest one being the Impact World+
method, which is almost 150% higher than the benchmark.
The next impact category, terrestrial acidification can be seen below:
Figure 4.6: Terrestrial acidification results: Results from different LCIA methods
in the Xylitol case study
For the terrestrial acidification the biggest difference is again in the Impact World+
method with a 100% difference to the benchmark. It is also noted that for this
impact category the different perspectives in the Recipe method have the same
results.
The next impact category, Ecotoxicity, can be seen below:
24
Uncertainty in Life Cycle Assessment: A Comparative Study
==PAGE:33==
Figure 4.7: Ecotoxicity results: Results from different LCIA methods in the Xylitol
case study
The differences in the ecotoxicity impact category are the highest of all the impact
categories. Here the biggest difference from the benchmark is in the CML method,
which is 663% higher than the benchmark. Furthermore, it can also be seen that
the difference in the Impact World+ method, the difference is just under 150%.
The last impact category analysed is eutrophication, which can be seen below:
Figure 4.8: Eutrophication results: Results from different LCIA methods in the
Xylitol case study
Uncertainty in Life Cycle Assessment: A Comparative Study
25
==PAGE:34==
The results in the eutrophication impact category are very similar across the meth­
ods, except for the Impact World+ method, which varies with almost a 100%. And
again, as in the acidification impact category, the results is the same for all Recipe
perspectives.
Along with these different method, there is also noted a difference when chang­
ing the location of the production, and especially when changing the electricity
source from wind to oil. The change of location to Rest of the World resulted in an
increase in all impact categories. And for the electricity change to oil, all impact
categories increased significantly relative to the benchmark, except ecotoxicity
which decreased.
The Xylitol biorefinery has also been compared in literature [27] to other produc­
tion processes of Xylitol. This comparison will be discussed briefly below.
4.2
Cumene production
In this chapter an LCA analysis will be conducted on the production of Cumene.
Cumene is a chemical that is produced and mostly used to produce other chemi­
cals such as phenol and acetone [10].
The data used for this LCA study is retrieved from a simulation found in Aveva.
The Cumene simulation is based on Turton et al.’s [44] design. In this process de­
sign, pure benzene is mixed with propylene. This mixture is vaporised and then
heated before being sent to a tubular reactor. The process stream from the reac­
tor is then cooled down before going to a flash vessel where fuel gas is separated
from the process stream. The process stream then hos through two distillation
columns, where in the first one benzene is removed, and the second columns top
product is Cumene with a 99.9 mol% purity. This simulation can be seen in figure
4.9 below.
Figure 4.9: Aveva simulation of a Cumene production
For the Cumene case study, no by­product is considered,boundaries are cradle­
to­gate, and there is assumed to be no waste stream.
26
Uncertainty in Life Cycle Assessment: A Comparative Study
==PAGE:35==
4.2.1
Benchmark results
As in the Xylitol case, a benchmark LCA study will be created and then multiple
other methods will be used to analyse the sensitivity of the results. This will be
done using a one­at­a­time sensitivity analysis where changes will be made within
the LCIA framework.
First the benchmark will be established. This will be done using the same method
as in the Xylitol case, that is, Recipe 2016 Midpoint V1.07. The goals is to assess
the environmental impact of a Cumene production process and compare results
using multiple different methods. The life cycle inventory of the process is found
from the simulation data, and can be seen below in table 4.5
Table 4.5: Life Cycle Inventory of a Cumene production process
Inputs from technosphere
Output to technosphere
Materials
Products
Benzene
8201,93
kg
Cumene
11216,7
kg
Propane
222,27
kg
Propene
4428,59
kg
Energy
Steam (MP)
43783,16
kg
Electricity
58003,33
MJ
Cooling water
411969
kg
Based off the inventory the characterisation factors can be found in Simapro. For
the benchmark the impact categories can be seen in table 2.2. The characterisa­
tion factors are found using the following items from Simapro.
Table 4.6: Items from the Ecoivent database used in the Cumene case study
Item from ecoivent
Unit
Benzene RER| production | Cut­off, S
kg
Propane GLO| market for | Cut­off, S
kg
Propylene RER| market for | Cut­off, S
kg
Steam, in chemical industry RER| production | Cut­off, S
kg
Water, deionised Europe without Switzerland| market for water, deionised | Cut­off, S
kg
Electricity, high voltage DK| electricity production, wind, >3MW turbine, onshore | Cut­off, S
MJ
The results will then be referenced to the amount of Cumene produced, so they
will represent the environmental impact of 1 kg Cumene. The characterisation
results of the production of Cumene can be seen below. It is noted that as all the
impact categories in the figure have different units, the units will not be displayed.
Uncertainty in Life Cycle Assessment: A Comparative Study
27
==PAGE:36==
Figure 4.10: Characterisation results: Benchmark results for the production of
Cumene
From figure 4.10 it can be seen that there are three environmental impacts that
are most significant in the characterisation results, which are global warming, ter­
restrial ecotoxicity and fossil resource scarcity. As in the Xylitol case study the
distribution of units and how they contribute to each impact category was anal­
ysed. These results can be seen below.
Figure 4.11: Characterisation results: The contribution of each impact category in
the Cumene case study
In figure 4.11 above it can be seen that the biggest factors in the environmental
results are benzene, propane and electricity
To fully complete the LCA analysis of this Cumene production and to compare
28
Uncertainty in Life Cycle Assessment: A Comparative Study
==PAGE:37==
the significance of the impact categories the results from figure 4.10 have been
normalised. The normalised results can be seen below in figure 4.12.
Figure 4.12: Normalisation results: Normalised results for the Cumene case study
It is now clear to see from figure 4.12 that when normalised, the most significant
environmental impact is human carcinogenic toxicity, fossil resource scarcity and
marine & freshwater ecotoxicity.
The human carcinogenic toxicity can be described as the impact on humans due
to the emission of toxic cancer related substances to the environment. Fossil
resource scarcity however is a measure of the depletion of fossil resources, in
this instance oil [38].
These impact categories can be analysed further by looking at figure 4.11. There
it can be seen that electricity accounts for over 80% of freshwater and marine
ecotoxicity. This was also seen in the Xylitol case study which was expected as
both production use wind as the electricity source. For fossil resource scarcity the
usage of benzene accounts for about 50% of the environmental impact.
Interpretation
From the results shown in figure 4.10 it can be seen that the global warming effect
of the Cumene production is minimal. The results show that for 1 kg of Cumene
produced the CO2−eq emission is 3,21 kg. This results is somewhat surprising as
the two Cumene LCA studies found in the literature review had a global warming
effect of under 1 kg CO2 −eq per kg Cumene.
These results will now be used as a benchmark for further LCA investigations
where the focus will be on different LCIA methods.
4.2.2
Sensitivity analysis on uncertainty due to choices
In this section changes will be done using a one­at­a­time sensitivity analysis.
Similar changes will be made in this case study as in the Xylitol study.
The
Cumene case will however not contain different sources of electricity, but will in­
clude process changes in the simulation. The changes that will be analysed in
this section can be seen in table 4.7 below.
Uncertainty in Life Cycle Assessment: A Comparative Study
29
==PAGE:38==
Table 4.7: Decision matrix for the Cumene case study
Case Number
LCA Method
Location
Impact Horizon
Amount of feedstock
1
ReCiPe 2016 Midpoint (H)
Denmark
100 years
8200 kg/h
2
ReCiPe 2016 Midpoint (I)
Denmark
20 years
8200 kg/h
3
ReCiPe 2016 Midpoint (E)
Denmark
1000 years
8200 kg/h
4
TRACI
Denmark
100 years
8200 kg/h
5
Impact World+ Midpoint
Denmark
Infinite
8200 kg/h
6
CML­IA Baseline
Denmark
100 years
8200 kg/h
7
ReCiPe 2016 Midpoint (H)
Denmark
100 years
20 % Increase
8
ReCiPe 2016 Midpoint (H)
Denmark
100 years
20 % Decrease
9
Recipe 2016 Midpoint (H)
Rest of the world
100 years
8200 kg/h
As in the Xylitol case study the same methods will be analysed along with a change
in location to ’Rest of the world’. In this case study, as the simulation has been set
up, the amount of feedstock will be varied and the environmental impacts anal­
ysed. This can be relevant for the production team to know, as often amounts
are changed in the production of chemicals, and therefore good to know how the
environmental impacts change.
The same impact categories will be compared between these methods, that is;
Terrestrial acidification, Stratospheric ozone depletion, Global warming, Ecotoxi­
city and Eutrophication. The results from this can be seen in table 4.8 below.
Table 4.8: Sensitivity analysis resulst: Results from the application of different
LCIA methods in the Cumene case study
LCIA Method
Climate Change
Ozone Depletion
Terrestrial Acidification
Ecotoxicity
Eutrophication
% of benchmark
% of benchmark
% of benchmark
% of benchmark
% of benchmark
Recipe (H)
3,21
­
3,20e­7
­
8,06e­3
­
7,45e­2
­
7,35e­4
­
Recipe (I)
4,01
24,80 %
3,56e­7
11,48 %
8,06e­3
0,00 %
6,60e­2
­10,92 %
7,35e­4
0,00 %
Recipe (E)
2,71
­15,74 %
3,80e­7
18,96 %
8,06e­3
0,00 %
7,48e­2
0,44 %
7,35e­4
0,00 %
CML
3,08
­4,16 %
1,52e­7
­52,50 %
9,96e­3
23,54 %
6,462e­1
788,64 %
1,14e­3
55,22 %
Impact
3,22
0,00 %
9,81e+1
­38,63 %
8,10e­3
­99,77 %
2,45e­1
228,52 %
8,21e­4
­98,02 %
TRACI
3,03
­5,72 %
1,87e­6
­41,60 %
9,67e­3
19,92 %
2,64e­2
­64,51 %
6,76e­4
­8,00 %
ROW
3,43
6,64 %
2,97e­7
­6,99 %
9,10e­3
12,85 %
6,62e­1
65,92 %
1,19e­3
61,26 %
Increase in feedstock
3,45
7,20 %
3,37e­7
5,51 %
8,50e­3
5,41 %
1,18e­2
­84,20 %
7,47e­4
1,57 %
Decrease in feedstock
5,70
77,31 %
8,61e­7
169,19 %
1,35e­2
67,86 %
2,26e­2
­69,58 %
1,67e­3
126,68 %
From table 4.8 above the difference between methods can be very different, with
the most significant differences (around 100%) highlighted in red. To analyse this
further each impact category will be looked at in more detail.
The first impact category, global warming, can be seen below.
30
Uncertainty in Life Cycle Assessment: A Comparative Study
==PAGE:39==
Figure 4.13: Global warming results: Results from different LCIA methods in the
Cumene case study
It can be seen that the difference in the emission of CO2 −eq is very little between
methods, with the biggest variation being around 25%, which is the individualistic
Recipe perspective.
The Ozone depletion can be seen in the next figure:
Figure 4.14: Ozone depletion results: Results from different LCIA methods in the
Cumene case study
The ozone depletion impact category has more variation than the global warming
effect. Here the three Recipe perspectives have the highest results, while TRACI,
Uncertainty in Life Cycle Assessment: A Comparative Study
31
==PAGE:40==
Impact World+ and CML are all lower. However the biggest variance is only just
above 50% which is in the CML method.
The next impact category, terrestrial acidification can be seen below:
Figure 4.15: Terrestrial acidification results: Results from different LCIA methods
in the Cumene case study
In the terrestrial acidification the biggest difference seen is in the Impact World+
method, where it is around 100% lower than the benchmark. It is also noted that
the different Recipe perspectives all have the same results.
The next impact category analysed is Ecotoxicity.
32
Uncertainty in Life Cycle Assessment: A Comparative Study
==PAGE:41==
Figure 4.16: Ecotoxicity results: Results from different LCIA methods in the
Cumene case study
The results from the ecotoxicity impact category are very varied. Here the biggest
variation from the benchmark is seen in the CML method where it is almost 800%
higher than the benchmark. Furthermore, the Impact World+ method is over 200%
larger than the benchmark.
The last impact category analysed is eutrophication.
Figure 4.17: Eutrophication results: Results from different LCIA methods in the
Cumene case study
For the eutrophication impact category the biggest variance is seen in the Impact
World+ method, which is almost 100% lower than the benchmark. Here it is also
Uncertainty in Life Cycle Assessment: A Comparative Study
33
==PAGE:42==
noted, as in the acidification, that the different Recipe perspectives all have the
same result.
When looking at production in the location category Rest of The World in stead of
Europe, a slight increase in all of the impact categories is noted as in the Xylitol
case.
When looking at the increase and decrease in the feedstock, all of the impact
categories increase, except ecotoxicity. This can be seen in figure 4.18 below:
Figure 4.18: Change in feedstock results: Results from the change in amount of
feedstock in the Cumene case study
When comparing these two changes it can be seen that a 20% decrease in the
feedstock has a much more negative environmental impact than the 20% in­
crease. This can for example be seen by looking at the climate change cate­
gory. here a 20% decrease in the feedstock results in a 77% increased CO2 −eq
emission, whereas the increased feedstock results in a 7% increase in CO2 −eq
emission.
4.3
FAME Biodiesel production using palm oil
In this last case study of how LCA results can vary when different decisions are
within the LCA framework, the production of biodiesel will be analysed.
The BioDiesel that will be analysed in this study is FAME (Fatty Acid Methyl Ester),
which is a generic term for biodiesel that is derived from renewable sources [11].
An LCA analysis will be done on the production of FAME from NaOH, methanol
and palm oil. Benchmark results will be created, and afterwards a one­at­a­time
sensitivity analysis will be conducted on the process.
This LCA study assumes a cradle­to­gate boundary, there is no by­product as­
sumed and no waste stream. Furthermore, even though this is a simulation as the
34
Uncertainty in Life Cycle Assessment: A Comparative Study
==PAGE:43==
Cumene case, the author was not able to change simulation parameters, such as
feedstock and get a valid simulation.
4.3.1
Benchmark results
The benchmark results for the production of FAME will be created using Recipe
2016 V1.07. Here the goal is to assess the environmental impact of the produc­
tion of FAME. The inventory for the production of FAME is found by setting up a
simulation in Aveva. In this simulation the biodiesel is created using palm oil as
a feedstock. The creation of FAME happens during the transesterification of the
palm oil where it transforms into an ester [11]. This simulation ca be seen below:
Figure 4.19: Aveva simulation of the production of FAME biodiesel
The life cycle inventory is then derived from this simulation and can be seen in
table 4.9 below:
Table 4.9: Life Cycle Inventory of a BioDiesel production process
Inputs from technosphere
Output to technosphere
Materials
Products
NaOH
2,39
kg
FAME
905,19
kg
Methanol
153,73
kg
Palm Oil
1053,66
kg
Energy
Water
110
kg
Electricity
316,63
MJ
This inventory list will be used to calculate the environmental impacts of the pro­
duction. The characterisation factors are found in Simapro and the results will be
calculated per kg of FAME produced. The items found in Simapro in the Ecoivent
database can be seen below:
Uncertainty in Life Cycle Assessment: A Comparative Study
35
==PAGE:44==
Table 4.10: Items from the Ecoivent database used in the biodiesel case study
Item from ecoivent
Unit
Sodium hydroxide, without water, in 50% solution state RER| chloralkali electrolysis, diaphragm cell | Cut­off, S
kg
Methanol GLO| market for | Cut­off, S
kg
Palm Oil, refined GLO| market for | Cut­off, S
kg
Water, deionised Europe without Switzerland| market for water, deionised | Cut­off, S
kg
Electricity, high voltage DK| electricity production, wind, >3MW turbine, onshore | Cut­off, S
MJ
The environmental impact results for the characterisation results can be seen in
the following figure. It is noted that the units are not shown as the impact cate­
gories have different units to them.
Figure 4.20: characterisation results: Benchmark results for the Biodiesel case
study
It can be seen in figure 4.20 above that the most significant environmental impact
is terrestrial ecotoxicity. The distribution of each item and how they effect the
environmental impact can be seen below:
36
Uncertainty in Life Cycle Assessment: A Comparative Study
==PAGE:45==
Figure 4.21: characterisation results: The contribution of units to each impact
category in the biodiesel case study
From figure 4.21 it can be seen that almost all of the environmental impacts are
related to the use of palm oil.This is not a big surprise as palm oil has been known
to be produced with highly unsustainable methods [45].
Now, as in the other case studies, the results will be normalised to make it eas­
ier to compare the impact categories and identify the most significant ones. The
normalisation is done using the same model as in the previous studies. The nor­
malised results can be seen below:
Figure 4.22: Normalisation results: Normalised results for the biodiesel case study
From figure 4.22 above it can be seen that when normalised, the most signif­
icant environmental impacts are freshwater eutrophication and human carcino­
genic toxicity.
Uncertainty in Life Cycle Assessment: A Comparative Study
37
==PAGE:46==
The freshwater eutrophication is an indication of the enrichment of the fresh water
ecosystem with nutritional elements, which is caused by the emission of either ni­
trogen or phosphor compounds. The human carcinogenic toxicity is an indicator
of toxic cancer related substances that impact humans [38].
Interpretation
For the production of 1 kg of FAME the most significant environmental impacts
were freshwater eutrophication and human carcinogenic toxicity. However, as
always, the carbon footprint will be looked at is it is one the most discussed en­
vironmental impact of any production. For the production of 1 kg of FAME, the
CO2 −eq emission is 4.39 kg. This results is approximately two times higher than
the results found in literature.
4.3.2
Sensitivity analysis on uncertainty due to choices
As in the previous cases, a one­at­a­time sensitivity analysis will be conducted
where similar changes will be made to the LCA methodology. An overview of the
changes that will be analysed for the BioDiesel can be seen in table 4.11 below.
Table 4.11: Decision matrix for LCA of the production of FAME biodiesel
Case Number
LCA Method
Location
Impact Horizon
1
ReCiPe 2016 Midpoint (H)
Denmark
100 years
2
ReCiPe 2016 Midpoint (I)
Denmark
20 years
3
ReCiPe 2016 Midpoint (E)
Denmark
1000 years
4
TRACI
Denmark
100 years
5
Impact World+ Midpoint
Denmark
Infinite
6
CML­IA Baseline
Denmark
100 years
7
ReCiPe 2016 Midpoint (H)
Rest of the world
100 years
These changes were implemented and the results from that can be seen in table
4.12 below.
Table 4.12: Sensitivity analysis results: Results from the application of different
LCIA methods in the biodiesel case study
LCIA Method
Climate Change
Ozone Depletion
Terrestrial Acidification
Ecotoxicity
Eutrophication
% of benchmark
% of benchmark
% of benchmark
% of benchmark
% of benchmark
Recipe (H)
4,39
­
1,10e­5
­
1,27e­2
­
0,14
­
0,13
­
Recipe (I)
5,28
20,24 %
7,19e­6
­34,43 %
1,27e­2
0,00 %
0,13
­7,19 %
0,13
0,00 %
Recipe (E)
3,62
­17,70 %
1,67e­5
52,56 %
1,27e­2
0,00 %
0,14
0,86 %
0,13
0,00 %
CML
4,26
­3,10 %
2,70e­7
­97,54 %
1,35e­2
6,15 %
4,46
3139,78 %
0,10
­23,52 %
Impact
4,39
0,00 %
3,22e­7
­97,06 %
2,75e­5
­99,78 %
2,34
1600,29 %
0,0258
­79,66 %
TRACI
4,19
­4,50 %
3,03e­7
­97,23%
1,48e­2
18,17 %
0,05
­66,74 %
0,10
­24,58 %
ROW
4,40
0,07 %
1,10e­5
0,01 %
1,27e­2
0,13 %
0,14
2,19 %
0,14
8,91 %
As in the previous two case studies the most significant variance (Around 100%
and higher) is highlighted in red. The difference between methods for these impact
categories is examined further by looking at each impact category in more detail.
The global warming effect can be seen below.
38
Uncertainty in Life Cycle Assessment: A Comparative Study
==PAGE:47==
Figure 4.23: Global warming results: Results from different LCIA methods in the
Biodiesel case study
As in the previous two case studies the results have very little variation. In this
instance the biggest variation is a 20% increase in CO2 −eq emission, which is
seen the individualistic perspective in the Recipe method.
The next impact category analysed is the ozone depletion
Figure 4.24: Ozone depletion results: Results from different LCIA methods in the
Biodiesel case study
The variation in the ozone depletion is much more as can be seen in the figure
above. Here the three Recipe methods have a much higher results than the other
Uncertainty in Life Cycle Assessment: A Comparative Study
39
==PAGE:48==
methods, with the results from TRACI, Impact and CML all being about 97% lower.
In the next figure the variation in the Acidification can be seen:
Figure 4.25: Terrestrial acidification results: Results from different LCIA methods
in the Biodiesel case study
The results for the acidification are pretty similar for all the methods excluding
Impact World+, where the results is almost 100% lower.
The next figure shows the results from the ecotoxicity impact category:
40
Uncertainty in Life Cycle Assessment: A Comparative Study
==PAGE:49==
Figure 4.26: Ecotoxicity results: Results from different LCIA methods in the
Biodiesel case study
The results for ecotoxicity are extreme in regards to Impact World+ and CML,
where they are 1600 and 3139% higher respectively.
The last impact category analysed is the eutrophication, which can be seen below:
Figure 4.27: Eutrophication results: Results from different LCIA methods in the
Biodiesel case study
The results for eutrophication are pretty similar across methods, but again the
Uncertainty in Life Cycle Assessment: A Comparative Study
41
==PAGE:50==
results from Impact World+ is the biggest difference from the benchmark at 80%.
The last change that was done in this case study was to analyse the rest of the
world, instead of Europe. The results for this had the same trend as in the other
studies, that is a increase in all impact categories.
4.4
Comparing results across case studies
The three case studies all included a benchmark method, four alternative meth­
ods, and an alternative location to the benchmark. The results across the methods
will now be looked at to see if the different methods showed similar trends in all
of the three case studies.
The first two methods that will be looked at here are the two different perspectives
found in the Recipe method, starting with the individualistic.
Figure 4.28: Variation in the Recipe Midpoint(I) method compared to the bench­
mark method ­ Recipe Midpoint (H)
From the figure above it can be seen that for the terrestrial acidification and eu­
trophication the results do not change for each of the case studies. This was
expected as due to lack of sufficient information the choices of perspectives were
not considered for these impact categories in the Recipe model [34]. For the
global warming effect, the results were higher in each of the three case studies,
one at just over 5% and the other two at around 20%. Here the difference in time
horizon between the methods is deemed to be the cause of this difference [34].
For the ozone depletion category a more interesting results was observed as in
the Cumene case study the result was just over 10% larger than the benchmark,
but in the Xylitol and biodiesel case, they were much lower. In this category the
only difference between the individualistic method and the benchmark is the time
horizon, which is therefore deemed to cause this difference [34].
42
Uncertainty in Life Cycle Assessment: A Comparative Study
==PAGE:51==
Lastly for the ecotoxicity, the results were very similar in all cases, with a results
at around 10% lower in each of them. This can be explained as the benchmark
method considers the environmental impact on sea and ocean for all chemicals,
while the individualistic perspective only considers organics and non­essential
metals [34].
The differences in the Recipe Midpoint (I) method compared to the benchmark
were expected to be small.
The next method is the egalitarian perspective in the Recipe method. These re­
sults can be seen below:
Figure 4.29: Variation in the Recipe Midpoint(E) method compared to the bench­
mark method ­ Recipe Midpoint (H)
The same trend is observed in this perspective that the results do not change for
the acidification and eutrophication impact categories, which was explained in the
previous method. The global warming effect is lower in each of the case studies
which is caused by the difference in time horizon [34]. The ozone depletion is
much higher, with the biodiesel case having roughly a 50% higher value than the
benchmark. This can be caused by the fact that in the egalitarian perspective the
included effects are skin cancer and cataract, while the benchmark and individu­
alistic perspective only consider skin cancer [34].
For the ecotoxicity the changes from the benchmark are very low, but all are
slightly higher than the benchmark. This can be explained as the egalitarian con­
siders all the same effects as the benchmark, so the difference is deemed to be
caused by the difference in time horizon [34].
The next method analysed here will be TRACI. The following figure shows the
results for each case study.
Uncertainty in Life Cycle Assessment: A Comparative Study
43
==PAGE:52==
Figure 4.30: Variation in the TRACI method compared to the benchmark method
­ Recipe Midpoint (H)
In the TRACI method each case study showed a decrease in global warming,
ozone depletion, ecotoxicity and eutrophication. Hence, the only impact category
that has a higher impact score is the terrestrial acidification.
In another study, [24], TRACI was also compared to the Recipe Midpoint (H)
method and all of the same impact categories, except ozone depletion were anal­
ysed. There it showed similar results in the global warming effect, i.e little to
no change. For the other three impact categories the results were the opposite of
those seen in this study. Meaning that the acidification potential decreased, fresh­
water ecotoxicity increased, and eutrophication increased. However the biggest
uncertainty was seen in the freshwater ecotoxicity with a difference of 137% com­
pared to just over 60% in this study.
The differences between TRACI and Recipe are mostly caused by a difference in
characterisation modelling, where different substances are seen dominating each
impact category compared to the benchmark method [24].
Next the Impact World+ method will be analysed. The results can be seen below.
44
Uncertainty in Life Cycle Assessment: A Comparative Study
==PAGE:53==
Figure 4.31: Variation in the Impact World+ method compared to the benchmark
method ­ Recipe Midpoint (H)
From the figure above it can be seen that Impact World+ has some significant dif­
ferences compared to the benchmark. This is especially noted in the ecotoxicity
impact category where the results from the Xylitol and Cumene study are around
200% higher than the benchmark, and the results from the biodiesel case is about
1600% higher. This difference can be explained by a difference in substance cov­
erage. This is as the toxic impact in the Impact World+ method are dominated by
aluminium(III), which is not seen in the Recipe method. Furthermore it has been
seen in literature that substances that contribute to more then 1% of the total im­
pact in the Recipe method, have been found to contribute less then 1% or not
seen at all in the Impact method. These discrepancies lead to a big difference in
results between these methods [46].
The global warming effect is very similar to the benchmark while the ozone de­
pletion varies as the Xylitol case results have an increase in ozone depletion,
while the Cumene and biodiesel case have lower impact scores. The difference
in ozone depletion compared to the benchmark can be explained by the fact that
Recipe and Impact World use different versions of a stratospheric ozone deple­
tion model that is developed by the World Meteorological Institute [46]. Lastly the
results for both terrestrial acidification and eutrophication are almost 100% lower
than the benchmark, and this variance compared to the benchmark is caused by
a difference in the characterisation models of the two methods [46].
The last LCIA method analysed is CML­IA Baseline. the results from each case
study using that method can be seen below.
Uncertainty in Life Cycle Assessment: A Comparative Study
45
==PAGE:54==
Figure 4.32: Variation in the CML method compared to the benchmark method ­
Recipe Midpoint (H)
The CML method has very similar trends as the Impact World+ method. Here
there is also a significant difference in the ecotoxicity results, with the biodiesel
case having a result over 3000% higher than the benchmark, while the Xylitol and
Cumene cases have results that are both 500% higher than the benchmark. This
big variance in the ecotoxicity impact category is caused by a difference in char­
acterisation modelling of the two methods and which substances are included
[24]. The CML method also has varied results in the ozone depletion category
where the Xylitol case study showed a higher value, whereas the Cumene and
biodiesel had lower results compared to the benchmark, but the variance is quite
small compared to the benchmark. The eutrophication impact category also has
small variance, and the results show a slight increase in the Xylitol and Cumene
cases, while the biodiesel case had lower results in that category. Lastly, the
global warming effect had minimal difference in each case, showing a slightly
lower score in each of them, and the terrestrial acidification had a slight increase
from the benchmark.
The CML method compared to Recipe was also included in the same study as
discussed in the TRACI section [24]. The results for the TRACI method there
compared to this study were very similar. A very significant difference was seen in
the freshwater ecotoxicity compared to benchmark, at just under 2500%. The eu­
trophication impact category was higher than the Recipe method, which was also
seen in the Xylitol and Cumene cases in this project. The acidification is however
opposite, as an increase was seen in this project compared to the benchmark,
while in the other study a decrease was seen.
The last analysis that will be analysed here is the change of location to ’Rest of
the World’. These results can be seen below.
46
Uncertainty in Life Cycle Assessment: A Comparative Study
==PAGE:55==
Figure 4.33: Variation between the rest of the world compared to the benchmark
location ­ Denmark
This change in location resulted in an increase in every case and every impact cat­
egory except ozone depletion in the Cumene case. Here the biggest differences
are seen in the Xylitol and Cumene cases in ecotoxicity and eutrophication, while
the increase in global warming and terrestrial acidification was not as significant.
Uncertainty in Life Cycle Assessment: A Comparative Study
47
==PAGE:56==
5
Conclusion, recommendations &
future perspectives
In this project the goal was to look at the uncertainty due to methods in a life cycle
assessment study. This was done by looking at three cases, where benchmark
results were created in each one, and than multiple other methods tried and com­
pared to the benchmark.
The three cases were analysed and the same impact categories tested in each
one. The global warming effect showed the least amount of uncertainty across
these different methods. As the global warming is one of the most pressing is­
sues today [2], the development of this impact category is the most researched
and most methods therefore have similar results [24].
However for the other impact categories the uncertainty and difference between
methods was much more significant and the results therefore varied between
methods. The method that deviated the most from the benchmark was Impact
World+, but this could be expected as it’s impact horizon is infinite, compared to
the 100 years in the benchmark, and there are many differences in substance
coverage of the two methods.
The freshwater ecotoxicity potential, also analysed in each case was seen to show
the most difference compared to the benchmark, going well over 1000% higher
than the benchmark in both the Impact World+ method and CML. Again, this can
be explained by the fact the Impact World+ has an infinite time horizon and dif­
ferences in substance coverage. As for the CML method and the big difference
compared to the benchmark is most likely seen because of difference in charac­
terisation modelling. This big difference in the freshwater ecotoxicity is therefore a
impact category that needs to examined thoroughly in order to understand which
method best represents the environmental impact on the fresh water ecosystem.
When looking at some process changes it was clearly shown that an increase in
feedstock in a production plant is a much more sustainable change then to de­
crease the feedstock.
This report has shown that the uncertainty in a life cycle assessment can be a
problem, as different methods can produce significantly different results for the
same product. However, the most pressing environmental issue that the world is
dealing with today, global warming [2], is consistently the same across all meth­
ods. This is a positive for companies conducting LCA studies as they should be
able trust the results in the global warming impact regardless of the method being
used.
Overall life cycle assessment is a great tool to analyse a products life cycle and can
be used to choose more sustainable production ways. The issue of uncertainty
is however still a problem, as not a clear defined method has been deemed the
correct one, and therefore results that vary with over 3000% can both be right
within their own methodology.
48
Uncertainty in Life Cycle Assessment: A Comparative Study
==PAGE:57==
Recommendations & future perspectives
To further work on the subject of uncertainty in LCA, some recommendations will
be presented here on what more could be done.
• Further uncertainty analysis on for example characterisation factors using a
Monte Carlo analysis.
• Identify the different substances covered in the various methods and how
that affects the LCA results. This could give a better idea of what the different
methods focus on.
• Conducting a similar uncertainty analysis where the scope is changed. This
could for example be including the usage of the product and therefore com­
pleting the whole life cycle. As this is a more complex scope there is ex­
pected to be more significant uncertainty to account for.
• Do a LCA analysis on a product with two or more production methods. Here
the goal would be to analyse each method with multiple LCIA methods and
learn if each LCIA method would prefer the same production method.
• Analyse the normalised results in the same manner the characterised results
were analysed in this project. This would further study the uncertainties
in LCA and if the normalised results behave in a similar manner then the
characterised.
Uncertainty in Life Cycle Assessment: A Comparative Study
49
==PAGE:58==
Bibliography
[1]
Pawel Nowodziński. Sustainability challenges. Mar. 2022. URL: https://
mitefcee.org/sustainability-challenges/.
[2]
NASA. Climate change evidence: How do we know? Dec. 2022. URL: https:
//climate.nasa.gov/evidence/.
[3]
Deena Robinson. The biggest environmental problems of 2021. Jan. 2023.
URL: https://earth.org/the-biggest-environmental-problems-of-our-lifetime/.
[4]
Tim Stobierski. Types of corporate social responsibility to be aware of. Apr.
2021. URL: https://online.hbs.edu/blog/post/types- of- corporate- social-
responsibility.
[5]
Sphera’s Editorial Team. What is Life Cycle Assessment (LCA)? Oct. 2022.
URL: https://sphera.com/glossary/what-is-a-life-cycle-assessment-lca/.
[6]
Life Cycle Assessment is used in business and environmental planning
across many industries. URL: http://www.athenasmi.org/resources/about-
lca/who-does-lca-why/.
[7]
Yvonee Van der Meer. Life cycle assessment: Benefits and limitations. Dec.
2018. URL: http://fibrenet.eu/index.php?id=blog-post-eleven.
[8]
Zahir Barahmand and Marianne S. Eikeland. “Life cycle assessment under
uncertainty: A scoping review”. In: World 3.3 (2022), pp. 692–717. DOI:
10.3390/world3030039.
[9]
Asma Gasmi Benahmed et al. “Health benefits of Xylitol”. In: Applied Micro­
biology and Biotechnology 104.17 (2020), pp. 7225–7237. DOI: 10.1007/
s00253-020-10708-7.
[10]
H. R. Norouzi et al. “Economic design and optimization of zeolite­based
Cumene Production Plant”. In: Chemical Engineering Communications 201.10
(2014), pp. 1270–1293. DOI: 10.1080/00986445.2013.806312.
[11]
Guide to fame biodiesel. May 2022. URL: https://www.crownoil.co.uk/
guides/fame-biodiesel-guide/#:~:text=FAME%20(Fatty%20Acid%20Methyl%
20Ester,road%20vehicles%20and%20static%20engines..
[12]
International Organization for Standarization. Jabatan Standard Malaysia,
2008.
[13]
Michael Z. Hauschild. “Introduction to LCA methodology”. In: Life cycle as­
sessment: Theory and practice. Springer International Publishing, 2018,
pp. 59–66.
[14]
Bjørn Anders et al. “Goal Definition”. In: Life cycle assessment: Theory and
practice. Springer International Publishing, 2018, pp. 67–74.
[15]
Anders Bjørn et al. “Scope Definition”. In: Life cycle assessment: Theory
and practice. Springer International Publishing, 2018, pp. 75–116.
[16]
Iyyanki V. Muralikrishna and Valli Manickam. “Life cycle assessment”. In:
Environmental Management (2017), pp. 57–75. DOI: 10.1016/b978-0-12-
811989-1.00005-1.
[17]
Michael Z. Hauschild et al. “Life Cycle Inventory Analysis”. In: Life cycle
assessment: Theory and practice. Springer International Publishing, 2018,
pp. 117–166.
50
Uncertainty in Life Cycle Assessment: A Comparative Study
==PAGE:59==
[18]
Subramanian Senthilkannan Muthu. “Estimating the overall environmental
impact of textile processing”. In: Assessing the Environmental Impact of Tex­
tiles and the Clothing Supply Chain (2020), pp. 105–129. DOI: 10.1016/b978-
0-12-819783-7.00006-5.
[19]
Stig Irvin Olsen, Mads Borup, and Per Dannemand Andersen. “Future­Oriented
LCA”. In: Life cycle assessment: Theory and practice. Springer International
Publishing, 2018, pp. 499–518.
[20]
Mary Ann Curran. “Strengths and Limitations of Life Cycle Assessment”. In:
Background and future prospects in life cycle assessment. Springer, 2014,
pp. 189–207.
[21]
Elorri Igos et al. “How to treat uncertainties in life cycle assessment stud­
ies?” In: The International Journal of Life Cycle Assessment 24.4 (2018),
pp. 794–807. DOI: 10.1007/s11367-018-1477-1.
[22]
Mark A. Huijbregts. “Application of uncertainty and variability in LCA”. In:
The International Journal of Life Cycle Assessment 3.5 (1998). DOI: 10.
1007/bf02979835.
[23]
Gregor Wernet et al. “Life cycle assessment of fine chemical production:
A case study of pharmaceutical synthesis”. In: The International Journal of
Life Cycle Assessment 15.3 (2010), pp. 294–303. DOI: 10.1007/s11367-010-
0151-z.
[24]
Edivan Cherubini et al. “Uncertainty in LCA case study due to allocation
approaches and Life Cycle Impact Assessment Methods”. In: The Interna­
tional Journal of Life Cycle Assessment 23.10 (2018), pp. 2055–2070. DOI:
10.1007/s11367-017-1432-6.
[25]
Diptarka Dasgupta et al. “Energy and life cycle impact assessment for xylitol
production from Corncob”. In: Journal of Cleaner Production 278 (2021),
p. 123217. DOI: 10.1016/j.jclepro.2020.123217.
[26]
Nikolaus I. Vollmer et al. “Life Cycle Assessment of an Integrated Xylitol
Biorefinery with Value­Added CoProducts”. In: (2022).
[27]
DuPont. In: XIVIA™XYLITOL White PAPER (2012).
[28]
Andrea Isella and Davide Manca. “GHG emissions by (petro)chemical pro­
cesses and decarbonization priorities—a review”. In: Energies 15.20 (2022),
p. 7560. DOI: 10.3390/en15207560.
[29]
Pedro G. Junqueira et al. “Economic and environmental analysis of the
cumene production process using computational simulation”. In: Chemical
Engineering and Processing ­ Process Intensification 130 (2018), pp. 309–
325. DOI: 10.1016/j.cep.2018.06.010.
[30]
Antonio Arguelles­Arguelles, Myriam Adela Amezcua­Allieri, and Luis Fe­
lipe Ramírez­Verduzco. “Life cycle assessment of green diesel production
by Hydrodeoxygenation of Palm Oil”. In: Frontiers in Energy Research 9
(2021). DOI: 10.3389/fenrg.2021.690725.
[31]
Ari Paminto, Mahawan Karuniasa, and Evi Frimawaty. “Potential environ­
mental impact of biodiesel production from palm oil using LCA (Life Cy­
cle Assessment) in Indonesia”. In: Jurnal Pengelolaan Sumberdaya Alam
dan Lingkungan (Journal of Natural Resources and Environmental Manage­
ment) 12.1 (2022), pp. 64–71. DOI: 10.29244/jpsl.12.1.64-71.
Uncertainty in Life Cycle Assessment: A Comparative Study
51
==PAGE:60==
[32]
Jinglan Hong. “Uncertainty propagation in life cycle assessment of biodiesel
versus Diesel: Global warming and non­renewable energy”. In: Bioresource
Technology 113 (2012), pp. 3–7. DOI: 10.1016/j.biortech.2011.11.107.
[33]
Rohit Gupta et al. “Life cycle assessment of biodiesel production from rape­
seed oil: Influence of process parameters and scale”. In: Bioresource Tech­
nology 360 (2022), p. 127532. DOI: 10.1016/j.biortech.2022.127532.
[34]
Mark A. Huijbregts et al. “Recipe2016: A harmonised life cycle impact as­
sessment method at midpoint and Endpoint Level”. In: The International
Journal of Life Cycle Assessment 22.2 (2016), pp. 138–147. DOI: 10.1007/
s11367-016-1246-y.
[35]
Jane C. Bare. “Traci.” In: Journal of Industrial Ecology 6.3­4 (2002), pp. 49–
78. DOI: 10.1162/108819802766269539.
[36]
Cécile Bulle et al. “Impact world+: A globally regionalized life cycle impact
assessment method”. In: The International Journal of Life Cycle Assess­
ment 24.9 (2019), pp. 1653–1674. DOI: 10.1007/s11367-019-01583-0.
[37]
CML­IA characterisation factors. URL: https://www.universiteitleiden.nl/en/
research/research-output/science/cml-ia-characterisation-factors.
[38]
Luc Hillege. Impact categories (LCA) ­ Overview. Aug. 2022. URL: https:
//ecochain.com/knowledge/impact-categories-lca/.
[39]
9. stratospheric ozone depletion. Apr. 2016. URL: https://www.eea.europa.
eu/publications/92-9167-205-X/page010.html#:~:text=The%20dramatic%
20depletion % 20of % 20stratospheric , low % 20temperatures % 20and % 20solar %
20radiation..
[40]
Ligia B. Azevedo et al. “Global assessment of the effects of terrestrial acid­
ification on plant species richness”. In: Environmental Pollution 174 (2013),
pp. 10–15. DOI: 10.1016/j.envpol.2012.11.001.
[41]
Hannah Ritchie. The carbon footprint of foods: Are differences explained by
the impacts of methane? Mar. 2020. URL: https://ourworldindata.org/carbon-
footprint-food-methane#:~:text=The%20average%20footprint%20of%20beef,
of%20most%20plant%2Dbased%20foods..
[42]
Wood Mackenzie. Global wind turbine fleet to consume over 5.5mt of copper
by 2028. Sept. 2019. URL: https://www.woodmac.com/press-releases/global-
wind-turbine-fleet-to-consume-over-5.5mt-of-copper-by-2028/.
[43]
Earthworks. Copper sulfide mining. June 2022. URL: https://earthworks.
org/issues/copper-sulfide-mining/#:~:text=A%20peer%2Dreviewed%20study%
20of,and%20risks%20to%20public%20health..
[44]
Richard Turton et al. Analysis, synthesis, and design of Chemical Processes.
Prentice Hall, PTR, 1998.
[45]
Cecilia Snyder. Palm Oil’s environmental impact: Can it be grown sustain­
ably? June 2021. URL: https : / / www . healthline . com / nutrition / palm - oil -
deforestation.
[46]
Mikołaj Owsianiak et al. “Impact 2002+, recipe 2008 and ILCD’s recom­
mended practice for characterization modelling in Life Cycle Impact Assess­
ment: A Case Study­based comparison”. In: The International Journal of Life
Cycle Assessment 19.5 (2014), pp. 1007–1021. DOI: 10.1007/s11367-014-
0708-3.
52
Uncertainty in Life Cycle Assessment: A Comparative Study
==PAGE:61==
A
Characterisation results from
the Xylitol case study
Figure A.1: Characterisation results using Recipe (H)
Uncertainty in Life Cycle Assessment: A Comparative Study
53
==PAGE:62==
Figure A.2: Characterisation results using Recipe (E)
54
Uncertainty in Life Cycle Assessment: A Comparative Study
==PAGE:63==
Figure A.3: Characterisation results using Recipe (I)
Uncertainty in Life Cycle Assessment: A Comparative Study
55
==PAGE:64==
Figure A.4: Characterisation results using CML
56
Uncertainty in Life Cycle Assessment: A Comparative Study
==PAGE:65==
Figure A.5: Characterisation results using TRACI
Uncertainty in Life Cycle Assessment: A Comparative Study
57
==PAGE:66==
Figure A.6: Characterisation results using Impact World+
58
Uncertainty in Life Cycle Assessment: A Comparative Study
==PAGE:67==
Figure A.7: Characterisation results using ROW
Uncertainty in Life Cycle Assessment: A Comparative Study
59
==PAGE:68==
Figure A.8: Characterisation results using oil as an electricity source
60
Uncertainty in Life Cycle Assessment: A Comparative Study
==PAGE:69==
Uncertainty in Life Cycle Assessment: A Comparative Study
61
==PAGE:70==
B
Characterisation results from
the Cumene case study
Figure B.1: Characterisation results using Recipe (H)
62
Uncertainty in Life Cycle Assessment: A Comparative Study
==PAGE:71==
Figure B.2: Characterisation results using Recipe (E)
Uncertainty in Life Cycle Assessment: A Comparative Study
63
==PAGE:72==
Figure B.3: Characterisation results using Recipe (I)
64
Uncertainty in Life Cycle Assessment: A Comparative Study
==PAGE:73==
Figure B.4: Characterisation results using CML
Uncertainty in Life Cycle Assessment: A Comparative Study
65
==PAGE:74==
Figure B.5: Characterisation results using TRACI
66
Uncertainty in Life Cycle Assessment: A Comparative Study
==PAGE:75==
Figure B.6: Characterisation results using Impact World+
Uncertainty in Life Cycle Assessment: A Comparative Study
67
==PAGE:76==
Figure B.7: Characterisation results using ROW
68
Uncertainty in Life Cycle Assessment: A Comparative Study
==PAGE:77==
Figure B.8: Characterisation results with a 20% decrease in feedstock
Uncertainty in Life Cycle Assessment: A Comparative Study
69
==PAGE:78==
Figure B.9: Characterisation results with a 20% increase in feedstock
70
Uncertainty in Life Cycle Assessment: A Comparative Study
==PAGE:79==
C
Characterisation results from
the biodiesel case study
Figure C.1: Characterisation results using Recipe (H)
Uncertainty in Life Cycle Assessment: A Comparative Study
71
==PAGE:80==
Figure C.2: Characterisation results using Recipe (E)
72
Uncertainty in Life Cycle Assessment: A Comparative Study
==PAGE:81==
Figure C.3: Characterisation results using Recipe (I)
Uncertainty in Life Cycle Assessment: A Comparative Study
73
==PAGE:82==
Figure C.4: Characterisation results using Recipe CML
74
Uncertainty in Life Cycle Assessment: A Comparative Study
==PAGE:83==
Figure C.5: Characterisation results using Recipe TRACI
Uncertainty in Life Cycle Assessment: A Comparative Study
75
==PAGE:84==
Figure C.6: Characterisation results using Recipe Impact World+
76
Uncertainty in Life Cycle Assessment: A Comparative Study
==PAGE:85==
Figure C.7: Characterisation results using ROW
Uncertainty in Life Cycle Assessment: A Comparative Study
77
==PAGE:86==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Søltofts Plads, Building 228A
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.kt.dtu.dk
