==PAGE:1==
Analysis of the Interaction Behavior and Eval­
uation of the Dashboard Interface of the Re­
Hyb Novel Rehabilitation System for Stroke
Patients and Therapists.
Master Thesis
DTU Management
Department of Technology, Management and Economics
==PAGE:2==
Technical University of Denmark
MSc Eng in Design and Innovation
Master Thesis
January 29th, 2023
Analysis of the Interaction Behavior and Evaluation of the Dashboard In­
terface of the Re­Hyb Novel Rehabilitation System for Stroke Patients and
Therapists.
Author:
Marco Puteo
Student number:
202880
Signature:
Supervisors:
John Paulin Hansen
Milton Edgardo Mariani
Published by:
DTU, Department of Technology, Management and Eco­
nomics, Akademivej, Building 358, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby,
Denmark.
www.man.dtu.dk
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must in­
clude the customary bibliographic citation, including author at­
tribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, (2012). All rights reserved.
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
A stroke is a dramatic event that can cause permanent disabilities due to short­
and long­term consequences. Post­stroke conditions can have a devastating im­
pact on a person’s life by causing severe physical, cognitive, social, and mental
deficiencies. In this context, the Technical University of Denmark, as part of the
ReHyb project funded by the Horizon 2020 Framework Programme of the Euro­
pean Union, is striving to develop the best possible solutions for the novel reha­
bilitation system for stroke patients and therapists.
In this project, the aim was to further develop and test the prototype of the pa­
tient dashboard, based on previous concepts created by former DTU ReHyb team
members. By adopting a Human­centered approach and Design thinking theory,
the deliverable was the result of several reiterations. In fact, all the improvements
brought to the dashboard were data­driven. User evaluations have provided both
qualitative and quantitative data. To collect these data, four different evaluations
were designed and conducted with post­stroke patients and therapists both in
Denmark and Italy, in which by using design methods such as Interviews, Think­
aloud, Retrospection, Human­Computer Interaction experiments, and question­
naires, it was possible to test the usability of the interface and to better define the
expectations of the end users. In addition, it was possible to acquire important
notions for making the interface knowledge­based.
The methods mentioned, were used with patients from a vulnerable target group,
so they were adapted according to each situation. The biggest challenge was
determined by the inability to administer the sampling for evaluations. However,
the results contributed satisfactorily to the final design of the dashboard, as well
as promoting a discussion on the perceived usability level in connection with the
technological ability of two different cultures.
i
==PAGE:4==
Acknowledgements
I would like to express my sincerest gratitude to my thesis supervisors John Paulin
Hansen and Milton Edgardo Mariani for their guidance, support, and motivation
throughout the entire research process. Their expertise and dedication were in­
strumental in compliting this project.
I would also like to acknowledge the project partners Roskilde Golf Club for having
us and allowing me to meet and discuss with exciting and kind people, and Villa
Beretta Rehabilitation Center for their precious contribution and for providing me
with the resources and support I needed to conduct this research, with special
mention to Mauro Rossini and Giovanna Palumbo for their kindness and helpful­
ness. Of course, I also extend my gratitude to all the patients and therapists who
participated in the evaluations for their effort and help.
Special thanks go to my friends, old and new, Danilo, Gabriele, Paola, Federica,
Freng, Mavi, Paolone, Gabriele, and my girlfriend Francesca for having been a
constant source of support, encouragement, and motivation throughout this jour­
ney. You made this adventure incredible and way more fun.
Last but not least, I would like to express my deepest gratitude to my family for al­
ways believing in me; to my father and my mother for the immeasurable sacrifices
they made to let me complete my education in another country; to my brother for
always being a friend and support for me, especially during tough times; to my
uncle who, even though he is not that normal, is always helpful and affectionate;
and to my dog for being my dog. Without your love, none of this would have been
possible.
ii
==PAGE:5==
Contents
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
i
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
ReHyb . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Motivation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.3
Goals and requirements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2
Related concepts
3
2.1
Stroke . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
Home­based rehabilitation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.3
The role of technology in stroke rehabilitation . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.4
Digital twin
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
3
Design principles
7
3.1
Design process . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
3.1.1
Human­centered Design and Design Thinking
. . . . . . .
7
3.1.2
Behavioral Design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
3.1.3
UX/UI Design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
3.1.4
Summary of the design process
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3.2
Design methods and tools . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
3.2.1
Participatory Design and Group interview . . . . . . . . . .
10
3.2.2
Think­aloud method . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
3.2.3
Knowledge elicitation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.2.4
Retrospection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.2.5
Questions and prompting . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.2.6
Combining methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.2.7
System Usability Scale (SUS) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.2.8
Net Promoter Score (NPS)
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3.2.9
Human­Computer Interaction (HCI) experiment . . . . . . .
13
4
State of Research
17
4.1
Previous version of the interface
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
4.2
Design implications of the newer version . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
5
Methodology
23
5.1
Evaluation I at Roskilde Golf Club
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
5.2
Evaluations at Villa Beretta Rehabilitation Center . . . . . . . . . .
24
5.2.1
Evaluation II ­ Therapists’ expertise elicitation . . . . . . . .
25
5.2.2
Evaluation III ­ Usability evaluation with patients
. . . . . .
26
5.2.3
Evaluation IV ­ Human­Computer Interaction experiment
.
27
6
Results
31
6.1
Evaluation I at Roskilde Golf Club
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
iii
==PAGE:6==
6.1.1
Design implications of reiteration I
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
6.2
Evaluation II ­ Therapists’ expertise elicitation . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
6.2.1
Design implications of reiteration II . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
6.3
Evaluation III ­ Usability evaluation with patients
. . . . . . . . . .
46
6.3.1
Design implications of reiteration III
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
6.4
Evaluation IV ­ Human­Computer Interaction experiment . . . . . .
50
6.4.1
Design implications of reiteration IV
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
6.4.2
Data analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
7
Discussion
57
7.1
Limitations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
8
Conclusion
59
8.1
Future work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
59
References
61
A EVALUATION I PROTOCOL ­ WORKSHOP
65
B EVALUATION II PROTOCOL ­ THERAPISTS’ EXPERTISE ELICITATION 68
C EVALUATION III PROTOCOL ­ USABILITY EVALUATION
70
D EVALUATION IV PROTOCOL ­ HUMAN­COMPUTER INTERACTION EX­
PERIMENT
73
iv
==PAGE:7==
1
Introduction
A stroke is a dramatic event that represents the second highest cause of death
and disability worldwide [1] with nearly 6 million deaths per year and about 5 mil­
lion left with permanent disabilities due to the short­ and long­term consequences.
Post­stroke conditions can have a devastating impact on a person’s life by causing
severe physical, cognitive, social, and mental issues. The increasing aged popu­
lation and a higher life expectancy together represent a problematic scenario for
the healthcare industry. In fact, due to the increase in stroke patients and limited
resources available from healthcare providers, stroke patients will transition home
and continue their long­term rehabilitation at their residences, often provided with
only static written instructions.
In this scenario, their routine changes, and they find themselves in a new set­
ting where to improve and maintain the gained condition. Furthermore, stroke
treatments and rehabilitation are subjective to every individual making a uniform
rehabilitation regimen less effective [2]. In response, DTU, as a partner in the
ReHyb project funded by the Horizon 2020 Framework Programme of the Euro­
pean Union, is developing an assist­as­needed exoskeleton system that parses
the patient movements and condition data, allowing for personalizing the rehabil­
itation routine accordingly to the patient’s needs. In addition, DTU is developing
dashboard prototypes to better engage the patient and other stakeholders in the
rehabilitation journey.
1.1
ReHyb
The ReHyb project, funded by the Horizon 2020 Framework Programme of the
European Union, is striving to develop an exoskeleton that enables the elderly to
maintain a healthy and active lifestyle. Therefore, the project brings together var­
ious fields related to hybrid neuroprostheses for rehabilitation. The outcome will
be a hybrid that combines a powered exoskeleton for the upper limbs and FES
technology, to enhance interaction effectiveness by improving the user model and
wearability of the system. Additionally, an advanced control algorithm will ensure
the safe and stable execution of all interactions. Indeed, the project will also inte­
grate an advanced cognitive system that will communicate with the Digital twin of
the user, which is created from the data recorded by the exoskeleton. This com­
bination allows the robotic system to make calculations, anticipate user behavior,
and tailor interaction strategies to the user by accessing digital knowledge about
the user.
In this context, the ReHyb project required developing three different interactive
dashboards, one for therapists, one for patients, and one for third parties ­ i.e.,
family members/caregivers/etc.
1
==PAGE:8==
1.2
Motivation
As a designer, one of the greatest missions I can embrace is to improve the living
conditions of people. By joining the DTU ReHyb team, I had the opportunity to
practice User Experience and User Interface principles in a real­life case study,
with real stakeholders, and real users. I felt motivated to improve my skills in this
field because I think my competencies as well as my attitude match this area of
interest for a professional future. Mostly, I worked on improving the empathetic
aspects of my design approach by focusing on understanding the patient users’
needs, understanding them as human beings, and reasoning on how to nudge
their behavior to achieve more significant results, more specifically, how to make
them feel more engaged in their rehabilitation.
1.3
Goals and requirements
The project aimed to develop and test the prototype of the patient dashboard,
based on concepts created by former DTU ReHyb team members [3][4]. These
concepts have been used as a basis for the new prototype, and other relevant
studies from other team members were collected and analyzed [5][6]. The general
goal has been to scientifically investigate how specific individuals interact with
an interface, understand their attention and intents, and get insights into human
general behavior that would guide them to the desired scenario – in this case, to
use the patient dashboard and improve their rehabilitation journey by achieving
greater results.
To fulfill the requirements, the dashboard has been evaluated in collaboration with
experts such as therapists and engineers to prove the medical validity of the con­
tents and discuss the future implementation of the system. Moreover, other eval­
uations were done with current and former patients to attain feedback identifying
weaknesses or areas needing improvement to match the users’ expectations. The
following research project focused on the development and testing of the patient
dashboard to answer the following research question:
How can the patient dashboard be designed to elicit the highest levels of
engagement and motivation from the patient to increase adherence to the
rehabilitation routines?
As a personal goal, I fixed some objectives to accomplish, including having a bet­
ter knowledge of UX/UI Design principles with special emphasis on accessibility,
improving my empathetic skills by understanding the target users and reiterative
matching the product usability to their abilities, to experiment the best way to test
the performance of a dashboard and how to adapt the procedures to different
situations, and, finally, to deliver improvements based on the data collected.
2
==PAGE:9==
2
Related concepts
All the fundamental aspects to know before proceeding with the dissertation are
presented in this chapter.
2.1
Stroke
According to CDC (Center for Disease Control and Prevention) [7], a stroke is a
dramatic event that causes short­ and long­term consequences. It occurs when
the blood supply to the brain is blocked or a blood vessel in the brain bursts.
This shortage of oxygen, makes brain cells start to die and this evolves into a
stroke. This serious medical condition damages the brain which controls move­
ments, memory, emotions, language, and breathing.
A stroke consists of two types, ischemic or hemorrhagic. The first one occurs
when the blood to the brain is blocked, and the second one occurs when an artery
in the brain leaks blood or breaks open. There is an additional type of stroke,
called Transient ischemic attack (TIA), which is severe as major strokes but occurs
for a shorter time. Nevertheless, it must be treated as a medical emergency.
Depending on the gravity of the consequences, different actions will be taken by
the doctors.
After the lesion starts, the first phase, known as the acute phase, lasts for roughly
two weeks. The second phase, known as the sub­acute phase, typically lasts up
to six months. The last phase, or chronic phase, which might last for the rest of
the patient’s life, starts several months to years following the stroke [8].
The most common consequences of a stroke described by the National Institute of
Neurological Disorders and Stroke (NINDS) [9] consist of paralysis (hemiplegia)
or weakness (hemiparesis) of one side of the body, problems swallowing (dys­
phagia), controlling posture, walking, and balance (ataxia), sensory disturbances
such as loss of the ability to feel touch or spatial positioning, pain, numbness, prob­
lems using or understanding language (expressive, receptive, or global aphasia),
trouble with thinking and memory (anosognosia, neglect, apraxia), and emotional
disturbances (fear, anxiety, and depression).
Because of these severe conditions, the rehabilitation of post­stroke patients be­
gins in the acute­care hospital with therapists assisting the movements to make
them reacquire the ability to perform basic activities. Usually, rehabilitation takes
place in:
• Inpatient rehabilitation units
The patient stays at the facility for 2 or 3 weeks receiving a full range of
medical services and supervision.
• Outpatient units
The patient receives a wide range of services and joins therapy sessions,
returning home at night. Normally, it applies to less demanding programs.
3
==PAGE:10==
• Home­based rehabilitation
The patient practices skills and movements at home – this solution is mostly
recommended for people requiring only one type of rehabilitation therapist.
The kind of treatment to use is coordinated by the hospital.
Besides, rehabilitative therapy can take weeks, months, or years, depending on
the individual and factors such as severity and degree of damage to the brain, age,
level of alertness, the intensity of the program, concurrent medical problems, the
home environment, and cooperation of family and friends can affect the outcome
of the rehabilitation.
2.2
Home­based rehabilitation
Home­based rehabilitation takes place in the patient’s home environment, rather
than in a hospital or rehabilitation facility. This type of rehabilitation allows pa­
tients to carry out the therapy and receive support in a familiar and comfortable
environment. This can help to improve the overall quality of life.
Home­based rehabilitation can include physical therapy, occupational therapy,
speech therapy, and other forms of rehabilitation. To have a quick overview, phys­
ical therapy aims to improve the patient’s ability to move their body whereas occu­
pational therapy focuses on performing activities of daily living such as dressing or
going to the toilet [10]. Speech therapy helps with communication and swallowing.
Different systematic reviews have shown that the effects of home­based technology­
assisted interventions are similar to clinic­based therapy [11][12][13]. However, a
qualitative study of therapists and patients presented by Stephenson & Wiles [2],
shows the pros and cons of this type of rehabilitation. Staying in their home en­
vironment is a key advantage for patients, as it offers convenience and a sense
of familiarity. However, some of them may find the therapeutic environment more
suitable to focus better during rehabilitation. In addition, they may enjoy the op­
portunity to go out and spend time with other people or patients.
From the therapist’s perspective, the main disadvantage is that they do not have
full control of the environment in a home­based therapy setting. On the other hand,
if the patient is asked to carry out too demanding activities, he/she may feel lost
[2]. This aspect is extremely important and has a strong influence on therapists
regarding the integration of advanced systems into home­based therapies. I will
discuss this aspect later in the final discussion (chapter 7).
2.3
The role of technology in stroke rehabilitation
As in many other areas, technologies are used in rehabilitative therapies to facil­
itate and assist the patient during exercising: telerehabilitation, robotic devices,
sensors, serious games, tablets, Virtual Reality, and Augmented Reality are some
of these. Depending on the patient’s condition, one or more can be integrated
into the program. Patients in the chronic stage of stroke with motor problems may
benefit from using robotic devices due to high­intensity training [10], while patients
with cognitive problems may benefit from serious games that promote memory or
speech abilities. VR or AR are great to make the experience more fun. However,
4
==PAGE:11==
not everyone is familiar with these technologies, especially the elderly.
2.4
Digital twin
A Digital twin is a virtual model designed to reflect the physical counterpart based
on real­time data. It continuously runs simulations to assist in decision­making
[14]. In healthcare, a Digital twin is used to detect the patient’s parameters and
accordingly adjust the regimen of the therapy to enhance satisfaction and pro­
duce better results, as well as show statistics and visualizations of progress to the
patient. In fact, it collects data and uses them to adjust, optimize, or even pre­
dict the performance of the physical counterpart. Additionally, it can simulate the
progression of chronic diseases and predict potential complications, allowing for
early intervention and prevention. Moreover, it allows doctors to monitor the pa­
tient’s conditions remotely and make more informed decisions about what therapy
will be effective the most.
However, the biggest challenge when implementing a Digital twin is to understand
if and how it can be integrated into the user experience of the system. How can a
back­end feature be shown in the front­end?
As I will discuss later, one of the most important social aspects in therapies is
empathy. This is crucial to gain the patient’s trust and make them adopt the target
behavior. Perhaps, can a Digital twin take care of this aspect? Some studies and
publications analyzed the integration of interactive agents and the different design
implications, such as its appearance or language to perceive it as more real, that
would make stroke survivors more motivated and engaged with their rehabilitation
program [15][16].
5
==PAGE:12==
3
Design principles
To answer the research question mentioned before, the following principles, meth­
ods, and tools have been used in the design process.
3.1
Design process
3.1.1
Human­centered Design and Design Thinking
Human­centered Design is an approach that places real people at the center of
the development process [17]. It is a technique that emphasizes empathy, collab­
oration, and iteration. The goal of Human­centered Design is to develop products,
services, and systems that are usable, desirable, and useful. The process is iter­
ative, with the design being refined and adjusted based on user feedback until a
final solution is reached. This approach shares a large number of similarities with
User­centered Design. For instance, both produce outcomes that are more rele­
vant and useful for the end­users [18]. However, Human­centered Design puts the
focus on the final users while considering the human factor as crucial. Therefore.
this approach is better suited to the specific target group of this project.
Human­centered Design follows the same framework of the Design Thinking pro­
cess [19], as shown in Figure 3.1:
• Empathize
The designer research and understand the user, including their needs, goals,
and the way they do things and why. To empathize, the designer must ob­
serve, engage, and watch and listen to the target users.
• Define
The designer defines the problems observed in the previous stage. It is criti­
cal to the design process because it is the synthesis of information gathered
through empathy and research work, which defines the right challenge to
address.
• Ideate
To transition from identifying problems to creating solutions. The designer
combines rational thoughts with imagination to get innovative solutions.
• Prototype
The iterative generation of artifacts is intended to get closer to the final so­
lution. It can be anything that a user can interact with, but it is important to
build it with the user in mind.
The benefits of Human­centered Design are that it can lead to innovation, as the
focus on user needs can reveal new opportunities. Human­centered Design can
also lead to more efficient and effective solutions, as the user’s point of view is
considered throughout the design process.
7
==PAGE:13==
Figure 3.1: Reiteration in the Design Thinking process
3.1.2
Behavioral Design
In Behavioral Design insights from psychology, sociology, and anthropology help
to understand how people think, feel and act, and the related design implications
that influence and shape human behavior. Persuasion, motivation, and nudges
are some of the techniques used to create solutions that are more likely to be used
and adopted.
According to the Fogg Behavior Model (FBM) in Figure 3.2, a target behavior
occurs when a person is sufficiently motivated, he/she has enough abilities to
perform the behavior and is triggered to perform it [20].
Figure 3.2: The Fogg Behavior Model (FBM) [20]. All rights reserved.
3.1.3
UX/UI Design
User Experience (UX) Design is the process used to create products that embed
meaningful and relevant experiences for the users. UX Design always prioritizes
users’ needs when considering design solutions to enhance customer satisfaction.
8
==PAGE:14==
The aim is to understand the users’ needs ­ both expressed and unexpressed ­
observe their journey, define problems, generate tasks and user flows, create pro­
totypes and test the usability. For this reason, the universally perfect experience
does not exist, because each experience must perform for a specific target in a
specific context. By researching, prototyping, and testing, UX designers deliver
products that are easy to use, efficient, and satisfying for users.
On the other hand, User Interface (UI) Design is the process of designing the
graphic and interactive elements of the system and making the product joyful to
interact with. The focus is to create and develop layouts, visual hierarchies, pat­
terns, and navigation flows that give visual cues to the user, and, of course, the
best appearance. This includes typography, color scheme, iconography, buttons,
etc. It is crucial for determining how easy­to­use and intuitive the product will be.
Both are important for creating successful products, UX without UI is like a brain
without a body. On the contrary, UI without UX is like a body without a brain.
However, they serve different purposes [21]:
• UX designers focus on developing products that solve a problem, UI design­
ers work on the design patterns and micro details of the product.
• UX designers work on how to make a product easy to use, UI designers,
work on how to make a product delightful and enjoyable to use.
• UX is the user’s general experience, UI is what the user physically sees
while interacting with the product.
3.1.4
Summary of the design process
All these design principles have contributed together to define a general approach
that places the user at the center of development and acts as a funnel between
the user experience and the user interface as shown in Figure 3.3.
Figure 3.3: The user­centric approach used.
9
==PAGE:15==
3.2
Design methods and tools
3.2.1
Participatory Design and Group interview
Participatory Design is a collaborative approach to design that encourages active
participation from all the stakeholders involved, allowing for a more comprehen­
sive design outcome tailored to the end user’s specific needs. A typical scenario
involves participants assuming the two main roles of users and designers. De­
signers try to learn the reality of the users’ situation, while users try to verbalize
their desires and learn the appropriate means to accommodate them [22]. In this
context, a useful tool as Group Interviews seeks to hear everyone’s opinion and
get different points of view to understand a specific community and learn quickly
what is valuable to them [23]. When using this tool, one additional person is likely
needed to help the examiner by taking notes while he/she is asking the questions.
3.2.2
Think­aloud method
The think­aloud method is a research technique used to gather information about a
person’s cognitive processes while they perform a specific task [24]. This method
allows researchers to gain insight into the person’s mental processes, problem­
solving strategies, and decision­making processes, as well as any difficulties or
misconceptions they may have. Problem­solving is the cognitive process to which
this method is applied most frequently because it involves two different types
of reasoning: constructing solutions and constructing justifications for these so­
lutions [24]. The think­aloud method can be used to investigate differences in
problem­solving abilities between people, differences in difficulty between tasks,
effects of instructions, and other factors that influence problem­solving.
In Think­aloud sessions, protocols are collected by asking the subject to solve
one or more tasks while stating what they have in mind and what they think. The
subject speaks out loud whatever thoughts come to mind while performing. In prin­
ciple, this method does not generate disturbance of the thought process because
the talking is executed automatically while solving the problem[24]. However, it
is not so easy both for the experimenter and the subject to keep on talking from
the start to the end, especially at the beginning when thinking aloud is not sponta­
neous for the subject. In this case, even if the role of the experimenter should be
a restrained one, he/she should prompt the subject by asking to keep on talking.
The experimenter could feel inclined to help the subject when stuck but this and
unnecessary interference must be avoided. In fact, interference should only occur
if the subject stops talking [24].
During a Think­aloud session, the setting should make the subject feel at ease and
relaxed. Also, he/she should be settled comfortably. Therefore, the experimenter
needs a quiet room with a comfortable chair, enough light, and water at hand. This
way, the focus should be on the task, so the experimenter avoids interfering with
the thought process. As it begins, the experimenter should give an explanation
about the purpose of the research, how the data will be treated and protected, and
what is going to happen. This information works not only as a matter of ethics and
legal practice, but also to ease the subject. Then, the experimenter follows the
protocol and gives a task to the subject together with the instructions to perform
the task and say out loud what comes to his/her mind. The experimenter observes
10
==PAGE:16==
the subject doing the task and proceeds depending on the protocol adopted.
3.2.3
Knowledge elicitation
When Think­aloud is used with expert subjects we assist with the so­called knowl­
edge elicitation. This is the basis for building a good knowledge­based system,
which is a system where tasks that normally are performed by human experts are
performed by digital programs. If they collaborate, their knowledge would likely
be the basis of the system [24]. In addition, it is a good way to obtain direct data
about the solution process used by the expert. However, experts tend to hide the
unclear, poorly understood areas in his/her expertise. This is an effort to help the
examiner, by keeping things simple and excluding in­depth details. Therefore,
experts should be instructed from the beginning that it is more important that the
protocol is valid rather than comprehensible to the examiner.
3.2.4
Retrospection
Retrospection is a method used to review and reflect on past events or experi­
ences. The subject solves a problem, and the experimenter asks questions at
the end about the thought process [24]. This method presents some downsides
related to memory, in fact, people answer a question not from direct memory of
the cognitive process but from an interpretation influenced by expectations.
3.2.5
Questions and prompting
Questions and prompting is a method used to elicit information and gather data
from the subject’s problem­solving process. It implies interrupting the process
and prompting the subject to tell what he/she is thinking or doing [24]. In this tech­
nique, the experimenter can ask about specific aspects, however, the interruption
represents a big disadvantage.
3.2.6
Combining methods
Often, different methods can be combined so that one collects data that facilitate
the application of the other.
When Think­aloud and Retrospection are combined, the first is used to create
the protocol of the second by observing eventual pauses or moments when the
talking sounds incomprehensible or incomplete [24]. The retrospection must be
done right after the think­aloud session.
Instead, when the Think­aloud and Question and prompting methods are com­
bined, the subjects are immediately questioned about what they are thinking or
doing while analyzing particular aspects. The advantage is that this overcomes
the effect of memory compared to retrospection – an important aspect to con­
sider for some patients with memory disabilities ­ and allows for obtaining more
complete data [24].
3.2.7
System Usability Scale (SUS)
According to the contents issued by the DTU course “Design for interaction” held
by Associate Professor Michael Deininger in February 2021 [25], System Usability
Scale is the most widely used questionnaire for measuring perceptions of usabil­
ity, which has become an industry standard over the years. The System Usability
Scale has been developed for more than 35 years by John Brooke. The goal was
11
==PAGE:17==
to quickly measure how people perceive the usability of the system they work
with. The final output is an easy­to­use reliable tool used when carrying out user
evaluations. It is composed of 10 statements with a 5­point scale answer ranging
from “Strongly agree” to “Strongly disagree”. The value of each statement is al­
ternating, which means every item contributes to a balanced overall score, with a
contribution range from 0 to 4 [26]. In fact, to counterbalancing, for odd items – the
positively worded items) the contribution is the user response minus 1, while for
even­numbered items (the negatively worded items) the contribution is 5 minus
the user response.
To obtain the overall value of SUS, the sum of all these scores must be multiplied
by 2.5. This is to convert the range of possible values from 0 to 100, otherwise, it
would be ranging from 0 to 40. However, this overall score must not be intended
as a percentage. In fact, Bangor, Kortum, and Miller (2009) [27] investigated the
relationship between the scores and possible worded evaluation adjectives. They
proposed it is possible to evaluate the score as in Figure 3.4. Later in 2016, Sauro
& Lewis [28] presented a curved grading scale to define a cut­off score of 68 for
above­ and below­average usability scores. The scale is shown in Figure 3.5.
Figure 3.4: Different rating systems compared to SUS score [27]. All rights re­
served.
12
==PAGE:18==
Figure 3.5: The Sauro­Lewis curved grading scale [28]. All rights reserved.
3.2.8
Net Promoter Score (NPS)
Net Promoter Score is a very popular tool introduced by Frederick Reichheld in
2003, used to measure loyalty and general satisfaction of the user [25]. It consists
of asking the user how likely he/she would recommend the product, service, or
system to other friends ­ in this specific case, the formula was “How likely would
you recommend this system to other patients?”. The score ranges from 0 “Not at
all likely” to 10 “Extremely likely”. A score from 0 to 6 will label the respondent
as Detractor, a score of 7 or 8 as Passive, and a score of 9 or 10 as Promoter.
Then, the overall score is the difference between the number of Promoters and
the number of Detractors, divided by the sum of the respondents. By multiplying
by 100, the percentage is obtained. Generally, a score greater than 0 is good.
However, this tool has some downsides. Indeed, it does not make the reason
behind the answer explicit, and for this, it is not clear what specifically the NPS
added value to surveys is, as concluded in a study on whether this tool can be
considered an asset to patient experience surveys [29]. Moreover, it is not certain
that the expressed likelihood to recommend corresponds to actual recommen­
dations. Consequently, such aspects contribute to not fully relying on this tool,
demonstrated by studies that confirmed it should not be used as a primary metric
but in conjunction with larger surveys [30].
3.2.9
Human­Computer Interaction (HCI) experiment
The design of the experiment has been developed accordingly to the principles
described in the book “Human­Computer Interaction: An Empirical Research Per­
spective” by I. Scott MacKenzie [31]. Here, to better understand the theory behind
human­computer interaction and its challenges, fundamentals about human fac­
tors are introduced.
Human factors are outlined in the descriptive Newell’s model Time Scale of Human
Action (fig. 3.6), where they are divided into four bands: biological band, cognitive
band, rational band, and social band [32]. The division is based on how long
13
==PAGE:19==
performing actions take. While the biological and social bands require opposite
time­ or resources­consuming evaluation methods – respectively quantitative and
qualitative – the cognitive and rational bands can be evaluated in easier time­
constrained observations. Indeed, most of the interactions performed by humans
while using computing technologies belong to the cognitive band.
Figure 3.6: Newell’s model “Time Scale of Human Action” [32].
As the first step to designing a Human­Computer Interaction experiment, experi­
mental variables must be defined. The most important consist of:
• Independent variables
Also called factors, they define the characteristics that the participant’s be­
havior cannot influence at any time ­ e.g., device, language, or the proposed
alternatives of the system. These alternate versions are called levels or test
conditions.
• Dependent variables
Essentials to define the measurements for human behavior, that means the
variables depend on what the participant does and how he/she performs.
Usually, they relate to speed and accuracy ­ e.g., completion time, error
ratio, etc.
HCI experiment can be designed either within­subjects or between­subjects. In
within­subjects experiment, each participant is tested on all the independent vari­
ables ­ i.e., all the levels of a factor. On the contrary, if the participant is tested
on only one level of the factor, the experiment is defined as between­subjects.
Therefore, between­subjects experiment will require a larger pool of participants
compared to within­subjects.
Although the main advantage of the within­subjects design is the need for fewer
participants to carry out the experiment, another significant one is that it takes into
14
==PAGE:20==
consideration the participant’s predisposition that might influence the performance
­ i.e., his/her personality and mental or physical condition. Indeed, the results will
not be likely affected by its variance. However, as a downside, given that the
participant is exposed to different test conditions, the risk of interference arises
because he/she will practice in one condition before testing the others, and this
will have an impact on the outcome.
Such a risk makes the participants benefit from the practice in the first condition to
then perform better in the latter. In fact, he/she becomes familiar with the system
and learns how to complete the task more effectively, increasing speed, accuracy,
success, etc. This factor is known as learning effect. Because the practice will
systematically increase throughout the whole experiment, it becomes a confusing
variable. On the other hand, this aspect could lead to the exact opposite effect
caused by mental or physical fatigue, known as fatigue effect. Both conditions
could compromise the comparison between two or more different levels, therefore
the order of testing could be alternated in order to counterbalance the results.
Counterbalancing requires splitting the pool of participants into more than one
group and alternating the test conditions among them. Then, by using a Latin
square, the results’ overall means for each group can be tabulated and compared
accordingly.
15
==PAGE:21==
4
State of Research
The project team previously worked on different aspects of the project. The lat­
est version of the general system interface was developed by Jing Zhang in her
thesis project “Design of interactive dashboards for therapists and patients with
respect to optimal user experience during rehabilitation” [3]. Here, she described
the general backbone of the system defining the context analysis, which includes
User environment, User characteristics, User goals, and Product goals. Also, she
provided for the stakeholder mapping, the value propositions, and a need anal­
ysis focused on user personas, user stories, and storyboards. All these aspects
have been included in a final prototype split into the patient dashboard, therapist
dashboard, and third­parties dashboard.
In addition, Jiajing Zhang, in the special course “Serious Game for ReHyb: UX
Design for VR and Screen­based Gaming during Stroke Rehabilitation” [4], re­
searched and defined technologies to be integrated into the system, suggested a
new hierarchy structure in the Information architecture which is incorporating as­
sessment into the exercise sessions. She also defined the style for the interface
including font style, color scheme, and general UI elements. Finally, she changed
the patient’s 2D avatar with a new 3D one.
In another previous study [5], members of the DTU ReHyb team researched be­
havioral aspects of the end­users and outlined design solutions to improve the
success rate of long­term rehabilitation. Here, the main focus was on the exer­
cises and the training program, the adjustments which can lead to an improved
experience and better solution to achieve greater results.
Additional insight is presented by Timo Scheitinger in ”Design of AR rehabilitation
with a user­centered exoskeleton” [6], where he researched how to integrate AR
into the patients daily living in the best easy way. In the study, he concluded that
such technology was perceived as alien and, therefore, counterproductive. As
the main key finding, he concluded that “[...] the basis of the digital rehabilitation
process must be an easy­to­use app that can be operated on a tablet”.
4.1
Previous version of the interface
With regard to the research question of the project, only the patient’s version has
been examined. It consisted of:
Login page
The first opening page is where the patient can log name and password to enter
the dashboard.
17
==PAGE:22==
Figure 4.1: The Login page [3]. All rights reserved.
Main page
Here, the patient can see in the center of the page the avatar previously created
as well as the predominant Start element, which leads to the training session;
on the left side a list of friends intended for companionship; in the top left corner
the profile picture, name, and training level; in the top right corner the Help and
Settings section.
Figure 4.2: The main page [3]. All rights reserved.
Exercises
On this page, the patient can see what exercises are in the session’s schedule and
the materials needed to do the exercises (fig. 4.3a). The guide avatar explains
18
==PAGE:23==
them better via text and voice. Once clicked on Start, the game is presented with a
demonstration video guided by the avatar (fig. 4.3b). In the top bar, the progress of
the training is shown. The Pause button in the bottom left corner allows the patient
to temporarily pause the session. At the end of the session, the avatar motivates
the patient for the work done and presents the progress achieved (fig. 4.3c). It
is possible to view the training history in the bottom left corner. The last screen
shows the ranking of the patients compared to friends and this can be shared by
clicking the icon on the bottom left corner (fig. 4.3d).
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 4.3: The Exercises, Game, Recap, and Ranking pages [3]. All rights re­
served.
Profile
The profile screen is accessible by clicking on the profile picture in the top left
corner of the Main page. Then an overlay appears and shows personal data such
as name, gender, date of birth, cognitive level, physical level, training level, and
points. A big button in the bottom right corner of the pop­up allows the user to edit
these data. In the top right corner, an outlined red button logs out the patient from
the dashboard.
19
==PAGE:24==
Figure 4.4: The Profile page [3]. All rights reserved.
Help
In this screen, two large modules let the patient ask for help either from the ther­
apist or third parties.
Figure 4.5: The Help page [3]. All rights reserved.
Settings
Here, sliders allow the user to adjust the main volume, music volume, and font
size and decide whether to receive notifications.
20
==PAGE:25==
Figure 4.6: The Settings page [3]. All rights reserved.
4.2
Design implications of the newer version
The design implications proposed by the newer study [4] consisted in integrat­
ing new contents in the architecture of the system (fig. 4.8) and adopting a new
style for graphics and elements such as a 3D avatar, a new easily recognizable
thicker font, a new color scheme according to the original ReHyb system and color
psychology in healthcare products with light blue as the primary color, purple as
secondary, and light yellow as the accent color (fig. 4.7). In addition, some UI ele­
ments have been specified such as speech bubbles for the Virtual Coach, targets
to assist the movements, buttons, and a comfort rate box (fig. 4.9).
Figure 4.7: The main page of the newer prototype [4]. All rights reserved.
21
==PAGE:26==
Figure 4.8: The Assessment phase in the newer prototype [4]. All rights reserved.
Figure 4.9: Comfort box at the end of the Assessment phase in the newer proto­
type [4]. All rights reserved.
22
==PAGE:27==
5
Methodology
Once agreed with the team on merging the two prototypes into one, the main pur­
pose was to test the interface with target groups to be able to collect feedback
and evaluate whether the work done so far was correct. Therefore, some evalua­
tions with relevant partners have been planned: the first one with the post­stroke
patients’ group at Roskilde Golf Club; the second, the third, and the fourth ones
with the Italian project partner Villa Beretta Rehabilitation Center of the Valduce
Hospital.
In this context, I had the opportunity to interview and discuss with several post­
stroke patients as well as therapists, evaluate the patients’ dashboard and its
usability level, and analyze whether the aspects and features that have been im­
plemented so far comply with certain clinical approaches.
5.1
Evaluation I at Roskilde Golf Club
The first evaluation has been conducted at Roskilde Golf Club on October 21st,
2022. Here, a post­stroke patients group meets every Friday to play golf. The
organization kindly invited us to the meeting and, therefore, provided a very inter­
esting sample to evaluate. Since the evaluation was simultaneously conducted
with another evaluation of the third­party dashboard, the sampling criteria were
that the participant had to be either a post­stroke patient or a family member or
caregiver.
First, the patients/relatives/caregivers were asked to participate by filling up the
informative form where they also expressed their preference to join the group
of English­speaking or Danish­speaking. 7 people out of 20 joined the English­
speaking group, 5 men and 2 women, both wives of two participants. The eval­
uation took place after lunch at the Golf Club restaurant in a spacious place but
with the kitchen quite near, thus the room was rather noisy, especially when the
two groups started talking loud during the session.
We started the workshop (fig. 5.1) by distributing to each participant a booklet with
the different screens of the dashboard printed out. The method used was based
on what is described in subsection 3.2.1. The screens examined were the Home
page, Profile page, Help page, Exercises page, and Exercises’ recap page. Login,
Settings, and Ranking pages have been excluded from the evaluation because
the first was not considered important content to be tested at that time, the second
was considered superfluous ­ in fact, the volume levels and notifications can be
set directly from the device settings, while adjusting the font size would disarrange
the layout and, therefore, further analysis would be required before integrating ­
and, finally, the Ranking page was not needed, as the concept would be tested
by other screens.
Every sheet was showing the screen with space for notes below, and for each
screen, 2 or 3 questions were asked to start the discussion and collect insight.
23
==PAGE:28==
The examiner’s booklet was slightly different, with the questions printed on the
back of each sheet, allowing asking questions while showing the screen to the
participants.
Figure 5.1: The setting for the evaluation at Roskilde Golf Club.
To record and store the data of this evaluation, a voice recording smartphone
has been placed in the middle of the table, in addition to written notes. The total
duration time was almost 1 hour. The detailed protocol of the evaluation is shown
in Appendix A.
5.2
Evaluations at Villa Beretta Rehabilitation
Center
As a native­speaking Italian, the ReHyb team proposed I conduct evaluations with
a partner located in Italy. This was mainly to overcome the language barriers which
make the evaluations difficult and the required methods hard to be used with the
target group. However, the main goal was to collect insights from therapists and
patients from other cultures to have an additional understanding of the use of the
system in different countries. Therefore, 3 more evaluations were conducted at
Villa Beretta Rehabilitation Center between November 2022 and January 2023 ­
one with therapists, the other two with sub­acute or chronic patients.
Villa Beretta is a rehabilitation center located in Costa Masnaga, province of Lecco,
Italy. As part of the Rehabilitation Medicine Department at Valduce Hospital ­
Como, Italy ­ it aims to provide the best possible functional recovery for individuals
with disabilities caused by genetic or acquired neurological conditions. The cen­
ter is equipped with advanced technology for evaluating patients’ functions and for
rehabilitation treatment for both the lower and upper limbs. Thanks to the applied
research and development of leading­edge technology, which can be applied to
24
==PAGE:29==
all phases of the various rehabilitation therapies, as well as long­time experience
in the use of robotics systems in the clinical environment, it is currently an inter­
national reference center for neuro­muscular rehabilitation, movement analysis,
and telemedicine.
During my stay, the partner was very kind and cooperative and tried to meet my
requests as best as possible. The sampling criteria were only that the participant
had to be a post­stroke patient. In fact, since recruiting participants from day to
day between inpatients and outpatients was already challenging, these criteria
were minimized to not discard any participants.
The objectives of the evaluations were to validate the concepts integrated into the
current prototype of the patient dashboard so far, test the functioning of the system
in terms of relevant contents and information ­i.e., if the features are helpful, clear,
and well­organized, user­friendly, and pleasing ­ and, finally, test the navigation
throughout the interface.
In these in­clinic evaluations, the prototype consisted of the Figma prototype trans­
lated into Italian to make it as familiar as possible for the participants. The proto­
type was run on Apple iPad Pro (1st generation) 11­inch Wi­Fi 64GB with a screen
resolution of 2388x1668 pixels. Before every evaluation, an informative form to fill
out was handed out to meet the ethical requirements in matters of research that
involve humans. This included an explanation about the nature of the research,
the data collection and storage, and the right to terminate the participation at any
time.
5.2.1
Evaluation II ­ Therapists’ expertise elicitation
The evaluation with the therapists was conducted on November 24th­25th, 2022.
Here, I had the opportunity to assimilate a lot of knowledge about the important
aspects to consider for successful rehabilitation. For these sessions, I used the
Bioengineering office in the facility. It was quiet, depending on the different mo­
ments of the day, and light, thanks to the sunny days at that moment. In these two
days, 8 therapists participated in the expertise elicitation sessions ­ more specifi­
cally, 3 physiatrists, 3 physiotherapists, and 2 neuropsychologists.
First, they have been asked to do a retrospection about the process of assessing
the patient’s conditions and the key points to take into consideration based on the
individual area of competencies. Then, they have been asked to think aloud about
how they would approach a stroke patient who is not motivated enough during the
rehabilitation and discuss all the important human aspects related. Therefore, the
method used was a combination of the Think aloud and Retrospection methods,
as described in subsection 3.2.6. In fact, the purpose was to elicit knowledge
from therapists’ expertise, thus developing the dashboard based on knowledge.
Finally, they have been asked to navigate through the prototype and evaluate it.
To record and store the data of this evaluation a voice recording smartphone has
been placed on the desk, in addition to written notes. The prototype used was
integrating all the design improvements from the previous evaluation at Roskilde
Golf Club. The duration of each session was almost 1 hour, for a total of 7­8 hours.
The detailed protocol of the evaluation is shown in Appendix B.
25
==PAGE:30==
5.2.2
Evaluation III ­ Usability evaluation with patients
The third evaluation was conducted again at Villa Beretta Rehabilitation Center
from November 28th to December 2nd, 2022, and it was a conventional laboratory­
based test. Here, the sessions consisted in testing the quality of the user expe­
rience and the usability of the dashboard. In fact, the patients were additionally
asked to fill out usability and satisfaction questionnaires to gather quantitative
data about the usability of the interface. The prototype used was integrating all
the design improvements resulting from the previous evaluation with therapists.
For this evaluation, the partner provided me with a private room, where there was
a desk and the subject was in front of me. There was a window right next to the
desk, so the light was pleasant in the morning, while in the afternoon the room
lighting was good and there was no risk of eye strain. This setting is shown in
Figure 5.2.
The pool of participants consisted in both inpatients and outpatients who accepted
to participate in the evaluation for a total number of 10 people, 9 men and 1
woman, aged between 37­76. It was heterogeneous in matters of disabilities both
cognitive and physical, with a predominance of the latter.
Each session started with a brief introduction to the ReHyb project to have a bet­
ter understanding of the system. Afterward, the participants were asked to solve
different tasks by navigating through the dashboard and thinking aloud about their
problem­solving process. To adapt the methods to the conditions of the partici­
pants, the Think aloud was combined with the Question and prompting method as
described in subsection 3.2.6. The tasks given were to start the daily exercises,
ask the therapist for help, and declare if personal progress was following a good
or a bad trend. To make them feel more comfortable, it was made clear from the
beginning that there was no possibility of failing, and the goal was not to receive
a grade on the prototype, or the work done, but to reason on their perception
of the interface and express honest feedback – especially bad feedback ­ which
eventually would lead to improvements.
At the end of each session, participants were asked to fill out the System Usabil­
ity Scale (SUS) questionnaire to measure the usability of the dashboard. How­
ever, given that the sample was not native English speakers, and mostly not even
knowing English, an Italian­translated version of the questionnaire was needed.
Unfortunately, no translated versions have been officially validated yet. Neverthe­
less, in 2011, Sauro [33] reported that unofficial translations into Spanish, French,
and Dutch have been done and it appeared to have similar internal reliability to
the original English version. In addition, Blažica & Lewis (2015) [34] presented
a Slovenian­translated version of the SUS and the results indicated that it can
be used with confidence because they highlighted it has properties similar to the
English version. Therefore, desk research was done to find the most reliable
Italian­translated version.
The questionnaire adopted was the one issued by the Italian research team Cog­
nitiveLab, which collaborates with the Italian Ministry of Public Administration [35].
All data collected through the questionnaire were digitized for storage and analy­
sis.
26
==PAGE:31==
Moreover, following the same scoring system, two additional statements were pro­
posed to compare the score given with the participant’s technological skills and
level of satisfaction and seek any trends:
1. I think the system would make me feel more engaged during my rehabilita­
tion.
2. My current technological skills allowed me to interact with the system.
Finally, Net Promoter Score (NPS) was used to measure the overall opinion of the
participants about the system. In this context, with the support of the think­aloud
sessions and the SUS questionnaire, it was adopted as a general assessment of
satisfaction.
Again, to record and store the data of this evaluation a voice recording smartphone
has been placed on the desk, in addition to written notes. The duration of each
session was around 40­45 minutes, for a total of 8­9 hours. The detailed protocol
of the evaluation is shown in Appendix C.
Figure 5.2: The setting for the evaluations with patients at Villa Beretta Rehabili­
tation Center.
5.2.3
Evaluation IV ­ Human­Computer Interaction
experiment
As a last evaluation, a Human­Computer Interaction (HCI) experiment was needed
to test out if the well­intentioned design changes that came out from the previous
evaluations were corresponding to actual performance improvements.
This evaluation was supposed to be conducted at Villa Beretta Rehabilitation Cen­
ter from December 12th to December 16th, 2022. However, it was postponed due
to a COVID­19 outbreak at the clinic. Therefore, it was conducted from January
27
==PAGE:32==
9th to January 13th, 2023 ­ the impacting results of this setback on the research
will be discussed in the next chapter.
The design of the experiment was developed accordingly to the principles de­
scribed in subsection 3.2.9. As mentioned before, the participants’ availability
was defined day by day at the clinic, thus the within­subjects design was the most
feasible.
The experiment was conducted in the same room as the previous one, with the
same setting shown in Figure 5.2. The pool of participants consisted in both in­
patients and outpatients who accepted to participate in the evaluation for a total
number of 8 people, 4 men and 4 women, aged between 37­69. It was hetero­
geneous in matters of disabilities both cognitive and physical, but this time with
a predominance of the first. Because the participants were not the same ones
from the previous evaluation, the sessions started with a brief introduction to the
ReHyb project to have a better understanding of the system.
The evaluation was divided into 3 different small experiments, each one based on
two versions of the prototype, labeled as test condition A or test condition B:
Experiment I
The goal was to investigate which icon would be more effective to make the user
landing on the Help section. Thus, the task was to click on the desired icon letting
to ask for help from the therapist. Here, the independent variables were the device
and language, while the dependent variable was the most clicked icon.
Figure 5.3: Test condition of Experiment I.
Experiment II
The goal was to investigate what was the best solution for the user to consult
other therapists. Therefore, the task was to make a call to a therapist different
28
==PAGE:33==
from the primary one. The independent variables were the device, language,
and interface. The Levels of the interface were the small button in the “Ask your
therapist” section (fig. 5.4a) or a big button in the “Ask for help” main section
(fig. 5.4b). The dependent variables were task completion time, error ratio, and
the number of clicks.
(a)
(b)
Figure 5.4: Test conditions of Experiment II.
Experiment III
The goal was to investigate if a scrollable frame or an expandable section was
easier for the user to visualize the personal data. The task was to check the
strength improvements. The independent variables were the device, language,
and interface. The Levels of the interface were a scroll bar (fig. 5.5a) or a “Show
more” button (fig. 5.5b) in the Profile section. The dependent variables were again
task completion time, error ratio, and the number of clicks.
(a)
(b)
Figure 5.5: Test conditions of Experiment III.
On Day 1, after the introduction to the project, the experiment started by asking
the participant to complete the different tasks by using the A­B order of test con­
ditions. However, since the sample had changed from the previous evaluation,
29
==PAGE:34==
some participants seemed disorientated and unable to complete the tasks. In­
deed, Experiment III failed for both participants on that day. From Day 2 onward,
a different approach was needed. Therefore, after the participants had been intro­
duced to the project, they were asked to navigate through the dashboard without a
particular task to perform to at least understand the architecture. However, I illus­
trated in person some features to prevent the learning effect eventually caused by
letting them practice with the dashboard. From that moment on, the experiment
started working. On Day 2, the ordering of test conditions was B­A, as to meet the
counterbalancing requirements. The experiment in the following days was carried
out by continuing alternating the test conditions.
To record and store the data of this evaluation, I printed a table for each experi­
ment, divided by participant, A or B test condition, completion time, errors, and the
number of clicks. Here, whenever an experiment began, I ran the stopwatch, and
when the task was completed I stopped it and wrote down the time taken. While
the participant was performing the task, I observed how many clicks he/she made
and how many took him/her off track. Once the experiment was over, I wrote the
results on the table and moved on to the next experiment. This was possible for
me because the operating speed of many patients was low. Finally, the results
have been tabulated and compared by using a 2X2 Latin square (fig. 5.6) to ac­
complish the counterbalancing. In addition to tables, the screen recording feature
of the device was used to record the behavior of the participant.
At the end of each session, to gather more feedback about the usability of the
system, the patients who had not participated in the previous evaluation were
asked to fill out both the SUS and NPS questionnaires too.
The duration of each session consisting of three experiments plus questionnaires
was around 30­35 minutes, for a total of 4­5 hours. The detailed protocol of the
evaluation is shown in Appendix D.
Figure 5.6: The 2X2 Latin square used to counterbalance the ordering of test
conditions.
30
==PAGE:35==
6
Results
The results from every evaluation generated different design implications which
allowed for reiterative discuss the prototype and its feature as well as its design
and the looking. The results from the evaluations with therapists contributed to
what the system should do, and the results from the evaluations with patients
contributed to what the system should show. These results led to the final exper­
iment to decide whether to integrate the implementations designed. Below, are
the results produced.
6.1
Evaluation I at Roskilde Golf Club
In the evaluation at Roskilde Golf Club, most of the screens of the prototype were
evaluated one by one.
Main page
In this screen (fig. 6.1), the Start button was immediately identified as the main
element. This made it easy to know where to start and it was clear that it would
lead to activity.
Regarding the avatar, it was clear that he was the one who was going to take
action. However, it was considered not so realistic because it was not representing
personal issues, and therefore it should be more customized. Nevertheless, skins
and accessories were considered as not so relevant but pleasant.
It was clear to the group that the profile frame on the top left corner was recall­
ing personal information. However, shortenings should be avoided given that LV
meaning was not clear. In addition, it was not understandable to click on this
frame to edit the profile.
The Settings button on the top right corner was misleading. In fact, it was not
clear whether it was about system settings or customization settings i.e., where
the system allows selecting the patient’s disabilities.
31
==PAGE:36==
Figure 6.1: The Main page of the prototype.
Profile
The biggest problem in this screen (fig. 6.2) was that no clear data about the
progress were shown as well as visualizations about the actual situation. Also, it
has been suggested that projections about rehabilitation would make the interface
more engaging. There were a lot of confusing elements, such as Points, Cogni­
tive, Physical, and Training level, which led the participants to think they could be
edited by the Edit button.
Figure 6.2: The Profile page of the prototype.
Help
Although this screen (fig. 6.3) was rather simple, different questions arose. Who
32
==PAGE:37==
is the therapist? A doctor, a physiotherapist, or a neurologist? Therefore, it was
considered useful to have your actual therapist already in the button. Usually,
the most common questions they ask therapists are specific and therapy related.
While discussing this aspect, very good feedback was given from one of the partic­
ipants, who started talking about how bad his therapist was. However, asking him
to better articulate the matter, he retracted saying that, to be honest, he does not
consider his therapist incompetent but rather believes the therapist is not compe­
tent enough with his disability. Therefore, this feedback provided the opportunity
to make a list of the therapists of the patient’s rehabilitation center sorted by area
of competencies.
With regards to the third party, it was not clear what it actually means. However,
statements such as “my wife knows me better than my therapist”, confirmed the
importance of it and that a shortcut to ask for help to a personal contact was
something to keep into consideration for the design.
Figure 6.3: The Help page of the prototype.
Exercises
In the Exercise screen (fig. 6.4), it was noted that the Start button looked redun­
dant. To solve this problem, they suggested making each exercise frame click­
able. Moreover, an introduction for each exercise would be desirable to explain
the goal and prevent the user from skipping any of them. They also asked for the
possibility of having Warmup and Cooldown sessions before and after the exer­
cises to prepare the body for movements, and, consequently, to prevent pain or,
even worse, injuries. Also, they noted it would be desirable to show the expected
time to better scheduling the day. Finally, the You need frames were not clear,
and if tools would be needed, they suggested finding a different approach.
33
==PAGE:38==
Figure 6.4: The Exercise page of the prototype.
Exercises recap
This screen (fig. 6.5) was probably the most criticized. The level­up icons for
Strength, Speed, and Cognitive or Physical Level were totally misleading ­ “maybe
I can set the level of strength or speed”. Also, it was not possible to view a recap for
each exercise. The balloons were judged as too childish and inappropriate, and
they suggested something more discrete on the daily basis and cheering when
some important progress is achieved. They also expressed the need to see a
sort of road map of the rehabilitation to visualize at what point of the rehabilitation
program they are, where they started, and where they can get by keep on training.
Regarding the stars earned and, more in general, the scoring system, they ap­
peared not really into competing with other people, instead, they tend to compete
against themselves ­ “We all are different”, “I would like to be a better me”, “Get­
ting better, but also getting worse, is motivating”, “You have to remember the good
pace”. Therefore, a personal diary where to put comments at the end of each ex­
ercise would be desirable.
Finally, the Virtual Coach has been discussed. They argued that it could be good
for motivating, but not as playful as it is. Instead, it should be more functional.
34
==PAGE:39==
Figure 6.5: The Exercises recap page of the prototype.
6.1.1
Design implications of reiteration I
The results from the first evaluation produced different design implications, which
are illustrated as follows:
Main page
On the top left corner of the Main page (fig. 6.6), to make the interface more in­
tuitive and simple, the Profile section has been replaced by simple written data
about the patient, such as name, days since the therapy started, and textual feed­
back on progress. Any element that might suggest this section was clickable was
removed. On the top right corner, the Settings section has been excluded as it
was just confusing and will be managed by the device settings. The Help section
has been moved to the right and the Profile section has been moved to its place.
No changes have been made to the Start button since it worked fine. About the
avatar, it was decided to leave behind the idea of using the 3D model from the
previous prototype, while integrating a photorealistic avatar created through the
platform Ready Player Me.
This innovative platform, founded in 2014, allows users to create and share their
virtual reality avatars by starting from a photo or customizing it with a wide range
of features, including the possibility of different clothing, hairstyles, and acces­
sories [36]. The same features will be integrated into the other ReHyb dash­
boards as presented by Gábor Máté Gulyás in his thesis project ”Implementation
of Interactive Progress­ and Performance Monitoring Web Dashboard for Digital
Twin­based Stroke Therapy” [37], thus different presets must be created to rig the
avatar and emulate the different potential disabilities.
In this way, the avatar will look more real as requested. However, it will be pos­
sible to customize the avatar through the third party dashboard as illustrated by
Israa Kerim in her thesis project ”Design of Interactive Dashboards for Therapists
and Patients in Digital Stroke Therapy”[38]. The motivation behind this choice is
35
==PAGE:40==
supported by some studies in which it has been shown that avatars resembling
the user’s physical appearance, commonly called self­avatars, can effectively pro­
mote specific target behaviors [39]. Indeed, a behavioral change can be eventu­
ally induced thanks to a phenomenon known as the Proteus Effect, in which the
visual characteristics of an individual’s avatar can alter his/her behavior [40].
Figure 6.6: The Main page after Evaluation I.
Profile
The Profile page (fig. 6.7) has been changed and has become a separate page.
On the left, it is shown an overview of the patient’s data, such as photo, name, ID
number ­ in case of support, this number will identify the patient ­ age, physical
information, and duration of his/her therapy, with no Edit button. Also, the Logout
has been made more intuitive. In the central frame, visualizations of patients’
personal data still had to be defined.
36
==PAGE:41==
Figure 6.7: The Profile page after Evaluation I.
Help
Compared to the previous version, the header of the page and the central element
have been merged as it was redundant. Therefore, the page (fig. 6.8) appears
clearer and more pleasant. The two icons of the therapist and third party have
been simplified. In fact, the button to call the therapist shows a photo of him/her
and the current status, i.e., Online, Offline, or Busy. This allows the patient to
immediately recognize the face of his/her therapist and consequently receive the
help needed.
Figure 6.8: The Help page after Evaluation I.
By clicking on Ask your therapist, the patient can leave him/her a message and
37
==PAGE:42==
wait for a response (fig. 6.9a). Moreover, starting from the insight collected about
the various competencies of different therapies, a list of therapists ­ with job titles
and areas of competence ­ has been designed (fig. 6.9b). This list is accessible via
the ”Other therapists” button shown in Figure 6.9a and lets the patient ask for help
or get a consultation from other professional figures within the rehabilitation center.
This will make the patient feel more listened to and receive the right support.
(a)
(b)
Figure 6.9: The Ask your therapist page after Evaluation I.
Similarly, it is possible to add a personal contact and define who is the person to
call when any help is needed.
Figure 6.10: The Add a contact procedure after Evaluation I.
Exercises
In this screen also (fig. 6.11a), the redundant elements have been removed. Ad­
ditionally, the exercise frame has been modified to be more consistent with the
interface. The exercise now shows what will be the focus and the time indication
for each exercise has been replaced by a general estimate for the whole session.
The ”You need” frame has been removed too, indeed, every time the user starts
an exercise, he/she will be provided with an explanation of the rules and what is
needed. The first exercise is the only one the user can access, while the others
38
==PAGE:43==
are locked. After completing each exercise, the next one will be unlocked. In addi­
tion, since the main purpose of the dashboard is to make the patient do exercises,
the color scheme in this crucial page is based on red and green. In UI Design,
red and green can be used to convey concepts, and, therefore, make elements
actionable. Red is often associated with either an emergency or a warning ­ in
this case, the Back button to leave the exercises page ­ and usually discourages
the user from making that decision. On the contrary, green is associated with a
positive outcome and encourages the user to take the intended action [41] ­ in this
case, clicking on the Start button and start training.
In addition, during the exercises (fig. 6.11b), the page is on full­screen, with the
Pause button on the bottom left corner to stop temporarily the exercise or, on the
bottom right corner, the STOP button to immediately stop the exercise ­ e.g., in
case of an emergency. This scheme aims to increase the ability of the patient,
and, therefore, complete the target behavior, as explained in Section 3.1.2. On
the top part, a progress bar shows the user where he/she is in the training session.
Finally, the virtual coach has been removed from this page as it will only interact
with the user during the training and assessment phase.
(a)
(b)
Figure 6.11: The Exercises pages after Evaluation I.
Exercises recap
According to the feedback received, several elements on this page have been
removed or redesigned (fig. 6.12). First of all, the Congratulations badge has
been replaced with more discreet and serious textual feedback. The results are
displayed in a more intuitive way to lead to fewer misinterpretations. Since the
general ranking was considered superfluous and therefore removed, the rewards
and levels have been replaced by information regarding what has been increased
or decreased, as well as the total time to complete the training session. A field for
text has also been added to leave comments and keep track of personal thoughts.
The same information is available for each exercise. Finally, a central frame shows
the user the visualizations regarding his/her performance.
39
==PAGE:44==
Figure 6.12: The Exercises recap page after Evaluation I.
6.2
Evaluation II ­ Therapists’ expertise elicitation
In this evaluation, much knowledge was shared and the feedback gathered led to
many interesting insights regarding content to be integrated into the dashboard.
The first therapist was a young physiotherapist with a strong academic approach,
therefore she provided detailed explanations mostly about how a patient is treated
in the acute, sub­acute, and, finally, chronic phase. From a medical perspective,
the most important aspects to take into account during the rehabilitation of a pa­
tient are to prevent tertiary pains ­ i.e., muscle­tendon retractions, sores, etc. ­
recover muscle strength, and improve muscle control, as well as attention deficit.
As for the acute, sub­acute, and chronic phases, it is important to set short­,
medium­, and long­term objectives. During exercises, the rules of the games
must be emphasized as confusion often leads to failure. In­person, the therapist
understands the difficulties during the exercise through observation and makes
adjustments accordingly ­ e.g., in a balance exercise, they could ask the patient
to change the feet distance if they detect a problem. She also confirmed that as­
sessment phases are carried out before, during, and after the training session,
not only to evaluate but also to adjust the difficulty of the exercises.
As additional general matters, she argued that if patients suffer from hemispa­
tial neglect, they ignore the left or right side of the space. Although they are not
unable to perceive it, they do not consider it. Thus, the patient must be pushed
to consider the blind part through the perceived part ­ e.g., making movements
starting from the right and ending on the left or vice versa. To assess the cog­
nitive conditions, the Mini­Mental State Examination (MMSE) or the Functional
Independence Measure (FIM) is used. When evaluating the prototype, to moti­
vate a patient, she suggested making it clear that what has been done is useful by
providing good feedback, to ask why he/she feels as selected in the comfort rate
40
==PAGE:45==
box (fig. 4.9). Finally, divide the tasks into smaller ones and set micro­objectives
to work on tasks the patient considers as important to feel independent again.
The second therapist was a physiotherapist as well. She explained that to mo­
tivate the patient, it is fundamental to be empathetic. Concerning providing bad
feedback when dealing with an uncooperative patient, she observed that an or­
dinary exhortation works well enough during the exercises, while, from a general
perspective, bad feedback must be communicated in a motivational way, not bru­
tally or straight to the point. Therefore, when evaluating the prototype, she sug­
gested providing live feedback to make the patient perform better through textual
indications.
The third and last physiotherapist was very empathetic and friendly. He started
sharing with me his approach and knowledge. In the first stage, he considers it
essential to build loyalty and make the patients trust the therapist by focusing on
their current abilities, observing their movements, and making them aware right
after. This is necessary to make them realize their progress during the rehabili­
tation program. If the patient shows a lack of motivation, he brings up the family
or sentimental sphere. About giving bad feedback, he agreed with his colleague
and added that he usually deals with it by taking notes about it and then checking
whether the problem entails a negative trend. In this case, he faces it together
with the patient.
When evaluating the prototype, he observed that the chat on the ”Ask your thera­
pist” page is confusing, thus it would be better to make it additional to something
easier like a call or video call. About the integration of a virtual coach or a digital
twin, he argued that any call for action must be honest: if embodying a family
member, a digital version ­ thus, fictitious ­ would be perceived as deceitful. In­
stead, perhaps a message, a notification, or a ”poke” from a real family member
would be more effective.
The fourth and fifth therapists were two neuropsychologists and they participated
together in a joint session. First, they presented their approach for a cognitive
evaluation of the patient. First, they start with the assessment of the deficit and
its impact on interpersonal interaction through many different tests. For example,
during the short­term memory assessment, they show something to the patients
and then wait until they say they are ready. Next, they observe how long it takes
to complete the task and how many mistakes they made. Finally, they analyze
how the completion time and error ratio varies throughout the rehabilitation.
They confirmed that empathy is fundamental for a therapist to carry out a suc­
cessful rehabilitation program, therefore when patients refuse to exercise multiple
times, they take it seriously and ask a psychologist to understand and work on
the underlying causes. However, sometimes, demotivation can be caused by the
repetitiveness of the exercises or the complexity of the system or the equipment
used. Therefore, they suggested first familiarizing patients with the system at the
hospital, then continuing to use it confidently at home. When evaluating the pro­
totype, they argued that, from a cognitive perspective, the digital twin, as shown
in the introduction of the project, would represent an added value for the patient
only if integrated into an immersive experience ­ i.e., Virtual Reality or Augmented
41
==PAGE:46==
Reality.
The sixth and seventh therapists were two physiatrists and, again, they partici­
pated together in a joint session. They immediately appeared to me very expert
ad empathetic, enthusiastic about the project, and with a creative approach to
problem­solving. They started discussing their approach, which starts with creat­
ing incremental objectives while taking into consideration the patient’s condition.
To keep the morale high, they define together with him/her the fixed objectives of
the rehabilitation and the additional personal objectives. To motivate the patient,
they emphasize the transition to a new exercise to remark on the improvement.
Certainly, the difficulty of the exercises must be fitting the patient’s abilities, oth­
erwise, this can make the patient feels not engaged enough.
If the patient’s performance appears weak, to better understand the cause, they
suggested starting with exercises that involve different stimuli to distinguish the
deficit, and then continuing with targeted exercises intended to evaluate what
causes the previous error ­ e.g., if the patient fails to follow the line, the next
exercise could test the coordination, and the following one the range of motion.
In general, to make the patient understand the purpose of the exercises, it is rec­
ommended that each of them is task­oriented to practice and deal with real­life
scenarios. During the rehabilitation program, they manage bad feedback by not
communicating it to the patients, instead, by analyzing it and encouraging the
patient to perform better in that aspect during the next session. Afterward, they
present it as good feedback.
When evaluating the system as a whole, they agreed with the neuropsychologists
on making the patient familiar with the system at the hospital first, because they
explained the importance of checking if the patient wears the device correctly, of
training patients and third­party ­ i.e., relatives, caregivers ­ on using it. Perhaps,
it would be beneficial for the patients to wear it, use it for a while, and get used
to it under the supervision of therapists at the rehabilitation center, before using it
on their own. In addition, they suggested that the digital twin should replicate the
patients’ movements only when they reach a new achievement.
Concerning the dashboard design, they suggested implementing a time indica­
tion around the Start button on the Main page to make the interface look different
every day, thus avoiding repetitiveness and, consequently, demotivation. Finally,
the visualizations in the profile and at the end of the exercises must be simple and
highly intuitive, while the complex ones must be hidden but available for patients
who are curious or skilled enough. In their opinion, the most effective visualiza­
tions concern progress bars ­ e.g., the time elapsed since the start of therapy, or
the progress made towards the fixed and additional objectives defined together.
The last therapist was a physiatrist too. He agreed with what his colleagues pre­
viously said about initial assessments of the patient’s condition to then define the
most suitable therapy based on short­, medium­, and long­term objectives. In ad­
dition, he emphasized how important it is to be positive, make the patient aware
of the progress, and understand his/her weaknesses but, at the same time, never
promise unattainable goals. On the other hand, he discussed how he deals with
bad feedback, agreeing with previous opinions to first analyze the data and then
42
==PAGE:47==
discuss it with the patient to work on it. However, to partially prevent this problem,
each time the patient starts the training session, he /she should be able to choose
the exercise to do from a few variations of it. In this way, it is possible to observe
what the patient does less or more and thus monitor his/her attitude.
6.2.1
Design implications of reiteration II
The results from the evaluation with therapists produced the following major de­
sign changes:
Profile
The Profile page now includes different visualizations such as a progress bar to
get an overview of the duration of the therapy, micro­objectives ­ to be defined
together with the therapist who will insert them through his/her dashboard ­ and
personal statistics (fig. 6.13a). The micro­objectives use green, yellow, and red to
give an additional visual measurement for the completion of each objective. The
statistics are sorted into relevant aspects depending on the patient’s disabilities.
When one aspect is clicked, an overlay window appears to show the visualization
(fig. 6.13b).
(a)
(b)
Figure 6.13: The Profile page and statistics after Evaluation II.
Help
When the patient clicks on ”Ask your therapist”, he/she can now call or video­
call the therapist as well as chat with him/her (fig. 6.14a). If the therapist is not
available ­ e.g., busy or offline ­ the call and video­call buttons are disabled, thus
the patient can only start a chat (fig. 6.14b).
43
==PAGE:48==
(a)
(b)
Figure 6.14: The Ask your therapist / Other therapists pages after Evaluation II.
Assessment phase
The Assessment phases (fig. 6.15a, fig. 6.15b, fig. 6.15c), which also work as
Warmup and Cooldown, are now available before and after the training session.
Starting from the design of the Jiajing Zhang concept [4], the new avatar has been
implemented and the Virtual coach has been replaced by textual indications and
feedback. The comfort box (fig. 6.15d) now shows an additional button to expand
a dropdown list and allows the patient to select any discomfort if he/she feels
worse than ”Ok”.
44
==PAGE:49==
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 6.15: The new design of the Assessment phase.
Exercises
The exercises now show details and preview only when the previous one has
been completed (fig. 6.16). Indeed, every exercise will be defined according to
the performance registered. In addition, the Start button now has a pulse effect
of being more noticeable and, eventually, encourages the user to click on it and
start training.
Figure 6.16: The Exercises pages after Evaluation II.
45
==PAGE:50==
Exercises recap
The visualizations frame has been removed to make room for animations of the
micro­objectives’ progress (fig. 6.17). In this way, the interface shows only good
feedback, while encouraging the patient to work on his/her weaknesses. The
micro­objectives shown can be either the ones that have been involved the most
in the training session or the ones that recorded the biggest improvement.
Figure 6.17: The Exercises recap page after Evaluation II.
6.3
Evaluation III ­ Usability evaluation with
patients
As mentioned in section 5.2, it was not possible to respect a fixed criterion for
the sample as patients were enrolled for the evaluation on a day­by­day basis
according to their availability. Therefore, the results produced have sometimes
appeared discordant due to the different disabilities of patients. However, some
shared opinions among the patients arose.
In the first task ­ i.e. to start the training session ­ the most common feedback
concerned the confusion in going through the assessment phase. In fact, the
image of the avatar led the patients to confusion, thus, they started making the
suggested movement and, since they were not receiving any feedback on the
screen, they appeared frustrated. Most of them suggested replacing it with a video
introduction or, even better, the avatar replicating the movement of the patient in
real­time. Also, a guiding voice would be desirable for both the assessment phase
and the exercises. A very good feedback pointed out that there is no way to see
in the interface whether the exoskeleton is connected or not. Concerning the
comfort box, they appreciated the emoticons, even though it was not clear that
the button allowing to select the reason for the discomfort was clickable as well as
the dropdown list was scrollable. In addition, a patient observed that asking how
46
==PAGE:51==
she feels would make sense in terms of physical condition only. Otherwise, if she
is in a bad mood, she will not even use the system that day.
During the exercises, the progress bar at the top of the screen was commonly
linked to the percentage of completion of each exercise. Therefore, its purpose will
be maintained as such. Also, one patient suggested integrating the ability to retry
the exercise to try to improve the performance. The final recap was considered
well organized, however a few patients tried to click on the micro­objectives.
In the second task, the patient was asked to call on the therapist for help. Here,
the most recurring observation was that the patients clicked on the Profile icon to
complete the task because, as they stated, they saw a person in the icon and,
therefore, pictured the therapist. In addition, some patients argued that the ability
to consult other therapists should be more easily accessible, perhaps by allowing
one or more to be added to favorites. In addition, the Add a Contact button was
not very intuitive, indeed, many patients were confused by this feature and did not
understand the purpose.
The last task was to explore personal data, seeking any trends in the performance
statistics. Many patients found it difficult to interact with this page as for some the
data shown appeared too complex, for others some aspects of the navigation itself
were not so intuitive. In fact, from the beginning, some patients did not understand
that the frame within this section was scrollable, and once they realized it, they
observed that they noticed the opportunity to scroll only by accidentally tapping.
One suggested that putting a scroll bar on the side would help. Concerning the
data shown and statistics, the sample split into those who found them useful and
would have preferred to have more to visualize and people who, believing the data
to be too specific and complex, said they would not use these features.
Finally, with some patients, I was able to gather a different type of feedback, this
time more general about the project as a whole. In fact, some sessions basically
failed for different reasons. However, I tried to extrapolate what I could from the
patient by continuing the discussion and adapting the methodology accordingly.
For example, a patient started to complain that his visual disability did not allow
him to read many elements and interact well with the prototype. However, I had
noticed from the beginning that he seemed agitated, thus I tried to slow down and
figure out what the problem was. The patient revealed that the system was making
him very anxious because, during the introduction to the project, the exoskeleton
had reminded him of a past traumatic event in which he had to wear an orthopedic
brace for quite a long time.
Another inconclusive session was with a patient who started by focusing on the
avatar and going off­topic explaining that the first thing he would do would be
to figure out what this person does for a living. The patient has been a painter
most of his life, so he began to argue about how the world has changed since
he started working, the role of technology, and how it annihilates the imagination.
Therefore, it was only possible to bring the discussion back to the initial topic after
a long digression. This pointed out that it is important to take into consideration
that some people, especially the elderly, are totally reluctant toward technology.
47
==PAGE:52==
After calculating, the overall score of the SUS registered in this evaluation was
79.5. According to what is described in Figure 3.5, this score is worth a grade of
A­, which indicates that the success rate in performing the required task ranges
from 85% to 89%. In addition, the NPS was 40%, indicating that the system will
have more promoters than detractors.
6.3.1
Design implications of reiteration III
After the evaluation with patients at Villa Beretta, some design improvements were
needed:
Profile
The amount of data shown on this page has been reduced to the overview of
the progress of therapy and the most important micro­objectives (fig. 6.18a). The
central frame is no longer scrollable, however, it is expandable by clicking on the
Show more button. As a result, the user enters his/her own statistics and can
observe and analyze more specific data, if desired (fig. 6.18b).
(a)
(b)
Figure 6.18: The Profile page and statistics after Evaluation III.
Help
In the central frame, an additional Other therapists button has been integrated
to make the feature more accessible, and the Add a contact button has been
adjusted with inverted colors to differentiate from the other two (fig. 6.19a). Also,
it has been rephrased to specify that the contact to be added is a personal contact.
In the list of therapists, the user can now see those he/she has added to favorites
via a star next to each therapist’s photo (fig. 6.19b)
48
==PAGE:53==
(a)
(b)
Figure 6.19: The Ask your therapist / Other therapists pages after Evaluation III.
Assessment phase
The question above the comfort box has been rephrased to clearly ask the patient
about his/her physical condition as shown in Figure 6.20. In addition, the color of
the button that allows the user to select what is wrong has been changed to red,
and a small arrow has been placed on it to be more intuitive.
Figure 6.20: The new comfort box at the end of the Assessment phase after Eval­
uation III.
Other UI elements
Based on feedback discussed before, a new UI element has been introduced and
now the user can check the status of the connection between the dashboard and
exoskeleton (fig. 6.21a). This element will be displayed on the corners of the
screen, depending on each different layout.
49
==PAGE:54==
(a)
(b)
Figure 6.21: Variants and example of the new UI element.
6.4
Evaluation IV ­ Human­Computer Interaction
experiment
The results of this evaluation allowed analyzing which design variant from the
previous evaluation makes the usability of the dashboard more intuitive and sat­
isfactory.
Experiment I (5.2.3)
As shown in Figure 6.22, the most clicked icon for asking the therapist for help
was the second one ­ the one representing a person ­ which was precisely the one
that was causing errors in completing that task during the previous evaluation.
Figure 6.22: Results of Experiment I in Evaluation IV.
50
==PAGE:55==
Experiment II (5.2.3)
Results of Experiment II suggest that the test condition B (fig. 5.4b) performed
better in terms of completion time, errors made and clicks. However, counterbal­
ancing worked only partially. In fact, the group means of the number of errors and
clicks in the two different test conditions are very close. The same is not applica­
ble to completion time. This may depend on the fact that the pool of participants
was too narrow and that the performance of cognitively impaired patients weighed
too heavily on the null performance of others.
Figure 6.23: Results of Experiment II in Evaluation IV.
Experiment III (5.2.3)
Experiment III produced some misleading results. In fact, as mentioned in Section
5.2.3, Experiment III failed for the first two patients. Although the group means
are much closer compared with previous results, the null performances of the first
two patients limited Group 1 to only 2 participants. Therefore, the data are not
enough to be reliable. However, the performance in the two test conditions was
not so different, and this motivated the final decision of which design variant to
adopt.
51
==PAGE:56==
Figure 6.24: Results of Experiment III in Evaluation IV.
It is important to acknowledge that the last session in Experiment II and III of the
evaluation was aborted because it was asked to be interrupted by the participant,
who appeared very tired and inattentive. He was feeling pain staying seated, and,
also, had a busy day due to visits with relatives and a physiatrist examination
earlier. Therefore, I agreed to immediately abort the evaluation session.
The SUS scores recorded in this evaluation were combined with the scores from
Evaluation III. The total score was lowered to 78.8, which is worth a grade of B+.
Therefore, the success rate in performing the required task now ranges from 80%
to 84%. However, the total NPS registered increased to 47%.
6.4.1
Design implications of reiteration IV
After the final evaluation, some minor design changes were implemented.
Main page
The Help page icon was replaced by the Profile one, since it was demonstrated
that users linked that illustration to the therapist. Therefore, the Profile icon now
shows the account profile picture.
52
==PAGE:57==
Figure 6.25: The new icons for Profile and Help on the Main page after Evaluation
IV.
Help
On the Help page, the design proposed in Figure 6.19 was finally adopted. This
will make it easier for the user to consult other therapists.
Profile
Data visualizations on the Profile page will be displayed according to the design
shown in Figure 6.18. Therefore, more complex data that may be confusing will
be hidden from users who are not interested in them. If the user is skilled enough,
he/she can view them by clicking on the Show more button.
Hierarchy of the dashboard architecture
After an interesting discussion with one of the therapists and a bioengineer at Villa
Beretta, I based the new hierarchy of the dashboard architecture on the abilities
of the end users, as shown in Figure 1. The first and most important level includes
the main features of doing exercises and asking for help in a easy and intuitive
way. This level must be easily accessible to all users. The second level, includes
features to consult other therapists or to analyze the progress of the objectives
and therapy. The third and final level includes features to investigate progress in
a more advanced way, i.e., through statistics and data visualizations. The yellow
inverted pyramid represents the distribution of end users in this hierarchy accord­
ing to their ability to access and use such features.
53
==PAGE:58==
Figure 6.26: The new hierarchy of the dashboard architecture based on abilities.
6.4.2
Data analysis
As a final analysis for the project, I tried to analyze the data collected in the pre­
vious evaluations seeking some insights or trends. Although the sample is too
limited to prove any correlation between the collected quantities, the plot in Fig­
ure 6.27 shows that participants who gave lower SUS scores are generally in the
age range from 60 to 80, while for SUS scores above 80, the age is always be­
low 60. This might suggest that older people find it more difficult to interact with
the system. If these data can be confirmed by a larger sample of users, then it
could provide interesting insights for reflection and analysis on the future strategy
of implementing the system in rehabilitation therapy.
Figure 6.27: Correlation analysis between age and SUS score.
In addition, the last question proposed at the end of the questionnaire entailed
another interesting observation. The bar chart in Figure 6.28 shows that there is
54
==PAGE:59==
a strong connection between the level of confidence in using technology and the
SUS score. Indeed, those who responded ”Strongly agree” to the statement ”My
current technological skills allowed me to interact with the system” gave a higher
SUS score, on average. However, also this finding would need to be confirmed
by a larger sample of users.
Figure 6.28: Correlation analysis between confidence in personal technological
skills and SUS score.
55
==PAGE:60==
7
Discussion
In this project, I had the opportunity to work with a target group of vulnerable peo­
ple. Therefore, it was crucial to use a human­centered approach. This approach
makes the designer put focus on the human factors of the end users, allowing
their needs and difficulties to be respected. Without a doubt, sometimes carrying
out the work has been frustrating, but resilience is one of the essential skills for
every designer or professional, and perhaps every human being. From this per­
spective, every patient of each evaluation has enriched me as an individual and
inspired me not to let difficulties get me down.
Therefore, I want to recommend to any other student or designer who finds him/her­
self carrying out evaluations, such as those I have illustrated in my project, to not
focus only on a single approach, method, or tool, but to always carry ”tool bag”,
since the situation does not always require what you had prepared for. I rec­
ommend always keeping in mind what the purpose of the analysis is and acting
accordingly to achieve the goal.
Throughout this project, the fil rouge has been empathy, perhaps the most impor­
tant aspect in this area of research. When dealing with vulnerable people who
have suffered a dramatic event and are working to improve their condition, the
designer must be always honest, and the design should be as well. However,
sometimes what works for some people in one way, works in another for other
people.
Thanks to the opportunity to conduct evaluations in two different countries, I was
able to observe how different cultures interact with technology. it was obvious from
the beginning that in Denmark people, especially the elderly, are more skilled and
enthusiastic, while in Italy there is still a strong reluctance towards it. This aspect
affects what can be achieved by the system, therefore it is clear that its success
is strongly connected to the technological progress of each country.
I found a different type of reluctance in some therapists as well, even if more
mitigated. The more responsibilities the therapist has over the patient, the more
skeptical he/she is about the extensive use of technology in therapy, especially if
home­based. This is because therapists have both a personal and legal responsi­
bility to the patient, thus, losing control over the therapy may make them skeptical.
On the other hand, physical therapists ­ who have less responsibility over therapy
­ are much more open to the implementation of technologies, which would flank
and lighten their work.
7.1
Limitations
The major limitations of this project relate to sampling. In fact, it was not possi­
ble to manage it in any evaluation due to the limited number of people available.
Indeed, the target group consisted of elderly with disabilities, which sometimes
made recruitment and participation in the evaluations challenging. Moreover, it
57
==PAGE:61==
was not possible to split the sample by disability because, at this stage, I consid­
ered it more beneficial to evaluate and improve the dashboard by general rather
than disability­oriented features.
Also, the total number of potential end users who participated in the evaluations
was 25, plus 8 therapists. Although in the nineties it was reported that 80­85% of
usability problems in an interface could be detected by only four or five participants
[42][43], later in 2001, a large­scale evaluation demonstrated that a significantly
larger number of participants would be needed to reach such a percentage [44].
Therefore, it is uncertain how many of these problems were detected. Moreover,
the effect of the COVID­19 outbreak at the clinic jeopardized the proper execu­
tion of the last evaluation, forcing me to adopt a different protocol than the one
designed.
Another major limitation was that the prototype was designed in Figma. Although
this is very useful and easy­to­use software, it has some issues. In fact, to interact
with the prototype, it is important to know how to use the software to run the dif­
ferent Flows, and it is necessary to be familiar with the platform to solve problems
that may be encountered when using the prototype. Indeed, while conducting
evaluations at Villa Beretta, many times I had to restart the prototype through the
software interface due to a loss of connection. This happened because the clinic
is located in a small town where the internet connection is not very good. If the
subject had run into these problems alone, most likely the outcome of the session
would have been null.
This consideration made me discard the idea of conducting remote usability test­
ing sessions although it would have allowed me to collect more feedback since
it has been demonstrated that the remote synchronous method is equivalent to
the conventional method [45]. However, in combination with the limitations of
the prototype, the characteristics of the target group would have made such an
evaluation even more difficult. Indeed, as research on remote usability testing
methods for home­bound older adults has shown [46], in this type of evaluation,
the method must be adapted to the sample. However, the elderly have different
needs compared to other groups when dealing with technology and usability test­
ing, and taking into consideration all the potential disabilities, such needs would
have been even more difficult to meet.
58
==PAGE:62==
8
Conclusion
Reiteration during the design process is crucial to meet the expectations and
needs of end users. It allows for the incorporation of feedback and the identifi­
cation and resolution of issues. User evaluations are an important aspect of the
reiteration process, as they provide valuable insights into the effectiveness and
usability of the product. However, to make accurate evaluations, it is important to
be able to manage the sampling to test the product under different conditions.
In healthcare, the design of advanced systems is particularly important as the
area is sensitive and the product is intended for vulnerable individuals. There­
fore, these systems must be knowledge­based to ensure that they are safe and
effective for patients as well as valuable compared to what therapists do in hos­
pitals and therapy.
8.1
Future work
As for the future, it is important to carry out more evaluations with a larger sample
of people to obtain more accurate and reliable results. This could mean classifying
the sample by disabilities or other relevant factors to ensure that the product is
tested under a variety of conditions.
Another area of future work is to test the usability of the system when integrated
with the exoskeleton. This will provide insights into how well the system works in
real life and how user­friendly it is for patients. What if the connection between the
interface and the exoskeleton is lost? How does the user deal with it? Is he/she
able to reconnect it from the device settings? Certainly, all these questions will
entail more design implications.
Another important aspect that will require further analysis is the emotional bond
generated between the user and the Digital twin integrated into the patient self­
avatar. It is important to test this aspect to ensure that it can provide a positive
and therapeutic experience for patients.
Finally, it is important to test the design of the data visualizations. Although this
project has defined the hierarchy of the dashboard architecture (fig. 6.26), the
exact contents and visualizations to be included in the final level need to be defined
and tested for effectiveness and user­friendliness. This will ensure that the data
are presented clearly and intuitively for patients, therapists, and third­parties.
59
==PAGE:63==
References
[1]
WHF: Stroke. World Heart Federation. (2017).
[2]
Stephenson S. and Wiles R. “Advantages and Disadvantages of the Home
Setting for Therapy: Views of Patients and Therapists”. In: British Journal of
Occupational Therapy. Vol. 63, Issue 2, pp. 59­64 (2000).
[3]
Zhang J. ”Design of interactive dashboards for therapists and patients with
respect to optimal user experience during rehabilitation”. MSc thesis, DTU,
Copenhagen. (2022).
[4]
Zhang J. “Serious Game for ReHyb: UX Design for VR and Screen­based
Gaming during Stroke Rehabilitation”. DTU, Copenhagen. (2022).
[5]
Kjær Langvad S., Arent Kirknel L., and Vissing Reimann M. “DESIGN FOR
BEHAVIOURAL CHANGE: A case study of stroke rehabilitation with the
ReHyb exoskeleton”. DTU, Copenhagen. (2021).
[6]
Scheitinger T. ”Design of AR rehabilitation with an user­centered exoskele­
ton”. DTU, Copenhagen. (2021).
[7]
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. About Stroke. (2022). URL:
https://www.cdc.gov/stroke/about.htm.
[8]
Kiran S. “What Is the Nature of Poststroke Language Recovery and Reor­
ganization?” In: International Scholarly Research Notices, Vol. 2012, Article
ID 786872 (2012). DOI: https://doi.org/10.5402/2012/786872.
[9]
National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke. Post­Stroke Reha­
bilitation Fact Sheet. (2022). URL: https://www.ninds.nih.gov/post-stroke-
rehabilitation-fact-sheet.
[10]
Massachusetts College of Pharmacy and Health Sciences. Occupational
Therapy vs Physical Therapy: What’s the Difference? URL: https://www.
mcphs.edu/about-mcphs/news/occupational-therapy-versus-physical-therapy.
[11]
Toh S. F. M., Chia P. F., and Fong K. N. K. “Effectiveness of home­based
upper limb rehabilitation in stroke survivors: A systematic review and meta­
analysis”. In: Frontiers in neurology, 13, 964196. (2022). DOI: https://doi.
org/10.3389/fneur.2022.964196.
[12]
Chi N.­F. et al. “Systematic Review and Meta­Analysis of Home­Based Re­
habilitation on Improving Physical Function Among Home­Dwelling Patients
With a Stroke”. In: Archives of Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation, Vol.
101, Issue 2, pp. 359­373. (2020). DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apmr.2019.
10.181.
[13]
Chen J. et al. “Effects of Home­based Telesupervising Rehabilitation on
Physical Function for Stroke Survivors with Hemiplegia: A Randomized Con­
trolled Trial”. In: American Journal of Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation,
Vol. 96, Issue 3, pp. 152­160. (2017). DOI: 10.1097/PHM.0000000000000559.
PMID:27386808.
[14]
IBM. What is a digital twin? URL: https://www.ibm.com/topics/what-is-a-
digital-twin.
61
==PAGE:64==
[15]
Aljaroodi H. M. et al. “Empathic Avatars in Stroke Rehabilitation: A Co­
designed mHealth Artifact for Stroke Survivors”. In: Maedche A., vom Brocke
J. and Hevner, A. (eds). Designing the Digital Transformation. DESRIST
2017. (2017).
[16]
Lugrin B., Pelachaud C., and D. Traum. The Handbook on Socially Inter­
active Agents: 20 years of Research on Embodied Conversational Agents,
Intelligent Virtual Agents, and Social Robotics Volume 1: Methods, Behav­
ior, Cognition. ACM Books #37. Association for Computing Machinery, New
York, NY, USA. (2021). ISBN: 978­1­4503­8720­0.
[17]
Lauren Landry. What Is Human­Centered Design? (2020). URL: https://
online.hbs.edu/blog/post/what-is-human-centered-design.
[18]
Digital Adoption Team. User­Centered Design vs. Human­Centered Design:
What’s the Difference? (2021). URL: https://www.digital-adoption.com/user-
centered-design-vs-human-centered-design/.
[19]
Stanford University Hasso Plattner Institute of Design. An Introduction to
Design Thinking PROCESS GUIDE. (2010). URL: https://web.stanford.edu/
~mshanks/MichaelShanks/files/509554.pdf.
[20]
Fogg B. J. “A behavior model for persuasive design”. In: Persuasive ’09:
Proceedings of the 4th International Conference on Persuasive Technology,
Article 40, pp. 1­7. (2009). DOI: https://doi.org/10.1145/1541948.1541999.
[21]
Salim Dabanca @ux.mars. UX vs UI. (2022). URL: https://www.instagram.
com/reel/ClB52JhL1aa/?igshid=YmMyMTA2M2Y=.
[22]
Simonsen J. and Robertson T. Routledge International Handbook of Partic­
ipatory Design. Routledge. (2012). ISBN: 9780415694407.
[23]
IDEO.org. The Field Guide to Human­Centered Design. (2015). ISBN: 978­
0­9914063­1­9.
[24]
van Someren M. W., Barnard Y. F., and Sandberg J. A. C. The Think Aloud
Method ­ A Practical Guide to Modelling Cognitive Processes. Department
of Social Science Informatics, University of Amsterdam. Academic Press,
London. (1994). ISBN: 0­12­714270­3.
[25]
Deininger M. Design for Interaction – User Evaluation. (2021). URL: https:
//learn.inside.dtu.dk/d2l/le/content/59716/viewContent/228771/View.
[26]
Brooke J. “SUS: A retrospective”. In: Journal of Usability Studies, Vol. 8,
Issue 2, pp. 29–40. (2013).
[27]
Bangor A., Kortum P. T., and Miller J. T. “Determining what individual SUS
scores mean: Adding an adjective rating scale”. In: Journal of Usability Stud­
ies, Vol. 4, Issue 3, pp. 114­123. (2009).
[28]
Sauro J. and Lewis J. R. Quantifying the User Experience: Practical Statis­
tics for User Research. 2nd Ed., pp. 9–18. Morgan Kaufmann. (2016). ISBN:
9780128025482.
[29]
Krol M. W. et al. “The Net Promoter Score – an asset to patient experience
surveys?” In: Health Expect, Vol. 18, pp. 3099­3109. (2015). DOI: https:
//doi.org/10.1111/hex.12297.
[30]
Adams C. et al. “The ultimate question? Evaluating the use of Net Promoter
Score in healthcare: a systematic review”. In: Health Expect, Vol. 25, pp.
2328­ 2339. (2022). DOI: doi:10.1111/hex.13577.
62
==PAGE:65==
[31]
MacKenzie I. S. Human­Computer Interaction: An Empirical Research Per­
spective. 1st Ed. Morgan Kaufmann Publishers Inc., 340 Pine Street, Sixth
Floor, San Francisco, CA, United States. (2013). ISBN: 978­0­12­405865­1.
[32]
Newell A. Unified Theories of Cognition. p. 122. Harvard University Press,
79 Garden St. Cambridge, MA, United States. (1990). ISBN: 978­0­674­
92099­6.
[33]
Sauro J. A Practical Guide to the System Usability Scale ­ Background,
Benchmarks & Best Practices. CreateSpace Independent Publishing Plat­
form. (2011). ISBN: 9781461062707.
[34]
Blažica B. and Lewis J. R. “A Slovene Translation of the System Usability
Scale: The SUS­SI”. In: International Journal of Human–Computer Interac­
tion, Vol. 31, Issue 2, pp. 112­117. (2015). DOI: 10.1080/10447318.2014.
986634.
[35]
CognitiveLab. Questionario SUS ­ System Usability Scale. URL: https://
www.cognitivelab.it/wp-content/uploads/2011/07/SUS-scheda.pdf.
[36]
Ready Player Me. Metaverse 3D Avatar Creator. URL: https://readyplayer.
me.
[37]
Gulyás G. M. ”Implementation of Interactive Progress­ and Performance
Monitoring Web Dashboard for Digital Twin­based Stroke Therapy”. DTU,
Copenhagen. (2023).
[38]
Kerim I. ”Design of Interactive Dashboards for Therapists and Patients in
Digital Stroke Therapy”. DTU, Copenhagen. (2023).
[39]
Suh K.­S., Kim H., and Suh E. K. “What If Your Avatar Looks Like You? Dual­
Congruity Perspectives for Avatar Use”. In: MIS Quarterly, Vol. 35, No. 3,
pp. 711­729 (2011). DOI: https://doi.org/10.2307/23042805.
[40]
Yee N. and Bailenson J. “The Proteus Effect: The Effect of Transformed
Self￿Representation on Behavior”. In: Human Communication Research,
Vol. 33, pp. 271 ­ 290 (2007). DOI: https://doi.org/10.2307/23042805.
[41]
Nick Babich. Using Red and Green in UI Design. (2019). URL: https://
uxplanet.org/using-red-and-green-in-ui-design-66b39e13de91.
[42]
Virzi R. A. “Refining the test phase of usability evaluation: how many sub­
jects is enough?” In: Human Factors, Vol. 34, pp. 457–468. (1992).
[43]
Nielsen J. and Landauer T. K. “A mathematical model of the finding of usabil­
ity problems”. In: Proceedings of ACM INTERCHI’93 Conference on Human
Factors in Computing Systems, pp. 206–213. (1993).
[44]
Spool J. and Schroeder W. “Testing web sites: five users is nowhere near
enough”. In: CHI ’01 Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing
Systems, pp. 285­286. (2001). DOI: https://doi.org/10.1145/634067.634236.
[45]
Andreasen M. et al. “What happened to remote usability testing?: An em­
pirical study of three methods”. In: Proceedings of the 2007 Conference
on Human Factors in Computing Systems, pp. 1405­1414. (2007). DOI:
10.1145/1240624.1240838.
[46]
Hill J. et al. “Usability­In­Place­Remote Usability Testing Methods for Home­
bound Older Adults: Rapid Literature Review”. In: JMIR Formative Research,
Vol. 5. (2021). DOI: 10.2196/26181.
63
==PAGE:66==
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOCATION  
  
Roskilde golf club, October 21st, 2022  
  
TEST OBJECTIVE  
  
To validate the concepts integrated into the current prototype of the interface for 
patients so far. Points to be tested:  
  
1. The functioning of the system in terms of relevant contents and information.  
  
2. The features are helpful, clear, and well-organized.  
  
3. So far, the prototype is user-friendly and pleasing.  
  
4. The navigation through the system.  
  
CONVERSATION STARTER  
  
Explain the purpose of the research, what is going to happen, and data protection (fill 
up the questionnaire). Emphasize that you are interested in gathering feedback – 
especially bad feedback – to improve the product: no grades, no mistakes and no 
success, no fear of being honest. Go through the materials and say out loud what 
comes to your mind.  
  
TASKS  
  
Each participant receives the booklet (the interface screens). They autonomously 
navigate through the different screens for 2 minutes. Q&A and open discussion. 
Every paper has a “Note” section on the bottom side to add any other written 
comments. Participants are encouraged to put notes on the screens too.  
  
MATERIALS  
  
• 
Main page screen x20  
• 
Profile screen x20  
• 
Help screen x20  
• 
Exercises screen x20  
• 
Exercise completion screen x20  
A
EVALUATION I PROTOCOL ­
WORKSHOP
65
==PAGE:67==
• 
Pens  
• 
Personal data questionnaire x20  
  
DATA RECORDING  
  
Audio recording, notes.  
  
QUESTIONS (CLOCKWISE OPINIONS)  
  
MAIN PAGE (1)  
  
1. What three elements grabs your attention the most?  
  
2. Where would you go first? Write below the element you picked and what you 
would expect to find in it.   
  
3. Are there any confusing design elements? If yes, write in the notes which one 
and why.  
  
PROFILE (2)  
  
1. Do you find the information presented is clear and useful? Strikethrough any 
information you think is irrelevant. Is there anything that you think is missing 
and would like to see in the dashboard? Write your feedback in the notes.  
  
2. Is information about your rehabilitation progress important to you? What 
information do you want presented to you?  
  
HELP (3)  
  
1. Would these functions be useful for you and what would you expect? How do 
you achieve this functionality today?   
  
2. Would you have any hesitation before calling for help? If yes, write in the 
notes your concerns.  
  
EXERCISES (4)  
  
1. What do you think is the purpose of this screen and what do you expect to be 
able to do once arrived on this screen?  
  
2. Would you like select first one game than another?  
  
3. Would you trust the schedule, or you would prefer some introduction or 
information about the exercises?  
  
EXERCISE COMPLETION (5)  
66
==PAGE:68==
  
1. What is your first impression of the design of this screen?  
  
2. What information would you like to see after completing the daily exercises? 
Strikethrough any design element you think is irrelevant and circle anything is 
not clear.   
  
3. What would motivate you to get more engaged during the exercises? How do 
you feel about scoring and reward elements?  
  
SCREENS  
  
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
  
  
  
  
  
  
 
1  -  MAIN PAGE  
  
  
  
        2  -  PROFILE  
3  -  HELP  
  
  
  
  
        4  -  EXERCISES  
67
==PAGE:69==
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
LOCATION  
  
Villa Beretta Rehabilitation Center, Valduce Hospital. November 24th – November 
25th, 2022.  
  
TEST OBJECTIVE  
  
To validate how the prototype interact with the patient and to elicit the knowledge of 
a domain expert to make the system consisting of knowledge-based interface. 
Points to be tested:  
  
1. 
The functioning of the system in terms of relevant contents and 
information.  
  
2. 
The features are helpful, and knowledge based.  
  
3. 
To what extent the system is covering all the aspects of a rehabilitation 
in real life.   
4. 
What knowledge-based improvements can be made?  
  
METHODS  
  
Thinking aloud - retrospection: the subject keeps on talking, speaks out loud 
whatever thoughts come to mind. During pauses or fragments of the session that 
sounded incomprehensible, a retrospective protocol will be developed and used at 
the end of the think aloud session.  
  
Interviews: unstructured interview to elicit information regarding how a particular 
task is performed or how a particular decision is made. Direct questions coming out 
of the prototype analysis that promote an open discussion.  
  
TASKS  
  
Ask the therapists to think aloud about how they would approach a stroke patient 
who is not motivated enough during the rehabilitation. Discuss all the important 
B
EVALUATION II PROTOCOL ­
THERAPISTS’ EXPERTISE
ELICITATION
68
==PAGE:70==
human aspects to keep in mind. Navigate through the prototype and gather 
feedback. Encourage the therapists to be clear, to not keep things simple.  
  
MATERIALS  
  
Figma prototype on tablet.  
  
DATA RECORDING  
  
Audio recording, notes.  
69
==PAGE:71==
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
LOCATION  
  
Villa Beretta Rehabilitation Center, Valduce Hospital. November 28th – December 
2nd, 2022.  
  
TEST OBJECTIVE  
  
To validate the concepts integrated into the current prototype of the interface for 
patients so far. Points to be tested:  
  
1. The functioning of the system in terms of relevant contents and information.  
  
2. The features are helpful, clear, and well-organized.  
  
3. So far, the prototype is user-friendly and pleasing.  
  
4. The navigation through the system.  
  
METHODS  
  
Think aloud: the subject keeps on talking, speaks out loud whatever thoughts come 
to mind.  
  
Question and prompting: interrupt and ask questions during the problem-solving 
process about what he is thinking or doing.  
  
Thinking aloud - Question and prompting: 
subjects are prompted specifically 
about events that sound incomprehensible or incomplete while thinking aloud. 
Interference should only occur when the subject stops talking.  
  
Retrospective: System Usability Scale questionnaire, Net Promoting Score.  
  
TASKS  
  
1. Start the daily exercises.  
  
2. Ask your therapist for help.  
  
C
EVALUATION III PROTOCOL ­
USABILITY EVALUATION
70
==PAGE:72==
3. Declare if your progress are in a good or a bad trend.  
  
Each participant navigates through the prototype completing the tasks given and say 
out loud what comes to their mind. Encourage to compare what they see with what 
they expect or desire.  
At the end of the session, the participants must fill out the usability and the promoting 
questionnaire.  
  
MATERIALS  
  
Figma prototype on tablet.  
  
SYSTEM USABILITY SCALE (SUS) QUESTIONNAIRE (5-point scale: strongly 
disagree->strongly agree)  
  
1. I think that I would like to use this system frequently.  
  
2. I found the system unnecessarily complex.  
  
3. I thought the system was easy to use.  
  
4. I think that I would need the support of a technical person to be able to use 
this system.  
  
5. I found the various functions in this system were well organized.  
  
6. I thought there was too much inconsistency in the system.  
  
7. I would imagine that most people would learn to use this system very quickly.  
  
8. I found the system very cumbersome to use.  
  
9. I felt very confident using the system.  
  
10. I needed to learn a lot of things before I could get going with this system.  
  
In addition, two questions will be asked to link the usability level to the technological 
skills of the participant in order to check if any trend exists:  
  
1. I think the system would make me feel more engaged during my rehabilitation.  
  
2. My current technological skills allowed me to interact with the system.  
  
NET PROMOTER SCORE  
  
How likely would you recommend this system to other patients?  
71
==PAGE:73==
  
0 = Not at all likely  
  
10 = Extremely likely  
  
DATA RECORDING  
  
Audio recording, notes.  
  
ENVIRONMENT  
  
Comfortable seat, quiet room, glass of water.  
  
CONVERSATION STARTER  
  
Explain the purpose of the research, what is going to happen, and data protection (fill 
up the questionnaire). Emphasize that we are interested in gathering feedback – 
especially bad feedback – to improve the product: no grades, no mistakes and no 
success, no fear of being honest.  
72
==PAGE:74==
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOCATION   
Villa Beretta Rehabilitation Center, Valduce Hospital. January 9th – January 13th, 
2023.   
  
TEST OBJECTIVE  
  
To evaluate the human performance and interactions in the current prototype of the 
interface for patients, with reference to the cognitive and rational bands outlined in 
the descriptive Newell’s model “Time Scale of Human Action”.  
  
  
PARTICIPANTS REQUIREMENTS  
  
Post-stroke condition  
  
  
METHODS  
  
Experiment 1  
  
Goal: Investigate which icon is more effective to make the user landing on the right 
screen.  
  
Task: Click the icon you think will let you ask for help from your therapist.  
  
Independent variables: Device, language.  
  
Dependent variables: Most clicked icon.  
  
D
EVALUATION IV PROTOCOL ­
HUMAN­COMPUTER
INTERACTION EXPERIMENT
73
==PAGE:75==
   
  
Experiment 2  
  
Goal: Investigate what is the best solution for the user to consult other therapists.  
  
Task: Make a call to a therapist different from yours.  
  
Independent variables:  
Factors: Device, language, interface.  
Levels: 1) Small button in the Ask your therapist section  
  2) Big button in the Ask for help section  
  
Dependent variables: Task completion time, error ratio, and the number of clicks.  
  
 
 
  
  
  
Experiment 3  
  
Goal: Investigate if a scrollable frame or an expandable section is easier for the user 
to visualize personal data.  
  
Task: Check your strength improvements.  
  
Independent variables:  
Factors: Device, language, interface. Levels: 
1) Scrollbar  
  2) Show more button  
  
Dependent variables: Task completion time, error ratio, and the number of clicks.  
  
74
==PAGE:76==
 
  
  
Retrospective: System Usability Scale questionnaire, Net Promoting Score (only if a 
new participant - to gather more feedback)  
  
  
DATA RECORDING  
  
Screen recording, notes.  
  
  
MATERIALS  
  
Figma prototype on tablet, stopwatch.  
  
System Usability Scale (SUS) questionnaire (5-point scale: strongly disagree -> 
strongly agree) (10Q+2extra)  
  
1. I think that I would like to use this system frequently.  
  
2. I found the system unnecessarily complex.  
  
3. I thought the system was easy to use.  
  
4. I think that I would need the support of a technical person to be able to use 
this system.  
  
5. I found the various functions in this system were well organized.  
  
6. I thought there was too much inconsistency in the system.  
  
7. I would imagine that most people would learn to use this system very quickly.  
  
8. I found the system very cumbersome to use.  
  
9. I felt very confident using the system.  
  
10. I needed to learn a lot of things before I could get going with this system.  
75
==PAGE:77==
  
In addition, two questions will be asked to link the usability level to the technological 
skills of the participant in order to check if any trend exists:  
  
1. I think the system would make me feel more engaged during my rehabilitation.  
  
2. My current technological skills allowed me to interact with the system.  
  
Net Promoter Score  
  
How likely would you recommend this system to other patients?  
  
0 = Not at all likely  
  
10 = Extremely likely  
  
  
ENVIRONMENT  
  
Comfortable seat, quiet room.  
  
  
CONVERSATION STARTER  
  
Explain the purpose of the research, what is going to happen and about the 
protection of the data. Emphasize that you are interested in the usability of the 
interface and not in evaluating it. No grades, no mistakes, no success, no fears to 
evaluate it badly. Perform the task and say out loud what comes to your mind.  
  
76
