==PAGE:1==
Investigation of optical transitions
in van der Waals materials
Author
Daniel Ilkjær Risom Henriksen
January 29, 2023
Department of Physics Engineering
Technical University of Denmark
==PAGE:2==
Master’s Thesis
Abstract
The goal of this paper is to investigate optical transition in van der Waals materials. As part of this
investigation of these van der Waals materials, will the emission intensity across flakes and photolu-
minescence spectra at specific points be determined. Furthermore. These experiments will be carried
out on samples with silica beads, which introduces bending defects and thus strain. The amount of
bright areas sufficiently large, then statistics on the photoluminescence spectra will be carried out. The
project will mainly focus on single-layer materials but also cover multilayer materials which have prove
themselves to be interesting.
It was shown that the spectral width of monolayer WS2 was significantly impacted by the
increases in laser power. It was shown that the optimal protocol for achieving a good bead density and
uniformity, is with a slow rotational acceleration, and a longer sonication time of the silica beads. It have
also been shown that the spectral peak red shifts for increasing number of layers. The spectral width
is observed to increase for the direct transition and decrease for the indirect transition, for increasing
number of layers. It was shown that the shift in peak energy increased for increasing number of layer.
It was also shown that the change in spectral width increased for increasing number of layers. Lastly,
it was shown that the strain induced by a silica bean underneath a 1L flake can be estimated to be ∼
0.63-1.4 %, resulting in a peak shift of ∼68-152 meV from our own simulation, and sim 31-70 meV
for the data from Muoi et. el. [40].
i
==PAGE:3==
Master’s Thesis
Acknowledgements
Alexander Huck, Associate Professor, Department of Physics
Core Supervisor
Tim Booth, Lecturer, Department of Physics
Core Supervisor
Ilya Radko, Researcher, Department of Physics
Supervisor
James Luke Webb, Postdoc, Department of Physics
Supervisor
ii
==PAGE:4==
Master’s Thesis
CONTENTS
Contents
1
Introduction
1
2
Theory
2
2.1
Optics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2.2
Photolumiescence . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.3
Electric and Vibronic band-structure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.4
Materials
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
3
Methods
16
3.1
Confocal Setup . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
3.2
Sample preparation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
4
Results
19
4.1
Beads deposition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
4.2
Tungsten disulphide
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
5
Discussion
45
6
Conclusion
48
7
Outlook
48
8
Litterateur
49
iii
==PAGE:5==
Master’s Thesis
1
Introduction
The quantum realm is an open window to a plethora of new possibilities, new applications that could
change the world: from finance modelling, to weather forecast, drug development, cryptography, every
field that needs a huge computational power could benefit from a quantum speed-up. In addition to
quantum computing, there is quantum sensing with incredibly high spatial resolution, and with quan-
tum communication there are new safe communication schemes. None of these have been industrialised
yet because of the many challenges still present, such as miniaturisation, integration, and scalability,
to name a few. A corner stone of quantum information is quantum light sources, the single-photon
source. Single photons are a requirement for many applications, such as quantum key distribution
(QKD). Therefore, much has been done to find, characterise, and optimise single-photon emitter and
detectors. nitrogen vacancy centres (NV) in diamond, quantum dots (QD), or fainted laser are few
examples of system cable of being utilised as single-photon emitters, but they are far from perfect. An
ideal single-photon source can be defined with these four criteria in mind: (i) on-demand: whenever a
button is pressed, a photon is emitted; (ii) one and only one photon is emitted at a time; (iii) indis-
tinguishability: the photons are indistinguishable from one another, and thus their trajectory can not
be traced back; (iv) the photons can be emitted arbitrarily fast, and there is no ”overheating” of the
system.
Literature has shown that some 2D materials can be hosts of quantum emitters at room tem-
perature. This is promising since they have a 2D nature, being atomically thin stacked layers bound
together by weak Wander-der Waals interactions, and would make integration easy. As this work is
still new, this paper aims to create a protocol for sample preparation and characterisation, to gain
insight into whether they can be used as a new type of magnetometer. To get a broader picture of
where this paper fits in, cutting-edge research on these and similar behaving materials is given. An
already well-established magnetometer is the qubit in NV centres, which can be used as a single photon
emitter. As a magnetometer, one can make a destination between an ensemble of NV centres and single
NV centres, which are used for different applications. Shallow NV centres are useful for applications
requiring strong dipolar coupling achieved by bringing the NV spin into close proximity of the external
spin of interest. The shallow NV centre suffers from spin coherence time (T2), due to the large sensi-
tivity, and the decoherence could be dominated by electric fields induced by dangling electrons on the
diamond surface [2,3]. Different ways of improving the coherence time have been studied, such as using
a radio frequency to drive the surface [8] and surface terminations [9–11]. The NV centre ensembles
have been shown to have high spatial and temporal resolution, giving it the ability to detect synthetic
signals that replicate electric signals from the biological neutral network [15]. Quantum information
is a hot topic right now, concentrating funds and getting attention from large companies and govern-
ments. Progress is being made in all domains, from creation of qubits [44], stabilisation of memory
(avoiding decoherence and extending memory time [44]), correction of errors [44], communicating at
longer distances or generating single photons with different systems. In this paper, we focus on the
characterisation of transition-metal dichalcogenides (TMDCs), specifically tungsten disulphide (WS2).
The structure of this paper is as follows: In Chapter 2 the theory needed for this paper is pre-
sented, starting with some optics where phenomena such as reflection, transmission, second correlation
function etc. The in-depth description of photolumiescence is followed by a general description of elec-
tric and vibronic band structure, in which topics such as emission spectra, electron-phonon coupling,
exiton, and trapping of excitons. In the last part of the theory, the materials used in this paper will
be described, this being TDMCs in particular WS2. In Chapter 3 the confocal setup will be described,
and the methods used for the preparation of samples will be presented.
The method ranges from
exfoliation, CAB transfer, and cleaning of samples. In Chapter 4 all of the result will be presented.
There has been an investigation of how to achieve the best deposition of beads. An investigation of
the photolumiescence spectrum dependence on laser power, number of layers and strain. In Chapter
Page 1/53
==PAGE:6==
Master’s Thesis
5 there will be a discussion on all of the collected data. Lastly, in Chapter 6 we conclude what we
have learnt based on the data, and in Chapter 7 we present an outlook presenting areas for further
investigation.
2
Theory
In this Chapter the theory needed to this paper is presented, starting with some optics where phe-
nomenon such as reflection, transmission, second correlation function etc.
Followed by a in depth
description of photolumiescence, then a general description of electric and vibronic band-structure,
where topics such as emission spectra, electron-phonon coupling, exiton and trapping of excitons. In
the last part of the theory will the materials used in this paper be described, this being TDMCs in
particular WS2.
2.1
Optics
Light seldom propagates in vacuum and is most often propagating within some kind of medium; there-
fore, it is important to understand how light interacts with these mediums.
In solid-state physics
the optical properties of solids can be divided into several classes of phenomena. Let us take a look
at the first class of these phenomena; to do so assume that we have a ray of light propagating in a
material. When this ray of light is incident on a different material, then due to refraction, the angle of
its propagation through the optical medium will change with respect to the Snell law;
n1 sin θ1 = n2 sin θ2
(2.1.1)
Figure 1: Different phenomenon in which light interacts with a medium. These phenomenons being
reflection when light encounter a medium with a different refractive index. Transmission where the
light propagates through the medium without interacting with it. Absorption where the light will
excite an electron within the medium. And lastly scattering where interactions with the medium will
change the propagation direction of the light.
Page 2/53
==PAGE:7==
Master’s Thesis
2.1
Optics
and its group velocity will decrease compared to the free space velocity. Beside the the change
of light speed inside the medium can dispersion occur, which is a broadening of the light pulse due to
different frequency components that constitute the pulse travel at differed velocities in the medium.
During the the propagation inside the medium, if the light has the appropriate frequency corresponding
to the transition frequencies of the atoms composing the medium, absorption will occur, and the light
will be attenuated inside of the medium.
The selective absorption is responsible for the colour of
different materials, therefor, defects within materials plays a crucial rule modulating the absorption
spectra, e.g. for sapphire. While travelling inside of the material light can undergo scattering, where
interactions with the medium will cause the light to ”bounce” off atoms, and change the direction of
propagation. Strictly speak the intensity of light will not change, but the intensity will decrease in
the original direction of propagation, since the some light will be redirected. Scattering can be either
elastic or inelastic depending on whether the energy changes during the process.
Figure 2: Schematic of a HBT setup. Photons from a light source are directed onto a 50/50 beam
splitter, and the transmitted light is collected by one detector, whilst the reflected light is collected by
another detector. From [38].
A device which builds upon some of the previously mentioned phenomena is a quantum emitter
(QE). A QE is a quantum system with a radiative optical transition. If the non-radiative transitions
are suppressed, one can reach 100% efficiency, thus, every time the system is excited it will always emit
a photon. An unique property of QEs is their capability of emitting single photon, thus, making them
possible single photon emitters. In order to determine whether an emitter is able to produce single
photons, a second-order correlation measurement has to be carried out. Thus, a photon source can be
characterised using the second-order correlation function, which is given by:
g(2)(⃗r1, ⃗r2, t2 −t1) = ⟨: ˆn(⃗r1, t1)ˆn(⃗r2, t2) :⟩
⟨ˆn(⃗r1, t1)⟩⟨ˆn(⃗r2, t2)⟩,
(2.1.2)
where ˆn is the photon number operator ˆa†ˆa and :: denotes the normal ordering of the operators,
which means that the annihilation operator ˆa to the right of the creation operator ˆa†. The second-
order correlation function is particularly useful, as it quantifies, independent of loss, the multi-photon
component of the state with respect to the single-photon component, meaning |n > 1⟩vs. |1⟩. In other
words g(2)(τ) gives us the degree of correlation between the number of photons at time t and at time
t + τ, thus relating the information about the number of photons at time t to what will be measured
at time t + τ. For a single-mode field, the second-order correlation function reduces to the form:
g(2)(τ) = 1 + ⟨(∆ˆn)2⟩−⟨ˆn⟩
⟨ˆn⟩2
,
(2.1.3)
where τ = t2 −t1. And if we consider the single-mode field in a number state |n⟩it follows that:
Page 3/53
==PAGE:8==
Master’s Thesis
2.2
Photolumiescence
g(2)(τ) = g(2)(0) =



0,
n = 0, 1,
1 −1
n,
n ≥2.
(2.1.4)
Since for a number state ⟨(∆ˆn)2⟩= 0. Therefore, from the above equation it is apparent that
for single-photon sources the second-order correlation function is g(2) = 0, and for two or more photon
sources it is g(2) ≥0.5. Thus, showing that if g(2) < 0.5 we have a single-photon source, and for
g(2) ≥0.5 we do not have a single-photon source.
To determine the second-order correlation a Hanbury Brown and Twiss (HBT) measurement
can be carried out, consisting of measuring the correlation of intensities (squares of the field, hence the
name) at different time delays, see Figure 2 for a sketch of a HBT setup. From HBT measurements, one
acquires the photon statistics, by measuring the correlation of intensities (coincidence counts on the
detectors) at different time delays, one measures ”the conditional probability of detecting one photon
at time t + τ given that one was detected at time t”, though this is not a real probability since it can
take any value between 0 and 2. Classical light source, i.g. light bulbs, produces chaotic light and
bunching of the photon is observed, thus g2(0) has a peak and the photons tend to come in pairs, see
Figure 3 plot 3. The opposite is observed for non-classical light sources, these being two-levels systems
e.g. nitrogen-vacancy (NV) centres in diamond and quantum dots (QDs). Where antibunching of the
light is observed, thus g2(0) has a dip and single-photons tend to come at a regular time interval, see
Figure 3 plot 2. The last type of light source which can be characterised by the second-order correlation
function is coherent light, e.g. lasers, g2(0) has a constant value of one, see Figure 3 plot 1.
Figure 3: The figure kinds of light and a sketch of their photon distribution. On the left are coherent
light. In the middle are non-classical light which produces antibunching, with the capability of single-
photon sources if g2(0) < 0.5. Lastly to the right we have classical light which produces bunching if
g2(0) > 1, where there comes multiple photons at a time.
2.2
Photolumiescence
Photolumiescence (PL) is the re-emission of light by interband luminescence after a direct-gap semicon-
ductor has been excited by a photon with energy greater than Eg. The band diagram corresponding
Page 4/53
==PAGE:9==
2.2
Photolumiescence
5
Figure 4: (a) Schematic diagram of the processes occurring during photolumonescence in a direct
bandgap semiconductor after excitation at frequency νL. The electrons and holes rapidly relax to the
bottom of their bands by phonon emission before recombination by emitting a photon. (b) Density
of states and level occupancies for the electrons and holes after optical excitation. The distribution
function shown by the shading apply to the classical limit where Boltzmann statistics are valid. Note
that the distribution functions and density of states are not on the same scale: the level occupancies
are always small in the Boltzmann limit. Taken from [33]
==PAGE:10==
Master’s Thesis
2.2
Photolumiescence
Figure 5: Photolumiescence spectrum of GaAs at 100 K. The exitation source was a helium-neon laser
operating at 632.8 nm. The inset gives a semilogarithmic plot of the same data. Taken from [33]
to the PL process in a direct gap material is given in figure 4 (a). Photons are absorbed from an
excitation source such as a laser, this will inject electrons into the conduction band and holes into the
valence band. This is possible if the frequency νL of the source is chosen such that hνL is greater than
Eg.
It is apparent from figure 4 (a) that the electrons are initially created high up in the conduction
band. The electrons do not remain in these initial states for very long, because they can lose their
energy rapidly by emission of phonons. This process is indicated by the cascade of transitions within
the conduction band shown in figure 4 (a). With each step corresponding to the emission of a phonon
with the correct energy and momentum to satisfy the conservation laws. In most solids the electron-
phonon coupling is very strong, thus these scattering events take place on time scales as short as ∼
100 fs. This is a lot faster than the radiative lifetime which are in the order of nanosecond, therefor,
the electron have time to relax to the bottom of the conduction band before the emission of photons.
The same condition apply for the relaxation holes in the valance band.
After electrons/holes have relaxed as far as they can by phonon emission, they must wait at the
extremum of the conduction/valance band until they can emit a photon or recombine non-radiatively.
Leaving time for thermal distributions as sketched in Figure 4 (b). The shading indicates the occupancy
of the available states.
At low carrier densities, the electron and hole distribution will be described by classical statistics.
The distribution shown in Figure 4 (b) are drawn for this limit. In this situation the occupancy of the
levels is small, thus, the occupancies is given by Boltzmann statistics:
Page 6/53
==PAGE:11==
Master’s Thesis
2.3
Electric and Vibronic band-structure
f(E) ∝exp

−E
kBT

.
(2.2.1)
The frequency dependence of the emission spectrum in the classical limit is given by:
I(hν) ∝(hν −Eg) exp

−ℏν −Eg
kBT

.
(2.2.2)
The (hν −Eg)1/2 factor arises from the joint density of states for the interband transition. The
other factor arises from the Boltzmann statistics of the electrons and holes. The luminescence spectrum
described by eq. 2.2.2 rises sharply at Eg and then falls off exponentially with a decay constant of kBT
due to the Boltzmann factor. We thus expect a sharply peaked spectrum of width ∼kBT starting at
Eg. Figure 5 shows the PL spectrum of GaAs at 100 K. The spectrum was obtained by using 1.96 eV
photons from a helium-neon laser as the excitaion source. The spectrum shown a sharp rise at Eg due
to the (hν −Eg)1/2 factor in eq. 2.2.2, and then falls off exponentially due to the Boltzmann factor.
The full width at half maximum (FWHM) of the emission spectra is very close to kbT, as expected.
The fact that the high energy decay is exponential is clearly shown by the semi-logarithmic plot of the
same data given in the insert. The slope of the decay is is consistent with carrier of 100 K.
2.3
Electric and Vibronic band-structure
In solids atoms are tightly packed together, with usually separation lengths of no more than an atom,
as a result there will be an overlap between the outer electronic orbitals. Free atoms have discrete
energy levels, but when atoms come together to form solids, two continuum of energy levels will be
formed due to Pauli’s exclusion principle, see Figure 6, and create what is know as electronic bands,
and optical transition between bands is possible, as long as the selection rules are still followed.
Absorption will occur in board bands instead of the discrete lines of free atoms.
In metals
there are no gap between the valance and conduction band, therefore electrons roam freely, whilst
semiconductors have a small gap which can be overcome, and for insulators the gap is so large that it
is challenging to runs a electrical current through it. In electronic bands electronic states are localised
and the wave function of the electron is periodic, reflecting the periodicity of the lattice; this is Bloch’s
theorem, which is given by:
ψk(r) = uk(r) exp(ik · r).
(2.3.1)
There is another phenomenon giving rise to bands; and that is when doping a material with
impurity atoms, the electronic states of these impurities will couple to the phonons of the host material,
resulting is vibronic bands (vibrational-electronic bands). They are different from electronic bands
because they are localised around specific lattice sites, compared to the rather delocalised bands of
electronic states. Vibronic transition exits for other types of compounds too, e.g. molecules, where
atoms and their bonds vibrate, giving rise to a different type of energy beside the electronic energy.
With in mind we can describe the absorption of a photon by a material with the following equation:
ℏωa = E2 + (n2 + 1/2)Ω−E1 −(n1 + 1/2)ℏΩ,
(2.3.2)
Page 7/53
==PAGE:12==
Master’s Thesis
2.3
Electric and Vibronic band-structure
Figure 6: The electronic structures depends on interatomic spacing, it can be seen that the electronic
structures will changes from discrete level to a band structure for decreasing interatomic distance.
Additionally, the distance between the valance and conduction band increase for decreasing interatomic
distance. Image taken from [34]
where ωa is the frequency of the absorbed photon, ni is the number of vibrational quanta
excited and Ωis the vibrational frequency. E2 −E1 −(n1 + 1/2)ℏΩis the frequency of the re-emitted
photon. Absorption and emission in the electron-phonon coupling expanded the two-level, absorption
will happen at the lowest energy of the ground state. If the electron is excited to energies higher than
the lowest energy of the excited state, it will dissipate heat into the lattice in order to reach the lowest
level, from where emission will happen. See Figure 7 for summery of this process.
A transition between the lowest energy level of the excited states and the lowest energy of the
grounds states, give rise to a zero phonon line (ZPL) in the absorption and emission spectra. Though
it is still possible to have other transitions through electron-phonon coupling, as there are a band of
energies allowing transition from E2 to the top of the ground state band and wise versa, giving rise to
broad spectra beside the ZPL, the so-called phonon side band (PSB), see Figure 8. The probability of
transitions occurring through the PSB increases with increasing temperate, since they directly depend
on the overlap of the different wave functions.
For the electric bands we have the concept of excitons, an exciton is a bound state of an electron
and an electron hole, which are attached to each other by the electrostatic Coulomb force. It is an
electrically neutral quasiparticle that exists in semiconductors and insulators. An excitons can form
when a material absorbs a photon with higher energy than its bandgap. This excites an electron from
the valence band to the conduction band, leaving behind a positively charged electron hole, in the
location from which the electron was moved. An exciton is considered stable if its binding energy is
greater than kBT, otherwise will collisions with phonons transport the electron throughout the lattice.
Hence, excitons are the primary mechanism of light emission at cryogenic temperature, whilst at room
temperature it is usually governed by free electron-hole recombination. We distinguish between two
type of excitons, Wannier-Mott excitons and Frenkel excitons see Figure 9 for a sketch of them, and
they are categorised based on their radius, in other words how large their binding energy is. Wannier-
Page 8/53
==PAGE:13==
2.3
Electric and Vibronic band-structure
9
Figure 7: Absorption and emission process of an impurity in a host material, the right part of the
figure, where electrons of the impurity will couple to the phonons of the host material. On the left part
of figure is the two-level system of the isolated impurity atom.
Figure 8: Diagram showing the possible transitions and their corresponding spectra, the the direct
transition between the lowest energy levels indicated on the spectra as the zero-phonon line.
==PAGE:14==
Master’s Thesis
2.4
Materials
Figure 9: A schematic illustrating the types of excisions there exist. (a) Frenkel excitons, which are
tightly bound with a binding energies up to a few eV, so they engolobe only a few atoms making them
highly localised. (b) Itermediate charge transfer exciton. (c) Wannier-Mott excitons, which are loosely
bound with binding energies ∼0.01 eV, so they englobe a large area of atoms, often called free excitons,
making them delocalised compared to Frenkel excitons. From [35]
Mott excitons have a really radius, englobing a lot of atoms, thus having a small binding energy of ∼
0.01 eV, which makes them stable at cryogenic temperatures. Because of this large radius, in which the
electrons are free to roam are Wannier-Mott excitons, often called free excitons. On the other hand,
are Frenkel excitons tightly bound making them englobe only a few atoms, and they can have binding
energies up to a few eV, thus some of them are stable at room temperature.
Free excitons (Wannier-Mott excitons) are often observed in direct bandgap semiconductors,
sometimes in indirect bandgap semiconductors aswell, with energies close to Eg since they are formed
by direct bandgap transitions (k = 0), whilst Frenkel excitons are usually found in large bandgap
materials. A phenomenon that can occur for excitons is self-trapping, which is when a deformation
of the crystal lattice has enough energy to counter the energy width of the exiton, thus localising the
exciton. The prefix ”self” can in one context reefer to the exciton-phonon coupling, which is usually
quiet strong, resulting in a local deformation of the lattice, thus confining the exciton to a smaller area.
The prefix ”self” can also reefer to the trapping of excitons due to a local defect, the exciton-phonon
coupling are considered an intrinsic effect whilst local defects are an extrinsic effect. Exciton traps
can also be artificially made by introducing defects into the material lattice, thus distorting the local
structure which modulates the interband transitions. These three types of trapping are illustrated in
Figure 10.
2.4
Materials
Transition-metal dichalcogenides (TMDC) in bulk form have been extensively studied on both an
experimental and a theoretical basis, due to their application in areas such as solar cells [16], solid
lubricants [17] or energy storage [19,20]. In this section, the electronic band structure of the tungsten
dichalcogenides bulk crystal discussed.
The basic building blocks of TDMCs are three hexagonal packed atomic layers where a layer
of metal atoms (Mo, W) are sandwiched in between two layers of chalcogen atoms (S, Se). These
materials have strong chalcogen-metal covalent bonds within a single layer, with a weak Wander-der
Waals force between layers, making it relatively easy to exfoliate and obtain a monolayer. In this thesis,
Page 10/53
==PAGE:15==
2.4
Materials
11
Figure 10: A schematic illustrating three types of exciton trapping. (A) Self-trapping due to exiton-
phonon coupling. (B) Trapping of excitons by distortion of the local structure. (C) Self-trapping near
a local defect. From [36].
Figure 11: (a) In plane lattice vectors marked by green and red arrows. Yellow circles denote the
layers of the chalcogen atoms (X), whilst blue circles represent the metal atoms (T). (b) Brillouin zone
together with the symmetry points of 2H-TX2 compounds. The label given in brackets is for some of
the high symmetry points in the Brillouin zone which are sometimes used for 2D systems. From [37].
==PAGE:16==
Master’s Thesis
2.4
Materials
we investigate different thicknesses of tungsten disulphide (WS2). The lattice vectors for WS2, as well
as WSe2, are given by:
a = a
 √
3
2 ˆx + 1
2 ˆy
!
(2.4.1)
b = a
 
−
√
3
2 ˆx + 1
2 ˆy
!
(2.4.2)
c∗= cˆz
(2.4.3)
The resulting reciprocal lattice vectors are given by:
a∗= 4π
√
3a
 
1
2 ˆx +
√
3
2 ˆy
!
(2.4.4)
b
∗= 4π
√
3a
 
−1
2 ˆx +
√
3
2 ˆy
!
(2.4.5)
c∗= 2π
c ˆz
(2.4.6)
As a consequence, the Brillouin zone has the form presented in figure 11 (b). There are several
symmetry points which are important for the electronic structure of TX2 compounds: (i) the centre of
the Brillouin zone, i.e. the Γ point, where the electronic states are involved in the indirect transitions
in bulk crystals, (ii) the middle of the edge joining two rectangular faces, i.e. the K point, where the
states are involved in the direct transitions in bulk and monolayer crystals. The high symmetry at the
Brillouin zone boundary for two-dimensional monolayers are usually labelled Q and P. For convince,
and following the convention in litterateur, we use throughout this work the same labels as for the 3D
bulk crystal where M and K corresponds to P and Q, respectively.
optical properties and band structure
The calculated bandstructures of WS2 and WSe2 bulk crystals are presented in figure 12 [21].
These calculation reveals an indirect band gap in bulk crystals which is located between the valance
band maximum (VBM), situated at the centre of the Brillouin zone (Γ point), and a conduction band
minimum (CBM) between the Γ and K (noted as T). The red arrow in figure 12 illustrate the indirect
optical transition,i.e.
the CMB at T and VBM at Γ, which originates from linear combinations
of tungsten dxy and dx2−x2 orbitals and chalcogen pz orbitals.
The wave function have a spatial
extension along the z-direction, i.e. along the c-axis of the crystal. These electronic states exhibit
a strong interlayer coupling, and their dispersion strongly depends on the number of layers.
The
indirect band gap in bulk crystals leads to an extremely weak, almost negligible, quantum yield for
photoluminescence (PL) [22]. In addition, to the indirect transition in bulk crystal are there a set of
possible direct optical transitions at the K point, marked with blue arrows in figure 12.
The electronic states of both valance and conduction bands at the K are mainly associated with
tungsten d-orbit, which have a weak spatial extension along the c-axis, thus these electronic states
can mainly be characterised in two-dimensional (2D). The direct transition at the K point can be
observed in optical absorption measurements as two prominent peaks at an energy higher than the
indirect transition energy; these peaks are referred to as A and B excitons [22]. An example of a
measurement of the absorption spectrum for the WS2 bulk crystal can be seen in Figure 13, with A
Page 12/53
==PAGE:17==
Master’s Thesis
2.4
Materials
Figure 12: DFT calculated electronic band structures of WS2 and WSe2 bulk crystal. The solid red
arrows indicate the lowest energy transition, i.e. the indirect band gap, whilst the blue arrows show
the direct transition associated with low-energy Wannier excitons (A and B excitons). Taken from [21]
and modified.
TX2
Eind
g
(eV)
Edir
g (eV)
WS2
1.3
2.04
WSe2
1.2
1.70
Table 1: Indirect and direct band gap transition energies for WS2 and WSe2 bulk crystal at room
temperature.
and B excitons at energies 2 and 2.4 eV, respectively. A and B excitons arise from vertical transitions
from a spin-orbit-split valence band to a spin-orbit-split conduction.
The large binding energy of
these excitons, which in the order of ≃50meV, indicates that they can be easily observed at room
temperate, where kbT ≈25meV. Strong absorption at higher energies (C peak) arises from nearly-
degenerate exciton states and can be observed in transmission and reflection measurements due to the
band nesting effect [24].
In table 1 are the values of the indirect and direct transition energy, determined experimentally
by optical or photoncurrent measurements, for WS2 and WSe2 bulk crystal [22, 25].
In this case
the direct transition energies Edir
g
was obtained by adding a constant exciton binding energy of 60
meV [26,27] to the experimentally determined energy position of the exciton peaks at A [22].
Monolayer crystals The atomically thin dichalcogninide crystals are of interest because their elec-
tronic properties are distinct from their bulk counterparts. Here, the electronic and optical properties
of 2D dichalcogenide crystals are described.
When the number of layers is reduced, the electronic band structure evolves to the one presented
in Figure 14, these being the band structure of monolayer WS2 and WSe2. The states at the Γ and
T point have a strong metal d-orbital characteristic combined with the pz-orbital of chalcogen, thus,
they strongly depend on the interlayer coupling, which is absent in monolayer flakes. In contrast, the
obritals contributing to the conduction/valences band states at the K point are localised within the
X-T-X sandwich and do not depend on the number of layers. Decreasing the number of layers results in
Page 13/53
==PAGE:18==
2.4
Materials
14
Figure 13: Optical absorption spectrum for WS2 bulk crystal measured at room temperature. The two
absorption peaks, noted as A and B, indicates the direct excitonic transition marked by blue arrows in
Figure 1. The C denotes the band nesting. Taken from [22].
Figure 14: DFT calculated electronic band structures of WS2 and WSe2 monolayer crystal. The red
arrows indicates the direct bandgap transition and also the transition associated with the low-energy A
and B excitons. ∆SO denotes the energy of the spilt VBM due to spin-orbit coupling. Taken from [21]
and modified.
==PAGE:19==
Master’s Thesis
2.4
Materials
Figure 15: (a,b) Normalised PL spectra of exfoliated 2H-WS2 and 2H-WSe2 flakes consisting of 1-5
layers. A and B are direct excitons. Peak I is the indirect band gap emission. The A’ and B peaks are
typically 100 to 1000 times weaker than the band edge emission peaks and are magnified for clarity.
(c,d) Relative decay in PL quantum yield as a function of the number of layers. Taken from [28]
the energy at Γ to change dramatically, while at the K point the energy remains practically unchanged.
In the monolayer limit, both the VBM and the CBM move from Γ and T respectively, to the K point
of the Brillouin zone. As a result, a monolayer of WS2 or WSe2 becomes a direct band gap material
with an optical transition at the corner of the Brillouin zone [22].
The optical response of monolayers are determined by the direct transition at the K+ and
K−points of the Brillouin zone. Since the electronic structure at the K point are almost identical
for monolayers and bulk sample, their absorption spectra are similar with two strong resonances (A
and B excitons).
However, this is not the case for the PL emission.
In monolayers the emission
occurs at an energy significantly different from that of the bulk. When the number of layers from the
bulk is decreased, a shift toward higher energies is induced for the peaks in the PL emission. Thus,
in compliance, there is a crossover from an indirect band gap in bulk to a direct band gap in the
monolayer limit [22, 29]. On Figure 15 (a) and (b) are the normalised PL spectra for 1 to 5 layer
flakes of WS2 and WSe2, showing that there is a shift in energy emission when changing the number of
layers. In addition, the PL for monolayers is about two orders of magnitude larger in amplitude than
the bilayer, and four orders of magnitude larger in amplitude compared to the five layer. Figure 15
(c) and (d) illustrates the change in the PL quantum yield (QY) with a decreasing number of layers.
Angle-resolved photonemisission spectroscopy has directly mapped the band structure of MoS2 and
MoSe2 [30, 31]. Similar behaviour in the energy and intensity of PL emission depends on decreasing
number of layers, has benn observed for other isoeletronic compounds of this family as a result of
similar lattice structures [22,29].
Addtionally, just like in the bulk crystal a clear band splitting of the VBM at the K point of
the Brillouin zone in monolayers is observed due to strong spin-orbit coupling. Spin-orbit splitting
increases with increasing atomic number of the transition metal or chalcogen atom. Therefore, due to
Page 15/53
==PAGE:20==
Master’s Thesis
TX2
Edir
g (eV)
∆V BM(eV)
∆CBM(eV)
WS2
1.95
0.435
0.029
WSe2
1.64
0.461
0.036
Table 2: Optical direct band gap for WS2 and WSe2 monolayer crystals. The spin-orbit splitting of
the level at the top of the valence band and the minimum of the conduction band at the K point of
the BZ.
the heavier mass of the tungsten atoms, in compounds of tungsten dicahlcogenides this splitting is larger
(≃400meV) compared to that of molybdenum dicahlcogenides (≃150meV). Another consequence of
spin-orbit coupling is a split of the CMB at both the band edge at the K point and the secondary
minimum at T, as illustrated in Figure 14. Similarly to the VBM the spin-orbit coupling in the CBM is
larger for Se compounds compared to S compounds. This is expected as a result of the heavier mass of
selenium compared to that of sulphur. A summery of the direct band gap values can be seen in Table
2, which were determined experimentally by both photoluminescence and absorption measurements, as
well as the splitting at the VBM and CBM at the K point for WS2 and WSe2 monolayer crystals [21,32].
3
Methods
In this Chapter will the confocal setup will be described, and the methods used for the preparation of
samples will be presented. The method ranges from exfoliation, CAB transfer, and cleaning of samples.
3.1
Confocal Setup
For optical investigations, a home-made confocal microscope setup was used to perform PL scanning.
A typical confocal image of the fluorescence can be seen in figure 24. The schematic of the setup used
during this project is depicted in figure 16. In this setup a green continues-wave (CW) 532 nm laser
is used to excite the samples. An acoustic optical modulator (AOM) is used to diffract the light, and
the 2-order diffracted light is guided into the setup to be used. This is done so that when the AOM
is turned off, no light is focused on the sample; in addition, by changing the voltage sent to the AOM
one can also vary the intensity of the light. It was possible to adjust the laser power from several
microwatts to several milliwatts, but using the AOM together with two polarises. The laser light was
focused on the sample by using an objective lens, with a 100x magnification and a numerical aperture
of 0.95. The light collected in the focal plan of the lens is sent through a dichroic mirror with a 550
nm cut-off, which reflects the laser light and transmits the fluorescence of the samples. The light was
then sent through some filter, these being a 600 nm long pass and a 532 nm notch filter to remove the
remaining reflected light from the sample. A focussing lens was used to focus the light on a collimator
to couple the light into an optical fiber. The light is then sent through a 50/50 fiber beam splitter
(FBS), where one fiber always went to an avalanche photodiode (APD), and the second one went to
either APD or a spectrometer. The APDs used are not photon-number resolving detectors, meaning
that they are not capable of distinguishing between one or more photons but merely determine if there
was a photon or not. Therefore, if one wants to perform g2 measurements there is a need for two
APDs. The spectrometer allowed measurements of the spectra at a specific point of interest.
Page 16/53
==PAGE:21==
3.1
Confocal Setup
17
Figure 16: A schematic of the confocal setup. In this setup a 532 nm laser was used; the light was first
guided through some filter, then an AOM and two polarises to control the power and the polarisation of
the light. The laser light was then guided through a beam expander to fill the entirety of the aperture
of the objective lens; it was then guided to a dichroic mirror with a 550-nm cut-off. The laser light
will be reflected at the dichoric mirror and guided to the objective lens with a 100x magnification and
a numerical aperture of 0.95, which focusses the laser light on the sample. The PL light from sample
is collected by the objective lens, transmitted through the dichroric mirror, and guided through a 532
nm notch filter and 600 nm long-pass filter. Using a focussing lens, the PL light will be focused onto
a collimator, which couples the light to an optical fiber. The PL is then guided through the fiber to
a 50/50 fiber beam splitter, where one fiber goes to an APD and the other one to an APD or the
spectrometer.
==PAGE:22==
Master’s Thesis
3.2
Sample preparation
Figure 17: Sketch of the mechanical exfoliation of hBN flakes, this specific type of exfoliation is a
top-down technique. From [39].
3.2
Sample preparation
The mechanical exfoliation method used is the same as that used for the discovery of graphene; Taking
a small chunk of the material which is to be exfoliated, the top layers of the material were then stripped
away by applying tape to the surface of the material and ripping the tape off. Thin layers of the material
adhere to the tape, and a fresh piece of tape with the adhesion side down is placed on top of it. The
two pieces of tape were then pulled apart, and a new piece of tape was placed on top of each of them,
raised, and repeated until the pieces of tape contain a large amount of small island. A substrate with
a 90-nm SiO2 grown surface and gold index marks was cleaned in acetone and isopropyl alcohol (IPA)
before entering the plasma asher. Plasma ashing of the wafer before transferring the flakes is crucial,
firstly to clean the sample and secondly to improve adhesion by removing the surface terminations.
The transfer was then carried out by placing the tape on top of the wafer shortly after it was removed
from the asher. The wafer and the tape were then heated until the tape lost its adhesion properties,
and the tape was slowly pulled off to ensure that the flakes were left on the substrate. Note that after
the transfer, some of the adhesion from the tape may remain on the surface of the wafer as residues.
See Figure 17 for an illustration of the exfoliation of a material.
The sample was prepared by two similar preparation methods; In the first method, WS2 was
exfoliated and transferred to a clean wafer, and a separate wafer was spin-coated with a silica beads
dilution in water. The flakes were moved from one flakes to the other using the CAB transfer. In the
second method, the CAB transfer was omitted, meaning that the flakes were transferred from the tape
directly on top of the wafer with beads. The silica beads used had a diameter of ∼90 nm and multiple
different dilutions were tested. Before spin-coating, the bead dilutions were sonicated to break up
clusters of beads, and different sonication times were tested. It is important to achieve a good protocol
for depositing beads on the wafer, as the beads should cover the entire surface of the wafer and be
as evenly spaced as possible with the right density. Because if density is too high, the flakes will be
suspended on top of the beads, while if it is too low, the flakes might be deposited on areas without
beads. Different spin-coating protocols were tested to achieve the best bead uniformity and density.
The CAB transfer is as follows:
• Prepare wafer with index marks and transferred material, locate flakes of interest.
• Spin-cast cellulose acetate butyrate (CAB) on the wafer where the flakes are deposited.
Page 18/53
==PAGE:23==
Master’s Thesis
• With a normal optical microscope and a scalpel, cut a square in the CAB around the flakes of
interest.
• Pour water over the area of the wafer that was cut. The water will flow into the cuts on the CAB
flowing underneath it, lifting it up, so that the CAB with flakes will float on the surface of the
droplet of water.
• With the microscope and tweezers, lift the floating square of the CAB and flakes with the tweezers
of the wafer.
• Deposit the square of CAB and flakes onto the wafer with beads.
• Place the wafer on a hot plate at 120 ° Celsius for 1-2 min.
• Removal of the CAB:
– 5 min in ehtyl actate to rinse most of the CAB off.
– 30 min in a new ehtyl actate bath.
– 30 min in acetone or over night.
– Wash is IPA
– Dry the wafer of with N2
See Figure 18 for an illustration of the CAB transfer.
4
Results
In this Chapter will all of the results will be presented. There has been an investigation of how to
achieve the best deposition of beads. An investigation of the photolumiescence spectrum dependence
on laser power, number of layers, and strain.
4.1
Beads deposition
In this section the results of the bead deposition investigation will be presented, the density and
uniformity of the bead deposition dependence on rotational speed and acceleration of spin-coater is
examined, and furthermore, the dependence on sonication time will be studied. Firstly, the dependence
on the rotational speed of the spin-coater will be investigated. In figure 19 there are three dark-field
(DF) images of the bead deposition of three different samples, with a rotational speed of 500, 1000
and 1500 rpm for figure 19 (a), (b) and (c), respectively. The other parameters are kept constant with
a rotational acceleration of 37 rpmrs (rounds per minute per second) with a spinning time of 60 s,
the bead dilution in water used was 1:100. It can be observed from the three figures that the bead
density and uniformity of the deposition do not have a high dependence on the rotational speed of the
spin-coater, since the three bead depositions look rather similar.
Second, the dependence on the rotational acceleration of the spin-coater will be investigated.
In figure 20 are four DF images of the bead deposition of three different samples, which was produced
at a rotational acceleration of 37, 50 and 75 rpmrs for figure 20 (a), (b) and (c), respectively. The
rotational speed was set to 1500 rpm for 60 s, and the dilution of the silica beads in water was 1:100.
From the figure 20 (a)-(c) it can be observed that the bead density does not seem to depend on the
Page 19/53
==PAGE:24==
4.1
Beads deposition
20
Figure 18: Schematic diagram of the sample fabrication. (a) WS2 is transferred to a clean silica wafer
with index marks using tape. (b) CAB is spin-coated on the wafer with flakes after the wafer is heated
to harden the CAB. (c) A square is cut into the CAB around the flake of interest, and a droplet of
water is placed onto the square, the water will flow underneath the CAB lifting it to the surface of the
droplet. (d) Using a pair of tweezers, the CAB is picked up and deposited onto a wafer with beads. (e)
A clean wafer is spin-coated with silica beads with a diameter of ≈90 nm. (f) The CAB from square
from (d) is transferred onto a wafer with silica beads (e), the wafer is heated to around 120-130° C to
smelt the CAB so that it adheres to the surface of the wafer. The wafer with bead and the transferred
CAB is rise in either pure acetone or a multiple step rising procedure. (g) The finished sample with
WS2 flakes on top of silica beads.
==PAGE:25==
4.1
Beads deposition
21
Figure 19: (a)-(c) Figures containing DF images of three different samples, illustrating the silica
bead density and uniformity dependence on rotational speed. The silica beads were distributed at a
rotational speed of 500, 1000 and 1500 rpm at 60 s for figure (a), (b) and (c), respectively. The dilution
of the beads in water was 1:100 and the rotational acceleration was 37 rpmps (rounds per minute per
second). The bead density and uniformity of the deposition for the different rotational speeds looks
rather similar.
==PAGE:26==
Master’s Thesis
4.1
Beads deposition
Figure 20: (a)-(c) Figures containing DF images of three different samples, illustrating the silica bead
density and uniformity dependence on rotational acceleration. The silica beads were distributed at
a rotational acceleration of 37, 50 and 75 rpmps for figures (a), (b) and (c), respectively. The bead
dilution in water was 1:100 and the rotational speed was 1500 rpm for 60 s. The bead density of
the different depositions looks similar. (d) DF image of the 50 rpmps sample at a different location,
illustrating that the bead deposition was uniform across the entire sample. This was observed for the
50 and 75 rpmps sample, but not for the 37 rpmps sample.
rotation acceleration. But from figure 20 (d), which is a DF image of the 50 rpmps at a different
location on the wafer, it can be seen that the uniformity of the bead deposition is especially bad in
some areas of the wafer. This behaviour of possessing areas with low uniformity was observed for both
the 50 and 75 rpmps samples, but never for the 37 rpmps sample, indicating that the bead uniformity
of the deposition depends on the rotational acceleration of the spin-coater.
Lastly, the dependence on the sonication time of the bead dilution in water will be investigated.
In figure 21 are five DF images of the deposition of beads of five different samples, where the sonication
of the 1:100 dilution of beads in water was 26, 39, 52, 65, 75 min for figure 21 (a), (b), (c), (d) and (e),
respectively. The spin-coating protocol used was a rotational acceleration of 37 rpmps and a rotational
speed of 1500 for 60 s. From the figure 21 it can be seen that the density of the beads depends on the
sonication time of the dilution of the beads in water, and that higher densities were achieved for longer
sonication times.
To conclude this section, we have seen that the rotational speed of the spin-coater does not
Page 22/53
==PAGE:27==
Master’s Thesis
4.2
Tungsten disulphide
Figure 21: (a)-(e) Figure containing DF images of five different samples, illustrating the silica bead
density ans uniformity dependence on sonication time of the bead dilution in water. The sonication
time of the dilution of the beads in water was 26, 39, 52, 65 and 75 min for (a), (b), (c), (d) and (e),
respectively. The dilution of the beads in water was 1:100 and was spin-coated at 1500 rpm for 60
s with an acceleration of 37 rpmps. It is apparent from the direct comparison that the density and
uniformity of the beads increases with increasing sonication time.
have any noticeable effect on the bead density or uniformity of the deposition. However, the rotational
acceleration of the spin coater has shown to have an effect on the uniformity of the bead deposition
and that lower rotational acceleration is preferred in order to achieve bead uniformity across the entire
sample. The bead density is mostly governed by the sonication of the silica bead dilution in water,
where longer sonication times will result in higher bead density. This is attributed to the fact that the
silica bead clusters will more likely break apart over longer sonication times.
4.2
Tungsten disulphide
In this section we present the results of the characterisation of WS2 optical properties and the depen-
dence on the strain defects. Four different thicknesses of WS2 have been investigated ranging from
monolayer (1L) to qudralayer (4L). All of the flakes are placed on top of silica bead introducing strain
defects into the WS2 crystal lattice.
Before the optical properties of different thicknesses of WS2 are investigated, a study on the
dependence of the PL spectra on the laser power is presented. In figure 22 (a) the PL spectra for
different laser powers are obtained, all of the measurements were acquired at the same location on a 1L
flake. The spectral width and spectral peak position is estimated by fitting; the fitting model will be
presented later, and can be seen in figure 22 (b)-(c). From 22 (b) it is apparent that the spectral peak
position is slightly blue-shifted for increasing laser power, but for most measurements it is constant.
In addition, from 22 (c) it is apparent that there is a broadening of the spectrum for increasing laser
power, these increases seem to be linear, and for the last couple of measurements it beings to flatten
out, more measurements are needed to determine whether this flattening is physical.
Page 23/53
==PAGE:28==
Master’s Thesis
4.2
Tungsten disulphide
Figure 22: (a) six measurements of the PL at a single location on a 1L flake, no noticeable difference in
the spectra are observed. (b) The energy of the peak position for the six measurements, a slight blue
shift in energy is observed, but the peak position is mostly constant. (c) The spectral width (FWHM)
of the spectra in eV, a small linear increase in spectral width is observed for increasing laser power.
First, we present the optical properties of 1L WS2. A bright field (BF) image of 1L flakes can
be seen in figure 23 (a), where the 1L flake is enclosed by a red box to highlight it. In figure 23 (b)
can a DF image of the same flake be seen, a small bright spot inside of the 1L flake can be observed
around the centre of the red box. This bright spot inside the flakes indicates that it is placed on top of
a silica bead; To verify this, a confocal image of the entire flake was acquired; see figure 24 (a). This
confocal image contains a spot with higher PL, the area in which this bright spot is located corresponds
to the area where a bead is observed. Verify that the 1L flake is placed on top of a bead and that
the said bead introduces strain in the flake, creating exiton traps, resulting in the observed increase in
PL. A confocal image zoomed in on the bright spot can be seen in figure 24 (b), from which it can be
observed that the bright spot is asymmetric and doughnut-shaped, since the photon count decreases
at the middle of the spot; see figure 25 (b). Furthermore, a white line has been placed across the bight
spot, indicating the location of a line scan of the PL spectrum.
The measurements from this line scan can be seen in figure 25 (a), where it is observed that for
areas with higher PL their spectral peak position has been red-shifted. The parameters of the spectral
peaks were estimated by fitting a function to the individual spectra. The function used for the fitting
is a skewed Gaussian function to imitate the PL spectra and a linear function as the background, with
the fitting function given by:
f(x; A, B, C, µ, σ, γ) =
A
σ
√
2π exp

−(x −µ)2/2σ2 
1 + erf
γ(x −µ
σ
√
2

+ Bx + C.
(4.2.1)
Where the fitting parameter A, µ and σ are the amplitude, centre (mean) and standard deviation
of the Gaussian function, respectively. B is the slope of the linear function, C is a constant offset, and
γ is the skewedness factor that determines the skewedness of the Gaussian function. In this paper, the
words standard deviation, full width half at half maximum (FWHM), and spectral width will be used
interchangeably. We know from theory and have observed measurement that the PL spectra are not
symmetric, where one side has an exponential evolution and the other side a sharp evolution, and hence
the skewed Gaussian function was chosen to model this behaviour. Examples of the fitting model can
be seen in figure 26 (a)-(b), on the figures are the data (blue line), the fit model (orange line), the linear
components (dotted green line) of the fit, and the Gaussian function (dotted red line) components of
the fit. The model used seems to capture the characteristic of PL spectra we are investigating, being the
Page 24/53
==PAGE:29==
Master’s Thesis
4.2
Tungsten disulphide
Figure 23: (a) Bright field images of 1L and 4L WS2, with a red/green box indicating the part of the
1L/4L flake investigated. It should be noted that the flake enclosed by the green square does not look
to be only 4L, but the PL spectrum is similar to the characteristic spectrum of 4L WS2, so throughout
this paper it will be treated as a 4L flake. (b) Dark-field image of 1L and 4L WS2, there are small dots
inside the flakes, indicating that the flakes have been placed on top of the silica beads.
spectral peak position and the spectral width; the spectral peak positions are indicated on the figures
with black lines. The spectral peak values predicted with the fitting model fall within close proximity
to the actual spectral peak position of the measurement. The degree to which the model captures
the amplitude of the spectra seems to depend on the shallowness of the peak near the maximum; the
pointier the peak, the worse the capture of the amplitude is. The part of the spectra just before it
flattens out is where the model has the most trouble capturing the behaviour of the spectra.
The two parameters are of interest for this work, the spectral peak position and the spectral
width of the line scan, these are estimated using the fitting model and can be seen in figure 27 (a)-(b).
Looking at figure 27 (a), it is apparent that the spectral peak position across the bead is red shifted
compared to that of the reference, which is parts of the flake without strain. In addition, it is observed
that for positions in close proximity to 100.5 the spectral peak position is less red shifted, the spectral
peak positions from this area correspond to the middle part of the doughnut shape bright spot. It
can also be seen that the offset is not constant, but linear, such that the spectral peak positions for
the references are quite far apart. The spectral width of the PL peak for the line scan can be seen in
figure 27 (b), and similar behaviour to the spectral peak position is observed for the spectral width.
The spectral width decreases for areas with higher strain, which is observed as an increase in PL in the
confocal measurements, resulting in a narrowing of the peak. Two dips are observed corresponding to
the areas of the doughnut-shaped bright spot with high strain, and at the middle of the bright spot,
the PL peaks are narrowed less. A linear offset is also observed for the spectral width, indicating the
phenomenon causing this offset effect the spectral peak position and spectral width similarly.
In addition, to the line scan, an area scan has been preformed, images of the 1L flakes investigated
can be seen in figures 28 (a)-(c), where the flake of interest is indicated by a red box. These three
images are a BF, a DF and a confocal image of the 1L flake for figures (a), (b) and (c), respectively.
It is apparent from these figures that the flake is placed on top of silica beads, as bright spots appear
in the BF, DF and confocal images at the same locations. In addition, it is also apparent that most of
the areas with induced strain are produced by clusters of silica beads rather than single beads, due to
the large size of the bright spots.
A confocal images zoomed in on the investigated area can be seen in figure 29 (b), the location
Page 25/53
==PAGE:30==
Master’s Thesis
4.2
Tungsten disulphide
Figure 24: (a) Confolcal image of the entire 1L flake, a hole in the flake can be seen, this hole was
produced during the preliminary investigation of the flakes, and is a result of using a too large of a
laser power, thus burning a hole in the flake. (b) Confocal image of the area containing and a bead,
the white line roughly indicates the path of the line scan. The area of the flakes containing a bead has
a higher PL, and is shape like an anti-symmetric doughnut.
of the area scan is indicated with a white box. The strain in this area is induced by a cluster of beads,
due to the large size of the bright spot, which is almost 2 µ m in diameter.
Similarly to the line scan, the PL spectra are fitted with the model from eq. 4.2.1, where the
parameters spectral peak position and spectral width have been extracted, see figure 30 (a)-(d). The
spectral peak position of the area scan can be seen in figure 30 (a) and its accompanying errors in figure
30 (b). It can be seen that the area corresponding to the bright spot is red-shifted, which coincides
with what we saw for the line scan. The spectral width of the area scan can be seen in figure30 (c)
and its accompanying errors in figure 30 (e). It is observed that the spectral width decreases where
the bright spot is located, similar to what we saw for the line scan.
Moving onto an investigation of the optical properties of bilayer (2L) WS2. A BF image of 2L
flakes can be seen in figure 31 (a), where the 2L flake is the one enclosed by a red box. DF images
of the flakes can be seen 31 (b); a single bright spot is visible on the BF and DF images, suggesting
that the flakes have a silica bead underneath. This bright spot also appears in the confocal images;
see figure 32 (a), verifying that the flake is placed on top of a silica bead. It can be seen from figure 32
(b) that the gain in PL is much smaller compared to that of the 1L flakes.
For the 2L flake, the PL spectra were taken at the nine different spots indicated on 31 (a), and
the PL spectra can be seen in figure 33. The nine PL spectra have been divided into two groups, the
first group being measurements 1-5, where measurements 2-5 were taken along the same horizontal line.
The second group consists of measurements 6-9 and were taken along the same vertical line. From the
optical images it was possible to determine whether the flake is 2L, but by comparing the obtained
PL spectra in figure 33 with the characteristic PL spectra seen in figure 15 (a), one can determine the
thickness of the flake. Converting the wavelengths ≈640 and ≈730 to energy gives ≈1.97 and ≈1.70 for
the direct and indirect bandgap, respectively. These values are relatively close to the ones observed in
33 verifying that the flake is a 2L. A red shift of the direct bandgap peak is observed for the positions
Page 26/53
==PAGE:31==
4.2
Tungsten disulphide
27
Figure 25: (a) 15 measurements of the PL spectrum across the white line in Figure 24, it is observed
that the spectral peak is first red-shifted, then slightly blue-shifted when it is near the centre, then red
shifted again when moving away from the centre, and final blue shifted back toward the spectral peak
position of the reference. (b) Photon count across the confocal image in Figure 24 (b) around the y
position 111.5, a decrease in the counts is observed around the x position 100.25, corresponding to the
middle of the doughnut-shaped feature in Figure 24.
==PAGE:32==
4.2
Tungsten disulphide
28
Figure 26: (a) An example of a function fitted to the spectrum observed at a x position of 99.8. (b)
An example of a fitted function to the spectrum observed at a position of x of 100.7. Along the x-axis
is the energy of the photon in eV and along the y-axis is the photon count. In both figures are the
measurements (blue line), the fitted functions (orange line), the Gaussian distribution (dotted green
line) component of the fit, and the linear component (dotted red line), in addition, are the spectral
peak indicated by a black line.
Figure 27: (a) The energy of the peak position across the white line in Figure 24 (b), a red shift
in energy is observed i areas with high photoluminescence. (b) The spectral width (FWHM) of the
spectra in eV, a decrease in spectral width is observed in areas with high photoluminescence.
==PAGE:33==
4.2
Tungsten disulphide
29
Figure 28: (a) Bight field image of a monolayer WS2 flake, the red square surround the flake of interest.
(b) Dark-field images of the monolayer flake, and the small bright dots indicate that the flake has been
placed on top of silica beads. (c) Confocal images of the monolayer flake; the dots seen in the dark-field
images show up as areas with high photoluminescence in the confocal image.
Figure 29: (a) A confocal images of the flake of interest, red box surround the area which was investi-
gated. (b) Confocal image zoomed in on the area of interest, the white box highlighting the area that
was scanned.
==PAGE:34==
4.2
Tungsten disulphide
30
Figure 30: (a) The energy of the peak positions inside the scanned area, which is highlighted by the
white box in Figure 29 (b), (b) the uncertainties of the estimated values in (a). (c) The spectral width
in eV inside the scanned area, (d) the uncertainties of the estimated values in (c).
Figure 31: (a) Bright field image of a bilayer WS2, the red box surrounds the flake of interest. (b)
Dark-field images of the bilayer flake, a bright dot suggests that the flake is placed on top of a bead.
==PAGE:35==
Master’s Thesis
4.2
Tungsten disulphide
Figure 32: (a) Confocal images of the bilayer flake, the numbers 1-9 specify the nine points which was
investigated. (b) The photon count across the conforcal image of the flake at a y position of around
159.8, a small increase in the photoluminescence observed when x is 124 to 125.
located on the bright spot, thus following the same behaviour as the 1L flakes.
Examples of the fitting model to the 2L PL spectra can be seen in figure 34 (a)-(b), on the
figures are the data (blue line), the fit model (orange line), the linear components (dotted green line)
of the fit, and the skewed Gaussian functions (dotted red and dotted purple line) components of the
fit. The model seems to capture the behaviour of the PL spectra extremely well, thus giving rise to
an accurate estimation of the characteristics. The estimated spectral peak positions are indicated on
the figures with black lines and fall directly on top of the ones from the PL spectra. The model has no
difficulty estimating the amplitude of the peaks, as had with 1L flakes.
The parameters spectral peak position and spectral width of the nine points estimated using
the fitting model are shown in figure 35 (a)-(d). Looking at Figure 35 (a), it is apparent from both the
horizontal and vertical groupings of positions that the spectral peak position for the direct bandgap
transition is red-shifted, on strained areas of the flake. This is similar to the behaviour observed for
the 1L; however, looking at figure 35 (b), a spectral broadening is observed for both the horizontal
and vertical groupings of positions, which is the opposite of the behaviour observed for the 1L. The
spectral peak position for the indirect bandgap transition, see figure 35 (c), is observed to blue shift for
position located on the silica bead. The spectral width for the indirect bandgap transition is observed
to broaden for the strained areas of the flakes, see figure 35 (d), which is a similar behaviour to that
of the direct bandgap transition.
Continue with an investigation of the optical properties of trilayer (3L) WS2. A BF image of
3L flakes can be seen in figure 36 (a), where the 3L flake is the one enclosed by a red box. A DF image
of the flake can be seen 36 (b); bright spots are visible on both the BF and the DF images, indicating
that the flake has silica beads underneath. A few of the bright spots also appear in the confocal image;
see figure 37 (a), verifying that the flake is placed on top of silica beads. It can be seen from figure 32
(b) that the gain in PL is noticeably large compared to 2L, but still a bit small compared to 1L flakes.
Similarly to the investigation of the 2L flake, a spot investigation of the 3L flake was performed,
where the PL spectra were taken at the eight different spots indicated on 37 (a), and the PL spectra
can be seen in figure 38. The eight PL spectra have been divided into two groups, the first group
being measurements 1-4 which were taken along the same horizontal line. The second group consists
of measurements 5-8 and were taken along the same vertical line. Just like for the 2L flake was it
not possible from the optical images to determine whether or not the flake is a 3L, but by comparing
Page 31/53
==PAGE:36==
4.2
Tungsten disulphide
32
Figure 33: Nine measurements of the photoluminescence spectrum for the points shown in Figure
32 (a), measurements are grouped into two groups, the first group 1-5 where 2-5 is taken along the
same horizontal line, and the second group 6-9 is taken along the same vertical line. Similarly to the
monolayer flakes we see that the peak corresponding to a direct band-gap transition is red shifted areas
with higher photoluminescence. The naming of the position is such that the first number refers to the
flake and the second to the position; thus Pos 1.1 refers to the bilayer flake 1 position 1
Figure 34: (a) An example of a function fitted to the spectrum observed at position 2. (b) An example
of a function fitted to the spectrum observed at position 3. Along the x-axis is the energy of the photon
in eV and along the y-axis is the photon count. In both figures are the measurements (blue line), the
fitted functions (orange line), the two Gaussian distributions (dotted red and purple lines) components
of the fit and the linear component (dotted green line); also, the spectral peak indicated by a black
line.
==PAGE:37==
4.2
Tungsten disulphide
33
Figure 35: (a) The energy of the peak position for the direct band gap transition, of the nine posi-
tions in Figure 32 (a), grouped into two groups, a red shift in energy is observed in areas with high
photoluminescence. (b) The spectral width (FWHM) of the spectra for the direct band-gap transition
in eV; an increase in the spectral width is observed in areas with high photoluminescence. (c) The
energy of the peak position for the indirect band-gap transition and a blue shift in energy is observed
in areas with high photoluminescence. (d) The spectral width of the spectra for the indirect band-gap
transition in eV, an increase in spectral width is observed in areas with high photoluminescence.
==PAGE:38==
4.2
Tungsten disulphide
34
Figure 36: a) Bright field image of a trilayer WS2, the red box surrounds the flake of interest. (b)
Dark field images of the trilayer flake, bright dots suggesting that the flake is placed on top of a bead.
Figure 37: (a) Confocal images of the trilayer flake, the numbers 1-8 specify the eight points which was
investigated. (b) The photon count across the confocal image of the flake at a y position of around
167.3, an increase in the photoluminescence observed when x is around 115.
==PAGE:39==
Master’s Thesis
4.2
Tungsten disulphide
Figure 38: Eight measurements of the photoluminescence spectrum for the points shown in Figure 37
(a), the measurements are grouped into two groups, the first group 1-4 is taken along the same horizontal
line, and the second group 5-8 is taken along the same vertical line. Similarly to the monolayer flakes,
we see that the peak corresponding to a direct band-gap transition is red-shifted in areas with higher
photoluminescence. The naming of the position is such that the first number refers to the flake and
the second to the position; thus Pos 1.1 refers to the trilayer flake 1 position 1
the obtained PL spectra in figure 38 with the characteristic PL spectra seen in figure 15 (a), one can
determine the thickness of the flake. Converting the wavelengths ≈650 nm and ≈820 nm to energy gives
≈1.51 eV and ≈1.70 eV for the direct and indirect bandgap, respectively. These values are relatively
close to the ones observed in 33 verifying that the flake is a 3L. A red shift of the direct bandgap peak
is observed for the positions located on the bright spot, thus following the same behaviour as the 1L
and 2L flakes. It is also observed that the transition from the indirect band gap is reduced for the
positions on the bright spot.
Examples of the fits to the 3L PL spectra can be seen in figure 39 (a)-(b), in the figures are
the data (blue line), the fit model (orange line), the linear components (dotted green line) of the fit,
and the skewed Gaussian functions (dotted red and dotted purple line) components of the fit. Just
like in 2L case the model seems to capture the behaviour of the PL spectra extremely well, resulting
in accurate estimations of the characteristics. The estimated spectral peak positions are indicated on
the figures with black lines and fall directly on top of the ones from the PL spectra. The model has no
difficulty estimating the amplitude of the peaks, as had with 1L flakes.
The parameters spectral peak position and spectral width of the eight points estimated using
the fitting model are shown in figure 40 (a)-(d). Looking at figure 35 (a) it is apparent from both the
horizontal and vertical groupings of positions that the spectral peak position for the direct bandgap
transition is red-shifted, on strained areas of the flake. This is similar to the behaviour observed for the
1L and 2L, looking at figure 35 (b) a spectral narrowing is observed, for both the horizontal and vertical
groupings of positions, which is the same behaviour as observed for the 1L. The spectral peak position
for the indirect bandgap transition, see figure 35 (c), is observed to red shift for position located on
Page 35/53
==PAGE:40==
Master’s Thesis
4.2
Tungsten disulphide
Figure 39: (a) An example of a function fitted to the spectrum observed at position 1. (b) An example
of a fitted function to the spectrum observed at position 2. Along the x-axis is the energy of the photon
in eV and along the y-axis is the photon count. On both figures are the measurements (blue line), the
fitted functions (orange line), the two Gaussian distributions (dotted red and purple lines) components
of the fit, and the linear component (dotted green line); also, are the spectral peaks indicated by a
black line.
the silica bead, opposite of what was observed for the 2L. The spectral width for the indirect bandgap
transition is observed to broaden for the strained areas of the flakes, see figure 35 (d), which is a similar
behaviour to that of the 2L flakes.
Lastly, the optical properties of qudralayer (4) WS2 investigated. A BF image of the 4L flake
can be seen in figure 23 (a), where the 4L flake is enclosed by a green box. A DF image of the flake
can be seen 23 (b); bright spots are visible on the DF image, suggesting that the flake has silica beads
underneath. These bright spots also appear in the confocal images; see figure 41 (a), verifying that the
flake is placed on top of a silica bead. In figure 41 (a) the area of interest is surrounded by a red box, a
confocal image zoomed in on this area can be seen in figure 41 (b), from which three symmetric bright
spots can be observed. The bright spot investigated is the one with a horizontal cyan line, indicating
the location of a line scan. It can be seen from figure 42 (b) that the gain in PL is extremely large
compared to the other thicknesses of the flakes.
Similar to the investigation of the 1L flake, a line scan investigation of the 3L flake was preformed,
where the PL spectra were taken across the cyan line indicated on 41 (b), and the PL spectra can be
seen in figure 42 (a). It should be noted that from the BF images the flake does not look to be only
four-layer thick. As it looks like it is a lot thicker, since a four-layer thick flake is expected to have
a dark blue colour similar to the 3L flake. But when comparing the PL spectra in 42 (a) with the
characteristic PL spectra seen in figure 15 (a), it can be seen that the flakes PL spectra match the
characteristic PL spectrum for 4L WS2. Thus, converting the wavelengths ≈650 nm and ≈850 nm to
energy gives ≈1.91 eV and ≈1.46 eV for the direct and indirect bandgap, respectively. These values
are relatively close to the ones observed in 42 indicating that the PL spectrum of the flake is similar
to the one expected from a 4L flake, so throughout this paper it will be treated as a 4L flake. A large
blue shift and spectral broadening of the indirect bandgap peak is observed for the positions located
on the bright spot.
Examples of the fits to the 4L PL spectra can be seen in figure 43 (a)-(b), on the figures are the
data (blue line), the fit model (orange line), the linear components (dotted green line) of the fit and
the skewed Gaussian functions (dotted red and dotted purple line) components of the fit. Just like in
2L and 3L case the model seem to capture the behaviour of the PL spectra extremely well, resulting
Page 36/53
==PAGE:41==
4.2
Tungsten disulphide
37
Figure 40: (a) The energy of the peak position for the direct band-gap transition, of the eight posi-
tions in Figure 37 (a), grouped into two groups, a red shift in energy is observed in areas with high
photoluminescence. (b) The spectral width of the spectra for the direct band-gap transition in eV, and
a decrease in spectral width is observed in areas with high photoluminescence. (c) The energy of the
peak position for the indirect band gap transition, a red shift in energy is observed in areas with high
photoluminescence. (d) The spectral width of the spectra for the indirect band gap transition in eV,
an increase in spectral width is observed in areas with high photoluminescence.
==PAGE:42==
Master’s Thesis
4.2
Tungsten disulphide
Figure 41: (a) Confocal images of the qudralayer flake, the red box surrounds the area of interest. (b)
Confocal images zoomed in on the area pf interest, the cyan line indicates the location of the line scan.
in accurate estimations of the characteristics. The estimated spectral peak positions are indicated on
the figures with a black lines, and fall directly on top of the ones from the PL spectra. The model does
not have any trouble with estimating the amplitude of the peaks, as had with 1L flakes. It can also be
observed that the shape of the PL spectra changes dramatically, transforming from a narrow pointy
peak to what looks like a Gaussian distribution.
The parameters spectral peak position and spectral width of the line scan is estimated using the
fitting model are shown in figure 44 (a)-(d). Looking at figure 35 (a) it is apparent that the spectral peak
position for the direct bandgap transition is blue shifted, on strained areas of the flake. This behaviour
is not observed for any of the other thicknesses, looking at figure 35 (b) a spectral broadening is
observed, this behaviour was also observed for the 2L. Furthermore, the spectral broadening of the
direct bandgap peak are small at the centre of the bright spot than at the edges. The spectral peak
position for the indirect bandgap transition, see figure 35 (c), is observed to blue shift for position
located on the silica bead, similar to observations made for the 2L. The spectral width for the indirect
bandgap transition is observed to decrease for the strained areas of the flakes, see figure 35 (d), this
behaviour have not been observed for any of the other thicknesses. The spectral width for the indirect
bandgap transition seem to have the an opposite behaviour of the dicret bandgap transition.
All the results from the spectral investigations are complied in tables 3-6. In the tables 3 and
4 show the spectral parameters for the direct and indirect bandgap, respectively.
The parameters
can be split into two groups; the first group contains parameters for the reference spectra, which
are obtained on the flakes with no strain, and the second group contains parameters for the strain
areas. The parameters for the first group are the mean intensity, the mean peak energy and the mean
spectral width denoted by I, E and FWTH, respectively. The parameters for the second group are
the maximum intensity, the peak energy shift, and the change in the spectral width denoted I, ∆E
and ∆FWHM, respectively. The data in table 5 and 6 are the same as in 3 and 4, just converted
to nm for convenience and to make the data more intuitive; it also makes it easier to compare with
the date in figure 15 (a). The data in table 5 and 6 contain the spectral parameters for the direct
and indirect bandgap, respectively. The grouping of the parameters for table 3 and 4 is also valid for
table 5 and 6. The first groupings of table 5 and 6 are the mean intensity, the mean peak wavelength,
and the mean spectral width denoted I, λ and FWHM, respectively. The second grouping is the
maximum intensity, the shift of the peak wavelength and the change in spectral width denoted I, ∆λ
and ∆FWHM, respectively.
Page 38/53
==PAGE:43==
4.2
Tungsten disulphide
39
Figure 42: (a) 14 measurements of the photoluminescence spectrum across the white line in Figure 22,
it is observed that the spectral peak for indirect bandgap transition is blue shifted in areas with high
photoluminescence. (b) The photon count across the across the confocal image in Figure 41 (b), an
increase in photon count is observed when x is around 96.
==PAGE:44==
Master’s Thesis
4.2
Tungsten disulphide
Figure 43: (a) An example of fitted function to the spectrum observed at the x-position 94.7. (b)
An example of fitted function to the spectrum observed the at x-position 95.3. Along the x axis is
the energy of the photon in eV and along the y-axis is the photon count. On both Figures are the
measurements (blue line), the fitted functions (orange line), the two Gaussian distributions (dotted red
and purple lines) components of the fit and linear component (dotted green line), in addition, are the
spectral peaks indicated by a black line.
To get a better understanding of what is going on in table 3 and 3 the data is plotted. In figure
45 are the relative increases in PL in strained for the direct (dotted black line) transition and the
indirect (dotted grey line) transition. It is observed that one of the 1L flake has a relative increase of
500 %, whilst the remaining 1L flake have a relative increase of around 50-80 %. The relative increase
in PL for direct transition decreases for 2L flakes, whereas it steadily increases afterwards. For the
indirect transition, the relative increase in PL decreases when moving from 2L to 3L, and increases
from 3L to 4L. The 4L flakes are the only case where the increases in PL if large for the indirect
transition than for the direct transition.
The mean energy of the reference spectra depend on the number of layers can be seen in figure
46 (a). It is apparent from this figure that the mean energy decreases with an increasing number of
layers for both the direct (black dotted line) and indirect (grey dotted line) transitions, though the shift
in energy for the indirect transition is much larger. The energy shift of the spectral peak dependence of
the number of layers can be seen in figure 46 (b). It is apparent for this figure that the energy shift of
the peak for the direct transition, increases for increasing number of layers. For the indirect transition
the figure suggest that the energy shift of the peak increases for increasing number of layers.
The mean spectral width of the reference spectra dependence on the number of layers can be
seen in figure 47 (a). It is apparent from this figure that the spectral width of the direct transition
(dotted black line) increases for an increasing number of layers, whilst it decreases for the indirect
transition (dotted grey line). The change in spectral width dependence on the number of layers can
be seen in figure 47 (b). From this figure it is observed that for the indirect transition, the change in
spectral width increases for increasing number of layers; the data suggest that this is also true for the
direct transition, though the 3L flake does not following this trend.
The direct bandgap transition energy dependence on strain was simulated using the PBE method
from DFT. The different amounts of strain were introduced into the calculation by changing the lattice
constants a and b of WS2, which is a = b = 3.160, by the desired amount of strain. In figure 48 (a)-(c)
are the changes in the band structure for monolayer WS2 for three different amounts of strain. On
figure 48 (a) is the band structure for zero strain, it can be observed that the band structure is similar
to 14 thought that the dips at the T point, the point in between the K point and the Γ point, are
lower in energy than the dip at the Γ point. On figure 48 (b) is the band structure for the 0.5 % tensile
Page 40/53
==PAGE:45==
4.2
Tungsten disulphide
41
Figure 44: a) The energy of the peak position for the direct band gap transition, of the line scan
in Figure 41 (b), a blue shift in energy is observed in areas with high photoluminescence. (b) The
spectral width of the spectra for the direct band gap transition in eV, an increase in spectral width is
observed in areas with high photoluminescence, with and small decrease at the centre of the spot. (c)
The energy of the peak position for the indirect band gap transition, a blue shift in energy is observed
in areas with high photoluminescence. (d) The spectral width of the spectra for the indirect band gap
transition in eV, an decrease in spectral width is observed in areas with high photoluminescence, with
a small increase at the centre of the spot.
==PAGE:46==
4.2
Tungsten disulphide
42
Figure 45: The relative increase in photoluminescence in % for the strained areas of the flake, for the
direct bandgap transition (dotted black line) and the indirect bandgap transition (dotted grey line).
It can be observed that the relative increase in photoluminescence is extremely high for one of the 1L
flakes with a 500 % increase, whereas for the other two flakes the increase is less than 100 %. It is also
observed for the relative increase in PL for the direct bandgap transition, decreases when going from
1L to 2L, but steadily increases for 3L and 4L. All of these data were extracted from tables 3 and 4.
Figure 46: (a) The average peak position in meV for the direct bandgap transition (dotted black line)
and the indirect bandgap transition (dotted grey line), for unstained areas of the flakes. It can be
observed that the average peak position decreases (red shift) with an increasing number of layers. (b)
The energy shift in peak position for the strained part of the flakes as a function of the number of
layers. It can be seen that for increasing number of layers the shift in direct bandgap transition (dotted
black line) increases, and it also seems to be the case for the indirect bandgap transition (dotted grey
line). All of this data was extracted from tables 3 and 4.
==PAGE:47==
Master’s Thesis
4.2
Tungsten disulphide
I
I
E
∆E
FWHM
∆FWHM
1L
16.16 ± 3.74kc
96.76 ± 0.06kc
2017.4 ± 4.3meV
8.5 ± 4.3meV
49.1 ± 0.8meV
3.3 ± 0.8meV
21.84 ± 0.43kc
38.02 ± 0.04kc
2050.2 ± 0.4meV
4.5 ± 0.4meV
54.1 ± 0.3meV
3.5 ± 0.3meV
23.13 ± 0.42kc
28.59 ± 0.04kc
2031.3 ± 0.4meV
4.1 ± 0.4meV
53.4 ± 0.3meV
2.7 ± 0.3meV
2L
6.88 ± 0.61kc
8.05 ± 0.03kc
1922.4 ± 0.5meV
10.0 ± 0.7meV
41.7 ± 1.9meV
15.8 ± 2.0meV
3L
5.49 ± 1.67kc
8.99 ± 0.04kc
1929.1 ± 14.5meV
28.3 ± 14.5meV
78.1 ± 6.2meV
4.1 ± 6.2meV
4L
2.28 ± 0.15kc
6.13 ± 0.47kc
1902.4 ± 8.9meV
63.6 ± 8.8meV
103.7 ± 6.2meV
26.7 ± 6.9meV
Table 3: Different parameters of the photoluminescence spectrum for the direct bandgap transition. I,
E and FWHM, are parameters for the unstrained areas of the flakes and is the mean peak intensity,
the mean energy of the peak position and the mean spectral width, respectively. I, ∆E and ∆FWHM
are parameters for the strained areas of the flakes and is the maximum intensity, spectral shift and
spectral broadening, respectively.
I
I
E
∆E
FWHM
∆FWHM
2L
4.65 ± 0.18kc
5.11 ± 0.04kc
1746.2 ± 1.6meV
16.4 ± 1.6meV
156.4 ± 2.3meV
6.6 ± 2.8meV
3L
3.26 ± 0.17kc
3.11 ± 0.04kc
1570.2 ± 1.5meV
1.5 ± 1.6meV
93.4 ± 0.5meV
8.1 ± 1.2meV
4L
6.46 ± 0.21kc
24.73 ± 0.45kc
1503.7 ± 7.2meV
104.8 ± 7.2meV
85.5 ± 28.7meV
55.0 ± 28.7meV
Table 4: Different parameters of the photoluminescence spectrum for the indirect bandgap transition.
I, E and FWTH, are parameters for the unstrained areas of the flakes and are the mean peak intensity,
the mean energy of the peak position and the mean spectral width, respectively. I, ∆E and ∆FWHM
are parameters for the strained areas of the flakes and is the maximum intensity, spectral shift and
spectral broadening, respectively.
strain, it is observed that the CBM at the Γ point decreases in energy and that the VBM remains
unchanged, thus lowering the band gap energy of the direct transition. The CBM at the T point is
also observed to decrease in energy, but by a smaller amount than the CBM at the Γ point, the VBM
increases slightly. On figure 48 (b) (b) is the band structure for 1 % tensile strain, the exact same
behaviour is observed, but the changes in energies are large.
The band gap structure was calculated using DFT for 13 different amounts of strain, and the
band gap energy was extracted and plotted; see figure 49. In the figure there are bandgap energies for
both compressive and tensile strain, with the tensile strain being of the most interest for this work. It
is observed that the bandgap energy increases for small amounts of compressive strain and decreases
linearly for large amounts of compressive strain. For tensile strain, the bandgap energy decreases only
with an increase in the amount of tensile strain, and the decrease in the bandgap follows a linear trend.
The slope of this linear trend is calculated to be -0.109.
Page 43/53
==PAGE:48==
4.2
Tungsten disulphide
44
Figure 47: (a) The average spectral width in meV for the direct bandgap transition (dotted black
line) and the indirect bandgap transition (dotted grey line), for unstained areas of the flakes. It can
be observed that the average spectral width increases (spectral broadening) for increasing number of
layers. (b) The amount of spectral broadening for the strained part of the flakes as a function of the
number of layers. It can be seen that for an increasing number of layers the spectral broadening for
the indirect bandgap transition (dotted black line) increases, but the evolution for the direct bandgap
transition is inconclusive. All of this data was extracted from tables 3 and 4.
Figure 48: Change of band structure for monolayer WS2 under strain calculated using the PBE method
from DFT, the two blue lines indicate the energy of the CBM and VBM for zero strain. (a) Band
structure of the monolayer WS2 without strain, it can be observed that the band structure is similar
to 14, although the dips at the T point, the point between the K point and the Γ point, is lower in
energy than the dip at the Γ point. (b) Band structure of monolayer WS2 with 0.5 % strain, resulting
in a decrease in the band gap at the Γ point. (c) Band structure of monolayer WS2 with 1 % strain,
resulting in a further decrease in the band gap at the Γ point
==PAGE:49==
Master’s Thesis
I
I
λ
∆λ
FWHM
∆FWHM
1L
16.16 ± 3.74kc
96.76 ± 0.06kc
614.57 ± 1.32nm
2.60 ± 1.32nm
14.61 ± 0.18nm
0.84 ± 0.19nm
21.84 ± 0.43kc
38.02 ± 0.04kc
604.74 ± 0.12nm
1.33 ± 0.12nm
15.54 ± 0.07nm
0.91 ± 0.09nm
23.13 ± 0.42kc
28.59 ± 0.04kc
610.37 ± 0.12nm
1.22 ± 0.12nm
16.63 ± 0.08nm
0.83 ± 0.09nm
2L
7.33 ± 0.39kc
8.05 ± 0.03kc
643.74 ± 5.33nm
7.67 ± 5.34nm
14.59 ± 1.62nm
3.64 ± 1.63nm
3L
5.49 ± 1.67kc
8.99 ± 0.04kc
629.37 ± 5.34nm
9.67 ± 5.35nm
23.99 ± 1.48nm
0.50 ± 1.48nm
4L
2.28 ± 0.15kc
6.13 ± 0.47kc
633.8 ± 2.10nm
8.44 ± 2.39nm
31.91 ± 1.60nm
7.25 ± 1.89nm
Table 5: Different parameters of the photoluminescence spectrum for the direct bandgap transition,
the same value as in table 3 but converted to nm. I, λ and FWHM, are parameters for the unstrained
areas of the flakes and is the mean peak intensity, the mean wavelength of the peak position and the
mean spectral width, respectively. I, ∆λ and ∆FWHM are parameters for the strained areas of the
flakes and is the maximum intensity, spectral shift and spectral broadening, respectively.
I
I
λ
∆λ
FWHM
∆FWHM
2L
5.16 ± 0.56kc
5.11 ± 0.04kc
737.64 ± 0.84nm
1.60 ± 0.86nm
61.87 ± 2.06nm
3.09 ± 2.17nm
3L
3.26 ± 0.17kc
3.11 ± 0.04kc
809.73 ± 0.48nm
1.23 ± 0.53nm
46.56 ± 0.27nm
3.93 ± 0.62nm
4L
6.46 ± 0.21kc
24.73 ± 0.45kc
845.42 ± 0.61nm
37.24 ± 0.63nm
46.29 ± 14.53nm
21.51 ± 14.53nm
Table 6: Different parameters of the photoluminescence spectrum for the indirect bandgap transition,
the same value as in table 4 but converted to nm. I, λ and FWHM, are parameters for the unstrained
areas of the flakes and are the mean peak intensity, the mean wavelength of the peak position and the
mean spectral width, respectively. I, ∆λ and ∆FWHM are parameters for the strained areas of the
flakes and is the maximum intensity, spectral shift and spectral broadening, respectively.
5
Discussion
In the investigation of on how different step of the sample preparation protocol affected bead density
and uniformity, it was observed that it was not affected by the rotational speed of the spin-coater. Or
rather, it was not affected by the range rotational speed used in the paper. However, the bead uniformity
was affected by the rotational acceleration of the spin coater, and the bead density was affected by the
sonication time of the bead dilution in water. We interpret the needed for slow rotation acceleration,
as the beads needing enough time to settle down and adhere to the surface, before the water in which
the beads are suspended is displaced by the centrifugal force. If the rotational acceleration is too large,
the beads are displaced, as they have yet to reach the surface of the wafer, resulting in some areas with
a high density of beads and other areas with no beads. The need for long sonication times is attributed
to the need to break up the clustering of the bead in water. If the sonication time is too short, a large
cluster of beads will be transferred onto the wafer, making it difficult to achieve single-bead captures.
Also, the droplets of water deposited on the surface will have a lower density bead, making it more
difficult to transfer a flake on top of a bead.
Page 45/53
==PAGE:50==
Master’s Thesis
Figure 49: Bandgap dependence on strain, calculated using the PBE method from DFT. It is observed
that the band gap energy at zero strain is around 1.94 eV, which is very close to the expected 1.95;
furthermore, it is observed that for increasing tensile strain the bandgap energy is decreased linearly.
In the work, two different sample preparations were used: in the first one, flakes are exfoliated
onto a clean wafer and then by using the CAB transfer deposited onto a flake with beads, and the
other was a direct flake exfoliation onto a wafer with beads. The one that worked the best for this
work is the direct flake exfoliation onto a wafer with beads. Since with this method, it was possible
to produce a lot of flake of different thicknesses on the same sample without going through the long
process of transferring single flakes at a time, it also decreased the amount of samples needed. There
were also some complications with the sample produced with the CAB transfer, mainly because after
cleaning there was still some CAB residue on the surface, which interfered with the PL investigations.
The CAB transfer would be better suited for making heterostructures.
An investigation into the PL spectrum’s dependence on laser power was presented. From this
investigation it was observed that the spectral peak position was blue shifted by ∼1.4 meV for an
increase in laser power of 5 µ, which is a significantly large shift for the 1L flakes, compared to the shift
induced by the strain, which was ∼4-8 meV, but the spectral peak position was mainly constant. The
spectral width increased linearly and seemed to flatten out at the end, but more is needed to confirm
this; the PL spectra were broadened by ∼1.04 meV for an increase in laser power of 5 µ which is a
significantly large shift for the 1L flakes, when compared with the shift induced by the strain, which
was ∼3 meV. From this investigation it is dubious whether the laser power affects the spectral peak
position, but the spectral width is significantly affected by the laser power. Therefore, one has to be
careful when increasing the laser power, especially since too high a laser power can make irreversible
changes to the flakes see the hole in figure 24. This investigation was only preformed for 1L, and has
to be executed on other flakes thicknesses to determine its significance.
For PL spectrum investigation, three different types of acquisition were utilised, these being
spot investigations, line scans, and area scans each of which having their own pros and cons. For spot
investigation, we have a fast and precise investigation on different spots on the flake, but it does not
capture the entity of the transitional behaviour of the PL spectrum on bright spots. The line scan
smoothly captures the change in the PL spectrum across bright spots, but due to the long acquisition
time for a high-resolution scan, the setup will drift significantly, making the each point the spectral
peak less precise. The area scan captures the change in the PL spectrum across the entire bright spot,
but due to the extremely long acquisition times, the area scan presented in this paper took around 100
Page 46/53
==PAGE:51==
Master’s Thesis
min, since each pixel took 60 s to acquire. In this time frame, the setup sometimes drifts a lot, making
re-alignment necessary throughout the measurements, making it dubious whether the measurement
was acquired in the noted area. In order to enhance this type of investigation, the acquisition has to
be cut down; this is achieved by increasing the laser power, but one has to be careful when the laser
power is increased, as previously discussed.
One of the bright spots investigated on a 1L flake was observed to be asymmetric and doughnut-
shaped. The asymmetry is theorised to be caused by either an optical artefact or that one of the lattice
directions is more easily strained than the other. The possibility of an optical artefact being the cause of
the asymmetry can be ruled out by rotating the sample by 90°, but unfortunately the WS2 deteriorated
in this flake, so it was not possible to carry out this investigation. This kind of feature on the bright
spot was never observed for any of the other flakes. The closest is the asymmetry of the area scan in
figure 30, but this asymmetry can be a result of the low resolution of the scan and the possible drift of
the setup. The doughnut shape is theorised to arise from the fact that there is less strain at the top of
the silica bead since the flattening out at the top of the bead.
As part work have the spectral peak position and spectral width for four different thicknesses
been studied, for the 1L flake with the spectral peak position and spectral seen in figure 27 (a)-(b), it
was observed that the spectral parameters are affected by a linear offset. The reason behind this offset
is unknown and never observed for any of the flakes, and it is unlikely that drift of the equipment is
the cause, as if this were the case, the reference spectra are expected to shift back the values close
to the other reference spectra. Comparing the spectral parameters for the different flakes thicknesses,
a similar behaviour is observed for the direct transition for 1L, 2L and 3L flakes. The 2L and 3L
flakes have matching behaviour for two parameters, and so do two pairings 2L and 4L, and 3L and
4L. Indicating that it is not possible to group the change in the spectral parameters into even and
odd numbers of layers. However, an investigation of thicker flakes can be performed to completely
verify this. However, there are still some systematic changes in the spectral parameters. One being
that the mean peak energy decreases as the number of layers increases for both direct and indirect
transition; this was to be expected, since it was also observed for Zhao et al. [28]. It was also observed
that the shift in spectral peak energy increased for an increasing number of layers. Meaning that the
bandgap energy is modulated more for thicker flakes. The spectral width is observed to increase for
the direct transition and decrease for the indirect transition. Indicating that an increasing number of
layers increases the emission from the indirect bandgap, which is expected. The spectral width changes
are observed to increase for an increasing number of layers. For broadening this can be explained by
multiple phenomena, a couple being that the CB and VB are broadening due to the strain, or the
defect trapping so many excitons that the excitons cannot decay to the bottom of the band before
emission, and vice versa for the narrowing.
From figure 25 (b) the strain induced by the silica beads can be estimated by determining the
distance between the location at the foot of the peak and the location of the maximum intensity, this
distance is around ∼0.5 µm. Using the fact that the diameter of a bead is ∼90 nm, then the bead-
induced strain is ∼1.4 %. From the simulation of the band gap as function of strain, see figure 49, this
would correspond to a shift in the peak energy of ∼152 meV which is to orders of magnitude larger
than the experimental result. If we determine the distance between the location at the foot of the peak
and the location in the middle of the spot, one gets a distance of around ∼0.8 µm, which would induce
a strain of ∼0.63 % corresponding to a shift in the peak energy of ∼68 meV, which is still one order of
magnitude larger than the experimental data. Muoi et al. [40] has investigated monolayer WS2 under
biaxial strain, where a similar behaviour for the bandgap dependence on strain is observed as in figure
49, from their DFT calculation a slope of ∼0.05 is estimated. Given the strains mentioned above, they
will result in a peak shift of ∼70 meV ∼31 meV for the strains 1.4 % and 0.63 %, respectively. This
is still one order of magnitude larger than the experimental data.
Page 47/53
==PAGE:52==
Master’s Thesis
6
Conclusion
It has been shown in the paper that the spectral width of monolayer WS2 is significantly affected by the
laser power, where the peak position dependence is dubious. It has also been shown that the optimal
protocol for achieving a good bead density and uniformity is one with a slow rotational acceleration
of the spin coater and a longer sonication time of the silica dilution in water.
The best protocol
for sample preparation is exfoliating straight onto the wafer deposited with silica beads. Different
methods of investigation of photoluminescence were trailed, each having its own pro and cons, the
spot investigation for quick and precise measurements though lacking some information regarding the
change from one regime to another. Line scan for determining the spectral parameters across a bright
spot with adequate resolution, though the longer acquisition shift might have occurred, reducing the
precision. Area scans were performed to determine the spectral parameters on a larger area around the
bright spot, with really longer acquisition times, resulting in low precision, since the setup might have
drifted a bit. One of the bright spots was doughnut-shaped and asymmetric and deteriorated before
the cause could be examined. It has also been shown that the spectral peak red shifts for an increasing
number of layers, as was expected from theory. The spectral width is observed to increase for the
direct transition and decrease for the indirect transition, as the number of layers increases, indicating
that the material transits from a direct bandgap material to an indirect bandgap material when the
thickness is increased, which was expected. The shift in peak energy increased with increasing number
of layers, indicating that the band structure is modulated to a larger degree for thicker flakes. The
change in spectral width increased for an increasing number of layers, suggesting for increases in the
width that there is a broadening of the bands due to strain or exictons that cannot decay to the bottom
of the bands before emission, and vice versa for narrowing of the width. Finally, a comparison of the
experimental data with the theoretical calculations was made. The strain induced by a silica bean
beneath a 1L flake was estimated to be ∼0.63-1.4 %, resulting in a peak shift of ∼68-152 meV from
our own simulation and sim 31-70 meV for the data from Muoi et al. [40]. These are 1-2 orders of
magnitude higher than the experimental values.
7
Outlook
The result from this paper opens up areas for further investigation. One of these being looking into
other materials, one such material could be WSe2, which is already heavily studied opening plenty
of areas of inspiration. Expanding on the heterostructure materials might an exiting and unexpected
behaviour when strain is introduced. An investigation into thicker flakes of WS2, than presented in is
work might give a better understanding of the changes strain introduces. There could also be expand
on the simulations, where the band structure of bi-, tri- or even quard-layer could be simulated under
different amounts of strain. Another investigation could look into origin of the asymmetric bright which
was observed.
Page 48/53
==PAGE:53==
Master’s Thesis
8
Litterateur
[1] R. Schirhagl, K. Chang, M. Loretz and C. L. Degen ”Nitrogen-Vacancy Centers in Diamond:
Nanoscale Sensors for Physics and Biology”, Annu. Rev. Phys. Chem. 2014. 65:83–105, 21 Novem-
ber 2013.
[2] M. Kim, H. J. Mamin, M. H. Sherwood, K. Ohno, D. D. Awschalom and D. Rugar ”Decoherence of
Near-Surface Nitrogen-Vacancy Centers Due to Electric Field Noise”, Phys. Rev. Lett. 115, 087602,
21 August 2015.
[3] M. Kim, H. J. Mamin, M. H. Sherwood, K. Ohno, D. D. Awschalom, and D. Rugar ”Decoherence
of near-surface nitrogen-vacancy centers due to electric field noise Supplemental Material”, Phys.
Rev. Lett. 115, 087602, 21 August 2015.
[4] A. Stark ”Development of measurement protocols for quantum magnetometry”, Department of
Physics, Technical University of Denmark, 30 November 2017.
[5] F. Dolde, H. Fedder, M. W. Doherty, T. N¨obauer, F. Rempp, G. Balasubramanian, T. Wolf, F.
Reinhard , L. C. L. Hollenberg, F. Jelezko and J. Wrachtrup ”Electric-field sensing using single
diamond spins”, Nature Physics volume 7, pages459–463(2011), 17 April 2011.
[6] B. K. Ofori-Okai, S. Pezzagna, K. Chang, M. Loretz, R. Schirhagl, Y. Tao, B. A. Moores, K. Groot-
Berning, J. Meijer and C. L. Degen ”Spin properties of very shallow nitrogen vacancy defects in
diamond”, Phys. Rev. B 86, 081406(R), 13 August 2012.
[7] N. Mizuochi, P. Neumann, F. Rempp, J. Beck, V. Jacques, P. Siyushev, K. Nakamura, D. J.
Twitchen, H. Watanabe, S. Yamasaki, F. Jelezko, and J. Wrachtrup ”Coherence of single spins
coupled to a nuclear spin bath of varying density”, Phys. Rev. B 80, 041201(R), 13 July 2009.
[8] Dolev Bluvstein, Zhiran Zhang, Claire A. McLellan, Nicolas R. Williams, and Ania C. Bleszynski
Jayich ”Extending the Quantum Coherence of a Near-Surface Qubit by Coherently Driving the
Paramagnetic Surface Environment”, Phys. Rev. Lett. 123, 146804, 4 October 2019
[9] Sorawis Sangtawesin, Bo L. Dwyer, Srikanth Srinivasan, James J. Allred, Lila V. H. Rodgers,
Kristiaan De Greve, Alastair Stacey, Nikolai Dontschuk, Kane M. O’Donnell, Di Hu, D. Andrew
Evans,5 Cherno Jaye, Daniel A. Fischer, Matthew L. Markham, Daniel J. Twitchen, Hongkun
Park, Mikhail D. Lukin, and Nathalie P. de Leon ”Origins of Diamond Surface Noise Probed by
Correlating”, Phys. Rev. X 9, 031052, 26 September 2019
[10] Y. Romach, C. M¨uller,2 T. Unden, L. J. Rogers, T. Isoda, K. M. Itoh, M. Markham, A. Stacey, J.
Meijer, S. Pezzagna, B. Naydenov, L. P. McGuinness, N. Bar-Gill, and F. Jelezko ”Spectroscopy of
Surface-Induced Noise Using Shallow Spins in Diamond”, Phys. Rev. Lett. 114, 017601, 6 January
2015
[11] Sora Kawai, Hayate Yamano, Takahiro Sonoda, Kanami Kato, Jorge J. Buendia, Taisuke Kageura,
Ryosuke Fukuda, Takuma Okada, Takashi Tanii, Taisei Higuchi, Moriyoshi Haruyama, Keisuke
Yamada, Shinobu Onoda, Takeshi Ohshima, Wataru Kada, Osamu Hanaizumi, Alastair Stacey,
Tokuyuki Teraji, Shozo Kono, Junichi Isoya and Hiroshi Kawarada ”Nitrogen-Terminated Diamond
Surface for Nanoscale NMR by Shallow Nitrogen-Vacancy Centers”, Journal of Physical Chemistry
C 2019 123 (6), 3594-3604, January 24, 2019
[12] Philip Chrostoski, H. R. Sadeghpour and D. H. Santamore ”Electric Noise Spectra of a Near-
Surface Nitrogen-Vacancy Center in Diamond with a Protective Layer”, Phys. Rev. Applied 10,
064056, 21 December 2018
Page 49/53
==PAGE:54==
Master’s Thesis
REFERENCES
[13] Linh M. Pham, Stephen J. DeVience, Francesco Casola, Igor Lovchinsky, Alexander O. Sushkov,
Eric Bersin, Junghyun Lee, Elana Urbach, Paola Cappellaro, Hongkun Park, Amir Yacoby, Mikhail
Lukin and Ronald L. Walsworth ”NMR technique for determining the depth of shallow nitrogen-
vacancy centers in diamond”, Phys. Rev. B 93, 045425, 25 January 2016
[14] D. Farfurnik, N. Alfasi, S. Masis, Y. Kauffmann, E. Farchi, Y. Romach, Y. Hovav, E. Buks,
and N. Bar-Gill ”Enhanced concentrations of nitrogen-vacancy centers in diamond through TEM
irradiation”, Appl. Phys. Lett. 111, 123101 (2017), 19 September 2017
[15] James L. Webb, Luca Troise, Nikolaj W. Hansen, Louise F. Frellsen, Christian Osterkamp, Fedor
Jelezko, Steffen Jankuhn, Jan Meijer, Kirstine Berg-Sørensen, Jean-Fran¸cois Perrier, Alexander
Huck, Ulrik Lund Andersen ”High speed microcircuit and synthetic biosignal widefield imaging
using nitrogen vacancies in diamond”, arXiv:2107.14156, 29 Jul 2021
[16] C. Levy-Clement and R. Tenne. ”Modification of Surface Properties of Layered Compounds by
Chemical and (Photo)Electrochemical Processes”, In A. Aruchamy, editeur, Photoelectrochemistry
and Photovoltaics of Layered Semiconductors, volume 14 of Physics and Chemistry of Materials
with Low-Dimensional Structures, pages 155-194. Springer Netherlands, 1992.
[17] S.V. Prasad and J.S. Zabinski. ”Tribology of tungsten disulphide (WS2): characterization of wear-
induced transfer films.”, Journal of Materials Science Letters, vol. 12, no. 18, pages 1413-1415,
1993.
[18] C. Ballif, M. Regula, P.E. Schmid, M. Remskar, R. Sanjin´es and F. Lee C. Levy. ”Preparation and
characterization of highly oriented, photoconducting WS2 thin films.”, Applied Physics A, vol. 62,
no. 6, pages 543-546, 1996.
[19] Ali Hussain Reshak and S. Auluck. ”Calculated optical properties of 2H-MoS2 intercalated with
lithium.”, phys. Rev. B 68, 125101, 2 September 2003.
[20] J. S. Ross, P. Klement, A. M. Jones, N. J. Ghimire, J. Yan, D. G. Mandrus, T. Taniguchi, K.
Watanabe, K. Kitamura, W. Yao, D. H. Cobden and X. Xu. ”Electrically tunable excitonic light-
emitting diodes based on monolayer WSe2 p-n junctions.”, Nature Nanotechnology, vol. 9, pages
268-272, April 2014.
[21] Rafael Rold´an, Jose A. Silva-Guill´en, M. Pilar L´opez-Sancho, Francisco Guinea, Emmanuele Cap-
pelluti and Pablo Ordej´on. ”Electronic properties of single-layer and multilayer transition metal
dichalcogenides MX2.(M = Mo, W and X = S, Se).”, Annalen der Physik, vol. 526, no. 9-10,
pages 347-357, 26 September 2014.
[22] Kin Fai Mak, Changgu Lee, James Hone, Jie Shan and Tony F. Heinz. ”Atomically Thin MoS2:
A New Direct-Gap Semiconductor.”, Phys. Rev. Lett. 105, 136805, 24 September 2010.
[23] C. Ballif, M. Regula and F. Levy. ”Optical and electrical properties of semiconducting WS2 thin
films: From macroscopic to local probe measurements. Solar Energy Materials and Solar Cells”,
vol. 57, no. 2, pages 189-207, , 1999.
[24] D. Kozawa, R. Kumar, A. Carvalho, A. Kiran Kumar, W. Zhao, S. Wang, M. Toh, R. M. Ribeiro,
A. H. Castro Neto, K. Matsuda and G. Eda. ”Photocarrier relaxation pathway in two-dimensional
semiconducting transition metal dichalcogenides.”, Nature Communications, vol. 5, page 4543, 2014.
[25] K. K. Kam and B. A. Parkinson. ”Detailed photocurrent spectroscopy of the semiconducting group
VIB transition metal dichalcogenides.”, The Journal of Physical Chemistry, vol. 86, no. 4, pages
463-467, 1982.
Page 50/53
==PAGE:55==
Master’s Thesis
REFERENCES
[26] A R Beal and W Y Liang. ”Excitons in 2H-WSe2 and 3R-WS2.”, Journal of Physics C: Solid
State Physics, vol. 9, no. 12, page 2459, 1976.
[27] J. A. Wilson and A. D. Yoffe. ”The transition metal dichalcogenides discussion and interpretation
of the observed optical, electrical and structural properties.”, Advances in Physics, vol. 18, pages
193-335, May 1969.
[28] Weijie Zhao, Zohreh Ghorannevis, Leiqiang Chu, Minglin Toh, Christian Kloc, Ping-Heng Tan
and Goki Eda. ”Evolution of Electronic Structure in Atomically Thin Sheets of WS2 and WSe2.”,
ACS Nano, vol. 7, no. 1, pages 791-797, 19 December 2012.
[29] Andrea Splendiani, Liang Sun, Yuanbo Zhang, Tianshu Li, Jonghwan Kim, Chi-Yung Chim, Giulia
Galli and Feng Wang. ”Emerging Photoluminescence in Monolayer MoS2.”, ANano Letters, vol.
10, no. 4, pages 1271-1275, March 15, 2010.
[30] Wencan Jin, Po-Chun Yeh, Nader Zaki, Datong Zhang, Jerzy T. Sadowski, Abdullah Al-Mahboob,
Arend M. van der Zande, Daniel A. Chenet, Jerry I. Dadap, Irving P. Herman, Peter Sutter,
James Hone and Richard M. Osgood. ”Direct Measurement of the Thickness-Dependent Electronic
Band Structure of MoS2 Using Angle-Resolved Photoemission Spectroscopy.”, Phys. Rev. Lett. 111,
106801 , 3 September 2013.
[31] Y. Zhang, T.-R. Chang, B. Zhou, Y.-T. Cui, H. Yan, Z. Liu, F. Schmitt, J. Lee, R. Moore, Y. Chen,
H. Lin, H.-T. Jeng, S.-K. Mo, Z. Hussain, A. Bansil and Z.-X. Shen. ”Direct observation of the tran-
sition from indirect to direct bandgap in atomically thin epitaxial MoSe2.”, Nature Nanotechnology,
vol. 9, pages 111-115, February 2014.
[32] Hualing Zeng, Gui-Bin Liu, Junfeng Dai, Yajun Yan, Bairen Zhu, Ruicong He, Lu Xie, Shijie
Xu, Xianhui Chen, Wang Yao and Xiaodong Cui. ”Optical signature of symmetry variations and
spin-valley coupling in atomically thin tungsten dichalcogenides.”, Scientific Reports, vol. 3, page
1608, 2013.
[33] A.M. Fox and D.P.A.M. Fox. ”Optical Properties of Solids.”, Oxford master series in condensed
matter physics. Oxford University Press, 2001.
[34] Lorenzo Mari. ”Energy Band Structures in Solids.”,
URL: https://eepower.com/technical-
articles/semiconductor-basics-energy-band-structures-in-solids/#, May 19 2021.
[35] Brian Lassiter. ”Tandem Organic Photovoltaics.”, URL: https://www.researchgate.net/publication/295276580 Tande
January 2013
[36] Yulia Lekina and Ze Shen. ”Excitonic States and Structural Stability in Two-Dimensional Hybrid
Organic-Inorganic Perovskites.”, Journal of Science: Advanced Materials and Devices 4, p. 194.,
April 2019.
[37] Anatolie
Mitioglu.
”Probing
the
electronic
properties
of
bulk
and
mono-
layer
crystals
of
tungsten
dichalcogenides
using
magneto-spectroscopy.”,
URL:
https://www.researchgate.net/publication/282863813 Probing the electronic properties of bulk and monolayer crysta
spectroscopy, 6 July 2015.
[38] Thi Ung. ”D´esordre contrˆol´e sur des nanostructures m´etalliques pour des applicationsen plas-
monique”, URL: https://www.researchgate.net/publication/324818471 Desordre controle sur des nanostructures met
PhD thesis p. 46, Marts 2018.
[39] M. Fischer et al ”Controlled generation of luminescent centers in hexagonal boron nitride by irra-
diation engineering”, SCIENCE ADVANCES Vol 7, Issue 8, 17 February 2021.
Page 51/53
==PAGE:56==
Master’s Thesis
REFERENCES
[40] Do Muoi, Nguyen N.Hieu, Huong T.T.Phung, Huynh V.Phuc, B.Amin, Bui D.Hoim Nguyen
V.Hieu, Le C.Nhan, Chuong V.Nguyen and P.T.T.Le ”Electronic properties of WS2 and WSe2
monolayers with biaxial strain: A first-principles study”, Volume 519, Pages 69-73, 1 March 2019.
[41] Chung-Huai Chang, Xiaofeng Fan, Shi-Hsin Lin, and Jer-Lai Kuo ”Orbital analysis of electronic
structure and phonon dispersion in MoS2, MoSe2, WS2, and WSe2 monolayers under strain”, Phys.
Rev. B 88, 195420, 19 November 2013.
[42] Sujay B. Desai, Gyungseon Seol, Jeong Seuk Kang, Hui Fang, Corsin Battaglia, Rehan Kapadia,
Joel W. Ager‡, Jing Guo, and Ali Javey. ”Strain-Induced Indirect to Direct Bandgap Transition in
Multilayer WSe2”, Nano Lett. 2014, 14, 8, 4592–4597, July 2 2014.
[43] Dan Han, Haiyi Sun, Wenyang Ding, Yue Chen, Xinyu Wang, Lin Cheng ”Effect of biaxial strain on
thermal transport in WS2 monolayer from first principles calculations”, Physica E: Low-dimensional
Systems and Nanostructures Volume 124, October 2020.
[44] J´er´emie Guillaud and Mazyar Mirrahimi. ”Repetition Cat Qubits for Fault-Tolerant Quantum
Computation”, Phys. Rev. X 9, p. 041053., 4 December 2019.
[45] A. Ortu, A. Holzapfel, and J. et al. Etesse ”Storage of photonic time-bin qubits for up to 20ms in
a rare-earth doped crystal”, NPJ Quantum Information 8, 29 Marts 2022.
[46] R Lescanne, M. Villiers, and T. et al. Peronnin. ”Exponential suppression of bit-flips in a qubit
encoded in an oscillator”, Nature Physics, pp. 509–513. , 16 Marts 2020
[47] Carmen Palacios-Berraquero, Dhiren M. Kara, Alejandro R.-P. Montblanch, Matteo Barbone,
Pawel Latawiec, Duhee Yoon, Anna K. Ott, Marko Loncar, Andrea C. Ferrari and Mete Atat¨ure.
”Large-scale quantum-emitter arrays in atomically thin semiconductors”, Nature Communications
volume 8, Article number: 15093, 22 May 2017
[48] Jianchen Dang, Sibai Sun, Xin Xie, Yang Yu, Kai Peng, Chenjiang Qian, Shiyao Wu, Feilong
Song, Jingnan Yang, Shan Xiao, Longlong Yang, Yunuan Wang, M. A. Rafiq, Can Wang and
Xiulai Xu. ”Identifying defect-related quantum emitters in monolayer WSe2”, npj 2D Materials
and Applications volume 4, Article number, 07 February 2020.
[49] Hong Tang, Bimal Neupane, Santosh Neupane, Shiqi Ruan, Niraj K. Nepal and Adrienn Ruzsin-
szky. ”Tunable band gaps and optical absorption properties of bent MoS2 nanoribbons”, Scientific
Reports volume 12, Article number: 3008, 22 February 2022.
[50] Ahmed Raza Khan, Teng Lu, Wendi Ma, Yuerui Lu, Yun Liu ”Tunable Optoelectronic Properties
of WS2 by Local Strain Engineering and Folding”, Advanced electronic materials Volume6, Issue4,
28 February 2020.
[51] Hannah L. Stern, Qiushi Gu, John Jarman, Simone Eizagirre Barker, Noah Mendelson, Dipankar
Chugh, Sam Schott, Hoe H. Tan, Henning Sirringhaus, Igor Aharonovich and Mete Atat¨ure. ”Room-
temperature optically detected magnetic resonance of single defects in hexagonal boron nitride”,
Nature Communications volume 13, Article number: 618, 1 February 2022.
[52] Chitraleema Chakraborty, Nicholas R. Jungwirth, Gregory D. Fuchs, and A. Nick Vamivakas.
”Electrical manipulation of the fine-structure splitting of WSe2 quantum emitterse”, Phys. Rev. B
99, 045308 , 24 January 2019.
[53] Raghav Chaudhary, Varun Raghunathan, and Kausik Majumda. ”Origin of selective enhancement
of sharp defect emission lines in monolayer WSe2 on rough metal substrate”, Journal of Applied
Physics Volume 127, Issue 7 10.1063/1.5139675, 2 February 2020.
Page 52/53
==PAGE:57==
Master’s Thesis
REFERENCES
[54] Maja Feierabend, Samuel Brem and Ermin Malic. ”Optical fingerprint of bright and dark localized
excitonic states in atomically thin 2D materials”, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2019, 21, 26077-
26083, 13 November 2019.
[55] Song Li, Gerg˝o Thiering, P´eter Udvarhelyi, Viktor Iv´ady and Adam Gali. ”Carbon defect qubit in
two-dimensional WS2”, Nature Communications volume 13, Article number: 1210, 08 March 2022.
[56] Chitraleema Chakraborty, Laura Kinnischtzke, Kenneth M. Goodfellow, Ryan Beams and A.
Nick Vamivakas. ”Voltage-controlled quantum light from an atomically thin semiconductor”, Nature
Nanotechnology volume 10, pages507–511, 04 May 2015.
[57] Alejandro R.-P. Montblanch, Dhiren M. Kara, Ioannis Paradisanos, Carola M. Purser, Matthew
S. G. Feuer, Evgeny M. Alexeev, Lucio Stefan, Ying Qin, Mark Blei, Gang Wang, Alisson R.
Cadore, Pawel Latawiec, Marko Lonˇcar, Sefaattin Tongay, Andrea C. Ferrari and Mete Atat¨ure.
”Confinement of long-lived interlayer excitons in WS2/WSe2 heterostructures”, Communications
Physics volume 4, Article number: 119, 07 June 2021.
[58] Chitraleema Chakraborty,
Arunabh Mukherjee,
Hyowon Moon,
Kumarasiri Konthasinghe,
Liangyu Qiu, Wenhui Hou, Tara Pe˜na, Carla Watson, Stephen M. Wu, Dirk Englund, and Nick
Vamivakas ”Strain tuning of the emission axis of quantum emitters in an atomically thin semicon-
ductor”, Optica Vol. 7, Issue 6, pp. 580-585, 2020.
Page 53/53
