==PAGE:1==
Art-​Net LED system
Master thesis
==PAGE:2==
Product development in Hackstage ApS.
Masters thesis
28th of Januar 2023
By
Sebastian McAleer Elkjær
==PAGE:3==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared at the Section for Design and Innovation, Department of Me-
chanical Engineering, at the Technical University of Denmark, DTU, in partial fulfilment for
the degree Master of Science in Engineering, MSc Eng.
It is assumed that the reader has a basic knowledge in the areas of product design and
mechatronics.
Sebastian McAleer Elkjær - s173869
Signature
Date
II
==PAGE:4==
Acknowledgements
Sebastian McAleer Elkjær, BSc Civil Engineering, DTU
Ryan Michael Arlitt, Assistant Professor, Associate professor, DTU
III
==PAGE:5==
Table of Contents
1
Hackstage
2
1.1
Business . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.2
Profiles . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.3
Intent
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.4
Undertaking a project
. . . .
5
1.5
Assessment of problem formu-
lation . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
1.6
Planning . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2
Stage lighting
10
2.1
Fixtures and effects . . . . . .
11
2.2
DMX . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.3
Art-Net
. . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2.4
Pixel LED . . . . . . . . . . .
14
2.5
Resolume Arena . . . . . . . .
18
3
Art-net LED system
20
3.1
Use case: Omega festival . . .
21
3.2
Design of the Art-Net LED
controller
. . . . . . . . . . .
27
3.3
Version 1: Falcon F16V4 Pixel
Controller . . . . . . . . . . .
28
3.4
Version 2: STM32F103 . . . .
29
3.5
Problems in development . . .
37
3.6
Problems in product hardware
and usage . . . . . . . . . . .
39
3.7
Version 3: New hardware plat-
form . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
3.8
Selecting hardware platform .
43
4
Evaluation: Selection of board
55
4.1
Niels . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
4.2
Marcus . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
5
Prototyping
57
5.1
Setting up environment . . . .
57
5.2
Product features
. . . . . . .
60
5.3
Planning . . . . . . . . . . . .
65
5.4
Protomap . . . . . . . . . . .
67
5.5
Collaboration . . . . . . . . .
70
5.6
The prototype: Goals reached
71
5.7
Libraries in use and legal as-
sessment . . . . . . . . . . . .
84
5.8
Future work . . . . . . . . . .
86
5.9
Evaluation of the project by Niels 89
5.10 Reflection . . . . . . . . . . .
92
6
User study
95
6.1
Scoping
. . . . . . . . . . . .
96
6.2
Private users
. . . . . . . . .
97
6.3
DJ . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
100
6.4
Event coordinators . . . . . .
100
6.5
Photographers . . . . . . . . .
101
6.6
Visual artist . . . . . . . . . .
102
7
Data processing
103
7.1
Needs and pains table
. . . .
103
7.2
Summary
. . . . . . . . . . .
108
Bibliography
109
A Project plan: PERT chart
112
B Omega Festival:
User journey
map
113
C Board comparison table
114
D Prototyping: PERT chart
115
E Pin availability table
116
F Protomap
117
IV
==PAGE:6==
G Prototyping planers (6)
118
H Interview: Niels evaluation
119
I
Question sheet: Private user
122
J
Question sheet: DJ
124
K Interviews: Private user
126
K.1 Inge
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
126
K.2 Larika . . . . . . . . . . . . .
129
K.3 Jason . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
132
K.4 Albert A.
. . . . . . . . . . .
134
K.5 Linea . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
136
K.6 Albert B.
. . . . . . . . . . .
139
L Interviews: DJ
142
M Interviews: Visual artist
147
M.1 Jonas from Hackstage . . . . .
147
N Interviews: Event maker
150
N.1 Simon from Camp Safari . . .
150
O Interview: Photographer
152
O.1 Tess
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
152
V
==PAGE:7==
List of Figures
1.1
Existing Art-Net LED systems [1]
[2] [3] [4] . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
1.2
PERT chart project plan.
. . . .
9
2.1
The figure illustrates blend ra-
tios of RGB sources reproduc-
ing colours in the entire visible
spectrum.[5] . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.2
Daisy chaining of DMX fixtures. .
13
2.3
Daisy chaining of LED pixels on a
strip.[6]
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
2.4
Order of PWM encoded binary
data. High bits are send first. [7]
16
2.5
PWM timing specifications for
WS2811.[7]
. . . . . . . . . . . .
17
2.6
The picture shows the Hackstage
LED bars in use.
They are ele-
vated in vertical rows above the
crowd. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
2.7
In this example, a digital fixture
is created as an array of 10 RGB
LEDs and positioned diagonally
in the video output in Resolume
Arena.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3.1
The picture shows the Hackstage
Art-Net LED system in use.
It
is implemented on rectangular fix-
tures elevated above the crowd. .
21
3.2
1: Computer, 2: Router, 3: Ether-
net CAT5 cable, 4: Falcon board,
5: 4-pin scroller cable (voltage and
signal), 6: Hackstage LED bars. .
23
3.3
A full screen version is available in
Appendix B
. . . . . . . . . . .
24
3.4
Mapping DMX fixtures in Ad-
vanced output settings in Resol-
ume Arena. . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
3.5
The stage during the last phase of
preparation and beginning of event. 27
3.6
System map from Niels . . . . . .
27
3.7
The figure illustrates subsystems,
signal in and out pathways, and
signal types.]
. . . . . . . . . . .
30
3.8
The figure displays components of
the system.
. . . . . . . . . . . .
31
3.9
A picture of the version 2 prototype. 31
3.10 Arduino IDE interface. The tabs
illustrate included files. . . . . . .
34
3.11 The websrever interface on the
version 2 prototype.
. . . . . . .
36
3.12 Columns
are
micro-conroller
boards and single board comput-
ers. See full size in Appendix C .
47
3.13 The ESP32-gateway revision G
board.
On the left side of the
board, hardware may be attached
to a row of pins.
. . . . . . . . .
54
5.1
The root directory of a project in
PlatformIO. . . . . . . . . . . . .
58
5.2
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
58
5.3
Branches. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
59
5.4
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
60
5.5
State machine diagram.
Figure
5.14 illustrates which states were
successfully prototyped.
. . . . .
64
5.6
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
65
5.7
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
66
5.8
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
68
VI
==PAGE:8==
5.9
This picture is a section of the pro-
tomap. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
69
5.10 Icons can also be found in the full
protomap. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
70
5.11 The prototype in an overview. . .
71
5.12 The prototype.
. . . . . . . . . .
72
5.13 Up-scaling.
. . . . . . . . . . . .
73
5.14 The prototyped systems are blue.
74
5.15
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
76
5.16 The ESP32-Gateway board is con-
nected via Ethernet to a com-
puter.
A router may allow us-
ing DHCP, and can put multiple
ESP32s on the network.
. . . . .
76
5.17 The prototype interface. . . . . .
78
5.18 A namespace. . . . . . . . . . . .
80
5.19 HSV and IP namespaces in the
prototype. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
80
5.20 Functions to read and write to
EEPROM via Preference.h library 80
5.21 The interface for making IP con-
figuration. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
81
5.22
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
82
5.23 Art-Net configuration . . . . . . .
83
5.24
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
83
5.25
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
84
5.26
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
84
6.1
WOM matrix.
. . . . . . . . . .
98
6.2
The Camp Safari sound system. .
101
M.1
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
148
List of Tables
3.1
Specifications sheet for hardware
and development environment . .
45
7.1
Needs table. . . . . . . . . . . . .
104
7.2
Pains table. . . . . . . . . . . . .
105
VII
==PAGE:9==
Abstract
This project is an investigation into the company Hackstage ApS, which seeks to do product
development. It includes locating and undertaking a project, which will be beneficial to the
company’s current activities. The paper will seek to define problems, create specifications
and develop a prototype. The goal is to to build a proof of concept.
1
==PAGE:10==
1
Hackstage
This chapter will introduce Hackstage ApS. It includes a description of members relevant
to the project, the activities in Hackstage, and the seed of ideas that initiated this project.
Hackstage presents itself on their homepage hackstage.com with the following lines:
”Hackstage is a multidisciplinary network of VJ’s 1, multimedia artists, technicians and
designers. We work with video projections, light, scenography, interactive installations and
anything in between. Our overall mission is to create challenging and transformational ex-
periences through stage design, music videos and interactive art. We aim to dissolve the
boundaries between audience and artists by applying technology in unconventional ways that
challenge the senses.”[8]
The Danish company is involved in a multitude of events, with a focus on music, art, the-
atre and conferences. By combining technical and creative abilities, they provide unique
and experimental experiences for their audience. The Hackstage company is formed in 2012,
and exists today of a handful of technicians and visual artists who bundle together, to draw
benefit from each other via collaborations and sharing of competences.
Individuals may conduct their own freelance work with Hackstage as common headquar-
ters. Large projects usually involve multiple employees. Employees have varying degrees of
activity levels. Three people work full time in the company, while the remaining workers
have working contracts in other companies, and only dedicates time to Hackstage for certain
activities.
The company got its name in Bolsjefabrikken, which was a venue built driven inside old
workshop rooms. Jonas, Andreas and Bjarke had their workstations in the rooms surround-
ing the venue hall. From one of the back rooms, they would project their content into the
venue itself, as if they were hacking it from the outside.
Their office is located centrally in Copenhagen.
Every employee has a workstation with
their required hardware and computers. The office also serves as a storage compartment for
their equipment reserve. From here, they work and develop projects.
1VJ stands for video jockey, and refers to a person manipulating visuals via some media, e.g. video
projection
2
==PAGE:11==
1.1
Business
Hackstage provide technicians, project managers and equipment for rental. They build solu-
tions for clients hosting events. A solution may be a fully covered technical setup for an event
or a technical setup in an isolated domain, such as audio equipment or lighting equipment.
Hackstage personnel will design and plan the setup, acquire equipment, hire crew (sometimes
other technicians) and ensure smooth operation.
For musical and art events they provide VJ’s, lighting equipment and technical crew. They
can deliver a complete package for building stage lighting, being one of their core products.
Hackstage has a large collection of lighting equipment.
1.2
Profiles
This section will provide a highlight of the people who have had some involvement in this
project.
Niels
Niels has an education in electro-engineering and embedded systems from the Technical
University of Denmark (DTU). He has a working contract with Shure, but has spent time
developing technical solutions with Hackstage in his spare time and in the past. Niels is one
of the primary figures associated with this project. The project title and problem formulation
is developed with him.
Niels aspires to build a saleable product to the stage lighting industry along with Mar-
cus and Michel. He and Marcus have build the two existing versions of the Art-net LED
controller. Niels is mostly responsible for embedded programming.
Within Hackstage, Niels is a project manager, stage designer and a lighting equipment tech-
nician.
Marcus
Marcus was a former student at the DTU in 2013. He dropped his education to work as
a technician. He could freelance various jobs with Hackstage as headquarter. Currently he
has full time employment outside of Hackstage. His role within Hackstage involves building
stage setups and installations, VJ’ing, and developing the Art-net LED system.
In Marcus’ opinion, Hackstage don’t make too much money on making live events. A lot of
time goes in to gig preparations, which is rarely accounted for. For some events, you work
the entire night and often have to work more hours that the contract says. Some events are
purely driven by passion, and while others are for making money. Marcus’ aspiration is to
go into product development.
CHAPTER 1. HACKSTAGE
3
==PAGE:12==
Together with Niels, he has developed designs for the Hackstage LED bar, an Art-net LED
system, and differential signal converters. Marcus’ sees several possibilities in creating a pro-
prietary hardware platform for LED control. As a user and creator of LED systems, he has
experienced a range of various problems that may occur and could be improved. Marcus is
mostly responsible for creating PCB and hardware.
Jonas
Jonas considers himself a video artist. His workstation in Hackstage is a 8 square meter
room containing an abundant collection of various analogous pieces of equipment, TV’s,
cameras, oscilloscopes, computers, midi-equipment and more. He works professionally with
video-making and filming, and does art installations and VJ’ing in Hackstage’s context.
Bjarke
Bjarke is primarily a VJ and video animator. He experiments currently with animations
generated by artificial intelligence.
He is experienced with controlling the Art-net LED
system via Resolume and mapping fixtures. Bjarke will reappear in Section 3.1 on Omega
Festival.
1.3
Intent
Hackstage wishes to expand their business with a product design meant for the commercial
market. Two overall concept ideas reside within the company.
Art-net LED system
This product design is finished, in terms of conceptualisation. A design already exists. For
concerts and stage designs, Hackstage incorporates the Art-net LED system for their shows.
Additionally, the system is rented out, being another way of generating revenue. They wish
to finish the design of their own Art-net LED system. The system comprises of;
• LED controller
• LED bars
• Power unit
• Cables
• Mounting solutions
The LED bar design is largely finished. It is based on extruded aluminium, matte plastic
cover, a circuit for receiving signal and power via 4-pin scroller type of cable. The fixture
has both an input and an output allowing daisy chaining. The cables and power units are
CHAPTER 1. HACKSTAGE
4
==PAGE:13==
sourced from a supplier.
Two existing LED controllers are based on sourced hardware. Their own design, based on a
micro-controller, is in a unfinished state.
The user
The user of this system have initially been Hackstage, and their clients renting the system.
Now they also want to sell the product rather than rent it and get booked. They want to
target venues, clubs and stage technicians as buying customers of the system.
Project owners
Niels and Marcus are developing this product.
Consumer oriented lighting system
This product idea is, unlike the Art-Net LED system, still unfinished conceptually. The
inspiration is to develop a lighting product which takes the technology of stage lighting into
the domain of the mass users.
A parallel of this concept is seen with the product SoundBoks, a battery driven speaker at
the loudness level of stage speakers. The SoundBoks is used for festival camping and private
events requiring music (especially loud). The product is a solution that requires no technical
knowledge, and it is portable. This makes it an easy and popular choice amongst user groups,
since its introduction to the market. The consumer oriented lighting system is assumed in-
herit portability and IoT based features, for increased usability.
The user is still undefined. An assumed target group is young people. This project will
require a demographic understanding in order to know which users to target. It will require an
understanding of user needs, as means to formulate problem statements. Problem statements
allow for conceptualising solutions. It will require a search into existing solutions, as means
to locate a market opportunity. Lastly, seeking market validation for a given design could
serve as final product evaluation.
Project owners
No Hackstage member is developing this product idea. Rather, it sporadically exists and is
in some cases tied to the Art-Net LED system.
1.4
Undertaking a project
While uncovering both projects, I was trying to make an assessment of which project would
have the better potential for innovation and success on the market. Initially, I was trying to
understand the intentions with the Art-Net LED system, without much actually knowledge
CHAPTER 1. HACKSTAGE
5
==PAGE:14==
of its use and full intent. For a while, I would have deemed this project for having low market
potential, because of the many existing market competitors. Competitors would reside both
in the high-end and low-end of the spectrum as seen in Figure 1.1.
Figure 1.1: Existing Art-Net LED systems [1] [2] [3] [4]
As it turns out, Art-Net LED controllers are very popular, especially on the American market
where they are used to build garden Christmas decorations. They are also common in clubs
and venues. LED fixtures are even more abundant, and comes in a broad range of types, price
and quality. The only advantage for Hackstage would be, if their own system was customised
exactly to their needs. This could optimise the price and value ratio, and their product
design could technically reside in the lower right corner of Figure 1.1. But to any other users
of Art-Net LED systems, what would make their product special? I could not find the answer.
With this initial conclusion I would set out to focus mainly on the Consumer oriented lighting
system. This led me to conduct a range of interviews, focusing on home lighting, smart
lighting, party lighting, portable lighting systems, photographic lighting and other.
Ten
interviews were conducted with four different user groups.
Chapter 6 will present work
CHAPTER 1. HACKSTAGE
6
==PAGE:15==
achieved in this project. Even when some of the collected data was analysed, it is open
ended and is only a preliminary research into the domain of users.
More aspects, such
as competing products on the market and quantitative studies may shed light on broader
demographics.
As my knowledge of Hackstage and their projects grew I realised, that if I spent the entirety
of this project conceptualising a Consumer oriented lighting system, I would not reach two
of my overall goals with the project:
• Be of use to Hackstage by contributing to their activities
• Focus a large portion of the project on prototyping activities to advance skills in hard-
ware programming.
A design proposal for a new product would be nothing more than a piece of paper leading
into an enormous new endeavour. Perhaps the endeavour is fruitful in theory, but Niels and
Marcus had a much more eminent problem, requiring attention. Their current prototype of
the Art-Net LED controller had reached a dead end (section 3.4). Additionally, the LED
controller was a part of a larger whole (the Art-Net LED system described in Section 3 which
I had not considered initially in the assessment seen in 1.1.
Niels and Marcus would not reject the potential future prospects of a consumer oriented
solution. its potential could therefore very well become a requirement in the work on the
new Art-Net LED controller.
Regardless, at this point (approximately 1,5 month into the project) in time I had to pivot,
and focus on the Hackstage Art-Net LED system in a solution oriented manner, in order to
reach the goals as stated above. A solution oriented approach would mean black boxing the
problem domain. A concept is already defined: The Art-Net LED controller as component
in the Art-Net LED system. The problem is instead how to realise the concept and solve
needs internally in Hackstage.
Scope of the Art-net LED system project:
• understand the problems with the existing versions of the Art-net LED system
• define technical specifications for a new hardware platform and development environ-
ment
• select a new hardware platform and implement the new development environment
• set goals for the prototyping phase via a state machine diagram and prototyping plan-
ners
• build the prototype, a proof of concept
• summarise outcome and future work
CHAPTER 1. HACKSTAGE
7
==PAGE:16==
1.5
Assessment of problem formulation
An assessment of the problem formulation becomes especially relevant, as the project did not
proceed linearly through the eight points, due to the project pivot.
Who are Hackstage, and how do they use LED for stage light systems and light installations?
Chapter 1 Hackstage briefly describe the company’s history, employees, business and project
intentions. Chapter 2 Stage lighting provides a foundation of knowledge, which builds up to
an understanding of every sub component of the Art-net LED system. Section 3.1 Omega
Festival narrates usage of the Art-Net LED system through a practical field study.
Who are the potential users of the Art-Net LED system, in addition to Hackstage, and what
needs do they share?
A user study is conducted in Chapter 6 User study with a focus on developing a Consumer
oriented lighting system. Domain experts and potential user groups, were scoped for an initial
investigation. A subset of these, a total of ten, were interviewed. The study uses a handful
of techniques to gather data, which undergoes some post-processing.
What solutions exist on the market, and what are their product features?
This point is only given little attention as it is not within the scope of the Art-Net LED
system project.
Which business model could be relevant for Hackstage to be competitive on the market?
This point is given no attention as the project pivot to the Art-Net LED system, which fo-
cuses on other topics.
What product features are needed for the Art-Net LED system to be competitive on the market
for light installations and stage lighting?
Product features for the Art-Net LED system are studied in Chapter 3 Art-net LED system.
Problems in usage, hardware and the development environment of the Art-Net LED system
are expanded upon, with the intention of improving the design and starting development on
a new hardware platform.
What technical specifications are necessary to accomplish the desired features?
A specifications sheet for hardware and development environment is made in Section 3.7
Version 3:
New hardware platform based on the identified problem spaces.
CHAPTER 1. HACKSTAGE
8
==PAGE:17==
Knowledge and experience gained throughout the prototyping phase, is used as input for a
future work section, that focuses solely on hardware requirements and necessary testing.
Which hardware and software allows for a solution that’s economically viable and fulfils the
desired specification?
The specifications sheet made in Section 3.7, Version 3: New hardware platform is used as a
decision making tool for selecting a new hardware platform for the Art-Net LED controller
and an improved software development environment.
Create proof of concept on a full or partial system, with focus on core features.
A large portion of the project is spent prototyping the LED controller. A state machine dia-
gram and prototyping planners set the goal for the development and a protomap documents
the progress. Section 5.6 summarises the outcome of the prototype.
Changes
Less work was spent on user study and market analysis. Instead, more time was spent on
problem solving and prototyping the Art-Net LED controller.
1.6
Planning
Throughout the initial weeks of the project, a PERT chart2 was made, in order to establish
a picture of future tasks and their codependency. Some tasks would depend on others being
finished, e.g. a new piece of hardware may not be selected before its specifications have been
established. Tasks were given an estimated duration. That duration would also become its
deadline, in order to leave sufficient time for the subsequent actions.
Figure 1.2: PERT chart project plan.
This plan, however would not entirely fit with the course of things, as a business model never
was made. g and j specifically would not become part of the project.
2The program evaluation and review technique (PERT) is a statistical tool used in project management,
which was designed to analyze and represent the tasks involved in completing a given project. [9]
CHAPTER 1. HACKSTAGE
9
==PAGE:18==
2
Stage lighting
This section will establish a general foundation of knowledge before before arriving at the
topic of the Art-net LED system. This includes:
• Fixtures and effects
• DMX signal protocol
• Art-Net signal protocol
• Pixel LED
• Resolume Arena software
Some may not directly be used in this project, although it serves as a useful knowledge foun-
dation.
Light is electromagnetic waves emitted from a source. An artificial source of light is a called
a lamp. Non-artificial sources may be a candle light or a sun. There are many types of
lamps, e.g. incandescent lamps, halogen lamps and LED (Light Emitting Diode). A lamp
is mounted in a fixture. The fixtures are sometimes designed with a practical intent, for
instance with reflectors and lenses to focus or diffuse the light. Fixtures are produced in a
wide range of types and by many companies. A fixture can be anything from a socket for a
light bulb to an architect lamp, a pendant or car headlights. [10]
Incandescent lamps are based on electromagnetic radiation from a hot body, and was the
first electrical lamp to be invented. Incandescent have a long history, but are being replaced
by lamps based on newer technologies and higher energy efficiency. This project revolves
mostly around LED. LEDs produce light by forcing electrons to jump between positive and
negative semi-conductive layers separated by a junction by the energy of electric current.
The electrons fall into a lower energy state, lose energy and emit photons. They are know
for being highly efficient. [10]
The human eye can perceive electromagnetic waves with a wavelength in the spectrum of 300
to 700 nanometres. Daylight and incandescent light serve as benchmark, when measuring
colour rendition index (CRI), a light quality parameter. Daylight, or natural light, has a
CRI of 100 and appears white to the human eye. If natural light is refracted by a prism,
it is continuous within the spectrum of wavelengths. Various types of lamps have different
10
==PAGE:19==
spectrum profiles. LEDs often emit a narrow band of electromagnetic waves, and therefore
they often lack wavelengths in sections of the spectrum. This results in lower CRI, and may
cause misrepresentation of some colours.[10]
Light mixes additively. Red, green and blue are primary colours, which means they can
produce all colours by changing proportion of the individual components. This is why LEDs
capable of producing all colours contain a red, a green and a blue diode. White colour is
produced if all three are mixed to an equal amount.[10]
Figure 2.1: The figure illustrates blend ratios of RGB sources reproducing colours in the
entire visible spectrum.[5]
2.1
Fixtures and effects
A wide range of fixtures and effects exist. The type and function of a stage light depends on
the type of lamp and the type of fixture in which the lamp resides. Modern fixtures can be
controlled in various of ways, and the list below will elaborate the main characteristics:
• PAR (parabolic aluminized reflector) lamp - This fixture uses a reflector to focus light
from a source (various types) into a beam. It is widely used as theatrical, commercial
and residential lighting. The beam can be used to illuminate objects.
• Moving head - This fixture is a PAR lamp on a motorised mount. Generally a lot of
parameters can be controlled in these fixtures, e.g.: position (both tilt and 360 degree
angle), movement speed, lens focus, light intensity and colour.
• Flood light - This light is used to light up a stage, a room or a crowd and typically
requires a lamp with high intensity, while having a wide angle. Often halogen with high
CRI is used. It is also used as theatrical lighting, photographic lighting and residential
lighting.
• Strobe (or stroboscopic) light - This lighting is characterised by strong light flashes in
a perceivable frequencies, typically 1 - 12Hz. The intensity effect makes it a popular
choice for some musical events and clubs. Above 12 Hz increases risk for seizures for
epileptics.
• Laser - Laser is a intense and focused light. Modern laser lamps can draw coloured
patterns on surfaces and planes in foggy air , by redirecting the light beam faster than
the eye can track the motion.
CHAPTER 2. STAGE LIGHTING
11
==PAGE:20==
• Projector - Projectors can light up a canvas or a surface with video content. One of
the main assets within Hackstage, is its projectors. They are often used in multiple
kinds and sizes for events like conferences or concerts. The projectors can be used to
map surfaces in three dimensions and the content can be manipulated in software like
Resolume.
• LED bar/strip - The LED bar is a 1 dimensional fixture, consisting of an array of
individual multi-colour LED pixels. Sometimes they can be controlled as a whole (one
lamp) and sometimes each individual pixel can be controlled.
• LED matrix - The LED matrix is a 2 dimensional fixture which can draw shapes like
a screen, usually with lower fidelity and on a large scale.
• Ultra violet (UV) light - UV lamps will make colours and materials containing phosphor
glow because of fluorescence. UV is popular in clubs.
• Smoke machine - a device that uses liquid chemicals to create volumes of foggy air.
Foggy air enhances the effect of focused light beams and lasers, as the beam itself
becomes visible in the air.
Hackstage owns a multitude of stage lights, including everything above. Additionally, they
have home built LED bars. The Hackstage LED bar will be used later in this report.
2.2
DMX
Most stage lighting systems are based on DMX, sometimes called DMX512. The signal pro-
tocol became the industry standard since it was created in 1986. DMX512 is an abbreviation
for ”Digital Multiplex with 512 pieces of information”. A DMX fixture will read these ”pieces
of information”, called channels, and respond to change by e.g. dimming, rotating or change
colour. One DMX512 cable can transmit the control information for a maximum 512 chan-
nels. 512 DMX channels are called a ”DMX universe”, in industry terms. [11]
A DMX controller is used to generate and manipulate the DMX signal. Controllers are de-
signed in a multitude of sizes and variants, suitable for individual preference and intended
scenarios, although the basics are often the same. Advanced controllers will have much extra
utility, allowing for control of many fixtures with automated motions, creating a layer of
abstraction In the old days one knob meant one control parameter. [11]
The DMX512 signal consists of a repetitive bit stream.
The bits are encoded onto the
electricity in the cable by alternating the voltage, +2,5 volts and -2,5 volts. Positive voltage
alternation encodes a 1 and negative a 0. Speed is important for high data rate. The bitrate
is 250kbit/s. The transmission of one bit information lasts 4 microseconds.[11]
A byte consists of 8 bits, which makes up one of the 512 channels in the DMX512 universe.
The bit-depth of one channel allows for a resolution of 256 steps. E.g. if a fixture dims in
response to one channel, it can do so with 256 discrete steps. Moving head fixtures usually
CHAPTER 2. STAGE LIGHTING
12
==PAGE:21==
require an large amount of channels, because of their many features [12]. Rotation, for in-
stance, requires more than an 8 bit resolution to simply turn one degree. This is overcome by
using multiple channels for one control parameter, exponentially adding bit-depth for every
channel consumed.[11]
In context, the DMX signal is generated and outputted from a DMX controller. DMX is an
asyncronous signal network protocol with a linear, or daisy-chained, topology. The signal
passes on from fixture to fixture. A fixture in the daisy-chained network reads one or more
specified channels while passing the signal through to the next receiver. A DMX fixture will
therefore always have both an input and output. Multiple fixtures may be configured to
listen to the same channel(s), causing them to perform synchronously.
Figure 2.2: Daisy chaining of DMX fixtures.
The DMX512 data limitation, one universe per cable, has become increasingly eminent since
the invention of the protocol.
2.3
Art-Net
One solution to the DMX512 data limitation is to digitise the data transfer, bypassing a
limitations of analogous data transfer. Art-Net is an implementation of DMX512 protocol
based on internet technology. This means that Art-Net can be used to transmit and receive
lighting data via a local area network (LAN) like WiFi or Ethernet. Data can be transferred
simultaneously, in multiple directions by multiple devices.
Art-Net revision 3 and 4 can
support the transfer of 32,768 universes. This means that a single Ethernet cable can, in
practice, replace almost any amount of DMX cables. The topology is no longer limited to
a daisy chain, now it is a mesh. Art-Net is the solution used by some LED controllers, e.g.
the ones designed by Hackstage, to drive LED pixels, as they tend to consume a multitude
of universes.[13][14]
Art-Net is based on the User Datagram Protocol (UDP), one of the widely used commu-
nication protocols of the Internet protocol suite. The protocol is used for high speed data
transfer, where data loss is expected, and goes unaccounted for. Live audio and video use
CHAPTER 2. STAGE LIGHTING
13
==PAGE:22==
this protocol, as its simplicity allows for higher data rate, while there is no time to try to
recover lost data. Other internet protocols will request lost data packets again.[15]
Art-Net also supports management functions such as detecting nodes, updating node control
parameters, and transmitting time codes, as well as functions that allow nodes to ”subscribe”
to ”publisher” nodes.[14]
Art-Net is royalty-free.[13]
2.4
Pixel LED
LEDs are traditionally an electronic component used as indicator lamps and in small dis-
plays. They are practical because of their physical robustness, small size and energy efficiency.
Traditionally, controlling multiple LEDs would require complex control circuits to produce
some specific behaviour of just a single LED. In modern days, and in the context of stage
lighting, there is a need for controlling vast amounts of LEDs to increase intensity, scale and
versatility. The Pixel LED is a conjunction of a control chip wired to a given amount of
LEDs. The control chip receives instructions, from a central processing unit (CPU), and will
respond by translating the instructions to the physical LEDs in the circuit. This allows for
creating multi-colour LEDs that are easy to control with a CPU. The chip creates a layer
of abstraction, at the cost of the price of the chip. Instructions are simple, and therefore a
chain of hundreds and thousands of chips can be controlled with a single CPU.[16] [17]
A fixture based on pixel LEDs is essentially a daisy chained array of chips. Such an array,
called a ”strip”, can be bought assembled, with in and output ports for easy integration into
projects. Data is sent to the first LED of the chain. It will bite off a chunk of instructions
to use for itself, and pass on the rest, for other pixels down the chain. This is how the chips
are individually controlled. [7]
CHAPTER 2. STAGE LIGHTING
14
==PAGE:23==
Figure 2.3: Daisy chaining of LED pixels on a strip.[6]
Pixel LED types
The defining characteristics of a multi-colour pixel LED is typically its chipset and its LED
profile. Chips are available in various qualities, which typically determines the data-rate
which they can handle, their power consumption and refresh rate. There are two categories
of chips, clock-less and SPI1. SPI based LED chips require a clock signal in addition to the
data-signal, inconvenient in some designs, but allows for a much higher data-rate. SPI based
LEDs, e.g. the APA102 by Adafruit, have a refresh-rate up to 20KHz. Clock-less usually
boast only one tenth of that. [19] [20] Some chips have three channels; red, green and blue.
Some have four channels and add a white channel, for better white representation (higher
CRI). A 3 or 4 wire cable will supply a LED fixture:
• Voltage (+)
• Ground (-)
• Data (DI)
• Clock (Clk)
Strips are available in different types, defined by their pitch, chip-type and LED profile. The
pitch is the amount of LEDs per meter. Higher density means higher pitch. Some strips have
1The Serial Peripheral Interface (SPI) is a synchronous serial communication interface specification used
for short-distance communication, primarily in embedded systems. [18]
CHAPTER 2. STAGE LIGHTING
15
==PAGE:24==
several hundreds per meter. [21] A higher pitch also means increased ability to reproduce
patterns (just like the resolution determines picture quality on a screen) and higher luminous
intensity.
This project deals specifically with two types, the WS2811 and SK6812. Both are clock-
less.[20] The SK6812 type is currently in the Hackstage LED bar fixtures. It is a four channel
RGBW LED. Each channel has a bit depth of 8. This means 256 steps for each colour. For
colour representation with red, green and blue, this adds up to 16.777.216 colours:
28bit·3channels = 16.777.216colours
The 8 bit white channels adds a dimension to this. The white channel also increases data
requirement by 25 percent. The strip has a pitch of 60.
Niels has acquired a RGB WS2811 chipset LED strip, which is presumed to replace the
SK6812, for its quality profile:
• The pitch is 144, meaning high luminous intensity.
• Each chip controls 3 LEDs, meaning lower data requirement for increased size. It has
a total of 48 chips per meter.
• WS2811 is cheaper than SK6812.
For each meter of SK6812, requiring 240 channels, 60 LEDs can be controlled. With the
same amount of channels, 1,66 meters of WS2811 can be controlled. The 60 percent increase
without adding more CPU may make a big difference in requirement specifications. Addi-
tionally the WS2811 has 240% more LEDs per meter, with approximately an equal increase
in luminous intensity. This design update will consume more power per meter and result in
20 percent lower pitch (between individually controlled segments of pixels). It is assumed
for this design change, that pitch (or resolution) is less important than data efficiency and
luminous intensity, because the Hackstage LED bars usually will be viewed from distance
and on a large scale.
LED controller
A LED controller is a CPU, which can output a control signal to a given pixel chip. Each
chip-type may have unique specifications, but they are all based on pulse width modulated
(PWM) electric current. The PWM signal encodes binary data in high and low voltage. 24
bits of data for red, green and blue is outputted as seen below, Figure 2.4, from left to right.
Figure 2.4: Order of PWM encoded binary data. High bits are send first. [7]
CHAPTER 2. STAGE LIGHTING
16
==PAGE:25==
The specific timing requirements of the duty cycle for WS2811 are stated below. A duty
cycle is the fraction of the pulse period in which a signal is high.
Figure 2.5: PWM timing specifications for WS2811.[7]
The Hackstage LED controller is based on signal conversion from Art-Net to PWM. One
LED channel consists of 8 bits. which is equal to one DMX channel, making the maths easy.
1 RGB Pixel requires 3 DMX channels. 100 RGB LEDs requires 300 DMX channels. As this
amount overflows one DMX universe, 2 universes are required to transfer this amount of data.
As mentioned in Section 2.3, Art-Net is essential for transferring a sufficient amount of DMX
universes to the LED controller, which is intended to control several thousand universes. The
frame-rate with which the LEDs can be updated depends on this duty cycle. [7]
Hackstage LED bar
Niels and Marcus have designed the Hackstage LED bar fixture based on an aluminium frame
extrusion. It is covered with a matte plastic light diffuser. The LED strip is taped on a rail
and slid into the frame. This makes it easy to construct. Additionally it is possible to repair
and replace components for prototyping and maintenance purposes. The frame has a cavity
below the rail, for integrated circuit designs of various kinds.
CHAPTER 2. STAGE LIGHTING
17
==PAGE:26==
Figure 2.6: The picture shows the Hackstage LED bars in use. They are elevated in
vertical rows above the crowd.
2.5
Resolume Arena
Resolume Arena is a VJ software for general purpose computers, Macs and Windows PCs.
Marcus says in an interview:
”Like a DJ needs DJ-equipment, VJ’s need VJ equipment. Resolume is one of the best pieces
of software for this application”.
Resolume is designed to generate, layer and manipulate video material in order to create
content. The synthesis happens in real-time and can to be outputted in a multitude of for-
mats. Content is represented as pictures or video in the software. A wide range of effects
and plugins allow for modifying and customising content.[22]
For the Art-Net LED system, Resolume Arena may output its content via Art-Net, a feature
which Hackstage utilises with their design. Inside Resolume Arena, a digital fixture represents
the target real world LED fixture. Via a mapping process, the two fixtures are linked. The
user of Resolume Arena now has control of the content being sent to connected fixtures. The
CHAPTER 2. STAGE LIGHTING
18
==PAGE:27==
digital fixture is positioned in the output video signal, in order to control which Section will
be represented.
Figure 2.7: In this example, a digital fixture is created as an array of 10 RGB LEDs and
positioned diagonally in the video output in Resolume Arena.
The mapping process will be elaborated Section 3.1.
The Art-Net is outputted to the LAN network.
The signal can be transmitted through
Ethernet and via WiFi. Some Art-Net receivers may appear automatically. Art-Net receivers
may be targeted via their IP address.[13][22]
CHAPTER 2. STAGE LIGHTING
19
==PAGE:28==
3
Art-net LED system
On a high level the system comprises of:
• A computer producing the Art-net signal via software e.g. Resolume Arena or similar.
• The Art-net controller, which translates Art-net to PWM.
• Router and Ethernet cables to create a network.1
• Pixel LEDs in fixtures
• Wiring solutions.
• Mounting solutions.
• Power supply(s).
The LEDs fixtures will reproduce the video content in some abstract form - typically with a
resolution so low, that the video content is no longer recognised. Only colours, shapes and
movement remains. LEDs can be put into any configuration, e.g. such that patterns of light
can traverse the stage on multiple axes, and over large distances. This effect is unique for
LEDs compared to other fixtures, e.g. ones mentioned in Section 2.1. According to Simon,
interviewed in Appendix N.1, LEDs are particularly good at highlighting objects from a
distance, rather than, for instance projecting lights onto surfaces. They can rapidly change
output and the Art-net LED system makes the process of reproducing complex content also
easy via computer software.
1An Ethernet cable in the context of this project consists of the CAT5 cable type and the RJ45 connector
20
==PAGE:29==
Figure 3.1: The picture shows the Hackstage Art-Net LED system in use. It is
implemented on rectangular fixtures elevated above the crowd.
3.1
Use case: Omega festival
Hackstage is hired as crew and stage managers for Omega Festival by Omega Festival’s
management. For that, Hackstage technicians work together in making designing the stage,
transporting equipment, building and disassembling the stage lighting.
Along with that,
Hackstage technicians control audio and visual equipment during the event.
Hackstage stage crew and roles
• Niels: Stage design, light production and DMX controller technician
• Bjarke: VJ in Resolume Arena and stage hand.
• Marco: Laser technician and stage hand2
• Danielle: Stage hand
• Sebastian: Stage hand
2Stage hand is a general purpose crew for assembly and disassembly of equipment. A hand is usually
instructed by a supervisor whom also controls the assembly.
CHAPTER 3. ART-NET LED SYSTEM
21
==PAGE:30==
A stage setup is typically a 2 node network between the stage itself and the front of house
(FoH). The stage is the scene for artists. The FoH is for technicians, their equipment and
computers. The FoH faces the stage and is distanced, so that it allows for a good overview.
From here, stage equipment is remotely operated. The Figure 3.2 illustrates such a setup.
With a stage design comes a need for a range of equipment. For Omega Festival, the following
lighting equipment was used:
Laser system
• 2 Laser lamps
• FB4 laser show control hardware
• A computer emitting laser control signal with BEYOND Advanced Lasershow software
DMX system
• 9 PAR LED lamps
• 2 Smoke machines
• 2 Strobe lights
• 1 DMX controller
• 1 computer assisting DMX controller with Chan Sys Magic software
Art-net LED system
• 14 Hackstage LED bars
• 2 LED controller boxes (version 1, using the Falcon board)
• A computer emitting Art-net via Ethernet with Resolume Arena software
• A LAN router
• Ethernet cable 3
• 4 pin scroller cable
The way that the Art-net LED system is installed is shown in in Figure 3.2. On a mechanical
level, equipment must be fastened and secured.
3An Ethernet cable in the context of this project consists of the CAT5 cable type and the RJ45 connector
CHAPTER 3. ART-NET LED SYSTEM
22
==PAGE:31==
Figure 3.2: 1: Computer, 2: Router, 3: Ethernet CAT5 cable, 4: Falcon board, 5: 4-pin
scroller cable (voltage and signal), 6: Hackstage LED bars.
Being a part of the crew, I assisted in mounting and connecting the Art-net LED system.
Along with that, I could be a fly on the wall for the night, ask questions and even get
my hands on the controllers. A user journey map, Figure 3.3, is created based on research
insights gained. A full size version is available in Appendix B.
CHAPTER 3. ART-NET LED SYSTEM
23
==PAGE:32==
Figure 3.3: A full screen version is available in Appendix B
From this event, there were a handful of takeaways that would become useful when working
with Art-net LED controllers in prototyping phase in Chapter 5 prototyping and defining
problems in Section 3.4:
• Digital creation of DMX fixtures in Resolume in the Fixture editor. The fixture editor
can create one and two dimensional LED fixtures and specify the target target diode
configuration, e.g. RGB, GRB, or RGBW.
• Configuring the Network adapter setting in DMX preferences determines if Art-net will
be transmitted via Wi-Fi or Ethernet. This setting is tricky in particular, as it resides
in a completely different settings menu - and when things are not working, one must
remember to also check that is setting is correct. (Bjarke had been scratching his head
for a while that day.)
CHAPTER 3. ART-NET LED SYSTEM
24
==PAGE:33==
• Configuring the output of Art-net via Advanced output. A ”Lumiverse” may target a
specific IP address or broadcast the Art-net to the network.
• Usage possibilities in Resolume: MIDI controller extension
• Once hardware (the LED controller itself and the LED bars) has been mounted and
configured on a stage or similar, it may be hard to physically access.
• PWM signal is rather sensitive in practice, and cannot traverse long distances without
power injection. (This is in contrast to e.g. DMX which has a multitude of measure-
ments protecting against signal noise.)
• Mapping fixtures onto a video signal can be rather confusing when dealing with 14
identical LED bars via 8 different outputs. Bjarke had prepared his session in Resolume
Arena prior to the event. But it turned out, that it was not correct after all. He had
a range of issues: 1) Getting Resolume’s fixtures to correspond to the LEDs seen up
on the stage (See Figure 3.4). 2) Actually getting an output to the stage (turned out
to be the Network adapter setting in DMX preferences 3) A pixel/channel offset in
the Art-net signal would cause an overflow from the target fixture. Lighting up one
particular LED bar would also light up a small section of the next LED bar in the
signal chain.
• Resolume can fix mapping digitally, rather than move physical cables around.
The Figure 3.4 illustrates a scenery where Bjarke is configuring DMX fixtures for Omega
Festival.
Fixtures are represented as a transparent rectangle.
A fixture can be moved,
rotated and stretched. The video signal, on top of which the fixtures are mapped, is bright
red. The resulting output can be perceived on the fixtures behind the computer.
CHAPTER 3. ART-NET LED SYSTEM
25
==PAGE:34==
Figure 3.4: Mapping DMX fixtures in Advanced output settings in Resolume Arena.
Other observations during the research:
• The aluminium LED bars designed by Marcus and Niels are vulnerable to squashing,
if the steel bolts are tightened with excessive torque.
• An Ethernet cable’s RJ45 plug is quite sensitive. The mechanical latch/clip made of
plastic tends to break if not handled with care.
• The working environment was rather rough. Mounting and de-mounting a stage is
characterised by dealing with plenty of large tools and moving heavy equipment covered
in wood and steel protection.
• Cables are generally a burden. Lots of cables for various systems inevitably get clustered
together - unless precautions are made. In some location, e.g. in the truss elevated
above the stage, a lot of cables need to go through the same small spaces. It gets
troublesome finding the ins and outs.
• Communication between technicians is not easy during a show, as the environment gets
very loud.
CHAPTER 3. ART-NET LED SYSTEM
26
==PAGE:35==
• Reliability of systems are of utmost importance. If a show is running and something
goes wrong, you’re in trouble. This event did experience a short power-out affecting
lighting systems. Emergency action was needed in order to get systems back up and
running - they did not reboot into their working state. Rebooting into working state is
an important feat a Hackstage LED controller according to Niels and this experience.
Formulating problems
Takeaways and observations will be elaborated and reformulated in to problem statements
in full in Section 3.6 Problems in product hardware and usage.
Figure 3.5: The stage during the last phase of preparation and beginning of event.
3.2
Design of the Art-Net LED controller
A system map from Niels, received upon project initiation, illustrates the signal pathway for
controlling LED’s via Resolume. It highlights the role of the Art-net LED controller, as a
signal processing unit.
Figure 3.6: System map from Niels
CHAPTER 3. ART-NET LED SYSTEM
27
==PAGE:36==
For the duration of this project, three versions of the Art-Net LED controller are in play:
• Version 1: A functioning unit based on a purchased Falcon F16V4 Pixel Controller[4].
Peripheral extensions make it compatible with the Hackstage LED bars.
• Version 2: An Art-net LED controller based on STM32F103 micro-controller pro-
grammed and designed by Niels and Marcus.
• Version 3: The revision of the LED controller designed and prototyped in this project.
3.3
Version 1: Falcon F16V4 Pixel Controller
Version 1 is currently the only system in professional use. It operates with an Art-Net signal
processing board F16V4 Pixel Controller by the brand Falcon. By purchasing a functioning
Art-Net processing unit, Niels and Marcus could speed up the process of acquiring an Art-Net
LED system for Hackstage’s activities. This board was purchased and encased with a power
supply and eight 4-pin scroller cable output ports, so it could interface with the Hackstage
LEDs bars. Two LED controllers of this variant is currently in use.
Art-net processing capabilities:
• Supports more than 70 LED types (both 3 and 4 channel).
• Can process a total of 16 universes .
• 8 output ports.
• 4 meters of SK6812 LEDs (2 universes) per output.
• A total of 32 meters of SK6812 LEDs.
• A total of 1920 RGBW LEDs.
The board is equipped with a range of overhead features:
• Configure IP settings.
• Configure Art-net settings.
• Ethernet input.
• Hardware interface: 5 push buttons and OLED screen.
• web server interface via Ethernet.
• power LED indicator.
• Processor temperature sensor.
The F16V4 Pixel Controller which sits inside the version 1 device has enormous processing
capabilities in itself [4]:
CHAPTER 3. ART-NET LED SYSTEM
28
==PAGE:37==
• Supports more than 70 LED types (both 3 and 4 channel)
• Can process 90 universes via 16 output ports
• Add extension boards for more ports (24 ports, 32 ports or 48 ports)
• 192 universes with port extensions
The hardware and web server interface is for control and monitor the device. The web server
interface is accessible via Ethernet once the device is booted. The IP address of the device
is typed into the browser on a computer.
3.4
Version 2: STM32F103
The second iteration is in development halt, upon the undertaking of this project. The hard-
ware has proven to have insufficient capabilities for the intended overhead application.
Art-net processing capabilities:
• Supports clock-less RGB and RGBW LED pixels
• Can process a total of 32 universes
• 8 output ports
• A total of 64 meters of SK6812LEDs
The board is equipped with a range of overhead features:
• Can Input DMX for LED control.
• Configure IP settings.
• Configure Art-Net settings.
• Ethernet input.
• Standalone generative animations4
• Hardware interface: Rotary encoder and LCD screen.
• web server interface via Ethernet. (insufficient flash memory to develop)
4Generative animations are hard coded algorithms that utilises maths and computation as foundation
for PWM signals.
CHAPTER 3. ART-NET LED SYSTEM
29
==PAGE:38==
A system map of the functionalities of the version 2 Art-Net LED system controller has been
created upon an analysis of the hardware and software, as seen in Figure 3.7.
Figure 3.7: The figure illustrates subsystems, signal in and out pathways, and signal types.]
Hardware
The version 2 is built a series of hardware:
• STM32F103. [23]
• KY-040 rotary encoder.
• LCD1602 screen display.
• SN74HCT08N Logic gate by Texas Instruments.
• W5500 Ethernet PHY and RJ-45 socket for Ethernet cable.
• Printed circuit board (PCB) containing signal resistors 5 and bridge capacitors 6.
5Resisters on PWM signal outputs prevent against spike voltage, e.g. on booting, which may be damaging
to LED chips.
6prevents voltage drop upon large power draws, e.g.
if all LEDs are turned on instantaneously and
simultaneously.
CHAPTER 3. ART-NET LED SYSTEM
30
==PAGE:39==
Figure 3.8: The figure displays components of the system.
Figure 3.9: A picture of the version 2 prototype.
User interface
The product was designed with a physical interface; a screen and a rotary encoder. The
rotary encoder can both be pressed to select and scroll to each side. Scrolling will incremen-
t/decrement integer values or browse the menu system. Version 2 was designed with a web
server user interface in addition to the physical interface. This way the user can remotely
read the configuration on devices on the LAN network via a computer, conveniently the same
CHAPTER 3. ART-NET LED SYSTEM
31
==PAGE:40==
computer which outputs the Art-Net signal. This is useful in the scenario where a technician
is stationed in FoH away from the controller, which may be mounted somewhere on stage
out of reach.
The CAT5 cables transfers data between nodes on the network. The computer sends Art-
Net into the network. The LED controller hosts a web server, available via its IP address.
The Ethernet PHY is an external PCB circuit connected to the LED controller via general
purpose in and out pins (GPIOs). The PHY translates data between computer logic in the
LED controller, and the protocol of the electric signal traversing the CAT5 cable.
DMA stands for Direct Memory Access. It is a processor, which make computational opera-
tions between memory and GPIOs on the micro-controller, without requiring attention from
the main thread7 of the single core processor. DMA is used to output PWM signal on a total
of 8 pins in a manner where multiple outputs can be handled simultaneously - at the same
speed as just a single pin. Utilisation of DMA is an important implementation for updating
many LEDs with high frame rate on the STM32F103.
The logic converter is an integrated circuit board.
It can step up voltage of the PWM
data signal going to the pixel LEDs. The pixel LEDs are 5 volt chips, and should therefore
also receive PWM signal at the same 5 volt logic level. The logic converter is of the type
SN74HCT08N made by Texas Instruments and has four channels. The logic converter must
be of a certain precision, otherwise it may introduce disruptive distortions in the outgoing
PWM signal.
Micro-controller and development environment
STM32 controllers are designed by the company ST. The STM32F103 micro-controller specif-
ically is a popular choice for industrial applications, as it is both a cheap and capable micro-
controller. its popularity has resulted in the nickname ”bluepill”. Niels has programmed the
STM32F103 via the Arduino framework. This framework is widely known amongst engineers
as a development environment for embedded programming. Arduino an open-source hard-
ware and software company. The framework is available via the Arduino IDE, a software
program configuring, programming and uploading code to a micro-controller. Even though
the Arduino framework traditionally was designed for ATMEL’s AVR micro-controllers, the
support for other micro-controller has increased with time.
The framework can become
available for the STM32F103 by configuring it with an Arduino bootloader.
The boot-
loader configures the STM32F103 micro-controller, so that it behaves like a piece of Arduino
hardware. Niels and Marcus have programmed the STM32F103 in the Arduino IDE. [24] [23]
The Arduino framework has become popular in hobbyist societies around the world and be-
cause of this, it is one of the most community supported frameworks. It has a vast amount of
coding libraries available, and many micro-controllers from various developers are supported.
Niels and Marcus have been developing their version 2 solution, by utilising a multitude of
7The thread is the unit of execution inside the CPU.
CHAPTER 3. ART-NET LED SYSTEM
32
==PAGE:41==
code libraries freely available on the internet. Libraries that handle Art-net signals, DMX
signals, and DMA have been utilised and modified to a functioning piece of code. Using
available code will speed up development time, ensure a high baseline for code efficiency and
ultimately allow for project completion without the prerequisite of having expert capabilities
in all fields. The downside of this is that the high layer of abstraction, when using foreign
code, is a limited understanding of lower level code behaviour, which may lead to bugs and
conflicts that are hard to resolve.
Software
The program is divided into multiple files, as a means to separate overarching tasks. This
makes browsing for functions related to a specific task easier. Each task has two files. The
.cpp file contains definitions of functions, which is the actual programming of a functions
behaviour. The header file contains declarations of content residing in the corresponding
.cpp file. The .h suffix is a file type called a header file. The purpose of the header file is to
share its declared functions with other scripts. The header file is included into other scripts,
so other scripts may access content like functions and variables. The complete list of 15 files
is:
• LedController
• ArtnetNode.cpp
• ArtnetNode.h
• Display.cpp
• Display.h
• Dmx.cpp
• Dmx.h
• Led.cpp
• Led.h
• Settings.cpp
• Settings.h
• Standalone.cpp
• Standalone.h
• WebServer.cpp
• WebServer.h
CHAPTER 3. ART-NET LED SYSTEM
33
==PAGE:42==
Figure 3.10: Arduino IDE interface. The tabs illustrate included files.
LedController.cpp
This script is the first to run.
Initially, it includes all other header files.
The script is
comprised of a setup() and a loop() function. The setup function calls setup functions defined
in other scripts, e.g.
the led setup() function from Led.cpp.
These setup functions will
make necessary initialisation for corresponding code tasks to run. After the setup() function
has run, the thread goes into the loop() function. The thread will repeatedly run through
this function, executing tasks at rapid speed. A switch case statement allows for changing
which code will be executed. This switch can be controlled via the product interfaces. The
LED controller has three switch case options: Art-net processing, DMX processing and a
standalone mode.
ArtnetNode.cpp
This script contains functions to handle incoming Art-net frames. It contains a setup function
artnet.begin() from the Art-net library ArtNet by hideakitai, which makes the micro-
controller into an Art-net node on the network. The Art-Net processing capabilities of this
prototype stems from the ArtNet library. Although, in order to make it work with the 4
channel SK6812 LED chip Niels had to modify the code.
CHAPTER 3. ART-NET LED SYSTEM
34
==PAGE:43==
Display.cpp
This script contains a state machine for the LCD display and code logic to control rotary en-
coder inputs. The rotary encoder can both scroll by turning clockwise and counter clockwise.
Scrolling is used for browsing and changing values. It can be pushed to enter menu systems
and accept changed values. While the menu is active, Art-net related display functions are
blocked, because the STM32F103 does not have the capability to run both processes.
Dmx.cpp
This file handles incoming DMX signals. They are used to trigger generative patterns (re-
siding in the Standalone.cpp) and colours.
Led.cpp
Led contains a setup function that configures 8 GPIO pins to output PWM signal to pixel
LEDs. It contains code that controls the Direct Memory Access (DMA) buffer system, which
is a feature that allows for rapid processing and outputting of Art-net frames.
Settings.cpp
This script contains functions that load configurations made in Display.cpp into the working
state of the controller. It contains definitions of variables needed for LAN network, DMX
and standalone mode. Settings.cpp have functions utilising EEPROM, which is a type of
non-volatile memory, that will persist even if the micro-controller is powered down. This is
used to save configurations and changing the state of the micro-controller, which requires
rebooting. Changing the IP address requires:
• 1. write new IP to EEPROM.
• 2. reboot.
• 3. read new IP from EEPROM.
• 4. connect to the network with the new IP address.
Standalone.cpp
This script contains hard-coded algorithms, which can control the pixel LEDs in various ways
without receiving an Art-Net signal.
WebServer.cpp
This script contains HTML data which allows the STM32F103 micro-controller to send a web
server, to client computers on the network. This HTML data specifies the an interface from
which the LED controller can be configured. Currently, the web server is in an incomplete
state, according to Niels. One of the main pain points of the STM32F103 micro-controller
that the program already maxed out all of its flash memory. Strings, that hold lines of HTML
CHAPTER 3. ART-NET LED SYSTEM
35
==PAGE:44==
code, take up a lot of memory compared to lines that describe computations.
The interface is only in a preliminary state, incorporating methods for configuring Ethernet
and Art-net. Some functions are missing for becoming a bare minimum proof of concept, e.g:
• Display current configurations of the device.
• Change between modes of the system: Art-Net processing, Standalone mode and DMX
mode.
• Hard reset
• Styling
The current state of the web server interface can be seen in Figure 3.11.
Figure 3.11: The websrever interface on the version 2 prototype.
Formulating problems
The version 2 device was only theoretically analysed as the prototype is not in an assembled
and functioning state. Interviews with Niels and Marcus has given insight into development
issues. They will be elaborated in full in Section 3.5 Problems in development.
CHAPTER 3. ART-NET LED SYSTEM
36
==PAGE:45==
3.5
Problems in development
This section intends to summarise problems found in the development environment based on
interviews with Marcus and Niels. The development environment in making of version 2 has
a range of problems, which point towards a revised version 3 of the system.
IDE
Niels has expressed a range of issues with the Arduino IDE. Functions, that are usually
present in most programming IDEs, have been stripped away. The Arduino IDE is developed
to be simple, for the sake of availability for new developers. It is a common choice in embedded
projects as it is easy to go to. A range of issues detected throughout the problem investigation
phase:
• There is no file management system. Files must be handled outside of the IDE in the
desktop file browser.
• There are no syntax links, which allows for jumping in between scripts, e.g. to locations
where variables and functions are used or defined.
• There is no options for version control, which is a useful tool to keep track of code
iterations. Niels and Marcus had used Apache Subversion for version control.
• There’s a lack of debugging features, such as syntax highlighting. Syntax highlighting
is a system that reads code and colourises code sequences based on their type.
• The IDE has no real-time syntax error detection. The Arduino IDE will only read the
code and detect errors when attempting to compile code. Compiling code takes time -
and breaks the coding flow.
• Niels has expressed, that whenever there is a bug in his code it is almost impossible to
locate it, because there are few relevant debug messages from the STM controller.
• If the debug message points to a low level code script, e.g. in the Arduino Framework or
a library, one has to dive into computer system files to surface the relevant document.
• Debugging: The Arduino IDE does not allow for adding break-points in the code8. Niels
has worked with micro-controllers from micro-chip which has this debugging feature
(which is more common when programming software than hardware).
•
• There are no library manager, which automatically includes libraries to a script.
• There’s a lack of external tools available. Other popular IDE’s tend to have an exten-
sions tab for automatic install of 3rd party tools.
8Break-points are targets in the code, which, when reached during execution, will freeze the micro-
controller. At break-points, the STM32 controller will communicate its state and values of variables to the
programmer’s IDE. This way, the programmer may discover errors, if the state of the micro-controller is not
as expected at a given break point.
CHAPTER 3. ART-NET LED SYSTEM
37
==PAGE:46==
General ease of development related to board capability
Marcus has pointed towards the STM32F103, calling it a mistake in the design. The STM32
can do the necessary Art-net processing but lacks power for utility. The money saved by
buying a cheap controller, has costed them a lot of time in development - due to a difficult
development environment and little capability overhead of e.g. flash memory. From devel-
oping the design of the LED bar, he realises that the cost of the micro-controller is a very
small proportion of the cost of the entire product (Hackstage LED bars and LED controller
hardware). Material cost in extruded aluminium, for instance, rises high above the cost of the
STM32F103. A higher budget could be set aside for improving the development environment
and the capability headroom of the micro-controller.
Version history
Niels has multiple versions of his LED controller code. But through time it becomes harder
to remember which ones does what and why. Naming schemes are not sufficient to keep an
overview. When code is shared back and forth between developers, this challenge tends to
increase
Community support
A development board that has plenty of community support will assist in development of the
new product. Many of the features of the LED controller are not unique. Having available
libraries and example code for the features which we are going to implement, will boost
development. Libraries of interest:
• DMA
• Ethernet (PHY)
• Display
• Rotary Encoder
• WiFi
• Bluetooth
• Webserver front end
• SD card/memory
• Art-net
• RTOS9
• LED control
9Real Time Operating System. It is a way for prioritising task for single and multi core processors, a
guarantee that a certain task can happen under specified circumstances.
CHAPTER 3. ART-NET LED SYSTEM
38
==PAGE:47==
• Standalone capability
• Multi-threading/proto-threading (An explanation of this concept will follow in Section
3.6)
STM32F103 had many available and relevant libraries, as it was programmed in the widely
popular Arduino Framework.
Collaboration platform
Niels and Marcus are currently developing without a centralised collaboration platform for
sharing code and proposing design changes. Niels has requested implementing such a collab-
oration platform. GitHub is an obvious choice.
Boot-loader
The STM32F103 has an external bootloader, the ST-Link. This inconvenient during de-
signing phase.
Development boards and newer micro-controllers typically have on-board
boot-loaders, making development easier, while also removing a source of complexity, e.g.
due to bad cables.
Ability to pivot
Hackstage has theorised multiple product designs that could potentially be future projects.
Building the version 3 on a versatile platform with capability headroom to pivot, could allow
for building new prototypes fast with existing technologies.
Hardware development
Hardware development, e.g. making custom PCB, is expensive in time and production. A
simple micro-controller with few onboard utilities may require large amount of hardware
development. A micro-controller board with processor and necessary built-in extensions is
preferable. The STM32f103 has very little utility other than bare minimum.
3.6
Problems in product hardware and usage
Hardware and usage have some overlapping topics and are described jointly in the following
sections.
Flash memory
The STM32F103 controller has 64 KB of flash memory. This is sufficient to implement the
signal processing code needed in the Art-Net LED system, however, Niels and Marcus have
maxed out the flash memory and are only half finished in developing the web server interface.
Not only was this an issue for the prototype, it was an issue in the development phase, where
CHAPTER 3. ART-NET LED SYSTEM
39
==PAGE:48==
time was spent compacting code. More flash memory is needed, although it is not easy to
predict how much exactly.
A safety factor could be added, to eliminate the risk of having to change platform again.
Another way of dealing with this problem is to select a platform which can be upgraded, e.g.
if the device consists of a series of products with graded capabilities.
The STM32F103 is an older micro-processor. Newer processors tend to have substantially
more flash memory as standard - an order of magnitude or more. The STM32F103 can be
upgraded to a 1024 KB version, perhaps sufficient to store the final web server code. [23]
Processor and multitasking
The version 2 system will freeze Art-net signal processing during device configuration. It
relies on hardware interrupts from the rotary encoder to enter configuration mode. Once
in configuration mode, the STM32F103’s 32 bit ARM Cortex M3 processor becomes busy
sensing input from the rotary encoder and updating the LED screen.
The 32 bit ARM
Cortex M3 is a single core processor. It has a single thread dedicated to execute action.
Multiple actions can happen concurrently by the process of proto-threading10. For a new
platform, it may be important to consider the processing power in order to handle Art-net
signal processing, configuration and other tasks simultaneously. Processing of Art-Net must
occur without interruption, once the show is on.
Hardware interface
Hardware interface requires a handful of GPIO pins. 3 pins for rotary encoder and minimum
2 pins for LCD screen. Using the hardware interface requires constant CPU attention for
continuous update and sensing of buttons.
Having both a hardware interface and a web server interface is redundant. It may be a benefit
to the user, if no computer is connected to the LAN network, to have the hardware interface.
The hardware interfaces in both the Falcon board and the version 2 look as if they are
prototype equipment.
Standalone mode
A final evaluation and solution to standalone modes have not yet been found. Using the
system independently of a computer is desirable in multiple scenarios:
• Events that extend for 10 hours can be tiresome. Initiating automatic programmes to
do the work for a time-period may be desirable.
10This is process where the thread will jump between prioritised tasks. A product may then appear to be
multitasking, if all tasks can finish within the time-frame
CHAPTER 3. ART-NET LED SYSTEM
40
==PAGE:49==
• Standalone mode may act as a back-up system if Art-Net signal feed fails.
• Building installations and lighting systems that was never intended as ”performances”.
This could be a an installation (for instance, art), miscellaneous lighting, home lighting
or other.
• Interactive lighting (music reactivity or other sensor reactivity)
• Testing a lighting setup before a computer is connected to the system.
Standalone mode may be achieved in a multitude of ways. One way is by writing algorithms
that generate patterns for pixel LEDs. One can imagine ways of incrementing and decre-
menting variables to give rise colours and motions in LED pixels.
Another way of achieving a standalone mode is by recording sequences of Art-Net onto ex-
ternal memory, such as an SD-card. Sequences may be replayed simply by replaying data
from memory - always accessible. This technique could achieve independence of an Art-Net
stream while having a good and creative environment to generate animations. Using Resol-
ume Arena to create animations would be incredibly more easy than hard-coding animations.
A third way of generating animations is via a modular synthesis principle inspired by Jonas’
approach. Jonas from Hackstage uses modular synthesis to generate visuals on TV-screens
through analogous video equipment. Jonas was interviewed (see Appendix M.1) with the
purpose of studying a modular approach.
He routes generators through modulators and
effects.
The result is colours and shapes moving across the screen.
This principle may
be replicated in a micro-controller by using math and timers for creating oscillations and
motions. It could, like Jonas’ equipment, provide an interface for generating animations and
complexities.
Mapping
Mapping fixtures in Resolume is usually a lengthy process. Wires are coupled without taking
note of the outputs and which LEDs they connect to. In Resolume, fixtures are turned on
and off, one by one, in the attempt of determining which virtual DMX fixture should be sent
to which output channel on the Art-net LED controller. Bjarke, Marcus, Niels and Andreas
have all mentioned this is tedious. They have expressed that it currently is an unavoidable
part of the process, although it could be a point of improvement.
Multiple ideas on how to deal with this problem have been discussed. One being: using a
camera, e.g. on a phone, as a feedback mechanism to the Art-Net LED system, which will
attempt to auto-configure mapping. Marcus assignment in the development sprint, upon
undertaking this project, was to investigate this domain.
Solutions to the mapping-problem will also increase usability for new users and reduce com-
plexity of potentially complicated mappings.
CHAPTER 3. ART-NET LED SYSTEM
41
==PAGE:50==
Wireless features
Wireless control of the unit is a desirable feat, as it will allow for usage of the LED controller
in completely new ways, e.g. controlling the LED controller via a smart-phone rather than a
computer. This could make the system much more portable and lightweight. Especially stan-
dalone modes can be operated without computer. The unit may be controlled independently
of physical interaction (e.g. if the LED controller is in a hard to reach place.). Art-Net may
already be transmitted from a Resolume via WiFi. This WiFi interface could be matched.
Usability in setup
Marcus has narrated, that whenever the Art-Net LED system is rented out to client, he ex-
pects a call for assistance. Clients always have trouble setting up the equipment. Specifically,
whenever the IP-address must be configured on the Art-Net controller, it confuses the users.
This is an indicator, that the setup and the interface that could be more intuitive. Users
have nothing other that instructions by mouth. For Niels and Marcus, who have experience
in building the system, it is quite intuitive how to use it. This is not the case for anybody
else.
Amount of LEDs controlled with one LED controller
No official minimum requirement has been decided from Niels and Marcus.
Marcus has
suggested 2000 LED chips. At the Omega Festival event, 32 meters of LED bar was used,
the maximum capability of the version 1 controller. Assuming the amount of meters to be
controlled is the factor to consider, some logical deductions will be made, relating the new
LED type to the version 1 capabilities.
Considering the new WS2811 LED strip with 144 LEDs and 48 chips per meter: 2000 RGB
LED chips corresponds to 12 DMX universes of data.
(2000chips · 3(channels/chip))/512(channels/universe) = 12universes
12 universes is sufficient to control 41 meters of WS2811 LED strip.
(2000chips/48(chips/meter) = 41, 6meters
41 meters is more than the version 1 system handled at the Omega Festival. 41 meters is at
the right scale, because it has proven to sufficient for a stage like the one used at Omega Festi-
val. 41 meters is relatively low in terms of data processing, comparing with the STM32F103,
which can process 32. More is always better, but the proposed minimum requirement of
universes (12) and LED chips (2000) is accepted. More is always better. This minimum
requirement is supported by other arguments following below.
Building a stage setup is not always easiest using just one LED controller. According to
Marcus, using multiple LED controllers may allow the controllers be positioned closer to
CHAPTER 3. ART-NET LED SYSTEM
42
==PAGE:51==
each LED bar, rather than in the middle of all of them, as a compromise. It may intuitively
seem most desirable to have just one powerful LED controller, which can control all LEDs
in a given setup, but this also creates more of a mess with cables.
Sound reactivity
Sound reactivity is a common topic in the conversation about lighting systems for musical
events. It is a feature which, imaginably, is desirable as a standalone mode. Niels and Marcus
have expressed it as desirable, although no current need for it has been expressed.
DMX input
A DMX input will make it possible to control LED fixtures as a DMX fixture. It would bypass
the need for using Resolume, and allow fixtures to be used in a more traditional context by
DMX controllers.
Many different implementations can be imagined and constructed for
various purposes.
Reboot into working state
At Omega Festival, a short power-out in lighting equipment caused the version 1 LED con-
troller to reboot. The LED controller had changed its state after rebooting, and did not
return to its prior workmode. This is very inconvenient while the show was running. Ideally,
the product should prevent this, perhaps through some configuration setting. The actual
cause of the power-out was not identified.
3.7
Version 3: New hardware platform
When initiating this phase, the term ”hardware platform” is to replace ”micro-controller”,
because the range of potential hardware reaches beyond just micro-controllers.
The first step in making a revision of version 2 is to select a new piece of hardware, fit for the
intended tasks. The new hardware platform is to replace the current STM32F103. Technical
feasibility of version 3 is of the essence. While considering a new piece of hardware, we intend
to also consider the accompanying development environment. This approach is intended as
means to solve problems in both domains. A specification sheet summarises requirements
and criteria for a given solution in table 3.1.
3.8
Selecting hardware platform
For evaluating a hardware platform, a minimum of GPIO pins must be available for controllers
that must with hardware. The following pin usage estimation is based on version 2 and
internet research.
CHAPTER 3. ART-NET LED SYSTEM
43
==PAGE:52==
• Ethernet shield uses 5 GPIOs
• SD-card shield uses 4 GPIOs
• WiFi shield uses 3 GPIOs
• DMX shield uses 2 GPIOs
• PWM pins for outputting PWM 4-8 GPIOs
• A hardware interface uses 5 pins (screen and encoder)
This adds up to a total of 23-27.
CHAPTER 3. ART-NET LED SYSTEM
44
==PAGE:53==
Category
Requirement
Criteria
Comment
IDE
Improved debugging experience
compared to Arduino
File management system
Syntax highlighting & error de-
tection
Real-time error detection
Library manager
Linked syntax
Ease of develop-
ment
Rather a better development en-
vironment than price
Version history
File backup system
Preferably
the
cloud
for
file
sharing
Must be within range of skills of
developers
E.g. FPGA and custom Linux
are too far off skillset.
Community sup-
port
Active forums
Libraries
available
for
main
tasks
Collaboration
platform
Possibility of integrating with a
collaboration platform
Hardware devel-
opment
A board with more required
hardware extensions built-in is
preferable
Ethernet
PHY,
Bluetooth,
WiFi, boot-loader, logic gate.
Built-in bootloader
Must allow for adding hard-
ware extensions: RJ-45 Ether-
net input, DMX, WiFi, Blue-
tooth shield and hardware inter-
face
Estimated GPIO pins needed:
23 - 27
Flash memory
Must be able to store the entire
program to be developed
64kB
is
the
size
of
the
STM32F103.
For
future
potential
and
faster
develop-
ment, a 5 - 10 times more is
most likely needed.
Ability to pivot
Show potential in other scenar-
ios
Processor
Multitasking Art-net signal pro-
cessing with other tasks
Standalone
mode
Ability to control LEDs without
Art-net signal feed.
Various methods to do this
Use as debugging tool to check
connected fixtures
Art-net
Ability to control LEDs via Art-
net stream: Minimum 30 frames
per second
More is better
Resolume is limited to 40 frames
per second
Minimum 2000 LEDs.
(Re-
quirement is derived in Section
3.6)
More is better
Multiple LED controllers can in-
crease the total amount.
Functionality
System
must
be
integratable
with IoT technologies such as
WiFi or Bluetooth.
Adding
more
devices
to
the
same Art-net network
Price
Price of hardware must ulti-
mately be lower than the cost of
a Falcon board
The lower the price, the higher
the potential bottom line of in-
come.
Table 3.1: Specifications sheet for hardware and development environment
CHAPTER 3. ART-NET LED SYSTEM
45
==PAGE:54==
Investigating possible hardware
Investigation into potential hardware have spanned across four categories, Single board com-
puters, FPGA and micro-controllers. FPGA was ruled out relatively fast, and will be assessed
initially.
FPGA
FPGA 11 should be considered as possible solution, as these can be programmed to be highly
efficient at specific tasks. Their capabilities often surpass that micro-controllers. Although,
even for their potential as a board, this type of development is out of the skill range, and
currently would imply more work than most likely necessary. Additionally, they usually come
at a much higher price. [25]
Comparison parameters for single board computers and micro-controllers
A table overview, Figure 3.12, has been created as comparison tool for the found candidates.
A range of comparison categories has been selected, covering the relevant aspects from the
specifications table, in terms of hardware capability and community support:
• Price: Price of the processor and the selected development are listed.
• IDE: Name the available IDE. If multiple IDEs and languages are available, the one
with most features for the category will be used for comparison.
• Library support: Availability of key libraries for the design. GitHub is the primary
source of this research.
• Development board extensions: Development board hardware extensions already
built-in.
• Processor specifications: Processor capabilities and architecture: Amount of cores,
CPU frequency, flash memory, RAM and SRAM.
• Peripherals: Relevant GPIO peripherals and amounts.
• GitHub library popularity: Art-Net and LED related
A range of candidates have been found through research. They have been selected from a
handful of competing brands, in a relevant spectrum of capability - also bearing in mind,
that these candidates may be a part of family of both more and less capable sisters, that
could also be relevant to consider.
11Field Programmable Gate Array
CHAPTER 3. ART-NET LED SYSTEM
46
==PAGE:55==
Figure 3.12: Columns are micro-conroller boards and single board computers. See full size
in Appendix C
Single board computers
Single board computers are used as embedded computational devices in industrial systems as
they possess both computational power (CPU and GPU), GPIO pins, IoT capabilities, USB
inputs and more. They host an operating system and can be operated standalone, meaning
they do not need an external computer to program them. On the contrary, this is a part of
the price of the system, that it needs computational power to run the entire operating system.
Perks of the single board computers is that they have plentiful of GPIOs for interfacing with
hardware while already having established IoT capabilities, WiFi, USB and Ethernet, with-
out spending GPIO pins. These devices can be programmed on higher level languages (Java,
Python, C++, C# and more), play media, have multiple softwares running concurrently and
even host the interface via HDMI ports like a normal computer.
The downside is cost, low power efficiency compared to a micro-controller and lack of tim-
ing. A computer operating system keeps the CPU busy with activities, that may interrupt
a program running. This can cause trouble in scripts, so that the timing of GPIO activity
may be disrupted.
A search into this domain has revealed two possible candidates:
• Raspberry Pi
• BeagleBone
CHAPTER 3. ART-NET LED SYSTEM
47
==PAGE:56==
Raspberry Pi
The Raspberry Pi is a popular single board computer, as it can easily be programmed and
used for applications, requiring a central controlling unit.
It possesses the versatility of
a computer and GPU software, which makes it computationally capable for tasks such as:
video-processing, machine learning and running softwares, such as an internet browser, IDEs,
games and more. At the same time, it has GPIO pins that can be put to any kind of use, such
as: input/output data streams, sensor inputting, actuator control, connecting to peripheral
hardware. Combined, this is a very capable hardware platform as both an Art-net and IoT
device. It is more costly than micro-controllers, but has a lot of built-in capabilities, including
WiFi, data storage, Ethernet PHY and RJ-45 Ethernet socket.
BeagleBone
BeagleBone is a competitor to Raspberry Pi. Its hardware is open source. It is generally
more powerful computationally and in its IoT capabilties, but also slightly higher priced. It
can run both Linux and Android based operating systems. It only has 1 USB input. It has a
lot of built-in capabilities, including WiFi, data storage and Ethernet PHY. It has 69 digital
GPIOs, more than sufficient, as it includes most of the needed hardware capabilities.
There are plenty of ways to program this device. As it is a Linux computer, a lot of community
support exist is accessible for porting and customising to specific needs.[26]
Micro-controllers
Every application has specific requirements for a micro-controller. It may be easy to simply
want the most capable processor and the most peripheral connections for a given device
build, but are tonnes of available micro-controllers and different developers with various
specialities.
We are searching for a balanced fit, that will satisfy our Specifications for
development environment and new hardware. 3.1
• BluePill STM32F103C8T6
• Arduino Uno
• Arduino Mega
• ESP8266
• ESP32-DEVKITC-32UE
• Teensy
• Microchip PIC32MZ
• Nordic nRF52832 module
CHAPTER 3. ART-NET LED SYSTEM
48
==PAGE:57==
The BluePill STM32F103C8T6 is included for comparison purposes. It is a micro-controller
with very few hardware extensions. Instead it has a lot of GPIO pins, which makes it more
of a general purpose micro-controller with a good processor. It is very cheap. It has very
little flash memory for code.
Arduino UNO
The Arduino UNO is a popular micro-controller. It has a lot of community support as it is
based on the Arduino Framework. It scores low as a candidate for a LED controller project
due to low amounts of GPIO pins and a weak processor, running at 16MHz.
Arduino MEGA
The Arduino MEGA is a popular micro-controller. It has a lot of community support as it is
based on the Arduino Framework. In contrast to the Arduino UNO it has a large amount of
GPIO pins. It is a general purpose micro-controller which is ideal in many complex projects.
The MEGA has more SRAM but otherwise its processor is as cable as the Arduino UNO.
ESP8266
The ESP8266 is a popular microchip used in IoT devices. Its popularity is mainly due to
its price and built-in radio, which allows for Bluetooth and WiFi interfacing. A wide range
of boards are built with this processor, both from the official developers, named NodeMCU,
and from clones, as the hardware is open source. It has a 80MHz processor, which is much
more powerful compared to the 16MHz Arduino UNO and MEGA. It is comparable to the
STM32F103’s 72MHz processor. A notable advantage is the flash memory size of 4MB com-
pared with the STM32F103’s 64kB. This single feat would fix a central problem, that Niels
has run out of flash memory to continue his development. The downside to the ESP8266 is
that is has only 19 available GPIOs, some of which are only for limited usage, e.g.input only.
With the need to interface with hardware, 19 available pins seems little even though WiFi
and Bluetooth interface is already established.
The ESP8266 is programmable in two frameworks:
• ESP8266 RTOS SDK is the official development framework for the ESP8266 chip made
by Espressif systems.
• The Arduino framework is available for the ESP8266 microchip. This framework is a
C++ style.
The Arduino framework is more popular than the ESP8266 RTOS SDK judging by stars on
GitHub, 14,642 versus 2,927, and 10 times the mentions. This clearly indicates that the
Arduino framework has greater community and library support. The reason may be that the
Arduino framework spans across a wider range of boards.[27]
CHAPTER 3. ART-NET LED SYSTEM
49
==PAGE:58==
ESP32
The ESP32 is the big brother microchip to ESP8266. It comes with 2 cores, 160/240MHz
processor(depending on how cores are utilised), and more SRAM. It has 34 GPIO pins, some
of which are only for limited usage, as some pins are busy multiplexing internal tasks.[28]
The added pins are an important improvement to the ESP8266 for this project, as we might
have some headroom comparing to the estimated need of 23 - 27 pins. Additionally, WiFi
and Bluetooth is already readily available without costing pins.
The ESP32 is programmable in two frameworks:
• ESP-IDF is the official development framework made by Espressif systems.[29]
• The Arduino framework is available for the ESP8266 microchip. This framework is a
C++ style.
The advantage of ESP-IDF is that Espressif has a well documented guide to get started and
API reference and guides, covering seemingly all that is relevant to this project - even an
official guide to LED control with PWM. [29] The advantage of the Arduino framework is
the familiarity of the syntax, in which Niels and Marcus have developed version 2.
Both frameworks have RTOS built-in. This is how both cores may be utilised.
Teensy
PJRC is the developer of a range of microcontroller boards named Teensy. These controllers
are known for having fast processors. The recently released Teensy 4.0 runs at 600MHz.
Substantially faster than other controllers to be mentioned. This make them well suited for
real time signal processing (DSP), and they are often used in projects involving audio for that
reason. It has 40 GPIO pins which means plenty of possibilities for interfacing with hardware.
If processing speed and multi-tasking is a concern with other hardware, this micro-controller
could be the ideal solution. It is programmed in the Arduino framework.
PIC32MZ EF 2.0
The PIC32MZ EF 2.0 development board by Microchip is a very capable micro-controller,
with an enormous amount of GPIOs, ready for attaching Microchip produced shields. The
PIC32MZ processor runs at 200MHz, 3 times faster than the STM32F103 and should there-
fore be very sufficient for the tasks that the STM32F103 already handles rather fine. 2Mb
flash memory is also a substantial upgrade, ready to store lots HTML data. Both the devel-
opment board and the microprocessor comes at a high price. Compared with the ESP32, the
processor itself is 10 times as expensive, at 130DKK. Microchip is a reputable brand, known
for reliable hardware, support and good documentation. Espressif has only recently worked
up their reputation.
CHAPTER 3. ART-NET LED SYSTEM
50
==PAGE:59==
Microchip hardware is programmed in MPLAB Harmony V3 IDE in the MPLAB Harmony
software development framework. C++ style coding, yet different from Arduino. With Mi-
crochip, code is portable between different processors. Micro-controllers of different sizes will
all be compatible with code written for one another. A perk if one needs to adjust hardware
capabilities and pricing.
Summary
The most eminent of problems with the hardware is the size of flash memory, which is pre-
venting continuation of the design and build phase. It seems, for most of the considered
platforms, that this is not becoming an issue on-wards.
Single board computers provide a lot of utility, and compared to some micro-controllers, e.g.
the PIC32MZ EF 2.0, they come at a fair price. They have better multi-tasking capabilities
and most external components needed. They are popular development platforms. Most of
the features of the operating system is superficial. Compared with some promising micro-
controllers they are priced high.
The Arduino Uno lacks GPIOs (20) and has even less flash memory (32kB). The CPU runs
at 16MHz, one fifth of the STM32F103. The Arduino mega has more flash memory, five
times that of the STM32F103, but it may still be a limiting factor in the long run. Its CPU
is much slower that the STM32F103, and it is expected that performance of signal processing
and multitasking will be problematic in other than just isolated examples. This controller is
not ideal.
The Arduino Mega may have a surplus of GPIOs, but runs at the same speed as the Arduino
Uno processor. It is expected that performance of signal processing and multitasking will be
problematic in other than just isolated examples. This controller is not possible.
The Espressif chips are cheap and have built-in IoT capabilites. They have loads of flash
memory and good processors. They have fewer pins than other choices. The ESP8266 may
be too limited. The ESP32 seemingly have sufficient even considering that some GPIOs are
not fully available. The Arduino framework may be a downside if the development environ-
ment cannot be improved from the Arduino IDE, which has been deemed very inefficient
during this research. The ESP-IDF framework is potentially a good solution. The downside
of the ESP-IDF frameworks is that learning new syntax, new workflow and new IDE may
take a lot of time and none of Hackstage members have experience with this framework.
Although, Niels has expressed that learning a new development environment is not an issue.
This controller is a good candidate.
The Teensy micro-controller is a good candidate, but comes at a high cost. Capabilities can
not be doubted, as the processor is clearly the best in the range, and there is a surplus of
GPIOs. But this micro-controller is expected to be over the top, and thus not approximating
the actual needs of this project. It is worth keeping this board in memory, if future projects
may begin to require more processing power. The Arduino framework may be a benefit, as
syntax and existing code to some degree can be ported. The Arduino IDE may be a limita-
CHAPTER 3. ART-NET LED SYSTEM
51
==PAGE:60==
tion in improving the development environment. This controller is not fitting.
The PIC32MZ EF 2.0 development board by Microchip is a very capable micro-controller.
It is a fitting processor. There are more GPIO pins available than any other candidates.
There is no advantage in hardware development, comparing with ESP32 boards. Support
and available libraries for core tasks is less than Espressif controllers. Processors are a factor
10 more expensive - and this is without any hardware advantages. The framework is new,
and will require a lot of initial learning. This controller is fitting, but lacks several advantages
comparing with the ESP32.
Selection: ESP32
The ideal hardware in terms of hardware specifications seems to be the ESP32 chip. There
is plenty of pins available to interface with hardware. The processor is close to 4 times faster
than the STM32F103 depending on how its two cores are utilised. Two cores may be advan-
tageous, as we would like til multitask signal processing/PWM generation at the same time
we use IoT for communications. IoT features are built-in, which is an advantage, as we do
not need to include this when designing and producing external PCB. Additionally, built-in
IoT features is also a cost saving when buying external components.
The ESP32 has plenty of potential as a piece of hardware in both wired and wireless product
designs. It has good documentation, applying to both the Arduino framework and ESP-IDF
[29], and plentiful of available code libraries on GitHub to boost product development.
In terms of pricing, the ESP32 chip is good comparing with some other choices and their
capabilities. Price is much lower than a Falcon board[4], important to realise the project.
External components will add to the cost. It is not cheaper than the STM32F103 micro-
controller, but in version 2 a range of external components would be needed to bring it to
the same feature level, closing this gap to some degree.
The pressing issue is now, that the development environment has yet be improved, as it does
not meet criteria of the specification sheet 3.1. Two frameworks are available, of which the
Arduino is preferred due to popularity and prior experience. The framework will eventually
affect library support, documentation, example code, online guides and community activity
level, favouring the Arduino framework.
Development environment
What seems to be the second to most popular choice for programming in the Arduino frame-
work is the PlatformIO12 [30] cross platform source editor. It is a platform which can be
integrated into the Microsoft developed Visual Studio Code IDE, as an extension tool. It is
not an IDE in itself, but it provides a range of tools for embedded development [31] as an
extension tool:
12The most popular choice is the Arduino IDE.
CHAPTER 3. ART-NET LED SYSTEM
52
==PAGE:61==
• Compile C++ Arduino code
• Source code editor - necessary for writing and compiling code in a given programming
language.
• Serial monitor - used for communicating data to and from a serial connected micro-
controller. The serial monitor is a debug tool, a development tool and receives error
messages when code crashes.
• Terminal - the terminal provides feedback when build and upload tools are working.
Essentially, it is a debug tool for systems outside the micro-controller itself.
• Smart code completions - syntax and code writing assistance
• Library manager - browse and import libraries to the file system of a project.
• Board manager - browse, select and build for vast amount of boards available.
• syntax highlighting and code links
These above features allow PlatformIO to replace the Arduino IDE, and some of the points
are improvements. Capabilities of the Visual Studio Code host IDE remain intact, which will
be a substantial improvement to the uniquely simplified Arduino IDE. Visual Studio Code
is a popular IDE, which is free, works on all operating systems and lightweight. PlatformIO
brands itself as ”The most loved IDE solution for Microsoft Visual Studio Code” on its front
page. [31] We will make our own judgement and evaluation.
Visual Studio Code provides integration with the Git, a cloud based version history and file
backup system, being a solution for another core need in the development environment, the
collaboration platform.[32]
OLIMEX ESP32-Gateway
An additional discovery was made while evaluating micro-processors. While browsing for
ESP32’s to purchase for prototyping on the Danish electronics website elextra.dk, an ESP32
board designed by a Bulgarian electronics company Olimex was discovered. The board is
named ESP32-Gateway, and it is designed with some highly desired components. It comes
with an Ethernet PHY, a RJ45 Ethernet scoket, and it has a microSD card slot. According
to the specification sheet, this is a valued upgrade, because it lessens tasks in the hardware
build phase. The STM32F103 board had none of the required built-in features. This micro-
controller board has Ethernet, SD-card, 4MB flash and WiFi. The only remaining interface
is DMX, occupying just 2 pinouts. Simultaneously, this board is not equipped with any
undesired components, being important as the ESP32 is slightly limited with regard to GPIO.
The added features take up a number of GPIOs as expected, but the board still has 17 GPIO
pins available on the breakout board. Some of these pins are busy for internal activities,
but an estimated available pins amount is at least 8. This is not excessive, but worth the
attempt. 2 would go to DMX, 6 would go to PWM generation. [33]
CHAPTER 3. ART-NET LED SYSTEM
53
==PAGE:62==
Figure 3.13: The ESP32-gateway revision G board. On the left side of the board, hardware
may be attached to a row of pins.
The ESP32-Gateway makes prototyping easier and we can concentrate on software devel-
opment. The board is open source, and schematics are available online. If we must make
alterations, this is a possible approach to change the system in some way. This also opens the
possibility to produce the board rather than sourcing this board form a vendor, if necessary.
Although, pricing is rather good, 126DKK (16.95 Euro), if this means most of the hardware
development is pre-made. Niels has said that the STM32F103 board and their version 2
extensions also cost approximately 100DKK.
CHAPTER 3. ART-NET LED SYSTEM
54
==PAGE:63==
4
Evaluation: Selection of board
4.1
Niels
Evaluation meeting with Niels can be found in Section 5.9.
4.2
Marcus
Interview was conducted 3rd of November.
”This board has sufficient flash memory to continue development.”
Built-in IoT, WiFi and Bluetooth, show good prospects in terms of developing a fitting user
experience. Marcus mentions captive portal as a means for the user to not have to deal with
IP addresses which is a primary issue regarding usability.
The prospective of having 2 cores seem good.
Multi-core processing does not seem too
complicated, and theoretically one core can do Art-net processing while the other core han-
dles interface communication. This could bypass issues had with the single-core STM32F103.
The ESP32-Gateway board does not have a lot of pins available on the break-out board. 19
isn’t a lot, but on the other hand, the ESP32-Gateway already has SD card and Ethernet
connections established.
The ESP32 has much higher clock speed than the STM32F103 and, even though more pa-
rameters are involved, this is an indicator that we should be able to handle as many LEDs
or more than version 1 or 2.
Regarding community support, Marcus is intrigued by the fact that some available libraries
promises to control 4000 LEDs at 60Hz. This is more than enough in his opinion. If more is
needed, a second LED controller can be put to use.
Art-net libraries for ESP32 uses the FastLED library to buffer data and output PWM. Fas-
tLED only handles RGB. Marcus tends to have the opinion that RGB is just as fine. RGBW
tends to have more brightness, but newer RGB pixels have also increased brightness. White
55
==PAGE:64==
is seemingly not too important, but some testing could resolve this finally.
Marcus has thought of using ESP controllers before and is excited to get started.
CHAPTER 4. EVALUATION: SELECTION OF BOARD
56
==PAGE:65==
5
Prototyping
With the ESP32-Gateway micro-controller at hand, and the new development environment
PlatformIO via Visual Studio Code, a new project phase could initiate.
Throughout this phase of the project, a range of models and tools were used:
• Specification Table 3.1
• System map: Figure 5.4
• State machine diagram: Figure 5.5 and 5.14
• PERT chart: Appendix D
• Pins study of the ESP32-Gateway: Appendix E
• Protomap: Appendix F
• Prototyping planners: Appendix G
The purpose of the prototype is a proof of concept of the hardware and software selected in
Section 3.8. It is not expected that the outcome of the prototyping phase is a final version
of the LED controller. The making of the prototype explores a wide range of sub-systems to
gain an understanding of the benefits and disadvantages of potential techniques and technolo-
gies. Lastly, it tries to integrate them into one programme. The integration of sub-systems
is indented as a first iteration of the LED controller based on an ESP32. Outcomes will be
elaborated via models and tools. The prototype will be evaluated with Niels at the end of
the chapter in Section 5.9.
5.1
Setting up environment
Niels and I went through different setup-processes of the development environment. Gen-
erally, this process took about half a day to get up and running - although it would take
experience to get familiar with it. Programming in PlatformIO comes with some changes:
Functions must be declared before they are used, if functions are defined later in the script.
Arduino would survey an entire script for function definitions before running the script setup
57
==PAGE:66==
and loop.
The file Platformio.ini is auto generated with settings when a project is made. It resides in
the root directory for the project.
Figure 5.1: The root directory of a project in PlatformIO.
The file acts as programmable code of project settings and settings overview. E.g. the file
displays platform, serial monitor, baud rate, board manager, library manager and framework.
This file ensures that settings are applied exactly as they should, useful for instance when
sharing. If changes are made, e.g. a library is added, it will automatically be fetched from
the internet.
Additional finds throughout the prototyping phase was the build type = debug and mon-
itor filters = esp32 exeption decoder code lines for the Platformio.ini file. Together, they
make interpretations on crash messages received in the serial monitor, when a connected
ESP32 micro-controller crashes. This helps backtracing the issue, by sometimes pointing to
the location of the bug.
Figure 5.2
Some other advantages in the environment was discovered through use:
CHAPTER 5. PROTOTYPING
58
==PAGE:67==
• PlatformIO detects the COM port your board is connected to automatically.
• VS Code IntelliSense Auto-Completer. IntelliSense tries to guess what you want to
write, displaying the different possibilities and provides insight into the parameters
that a function expects on the fly.
• Multiple open tabs: you can have several code tabs open at once
• You can fold parts of the code to make it appear more compact when browsing.
• Add externally built tools.
• Zen Mode (very delightful).
• Visual layout is customizable.
• VS Code can compile HTML code, which has been used in developing the web server.
With increased experience using Visual Studio Code, the IDE tends to open op more possi-
bilities.
GitHub
Niels created our GitHub repository with the name Berliner1. This repository is shared
between Niels, Marcus and I. In here, we can look into each others work and also backup our
code in the cloud. Usually, GitHub is a platform which facilitates merging of coding work.
The GitHub has primarily worked as a version history system during the prototyping phase,
because mostly we have been merging code by transferring scripts to each other. Getting used
to Git has not been easy for us, but slowly we have been able to utilise more of its features.
Git integrates into the Visual Studio IDE, which allows us to browse version history and
switch between branches with only a few clicks of a button.
Figure 5.3: Branches.
My coding branches have been used to test new implementations and integrating systems -
building towards a final prototype. Niels’ coding branches have primarily been smaller scripts,
1Named after a type of pastry.
CHAPTER 5. PROTOTYPING
59
==PAGE:68==
testing performance in a more isolated environment. His contributions will be highlighted in
Section 5.5.
An evaluation of the development environment by Niels is found in Section 5.9.
5.2
Product features
In Section 3.4, the version 2 system map, Figure 3.7 was outlined. This map is the foundations
for a version 3 revision, seen in Figure 5.4 below.
Figure 5.4
From version 2, just a few additions have been made (although plenty of discussion and
iterations have been part of arriving at this system map). Notably wireless control has been
added as a substitute for a hardware interface. This topic will be discussed shortly below.
Ideally, user data would validate the reasoning through testing and analysis.
Wireless control signals
Wireless communication with the device is a feature with much future potential for the LED
controller:
• The LED controller may be configured via a web server from a phone on the stage
during mounting and installation. This is replacing the hardware interface. It is an
addition to using Ethernet.
• The LED controller will be easier to integrate in a light-weight or portable setup, where
fewer cables and less hardware is important.
• A phone may be used to initiate standalone modes.
• Future potential as a consumer oriented smart device based on Bluetooth communica-
tion.
CHAPTER 5. PROTOTYPING
60
==PAGE:69==
• Wireless control allow for embedding the system into constructions, where a physical
interface may be inconvenient.
Hardware interface
The benefit of a hardware interface is that the device may be controlled without wired or
wireless connections.
The hardware interface is also costly in terms of design and production.
A downside of
hardware interfaces is the attention they must give to the sensor inputs from buttons and
encoders.
Continuous sensing is necessary to interpret signals, being a costly computing
power.
Menu control
For the configurations menu, the following requirements apply:
• Must be able to change the mode of the device: standalone, art-net, DMX, OFF and
likely others.
• Must be able to configure IP settings, LED/fixture settings and Art-net settings (and
likely others).
• Must be able to save configurations for later use and emergency reboot.
• Must be able to display important information to the user.
• Must be able to be aesthetically customised.
State machine diagram
During Phase 1 the state machine diagram, Figure 5.5, was iterated. The outcome we strive
for, is a functioning iteration of the LED controller system and the state machine diagram is
produced as a goal setting tool. The system map for version 3, Figure 5.4, acted as input to
the state machine diagram. The diagram were made in a handful of iterations through feed-
back from Niels and by acquiring knowledge in the relevant domains through prototyping and
research. The upper lane Models for project overviewing and goal-setting in the protomap
(Appendix F)) both shows and dates iterations.
The state machine diagram serves as a development tool for a range of reasons:
• Agreeing on goals for the prototype.
• Describing how the prototype is tied together.
• Describing how it responds to events.
CHAPTER 5. PROTOTYPING
61
==PAGE:70==
• Anticipate coding structure
Short walk-though:
web server menu
The code is centred on the web server menu interface, which must constantly be available to
the user. This menu displays information and available functions to the user .
IP configuration
The intent with IP configuration settings is to have full control over the ESP32s connection
settings to a LAN network. This will allow a technician to implement the LED controller
in a network, that handles many other connections, without interference. It will allow for
multiple LED controllers to co-exist on a network. Multiple LED controllers with different IP
addresses may then become target for different data-streams. This is necessary for building
large systems, that require more LEDs than one LED controller can handle.
Configurations can be made to IP settings.
• IP
• Subnet mask
• Gateway
For applying settings, the system must save configurations and reboot the system.
Art-net configuration
Configurations can be made to Art-net settings.
• Change the amount of LEDs on output ports.
• How many LEDs per universe it expects (must correlate with Resolume Arena Art-Net
output)
• Start universe (must correlate with Resolume Arena Art-Net output)
• Which type of LED is to be outputted for (each chip has different protocol specifications,
e.g. order of diodes: RGB, GRB etc)
Display
Art-Net, SD, IP and Mode settings must be displayed to the user.
CHAPTER 5. PROTOTYPING
62
==PAGE:71==
Mode
Change the mode of the system, determining which methods are being used to control LEDs.
The goal of the prototype is to add the following modes:
• 0 = Off
• 1 = Art-net streaming
• 2 = DMX
• 3 = Standalone
• 4 = SD-card playback
• 5 = SD-card record
User connect
The user connects to the hosted web server by joining the LAN network and typing the IP
address of the device into his browser. The user will then access the interface in its current
state.
CHAPTER 5. PROTOTYPING
63
==PAGE:72==
Figure 5.5: State machine diagram. Figure 5.14 illustrates which states were successfully
prototyped.
CHAPTER 5. PROTOTYPING
64
==PAGE:73==
Some topics were new:
Resolume was a new software to work with. During the Omega Festival, useful knowledge
was picked up. Additionally, the official website Resolume.com provides a lot of useful knowl-
edge both as articles and as blog posts.
Art-net was a new protocol to work with. Gratefully, a lot of knowledge is available online
and a lot of libraries would carry a heavy load with regard til implementing Art-net related
features. Only, it was necessary to scout and evaluate a multitude of possibilities.
web server programming was a new topic as well. Front-end and back-end systems are
required for creating a functional user interface to the LED controller. This required getting
familiar with HTML, CSS and JavaScript code (for the web server) and an accompanying
back-end processing of incoming messages from a web server client.
Ethernet and IP was also a foreign topic, that was slowly introduced as prototyping pro-
gressed. An understanding terms and concepts was gradually developed.
Joining together a program of multiple sub-systems is hard, as it may be prone to internal
conflicts and increased complexity. There is a need for higher standard in code structure,
than what I have previously done.
5.3
Planning
According to initial planning in Section 1.6, the prototyping phase is expected to run for
8 weeks according to planning made in Section 1.6. As seen in the snip of the pert chart
5.6, Prototype HW platform core features, 8 weeks is the estimated time, occurring alongside
other tasks. At the time of making, the goals of the prototyping phase were far from known.
The prototyping phase and final learning objective Create a proof of concept on full or partial
system was weighted quite high in this project.
Figure 5.6
Task o related to a consumer oriented lighting system product, would be focused on devel-
opment of the Art-Net LED system instead.
CHAPTER 5. PROTOTYPING
65
==PAGE:74==
PERT chart
Along with an iteration of the state machine, Figure 5.5, a PERT chart was made. The
PERT chart gives an overview of tasks and how tasks are dependant on others. It can be
seen in full size in Appendix D.
The duration of each task has been estimated. Dependency and duration ends up being the
determining factor for how the project must progress. The PERT chart is made in rough
correspondence to prototyping planners, highlighted by icons, as defined in Figure 5.10 and
protomap.
This PERT chart divides the project into four phases.
• Phase 1 A back-traced overview2 of the central process of the preceding 4 weeks:
Setting up development environment and getting experience with core systems.
• Phase 2 Prototype Art-net processing capabilities: Art-net stream based on Ethernet,
recording and playback
• Phase 3 Prototyping interface: Display information, alter layout, communicate with
back-end and build state machine.
• Phase 4 Combine the Phase 2 and Phase 3 branches. Ensure that the state machine
works as intended, and that code will not crash during use.
Figure 5.7
The phases of the project defined in the PERT chart are also visible in the protomap; they
are inserted to mark roughly the end of the phase.
Presumed future work as estimated in the making of the PERT chart includes:
2Nontraditional for this method, phase 1, was made in retrospect, in order to add more context; specif-
ically highlight areas of experience before the subsequent phases 2, 3 and 4).
CHAPTER 5. PROTOTYPING
66
==PAGE:75==
• Finding/developing tool for discovering IP devices on network - presumed needed in
user journey.
• Testing of multiple working ESP devices on the network.
• Define user journey through user research.
• DMX.
• Saving configuration in persistent memory.3
Prototyping planner
Prototyping planners are created for planning prototypes and presenting results hereof. Each
planner contains the following sections: Idea, Purpose, Expected outcome, Goal, Test plan,
Work presentation, Results, Insights and actions and Evaluation. Together, they constitute
the some of the overarching prototypes conducted during this project phase. The prototyping
planners help structure a process before undertaking the task, and it is a tool for post-
evaluation of the results. Ideally, from an ended prototype, if there are any future actions to
be taken, a new prototyping planner can be formulated. The prototyping planners also serve
as a documentation tool, that extend the writings of the report. Along with the protomap,
they will express the bulk of the prototyping work. Their outcome will be shortly summarised
in the Goals reached section. A total of six are created and completed during this prototyping
phase, see in Appendix G. Each one of these dissect a section of the state machine diagram,
making it a task to be prototyped. Together, they constitute the overarching prototypes
conducted during this project phase. They are:
• Ethernet connection
• web server front-end and back-end. Control and display.
• Art-net signal processing
• Art-net recording and playback
• Saving configurations
• Configuring IP address: front-end and back-end
5.4
Protomap
The protomap is a documentation technique for projects. The map based on a swim-lane
diagram format. A node in a swim-lane diagram represents an event and an edge illustrate
its relationship with other events. Nodes are built from icons, text fields, pictures, figures
and arrows.
3This feature did become part of the prototype.
CHAPTER 5. PROTOTYPING
67
==PAGE:76==
Figure 5.8
The horizontal axis of the protomap represents time, sectioned into intervals by blue vertical
lines. The top swim-lane dates a given interval interval. The first interval is approximately
4 weeks, corresponding to Phase 1. The subsequent intervals are sectioned into weeks, not
particularly fitting any phases. The vertical axis contains swim-lanes in which a particular
system progresses. The swim-lanes are:
• Models for project over-viewing and goal-setting
• Integrated concept
• Physical prototype
• Art-net
• Internet connection (LAN)
• Multi core processing
• SD card
• LED control
• Code structure
• Resolume Arena
• pinout study4
4Knowledge of GPIO availability on the ESP32-Gateway progressed iteratively, impacting some systems.
CHAPTER 5. PROTOTYPING
68
==PAGE:77==
• State machine
• Standalone mode
• Record and playback of Art-net
• Multiple art-net receivers on the network
• DMX
The model shows how each sub-system progresses, and how they are interconnected. Upon
discovery and progress in one system, it may have cascading effects and decisions made in
other subsystems.
The protomap is seen in full size in the Appendix F.
Figure 5.9: This picture is a section of the protomap.
In some sense, the protomap will only be an approximation of reality. With too little or too
much resolution it may loose its communicative value. This protomap has been created with
abundant text, so it should be a self explanatory project log. If a higher resolution is needed,
looking directly into the code5 or the GitHub repository can increase resolution.
A range of icons have been used to tag nodes in the protomap:
5Coding has by far been the primary task.
CHAPTER 5. PROTOTYPING
69
==PAGE:78==
Figure 5.10: Icons can also be found in the full protomap.
• The prototyping planner icon corresponds to planners that are completed.
• System wide implementation highlights if a concept is applied generally to the
system. This may omit the need for drawing an edge to multiple nodes.
• User testing desirability testing.
• Coding work.
• Physical model work implies tasks with hardware, such as making connections sol-
dering and building circuits.
• Tests are either described in prototyping planners or described in the node.
• Eliminated concept/branch highlights a concept which was either terminated or
changed for a different concept/technology.
• Failed event highlights a concept/technology which had errors.
• Input from collaborator highlights work that was not done by me. A given node
will elaborate.
• Phase convergence of 1, 2 , 3 and 4 points to the end of that phase.
• Edges. An edge associated with a yellow node, it inherits that colour.
Three types of nodes exist. The black outline is an event describing a concept which was
developed or explored. Yellow is an event describing theory research on a topic which was
relevant to resolve some issues. Blue nodes indicates future work.
5.5
Collaboration
In a practical sense, Niels has assisted in testing code on his system, especially related to
establishing Ethernet connection and testing Art-Net capabilities. These topics caused most
trouble during development. Collaboration revealed differences in our system, a source of
complexity and bugs which was only discoverable without collaboration. Niels and Marcus
assisted in goal setting via feedback on the state machine diagram iterations. Niels’ inputs
to the code are highlighted with the green arrow icon in the protomap. Marcus have not
participated in coding. The development processes is evaluated with Niels in Section 5.9.
CHAPTER 5. PROTOTYPING
70
==PAGE:79==
The developer, hpwit, of the primary Art-net library used in prototyping, has provided direct
feedback through mail correspondence and via an issue on GitHub[34]6. His assistance was
related to transferring of his Art-net code from WiFi to Ethernet and the issues related to
that. His input will be highlighted with the green arrow icon in the protomap.
5.6
The prototype: Goals reached
The goal was to prototype the state machine diagram according to 5.5. A total of six pro-
totyping planners summarises the outcome of individual sub systems. These can be found
in the Appendix G. Additionally, intermediary development steps can be studied in the
protomap. Most of the achievement since the selection of the ESP32-Gateway board, have
been in code.
During prototyping many different scenarios have been built, which can be inspected via the
Integrated concept lane in the protomap. A scenario can be seen in Figure 5.11.
Figure 5.11: The prototype in an overview.
The ESP32 integrates a multitude of subsystems and updates pixel LEDs according to Art-
Net signal emitted from Resolume. Figure 5.12 illustrates this process on an 8x8 WS2812
LED matrix.
6The dialog is publicly available. My developer name is McAleerElk on GitHub.
CHAPTER 5. PROTOTYPING
71
==PAGE:80==
Figure 5.12: The prototype.
Even with a matrix of 64 LEDs, emitting PWM signal for 1000 LEDs can still be emulated,
only the 64th LED will pass on the PWM signal into nothing. Up-scaling the prototype will
be a part of the preparation for a demonstration during the oral defence.
CHAPTER 5. PROTOTYPING
72
==PAGE:81==
Figure 5.13: Up-scaling.
A state machine diagram that highlights which systems were successfully implemented during
the prototyping phase can be seen in Figure 5.14.
CHAPTER 5. PROTOTYPING
73
==PAGE:82==
Figure 5.14: The prototyped systems are blue.
CHAPTER 5. PROTOTYPING
74
==PAGE:83==
A summary of the outcomes will be elaborated in the following sections. Some relate directly
to prototyping planners, some do not.
Files
artnetStream(.h & .cpp)
This file deals with Art-Net functions: setup, record, playback and stream
main(.cpp)
This file calls setup functions from other files. It calls some functions that will read saved
configurations. It contains the main loop function.
pixel(.h & .cpp)
This file initialises the FastLED objects which is used to define the amount of LEDs per
output. It also contains standalone features, such as HSV7 control.
sd card(.h & .cpp)
This card initialises the SD-card, to be used for recording.
WebServerSetup(.h & .cpp)
This file initialises the LAN connection via Ethernet and the server. It processes all incoming
messages from the client and responds accordingly.
preferences(.h & .cpp)
This file defies functions for saving data to EEPROM.
HTML CSS JS(.h)
This file contains one string (a total of 638 lines of code) which specifies the web server
(consisting of css code, HTML code and JavaScript code). This string is sent to the client
when a connection is made, so the client may build the web page from these specifications.
Physical build
Physical builds mostly consists of making simple connections between devices, as seen below,
5.15. Some intermediary physical prototypes, as well as preparation for the oral defence, can
be studied in the protomap.
7HSV stands for hue, saturation and value. These tree constants are 8-bit integers inside the program,
that specify the Colour of the LEDs. Hue is colour, saturation is white-blend, and value is light intensity
CHAPTER 5. PROTOTYPING
75
==PAGE:84==
Figure 5.15
Figure 5.16: The ESP32-Gateway board is connected via Ethernet to a computer. A
router may allow using DHCP, and can put multiple ESP32s on the network.
Ethernet connection (planner)
The Ethernet connection to the LAN network is supposed to allow data transfer between
a computer running Resolume Arena (or similar) and the LED controller. The following
scenarios have been achieved:
• The ESP32-Gateway becomes a server by hosting a web server interface for connecting
clients.
• Transfer configuration messages (button clicks, strings and other) from computer (client)
to the ESP back-end.
• Update data on the web server for client monitoring of the system.
• Streaming of approximately 1500 LEDs worth of Art-net to the ESP32-gateway.
• Art-Net streaming, web server hosting and server-client communication occurring con-
currently.
• The ESP32 may create a SoftAP8 making the hosted web server interface accessible for
any wireless device with a browser.
The code manages to sustain connection while streaming Art-net and hosting web server.
The connection is stable, reconnects if the signal is dropped and response swift when inter-
acting with the hosted web server.
The Ethernet connection can be established between a computer and the ESP32 both using
DHCP and static IP, allowing for usage in multiple scenarios. Usability studies shall decide
which is preferable. A bug related to the Ethernet connection via static IP, is currently solved
by re-inserting the Ethernet cable. This makes the ESP make the final connection step. Not
elegant, but it is presumed to be a minor issue.
8SoftAP is an abbreviated term for ”software enabled access point”. This is software enabling a computer
which hasn’t been specifically made to be a router into a wireless access point. [35]
CHAPTER 5. PROTOTYPING
76
==PAGE:85==
web server front-end and back-end: Control and display. (planner)
A web server is created with a code example ESP32 WebPage [36] built by the developer
KrisKasprzak on GitHub. A legal assessment of this code usage can be found in Section
5.7. Reverse engineering of the code revealed a system with the necessary aptitude for our
purposes. The system integrates the following mechanisms:
• HTML code to generate elements in the user interface
• CSS code to style elements in the user interface
• JavaScript code to: 1. process data related to HTML front end elements (like sending
data to the ESP32 as strings), and 2. process incoming data from the ESP32.
• C++ call-back functions9 that are activated in the ESP32 back-end code, when strings
are sent from the client. These functions become the interface between the client and
the ESP32, and can be programmed to do any desired actions.
• A c++ function must be called continuously in the system main loop, in order to check
for any strings from the web server.
The web server can be hosted via both a WiFi and Ethernet LAN connection. Users ex-
perience no signal delays when interacting with the interface. Dropouts may be experienced
during low WiFi signal strength, and the user will experience irregular delays because of this.
The web server front-end and back-end code is seemingly a highly functional foundation for
continuous development.
XML10 is easy to work with, and is an efficient and standardised code structure for sending
data between computers. During message transfers, there was never any perceivable inter-
ference while art-net streaming occurred.
JSON11 is a widely used format for sending data in IoT devices, and was implemented as a
method to receive strings from the client. Strings are received in the ESP32 back-end with
the arduinoJSON library [38], which will reformat a string to an object that can be indexted
for retrieving data. For more about ArduinoJSON, see the Configuring IP address: front-end
and back-end -prototyping planner or the protomap.
The front-end HTML code has plentiful of styling options with CSS and HTML in the hands
of a skilled person. Some styling of the elements have been implemented, like fonts, buttons
colour and rounded edge. Some are still inherited from the original code by KrisKasprzak.
9The call-back functions are sometimes called .on functions as this refers to their syntax style in the c++
code on the ESP32.
10Extensible Markup Language (XML) is a markup language and file format for storing, transmitting,
and reconstructing arbitrary data. It defines a set of rules for encoding documents in a format that is both
human-readable and machine-readable.[37]
11JSON is short for JavaScript Object Notation. It is a text-based format for representing structured data,
and used in many systems.
CHAPTER 5. PROTOTYPING
77
==PAGE:86==
Figure 5.17: The prototype interface.
Art-net signal processing & Art-net recording and playback (two
planners)
The library ArtnetESP32 [39] by the developer hpwit was a promising solution to our LED
controller, due to its proclaimed usage of multiple processing cores, Art-Net processing ca-
pabilities, while the library also boast examples for recording and playback to SD card. The
library is successfully implemented as the state machine diagram directs. The logic allows
for changing modes fluently, with the click of mode-buttons in the user interface, as seen in
Figure 5.17:
• The Artnet button will initiate Art-Net processing on incoming data on the network.
The library will generate a PWM output signal specified by LED settings and the
CHAPTER 5. PROTOTYPING
78
==PAGE:87==
Art-Net itself
• The Record button will, process the data by converting it to a binary data stream,
but in stead of generating PWM, it will be loaded onto the SD card. The time in
milliseconds between each incoming frame, is also stored, to be utilised the playback
code.
• The Playback button will index the file created with the Record function.
It will
playback the sequence, and loop once it reaches the end.
To achieve the functioning logic, a switch statement in the main loop functions was utilised
as well as a .on callback function. This will be elaborated in Section 5.6.
Implementation was never fully successful in terms of performance. With the time available,
we did not manage to fully analyse the issues or fix them. hpwit has claimed he can process
6000LEDs. To replicate this we may need to use more outputs, than we have available, but
still, we have not succeeded in replicating this proclaimed performance, which would have
been satisfactory according to our specification in Table 3.1.
• Streaming is limited to approximately 1500 LEDs.
Our requirement is minimum
2000LEDs according to table 3.1.
• Playback of Art-Net recording is not smooth.
Although the issues are unresolved, we have three proposals to why the issues occur:
• For recording and playback, SD-card write and read speed is the most obvious bottle-
neck according to hpwit. This remains to be tested, with a SD-card read and write
speed test and testing with SD-cards of various quality. Our prototype is built with a
cheap and likely low quality SD card.
• Some low level Ethernet configurations on the ESP32 may need optimising. See proto-
typing planners in Appendix G for more info.
• The WS2811 LED chip is slow and clock-less. When generating PWM, all other system
activities and interrupts must be disabled on that core, to update the entire LED array
with a new frame. The more LEDs in one chain, the more time for PWM generation
is needed12. hpwit’s library actually takes this into account: one core generates PWM
while the other processes incoming Art-Net. Yet, this complexity of multitasking is
suspected as cause error. [20]
According to UDP testing on my system, signal bandwidth is sufficient to sustain between
4.777 LEDs and 70.000 thousand 3 channel LEDs. This is in direct conflict with results made
on Niels system. We use different computers, but we have tested with exactly the same code
and get different results. My results are rather dramatic and suspicious, as the data rate
spans over a factor of 10. The source of this UDP test script [40] states that it is ”rather
rough”.
121024 WS2812B LEDs spoken to at 800 kHz will give you 30 FPS. Any more will lower the effective
framerate.[20]
CHAPTER 5. PROTOTYPING
79
==PAGE:88==
Saving configurations (planner)
The Preference.h library, written for Arduino is used read and write data to EEPROM13.
Data saved to EEPROM during runtime is available even after removing the power source
to the ESP32-gateway. Data is saved in the format of namespaces, containing key-value
pairs. Key-value pairs is a common means for indexing data. Figure 5.19 shows namespace
variables used in the prototype.
Figure 5.18: A namespace.
Figure 5.19: HSV and IP namespaces
in the prototype.
This feature is utilised for saving configurations. Functions have been created as an abstrac-
tion layer to the Preference.h library, seen in Figure 5.20. The functions interface with the
namespaces created for the implemented systems.
Figure 5.20: Functions to read and write to EEPROM via Preference.h library
The prototype is rather rough, but works as intended. EEPROM is proved to be a functional
solution.
13EEPROM stands for electrically erasable programmable read-only memory and is a type of non-volatile
memory used in computers and microcontrollers to store relatively small amounts of data by allowing indi-
vidual bytes to be erased and reprogrammed.[41]
CHAPTER 5. PROTOTYPING
80
==PAGE:89==
The ESP32 has 512 bytes of EEPROM which is rather little data. Although, only little data
needs to be stored. One IP address is 4x1 bytes. HSV values, each one byte, are 3 bytes. 505
bytes are still available after implementing these features in the ESP32. Not even 10 percent
of EEPROM is assumed to be used if the entire state machine diagram prototype was to be
completed.
Prospects of using SD card for data storage
The SD card is an alternative to EEPROM, as a type of memory which will persist if power
is lost. This domain could be useful to use in other scenarios, for instance: Make all your
configurations on a computer, load them to the SD card, and the ESP32 will boot in a
customised state. Also, such a custom state could be shared amongst users, along with art-
net recordings and other data if desirable. With future prototype and usability tests this
could be added.
Configuring IP address: front-end and back-end (planner)
Saving IP configurations has a range of challenges in addition to storing data in non-volatile
memory, described in the Saving configurations prototyping planner. It utilises a long series
of systems to work. The challenges are:
• The user must be able to type the intended IP address into the web server front-end.
• This data must be sent from the client to the back-end.
• The back-end must receive the data.
• The back-end must check it is valid for its purpose, e.g. be an integer between 0 and
255.
• The back-end must save the data to EEPROM.
• ESP32 must reboot, and load in new IP from EEPROM, before connecting to Ethernet.
Figure 5.21: The interface for making IP configuration.
CHAPTER 5. PROTOTYPING
81
==PAGE:90==
A solution to the challenges have been prototyped - the front-end is seen in Figure 5.21 Typing
the IP address into the web server front-end is achieved with a HTML forms element. The
forms element is attached to a button, the Save IP preferences. When clicked, a function
in JavaScript is triggered and it takes the typed data as input. The function ensures that
the data is an integer before sending the data to the back-end. The library arduinoJSON
is used to receive the integers and store them in the doc buffer. From the buffer, we can
check if the values are correct, and save it to EEPROM in a controlled manner manner. The
back-end code is seen in Figure 5.22. Lastly, to change to the IP setting that was saved, the
user must click the buttonStored IP. This button will reboot the ESP32 and boot with the
new settings. The green button will return the ESP32 to its original, hard-coded IP address.
More on this topic can be found in prototyping planners and the protomap.
Figure 5.22
IP connection settings consist of: IP, Subnet and Gateway addresses. Although, this code
will only allow the ESP32 to change the IP address. The technique that has been prototyped
can be replicated for Subnet and Gateway addresses. In a final implementation this is nec-
essary.
CHAPTER 5. PROTOTYPING
82
==PAGE:91==
Configuring Art-Net
As seen in the Figure 5.14, Art-Net configuration has not been prototyped. Although, it is
expected that technologies used in the prototyping of IP configuration can be applied to this
domain:
• A front-end interface will allow the user to type data into forms and click buttons
• A back-end function will receive the data from the client.
• The system can initiate a reboot (if even necessary) so the system can apply new
settings.
A low fidelity placeholder was implemented in the front-end user interface.
Figure 5.23: Art-Net configuration
Other: Setup and main loop
A setup function initialises all systems: Ethernet, SD card, LED outputs, Art-net and system
preferences, as seen in Figure 5.24. Debug messages will communicate if a system is initialised
correctly to a PC that is serially connected to the ESP32. Debug messages will tell if the
system is booted with preferences.
Figure 5.24
Subsequent to the setup function, the main loop keeps systems running.
The HandleClient monitors the presence of a client attempting to access the web server, and
delivers the web server code to clients. It must be called constantly for keeping the server
responsive.
CHAPTER 5. PROTOTYPING
83
==PAGE:92==
Figure 5.25
The stateMachine() function is a switch case containing functions to be called repeatedly
depending on which button was pressed in the web server (Seen in Figure 5.26). E.g. it will
call the Art-Net processing functions, that will repeatedly process incoming Art-Net frames
if the Artnet button is pressed.
Figure 5.26
The ESP32 can jump freely between actions due to an interplay of the stateMachine() func-
tion and the .on callback function named ModeFunction(). The ModeFunction() terminates
and initiates prior actions (if necessary), before switching to a new state in stateMachine().
E.g. for Art-net recording, a file must be opened before the recording functions may begin.
Pin availability table
Deciphering the purpose and availability of the pins on the ESP-32 Gateway revision G
board was a continuous struggle, and as work progressed, so did knowledge of their usage.
The protomap has a dedicated lane which illustrates how pin availability related to some
problems, and how acquired knowledge would lead to subsequent solutions. Initially the
ESP32-Gateway board appeared to have a lot of pins available, but the ones accessible on
the surface, as seen in Figure 3.13, are not strictly free to use. The full pin availability table
can be found in Appendix E.
5.7
Libraries in use and legal assessment
Libraries in use, and their license sources are listed below:
• ArduinoJSON on ArduinoJSON.org by bblanchon - MIT license [42]
• ArtnetESP32 on GitHub by hpwit - MIT license [43]
• FastLED on GitHub by FastLED - MIT license [44]
CHAPTER 5. PROTOTYPING
84
==PAGE:93==
• Preferences on GitHub by espressif - LGPL-2.1 license [45]
• SD MMC on GitHub by espressif - LGPL-2.1 license [45]
• ETH on GitHub by esperssif - LGPL-2.1 license [45]
Other code being used in the code, which is not a library:
• ESP32 WebPage on GitHuB by KrisKasprzak - No licensing attached
The ESP32 WebPage is used as programming inspiration. The code is modified in most areas,
but still utilises the original programming technologies. The developer KrisKasprzak was
contacted, as no licensing was stated. The response was:
”It was my intention that people can use this code for any user, provided I’m not held liable
in any way. I have just added the standard MIT license to the source code which grants you
usage.” - mail was received 26th of January 2023
MIT License
The MIT license is a short and simple permissive license with conditions only requiring preser-
vation of copyright and license notices. Licensed works, modifications, and larger works may
be distributed under different terms and without source code. [46] In short, this means that
the code can be used for proprietary software.
Permissions:
• Commercial use
• Modification
• Distribution
• Private use
Limitations:
• Liability
• Warranty
Conditions:
• License and copyright notice
CHAPTER 5. PROTOTYPING
85
==PAGE:94==
GNU Lesser General Public License v2.1 (LGPL-2.1 license)
Primarily used for software libraries, the GNU LGPL requires that derived works be licensed
under the same license, but works that only link to it do not fall under this restriction. There
are two commonly used versions of the GNU LGPL. The LGPL License (both versions) al-
lows users of the licensed code to use the code commercially. [47]
Permissions:
• Commercial use
• Modification
• Distribution
• Private use
Limitations:
• Liability
• Warranty
Conditions:
• License and copyright notice
• Disclose source
• State changes
• Same license (library)
License conclusion
No restrictions seems to hinder product development of an Art-Net LED controller based
on the code and libraries utilised so far, as the software may be used commercially, and the
software be proprietary. This is especially true, as the LED controller is a hardware product,
so even if code has to become open source, it would have little impact on the economic model
of the product itself.
Both the MIT license and LGPL-2.1 license are so called Copyleft licenses, meaning that
derived software must inherit the same licenses.
5.8
Future work
Future work is also indicated in the protomap and in prototyping planners.
CHAPTER 5. PROTOTYPING
86
==PAGE:95==
Bluetooth
It is important to prototype the Bluetooth capabilities of the ESP32. We want to know what
the prospects are in regard to using this technology. Can it be used to send wireless control
messages, as the system map suggests 5.4? How well does this technology integrate with
other systems being handled on the ESP32?
DMX
DMX, as seen on the protomap, has not yet been prototyped. Inputting DMX should occupy
just one GPIO pin.
Outputting DMX should occupy just one GPIO pin.
Prototyping
integration with the existing code has yet to be explored. The DMX button in the Figure 5.26
is currently just a placeholder.
Art-net stream & Art-net recording and playback
Art-net stream must be investigated by, perhaps, several means in order to find and solve
issues preventing us from reaching our performance requirement. Potential sources of errors
have been detected, being a target for future work. An unknown difference between Niels’
and my coding environment has complicated debugging and collaboration on the matter.
For recording and playback, the SD card is suspected as begin the bottle neck as well as the
Ethernet data transmission.
More tests with recording and playback should happen in a controlled environment, for us
to locate possible issues:
• Reduce overhead and complexity - do not host web server code while trying to improve
performance.
• Try recording with a much better SD card and compare results to our current, laggy
performance. Invent a test-method, e.g. using high speed camera.
• Try making tests based on WiFi instead of Ethernet. Will this change performance?
• Change IDE (has given different results before, as it changes framework)
• Try regular SD card connection instead of the slower SD-MMC implementation!
• Try both using DHCP and using static IP address.
• Try speed limiting to 10MB/s (as recommended by hpwit) and 100MB/s
This search may continue if none of the above bullet points can help resolve the issue. If this
issue cannot be dealt with, we can try the ESP-IDF framework by Espressif, the developers
of the ESP32. With their framework and IDE, it should be easier to make low level changes
to settings e.g. settings regarding Ethernet.
CHAPTER 5. PROTOTYPING
87
==PAGE:96==
Additionally, we should perform an SD card speed test to see how many universes we can
theoretically be recording. Compare SD card write-speed and the data rate of x numbers of
Art-net universes. 2000 RGB LEDs require 12 Art-net universes. This is equivalent to 1,5
MB/s, assuming 30 frames per second, which we need to write to the SD card.
12universes ∗512channels ∗8bytes ∗30framesH1, 5MB/s
Our requirements specifications, defined in Table 3.1, can be updated with this new trans-
fer speed value. A minimum of 1,5 MB/s Ethernet speed and SD card read and write speed
is necessary. Future prototyping should focus on problem solving these base performances.
Usability
A range of issues have been located in the usability domain, for version 1 LED controler in
Section 3.6. So far, prototyping have solely focused on the feasibility of the ESP32-Gateway
controller. Defining the user journey is an important step in finalising the Art-Net LED
system as a commercial product. Usability studies shall be used as input for designing the
final product. Feasibility studies have concluded that there should be a multitude of ways to
redesign the user journey.
Web server style
Styling of the web server user interface should be coupled with usability. But additionally it
can be used to express Hackstage’s brand values. HTML and CSS have proven versatile in
regard to this.
Testing LEDs
Multiple parameters make up the qualities of pixel LEDs:
• Amount of LEDs in one pixel (RGB or RGBW)
• Amount of pixels per chip.
• Overall brightness in the pixel
• Pixel pitch of the strip (amount per meter)
• The speed of each pixel
• How many LEDs per pixel chip (how many pixels operate as one)
• The price of a given type
Experimentation with different kinds shall ideally determine which qualities are best suited
for the intended use.
CHAPTER 5. PROTOTYPING
88
==PAGE:97==
5.9
Evaluation of the project by Niels
Niels was interviewed as means to evaluate work done in this project. A question sheet was
prepared for this interview, seen in Section H and it was divided into topics.
Visual Studio Code
The IDE works good. Niels is satisfied with the fact that the IDE is up to current standards.
Clicking through the code gets you into various layers of the program, useful for development.
It is an advantage that Git is built into the IDE, making it easy to collaborate on code - even
though we never did any actual code merging.
Niels refers to MPLAB, the IDE which is used to program Microchip microprocessors. This
IDE has an actual debug-function where the programmer can step through code, making it
easier to locate bugs causeing crashes.
The live error finder makes it much easier to locate errors, according to Niels. Rather than
having to compile code for discovering obvious syntax errors.
PlatformIO
Platform IO has been working nicely. Platform IO was also easy both to setup and control
things like writing code for utilising two cores.
Although, Niels has experienced in some way that the Arduino framework is not the official
framework for the ESP32 chip. He has studied ESP-IDF, and ESP-IDF seems to have more
and easier control of the lower levels. ESP-IDF IDE has an interface for setting low level
registers that determine behaviour. Perhaps you still can do such low level things via the
Arduino framework- but we have yet to discover that.
In Arduino you have to dig into low level files and search for parameters determining this
behaviour.
ESP32 microchip
The ESP32 comes at a very good price, it has many useful peripherals and it is fast. It has
a large amount of flash memory, and the two cores. You get a lot for your money. On paper
it has everything and is the ideal platform. The question is just if it can satisfy the require-
ments we have for data transmission speed and SD-card write speed. Maybe the ESP-IDF
framework can help us solve and verify the issues we have been having with SD-card writing
and Ethernet.
The Bluetooth and WiFi capabilities are really good. They give many pissibilities for new
scenarios like setting up the device via a mobilephone and aan app. The radio is important.
CHAPTER 5. PROTOTYPING
89
==PAGE:98==
Downsides
The ESP32 does not have a lot of pinouts available for extra tasks. This is a downside. It
may even be a hinder for future designs. E.g. we do currently not have enough pins for
implementing a screen as i seems. Perhaps the ESP32 is available in a larger size with more
pinouts in some form. That could be useful. More pins could also solve the problem with
SD-card speed, instead of relying on a one-pin data connection.
Community for the ESP32 chip
Niels was especially surprised that there was very little support on making Ethernet connec-
tions for the ESP. Niels says he supposes that it is because most users of ESP32’s will utilise
the WiFi features instead. In Niels’ opinion, we were lacking some resources in regard to
that. We have had to dig very deep in this topic, ask on the Olimex forum and more.
ESP32-Gateway board
Niels thinks this board is a good design, with the downside of its available pin-amount.
It has quite bad documentation at times. It was confusing processing getting used to this
board. Niels says:
”Why are pins set up like booby traps?? Why are pins available on the outside of the board,
when they are mostly busy with internal activities? This has been a little frustrating.”
Inside platformIO it is quite hard to know how peripherals are used and which are available.
This part is not really well integrated, Niels thinks.
The extensions that the ESP32-Gateway board came with were awesome. SD card and Eth-
ernet was what we wanted. But developing the software to make them run was not easy. But
the SD card worked quite easily - if it turns out to be sufficient with one-pin connection.
Spending more money on a piece of hardware may be necessary when working with real time
processing of data if we cannot get the system up and running better. This could be justified
in our design.
Development process
”I think it is really good that we have been doing this extensive feasibility study - and in reality
we did not spend too much time on it yet.”
The proces has been good. There are always things that can be better, but it is hard to
know those things in advance. A lot of things can fail. Deep research is important, and it
comes free, comparing to spending too much time in development.
CHAPTER 5. PROTOTYPING
90
==PAGE:99==
”I have learned in the past that prior research is alpha-omega. This is how you may avoid
ending up with lost work, taking paths that were actually never possible. E.g. if we never get
the Olimex board Ethernet working - we’ve will have lost a lot time doing this.”
”Dive into every detail is good. But there is a limit. Some things you learn with testing.
Especially before you build too much overhead, make sure the core engines run first.”
”It’s fun to work with utility features. But they may be in vain. That’s why we need to focus
on Ethernet and SD card testing”
Scoping and analysing the various options on the market for a new hardware platform was
very fruitful, in Niels opinion. It also helped developing the concept on a larger level, because
we had to expand on: What is the vision with the Art-Net LED system and, what do we
want it to do?
”At some point we even considered running the system on an Android device - we’ve come
far since then. That part was good - an important step.”
Regarding GitHub, Niels says that it has not been very easy. But it actually did the job, even
though we only used a few of its functionalities. Our code has been safe for now. We both
know how to create branches and, and it has been easy, with regard to switching branches
with just a few clicks in the IDE. Much better than keeping files on the computer in various
folders, from random dates using newest newer 18 juli naming schemes.
Github may have OTA update features - which can become useful in the future, says Niels.
Goal setting
”The goal setting might have been very ambitious. We set the goal to almost finish the LED
controller. Get we got almost all peripherals working, and a front-end has also been proto-
typed.”
This was perhaps too optimistic. Development takes time and in our heads we thought we
could simply finish the whole thing. In a sense we might have thought that we were done
already before we started.
In the state machine diagram we should have stated the requirements for sub-systems. Things
are not actually finished before the part fully works. Niels thinks, for the future, we need to
list all sub requirements and list the required test better. With this approach we have had,
and the results from the prototype, we know where the bottle necks are - and now we can
better state them.
CHAPTER 5. PROTOTYPING
91
==PAGE:100==
Requirements
”We didnt say anything concrete: like: it should be 4000 LEDs, or it should be 32 Universes
of data ”
Niels thinks, that in regard to requirements concerning processing capabilities, we had the
assumption that the ESP32 indeed would be faster than the STM32F103. Processing 32
universes should not be a problem.
”but we should KNOW instead of guessing.... In Shure we also encounter hard problems on
core systems too late. This sometimes holds back products from reaching the market.”
Status quo
We need final evaluation if the ESP32-gateway is the way to go. We keep working, and make
it work at some point.
”I’ve had a lot going on in my life and I hope I can participate more in the future.”
It is good work that we have done. We have identified the necessary minimal requirements.
5.10
Reflection
This section will be used to reflect on a few topics in regard to the prototype and the work
on the Art-Net LED controller.
Focus
Our focus may have been too wide. Essentially, some of the work made in this prototyping
phase is jeopardised by the fact, that the Art-Net features are not meeting our requirements.
If they cannot be satisfied, and the the easier approach is to change framework or hardware,
we might need to start over on a range of aspects. Like Niels says in the evaluation section,
Section 5.9, we assumed that the ESP32 would not lack processing capability with regard
to Ethernet because the STM32 was already more than sufficient in this aspect - and the
ESP32 is faster in clock-speed. Initialising prototyping with a narrow focus on these central
performance aspect, we could have spared ourselves from potentially lost time in develop-
ment. More time must be spent looking for solutions before a conclusion can be made in this
regard. A the least, we are now at a state where we know in which direction we might have
to look, to deal with the last challenges: Ethernet and SD card signal speed.
On the positive side of things, we now have good experience with the ESP32 controller, we
have implemented a wide range of sub-systems that have good prospects, and they are ruled
out as being major concerns.
CHAPTER 5. PROTOTYPING
92
==PAGE:101==
I was unable to focus on the innovation aspect because of lost time in spent in research
into Consumer oriented lighting system. We could have been designing the prototype with a
closer focus on user needs. Instead, this prototype is mostly a replica of version 1 and 2, and
does not introduce innovation to any degree.
Hackstage needs
Needs stated by Niels and Marcus have been central instead. Their problems in hardware
and development environment was thoroughly processed, and based on that we were able to
take a big step forward into a completely new way of programming. Niels and I successfully
collaborated via the GitHub repository and the Git integration with Visual Studio Code.
This was enabled by the Visual Studio Code IDE, and have meant that no code was lost
during the development phase so far.
At one point, I had created a bug in my code, and it would take me two days to locate it.
The final approach that helped me locate the source of error, was to open an older version
of the code via Git, and scan through each file from top to bottom. This was all handled
natively in the IDE.
Hardware development has, for the most part, completely been avoided by the Olimex ESP32-
Gateway board, because the necessary extensions are already attached. This has potentially
saved us many days of development just during this prototyping phase. Imaginably, it may
continue to be a benefit, because developing our own prototype builds or PCBs implies a
handful of things:
• Time spent making the right connections and looking up schematics.
• Unstable connections in prototyping kits (jumper-wires, breadboards and bad solders).
• Sources of errors now exist in two domains: hardware and software.
This can be
deceiving, and costly in extra hours of trouble-shooting.
• Less production cost (hours, planning, shipping, complexity) when a final product
pipeline is to be created
Coding process
The approach was to utilise code and libraries available online to boost development as much
as possible. If we could stand on top of the pillars that other developers had created, we
could reach higher faster. The approach would allow me to integrate most sub-systems into a
functional prototype, even when the available time-frame was quite short. Most sub-systems
are a proof of concept (which was what the original problem formulation stated). For future
development, each sub-system may need a revisit to improve efficiency and structure.
CHAPTER 5. PROTOTYPING
93
==PAGE:102==
Planning
The PERT chart, Appendix D, was useful for keeping the overall direction of the project.
Phase 4, which was supposed to be integrating the subsystems, ended up happening con-
tinuously. Mostly, when I had tested system in isolation, the next step would be integration.
Consumer oriented lighting system
A consumer oriented lighting system may benefit by our choices of hardware and technology.
The IoT capabilities of the ESP32 are most likely a strong benefit in today’s smart products.
The ESP32 comes in many price ranges and with different qualities. The code could be ported
to the related micro-controller, the ESP8266, which could cut cost even more if necessary.
Creating a specifications sheet
The approach of creating specifications sheets was not implemented in Hackstage upon un-
dertaking the project. Generally, little information was given about the product (version 1
and 2) and performance requirements were vague for defining a new system. This could be
because Niels and Marcus have not practised a user oriented design approach, where analysed
user input serves to determine requirements. I had to deduce a reasoning for the minimum
2000 LEDs requirement in Section 3.6.
Niels has mentioned the lack of user data himself, and while the LED controller is still in
development, there is room to conduct these studies. Hackstage generally has a wide reach
into various networks of people, and finding lighting technicians for studies is not a problem.
Conclusion
The prototyping work has contributed to Hackstage’s development of the Art-Net LED con-
troller by:
• Creating an overview of possible hardware
• Making specifications for the Art-Net LED controller
• Improving the development environment, using GitHub
• Exploring the capabilities of a promising new hardware platform
The ESP32-Gateway board is close to a final evaluation, concluding its potential in the Art-
Net LED system.
CHAPTER 5. PROTOTYPING
94
==PAGE:103==
6
User study
This chapter presents work made in scoping, gathering and analysing collected data from
stakeholders. Due to the project pivot described in Section 1.4, the chapter is only a prelim-
inary research. The study has a primary focus on consumer oriented lighting products and
experiences. The Section 6.1 will elaborate the scope of stakeholders. The seed thought is
to identify if there is an overlap of user needs with Hackstage’s expertise in lighting. This
overlap could become a low hanging fruit in terms of a product design venture. Several
groups have been interviewed with the purpose of:
• understanding user groups’ usage and preference in lighting products
• understanding user groups’ needs and pains
• learning from relevant domain experts
Area of research
Ideally, this search would span as wide as possible. Multiple tangents exist around the topic
of lighting systems, but for the sake of making noteworthy progress other than exploratory
research into problem domains, the research will in some cases narrow the focus to battery
driven light systems.
Method use: gathering data
Interviews have been selected during the initial study for a range of reasons:
• It is possible to navigate through relevant topics unique for a specific interviewee.
• It allows for reading between the lines: a researcher may understand things that are
not directly what the interviewee have said.
• It is easier to resolve, if a question was understood correctly.
• ”ping-ping”: the interviewee may correct the researcher if they sense our understanding
is wrong. There is no feedback communication e.g. via questionnaire.
Using interviews in conjunction with other quantitative research methods, such as question-
naires, may provide a wider demographic understanding of users. During this research, other
95
==PAGE:104==
techniques have not yet been exercised. Input from interviews may help in forming better
questionnaires in the future.
Interviewing has the downside, that users may try to give us information, that they might
think the researchers want. During the studies made, this has been a downside - especially
when subjects may have been introduced to the overall topic of the project before the inter-
view. Better control of the environment, should have been exercised.
Field studies, e.g. observations (fly on the wall) may assist in locating user needs and pains
which users may have difficulty articulate or pin-point themselves, e.g. if they are too used
to them.
6.1
Scoping
A list of relevant stakeholder categories emerged as a result from brainstorming with Niels.
The stakeholders listed below are potential customers of various kinds, or lighting experts
of various kinds. Lighting experts may be DJ’s and event makers who has first-hand expe-
rience with lighting systems, and its effect on people. Expertise knowledge may provide the
information needed to develop a better overall product in any aspect.
• Private users
• Event makers
• Bars, clubs & venues
• Visual artists
• Lighting technicians
• Photographers
• Equipment rentals
• Photographers
• DJ’s
Some of the above stakeholders will shortly be elaborated:
Private users is a group not defined by any requirements. In this interview session, they
are between 20 and 30 years old, an assumed target of a product design. They may have
individualised needs and pains in relation to current lighting solutions. Integrating these
needs and pains may locate a market opportunity. The bulk of the investigation has been
made into private users, the potential users of consumer oriented lighting systems. With
limited time available to conduct studies, this will be the focus.
CHAPTER 6. USER STUDY
96
==PAGE:105==
Event makers, bars, clubs and venues are assumed to have knowledge on which lighting
systems that are important for creating a atmosphere for their customers.
Visual artists may have the need to implement lighting in their works. An easy way to do
this, could be an area of focus for this project. Additionally, visual artists may have expertise
that can benefit the understanding of lighting products. A handful exists within Hackstage.
Photographers are domain experts in lighting, and could provide useful knowledge input
to the research. Simultaneously, they may have needs and pains that a potential product
may want to address.
DJ’s are assumed to have a great sense of feeling with music. They may be domain experts
in lighting developed through practical experience. In some settings the lighting and the
music is complementary to the experience as a whole.
6.2
Private users
Interviews were conducted with a list of questions and some methods for conversation and
visualisation. On a high level, it was the intention to get a sense of how people use lights,
if people own or have interest in smart lighting and how people prefer lighting in various
situations.
For the interviews, three techniques were used:
• Using the question sheet for directing conversation
• Using wishful thinking combined with drawing as means to lead the conversation.
• Rating qualities of an imagined portable lighting system: Weighted Objectives Method
(WOM)
Question sheet
The question sheet used for the interview is seen in Appendix I. The question sheet was used
loosely during conversations in order to keep a natural flow, and let topics of interest steer
the conversation.
Questioning people’s inventory of lights, or simply knowledge of lighting products, helps to
paint a picture of what is of interest to people. [design methods]
Drawing
As a method for dialogue and the fun of creative freedom, users were asked to draw what the
optimal lighting situation would look like, in a festive situation. The scenario pictures a crowd
CHAPTER 6. USER STUDY
97
==PAGE:106==
dancing around a speaker. The paper is heavily inspired from the Danish Roskilde Festival
and the Soundboks, which both are a common and known scenario for the youth of Denmark.
Portable lighting system: WOM
After considering general lighting and products in the context of daily life and party, atten-
tion is brought to a battery driven solution. The user is asked to imagine a portable lighting
system. A parallel to the SoundBoks. A small introduction is made without predetermining
any characteristics. The interviewee may make up their own product.
Design objectives have been assumed with a focus on high level qualities:
• Light quality: The ability of the light source to reproducing colour and light intensity.
• Build quality: Sturdiness and build quality of the product.
• Usability and versatility: Easy to use and lots of functionality
• Battery time: Long lasting battery.
• Price: Good price means low price.
• Portability: Easy to transport.
The user well be prompted to decide how each of the objectives rank against one another.
The outcome may be useful when generating concepts, when we can tell which quality aspect
that were important to the users, and hopefully their explanation can also let us answer, why
so. This is not the traditional way of doing a WOM, which is usually made when evaluating
design alternatives, according to the Engineering Design Methods book by Nigel Cross. But
nonetheless it was used as discussion topic.
We go through the table 6.1 and score each pair of qualities, or design objectives, discussing
their relation to one another. All the white fields will be filled out and summed into the
Total column. Discussing quality parameters was theorised as a way to surface opinions and
expectations on certain aspects the lighting product, based on reasoning. This reasoning may
give us useful insight along with the final score.
Figure 6.1: WOM matrix.
CHAPTER 6. USER STUDY
98
==PAGE:107==
Interviewees
Six subjects were interviewed:
• Linea
• Albert B.
• Albert A.
• Jason
• Larika
• Inge
Results from interviews is found in the Appendix K.
Each user have their own section
containing results from the three methodologies used. Interviews in the appendix are para-
phrased to increase clarity and readability. This also made them shorter to read. It means
that data have undergone some compression synthesis, ultimately lowering data resolution.
Raw data, in the form of recordings, have been archived if later use deems necessary.
Outcome
All subjects were students of various types, in approximately the same age range . This gives
rather narrow spectrum, but it provides get an in-depth understanding of what users of that
group concretely value in lighting solutions. We gain insight into what people do and do not
currently own. We also get insight into users needs and pains.
The data can be analysed and measured in a multitude of ways. Severity, how strong is the
need, and frequency, how many users experience the same need, are factors in determining
the importance of a need. Needs will ultimately lead to formulating a problem. The higher
severity and frequency, the more incentive there should be to solve it. Data is quantified in
Table 7.1 and interpreted in Section 7.1.
Data based on larger studies, in terms of more subjects, could enable us to assume things
on a larger demographic scale, useful when we want to identify potential markets . The
knowledge input may be used to create an improved quantitative study.
The users are a direct source of design inspiration, both in terms of aesthetics and function.
Wishful thinking helps users dream beyond usual barriers and their day-to-day needs. The
drawing exercise is equally a source of inspiration and a topic for discussion. It allows users
to express their mind in a visual form. Drawing is suited for displaying problems, functions
and aesthetics. The drawing session would refresh energy after a sometimes heavy interview
sessions.
The WOM table, which was an improvised exercise, would provide very concrete user state-
ments for an imagined product solution such as:
CHAPTER 6. USER STUDY
99
==PAGE:108==
• ”Battery life is important. If you bring it around, and it can’t last, then it’s useless.”
• ”Ease of control is perhaps the most important feature. This is going to make it a good
product that is fun to use.”
• Linea estimates a sales price somewhat in comparison to the high quality wake lights
that exist on the market, being 1000DKK - 2000DKK. ”If the light product could be
this ‘do-it-all’-type of solution, while also being pretty, I would gladly pay that price.”
The systematic approach of comparing each quality, would force the conversation into
topics not included otherwise and reveal other details.
The drawings are also to be found in the Appendix, on the page(s) following individual users.
6.3
DJ
Esther Kay agreed to participate in an interview. A question sheet was used for the interview
(Appendix J) along with the drawing exercise. The results can be found in the Appendix L.
Outcome
Ether Kay have had many years of practical experience with lighting that accompanies music
and dancing people. This shines through in her statements, as she can formulate her prefer-
ence and pains with examples, such as:
”If I find, that the crowd is not dancing, I would lower the lights.”
”That’s exactly what I’m saying. It (the lighting) does not need to match the beat. And
actually I would say if it matches the beat it can become boring and predictable. The same
way if you go to a club and it’s the same music all night, you know what to expect and there’s
no surprises.”
The outcome of the interview is generally a knowledge perspective that seems more educated.
This gives us as designers insight that can be used when designing a product, and we might
also be able to interpret user statements from e.g. private users in more detail.
6.4
Event coordinators
Simon at Camp Safari
Simon is both a technician and he works in event-making with his sound system. He has
practical experience in making dance floors, and his opinion and needs and user need inter-
pretation is useful experience that may let us understand what is desirable for his audience.
CHAPTER 6. USER STUDY
100
==PAGE:109==
Additionally, he has needs which may be useful input in relation to the Hackstage Art-Net
LED system.
Figure 6.2: The Camp Safari sound system.
The sound system is accompanied by a multitude of lighting solutions. A center-effect
projector, two moving heads projectors, 2 lasers, LED strips in the ceiling and LED panels
in the front. All of their equipment uses automatic sound-modes for the ease of use. Alterna-
tively, a expensive DMX controller seems the only way to gain customised control, in Simons
opinion. Although, they are also hard to learn how to use.
Simon explains how some lighting types function better on a dance floor, and in this context
he mentions, strobe light, projected light (e.g. from a PAR lamp or moving head) and other.
To get people dancing, it is important to the idea that the atmosphere is festive.
6.5
Photographers
Tess is interviewed with the intention of understanding lighting systems from a different
perspective. She expresses a wide range of needs, related to her own personal affairs, and her
personal insight on party lighting and common miscellaneous lighting system that she has
experienced around her. A short highlight of the topics of the conversation can be found in
CHAPTER 6. USER STUDY
101
==PAGE:110==
Appendix O.1. A transcript is not provided. The conversation is only stored as raw data. It
will not undergo any further processing in the report.
6.6
Visual artist
Jonas from Hackstage is interviewed with the intention of understanding how he perceives
light, and how he works with creating it. He explains how it satisfies him, what he strives
for and shows it in practice. The interview was held in his creative studio. An overview of
discussion topics can be found in Appendix M.1, along with photos of equipment and creative
output.
The perspectives he brings is useful, in the case we have to design an interface. He uses
modular synthesis to express himself artistically. The equipment principles may be replicated
on e.g. a digital interface. The full interview is stored as video, pictures and audio recording.
CHAPTER 6. USER STUDY
102
==PAGE:111==
7
Data processing
This chapter seeks to summarise and make sense of prior data collection. Ideally, a search
into the existing market of product solutions would help identfy a market uppertunity, but
because of the project pivot described in 1.4, only some initial analysis of the private users
have been made.
7.1
Needs and pains table
Statements and interpretations from interviews conducted with private users have been sum-
marised and counted in tables 7.1 and 7.2. The tables list needs and pains, and their frequency
amongst users, which allows us to count them. One statement, e.g. Browsing moods, may
be an abstraction of approximately the same need, expressed amongst users.
Name
Number
Inge
U1
Larika
U2
Jason
U3
Albert A.
U4
Linea
U5
Albert B.
U6
103
==PAGE:112==
Need
U1
U2
U3
U4
U5
U6
Sum
Creating an atmosphere for being with friends
1
1
1
1
4
Browsing moods
1
1
1
1
4
Adjust light temperature
1
1
1
1
4
Lighting that creates an atmosphere for party
1
1
1
3
High intensity lighting
1
1
1
3
Plentiful functionalities
1
1
1
3
Automatic programmes/Sync to music
1
1
1
3
Adjust light colour
1
1
1
3
Extended battery life
1
1
1
3
Dim lighting
1
1
1
3
Immersive lighting
1
1
1
3
Good price
1
1
1
3
Remote control
1
1
1
3
Easy to use
1
1
2
Something for the nerds / design patterns
1
1
2
Lights that follow the music (automatic)
1
1
2
Multiple ways of mounting/placing the light
1
1
2
Gamify dancing
1
1
2
Working lights
1
1
2
Portable
1
1
2
Fun to use
1
1
2
Beautiful design
1
1
Not too expensive
1
1
Clamp to Soundboks
1
1
Water ressistant
1
1
Performance reliability
1
1
UV lights
1
1
High quality build
1
1
Light for supporting circadian rythm
1
1
wake-light
1
1
Small dimensions
1
1
Aesthetic appearance
1
1
Bonfire-effect (heating)
1
1
Phone app
1
1
Buttons
1
1
Light can be directed via app (360 degrees}
1
1
Modular / Sync together multiple devices
1
1
Table 7.1: Needs table.
CHAPTER 7. DATA PROCESSING
104
==PAGE:113==
Pains
U1
U2
U3
U4
U5
U6
Sum
Blinding lighting
1
1
2
Party lights are ugly
1
1
Cheap lights are weak
1
1
Clubs often have basic lighting
1
1
No vibrant lighting at private events
1
1
Low on money
1
1
Having to move to adjust lighting
1
1
Table 7.2: Pains table.
Need interpretation
The tables are a landscape of potential needs and pains to be addressed. The needs can be
used as input to innovation of concepts, while knowing how frequent they appeared amongst
interviewees. Some interpretations of gathered data. The interpretation will also take fre-
quency into account, while comparing different users.
Versatile lighting
It is clearly established by users that there is a need for versatile lighting products for a
multitude of situations - both situations in solitude (working, reading, relaxing and sleeping)
and in social gatherings. Many users have mentioned smart lighting systems from Ikea and
Philips as solutions. They both dim and adjust hue by will of the user. Other users have
pointed to LED strips, electric lanterns, light chains and decorative lamps that solve the
problem for versatile lighting in situations. Dimming is important, often for activity based
situations. Hue and light motion is important for atmosphere and party.
Adjusting light temperature is good for keeping a proper circadian rythm stated by some
users. Linea asked for a wake-light. Dedicated wake-light from other companies are very
expensive and does only that.
Some users have dedicated lights for parties and dancing. Inge has a small and cheap product
projecting light into the ceiling. The intensity is not what she had been used to from her
younger days - but it did the job for her apartment, she said. Linea has a stage-like lighting
product. It has very little control parameters, so the lighting would become annoying either
because it is too chaotic or static, with no means to do anything about it.
Users seem to want a solution which is very easy to use. None of the users has asked or
favoured detailed ways of controlling their systems. Some has mentioned specifics, that they
like UV light, colours red and blue, strobe lighting and high intensity. Others have mentioned
that they don’t like sharp blinking, and blinding lights
Multiple users mentioned light-settings that represent moods should be integrated in a hypo-
thetical product. Some exemplified with playlists that you find in music streaming services.
CHAPTER 7. DATA PROCESSING
105
==PAGE:114==
This is perhaps a popular feature, because it is an easy way to get a quality solution. Users
have also mentioned ”lights that follow the music”, as an important quality for light in
some scenarios. Esther Kay would elaborate on this, saying that lighting should have a con-
cept of its own - a composition that goes together with music rather than trying to imitate it.
Inge and Albert have a shared experience from Roskilde Festival: All of a sudden, the sun
has gone down. The encampment where people are sitting, is now pitch black and nobody
can see a thing. In this situation, a lighting system driven by a battery would be good, says
Inge. Not only for illuminating the common space, maybe they would like to invite people
to their area and turn it into a dance floor. A battery should therefore at least last the
whole night - or perhaps multiple nights. A lighting system could, as well as a sound system,
attract people’s attention.
Some users had products to satisfy a need in this category - to a degree. Naturally, everybody
already had electric home lights. Some had smart lights or adjustable lamps. But the market
for smart light, based on this rather small sample, is not yet fully saturated, as most people,
even though they owned solutions, had unsatisfied needs.
Lights for party
A few people, Albert and Larika amongst them, mentioned that lighting in clubs is usually a
background thing, which is rarely brought attention to. As long as ”something” is there, it
will get the job done. Larika mentioned, that you must go to an expensive club, if you want
to experience anything noteworthy. A deduction from this is, that lighting takes up only a
few people’s attention.
Inge owns a light bought in Netto. It was cheap, small and not powerful enough. She states
that it is boring because it only has an On/Off button - although it seems it does the job for
her. For Inge, powerful lighting was a feat she preferred.
Powerful lighting was a pain point to both Linea and Larika. They both experienced that
sharp blinking was a pain point. Sometimes lighting would be too obnoxious and blinding,
preventing you from look in that direction. This could happen both at clubs or at home.
Users mention that lighting at parties is important, especially if people want to dance. Jason
B. said, that blinking lights and dimmed lighting help lowering peoples perception. This
chaotic state may help people wanting to let loose.
Miscellaneous lighting
Users, Linea included, has stated a need for a ’all-in-one’ solution. One way to interpret this
is, that in all of her home lighting she would like smart light features like coloured lights, work
light, dim lights, party lights and wake lights. Another way to see it, is that one separate
CHAPTER 7. DATA PROCESSING
106
==PAGE:115==
light solutions could perhaps substitute all miscellaneous lighting.
Miscellaneous lighting needs may vary from individual to individual. Albert has a lantern
which he brings to his terrace. He presents a type of need where you might want to bring
light outside in the evening, when you do not have any permanent lights
Larika needs a light for putting makeup. It requires high intensity, which is something that
her current smart lamp can not substitute. She does not like ring lights, which are sometimes
used for that.
Price
Philips Hue is a known brand in smart lighting. Linea mentions their wake-light product,
and says it is expensive. She already has one, but not by this brand. Linea would happily
pay 1000 - 2000DKK for a solution that could be both wake light, study light and more. She
could also imagine a portable system could be practical in her home - a light that can be
used for work and night time.1
Albert also mentions Philips Hue. He can’t afford the LED bulb himself, instead he has
wished for Philips Hue light in his birthday gift.
Inge says that price is a quality tag. Some times a high price makes a product more ap-
pealing - especially if the product can satisfy ones expectation. Other wise you may not
believe that the product is that good. Comparing with the SoundBoks, which she mentions
is priced around 7000DKK. ”But you just know that it does the job.” ”For a quality product,
1000DKK is too cheap.”
Tess (photographer) says that people never see the world like her. She is constantly paying
attention to lighting. Her opinion is that smart lighting and relentless colour-fading usually
makes her dizzy. For a trained eye, there may be a higher level of quality to be achieved.
Her opinion may become important in potential desirability testing of a design.
Fun to use
Larika mentioned, that a product would be fun to use if you have a variety of options to choose
from. Her drawing concept was a gamified dance floor, imitating Dance-Dance-Revolution 2
Battery
Battery driven lights are a solution when you are on festival according to Inge and Albert.
Having a lot of power is important, so it can last for a nights use or more. Inge: If you use
1Note: Linea had been presented with the idea of a portable system prior to the interview, so the data
is spoiled to some degree in this regard.
2Dance Dance Revolution is a music video game series produced by the brand Konami. The player stomps
on floor tiles in the correct sequences to win.
CHAPTER 7. DATA PROCESSING
107
==PAGE:116==
the battery at home, it is not very important. But if you bring it for a festival, you would
happily pay more for extended life.
Linea mentioned having a light to move around in your home. Battery long capacity is per-
haps not high priority in this constellation.
Albert brings an electric lantern to his terrace. This may be a wider need to explore. This
is a similar scenario to that of Linea.
According to Larika, if the battery runs out at the wrong time, it would be bad. Larika
makes the comparison: ”I’d rather have a bad speaker that lasts all night rather than good
sound for a short time.” If the system runs on battery, then that is the important feature.
Easy to use
Usability seems important to some users. For Inge, it was important that you have something
with a variety of functions, so you can explore different settings in a given lighting product.
Linea similarly mentioned that her solution has no adjustability other than a static setting
and something that produces obnoxious blinking.
Aesthetic appearance/beautiful design
Linea mentioned wanting a home light which had aesthetic appearance. She would pay more,
if the product was pretty.
Larika mentioned that she did not like ring-lights - typically used in photography for portraits.
Somethings different and more unique could perhaps be of use to her, e.g. when putting make
up.
7.2
Summary
It can be concluded that there is generally a large and diverse need for lighting systems, both
in companies, professionally and amongst private users. Private users have needs residing
both in their homes, when being social with people and remote locations such as Roskilde
Festival. Many existing solutions are already widely popular on the market, such as Phillips
products and cheap miscellaneous lighting systems like electric lanterns, lighting chains and
battery-driven light projectors. Perhaps, with further research and utilisation of the many
competences in Hackstage, a product can be conceptualised, with the purpose of addressing
a new market segment.
CHAPTER 7. DATA PROCESSING
108
==PAGE:117==
Bibliography
[1]
“Spi matrix – pixel led decoder for art-net.” https://ledstripstudio.com/shop/
product/spi-matrix/. Accessed: 2022-09-10.
[2]
“Alphapix classic 16 v3 - e1.31 & artnet to spi pixel controller w/lcd display - 16 spi + 3
rs485 outputs.” https://www.holidaycoro.com/AlphaPix-16-Pixel-Controller-V3-
p/721-v3.htm. Accessed: 2022-09-10.
[3]
“H802ra
4
ports(4096pixels)
salve
led
pixel
controller;support
art-net
protocol
for
madrixs,or
marster
controller(h803tv/
h803tc).”
https://www.alibaba.com/
product-detail/Art-net-H802RA-4-Ports-4096pixels 1600658165462.html?spm=
a2700.galleryofferlist.0.0.2492720207oKg6. Accessed: 2022-09-10.
[4]
“F16v4
pixel
controller.”
https://pixelcontroller.com/store/products/70-
f16v4.html. Accessed: 2022-09-14.
[5]
“Fastled
hsv
colors.”
https://github.com/FastLED/FastLED/wiki/FastLED-HSV-
Colors. Accessed: 2022-01-10.
[6]
“Ws2812b 5050 rgb led strip 5v dc.” https://ardustore.dk/produkt/ws2812b-5050-
rgb-led-strip-5v-dc. Accessed: 2023-1-11.
[7]
“Ws2812
-
intelligent
control
led
integrated
light
source.”
https://cdn-
shop.adafruit.com/datasheets/WS2812.pdf. Accessed: 2023-1-10.
[8]
“Hackstage homepage.” https://hackstage.com/. Accessed: 2022-09-01.
[9]
“Wikipedia: Program evaluation and review technique.” https://en.wikipedia.org/
wiki/Program evaluation and review technique. Accessed: 2022-09-27.
[10] A. Jukanovi´c, Architectural Lighting Design A PRACTICAL GUIDE. The Crowood
Press Ltd, 2018.
[11] “Dmx512.” http://www.theater-technisch-lab.nl/dmxen.htm.
Accessed: 2022-12-
10.
[12] “Moving
head
design
spot
250
spotlight.”
http://cdb.s3.amazonaws.com/
ItemRelatedFiles/10334/Design\%20spot\%20250-DMX\%20traits.pdf.
Accessed:
2022-12-1.
[13] “art-net.org.” https://art-net.org.uk/. Accessed: 2022-10-1.
109
==PAGE:118==
[14] “Art-net.” https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Art-Net. Accessed: 2022-10-1.
[15] “Udp
delivers
-
take
total
control
of
your
networking
with
.net
and
udp.”
https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/archive/msdn-magazine/2006/february/
udp-delivers-take-total-control-of-your-networking-with-net-and-udp.
Accessed: 2022-10-1.
[16] “Digital led pixels: Instructions for use and a characterization of their properties.”
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5101347/. Accessed: 2022-10-1.
[17] “Light-emitting
diode.”
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Light-emitting diode.
Accessed: 2022-11-1.
[18] “Wikipedia: Spi.” https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Serial Peripheral Interface.
Accessed: 2023-01-27.
[19] “What
digital
led
chip
to
choose.”
https://quinled.info/2019/06/02/what-
digital-led-chip-to-choose/. Accessed: 2022-10-1.
[20] “Fastled: Chipset reference.” https://github.com/FastLED/FastLED/wiki/Chipset-
reference. Accessed: 2022-11-1.
[21] “What digital 5v/12v/24v rgb(w) led strip to buy.” https://quinled.info/2019/06/
03/what-digital-5v-12v-rgbw-led-strip-to-buy/. Accessed: 2022-10-1.
[22] “Resolume avenue & arena.” https://resolume.com/software/avenue arena.
Ac-
cessed: 2023-1-11.
[23] “Stm32f103
documentation.”
https://www.st.com/en/microcontrollers-
microprocessors/stm32f103.html#documentation. Accessed: 2022-10-7.
[24] “Wikipedia: Arduino.” https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Arduino. Accessed: 2022-09-
25.
[25] “How does an fpga work.” https://learn.sparkfun.com/tutorials/how-does-an-
fpga-work/all. Accessed: 2022-09-25.
[26] “Raspberry
pi
4
versus
beaglebone
black.”
https://jfrog.com/connect/post/
raspberry-pi-4-vs-beaglebone-black/. Accessed: 2022-10-5.
[27] “Compare arduino vs esp8266.” https://www.libhunt.com/compare-Arduino-vs-
ESP8266\ RTOS\ SDK. Accessed: 2022-10-17.
[28] “Esp32 api reference: Gpio.” https://docs.espressif.com/projects/esp-idf/en/
latest/esp32/api-reference/peripherals/gpio.html. Accessed: 2022-10-17.
[29] “Esp-idf: get started.” https://docs.espressif.com/projects/esp-idf/en/latest/
esp32/get-started/index.html. Accessed: 2022-10-17.
[30] “10
arduino
ide
alternatives.”
https://www.javacodegeeks.com/2018/08/10-
arduino-ide-alternative.html. Accessed: 2022-10-17.
CHAPTER 7. DATA PROCESSING
110
==PAGE:119==
[31] “Platformio home-page.” https://platformio.org/. Accessed: 2022-10-17.
[32] “Wikipedia: Git.” https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Git. Accessed: 2022-10-17.
[33] “Olimex.com:
Esp32-gateway.”
https://www.olimex.com/Products/IoT/ESP32/
ESP32-GATEWAY/open-source-hardware. Accessed: 2022-10-17.
[34] “Github:
hpwit - issue:
”with lan8720 not more than 8 universes”.” https://
github.com/hpwit/artnetESP32/issues/9. Accessed: 2022-12-01.
[35] “Wikipedia: Softap.” https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/SoftAP. Accessed: 2022-12-01.
[36] “Github:
Kriskasprzak
-
esp32 webpage.”
https://github.com/KrisKasprzak/
ESP32 WebPage. Accessed: 2022-12-01.
[37] “Wikipedia: Xml.” https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/XML. Accessed: 2023-01-27.
[38] “Arduinojson homepage.” https://arduinojson.org/. Accessed: 2022-12-15.
[39] “Github: hpwit - artnetesp32.” https://github.com/hpwit/artnetESP32. Accessed:
2022-12-15.
[40] “elifulkerson.com: Python udp stress tester.” https://elifulkerson.com/projects/
python-udp-stress-tester.php. Accessed: 2022-12-15.
[41] “Wikipedia: eeprom.” https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/EEPROM. Accessed: 2022-12-
15.
[42] “Github: Arduinojson - license.txt.” https://github.com/bblanchon/ArduinoJson/
blob/6.x/LICENSE.txt. Accessed: 2022-12-15.
[43] “Github: hpwit - arduino-esp32 license.” https://github.com/espressif/arduino-
esp32/blob/master/LICENSE.md. Accessed: 2022-12-15.
[44] “Github:
Fastled - license.” https://github.com/FastLED/FastLED/blob/master/
LICENSE. Accessed: 2022-12-15.
[45] “Github: espressif - license.” https://github.com/espressif/arduino-esp32/blob/
master/LICENSE.md. Accessed: 2022-12-15.
[46] “licenses mit.” https://spdx.org/licenses/MIT.html. Accessed: 2022-12-15.
[47] “Open-source software licenses 101 lgpl license.” https://fossa.com/blog/open-
source-software-licenses-101-lgpl-license/. Accessed: 2022-12-15.
[48] B. Hanington, Universal Methods of Design. Rockport Publishers, 2012.
[49] N. Cross and R. Roy, Engineering Design Methods Strategies for Product Design, Fifth
Edition, vol. 5. Wiley Chichester, 2021.
CHAPTER 7. DATA PROCESSING
111
==PAGE:120==
A
Project plan: PERT chart
See appended item on the following page(s).
112
==PAGE:121==
+DFNVWDJHLQWUR
8QGHUVWDQGDUWQHWb
/('V\VWHPDQGb
WHFKQRORJ\
8QGHUVWDQG+DFNVWDJH
Vb
LQWHQW	SUREOHPVSDFH
LQYHVWLJDWH/('V\VWHPVDQGWHFKQRORJ\
ΖQYHVWLJDWHSUREOHPb
VSDFH
RQPDVVPDUNHWV
ΖQYHVWLJDWHPDVVb
PDUNHWFRPSHWLWLRQ
ΖQYHVWLJDWHFRPSHWLQJ/('b
VROXWLRQVȴ[WXUHVDQGVLJQDOb
SURFHVVRUV
&RQYHUJHSUREOHPVSDFH
%XVLQHVVPRGHOOLQJ
&RQFHSW	IHDWXUHV
VSHFV
6HOHFWKDUGZDUH
FRQFHSWXDOL]H
GLYHUJHQW
3URWRW\SH+:SODWIRUPFRUHIHDWXUHV
D
E
F
I
G
H
J
K
L
M
N
O
P
Q
5HSRUWZRUNFDWFKLQJXSOD\RXW	ȴJXUHV
S
(YDOXDWHSURWR
W\SLQJZRUN
T
&RQFHSWUHȴQLQJRI
FRQVXPHUSURGXFW
R
3(57FKDUW




















(YHQWQR
ZHHNV




5HSRUWȴQLVKHG

:KLFKSURWRW\SLQJUHVXOWVRQWKHKDUGZDUHb
SODWIRUPDOLJQVZLWKWKHFRQVXPHURULHQWHGb
SURGXFWGHVLJQ
3URMHFWHQGWREHHYDOXDWHGDQGb
GRFXPHQWDWLRQUHȴQHG
6FRSHWKHSURWRW\SLQJSKDVHDQGIXUWKHUb
FRQFHSWXDOL]DWLRQEDVHGRQWHFKQRORJ\b
VWXGLHV
5HDG\IRUVHOHFWLQJPLFURSURFHVVRU
.QRZOHGJHWRIRUPDOL]HDVSHFLȴFDWLRQb
VKHHWLVDTXLUHG
.QRZOHGJHDTXLUHIRUGHȴQLQJWKH$UWQHWb
/('V\VWHPFRQFHSWDQGDPDUNHWb
FRPSHWLWLYHFRQFHSW
$SUREOHPVSDFHDOORZVIRUGLYHUJHQWb
FRQFHSWXDOLVDWLRQ
5HDG\IRUFRQYHUJLQJWKHSUREOHPVSDFHb
EDVHGRQFRPSHWLWLRQDQGQHHGV
ΖQYHVWLJDWHFRPSHWLWLRQLQSRWHQWLDOPDVVb
PDUNHWV
8QGHUVWDQGLQJ+DFNVWDJH
VDPELWLRQVb
DOORZVIRUDQHZVFRSLQJb
LQYHVWLJDWHRSSRUWXQLWLHVERWKWKHPDUNHWRIb
VWDJHOLJKWLQJDQGPDVVPDUNHW
ΖQVLJKWLQWR+DFNVWDJH
VPXOWLSOHD΍DLUVb
DOORZVIRUVFRSLQJRILQLWLDOSURMHFW
KDUGZDUHSODWIRUP	DPDUNHWFRPSHWHWLYHb
VROXWLRQ
3URMHFWVWDUW














3URMHFWb
UHȴQLQJb
DQGb
HYDOXDWLRQ
U
&RQFHSW	IHDWXUHV
==PAGE:122==
B
Omega Festival: User journey
map
See appended item on the following page(s).
113
==PAGE:123==
 Jobs to be  
 done
  Journey
phases
 Context &
 Touchpoint
s
Gains
 Pains
 Emotion
Preparing LED bars
Connecting wires
Mapping & 
configuration of 
Falcon board
Running the Show
We met 08:00 at the venue and 
unloaded all lighting equipment from 
the cargo-​trailer. 
Feed bolt-​mounted clamps into slits on 
the backside of the LED bars.
Tighten bolts.
Mount LED bars onto truss rod. The 
mounting clamps were positioned and 
tightened with wrench tool.
15 LED bars.
Use fingers and tools to tighten 
bolts
Use tool to tighten mounting 
clamps.
Mounting clamps must be 
tightened so they will stay fixated 
even when the truss is pivoted from 
horizontal position.
The ethernet cable plug (RJ45) is very weak and 
vulnerable in the environment.
Maximum 2 LED bars can be serially connected, 
as each output of the Falcon board supports 2 
universes.
The Falcon board is strapped to the triangular 
truss, from where cables are pulled.
There were only few long 4-​pin scroller cables, 
making it complicated which ones to use 
where.
There were a limited amount output on the 
Falcon board.
Simple mechanisms and few actions 
would complete the LED bars.
One cable supplies LED bars with 
power and signal, making connections 
easy.
One CAT5 ethernet can supply 256 
DMX universes (theoretically 21.000 
LED's), which is more than enough.
Feeding bolts into the aluminium profile  was not 
easy where the aluminium frame was damaged.
Tightening (steel) bolts too much may bend and 
squeeze aluminium.
It's not clear when mounting clamps are 
tightened sufficient - it would be almost 
unfixable, if the clamp would loose grip. This 
would cause the LED bar to fall out of alignment 
with the others..
Problems may arise when applying a mapping to 
physical LEDs. Orientation may be backwards, 
XXXX
Setting up can be troublesome. If theres a lot of 
fixtures, you can get lost in Resolume's dedicated 
mapping function, and it usually takes a while 
going through all fixtures, and see that they 
point to the expected physical LED on stage via 
the right channel on the Falcon board.
Illustration
The Falcon board on the stage is connected to FoH 
running Resolume via a ~50m CAT5 ethernet cable.
The LED bars are connected, maximum 2 in one chain, 
to the Falcon board via 4-​pin scroller cable.
A massive amount of cables are threaded through the 
truss, all of which must be fixated with tape. PWM 
signal is only 5 volts and they, for the sake of stability, 
must not be in close proximity with power cables.
15 LED bars, 15 scroller cables, 2 falcon boards and 2 
ethernet cables were intended for the show.
1 LED bar was faulty, 14 LED bars were used.
Packing up
A Lumiverse is created in Resolume. It 
represents fictive DMX universes to be 
transferred via Art-​net. To set up the Falcon 
board, its IP address on the LAN must be 
entered into Resolumes Lumiverse output 
settings . Inside of Resolume DMX fixtures 
are created as a representation of the 
physical LED's. DMX fixtures are then 1. 
assigned to a Lumiverse, 2. geometrically 
positioned, 3. assigned to a channel and 4. 
assigned to a specific output channel of the 
Falcon Board(s).
The ethernet cable plug (RJ45) is very weak 
and vulnerable in the environment. 1 of 3 
was already dysfunctional. As 2 were used, 
no backup existed.
Maximum 2 LED bars can be serially 
connected, as each output of the Falcon 
board is 2 universes.
The Falcon board is strapped to the 
triangular truss, from where cables are 
pulled.
Very flexible control of LED bars. 
Easy hue control for matching with 
other lighting systems.
Triangle were bright enough in 
comparison with other lighting 
systems, giving good overall 
compositions.
A short power dropout caused the LED's to freeze  
for a time and the Falcon boards to reset.
The truss could be lowered, so 
everybody could work together.
Only one cables connects to LED bars.
Only one cable per Falcon board 
connects FoH with Art-​net.
Cables must be unplugged and bundled 
correctly.
Both 4 pin scroller cables and ethernet 
easily unplugs. Amidst other cables, it 
seemed overwhelming, but all in all it 
was easy.
LED
LED
LED
LED
LED
LED
Fixtures in the fixture editor can be pre-​made. Bjarke 
had created them on beforehand as he knew how the 
LEDs were represented. Next he only need to map 
them to the correct IP address (specific for each 
falcon board) and channel (which output on the falcon 
board)
Activating one after another, it's possible to configure 
mapping on each individual LED bar.
Resolume can fix mapping, rather than move physical 
cables around. Once configured, theres no need to 
think about mapping again.
For creating fixtures you must know: diode 
specification(e.g. GRB), amt of pixel per fixture, universe 
per channel, IP of falcon
It is up to the designer to determine how he prefers to 
locate the fixtures in the coordinate system. This will 
affect how his video animations are reproduced on the 
LEDs. E.g.: Should a sideways motion also give a sideways 
motion on the stage? I this case, it would move a light 
from the bottom triangle, to the upper side, move across 
to the other side, and return to the bottom again.
Toggling DMX output via WiFi or Ethernet cable is a 
setting far away from the Output settings and the DMX 
fixture editor.
Bjarke was producing content out of 
prepared material with his computer.He 
had attached a MIDI-​controller to his 
computer, for intuitive control. With 
pushbuttons and faders he would 
control the lighting of the triangle 
directly.
A sequencer allowed him to 
rhythmically activate individual LED 
bars. 9 hours of content was produced 
in interplay with two other computers.
1
1
4
4
4
slit
bolt
clamp
truss
Tiredness after approximately 22 
hours of work.
With all the work ahead of us and the 
need for sleep, it was not the optimal 
conditions for packing things down 
nicely.
Distortions in the signal was suspected to 
occur  because of voltage drop, defect cable 
or defect LED bar. One LED bar was dropped!
The solution in the end was to use a second 
Falcon board box, allowing providing the 
extra needed output. This required a second 
ethernet as well.
Careful action is required with ethernet 
cable. There were no spare.
==PAGE:124==
C
Board comparison table
See appended item on the following page(s).
114
==PAGE:125==
==PAGE:126==
D
Prototyping: PERT chart
See appended item on the following page(s).
115
==PAGE:127==
Configure development 
environment.
Visual studio code + 
Platform IO.
PERT chart: prototyping
0
1
Event no.
Days
21
Combine 
1 webserver, statemachine, configuration, 
diplay 
with 
2 art-​net processing capabilities
Merge functionalities
Build statemachine MODE
 (placeholder for states)
Display: IP, GATEWAY, Subnet
Send strings to backend
Webserver:
Display layout
Decide sufficiency of code.
Test laggs by loading system.
TEST ROBUSTNESS
Create specs of the system
Build simple implementation
Art-​net recording
Find example
Test Art-​net playback for new WS2811 
pixels:
-​Speed
-​Channels amount
-​Framerate
Coexistance with Art-​net Ethernet code
Test Art-​net for new WS2811 pixels:
-​Speed
-​Channels
-​Framerate
20
19
18
17
16
15
14
13
Integrate with Webserver
hosting code
12
Clean up for new development
Project end, to be evaluated, and 
documentation refined
Control Art-​net [ON/OFF] via webserver
Use multithreading to seperate Art-​net 
signal processing from core handling 
communication
Config resolume and output to ESP Art-​net 
WIfi
Web Server - modify interface
Web Server - control values transferred 
back an forth to interface and mcu
Web Server - compile & upload example
Config resolume and output to ESP
Art-​net debugger code.
Compile example
code Art-​net WiFi
Use multithreading on a simple sketch
Boot ESP32.
Compile & upload example
code via PlatformIO
Project start
0
11
10
9
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
Boot ESP32.
Compile & upload 
example
code via PlatformIO
c) 1
4
Compile example
code Art-​net WiFi
Web Server - compile 
& upload example
Use multithreading on a 
simple sketch
b) 4
f) 4
9
0
5
Control Art-​net  
[ON/OFF] via 
webserver
3
Config resolume and 
output to ESP
Art-​net debugger code.
Config resolume and 
output to ESP Art-​net 
WIfi
7
6
Web Server - modify 
interface
Web Server - control 
values transferred 
back an forth to 
interface and mcu
Use multithreading to 
seperate Art-​net signal 
processing from core 
handling communication
2
8
Baseline for Interface and 
threading established
Compile example
code Art-​net Eth
Webserver:
Send strings
Art-​net recording
Find example
10
2
Build statemachine MODE
(placeholder for states)
Display: IP, GATEWAY, Subnet
Merge functionalities
18
4
Send strings to backend
19
7
11
3
Clean up for new 
development
12
5
Integrate with 
Webserver
hosting code
Test Art-​net for new 
WS2811 pixels:
-​Speed
-​Channels
-​Framerate
13
9
Decide sufficiency of 
code.
Test laggs by loading 
system.
Test robustness
Create specs of the 
system
Test mulitple devices 
on the network
Define User Journey
Workflow finished
20
14
Phase 1
Board feasibility
Setting up development 
environment. 
Getting experience with 
involved systems:
Webserver
Art-​net
Resolume
IP
Phase 3
Prototyping interface:
Display information
Alter layout
Communicate with 
backed
Build statemachine
Phase 2
Prototype Art-​net 
processing capabilities:
Art-​net stream 
based on ethernet
Recording and 
playback
[1
1]
[2
2]
[3
3]
17
13
Known capabilities
Test Art-​net playback 
for new WS2811 pixels:
-​Speed
-​Channels amount
-​Framerate
Coexistance with Art-​net 
Ethernet code
15
6
Phase 4
Combine into a 
functioning unit
[4
lCombine
1 webserver, 
statemachine, 
configuration, diplay
with
2 art-​net processing 
capabilities
21
17
4]
14
5
Build simple 
implementation
Signal processing 
finished
Product build 1
16
9
Discovery tool - sniffer 
finding IP
Save in 
configurations in 
persistent  memory
DMX
Future work
==PAGE:128==
E
Pin availability table
See appended item on the following page(s).
116
==PAGE:129==
==PAGE:130==
F
Protomap
See appended item on the following page(s).
117
==PAGE:131==
Subsystem 
Art-​net
Week 43 - 48 
1 - 30 November
rt
Subsystem 
Internet 
connection
Week 48 
31 - 6 December
Week 49
7 - 13 December
Week 50
14 - 20 December
https://learn.sparkfun.com/tut
orials/using-​artnet-​dmx-​and-​
the-​esp32-​to-​drive-​pixels/all
Artnet via WiFi 
example code
Code found at sparkfun.com. 
Code implements both access 
point mode and via WiFi router. 
Both works.
Using: hideakitai's library
Subsystem 
Multi-​core
processing
Example code 
Code found at a blog. The code was 
gradually implemented in an empty 
script to test behavior.
The coding technique creates a 
second super-​loop to be run on core 
0, which is otherwise idle.
https://randomnerdtut
orials.com/esp32-​
dual-​core-​arduino-​ide/
Code modified
Webserver continuously updates WIFi 
Signal Strength RSSI instead of analog 
(ADC) measurements.
This implementation serves as 
debugging tool, to see if code gets 
locked up, or if performance drops (e.g. 
if the 1second timing starts to drift).
Subsystem 
Webserver 
interface
Subsystem 
SD card
Example code 
Code found at Github: A webserver example, which handles 
both frontend and back-​end. The code uses utilizes FreeRTOS 
(Espressif) to proto-​thread in- and outgoing requests, being a 
dynamic base for development where other actions are 
occuring. Messages are sent via XML, so individual parts of 
the webserver can be updated independently (rather than a 
whole webserver at a time)
The HTML webserver code uses CSS for styling, HTML for 
defining webserver elements and JavaScript for processing 
and communicating messages between frontend and backed.
https://github.com/KrisKas
przak/ESP32_WebPage
Subsystem 
LED 
Control
Subsystem 
Code
structure
Subsystem 
Resolume
Subsystem 
Pinout study
Subsystem 
Captive portal
Subsystem 
Physical
prototype
Booting ESP32
Within platform IO, a project is build 
for the type:
"Firebeetle-​ESP32 (DFRobot)"
Successful uploading of code to the 
ESP32, means that required 
dependencies have been met for 
working in the environment and using 
Espressif's Arduino Core for ESP 
microprocessors.
Art-​net switch ON/OFF 
A part of getting to know the code 
included making a function which 
switches mode based on input.
Prototyping
planner
Code merger: Webserver and Art-​net using WiFi 
The ESP32 Firebeetle board was programmed to incorporate a 
sequence of features, to prototype the relationsship and potential 
methods of integration:
Webserver, Art-​net WiFi & 
multithreading on ESP32
Gateway bard
Code transferred to run on the 
ESP32-​gateway. It was quite a 
painless process.
Threading merge
Threading utilized in handling 
of FASTLED PWM output in 
existing art-​net code.
Ethernet example
Running Ethernet example 
on ESP32-​gateway revision G
ESP32-​Gateway
Booting ESP32-​Gateway and configuring 
board manager in IDE
State machine diagram
The system diagram was developed and iterated in 
collaboration with Niels and based on analysis from 
the version 2 of the Artnet LED controller. A 
significant difference is the lack of a physical interface, 
screen and rotary encoder.
Compile for ESP32-​POE instead of Gateway
SD Card example
Running Ethernet example 
on ESP32-​gateway revision G
Compile for ESP32-​
POE due to faulty 
board manager
FastLED code library
for buffering and 
PWM output
FastLED code: Multiple output 
channels
Transfer code to 
PlatformIO
Toggle mode
Changed switch 
button function:
Webserver can toggle 
the Art-​net WiFi 
mode ON and OFF.
Captive portal example 
main.cpp script
main.cpp and SuperMon.h
Created webserversetup.cpp 
& webserversetup.h
Use header files to 
outline core 
functionalities
Booting and read/write 
successful for POE
https://iotespresso.com/create-​
captive-​portal-​using-​esp32/
Create captive portal to discover
hosted webserver without knowing 
the correct IP address
DNS -  Scrap and pivot 
https://iotespresso.com/create-​
captive-​portal-​using-​esp32/
DNS worked on Android, but not 
elegantly, and not the same on 
multiple devices.
DNS is scrapped. Using Static IP 
addresses, we can predict "where" 
LED controllers are on the network.
https://iotespresso.com/create-​
captive-​portal-​using-​esp32/
Captive portal worked on Android 
only, but not elegantly, and not the 
same on multiple devices. Error 
wasn't exactly located.
Example trail failed
Due to faulty board manager, the 
Olimex gateway-​version is 
outdated. The Olimex POE board 
is a closer match, and will compile 
fine in Arduino IDE. 
Compiling fails due to outdated 
Arduino framework. Niels 
shares his framework files.
WiFi mode - Accesspoint
and Router switch
A part of getting to know the code 
included making a function which 
switches mode based on input.
Models for 
project 
overviewing 
and goal-​
setting
System map outlines goal features for prototype
PERT chart used for outlining project. With current 
standpoint at the black downwards arrow, it projects 
future tasks and dependencies before achieving basic 
prototype at the end of Phase 4.
Week 51
21 - 28 December
Changing the framework files solved 
the issue. Niels shared his.
Webserver, Art-​net WiFi integrated with multi-
core processing 
Code creates a task on a separate system core (core 0) and will run 
without interference from actions on core 1. It is assumed that 
performance would be better if Webserver activity was separate from 
artnet-​handlers.
Use .h header files to share 
global variables, objects and 
functions in multiple .cpp 
files. This header notation is 
more related to C coding 
than C++
Niels worked on hpwit's  library so it 
would fit our coding format. He split up 
artnet related tasks and FastLED related 
tasks in to C++ Class structures.
He sent me his code, and I implemented it 
in my WebServer code.
Coding format of 
hpwit's library
Choppy performance, issues with
serial communication and webserver
The ESP board has a lot of pins that are in use for 
various systems (clock, ethernet, SD-​card and other). 
It is suspected that these may be interfering with 
performance, if we use busy pins.
Version 2 analysis
 8 x 8 LED matrix, 3 channel 
GRB fixture to match the
WS2812B pixel matrix.
In DMX preference 
Network Adapter is set to 
Wi-​Fi. 
Target IP address is set 
for local IP address of the 
ESP
PERT Chart
Start channel is 1 as long 
as theres just one fixture 
and one output channel
The main.cpp script is
the first script to be run in 
Platform IO in VS code, when 
running a program. The 
main.cpp is therefore the 
minimum requirement for 
running any code.
The main.cpp can import other 
files and libraries via header (.h 
or .hpp) files.
webserver header file file is named SuperMon.h from example code
Ethernet 
Webserver code 
example 
Test sketch connects to the LAN 
network via Ethernet. The ESP 
hosts a small webserver which 
can be accessed via it's IP 
address, proving the connection 
is established.
Compiling code for the wrong 
gateway-​version gave rise to 
issues with PHY, because the it 
expects two pins to be wired 
differently:
PHY Power and PHY Clock. 
Without proper connection, 
ethernet could not work.
State machine diagram - goal for prototyping phase
Iterating with Niels' feedback. The diagram 
represents what seems feasible within the 
timeframe.
Art-​net Ethernet 
hpwit's Art-​net library is used 
for art-​net streaming. hpwit 
uses FastLED to convert data 
from buffer to the correct PWM 
protocol suitable for the specific 
pixel LED type, e.g WS2812B.
https://www.olimex.com/Products/IoT/ESP32/ESP32-​GATEWAY/resources/ESP32-​GATEWAY-​
GPIOs-​Rev.F-​up.pdf
This webpage displays a 
lightweight pinout of the ESP32 
gateway's pins.
It was initially used
 to try to guess which pins were 
available for PWM outputting.
It also confirms pins used for 
PHY, helping to debug compile-​
issues and PHY booting issues.
Pinout overview
A pin study was made to create a
better overview of available pins 
and which pins were in use for 
which tasks. The goal was to 
figue out how many pins were 
available for LED-​control while 
integrating more features that 
requires pin-​usage. Ethernet and 
SD in particular. GPIO 16, 17, 5, 
12 seemed clear to use. 
Potentially also: 4, 32, 33.
Issues indicating errors in prior 
study, invoked a new study, using 
more sources including the 
official ESP32-​Gateway revision G 
schematic.
Pin 5 and 12 cause trouble.
Clear to use:
Pin 4, 13, 16 and 32
Clear to use:
Pin 2, 4, 13, 14, 15 16, 32 
and 33.
Total: 8
 ​ ​Equipment:
ESP32 GATEWAY
WiFi Router
2x RJ45 LAN cables
Computer
WS2812B LED matrix
New build using Ethernet
The build is a code merge 
between:
Webserver code, artnet 
toggle, webserver display
establishing network 
connection with ethernet
using hpwit's Art-​net library.
Changes in Resolume is equally 
necessary to make the build 
work.
New Artnet library
hpwit, a developer on github has built 
3 code examples, capable of artnet 
streaming, artnet record-​ing to SD-​
card and playback from SD-​card. Also, 
notably, it is intended to handle 800< 
LEDs.
This library may either be our solution 
or give inspiration to developing 
playback feature ourselves
A new build was assembled in order to have 
multiple outputs connected at once.
A new type of LED pixel was used:
12V WS2811 pixels, with 144 pixel density, but 
only 48 controllable sections. These pixels 
giving more light intensity and density with 
less CPU requirement, at the cost of 
resolution.
3 were made. Niels used this as his only ESP 
build. Marcus got one for his possession - 
although he never participated. I never used it 
because it didn't suit my preference regarding 
portability.
ESP32-​Gateway build with multiple LED outputs
t
Ethernet requires using CAT5 LAN 
cable to connect devices.  A router 
can provide DHCP if 
wanted/needed.
DHCP will automatically assign IP 
addresses to devices on the 
network, avoiding conflict between 
them.
A router can be used if more than 
two devices must be on the 
network, assuming one divice uses 
only one CAT5 cables as in and 
output.
Setup with Static IP
Setup with DHCP
New physical prototype
using ethernet
Specifying output via 
ethernet 
Performance 
issue with pins
Varying results depending on which 
pin used for outputting PWM. It 
indicates potential errors with pin-​
study.
Code may become slow and choppy, 
LED-​out may become very laggy.
Pin 5, 12 and 16 have been causing 
issues.
Available pins
The study actually proves a lot of errors 
from the prior official Olimex sources 
used! (highlighted in red.)  Many users 
on the internet have complained 
about similar incompleteness
SD versus SD_MCC
The SD card can be controlled 
in 2 configurations. Regular 
SD and SD_MMC 
(MultiMediaCard). SD_MMC 
uses 2 fewer pins, as DAT1 
and DAT2 can be spared. Data 
transfer speed is slower, but 
MMC allows more pins 
available for Art-​net, which 
perhaps is preferable, due to 
a tight situation regarding 
pixel amount.
MMC uses 3 pins for data:
Pin 2, 14 and 15 on the 
ESP32-​Gateway
SD uses 5 pins for data:
Pin 2, 4, 12, 14 and 15 
on the ESP32-​Gateway
Pin availability
The following pins should be ok to 
use:
Pins: 4, 12, 13, 16, 32 and 33.
Niels and I are experiencing different 
results, seemingly using the same 
code. Problem may reside in different 
use of hardware, different PlatformIO 
configuration, different platform, 
different library versions.To be tested 
further.
Other pins primarily consist of in-​put 
only types.
Pins occupied for Ethernet
The following pins are used 
for ethernet PHY:
Pins: 5, 17, 18, 19, 22, 23, 25, 
26, 27
5 and 17 of the above are 
exposed as GPIO. Using pin 5 
for LED's has caused us
Pins occupied for SD card module
hpwit utilizes core 0 and core 1
.
Wireless connection between ESP32 
and computer.
Subsystem 
State machine
l
main.cpp State Machine
Using the pre-​existing switch-​syntax used in 
Niels' version 2 LedController, a State Machine 
was implemented in the prototype, as a means 
for changing between modes.
The state machine diagram is used as input to 
the State Machine skeleton.
The integer variable MODE is introduced as 
control parameter. If MODE changes, so does 
the State Machine.
Initially the statemachine largely was an "empty 
shell". Only MODE = 1 would toggle the Art-​net  
mode on. All other modes would do nothing.
Version 2
Version 3 prototype
MODE:
1 = Artnet
2 = Standalone
3 = DMX
4 = SD playback
5 = SD record
Subsystem 
Persistent 
memory
(EEPROM)
Multiple outputs
Code is outputting PWM on multiple pins. Although, only one 
matrix is attached. The signal-​wire can be switched between pins, 
to confirm output and output quality (FPS) on all pins.
Webserver and LED
Webserver (asyncronous)
Updating of variables (Signal Strength) in UI
Art-​net control of LEDs (signal streaming)
Toggle Art-​net mode on/off via UI.
Function to set MODE value
Server.on sets the ESP32 to listen for incoming 
strings with"/led_set". If this string is received, it 
will trigger the ModeFunction.
The ModeFunction updates the variable MODE with 
the incoming string. The change of MODE will change 
the state of the ESP32.
The modestr integer is returned to the ESP32 
Webserver, displaying which mode is active to the 
user. Implementation is only a functional beta,
not a final solution.
Buttons in webserversend 
integer to ESP backend
HTML & CSS defines the button 
elements and their style.
HTML code calls JavaScript function Send(int x) with 
a given integer x as input when clicked (via "onclick").
Send() function sends strings to ESP32 
backend with GET-​request
Goals:
Control via WiFi
Control via Ethernet
Configure IP
IT security 
measurements
Configure LEDs settings
Change modes:
Record artnet
playback Art-​net
DMX input & output
Standalone LED animations
New coding format: Class structure
Niels' notation style was implemented 
system wide: .hpp files instead of .h. 
This is native to object oriented C++ 
notation rather than C language code.
Class structure for public and private 
variables, functions and objects.
Public: they are available in other scripts.
Private: they are only available in the .cpp 
script.
Perks with this structure
Test: multiple
outputs, how 
many LED's?
Test
Concept
Study
User testing
Coding
Physical model
Eliminated
concept/branch
Subsystem 
Standalone
mode
Record and 
playback of
Art-​net
A code which makes a recording of 400 frames (10 seconds if FPS is 
40) is created to test out the logic and co-​existance of the features 
built by HPWIT. His examples does not combine the functions.
Code runs with some playback jitter. It seems as if the playback or 
recording process is not perfected.
Simple recording and playback 
merge
Code run and compile testing
To answer the question, if we are able to use this code 
library for recording and playback of Art-​net data, this 
code must be tested. Initially, with the simplest possible 
implementation, keeping uknown variables at a 
minimum, each script was run:
SD-​Artnet for recording.
readSD for playback.
https://github.com/hpwit/artnetESP32/tree/master/examples
Code run and compile testing
The SD card failes to initialize.  Using the 
OLIMEX ESP32 POE (power over ethernet)
board solved the issue.
Failed event
"Forms" to input strings from users
Adding "forms" to the website has 
been done by the following 
methods:
The HTML forms  section
Javascript code to receive, 
format and check inputted 
strings.
Javascript code that sends 
inputted data to the ESP32 
backend code by triggering a .on 
function call
The .on function must input 
strings, and write it to internal 
memory. For this, ArduinoJSON 
has been used.
Detailing SD record 
and playback and 
added display arrows
Arduino JSON for 
receiving strings from 
webserver 
Arduino JSON is used to parse(deserialize) 
strings from the webserver.  The doc 
object can be used to index an array of 
data
Writing to persistent (non-​volatile) memory, 
also called EEPROM, for storage of data and 
preferences for next boot.
https://randomnerdtutorials.com/esp32-​save-​data-​permanently-​preferences/
"Preferences.h" is a 
library, which uses the 
EEPROM on the ESP 
board to store data.
Data is saved and read 
in the form of a 
namespace. A 
namespace specifies 
the name of a set of 
key-​value pairs like so:
Like other overarching functions of the project, 
saving to persistent memory is created as it's 
own class:
The functions ReadEEPROM and SaveEEPROM creates 
an abstraction layer from library functions, to be used 
in conjunction with defined namespaces.  
ReadEEPROM and Save EEPROM be called in other 
scripts, to access the functionalities of Preferences.h
In the main.cpp file, the Setup() 
function call a series of initialisation 
functions from other .cpp scripts. 
Along with these, boot functions 
shall initialise stored variables from 
EEPROM into RAM, applying them 
into the runtime. The BootHSV() 
function updates global HSV values 
to their prior saved state:
Boot with preferences
In SetupEth(), a code function 
boots with saved IP settings, 
if it is asked to do so. A 
corresponding UI will allow 
users to make this request:
Subsystem 
Using forms to define H S V values
HSV gives control of Pixels, without relying on 
an incoming art-​net signal  (analog to a DMX-​
controller)
Using sliders/ranges to update global 
intergers in the ESP32 system 
The  response of these ranges is immedieate, and gives 
surprisingly smooth control of LEDs.
A button Save HSV Preferences saves HSV values to 
persistent memory.
Multiple art-​
net receivers 
on the 
network
Subsystem 
The ability to reconfigure IP of the ESP
Configuring the ESP's IP address allows for receiving 
individual signals out of Resolume. In Resolume, 
multiple "Lumiverses" can be created, each targeting 
an individual IP address.
Added output pins - no SD card
Redesign state machine logic
The prior version of the statemachine 
runs solely in a continuous loop. This 
becomes an issue for the Art-​net 
Recording and Playback mode, where 
initialisation and termination of 
recording and playback is important 
prior to the continuous loop.
The .on call function ModeFunction() 
contains a a switch case logic, which  
can be used to individualise such 
initialisations/terminations before the 
statemachine loop gets affected.
Running SD-​card record 
and playback test
Code recording and test is implemented on artnet via WiFi. It's only 
implemented on a small scale model.
HPWIT's code library forgets to initialize the ReadFromSDTask, which 
is the callback function that handles incoming Art-​net frames. This is 
fixed by uncommenting both line 144 and 145.
The code is fixed with the case-​switch code logic, in the .on function 
ModeFunction(). The case-​switch allows for running specific code for 
individual scenarios. This gives complete control of what happens 
when changing from one mode to another - before affecting the main 
loop.
Recordings can now be started and playback mode activated without 
any limits or crashes.
A recording is saved under the filename "/filename" as a start. If the 
system is rebooted, the file is still available for playback. When 
initiating a new recording, the prior file is overwritten and lost from the 
system.
Fixing recording and playback
Recording indefinately
A code logic is built, so that the recording process can run indefinitely, after being 
initialised. Pressing "Recording" in the interface will initialize file recording and 
loop until playback is pressed.
Some function calls are made prior
to recording:
Some are made after:
Playback is done like so:
Available pins:
SD card mode = off 
In settings > DMX preference > 
"Network Adapter" is set to USB 
10/100 LAN.
Multiple Lumiverses 
means multiple target IP's
Target multiple devices with 
different content.
l
Multiple receiving nodes on 
the network means more LED 
control
Adding more LED controllers to the 
system, means larger throughput. 
For larger installations, this should 
naturally be possible.
This method was built 
upon changing MODE 
variable in .on call.
Although, it had a tendency 
to break after one 
recording. Performance 
was a bit irregular, perhaps 
due to some unlucky timing 
in code, not finishing or 
starting tasks in correct 
order.
(webserver interface)
In a subsequent loop, the playback function would run indefinately
File system to keep track 
of multiple recordings
Use the Forms, that input strings to 
name recordings before recording 
them. When booting the system, 
when saving or deleting a file, 
update a list-​section to see which 
files are available.
Playback any one of those recorded 
files.
Improve record and 
playback
Replace or optimize code logic. 
Suggested changes:
don't record time inbetween 
frames. Instead, assume an 
incoming framerate, e.g. 40.
how many frames can be 
recorded at once, with a better 
implementation?
Modified code 
version: NO SD 
card
A modified version of the 
code Removes SD-​card 
initialisation. Instead, the 
pin numbers: 2, 14 and 
15 can be added for LED 
control.
SD card initialisation logic
One function now 
initialises SD-​card 
and reports if the 
process was 
obstructed.
Much better control of global and local variables - 
less chance of errors with multiple declared 
variables with the same name
Test: LEDS and 
webserver 
simultaneously
Error message
Solution in code
With this library, we 
might for a time forget 
about multi-​threading, 
as the library itself 
should draw benefit 
from this capability.
If performance is 
insufficient, it may 
become relevant to 
return to this field.
The SuperMon header file contains a code example with for 
a webserver interface. It is imported into the main.cpp. 
From the main.cpp we can control it and manipulate 
backend functions. From the SuperMon.h we can control 
interface elements and preprocessing of elements before 
they are sent to the backend.
System wide 
implementation
</>
Example is imported
</>
</>
</>
</>
</>
</>
</>
</>
</>
</>
</>
The webserversetup scripts have 
been created to isolate functions and 
variables dealing with the webserver 
and internet connection in order to 
clean up main.cpp.
The getRSSI() and HandleClient() 
functions are shared to main.cpp, via 
.h file so they can be called in the 
main loop
Integrated 
concept
</>
</>
</>
The prior hideakitai library is 
replaced with the hpwit 
library. Its initialization 
process and function calls is 
built in to the existing script.
</>
</>
</>
</>
</>
Code is implemented on 
the ESP32 Firebeetle. The 
code seems like a solid 
base and has a series of 
implemented features to 
be repurposed.
An assumed way of routing systems together was like proposed in the 
picture. The lack of an Ethernet port to interface with the ESP32 made 
WiFi the only way to get started. This prototyping setup shall give the 
possibility of getting familiar with:
The 8x8 WS2812 RGB LED matrix would be a fine component 
for monitoring output quality, such as framerate and jitter.
Resolume
ESP32 programming
PlatformIO
Art-​net libraries
internet connection
webserver
DMX
Subsystem 
DMX implementation
To be investigated. Acquire suitable 
hardware for prototyping.
DMX hardware 
components
Niels had done some 
research on hardware 
components, and 
proposed this DMX to 
LED Shield for 
prototyping:
ESP32 THING PLUS DMX
TO LED SHIELD
https://let-​elektronik.dk/shop/1090-​led-​
drivers/15110-​esp32-​thing-​plus-​dmx-​to-​
led-​shield/
</>
https://github.com/espressif/arduino-​
esp32/blob/master/libraries/Ethernet/examp
les/ETH_LAN8720/ETH_LAN8720.ino
</>
</>
</>
</>
Ethernet initialisation 
</>
This code example is merged 
into all future prototypes as it 
robustly can connect devices
and automatic reconnect logic
</>
Fewer pins are used in the 
SD_MMC configuration at the 
cost of read/write speed. This 
feature is now a topic for 
further development, as we 
seem to be short of pins for 
LED control.
SD replaced 
with SD_MMC
</>
All files in src
artnetStream deals with Art-​
net functions:  setup, record, 
playback and stream.
Erase_EEPROM_nsv.txt is a 
guide to reformatting 
EEPROM in case too many 
faulty and unused data writes 
has occurred
main.cpp calls initializing 
functions from other .cpp 
files. It calls some boot-​
functions. It has the main 
loop state machine.
pixel deals with initializing 
fastled, amount of pixels, 
which pins to be used and 
standalone features.
preferences defines 
functions for saving and 
reading to EEPROM.
sd_card initializes SD-​card 
MMC, to be used for 
recording.
WebServerSetup initialises 
internet connection, the 
server, and does all 
processing of incoming 
messages
HSV LED control
Fastled library function is used
to control leds with input from webserver.
Global variables: Hue, Sat and Val can be 
updated from other scripts, and 
automatically affect the HSV() function.
Interface designning with inspiration from 
existing technical instruments: Channels 
with individual settings for each output
Niels was eager to leave this part behind, as, in the future, It would be preferred 
to leave interface designing to a front end programmer. I had already made 
some initial sketches on paper and in HTML:
Interface layout and user friendliness
Changing IP address of 
device
1: type a new IP and hit save.
2: ensure that the stored IP 
is noted and desired
3: Reboot with stored IP
(Or reboot with default IP)
Control statemachine via interface
Display some IP information
IP address is automatically updated when 
webserver is hosted from the ESP
Style code changes colours and shape of 
buttons and text.
An integer is sent to the ESP backend 
when clicked for further processing.
The interface and it's 
font-​end functions
Input from 
collaborator
Future
work
</>
</>
Controlling RGBW leds rather than RGB
FastLED is not made for RGBW control, 
even though many LED's are RGBW.
The implementation works - at least at a 
scale for controlling a few hundred LEDs.
The implementation comes at a cost of CPU 
power, depending on how it will scale, we 
must optimise art-​net and  FastLED code 
efficiency.
Working on exam demonstration, increasing the scale of the LEDs. Lamps are built with RGBW.
Logic gate raises signal 
from 3v3b to 5v

www.partsnotincluded.com
FastLED with RGBW
NeoPixels (SK6812) -
Parts Not Included
Someone has shown me a way to
control RGBW NeoPixels (SK6812
chipset) using the FastLED library and a
small additional header file.
</>
https://www.partsnotincluded.co
m/fastled-​rgbw-​neopixels-​sk6812/
UDP package transfer speed
A series of speedtests reveals data 
transfer speed. The original test from 
Eli Fulkerson was found by Niels.
 yves, the developer of hpwit 
artnetESP32 library altered this script 
to simultaneously display the 
theoretical amount of LED's that can 
be controlled with the given UDP 
speed. This number ranges between
933 LEDs all the way up to 66666 LEDs.
https://www.elifulkerson.com/projects/python-​udp-​stress-​tester.php
LED limit testing
Niels and I have suffered from the fact 
that our results are not similar. Niels 
seemed to be able  to control up to 
4000 LEDs.
Some combinatorial testing has sought 
to explore this:
Between 1 and 4 pins:
PIN 4, 500 LEDS, runs very smooth
PIN 4 , PIN 13, EACH 500 LEDS, runs very smooth
PIN 4 , PIN 13, PIN 16, EACH500 LEDS, runs very smooth
PIN 4 , PIN 13, PIN 16, PIN 32, EACH 500 LEDS, runs very choppy
PIN 4 , PIN 13, PIN 16, PIN 32, EACH 400 LEDS, runs very little choppy.   TOTAL: 1600
PIN 4 , PIN 13, PIN 16, PIN 32, EACH 400 LEDS, runs very little choppy.   TOTAL: 1600
PIN 4 , PIN 13, PIN 16, PIN 32, EACH 300 LEDS, runs very smooth.   TOTAL: 1600
PIN 4 , PIN 13, PIN 16, PIN 33, EACH 500 LEDS, runs very choppy
5 pins:
PIN 4 , PIN 13, PIN 16, PIN 32, PIN 33, EACH 500 LEDS, runs very choppy TOTAL 2000
PIN 4 , PIN 13, PIN 16, PIN 32, PIN 33, EACH 400 LEDS, runs very choppy TOTAL 1800
PIN 4 , PIN 13, PIN 16, PIN 32, PIN 33, EACH 300 LEDS, runs a little choppy
PIN 4 , PIN 13, PIN 16, PIN 32, PIN 33, EACH 270 LEDS, runs a little choppy
PIN 4 , PIN 13, PIN 16, PIN 32, PIN 33, EACH 200 LEDS, runs a little choppy.   TOTAL  1000
PIN 12 seems to be very disruptive.
I seem to have a limitation cap around 
1500LED's no matter how many LED's 
per pin and amount of pins I use, ~1500 
is the cap where LEDs animations 
drasticly looses quality.
</>
Pin 12 is scrapped from usage. The other pins should be good to use 
when SD card is not in use.
Display IP and subnet
Configure IP
Mode switch
HSV control in standalone mode
Save HSV to EEPROM
Placeholder for Art-​net 
configuration (is not fully 
implemented)
Toggle Built-​in LED
Display time and date
(debug purpose: check ethernet response time)
Reboot with Stored IP
Boot with IP if key BoolIP  has value 1 
IP configuration: From ArduinoJSON to saved data in EEPROM
The webserver form input is 
converted to JSON in 
javascript, before it is sent to 
the ESPe32 backend.
The .on function IPConfig() 
receives the JSON string. It is 
deserialised using the 
ArduinoJSON function
deserializeJson(doc, String) 
(meaning it can be indexed by 
it's key value pair)
Once deserialized the 
incoming data can be accessed 
and saved to EEPROM
</>
</>
Prototyping planners
[1]
[2]
[3] [4]
Phase 
convergence
 Phase [1] 
convergence 
 Phase [3] 
convergence 
 Phase [2] 
convergence 
Edge
Nodes
Edge theory
Icons
</>
 Phase [4] 
convergence 
GitHub
WiFi.h library 
for IoT 
capability
GitHub
Continue testing Art-​net capabilities
Testing and debugging
Resolve issues with LED limitations - maybe Ethernet is creating the problem. Strive towards performance as hpwit 
manages.
Domains to explore:
 Reduce overhead and complexity - do not host webserver code while trying to improve performance.
 Try recording with a much better SD card and compare results to our current, laggy performance. Invent a 
test-​method, e.g. using high speed camera.
 Try making tests based on WiFi instead of Ethernet. Will this change performance?
 Change IDE (has given different results before, as it changes framework)
 Try regular SD card connection instead of the slower SD-​MMC implementation!
Try both using DHCP and using static IP address.
Try speed limiting to 10MB/s (as recommended by hpwit) and 100MB/s
Pivot
If the ArtnetESP32 library by hpwit cannot give us the performance we want, we must look elsewhere for 
increasing performance.
Continue testing Art-​net capabilities
Testing and debugging
Resolve issues with LED limitations - maybe Ethernet is creating the problem. Strive towards performance as hpwit 
manages.
Domains to explore:
 Reduce overhead and complexity - do not host webserver code while trying to improve performance.
 Try recording with a much better SD card and compare results to our current, laggy performance. Invent a 
test-​method, e.g. using high speed camera.
 Try making tests based on WiFi instead of Ethernet. Will this change performance?
 Change IDE (has given different results before, as it changes framework)
 Try regular SD card connection instead of the slower SD-​MMC implementation!
Try both using DHCP and using static IP address.
Try speed limiting to 10MB/s (as recommended by hpwit) and 100MB/s
Pivot
If the ArtnetESP32 library by hpwit cannot give us the performance we want, we must look elsewhere for 
increasing performance.
Build a test setup with 
two nodes co-​existing
Have resolume output visuals for 
two LED controllers with different 
IPs on the same network.
Is performance unchanged from 1 
LED controller?
Implement standalone 
mode based on 
generative LED control
Use hardcoded algorithms to 
control LEDs. Create a new MODE 
in which generative algorithms can 
be selected.
Captive portal as means 
to create usability
Captive portal was initially 
considered as a preferable 
technology, as it allows to bring 
clients on a network to a specific IP 
address in the web browser. It is 
still a consideration once it has 
been researched.
Usability study
Study usage of the device 
through:
prior versions of the 
LED controller
new designs of the 
LED controller
Wishful thinking: 
how does users 
really want to 
control the LEDs 
intuitively?
Testing types of 
LEDs
Testing which types of 
ELD that ideally are most 
suited for stage use and 
potentially other uses. 
Hackstage already has 
purchased a handful.
Protomap
Sebastian McAleer Elkjær
Art-​Net LED System
The interface and it's 
font-​end functions
==PAGE:132==
G
Prototyping planers (6)
See appended item on the following page(s).
118
==PAGE:133==
We want the olimex ESP32-gateway board to 
successfully connect to a LAN network via its built-in 
LAN8262 Ethernet port. 
x
The prototype is conducted to verify the feasibility 
of using the Olimex ESP32-Gateway. 
x
x
If a stable connection is made, the designed
way of establishing connection will server as a 
base for further deveopment of WebServer, Art-
net streaming and all other features.
Ethernet connection
Sebastian McAleer Elkjær
5/12-2022
1
Stable connection (no dropouts)
Automatic reconnect
Static IP and DHCP 
•
UDP package speed 
test
Resources:
•
Olimex board has 
onboard RJ45 
(ethernet) connector
•
LAN router
•
Computer
•
Cat5 and RJ45 
ethernet cables
•
Code
Snippit from state machine diagram:
Debug message when successfully connected 
The prototype will act as component in the 
system prototype. 
A speed test should assist in validating that the 
speed is sufficient for theoretical needs.
Usage of the code should verify if the code works 
in context.
The code manages to sustain connection while 
streaming art-net and hosting webserver.
Some limitations regarding art-net streaming or LED 
update may relate to ethernet connection. Some 
sources point to this. The effect is, that more than 
~1500 Leds cannot be controlled lag-free.
According to UDP testing, speed is not an issue. 
Rather the issue may be FastLED or signal 
processing after receiving.
For now, this code is sufficient for further 
development. 
Locating the issue with artnet Streaming is an 
ongoing process where etherenet is a suspect. 
Ways to go about it: 
1. change the artnet library from hpwit to try to 
isolate the error.
2. change to WiFi connection to see if behavior 
changes
. Ways to go about it: 
1. change the artnet library from hpwit to try to 
isolate the error.
2. change to WiFi connection to see if behavior 
changes
Ethernet using static IP does not digitally connect if you do not un-
plug and plug back in the Ethernet cable - no matter how long you 
wait. Idea: make a timer, Make pin 5 go low and high to reboot PHY.
Testing the connection is a part of this prototype in the 
following ways:
1 Host a webserver code via Ethernet and transfer 
2 messages from client (computer) to the ESP backend.
3 Make a speed test of data transfer.
4 Stream Art-net to the ESP32-gateway
5 Art-net streaming, webserver hosting and message 
transfer is occurring concurrently.
==PAGE:134==
This prototype is meant to explore a functional 
foundation on which to build a digital user 
interface for controlling and monitoring the state 
of the LED controller.
The interface we want to build is a webserver 
which can be hosted on the ESP32 via Ethernet 
and WiFi.
The Ethernet/WiFi connection is the pathway 
through which we stream Art-net from a 
computer to the ESP32. This same network is 
therefore to be utilized for device control.
x
Webserver front and backend
control and display
Sebastian McAleer Elkjær
5/12-2022
1
Approach: 
GitHub user KrisKasprzak has a code example of a WiFi 
hosted WebServer, his code, in contrast to most 
examples, was based on a much more complex 
foundation. Using this as input, we want to explore if it has 
the potential to become the interface we need.
Resources:
•
ESP32 
microcontroller
•
Internet connection (both WiFi and Ethernet)
The example uses XML code to send 
messages to and from the ESP32, thus 
allowing it to update only parts of the 
webserver, rather than updating the entire 
system.
The webserver is tested through usage:
1.
How is the response? Is the interface 
annoying to use due to delays and lagg?
2.
Can the webserver be hosted while 
processing an Art-net steam?
3.
Does the code have a potential to be 
customized with new HTML elements and 
custom styling? 
The response from the webserver is always swift while using 
ethernet. WiFi would tend to have dropouts if signal strength 
was low, resulting in button response latency.
XML is easy to work with, and seems to be a very efficient 
code structure, as there was never percevable interference 
while art-net stream was running due to messages being 
sent back and forth.
JSON with arduinoJSON makes receiving strings easy to 
handle. JSON is also a widely used format. For more about 
ArduinoJSON, see Saving configurations prototyping 
planner.
Plenty of styling options with CSS and HTML in the hands of 
a skilled person.
This base is easy to work with and simultaneously very capable. I had 
never worked with webserver front-end and backend before, but this 
coding framework could be reverse engineered with some days of 
experience.
This webserver framework has show no weaknesses during use, or 
limitations with regard to functional development and aesthetic 
improvement. Good prospects. 
The framework can quickly be implemented in a new context, acting as 
a remote control of an ESP micro-controller, wired and wireless.
Assumption:
The webserver is good and functional interface for technicians, experts 
and engineers. Perhaps NOT good for laymen, in terms of usability, 
having to type IP adress into the webserver.
Improvement of UI: have a design aesthetics vision 
and transform visual aesthetics.
Continue implementation, as a means to provoke the 
system by adding stress and make improvements. 
Make user testing for testing the UI and setup-
scenario.
How can we build a user interface, which is: 
1 Is sufficient to establish communication 
messages between a computer and the ESP32?
2 Can be customized and styled to future needs?
x
The webserver must prove the potential to:
1. Be styled and customized 
2. Send messages to backend
3. Receive messages from backend
4. Control state of ESP - while data streaming occurs 
and without any lag or interferences
This should allow us to complete the envisioned state 
machine diagram.
Being able to display values in the internet browser 
of a computer
Being able to transfer integers and string messages 
to the ESP backend for further processing and 
configuring of the microcontroller.
The origin code is freely available with no license at: 
https://github.com/KrisKasprzak/ESP32_WebPage
This code example has buttons to control some backend functionality 
and displays data, continuously updated, from the ESP via XML. 
Additionally the code includes a header, a table and come CSS 
styling to complete the layout. Lastly, a slider, which may also be 
useful for controlling backend. 
The HTML webserver code uses
CSS for styling, 
HTML for defining webserver elements and 
JavaScript for processing and 
communicating messages between frontend
and backed.
XML is used as a messaging format to send 
variables back and forth between client and 
host. Sending messages is preferred rather
than, alternatively, sending and updating the 
entire webpage, which is the default and 
simple solution
The interface must be lag free and robust. If the 
webserver replaces hardware, it must also be
equally reliable. 
If the ESP can handle the max amount of LED’s and 
host a lag free webserver, it is a successful 
implementation.
x
The result after prototyping phase is ended.
==PAGE:135==
Art-net signal processing is the essential part of the LED 
controller. It is the core engine, ontop of which we want to 
build an application. The ESP32-Gateway 
microcontroller’s processing power shall primarily be used 
to convert Art-net stream into PWM signal, which in turn 
will control hundreds or thousands of pixel LED’s.
Resolume can output close to infinitely many DMX 
universes via Art-net. The maximum output framerate is 
40fps. 3 and 4 colours are supported, (RGB and RGBW 
in various orders) 
Niels has stated he wants to control 4000 LEDs with the 
controller. E.g. with four outputs.
x
With the LED controller, we want to process as many Art-
net universes as possible.
Resolume can output for multiple IP adresses, so we don’t
have to limit us to just one microcontroller. 
The intended pixels are of the GRB WS2812 type initially, 
a new type purchased for Hackstage LED bars.
x
x
With this prototype, I wish to have find one or more ways
to process Art-net, potentially controlling multiple 
thousand LED’s with one ESP32 microprocesser. 
Niels expects 4000 LEDs. The available amount of pins to 
use for LEDs could become a limiting factor.
Art-net signal processing
Sebastian McAleer Elkjær
5/12-2022
1
That the ESP32 microprocessor can process up to 
4000 LEDs with the available amount of pins. 4-8 is 
expected to be needed. Perhaps only 5 is available.
Resources:
•
ESP32
•
Computer
•
Resolume Arena 
software
•
Ethernet cables
and router
•
LEDs,. WS2812
Firstly, hideakitai’s art-net library 
was put to use. This seemed like a 
good protocol, because it is popular 
on github. For WiFi this worked fine, 
at it was easily scaled up to 2000 
LEDs. 
A small strip of 64 pixel is enough to evaluate framerate of 
1000 pixels. The signal is generated and passed on 20 
times, before it is passed out into to nothing. Animation 
must continuously appear smooth. The signal pin can be 
changed to other pinouts.
When a good base is established, we can try to scale up 
the model to a few thousand LEDs. At this point it would 
be suitable to, for instance use a high speed camera to 
count frames. 
The artnet processing code is easily swapped for a new 
one (hpwit, hideakitai, other), once internet connection is 
made.
4000LEDs should be achievable on any system, once Niels 
has succeded with it. His version and coding setup must be 
tested thoroughly.
Recording requires high read/write speed. Current SD card 
is very cheap and low r/w speed.
UDP testing theoretically claims that the internet speed via 
the ESP is sufficient.
Maybe problem is related to PWM generation, which locks 
up the code
Confidence is high, that 4000 pixel LEDs at 40 FPS 
is an acheivable number. 
With this result, it makes sense to further develop a 
final solution based on the ESP32 Olimex 
Gateway revision G board.
The misalignment between Niels’ and my hardware 
and software must be found, so we can achieve 
the same results.
Further testing is needed. Niels and I will have 
to sit side by side and seach for errors in 
oneanothers computer system. Also we should 
try to swich hardware.
If counted frames per second is 40 and the amount 
of LEDs is 4000, we have completed the Art-net 
signal processing prototype.
If the max amount is lower, we must evaluate if it 
can get better. If it cannot get better, we must 
evaluate if the results are good enough for the 
platform.
The optimal approach is to 
find a suitable library on 
github which handles the art-
net processing for an ESP32.
If performance is not enough, 
other methods must be
considered: building our own.
The hpwit library, ArtnetESP32, seemed even more 
promising, due to it’s proclaimed usage of multiple 
processing cores, while library examples boast a 
recording and playback feature. 
While trying to port ArtnetESP32 to ethernet, we had a lot of trouble setting it up, and 
with subsequent performance. For this reason I entered a dialog in “Issues” on the library. 
This ended up putting me in direct contact with hpwit. In this context I’ve done a handful 
of code testing unsuccessfully. With the time available, we didn’t manage to analyze the 
issues or fix them. Some feedback was given: 
For recording and playback, SD-card write and read speed is the bottle neck. This 
remains to be tested. 
Theoretically, we should have enough data through put as shown in this UDP speed test:
Niels has succeeded 
in driving 4000 LEDs 
via hpwit’s library. I, 
on the other hand, 
could not drive this 
many LEDs with 
exactly the same code. 
I expect a simple error 
or misaligment in our 
coding environment is 
the root cause.
yves, the developer of hpwit artnetESP32 library altered this script to simultaneously display the theoretical 
amount of LED's that can be controlled with the given UDP speed. 
This number ranges between 933 LEDs all the way up to 66666 LEDs.
==PAGE:136==
The LED controller is sought to have standalone features. 
This means, the capability of driving LEDs with animation 
without a continous stream of Art-net.
An Art-net based recording on the other hand is a much 
more agile way of fine-tuning animation to ones liking, and 
potentially a much faster way of acheiving a result. 
We want to implement the possibility of recording incoming 
art-net stream, and save it as a file. Then, we want to be 
able to click the playback button, and the entire recording 
shall playback in a loop, as an initial step. The recording 
must be saved and available even after a restart of the 
system.
Usecase: Light installations and unmanned lightshows. 
x
What are the capabilities and limitations of SD-recording? 
If a simple implementation can be built, it can be tested 
and evaluated. If we can drive hundreds or thousands of 
LEDs it may become a very attractive feature.
x
Successful:
We have an implementenation ontop of which we can build
one or more applications for the LED controller
Failure: 
We may know more of where to look and which techniques
to use, in order to obtain the desired feature.
Art-net recording 
and playback
Sebastian McAleer Elkjær
5/12-2022
1
Is it feasible to build an Art-net recorder
functionality?
How can we do so?
Are there existing solutions which we can apply?
What are the limits and capabilities?
What are the needed resources to make it work?
SD card is necessary to store data, as the ESP32 
chip does not have enough.
Additionally, the 
internet should be
scouted for existing
implementations to 
be tested, as a 
starting point. 
Resources:
•
Computer
•
Resolume Arena
•
ESP32
•
Router and Ethernet 
cable
•
LED pixels
•
SD-card
Firstly, a simple and glitch free playback is to be 
acheived with a given number of LEDs. Slowly build 
this number to a few hundred and potentially 
thousands of LEDs to get an idea of the 
performance limit.
hpwit claims his performance is smooth. It 
should be possible to replicate his results. 
Perhaps this is better to be done without hosting 
the webserver simultaneously, to avoid creating 
more problems than necessary.
Hpwit claims to be able to record 6000 rgb
pixels. We do not seem to be close to such 
results
Upgrading the SD-card to a much faster type, in 
order to remove potential bottle neck.
Perform SD card speed test to see how many universes 
that can theoretically be written from the incoming stream.
Reduce overhead – only run a bare minimum script.
Investigate coding framework and envronment for missing 
updates.
Aquire a fast SD-card for more trials.
Try making tests based on WiFi instead of ethernet.
•
New SD card
•
Coding environment check
•
Simple implementation with less overhead
•
Change IDE (has given other results before, 
as it changes framework version)
•
Try regular SD instead of the 1 pin and 
slower SD-MMC implementation!
x
For the most part, recording was never providing 
satisfactory results. No methodical way of testing the 
performance was considered, as there was clear visual 
disturbance in output performance. Result would jitter, as if 
frames were not being played back in the right order or 
speed. 
In some cases, when less data was transferred, success 
was higher. Hpwit library has a debug-print message to the 
serial monitor showing how many frames recorded and how 
many dropped frames. The prints would never seem to be 
problematic. SD card write speed shoud be tested.
SD card
The setup which has been used has 
been based on a very cheap SD 
card. In conversations with hpwit, he 
says, that the limiting factor is the SD 
card Read/Write speed. An obvious 
way to improve results is to purchase 
that and test for improvement.
==PAGE:137==
The LED controller is a device, meant for 
technicians, is a device which may require quite a 
bit of setup. Once a setup has been made, it may 
be preferable to if these settings can be saved 
and recalled for future productions,  e.g.:
•
Configure IP
•
Configure fixture settings (number of LEDs) 
•
Configure type of LED chip
•
Booting into specific mode, e..g playback of a 
specific Art-net recording.
Changes made in RAM (normal system operation) 
will not persist if the system is powered down.
x
How can we build a device which may save 
configurations for later use? 
How can we recall configurations back into working
memory, when the system is rebooted?
x
The goal is to find and protoype a suitable 
technique, which in the future, can be 
implemented system wide.
An implementation of one of the desired cases 
will be sufficient to prove it’s potential.
Saving configurations
Sebastian McAleer Elkjær
5/12-2022
1
Prove that a given technique can fulfill the desired
purpose.
The prototype will be
made through
research and coding
of the ESP32 device. 
The code will be built
on top of the existing
prototype.
Resources:
•
ESP32
•
Computer
•
Development 
environment
•
Internet connection for 
hosting webserver
interface
Niels will see and comment on the prototype
Implementations in the webserver UI shall 
activate EEPROM save and read functionalities.
The serial monitor will output status messages.
Preference.h library is easy to use and provides good control of 
EEPROM.
This implementation is a rough sketch that could be optimized, but 
it is a proof of concept of “saving configurations”
Decisions affecting other systems: 
The IP configuration implementation allows for testing multiple Art-
net LED controllers on the same netowork solely via the UI.
Trying to boot with Preferences that doesn’t exist, for instance in 
new microcontrollers, may cause problems. A test should 
investigate if this is infact root cause of errors.
Apply this learning to other preferences: MODE and art.net config
Testing of the script on microcontrollers with empty 
EEPROM shall investigate if the script will result in crashes, 
misbehavior or othe bugs. Boot functions specifically may 
be problematic.
For testing on users: Count the amount of writecyclesusers 
make to EEPROM in one session. How many sessions 
before 100.000 write cycles have been made? 
The Preference.h library, written for 
Arduino, is the successor to a prior 
EEPROM.h library. A guide found on 
randomnerdtutorials.com introduced
the topic quite extensively, while
providing table overview of which
functions to use. (it varies for individual
types of variables like integer, float and 
string.)
This article also intoduced the 
ESP.restart() command which was
implemented into the functionality of 
changing IP adress.
Prototype
•
If the implementation can read and write data to 
EEPROM, in context, the technique and technology is 
deemed suited for future use. 
•
If expected read/write cycles of the device is below 
100.000.
•
If we do not run out of EEPROM memory. The ESP32 
has 512 bytes of EEPROM which is quite limited, 
although, only very little data is stored: 
One IP addresse, is 4x1 bytes. HSV values are 3x1 
byte. 505 bytes are still available.
Preference.h library is easy to use and provides good 
control of EEPROM.
SD card is an alternative to EEPROM, as a type of 
memory which will persist if power is lost. This is a 
secondary domaine, which could be useful to use in 
other scenarios, for instance: Premake all your 
configurations on a computer, load them to the SD card, 
and the ESP32 will boot in a customized state. Also, 
such a custom state could be shared amongst users, 
along with art-net recordings and other data if desirable. 
With future prototype and usability tests this could be 
added. 
The IP configuration implementation allows for testing 
multiple art-net LED controllers on the same network.
==PAGE:138==
The IP address must be configurable, so that the 
LED controller may fit into the network settings of 
the user.
The IP address must be configured via the 
available WebServer interface.
For configuring IP address and other, the ESP32 
backend code must somehow receive typed 
datafrom the webserver code. Typed data could 
be numbers and strings typed into text fields. 
The backend handles.
x
Take strings as user input in the webserver –
specifically the IP addrress. 
Send user input to the ESP32 backend. 
Make user input an available format. 
Save IP address to EEPROM. 
Reboot using IP saved to EEPROM.
x
x
Take string input from webserver, and have it 
available in some format in the ESP32 backend
code.
Boot the ESP32 using data from EEPROM in 
the setup phase of e.g. static IP address and 
other.
Configuring IP address: 
front-end and backend
Sebastian McAleer Elkjær
5/12-2022
1
Functioning code. A sequence of actions that
robustly work together.
1.
Type IP
2.
Click update IP
3.
Reboot system
The internet will be scouted
for examples
The state machine diagram 
is the template which we
might want to recreate.
Resources:
•
ESP32
•
Webserver code
•
Internet connection
•
VS Code IDE for 
programming
The implementation is a proof of concept. If it 
works, the technique may be implemented in 
future use cases. 
The prototype is tested through usage. Does it 
perforrm as intended? 
Niels and Marcus will evaluate code.
Noteworthy: EEPROM has 100.000 write cycles (infinite 
read cycles), meaning automatic and repeated write to 
EEPROM can potentially wear out the hardware. Writing to 
EEPROM should only be implemented where it is strictly 
needed. (most users should not know or worry about this 
risk.)
If one types the wrong IP address, users may ‘loose’ 
devices in the network, not knowing where they are. A hard 
reset function should bring back the LED controller to a 
known IP address before making the change again. Pop up 
messages in the webserver may assist users to take not of 
their actions and guide them regarding IP configuration 
(Niels mentioned it as a common problem for users).
Perhaps it may also be done differently in the future.
Using EEPROM seems well suited for furher 
implmentation.
The code should be optimized for future 
implementations. Current implementation is rather 
simple and general. 
Usability and workflow designs can now be 
designed and build on-top of this back-end 
implementation.
A chart for overviewing the available 512 bytes of 
EEPROM should be made. This should help with planning 
and coding.
Testing on a ‘fresh’ ESP32 with no prior EEPROM data 
writes shall prove if code will run bug-free when (perhaps) 
tryng to boot with IP and HSV settings that do not exist. 
Otherwise some measurement should be created for 
making code robust to this scenario.
x
4. Configure ESP with 
typed IP during setup.
The .cpp script HTML_CSS_JS.h stores all HTML, 
CSS and Javascript code. This HTML code block 
creates the input forms, and the UI, with some CSS 
style classes for buttons and fonts:
The .cpp script WebServerSetup.cpp stores functions 
receiving messages from the WebServer. The following node 
from the ProtoMap describes the sequence:
This following code block is the JavaScript function that is activated
when clicked Save IP preferences. It checks that input is (or 
becomes) an interger before it is sent to the ESP backend. 
Webserver UI:
Uses forms and buttons to receive string and prompts. Fonts styled with CSS.
Qualitative test:
Does the code behave as we want? 
Do we succeed in creating the inteded scenario?
What are the risks with this technique?
What problems occurs, and how are they 
countered?
==PAGE:139==
H
Interview: Niels evaluation
Interview was conducted 5th of January
Visual Studio
How is Visual Studio as an IDE in the prototyping work so far?
In what way is Visual Studio an advantage?
In what way is Visual Studio at a disadvantage?
Is it a change to the development environment that you want to keep?
PlatformIO
How does platformIO work as a plugin to work in the Arduino Framework?
What advantages would you point out to PlatformIO as opposed to Arduino IDE?
How is PlatformIO a disadvantage?
ESP32
What are the characteristics of this microprocessor according to the task to be solved?
Are there any downsides to the MCU that you want to point out?
Are there any particular advantages of the MCU that you would like to point out?
Is the processor suitably flexible/rigid?
Is the support as expected for this microprocessor?
119
==PAGE:140==
Are you thinking of continuing with this microprocessor?
Olimex Gateway revision G
How is the design of this development board, according to the task to be solved?
What are the advantages of this board as opposed to other options?
What are the disadvantages of this board as opposed to other options?
How has the development process been with this board?
Has there been sufficient community support to solve the tasks that needed to be solved?
Are you thinking of continuing with this board?
GitHub
How has GitHub contributed to the development process?
What has worked well?
What has gone wrong?
Do you want to continue using Git in Hackstage?
How would you like collaboration via Git to have been?
The prototype
How do you think the objective has been regarding the prototype? (Using the system map,
Figure 5.4, & state machine, Figure 5.5 in the discussion )
In your eyes, what have we achieved so far?
How satisfied are you with the prototype work we have done?
In your eyes, what has the highest priority regarding the prototype work?
Which contributions have been good?
Which entries have been not so good?
APPENDIX H. INTERVIEW: NIELS EVALUATION
120
==PAGE:141==
Have you seen any limitations in relation to the direction we have taken?
Do you see any advantages to the direction we have taken?
Where do we stand?
Where will the prototype work go from here?
Cooperation
How do you think we have worked towards the goal?
How do you think the collaboration has been?
How do you think the division of labour has been?
APPENDIX H. INTERVIEW: NIELS EVALUATION
121
==PAGE:142==
I
Question sheet: Private user
Introduction
• Name
• Age
• Occupation
• Short background
Questions
What type of lighting is in your household?
Do you own a type of lighting, which is ideal for a given scenario?
Do you own or lack some type of lighting for a given scenario?
Which types of lighting do you like best?
Do you have any coloured lights of your or something that you activate when you need to
set a mood?
What does the light do at a party or perhaps another kind of occasion?
How do you use lights at parties?
Do you own any lighting products that assist when you have a party?
Which types have you or your friends used on occasions?
How do you think you most often party with your friends? E.g. Private events, at a club,
bar, or festival.
What makes lighting cool in those scenarios?
How important is lighting when you’re dancing or when you are with friends?
122
==PAGE:143==
• Why?
What do you miss about lighting in a given scenario?
How important is the light compared to the music?
Do you have a SoundBoks? Do you know someone who has?
How do you wish it would be cooler, e.g. for the SoundBoks party in a remote location?
Wishful thinking: What might your dream lighting system look like?
APPENDIX I. QUESTION SHEET: PRIVATE USER
123
==PAGE:144==
J
Question sheet: DJ
Introduction
• Short background
Questions
Shortly, tell me what it is you do as a DJ.
Why do you DJ?
Can you tell me a few things what you like about it?
What type of venues do you visit the most?
Do you have a certain preference? Perhaps bigger is better?
In your opinion, what is the purpose of lighting, at a musical event?
What works good in such a setting?
And what does not work, when DJ’ing or dancing at musical event?
What makes the light look good?
Do you ever express your own opinion on lighting when you’re DJ’ing, even though your job
is about the music?
Are there any struggles regarding lighting in certain scenarios, like some clubs or venues?
For you and for the crowd?
Did you ever assist designing a stage-setup or similar?
Do you have a lamp or kind of light of your own that you might use at home or bring with
you for events?
124
==PAGE:145==
Do your friends have something of their own, that you might use?
Do you think that you’d ever have the need for a light for your own use/private use?
APPENDIX J. QUESTION SHEET: DJ
125
==PAGE:146==
K
Interviews: Private user
K.1
Inge
Inge is 22 years old. She normally lives in a flat situated in Copenhagen, but is currently
living in Spain during an exchange programme. She studies business at Copenhagen Business
School.
Context
”I come from the countryside, and we had a large banquet room. I used to invite the whole
high school. 120 people would sometimes show up. We can’t do it like that any more, living
in the flat. We had a music wagon. It was built with both speakers and lights. For lighting,
the wagon had a rack with projectors, I think. And some other things.”
Inge mostly goes out when being with friends. Especially since everybody moved out and
into flats in Copenhagen. Flats are a limitation because the noise will disturb the neighbours.
In the flat, Inge has a big speaker of some type. It is not a SoundBoks, but it is loud enough
for its purpose.
Do you own any smart lights or coloured lights, which you may use in festive gatherings or
the like now?
”I have a small and cheap party light from Netto. We bought it for having parties in the flat.
It could be more fun like that. During Corona lockdown we had a lot of parties. I almost
got thrown out of the place. ”
Would you purchase a SoundBoks yourself?
”I’d gladly spend my money on a Soundboks, but I just don’t have the use for it at the
moment in the flat. I have used my mom’s a lot.”
In your opinion, what is the role of lighting, at a party?
”I think the function of lights is important because, it helps to focus on the music and get
in the mood. Strobe lights make you more invisible. And you think less about how you look
126
==PAGE:147==
to others. It hides you a bit.”
What would be a requirement, if you should bring a portable light to, for instance, a festival?
”If I imagine carrying a light system to a Festival, I think it’s important if it can follow the
music, perhaps as an addon to the sound system. It shouldn’t be too expensive. It could
be cool to bring. But perhaps not too expensive. If you want to have something for the
big camps, yes, perhaps it could be expensive, but for all the smaller ones, it shouldn’t be
too expensive. I think, perhaps, 1000DKK. You wouldn’t go spend another seven thousand
(comparing with the Soundboks) on the lights.”
To Inge, it is important, that it is powerful. Comparing with the small light from Netto, it
is boring that it’s not powerful, and that it just has an on-off button. ”It should be able
to follow the music and perhaps some settings for various moods. Sometimes you’re just
chilling. Sometimes you want to dance, and there could be even others around that. Just
like Spotify, you have these playlist of various moods. It’s very easy to browse around.”
What if you could make your own sequences and moods?
”Making custom sequences be cool too. But I’m not that creative. For a lot of products
you can often make your own custom settings. It’s awesome for the nerdy people. And you
know, it’s really good with those system functions where you think Oh, that’s smart. It can
do that too?”
Would you use this also at home, do you think? If it was a beautiful design, I could probably
use it at home in my day to day life. When I think about lights for parties I think of black
ugly boxes, and those would be horrible to look at all the time. A beautiful design, I could
probably put somewhere in my home.
Drawing
This scene is set at Roskilde Festival. The light is placed up under the roof in a pavilion.
People are happy. The lights reach everywhere underneath the tent. The light is powerful
and can do just about anything.
The product itself can be mounted in multiple ways. It has a foot to stand on a table. It also
has a strap so it can be hung in a hook. The light has a clamping function to trap directly
onto a Soundboks, because it’s necessary when things go wild. The strap is also for carrying.
The exact shape is not determined in Inge’s drawing. It’s not my expertise. But it has tonnes
of lights. It can be purchased in various colours. White, Pink and a shimmering version.
Design wise, it could look like a UFO. Perhaps it could take some inspiration from Bang&Olufsen
(Beoplay A9). Perhaps it isn’t so pretty. But it’s expensive.
APPENDIX K. INTERVIEWS: PRIVATE USER
127
==PAGE:148==
If I had been able to draw on paper, it could have been better.
Imagining a portable lighting system for parties: WOM discussion
”Easy control is important. Every time you buy something, it is like getting a new toy.
Having something to interact with is important. Somebody tells you And then you can click
in here and do thisand I’ll say Oh that’s smart!. Something like that. It has to be cool! And
useful in many situations. Even if you have a date over.”
”If you use it at home, then the battery isn’t important. But if portability is a main selling
point, it has to be very good and efficient, so you want to bring it to a festival for a week.
You’d happily pay more for extended battery life.”
”Price versus light quality is hard. You know, how expensive will it be then? I think now
that we’ve talked about it, that the price has to be higher. 1000DKK is too cheap. You won’t
believe it’s that good. Price is a quality tag. So it can’t be too cheap. With the Soundboks
you pay 7000DKK. But you just know that it does the job.”
”Light quality is kindof hard. You buy it for the light, but as long as the light is there, it’s
good. Intensity was important, but niether me or my friends would at some point stop the
party because - hey, the light quality is too bad.”
APPENDIX K. INTERVIEWS: PRIVATE USER
128
==PAGE:149==
==PAGE:150==
K.2
Larika
Larika is 20 years old. She studies at CPH Business Academy, focusing on marketing, logistics
and Business to Business. She lives with her boyfriend at a dormitory, sharing a kitchen and
other facilities with her neighbours.
Context
In her old room, she had a Philips Hue lamp with a remote control. It could simulate sun-
down, moon light, evening light and a very bright light for working situations. But it was
not bright enough, for instance when putting make up. When applying make-up, you always
need a strong light. Usually you need a light that is put really close. It could be nice with
something to replace that. One light bulb that could serve all purposes, would be good. Like
the Philips Hue, but stronger. Then we could get rid of ring lights, which people, that shoot
videos of themselves with phones, use a lot.
”When I’m with my friends, we often turn down the lights. It makes the atmosphere calmer
and more relaxed. Then you talk together with people in a different way.”
For parties, Larika thinks there should be more colours. Not something that blinks so strong
so that it blinds you. Sometimes, when you’re out in somewhere in a bar or club, you can’t
even stand to look in one direction, because the light is so strong. It’s like standing up
against the speaker, and the music is too loud. It’s unpleasant.
Lights help to create a mood, and they are important.
It should follow the music.
It’s
annoying to see a lamp going off asynchronously. It should be precise. You don’t need UV
lights. You just find out that you have a dirty spot on your shoes. Then again, sometimes
it’s fun, Larika would just like to know it beforehand.
”It could be fun with a lamp that has multiple settings. With a button, you could turn on
various types, like UV or LED colours.”
How would you wish that the lights were better at private parties?
For private parties at somebody’s home, it’s kind of sad if you just have the opportunity of
normal lights or nothing. At my place, I could turn it down low. You should be able to
do that always. I paid 1000DKK for my bulb, and it was enough lights for the entire lamp.
Mine was expensive because it was a Phillips Hue, and it had a remote control. But in Ikea
you could find something cheap that can do the same.
”When going out, you always have to go to the expensive or special places to get some kind
of extraordinary experience with lighting at the dance floor. I guess that lighting must be
expensive”.
APPENDIX K. INTERVIEWS: PRIVATE USER
129
==PAGE:151==
Drawing
Larika drew multiple concepts during the session. Firstly, the wristbands are an inspiration
from concert wristbands, you get when you enter. Larika
”When people go to concerts, they get wristbands. They’re always the same. You see these
photos form concerts where everybody is waving their hands in the air wearing the same
wristband. In this drawing, the bands are like glow sticks, you can wrap around your arm.
These wristbands have different colours, they are durable and not that expensive.”
Secondly, there is the lights in the ceiling. They’re mechanical and can tilt while shooting
a beam of light. The beams move around above people and through people. In Larika’s
opinion, a party need more than just people wearing wristbands, because it is not enough to
illuminate the room. It needs some lights from above. This is both so people can move, and
for the extra effect.
Thirdly, Larika imagines lights in the floor. They are inspired from the arcade game ”Dance
Dance Revolution”.
”You have got to stamp on the light that is illuminated. The game already exists, but for a
dance floor it is not yet invented.”
The concept is vaguely described, but on a high level, some kind of gamification could make
a dance floor fun.
Imagining a portable lighting system for parties: WOM discussion
”If the light isn’t good enough, people won’t like the product. That’s why I weigh this pa-
rameter high.”
Battery is important, according to Larika. If the battery runs out at the wrong time, it
would be bad. Larika makes the comparison: ”I’d rather have a bad speaker that lasts all
night rather than good sound for a shorter time.”
APPENDIX K. INTERVIEWS: PRIVATE USER
130
==PAGE:152==
”Cost price is also important. If you’re going to bring the lamp around, price is important.
You don’t want to loose it”, and thus loose the money you spent.
”People help each other carrying things, so portability is not the most important parameter.
Ease of use is more important. You don’t want to carry something around that is horrible
to use and gives people a bad experience because of that.”
”Build quality is important. You don’t have to worry if you break it under rough circum-
stances. Just like the Soundboks. You don’t worry about a little bit of beer spill.”
According to Larika, ease of use shouldn’t have to be a complicated matter. It needs a few
automatic programs. That should be fine. ”If you know how to configure it yourself, then
that’s good too. Your friends do not have to know how it works until they get their own
device to fiddle around with.”
”Some target users want things to be expensive. Pricing depends on your target user group.”
APPENDIX K. INTERVIEWS: PRIVATE USER
131
==PAGE:153==
==PAGE:154==
==PAGE:155==
K.3
Jason
Jason studies Human Centered Artificial Intelligence at DTU. He lives in a dormitory nearby,
where he has his own private room, and shares kitchen facilities amongst other common
spaces.
Interview
”Personally, I’m mostly interested in home lighting and how it can be used to affect sleep
pattern, work efficiency and tiredness.”
”When either gaming on the computer or working, a proper background light is important.
Perhaps colour does not matter in that scenario, but light temperature is.”
Jason would like a reddish light, that helps to relax the brain, and could assist with sleep
patterns. The light could help one calm down, as the hour grows late.
Jason likes those lights on the back of TV’s that project the colours of the picture to the wall
behind.
Jason rarely goes to parties, but has some reflections on the situation anyhow. Reducing
perception is an important function of lighting, in order to steer the focus of the crowd to-
wards the music. The result is also that you can’t see people’s faces as clearly. Some level of
background light is important, so people still know where they are.
Lights that match the music is important, says Jason. He also likes strobe lighting.
Drawing
Jason conceptualizes a type of interaction or game. The dance floor detects weight. There’s
a computer in the corner processing inputs from the floor. It can single out individuals. As a
reaction to input, the spotlight that will focus on a crowd or an individual. The intensity of
the light could rise, as more people join. It could encourage people to dance more intensely,
as the setup should have a competitive element to it. This broad concept could be further
developed.
In sports situations that include a ball, it could be cool if the ball itself lit up. That way it
would be harder to lose track of. Perhaps it opens up for new game-modes where the lighting
situation could play a role.
One drawing, that Jason made, illustrates a type of light that shines down from the ceiling.
When walking in the forest, Jason loves watching the sunlight shining through the branches
and leaves in the treetop. This effect I have emulated with a lamp concept. There is a light
source above a mesh structure. Perhaps it moves. Perhaps it could be good for a disco or club.
APPENDIX K. INTERVIEWS: PRIVATE USER
132
==PAGE:156==
Another concept from Jason is like a rope. It’s battery driven, and thus it can be thrown
up anywhere without meddling with any power cables or rigging equipment. They’re self
mounting because they will hang just by themselves. They can be controlled from an app.
They may even be set to blink at the same rate as that of current childbirth.
Imagining a portable lighting system for parties: WOM discussion
APPENDIX K. INTERVIEWS: PRIVATE USER
133
==PAGE:157==
==PAGE:158==
==PAGE:159==
==PAGE:160==
K.4
Albert A.
Albert is a student at DTU.
Interview
Albert has a coloured bulb which costed him 150DKK from Ikea. The bulb should last many
years. It can produce five different colours and has a battery driven remote controller for
adjusting the light.
What the good thing about it?
It can change temperature. It can produce a warm sunrise type of colour, which he uses in
the morning. I use that one. Sometimes he changes the settings of the light throughout the
day. Blue and red are my favourite colours. I have found the ideal warm colour, which is
pleasant to be in.
Albert has a JBL speaker. It is cylindrical and play’s music, but additionally it’s wrapped
in a clear plastic coat. This coat is lit up from the inside, and produces colours and pattern
synchronised to the music. He likes the effect. He can also put it into different modes.
For private events, people rarely have dedicated party lighting. Albert mostly goes to private
parties. Sometimes he goes out to clubs. In clubs. They mostly have coloured and festive
lighting. Especially, they have it on the dance floor, he says.
What is the functin of lighting in a festive situation?
The function is to create an atmosphere that people are immersed into, and perhaps reduce
people’s perception a bit. In clubs, it is to be expected that they somehow produce this
effect. Without those lights, it could just be awkward. Darker lighting is good.
Introducing artificial intelligence to the dance floor could be interesting. It looks at people
and highlight those people who dance. Make it a game that motivates people to dance and
react to each others. Or it sees where people look, and may highlight that person somehow.
What might your dream lighting system look like?
I imagine you have something like an incandescent lamp. That way you also had the function
of heat radiation. So the lamp becomes an artificial bonfire. It could be used for a type of
gathering, that gives both warm light and heat.
Drawing
The roof is one big light. The light changes in sequences.
APPENDIX K. INTERVIEWS: PRIVATE USER
134
==PAGE:161==
”I didn’t have much of a vision when I drew it. This is just from experience, and a topic for
talking. I do not think that lighting is a topic that you think so much, about even though it
really affects the atmosphere a lot in a given setting. It’s not something you talk about. In
many places, it is just ‘the same thing’.”
Imagining a portable lighting system for parties: WOM discussion
Battery life is important. If you bring it around, and it can’t last, then it’s useless.
It can still be carried around, even though it’s unhandy, so that isn’t an important parameter.
It shouldn’t be so big, so if it isn’t too big, it can’t be too heavy.
I think it’s funny that the light quality isn’t the most important parameter. At least you
have something that can be brought outside of the house.
APPENDIX K. INTERVIEWS: PRIVATE USER
135
==PAGE:162==
==PAGE:163==
==PAGE:164==
==PAGE:165==
K.5
Linea
Linea is a student at DTU, in the master of science programme Human-Centered Artificial
Intelligence. She’s 24 years old. Linea lives in a dormitory close to DTU. She has a one-
room apartment and shares facilities with twelve other people. Her family is from Farum in
Nordsjælland.
Interview
So, do you own any type of lighting or smart lighting in your home?
Linea has an LED bulb that can be dimmed. It screws into a lamp socket and is situated
above her desk. She likes it has adjustability. It’s good for work and reading because of its
high intensity. Additionally, she has a cosy, dim light, and lastly she has a morning alarm
that has a built-in wake light. Sometimes dim lights are better when it’s close to bedtime
or early morning. She would especially like it, if it could also change the tone and colour of
the light. That would be useful for various situations, for instance while on the computer,
reading and more. She refers to a Philips Hue lamp, which has those features. They emit
any colour and adjust intensity.
What would be your optimal lighting system at home? 1
Her dream light for the room would be like a smart lamp, that can be used for everything.
A system that is more all round. A portable lamp with built-in functions, that could pro-
duce light for all situations, would be great. Architect lamps are not so pretty. It would be
good with something that could be moved around the apartment for my various purposes.
Portable, adjustable and a built-in wake light function. It does not really exist. Only Philips
Hue. But their version of a wake light costs two thousand Danish crowns.
Her favourite lighting is coloured lights. For her, it does not have to be any specific form.
She would like something in her room, perhaps a light chain, but not a strobe light. Light
has a great effect on a room. Linea also likes dimmed lights, even in her own room when she
does various activities. It gives a good atmosphere.
For parties, a disco light is important. Especially when it is dark outside. Linea doesn’t
personally own any type of light that is good for parties. The dormitory she lives in has a
light. It is half broken because 2 out of 4 lamps are does not function. It can only blink
red and blue, but those are her favourite colours anyway When you do not have great dance
moves, the lighting helps you along the way.
If she could update the dormitory party light with any features, without limitation, some
would like some more control. Currently, it only has a sound reactive program. More con-
trol and different auto-programs could be good. For instance, so it could produce more still
1Linea and I had previously talked about portable lighting systems, so the idea of a portable light was
already implemented.
APPENDIX K. INTERVIEWS: PRIVATE USER
136
==PAGE:166==
lights and casually fade between colours. Currently, it is uncontrollable and is usually only
produces sharp blinking. It can be uncomfortable and monotone.
Linea thinks that lights and music should go together. Bright and blinking strobe lights are
not a good match for listening to music by Abba, for instance. There are two scenarios;
sing-along mood while you and your friends are standing in a circle, and techno party.
When Linea goes to out, it’s mostly at her university. This is where she gets together with
friends and fellow students for events, Friday bar and the like. Parties and events happening
at the dormitory she also regularly attends to.
Her friend has a disco light, and she thinks is really cool. Another friend has a ”blinky” light
chain.
For a festive situation, the lights are quite important. Lanterns and light chains are for in-
stance really great for being outdoors. It’s a different situation compared to going to a club.
Linea is not an owner of Soundboks, so she’s been around that type of speaker a lot. She
thinks they’re a bit too loud and too much. ?
Drawing
Linea made two drawings.
One drawing illustrated the concept of an all-round portable
lamp. It is meant to sit in a wireless dock while charging, but can also be moved around the
house or outdoor at will. The lamp has been drawn with an arbitrary look and shape. It
was drawn as a means for illustration of functions, rather than pursuing a certain aesthetic
appeal, she says. Buttons symbolize features. The lamp has ”sundown” and wake-light. It
has a party mode which include various lights. It can be controlled in various ways, perhaps
with buttons and for instance via an app on the phone. The light can be directed with a cir-
cular, so it can focus where it’s needed. This way you don’t have to get up and turn it around.
”I want it placed on my dresser. But then I want to be able to move it around. It should
be something without a cable, for instance wirelessly charged in a dock on the dresser, and
then, once charged, it can be transported to other locations, and then used, as long as it
keeps charge.”
APPENDIX K. INTERVIEWS: PRIVATE USER
137
==PAGE:167==
Imagining a portable lighting system for parties: WOM discussion
• Light quality is the most important thing. This determines if it’s even worth bringing
along.
• Price is important, because it’s got to be worth buying. You could build this thing for
10000DKK, but that’s not for average users, like herself.
• Price is estimated somewhat in comparison to the high quality wake lights that exist
on the market. 1000 - 2000DKK. If the light product could be this ‘do-it-all’ type of
solution, while also being pretty, she would gladly pay that price.
• Controls are not weighted as high, because you can get used to many things, assuming
it’s a bit complicated. As long as you can get familiar with it yourself.
• Portability is not weighted as high either, comparing with the SoundBoks, which is not
very portable. but it does its job very good because of it.
APPENDIX K. INTERVIEWS: PRIVATE USER
138
==PAGE:168==
==PAGE:169==
==PAGE:170==
K.6
Albert B.
Albert B. studies Datalogy. He’s 22 years old and lives alone in a one room studio flat in
Nordvest, Copenhagen. He grew up in Ringsted with his parents.
Interview
What types of lighting do you have?
At home, Albert B. has no coloured lights or smart lights. He has a few lamps for static
indoor lighting. Additionally, he has a lantern, which emulates an oil lamp or a candlelight
by small flickering and an orange tone. It’s powered by replaceable batteries. Albert says, it
is good when you need dimmed lights. He can also bring it to his terrace.
You often go to clubs. Can you tell me more?
At least one time a week. Perhaps multiple times a week.
You always go with the same people?
Albert goes with his friends. They always want to go to the dance floor.
Do you have any preferred place to go, if you go out?
Albert goes out often to bars and clubs with his friends, usually where there’s a dance floor
and lots of people. They have a favourite place they go, The Old Irish. There was one time,
when they tried to enter this other place, then the guard told them not to go in. There
was not a lot of people in there. It was kind of dead. So they went to The Old Irish where
there’s always a dance floor. They go almost every weekend during the summer. Now that
the semester has started, he goes out less. Sometimes he goes to the Friday bar at the school
he attends to.
The easiest way to find a party is by going to clubs, but festivals and outdoor private parties
are even better, he thinks. It’s just easier if you go out to a place where people come. Albert
attended this year’s Roskilde Festival. There were no lights in the camping as far as he
remembers. All of a sudden, everything is dark around you.
What is your experience of the lighting when you go out?
Regarding club lighting, Albert never thought actively about its role or what they look like.
It’s just there. To Albert, the lights are a part of creating the whole experience. It’s backing
up the atmosphere that the club is trying to create. It does not have to steal your focus, but
it’s important in a sense, just like the music. For instance, if the regular white indoor lights
were turned on, it does not feel like it is time to go dance.
APPENDIX K. INTERVIEWS: PRIVATE USER
139
==PAGE:171==
Albert thinks, that not a lot of clubs are experimenting with their lighting. Mostly it’s the
same stuff they have.
Drawing
Albert is being asked to design a portable light
Albert B. spends a bit of time gathering thoughts and thinking of a concept. The traffic light
inspired lamp, is something his mother owns. It has a sound-reactive mode. Especially for
songs that have a loud and clear beat, it knows how to blink to the beat. For other scenarios,
it works quite bad. But when it does work, it’s great.
The other concept that Albert B. comes up with, is a mobile, battery driven multi-light. It
can be any colours and produce various sequences of light in different patterns and colours.
He does not know how, but somehow it’s physically moving back and forth within a certain
range, illustrated by the arrows. The light can be put on a pole or tripod sort of thing. It
can also be put on the floor or on some furniture. People can sync them together and have
them scattered around the room or the party to make an even lighting. The light can be
synced via an application on the phone. He conceptualized a feature that is called “Share
The Party” or “STP”. This is a sync-feature. With an “STP”-code, you can sync multiple
lighting devices to one session, allowing for the lights to be programmed into coordinated
sequences. This way you may own just one of these, but for a party situation, multiple people
can bring one, and you may have an even more immersive experience, a 3D-effect.
The drawing has two of these lights, one in each side, elevated on with a stand. There’s also
one which centrally located. Three of them are bundled together. They’re mounted so that
they are hanging from the ceiling. One lies on the floor. The Traffic Light is placed either
on the floor or the speaker. The light can be purchased standalone or with stand.
He envisions different modes that can be controlled with an app. Still lights and a sound
mode, that can react to the music. Perhaps even a way to design your own patterns. Maybe
that would be a bit complicated. Perhaps or perhaps not. Albert B. exemplifies that you
would be able to control the blink rate, the same way you turn up the screen light on your
phone. ”It just got to be flexible.”
If you have then linked the devices together with your friends, you can all go in and change
it, just like changing a song on a playlist, comparing with a music streaming application.
Lastly, Albert gave people a transportable light, a type of wristband. It could illuminate the
crowd with colours.
The “Share the party” standalone lamp is priced at around 500 - 700 Danish crowns. Philips
Hue, is priced around 500 for a bulb. In Alberts opinion, the lamp must be priced a bit
higher, because of its controlling capabilities.
APPENDIX K. INTERVIEWS: PRIVATE USER
140
==PAGE:172==
The ”traffic light” which is a larger version that has more capabilities should be priced around
1500 - 2000DKK. It is definitely worth more. It’s the premium version.
He says, he believes that the light is going to have customers out there. For himself, it would
be too expensive. He just moved out and must also have money for food. But then again,
for his upcoming birthday, he has already wished for a Philips Hue light bulb. This could
have been an alternative ting to wish for.
Imagining a portable lighting system for parties: WOM discussion
Light quality and build quality are both important, because those are the core functions of
the light.
Ease of control is perhaps the most important feature. This is going to make it a good
product that is fun to use.
He states, that this is a premium product, and therefore it does not have to be cheap.
Price doesn’t matter, if it has good durability. ”Build quality is just very important, I think.”
It’s a quality product.
Transporting it is impossible. No matter the size or weight. Proper handles is needed so you
can bring it and use it. The sum: Durable, ever lasting product.
APPENDIX K. INTERVIEWS: PRIVATE USER
141
==PAGE:173==
L
Interviews: DJ
Esther Kay
Esther Kay is a DJ with the artist name N.E.Girl. She’s now 30 and originally from London,
where she has been engaged in the culture of raves and clubs for a long time. She came to
Denmark in 2017. Esther has been playing at venues all over Denmark since then, recently
at Distortion Festival, Roskilde Festival and Pumpehuset, to name a few. She continues to
play in Denmark and England.
Interview
Esther mostly goes to clubs. At private events, you’re more comfortable because you’re with
people you know and mutual friends. At the clubs, the music experience is more immersive.
What do you do as a DJ, and why do you do it?
”I play UK bass and UK rave music, which over arches a lot of subgenres like dubstep and
drum & bass.”
She likes to play hard music, cross genres, play stuff that is weird and play music in high
tempo. Esther is more interested in energy rather than tempo and beat-per-minute, which is
something many DJ’s restrict themselves by. ”My style tends to resonate more with people
from united kingdom. In Denmark people are more into ”four-to-the-floor”
”I like having the ability to affect people’s emotions. Historically, raves and clubbing has a
lot of political references. It’s a place where people can feel and be themselves, which wasn’t
necessarily the case where the culture originally stems from. I like to give people permission
to let loose.”
Where do you go to yourself?
”In Denmark, I used to go mostly to Bolsjefabrikken, but it’s closed now. In UK my favorite
club is Corsica Studios. They’re alot a like. They’re warehouse-like and have a good sound
system. The music is more clean instead of loud.”
142
==PAGE:174==
”Prioritizing sound quality is important. The people who attend are, let’s be honest, music
nerds. They also care about the sound tech, how it sounds and how it feels. With that type
of crowd, you get a more welcoming environment. It’s less pretentious.”
”I’ve been to a lot of places where everyone wants to look cool. It’s a different way. I don’t
feel comfortable in those places. I don’t particularly like to dress up either.”
What is the best place you ever played?
”It was probably a basement in London called Four Quarters.”
What is the purpose of lighting at a musical event?
”It’s a whole other level to the space. An example I would give is from Strøm Festival. I
played at KPH Volume. The venue had very bright white ”flood” light. I was playing very
dark, minimal music at 140 beats per minute. So the lighting was very contradictory to what
I was playing. That’s an example where lights really has to complement the sounds. I think
it is really important.”
”I’ve been lighting technicians at times. If I find, that the crowd is not dancing, I would
lower the lights. This changes peoples nervouseness to move and dance. It just is another
element. It has to be complementary to the music. The light should have a concept.”
I’ve asked this question a lot, and the response I usually get is that the lights has to ”match
the beat”. You’re saything this is perhaps constraining it too much? What you’re are saying
instead is in a more abstract level. It has to be complementary, but it can perhaps be done in
many ways?
”That’s exactly what I’m saying. It does not need to match the beat. And actually I would
say if it matches the beat it can become boring and predictable. The same way if you go
to a club and it’s the same music all night, you know what to expect and there’s no surprises.”
”The lighting in itself is another artistic form, as is the DJ. Whatever the light technician is
doing, as long as it complements the vibe, vibe is probably a better word, he’s doing it good.”
”I pay attention to the light.”
Some of my other interviewee experience, that lighting in clubs is usually a job that is not
prioritized so much. What do you think?
”I used to feel like a diva because I would often have to ask the technicians to lower the
lights. Now it’s come to a point where I will do it without caring what they think of me.”
Is there anything else you think that works well in a club-like setting?
APPENDIX L. INTERVIEWS: DJ
143
==PAGE:175==
Esther mentions a centred logo. It could display the name of the venue or the DJ. It works
nice, as a focal point in the room, perhaps to steer attention.
”One thing I’ve noticed, depending on the style of the music of a given DJ, he gets a cer-
tain colour. For every DJ, they would have their own colour. For instance, if one DJ plays
Drum&Bass and Jungle, green would for instance be good for that type of music.”
Can you think of anything that does not work?
”Esther thinks lasers can be a bit overwhelming. They pose a danger, and Ether thinks some
technicians have stopped using them. In her experience, the laser-systems come with a range
of stock figures and sequences.
”It looks like people are just pressing stuff. Like... Why are there diamonds on the floor?!
What is that. It would be the same if a visual artist puts a stock video on loop on the
backdrop.”
Do you ever express your own opinion on lighting?
”Yes, we talked about it.
But I’d like to add something.
I wish there was a better re-
lationship with the different technicians and the Dj’s. For bands, technicians always ask
”what are your requirements?” but for DJ’s they’re just going to do whatever. I also have
wishes for the vibe I’m going for. Maybe we can work together to find some kind of harmony.”
”They asked me at Roskilde Festival. Blue, green and pink, I said. I watched some video
afterwards. It looked really cool. And it felt nice, because you take more pride of the whole
production.”
Esther wanted to change the music during her show on Roskilde Festival from one genre to
another. Along with that, she wanted to signify the change with a change of colour in lights.
Even though she had talked with the technicians, she had no way of communicating the exact
timing to the lighting technician. She couldn’t expect him just to know, either. That would
be the dream scenario, but it didn’t exactly change with the transition she had imagined.
Did your assisted in designing a stage setup?
”At Loppen I helped put on a show with Raske Penge and some hiphop bands. I was VJ’ing.
That’s when you realize, that it is a part of a bigger production, and everyone needs to know
what is going on for it to be cohesive to the audience.”
Were there any takeaways from this experience?
”I found that taking a break helps to refresh the vibe. Literally going to black. Every time
we did it, it changes something in the atmosphere. It’s and makes you ready for another
APPENDIX L. INTERVIEWS: DJ
144
==PAGE:176==
”ride”, or sequence of lighting.”
Do you own any kind of lighting system?
Esther does not. Esther knows people from various organisers, that have a bunch of things.
She says, the closest thing she has, is a Philips Hue light.
Do you have a favourite type of lighting?
Esther like it when the lights come from behind the DJ, for instance on a screen, and it
creates a silhouette. It works especially well with smoke on the stage. Additionally, Ether
likes when music transitions to an interlude or a break, and the lights follow in the right way.
It is really great. But again, if the lighting is predictable, it can also be boring.
Drawing
In Esther’s first drawing, she draws a DJ who is in the middle of the crowd. The printed
speaker is once again ignore. The DJ is at the same height as everyone. The people are
around him or her. The speakers are monostep, which means they’re stacked together, like a
wall. They’re sitting at the back of the room.
”What if the light was a ring? It could be pulsing. It’ could have sections which that turn
on and off or have different colours. It’s like a spaceship on top of the DJ. It can produce
a beam or a pulse, that move along the circle’s circumference. The lighting is minimalistic.
And it is never too bright.”
The reason Ether likes this setup, is because it breaks the barrier of the DJ being superior.
The second drawing is more like a box. Esther draws a venue, which is hexagonic. The
printed speaker is once again ignored. She really likes decentralising it.
”It could be interesting if the DJ is elevated in the middle. The entire venue is like a dome.
Like a hexagon.... But where would the sound come from?”
Esther realised she got inspired from another place, where the DJ is encompassed in a fish-
tank looking cube in the center of the room. She’s not sure about the second one.
”Does it make sense to have lights in the floor? I like that. I imagine a white subtle light,
that shines to the ceiling.”
”It was quite fun thinking about lighting for a change. Apparently, I pay a lot of attention
to the lights. It surprises me a little.”
APPENDIX L. INTERVIEWS: DJ
145
==PAGE:177==
”I assume a lot of people share the feelings I have with lights, but rarely you have a chance
to articulate them, like now.”
APPENDIX L. INTERVIEWS: DJ
146
==PAGE:178==
M
Interviews: Visual artist
M.1
Jonas from Hackstage
Interview was conducted 10th of October.
This interview was conducted as a study into Jonas’ workflow using analogue equipment in
the creation of visual art. The technique of using modular equipment creates a plethora of
options for creating custom live-generated sequences of colour and patterns. This principle
may be reapplied digitally, which could then give rise to a standalone mode that does not
require a signal feed, e.g. Art-Net. Merely control signals to specify internal routing would
be sufficient to initiate and experiment with colour and pattern until the user is satisfied.
The full outcome of the interview is saved in recording, pictures and video. A short overview
of topics is given below.
• Walk-through of past applications/works where the eqiupment has been used.
• Walk-through of different types of equipment, buttons, signal types and how they may
be routed together and what effects they might produce on the output.
• Demonstration of various pieces of equipment.
List of items in setup (not limited to):
• An input for midi signals
• Video mixer: mix multiple signals. Can also manipulate signal to increase complexity
of output
• Random generator: can create random patterns via LFO’s, clocks and ”chaos”.
• LFO generator: create an oscillating signal which can be used as control signal for other
parameteres. A LFO tempo/frequency can be tapped with finger, allowing for quick
synchronisation to other motions, for instance rhythms in music.
• High frequency oscillators (multiple kinds): High frequency oscillators generates video
content. Video content may be lines, dots, boxes and various thickness and have various
motions across the screen.
147
==PAGE:179==
• Video component mixer: inputs a video signal. Colours can be manipulated via control
of frequency bands.
• Visual cortex: outputs video to screen format.
• Audio input device: can input audio signals via cable.
• Camera input: device to route and process incoming video feed.
• Camera: for creating feed back.
• Large collection of analogue TVs for outputting content.
Figure M.1
The output of making a few settings are seen below. The output is in these cases composed
of two dimensional geometries (squares, lines, circles) and repeating patterns. The pattern
to the left is reacting on audio input. A tone in a specific frequency will produce a complete
red circle inside the blue field. Talking and mixed frequencies will cause read lines to appear
more sporadically.
A full transcript is not included, as the report did not directly benefit from these inputs.
APPENDIX M. INTERVIEWS: VISUAL ARTIST
148
==PAGE:180==
APPENDIX M. INTERVIEWS: VISUAL ARTIST
149
==PAGE:181==
N
Interviews: Event maker
N.1
Simon from Camp Safari
Interview was conducted 15th of September.
Simon is a student at DTU, a technician in sound and lighting systems, and constructor at
Camp Safari. He is also a hosting events, using the Camp Safari equipment. They also get
booked for various events.
Interview outcomes
Camp Safari is a collective of technicians designing and building sound systems and party
setups. Camp Safari started because Mikkel, the owner, wanted to build a sound system for
Roskilde Festival. Several hundreds of thousands of Danish crowns have through the years
been spent on equipment and materials to steadily increase it’s quality. During the later
years of its existence, Camp Safari now collaborates with Roskilde Festival, contributing to
the Dream City camping zone with its festive creations.
Outside the festival, Camp Safari makes a business as well. Their sound and light systems
are rented out for shows, carnivals, and town festivals. They also make money from sponsors
and camp members during Roskilde Festival. Money is spent on equipment, booking artists
and continuous development of the system.
Use of lighting systems
The wagon is installed with a multitude of lights. One center-effect projector, two moving
heads projectors, 2 lasers, LED stips in the ceiling and LED panels in the front. (See the
section 2.1 for info on lighting fixtures). The Center-effect is a lamp that uses mirrors to
move projected shapes and colours around surfaces, for instance the dance floor, the crowd
or ceiling.
For controlling the lights, they use internal algorithm programs, which takes input from a
built-in microphone. The system is fully automatic. For synchronising left and right side, a
DMX cable is used to link the pair of lamps. This ensures visual symmetry on the output.
150
==PAGE:182==
Opinion on lightig systems and controls
The sound algorithm isn’t that good. It does the job, but it’s sometimes delayed and there
is no further control of intensity, colours, rhythm or the like. With a DMX controller, you
can make your own sequences, and be able to change the flow. It is quite complicated, and
there’s a lot to learn, but the result is good, and you can back up the music. Although, a
DMX controller is very expensive. An estimated seven to ten thousand Danish crowns is
needed for such a controller.
Hexagonal LED surface lamps were used as ambient light around the dance floor. It served
no purpose for the people dancing. LEDs are often on walls or ceiling in clubs. We had disco
balls with lights inside. These were not good. Not powerful enough. LED works best on
stage - behind the DJ. They don’t work for the crowd because they don’t move as much.
An LED lamp can only put light in front of itself. Moving heads give a lot more movement,
because they beam a light on a surface, and it can travel around. It has a good effect on
people. A smoke machine is good, because moving head light cones become visible in the air.
Strobe has an intense effect on people, because it’s distorting the way we see and observe
movement. Colourful lights lift the party with some level of intensity. To get people dancing,
it’s important to the idea that it’s festive. The right lighting help to do that. If normal indoor
lights are on, people feel exposed. The lights should dance with people and support the music.
If the lights and music play together, the experience is more coherent and immersive.
Improving systesms
Better programs and a better interface on the lamps could be better. They are bad and not
intuitive. Usually they have few buttons and bad displays on them.
Better display and more customization on e.g. the sound control and the ”automatic” lighting
programs that products come with.
Interpretations
The preferred lamp type for parties are based on projections, because they have a lot of
movement.
Good controls are hard to come by. DMX controllers are expensive and hard to use. Built-in
controllers are limited. Sound-mode does the job, but still lacks some level of customisation
and tuning to increase satisfaction of the output.
APPENDIX N. INTERVIEWS: EVENT MAKER
151
==PAGE:183==
O
Interview: Photographer
O.1
Tess
Interview was conducted 30th of September.
The full outcome of the interview is saved in recording. A short overview of topics is given
below.
• Introduction to Tess’ daily work
• How Tess uses light when capturing photos inside and outside a studio
• Walk-through of inventory
• Listing problems with inventory
• Naming problems in photography in general
• Wishful thinking: what does ideal product solutions look like
• Usage of light for parties and daily use
152
