==PAGE:1==
Improving Artifact­driven Process Monitoring
by Aggregating Smart Object Measurements
Master Thesis
DTU Compute
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Improving Artifact­driven Process Monitoring by Aggregating Smart Object Mea­
surements
Master Thesis
February, 2023
By
Szabolcs Garda
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus­
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Published by:
DTU, Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science,
Richard Petersens Plads, Building 324, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
www.compute.dtu.dk
ISSN:
[0000­0000] (electronic version)
ISBN:
[000­00­0000­000­0] (electronic version)
ISSN:
[0000­0000] (printed version)
ISBN:
[000­00­0000­000­0] (printed version)
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over twenty­two weeks at the Department of Applied Math­
ematics and Computer Science, at the Technical University of Denmark, in fulfilment for
the Master’s degree in Computer Science and Engineering.
Szabolcs Garda ­ s202472
Signature
Date
ii
Improving Artifact­driven Process Monitoring by Aggregating Smart Object Measurements
2023.02.06.
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
Today, business process monitoring has become an important aspect of organizations’
lives because it is a powerful tool to reduce costs, and support quality assurance. To
increase effectiveness, organizations often involve other organizations (so­called service
providers) in their process executions. This results in single­party business processes
turning into multi­party processes. With this new setup, challenges arise when information
about process executions is no longer always available for the process owner. Organi­
zations have tried to overcome this by building cross­organizational information systems
which are costly, and inflexible. Therefore, these organizations were motivated to build
long­term cross­organizational collaborations, without changing service providers often.
The SMARTifact platform introduced by Meroni[1] sought to overcome this inflexibility, and
implement an artifact­driven monitoring approach, using extended Guard Stage Milestone
(eGSM) process modelling language. This turns the artifacts participating in process exe­
cutions into smart objects, and involves them in the process monitoring, while eliminating
the need to modify organizational information system whenever they use a new service
provider. This project seeks to overcome certain limitations of the SMARTifact platform
to allow its more extensive testing. In addition, this project studies the different possibili­
ties in information aggregation of multiple eGSM engines, and how organizations can use
this information to support their operation. Finally, the project introduces a way to export
information from an eGSM model into its corresponding BPMN diagram, with minimal in­
formation loss, so as to produce a semantically equivalent, enriched Business Process
Model and Notation (BPMN) diagram.
Improving Artifact­driven Process Monitoring by Aggregating Smart Object Measurements
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
I would like to express my deepest gratitude to my two supervisors, Giovanni Meroni and
Andrea Burattin, for their invaluable guidance and support throughout the completion of
my thesis. Their regular meetings and useful advice have been instrumental in helping
me achieve my goals.
I would also like to extend my heartfelt thanks to my parents for their unwavering support
and encouragement throughout my many years of study. Their love and belief in me have
been a constant source of motivation.
Finally, I would like to thank my girlfriend, Valerie, for her unwavering love, support and
understanding. Her presence in my life has been a source of strength and inspiration.
Thank you all for being a part of my journey.
iv
Improving Artifact­driven Process Monitoring by Aggregating Smart Object Measurements
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Scope . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.2
Project outline
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2
Background
4
2.1
Business Process Monitoring . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.2
Business process models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.3
Internet of Things (IoT) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.4
Problem domain
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
3
Related works
10
3.1
IoT Devices in Business Processes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
3.2
Barcelona: An Artifact­centric Process Runtime Environment . . . . . . . . 10
3.3
SMARTifact: An Artifact­driven Monitoring Platform . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
4
Problem Analysis
14
4.1
Contributions and Research Questions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
4.2
Methodology
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
5
Engine Deployment at Scale
17
5.1
Deploying E­GSM engine out of artifact
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
5.2
Parallel E­GSM deployment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
6
Deviation Detection in E­GSM models
21
6.1
Process Tree . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
6.2
Types of E­GSM Blocks and Signs of Deviations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
6.3
Algorithm for Deviation Detection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30
7
E­GSM Aggregation
33
7.1
Data Sources and Trigger Events . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 33
7.2
Data Storage . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 34
7.3
Event broadcasting . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 35
7.4
Stakeholder notification
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 35
7.5
Aggregation approaches . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 35
7.6
Process Groups
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 37
7.7
Notification routing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 37
7.8
Technical aspects
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 38
8
E­GSM to BPMN conversion
40
8.1
Mapping E­GSM stages to BPMN constructs
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 40
8.2
State and status export to BPMN models
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 40
8.3
Enrichment of BPMN models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 41
8.4
Visualization of BPMN diagrams
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 42
8.5
Visualization of aggregated metrics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 42
Improving Artifact­driven Process Monitoring by Aggregating Smart Object Measurements
v
==PAGE:8==
9
Software Design and Implementation
44
9.1
Technologies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 44
9.2
System Architecture . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 47
9.3
MQTT Communication . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 48
9.4
Database module . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 48
9.5
Engine Worker Application
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 50
9.6
Aggregation Agent . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 52
9.7
Supervisor module . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 55
9.8
Front­end module (Client application)
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 57
10 Evaluation and results
58
10.1 Deployment at Scale . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 58
10.2 Deviation Detection and E­GSM to BPMN translation . . . . . . . . . . . . . 61
10.3 Information aggregation from E­GSM Engines . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 68
11 Conclusion
72
11.1 Answers to Research Questions
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 72
12 Future works
76
Bibliography
77
A Sequence Block Deviation Scenarios
79
B Parallel Block Deviation Scenarios
80
C Exclusive Block Deviation Scenarios
81
D Inclusive Block Deviation Scenarios
82
E
Loop Block Deviation Scenarios
83
F
BPMN to E­GSM Translation Rules
84
G Activity diagrams
86
vi
Improving Artifact­driven Process Monitoring by Aggregating Smart Object Measurements
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction
With the proliferation of modern business information systems, solutions for monitoring
business processes have emerged in every possible field, and have become a popular
topic in scientific research.
Process monitoring is a powerful tool to minimize the costs of deviations, detect problems,
improve the efficiency of business processes, and provide quality assurance capabilities
for process owners. Today, continuous enhancements of these monitoring systems are
done with the aim of minimizing hardware and infrastructure costs, and reducing human
labour in the monitoring process as much as possible, as labour costs often form a signif­
icant portion of operational expenses.
The default form of business processes is single­party business processes, which are
completely performed and managed by one organization only, and all information required
for monitoring are accessible at any time. In this case, the infrastructure required for
monitoring, collecting information, and ensuring security, is considered to be simple, since
all resources and artifacts are the possession of one organization.
On the other hand, multi­party business processes are managed by at least two orga­
nizations, and their monitoring is much more sophisticated. Today, multi­party business
processes play increasingly important roles in our lives as organizations find that their
competitiveness can be greatly increased via collaborations with other companies, so­
called service providers, who are specialized to do a certain kind of work for a defined
cost or periodic fee. This change turns internal business processes into multi­party pro­
cesses since assets are now handled by multiple cooperating organizations. In this new
setting, a continuous and cost­efficient process monitoring platform is crucial to keep ser­
vices competitive and compliant with deadlines.
However, multi­party processes pose new challenges in business process monitoring. In
particular, information on all assets in the process may not be available at all times, for
both the asset owner and the service provider. To make multi­party process monitoring
reliable, organizations need to build a customized monitoring system where different or­
ganizations can communicate with each other in a well­defined manner. Unfortunately,
developing these systems is costly, so companies were encouraged to build long­term
cross­organization collaborations and avoid frequent changes in the process monitoring
system. Nowadays, the proliferation of digital technology and the rapidly changing global
landscape are creating radical changes to this approach. The ability to change business
processes and service providers without significant additional costs is crucial to continu­
ously enhance services, and to remain competitive.
Meroni [1] has introduced Artifact­driven monitoring, a new business process monitor­
ing approach, which aims to observe processes by applying IoT devices to turn physical
goods that participate in business processes into ”smart objects”. Using the different types
of measurements obtained from these smart objects, business processes can be ob­
served. These smart objects are aware of their current state, communicate, and perform
different measurements to detect how the process is being executed. For artifact­driven
monitoring, traditional activity­centric process modelling languages (e.g.: Business Pro­
cess Model and Notation [2] BPMN) are not suitable. Instead, artifact­centric languages
are needed to enable process to not strictly follow a certain execution path. This makes
it possible to continuously and autonomously monitor the process even if its execution
Improving Artifact­driven Process Monitoring by Aggregating Smart Object Measurements
1
==PAGE:10==
deviates from the process definitions. The referenced research uses Extended Guard­
Stage­Milestone (E­GSM) and provides a way to create E­GSM diagram(s) based on a
reference BPMN model, which is probably the most widely used cross­industrial language
for describing processes.
The research discussed the SMARTifact platform, which is an architecture that consists
of multiple software components. The core element is the engine, which is capable of
deploying an E­GSM process model while listening to events from smart objects fired by
certain environmental changes.
In this thesis, we introduce a new framework built around the E­GSM engine handed
over from SMARTifact. Using this framework, we seek to overcome certain limitations of
the old framework while enhancing usability and investigating opportunities in deviation
detection and information aggregation of E­GSM engines, and recognizing conversions
rules between E­GSM and BPMN models.
1.1
Scope
This project’s goal is to build a scalable and flexible software infrastructure around the
E­GSM engine to make possible its excessive usage and testing. In addition, we also aim
to investigate the possibilities of aggregating information from different E­GSM process
instances, and how we can map E­GSM engines into semantically equivalent BPMN mod­
els. We also seek to discover options to enrich BPMN diagrams with information which
are available in E­GSM models, but not typically part of BPMN representations.
1.2
Project outline
This thesis consists of 12 chapters, which are structured as follows.
Chapter 2 ­ Background: We introduce the most important fields and theories that the
project works with, the problems and challenges that it aims to resolve, and its key con­
tributions.
Chapter 3 ­ Related Works: This chapter provides the theoretical foundations of the
topics that the project utilizes and builds on.
Chapter 4 ­ Problem Analysis: We define a set of research questions that will be tackled
in subsequent chapters. We explore various possibilities to address the defined research
questions. Additionally, we define the functional and non­functional requirements of this
project.
Chapter 5 ­ Engine Deployment at Scale: We introduce our proposed solution to ad­
dress research questions related to engine deployment.
Chapter 6 ­ Deviation Detection in E­GSM Models: We introduce the most important
types of process deviations in E­GSM models, and a possible method for recognizing
them algorithmically in real­time.
Chapter 7 ­ E­GSM Aggregation: We discuss the different approaches we recognized
for E­GSM aggregation. We then describe in detail how these approaches can be imple­
mented while using the engine deployment solution introduced in Chapter 5.
Chapter 8 ­ E­GSM to BPMN Conversion: This chapter summarizes the recognized
translation rules between E­GSM and BPMN models, and how the conversion can be
performed in real­time.
2
Improving Artifact­driven Process Monitoring by Aggregating Smart Object Measurements
==PAGE:11==
Chapter 9 ­ Software Design and Implementation: This chapter discusses the techno­
logical and design decisions we made during the software design and development phase.
It describes the main challenges we had to resolve, and introduces the main technologies
we utilized.
Chapter 10 ­ Evaluation and Results: This chapter describes the different methods of
evaluation performed in order to verify the operation of implemented solutions.
Chapter 11 ­ Conclusion: This chapter concludes the project and summarizes our find­
ings and results.
Chapter 12 ­ Future Works: This chapter discusses some untapped opportunities in the
introduced system, and possible future works.
Improving Artifact­driven Process Monitoring by Aggregating Smart Object Measurements
3
==PAGE:12==
2
Background
In Chapter 1, we discussed the importance of multi­party business processes, and defined
the scope of this project. In this chapter, we will provide the theoretical foundations of the
main concepts that we build on in this project. We then discuss fields of the introduced
topics that raise challenges, and require further research.
2.1
Business Process Monitoring
As a fundamental part of Business Process Management, Business Process Monitoring is
a set of proactive monitoring activities performed by business owner organizations to de­
tect problems with process instance executions as early as possible. These activities also
support decision makers in intervening in the escalation of deviations, reduce the negative
effects of problems, and provide useful analytical data and performance measures [3].
From a management point of view, business process monitoring is a broad area, and
may involve numerous aspects of the organization including finance, strategy, expecta­
tions, performance etc.. As a result, the applied tool­set, techniques, and implemented
technical solutions are highly dependent on the nature of monitored properties. From a
process perspective, business process monitoring is the continuous observation of pro­
cess instances to verify its correct execution, and channel alerts to the right entities, so as
to avoid unhandled and incorrect executions. Business process monitoring tools can also
derive certain measures in order to maintain statistics about process types and resources.
The default form of monitored business processes is single­party business processes,
which means that the process is completely executed by the process owner and hence
has all information available at any moment to perform monitoring. In this case, the infras­
tructure required for monitoring, collecting information, and ensuring security, is consid­
ered to be simple, since all resources and artifacts are the possession of one organization.
On the other hand, multi­party business processes are performed by two or more collab­
orating organizations. In this case, the monitoring is much more sophisticated, since not
all resources involved in process execution are available at any given time. Organizations
have overcome this by implementing cross­organizational monitoring solutions. However,
these systems are costly and are not flexible for frequent modifications. Therefore, there
is a need for innovative and flexible cross­organizational monitoring platforms.
2.2
Business process models
Business process models are abstract representations of activity sequences performed
by organizations, and involve various human and non­human resources in the production
of goods and services. Business process models consist of a set of activity models and
execution constraints [4]. An organization may handle multiple instances of the same
process model, all of them forming a concrete case when the process has been exe­
cuted. Based on our intentions and needs, we can choose from several types of business
process representations, each of them coming with their own features, advantages and
drawbacks.
This thesis deals with Extended Guard Stage Milestone (E­GSM) and Business Process
Model and Notation (BPMN) modelling languages. These two languages implement fun­
damentally different approaches to represent processes. The most conspicuous differ­
ence is that the BPMN is procedural (control­flow­based), while the E­GSM is a declarative
4
Improving Artifact­driven Process Monitoring by Aggregating Smart Object Measurements
==PAGE:13==
language. BPMN allows only well­defined control flows, while E­GSM does not enforce
any execution sequence and simply verifies if the execution satisfies certain rules, which
are the constraints of the model. BPMN is a well­known language, is easy to interpret by
humans, and is widely applied by organizations. On the other hand, E­GSM is the result
of a relatively new modelling approach and its interpretation requires more effort and time.
Therefore, representing business processes on BPMN diagrams is highly advantageous
and preferred by organizations.
2.2.1
Business Process Model and Notation (BPMN)
Business Process Model and Notation was developed by the Object Management Group
(OMG)[5], a non­profit and vendor­neutral organization which aims to catalyze the stan­
dardisation of different technological solutions in several domains. In the past decades,
BPMN has become probably the most widely applied and recognized notation to describe
business processes. Its refined expressiveness makes it possible to be understood by
basically anyone in the organization, while still supporting a wide range of features that
can describe sophisticated business process scenarios as well.
The main elements of the language are events (occurrences in the real world), activities,
gateways and the relations between them (sequence flow) [4]. The core notation set (Fig­
ure 2.1) allows us to visualize a single process. By using the whole set of notations, more
advanced scenarios can be described and visualized too (e.g.: representing organiza­
tional aspects by pools and lanes). BPMN can be enriched by data objects which are
intended to represent artifacts manipulated by the process.
Figure 2.1: The core subset of BPMN elements [6]
BPMN is a control­flow­based language.
It determines the acceptable execution se­
quence(s) of activities, while considering everything else forbidden. This inflexible be­
haviour makes BPMN incapable of following process executions where a prohibited state
transition has occurred, or in cases where the process is not executed as expected. In
addition, BPMN is an activity­centric model, and is inadequate for the SMARTifact plat­
form which requires an artifact­centric modelling language, as has been recognized in [1].
Artifact­centric modelling languages exploit a data­centric approach to model business
Improving Artifact­driven Process Monitoring by Aggregating Smart Object Measurements
5
==PAGE:14==
processes[7].
2.2.2
Extended Guard Stage Milestone (E­GSM)
Guard Stage Milestone (GSM) is a declarative, artifact­centric business process mod­
elling language, which represents processes in terms of participating artifacts. A process
may have multiple GSM perspectives depending on the number of participating artifacts.
Each perspective regards one type of artifact, and has a data schema with state and data
attributes as well as a life­cycle definition[8][9].
The main constructs of GSM models are Stages, which are supplemented with certain
logical expressions called Guards and Milestones.
• Information Model: The state and characteristics of the artifact are monitored by
the Information Model
• Stage: Stages represent the activities that interact with the artifact. Each stage has
a ’state’ attribute which can be ’closed’ or ’opened’. By default, stages have states
that are ’closed’.
• Guard: Guards control when a stage is considered to be under execution (’opened’).
Milestones recognize when a stage has been executed, and its state can become
’closed’. Each stage must have at least one guard.
• Milestone: Milestone is a condition which expresses when the corresponding stage
is considered to be executed. Each stage must have at least one guard.
Atomic stages can be wrapped into each other, constructing composite stages, so as
to realize more sophisticated process scenarios. Composite stages behave similarly to
atomic ones and also have guards and milestones. When a composite stage is ’closed’,
we can assume that no member activity is under execution. When it is ’opened’, any
member activity can be ’opened’ as well.
As mentioned, GSM is a declarative modelling language, so explicit declaration of exe­
cution sequences is not possible. However, business processes often declare a desired
or correct path which has to be represented in declarative models as well although no
execution sequence should be enforced. Hence, the model should be able to indicate if
an execution does not follow the desired trace, while still being able to track it and repre­
sent the momentary state of the process accurately. To realize this, [1] constructed the
extended Guard Stage Milestone (E­GSM) modelling language by partially modifying the
already introduced GSM constructs and extending it with new ones:
• Informal Model: Inherited from GSM and represents the current state of the artifact.
• Stage: The stage construct has been extended with the status and the compliance
attributes, whose possible values are ’regular’ or ’faulty’, and ’onTime’, ’skipped’ or
’outOfOrder’ respectively. In addition, ’unopened’ has been added to the possible
values of the state attribute.
• Data Flow Guard: Event Condition Action (ECA) rules control when the associated
stage is ’opened’. It has the same purpose as Guards in GSM.
• Milestone: Express the condition when the stage is considered to be executed. It
is identical to the Milestone definition in GSM.
• Process Flow Guard: A new construct introduced in E­GSM. Includes the expected
execution flow in the form of an ECA rule. The rule is evaluated every time at least
one Data Flow Guard of the associated stage is triggered. If the value of the Process
6
Improving Artifact­driven Process Monitoring by Aggregating Smart Object Measurements
==PAGE:15==
Flow Guard is true, the execution sequence follows the desired trace. If it is false,
then the execution deviates from the expected sequence.
• Fault Logger: This new construct is intended to detect deviations during the exe­
cution of the associated stage. The nature of detectable faults is varied, although,
in general, we can say that it needs to be expressible by ECA rules.
[1] introduced a semi­automated way to generate E­GSM process model from a BPMN
collaboration diagram for any artifact participating in the process. This allows a process
constructed in BPMN language to be monitored by SMARTifact platform after performing
the model translation.
eGSM
Stage
D
P
Data Flow Guard
Process Flow Guard
Milestone
Fault logger
GSM
Stage
D
Guard
Milestone
Figure 2.2: GSM and E­GSM stages
2.3
Internet of Things (IoT)
Remote accessibility of certain types of devices has been around for several decades.
Industrial control systems, transportation networks, and other high­cost fields have been
applying networks to monitor and control instruments and machines. However, for a long
time, the high costs of network infrastructure and microprocessor units have prevented
the wide­spreading of these technologies.
Microprocessors and wireless communication technologies have undergone accelerated
enhancement in recent decades. Devices with processing and communication capabil­
ities have become so tiny and consume so little power that they can fit into most of the
objects surrounding us and be powered with a small battery. This turns the object into a
smart device, or Internet of Things (IoT) device [10].
In most cases, IoT devices are simple sensors with processing units and communication
interfaces. However, they can be much more sophisticated, and in some cases contain
actuators and combining multiple communication methods.
Due to the proliferation of this technology, unit prices of IoT devices have reduced signifi­
cantly. Organizations and individuals today can think about mounting application­specific
chips onto objects with different purposes. This was virtually impossible, or at least much
more costly, a few years back.
All these developments are necessary in the consideration of turning organizational arti­
facts into IoT devices, and using them as tools to resolve process observability needs.
2.3.1
Message Queue Telemetry Transport
The communication profile of IoT devices is different from that of traditional devices con­
nected to networks. In most applications, data must be received or sent infrequently.
Improving Artifact­driven Process Monitoring by Aggregating Smart Object Measurements
7
==PAGE:16==
Often, the same messages have to reach not only one device, but a group of them. Fur­
thermore, the amount of transmitted data is relatively small in size. On the other hand,
IoT devices have limited computational resources and network bandwidth. In addition, in
most applications, due to different considerations, their energy consumption must be kept
low. These requirements bring about the need for lightweight and reliable communication
protocols optimized for a high number of endpoints. One response to this need is the ap­
pearance of publish­subscribe protocols, with one of its most widely known, standardized
implementation being the Message Queue Telemetry Transport (MQTT), which has been
utilized by the referenced SMARTifact project.
The MQTT protocol exploits the paradigms of Message Queue, which is a type of asyn­
chronous communication. Each message is stored temporarily in a message queue until
it gets processed and deleted from the queue. The fact that it is an asynchronous way of
communication results in the sender and receiver being highly decoupled, which makes
it applicable in systems where the high reliability and flexibility is a must.
The MQTT protocol is based on the MQTT broker, which allows clients to connect to it by
a single Transmission Control Protocol (TCP) connection. After the connection has been
established, it allows the clients to subscribe to topics, and also publish on them. The
broker will forward the messages published on a topic to each client who is subscribed
to that particular topic. The different versions of the MQTT standards specify several ad­
vanced features, which can be flexibly used. One of the most important capabilities of the
MQTT is the option to set Quality of Service (QoS), which allows us to choose a delivery
policy for each message. There are three levels of QoS, summarized by Figure 2.3. The
protocol also allows us to implement request­reply message passing by using Response
Topics to receive replies and Correlation Data in order to match responses to requests.
Figure 2.3: Levels of service in MQTT protocol [11]
2.4
Problem domain
Business process monitoring is crucial for today’s organizations. It is a fundamental tool
for quality assurance, eliminating deviations, and reducing costs. To remain competitive,
single­party business processes are typically inadequate, and need to be transformed into
multi­party processes. As a result, there is a need for new, effective, and affordable ways
to perform process monitoring where activities are conducted by multiple organizations.
The referenced study by Meroni ([1]) introduces a state­of­the­art solution for multi­party
business process monitoring. This solution enhances the quality of process surveillance,
increases the flexibility of the monitoring platform, and reduces the time required by staff to
document activities. However, further development and implementation of new features
8
Improving Artifact­driven Process Monitoring by Aggregating Smart Object Measurements
==PAGE:17==
is needed to make it attractive for businesses, and make possible its high­scaled usage.
Furthermore, the utilization of data from E­GSM engines is also not a well­studied field
yet. The potential fields of applications can be broadened by recognizing possibilities in
this field.
In real­world scenarios, companies need to handle a high number of processes. Very
often, a significant portion of these are instances of one process model where the same
model is being deployed several times in parallel. Even though a process model has to be
prepared only once, monitoring several parallel instances can be challenging and remains
an unresolved challenge for e­GSM.
Therefore, there is a need for a monitoring solution which aggregates real­time information
about a group of identical e­GSM process instances. It should be able to automatically
detect deviations at early stages, and notify appropriate entities to intervene or resolve
the issues, therefore a method to find deviations in an E­GSM engine is also needed.
The operators of this system will be humans who need an easy­to­understand, insightful,
and accurate visual representation of how the monitored processes are performing. Since
BPMN has become an industry standard that is well­known by many professionals, and
much more easily understandable for humans than e­GSM diagrams, it would be highly
advantageous to base the visualization of the monitoring on BPMN diagrams. For this
reason, there is a need for a converter which can construct a semantically equivalent
BPMN diagram based on a reference e­GSM model. As e­GSM diagrams may contain
more information than an equivalent BPMN, to minimize information loss, BPMN needs to
be extended by these additional details. The enrichment of BPMN diagrams also raised
questions which we tried to address in this project.
Improving Artifact­driven Process Monitoring by Aggregating Smart Object Measurements
9
==PAGE:18==
3
Related works
In Chapter 2, we saw how IoT devices became applicable in many different fields in recent
years. We also explored how [1] used IoT devices to turn artifacts that participate in
process executions into smart objects, which are now able to perform business process
monitoring. In this chapter, we refer to some recent researches which are relevant to this
project, and go into the details of the SMARTifact platform, its operation and capabilities,
as well as its limitations.
3.1
IoT Devices in Business Processes
IoT devices allow us to measure, and collect information about business processes and
their execution environment. In most applications, IoT devices perform some well­defined
tasks, and are not involved in business process controlling and monitoring at a high level.
Some recent studies aimed to combine the information provided by different IoT devices,
and utilize them in business processes. For example, Meyer [12] has recognized and
integrated IoT­based resources into business processes. IoT devices are handled as
information providers, which are associated with physical entities and therefore provide
insights into the properties of the system in real time. This information can be used for
decision­making in business processes. However, this research did not consider the ex­
ecution of these processes.
Building on the results of Meyer, [13] has integrated IoT devices in the execution of busi­
ness processes. It introduced a platform that allows us to bidirectionally map IoT devices
to business processes, so as to realize an IoT­aware business process. The state of the
IoT devices and the measurements performed by them influence the business process
engine. As a result of the bidirectional mapping, the process model can also control the
associated IoT devices by triggering actions, realizing a whole control loop. This solu­
tion allows us to coordinate a large number of devices by using a BPMN process engine
for process logic. This solution is based on the BPMN modelling language, which is an
activity­centric language. Therefore in this case, its operation is only supported by infor­
mation from IoT devices, but it still mainly relies on events from activities, which come
from sources other than IoT devices. To completely exploit the opportunities in IoT de­
vices, activity­centric languages are inadequate, and an artifact­centric model is needed
to apply artifact­driven monitoring.
3.2
Barcelona: An Artifact­centric Process Runtime
Environment
Artifact­driven monitoring requires special runtime environments to deploy the artifact­
centric models. One implementation of it is Barcelona[14], which is a design and runtime
environment for declarative artifact­centric business models. The application uses the
GSM modelling language, which has been discussed in Chapter 2. Barcelona provides
a graphical interface to create, edit and execute GSM models. Its usage is convenient
but it is not applicable for process monitoring. Therefore, the aforementioned SMARTifact
platform is also unable to use it.
3.3
SMARTifact: An Artifact­driven Monitoring Platform
The first project that utilized E­GSM language to monitor real physical processes was
SMARTifact which was introduced by [1]. The platform was designed to test and validate
10
Improving Artifact­driven Process Monitoring by Aggregating Smart Object Measurements
==PAGE:19==
the E­GSM­based, artifact­centric monitoring approach, and it is based on IoT devices
which are attached to artifacts participating in the monitored process. Each IoT device
consists of a sensor array and a computational unit which has network capabilities as well,
and also deploys 4 applications:
• On­board Sensor Handler: Performing measurements using the on­board Sensor
array is a fundamental responsibility of the IoT device. The type of applied sensors
is highly dependent on the application field and the exact type of the artifact. In the
presented example, a GPS module has been applied to retrieve location data. In
reality, any type of sensor can be added to the system (thermometer, accelerometer,
humidity sensor etc.). This application is unable to be deployed outside of the smart
object since it needs direct access to the sensors. This module can also contain
a certain level of data processing (e.g.: data filtering), but the logic behind event
formulation is in the next module, called the Event Processor.
• Event Processor: Event Processor is responsible for event formulation based on
sensor measurements performed by the onboard Sensor Handler. It contains the
application­specific logic for event formulation. The exact content of the events is
also specified here. The module notifies the Event Router module about events
(local artifact events), which will forward these to the appropriate MQTT topic. Event
Router instances assigned to E­GSM engines can subscribe to topics corresponding
to artifacts which are attached to the embodied process instance. In case of a new
event published by the Event Processor, the MQTT broker will deliver the message
to each Event router which is subscribed to the topic.
• Event Router: Event Router module is deployed next to the E­GSM engine, and
its responsibility is to route events from artifacts which are attached to the process
to the engine itself. This means that the Event Router is a software agent between
the MQTT broker and E­GSM engine, and takes care of topic subscriptions. In
addition, this module is responsible for receiving events from the local Event Pro­
cessor and publishing it to the appropriate MQTT topic, which is dedicated to the ar­
tifact (/{artifact_type}/{object_id}). Special purpose messages via process instance­
specific topics (/{process_name}/{instance_id}) coming from the Organization Infor­
mation System are also processed here. They inform the module if an artifact has
been attached or detached to the process instance. This enables the Event Router
to perform topic subscriptions or un­subscriptions based on that.
• E­GSM Engine: The application builds the E­GSM representation of the monitored
process based on the provided configuration file. This includes the definition of
all E­GSM stages and guards. In runtime, it receives events from the associated
Event Router and updates the model accordingly, determining the stage, status and
compliance tuples to each stage. The module also provides a REST­API, which
allows us to visualize the current state of the E­GSM model in the browser.
The system architecture and the relations between the introduced modules are depicted
by Figure 3.1.
3.3.1
Limitations
The main goal of the SMARTifact projects was to implement a lightweight platform which
is able to perform artifact­driven business process monitoring by exploiting E­GSM lan­
guage. The implemented system is easily configurable and only requires an IoT device to
deploy (if the MQTT broker is also deployed on it). The solution satisfies all requirements
stated for the SMARTifact project. However, the goal of this project aims to broaden the
Improving Artifact­driven Process Monitoring by Aggregating Smart Object Measurements
11
==PAGE:20==
Monitoring Platform
MQTT Broker
Truck AB123XY
Publish
/Truck/ab123xy
/Container/sn9876
/Process/inst1
REST API
On-board 
Sensors
Events 
Processor
Node-RED flow
Events 
Processor
Node-RED flow
Events Router
<–––––––––>
<–––––– ––––––––>
<–––––– ––––––––/>
<––––––––– –––––––––/>
</––––––>
<–––––– ––––––––>
<–––––– ––––––––/>
<––––––––– –––––––––/>
<–––––– ––––––––/>
<––––––––– –––––––––/>
</––––––>
<–––––– ––––––––>
<–––––– ––––––––/>
<––––––––– –––––––––/>
</––––––>
Artifact-to-object 
mapping criteria
Events Router
<–––––––––>
<–––––– ––––––––>
<–––––– ––––––––/>
<––––––––– –––––––––/>
</––––––>
<–––––– ––––––––>
<–––––– ––––––––/>
<––––––––– –––––––––/>
<–––––– ––––––––/>
<––––––––– –––––––––/>
</––––––>
<–––––– ––––––––>
<–––––– ––––––––/>
<––––––––– –––––––––/>
</––––––>
Artifact-to-object 
mapping criteria
E-GSM Engine
––––––
––
––––––
–––––––
D
P
P
––––––
–––––––
D
––––––
–––––––
D
D
D
P
––––––
–––––––
D
P
P
––––––
––
––––––
–––––––
D
P
P
––––––
–––––––
D
––––––
–––––––
D
D
D
P
––––––
–––––––
D
P
P
E-GSM process model
E-GSM Engine
––––––
––
––––––
–––––––
D
P
P
––––––
–––––––
D
––––––
–––––––
D
D
D
P
––––––
–––––––
D
P
P
E-GSM process model
Subscribe
Notify
Subscribe
Notify
Container SN9876
Publish
Subscribe
Notify
Subscribe
Notify
Organization 
Information 
System
Publish
Operator
Configure
Interact with
Sensor 
data
Local 
state 
changes
State 
changes
Figure 3.1: Architecture of SMARTifact platform [1]
application fields of artifact­driven monitoring, which arises a misalignment between the
goals of the two projects. Considering this, the current SMARTifact platform is inade­
quate for the purposes of this project and we need to overcome certain limitation, which
are discussed below.
• Computational resources: Computational resources available in IoT devices can
be a limitation to deploying more sophisticated process models. Among the four in­
troduced modules, the E­GSM engine is the most computationally intensive. There
is no purpose for this being deployed in the smart object, and it can be removed
from it and deployed on another device, or in the cloud. The same counts for the
Event Router. While the application for onboard sensors and the Event Processor
needs to remain on the IoT device since the sensor handler module needs direct
access to sensors, and to avoid networking overhead, the Event Processor should
stay next to it.
• Power consumption: Powering on­board IoT devices directly from the power grid
may not be feasible in many cases, since the power grid is not necessarily avail­
able, or the application of supply cables would be cumbersome. The power supply
of the onboard devices in most application fields would likely be a battery, which
requires us to be conscious of power consumption and minimize it as much as pos­
sible. Consumption can be reduced significantly by performing less computation.
Removing the Event Router and Process Engine from the IoT device introduced in
the previous point can be helpful to develop the system as well.
• Parallel deployment: Current implementation allows us to deploy one engine in­
stance on each smart object. This is not ideal because the number of process in­
12
Improving Artifact­driven Process Monitoring by Aggregating Smart Object Measurements
==PAGE:21==
stances may be higher than the number of smart objects. In this case, we would not
have enough executors.
• Configurability: One process instance can interact with multiple artifacts at the
same time, and can get attached or detached from artifacts in runtime. Starting an
engine on a smart object bonds the engine to the artifact it is deployed on. This can
cause issues to arise when, for example, the process gets detached from this smart
object. Messages from Organization Information System can reconfigure the Event
Router to receive events from another smart object, but the engine will continue
running on an artifact which is no longer attached to it. If the organization deploys
a high number of processes, it can lead to difficulties in locating engines.
• Accessibility and Reliability: E­GSM model representation must be available from
outside of the engine to make possible organizational decision­making, and support
other more advanced business process monitoring activities. These include con­
tinuous monitoring, deviation detection and information aggregation. The current
engine implementation provides a REST­API which allows us to retrieve different
kinds of information about the state of the engines. However, each process is de­
ployed on a different device at different locations, with different network conditions
(bandwidth, latency etc.). This can make it difficult to interact with the engines from
outside through the network. By moving out the E­GSM engine from the IoT device
and deploying it in the cloud, we can significantly reduce the necessary network
bandwidth for IoT devices since only the events triggered by the Event Processor
have to be sent out. Moreover, the engine will remain accessible even if the artifact
goes offline or got damaged, so the last known state of the process will be always
available.
• Safety: Deploying E­GSM engines on artifacts can easily lead to information loss
since smart objects participating in business processes are very vulnerable entities
compared to cloud infrastructure, or on­premise servers. In addition, they can get
easily damaged by environmental effects or mishandling, which can cause deteri­
oration or malfunction of the onboard IoT device. If the engine is deployed out of
the smart object, then its state history can be restored until the point when the IoT
device became unusable and it can help process operators investigate faults.
Improving Artifact­driven Process Monitoring by Aggregating Smart Object Measurements
13
==PAGE:22==
4
Problem Analysis
In Chapter 1 and 2, we have understood the need for new business process monitoring
approaches. In Chapter 3, we familiarized ourselves with the SMARTifact platform ­ the
first artifact­centric business process monitoring solution, which utilizes E­GSM modelling
language. In this chapter, we first identify a set of research questions, while considering
the limitations of the SMARTifact platform, and the potential in the E­GSM modelling lan­
guage. Following that, we define our methodology while working on this project.
4.1
Contributions and Research Questions
This project aims to extend the SMARTifact platform, and introduce new ways to utilize the
characteristics of artifact­centric process monitoring by applying information aggregation.
The project contributions have been formulated as research questions below, and can
be categorised into 3 main categories. The research questions included in RQ 1. are
related to the most significant limitations of the SMARTifact platform. Questions in RQ
2. are related to information aggregation, and try to find ways to utilize the information
available in E­GSM models in order to enhance process executions. Finally, questions
in RQ 3. tackle the challenges of converting E­GSM models into equivalent BPMN ones
with minimal information loss. The detailed Research Questions and sub­questions are
listed below:
RQ 1. How can multiple process instances deployed in parallel?
RQ 1.1. How is it possible to run the process models out of the smart object (e.g.: on
servers of the process owner)?
RQ 1.2. Is the current system architecture applicable to address RQ 1.1, what architec­
tural changes are necessary?
RQ 1.3. How can multiple process instances on one device run in parallel?
RQ 1.4. What advantages are expected from parallel process deployment compared to
the currently implemented architecture?
RQ 1.5. Considering computational resource requirements, robustness, and level of
complicatedness to apply, what software solutions are the best to deploy par­
allel process instances?
RQ 2. How can aggregate information in real­time from multiple instances of the
same process?
RQ 2.1. Is it possible to reliably estimate how a process is performing depending on the
aggregated information from different process model instances participating in
the process?
RQ 2.2. What techniques can be applied, and rules can be identified to aggregate in­
formation?
RQ 2.3. How to handle inconsistencies among process instances?
RQ 2.4. Can the parallel process instances lead to unresolvable uncertainties or other
risk factors decreasing accuracy of observance?
14
Improving Artifact­driven Process Monitoring by Aggregating Smart Object Measurements
==PAGE:23==
RQ 3. How can processes monitored by artifact­driven methods visualized based on
the equivalent BPMN model?
RQ 3.1. How can e­GSM process model have converted into semantically equivalent
BPMN model?
RQ 3.2. Can a BPMN diagram enriched by the information available in the equivalent
e­GSM model in order to provide a full overview of the process state?
RQ 3.3. Is it possible to map the state of an e­GSM model to the appropriate state of
an equivalent BPMN diagram?
RQ 3.4. How can detected deviations in process flow visualized, is it possible to enrich
a BPMN diagram by process flow deviations detected by e­GSM?
RQ 3.5. How can a process containing multiple e­GSM instances visualized by showing
aggregated information?
RQ 3.6. What front­end technologies, frameworks and libraries are applicable to achieve
the stated goals regarding visualization?
4.2
Methodology
The listed research questions specify the requirements at a high level. Neither the exact
approaches to tackle the problems, nor the technical aspects are not specified. Before we
embark on the project, we had to expand the research questions to obtain more detailed
requirements, while gaining deeper knowledge on the related fields, and explore different
tools and approaches. In order to specify the requirements in detail, we formulated a list
of functional and non­functional requirements.
4.2.1
Functional requirements
RQ 1. lists a few functional requirements, which aim to overcome certain limitations of
SMARTifact platform. The functional requirements to address RQ 1. can be expressed
as:
• Detach the E­GSM engine from the IoT device and deploy it independently
• The solution should allow multiple E­GSM instances to run on the same device
From a functional point of view, RQ 3. requires the formulation of different rules, and
the implementation of a special­purpose software component which performs real­time
E­GSM to BPMN conversion. The functional requirements for RQ 3. can be listed as:
• Formulate a set of E­GSM stage patterns for each relevant deviation scenario
• Design and implement an algorithm that is capable of finding deviations in an E­GSM
model using the recognized deviation patterns from the previous point
• Formulate a set of rules to find the corresponding E­GSM stage to each BPMN
activity, event, and block
• Design and implement a method to enrich BPMN diagram with available information
from the corresponding E­GSM model, including the found deviations
• Visualize aggregated metrics from multiple process executions on the correspond­
ing BPMN diagram
RQ 2. considers the opportunities in aggregating information of multiple process execu­
tions, and stating the functional requirements listed as follows:
Improving Artifact­driven Process Monitoring by Aggregating Smart Object Measurements
15
==PAGE:24==
• Provide the theoretical foundations of different aggregation approaches using infor­
mation from multiple process executions
• Estimate how individual process executions are performing based on the aggre­
gated information
Finally, to visualize information and to make the interaction with the system easier, we
need to create a user interface application as well. This is also a functional requirement.
4.2.2
Non­functional requirements
The research questions also state some non­functional requirements, which are:
• The implemented E­GSM engine deployment system needs to be efficient regarding
utilized computational resources
• The system needs to be scalable
16
Improving Artifact­driven Process Monitoring by Aggregating Smart Object Measurements
==PAGE:25==
5
Engine Deployment at Scale
In Chapter 4 we defined the research questions of this project and a set of functional
and non­functional requirements. In this chapter, we start to discuss our approaches to
address the research questions. We introduce our proposals to address questions in RQ
1. Since these questions concern the applied system architecture and the deployment of
engines, our proposal to address them will undoubtedly affect our approaches to further
research questions. The detailed theoretical and technical description of the introduced
solutions can be found in Chapter 9.
5.1
Deploying E­GSM engine out of artifact
Deploying E­GSM engine instances on IoT devices as the SMARTifact platform is ad­
equate for experiments, and for presenting the operation of artifact­centric monitoring.
However, there are several limitations, and it is not ideal to apply in real­world scenarios.
These have been discussed in 3.3. Therefore, the deployment of engines out of smart ob­
jects is crucial. While significant modifications in the method of deployment are needed,
the E­GSM engine implementation of the SMARTifact platform remains solid and reliable.
Considering the implementation complexity of E­GSM engine, complex challenges may
arise since the evaluation sequence of guards in the E­GSM model is not always straight­
forward, and incorrect sequence may result in unexpected behaviour. This project does
not intend to tackle these topics, so we decided to use the engine implementation of the
SMARTifact with only minimal, unavoidable internal modifications.
SMARTifact has been implemented in NodeJs[15]. It is a popular framework with runtimes
available basically for any platform. This allows the application to be deployed on any
machine having NodeJs runtime and the necessary libraries installed.
As a result, the E­GSM engine application can be deployed on any platform since it was
already a standalone application on the IoT device. Considering that the Event Router
should be kept close to the engine, we also moved it out from the IoT device. The event
Router requires significant upgrades since the ”local artifact” expression no longer has
any meaning. This is because, in this new setup, the artifact’s hardware (IoT device) is
only running the Sensor and Event Processor modules, and the Engine and Event Router
are deployed on a separate machine.
This new setup disencumbers the Event Router from forwarding events coming from the
local sensor array, so it only needs to receive events from certain IoT devices and pass
them to the local engine. The Event Router module has been modified to satisfy require­
ments relating parallel deployment of engines as well (RQ1.3). Its detailed description
can be found in 5.2.
5.2
Parallel E­GSM deployment
The original E­GSM engine can be used to deploy multiple engine instances at the same
time in two fundamentally different ways:
• Containerizing the E­GSM engine resulting in an Engine Container and spawning
multiple instances of it.
• Building a wrapper around the E­GSM engine on the application level, and making
possible the deployment of multiple engines in the same application without chang­
ing the engine significantly, resulting in an E­GSM Worker or Engine Worker.
Improving Artifact­driven Process Monitoring by Aggregating Smart Object Measurements
17
==PAGE:26==
5.2.1
Engine container
In the age of containerized applications, the most straightforward way to make possible
multi­engine deployment is to create a container image which includes the E­GSM engine
implementation with the Event Router (Figure 5.1). The solution allows the deployment of
an arbitrary number of standalone E­GSM instances with their own REST API to retrieve
real­time model information. This approach has its own advantages since the deployment
of containerized applications can be a highly automated process, and a very high level
of system reliability can be achieved via this approach. This allows it to perform well in
both scalability and reliability since an arbitrary number of container instances can be
deployed across multiple host machines. Moreover, it would require minimal effort to
implement, since there is no need for code modification, and only the container image
definition with the appropriate port(s) opened has to be achieved. However, this solution
would be wasteful regarding hardware resources. Aside from the engine itself, we will
need to deploy supplementary modules around it several times. These include the Event
Router, where each Event Router would open a TCP connection to the MQTT Broker.
This may result in the overload of the Broker and can easily become a bottleneck for the
system.
Container
A
Engine A
Event
Router A
Container
B
Engine B
Event
Router B
Container
C
Engine C
Event
Router C
Container
D
Engine D
Event
Router D
Container
E
Engine E
Event
Router E
Container
F
Engine F
Event
Router F
Host Operating System 1
Kernel 1
Host Operating System 2
Kernel 2
Figure 5.1: System architecture using containerized applications
5.2.2
Engine Worker ­ A Pool of Engines
Another way to deploy a large number of engines in parallel is to make a software wrapper
around the SMARTifact’s E­GSM engine, which allows us to create independent process
instances encapsulated into the same application. This can be achieved by applying
Object Oriented principles to the E­GSM engine implementation, and placing each created
engine instance into a pool, which is available through a similar REST­API as SMARTifact
does.
To take further advantage of deploying multiple E­GSM engines in a single application,
we need to modify the Event Router module. MQTT clients establish only one TCP con­
nection per MQTT broker. Considering that two or more engines are attached to artifacts
which are communicating through the same MQTT broker, we can significantly reduce
the number of connections if we share the MQTT client, and hence the TCP connection
to the broker among the locally deployed engines. This new feature has to be added
carefully because the behaviour of the Event Router from the engine perspective has to
be unchanged.
This solution requires us to make minor modifications in the E­GSM Engine module, imple­
ment the engine pool, and make unavoidable modifications in the Event Router. These
changes can bring about challenges, but this method has huge advantages compared
18
Improving Artifact­driven Process Monitoring by Aggregating Smart Object Measurements
==PAGE:27==
to the containerized approach since it requires significantly less computation resources,
and results in simpler networking as well because the Event Router has to maintain fewer
TCP connections. Information about a group of engines can also be accessed through
the same REST­API. Figure 5.2 depicts the planned structure of the Engine Worker ap­
plication.
Host Operating System
Kernel
Engine Worker

Engine Pool
Engine A
Engine C
Engine B
Engine F
Engine E
Engine D
Central 
Event Router
Figure 5.2: Inner structure of the Engine Worker application
5.2.3
Microservice Architecture
So far, we have considered two solutions to scale up the E­GSM engine deployment, and
allow multiple engines to run in parallel. These are containerized applications, and the
engine worker approach. As discussed, containerization supports the involvement of mul­
tiple host machines natively. Container instance management can be highly automated
by container management tools such as Kubernetes[16] or Amazon Elastic Container
Service[17]. On the other hand, for the Engine Worker, we considered the usage of a
single machine only, which is a limitation to the maximum number of engines. To over­
come this limitation, the software wrapper around the E­GSM engine has to be extended
by functionalities, allowing us to remotely control the whole application, including engine
creation and termination. This will allow us to deploy multiple engine worker instances
in a microservice architecture, resulting in a flexible and highly scalable system. The
microservice architecture allows us to deploy multiple applications as a loosely coupled
system in order to provide different services.
5.2.4
Proposal for parallel deployment
The proposal to address the parallel deployment requirements is to implement the Engine
Worker approach introduced in 5.2.2, due to its resource utilisation advantages. This
approach will allow us to deploy a large number of engines in one application, where the
maximum number of engines is limited by the available hardware resources. By deploying
multiple instances of the Engine Worker in a microservice architecture (Figure 5.3), we
can overcome this limitation, and similarly to the containerization approach, we can have
an arbitrary number of engines running in parallel.
Improving Artifact­driven Process Monitoring by Aggregating Smart Object Measurements
19
==PAGE:28==
Host Operating System 1
Kernel 1
Host Operating System 2
Kernel 2
Engine Worker 1
Engine Pool
Engine A
Engine C
Engine B
Engine F
Engine E
Engine D
Central 
Event Router
Engine Worker 2
Engine Pool
Engine G
Engine I
Engine H
Engine L
Engine K
Engine J
Central 
Event Router
Figure 5.3: Architecture to deploy multiple Engine Workers
20
Improving Artifact­driven Process Monitoring by Aggregating Smart Object Measurements
==PAGE:29==
6
Deviation Detection in E­GSM models
So far, we have discussed how scaling up engine deployment, and overcoming the most
serious limitations of the SMARTifact platform, is possible. In this chapter, we will dis­
cuss the possible signs of process deviation scenarios in E­GSM engines, and introduce
a method to detect incorrect process executions based on information available in the
E­GSM representation of the process. The approach will be used later for information
aggregation purposes.
Automated, real­time deviation detection in E­GSM models can be a powerful tool for
business process operators to continuously monitor a large number of processes with
minimal human resources. Deviation detection aims to recognize the incorrect execution
of a process instance in real­time purely based on the information available in its E­GSM
model. The deviation detection should be as specific as possible, and should specify
the group of affected E­GSM stages. In addition, it should also tell exactly what kind of
deviation(s) happened.
To automatically detect incorrect process executions in E­GSM models, it was necessary
to study the impact of the most important types of deviations on these models. In this
chapter, we discuss the most widely applied E­GSM blocks, and introduce the effects of
the most consequential types of deviations on them.
Deviation detection can be challenging since, in certain cases, different kinds of deviations
can cause the same patterns in the E­GSM stages. This makes it impossible to distinguish
between them using only the momentary state of the E­GSM model. In addition, partially
executed (Figure 6.1a) and overlapped activities (Figure 6.1b) can also lead to similar
conditions. Some of the ambiguous stage patterns can be resolved by considering the
history of the engine, since certain conditions in the E­GSM model develop across multiple
steps.
Parent stage
open
Parent stage
closed
Activity A
Activity B
(a) Incomplete Activity
Parent stage
open
Parent stage
closed
Overlap
Activity A
Activity B
(b) Activity overlapping
Figure 6.1: Incomplete and overlapped activities
6.1
Process Tree
Process tree is an alternative way to visualize processes, and represents the structure
of processes as a tree. Each node in the tree corresponds to a stage of the E­GSM
model, and the edges between the nodes represent the connections or dependencies
between them. In process trees constructed based on E­GSM models, each leaf is an
atomic activity, or event, which persists directly in the corresponding BPMN diagram as
Improving Artifact­driven Process Monitoring by Aggregating Smart Object Measurements
21
==PAGE:30==
well. The intermediate nodes are stages representing blocks, such as sequence block,
parallel block etc..
Our proposed deviation detection algorithm, which we will introduce later, utilizes process
trees. For simple and more coherent documentation, we provide the process tree repre­
sentation for each type of E­GSM block while discussing its possible deviations in Section
6.2.
6.2
Types of E­GSM Blocks and Signs of Deviations
To build an algorithmic solution that is able to detect deviations, we studied the scenarios
which can cause incorrectly executed processes. In this section, we explore the most
important E­GSM block categories, and introduce the most consequential deviation types
as well as their effect on E­GSM stages.
For each discussed E­GSM block category, we provide its BPMN, E­GSM, and process
tree representation. In addition, for each blocks we provide a table containing all scenarios
that have been taken into account. Due to size constraints, all tables are provided in
the Appendix only. Each scenario in the tables defines a process execution flow, and
contains the state of each E­GSM stages of the model at the end of the execution in the
form of state, status, and compliance tuples. The tables highlight in green the reference
execution, and mark in red all stage attributes which differ from the reference. This allows
for easy identification of deviations, and clearly illustrates which stages have deviated
from the expected behaviour.
The table also takes into account cases where one or more activities were not executed
completely, or where the execution of two activities overlapped. In these cases, simply
defining the sequence of activities is insufficient. It is necessary to specify when an activity
had started, and finished, relative to others. To address this, we introduced the notations
Activity_s and Activity_e, where ’s’ stands for start and ’e’ stands for end of the Activity.
To get a broader view of how different block types behave among certain conditions, we
will not consider atomic blocks in the provided model snippets, but rather a full execution
flow with additional activities, start, and end events.
Even though each studied deviation caused at least one E­GSM stage to be different
from that of the correct (reference) execution, in many cases we cannot identify what
went wrong, because two or more types of deviation may have caused the same pattern.
By having available a list of past snapshots about the E­GSM model, each snapshot is
taken after a change in the engine, allowing us to enhance the detection, since in several
cases, the final deviations are developing through multiple steps. Historical snapshots can
be also useful when a block gets reopened after an incorrect execution, since opening a
stage will reset its inner attributes, causing partial or complete erase of the signs of past
deviations. With the history available, we are then able to see the path of how the system
got into its current state. This study is not intended to discuss the utilization of historical
engine states however, we mention some possibilities to utilize history while discussing
deviations.
6.2.1
Sequence Block
Sequence block is probably the most frequently occurring E­GSM construct. Each event
and activity participating in the sequence is represented as a member stage of a ’SEQ’
stage in the E­GSM model, and each member stage is supplemented with a process
flow guard. This assures that the previous stage has been successfully and completely
executed in the flow. A sequence block is considered to be correctly executed if all activ­
ities have been performed successfully exactly once. Thus, the status and compliance of
22
Improving Artifact­driven Process Monitoring by Aggregating Smart Object Measurements
==PAGE:31==
each member stage are ’closed’ and ’onTime’ respectively, and the ’SEQ’ block itself is
also ’closed’ and ’onTime’.
e
A
B
f
(a) BPMN
SEQ
S_f
S_B
S_A
S_e
(b) Process tree
S`_e
S_B
S`_f
S_A
SEQ
D
P
DFG1: on e
PFG1: not S'_e.M1
M1: on e
D
P
DFG1: on f
PFG1: S_B.M1
and not S'_f.M1
M1: on f
D
P
DFG1: on B_s
PFG1: S_A.M1 
and not S_B.M1
M1: on B_t
D
P
DFG1: on A_s
PFG1: S'_e.M1
and not S_A.M1
M1: on A_t
D
D
DFG1: on e
DFG2: on A_s
M1: if S'_e.M1
and S'_f.M1
and S_A.M1
and S_B.M1
D
DFG3: on B_s
D
DFG4: on f
(c) E­GSM
Figure 6.2: Sequence block representations
A basic sequence block is represented by the Figures of 6.2, and the considered scenarios
and their result are summarized in Appendix A.
From the table, we can observe that each studied deviation caused at least one E­GSM
stage to be different from that of the correct execution, so the existence of a deviation can
be easily verified. However, in several cases, different deviations caused the model to fall
into the same state. Thus, considering only the final snapshot of the model, we cannot
tell exactly which kind of deviation actually happened. By generalization, we can group
the violations into three groups, which are clearly distinct in the table:
• Skipping one or more stages: Skipping one or more activities/events in a se­
quence block will cause the subsequent activity/event to have ’outOfOrder’ compli­
ance while all skipped stages will have ’unopened’ status. In addition, the last stage
of the skipped sequence will have ’skipped’ compliance. Considering these signs,
skipping one or more stages in a sequence block is recognizable. Moreover, we
can exactly tell which activities have been skipped.
• Violating the desired sequence flow: A larger group of possible deviations be­
longs to the sequence flow violations. In this case, we cannot identify exactly what
happened, but we know that the desired sequence has been violated in some way.
The sign of sequence flow violation is the presence of ’outOfOrder’ compliance of
Improving Artifact­driven Process Monitoring by Aggregating Smart Object Measurements
23
==PAGE:32==
one or more stages, without the other signs of activity skipping. This kind of devia­
tion includes:
– Executing stages on an incorrect order
– Executing one stage more than once
– Two or more stages has been overlapped during execution
• Incomplete Execution: We can recognize the partial execution of a stage. The par­
ent ’SEQ’ block will stay open until any children’s state is ’opened’ or ’unopened’.
Therefore, it can cause different types of deviations. If the ’opened’ state of the
’SEQ’ block causes any deviation, it means that the block is supposed to be already
completely executed, so all children which are still ’opened’ or ’unopened’, are de­
viating. The stages with ’opened’ state can be considered incompletely executed.
• Missing Execution: Similar to ’opened’ children stages, ’unopened’ stages can
also keep the parent ’SEQ’ block open, and cause deviations. We can consider
stages with ’unopened’ state as ’missing execution’ deviations. Most ’unopened’
stages will be recognized as a ’skipped’ stage too, but it may occur that only the last
stages of the sequence are not executed and they remain ’onTime’ in compliance.
Therefore, they will not be recognized as skipping, but are recognized as ’missing
executions’.
In this case, considering the historical states of the engine can help to diagnose exactly
what happened when a violation of the desired execution flow has been detected.
6.2.2
Parallel Block
Parallel blocks aim to enable the execution of two or more branches in parallel. In the
BPMN representation, parallel execution of activities is represented by a pair of parallel
gateways, one diverging and one converging. In E­GSM language, stages intended to
be executed in parallel are embedded into a ’PAR’ stage. They are supplemented with
process flow guards aiming to detect if any of them has been executed more than once.
The execution of a parallel block is successful if each member activity has been executed
exactly once, so the status and compliance of each member stage are ’closed’ and ’on­
Time’ respectively. In addition, their parent stage will be also in ’closed’ status if all parallel
activity has been executed properly. Overlapping executions of member stages are not a
concern, since the parallel block intentionally allows this. In Appendix B we summarized
the possible deviations of the parallel block depicted by Figure 6.3.
Based on the snapshots of the E­GSM model summarized in the table (Appendix B) we
can distinguish between 3 different deviations types which cover all considered scenarios:
• Missing Execution: If a branch was not executed, its status remains ’unopened’.
In addition, it will not allow the parent parallel stage to close, so it will remain in
’opened’ status. If the parent stage is supposed to be completely executed and
therefore ’closed’ in state, but has at least one ’unopened’ child, it means that the
child was not executed in time, so it has a ’missing execution’ deviation.
• Executing one or more branches more than once: The only purpose of the pro­
cess flow guards attached to member stages in parallel blocks is to detect if the
corresponding stage has been executed more than once. This means that any
member stage of a parallel block can have ’outOfOrder’ compliance only if it has
been executed more than once.
24
Improving Artifact­driven Process Monitoring by Aggregating Smart Object Measurements
==PAGE:33==
e
B
f
A1
A2
(a) BPMN
SEQ
S_f
S_B
PAR
S_e
S_A1
S_A2
(b) Process tree
SEQ
PAR
S_A1
S_A2
D
P
DFG1:
 on A1_s
PFG1: 
not 
S_A1.M1
M1: on A1_t
D
P
DFG1:
 on A2_s
PFG1:
not
S_A2.M1
M1: on A2_t
D
DFG1:
 on A1_s
D
DFG2:
 on A2_s
M1: if S'_e.M1
and S'_f.M1
and S_B.M1
and S_PAR.M1
M1: if 
S_A1.M1
and
S_A2.M1
D
D
DFG1: on e
DFG2: on PAR_s
D
DFG3: on B_s
D
DFG4: on f
S_f
S`_e
S_B
D
P
DFG1: 
on e
PFG1: 
not S'_e.M1
M1: on e
D
P
DFG1:
 on f
PFG1:
 S_B.M1
 and not
 S'_f.M1
M1: on f
D
P
DFG1:
 on B_s
PFG1: 
S_PAR.M1
 and not 
S_B.M1
M1: on B_t
P
PFG1:
S'_e.M1 
and not 
S_PAR.M1
(c) E­GSM
Figure 6.3: Parallel block representations
• Incomplete execution of one or more branches: Finally, the last type of deviation
is the incomplete execution of branches. In this case, one or more member stage
has been opened, so the included activity has been started, but never finished, and
the stage remained in ’opened’ status. In addition, this will not allow the parent
parallel stage to close, so it will also be in ’opened’ status. Similar to ’missing exe­
cution’, this deviation also becomes detectable when the parent stage is expected
to become ’closed’.
In this case, we cannot upgrade the detection using historical snapshots of the process
model, mainly due to the fact that overlapped executions are not root causes of deviations,
and it decreases the possible scenarios significantly.
6.2.3
Exclusive Block
Exclusive blocks aim to choose and execute one branch from a set of available branches.
The selection is based on the result of an online evaluation process. In the BPMN repre­
sentation, exclusive execution of activities is represented by a pair of exclusive gateways,
one diverging and one converging. In E­GSM language, exclusive stages are embedded
into an ’EXCL’ parent stage, and they are supplemented with process flow guards aiming
to detect if any of them has been executed more than once, and verify that the appropriate
branch has been executed.
Improving Artifact­driven Process Monitoring by Aggregating Smart Object Measurements
25
==PAGE:34==
The execution of an exclusive block is successful only if the correct branch has been
executed exactly once. In this case, the status of the intended branch is ’closed’, while
all other member stages are ’unopened’. When the intended branch gets ’closed’, the
exclusive parent stage is also ’closed’.
The execution of any other branch and/or incomplete execution of the correct one leads
to deviations. We consider that one activity cannot be executed multiple times in parallel,
so we do not need to consider cases when the correct branch is executed twice, since
at the moment of execution, the parent block gets closed. If it is executed again, then
the parent block will be ’opened’ again and due to multi­execution its compliance will be
’outOfOrder’, but this does not affect the children stages.
e
B
f
a
b
A1
A2
(a) BPMN
SEQ
S_f
S_B
EXCL
S_e
S_A1
S_A2
(b) Process tree
SEQ
EXCL
S_A1
S_A2
D
P
DFG1:
 on A1_s
M1: on A1_t
D
P
DFG1:
 on A2_s
M1: on A2_t
D
DFG1:
 on A1_s
D
DFG2:
 on A2_s
M1: if S'_e.M1
and S'_f.M1
and S_B.M1
and
S_EXCL.M1
M1: if ((
S_A1.M1
and a) or
(S_A2.M
and b)) 
and not
(Active(
S_A1) or
Active(
S_A2))
D
D
D
D
S_f
S`_e
S_B
D
P
DFG1: 
on e
PFG1: 
not S'_e.M1
M1: on e
D
P
DFG1:
 on f
PFG1:
 S_B.M1
 and not
 S'_f.M1
M1: on f
D
P
DFG1:
 on B_s
PFG1: 
S_EXCL.M1
 and not 
S_B.M1
M1: on B_t
P
PFG1:
S'_e.M1 
and not 
S_EXCL.M1
PFG1: a and
not S_A1.M1
and not
Active(S_A2)
PFG1: b and
not S_A2.M1
and not
Active(S_A1)
DFG1: on e
DFG2: on EXCL_s
DFG3: on B_s
DFG4: on f
(c) E­GSM
Figure 6.4: Exclusive block representations
We summarized the considered execution scenarios in Appendix C. We were able to
define two atomic deviation groups, which are listed below. Some scenarios satisfy the
requirements of two groups, which means that at the same time, two types of deviations
are detectable in those cases.
• Incorrect Branch Execution: The execution or partial execution of non­intended
branches will cause them to have ’closed’ or ’opened’ status, instead of ’unopened’.
In addition, their compliance will be ’outOfOrder’. In general, we can say that any in­
correct branch with ’opened’ status will have ’outOfOrder’ compliance, which allows
26
Improving Artifact­driven Process Monitoring by Aggregating Smart Object Measurements
==PAGE:35==
us to recognize them since, aside from one special condition, no other deviation
causes member stages to be ’outOfOrder’. The only exception is a very special
case when an incorrect branch is under execution, while the correct one also gets
’opened’ and eventually, both of them are finished. In this case, both the intended
and the non­intended stages will have ’outOfOrder’ compliance, making it impos­
sible to distinguish between them. However, we still know that one branch was
incorrectly executed, so we decided to include this case in the ’Incorrect Branch
Execution’ category.
• Incomplete Execution of Correct Branch: The sign of the incomplete execution
of the correct branch is a stage being ’opened’ and ’onTime’. In this case, the par­
ent exclusive stage also will be ’opened’, therefore possibly causing deviations. It is
possible that besides the partially executed correct branch, another branch was also
completely or partially executed, which results in the scenario satisfying both ’Incor­
rect Branch Execution’ and ’Incomplete Execution of Correct Branch’ deviations.
This deviation becomes detectable when the parent stage is expected to become
’closed’.
• Missing execution: If a branch has ’skipped’ compliance, then we know that it was
the correct branch, and it has not been executed. Therefore, as a side­effect, it will
cause the parent stage to stay open. Hence, we can mark this branch as skipped,
and add to the deviations.
Considering the engine history in this case, allows us to recognize the special case men­
tioned in the discussion of ’Incorrect Branch Execution’, since with the history available
we would be able to see the steps each stage went through before getting into its final
state, therefore the introduced special scenario could be handled as an individual case.
6.2.4
Inclusive Block
Inclusive blocks (Figure 6.5) aim to choose and execute one or more branches from a set
of available options. The selection is based on the result of an online evaluation process.
In the BPMN representation, inclusive execution of activities is represented by a pair of
inclusive gateways, one diverging and one converging. In E­GSM language, inclusive
stages are embedded into an ’INCL’ parent stage, and are supplemented with process
flow guards that aim to detect if any of them has been executed more than once. This
verifies that the stage is intended to be executed, and checks that no other branch is
under execution yet.
The execution of an inclusive block is successful if only the correct branches have been
executed, each of them exactly once. In this case, the status of the intended branches
are ’closed’, while all other member stages are ’unopened’. When all intended branches
get ’closed’ and there are no active (’opened’) stages, the inclusive parent stage also gets
’closed’.
Based on the considered scenarios (Appendix D), we can recognize the following two
deviation patterns:
• Incorrect Branch Execution: Immediately after a branch that was supposed to be
not executed gets ’opened’, its compliance will also change to ’outOfOrder’. This al­
lows us to recognize non­intended branch executions. However, another condition
can also cause the same pattern. When multiple branches are intended to be exe­
cuted, then it may happen that one or more of them get executed more than once,
which will cause them to have ’outOfOrder’ compliance. This renders it impossible
to distinguish from non­intended branch executions. Since multi­execution can also
Improving Artifact­driven Process Monitoring by Aggregating Smart Object Measurements
27
==PAGE:36==
e
B
f
a
b
A1
A2
(a) BPMN
SEQ
S_f
S_B
INCL
S_e
S_A1
S_A2
(b) Process tree
SEQ
INCL
S_A1
S_A2
D
P
DFG1:
 on A1_s
M1: on A1_t
D
P
DFG1:
 on A2_s
M1: on A2_t
D
DFG1:
 on A1_s
D
DFG2:
 on A2_s
M1: if S'_e.M1
and S'_f.M1
and S_B.M1
and S_INCL.M1
M1: if ((
S_A1.M1
and a) or
(S_A2.M
and b)) 
and not
(Active(
S_A1) or
Active(
S_A2))
D
D
D
D
S_f
S`_e
S_B
D
P
DFG1: 
on e
PFG1: 
not S'_e.M1
M1: on e
D
P
DFG1:
 on f
PFG1:
 S_B.M1
 and not
 S'_f.M1
M1: on f
D
P
DFG1:
 on B_s
PFG1: 
S_INCL.M1
 and not 
S_B.M1
M1: on B_t
P
PFG1:
S'_e.M1 
and not 
S_INCL.M1
DFG1: on e
DFG3: on B_s
DFG4: on f
PFG1: a
and not 
S_A1.M1
PFG1: b
and not
S_A2.M1
(c) E­GSM
Figure 6.5: Inclusive block representations
be considered as a non­intended branch execution, we include it in the ’Incorrect
Branch Execution’ deviation type.
• Incomplete Execution: Incomplete branch executions are recognizable by the
’opened’ status, both for correct and incorrect branches. They will also cause the
parent stage to stay ’opened’ too. If an incorrect branch has been partially executed,
it will be ’opened’ and ’outOfOrder’, thus satisfying the requirements of both ’Incor­
rect Branch Execution’ and ’Incomplete Execution’, resulting in the two deviation
instances being found. Incomplete Execution deviation becomes detectable at the
moment when the parent stage is expected to be closed.
Considering the engine history in the case of inclusive block, we are able to distinguish
between the execution of non­intended branch(es), and the multi­execution of them, since
the ’outOfOrder’ compliance of a correct branch is developed in a different way than in
the case of an incorrect branch execution.
6.2.5
Loop Block
Finally, we discuss the loop block (Figure 6.6), which allows us to perform activities repet­
itively until a certain condition meets. In BPMN diagram, loops are represented by a pair
of exclusive gateways, one diverging and one converging. In the E­GSM language, repet­
itive stages are embedded into an ’ITE’ parent stage, which is the child of a ’Loop’ stage.
At the beginning of each iteration, the ’ITE’ block gets ’opened’ and stays in that status
28
Improving Artifact­driven Process Monitoring by Aggregating Smart Object Measurements
==PAGE:37==
until ’A1’ gets executed and the ’c’ condition meets, or until both ’A1’ and ’A2’ get exe­
cuted and the ’b’ condition meets. The ’b’ condition will immediately reopen the ’ITE’ stage
to trigger another iteration, while condition ’c’ will allow the ’Loop’ block to close. Addi­
tionally, repetitive blocks are supplemented with process flow guards which ensure that
multiple executions of any activity in one iteration will not remain undetected and that ’A2’
is executed only if ’b’ condition is met. Since correct executions can open the ’ITE’ block
multiple times, it makes it impossible to detect most types of deviations, since reopening
’ITE’ stage will reset all attributes of both ’A1’ and ’A2’, so if during the last iteration, ev­
erything is correct, then the previous deviations are completely hidden. Therefore for loop
blocks, the detectable deviation scenarios without considering the engine history are very
limited.
The studied deviation scenarios are summarized in Appendix E. We considered two ref­
erences: ’c’ satisfied after one ’A1’ execution and ’c’ satisfied after the execution of
’A1’;’A2’;’A1’. Considering the scenarios in the table, we found the following deviations
types clearly distinguishable:
• Incorrect Execution Sequence: We are able to detect if ’A1’ has been executed
multiple times in the last iteration, since it is possible that after the first execution of
the ’A1’, the ’ITE’ block stays open, and the ’A1’ can be executed again. However,
this incorrect execution sequence will cause the compliance of ’A1’ to become ’outO­
fOrder’. The only way for ’A1’ to have ’outOfOrder compliance is its multi­execution,
so this deviation is distinct and recognizable. Detection of ’A2’ multi­execution is
not possible. If ’A1’ has been executed and it satisfies condition ’b’, then ’A2’ will be
executed, and it will immediately cause ’ITE’ to close before ’A2’ could be executed
again. The only way to execute ’A2’ multiple times in one ’ITE’ opening is to skip ’A1’
and execute ’A2’ twice. However, in this case, the compliance of ’A2’ will already
be ’outOfOrder’ due to the skipped ’A1’, so multi­execution of it will not cause any
change. Unfortunately, if we consider overlapped activities as well, then we need to
take into account another type of incorrect repetition of ’A1’, since for example, if ’A2’
has not been executed completely, and ’A1’ gets opened as a part of a new iteration,
then it will cause ’A1’ to have ’outOfOrder’ compliance since it is technically a multi­
execution of ’A1’ in one ’ITE’ opening (’ITE’ stayed in ’opened’ state, because ’A2’
did not get ’closed’ in time), combined with and incorrect execution sequence({A1;
A2_s; A1_s; A2_e; A1_e}). Considering these scenarios we decided to handle ’A1’
and ’A2’ similarly if they have ’outOfOrder’ compliance, and consider these cases
’incorrect execution sequence’ deviation, since this can include multi­execution of
stages as well.
• Skipping of ’A1’: If in the last iteration ’A1’ has been skipped, it will cause ’A1’
to have ’skipped’ compliance, and ’A2’ to be ’outOfOrder’. The fact that ’A2’ has
’outOfOrder’ compliance will result in an ’incorrect execution sequence’ deviation
as well, so skipping ’A1’ results in two deviation instances.
• Incomplete Execution: ’ITE’ and ’Loop’ blocks stay ’opened’ as long as one of the
milestones of ’ITE’ is not satisfied. This requires both ’A1’ and ’A2’ to be ’closed’ or
’unopened’. Therefore, if the ’Loop’ block is already expected to be ’closed’, but it is
still open, and ’A1’ and/or ’A2’ is still ’opened’, then we can know that the ’opened’
stage(s) are deviating.
Improving Artifact­driven Process Monitoring by Aggregating Smart Object Measurements
29
==PAGE:38==
e
B
f
A1
A2
c
b
(a) BPMN
SEQ
S_f
S_B
Loop
S_e
Ite
S_A1
S_A2
(b) Process tree
SEQ
Loop
Ite
D
D
M1: if S'_e.M1
and S'_f.M1
and S_B.M1
and
S_Loop.M1
S_A1
S_A2
D
P
DFG1:
on A1_s
PFG1:
not 
S_A1.M1
M1:
on A1_t
D
P
DFG1:
on A2_s
PFG1: 
S_A1.M1 
and b and
not S_A2.M1
M1:
on A2_t
M2: if
S_A1.M1
and
(S_A2.M1
and b)
M1: if 
S_A1.M1
and c
and not
Active(
S_A2)
D
D
DFG1:
on A2_s
DFG1:
on A1_s
D
D
DFG1:
on A2_s
DFG1: 
on A1_s
M1: on
+Ite.M1
DFG1: on e
DFG2: on LOOP_s
DFG3: on B_s
DFG4: on f
D
D
S_f
S`_e
S_B
D
P
DFG1: 
on e
PFG1: 
not S'_e.M1
M1: on e
D
P
DFG1:
 on f
PFG1:
 S_B.M1
 and not
 S'_f.M1
M1: on f
D
P
DFG1:
 on B_s
PFG1: 
S_LOOP.M1
 and not 
S_B.M1
M1: on B_t
(c) E­GSM
Figure 6.6: Loop block representations
6.3
Algorithm for Deviation Detection
As mentioned previously, the designed deviation detection algorithm utilizes the process
tree representation of E­GSM models, which can easily be built algorithmically using the
E­GSM model definition itself. Besides the relations between the tree nodes, each node
has its own unique ID, which is identical to the ID of the corresponding E­GSM stage. The
type of node is also provided and is determinable from the stage ID which is identical to
the ID of the block. The node is ’ATOMIC’ when it has no child, so it is an atomic activity
or event. The ’SEQUENCE’ type nodes have a special feature where they store the order
of their children too. Therefore, while evaluating the children of sequential stages, the
algorithm can know the exact intended execution sequence of children. This knowledge
is retrieved from the E­GSM model definition by evaluation of the process flow guards,
and helps to find all stages among the children which have been skipped.
The detection algorithm performs a Breadth First Search (BFS) traversal on the process
tree, while evaluating the children of each node. The algorithm evaluates the children to
30
Improving Artifact­driven Process Monitoring by Aggregating Smart Object Measurements
==PAGE:39==
find deviations based on the type of their parent, since the parent determines the set of
possible deviation types (Figure 6.7) as has been discussed in this chapter.

Deviation detection
for
SEQUENCE block
children
node.type = 'SEQ'
node.type = 'PAR'
node.type = 
'EXC'
node.type = 'INC'
node.type = 'Loop'
node.type = 'ATOMIC'
node.type = 'Ite'
Deviation detection
for
PARALLEL block
children
Deviation detection
for
EXCLUSIVE block
children
Deviation detection
for
INCLUSIVE block
children
Deviation detection
for
Loop block
children
Deviation detection
for
Iterative block
children
For each Tree Node
Deviations
Figure 6.7: Evaluation of a tree node
The algorithm applies ’propagated conditions’. This means that if a parent is participating
in certain deviations, then this condition will be saved into the node, and used during the
evaluation of children. This is used for deviations which become detectable only after
their parent is supposed to be closed.
The algorithm returns a list of ’deviation instances’ found in the model. Each instance
has a type, which is one from the previously introduced ones. In addition, it contains
the affected stages, so we can identify exactly, for each E­GSM stage, whether they are
Improving Artifact­driven Process Monitoring by Aggregating Smart Object Measurements
31
==PAGE:40==
participating in any kind of deviation, and if yes, what type of deviation it is.
The currently implemented solution does not take into account the history of the engine,
which arises limitations, although it is still capable to find the most serious deviations in
an E­GSM model. The algorithm can run at any time after the instantiation of the engine,
and we do not need to wait for the process to get terminated, so it can detect deviations
in real­time.
32
Improving Artifact­driven Process Monitoring by Aggregating Smart Object Measurements
==PAGE:41==
7
E­GSM Aggregation
In the previous chapter, we saw how is it possible to detect different kinds of deviations in
E­GSM process models. In this chapter, we address RQ 2. We seek to discover the possi­
bilities in aggregating information from multiple E­GSM engines. Some of the approaches
we are introducing will use the results of the previous section.
Supporting business process monitoring in real­time by using aggregated historical data
collected from previous executions can help with recognizing unintended behaviour, rec­
ommending the next best step for operators [18], and even predicting the outcome of the
execution [19]. Similarly, performing aggregation of multiple process executions in real­
time can also help us to recognize deviations and the root causes of errors, while helping
system operators to enhance processes. Our approach is similar to these solutions. We
aim to derive different kinds of measures by aggregating information from different exe­
cutions, and using them to support subsequent executions.
Most methods supporting process executions using historical data are based on activity­
centric process modelling languages. Therefore, the most straightforward way to collect
data is to record the sequence of activities, or events themselves, resulting in an event
log which can then be analyzed with process mining tools. Event logs are a set of events
collected from multiple process executions and extended with application­specific, sup­
plemental information, such as timestamps, process instance ID­s (trace ID), and event
arguments. Sequential events belonging to the same process execution in an event log
are called traces.
In the case of the E­GSM­based platform presented in this project, the collection of events
to build an event log is more cumbersome. This is because events come from smart
objects, which are not a fundamental part of any process instance and can be attached
or detached to any of them in runtime.
Primarily, we plan to use information directly from E­GSM engines to perform aggregation.
Besides this, other sources of information are also available in the system. Our goal is
to perform the information aggregation in real­time. Therefore, an event­driven approach
is highly advantageous since it can result in efficient processing with minimal overhead.
The triggering events and conditions need to be defined for each data source, and their
exact effect must be specified. Some events should not trigger aggregation, but should
write an entry to the database which can then be processed by a software component
performing aggregation. Another group of events may require both database entry writing
and immediate response of aggregation application.
7.1
Data Sources and Trigger Events
In this section, we introduce the available data sources for information aggregation, and
the events which trigger data collection and/or information aggregation.
7.1.1
E­GSM Engines
The main source of data we can use for information aggregation is the data encapsulated
in the currently deployed E­GSM engines. For each engine, the available data that can
be used:
• Process Instance Information: Process type, instance ID, process perspective
name and timestamp
Improving Artifact­driven Process Monitoring by Aggregating Smart Object Measurements
33
==PAGE:42==
• Stage information: Momentary state, status, and compliance of each E­GSM stage
of the model
While each attribute of the process instance information is constant, the stage attributes
can change anytime a new smart object event is received. However, we still need the pro­
cess instance information in order to distinguish between different execution instances.
Events should be triggered by changes in stage information. The optimal way is to trigger
an event every time the content of an E­GSM stage in the model changes. This event
should both write a database entry containing the details of the change, and notify the
aggregation component to allow it to perform real­time processing. The content of logged
entries include both the momentary stage information, and the process instance informa­
tion. These will allow us to formulate a similar concept to traces introduced earlier by
ordering corresponding stage logs together sequentially.
7.1.2
Event Routers
The Event Router module is always aware of which artifacts are attached to which engine
instances. It is also a piece of precious information from our perspective since we can use
it to determine which artifacts have been attached to a specified engine at any moment,
and also determine which processes were using an appointed artifact at a given time.
The trigger event for this kind of information should be the attachment and detachment
of an artifact to an engine, and it should trigger to write a database entry containing both
process and artifact instance information, while also notifying the aggregating component
since it may require immediate processing or verification.
7.1.3
Process Lifecycles
Creation and termination of process engines can be used in aggregation. Lifecycle infor­
mation can be used in data processing, or for example, the termination event of a process
can trigger aggregate information related to that specific process execution. Therefore,
lifecycle events should trigger database operations and notify aggregating entities.
7.1.4
Further Data Sources
Finally, a group of information can be provided by the system operator organizations.
This information describes the resources and entities participating in process executions.
This data should not be assigned to any process engine or engine worker, and should be
globally available in the system and easily maintainable by the system operators.
• Stakeholder­related information: Name and other information related to stake­
holders
• Process Type definitions: Defines the name of the process models, their BPMN
and E­GSM representations
• Artifact instances: A global, up­to­date collection of artifact instances interacting
with the processes
7.2
Data Storage
The event entries and information provided by the operators should be stored in a safe
and reliable shared database system. There are several database solutions available,
with their own advantages and drawbacks. In Chapter 9, we will discuss the main features
of some relevant solutions, and select the most applicable one for our purposes. In this
chapter however, it is irrelevant to go into the technical details. Hence, we assume that
the database is available by all software modules, and entry write, update, and delete
operations are supported.
34
Improving Artifact­driven Process Monitoring by Aggregating Smart Object Measurements
==PAGE:43==
7.3
Event broadcasting
Decoupling software components performing aggregation can have significant advan­
tages such as increased system stability, and better scalability. It requires us to allow
entities performing aggregation to receive events from different sources without consid­
erable delay. This way of operation is similar to that of the Event Router module in the
SMARTifact platform, which applies MQTT protocol for communication. For our purposes,
the MQTT protocol is also applicable to broadcast events.
7.4
Stakeholder notification
An important contribution of the aggregation approaches is the option to notify relevant
stakeholders in real­time. Stakeholders can be owners of artifacts and/or owners of the
executed process instances. Notifying stakeholders in case of deviations, or increased
risks of deviations is a way to utilize the aggregated measures, and can be useful for
system operators to schedule maintenance or replacement of artifacts, and to handle
unintended process executions.
7.5
Aggregation approaches
In this section, we introduce multiple approaches for information aggregation. These tech­
niques aim to derive aggregated measures based on multiple executions, which can be
used to support other process executions.
The first group of methodologies for gathering information that we will discuss utilize the
artifact­centric nature of E­GSM, enabling us to calculate specific metrics for each artifact
based on the results and other characteristics of the process instances in which they were
involved.
Before presenting various information aggregation techniques, it is necessary to distin­
guish between the two types of aggregation activities: daemon and real­time aggrega­
tions.
• Daemon Aggregation: Perform aggregation on a periodic basis, where the ag­
gregation process is executed at regular intervals, such as daily, hourly or weekly.
Daemon aggregation involves retrieving information from a database, calculating
certain metrics, and storing them back into the database. Additionally, they can
also include trigger notifications to certain Stakeholders.
• Event­driven Aggregation: Performing aggregation in an event­driven manner,
where the aggregation is executed in response to specific events or triggers, rather
than on a pre­defined schedule or interval. It can include trigger notifications to
stakeholders and retrieval information from the database, but it cannot update or
add new entries to it.
Figure 7.1 and 7.2 illustrate the difference in the flow of information between daemon and
real­time aggregation processes.
7.5.1
Artifact alerts
A set of potential information aggregation techniques focus on monitoring artifacts and
generating notifications when certain conditions are met.
To implement Artifact Alerts, we assign measures to each smart object in the database,
which is updated periodically based on information collected from process executions by
daemon aggregation processes. The measures are calculated based on specific argu­
ments of E­GSM stage logs belonging to engine instances which were attached to the
Improving Artifact­driven Process Monitoring by Aggregating Smart Object Measurements
35
==PAGE:44==
Data retrieval/update
Shared
Database
Event
eGSM Engines
Event
Event Routers
Notif.
 Daemon
Aggregation
Auxiliary information
Stakeholders
Figure 7.1: Flow of information in daemon aggregation
Data retrieval
Shared
Database
Event
eGSM Engines
Event
Event Routers
Notif.
 Real-time
Aggregation
Event
MQTT Broker
Auxiliary information
Stakeholders
Figure 7.2: Flow of information in event­driven aggregation
artifact during its execution. Having this information will allow us to raise certain alerts, or
send notifications in order to reduce the risk of deviations, or avoid escalation of current
ones. In order to know which artifacts were attached to a certain engine at a given time,
we need to utilize the database entries written by the Event Router modules as well.
Event Routers, E­GSM Engines, and system operators write entries into the database.
The aggregator component is triggered periodically by a software timer, which calculates
aggregated information for artifact instances, and stores it in the database. In case of
certain conditions, it can trigger immediate notification of stakeholders.
The possible types of measures calculated by daemon aggregation processes we con­
sidered are:
• Ratio of past executions where the artifact participating had at least one stage with
faulty state. This measure can be applied with different­sized windows to neglect
the effect of old executions. The system sends out alerts when the faultiness rate
of an artifact climbs above a threshold.
• The gradient of faultiness ratio can also be the trigger for sending notifications. If
there was a recent rise in the ratio of faulty executions by the participating artifact,
it may indicate that the artifact is malfunctioning, and the system can request oper­
ators to schedule maintenance.
As discussed, the daemon aggregation processes calculating these measures can send
notifications to stakeholders when certain conditions are met to pinpoint potentially harm­
ful conditions in the used artifacts. In addition, the derived measures can be applied
to support real­time executions. Artifact attachment or detachment events can trigger
validations involving these measures, and notify the process stakeholders when certain
36
Improving Artifact­driven Process Monitoring by Aggregating Smart Object Measurements
==PAGE:45==
conditions are met. For example, the process stakeholder can be notified if their process
has been attached to an artifact which has recently participated in a high number of faulty
executions.
7.5.2
Aggregate process information
Another group of information aggregation features aims to leverage information from mul­
tiple process executions to improve monitoring and analysis. Our approach consists of
two parts: real­time and historical aggregation. Real­time aggregation utilizes only the
momentarily deployed engines, while the historical approach aggregates information from
past executions. By applying the E­GSM to BPMN mapping techniques we will introduce
later in Chapter 8, we will be able to assign these metrics to BPMN activities, events and
gateways, and visualize them on the BPMN diagram.
Real­time aggregation
Real­time aggregation collects information from all engines belonging to a specific type,
and maintains different metrics by using this data. It belongs to event­driven aggrega­
tions. The metrics are the cardinalities of different conditions regarding E­GSM stages.
For each stage, it calculates how many times is it ’regular’, ’faulty’, ’opened’, ’unopened’,
’closed’, ’onTime’, ’skipped’, and ’outOfOrder’, among the currently executed engines. By
using the results of Chapter 6, we can use the findings of the deviation detection algoritm
to determine for each stage, the cardinality of the different deviation types they are partic­
ipating in. Visualizing these metrics on the corresponding BPMN diagram allows system
operators to have an insightful view into the available real­time aggregated information,
and see problematic process parts and bottlenecks.
Historical information aggregation
Maintain a record of historical stage conditions and deviations in the database, along
with their frequency, for each phase of the E­GSM process model. The aggregation met­
rics are updated when an engine is being terminated, so the metrics consider the engine
states right before its termination. It also belongs to event­driven aggregations. Simi­
lar to real­time aggregation, historical aggregated information can be also visualized on
the corresponding BPMN diagram allowing stakeholders to more effectively identify and
eliminate the root causes of deviations, and enhance the processes.
7.6
Process Groups
In order to make information aggregation customizable, we introduced the concept of
Process Groups, which allows us to aggregate the information from a certain group of en­
gines defined by group membership rules. This makes it possible to perform aggregations
which perform observations on a group of E­GSM engines where new group members are
automatically added when a new process has been started and is satisfying the specified
membership rules, or automatically removed when it is terminated. The membership rules
define the member processes indirectly. The available membership rules are:
• Process Type: Defines the type of member processes
• Stakeholder: Defines the stakeholder of member processes. In the case of multiple
process stakeholders, it is enough that one of them is the specified one.
7.7
Notification routing
An important aspect of information aggregation is its ability to generate alerts and notifica­
tions. Certain stakeholders can be automatically notified in the event of specific process
or artifact conditions. To make notification routing more flexible, we propose the use of
notification policies that can be applied for each type of aggregation that involve triggering
Improving Artifact­driven Process Monitoring by Aggregating Smart Object Measurements
37
==PAGE:46==
notifications. These policies will define who will be notified to ensure that the right entities
are informed at the right time.
The defined notification rules have been summarized below.
Available rules for ’artifact’ jobs:
• Artifact Owners: Notifying the stakeholder who owns the affected artifact
• Process Owners: Notifying all process owners who have at least one process in­
stance attached to the problematic artifact
Available rules for ’process’ jobs:
• Artifact Owners: Notifying the owners of the artifacts which are attached to the
problematic process instance
• Process Owners: Notifying the owners of the process
7.8
Technical aspects
There are several options available for aggregating information from process instances,
but not all of them may be relevant or beneficial for a particular organization or process.
Therefore, the set of applied aggregations should be configurable based on organizational
needs. Additionally, the aggregation functionality should be decoupled from the process
engine to allow greater flexibility and scalability. This is particularly important as aggre­
gations can consume a significant amount of computational resources, so the ability to
scale is an essential requirement.
To address these requirements, we introduce the concepts of an Aggregation Agent and
an Aggregation Job.
7.8.1
Aggregation Agent
To fully decouple information aggregation from E­GSM engines, we have developed a
separate application called Aggregation Agent, which can be deployed independently
from the engine and potentially on a separate machine. Similar to the already introduced
Engine Worker, the Aggregator Agent is also intended to be deployed as a part of a mi­
croservice architecture, potentially multiple instances at a time. As mentioned previously,
in addition to writing logs to a database, certain log entries are also broadcasted through
an MQTT broker. This allows the Aggregation Agent to subscribe to the appropriate,
process­specific topic, and receive log entries in real­time. This will enable it to perform
the real­time aggregation features independently from the E­GSM engine. At the same
time, by utilizing its direct access to the database, it can also perform daemon aggrega­
tion activities. This approach allows for greater flexibility and scalability as the aggregation
processes can be managed separately from the E­GSM Engines and can be deployed on
a different machine.
7.8.2
Aggregation Job
The concept of an Aggregation Job has been introduced to provide a general framework
for different types of information aggregations. Although the purpose and functionality of
different aggregations may vary, their lifecycle, communication interfaces, and database
connections are similar, and can be shared among multiple aggregations. An Aggregation
Job is defined by a set of data fields and business logic required to perform the accumu­
lation of information. Jobs are created on­demand, and their specific setup is determined
by the configuration, which defines which artifacts and/or process instances should be
included in the job, and sets the notification rules for alerts. This approach allows for
38
Improving Artifact­driven Process Monitoring by Aggregating Smart Object Measurements
==PAGE:47==
greater flexibility as it allows multiple aggregation jobs to be defined and executed based
on organizational needs, and the exact setup of each job can be easily configured.
Improving Artifact­driven Process Monitoring by Aggregating Smart Object Measurements
39
==PAGE:48==
8
E­GSM to BPMN conversion
In the previous chapters, we saw how it is possible to detect deviations in E­GSM process
models, and derive useful and insightful measures to support subsequent process execu­
tions by aggregating information from multiple process instances. In this section, we will
discuss the final large topic that the project tackles: the conversion of E­GSM models into
semantically equivalent BPMN ones, and BPMN enrichment with additional information.
8.1
Mapping E­GSM stages to BPMN constructs
As discussed in Chapter 3, E­GSM diagrams are generated in a semi­automated way
based on the corresponding BPMN model. As depicted by Figure 8.1, we only need to
enrich the BPMN with the artifacts, and the remaining part of the process is fully auto­
mated. Therefore, considering a BPMN model with a set of artifact assignments, we can
expect the same E­GSM process model as output every time we run the translator. This
means that the naming conversions applied in the E­GSM model are also deterministic.
The translation rules for the considered BPMN constructs are summarized in a graphical
way in Appendix F. As we can see, we are able to map an E­GSM stage to each BPMN
activity and event, as well as one or two stages to each BPMN gateway pair in the corre­
sponding BPMN model. E­GSM stages, which correspond to BPMN events and activities,
are directly named after the original BPMN construct, so their ID is the same as the ID of
the corresponding BPMN event or activity.
In BPMN language, parallel, exclusive and inclusive blocks are expressed as a pair of
diverging and converging gateways. In E­GSM language, they are only a single block,
whose ID is identical to that of the corresponding diverging gateway in the BPMN model,
so their mapping is straightforward.
Loop blocks are translated into two stages, which are embedded into each other. The
outer block directly inherits the ID of the diverging gateway of the corresponding BPMN
construct, while the embedded ’ITE’ block has an ID which is also derived from the ID of
the corresponding diverging gateway. Therefore, E­GSM loop block also can be mapped
back to BPMN constructs.
There are two cases where the E­GSM block does not have a corresponding BPMN con­
struct: the parent block of sequential blocks, and the inner block of loops.
The converging gateways of the BPMN diagram can also be involved in the mapping, by
finding the corresponding diverging gateway for each of them. It is possible algorithmi­
cally, as we will see later in this chapter.
8.2
State and status export to BPMN models
For each BPMN activity, event, and gateway pair, we can find a corresponding E­GSM
stage, whose state and status information can be directly exported into the BPMN model.
However, the loop block requires special attention, since its E­GSM representation con­
sists of two blocks, which are embedded into each other. The state and status of the
loop are expressed correctly by the attributes of the outer block, so we can directly export
these to the corresponding gateways of the BPMN, although we will need to consider the
information available in the inner block while enriching the BPMN with further information
available in E­GSM.
40
Improving Artifact­driven Process Monitoring by Aggregating Smart Object Measurements
==PAGE:49==
Produce E-GSM models and binding criteria
Enrich BPMN 
collaboration diagram 
with artifacts
Derive BPMN 
artifact-oriented 
process view
Derive E-GSM 
artifact lifecycle 
model
Derive E-GSM 
process model
Derive Artifact-
to-object 
mapping criteria
Configure 
smart object
BPMN 
collaboration diagram
Enriched BPMN 
collaboration diagram
BPMN 
process diagram
E-GSM
process model
Artifact-to-object 
mapping criteria
E-GSM artifact
lifecycle model
For each 
artifact
Figure 8.1: BPMN to E­GSM transformation process [1]
Exporting state and status allows us to visualize the state of the execution of any pro­
cess instance, showing which activities, events, and gateways have been executed. The
partially executed constructs have ’opened’ status, the completely executed ones are
’closed’, while the non­executed ones are ’unopened’. It is important to note that in E­
GSM models, if a stage is executed more than once, then every time it gets ’opened’, all
member stages reset to the default state, so the results of previous executions get lost.
Thus, the usage of state and status information on BPMN diagrams are limited without
considering the detected deviations in the E­GSM diagram.
8.2.1
Finding blocks in BPMN models
BPMN gateway pairs are represented in E­GSM models by one stage, or in the case of a
loop, two stages embedded into each other. To be able to match these E­GSM stages to
the appropriate BPMN blocks for each diverging gateway in the BPMN model, we need to
find the corresponding converging one, which supplemented with the intermediate blocks
between them, construct a BPMN block. This directly persists in the E­GSM model as
well.
To match diverging and converging gateways together, we applied an algorithm, which
starts to traverse BPMN edges from the diverging gateway we are looking for pair for,
and maintains a counter about the gateways the algorithm passed. Diverging gateways
increase the counter value by one while converging ones decrease it. The algorithm will
stop when the counter reaches 0, indicating that it has reached the converging pair of the
diverging gateway from which the algorithm started. The discovered block is delimited by
the two gateways.
8.3
Enrichment of BPMN models
To provide a more insightful and realistic view of process instances, we need to enrich the
BPMN diagram with the aggregated measure introduced in Chapter 7, and the information
we retrieved through deviation detection introduced by Chapter 6. The deviation detec­
tion provides a list of deviations along with the affected stages of the E­GSM diagram.
Since we are able to assign E­GSM stages to BPMN constructs, we can also export the
aggregated information and the deviations to the BPMN diagram, and ’apply’ them to the
BPMN model. This allows us to visualize and show both the aggregated information and
the deviations to the system operators, who are now able to see exactly which activities
went wrong, or exactly how the desired execution sequence has been violated. This can
be very helpful information and accelerate organisational decision­making so as to avoid
Improving Artifact­driven Process Monitoring by Aggregating Smart Object Measurements
41
==PAGE:50==
further deviations and/or fix the effect of the already persisting ones.
8.4
Visualization of BPMN diagrams
To visualize all available information we retrieved from the E­GSM model, we need to
extend the basic set of BPMN visualization constructs. We introduce deviation flags,
which are icons placed next to BPMN constructs. Each type of them represent that the
BPMN construct they have been assigned to have been affected by a specific type of
deviation. The introduced flags are summarized by Figure 8.2.
Icon 
Meaning 
Incomplete Execution 
Multi-execution 
Incorrect Execution 
or 
Incorrect Branch 
Execution 
Skipped BPMN construct 
Figure 8.2: Flags and their meaning
Flags are adequate to visualize all types of deviation detectable with the deviation detec­
tion algorithm. For skip deviations, we added additional visualization. To visualize skipped
activities, events or gateways more accurately, we introduce the skip arrow notation (Fig­
ure 8.3), which draws the executed sequence on the BPMN diagram, so the operators
will be able to quickly interpret the diagram, and recognize exactly which activities have
been skipped.
8.5
Visualization of aggregated metrics
To provide insightful information for system operators, we can visualize both real­time and
historical aggregated information on the corresponding BPMN diagram. As we discussed
in Chapter 7, aggregation metrics are calculated on a per­stage basis. Using the mapping
between E­GSM stages and BPMN constructs introduced in this chapter, we can enrich
the BPMN constructs with the aggregated information and visualize them as an overlay
on the BPMN diagram placed near the appropriate BPMN constructs (Figure 8.4). The
user can select which stage’s information to be visualized by hovering over the desired
one with the mouse.
42
Improving Artifact­driven Process Monitoring by Aggregating Smart Object Measurements
==PAGE:51==
Figure 8.3: Visualization of activity skipping
Figure 8.4: Aggregated metrics visualized on BPMN diagram
Improving Artifact­driven Process Monitoring by Aggregating Smart Object Measurements
43
==PAGE:52==
9
Software Design and Implementation
So far, we have explored the theoretical foundations of the contributions to the project.
This chapter is intended to provide an understanding of the software architecture we de­
signed, describe the operation of the implemented software modules, and explain the
most significant design decisions we made during the design and development phase.
The source code of all software application we are introducing is available through the
project’s GitHub page1.
9.1
Technologies
In this section, we discuss how we chose the main technologies applied in the system.
We state the requirements, introduce the considered technologies, and finally discuss the
one that has been selected, including its advantages and limitations for our consideration.
9.1.1
Application deployment technologies
Since all applications of the SMARTifact platform have been deployed on IoT devices,
the hardware resource requirements of the system had to be kept low. This makes the
application of low­level programming languages highly advantageous. With this in mind,
the best solution would be C or C++, which are among the most powerful and efficient
programming languages. However, the estimated time of development would have been
relatively high for these low­level programming languages, which is also an important
factor during project planning.
Java is also relatively efficient and has various features that aim to accelerate the devel­
opment process. However, Java applications can be deployed with Java Virtual Machine
(JVM) only, and unfortunately, the resources of the applied hardware were so limited that
the available memory was barely enough for the JVM itself.
Finally, each module of the SMARTifact platform has been implemented in JavaScript
and is being deployed with NodeJs, an open­source JavaScript runtime environment.
While NodeJs is used mainly for the deployment of server­side applications, it is effectively
usable for local application deployments as well on basically all popular platforms. NodeJs
applications exploit the versatility, speed, and popularity of JavaScript language, while
providing a flexible environment to deploy these applications in different environments
effectively, and with minimal hardware overhead.
In this project, smart objects need to deploy only the Sensor handler module and the Event
Processor, which are directly exported from the SMARTifact platform, without any modi­
fication. Further applications of the architecture are running on more powerful machines
(cloud, on­premise servers), so hardware resources are no longer such harsh limiting fac­
tors. At the same time, our options for technologies have widened.
For our purposes, an ideal programming language is generic which allows for easy main­
tainability, natively supports parallelism, and can be used for event­driven applications.
JavaScript’s feature set is ideal to develop cloud­based applications. However, a draw­
back concerns its maintainability, rendering it not the most ideal solution, since it is a
non­generic language, and its object­oriented features are limited compared to Java for
example.
1All source­code available on GitHub: https://github.com/orgs/eGSM-platform/repositories
44
Improving Artifact­driven Process Monitoring by Aggregating Smart Object Measurements
==PAGE:53==
As discussed in Chapter 5, the core of the Engine Worker is imported from the SMARTifact
platform, so implementing the whole application in JavaScript as well could save us a
significant amount of development time. Since all necessary libraries (MQTT client, XML
parser, JSON parser etc.) are available, and we did not find any limitation of NodeJs and
JavaScript that would endanger the feasibility of the application, we decided to implement
the Engine Worker in JavaScript.
We considered that JavaScript is very practical for developing cloud applications, and
that we want to keep technology consistent between different modules of the project. We
also want to allow the reuse of implemented solutions among them. Thus, we decided to
implement the other software modules in JavaScript as well.
9.1.2
Front­end technologies
Although this project is rather heavy on the system architecture and data processing side,
visualization of different information is also among the requirements of the project. Our
needs from the front­end technology are not extraordinary, and any modern technology
could have been used (e.g.: React JS, Angular, HTML5 Boilerplate, Vue JS). This project
could also have been implemented with plain HTML and JavaScript as well. After consid­
ering my previous development experiences, we decided to use the open­source Angular
framework[20].
Angular has numerous advantages compared to plain HTML webpages. Angular is a
whole development framework, and allows developers to easily deploy Angular applica­
tions locally with an integrated NodeJs­based development server. It allows us to create
single­page websites, which helps to reduce communication with the server. Furthermore,
several open­source libraries and examples are available both for design and functional­
ities thanks to Angular’s thrilling community, which makes development easier.
9.1.3
Visualization frameworks
Our front end must be able to visualize BPMN and E­GSM diagrams. Building visualization
from scratch without exploiting any visualization toolbox or framework can be challenging.
As such, we did not intend to tackle this in this project instead, and chose to use free,
or open­source libraries. For E­GSM diagram visualization, we decided to use GoJS
framework, which have been used by the SMARTifact project as well. To visualize BPMN
diagrams we used BPMN­Js[21], an open­source library intended for BPMN visualization
and editing.
9.1.4
Database technologies
For decades, different implementations of conventional relational database approaches
were the most widely applied general­purpose data storage systems in information tech­
nology. Even though the underlying theoretical background of other approaches was
already there, the need for most of them was not great enough to encourage their devel­
opment and spread throughout in the industry. Over the last 15 years, the exponential
rise in the number of computational devices has resulted in the rapid development of data
storage solutions. Nowadays, developers can choose from several fundamentally differ­
ent database systems, all of which have are designed to be optimized for certain types of
operations.
In addition, the introduced monitoring platform relies on a database system which stores
engine log entries, pre­processed information, and data about process instances, arti­
facts, and stakeholders. Here, we introduce the important properties of 3 relevant database
technologies we considered using in this project.
Improving Artifact­driven Process Monitoring by Aggregating Smart Object Measurements
45
==PAGE:54==
Relational Database
Relational databases are constructed from tables with predefined column types and names.
Each row in the tables corresponds to an entry of data. After an entry is added to the table,
it can be read, updated or deleted by accessing it through a key, which is the value of the
’key’ column for the required entry. Tables can be connected to each other with ’secondary
keys’, which allows us to perform complex operations effectively. Relational databases
are applicable for systems where the data is predictable, and the table connections can
be exploited. The biggest limitations of relational databases are related to scalability and
flexibility. The relations between tables do not allow distributed deployment of the system,
which limits its scalability. Furthermore, all columns have to be defined before populating
the table, which makes subsequent modifications complicated, and costly.
Non­relational Database
Non­relational databases are key­value storage systems which are based on the imple­
mentation, assigning one or more data fields to each key. The type of stored data does
not need to be defined in advance, which provides great flexibility. The key­value way
of storing information allows scalability. Since the system does not need to maintain re­
lations between different entities, one request will affect exactly one key and its value.
Exploiting this by thoughtful key generation, a very fast, scalable and reliable system can
be designed. Some implementations allow us to use special operations or data structures
in the database such as maps, sets, lists, and basic numeric operations on stored data.
Non­relational databases are ideal to store non­structured data in scalable systems, al­
though the design of an efficient database system can be challenging since entries cannot
be related to each other.
Time Series Database
Time Series Databases have been designed and optimized for data collection. They allow
us to write entries frequently and quickly, although the reading and modification capabili­
ties are limited and slow. Time series databases are mostly used to write regular updates
about how the value of a set of measures changes in time (e.g.: storing log entries).
As has been discussed, our system is using a database for different purposes, which is
detailed in 9.4. After considering the features of the different database types, we decided
to use a non­relational database implementation, mainly due to its scalability and flexibil­
ity in stored data types. For the log messages generated by E­GSM Engines and Event
Routers, a time series database would be well applicable too, although the application of
two independent database modules would increase the complexity of the system. There­
fore, we decided to use a single non­relational database for all data storage purposes.
For implementation, we used DynamoDB[22] from Amazon Web Services, which is a
feature­rich and powerful implementation of non­relational databases. The main reasons
we decided on this solution are its advanced data structure features (maps, lists etc.), and
the freely available DynamoDB Docker container, which allows local deployment during
the development phase.
9.1.5
Communication
As mentioned in Chapter 3, the referenced SMARTifact platform uses the MQTT protocol
for communication between IoT devices. In the new architecture, new components are
introduced besides the IoT devices. These new applications are a part of a microservice
architecture, and need to communicate with each other in a reliable way. Several inter­
service communication solutions exist to provide communication between microservice
applications. There are both synchronous and asynchronous approaches.
Synchronous communication
In the case of synchronous communication, the state of the sender and the receiver are
not decoupled, which means that the sender will wait for the receiver to process the mes­
46
Improving Artifact­driven Process Monitoring by Aggregating Smart Object Measurements
==PAGE:55==
sage and respond to it. A traditional, synchronous way of communication is the HTTP
protocol. It is a direct, or point­to­point way of communication and thus does not require
any additional agent or broker, which is undoubtedly an advantage. However, in a dynam­
ically changing architecture, maintaining point­to­point connections can be difficult, and in
the case of small message sizes, the overhead of an HTTP request can be unreasonably
high. However, in many applications, REST­API­s and HTTP protocol is still an adequate
solution.
Asynchronous communication
Another approach for inter­service communication is asynchronous communication, which
completely decouples the state of the sender and receiver. It applies an intermediate
agent to temporarily store and forward the messages. Some implementations allow us
to apply certain policies on the agent, such as load balancing or routing policies. Asyn­
chronous communication is advantageous for dynamically changing architectures since
the nodes do not need to know the network address of each other, and it is enough to
know the messaging agent. For microservice architectures, a popular method for asyn­
chronous communication is RabbitMQ[23], which is similarly to the already mentioned
MQTT protocol is based on a message broker. RabbitMQ is intended for inter­service
communication in non­resource constraint environments. Therefore, regarding resource
requirements, it is heavier than the MQTT (which is intended for IoT applications), but
provides more features and flexibility.
Since our system is highly dynamic, we decided to use asynchronous communication for
inter­service communication. The architecture already contains an MQTT message bro­
ker, which is inherited from the original SMARTifact platform. We decided to keep the
communication consistent in the architecture, so we used the MQTT broker for interser­
vice communication as well.
9.2
System Architecture
Applying the results and findings of this project in an efficient and highly scalable way in
a software implementation, was among the top priorities during both the project planning,
and the realization itself. The initial version of the system architecture was drawn at the
beginning of the software development phase. It later underwent smaller refinements and
modifications to be a good fit for the implemented aggregation features, and to provide a
wide range of scalability.
Microservice architectures have emerged in recent years, and have been applied in sev­
eral high­scaled software projects. In contrast to a monolithic architecture, where all ser­
vices are managed by one central core module, microservice architecture is a distributed
solution, deploying services in different nodes. Their functionalities are often overlapped,
so a single­node failure will not paralyze the whole system. The power of the microservice
approach comes from its high reliability and great scalability, which is exactly what we are
looking for in this project.
Engine Worker and Aggregator Agent have been introduced in 5.2. Here, we expand
their concepts in order to meet all of our goals regarding scalability, and make them ap­
plicable in a microservice architecture. As an integral part of the software architecture,
we also introduce auxiliary applications to support the core business logic. In addition,
the architecture also contains some inherited SMARTifact modules deployed on smart
objects.
As discussed in Chapter 5.2 and 7, both Engine Worker and Aggregation Agent are in­
tended to be deployed in a microservice architecture in order to achieve great scalability.
Improving Artifact­driven Process Monitoring by Aggregating Smart Object Measurements
47
==PAGE:56==
Modern cloud architectures allow us to spawn module instances on­demand. Therefore,
for example, when organizational needs increase, an automated system can start new in­
stances of workers or aggregators. This setup makes it challenging to reach out to these
modules from outside and retrieve information since the system is now highly dynamic,
and the networking also became more sophisticated. There is thus a need to have a priv­
ileged module, called Supervisor Application, with static network availability which can be
used as a proxy to send commands and requests to Engine Workers and Aggregation
Agents. The Supervisor module is only an entry point to the dynamic system. Other ap­
plications do not rely on it, so an error in the Supervisor module will not cause information
loss in any E­GSM engine or aggregation job.
As discussed previously, aggregation capabilities depend on a database. Therefore, a
database module has been added to the architecture as well, which is deployed as a
standalone application, potentially on an independent machine.
The last module we are adding to the architecture is a Front­end Application that allows us
to send commands and retrieve information from the system, including visualising E­GSM
and BPMN diagrams.
Finally, the architecture contains IoT device endpoints, and an MQTT Broker module.
Each IoT device contains a Sensor Handler module and an Event Processor, both in­
herited from the original SMARTifact architecture. Figure 9.1 depicts the implemented
architecture.
In the following sections, we explore all architectural modules and explain their roles and
responsibilities. We also cover communication between modules.
9.3
MQTT Communication
The primary communication method between the different modules of the architecture is
the MQTT protocol. The system utilizes several topics to reach out to the appropriate en­
tities, which are summarized by Figure 9.2. The topic names surrounded by [] means that
each instance of the entity has its own topic, so other Workers or Aggregators will not re­
ceive the messages published to these topics. The messages published to topics marked
as ’BROADCAST’ will be delivered to each Worker or Aggregator, and are thus ideal to
perform searching. The system utilises the request­reply communication paradigm, in
these cases, the request message always contains a unique ID and the response will
include it too, in order to allow the requester to map the received replies to requests.
Apart from the messages sent by IoT devices, the structure of messages is unified. The
payload of each message is encoded as JSON and each of them contains the following
data fields:
• Message type: The type of the message determines how the receiver will handle
it. It also determines the expected content of the ’payload’ field.
• Message ID: Unique message ID used for request/reply communication to allow the
sender to match the received responses to transmitted messages.
• Payload: Message type specific content. It contains each subfield, which is neces­
sary to execute the command or process the response.
9.4
Database module
The database module is a Docker container containing an instance of AWS DynamoDB.
This solution is intended for developing and testing purposes. For production, the AWS
48
Improving Artifact­driven Process Monitoring by Aggregating Smart Object Measurements
==PAGE:57==
IoT Device
IoT Device
Worker
Worker
Information Aggregation 
Agent
Information Aggregation 
Agent
IoT Device
Onboard 
Sensor 
Interface
Event 
Processor
MQTT 
Broker
Supervisor
Information 
Aggregation 
Agent
Worker
Front-end 
Application
Organization 
Information 
System
Log Database
(DynamoDB)
WebSocket
Angular 
NodeJS 
Server
REST API
Main
Database
(DynamoDB)
WebSocket
Figure 9.1: System Architecture
Aggregator
Instance
Supervisor
Worker Instance
SUPERVISOR 
to 
WORKERS
BROADCAST
SUPERVISOR
to
AGGREGATORS
BROADCAST
WORKERS
AGGREGATOR
BROADCAST
[WORKER
INSTANCE]
[AGGREGATOR
INSTANCE]
WORKERS
to
SUPERVISOR
AGGREGATORS
to
SUPERVISOR
Smart Object
Organization
Information
Network
[ARTIFACT
INSTANCE]
[eGSM
ENGINE
INSTANCE]
[STAKEHOLER]
Stakeholder
notification
API
Aggregator
Instances
Supervisor
Aggregator
Instance
Aggregator
Instances
Worker
Instances
Worker
Instance
Supervisor
Worker
Instances
Worker
Instance
Worker
Instance(s)
MQTT
Broker
[eGSM
ENGINE
LOG]
Aggregator
Instance(s)
Figure 9.2: MQTT topics
Improving Artifact­driven Process Monitoring by Aggregating Smart Object Measurements
49
==PAGE:58==
cloud DynamoDB is recommended, which is usable through the same API­s, making the
migration to the cloud easy.
The deployed applications require the following tables in the database, which need to be
created in advance:
• Stakeholder definitions: Name, notification information, and other stakeholder­
related information
• Artifact definitions: Type, unique identifier, stakeholders, aggregated information
• Engine log entries: Each entry describes a change in an E­GSM engine instance
• Event Router log entries: Each entry describes an attach or detach event of an
artifact to an E­GSM engine instance
• Preprocessed information: Includes processed events, which will be used for de­
riving artifact­specific aggregated measures
• Process instances: Process type, instance ID, and current lifecycle stage
• Process type: Process type definitions with all necessary model information (E­
GSM, BPMN, perspectives)
• Process groups: Definitions of process groups and the membership rules
9.5
Engine Worker Application
The functionalities of the Engine Worker module have been discussed in 5.2, and its de­
tailed inner structure represented by Figure 5.2, although the detailed operation of the
components and relation between them is not detailed yet. Figure 9.3 depicts the de­
tailed inner structure of the Engine Worker module, considering the relations between the
different components as well. We will discuss the main modules of the application and
describe their operation.
Engine Worker
Central 
Event Router
MQTT
Module
Routes
MQTT 
Broker
Web
Application
Database
Connector
Database
Engine
Pool
eGSM
Engine
eGSM
Engine
eGSM
Engine
Figure 9.3: Inner structure of the Engine Worker module
E­GSM Engine
The E­GSM engine module from SMARTifact has been modified to behave not as a mod­
ule, but as an object primitive, which allows us to instantiate it and destruct its instances in
runtime. The engine has been also extended with some additional parameters to support
new features, but its core functionalities remained unchanged.
The naming conversions of engines have also been modified. The SMARTifact applied
50
Improving Artifact­driven Process Monitoring by Aggregating Smart Object Measurements
==PAGE:59==
{process_type}/{instance_id} as the engine name. We extended it by including the pro­
cess perspective name: {process_type}/{instance_id}__{perspective_name}. This allows
us to group together engines which represent the same process executions from differ­
ent perspectives. For example, if ’transportation_process’ is the process type and the
instance ID is ’001’, and we would like to represent the process from two perspectives
(Truck, Container), then we can have two engines: ’transportation_process/001__Truck’
and ’transportation_process/001__Container’.
Engine Pool
The deployed engine instances are placed in the Engine pool, which is able to accommo­
date a certain number of engine instances, determined by the initial setup. The engine
pool can be considered the central module of the application since all other modules are
intended to support its operation.
In the SMARTifact project, the initialization files for E­GSM engines were provided as com­
mand line arguments, so these files have to be on the same machine where the applica­
tion was being deployed in advance. In the new architecture, it is certainly not an option,
since the application is intended to be deployed in the cloud, not locally. Furthermore, a
worker now deploys multiple engine instances, so the lifecycle of an engine is no longer
bonded to the deployed engine. Thus, the application should allow engine creation and
termination in runtime. Engine Pool provides an API for engine­related operations such
as creation, termination and information retrieval.
Central Event Router
The Event Router was a fundamental part of the SMARTifact project. It manages MQTT
subscriptions to the appropriate smart object topics based on messages from the Orga­
nization Information System, and forwards events to the E­GSM Engine.
In the Engine Worker implementation, there is no Event Router for each E­GSM engine.
Instead, there is only one Central Even Router, which is shared among all engines in the
Engine Pool. It allows us to maintain only one TCP connection per Engine Worker to
the broker. It maintains an inner collection of subscribed topics. If an engine requests to
subscribe to a new topic, the module will first check if a subscription already exists to that
particular topic, and if yes, then it will skip subscribing to the topic in the broker. Instead,
it will just add the engine to the subscribers to the topic. Un­subscriptions are performed
in a similar way.
MQTT Communication Module
MQTT protocol has been utilized in the SMARTifact project, where it was responsible
to manage communication between smart objects and event routers. In the introduced
architecture, besides the Central Event Router, the MQTT Communication Module also
exploits MQTT protocol. Its responsibilities are to maintain communication with other
workers, aggregators and the supervisor module. The new communication channels and
their purpose are:
• With other Engine Workers: Each Engine Worker needs a globally unique ID
which is determined right after startup consensually involving all other Workers
• With Aggregator Agents: Besides writing log entries to the database, Engine
Workers are also publishing them to special process­specific MQTT topics, which
are then received by the subscribed Aggregator Agents. Furthermore, the Engine
Workers are providing services available through an MQTT topic for the Aggrega­
tion Agents. These services are intended to retrieve special, real­time data about
processes (e.g.: retrieve engines which meet certain criteria).
• With Supervisor Module: The module provides services for the Supervisor as well.
These are intended mainly for engine lifecycle management (creation/termination),
Improving Artifact­driven Process Monitoring by Aggregating Smart Object Measurements
51
==PAGE:60==
engine lookup, and information retrieval.
Routes Module
The Routes Module provides a REST­API and an HTML page in order to visualize the
deployed E­GSM engines. The foundations of the module have been exported from the
SMARTifact platform. Since the system architecture is dynamic and the addresses of
Workers in the network are not known from the outside, the introduced MQTT Communi­
cation Module can be used to expose the hostname and port of the REST­API.
9.6
Aggregation Agent
Aggregator Module is intended to perform different types of Jobs including information
aggregation and E­GSM to BPMN translation. It is certainly the most sophisticated module
of the architecture, and contains a significant portion of the business logic. The inner
structure of the module is depicted in Figure 9.4.
Aggregation Agent

MQTT
Module
Socket 
Server
MQTT 
Broker
Web
Application
Database
Connector
Notification
Manager
Group
Manager
Engine
Observer
Database
JobFactory
Monitoring 
Manager
eGSM
Engine
eGSM
Engine
Job
Figure 9.4: Inner structure of the Aggregation Agent module
Similar to the way Engine Workers handle engines, Aggregator Agents deploy a pool of
jobs which are created on demand. The job instances are encapsulated into the Monitor­
ing Manager module, which is responsible for their lifecycle and connecting them to the ap­
propriate auxiliary modules. The Aggregation Agent exploits Object Oriented paradigms
and well known design patterns to make its subsequent enhancement easy, so the defi­
nition of new jobs is as simple as possible.
Monitoring Manager
The core of the application is the Monitoring Manager, which is a singleton class respon­
sible for the proper instantiation of service classes supporting the execution of jobs. Fur­
thermore, it serves as a job pool, encapsulating the jobs themselves and handling their
lifecycle.
The class provides functions to control the lifecycle of jobs (creation/termination) and dif­
ferent accessibility functions to them, which are exploited by the MQTT Communication
and the Socket Server modules.
Engine Observer
Engine Observer has a similar function as the Central Event Router in the Engine Work­
ers. It is responsible for delivering the updates from the engines to the appropriate jobs.
Therefore, it handles the MQTT topic subscriptions and un­subscriptions.
Job Factory Module
Job Factory class exploits the Factory design pattern and hides the complexity of job
instantiation. Thus￿inside the Monitoring Manager, the process of creating a new job can
be done in one line only. The Job Factory takes care of parsing the job configuration JSON
52
Improving Artifact­driven Process Monitoring by Aggregating Smart Object Measurements
==PAGE:61==
strings, retrieving the necessary parameters, validating the information, and instantiating
the requested job.
Job types
The concept of job has been already introduced in Chapter 7, which is basically an ab­
straction of different aggregation and conversion activities performed by aggregation agents.
Here, we describe how jobs are structured, what data fields they have, and how the con­
cept of a job has been generalised.
All types of jobs are inherited from the ’Job’ superclass, which contains data fields and
functionalities of all types of jobs, including job id, collection of monitored processes and
artifacts, and features to perform periodic evaluation and to subscribe to specific events
of the job. The job type­specific logic is placed into the inherited classes. Considering the
purpose of jobs, they can be grouped into three main categories:
• Artifact jobs: Perform aggregation to detect malfunction of artifacts
• Process jobs: Aggregate information from different process executions
• E­GSM to BPMN conversion: Job performing deviation detection of an E­GSM
model, and E­GSM to BPMN conversion, including foundations for BPMN visualiza­
tions. This job cannot send notifications to stakeholders, although it has real­time
visualization support on the front­end.
The following job classes have been implemented:
• Artifact Event Processing Job: A type of daemon job, running periodically, and
intended to find occasions where artifacts have been used. It also creates constructs
which contains the type and ID of the artifact, and the details of the process it was
attached to based on the Process Engine and Event Router logs. The job considers
only the engines which have already been terminated. The job writes the found
artifact usage occasions into the database, and these entries will be used by the
Artifact Usage Statistic Processing jobs.
• Artifact Usage Statistic Processing Job: A type of daemon job, running peri­
odically, and intended to calculate the introduced artifact measures by using the
database entries created by Artifact Event Processing Job.
• Artifact Unreliability Alert Job: Event­driven job intended to notify certain entities
in case of an artifact measure climbs above a certain value. The job can monitor
multiple artifacts at the same time, and notify certain entities. Besides the artifacts’
owner, process owners who are currently using the problematic artifact, can also be
notified.
• Real­time Process Deviation Detection Job: Event­driven job, capable of moni­
toring a group of engines, and notifying certain entities in case of a deviation. The
notification routing is determined by the provided notification rules, while the group
of monitored engines is defined indirectly by the group membership rules, or directly
by the ID of the engines.
• Real­time Process Aggregation: Event­driven job, calculating the aggregated
measures in real­time for a certain type of engine. The job cannot send any notifica­
tions. However, it provides a special interface to retrieve the aggregated measures
at any time. Therefore, another module will be able to map aggregated information
to the corresponding BPMN construct.
• Deviation detection and E­GSM to BPMN Conversion Job: Event­driven job,
Improving Artifact­driven Process Monitoring by Aggregating Smart Object Measurements
53
==PAGE:62==
performing real­time deviation detection on a defined engine instance, and creat­
ing a semantically equivalent BPMN representation of the process, which is already
enriched by the deviations. When the monitored engine is terminated, the job up­
dates the aggregated information of the job type in the database. The job provides
a special interface to retrieve the enriched BPMN model, and allows the front­end
application to visualize it.
MQTT Communication Module
MQTT Communication Module is the primary communication interface of Aggregation
Agents, it is used to communicate with:
• Other Aggregation Agents: Similarly to Engine Workers, the instances of this ap­
plication also need a unique ID, which is determined after startup consensually in­
volving all other aggregation agents.
• With the supervisor: The module allows the Supervisor to send commands to the
Monitoring Manager and retrieve data from there. Furthermore, it can get the net­
work credentials of the WebSocket, which is opened by the Socket Server module.
• The Engine Workers: A fundamental purpose of this communication channel is to
receive log entries in real­time. Besides, it is also used to perform network discov­
ery features, which are intended to find all process instances which meet certain
requirements and be deployed on one of the Engine Workers.
• The Stakeholders: Certain jobs are able to send notifications to stakeholders via
this module. Notifications are published on stakeholder­specific topics. Note that
Stakeholders are not part of the current architecture, but for proof of concept, the
notification mechanism has been added. As we will present, notifications can be
received and visualised by the usage of stakeholder and front­end modules.
Socket Server Module
The Socket Server module starts a WebSocket server and allows outer applications to
establish an efficient, full­duplex communication channel with any Aggregation Agent in­
stance. Since the architecture is highly dynamic and the location of the module is not
known by outer applications, the network credentials are enclosed on request through the
MQTT Communication Module. The WebSocket connection is exploited by the front­end
application to visualize BPMN diagrams from ’Deviation detection and E­GSM to BPMN
Conversion’ jobs, and receive real­time updates.
Group Manager
The Group Manager module maintains the set of member processes for each process
groups, which is used by at least one job.
Notification Manager
Routing notifications to the appropriate stakeholders is an important feature of information
aggregation jobs. The notification Manager module provides an interface for jobs to notify
stakeholders. The notification routing is based on the type of job (artifact/process) and
the applied notification rules, which are provided at the creation of jobs, and have been
discussed in Section 7.7. Notification rules make the notifying process relatively complex
because of the time dependence of the group of stakeholders who should be notified.
The trigger conditions for notification sending are based on the inner logic of the jobs, but
they all apply the same type of notification rules. Each job can have an arbitrary number
of these. Currently, the channel of notifications is MQTT, so each notification will be pub­
lished on a topic named after the stakeholder, which should be notified. Stakeholders are
able to subscribe to these topics and receive notifications in real­time.
54
Improving Artifact­driven Process Monitoring by Aggregating Smart Object Measurements
==PAGE:63==
9.7
Supervisor module
The supervisor is a standalone application connecting to the central database, and MQTT
broker serves as an interface to the system. It provides a set of functionalities which allows
us to control Engine Workers and Aggregation Agents, and to retrieve information from
different parts of the systems.
The supervisor deploys a Websocket server allowing outer applications (e.g.: front­end
application deployed in the browser) to send commands and request information about
the system. Websocket connection is a full duplex way of communication, so both server
and client can initiate message passing at any time after the connection has been estab­
lished. This is an advantage compared to simple REST­API­s, and is exploited when the
supervisor is delivering job notifications to the client application.
Several client commands have multiple steps. These are managed and performed by the
supervisor autonomously while hiding their complexity from the client application’s per­
spective, and allowing us to minimize the amount of business logic placed into the client
application. Before we discuss the available features for the client application provided
by the supervisor, we need to introduce a set of primitive activities which are the con­
structs of many complex ones the supervisor is able to perform. These low­level, atomic
activities extensive use MQTT protocol to reach out to Workers and Aggregation Agents.
Furthermore, some of them also involve database operations on the already introduced
shared Database. They have been designed to minimize the network traffic through the
MQTT broker while communicating with Workers and Aggregators. Below, we introduce
the non­trivial atomic activities of the supervisor. We consider an atomic activity trivial if
it involves only a single database read or write operation.
Non­trivial atomic activities:
• Discovering online Engine Workers: Publishing a ping message to the ’SUPER­
VISOR to WORKERS BROADCAST’ topic. As a reply, each engine responds with
its details through the ’WORKERS to SUPERVISOR’ topic. This functionality is not
necessary for operation, and was created mainly for development purposes, and
to provide a better overview of the state of the system. However, this functionality
may involve a high number of network messages, which may be problematic above
a certain number of engines. As such, in a production environment, this feature
should be disabled.
• Discovering online Aggregation Agents: Publishing a ping message to the ’SU­
PERVISOR to AGGREGATORS BROADCAST’ topic. As a reply, each aggrega­
tor agent responds with its details through the ’AGGREGATORS to SUPERVISOR’
topic. Similar to the engine discovery, it is also not necessary for the operation, and
can be disabled in a production environment.
• Finding a free engine slot: This functionality is used before the instantiation of
new engines in order to find free engine slots. Broadcasts a message through the
’SUPERVISOR to WORKERS BROADCAST’ topic. The workers, which have at
least one free engine slot, will reply with their details and the number of free slots.
The supervisor will choose the worker with the most free engine slots.
• Creating a new E­GSM engine on a specified Worker: Publishes a message to
the dedicated topic of a Worker instance, and requests it to instantiate an engine.
The message contains all details necessary to create the new engine instnace.
• Searching for a specified engine: The feature is intended to find an engine in­
Improving Artifact­driven Process Monitoring by Aggregating Smart Object Measurements
55
==PAGE:64==
stance specified by its ID. It publishes to the ’SUPERVISOR to WORKERS BROAD­
CAST’ topic, and the worker which has the specified engine replies through the
’WORKERS to SUPERVISOR’ topic. The response message contains the details
of the worker where the engine is running, including the address and port number
of the REST­API, which can be used to retrieve more information about the engine.
• Searching for engines belonging to a specified process: One process can have
multiple perspectives. This feature works similarly to ’Searching for a specified en­
gine’. Instead of one engine instance however, it looks for a specified instance ID,
which may have multiple perspectives. The feature will discover all engines which
belong to this process instance.
• Deleting a specified engine: Requests the Worker instance deploying the speci­
fied engine to terminate it.
• Deleting all engines belonging to a specified process: Requests the Workers
to delete all engine instances which belong to a specified process instance.
• Get the list of E­GSM engines deployed by a specified Worker: Get the list of
engines deployed by a specific Worker instance.
• Finding a free Aggregator slot for a new Job: Similar to ’finding a free engine
slot’, it finds a free job slot on the aggregator agents.
• Creating a new job on a specified aggregator: Creating a new job on an aggre­
gator agent. The message contains all the necessary information for job creation.
• Searching for specified Job: Similar to the ’searching for a specified engine’, it
broadcasts a message to aggregator agents, and the one which has the requested
job will reply. The response message contains the network address of the aggre­
gator, and the port of the WebSocket server as well.
• Subscribing and unsubscribing to notifications: As we mentioned, when a job
sends notifications, they are published to stakeholder­specific MQTT topics. To al­
low testing and validation, we implemented ’subscribing and unsubscribing to noti­
fications’ in the supervisor application. This allows us to subscribe to the topic of
one or more stakeholders, and enables the supervisor to receive its notifications as
MQTT messages, which can then be forwarded to the front­end.
High­level features provided for the client application:
• Sending periodic updates: Each client with an established WebSocket connection
receives a periodic update containing the up­time of the supervisor, and a list of
online Workers and Aggregation Agents.
• Retrieve the list of available Process Type definitions: Allows the front­end ap­
plication to list the available process types
• Get the list of Workers: Allows the front­end to show the list of Workers, and their
most important details
• Get the list of Aggregator Agents: Allows the front­end to show the list of Aggre­
gator Agents, and their most important details
• Define and Read process groups: Allows the users to add new process groups
to the database, and read the membership rules of already existing ones
• Define artifact: Creates a new artifact instance in the database.
56
Improving Artifact­driven Process Monitoring by Aggregating Smart Object Measurements
==PAGE:65==
• Read artifact: Reads the details of an artifact from the database.
• Define process group: Creates a new process group in the database.
• Read process group: Reads a process group from the database
• Define stakeholder: Creates a new stakeholder in the datsbase
• Read stakeholder: Reads a stakeholder from the database
• Get the list of stakeholders: Retrieves all stakeholders from the database.
• Subscribe to stakeholder notifications: Orders the supervisor to subscribe to the
notification topics of a set of stakeholders. It will forward all received notifications to
the front­end, where it can be visualized.
• Get process type­level aggregated information: Retrieves process model and
process type level aggregated information from the database. Additionally, it at­
tempts to find a real­time aggregation job for the specified process type. It transfers
the process mode, the aggregated information from the database, and if found, the
information from the real­time aggregation job as well, to the front­end where it all
can be visualized as a BPMN diagram.
• Create process instance: Creates a new process instance
• Delete process instance: Deletes a process instance
• Create job: Creates a new job. All details should be provided in JSON format.
Appending G contains some diagrams, explaining the most complex activities performed
by the system, including the engine and job instantiation.
9.8
Front­end module (Client application)
A front­end application has been also created, which allows the user to monitor the system
and the engines as well. The application was created using the Angular framework and
currently, we are using its Angular cli to deploy it. The browser application connects to
the E­GSM platform by connecting to the introduced WebSocket server deployed by the
Supervisor. The application is able to retrieve data directly from Engine Workers and
Aggregation Agents, through a REST­API, or WebSocket connection, which is utilized
while visualizing E­GSM and BPMN models.
The application has been developed in TypeScript and we used the design component of
Angular Material to achieve a consistent and modern design combined with easy usability.
Its functionalities have been summarized in the previous section since it corresponds to
the functionalities the supervisor provides for the client application. Pictures about the
front­end application will be presented during evaluation (Chapter 10).
Improving Artifact­driven Process Monitoring by Aggregating Smart Object Measurements
57
==PAGE:66==
10
Evaluation and results
So far, we have discussed the theoretical foundations of the project contributions, and
how we applied these results in the implementation. In this chapter, we demonstrate the
operation of the implemented solutions, and the feasibility of the proposed architecture
with different test approaches.
Artifact Emulator
For testing purposes, we implemented Artifact Emulator, a standalone NodeJs application
capable of emulating a large number of smart objects (up to few thousand), and reliably re­
producing scenarios. The application requires a configuration file, which specifies which
smart objects the software should emulate. For each of them, it references an ’event
stream file’, which contains all events, and their timing from the moment of software in­
vocation (moment 0). Artifact Emulator reads all files, and publishes each event to the
corresponding MQTT topic at the desired moment.
Used data
For empirical verification, we used a real­world process scenario, which was used by
the SMARTifact project as well to demonstrate its operation and validation. The process
models a transportation process by a truck from London Heathrow to Amsterdam, called
’LHR­AMS process’. As figure 10.1 depicts, the process has two organizational perspec­
tive: producer and shipper. The producer prepares the container for transportation and
notifies the shipper when it is done. The shipper can then start the transportation itself,
which consists of two main parts. The first one is ”travel in the United Kingdom”, and the
second one is ”travel in the European Union”. Between the two parts of the transporta­
tion, the truck needs to take the Channel Tunnel. On the road, the truck takes breaks on
a regular basis. This is also included in the model. Figure 10.2 shows the same process
from the truck perspective, which were used to generate the E­GSM model. The model
comes with two real­life artifact event logs: a fully compliant one, and a faulty one, which
will cause deviations in the E­GSM model. The event log contains the events triggered by
the smart object, which was used in the scenario, so it allows us to replay these events
and emulate the operation of an artifact. The SMARTifact project also provided a demo
setup, which has a dedicated application for event generation based on real­world mea­
surements. The application can serve only one engine at a time, so we could not use it
directly for our testing purposes.
10.1
Deployment at Scale
In this section, we verify that the implemented solution is able to address questions of RQ
1. The new Worker implementation makes it possible to deploy multiple engine instances
in parallel, thus overcoming the limitation of SMARTifact. Moreover, the SMARTifact de­
ploys an Event Router module for each engine, while the new implementation deploys an
enhanced Event Router which can be used by all engine instances running on the Worker.
These upgrades are expected to have a significant effect on resource utilization.
To verify the operation of parallel engine deployment, we started an Engine Worker in­
stance with the setting of maximum engine number as 10, and started to instantiate the
E­GSM model of ”LHR­AMS process” from SMARTifact project, which is a real­world pro­
cess scenario. When we reached 10 running process instances, we started another En­
gine Worker and continued the engine creation until we reached 20 running engines.
During the test, we monitored the memory usage of the Engine Workers, which in our
58
Improving Artifact­driven Process Monitoring by Aggregating Smart Object Measurements
==PAGE:67==
Figure 10.1: Collaboration diagram of ’LHR­AMS’ process[1]
Figure 10.2: Truck perspective of ’LHR­AMS’ process[1]
Improving Artifact­driven Process Monitoring by Aggregating Smart Object Measurements
59
==PAGE:68==
case, is the most important measure of hardware resource utilization. To make a possi­
ble comparison with SMARTifact project, we deployed 20 Engine instances with its Event
Routers, and measured the memory usage. The results are depicted in Figure 10.3.
Figure 10.3: Memory usage
As we can observe, applying Engine Workers resulted in a significant drop in memory
usage compared to the independent deployment of E­GSM engine instances. Even de­
ploying one engine requires less memory in the new setup, which is caused by the fact
that SMARTifact deploys two independent Node applications to make an engine run, and
there are certain libraries which are used by both (XML parser, MQTT module). These
libraries are loaded twice into the memory, and combine the two applications into a sin­
gle one, thus eliminating the communication overhead between them. The difference in
memory utilization becomes more and more noteworthy as we increase the number of
E­GSM engines, since every time a new engine is created in SMARTifact, we need to
start two new applications (Event Router and the Engine itself), while the Worker only
adds a negligible amount of data to its inner data structures. When we reach the point
where we need to start another Worker, we can observe a sudden rise in the memory
utilization from the starting of a second application. Nonetheless, even considering this,
the memory utilization stays well below the SMARTifact’s curve. The trend is expected to
remain the same as we increase the number of engines.
Another measure that we successfully enhanced is the average engine startup time. The
worker implementation achieved a remarkable drop in the time needed to create a new
engine instance. The drop is a result of the already running program in case of the new
implementation. In SMARTifact, if we want to create a new process instance we need to
start two applications, which can be automated by scripts. However, starting programs
is always computationally costly and requires a significant amount of CPU time. The
new E­GSM Worker is instead considered to be already online, and can quickly respond
to commands requesting new engine instances. Since the operating system we used to
deploy applications (Windows 10) is not time­predictable, significant differences can occur
between the outcome of two tests aiming to measure execution times due to different
60
Improving Artifact­driven Process Monitoring by Aggregating Smart Object Measurements
==PAGE:69==
operating system states. To eliminate these effects, we measured the creation time of
100 engines on both SMARTifact and Engine Worker, and calculated an average value.
The average setup time with SMARTifact was 76 [ms]. With the new implementation, it
was only 28 [ms].
To verify that all engines operate as intended and the parallel deployment has no un­
foreseen effect, we emulated 20 process instances by the Artifact Emulator, 10 of which
used the compliant scenario, while the remaining 10 used the non­compliant one. While
the Artifact Emulator replayed the event streams, we observed in real­time the changes
of a few randomly selected engine instances through the front­end application, while also
checking the log entries of each engine afterwards. All changes in each engine happened
as expected, so engines do not have any unintended effects on each other, and the new
Event Router module also behaves as intended.
Finally, we verified that the scalability also works as intended, and were able to deploy
multiple Worker instances at the same time. We deployed 5 Worker instances which were
able to find unique ID­s cooperatively, and all of them were able to communicate with the
supervisor. We also tested the engine instantiation with multiple Worker instances. The
supervisor always instantiated the new engine on the worker with the most free engine
slots.
The testing and verification were supported by the implemented front­end application,
making it possible to get an overview of the state of the system, and helps search among
engines and navigation between them (Figure 10.4, 10.5, 10.6, 10.7).
Figure 10.4: List of Engine Workers
10.2
Deviation Detection and E­GSM to BPMN translation
We verified the operation of the deviation detection algorithm introduced in Chapter 6 in
two ways: validation by unit­tests, and verification by a real world scenario. The custom
made unit­tests allowed us to achieve nearly 100[%] test coverage of the deviation de­
tection functionalities, while the real world example verified that the detection algorithm
performs as intended while monitoring a real process, and is able to work together with
Improving Artifact­driven Process Monitoring by Aggregating Smart Object Measurements
61
==PAGE:70==
Figure 10.5: List of engines deployed by a Worker
Figure 10.6: Process types, new process instance creation, process group read and write
62
Improving Artifact­driven Process Monitoring by Aggregating Smart Object Measurements
==PAGE:71==
Figure 10.7: Artifact menu
the other modules of the Aggregation Agent. In addition, we tested the eGMS to BPMN
mapping functionalities while visualizing the corresponding BPMN model by the front­end
application.
Validation by unit­tests
Unit testing is a widely applied approach in software development to validate the operation
of code fragments. It helps developers to identify bugs at a very early phase, and eliminate
them before they cause more sophisticated error conditions, which would be significantly
harder to debug.
Among the several testing frameworks available for NodeJs, we selected Jest[24]. It
allows us to instantiate the necessary aggregation jobs, change its inner data structures so
as to set the E­GSM engine representation to certain states, run the detection algorithm,
and verify if the set of detected deviations the algorithm returns with is equal to the set
of deviations we expect. We wrote test cases for all types of primitive blocks covered in
Chapter 6, and also covered more advanced cases where the E­GSM model contains
multiple types of blocks, thus verifying the tree traversal features as well. The test cases
for the deviation detection algorithm are summarized in Table 10.1 and 10.2. The deviation
detection algorithm performed as expected in the unit tests, so we could start testing the
algorithm in more realistic scenarios where other modules and real E­GSM engines are
also involved.
Improving Artifact­driven Process Monitoring by Aggregating Smart Object Measurements
63
==PAGE:72==
Block type
Test scenario
SEQUENCE
No deviation
SEQUENCE
One stage skipped
SEQUENCE
Multiple stages skipped
SEQUENCE
Start event skipped
SEQUENCE
Multiple stages including start event skipped
SEQUENCE
Multi­execution of a stage
SEQUENCE
Incorrect execution sequence including 2 stages
SEQUENCE
Stage opened but not finished ­ parent should be closed
SEQUENCE
Stage opened but not finished ­ parent should not be closed
SEQUENCE
Overlapped activities
PARALLEL
One stage not executed at all ­ parent should be closed
PARALLEL
One stage not executed at all ­ parent should not be closed yet
PARALLEL
One stage opened but not closed ­ parent should be closed
PARALLEL
One stage opened but not closed ­ parent should not be closed yet
PARALLEL
Multiple stages not executed ­ parent should be closed
PARALLEL
Multiple stages not executed ­ parent should not be closed yet
PARALLEL
Multi­executing a stage ­ parent should be closed
PARALLEL
Multi­executing a stage ­ parent should not be closed yet
PARALLEL
Multi­executing more than one stages ­ parent should be closed
PARALLEL
Multi­executing more than one stages ­ parent should not be closed yet
EXCLUSIVE
Executing and incorrect branch
EXCLUSIVE
Partially executing the correct branch ­ parent should be closed
EXCLUSIVE
Partially executing the correct branch ­ parent should not be closed
EXCLUSIVE
Partially executing an incorrect branch ­ parent should be closed
EXCLUSIVE
Partially executing an incorrect branch ­ parent should not be closed
EXCLUSIVE
Partially executing a correct branch and executing and incorrect one ­ parent
should not be closed
Table 10.1: Deviation detection algorithm unit tests (1/2)
64
Improving Artifact­driven Process Monitoring by Aggregating Smart Object Measurements
==PAGE:73==
Block type
Test scenario
EXCLUSIVE
Partially executing a correct branch and executing and incorrect one ­ parent
should be closed
EXCLUSIVE
Partially executing an incorrect branch and executing the correct one ­ parent
should be closed
EXCLUSIVE
Partially executing a correct branch and executing and incorrect one ­ parent
should be closed
EXCLUSIVE
Partially executing an incorrect branch and executing the correct one ­ parent
should not be closed
EXCLUSIVE
Overlapped executions
INCLUSIVE
Executing one of the correct branches twice
INCLUSIVE
Executing one of the correct branches partially only ­ parent should be closed
INCLUSIVE
Executing one of the correct branches partially only ­ parent should not be
closed yet
INCLUSIVE
Executing unintended branch beside the correct ones
INCLUSIVE
Executing multiple unintended branches beside the correct one
ITERATION
Incorrect execution sequence ­ 1 stage
ITERATION
Incorrect execution sequence ­ 2 stages
ITERATION
Skipping A1
ITERATION
Incomplete execution of one stage ­ parent should not be executed yet
ITERATION
Incomplete execution of 2 stages ­ parent should not be executed yet
ITERATION
Incomplete execution of one stage ­ parent should be executed
ITERATION
Incomplete execution of 2 stages ­ parent should be executed
SEQ&PAR
Missing parallel stage execution
SEQ&PAR
Incomplete parallel stage execution
SEQ&PAR
Executing one parallel stage more than once
SEQ&EXCL
Executing and incorrect exclusive branch
SEQ&EXCL
Not executing the desired branch and executing a non­desired
SEQ&INCL
Executing an incorrect branch
SEQ&INCL
Incomplete branch execution
Table 10.2: Deviation detection algorithm unit tests (2/2)
Verification with a real­world scenario
Besides the validation, we also performed verification. We used the ’LHR­AMS’ trans­
portation example used by the SMARTifact project for this purpose, which uses real­world
data. As we discussed in 10, we are able to replay a real­world event stream with the use
of the Artifact Emulator.
As depicted by Figure 10.8, the test setup consists of an Engine Worker instance, an Ag­
gregator Agent, the Artifact Emulator, the front­end application and the Supervisor mod­
ule, which is responsible for the orchestration of different system components.
In the test scenario, by using the front­end application, we created one E­GSM engine
instance of the introduced transportation process (Figure 10.9), and also created an Ag­
gregation Job, which aims to detect deviations of the engine in real­time.
After that, we configured the Artifact Emulator to publish to the engine­specific topic so
as to attach the engine to a specified Truck. Following that, it will replay the event stream
recorded from the SMARTifact demo: in the first scenario, the compliant, and in the sec­
ond scenario, the non­compliant one.
Improving Artifact­driven Process Monitoring by Aggregating Smart Object Measurements
65
==PAGE:74==
MQTT 
Broker
Engine
Worker
Aggregation
Agent
Event Stream
Artifact
Emulator
Supervisor
Front-end
Application
Figure 10.8: Verification test setup
Figure 10.9: Process creation on the front­end
66
Improving Artifact­driven Process Monitoring by Aggregating Smart Object Measurements
==PAGE:75==
When everything was set, we opened the engine details in the front­end application, and
started the Artifact Emulator. We opened both the E­GSM diagram (Figure 10.11) and the
BPMN representation (Figure 10.12). As observed, all activities and events are marked
initially with grey on the BPMN diagram, since they are unopened. As we will observe
later, ’opened’ activities are marked with orange, and ’closed’ ones with green.
Figure 10.10: Process detail view
Figure 10.11: Visualized E­GSM model of the instantiated process
As expected, when we started the event stream from the artifact emulator, we can ob­
serve from the diagram the changes in the engine, and how activities became ’opened’
and ’closed’. In the case of the compliant scenario, we have not seen any deviation repre­
sented on the BPMN diagram, until eventually became ’opened’ and ’closed’ as intended.
On the other hand, when we redo the test with the non­compliant event stream, we saw
deviations on the BPMN diagram (Figure 10.13). As we can see, ’Take Channel Tunnel’
stage has still grey colour, which means that it has not been opened. Therefore, at the
Improving Artifact­driven Process Monitoring by Aggregating Smart Object Measurements
67
==PAGE:76==
Figure 10.12: Visualized BPMN model of the instantiated process (after initialization)
moment the subsequent exclusive block opened, it got ’skipped’ in compliance. It has
been recognized as a Skip deviation by the deviation detection algorithm, and visualized
on the BPMN diagram. In addition, ’Travel in EU’ has not been executed completely be­
fore the ’process­ended’ event. Thus, the ’process­ended’ event became ’outOfOrder’ in
compliance, and marked with the incorrect execution sequence flag.
Figure 10.13: Visualized BPMN model of the instantiated process (non­compliant execu­
tion)
10.3
Information aggregation from E­GSM Engines
In this section, we verify the operation of the introduced E­GSM aggregation features.
As shown in figure 10.6, there is a ’Details’ button assigned to each process type, which
allows us to visualize the processes on a BPMN diagram. The introduced aggregated
measures are determined on per­stage basis, so for each BPMN constructs, we can as­
sign a set of measures as discussed in Chapter 8. The measures are visualized as an
overlay on the BPMN diagram, and appear next to each block when the cursor goes on
the block (Figure 10.14). The overlay box consists of two parts: historical aggregated
data, and real­time aggregated data. The historical data is retrieved from the database,
while the real­time data is retrieved from the corresponding ’Real­time Process Aggrega­
tion’ job if it has been created by the user. Otherwise, for these fields, the front­end will
show ’undefined’.
For verification, we considered two scenarios. In the first one, we deployed 10 process
instances of the reintroduced ’LHR­AMS process’, and wait for them to be terminated.
5 of them have been executed correctly, while the other 5 contain deviations, where the
’TakeChannelTunnel’ activity has been skipped. Therefore, we expect that the ’TakeChan­
nelTunnel’ stage has been skipped 5 times, and it also participated in Skip deviations
as ’skipped activity’ 5 times (Figure 10.14). The same measures are available for other
BPMN constructs as well. For example, the ’Travel in UK’ got opened and executed cor­
68
Improving Artifact­driven Process Monitoring by Aggregating Smart Object Measurements
==PAGE:77==
rectly in each execution, so at the end of process executions it was 10 times ’regular’ and
’onTime’, while not participating in any deviation (Figure 10.15).
Figure 10.14: Historical aggregated measures on BPMN diagram (Take Channel Tunnel)
Figure 10.15: Historical aggregated measures on BPMN diagram (Travel UK)
In the second test scenario, we tested the real­time aggregation features. We created
a ’Real­time Process Aggregation’ job for ’LHR­AMS’ process type, and instantiated the
process 10 times. Similar to the previous scenario, we set up the artifact emulator to
simulate 5 successful and 5 unsuccessful process executions. In this case however, we
stopped the event stream right after the ’Travel in EU’ ­ ’Take a break EU’ loop and not
send the ’process ended’ event in order to keep the processes ongoing, and avoid their
termination. The aggregation job running on an Aggregator Agent calculates the aggre­
gated measures every time a change happens in a process, and similar to the previous
scenario, we are able to visualize these measures. Figure 10.16 and Figure 10.17 de­
picts how the measures are visualized on the front end. As we can see, ’Load Container’
activity is currently ’regular’ and ’onTime’ 10 times, while all other real­time measures are
Improving Artifact­driven Process Monitoring by Aggregating Smart Object Measurements
69
==PAGE:78==
0. At the same time the ’Take Channel Tunnel’ activity is ’regular’ 10 times, ’unopened’
5, ’onTime’ 5 times, and ’skipped’ 5 times. After the previous test scenario, the database
has been reset. Therefore, all historical aggregated measures are 0 at this time.
Figure 10.16: Real­time aggregated measures on BPMN diagram (Load Container)
Figure 10.17: Real­time aggregated measures on BPMN diagram (Take Channel Tunnel)
10.3.1
Stakeholder notification
Finally, we demonstrate the operation of stakeholder notifications. As mentioned, certain
kind of jobs deployed by Aggregation Agents can notify stakeholders. To make validation
and testing easier, we added a real­time notification visualization feature to the front­end,
where notifications appear as a list.
To validate its operation, we created an ’Artifact Unreliability Alert’ job, and drive the sys­
tem into a state by executing faulty process instances, which will send out stakeholder no­
tifications to the artifact owner. On the front­end, we can select the stakeholders whose
70
Improving Artifact­driven Process Monitoring by Aggregating Smart Object Measurements
==PAGE:79==
notifications we would like to receive. After starting the job, we received the expected
notification addressed to the owner of the artifact (Figure 10.18).
Figure 10.18: Real­time notifications on the front­end
Improving Artifact­driven Process Monitoring by Aggregating Smart Object Measurements
71
==PAGE:80==
11
Conclusion
This thesis presented a solution to overcome the most significant limitations of the SMAR­
Tifact platform, and allow more extensive testing and utilization of artifact­driven business
process monitoring. In addition, we presented and implemented a way to detect devi­
ations in E­GSM engines in real­time. Besides this, we introduced a set of aggregated
measures, which can be useful for system operators and stakeholders to improve effi­
ciency and reliability. Last but not least, we presented how we can map E­GSM stages
to BPMN constructs, and how it is possible to enrich BPMN diagram with relevant infor­
mation available in the E­GSM engine.
In this chapter, we answer the research questions we stated in Chapter 4.
11.1
Answers to Research Questions
RQ 1. How can multiple process instances deployed in parallel?
We were able to design a scalable microservice architecture capable of deploying
multiple E­GSM engine instances in parallel. For this, we had to build a software
wrapper around the Engine, and deploy it outside of the smart object. The Event
Router module also had to be modified in order to work with the new system.
RQ 1.1. How is it possible to run the process models out of the smart object (e.g.: on
servers of the process owner)?
Since both the E­GSM Engine and the Event Router module was imple­
mented in JavaScript, they can be deployed on any other platform that
supports Node.Js JavaScript runtime. The corresponding Event Router
will continue to communicate with the Event Processor on the IoT device
through MQTT protocol.
RQ 1.2. Is the current system architecture applicable to address RQ1.1, what architec­
tural changes are necessary?
To deploy the E­GSM engine out of the smart object we had to move out
the Event Router as well and modify it. The Event Router is now deployed
as a part of Engine Worker. Besides this, we added a Supervisor module
which helps to retrieve organized information about the system and about
the deployed engines, in addition, it allows us to send different commands.
RQ 1.3. How can multiple process instances on one device run in parallel?
We investigated the possibilities with containerization, and applications de­
ploying multiple engine instances. Primarily due to resource considera­
tions, we decided to implement parallel deployment inside one applica­
tion. We implemented an Engine Worker application capable of deploying
multiple engines in parallel. This application contains a pool of engines,
which can be created and terminated at any time by outer commands. In
order to receive the appropriate smart object events, an enhanced Event
Router is also included in the Engine Worker application, which has the
same features as the original SMARTifact Event Router, but applies sev­
eral optimizations to reduce network overhead.
72
Improving Artifact­driven Process Monitoring by Aggregating Smart Object Measurements
==PAGE:81==
RQ 1.4. What advantages are expected from parallel process deployment compared to
the currently implemented architecture?
Parallel deployment of E­GSM engines resulted in significant enhance­
ments in hardware resource utilization. The system uses significantly less
memory per engine than SMARTifact did. It also allows us to deploy E­
GSM engines on a server, and not on the IoT device, which is certainly a
more reliable and safer solution.
RQ 1.5. Considering computational resource requirements, robustness, and level of
complicatedness to apply, what software solutions are the best to deploy par­
allel process instances?
The project investigated two options to deploy processes in parallel: de­
ploy engines as containerized applications on the same machine, or en­
capsulate multiple engines into the same application. Both options have
great scalability features and can result in a robust and reliable architec­
ture. Regarding implementation effort, containerization is simpler to imple­
ment, although it has a huge resource overhead. Taking everything into
consideration, we decided to implement an application capable of deploy­
ing multiple engine instances. In addition, to better support scalability, we
designed the application to be deployable as part of a microservice archi­
tecture, and created an application (Supervisor) to help provide overview,
and control the system.
RQ 2. How can aggregate information in real­time from multiple instances of the
same process?
We introduced different types of aggregation measures, which aim to support the
work of stakeholders. The introduced measures help to identify faulty, or malfunc­
tioning artifacts, and find risk factors and inefficiencies in processes.
RQ 2.1. Is it possible to reliably estimate how a process is performing depending on the
aggregated information from different process model instances participating in
the process?
The introduced aggregated measures allow process owners to have a gen­
eral overview of how different process types perform, and which parts of
the processes are participating in deviations on a regular basis. The intro­
duced measures for artifacts are also useful in identifying situations where
an incorrect process execution has a higher risk than usual.
RQ 2.2. What techniques can be applied, and rules can be identified to aggregate in­
formation?
The introduced techniques can be grouped into two main groups: artifact
measures, and process­type measures. Artifact measures aim to aggre­
gate information from different process executions, whose execution in­
volved the artifacts. Using this information supports the execution of sub­
sequent processes. Process­type measures on the other hand, are calcu­
lated for each process type. For each stage in the process, a set of mea­
sures are calculated, which are updated based on the result of different
executions. The aggregated process­type measures can provide useful
insight into how processes are performing, and can help to enhance them.
RQ 2.3. How to handle inconsistencies among process instances?
Improving Artifact­driven Process Monitoring by Aggregating Smart Object Measurements
73
==PAGE:82==
The aggregation takes into account all of them, so the operators will be
able to see major trends about the processes, while unique execution be­
haviours will be also considered in the aggregated measures, but their
weight will be significantly lower.
RQ 2.4. Can the parallel process instances lead to unresolvable uncertainties or other
risk factors decreasing accuracy of observance?
The introduced system handles each process execution individually and
independently, and aggregation features can take into account an arbitrary
number of engines, so parallel execution should not result in any problem.
RQ 3. How can processes monitored by artifact­driven methods visualized based on
the equivalent BPMN model?
We implemented a solution which is capable of mapping an E­GSM status and state
information of each BPMN activity in the corresponding BPMN diagram. We also
managed to map and visualize deviations detected in the E­GSM diagram to the
BPMN diagram.
RQ 3.1. How can e­GSM process model have converted into semantically equivalent
BPMN model?
Since each E­GSM diagram was built based on a reference BPMN model,
we can use the naming conventions applied by the translator software to
find out which E­GSM construct corresponds to which BPMN activity, event
or block. Based on the known mapping criteria, we can update the status of
BPMN constructs based on the state of the corresponding E­GSM stage.
RQ 3.2. Can a BPMN diagram enriched by the information available in the equivalent
e­GSM model in order to provide a full overview of the process state?
• We enriched all BPMN activity, event and gateway by status and state in­
formation retrieved from the corresponding E­GSM construct. In addition,
we could enrich the BPMN diagram with the deviations detected in the
E­GSM diagram, allowing us to represent deviations in the BPMN model.
RQ 3.3. Is it possible to map the state of an e­GSM model to the appropriate state of
an equivalent BPMN diagram?
As we saw in the previous answer, we can directly apply the E­GSM stage
status and state information on the BPMN model. In addition, we can also
add the detected deviations to it.
RQ 3.4. How can detected deviations in process flow visualized, is it possible to enrich
a BPMN diagram by process flow deviations detected by e­GSM?
Deviations detected in the E­GSM model can be visualized on the BPMN
diagram by using flags to signal different kinds of activity conditions, and
using additional arrows which can represent non­intended execution paths.
RQ 3.5. How can a process containing multiple e­GSM instances visualized by showing
aggregated information?
The introduced aggregated features provide measures on a per­stage ba­
sis. So in each E­GSM model, we can assign a set of aggregated mea­
sures to each E­GSM stage. As we saw, we can map E­GSM stages to
BPMN constructs, which allows us to export the aggregated measures as
74
Improving Artifact­driven Process Monitoring by Aggregating Smart Object Measurements
==PAGE:83==
well. This is similar to what we did with the stage status and state informa­
tion. Finally, we can visualize the measures as an overlay on the BPMN
diagram.
RQ 3.6. What front­end technologies, frameworks and libraries are applicable to achieve
the stated goals regarding visualization?
We resolved the visualization of BPMN diagrams with the BPMN­JS library,
which is a feature­rich library, intended to visualize and edit BPMN dia­
grams. It also allows us to visualize components which are not part of the
BPMN definition. For E­GSM diagrams, we used Go­Js general­purpose
library, which was used by the SMARTifact project as well.
Improving Artifact­driven Process Monitoring by Aggregating Smart Object Measurements
75
==PAGE:84==
12
Future works
The project overcame the main limitations of the SMARTifact platform, and introduced
new techniques for information aggregation, deviation detection and E­GSM to BPMN
mapping. However, some topics may require further considerations and enhancements
in order to make the system more usable and attractive for organizations.
As we mentioned in Chapter 6, deviation detection can be enhanced, and its accuracy can
be increased by considering the historical states of the process engines, instead of using
only its momentary status. We discussed where considering historical engine states can
result in significant upgrades, although it has not been used in implementation. Therefore,
the enhancement of the deviation detection algorithm to consider past states is a possible
future work.
Another possible future work is the definition and implementation of further aggregated
measures. The realized system architecture and the implemented ’Job’ superclass in the
Aggregator Agent application allow us to implement new aggregated measures and new
alerting functionalities with relatively small effort. Since the foundations of any aggregation
are already implemented, only the core logic of the new aggregation measures has to be
added.
For deviation detection and E­GSM to BPMN conversion, we did not consider all possible
E­GSM stage types and BPMN constructs. For example, the different types of exceptions
and exception handlings have not been considered. Including further constructs in the
deviation detection algorithm and investigating the E­GSM to BPMN mapping for them
can be a valuable contribution in the future.
Finally, a possible future work regards the implemented architecture. As we discussed,
the implemented architecture utilizes MQTT as a communication channel between differ­
ent software components. Even though the system is performing well, MQTT is mainly
intended for IoT applications and not for the cloud. Our main reason to use MQTT was
the fact that the architecture contains IoT devices as well and we did not want to involve
a second message broker, therefore besides IoT devices, MQTT has been used to com­
municate between other applications as well (workers, supervisors etc.). As a possible
future work, the system can be changed to use a more suitable messaging platform for
communication between software modules, which does not involve IoT devices, while
for IoT devices the MQTT protocol can be kept. A possible solution is Apache Kafka or
RabbitMQ.
76
Improving Artifact­driven Process Monitoring by Aggregating Smart Object Measurements
==PAGE:85==
Bibliography
[1]
Giovanni Meroni. Artifact­Driven Business Process Monitoring: A Novel Approach
to Transparently Monitor Business Processes, Supported by Methods, Tools, and
Real­World Applications. 1st. Springer Publishing Company, Incorporated, 2019.
ISBN: 3030324117.
[2]
Wolf Rogowski and Walter Swoboda. “Business Process Model and Notation”. In:
Management im Gesundheitswesen: Fallstudien, Aufgaben und Lösungen. Ed. by
Wolf Rogowski. Wiesbaden: Springer Fachmedien Wiesbaden, 2020, pp. 159–170.
ISBN: 978­3­658­26982­1. DOI: 10 . 1007 / 978 - 3 - 658 - 26982 - 1 _ 12. URL: https :
//doi.org/10.1007/978-3-658-26982-1_12.
[3]
Marlon Dumas et al. “Introduction to Business Process Management”. In: Funda­
mentals of Business Process Management. Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer Berlin Hei­
delberg, 2018, pp. 1–33. ISBN: 978­3­662­56509­4. DOI: 10.1007/978-3-662-56509-
4_1. URL: https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-662-56509-4_1.
[4]
“Business Process Modelling Foundation”. In: Business Process Management: Con­
cepts, Languages, Architectures. Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer Berlin Heidelberg,
2007, pp. 73–124. ISBN: 978­3­540­73522­9. DOI: 10.1007/978-3-540-73522-9_3.
URL: https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-540-73522-9_3.
[5]
Object Management Group website. URL: https : / / www . omg . org/. (accessed:
16.12.2022).
[6]
Amin Jalali, Petia Wohed, and Chun Ouyang. “Aspect Oriented Business Process
Modelling with Precedence”. In: Business Process Model and Notation. Ed. by Jan
Mendling and Matthias Weidlich. Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer Berlin Heidelberg,
2012, pp. 23–37. ISBN: 978­3­642­33155­8.
[7]
David Cohn and Richard Hull. “Business Artifacts: A Data­centric Approach to Mod­
eling Business Operations and Processes”. In: IEEE Data Eng. Bull. 32 (2009),
pp. 3–9.
[8]
Julius Köpke and Jianwen Su. “Towards Quality­Aware Translations of Activity­
Centric Processes to Guard Stage Milestone”. In: Business Process Management.
Ed. by Marcello La Rosa, Peter Loos, and Oscar Pastor. Cham: Springer Interna­
tional Publishing, 2016, pp. 308–325. ISBN: 978­3­319­45348­4.
[9]
Elio Damaggio, Richard Hull, and Roman Vaculín. “On the Equivalence of Incremen­
tal and Fixpoint Semantics for Business Artifacts with Guard­Stage­Milestone Life­
cycles”. In: Business Process Management. Ed. by Stefanie Rinderle­Ma, Farouk
Toumani, and Karsten Wolf. Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2011,
pp. 396–412. ISBN: 978­3­642­23059­2.
[10]
Simone Cirani et al. Internet of Things. Architectures, Protocols and Standards.
Hoboken, NJ: Wiley, 2019. 408 pp. ISBN: 978­1­119­35967­8.
[11]
Fatima Zahra Chafi, Youssef Fakhri, and Fatima Zahrae Ait Hamou Aadi. “Introduc­
tion to Internet of Things’ Communication Protocols”. In: Advanced Intelligent Sys­
tems for Sustainable Development (AI2SD’2020). Ed. by Janusz Kacprzyk, Valentina
E. Balas, and Mostafa Ezziyyani. Cham: Springer International Publishing, 2022,
pp. 142–150. ISBN: 978­3­030­90639­9.
[12]
Sonja Meyer, Andreas Ruppen, and Carsten Magerkurth. “Internet of Things­Aware
Process Modeling: Integrating IoT Devices as Business Process Resources”. In:
Advanced Information Systems Engineering. Ed. by Camille Salinesi, Moira C. Nor­
Improving Artifact­driven Process Monitoring by Aggregating Smart Object Measurements
77
==PAGE:86==
rie, and Óscar Pastor. Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2013, pp. 84–
98. ISBN: 978­3­642­38709­8.
[13]
Christian Friedow, Maximilian Völker, and Marcin Hewelt. “Integrating IoT Devices
into Business Processes”. In: Advanced Information Systems Engineering Work­
shops. Ed. by Raimundas Matulevičius and Remco Dijkman. Cham: Springer Inter­
national Publishing, 2018, pp. 265–277. ISBN: 978­3­319­92898­2.
[14]
Fenno (Terry) Heath et al. “Barcelona: A Design and Runtime Environment for
Declarative Artifact­Centric BPM”. In: Service­Oriented Computing. Ed. by Samik
Basu et al. Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2013, pp. 705–709. ISBN:
978­3­642­45005­1.
[15]
NodeJs website. URL: https://nodejs.org/en/. (accessed: 17.01.2023).
[16]
Kubernetes website. URL: https://kubernetes.io/. (accessed: 17.01.2023).
[17]
Amazon Elastic Container Service website. URL: https://aws.amazon.com/ecs/.
(accessed: 17.01.2023).
[18]
Sven Weinzierl et al. “Prescriptive Business Process Monitoring for Recommending
Next Best Actions”. In: Lecture Notes in Business Information Processing. Springer
International Publishing, 2020, pp. 193–209. DOI: 10.1007/978-3-030-58638-6_12.
URL: https://doi.org/10.1007%2F978-3-030-58638-6_12.
[19]
Qianlan Liu and Budan Wu. “Prediction of Business Process Outcome Based on
Historical Log”. In: Proceedings of the 10th International Conference on Computer
Modeling and Simulation. ICCMS ’18. Sydney, Australia: Association for Comput­
ing Machinery, 2018, pp. 118–122. ISBN: 9781450363396. DOI: 10.1145/3177457.
3177465. URL: https://doi-org.proxy.findit.cvt.dk/10.1145/3177457.3177465.
[20]
Angular Framework website. URL: https://angular.io/. (accessed: 17.01.2023).
[21]
BPMN­JS framework website. URL: https://bpmn.io/toolkit/bpmn-js/. (accessed:
31.01.2023).
[22]
Amazon Dynamo DB website. URL: https://docs.aws.amazon.com/dynamodb/index.
html. (accessed: 19.01.2023).
[23]
Rabbit MQ website. URL: https://www.rabbitmq.com/. (accessed: 29.12.2022).
[24]
Jest framework website. URL: https://jestjs.io/. (accessed: 21.01.2023).
78
Improving Artifact­driven Process Monitoring by Aggregating Smart Object Measurements
==PAGE:87==
A
Sequence Block Deviation Scenarios
Status
State
Compl.
Status
State
Compl.
Status
State
Compl.
Status
State
Compl.
Status
State
Compl.
0 {e;A;B;f}
Reference
Regular
Closed
OnTime
Regular
Closed
OnTime
Regular
Closed
OnTime
Regular
Closed
OnTime
Regular
Closed
OnTime
1 {e;B;f}
A skipped
Regular
Closed
OnTime
Regular
Closed
OnTime
Regular
Unopened Skipped
Regular
Closed
OutOfOrderRegular
Opened
OnTime
2 {e;A;A;B;f}
A executed twice
Regular
Closed
OnTime
Regular
Closed
OnTime
Regular
Closed
OutOfOrderRegular
Closed
OnTime
Regular
Closed
OnTime
3 {e;B;A;f}
Flow violation (A and B)
Regular
Closed
OnTime
Regular
Closed
OnTime
Regular
Closed
OutOfOrderRegular
Closed
OutOfOrderRegular
Closed
OnTime
4 {e;A;B;A;f}
A repeated after B
Regular
Closed
OnTime
Regular
Closed
OnTime
Regular
Closed
OutOfOrderRegular
Closed
OnTime
Regular
Closed
OnTime
5 {e;B;A;A;f}
A executed after B and A repeated
Regular
Closed
OnTime
Regular
Closed
OnTime
Regular
Closed
OutOfOrderRegular
Closed
OutOfOrderRegular
Closed
OnTime
6 {e;A;A;B;B;f}
A and B repeated
Regular
Closed
OnTime
Regular
Closed
OnTime
Regular
Closed
OutOfOrderRegular
Closed
OutOfOrderRegular
Closed
OnTime
7 {e;A;B;A;B;f}
A and B repeated in sequence
Regular
Closed
OnTime
Regular
Closed
OnTime
Regular
Closed
OutOfOrderRegular
Closed
OutOfOrderRegular
Closed
OnTime
8 {e;f}
Skipping multiple activities
Regular
Closed
OnTime
Regular
Closed
OutOfOrderRegular
Unopened OnTime
Regular
Unopened Skipped
Regular
Opened
OnTime
9 {e;A_s;B;f}
Intermediate stage not finished
Regular
Closed
OnTime
Regular
Closed
OnTime
Regular
Opened
OnTime
Regular
Closed
OutOfOrderRegular
Opened
OnTime
10 {e;A_s;B_s;f}
Multiple activities are not finished
Regular
Closed
OnTime
Regular
Closed
OutOfOrderRegular
Opened
OnTime
Regular
Opened
OutOfOrderRegular
Opened
OnTime
11 {e;f;B}
Sequence violance
Regular
Closed
OnTime
Regular
Closed
OutOfOrderRegular
Unopened Skipped
Regular
Closed
OutOfOrderRegular
Opened
OnTime
12 {e;A_s;B_s;B_e;A_e;B;f}
A and B are overlapped
Regular
Closed
OnTime
Regular
Closed
OnTime
Regular
Closed
OnTime
Regular
Closed
OutOfOrderRegular
Closed
OnTime
13 {e;A_s;B_s;A_e;B_e;B;f}
A and B are partially overlapped
Regular
Closed
OnTime
Regular
Closed
OnTime
Regular
Closed
OnTime
Regular
Closed
OutOfOrderRegular
Closed
OnTime
14 {e;B_s;A_s;A_e;B_e;B;f}
Seq violation & overlapped A&B
Regular
Closed
OnTime
Regular
Closed
OnTime
Regular
Closed
OutOfOrderRegular
Closed
OutOfOrderRegular
Closed
OnTime
15 {e;B_s;A_s;A_e;B_e;B;f}
Seq violation & part.olapped A&B
Regular
Closed
OnTime
Regular
Closed
OnTime
Regular
Closed
OutOfOrderRegular
Closed
OutOfOrderRegular
Closed
OnTime
16 {A_s;e;A_e;B;f}
Start event is overlapped
Regular
Closed
OutOfOrderRegular
Closed
OnTime
Regular
Closed
OutOfOrderRegular
Closed
OnTime
Regular
Closed
OnTime
17 {e;A;B_s;f;B_e}
End event is overlapped
Regular
Closed
OnTime
Regular
Closed
OutOfOrderRegular
Closed
OnTime
Regular
Closed
OnTime
Regular
Closed
OnTime
Execution
Case
S_SEQ
S`_e
S`_f
S_A
S_B
Improving Artifact­driven Process Monitoring by Aggregating Smart Object Measurements
79
==PAGE:88==
B
Parallel Block Deviation Scenarios
Status
State
Compl.
Status
State
Compl.
Status
State
Compl.
Status
State
Compl.
Status
State
Compl.
Status
State
Compl.
Status
State
Compl.
0 {e;A1;A2;B;f}
Reference
Regular
Closed
OnTime
Regular
Closed
OnTime
Regular
Closed
OnTime
Regular
Closed
OnTime
Regular
Closed
OnTime
Regular
Closed
OnTime
Regular
Closed
OnTime
1 {e;B;f}
Skipping Parallel block
Regular
Closed
OnTime
Regular
Closed
OnTime
Regular
Unopened OnTime
Regular
Unopened OnTime
Regular
Unopened Skipped
Regular
Closed
OutOfOrderRegular
Opened
OnTime
2 {e;A1;B;f}
Incomplete Parallel block
Regular
Closed
OnTime
Regular
Closed
OnTime
Regular
Closed
OnTime
Regular
Unopened OnTime
Regular
Opened
OnTime
Regular
Closed
OutOfOrderRegular
Opened
OnTime
3 {e;B;A1;A2;f}
Incorrect block-level sequence
Regular
Closed
OnTime
Regular
Closed
OnTime
Regular
Closed
OnTime
Regular
Closed
OnTime
Regular
Closed
OutOfOrderRegular
Closed
OutOfOrderRegular
Closed
OnTime
4 {A1;A2;B;f}
Incorrect block-level sequence
Regular
Unopened Skipped
Regular
Closed
OnTime
Regular
Closed
OnTime
Regular
Closed
OnTime
Regular
Closed
OutOfOrderRegular
Closed
OnTime
Regular
Opened
OnTime
5 {A1;B;f}
Incorrect block-level sequence
Regular
Unopened Skipped
Regular
Closed
OnTime
Regular
Closed
OnTime
Regular
Unopened OnTime
Regular
Opened
OutOfOrderRegular
Closed
OutOfOrderRegular
Opened
OnTime
6 {e;A1;A2;B;A1;A2;f}
Reexecuting the whole block
Regular
Closed
OnTime
Regular
Closed
OnTime
Regular
Closed
OnTime
Regular
Closed
OnTime
Regular
Closed
OutOfOrderRegular
Closed
OnTime
Regular
Closed
OnTime
7 {e;A1;A2;B;A1;f}
Partially reexecute the block
Regular
Closed
OnTime
Regular
Closed
OnTime
Regular
Closed
OnTime
Regular
Unopened OnTime
Regular
Opened
OutOfOrderRegular
Closed
OnTime
Regular
Opened
OnTime
8 {e;A1;A1;A2;B;f}
Multi-executing of activity
Regular
Closed
OnTime
Regular
Closed
OnTime
Regular
Closed
OutOfOrderRegular
Closed
OnTime
Regular
Closed
OnTime
Regular
Closed
OnTime
Regular
Closed
OnTime
9 {e;A1;A1;B;f}
Missing activity and multi. Ex.
Regular
Closed
OnTime
Regular
Closed
OnTime
Regular
Closed
OutOfOrderRegular
Unopened OnTime
Regular
Opened
OnTime
Regular
Closed
OutOfOrderRegular
Opened
OnTime
10 {e;A1;A2;A1;B;f}
Partially reexecute the block
Regular
Closed
OnTime
Regular
Closed
OnTime
Regular
Closed
OnTime
Regular
Unopened OnTime
Regular
Opened
OutOfOrderRegular
Closed
OutOfOrderRegular
Closed
OnTime
11 {e;A1_s;A2;B;f}
Incomplete execution of one
Regular
Closed
OnTime
Regular
Closed
OnTime
Regular
Opened
OnTime
Regular
Closed
OnTime
Regular
Opened
OnTime
Regular
Closed
OutOfOrderRegular
Opened
OnTime
12 {e;A1_s;A2_s;B;f}
Incomplete exection of multiple
Regular
Closed
OnTime
Regular
Closed
OnTime
Regular
Opened
OnTime
Regular
Opened
OnTime
Regular
Opened
OnTime
Regular
Closed
OutOfOrderRegular
Opened
OnTime
13 {e;A1_s;A2_s;B;f}
Incomplete exection of all
Regular
Closed
OnTime
Regular
Closed
OnTime
Regular
Opened
OnTime
Regular
Opened
OnTime
Regular
Opened
OnTime
Regular
Closed
OutOfOrderRegular
Opened
OnTime
S_B
S_SEQ
Case
Execution
S`_e
S`_f
S_A1
S_A2
S_PAR
80
Improving Artifact­driven Process Monitoring by Aggregating Smart Object Measurements
==PAGE:89==
C
Exclusive Block Deviation Scenarios
Status
State
ComplianceStatus
State
ComplianceStatus
State
ComplianceStatus
State
ComplianceStatus
State
ComplianceStatus
State
ComplianceStatus
State
Compliance
0 {e;A1;B;f}
Reference
Regular
Closed
OnTime
Regular
Closed
OnTime
Regular
Closed
OnTime
Regular
Unopened OnTime
Regular
Closed
OnTime
Regular
Closed
OnTime
Regular
Closed
OnTime
1 {e;B;f}
Skipping exclusive block
Regular
Closed
OnTime
Regular
Closed
OnTime
Regular
Unopened OnTime
Regular
Unopened OnTime
Regular
Unopened Skipped
Regular
Closed
OutOfOrderRegular
Opened
OnTime
2 {e;A1;A2;B;f}
Incorrect executed after correct one
Regular
Closed
OnTime
Regular
Closed
OnTime
Regular
Unopened Skipped
Regular
Closed
OutOfOrderRegular
Opened
OutOfOrderRegular
Closed
OutOfOrderRegular
Opened
OnTime
4 {e;A1;A2;A1;B;f}
Executing Activity twice and undesired activity Regular
Closed
OnTime
Regular
Closed
OnTime
Regular
Closed
OnTime
Regular
Unopened OnTime
Regular
Closed
OutOfOrderRegular
Closed
OnTime
Regular
Closed
OnTime
5 {A1;B;f}
Unsatisfied Fflow guard before block
Regular
Unopened Skipped
Regular
Closed
OnTime
Regular
Closed
OnTime
Regular
Unopened OnTime
Regular
Closed
OutOfOrderRegular
Closed
OnTime
Regular
Opened
OnTime
6 {e;A1;B;A1;f}
Correctly reexecuting exclusive block
Regular
Closed
OnTime
Regular
Closed
OnTime
Regular
Closed
OnTime
Regular
Unopened OnTime
Regular
Closed
OutOfOrderRegular
Closed
OnTime
Regular
Closed
OnTime
7 {e;A1;B;A1;A1;f}
Incorrectly reexecuting exclusive block
Regular
Closed
OnTime
Regular
Closed
OnTime
Regular
Closed
OnTime
Regular
Unopened OnTime
Regular
Closed
OutOfOrderRegular
Closed
OnTime
Regular
Closed
OnTime
8 {e;A2;B;f}
Executing the incorrenct branch
Regular
Closed
OnTime
Regular
Closed
OnTime
Regular
Unopened Skipped
Regular
Closed
OutOfOrderRegular
Opened
OnTime
Regular
Closed
OutOfOrderRegular
Opened
OnTime
9 {e;A1_s;B;f}
Halfly executing the correct branch
Regular
Closed
OnTime
Regular
Closed
OnTime
Regular
Opened
OnTime
Regular
Unopened OnTime
Regular
Opened
OnTime
Regular
Closed
OutOfOrderRegular
Opened
OnTime
10 {e;A2_s;B;f}
Halfly executing an incorrect branch
Regular
Closed
OnTime
Regular
Closed
OnTime
Regular
Unopened Skipped
Regular
Opened
OutOfOrderRegular
Opened
OnTime
Regular
Closed
OutOfOrderRegular
Opened
OnTime
11 {e;A1_s;A2;B;f}
Halfly executing correct branch & incorrect
Regular
Closed
OnTime
Regular
Closed
OnTime
Regular
Opened
OnTime
Regular
Closed
OutOfOrderRegular
Opened
OnTime
Regular
Closed
OutOfOrderRegular
Opened
OnTime
12 {e;A2_s;A1_s;A1_e;B;f}
Halfly executing incorrect & correct
Regular
Closed
OnTime
Regular
Closed
OnTime
Regular
Closed
OnTime
Regular
Opened
OutOfOrderRegular
Closed
OnTime
Regular
Closed
OnTime
Regular
Closed
OnTime
13 {e;A1_s;A2_s;A1_e;B;f}
Executing correct branch & incorrect
Regular
Closed
OnTime
Regular
Closed
OnTime
Regular
Closed
OnTime
Regular
Opened
OutOfOrderRegular
Closed
OnTime
Regular
Closed
OnTime
Regular
Closed
OnTime
14 {e;A1_s;A2_s;A2_e;B;f}
Executing incorrect & correct
Regular
Closed
OnTime
Regular
Closed
OnTime
Regular
Opened
OnTime
Regular
Closed
OutOfOrderRegular
Opened
OnTime
Regular
Closed
OutOfOrderRegular
Opened
OnTime
15 {e;A1_s;A2_s;A2_e;A1_e;B;f}Incorrect executed & correct(overlapping)
Regular
Closed
OnTime
Regular
Closed
OnTime
Regular
Closed
OnTime
Regular
Closed
OutOfOrderRegular
Closed
OnTime
Regular
Closed
OnTime
Regular
Closed
OnTime
16 {e;A1_s;A2_s;A1_e;A2_e;B;f}Incorrect executed & correct(overlapping)
Regular
Closed
OnTime
Regular
Closed
OnTime
Regular
Closed
OnTime
Regular
Closed
OutOfOrderRegular
Closed
OnTime
Regular
Closed
OnTime
Regular
Closed
OnTime
17 {e;A2_s;A1_s;A2_e;A1_e;B;f}Correct executed & incorrect (overlapping)
Regular
Closed
OnTime
Regular
Closed
OnTime
Regular
Closed
OutOfOrderRegular
Closed
OutOfOrderRegular
Closed
OnTime
Regular
Closed
OnTime
Regular
Closed
OnTime
18 {e;A2_s;A1_s;A1_e;A2_e;B;f}Correct executed & incorrect (overlapping)
Regular
Closed
OnTime
Regular
Closed
OnTime
Regular
Closed
OutOfOrderRegular
Closed
OutOfOrderRegular
Closed
OnTime
Regular
Closed
OnTime
Regular
Closed
OnTime
19 {e;A1;B;f}
Overlapped with the subsequent activity
Regular
Closed
OnTime
Regular
Closed
OnTime
Regular
Closed
OnTime
Regular
Unopened OnTime
Regular
Closed
OnTime
Regular
Closed
OutOfOrderRegular
Closed
OnTime
S_B
S_SEQ
Case
Execution
S`_e
S`_f
S_A1
S_A2
S_EXCL
Improving Artifact­driven Process Monitoring by Aggregating Smart Object Measurements
81
==PAGE:90==
D
Inclusive Block Deviation Scenarios
Status
State
ComplianceStatus
State
ComplianceStatus
State
ComplianceStatus
State
ComplianceStatus
State
ComplianceStatus
State
ComplianceStatus
State
Compliance
0 {e;A1;A2;B;f}
Reference 1
Regular
Closed
OnTime
Regular
Closed
OnTime
Regular
Closed
OnTime
Regular
Closed
OnTime
Regular
Closed
OnTime
Regular
Closed
OnTime
Regular
Closed
OnTime
1 {e;B;f}
Skipping inclusive block
Regular
Closed
OnTime
Regular
Closed
OnTime
Regular
Unopened OnTime
Regular
Unopened OnTime
Regular
Unopened Skipped
Regular
Closed
OutOfOrderRegular
Opened
OnTime
2 {e;A1;A1;A2;B;f}
Executing one activity twice
Regular
Closed
OnTime
Regular
Closed
OnTime
Regular
Closed
OutOfOrderRegular
Closed
OnTime
Regular
Closed
OnTime
Regular
Closed
OnTime
Regular
Closed
OnTime
3 {e;A1;B;f}
Not executing a required activity
Regular
Closed
OnTime
Regular
Closed
OnTime
Regular
Closed
OnTime
Regular
Unopened OnTime
Regular
Closed
OnTime
Regular
Closed
OnTime
Regular
Closed
OnTime
4 {a;A1_s;A2;B;f}
Incomplete activity
Regular
Closed
OnTime
Regular
Closed
OnTime
Regular
Opened
OnTime
Regular
Closed
OnTime
Regular
Opened
OnTime
Regular
Closed
OutOfOrderRegular
Opened
OnTime
6 {e;A1;B;f}
Reference 2
Regular
Closed
OnTime
Regular
Closed
OnTime
Regular
Closed
OnTime
Regular
Unopened OnTime
Regular
Closed
OnTime
Regular
Closed
OnTime
Regular
Closed
OnTime
7 {e;A1_s&A2_s;A1_e&A2_e;B;f}
Non-intended branch beside correct one
Regular
Closed
OnTime
Regular
Closed
OnTime
Regular
Closed
OnTime
Regular
Closed
OutOfOrderRegular
Closed
OnTime
Regular
Closed
OnTime
Regular
Closed
OnTime
8 {e;A1;A2;B;f}
Non-intended branch beside the correct onRegular
Closed
OnTime
Regular
Closed
OnTime
Regular
Unopened OnTime
Regular
Closed
OutOfOrderRegular
Opened
OnTime
Regular
Closed
OutOfOrderRegular
Opened
OnTime
9 {e;A1_s;A2_s;A1_e&A2_e;B;f}
Non-intended brach beside the correct oneRegular
Closed
OnTime
Regular
Closed
OnTime
Regular
Closed
OnTime
Regular
Closed
OutOfOrderRegular
Closed
OnTime
Regular
Closed
OnTime
Regular
Closed
OnTime
10 {e;A2;B;f}
Executing only a non-intended branch
Regular
Closed
OnTime
Regular
Closed
OnTime
Regular
Unopened OnTime
Regular
Closed
OutOfOrderRegular
Opened
OnTime
Regular
Closed
OutOfOrderRegular
Closed
OnTime
S_B
S_SEQ
Case
Execution
S`_e
S`_f
S_A1
S_A2
S_INC
82
Improving Artifact­driven Process Monitoring by Aggregating Smart Object Measurements
==PAGE:91==
E
Loop Block Deviation Scenarios
Status
State
ComplianceStatus
State
ComplianceStatus
State
ComplianceStatus
State
ComplianceStatus
State
ComplianceStatus
State
ComplianceStatus
State
ComplianceStatus
State
Compliance
0 {e;A1;B;f}
Reference 1
Regular
Closed
OnTime
Regular
Closed
OnTime
Regular
Closed
OnTime
Regular
Unopened OnTime
Regular
Closed
OnTime
Regular
Closed
OnTime
Regular
Closed
OnTime
Regular
Closed
OnTime
1 {e;A1;A1;B;f}
Double execution of A1
Regular
Closed
OnTime
Regular
Closed
OnTime
Regular
Closed
OutOfOrderRegular
Unopened OnTime
Regular
Closed
OnTime
Regular
Closed
OnTime
Regular
Closed
OnTime
Regular
Closed
OnTime
2 {e;A2;B;f}
Executing A2 without A1
Regular
Closed
OnTime
Regular
Closed
OnTime
Regular
Unopened Skipped
Regular
Closed
OutOfOrderRegular
Opened
OnTime
Regular
Opened
OnTime
Regular
Closed
OutOfOrderRegular
Opened
OnTime
3 {e;B;f}
Skipping the whole Loop Block
Regular
Closed
OnTime
Regular
Closed
OnTime
Regular
Unopened OnTime
Regular
Unopened OnTime
Regular
Unopened Skipped
Regular
Unopened OnTime
Regular
Closed
OutOfOrderRegular
Opened
OnTime
4 {e;A1_s;B;f}
Continue with B after A1 without closing A1
Regular
Closed
OnTime
Regular
Closed
OnTime
Regular
Opened
OnTime
Regular
Unopened OnTime
Regular
Opened
OnTime
Regular
Opened
OnTime
Regular
Closed
OutOfOrderRegular
Opened
OnTime
5 {e;A1;A2;A1;B;f}
Reference 2
Regular
Closed
OnTime
Regular
Closed
OnTime
Regular
Closed
OnTime
Regular
Unopened OnTime
Regular
Closed
OnTime
Regular
Closed
OnTime
Regular
Closed
OnTime
Regular
Closed
OnTime
6 {e;A1_s;A2_s;A1_e;A2_e;A1;B;f}
Starting A2 while executing A1 
Regular
Closed
OnTime
Regular
Closed
OnTime
Regular
Closed
OnTime
Regular
Unopened OnTime
Regular
Closed
OnTime
Regular
Closed
OnTime
Regular
Closed
OnTime
Regular
Closed
OnTime
7 {e;A1_s;A2_s;A2_e;A1_e;A1;B;f}
Starting A2 while executing A1
Regular
Closed
OnTime
Regular
Closed
OnTime
Regular
Closed
OnTime
Regular
Unopened OnTime
Regular
Closed
OnTime
Regular
Closed
OnTime
Regular
Closed
OnTime
Regular
Closed
OnTime
8 {e;A1;A2_s;A1_s;A2_e;A1_e;B;f}
Starting A2 while executing A1
Regular
Closed
OnTime
Regular
Closed
OnTime
Regular
Closed
OutOfOrderRegular
Closed
OnTime
Regular
Closed
OnTime
Regular
Closed
OnTime
Regular
Closed
OnTime
Regular
Closed
OnTime
9 {e;A1;A2_s;A1_s;A1_e;A2_e;B;f}
Starting A2 while executing A1
Regular
Closed
OnTime
Regular
Closed
OnTime
Regular
Closed
OutOfOrderRegular
Closed
OnTime
Regular
Closed
OnTime
Regular
Closed
OnTime
Regular
Closed
OnTime
Regular
Closed
OnTime
10 {e;A1;A2_s;B;f}
Partially executing A2
Regular
Closed
OnTime
Regular
Closed
OnTime
Regular
Closed
OnTime
Regular
Opened
OnTime
Regular
Opened
OnTime
Regular
Opened
OnTime
Regular
Closed
OutOfOrderRegular
Opened
OnTime
11 {e;A1;A2}
One iteration only
Regular
Closed
OnTime
Regular
Unopened OnTime
Regular
Closed
OnTime
Regular
Closed
OnTime
Regular
Opened
OnTime
Regular
Closed
OnTime
Regular
Unopened OnTime
Regular
Opened
OnTime
12 {e;A1;A2;A2}
Multi-execution of A2
Regular
Closed
OnTime
Regular
Unopened OnTime
Regular
Closed
OnTime
Regular
Closed
OutOfOrderRegular
Opened
OnTime
Regular
Closed
OnTime
Regular
Unopened OnTime
Regular
Opened
OnTime
13 {e;A1;A1;A2}
Multi execution of A1
Regular
Closed
OnTime
Regular
Unopened OnTime
Regular
Closed
OutOfOrderRegular
Closed
OnTime
Regular
Opened
OnTime
Regular
Closed
OnTime
Regular
Unopened OnTime
Regular
Opened
OnTime
14 {e;A1;A2_s;}
Incomplete execution of A2
Regular
Closed
OnTime
Regular
Unopened OnTime
Regular
Closed
OnTime
Regular
Opened
OnTime
Regular
Opened
OnTime
Regular
Opened
OnTime
Regular
Unopened OnTime
Regular
Opened
OnTime
15 {e;A1;A2;A2_s}
Incomplete execution of A2 and multi exec
Regular
Closed
OnTime
Regular
Unopened OnTime
Regular
Closed
OnTime
Regular
Opened
OutOfOrderRegular
Opened
OnTime
Regular
Opened
OnTime
Regular
Unopened OnTime
Regular
Opened
OnTime
S_ITE
S_B
S_SEQ
Case
Execution
S`_e
S`_f
S_A1
S_A2
S_LOOP
Improving Artifact­driven Process Monitoring by Aggregating Smart Object Measurements
83
==PAGE:92==
F
BPMN to E­GSM Translation Rules
eGSM
BPMN
e
e
A
S_A
D
DFG1: on A_s
M1: on A_t
S`_e
D
DFG1: on e
M1: on e
Activity
Event
Sequence Block
e
A
f
S`_e
S`_f
S_A
SEQ
D
P
DFG1: on e
PFG1: not S'_e.M1
M1: on e
D
P
DFG1: on f
PFG1: S_B.M1
and not S'_f.M1
M1: on f
D
P
DFG1: on A_s
PFG1: S'_e.M1
and not S_A.M1
M1: on A_t
D
D
DFG1: on e
DFG2: on A_s
M1: if S'_e.M1
and S'_f.M1
and S_A.M1
D
DFG4: on f
A1
A2
Parallel Block
PAR
S_A1
S_A2
D
P
DFG1:
 on A1_s
PFG1: 
not 
S_A1.M1
M1: on A1_t
D
P
DFG1:
 on A2_s
PFG1:
not
S_A2.M1
M1: on A2_t
D
DFG1:
 on A1_s
D
DFG2:
 on A2_s
M1: if 
S_A1.M1
and
S_A2.M1
84
Improving Artifact­driven Process Monitoring by Aggregating Smart Object Measurements
==PAGE:93==
a
b
A1
A2
EXCL
S_A1
S_A2
D
P
DFG1:
 on A1_s
M1: on A1_t
D
P
DFG1:
 on A2_s
M1: on A2_t
D
DFG1:
 on A1_s
D
DFG2:
 on A2_s
M1: if ((
S_A1.M1
and a) or
(S_A2.M
and b)) 
and not
(Active(
S_A1) or
Active(
S_A2))
PFG1: a and
not S_A1.M1
and not
Active(S_A2)
PFG1: b and
not S_A2.M1
and not
Active(S_A1)
a
b
A1
A2
INCL
S_A1
S_A2
D
P
DFG1:
 on A1_s
M1: on A1_t
D
P
DFG1:
 on A2_s
M1: on A2_t
D
DFG1:
 on A1_s
D
DFG2:
 on A2_s
M1: if ((
S_A1.M1
and a) or
(S_A2.M
and b)) 
and not
(Active(
S_A1) or
Active(
S_A2))
PFG1: a
and not 
S_A1.M1
PFG1: b
and not
S_A2.M1
A1
A2
c
b
Exclusive Block
Inclusive Block
Loop Block
Loop
Ite
S_A1
S_A2
D
P
DFG1:
on A1_s
PFG1:
not 
S_A1.M1
M1:
on A1_t
D
P
DFG1:
on A2_s
PFG1: 
S_A1.M1 
and b and
not S_A2.M1
M1:
on A2_t
M2: if
S_A1.M1
and
(S_A2.M1
and b)
M1: if 
S_A1.M1
and c
and not
Active(
S_A2)
D
D
DFG1:
on A2_s
DFG1:
on A1_s
D
D
M1: on
+Ite.M1
DFG1: 
on A1_s
DFG1:
on A2_s
Improving Artifact­driven Process Monitoring by Aggregating Smart Object Measurements
85
==PAGE:94==
G
Activity diagrams
User requests a new 
process instance
on the front-end
Check validity of
Input Data
not valid
valid
process ended
Request
Supervisor to
create new
Process Instance
Search for engine
with the intended
ID of the new
Process 
not 
found
found
Finding a new
Engine Slot
slot found
no free slot found
Select a slot on
the Worker with
the most free slots
Send necessery
data and create
Engine on the
selected Worker
success
error
Create Engine on
the selected
Worker and post to
the 'lifecycle' topic
Pop up notification
about invalid
process ID
Pop up notification
about ID that is
already in use
Sending error
message to front-
end
Sending error
message to front-
end
Pop up notification
about back-end
error
Notify front-end
about successful
operation
Pop up notification
about successful
operation
User requests a new 
Job instance
on the front-end
Check validity of
Input Data
not valid
valid
process ended
Request
Supervisor to
create new Job
Instance
Search for job with
the intended ID of
the new job 
not 
found
found
Finding a new Job
Slot
slot found
no free slot found
Select a slot on
Aggregation Agent
with the most free
slots
Create Job on the
selected
Aggregation Agent
success
error
Job on the
Aggregation Agent
Pop up notification
about invalid job
ID
Pop up notification
about ID that is
already in use
Sending error
message to front-
end
Sending error
message to front-
end
Pop up notification
about back-end
error
Notify front-end
about successful
operation
Pop up notification
about successful
operation
Process Instantiation - high level perspective
Job Instantiation - high level perspective
86
Improving Artifact­driven Process Monitoring by Aggregating Smart Object Measurements
==PAGE:95==
New Process
Engine requested
Check validity of
input data
valid
invalid
Parse E-GSM
model
Parse binding file
Create Engine
Instance
no 
error
error
no
error
error
Register the new
Engine to the
Central Event
Router
process ended
Respond to
request with error
message
Respond to
request with
success message
New Job 
requested
Check validity of
input data
valid
invalid
Parse Job
definition
Create Job
Instance
Register Job to
GroupManager
no 
error
error
no
error
error
process ended
Respond to
request with error
message
Retrieve Process
Group Details from
database
Discover member
Processes
Schedule periodic
tasks
Add member
processes to the
EngineObserver
Respond to
request with
success message
Event triggered 
by 
IoT device
Publish to artifact-
specific topic
Attached Process
Engine receives
the message
Process Engine
reevaluates E-
GSM model
sentries and
updates model
stages
Write Log Entry
into Database
Publish Log Entry
on Engine-specific
topic
stage
attribute
changed
process ended
Process Engine Instantiation - worker level perspective
Job Instantiation - aggregator agent level perspective
IoT device event
Improving Artifact­driven Process Monitoring by Aggregating Smart Object Measurements
87
==PAGE:96==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Richard Petersens Plads, Building 324
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.compute.dtu.dk
