==PAGE:1==
Development of a UX/UI design to 
assess and reduce children’s anxiety in 
the paediatric emergency department
Emilie Kjeldsen
S173847
January 2023 
Department of Applied Mathematics 
and Computer Science
DTU Compute
==PAGE:2==
Approval
This thesis was completed over five months at the Sector of DTU Compute, Depart-
ment of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science, at the Technical University of
Denmark, DTU, in partial fulfilment for the degree Master of Science in Engineering,
MSc Eng.
Emilie Kjeldsen - S173847
Signature
Date
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
Feeling anxious is common for children in the paediatric emergency department
(PED). Uncertainty about their treatment and fear of pain combined with being in a
new, clinical environment typically cause distress and anxiety. If these negative feel-
ings are not addressed, the children’s anxiety may lead to complications during treat-
ment, increased pain perception as well as a negative experience and a bad memory
of being in the PED. The main objective of this thesis is to investigate how a techno-
logical intervention can aid in managing paediatric anxiety. The aim is two fold: 1)
to investigate how anxiety can be assessed with a review of the potential of using
biometric systems and the visual analog scale (VAS) to detect emotional distress and
2) to investigate how anxiety may be reduced in the PED, while the child is waiting for
treatment, and use this knowledge to develop a suitable intervention. Observational
studies and interviews at the PED at Herlev Hospital provided qualitative insights and
a lean, user-centred design approach was followed to build the prototype. The devel-
oped game prototype uses techniques from cognitive behavioural therapy (CBT) and
targets 5-8 year-olds. An informal summative evaluation was done in the PED with 14
children, 7 being in the control group. The children’s anxiety was measured using the
modified Yale Preoperative Anxiety Scale (mYPAS) and the VAS at different points in
time during their stay. Tests in a PED, evaluating the CBT game intervention, the VAS
scale for anxiety and the Empatica E4 wristband, showed promising results in terms
of the feasibility of implementation. The wristband was worn during the whole wait-
ing period in 11/14 children. The game intervention was engaging and appreciated
by children, parents and nurses based on the qualitative data. A 53.9% reduction in
anxiety was seen in the intervention group compared with a 24.6% reduction in the
control group. More controlled tests with more participants are required to establish
the effectiveness of the prototype. The results show that CBT exercises are feasible
to include in a game for children, also in a place as stressful as the PED.
==PAGE:4==
Contents
Abstract
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Acknowledgements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
vi
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Motivation and context
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Background and literature summary
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.3
Problem statement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.4
Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.5
Thesis overview . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2
Background and Related Work
5
2.1
Children’s anxiety in the PED . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
Problem statement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.3
Background: A deeper look into anxiety . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.4
Methods to evaluate anxiety and distress . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.5
Related work on reducing patients’ anxiety . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
3
Methodology
23
3.1
Overall design approach . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
3.2
Methods for collecting insights . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
3.3
Discussion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
4
Problem Exploration
27
4.1
Status quo at Herlev Hospital . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
4.2
Observational studies
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
5
Concept creation
37
5.1
Reducing anxiety with an intervention . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
5.2
Updated problem statement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
5.3
Concept C: The CBT game . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
5.4
Proof of concept 2: Mountain top breathing exercise . . . . . . . . . . .
44
6
Iterations
45
6.1
Iteration 1
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
6.2
Iteration 2
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
6.3
Iteration 3
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
6.4
Iteration 4: The final iteration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
7
Discussion
59
7.1
Was the problem statement answered? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
59
==PAGE:5==
CONTENTS
7.2
Further work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
61
8
Conclusion
62
Bibliography
63
A
Visit and interview at Herlev Hospital
73
B
Shadowing nurses in the paediatric emergency department
77
C
Empathy map
84
D Map of the actors and their relations
85
E
Design Specifications
86
F
Evaluation of biometric modalities
89
G Research process of research question 1
93
H Research process of investigating research question 2
96
I
Related work: Recognising anxiety and stress
99
J
Related work: Reducing anxiety
100
K
VR testing
102
L
Proof of concept testing of breathing exercise
104
M The 5 Whys Technique
107
N Brainstorming session and initial evaluation
108
O Morphology and Pugh Matrix
111
O.1 Morphology chart . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
111
O.2 Pugh Analysis Matrix . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
113
P
CBT game development
114
Q Iteration 1
116
Q.1 Wireframes
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
116
Q.2 Testing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
117
R
Iteration 2
121
R.1
Wireframes
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
121
iv
==PAGE:6==
CONTENTS
R.2
Testing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
123
S
Iteration 3
127
S.1
Wireframes
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
127
S.2
Testing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
130
T
Iteration 4
132
T.1
Wireframes
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
132
T.2
Testing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
132
U How to talk to children who need medical procedures
141
v
==PAGE:7==
Acknowledgements
This report documents the Master Thesis within the study programme MSc Design
and Innovation at The Technical University of Denmark, DTU. The project was carried
out over a period of 20 weeks from August to January.
A special thanks to the following people for their help or guidance throughout the
project:
The paediatric emergency department (Børn- og Ungemodtagelsen) at Herlev Hospi-
tal for their helpfulness during my visits, letting me get an insight into how they work
and allowing me to test my intervention with the children.
Gitte Maria Flyger Würtz and Hanne Konradsen for providing helpful insights through-
out the project.
Thomas Møller Jensen for letting me test my prototype with children at Strandskolen.
The kind people in my network who have either tested my prototype, let me test it
with their children or have in other ways supported me during the project.
My supervisors Per Bækgaard and Michael Deininger, for their guidance, support and
good spirit throughout the project.
==PAGE:8==
1
Introduction
1.1
Motivation and context
Feeling anxious is common for children when stepping into the paediatric emergency
department (PED). They may feel scared or uncertain about what will happen to them
and if it will hurt. Perhaps they are already feeling pain or discomfort and any past
negative experiences may resurface. Additionally, the unfamiliar, clinical environ-
ment in the hospital and their parents’ worry may affect children’s emotional state. It
is essential to recognise and address children’s anxiety as it often has several impli-
cations on their emotional and physical well-being.
The negative emotional state is likely to affect children’s ability to cope with the med-
ical procedures and treatment. As children’s natural defence mechanism kicks in,
they tend to behave in ways that complicate treatment, lead to accidents or prolong
the treatment unnecessarily. Anxiety can also increase children’s perception of pain
and lead to the development of future medical phobias if they have a particularly
negative experience. Children are most vulnerable to this when they are 5-8 years
old, as this is when they are old enough to understand the potential consequences of
being treated in the PED, while not having the competencies yet to control their fear.
Children this age may also be shy or not know how to communicate their anxiety
appropriately.
However, the waiting period in the PED also presents an opportunity to assess the
patients’ emotional state and intervene when necessary. The patients typically spend
3-6 hours waiting for their treatment. During this time, their level of anxiety could be
monitored by collecting and analysing biometric signals. This would make it possible
to know which children need extra attention and to put a treatment plan in place that
would comply with their needs. When children’s anxiety is better understood, it is eas-
ier to reduce it. A variety of strategies can be used to help reduce children’s distress
in the hospital emergency department, including age-appropriate explanations and
preparation, involving children in decision-making and using comforting techniques
such as distraction and relaxation.
1.2
Background and literature summary
1.2.1
Methods to assess anxiety
Emotions are complex and can be difficult to assess accurately. Subjective methods
that use self-reports or objective methods that observe behavioural responses have
been the primary ways of assessing emotions. However, as technology progresses,
==PAGE:9==
CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION
the interest has increased in evaluating emotions by analysing physiological signals,
also referred to as biometric data. Applying technology could provide a time-efficient
and convenient way to gain emotional insight and potentially add a more comprehen-
sive understanding of the individual’s emotions. Utilising biometric insights is poten-
tially less biased by social factors or cultural norms compared with the subjective and
observational methods.
1.2.2
The potential of biometrics
The most accurate biometric systems have reported accuracies above 99% in assess-
ing anxiety, stress or fear. However, these results are currently only achieved in
the lab, and usually require the user to wear multiple non-wearable sensors such
as electroencephalography (EEG) sensors to measure brain activity or electromyog-
raphy (EMG) sensors to measure muscle movement in the face or body. These meth-
ods would, however, be cumbersome to apply and use in a PED setting. However,
wearable systems that apply machine learning algorithms have also shown promis-
ing results with accuracies above 70% in the lab [1][2][3][4] and in the wild [5][6][7].
However, these studies have looked at stress, performance anxiety and fear and have
only included participants above the age of 16 years old. There is therefore a gap in
the literature in terms of studies including children and in assessing hospital-related
anxiety using biometrics.
1.2.3
Reducing anxiety in the PED
From the literature review and desk research, 6 categories of methods to reduce anxi-
ety emerged: preparation, involvement, relaxation techniques, support systems, play
and distraction as well as complementary therapies. Many studies investigate play
and distraction via games, videos or VR interventions, often with significant results
in reducing paediatric anxiety in medical settings. Utilising emotional support sys-
tems can also effectively calm the child, and new ways of doing so include the use of
social robots. Relaxation techniques, such as those commonly used in cognitive be-
havioural therapy (CBT), e.g. deep breathing or progressive muscle relaxation, have
also shown promising results in calming patients. Preparation and involvement were
also important factors in reducing anxiety, however, applying these in the right way
is essential as some children get more anxious if they are given too much informa-
tion or control. However, most of the studies found were conducted at the paediatric
dentist or tested with hospitalised children. Therefore, more studies carried out in
the PED environment to investigate which interventions are feasible and effective in
reducing children’s anxiety are needed.
2
==PAGE:10==
CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION
1.3
Problem statement
Assessing and reducing anxiety in the PED is important for the children’s care as well
as their emotional and physical well-being. For the anxious patient to have a good
experience of being in the PED, it is important to both assess it early and accurately
and apply appropriate methods to reduce it. However, currently, there is not a clear
focus on assessing anxiety in the PED. There is also room for improvement in finding
methods that effectively reduce children’s anxiety thus helping them to cope with
their treatment and distress.
This thesis will therefore investigate the problem statement:
How can a technological intervention aid in managing paediatric anxiety?
As well as the sub-questions:
• What potential do biometric systems have in assessing anxiety in the PED?
• How can a digital intervention be developed to reduce paediatric anxiety?
To get an understanding of the problem and opportunities, insights were collected
through interviews and observational studies. Throughout the development of the
prototype, think-aloud tests, observational tests, objective evaluations and a design
review were carried out to gain new insights. These methods were all supported
by continuous desktop research and followed design methodologies and principles
described in section 3. The research process is described in G and H.
Scope
The target group were children in the age group 5-7 and focus was to add value during
the waiting time before their treatment, examination or procedure. While methods
to use biometrics were theoretically investigated, the steps to collect, analyse and
visualise biometric data was not within the scope of this project.
1.4
Results
This thesis provides:
• An analysis of the problem, limitations and opportunities identified in the PED.
• A developed prototype of a game intervention, which children can use in the
PED, that engages them in CBT relaxation techniques to reduce their anxiety
prior to treatment.
• A feasibility test of implementing an E4 wristband in the PED and using VAS for
3
==PAGE:11==
CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION
self-reporting anxiety, both with promising results.
• Test results indicating feasibility of implementing a CBT game intervention in
the PED, with indications of high engagement and reduced anxiety.
1.5
Thesis overview
Chapter 2 gives the necessary background information and lays the foundation for
the rest of the paper with a literature review of anxiety assessment tools and methods
to reduce anxiety.
Chapter 3 describes the methodology used to tackle the problem and discusses the
chosen design approaches and methods.
Chapter 4 goes in-depth with the problem and includes interviews with nurses and
observational studies from the paediatric emergency department of Herlev Hospital.
Chapter 5 describes the concept creation process, design considerations and meth-
ods used. The knowledge collected in chapter 2 and chapter 4 is utilised here.
Chapter 6 goes through the four iterations, what was built, how it was tested and
what insights were obtained in the process. In the end, further work to be done on
the prototype was suggested.
Chapters 7 and 8 discuss the results of the project and round up the paper with a con-
clusion and a further work section that proposes how to further improve the concept
and implement it in the PED.
4
==PAGE:12==
2
Background and Related Work
This chapter sets the stage for the project work presented in the remainder of the
thesis by providing the necessary background and context. The chapter begins by
illustrating the motivation behind addressing paediatric anxiety and goes on to de-
scribe the goal of this thesis. The chapter then describes anxiety more in depth and
covers methods to measure it. The physiological and behavioural manifestations of
anxiety are described and a review of prior work done to assess and reducing anxiety
is provided. Finally, the chapter addresses gaps in the literature and describes the
contributions of this paper.
2.1
Children's anxiety in the PED
Fear and anxiety are common and normal feelings for children in the paediatric emer-
gency department. However, negative feelings can become a problem when they
lead to unwanted outcomes or are out of proportion to the situation. The causes of
anxiety can be many; being unsure or confused about what will happen, fearing the
pain and the procedures and the unfamiliar environment. In a Finnish study of 90
children aged 4-6, more than 90% of them said they were afraid of at least one thing
in a hospital. The majority, about 60% of the children, said they were afraid of pain,
while more than 20% expressed fear of the medical instruments and fear due to lack
of information. Children who had been at the hospital before reported more fear
than those who had no prior experience [8].
Implications of paediatric anxiety
It is important to recognise and address children’s anxiety in the hospital emergency
department, as it is likely to affect their ability to cope with medical procedures and
impact their overall physical and emotional well-being. Apart from anxiety and dis-
tress being uncomfortable feelings on their own, these emotions often make it dif-
ficult for children to follow instructions and cooperate thus complicating their treat-
ment. Children often show anxiety through regression in their behaviour, withdrawal
or fleeing, clinging to their caregivers and using aggression like pushing or kicking
[9][10]. When nurses and doctors try to treat an anxious child, the unwanted be-
haviours can lead to accidents and prolong the procedure [10][8]. This will in turn
extend the waiting time, which has been shown to further increase anxiety and re-
quire a higher usage of sedative drugs [11]. Anxiety has also been shown to increase
the perception of pain and affect pain memory [12][13] [14][15]. A study by Noel et
al. from 2012 concluded that children with higher state anxiety (situational anxiety)
had more negative pain memories. Furthermore, anxiety sensitivity was a significant
==PAGE:13==
CHAPTER 2. BACKGROUND AND RELATED WORK
predictor of recalled pain-related fear over and above other well-established factors
[12].
Anxiolytic medication, such as benzodiazepines and nitric oxide, is sometimes used to
calm down anxiety. These drugs induce drowsiness and cause a temporary inability
to create new memories [16][17]. However, pharmacological interventions may not
be appropriate for all children and may have side effects. In some cases, when anxiety
makes the child too uncooperative, the medical staff may decide to restrain them.
This practice has led to controversy due to the ethical issues it entails. It poses a risk
of traumatising children and may lead them to carry medical phobias into their adult
life [18][19][20][21].
Paediatric anxiety and its related problems have been known for decades, yet the
patients’ anxiety often goes unaddressed or is managed in sub-optimal ways. Imple-
menting a method to better assess and reduce anxiety could give children a more
positive hospital experience [10].
2.2
Problem statement
The goal of this thesis is to address the problem of paediatric anxiety, with the prob-
lem statement:
How can a technological intervention aid in managing paediatric anxiety?
To answer this, the following sub-questions are investigated:
• What potential do biometric systems have in assessing anxiety in the PED?
• How can a digital intervention be developed to reduce paediatric anxiety?
As the paediatric emergency departments often have long waits, the opportunity was
identified to intervene during this period to minimise the anxiety. Having an anxiety
score in the PED was assumed to make the patients’ anxiety more tangible and in-
crease the efforts in preventing and reducing it. Additionally, assessing anxiety with
a biometric system might have the benefits of being a less biased, and thus more
objective method.
2.3
Background: A deeper look into anxiety
This section defines anxiety in the context of this paper and describes the main as-
pects of how it affects our psychology, physiology and behaviour. The purpose is to
provide background for the later sections that review biometric systems and inter-
ventions to reduce anxiety.
6
==PAGE:14==
CHAPTER 2. BACKGROUND AND RELATED WORK
Defining anxiety
The emotions fear and anxiety are multi-dimensional states as they affect our psy-
chology, physiology and behaviour when we face a threat to our survival or well-being
[22]. Although many definitions of anxiety exist, it is generally described as feelings
of tension, worried, fearful thoughts, and heightened activity of the autonomic ner-
vous system (ANS) [23]. When referring to anxiety, there are two main types as de-
scribed by psychologist Charles D. Spielberg: trait anxiety and state anxiety [24][25].
Whereas state anxiety is situational and temporary, trait anxiety or anxiety disorder
refers to a persistent and recurring tendency to worry, which often inhibits the per-
son’s day-to-day life [26]. As this project focuses on children’s situational distress,
the term ‘anxiety’ will exclusively refer to state anxiety. Additionally, as anxiety, fear
and distress are closely related in their physiological implications, the terms are used
interchangeably throughout the report [27].
Emotions are commonly described using the Circumplex Model, shown in Figure 2.1.
Valence describes how pleasant or unpleasant a sensation is, whereas arousal charac-
terises the intensity of the cognitive stimulation, with low arousal being passive, and
high arousal being active. A third dimension of approach–avoidance may be useful
to include to distinguish fear (avoidance) from anger (appraoch). When mapping fear
on these dimensions, fear and anxiety are mostly in the low valence, high arousal and
avoidance-motivated space [28].
7
==PAGE:15==
CHAPTER 2. BACKGROUND AND RELATED WORK
Figure 2.1: The 2-dimensional valence-arousal map with emotions
[29].
2.4
Methods to evaluate anxiety and distress
Historically, anxiety and distress have primarily been assessed either by using subjec-
tive methods that rely on the individual self-reporting emotions or objective methods
relying on observations of the individual’s behaviour. The strength of these methods
is that they have been validated and used in research and clinical practice for decades.
Weaknesses are the time demand and resources needed to collect and analyse the
responses and the social biases linked to them. The most commonly used self-report
and observational scales to assess state anxiety include:
• The state-trait anxiety inventory (STAI) by Spielberger; STAIC being the version
used in children [30].
• The Venham Picture Test (VPT); a visual scale to assess situational distress in
children showing different emotions with cartoon images [31].
• The children’s fear scale (CFS); A visual 5-point scale with illustrations of faces.
• The modified Yale Preoperative Anxiety Scale (mYPAS); for assessing children’s
anxiety at different timestamps while waiting for surgery [32].
8
==PAGE:16==
CHAPTER 2. BACKGROUND AND RELATED WORK
• The Self-Assessment Manikin (SAM); a visual method used to assess various
emotions using the pleasure, arousal, and dominance dimensions [33].
• Subjective Units of Distress Scale (SUDS); a visual ”feelings thermometer” rang-
ing from 0 – “no distress” to 10 – “extreme distress” [34].
The potential of biometric systems
With the advancement in technology, objective methods to evaluate emotions from
physiological signals, or biometrics, have become increasingly interesting. Applying
technology could provide insight into the individual’s emotions, without the need to
spend lots of time collecting lengthy self-reports or behavioural analyses. Although
subjective methods provide valuable insight into the individual’s subjective experi-
ence, they may be influenced by factors such as social desirability bias and may not
always correlate with observable behaviours or physiological responses. Additionally,
observational studies may be biased by social factors or cultural norms. Evaluating
emotions from physiological signals analysed with machine learning or deep learning
algorithms could have the potential of providing a more comprehensive and objec-
tive understanding of distress and anxiety in a time-efficient manner [35].
How anxiety is reflected in our physiology and and behaviour
To assess emotions from physiological signals, it is essential to understand how fear
and anxiety are manifested in the body. Here, the ANS plays an essential role. The
ANS has a sympathetic branch linked to activation (fight or flight), and a parasympa-
thetic branch associated with relaxation (rest and digest). The ANS controls bodily
functions accordingly such as attention, effort, digestion and illness – the latter being
important to keep in mind when designing an anxiety-score system for the PED [28].
When we perceive a thread the sympathetic nervous system activates to enhance our
capabilities of managing the situation. The problem is that children are inclined to
perceive the thread as more serious than it is due to their inexperience and imagina-
tion, which in turn reflects in their actions with behaviours such as fleeing, freezing,
seeking comfort, fidgeting, crying, screaming or kicking.
Measuring physiological changes
Nine main ways anxiety affects our physiology and behaviours, and how they are com-
monly measured were identified during research and are described in the following
paragraph. They are also visualised in Figure 2.2.
9
==PAGE:17==
CHAPTER 2. BACKGROUND AND RELATED WORK
Biometric 
measures for 
assessing 
anxiety
Respiration
Pupil dilation
Gaze and pupil dilation
Blinking patterns
Brain activity
Hormonal measures
Cortisol level
Amylase levels
Respiration rate
Tidal volume
Posture and facial expressions
Eye gaze behaviour
Voice measures
Volume
Pitch
Rate
Heart measures
Skin conductance (SC)
Blood pressure
Heart rate variability (HRV)
Heart Rate (HR)
Figure 2.2: Primary physiological functions to identify fear or anxiety from ANS activ-
ity.
• Heart rate: Anxiety is known to increase heart rate (HR) and decrease heart
rate variability (HRV). HRV refers to the variation in the time interval between
heartbeats. It has been closely linked to arousal and parasympathetic activity,
making it interesting to use to monitor emotions. Additionally, sensors are non-
intrusive, small and cheap and the software for data analysis has become au-
tomated. Increased HR is often seen in high arousal emotions and changes in
heart rate can be monitored using devices such as electrocardiography (ECG) or
Photoplethysmography (PPG) technology [28][36].
• Blood pressure: Anxiety is shown to increase blood pressure (BP) [27]. BP can
be monitored using devices such as sphygmomanometers or automated blood
pressure monitors.
• Skin conductance: Anxiety also can manifest itself in an increased electroder-
mal activity (EDA)/skin conductance (SC) referring to the ability of the skin to
conduct electricity. Increased SC is often seen in high arousal emotions and
can be measured using galvanic skin response (GSR) sensors. A study of chil-
dren’s anxiety in a dental clinic, indicate that measuring SC is useful to assess
anxiety in children despite their lower sweat production [37].
• Gaze and pupil measures: Pupil changes are known to be related to emotional
reactions. For example, pupil dilation has been coupled with activation of the
10
==PAGE:18==
CHAPTER 2. BACKGROUND AND RELATED WORK
sympathetic nervous system, however, the relationship is complex since pupil
dilation is also related to cognitive processing load and and light exposure. Pupil
changes can be measured using techniques such as pupillometry [38]. Anxiety
can also alter gaze behaviour and blinking rate, which can be detected using
eye tracking [27].
• Voice measures: Anxiety can affect vocal characteristics such as pitch, inten-
sity and rate. These changes can be measured from voice analysis and speech
recognition software [shuller][39].
• Posture and facial expressions: As mentioned previously, anxiety is often re-
flected in changes in the individual’s posture, movement and facial expressions.
Video analysis tools can detect changes in movement and facial features while
electromyography (EMG) can reveal changes in muscle activity [40]. Similar to
verbal expressions, posture and face expressions are dependent on personality,
and social and cultural norms [41].
• Respiration: A higher respiratory rate (RR) due to a decreased respiration depth
is also reported in anxious individuals. Respiration can be monitored by using a
respiratory band, a spirometer or a microphone that is placed close to the nose
and mouth area [42].
• Brain activity: Anxiety and fear lead to changes in the brain activity typically
measured using electroencephalography (EEG) sensors or functional magnetic
resonance imaging (fMRI) [43]. Hormonal changes: An increase in the levels of
the hormones cortisol and amalyse is also linked to a stress or anxiety response.
Cortisol levels can be measured from saliva test [44].
Although the modalities are listed individually, it is well established in the literature
that multimodal systems outperform unimodal systems in terms of accuracy and that
giving context to the data further increases accuracy [45][46]. Particularly in real-
life situations, outside of the controlled lab setting, many interfering signals would
threaten the accuracy of a unimodal system. Using a multimodal system should be
prioritised to give a more representative assessment of the individual’s emotions. To
determine anxiety from these signals, it is as mentioned, necessary to pre-process the
raw physiological signals and apply an appropriate classifying algorithm for accurate
emotion recognition. A visualisation of the way emotions can be recognised from
physiological signals and analysis is shown in Figure 2.3.
11
==PAGE:19==
CHAPTER 2. BACKGROUND AND RELATED WORK
Figure 2.3: Emotion recognition process using biological signals from wearable de-
vices and classifying algorithms. The figure is from Saganowski et al. [47].
Evaluating biometric modalities
The next step was assessing the biometric modalities’ degree of usefulness and fea-
sibility in the paediatric department to narrow down the solution space. The design
specification, created after interviewing and observational studies of the PED, was
used to screen the modalities on their strengths and weaknesses in the PED con-
text. The design specification is displayed in E and the evaluation is shown in Table
F. A major weakness and uncertainty of all of the modalities is the effect illness in
paediatric patients has on the accuracy of the anxiety evaluation. As diseases alter
the ANS responses in many of the same ways emotions do, this is likely to interfere
with the accuracy of an anxiety monitoring system. Posture, facial expressions, voice
measures and EEG data may be less affected by physical illness, but it is still a factor
that needs testing. For the modalities that track facial expressions, posture and eye
activity, a weakness is the difficulty of tracking anxiety continuously and at different
locations in the PED, e.g. in the triage room, common waiting room and private wait-
ing room. Recording video and voice data may also feel like an invasion of privacy
to the patients or their parents. Using eeg sensors and emg sensors would presum-
12
==PAGE:20==
CHAPTER 2. BACKGROUND AND RELATED WORK
ably be too intrusive and uncomfortable, especially considering that many paediatric
patients are already in a vulnerable, anxiety-provoking situation.
The requirements deemed most important in the screening process were: monitor-
ing at multiple points in time, using a multimodal system for increased accuracy, con-
venience and time-efficiency for the medical personnel, not complicating treatment,
comfort for the patient and the possibility of monitoring both in the triage room and
in the waiting room. For this reason, the biometric modalities deemed to be most
promising to go further with was a wearable device to measure HR, HRV, SC, respi-
ration rate (RR) and skin temperature (ST). A multimodal wristband or chest device
using ECG or PPG sensors and SC sensors would additionally both be widely available
and relatively inexpensive.
Related work of assessing anxiety with biometric systems
This section investigates what has previously been done to assess anxiety from the
biosignals HR, HRV, SC, RR and ST. Promising results have been achieved in a study by
De Santos Sierra et al. showed a 99.5% accuracy in detecting stress in 80 participants
from measuring SC and HR collected by an ECG sensor in only 10 seconds [48]. A
study by Oh S. et al. showed an accuracy of 95.8% for fear detection specifically, from
HR and respiration signals using convolutional neural networks (CNN) [46]. Many
studies that have achieved high accuracies have, however, used cabled systems and
cumbersome devices that would likely be too inconvenient to use in the PED. The
potential of using wearable biometric systems was therefore investigated with the
research question:
What has been done to assess feelings of distress using a wearable system that
collects and analyses physiological signals?
An accuracy above 75% in recognising distress in terms of low valence and high arousal
was deemed acceptable. 7 studies were left after the screening. The research fol-
lowed the Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic reviews and Meta-Analyses (PRISMA)
guidelines. The research and filtering process and eligibility criteria are displayed
in appendix G. The 7 studies and their characteristics are displayed in Figure 2.4.
Whereas some studies are performed in real-life settings, others use a lab setting
and invoke emotions with tasks, videos or other means.
Assessing stress and anxiety in the lab
Zhao et al. built a wearable system for detecting valence and arousal from physiolog-
ical signals as 15 participants watched different video clips. The wristband Empatica
E4 was used, which measures HR, HRV (using PPG), electrodermal activity and skin
13
==PAGE:21==
CHAPTER 2. BACKGROUND AND RELATED WORK
temperature. 4 classification algorithms were tested, with an average accuracy of
75.6 % in measuring valence and arousal [1]. A study carried out by Montesinos et al.
similarly measured emotions while showing horror clips giving an average accuracy
of 83.7% in the single-user model but only a 68.5 % average accuracy in the multi-
user using the E4 wristband [2]. Masino et al. aimed to detect stress in a group of 22
autistic children and 38 non-autistic children who carried out stress tasks. The study
used an ECG chest strap, achieving an accuracy of 93% on stress detection [3].
Assessing stress and anxiety in the wild
A real-life stress measuring system using the E4 wristband was tested by Can et
al. achieving an average accuracy of 90.4% [6]. The study took place at a 3-day
high school algorithmic programming contest and included 30 participants. Another
stress detection system tested in a real-life scenario was tested by Han et al. with an
average accuracy of 81.8% [7]. This study used both a Shimmer3 device and the E4
and included 17 participants. The studies additionally show that the context-based
classifiers perform significantly better than the no-context classifiers and that multi-
user methods, that are transferable to other users, are less accurate than single-user
methods.
14
==PAGE:22==
CHAPTER 2. BACKGROUND AND RELATED WORK
Figure 2.4: Studies investigating the accuracy of wearable systems in detecting anxi-
ety, stress or fear. The full table is shown in Appendix I.
15
==PAGE:23==
CHAPTER 2. BACKGROUND AND RELATED WORK
Discussion
During the research, it was found that the number of studies investigating stress
by far exceeded the number of studies looking at state anxiety. However, as both
states are defined as high arousal, and low valence, and have the same physiologi-
cal responses, studies detecting stress were included in the review [49]. Only a few
studies were encountered that assessed anxiety or stress in children from physio-
logical signals, and these looked at high school students or children with autism or
generalised anxiety disorder. Although the baseline ANS activity differs somewhat
in neurodivergent individuals, these studies were included as long as they detected
situational distress.
Although the studies achieve promising accuracy scores above 75%, several aspects
should be taken into consideration. The studies are not done in clinical care settings
where the patients may be affected by illness, fever or other physiological stressors,
which is likely to influence the accuracy of an emotion recognition device. Addition-
ally, the datasets are predominantly tested with and built for adult users and the
sample sizes are below 50, which limits their generalisability and increases the risk of
bias. The literature is scarce when it concerns healthcare settings and studies with
children or young adults. The studies furthermore investigate anxiety and stress re-
lated to public speaking, cognitive tasks or reacting to typically fear-provoking content
such as horror movies. The emotions these activities provoke would be in the low-
valence, high-arousal, avoidance space, however, it is uncertain how accurately these
datasets can represent paediatric anxiety. Additionally, only a few studies were con-
ducted in real-life scenarios. Still, the results indicate that wearable systems show
potential, especially with the gradual improvement in machine learning algorithms
and improved sensors in wearable devices. A gap in the research exists that aim to
assess state anxiety and distress with a wearable system in real-time, in children with
no diagnosis. A first step could be to assess if children in the PED are willing to wear
a wearable device during their wait.
2.5
Related work on reducing patients' anxiety
This section investigates what has previously been done to reduce anxiety in health-
care settings. An initial broader search was carried out to first uncover how paediatric
anxiety is managed overall. Next, to gain an understanding of what has been done to
reduce state anxiety in healthcare settings, the area was similarly researched using
the PRISMA guidelines with the research question:
What has previously been done to reduce children’s distress with a non-medical
digital intervention in healthcare settings?
16
==PAGE:24==
CHAPTER 2. BACKGROUND AND RELATED WORK
The interventions found during this process are shown in Appendix J. Other inter-
ventions were also identified from Region H’s online resource Playpedia and general
desk research. An overview of identified types of anxiety-reducing interventions is
shown in Figure 2.5. 4 main categories of methods or principles to reduce anxiety
emerged from the research: preparation, mindful relaxation, emotional support and
play and distraction. This section describes each technique and provides examples
of interventions that put them into use.
How can anxiety be reduced 
prior to a medical procedure?
Complementary interventions
Biofeedback
Play & distraction
Preparation and Involvement
Aromatherapy (e.g. lavender)
Familiarise child with tools used (systematic desensitization)
Explain each steps of procedure (e.g. tell-​show-​do)
Passive
Active / interactive
Music or nature sounds
Playing a videogame
Drawing
Playing
Video/movies
Animal-​therapy
Social robot
Toys and teddy bears
Looking at soap bubbles
Music
Peaceful and friendly decorations
Storytelling
Hospital clowns
Breathing exercises
Progressive Muscle relaxation
Considering the child's wants and needs
Mindful relaxation and CBT
Blowing soap bubbles
Guided imagery
Cognitive restructuring
Hypnotherapy
Yoga
Modelling (e.g. showing a video of a cooperative patient)
Meditation
Emotional support
Shared decision making (SDM) with child
Teddy bear
Social robots
Child-​life specialists
Involve parents
Balloon artists
Figure 2.5: Interventions identified for reducing anxiety in medical settings.
Emotional support
It can be helpful to involve family members or other trusted individuals in the child’s
care, or in other ways provide emotional support. A stuffed toy can also have a sig-
nificantly supportive role to children during their hospital visit [50]. An approach to a
non-human intervention for emotional support has been taken by the Massachusetts
Institute of Technology by creating Huggable; a social robot created to mitigate stress,
anxiety and pain in paediatric patients. This is done by engaging them in playful in-
teractive activities. A child life specialist operates the bear remotely while talking
through it, however, the aim is for Huggable to work independently using artificial
intelligence. Compared with a regular stuffed toy or a digital avatar, greater levels of
17
==PAGE:25==
CHAPTER 2. BACKGROUND AND RELATED WORK
engagement, joyfulness and agreeableness were achieved when children interacted
with Huggable [51].
Figure 2.6: Huggable, a social robot.
A study from 2016 has similarly looked into the calming effects of a stuffed social
robot, which they have named The Haptic Creature. The robot, shown in Figure 2.7,
utilises affective touch as it is able to sense a user’s touch on its entire body and
expresses itself by purring, stiffening its ears and simulating breathing. The idea is
based on the many mental health benefits reported of interacting with an animal, e.g.
in animal-assisted therapy. When the participants stroked the robot while it breathed,
their heart and respiration rates significantly decreased and they also reported them-
selves as happier and calmer.
Figure 2.7: The Haptic Creature, a social robot.
Preparation and involvement
It is essential to communicate to children what is going to happen in a way that is
understandable and relatable to their age, developmental level and preferences. A
higher degree of anxiety is often observed among children with the least familiar-
ity with medical procedures and instruments [52]. Using simple, concrete language
and visual aids, and letting the child familiarise themselves with the tools makes the
18
==PAGE:26==
CHAPTER 2. BACKGROUND AND RELATED WORK
procedure more predictable reducing the child’s anxiety. However, some children,
especially preschoolers get more anxious when knowing too many details of their
treatment [53][54].
Children may also feel less anxious if they are provided with a sense of control and
the opportunity to participate appropriately in decisions about their treatment. A
Swedish study highlights that children should be given a voice to influence their treat-
ment, as they are often competent in describing how they feel and what they need to
cope with the situation. Some children prefer to look while having a blood test e.g.,
while others prefer not to. Creating a plan with the children that fit their individual
needs is essential [55].
An interventions that aim to prepare children for their treatment is ”Rumle til Blod-
prøvetagning” where they can accompany Rumle when he has a blood test taken [56].
The app is interactive with animated characters that show what will happen, why the
blood test es necessary and what Rumle can do to feel better, e.g sit on the lap of a
parent.
Figure 2.8: Preparing for a blood test with Rumle [56].
Mindful relaxation
Teaching children mindful relaxation techniques can help them manage their anxiety
in the hospital. The techniques recommended by psychologists, therapists and med-
ical professionals include relaxation techniques also used in Cognitive-behavioural
therapy (CBT). CBT is the most widely used evidence-based intervention for treating
anxiety and phobias [57]. CBT is based on the concept that our thoughts, feelings, ac-
tions and physical sensations are interrelated – influencing one parameter can then
19
==PAGE:27==
CHAPTER 2. BACKGROUND AND RELATED WORK
both negatively and positively affect the others. The term mindfulness defines the
practice of gently focusing one’s awareness on the present moment. The relaxation
practises reduces momentary stress and anxiety by activating the parasympathetic
nervous system [58][toussanit][59]. Common techniques include:
• Diaphragmatic and paced breathing (e.g. box breathing): This technique in-
volves taking slow, deep breaths to help the person relax and reduce stress
and anxiety in the moment. [60][61][62].
• Progressive muscle relaxation (PMR): This technique involves tensing and relax-
ing different muscle groups in the body to help the person relax and reduce
muscle tension [59][63][Liu].
• Guided imagery: This technique involves using the imagination to create posi-
tive mental images to ease anxiety, e.g. thinking of a safe place [64].
• Biofeedback training: Uses electronic devices to measure and provide informa-
tion about a person’s physiological functions, such as heart rate or muscle ten-
sion. The goal of biofeedback is to help people become more aware of their
body’s signals, so they learn to manage them and reduce e.g. anxiety or stress
[65].
• Hypnotherapy or self-hypnosis: Helps the person relax and enter a state of hyp-
nosis in which they are more receptive to positive suggestions or affirmations
[66].
Although biofeedback has been used for decades, the interest has been growing re-
cently in using it to manage anxiety and stress. Several studies support the use of
biofeedback as a way to manage anxiety and stress [67][65][68][69]. An intervention
that has applied the biofeedback method is BrightHearts. The iPad application re-
flects the paediatric patient’s heart rate and assists in deep breathing training. The
heart rate is reflected in different colours and patterns, displayed in Figure 2.9, a red
colour palette signifying a rapid heart rate and a blue palette demonstrating a slow
heart rate [70]. It is the patient’s mission to make the artwork as blue as possible.
20
==PAGE:28==
CHAPTER 2. BACKGROUND AND RELATED WORK
Figure 2.9: The Brighthearts app [71].
Another project that uses biofeedback to reduce stress and anxiety is My Compan-
ion developed by Serious Games Interactive in 2018. It is designed for 4-10 year-old
patients at Rigshospitalet, Denmark. The solution is a teddy bear undergoing the
same medical procedure as the child. It uses a game-based iPad application and a
wristband for measuring the child’s stress level. If the wristband measures a stress
response from the child, it will be reflected in the digital teddy bear in the app. It is
the child’s job to comfort the teddy bear through the games on the iPad. In one of the
games, the children can blow soap bubbles to engage in deep breathing. Scientific
studies show that using the app leads to a significant stress reduction [72] [73].
Figure 2.10: My Companion; a teddy bear, wristband and iPad app
2.5.1
Play and distraction
A widely applied method to reduce fear and anxiety in paediatric patients is through
play and entertainment. Researchers seem to agree that distraction is an effective
method of reducing paediatric patients’ pain and anxiety and behavioural distress,
the more immersive the media, the more effective the method seems to be [74][nuvuula][75][76]
[75]. Children feel more at ease if they can engage in activities that are familiar and
fun and can distract them from the activities in the PED. This could include playing
21
==PAGE:29==
CHAPTER 2. BACKGROUND AND RELATED WORK
with toys, watching movies, playing games or reading books. A Danish project by
Khora used virtual reality (VR) glasses to help children sit still during needle proce-
dures at Rigshospitalet. The VR game is for 5-12 year-olds and is specifically designed
for hospital situations to make sure the child can hear the surroundings and does not
move in ways that may complicate the procedure. The game consists of shooting wa-
ter balloons at seagulls [77].
Figure 2.11: Child playing Trouble at Jetty with VR glasses while getting an IV. He is so
distracted that he does not register the procedure happening. [77]
2.5.2
Discussion
Although children’s adverse reactions to being in the PED have long been known,
there have been continuous efforts to minimise them. An increasing number of stud-
ies aim at minimising anxiety with a technology-based intervention. Audiovisual inter-
ventions, games and VR glasses were in particular shown to be effective in distracting
children and thereby reduce their anxiety. Other ways. Many studies were found that
tested interventions at the dental clinics, however much fewer were found that stud-
ied the feasibility of interventions in the PED setting. Additionally, many interventions
used play and distraction and fewer implemented multiple elements of reducing anx-
iety such as preparation and relaxation, which may be a more effective approach.
2.5.3
Contribution of this paper
The present thesis aims to 1) test the feasibility of using a wearable biometric system
in the PED in terms of the children’s willingness to wear it and 2) to develop and test
the feasibility and effect of a digital prototype aiming at reducing anxiety in a Danish
PED. The literature reviews will be used as tools for inspiration and insight into the
effectiveness of different types of interventions going forward in the design process
and the studies will be used as references, when testing the final prototype.
22
==PAGE:30==
3
Methodology
This chapter describes the overall design approach and methods used to answer
the project’s hypotheses. The chapter is finished with a discussion of the chosen
approaches and their implications on the project.
3.1
Overall design approach
The overall process that the project followed was The Design Council’s Double Dia-
mond framework [78]. The first diamond represents the process of exploring the
problem and honing in on a focus area. The second diamond represents the pro-
cess of developing ideas and concepts. In Figure 3.1 a modified version of the double
diamond is shown with a third diamond displaying the Build Measure Learn (BML)
cycle feedback loop – a concept coined by Eric Ries in his book The Lean Startup
[79]. In this third diamond, the prototype was further developed, tested and iter-
ated. The annotations show how the project was organised within the framework.
The way of thinking goes from divergent thinking to convergent thinking as the dia-
monds expand and contract respectively. As it is an iterative approach, the project
work jumped between the diamonds but advanced toward the right end as the de-
velopment progressed. Sometimes, designers choose to develop and test multiple
concepts. The approach of building and testing only one was decided due to the need
for the prototype to be engaging which requires a certain level of detail which would
be time demanding.
Interviews
Desk research
Observation / 
shadowing
Design 
specification
K-​J Technique
AS-​IS mapping
Brainstorming
Matrix scoring
Prototyping
Design 
walktrough
Think-​aloud
Objective and 
subjective UX 
evaluation
Proof of 
concept testing
Prototyping
Converging 
activities
Diverging 
activities
Concept 
creation
Design 
walktrough
Figure 3.1: Triple diamond with Build Measure Learn cycle included primarily in the
third diamond.
==PAGE:31==
CHAPTER 3. METHODOLOGY
The principles of Lean UX and the Build Measure Learn approach helped structure
and prioritise the prototyping, and to test assumptions early and continuously [80][79].
Building a minimal viable product (MVP) is key in this framework as it provides valu-
able insights into the problem and the users’ needs and wants with little effort re-
quired. Testing the prototypes often provided new insights that guided the direction
of the prototyping and minimised the risk of wasting time and effort building some-
thing ineffective. The conceptualisation of the game was done by following the Art of
Serious Game Design conceptual framework, which is anchored in the Design, Play,
Experience Framework originally developed by Brian Winn [81][82].
Common for the mentioned design frameworks is the human-centred design ap-
proach, in which it is essential to involve the users in all stages of the design pro-
cess to ensure that the right problem is solved and the right solution is developed.
From the beginning, it was a priority to test the prototype with children and get the
nurses’ points of view. Empathising and creating a good understanding of the users
was crucial in each part of the project.
3.2
Methods for collecting insights
A mixed-methods systematic review and desk research was done to acquire back-
ground knowledge of the topic and gain an understanding of what has previously
been done in the field – in particular in assessing anxiety and reducing anxiety in
children in medical settings.
3.2.1
Problem exploration
To gain deep insights into the problem, different qualitative methods were carried
out. Shadowing was used as a method to observe the physical space and the nurses’
behaviour, workflow, roles and decision-making concerning the paediatric patients’
care and emotional well-being. This allowed for collecting detailed and nuanced per-
spectives on the problem first-hand and in real time.
Semi-structured interviews with open-ended questions with the nurses led to descrip-
tive insights and opinions and new perspectives on the problem. To gain an under-
standing of the children’s situation simple questions were asked in person when pos-
sible and acceptable. Previously conducted interviews with paediatric children were
also found during the literature research to help understand the children’s points of
view and preferences when in the hospital.
3.2.2
Methods for evaluating the prototype
To test the prototypes developed in each iteration, different UX testing methods were
chosen based on the context and test participants. Think-aloud tests were done with
24
==PAGE:32==
CHAPTER 3. METHODOLOGY
adult test participants to gain an understanding of their thoughts while interacting
with the prototype. As children below the age of 8 have difficulty thinking aloud while
interacting with a prototype, observing their behaviour and emotional responses was
an important factor [83]. Questions about their thoughts and opinions were asked
at a later stage during testing. The UX evaluation methods used were guided by The
UX Book [80] and moved from being more formative in the beginning, where mostly
qualitative data was collected to being more summative towards the final iteration
4 where quantitative data was also collected to evaluate the prototype’s effect was
evaluated.
When validating the prototype with the nurses, a design walkthrough was carried
out to collect their initial reactions and subjective opinions of the concept including
its use and implementation in the emergency department. In the final test with the
paediatric patients at Herlev Hospital, which can be defined as an informal summa-
tive UX evaluation, both quantitative and qualitative data was collected about the
participants’ experience of the prototype. User engagement was tested by asking if
the participants wanted to continue playing, inspired by Schønau-Fog and Bjørner’s
paper on methods for mapping the experience of engagement [84]. The prototype’s
effect was tested in terms of reducing anxiety, measured with the mYPAS scale. How-
ever, qualitative insights were also collected on the opinions from the children, their
parents and nurses.
3.3
Discussion
In the final experiment, quantitative data was collected to test the effect of the pro-
totype. However, as the number of test participants was only 14 children aged 5-8,
with 7 in the control group and 7 in the invention group, a statistical analysis would
be questionable, so qualitative insights were valuable.
Although it had been more accurate to test only on the targeted users: children aged
5-7 in a medical setting, this was not always viable. Instead, children who were at
the SFO (after-school arrangements) were asked to test the game. When this was not
viable either, adult participants in my network were asked to be test participants. It
should also be noted that the playful, energetic environment in the SFO was signifi-
cantly different from the hospital.
As the prototype is a game, the usual usability criteria such as high speed, high accu-
racy and a low error rate were not appropriate to aim for. A game has to be challeng-
ing to be engaging, so the typical usability criteria had to be used in reverse, e.g. by
hiding elements and activating the user’s cognitive skills to be able to progress in the
game. However, a balance must be maintained to be suitable for the target audience,
25
==PAGE:33==
CHAPTER 3. METHODOLOGY
here children aged 5-7.
Validating with children is in many ways different from testing with adults. The best
method for testing with children seemed to be observational evaluations, however,
this could have created a bias in the children, as they may have behaved differently,
if I was not in the room with them. Using a camera had been beneficial in avoiding
a social bias. Open-ended questions work well with adults, but many children would
not know how to answer or were too timid, so in some cases they had to be guided
with leading questions, which could have caused a bias as well.
26
==PAGE:34==
4
Problem Exploration
This chapter offers an insight into how the situation is currently at the PED at Herlev
Hospital. It dives into the problem area based on interviews with nurses and obser-
vational studies. In the end of the section the main design take-aways are listed.
4.1
Status quo at Herlev Hospital
To get an understanding of the problem and the physical space, a visit was paid to
the PED in Herlev, where the case was discussed with Hanne Konradsen and Gitte
Maria Flyger Würtz. Hanne is a researcher and an employee at the Department for
Stomach, Intestinal and Liver Diseases at Herlev Hospital, and Gitte is a researcher
and a clinical nursing specialist who works at the PED at Herlev Hospital (in Danish
Børn og Unge Afdelingen). More details from the interview are given in Appendix A.
The user flow for paediatric patients
The PED at Herlev Hospital receives 0-17 year-old children, 24 hours a day, who are
referred by their own doctor or via the emergency telephone number 1813 [85]. After
announcing their arrival at the reception, the parents and children wait in the com-
mon waiting area for a maximum of 10 minutes (unless it is particularly busy) until
they are called into the triage room by a nurse. Here, the nurse measures the child’s
heart rate, blood oxygen saturation and temperature, and counts the respiration rate
by applying a hand on the stomach. The children are asked if they feel pain, and to
what degree. If the child is above 5 the Wong-Baker/visual analog scale (VAS) is used,
shown in Appendix A). When triaged, the children and their parents are placed either
in the common waiting area or in the single-patient waiting room where they can
watch TV or use streaming services on the patient tablet, as shown in Figure A.2. A
flow diagram in Figure 4.2 visualises the most typical steps of the patients’ treatment
in the hospital.
==PAGE:35==
CHAPTER 4. PROBLEM EXPLORATION
(a) The single-patient waiting room
(b) TV with info and entertainment options
Figure 4.1: The patients wait in the single-person waiting room were they are also
examined or treated by the doctors and nurses
.
They wait in the common area 
(max 10 minutes unless too 
busy)
Nurse and / or doctor carry out 
procedure or examination in 
single-​patient waiting room. 
Gives test results and / or 
diagnosis
If needed, the patient goes 
to get x-​ray, urinalysis etc. 
done and nurse or medical 
lab technician collects blood 
samples
Nurse/doctor checks in, 
informs and prepares child, 
may put on numbing plaster 
if blood test needed and ask 
for urine test
Patient is triaged by a nurse 
in the triage room.
Pain levels, temperature, 
respiration, pulse and oxygen 
saturation etc. is noted down
Appointment is made
(doctor's referral or 1813)
Child and parent check in 
at reception
Child and parent gets results / 
diagnosis and go home
(Waiting in the common area)
If no free space
If free space
Arrival and triage
Waiting and preparing
Procedure, tests /or
examination
(typically 3-5 hours)
Child and parent wait for 
next steps / diagnosis in 
the single-​patient room
Child is too 
anxious and 
requires time to 
get emotionally 
ready. A change 
in strategy may 
be needed.
Potentially part of patient's care
Always part of patient's care
Figure 4.2: User flow for paediatric patients. The waiting times are highlighted in
blue.
The need for an anxiety assessment tool
Currently, there is no method or system in place for assessing fear and anxiety in
young patients. The nurses use their best judgement to evaluate the emotional state
28
==PAGE:36==
CHAPTER 4. PROBLEM EXPLORATION
of the child and pass on the information to the other nurses and doctors, but a more
objective yet reliable way to do it was requested. The reason for this is both to assess
when the children are ready for the next step in their treatment and also to get a
more accurate assessment of their pain score. Gitte states:
”Often staff do not react to the pain score that is measured because, based
on objective assessments, they think that the child is not in as much pain as
he or she expresses (...) I assume that if you measured anxiety as well, then
perhaps children and staff could better agree on how much pain the child is
in” (Appendix A).
In Gitte’s experience, the medical staff risk underestimating the children’s experi-
enced pain when their anxiety level is not considered. The connection between fear
and pain is not completely understood, but studies suggest that fear increase the pa-
tient’s pain sensitivity and leads to a memory of a higher pain level [13][14][15][12].
4.1.1
A need
The fear and experienced pain often lead to avoidance behaviour where the child acts
out in self-defence, e.g. by kicking. This complicates the procedure and can require
parents and nurses to restrain the child [86]. Gitte says, that the nurses do some-
times use physical restraint at Herlev Hospital, but they want their hospital to offer
other solutions. To reduce the children’s anxiety, the nurses currently use games,
toys and soap bubbles but often the children bring their own toys. They also get a
visit by a balloon man or a hospital clown weekly. The patient tablet is also an ap-
preciated asset in keeping the children entertained and sometimes distracted during
procedures.
Hanne and Gitte mentioned that the most relevant age group to target is from 5 to 7
years. This is when children have developed the cognitive ability to understand the
situation, and worry about future events, but their vivid imagination may cause them
to catastrophise the situation. Additionally, many children at this age do not yet know
how to communicate and regulate their emotions well.
4.1.2
The role of communication
Parents’ distress was also mentioned as a relevant factor in affecting the child’s level
of anxiety. Parents may not know how to manage their own worries and the best
approach to comfort their children. Gitte said that the nurses have guidelines for
what to say and what not to say to the children. Saying that there is nothing to be
afraid of and that they will not feel the needle prick are some of the things not to say.
If children are told not to be afraid, they may think that there probably is a reason to
be afraid and if they do experience pain from the needle, then this can diminish their
29
==PAGE:37==
CHAPTER 4. PROBLEM EXPLORATION
trust. The best way to inform the children is in a non-negative and relatable way. The
main guidelines are shown in appendix U.
4.2
Observational studies
Shadowing session were carried out to get a better understand of the problems and
opportunities regarding anxiety in the PED, to better understand the children’s situ-
ation and circumstances and observe the nurses’ and doctors’ roles, responsibilities
and practises during their daily work. Hospital clowns also showed up during a pa-
tient’s blood test, so their actions were also observed. The documentation of the
observations and the physical space and systems used can be seen in in Appendix
B. The patients and nurses are given placeholder names to keep the observations
confidential.
Nurses' decision-making
The shadowing sessions gave an insight into how the nurses make decisions based
on their assessment of the child’s anxiety. There is always one nurse who has an
overview and is responsible for assigning the other nurses to a child’s care. One of
their main tools of communication is the screen in the nurses’ meeting room, dis-
played in Figure ??. The nurse in charge e.g. says: ”[nurse 2] should do it, she is so
empathetic (dansk: pædagogisk)” she says to another nurse in the meeting room ...and
you are pregnant so it is not good if she is kicking...”. Nurse 3 said that she had car-
ried out the procedure many times before and were assigned instead. The children’s
responses were also discussed in the meeting room: ”The tears were rolling down so I
could see that she wouldn’t allow me to do it”. The nurses used several methods to try
to calm down and prepare the children for their treatments. The methods the nurses
used to manage the patients’ anxiety are listed below, sorted into five categories.
30
==PAGE:38==
CHAPTER 4. PROBLEM EXPLORATION
Figure 4.3: The screen showing the children’s names, ages, triage categories, condi-
tions, doctors and nurses assigned, the rooms they are in etc.
1. Play and distraction
The nurses tried to entertain the patients and talked about other things to try and
divert the their attention away from what was happening. Nurse 1 e.g. talked about
the patient Anna’s earrings and how it had been at school to get the focus off of the
treatment. Nurses 2 and 3 played with Anna’s teddy bear to calm her down and make
her laugh. They also impersonated her finger by explaining how it hurts because the
finger had become very scared, and calling it a smurf with its blue ’hat’ full of numbing
creme. Another nurse mentioned that they use soap bubbles, dance and sing or put
on a show on the tablet. Several nurses also expressed that hospital clowns were
highly appreciated. Two of them visited the patient Carl, who got a blood sample
done. After a very anxiety-ridden experience they made him laugh by throwing paper
towel ”snowballs” at the ”mean” nurses.
31
==PAGE:39==
CHAPTER 4. PROBLEM EXPLORATION
2. Preparation and planning
To prepare the patients, the nurses walked through the steps of their procedure and
gave some of them the tools they were going to use during the procedure. This was
in order to make the patient familiar with them beforehand. After the patient Carl
had become highly anxious during a blood test, one of the nurse mentioned that it
was partly because there was not a proper plan in place among the medical staff and
the parents about who does what and no proper preparation of the child. The nurse
said that the parents were too involved in the wrong things, and that the medical
laboratory technologist who did the blood test, started the procedure too quickly.
According to her, the parents should be there for distraction and emotional support,
but instead the mother restrained her son when he was sitting on her lap. She said
that if there had been a better discussion of roles and more preparation beforehand
it might have look differently.
3. Expressing sympathy and giving praise
The nurses also made sure to express understanding about the patients’ situation by
asking what they had been through and by expressing sympathy. When the children
behaved well, they made sure to praise them for being tough. When examining the
children they made sure to say that they had no tools so nothing would hurt and that
they had done a certain procedure many times before.
4. Give a sense of control
Another way the nurses tried to alleviate anxiety was by giving the patients a sense
of control over the situation. They asked and waited for the patients’ consent before
starting on the procedure and asked if they wanted a sedation drug to relief anxiety
(referred to as juice). They also sometimes provided the possibility of saying stop if it
became too much. The nurse expressed: ”They must be in on it, so they don’t have a bad
experience which could stay with them for a long time (...) I don’t inject my patients until
they say go... The patients I have on a regular basis appreciate that, and always choose
me for that reason”. Although the nurses were busy, and the rooms were filled, they
provided breaks where the patients could be alone with their parents until they were
ready for the next step in their treatment.
5. Sedative medication
One child, Anna, was given sedative medication, which causes drowsiness, decreases
anxiety, and causes forgetfulness during the procedure.
They also put numbing
cream on her finger. Another girl, Bea, was given nitrous oxide in a mask to decrease
her anxiety prior to a blood test.
32
==PAGE:40==
CHAPTER 4. PROBLEM EXPLORATION
6. Restraining
In some cases, the children were restrained, which was done by the parents. The
children were no longer interested in watching TV, and cried and yelled loudly. One
of the nurses said: ”It was too late, there was no way that we could get him to calm back
down after he reached that point, so it wouldn’t have an effect even if we gave him a break.
We had to just get it over with. In another case, the patient Anna was crying: ”stop I
need a break”, while trying to kick and pull her arm away when the nurses tried to
remove her stitches. However, the nurses carried through to get it over with. When it
was done the nurses praised her for being brave and they played with her teddy bear
which made Anna laugh, but the young patient was still marked by the experience.
Afterwards, nurse 2 expressed: ”I know it was rough in there, but [nurse 3] said that
now was the time to get it done (...)”. She said that using nitrous oxide would not have
helped her, as her anxiety was so high. And since the nurses were very busy, they
had to get it done to clear the room for their next patient. Nurse 2 said that it was
only the final stitch she felt, the reaction from the other stitches was pure anxiety and
the anticipation of feeling pain that she had from the first traumatic experience she
had in another clinic.
4.2.1
Causes and effects of the children's anxiety
To get an overview of the causes and effects of patient anxiety, a 5 Whys inspired
model was created, which can be seen in Figure M.1. An empathy map, that illus-
trates the thoughts, behaviours, feelings and quotes a fearful child in the emergency
department may have, is shown in Figure 4.5.
33
==PAGE:41==
CHAPTER 4. PROBLEM EXPLORATION
Why are children aged 5-7 anxious about being in the hospital
They fear pain
They are old old 
enough to worry about 
pain related to 
common procedures 
(e.g. blood tests or IV)
They are uncertain 
about what will 
happen to them
They usually have to 
wait a long time for a 
nurse/doctor to 
examine them
Why?
The medical staff are 
often busy with other 
patients
The amount of time 
that a patient requires 
is more than what staff 
is able to provide
Why?
One reason is due to 
procedure being 
postponed / taking 
longer in highly 
anxious children
Why?
They are in a new  
clinical environment
Why?
The medical 
environment has weird 
tools, smells, sounds, 
and strangers in white 
coats
The hospital 
environment needs to 
be as clean as possible
Difficulty regulating 
their emotions
Difficulty handling 
negative emotions
Many children that age 
have not learned how 
to regulate their 
feelings and 
behaviours
Why?
Why?
Why?
Why?
They pick up anxiety 
from their parents
Parents are also 
worried and may not 
know how to handle 
the situation 
appropriately
No one has informed / 
taught them
Why?
Why?
Some are 
inexperienced but 
imaginative, so even a 
little pain can seem 
overwhelming
Some already have had 
bad experiences with 
e.g. needles
Why?
Why?
Why?
Not enough staff / too 
many other things to 
do
Why?
Why?
Why?
Why?
Why?
No plan for reducing 
the anxiety made / 
followed by the staff
They did not know the 
child was / would get 
anxious
Busyness can cause 
them to skip this step 
to have time for other 
patients
The child's anxiety was 
not easily readable by 
the medical staff
Why?
Children express / 
exhibit fear and anxiety 
differently from child to 
child
Why?
Why?
Why?
No anxiety-​reducing 
interventions were 
given
Children waiting in the 
common area do not 
always have access to 
anxiety reducing 
interventions
Why?
Why?
Why?
Figure 4.4: The five whys technique was used to get an overview of causes and effects
within the problem space. A bigger version is displayed in Appendix M.
34
==PAGE:42==
CHAPTER 4. PROBLEM EXPLORATION
Figure 4.5: Empathy map showing the typical thoughts, feelings, quotes and be-
haviour of fearful children in the emergency department (Appendix C).
Takeaways to consider in the design process
• It would make sense to assess the child’s anxiety level already in the triage room
and document it to be displayed on the big screen. This is because the child’s
level of anxiety presented itself here rather than in the single-patient waiting
room where the children were generally relaxed and busy watching a show or
playing a game on a tablet.
• It would be interesting to investigate if the VAS score, used for pain assessment,
could additionally be used as a tool for children to assess their anxiety. This
would be both quick and convenient as it is already part of the nurses practises.
• The children can reach a point where they are so anxious and distressed that
it is not possible to calm them down, and they lose interest in all types of en-
tertainment, in which case the procedure just has to be finalised. Detecting or
predicting a high anxiety response early on and acting on it is key to help avoid
these cases.
• There is an opportunity to intervene in the waiting period to prepare the chil-
dren better for their procedure in ways that may go beyond entertaining them.
35
==PAGE:43==
CHAPTER 4. PROBLEM EXPLORATION
• The patient and parent will move around from room to room and during busy
times, children can wait for a long time in the common area. For a better ac-
curacy, the assessment tool should therefore be portable or usable in several
locations for continuous measurements.
• Preparing the children, giving them the appropriate amount of control, commu-
nicating roles with the nurses and parents and making a good treatment plan
are also essential factors.
• Although one nurse is responsible for a specific child’s care, there are often
several nurses and other medical professionals involved in the patient’s treat-
ment. Successfully sharing information about the patient’s state is essential.
The nurses use a screen with the children’s names, ages, triage categories and
reasons for being there. On this screen, it could make sense to include an anxi-
ety score.
Design specification
From the data and insights collected while interviewing and shadowing nurses, a de-
sign specification was developed, shown in Appendix E, with requirements and crite-
ria to evaluate future solutions for assessing and reducing anxiety in the PED.
36
==PAGE:44==
5
Concept creation
This chapter describes the concept creation of an intervention for reducing anxiety. It
covers idea generation, conceptualisation and selection of a concept based on matrix
rating. The development of the selected concept and the proof of concept tests are
then described.
5.1
Reducing anxiety with an intervention
5.1.1
Brainstorming
A brainstorming session on ways to reduce anxiety and distress was carried out.
Research within technology, psychology, alternative therapy, play activities and cur-
rently used methods in hospitals inspired the brainstorm. The ideas were then cat-
egorised into an affinity diagram using the KJ technique. This is shown in Appendix
N.
The ideas were evaluated with the Impact-Effort matrix by plotting in the ideas in
relation to their effectiveness in reducing anxiety and assumed value added for the
users versus the implementation effort, cost and use of the idea. The insights gained
in the research phase were utilised for this. The matrix was used as a tool to gain
an overview of the ideas in the high-impact and low-effort space. The distraction
techniques of virtual reality (VR) and playing video games, offering preparation and
information, and the CBT practises of deep breathing and muscle relaxation were
some of the more interesting ideas. The matrix is displayed in Appendix N.
5.1.2
Proof of concept: VR
In the literature review, VR showed promising results in reducing anxiety in children
before and during medical and dental procedures. To gain more insight into the
limitations and opportunities of VR, the headset BoboVR Z4, with a smartphone insert,
was acquired to do some quick proof of concept testing. This should reveal if it could
be a viable technology to apply in the VR waiting period.
4 adult participants tested the headset with different videos from the app Within. The
testing led to a list of advantages and disadvantages, which can be seen in Appendix
K. In short, the headset was not deemed feasible for unse in the PED waiting period.
The main reasons were that the headset was too heavy for the participants’, the focal
point had to be adjusted by each new participant and children should only wear it
for 10 minutes due to eye-vision safety concerns, which could be difficult to manage
in the busy ER. For these reasons, VR was not considered a viable option and was
eliminated in the concept creation round.
==PAGE:45==
CHAPTER 5. CONCEPT CREATION
5.1.3
Morphology concept creation
In the next step, different concepts were created using a morphology-inspired chart
with the categories: medium, content, method, activity, and technology. The chart
and developed concepts are displayed in Figure 5.1.
Support and info
Tablet
Medium
Method
Content
Smartphone
Social robot
TV screen
Projector
Smartwatch
Preparation
Involvement
Relaxation
Emotional support
CBT techniques
Modelling
Virtual tour
Activity
Offer choices
Desensitisation
Guided imagery
Biofeedback
Play a game
Watching a film
Conversation
(Technology)
Augmented reality
Artificial intelligence
Listen to audio
*All concepts will by default use elements from the play 
and distraction category
Speaker
Observe animations
Game that applies CBT techniques
Guided imagery, hospital-​oriented
Social robot / AI assistant that informs and supports patients
Biofeedback relaxation training
Game that offers low-​level decisions for patients
Augmented reality hospital tour with cooperative child (modelling)
Play and distraction*
Biosensors
VR desensitisation
VR headset
Figure 5.1: Morphology chart with developed concepts.
Evaluation of concepts
Next, the concepts were evaluated using a weighted Pugh Analysis Matrix [87]. The
matrix is shown in Figure 5.2. The concepts were rated up against datum; the current
patient tablet solution. The following criteria were included in the evaluation:
• Engaging: How much potential the concept has in capturing and sustaining the
patients’ attention, the better it is, the higher the score is.
• Effectiveness: How much potential it has in reducing the patients’ anxiety based
on the results found in the literature review, the more effective, the higher
score.
• Low cost: The concepts’ potential in affordability to implement and maintain,
the lower the cost, the higher the score.
38
==PAGE:46==
CHAPTER 5. CONCEPT CREATION
• Easy implementation: How easy the concept is to integrate into current systems
and workflow, the easier it is, the higher the score is.
• Ease of use: How simple the concept is to understand and use for a first-time
user, the easier it is, the higher the score is.
• Time demand: How time consuming the concept is for nurses, doctors or other
staff, the lower the time demand, the better the score.
Concept A
Concept B
Concept C
Concept D
Concept E
Concept F
Engaging
Sustains 
attention
Low cost
to run and 
implement
Easy imple-​
mentation
into systems
Ease of use
by children
aged >5
Time demand
is low for nurses
and staff
Total score
Datum
0
0
0
0
0
2
Effectiveness
in reducing 
anxiety
1
Weight
3
0
3
1
2
3
2
-1
1
1
0
0
0
1
1
1
2
0
2
2
1
2
1
1
0
0
-2
0
-1
2
1
1
-1
0
0
0
-1
-1
-1
-1
0
10
3
12
3
7
3
Figure 5.2: Concepts evaluated using the Pugh Analysis Matrix
The concept with the highest score in the Pugh analysis is a game concept using CBT
techniques for calming anxiety. As games scored highly on the effectiveness param-
eter in reducing anxiety by distraction, it was interesting to see if another layer, prac-
tising CBT techniques, could be applied and have a calming, preparing effect.
5.2
Updated problem statement
Since describing the initial problem statement, investigating the problem and oppor-
tunities through research, interviews and observations has helped narrow down the
problem and solution space. The main problem statement remains the same, but
with an addition of the following sub-questions:
• How feasible is it to use a wearable wrist device in terms of children’s willingness
to wear it in the waiting period?
39
==PAGE:47==
CHAPTER 5. CONCEPT CREATION
• How feasible is it to use the Visual Analog Scale (VAS) as a method to assess
anxiety in terms of children’s willingness and ability to self-report?
• How can a prototype be developed that incorporates CBT exercises in a game
for children in the PED? [H]ow will the patients respond to the intervention?
During problem exploration, the opportunity to use the VAS score to assess anxiety
was identified. Studies further show promising results in using it as a one-question
anxiety assessment tool [88][VAS1]. The test was carried out to see it it would also
be feasible in the PED in Herlev. Data collection and analysis will not be carried out
when testing the wristband, as this is outside this project’s scope. The know how the
children react to it.
5.3
Concept C: The CBT game
This section describes how the CBT game concept was further developed and the
decision process behind it.
Conceptual framework for serious games
A serious game is a type of game that is designed for a primary purpose other than
entertainment [89] – in this case to practise the CBT techniques. In recent years, there
has been an increase in studies that show the benefits of playing games in developing
children’s cognitive and emotional competencies [90]. However, as games become
increasingly accessible and engaging, even addictive in some cases, parents become
more aware of balancing the time their children spend playing video games. As the
usage context of a hospital game is only for a limited time frame and the situation is
out of the ordinary, this concern is likely less significant but should still be considered.
The Art of Serious Game Design conceptual framework was followed to create game
concepts. The framework is anchored in the Design, Play, Experience Framework orig-
inally developed by Brian Winn [81][73]. The methodology goes through two ideation
rounds using brainstorming cards and in the end paper prototypes of concepts are
created. The framework’s Methodology Circle is illustrated in Figure 5.3. As the ques-
tions on the brainstorming cards were answered they were put on the model in the
right places. The brainstorming and development process is displayed in Appendix
P.
40
==PAGE:48==
CHAPTER 5. CONCEPT CREATION
Figure 5.3: Methodology Circle for serious games
Designing UX for paediatric patients
Designing a game for children is different from designing for adults in several sig-
nificant ways. To create a game that has potential of being engaging for paediatric
patients aged 5-7, the following considerations were taken into account:
• Age-appropriate content: Children have different interests and developmental
levels than adults, so it is important to keep this in mind when designing the UX.
• Engaging and interactive: Children are more likely to engage with a UX that is
interactive and visually appealing. Especially elements of surprise, exploration
and using characters with faces work well. For children aged 5-7, incorporating
puzzles or other rule-based activities is effective in keeping them motivated.
• Progression and accomplishment: Children aged 5-7 usually seek to finish one
task before moving on to the next and are willing to try again until they have
completed the ongoing task. This age group is driven by experiences of positive
progression and accomplishments, so using these types of elements, e.g. levels
and badges, is effective.
• Simple and intuitive: Children have a shorter attention span and may have diffi-
41
==PAGE:49==
CHAPTER 5. CONCEPT CREATION
culty understanding complex systems or instructions, so it is important to keep
the UX simple and intuitive with clear language, icons and straightforward in-
structions.
• Accessibility: Children may have difficulty with fine motor skills, so accessibility
should be considered, e.g. by using large buttons and ways of interacting that
are familiar to children [83] [91].
• Communication: The game should use communication that is appropriate for
paediatric patients. There is an opportunity to use communication that is em-
pathetic yet empowering.
Applying CBT techniques
Cognitive-behavioural therapy (CBT) techniques such as breathing exercises and pro-
gressive muscle relaxation (PMR) can as mentioned previously, be a helpful self-regulatory
tool to manage anxiety, both when anticipating an anxiety-provoking situation and
when going through it. Practising them while the patient is calm is essential as it is
often too overwhelming to learn them while the patient is distressed. This means
that the patient should be introduced to them while waiting, as observations showed
that patients are more relaxed at this point.
Designing the exercises
The first task was to figure out the correct breathing pace to use. It is well-established
empirically that breathing rates between 4.5 and 6.5 breaths per minute (bpm) have
the largest effects in adults (e.g., Lehrer et al., 2020), however, suitable breathing
rates for children are scarce in the literature as they are rarely mentioned. A study by
Uratani et al. (2014) [92] report the highest increases in HRV in children at a breathing
rate of 5–6 bpm. However, limitations include the small sample size of 10 children
aged 5-12 and the fact that they struggled following these breathing rates. A study by
Shaffer et al. (2020) as cited by Urutani suggested breathing rates between 6.5 and
9.5 bpm for children, but the empirical basis for this is not clear [92]. The prototyping
and testing will take this into account to find a breathing rate that is low enough to
be effective and high enough to not be frustrating to follow for the child. The PMR
exercises were adjusted to be easy for children to understand and complete, and to
make them compatible with a game [PMRHL].
5.3.1
Proof of concept 1: Fallen star breathing exercise
Goals
The iteration’s purpose was to quickly build a prototype of an animated breathing
exercise and test:
42
==PAGE:50==
CHAPTER 5. CONCEPT CREATION
• Whether a child in the ER would want to engage with the intervention and follow
the pace of the animation with their breathing.
• Whether the children enjoyed the experience.
The full description, screenshots and a link to the prototype can be found in Appendix
L.
Procedure
One boy aged 5, participant 1A, was in the appropriate age group for testing the
prototype. He was in the single-patient emergency room at Herlev Hospital due to in-
flammation in his knee. A 13” MacBook Air M2 was used to show the clickable Figma
prototype. The animation was initiated by the facilitator (me) while verbal instruc-
tions (”Wizard of Oz” approach) were given to guide the user to breathe according to
the animation. Voice instructions should be implemented in a future iteration. The
back story was given that the star had fallen down and now needed to go back to the
sky. To do this, the participant had to breathe in and out with the star.
It was noted, how many of the total 6 rounds (lasting 1 minute) the children would
pay attention while breathe accordingly. Follow-up questions were asked regarding
the experience: How did it feel? Have you tried something like this before? Would
you want to do it again another time? Why/why not? As these questions were prone
to a biased reply, the body language of the child was carefully observed.
Figure 5.4: Fallen star breathing exercise
43
==PAGE:51==
CHAPTER 5. CONCEPT CREATION
Outcome
The participant breathed in and out with the animation but did not breathe in and
out consistently. This could be due to many things, e.g. the pace being too slow for
a child’s smaller lung capacity, the animation’s design, the voice instruction or the
user’s emotional state. For the next iteration, the animation will be designed with
boundaries so the user is better prepared for how long to inhale and exhale. The
breathing pace will also try to target children better. The child thought the exercise
was relaxing and comfortable, but he did not want to try it again, as he said it was
too boring. For the next iteration, more engaging elements will be used, while being
careful to not take focus away from doing the breathing exercise correctly.
5.4
Proof of concept 2: Mountain top breathing exercise
What was built
In this iteration, the animated fallen star breathing exercise was redesigned to make
it more visually engaging for children. The prototype should test:
• Whether an anxious child in the ER would want to engage with the intervention
and follow the new pace of the animation with their breathing.
• Whether the children enjoyed the experience.
The full description, screenshots and a link to the prototype can be found in Appendix
L.
Procedure
One 9-year-old girl, participant 1B, who was waiting for an intravenous venipuncture
was the only child who was somewhat in the appropriate age group. She was in the
single-patient emergency room at Herlev Hospital. A Macbook Air M2 13” was used
to show the animation and prototype, which was not yet clickable.
Outcome
Although she expressed, after the test, that she was worried about getting the intra-
venous venipuncture, she had been willing to try the breathing exercise and said that
it made her feel relaxed, but similarly stated that the pace was a bit hard for her to
follow which was also visible during observation. Although the test sample of only
two children is not a lot to base conclusions on, the test indicated that the interven-
tion is feasible to apply in the ER. The breathing pace should be corrected for the next
version to make it easier to follow. To increase engagement, the CBT activities will be
made into a game with interactive elements and progression.
44
==PAGE:52==
6
Iterations
This chapter describes the development of the prototype. There are a total of 4 iter-
ations and each section goes through the iterations’ goal, what was built, how was it
tested and what was learned from the results. In the end a section on further work
for the prototype is included.
6.1
Iteration 1
Goal of the iteration
This iteration wished to test:
• If the participants carried out the breathing and PMR exercises appropriately.
• The difficulty level of the game and the general usability.
• If participants in the intended age group were engaged and interested enough
to want to keep playing and go to the next locations on the map (the activity
behind it was not yet designed).
What was built
This iteration included interactive elements, improved storytelling and problem-solving
activities to be more engaging. The prototype now had a map to guide the user
from one activity to the next, a breathing exercise on the mountain and a progres-
sive muscle relaxation (PMR) exercise in the orange garden. See Figure Q.4. It also
included a chest for collecting items. The audio guides were given by reading from
the manuscript using the Wizard of Oz approach. Annotated wireframes can be seen
in Appendix Q
==PAGE:53==
CHAPTER 6. ITERATIONS
Figure 6.1: Screenshots from iteration 1
Testing
Participants
Testing the prototype with the correct target group, children, was a priority, however,
for this iteration, only one child could be recruited for testing. Due to multiple poten-
tial usability problems in this first iteration, it was not considered a problem to test
the game with adult participants. The participants included P1: female aged 6, P2:
female aged 25, P3: male aged 25, P4: female aged 64, P5: male aged 46.
Procedure
This iteration was tested A think-aloud approach was used where the participants
were given tasks to test the usability and learn what the participants thought of the
game prototype. Any misclicks or requests for help were noted down. If the par-
ticipants asked for help, they were encouraged to try to do what they instinctively
thought was right and were only helped if they still did not know what to do.
As it is generally hard for children to speak while interacting with a prototype, and
since children are often shy, observations of facial expressions and body language
were key in interpreting how the child perceived the prototype [83].
Apparatus
The prototype was tested using a Macbook Air M2, 13” laptop as a substitute for an
iPad. The aim was to test the iteration on an iPad, but unfortunately, Figma did not (as
of November 2022) support audio or video on the Figma mobile app. This meant that
the audio guides to be included in the next iteration would not work. The decision
stood between using the intended device, an iPad, where audio guides would not
work – or testing using the wrong type of device, a MacBook Air, but with functioning
46
==PAGE:54==
CHAPTER 6. ITERATIONS
audio guides. It was chosen to test the porototype on the MacBook, as the audio
guide was deemed an important feature to be included.
Results
Testing the iteration revealed that the dragging interactions were not intuitive enough.
The 6-year-old P1 was especially struggling with using the touchpad to complete the
tasks in the game, as she lacked experience with using a computer. For clickable in-
teractions, she also had a hard time hitting the targets (e.g. pressing the road signs).
This made it clear that the iPad should be used instead for future iterations and test-
ing with an audio workaround. Going into the locations should be doable in one click
as this is what the participants expected. The participants also had a hard time know-
ing to press the chest to collect the items. Additionally, it should not be possible to
press the map as it is too frustrating to have to start over if you accidentally press it.
The buttons should be more intuitive and there should be more guidance than previ-
ously assumed to help the participants know what to do. The game should, however,
not be too easy either. Overall, the participants expressed joy when using the game
and thought the aesthetics were visually pleasing.
6.2
Iteration 2
Goal of the iteration
Building and testing this iteration was done to get insights into:
• The prototype’s emotional impact on the participants, and their opinions of the
game and its characters.
• If the participants carried out the breathing and PMR exercises according to the
guide.
• The age-appropriateness, difficulty level and usability.
What was built
This iteration included another breathing exercise in the forest and another PMR ex-
ercise on the beach. See Figure ??. It also included a chest for collecting items. New
collectable items were included and the castle was replaced by a hospital as the plot
was falling more into place. The character Emma was included in more places and
the map button was removed from places where it could be clicked by mistake. In
the orange orchard, the oranges would now reflect better the exercise that the par-
ticipants should do. They could also click either the item or the chest to collect an
item. The audio guides were given by reading from the manuscript using the Wizard
47
==PAGE:55==
CHAPTER 6. ITERATIONS
of Oz approach. Annotated wireframes can be seen in Appendix Q.
Figure 6.2: Screenshots from iteration 2
Testing
Participants
The iteration was tested on 5 children, 4 girls and 1 boy, all aged 7.
Procedure
First, an interview was done to know the children’s preferences and opinions. After-
wards, the game was introduced with an explanation of the mission and introduced
them to Bjørn the bear. An observational study was then carried out while the chil-
dren tried the game. Audio and screen recordings were done so it was easier to
document afterwards. They were encouraged to say what they were thinking while
playing the game. The same considerations as in section 6.1 were made.
Results
The test results can be seen in detail in Appendix R. Testing revealed that the par-
ticipants were highly engaged in the game. Several of them wanted to play again
and there was lots of smiling and laughing. Although it was a very distracting envi-
ronment to test in they stayed focused on the game and if they were distracted by
others they quickly returned to the game. The children who were not playing were
not allowed to see the screen before their turn, however, this social, fun environment
could have made them more engaged than if they were in the intended setting at the
hospital. Feasibility testing in the hospital is still a crucial step in knowing if and how
the intervention would work in practise.
The children thought the breathing exercises were the hardest. Especially in the For-
48
==PAGE:56==
CHAPTER 6. ITERATIONS
est, as they used many rapid breaths to ’start the fire’. A voice guide should run
throughout the game to help the participants do the CBT exercises correctly and only
use one full breath. On the mountain, the fog animation created too much lag, so the
exhales were longer than intended, which likely explains why the children struggled
with it. On the beach, the exercises could be shown by the character Emma to make
it easier to understand what to do. Some of the UX elements could also be designed
more intuitively. According to their mental model, the items should be dragged into
the chest. In the orange orchard, they did not understand why they needed to pick
certain oranges which could be specified. When they were impatient, they would click
around on everything. Creating more clickable elements with animated movements
could be used to maintain the user’s attention.
They liked the characters, even the dragon who seemed scary at first, was given a 5/5
’good’ rating. It was interesting to see that 3/5 would have preferred to play as Oscar
although 4/5 were girls. Being able to choose the character yourself at the beginning
of the game could be another way of creating more engagement. Another interesting
aspect was that the participants were convinced their breathing and muscle exercises
had an impact on the game. Even when they found out that it did not have an impact,
they still did the exercises as they thought they were fun.
6.3
Iteration 3
Goal of the iteration
This iteration wished to test:
• If the participants carried out the breathing and PMR exercises appropriately.
• The game’s difficulty level and general usability.
• If the participants were engaged enough to want to continue playing after they
had completed it.
What was built
The intro and outro were built to tie the plot together and increase the feeling of
progress and accomplishment. 5 audio files were made as this would make it easier
to play instead of reading it aloud every time. Subtitles were put in the top area of
the screen to make it easier to read them aloud and to allow parents and children to
cooperate. The buttons were put in more intuitive places and the chest was made
into a backpack with a pop-up connected to it to make it more intuitive. Items would
also be draggable to match the children’s mental model of how to collect an item.
A countdown was added in the mountains and Emma was inserted in more places
49
==PAGE:57==
CHAPTER 6. ITERATIONS
throughout the game especially in the forest and on the beach to guide the exercises.
It was made more clear in the orange garden that they were looking for specific or-
anges.
Figure 6.3: Screenshots from iteration 3
Testing
Participants
5 children aged 5-8, 2 girls and 3 boys, participated in testing the prototype.
Procedure
The iteration was tested on an iPad Air 2 in a setting that was closer to the intended
setting where the children played alone in a quiet place without distractions. Whereas
the first testing focused on qualitative measures, this iteration was tested quantita-
tively with UX metrics to test if the instructions of the game were clear enough and to
test the children’s engagement. As observations and quotes were still valuable these
were collected as well.
Results
Detailed results in the UX metrics table can be seen in Appendix S. The participants
were able to reach all the UX targets and performed better than in the last iterations.
The children still showed a high level of engagement, only one child was indifferent
as to continuing.
The UX improvements meant that the children could play the game without help, ex-
cept for one boy who did not pick up the diploma in the end. This should be corrected
for the next iteration but is not a big concern as this is at the end of the game after
the main exercises have been completed.
50
==PAGE:58==
CHAPTER 6. ITERATIONS
The next step was to make sure the game was feasible to use in a PED setting. Would
the children be interested in playing the game and would the game reduce the their
anxiety?
6.4
Iteration 4: The final iteration
6.4.1
Goal of the iteration
This iteration wished to test the feasibility and effectiveness of the interventions in
the paediatric emergency department at Herlev Hospital.
Four tests were carried out to get insights into the following aspects of the solution:
1. Are children in the PED willing and able to wear a wearable wrist device (Empat-
ica E4) for the entire period?
2. Are children willing to and capable of assessing their anxiety using the Visual
Analog Scale (VAS) as a self-reporting tool? Do their scores correlate with the
mYPAS score?
3. Are children willing to play the game and are parents willing to let them play? Do
the children become engaged in the game enough to want to continue playing?
4. Are children less anxious after having played the game than children who did
not play the game measured with the modified Yale Preoperative Scale (mY-
PAS)?
What was built
This iteration reassembled iteration 3, but small usability issues were fixed and it
included the possibility to press the hot air balloon to continue playing. In the version
for continued play, The PMR exercises that were not safe to do during a blood test or
an IV were locked but the breathing exercises were open.
6.4.2
Design walkthrough
A design walkthrough was done with a group of 6 nurses in their meeting room before
the 4 tests were carried out. The aim was to get subjective, qualitative insights on
the prototype and to become aware of any implications it might have. The design
walkthrough was done with 5 nurses and one social paediatrician in their meeting
room. When asked about any implications, e.g. the state of the child, they expressed
that any respiratory problems could make it difficult for the child to breathe as slowly
as the prototype instructs them to. Also if they have a fever or pain they may not be
able to put as much strength into the muscle exercises. The nurses said that children
51
==PAGE:59==
CHAPTER 6. ITERATIONS
only go along as far as they can and will not do something that hurts, so they did not
see this as a problem. On the contrary, they called the prototype ”a really good idea,
without a doubt”, ”a genius idea, as it is something they [children] can also use outside
of the hospital” and ”something we can definitely use”. It was also mentioned that the
game gives the nurses and children a common ground to talk about. As an effective
distraction strategy is to talk to the child about something else than the procedure,
the game would be a golden opportunity to do so. ”It would be easier to talk about that
than school or the Ramasjang show they are watching which we know nothing about”. The
opportunity for parents to join was also mentioned, as that could give the parents
something to focus on with their children and provide calmness and comfort.
6.4.3
Methods of empirical testing
The participants’ anxiety was measured with the modified Yale Preoperative Score
(mYPAS), which is a commonly used method to assess anxiety from children’s be-
haviour at different points in time during their treatment [93][32]. The Visual Analog
Scale (VAS) was tested as an anxiety assessment tool. The scale with faces is shown
in Figure B.2b, Appendix A. To test the children’s engagement the question ”do you
want to continue?”, follows the theory from [84].
Participants
The tests were done with 14 participants (8 girls), with a mean age of 6.6. 7 tried the
final version of the prototype (Group A), while 7 were a control group (Group B). The
eligibility criteria included:
• Aged 5-8 years old
• Speaks Danish
• No acute procedure needed (enough waiting time)
• Needs a procedure or examination that could cause anxiety
• Has no cognitive impairment.
Apparatus
• iPad Air 2
• Figma Mobile App Version 22.6.0
• Link to prototype: Figma link
• Link to sound files: Soundcloud link
• Wireframes are displayed in Appendix S and T.
52
==PAGE:60==
CHAPTER 6. ITERATIONS
Procedure
A detailed step-by-step walkthrough of the experiment is given in Appendix T. The
participants were randomly assigned to either the intervention group or the control
group. The participants’ anxiety was measured using the moderated Yale Preopera-
tive Anxiety Scale (mYPAS) at 3 different points in time during their treatment:
1. When the child was triaged or communicated with the nurse about what was
going to happen (T1)
2. When the child was waiting (T2)
3. Right before the potentially anxiety-provoking procedure would happen (before
experiencing pain) (T3).
A brief introduction was given describing the goal of the project of improving the
children’s experience of being in the hospital. The document of consent was signed
by the parent which contained a more detailed description of my goal. Any questions
were answered and an emphasis was put on making the child feel at ease. It was
made clear that the aim was to test the design and not them, and that they could stop
anytime. The wristband was put on them so it was snug but not too tight and also
here they were told that they could take it off if it was uncomfortable. The children
were randomly assigned to either the intervention group or the control group. The
intervention group played the game while waiting for the next step in their treatment.
The game was played either alone or with the child’s parent while the audio files
were played to guide the participant. The text was read aloud by me or a parent.
The screen and audio were recorded to better document the results. I gave a hint or
allowed the parent to help, if the participant got stuck during the game. In the end,
the children were asked whether they wanted to continue or not and questions were
asked to gather qualitative insights. If the children wanted to continue, told them
that other children were in line to try it, but I would come back when the procedure
would take place, so they could try it again at this time. One of the children playing
the game while getting a blood test done can be seen in Figure 6.4b.
After having played the game, the children were asked how anxious they were feeling
about the coming procedure using the VAS, displayed in Figure B.2b in appendix A.
They were asked how scared or anxious they felt about the coming procedure (e.g.
blood test) and they could use the slider to select their response. The VAS was an-
chored by 0 beings ”the least anxiety or fear I have experienced” and being “the worst
anxiety or fear I have experienced”.
53
==PAGE:61==
CHAPTER 6. ITERATIONS
(a) Child playing in the waiting area
(b) Child playing while getting a blood test
Figure 6.4: Testing photos taken at Herlev Hospital
Results of empirical test and discussion
All results are displayed in Appendix T.
Test 1: Wearable wrist device Empatica E4
Test 2: Self-reporting anxiety using the VAS
10 out of 10 of the asked participants were willing to self-report their anxiety using the
VAS which is currently used as a self-report tool to assess pain. The nurse’s or Medical
Laboratory Scientist’s VAS assessment was also noted down after the procedure had
been carried out. The results are shown in Figure T.4 and T.5.
Test 3: Feasibility of the intervention
The intervention’s feasibility was tested on the parameters of the children’s willing-
ness to play, the parents’ willingness to let them play and finally, the child’s engage-
ment in the game. In 7/8 both the child and their parent agreed to participate. The
one child who did not play was not allowed to play iPad games by her parents. 7/7
completed all the exercises and 6/7 wanted to continue playing.
Test 4: Effect of the intervention
Figure T.2 displays the mean mYPAS scores in a diagram over the three points in time;
T1, T2 and T3. It also displays the standard deviations with vertical bars.
54
==PAGE:62==
CHAPTER 6. ITERATIONS
Figure 6.5: mYPAS anxiety scores at T1 (triage), T2 (waiting) and T3 (before procedure).
Group A is the intervention group, Group B is the control group.
The intervention group, Group A, had a higher initial mean anxiety score at T1 than
Group B, but after the intervention at T2, the anxiety mean goes below that of Group
B. At T3, after the intervention and before the procedure, the mean anxiety score of
Group A then goes above that of Group B again. The change in anxiety in percentage
from T1 to T2 and from T1 to T3 is displayed in Figure 6.6.
55
==PAGE:63==
CHAPTER 6. ITERATIONS
Figure 6.6: Percentage change in anxiety from T1 to T2 and from T1 to T3. A positive
number represents anxiety reduction and a negative number represents an increase
in anxiety.
6.4.4
Discussion
The results indicate that the wristband was a feasible way to collect data based on the
children’s willingness to wear it, however, some important obstacles were identified
in the need to take it off during x-rays, skin irritation and the risk of children heading
to other departments or going home with the wristband on. Finding a way to avoid
or mitigate this is necessary to implement it successfully.
The results of self-reporting anxiety with the VAS were feasible in the sense that the
children were all willing and able to assess their anxiety with it. It was a good way
to start the conversation about the child’s potential hospital-related fears as parents
often joined in to discuss the child’s previous experiences. Calculating the correlation
between the child’s VAS scores and the mYPAS T3 scores gives a result of 0.53 which
indicates a moderate correlation. The VAS was collected while the child waited for
a coming procedure, e.g. a blood test, and the mYPAS T3 score indicates the actual
anxiety or fear of the child as they faced the procedure. Calculating the correlation
between the child’s VAS assessment and the nurse’s or Medical Laboratory Scientist’s
VAS assessment collected after the procedure gives a similarly moderate correlation
of 0.47. Being able to assess anxiety with only one question would make it easy and
56
==PAGE:64==
CHAPTER 6. ITERATIONS
convenient for the nurses, as they could do it in conjunction with the pain assessment
during the triage. However, a test with more participants is required to make the
result more generalisable.
A high engagement level was also seen, as 7/7 completed all the exercises and 6/7
wanted to continue playing. Only one child was not allowed to play iPad games. By
observing the children playing, it was easy to see from their smiles and laughter that
they were having fun and were relaxed, but they were also focused when doing the
CBT exercises and finding things. Especially the part about collecting items and ex-
ploring was mentioned often as their favourite activity in the game. After having com-
pleted the game one girl expressed ”Now I feel much better”, while a parent stated that
she ”could see that he [her son] loosened up”. The game was effective in distracting the
children from the activities in the PED, while waiting and while getting a blood test
done as seen in 6.4. This particular girl expressed being anxious about her blood
test but as she played the game while getting it done, helped her as she said that
.Aparentstatedthat”games are very effective in that age range, so using it in this context is very smart”.
In regard to the effectiveness of the intervention in reducing anxiety, the control
group had a drop in anxiety levels of 24.6% while Group A had a reduction of 53.9%.
From the baseline T1, the mean anxiety level increases in both groups, with a slightly
higher increase in Group B. These results indicate a significant reduction in anxiety
for children trying the intervention, however, the high standard deviation and the low
number of participants make the results less generalisable.
A factor that could have affected the accuracy of the results is the bias of the partici-
pants, as the child and parent knew the reason for their participation. My presence
throughout the test could also have affected the test results, both in terms of the
children’s willingness to continue and their ability to focus on the tasks. It could also
alter the results if the parent was playing with the child or not. For three participants,
hospital clowns joined the children at timestamp T3, which could also have altered
the results.
There was a trade-off on many occasions between keeping the test more controlled
to make it more reliable, but then risking losing insights, e.g. into whether the parents
wanted to join. It would also lead to fewer participants in the test. As the goal of the
testing was more to gain a broad insight into the feasibility and get a rough estimate
of the effectiveness, the test was not done as a formal, summative evaluation but
rather followed the guidelines of an informal summative UX evaluation as described
by Hartson and Pyla in The UX Book [80], pp. 430-432.
57
==PAGE:65==
CHAPTER 6. ITERATIONS
6.4.5
Further work
Due to limitations of the scope and Figma’s abilities the following points are further
work to be done on the prototype:
• The sound guides should be incorporated into the prototype so there is a guide
throughout the game rather than individual sound files.
• Respiration data could be collected from the microphone of the device to make
the experience more engaging. A ball could also be used for the child to squeeze
during the PMR exercises. E.g. a ball that can detect squeezing such as [94].
• A version for playing the game during a common procedure like a blood test
would be a useful feature to keep the child distracted safely while they got their
blood test done.
• The items that should be collected in the game could include tools commonly
used by nurses and doctors to help the child get more familiar with them. There
could also be more of them to collect to keep the children engaged.
58
==PAGE:66==
7
Discussion
This chapter will evaluate and discuss the findings and results of the thesis up against
the sub-questions and research questions related to the main problem statement:
How can a technological intervention aid in managing paediatric anxiety?
This chapter also discusses the study’s limitations with further work to be done in
each area and ends with a broader look at further work to do in the project.
7.1
Was the problem statement answered?
What potential do biometric systems have in assessing anxiety in the PED?
Assessing emotions is a complex task. Children show anxiety differently and subjec-
tive measurements tend to have inherent biases, no matter if it is the nurse, parent
or child who is assessing the anxiety. The method of assessing emotions with physi-
ological responses and algorithms likewise has inherent biases, as they are often val-
idated with subjective self-assessments, may be influenced by cultural norms, a nar-
row section of the general population or the content used for training them. Most of
the wearable biometric systems included in the literature review achieved accuracies
above 70%, however, the studies’ setting and amount and type of participants limit
how representative the results are. The biggest challenge of the proposed system is
the accuracy when collected from patients who have illnesses that are likely to alter
the physiological signals. A way to mitigate this, could be by developing a system that
can take into account the child’s condition, fever, drugs taken etc., when the child is
triaged, and create a baseline when the child is emotionally calm – e.g. while playing
a game during the waiting period. A weakness of biometric systems, may include the
patient feeling psychologically ready for their treatment but have biosignals that in-
dicate high anxiety. Using multimodal biometric systems would achieve the highest
accuracies based on the findings in the literature research, and taking subjective self-
reported data into the calculation also has potential to give a more comprehensive
assessment. However, such a system would also have increased complexity. Further
work in assessing anxiety in the PED, include collecting and analysing the patient’s
biometric data using a machine learning algorithm, testing the accuracy and develop
a good way of visualising it for the nurses and doctors. Displaying an anxiety assess-
ment would make sense both on the big screen in the meeting room and perhaps as
a discrete indication on the patient’s wearable device.
==PAGE:67==
CHAPTER 7. DISCUSSION
How feasible is it to use a wearable wrist device in terms of children's willingness to
wear it in the waiting period?
The feasibility test of using a wearable wrist at the PED at Herlev Hospital gave promis-
ing results as 11/14 of the children were able to wear the Empatica E4 wristband
for the entire waiting period. There were two cases of discomfort, which could be
avoided by using another wristband design, and one case where the wristband had
to be taken off during x-rays. Testing it with more children would of course make
the results more reliable. Further work includes designing the system for how the
wristbands should be used in practice.
How feasible is it to use the Visual Analog Scale (VAS) as a method to assess anxiety
in terms of children's willingness and ability to self-report?
As the VAS is already used as a one-question pain assessment tool in the triage, the
opportunity of applying it as a one-question anxiety assessment tool was identified.
The test showed that the children easily understood the difference between pain and
anxiety and were both able and willing to score their anxiety on the scale. Additionally,
the correlation between the children’s anticipated anxiety (VAS) and their actual anxi-
ety (mYPAS and VAS) was moderate. Other studies have shown even more promising
results when testing the feasibility of VAS to measure anxiety [88][95]. Further work
includes testing how this would work in the triage and/or integrating the scale into
the game.
How can a digital intervention be developed to reduce paediatric anxiety?
Research and a literature review was done to uncover what has previously been done
to reduce anxiety. 4 main categories in reducing anxiety in healthcare settings with
a digital intervention were identified: preparation and involvement, play and enter-
tainment, emotional support and mindful relaxation. Distraction techniques by using
iPad games, TV-shows or VR, in particular, were effective in reducing anxiety. Prepara-
tion and involvement is effective when done in the appropriate way, and emotional
support was also a valuable tool to reduce anxiety. Research indicated that mind-
ful relaxation is an effective relaxation method for situational anxiety, however, not
many trials had been done with children. Taking advantage of the effectiveness of
distraction tools and applying another method of reducing anxiety may be an even
more effective way to prepare children for their treatment.
How can a prototype be developed that incorporates CBT exercises in a game for
children in the PED and how will the patients respond to the intervention?
The revised problem statement gave rise to the developed prototype CBT game. When
the developed CBT game was tested at Herlev Hospital, the results were promising
both on the engagement and effectiveness parameters. All children wanted to play it
and 6/7 wanted to continue playing when they were done. The game was effective in
60
==PAGE:68==
CHAPTER 7. DISCUSSION
distracting them and they were able to follow the CBT exercises when the breathing
rate was adjusted to the children. Here, the study contributes by showing that CBT
exercises can be successfully implemented in a game intervention in the PED. The
anxiety reduction was 29% higher in the children who played the game compared
to the control group. The results cannot show how much of their anxiety reduction
can be attributed to the distracting and entertaining elements and how much was
from the CBT exercises, which would be interesting to investigate in future research.
However, from observing the child, the engaging game elements seemed to be the
most influential in reducing anxiety. The present results of the effectiveness of using
games to distract children and reduce anxiety are therefore in line with the findings
in the literature review. Also here, more participants and a more controlled test are
necessary in evaluating the intervention’s effect. The positive comments from the
parents and nurses also indicated feasibility and effectiveness, however, further re-
search should test whether the game would be used without my presence to assess
the feasibility of the intervention. Further work could also be done to develop levels
of the game that can respond to other age groups.
7.2
Further work
General points for further work include the following points:
• In the long run, it would be interesting to assess anxiety based on both the
biometric data, the VAS score given in the triage and/or in the game, as well
as the child’s actions while playing. Perhaps respiration could be used Aside
from visualising the assessment to the nurses, the game could also adapt to
the specific child’s emotional state to provide what they needed.
• Calculation cost and acquiring funding would be necessary for the interventions
to come to life. Although it is one of the more affordable types of biometric
systems, it is still not free to implement, and Herlev Hospital would not have
the funds currently.
• To implement and test the game at a lower expense, it could be developed
for mobile applications. A QR could be placed in a visual place or given by a
nurse to prompt the parents to let their children play the game from the par-
ent’s smartphone. If this was successful, implementing it on the tablets in the
waiting rooms could be the next step.
61
==PAGE:69==
8
Conclusion
This thesis aimed to investigate how anxiety can be assessed in children in the pae-
diatric emergency department (PED) and looked into the potential of using biomet-
rics. The thesis then looked at how to improve children’s experience in the PED, from
which an intervention was developed aiming at reducing their anxiety while waiting
for the next step in their treatment.
The insights gathered from desk research, interviews and observational studies sug-
gested that a wearable system that detects changes in heart rate, skin conductance
and respiration would fit into the PED setting and be able to indicate emotional dis-
tress with reasonable accuracy (>70%) when paired with a machine learning algo-
rithm. This was, however, only possible to conclude theoretically. Additionally, an
experiment was done to test the feasibility of using a wearable device in the PED set-
ting. With some design changes, the results indicate that it can be a feasible method
as 79% of the children wore it for the entire waiting period.
Desk research led to inspiration on how to minimize paediatric anxiety while observa-
tional studies led to an understanding of the opportunities and constraints of imple-
menting an intervention in the PED. A prototype of a game for children that utilises
CBT techniques was developed over four iterations. The CBT game prototype and
an Empatica E4 wristband were tested at Herlev Hospital’s PED with 14 children aged
5-8, 7 of them being in a control group. The children’s anxiety was measured with the
mYPAS score and VAS at different time points during their care. Quantitative results
showed a 53.9% reduction in anxiety in the intervention group compared to a 24.6%
reduction in the control group. Limitations include the low number of participants
in the test. The qualitative results from testing indicate that the prototype was effec-
tive in calming and distracting the children and was feasible to implement in the PED
setting.
Testing the CBT game intervention and a wearable wristband showed promising re-
sults in terms of the feasibility of implementing them in the PED. The intervention
was engaging and appreciated by children, parents and nurses based on the quali-
tative data. The quantitative data also showed a higher decrease in the anxiety of
29% in the children who tried the game, however, more tests are required to better
determine the effectiveness of the prototype. The results show that CBT exercises
are feasible to include in a game for children, also in a place as stressful as the PED.
==PAGE:70==
Bibliography
[1]
Bobo Zhao et al. “EmotionSense: Emotion Recognition Based on Wearable Wrist-
band”. In: undefined (Dec. 2018), pp. 346–355. DOI: 10.1109/SMARTWORLD.
2018.00091.
[2]
Victoriano Montesinos et al. “Multi-Modal Acute Stress Recognition Using Off-
the-Shelf Wearable Devices”. In: Proceedings of the Annual International Confer-
ence of the IEEE Engineering in Medicine and Biology Society, EMBS (July 2019),
pp. 2196–2201. ISSN: 1557170X. DOI: 10.1109/EMBC.2019.8857130.
[3]
Aaron J. Masino et al. “M-Health and autism: Recognizing stress and anxiety
with machine learning and wearables data”. In: Proceedings - IEEE Symposium
on Computer-Based Medical Systems 2019-June (June 2019), pp. 714–719. ISSN:
10637125. DOI: 10.1109/CBMS.2019.00144.
[4]
Ayten Ozge Akmandor and Niraj K. Jha. “Keep the Stress Away with SoDA: Stress
Detection and Alleviation System”. In: IEEE Transactions on Multi-Scale Computing
Systems 3.4 (Oct. 2017), pp. 269–282. ISSN: 23327766. DOI: 10.1109/TMSCS.
2017.2703613.
[5]
Martin Gjoreski et al. “Monitoring stress with a wrist device using context”. In:
Journal of biomedical informatics 73 (Sept. 2017), pp. 159–170. ISSN: 1532-0480.
DOI: 10.1016/J.JBI.2017.08.006. URL: https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
28803947/.
[6]
Yekta Said Can et al. “Continuous Stress Detection Using Wearable Sensors
in Real Life: Algorithmic Programming Contest Case Study”. In: Sensors 2019,
Vol. 19, Page 1849 19.8 (Apr. 2019), p. 1849. ISSN: 1424-8220. DOI: 10.3390/
S19081849. URL: https://www.mdpi.com/1424-8220/19/8/1849/htm%20https:
//www.mdpi.com/1424-8220/19/8/1849.
[7]
Hee Jeong Han et al. “Objective stress monitoring based on wearable sensors
in everyday settings”. In: (2020). ISSN: 0309-1902. DOI: 10 . 1080 / 03091902 .
2020.1759707. URL: https://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?
journalCode=ijmt20.
[8]
Marja Salmela, Sanna Salantera, and Eeva Aronen. “Child-reported hospital fears
in 4 to 6-year-old children”. In: Pediatric Nursing 35.5 (2009), pp. 269–276. URL:
https://findit.dtu.dk/en/catalog/54412ed8acc4e2154df470d9.
[9]
Christina M Rodriguez et al. “Multimethod Assessment of Children’s Distress
During Noninvasive Outpatient Medical Procedures: Child and Parent Attitudes
and Factors”. In: (). DOI: 10.1093/jpepsy/jss005. URL: https://academic.oup.
com/jpepsy/article/37/5/557/970258.
[10]
Julie L Lerwick. “Minimizing pediatric healthcare-induced anxiety and trauma”.
In: World Journal of Clinical Pediatrics 5.2 (May 2016), p. 143. ISSN: 2219-2808.
==PAGE:71==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
DOI: 10.5409/WJCP.V5.I2.143. URL: /pmc/articles/PMC4857227/%20/pmc/
articles/PMC4857227/?report=abstract%20https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pmc/articles/PMC4857227/.
[11]
J. E. Kim et al. “High Anxiety, Young Age and Long Waits Increase the Need for
Preoperative Sedatives in Children”. In: http://dx.doi.org/10.1177/147323001204000416
40.4 (Aug. 2012), pp. 1381–1389. ISSN: 14732300. DOI: 10.1177/147323001204000416.
URL: https://journals.sagepub.com/doi/abs/10.1177/147323001204000416.
[12]
Melanie Noel et al. “The Role of State Anxiety in Children’s Memories for Pain”.
In: Journal of Pediatric Psychology 37.5 (June 2012), pp. 567–579. ISSN: 0146-8693.
DOI: 10.1093/JPEPSY/JSS006. URL: https://academic.oup.com/jpepsy/article/
37/5/567/971760.
[13]
Edmund Keogh and Mary Cochrane. “Anxiety sensitivity, cognitive biases, and
the experience of pain”. In: The Journal of Pain 3.4 (Aug. 2002), pp. 320–329. ISSN:
1526-5900. DOI: 10.1054/JPAI.2002.125182.
[14]
Alexander Ploghaus et al. “Exacerbation of Pain by Anxiety Is Associated with Ac-
tivity in a Hippocampal Network”. In: Journal of Neuroscience 21.24 (Dec. 2001),
pp. 9896–9903. ISSN: 0270-6474. DOI: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.21-24-09896.2001.
URL: https : / / www . jneurosci . org / content / 21 / 24 / 9896 % 20https : / / www .
jneurosci.org/content/21/24/9896.abstract.
[15]
Ulrich Klages et al. “Anxiety sensitivity as predictor of pain in patients undergo-
ing restorative dental procedures”. In: Community Dentistry and Oral Epidemi-
ology 34.2 (Apr. 2006), pp. 139–145. ISSN: 03015661. DOI: 10 . 1111 / J . 1600 -
0528.2006.00265.X.
[16]
Nordsjællands Hospital. Beroligende behandling af børn med Midazolam. URL:
https://www.nordsjaellandshospital.dk/undersoegelse-og-behandling/find-
undersoegelse-og-behandling/Sider/Beroligende-behandling-af-boern-med-
Midazolam-26538.aspx.
[17]
Herlev Hospital. Lattergas. URL: https://www.herlevhospital.dk/undersoegelse-
og- behandling/find- undersoegelse- og- behandling/Sider/Lattergas- 21345.
aspx.
[18]
Videnscenter for Børnesmerter. Det behøver ikke gøre ondt.
[19]
Kristeligt Dagblad. Børn traumatiseres af at blive holdt fast på hospitalet. 2015.
URL: https://www.kristeligt-dagblad.dk/liv-sjael/boern-traumatiseres-af-blive-
holdt-fast-paa-hospitalet.
[20]
Louise G. Christensen. Fastholdelse af syge børn udfordrer sundhedsvæsenet. 2015.
URL: https://www.kristeligt-dagblad.dk/danmark/fastholdelse-af-syge-boern-
udfordrer-sundhedsvaesenet.
[21]
Region H. ”Det er ikke bare ’et lille stik’ – og det bliver værre og værre for hver
gang”. June 2019. URL: https://www.rigshospitalet.dk/presse-og-nyt/nyheder/
64
==PAGE:72==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
nyheder/Sider/2019/juni/det-er-ikke-bare-et-lille-stik-og-det-bliver-vaerre-og-
vaerre-for-hver-gang.aspx.
[22]
Thierry Steimer. “The biology of fear- and anxiety-related behaviors”. In: Dia-
logues in Clinical Neuroscience 4.3 (2002), p. 231. ISSN: 12948322. DOI: 10.31887/
DCNS.2002.4.3/TSTEIMER. URL: /pmc/articles/PMC3181681/%20/pmc/articles/
PMC3181681 / ?report = abstract % 20https : / / www . ncbi . nlm . nih . gov / pmc /
articles/PMC3181681/.
[23]
American Association of Psychology. Anxiety. URL: https://www.apa.org/topics/
anxiety.
[24]
Charles D. Spielberger. “Anxiety: Current trends in theory and research”. In: Anx-
iety (Jan. 1972), pp. 3–19. DOI: 10.1016/B978-0-12-657401-2.50008-3.
[25]
Sumner Sydeman. “Spielberger, Charles D.” In: Encyclopedia of Personality and
Individual Differences (2017), pp. 1–4. DOI: 10.1007/978-3-319-28099-8{\_}1003-
1. URL: https://link.springer.com/referenceworkentry/10.1007/978-3-319-
28099-8_1003-1.
[26]
Tanis Schisler, Janice Lander, and Susan Fowler-Kerry. “Assessing Children’s
State Anxiety”. In: Journal of Pain and Symptom Management 16.2 (Aug. 1998),
pp. 80–86. ISSN: 0885-3924. DOI: 10.1016/S0885-3924(98)00033-5.
[27]
Sylvia D. Kreibig. “Autonomic nervous system activity in emotion: A review”. In:
Biological Psychology 84.3 (July 2010), pp. 394–421. ISSN: 0301-0511. DOI: 10.
1016/J.BIOPSYCHO.2010.03.010.
[28]
Iris B. Mauss and Michael D. Robinson. “Measures of emotion: A review”. In:
Cognition and Emotion 23.2 (2009), pp. 209–237. ISSN: 02699931. DOI: 10.1080/
02699930802204677.
[29]
Robert R. Sinclair, Mo Wang, and Lois E. Tetrick. “Research methods in occupa-
tional health psychology: Measurement, design, and data analysis”. In: Research
Methods in Occupational Health Psychology: Measurement, Design, and Data Anal-
ysis (Jan. 2012), pp. 1–440. DOI: 10.4324/9780203095249.
[30]
C. D. Spielberger et al. “State-Trait Anxiety Inventory for Children”. In: (1973).
URL: https://psycnet.apa.org/doiLanding?doi=10.1037%2Ft06497-000.
[31]
Larry L Venham and Elise Gaulin-Kremer. “A self-report measure of situational
anxiety for young children”. In: (1979).
[32]
William J Greeley et al. “PEDIATRIC ANESTHESIA SECTION EDITOR The Yale Pre-
operative Anxiety Scale: How Does It Compare with a ”Gold Standard”?” In: SO-
CIETY FOR PEDIATRIC ANESTHESIA (1997).
[33]
Margaret M. Bradley and Peter J. Lang. “Measuring emotion: The self-assessment
manikin and the semantic differential”. In: Journal of Behavior Therapy and Exper-
imental Psychiatry 25.1 (Mar. 1994), pp. 49–59. ISSN: 0005-7916. DOI: 10.1016/
0005-7916(94)90063-9.
65
==PAGE:73==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[34]
Courtney L. Benjamin et al. “Patterns and Predictors of Subjective Units of Dis-
tress in Anxious Youth”. In: Behavioural and cognitive psychotherapy 38.4 (July
2010), p. 497. ISSN: 13524658. DOI: 10.1017/S1352465810000287. URL: /pmc/
articles / PMC4874244 / %20 / pmc / articles / PMC4874244 / ?report = abstract %
20https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4874244/.
[35]
Lin Shu et al. “A Review of Emotion Recognition Using Physiological Signals”. In:
Sensors 2018, Vol. 18, Page 2074 18.7 (June 2018), p. 2074. ISSN: 1424-8220. DOI:
10.3390/S18072074. URL: https://www.mdpi.com/1424-8220/18/7/2074/htm%
20https://www.mdpi.com/1424-8220/18/7/2074.
[36]
Daniel S. Quintana and James A.J. Heathers. “Considerations in the assessment
of heart rate variability in biobehavioral research”. In: Frontiers in Psychology
5.JUL (2014). ISSN: 16641078. DOI: 10.3389/FPSYG.2014.00805.
[37]
Ebrahim Najafpour et al. “Can galvanic skin conductance be used as an ob-
jective indicator of children’s anxiety in the dental setting?” In: Journal of Clin-
ical and Experimental Dentistry 9.3 (2017), e377–e383. ISSN: 19895488. DOI: 10.
4317/JCED.53419.
[38]
Jakob de Lemos et al. “Measuring emotions using eye tracking”. In: (2008).
[39]
Taiba Majid Wani et al. “A Comprehensive Review of Speech Emotion Recogni-
tion Systems”. In: IEEE Access 9 (Jan. 2021), pp. 47795–47814. ISSN: 2169-3536.
DOI: 10.1109/ACCESS.2021.3068045. URL: https://doaj.org/article/c98d0b9bce484d7eb14d9b0d
[40]
Lisa Feldman Barrett et al. “Emotional Expressions Reconsidered: Challenges
to Inferring Emotion From Human Facial Movements”. In: Psychological Science
in the Public Interest 20.1 (July 2019), pp. 1–68. ISSN: 21600031. DOI: 10.1177/
1529100619832930.
[41]
Douglas Heaven. “Why faces don’t always tell the truth about feelings”. In: Na-
ture 578.7796 (Feb. 2020), pp. 502–504. ISSN: 14764687. DOI: 10.1038/D41586-
020-00507-5.
[42]
F. Q. Al-Khalidi et al. “Respiration rate monitoring methods: A review”. In: Pe-
diatric Pulmonology 46.6 (June 2011), pp. 523–529. ISSN: 1099-0496. DOI: 10.
1002/PPUL.21416. URL: https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/full/10.1002/ppul.
21416%20https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1002/ppul.21416%
20https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/ppul.21416.
[43]
Stamos Katsigiannis and Naeem Ramzan. “DREAMER: A Database for Emotion
Recognition Through EEG and ECG Signals from Wireless Low-cost Off-the-Shelf
Devices”. In: IEEE Journal of Biomedical and Health Informatics 22.1 (Jan. 2018),
pp. 98–107. ISSN: 21682208. DOI: 10.1109/JBHI.2017.2688239.
[44]
Majed AlMaummar, HudaOthman Althabit, and SharatChandra Pani. “The im-
pact of dental anxiety on the salivary cortisol and alpha-amylase levels of chil-
66
==PAGE:74==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
dren undergoing dental treatment”. In: Saudi Journal of Oral Sciences 6.2 (2019),
p. 60. ISSN: 1658-6816. DOI: 10.4103/SJOS.SJORALSCI{\_}54{\_}19.
[45]
Sidney K. D’Mello and Jacqueline Kory. “A review and meta-analysis of multi-
modal affect detection systems”. In: ACM Computing Surveys 47.3 (Feb. 2015).
ISSN: 15577341. DOI: 10.1145/2682899.
[46]
Seungjun Oh, Jun Young Lee, and Dong Keun Kim. “The Design of CNN Archi-
tectures for Optimal Six Basic Emotion Classification Using Multiple Physiolog-
ical Signals”. In: Sensors 2020, Vol. 20, Page 866 20.3 (Feb. 2020), p. 866. ISSN:
1424-8220. DOI: 10 . 3390 / S20030866. URL: https : / / www . mdpi . com / 1424 -
8220/20/3/866/htm%20https://www.mdpi.com/1424-8220/20/3/866.
[47]
Stanislaw Saganowski et al. “Emotion Recognition Using Wearables: A System-
atic Literature Review-Work-in-progress”. In: 2020 IEEE International Conference
on Pervasive Computing and Communications Workshops, PerCom Workshops 2020
(Mar. 2020). DOI: 10.1109/PERCOMWORKSHOPS48775.2020.9156096.
[48]
Alberto De Santos Sierra et al. “A stress-detection system based on physiolog-
ical signals and fuzzy logic”. In: IEEE Transactions on Industrial Electronics 58.10
(Oct. 2011), pp. 4857–4865. ISSN: 02780046. DOI: 10.1109/TIE.2010.2103538.
[49]
World Health Organization. Stress. Oct. 2021. URL: https://www.who.int/news-
room/questions-and-answers/item/stress.
[50]
Iben Emilie Christensen, Jacob Ladenburg, and Marie Brandhøj Wiuff. “Kram-
mebamser til børn”. In: (). URL: www.kora.dk.
[51]
Deirdre E. Logan et al. “Social robots for hospitalized children”. In: Pediatrics
144.1 (July 2019). ISSN: 10984275. DOI: 10.1542/PEDS.2018-1511/76828. URL:
https://publications.aap.org/pediatrics/article/144/1/e20181511/76828/Social-
Robots-for-Hospitalized-Children.
[52]
Robyn Lewis Claar, Lynn S. Walker, and Craig A. Smith. “The influence of ap-
praisals in understanding children’s experiences with medical procedures”. In:
Journal of Pediatric Psychology 27.7 (Oct. 2002), pp. 553–563. ISSN: 01468693.
DOI: 10.1093/JPEPSY/27.7.553. URL: /record/2002-04308-001.
[53]
Wendy Fincher, Jane Shaw, and Anne Sylvie Ramelet. “The effectiveness of a
standardised preoperative preparation in reducing child and parent anxiety: A
single-blind randomised controlled trial”. In: Journal of Clinical Nursing 21.7-8
(Apr. 2012), pp. 946–955. ISSN: 09621067. DOI: 10.1111/J.1365- 2702.2011.
03973.X.
[54]
Lisa Aufegger et al. “Designing a paediatric hospital information tool with chil-
dren, parents, and healthcare staff: A UX study”. In: BMC Pediatrics 20.1 (Oct.
2020). ISSN: 14712431. DOI: 10.1186/S12887-020-02361-W.
[55]
Ida Kleye et al. “Children’s individual voices are required for adequate manage-
ment of fear and pain during hospital care and treatment”. In: Scandinavian
67
==PAGE:75==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Journal of Caring Sciences 35.2 (June 2021), pp. 530–537. ISSN: 1471-6712. DOI:
10.1111/SCS.12865. URL: https://onlinelibrary- wiley- com.proxy.findit.cvt.
dk/doi/full/10.1111/scs.12865%20https://onlinelibrary- wiley- com.proxy.
findit.cvt.dk/doi/abs/10.1111/scs.12865%20https://onlinelibrary- wiley-
com.proxy.findit.cvt.dk/doi/10.1111/scs.12865.
[56]
Rumle app. URL: https://www.heyday.dk/cases/rumle-app/.
[57]
American Psychological Association. What is Cognitive Behavioral Therapy? 2017.
URL: https://www.apa.org/ptsd-guideline/patients-and-families/cognitive-
behavioral.
[58]
Marijke De Couck et al. “How breathing can help you make better decisions:
Two studies on the effects of breathing patterns on heart rate variability and
decision-making in business cases”. In: International Journal of Psychophysiology
139 (May 2019), pp. 1–9. ISSN: 0167-8760. DOI: 10.1016/J.IJPSYCHO.2019.02.
011.
[59]
P. Sabherwal et al. “Hypnosis and progressive muscle relaxation for anxioly-
sis and pain control during extraction procedure in 8–12-year-old children: a
randomized control trial”. In: European Archives of Paediatric Dentistry 22.5 (Oct.
2021), pp. 823–832. ISSN: 19969805. DOI: 10 . 1007 / S40368 - 021 - 00619 - 0 /
FIGURES / 4. URL: https : / / link . springer . com / article / 10 . 1007 / s40368 - 021 -
00619-0.
[60]
Seema Bargale et al. “Comparative evaluation of effect of two relaxation breath-
ing exercises on anxiety during buccal infiltration anesthesia in children aged
6-12 years: A randomized clinical study”. In: Journal of Indian Society of Pedodon-
tics and Preventive Dentistry 39.3 (July 2021), pp. 284–290. ISSN: 19983905. DOI:
10.4103/JISPPD.JISPPD{\_}501{\_}20.
[61]
Martina Levi et al. “Breathing out dental fear: A feasibility crossover study on
the effectiveness of diaphragmatic breathing in children sitting on the dentist’s
chair”. In: International Journal of Paediatric Dentistry (Nov. 2022). ISSN: 1365263X.
DOI: 10.1111/IPD.12958.
[62]
Kiat Hui Khng. “A better state-of-mind: deep breathing reduces state anxiety
and enhances test performance through regulating test cognitions in children”.
In: Cognition & emotion 31.7 (Oct. 2017), pp. 1502–1510. ISSN: 1464-0600. DOI:
10.1080/02699931.2016.1233095. URL: https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
27666392/.
[63]
Yunping Li et al. “Progressive Muscle Relaxation Improves Anxiety and Depres-
sion of Pulmonary Arterial Hypertension Patients”. In: Evidence-based Comple-
mentary and Alternative Medicine : eCAM 2015 (2015). ISSN: 17414288. DOI: 10.
1155 / 2015 / 792895. URL: /pmc / articles / PMC4397496 / %20 / pmc / articles /
68
==PAGE:76==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
PMC4397496 / ?report = abstract % 20https : / / www . ncbi . nlm . nih . gov / pmc /
articles/PMC4397496/.
[64]
Loren Toussaint et al. “Effectiveness of Progressive Muscle Relaxation, Deep
Breathing, and Guided Imagery in Promoting Psychological and Physiological
States of Relaxation”. In: Evidence-based complementary and alternative medicine
: eCAM 2021 (2021). ISSN: 1741-427X. DOI: 10.1155/2021/5924040. URL: https:
//pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/34306146/.
[65]
Debra P. Shockey et al. “Preprocedural Distress in Children With Cancer: An In-
tervention Using Biofeedback and Relaxation”. In: Journal of Pediatric Oncology
Nursing 30.3 (May 2013), pp. 129–138. ISSN: 10434542. DOI: 10.1177/1043454213479035/
ASSET/IMAGES/LARGE/10.1177{\_}1043454213479035-FIG1.JPEG. URL: https:
//journals-sagepub-com.proxy.findit.cvt.dk/doi/10.1177/1043454213479035.
[66]
D. Corydon Hammond. “Hypnosis in the treatment of anxiety- and stress-related
disorders”. In: https://doi.org/10.1586/ern.09.140 10.2 (Feb. 2014), pp. 263–273.
ISSN: 14737175. DOI: 10.1586/ERN.09.140. URL: https://www.tandfonline.com/
doi/abs/10.1586/ern.09.140.
[67]
M. Knox et al. “Game-based biofeedback for paediatric anxiety and depression”.
In: Mental Health in Family Medicine 8.3 (Sept. 2011), p. 195. ISSN: 1756834X.
URL: /pmc/articles/PMC3314276/%20/pmc/articles/PMC3314276/?report=
abstract%20https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3314276/.
[68]
Kristine McKenna et al. “Ready, Set, Relax: Biofeedback-Assisted Relaxation Train-
ing (BART) in a Pediatric Psychiatry Consultation Service”. In: Psychosomatics
56.4 (July 2015), pp. 381–389. ISSN: 0033-3182. DOI: 10.1016/J.PSYM.2014.
06.003.
[69]
Ravinder Jerath et al. “Self-Regulation of Breathing as a Primary Treatment for
Anxiety”. In: Applied Psychophysiology Biofeedback 40.2 (June 2015), pp. 107–115.
ISSN: 10900586. DOI: 10.1007/S10484-015-9279-8.
[70]
S. Nuvvula et al. “Effect of audiovisual distraction with 3D video glasses on den-
tal anxiety of children experiencing administration of local analgesia: a ran-
domised clinical trial”. In: European Archives of Paediatric Dentistry 16.1 (Feb.
2015), pp. 43–50. ISSN: 19969805. DOI: 10.1007/S40368-014-0145-9.
[71]
Angela M. Morrow et al. “Developing BrightHearts: A Pediatric Biofeedback-
Mediated Relaxation App to Manage Procedural Pain and Anxiety”. In: Pain Prac-
tice 18.6 (July 2018), pp. 698–708. ISSN: 15332500. DOI: 10.1111/PAPR.12655.
[72]
Webgruppen Rigshospitalet. An interactive teddy companion is going to help re-
duce anxiety and stress in children. 2018. URL: https://www.rigshospitalet.dk/
maryelizabethshospital/english/news-and-press/news/Sider/2018/an-interactive-
teddy-companion-is-going-to-help-reduce-anxiety-and-stress-in-children.
aspx.
69
==PAGE:77==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[73]
Serious Games Interactive. My Companion. 2018. URL: https://www.seriousgames.
net/en/portfolio/bornerige-rigshospitalet-my-bear/.
[74]
Stéphanie Dumoulin et al. “A Randomized Controlled Trial on the Use of Virtual
Reality for Needle-Related Procedures in Children and Adolescents in the Emer-
gency Department”. In: Games for Health Journal 8.4 (Aug. 2019), pp. 285–293.
ISSN: 21617856. DOI: 10.1089/G4H.2018.0111.
[75]
Naser Asl Aminabadi et al. “The Impact of Virtual Reality Distraction on Pain
and Anxiety during Dental Treatment in 4-6 Year-Old Children: a Randomized
Controlled Clinical Trial”. In: Journal of Dental Research, Dental Clinics, Dental
Prospects 6.4 (2012), p. 117. ISSN: 2008-210X. DOI: 10.5681/JODDD.2012.025.
URL: /pmc/articles/PMC3529924/%20/pmc/articles/PMC3529924/?report=
abstract%20https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3529924/.
[76]
Jyothsna Setty, Sindura Allani, and Jyothsna V Setty. “Effectiveness of Distraction
Techniques in The Management of Anxious Children in the Dental Operatory”.
In: Article in IOSR Journal of Dental and Medical Sciences 15.10 (2016), pp. 69–73.
DOI: 10.9790/0853-1510026973. URL: www.iosrjournals.org.
[77]
Webgruppen Rigshospitalet. Specially designed virtual reality game for children
who are afraid of needles. 2020. URL: https://www.rigshospitalet.dk/english/
news-and-media/news/Pages/2018/march/specially-designed-virtual-reality-
game-for-children-who-are-afraid-of-needles.aspx.
[78]
Design Council. Framework for Innovation: Design Council’s evolved Double Dia-
mond. URL: https://www.designcouncil.org.uk/our-work/skills-learning/tools-
frameworks / framework - for - innovation - design - councils - evolved - double -
diamond/.
[79]
Eric Ries. The Lean Startup: How today’s entrepreneurs use continuous innovation
to create radically successful businesses. 7th ed. Crown Business, 2011.
[80]
Rex Hartson and Pardha Pyla. The UX Book: Process and guidelines for ensuring a
quality user experience. 1st ed. 2012.
[81]
Brian M. Winn. “The Design, Play, and Experience Framework”. In: Handbook of
Research on Effective Electronic Gaming in Education (May 2009), pp. 1010–1024.
DOI: 10.4018/978-1-59904-808-6.CH058.
[82]
Ryerson University Digital Education Strategies The Chang School of Continuing
Education. The Art of Serious Game Design Conceptual Framework. URL: https :
//pressbooks.library.torontomu.ca/guide/chapter/1-3-the-art-of-serious-
game-design-conceptual-framework/.
[83]
LaToye Adams and Ashley Moulton. UX Research With Kids. URL: https://www.
youtube.com/watch?v=jNB9NAG4Rnw.
[84]
Henrik Schønau-Fog and Thomas Bjørner. ““Sure, I Would Like to Continue”:
A Method for Mapping the Experience of Engagement in Video Games”. In:
70
==PAGE:78==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Bulletin of Science, Technology and Society 32.5 (Oct. 2012), pp. 405–412. ISSN:
15524183. DOI: 10.1177/0270467612469068/ASSET/IMAGES/LARGE/10.1177{\_
}0270467612469068- FIG2.JPEG. URL: https://journals- sagepub- com.proxy.
findit.cvt.dk/doi/full/10.1177/0270467612469068.
[85]
M. R. Jensen. Børne- og Ungemodtagelsen Herlev Hospital. URL: https : / / www .
herlevhospital . dk / afdelinger - og - klinikker / Afdeling - for - Boern - og - Unge /
klinikker-sengeafsnit-boerne-og-ungemodtagelse/Sider/Boerne-og-Ungemodtagelsen.
aspx.
[86]
Julie Aaberg Lauridsen et al. “Investigating the use of physical restraint of chil-
dren in emergency departments: A Scandinavian survey”. In: Acta anaesthesi-
ologica Scandinavica 65.8 (Sept. 2021), pp. 1116–1121. ISSN: 1399-6576. DOI:
10.1111/AAS.13833. URL: https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/33866540/.
[87]
Stuart Pugh. “Concept selection - A method that works”. In: Schriftenreihe Wdk
(workshop Design - Konstruktion) (1981), pp. 497–506.
[88]
Johan M. Berghmans et al. “A Visual Analog Scale to assess anxiety in children
during anesthesia induction (VAS-I): Results supporting its validity in a sample
of day care surgery patients”. In: Pediatric Anesthesia 27.9 (Sept. 2017), pp. 955–
961. ISSN: 1460-9592. DOI: 10.1111/PAN.13206. URL: https://onlinelibrary.
wiley.com/doi/full/10.1111/pan.13206%20https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/
abs/10.1111/pan.13206%20https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/pan.
13206.
[89]
Damien Djaouti et al. “Origins of Serious Games”. In: Serious Games and Edutain-
ment Applications (2011), pp. 25–43. DOI: 10.1007/978-1-4471-2161-9{\_}3.
[90]
Isabela Granic, Adam Lobel, and Rutger C M E Engels. “The Benefits of Playing
Video Games”. In: (2013). DOI: 10.1037/a0034857.
[91]
Funday Factory. “Game Design for Kids: A paper on how to design age-appropriate
game experiences for kids of all ages”. In: (). URL: https://fundayfactory.com/
media/147699/age-appropriate-game-design-for-children.pdf.
[92]
Hiroki Uratani, Kohzoh Yoshino, and Mieko Ohsuga. “Basic study on the most
relaxing respiration period in children to aid the development of a respiration-
leading stuffed toy”. In: Annual International Conference of the IEEE Engineering
in Medicine and Biology Society. IEEE Engineering in Medicine and Biology Society.
Annual International Conference 2014 (Nov. 2014), pp. 3414–3417. ISSN: 2694-
0604. DOI: 10.1109/EMBC.2014.6944356. URL: https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.
gov/25570724/.
[93]
Zeev N. Kain et al. “Measurement tool for preoperative anxiety in young chil-
dren: The yale preoperative anxiety scale”. In: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/09297049508400225
1.3 (Dec. 2007), pp. 203–210. ISSN: 17444136. DOI: 10.1080/09297049508400225.
URL: https://www.tandfonline.com/doi/abs/10.1080/09297049508400225.
71
==PAGE:79==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[94]
En elektronisk stressball for psykisk helse - Grasp. URL: https://www.smartcarecluster.
no/en/aktuelt/2020/2/en-elektronisk-stressball-for-psykisk-helse.
[95]
Christoph H. Kindler et al. “The visual analog scale allows effective measure-
ment of preoperative anxiety and detection of patients’ anesthetic concerns”.
In: Anesthesia and analgesia 90.3 (2000), pp. 706–712. ISSN: 0003-2999. DOI: 10.
1097/00000539-200003000-00036. URL: https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
10702461/.
[96]
Gibbons S. Empathy Mapping: The First Step in Design Thinking. URL: https://www.
nngroup.com/articles/empathy-mapping/.
[97]
IDEO. Design Kit - The Five Whys. URL: https://www.designkit.org/methods/the-
five-whys.
[98]
Region H. Hvad skal jeg sige til mit barn? Sprog ved medicinske procedurer. URL:
https://www.rigshospitalet.dk/afdelinger-og-klinikker/julianemarie/videnscenter-
for-boernesmerter/til-foraeldre/Documents/ord-der-dur.pdf.
72
==PAGE:80==
A
Visit and interview at Herlev Hospital
Discussing the case with Hanne Konradsen and Gitte Maria Flyger Würtz
Anxiousness in children
Gitte: We sometimes can’t get close to the children at all if they have a lot of trauma.
There was a girl who had a lot of things done a s a child and she came back to the
hospital when she was 12 years old and she was the nicest kid but she was scream-
ing and going bananas when we were just approaching her arm, so she had a lot of
trauma. We can give them medication and sometimes we will restrain them, but we
want to be the hospital who do not do that. A nurse told me that she could see that
as she approached the child the pulse rate increased just from the anticipation.
Parents' anxiety
Gitte: Often the parents are very worried and stressed, so the parents anxiousness
can definitely influence the child and make them anxious.
The triage process
The children are given a green, yellow, orange or red colour, based on the urgency of
their state. Red is the most urgent where the children are in a critical state. However,
a high pulse, a fever or high pain score can cause the child to be in the red or orange
category even if it is not so urgent, but in this case the nurse can triage them one
level down. The nurses use a pulse-oximeter on the finger to measure pulse, blood-
saturation and temperature. Then they count the respiration with a hand on the
stomach and listen for inhalation problems. The child assesses their pain using the
Wong-Baker scale, NPS of FLACC depending on their age. If they are old enough to
express it themselves WB and NPS is used (See Figure B.2b). If the child experiences
a lot of pain the nurses draw blood but it is not common.
The problem with assessing pain in children
Gitte: Today, all children are given a pain score, and often staff do not react to the
pain score that is measured because, based on objective assessments, they think
that the child is not in as much pain as they express. Maybe because the child moves
freely and plays after a while. So I assume that if you measured anxiety as well, then
perhaps children and staff could better agree on how much pain the child is in. Some-
times the children will tell us that they are a 10 out of 10, but I can tell that they are
not a 10, and I won’t give them any drugs. They are just a 3 or 4 if I measure and
evaluate them objectively. The nurses and physicians do that a lot, they won’t trust
the word of the patient. I think this happens because the children are anxious. The
children can feel more pain if they are anxious, for example they can be anxious of
the unknown and so on. A child can be orange on the triage if it is 8, 9 and 10 on
==PAGE:81==
APPENDIX A. VISIT AND INTERVIEW AT HERLEV HOSPITAL
the pain scale - but maybe we don’t give them any drugs because they are playing
around when they come into the waiting room.
Hanne: And what is a 10? If that is what you have experienced is the worst thing, so if
the child has never had more pain and it is the first time in the hopsital, then it would
be a 10 for them.
How would you use an anxiety score?
Gitte: My assumption for using an anxiety scoring tool is that doctors and nurses can
treat the child in the best way possible. We would like a way to know when the best
time to see the child is - both for the nurses and physicians. They get anxious from
both of us, even if we just put on a bandage. When they sit in the waiting room, we
visit them from time to time to check up on them. The anxiety score could be used
to assess the child’s level of readiness for the next steps in their treatment. Studies
show that anxiety increases pain sensitivity, so if we can reduce their anxiety, we can
better manage their pain.
Hanne: Maybe we could even shift the power balance, so it is more up to the child to
decide that they are ready for a doctor to come.
Reducing anxiety and distracting the child
The balloon guy come once a week, and they also have clowns coming, then they use
soap bubbles, teddy bears, games, toys, many that are donated by Flying Tiger or
even private people.
The most appropriate age group to target
Gitte: We earlier talked about pre-school children of 5-7 years old. In this age group
they have just reached the capacity to understand some more things and they can
get really scared. They are also imagining a lot of things.
Hanne: And they can express their level of anxiety.
74
==PAGE:82==
APPENDIX A. VISIT AND INTERVIEW AT HERLEV HOSPITAL
Images from the initial visit at Herlev Hospital
(a) Screen for documenting pain.
(b) VAS / Wong-Baker scale
.
Figure A.1: Computer-system and pain scales used during triage.
(a) The single-patient waiting room
(b) Screen for info and entertainment options
Figure A.2: After triaging, patients wait in the single-person waiting room in which
they are also treated by the doctors and nurses.
75
==PAGE:83==
APPENDIX A. VISIT AND INTERVIEW AT HERLEV HOSPITAL
Figure A.3: The cabinet of toys, games and soap bubbles that help distract the chil-
dren.
76
==PAGE:84==
B
Shadowing nurses in the paediatric
emergency department
Goals
• Observe the nurses’ roles and responsibilities in their daily work by collecting
detailed insights first-hand. Document how they make decisions, what artefacts
and systems they use, and how they interact with children, assess their anxiety
and try to calm their anxiety.
• Observe the children and their parents with a focus on how they feel, what they
do and what they say – what makes them anxious and what do they do to cope
with it?
• Observe the physical space, which systems are in place, and what is possible.
Participants
• A team of nurses (approx. 10) was observed with the main focus on shadowing
3 nurses – referred to as nurse 1, nurse 2 and nurse 3 – who were central in
handling the anxious 6-year old (Anna).
• The anxious 6-year-old girl who will be referred to with the placeholder name
Anna. Anna had her fingers squeezed between two rocks and needed to have
her stitches removed.
• Anna’s mother, who was with her from start to end, was also observed.
Apparatus
Physical notebook, an iPhone 11 camera for taking pictures, and audio recordings
when allowed and verbal consent was given.
Procedure
The nurses were followed into both the triage room, the nurses’ meeting room and
inside the single-patient waiting room which was also where the Anna was treated.
The observations that were documented in the notebook were:
• Anna’s emotional state, behaviour, verbal responses and coping mechanisms,
• The nurses’ decision-making, use of systems, handling and treatment of Anna,
• How her mother interacted with Anna.
==PAGE:85==
APPENDIX B. SHADOWING NURSES IN THE PAEDIATRIC EMERGENCY DEPARTMENT
Reflections and questions (Q) were also written down. A physical distance was main-
tained to avoid interrupting the nurses’ routines and to avoid any behaviour change
as a result of being observed. However, when the nurses were not treating patients
and had time to interact, relevant questions were asked to clarify observations. Con-
sent was given for taking pictures of the screens and systems. I presented myself
to the nurses as a student from DTU collecting data to write my thesis on assessing
and reducing anxiety in the ER waiting room. To the children and parents, I was in-
troduced as ”Emilie who is joining today to observe the treatment” to make sure the
participants did not feel personally observed and monitored.
Outcome
The nurses use a big screen in their meeting room which has the children’s name,
age, triage category, total wait time, reason for being there, the nurse and doctor
assigned, their waiting room etc. displayed in Figure ??.
Following Anna's treatment
In the triage room
Anna - 6 years old, brought a teddy bear, has 4 stitches in the tip of her finger that
need removal. Nurse 1 knows in advance from Anna’s general practitioner that she
is anxious. Her stitches should have been removed by Anna’s own doctor but due to
her anxiousness, this was impossible. Anna had a bad experience being stitched
– she was not properly sedated in the beginning and they had to restrain her.
Anna and her mother are followed into the triage room. Anna stands next to her chair
by her mothers side, – touches her face a lot – hides behind her mom’s chair when
Nurse 1 talks about what is going to happen. Anna says her stomach is hurting and
her mother tries to explain that it is because she is feeling nervous.
Nurse 1: Heart beating is fast, because of the nerves (measures using a pulse-
oximeter on the finger).
Nurse 1 notes down her heartbeat, blood oxygen saturation, counts her respiration
with a hand on her stomach and measures her temperature to 37.8 C
Nurse 1: “Does your finger hurt?”
Anna looks up at her mother who says she needs to answer herself – “No”, she says.
Nurse 1: “I’m glad to hear that” – enters her answers into the computer system. Nurse
1 tells her about the procedure, and Anna starts crying
Anna’s mother: “But these stitches need to come out”
78
==PAGE:86==
APPENDIX B. SHADOWING NURSES IN THE PAEDIATRIC EMERGENCY DEPARTMENT
(a) The screen in the nurses’ meeting room showing the patients’ in-
formation
(b) Computer-system used when triaging
Figure B.1: Systems used to document and get an overview of the patients
79
==PAGE:87==
APPENDIX B. SHADOWING NURSES IN THE PAEDIATRIC EMERGENCY DEPARTMENT
Anna is was triaged in the green category.
Nurse 1 talks about Anna’s gummy bear earrings and asks about school and
Anna answers her. Nurse 1 asks if Anna wants some “juice” – the sedative drug
Midazolam (benzodiazepine) which Anna also had when she was stitches. She nods
convincingly. A doctor will make the decision to give it or not. Nurse 1 asks if she
wants to watch some Ramasjang (children’s TV channel) before beginning which
she is eager to do. Anna and her mother go to the single-patient waiting room.
Treatment attempt 1
Nurses talk about Anna in the meeting room. A new nurse requests that she could
try to do it quickly without needing to use a sedative. She enters her waiting room
and talks to Anna about the procedure which makes Anna cry again. The nurse ex-
presses understanding and sympathy about Anna’s prior bad experience and
says it will be nothing like that today, and that this is a much easier now.
Nurse asks: “Are you afraid it is going to hurt” and Anna says yes. She lets her know
she can say stop anytime and that they need to agree before doing anything
and awaits her acceptance. Anna cries and gives no response. Back in the meeting
room the nurse says: “The tears were rolling down so I knew she wouldn’t let me do
it”. There is a shift change and a need to assign a new nurse to take care of Anna.
One of the nurses say: “[Nurse 2] should take it, she is so sympathetic (dansk =
pædagogisk)” – “and you [to another nurse] are pregnant so I wouldn’t feel good
about you taking it if she is kicking.
Another nurse says to me: “It is a shame you are not here when someone needs a
mask (anesthesia). They are usually very afraid of that, depending on the child.”
Q: “What do you do to reduce their fear in that case?” Nurse: “We use soap bubbles,
put on Ramasjang which is a game changer, dance and sing, anything to distract
them. We use a hospital clown if it’s really bad.”
Nurse 2 visited Annas’s waiting room alone and got her to touch her own stitches
which indicated that they did not hurt. She also gave Anna the tools and equip-
ment she would use in the procedure so she could get familiar with them. Nurse
2 says: “The patients must be in on it, so they don’t have a bad experience which
could stay with them for a long time. In my usual job, I have patients who need in-
jections regularly and I don’t stick them until they say go. They choose me for that
reason. Of course, if it takes too long I will have to count down from 3 and then do it,
but then they are prepared. They prefer to be in control.”
Nurse 2 said that she didn’t have so much experience with removing stitches so they
80
==PAGE:88==
APPENDIX B. SHADOWING NURSES IN THE PAEDIATRIC EMERGENCY DEPARTMENT
decided that Nurse 3 should be the one performing the procedure while Nurse 2
would be there to help. Nurse 3 suggested that Anna could maybe pull out the
strings herself. Nurse 2 says that Anna had the Midazolam and is “drunk” from it so
to say.
Treatment attempt 2
Anna watches Peppa Pig on the screen in front of her but stops when Nurse 2 and 3
enter the waiting room. The nurses talk to her in a comforting way and Nurse 3 walks
over the procedure with Anna and her mother.
Anna seems more relaxed and says “I don’t want to look” with a smile and looks up
at Peppa Pig.
When they tell her about what they are going to do and touch her finger she gets
very scared again and cries.
Anna’s mother: “squeeze mom’s hand”
When Nurse 3 tries to do the procedure.
Anna says: “No, I can’t, no I can’t”
Nurse 3: ”I have done this many many times before, it is very quick and easy for me
to do”
Anna’s mother: “We have to remove the threads Anna”
Anna: ”But it hurts”
Nurse 2: But Anna your finger doesn’t hurt does it? You can’t feel it right?”
Anna’s mother: “Anna, I think you feel like it hurts inside your head a bit more than
it actually hurts”
Anna: No it hurts when they come out”
Nurse 3: Touches her good fingers one by one saying “this doesn’t hurt, this doesn’t
hurt” – “But this little finger has become very scared” – “I got an idea!” Gets some
numbing cream that she puts into a cut-off glove finger. Anna is very scared of putting
her finger into the glove but eventually does.
Nurse 3: “Now you have a little smurf finger isn’t that silly!”
The nurses exit and attends to other patients while the cream starts working.
81
==PAGE:89==
APPENDIX B. SHADOWING NURSES IN THE PAEDIATRIC EMERGENCY DEPARTMENT
Final treatment of Anna
When the nurses enter again, Anna is calmer, but the second they start touching her
finger she says that hurts and hides by her mother.
Nurse 2: “But your finger doesn’t hurt, right Anna – can you feel any pain in it?”
Anna crying: “I can’t, I cant”
Anna’s mother: “It’s up in your head you think it hurts – we have to get the threads
out”
Nurse 3: “Let us know if it hurts” - they try to hold her arm still but she fights back,
pulling her arm and kicking.
Anna: “Please stop, I don’t want to”
Nurse 2: “Don’t you want to watch some Peppa Pig?” – But Anna’s full attention
is on her finger.
The nurses says that they need to restrain her and ask her mother to hold her
feet so she can’t kick.
Anna yells: “I DONT WAN’T TO – STOP MOM!” struggling to get away.
The nurses are holding her hand out of her sight while working although she says she
wants to see.
Anna screams loudly and repeats: “I NEED A BREAK, I NEED A BREAK!” and is crying
but the nurses carry on to get the stitches out as quickly as they can while holding
her down
Nurse 3: “One is out! – Two are out!” etc.
When they are done they praise her for being very brave and give her a small gift.
They also play with her teddy bear and a pair of tweezers which makes Anna
laugh. Nurse 3 gives Anna the tweezers.
Nurse 3: “Pinch me now – auch auch! – it’s okay I can take it.” – Anna laughs.
Afterwards, in the meeting room:
Nurse 2: ”I know it was rough in there, but [nurse 3] said that now was the time to
get it done before we went in and we just had to carry through.”
Q: How much do you think she felt actual pain in her finger and how much was from
anxiety?
82
==PAGE:90==
APPENDIX B. SHADOWING NURSES IN THE PAEDIATRIC EMERGENCY DEPARTMENT
Nurse 2: ”It was only the final stitch she felt – this was the only time her finger
twitched. She could not feel the other stitches – that was pure anxiety and
anticipation of feeling pain.”
Q: ”Did you at any point consider using nitrous oxide?”
Nurse 2: ”Using nitrous oxide would not have helped her, as her reaction came from
her anxiety. And we’re just so busy, we had to get it done.”
(a) Screen for documenting pain.
(b) Wong-Baker (top) and NPS (bottom).
Figure B.2: Computer-system and pain scales used during triage.
83
==PAGE:91==
C
Empathy map
The empathy map was build using the guide by the NNgroup [96]. The insights are
from own observational studies while shadowing nurses at Herlev Hopsital (as de-
scribed in Appendix B and a study from Sweden where thirteen children aged 4-12
were interviewed about their strategies for managing their fear and anxiety in the
hospital [55].
Figure C.1: Empathy map showing the typical thoughts, feelings, quotes and be-
haviour of fearful children in the emergency department.
==PAGE:92==
D
Map of the actors and their relations
Figure D.1: A map of the actors and their most important connections.
==PAGE:93==
==PAGE:94==
APPENDIX E. DESIGN SPECIFICATIONS
E
Design Specifications
Figure E.1: Design specification for assessing anxiety with a biometric system
87
==PAGE:95==
APPENDIX E. DESIGN SPECIFICATIONS
Figure E.2: Design specification for reducing anxiety with a digital intervention
88
==PAGE:96==
==PAGE:97==
APPENDIX F. EVALUATION OF BIOMETRIC MODALITIES
F
Evaluation of biometric modalities
Figure F.1: Strengths and weaknesses of biometric modalities 1/3...
90
==PAGE:98==
APPENDIX F. EVALUATION OF BIOMETRIC MODALITIES
Figure F.2: Strengths and weaknesses of biometric modalities 2/3...
91
==PAGE:99==
APPENDIX F. EVALUATION OF BIOMETRIC MODALITIES
Figure F.3: Strengths and weaknesses of biometric modalities 3/3...
92
==PAGE:100==
G
Research process of research question 1
This appendix describes the main aspects of the research process for the research
question:
What has been done to assess feelings of distress using a wearable system that
collects and analyses physiological signals?
In searching for modalities and their advantages and disadvantages a broad search
was done initially using the search string ’Emotion OR affect recognition physiological
OR biological signals review’. Snowballing was particularly useful in this step.
in the next phase, the search was more narrowly targeted towards assessing distress
with wearable sensor systems. At this step, a more systematic approach and specific
search terms were used. The search strings and databases used are shown in Figure
G.1, while a flow diagram showing the research process is shown in G.2.
Figure G.1: Search strings and databases
A screening was then done on the most relevant articles found in the initial search.
The screening process is shown in Figure G.1
Inclusion criteria:
• Assessing situational distress (anxiety, fear, stress).
==PAGE:101==
APPENDIX G. RESEARCH PROCESS OF RESEARCH QUESTION 1
• Using one or more algorithms for affect detection.
• Testing low valence high arousal (stress, anxiety, or fear).
• Wearable device.
Studies that were performed in real-life settings were prioritised. Only few studies
had children participants, this was not used as a criteria.
Exclusion criteria:
• Diagnosing chronic anxiety, depression or neurodivergence (autism, Asperger’s
etc.).
• Lack of information about which sensors were used.
• Use of a system that is not wearable.
• No accuracy calculated.
94
==PAGE:102==
APPENDIX G. RESEARCH PROCESS OF RESEARCH QUESTION 1
Eligibility
Screening
Inclusion
Identification
Identification of studies via databases and registers
Records identified from
Databases:
DTU Findit (n = 698)
Google Scholar (n=17.400)
Records removed before screening:
Duplicate records removed  (n =74)
Records removed for other reasons 
(n=17.678)
Records screened
(n = 346)
Reports sought for retrieval (n=44)
Records excluded
(n = 302)
Not able to retrieve (n=6)
Full text articles assessed for eligibility 
(n=38)
Reports excluded
(n= 5, not a wearable device)
(n= 16, detecting chronic conditions)
(n=7, uses eeg sensors)
(n=7, no clear results)
(n=3, types of sensors unclear)
Studies included in review
(n=8)
Figure G.2: PRISMA flow diagram for research on assessing distress with a wearable
device
95
==PAGE:103==
H
Research process of investigating
research question 2
This appendix describes the main aspects of researching the research question:
What has previously been done to reduce children’s distress with a non-medical
digital intervention in healthcare settings?
A brainstorming round was done to come up with relevant search terms and syn-
onyms. The search string used is shown in Figure H.1, while a flow diagram illustrat-
ing the researching process is H.2.
Figure H.1: Search strings and databases
The records were sorted according to ’relevancy’ so the search through the pages was
done when 1) there were enough for the time available to complete the research, or
2) no more relevant titles were appearing.
Inclusion criteria:
• Digital intervention
• Aims at reducing situational anxiety or stress
==PAGE:104==
APPENDIX H. RESEARCH PROCESS OF INVESTIGATING RESEARCH QUESTION 2
• Tested in a real-life healthcare setting
• Child participants, <18 years old.
Exclusion criteria:
• Intervention for treating chronic anxiety/depression/stress
• Adult participants
• Intervention is inherently non-digital
• Focus on parents anxiety.
97
==PAGE:105==
APPENDIX H. RESEARCH PROCESS OF INVESTIGATING RESEARCH QUESTION 2
Eligibility
Screening
Inclusion
Identification
Identification of studies via databases and registers
Records identified from
Databases:
DTU Findit (n = 1.190)
Google Scholar (n=1.210)
Websites (Riget.dk, Youtube.com, n=5)
Records removed before screening:
Duplicate records removed  (n =52)
Records removed for other reasons 
(n=1.807)
Records screened
(n = 346)
Reports sought for retrieval
Records excluded
(n = 282)
Not able to retrieve (n=7)
Full text articles assessed for eligibility 
(n=57)
Reports excluded
(n= 15, Not the proper setting)
(n= 3, Not targeted toward children
(n=10, Focus on chronic conditions)
(n=4, Results not clearly stated)
(n=11, Not suitable intervention)
Studies included in review
(n=14)
Figure H.2: Flow diagram for research on reducing children’s anxiety or distress
98
==PAGE:106==
I
Related work: Recognising anxiety and
stress
Figure I.1: Studies aiming to detect stress, fear or anxiety and their results.
==PAGE:107==
J
Related work: Reducing anxiety
Figure J.1: Studies of interventions aiming to reduce anxiety and their results 1/2...
==PAGE:108==
APPENDIX J. RELATED WORK: REDUCING ANXIETY
Figure J.2: Studies of interventions aiming to reduce anxiety and their results 2/2.
101
==PAGE:109==
K
VR testing
.
Participants
4 adult participants 3 females, 1 male.
Apparatus
A BoboVR Z4 headset with attached headphones and with an iPhone 11 inserted. The
videos played came from the app Within.
Procedure
The headset was adjusted to the individual participants adjusting the straps, distance
to the lenses and focal point. A video was selected from Withing which was watched
for 5-10 minutes.
==PAGE:110==
APPENDIX K. VR TESTING
Results
Figure K.1: Advantages and disadvantages of using a VR headset in the medical set-
ting.
Although adult participants and not the target user, children, were tested, it gave an
indication of several challenges in applying it to the real setting in the ER. The headset
was heavy for 3/4 participants and it would surely also be heavy for children to wear.
It was also quickly collecting dust and particles on the lenses which meant that these
should be cleaned after every use. In an ER setting the headset should additionally
be cleaned in the places it touches the child’s.
103
==PAGE:111==
L
Proof of concept testing of breathing
exercise
Goal
The iteration’s purpose was to build a prototype of an animated breathing exercise
and test how children reacted to it and what they thought of it. Follow this link to go
to the Figma prototype.
Participants
A boy aged 5, who will be called Magnus, who was in the private emergency room at
Herlev Hospital due to a knee injury. A girl aged 7, who will be called Mia who tested
the prototype in a private setting with no medical conditions or injuries.
Apparatus
A 13” Macbook Air was used to show the clickable Figma prototype.
Procedure
I introduced myself to the children and parents as a DTU student investigating ways
to help children in the ER cope with difficult feelings. I was vague to not prime the
participants more than necessary. Only participants without respiration problems
were chosen. I asked for 5 minutes of their time. One participant did not want to
participate as he thought I was going to touch his injured knee, but changed his mind
when I promised to not touch his knee. The participants age, gender, pain-level and
emotional state (self-reported by selecting an emoji) was written down.
The animation was played while a ”Wizard of Oz” approach was used to test the voice
commands that should guide the user to breathe correctly. The following lines were
said aloud: ”Look a star has fallen out of the sky. We need to get it back up in the
sky which we can do by breathing in a certain way. First, we put out hands on our
bellies, then we breathe in slowly and feel our belly expand and then exhale so we
relax in the body. Inhale now (as star expands), and exhale (as star shrink). (After
6 rounds:) Now the star can get back home. The animation extended for 4 seconds
and contracted for 6 seconds, as this is a breathing pattern that prompts the nervous
system to relax.
It was noted down how many rounds they could pay attention and follow the instruc-
tions. Follow up questions were asked regarding the experience: How did it feel?
Have you tried to something like this before? Would you want to do it again? Why?
==PAGE:112==
APPENDIX L. PROOF OF CONCEPT TESTING OF BREATHING EXERCISE
(Was it fun or boring?) Open questions were used to not bias the participants but if
they didn’t know what to answer, leading questions were made to guide them.
(a) Introduction screen.
(b) The star expands and contracts.
(a) The star travels up into the sky.
(b) The star finds its way back.
Figure L.2: Computer-system and pain scales used during triage.
Results
Although the participants breathed in accordance to the animation, they did not
breathe in and out consistently. One factor is of course the children’s emotion state
which is known to affect the respiration pattern. But if one is to believe the children’s
self reported happy state and calmness, another reason could be the animation not
giving the user an indication of how long they should breathe in and out. Giving feed-
back by counting down or showing the boundary the circle expands to might help
with this. It could also be due to children having a smaller lung capacity and that
makes it challenging to breathe in and out for so long.
The children thought the exercise was relaxing and comfortable, but they said they
did not want to try it again, as it was not fun enough. For the next iteration, more
captivating elements will be used, while being attentive that it does not take focus
away from the breathing exercise.
105
==PAGE:113==
APPENDIX L. PROOF OF CONCEPT TESTING OF BREATHING EXERCISE
(a) Introduction screen.
(b) The star expands and contracts.
106
==PAGE:114==
M
The 5 Whys Technique
Why are children aged 5-7 anxious about being in the hospital
They fear pain
They are old old 
enough to worry about 
pain related to 
common procedures 
(e.g. blood tests or IV)
They are uncertain 
about what will 
happen to them
They usually have to 
wait a long time for a 
nurse/doctor to 
examine them
Why?
The medical staff are 
often busy with other 
patients
The amount of time 
that a patient requires 
is more than what staff 
is able to provide
Why?
One reason is due to 
procedure being 
postponed / taking 
longer in highly 
anxious children
Why?
They are in a new  
clinical environment
Why?
The medical 
environment has weird 
tools, smells, sounds, 
and strangers in white 
coats
The hospital 
environment needs to 
be as clean as possible
Difficulty regulating 
their emotions
Difficulty handling 
negative emotions
Many children that age 
have not learned how 
to regulate their 
feelings and 
behaviours
Why?
Why?
Why?
Why?
They pick up anxiety 
from their parents
Parents are also 
worried and may not 
know how to handle 
the situation 
appropriately
No one has informed / 
taught them
Why?
Why?
Some are 
inexperienced but 
imaginative, so even a 
little pain can seem 
overwhelming
Some already have had 
bad experiences with 
e.g. needles
Why?
Why?
Why?
Not enough staff / too 
many other things to 
do
Why?
Why?
Why?
Why?
Why?
No plan for reducing 
the anxiety made / 
followed by the staff
They did not know the 
child was / would get 
anxious
Busyness can cause 
them to skip this step 
to have time for other 
patients
The child's anxiety was 
not easily readable by 
the medical staff
Why?
Children express / 
exhibit fear and anxiety 
differently from child to 
child
Why?
Why?
Why?
No anxiety-​reducing 
interventions were 
given
Children waiting in the 
common area do not 
always have access to 
anxiety reducing 
interventions
Why?
Why?
Why?
Figure M.1: The 5 Whys with both horizontal and vertical rows. The vertical rows were
stopped when it no longer made sense to ask ’why’. [97]
==PAGE:115==
N
Brainstorming session and initial
evaluation
An affinity diagram was made using the KJ-technique to categorise ideas from brain-
storming and gain an overview of them. They were sorted into the primary methods
used to reduce anxiety. These categories were later used in the morphology chart
for concept creation. Afterwards they were plotted into the Impact-Effort matrix to
gain an overview of the most promising concepts, which facilitated the morphology
concept creation process.
==PAGE:116==
APPENDIX N. BRAINSTORMING SESSION AND INITIAL EVALUATION
Assessing anxiety: Brainstorm affinity diagram
Videogame
Virtual
reality
Audiobooks
CBT play
therapy
Social
robot
Modelling
(role 
model)
Deep 
breathing
Progressive
Muscle 
Relaxation
Aromatherapy 
(e.g. lavender 
oil)
Cartoon / 
streaming
Buzzing
device
Decorations 
in the ER
Stress
ball
Animal 
therapy
Meditation
Yoga
Hypnotherapy
Preparation and
information
Hospital
clown
Drawing
Soap 
bubbles
Guided 
imagery
Physical 
reassurance
Teddy
bear
Physical
game
Placebo 
heart 
beat
Biofeedback
Music
Screaming 
device
Mindfullness
Balloon
man
Active 
distraction
Toys
Desensitizing 
practise
Information 
about what 
will happen
Visualisation
of what will 
happen to 
them
Information 
about why it
is important
Calming
Physical 
Relaxation 
Techniques
Social 
interaction
Control
Prototype where 
they can make 
decisions (e.g. 
which color elastic
band around arm)
A 
stop/pause 
button
A nurse's / 
doctor's 
toolkit they 
can play with
Doing
crafts
Passive 
distraction
Music
Nature 
sounds
Decorations 
in the ER
Mental
Relaxation
Techniques
Figure N.1: Affinity diagram of ideas
109
==PAGE:117==
APPENDIX N. BRAINSTORMING SESSION AND INITIAL EVALUATION
HIGH IMPACT
HIGH EFFORT
LOW IMPACT
LOW EFFORT
Augmented
reality
Drawing
Audiobook
Stress ball
Videogame
Decorations
in the ER
Animal 
therapy
Social 
robot
Screaming 
device
Physical 
game
Yoga
Caring for a
teddy bear
Hospital clown 
and balloon man
Placebo low 
heart rate / 
respiration
Deep 
breathing
Meditation 
and Mindfullness
Hypnotherapy
A toy medical
toolkit
Modelling 
(role model)
A stop/pause
button
App for making 
decisions (e.g. which 
color elastic band 
around arm)
Entails both cost and time demands
Assumed effectiveness of intervention
Doing 
crafts
Area of interest
Child life 
specialist
Massage
A toy medical
toolkit
Info on  what will
happen and why
Desensitisation video 
(e.g. patient sees 
themselves getting a 
blood test)
Virtual 
reality video
Virtual 
reality game
CBT play therapy
(facilitated)
Progressive 
Muscle 
Relaxation
Guided 
imagery
Interactive story that 
changes depending 
on biometrics
Biofeedback
Figure N.2: Ideas plotted into the Impact-Effort matrix
110
==PAGE:118==
O
Morphology and Pugh Matrix
O.1
Morphology chart
The concepts were created from 5 categories: Medium, content, method, activity, and in three cases, technology. In the medium
category, only digital solutions were included, although teddy bears, toys etc. were considered in the initial brainstorming, as this
was deemed easier and faster to prototype for, easy to collect data with and possibly more engaging to use. The morphology
does not exclude the possibility of combining solutions later, e.g. by including biofeedback into the CBT game or include hospital
information into the decision game. It merely reflects the core function of the concept.
==PAGE:119==
APPENDIX O. MORPHOLOGY AND PUGH MATRIX
Support and info
Tablet
Medium
Method
Content
Smartphone
Social robot
TV screen
Projector
Smartwatch
Preparation
Involvement
Relaxation
Emotional support
CBT techniques
Modelling
Virtual tour
Activity
Offer choices
Desensitisation
Guided imagery
Biofeedback
Play a game
Watching a film
Conversation
(Technology)
Augmented reality
Artificial intelligence
Listen to audio
*All concepts will by default use elements from the play 
and distraction category
Speaker
Observe animations
Game that applies CBT techniques
Guided imagery, hospital-​oriented
Social robot / AI assistant that informs and supports patients
Biofeedback relaxation training
Game that offers low-​level decisions for patients
Augmented reality hospital tour with cooperative child (modelling)
Play and distraction*
Biosensors
VR desensitisation
VR headset
Figure O.1: Morphology chart for concept creation
112
==PAGE:120==
APPENDIX O. MORPHOLOGY AND PUGH MATRIX
O.2
Pugh Analysis Matrix
The Pugh matrix was used to investigate how the created concepts rated across different parameters from the design specification.
The parameters were weighted according to importance, with effectiveness, engagement and usability being the most important for
the concept to function. Concept C; the CBT game, scored the highest followed by concept A; the augmented reality tour, information
and modelling app followed by concept E; biofeedback. The matrix helps with seeing what makes a solution work better and to use
the good aspects as ideas to include in the chosen concept.
Concept A
Concept B
Concept C
Concept D
Concept E
Concept F
Engaging
Sustains 
attention
Low cost
to run and 
implement
Easy imple-​
mentation
into systems
Ease of use
by children
aged >5
Time demand
is low for nurses
and staff
Total score
Datum
0
0
0
0
0
2
Effectiveness
in reducing 
anxiety
1
Weight
3
0
3
1
2
3
2
-1
1
1
0
0
0
1
1
1
2
0
2
2
1
2
1
1
0
0
-2
0
-1
2
1
1
-1
0
0
0
-1
-1
-1
-1
0
10
3
12
3
7
3
Figure O.2: Pugh Matrix
113
==PAGE:121==
==PAGE:122==
APPENDIX P. CBT GAME DEVELOPMENT
P
CBT game development
Brainstorm on CBT game activities
Diaphramic
breathing
Progressive
muscle 
relaxation
Game 
activities
Collecting 
(e.g. eggs, 
rocks, 
animals)
Doing
tasks
Shooting
(non-​
violent)
Cleaning/
tidying/
repairing
Exploring
Driving
Calming 
anxiety
Under
water
Field
Forest
House
Space
Beach
Mountains
Blowing 
dandelion
Blowing 
a 
windmill
Blowing 
soapbubbles
Blowing
fire
Environment
Another
planet
Squeeze 
lemons or
oranges
Flute
Expanding 
and shrinking
circle / bar / 
sun
Water 
moves
Blowing 
away 
leaves
Fog 
disappears
Dust 
disappears
Sitting
still
Other
ideas
Bio-​
response 
controls 
game
Using 
microphone to
get feedback 
from 
breathing
Squeeze
a 
sponge
Tighten 
like a 
turtle
Tighten 
like a 
hedgehog
Tighten 
like an 
armadillo
Squeeze face 
like your 
tasting 
something 
sour
Stretch 
feet into
sand
Activate 
face 
muscles by 
smiling
Use arm 
muscles to 
hold onto 
rope
Using 
respiration 
response to 
indicate 
anxiety
Using a 
respiration 
band for 
feedback
Using a  
band for 
feedback
Mixed
Brainstorm and Methodology Circle
Puzzle
Relaxation
Focus
Curiosity
Surprise
Only one 
degree of 
difficulty in 
first iterations
Progress by
unlocking 
new 
territory
If they 
complete the 
exercise they 
get a new item
The player 
is a 5-7 
year old in 
the ER
Learning 
how to do 
the CBT 
techniques
Goal is to do
exercises 
and collect 
items
CBT 
exercises
Use logic 
reasoning 
and trial 
and error
Learning
by doing
The player need 
to collect 
food/items/coins 
for the hospital
The player  
collects items 
that unlock the
next territory
The player 
collects items 
that can 
prepare him/her
for procedure
Fantasy
world
Nature*
The characters
need the 
player to help 
them
Prepare 
emotionally
Collect
items
Game ends 
when all items 
are collected 
and player 
returns home
Touch
Drag
Pan
The player should 
be able to show 
the items 
collected to the 
nurse and parents
The player 
sees their 
progress when
they get a new 
item
Motivation is 
sustained by 
progress, 
puzzles and 
curiosity
They 
complete the 
game if they 
get all items
Following the  
animations 
help in 
learning the 
durations
Name: 
Zenland
Relaxing 
atmosphere
Backstory: 
Hospital visit 
and ways to 
make it easier
Emma is 
main 
character and
is a patient
Nurse is secondary 
character and wants
to help Emma relax 
and needs Emmas 
help too
Interact 
with items 
and 
characters*
Solution find 
objects and 
put them in 
the right 
places
The player 
feels relaxed 
in the end and 
ready for new 
challenges
Mix of 
cartoon and 
photorealistic
Music could be
used when 
looking at the 
landscape / 
map
Nature 
sounds to 
fit the 
scene
Breathe in 
scents: 
lavender 
field
Breathe in 
the orange
scent
Clouds 
dissappear
Smelling 
flowers / 
other 
scents
Characters
Animals
Nurse
Patients
Figma prototypes
Breathing
Breathing
PMR
Maps
Breathing
Paper prototypes
Figure P.1: Serious games methodology circle: Brainstorming, affinity and prototyping activities
115
==PAGE:123==
Q
Iteration 1
Q.1
Wireframes
Figure Q.1: Iteration 1 wireframes (1/2)...
==PAGE:124==
APPENDIX Q. ITERATION 1
Figure Q.2: Iteration 1 wireframes (2/2).
Q.2
Testing
Procedure
The porotype was tested on a Macbook Air M2 and methods used were Think aloud
and observation. For this the following tasks were given:
• Task 1 (map screen): Go to the first location
• Task 2 (mountain top): Breathe according to the cloud animation. Inhale when
the cloud expands and exhale when the cloud shrinks.
• Task 3 (map screen): Go to the second location
• Task 4 (orange garden): Squeeze the orange between your hands.
117
==PAGE:125==
APPENDIX Q. ITERATION 1
While the participants tried the game, observations and quotes were noted down.
They were encouraged to say everything they thought aloud. The participants were
encouraged to try themselves when in doubt. Only if they were stuck I would ask
them a question or give a hint so they could move forward.
When testing with children, it is important to create a safe environment where they do
not feel like they are tested on their abilities but rather that the game is being tested.
The more they feel safe, the more comfortable they will be telling their opinion and
being honest. As many children are shy, observations are key in getting an idea of
how the child perceives the prototype as they usually show their feelings in their body
language and expressions.
I told the 6 year old that she was only doing this for fun, not for me or anyone else, so
she could stop any time and she should only continue if she wanted to to so. She was
also told that the game was not finished so it was to test that and find its mistakes
rather than to test her. As she was a target user, I also asked about her interests and
preferences and what was popular at school, and got the following answers.
• Which game(s) are you playing at the moment: Ramasjang games, the football
game is my favourite where you have to score goals. It is because I also play
football after school.
• Do you have other hobbies?: I am a scout and I also go to swimming practise.
• What is popular at school right not: Collecting and swapping pokemon cards
and Tinka cards. My friends also play Ramasjang games.
• What do you think of Emma? She is actually very nice.
This helped me know what interactions the children are most used to from the other
games, what their skill level approximately is and an indication what engages them.
118
==PAGE:126==
APPENDIX Q. ITERATION 1
Outcome
Figure Q.3: Iteration 1 testing (1/2)...
119
==PAGE:127==
APPENDIX Q. ITERATION 1
Figure Q.4: Iteration 1 testing (2/2)...
120
==PAGE:128==
R
Iteration 2
R.1
Wireframes
Figure R.1: Iteration 2 wireframes (1/3)...
==PAGE:129==
APPENDIX R. ITERATION 2
Figure R.2: Iteration 2 wireframes (2/3)...
122
==PAGE:130==
APPENDIX R. ITERATION 2
Figure R.3: Iteration 2 wireframes (3/3).
R.2
Testing
Procedure
Methods used were Think aloud and observation. The prototype was tested on an
iPad Air 2. First some questions were asked about their favourite TV-show or game
to get an idea of their interests and the difficulty level of the games they were playing.
They were also asked about their opinions on the characters in the game and whether
they would prefer to play as Oscar or Emma.
To try and reduce bias and avoid the children wanting to please me I made sure to
say the following to them before beginning or during the game: This is only for fun,
this is not something you do for me or anyone else. You can stop whenever you feel
like it. If you think it’s funny you can laugh if you don’t like something you can say so.
The game is not finalised so there could be some errors. Try to pretend I’m not here.
If you really need help I will give you a clue.
123
==PAGE:131==
APPENDIX R. ITERATION 2
Outcome
Figure R.4: Iteration 2 testing (1/3)...
124
==PAGE:132==
APPENDIX R. ITERATION 2
Figure R.5: Iteration 2 testing (2/3)...
125
==PAGE:133==
APPENDIX R. ITERATION 2
Figure R.6: Iteration 2 testing (3/3)...
126
==PAGE:134==
S
Iteration 3
S.1
Wireframes
Figure S.1: Iteration 3 wireframes (1/3)...
==PAGE:135==
APPENDIX S. ITERATION 3
Figure S.2: Iteration 3 wireframes (2/3)...
128
==PAGE:136==
APPENDIX S. ITERATION 3
Figure S.3: Iteration 3 wireframes (3/3).
129
==PAGE:137==
APPENDIX S. ITERATION 3
S.2
Testing
S.2.1
Procedure
5 children participated in testing the prototype, 3 males and 2 females aged 5-8. They
were recruited from my network and the test took place in a quiet private setting. An
iPad Air 2 was used to test on. The focus was on assessing engagement and level
of difficulty. It was important to find out if the children did the exercises correctly
and were able to complete the game independently. Their engagement level was
assessed with the question ”Do you want to continue?” and the accuracy of doing the
exercises were measured by number of rounds done correctly [84].
The setting was quiet and without distractions for more reliable results and hints
were only provided if the participants did not know how to get further.
130
==PAGE:138==
APPENDIX S. ITERATION 3
S.2.2
Outcome
Figure S.4: Iteration 3 UX metrics testing.
131
==PAGE:139==
T
Iteration 4
T.1
Wireframes
Iteration 4 was mostly identical to iteration 3 shown in Figure S.1 to S.3. The new or
iterated wireframes are shown in Figure T.1.
Trigger: Tap on the air 
balloon / click girl / drag girl.
Feedback:  Girls gets into air 
balloon and goes to the 
landscape overview.
Iteration 4 changes (otherwise identical to Iteration 3)
Diploma animated to catch attention
Diploma enlarged
Trigger: Delay
Trigger: Drag diploma.
Feedback: Diploma moves with 
finger into empty slot
Rule: System saves the collected diploma
Locations locked that could interfere with treatment
Locations locked that could interfere with treatment
Trigger: Tap on the forest 
Feedback: Screen goes to 
the forest
Rule: Locked orange orchard 
and beach in second go
Trigger: Tap on the mountains 
Feedback: Screen goes to the 
mountain
Rule: Locked orange orchard and 
beach in second go
See iteration 3
See iteration 3
Figure T.1: Iteration 4 iterated wireframes
T.2
Testing
T.2.1
Method
A small experiment was carried out to test if there was any difference in the children
who received the intervention and the children who did not.
Participants
14 participants were included in the testing (8 females and 6 males). 7 children re-
ceived the intervention while 7 were in the control group and did not receive it. The
participants did not receive any reward for participating.
Inclusion criteria included:
• Aged 5-8 years old
• Speaks Danish
• No acute procedure needed
• Needs to get procedure or examination done that could cause anxiety
• Has no a cognitive impairment.
==PAGE:140==
APPENDIX T. ITERATION 4
Apparatus
• iPad Air 2
• Figma Mobile App Version 22.6.0
• Link to prototype: Figma link
• Link to sound files: Soundcloud link
• Wireframes are displayed in Appendix S and T
Procedure
For Group A who received the intervention:
1. Introduction to project and consent given by parent and child.
2. The Modified Yale Preoperative Anxiety Scale (link) was used to assess the chil-
dren’s level of anxiety were triaged and told of what was going to be done by the
nurses doctors. It was assessed either by me or in collaboration with a nurse -
this is timestamp 1 (T1)
3. (E4 wristband is turned on and put on the child).
4. While the child was waiting they received the intervention on the iPad. The
game took approx. 20 minutes. The child’s facial and verbal expression were
observed and noted down to reveal their feeling towards the game. In the end
the engagement of the game was tested by saying: If you want to continue you
can tap the air balloon.
5. After the intervention the child was asked to assess their anxiety about the com-
ing procedure (e.g. blood test) on the Visual Analog Scale (VAS) (from 1-10).
6. mYPAS is filled out again – this is timestamp 2 (T2).
7. Qualitative questions: How was it to play it? Did you enjoy it? Was it hard – Why?
What was the best part? What did the parents think of it?
8. mYPASis filled out again when the nurse/doctor/Medical Laboratory Technolo-
gist comes in to do the procedure or examination (e.g. right before the blood
sample is collected, before any pain is experienced) - this is timestamp 3 (T3).
9. After the procedure, the anxiety level on the VAS scale is assessed by the nurse/-
doctor/Medical Laboratory Technologist.
10. Qualitative questions for nurse/doctor are asked: What do you think led to the
child’s anxiety in this case? What went well and what could have improved the
133
==PAGE:141==
APPENDIX T. ITERATION 4
experience?
Group B: Who did not receive the intervention
1. Introduction to project and consent given by parent and child.
2. The Modified Yale Preoperative Anxiety Scale (link) was used to assess the chil-
dren’s level of anxiety were triaged and told of what was going to be done by the
nurses doctors. It was assessed either by me or in collaboration with a nurse -
this is timestamp 1 (T1).
3. (E4 wristband is turned on and put on the child).
4. While the child waited they were asked to assess their anxiety about the coming
procedure (e.g. blood test) on the Visual Analog Scale (VAS) (from 1-10).
5. mYPAS is filled out again – this is timestamp 2 (T2).
6. mYPAS is filled out again when the nurse/doctor/Medical Laboratory Technolo-
gist comes in to do the procedure or examination (e.g. right before the blood
sample is collected, before any pain is experienced) - this is timestamp 3 (T3).
7. After the procedure, the anxiety level on the VAS scale is assessed by the nurse/-
doctor/Medical Laboratory Technologist.
8. Qualitative questions for nurse/doctor are asked: What do you think led to the
child’s anxiety in this case? What went well and what could have improved the
experience?
Design
The participants were randomly assigned to the intervention group or the control
group.
Null-hypothesis: There is no difference in anxiety levels between children playing a
game with relaxation exercises and those who are not playing the game.
Alternative Hypothesis: Playing a game with with relaxation exercises reduces anxiety
more in children in the ER than not playing the game.
Independent Variables: The game prototype, one round of playing from the start
until the end where all elements are collected. Dependent variables: Level of anxiety
measured by the assessment scales VAS and mYPAS.
134
==PAGE:142==
APPENDIX T. ITERATION 4
T.2.2
Outcome
Figure T.2: mYPAS anxiety scores at T1, T2 and T3
135
==PAGE:143==
APPENDIX T. ITERATION 4
Figure T.3: Change in anxiety in percentage from T1 to T2 and T1 to T3
136
==PAGE:144==
APPENDIX T. ITERATION 4
Results from testing iteration 4 at Herlev 
mYPAS of Group A 
(intervention)
T1
T2
T3
Pain (VAS/Wong-
Baker)
Anxiety (VAS by 
child) after 
intervention
Anxiety (VAS by nurse 
or BA) after procedure 
Participant no.
CK92
100,00
22,92
100,00
0
3
10
VM27
41,67
22,92
100,00
0
10
10
LO33
41,67
22,92
62,50
0
7
7
BR02
35,42
22,92
22,92
5
4
0
KS48
29,17
22,92
41,67
5
4
0
AP52
60,42
22,92
35,42
2
0
4
CM78
39,58
22,92
58,33
0
N/A
N/A
Mean
49,70
22,92
60,12
1,71
4,67
5,17
Std deviation
24,16
0,00
30,34
Figure T.4: Results from testing Iteration 4
137
==PAGE:145==
APPENDIX T. ITERATION 4
Results from testing iteration 4 at Herlev 
mYPAS of 
Group A 
(intervention)
Reason for being 
there
Procedure or 
examination needed
Age
Continue?
Additional comments or citations
Participant no.
BA = bioanalytiker
CK92
Fever and sickness
Blood sample (N)
7 Yes
Now I feel much better (after the intervention). Very anxious, 
had to get nitrious oxide for them to be able to take the blood 
test. Having done the breathing exercises before helped her do 
it correctly.
VM27
Swollen fingers, 
sickness
Blood sample (N+BA)
5 Yes
Hospital clown – His mom had played the game with him and 
used the breathing exercises with him and he calmed down for 
a couple of seconds while doing them. Very anxious and had to 
restrained
LO33
Fever, high CRP
Blood sample (N+BA)
6 Yes
Hopsital Clowns - She was anxious but also good at saying what 
she needed, cooperated and sat still, very brave
BR02
Fever and soreness, 
suspect reactive 
athritis 
Blood sample (BA)
7 Yes
She said that it hurt and felt weird in the arm – she was 
distracted by the game. Very positive comments from parents.. 
She asked for her bunny before it began. When asked if she was 
scared during she said that she was not scared 
KS48
Stomach ache, 
throwing op
Blood sample (BA)
8 Indifferent
Seemed very tough but tightened up when he saw the needle.. 
Did not mind using the intervention while the blood test was 
going 
AP52
Fever, flu
Blood sample (N)
9 Yes
Was effectively distracted during blood test
CM78
Blood sample (N)
6 Yes
Good at saying what he needed. 
Mean
6,85714286
Figure T.5: Results from testing Iteration 4
138
==PAGE:146==
APPENDIX T. ITERATION 4
Results from testing iteration 4 at Herlev 
mYPAS of Group B 
(control)
T1
T2
T3
Pain (VAS by child) Anxiety (VAS by 
child) while waiting
Anxiety (VAS by nurse) 
after procedure 
Participant no.
GP37
29,17
29,17
43,75
8
6
4
IL51
22,92
29,17
41,67
3
4
1
AO58
29,17
29,17
29,17
4
4
0
PL77
29,17
29,17
29,17
0
2
0
AE26
72,92
22,92
100,00
0
N/A
N/A
TU60
39,58
29,17
52,08
2
N/A
N/A
DW13
39,58
29,17
41,67
0
N/A
N/A
Mean
37,50
28,27
48,21
2,43
4,00
1,25
Std deviation
16,75324734
2,362277956
24,24879995
Mean and Std deviations
Difference (%)
T1
T2
T3
T1-T2
Mean
Group A
49,70
22,92
60,12
53,89
Group B
37,50
28,27
48,21
24,60
Group A band
upper
73,86
22,92
90,46
lower
25,54
22,92
29,78
Group B band
upper
54,25
30,64
72,46
lower
20,75
25,91
23,97
Std deviation
Group A
24,16
0,00
30,34
Group B
16,75324734
2,362277956
24,24879995
Figure T.6: Results from testing Iteration 4
139
==PAGE:147==
APPENDIX T. ITERATION 4
Results from testing iteration 4 at Herlev 
mYPAS of 
Group B 
(control)
Reason for being 
there
Procedure or 
examination needed
Age
Additional comments or citations
Participant no.
BA = bioanalytiker
GP37
Fever
Blood sample (N)
7
She was very brave, she sat still and let me do it 
IL51
Swallowed 6 magnetsX-ray and surgery 
5
I have seldomly seen a child respond so calmy to getting told he 
needs surgery
AO58
Virus 
Blood sample (BA)
6
Had had a blood test two times before the previous two days 
PL77
Fever
Blood sample (BA)
8
Was the toughest little girl, everything was fine by her
AE26
Infection
Blood sample (N)
7
Very anxious, had to be restrained
TU60
Infection
Blood sample (BA)
6
DW13
Fever
Blood sample (BA)
6
Mean
6,42857143
Correlations mYPAS and VAS
mYPAS T3
VAS child
VAS. nurse/BA (after procedure)
100,00
3
10
100,00
10
10
Correlation yMPAS and VAS child
62,50
7
7
0,526737865
22,92
4
0
41,67
4
0
Correlation VAS child and VAS nurse/BA
35,42
0
4
0,476009626
43,75
6
4
29,17
4
1
29,17
4
0
29,17
2
0
Figure T.7: Results from testing Iteration 4
140
==PAGE:148==
U
How to talk to children who need
medical procedures
Hvad skal jeg sige til mit barn?
Sprog ved medicinske procedurer
Sprog der skal undgås
Sprog der virker
Det skal nok gå, der er ikke 
noget at være bange for 
(falsk garanti)
Hvad har du lavet i skolen i dag?
(distraktion)
Det kommer ikke til at gøre 
ondt 
(uklart; negativt fokus)
Andre børn siger at det føles som 
et krads
(information)
Lægen/sygeplejersken skal 
tage noget blod
(uklar information)
Først vil de lægge en elastik 
omkring din arm, så vil de vaske 
din arm med noget koldt og 
bagefter …….
(information)
Du opfører dig som en baby
(kritik)
Lad os prøve at tænke på noget 
andet, fortæl mig om den film……
(distraktion)
Det vil føles som et bistik
(negativt fokus)
Fortæl mig hvordan det føles
(information)
Det vil tage lige så lang tid 
som ….
(negativt fokus)
Det vil tage kortere tid end…..  
(tv program, eller anden kendt 
tidshorisont for barnet) 
(information)
Medicinen vil give en 
brændende fornemmelse
(negativt fokus)
Nogle børn siger at medicinen 
giver dem en varm fornemmelse
(information, positivt fokus)
Fortæl mig når du er klar 
(for meget kontrol)
Når jeg tæller til tre, kan du puste 
fornemmelsen ud af kroppen 
(støtte til mestring, distraktion)
Jeg er også ked af det
(undskyldning)
Du er meget modig 
(ros, opmuntring)
Du skal ikke græde
(negativt fokus)
Det var svært - jeg er stolt af dig
(ros)
Det er snart overstået
(negativt fokus)
Det var rigtig flot at du…. 
(giv specifik ros- hvad var godt)
Sprog der skal undgås
Sprog der virker
Krauss et al. Lancet 2016
Figure U.1: Effective and non-effective use of language for children who need a med-
ical procedure [98]
==PAGE:149==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Akademivej, Building 358
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.dtu.dk
