==PAGE:1==
DTU Wind
Cost-benefit assessment for increased 
renewable energy integration in the Bornholm 
Island
Monesh Shantharam 
DTU Wind-M-0597 
February 2023
==PAGE:2==
DTU Wind-M-0597 
February 2023
Project period: 
September 2022 - February 2023
ECTS: 30
Education: Master of Science
Supervisor(s):
Guangya Yang
Jose Angel Leiva Vilaplana
DTU Wind and Energy Systems
Remarks:
This report is submitted as partial 
fulfillment of the requirements for 
graduation in the above education at the 
Technical University of Denmark.
Technical University of Denmark 
Department of Wind and Energy 
Systems Frederiksborgvej 399
DK-4000 Roskilde
www.wind.dtu.dk
Author: Monesh Shantharam
Title:
Cost-benefit assessment for increased renewable 
energy integration in the Bornholm Island
DTU Wind and Energy Systems is a department of the 
Technical University of Denmark with a unique 
integration of research, education, innovation and 
public/private sector consulting in the field of wind and 
energy. Our activities develop new opportunities and 
technology for the global and Danish exploitation of 
wind and energy. Research focuses on key technical-
scientific fields, which are central for the development, 
innovation and use of wind energy and provides the 
basis for advanced education.
==PAGE:3==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over six months at the Section for Sustainable Energy,
Department of Electrical Engineering, at the Technical University of Denmark, DTU, in
partial fulfilment for the degree Master of Science in Engineering, MSc Eng.
It is assumed that the reader has a basic knowledge in the areas of Sustainable Energy
and Economics.
Monesh Shantharam - s210214
Signature
Date
Abstract
“Decarbonisation” is a crucial step to be taken to reduce the amount of carbon dioxide
emissions produced in various economic sectors such as energy, industry, and trans-
portation. The decarbonisation of such economic areas requires a global shift to renew-
able energy sources other than fossil fuels (oil, gas, and coal). This shift may be performed
in inland regions where public support, logistics and management, and local leadership
are readily available. However, in the case of islanded regions such as remote locations
or geographic islands, there are significant limitations with power generation technologies
and resources available. Therefore, it is essential to take specific measures to ensure the
environmental and economic sustainability of islands.
The main purpose of this project is to perform a stochastic economic analysis of a 20 MW
photovoltaic power (PV) plant on the island of Bornholm (Denmark). Here, the issue of
power curtailment in the PV plant will be investigated for different scenarios where (i) the
PV power plant is run with curtailment, (ii) without power curtailment, and (iii) solving the
curtailment issue with the connection of the PV plant with a district heating system, per-
forming power-to-heat. Cost-benefit analysis is calculated based on different parameters
required for this scale of a project. These different parameters are obtained with the help
of a specialized PV software called system advisor model (SAM). The methodology em-
ployed in this study is divided in energy generation forecast, cost-benefit analysis, power
congestion, sensitivity, and uncertainty analysis.
The main purpose of the cost-benefit analysis is to obtain financial metrics to assess
the economic profitability of the PV plant investment. The considered metrics are the
net present value (NPV) and internal rate of return (IRR) along with the Levelized Cost
of Energy (LCOE). Finally, a stochastic approach is considered for input parameters to
perform a probabilistic analysis, based on Monte Carlo simulation, of financial metrics.
The conclusions of this study are that the results achieved by the scenario without any
power curtailment are the best case with the highest net present value. The main results
obtained for this scenario are $841,292 as NPV and 10.76% as IRR; with an LCOE of
10.41 c$/kWh. Future work will require further analysis of the power-to-heat alternative to
expand the economic profitability of the power plant operation in the long term.
Cost-benefit assessment of increased renewable energy systems integration in the Bornholm Island
iii
==PAGE:4==
Acknowledgements
Guangya Yang, Senior Researcher, Department of Wind and Energy Systems Power
Systems- DTU
Supervisor
Jose Angel Leiva Vilaplana, PhD Student (Marie Skłodowska-Curie ESR for InnoCyPES
ITN), Department of Wind and Energy Systems Power Systems- DTU
Supervisor
I would like to take this opportunity to express my deep and sincere gratitude to my super-
visors Guangya Yang and Jose Angel Leiva Vilaplana, for providing me with their invalu-
able guidance and support throughout this research. They have helped me carry put the
research and present it as clearly as possible. Their immense knowledge and experience
along with their guidance and motivation assisted me in completing this master’s thesis.
I also want to thank Fatma Bulut for her remarkable contributions in this project.
Further, I would like to extend my thanks to Technical University of Denmark for the two
years of learning during my Master’s Degree.
Finally, I am extremely grateful to my family and friends for their continuous love and
support when undertaking this master’s thesis.
iv
Cost-benefit assessment of increased renewable energy systems integration in the Bornholm Island
==PAGE:5==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
2
1.1
Decarbonization, power congestion, and power-to-heat in islands . . . . . .
2
1.2
Need for economic and uncertainty analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.3
Thesis context
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
1.4
Thesis objectives and contributions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
1.5
Thesis structure
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2
Literature review
7
2.1
Review on energy islands . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.2
Solar PV integration in islands
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
2.3
Economic analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
2.4
Power congestion management . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
3
Methodology
23
3.1
Forecast of renewable power generation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
3.2
Economic analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
3.3
Analysis of power congestion challenges and opportunities
. . . . . . . . . 25
3.4
Uncertainty analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
3.5
Software . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26
4
Case study
27
4.1
Context definition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
4.2
Forecast of energy generation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
4.3
Cost-benefit analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
4.4
Analysis of power congestion challenges and opportunities
. . . . . . . . . 36
4.5
Uncertainty analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 40
5
Discussion
48
6
Conclusion
51
Bibliography
52
A Appendix
57
Cost-benefit assessment of increased renewable energy systems integration in the Bornholm Island
1
==PAGE:6==
1
Introduction
This chapter is dedicated to providing the readers with a brief introduction to the concepts,
objectives, motivation, and structure of the current thesis. The concepts covered in the
introduction are the need for decarbonization, the drawbacks of power congestion, and
the potential solutions to be explored such as power-to-heat. In addition, the importance
of cost-benefit and uncertainty analysis in a project will be highlighted.
1.1
Decarbonization, power congestion, and power-to-heat in
islands
The European Union (EU) aims to achieve 80% to 95% reduction of emissions by 2050 [1].
According to EU consumption data [2], major energy industries primarily use fossil fuels,
which display high calorific value to generate heat. However, with gaining access and the
possibility of renewable energy opening doors for new energy arrangements, wind, and
solar energy are paving the way for a clean energy transition [3]. This energy transition is
driven by public support, logistics and management, and local leadership. Other factors
that help in this transition are financial and affordable manufacturing. These factors may
be readily available in cities, which may be considered one of the main sources of global
energy demand and carbon emissions [4].
Unlike inland regions, islands are not able to receive energy from other sources such
as different neighbouring countries or alternative energy generation technology. There-
fore, there is a significant limitation in the capacity of generation, which may also lack
diversification of power generation technologies. This, increases the likelihood of power
outages and their consequences, directly affecting residents and their well-being [5]. Fur-
thermore, islands may face energy poverty if self-sustainability is not implemented as an
energy plan. Not satisfied with conventional methods, new solutions are arising with plans
to make islands self-sufficient with less polluting technologies without depending on the
mainland for their energy supply.
In the EU, more than 16 million people reside in islands [6]. These inhabitants, who are
cut off from the continental European power grid, often face common difficulties that can
be specifically addressed depending on the characteristics of the island. Geographically,
the island’s energy sector may be highly polluted due to a high reliance on imported fossil
fuels along with aging and inefficient power plants. Due to this, the cost of energy is 100%
to 400% higher than that of the mainland [7]. To tackle this, implementing wind, solar,
biomass, and other renewable energy sources (RES), as alternative energy generation
systems might help in reducing the dependency on conventional energy systems that are
run on fossil fuel, gas, or coal. In addition, RES reduce the carbon emissions that would
be produced by the current technologies. Thus, in this context, small size and reduced
populations make islands an optimal place to carry out different experiments to deploy
different innovative solutions toward energy transition. These solutions have the potential
of enhancing self-sustainability and increase energy efficiency through proper use of the
available renewable energy along with load management. This way, power congestion
can be monitored and optimized with the best match with energy production and grid
capacity in order to maximize the profit and utilisation of locally available energy.
2
Cost-benefit assessment of increased renewable energy systems integration in the Bornholm Island
==PAGE:7==
Electric energy infrastructure planning and management are becoming, nowadays, one of
the main concerns faced by isolated communities on an island. In such communities, the
energy demand is generally satisfied through mainland energy markets. However, this
energy transmission is constrained by the capacity of the physical infrastructure which,
in most cases, is limited and relies on the connection to nearby land mass using high-
capacity underwater cables or huge shipments of diesel or other fuels. This issue hinders
energy security in islands creating a major impact on their environmental and economic
sustainability [8]. RES systems are also highly unreliable due to their variability compared
to conventional power plants. To improve this, technology can be introduced to make the
grid resilient and have a secure supply of energy at all times such that the majority of the
electricity is generated from Renewable energy technology.
However, there is also a disadvantage when the generation units produce more than the
required demand. This situation may lead to power congestion in the grid if such en-
ergy cannot be properly exported [9]. Such overload may cause failure in the cables due
to heating and expansion of the cables leading to failure and reduced system integrity.
Therefore, in order to safeguard and maintain the system, power generators need to cut
down their production to match the demand. These effects are unique to each balancing
zone due to different grid properties and other factors such as operating practices and
weather conditions. In the case of wind and solar plants, curtailment occurs due to trans-
mission congestion or lack of transmission access, but the other reason is due to excess
production during low load periods which causes the generators to reach the threshold
limit, such that the frequency and voltage requirements are maintained, particularly in
case of small isolated grids. Ultimately curtailment can affect the revenue of the wind or
solar energy project [10].
To solve this issue, a technique can be introduced to convert the energy produced from
solar and wind to different types of energy vectors to be used across multiple sections.
This has great potential in relieving and increasing the flexibility of a power grid. Allowing
an option to put the temporary excess surplus in other sectors with a complementary
reduction in carbon emission by replacing fossil fuels. For this purpose, excess electric
power can be converted into hydrogen, gas, or heat. For instance, power-to-hydrogen is
the method of using electrolysis to split water into hydrogen and oxygen using electricity.
While power-to-gas is the process of converting renewable energy to gaseous energy
carriers such as methane. Also, another way is, renewable power-to-heat, which involves
using the electricity produced from renewable energy sources to generate heat through
heat pumps or large electric boilers [11].
In this particular project power congestion and power to heat plays a very important role.
With the construction of a new solar photovoltaic (PV) plant and other future developments
in Østerlars, there will be an excess strain on the power grid. Power-to-heat might play
an important role to avoid restricting power generation. The presence of a heating plant
close to the expected location of solar PV plants makes it an added advantage in this
project. Therefore, making it is beneficial for both PV owners in producing more energy
and for society, due to the increased renewable energy utilisation.
However, even with more power production, there is a possibility that the project may
not be feasible. The reason behind this might be due to more cost and lesser benefits
with the introduction of power-to-heat technology. Therefore, it may be vital to perform
a cost-benefit and uncertainty analysis to determine the feasibility of the project. So that
the decision-makers are aware of the need for new investments.
Cost-benefit assessment of increased renewable energy systems integration in the Bornholm Island
3
==PAGE:8==
1.2
Need for economic and uncertainty analysis
At the beginning of a new project, there is a need to conduct an economic analysis to
assess all the potential costs and revenues the company may generate from the project.
This is known as an ex-ante economic evaluation. This analysis facilitates the appraisal
of a project to determine its financial profitability. To make business decisions there is
a need to consider all the options and make decisions against one other [12]. If the
project’s revenue outweighs the cost, it would be a good decision to go forward with the
project. However, when the cost outweighs the revenue, the investors must reconsider
the decision or project. Companies may benefit from conducting this type of cost-benefit
analysis prior to making critical organizational decisions. Analytics allows you to analyse
important information such as the company’s value chain and the rate of investment of the
project. According to [13], economic analysis is defined as data-driven decision-making
in both established and start-up businesses. The idea is to weigh the costs and benefits
of the project and identify the actions that will be most cost-effective.
The steps for economic analysis start with establishing the framework which needs to be
accurate and rely upon the specifics of the organisation. Then the goals and objectives are
determined followed by identifying the cost and benefits. Where all the direct, indirect, and
tangible costs and benefits are listed. Direct costs are which include expenses directly
related to the production or development of a product or service. While indirect costs
are typically fixed expenses, such as utilities and rent, that contribute to the overhead
of conducting business. The current and future costs that are difficult to measure and
quantify are tangible costs. Once this step is completed, the appropriate monetary units
are established by assigning a dollar amount to each cost and then they are tallied and
the cost and benefits are compared to check which one outweighs the other.
Economic analysis of projects is highly affected by uncertainties such as cost of resources,
financing sources, implementation times, and cost overruns. Adding to this, renewable
energy projects are also unpredictable and variable, for example, solar radiation, discount
rate, power production, and losses are some of the factors that make them unpredictable.
Knowing this percentage of variability provides added advantage in planning proper steps
and measures toward a more stable energy system. Therefore, an uncertainty analysis
plays a vital role in this project. With the help of this analysis, it is possible to know the
percentage of this imbalance in the system.
Uncertainty analysis is a method to obtain the variability of a model output due to uncer-
tainty in one or more input variables that can be quantified. This quantification is most
commonly performed by estimating a statistic of interest, such as the mean, median, or
population quantiles while estimation relies on uncertainty propagation techniques. The
main steps that need to be followed are: determine the model’s input parameter, important
assessment, propagation of uncertainty, and finally uncertainty visualisation.
This project employs economic and uncertainty analysis applied to the case of renewable
energy penetration in islands with the use of power-to-heat to solve power congestion
issues.
4
Cost-benefit assessment of increased renewable energy systems integration in the Bornholm Island
==PAGE:9==
1.3
Thesis context
1.3.1
Use case: Bornholm island
Located in the Baltic Sea, the Danish Island houses 40,000 inhabitants over an area
of 589 square km. Bornholm Island has been a test island for energy technology for a
long time and in the year 2020 they were awarded the “RESponsible Island Price” for its
involvement in the renewable energy system and innovative projects by the EU as 75%
of the Islands electricity demand is produced by Wind, PV and Biomass [1.1]. While a
minute percentage of the generation is through CHP which is run either on woodchips
or coal/oil when the underwater sea cable connecting the mainland (Sweden) is down.
Currently, 67% of the energy consumption is based on renewable energies. The whole
Bornholm heat production system consists of a 35 MW woodchip fuelled combined heat
and power plant and a decentralized district heating grid. The power mix of Bornholm is
made up of 37 MW of wind energy, 23 MW of solar PV, 3 MW of biogas, 58 MW of fossil
fuel, and 60 MW of import/export capacity via sea cable [14].
Østerlars is a village in the northeast of the Danish Island of Bornholm with a popula-
tion of 243. There exists a district heating system run on straw-fuelled boilers of 4MW
capacity. In total, it produces 18,000 MWh/year and satisfies the domestic need of the
habitants. In addition, an electric and wood pellet boiler each of capacity 2.4MW and 1-2
MW respectively is available as backup for the straw boiler. A 20MW solar PV plant is in
plans to be constructed here as part of the demo project. Meaning in the future the sea
cable connecting Bornholm and Sweden will not be sufficient enough to export electricity
produced from RES in Bornholm.
Figure 1.1: Current Energy Mix of Bornholm. Source :[15]
This master’s thesis aims to analyse the 20MW solar PV plant, covering the fundamentals
Cost-benefit assessment of increased renewable energy systems integration in the Bornholm Island
5
==PAGE:10==
of cost and benefit/economic analysis, and discussing its application in the context of
power-to-heat with the final goal to study the feasibility of the project. With this goal, the
core of the thesis is the development of a scenario that is profitable for the Shareholders.
1.4
Thesis objectives and contributions
In particular, this document explores the cost-benefit assessment of the increased re-
newable energy system integration in Bornholm Island in the Baltic Sea in particular the
20MW solar plant in Østerlars. Then propose a scenario that helps in potential saving of
lost energy (i.e., the energy that could have been produced from renewable energies and
cannot be delivered to the power grid due to the capacity constraints) and make use of this
energy for the betterment of both environmental and economic sustainability of the island.
Further, calculate the power congestion in the grid due to the excess energy production
due to solar plants and find opportunities such as power-to-heat to reduce the loss of
power generated and, finally, perform an uncertainty analysis by means of methods such
as the Monte Carlo Simulation [16].
The objectives considered in this project can be summarised as follows:
• Assess the benefits and costs of the power-to-heat application to avoid power cur-
tailment for the solar PV plant in the Bornholm area;
• Assess the benefits of using a probabilistic economic analysis, based on the Monte
Carlo simulation method, to handle forecasting uncertainties and obtain a proba-
bilistic estimation of different financial metrics such as net present values, internal
rate of return, and levelized cost of energy.
1.5
Thesis structure
The structure of the paper is as follows:
• Chapter 2 provides the literature review for the study, introduces the existing self-
sufficient islands, and highlights the relevance of Cost Benefit Analysis for PV Plant
and followed by the power congestion management.
• Chapter 3 fully describes the procedure followed to obtain the total forecast of en-
ergy generated for the PV Plant followed by its cost-benefit analysis.
• Chapter 4 provides the results of the conducted simulations and illustrates the Net
Present Value, Internal rate of return, and Levelized cost of Energy to determine the
feasibility of the plant. Furthermore, it provides the results such as the section 4.4,
which presents the power congestion analysis and the opportunities to relieve them,
and section 4.5, an uncertainty analysis is also included to illustrate the stability of
the results.
• Chapters 5 and 6 present the final discussion and conclusions of the paper, re-
spectively.
6
Cost-benefit assessment of increased renewable energy systems integration in the Bornholm Island
==PAGE:11==
2
Literature review
The literature review focuses on the existing self-sufficient energy islands and the PV
plant integration in islands, followed by the cost-benefit analysis and uncertainty analysis
in general and in the case of PV projects. Finally, a review of power-to-heat and its advan-
tages over other power-to-X methods. This provides the previous and current technology
trends and studies in these fields which is also the structure of this project. Therefore,
it helps in understanding the problems faced in general and assists in coming up with a
novel solution.
2.1
Review on energy islands
2.1.1
Cases of self-sufficient energy islands
Three islands El Hierro, Tilos and Samsø are reviewed in this subsection. Which provides
the past energy system and its move into the current renewable energy system by these
islands. Likewise, the economic and environmental gain achieved due to this transition
is studied. In addition, the three islands being located in Europe provides an added ad-
vantage since the project case island Bornholm also lies in Europe. Therefore, following
the steps of the three islands will provide best practices in such projects and provides
valuable insights for this particular project.
El Hierro
El Hierro is the second smallest island among the Canary Islands (Spain), and is a moun-
tainous terrain with a diverse landscape. With an area of 278 km2 and a population of
only 7000-10000 people, the island is barely populated with 36 people per km2. The
energy requirement in the past was met by electricity produced through diesel oil, which
amounted to 6000 tons per year. The oil required for the production was shipped to the
island with a tanker for an estimated cost of EUR 2,000,000 [17]. Therefore, for a cleaner
energy generation, the island has moved to wind energy due to the suitability of the to-
pography. Now a wind power plant as the one shown in Figure [2.1] accompanied by a
pumped hydro storage to act as a backup source in case of wind energy scarcity is used
as their main source of energy generation. The construction of this plant began in the year
2009, with the wind farm placed 2.5 km far from the hydroelectric plant, which acts as a
load from the accumulated excess energy from the wind production. The farm consists of
five ENERCON E-70 turbines with a total installed power of 11.5 MW. And the second part
of the system, the pumped hydro storage has a total power of 11.3 MW, which includes
four Pelton turbines, each with a unit power of 2.83 MW. The hydro-wind plant started
operating in the year 2014 and was used to satisfy the main demand such as water de-
salination and domestic needs of the island’s population. Overall, the five turbines along
with the hydro plant cater 80% of the energy demand, while the remaining is satisfied
through solar thermal collectors and grid-connected photovoltaic systems. Regarding the
investment for the project, the initial capital expenditures (CAPEX) of 35M€ were handled
by the Spanish Government through the Institute for Diversification and Energy Saving
and then later 20M€ was pitched by Cabildo de El Hierro, the Ministry of Industry of the
Government of the Canary Islands and Endesa. With the money gained from selling the
Cost-benefit assessment of increased renewable energy systems integration in the Bornholm Island
7
==PAGE:12==
Figure 2.1: Simplified one-line diagram of El Hierro power system. Source: [17]
energy in the wholesale electricity market, the loan of 25.6 M€ was repaid within the first
three years of operation. Government is the majority shareholder and hence receives the
largest portions of the gains, while the remaining is distributed to the other sharehold-
ers. However, there is no reduction in the monthly electricity bills of the residents since
the government reinstates the economic gains back into subsidies for LED lights, and
campaigns to reduce and recycle plastic bags while another part goes to subsidizing the
electricity cost of the most vulnerable households and to improve the energy efficiency of
buildings[18].
Tilos
A small Greek Island with an area comprising 64 square km and a coastal perimeter of
63km, is located in the south-eastern part of the Aegean Sea and a part of remote Dode-
canese. The topography is mostly a mountain or semi-mountain terrain except for a long
valley extending from its centre to the south. With a scarce population of 780 inhabitants,
that triples itself during summer due to tourist attractions. The island has an annual de-
mand of 3.2GWh, out of which 300MWh is consumed by public-use loads such as street
lighting, water pumping, and bores, while the remaining is utilized by the local residential
and service sector. In the past, this demand of 3.2GWh/year was satisfied through the
use of two oil-fired power stations located in Kos and Kalymnos with a capacity of 102MW
and 18MW respectively. Where the electricity was transferred via a 20kV undersea cable.
However, these cables were unreliable causing regular and long blackouts mainly during
the summer periods. Also, the cost of electricity was comparatively much higher on the
island than that of the mainland which was in 2019 around 153€/MWh and 58.2€/MWh
respectively[19]. With a goal of reaching 20% renewable energy production and reduction
of greenhouse gas by 80-95% by 2050, the Tilos and European Horizon 2020 project was
initiated.
The hybrid energy system consists of a wind and solar park [2.2] with a capacity of 800kW
and 160kW respectively, a 2MWh NaNiCl2 batteries used for energy storage for ancillary
services which will be able to manage 12 hours of energy without any other source of
electricity. The project is forecasted to reduce electricity prices by 350,000€ yearly [22].
This project is a multinational European demonstration and research project involving
8
Cost-benefit assessment of increased renewable energy systems integration in the Bornholm Island
==PAGE:13==
Figure 2.2: Solar and wind potential quality for the island of Tilos, Source: [20] and [21]
13 participants (7 academic and research partners, 4 industrial partners, 2 distribution
system operators, and 1 non-governmental organization). Hellenic Electricity Distribution
Network Operator (HEDNO) and the private energy group Eunice Energy Group (EEG),
which operates the project have signed the first contract for the sale of electricity. The
funding for the project came from Horizon 2020 and private funds amounting to 15M€.
The municipality receives 3% of the total profit from selling the energy to HEDNO, out of
which a third is used to reduce the electricity bills of the island residents and the remaining
to other projects to improve the livelihood of the habitants [23].
Samsø
One of the smallest municipalities in Denmark ranked 96th out of 98 in terms of popula-
tion, with an area of 114 square km and a population of around 4000 inhabitants. Where
agriculture is the prime occupation along with major employers in the social and health
care system and has the lowest income per capita in Denmark. In 1997, the Danish gov-
ernment held a competition to make the island self-sufficient using only clean renewable
energy, which they have been able to achieve currently. Søren Hermansen[24], a Samsø
native vegetable farmer–turned–environmental teacher won the competition and changed
the island from a carbon-dependent importer of coal and oil to an island run on renewable
energy.
Within a decade’s time, they were able to achieve 100% renewable energy system and
carbon neutral. In total 11 wind turbines, each with a capacity of 1MW were constructed
by 2000 to meet the entire demand of the island’s 22 villages. In addition to these 10 more
offshore wind turbines of a total of 23 MW were erected to compensate for the emissions
from the island’s vehicles, which are connected to the mainland. Apart from electricity
generation, they have also built three district heating plants run on centralized biomass
burner fuelled by locally grown straws, which provides heating and hot water to three-
quarters of the housing. While the remaining houses outside the district heating have
replaced their existing oil furnaces with biomass burners or solar collectors of their own.
Cost-benefit assessment of increased renewable energy systems integration in the Bornholm Island
9
==PAGE:14==
These local productions a reduction in energy imports, in the years 1997-2003 the savings
from this reduced consumption was 3.2 million euros per year, thereby helping the local
economy, increasing revenue for local business and creating new job opportunities[25].
From the review of the energy islands, it can be inferred that the government is able to
make good profit both economically and sustainably from the integration of renewable
energy into the island’s power system. This economic gain is further utilized for the better
livelihood of the island’s inhabitants.
2.2
Solar PV integration in islands
2.2.1
Solar PV integration in general
The increasing development of solar energy throughout the world has demonstrated that
it is the second largest generation growth of all renewable technologies in 2021 after wind
[26]. Reaching an estimated annual solar PV generation level of approximately 7400 TWh
[2.3] in 2030 from the current 1000 TWh may require annual average generation growth
of about 25% during 2022-2030.
Figure 2.3: Solar PV power generation in the Net Zero Scenario, 2010-2030 Source: IEA
[26]
The solar PV plant works when sunlight strikes the solar cell. This phenomenon causes
the electron and hole to separate after absorbing the energy from the photon (sunlight).
The electron’s movement across the junction of the solar cell causes the current to start
flowing in that particular cell. Combining the current of all the solar cells in each solar
panel, provides the total output of the plant [27].
The three major classifications of solar PV plants are on-grid, off-grid, and hybrid [28]. On-
Grid is the most popular Solar PV module primarily installed in industrial, and residential
areas. It generates electricity when the utility power grid is available. While in the case of
off-grid, the plant is independent of utility grids and stores all the unused extra power in
battery banks. Hybrid is a combination of both on-grid and off-grid, where it is connected
to the grid as well as contains a battery backup. Solar PV plants can also be classified
as utility-scale, residential and commercial, and industrial. In 2021, the utility scale is
responsible for 52% of global solar PV capacity, followed by the residential (28%) and
10
Cost-benefit assessment of increased renewable energy systems integration in the Bornholm Island
==PAGE:15==
commercial and industrial (19%). The utility-scale solar PV plant is more relatable in this
project since the size of the plant that will be constructed in Østerlars is 20MW.
2.2.2
Solar PV integration of large-scale PV plants
For decades utility-scale solar PV plants have been generating reliable, clean electricity
with a stable fuel price. Developing utility-scale solar PV plants may be one of the fastest
ways to decrease carbon emissions and can be developed in a manner that balances
environmental protection with energy demands and climate goals [29]. Utility-scale gen-
eration is distinguished from other types of generation on the basis of project size and
the electricity sold directly to wholesale buyers and not end-use consumers. Likewise,
in terms of the location utility-scale and other large-scale solar projects have much more
flexibility in comparison to residential solar [30].
The main components in a utility-scale solar PV plant according to the report ”design and
modeling of a large-scale PV plant [31]”are :
• Solar PV module: PV modules convert solar radiation directly into clean electric
energy. There are many different technologies and types of solar cells. The two
main major types are silicon crystalline structure and thin-film technology.
• Mounting structures: These components are used to fix the PV modules to the
ground to determine the tilt and orientation of the panels. There are two different
types of mounting structures: fixed and tracking axis systems. A fixed structure will
not be able to change its orientation. The tracking system is split into 1-axis tracking
systems and 2-axis tracking systems, which are based on the number of degrees
of freedom.
• Inverter: The PV modules generate electricity at DC current, however, to comply
with the grid requirements the electricity needs to be converted into AC current. The
different types of solar inverters are stand-alone, grid-Tie, string, central, and micro-
inverters. In the case of a utility-scale plant central inverters are most typically used
[32].
• Transformer: Electric device that transfers power from a primary winding to a sec-
ondary winding to obtain power with different voltage and current while having the
frequency constant. The ratio between the number of turns in the primary and sec-
ondary winding determines whether it is a step-up or step-down transformer. In a
solar PV plant, a step-up transformer is used to increase voltage and thereby de-
crease the loss of distribution. The main difference between residential and utility-
scale applications is the admissible voltage level. For utility-scale applications the
voltage at the interconnection is around 12-115 kV [33].
• Switchgear: A set of switches, fuses, or circuit breakers used to control, protect and
isolate the electrical equipment included in the system. While the type of switchgear
depends on the interconnection voltage level.
• DC and AC cable: The DC cables are used to connect the solar panel to the invert-
ers while the AC cables are used in connecting the remaining equipment in the PV
plant. The three main criteria for the DC cable are: proper voltage rating, current
carrying capacity, and minimized voltage drop [34].
The cost of large-scale PV plants has reduced drastically during the last decade, together
with the electricity from the PV plant which, in 2013, was half as expensive as in the aver-
age cost in 2010 [35]. Making the cost come closer to the wholesale prices set by natural
Cost-benefit assessment of increased renewable energy systems integration in the Bornholm Island
11
==PAGE:16==
Figure 2.4: PV production from two sites on Mahé Source:[38]
gas or other power plant options. These reductions are mainly due to economies of scale
as well as technological improvements. Which helped in lowering the price of the solar
panels as well as the remaining equipment. In addition, the soft cost for a large-scale
plant is less per unit of installed capacity in comparison to residential systems [36]. As a
result, the total cost for a large-scale PV plant is half that of residential solar, even after
including the cost of mounting structures. Apart from the financial, environmental, and
technical benefits, a large-scale PV plant creates job growth in areas such as manufac-
turing, construction, operations, and maintenance.
2.2.3
Solar PV integration in islands
The penetration of solar PV in geographically islanded regions has constantly grown dur-
ing the last years, due to the low cost and high modularity of photovoltaics. In particular, in
islands, the power supply is usually based on two concepts [37]: either the islands gener-
ate their own electricity or the power is transported from the mainland through submarine
cables. Many times, when the islands are located further away from the mainland, they
are equipped with diesel generators or coal/oil-fired plants. This is where the problem
rises since diesel, oil, and coal needs to be shipped to the islands. Which is not only
expensive and worsens the CO2 balance but also not very energy secure. Hence directly
available energy sources may be a necessity and with the added advantage of the island’s
potential for PV power plants.
However, land taken for PV plants is increasing and is expected to continue. This in-
crease in land taken for PV plants is escalating the pressure on land use, and with grow-
ing recognition of the importance of our ecosystems, there is a critical need for a better
understanding of PV plants. This knowledge will enable better location, design, and sur-
rounding land management use decisions. In the case of the island’s PV systems both
rooftops, as well as ground-mounted systems are present. Due to limited land, rooftop PV
can be a very good option. Therefore, many studies and analyses have been conducted
to develop PV plants of different sizes.
One of the studies [39], detailed the ground-mounted PV plants promoting cool land sur-
12
Cost-benefit assessment of increased renewable energy systems integration in the Bornholm Island
==PAGE:17==
face in arid islands. The surface air within the PV plants is cooler since 15% of the solar
radiation is removed by the panels as electricity. From their findings, they have identified
that PV plants cool islands for the first time, however, improved understanding is required
given the increasing land taken for PV plants and the implications for ecosystem function.
Further two studies on PV integration were performed on the Seychelles island [38] and
a small island in Eastern Indonesia [40]. The assessment in Eastern Indonesia has been
developed from technical economic and environmental points of view. The simulations re-
quired for the studies were accomplished through a MATLAB-based GUI program and the
input of the program were irradiation data, temperature, PV array, module, and inverter.
The scenarios were considered for the test by simulating small (50 kWp), medium (500
kWp), and large (5 MWp) scale PV plants with specified monocrystalline PV modules and
inverters. From the simulation results, the paper concluded that Eastern Indonesia has
great potential to implement all scales of PV plants and the predicted performance ratio
and capacity factor show high-performance quality in both simulation scenarios. Regard-
ing area limitation, the medium-scale (500 kWp) PV plant had the best result in capacity
factor and LCOE. While in the case of the Seychelles island, the study focused on how
much photovoltaic (PV) generation [2.4] the grid can absorb. This focused study was
performed in two years: 2020 and 2030. The software DIgSILENT’s PowerFactory [41]
was used to investigate the overloading of network assets, voltage problems, frequency
stability, and the maintenance of sufficient reserves with varying amounts of PV. Investi-
gations were conducted on PV integration limits where two representative feeder’s power
lines, one commercial and one residential were tested. For different strategies [2.5] load
flow calculations were conducted with different distributions of PV units along the feeder
used with different voltage/feed-in control strategies and different limits on PV installation
size to reduce overloading and over voltage problems. Accordingly, the study concluded
that Seychelles can reach its target of 15% load coverage by renewable by 2030 even
with conservative operating practices.
Figure 2.5: Coverage of load by all renewable for the whole of Seychelles according to
the different scenarios Source:[38]
Further, a study in Maldives [42] was conducted to analyse the island’s energy system
based on offshore floating technology in particular floating PV. This optimisation study
was performed using the EnergyPLAN model [43]. The offshore floating PV is modelled as
utility scale in this study, due to the restriction in land area prohibiting utility-scale ground-
mounted PV systems. Also, additional efforts might be required to connect the offshore
Cost-benefit assessment of increased renewable energy systems integration in the Bornholm Island
13
==PAGE:18==
technologies with the island’s grid. The result of the study was that floating PV is one of
the most dominant in the case of installed capacity and electricity generation.
Various studies and analyses are conducted to integrate PV plants for the development of
renewable energy systems in islands. These studies help in the configuration of the plant
and grid in relation to the advancement of technology. New technology is introduced to
reduce land usage, and energy loss and overall improve the efficiency of the plant.
2.3
Economic analysis
2.3.1
Cost-benefit analysis
In the early 20th century, to study the attractiveness of projects in the project and policy
domain, cost-benefit analysis was one of the most useful tools to compare the costs and
benefits over a project lifetime. The cost-benefit analysis was performed to obtain the net
present value (NPV), and discount rate applied to cash flows (CF) across T years. The
feasibility of the project is judged based upon the derived value of NPV [44]. Where if
it is positive, the project achieves profitability while it is at a loss when NPV is negative.
According to [45], there are three types of CBA based on financial, environmental, and
social: fCBA, eCBA, and sCBA.
Financial CBA (fCBA) is used for private profitability assessment, where discounted cash
flows are taken into consideration [46]. However, only in a perfect market, fCBA would
be enough to assess sustainability. Therefore, for a much more comprehensive view of
sustainability eCBA and sCBA are needed as well. Environmental concerns in the late
1960s and early 1970s led to the introduction of environmental CBA (eCBA). Where in
the analysis external costs caused by environmental impacts are included to express the
damages in monetary values. Further, this impact is external to the producer since he
does not endure the cost. Impacts such as pollution, property damages, and ecosystem
losses are some examples of external costs [47]. In the case of a societal CBA, the project
is analysed from the viewpoint of society as a whole. Even though money is used as a
common unit to express cost and benefit. In both environmental and societal, welfare is
where the main focus of the study lies. While money can be used as a unit to calculate
welfare and compared across other projects. Recreational benefits, reduction of air pol-
lution and noise level, and job creation are considered some of the benefits. Similarly,
examples of costs are construction and maintenance costs, health impact costs, environ-
mental impact costs, and safety deterioration. In both eCBA and sCBA the project’s NPV
will be positive if there are no excessive environmental losses and positive for society
respectively [45].
In a rationalised decision process determining the pros and cons is very crucial. The two
main types do this are multi-criteria analysis (MCA) and cost-benefit analysis (CBA) [48].
In both these methods the impacts are quantified and choosing weights for each impact
are, in the case of MCA the weights are chosen by the analyst, politicians, civil servants
or others [49]. While individual citizens’ preferences are the basis of the appraisal in the
case of CBA. Cost–benefit analysis is the basis for rational economic decision-making,
where it measures the project’s value by quantifying the cost and benefits in monetary
terms [13].
14
Cost-benefit assessment of increased renewable energy systems integration in the Bornholm Island
==PAGE:19==
2.3.2
Cost-benefit analysis in PV power plants
Cost-benefit and economic analysis is necessary to determine the economic profitability
of new photovoltaic (PV) projects. However, this analysis is complex, as stated in [50],
since the economic aspects of solar plants need to be evaluated individually based on
their location, available area, solar radiation, and regulations. In addition, for a PV power
plant, the initial construction cost may be very high compared to its maintenance, which
is annually 1% of the initial cost [51]. Therefore, in order to compare different potential
investments, it is necessary to analyse their value.
Recently, there have been several interesting analyses and studies regarding the best
cost-benefit analysis on PV power plants [50, 51, 52, 53, 54]. The most important step in
the analysis lies on the monetary evaluation of costs and benefits and the correct selection
of the discount rate to analyse the present value of the future cash flows. While the other
important aspects are the selection of adequate decision rules, uncertainty, risks, and
distributive effects (effect due to redistribution of the final gains and costs derived from
the direct gains and cost allocations of a project). Evaluating cost and benefit depends
on the existing market, however, they consider only the marginal cost and benefits. In
practice, there are other adjustments such as market imperfect, taxes, etc. Due to this
reason, a shadow price is used to quantify the social marginal cost of the service or goods
[52]. These costs and benefits are across time, therefore it becomes necessary to reduce
them to their present value with a discount system. In doing so, it makes them comparable
at different times in order to make the required decision. The equation to determine the
present value is:
PV =
FV
(1 + i)t
where, PV represents the present value, FV is the future value, i is the discount rate and
t is the time period.
After obtaining the present value of the cost and benefit, the next step is to select the
appropriate decision rule. At this point, different project chooses their decision rule ac-
cording to their requirement. This report [53], has used Net Present Value(NPV), which is
one of the most used decision rules. It calculates the difference between the social bene-
fits over cost and maximises it to choose the project with a higher NPV as the best project.
A negative NPV value shows that the project is not economically feasible and would not
be a good choice to go forward with the project. The expression for this decision rule is:
NPV =
T
∑
t=0
Bt −Ct
(1 + r)t > 0
where
Bt: Benefits in period t,
Ct: Cost in period t,
r: Discount Rate,
T: Total time period of the project
The ratio of Benefit-to-Cost can also be used as another possible decision parameter.
This concept is similar to Net Present Value, where when the ratio is greater than 1 the
project is acceptable. Internal Rate of Return (IRR), is a dynamic evaluation to calculate
the profitability of the project. IRR is the discount rate when the NPV is zero, and a higher
IRR means better revenue for the project. To calculate it a linear interpolation is usually
Cost-benefit assessment of increased renewable energy systems integration in the Bornholm Island
15
==PAGE:20==
used in actual projects, which is:
IRR = r1 +
NPV (r1)
NPV (r1) + NPV (r2)(r2 −r1)
where, NPV (r1) > 0, NPV (r1) < 0, r1 > r2 and also the value of (r2 −r1) should not be
more than 2%.
Other possible parameters are the Levelized Cost of Energy (LCOE) and the Payback
time (PBT), which are estimated from the ratio of the total life cycle cost to the total life-
time energy production and provides the time period at which the project break-evens re-
spectively [54]. The project can say to be profitable when the payback period is achieved
before the lifetime of the plant.
LCOE = Annual Capital Cost + Annual O&M Cost
Annual Electricity Output
In some projects [55], environmental cost-benefit analysis (ECBA) is used for the social
evaluation of investment projects and policies that involve significant environmental im-
pacts. These environmental impacts can be either positive or negative. In the case of
solar power, this analysis is conducted by studying the merits of energy generation in a
renewable method and also by comparing it with the existing system of power genera-
tion through the conventional way using fuel as a source. The parameters used for this
quantification are the positive environmental impact that measures the quantity of avoided
carbon dioxide emission, saved externality cost associated with conventional power gen-
eration, and eco-efficiency which is defined as the ratio between the (added) economic
value of what has been produced and the (added) environment impacts of the product.
Conventional cost-benefit analysis studies consider deterministic assumptions to calcu-
late the inputs of the economic model (e.g., costs and benefits). This approach is con-
ventionally adopted due to the simplicity and difficulty of assigning probabilistic quantities
to certain parameters. However, this approach may result inadequate to assess the un-
certain and complex dynamics of certain projects, leading to a decision-making process
that may end up with poor estimations of the economic value of an investment. Therefore,
an analysis of uncertainty must be carried out after obtaining the deterministic value of
financial metrics such as NPV.
2.3.3
Uncertainty analysis
Sensitivity and uncertainty analysis are two different concepts with their own purpose that
are often explored simultaneously [56]. Sensitivity analysis relates to how the variation
in the input reflects on the variation in the output, while uncertainty analysis attempts to
quantify the variability in the outcome associated with an action [57].
When there is a dispersion of the model output due to the uncertainty of the system pa-
rameters, a practical way to solve this problem is by quantifying the uncertainty through
sensitivity analysis to obtain a series of possible results by varying the risk assumptions.
Commonly, this result is obtained by selecting scenarios under ’optimistic’, ’pessimistic’,
and ’point of view of the analyst’. According to [58], this analysis is limited in scope: the
selection of input changes is random, there are no estimates of the probabilities for vari-
ations in inputs, and the analysis for each input is independent of other parameters. In
real-life scenarios changes in input may occur simultaneously. Therefore an uncertainty
analysis such as Monte Carlo simulation is followed to consider multiple sources of un-
certainty and their interrelationships [59].
16
Cost-benefit assessment of increased renewable energy systems integration in the Bornholm Island
==PAGE:21==
The following steps are considered to perform an uncertainty analysis:
1. Define the assessment endpoint.
2. List all uncertain parameters
3. Define the maximum range of potential values applicable for unknown parameters
in regard to the endpoint of the assessment.
4. Define a subjective probability distribution for values occurring in this particular range.
5. Determine and account for their relation with other parameters.
6. Using either analytical or numerical procedures, propagate the uncertainty in the
model parameters to obtain a (subjective) probability distribution of model predic-
tions.
7. Derive quantitative statements of uncertainty for the unknown value in terms of a
subjective confidence interval.
8. Rank the parameters based on their contribution to uncertainty in the model predic-
tion by performing a sensitivity analysis.
9. Obtain additional data for the important model parameters and repeat steps 3 through
8.
10. Present and interpret the results obtained from the analysis.
Quantitative uncertainty analysis can be performed either using analytical methods or
by numerical methods. For relatively simple equations, analytical methods are followed
for statistical error propagation. It is frequently used in the case of the equation of vari-
ance propagation. However, for complex calculations variance propagation techniques
are more difficult to apply analytically. In those cases, numerical methods are more use-
ful in performing an uncertainty analysis. One of the commonly used numerical methods
is Monte Carlo and other approaches include differential uncertainty analysis where the
uncertainty estimate is obtained using partial derivatives of the model with respect to the
parameters, and first-order analysis employing Taylor expansions.
2.3.4
Monte Carlo simulation method
One such method used for uncertainty propagation is Monte Carlo [16], a technique used
to understand the impact of risk and uncertainty. Monte Carlo Simulation uses multiple
values to average out the result compared to other methods which average the uncer-
tain values to a single number to estimate the forecast or outcome. The Monte Carlo
method can be summarised into the following steps: (i) definition of a predictive model
and determination of the dependent variables that need to be predicted; (ii) definition of the
probability of the independent variables and (iii) simulation repeated until enough results
are gathered to make up a representative sample.
Monte Carlo is performed usually using two sampling processes: Simple Random Sam-
pling (SRS) and Latin Hypercube Sampling (LHS). In the case of SRS, a completely ran-
dom value is sampled from each distribution relating to each uncertain model parameter
and a single estimate of the endpoint is calculated. This process is less efficient compared
to LHS, where the distribution for all parameters is split into sections of equal probability.
The number of sections equals the number of samples made in the simulation, where
Cost-benefit assessment of increased renewable energy systems integration in the Bornholm Island
17
==PAGE:22==
Figure 2.6: Flow of the economic analysis
during the sampling random numbers are selected in each section, and the section is ex-
cluded after the selection. Hence the distribution is represented more efficiently than with
SRS.
Monte Carlo is a mathematical technique used to predict the possible outcome of an
uncertain event. Unlike the normal forecasting model, it estimates the outcomes based
on the range values against a fixed set of inputs. Monte Carlo involves a three-step
process [2.6]:
• Generation of ’N’ random inputs.
• Computerized simulations run for each of the ’N’ inputs for analysis.
• From the simulations the outputs are aggregated and assessed.
Similarly, Yan Luo [50] follows these procedures defined in Figure [2.7] that needs to
calculate the Model output LCOE under Monte Carlo simulation for a solar power tower.
In the following lines, several examples of Monte Carlo analysis are studied. For instance,
in Irina Khindanova [16], both a sensitivity and uncertainty analysis are performed to ob-
tain the input with greater impacts and examine the generated distributions for the wind
project’s NPV respectively. Firstly, five inputs are considered for the sensitivity analysis:
construction cost, load factor, electricity price, operation and maintenance costs, and dis-
count rate. These inputs are varied up and down 50% from their base case values and
18
Cost-benefit assessment of increased renewable energy systems integration in the Bornholm Island
==PAGE:23==
Figure 2.7: Flowchart of the MC Simulation used by Yan Luo [50]
their NPV is calculated based on this while having other inputs constant. Further, four
inputs (electricity price, load factor, construction costs, and O&M costs) are assigned to
run the Monte Carlo simulation.
Table 2.1: Probabistic analysis performed in Khindanova report [16]
Input
Distribution
Parameters
Electricity price acceleration
Normal
Mean = 3.0% (the base case value)
Standard deviation = 0.5%
Construction cost
Normal
Mean = Base case value
Standard deviation = 1% of the mean value
Load growth rate
Normal
Mean = 0% (the base case value)
Standard deviation = 1.5%
O&M costs increase rate
Normal
Mean = 3% (the base case value)
Standard deviation = .03% (1% of the mean value)
The input distribution in the table [2.1] was considered from their base case value to gen-
erate random variables that were used to run the monte carlo simulations. The paper
concludes from the result that the economics of the power generation investments de-
pends on many uncertain factors and a monte carlo simulations framework can take into
account these multiple sources of uncertainty and their interrelationship.
Following these above steps provides the probabilistic distributions of NPV. Philip A. Le-
icester [60] has used a similar procedure to perform a Bayesian network model which
is a type of probabilistic model that he applied to perform an assessment on discounted
cash flow. Figure [2.8 ]shows NPV distributions calculated by the model for each of the
four census areas used in his study. The variation in the NPV is due to the uncertainty
inherent in the specific input parameters, including system rating and yield, orientation,
and PV energy self-consumption. The result of this work illustrates that NPV provides a
Cost-benefit assessment of increased renewable energy systems integration in the Bornholm Island
19
==PAGE:24==
valuable depiction of how multi-criteria parameters can be integrated for decision support
and take into account the perspectives of diverse stakeholders. Moreover, a probabilistic
analysis of parameters can help to define risks pertaining to the attainment of specific
key performance indicators (KPIs) in simulated scenarios using the Bayesian network or
similar approach.
Figure 2.8: Net present value distributions for each area [60]
2.4
Power congestion management
Power congestion Management plays an important role in the power system’s stability
and reliability. With the increased competition in the electricity market has led to the oper-
ation of transmission lines beyond their operational constraints. When the power flowing
through the transmission lines exceeds the system’s constraints such as thermal limit,
voltage limit, and stability limit then congestion occurs. A few reasons for congestion are
the unexpected increase in the system load, sudden line outage, generator tripping, and
unscheduled line flows. In these situations, to alleviate grid congestion the distribution
system operators (DSOs) can curtail the power output of the plant [61]. To overcome this,
the adoption of some strategies like establishing a new transmission line, rescheduling the
power output of the generators, and proper management of reactive power is needed.
Power system researchers have come up with many power congestion management ap-
proaches to relieve this congestion in the transmission lines. One of the suggestions [62]
is to implement the use of Energy Storage Systems (ESSs) to minimize the uncertainty
in the Renewable energy system. EES can be used to relieve the congestion by peak
shaving and thereby postponing the need for upgrading the network. Delayed investment
costs and congestion management are not the only benefits of the Energy storage system,
but can also affect various parts of the power system such as generation, transmission,
and distribution. For example, these systems will be able to participate in the ancillary
service market and maintain network reliability due to their ability to adjust the output.
Other energy storage systems like compressed air energy storage and pumped-storage
hydro-power plant can also be used in the system for congestion management. However,
20
Cost-benefit assessment of increased renewable energy systems integration in the Bornholm Island
==PAGE:25==
Figure 2.9: Schematic Representation of Proposed Approach for power congestion man-
agement. Source: [61]
one of the main disadvantages of using ESSs is the high investment cost and therefore
must require an increase in incentive to invest in this sector. The other methods that can
be followed to achieve the same goals are rescheduling of generators, price-based ap-
proach, sensitivity-based approach, optimal placement of FACTS devices, auction-based
approach, zonal congestion-based approach [63].
To overcome these disadvantages, power-to-heat [2.10] (PtH or P2H) refers to an appli-
cation in which electrical energy is converted into heat. This application is mainly used
in the case of a built environment or industrial processes. P2H provides various advan-
tages to drive the energy transition, such as utilising the excess variable renewable energy
(VRE) helps in energy regulation and reduces the use of fossil fuels. During high VRE
production using this P2H helps to increase the total load thereby limiting the rise of the
instantaneous VRE and keeping the power grid more stable with less power curtailment.
Apart from these it also offers additional flexibility in the electricity market by balancing
energy in times of low or negative electricity prices. When the electricity price is negative
fossil-fueled power plants still be in the market since it is not profitable to leave. In such
situations, P2H can provide the service at a much cheaper price and at reduced carbon
dioxide emissions.
The three identified applications of P2H are Heat pumps, electric boilers, and electric re-
sistance heaters. A heat pump is an outstanding technology that can extract and provide
heat from a medium such as water or air, with limited electrical energy. This technology
is really advantageous due to its high efficiency, low energy cost, easy installation, high
safety standards, and less maintenance requirement compared to other heating tech-
nologies. Another popular application is an electric boiler, which is mainly used in the
utility-related process to manufacture hot water and steam. Similarly, this application is
better compared to other technology due to its robust and compact, low initial cost, de-
sign, no stack requirements, zero carbon emission if provided with renewable electricity,
flexibility, quiet operation, high efficiency, and ease of maintenance. They have a high
efficiency ranging from 95 to 99.9% [64].
For Europe, heat pump yearly sales indicate an increasing market trend. Where the sales
are between 500,000 and 1 million units in recent years, totalling a European stock of
Cost-benefit assessment of increased renewable energy systems integration in the Bornholm Island
21
==PAGE:26==
Figure 2.10: Classification of Power to Heat. Source: [64]
around 9.5 million units in 2016 [65]. Yet, this number is still small compared to the overall
stock of dwellings. Overall, heat pumps and other power-to-heat technologies are a small
segment of the current market which is growing steadily in terms of stricter regulations on
building energy standards. Therefore, the P2H industry would have to grow substantially
more to achieve the projected high future deployments.
22
Cost-benefit assessment of increased renewable energy systems integration in the Bornholm Island
==PAGE:27==
3
Methodology
Figure 3.1: Flow chart of the methodology followed in this study.
In this chapter, the methodology of the thesis is discussed. Figure [3.1], provides the
methodological workflow. The first step is the calculation of the energy generation from
the PV plant based on the capacity, location and orientation, and axis movement of the
mounting structure. Using the result from the first step, the costs such as the equipment
and operation are obtained along with the benefit which is the total revenue achieved by
the plant by selling the generated electricity. In the next step, the calculated cost and
benefit are used as inputs in the system advisor model to run the simulations for cost-
benefit analysis. Further, the simulation is run again for different scenarios where in one
case the curtailment of energy is taken into account and in another, the energy that is to
be curtailed is sold to the district heating system. Then a sensitivity analysis is carried out
Cost-benefit assessment of increased renewable energy systems integration in the Bornholm Island
23
==PAGE:28==
for various parameters with different percentage changes to see their effect on NPV, IRR,
and LCOE. Finally, uncertainty analysis is performed using monte carlo method using
selective parameters from the sensitivity analysis.
3.1
Forecast of renewable power generation
Forecasting of power generation can be done with the use of performance models to es-
timate the expected energy output of a given PV system. Currently, there are different
software for solar PV simulations such as system advisor model (SAM), photovoltaic sys-
tems (PVSyst), and PVLib. A typical simulation in the software comprises the following
steps:
• Defining the project, where the user creates the desired project on the software.
arrays.
• Importing the necessary data like weather data for the desired site and specifying the
input variables like the orientation of the PV modules, site location, and equipment.
The weather data is obtained from typical meteorological year files which can be
downloaded from websites like PVGIS [3.2].
• Running the simulation and generating a variety of graphs and reports for the anal-
ysis of the PV system. Which can also be exported for further presentation or anal-
ysis.
Figure 3.2: PVGIS website page to download weather data. Source:[66]
3.2
Economic analysis
The two components of the life-cycle cost of a PV plant are capital investment cost (CAPEX)
and maintenance cost (OPEX). The CAPEX of the PV plant can be calculated as the sum
of the cost of PV modules, inverters, and the balance-of-system (BoS) cost which includes
all the costs of the mounting structure, wiring, inverter, the cost of installation, grid con-
nection, planning, documentation, and other work. Further, it also involves the cost to
acquire, upgrade, and maintain physical assets such as property, plants, buildings, and
24
Cost-benefit assessment of increased renewable energy systems integration in the Bornholm Island
==PAGE:29==
technology. While the OPEX cost includes the cost of maintenance which involves clean-
ing and other minor costs. Apart from that it also consists of insurance costs, land rental
costs, property taxes, security costs, and asset management costs. However, operational
expenses can vary to a large extent and depends on whether all the costs mentioned are
applicable to the particular PV plant.
Once the cost is calculated, the next step is to obtain the benefit gained from the project.
Which is revenue generated from the PV plant by selling the produced electricity. This is
calculated using the market value, which is the average weighted price of the technology
in the spot market at all hours during the day when that particular technology is feeding
electricity to the grid. However, to obtain the revenue generated in the future inflation is
added to the average prices that were sold the previous years for the same electricity
generated. It is also necessary to input the discount rate to analyse the present value of
future cash flows. The discount rate is used as the time value of the capital and can help
in determining whether the project is feasible or not.
When all the above data is sourced and ready, similar steps used in the forecasting of
renewable power generation are applied in the PV software. However, in addition to
mentioned inputs, the CAPEX, OPEX, electricity price, inflation, and the discount rate is
also specified. Then the final step is to run a simulation to obtain the NPV and IRR along
with other graphs and reports.
3.3
Analysis of power congestion challenges and
opportunities
In this section, the first step is to find the amount of power curtailed. This is achieved by
finding the capacity of the transmission grid located near the PV plant and comparing it
with the power generated in the PV plant. When the energy generation exceeds this limit,
then the power is curtailed. Using the data from energy generation forecast, the curtailed
power can be calculated. However, if the transmission grid limit data is not available, an
average power curtailment percentage for that location can be used instead. After the
curtailment calculation, the next step is to additionally include the input of energy loss
percentage into the software and run the simulation as suggested in previous section.
Coming to opportunity, the curtailed power can either be sold to other users directly without
sending it to the grid or to grid when the production is low. This can be done using various
methods such as using batteries to store the excess energy and send it to the grid at times
when the grid limit is not reached, convert the power to other fuels or heat. Once the
method has been chosen, the price at which the electricity is sold needs to be calculated.
Then the simulation is run after following similar steps as stated previously.
3.4
Uncertainty analysis
Firstly, to perform uncertainty analysis it is necessary to measure the variability caused
by model inputs. So that proper identification of inputs are required and a check on how
many parameters are needed to be changed at a given point. To achieve this sensitivity
analysis is carried out to find the inputs that affect the output greatly. Sensitivity analysis is
therefore performed by inputs with different values. Where the parameters can be varied
based on the the number of activities, technical parameters, the objective in relation to
the risk assumed and the profits expected, number of constraints and its limits. The initial
step in the sensitivity analysis is to define the base case output for which the sensitivity
Cost-benefit assessment of increased renewable energy systems integration in the Bornholm Island
25
==PAGE:30==
is to be measured. Then each selected input parameter is changed individually while the
other inputs of the model are kept constant. This is then repeated for all the parameters
and finally, the percentage change of the output and the input are calculated.
From the result of the sensitivity analysis, the parameters are selected based on their
impact on the output for the uncertainty analysis. For this analysis the monte carlo ap-
proach is followed, where a direct simulation of the distribution of the output is carried out.
Then based on the parameters best probability distribution is chosen with reference from
various research papers. For each parameter, a constraint is given, so that the spectrum
of inputs provides a good representation of the true output distribution. Using the system
advisor model random input samples are generated stochastically and simulations are
run to achieve the output with samples of all parameters together. The result is used to
create a probability distribution graph to understand the outcomes which are most likely
to occur, the spread of potential values, and the likelihood of different results.
3.5
Software
The System Advisor Model [67] (SAM) was developed by National Renewable Energy
Laboratory in collaboration with Sandia National Laboratories in 2005. Which was used
internally by the U.S. Department of Energy’s Solar Energy Technologies Program for
analysis of solar technology improvement opportunities within the program. In 2007, the
public version was released which enabled to analyse of photovoltaic and concentrating
solar energy parabolic trough systems on the same modeling platform. Now, SAM in-
cludes several features for analysis that involves comparing scenarios, optimizing input
parameters, or more sophisticated parametric and statistical analyses.
SAM is a free techno-economic software model that facilitates decision-making for people
in the renewable energy industry, such as Project managers and engineers, Policy an-
alysts, Technology developers, and Researchers. SAM makes performance predictions
and cost estimates for grid-connected power projects based on installation and operating
costs and system design parameters that are inputted by the users. The projects can be
based on either the customer side of the utility meter, buying and selling electricity at retail
rates, or on the utility side of the meter, selling electricity at a price negotiated through a
power purchase agreement (PPA) [68].
The first step in the analysis is creating a SAM file and choosing the technology and fi-
nancing option for your project. Then SAM automatically populates the input variables
with their default values for the type of project. Next, the user needs to provide the re-
quired input such as the project’s location, the type of equipment in the system, the cost
of installing and operating the system, and financial and incentives assumptions. Once
the inputs are provided, the simulation is run and the result is obtained.
26
Cost-benefit assessment of increased renewable energy systems integration in the Bornholm Island
==PAGE:31==
4
Case study
In this section, the methodological steps are followed with respect to this project. The
results obtained from the calculation are compared and presented.
4.1
Context definition
4.1.1
The Re-Empowered Project
The “RE-EMPOWERED” project is a knowledge exchange between the EU and India to
upgrade and provide a complete energy solution for islands and communities. It mainly
focuses on the energy transition of the local energy system based on multi-energy Micro-
grids, interconnecting multiple energy vectors. The demo sites for the RE-EMPOWERED
projects are the three towns located in the eastern part of Bornholm, Østerlars and its heat
plant, Østermarie and Gudhjem with a total of 9.4 square km. The total yearly consump-
tion of the pilot site is 10-15 GWh of Power and 18 GWh of Heat. Total yearly production
is 1 GWh Power and 18 GWh Heat [15]. In 2022, a new PV plant is expected to come
into operation which will increase the power production by 20-25 GWh.
Table 4.1: Existing infrastructure in Bornholm island Source: [15]
Bornholm Island - Power
Østerlars District Heating System (Demo)
37 MW from 35 large wind turbines
4 MW straw fuelled boiler
8 MW from 1000 PV rooftop
2.4 MW electric boiler for backup
15 MW from two private PV Plant
1-2 MW wood pellet boiler for backup
3 MW from Biogas Plant
80 MWh in hot water storage tank
35 MW from woodchip fuelled boiler
93 kW of power from rooftop PV
58 MW capacity of fossil fuel gener-
ation
20 MW PV plant near Østerlars
60 MW capacity of import/export
through sea cable
District Heating Networks
This Demo will help in integrating more electricity that will be produced through renewable
energy systems. With the municipality’s help, a few citizens have already started devel-
oping a 100MW offshore Wind Plant that is to start commissioning in 2025 and have also
started planning to construct new PV parks. This will lead to a point in the near future,
where the sea cable will not have sufficient capacity to export all the electricity produced
during times of higher production from both wind and solar. A cost-effective solution is
required to integrate electricity with other vectors, otherwise, the production needs to be
curtailed at times of higher production which means waste of the excess energy produced.
As a solution to this, the demo will also focus on the forecast of the PV Plant’s generation
and the excess energy will be used to control the electrical boilers in Østerlars, storing it
as heat in the district heating system.
4.2
Forecast of energy generation
The solar plant [4.1] with a capacity of 20MW will be constructed at Kildevad approximately
1 km southwest of Østerlars with a gross area of 22 hectares [69]. This location is a nitrate-
Cost-benefit assessment of increased renewable energy systems integration in the Bornholm Island
27
==PAGE:32==
laden water extraction area at Kildevad, hence the Nature and Environment Department
of BRK proposed to use it as a solar plant to reduce the water’s nitrate content due to
agricultural operations. This is a pilot project, which has great value in both the energy
strategy and in relation to drinking water protection.
Figure 4.1: Solar Plant Location in Bornholm. Source:[69]
The markings in the figure indicated the area of construction, where green line represents
the areas where vegetation need to be planted, while the orange encloses the actually
area of the solar plant included for construction and the red line on the map shows the
200m distance zone around the total area and the location of neighbouring properties.
The project will be able to generate 20,000,000 kWh annually, which will be enough to
satisfy the energy demand of 4000 households.
The software SAM was used to forecast the basic Annual Energy production from the
utility. SAM can model many types of renewable energy systems, for example, Photo-
voltaic and Concentrating Solar Power systems, Wind power, Battery storage, Geother-
mal, Biomass, etc. For this project, the photovoltaic system without a financial model is
used to obtain annual energy generation.
To achieve the required output the required input data are the hourly solar irradiation
received at the site of the plant, and the orientation of the panels to be placed and finally,
the grid capacity. Solar irradiation is obtained through PVGIS, which is a website that
gives you information about solar radiation and Photovoltaic (PV) system performance.
On this website, the TMY tool is selected to generate the Typical Meteorological Year
(TMY) data of solar radiation, temperature, and other meteorological data. The next input
is the orientation of the PV module, a solar panel will utilize the maximum power when
the sun rays hit the panel perpendicularly. Facing the solar panel in the correct direction
and appropriate tilt help to produce maximum energy as they are exposed to the highest
intensity of sunlight for the greatest period of time. Finally, the sum of the maximum
power outputs (nameplate capacity) of the generators can physically produce that are
attached to an electrical grid might be considered to be the grid capacity calculated to
know whether the power produced from the plant will be curtailed or not. To calculate this
value, the substation and transmission cable specification located near the PV plant is
collected. Firstly, the latitude and longitude of the solar plant are 55.1545 °N and 14.9547
°E respectively and the hourly solar irradiance at this location is collected using the PVGIS
Tool. Where the TMY data from the year 2005 till 2020 is collected in EnergyPlus weather
28
Cost-benefit assessment of increased renewable energy systems integration in the Bornholm Island
==PAGE:33==
file (epw) format. From figure [4.2], we can see that the global horizontal irradiance is
high during the month from April to August and the maximum being in May with around
900W/m2.
Figure 4.2: Global Horizontal Irradiance in the selected location at the Bornholm island.
Regarding the orientation of the panel, the simulation was carried out for each tilt and az-
imuth angle of the panel and the best was chosen through trial-and-error method. Figure
[4.4], provides us with the expected Annual AC energy produced from different angles
of both tilt and azimuth. The best angle was found to be at 28°,29°, and 30°for tilt and
160°,161°, and 162°. So, another simulation with both tilt and azimuth together was per-
formed to obtain the overall best angles, and from the result it can be seen that with 30°tilt
and either 161°and 162°azimuth angle provided the same yield.
Together with all the data inputted into SAM the total annual yearly energy is 20,212 MWh
yearly with the maximum generation coming from in the month of May [4.5]. However,
this simulation was carried out for a fixed open rack. With a single-axis tracking system
the energy production increase by 2000 MWh [4.6].
4.3
Cost-benefit analysis
SAM software is also used for the cost-benefit analysis, where the Net present value,
Internal rate of return, and Levelized cost of energy are achieved as the output for the
appropriate inputs. SAM’s financial models are for the following types of projects:
• Residential and commercial projects where the renewable energy system is on the
customer side of the electric utility meter (behind the meter) and power from the
system is used to reduce the customer’s electricity bill.
Cost-benefit assessment of increased renewable energy systems integration in the Bornholm Island
29
==PAGE:34==
Figure 4.3: Tilt and azimuth for the Solar Panel
Figure 4.4: Combined Simulation of Tilt and Azimuth
• Power purchase agreement (PPA) projects where the system is connected to the
grid at an interconnection point, and the project earns revenue through power sales.
The project may be owned and operated by a single owner or by a partnership
involving a flip or leaseback arrangement.
• Third-party ownership is where the system is installed on the customer’s (host) prop-
erty and owned by a separate entity (developer), and the host is compensated for
power generated by the system through either a PPA or lease agreement.
In the above financial model, a single-owner grid-connected type was selected. Some
of the required inputs for this type are CAPEX (Capital expenditures), OPEX (operating
expenses), Discount rate, Revenue (from capacity and curtailment), and project tax, etc.
The initial amount is CAPEX which is used as an expense to undertake new projects or
investments by the company.
The equipment cost involved in CAPEX is obtained through the suppliers for the second
quarter of the year 2023. Further, the CAPEX includes the installation and soft costs which
30
Cost-benefit assessment of increased renewable energy systems integration in the Bornholm Island
==PAGE:35==
Figure 4.5: Annual Yearly Yield for fixed System
are the expenses required to set up the PV system, including mechanical and electrical
installation and expenditure related to acquiring all the relevant permits respectively.
After the construction of the PV plant, money is mainly utilised to cover the expenses
incurred in the course of operation and maintenance (O&M) of the PV systems. Table
[4.2], provides the average cost of equipment from different suppliers for the year 2023.
The majority of the cost comes from PV modules [4.7] which is 52% followed by mounting
structures (23%).
Table 4.2: Equipment cost derived from different suppliers
Hardware
Cost per Wp
PV Modules
$ 0.281
Inverters
$ 0.0237
MV Station
$ 0.0214
Mounting System
$ 0.121
HV TRAFO
$ 0.023
HV Substation
$ 0.046
GenTie
$ 0.0214
Total
$ 0.538
Cost-benefit assessment of increased renewable energy systems integration in the Bornholm Island
31
==PAGE:36==
Figure 4.6: Annual Yearly Yield for One axis Tracking System obtain in SAM.
Figure 4.7: Hardware Cost Breakdown per Wp
32
Cost-benefit assessment of increased renewable energy systems integration in the Bornholm Island
==PAGE:37==
From the equipment cost and using the paper [70] the total initial investment (CAPEX) is
calculated.
I0 = H + SC + I = H + 1
2.H.ψ
Where,
I, is the total initial investment
H, hardware cost
SC, soft cost
I, installation cost
ψ, normalized wage of country
With the above equation, the total initial investment comes out to be 0.958 dollars/Wp.
Similarly, the operational cost (OPEX) is obtained with the equation [70] :
O = 0.0128 ∗I0
Where the calculated OPEX is 0.01226 dollars/ Wp-year.
Figure 4.8: Average Electricity Spot Market Price and its increase/decrease percentage
Cost-benefit assessment of increased renewable energy systems integration in the Bornholm Island
33
==PAGE:38==
Figure 4.9: Estimated Electricity Price derived using data from 2010-2022 and the PPA
price used in the simulation
Once the cost of the project has been inputted the next input is the benefit gained from
the PV plant, which is the revenue received by sending the generated electricity to the
grid/customer. To calculate the revenue, the electricity spot market price of Bornholm
was collected from Energinet [71]. The average price from the year 2012 to 2022 was
found and their trend was calculated. It can be inferred from graph [4.8], that in the last
couple of years, there has been a drastic increase in the price. Using the obtained trend
line the future electricity price was estimated. However, it can be seen from graph [4.9],
the price reaches above 350 dollars/MWh after 2045. Further, the PPA price considered
for simulation starts from 100$ for 2023 and increases linearly every year by 1%.
Inputting the obtained CAPEX and OPEX along with the estimated electricity price as the
power purchase agreement (PPA) price, two simulations were performed. Where in one
scenario the project term debt was included and in the other it was not as shown in the
cash flow graph [4.10]. Finally, with all the parameters input in the software, the simulation
is run again and the required NPV, IRR, and LCOE results were gained. Figure [4.11],
34
Cost-benefit assessment of increased renewable energy systems integration in the Bornholm Island
==PAGE:39==
Figure 4.10: Cash flow comparison
provides the obtained result of the simulation, where the IRR at the end of the project is
10.76% and NPV is 841,292 dollars.
Figure 4.11: Cost-benefit Analysis result
Cost-benefit assessment of increased renewable energy systems integration in the Bornholm Island
35
==PAGE:40==
4.4
Analysis of power congestion challenges and
opportunities
Figure 4.12: Map of Bornholm Islands’s 60kV Network. Source: [15].
In this part of the analysis, simulations are performed to obtain the energy lost due to
power congestion and thereby loss in revenue. Figure [4.12], provides Bornholm’s 60kV
Network. With the implementation of an additional 20MW PV plant in Østerlars, there
is a possibility it might lead to overloading in the grid’s capacity and transmission line at
certain times when the supply is high. To void this stress the government instructs the PV
plant to stop energy generation at those times.
To solve this issue, one solution will be analysed in this section. Which is to utilise the
excess energy to other components of Østerlars [4.13]. In Østerlars, a district heating
system already exists that provides the hot water and space heating to the population.
This heat plant has a capacity of 4MW and is fueled through straw and produces 18.000
MWh/year. The system also has a 2.4MW electric boilers as a backup. Integrating the
20MW PV plant [4.14] into the DHS will help to provide the required energy to run these
electric boilers at times when there is curtailment as well as when the price of electricity
is much lesser than buying straws.
36
Cost-benefit assessment of increased renewable energy systems integration in the Bornholm Island
==PAGE:41==
Figure 4.13: Components of Østerlars site
Figure 4.14: Components of Østerlars site integrated with PV Plant
The simulation is performed in the software, where an average percentage is taken from
scientific papers to determine the curtailed amount out of the total energy generated. This
percentage is inputted as system loss into the software, and simulations are performed
to obtain the new NPV, IRR, and LCOE due to curtailment.
The simulation for the scenario with curtailment was run with the same inputs as the case
in the previous section. Except, the energy loss due to curtailment which was derived
Cost-benefit assessment of increased renewable energy systems integration in the Bornholm Island
37
==PAGE:42==
from the IEA report[72] was added additionally. From the result [4.15], it can be observed
that the annual energy is reduced and the NPV is negative.
Figure 4.15: Cost-benefit Analysis result for Curtailed scenario
The new cost at which the energy is sold to the grid and to the district heating system is
represented in the table 4.3.
Table 4.3: Cost for the scenario when is sold to district heating system
Cost
Unit
Total Energy
22,243,692
kWh
After Curtailmet
21,199,538
kWh
Curtailed Energy
1,044,154
kWh
Cost for normal energy
0.1
dollars/kWh
Cost for curtailed energy
0.02
dollars/kWh
Total Cost
2,140,836.88
dollars
Cost per kWh
0.0962
dollars/kWh
Using the calculated cost the simulation is run again [4.16], where the NPV obtained is
43,801 dollars with the IRR 9,14%.
38
Cost-benefit assessment of increased renewable energy systems integration in the Bornholm Island
==PAGE:43==
Figure 4.16: Cost-benefit Analysis result in case of scenario including district heating
system
The results from all three scenarios, that is without curtailment, with curtailment, and cur-
tailed energy sold district heating system are combined and represented as table [4.4].
Table 4.4: NPV, IRR, and LCOE of three scenarios
Without
Curtailment
With
Curtailment
Solving Curtailment
with District Heating System
(P2H)
NPV (Dollars)
841,292
-155,580
43,801
IRR (End of project)
10.76%
8.78%
9.14%
LCOE (Nominal) (Dollars/kwh)
10.41
10.89
10.38
However, for a period of one month every year in an island the system goes into a islanding
operation. During this period, the curtailment of renewable energy goes between 15-20%.
So that the production remains constant with less fluctuation. To study this, a sensitivity
analysis [4.17] is performed that includes the islanding operation.
Cost-benefit assessment of increased renewable energy systems integration in the Bornholm Island
39
==PAGE:44==
Figure 4.17: Sensitivity analysis to study the impact of curtailment on NPV, IRR and LCOE
4.5
Uncertainty analysis
Firstly, the sensitivity analysis is performed by changing the input parameters individually
while the other inputs of the model are kept constant. Using this analysis, how the variation
in the input impacts the result is studied. The results from the sensitivity analysis for NPV
are shown in the figure[4.18].
40
Cost-benefit assessment of increased renewable energy systems integration in the Bornholm Island
==PAGE:45==
Figure 4.18: Sensitivity Analysis of NPV with 10% change in parameters.
Similarly, the results are obtained in case of IRR and LCOE as shown in figures [4.20,
4.19]. The input parameters used for the analysis are ±10% from their actual value.
While the output is NPV, LCOE, and IRR, where PPA price affects the most in all three
cases.
Figure 4.19: Sensitivity Analysis of LCOE with 10% change in parameters.
The sensitivity analysis is used to select the input parameters for the monte carlo simu-
lation, based on the impact on the result. After studying the uncertainties of the different
Cost-benefit assessment of increased renewable energy systems integration in the Bornholm Island
41
==PAGE:46==
scenarios and parameters in a deterministic manner, a probabilistic approach is adopted
to provide a more comprehensive assessment of the economic results.
Figure 4.20: Sensitivity Analysis of IRR with 10% change in parameters.
In the next step, the probability distribution of all the parameters is chosen based on the
best suitable distribution suggested by other researchers. Table [2.1] provides all the
distribution functions and constraints for each input parameter. For parameters balance
of system equipment, installation labour, inverter cost, module cost and fixed cost by
capacity (O&M) the distribution function is chosen based on the paper [73]. While the
inputs inflation rate, real discount rate and PPA price it is obtained from the research
papers [74], [75], [76] respectively.
Table 4.5: Probability distribution of input parameters for Monte Carlo simulation
Parameter
Probability Distribution
Constraints
Balance of system equipment
Uniform
Max - 0.276 Min- 0.184
Installation labor
Uniform
Max - 0.504 Min- 0.336
Inverter Cost
Uniform
Max - 0.024 Min- 0.016
Module Cost
Log-normal
Mean – 0.28 ErrorF- 3
Inflation rate
Log-normal
Mean – 2.5 ErrorF- 3
Real discount rate
Triangular
A - 5.12 B - 6.4 C - 7.68
Fixed cost by capacity
Uniform
Max - 14.712 Min- 9.808
PPA price
Normal
Mean - 0.1 Standard Deviation - 0.02
42
Cost-benefit assessment of increased renewable energy systems integration in the Bornholm Island
==PAGE:47==
Using the specified probability distribution function for each input, 100 samples [4.21] were
stochastically generated in the SAM software.
Figure 4.21: Stochaistically generated 100 samples of input parameters
Cost-benefit assessment of increased renewable energy systems integration in the Bornholm Island
43
==PAGE:48==
The stochastically generated samples are taken as the input parameter. Using these
inputs in the stochastic simulation in SAM, the output NPV, IRR and LCOE are obtained
and represented in probability and cumulative distribution function graphs. Where, the
probability distribution function provides the probability of an event that will occur in a
given interval. While the cumulative distribution function shows the probability of a random
variable that will take a value equal to or less than the variable.
Figure 4.22: Probability and cumulative distribution function of NPV
44
Cost-benefit assessment of increased renewable energy systems integration in the Bornholm Island
==PAGE:49==
For each input sample of NPV, outputs are obtained which are depicted through proba-
bility and cumulative distribution function graphs as shown in figure [4.22]. The function
depends on the mean and standard deviation values received from the output.
Figure 4.23: Probability and cumulative distribution function of IRR
Cost-benefit assessment of increased renewable energy systems integration in the Bornholm Island
45
==PAGE:50==
Similarly, the distribution functions for both IRR and LCOE are represented in the figures
[4.23] and [4.24] respectively.
Figure 4.24: Probability and cumulative distribution function of LCOE
From the result, it can be observed that the mean NPV is 9.49 · 105, with minimum value
−1.42 · 107 and maximum 1.44 · 107.
Table 4.6: Estimated parameters of NPV, IRR and LCOE probabilty distribution
NPV ($)
IRR (%)
LCOE (cents/kWh)
Mean
807063.50
24.45
10.66
Median
1363905.00
11.88
10.11
Standard Deviation
6431588.02
33.96
2.44
Minimum
-26239700.00
-11.08
8.01
Maximum
15133600.00
205.59
23.80
Finally, the cash flow for all the three scenarios are represented graphically in figures
[4.25, 4.26, 4.27].
46
Cost-benefit assessment of increased renewable energy systems integration in the Bornholm Island
==PAGE:51==
Figure 4.25: Cash flow in case of scenario without curtailment
Figure 4.26: Cash flow in case of scenario with curtailment
Figure 4.27: Cash flow in case of scenario, solving curtailment with district heating system
and power-to-heat
Cost-benefit assessment of increased renewable energy systems integration in the Bornholm Island
47
==PAGE:52==
5
Discussion
The main issue addressed in this project is how to improve the self-sufficiency of an island
while reducing its dependency on conventional energy generation and energy from the
mainland through cables. Using the 20MW PV plant in Bornholm that is in development as
the reference case to solve this challenge. During the calculation, three different PV plant
scenarios are compared. The main objective of the project is to conduct a cost-benefit
analysis on a 20MW solar PV plant in Østerlars to do that, a methodology is implemented
and the different scenarios are compared to obtain the best possible result.
The obtained result from all three scenarios is compiled in the table 4.4. Inferring from it,
the scenario without curtailment produces the highest profit. However, in a realistic world,
that case is highly not possible due to the limitations in grid capacity. Therefore, the next
best scenario is to utilize the curtailed energy by selling it to the district heating system
located near the PV plant. This results in a reduced profit since the excess energy is sold
at a lower price than the PPA price. However, this case is the best option compared to
not selling, where the NPV is negative.
The result from the monte carlo analysis is represented as probability and cumulative
distribution function. Where the mean NPV and IRR are 807063.50$ and 24.45%. The
project has a higher probability of having a positive NPV as seen from the probability
distribution function 4.22. Where the likelihood is slightly positively skewed.
The other important points obtained from the project result are discussed below:
• The CAPEX and OPEX obtained from the result are 0.958 dollars/Wp and 0.01226
dollars/ Wp-year respectively. The CAPEX value was obtained by taking the aver-
age quotes from various suppliers for the year 2023. And the OPEX was obtained
using the equations used in this paper [70]. These calculated values are very close
to the values predicted [5.1] in ”The true competitiveness of solar PV: A European
case study [77]”. Showing that the equipment cost received from the supplier and
the formula used in a research paper is correct.
• The PPA price considered in the simulation is 100 dollars/MWh in the year 2023
with an escalation of 1% every year. However, this is not the estimation obtained
from the Elspot market price. This is due to the increase in price in the years 2021
and 2022 because of COVID-19 and Russia-Ukraine war. However, before these
years there were no sudden changes in the price and was a constant trend. Hence
keeping in mind, the price will drop again in the coming years when the issues are
cleared, the price mentioned above was used in the simulation.
• In all the scenarios, the simulations were performed with debts. From figure [4.10],
it can be seen that initial investment is high in cases of without debt. This cost is
partially absorbed in the case of with debt scenario. Even though interest payments
on debt reduce net income and cash flow, it is beneficial since it lowers the taxable
income [78]. Overall, making the project more feasible when debt is involved
• The NPV, IRR, and LCOE for all three scenarios is comprised in the table [4.4]. The
scenario without curtailment provides the best value of NPV and IRR. However,
in the case of LCOE, the scenario With Curtailment and District Heating System
is better since the NPV of annual cost is lower compared to the scenario without
curtailment.
48
Cost-benefit assessment of increased renewable energy systems integration in the Bornholm Island
==PAGE:53==
• The input parameters such as inflation, discount rate and curtailment percentage
were taken as average values from various sources. To have a more concrete re-
sults, sensitivity analysis was performed to obtain their impact on NPV, IRR and
LCOE. Curtailment percentage had a major impact on the result as can be seen
from the figure [4.17].
Figure 5.1: PV CAPEX and OPEX price development for 2016-50. Prices are in real 2016
money. Source: [77]
• The result from sensitivity analysis provides the input parameter that influences the
change in NPV, IRR, and LCOE. From figures [4.18, 4.19, 4.20 ], it can be inferred
that inverter cost and PPA escalation play a very minor role in all three cases. Hence,
for the monte carlo simulation PPA escalation was not included as PPA price was
Cost-benefit assessment of increased renewable energy systems integration in the Bornholm Island
49
==PAGE:54==
already added as one of the parameters.
Even though all the results are consistent and correlate with other research papers, there
are some limitations. In particular, the main limitation is the accuracy and assumption
in the data used as input parameters to conduct the cost-benefit analysis. Firstly, the
forecast of energy generation is calculated using the weather data recorded in the past
at a particular location. Mainly, the amount of solar radiation available throughout the
year is required for the prediction. The forecast is limited to linear relationships, location
restrictions, or input data limits to one atmospheric condition. Also, clouds are usually
the most important driver, but due to their tiny scales clouds do not really exist in weather
models.
Next, the CAPEX was calculated using the expected price quotes from suppliers. There-
fore, there is a chance that this value can change in the future due to unforeseen cir-
cumstances. The main assumption comes from the forecast of electricity prices. This
prediction of the electricity market price is very important since the entire project’s benefit
is derived from it. The combination of renewable generation and electricity prices can sig-
nificantly impact the profitability of the project’s investments. Determining the correlation
between future energy scenarios and electricity prices to obtain the hourly values has its
own hurdles. First, the data on future price drivers is often only available as a yearly es-
timate, with hourly predictions mainly available for shorter-period applications. Second,
the historical correlation shows few common patterns with electricity prices. The main
reason behind this is the high volatility of electricity prices. Apart from this, other values
such as inflation, discount rate, etc are highly fluctuating and hard to predict.
To compensate for these limitations sensitivity and uncertainty analysis help to provide
better results by considering a whole range of probability distributions for the input pa-
rameters.
50
Cost-benefit assessment of increased renewable energy systems integration in the Bornholm Island
==PAGE:55==
6
Conclusion
In summary, the calculation methodology for a large-scale PV plant has been successful
in helping to assess the economic profitability of the PV power plant in different scenar-
ios. This may be inferred since the results obtained by means of calculations and SAM
simulations are similar to the results obtained in the literature. The scenario presenting
the best results is the case without curtailment which has the highest NPV and IRR. While
the scenario with the district heating system is a model with the lowest LCOE.
The result obtained through the methodology followed can be valid, but still, some im-
provements can be done to produce much more accurate results. A few aspects of the
current PV plant analysis that can be improved in the future are:
• To obtain more accurate weather data, instead of using just one source for the infor-
mation various data from different entities can be utilized. By following this method,
any exceptions/anomalies in the data derived only from a particular source can be
reduced.
• To improve the calculation of electricity prices. In the current project, the price is
calculated based on the data from the past decade and then estimated for future
prices.
• To carry out an in-depth study about the percentage of power curtailed. Try to obtain
this percentage by correlating calculating the future energy generation and the grid
capacity.
• Further, to study other power-to-X applications to utilize the curtailed energy. In
addition, compare the obtained result with power-to-heat.
• Finally, to perform a more general calculation methodology to facilitate reproducible
results and new studies for different PV plants located at different sites.
Cost-benefit assessment of increased renewable energy systems integration in the Bornholm Island
51
==PAGE:56==
Bibliography
[1]
Timo Gerres et al. A review of cross-sector decarbonisation potentials in the Euro-
pean energy intensive industry. Feb. 2019. DOI: 10.1016/j.jclepro.2018.11.036.
[2]
Energy statistics - an overview - Statistics Explained. URL: https://ec.europa.eu/
eurostat/statistics-explained/index.php?title=Energy_statistics_-_an_overview.
[3]
Tineke Van Der Schoor and Bert Scholtens. “Power to the people: Local community
initiatives and the transition to sustainable energy”. In: Renewable and Sustainable
Energy Reviews 43 (Mar. 2015), pp. 666–675. ISSN: 1364-0321. DOI: 10.1016/J.
RSER.2014.10.089.
[4]
Francisca Jalil-Vega, Iván García Kerdan, and Adam D. Hawkes. “Spatially-resolved
urban energy systems model to study decarbonisation pathways for energy services
in cities”. In: Applied Energy 262 (Mar. 2020). ISSN: 03062619. DOI: 10.1016/j.
apenergy.2019.114445.
[5]
Manuel Uche-Soria and Carlos Rodríguez-Monroy. “Energy planning and its re-
lationship to energy poverty in decision making. A first approach for the Canary
Islands”. In: Energy Policy 140 (May 2020), p. 111423. ISSN: 0301-4215. DOI:
10.1016/J.ENPOL.2020.111423.
[6]
How to decarbonise the energy systems of islands? - MAESHA. URL: https://www.
maesha.eu/how-to-decarbonise-the-energy-systems-of-islands/.
[7]
The challenge of energy supply and distribution in European islands - Trialog. URL:
https://www.trialog.com/en/the-challenge-of-energy-on-islands/.
[8]
Marko Jelić et al. “Towards self-sustainable island grids through optimal utilization of
renewable energy potential and community engagement”. In: Energies 13.13 (July
2020). ISSN: 19961073. DOI: 10.3390/en13133386.
[9]
Sadhan Gope et al. “Rescheduling of real power for congestion management with
integration of pumped storage hydro unit using firefly algorithm”. In: International
Journal of Electrical Power and Energy Systems 83 (Dec. 2016), pp. 434–442.
ISSN: 01420615. DOI: 10.1016/j.ijepes.2016.04.048.
[10]
Website : Www and Avinash Swami. International Journal of Emerging Technology
and Advanced Engineering Transmission Congestion Impacts on Electricity Market:
An Overview. Tech. rep. 8. 2008. URL: www.ijetae.com.
[11]
International renewable energy agency. Innovation landscape brief: Renewable power-
to-heat. 2019. ISBN: 978-92-9260-144-7. URL: www.irena.org.
[12]
Decision Quality. Tech. rep. 2018.
[13]
What Is Cost-Benefit Analysis, How Is it Used, What Are its Pros and Cons? URL:
https://www.investopedia.com/terms/c/cost-benefitanalysis.asp.
[14]
Jacob Østergaard and John Eli Nielsen. THE BORNHOLM POWER SYSTEM An
overview. Tech. rep. 1. 2010.
[15]
Deliverable 2.1: Report on requirements for each demo, use cases and KPIs defi-
nition. Tech. rep. 2021.
[16]
Irina Khindanova. A Monte Carlo Model of a Wind Power Generation Investment.
Tech. rep.
[17]
José Ignacio Sarasúa et al. “Alternative operating modes to reduce the load shed-
ding in the power system of El Hierro Island”. In: International Journal of Electrical
Power and Energy Systems 128 (June 2021). ISSN: 01420615. DOI: 10.1016/j.
ijepes.2020.106755.
52
Cost-benefit assessment of increased renewable energy systems integration in the Bornholm Island
==PAGE:57==
[18]
Marula Tsagkari, Jordi Roca, and Giorgos Kallis. ““From local island energy to de-
growth? Exploring democracy, self-sufficiency, and renewable energy production
in Greece and Spain””. In: Energy Research and Social Science 81 (Nov. 2021).
ISSN: 22146296. DOI: 10.1016/j.erss.2021.102288.
[19]
Gilles Notton et al. Tilos, the first autonomous renewable green island in Mediter-
ranean: A Horizon 2020 project. Tech. rep.
[20]
Solar Irradiance data | Solargis. URL: https://solargis.com/.
[21]
Global Wind Atlas. URL: https://globalwindatlas.info/en.
[22]
Phedeas Stephanides et al. “Public perception of sustainable energy innovation: A
case study from Tilos, Greece”. In: Energy Procedia. Vol. 159. Elsevier Ltd, 2019,
pp. 249–254. DOI: 10.1016/j.egypro.2018.12.058.
[23]
D. Boulogiorgou and P. Ktenidis. “TILOS local scale Technology Innovation enabling
low carbon energy transition”. In: Renewable Energy 146 (Feb. 2020), pp. 397–403.
ISSN: 18790682. DOI: 10.1016/j.renene.2019.06.130.
[24]
Søren Hermansen. ”Think local-act local”. ISBN: 9788792274014. URL: www.energiakademiet.
dk.
[25]
Samsø: A Wind of Change – Climate Heroes. URL: https://climateheroes.org/samso-
a-wind-of-change/.
[26]
Solar PV – Analysis - IEA. URL: https://www.iea.org/reports/solar-pv.
[27]
Solar Power Plant - Main Components, Working, Advantages and Disadvantages
- Mechanical Booster. URL: https://www.mechanicalbooster.com/2017/12/solar-
power-plant.html.
[28]
3 Types of Solar Power Plants: Guide to Choose the Best One. URL: https : / /
insolationenergy.in/types-of-solar-power-plants-how-to-choose-the-right-one/.
[29]
Utility-Scale Solar Power | SEIA. URL: https://www.seia.org/initiatives/utility-scale-
solar-power.
[30]
Large-Scale Solar Siting | Department of Energy. URL: https://www.energy.gov/
eere/solar/large-scale-solar-siting.
[31]
Report Author and Roca Rubí. Design and Modelling of a Large-Scale PV Plant
Escola Tècnica Superior d’Enginyeria Industrial de Barcelona. Tech. rep. 2018.
[32]
Different Types Of Solar Inverters & Their Advantages In 2022. URL: https : / /
mccoymart.com/post/types-of-solar-inverters/.
[33]
“distribution-and-substation-transformers-in_compress”. In: ().
[34]
Utility-Scale Solar Photovoltaic Power Plants In partnershIp wIth a project Devel-
oper’s GuIDe. Tech. rep. 2015.
[35]
SOLAR PROGRESS REPORT ADVANCING TOWARD A CLEAN ENERGY FU-
TURE. Tech. rep. 2014.
[36]
Large-Scale PV | Union of Concerned Scientists. URL: https://www.ucsusa.org/
resources/large-scale-pv#references.
[37]
Future Islands: Renewable energies on islands. URL: https://www.next-kraftwerke.
com/energy-blog/renewable-energy-island.
[38]
Tom Brown, Thomas Ackermann, and Nis Martensen. “Field Actions Science Re-
ports Solar Power Integration on the Seychelles Islands”. In: (). ISSN: 1867-8521.
[39]
Li Guoqing et al. “Ground-mounted photovoltaic solar parks promote land surface
cool islands in arid ecosystems”. In: Renewable and Sustainable Energy Transition
1 (Aug. 2021), p. 100008. ISSN: 2667095X. DOI: 10.1016/j.rset.2021.100008.
[40]
K. P. Aprilianti et al. “Potential assessment of solar power plant: A case study of a
small island in Eastern Indonesia”. In: IOP Conference Series: Earth and Environ-
mental Science. Vol. 599. 1. IOP Publishing Ltd, Nov. 2020. DOI: 10.1088/1755-
1315/599/1/012026.
Cost-benefit assessment of increased renewable energy systems integration in the Bornholm Island
53
==PAGE:58==
[41]
PowerFactory - DIgSILENT. URL: https://www.digsilent.de/en/powerfactory.html.
[42]
Dominik Keiner et al. “Powering an island energy system by offshore floating tech-
nologies towards 100% renewables: A case for the Maldives”. In: Applied Energy
308 (Feb. 2022). ISSN: 03062619. DOI: 10.1016/j.apenergy.2021.118360.
[43]
Henrik Lund et al. “EnergyPLAN – Advanced analysis of smart energy systems”. In:
Smart Energy 1 (Feb. 2021). ISSN: 26669552. DOI: 10.1016/j.segy.2021.100007.
URL: https://www.energyplan.eu/.
[44]
Robert J. Brent. Handbook of research on cost-benefit analysis. Edward Elgar,
2009, p. 540. ISBN: 9781847200693.
[45]
Rob Hoogmartens et al. Bridging the gap between LCA, LCC and CBA as sustain-
ability assessment tools. 2014. DOI: 10.1016/j.eiar.2014.05.001.
[46]
David W. (David William) Pearce et al. Cost-benefit analysis and the environment :
recent developments. Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development,
2006, p. 315. ISBN: 9264010041.
[47]
María Molinos-Senante, Francesc Hernández-Sancho, and Ramón Sala-Garrido.
“Economic feasibility study for wastewater treatment: A cost-benefit analysis”. In:
Science of the Total Environment 408.20 (Sept. 2010), pp. 4396–4402. ISSN: 00489697.
DOI: 10.1016/j.scitotenv.2010.07.014.
[48]
Niek Mouter et al. “Comparing cost-benefit analysis and multi-criteria analysis”.
In: Advances in Transport Policy and Planning. Vol. 6. Elsevier B.V., Jan. 2020,
pp. 225–254. ISBN: 9780128208212. DOI: 10.1016/bs.atpp.2020.07.009.
[49]
Alan D Pearman. Multi-Criteria Analysis: A Manual. Tech. rep. 2009. URL: www.
communities.gov.uk.
[50]
Yan Luo et al. “Multi-objective robust optimization of a solar power tower plant under
uncertainty”. In: Energy 238 (Jan. 2022). ISSN: 03605442. DOI: 10.1016/j.energy.
2021.121716.
[51]
Muhammad Asad et al. “The Cost Benefit Analysis of Commercial 100 MW Solar
PV: The Plant Quaid-e-Azam Solar Power Pvt Ltd.” In: Sustainability (Switzerland)
14.5 (Mar. 2022). ISSN: 20711050. DOI: 10.3390/su14052895.
[52]
A Galán et al. Cost-Benefit Analysis of aBiomass Power PlantinMorocco anda Pho-
tovoltaic Installation in Algeria. Tech. rep. 1999.
[53]
Andrés Honrubia-Escribano et al. Influence of solar technology in the economic
performance of PV power plants in Europe. A comprehensive analysis. 2018. DOI:
10.1016/j.rser.2017.09.061.
[54]
Mohammad Ramadhan and Adel Naseeb. “The cost benefit analysis of implement-
ing photovoltaic solar system in the state of Kuwait”. In: Renewable Energy 36.4
(Apr. 2011), pp. 1272–1276. ISSN: 09601481. DOI: 10.1016/j.renene.2010.10.004.
[55]
Krishpersad Manohar Rikhi Ramkissoon. “Cost Benefit Analysis of Implementing
a Solar Photovoltaic System”. In: International Journal of Innovative Research in
Science, Engineering and Technology 4.12 (Dec. 2015), pp. 11696–11703. ISSN:
23476710. DOI: 10.15680/ijirset.2015.0412006.
[56]
Sensitivity and Uncertainty – Center for Systems Reliability. URL: https://www.
sandia.gov/csr/center-for-systems-reliability/capabilities/sensitivity-and-uncertainty/.
[57]
Francesca Pianosi et al. Sensitivity analysis of environmental models: A systematic
review with practical workflow. May 2016. DOI: 10.1016/j.envsoft.2016.02.008.
[58]
Peter J Spinney and G Campbell Watkins. Monte Carlo simulation techniques and
electric utility resource decisions. Tech. rep. 2. 1996, pp. 155–163.
[59]
Donald Hertzmark. Energy Sector Management Assistance Program RENEWABLE
RENEWABLE RENEWABLE RENEWABLE RENEWABLE ENERGY ENERGY EN-
ERGY ENERGY ENERGY Risk Assessment Methods Risk Assessment Methods
54
Cost-benefit assessment of increased renewable energy systems integration in the Bornholm Island
==PAGE:59==
Risk Assessment Methods Risk Assessment Methods Risk Assessment Methods
for P for P for P for P for Power ower ower ower ower Utility Planning Utility Planning
Utility Planning Utility Planning Utility Planning RENEWABLE RENEWABLE RE-
NEWABLE RENEWABLE RENEWABLE ENERGY ENERGY ENERGY ENERGY
ENERGY Special Report. Tech. rep. 2007.
[60]
Philip A. Leicester, Chris I. Goodier, and Paul Rowley. “Probabilistic evaluation of
solar photovoltaic systems using Bayesian networks: a discounted cash flow as-
sessment”. In: Progress in Photovoltaics: Research and Applications. Vol. 24. 12.
John Wiley and Sons Ltd, Dec. 2016, pp. 1592–1605. DOI: 10.1002/pip.2754.
[61]
Kaushik Paul et al. “A Novel Improved Crow Search Algorithm to alleviate con-
gestion in power system transmission lines”. In: Energy Reports 8 (Nov. 2022),
pp. 11456–11465. ISSN: 23524847. DOI: 10.1016/j.egyr.2022.08.267.
[62]
Nader Tarashandeh and Ali Karimi. “Utilization of energy storage systems in con-
gestion management of transmission networks with incentive-based approach for
investors”. In: Journal of Energy Storage 33 (Jan. 2021). ISSN: 2352152X. DOI:
10.1016/j.est.2020.102034.
[63]
Vijaykumar K. Prajapati and Vasundhara Mahajan. “Reliability assessment and con-
gestion management of power system with energy storage system and uncertain
renewable resources”. In: Energy 215 (Jan. 2021). ISSN: 03605442. DOI: 10.1016/
j.energy.2020.119134.
[64]
Andreas Bloess, Wolf Peter Schill, and Alexander Zerrahn. Power-to-heat for re-
newable energy integration: A review of technologies, modeling approaches, and
flexibility potentials. Feb. 2018. DOI: 10.1016/j.apenergy.2017.12.073.
[65]
Md Nasimul Islam Maruf et al. “Classification, potential role, and modeling of power-
to-heat and thermal energy storage in energy systems: A review”. In: Sustainable
Energy Technologies and Assessments 53 (Oct. 2022). ISSN: 22131388. DOI: 10.
1016/j.seta.2022.102553.
[66]
JRC Photovoltaic Geographical Information System (PVGIS) - European Commis-
sion. URL: https://re.jrc.ec.europa.eu/pvg_tools/en/.
[67]
About - System Advisor Model - SAM. URL: https://sam.nrel.gov/about-sam.html.
[68]
Paul Gilman and Aron Dobos. System Advisor Model, SAM 2011.12.2: General
Description. Tech. rep. 2011. URL: http://www.osti.gov/bridge.
[69]
Bornholm - Solar cell plant at Kildevad - Bornholm Municipality. URL: https : / /
bornholm.viewer.dkplan.niras.dk/plan/55#/.
[70]
Daniel Lugo￿laguna, Angel Arcos￿Vargas, and Fernando Nuñez￿hernandez. “A
european assessment of the solar energy cost: Key factors and optimal technology”.
In: Sustainability (Switzerland) 13.6 (Mar. 2021). ISSN: 20711050. DOI: 10.3390/
su13063238.
[71]
ENERGI DATA SERVICE. URL: https://www.energidataservice.dk/tso-electricity/
Elspotprices#metadata-info.
[72]
International Energy Agency. Together Secure Sustainable Digitalization & Energy.
Tech. rep. URL: www.iea.org/t&c/.
[73]
Carlos J. Sarasa-Maestro, Rodolfo Dufo-López, and José L. Bernal-Agustín. “Eval-
uating the effect of financing costs on PV grid parity by applying a probabilistic
methodology”. In: Applied Sciences (Switzerland) 9.3 (Jan. 2019). ISSN: 20763417.
DOI: 10.3390/app9030425.
[74]
Jonathan Kearns. THE DISTRIBUTION AND MEASUREMENT OF INFLATION.
Tech. rep. 1998.
[75]
Dima Jawad and Kaan Ozbay. THE DISCOUNT RATE IN LIFE CYCLE COST
ANALYSIS OF TRANSPORTATION PROJECTS. Tech. rep.
Cost-benefit assessment of increased renewable energy systems integration in the Bornholm Island
55
==PAGE:60==
[76]
H. Zhou et al. “Study on probability distribution of prices in electricity market: A
case study of zhejiang province, china”. In: Communications in Nonlinear Science
and Numerical Simulation 14.5 (May 2009), pp. 2255–2265. ISSN: 10075704. DOI:
10.1016/j.cnsns.2008.04.020.
[77]
“the-true-competitiveness-of-solar-pv-a-european-ca (2)”. In: ().
[78]
Adjusted Present Value (APV): Overview, Formula, and Example. URL: https://
www.investopedia.com/terms/a/apv.asp.
56
Cost-benefit assessment of increased renewable energy systems integration in the Bornholm Island
==PAGE:61==
A
Appendix
Figure A.1: Sensitivity Analysis of NPV with 20% change in parameters.
Figure A.2: Sensitivity Analysis of LCOE with 20% change in parameters.
Cost-benefit assessment of increased renewable energy systems integration in the Bornholm Island
57
==PAGE:62==
Figure A.3: Sensitivity Analysis of IRR with 20% change in parameters.
Figure A.4: Sensitivity Analysis of NPV with 30% change in parameters.
58
Cost-benefit assessment of increased renewable energy systems integration in the Bornholm Island
==PAGE:63==
Figure A.5: Sensitivity Analysis of LCOE with 30% change in parameters.
Figure A.6: Sensitivity Analysis of IRR with 30% change in parameters.
Cost-benefit assessment of increased renewable energy systems integration in the Bornholm Island
59
==PAGE:64==
System Advisor Model Standard Report generated by SAM 2020.11.29 on Sat Dec 31 16:53:15 2022 
1 / 3 
 
System Advisor Model Report 
PVWatts 
Single Owner 
20.0 DC MW Nameplate 
$0.95/W Installed Cost 
55.16, 14.96 
UTC +1 
Performance Model 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Results 
Solar Radiation 
AC Energy 
(kWh/m2/day) 
(kWh) 
Jan 
0.49 
228,692 
Feb 
1.14 
523,657 
Mar 
2.38 
1,244,591 
Apr 
6.94 
3,485,738 
May 
7.56 
3,865,187 
Jun 
7.29 
3,487,631 
Jul 
6.85 
3,427,301 
Aug 
6.08 
3,002,599 
Sep 
3.45 
1,674,568 
Oct 
1.54 
761,128 
Nov 
0.8 
365,768 
Dec 
0.41 
176,827 
Year 
3.75 
22,243,692 
Availability/Curtailment 
none 
Degradation 
0.500000 %/yr 
Hourly or custom losses 
none 
Performance Adjustments 
PV System Specifications 
System nameplate size 
20,000 kW 
Module type 
0 
DC to AC ratio 
1.2 
Rated inverter size 
16,666.67 kW 
Inverter efficiency 
96 % 
Array type 
1 axis tracking 
Array tilt 
0 degrees 
Array azimuth 
161 degrees 
Ground coverage ratio 
0.40 
Total system losses 
14.08 % 
Shading 
no 
==PAGE:65==
System Advisor Model Standard Report generated by SAM 2020.11.29 on Sat Dec 31 16:53:15 2022 
2 / 3 
 
PVWatts 
Single Owner 
20.0 DC MW Nameplate 
$0.95/W Installed Cost 
55.16, 14.96 
UTC +1 
 
Photovoltaic System Electrical Output by Month 
4 
 
 
3 
 
 
2 
 
 
1 
 
 
0 
Jan 
Feb 
Mar 
Apr 
May 
Jun 
Jul 
Aug 
Sep 
Oct 
Nov 
Dec 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Project After-tax Annual Cash Flow 
5 
 
 
 
0 
 
 
 
-5 
 
 
 
-10 
 
Year 
0 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
8 
9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 
Million $ 
Million kWh/month 
==PAGE:66==
System Advisor Model Standard Report generated by SAM 2020.11.29 on Sat Dec 31 16:53:15 2022 
3 / 3 
 
PVwatts 
Single Owner 
20.0 DC MW Nameplate 
$0.95/W Installed Cost 
55.16, 14.96 
UTC +1 
 
This performance model does not specify any loss diagram items. 
Current case name is CBA 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Single Owner | PVWatts System Model 
==PAGE:67==
System Advisor Model Standard Report generated by SAM 2020.11.29 on Sat Dec 31 16:55:25 2022 
1 / 3 
 
System Advisor Model Report 
PVWatts 
Single Owner 
20.0 DC MW Nameplate 
$0.95/W Installed Cost 
55.16, 14.96 
UTC +1 
Performance Model 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Results 
Solar Radiation 
AC Energy 
(kWh/m2/day) 
(kWh) 
Jan 
0.49 
217,282 
Feb 
1.14 
498,398 
Mar 
2.38 
1,185,557 
Apr 
6.94 
3,323,365 
May 
7.56 
3,685,045 
Jun 
7.29 
3,324,720 
Jul 
6.85 
3,267,078 
Aug 
6.08 
2,862,066 
Sep 
3.45 
1,595,569 
Oct 
1.54 
724,603 
Nov 
0.8 
347,903 
Dec 
0.41 
167,946 
Year 
3.75 
21,199,537 
Availability/Curtailment 
none 
Degradation 
0.500000 %/yr 
Hourly or custom losses 
none 
Performance Adjustments 
PV System Specifications 
System nameplate size 
20,000 kW 
Module type 
0 
DC to AC ratio 
1.2 
Rated inverter size 
16,666.67 kW 
Inverter efficiency 
96 % 
Array type 
1 axis tracking 
Array tilt 
0 degrees 
Array azimuth 
161 degrees 
Ground coverage ratio 
0.40 
Total system losses 
18.08 % 
Shading 
no 
==PAGE:68==
System Advisor Model Standard Report generated by SAM 2020.11.29 on Sat Dec 31 16:55:25 2022 
2 / 3 
 
PVWatts 
Single Owner 
20.0 DC MW Nameplate 
$0.95/W Installed Cost 
55.16, 14.96 
UTC +1 
 
Photovoltaic System Electrical Output by Month 
4 
 
 
3 
 
 
2 
 
 
1 
 
 
0 
Jan 
Feb 
Mar 
Apr 
May 
Jun 
Jul 
Aug 
Sep 
Oct 
Nov 
Dec 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Project After-tax Annual Cash Flow 
5 
 
 
0 
 
 
-5 
 
 
-10 
 
Year 
0 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
8 
9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 
Million $ 
Million kWh/month 
==PAGE:69==
System Advisor Model Standard Report generated by SAM 2020.11.29 on Sat Dec 31 16:55:25 2022 
3 / 3 
 
PVwatts 
Single Owner 
20.0 DC MW Nameplate 
$0.95/W Installed Cost 
55.16, 14.96 
UTC +1 
 
This performance model does not specify any loss diagram items. 
Current case name is Curtailment 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Single Owner | PVWatts System Model 
==PAGE:70==
System Advisor Model Standard Report generated by SAM 2020.11.29 on Sat Dec 31 17:01:14 2022 
1 / 3 
 
System Advisor Model Report 
PVWatts 
Single Owner 
20.0 DC MW Nameplate 
$0.95/W Installed Cost 
55.16, 14.96 
UTC +1 
Performance Model 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Results 
Solar Radiation 
AC Energy 
(kWh/m2/day) 
(kWh) 
Jan 
0.49 
228,692 
Feb 
1.14 
523,657 
Mar 
2.38 
1,244,591 
Apr 
6.94 
3,485,738 
May 
7.56 
3,865,187 
Jun 
7.29 
3,487,631 
Jul 
6.85 
3,427,301 
Aug 
6.08 
3,002,599 
Sep 
3.45 
1,674,568 
Oct 
1.54 
761,128 
Nov 
0.8 
365,768 
Dec 
0.41 
176,827 
Year 
3.75 
22,243,692 
Availability/Curtailment 
none 
Degradation 
0.500000 %/yr 
Hourly or custom losses 
none 
Performance Adjustments 
PV System Specifications 
System nameplate size 
20,000 kW 
Module type 
0 
DC to AC ratio 
1.2 
Rated inverter size 
16,666.67 kW 
Inverter efficiency 
96 % 
Array type 
1 axis tracking 
Array tilt 
0 degrees 
Array azimuth 
161 degrees 
Ground coverage ratio 
0.40 
Total system losses 
14.08 % 
Shading 
no 
==PAGE:71==
System Advisor Model Standard Report generated by SAM 2020.11.29 on Sat Dec 31 17:01:14 2022 
2 / 3 
 
PVWatts 
Single Owner 
20.0 DC MW Nameplate 
$0.95/W Installed Cost 
55.16, 14.96 
UTC +1 
 
Photovoltaic System Electrical Output by Month 
4 
 
 
3 
 
 
2 
 
 
1 
 
 
0 
Jan 
Feb 
Mar 
Apr 
May 
Jun 
Jul 
Aug 
Sep 
Oct 
Nov 
Dec 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Project After-tax Annual Cash Flow 
5 
 
 
0 
 
 
-5 
 
 
-10 
 
Year 
0 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
8 
9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 
Million $ 
Million kWh/month 
==PAGE:72==
System Advisor Model Standard Report generated by SAM 2020.11.29 on Sat Dec 31 17:01:14 2022 
3 / 3 
 
PVwatts 
Single Owner 
20.0 DC MW Nameplate 
$0.95/W Installed Cost 
55.16, 14.96 
UTC +1 
 
This performance model does not specify any loss diagram items. 
Current case name is Curtailment (DHS) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Single Owner | PVWatts System Model 
==PAGE:73==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Department of Wind and Energy
Systems Frederiksborgvej 399
DK-4000 Roskilde
www.wind.dtu.dk
