==PAGE:1==
M.Sc. Thesis
Master of Science in Engineering
Comparison of path planning algorithms for multiple robots
based on edge-cloud collaborative computing, cloud com-
puting and local computing
Maciej Tatarski (s202609)
Kongens Lyngby 2023
==PAGE:2==
DTU Electro
Department of Electrical and Photonics Engineering
Technical University of Denmark
Ørsteds Plads
Building 348
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Denmark
Tel (+45) 45 25 38 00
www.electro.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
In this master thesis, the problem of eﬀicient path planning for autonomous navigation
is addressed through the exploration of collaborative computing approaches. The goal of
the project is to develop an end-to-end system for path planning that can be used with
both simulated agents and real edge devices. In order to achieve this goal, the project
investigates both collaborative computing between agents and edge-cloud collaborative
computing.
The focus of the project is not only on the implementation of specific algorithms but
rather on the overall system design and performance. The research also assesses the
impact of network latency on algorithm performance and the limits of agent resources
that make it more beneficial to run algorithms in the cloud. An end-to-end system was
designed and implemented, using simulated agents and physical edge devices, to test the
performance of the A* and CA* algorithms in both local and cloud computation.
Results showed that for agents with average resources, the A* algorithm performed
better locally, while the CA* algorithm performed better in the cloud. The system was
also tested with agents of varying resource profiles and computation limits, revealing
the importance of matching algorithms to resource capabilities. Overall, the system
demonstrated that, even for simple algorithms like A*, outsourcing computation to the
cloud can be beneficial for agents with hardware limitations and that the collaborative
CA* algorithm provides suﬀicient performance only when computed in the cloud.
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Contents
Abstract
i
Contents
iii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Problem statement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.2
Robots fleet in smart factories . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.3
Smart cars . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2
Theoretical overview
5
2.1
Path planning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
Algorithms for single agent . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.3
Algorithm for multiple agents
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.4
Communication protocols
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.5
Containerization
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3
System Design
13
3.1
Microservices
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3.2
Cloud computing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3.3
Local computing
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3.4
Communication between agents . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3.5
Leader election
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3.6
Map design
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
3.7
Liveliness algorithm . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
3.8
Visualization
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
3.9
Multi tenancy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
4
System Implementation
29
4.1
Local development
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
4.2
Kubernetes
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
4.3
Algorithms implementation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
4.4
Broker . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
4.5
Observability
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
4.6
Visualization
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
5
Testing and Analysis
39
==PAGE:6==
iv
Contents
5.1
Test cases . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
5.2
Communication time . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
5.3
Comparison between computing time . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
5.4
Results by resources given to an agent
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
6
Conclusion and Future Work
45
6.1
Conclusion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
6.2
Future work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
A
Backend REST endpoints
49
B
MQTT topics
51
C
Multi tenant design
53
D
Test cases
55
E
Make targets
57
F
Project plan
59
G
CI/CD pipeline
61
Bibliography
63
==PAGE:7==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
Path planning is a process of finding a route between starting position and a goal. It is a
common task in the current industry setup, used for autonomous navigation. Navigation
involves three main challenges: determining the current location (localization), deciding
on a route to follow (path planning), and controlling the movement of the robot (motion
control). Of these, path planning is considered to be particularly significant because it
involves choosing an appropriate path for the robot to take within its environment [1].
Mobile robots have become increasingly important in today’s world due to their abil-
ity to perform tasks that are either dangerous or diﬀicult for humans. Path planning is a
crucial aspect of mobile robotics, as it enables robots to navigate to a desired destination
while avoiding obstacles and other hazards. This is particularly important in fields such
as manufacturing, entertainment, medicine, mining, rescue, education, military, space,
and agriculture where robots can help to increase eﬀiciency and safety. For example,
in manufacturing, robots can work in hazardous environments such as nuclear power
plants or mines without putting human lives at risk. In the same environments, mobile
robots usually are more performant than their human counterpart. In rescue, robots
can be used to search for survivors in dangerous environments such as collapsed build-
ings. In addition, mobile robots with advanced path-planning capabilities can be used
to make the delivery and transportation of goods more eﬀicient and cost-effective. Fur-
thermore, Mobile robots, specifically Automated Guided Vehicles (AGVs), have found
wide adoption in the manufacturing and logistics industries, where they are used to
transport materials and goods within a facility. They are particularly useful in large
manufacturing plants or warehouses where a lot of material handling is required [2].
While more mobile robots are being used it becomes important to solve this task eﬀi-
ciently using state-of-the-art approaches. As path planning is computationally intensive
in a large setup, it might require more resources than a single mobile robot (agent) can
provide, therefore, this project will explore collaborative computing between the agents
as well as edge-cloud collaborative computing. The focus is not only on the implemen-
tation of the algorithms but rather on an overall end-to-end system that can be used
both with simulated agents as well as real edge devices.
In the second chapter theory behind multi-agent path planning is introduced along
with an explanation of standard algorithms designed for this purpose. It also serves as
an introduction to the cloud and edge computing as both of those technologies are used
in this project. Finally, this section elaborates on standard communication protocols
and algorithms used in agent implementation.
The third chapter focuses on the design of the system, with an emphasis on creating
a system that can be easily simulated but also embedded in the real robot or stand-alone
==PAGE:8==
2
1 Introduction
computing unit. It elaborates on specific communication patterns among the agents and
the general architecture of both local/edge and cloud entities.
The fourth chapter explains in detail how the system was implemented. It starts with
a description of the development process and goes deeper into more specific technologies
and their placement in the project. It also shows the final look of the system as well
as its user interface of it. The system testing approach is explained in the fifth chapter,
focusing on reproducible test cases along with test results with different algorithms and
resource profiles.
The sixth chapter serves as a summary of the project and explains what can be
improved in future work. The project plan was created beforehand and it is attached in
Appendix F.
1.1
Problem statement
The problem that this master thesis aims to address is how to optimize the performance
of path-planning algorithms in a distributed system. Specifically, the research aims to
determine whether it is more beneficial to run path planning algorithms in the cloud or
locally, and which algorithms are most suitable for different use cases. Moreover, this
thesis tries to investigate the impact of network latency on algorithm performance and to
determine the limits of agent resources that make it more beneficial to run path planning
algorithms in the cloud rather than locally. The focus of this master thesis is not just
on comparing different path-planning algorithms, but also on the implementation of a
distributed system that can effectively utilize these algorithms. The ultimate goal of
this research is to provide a robust and scalable system that can meet the needs of a
wide range of use cases.
1.2
Robots fleet in smart factories
One of the main use cases of the proposed system can be robot fleets in factories. Mobile
robots are widely used in production plants, but the most popular solution is to use AGV
- an automated guided vehicle [3]. The difference between AGV and the fully autonomous
mobile robot is that AGV will usually follow the guided path marked by the magnetic or
traditional marker. This solution allows to simplify robot setup, by reducing the number
of sensors, but at the same time, it is less flexible and requires constant maintenance of
marked paths. The use of AGVs with advanced path planning capabilities can help to
improve the eﬀiciency and cost-effectiveness of the transportation and delivery of goods
within a facility. This can lead to increased productivity, reduced labor costs, improved
inventory management, and flexibility in adapting to changes in the production schedule
[4].
Using multi-agent path planning, robots are not required to follow any marked path.
However, they need to have more sensors to locate each other in the factory.
This
==PAGE:9==
1.3 Smart cars
3
solution enables robots to reach any point in the factory and not collide with each other.
It is also very extensible as any number of robots can be added to the fleet without
expanding existing infrastructure.
1.3
Smart cars
Path planning for autonomous cars involves determining the best route for the car to
take from its current location to its destination while taking into account various factors
such as traﬀic conditions, road conditions, and the car’s capabilities. This process can
be computationally intensive, especially if the car needs to consider the paths of multiple
other cars in order to find the optimal route. In such cases, it may be beneficial to use
cloud computing resources to help handle the increased complexity. By upstreaming
some of the computations to the cloud, the autonomous car can offload some of the
workloads and potentially make better use of its local computing resources. Additionally,
using multi-car path planning can help to reduce traﬀic congestion and improve the
overall eﬀiciency of the road system, as the cars can coordinate their routes to avoid
conflicts and optimize their use of available road space [5].
==PAGE:10==
4
==PAGE:11==
CHAPTER 2
Theoretical overview
This section provides an overview of the fundamental concepts underlying path plan-
ning. The focus is on a theoretical explanation of popular path-planning algorithms for
both single-agent and multi-agent scenarios. It also covers the topic of containerization
and communication protocols, which are critical components of modern path-planning
systems.
2.1
Path planning
Path planning is the process of finding a correct path from source to destination with a
focus on avoiding obstacles, for example, navigating a mobile robot in a factory setup
from one place in a factory to another[6]. In mobile robotics, the environment in which
the robot operates is often represented by a map. The map can be represented in either
2D or 3D, depending on the environment’s complexity and the robot’s capabilities. 2D
maps are simpler to work with and are often used for robots that operate in relatively
flat environments. On the other hand, 3D maps are used for robots operating in more
complex environments, such as buildings or mines.
In terms of path planning, map geometry can differ using different types of algorithms.
Some popular algorithms include Artificial Potential Field (APF), Sampling-based meth-
ods, and grid-search algorithms. Grid-search algorithms use a grid to represent the envi-
ronment, and they work by searching for a path through the grid that avoids obstacles
and leads the robot to the goal. These algorithms are simple to implement and are
computationally eﬀicient [7]. This master thesis focuses on 2D path planning and puts
emphasis on grid-search algorithms as opposed to different solutions such as Artificial
Potential Field or Sampling-Based algorithms, as it is simple, computationally eﬀicient,
and well-suited for mobile robots with limited resources.
Grid-based algorithms assume that the world can be represented as a grid and every
position of an agent can be described as a grid point. The robot, which also will be
referred to as an agent is only allowed to move to adjacent grid points, so the available
state space is discretized which simplifies the computation. The drawback is that solu-
tions may be sub-optimal in relation to the real-world scenario as only a limited number
of point is being considered [8].
==PAGE:12==
6
2 Theoretical overview
2.1.1
Known and unknown environment path planning
Path planning problems can be classified into two categories: known-environment path
planning (KEPP) and unknown-environment path planning (UEPP). The former cate-
gory assumes that there is a complete knowledge of the environment prior to the exe-
cution of the algorithm, and there is no need for an exploration phase or sensing. The
latter category incorporates sensing information into the planning process, thus, com-
plete and absolute information is not required during the execution of the algorithms.
While KEPP is more straightforward to execute, UEPP more closely resembles real-
world scenarios. In this study, only KEPP solutions will be discussed, as the primary
objective is to effectively address multi-agent system path planning and information
gathering and environment sensing are not essential for this process [9].
2.2
Algorithms for single agent
Grid-based path-planning algorithms are commonly used in single-agent path planning
scenarios. Those algorithms are usually based on graphs and represent a map as a set
of vertices and edges. The graph can be either undirected or directed, depending on
whether the agent is allowed to move in both or in just one direction between vertices
[10]. Only three algorithms will be discussed in this section: Dijkstra’s Algorithm, A*
Algorithm, and BFS algorithm, as they are useful for further understanding of more
complex algorithms. A diagram explaining the general approach for graph-based path
planning is shown in figure 2.1.
It is assumed that the grid map of the environment has been translated into a graph
representation, with each cell of the grid map being represented by a node in the graph.
The starting point and the goal of the robot’s path are also known and provided as input
to the algorithm.
The execution of the algorithm begins by initializing the starting node as the current
node and adding its neighboring nodes to the frontier. The frontier is usually represented
by a data structure such as a priority queue, where the priority of each node is determined
by algorithm-specific conditions such as the distance from the starting point, the distance
to the goal, or a combination of both. At each iteration, the algorithm selects the node
with the highest priority from the frontier and expands it by adding its neighboring
nodes to the frontier. The algorithm then calculates a condition for each neighboring
node. Once a node is expanded, the algorithm checks if the node is the goal node. If
this is the case, the algorithm terminates and the path from the starting point to the
goal is returned. If the node is not the goal node, the algorithm continues by selecting
the next node from the frontier and repeating the process. If at any point the frontier
becomes empty, this indicates that there is no route from the starting point to the goal,
and the algorithm terminates without finding a path [11].
==PAGE:13==
2.2 Algorithms for single agent
7
Figure 2.1: General approach for graph-based path planning algorithms.
2.2.1
Dijkstra’s algorithm
Dijkstra’s algorithm is a graph traversal technique that assigns a minimal length, rep-
resented by the edge value g(n), from a designated starting vertex to every vertex in a
graph. The starting vertex is initially assigned a length of 0, while all other vertices are
assigned a length of infinity. The algorithm proceeds by iteratively expanding new ver-
tices, specifically those that are neighbours of the vertex with the current lowest length
from the starting vertex, and marking them as visited. The process continues until all
vertices have been visited or the goal vertex is reached. If the goal is not reached, the
expansion process continues. The algorithm is guaranteed to find the shortest path from
the starting vertex to the goal, as long as all edges have non-negative weights [10, 12].
==PAGE:14==
8
2 Theoretical overview
2.2.2
Greedy Best-First-Search
This algorithm is a variant of graph traversal that employs a heuristic function - denoted
as h(n), to guide the exploration of vertices. Heuristic function is a formula to determine
the cost of reaching a goal.
Rather than prioritizing the vertices with the shortest
distance from the starting vertex, as in Dijkstra’s algorithm, this algorithm prioritizes
vertices that are estimated to be closest to the goal vertex using the heuristic function
h(n) [13]. This approach is referred to as a greedy strategy, as it prioritizes reaching
the goal as quickly as possible, without taking into account potential obstacles. The
algorithm is fast in terms of computational complexity, but the paths it finds are often
sub-optimal.
2.2.3
A* algorithm
A*(pronounced A star) is the most popular choice for pathfinding, because of its sim-
plicity and robustness.
It has also many advanced extensions used in a multi-agent
systems approach. It works very similarly to Dijkstra’s algorithm, except it is also using
heuristics to guide itself. It combines the information about the distance from the start
- g(n) and the heuristic function which is usually a distance to a goal - h(n). In each
iteration, it examines the node that has the lowest sum of g(n) + h(n) [12].
The behavior of A* algorithm will vary, depending on the heuristic function that is
being used. It is usually faster than Dijkstra when finding a solution, but a result can
be sub-optimal so it is a challenge to balance those two.
2.3
Algorithm for multiple agents
Basic approaches such as A* solve the problem for single agents, but cannot be used
in a multi-agent approach without modifications.
The reason is that a multi-agent
scenario is more dynamic and agents have to avoid collision with each other so it is
not enough to just plan a simple route for every agent separately. Computing power is
often an additional constraint, as an agent is usually a computer or robot with limited
resources. Therefore it is beneficial if agents are cooperating with each other. Most of
the algorithms used in this setup are based on A* with tweaks that allow multi-agent
cooperation [14].
Multi-agent path-finding can be classified into two categories: collaborative and non-
collaborative.
In the collaborative approach, it is assumed that all agents have full
knowledge of all the others whereas in the non-collaborative it must predict the move-
ment of the other agents as it has limited knowledge. This thesis will mostly focus on
the former.
Among multiple path-planning algorithms, CA* (pronounced CA star) was selected
for implementation, because it is based on the widely used A* algorithm, which has
a simple and well-understood structure. Additionally, the collaborative aspect of the
==PAGE:15==
2.3 Algorithm for multiple agents
9
algorithm can be implemented using standard communication protocols, making it a
straightforward task to integrate the algorithm into a multi-agent system.
Another
reason is that CA* is not highly eﬀicient, which can be useful in certain scenarios.
Specifically, if the goal is to understand and analyze the behavior of a multi-agent
system, a less eﬀicient algorithm can provide more insight into the system’s workings.
Additionally, the algorithm can be useful for scenarios where computational resources
are limited.
2.3.1
Colaborative A*
The Cooperative A*(CA*) algorithm is also divided into a smaller number of individual
agent searches, but it takes into consideration the routes of other agents. It uses a 3-
dimensional representation of a time-space map. Usually two dimensions are storing the
location of the agents and 3rd one represents the time frame, this structure is called the
reservation table. The table is shared between the agents so they can mark the other
agents as obstacles at any given time to avoid collision [14].
The problem with this approach is that the routes have to be calculated in a se-
quence in 3-dimensional space which can slow down the execution of the algorithm and
increase the level of coordination between agents as they have to agree on the sequence
of calculation. Moreover, it might not be ideal for a cloud collaborative approach as
even an agent with more computational power will not be able to solve the task more
eﬀiciently as it has to invoke computations in a sequence.
The algorithm works the same as the original A*, the only differences are the creation
of the grid map which is now 3 dimensional, and performing of the computation in
sequence. Grid map has to be constructed in a way to disallow agents to move backward
along the z-axis which symbolizes time. To achieve that nodes of graphs have to be
connected only in one direction. More information about the structure of the map and
the connection between the nodes can be found in section 3.6.
2.3.2
Windowed Hierarchical Cooperative A*
Previous algorithms have operated under the assumption that once an agent reaches its
designated goal, it should cease movement. However, this approach can lead to edge
cases in which agents may block the path of other agents. The Windowed Hierarchi-
cal Cooperative A*(WHCA*) algorithm addresses this issue by permitting agents to
continue moving after their routes have been calculated. Furthermore, this algorithm
utilizes a dynamic ordering of agents, in which the priority of each agent is continually
reassessed, allowing for every agent to have the highest priority at a given point in time.
One of the limitations of prior algorithms is the challenge of planning in large three-
dimensional spaces. To address this, the algorithm employs a technique known as win-
dowed search, which reduces the complexity of the search process. In this approach, each
agent plans a partial route to its goal by first planning the full route without consid-
ering the presence of other agents and then dividing it into smaller, ”windowed” goals.
==PAGE:16==
10
2 Theoretical overview
Interactions between agents are only considered at the level of these windows, which
leads to a reduction in computational demands. Additionally, the window is moved in a
specific manner, for instance, if an agent is halfway through the window. The objective
for each agent becomes to complete the assigned window without collision with other
agents [15][14].
The utilization of windowing in the algorithm allows for a more eﬀicient division of
calculations, as only one window needs to be computed at a time. This enables agents to
proceed to the computation of the next window while other agents are still working on
the previous one. This allows for distributed, eﬀicient computation of the path and the
possibility of offloading some of the work to external agents such as cloud computing.
However, the introduction of these enhancements also increases the complexity and
diﬀiculty of implementing the algorithm.
2.3.3
Fast and Memory-Eﬀicient Multi-Agent algorithm
The Fast and Memory-Eﬀicient Multi-Agent algorithm(FAR) is a method that utilizes
the concept of flow restriction areas inspired by road networks. It limits the movement of
agents to only horizontal or vertical directions within a single column or row, in order to
prevent head-to-head collisions. Using this approach, the algorithm constructs a graph
and performs A* search for each agent independently, disregarding the presence of other
agents.
Deadlocks and cycles are then resolved locally in order to avoid costly re-planning.
This algorithm operates under the assumption that all rows and columns are one-
directional and that head-to-head collisions are not possible. This simplifies the process
of resolving side-collision situations, as specific sequences of movements can be imple-
mented to break out of collision situations. The algorithm is designed to be scalable and
has low compute and memory requirements. Its implementation is simple and eﬀicient
as it uses a normal graph representation [16].
2.3.4
Multi-agent Path Planning algorithm
The Multi-Agent Path Planning algorithm(MAPP) is a method that, in contrast to
previously mentioned algorithms, is able to avoid deadlocks and cycles through the use
of a special ordering of agents. The algorithm begins by computing a path to the goal
for each agent, while simultaneously computing and caching alternative paths that meet
the requirement of being ”SLIDABLE” [17].
The algorithm divides the set of agents into two categories: solved and active units.
Initially, all agents are considered active, and once an agent reaches its goal, it is marked
as solved and no longer considered in the resolution of the problem. The algorithm then
proceeds by iterating through progression steps to move active agents towards their
goals, with each progression step resulting in at least one active agent reaching its target.
However, as the progression step may violate the necessary conditions, a repositioning
==PAGE:17==
2.4 Communication protocols
11
step is subsequently executed. Once all agents have reached their targets, the algorithm
terminates [17].
2.4
Communication protocols
Agents will have to communicate with each other, to allow message exchange two
lightweight messaging protocols are being considered Message Queueing Telemetry Trans-
port (MQTT) and Advanced Message Queuing Protocol (AMQP). Both are mature so-
lutions that are using message brokers for facilitating communication between entities.
2.4.1
MQTT
MQTT is a lightweight machine-to-machine messaging protocol that was created to be
utilized in scenarios with constrained network capacity or high levels of network latency.
This makes it appropriate for Internet of Things (IoT) applications where it is crucial
to reduce the overhead of transferring data.
In MQTT, there are three main components: the publisher, the broker, and the
subscriber. The publisher is the client that sends the data. It can publish data on a
specific topic on the broker. The broker is a server that receives the data and stores it
until a subscriber is ready to receive it. The broker is responsible for distributing the
data to all subscribed clients. The subscriber is a client that receives the data from the
broker. It can subscribe to one or more topics and will receive all messages published to
those topics. [18]
The MQTT protocol uses a publish/subscribe model, where clients can subscribe to
topics and receive messages that are published to those topics. The protocol also includes
features for Quality of Service (QoS) and reliability, such as message acknowledgments
and retries [19].
2.4.2
AMQP
AMQP uses a point-to-point model, where clients send messages directly to specific
queues, it is also able to support publish/subscribe model but it was not primarily
designed for that [20]. It is more complex than MQTT and it is designed to be secure
reliable and performant. Similar to MQTT, it is using TCP as a transport layer, but
messages are more complex.
2.5
Containerization
The whole distributed system will be deployed in the cloud, therefore it is important to
use cloud-native technologies such as containerization and micro-services. A container
==PAGE:18==
12
2 Theoretical overview
is a technology that allows packaging the code along with all dependencies and os in-
formation into one stand-alone image. This image can be later run in any environment,
isolated from the rest of the system and other containers [21].
Linux container runtime (LXC) [22] technology is the foundation of many container
systems. Recent Linux distributions include features such as namespaces and cgroups as
a method to separate processes and resources on a shared operating system. Using LXC
mechanisms, file systems are stacked on top of one another to create a container image.
By building on top of basic images, this characteristic may be utilized to produce new
images [21]. This technology has many advantages:
• Portability - Container image contains everything that the container needs to be
run and therefore it can be deployed in multiple environments f.e locally or in the
cloud.
• Isolation - Containers are isolated both from the host machine as well as each other.
This isolation is also programmable so communication between containers can be
allowed or disallowed.
• Resource eﬀiciency - Containers are sharing the kernel and resources so those can
be easily consumed. Moreover, containers tend to boot and work faster than virtual
machines.
• Modularity - Images can be reused to build software on top of existing ones.
• Security - Containers are isolated from each other and from the host system, which
can help to reduce the risk of vulnerabilities and attacks.
==PAGE:19==
CHAPTER 3
System Design
This section provides an overview of the system design for the development of a multi-
agent system. The system design involves creating multiple instances of identical entities,
simulating a real-world scenario where these entities would be physical robots connected
to each other through some form of networking. To achieve this simulation, a microser-
vices approach is employed, allowing for easy separation of agents, even on a single
computer setup, and enabling the setup of constraints on computing power and memory
usage.
The system design also incorporates the use of cloud and edge computing, with cloud
computing being utilized for data gathering, computation, and visualization, while edge
computing is utilized to model the behavior of agents. Communication and collaboration
among the agents are facilitated through the implementation of mechanisms such as
leader election, liveness checks, and local discovery. Additionally, this section will cover
the implementation of data gathering and visualization and its integration into the
overall system.
Python is chosen as the primary programming language for the implementation of
this system. Python is a widely-used, high-level programming language that is known
for its simplicity, readability, and flexibility [23]. Moreover, its extensive support for
concurrency and parallelism allows for eﬀicient and effective handling of large amounts
of messages, which is crucial for the multi-agent system.
3.1
Microservices
In recent years wide cloud adoption has caused huge momentum in adopting software
architecture known as micro-services, as it is a native architecture for the cloud. This
project will also adapt this architecture because part of the deployment is being done in
the cloud, and a swarm of agents can also be simulated using this approach. Moreover,
modern technologies such as ’kind’ and ’tilt’ made it easier to develop all services locally
using the local Kubernetes cluster, those technologies will be explained in implementa-
tion section.
Microservices are small autonomous services that cooperate with each other to create
certain application logic [24]. Usually, microservices are deployed as Linux containers
and encapsulate logic for a single logical part of the solution. Those services are then
communicating whit each other to build bigger, more complex systems. The general
design of microservices is illustrated in Figure 3.1. The colorful rectangles symbolize the
==PAGE:20==
14
3 System Design
individual components of a system, while the connections between them denote the flow
of communication among these components.
Figure 3.1: Microservices system design.
3.1.1
Agent
An agent microservice is a small, independent microservice that is responsible for imple-
menting the logic of an entity that needs to plan a path. When the agent microservice
is started, it begins a process called local discovery to find other instances of the same
microservice, which are referred to as its peers. Once its peers are discovered, the agent
microservice initiates an election algorithm to determine which agent will be the leader
of the group, or ”swarm.” The leader is responsible for coordinating the actions of the
other agents and ensuring that they are working together effectively.
In addition to its responsibilities as a member of a swarm, the agent microservice
also performs periodic liveness checks on its peers to verify that they are still active
and able to communicate. This is important because it ensures that the swarm remains
functional even if one or more agents become unavailable or unresponsive.
The agent also contains algorithms for path planning, and in a base-case scenario, it
is responsible for performing the computations necessary to determine the optimal path,
but it can also outsource the computation to the cloud by sending messages to the cloud
agent. It communicates with other microservices using a local broker, the number of
instances of the microservice may vary depending on the needs of the system, and it is
designed to have limited resources to simulate a real-world scenario.
==PAGE:21==
3.1 Microservices
15
3.1.2
Cloud-agent
The cloud-agent is a service that provides computational resources to offload the work-
load from agents. It is designed to have significantly more computing power than the
agents, but it may be located in a different geographical location, which could result in
latency issues when transmitting data back and forth.
In order to communicate with the agents, the cloud-agent uses the cloud-broker as
a medium. The cloud-broker acts as an intermediary, enabling the cloud-agent and the
agents to exchange messages and data.
The cloud-agent is deployed in the cloud and is intended to be used for performing
computationally intensive tasks that would be too resource-intensive for the agents to
handle on their own. By offloading these tasks to the cloud-agent, the agents may be
able to operate more eﬀiciently.
3.1.3
Broker
This service plays a crucial role in the system, it is responsible for facilitating communica-
tion between various services. It is deployed both in the cloud and in local environments,
and the two entities are connected by a bridge. The bridge serves as a single connection
point between the cloud and the edge, allowing the two to communicate and exchange
data.
Alternatively, the cloud and local services can also cross-subscribe to both brokers,
allowing them to communicate directly with each other. The service uses a publish-
subscribe approach to handle and distribute messages between the different services.
The service acts as an intermediary, enabling services to exchange messages and data
without the need for direct communication. This can help to reduce the complexity of
the overall system and make it more scalable and resilient.
3.1.4
Map-service
This service is responsible for generating maps and spawning agents within them. When
an agent is first created, it does not have any map assigned to it. The leader agent
will trigger the generation of a new map by sending a message to the map-service.
The map-service is responsible for creating the map and spawning the agent within
it. Communication between the map-service and the agents is facilitated by the broker
service. The broker service acts as an intermediary, enabling the map-service and the
agents to exchange messages and data. It is through the broker service that the map-
service sends the necessary information to the agents and receives requests and updates
from them.
The map-service serves as a substitute for sensing for the agent, as it provides the
robot with all the necessary information for determining its position on a global map.
In addition to generating new maps, the map-service also stores pre-defined maps that
can be adopted by the agent upon request.
==PAGE:22==
16
3 System Design
It is possible for the map-service to spawn agents in places that are not reachable
from the goal. This is a valid scenario as not all points on the map might be reachable.
The map-service is a crucial component for enabling agents to navigate and interact
with their environment.
3.1.5
Backend
This service is designed to gather data and facilitate communication with a core module
service (such as an agent or map service) through a cloud broker. The service exposes
endpoints through a REST(representational state transfer) API (Appendix A), which
can be accessed by a frontend application. It also forwards requests to an MQTT broker.
In addition to interacting with other services, this service also receives data from
various entities and stores it in a database. The backend of this service is deployed in
the cloud, and the endpoints are accessible to end-users. It is equipped with a database
for storing data. The database is attached to the service, which means that it is directly
accessible and can be used for storing and retrieving data as needed. The service is
designed to receive data from various entities, and it stores this data in the attached
database for later use.
This service acts as an intermediary between the frontend, the core module service,
and the MQTT broker, allowing them to communicate and exchange data. It is deployed
in the cloud and connected to a cloud broker, which enables it to access resources and
services hosted in the cloud.
3.1.6
Frontend
The frontend of this service is a graphical interface that is deployed as a web service. It
is accessed by end users through a web browser and is used to trigger specific actions
and perform raw data visualization.
The frontend is responsible for taking input from the end user and sending requests
to the backend service through its API. It is also used for visualizing raw data, allowing
the end user to view and analyze the data in various ways.
The frontend is deployed in the cloud and is exposed to end users over the inter-
net.
Its capabilities are further explained in the visualization section section of the
documentation.
Frontend serves as the interface between the end user and the backend service, al-
lowing the end user to interact with the service and access its functionality. It is an
important component of the service, as it enables the end user to perform various actions
and view raw data in an intuitive and user-friendly way.
==PAGE:23==
3.2 Cloud computing
17
3.2
Cloud computing
The objective of the design of cloud deployments is to achieve cloud agnosticism, which
implies that it can operate seamlessly with any cloud provider with minimal or no mod-
ifications. To achieve this, all services are intended to be deployed within a Kubernetes
cluster, regardless of the location or configuration of the cluster. This is feasible as
most major cloud providers offer Kubernetes as a Service (KaaS), and it is also widely
available among smaller providers.
The comprehensive design of the cloud services is depicted in Figure 3.2. The com-
munication between the various services is established in two ways:
• Through the Cloud Broker: The backend and cloud-Agent services are both sub-
scribers to a set of topics and exchange information through MQTT messages sent
to the Cloud Broker.
• Through REST Endpoints: The backend services expose REST endpoints which
are consumed by the frontend. The frontend is designed to solely serve HTML
documents and function as a consumer of the backend endpoints.
Figure 3.2: Cloud services system design.
==PAGE:24==
18
3 System Design
In this system design, three endpoints are exposed to external traﬀic, which originates
from outside of the cluster. These include two HTTP/HTTPS(Hypertext Transfer Pro-
tocol) endpoints for the Backend and Frontend and one WebSocket endpoint for MQTT
messages that are sent to the cloud broker. HTTP/HTTPS traﬀic for frontend and
backend is served through the use of ingress resources within the cluster. The traﬀic is
forwarded via a reverse proxy (NGINX) to a Kubernetes service, which then distributes
the request among the pods. The default ingress resource is designed to handle only
HTTP/HTTPS requests and does not allow for any other protocol.
For the MQTT protocol, which is transported over TCP protocol, a NodePort [25]
would typically be used to expose the service to the outside world. This maps pod ports
to ports of the node in the cluster. However, some cloud providers do not permit the use
of NodePorts, so a more flexible option was chosen, which involves bootstrapping the
MQTT protocol over WebSockets and using ingress resources to handle external traﬀic
coming to the cluster. This approach allows for the handling of MQTT traﬀic in a way
that is compatible with the ingress resource and does not require the use of NodePorts.
3.3
Local computing
Agents, a local broker, and a map service are deployed on-premises and can facilitate
the computation of the path in this setup. Agents can communicate with each other
to agree on who will initiate the computation.
Figure 3.3 shows how local services
are deployed. Local broker and map services need to be accessible for all agents to
communicate and map selection and therefore in most cases those services would be
deployed on a stand-alone server in the same subnet as agents.
Figure 3.3: Local services system design.
This design can be extended, by deploying an edge agent on the same server as a
map service and a broker. It would allow performing path computation with help of an
edge agent which would have a higher resource profile than agents.
==PAGE:25==
3.4 Communication between agents
19
Agents can be deployed in a different way, depending on implementation. Preferably
it should be a single binary package that could be deployed on machines with low resource
profiles. All the agents need to have an ID or NAME assigned to them, and those have
to be unique in the scope of the system. They should also be given information about
the IP address or URL of the local broker and a way to authenticate themselves.
Map service and broker are more flexible in case of deployment because those services
would probably be deployed on a stand-alone server with a high resource profile. Recom-
mended way would be to use a containers orchestrator such as solutions like Kubernetes
or docker swarm and deploy the as containers/pods. It would assure the reliability and
maintainability of those services. Otherwise, those can also be deployed on bare metal
or in virtual machines.
3.4
Communication between agents
The broker is a critical component in the proposed system design, responsible for fa-
cilitating communication between microservices. In an on-premises system, the broker
is deployed to allow communication between agents and map service. In an industry
setup, it would typically be deployed on a stand-alone server located in the same subnet
as the agents. It acts as a middleman, receiving all messages and redirecting them to
the appropriate parties involved in the communication process. One broker can be used
to support multiple systems, as long as they are connected to the same subnet as the
broker. This is made possible by the messaging scheme, which is distinctive for every
system (as described in section B), allowing the broker to correctly route the request.
The broker is an essential component of the system, ensuring that all mobile robots can
communicate effectively and enabling the system to function as intended.
The MQTT protocol was selected for communication between the agents because it
is extremely lightweight and suitable for Internet of Things communication. This makes
it an ideal choice for supporting agents with very limited resources, such as those with
limited memory, CPU, or bandwidth. This protocol is designed to be eﬀicient in terms
of both bandwidth and power usage, which makes it well-suited for use in a large-scale,
distributed system like the one proposed here.
3.5
Leader election
In situations where multiple agents are required to make decisions, it is necessary to elect
a leader among the agents to facilitate the decision-making process. The elected leader
will assume responsibility for generating a map and for transmitting relevant data about
the swarm to other relevant services (e.g. the backend system). The primary algorithm
utilized for leader election is depicted in Figure 3.4.
==PAGE:26==
20
3 System Design
Figure 3.4: Election logic.
The leader election algorithm described is triggered under specific conditions, namely
the discovery of a new peer or the failure of the current leader to maintain connectivity.
Additionally, it is a requirement that there is no already elected leader.
Upon the
occurrence of these conditions, an agent initiates the election process by broadcasting a
message to other agents, including a randomly generated number that serves as a signal
of the importance of the election. Multiple elections can be concurrently initiated by
multiple agents.
After initiating an election, the agent enters a waiting state during which it receives
votes from other agents. However, if the agent receives a message indicating the initiation
of a more important election (f.e. one with a higher randomly generated number), it
will discontinue its current election and participate in the more important one. Once all
votes are received, the agent with the highest vote is declared the leader and announced
as such to the other agents, who subsequently accept it as the leader. To avoid conflicts,
the randomly generated numbers used for both voting and signaling election importance
should be set to large values.
==PAGE:27==
3.6 Map design
21
3.6
Map design
This section focuses on the design of the map representation used in the multi-agent
system. The map serves as a representation of the possible location of the agents in
a discrete space. The initial map generated for the agents will indicate the starting
and finishing points for each agent. Additionally, different algorithms may require the
map to be translated into different forms, such as a graph. These different forms of
representation are necessary to enable the eﬀicient operation of specific algorithms.
3.6.1
Gridmap
A grid map represents the potential locations of an agent in a discrete space.
The
starting and ending points for each agent are marked on the initial map, along with
areas that are inaccessible, referred to as ”walls” or ”obstacles”. Two map formats will
be implemented: a space-separated map for creating and storing persistent maps and a
human-readable format, and a JSON-based map for machine-to-machine communication
and ease of parsing. The map service will handle the conversion and storage of maps,
and will serve them to the agents, including the ability to generate random maps and
place agents on them.
Figure 3.5: 2D map to graph translation.
Each tile represents the node and it is connected with two edges to neighboring tiles,
which represents the possibility of two-way movement from and to neighboring tiles.
3.6.2
Gridmap for CA* algorithm
For CA* algorithm map has to be translated into a three dimensional(3D) grid map
where every layer is a representation of the possible location of the agent in a particular
==PAGE:28==
22
3 System Design
time frame and therefore time becomes the third dimension in a graph. Similar to in a
2d grid map there are two possible modes which are represented in the figure below. An
agent can only move in one direction vertically as each level corresponds to one moment
in time. Other tiles on each level are connected in the same way as in figure 3.5.
Figure 3.6: 3D map to graph translation.
After the path is planned for specific agents, it has to be marked as an obstacle so
agents which are planning their paths, later on, would be aware of unreachable/occupied
tiles.
3.6.3
CA* front collision problem
Planning multiple agents’ paths on a single map leads to a problem when agents are
colliding with each other because they are moving in the opposite direction on the same
column or row. This situation is shown in Figure 3.7. Both agents assume that the tile in
front of them is not occupied, which is a valid assumption. However, as this is a discrete
model, a collision occurs between timeframes. To mitigate this problem, after the path
is planned edges in the opposite direction of agent movement need to be removed.
==PAGE:29==
3.7 Liveliness algorithm
23
Figure 3.7: CA* head collision problem.
3.7
Liveliness algorithm
In order to effectively plan paths and coordinate actions, the agents must maintain
information about the current states of the other agents. To accomplish this, a liveness
check algorithm will be implemented in each agent. This algorithm is depicted in Figure
3.8.
==PAGE:30==
24
3 System Design
Figure 3.8: Liveness check.
The liveness check algorithm is used to ensure that the agents maintain an accurate
and up-to-date view of the states of the other agents in the system. The algorithm is
executed periodically by each agent.
During each execution, the agent sends a discovery message to a specific topic, al-
lowing other agents to discover it as a peer and marking it as alive. The agent also
subscribes to the same topic to receive discovery messages from other agents. In the
event that a new, unknown agent is discovered, it is added to the list of known agents
and a Time-to-Live (TTL) timer is assigned and started for that agent. If the discovered
agent is already known, the timer is simply restarted.
After sending the discovery message, the agent performs a liveness check by decre-
menting the timers of each known agent and checking if the timer exceeds the TTL. If
the timer exceeds the TTL, it indicates that there have been no messages from that
particular agent for a period longer than is allowed, and the agent is marked as dead.
This allows the agent to maintain an accurate and up-to-date view of the states of the
other agents in the system.
3.8
Visualization
The system is designed to include a web-based application for visualizing maps and paths
of the agents. The application is designed to be accessible via the internet, providing a
==PAGE:31==
3.8 Visualization
25
user-friendly interface for monitoring the agents’ movements in real-time. The web ap-
plication connects to the system’s data source to retrieve live data, allowing for real-time
monitoring of the agent’s actions and providing a powerful tool for understanding the
behavior of the system. A mockup of the visualization is presented in Figure 3.9, which
illustrates the type of information that will be presented through the web application.
Figure 3.9: Mock of the visualization.
The design of the graphical interface of the system is centered around a grid map,
which serves to clearly display the positions and goals of all the agents as colored dots.
The design also includes the display of important information such as the status of the
agents, the current leader, and other relevant information pertaining to the outcome of
the algorithm, all of which are presented alongside the map.
The design of the system includes a web-based application that enables the user to
perform a variety of functions related to the visualization and manipulation of maps and
agents. Specifically, the user will be able to:
• Generate new maps, either using random generation or by specifying predefined
maps.
==PAGE:32==
26
3 System Design
• Create new maps by utilizing the built-in map creator feature.
• Select from a variety of algorithms for the agents to follow.
• Visualize the algorithm in real-time, providing a powerful tool for understanding
the behavior of the system.
In addition to these core features, the system’s design also incorporates a number of
additional functionalities. These include the ability to:
• Access a map creator, allowing the user to specify their own maps.
• Choose among different systems, providing multi-tenancy functionality.
• Replay visualizations, allowing the user to review previous simulations.
• Replay visualizations step-by-step, providing a detailed understanding of the be-
havior of the system at each stage of the algorithm.
These features are intended to provide a comprehensive and intuitive tool for un-
derstanding the behavior of the agents, and for analyzing the performance of different
algorithms and maps.
3.9
Multi tenancy
The cloud-based component of this solution is designed to support multi-tenancy and
multiple systems, utilizing shared cloud resources. In the context of this solution, a
tenant is an independent and distinct entity that shares the same cloud solution with
other tenants.
In this case, a tenant might be defined as a factory, which has the
capability to utilize multiple systems on-site. These systems are comprised of a group
of mobile robots or agents, which are designed to perform specific tasks and operate
within the factory environment. The main principle of the multi-tenant system design
is illustrated in Figure 3.10. One tenant, for example, one factory, will be able to have
multiple systems on-site, where a system refers to a group of agents, a map-service, and
a broker. To optimize resource utilization, systems will also be able to share the broker,
as detailed in Appendix C. This approach allows for eﬀicient and effective management
of the cloud resources while providing flexibility for individual tenants to have multiple
systems on-site.
==PAGE:33==
3.9 Multi tenancy
27
Figure 3.10: Multi-tenant system design.
The cloud components of the solution are designed to be shared among tenants and
accessed through a common web-based application. The final product will include a
logging page where tenants can provide credentials to authenticate themselves. Once
successfully logged in, tenants will have the option to choose the system that will be
visualized.
The cloud services are designed to automatically scale as more tenants are onboarded.
Additionally, the microservices are implemented as stateless, with the exception of the
database where all tenant data is stored. Stateless services can be easily scaled horizon-
tally through the use of auto-scaling, providing the system with greater scalability and
flexibility. This approach allows the system to accommodate an increasing number of
tenants while maintaining performance and stability.
==PAGE:34==
28
==PAGE:35==
CHAPTER 4
System Implementation
The following section provides an in-depth examination of the implementation process
of the designed system. It outlines the technical details of the local development setup,
deployment options, and the implementation of various algorithms used within the sys-
tem. In addition, it explains the communication protocols employed between different
services within the system and the implementation observability of the system. The
system is developed using robust coding practices and industry-standard development
tools. The project employs a continuous integration and continuous deployment model,
in which code changes are automatically deployed to both cloud and on-premises in-
stances following modifications to the source code, as depicted in Appendix G.
4.1
Local development
Local development of the project was designed to be easy to set up and reproducible in
any development machine. For this purpose development virtual machine (referred as
dev-VM) was created using the infrastructure-as-a-code principle. Tools which are used
for reproducible creation of machine are:
• Oracle Virtualbox [26] - hypervisor which is hosting VM, it was chosen because it
supports deployment in the 3 most popular operating systems: Microsoft Windows,
MAC os, and Linux.
• HashiCorp Vagrant [27] - a tool that helps to build a development environment as
a code. It allows specifying all details of provisioned VM, as well as configuring
networking and hardware specifications.
All files used for development can be
found in dev-VM repository [28].
The base of the development virtual machine is an Ubuntu Linux server, so it is
not shipped with the graphical user interface. It was chosen to resemble the production
environment, lower the VM blueprint and increase the speed and performance of the
setup. To interact with the machine Secure Shell Protocol (SSH) is used, it can be seen
in the Figure 4.1.
==PAGE:36==
30
4 System Implementation
Figure 4.1: Local development.
By default Kubernetes (k8s) cluster is deployed in dev-VM using a tool called ’kind’.
It allows the creation of Kubernetes nodes as containers and forms a Kubernetes (k8s)
cluster. It can be then accessed with Kubernetes client command line tool called ’kubectl’.
To speed up the development process and allow continuous testing of both software and
deployment, software called ’tilt’ is used. This software interacts with the k8s cluster by
building container images and deploying resources as soon as there is any change in the
code. It also includes a dashboard shown in the Figure 4.2 which visualizes resources
deployed in a cluster as well as aggregates the logs and shows them in an approachable
matter.
Figure 4.2: Tilt dashboard.
==PAGE:37==
4.2 Kubernetes
31
Integration with an Azure cloud is made with azure command lines tools along with
personal access tokens(PAT) token. After the initial creation of the Kubernetes cluster
in the cloud, interactions are limited to only the Kubernetes cluster and therefore only
’kubeconfig’ [25] (Kubernetes configuration) file is needed.
In order to improve the ease of interaction with the various resources used in the
project, a set of ”make rules” were developed. These rules abstract the workflow by con-
solidating multiple commands into logical components referred to as ”rules” or ”targets.”
The entirety of the rules are documented in the Appendix E.
4.2
Kubernetes
The project is designed to be deployed in the cloud, specifically in a Kubernetes as
a Service (KaaS) solution. To evaluate the cost of different cloud providers, an open-
sourced cost calculator [29] was used. The results for the most popular cloud providers,
including Amazon Web Services (AWS), Azure (AKS), Google Cloud (GKE), and Digital
Ocean (DO) can be seen in the plot below. Additionally vendors with free tier, such us
Okteto cloud, were explored.
Figure 4.3: Managed Kubernetes cost.
For small-scale projects, Digital Ocean and Azure are the most cost-effective options
as they do not charge for the compute used for the control plane. For large-scale projects,
Google Cloud is the most affordable.
Two cloud providers, Microsoft Azure and Okteto Cloud, were evaluated for this
implementation. Both providers offer Kubernetes as a Service, but they have adopted
different approaches.
==PAGE:38==
32
4 System Implementation
In Azure, the Kubernetes cluster is created and then primarily managed by the user.
This approach is more diﬀicult to maintain, but also more flexible as the cluster can be
easily scaled and extended.
In contrast, Okteto Cloud has adopted a different approach, focusing on creating
a development environment that is not typically production-ready.
In the free tier,
Okteto Cloud provides a namespace in a cluster that is fully managed by Okteto, with
the possibility of deploying up to 10 pods with limitations as specified below.
• Namespaces: 5
• Pods: 10
• CPU: 1 per pod
• Memory: 3Gb per pod
• Storage: 5Gb
These limitations are intended to provide a development environment that is easily
accessible and manageable for users, but with less computational and storage resources
than a production-ready system.
The result of the comparison between Azure and Okteto Cloud is that Okteto Cloud
is better suited for development purposes while Azure is more suitable for productization.
Okteto Cloud is focused on creating development environments that are not typically
production-ready, and it’s also free, it’s limited to 10 pods and not suitable for large
projects. On the other hand, Azure provides more flexibility and scalability options, but
it’s harder to maintain and it’s more expensive. It’s a better fit for large projects and
production-ready systems. Based on this evaluation, Okteto Cloud will be used for the
implementation of this project, as it provides an appropriate development environment
and is cost-effective.
4.3
Algorithms implementation
The algorithms were implemented in separate Python libraries to enable reusability and
library sharing among multiple microservices. To facilitate development and debugging,
visualizations were created and integrated into the libraries. Each algorithm includes
test case examples for local development as well as a console-based visualization module.
An example of the visualization for single-agent path planning algorithms is depicted
in the Figure 4.4. The red line symbolizes the path found by the agent, and the black
squares show walls or obstacles.
==PAGE:39==
4.3 Algorithms implementation
33
Figure 4.4: Single agent path planning example.
In the implementation of the system, several algorithms were implemented to facili-
tate the eﬀicient path planning of local agents. These included the CA*, A*, Dijkstra
and Breadth-First Search (BFS) algorithms. Additionally, to support cloud-enhanced
computation, the CA*, A* and Dijkstra algorithms were also implemented. The choice of
algorithms was based on their computational eﬀiciency, performance, and suitability for
the specific problem domain. The system also allows for the flexibility to switch between
different algorithms depending on the requirements of the specific task. Furthermore,
the system was designed to be modular and extensible, allowing for the integration of
additional algorithms in the future as needed by incorporating new algorithms into the
existing library.
In the case of multi-agent algorithms, there are also time considerations and thus,
the visualizations must include multiple time frames. To demonstrate this scenario, an
example of the planned path is illustrated in Figure 4.5. The agents are not colliding, and
they may choose sub-optimal paths to avoid collisions. The starting and goal positions
are denoted by circles, while the agents are represented by squares.
All libraries that are necessary for the algorithms and visualizations are included
during the building of the Docker image. This ensures that all required dependencies
are present and that the libraries are ready for use when the image is deployed. The
libraries are then imported into the main program and utilized for the functionality of
the system. This approach allows for easy distribution and deployment of the system, as
all necessary components are included within the Docker image and can be easily pulled
and run on any system that supports Docker. Additionally, this approach ensures that
==PAGE:40==
34
4 System Implementation
the libraries are available in a consistent and predictable environment, reducing the risk
of compatibility issues.
Figure 4.5:
Example of the planned path for multiple agents .
4.4
Broker
To allow the broker to be cloud agnostic, it was deployed as a container. Two main open-
source projects were considered Eclipse Mosquitto and HiveMQ Community Edition,
both implementing MQTT (Message Queuing Telemetry Transport) protocol.
Differences between the two include:
• Mosquitto is fully open-sourced and maintained by Eclipse Foundation. HiveMQ
is an enterprise product with a free community edition version.
• HiveMQ is better suited for a large-scale project, whereas mosquito is designed for
small to medium-sized projects.
• HiveMQ has more features but most of them are not included in the community
edition.
• Mosquito includes free implementation of MQTT bridge - the connection between
two MQTT brokers that allows them to exchange messages with each other.
==PAGE:41==
4.5 Observability
35
Both brokers were deployed and tested. HiveMQ was easier to manage and deploy to
the Kubernetes cluster, but Mosquito was faster and more reliable. The feature which
decided on choosing Mosquito as a broker in this project is the implementation of the
MQTT bridge which allows easy connect local and cloud brokers together and isolates
traﬀic between cloud and local deployments.
4.5
Observability
Observability is the ability to check and visualize the state of the overall system. It
is especially important with microservice architecture as complexity is increasing along
with the decoupling of the services. There are also multiple data sources that need to
be combined together to provide insight into component interactions.
Figure 4.6 shows the design of the observability system for this project. In a standard
cloud-based application, all metrics are directly scraped by metric scrapers, which was
implemented in a local setup. In a real system, some components are not deployed in
the cloud (f.e agents) and therefore metrics need to be transported to the service which
is deployed in the cloud - in this case, the backend service. Later those metrics are
exposed to the metric collector.
Figure 4.6: Observability design.
Two open-source components are used in order to create an observability stack:
Grafana and Prometheus. Prometheus is a monitoring solution that scrapes metrics
from the HTTP endpoint, in the case of Kubernetes it scrapes metrics from pods whose
metric monitor service is exposed. Prometheus later stores collected data in a time-series
database and provide a way to query the data using the specific language (Prometheus
Query Language) [30].
==PAGE:42==
36
4 System Implementation
Figure 4.7: Dashboard in grafana.
Grafana is meant as a visualization tool for all resources. It uses Prometheus queries
to show data in form of charts, graphs, and other visualizations. In this project, mul-
tiple Grafana dashboards were created to monitor the status of the system and the
performance of the solution. An example can be seen in the Figure 4.7.
The observability solution is capable of visualizing various aspects of the agents’
performance, including their uptime, the current leader, the average memory and CPU
utilization of the agents, the time taken for path calculation, and the number of paths
found.
4.6
Visualization
Visualization of the systems was implemented in the form of a webpage. The webpage is
served via frontend service and once fetched it keeps communicating with the backend
service in order to serve the most recent information about the system. As service is
exposed through ingress resources it is available externally from any machine connected
to the internet. A real, working website example can be seen in the Figure 4.8.
The user journey begins by selecting the system from the ”Systems” dropdown menu.
This menu is filled while fetching the webpage. After selecting the system, its state will
be shown in the main area of the webpage. The state will be visualized as a grid map
with agents’ positions marked as colored dots and starting and goal positions as colored
squares. In cases where the path is not yet planned, agents won’t be shown on the map.
On the right side of the main area, a list of the agents along with the machine’s name
will be displayed, crown symbolize that this particular agent is a leader.
==PAGE:43==
4.6 Visualization
37
Figure 4.8: Frontend website.
Users can interact with a webpage by selecting a predefined map for the agents, and
selecting an algorithm that should be used for calculation. After calculating the path,
it can be visualized as an animation or replayed step by step using the slider located in
the top right of the web page.
Additionally, the user can create his own map by accessing ”map-creator”. Once
selected user will be asked about the size of the map and shown a map of that size
meant for marking the walls and agents’ position. An example of a ”map-creator” view
can be seen in the Figure 4.9.
Figure 4.9: Frontend map-creator.
==PAGE:44==
38
==PAGE:45==
CHAPTER 5
Testing and Analysis
The system mentioned in this work is complex and manual testing is not a viable ap-
proach, therefore automatic testing was implemented. For this purpose, an additional
microservice was introduced, called a performance test. It utilizes backend REST API
to create reproducible test cases. It is also gathering the results and shows performance
KPIs (Key Performance Indicators) for the system. An example of test maps can be
seen in Appendix D.
5.1
Test cases
The system was put through a series of tests using 14 different maps (examples in Ap-
pendix D) of varying sizes and levels of complexity. Each algorithm being evaluated
is run on each map, with the agents’ positions remaining tests runs with different al-
gorithms. End-to-end test time is measured, from when the calculation is triggered by
the agent until the final path is determined. Additional information such as how long it
took to set up the test, any communication time, and how long the algorithm took to
calculate the path can be found in the section 4.5. This allows for a thorough evaluation
of the system’s performance and helps identify any areas for improvement. Depending
on the requirements, the system can be simulated in the cloud, run on an on-premises
system, or even composed of virtual machines, those approaches are explained in further
sections. For the final test, an approach with the real on-premises system is used to
examine communication delay to system performance.
5.1.1
System simulated in the cloud
The system can be simulated in a cloud-based environment. This is achieved by creating
and connecting multiple agents to the system through the utilization of multiple Kuber-
netes pods spawned in a separate namespace. The simulation of the agent is performed
in a cloud environment, and as such, this scenario does not take into account any com-
munication delays as all containers are communicating within a local network (cluster
network). This approach allows for the simulation of a cloud-based environment while
maintaining control over the test conditions and minimizing external variables that may
affect the results. This scenario is particularly useful for testing the system’s scalability
and performance under a cloud-based deployment.
==PAGE:46==
40
5 Testing and Analysis
5.1.2
Real system
A small-scale system composed of three external devices (Raspberry Pi) was constructed
to demonstrate the functionality of a real-world system. On each of these devices, an
agent container was deployed. One of the devices serves as the host for the map-service
and broker containers. This configuration is shown in the Figure 5.1. This approach
allows for the simulation of a real-world deployment scenario, while maintaining a man-
ageable scale for testing and evaluation. This scenario is particularly useful for testing
the system’s functionality and performance under real-world conditions, as well as for
evaluating the system’s ability to integrate with external devices.
Figure 5.1: Real cluster.
This setup resembles a real-world scenario, with 3 robots (agents) and one server
meant for deploying brokers and communicating to the cloud.
Agents have limited
resources as Single Board Computer used for deployment only has 1GB of memory and
Quad-core Cortex-A72 1.5GHz processor [31]. For the purpose of the test, computing
power can also be throttled. Devices are connected to the local network via an internet
switch.
The implementation of the solution presented a significant challenge due to the use of
devices with ARM architecture. As a result, it was necessary to rebuild the containers to
ensure compatibility with this architecture. To mitigate the diﬀiculties associated with
this process, the installation of Azure DevOps agents on the machines was implemented.
This enabled the deployment of any software on the agent devices, and a Continuous
Integration pipeline was put in place to rebuild ARM images on every code change
using local machines as hosts and to push them into the image registry. Additionally,
the cloud component of the solution was deployed on Okteto cloud, and both parts of
the solution were able to exchange messages through the use of MQTT brokers. This
approach ensured that the solution was robust and able to adapt to the unique technical
requirements of the devices.
==PAGE:47==
5.2 Communication time
41
5.1.3
System composed from virtual machines
Another way of testing the system is to create a set of virtual machines or containers
locally and connect them to the cloud system. The benefits of this approach are that
this setup is easier to maintain, supports x86 architecture, and is easily extensible, as
for spawning more agents there is no additional hardware needed. Resource limits can
also be implemented both in the case of containers and virtual machines. Those entities
have to be put in the same virtual network to enable communication between simulated
machines.
5.2
Communication time
The results of the 24-hour latency test indicate that there is a significant delay between
the real agents located in Copenhagen, Denmark and the cloud provider data center
located in Council Bluffs, Iowa, United States. The distance between these locations
is roughly 7500km, which may contribute to the observed delays. During the test, an
ICMP package with 32 bytes of data was sent every minute to the cloud broker endpoint,
and the Round Trip Time (RTT) was measured. The results of this test can be viewed
in Figure 5.2. RTT ping test is a method used to measure the time it takes for a packet
of data to travel from a source device to a destination device and for the response to
travel back to the source device.
Figure 5.2: RTT time.
The results of the test revealed an average RTT of 131 milliseconds, with a minimum
RTT of 126 milliseconds, a maximum RTT of 236 milliseconds, and a standard deviation
of 6 milliseconds over the entire test period. The largest standard deviation was observed
between 1 and 4 AM UTC.
==PAGE:48==
42
5 Testing and Analysis
5.3
Comparison between computing time
Test results for real agents were performed for agent devices forced to use half of
their CPU capabilities and 512Mb of memory. Algorithms were grouped into a non-
collaborative group (A*, Cloud A*) and a collaborative group (CA*, Cloud CA*). Re-
sults can be seen in Figures 5.3 and in logarithmic scale on Figure 5.4. The vertical
axis represents the sum of paths computing time in milliseconds and the vertical axis
indicates the dimension of the map f.e map with dimension 5 will have 25 (5x5) possible
locations for the agent.
Figure 5.3: Test on on-prem setup.
Figure 5.4: Test on on-prem setup in log scale.
The results of the performance testing indicate that non-collaborative algorithms are
significantly faster than collaborative ones. The average time difference between A* and
Cloud A* was found to be around 150 ms, with A* being faster. Additionally, the results
show that Cloud A* has a higher deviation than A*.
When comparing the results of CA* and Cloud CA*, it was found that CA* outper-
forms Cloud CA* on the smallest map. However, on larger maps, Cloud CA* performed
==PAGE:49==
5.4 Results by resources given to an agent
43
better. The average performance of Cloud CA* was found to be around 10 times faster
than CA*.
5.4
Results by resources given to an agent
There is a possibility to deploy an agent application on machines with different resource
profiles and therefore it is important to determine how algorithms are performing given
different resource limits. In this test 4 agent profiles with limited CPU and memory
were considered and can be seen in Table 5.1.
Table 5.1: Resources profiles.
Profile name
Memory limit
CPU limit
very low profile
128 MB
0.1 CPU
low profile
128 MB
0.2 CPU
medium profile
256 MB
0.3 CPU
high profile
800 MB
1.0 CPU
Memory limit refers to the maximum amount of memory that can be used before the
process running application in the agent will be terminated. CPU limit will ensure that
the agent can only use a specific part of the host CPU resources, i.e. setting it to 0.5
will produce the same output as running an application with 2 times slower CPU [32].
A time limit of 10 seconds was given to the agents while performing computations.
A comparison of agents running with different resource profiles according to the
percentage of paths found can be seen in the Figure 5.5. In the case of the first free
algorithms (A*, Cloud A*, Cloud CA*), agents are able to find all possible paths which
are equal to around 95% of the total number of paths for all resources profile.
In the case of the CA* algorithm, agents with very low profiles can only find 50%
of the total path given, low profile 65%, medium profile - nearly 80%, and high profile
95%.
Figure 5.6 shows the performance of agents with different resource profiles in relation
to the average computing time for all agents. Time is given in milliseconds and shown
on a logarithmic scale.
An agent with the low resource profile performed similarly for A* and Cloud A*
algorithms, however, Cloud CA* computing time was more than 10 times smaller than
Local CA*. Further increase of agent resources, results in lowering of computing time.
For agents with high resources, A* performed significantly better than cloud A*, and
results from cloud CA* and CA* were similar, but cloud CA* performed better.
==PAGE:50==
44
5 Testing and Analysis
Figure 5.5: Percentage of paths found by an agent with different resources profile.
Figure 5.6: Difference in compute time by agent resources.
==PAGE:51==
CHAPTER 6
Conclusion and Future
Work
This section provides a conclusion of the research presented in this thesis and discusses
potential areas for future work. Additionally, it summarizes the main findings and the
implications of the research for both academia and industry.
6.1
Conclusion
In this thesis, the problem of multi-agent path planning was discussed. A system that
supports collaborative and cloud-enhanced path planning was designed, implemented,
and tested using agents simulated on multiple devices. Part of the system representing
local agents and their environment was deployed on physical devices, and another part
responsible for visualization and delegation of computation was deployed in the public
cloud in a way that it can support multiple tenants. Dijkstra, A*, and CA* algorithms
were implemented and used both in local and cloud computation.
Twenty four hour latency test (Figure 5.3) was performed to determine the average
latency between local agents and the cloud system. On purpose, the location of the cloud
system (Central USA) was selected to be distant from the location of the agents located
in Copenhagen, Denmark to investigate the influence of network latency on performance.
The average latency for this test was 131 miliseconds. The largest deviation was observed
between 1 AM and 4 AM UTC (8-11 PM EST), which is a time when network lines in
the USA might be highly utilized. This can be attributed to the fact that during these
hours, many individuals and businesses in the USA are likely to be using the internet
for various activities, leading to increased traﬀic on the network and resulting in higher
latency.
For testing purposes, an automatic test suite was created, which was testing the
performance of all algorithms both in the local setup as well as in the cloud setup with
3 agents deployed on local devices.
A* algorithm has significantly lower complexity
than CA* and therefore for agents with average resources (0.5 CPU, 512Mb memory),
it is better to perform it locally. Given the largest map in the testing suite (961 tiles)
it performed more than three times faster than its cloud version.
It is caused by a
significant difference between network latency and algorithm execution time. Network
latency is not dependent on algorithm complexity nor map size and therefore when
==PAGE:52==
46
6 Conclusion and Future Work
map size increases the difference between the cloud algorithm and local algorithm would
become less significant.
Test performed for the CA* algorithm (Figure 5.3) has shown that for agents with
average resources, it is better to perform computation in the cloud. There was only one
case, for the smallest map where CA* performed better locally. As CA* is more complex
than A*, it needs more resources. On average cloud solution was around ten times faster
than the local solution. It is caused by significantly higher resources of cloud-agent and
insignificant network delay in comparison to algorithm compute time. Additionally, it
was discovered that in all test cases, there were no network disturbances and one round
trip was enough to perform computation in the cloud and deliver results.
Agents with different resource profiles (Table 5.1) were tested to discover how the
system behaves, given diverse hardware limitations (Figure 5.4). The only agent which
was able to find all possible using CA* algorithm performed locally, given a 10-second
computation limit was an agent with the highest resource profile.
On the contrary,
agents using cloud-enhanced algorithms found all possible paths for every resource profile.
For all resource profiles, the A* algorithm was faster to perform locally, however, for
agents with the lowest resource profile results for both A* and Cloud-enhanced A* are
comparable. Cloud solution was 39% slower on average despite being faster on maps
larger than 23x23 tiles. It is caused by the throttling of local agent resources on larger
maps, which is causing slow down in computation time. For all resources, profiles CA*
performed significantly better in the cloud than in the local setup, which is an effect of
high resource consumption for algorithms with high complexity.
The overall built system proved that given agents with hardware limitations, it is
usually beneficial to outsource computation to the cloud, even though the location of the
cloud servers is distant from the agents. Even for simpler, non-collaborative algorithms,
such as A*, a delay of around 150 milliseconds might be acceptable in an industry
scenario. CA* algorithm proved to be computationally expensive and, in most cases,
not feasible to be performed on a local agent machine with limited resources. However,
when computed in collaboration with the cloud provides suﬀicient performance.
6.2
Future work
In the future, it would be beneficial to expand the scope of this master thesis by im-
plementing more algorithms to address different use cases and lower the complexity,
especially for multi-agents path planning.
Additionally, improving the robustness of
the current algorithms should be a priority for production ready solution. This could
involve testing the algorithms under different conditions, such as high load or network
latency, and implementing failover mechanisms to ensure that the algorithms continue
to function properly.
Another area for future work is to test different communication protocols in addition
to MQTT. This could include protocols such as HTTP or AMQP, and could help to
identify the most suitable protocol for different use cases. Experimenting with different
==PAGE:53==
6.2 Future work
47
Quality of Service (QoS) settings could help to optimize the system’s performance and
ensure that it meets all requirements.
To further improve the software’s multi-tenancy capabilities, it would be beneficial to
implement more robust mechanisms for ensuring that different tenants’ data is isolated
from one another. This could involve implementing encryption or access controls at
different levels of the system, as well as logging the system.
In addition to these improvements, it would also be interesting to experiment with
the kube-edge software to see how it can be integrated into the system. This could
provide additional scalability and fault tolerance capabilities. It can also lead to better
user experience as agents’ machines would be managed from the cloud.
Overall, these future improvements could help to make the software more robust and
widely applicable, and it could be distributed as a Software as a Service (SaaS) software
to make it easier for organizations to adopt and use.
==PAGE:54==
48
==PAGE:55==
APPENDIX A
Backend REST endpoints
endpoint
params
returns
action
method
/backend/test
none
test string
none
GET
/backend/discovery
none
status string
triggers
agents
dis-
covery
GET
/backend/new-map
size::int
status string
triggers
new
map
generation
GET
/backend/map-from-file
map_file::string
map_file::random
triggers
new
map
generation
GET
/backend/refresh-info
none
status string
fetches
info
from
leader
GET
/backend/get-info
none
{”agents”: [],”leader”: ,”map”: }
none
GET
/backend/single_agent_calculate
algo::<a_star|dijkstra|BFS>
status string
request
calculation
for single agent
GET
/backend/sequence_calculate
none
status_string
request
calculation
for multi agent
GET
/backend/single_agent_calculate_cloud
algo::<a_star|dijkstra|BFS>
status string
request
calcula-
tion
for
single
agent(cloud)
GET
/backend/sequence_calculate_cloud
none
status_string
request
calcula-
tion
for
multi
agent(cloud)
GET
/backend/show_paths
none
{”agent”:, “map”: }
none
GET
/backend/get_systems
none
{”paths”: }
none
GET
/backend/get_prerendered_map
none
map string
renders map string
GET
/backend/save_map
map without agents
ok|error
saves created map
POST
/backend/adopt_new_map
map with agents
ok|error
adopt
created
map
with agents positions
POST
Table A.1: Backend enpoints.
==PAGE:56==
50
==PAGE:57==
APPENDIX B
MQTT topics
Figure B.1: Backend topics.
Figure B.2: Cloud-agent topics.
Figure B.3: System topics.
Figure B.4: Map-service topics.
==PAGE:58==
52
==PAGE:59==
APPENDIX C
Multi tenant design
Figure C.1: Multi tenant system design.
==PAGE:60==
54
==PAGE:61==
APPENDIX D
Test cases
Figure D.1: Example test scenarios.
==PAGE:62==
56
==PAGE:63==
APPENDIX E
Make targets
• make dev - run dev cluster and tilt
• make clean - stop local cluster and tilt
• make cloud-login - login to Azure and setup kubectl
• make cloud-up - start kubernetes cluster in Azure
• make cloud-down - stop kubernetes cluster in Azure
• make cloud-deploy - deploy to kubernetes cluster in azure
• make cloud-build - build and push docker images
• make local-observability - deploy observability stack to local cluster
• make pdf - generate this document in form of pdf
==PAGE:64==
58
==PAGE:65==
APPENDIX F
Project plan
Logical elements of the projects are called ”epics”, they divide work into 17 parts which
should be executed in the following order:
ID
Name
Start Date
End Date
E00
Problem identification, formulation
August 25, 2022
August 28, 2022
E01
Project planning
August 25, 2022
September 4, 2022
E02
Background research, theoretical solutions
September 5, 2022
September 18, 2022
E03
System design - microservices
September 19, 2022
September 25, 2022
E04
System design - communication
September 26, 2022
October 2, 2022
E05
Implementation - development environment and tools
October 3, 2022
October 9, 2022
E06
Implementation - basic algorithms
October 10, 2022
October 16, 2022
E07
Implementation - advanced algorithms
October 17, 2022
October 30, 2022
E08
Implementation - side services
October 31, 2022
November 6, 2022
E09
Implementation - agent
November 7, 2022
November 27, 2022
E10
Implementation - cloud agent
November 28, 2022
December 4, 2022
E11
Implementation - Enabling true edge computing
December 5, 2022
December 11, 2022
E12
Implementation - result scraping and visualization
December 12, 2022
December 18, 2022
E13
Implementation - observability
December 19, 2022
December 25, 2022
E14
Measurement and testing
December 26, 2022
January 1, 2023
E15
Final report - Design and preparation
January 2, 2023
January 8, 2023
E16
Final report - Content
January 9, 2023
January 29, 2023
Table F.1: Epic list.
==PAGE:66==
60
==PAGE:67==
APPENDIX G
CI/CD pipeline
Figure G.1: CI/CD pipeline.
==PAGE:68==
62
==PAGE:69==
Bibliography
[1]
N. Sariff and N. Buniyamin. “An Overview of Autonomous Mobile Robot Path
Planning Algorithms.” In: 2006 4th Student Conference on Research and Develop-
ment. 2006, pp. 183–188. doi: 10.1109/SCORED.2006.4339335.
[2]
B.K. Patle, Ganesh Babu L, and Anish. “A review: On path planning strategies
for navigation of mobile robot.” In: Defence Technology 15.4 (2019), pp. 582–606.
issn: 2214-9147. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.dt.2019.04.011. url:
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S2214914718305130.
[3]
Qiu Ling et al. “Scheduling and Routing Algorithms for AGVs: a Survey.” In: (Nov.
1999).
[4]
Tao Zheng, Yanqiang Xu, and Da Zheng. “AGV Path Planning based on Im-
proved A-star Algorithm.” In: 2019 IEEE 3rd Advanced Information Management,
Communicates, Electronic and Automation Control Conference (IMCEC). 2019,
pp. 1534–1538. doi: 10.1109/IMCEC46724.2019.8983841.
[5]
Younes Regragui and Najem Moussa. “A real-time path planning for reducing
vehicles traveling time in cooperative-intelligent transportation systems.” In: Sim-
ulation Modelling Practice and Theory 123 (2023), p. 102710. issn: 1569-190X.
doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.simpat.2022.102710. url: https://www.
sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1569190X22001794.
[6]
Path planning. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Motion_planning. Accessed:
2020-09-30.
[7]
Shiwei Lin et al. “A Review of Path-Planning Approaches for Multiple Mobile
Robots.” In: Machines 10.9 (2022). issn: 2075-1702. doi: 10.3390/machines10090773.
url: https://www.mdpi.com/2075-1702/10/9/773.
[8]
C. Saranya et al. “Real Time Evaluation of Grid Based Path Planning Algorithms:
A comparative study.” In: IFAC Proceedings Volumes 47.1 (2014). 3rd Interna-
tional Conference on Advances in Control and Optimization of Dynamical Systems
(2014), pp. 766–772. issn: 1474-6670. doi: https://doi.org/10.3182/20140313-
3-IN-3024.00050. url: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/
pii/S1474667016327410.
[9]
Jenhui Chen and Li-Ren Li. “Path planning protocol for collaborative multi-robot
systems.” In: July 2005, pp. 721–726. isbn: 0-7803-9355-4. doi: 10.1109/CIRA.
2005.1554362.
==PAGE:70==
64
Bibliography
[10]
Kairanbay Magzhan and Hajar Mat Jani. A Review And Evaluations Of Shortest
Path Algorithms.
[11]
J. Ricardo Sánchez Ibáñez, Carlos Perez-del-Pulgar, and Alfonso Garcia. “Path
Planning for Autonomous Mobile Robots: A Review.” In: Sensors 21 (Nov. 2021),
p. 7898. doi: 10.3390/s21237898.
[12]
Basic Algorithms. http://theory.stanford.edu/~amitp/GameProgramming/
AStarComparison.html. Accessed: 2020-09-30.
[13]
Jitin Kumar Goyal and K.S. Nagla. “A new approach of path planning for mobile
robots.” In: 2014 International Conference on Advances in Computing, Commu-
nications and Informatics (ICACCI). 2014, pp. 863–867. doi: 10.1109/ICACCI.
2014.6968200.
[14]
David Silver. “Cooperative Pathfinding.” In: Jan. 2005, pp. 117–122.
[15]
Solving Algorithms for Multi-agent Path Planning with Dynamic Obstacles. https:
//dspace.cuni.cz/bitstream/handle/20.500.11956/90574/DPTX_2014_2_
11320_0_443220_0_164071.pdf?sequence=1&isAllowed=y. Accessed: 2020-09-
30.
[16]
Ko-Hsin Wang and Adi Botea. “Fast and Memory-Eﬀicient Multi-Agent Pathfind-
ing.” In: Jan. 2008, pp. 380–387.
[17]
Ko-Hsin Cindy Wang and Adi Botea. “MAPP: A Scalable Multi-Agent Path Plan-
ning Algorithm with Tractability and Completeness Guarantees.” In: J. Artif. Int.
Res. 42.1 (Sept. 2011), pp. 55–90. issn: 1076-9757.
[18]
oasis. MQTT specification. Dec. 2022. url: https://docs.oasis-open.org/
mqtt/mqtt/v5.0/mqtt-v5.0.pdf.
[19]
Jorge Luzuriaga et al. “A comparative evaluation of AMQP and MQTT protocols
over unstable and mobile networks.” In: Jan. 2015. doi: 10.1109/CCNC.2015.
7158101.
[20]
oasis. Advanced Message Queuing Protocol (AMQP) specification. Dec. 2022. url:
https://www.oasis-open.org/committees/download.php/56763/amqp-core-
overview-v1.0-wd01.pdf.
[21]
Claus Pahl et al. “Cloud Container Technologies: A State-of-the-Art Review.” In:
IEEE Transactions on Cloud Computing PP (May 2017), pp. 1–1. doi: 10.1109/
TCC.2017.2702586.
[22]
Canonical Ltd. Linux containers documentation. Dec. 2022. url: https://linuxcontainers.
org/.
[23]
Python Software Foundation. Python documentation. Dec. 2022. url: https://
www.python.org/doc/essays/blurb/.
[24]
Sam Newman. Building Microservices. O’Reilly Media, Inc., 2015.
[25]
Kubernetes Authors. Kubernetes documentation. Dec. 2022. url: https://kubernetes.
io/docs/home/.
==PAGE:71==
Bibliography
65
[26]
Oracle virtualbox. https://www.virtualbox.org/. Accessed: 2020-10-30.
[27]
HashiCorp Vagrant. https://developer.hashicorp.com/vagrant/intro. Ac-
cessed: 2020-10-30.
[28]
Maciej Tatarski. Development Virtual Machine. Oct. 2022. url: https://github.
com/mactat/dev-vm.
[29]
sidpalas. managed-kubernetes-pricing. Oct. 2022. url: https://github.com/
sidpalas/managed-kubernetes-pricing.
[30]
Prometheus Authors 2014-2023. Prometheus documentation. Dec. 2022. url: https:
//prometheus.io/docs/introduction/overview/.
[31]
rasperry pi fundation. raspberry pi specification. Oct. 2022. url: https://www.
raspberrypi.com/products/raspberry-pi-4-model-b/specifications/.
[32]
Docker. Docker container resources limit. Dec. 2022. url: https://docs.docker.
com/config/containers/resource_constraints/.
==PAGE:72==
