==PAGE:1==
Danmarks Tekniske Universitet
Master Thesis
Nanolasers based on extreme
confinement of light
Authors: Simon Borregaard & Adrian Dubr´e
Supervisors: Jesper Mørk, Yi Yu, Meng Xiong, Kresten Yvind &
Evangelos Dimopoulos
Technical University of Denmark
Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
31st of January 2023
==PAGE:2==
Abstract
In this project, we have fabricated active and passive nanocavities in an indium phos-
phide (InP) membrane, using cavity designs based on photonic crystal and extreme
dielectric confinement. Active cavities include single quantum well buried heterostruc-
tures with varying in-plane dimensions from 50 nm to 275 nm.
The devices were characterised physically, using scanning electron microscopy, and
found to vary in in-plane dimensions by up to 10 nm from the intended sizes, and ellip-
sometry measurements have suggested that the InP membrane varied by more than 10
nm as well. Numerical simulations suggest that this fabrication error alters the cavi-
ties’ resonant wavelengths - by the tens of nm - and their quality factors, in some cases
reducing Q by more than 60 %. Input-output characteristics were extracted for the
active devices, using optical characterisation methods, in order to determine whether
they could achieve lasing, and quality factors were experimentally measured on passive
devices for comparison.
Lasing appeared to be achieved only for two photonic crystal nanocavity designs, an L7
design and an H0 design. The devices based on extreme dielectric confinement were not
found to lase. We compared physical characterisation results, theoretical models for
the output and threshold power of a laser, and results of simulations based on intended
and measured physical device parameters and fund that issues related to fabrication
may be a sufficient cause of the lack of lasing. Threshold trends were characterised on
the devices that do appear to lase and, compared to models, which predict that said
threshold power could be decreased by reducing the dimensions of the active region
and that the threshold has a minimum for some active region size. However, we cannot
confirm nor deny the existence of these trends based on our results.
i
==PAGE:3==
Contents
Abstract
i
Contents
ii
List of abbreviations
v
1
Introduction
1
2
Theoretical concepts
6
2.1
Lasers and nanolasers - motivation for extreme confinement . . . . . . .
6
2.1.1
Modelling the threshold pump power, using the rate equations .
9
2.1.2
Modelling a laser’s output using the rate equations
. . . . . . .
13
2.2
Photonic crystals nanocavities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
2.3
The EDC cavity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
2.4
Buried heterostructures . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
2.5
The finite difference time domain method . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
3
Initial characterisation of buried heterostructures
24
3.1
Physical characterisation of the BHs
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
3.1.1
Method
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
3.1.2
Results and discussion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
3.2
Optical characterisation of the BHs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
3.2.1
Imaging emission from buried heterostructures . . . . . . . . . .
28
3.2.1.1
Method . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
3.2.1.2
Results and discussion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
3.2.2
Measuring photoluminescence spectrum . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
3.2.2.1
Method . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
3.2.2.2
Results and discussion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
4
Fabrication
33
4.1
Method
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
4.1.1
Design of the mask used for electron beam lithography . . . . .
33
4.1.2
Cleanroom processing
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
4.2
Fabrication difficulties
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
ii
==PAGE:4==
Contents
4.2.1
PECVD of silicon nitride : A non-uniform film . . . . . . . . . .
41
4.2.2
EBL: Stitching error, underexposure, and non-uniformity . . . .
42
4.2.3
New exposure with writing fields displaced . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
4.2.4
Exposure of sample with Al on top of resist
. . . . . . . . . . .
46
4.3
Results and discussion
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
4.3.1
Physical characterisation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
5
FDTD simulations and laser threshold trends
52
5.1
Method
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
5.1.1
Setting up the FDTD simulations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
5.2
Results and discussion
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
5.2.1
Quality factor and resonance wavelength . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
5.2.2
Calculating the confinement factor
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
5.3
Laser threshold trends
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
59
5.3.1
Design dimensions of the laser cavities
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
59
5.3.2
Fabricated dimensions of the laser cavities . . . . . . . . . . . .
61
6
Optical characterisation
63
6.1
Laser setup - Measuring input-output curves of fabricated devices . . .
63
6.1.1
Method
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
63
6.1.2
Results and discussion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
65
6.1.2.1
TO cavities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
66
6.1.2.2
H0 PhC cavities
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
70
6.1.2.3
L7 PhC cavities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
75
6.1.2.4
H1 Phc Cavities
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
80
6.2
Photoluminescence setup - Better noise floor and the gain spectrum . .
81
6.2.1
Method
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
81
6.2.2
Results and discussion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
83
6.3
Quality factor measurements on passive cavities . . . . . . . . . . . . .
85
6.3.1
Method
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
86
6.3.2
Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
89
6.4
Fitting of input-output curves . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
92
7
Discussion and outlook
100
8
Conclusion
106
iii
==PAGE:5==
Contents
Bibliography
108
A Analytical solution to the conventional rate equations
113
B Fabrication process flow
116
C Process parameters for ICP and PECVD
117
D Qualitative device characterisation using the quality factor setup
118
E Design parameters of photonic crystals
121
F FDTD simulations including modelling of the BH region
122
iv
==PAGE:6==
List of abbreviations
BH
Buried heterostructure
BS
Beam splitter
CW
Continuous wave
EBL
Electron beam lithography
EDC
Extreme dielectric confinement (see also: TO)
FDTD
Finite difference time domain
FoM
Figure of merit
FWHM
Full width at half maximum
ICP
Inductively coupled plasma
InP
Indium phosphide
OSA
Optical spectrum analyser
PECVD
Plasma enhanced chemical vapour deposition
PhC
Photonic crystal
PC
Polarisation controller
Q-factor
Quality factor
QW
Quantum well
RIE
Reactive ion etching
SEM
Scanning electron microscope / microscopy
TIR
Total internal reflection
TO
Topology optimisation / Topology optimised (see also: EDC)
v
==PAGE:7==
1
Introduction
Telecommunication has significantly influenced the way we live our lives over the last
decade. Today the internet can be accessed from nearly everywhere using a mobile
phone and it is used to perform several of our daily tasks. Naturally, information and
communication technology is in constant development. A study made by the network
equipment company Cisco showed that global internet traffic increased by a factor of
three from 2012 to 2017. This trend is expected to persist [1].
All else being equal, an increase in internet traffic will result in larger power consump-
tion. The main part of the internet consists of servers collected inside data centres [2].
In 2010 data centres were estimated to account for 1 % of global electricity consump-
tion [2]. Predictions show that in the worst case, this number may rise to 13 % by
2030 [2]. As global electricity consumption is expected to increase from 2010 to 2030
by around 40 %, data centres seem to be one of the main challenges in lowering future
global electricity consumption [2].
One way to tackle this challenge is by trying to lower the energy consumption of the
servers themselves. The main power-consuming element of a server is the processor
[3]. A study on computer microprocessors, performed by the hardware manufacturer
Intel, showed that over 50 % of the total chip power consumption comes from the
electrical interconnects, i.e. data transport, rather than data processing [4]. Further-
more, the study showed that 90 % of this power consumption comes from just 10 %
of said interconnects. One possible way to reduce the power consumption of proces-
sors could be to replace some of the electrical interconnects with optical interconnects.
When using optical interconnects, an electrical signal from one part of the chip is con-
verted to an optical signal using, e.g. a nanolaser (NL), it is then guided to another
part of the chip and converted back to an electrical signal at another processing circuit.
As data transfer with light, transported through waveguides, hence is not prone to
1
==PAGE:8==
Chapter 1. Introduction
the ohmic loss of electrical transfer, the data can be transported with much greater
efficiency. To ensure that the power consumption of such an implementation is actu-
ally lower than that of simply using electrical interconnects, one would need small and
efficient lasers, waveguides and photodetectors. In this project, the main focus is on
the laser - the emitter in this system.
The simplest laser one can imagine consists of 2 mirrors with an active gain material
between them. The gain material in pumped either electrically or optically, and some
of the excited carriers in the active material start to decay to produce photons through
spontaneous emission. If you continue to increase the pumping, some of the generated
photons in the cavity mode will interact with the gain material through stimulated
emission to produce identical copies of said photon. When the rate of generated pho-
tons balances out with the intrinsic losses and mirror losses of the cavity, the threshold
has been reached and the carrier density of the gain material clamps. Further pumping
of the gain material results in photon generation [5]. In this project, we aim to study
the effect of using a very small quantum well buried heterostructure, a so-called nano-
BH (50 nm - 270 nm), as the active material for nanolasers with different cavity designs.
The gain needed to outweigh the losses of the cavity can be described by a simple
condition if we assume that the spontaneous emission into the lasing mode is low:
Γgthug =
1
τp. Here Γ is the so-called confinement factor, gth is the threshold gain, ug is
the group velocity and τp is the photon lifetime. The right-hand side of the equation
describes the photon loss in the cavity. The photon lifetime is related to the so-called
quality factor, Q, with the relation τp = ω0
Q , where ω0 is the angular resonance frequency
of the cavity. The quality factor can be used as a figure of merit used to evaluate the
temporal confinement of light in a given cavity.
The confinement factor (Γ) is defined as the ratio of the stored electrical field energy
inside the active region to the total electrical field energy in the cavity [5]. Thus it
describes the spatial confinement of the light within a given active region size of the
laser cavity. From the gain condition, it can be seen that to minimise the threshold
gain one needs to maximise the quality factor (Q) and the confinement factor (Γ). This
corresponds to minimising the photon losses in the cavity and maximising the intensity
of the electrical field inside the active material.
One extensively studied optical cavity design for creating small efficient in-plane nanolasers
2
==PAGE:9==
Chapter 1. Introduction
is photonic crystal (PhC) slabs [6, 7, 8]. Here, a pattern of holes is etched into a mem-
brane of semiconductor material like indium phosphide (InP). The periodic difference
in refractive index will create a so-called photonic bandgap [6] that will confine the light
in-plane. A cavity is then created by removing one or more of the holes in the centre
of the photonic crystal, and a laser can be made by introducing an active material like
a quantum well buried heterostructure inside this cavity. The light is confined in the
dimension normal to the plane by total internal reflection (TIR).
Electrically pumped ultra-low threshold lasers with threshold currents down to 730
nA have been demonstrated with the use of L7 cavities in combination with BHs [9].
In the same demonstration, it was also found that when decreasing the length of the
BH active region the threshold current would also decrease linearly. When varying the
length of the BH from around 3µm to 450 nm, the threshold would decrease from 17
µA to 0.7 µA [9]. No minimum in the threshold current was found but was expected
to be found for smaller sizes of the BH region.
From the gain condition, it is not completely obvious why decreasing active region vol-
ume could lead to a smaller threshold current and possibly a minimum in the threshold,
as the confinement factor will always become lower when decreasing the size BH region.
We will later in the theory section of this report, derive a model based on conventional
laser equations for the threshold power and discuss this in more detail. Still, it is ob-
vious that the largest possible confinement factor is desirable also when a small active
region is used.
Very high quality factors (Q > 1,000,000) for a desired resonance wavelength of the
photonic crystal cavity can be acquired by shape optimisation (SO) of the hole radius,
lattice spacing and position of the holes closest to the cavity [8]. Even though quality
factors optimisation has been shown in several works, not a lot of works focus on the
spatial confinement of the field for photonic crystals [10].
A possible approach to increase the spatial confinement of a nanocavity is by using
so-called extreme dielectric confinement (EDC) [11, 10, 12]. One of the most simple
examples is a bowtie structure [13]. Using two small tips of dielectric material touching
at the sharp end, light can be confined in the narrow bridge between the two tips with
high field density. The temporal confinement of light in a bowtie is, unfortunately, quite
low, but by placing the bowtie structure inside a photonic crystal or Bragg grating, the
3
==PAGE:10==
Chapter 1. Introduction
quality factor can be significantly increased [11, 13, 14]. Small bowtie structures are
difficult to fabricate in a cleanroom due to limitations of the electron beam lithography
process used to define the structures and the dry etching to transfer the pattern into
the dielectric [11].
Another approach to optimise a cavity for a specific figure of merit is using Topol-
ogy Optimisation (TO) [10]. Here one starts with an initial guess for a cavity design,
which could be a photonic crystal. Maxwell’s equations are then solved in the fre-
quency domain for a resonant mode excited by a dipole emitter, and a figure of merit
is evaluated [11]. The structure can then be updated, and the calculation performed
again [11]. Through an iterative process using steepest descent algorithms, a structure
optimised for the figure of merit can be extracted. [11]
For the structures used in this project, the figure of merit (FoM) was chosen to be the
local density of states (LDOS) [10], which can be shown to be proportional to Q/V with
the mode volume V described using the definition for a single dipole emitter [11]. For
our case, where the active region is a geometrically defined volume, the mode volume
can instead be written as Vp = Vact/Γ. As will be discussed later, this definition in the
limit where the active region becomes infinitely small approaches the mode volume of
the single dipole emitter. Different constraints can be introduced into the optimisation
process as well, for example, a minimum feature size. In our specific case, the smallest
feature size was set to 74 nm, which is well above the limitations of the fabrication
process [10].
In this project, the goal is to investigate if a minimum in the laser threshold pump
power can be found for an optimal size of the nano-BH active region with the main
focus on topology optimised cavities. We will fabricate and characterise InP membrane
nanolasers based on topologically optimised EDC cavities and photonic crystal cavities
using small buried heterostructures as the active material and optically measure the
input-output laser characteristic with optical pumping of different devices with varying
sizes of the active BH region. The extracted threshold trends will be analysed and
compared to models based on conventional rate equations and numerical simulations.
The report is structured such that we will first go through the most important theo-
retical concepts to understand the basis of the project. This includes the derivation
of a model to describe the threshold pump power of optically pumped nanolasers with
varying active region volumes. We will then describe how the fabricated buried het-
4
==PAGE:11==
Chapter 1. Introduction
erostructures were characterised physically and optically. After this, the method and
results of the fabrication process of our laser cavities will be presented, followed by
a description of the numerical simulations used to extract the confinement factor for
our given sizes of BH. Combined with the theoretical model, expected trends for the
laser threshold as a function of BH lengths will be presented. Finally, we will discuss
the results of the optical characterisation of our fabricated lasers to compare with the
trends of theoretical models.
5
==PAGE:12==
2
Theoretical concepts
We have briefly and in broad terms discussed the reasons for the usage of nanolasers
and the motivation for using small active volumes in the introduction. We will now
discuss this in slightly more detail in section 2.1 and then, in sections 2.2-2.4 describe
the approaches we take in attempting to fabricate efficient nanolasers, specifically PhC
and EDC nanocavities and the usage of buried heterostructures.
2.1
Lasers and nanolasers - motivation for extreme
confinement
Generally speaking, the behaviour of lasers, nanolasers included, can be described by
the rate equations, whose conventional form is [5]:
dN
dt = Rpump −1
τc
N −ug g(N) Np
(2.1a)
dNp
dt =

Γ ug g(N) −1
τp

Np + Γ β N
τc
(2.1b)
Here, N and Np represent the average carrier- and photon densities, respectively, and τc
and τp are the carrier- and photon lifetimes, the latter of which may also be given using
the quality factor, Q = τp ω with ω the frequency of the light. Furthermore, ug = c/ng
is the group velocity of light inside the active region with ng the corresponding group
index, Γ is the confinement factor, g(N) is the carrier density-dependent gain, and β is
the fraction of total spontaneous carrier decays - including both spontaneous emission
and nonradiative decays - that results in a photon in the lasing mode.
Note that
the carrier- and photon densities are considered as average densities, meaning that
the carrier and photon numbers are N Vact and Np Vp, respectively, where Vact and Vp
are the active region volume and the mode volume, respectively. The possibility of
different carrier densities at different points in space, and the consequences thereof,
6
==PAGE:13==
Chapter 2. Theoretical concepts
such as spatial hole burning [5], are thus neglected in this model. The active region
volume is given by its physical dimensions while the mode volume is defined from
Vp = Vact/Γ, as we will get into shortly. For our experiments, we pump our devices
optically and therefore model, in our calculations, the pumping rate as:
Rpump =
ηo Pin
ℏωp Vact
(2.2)
with ηo the optical pumping efficiency, Pin the pump power, ℏωp the energy of the
pumping photons, and Vact the volume of the active region. The number of carriers
per unit time pumped into the active region is thus described by ηo Pin
ℏωp , while Rpump
represents a pump density, given by the inverse proportionality with the active region
volume Vact. This means that reducing Vact, keeping all else equal, will effectively in-
crease Rpump as the same carrier number is injected into a smaller volume.
We can rewrite the pump rate, taking the relevant values at threshold and isolating
for the threshold power to obtain:
Pth = Rpump,th ℏωp Vact/ηo
(2.3)
It would then, intuitively at least, stand to reason that a decrease in the active region
volume by effectively increasing the pumping density (introducing the same carrier
number per unit time into a reduced volume) would result in a corresponding decrease
in the threshold pump power. In reality, however, two other factors come into play
as well. First, the laser used for optical pumping can only be focussed into a beam
spot of finite size on the sample surface. If the active region is smaller than this beam
spot, a further decrease in Vact will cause a lesser portion of the laser spot to pump
the active region, effectively lowering ηo and thereby increasing the threshold pump
power. Second, a decrease in Vact generally lowers the confinement factor Γ, which, in
turn, lowers the gain term and the spontaneous emission term in eq. (2.1b), which will
increase the threshold pump rate Rpump,th. We will elaborate on the modelling of the
threshold pump power Pth in section 2.1.1 after discussing the relation between Γ and
Vact a bit further.
The effect on the confinement factor Γ by varying Vact cannot be fully understood
without knowledge of the electrical field inside the structure. The confinement factor
is defined as the relation between the field energy inside the active region and the total
field energy in the device [5]:
7
==PAGE:14==
Chapter 2. Theoretical concepts
Γ =
R
Vact εact |E(r)|2 d3r
R
V ε(r) |E(r)|2 d3r
(2.4)
As we will discuss later (see chapter 5), the field in a nanocavity is far from uniform
- which would have been the requirement for a linear dependence between Vact and
Γ. Instead, it is concentrated to varying degrees and may include a number of nodes,
depending on the cavity, which will affect the dependence between the two variables.
An imaginary example of this is sketched in figure 2.1. Here, two hypothetical modes
are sketched in the x-direction along with the confinement factor inside a region of a
given dimension.
(a) Normalised field energy density in space
(b) Light confinement in x vs. active region
length ∆x in x
Figure 2.1: Sketches of (a) the normalised field intensity distributions in x of two
arbitrary cavity modes - one with a single anti-node and one with several - and (b)
the confinement, Γ, of the field in x, dependent on the length of an active region. Γ is
calculated as the integral of the field distribution over the range x ∈[−∆x/2, ∆x/2]
The figure shows two modes; one with a single anti-node and one with three - along
with some smaller anti-nodes along the tails. Figure 2.1(b) shows the confinement
factor in the x-direction, Γx as a function of an active region length ∆x, assuming
that the cavity is centred around x = 0 in figure 2.1(a). For ”mode 1”, Γx is highly
dependent on the ∆x at lower values, but the dependence decreases at higher ∆x, as
most of the field is covered by the active region. For ”mode 2”, a strong dependence
of Γx on ∆x is again seen at low values, but a plateau is reached around ∆x ≈0.5
where the central node is covered even though the other nodes are not. In order to
8
==PAGE:15==
Chapter 2. Theoretical concepts
accurately analyse the cavities which we fabricate in this project, we, therefore, need
to have some information about the field in the cavity which we will obtain through
numerical simulations.
While we will not discuss the mode volume at length - instead mostly focussing on
Γ and Vact separately - it is used in parts of the literature [10, 11, 15], such as for
optimisation of certain devices, as we will get into later. We, therefore, point out that,
given the definition we use here, Vp may be written as:
Vp = Va/Γ =
R
V ε(r) |E(r)|2 d3r
1
Vact
R
Vact εact |E(r)|2 d3r
(2.5)
This corresponds to the total field energy, normalised to the mean field energy density
inside the active region. In the limit of Vact →0, the denominator thus simply becomes
the energy density at the position of the emitter. Thereby, we obtain the following
effective mode volume, which is the relevant mode volume for dipole emitters [15]:
Veff = Va/Γ =
R
V ε(r) |E(r)|2 d3r
εact |E(re)|2
(2.6)
2.1.1
Modelling the threshold pump power, using the rate
equations
We will now describe a simple model for the threshold pump power, using some as-
sumptions. We have, as before - in eq. (2.3) - a threshold power given by:
Pth = ℏωp Vact
ηo
Rpump,th
(2.7)
The value of the threshold pumping density can be found using the carrier rate equation
at steady state, i.e.:
0 = dN
dt = Rpump,th −1
τc
Nth −ug g(Nth) Np,th
(2.8)
We now assume that the rate of stimulated recombinations is significantly lower than
the spontaneous recombination rate at threshold. This gives:
Rpump,th = 1
τc
Nth
(2.9)
9
==PAGE:16==
Chapter 2. Theoretical concepts
...into which the threshold carrier density is inserted.
This is done from the gain
condition; at threshold, the gain gth = g(Nth) is equal to the losses in the cavity - once
again at steady state, now using the photon density rate equation:
0 = dNp
dt =

Γ vg g(N) −1
τp

Np + Γ β N
τc
(2.10)
Here another assumption is used - that the fraction of spontaneous recombination
contributing to the lasing mode is low compared to the contribution from stimulated
emission. The two assumptions used thus far, thereby, require that β ≪1 in order to
both be valid. We obtain:
Γ vg gth = 1
τp
(2.11)
The gain is modelled as linear, i.e. g(N) = gN(N −N0), where gN is an empirical gain
coefficient, which applies to this particular model. We will also discuss a logarithmic
gain model later. Using this gain model allows us to isolate the carrier density in the
above as:
gth = gN (Nth −N0)
(2.12)
⇒Nth = N0 + gth
gN
(2.13)
If we combine the above equations, we obtain the following threshold pump power:
Pth = ℏωp Vact
ηo
Rpump,th
(2.14)
= ℏωp Vact
ηo
1
τc
Nth
(2.15)
= ℏωp Vact
ηo
1
τc

N0 +
1
Γ ug gN τp

(2.16)
Utilising the definition of the mode volume Vp = Vact/Γ, we may rewrite this as:
Pth = ℏωp
ηo
1
τc

N0 Vact +
Vp
ug gN τp

(2.17)
We thus have a dependence of the threshold power on two terms which include the
active region volume Vact and the mode volume Vp, respectively. Once again, the re-
lation between Pth and Vact depends on the distribution of the electrical field. As can
be shown, using considerations regarding nodes and anti-nodes, such as the ones in
figure 2.1, Vp may be expected to converge as Vact →0, provided that the electrical
10
==PAGE:17==
Chapter 2. Theoretical concepts
field at the emitter’s position is nonzero; otherwise, it may explode if the field has a
node in the cavity centre. As the first term in Pth is linearly dependent on Vact, and
the second term, proportional to Vp, has a less predictable dependence on Vact, we may
expect that Pth itself, can either be reduced when going to the limit of Vact →0, or
that a minimum in Pth may be found for some value of Vact. Intuitively, eq. (2.17)
suggests that the threshold power may be reduced by simultaneously decreasing the
active region volume and confining the light to a smaller mode volume, although such
an interpretation depends on the definition of the mode volume.
The pump rate may be defined in different terms if a laser is electrically pumped rather
than optically, as is done in this project. This is of interest if the lasers are to be used
in optical communication [8, 9]. The pump rates may be written as
Rpump =



ηo Pin
ℏωp Vact,
optical pumping
ηe Iin
q Vact,
electrical pumping
(2.18)
The same equations and assumptions as above may then used to obtain an electrical
pumping threshold of
Ith = q
ηe
1
τc

N0 Vact +
Vp
ug gN τp

(2.19)
The assumptions used in the derivations of these equations come with some limitations,
however. The gain g(N) can be modelled in a variety of ways. It tends to be more
linear for bulk materials but is usually more accurately represented, using a logarithmic
gain model when applied to quantum wells [5, 8], which are used as the active regions
in this project. Additionally, we have assumed that β ≪1, which is not, in general,
expected to be the case with buried quantum well (QW) nanolasers [16]. This must
therefore be taken into account when comparing eq. (2.17) to data which appears to
have higher values of β, as we will extract from fitting.
Rather than a linear gain model, a logarithmic one may by used instead, which may
better approximate g(N). In this case:
g(N) = g0 ln(N/N0)
(2.20)
Where it may be noted that a Taylor approximation at N ≈N0 yields the linear gain
11
==PAGE:18==
Chapter 2. Theoretical concepts
model where the coefficients are related by gN = g0/N0. If we use the threshold carrier
density from the logarithmic gain model, we obtain:
gth = g0 ln(Nth/N0)
(2.21)
⇒exp(gth/g0) = Nth/N0
(2.22)
⇒Nth = N0 exp

1
Γ ug g0 τp

(2.23)
Which in turn yields the threshold power:
Pth = ℏωp
ηo
1
τc
N0 Vact exp

1
Γ ug g0 τp

(2.24)
In this case, the mode volume Vp = Vact/Γ does not appear anywhere. Instead, we see
an exponential with the potential to grow rapidly as its argument increases, which occur
as Γ →0, no matter the convergence value of Vp for low Vact. Just like the linear gain
can be obtained from a Taylor expansion of g0 ln(N/N0) at N ≈N0, this exponential
can be approximated to obtain eq. (2.17) from eq. (2.24) when the argument of the
exponential is very low, i.e. Γ ug g0 τp ≫1. Here, assuming a photon lifetime invariant
of Vact, the exponential explodes at small Vact due to the small Γ. In this case, the linear
gain approximation breaks down. Using g0 = 2000 cm−1 a group index of ng = 3.5 [8]
and assuming a mode at telecom wavelength λc = 1550 nm, the term becomes:
Γ ug g0 τp = Γ Q g0 λc
2 π ng
≈Γ Q · 0.0141 ≈Γ Q/70
(2.25)
And thereby, the assumption at which the approximation of linear gain applies may
be formulated approximately as Γ Q ≫70. As it will turn out, this condition applies
to some but not all of the cavities that we will attempt to fabricate.
A few examples of the calculated threshold power as a function of the active region
volume are shown in figure 2.2. They are estimated using Γ- and Q-factors, calcu-
lated numerically for different cavity designs. We will discuss numerical simulations in
greater detail in sections 2.5 and in chapter 5, where the figures are repeated.
Figure 2.2(b) suggests that assuming logarithmic gain, a minimum of Pth may be found
by altering Vact for very small nanometre-scale sizes. The linear gain approximation
appears to break down at lower Vact by suggesting that, depending on the cavity design,
the threshold may be lowered by reducing Vact, without exploding at low Vact.
12
==PAGE:19==
Chapter 2. Theoretical concepts
(a)
(b)
Figure 2.2: Optical threshold pump power as a function of the BH side length. The
values are calculated from parameters extracted from simulations using the cavity
design dimensions. Figure (a) shows the result for the model based on linear gain,
while (b) shows the result for the model based on logarithmic gain.
As the exponential in eq.
(2.24) explodes at low Γ, it seems that the lowering of
the threshold power by lowering Vact only applies when the light inside the cavity is
sufficiently confined to the small active region. Fabrication of lasers with ultra-low
thresholds, therefore, appears to require very small active regions and cavity designs
that confine light to comparatively small mode volumes.
We will discuss photonic
crystal and EDC nanocavities in sections 2.2 and 2.3, and we will discuss quantum
well buried heterostructures which can be used as nano-scale active regions in section
2.4.
2.1.2
Modelling a laser’s output using the rate equations
The output of a laser can be determined from the photon number inside the cavity and
the mirror losses.
Pmirror = ℏω 1
τp
αm
αm + ⟨αi⟩Np Vp
(2.26)
Here, αm and ⟨αi⟩are the rates of mirror loss and internal cavity losses, respectively,
meaning that 1
τp
αm
αm+⟨αi⟩= ηm/τp represents the rate of losses through the mirrors where
13
==PAGE:20==
Chapter 2. Theoretical concepts
ηm is introduced to denote the ratio of mirror losses to total losses. The photon energy
is given by ℏω where ω is the frequency of the cavity mode.
Using the assumption of linear gain, g(N) = gN(N −N0), the rate equations - eqs.
(2.1) - can be solved explicitly for the photon density. No assumptions are here made
about β. For the full derivation, see appendix A. The solution is:
Np =
1
2 ug gN τc
h
Γ ug gN (Rpump τc + N0(β −1)) τp −1
+
q
(Γ ug gN (Rpump τc + N0(β −1)) τp −1)2 + 4 Γ ug gN β τc τp Rpump
i
(2.27)
In addition to ηm, an output coupling efficiency must also be taken into account when
modelling the output that we will measure from our cavities. Such modelling will be
discussed in section 6.4 and, for the purposes of fitting, the efficiencies are combined
into a single efficiency ηout, which will be used as a fitting parameter. We thus have
the following model:
Pout = ℏω ηout Vact
2 τc
1
Γ ug gN τp
h
Γ ug gN τp (Rpump τc + N0(β −1)) −1
+
q
(Γ ug gN τp (Rpump τc + N0(β −1)) −1)2 + 4 Γ ug gN τp β τc Rpump
i
(2.28)
Here, the mode volume has been inserted as Vp = Vact/Γ, where the active region
volume is taken from the region’s geometry as determined with scanning electron mi-
croscopy (SEM), and the confinement factor is found through simulations.
The solution has been rearranged to illustrate a particular detail about this result:
The photon lifetime τp, the confinement factor Γ, the group velocity ug, and the gain
coefficient gN invariably appear together as a product, Γ ug gN τp. The group velocity
and the gain coefficient are material parameters, taken from the literature [8], but the
other two terms, Γ and τp are, in principle, unknown for a given cavity, and eq. (2.28)
suggests that they cannot be determined individually from a characteristic of input
pump power vs. output measured power. Only their product can be found in this
way. It should, theoretically, be possible to estimate one of the two parameters, given
prior knowledge of the other parameter. However, other complications may arise as
well. To best illustrate this, solutions to eq. (2.28) are shown in figure 2.3 for a se-
lection of parameters. Note that the powers are plotted in dBm, i.e. a logarithmic scale.
14
==PAGE:21==
Chapter 2. Theoretical concepts
(a) Q = 60, 000
(b) β = 0.01
Figure 2.3: The output power in eq. (2.28) for a constant set of parameters, except
with (a) varying β and (b) varying Q. For the values of Q = ωc τp, telecom wavelength
was used, i.e. ωc = 2π/1550 nm.
The Q- and β-factors are arbitrarily chosen for illustration purposes. The other pa-
rameters are taken from data fitting, which we will describe in section 6.4. In figure
2.3(a), the effect of varying β is shown. When it is low, the kink threshold is clearly
visible. As β increases, the output below threshold does as well, while the output
above threshold appears unaffected by the increase in contribution from spontaneous
emission, which is significantly lower than the contribution from stimulated emission
far above threshold. In the limit of β →1, a threshold is no longer seen. Increasing the
quality factor, as shown in figure 2.3(b), appears to visibly lower the threshold pump
power as was suggested by eq. (2.28).
The model described by eq. (2.28) will be used later on in this report for fitting of
input-output curves, so just as τp and Γ cannot be determined individually from fit-
ting alone, it should be pointed out that the behaviour when changing β may further
make accurate modelling difficult. Looking at figure 2.3, an increase in β will raise
Pout below threshold, and an increase in τ (or Γ) will lower Pout below the threshold,
simultaneously moving the threshold to lower pump power. This means that a given
curve can be described by more than one combination of τp Γ and β, unless the cou-
pling efficiencies ηo and ηout are assumed to be known, since changing said efficiencies
displaces the entire curve (along the horizontal axis Pin in the case of ηo and along
the vertical axis Pout in the case of ηout) and can thus displace the threshold without
15
==PAGE:22==
Chapter 2. Theoretical concepts
altering the output below and above that threshold.
The behaviour well above threshold can be approximated from eq. (2.28) by letting
the Rpump-dependent terms dominate, generally, and doing the same for the R2
pump-
dependent term inside the square root. Doing so gives:
Pout = ℏω ηout Vact
2 τc
1
Γ ug gN τp
h
Γ ug gN τp Rpump τc +
q
(Γ ug gN τp Rpump τc)2 i
(2.29)
= ℏω ηout Vact
2 τc
1
Γ ug gN τp
· 2 Γ ug gN τp Rpump τc
(2.30)
= ℏω ηout Vact Rpump
(2.31)
The same applies when β →1. In this limit, we have:
Pout = ℏω ηout Vact
2 τc
1
Γ ug gN τp
h
Γ ug gN τp Rpump τc −1
+
q
(Γ ug gN τp Rpump τc −1)2 + 4 Γ ug gN τp τc Rpump
i
(2.32)
The square root may be rewritten as:
Pout = ℏω ηout Vact
2 τc
1
Γ ug gN τp
h
Γ ug gN τp Rpump τc −1 +
q
(Γ ug gN τp Rpump τc + 1)2 i
(2.33)
Doing so yields the same result as before:
Pout = ℏω ηout Vact
2 τc
1
Γ ug gN τp
2 · Γ ug gN τp Rpump τc
(2.34)
= ℏω ηout Vact Rpump
(2.35)
This means that all carriers pumped into the system go directly to the lasing mode
above threshold.
The situation for β = 1 is identical to the situation well above
threshold. In these cases, the spatial and temporal confinement should cease to influ-
ence Pmeas. It should be noted, however, that the linear gain model, as described in
the previous section, only works at N ≈N0, a condition that a sufficiently high Rpump
may break.
16
==PAGE:23==
Chapter 2. Theoretical concepts
2.2
Photonic crystals nanocavities
Photonic crystals (PhC) [6, 17] are structures with a periodic change in the refractive
index. The periodic change in the refractive index gives the structures a so-called pho-
tonic bandgap. Light of a frequency within the photonic band gap is not allowed inside
the structure and will thus be reflected. To illustrate the working principle of photonic
crystals, we can consider a simple model - a multilayered stack, also known as a 1D
photonic crystal. Here a stack of layers with alternating refractive indices is made. An
example of such a structure can be seen in figure 2.4. Light propagating to the crystal
at normal incidence will partially be reflected at each interface of different layers, and
this will create an interference pattern leading to certain frequencies not being allowed
to propagate through the stack in the y-direction.
Figure 2.4: An illustration of a 1D photonic crystal with alternating layers of two
different dielectrics, one having a refractive index of n1 and the other a refractive index
of n2. The crystal has the lattice constant a.
The concept of photonic crystal as also be extended to 2D and 3D. In real space,
the photonic crystal can be described by the lattice constant a, and, for 2D and 3D
structures, by lattice vectors. In this project, we work with 2D photonic crystal slabs.
Here a triangular pattern of holes is etched into a membrane of dielectric material to
create an in-plane photonic bandgap, while light is confined inside the membrane in
the out-of-plane direction by total internal reflection (TIR).
PhCs can be described as an optical analogue to solid-state crystals, and, likewise, the
pattern results in a photonic band structure [6, 17]. One such - for a photonic crystal
slab - is shown in figure 2.5(b). The structure gives rise to different bands for TE- and
TM-like modes. As with the electronic band structure, a bandgap may also occur in
17
==PAGE:24==
Chapter 2. Theoretical concepts
(a)
(b)
Figure 2.5: (a): A SEM image of photonic crystal with an embedded L7 line defect
cavity, fabricated as part of this project, and (b): A sketch of a photonic band diagram
of a 2D photonic crystal slab, taken from Ref. [6]
the photonic band structure. This is highlighted in the figure as the ”TE-like gap”.
The wave function of a photon whose frequency is in the bandgap will rapidly die out
in the structure, thereby preventing the propagation of light into the structure. As
the bandgap in figure 2.5(b) only exists for TE-like modes (TM-modes are allowed in
the structure for all frequencies outside the light cone), only TE-modes in the bandgap
are prevented from propagating in the structure. For a different structure, such as a
rod slab, rather than the hole slab shown here, the situation may be reversed, and a
TM-like gap will arise instead of a TE-like gap. Tweaking of the structure can facili-
tate a ”complete” bandgap, i.e. a range in of frequencies where neither TE- or TM-like
modes are allowed [6]. The light cone in figure 2.5(b) describes the waves which are not
totally internally reflected in the slab. This occurs when the ratio between the normal
and in-plane wave vector components kz/k|| becomes sufficiently large, whereby the
propagation angle exceeds the critical angle required for total internal reflection.
By introducing a defect into a photonic crystal, a PhC cavity can be made. In this
way, we use the photonic bandgap of the structure to confine light in the in-plane
dimensions, while light is confined in the membrane in the out-of-plane direction by
total internal reflection. Several types of defects can be introduced. One method is to
remove one or more holes in the centre of the photonic crystal. This is referred to as a
line defect cavity or LN cavity, where N denotes the number of holes removed [6]. An
example of an L7 cavity is shown in figure 2.5(a). Another method is by moving four
(or more) holes around a point without removing any holes. The defect introduced by
18
==PAGE:25==
Chapter 2. Theoretical concepts
moving the holes away from it is known as an H0 cavity. Finally, one can also remove
one hole and shift the nearest-neighbour holes around this point away from the centre
to create an H1 cavity [6].
2.3
The EDC cavity
While photonic crystals have successfully been used in combination with BHs to fab-
ricate nanolasers with ultra-low thresholds [8], they are limited in their spatial con-
finement of light [10].
Another approach can therefore be used to increase spatial
confinement. Such designs are referred to as extreme dielectric confinement (EDC)
cavities. They work by significantly enhancing the electric field at a single point -
the cavity centre - thereby lowering the denominator in eq. (2.4), increasing the con-
finement in turn.
For instance, the so-called slot- and anti-slot effects [13] can be
utilised to enhance the field in a (vacuum) slot between two pieces of dielectric or in
an anti-slot, i.e. a dielectric bridge across the slot. Upon repeated application (and
thereby progressively enhanced field intensity), these are taken to a limit in the form
of bowtie structures with or without a bridge (depending on whether the last iteration
was a slot or an anti-slot), which, likewise, enhance the field in their centre. In the
case of a bridge, this can work to significantly enhance light-matter interactions in the
centre of said bridge. Generally speaking, the smallest minimum feature size in such
a bowtie structure will result in the greatest field intensity enhancement [11, 13, 14].
The temporal confinement i.e. the quality factor of such structures, is relatively low,
however, but can be enhanced by placing the bowtie structure inside a photonic crystal
or Bragg grating.
Bowtie structures, however, are generally relatively fabrication-sensitive due to their
small feature size with bridges typically down to a few nm in width [11]. This leads to
designs in which topology optimisation (TO) [10] is utilised, as fabrication constraints
such as minimum feature size an be included. In this method, one picks a starting
guess, e.g. a photonic crystal nanocavity, then iteratively simulates its performance
numerically and alters it using a gradient-based optimisation scheme. The structures
we will attempt to fabricate are the five structures in figure 2.6 below, taken from Ref.
[10].
In Ref. [10], the gradient-based ”Method of Moving Asymptotes” (MMA) is used as
19
==PAGE:26==
Chapter 2. Theoretical concepts
Figure 2.6: The five EDC cavity designs we consider in this project, from (a) to (e),
we refer to them as TO1 through TO5, respectively. The light in such a structure is
strongly confined to the 80 nm wide gap in the centre of each structure, between two
holes. The cavities are intended to be suspended in air, wherefore 80 nm beams are
attached at either end of the structures. The designs are taken from Ref. [10].
the optimisation scheme. As opposed to shape optimisation of PhC structures, the
whole PhC region is designable in TO - save for an 80 nm region in the centre. Addi-
tionally, in the design of the aforementioned five structures in figure 2.6, a smoothened
Heaviside projection filtering is applied to the optimisation, meaning that features be-
low a specific size (74 nm) are disallowed in the TO structure. Ref. [10] report mode
volumes on the order of V ∼0.8 (λ/(2n))3 for all five structures. The mode volume
normalisation used here comes from the diffraction limit. In a box of homogeneous
dielectric material, light can not be confined below the limit of (λ/(2n))3 [11]. An
analogy is to think of a box of plane mirrors. Here, light can not be confined below
half a wavelength in all three dimensions. Even though the diffraction limit does not
apply to nanocavities with varying dielectric constants, it is still used as a normalisa-
tion.
Omitting the usage of the projection filtering technique allows for structures with V
down to ∼0.002 (λ/(2n))3 at the cost of making the structure highly fabrication-
sensitive and possibly impossible to fabricate [10]. It should be noted that the mode
volume, used for the figure of merit FoM = Q/V , in Ref. [10] is defined differently
20
==PAGE:27==
Chapter 2. Theoretical concepts
than the mode volume we introduced in section 2.1. In Ref. [10], it is the integral of
the electric field energy density (i.e. the total field energy), normalised to field energy
at the point of the emitter.
V =
R
V ε(r) |E(r)|2 d3r
εact |E(re)|2
(2.36)
In our case, it is V = Vact/Γ or, taking eq. (2.4) into account, the total field energy
normalised to the average energy density in the active region - a more relevant figure
for our structures with embedded BHs. This could mean that the structures are not
fully optimised for our usage.
2.4
Buried heterostructures
So far, we have discussed the spatial confinement of light to small volumes, such as
V < (λ/(2n))3, for the purpose of achieving good confinement in a small active region.
However, as with the cavities themselves, the design of such a small active region is
nontrivial. A method that has been used to achieve lasing in nanocavities is to fab-
ricate an active region in the form of a quantum well spanning a full substrate [18].
This approach is limited by the carrier diffusion out of the region of interest in the
centre of a given cavity - effectively, an additional loss mechanism. They can still be
utilised for optically pumped devices, so long as said diffusion is sufficiently low [19].
This leads to the fabrication of buried heterostructures (BH) which consist of small
single- or multi-quantum well structures which are finite in the in-plane dimensions
[20]. The usage of BHs has been shown to reduce the operating powers of distributed
feedback (DFB), and distributed Bragg reflector (DBR) semiconductor lasers by an
order of magnitude [20].
Experiments with semiconductor nanolasers using embedded BHs suggest a strong de-
pendence of the operating power on the dimensions of the BH, see figure 2.7, which
is taken from Ref. [9]. The result seems to suggest a linear-like relation between the
threshold (threshold current, in their study, rather than optical pump power) and the
size of the BH down to a volume of 400 nm×440 nm×8 nm. An L7 cavity was used for
the experiment. The measurements were performed on devices of the same L7 cavity
design, and only the length of the BH (in the direction of the line defect) was changed.
The BHs used had lengths of integer multiples of the lattice constant aPhC = 440 nm.
We attempt, in this project, to find out whether a further decrease in BH volume can
21
==PAGE:28==
Chapter 2. Theoretical concepts
Figure 2.7: Threshold current vs. BH length in an electrically pumped L7 PhC cavity
- taken from Ref. [9]. InGaAsP is used as the active region, which has a volume of
400 nm × 8 nm × n aPhC where n ∈N and the lattice constant is aPhC = 440 nm. A
minimum threshold of Ith = 730 nA is achieved with n = 1.
still be beneficial.
2.5
The finite difference time domain method
While a selection of EDC structures [10] to be fabricated was already chosen prior
to the beginning of this project, PhC nanocavities for usage in comparison were not,
and thus needed to be designed. Additionally, for both types of structures, we were
interested in a variety of theoretical values relevant to the structures’ ability to lase,
given the presence of a BH, for the sake of comparing experimental results to theory.
These include, for example, the values for the fundamental mode Q-factor, the con-
finement factor, Γ, and the resonance wavelength λ. These theoretical values were also
the figures of merit, with which the PhCs should be optimised. These attributes are,
however, not trivial to calculate directly from the geometry of a cavity design, nor
can a geometry simply be calculated from its desired parameters. Instead, both for
extraction of FoMs from a structure and for optimisation of structures, taking these
into account, we utilise the finite difference time domain [21] (FDTD) method.
22
==PAGE:29==
Chapter 2. Theoretical concepts
FDTD is a method of numerically solving Maxwell’s equations in arbitrarily complex
geometries in order to extract the evolution of electric and magnetic fields inside [21],
from which e.g. the above figures of merit can be determined. A few assumptions or
limitations are present when performing an FDTD simulation. One of these is that
time and space are treated as sets of discrete values rather than as continuous ranges
for usage in an exact solution. This allows iterative, numerical simulations, wherein
for each time step, Maxwell’s equations are solved in every ”voxel”, i.e. every point
on the spatial grid. The assumption lies in choosing values for the grid spacing and
the time steps, which yield results as close as possible to the true values. These are
determined using convergence testing [22, 23] in which an arbitrary simulation is run
repeatedly with decreasing step sizes until its results converge. Another assumption
is made up of the boundary conditions in the simulation. Assumptions of symmetry
or anti-symmetry may be used in all three dimensions around the origin, which is
placed at the centre of the cavity. Appropriate symmetries for a fundamental mode
may here be chosen, effectively reducing the simulation region to 1/8 of the original
size and significantly lowering computational costs. Likewise, assumptions must be
made regarding the outer boundaries, i.e. the region around the cavity, both regarding
the position of the boundary (e.g. whether or not to include the silicon below the
membranised device in the simulation) and how to treat these boundaries. For our
simulations, we choose perfectly matched layer [24] (PML) boundaries, which are op-
timised to minimise reflections. A number of PML configurations exist, but we most
frequently use Lumerical’s inbuilt ”Stabilised” PML profile [24].
23
==PAGE:30==
3
Initial characterisation of buried
heterostructures
Before any fabrication of lasers could be performed, the buried heterostructure arrays
to be used as active material had to be characterised. The arrays were fabricated in
January 2022 by Aurimas Sakanas.
The fabrication of the BHs starts with a 2-inch InP substrate wafer. On top of this,
a 100 nm InGaAs sacrificial layer is first grown using metalorganic vapour-phase epi-
taxy (MOVPE). This sacrificial layer will later be used to remove the InP substrate.
The active region is then grown using MOVPE. The active region consists of 5 layers.
The top and the bottom layers are made of InAlAs; in-between these layers, two 10
nm AlInGaAs barrier layers are grown, and in the centre, an 8 nm active InGaAsP
quantum well is grown. On top of the active region, passive InP is then deposited.
The InP substrate is then flipped upside down and bonded to another substrate of 1.2
µm SiO2 on top of silicon. Alignment marks have already been defined in the silicon
substrate prior to the bonding using UV-lithography.
Using the InGaAs sacrificial
layer, the original InP substrate is removed, and the BHs can be defined in an electron
beam lithography (EBL) process. The remaining active material is etched away using
dry etching, and the etched material can be replaced with passive InP in a regrowth
process. In our case, the regrown sample was split into four quarters, each containing
a number of 60 by 60 BH arrays. The design side length of the square BHs varied
from 5 nm to 300 nm in increments of 5 nm per column. Thus 60 identical lines of
BH structures were present for each array. More details about the fabrication of the
buried heterostructures can be found in Ref. [20].
The characterisation of the buried heterostructures can be split into two parts: a
physical characterisation and an optical characterisation. The physical characterisation
was based on SEM images of the developed HSQ e-beam resist, in which the BHs were
24
==PAGE:31==
Chapter 3. Initial characterisation of buried heterostructures
defined before etching. The optical characterisation used infrared light to pump the
structures in order for us to analyse the outgoing light - also infrared, but shifted to a
longer wavelength - from the structures using an infrared camera to find the size of the
smallest light-emitting buried heterostructure as well as to ensure that most structures
were working. After that, an attempt was made to extract the gain spectrum of the
BHs using a photoluminescence setup with a spectrometer to analyse the spectrum of
the outgoing light.
3.1
Physical characterisation of the BHs
3.1.1
Method
SEM images of the developed HSQ resist after E-beam lithography to define the buried
heterostructures were provided by Aurimas Sakanas. All images were captured using
the In-lens detector of the SEM Supra 3 (a Zeiss Supra 40VP) provided in the DTU
nanolab cleanroom. Images were captured for BH design side lengths of 100 nm to 300
nm in increments of 25 nm. For each size, two different BHs were analysed. From the
resulting images, measurements of the height and width of the BHs were carried out for
all the imaged devices. Using the measured side lengths, a linear fit could be made to
extract a relation between the fabricated size and the design size. This relation could
later be used in FDTD simulations to generate a best guess of the real size of the BH
structures.
3.1.2
Results and discussion
Four examples of SEM images of BH devices for design side lengths of 300 nm, 175
nm, 110 nm, and 100 nm, respectively, can be seen in figure 3.1.
The first thing that can be observed from the images is a change in shape with the
side length of the resist after development. The structures were originally designed to
be squares. As it can be seen, a rectangular shape is obtained in the case for the BH
with a design side length of 300 nm, but for structures with a design size of 175 nm
down to 110 nm we seem to get a more circular result. Below 110 nm there does not
seem to be a well-defined shape of the BH.
25
==PAGE:32==
Chapter 3. Initial characterisation of buried heterostructures
(a) Design side length - 300 nm
(b) Design side length - 175 nm
(c) Design side length - 110 nm
(d) Design side length - 100 nm
Figure 3.1: SEM images of the developed negative HSQ photoresist used to define the
buried heterostructures. The images were captured using an In-lens detector. The
depicted structures have design side lengths of (a) 300 nm, (b) 175 nm, (c) 110 nm and
(d) 100 nm, respectively. Images were captured by Aurimas Sakanas.
There could be several reasons for the observed result, but the rounded corners could
indicate that the lithography process was not sufficiently optimised, as it should be
possible to make lines down to 10 nm with HSQ [25]. Thus we should not have sig-
nificant rounding of corners at a design size of 175 nm. A dose of 4000 mJ/cm2 with
proximity error correction (PEC) was used to expose the pattern, but as the modula-
tion table of the PEC is not known, it is very hard to say if too high of a dose is the
cause of the problem. This could be examined by performing a dose test wherein the
same pattern would be exposed using different doses to check if a more optimal dose
could have been used.
Another reason could be that the HSQ resist used for the specific process was expired.
Over time, the chemical composition of the resist might change, and this could affect
the result of the lithography process.
26
==PAGE:33==
Chapter 3. Initial characterisation of buried heterostructures
Another important parameter that can be extracted from the SEM images is the size
of the developed BH patterns. When performing e-beam lithography, there will always
be a deviation in feature sizes in the developed pattern compared to in the mask.
The results of measurements of the in-plane dimensions, referred to here as height and
width, for all HSQ definitions of BHs can be seen in figure 3.2 along with a linear fit
of the data.
Figure 3.2: The measured lithography side length plotted as a function of the design
side length. The height and width are measured for two devices at each size in the plot
denoted group 1 and group 2. Furthermore a linear fit of the data is included.
From the plot, we extract the following relation between the design side length and the
measured side length after the lithography process, not taking shape into consideration:
llithography = 1.09 · ldesign −50.52 nm
(3.1)
The fit has r2 = 0.995 and is used later in the project to extract best guesses on the real
sizes of the buried heterostructures. There are still several uncertainties. One thing
that should be mentioned that the fact that the size of the final buried heterostructures
does, to some extent, depend on the dry etching process that follows the lithography.
27
==PAGE:34==
Chapter 3. Initial characterisation of buried heterostructures
Unfortunately, no images were captured between this step and the regrowth, but as
the dry etching is expected to be highly anisotropic, the BH sizes are expected to be
comparable to the size measured on the developed e-beam resist.
3.2
Optical characterisation of the BHs
3.2.1
Imaging emission from buried heterostructures
First, we needed to ensure that the fabricated buried heterostructures were working
and would emit light in the infrared spectrum when pumped with light at a higher
frequency. Another useful parameter to extract was the smallest working size of BH.
3.2.1.1
Method
To capture infrared images of the light from the BHs, the setup given in figure 3.3
was used. The setup works by using 900 nm CW laser as a source to excite a given
BH. The laser light first goes through a polarisation controller and a collimator. It
is then focused onto the sample using an objective that can be changed between x20,
x50 and x100. A BH of interest is then located and excited using the pump. Some
of the emitted light is then collected using the same objective. To filter away the re-
flected light from the pump, a 1180 nm dichroic mirror is used along with a long-pass
filter at the same wavelength. The light that passes through the mirror and the fil-
ter is then collected using an infrared camera to capture the emission from only the BH.
Figure 3.3: The setup, which was used for BH characterisation.
28
==PAGE:35==
Chapter 3. Initial characterisation of buried heterostructures
The setup could also be used with a broadband infrared LED lamp as the pump source
to give overview images of the emission from the buried heterostructures. This source
was too weak to observe emission from structures with a design side length below 175
nm, however. Smaller BHs were successfully located with the 900 nm CW laser.
Two BH arrays of 60×60 devices were analysed. These were not the exact BH structures
to be used for the fabrication later, but they were cleaved from a chip of the same
fabrication batch and thus believed to be similar to the ones used for the fabrication.
Several overview pictures were first captured to ensure most devices were working. This
was done using the infrared lamp. The setup was then switched to the 900 nm laser,
and devices with decreasing sizes were characterised until the smallest light-emitting
BH was found.
3.2.1.2
Results and discussion
Examples of pictures of the BH emission captured using the 900 nm laser can be found
in figure 3.4. As shown in the figure, we not only observe emission from buried het-
erostructures, themselves but also the four marks around the BH. These are numbers
to indicate the size of said BH, but as they are defined in the same EBL step as the
BH, they emit light as well.
(a) Design side length - 295
nm
(b) Design side length - 85 nm
Figure 3.4: Images of the infrared light emission from the buried heterostructures with
design side lengths of (a) 300 nm and (b) 80 nm. The BHs are the points in the centres
of the two images. The four marks around each BH are numbers to indicate the size
of said BH, but they produce light as well, as they are defined along with the BHs in
the EBL mask.
29
==PAGE:36==
Chapter 3. Initial characterisation of buried heterostructures
From figure 3.6(b) it is clearly visible that we get emission from a device with a design
side length of 85 nm. This was the smallest observable working BH. All of the devices
with a design side length of 90 nm were measured to emit light, while only a fraction
of 85 nm devices emitted light.
As discussed in the physical characterisation of the buried heterostructures, it should
again be noted that the shape and size of the BHs below a design side length of 110
nm can not really be trusted due to apparent limitations of the EBL process.
3.2.2
Measuring photoluminescence spectrum
Another relevant feature to extract for the buried heterostructures when using them
as the active material in a nanolaser is the photoluminescence which can be used to
extract information about the gain spectrum of the BHs [5].
3.2.2.1
Method
The setup used for measuring the photoluminescence spectrum of the buried het-
erostructures is illustrated on figure 3.5.
Figure 3.5: The setup used for measuring the photoluminescence spectrum of the buried
heterostructures
30
==PAGE:37==
Chapter 3. Initial characterisation of buried heterostructures
A pulsed 638.5 nm pulsed laser source was used to pump the structures. The incoming
pump power was controlled by two variable attenuators and monitored using a photo-
diode coupled to the setup via a beam splitter.
After the beam splitter, the pump light was focused down onto the sample to excite
a given BH of interest. The structure in question could be located by coupling in a
camera combined with a white LED using a foldable mirror. The sample was moved
around, and the pump beam spot was aligned with a specific buried heterostructure
using the movable stage. After coupling in the pump to the setup, some of the light
from the active structure could be collected by the same objective used to pump it.
Reflections of the pump and luminescence from the substrate will also be collected.
Before entering the infrared spectrometer, a long pass filter was used to filter away
the pump, and an achromatic doublet focused the light of different wavelengths to the
same point in space.
The spectrometer was then set to the specific wavelength range of interest, and the
signal from the structure was optimised by moving piezoelectric motors of the stage in
all three dimensions, one at a time, until the maximum number of counts was achieved.
The photoluminescence spectrum could then be collected and saved at different pump
powers. A background signal with no light coupled into the setup was also collected to
be subtracted from the measurements.
3.2.2.2
Results and discussion
Photoluminescence spectra captured at different pump powers can be seen on figure
3.6(a). Unfortunately, the light is not expected to have been emitted from the BH
region of interest but instead from the four markers around the BH. As stated before,
the markers, indicating the size of the structures, are defined in the same EBL process
as the main BH and are thus also active regions. The pumping beam spot was initially
aligned with the centre of the four marks and the BH of interest, but after optimisation
of the number of counts per unit time in the spectrometer, by moving the piezoelectric
motors of the stage, the beam spot consistently ended up in the centre of one of the
marks. A yellow circle on figure 3.6(b) indicates the position of the pump beam spot
after optimisation, and the position of the BH is indicated by the arrow. Several devices
were measured with the same result.
31
==PAGE:38==
Chapter 3. Initial characterisation of buried heterostructures
(a)
(b)
Figure 3.6: (a) shows the measured photoluminescence spectrum at different pump
powers, and (b) indicates, roughly, the position of the BH intended to be measured.
The yellow circle indicates the position of the beam used for pumping after optimisation
of the output.
Even though the photoluminescence spectrum measured is not believed to be from one
of the nano-BHs, it can still, to some extent, give an indication of the position and
shape of the spectrum from the real BH, as the structures should of the same material,
only with different dimensions.
As can be seen in figure 3.6(a), the spectrum covers a wide wavelength range at larger
pump powers from below 1300 nm up to 1600 nm. A blue shift of the peak in the gain
spectrum is observed with increasing pump power. This could be explained by the
band filling effect [26] - only a limited number of carriers can occupy the low-energy
states of the energy bands, and thus with an increase in the carrier concentration, the
number of carriers with high energy increases, shifting the peak of the emission spec-
trum to shorter wavelengths. Due to the higher density of high-energy states than of
low-energy states, the gain is increased as well, moving the photoluminescence peak to
higher emission rates as well [26].
It seems that the maxima at higher pump powers are closer to 1450 nm than the desired
1550 nm. Still, it overlaps with the fundamental modes of our cavities, designed to
have resonance wavelengths around 1550 nm.
32
==PAGE:39==
4
Fabrication
Fabrication of InP-based membrane nanolasers with nano-BH is a novel process that
is a result of a number of optimisations and involves several steps. One of the most
crucial steps is the electron beam lithography (EBL) process; here, the nanocavity
designs are defined and aligned with the already fabricated BHs. As will be discussed
later, a misalignment of ∼100 nm can easily result in non-functioning devices.
We will, in this chapter, go through the process flow for the fabrication of the nanolasers,
starting with the InP-on-SiOx chip with the buried heterostructures inside it. We will
then go through some of the challenges that were encountered in the process and how
we have tackled them. Finally, we will present and discuss the results of the physical
characterisation of the fabricated devices.
4.1
Method
The fabrication process started with a chip consisting of a silicon substrate with ∼1200
nm SiO2 above it and ∼250 nm InP on top. The InP film included a number of buried
heterostructures, vertically centred in the film, and laid out in arrays of 60 × 60 BHs.
The BHs varied in design size from 5 nm to 300 nm, increasing with column number in
steps of 5 nm. The 60 rows in each array were identical to one another, each containing
60 BHs of varying size. Five of these 60×60 arrays are present on the chip. The active
region of each BH consisted of a single quantum well (1QW) InGaAsP layer with a
thickness of 8 nm.
4.1.1
Design of the mask used for electron beam lithography
Before any cleanroom processing was performed, the EBL mask for the nanocavities
had to be created. This was done using the GDSpy package in python. As the buried
heterostructures were laid out in arrays with 60 identical rows, 60 different cavity
33
==PAGE:40==
Chapter 4. Fabrication
designs could be selected for each array. Five different arrays of BHs were available
on the chip used. An overview of the chip is shown in figure 4.1. In addition to the
nanolasers with BHs inside, a single passive 60×60 array of nanocavities would also be
fabricated - its position is indicated as AP in figure 4.1. The A’s followed by numbers
indicate the five BH arrays.
Figure 4.1: A sketch of the chip used for fabrication, illustrating the placements of our
five active arrays and one passive array. Each of the active arrays is indicated with an
A followed by a number, while the position where a passive array is placed is indicated
as AP.
Several considerations had to be made when selecting the different cavity designs and
laying them out on the mask. The main focus of this project was the topologically
optimised EDC cavities. 5 of these with varying sizes and shapes of the Bragg grating
were available. An overview of the cavities, along with some relevant parameters can
be seen in figure 4.2.
The size of the gap in the middle of the structure, where the active material will be
placed, is designed to be 80 nm in width. From FDTD simulations and earlier fabri-
cation tests, it has been found that small changes in the size of the gap and the rest
of the structure can affect the resonance wavelength and the Q-factor of the cavity
severely. When defining a structure using e-beam lithography, there will always be a
so-called fabrication factor. This means that when a design is exposed and developed,
it will have different dimensions than the mask. The size and shape of the fabricated
structures can also be influenced by the etching, performed after development when
transferring the design to layers below. Earlier fabrication processing in the research
group, using a substrate with quantum well everywhere, suggested that the gap of
34
==PAGE:41==
Chapter 4. Fabrication
Figure 4.2:
The different topologically optimised EDC cavities fabricated in this
project.
All values for the quality factor and resonance of the fundamental mode
are extracted using FDTD simulations where the structure is etched into a 245 nm
thick InP membrane with the effective refractive index neff = 3.17.
fabricated TO devices would be around 12-13 nm smaller than the design value in the
mask. To compensate for this, it was decided to shrink each of the structures on the
mask with values from 10 nm to 14 nm in increments of 1 nm. An example of a shrunk
pattern in a mask is illustrated in figure 4.3. Altering the shape and size of a pattern
for the purpose of compensating for proximity effects is referred to as shape correction
[27]. In this report, we usually refer to the degree of shape correction on a device by
the distance by which it was shrunk. As opposed to a fabrication factor, which usually
refers to the ratio between the size of a fabricated feature and its size in the mask,
the shape correction we perform consists of an offset by a single constant distance for
the boundaries of every feature in a mask which does not correspond to stretching or
compressing the entire pattern. In total, the inclusion of five different TO cavities,
each in five different sizes - i.e. values by which they are shrunk - takes up a total of
25 of the available rows for a single 60 × 60 BH array.
35
==PAGE:42==
Chapter 4. Fabrication
Figure 4.3: The centre of a TO cavity as taken directly from Ref. [10] (black) and
our shape corrected mask pattern (red). The red pattern is shrinked by 10 nm with
respect to the original, black, pattern, meaning that every feature (hole) is reduced by
that size in all directions.
This left us with plenty of space to include photonic crystal cavity designs. Here it was
decided to use H0 cavities, H1 cavities and L7 cavities. H0 cavities at the time seemed
to be a good candidate for comparing with TO cavities, as they have the smallest
mode volume of the photonic crystal cavities. Unfortunately, the confinement factor
for a small BH in the centre of such a cavity is not optimal, as the electric field has a
node in the centre, which will also be discussed further later on. 3 different designs of
H0 cavities were chosen. They are summarised in figure 4.4. Their respective design
parameters can be found in appendix E.
Figure 4.4: The three H0 cavity designs.
The H03 and the H04 cavities were optimised such that the quality factor Q, their
resonance λ0, and their footprint would be comparable to those of the TO3 and TO4
cavities. The H04HQ design is based on the H03 cavity, but its quality factor has been
36
==PAGE:43==
Chapter 4. Fabrication
Figure 4.5: Illustrations of the L7 and the H1 cavities. Q-factors and resonance wave-
lengths have been extracted by using FDTD simulations with a InP membrane of 245
nm.
optimised by adding some mirror holes. The Q-factor and wavelength were optimised
for a sample with quantum well everywhere, modelled using an effective refractive in-
dex neff = 3.2 for the entire substrate. As we use neff = 3.17 for our passive InP,
the values vary slightly from the TO cavities but are still comparable. When laid out
on the mask, each design was again shrunk from 10 nm to 14 nm in increments of 1 nm.
H1 and L7 cavities were optimised using FDTD simulations to have the highest pos-
sible quality factor with a resonance wavelength close to 1550 nm. Unfortunately, it
was discovered after fabrication that the optimisation had been performed for an InP
membrane thickness of 219 nm instead of the expected 245 nm.
The number of mirror holes was set to be to be 15 in both directions for both H1
and L7 cavities, i.e. nx = ny = 15, as a result of a convergence test performed in
an earlier project [23], see appendix C.1 in the reference. Note that the number of
mirror holes is defined as the number of holes on each of the four sides in the cav-
ity, not the total number of holes in a direction for the entire structure. This means
for an L7 cavity, which itself is 7 holes long and 1 hole wide, the footprint will be
∆x = (2 nx + 7) a = 37 a = 13.6, ∆y = (2 ny + 1) a = 31 a. As with the TO- and H0
cavities, these two cavity designs were included in the mask on five rows each, shrank
37
==PAGE:44==
Chapter 4. Fabrication
from 10 nm to 14 nm in increments of 1 nm. We thus have five PhC cavity designs,
each with five sizes, just as with the TO cavities, corresponding to another 25 rows.
Lastly, each TO cavity design is included in two additional rows where it is displaced
by 5 nm to the left and right, respectively. The displacement is in the direction of the
two holes on either side of the cavity centre. These displaced cavities are shrunk by
13 nm in the mask as this was the best possible guess as to what would give the right
dimension after the electron beam lithography process. This takes up the remaining
10 rows. This was only done with the TO cavities, as opposed to including the other
PhC cavities, since the gap between the two central holes is just 80 nm, a significantly
smaller distance than the cavity centres in all the remaining devices. In an H0 cavity,
the distance between the two holes nearest to the cavity centre is ∼400 nm - the
smallest after the TO cavities. The non-TO cavities should, thus, not be as sensitive,
with respect to alignment, as the TO cavities are.
To have enough identical devices to characterise later on in the project, it was decided
that three of the five buried heterostructure arrays would be used for the mask, we
have just described. Furthermore, an array of passive devices using this design was
laid out to be able to do quality factor measurements on the passive devices. The four
arrays used for the mask are the ones labelled AP, A 1.1, A 1.2, and A 2.1 in figure
4.1.
Earlier experimental characterisations of the BHs suggested that they could be mis-
aligned from the mask by up to around 50 nm. For this reason, it was decided to use
the last two arrays on TO3 and TO4 cavities, offset by 10 nm to 50 nm (in increments
of 10 nm) to the left and to the right. A shrinkage of 13 nm was used for these devices
once again. Arrays A 2.2 and A 3 in figure 4.1 were used for this mask. With the mask
design laid out, it was now possible to start the fabrication process in the cleanroom.
4.1.2
Cleanroom processing
A graphical overview of the fabrication process can be found in appendix B. First the
chip was cleaned in a beaker of acetone for 5 minutes, followed by a rinse with acetone
and isopropyl alcohol. It was then dried using a nitrogen gun.
95 nm of SiNx then had to be deposited on top of the chip using plasma enhanced
38
==PAGE:45==
Chapter 4. Fabrication
chemical vapour deposition (PECVD). The SiNx would later be used as a hard mask
for etching into InP. First, a Si test piece was loaded into the chamber. The recipe pa-
rameters are given in appendix C and the time was set to 9 minutes and 15 seconds. To
ensure a uniform film, a 2-minute nitrous oxide wafer cleaning step was introduced in
the PECVD recipe before deposition. After deposition, the uniformity was inspected
in the optical microscope and thickness was measured in ellipsometry.
The recipe
time could then be adjusted according to the deposition rate on the test chip. As a
thickness of 100.8 nm was measured, the time was adjusted to 8 minutes and 43 sec-
onds to achieve a thickness of 95 nm. The SiNx was then deposited on the InP sample,
and the film was inspected again in both the optical microscope and using ellipsometry.
Now 180 nm of CSAR 62 E-beam resist could be deposited on top of the chip using the
automatic S¨uss e-beam spin coater. As the machine can only handle full-size wafers,
the chip was bonded to a 4-inch silicon carrier wafer using crystal bond 555 on a 90
◦C hotplate. To ensure a uniform coating of the correct thickness, a dummy wafer
was spin-coated prior to the real chip and its resist thickness was measured using el-
lipsometry. After spin coating, the chip was demounted from the carrier with a pair of
tweezers after leaving it on a 150 ◦C hotplate for 3 minutes to ensure that the crystal
bond had melted.
The E-beam alignment and exposure could now be performed. The E-beam exposure
is one of the most crucial parts of this fabrication process. Several issues were encoun-
tered with this step and as a result, the exposure had to be redone several times during
the project. More details about these issues and how they were tackled can be found
in section 4.2. Each of 5 BH arrays was exposed using one of two different masks. The
alignment was performed by first finding two global alignment marks. These were then
used to find four local alignment marks for each of the 5 arrays. The local alignment
marks were located outside each corner of the local array. Furthermore, a passive array
of devices was exposed above the other devices. All of the arrays were exposed using
a dose of 260 µJ/cm2.
After exposure, the pattern was developed using an e-beam puddle developer (Laurell
EDC 650) with AR600-546 for 60 seconds. After development, the pattern was eval-
uated in an optical microscope, and it was ensured that no macroscopic misalignment
or stitching error could be observed.
39
==PAGE:46==
Chapter 4. Fabrication
The next step was to transfer the pattern to the SiNx hard mask. This could be done
using the III-V ICP. Before any processing was done, a 30-minute chamber cleaning
was performed. This was followed by a 15-minute preconditioning. The final SiNx etch
process could then be run on the InP chip with the time set to 2 minutes. The full
recipe parameters can be found in appendix C.
With the mask transferred to the SiNx, the CSAR layer could be removed. This was
done through submersion of the sample in a beaker of Microposit Remover 1165 in
an ultra-sonic bath. The sample remained submerged for 30 minutes while the bath
was being heated to 60 ◦C over the duration. After this, the sample was rinsed with
acetone and IPA and, again, dried with a nitrogen gun. To ensure the removal of as
much residue and scum as possible, a plasma ashing was then performed on the device.
This was done for 10 minutes, using a 300 mL/min O2 flow at a pressure of 0.8 mbar
and with a power of 400 W. Before moving further in the fabrication process, the chip
was inspected in SEM to make sure that the pattern transfer was successful and to
ensure that the result of the e-beam lithography process was as expected.
Thereafter, ICP was once again used, this time for transferring the pattern into the
InP layer. The chamber was first heated to 180 ◦C over a duration of 5 hours. There-
after, 30 minutes of chamber cleaning followed by 15 minutes of preconditioning were
performed once more. Thereafter, the chip was etched for 105 seconds using bromine
chemistry. The full recipe parameters are listed in appendix C.
With the pattern transferred into the InP, wherein our BHs were already present, the
last fabrication step was to remove the SiNx, as well as to membranise the devices. As
the membranisation consists of an etching into the SiO2 layer below the InP, the pro-
cess was done in a single step: The sample was submerged into buffered hydrofluoric
acid, BHF, for 15 minutes as an etch rate for SiO2 was expected to be 80 nm/min. Af-
ter the BHF dip, the chip was rinsed with DI water and blow-dried with a nitrogen gun.
The chip was now ready for physical characterisation in SEM to evaluate the fabrication
factor, followed by optical characterisation.
40
==PAGE:47==
Chapter 4. Fabrication
4.2
Fabrication difficulties
The above process flow was the result of several modifications due to technical difficul-
ties we encountered during the processing. In this section, we will describe said issues
and how they could be solved. We will first describe issues found with PECVD of SiNx.
Afterwards, we go into detail with some of the several problems encountered from the
electron beam lithography process and how solutions to these were attempted.
4.2.1
PECVD of silicon nitride : A non-uniform film
One of the first steps of the fabrication process was to deposit the SiNx hard mask,
used to transfer the cavity designs, onto the InP film. PECVD deposition of SiNx is a
standard process in the DTU Nanolab cleanroom, and quality control of the resulting
film from the machine is checked regularly by staff.
When the process was first attempted, both a silicon test piece and three passive InP
test chips were used in two separate processes prior to the deposition onto our active
sample. The thickness was measured using ellipsometry and the appearance of the film
was evaluated with optical microscopy. No irregularities or apparent problems were
found with any of the two test samples. Despite these precautions, the resulting film
after deposition on our sample looked very non-uniform. An image of the resulting
film can be seen in figure 4.6.
Figure 4.6: An image of the non-uniform SiNx film after deposition using PECVD.
41
==PAGE:48==
Chapter 4. Fabrication
There could be several reasons for the result observed. One could be the SiO2 carrier
used for the chip when loading it into the machine. Different carriers were used for
the test chips and the real chip. If the carrier used had not been cleaned well enough,
there might be contamination from the chamber or other samples left on the carrier
that could be transferred into the plasma of the PECVD process and thus might be-
come part of the deposited film.
To make sure this was not the source of the problem, the SiNx was removed from the
chip using a 2 min BHF dip, and the process was repeated using the carrier used for
the passive InP test chips. Unfortunately, the resulting film also turned out with the
same uneven result.
Again the SiNx was removed in a 2 min BHF dip. To ensure that the surface of the
chip was clean, it was rinsed in a bath of acetone for 5 minutes, followed by a rinse
in isopropyl alcohol. Furthermore, a 2-minute N2O wafer clean step was added to the
PECVD process. The process parameters are given in appendix C. Fortunately, this
solved the problem and a uniform film was deposited on the surface.
4.2.2
EBL: Stitching error, underexposure, and non-uniformity
Another more complex problem was encountered after the third attempt of EBL lithog-
raphy. After the exposure and development had been performed - and no macroscopic
problems were found with optical microscopy - pattern transfer via ICP was performed
onto the SiNx layer. However, upon closer analysis of the pattern, particularly in SEM,
multiple issues became apparent. These are shown in figure 4.7. The images show a
cavity whose two halves are severely misaligned and a cavity with some features (i.e.
holes) smaller than intended, with some holes not even present in the pattern at all.
The first of the two issues, shown in figure 4.7 (a) is, fortunately, somewhat easy to
identify and is referred to as a field stitching inaccuracy, and it has been shown [28]
to be on the order of nm on the e-beam writer that we used, a JEOL JBX-9500FSZ,
specifically: 2.2 ± 1.2 nm in x and 7.3 ± 2.2 nm in y. We measure inaccuracies on the
order of 100s of nm on our own sample, however. Stitching errors can occur when a
pattern, in this case, one 60×60 device array, is larger than the field size, 1 mm ×1 mm.
As the cavities are separated by 25 µm both in x and in y, the total array is greater
42
==PAGE:49==
Chapter 4. Fabrication
(a) A device, subject to a stitching error
(b) A device without extreme, visible flaws
(c) An randomly exposed device
Figure 4.7: Three TO4 structures in the SiNx layer, all resultant from the same fabri-
cation process attempt. In (a), a stitching error is shown as the border between two
fields goes through the middle of said device. (b) is included as a comparison for the
other two images, as it shows a device mostly without significant flaws. In (c), the
device is very visibly underexposed, which can be seen on the etched regions, which
are generally smaller and less well-defined than the features in (b). Rather critically,
the two holes in the middle are not even present in image (c).
43
==PAGE:50==
Chapter 4. Fabrication
than 1 mm in both dimensions, and the pattern is separated by the e-beam software
into four fields which are exposed individually. This inevitably leads to some degree
of misalignment which, nonetheless, should be much smaller than what we observe as
found in Ref. [28]. We speculate that it may have been caused by a charging issue as
this can, however rarely, occur when an electrode is improperly clamped to a sample
[18]. If this is the case, the charging effect is most clearly seen where the fields are
stitched together as, in this case, said fields should be systematically displaced relative
to one another.
The other issue we see - figure 4.7(c) - is the missing smaller feature sizes, which appear
to be a result of underexposure. This should not be an issue with dosage, however,
as the same dose has been successfully used prior. We do not know for certain that
the two issues are related, but they have only appeared together, and we, therefore,
speculate that charging may have both deflected our electron beam and, in other un-
known ways, affected it such that the achieved effective dose does not correspond to
the intended value, thereby causing underexposure in some places.
A third issue is the non-uniformity of the sample. Figures 4.7(b, c) show two devices
that should have been identical but appear to be subject to differing degrees of under-
and overexposure. A systematic error in exposure can, to some extent, be corrected for
by adjusting feature sizes in the mask to compensate. The corresponding shrinking of
features in the mask could merely have been adjusted to take this into account. The
situation is more severe when non-uniformity occurs. A few methods of lessening the
above issues are described in the following two sections.
4.2.3
New exposure with writing fields displaced
The first way of attempting to mitigate the above issues - at least the apparent charg-
ing issue - was to simply redo the experiment. Pattern transfer into InP was not done
for this process iteration. Instead, the SiNx hard mask was stripped in BHF, and the
entire fabrication process was repeated, starting from the PECVD. This was because
of the error generally not occurring for similar process flows within the research group,
but being known to (however rarely) do so [18], seemingly being caused by the earlier
mentioned improper clamping of the sample in the e-beam writer. The idea was to redo
the process in the hope that this was the case, whereafter other eventual alterations
44
==PAGE:51==
Chapter 4. Fabrication
to the process flow could be considered, if necessary. This attempt is the one that
was considered successful and thus was included in the sections on physical and optical
characterisation in this report.
One correction to the process was added, however. We have mentioned, in the previous
section, how the e-beam writer stitches 1 mm2 writing fields together when exposing.
We wished to avoid the possibility of a device being split in half, as shown in figure
4.7 (a). This required displacing the writing fields such that a border between these
would not go through any devices. One of our device arrays is shown in figure 4.8 with
the writing field pattern overlaid. Devices which coincide with the lines are exposed
on one side in one writing field and then on their other side later in another writing
field. This, in combination with the unusually high field stitching inaccuracy, causes
said devices to be broken, as shown in figure 4.7 (a).
Figure 4.8: A 60 × 60 device array in the mask with lines overlaid, displaying the four
fields into which the mask is separated.
The mask is split into fields, starting with a 1 mm2 square in the top left of the mask.
The top-left corner of this square is simply an alignment mark. In order to displace the
writing fields, a feature was added further away than the alignment mark, specifically,
a tiny square placed 1 mm to the left of and 1 mm above the centre of the device array.
This meant that when the fields were defined from the mask, the first field would have
its lower right corner exactly in the middle of the array. Thus, the field borders go in
between rows and columns of devices rather than directly through any features.
This correction should mean that the issue, shown in figure 4.7(a) will be averted.
45
==PAGE:52==
Chapter 4. Fabrication
However, while no individual devices would be split into potentially misaligned parts,
any - perhaps still present - stitching inaccuracy would still result in the devices be-
ing misaligned, compared to the already fabricated buried heterostructures. It is not
possible for us to analyse whether the devices are, in fact, misaligned, however.
4.2.4
Exposure of sample with Al on top of resist
A method of mitigating the issue of charging in EBL of a non-conducting sample is
to apply a thin conducting layer - such as metal - on top of the resist to assist in
charge evacuation [29, 30, 31]. Common, recommended practice in the DTU Nanolab
Cleanroom is to deposit ∼20 nm of thermally evaporated Al on top prior to exposure,
which can then be removed with AZ 726 MIF (a developer, consisting of an aqueous
solution of 2.38 % TMAH) after e-beam exposure and before development.
We evaporated 20 nm Al onto a second sample; another one of the four quarters of
the sample with InP regrown over BHs, as described in chapter 3. Removal of the Al
would be performed by a 60 s application of AZ 726 MIF with a puddle developer.
Prior to the processing of the actual sample, three dummy chips were prepared by spin
coating 180 nm CSAR onto Si and then evaporating Al on top of these. These were
then subject to 30 s, 60 s, and 120 s of AZ 726 MIF application in order to find an
appropriate application time that would remove the Al layer without any visible residue
and without damaging the CSAR below. Some residue, assumed to be Al, remained
on the sample with an application time of 30 s, but not for either of the other two.
This was checked in an optical microscope. No difference in the quality of the CSAR
could be seen between the 60 s and 120 s samples, but as 60 s was deemed sufficient
and no improvement was seen over this sample with 120 s, an application time of 60 s
was chosen.
4.3
Results and discussion
In this section, we will present and discuss the main results of the physical characteri-
sation of the fabricated devices. We will compare the results of the sample fabricated
using the conventional electron beam lithography process and the sample fabricated
with a 20 nm aluminium discharge layer to compensate for possible charging.
46
==PAGE:53==
Chapter 4. Fabrication
4.3.1
Physical characterisation
The thickness of the InP film was measured to the left of the fabricated arrays using
ellipsometry. The measured data can be seen in table 4.1.
InP thickness [nm]
MSE
Passive array
238.4
19.0
Array 1.1
239.5
15.8
Array 1.2
251.9
31.3
Table 4.1: Measurements of the InP film thickness of the chip used for fabrication of
laser cavities with Nano-BH.
From the measurements, a variation of the InP thickness of around 12 nm was observed
between array 1.1 and array 1.2. The placement of the arrays can be seen in figure
4.1. The variation in the thickness could be due to the epitaxial regrowth process of
the InP where it can be hard to control the exact thickness of the regrown film. From
earlier processing in the research group, the thickness varying was found to be between
235 nm and 250 nm, which seems to be in good agreement with what we observed.
To evaluate the result and uniformity of the fabricated arrays of cavities, SEM images
were captured of different devices from each array. Two examples of SEM images can
be seen in figure 4.9.
47
==PAGE:54==
Chapter 4. Fabrication
(a)
(b)
Figure 4.9: Examples of SEM images captured of two different devices from array 1.1.
(a) shows a TO4 cavity where the image was captured using the SE2 detector at an
acceleration voltage of 10 kV, thus some electrons penetrate the InP membrane and
membrenised area is visible. (b) shows a H04HQ image captured using the In-Lens
detector at an acceleration voltage of 2 kV.
The first thing that can be extracted from 4.9 (a) is the etch rate for SiO2 in BHF dip
can be estimated. The etch is isotropic, meaning that it has the same etch rate in all
directions. A length of the 1270 nm was measured, as the chip was submerged for 15
minutes. This corresponds to an etch rate of 84.5 nm/min, which is fairly close the
expected 80 nm/min.
As a measure of the fabricated size of the TO cavities, the gap between the two holes
in the centre of the cavity was used. This gap was designed to be 80 nm for all TO
cavities. An example of a measurement of a device can be seen in figure 4.10.
48
==PAGE:55==
Chapter 4. Fabrication
Figure 4.10: A measurement of a TO4 cavity. The zoomed image was captured with a
with of 1 µm corresponding to a pixel size of 0.98 nm.
TO3 cavities and TO4 cavities from all fabricated arrays on the standard chip and the
chip with aluminium were measured. All devices analysed in this test were created
with a mask shrunk 13 nm, corresponding to the best guess for the fabrication factor.
Each device was measured 5 times, and the average of the measurements was used. A
plot of the resulting gap size can be seen on figure 4.11 (a). Furthermore figure 4.11
(b) includes a plot of the calculated fabrication factor for the TO cavities. We have
defined the fabrication factor to be the shrunk design gap size of 106 nm divided by
the measured gap size.
(a)
(b)
Figure 4.11: The measured gap sizes of the TO cavites (a) and the fabrication factor
calculated from those measurements (b). The fabrication factor has been defined as
the mask gap size divided by the measured gap size.
49
==PAGE:56==
Chapter 4. Fabrication
The first thing that can be observed is that the fabricated gap sizes are lower than
the expected design size. This is the case for both of the fabricated chips. The 13
nm shrunk design gap size used on the mask was based on results for identical devices
created on a substrate with a buried quantum well everywhere. An EBL process is
very dependent on the substrate used, and changing the substrate without further op-
timisation of the process can lead to very different lithography results [29]. To mitigate
this issue, one could shrink the structure further when creating the mask for future
exposure or perform more optimisation on the electron beam process by dose testing
and optimisation prior to the exposure. This was unfortunately not an option in this
project due to the limited access to the e-beam writer.
The size of the gap for the chip with an aluminium charge dissipation layer is around
10-15 nm smaller than for the chip made without. The exposure dose and the substrate
were identical. A possible explanation could be that the aluminium layer scatters some
of the electrons when exposing the holes of the pattern, this could slow them down, and
thus they will interact more with the resist. In the end, this could lead to the exposed
areas becoming larger after development, as we use a positive tone resist. The effect
has been demonstrated in experiments in the literature [32]. Another more crucial
thing is the fact that we used an electron beam evaporator to deposit the aluminium
layer, this means that the sample will become more or less evenly exposed with elec-
trons and x-rays all over the resist. As a result, the resist will have a background dose
everywhere, making the dose clear smaller [33]. This makes the comparison of the
two samples extremely questionable. Instead, one should have used a thermal method
to deposit the charge dissipation layer (CDL). Comparisons in the literature [34] of
the effect of using e-beam evaporated CDLs and thermally evaporated CDLs show a
significant difference in the resulting structure when exposing identical patterns using
identical doses. It could have been interesting to repeat the exposure using a thermally
evaporated CDL, thus was unfortunately not done due to limited access due to time
constraints and limited access to the e-beam writer.
Measurements were also performed on photonic crystals. Here the radius of the holes
were measured for the various designs on each of the different arrays. The resulting
measured hole radii can be seen in figure 4.12 (a). Again all sizes were shrunk 13 nm
in the mask to compensate for the expected fabrication factor.
50
==PAGE:57==
Chapter 4. Fabrication
(a)
(b)
Figure 4.12: Measurements of the radius of photonic crystals of different designs (a)
and the fabrication factor (b). The fabrication factor is defined to the ratio measured
radius and radius of the mask.
Here the same trend is observed for the TO cavities. As we are analysing holes rather
than gaps, the size will be larger than the design size. For PhCs it again seems that
the sample exposed without a discharge layer is closer to the design size compared to
the one with a discharge layer.
The fabrication factor of the photonic crystals has also been calculated. Here it is de-
fined as the measured radius divided by the shrunk radius in the mask. The calculated
fabrication factor here is generally lower than for the TO cavities, which is mainly due
to the changed definition of the fabrication factor.
One thing that should be mentioned is the uncertainty of the manual measurement
of the SEM images. Even though each measurement was performed 5 times and the
average was calculated, there seems to be a variation of up to 3 nm on individual mea-
surements. This is most likely due to the limited resolution of the SEM images. The
images were captured with a width of 1 µm, and the resolution in the x-direction of
the image is 1024 pixels, which yields a pixel size of 0.97 nm; thus, a couple of pixels
can make quite a large difference in measurements.
51
==PAGE:58==
5
FDTD simulations and laser threshold
trends
Finite difference time domain (FDTD) simulations were used to extract several param-
eters for our laser cavity designs, including resonance wavelength, quality factor and
confinement factor. All of the simulations were performed using the software Lumerical
FDTD Solutions.
In this chapter, we will first go through how the simulations were set up and performed.
We will then present and discuss the results of resonance wavelengths and quality
factors for passive cavities. Following this, we will discuss how confinement factors
could be extracted as a function of the active material side length for different cavity
designs. Using the extracted confinement factor relations, trends of the threshold pump
power could then be calculated and discussed.
5.1
Method
5.1.1
Setting up the FDTD simulations
The simulation geometry consisted of a rectangular InP slab modelled with a refractive
index of neff = 3.17. Within the membrane, either a pattern of a TO cavity or a pho-
tonic crystal was placed. The etched part of a structure was modelled as air with n = 1.
TO cavities were imported using the EBL mask design, and the size could be shrunk
and expanded to match the fabricated size found in the physical characterisation of
the devices. For photonic crystals, a script was used to generate the holes. Holes were
added in a triangular pattern - with lattice vectors −→
a1 = (1, 0) a and −→
a2 =
 √
3
2 , 1
2

a.
With the lattice constant a and hole radius r given for the specific design. In the centre
of the pattern one or several holes could be removed to create a LN cavity and/or holes
could be shifted to create H0 or H1 cavities.
52
==PAGE:59==
Chapter 5. FDTD simulations and laser threshold trends
To excite the modes of the structure, a magnetic dipole source was used. This was
placed at a random point inside the cavity, i.e. not in a symmetry point. Placing
the dipole emitter in a point of symmetry could lead to some cavity modes not being
coupled to. Modes with zero intensity at the point of the emitter will not be excited.
Generally, zero intensity occurs at points of symmetry and thus, by placing the dipole
at a random position, we can negate the issue.
Three different mesh sizes were used for each simulation. Within and close to the cav-
ity, a mesh with steps of 5 nm was used in the x- and y-directions, while a 2 nm step
size was used in the z-direction. The outer region of the simulation was set to have
a non-uniform mesh defined by the Lumerical software. This is defined by a mesh-
accuracy parameter between 1 and 8. In our case, it was set to 4. This corresponds to
a mesh size of at least 4 points per wavelength, but according to the company devel-
oping the software, the algorithm that generates the mesh also takes specific materials
parameters and content of the simulation environment into account [35]. Between the
rough outer mesh and inner cavity mesh, a buffer mesh had to be placed. This was the
case since simulations with too steep a difference between mesh sizes have a tendency
to diverge [18]. The buffer mesh was typically set to a step size of 10 nm in all directions.
Symmetries along the x-, y- and z- directions were used, as this significantly reduced
the simulation time. Utilising symmetry will result in some modes not being allowed
in the simulation, as they might not fulfil the given symmetry conditions. As the main
focus of this project was on the fundamental mode, symmetries of said fundamental
mode could be used for the simulation.
A thickness of 233.5 nm was used for the InP membrane.
To ensure the validity of FDTD simulations, convergence testing with respect to the
mesh step size is often performed [22]. Due to time constraints, this was unfortunately
not performed as part of this project. Instead, we refer to our bachelor thesis, where
convergence testing on similar structures was performed and discussed in detail [23].
Here it was found that for simulations of photonic crystals, the quality factor and
resonance wavelength converged at a mesh step size of ∼35 nm in x and y [23]. This
test was performed with a uniform mesh throughout the entire simulation region. Here,
different mesh sizes were used in different parts of the simulations. Even though our
53
==PAGE:60==
Chapter 5. FDTD simulations and laser threshold trends
mesh steps in x, y and z were finer than 35 nm in the part of the simulation where
most of the field was located, it might have been coarser outside the fine mesh regions,
as the mesh there was defined by the software.
5.2
Results and discussion
5.2.1
Quality factor and resonance wavelength
The resonance wavelength and quality factor of the fundamental mode could be ex-
tracted from FDTD simulations of passive cavities, given the sizes of the fabricated
devices measured using scanning electron microscopy and a membrane thickness of
233.5 nm. This membrane thickness was used as the corresponding result for the fun-
damental mode resonance wavelength matched with measurements on passive cavities
given in optical characterisation when extracting quality factors.
The simulated wavelength and Q-factor are shown in table 5.1 along with values ex-
tracted using design dimensions and a membrane thickness of 245 nm.
Fabricated
device dimensions
Design
device dimensions
Cavity design
λc
Q-factor
λc
Q-factor
TO3
1497 nm
4955
1544 nm
4698
TO4
1487 nm
3833
1547 nm
10347
H04HQ
1512 nm
84523
1551 nm
111452
H1
1556 nm
6846
1592 nm
16066
L7
1559 nm
75215
1588 nm
70842
Table 5.1: The resonance wavelength and quality factor for the fundamental mode of
different cavity designs. The values were extracted using FDTD simulations. For the
design dimensions, a membrane thickness of 245 nm was used, while for the fabricated
devices, 233.5 nm was used.
As can be seen from the results, all resonance wavelengths for the fabricated devices
are shifted to lower values. This is in part due to the reduced membrane thickness but
also the fact that our fabricated photonic crystal patterns have larger hole radii while
TO cavities have smaller gaps (resultant of the larger holes on the sides of the gap)
compared to the design values.
54
==PAGE:61==
Chapter 5. FDTD simulations and laser threshold trends
The Q-factors are, in most cases, reduced due to fabrication error. This is especially
the case for the TO4 cavity, where the Q-factor is reduced by a factor of 2.7. This
supports the idea that the topologically optimised cavities are quite sensitive to fabri-
cation imperfections; still, we see that the Q-factor of the TO3 cavity actually slightly
increases with the reduced size of the gap and membrane.
5.2.2
Calculating the confinement factor
The confinement factor for different sizes of the active region was calculated for the
various cavity designs fabricated in this project. This was done using data from a 3D
electrical field monitor set to the fundamental mode wavelength in combination with a
refractive index monitor in the xy-plane. By using equation 2.4 and inserting ε = n2,
we get the following formula
Γ =
R
Vact n2
act |E(r)|2 d3r
R
Vsim n2(r) |E(r)|2 d3r
(5.1)
To calculate the confinement factor, a Matlab script was written. First, the electrical
field data from the simulations in all three dimensions was loaded into the script, along
with the xy-plane refractive index data extracted at z = 0. As the cavity designs are
invariant of z inside the InP membrane, the in-plane refractive index could just be
extended to match the thickness of the membrane and set to air (n = 1) above and
below the membrane.
The integral of the field energy over the full simulation region could then be computed
using numerical integration. Several side lengths of active regions were now selected.
For all of them, a height of 8 nm was selected in the z-direction corresponding to the
height of the quantum well layer of our devices. After the selection of a specific size,
the electrical field and the refractive index of this given region were extracted from the
full data set, and the field energy integral was computed. One thing to be aware of here
is that the active region of the EDC cavity might extend beyond the gap of the cavity.
An example can be seen in figure 6.2. To exclude this part from the calculation, the
electrical field in the region of the active material where n = 1 was set to zero when
calculating the integral over Vact. This was simply not done when the calculating the
integral over the full volume.
55
==PAGE:62==
Chapter 5. FDTD simulations and laser threshold trends
Finally, the confinement factor for a specific size of the active region could be calculated
as the ratio between the two field energy integrals. The resulting confinement factors
for the different cavity designs at different side lengths of the active BH region can be
found in figure 5.1.
Figure 5.1: Confinement factors calculated from FDTD simulations for different cavity
designs.
The TO cavities have the highest confinement factors of the analysed cavities. The
cavities are optimised with Q/V as the figure of merit, where the mode volume V is
defined for single dipole emitter. Even though the mode volume used does not apply
to our given geometry, as shown in the theory section, the limit of going to infinitely
small BH structures equals a mode volume defined in the same way as for the dipole
emitter. A plot of the normalised electrical field magnitude for a TO4 cavity be seen
in figure 5.2.
56
==PAGE:63==
Chapter 5. FDTD simulations and laser threshold trends
Figure 5.2: The in-plane normalised magnitude of the electrical field for a TO4 cavity.
Another thing that is observed for TO cavities is the very similar confinement factor,
this could be explained by the fact that the two designs are optimised with the same
constraints and parameters, except with a different footprint of the designable region.
A larger footprint allows for a larger Bragg grating to reduce the in-plane loss, thereby
increasing Q [10].
The confinement factor for H04HQ increases a lot with the BH side length, but for
low values of the BH size, the confinement factor has the lowest value of all analysed
cavities. This can be explained by looking at the field profile inside the cavity. Figure
5.3 shows the normalised magnitude of the electrical inside the H0 cavity.
Figure 5.3: The in-plane normalised magnitude of the electrical field for a H04HQ
cavity.
The field is extracted using the FDTD simulations. Here it is clear that the field has
a node (|E| = 0) in the centre of the cavity. Thus the confinement factor must be very
close to zero for small active region volumes placed in the centre of the cavity.
57
==PAGE:64==
Chapter 5. FDTD simulations and laser threshold trends
L7 and the H1 cavity should each have an anti-node of the electrical field inside the
centre of the respective cavity, corresponding to a local maximum in the electric field
magnitude. This means that there should still be some amount of confinement at low
values of BH side length. The electrical field magnitude of an L7 cavity is seen on
figure 5.4.
Figure 5.4: The in-plane normalised magnitude of the electrical field for an L7 cavity.
One parameter that was not taken into account for these calculations was the refractive
index of the BH. To investigate this, further simulations were made where BH region
was modelled with an effective refractive index. The in-plane BH dimensions were
varied with a side length corresponding to the fabricated samples, and the region was
extended through the whole membrane with an effective refractive index of neff = 3.31.
Details regarding these simulations can be seen in appendix F.
It was found that the change in refractive index will have an impact on the reso-
nance frequency and Q-factor of the cavities analysed, but the impact on the in-plane
confinement factor was found to be minimal. Thus, the increased accuracy in the con-
finement factor alone arguably does not make up for the increase in simulation time
which increased by a factor 26; since 26 different BH sizes were analysed.
58
==PAGE:65==
Chapter 5. FDTD simulations and laser threshold trends
5.3
Laser threshold trends
Parameters used
for Pth
ηo = 5 · 10−5
τr = 2 ns
τnr = 10 ns
τp = Q/ω
ng = 3.5
ug = c/ng
N0 = 8.7 · 1023 m−3
g0 = 2000 cm−1
λpump = 980 nm
Table 5.2: The constants used
for calculation of the threshold
power.
The optical pumping
efficiency has been extracted
from the fitting of rate equa-
tions, while the rest of the val-
ues have been taken from Ref.
[8].
From the extracted quality factor, the resonance wave-
length, and the relation between Vact and Γ, trends for
the laser threshold pump power as a function of the
BH side length can now be calculated. In the theory
section, two models were derived to describe the input
threshold power for optical pumping. One developed
on the basis of a linear gain model, and the other on
a logarithmic gain model. The two models are sum-
marised in eq. 5.2.
Pth =



ℏωp Vact
ηo τc
h
N0 +
1
Γ ug gN τp
i
,
Linear gain
ℏωpVact
ηo τc N0 exp

1
Γ ug g0 τp

,
Logarithmic gain
(5.2)
The photon lifetime was calculated from the resonance
wavelength and quality factor of each of the cavity
designs and was assumed to be constant for all BH side
lengths. The optical pumping efficiency was assumed
to be constant and was set to 5 · 10−5, this value was
extracted from fitting input-output curves of H04HQ
cavities in section 6.4.
The rest of the values were
taken from Ref. [8] where similar devices have been
analysed.
5.3.1
Design dimensions of the laser cavities
Using quality factors and resonance wavelengths for the design cavity dimensions given
in table 5.1, trends for the threshold power could now be calculated. Figure 5.5 shows
the optical threshold pump power as a function of the BH side length. Figure (a) uses
a linear gain model, while figure (b) is based on a logarithmic gain model.
59
==PAGE:66==
Chapter 5. FDTD simulations and laser threshold trends
(a)
(b)
Figure 5.5: Optical threshold pump power as a function of the BH side length. The
values are calculated from parameters extracted from simulations, using the intended
cavity dimensions. Figure (a) shows the result for the model based on linear gain and
(b) shows the result for the model based of logarithmic gain.
Starting with the results from using the linear gain model, it seems that for all cavity
designs, except H04HQ, we get the minimum threshold at the smallest size of the active
region. In the linear gain model, no gain saturation is included and thus, the gain will
always increase linearly with the carrier density.
This might not be a good approximation for our geometry as with small active regions,
we can get very large carrier densities, and for linear gain to be valid Nth needs to
be close to the transparency carrier density N0.
To check this, we can perform a
sample calculation. The threshold carrier density using a logarithmic gain model can
be calculated as
Nth = N0 · exp

1
Γugg0τp

(5.3)
Inserting the relevant values for TO4 with a BH size of 50 nm, we obtain:
Nth = N0 · exp

2π · 3.5
0.0018 · 10347 · 1547 nm · 2000 cm−1

= 45.5 N0
As Nth is quite a lot larger than N0 it seems that the assumption used for linear gain
does not hold well in this case. From this, it seems that the logarithmic gain model is
60
==PAGE:67==
Chapter 5. FDTD simulations and laser threshold trends
a better approximation of our given geometry at small side lengths of the BH region.
From here on, we will mainly focus on the model, based on logarithmic gain. When
looking at the exponential part of the threshold model based on logarithmic gain, the
main factor there is ΓQ.
The TO cavities turned out to have very similar confinement factors at the different
side lengths of the BH, but as can be seen in figure 5.5(b), their minima in the thresh-
old pump power differ significantly. This can mainly be explained by the difference
in the Q-factor. TO4 was found to have a Q-factor around 10400, while TO3 had
one at around 4600. From this, it seems that the quality factor is very important to
maintain a low threshold for the TO cavities, even though they have a relatively large
confinement factor for the sizes of the active regions studied.
L7 and H04HQ seem, from this model, to be good candidates for a low threshold power
even though the confinement factor of H0 approaches zero quite fast at low BH side
lengths. Again the large quality factor for both samples seems to be an important
factor, at least given our model.
Even though the H1 cavity had the largest confinement factor of the photonic crystals
below a BH size of 250 nm, it seems that the minimum threshold is also limited by the
Q-factor. In our case, a Q-factor of around 16000 was found. H1 cavity designs with
Q > 50,000 have been demonstrated in simulations, but they often rely on varying the
radius of the holes closest to the cavity [7]. This increases the fabrication complexity
and thus, sensitivity quite a lot and was therefore not included as part of this project.
One thing that should be mentioned is that the constants in table 5.2 used in the
model are not determined for our specific devices and could vary from the numbers
taken from Ref. [8]. There is also a large uncertainty on the optical pumping efficiency
as this has been extracted from the fitting of the input-output curves. Even though the
specific numbers for the minimum in threshold can not necessarily be trusted, trends
and comparisons can still be made.
5.3.2
Fabricated dimensions of the laser cavities
Using the parameters extracted from simulations with the fabricated cavity dimensions,
the threshold power as a function of BH side length could again be calculated. The
61
==PAGE:68==
Chapter 5. FDTD simulations and laser threshold trends
results are given in figure 5.6
(a)
(b)
Figure 5.6: Optical threshold pump power as a function of the BH side length. The
values are calculated from parameters extracted from simulations the fabricated cavity
dimensions. (a) show the result for the model based on linear gain, while (b) shows
the result for the model based of logarithmic gain
Comparing the resulting curves to the ones for the design dimensions, we can see
that the lowered quality factor for most of the samples has quite a large impact on
the minimum threshold pump power. This is especially the case for TO4 and H1.
The reduction in the quality factor moves the minimum threshold pump power to a
much larger value. From our model based on logarithmic gain, it seems that the best
candidates for lasing are L7 and H04HQ. Of the TO cavities, TO3 seems to be the best
candidate, although its minimum threshold power lies considerably higher.
62
==PAGE:69==
6
Optical characterisation
A variety of characterisation methods were used for the analysis of our fabricated
devices. We attempt to extract input-output curves (which we also refer to as L-L
curves) for a selection of devices in a systematic characterisation procedure whereby
we seek to extract relevant parameters such as threshold input powers, maximum
output power, β- and Γ-factors for individual devices as well as to see the effects on
such parameters by varying the design parameters of the devices, such as, chiefly,
the active region size. Sections 6.1 discuss the measurements of the aforementioned
input-output curves. In 6.2 we will extract the input-output curves using a different
method. However, to extract relevant device parameters, we need to fit our data to
theoretical predictions, which we will get into in section 6.4. In addition, a relatively
large number of parameters are of relevance to the shape of our L-L curves, making
fitting and interpretation difficult if we are not well informed of qualified initial guesses
to some of these parameters. Therefore, we characterise our passive devices, see section
6.3, in order to measure unloaded quality factors of our devices.
We also use the
finite difference time domain method (FDTD simulations, see chapter 5), to extract
theoretical confinement factors and quality factors of the devices. Using the results of
section 6.3 and chapter 5, we will perform fitting of the data in section 6.4, to a model
for the output power based on the conventional rate equations, as we have discussed
in the theory, section 2.1.2.
6.1
Laser setup - Measuring input-output curves of
fabricated devices
6.1.1
Method
The setup used to characterise the input-output curves of the fabricated devices is
sketched in figure 6.1. As an optical source to pump the active material of our devices,
63
==PAGE:70==
Chapter 6. Optical characterisation
a 980 nm laser diode was used. Pulsed pumping was achieved using a modulator set
to 10 % duty cycle, 1 A of current and 0.2 µs periodicity.
The intensity of the pump light going into the setup was varied by utilising a 980 nm
variable attenuator that could be electronically controlled. The attenuator was cou-
pled to a 99:1 coupler where 1% of the light was sent to an optical power meter to
monitor the intensity of incoming light to the setup. The remaining 99% was coupled
further into the setup through a polarisation controller to be able to control and op-
timise the polarisation of the pump light. After the polarisation controller, the light
was collimated through a free space coupler and sent into the microscope of the setup.
From here, it was focused unto the sample through a x50 objective to excite the active
material of a given nano-cavity.
Figure 6.1: The setup used for laser characterisation.
Some of the emitted light from the device was then collected by the same objective,
along with reflections of the pump. As we were only interested in the emitted light
from the laser cavity, the pump reflection light was filtered away using a dichroic mirror
at 1180 nm along with a long-pass filter at 1180 nm. Finally, the emitted light was sent
through a beam splitter and collected by an IR camera along with the optical spectrum
analyser (OSA) used to characterise the output spectrum. To minimise thermal effects,
64
==PAGE:71==
Chapter 6. Optical characterisation
the chip was placed unto a Peltier element cooling block set to a temperature of 20 ◦C.
Before measuring any input-output curves, that setup had to be calibrated by measur-
ing the maximum output from the objective lens. This was performed by first setting
the attenuator to 0 dB and using a portable optical power meter set to the wavelength
of λ = 980 nm. The power meter was placed below the lens approximately where
the chip would be placed and moved up and down to find the maximum obtainable
intensity of light. This value was noted down to enter into the software controlling the
setup to calibrate the input power of the input-output curves.
The chip was now mounted, and the cooling was turned on. After mounting the chip
on the stage, it was moved to a specific device. For navigation, the IR camera was
used in combination with an IR lamp that could be coupled into the microscope. The
device was then roughly aligned such that the laser spot would be in the centre of the
cavity.
The attenuator was then set to a relatively high value (∼30 dB) to ensure that the
device would not get burned when initially pumped. The pumping laser was then cou-
pled into the setup, and the fundamental mode of the laser cavity could be found on
the optical spectrum analyser. The signal from the cavity mode was then maximised
by moving the built-in piezo-electric motors of the stage in all three dimensions and
changing the polarisation of the pump light using the polarisation controller.
The software of the setup could now be used to collect the spectrum from the OSA
at various attenuator values corresponding to different pump powers. The maximum
intensity of the resonance in the OSA spectrum was collected and plotted in an input-
output curve for the given device. Several devices were now analysed, including sweeps
over the BH side length for various different cavity designs.
6.1.2
Results and discussion
In this section, we will present and discuss the results of the device characterisation
using the laser characterisation setup presented above. The section is divided such
that the results from each cavity design are presented and discussed separately.
65
==PAGE:72==
Chapter 6. Optical characterisation
6.1.2.1
TO cavities
Topology optimised cavities were the main focus of this project. In this section, we
show some of the results of their optical characterisation. As the size of the buried
heterostructure is discussed as a parameter regarding the devices, a TO cavity is shown
in figure 6.2 below in two instances where two different BHs of different sizes are super-
imposed. Figure 6.5(a) illustrates the largest of our available BHs with a side length of
276 nm. Figure 6.5(b) shows the smallest ”well-defined” BH which has a side length
of 66 nm. Images of the two superimposed BHs are given in figures 3.1(a, c) and have
design side lengths of 300 nm and 110 nm, respectively. The even smaller BH in figure
3.1(d) is omitted here as its shape is less well-defined than the 66 nm BH we include
here. Note that the 66 nm BH - due to fabrication imperfections - is circular as op-
posed to the square 276 nm BH. Note also that the 276 nm BH in figure 6.5(a) has a
significant overlap with the holes surrounding the gap in the cavity centre. This means
that parts of the BH are etched through, during the ICP process, and parts of it may
be exposed to air, possibly facilitating surface recombination [36]. This is, of course,
the case for all BHs with greater side length than the gap, which is expected to be
∼70 nm wide, meaning that very few BHs - such as the 66 nm one - can be expected
to not be exposed to air.
(a) TO cavity - 276 nm BH
(b) TO cavity - 66 nm BH
Figure 6.2: A SEM image of a TO3 cavity with a BH in each of two sizes overlaid.
An example of an L-L curve of a TO cavity its output spectra are shown in figure
6.3. The output spectra are measured at various peak pump powers. As a 10 % duty
cycle was used for input, the peak pump powers are 10 times higher than the average
powers, corresponding to 10 dBm higher.
66
==PAGE:73==
Chapter 6. Optical characterisation
(a) Output spectra, measured at different pump
powers
(b) L-L curve
Figure 6.3: The lineshape at different pump powers (a) of a TO4 cavity and its input-
output characteristic (b). The device measured had a BH size of 244 nm.
The L-L curve in figure 6.3 does not greatly resemble the S-curves, we discussed in
section 2.1.2. It shares some features, however, in that the slope increases at some
pump rate and then decreases at a higher pump rate. However, a background level in
the range [−86, −85] dBm was measured when using the setup, causing the curve to
be flat at lower pump values. It increases in slope as the signal exceeds the noise. At
higher pumps, the slope decreases once more and then becomes negative. The latter
is unexpected, under the assumption that the slope decrease corresponds to the right
side of an S-curve, as both sides should have a slope of 1. However, other effects than
laser threshold may be at play here.
The flattening - followed by the negative slope - of the output at higher input powers
was observed for most of our devices and may be caused by gain saturation [5] (in the
case of the flattening, specifically) and by thermal effects [37]. Thermal effects may
alter the device parameters, although the reasons for the behaviour in figure 6.3(b)
were not determined conclusively. It is expected, however, that a temperature increase
will result in an increase in the refractive index of the medium [37]. The sample stage
was cooled during the experiment, but some devices have been melted during runs of
this experiment at higher pump powers (peak pump > 20 dBm), so thermal effects
can not be ruled out. The vulnerability to thermal effects is expected to, in part, be
a result of the membranisation of the device, which diminishes the efficiency of the
67
==PAGE:74==
Chapter 6. Optical characterisation
transfer away from the cavity.
Looking purely at the output spectra in figure 6.3(a), the contrast between the peak
and the background does not appear to improve with increased pump power as evi-
denced by the increasing background, although this might have been expected [5]. The
curve for peak pump power Pin = 10.3 dBm, specifically, does appear lower on the
sides of the peak than the spectrum before it, i.e. Pin = 5.9 dBm, but its peak is lower
as well, as shown by the trend furthest to the right on figure 6.3(b). This suggests that
the device did not lase during the experiment.
A few other studies could have been performed as well, given the time and the equip-
ment. For instance, the coherence of the output light may be verified by measurements
of its g(2)(0) [16, 38]. Alternatively, a continuous wave laser may have been used as
it would not have the broadening effect of pulsed pumping [18]. This would allow for
more accurate determination of the linewidth, which is expected to decrease at the
onset of lasing and of the wavelength of the output which is expected to be blue shifted
with increasing pump power below threshold due to reduction of the refractive index
with increasing carrier density and then red shifted with increasing pump power above
threshold due to an increase in the refractive index of the cavity with temperature [37].
However, the usage of a CW laser would worsen the thermal effects which the pulsed
source was employed to mitigate, meaning that saturation and burning of the device
will be more likely.
The measurement whose results are shown in figure 6.3 was performed on more than
50 different EDC cavities of different design (TO1 through TO5), BH size, shrink value
and, in some cases, lateral offset with respect to the expected BH position (the devices
fabricated on arrays A 2.2 and A 3 in figure 4.1), and none showed clear signs of
lasing. As no thresholds could be found, comparisons hereof, or of certain other lasing
characteristics, were not performed.
68
==PAGE:75==
Chapter 6. Optical characterisation
Figure 6.4: The maximum output from a series of TO3 cavities (blue crosses) and
TO4 cavities (orange crosses) with varying BH size. Both are on array 1.1, see figure
4.1, and have mask designs shrunk with 14 nm relative to their original designs. They
have measured gap widths of ∼70 nm. The red line indicates the border where two
of the e-beam writing fields were stitched together, i.e. in between columns 30 and 31,
corresponding to design BH side lengths of 150 nm and 155 nm, respectively.
The results of a sweep over BH size for TO3 and TO4 cavities are summarised in
terms of their maximum output power in figure 6.4. The value of BH side length,
corresponding to the edge of the e-beam writing field, is included as the red line in the
plot. We have described, in chapter 4 on the fabrication process, some of the issues
that have come from this stitching line. Additionally, we describe some qualitative
results on whether EDC cavities, particularly in the proximity of the border between
writing fields, in appendix D. It appears not only that there are significant differences
in fabrication quality between different writing fields, but also that the devices closest
to the stitching line appear to be affected by the stitching. Figure 6.4 seems to suggest
that the max output decreases with decreasing BH size for BHs smaller than ∼150
nm side length, but we cannot state for certain that this is due to the BH size and not
a potential issue with the fabrication. It was generally not possible, using the current
setup, to couple light into (and out of) EDC cavities on the left side of the stitching
line, i.e. on the field with smaller BH sizes. This was not possible for any EDC cavities
on array 1.1, wherefore no points are included to the left of the stitching line. Note
that the max output also approaches the noise floor at approx. -86 dBm for smaller
BH sizes in figure 6.4.
69
==PAGE:76==
Chapter 6. Optical characterisation
The cavities in figure 6.4 are all shape corrected by a shrinking of 14 nm of their
mask patterns. As described in section 4.1.1, we have fabricated all designs with five
different values of shrinking, from 10 nm to 14 nm. As we experienced significantly
greater proximity error (∼18 nm) than expected (∼13) nm, the shrinking value of 14
nm is closest to the original design. It has a gap width of ∼70 nm, where the intended
value was 80 nm. It is possible that fabrication issues may be the reason for the lack
of lasing. Due to the disappointing results, we will go through further analyses of our
cavities in section 6.3, where we attempt to directly measure the quality factors of our
cavities. We have, likewise, discussed simulation results in terms of Q and Γ in chapter
5, where the fabricated devices are compared to the designs we intended to fabricate.
In both sections, we find worse parameters than were hoped for, suggesting once again,
that fabrication issues may be the reason for the non-lasing devices. Lastly, the TO3-
cavities appear to possess higher maximum output powers than the TO4 cavities in
figure 6.4, which may be unsurprising, assuming that lasing is not seen in any of said
cavities; below the threshold, Pout is expected to increase when Q is lowered, and it is
expected to be lower for TO3 than for TO4, which, in exchange has a greater footprint,
allowing for a larger Bragg grating to improve the temporal confinement. It should be
pointed out that a ∼20 % higher Q is actually measured for TO3 than for TO4 in
section 6.3, which was unexpected and somewhat contrary to the result in figure 6.4,
unless, either, the devices are in fact lasing, which did not appear to be the case, or
that simple measurement uncertainty is the reason.
6.1.2.2
H0 PhC cavities
Another cavity measured was the H0 cavity. Mainly, measurements were performed
on the design H04HQ, which from simulations, was shown to have a quality factor of
around 75000. Figure 6.5 shows an SEM image of the cavity with two different sizes
of BHs overlaid. Unlike the TO cavities which all have gaps on the order of ∼70 nm
in the middle, the H0 cavities have ∼400 nm in between the two holes closest to the
middle, i.e. the ones to the left and to the right in the figures, meaning that there is
enough space for even the 276 nm BH, shown in figure 6.5(a).
70
==PAGE:77==
Chapter 6. Optical characterisation
(a) H04HQ - 276 nm BH
(b) H04HQ - 66 nm BH
Figure 6.5: Illustration of how the BH is oriented inside the H0 cavity for a BH side
length of 276 nm and a BH side length of 66 nm.
The input-output curves were again measured for identical devices with different sizes
of the buried heterostructure. Figure 6.7 shows an example of (a) a series of spectra
recorded at different pump powers and (b) an input-output characteristic.
(a) Output spectra, measured at different pump
powers
(b) L-L curve
Figure 6.6: The lineshape at different pump powers (a) of a H04HQ cavity and its
input-output characteristic (b). As in the previous example (TO cavity), the measured
device had a BH size of 244 nm.
The spectra in figure 6.6(a) clearly do not resemble well-defined peaks. This can be
considered an indication of lasing [37], but it makes extraction of information about the
spectra somewhat difficult. Blue-shifting is, nonetheless, apparent in this case despite
71
==PAGE:78==
Chapter 6. Optical characterisation
the width of the peaks. The spectrum appears to be blue-shifted by less than 1 nm;
however, and subsequent red-shifting does not seem to occur. The LL-curve in figure
6.6(b) seems to suggest lasing; however, in resembling an S-curve; near-constant slopes
are found before and after the threshold, at which the curve is steeper. Strangely,
however, the slopes do not appear to be the same above and below the threshold. This
may be due to the influence of noise below the threshold.
Figure 6.7 shows a series of input-output curves of H04HQ cavities with varying BH
sizes. Some outliers appear, such as the curve for 95 nm BH, which crosses a number
of other L-L curves in the plot, but generally, the plots appear to yield higher output
powers with increasing BH size, and the inflection points, deemed to correspond to the
threshold pump powers, are further to the left for the plots with larger BHs.
Figure 6.7: Different input-output characteristics of a series of H04HQ cavities with
varying BH side length. The cavities are all on array 1.1, see figure 4.1.
The devices featured in figure 6.7 are placed on array 1.1 - A 1.1 in figure 4.1. As
we have described, regarding the physical characterisation of our sample - see section
4.3, specifically table 4.1 - there was some degree of non-uniformity on our sample; the
thickness of the InP membrane had been measured to be around ∼240 nm near A 1.1,
as opposed to around ∼252 nm near A 1.2. Figure 6.8 compares the threshold pump
powers of H04HQ cavities on these two different arrays, 1.1 and 1.2, and of different
BH sizes.
72
==PAGE:79==
Chapter 6. Optical characterisation
Figure 6.8: Threshold pump powers of H04HQ cavities of different BH side length
on array 1.1 (blue crosses) and array 1.2 (orange crosses). The red line indicates the
border between two EBL writing fields.
The threshold pump powers in figure 6.8 are extracted manually by comparing the
numerically calculated slopes of individual L-L curves, e.g. the ones in figure 6.7, and
taking the greatest slope, manually accounting for possible noise - some curves were,
for example comparatively noisy close to the noise floor at approximately -86 dBm,
wherefore purely automatic, numerical extraction of the inflection point was avoided.
Two example plots of slopes are given in figure 6.26, for reference. The issue is partly
caused by the logarithmic scale in which a small absolute deviation in Watts at low
output power can correspond to several dB differences. The inflection points are of
course only included for measurements where lasing appeared to have been achieved.
The two smallest BH sizes in figure 6.7 (side lengths 57 nm and 90 nm) are thus not
included in figure 6.8, but the outlier in the latter plot at 95 nm BH and ∼12 dBm
threshold corresponds to the yellow curve for 95 nm in figure 6.7.
The threshold appears, in figure 6.8, to decrease with increasing BH side length. Un-
like what we expected theoretically from the linear and logarithmic expressions of Pin,th
given by eqs. (2.17, 2.24), and illustrated in figures 5.5 and 5.6, we do not find any
apparent minimum value of the threshold power, which could have corresponded to an
optimal BH size.
Additionally, it is difficult to spot any difference in trends between the measurements
73
==PAGE:80==
Chapter 6. Optical characterisation
on the two arrays, i.e. the blue and orange cross in figure 6.8. To the right of the field
stitch, there appear to be more outliers in the measurements on A 1.2 than on A 1.1,
and A 1.1, in turn, yields some significantly higher threshold pump powers than A 1.2
to the left of the stitching line, but a systematic difference in trends is not apparent,
despite the ellipsometry measurements which suggested a difference of perhaps more
than 10 nm in the membrane thickness of the two arrays. A difference was, however,
found in wavelength, as discussed in chapter 5. We have generally assumed a gain
coefficient invariant of wavelength, but when considering the measured gain spectrum
in figure 3.6(a), it would appear that a difference in λ might affect the gain and thus
the threshold.
Unlike with TO cavities, it was frequently possible to couple light out of cavities on
the EBL writing field with smaller BHs. In the above figures, a few devices close to the
line but on the small-BH side have been included, but as can be noted from figure 6.7,
it does not appear that lasing could be achieved for H04HQ cavities with BHs smaller
than 95 nm. Once again, referring to the qualitative measurements of devices close
to the stitching line, described in appendix D, it cannot be ruled out that fabrication
errors may have affected the devices closest to the stitching line, but the theoretically
calculated threshold pump power values, illustrated in, e.g. figure 5.6(b), suggest that
the threshold should rapidly increase for BH side lengths smaller than ∼175 nm where
a minimum was expected. As stated above, no minimum Pin,th was found, but the
rapid increase for small BH size does correspond to theory.
Again, further investigations of the devices using a continuous wave laser source may
have aided in estimating whether (and when) the threshold was achieved, and unlike
for TO cavities, the usage of a CW source is not expected to cause issues due to
thermal effects to the same extent as can be expected for TO cavities. TO cavities are
suspended in the air by bridges on opposite sides of the square cavity, while photonic
crystal cavities - although they are also membranised - are not suspended in the same
way. The photonic crystal pattern is simply etched into the InP slab without any gaps
on the sides. This was shown in figures 4.2,4.4, which illustrate the TO and H0 mask
designs. This should improve heat transfer away from the cavity, and, likewise, no
H0 cavities were burnt during experiments with higher pump powers. However, a CW
laser was not used, as the H0 cavities, as opposed to TO cavities, were not the main
focus of this project.
74
==PAGE:81==
Chapter 6. Optical characterisation
6.1.2.3
L7 PhC cavities
L7 cavities were measured as well. They are expected to have the second-highest qual-
ity factor after H04HQ, on the order of Q ≈75, 000. As before, the cavity is illustrated
in figure 6.9, in which the smallest and largest BHs are overlaid.
(a) L7 - 276 nm BH
(b) L7 - 66 nm BH
Figure 6.9: A SEM image of an L7 cavity with a BH in each of two sizes overlaid.
The cavity is the largest among the designs we have fabricated. As with H0, we do
not expect to etch through the BH unless it is severely misaligned - even more so in
this case - unlike with the TO cavities, where it is nearly an inevitability. Results of a
single device are given in figure 6.10.
75
==PAGE:82==
Chapter 6. Optical characterisation
(a) Output spectra, measured at different pump
powers
(b) L-L curve
Figure 6.10: The lineshape at different pump powers (a) of an L7 cavity and its input-
output characteristic (b). The device had a BH with side length 248 nm.
The device whose L-L characteristic is shown in figure 6.10 corresponds to, simultane-
ously, the lowest threshold input power and the highest maximum output power among
this particular BH size sweep - the full sweep is shown in figure 6.11. It might thus
be not only the best example but also a bit of an outlier. It is possible that this is
caused, in part, by fabrication uncertainty working in the device’s favour. It has a peak
wavelength of ∼1573 nm, approximately 2 nm shorter than the typical value found for
this cavity design with other BH sizes. It is a minor deviation, but it may not be the
only deviation on the device, and the different wavelength may itself affect the gain,
which could have improved the cavity. As shown in figure 3.6(a), 1573 nm is on the
edge of the gain spectrum at high wavelength, i.e. low energy. The reliability of the
data in figure 3.6(a) is not certain, however, and it is hard to say whether a noticeable
improvement of the device could come from the wavelength shift alone.
76
==PAGE:83==
Chapter 6. Optical characterisation
Figure 6.11
As earlier mentioned, the 248 nm BH appears both as the highest of the curves in figure
6.11 and as the one with the lowest threshold. Other than with this specific example,
trends are best summarised in figures 6.12 and 6.13 which show the threshold powers
and max output powers of the L7 cavities, respectively.
Figure 6.12: Estimated threshold pump powers of different L7 cavities on array 1.1
The threshold has a minimum value, estimated at a BH side length of 248 nm, and
the slope appears relatively sharp on both sides - the threshold increases from -5 dBm
to 0 dBm at 50 nm smaller BH and increases up to nearly 5 dBm at 270 nm BH side
77
==PAGE:84==
Chapter 6. Optical characterisation
length. Our model in figure 5.6(b) once again suggested that there should indeed be a
minimum value in Pth, only at a side length of ∼120 nm, which is significantly smaller
than any L7 device we have managed to achieve lasing on. Side lengths of 139 nm and
161 nm were shown in figure 6.11 - they lie far below most of the other curves in output
power and do not show indications of lasing. We see a sharp increase in threshold power
as early as when the BH side length decreases to under 200 nm - although, in isolation,
the three points at the smallest BH size do not seem to suggest a rapid increase. If the
third value from the left (∼195 nm) were not taken into account, a possible outlier,
there may have been a trend. In addition to finding a very different ”optimum” BH
size (in terms of minimising Pth) than predicted, said predictions once again show a
much flatter BH size vs. threshold characteristic to the right of the minimum (∼2
dBm higher Pth at 270 nm BH than at the minimum at 120 nm) than here, where the
threshold at 270 nm is nearly 10 dBm higher than at the minimum despite being much
closer to said minimum in BH size.
Figure 6.13: Maximum output power of L7 cavities on arrays 1.1 (blue) and 1.2 (or-
ange). Note that the membrane was ∼10 nm thicker close to A 1.2 than close to A
1.1, according to our ellipsometry results.
Figure 6.13 shows the maximum output powers of the aforementioned cavities, which
were all on array 1.1 on our chip (see figure 4.1), along with results on a different array
(A 1.2). Ellipsometry results, given in table 4.1, show that the membrane appears
∼10 nm thicker closer to the edge. Simulations confirm that this increases the mode
wavelength , and measurements also find significantly higher λ on A 1.2 than on A
78
==PAGE:85==
Chapter 6. Optical characterisation
1.1, see figure 6.14. The devices on A 1.2 did not lase, and the wavelength may be
the reason. As discussed earlier, the wavelength for L7 is already on the edge of the
gain spectrum and the increase in membrane thickness may have thus reduced the gain
significantly. This was not an issue we encountered with H04HQ cavities, possibly due
to their already shorter wavelength.
Figure 6.14: The wavelengths of L7 cavities on arrays 1.1 (blue) and 1.2 (orange)
Figure 6.14 shows the wavelengths of L7 cavities on the two different arrays. The or-
ange crosses correspond to array 1.2, which has higher membrane thickness and do not
lase wherefore not many spectra were recorded on L7 cavities on A 1.2. Note that the
highest wavelength found on A 1.1, 1580 nm for 193 nm BH, was found on a device in
the near proximity of a bonding defect, believed to be a possible reason for the outlier.
Generally, the wavelength appears to be highly dependent on the array, presumably
because of the membrane thickness difference, which, in turn, prevents devices on A
1.2 from lasing as their wavelength is seemingly outside the gain spectrum, according
to the result from earlier, in figure 3.6(a).
The max output peaks where the threshold power is at a minimum. This is, perhaps,
not too surprising, as an earlier threshold allows a device to rapidly grow in output
power for longer until saturation effects begin to affect the curve significantly. The
model for the output power, eq. (2.28) and its approximation at high pump rates, eq.
(2.31) suggest that Pout should converge to a value, invariant of Pth, well above the
threshold, which is not the case here, but we cannot necessarily say that any curves
79
==PAGE:86==
Chapter 6. Optical characterisation
here go ”well” above the threshold. Additionally, eq. (2.28) assumes linear gain, i.e.
N close to N0 which breaks down when saturation occurs.
6.1.2.4
H1 Phc Cavities
As a final example, we have recorded some spectra of H1 cavities. Lasing was not
achieved on these, and they were not considered a major focus of this project, unlike
TO cavities, and we thus opt to be brief. Once again, output spectra of an H1 cavity
are given in figure 6.15 along with the corresponding L-L curve. The device has a BH
of side length of 276 nm - the largest BH available to us at the beginning of this project.
(a) Output spectra, measured at different pump
powers
(b) L-L curve
Figure 6.15: The lineshape at different pump powers (a) of a H1 cavity and its input-
output characteristic (b). The device measured had a BH size of 276 nm.
Two modes are present in figure 6.15(a), quite close to one another. This could be
a problem for achieving lasing as carriers will contribute to this other mode, at least
lowering β for the fundamental mode.
The L-L curve in figure 6.15(b) does not seem to suggest lasing, having a near-constant
slope from -20 to +20 dBm input power and reaching only -76 dBm at the highest in-
put - as opposed to the values for other PhC cavities, H04HQ and L7, which both
reached ∼−45 dBm when lasing. Even the TO cavities, which were not believed to
lase, achieved ∼−75 dBm. The spectra appear to blue-shift and then red-shift at
80
==PAGE:87==
Chapter 6. Optical characterisation
higher pump powers, however - a characteristic expected of lasers.
We expected from our model for the threshold, eq. (2.24) - especially after taking the
results of fabrication into account and when using the logarithmic gain model - that H1
cavities would be the ”worst” candidates for this project, in that they were predicted
to have the highest Pth for all available BH sizes. The results arguably correspond well
with this prediction, except for the fact that the plot of the model in figure 5.6(b) ac-
tually suggests that the device should lase under certain circumstances. The minimum
Pth in said figure is for the largest BH of 276 nm side length, which corresponds to the
example given in figure 6.15 above.
As the results here are generally doubtful - high wavelength, low output, no lasing
achieved on the attempted devices, etc. - we will not continue to discuss these H1
cavities.
6.2
Photoluminescence setup - Better noise floor
and the gain spectrum
One challenge with using the laser setup for characterisation was that light emission at
an intensity below 85 dBm could not be measured. Thus it would be hard to conclude
if the S-shaped curve came from lasing or the large noise level. To measure the emission
from our device at low pump powers and verify s-curve characteristic, another setup
had to be used.
6.2.1
Method
The photoluminescence setup used to get better energy resolution of the input-output
curve at low pump powers is illustrated in figure 6.16. A 638.5 nm pulsed laser source
was used as the pump source in the setup. The modulator of the source was set to
an average power of 2.40 mW at a repetition rate of 40 MHz. The intensity of the
incoming pump light could be controlled by two manually changeable attenuators. To
monitor the power of the incoming light, a photodetector coupled to the setup via a
beam splitter was used. The remaining part of the light was focused down on the
sample through a x50 objective.
81
==PAGE:88==
Chapter 6. Optical characterisation
Part of the incoming light excited the active region of the laser cavity, and a fraction of
the light emitted from the device, along with reflections of the pump, would be collected
by the objective. From here, the collected light would be sent back through the same
path to the beam splitter. Here the reflected part of the light was sent through first
a long-pass filter, filtering away the pump reflections and an achromatic doublet was
used to focus different wavelengths to the same point. Finally, the light would enter
the infrared spectrometer.
Figure 6.16: The photo luminescence setup used for further laser characterisation.
Navigation of the sample to find an area of interest was performed with the pump light
blocked. A foldable mirror could be inserted into the setup, and using a white LED
combined with a camera, the sample could be imaged. By moving the stage, a cavity
of interest could roughly be aligned with the position of the pump laser spot indicated
on the screen beforehand.
Once the cavity was aligned with the pump laser spot, the foldable mirror could be
removed from the setup. The input power of the light was then set to a relatively
low value (∼-30 dBm), and the pump light was coupled into the system. Now the
spectrometer could be set to the wavelength range of interest, and the fundamental
mode of the laser cavity was located. The number of counts on the detector was then
82
==PAGE:89==
Chapter 6. Optical characterisation
optimised by moving the stage using the built-in piezomotors of the stage.
To capture the input-output characteristic of a device, the pump power was set manu-
ally for each point using the attenuators, and a spectrum was collected. One important
note was that the detector of the spectrometer would become saturated at 60000 counts,
and thus the integration time of the detector had to be lowered in case the light output
approached this limit. Each time a new integration time was used, the background
spectrum had to be collected with the light from the setup blocked. The background
had to be subtracted from the collected data to ensure only the output of the setup
was included in the measurement. As the attenuators and the integration time had to
be manually updated each time a new data point would be captured, the measurement
of an input-output characteristic for a single device could easily take over 1 hour. Thus
only a limited number of devices could be analysed using this method.
6.2.2
Results and discussion
The emission spectrum at different pump power, as well as an input-output character-
istic for an H04HQ device with a hole radius of 136 nm and a 221 nm BH, is shown on
figure 6.17.
(a) Output spectra at different pump powers
(b) L-L curve
Figure 6.17: Measurements of a H04HQ cavity. Figure (a) shows the measured spec-
trum at different pump powers converted to from counts to a logarithmic dBm scale,
while figure (b) is the measured input-output characteristic of the device.
From the input-output characteristic, a clear indication of lasing is seen from the change
in the slope at around −26 dBm of peak pump power. This supports the s-curve char-
83
==PAGE:90==
Chapter 6. Optical characterisation
acteristic seen in the laser characterisation setup used earlier.
Another indicator of lasing is an increase in the lasing spectrum peak with no increase
from the background after the threshold. This is not as clear in our spectrum, but
it seems that be background is more or less constant for the last two measurements
included. This measurement might also have benefited from being performed using
CW pumping as we would be able to look at more indicators of lasing, such as the
linewidth of the emitted light.
TO cavities were also analysed to confirm if any lasing could be observed. Several
devices were analysed, but none of them showed clear signs of lasing. An example of a
measured spectrum at different pump powers, along with the light-light characteristic,
can be seen on figure 6.18. The data is measured on a TO3 cavity with a 221 nm BH.
(a) Output spectra at different pump powers
(b) L-L curve
Figure 6.18: Measurements of a TO3 cavity. Figure (a) shows the measured spectrum
at different pump powers converted to from counts to a logarithmic dBm scale, while
figure (b) is the measured input-output characteristic of the device.
Similar results to that of the laser characterisation setup is seen. A very linear output
is observed before the emission starts to saturate at around -20 dbm peak pump power.
The background of the spectrum also increased for all the pump powers shown in figure
6.18 (a).
An L7 cavity with a 300 nm BH was also analysed in the setup to check if the gain
spectrum could be seen as part of the background emission spectrum. The measured
84
==PAGE:91==
Chapter 6. Optical characterisation
spectrum can be seen on figure 6.19.
Figure 6.19: The spectrum of an L7 cavity with a 300 nm BH. The background spec-
trum appears to have the gain spectrum from the BH overlayed. The spectrum was
measured using a pump power of -49 dbm.
As can be seen, there appears to be a larger background emission between around 1430
nm and 1600 nm. This could resemble our gain spectrum. Compared with what we
initially measured in section 3.2.2, this seems to decrease faster close to 1600 nm, but
this might be a better indication of the real gain spectrum as the initial measurements
were not believed to be from one of the real BHs, rather the text to indicate the size,
that also became active due to fabrication process.
The low values of the gain spectrum close to 1600 nm could explain why the L7 laser
cavities of array 1.2 with a fundamental mode resonance of around 1605 nm were not
able to lase.
6.3
Quality factor measurements on passive cavi-
ties
The quality factors of active samples cannot be extracted in other ways than through
fitting of the L-L curves or simulations, meaning that the results we obtain may be
skewed by possible overfitting in the first case or fabrication imperfections not taken
into account in the second case. Additionally, as we have discussed in the previous
85
==PAGE:92==
Chapter 6. Optical characterisation
section, we hoped to observe lasing in a number of EDC cavities but did not, and do
not have a solid explanation as to why, based purely on the measurements, prompt-
ing us to perform other analyses on our sample in the hope of reaching a satisfactory
explanation. For these reasons, we opted to also measure Q for the passive cavities.
The introduction of an active region with a complex refractive index to such a cavity
will generally alter Q in some way, the degree of which depends on the size of said
region, wherefore the results of this experiment cannot necessarily be used as a final
result - however, we intended to use these results in assisting with the fitting that we
will go through in section 6.4. Ultimately, simulation results were used for this purpose
instead, however. Depending on the results of this experiment, the results of the previ-
ous section (e.g. lasing not being achieved in TO cavities) may, in part, be attributed
to lower Q-factors than were expected. Note that passive cavities can be simulated
numerically without having to take the BH into account, making this experiment more
simple to compare to theory.
In this experiment, we analyse the resonance(s) of the cavities we characterise. As
there, in general, are more than one resonance in a cavity, it is not guaranteed that we
measure the fundamental mode. We attempted to judge this based on the proximity
of a mode’s wavelength to the expected wavelength of the cavity’s fundamental mode.
We then extracted the wavelength of the mode along with the quality factor, estimated
as the ratio between the resonance and its linewidth Q = λ0/δλ with the resonance
being modelled as a Fano lineshape [39]:
F(λ) = A0 + F0
[q + 2 (λ −λ0) /δλ]2
1 + [2 (λ −λ0) /δλ]2
(6.1)
6.3.1
Method
The experimental setup for quality factor measurements is illustrated in figure 6.20. A
superluminescent diode (SLED) emits broadband infrared light, which is polarised in
the polarising beam splitter (PBS). The polarisation controller is used to maximise the
signal through PBS. The transmitted light is then guided through the microscope and
focused onto the sample surface. The sample is rotated 45 ◦in the horizontal plane,
with respect to the polarisation of the incoming light. Light coupled back out will be
of a different polarisation due to the cavity orientation, allowing some of it to be re-
flected in the PBS, thereby being led to the OSA for characterisation. Reflection from
86
==PAGE:93==
Chapter 6. Optical characterisation
the sample surface into the IR camera is used for navigation. The PBS has extinction
ratios in transmission and reflection of Tp/Ts > 1000 : 1, Rs/Rp ∼100 : 1, respectively
[40], wherefore a polarisation filter is placed before the OSA to filter out the remaining
SLED signal which may have been reflected on the sample surface and then reflected
in the PBS.
Figure 6.20: The setup, used for quality factor measurements of passive nanocavities.
The design of the setup is mostly identical to the one used in Ref. [39], except for our
usage of the SLED, where Galli et al. instead uses a tunable laser.
A prerequisite to measurements on a cavity is that reflections on the sample surface
are filtered away, and this is the reason for the sample orientation. With photolumi-
nescence setups, we only need a wavelength-dependent detector, as the output light
is of a longer wavelength than the input, but in the setup we use in this section, the
cavities are passive, wherefore we can only couple to their modes by using their own
wavelengths. As described above, we instead utilise the polarisation of light of our
source and of our cavity modes. The electric field in a TO cavity is shown in figure
6.21. The fields are obtained through FDTD simulations.
87
==PAGE:94==
Chapter 6. Optical characterisation
Figure 6.21: A SEM image of the centre of a TO cavity with the direction of its electrical
field superimposed as the red arrows (i.e. along the bridge) as well as the direction
of the incoming light (blue arrows) when the sample is rotated 45 ◦with respect to
the incoming light, i.e. the configuration in which the Q-factor measurements were
performed.
As shown in figure 6.21, the electric field is along the bridge in the TO cavity. As
another example, it is orthogonal to the direction of the line defect in an L7 cavity.
The modes can be excited as long as the incoming light has a nonzero electric field
component in the direction of the mode’s polarisation, i.e. θ ̸= 90 ◦in figure 6.21.
Light coupled back out of the cavity will retain the polarisation from the cavity mode,
i.e. a different polarisation than the reflections of incoming light, unless θ = 0. If the
polarisations of the mode and of the incoming light are not identical, the reflections
can be filtered away by the PBS and the polarisation filter, while a fraction of the
signal will be reflected in the PBS and reach the OSA.
A signal can thus be expected to reach the OSA as long as the sample is not oriented
as θ = 0 ∨θ = 90 ◦. We determined, in an earlier project [23], that the optimal angle
that maximises the signal is θ = 45 ◦.
88
==PAGE:95==
Chapter 6. Optical characterisation
6.3.2
Results
In this section, we briefly describe our method of data analysis, giving two examples,
and present, at the end of the section (see table 6.1) the measured quality factors for
four different cavity types, along with the wavelengths of the modes at which the Q-
values were measured.
Two example output spectra are shown in figure 6.22. They come from an L7 cavity
and a TO4 cavity, respectively. We choose to show two examples to illustrate how
some peaks appear to have a little background (such as the L7 cavity) while other
peaks are harder to fit due to their strong background. Additionally, our TO-cavities
are expected, from simulations, to have lower quality factors than a typical L7 cavity
and, correspondingly, the peak is significantly wider in figure 6.22(b) than it is in figure
6.22(a).
(a) L7 cavity
(b) TO4 cavity
Figure 6.22: Two raw output spectra from the quality factor measurements. Note the
differing widths of the peaks and the different background levels, as well as the fact
that the peaks are in opposite directions.
In principle, many of these measurements can simply be linearised and then fitted to
eq. (6.1), and this is done for the L7 peak in figure 6.22(a) (the result is shown in
figure 6.24 below), but in other cases, a simple background correction is performed
whereby we, after linearisation, fit an appropriate function such as a polynomial to the
background, neglecting the peak itself from the spectrum. This is shown in figure 6.23.
89
==PAGE:96==
Chapter 6. Optical characterisation
Figure 6.23: The background in figure 6.22(b) (A TO4 cavity), fitted as a polynomial.
The data points near the peak are neglected when this fitting is done.
With the background accounted for, the data for the TO4 cavity can be fitted as a
Fano lineshape, just as the data for the L7 cavity. The fits for these two examples are
shown in figure 6.24.
(a) L7 cavity
(b) TO4 cavity
Figure 6.24: The data in figure 6.22, fitted to eq. 6.1 after linearisation. The data in
figure (b) is background corrected first, as illustrated in figure 6.23 above.
We extract the relevant parameters from the fit to obtain quality factors Q = λ0/δλ
of QL7 = 54430, QTO4 = 2390, respectively. Measurements were performed on five
devices for each of the four cavity designs, TO3, TO4, L7 and H04HQ. The results are
shown in table 6.1.
90
==PAGE:97==
Chapter 6. Optical characterisation
Q
λ [nm]
TO3
3749 ± 499
1491 ± 2.6
TO4
3153 ± 533
1489 ± 5.0
L7
53268 ± 4794
1558 ± 1.2
H0
45510 ± 6599
1511 ± 2.5
Table 6.1: Average values of Q and λ and standard deviations for a selection of passive
cavities. For results from simulations, see table 5.1
For the expected values from simulations of structures with the expected and fabri-
cated dimension, respectively, see table 5.1. The wavelengths are off from the target
values of approximately ∼1550 nm by up to more than 60 nm. The L7 wavelength
is closest to the target and has, as the only one, a positive deviation. If we compare
to figure 3.6(a), the negative deviations do not appear to be an issue for the gain,
however, as we generally measured greater gain at wavelengths around 1500 nm than
at 1550 nm. The quality factors are also lower than expected, which may, in part,
explain our issues with apparently not seeing lasing in the previous section. For TO3,
the value is ∼1000 lower than expected, corresponding to a ∼20 % reduction. With
TO4, an even lower Q is measured, corresponding to a relative deviation of ∼70 %, a
rather more severe reduction. Although the mean Q is lower for TO4 than for TO3,
both cavities’ measurements have uncertainty on the order of the difference in Q. We
would have expected a higher Q for the larger TO4 cavity, however.
In regards to the two PhC cavities, the Q-factors are also lower than expected. How-
ever, a detail in the setup, which we will briefly discuss, limits the accuracy of mea-
surements of higher quality factors; the spectral resolution in our OSA, a Yokogawa
AQ6370D [41]. It has a minimum resolution of 20 pm. The linewidth corresponding
to the average L7 cavity in table 6.1 is δλ = λ0/Q ≈29 pm, for comparison. The
H04HQ cavities, likewise, had linewidths on the order of the resolution limit, while
the TO cavities with their lower Q-values had linewidths approximately one order of
magnitude greater. The measured data being a convolution of the cavity mode and
a gaussian distribution with 20 pm linewidth, our measurements are skewed to lower
Q-values, particularly for cavities with high Q. Note that a 20 pm resolution gives an
upper bound to a measurement of Q = λ0/δλ ≈1500 nm/20 pm = 75, 000.
Extracting the real linewidths would require a deconvolution which was not done.
Alternatively, alterations could have been made to the setup. For example, our exper-
91
==PAGE:98==
Chapter 6. Optical characterisation
iment is only resolution-bound by the OSA due to our usage of a broadband source. If
a tunable laser source (TLS) were used instead, the measurements could be resolution-
bound to the TLS, which may have given more accurate results. This was done in Ref.
[39] by Galli et al.
6.4
Fitting of input-output curves
In this section, we fit the input-output curve data from the laser characterisation to
theory, specifically eq. (2.28), repeated here:
Pout = ℏω ηout Vact
2 τc
1
Γ ug gN τp
h
Γ ug gN τp (Rpump τc + N0(β −1)) −1
+
q
(Γ ug gN τp (Rpump τc + N0(β −1)) −1)2 + 4 Γ ug gN τp β τc Rpump
i
(6.2)
where
Rpump =
ηo Pin
ℏωp Vact
(6.3)
Fitting is performed using powers in dBm, meaning that we expect to see an S-curve,
i.e. a straight line with a slope of 1 below threshold, followed by a bend upwards - the S
- followed again by a line with a slope of 1. The shift to a straight line at higher values
corresponds to the increase in slope in a Pout vs. Pin characteristic after threshold. The
size of the shift in dBm depends on β as well as on τp and Γ. If near-unity β occurs,
the contrast between the regions below and above threshold becomes less clear.
Extraction of useful parameters via fitting to eq. (6.2) requires that the data suggests
lasing. In principle, fitting can be performed on a device that does not lase as the
data would be expected, then, to be a straight line which, in terms of fitting, could
correspond to anywhere above or below the threshold. In that case, however, no useful
parameters can be obtained from the fit as an infinite number of combinations could
include this straight line with a possible threshold being anywhere else on the curve.
Likewise, very high β could be an apparent conclusion from fitting data in a nearly
straight line, even if lasing was not achieved in the acquisition of said data.
This means that we cannot expect to find anything useful from the fitting of data from
EDC cavities, none of which were believed to lase. Instead, this section will focus on
92
==PAGE:99==
Chapter 6. Optical characterisation
the photonic crystal H04HQ cavity, whose results we also discussed in section 6.1.2.2.
The fact that adjusting just three parameters, e.g. β and the in- and out-coupling effi-
ciencies ηo and ηout is sufficient to acquire any combination of threshold pump power,
output power and contrast between regions below and above the threshold, we are
restricted in how many parameters we fit to. We know the active region volumes Vact
and, of course, the controllable or directly observable parameters in the experiments,
such as input and output powers and wavelength. We use τ −1
c
= τ −1
r
+τ −1
nr . For the car-
rier lifetimes τr, τnr, the group index ng, the gain coefficient g0, and the transparency
carrier density N0, we refer to table 5.2 where the values, taken from Ref. [8] are given.
This leaves five unknown parameters: β, the coupling efficiencies ηo and ηout, Γ, and
τp = Q/ω. The latter two have both been studied using simulations (chapter 5), and
τp has been experimentally measured (section 6.3), whereas no prior information is
known about β, ηo and ηout. In appendix F, we go through simulations of various
cavity designs in which BHs of varying sizes are included in the simulations as a region
with a different refractive index, nBH = 3.31 as opposed to nInP = 3.17. The BH
is, in this case, modelled as a square in the xy-plane, but going through the entire
membrane in the out-of-plane direction z. Rather than the intrinsic quality factor,
given in table 5.1, of QH04HQ = 111452, we use the BH-dependent quality factors from
simulations here, along with the confinement factors, also extracted in appendix F.
Alternatively, the experimentally determined value from the previous section, section
6.3, of Q = 45510 might also have been used, but due to the issues with measurements
of higher quality factors, which we discussed in that section, as well as the fact that
this value is also extracted from a passive device, we use the aforementioned values for
both Q and Γ from appendix F. An example of a fit is given in figure 6.25(a).
93
==PAGE:100==
Chapter 6. Optical characterisation
(a) Without noise
(b) Noise level at -86 dBm
Figure 6.25: The L-L spectrum of a H04HQ cavity with a BH of side length 220 nm
(blue dots) along with a fit of the data to eq. (6.2) (red line). Figure (a) shows a
fit that does not take noise into account (note that some data points are close to the
noise floor at -86 dBm at low input power), and figure (b) takes noise into account by
assuming a constant background of -86 dBm. The values of β are given for the fits
along with Pth, in this case taken to be the inflection point of the fitted curve.
Noise and saturation were not accounted for in the fitting and may thus have skewed
the fit by moving Pout up, when below the threshold (noise), and down, when above
the threshold (saturation). The latter is suggested by the fitted curve being slightly
lower than the data at Pin ≈0 dBm right after the threshold, possibly to account for
the data points which are lower further to the right (Pin ≈15 dBm). Likewise, the fit
is higher than the data to the immediate left of the threshold and below it further to
the left, likely because noise was not taken into account. Note that some data points
were not included in the fit, as lower Pin yielded only data points at -86 dBm - the
same as when no Pin was applied, and some data points at higher Pout were excluded
as well, since the slope of Pout turned negative at this point, much like the result for
a TO cavity, we showed in figure 6.3(b). As these two effects are not accounted for in
the model, given by eq. (6.2), they may have further skewed the results had they been
included in the fit. As stated above, these effects appear to still be present, however.
If these details are true, the fit is more linear than it otherwise should have been, cor-
responding to a higher estimated β than the ”true” value. The fit does actually have a
kink at Pin = −4.6 dBm, although it is difficult to see on the curve. A value of β = 0.77
was extracted from this particular fit, along with ηo = 5.55 · 10−5, ηout = 2.18 · 10−2.
Values of Q = 5.9·104, Γ = 3.0·10−3 were used from the simulation of a H04HQ device
94
==PAGE:101==
Chapter 6. Optical characterisation
with 220 nm BH. In the case of this particular data point, noise was also included
in a secondary fit, shown in figure 6.25(b). Here, a constant noise level of -86 dBm
was included, and β, ηo and ηout were fitted as otherwise. Possible saturation effects
at higher pump powers are not taken into account. This improves the fit, but gives a
different result of β = 0.22, and the kink on the fit is moved to Pin = −6.1 dBm. The
determined coupling efficiencies are increased to ηo = 3.37 · 10−4, ηout = 3.45 · 10−3.
Note that β is not explicitly included in our models for the threshold current, see eq.
(2.24), whereas ηo is. The fits should thus give different results in Pth by nearly an
order of magnitude.
The noise floor varied between experiments and was usually not taken into account,
but it is clear that results vary drastically between different fits. Unfortunately, the
inflection points of the measured L-L curves were very frequently close to the noise
floor as it was in figure 6.25, meaning that the issue was ever-present. A number of
L-L curves were used for fitting, but for smaller BH sizes, this was not possible. As
we have stated before, we expect an S-curve to have a slope of 1 above and below
threshold and a higher slope at threshold. Two further examples of L-L spectra are
given in figure 6.26, along with their slopes. Figure 6.26(a) corresponds to a BH side
length of 95 nm (the yellow curve in figure 6.7), while figure 6.26(b) is for a 242 nm BH.
(a)
(b)
Figure 6.26: Two L-L curves for H04HQ cavities with different sizes of BH, along with
their respective slopes. Thresholds are possible to manually extract from said slopes,
but fitting to data, while possible for figure (b) was not possible for figure (a), possibly
due to low slope values above and below threshold.
95
==PAGE:102==
Chapter 6. Optical characterisation
Figure 6.26(a) was not successfully fitted, possibly due to the lack of a range in Pin
where the slope is close to 1. Below the threshold, it appears to be dominated by
noise, and the slope decreases sharply immediately after the threshold. The fact that
the slope clearly does peak at a value above 1 suggests that the device likely was las-
ing, however, only fitting was not possible. In the other example, figure 6.26(b), the
slope appears to reach a plateau on the right-hand side of the threshold which corre-
sponds more closely to the model for Pout, given in eq. (6.2). This method of taking
the slope and ensuring that a maximum can be found (the peaks at ∼10 dBm and
∼−8 dBm in the two plots, respectively) is also the method by which the thresh-
old can be extracted from data without accidentally taking a single noisy outlier to
be the threshold - as was discussed regarding the threshold powers, shown in figure 6.8.
We have thus not included any devices to the left of the stitching line, i.e. with BH
side length ∆x ≤111 nm. Some results of the data that was fitted to are summarised
in figure 6.27.
(a) β-factors
(b) Threshold powers
Figure 6.27: Results of fitting to H04HQ cavities of varying BH sizes. Figure (a) shows
the β-factors, calculated with fitting without (blue) and with (orange) taking the noise
floor into account. Figure (b) shows the threshold pump powers, taken as the inflection
points on the fits (blue) and as the result of insertion of Q and Γ from simulations along
with the fitted ηo into eq. (2.24). Here, noise is not accounted for.
We see a trend of β increasing with BH size, save for the last few points. As the cavity
field has a node at the origin, it is possible that the rate of spontaneous decay into
the lasing mode increases with BH size, as the overlap between the active region and
96
==PAGE:103==
Chapter 6. Optical characterisation
electrical field is significantly improved by increasing Vact, seemingly increasing to near-
unity. This trend is broken at the highest active region volumes, where it decreases
instead.
Although it is possible that the trend of a Vact-dependence in β may be
plausible, the estimated values of β are arguably not. We have taken β to be the fraction
of all spontaneous decays that contribute to the lasing mode, i.e. β = R′
sp/(Rr+Rnr) as
opposed to β = R′
sp/Rr. Additionally, we have assumed the constant carrier lifetimes
in radiative and nonradiative decay of τr = 2 ns, τnr = 10 ns, meaning that only 5/6
spontaneous decays should be radiative:
τ −1
r
τ −1
r
+ τ −1
nr
= 0.833
(6.4)
The highest three points in figure 6.27(a) are all higher than this value, which is un-
physical. We cannot be certain of the validity of the data in either curve, but it is
realistic that the real values of β are lower than the ones determined without taking
noise into account.
Figure 6.27(b) shows the inflection points on the fitted curves along with the result of
eq. (2.24), our model for the threshold pump power Pth, which depends on the known
Vact, the Q and Γ, we take from simulations, and ηo which fitting gives. The calculated
threshold powers are all higher than the ones taken directly from the curves, but the
trend is, as earlier, a decrease in Pth with increasing Vact up to ∼150 nm side length,
after which the trend is closer to linear. Figure 5.6(b), which showed the calculated
thresholds for different cavity types, assuming constant ηo, suggested that there should
be a minimum value of Pth at a BH side length of ∆xact ∼175 nm (a value only ∼2
dBm lower than the value for the largest BH, ∆xact = 270 nm), which is not clearly
reflected in figure 6.27(b). The data is also rather noisy, limiting the possibility of such
a trend being apparent. As the fits for which noise was taken into account yielded
higher values of ηo, it is possible that thresholds calculated with said values would be
closer to the inflection points of the fits.
97
==PAGE:104==
Chapter 6. Optical characterisation
(a) Pumping efficiency ηo
(b) Out-coupling efficiency ηout
Figure 6.28: Coupling efficiencies, resultant from fitting to H04HQ cavities of varying
BH sizes: (a) the pumping efficiency ηo and (b) the collection efficiency ηout. Noise is
not taken into account.
Figure 6.28 shows the coupling efficiencies found by fitting to the L-L curves for the
H04HQ cavities. The pumping efficiency (figure 6.28(a)) remains around η ≈5 · 10−5
until ∆x > 250 nm, where some significant outliers appear. Assuming that the pump
laser was successfully focussed to a beam spot smaller than the typical in-plane area of
a BH, it is arguably strange that there is any variation at all since ηo comes from the
interaction between the laser and the BH - ignoring the rest of the cavity - depending
only on the thickness of the active region, ∆z = 8 nm, as an increase herein would
improve the path length, the laser travels through the active region. We have not
made assumptions as to whether there is a systematic dependence of ηo on the in-plane
dimensions, and fabrication or measurement error may have occurred, wherefore ηo has
not been constrained. It is also possible that ηo was, in fact, close to unchanging and
that the estimated values are off due to the fitting. Note that the last three points
(highest three BH side lengths) in figure 6.28(a) are of far higher ηo than the average
on the plot, corresponding to a decrease in Pth in figure 6.27(b) which is the opposite
of the expectation from theory.
The out-coupling efficiency in figure 6.28(b) also appears to follow trends in some places
but has significant deviations. We may generally expect the field to not be significantly
varied by the presence of the BH, but an alteration due to it - by introducing a region
with a higher effective refractive index - might alter the field, thereby changing the
out-of-plane losses and, possibly, the directions thereof. In appendix F, we discuss sim-
98
==PAGE:105==
Chapter 6. Optical characterisation
ulations that suggest a dependence of Q on the active region size. The effect appears
most clearly on TO cavities, however. As the simulations do not take photon absorp-
tion in the material into account, the change in Q must be due to either in-plane or
out-of-plane losses. This may be possible to model by performing further simulations,
recording the field at given points outside the membrane to find the out-of-plane loss.
Another approach for fitting would have been to fit to other parameters than the ones
chosen here. To reiterate a qualitative observation from the theory section, β, affects
the height of the curve below the threshold, the product Γ τp affects the height below the
threshold, as well as the threshold pump power, and ηo and ηout move the entire curve
to the left and right (along Pin) and up and down (along Pout), respectively. Therefore,
Γ τp could have been included as a fitting parameter if ηo and ηout were omitted instead,
as, in this case, it should be possible to find Γ τp, as it governs the threshold, allowing β
to be found in turn, taking into account the height of the threshold kink and the value
of Γ τp. This would require knowledge of the coupling efficiency, however, which was not
presumed here. The coupling efficiency could, however, have been assumed invariant of
BH size and not prone to possible irregularities in between different cavities, nor how
well the experiment was performed, i.e. the manual focus of light into the cavity. This
was not done here, but it could have been valid, assuming a sufficiently small beam
spot on the sample and successful measurements and fabrication. For instance, most
of the ηo, we acquired from fitting were on the order of ηo ≈5 · 10−5, which could have
been chosen as a constant for another attempt at fitting.
99
==PAGE:106==
7
Discussion and outlook
We have generally discussed results and issues in the sections to which they pertain in
this report, but we will here provide a more general discussion and outlook, reiterating
some of the points we have discussed earlier in the report.
We have fabricated several active nanocavities - some, shape optimised photonic crystal
nanocavities and others topology optimised EDC cavities - all with single quantum well
buried heterostructures as their active regions and characterised them using a selection
of optical methods. Furthermore, we have utilised numerical simulations to compare
the characterisation results to theory. However, the fabrication process was riddled
with issues, and the results seem to correspond hereto.
In terms of results, pumping and collection of light emission from most of the fabri-
cated devices was possible, but their input-output characteristics were not generally as
predicted. Out of 10 different cavity designs, lasing has seemingly only been achieved
on two types of cavities, namely the shape optimised L7 and H0 (specifically H04HQ)
photonic crystal nanocavities. Lasing did not seem to be achieved on the EDC cavities,
despite their designs being optimised to maximise Q/Veff. This obviously prohibited
findings on trends in their lasing thresholds as said thresholds themselves were not
found.
Even though numerical simulations suggested that the topology optimised cavities to
have a considerably larger confinement factor than the photonic crystals for all side
lengths of the BH active regions studied in this project, it seemed from modelling that
the lasing threshold minimum was largely dependent on the reduction in the quality
factor due to fabrication imperfections. This was especially the case for the TO4 cav-
ity, where an average quality factor of ∼3150 was measured for passive cavities. Initial
simulations with design dimensions suggested a Q-factor of ∼10350. The reduced qual-
ity factor could be one of the reasons that lasing was not believed to be achieved for
100
==PAGE:107==
Chapter 7. Discussion and outlook
the TO cavities measured.
Some devices were believed to achieve lasing, however. H04HQ and L7 cavities both
seemed to lase at peak pump power thresholds down to Pth ≈−5 dBm ≈0.32 mA. As
no prior knowledge of the pumping efficiency ηo has been assumed, we cannot state
how well the minimum threshold corresponds to theory, but, assuming comparable ηo
for the two devices (as well as that ηo does not strongly depend on the BH’s in-plane
dimensions), our theoretical modelling does suggest that their minimum threshold pow-
ers should be similar. The values of BH side length at which the thresholds are found
do not correspond to predictions, however. For H04HQ, an optimum BH side length is
difficult to define due to noise in the data, and the optimum for L7 is far off from the
expected value. Mostly, our experiments have suggested that larger BH size improves
Pth for the two cavities in question. This stands in contrast to what our model suggests
and what has been found in Ref. [9].
If the data is taken at face value, however, it may seem that ∼250 nm is an optimal
side length for L7, although this is close to our largest BH at 270 nm and therefore
somewhat unreliable as very few data points could be recorded for higher BH side
length. Thus, it could also be explained by variations in the fabrication result. Mea-
surements on several other devices would have to be performed to confirm anything.
One thing that could be interesting for future investigation would be to create a sample
of L7 cavities with a wider range of BH side lengths, going to larger lengths to verify
that a minimum in lasing threshold can actually be found, as suggested by Ref. [9]
and by our models.
In the future, systematic investigations and/or theoretical modelling of ηo could help
to better compare results such as Pth to expectations from theory as well as to improve
fitting to data of S-curves that display lasing. This would require, of course, that the
efficiency ηo is not too dependent on unpredictable errors such as fabrication-related
errors or the manual optimisation of the coupling.
As 1QW BHs, rather than quantum dots (point emitters), were used as the active re-
gions in this project, and as the logarithmic gain model predicts that Pth should grow
rapidly when Γ is decreased in spite of a proportional decrease in Vact - see eq. (2.24)
- topology optimisation to improve Q/Veff may not have given an optimal result, con-
sidering the goal of fabricating an EDC nanolaser with a BH. Instead, Q Γ for a given
101
==PAGE:108==
Chapter 7. Discussion and outlook
active region size may be used as a figure of merit in future topology optimisation. This
is predicated on the validity of the logarithmic gain model g(N) = g0 ln(N/N0), how-
ever, which, it should be pointed out, is an approximation. Additionally, we have found
that some of the EDC designs we have used should still be among our best candidates
if a better result of fabrication were assumed - as figure 5.5(b) showed, TO4 should
have the lowest threshold pump power in the case of the design dimensions. Likewise,
even with the altered physical device parameters, resultant of our fabrication, taken
into account, we would have expected that some EDC designs - such as TO3 - might
have achieved lasing, as shown in figure 5.6(b). Even though the calculated threshold
trend of the TO cavities was predicted to be significantly higher than for the L7 and
H04HQ phonic crystals. This might also be part of the explanation to why no lasing
was observed for the TO cavities.
Furthermore, the photonic crystal nanocavities may also be further optimised.
As
stated earlier in the report, H1 and L7 had been optimised for a different membrane
thickness (219 nm) than the one our substrate possessed. A new optimisation to the
correct thickness may be of more use insofar as achieving lasing is concerned. Addi-
tionally, if the footprint were not considered an issue, H0 cavities may have achieved
higher Q than the one H04HQ possessed, simply through the addition of even more
mirror holes. Values of the design quality factor of up to 280.000 have been achieved
for H0 cavities in the literature [42].
The aforementioned membrane thickness is itself another issue, though more closely
related to the fabrication process. We have assumed one value (245 nm), but find val-
ues, through ellipsometry, varying between approximately 240 nm and 252 nm, while
simulations, optimised to match the resonant wavelengths of devices to the wavelengths
we have measured for devices close to where 240 nm were measured, suggest that a
thickness of 233.5 nm is more realistic. We have found that the resonant wavelength
is highly dependent on this membrane thickness and, in the case of some L7 cavities,
appears to be sufficient to prohibit lasing as the resonance wavelengths can be shifted
to the very edge of the gain spectrum. Better control over the membrane thickness, if
achievable, could thus also be of great use.
Another obvious fabrication-related issue is the feature sizes of fabricated devices.
Shape correction had been performed before our fabrication process began, but the
apparent proximity errors in the e-beam lithography process were of a different magni-
102
==PAGE:109==
Chapter 7. Discussion and outlook
tude than expected - so much so that despite the shrinking of feature sizes in the mask
to five different values, even the greatest shrink value of 14 nm has been insufficient
to compensate for the error. The difference in membrane thickness and feature size
reduced the simulated Q-factor of the TO4-cavity, otherwise arguably the best candi-
date for low thresholds using small BHs, by more than 60 %. A simple solution would
be to use a greater shrink value of 20 nm (as a gap size of 68 nm was measured for
TO4 cavity shrunk 14 nm) and evaluate the dimensions of the resulting cavity. Future
electron beam dose testing and optimisation of the dry etching process could also be
performed to optimise the predictability of the fabrication process. Additionally, other
methods, such as EBL field shift writing, may be employed if necessary. The exposure
of the sample with a 20 nm aluminium charge dissipation layer on top of the CSAR
e-beam resist could also be repeated, only with thermal evaporation of Al, rather than
e-beam, the latter of which is believed to be the cause of the issue of our extremely
overexposed resist.
Our cavities may be misaligned relative to the BHs. However, we have not been able
to characterise such offsets, making this one of several possible, but not known issues.
In a future project, systematic error, at least, may be analysed by the fabrication of
dummy structures whose alignment may be used for extrapolation. One could try to
cleave a sample through the centre of the cavity and look at the cross section in SEM to
try to evaluate the alignment. This might be a very difficult task using the structures
in this project as the BH side length is very small.
Another issue that could worsen the possibility of lasing for the TO cavities is non-
radiative recombination introduced by surface states. As stated for side length of the
BH region larger than the ∼80 nm gap in the TO cavity, we will etch through part
of the active region. This will introduce surface states that might lead to increased
non-radiative carrier recombination [36]. To minimise this issue, methods for sidewall
passivisation can be used [36]. If successful, this could mitigate surface recombination
of active regions that overlap with holes in, e.g. TO cavities, although it might not
improve the fabrication of TO cavities with extremely small BHs below the gap size.
However, it would minimise fabrication sensitivity for BHs of greater side length than
the gap width (i.e. most of our BHs) in addition to potentially improving devices with
quantum well everywhere.
In optical characterisation, issues such as the noise floor and random noise on mea-
103
==PAGE:110==
Chapter 7. Discussion and outlook
surements. In the example of noisy measurements, it may be a good idea to simply
have taken more data points when recording L-L characteristics. The noise floor has
been an issue, in part, because our lasing cavities, H04HQ and L7 have frequently had
inflection points at output powers very close to the noise floor, making the L-L curve
less similar to a perfect S-curve. Additionally, had the thresholds been even lower, they
may have been nearly impossible to measure. The issue of the poor signal-to-noise ra-
tio has been somewhat mitigated by the usage of the photoluminescence setup, which
improved SNR at the cost of requiring a significantly longer time to perform mea-
surements due to the lack of an electronically controllable variable attenuator which
improved measurement speeds in the other setup. Additionally, since H04HQ and L7
cavities achieved lasing while TO cavities did not, arguably shifting some focus away
from the latter, the usage of a CW source may be used to give more information about
the spectra than what is possible using a pulsed source, since said cavities seemingly
are not as prone to thermal effects as the TO cavities.
The optical characterisation of the photoluminescence spectrum of our buried het-
erostructures was also not successful in that the BHs themselves were not, in reality,
characterised - only the numbers which were other, larger structures in the same active
layer. New measurements could be performed to get more accurate results, using the
prior knowledge that output optimisation may lead to coupling to the wrong structure
or, simply, different components could have been used in the setup, as it is doubtful
that we could have successfully coupled to the BHs with the current setup. If our result
is to be believed, telecom wavelength, 1550 nm, is quite far from the peak of the gain
spectrum for most pump powers, suggesting that lasing may be more easily achieved
with a different active region material, if possible, whose gain spectrum better overlaps
with the intended wavelength or, alternatively, with cavities that are not of telecom
wavelength but can be expected to have greater gain.
As TO cavities have been demonstrated to lase using a membrane with quantum well
everywhere [18], lasing may be possible for the devices we attempted to fabricate as
well. The fabrication-related issues may be a sufficient cause of our devices not lasing
- the much lower Q of TO4, the different wavelengths than expected, as well as the
potential misalignment, which for small BH sizes could be especially crucial. As for
the PhC cavities, as earlier mentioned, further shape optimisation and the addition of
extra mirror holes might further improve the device parameters. The success of L7 and
H04HQ nanolasers with nano-BHs may be considered a somewhat interesting result in
104
==PAGE:111==
Chapter 7. Discussion and outlook
that neither of the two confines light to nearly as small volumes as some of the other
cavities, as evidenced by their generally lower confinement factors Γ from calculations
on using our given active region sizes. It seems that the larger quality factor of the
PhC devices compared to the TO cavities might be one of the important factors in
reaching lasing.
105
==PAGE:112==
8
Conclusion
We have, in this project, successfully fabricated a selection of active nanocavities, in an
InP membrane, whose designs were based on shape optimised PhC cavities of different
types, i.e. H0, H1, and L7, and topology optimised EDC cavities. We fabricated said
cavities on a chip with quantum well buried heterostructures already fabricated prior
to this project, such that our finished devices consisted of the aforementioned cavities
with QW BH active regions in their centres, with said BHs varying in in-plane dimen-
sions from 50 nm to 275 nm side lengths.
Physical characterisation has been performed on the fabricated devices to estimate
their physical parameters, and it has been found that the feature sizes of the devices
differ significantly from the intended values, despite our attempts to compensate for
this effect, namely the shape correction of the patterns in the lithography mask by
shrinking the pattern features by 10 nm to 14 nm in increments of 1 nm, but still the
fabricated feature sizes deviated more than expected. This has resulted, as an example,
in a gap width in TO cavities on the order of 70 nm, where 80 nm was the target value,
since the holes on either side of said gap were ∼5 nm larger in radius than intended,
even for the patterns with the smallest central holes in the mask. Likewise, it seems
the InP thickness has varied across the chip. It has been estimated, using ellipsometry,
to be approximately 240 nm in some places (near our device array 1.1) and 252 nm
in other places (near A 1.2). Simulations have suggested that 233.5 nm is a realistic
value near A 1.1 as said thickness, combined with the in-plane feature sizes we have
measured, yields the optical parameters closest to what we measure with optical char-
acterisation. Simulations suggest that the resonant wavelengths λ and quality factors
Q of our fabricated devices differ from the values obtained with the design parameters
by tens of nanometres in λ and more than 60 % in Q, in some cases. Better control over
the fabricated device parameters is, thus, desirable. This may be obtained by e.g. new
dose testing for the e-beam lithography or, alternatively, a new fabrication round with
different shape corrections corresponding to the measured deviations in feature size
106
==PAGE:113==
Chapter 8. Conclusion
between the mask and the fabricated devices. We have also performed an additional
round of fabrication using a charge dissipation layer, but with unusable results due to
significant over-exposure. The usage of a thermally evaporated CDL, as opposed to
our e-beam, evaporated CDL, may improve the process.
Input-output characteristics were extracted for the nanocavities with BH active regions,
but indications of lasing were found in only two of the PhC cavity designs, the L7 and
H04HQ cavities. The remaining three PhC cavity designs have not appeared to lase,
nor have any of the EDC cavities. The lack of lasing for most of the fabricated cavity
designs has limited the finding of trends in lasing, although thresholds were compared
for L7 and H04HQ devices with different BH sizes. We do not see the same trends,
however, as the ones we had expected from theoretical models, which suggested that
minimum threshold values could have been obtained for certain optimum BH sizes but
also that the threshold would grow rapidly with a decrease in the active region volume
at small values. The rapid growth was seen, but uncertainty in the results, seemingly
due to the field stitching in the lithography process, makes it difficult to verify the
suspected trend. The minimum threshold pump powers are likewise difficult to define
due to noise in the data and an insufficient number of data points, but appear to be
at BH side lengths of approximately 250 nm for both H04HQ and L7 devices, which
contrasts the values; we had expected. The trends do not appear to be identical to the
ones found in the literature either [9].
We have not found the optical results we initially aimed for, in the sense that the
observed trends were not as expected and that EDC nanolasers were not successfully
created. However, physical examination of our samples after fabrication, combined
with simulations and optical quality factor measurements, suggest that worse results
were to be expected due to the physical parameters of the fabricated. Further attempts
at fabrication, using new parameters for, e.g. the shape correction of the structures
or a new dose test, may improve results, possibly bettering the chances of successfully
achieving lasing in EDC cavities with quantum well buried heterostructures in the
future.
107
==PAGE:114==
Bibliography
[1] Cisco, “Cisco Visual Networking Index:
Forecast and Trends 2017–2022,”
Tech. Rep., 2019. [Online]. Available: https://twiki.cern.ch/twiki/pub/HEPIX/
TechwatchNetwork/HtwNetworkDocuments/white-paper-c11-741490.pdf
[2] A. Andrae and T. Edler, “On Global Electricity Usage of Communication Tech-
nology: Trends to 2030,” Challenges, vol. 6, no. 1, pp. 117–157, 2015.
[3] L. Minas, B. Ellison, and I. Books24x7, Energy Efficiency for Information
Technology: How to Reduce Power Consumption in Servers and Data Centers,
ser. IT Pro.
Intel Press, 2009. [Online]. Available:
https://books.google.dk/
books?id=qmM7QQAACAAJ
[4] N. Magen, A. Kolodny, U. Weiser, and N. Shamir, “Interconnect-power dissipation
in a microprocessor,” in Proceedings of the 2004 international workshop on System
level interconnect prediction - SLIP ’04.
New York, New York, USA: ACM
Press, 2004, p. 7. [Online]. Available: http://portal.acm.org/citation.cfm?doid=
966747.966750
[5] L. A. Coldren,
S. W. Corzine,
and M. L. Mashanovitch,
Diode Lasers
and Photonic Integrated Circuits, ser. Wiley Series in Microwave and Optical
Engineering.
Wiley, 2012. [Online]. Available: https://books.google.dk/books?
id=GBB1kOYONT4C
[6] J. D. Joannopoulos, S. G. Johnson, J. N. Winn, and R. D. Meade, Photonic
Crystals: Molding the Flow of Light - Second Edition. Princeton University Press,
2011. [Online]. Available: https://books.google.dk/books?id=owhE36qiTP8C
[7] H. Takagi, Y. Ota, N. Kumagai, S. Ishida, S. Iwamoto, and Y. Arakawa, “High Q
H1 photonic crystal nanocavities with efficient vertical emission,” Optics Express,
vol. 20, no. 27, p. 28292, 2012.
[8] E. Dimopoulos, A. Sakanas, A. Marchevsky, M. Xiong, Y. Yu, E. Semenova,
J. Mørk, and K. Yvind, “Electrically-Driven Photonic Crystal Lasers with Ultra-
low Threshold,” Laser and Photonics Reviews, p. 2200109, 2022.
[9] E. Dimopoulos, M. Xiong, A. Sakanas, A. Marchevsky, G. Dong, Y. Yu,
E.
Semenova,
J.
Mørk,
and
K.
Yving,
“Experimental
Demonstration
108
==PAGE:115==
Bibliography
of Nanolaser with sub-µA Threshold Current,”
2022. [Online]. Available:
https://arxiv.org/abs/2212.05148
[10] F. Wang, R. E. Christiansen, Y. Yu, J. Mørk, and O. Sigmund, “Maximizing the
quality factor to mode volume ratio for ultra-small photonic crystal cavities,”
Applied Physics Letters, vol. 113, no. 24, p. 241101, 2018. [Online]. Available:
https://doi.org/10.1063/1.5064468
[11] M. Saldutti, M. Xiong, E. Dimopoulos, Y. Yu, M. Gioannini, and J. Mørk, “Modal
Properties of Photonic Crystal Cavities and Applications to Lasers,” Nanomate-
rials, vol. 11, no. 11, p. 3030, 2021.
[12] H.
Choi,
M.
Heuck,
and
D.
Englund,
“Self-Similar
Nanocavity
Design
with Ultrasmall Mode Volume for Single-Photon Nonlinearities,” Phys. Rev.
Lett.,
vol.
118,
no.
22,
p.
223605,
2017.
[Online].
Available:
https:
//link.aps.org/doi/10.1103/PhysRevLett.118.223605
[13] S. Hu and S. M. Weiss, “Design of Photonic Crystal Cavities for Extreme Light
Concentration,” ACS Photonics, vol. 3, no. 9, pp. 1647–1653, 2016. [Online].
Available: https://doi.org/10.1021/acsphotonics.6b00219
[14] S. Hu, M. Khater, R. Salas-Montiel, E. Kratschmer, S. Engelmann, W. M. J.
Green, and S. M. Weiss, “Experimental realization of deep-subwavelength
confinement in dielectric optical resonators,” Science Advances, vol. 4, no. 8, p.
eaat2355, 2018. [Online]. Available: https://www.science.org/doi/abs/10.1126/
sciadv.aat2355
[15] E. Yablonovitch, “Smallest possible electromagnetic mode volume in a dielectric
cavity,” IEE Proceedings - Optoelectronics, vol. 145, no. 6, pp. 391–397, 12 1998.
[Online]. Available:
https://digital-library.theiet.org/content/journals/10.1049/
ip-opt 19982468
[16] N. Takemura, M. Takiguchi, E. Kuramochi, A. Shinya, T. Sato, K. Takeda,
S. Matsuo,
and M. Notomi,
“Lasing thresholds and photon statistics in
high-β buried multiple quantum well photonic crystal nanocavity lasers,”
Phys. Rev. A, vol. 99, no. 5, p. 53820, 2019. [Online]. Available:
https:
//link.aps.org/doi/10.1103/PhysRevA.99.053820
109
==PAGE:116==
Bibliography
[17] E. Yablonovitch, “Inhibited Spontaneous Emission in Solid-State Physics and
Electronics,” Phys. Rev. Lett., vol. 58, no. 20, pp. 2059–2062, 1987. [Online].
Available: https://link.aps.org/doi/10.1103/PhysRevLett.58.2059
[18] “Personal communitaion with Meng Xiong [Date: 27-11-2022].”
[19] Y. Yu, “Note on theory of nanolasers and spatial hole burning,” 2022.
[20] A. Sakanas, “Buried Heterostructure Photonic Crystal Lasers,” 2019.
[21] “Finite
Difference
Time
Domain
(FDTD)
Solver
Introduc-
tion.”
[Online].
Available:
https://optics.ansys.com/hc/en-us/articles/
360034914633-Finite-Difference-Time-Domain-FDTD-solver-introduction%7D
[22] “Convergence
testing
process
for
FDTD
simulations
–
Ansys
Op-
tics.”
[Online].
Available:
https://optics.ansys.com/hc/en-us/articles/
360034915833-Convergence-testing-process-for-FDTD-simulations?fbclid=
IwAR14DQvLjs j6RCpJS-LS33D-9RWaoFp2yfelhs0EDhk20g--eoLI6UCsUc
[23] S. K. Borregaard and A. H. Dubr´e, “Fabrication and characterization of pho-
tonic crystal nanocavities, Fabrikation og karakterisering af fotonisk krystal
nanokaviteter,” 2020.
[24] “PML
boundary
conditions
in
FDTD
and
MODE
–
Ansys
Op-
tics.”
[Online].
Available:
https://optics.ansys.com/hc/en-us/articles/
360034382674-PML-boundary-conditions-in-FDTD-and-MODE
[25] “Specific
Process
Knowledge/Lithography/EBeamLithography/High
res-
olution
patterning
with
HSQ
-
LabAdviser.”
[Online].
Available:
https://labadviser.nanolab.dtu.dk/index.php?title=Specific Process Knowledge/
Lithography/EBeamLithography/High resolution patterning with HSQ
[26] T. Numai, Fundamentals of Semiconductor Lasers.
Springer, 2015.
[27] P. Bøggild, “Electron beam lithography,” Technical University of Denmark, Tech.
Rep., 2021.
[28] T. Greibe, T. A. Anhøj, L. S. Johansen, and A. Han, “Quality control of
JEOL JBX-9500FSZ e-beam lithography system in a multi-user laboratory,”
Microelectronic Engineering, vol. 155, pp. 25–28, 2016. [Online]. Available:
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0167931716300466
110
==PAGE:117==
Bibliography
[29] “Specific
Process
Knowledge/Lithography/EBeamLithography
-
LabAd-
viser.”
[Online].
Available:
https://labadviser.nanolab.dtu.dk//index.php?
title=Specific Process Knowledge/Lithography/EBeamLithography&fbclid=
IwAR3cdPGVZ0FNnagauiic5B15X3GCbTRvK88U7nTuAvN1RfV4Q9SWtwJnjWg
[30] C. Constancias, S. Landis, S. Manakli, L. Martin, L. Pain, and D. Rio, “Electron
Beam Lithography,” in Lithography.
John Wiley & Sons, Ltd, 2013, ch. 3, pp.
101–182. [Online]. Available:
https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1002/
9781118557662.ch3
[31] Y. Zheng, M. Pu, and K. Yvind, “Reducing insulating substrate charging in
electron beam lithography without using charge dissipation layer,” in Proceedings
of 44th International Conference on Micro and Nano Engineering. United States:
IEEE, 2018. [Online]. Available: http://mne2018.org
[32] A. I. M. Greer and D. A. J. Moran, “Charge dissipation layer optimisation for
nano-scale electron-beam lithography pattern definition onto diamond,” Diamond
and Related Materials, vol. 29, pp. 13–17, 2012.
[33] P.
Rai-Choudhury
and
I.
of
Electrical
Engineers,
Handbook of Mi-
crolithography, Micromachining, and Microfabrication: Microlithography,
ser.
Handbook
of
Microlithography,
Micromachining,
and
Microfabrica-
tion.
SPIE
Optical
Engineering
Press,
1997.
[Online].
Available:
https://books.google.dk/books?id=i58BblncJv0C
[34] A. Hambitzer, A. Olziersky, T. Saranovac, and C. R. Bolognesi, “Comparison of
charge dissipation layers and dose sensitivity of PMMA electron beam lithography
on transparent insulating substrates such as GaN,” Cs Mantech 2017 - 2017 In-
ternational Conference on Compound Semiconductor Manufacturing Technology,
2017.
[35] “Selecting the best mesh refinement option in the FDTD simulation object
– Ansys Optics.” [Online]. Available: https://optics.ansys.com/hc/en-us/articles/
360034382614-Selecting-the-best-mesh-refinement-option-in-the-FDTD-simulation-object
[36] L. Lin and J. Robertson, “Passivation of interfacial defects at III-V oxide inter-
faces,” Journal of Vacuum Science and Technology B:nanotechnology and Micro-
electronics, vol. 30, no. 4, p. 04E101, 2012.
111
==PAGE:118==
Bibliography
[37] B. E. A. Saleh and M. C. Teich, Fundamentals of Photonics, ser. Wiley
Series
in
Pure
and
Applied
Optics.
Wiley,
2019.
[Online].
Available:
https://books.google.dk/books?id=rcqKDwAAQBAJ
[38] C. Gerry, P. Knight, and P. L. Knight, Introductory Quantum Optics. Cambridge
University Press, 2005. [Online]. Available: https://books.google.dk/books?id=
CgByyoBJJwgC
[39] M. Galli, S. L. Portalupi, M. Belotti, L. C. Andreani, L. O’Faolain, and
T. F. Krauss, “Light scattering and Fano resonances in high-Q photonic crystal
nanocavities,” Applied Physics Letters, vol. 94, no. 7, p. 71101, 2009. [Online].
Available: https://doi.org/10.1063/1.3080683
[40] “Broadband
Polarizing
Beamsplitter
Cubes
in
30
mm
Cage
Cubes.”
[Online].
Available:
https://www.thorlabs.
com/newgrouppage9.cfm?objectgroup id=4137&pn=CCM1-PBS254%
2FM&fbclid=IwAR04otT2wGoImglxBPIDGd7Pd-4eWQOZ8b7YH3
RtQ78YOu817agU8nW5wU
[41] “AQ6370D
Telecom
Optical
Spectrum
Analyzer
600
-
1700
nm
—
Yokogawa
Test&Measurement
Corporation.”
[Online].
Available:
https:
//tmi.yokogawa.com/dk/solutions/products/optical-measuring-instruments/
optical-spectrum-analyzer/aq6370d-optical-spectrum-analyzer/?fbclid=
IwAR3thoeNdDbatpywUGCsTJtTnWErB2ZXgq7lpi-lgacwqtvWfm2sSQ-qesU#
Documents-Downloads
downloads 8
[42] M. Nomura, K. Tanabe, S. Iwamoto, and Y. Arakawa, “Design of a high-Q H0
photonic crystal nanocavity for cavity QED,” Physica Status Solidi (c) Current
Topics in Solid State Physics, vol. 8, no. 2, pp. 340–342, 2011.
112
==PAGE:119==
A
Analytical solution to the conventional rate
equations
In this appendix, we derive an analytical solution to the conventional rate equations[5]:
dN
dt = Rpump −1
τc
N −ug g(N) Np
(A.1)
dNp
dt =

Γ ug g(N) −1
τp

Np + Γ β N
τc
(A.2)
where N and Np are the carrier and photon densities in the cavity, τc and τp are the
carrier and photon lifetimes, Γ is the confinement factor, Rpump is the carrier pumping
rate, ug = c/n is the group velocity, β is the fraction of spontaneous recombination
(both radiative and nonradiative) that contributes to the lasing mode, and g(N) is the
gain. We here assume a linear gain model, i.e. g(N) = gN(N −N0). Using this gain,
we have, at steady state, the following:
0 = Rpump −1
τc
N −ug gN(N −N0) Np
(A.3)
0 =

Γ ug gN(N −N0) −1
τp

Np + Γ β N
τc
(A.4)
We perform a simple substitution, whereby we solve the first of the two equations (the
carrier density rate equation) for N and use the solution to find an expression for Np
by solving the second equation (the photon density rate equation) for Np. From the
carrier rate equation:
113
==PAGE:120==
Appendix A. Analytical solution to the conventional rate equations
0 = Rpump −1
τc
N + ug gN N0 Np −ug gN N Np ⇔
 1
τc
+ ug gN Np

N = Rpump + ug gN N0 Np ⇔
N = Rpump + ug gN Np N0
1/τc + ug gN Np
(A.5)
We have here used τc, ug, gN, Np ≥0. We insert this into the second equation and
solve:
0 =

Γ ug gN(N −N0) −1
τp

Np + Γ β N
τc
=

Γ ug gN
Rpump + ug gN Np N0
1/τc + ug gN Np
−Γ ug gN N0 −1
τp

Np
+ Γ β
τc
Rpump + ug gN Np N0
1/τc + ug gN Np
(A.6)
We multiply, this time, by 1/τc + ug gN Np to obtain a quadratic equation:
0 = [Γ ug gN (Rpump + ug gN Np N0) −(Γ ug gN N0 + 1/τp) /τc −(Γ ug gN N0 + 1/τp) ug gN Np] Np
+ Γ β
τc
(Rpump + ug gN Np N0)
= −ug gN
τp
N 2
p +

Γ ug gN

Rpump −N0
τc

−
1
τc τp
+ Γ β
τc
ug gN N0

Np + Γ β
τc
Rpump
(A.7)
For convenience, we expand with −τc τp:
Np = −ug gN
τp
N 2
p +

Γ ug gN

Rpump −N0
τc

−
1
τc τp
+ Γ β
τc
ug gN N0

Np + Γ β
τc
Rpump
(A.8)
= ug gN τcN 2
p −

Γ ug gN

Rpump −N0
τc

τc τp −1 + Γ β τp ug gN N0

Np + Γ β τp Rpump
(A.9)
= ug gN τcN 2
p −(Γ ug gN (Rpump τc + N0(β −1)) τp −1) Np + Γ β τp Rpump
(A.10)
This yields a quadratic equation of the form a N 2
p +b Np+c = 0 which has the solution:
114
==PAGE:121==
Appendix A. Analytical solution to the conventional rate equations
Np =
1
2 ug gN τc
h
Γ ug gN (Rpump τc + N0(β −1)) τp −1
+
q
(Γ ug gN (Rpump τc + N0(β −1)) τp −1)2 + 4 Γ ug gN β τc τp Rpump
i
(A.11)
We have here taken the positive root as the term −4 a c ≤0 which in turn means that
the minimum value of the square root is found when the aforementioned term goes to
zero, i.e.
√
b2 −4 a c
a c=0
→|b|. Thus, |−b| ≤
√
b2 −4 a c always. Then, the numerator,
as a whole, is nonnegative when the positive root is taken and nonpositive when the
negative root is taken. a > 0 as ug, gN, τc are all, individually, positive, so the positive
root always yields physical results (nonnegative Np) while the negative root always
gives nonphysical results, save for Np = 0.
115
==PAGE:122==
B
Fabrication process flow
Figure B.1: The process flow for creating the EDC cavities with nano-BH. Note that
the drawing is not to scale.
116
==PAGE:123==
C
Process parameters for ICP and PECVD
ICP
Pressure and power
Gas flows [sccm]
Process
p [mTorr]
Pplaten [W]
Pcoil [W]
N2
SF6
CF4
HBr
Ar
CH4
SiNx w/ strike
10
20
200
60
12
12
-
-
6
HBr etch
10
80
600
-
-
-
5
1
3
Table C.1: Recipe parameters for the ICP processes. The SiNx w/ strike process was
used to transfer the developed e-beam pattern to the silicon nitride hard mask, while
the HBR etch was used to to etch InP at an elevated temperature of 180◦C.
PECVD
Pressure, frequency and power
Gas flows [sccm]
Process
p [mTorr]
Pplaten [W]
f
N2O
SiH4
NH3
N2
Wafer Clean
550
500
380 kHz
1000
-
-
-
SiN HF
900
20
13.56 MHz
-
40
55
1960
Table C.2: Recipe parameters of the wafer clean process and the process for deposition
of silicon nitride.
117
==PAGE:124==
D
Qualitative device characterisation using
the quality factor setup
We have, in section 3.2.1, described a method of locating buried heterostructures on
a sample, thereby qualitatively estimating whether or not the BHs were even present
and functional. The same analysis was performed on the finalised devices, i.e. the
nanloaser devices in membranised InP after fabrication was complete. The purpose
was much the same: to see whether the devices were functional prior to performing
the optical characterisation of the devices, we have discussed in chapter 6. This was
done by seeing whether, upon being illuminated a IR lamp, they would emit light of
a longer wavelength - much like with the initial BH characterisation. We used, once
again, the setup illustrated inf figure 3.3.
118
==PAGE:125==
Appendix D. Qualitative device characterisation using the quality factor setup
(a) TO5 cavities, small BH size
(b) Centre of array 1.2
Figure D.1: Two images taken in the setup, shown in figure 3.3. Both show TO5
cavities, but on different parts of our chip. In figure (a), cavities with BH design side
lengths of 85 nm to 105 nm (increasing from left to right) are shown. The cavities down
to at least 90 nm and, arguably, the 85 nm sample in the bottom left, appear to emit
light. Figure (b) shows the middle of a particular array, specifically 2.1. The white
cross highlights the exact middle. Cavities appear to emit light in the top-right and
lower-left quadrants, but not the remaining two, suggesting the influence of a stitching
error.
In chapter 3, we found that BHs down to a design side length of 85 nm could be located
with the setup. It is harder to say, in this case, whether the cavities are functional
or not, as the cavities themselves, and not only their BHs, light up in the setup.
Nonetheless, light appears in the centres of the cavities to quite varying degrees, as
is seen relatively clearly in figure D.1(b). In figure D.1(a), it is less clear. It would
appear, however, that light is emitted from e.g. the bottom-left cavity, a TO5 cavity
with an 85 nm BH, suggesting that some cavities with 85 nm BHs are functional. Note
that the entire left column consists of cavities with 85 nm BH, but the bottom one
shows clear signs of successful coupling than e.g. the top one in which light cannot
be seen in the middle. As we move to the right (to larger BH size, in increments of 5
nm per column), more and more cavities appear functional. In the other image (figure
D.1(b)), the centre of array 2.1 is shown. Here, the BHs are significantly larger (design
side lengths of 145 nm to 160 nm), so from the discussion before, we might imagine
that cavities should, fairly reliably, emit light at these BH sizes. We see, however, a
significant difference between the four quadrants of the image, i.e. the four areas that
the e-beam writer exposes individually. This is an issue, but had hoped would be a
non-issue, when the exposure was retried. It seems, however, that the alignment is
119
==PAGE:126==
Appendix D. Qualitative device characterisation using the quality factor setup
better in two of the quadrants (top-right and lower left) than the other two, which
suggests that our sample may have been affected by a stitching error. This effect was
seen in other images of the centres of other arrays as well. The most relevant part of
this analysis, however, is the simple fact that we do, in fact, have cavities (even with
relatively small BHs) that emit light. Despite the apparent stitching error, we attempt,
in further measurements, to characterise a variety of devices without prior confirmation
that said device works. Likewise, we do not exclude measurements of specific small-BH
cavities on the grounds that the Q-setup does not show them emitting light.
120
==PAGE:127==
E
Design parameters of photonic crystals
Design
Parameters
H03/H04HQ
H04
L7
H1
a
484 nm
472 nm
452 nm
482 nm
r
130 nm
110 nm
120 nm
144.6 nm
C1
0.1655a
0.155a
-
0.15a
C2
0.1545a
-
-
0.1a
C3
0.07a
-
-
-0.26a
Table E.1: The design dimensions of the photonic crystals fabricated in the project.
121
==PAGE:128==
F
FDTD simulations including modelling of
the BH region
To investigate the influence of the refractive index change inside our cavities due to the
active BH region, FDTD simulations were made with the active region modelled with
an effective refractive index going all through the membrane in the vertical dimension
and having the in-plane dimensions of the fabricated BH-structures. We did not take
the change in the shape of the BH into account for smaller regions, and the region was
modelled as a square region for all sizes. Simulations were made on a TO4 cavity and
an H04HQ cavity.
As there are several layers in the BH region and the individual refractive indices of
these layers were not fully known, the best possible way to estimate the influence was
to use an effective refractive index for the region. Originally an effective refractive
index of 3.26 was used, as this matched the results of simulations of BH structure that
have already been performed in the research group. Later it was changed to 3.31 as
this matched the measured resonances in the laser characterisation setup.
A gap size of 68 nm was used for the TO4 cavity calculation; this was the result of
the SEM analysis of the fabricated devices, while a hole size of 136 nm was used for
the H04HQ photonic crystal. A membrane thickness of 133.5 nm was used as this
gave a resonance wavelength matching with the passive cavity measurement extracted
when measuring the Q-factor of the cavities. The extracted resonance wavelength and
quality factor for different sizes of the BH region for the H04HQ cavity can be seen in
figure F.1. Resonances measured on devices from array 1.1 of the fabricated chip are
also included.
122
==PAGE:129==
Appendix F. FDTD simulations including modelling of the BH region
(a)
(b)
Figure F.1: The extracted resonance wavelengths and quality factor for the H04HQ.
The resonance wavelengths for the active devices are also exacted at the same pump
power value.
As can be seen, the measured values match quite well with the simulations, except
for three points around 110 nm BH side length. The change in the resonance here
could be due to a defect in the InP membrane, but it could also be that the structural
dimensions have been affected by the e-beam lithography process as they are close to
the e-beam field stitch line. This lies between the devices with a BH sidelength size of
110 nm and 121 nm. Another thing to notice is the reduction in the quality factor at
larger BH sizes. This would have been interesting to include in the plots of threshold
pump power to see the effect of the reduction at larger sizes of the BH. Values were
also extracted for a TO4 cavity. These are plotted on figure F.2.
123
==PAGE:130==
Appendix F. FDTD simulations including modelling of the BH region
(a)
(b)
Figure F.2: The extracted resonance wavelengths and quality factor for the TO4. The
resonance wavelengths for the active devices are also exacted at the same pump power
value.
Again we see a similar trend in the resonance wavelength, unfortunately, no emission
was measured for any TO4 below the e-beam lithography field stitching line. An in-
teresting observation here is that the quality factor increases with the BH side length.
This might not be surprising as the cavity is not optimised for having a change in the
refractive index inside the cavity.
The electric field profile inside the cavity was also extracted to calculate the in-plane
confinement factor. This is defined in the same way as the full confinement factor, just
only calculated for one plane where z = 0 i.e. in the vertical centre of the membrane.
The resulting plots compared with the result of extracting the field of a passive cavity
can be seen on figure F.3.
124
==PAGE:131==
Appendix F. FDTD simulations including modelling of the BH region
(a) H04HQ
(b) TO4
Figure F.3: The in-plane confinement factor calculated with the modelled BH region
and with just taking field profile from a passive cavity.
(a) shows the result for a
H04HQ cavity, while (b) shows the result for TO4 cavity.
As can be seen from the figures in-plane confinement factor does not change significantly
from including the model of the BH. Especially for the TO cavity, a very small deviation
is seen when compared to the result taken from the passive cavity.
125
