==PAGE:1==
Game
Development
Security
Response
Toolkit
GDSRT
Master Thesis
Technical University of Denmark
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
==PAGE:2==
Game Development Security Response Toolkit
GDSRT
Master Thesis
February, 2023
By
Morten Jørvad
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus-
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Published by:
DTU, Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science,
Richard Petersens Plads, Building 324, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over six months at the Department of Applied Mathematics
and Computer Science, at the Technical University of Denmark, DTU, in partial fulfilment
for the degree Master of Computer Science and Engineering, MSc Eng.
It is assumed that the reader has a basic knowledge in the areas of computer science, and
knows basic concepts on development of software modules. Furthermore the thesis also
assumes that the reader has a basic knowledge of networking and knows the principles
of devops.
Morten Jørvad - s144827
Signature
1st of February 2023
Date
ii
Game Development Security Response Toolkit
==PAGE:4==
Abstract
This project explores the need for a CIRT tool for handling events inside online multiplayer
games, and analyses why the field is currently missing an implementation to aid with this.
Based of the analysis, a design is proposed, which focus is to cover the specific needs
that were found in the field, by introducing a system that will aid in process of performing
mitigation for a security incident. This system will then be designed and implemented with
practical user stories for CIRT incident management in mind, to ensure validation of the
implementation can be verified.
In addition to this, the approach of the development will also be done in a iterative sprinting
process, to ensure user feedback is managed, and considered during the development.
The result, or more specifically, the implemented tool, will then be put to scrutiny, by
performing the validation of the user stories against the tool, to prove that the proposed
solution does in fact provide a solution to the problem statement.
Game Development Security Response Toolkit
iii
==PAGE:5==
Acknowledgements
Nicola Dragoni, [Professor, Head of section, Department of Applied Mathematics and
Computer Science], [Cybersecurity Engineering]
I would like to thank Nicola Dragoni, my acting supervisor for his advice and guidance,
during the thesis period, and his help in direction on how to construct the different areas
of the thesis.
Furthermore I would also like to thank the group of game developers that i utilized through-
out this period, that were assisting with giving feedback, and discussion points regarding
the product developed in the confines of this thesis.
iv
Game Development Security Response Toolkit
==PAGE:6==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Problem . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Motivation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.3
Goals
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.4
Thesis Structure
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2
Analysis
4
2.1
Issues in online development . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.2
Existing solutions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.3
Types of cheats and exploits
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.4
CIRT process . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
2.5
Importance of microservice deployment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
3
Design
12
3.1
User scenario . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
3.2
Work process . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
3.3
The solution . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
4
Implementation
18
4.1
Encryption/Cryptography
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
4.2
Service environment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
4.3
Exchange of data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
4.4
Algorithms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
4.5
Data storage
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
4.6
Data output . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
4.7
Connection between services . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
4.8
Discussion
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
4.9
Implementation summary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
5
Validation and Testing
26
5.1
Validation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26
5.2
Testing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30
6
Conclusion
38
6.1
Ending thoughts
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 38
7
Future work
40
Bibliography
42
A Appendix, Test Results
43
A.1 Test data
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 43
Game Development Security Response Toolkit
v
==PAGE:7==
B Appendix, TestCases for Validation
53
B.1 TestCaseOne output . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 53
B.2 TestCaseTwo output . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 54
C Appendix, Setup/deployment
55
vi
Game Development Security Response Toolkit
==PAGE:8==
1
Introduction
Software limitations are constantly being broken and expanded upon, due to the ever
rising need for technology in our life, by the the introduction of new technologies. This
causes developers to have to improve their knowledge base and wisdom, so they can stay
competitive in a ever-growing market. The development of this requires the complexity of
security to follow suit, since as people become more knowledgeable, so does the various
exploits and attacks a hacker will perform.
As a result of this, it becomes harder for individuals to perform multiple roles, as knowl-
edge in a specific area becomes more complex, making it harder and harder for one
individual to carry multiple roles. This is especially the case for smaller enterprises or
companies, which usually does not have the resources available to have a expansive
team with expertise in every role, and usually have to utilize various services to fill those
gaps.
The same concept holds true, if not even more so in the game development industry,
as games in general already requires a large set of different skills, such as art, program-
ming, mathematics, world building and more. New games are being developed every day,
from varying groups of people and studios, and a large part does not have the resources
available to fill all the required roles.
This thesis will address this issue, by reviewing the current security options available, and
contribute with a design and open-source implementation, that will help to make aspects
of CIRP security processes more freely available for use by smaller groups.
1.1
Problem
Currently, for development of games and apps with online aspects, these require a lot
of work to fully support an online environment, and are usually lacking a lot in terms of
security and functionality for tracking cheating individuals exploiting the system. This
creates a very high list of requirements if one would like to implement such an aspect into
their service, where requirements grows larger as security becomes more important. Not
only does this require expertise, but takes a huge time-investment, which instead could
be utilized in our parts of the system.
In the game development sector, this is due to the fact, that most existing CIRP and CIRT
approaches that are available for public use, are targeted towards traditional software for
business use.
These approaches are usually there to mitigate incidents related to unauthorized access-
control, breaches or service disruption[1].
While this is still the case for online game services, for the actual infrastructure of the
server, the in-game events and actions inside the game itself, need to have mitigation
against incidents that occur inside that virtual space as well.
Although solutions for this software obviously does exist in some aspect for applications
in production, it is not publicly available for use, as knowledge of the systems would make
the efficiency of said software weaker, as it is largely based on detection.
Game Development Security Response Toolkit
1
==PAGE:9==
1.2
Motivation
The motivation of this project is to design and develop a system, that would allow game
developers, to easily implement security mitigations for the in-game events that their on-
line game encumbers. Currently, a service to help with providing aid in handling CIRT
related incidents inside the game-world is not publicly available for online game develop-
ers to use.
This is due to the fact that the data that is generated inside the game, is usually not iden-
tical, or the same as the data that would be generated for standardized incidents.
Doing this would allow developers with limited resources, to implement mitigation efforts,
that would otherwise not exist into their system.
Currently, the system is focused on the player-to-player interaction during trading, as to
create a stable in-game economy, but in the future, this could be expanded upon for other
aspects.
1.3
Goals
As the field of security, and security response is a very broad topic, and includes many of
different aspects, it is important to narrow the subject. The thesis main goal is to develop
and implement a Security response toolkit, that can be used in conjunction with online
game services.
The goals framework can be categorized into the following main components:
• Aiding a CIRP: The proposed solution and implementation should be able to assist
in the process of handling certain incidents, that has occurred inside a online game.
• Data handling: The proposed solution and implementation should be able to process
data, and use this in conjunction with data that has been previously collected, to
make a educated assumptions about the legality of the data.
• Data communication: The proposed solution and implementation should be able to
receive and understand data that is coming from a service that it is not affiliated with.
With the non-functional goals being:
• Modularity: The proposed solution and implementation should be constructed in a
modular way, which allows for use by a variety of different foreign interfaces and
services.
• Clarity: Since the project is for use in a security setting, it’s important that the service
is transparent, so developers know that it is not malicious.
• Speed The solution should be lightweight, and data transfer from service to service
should happen fast, as to not put strain on the service utilizing the framework.
2
Game Development Security Response Toolkit
==PAGE:10==
1.4
Thesis Structure
The structure of the thesis is constructed in the following way:
With the problem and objectives described in this chapter, chapter 2 will give an intro-
duction to the basic concepts regarding the field and compare existing approaches and
make arguments for why some of these are not applicable, or not enough to cover this
specific field. Chapter 3 and 4 will then describe the proposed solution that this thesis
concerns. This solution will then be put under scrutiny with validation and user testing in
chapter 5, followed by conclusions and thoughts in chapter 6. Afterwards, future work will
be discussed in chapter 7.
In more depth, the thesis covers the following chapters:
Chapter 2 introduces essential elements and concepts related to security, game develop-
ment, and gaming in general, and investigates currently applied technologies in the field.
Additionally it also analyses common working practices, both in relation to developing with
security in mind, but also process of developing a cybersecurity response plan for use.
Furthermore, the analysis will contain documentation about existing solutions available,
and why some of the of traditional approaches does not directly transfer to work in this
field.
Chapter 3 will present the design of the overall solution of the thesis, by making use of
user stories relating to incident scenarios. Furthermore, this section will also include the
development process.
Chapter 4 will describe the implementation process of the GDSRT system, and which
implementation choices where made. In this chapter, assumptions made about the de-
ployment and scenarios, that the service would be run in, will also be made, and argued
for. Furthermore, issues during implementation will also be discussed in full.
Chapter 5 will illustrate and summarize the evaluation, validation and testing process of
the GDSRT framework, not only to determine whether or not the goals set for the project
were met, but also to document and analyse the user feedback that was received.
Chapter 6 draws the conclusion of the overall work constructing and developing the
GDSRT framework, and summarizes the main takeaways from the thesis.
Furthermore there will be a section containing the authors thoughts about the problem
itself, and the problems and things in hindsight that should of been more carefully consid-
ered.
Chapter 7 will depict the future of the framework, and how it can improved upon, further
developed, and expanded upon to create a more insightful and in depth product.
Game Development Security Response Toolkit
3
==PAGE:11==
2
Analysis
In this section, the analysis will cover the basis and aurgmentation for the reasoning be-
hind the proposed solution. This will be achieved by analyzing the standard issues devel-
opers face when developing online games and put those again which current mainstream
technologies that are available for use, to prove that the problem formulation proposes
a real need, and requires a solution to help with the problem. Furthermore, the analysis
will go into the basis in theory of CIRT and the usual process that occurs when a security
breach, exploit or vulnerability happens. This is done to set a baseline knowledge, and to
tie the objective goals of the thesis to a specific use-case, which then the success criteria
can be measured against.
2.1
Issues in online development
In general, development of online services is a massive undertaking, just like development
of any other software, since mechanics and systems for this usually are very complex, and
requires a varied toolkit between the developers to finish the project. This is even more
the case when developing online games, as it adds on a whole new component on top of
what is already challenging. Elements such as synchronization, message transfer, state
controlling, accounting for internet speed, stability and others are a massive undertaking,
and that’s without even considering the security aspect of system.
When you consider all these elements, it’s becomes fairly obvious why developers es-
pecially those in small teams usually skimp on the security aspects in the development
cycle, as this is not only a ”hidden” element that won’t be showcased or experienced by
normal users, but also something that will cost the developers a good deal of resources
in attempt to try implement.
The sad state of affairs is that most of the projects that does utilize some sort of gaming
anti-cheat will either use a well-known medium such as EAC[2] or use their own private
version, which works by keeping the specific methods of detection a secret. This is be-
cause of the other side of the ”fence”, there are individuals or groups who work against
these services and implementations by creating hacks or exploits that can be used, usu-
ally for monetary reasoning. This means that the field is always getting more complex,
since both sides will continue to implement more sophisticated methods to overcome ea-
chother.
With this happening, it raises the amount of work that needs to be put in, to come up
with proper exploit prevention and makes it harder for developers. Furthermore, as game
development usually consists of very dynamic and special interactions, standardized soft-
ware for general applications are usually not applicable. This is due to that fact, that the
method of exploitation, exploiters in online games use vary very differently from those
that normal software faces. Of course, it should be noted, that general security things,
such as firewall, server access control, server protection and alike can be combated with
standardized tools, as this part is the same. The difference is in the game-play process
and dynamic between the users and the communication from server to game play.
4
Game Development Security Response Toolkit
==PAGE:12==
2.2
Existing solutions
This section will cover and analyse different solution and concepts, that is currently in
use, for both online games and standard software. These types of solutions vary, and will
range from standard incident management software, to existing cheat preventing and to
concepts about trading in games.
2.2.1
Log360
Analysis of a standardized incident management software system, will take focus on the
application Log360. Log360 have implemented a sub-service such as their incident man-
agement[3], which is designed to ”reduce the taken take to detect and response to security
incidents”. This service is implemented in a much more broad sense, with the focus being
on detecting the most common attacks. This service provides the following functionality
for two different sides:
• Incident detection
– Rule-based event correlation engine
This functionality allows you to set up specific rules, that allows for detection of
common cyberattacks.
– Machine-learning-based behavior analytics
This functionality is used for detecting abnormal access to services, based on
deviations from the trained behavior.
– Leveraging threat intelligence
This functionality allows for detection of malicious sources, by retrieving data
from popular anti-virus vendors that scans for viruses.
• Incident Response
The more interesting comparison and analysis, is Log360’s incident response tools.
This application have two different systems that is supported, and provided with the
service:
– Real-time alerting system
This system allows for the service to scan in real-time if any security threat is
discovered. The service allows for users to set up different profiles with up to
1000 different criteria to detect for either a specific anomaly or a wide array[4].
– Automated incident workflows
This service allows a user to automatically person a predefined CIRP plan once
a specific incident have been found. This can be triggered directly from the
above system.
While Log360 on the surface level does seem to be a complete package, is it clear through
use of the application, that the specifically of the requirementsin this thesis, does not seem
possible by the use of this.
All of the predefined alerts, and compliance alerts possible in this application, is only
targeted towards standardized and traditional security vulnerabilities, as shown in figure
2.1.
Game Development Security Response Toolkit
5
==PAGE:13==
Figure 2.1: Alert options of log360
Furthermore, the level of customizable alerting, whilst very impactful and broad, does
not offer enough in-depth customization to be able to achieve a very specific end goal or
data calculations when receiving an orthodox types of data, such as an game-event. The
custom alerting is shown in figure 2.2.
Figure 2.2: Custom options of Log360
While it is not impossible that an implementation could be made using this system, that
might fit the criteria of the problem, this alert would be almost impossible to test, manage
and would be extremely bloated. This is because you would not only have to convert the
game-event to something the system would understand, and afterwards you would also
have to perform calculations on this, which the system is not designed for.
6
Game Development Security Response Toolkit
==PAGE:14==
Since game-events inside an online-game follow a very specific pattern, and the data will
be presented in the same way for all of these events, this makes it hard for the system to
detect an anomaly. This is due to the fact, that ”anomalies” in a game-environment can be
very different from those that is usually accepted for standard applications. For example,
an anomaly for 1 game, does not have to be the same for another game, depending on
each of the EULAs that each game encumbers. This means that the rules and the alerts
that need to be set will wildly differ from game to game.
This is quite different from standard applications, where for example, it is almost always
the same for alerts related to say, DDOS attacks, unauthorized access and more, regard-
less of the type of service. With this, it makes it very hard to cover the bases that an online
game requires, unless it was specifically crafted in that way.
In addition, due to the fact, that most of the incidents of in-game events that occurs in an
online game, does not have a directly correspondent eradication method, as other attacks
have. This means that for most of the incidents that occur, such as RMT as described in
subsection Trading, they will be performed over and over again, with no possible patch,
because of the many nuances that a trade can have.
In summary, this means that for a large number of incidents that occur, that will have to
be mitigated, these incidents be performed with a a eradication stage, where the incident
is patched. This can clearly be argued for the case, when you consider, that even now,
after decades, companies and online studios, such as Jagex[5] still struggle dealing with
RMTers.
With that said, one could potentially use this for incident management, by manually read-
ing all of the logs, unfiltered, but this would be inefficient, and very slow, and would defeat
the purpose of the system.
It is without a good idea that online games uses a system such as this one, for the over-
all protection of the server infrastructure itself, but for the incident response of in-game
events, this does not have the necessaries available to support this. This is further sup-
ported by the article by Stephen Mohr and Shawon S. M. Rahman[6], which describes
that generalized Security Issues are just as prominent in the Video Game industry, as
they are anywhere else.
2.2.2
Anticheat
On other side of the spectrum, for the prevention and detection of cheats and exploiting
from the perspective of the client, we have anti-cheat services. Although there are many
systems and services available that offer anti-cheat for games, these are systems that
work at prevention and usually function primarily on the client-sides, rather than dealing
with handling of incidents or dealing with the results of an exploit.
The kind of software is for example EAC[2] which is a major service available for game
development companies to use, and is used by a large number of popular online games.
These services in question works by doing a set of look ups and scans on the users com-
puter, which vary from service to service specifically, and their specific process is usually
unavailable to the public.
The general concept of how these prevention software implementations work[7] is rela-
tively simple. They work by scanning in order to detect files & processes on the users
computer, which might expose unusual modifications, anomalies, injections or unautho-
rized access to memory that show the markings of a hack or cheat. When these are
discovered, it is then shared with a controlling server together with the users id, to be
checked.
Game Development Security Response Toolkit
7
==PAGE:15==
As these system usually will perform actions at a very low level on a computer, nowadays
the kernel, they are considered somewhat intrusive and comes at the cost of the users
security and privacy, often considered a necessary evil.
2.2.3
Trading
A major part in many online games, which uses player-to-player interaction is the trading
between users, either through a trading medium such as an exchange or directly between
users in the game. This interaction can be considered the same in principle with what
happens with during exchanges with trading services or banks in general, as many of the
aspects of both, mimic that in which occurs albeit more lax for trading systems in games.
RMT, or Real Money Trading, is defined as the exchange that happens when one would
receive in-game currency in exchange for real-world currency, through improper chan-
nels[8]. This is an issue a large amount of games struggle with, as not only can it be
difficult to track when it occurs, but for many users, it is also a desirable thing to do for a
number of reasons. Reasoning can be anywhere from lack of time-commitment, fun, or
a desirable to beat other players. The result of this is usually breaking the EULA of the
game, and will in most cases result in having your account deactivated or suspended, but
usually not anything more in most cases. This makes it a very lucrative business for the
people doing this, as there are rarely any real-life consequences[9].
Detection of this phenom is usually extremely complex, and individuals will usually slip
through to the cracks and end up without having faced any consequence. As a result of
how difficult detection can be, a possible detection of this is described in the 2011 pub-
lication Detecting Real Money Traders in MMORPG[10], where the authors, describes a
theoretical solution for the detection, by performing a long series of steps, using a large
volume of trades. This method is largely based on collecting data of individuals which
have traded closely with each-other. This means that if the individuals knew the detection
method, this could be circumvented, by not performing trades in a closely manner, but
instead creating new users for the trading.
It is also stated in the publication, that operators, or admin who has to perform the mitiga-
tion against these users, will still have to manually make a judgement call, as the precision
is not near close enough to be certain, and can only make suggestions.
Although not visible, there is without a doubt, quite a few applications in production that
not only have different kinds of detection algorithms for preventing this, but also have tools
for managing and mitigating these types of incidents. If this was not the case, most if not
all of online games with this functionality would be overrun with rampant RMT.
But due to the fact that these often are very sensitive systems, which work most optimally
against this, when its method of detection is hidden, this means that these application
are either privatized in each studio or handled and created on a service to service basis.
This is done, due to the fact that if RMTers were to know exactly how the process was
performed, they could specifically design countermeasures to circumvent this, instead of
having to guess by experience and trial and error.
8
Game Development Security Response Toolkit
==PAGE:16==
2.3
Types of cheats and exploits
When considering the types of exploits possible in a game, it becomes a large list, as
there are so many factors to consider. This is very different from usual exploits in the
software world for online services, where it’s mostly about gaining inside access to the
service through various means, preventing service or through crashing the service.
This is of course still a very integral element of a game development service, but in ad-
dition it also adds a layer on top of that, as cheats can be more nuanced in terms of the
objectiveness. This is because of the fact that whilst the real world has very specific se-
curity rules of what is allowed and what is not, a online virtual world not only has the same
security rules about the service and server itself, but also rules on what is allowed in the
game. This makes it harder to create generalized software for these types of services, as
these intrigue rules usually are more nuanced from game to game. This means that whilst
some rules for a specific online game might permit some things, this can well enough not
be considered the case for another game. Some of the most prominent types are[11]:
• Botting
A very common cheat, where a computer-system will control and play the game for
you, doing various tasks inside the game. This will most commonly be done by what
is known as a bot-farm, which has multiple instances running, doing this. These bot-
farms are mainly done for a monetary reason, where they will usually gather in-game
currency to sell for money in the real world. In most cases, these are very damaging,
not only for the economy of the online game, but also as it minimizes each players
feeling of accomplishment[12].
• Hacking
A common cheat, where a user will run a script on his computer, which modifies
the games code, and allows the user to perform things that usually would not be
possible. This abuse is only used on games that utilize some or all client-side logic.
This would in most cases not be possible if the calculations are done server-side.
• Real-world trading
As described in section Trading, this entails trading a in-game item or service for
real-life currency. Nowadays it is quite common that a system will be in place to
offer this by the developers themselves, as to minimize the amount of players that
RMT and thus break the EULA. Still, RMTers will usually sell for a much lower price
than what is offered by the game itself, making it a more desirable option.
As mentioned in above section, this is paired with automated systems, by the use of
Botting software to gather in-game valuables quickly, in a distributed way. This is for
example the case for Amazon’s online game Lost Ark[13], where a large number of
bots are present at all times, due to the monetary gain that is possible, from running
these bots at all times.
• Abuse/Exploits
As there are lot lower consequences for abusing an exploit inside a game, such
as a bug, compared to abusing an exploit in a online service, such as a online
retailer. The result of this, is that a much bigger number of individuals will try and
take advantage, and as a result, when a exploit is discovered, it is exploited by a
large numbers of players. This is especially harmful, as a large number of users will
then have to be dealt with, directly affecting revenue stream of the developers.
Game Development Security Response Toolkit
9
==PAGE:17==
2.4
CIRT process
When a security incident happens in enterprises, the group responsible for managing and
responding to such an incident is known as a Cyber Incident Response Team. This team
will try to mitigate and patch the security incident, as quickly as possible.
The process this group usually follows, is what is know as a CIRP, or Cyber Incident
Iesponse Plan, which defines possible eventual threats and exploits a enterprise might
have occur. These plans are created and constructed from the basis of an risk analysis,
where possible threats and risk are determined from possible factors and percentage of
occurrence.
This means that plans for possible attacks are created before they happen, and the indi-
viduals responsible can then perform the mitigation much quicker against these attacks.
This is due to the fact, that they can follow the plan for that specific scenario, rather than
having to figure out the steps of mitigation during an attack.
The steps of this plan is usually constructed in the following way[14]:
1. Preparation This step is about detailing who is responsible, and who need to be
contacted.
2. Detection and Analysis This step is detecting and analysing when a incident has
occurred. Usually this step is triggered by the use of software to automatically detect
incidents.
3. Containment This step is about containing the incident, and ensuring it does not
escalate.
4. Eradication This step is about rectifying the incident and eradicating any possible
danger.
5. Recovery This step is about making recoveries of the damage that occurred, and
getting everything working again.
6. Review This step is about reviewing how it happened, why and discussing plans to
prevent this.
During this project, this will be utilized to select several scenarios of attacks that could
occur, and then the development toolkit will be designed from the basis of those, to ensure
that the product can be used in conjunction with the plan to mitigate an incident.
This means that for the CIRP that are constructed in the next chapter, the finalized product,
should be able to help with the mitigation efforts in other to be validated.
2.5
Importance of microservice deployment
The following section describes concept of microservice and monolithic applications and
design choices that is usually considered when developing services that work hand in
hand with other services.
In the context of this thesis, the problem specifies its goal to be that of helping game
developers, increase security, by providing CIRT functionality. Because of this, it is im-
portant to understand the different options that need to be considered when building such
a service.
Microservices are not a new thing, the paradigm has been around for a while, but they are
still increasing in popularity to this day[15]. This is due to the fact that the monolithic archi-
tecture that used to be the mainstream paradigm is being out-phased, as it had elements
of architecture that is not longer desirable.
10
Game Development Security Response Toolkit
==PAGE:18==
A monolithic service is defined[16] as a project where all the functionalities of the project
exists within a single code-base. This means for example, in the concept of the thesis,
the service itself and security would be directly intertwined in the code base.
A micro service is a paradigm, where the project is made up of smaller services, in which
each handle their own part, and then communicates with each other through a common
shared protocol. This not only allows for splitting up responsibility between the different
services, so they are not intertwined, but also makes it easier to detect issues, as faults
can be localised faster.
In most instances, microservices will be the preferred choice, as it allows for a more in-
depth application, without greatly increasing the complexity as a whole.
Furthermore it allows for different technology stacks to be integrated together, rather than
reyling on a single one. This is especially desirable for third-party applications, as these
can be deployed as a microservice, and be utilised through the use of a interface, rather
than having to directly integrate them into ones application. An implementation as such
can be seen in figure 2.3
Figure 2.3: Microservice example, https://vuestorefront.io/microservices
Game Development Security Response Toolkit
11
==PAGE:19==
3
Design
The following chapter presents the design that was made off the basis of the problem
statement and the analysis. The focus in this section is on the process of design by the
use of user scenarios, for a selection of CIRPs, which follow one or more of the elements
highlighted in the analysis.
3.1
User scenario
To ensure that the service adheres to the problem statement, and solves the presented
need, user scenarios/cases will be chosen, in which the development will follow and vali-
date against. These cases will be focused around the trading aspect of the system, as this
is a very vital part, and will cover some of the most common scenarios that could occur.
The following user scenarios/cases is what the resulting design and implementation will
follow and be validated against:
• Case #1, Botting
This case will be focused around the User Story, where a individual has been caught
to be botting/macroing, and thus breaking the EULA. Before it was discovered the
individual decided to transfer the valuables gained through a series of different ac-
counts, to prevent that those valuables are removed.
The basis for this, is that the design should encumber a service that allows for de-
tection of this, and to aid in the mitigation of this incident. This is done by allowing
a administrator to discover that the valuables traded hands, and the user that ends
up with the valuables can be identified through the service.
• Case #2, RMT trading
This case will be focused around the User Story, where a individual has been caught
selling in-game currency to other players in exchange for real-life money.
The validation of this, is whether or not the individuals that have engaged in activity,
can be presented to a mitigation administrator, so a judgement and recovery can be
made against all accountable users. Furthermore, as a negative-validation of this,
it should also be the case, that any individuals who might have made real and valid
trades with this player, are not presented to the administrator.
3.2
Work process
The development of the project will happen in several iterative sprints, which are focused
around gathering feedback from various tests, and then continuing the next sprint, with
the knowledge gathered from the tests.
Figure 3.1: Iterative sprint[17]
12
Game Development Security Response Toolkit
==PAGE:20==
This means, that for the feedback received throughout the sprints, the design might change,
or the requirements could be slightly adjusted, to better suit the need of the target user
group.
For the tests, they will not only be different types of tests performed when the develop-
ment of the system is at three different stages, but also utilize a group of individuals that
represent the target audience that the proposed solution caters to. Further description
and results of these tests will be described in section 5,
3.3
The solution
The solution for this will be divided into two parts, respectively, the service itself, and the
integration of the interaction between the foreign service that developers will use and the
service itself. The full solution will then be the these two parts combined.
An overview of the envisioned design is showcased in figure 3.2.
Figure 3.2: Design over system
All of the individual parts that make up the entire system, will be described in further details
in this chapter.
To determine whether or not the proposed design and solution fulfills the requirements,
and solves the problem statement, will be evaluated in chapter 5.
3.3.1
Processing the trade
When a trade is received in the service, analysis needs to be made on that trade, so it
can be used later for incident mitigation. By performing this analysis, these results can
then later be compiled into a report, by an admin, for use in aiding a CIRP.
There are two parts, that is this process is split up into. First is the overall structure, which
describes the process from receiving the trade data to saving the result of the analysis.
The other is the calculation itself during the trade processing.
Overall structure
First, for the data received, it is important to make the data transfer from the client, to
the service, as simple as possible. This will allows us to make the implementation for the
client integration as simple as possible.
Game Development Security Response Toolkit
13
==PAGE:21==
Therefore, the process of registering users, and items is combined into the process of
trade. This means that if the service receives one of these that are not already stored on
the service, then it will register it during the trade.
This overall process can be seen in figure 3.3.
Figure 3.3: Design of overview of trading process
Constructing the design in this manner will allow the client integration to only have to send
the trade data, and nothing else, and thus making it as simple as possible.
Furthermore, after processing the trade, it will based off the result, decide whether or not
the traders should be checked in more depth. The user here will then be checked, by
making comparisons based on previous trades.
Trade processing
To process a trade, a series of calculations will be done, to create an output, which can
later be used for report management.
The following data will be used in conjunction with previous trades to determine the result
of the trade:
• Trade
– Items
– Users warning level
– Recent trades
• Item
14
Game Development Security Response Toolkit
==PAGE:22==
– Price
– Accuracy
The idea is to use all of this data to make a educated guess on the legality of the trade,
as shown in figure 3.4. This is done by making comparison between the two traders, and
their value, their recent trades, and by utilizing generalized data about items from previous
trades.
The most important part of the calculation will be in the accuracy of the items. This is due
to the fact, that the more accurate and precise a value of an item is, the more likely it is
that the judgement the service makes, is to be true.
This is why the accuracy of the items will generally be low when starting initially, due to
system not knowing the precise price. But as the service becomes trained, by receiving
enough trades, this will slowly increase and by extension, increase the proficiency of the
processing.
Figure 3.4: Design of the trade calculation
For this design to be validated, the goal is for the calculation to be done in such a manner,
that it leaves a trade result that is consistent enough to pass the validation of the user
scenarios that have been set up.
Game Development Security Response Toolkit
15
==PAGE:23==
3.3.2
Handling the report
For the main part of the user story, a administrator that is mitigating an incident, need to
be able to receive a report on the specific user or user(s) that the incident is concerning.
To achieve this, we can list the essentials in the data-set that the administrator needs to
be able to retrieve for any user:
• Username
• List of suspicious trades
– Linked individual to each of the suspicious trades
A set of trades, for that specific user, in which the trade processing deemed the
trades to be suspicious.
Linked to each of these suspicious trades, is the corresponding user, for each of the
trades.
This will allow the report to fully encumber the entirety of the Users actions.
Furthermore, the report will also contain a recursive iteration of each linked individ-
uals for the user, performing the same report. This will allow the data outputted to
be able to show a ”chain” of users, and thus being able to complete the validation
of case #1.
As can be seen in figure 3.5, the process begin with a initial request from a admin, through
the connection, which then initiates the data generation for the output.
This process is recursively scanned, until all linked of suspicious traders have been iter-
ated through, as mentioned above.
Once all of the data have been inspected, a request to create the actual report file is made,
which will then make a report file, which contains the linked data and the corresponding
trades.
Figure 3.5: Design of report generation
16
Game Development Security Response Toolkit
==PAGE:24==
3.3.3
Integrating the client-service
The integration of the foreign service that developers will use to connect to the GDSRT
framework service, will be in the form of a code library in a language of their choosing.
As mentioned above, to simplify things, the only elements that needs to be handled by
the foreign service, and be implemented in their service is the following:
1. Create data object for the connection
2. Connect to the service through the connection
3. Send trade data, as trades occur
For the connection between the two GDSRT services, a interface type system will be de-
veloped, which allows for different types of communication to be used interchangeably.
Although the construction of the service will be made to support this, only TCP commu-
nication through a socket will be used. This is chosen, because it allows for not reliable
lightweight communication between the two services, but also because almost all imple-
mentation languages support basic socket communication, and therefore it can applied
easily. There is an argument to make, to instead use for example HTTP request, as this
allows for more simplistic communication, but it has the downside of being more heavy
than TCP, since HTTP is a protocol built on top of TCP.
Furthermore, the ability to use RSA encryption for the data transfer will be available in
the client service, as a proof of concept for encryption during data transfer. This should
be possible by providing a public key on the foreign service to encrypt the data, and a
corresponding private key on the receiving service, that will decrypt the data.
Due to the fact, that the client implementation, does not need to receive any data back,
there does not need to be encryption the other way around. ,
The entire process and the elements involved in the integration with the foreign service
can be seen in figure 3.6.
Figure 3.6: Client library integration design
Game Development Security Response Toolkit
17
==PAGE:25==
4
Implementation
This section will cover and document the different implementation choices, priorities and
processes that were taken for the different aspects of implementation. Furthermore it will
also contain argumentation for the different choices, and assumptions about usage.
The service is written in Java, with client libraries for use written in both Java and Python.
The client libraries are meant to primarily serve as a proof of concept, that this service can
work with a wide variety of different languages, and can easily be implemented to work
with other languages.
For the service, the code has been implemented in a iterative process, with testing done
throughout the cycle, which is documented later in section Validation and testing.
Both of the services are available as Open-source on GitHub:
GDSRT Service: https://github.com/Morten-JO/GDSRT
GDSRT Client Library: https://github.com/Morten-JO/GDSRT-C
4.1
Encryption/Cryptography
While the implementation does contain the possibility to encrypt the message using a
private and a public key set, private for the service, and a public key for the client, using
RSA, this in hindsight does not necessarily make sense. This is due to the fact that in
almost all realistic scenarios, the service would most likely run in the same container
environment as specified in the next section, together with the server that is sending the
data. Setting up the service in this manner would allow for the environment to only accept
inbound connections to the framework coming from inside the container environment.
This would mean that the only connection to enter the service, would be a connection
from inside the same environment, and thus greatly reducing the need for any kind of
encryption.
In addition, considering what exactly is being transmitted, it is not the most vulnerable
type of data, especially considering the users can just be identified by an id, rather than
something vulnerable. A possibility that could be exploited here is to make a MITM attack,
which could send the false trades, training the service, which then would allow the attack-
ers to ”sneak” in an unflagged trade that would otherwise have been flagged. But in this
specific case, if the environment has already been violated, the more pressing security
risk would be in another service, as the server itself that is running the player data or the
game itself is most likely the more vulnerable asset.
Considering the fact, that the service does not require the inbound connection to verify
its identity or its data, even with the encryption enabled and knowledge of the public key,
would allow a possible attacker to create false requests. This could have been mitigated
in a number of ways, but this was deemed not worth a priority to implement, as the risk of
this happening is very low.
4.2
Service environment
Whilst not originally in the scope of the project, or more specifically, related to the problem,
it is important to consider exactly how the service would function in terms of deployment
and execution.
This is because this affects certain implementation choices to make, especially in terms of
18
Game Development Security Response Toolkit
==PAGE:26==
how security should be managed, and which areas of implementation should be focused
on. This for example means that if the environment for a service, is already at an extremely
low risk of attack, it does not make lot of sense to secure the application at the application
level.
Figure 4.1: Overview of environment
As can be seen in 4.1, the GDSRT system will in a optimal deployment exist within an
protected environment with the corresponding service.
4.2.1
Modularity
Considering the fact that this service is designed work with a wide variety of different
unknown services and implementations, but also utilize various types of technology, the
implementation has to be made in a modular way to encompass all of these elements.
This means that elements, such as the data storage on the service, the communication
connection of the client-side and server-side are made in such a way that they can easily
be exchanged a for different technology stack or implementation. This allows not only
different implementations on the framework to be integrated with ease, after initially cre-
ating the system, but also allows for developers to use the framework in a way that makes
sense in their infrastructure.
Game Development Security Response Toolkit
19
==PAGE:27==
4.3
Exchange of data
The data that is being sent from client is specified as the following:
Figure 4.2: Data exchange of trade
Users
Description
NameTraderOne
Name of trader
NameTraderTwo
Name of trader
ItemsTraderOne
List of items in format [(itemName, quantity)]
ItemsTraderTwo
List of items in format [(itemName, quantity)]
During processing on the client, the data is converted to a string, sent through the com-
munication channel, and then reformatted back onto the corresponding data structure on
the service side.
4.4
Algorithms
There are several mechanics in in the service that uses extensive algorithms to perform
various checks and calculations based on values presented.
All of these algorithms work together, to become a whole that is able to validate the user
scenarios constructed in the design phase.
4.4.1
Trade calculation
This algorithm is used for calculating a TradeResult when receiving a trade, to determine
various factor about the trade, such as potential warning signs like having a uneven trade,
or individuals who might be trying to trade ill-gotten gains.
The resulting TradeResult provides the following as a result, to be used later:
• Median trade-diff value
• Minimum trade-diff value
• Maximum trade-diff value
• Trade warning level
• Trade calculation completion
The first of these results is the different values, median, minimum and maximum, which
defines the current difference in value between the two individuals at the items minimum,
maximum and median pricing. This is used to determine when items and trades are
considered to be in bounds of each other, value-wise.
20
Game Development Security Response Toolkit
==PAGE:28==
The Trade warning level is used as a scale from 0-10, to define in what regard the systems
think how suspicious the trade was. This level is used to consider if the users in question
should be added for investigation as well as storing the trade for later use.
Lastly the Trade calculation completion is used for marking the trade as one of the follow-
ing options:
COMPLETED, ERROR, NOTCOMPLETED, INCONCLUSIVE, FINALIZED.
All of these options are used to showcase what has occurred through trade processing,
and to mark the trade for any further action in the future.
NOTCOMPLETED is the default indicator that the trade has not yet been processed.
ERROR defines that the service ran into a problem processing the trade, and as a result,
either this or dropping the trade will occur. This will most likely be due to an error in input,
or an obscure implementation bug.
COMPLETED Means that the trade fulfilled all criteria, and was completed. There is
the possibility for the trade to be recalculated should the need arise. See section User
warning levels
INCONCLUSIVE This tag will occur if the result of the trade couldn’t be determined. This
can be due to factors such as the price uncertainty of the items.
FINALIZED This tag is when a trade have been fully processed and passed all steps, and
the elements of the trade have had a high certainty percentage, and can be considered
”clean”, and therefore does not need to be processed any further. This will most likely
happen if all the trade factors in the trade have a high enough confidence that the system
can provide a clear establishment of the trade. This does not mean that this trade is not
used later on, but only that the calculations on this trade, will not reoccur even if the data
becomes more accurate.
Figure 4.3 describes the different possibilities as a result of a trade and which actions can
be taken due to this.
Figure 4.3: TradeResult paths
For the trade calculation itself, and how the TradeResult is calculated, it uses a various
set of calculations, based on the following factors:
• Difference of certainty in items of the two traders.
Game Development Security Response Toolkit
21
==PAGE:29==
• Median value difference between the two traders.
• Corresponding items recent trades.
• Minimum/maximum value overlap value difference between the two traders.
Furthermore, the algorithm also deliberates based on some of these factors, whether or
not to update the pricing of the items and to increase their certain percentage. As a result,
this allows the algorithm to be more precise, the more data it is ran through, assuming the
majority of trades are fair trades.
If the algorithm does receive a large amount of unfair trades, the accuracy of the cal-
culations can be reduced, due to the fact that the pricing will not be accurate, which is
definitely a downside.
4.4.2
Price flooder
As a result of user testing as discussed in 5.4, this was a functionality that was added
onto the service, as to improve the accuracy of the system.
This algorithm is a add-on algorithm that allows developers to import existing prices of
items into the system, so they can be stored with their real price and with an extremely
high confidence and accuracy level. The confidence level of the items will allow the system
to work with much better precision, as it will make the system reach the real prices of other
items as well, in much fewer trades, and thus be able to confirm with much better accuracy
when a trade is deemed uneven.
This is a configuration that the user can enable, by providing a .csv file that contains a
series of [itemId,price] of the various items. This will then be loaded into the database on
startup, by setting the prices of the items accordingly, and adding them to the database.
4.5
Data storage
The data storage of the system is used to store the following:
• Item data, including but not limited to pricing, certaintyPercentage(accuracy) and
amount of trades.
• Trade data, including but not limited to Trade details as specified in section Ex-
change of data and result of the trade.
• User data, including but not limited to userId and warningLevel.
This data storage is constructed with modularity in mind, through a interface and imple-
mented in two ways, both with the goal as being a proof of concept. The first is as a
transient database and the other as a PostgreSQL[18] database. Currently, the database
implementation for PostgreSQL utilizes JDBC[19] to make calls to the database. This al-
lows for a very easy way to implementation other relational database options in the future,
as the calls through this is the same across all databases.
Furthermore, the data objects stored in the database, also include a row of type list, where
any data can be inputted. This serves as a future-proof implementation, in case revisions
to the data stored have to made, the database table does not need to be updated with a
new column, and can instead use this.
4.5.1
User warning levels
Users criticality is managed by a ”User warning level” system, which marks a specific user
to a level between 1-10. The level is a gauge to keep track of how suspicious a user is,
which is determined as data is processed about the user. This system is used throughout
22
Game Development Security Response Toolkit
==PAGE:30==
the service, and is responsible for keeping track of how much attention to pay to a specific
user.
This means that if a suspicious trade has been processed, a users level might increase
depending on a series of factors. This level is being utilised when generating a report on
the user, as shown in the next section.
4.6
Data output
As described in section 3, when a incident has occurred, for a mitigation to be done swiftly,
data in the service need to be retrieved. This is done by recursively scanning through the
users and constructing them in a graph formation. The amount of data, to consider is
based on the criteria specified from the admin.
Figure 4.4: Report output graph
As can be seen in figure 4.4, the process starts by constructing the graph and connecting
each of the users in which there has been trades that have been deemed suspicious. This
is then recursively done for until the entire graph has been filled out, or the layer of the
graph has reached its maximum. If a user does not have any suspicious trades or the
users have already been in iteration, the link between that user will be broken.
Furthermore, the graph created will be prioritized on its left edges, as to discourage a large
size due to duplicate users. This is because links between users will not be repeated, so
it will prioritize 1 connection or chain at a time.
The result of this can be seen during test in section 5 listing 5.1, where output showcasing
this concept is displayed.
Game Development Security Response Toolkit
23
==PAGE:31==
4.7
Connection between services
The initial communication protocol for use by the client service library and the GDSRT
framework, was chosen to be the TCP protocol, as specified in the design phase. Whilst
the service is designed to encumber multiple different communication protocols, not only
in modularity, but also in design, due to time constraint, and the fact that they would serve
the same purpose, only TCP has been focused on.
Figure 4.5: TCP communication system
As showcased in figure 4.5, this implementation works by having a socket that accepts
a user and starts the appropriate data objects for that user. This more specifically is the
reader and writer channels, of which each has their own thread that can handle these
channels, and receive/send data concurrently. Once a user has been accepted, and the
threads have been started, the system will accept new inbound connections once again.
This allows for multiple inbound connections to be connected to the service at once, and
thus allows for admins to access the system, whilst the service is live, or allows for multiple
different servers to feed data to the system concurrently.
4.8
Discussion
The majority of the things implemented into the service has been done in a very consid-
erate way in regards to the requirements and design. But there have been some issues,
which has halted and slowed down the development of the project, to a degree where
certain elements had to be stripped or simplified.
This is especially true for the algorithms, especially for the algorithm calculating the trade
data received from the client. This algorithm was originally designed with a very simple
premise, and was thought to be much simpler in terms of implementation and reach. This
turned out to not be the case at all, and the time spent developing was much higher than
the time initially envisioned.
This was partly due to the fact that to get the algorithm to work properly, a lot of testing
had to be done, to ensure that the algorithm would correspond correctly to the different
scenarios that were possible.
Another reason that caused problems related to this was that since the complexity was ini-
tially marked as somewhat low, a rather primitive approach was used for implementation,
rather one that was could have been more state of the art AI oriented.
For other parts of the system, there were also other elements that also was undershot
in terms of time consumption. This can be somewhat due to the level of modularity that
24
Game Development Security Response Toolkit
==PAGE:32==
decided on and implemented for the different functionalities. Whilst this will reduce the
time taken to develop new implementations, the initial development time to develop this
was increased.
Furthermore, as already covered in section 4.1, implementing and testing the encryption,
which should not have been an priority did also take up time that could have been utilized
in a different area.
4.9
Implementation summary
In this chapter, we described how the developed design had been implemented, and dis-
cussed the different aspect and choices for implementation. Furthermore, we discussed
the implementation choices that could have been done in a different and possibly better
way.
The implementation chapter can be summarized in the following parts:
Encryption/Cryptography describes the implementation of the encrypting the messages
sent from service to service, and argues for the reasoning why this initially was done.
Furthermore it discusses the potential issues there are with developing it.
Exchange of data describes the specific data that is being sent between the services,
and how the process occurs. This is done by converting a series of variables related to a
trade to a String, sending, and then reformatting when received.
Algorithms describes the different vital algorithms that is implemented into the service.
The trade calculation works by performing a series of calculations on a trade, and saves
a TradeResult, which shows the results of that specific trade, according to the algorithm,
in the database. The price flooder works by feeding the system data, and thus increasing
the accuracy of the trade calculation, and by extension, the accuracy of the system as a
whole.
Data storage describes the data that the system keeps, and the different ways of stor-
age that the service supports. Currently the service supports a transient database and a
PostgreSQL implementation.
Data output describes the way a user report is generated about a specific individual to
gauge their involvement, when performing mitigation on an incident. This process maps
the users to a graph, with their relation being the trades between each other, filtered by
the warning level of the trades.
Connection between services describes the communication protocol that the client li-
brary service and the GDSRT service utilizes to send data to each other. In this section,
TCP choice is reiterated, as per the design chapter. Furthermore, a in-depth look into
how the server accepts multiple clients is highlighted and shown, to support the different
use cases.
Game Development Security Response Toolkit
25
==PAGE:33==
5
Validation and Testing
This chapter describes the iterative testing that was done during the project and the vali-
dation of the software toolkit, by use of corresponding user stories and scenarios to verify
whether or not they are fulfilled by the system.
For the testing phase, this was done in iterative steps, where each test was done at a
different point in the tool-kit’s development cycle. Due to this, the functionality of the
product in the different tests vary greatly and the tests reflect that.
Each of the tests will be done with user tests, as acceptance tests for the different parts,
and will also be done in different ways in terms of moderation, from unmoderated user
tests, to moderated user tests. The focus of these tests is to gather insightful quality
feedback, rather than quantitative feedback, and the users chosen for this represents
that fact.
For the validation, we will look at the different user scenarios created, and see if the
toolkit proves adequate support for the different CIRPs that were created in chapter 3. To
validate whether or not the toolkit is successful, success-criteria will be set up up each of
the scenario, and after following the scenario, this will be discussed.
5.1
Validation
To validate whether or not the service can be deemed properly implemented, two test
cases will be run through, named Case #1: TestCaseOne and Case #2: TestCaseTwo,
as per section 3.
These two test cases are implemented in Python and Java respectively, and they each
match a scenario for a specific incident.
Both test cases work by using the service, and sending trade data that match what would
occur in the incident. These test cases are then validated manually, by checking the
output of the service, and seeing if the connection in the output that matches that of the
scenario.
5.1.1
Case #1: TestCaseOne
This test case revolves around checking if trading valuables repeatedly through different
accounts, also known as muling, can be tracked through the system, as specified in the
design section.
This means that if a user is found to have done something illegal, and have decided to
transfer his valuables through different mules, to lose the ”trail”, they can be tracked in
the system, and the end recipient can be found.
The implementation for this test is documented on GitHub
Users
The test will use following users:
Users
userOne
userTwo
userThree
userFour
userFive
userSix
userSeven
Performing the test
The requirement for this test, is that all of the items for that are used for the trades have
already been added to the database, with their values present. This is done on starting the
service up, by flooding prices defined in a .csv into the database, using PriceFlooder.java.
26
Game Development Security Response Toolkit
==PAGE:34==
These users will perform trades of the same items, starting from userOne to userTwo,
and then from userTwo to userThree and onward.
This is done until the trade between userSix to userSeven has been done.
Once all trades are done, a request to give a report on userOne where all trades of
warning level 6 and above are present, with a layer depth of 10. The goal is that the report
generated will contain all of the above trades, and show a link between the different users
that make the scenario become validated.
The file outputted can be seen in full in Appendix B.1, but an shortened and omitted
version is below in listing 5.1:
1
{
2
"layer": 10, "warning": 6, "userOne": {"trades": [{"trade": "9
FGF0yJ8jscVRd7zREqn3an7N", "warning_level": 10, "trade_diff": 25200}], "
child_graphs": [
3
{
4
"layer": 9, "warning": 6, "userTwo": {"trades": [OMITTED}], "child_graphs":
[
5
{
6
"layer": 8, "warning": 6, "userThree": {"trades": [OMITTED], "child_graphs
": [
7
{
8
"layer": 7, "warning": 6, "userFour": {"trades": [OMITTED], "
child_graphs": [
9
{
10
"layer": 6, "warning": 6, "userFive": {"trades": [OMITTED], "
child_graphs": [
11
{
12
"layer": 5, "warning": 6, "userSix": {"trades": [OMITTED], "
child_graphs": [
13
{
14
"layer": 4, "warning": 6, "userSeven": {"trades": [OMITTED]}
15
16
}
Listing 5.1: Shortened report of TestCaseOne
Result
As can be seen, all of the users are linked, and they are being chained together from
userOne due to the trades performed. In what was previously in the OMITTED field,
but has been shortened due to visibility, showed that all of the trades had a trade_diff of
25200.
With this, this scenario and TestCase can be validated to be properly working and imple-
mented, since an admin can conclude the result outputs the same as what was the goal
for this user story.
Game Development Security Response Toolkit
27
==PAGE:35==
5.1.2
Case #2: TestCaseTwo
This test case revolves around checking if an individual is selling in-game currency in
exchange for real life money, and if this can be traced if the account doing this is caught,
as specified in the design section.
This allows for an admin to trace whoever have been buying from that individual, and see
the exact amounts of what was traded.
The implementation for this test is documented on GitHub
Users
The individual performing the trade with all others are: rwtname
The test will use following suspicious users:
Users
traderOne
traderTwo
traderThree
traderFour
traderFive
traderSix
and the following non-suspicious users:
Users
traderSeven
traderEight
Performing the test
The requirement for this test, is that all of the items for that are used for the trades have
already been added to the database, with their values present. This is done on starting the
service up, by flooding prices defined in a .csv into the database, using PriceFlooder.java.
The suspicious users will perform trades where they are traded various amounts of cur-
rency from rwtname. Furthermore, two trades with rwtname and non-suspicious users,
will also be done, as legit trades, that should not be outputted in the report.
Once all trades are done, a request to give a report on rwtName where all trades of
warning level 7 and above are present, with a layer depth of 5. The goal is that the report
generated will contain only the trades that the rwtName did with the suspicious users,
and not any other trades. This will hopefully give the list of users who bought currency
and make the scenario become validated.
The file outputted can be seen in full in Appendix B.2, but an shortened and omitted
version is below in listing 5.2:
28
Game Development Security Response Toolkit
==PAGE:36==
1
{
2
"layer": 5, "warning": 7, "rwtname": {"trades": [OMITTED], "child_graphs": [
3
{
4
"layer": 4, "warning": 7, "traderOne": {"trades": [{"trade": "4
OKgurF87W5H3CqTfxGSfOC24", "warning_level": 10, "trade_diff": 500000}],
"child_graphs": []}
5
},
6
{
7
"layer": 4, "warning": 7, "traderTwo": {"trades": [{"trade": "
I5Kb8gjv8Lh3PrDh7FcBhH2Wr", "warning_level": 10, "trade_diff":
2500000}], "child_graphs": []}
8
},
9
{
10
"layer": 4, "warning": 7, "traderThree": {"trades": [{"trade": "
cjb1LundWeoaHOYiCXauiSqvl", "warning_level": 10, "trade_diff":
10000000}], "child_graphs": []}
11
},
12
{
13
"layer": 4, "warning": 7, "traderFour": {"trades": [{"trade": "
r1Qti0G2yWgqBTVozYHaSEUim", "warning_level": 10, "trade_diff":
1000000}], "child_graphs": []}
14
},
15
{
16
"layer": 4, "warning": 7, "traderFive": {"trades": [{"trade": "
vDdDd4Z1J4n2PZFaX6HNG8jGK", "warning_level": 10, "trade_diff": 200000}],
"child_graphs": []}
17
},
18
{
19
"layer": 4, "warning": 7, "traderSix": {"trades": [{"trade": "
xjpu7WiQpNS1TolxEMojtEGTU", "warning_level": 10, "trade_diff": 750000}],
"child_graphs": []}
20
}]}
21
}
Listing 5.2: Shortened report of TestCaseTwo
Result
As can be seen, all of the users in the suspicious groups are shown, with the amount that
was traded clear, and their tie to rwtName clearly visible. In what was previously in the
OMITTED field, all of the trades for each of the different users, was also shown. This can
be seen to be the case in Appendix B, 5.2.
With this, this scenario and test case can be validated and verified to properly working
and implemented, since an admin can conclude the result outputs the same as what was
the goal for this user story.
Game Development Security Response Toolkit
29
==PAGE:37==
5.2
Testing
5.2.1
Testing participants
During design and development, it became apparent that performing wide-spread feed-
back would most likely end up being useless feedback or result in very little usable feed-
back.
This is due to the fact that the system that is being tested, is not only meant for a very
specific niche use, comparatively speaking, but also due to the fact that it is the type of
tool that does not give direct feedback as a result of an action. For example, if one were
to make a trade, that would not be enough, since it is data-driven and works off the basis
of a lot of data.
This could possibly be circumvented if testing was either done in a very guided and mod-
erated qualitative way, where users would be directed, or the users of the product would
take a moderate time to invest in the program, to gather enough information.
This is sadly a side-effect due to fact that the tool is meant to be a security-response
tool, which means that for any security-response to take action, a lot of processes need
to have passed through. As already mentioned this basically means that a good sum of
data have to be inputted into the system, to give decent results, and you would have to
test the system in a way that respects the products objective, rather than just a software.
A way to combat this, could be to provide specific scenarios that were already set up, that
users could just run, but as this would most likely on its own not display anything that was
not already tested, since it was running the same data. While this is not the perfect way,
it should be noted, that test cases were provided to the users testing.
Because of this, the test structure that have been decided upon are to take a more quali-
tative approach to the tests, rather than a quantitative one, and as a result, the tests will
be performed with a small group of users. This group of users are not only willing to invest
an appropriate of time to generate at least usable feedback, but are also individuals, who
are known to have some knowledge in terms of online game development. This will mean
that this group of people is a subset of the “target” audience that the tool is designed for.
The structure and process for the tests will be slightly different for each of the tests, since
they were performed at wildly different points of implementation.
Furthermore, each of the sections will be a overview of the testing, with only what was
deemed as the most vital or riveting feedback for that specific test. A more descriptive
data, can be found in the Appendix A.
30
Game Development Security Response Toolkit
==PAGE:38==
5.2.2
First iteration test
For the first test, this was a test that was done relatively early, and therefore there were
little to no functional implementations made. Therefore instead this test was focused
around the infrastructure and processes, that would later be developed.
The objective of the test, was to introduce the concept, and hopefully gather early feed-
back, so any changes to this, could be performed early, and the design phase could be
revisited if needed. This would ideally limit the amount of refactoring or changes that would
need to be made later on, as things or faults could be discovered prior to implementation.
Locale
This test was done online and remotely, over the course of a few days, with each of the
users being individually ”interviewed” and having the project showcased. All of the test
sessions were relatively short, ranging from 10-20 minutes for each of the sessions.
Rundown
The test was conducted by performing interviews in a very moderated way, where testers
was introduced to the project, and their thoughts were taken about the infrastructure and
process. As previously mentioned, this is due to the lack of functionality that was currently
implemented when the test was performed.
Figure 5.1: Rundown of first test
Results and discussion
The results of this tests were in form of answers to questions that were asked by the
interviewer. The questions were mainly about investigating their thoughts about the in-
frastructure, and what was required for them to utilize the different aspects of the service.
Furthermore, the questions also asks for different options of presenting data for usage,
when inspecting the service. This done to get a better understanding of what specific data
was warranted and needed. Some of the most interesting responses were to the following
questions, that were asked:
Full answers to these questions can be found in Appendix A.
• Q3: Is there anything that would be vital to have, that’s not in the general
system yet?
The usable answers to this question, was 1. asking for a more versatile system,
which would allow for different setup and tracking situations, and 2. concerns about
how the system would work for ”harmless” situations that might be negatively flagged,
such as trading between friends.
While for the first part, a versatile system would definitely be an improvement, but it
is also something that would require more time to be developed, and not only that,
it would also cause greater distinction between different instances of the service.
This could potentially cause it to not work very well in certain scenarios, rather than
an overall setting that works for what it is supposed to.
Game Development Security Response Toolkit
31
==PAGE:39==
For the second part, there is definitely parts of the current proposed system that
would false-positive flag certain trades and interactions, that might look bad on ”pa-
per”, but could just be harmless trade or interaction between a friend. There is not
current a solution in mind for this scenario, apart from ensuring that the admin re-
sponsible for making the mitigation takes the results with a grain of salt, rather than
fact. This is possibly something that could later be investigated and research could
be done to figure out which heuristics could be used to prevent this.
• Q4: In what way would be the best to utilize the results of the system, in re-
gards to which data is presented?
The results for this question was mostly about the same concept which was defined
in the design for the system, even without the testers being aware of the specific
procedure of results.
One thing that was interesting here, is that a concern of efficiency about having
to investigate lots of data from different individuals at once, if a widespread incident
would occur. This is definitely something that might be a concern, and it is beneficial
to evaluate whether this is something to pursue, as it would most likely require lot
of additional work, due to the the addition of more complex algorithms and more
intrigue output systems.
In general, the feedback for this iteration of development proved to be valuable, but a
good portion of the testers did mention that it was very difficult to give in-depth responses,
as the system was more on a theoretical level, rather than a functional one.
32
Game Development Security Response Toolkit
==PAGE:40==
5.2.3
Second iteration test
For the second test, this test was performed with a baseline working implementation,
where the general process was implemented, but the system as a whole was still in a
very rough state. This means that whilst functionality was here, it was not at all polished,
and only a subset of the project configurations was developed.
The objective of this test was to outline certain flaws, possibilities or improvements in the
process and implementation, so the things that did not work could either be thrown out,
improved upon or changed completely. Furthermore, the test was also meant to gather a
more precise and less moderated form of feedback, that was lacking from the first test.
Locale
This test was done online and remotely, over the course of a few days, with each of the
users, having received the toolkit and the client for using it. The testers were free to use
as much or little time as they desired, so the time spent is somewhat varied and unknown.
Rundown
The rundown was conducted by letting the testers conduct their exploration in their own
way, after providing them with the required elements to run the system.
The testers received the main service to run, and the client library in Java for testing, with
a tiny example of code showing how the client worked. A small guide was also given to
the testers, together with the services, and the reasoning behind limiting the guide to be
small, was to see if the system was intuitive enough for the testers, with little knowledge,
or if they would require support. Furthermore the testers had access to support in case
of problems at any time.
Figure 5.2: Rundown of second test
Results and discussion
The results of this tests were in form of feedback received from the testers. This feedback
could be anything from how the system was to use, or specific functionality of the service.
Some of the feedback received led to discussions, whilst other parts was pretty clear and
concise. Also as the system was still in the process of development, there were some
feedback that was errors or issues that the testers had discovered.
Some of the most interesting feedback that was received were the following:
Full feedback can be found in Appendix A.
Game Development Security Response Toolkit
33
==PAGE:41==
• ”The output of the users(The report) was somewhat lacking, and did not really
give any definite useful information.”
For this feedback, the user was asked to clarify, and said the following: “It show-
cased what the system thought of the users, but not the reasoning”
Since it is not CIRT professionals that are the target group of this application, but
instead it is individuals who have a passion for game development, this is a clear
misunderstanding about the service. It is meant to be a add-on for developers to
use when making judgement about an incident, rather than something they can
blindly trust. With that said, the user did make a good point, in the sense that the
report only showed the result that was created, but did not contain any reference or
reasoning to what decided that specific result. After some going back and forward,
it was decided that this was something that definitely should be changed, at least in
some sense, so the reasoning is there, and the decisions can be more substantial
and more impactful.
• ”The values of the items are very slow at being adjusted?”
This feedback was concerning the price updating of the items as trades were re-
ceived. Initially this feedback was related to a specific bug, where the service was
received 1-1 trades, in which the values would not change.
But disregarding that, the tester still found that adjusting the pricing of items through
trading would take an enormous amount of ”real” trades. This is because currently,
if a very high valuable item need to find its real price, the item need to be traded
an immense amount of times to increase the price little by little. This process was
something that the tester had some faults with, especially if the service was to be
introduced at a point in time, where the game had already been up for some time.
After discussion, a proposal was made, to allow developers to import existing prices,
into the database, that the service would use. The tester found this to be a good
idea.
In general, there were some concerns about different parts of the system, mostly about the
output of the system, but it also became apparent, that the guide/documentation provided
was not enough, which was signalled by the amount of support questions that were asked.
In addition, testers did not have enough time to fully feel the effect of the algorithms, but
this is partly due to the fact that only a transient database was available, and the time
constraint.
34
Game Development Security Response Toolkit
==PAGE:42==
5.2.4
Third iteration test
For the third and final test, this test was performed in much of the same way as the
second test, except the fact that the service was further along in development, and had
been fine-tuned in terms of functionality. With that said, there were still quite a few things
that was not implemented yet, as the time schedule for the different elements had been
too overambitious and the time required for the finer things in the implementations was
undershot when making the initial plan. Further information on this can be found in the
section nd section 4.8.
The objective of this test was to gather the testers final thoughts on the project, now
that some more functionality had been implemented. Another goal of this tests was to
determine if it was possible for the testers to only use the provided material to work with
the service.
Locale
This test was done online and remotely, over the course of a few days, with each of the
users, having received the toolkit and the client for using it. The testers were free to use
as much or little time as they desired, so the time spent is somewhat varied and unknown.
Rundown
The rundown was conducted by letting the testers conduct their exploration in their own
way, after providing them with the required elements to run the system.
The testers received the main service to run, and the client library in either Python or Java,
that could be utilized to work with the service. A full documentation and guide for both
the service and client library was given to the testers. Furthermore it was expressed that
the testers should try to use the documentation as much as possible, and only request
support if something went very wrong.
Figure 5.3: Rundown of third test
Results and discussion
The results of this tests were in the same form as the previous test, meaning feedback
from the testers, ranging wildly, and also some in depth discussion, if the corresponding
subject warranted it.
Some of the most interesting feedback that was received were the following:
Full feedback can be found in Appendix A.
Game Development Security Response Toolkit
35
==PAGE:43==
• ”I think there could be more options to distinguish or configure the system?
If one knew that a game were using this system, I think some very specific
ordering of processes could very easily break since there are no “changes”
from game to game.”
This is a very good point, and this question sadly goes full circle to what was de-
scribed in the analysis, as this is the main reason why these types of systems are
not available for the public to use.
On one hand it is true, that at the current implementation, if one knew that a game
was using this service, they could perform specific actions repeatedly, to make the
system become trained to those action, and pass the suspicious trade, that it oth-
erwise would not have. On the other hand, this is not something that can be easily
combated, and it could eventually end up being an endless fight, with trying to con-
tinuously patch these things. Furthermore this should not be the only security that
a system should depend on. The tester does make a good suggestion with having
multiple configurations that the exploiters would not be able to see, and then fight
this weakness in that way. But again, this could cause issues with how the system
works, and would most likely take a long time to develop and integrate properly.
• ”The encryption does seem rather unnecessary when you consider you’d
most likely want to deploy this as a container on the save server as what’s
connected to it.”
Yes, this is something that was realized after implementation. First of all, it is true,
that the connection between this service and the service feeding it data would in
most cases run on the same instance, on the same network. This means that the
devops admin could configure the service to only accept connections and data from
that specific instance, so there is not much need for it.
Second, since it is not really that vulnerable data that is being transmitted, except
maybe for the username, which could be masked, it does not expose the system or
the data to much exploitation.
The only case that could be made for this, is that if one were to adjust the data
that is being transmitted, this could be used for exploitation, by feeding fake data,
”incriminating” others or inflating the values. But not only is this is a far fetched
scenario, but it can still be done with knowledge of the public key in this current
system, and the risk of this happening would be extremely low.
• Regarding the output, a tester felt that for a user with a big enough data-set
of trades, the output would become huge and hard to read.
With how the system works, if one user gets too many trades, it will match and chain
the different trades of users to it, and generate a really big report.
This is because currently, the only way to influence which filtering is done on the
user, is by marking what level of ”warning” should occur. Whilst maybe difficult or
harder than not, in my mind, it is better to have a in-depth system that shows a albeit
big, but complete transnational map over the user, rather than something that might
leave out something important.
With that being said, the user did suggest the option of pairing a subset of different
users together, and only performing the report on those. This is a good idea, as this
would allow a admin to only look at a very specific group of people, and determine
exactly what the link between these users were.
36
Game Development Security Response Toolkit
==PAGE:44==
In general, testers felt that the system was quite a bit better than the previous iteration,
but did feel like some things were missing. For example for the Python client library, users
said that it was more incomplete in comparison to the Java client library.
This is true, and it is the case, and the reason for this is that the Python client library was
implemented more as a proof of concept for different libraries or implementations in other
languages, rather than an actual implementation.
In addition, users also wanted more connection possibilities, other than purely TCP based
solution through socket, but as the previous point, this was done as a proof of concept,
and would be an element in future work.
Game Development Security Response Toolkit
37
==PAGE:45==
6
Conclusion
In this thesis, the focus and goal was to create and develop a framework which would
allow developers of online games to perform mitigation on events that would occur inside
online games, and thus quicker resolve incidents.
Initially, the analysis and research focused on exploring the industry as a whole, and de-
termining whether current solutions would allow for the goal to be fulfilled. By researching
Log360, this was determined to not be the case, due to the fact, that the variety between
mitigation and incident management for standardized issues such as software breaches,
attacks and access control, does not align with the required incident mitigation that is
needed inside a online game.
From this, a design was constructed, in which a solution for the problem statement was
proposed. In this design, the core system is built around two different incident response
user stories, which goals are to be validated and verified, and thus proving the design fits
the specific need. The design included a system that would be able to retrieve data from a
foreign service, by the use of a client library, and use that data to perform calculations and
generate incident response analysis that a administrator could use to perform mitigation
quicker than otherwise not.
The implementation for this proposed design was implemented as a proof of concept, in
which multiple client libraries in both Java and Python was made to provide proof that
the service could be used in conjunction with any kind of language, assuming the library
implementation was made. Furthermore for the service itself, it was created in Java, and it
was created in a very simplistic modular infrastructure, that allowed for multiple extensions
to be made in the future.
Having implemented the GDSRT framework, to ensure that the framework meets the
objective, the validation of the framework had to be performed. This was done by using
the two incident user stories that were created during design, and seeing if the results of
this proved a real help to the process of the incident.
This was determined to be the case, as the system was able to provide extracted data
specific to that incident, and the incident could be rectified by using this data.
Furthermore, the iterative process of development was also documented and performed
through the thesis, which allowed insight into certain thoughts and assessments that were
done, due to the user feedback.
To conclude, even though there were several issues and mistakes done along the way,
from the basis of the process of analysis, design, implementation and validation it can
be stated that the objective of thesis was met. Nevertheless, it is vital to document, that
for a complete incident response system as a whole, it is only a very limited part of this,
as it only supports very specific functionality. If one were to further development on the
framework, further validation for many other incidents would have be to done, to determine
if the system as whole would work for more than just a handful of scenarios.
6.1
Ending thoughts
During the course of the thesis, several things that can be considered mistakes were
made, that somewhat hindered the process of the project.
38
Game Development Security Response Toolkit
==PAGE:46==
Whilst these were mostly related to incorrect and inefficient time management, as de-
scribed in section 4, for the design and implementation, there were also other elements
in the project that could have been done in a better way.
Early in the project, It might have been beneficial to try have spent more time researching
during the analysis phase, which could have minimized the specific scope of the project,
and allowed for a more in depth design and implementation. This section was cut some-
what short, due to the lack of information available for this specific subject.
Furthermore, I wish the planning and execution of the different tests had been more evenly
split out, as the first test, had very little impact, as it was done too early in the process,
where the baseline implementation had not yet been integrated. In addition, specific focus
points of the implementation should been have shifted and split onto more different parts,
instead of perfecting certain algorithms by doing many iterations and tests, to get it just
right.
Game Development Security Response Toolkit
39
==PAGE:47==
7
Future work
GDSRT provided a foundation and baseline for an flexible, Open-source and very modular
Online-game CIRT response tool, which can be extended upon. This tool is currently
available on GitHub, as a Open-source project that can be contributed to:
https://github.com/Morten-JO/GDSRT
https://github.com/Morten-JO/GDSRT-C
While the toolkit as a whole, only support a small piece of the totality of the different events
and triggers could be handled as a incident management tool for Online Games, below is
ideas and extra implementations that can be made as extension of this thesis:
• In-game actions event processing
Currently, the only actions that are tracked through user interaction is multiplayer
trading. Further functionality can be added to include and track other aspects of the
game, which then can processed and rectified if an incident corresponding to those
actions should occur.
So for example, one could track a users level, or experience, and perform a rollback
or alike to reset a specific users progression.
These could be the following, but not limited to:
– Character Progression(level, experience)
– Character Items (items, bank, gear)
– Character movement (position, speed)
• Automatic incident management
The GDSRT framework was designed in mind that it was to be a mainly manually
focused mitigation tool, but an extension could be made, to allow for incidents dis-
covered, to automatically integrate with a different process, such as Log360, and
send a message so a process would begin.
The process for this could be:
Retrieve data -> Process data -> Discover incident -> Send message to foreign
service
The idea behind this, is that you could for example automatically restrict trading on
specific users, if they were marked suspicious, and then they could be researched.
This would allow prevention of escalating incidents, as it would stop the individuals
earlier in the process. This would although require developers to set up correspond-
ing functionality that could be called from this service.
• Database rollback recovery
While not in the scope of the project, if the framework was extended, it could be
possible to perform a database rollback that an admin could perform, so a incident
involving a set of users could automatically be mitigated against simultaneously by
rolling back only their progress.
This would allow for a service, not to have to negate the progress of all individuals
using the service, but only those involved.
40
Game Development Security Response Toolkit
==PAGE:48==
• More options and implementations
As many elements of the GDSRT framework was created as a proof of concept,
such as the communication protocol, the client library and the database connectivity,
it would make sense to further develop on this.
This would allow users to integrate the service with more types of technology stacks,
and also expand on the possibilities for the client.
• Cryptography
Whilst cryptography was not a focus of the current thesis, due to the service envi-
ronment, the lack of vulnerable data and the time constraint, it is still without a doubt
an important aspect. This would be especially true if one or more of the future works
described would be implemented, as this would raise the vulnerability of the system
and the data.
Extensions and implementation of this could be in form of not only encryption through
TLS, RSA, AES or ECC, for the transfer itself, but also require authentication when
making requests, to protect against fake or unauthorized requests.
• Extension and development of the algorithms
While the GDSRT framework does feature a working algorithm, there is without a
doubt several elements of it, that is not perfect. This is due to the fact that without a
large data set, and extensive testing over a long period with multiple instances run-
ning, it is extremely hard to gauge which faults or ”cracks” there is in the algorithm.
But as the system becomes more developed, and more used, improvements to not
only the efficiency of algorithm, but also the complexity would allow for more in-depth
and accurate processing, that is harder to bypass.
Furthermore, as was discovered during the iterative tests, several configurations to
the systems and algorithms, would allow for a more customizable experience. This
would as a result not as easily allow the users to know the systems exact detection
method, as is currently the case with the system right now.
Game Development Security Response Toolkit
41
==PAGE:49==
Bibliography
[1]
Linda Rosencrance. 10 Types of security incidents and how to handle them. 2019.
URL: https://www.techtarget.com/searchsecurity/feature/10- types- of- security-
incidents-and-how-to-handle-them.
[2]
Easy Anti Cheat. 2022. URL: https://www.easy.ac/en-us/.
[3]
Incident management with Log360. 2022. URL: https://www.manageengine.com/
log-management/soar-incident-management.html.
[4]
Cloud log management with Log360. 2022. URL: https://www.manageengine.com/
cloud-log-management/help/alerts/alerts.html.
[5]
Rich Richman. The Ethical Costs of Winning the Way on Botting and RMT - Our
Consequences. 2021. URL: https://www.newedenpost.com/2020/10/the-ethical-
costs-of-winning-the-war-on-botting-and-rmt-our-consequences/.
[6]
Stephen Mohr and Shawon S. M. Rahman. “IT Security Issues Within the Video
Game Industry”. In: (2011). URL: https://www.researchgate.net/publication/51952605_
IT_Security_Issues_Within_the_Video_Game_Industry.
[7]
Nisha Ellis. Security and Online Gaming: Understanding Anti-Cheat. URL: https:
//hub.schellman.com/blog/security-and-online-gaming-understanding-anti-cheat.
[8]
Byungchul Park and Duk Hee Lee. “The Interplay between Real Money Trade and
Narrative Structure in Massively Multiplayer Online Role-Playing Games”. In: ().
URL: https://www.hindawi.com/journals/ijcgt/2017/3853962/.
[9]
AJ Glasser. Real money trading - the black market of online gaming. 2010. URL:
https://www.itbusiness.ca/news/real-money-trading-the-black-market-of-online-
gaming/14774.
[10]
Hiroshi Itsuki Atsushi Fujita and Hitoshi Matsubara. “Detecting Real Money Traders
in MMORPG by Using Trading Network”. In: (2011). URL: https://www.researchgate.
net/publication/220978460_Detecting_Real_Money_Traders_in_MMORPG_by_
Using_Trading_Network.
[11]
Allan Brown. Cheats and Hacks That are Commonly Used in Online Games. 2020.
URL: https://ugtechmag.com/cheats-and-hacks-that-are-commonly-used-in-online-
games/.
[12]
Alex Mcconnell. How Bots are Ruining Online Gaming for Players and Publishers.
2021. URL: https://netacea.com/blog/bots-are-ruining-online-gaming-for-players/.
[13]
XC Enriquez. Lost Ark Bans Over A Million Bots. 2022. URL: https://clutchpoints.
com/lost-ark-bans-over-million-bots.
[14]
Jingcong Zhao. How to Create a Cybersecurity Incident Response Plan. 2022. URL:
https://hyperproof.io/resource/cybersecurity-incident-response-plan/.
[15]
Vahid Dejwakh. Docker and the rise of microservices. 2021. URL: https://dev.to/
dej/docker-and-the-rise-of-microservices-16lc.
[16]
Marta Beznos. “Microservices vs monolith: Which architecture is the best choice for
your business?” In: (2020). URL: https://www.n-ix.com/microservices-vs-monolith-
which-architecture-best-choice-your-business/.
[17]
Ashutosh Agrawal. Agile Methodology: Incremental and Iterative way of develop-
ment. 2019. URL: https://medium.com/@ashutoshagrawal1010/agile-methodology-
incremental-and-iterative-way-of-development-a6614116ae68.
[18]
PostgreSQL. 2022. URL: https://www.postgresql.org/.
[19]
Java Database Connectivity. 2022. URL: https : / / en . wikipedia . org / wiki / Java _
Database_Connectivity.
42
Game Development Security Response Toolkit
==PAGE:50==
A
Appendix, Test Results
A.1
Test data
Game Development Security Response Toolkit
43
==PAGE:51==
Types:
1.
Questionnaire/Survey
2.
Usability moderated remote general
3.
Usability unmoderated explorative
4.
Usability unmoderated comparative
1: First questionnaire/survey
General:
This survey was done prior to project start and was meant to gauge interest and focus areas.
Project progress:
Not started
Test rundown:
●
Give surveys to a community of developers, to hopefully retrieve some answers.
Questions:
(All questions will have an answer “No Answer” if the question is not applicable (For example
not developing online games)
All questions are by default from a scale to 1-5, with optional data.
1.
Have you developed any online games(released or not released, but working)(no
yes)?
2.
What is your experience in terms of CS security in general?
a.
What is your experience in terms of security in online games?
3.
How important from a scale of 1-5 is security when you’re developing online games.
○
If answered 1-3, why is this the case?
4.
How much time in percentage of the development time of previous game projects,
have been spent on security implementation?
5.
For the online games you have developed, did you implement any contingencies in
place if something bad should occur(Not detecting exploits, but managing the effect
of it)?
6.
How much time in (% of development time) would you be willing to use on security, if
you knew the result would be something that helped?
7.
Would you be willing to use a third-party application that would deal with security in
some aspect in online games, if the time spent could be minimized?
a.
If yes, how long would you be willing to spend learning the application to be
able to utilize it?
8.
During development of online games, have you had a focus/considered deterring or
preventing cheaters when developing certain systems or functions?
a.
If yes, in which parts?
Results:
13 answers(1 omitted):
Question 1:
yes
no
4
9
==PAGE:52==
Question 2:
1
2
3
4
5
3
5
4
1
Question 2a:
1
2
3
4
5
2
5
3
3
Question 3:
1
2
3
4
5
1
7
5
Question 3a:
●
would take too long
●
i don’t know how to
●
games i develop is not too damaging if cheat is find
●
Did implement in a game, but wasn’t that complex, and was very simple, but still
used a bit of time on it.
Question 4:
0-20%
20-40%
40-60%
60-80%
80%+
13
0
0
0
0
Question 5:
yes
no
1
12
Question 6:
0-20%
20-40%
40-60%
60-80%
80%+
8
5
0
0
0
Question 7:
==PAGE:53==
yes
no
13
0
Question 7a:
Under 10h
Under 30h
Under 50h
Under 100h
Under 200h
1
8
2
2
0
Question 8:
yes
no
6
7
Question 8a:
●
“implementing vital systems on serverside”
●
“preventing client from sending “bogus” values that could not happen”
●
“A variety of different implementations. But was mostly focused on ensuring stability”
●
“yes”
●
No answer
●
“Ensuring server running game was properly protected”
Test group
Came to the realization when performing tests, that standardized wide-spread feedback
would most likely end in useless feedback or very little usable feedback.
This is due to the fact that the system is not only meant for a very specific niche use, but
also due to the fact that it’s the type of tool that does not give proper feedback, unless it was
either very guided(moderated) qualitative testing, where users would be directed, or the
users of the product would take a moderate time to invest in the program.
This is sadly a side-effect because the tool is meant to be a security-response tool, which
means that for any  security-response to take action, a lot of processes need to have passed
through. The only option for this would be specific scenarios that were already set up, but as
this would not display anything that was not already tested, it seems rather moot.
Because of this, I have decided to take a more qualitative approach to the tests, rather than
a quantitative, and as a result, the tests will be performed with a small group of users, that
not only are willing to invest an amount of time to generate at least usable feedback, but also
individuals, who are known to have medium knowledge in terms of multiplayer infrastructure
and development. This will mean that this group of people is a subset of the “target”
audience that the tool is designed for.
==PAGE:54==
The testing group primarily for the 3 tests were as follow(omitting a few additional ones for
the first test, that didn’t really pan out(lack of time usage, or experience)):
2 With low experience in security, medium in GD, low in online games.
1 With medium experience in security, medium in GD, low in online games.
1 With low experience in security, medium in GD, medium in online games.
1 With medium experience in security, low in GD, low in online games, but high in
networking in general.
The amount of feedback from each varied a lot, and are therefore filtered in the results.
Whilst people with low time or low experience can prove feedback, it was usually superficial,
and was in areas that wasn’t in line with the development goals of the plan.
It should also be noted that the answers to the tests are what the testers answered,
either in full or at least in essence, rewritten to be precise and short.
2: Usability moderated remote general test
General:
This first test is meant to showcase the general structure & process that the system will
undertake, and hopefully outline certain possible flaws or improvements that could be made,
so the infrastructure will be set from the get go. Due to the fact that this test is more about
the infrastructure and less about the implementation, this was done in a moderated way.
Project progress:
This test was done while the project has very limited functionality, it was mostly baseline
infrastructure, with very minimal implementation.
Test rundown:
●
Showcase project, general process
●
Ask questions
●
Retrieve feedback
Results:
General thoughts while showcasing:
Testers were generally a bit confused, or perhaps a better word for it, overloaded, think a
good idea is to just separate the “system” and the entry point(library), so the testers/users
don’t get to know the system or at least not without asking for them, but rather just see “okay
these are what are available for you to use”
Questions & Answers(Asked all, noted down unique answers; Same answers are
omitted):
Q1: Is there anything about the process/infrastructure that you find odd or out of place?
A: Not really
A: Not for the library, the service itself seems rather complicated, if you’re not familiar
with the project.
A: Hard to say, there might be small things, but without implementation, it’s almost
impossible to say.
Q2: Would it seem probable that it would be possible for you to implement the client service
with the provided methods?
A: I think yes, but with the implementation only being Java, it might be a problem to
implement if you were to use something else.
==PAGE:55==
A: Yes for the client, but for setting up the service it might be a problem without a
guide
A: Hmm.. I think there might be issues if you aren’t 100% sure what exactly to send.
Some data type that you can use might be a good idea.
Q3: Is there anything that would be vital to have, that’s not in the general system yet?
A: I think a more versatile system that has more different options would be nice.
A: From what it sounds like, it seems that trades between friends, or even your own
accounts(if you had multiple) are being “scanned” by the service. I’m not sure this could be a
problem. Is there any bias that have been considered?
A: Don’t think so, it seems like the system is targeted at something very specific, I
think as long as the implementation for the connection is easy with what the users create,
then that’s more important, so maybe more documentation? Or more options for the client
A: Hard to say, I'd need to try it myself when it’s implemented and working.
Q4: In what way would be the best to utilize the results of the system, in regards to which
data is presented?
A: I think a way to extract the results of a specific person, and be able to trace the
results in a way where you could see what the results of that person was, and any
connecting people. Also i think it would be nice if you could filter, idk, so for example it would
only show results that were harsh enough, or something.
A: A way of displaying the system's “report” would be fine.
A: I think maybe a report or something, or maybe a warning message of some kind.
Could for example create a report everyday, that would display warnings/etc
A: Depends, i think if you wanted to prevent something, then maybe it would be good
with a system that could display a report of suspicious behavior, whilst if you wanted to
mitigate something that happened, then just requesting certain results would be okay i think.
A: I think specific lookups would be nice, so you could investigate one specific
individual. But I think if you don’t have something to investigate a set of people at once, it
might be hard to do that if you had a widespread “incident” or something and you needed to
investigate a widespread amount of people.
Q5: Are there any other thoughts you have about the system?
A: No
A: Think maybe it would be nice to have a log system in place, so you could see
certain things, or if something went wrong, you could target the issue.
Personal question & answers:
Q6:What would be the best way of creating documentation or guidance for you to integrate
the connection between your service and mine?
A: I think and/or of the following things:  a video documentation, written
documentation or an example project. I think it would be fine with either of these, it
seems relatively easy. An important factor could be to also do documentation for the
service aswell, rather than just the client.
(Follow up question): What would be the best way for the service then?
A: I think written documentation is fine, easier as it’s just something that
needs to be done. The most important part would probably be to also display
issues/fixes for the services.
Q7: Is there anything specific you would want to see in the “report” you envisioned?
A: No, I think the general and important stuff would be okay, if anything, it would
maybe be either a summary or the document was kept brief, so you could very
quickly see if there was something wrong.
==PAGE:56==
Q8: Is there anything specific you would want to see in the “report”(mitigation):
A: Hmm.. Think just very detailed and filtering out unnecessary things, so the person
performing whatever would be also to quickly read/understand it. Hard to say without
having the system fully developed, I think it’s something that might have to be done
after release, since it requires a lot of tests to figure out exactly how it operates.
Other:
Testers were generally quite satisfied? (Not the right word), with the current infrastructure,
but there were some small things all around. Most agreed that it was hard to properly gauge
since there wasn’t quite yet an implementation.
3: Usability semi-unmoderated explorative test
General:
This second test is meant to showcase a baseline working implementation, and hopefully
outline certain possible flaws or improvements that could be made, so non-working
implementations can be adjusted, or tossed aside. As this test was a working baseline
implementation, this was in a semi-unmoderated way, where testers got a short
implementation documentation, and given the toolkit, and a basic client they could use for
testing purposes.
Project progress:
This test was done while the project had basic functionality, most were working, but the
implementation was still lacking, especially in terms of fine details of the algorithms, as this
proved to be more work than anticipated.
Test rundown:
●
Give toolkit
●
Give client for using toolkit(that could have small adjustments)
●
Give documentation for basic usage
●
Testers were left alone, but could access me at any time about question/details
●
Retrieve feedback
Results:
Feedback(filtered):
●
The output of the users(The report) was somewhat lacking, and didn’t really give any
definite useful information.
○
Asked to clarify: “It showcased what the system thought of the users, but not
the reasoning”. Tester felt it was like blindly trusting the system.
●
The server produced some NullPointer exceptions during processing of certain
trades.
●
Tester said “I think if you trade an uneven trade, with one of the sides having no
items, the prices are still calculated? Couldn’t this cause abuse”.
○
Future thought: Yes this did seem to be the case.
●
The output of the “the report” is messy and almost unreadable. Why is it not in a json
format or something?
○
Good question.
==PAGE:57==
●
I think some documentation about how it works would be nice. Like how does it work,
how does it track, and what triggers the different things? In that sense you can figure
out what bases to cover.
○
Thought: This is an insanely good point, and there definitely needs to be
documentation for this, but in some sense, the thesis would probably be this.
●
The values of the items are very slow at being adjusted? Or how is the value even
determined? Nothing seemed to be happening.
○
Future note: This was due to an error when calculating 1-1 trades, where the
values would NOT change, if none of the items traded had been price set
previously. This was fixed by starting every single value at 100, and then they
would automatically set themselves after enough trades.
■
When approached about the solution, the tester liked the idea, but
was worried about very high valued items that were traded rarely, and
how they would “reach their” real price.
■
Furthermore when proposed about importing specific values for
existing games using this service, the tester liked the idea of importing
a set of predefined values to help the system to initially start.
●
Some more configurations would be nice, like setting when to do certain things.
○
Discussion: While this might lead to more sophisticated usages, it also could
increase the complexity for users, so it’s a fine line to walk, as more options
would make it harder to create a standardized version that is a baseline.
Furthermore with too many configurations, developers might make the
program not work with specific settings. Tester could see my viewpoint, but
still felt that some specific configuration options wouldn’t hurt, and I agreed.
Other/Thoughts:
It has become somewhat clear that the documentation was a bit lacking, as was showcased
by a lot of questions that most likely should have been answered by a documentation or a
small guide.
Testers generally didn’t have enough time to explore everything, and “feel” the full effect of
some of the algorithms and systems in place, and didn’t get to explore everything. This can
be partly attributed to the fact that the system in a sense needs to be “trained” in the aspect
of pricing & trades, and that for the initial trades there is a lot of uncertainty, since no data is
known prior.
4: Usability unmoderated comparative test
General:
This third test is meant to showcase the general implementation and semi-final
implementation of the toolkit. From this, the desired result would be to retrieve further
feedback about what was working and what wasn’t. As this test was a “working”
implementation, this was in an unmoderated way, where testers got a short implementation
documentation(same as previous test), and given the toolkit, and a basic client they could
use for testing purposes. Furthermore, users could optionally use the client with their own
implementations, and deploy or specify launch options for the service.
==PAGE:58==
Project progress:
This test was done while the project had the reached functionality, which was tested, but not
all the implementations as specified in the design had been implemented, as this could not
be done in time, due to time-constraints.
Test rundown:
●
Give toolkit
●
Give client for using toolkit(that could have small adjustments)
●
Give documentation for basic usage
●
Testers were left alone, but could access me if an error or fault occurred. (Testers
were encouraged to try to use the documentation, rather than relying on me to
answer questions, as this would give feedback about if something(documentation or
implementation) was lacking)
●
Retrieve feedback
Results:
Feedback(Filtered, Results from previous tests omitted)
●
I think there could be more options to distinguish or configure the system? For
example tracking ways. If one knew that a game were using this system, I think some
very specific ordering of processes could very easily break since there are no
“changes” from game to game.
○
I think this is extremely good feedback, and this can be a clear oversight.
Although it does require the attacker to know that they are utilizing this toolkit,
it does pose a threat. This does break the principle that cryptography/security
shouldn’t rely on staying hidden, this could be something that might be
required
■
Discussion led to talking about the interviewer(me) asking if there was
something specific: Tester suggested adding a scalable configuration
for item values only to be adjusted with trades with “reputable” items.
So only items that were trades enough for example
●
Would be nice with more connection options.
○
Answer: As this is more of a “prototype” of an implementation, rather than a
full implementation, this would probably be a thing in the future. But it’s
constructed to be modular enough to allow for this thing in the future.
●
The encryption does seem rather unnecessary when you consider you’d most likely
want to deploy this as a container on the save server as what’s connected to it.
○
Answer: Yes this is true, it was implemented rather early, when it was unclear
in what specific scenario the system infrastructure would develop to. It is
correct that this would most likely be secured by a devops infrastructure
rather than at an application level.
■
Discussion ended with the agreement that even without the same
server, the information that was transferred could easily be masked,
as the service can just tie the users to any id, and the data is not really
“vital” in any sense.
●
The “warning” part of the system seems unfinished
○
Yes, this wasn’t developed, or rather it wasn’t prioritized, further than a print,
as there were other things that needed to be focused on rather than “UI”
elements.
■
Furthermore i asked “If it were to be implemented, in which way would
you like to see it?”
==PAGE:59==
●
Email, Service call somewhere, dumped-log maybe?
●
A tester thought the output seemed quite a bit better than the last test, but it still
would be nice to have a way to specify what exactly you wanted. He felt that if you
had a big enough dataset about the user you wanted to investigate, it became huge
and hard to read.
○
Answer/discussion: Whilst this is true, as it currently stands it’s only
possible to configure the report to a specific warning level, and yes if you
have a large amount that fit that criteria, then it will be hard. While it definitely
would help and give more room with generating a proper report, it’s supposed
to be a response tool, in the sense that it’s what you use after something has
happened, and in that sense if you generate a report that contains a large
amount of data with appropriate warning levels, you can ensure that
something have been exploited.
■
Question to tester: If additional configurations were made, which
would you like to see implemented?
●
“Ability to maybe give more than 1 user, so you could see
relationship between a x amount of users or maybe filter with
certain trades or items, so if something had been duped or
something, you could track the trades with only that item”
○
Thoughts: I like both suggestions, but the latter would
really be something that could be helpful.
Others:
There were quite a few who mentioned about missing features in what i’d call “duplicate”
code, meaning for example, some testers mentioned that the Java client was more
implemented than the Python, and whilst this was intentional as the Python version was
made more as a proof of concept, rather than an actual implementation.
Furthermore it seemed that users wanted more than 1 way of connecting to the server, and
whilst again, a proof of concept, in hindsight, it might have been a better way to implement it
as a rest service, or something more baseline, as this could of have been easier to
implement for all environments, even for those not implemented.
==PAGE:60==
B
Appendix, TestCases for Validation
B.1
TestCaseOne output
1
{
2
"layer": 10, "warning": 6, "userOne": {"trades": [{"trade": "9
FGF0yJ8jscVRd7zREqn3an7N", "warning_level": 10, "trade_diff": 25200}], "
child_graphs": [
3
{
4
"layer": 9, "warning": 6, "userTwo": {"trades": [{"trade": "9
FGF0yJ8jscVRd7zREqn3an7N", "warning_level": 10, "trade_diff": 25200},{"
trade": "QUCItkJmIabpV6JBroODAzt3n", "warning_level": 10, "trade_diff":
25200}], "child_graphs": [
5
{
6
"layer": 8, "warning": 6, "userThree": {"trades": [{"trade": "
QUCItkJmIabpV6JBroODAzt3n", "warning_level": 10, "trade_diff":
25200},{"trade": "21CBWxnoUFV3A8Ef75q3XsmaK", "warning_level": 10, "
trade_diff": 25200}], "child_graphs": [
7
{
8
"layer": 7, "warning": 6, "userFour": {"trades": [{"trade": "21
CBWxnoUFV3A8Ef75q3XsmaK", "warning_level": 10, "trade_diff":
25200},{"trade": "r6IaXdcLWeizNd79vGZp3f4Tx", "warning_level": 10, "
trade_diff": 25200}], "child_graphs": [
9
{
10
"layer": 6, "warning": 6, "userFive": {"trades": [{"trade": "
r6IaXdcLWeizNd79vGZp3f4Tx", "warning_level": 10, "trade_diff":
25200},{"trade": "nXGgdchshE9EXRRv9AFCY2TPr", "warning_level": 10,
"trade_diff": 25200}], "child_graphs": [
11
{
12
"layer": 5, "warning": 6, "userSix": {"trades": [{"trade": "
nXGgdchshE9EXRRv9AFCY2TPr", "warning_level": 10, "trade_diff":
25200},{"trade": "Sf2st7vBvaYfieUMViKu6nBZv", "warning_level":
10, "trade_diff": 25200}], "child_graphs": [
13
{
14
"layer": 4, "warning": 6, "userSeven": {"trades": [{"trade": "
Sf2st7vBvaYfieUMViKu6nBZv", "warning_level": 10, "trade_diff":
25200}], "child_graphs": []}
15
}]}
16
}]}
17
}]}
18
}]}
19
}]}
20
}]}
21
}
Listing B.1: Report of TestCaseOne
Game Development Security Response Toolkit
53
==PAGE:61==
B.2
TestCaseTwo output
1
{
2
"layer": 5, "warning": 7, "rwtname": {"trades": [{"trade": "4
OKgurF87W5H3CqTfxGSfOC24", "warning_level": 10, "trade_diff": 500000},{"
trade": "I5Kb8gjv8Lh3PrDh7FcBhH2Wr", "warning_level": 10, "trade_diff":
2500000},{"trade": "cjb1LundWeoaHOYiCXauiSqvl", "warning_level": 10, "
trade_diff": 10000000},{"trade": "r1Qti0G2yWgqBTVozYHaSEUim", "
warning_level": 10, "trade_diff": 1000000},{"trade": "
vDdDd4Z1J4n2PZFaX6HNG8jGK", "warning_level": 10, "trade_diff": 200000},{"
trade": "xjpu7WiQpNS1TolxEMojtEGTU", "warning_level": 10, "trade_diff":
750000},], "child_graphs": [
3
{
4
"layer": 4, "warning": 7, "traderOne": {"trades": [{"trade": "4
OKgurF87W5H3CqTfxGSfOC24", "warning_level": 10, "trade_diff": 500000}],
"child_graphs": []}
5
},
6
{
7
"layer": 4, "warning": 7, "traderTwo": {"trades": [{"trade": "
I5Kb8gjv8Lh3PrDh7FcBhH2Wr", "warning_level": 10, "trade_diff":
2500000}], "child_graphs": []}
8
},
9
{
10
"layer": 4, "warning": 7, "traderThree": {"trades": [{"trade": "
cjb1LundWeoaHOYiCXauiSqvl", "warning_level": 10, "trade_diff":
10000000}], "child_graphs": []}
11
},
12
{
13
"layer": 4, "warning": 7, "traderFour": {"trades": [{"trade": "
r1Qti0G2yWgqBTVozYHaSEUim", "warning_level": 10, "trade_diff":
1000000}], "child_graphs": []}
14
},
15
{
16
"layer": 4, "warning": 7, "traderFive": {"trades": [{"trade": "
vDdDd4Z1J4n2PZFaX6HNG8jGK", "warning_level": 10, "trade_diff": 200000}],
"child_graphs": []}
17
},
18
{
19
"layer": 4, "warning": 7, "traderSix": {"trades": [{"trade": "
xjpu7WiQpNS1TolxEMojtEGTU", "warning_level": 10, "trade_diff": 750000}],
"child_graphs": []}
20
}]}
21
}
Listing B.2: Report of TestCaseTwo
54
Game Development Security Response Toolkit
==PAGE:62==
C
Appendix, Setup/deployment
Guide/documentation and code for the main service can be found on:
github.com/Morten-JO/GDSRT
Guide/documentation and code for the client libraries can be found on:
github.com/Morten-JO/GDSRT-C
These guides detail on how to run the service, by using the latest release on GitHub, and
the corresponding library.
Game Development Security Response Toolkit
55
==PAGE:63==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Richard Petersens Plads, Building 324
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.compute.dtu.dk
