==PAGE:1==
View Synthesis for Light Fields
Author: Hui Wang
==PAGE:2==
Supervisor: Prof. Søren Forchhammer
DTU Fotonik
Department of Photonics Engineering
Technical University of Denmark
Ørsteds Plads
Building 340
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
Light Field (LF) imaging is a possible technique for delivering more immersive and
realistic multimedia experiences for end users. Traditional light field has a variety
of restrictions, e.g., data is precisely defined with certain parameters, fixed baseline
across views, making its practical application challenging.
Neural Radiance Fields (NeRF) is a new technology with the potential to produce
high-quality novel views and a disparity map from a relatively small number of input
photos, and can be used with handheld capture images. In effect, it is a novel repre-
sentation of a light field.
NeRF must sample each ray when fitting the light field, and the number of effec-
tive samples is related to the view quality. However, a larger sample size necessitates
more calculations, which reduces eﬀiciency.
The present NeRF approach still has
issues with training duration and rendering speed.
Consequently, this project proposes an optimized NeRF that enables the coarse
and fine networks to share sampling results, thereby improving network training speed
and decreasing unnecessary light sampling. The proposed method can cut training
time by 23% and increase view synthesis eﬀiciency by 25% compared to the baseline
method.
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Acknowledgements
My supervisor, Professor Søren Forchhammer, is the first and most important person
I need to thank. This thesis could not have been completed without his dedicated
participation at every step during the process. I would like to offer my sincere grati-
tude to him for all of the help that he has provided.
In addition, I would like to express my gratitude to Dr. Muhammed Umair Mukati,
whose insightful comments and support had an impact on how I conducted my ex-
periments. Friends Tianyi Ma, Jingxin Zhang, Jiahao Li are all appreciated for the
fun times we had working and socializing together.
Lastly, I must express my deepest gratitude to my husband Xiaobo Wang for his
unwavering support and constant encouragement during my years of study, and the
process of conducting research and writing this thesis. Without you, this accomplish-
ment would not have been possible. Thank you very much! To my parents and my
little brother, thank you for your continued support!
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Abstract
i
Acknowledgements
iii
Contents
v
Glossary
vii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Motivation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Objective
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.3
Outline
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2
Background
5
2.1
Light Field
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.1.1
Light Field concept . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.1.2
Light Field acquisition technologies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.1.3
Light Field representation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.1.4
Light Field coding . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2.2
View Synthesis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
2.2.1
Depth-dependent View Synthesis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
2.2.2
Depth-independent View Synthesis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
2.2.3
Neural Radiance Fields (NeRF) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3
Method
19
3.1
NeRF revisited . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3.1.1
Ray tracing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
3.1.2
Neural radiance field scene representation . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
3.1.3
Volume rendering with radiance fields
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
3.1.4
Positional encoding and hierarchical volume sampling
. . . . .
23
3.1.5
NeRF pipeline
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
3.1.6
Network architecture . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
3.2
Optimized NeRF . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
==PAGE:8==
vi
Contents
4
Experiments
31
4.1
Datasets . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
4.2
Implementation details . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
4.2.1
System configuration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
4.2.2
Training configuration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
4.2.3
Main code . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
4.3
Evaluated methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
4.3.1
Peak signal-to-noise ratio, PSNR . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
4.3.2
Structural similarity index measure, SSIM . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
5
Results
43
5.1
Performance analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
5.1.1
View-Dependent appearance
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
5.1.2
Geometry visualization
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
5.1.3
Block-based PSNR . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
5.2
Comparison result
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
5.2.1
real forward-facing dataset
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
5.2.2
Realistic Synthetic 360◦dataset.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
5.2.3
Few-input view synthesis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
6
Conclusion and outlook
55
6.1
Conclusion
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
6.2
Outlook . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
56
Appendix
i
Bibliography
iv
List of Figures
ix
List of Tables
xi
==PAGE:9==
Glossary
VR
Virtual Reality
AR
Augmented Reality
XR
eXtended Reality
LLFF
Local Light Field Fusion
NeRF
Neural Radiance Field
Nc
Number of sample points for coarse network
Nf
Number of sample points for fine network
LF
Light Field
7D
7 dimensional
4D
4 dimensional
MLA
Microlens Array
HD
High Definition
DCT
Discrete cosine transform
MuLE
Multidimensional Light Field Encoder
EIA
Elemental Image Array
GAN
Generate Adversarial Network
SAI
Sub-aperture Image
HEVC
High Eﬀiciency Video Coding
CNN
Convolutional Neural Network
DoF
Degrees of Freedom
MLP
Multi-Layer Perceptions
r
Ray
o
Starting point of the light
d
Direction of the light
H
Height of the image
W
Width of the image
f
Focal length
x
3D coordinates of the point in the scene
c
Emitted color of points in the space
σ
Volume density of points in the space
C(r)
The final color of the corresponding pixel
δi
Distance between neighboring samples
γ(·)
Encoding function
==PAGE:10==
viii
==PAGE:11==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
1.1
Motivation
Since the first tin-type photographs in the 1800’s, camera technology has come a
long way. In the past 20 years, camera technology has developed rapidly and to-
tally changed our life. Especially after 2007, Steve Jobs revealed iPhone, probably
the most popular digital camera in the world, significantly reduced the threshold for
common people to shoot pictures and movies. People begin to produce visually stun-
ning stuff, and pursue requirements for higher resolution and immersive experiences.
Based on these requirements, Virtual Reality (VR), Augmented Reality (AR) and eX-
tended Reality (XR) technologies emerges gradually as the times require. Although
VR headsets have more physiological visual information and can provide both binoc-
ular parallax and motion parallax, they can’t solve vergence-accommodation conflict
because they display only on one layer. In this case, the light field starts to attract
people’s attention and is considered as a key technology.
The light field is a vector function that describes the amount of light that passes
through each point in space in every direction. The term ”light field” to describe
the collection of light rays was first defined by Gershun in 1939 [1]. To describe the
intensity of the light rays, Adelson and Bergen proposed 7D plenoptic model [2].
L = P(x, y, z, θ, ϕ, t, λ)
The plenoptic function is composed of three spatial dimensions (x, y, z), two angular
dimensions (θ, ϕ), a time dimension (t), and a wavelength dimension (λ). For the
purposes of visualization, the plenoptic function can be considered as a scene repre-
sentation [3]. For a scene of a static object, if collect pictures are collected at every
possible viewpoint, when representing the scene, it is feasible to display the pictures
of any viewpoint, any view direction and any focus. This will create an immersive
experience.
However, it is a great challenge to capture the full plenoptic function due to the
high dimensionality of the data. There are currently four main light field acquisition
techniques: Multi-Camera Array, Camera Gantry, Lenslet and handheld camera. Be-
cause of the limited resolution of sensors of these technologies, there is a natural
trade-off between angular and spatial resolution [4]. This means that the light field
==PAGE:12==
2
1 Introduction
cameras only take a few samples in either the angular or spatial domain. Besides,
acquisition requires professional equipment, which also limits the development and
wide application of light field technology.
In order to mitigate the problem of limited angular resolution, view synthesis
is a potential approach as it can render any viewpoint within certain volume. In
recent years, some methods using deep learning technology for view synthesis, for
example, Local Light Field Fusion (LLFF) [5] and Neural Raidance Field (NeRF) [6],
were proposed.
They can capture and render novel views of complex real world
scenes with wider baseline, so that light field acquisition does not have to rely on
professional light field cameras. Among them, NeRF starts a small revolution in the
way light fields are conceptualized, built, and processed. In contrast to most previous
light field data with constraints such as (1)stable baseline between views is needed
(2)specific parameters should be well-defined, NeRF uses a relatively small number
of photographs pointing at the same subject from various angles [7]. NeRF must,
however, suit all of the light sampling locations, which requires extensive calculation
and time-consuming training. Therefore, it’s important to investigate more effective
NeRF techniques.
1.2
Objective
This project’s main goal is to shorten the training period of the NeRF method and
accelerate its rendering time.
The original NeRF represents a scene using a coarse and a fine network. It first
evaluates the coarse network at Nc locations which are stratified sampling. Then it
evaluates the fine network at the union of the Nc and Nf samples. The Nc locations
are the same as that used in the coarse network, and the Nf locations are biased
towards the pertinent portions of the volume. The final color will be rendered accord-
ing to the output of the fine network.
This project proposes a NeRF-based optimization strategy that involves fewer
samples. In original NeRF method, Nc sampling points are trained twice. In the
method proposed in this project, those Nc sampling points only need to be trained
once, and the final color will be rendered jointly according to the output of the coarse
and the fine network. In theory, this method can save 25% of the training time.
==PAGE:13==
1.3 Outline
3
1.3
Outline
The thesis is organized as follows:
The first chapter is Introduction. It describes the research background and impor-
tance of view synthesis for light fields, explains the problems and challenges it faces,
and indicates the specific research direction.
The second chapter is a review of light field and view synthesis. It introduces the
concept of light field and its acquisition methods, and also involves various technolo-
gies of view synthesis in recent years.
The optimized NeRF network is covered in the third chapter. NeRF’s fundamental
pipeline is reviewed and the optimized network structure is proposed.
The fourth chapter, which describes the experiment, provides an overview of the
experimental data set as well as implementation details and evaluation methods.
The experimental results are presented in the fifth chapter.
Finally, the thesis is concluded in the sixth chapter.
==PAGE:14==
4
==PAGE:15==
CHAPTER 2
Background
2.1
Light Field
This section provides a brief review on the basic concepts of light field, light field
imaging and processing technology, which focus on the main stages that are essential
for delivering light field content to end-users.
Essentially, a light field image processing chain consists of a series of stages, as
illustrated in figure 2.1:
Figure 2.1.
Light field (LF) imaging processing flow [8], which generally consists of ac-
quisition/creation, representation, encoding, transmission/storage, decoding, rendering and
display.
• Light Field acquisition. The initial stage in light field processing is the pro-
duction of light field content. light field imaging acquisition is detailed discussed
in section 2.1.2.
• Light Field representation. The light field data acquired in the preceding
stage may have a representation format that differs from the format acquired.
Section 2.1.3 provides an overview of light field representation.
• Light Field coding.
Considering the vast volume of data connected with
light field transmission systems, eﬀicient light field encoding/decoding methods
become crucial. Section 2.1.4 presents a brief overview of possible light field
coding approaches.
• Light Field rendering.
The goal of light field rendering algorithms is to
provide the optimal end-user experience for a given display technology.
• Light Field display. LF imaging systems provide the recording of the 4D light
field; hence, the same LF material may be played in a larger range of display
technologies by simply recreating alternative displayable copies of the content.
==PAGE:16==
6
2 Background
In the following text, the concept of light field as well as its acquisition, representation
and coding, will be explained.
2.1.1
Light Field concept
Andrey Gershun invented the term ”light field” in a 1936 work on the radiometric
characteristics of light in three-dimensional space, for analytically describing the ”a
beam of light which propagates in a straight line through a homogeneous medium,
and which is the carrier of radiant energy” [1].
With the rise of computer vision and computer graphics in the early 1990s, the
problem of mathematically expressing the visible world assumed great significance.
Specifically, Adelson and Bergen [2] suggested a seven dimensional function, plenoptic
function, to define the overall distribution of light. The word “plenoptic”, translated
to “full view”, has Latin origin and is the combination of “plenus” and “optic”. This
model depicts the light in a scene in terms of its position, angle, wavelength and time.
The function models the light rays at every possible location in space (x, y, z), toward
every possible direction (θ, ϕ), over any range of wavelengths (λ), and at any time (t)
(see figure 2.2). The function is mathematically shown below,
L = P(x, y, z, θ, ϕ, t, λ)
(2.1)
Figure 2.2. The 7D plenoptic function [9]. (x, y, z) are location in space, (θ, ϕ) are light
direction, (λ) is light wavelength and (t) is time.
However, it is challenging to record and manipulate such high-dimensional data
in practice. Consequently, the light field model has been simplified from the 7 di-
==PAGE:17==
2.1 Light Field
7
mensional plenoptic function in (2.1) to a four dimensional (4D) function proposed
by Levoy and Hanrahan [10] and Gortler et al. [11]. Dimension reduction is based on
three specific assumptions.
1) Time-invariant. Assuming the scene is static. For a dynamic light field, the
time sequence t can be captured in distinct frames (i.e., a light field video). In
this way, we can remove time t dimensions from the plenoptic function.
2) Monochromatic. There are three types of photosensitive cells in the human
eye, corresponding to the primary hues red (R), green (G), and blue (B). By
assuming three distinct plenoptic functions (one for each of the R, G, and B
components), it is possible to reduce the wavelength dimension λ from the
plenoptic function in (2.1).
3) Constant radiance along its path (free-space).
Assuming the air is actually
transparent and the light ray is transmitted in free space, light ray radiance
remains constant along a straight line, making one dimension redundant.
It is a common practice to depict the 4D plenoptic function in Cartesian coordinates
using a two-plane parameterization as shown in figure 2.3. An oriented light ray de-
fined in the system first intersects the uv plane at coordinate (u, v) and then intersects
the st plane at coordinate (s, t), and is thus denoted by L(u, v, s, t).
Figure 2.3. Two-plane parameterization for the 4D plenoptic function [10].A point on the
uv plane and a point on the st plane are connected to form an orientated line. One appealing
aspect of this depiction is the ability to position one of the planes at infinity. This is useful
since it allows for the parameterization of lines using a point and a direction.
2.1.2
Light Field acquisition technologies
A conventional camera captures a two-dimensional projection of a light field on its
sensor plane by integrating the light rays that strike each pixel from all directions.
==PAGE:18==
8
2 Background
In contrast, devices and methods for light field acquisition measure the distribu-
tion of light rays in a directionally-resolved manner, thereby avoiding angular inte-
gration. With the goal of enhancing immersion, more advanced imaging technologies
are emerging that enable the acquisition of richer forms of visual data and the repre-
sentation of the scene as a 4D light field. Depending on the requirements for spatial
or angular resolution, various acquisition techniques can be employed to capture light
field content with varying densities in each of the four dimensions.
Existing light field acquisition methods can be categorized into four groups: multi-
camera array, camera gantry, lenslet camera and handheld camera.
• Light Field Imaging with Multi-Camera Array. The multi-camera cap-
ture method necessitates an array of image sensors distributed on a planar or
spherical surface to capture light field samples from multiple directions simul-
taneously, as shown in figure 2.4.
The spatial density is determined by the
sensor resolution of the camera, while the angular density is determined by the
distance (baseline) between the cameras on the array.
Figure 2.4.
A camera array system composed of 8 × 12 video cameras developed by
Wilburn et al. [12].
==PAGE:19==
2.1 Light Field
9
• Light Field Imaging with Camera Gantry. In contrast to the multi-camera
method, the camera gantry capture method uses a single image sensor to col-
lect multiple light field samples through several exposures. Typically, a sensor
mounted on a mechanical gantry as shown in figure 2.5. It is used to measure
the light field at various places. The spatial density is determined by the sensor
resolution of the camera, while the angular density is determined by the preci-
sion of the gantry motion. The field of view (FoV) is determined by the degrees
of freedom (DoF) supported by the gantry structure. Although camera gantries
offer versatile and less expensive capture solutions, they can only capture static
scenes.
Figure 2.5. The Stanford Light Field Gantry with four degrees of freedom of the camera
motion: translation in X and Y, along with nod and shake. The gantry motion is repeatable
and sub-millimeter accurate [13].
==PAGE:20==
10
2 Background
• Light Field Imaging with Lenslet Camera. This method involves multi-
plexing the angular domain into the spatial domain in order to encode the 4D
light field onto a 2D sensor plane. It permits dynamic light field capture with
a single image sensor, but at the expense of spatial and angular resolutions.
As shown in figure 2.6, the camera has a single-tier sensor overlaid by the Mi-
crolens Array (MLA). The number of pixels behind each microlens determines
the angle density, and the number of microlenses in the MLA determines the
spatial density. Although lenslet cameras can capture highly dense light fields
in a single frame, their narrow FoV makes them ideal for photographing objects
at close range.
Figure 2.6. The lenslet camera [9]. There are two different lenslet camera configurations:
the focused lenslet camera system seen in commercial Raytrix [14] cameras and the unfocused
lenslet camera setup found in commercial Lytro cameras [15,16]. The distance b of the MLA
from the image sensor separates these two configurations. The distance b is equivalent to
the MLA focal length f for the unfocused setup, while for the focused setup, b ̸= f.
==PAGE:21==
2.1 Light Field
11
• Light Field Imaging with handheld camera. Previous approaches either
require intractably dense view sampling or professional acquisition equipment.
Recently, Mildenhall et al. [5] proposed a method that could capture the local
light field by using a handheld camera in a quick and uncomplicated manner as
shown in figure 2.7.
Figure 2.7.
Fast and easy handheld capture light field [5]. From a collection of input
photographs taken by a handheld camera in an atypical grid pattern, they describe a quick
and accurate approach for view synthesis.
2.1.3
Light Field representation
A light field imaging system can acquire data with the following raw formats [17]:
• Lenslet Representation. For light field acquired with a lenslet camera, the
light field content is represented as a 2D image consisting of a 2D grid of mi-
crolens images, as shown in figure 2.8.
==PAGE:22==
12
2 Background
Figure 2.8. Lenslet representation.
• Full Parallax Multiview Representation. For light field obtained via a
multi-camera array or camera gantry, the light field content is represented as a
2D grid of views as depicted in figure 2.9.
Figure 2.9. Full Parallax Multiview representation.
==PAGE:23==
2.1 Light Field
13
2.1.4
Light Field coding
The light field imaging technique captures a wealth of information, not only the
brightness of scenes but also the orientations of light rays, resulting in data with a high
degree of redundancy. This creates additional diﬀiculties for transmission bandwidth,
storage, and processing (read/write). For instance, the raw light field image from
a Lytro camera has resolution of 5368x7728, and it requires approximately twenty
times the amount of memory for storage compared to a single high-definition (HD)
image [18]. Therefore, there is a huge demand for light field compression techniques
with high eﬀiciency.
Redundancy reduction approaches enable image compression algorithms to com-
press image data into a compact format [19]. Figure 2.10 depicts a general block
diagram of an image compression system.
Figure 2.10. A general compression scheme [20].
The compression system consists of three distinct phases: compression, transmis-
sion/storage, and decompression. During compression, data redundancy in an image
is eliminated by a transformation and/or prediction process, followed by entropy
coding of the leftover signal to generate a compressed bitstream. For picture recon-
struction, the compression procedure is inverted during the decompression phase.
By defining the codec is responsible for utilizing the inherent light field correla-
tions in transform or prediction process, the existing light field coding techniques are
grouped into the two major classes represented in figure 2.11.
• Transform-Based Approaches.
Transform-based techniques leverage the
light field correlations in the transform domain, depending on a specific trans-
form coding methodology. Recently, in [21], an approach to lenslet light field
coding that makes use of a 4D discrete cosine transform (DCT) is described.
This method is referred to as the Multidimensional Light Field Encoder (MuLE).
In order to investigate the 4D redundancy of light fields, the lenslet image is
==PAGE:24==
14
2 Background
Figure 2.11. Categories of the light field coding solutions [9].
first converted to its full-parallax multiview format, then it is divided into 4D
blocks (with two spatial and two directional dimensions), and finally, a separate
1D DCT is applied to each dimension.
• Predictive-Based Approaches. Predictive method takes advantage of the
correlation across views to achieve compression rather than analyzing the in-
herent light field correlations in the transform domain. As depicted in figure
2.11, predictive-based techniques can be further classified based on the data
structure and prediction schemes employed. Specifically, three categories are
distinguished: i) light field coding based on inter-view prediction; ii) light field
coding based on non-local spatial prediction; and iii) light field coding based on
view synthesis.
– Based on inter-view prediction.
Until now, based on inter-view predic-
tion method is the most widely used method. It has been demonstrated
that it is generally achievable to obtain competitive rate-distortion coding
performance for light field content using typical 2D or 3D video coding
techniques. A hierarchical 2D inter-view prediction structure is suggested
in [22]. They use multiview video coding for lenslet light field video coding.
First, the elemental image array (EIA) is preprocessed using the subimage
transform. And then minimizing the gap between the present subaperture
picture and its inter-view reference frame.
– Based on non-local spatial prediction. For coding lenslet light field mate-
rial, non-local spatial prediction-based light field coding approaches have
been explicitly suggested. The benefit of this prediction method is that
it allows for investigating the specific correlation of lenslet light field con-
tent without explicitly requiring knowledge of the optical system being
employed and relies less on a very accurate calibration pre-process. The
==PAGE:25==
2.2 View Synthesis
15
idea of employing non-local spatial prediction with Lenslet light field con-
tent compression was initially proposed in [23]. To boost the eﬀiciency of
the H.264/AVC standard for lenslet image coding, the method takes use
of the self-similarity to micro-image content.
– Based on view synthesis. The coding algorithms in this category, in con-
trast to earlier predictive light field coding methods, attempt to drastically
reduce the quantity of light field texture data that must be encoded and
sent in order to accomplish compression. In order to do this, the light field
data is represented by a limited number of key views and geometry data,
which are then encoded and transformed. Thus, the sparse collection of
views and geometry information are combined at the decoder side to gen-
erate synthesized view that was deleted at the encoder side. Jia et al. [24]
presents a framework for the compression of light field images driven by a
generative adversarial network (GAN). They use GAN network to generate
sub-aperture image (SAI), then the sampled SAI adopts a hierarchical cod-
ing scheme to effectively eliminate the overlap across views. A novel light
field compression strategy based on depth image-based view synthesis is
proposed in research [25]. In order to rebuild the full light field, a limited
group of views are first compressed using High Eﬀiciency Video Coding
(HEVC) inter coding. The remainder of the entire light field can then be
reorganized as a video series and encoded using HEVC inter coding. More
details will be discussed in the next section.
2.2
View Synthesis
As talked about in section 2.1.2, multi-camera capture required custom-made camera
systems that were cumbersome, costly, and hence unavailable to the public. Camera
gantries can only capture static scenes. And for the lenslet cameras, cameras sample
sparsely in either the angular or spatial domain due to the low resolution of the
sensors.
View synthesis is a potential method for resolving the problem of restricted an-
gular resolution [26]. The objective of novel view synthesis, given a series of posed
photos of a scene, is to generate photorealistic images of the same scene from new
perspectives. Existing view synthesis methods may be categorized into three groups:
depth-dependent view synthesis, depth-independent view synthesis and NeRF-based
view synthesis.
2.2.1
Depth-dependent View Synthesis
In general, the depth-dependent view synthesis approach generates novel views on a
scene in two steps. First, warp the input images to novel view based on the estimation
==PAGE:26==
16
2 Background
of the input view’s depth information. The final image is then created by integrating
these warped images.
Georgiev et al. [27] employed three-view morphing to interpolate the missing an-
gular samples of radiance. This is accomplished by computing warps that permit
view transformation between each pair of views connected by an edge. The combi-
nation of these warps enables barycentric interpolation of views within each triangle
of viewpoints. Chaurasia et al. [28] developed a depth-synthesis technique that could
synthesize depth samples in places with insuﬀicient depth, followed by a local shape-
preserving warp and a rendering algorithm to provide believable novel perspectives.
Standard depth-based view synthesis techniques mainly rely on the estimated
depth, which is susceptible to textureless and obstructed regions. Moreover, they
frequently prioritize the quality of depth estimation over the quality of the synthetic
images. In recent years, several studies utilizing learning-based method to optimize
the quality of synthetic views have been published. The first system for view synthesis
based on deep learning is proposed by Kalantari et al. [4]. They used two convolu-
tional neural network (CNN) networks to model disparity and final pixel color. Both
networks are trained at the same time by decreasing the difference between the syn-
thesised perspective and the ground truth image. By utilizing this idea, it is feasible
to provide four corner light field views and to forecast the other scene image. Srini-
vasan et al. [29] used the pipeline which is similar to Kalantari et al. [4] but with only
one input image.
Overall, the depth information is crucial for depth-dependent view synthesis.
These techniques frequently fail because the warped images are unable to provide
enough information to synthesize high-quality views for challenging scenes that con-
tain significant depth variations, complex lighting conditions, occlusions, non-Lambertian
surfaces, etc., where inaccurate depth estimation typically occurs.
2.2.2
Depth-independent View Synthesis
Direct interpolation will result in ghosting effects in the produced views for light fields
with sparse sample coverage. Some research has looked into light field reconstruction
in the Fourier domain as a way to lessen this impact. Levin and Durand [30] inter-
polated sparse directional samples and aliased spatial measurements using the new
prior in order to create the 4D light field from a 3D focused stack sequence. The
Fourier domain’s important attribute of sparsity makes dense signal reconstruction
possible. Based on this, Shi et al. [31] suggested a reconstruction method that maxi-
mizes sparsity in the continuous Fourier spectrum. They recovered non-Lambertian
light fields from a small number of 1D viewpoint trajectories. Upsampling the angular
dimensions without using the scene’s geometry is also an alternative method for view
synthesis [32].
However, the light field must always be sampled in a certain way for those recon-
struction methods to be used, which places a restriction on their practical application.
==PAGE:27==
2.2 View Synthesis
17
2.2.3
Neural Radiance Fields (NeRF)
NeRF operates by employing only a small number of photos that are directed at
the same scene from various angles, as opposed to the majority of previous light
field data that is carefully defined with specific characteristics, fixed baseline between
views, and has a number of limitations. After some trainings, the underlying network
creates a 3D model of the scene from which additional data can be gleaned, such
as disparity maps or novel views. NeRF has generated spectacular demonstrations,
state-of-the-art visual quality, and many other works that were inspired by this new
methodology.
To solve the problem of modeling unbounded 3D background content with an in-
verted sphere scene parameterization, Zhang et al. [33] devised the NeRF++ model,
which separately models foreground and background. Using this strategy, they out-
performed the basic NeRF on Tanks and Temples [34] and Yucer et al. [35] scenarios.
Wang et al. [36] proposed NeRF−−, to simplify NeRF training process for forward-
facing scenes by removing the necessity of known or pre-computed camera parameters,
including intrinsics and 6 DoF poses.
This approach can recover correct camera
parameters and attain novel view synthesis quality comparable to that of methods
trained using COLMAP pre-computed camera parameters.
By using a multi-resolution hashed positional encoding as extra learnt features,
Instant Neural Graphics Primitives(Instant-NGP) [37] now shows the most poten-
tial. The model could describe scenes accurately using small and effective multi-layer
perceptions(MLPs). This made training and inference exceedingly quickly.
==PAGE:28==
18
==PAGE:29==
CHAPTER 3
Method
3.1
NeRF revisited
Neural Radiance Fields were first proposed by Mildenhall et al. [6] in 2020 for novel
view synthesis. NeRF drew a lot of interest in the sector by achieving highly pho-
torealistic view synthesis of complicated scenarios. NeRF utilizes a fully-connected
network to depict a scene and produce the color and density of every point in space.
Then, it employs volume rendering to project the color and density to synthesize the
novel view image.
In general, the novel view synthesis procedure employing a trained NeRF model
is as follows:
1. Generate a sampled set of three-dimensional coordinates for each pixel in the
image that is being synthesized by marching camera rays through the scene.(see
(a) in figure 3.4)
2. Those sampling locations and viewing directions were inputted into an MLP,
which produced the color and volume density. (see (b) in figure 3.4)
3. Make the synthesised image out of these colors and densities by employing
volume rendering.(see (c) in figure 3.4)
Figure 3.1. Neural radiance field scene representation and rendering procedure [6].
The following will be a detailed explanation of the pipeline.
==PAGE:30==
20
3 Method
3.1.1
Ray tracing
A renderer’s aim is to assign a color to every pixel of the frame. When a ray meets
a scene object, the item’s color is assigned to the pixel at the intersection point as
shown in figure 3.2. Therefore, the first step in rendering a scene is to generate the
ray for each pixel of the frame.
Figure 3.2. Ray tracing [38].
A ray could be written as:
r(t) = o + td
(3.1)
where o is the starting point of the light, i.e., the camera position, which can be
acquired from the camera pose matrix. d is the direction of the light, t is the sampling
distance from the origin along the ray direction.
If assume the height of the image is H, the width of the image is W and the
focal length is f. As shown in figure 3.3, the coordinate of the camera center should
be ( W
2 , H
2 , 0). It is customary to position the camera along the negative z-axis, so
the coordinate of the pixel in the image is (i, j, −f). So the view direction vector
d = (i−W
2 , j−H
2 , −f). Since the pinhole imaging is an inverted image, it is necessary
to invert the y-axis￿in ray tracing, the film plane is normally positioned 1 unit distant
from the camera’s origin, therefore, the z-axis needs to be normalized. So the final
view direction is
d = (i −W
2
f
, −j −H
2
f
, −1)
(3.2)
Hence, in order to render the synthesized images, camera position and camera
matrix will be needed. The author of [6] use the COLMAP structure-from-motion
==PAGE:31==
3.1 NeRF revisited
21
Figure 3.3.
The direction from a point on the pixel plane to the optical center of the
camera.
package [39] to estimate these parameters: camera poses, intrinsic parameters, and
scene bounds. Then the ray for each pixel of the image could be acquired based on
equation (3.1) and (3.2).
3.1.2
Neural radiance field scene representation
NeRF models a 3D static scene as a neural radiance field, which defines the density
and color of each visual direction and point in space. The neural radiance field is
then fitted by a fully-connected neural network (the fully-connected neural network
without any convolutional layers often referred to as a multilayer perception or MLP).
This is written as:
F : (x, d) →(c, σ)
(3.3)
The input is the 3D coordinates x = (x, y, z) of the point in the scene, and 2D viewing
direction (θ, ϕ).
In the actual process, in order to facilitate the calculation, the
viewing direction vector d is represented by a three-dimensional vector of a Cartesian
coordinate system, which could be acquired based on the equation (3.2).
The output is an emitted color c = (r, g, b) and volume density σ. Volume density
σ(x) in a 3D space may be regarded as the differential probability that a ray will hit
an infinitesimally small particle at position x.
The architecture of the MLP network will be introduced in detail in section 3.1.6.
Because of the particular structure of the network, the volume density is simply tied
==PAGE:32==
22
3 Method
to the position, however the color will alter depending on the viewing direction.
3.1.3
Volume rendering with radiance fields
The volume density and emitted color of a scene are represented at every point in
space by the 5D neural radiance field. The final color is created via classical volume
rendering given volume density and color.
Given a ray r(t) = o + td from the near bound tn to the far bound tf, the final
color C(r) of the corresponding pixel could be:
C(r) =
Z tf
tn
T(t)σ(r(t))c(r(t), d)dt
(3.4)
The function T(t) stands for the cumulative light transmittance from tn to t, that is,
the likelihood that ray will not be blocked when travel from tn to t, given by
T(t) = exp

−
Z t
tn
σ(r(s))ds

(3.5)
Setting the sensor plane of the camera as the near plane and infinity as the far plane,
the color corresponding to each pixel in the to-be-synthesized image can be calculated
by equation (3.4).
The integral was estimated by using a discrete set of samples during the actual
implementation process, where N evenly spaced bins were created out of the ray, and
a sample was uniformly taken from each bin:
ti ∼U

tn + i −1
N
(tf −tn) , tn + i
N (tf −tn)

(3.6)
The number N of samples influences how closely the estimated value and the real
value resemble each other. When all other factors are the same, the estimated light
color is more accurate and the synthetic view is of higher quality when there are more
discrete samples.
Then, the equation (3.4) can be approximated as:
ˆC(r) =
N
X
i=1
αiTici, where Ti = exp

−
i−1
X
j=1
σjδj


(3.7)
where δi = ti+1 −ti is the distance between neighboring samples, αi the transparen-
cy/opacity from alpha compositing at sample point i is given by:
αi = 1 −exp (−σiδi)
(3.8)
==PAGE:33==
3.1 NeRF revisited
23
The squared error between the rendered and true pixel colors is used to optimize the
MLP parameters. The loss function is given by:
L =
X
r∈R
 ˆC(r) −Cgt(r)

2
2
(3.9)
in which Cgt is the ground truth color of the corresponding pixel, and R is the set of
rays in each training batch.
As mentioned in section 2.2.3, NeRF can not only perform view synthesis, but
also generate some additional data, such as depth information. The ray’s predicted
depth can be determined by [40]:
D(r) =
Z t2
t1
T(t) · σ(r(t)) · t · dt
(3.10)
This equation can be approximated as in equation (3.7) as [41]:
ˆD(r) =
N
X
i=1
αitiTi
(3.11)
in which αi, ti, Ti has the same definition as in equation (3.7).
3.1.4
Positional encoding and hierarchical volume sampling
In the preceding section, the fundamental elements required for representing a scene
as a neural radiance field and creating novel views from this representation were
introduced. However, these elements are insuﬀicient to achieve state-of-the-art quality.
Two enhancements, positional encoding and hierarchical sampling, are provided by
the author of [6] to enable the representation of high-resolution complex scenes.
Positional encoding
It is well known that neural networks are a class of extremely expressive functions
capable of fitting random input-output mappings with 100% accuracy. The work by
Rahaman et al. [42] demonstrates a learning bias towards low frequency functions in
deep neural networks. This phenomenon also exists in NeRF, that rendered images
are incapable of accurately expressing high-frequency variations in color and geometry
when inputting x, d directly to the network F.
Inspired by [42], that the mapping of inputs to a higher dimensional space utilizing
high frequency functions before feeding them to the network could improve fitting of
high frequency variation-containing data, the author of [6] uses positional encoding
to enhance the MLP network’s performance. The encoding function is:
γ(p) =
 sin
 20πp

, cos
 20πp

, · · · , sin
 2L−1πp

, cos
 2L−1πp

(3.12)
==PAGE:34==
24
3 Method
where γ(p) is a mapping function, which could map a 1D vector p to a 2L dimension
vector. In the experiment, this mapping function γ(·) is applied to each of the three
coordinate variables (x, y, z) and view direction d individually, and the author of [6]
set L = 10 for γ(x) and L = 4 for γ(d), respectively.
So the x is mapped to a
60-dimension vector, and the d is mapped to a 24-dimension vector.
Hierarchical volume sampling
In equation (3.6), N evenly samples are used to estimate the integral, experimental
results prove that this method is ineﬀicient: free space and occluded regions are still
multisampled even though they do not contribute to the displayed image.
Inspired by early work in volume rendering [43], the author of [6] suggests using
hierarchical sampling as a way to boost the eﬀiciency of the rendering process. One
”coarse” network and one ”fine” network are optimized at the same time, rather than
only utilizing a single network to represent the scene as a whole. The output of the
coarse network can be used to control the sampling input of the fine network. This
ensures that a greater number of points are sampled from the effective area of the
scene, while the number of points sampled from other areas is minimized.
In more detail, for a coarse network, first, using stratified sampling as described in
equation (3.6) select Nc points, and then evaluate the ”coarse” network at these places.
In order to provide a more accurate sampling of points along each ray, equation (3.7)
needs to be rewritten, where the final color is regarded as the weighted sum of all
position colors:
ˆCc(r) =
Nc
X
i=1
wici,
wi = Ti (1 −exp (−σiδi))
(3.13)
The weight of each sampling location is proportional to the likelihood that the
target sampling can be obtained from neighboring locations. By normalizing these
weights, the probability density function (PDF) along the ray can be obtained:
ˆwi =
wi
PNc
j=1 wj
(3.14)
After that, using inverse transform sampling, the second set of Nf samples is selected
from the distribution. During this method, more samples are allotted to areas that
are anticipated to contain visible content.
After query of Nf samples, the union of the Nc + Nf samples are inputted to the
fine network, and the final rendered color of the ray can be computed based on the
output.
The final color is only rendered from the fine network, but the coarse network will
influence the input of the fine network, which means that both networks need to be
==PAGE:35==
3.1 NeRF revisited
25
optimized. The loss function (3.9) is replaced by:
L =
X
r∈R
 ˆCc(r) −Cgt(r)

2
2 +
 ˆCf(r) −Cgt(r)

2
2

(3.15)
where Cgt(r) is the ground truth color, ˆCc(r) is predicted color by coarse network
and ˆCf(r) is predicted color by fine network.
3.1.5
NeRF pipeline
On the basis of all of the theories that were discussed earlier, the pipeline of the whole
process is shown in figure 3.4.
Figure 3.4. NeRF pipeline.
1. For each ray r in the scene, the first step is to uniformly sample Nc points, and
acquire the xc and d. xc are the coordinates of Nc points, and d is the view
direction of the ray r.
2. Input the coordinates and view direction (xc, d) to the coarse network MLPcoarse.
The MLPcoarse will produce the color and density (cc, σc) of Nc points based
on the input.
3. Based on the output (cc, σc) of the coarse network, calculate the probability
density function (PDF) along the ray. Using inverse transform sampling, select
Nf samples, and acquire the (xf, d).
4. Sort the Nc, Nf samples based on the coordinates from near to far, generate
(xc+f, d).
5. Input the (xc+f, d) to the fine network MLPfine. The MLPfine will produce
the color and density (cc+f, σc+f).
==PAGE:36==
26
3 Method
6. Render the final color ˆ
Cf(r) based on the output of fine network. Render the
color ˆ
Cc(r) based on the output of coarse network.
7. Calculate the loss function based on the equation (3.15), then optimize the
coarse network and fine network.
3.1.6
Network architecture
The only difference between the coarse network and the fine network is the data that
is fed into the system.
Both networks have the same network architecture.
The
visualization of the MLP network architecture is shown in figure 3.5.
Figure 3.5. MLP network architecture [6].
• Green represents input vectors.
• The number in the each green block denotes the vector’s dimension.
• The dimension of the input location(γ(x)) is 60, and the dimension of input
viewing direction(γ(d)) is 24, for they are mapped to higher dimensional space.
• The blue blocks represents intermediate hidden layers. All layers are typical
fully-connected layers. The number inside signifies the number of channels.
• Layers with ReLU activations are indicated by black arrows, while those without
activations are indicated by orange arrows. Layers with sigmoid activations are
indicated by dashed black arrows.
• The red represents output vectors, and the number inside each block denotes
the vector’s dimension.
• Vector concatenation is indicated by ”+”, and in red blocks, output vectors are
displayed.
==PAGE:37==
3.2 Optimized NeRF
27
Overall, the workflow is as follows￿
1. The positional encoding was applied to the input location x = (x, y, z) and d.
2. The encoded location γ(x) is passed through 8 fully-connected ReLU layers, the
author of [6] also concatenates this input to the fifth layer’s activation.
3. After 8 fully-connected layer, additional layer outputs the volume density σ, in
order to make sure that the output volume density is non-negative, the output
is rectified using a ReLU.
4. A 256-dimensional feature vector is generated with volume density at the same
time, this feature vector is concatenated with the encoded viewing direction
(γ(d)), to output the RGB color.
Because the viewing direction is added to predict the color, the final color C(r) is
permitted to depend on both viewing direction and in-scene coordinate, the prediction
of volume density is constrained to be independent of viewing direction using this
network architecture.
So the view-dependent effects of reflection, refraction, and
translucency can be faithfully reproduced using NeRF [44].
3.2
Optimized NeRF
Despite the fact that it has been quite successful in a variety of data sets and a va-
riety of challenge scenarios, one of NeRF’s primary issues is that its training takes
a very lengthy time. Based on the result in [6], it usually takes between 100 and
300 thousand iterations for the optimization of a single scene to converge on a single
NVIDIA V100 GPU. This process can take around 1-2 days.
As analyzed in section 3.1.3, the quality of the final view synthesis is determined
by the number of sampling points on each ray. This is due to the fact that NeRF is a
sampling-based approach. Because of this, decreasing the number of sampling points
directly is not an eﬀicient technique to increase the training speed, as doing so will
result in a decrease in view quality.
According to the content covered in section 3.1.4, the output of the coarse net-
work is not used to render the final color; rather, it is simply used in the process of
establishing the sampling locations for the fine network. And for the fine network, it
will calculate the color at Nc locations again, which results in the color and density
of Nc locations being calculated twice, causing the unnecessary computation. In view
of this situation, an optimization strategy for combining the output of the coarse and
the fine networks is being proposed by this project.
The idea is to feed just Nf samples into the fine network, merge the output of the
coarse network (cc, σc) with the output of the fine network (cf, σf), and then render
the final color using (cc+f, σc+f).
==PAGE:38==
28
3 Method
During the rendering process, the sequence of near to far is taken into considera-
tion to determine the final color. In order to merge the results of the coarse network
and the fine network, it is necessary to sort the Nc and Nf sample points according
to their location first:
xc+f
s
= sort(xc, xf)
(3.16)
According to the sorting order generated by formula (3.16), the color and density are
sorted in the same way to generate the corresponding cc+f
s
and σc+f
s
. Based on the
cc+f
s
and σc+f
s
, the final color is calculated according to formula (3.7).
In actual training, the loss function used by this method is:
L =
X
r∈R
 ˆCc(r) −C(r)

2
2 +
 ˆCf(r) −C(r)

2
2

(3.17)
The architecture of the coarse network and fine network in this project is consis-
tent with the NeRF, which is shown in figure 3.5.
The entire optimization scheme is shown in figure 3.6.
Figure 3.6. Optimized NeRF pipeline.
1. For each ray r in the scene, the first step is to uniformly sample Nc points, and
acquire the xc and d. xc are the coordinates of Nc points, and d is the view
direction of the ray r.
2. Input the coordinates and view direction (xc, d) to the coarse network MLPcoarse.
The MLPcoarse will produce the color and density (cc, σc) of Nc points based
on the input.
3. Based on the output (cc, σc) of the coarse network, calculate the probability
density function (PDF) along the ray. Use inverse transform sampling, select
Nf samples, and acquire the (xf, d).
4. Input the (xf, d) to the fine network MLPfine. The MLPfine will produce the
color and density (cf, σf).
==PAGE:39==
3.2 Optimized NeRF
29
5. Sort the Nc, Nf samples based on the coordinates from near to far, sort the
(cc, σc) and (cf, σf) based on the same sort sequence of sorting samples, gener-
ate (cc+f, σc+f).
6. Render the final color ˆ
Cf(r) from the combined color and density (cc+f, σc+f).
Render the color ˆ
Cc(r) based on the output of coarse network.
7. Calculate the loss function based on the equation (3.17), then optimize the
coarse network and fine network.
In the original NeRF paper, for each ray r, the sample numbers for coarse network
is Nc = 64, the sample numbers Nf = 128 and the sample numbers for fine network
is Nc + Nf = 192. There are 256 total sampling points for each ray in total.
In this project, when using the same sampling numbers as NeRF, which is Nc = 64
and Nf = 128, for the coarse network, it will need 64 sample points, and for fine
network, it will need 128 sample points, there are 192 total sampling points for each
ray in total. Compare to the original NeRF,
256 −192
256
= 25%
this method reduces the sampling point by 25%.
Because the amount of time needed for training is proportional to the number
of sampling points, and the method described in this project reduces the number of
sampling points by 25% when comparing to the original NeRF. Theoretically, the
method described in section 3.2 will reduce the amount of time required for training
by 25%.
Detailed experimental results will be presented in Chapter 5.
==PAGE:40==
30
==PAGE:41==
CHAPTER 4
Experiments
4.1
Datasets
Experiments are carried out on the Real Forward-Facing data set [5] and Realistic
Synthetic 360◦[6] in this project in order to validate the accuracy of the methodology
described in this project.
As shown in figure 4.1, the Real Forward-Facing dataset, which also called LLFF
dataset, is made up of eight different complicated real-world scenarios that were taken
with a handheld cellphone. The views are looking forward, towards the object in the
center of the scene. For each scene, the train set consists 20-62 images, and the test
set consists of one eighth of the total number of train set.
The resolution of the
images is 4032x3024 pixels.
Because NeRF training is a time-consuming procedure, the actual training method
involves compressing the photos in the data set to one-eighth of the original size for
training, with a resolution of 504x378 pixels. This is done so that the images can be
processed more quickly.
Figure 4.1. Real Forward-Facing dataset.
As shown in figure 4.2, the Realistic Synthetic 360◦dataset, which also called
==PAGE:42==
32
4 Experiments
blender dataset, consist of eight objects: chair, drums, ficus, hotdog, lego, materiasl,
mic and ship. These items have intricate geometries and realistic non-Lambertian ma-
terials. This dataset is rendered by the Cycles Path Tracer that comes from Blender.
The focal lengths of the virtual cameras are identical, and they are all positioned the
same distance from the subject. The images are produced at a resolution of 800x800
pixels, with 100 views being used for training and 200 views being used for testing.
Figure 4.2. Realistic Synthetic 360◦dataset.
4.2
Implementation details
4.2.1
System configuration
The algorithm program in this project is written by Python, the neural network is
carried out on the PyTorch framework. The training process is done on DTU HPC
LSF10 cluster with Tesla A100-PCIE GPU. The system configuration has shown in
table 4.1
4.2.2
Training configuration
The training configuration is divided into two parts: one part is the one that may be
customized by modifying the input parameter file, and the other part is the one that
is already predefined by the program.
==PAGE:43==
4.2 Implementation details
33
Table 4.1. System configuration.
item
information
Operation System
Scientific Linux release 7.9 (Nitrogen)
GPU
Tesla A100-PCIE
number of cores
1
system memory
16GB
Python version
3.9.11
PyTorch version
1.13.0
CUDA version
11.7
Nvidia driver version
525.60.13
Parameter file
The program has a large number of parameters that are open to user customization.
Figure 4.3 shows an example parameter file which used for training flower scene. The
settings are the same for all of the other real forward-facing datasets.
Figure 4.3. Parameter file.
• expname Experiment name, which will be used to generate corresponding log
file.
• basedir Directory of log file.
• datadir Directory of input data.
• dataset_type For different dataset, LLFF and blender dataset, the program
will use different method to process the data. Therefore, the data type needs
to be stated at the beginning.
• factor As mentioned in section 4.1, the input image will be downsampled to
speed up render. The parameter will determine the downsampling rate.
• llffhold For LLFF dataset, during the training process, it will take every 1/N
images as test set.
==PAGE:44==
34
4 Experiments
• N_rand Batch size, the number of rays per iteration. Out of memory can be
avoided by adjusting this parameter.
• N_samples Number of sampling point for coarse network.
• N_importance Number of sampling point for fine network.
• use_viewdires As mentioned in network architecture (section 3.1.6), the color
is independent with both viewing direction and coordinates. By setting this
parameter True will enable this function.
• i_weights Frequency of checkpoints saving.
Predefined parameters
The network uses Adam optimizer for training. Adam configuration parameters β1 =
0.9, β2 = 0.999.
The default learning rate for training is 5 × 10−4, , which decreases to 5 × 10−5
at an exponential rate throughout the optimization process:
lrate = 5 × 10−4 × 0.1
global_step
N_iters
(4.1)
in which, global_step is the current iteration number, N_iters is the total number
of iterations.
For real forward-facing dataset, it is trained to 200k iterations for each scene, in
order to converge on a more accurate result. For Realistic Synthetic 360◦dataset, it
is trained to 500k iterations.
4.2.3
Main code
As introduced in section 3.1, the general process of the NeRF pipeline is mainly
divided into three processes: data processing, training, and rendering.
Take real
forward-facing dataset as example, the main codes involved in the three processes are
as follows, these code inspired a lot by nerf-pytorch [45].
Data processing
The process of data processing includes three parts: data loading, rays getting and
positional encoding.
• Data loading.
The first step is to load the data, obtain the images and the corresponding
camera parameters: resolution, focal length, intrinsics and extrinsics matrix.
The dataset used in NeRF has already provided the estimate pose of the camera
in the poses_bounds.npy file. Therefore, data can be loaded directly with llff
dataloader without processing.
==PAGE:45==
4.2 Implementation details
35
def load_data(basedir, factor=None, width=None, height=None,
load_imgs=True):
poses_arr = np.load(os.path.join(basedir, 'poses_bounds.npy'))
poses = poses_arr[:, :-2].reshape([-1, 3, 5]).transpose([1,2,0])
bds = poses_arr[:, -2:].transpose([1,0])
The poses_bounds.npy file contains a numpy array of dimensions Nx17 (where
N is the number of input images). Each row consists a 3x5 pose matrix and
2 depth values that enclose the nearest and farthest scene elements from that
viewpoint.
The pose matrix is a 3x4 camera-to-world matrix concatenated with a 3x1
column [image height, image width, focal length].
If other dataset need to be trained, it is necessary to generate camera poses and
sparse depth information using COLMAP [39].
• Rays getting.
As introduced in section 3.1.1, it is necessary to generate the ray for each pixel
of the frame.
The camera intrinsic matrix could be loaded from the former step, which is:
K = np.array([
[focal, 0, 0.5*W],
[0, focal, 0.5*H],
[0, 0, 1]
])
Then the ray for each pixel could be calculated based on the equation (3.1) and
(3.2).
def get_rays_np(H, W, K, c2w):
#pixel coordinate
i, j = np.meshgrid(np.arange(W, dtype=np.float32), np.arange(H,
dtype=np.float32), indexing='xy')
dirs = np.stack([(i-K[0][2])/K[0][0], -(j-K[1][2])/K[1][1],
-np.ones_like(i)], -1)
# Rotate ray directions from camera frame to the world frame
rays_d = np.sum(dirs[..., np.newaxis, :] * c2w[:3,:3], -1) # dot
product, equals to: [c2w.dot(dir) for dir in dirs]
# Translate camera frame's origin to the world frame. It is the
origin of all rays.
rays_o = np.broadcast_to(c2w[:3,-1], np.shape(rays_d))
==PAGE:46==
36
4 Experiments
return rays_o, rays_d
• Positional encoding.
According to section 3.1.4, it is important to map the coordinated to high
frequency domain to improve the performance.
class Embedder:
def __init__(self, **kwargs):
self.kwargs = kwargs
self.create_embedding_fn()
def create_embedding_fn(self):
embed_fns = []
d = self.kwargs['input_dims']
out_dim = 0
#log the dimension of the output, which will be one of the input
parameters of the network
if self.kwargs['include_input']:
embed_fns.append(lambda x : x)
out_dim += d
#L(x) = 10, L(d) = 4
max_freq = self.kwargs['max_freq_log2']
N_freqs = self.kwargs['num_freqs']
#'log_sampling' : True
if self.kwargs['log_sampling']:
freq_bands = 2.**torch.linspace(0., max_freq, steps=N_freqs)
else:
freq_bands = torch.linspace(2.**0., 2.**max_freq,
steps=N_freqs)
# 'periodic_fns' : [torch.sin, torch.cos]
for freq in freq_bands:
for p_fn in self.kwargs['periodic_fns']:
embed_fns.append(lambda x, p_fn=p_fn, freq=freq : p_fn(x *
freq))
out_dim += d
self.embed_fns = embed_fns
self.out_dim = out_dim
def embed(self, inputs):
return torch.cat([fn(inputs) for fn in self.embed_fns], -1)
==PAGE:47==
4.2 Implementation details
37
Network
After data processing, the next step is training. The most important thing in training
is to create NeRF network. The network architecture is introduced in section 3.1.6,
the following code is implemented based on the network architecture shown in figure
3.5.
The input of the network is the coordinates after position encoding with the
dimension of 60, and the view direction after position encoding with the dimension
of 24. The output of the network is the color and density of the input point.
class NeRF(nn.Module):
def __init__(self, D=8, W=256, input_ch=3, input_ch_views=3, output_ch=4,
skips=[4], use_viewdirs=False):
super(NeRF, self).__init__()
self.D = D #the location is passed through 8 fully-connected layer
self.W = W #the dimension of the output vector
self.input_ch = input_ch #location is a 3d vector
self.input_ch_views = input_ch_views #view direction is a 3d vector
self.skips = skips
self.use_viewdirs = use_viewdirs #if true, final color will depend on
the view direction
self.pts_linears = nn.ModuleList(
[nn.Linear(input_ch, W)] + [nn.Linear(W, W) if i not in self.skips
else nn.Linear(W + input_ch, W) for i in range(D-1)])
self.views_linears = nn.ModuleList([nn.Linear(input_ch_views + W,
W//2)])
if use_viewdirs:
self.feature_linear = nn.Linear(W, W)
self.alpha_linear = nn.Linear(W, 1)
self.rgb_linear = nn.Linear(W//2, 3)
else:
self.output_linear = nn.Linear(W, output_ch)
def forward(self, x):
input_pts, input_views = torch.split(x, [self.input_ch,
self.input_ch_views], dim=-1)
h = input_pts
for i, l in enumerate(self.pts_linears):
h = self.pts_linears[i](h)
h = F.relu(h)
if i in self.skips:
h = torch.cat([input_pts, h], -1)
==PAGE:48==
38
4 Experiments
if self.use_viewdirs:
alpha = self.alpha_linear(h)
feature = self.feature_linear(h)
h = torch.cat([feature, input_views], -1)
for i, l in enumerate(self.views_linears):
h = self.views_linears[i](h)
h = F.relu(h)
rgb = self.rgb_linear(h)
outputs = torch.cat([rgb, alpha], -1)
else:
outputs = self.output_linear(h)
return outputs
Volume rendering
After the NeRF model predict the color and density, the volume rendering will be
used to transform model’s predictions to semantically meaningful values: final color,
disparity, weight and depth based on the theory introduced in section 3.1.3.
As introduced in the section 3.2, the idea of the optimized NeRF is to render the
final color from the combine output of coarse network and fine network. Rendering
is in order from near to far, so the output of the coarse and fine network needs to be
sorted before rendering.
#raw0 is the output of the coarse network
raw0 = network_query_fn(pts, viewdirs, run_fn)
#Hierarchical sampling
z_vals_mid = .5 * (z_vals[...,1:] + z_vals[...,:-1])
z_samples = sample_pdf(z_vals_mid, weights[...,1:-1], N_importance,
det=(perturb==0.), pytest=pytest)
z_samples = z_samples.detach()
pts = rays_o[..., None, :] + rays_d[..., None, :] * z_samples[..., :,
None]
#raw1 is the output of fine network
run_fn = network_fn if network_fine is None else network_fine
raw1 = network_query_fn(pts, viewdirs, run_fn)
z_vals, idx = torch.sort(torch.cat([z_vals, z_samples], -1), -1)
#combine the output of coarse network and fine network
raw = torch.cat([raw0, raw1], 1)
#sort the output based on the distance from near to far
idx1 = idx.unsqueeze(0)
==PAGE:49==
4.2 Implementation details
39
idx1 = idx1.expand(raw.shape[-1], idx.shape[0], idx.shape[1])
idx1 = idx1.permute(1, 2, 0)
raw = torch.gather(raw, dim=1, index=idx1)
The input of the function is the prediction from model, which conclude the color
and density, the coordinates of the sampling point and the view direction of the ray.
The output of the function is the estimate RGB color of the ray, the disparity map,
weights assigned to each sampled color and the estimated distance to the object.
def raw2outputs(raw, z_vals, rays_d, raw_noise_std=0, white_bkgd=False,
pytest=False):
#raw: [num_rays, num_samples along ray, 4]. Prediction from model.
raw2alpha = lambda raw, dists, act_fn=F.relu:
1.-torch.exp(-act_fn(raw)*dists)
#z_vals: [num_rays, num_samples along ray]. Used for integration.
dists = z_vals[...,1:] - z_vals[...,:-1]
dists = torch.cat([dists,
torch.Tensor([1e10]).expand(dists[...,:1].shape)], -1) # [N_rays,
N_samples]
#we need to multiply by the length of the ray direction to get the actual
distance between the points.
dists = dists * torch.norm(rays_d[...,None,:], dim=-1)
#color of each space point
rgb = torch.sigmoid(raw[...,:3]) # [N_rays, N_samples, 3]
noise = 0.
alpha = raw2alpha(raw[...,3] + noise, dists) # [N_rays, N_samples]
weights = alpha * torch.cumprod(torch.cat([torch.ones((alpha.shape[0],
1)), 1.-alpha + 1e-10], -1), -1)[:, :-1]
rgb_map = torch.sum(weights[...,None] * rgb, -2) # [N_rays, 3]
depth_map = torch.sum(weights * z_vals, -1)
disp_map = 1./torch.max(1e-10 * torch.ones_like(depth_map), depth_map /
torch.sum(weights, -1))
acc_map = torch.sum(weights, -1)
return rgb_map, disp_map, acc_map, weights, depth_map
==PAGE:50==
40
4 Experiments
4.3
Evaluated methods
The Peak Signal-to-Noise Ratio (PSNR) and the Structural Similarity Index Measure
(SSIM) [46] are the two metrics that are utilized in this project in order to conduct
quality analysis.
4.3.1
Peak signal-to-noise ratio, PSNR
The mean squared error (MSE) is the most straightforward method for defining PSNR.
In order to compute PSNR, MSE must be computed first, and its value can be found
by using the following formula:
MSE =
1
mn
m−1
X
i=0
n−1
X
j=0
[I(i, j) −K(i, j)]2
(4.2)
where m and n are the height and width of the image respectively. And then PSNR
is given by:
PSNR(I) = 10 · log10
MAX(I)2
MSE(I)

(4.3)
where MAX(I) is the highest pixel value that can possibly be achieved in the image,
which is 255 for 8bit integer. And the pixel-wise mean squared error, denoted by
MSE(I), is the error that is determined across all color channels.
In the experiment, higher PSNR value means better image quality.
4.3.2
Structural similarity index measure, SSIM
SSIM evaluates image similarity from three aspects: luminance, structure and con-
trast. For a single patch, this is given by:
SSIM(x, y) =
(2µxµy + C1) (2σxy + C2)
 µ2x + µ2y + C1
  σ2x + σ2y + C2

(4.4)
with:
• µx = 1
N
PN
i=1 xi, the pixel sample mean of µx;
• µy same as µx, the pixel sample mean of µy;
• σ2
x =
1
N−1
PN
i=1 (xi −µx)2, the variance of x;
• σ2
y same as σ2
x, the variance of y;
• σxy =
1
N−1
PN
i=1 (xi −µx) (yi −µy), is the covariance of x and y;
==PAGE:51==
4.3 Evaluated methods
41
• Ci = (KiL)2, L is the dynamic range of the pixel-values, typically 255 for 8bit,
and K1 = 0.01; K2 = 0.03 by default.
The SSIM formula is derived from three comparative measurements that are made
between the samples of x and y. These measurements include luminance, contrast,
and structure. The separate comparison functions are as follows:
l(x, y) = 2µxµy + C1
µ2x + µ2y + C1
c(x, y) = 2σxσy + C2
σ2x + σ2y + C2
s(x, y) = σxy + C3
σxσy + C3
(4.5)
with, in addition to the definitions given above:
• C3 = C2
2
Finally, combine the three comparisons of (4.5), the SSIM is :
SSIM(x, y) = [l(x, y)]α · [c(x, y)]β · [s(x, y)]γ
(4.6)
Setting the weights α, β, γ to 1, the formula (4.6) can be reduced to the form (4.4).
If the SSIM score is higher, then the quality of the synthesized image will be higher
as well. When the two images are identical to one another, the SSIM value is equal
to one. This indicates that the structure of both images is the same.
==PAGE:52==
42
==PAGE:53==
CHAPTER 5
Results
5.1
Performance analysis
5.1.1
View-Dependent appearance
The particular network structure of NeRF, which was introduced in the section 3.1.6,
uses the direction of sight to anticipate the color. As a result, the produced images
will change depending on the direction in which the viewer is looking at them. The
view-dependent outcome will be demonstrated in the following photographs.
Figure 5.1. Rendering result on room scene.
The view-dependent effect of reflection is depicted in figure 5.1. In the room scene,
there is a television mounted in the centre of the wall. The front panel of the television
can be regarded as a mirror because it is capable of reflecting the scene around it. It
is clear by looking at the figure that the reflection on the television screen adjusts
itself according to the viewing angle. The table that is located in the lower right of
==PAGE:54==
44
5 Results
the room has a matt finish. Despite the fact that it has a low reflectivity, the light
can still be observed to change depending on the viewing angle.
Figure 5.2. Rendering result on bottle scene.
In the bottle scene, there is a transparent bottle on the table. Behind the bottle
is a painting with some flowers on it. It is possible to observe the refraction effect of
the flowers through the bottle by adjusting the viewing angle.
==PAGE:55==
5.1 Performance analysis
45
5.1.2
Geometry visualization
As can be seen in equations (3.10) and (3.11) of section 3.1.3, the depth maps were
computed as the expected termination of each camera ray in the encoded volume.
NeRF has the ability to accurately depict the geometry of intricate scene which has
multifaceted occlusions. The depth maps of rendered novel views are shown in figure
5.3.
Figure 5.3. Geometry visualization on fern, flower and leaves scene.
Although the three scenes have complex geometries, as illustrated in figure 5.3,
==PAGE:56==
46
5 Results
the depth estimations are very consistent with human perceptions. In more details,
objects that are closer to the camera, such as the plant in the fern scene and the red
bloom in the flower scene, have a clearer geometric structure.
5.1.3
Block-based PSNR
Calculating block-based PSNR is done in order to determine whether or not the
method described in this work performs differently in various positions of the image,
such as between the foreground and the background, or between the center area and
the edge area.
The rendering image and the ground truth image are both divided into 14x14
blocks, PSNR is calculated between the corresponding blocks and the heatmap is
generated.
Figure 5.4. Heatmap of block-based PSNR.
From the figure 5.4, it is obvious that the PSNR value of the middle part is higher
than that of the border part. This is because, when the forward-facing dataset is
collected, it tends to put the target in the middle. This allows the middle object of the
==PAGE:57==
5.2 Comparison result
47
scene to have more light information during training, compared with less information
in the edge area. So when rendering the novel view from the scene, the middle part
has high quality and the edge part has relatively low quality.
5.2
Comparison result
For the purpose of evaluating our model, the results will be compared with the original
NeRF for view synthesis, as will be described further down. Every method employs
the exact same group of input views to train a separated neural network for each
scene.
According to section 3.2, in principle, the computation time required by the op-
timized NeRF will be reduced by 25% in comparison to that required by the origin
NeRF when Nc = 64 and Nf = 128.
Comparison results on real forward-facing dataset and Realistic Synthetic 360◦
are as follow:
5.2.1
real forward-facing dataset
Table 5.1. Comparison result on real forward-facing dataset.
Training
Time(h)
Rendering
Time(s/img)
PSNR(dB)
SSIM
Dataset
NeRF
Optim
NeRF
Optim
NeRF
Optim
NeRF
Optim
Fern
8.07
6.15
9.55
7.17
26.9
26.87
0.86
0.86
Flower
8.17
6.5
9.62
7.23
28.5
28.23
0.92
0.92
Fortress
8.27
6.35
9.56
7.16
32.6
32.53
0.93
0.93
Horns
8.1
6.23
9.56
7.17
29
28.66
0.88
0.87
Leaves
8.25
6.23
9.56
7.22
22.4
22.39
0.84
0.84
Orchids
8.25
6.43
9.55
7.22
21.3
21.36
0.74
0.76
Room
8.08
6.35
9.55
7.17
33.2
32.97
0.97
0.97
trex
8.43
6.27
9.62
7.22
28.1
27.98
0.94
0.94
The comparison results on real forward-facing dataset are provided in table 5.1.
PSNR values and SSIM scores are reported in the table. It is clear by looking at the
PSNR values and the SSIM scores that the performance of the two approaches is not
significantly different from one another.
Table 5.2. Average training and rendering time on real forward-facing dataset.
NeRF
Optimized
Time reduction
Average Training time(h)
8.20
6.31
23.05%
Average Rendering time(s/img)
9.57
7.20
24.76%
==PAGE:58==
48
5 Results
The average amount of time spent on training and rendering on dataset real
forward-facing is described in table 5.2. From the table, it is able to determine that
the time reduction accomplishes the targeted 25% for the rendering time, and that
the average training time reduction is around 23%, which is a little bit less than the
targeted 25%.
The reason is that during the training process, a portion of the calculation is
devoted to the process of light sampling, and other operations, such as data loading
and position encoding. All of them require a certain amount of calculation. Therefore,
the reduction in average training time it’s less than 25%.
Figure 5.5. PSNR vs Time.
Figure 5.5 is the curve of PSNR and time during the training process of the room
dataset. As can be seen in this curve, in general, the optimized algorithm performs
better when training for the same amount of time.
==PAGE:59==
5.2 Comparison result
49
Figure 5.6. Comparisons on test-set views of real forward-facing scenes.
The contrast of the test-set views of real forward-facing scenarios can be seen in
figure 5.6. Based on the findings, it is discovered that both approaches were able
to accurately capture fine geometry and produce consistent rendered views. Both
methods are able to correctly rebuild partially occluded regions, as can be seen in
the leaves of the orchid and the railing in the horns. Both of these techniques are
==PAGE:60==
50
5 Results
effective, as seen by the crop of the room, in bringing back the reflective portion of
the TV as well as the features of the desktop.
5.2.2
Realistic Synthetic 360◦dataset.
Table 5.3. Comparison result on Realistic Synthetic 360◦dataset
Training
Time(h)
Rendering
Time(s/img)
PSNR(dB)
SSIM
Dataset
NeRF
Optim
NeRF
Optim
NeRF
Optim
NeRF
Optim
hotdog
24.66
18.91
32.40
24.35
35.34
31.46
0.97
0.93
lego
24.61
18.81
32.45
24.42
28.29
27.75
0.92
0.91
materials
22.08
17.66
32.35
24.27
29.62
29.61
0.96
0.96
ship
20.93
16.88
31.31
24.10
28.25
23.91
0.80
0.73
The comparison result on Realistic Synthetic 360◦dataset are provided in table
5.3. PSNR values and SSIM scores are reported in the table. Observing the PSNR
and SSIM values, it is discovered that in some datasets, such as the lego and materials
datasets, there is little difference between PSNR and SSIM, however in other datasets,
such as the hotdog and ship datasets, there is a substantial difference. The comparison
results are depicted more clearly in figure 5.7.
Table 5.4. Average training and rendering time on Realistic Synthetic 360◦dataset.
NeRF
Optim
Time reduction
Average Training time(h)
23.07
18.07
21.69%
Average Rendering time(s/img)
32.13
24.29
24.41%
A similar conclusion to table 5.2 can be drawn from table 5.4, that is a 25% increase
in rendering performance and a 21% decrease in training time are both achieved by
the optimized approach.
==PAGE:61==
5.2 Comparison result
51
Figure 5.7. Comparisons on test-set views of Realistic Synthetic 360◦scenes.
==PAGE:62==
52
5 Results
The contrast of the test-set views of Realistic Synthetic 360◦scenarios can be seen
in figure 5.7. For the hotdog scene, although the optimization algorithm accurately
renders the boundary lines, the delicate texture information is lost, and the texture
of the bread surface is blurred. For the lego scene, the texture of the backlit side
is more blurred than the other side, combined with the similar scene in hotdog, it
can be guessed that whether there is enough light will also affect the quality of view
synthesis. Compared with other scenes, the materials scene’s structure is simple, the
light distribution is uniform, and the performance of view synthesis is very good. The
ship scene is the most complex scene, optimized NeRF reduces the number of sam-
pling points, which is challenged in this complex scene, and the rendering result is
not satisfactory.
In general, when compared with the origin method, the Optimized-NeRF approach
cuts the amount of time required for training by 23% and increases the speed at
which rendering occurs by 25% while keeping the view quality unchanged on real
forward-facing dataset. When training on Realistic Synthetic 360◦dataset, although
the optimized method improves the training speed, it sacrifices the quality of view
synthesis.
5.2.3
Few-input view synthesis
The previous sections have discussed the performance of optimized NeRF and its
comparison with the baseline method. The optimized-NeRF could achieve the target
which decrease the training time and increase the rendering speed.
This section
presents a few other attempts based on the optimized NeRF approach.
Figure 5.8. Few-input view synthesis result.
It is ineffective to directly reduce the number of sample points to speed up training,
as discussed in section 3.1.3.
Inspired by view synthesis application in light field
compression, that only compress only four corner images, then use view synthesis
==PAGE:63==
5.2 Comparison result
53
to synthesize other views from the four corner images.
Another sensible solution
is to decrease the number of input images in order to increase training speed. In
this section, few-input view synthesis is implemented. In this experiment, only four
images are input for view synthesis.
Take the room scene as the example. The room scene dataset consists of 41 photos
taken from various perspectives. From the original dataset, four corner photos are
chosen and will be utilized to synthesis novel view.
The synthesis results are shown in figure 5.8, in which comparison of the synthe-
sised result of all input with few input is shown. The conclusion that the few inputs
have worse quality could be drawn from the data presented in the figure 5.8. The
scene that is reflected on the TV is blurry, and the rightmost border of the table at
the bottom right corner is incorrectly generated.
Such a result is expected. On the one hand, there is no way to provide enough
information to accurately generate the model because of less input. On the other
hand, this method only calculates the color loss between the ground truth and the
synthesized image, thus there are not enough constraints to limit the model. In this
case, the model may be overfitting, resulting in a large error in the final synthesized
image.
==PAGE:64==
54
==PAGE:65==
CHAPTER 6
Conclusion and
outlook
6.1
Conclusion
People are becoming more and more interested in light fields because they provide
users unparalleled creative freedom and flexibility for applications across a variety
of fields, enabling more immersive and realistic multimedia experiences. Traditional
light field technologies has the trade-off between the angular and spatial resolution.
NeRF is a novel method of representing the light field.
NeRF, however, must spend a lot of time training a single scenario.
In order
to enhance the view synthesis procedure, this project proposed an optimized NeRF
approach.
The coarse network and the fine network are the two networks utilized for training
in the original NeRF. For each ray, the coarse network requires 64 samples, and the
fine network requires 192 samples, of which 64 are identical to those required by
the coarse network.
The 64 samples must be computed twice, resulting in extra
computing waste, even if the final color is only predicted from the fine network. In
this project, an optimized NeRF is proposed, in which the coarse and fine networks
share the sample result and the number of unneeded sampling points is reduced to
accelerate training and rendering. The following are the conclusions:
• The main characteristics of NeRF, including view dependency, allowing it to
produce an accurate depth map, are retained by the optimized NeRF since it
uses the same network architecture as the basic NeRF.
• From the results of block-based PSNR, in the rendered image, the quality of
the center of the scene is higher than that of the edge.
• For Real Forward-Facing dataset, compared to the baseline method, the method
could reduce training time by 23% and boost view synthesis eﬀiciency by 25%.
• For Realistic Synthetic 360◦dataset, although the optimized method can reduce
the training time by 25%, the view synthesis quality is reduced. Considering
this is a more challenging 360◦scene, the decrease in quality maybe because the
==PAGE:66==
56
6 Conclusion and outlook
optimization method reduces the number of sampling points, leaving insuﬀicient
information to synthesize a higher quality view
• Based on the experimental results, the current method cannot handle the situa-
tion of fewer input images very well, which will lead to overfitting and generate
incorrect novel views.
6.2
Outlook
Aiming at the high computational cost of NeRF, this project propose a optimized
NeRF method, in which the output of the coarse network and the output of the fine
network are shared with each other, and the final color is created from the combined
output of both networks. Experimental results verify that this method can reduce
training time by about 23% and speed up rendering by 25%. However, this method
suffers from mediocre view synthesis quality in challenging scenarios such as Realistic
Synthetic 360◦and few input situation.
The following are some potential paths for further work:
• In the current method, each ray has the same number of sampling points. For
some rays, such as those corresponding to background elements, it is not es-
sential to perform a large number of samples; instead, only a constant color is
needed for expression. In the future, a significant number of samples can be
collected in meaningful areas, but the number of sampling points in meaningless
locations can be lowered to increase eﬀiciency.
• In addition, NeRF still needs enough input images for fitting (around 20-60). In
order to improve eﬀiciency, reducing the number of input images to reduce the
amount of calculation is also a potential method. As shown in section 5.2.3, the
existing system is not capable of dealing with situations in which there are few
input photographs in an effective manner. This could be due to the fact that
when using with insuﬀicient input views, current approaches have a tendency to
fit incorrect geometries. In this case, other information needs to be considered
to assist supervision, such as depth information, to prevent learning incorrect
geometry.
• NeRF has achieved great success in view synthesis for still photos, but its po-
tential goes beyond that. View synthesis has been successfully applied in the
field of light field data compression. Based on this, applying NeRF to video
compression can theoretically greatly improve compression eﬀiciency. There-
fore, applying NeRF to streaming media transmission is a promising prospect.
In addition, Instant-NGP [37] has made great progress in real-time rendering,
and real-time NeRF will enable light field to bring users an upgraded immersive
==PAGE:67==
6.2 Outlook
57
experience. For example, remote VR conferences will become possible in the
near future.
==PAGE:68==
Appendix
User guide
The user guide for the source code of this project is presented in this section.
File list
The source code folder contains the files shown in figure 6.1.
Figure 6.1. Files list.
• configs The parameter configuration file is stored in the configs folder
• data The data folder contains the fern and room scene of real forward-facing
dataset. The whole real forward-facing and Realistic Synthetic 360◦dataset
could be download from: NeRF data
==PAGE:69==
ii
Appendix 6 Conclusion and outlook
• llff In this folder, some helper codes are provided to process the data.
• logs logs is the experiment directory for the training output.
• Apply.sh Job description file for training on DTU HPC.
• img2poses Helps to generate camera pose from the image.
• load_.py Dataloader for different datatype.
• run_nerf.py Original NeRF code.
• run_nerf_helpers.py Some pre-defined functions which could be used during
the training process.
• run_nerf_optimized.py Optimized NeRF code which proposed by this project.
How to run
Generate camera poses and sparse depth information using COLMAP
This step is required when wanting to test on your own dataset.
1. Install COLMAP software.
2. place the scene directory under data folder. For an illustration, have a look at
the directory layout below:
|-data
|
|-testscene
|
|-----|-images
|
|-----|-----|-image0.jpg
|
|-----|-----|-image1.jpg
3. Generate the poses and sparse point cloud:
python imgs2poses.py <scenedir>
Testing
For the fern and room scene, there are pre-trained models under the logs folder,
which could be used for testing directly. The script for render the video:
==PAGE:70==
Appendix 6.2 Outlook
iii
python run_nerf.py --config configs/origin/fern.txt --render_only
python run_nerf_optimized.py --config
configs/optimized/fern_optimized.txt --render_only
Training
To train a optimzied-NeRF on the example room dataset:
python run_nerf_optimized.py --config configs/optimized/room_optimized.txt
It will create an experiment directory in logs, and keep the rendering samples and
checkpoints there.
==PAGE:71==
iv
==PAGE:72==
Bibliography
[1]
A. Gershun, “The light field,” Journal of Mathematics and Physics, vol. 18,
no. 1-4, pp. 51–151, 1939.
[2]
J. R. Bergen and E. H. Adelson, “The plenoptic function and the elements of
early vision,” Computational models of visual processing, vol. 1, p. 8, 1991.
[3]
L. McMillan and G. Bishop, “Plenoptic modeling: An image-based rendering
system,” in Proceedings of the 22nd annual conference on Computer graphics
and interactive techniques, pp. 39–46, 1995.
[4]
N. K. Kalantari, T.-C. Wang, and R. Ramamoorthi, “Learning-based view syn-
thesis for light field cameras,” ACM Transactions on Graphics (TOG), vol. 35,
no. 6, pp. 1–10, 2016.
[5]
B. Mildenhall, P. P. Srinivasan, R. Ortiz-Cayon, N. K. Kalantari, R. Ramamoor-
thi, R. Ng, and A. Kar, “Local light field fusion: Practical view synthesis with pre-
scriptive sampling guidelines,” ACM Transactions on Graphics (TOG), vol. 38,
no. 4, pp. 1–14, 2019.
[6]
B. Mildenhall, P. P. Srinivasan, M. Tancik, J. T. Barron, R. Ramamoorthi, and
R. Ng, “Nerf: Representing scenes as neural radiance fields for view synthesis,”
Communications of the ACM, vol. 65, no. 1, pp. 99–106, 2021.
[7]
P. Matysiak, S. Ruano, M. Alain, and A. Smolic, “A comparative study of tradi-
tional light field methods and nerf,”
[8]
F. Pereira, E. A. da Silva, and G. Lafruit, “Plenoptic imaging: Representation
and processing,” Academic Press Library in Signal Processing, Volume 6, pp. 75–
111, 2018.
[9]
C. Conti, L. D. Soares, and P. Nunes, “Dense light field coding: A survey,” IEEE
Access, vol. 8, pp. 49244–49284, 2020.
[10] M. Levoy and P. Hanrahan, “Light field rendering,” in Proceedings of the 23rd
annual conference on Computer graphics and interactive techniques, pp. 31–42,
1996.
==PAGE:73==
vi
Bibliography
[11] S. J. Gortler, R. Grzeszczuk, R. Szeliski, and M. F. Cohen, “The lumigraph,” in
Proceedings of the 23rd annual conference on Computer graphics and interactive
techniques, pp. 43–54, 1996.
[12] B. Wilburn, N. Joshi, V. Vaish, E.-V. Talvala, E. Antunez, A. Barth, A. Adams,
M. Horowitz, and M. Levoy, “High performance imaging using large camera
arrays,” in ACM SIGGRAPH 2005 Papers, pp. 765–776, 2005.
[13] S. U. Computer Graphics Laboratory, “The (new) stanford light field archive.”
http://lightfield.stanford.edu/index.html.
[14] “Raytrix.” https://raytrix.de/.
[15] L. Forum, “Lytro archive.” http://lightfield-forum.com/en/.
[16] T. Georgiev, Z. Yu, A. Lumsdaine, and S. Goma, “Lytro camera technology:
theory, algorithms, performance analysis,” in Multimedia content and mobile
devices, vol. 8667, pp. 458–467, SPIE, 2013.
[17] M. Teratani, X. Jin, L. Li, G. Lafruit, and L. Yu, “Exploration experiments and
common test conditions for dense light fields,” ISO/IEC JTC1/SC29/WG11,
Marrakesh, Morocco, N18173, 2019.
[18] T.-C. Wang, J.-Y. Zhu, N. K. Kalantari, A. A. Efros, and R. Ramamoorthi,
“Light field video capture using a learning-based hybrid imaging system,” ACM
Transactions on Graphics (TOG), vol. 36, no. 4, pp. 1–13, 2017.
[19] G. K. Wallace, “The jpeg still picture compression standard,” Communications
of the ACM, vol. 34, no. 4, pp. 30–44, 1991.
[20] P. Chaudhary, R. Gupta, A. Singh, P. Majumder, and A. Pandey, “Joint image
compression and encryption using a novel column-wise scanning and optimization
algorithm,” Procedia Computer Science, vol. 167, pp. 244–253, 2020.
[21] M. B. de Carvalho, M. P. Pereira, G. Alves, E. A. da Silva, C. L. Pagliari,
F. Pereira, and V. Testoni, “A 4d dct-based lenslet light field codec,” in 2018
25th IEEE International Conference on Image Processing (ICIP), pp. 435–439,
IEEE, 2018.
[22] J. Wei, S. Wang, Y. Zhao, and F. Jin, “Hierarchical prediction structure for
subimage coding and multithreaded parallel implementation in integral imaging,”
Applied optics, vol. 50, no. 12, pp. 1707–1716, 2011.
[23] C. Conti, J. Lino, P. Nunes, L. D. Soares, and P. L. Correia, “Spatial prediction
based on self-similarity compensation for 3d holoscopic image and video coding,”
in 2011 18th IEEE International Conference on Image Processing, pp. 961–964,
IEEE, 2011.
==PAGE:74==
Bibliography
vii
[24] C. Jia, X. Zhang, S. Wang, S. Wang, and S. Ma, “Light field image compression
using generative adversarial network-based view synthesis,” IEEE Journal on
Emerging and Selected Topics in Circuits and Systems, vol. 9, no. 1, pp. 177–189,
2018.
[25] X. Jiang, M. Le Pendu, and C. Guillemot, “Light field compression using depth
image based view synthesis,” in 2017 IEEE International Conference on Multi-
media & Expo Workshops (ICMEW), pp. 19–24, IEEE, 2017.
[26] G. Wu, B. Masia, A. Jarabo, Y. Zhang, L. Wang, Q. Dai, T. Chai, and Y. Liu,
“Light field image processing: An overview,” IEEE Journal of Selected Topics in
Signal Processing, vol. 11, no. 7, pp. 926–954, 2017.
[27] T. G. Georgiev, K. C. Zheng, B. Curless, D. Salesin, S. K. Nayar, and C. Int-
wala, “Spatio-angular resolution tradeoffs in integral photography.,” Rendering
Techniques, vol. 2006, no. 263-272, p. 21, 2006.
[28] G. Chaurasia, S. Duchene, O. Sorkine-Hornung, and G. Drettakis, “Depth syn-
thesis and local warps for plausible image-based navigation,” ACM Transactions
on Graphics (TOG), vol. 32, no. 3, pp. 1–12, 2013.
[29] P. P. Srinivasan, T. Wang, A. Sreelal, R. Ramamoorthi, and R. Ng, “Learning to
synthesize a 4d rgbd light field from a single image,” in Proceedings of the IEEE
International Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 2243–2251, 2017.
[30] A. Levin and F. Durand, “Linear view synthesis using a dimensionality gap light
field prior,” in 2010 IEEE Computer Society Conference on Computer Vision
and Pattern Recognition, pp. 1831–1838, IEEE, 2010.
[31] L. Shi, H. Hassanieh, A. Davis, D. Katabi, and F. Durand, “Light field recon-
struction using sparsity in the continuous fourier domain,” ACM Transactions
on Graphics (TOG), vol. 34, no. 1, pp. 1–13, 2014.
[32] Y. Wang, F. Liu, Z. Wang, G. Hou, Z. Sun, and T. Tan, “End-to-end view syn-
thesis for light field imaging with pseudo 4dcnn,” in Proceedings of the European
Conference on Computer Vision (ECCV), pp. 333–348, 2018.
[33] K. Zhang, G. Riegler, N. Snavely, and V. Koltun, “Nerf++: Analyzing and
improving neural radiance fields,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2010.07492, 2020.
[34] A. Knapitsch, J. Park, Q.-Y. Zhou, and V. Koltun, “Tanks and temples:
Benchmarking large-scale scene reconstruction,” ACM Transactions on Graphics
(ToG), vol. 36, no. 4, pp. 1–13, 2017.
[35] K. Yücer, A. Sorkine-Hornung, O. Wang, and O. Sorkine-Hornung, “Eﬀicient 3d
object segmentation from densely sampled light fields with applications to 3d
reconstruction,” ACM Transactions on Graphics (TOG), vol. 35, no. 3, pp. 1–15,
2016.
==PAGE:75==
viii
Bibliography
[36] Z. Wang, S. Wu, W. Xie, M. Chen, and V. A. Prisacariu, “Nerf–: Neural radi-
ance fields without known camera parameters,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2102.07064,
2021.
[37] T. Müller, A. Evans, C. Schied, and A. Keller, “Instant neural graphics primitives
with a multiresolution hash encoding,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2201.05989, 2022.
[38] “Ray-tracing:
Generating
camera
rays.”
https://www.scratchapixel.
com/lessons/3d-basic-rendering/ray-tracing-generating-camera-
rays/generating-camera-rays.html.
[39] J. L. Schönberger and J.-M. Frahm, “Structure-from-motion revisited,” in Con-
ference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), 2016.
[40] K. Gao, Y. Gao, H. He, D. Lu, L. Xu, and J. Li, “Nerf: Neural radiance field in
3d vision, a comprehensive review,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.00379, 2022.
[41] Y.-C. Guo, D. Kang, L. Bao, Y. He, and S.-H. Zhang, “Nerfren: Neural radiance
fields with reflections,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer
Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), pp. 18409–18418, June 2022.
[42] N. Rahaman, A. Baratin, D. Arpit, F. Draxler, M. Lin, F. Hamprecht, Y. Bengio,
and A. Courville, “On the spectral bias of neural networks,” in International
Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 5301–5310, PMLR, 2019.
[43] M. Levoy, “Eﬀicient ray tracing of volume data,” ACM Transactions on Graphics
(TOG), vol. 9, no. 3, pp. 245–261, 1990.
[44] M. Suhail, C. Esteves, L. Sigal, and A. Makadia, “Light field neural rendering,”
in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition, pp. 8269–8279, 2022.
[45] L.
Yen-Chen,
“Nerf-pytorch.”
https://github.com/yenchenlin/nerf-
pytorch/, 2020.
[46] Z. Wang, A. C. Bovik, H. R. Sheikh, and E. P. Simoncelli, “Image quality assess-
ment: from error visibility to structural similarity,” IEEE transactions on image
processing, vol. 13, no. 4, pp. 600–612, 2004.
==PAGE:76==
List of Figures
2.1
Light field (LF) imaging processing flow [8], which generally consists of ac-
quisition/creation, representation, encoding, transmission/storage, decod-
ing, rendering and display. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
The 7D plenoptic function [9]. (x, y, z) are location in space, (θ, ϕ) are light
direction, (λ) is light wavelength and (t) is time.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.3
Two-plane parameterization for the 4D plenoptic function [10].A point on
the uv plane and a point on the st plane are connected to form an orientated
line. One appealing aspect of this depiction is the ability to position one of
the planes at infinity. This is useful since it allows for the parameterization
of lines using a point and a direction.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.4
A camera array system composed of 8 × 12 video cameras developed by
Wilburn et al. [12]. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.5
The Stanford Light Field Gantry with four degrees of freedom of the camera
motion: translation in X and Y, along with nod and shake. The gantry
motion is repeatable and sub-millimeter accurate [13]. . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.6
The lenslet camera [9]. There are two different lenslet camera configurations:
the focused lenslet camera system seen in commercial Raytrix [14] cameras
and the unfocused lenslet camera setup found in commercial Lytro cameras
[15,16]. The distance b of the MLA from the image sensor separates these
two configurations. The distance b is equivalent to the MLA focal length f
for the unfocused setup, while for the focused setup, b ̸= f.
. . . . . . . .
10
2.7
Fast and easy handheld capture light field [5]. From a collection of input
photographs taken by a handheld camera in an atypical grid pattern, they
describe a quick and accurate approach for view synthesis. . . . . . . . . .
11
2.8
Lenslet representation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.9
Full Parallax Multiview representation.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.10 A general compression scheme [20].
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2.11 Categories of the light field coding solutions [9].
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3.1
Neural radiance field scene representation and rendering procedure [6]. . .
19
3.2
Ray tracing [38]. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
3.3
The direction from a point on the pixel plane to the optical center of the
camera. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
3.4
NeRF pipeline. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
==PAGE:77==
x
List of Figures
3.5
MLP network architecture [6]. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
3.6
Optimized NeRF pipeline. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
4.1
Real Forward-Facing dataset. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
4.2
Realistic Synthetic 360◦dataset.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
4.3
Parameter file.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
5.1
Rendering result on room scene.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
5.2
Rendering result on bottle scene.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
5.3
Geometry visualization on fern, flower and leaves scene. . . . . . . . . . .
45
5.4
Heatmap of block-based PSNR. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
5.5
PSNR vs Time. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
5.6
Comparisons on test-set views of real forward-facing scenes. . . . . . . . .
49
5.7
Comparisons on test-set views of Realistic Synthetic 360◦scenes. . . . . .
51
5.8
Few-input view synthesis result. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
6.1
Files list.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
i
==PAGE:78==
List of Tables
4.1
System configuration.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
5.1
Comparison result on real forward-facing dataset. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
5.2
Average training and rendering time on real forward-facing dataset. . . . .
47
5.3
Comparison result on Realistic Synthetic 360◦dataset
. . . . . . . . . . .
50
5.4
Average training and rendering time on Realistic Synthetic 360◦dataset. .
50
