==PAGE:1==
Production, Customer Validation, Market 
entry and Business strategy for the product
DTU Mechanical Engineering 
DTU Entrepreneurship
A Master thesis by Casper Gramhald-Nørland and Laila Sofie Midjord
10.02.2023
==PAGE:2==
Casper Gramhald-Nørland
10-02-2023
Laila Sofie Midjord 
10-02-2023
 
Technical University of Denmark
Master thesis title: 
Production, Customer validation, Market entry and 
Business strategy for the product Drinksaver. 
Date: 01-09-2022 to 10-02-2023
ECTS: 30
Counted words: 16.504 words
Supervisors: 
Thomas J. Howard 
Department of Entrepreneurship 
Yang Zhang
Department of Mechanical Engineering 
Students: 
Casper Gramhald-Nørland 
s173865 - M.Sc. Design and Innovation
Laila Sofie Midjord 
s173874 - M.Sc. Design and Innovation
==PAGE:3==
1
Abstract
This master thesis is written by Casper Gramhald-Nørland and Laila Soﬁe Midjord, M.Sc. Design &
Innovation students at the Technical University of Denmark and founders of the company Drinksaver.
Drinksaver is a company focusing on developing universal products which include users with special needs
in non-stigmatizing ways. Prior to the project, the company had created a lid designed to ﬁt cups used
at festivals and concerts that minimize spillage.
This project aims to investigate possible market segments of the solution created by Drinksaver and to
adjust the solution to the speciﬁc needs of this segment.
The project has resulted in a design of a drinking glass and a hidden lid, which provides less spillage, avoids
head bending when drinking, ensures an easy grip, and uses colours which increase water consumption
without showing any visual indicators of being an assistive device. The solution fulﬁls the functional
needs of people with motor disabilities and swallowing diﬃculties and is aesthetically a product they can
use daily without attracting attention to their disability. In addition, the solution provides the user with
the tools needed to ensure the correct consumption of ﬂuids while increasing their conﬁdence in engaging
in social contexts.
The products are being manufactured in Portugal by a manufacturer experienced in producing glassware
in the desired type of material. The ﬁrst product will arrive in Denmark before the end of the ﬁrst quarter
of 2023.
Following the end of this project, the company will be able to order the products from the manufacturer
and distribute it B2C and B2B. The project proposes that the products should be sold in packages
containing four drinking glasses and four lids at a retail price of 400 DKK, including VAT.
==PAGE:4==
2
Acknowledgement
We would like to express our deepest appreciation to our two supervisors, Professor Yang Zhang & Profes-
sor Thomas J. Howard for their guidance and structure throughout the entire project. We would also like
to extend our deepest gratitude to the Skylab Incubator’s Start-up coaches, Jacob Svagin & Alexander
Egebjerg, for detailed feedback and advice during the project.
We cannot begin to express our gratitude to the Bevica Foundation for providing the requested funding,
which made all this possible and for placing our ﬁrst order of 400 products.
We would like to extend our sincere thanks to the test persons of our products, Tina Højager, Fred-
erik W. Olsen and Johan Lauritsen. We also wish to thank the nursing homes and rehabilitation center
for providing in-depth market and user insight, Virumsg˚ard, Lystoftebakken, Bakkeg˚arden, Baunehøj &
Rehabiliteringsenheden Østervang.
We also wish to thank the organisations and companies RB-Drinks, APT-Mould, Kifa-Plast, Abena,
Zacco, Mediq Denmark, Pro-Care, Lægemiddlestyrelsen, Dansk Standard, EUIPO, DanishCare, Car-
tonarte and Kop&Kande for detailed insight, technical estimations and knowledge sharing.
We would like to thank Søren Røn for his good cooperation with the implementation of the website
and the graphics provided.
Lastly, we want to thank all our friends and family for their support throughout the project.
==PAGE:5==
3
Abbreviations
DTU
Danish Technical University
LOT
Letter of Intent
IDE
Innovation-Driven Enterprise
SME
Small and medium-sized enterprises
WHO
World Health Organization
SOM
Serviceable Obtainable Market
SAM
Serviceable Available Market
TAM
Total Addressable Market
DFM
Design for Manufacturing
BOM
Bill of Material
CAD
Computer-aided Design
PC
Poly-carbonate
PP
Poly-propylene
PA
Poly-amid
PBTP
Poly-butylene TerePhthalate
PETP
Poly-Ethylene TerePhthalate
3D
three dimensional
SDG
Sustainable Development Goals
MVP
Minimum Viable Product
DKK
Danish Krone
IP
Intellectual Property
VAT
Value-Added Tax
IPR
Intellectual Property Rights
approx.
approximately
incl.
including or inclusive
excl.
excluding
Pkg.
package
e.g.
for example
EUIPO
European Union Intellectual Property Oﬃce
i.e.
in other words
Reading Guide
This project consists of two documents, with this report being the primary document describing the
results achieved and the decisions made. The supplementary technical report goes into detail about the
process of the results and elaborates on the processes behind the decisions.
In this report, reference will be made to the technical report, using the phrase appendix and then specifying
which one. A reading guide for the technical report can be found in its own report.
==PAGE:6==
TABLE OF CONTENTS
4
Table of Contents
1
Introduction
6
1.1
The Company Drinksaver . . . . .
7
1.2
The Journey
. . . . . . . . . . . .
8
1.3
The Principle Behind the Product
9
1.4
Scope of the Project . . . . . . . .
10
1.5
Approach and Report Structure . .
10
2
Market Segmentation
13
2.0.1
Private User Segment
. . .
13
2.0.2
Health Care and Service
Segment . . . . . . . . . . .
14
2.0.3
Festival and Concert Segment 14
2.0.4
Segmentation . . . . . . . .
15
2.0.5
The Market Opportunity
.
16
2.1
Market size . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
2.1.1
The Danish Market
. . . .
17
2.1.2
End User proﬁle
. . . . . .
18
2.2
Summary of Chapter . . . . . . . .
19
3
User Insight and Market Research
21
3.1
Drinking Correctly . . . . . . . . .
21
3.2
Insight From Institutions
. . . . .
22
3.3
Insight From Retailers . . . . . . .
23
3.4
Insight From Private Users
. . . .
24
3.5
Similar and Competitive Products
25
3.6
End-user testing and validation . .
27
3.6.1
Minimal Viable Product . .
27
3.7
Ability Prompt Cards
. . . . . . .
28
3.8
Summary of Chapter . . . . . . . .
30
4
Product Development
32
4.1
The Drinking Glass . . . . . . . . .
32
4.1.1
Inspirational Design . . . .
32
4.1.2
Inclusive Features
. . . . .
32
4.2
The Lid . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
4.3
Branding
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
4.3.1
Drinksaver as a medical de-
vice? . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
4.4
Summary of Chapter . . . . . . . .
38
5
Design for Manufacturing
40
5.1
Material and Process Selection
. .
40
5.1.1
The Advantages of Polycar-
bonate as a Plastic . . . . .
40
5.2
Manufacturer and Compliance
. .
41
5.2.1
Certiﬁcations . . . . . . . .
41
5.3
Simulations . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
5.4
Cost of Tooling and Manufacture .
42
5.5
Packaging and Transportation . . .
43
5.6
Product Life Cycle Use Case
. . .
44
5.7
Summary of Chapter . . . . . . . .
45
6
Intellectual Property Rights
47
6.1
Patent Investigation
. . . . . . . .
47
6.2
Design Registration . . . . . . . . .
47
6.3
Trademark
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
7
Business Plan
50
7.1
Value Proposition . . . . . . . . . .
50
7.2
Product Pricing . . . . . . . . . . .
52
7.2.1
Competitive and Wholesale
Pricing
. . . . . . . . . . .
52
7.2.2
Price Setting . . . . . . . .
53
7.3
Market Analysis
. . . . . . . . . .
53
7.4
Growth and Employment
. . . . .
54
7.5
Budget and Investment plan . . . .
55
7.6
Value and Equity Statement . . . .
56
7.7
Summary of Chapter . . . . . . . .
57
8
Next Steps
59
9
Conclusion
61
10 Reﬂection
63
==PAGE:7==
1Introduction
This chapter introduces the reader to the iden-
tified struggle experienced and how a team 
reversed this struggle into a new invention. In-
cluding their journey from an idea to a function-
al product.
==PAGE:8==
1
INTRODUCTION
6
1
Introduction
Every person has experienced that a slight hand movement can cause a beverage to spill and may result
in the waste of expensive drops of your favourite drink, a stain on the shirt or even scalding of your skin.
Preventing spillage often requires high concentration and balance, but to many this is not a daily struggle,
and the majority are able to carry around cups and glasses without spilling. Take a moment and imagine
how it would feel to live with uncontrollable shivering and struggle with every sip you took for the rest
of your life.
People with motor disabilities and many elderly are experiencing diﬃculties in performing otherwise
usual simple tasks, such as drinking, swallowing, holding and transporting their beverages while prevent-
ing spillage. Because of the stigmatization of using assistive devices that visualize the user’s disability,
many disabled choose to live with their functional disability rather than using devices which separate
them from non-disabled. To ease the pain and struggle of performing these tasks, Drinksaver developed
a universal solution.
The lid by Drinksaver is an innovative solution whose unique value proposition is to reduce the spillage
of beverages without impairing the drinking experience. The product works as “the hidden lid” and is
designed to control the liquid in the drinking glass in a non-stigmatizing way. The solution puts less focus
on the user’s disability, as the product is placed inside the cup, invisible to the user’s surroundings. The
solution will allow everyone to drink from the same glass without visible assistive devices.
The lid by Drinksaver is a universal product for anyone who wants to avoid the unfortunate spillage
of beverages without adding a regular lid. Through research and interviews, there has been evidence that
the current glasses used in nursing homes, institutions and rehabilitation centres have several downsides.
Therefore, the intention is to design a new drinking glass compatible with the lid in collaboration with
users with disabilities, caretakers and occupational therapists to achieve the greatest result.
==PAGE:9==
1
INTRODUCTION
7
1.1
The Company Drinksaver
The company’s vision is to design and develop products that increase the quality of life for people with
disabilities and elders. This is achieved by creating universal solutions that minimize the stigma associ-
ated with using assistive technology and by discreetly incorporating the functions required in the design
of the product.
According to the United Nations report on Disability and Development [1], people with disabilities are
left behind and their needs are often ignored in product development if regulation does not require it.
Furthermore, they highlight the goal of enabling people with disabilities to use assistive technology and
replace it with universal solutions. Ant´onio Guterres, Secretary-General of the United Nations, highlights
that this minority is still experiencing signiﬁcant challenges.
”Despite the strong commitment expressed by the international community for inclusive and sustainable
development, persons with disabilities continue to face signiﬁcant challenges to their full participation in
society. These include negative attitudes, stigma, discrimination and lack of accessibility in physical and
virtual environments.” - Ant´onio Guterres, Secretary-General of the United Nations [1].
Drinksaver strives to minimize the challenges and barriers experienced in their daily lives by providing
aesthetically pleasing assistive solutions which remove the stigma and increase accessibility by utilizing
universal design concepts.
The company is owned by the two founders, Casper Gramhald-Nørland and Laila Soﬁe Midjord, each
holding a 50% stake. The company has an oﬃce space in the DTU Skylab Incubator.
==PAGE:10==
1
INTRODUCTION
8
1.2
The Journey
In the fall of 2017 the team consisted of six Bachelor students from the Technical University of Denmark
(DTU) Design / Innovation program. The concept behind Drinksaver was ﬁrst created after conduct-
ing research on the challenges faced by wheelchair users at festivals. The ﬁrst prototype of the lid was
designed to make festivals more accessible for wheelchair users. The prototype received positive feed-
back from within and outside the university, such as DTU Skylab, Stardust, newspapers, Bevica Fonden
etc., leading the team to recognize the market potential of the product. However, the workload required
throughout the journey led to a reduction of founders over time, and since 2020, the last two founders
have kept the business operating.
Since 2017 the development of Drinksaver has involved a wide range of stakeholders, activities and re-
search and has required signiﬁcant time and ﬁnancial investment (see appendix I.07). These steps were
possible thanks to the two organisations Bevica Fonden and Verner Overgaards familiefond, which respec-
tively have provided soft funding of 25.000 DKK and 200.000 DKK. In 2018, Bevica Fonden o↵ered an
investment of 500.000 DKK for 50% of the company. However, as the company was in need of expertise
rather than money, the company declined the o↵er.
Achievements that have had a signiﬁcant impact have been for example: Competing against the ﬁve
ﬁnalists for the Plastic Engineering contest, which led to a Letter of Intent (LOT) from the company
Abena, which saw potential in a single-use product for festivals. However, many single-use plastic prod-
ucts have been replaced by reusable versions of the same product, leading to the LOT being invalid for
the intended former design of the lid. Furthermore, attending and testing the product at the Roskilde
festival led to TV2 lorry (news show) launching a feature with wheelchairs user testing the product, and
led to a growth in traction.
The last achievement prior to the beginning of this thesis was to produce a mould and manufacture 100
units of the new design of the lid made for reusable festival cups.
The journey can be seen in more detail in appendix I.07, including the development of the lid from concept
to manufacturing in appendix I.06.
Figure 1: The timeline showing the main activities performed since 2017.
==PAGE:11==
1
INTRODUCTION
9
1.3
The Principle Behind the Product
The principle behind the design of the lid derives from the behaviour and study of liquids when a force is
applied. When a cup experiences linear force, as shown in Figure 2 as F movement, the liquid will stay at
rest until the force stops. This will cause the ﬂuid to travel up the side, and if the force is large enough,
it will go over the edge [2]. By using the opportunity to diverge the liquid back down to the centre of the
cup, the liquid will lose its inertial force and be at rest again. This is achieved by employing a unique
design feature in the form of a parabolic curve that diverts the liquid towards the centre.
Figure 2: How ﬂuid behaves during movement and how liquid is poured from the product design.
The ﬂuid is prevented from spilling when experiencing sudden movements due to the parabolic curve. To
enable the user’s ability to drink normally from the rim of the glass, layered openings are implemented in
the design. The lid will still block the liquid from sloshing out, but simply ﬂow out through the openings
when poured, as shown in Figure 2 or in more detail in appendix I.05.
Figure 3: Invisible to others, no interference with lips or nose, maintaining aroma and the visual aspect.
The design in ﬁgure 2 is not an exact image of the initial concept. It is the result of tests, user feedback
and advice from experts on the subject which have led to the ﬁnal design, which ensures the desired
control of ﬂuids. Every decision has been a part of a longer journey (see appendix I.06.).
==PAGE:12==
1
INTRODUCTION
10
1.4
Scope of the Project
The master thesis’ ﬁrst structure and objectives were deﬁned in a thesis description, documented in
appendix I.01, with the overall goal to involve customer validation of the manufactured lid, with the
intention to go to market with the product intended for the festival segment. However, the ﬁrst month of
gathering user validations and being on hold publishing the new design due to the preparation of papers
for design registration led to a change in direction.
The reusable festivals cup was in an early stage, and the company prematurely witnessed diﬃculties
in their existing logistics with the take-back and cleaning system of the cups. This made the company
realize that implementing a new add-on to this logistics would require signiﬁcant time and development.
Simultaneously, the company experienced a demand for a lid that could interact with people’s everyday
experience of spillage, and this resulted in the company placing the festival product on hold ”Kill their
darling” and starting over, with the goal to deliver a solution that could be used daily.
The observed need was translated into a new project plan, which can be read in appendix I.04, with
the main focus on designing the lid to an already exciting drinking glass or designing a new drinking glass
that fulﬁlled the customers’ need, and providing the customer with an everyday solution.
The Master Thesis Statement
Can Drinksaver create a unique and universal solution which fulﬁlls the functional needs of its user and
which aesthetically is not associated with assistive devices for a market segment involving people with
disabilities, their relatives and their social circle while being manufacturable and cost-eﬃcient?
1.5
Approach and Report Structure
As an Innovation-Driven Enterprise (IDE), the goal is to achieve exponential growth and expand globally
with a future-designed solution.
To reach these goals, the company developed a Gantt diagram [3],
followed by a triple diamond (double diamond), which was developed by the British Design Council in
2003, as the description of a design process [4], to structure the work ahead in an iterative design process.
This was done to utilize design methods and ensure that desired milestones were reached on time, see
appendix I.02 and I.04.4-5. The milestones took inspiration from the 24 steps to a successful startup
developed by Bill Aulet [5], which was used as a guideline to evolve as a business.
==PAGE:13==
1
INTRODUCTION
11
The Report Structure
1. Introduction This chapter introduces the reader to the identiﬁed struggle experienced and how a
team reversed this struggle into a new invention. Including their journey from an idea to a functional
product.
2.
Market Segments In this chapter, both the customer and market segments are investigated to
build promising end-user proﬁles and personas. Based on this, the size of both the Total Addressable
Market and the beachhead is calculated.
3.
User Insight and Market Research This Chapter investigates and observes the end-user pro-
ﬁles to truly understand what diﬃculties they are struggling with and to understand how to help them.
Additionally, the festival lid is used as a Minimal Viable Product (MVP) to identify improvements to
take into further consideration.
4.
Product Development In this chapter, the problems observed are reversed to design opportu-
nities, including trial and error, to optimize the ﬁnal solutions. Furthermore, the association with the
product in relation to branding is taken into consideration.
5.
Design for Manufacture This chapter outlines the product requirements to ensure a manufac-
turable and cost-eﬃcient product, but most importantly, ensures that the product fulﬁls the end-user and
legal needs. Additionally, the life cycle use case is outlined.
6.
Intellectual Property Rights In this chapter, the possible Intellectual Property Rights (IPR)
are investigated to outline the di↵erent possibilities to get protection for the invention. This is done to
ensure a stronger position in the market.
7.
Business Plan In this chapter, the business model is built upon the possible customers, and the
market size is calculated based on the follow-on market segment. To ensure a healthy business, a strate-
gic price approach was conducted to ensure a competitive position, and a total budget was outlined to
establish funding needs to achieve the goals.
8. Next Steps This chapter outlines the next steps the company should focus on.
9.
Conclusion This chapter summarizes the product development and outlines if the product fulﬁls
the user’s needs and if there can be built a healthy business upon this invention.
10.
Reﬂection This chapter will reﬂect on the decisions made and discuss whether these could be
done di↵erently in the future and what learnings have been encountered.
==PAGE:14==
2Market Segmentation
In this chapter, both the customer and market 
segments are investigated to build promising 
end-user profiles and personas. Based on this, 
the size of both the Total Addressable Market 
and the beachhead is calculated.
==PAGE:15==
2
MARKET SEGMENTATION
13
2
Market Segmentation
The simple task of consuming liquid and staying hydrated is for many people just something you do
without thinking about it. This is not the case for all people. For many, this includes a wide range
of challenges. Having diﬃculties with controlling movement is a consequence of motor disabilities and
may result in spillage on yourself, others or objects, risk of scalding and feeling humiliated and unable to
perform an otherwise simple task. The possible solutions on the market are stigmatizing or too expensive,
so many choose not to use them.
”When I was ﬁrst introduced to the Drinksaver product, I really felt that I was facing a product that
had ﬁnally solved one of the challenges that my Cerebral Palsy gives me in my daily life - namely, the
fact that due to my diﬃculty walking, I could not move with a glass of water or a cup without both water
or co↵ee sloshing out of the glass/cup.” - Tina Højager, su↵ering from Cerebral Palsy Appendix UIMR.15.
The function of the products by Drinksaver can beneﬁt everyone, as spillage is a pain that every person
can experience. However, the need is more signiﬁcant for some groups of people and in some temporary
situations. People su↵ering from motor disabilities, such as Cerebral Palsy, Essential tremors, Parkinson
etc. are continuously experiencing uncontrollable movements, while people with limited ability to move
because of injuries and people in transportation or in active movement are temporarily experiencing dif-
ﬁculties in controlling their movement. These customer segments are typically regardless of age, gender
and ethnic background and will be elaborated further in the following subsections.
2.0.1
Private User Segment
It is a common misconception that people with disabilities are primarily conﬁned to nursing homes.
In reality, many individuals with disabilities live at home by themselves or with their families. They
may receive support from home care services, assistive technology, and other resources to help them live
independently. Living at home allows people with disabilities to maintain a sense of autonomy and control
over their own lives. They are able to make their own decisions, set their own schedules, and participate
in their communities. Being in a home environment also provides a sense of familiarity and comfort [6].
Furthermore, with the availability of assistive technology and remote care, people with disabilities can
receive the same level of care and support as they would in a nursing home, but with greater independence
and ﬂexibility.
”As a person with a disability who really values being able to fend for myself on a day-to-day basis,
Drinksaver has been a huge help in ensuring that I can manage to collect my co↵ee myself, which may
seem like a small thing, but it really means a lot when you, like me, have been used to not being able to
do it. I can thank the entrepreneurs of Drinksaver for that” - Tina Højager, Cerebral Palsy (see appendix
UIMR.15).
It’s important to remember that people with disabilities are just as diverse as the general population and
that each person has unique needs and preferences. Some may prefer to live in a nursing home, while
==PAGE:16==
2
MARKET SEGMENTATION
14
others may prefer to live at home. It is also essential to recognize that living at home with a disability
is not without its challenges, but with the right resources and support, it can be a viable and fulﬁlling
option. The importance for this segment, and where Drinksaver is able to help, is to create solutions that
reduce spillages and cleaning while providing them with the opportunity to buy products that increase
their dignity and give them an opportunity to reduce the challenge.
2.0.2
Health Care and Service Segment
Maintaining the independence and dignity of elders at nursing homes is crucial for their physical and
emotional well-being. Independence allows seniors to continue to make choices and have control over
their daily lives, which can boost their self-esteem and self-worth. Dignity, on the other hand, is about
respecting the inherent value of each individual, regardless of their age or physical condition.
” If you drink from a di↵erent cup, then you are di↵erent. Their brains can pick up on that, and they live
in a care centre that is a residential community”, - Lena, Head of the department at Virumsg˚ard nursing
home. See appendix UIMS.08 for the full interview.
Allowing seniors to maintain their independence and dignity can also improve their overall quality of
life. When seniors feel respected and valued, they are more likely to be engaged and active, which can
help to reduce feelings of loneliness and isolation. This can also help to reduce the risk of depression,
which is a common condition among older adults living in long-term care facilities. It is important to
note that a nursing home should be a place where older adults can live with dignity and respect, not just
receive care. They should be encouraged to maintain as much autonomy as possible and be treated with
respect and consideration, just like any other individual. It is essential to respect elders’ right to privacy,
choice, and self-determination. This is an integral part of the nursing home culture. The importance of
this segment, and where Drinksaver is able to help, is to create solutions that beneﬁt all and that do not
place any group in a box.
2.0.3
Festival and Concert Segment
A festival is a large-scale event that typically celebrates a particular culture, tradition or theme. Festivals
can include music performances, dance, art exhibits, food, and other forms of entertainment. They may
be held outdoors or indoors and can be one-day or multi-day events. On the other hand, a concert is a
live music performance by one or more musicians or bands, usually in a speciﬁc venue such as a theatre
or stadium. Both types of events attract a large number of guests from almost every social group of
people. This is the segment in which the product was intended to be implemented when the concept was
ﬁrst developed. It was designed to help wheelchair users carry their beverages and make festivals more
accessible to them.
For this segment, the product is meant to be manufactured on a larger scale and for a lower unit cost
than in the other segments because the use scenario in this segment is a ”use and toss” case. The user
==PAGE:17==
2
MARKET SEGMENTATION
15
will take a lid as an additional free service in the bar, just as a straw, and place it in the cup. After
ﬁnishing the beverage, the user will discard the lid with the cup. The lid should, for this segment, be
manufactured in the same material as the cup so that it can be reused and recycled together.
2.0.4
Segmentation
Customer segmentation is the division of market segments into customer groups and is imperative for a
business to understand its customers. It can enlighten and help the business understand the target audi-
ence and group the customer based on common characteristics. Most importantly, the groups can possess
di↵erent sales potential and buying likelihoods, and the customer’s needs can di↵er greatly [7]. To estab-
lish a holistic overview of possible customers, a brainstorm was conducted, see Appendix CS.01.01. As
the cause and frequency of spillage di↵er signiﬁcantly depending on the customer, the level of importance
of our product can be evaluated through a Nice to have and Need to have scale, see Figure 4.
Figure 4: Customer groups evaluated with the Need to have and Nice to have scale.
The customer with the highest level of Need to have in the private sector is people experiencing spillage
daily, caused by their shivering and uncontrolled movement of their limbs, resulting in spillage or inability
to drink from a cup independently. These customers are followed by people su↵ering from dysphagia and
dementia. Dysphagia a↵ects the user’s ability to swallow correctly, which can cause aspiration. Dementia
can cause the user to misplace or forget their beverage and thereby consume less ﬂuid, which results in
dehydration. Both illnesses a↵ect the drinking process and experience. These customers are ranked high
in the likelihood of buying a product that would minimize their daily pain.
==PAGE:18==
2
MARKET SEGMENTATION
16
The DrinkSaver has made a huge di↵erence for me in my everyday life, both at home and at work.
With the DrinkSaver in hand, I can now move with a full cup from A to B, without worrying about drop-
ping half the contents on the ﬂoor. The Drinksaver has thus increased my ability to function independently
in everyday life, as I no longer need to ask others for help to carry my cup to ensure that I do not spill.”
- Tina Højager, su↵ering from Cerebral Palsy.
In the Organisation sector, nursing homes and rehabilitation centres are housing the same group of people
as prior customers, thus including the elderly, whose uncontrollable movements are caused by weakness,
arthritis, motor disability or the high likelihood of su↵ering from dysphagia [8]. The product would ease
the workload for the caretaker and thus give time for the many other tasks they have. These customers
are followed by hospitals, which includes all listed customer groups in shorter periods.
The product has a higher level of Nice to have in situations where the user beneﬁts from it in shorter
periods of time. This includes festivals or concerts, where it would be provided for beers and drinks. This
would enable movements caused by dancing, inebriation, driving with wheelchairs, etc., without spilling
on themselves, others or the ﬂoors. The downside of this value proposition is the signiﬁcant add-on to
the already existing logistics in the take-back and cleaning of the product. Also, it is diﬃcult to sell a
product to a company which proﬁts on users spilling their beverage, and then purchase more.
2.0.5
The Market Opportunity
The market opportunity navigator is a simple and systematic way to navigate the process of selecting
what market to start with to enhance the right path to success; it covers three main questions for
applying a smart strategy: (i) Which market opportunities exist?
(ii) What are the most attractive
market opportunities? (iii) What market opportunities should be focused on? [9]. The process gives a
clear overview of the potential customer segments, including their need, attractiveness, likelihood to buy,
time to revenue etc. and results in an agile focus dartboard, dividing the customer against pursue now,
keep open and place in storage (see appendix CS.02).
The core abilities that DrinkSaver can provide, along with the listed customer in Figure 4, led to three
di↵erent versions of the product: (i) mass production, (ii) universal drinking glass compatible with the
lid by DrinkSaver, (iii) The Lid made of a higher quality compatible with a diverse range of drinking
glasses see appendix [CS.02.1-2]. As a result of the shared customer characteristics and use patterns,
a broader customer grouping was formed into market opportunities: Event, Deglutition, Institute and
Motor disability. These were evaluated against the company’s market attractiveness see appendix CS.02.3-
8, resulting in the Motor disability scoring highest in the potential and lowest in the challenge. Targeting
Motor disabilities as our primary market opportunity while mitigating the risk and increasing the value,
the Deglutition and institute are chosen as growth options. This is based on the fact that the relatedness
of the products and market is nearly the same (see appendix CS.02.9-12).
==PAGE:19==
2
MARKET SEGMENTATION
17
2.1
Market size
According to the Agile Focus Dartboard (see appendix CS.02.11-12), the market segments that should be
targeted are institutes, deglutition and individuals living with motor disabilities. It is essential to consider
a holistic perspective to gain a comprehensive understanding of the total addressable market (TAM). The
market size of individuals su↵ering from motor disabilities and deglutition varies signiﬁcantly depending
on the region and country in which the population is located. As a result, it is challenging to provide an
exact market size for this population. However, according to the World Health Organization, from 2011,
approximately 15% of the world’s population, or 1.2 billion people, have lived with some form of disability.
Of those, approximately 200 million individuals live with a motor disability [10]. As the world population
has grown by approximately 11.7% since the report was prepared, it is assumed that the numbers have
had a proportional growth, resulting in around 1.3 billion people living with a disability and 225 million
individuals living with a motor disability. Additionally, the World Report on Disability estimates that
at least 2-4% of the world’s population, or approximately 160-315 million people, including the world
population growth, live with a disability that a↵ects their ability to swallow. Overall, the global market
size of individuals is estimated to be between 380 - 540 million worldwide.
Unfortunately, no comprehensive data is available on the total number of nursing homes globally. However,
a study has been conducted on 16 countries in Europe with similar characteristics to Denmark, as outlined
in Appendix CS.03. According to this research, these 16 countries have approximately 59,350 nursing
homes [11].
2.1.1
The Danish Market
According to the report conducted by the National Research and Analysis Center for Welfare (VIVE),
the most recent numbers from 2019 indicated that approximately 700.000 people in Denmark were living
with a disability, representing 21% of the Danish population aged 16-64 years [12]. According to this
report, 45% of these people experience that their disability limits them in social contexts.
Roughly 50,000 individuals su↵er from Parkinson’s disease [13], Essential Tremor [14] and Cerebral
Palsy [15], causing them to have impaired movement. Additionally, approximately 100,000 Danes use
wheelchairs or similar mobility devices [16], which can impede the performance of basic tasks during
movement. Approximately 75% (135,000) of the residents in elderly homes su↵er from dysphagia and
87,000 people over 65 live with dementia. It should be noted that these ﬁgures cannot be added up due to
the possibility of individuals su↵ering from more than one of these disabilities. Taking this under consid-
eration, an estimation of the market size was conducted see appendix CS.03, resulting in the market size
for the private users being 145.860 individuals. It is estimated that the size of this target group will only
increase due to the exclusion of those with temporary movement impairments and an ageing population,
of which 53% are over the age of 65 and have a disability. Lastly, there are 950 nursing homes in Denmark
[17].
==PAGE:20==
2
MARKET SEGMENTATION
18
2.1.2
End User proﬁle
The target customer segments are translated into an end-user proﬁle to specify the end user’s speciﬁc
needs. These needs are then investigated when doing market research and later on used for the readjust-
ment of the solution.
Experienced challenges
• Individuals su↵ering from illnesses that a↵ect their ability to control their limbs, i.e., shivering and
movements disorder.
• Individuals that experience challenges transporting their beverage from A-B, i.e., wheelchair users
or walking problems.
• Individuals experience diﬃculty holding their drinking glasses caused for example by dementia or
old age.
• Individuals su↵ering from swallowing disorders caused for example by dementia or dysphagia.
In addition to these symptoms, a person with motor diﬃculties or dysphagia may experience a range
of emotional and social challenges. As documented in the VIVE report from 2019, 45% of the danish
population with disabilities experience limitations in social contexts [12]. The users disability is not only
a↵ecting their physical abilities, but also their social and mental health.
In order to give an idea of who the customers may be and how they are a↵ected, three personas have
been created. The personas can be seen in Figure 5.
Figure 5: Developed personas showing possible customers of the product
==PAGE:21==
2
MARKET SEGMENTATION
19
2.2
Summary of Chapter
Among the considered segments, the segment including people with motor disabilities, people with swal-
lowing diﬃculties and institutions assisting these groups of people are categorised as the segment with
the highest need and is most likely to become early adapters. The segment has a large market size and
the ability to scale is good. This is why this segment is chosen as the Drinksavers beach head marked,
while the other segments are put on hold.
==PAGE:22==
3
This Chapter investigates and observes the 
end-user profiles to truly understand what dif-
ficulties they are struggling with and to under-
stand how to help them. Additionally, the festi-
val lid is used as a Minimal Viable Product (MVP) 
to identify improvements to take into further 
consideration.
User Insight and 
Market Research
==PAGE:23==
3
USER INSIGHT AND MARKET RESEARCH
21
3
User Insight and Market Research
In order to ensure the most e↵ective market entry, comprehensive desktop research has been conducted
for the literature study, and user insight has been gathered to get insight and an understanding of the
market and the possible customers. The purpose has been to examine the pros and cons of the lid in
regard to the chosen end-user proﬁle, to analyse whether the lid should be re-designed and to determine
if it should be compatible with an original glass on the market or a new design of a drinking glass should
be developed for the targeted end user.
3.1
Drinking Correctly
Examining how to drink and swallow correctly can determine crucial features that either should be in-
cluded or excluded in future designs. Swallowing liquids involves a predictable and systematic process
[18] [19], and can be divided into four stages, as illustrated in Figure 6, and indicates how to swallow
properly (see appendix UIMR.02.). In contrast, any structural, physiological, or neurological disturbance
in this process may lead to dysphagia [20]. It is estimated that approximately 33-73% of people su↵ering
from dysphagia is a result of a stroke, motor disease, Parkinson, Cerebral palsy etc. [21]. It is diﬃcult
to estimate the number of people su↵ering from dysphagia because the condition is often not diagnosed
or reported. Additionally, dysphagia can be a transient symptom that resolves on its own, or it can be
a chronic condition that is not always severe enough to require medical attention. Furthermore, there is
no clear consensus on how to diagnose and classify dysphagia, which makes it challenging to accurately
estimate the number of people a↵ected.
Dysphagia refers to diﬃculties processing liquids in either of the drinking process, which can lead to mal-
nutrition, dehydration, aspiration pneumonia, compromised general health, chronic lung disease, choking,
and even death. Su↵ering from this also a↵ects the social aspect, as experiencing disinterest, reduced
enjoyment, embarrassment, and/or isolation related to eating or drinking, where studies indicate that
people su↵ering from this illness tend to have a lower quality of life [22].
Figure 6: The four stages of the drinking process [23]
Various techniques have been proposed, e.g., scientists at the Makerere University Medical School
==PAGE:24==
3
USER INSIGHT AND MARKET RESEARCH
22
investigated the e↵ect of posture on swallowing, which statistically showed signiﬁcant di↵erences between
consuming liquids in an upright position, head/neck ﬂexed or extended, and lying supine. Furthermore,
sitting upright was the least diﬃcult for subjects to swallow while lying supine, and sitting with head/neck
extended was the most diﬃcult [21]. Further, as documented in appendix UIMR.01, drinking products
should not encourage the user to drink and swallow in any other position than upright. According to the
Danish Health Authority’s national clinical guideline in relation to upper dysphagia from 2018: patients
with upper dysphagia are advised not to eat and drink lying down or reclining far back due to increased
risk of aspiration [24]. By drinking directly from the rim of a drinking glass, the user will generally change
Figure 7: indicative sitting and lying position for ﬂuid intake from the Central Jutland Hospital Unit.
Appendix UIMR.01.
position to an upright position as intended. Solutions such as spouts can encourage the user to drink
while lying down because of the convenience or extend the head/neck, an example of unintended use.
From the research done on the subject, it could be concluded that drinking from the rim of a drinking
glass is the best way to ensure the correct drinking process. Following the correct process also indicates
that the swallowing begins by identifying the beverage by looks and smell, followed by taste, consistency,
temperature and volume, as seen in Figure 6. Overall, users should avoid using enclosed lids and spouts
because it prevents and interferes with the ﬁrst step in the correct drinking process; a further explanation
is documented in appendix UIMR.03.
3.2
Insight From Institutions
As nursing homes and rehabilitation centres are deﬁned as one of the customers Institutions, it was es-
sential to gain a deeper understanding of their approach and perspective on their patients’ ability to
consume liquids and the use of assistive devices for controlling the liquids. The interview was based
on an interview guide (see appendix UIMR.04) with a list of high-level questions that were used as a
guide to the conversation [25], however, this in-depth interview is a central method of qualitative data
collection, and thereby it was essential to allow respondents to present their view or ”tell their story”
to understand the main diﬃculties experienced [26].
The interview was conducted with four nursing
homes and one rehabilitation centre, with the managing nurse and the on-site occupational therapist.
==PAGE:25==
3
USER INSIGHT AND MARKET RESEARCH
23
An in-depth description of the interviews can be read in appendix UIMR.05-09. Furthermore, an analy-
sis of the information gained was listed and divided into subcategories of interest (see appendix UIMR.10).
General Conclusions:
• Institutions are focusing on making a home-friendly and social environment to ensure no resident
is feeling excluded or treated di↵erently, with a desire to have the same drinking glass for every
resident.
• Residents are given special assistive devices if they are in need.
• The most commonly used assistive device across all the institutions is the Rika cup (a grooved
cup with a spout), followed by the Heidi Cup (products can be seen in appendix UIMR.11). The
institutions use the spout because it is easy for the resident to use, it does not spill, comes in two
parts and the user can drink while bedridden.
• There is a controversy between the caretakers and the occupational therapist because the spout is
used too frequently, also by residents who are not in need. It is observed that there is an ignorance
about the consequences of using the spout among the employees at the institutions.
• The Rika cup is said to wear out quickly and thus break and develop visual cracks after shorter
periods, and the plastic soon becomes visually unappealing.
• Alternatives to the spout are too expensive, too advanced or not represented in the assortment of
the used retailers.
• Dysphagia cups are not used because of too many sub-parts. The current solution used requires
head/neck extended.
Occupational therapists, managing nurses, caretakers and residents are all very interested in imple-
menting new alternatives to the spout if the alternative solution can have the same functional beneﬁts
while minimizing the consequences and the stigmatisation of drinking from a spout while still being in
the same price range.
From the visits, it could be concluded that the task was not to re-design just another cup for people
with dysphagia or motor disabilities but to invent a universal cup which would be used and beneﬁt all
regardless of disability or age.
3.3
Insight From Retailers
A list of relevant retailers was conducted through desktop research and interviews with institutions. In-
stitutions commonly purchase assistive devices from websites like Hjælemiddelbasen, DanishCareSupply,
Seniorshop, Mediq Denmark, ProCare, Abena, etc.
However, since DrinkSaver’s participation in the
competition Project Plastic by Plastic Engineering Denmark in 2018, the company have been in contact
==PAGE:26==
3
USER INSIGHT AND MARKET RESEARCH
24
with Abena, who has shown interest and given insight into how the supply agreement is structured when
supplying the institutes in the municipalities.
In the municipalities, institutions are given the option and recommended to purchase products or services
from companies that have purchase agreements with the municipality. These agreements, also known as
”contracts,” are put in place to ensure that the municipality’s funds are being used in a responsible and
eﬃcient manner.
The process for awarding these contracts typically involves a competitive bidding process in which com-
panies submit proposals for the products or services the municipality requires. The proposals are then
evaluated based on a variety of factors, such as the company’s past performance, the quality of the prod-
ucts or services o↵ered, and the price. The structure is illustrated in ﬁgure 8.
Once a contract is awarded, the company is given the exclusive right to supply the speciﬁed goods or
services to the municipality during the term of the contract. The institutions are able to purchase other
products, but some products are only available from the supplier who has ”won” the ”bidding war”.
Many of the products made for people with disabilities are then also sold by these companies to the
private segment. If a resident from a rehabilitation centre or a disabled living at home wishes to use a
product of his or her own choosing, his/her option for getting a kind of assistive device is most likely
limited to the companies listed at the beginning of the chapter.
Figure 8: Supply and purchase agreement between the municipality and suppliers.
3.4
Insight From Private Users
In order to determine how many users experience spillage and if a product reducing spillage has traction,
two online surveys were conducted to gather feedback from wheelchair users and people with motor dis-
abilities. The surveys were shared on social platforms targeting these communities. However, the majority
of people with motor disabilities where people su↵ering from Essential tremors and Cerebral Palsy. The
full analysis of the survey can be read in appendix UIMR.11.
==PAGE:27==
3
USER INSIGHT AND MARKET RESEARCH
25
In total, 96 people participated in the survey (42 wheelchair users and 54 motor disabled), in both
surveys, the majority of participants were over 60, but approximately one quarter was under 40.
The online survey revealed that spillage of beverages is a common problem among individuals with motor
disabilities, with 92% experiencing it on a daily basis. 42% of these individuals are using assistive devices
to help them avoid this and, on average, use between 100-199 DKK yearly on drinking aids.
For wheelchair users, 17% experience spillage when transporting beverages on a daily basis and 71% only
sometimes. 29% of those use assistive devices to help them avoid this.
When asked about purchasing the Drinksaver product, 72% of people with motor disabilities said they
would, while 26% were uncertain. Similarly, 44% of wheelchair users said they would purchase the prod-
uct, and 46% were uncertain. The rest were uninterested. The participants were asked why or why not
they would use a Drinksaver, and some of the quotes are listed.
List of quotes from participants
• ”You get the co↵ee in your mouth, not your hand”
• ”We would use it as he doesn’t like to stand out by using visible aids -relative”
• ”To be able to participate in social contexts without being seen as the disabled person”
• ”Depends on the price and eﬃciency”
• ”To look more normal and avoid spillage”
The results of this survey provide valuable insights into the needs and preferences of these target end
users. There is evidence that they are experiencing diﬃculties controlling their beverages which results
in spillage, and most importantly that there is traction for a new product that is not stigmatizing and
eye-catching.
3.5
Similar and Competitive Products
The primary identiﬁcation of the competing products on the market is that they are eye-catching and
typically designed with solid colours, as well as frequently being designed with a form of a spout. Through
user validation, these kinds of products are often referred to as children’s cups and are not appealing,
thereby opting them out, see Figure 9. Based on the interviews with the nursing homes, occupational
therapists do not recommend using a cup with a spout during swallowing rehabilitation or disorders. By
using a spout, the liquid is poured directly into the mouth, which is not the proper method to retrain the
ability to swallow.
Furthermore, citations from the online survey, ”I do not use any aids, because of the selection and it is
diﬃcult to admit/accept that you need aids”. The nursing homes quoted ”That dysphagia cups come in
way too many sub-parts, e.g., up to eleven parts (Rose Cup), therefore being excluded” - (see appendix
==PAGE:28==
3
USER INSIGHT AND MARKET RESEARCH
26
Figure 9: List of competitor cups available on the market today
UIMR.12.02). Identifying the company’s competitors is based on competitor analysis and is grouped and
evaluated in a comparison matrix. To examine the strengths and weaknesses of the di↵erent products,
they are evaluated against Minimising spillage, Good and Correct swallow, Life span, Prevent stigma,
Prevent dehydration, and Price, which are considered essential and relevant for a solution intended for
our customers, this evaluation can be seen in appendix UIMR.13. The products that scored the highest
in the evaluation are Zipo Care and Hand Steady, which can be seen in Figure 10. These cups come at
a high price and are not performing excellently, considering stigmatization. However, they provide the
opportunity to drink from the rim of the glass while reducing spillage. Alongside these cups, it could be
concluded from the ﬁeldwork that the dominant market position and thereby our direct competitor for
institutions, is the Rika cup, followed by the Heidi cup. These cups are scoring poorly in stigmatization
but come at lower prices.
Figure 10: Direct competitor products on the market and their designated price
In-depth knowledge of the competitive products on the market is the key to sustaining a competitive
advantage in the competition [27]. Utilizing each competitor’s performance can outline which features
are not covered in the market and which should not be included. The analysis is set as a basis for a new
design to target market needs that are not currently covered.
==PAGE:29==
3
USER INSIGHT AND MARKET RESEARCH
27
3.6
End-user testing and validation
To reduce risk and enhance the chances for success by validating a Minimum Viable Product (MVP)
in the market prior to launching in full scale, is an approach known from the LEAN Start-up principle
[28]. In order to validate the product early in the product development cycle, with a product that can
attract early adopters, an MVP, can give user feedback early in the process to iterate and improve the
product. With early rapid testing, the company can minimize the cost for possible future changes [29].
The MVP used in this stage, is the injection moulded version of the lid, compatible with the festival
cups and manufactured prior to this thesis see Figure 11. The MVP used in this stage is the injection
moulded version of the lid that is compatible with the festival cups and manufactured prior to this thesis,
see Figure 10. The product performs excellently. It is however a large cup which can give diﬃculties for
the user to hold or see as a product used daily. The goal is to collect user feedback to develop a product
based on the customer’s needs and wants.
Figure 11: Picture of the injection moulded lid (the MVP) and the festival cup it was designed to ﬁt.
3.6.1
Minimal Viable Product
The MVP was tested by four private test persons, who all experience spillage of beverages on a daily basis
because of Cerebral Palsy and Muscle wasting. The feedback and statements were given to the company 2
to 3 weeks after the test users received the product to ensure that all features of the product were tested,
see appendix UIMR.09, 14, 15 and 16.
The test persons enlightened the company with valuable feedback from actual use case scenarios and
additionally acknowledged that the product worked. The feedback provided insight into the speciﬁc need
of individuals with Cerebral Palsy and how the product could better serve them. The most frequent
response was that the user felt conﬁdent and independent while carrying their beverage. This conﬁdence
came from not having to use a stigmatising solution for preventing spillage and to be able to carry the
beverage by themselves.
Suggestions for adjustments were also given, such as: Holder for straws, a stabler cup, color variations,
endure hot beverages and the material should be made of plastic, without feeling and looking like plastic.
==PAGE:30==
3
USER INSIGHT AND MARKET RESEARCH
28
The feedback given from the private test was evaluated to ensure the satisfaction and need of the users
and translated to further design requirements for the product development.
Besides testing with users with disabilities, 400 MVP was sold and used for the 150th anniversary of
the company Bevica. Bevica is a foundation that wants to create a world where people with mobility
disabilities have the greatest possible independence. The guests were served with a lid from Drinksaver
and feedback was gathered during the event, see appendix UIMR.17.
The results of the test were mainly positive, with many guests praising the e↵ectiveness of the prod-
uct. Many were surprised at how well it worked, and several mentioned family members or friends with
Parkinson’s or other disabilities who they felt would beneﬁt signiﬁcantly from the product. Many guests
also saw the potential for personal use, such as while driving or for those who are clumsy. An elderly
couple even expressed interest in using the product in their private home. One guest dropped her cup on
the table and pointed out how the lid reduced the amount of ﬂuid that was spilt.
However, there were also some cons reported. Some guests had trouble placing the lid correctly (upside
down), and a few felt that when drinking quickly, the liquid came out of the centre hole or felt the lid
touch their upper-lip while drinking. Another guest felt that the liquid passed too slowly when they were
halfway through their drink.
Overall, the testing of the MVP of Drinksaver was successful, with both positive and constructive feedback
with areas for improvement which will be taken into account in further product development.
3.7
Ability Prompt Cards
With the aim of using the methodology of the concept ’Technology leaving no one behind’, the Ability
prompt cards developed by Bevica [30] were taken into use. These cards are a tool used to challenge
product developers and designers to create solutions that are inclusive of a diverse range of users, including
those with disabilities. They are used to encourage designers to think about the needs and abilities of
di↵erent user groups in the design process and to ensure that the ﬁnal product is usable and accessible
to as many people as possible. Some beneﬁts of using ability prompt cards include:
• Increased accessibility: By considering the needs of users with disabilities that either is permanent,
temporary and situational, designers can create products that are more accessible and usable for a
wider range of people.
• Better user experience: By designing for the needs of di↵erent users, designers can create products
that provide a better overall user experience for everyone.
• Compliance with accessibility standards: Designing for accessibility can help ensure that products
meet relevant accessibility standards and regulations, which can help to avoid legal issues.
• Increased market potential: By designing products that are inclusive of a wider range of users,
companies can increase their potential customer base and reach new market segments.
==PAGE:31==
3
USER INSIGHT AND MARKET RESEARCH
29
• Increased innovation: By considering the needs of diverse user groups in the design process, designers
can come up with innovative solutions that may not have been considered otherwise.
The cards were taken into use after the research phase and helped categorise the ﬁndings and match them
with the various types of disabilities. The categorisation of the cards can be seen in appendix UIMR.18.
A sorting matrix, also referred to as ”e↵ort versus impact matrix,” was used to prioritize di↵erent pa-
rameters and identify which to focus on. By comparing the e↵ort required to implement a particular
parameter against its potential impact, the team can prioritize the most impactful and eﬃcient changes
to make. The features chosen to focus on in further product development are shown in Figure 12, and
the sorting matrix can be seen in appendix UIMR.19.
Figure 12: Features chosen to focus on in further product development.
==PAGE:32==
3
USER INSIGHT AND MARKET RESEARCH
30
3.8
Summary of Chapter
From desktop research and user insight, Drinksaver concluded that no existing drinking glasses were
eﬃcient in regard to the need of the targeted user segment, and there was a need for a new solution.
There is a need for a solution that beneﬁts and fulﬁls the needs of users with motor disabilities and
swallowing diﬃculties while having the natural swallowing process maintained, and the product has the
appearance of an ordinary drinking glass to ensure the most optimal drinking experience.
Providing discreet and aesthetically pleasing devices can help people feel more conﬁdent and comfortable
in social situations, which can improve their quality of life and social well-being.
Additionally, non-
stigmatizing products can also help to reduce negative attitudes and stigmas surrounding disabilities,
promoting greater understanding and inclusion in society.
==PAGE:33==
4Product Development
In this chapter, the problems observed are re-
versed to design opportunities, including trial 
and error, to optimize the final solutions. Fur-
thermore, the association with the product in 
relation to branding is taken into consideration.
==PAGE:34==
4
PRODUCT DEVELOPMENT
32
4
Product Development
This part is dedicated to the design and development phase of the drinking glass and lid and how user
and market insight played a crucial role in shaping the ﬁnal products. The design process was iterative,
where feedback and input from users and market research were integrated at every stage to ensure that
the ﬁnal products met the needs and expectations of its target audience. Various design considerations
were taken into account, such as ergonomics, shape, colours, features and aesthetic appeal, and how these
considerations were balanced to create a functional and visually pleasing product for the end user.
4.1
The Drinking Glass
From the research phase, it was concluded that there was a need for a new design for a drinking glass,
which not only beneﬁted people with motor disabilities by being adaptable with the lid but which also
could beneﬁt the majority of people with and without any kind of disabilities.
4.1.1
Inspirational Design
Figure 13: The chosen
glass for inspiration
The team made a photo safari of a wide range of drinking glasses to be used
for inspiration (see appendix OP.01). Shape, size, colour, grip and aesthetics
were analyzed with each glass to better understand what makes a great drink-
ing glass. The task was done as an inspirational design method to inform
the design choices and also market analysis to be able to map out compet-
ing products. The manufacturing process and the materials were taken into
consideration to ensure that the ﬁnal product would be both functional and
a↵ordable. Ultimately, one particular drinking glass was chosen as the basis
for the initial design of the drinking glass by Drinksaver. This choice was
based on user feedback from residents at a nursing home, where the major-
ity of residents picked the chosen drinking glass as their favourite due to its
comfortable grip and attractive ”simple” design. The chosen drinking glass
can be seen in ﬁgure 13.
4.1.2
Inclusive Features
The drinking glass took its shape through an iterative design process that incorporated user insight, expert
consultation with occupational therapists, and research. The process began by gathering user feedback
and data on the needs and challenges faced by individuals with disabilities when using drinking glasses.
This feedback was used to inform the initial design of the glass, which was then reviewed and reﬁned.
Good grip
One of the key features of the drinking glass that was developed through this process is the outer shape,
which ensures a better grip for individuals with limited hand mobility. The shape of the glass was de-
==PAGE:35==
4
PRODUCT DEVELOPMENT
33
signed with a middle edge, so the user can rest the glass on a ﬁnger while holding it, see ﬁgure 14. This
feature is meant to ensure the glass does not slip and to make it easier to hold and handle. The other
dimensions taken into account can be seen in the ﬁgure. The correct measurements have been found by
testing 3D-printed prototypes.
Correct swallowing
Another important feature is the diameter and inner tilting angle of the glass, which was speciﬁcally de-
signed to ensure better swallowing for individuals with disabilities. The design of the glass was optimized
to reduce the risk of aspiration and make it easier to drink from. As can be seen in ﬁgure 14, the diameter
of the glass matches the distance from the lips to the top of the nose, which ensures that the glass can
be tilted as close to the head as possible. The angle is measured to be big enough to ensure that the user
does not have to tilt their head when drinking all the ﬂuid in the glass. The correct measurements were
found by testing 3D-printed prototypes.
Figure 14: The features considered regarding grip, swallow and measurement. Appendix OP.02 – OP.05.
Increase ﬂuid intake
The use of colours plays an important role in the design, as it was used to increase the intake of ﬂuid,
which helps to ensure hydration. From research it was discovered that colours have an e↵ect on people
su↵ering from dementia. People with dementia will, in some cases, lose the ability to feel thirst and
therefore forget to drink the needed ﬂuid to stay hydrated. Some colours are able to trigger a person to
drink more [31] [32]. For the drinking glass, the colours red, blue and transparent were chosen. See the
alternative colours and user feedback in the appendix. OP.04, OP.07 and OP.09.
Measuring ﬂuid intake
TThe glass was designed with hidden measurement indicators, which are not visible to the user, prevent-
ing any kind of stigma, but helping keep track of ﬂuid intake. From research and ﬁeldwork it was found
that many elders ﬁnd it diﬃcult to stay hydrated and keep track of their ﬂuid intake. The measurement
indicators make it possible for caretakers to monitor the hydration levels of their patients, but without
the glass being a measurement cup. Other more visual indicators were also taken into account and those
can be seen in appendix OP.05 and OP.06.
==PAGE:36==
4
PRODUCT DEVELOPMENT
34
The ﬁnal design resulted in a universal drinking glass, with the looks of an ordinary glass but with
inclusive features that have taken the speciﬁc needs and challenges faced by individuals with disabilities
into account, resulting in an optimally ergonomically functional and visually appealing product. The
prototype of the Drinking glass can be seen together with the lid tested by an end user in ﬁgure 15 and
as a render in ﬁgure 17.
Figure 15: The 3D printed prototype of the drinking glass and the lid tested with end-users
4.2
The Lid
The lid’s function is to reduce spillage while providing the same drinking experience. The original design
was created to be non-visible and not detract from the overall aesthetic of the glass. However, a design
change was made as a result of user testing, which revealed the need for a holder for straws.
Figure 16: How the lid is shaped and stacked
==PAGE:37==
4
PRODUCT DEVELOPMENT
35
To fulﬁl this requirement the design team carefully considered how to integrate the holder into the existing
design while maintaining the ”hidden and invisible” purpose of the lid. The team decided to add a small,
discreet holder to the lid, which would be used to securely hold a straw in place while still maintaining
the lid’s primary function of reducing spillage. It was added to the lid in such a way that it could be used
if needed but would not be noticeable if not in use.
The design team also made sure that the addition of the straw holder did not compromise the original
design of the lid in terms of functionality. The lid was still able to e↵ectively reduce spillage and provide
the same drinking experience for the user.
The lid is meant to be stacked when it is packed and stored. The angle of the sides has been angled to ﬁt
the angle of the drinking glass, making the lid wider and has improved the lids’ stack-ability so they can
be stacked even tighter. The implementation of the straw holder is designed so that it does not interfere
with the other lids when it is stacked. This can be seen in the section view in Figure 16.
Overall, the addition of a straw holder allowed the team to fulﬁl a requirement garnered from the user test
while keeping the original design intact, providing a functional and visually appealing product. The ﬁnal
design was then evaluated and compared against the competing products. Drinksavers solution scored
higher than its competitors, and the evaluation and scores can be seen in appendix OP.10.
Figure 17: A rendering of the drinking glass in the three colours and the lid.
==PAGE:38==
4
PRODUCT DEVELOPMENT
36
4.3
Branding
The team recognized the need to develop two di↵erent branding strategies for their products. One prod-
uct, a lid for draft beer, was intended for use at festivals and concerts, while the other product, a drinking
glass and lid, was meant for everyday use at home and in institutions.
To e↵ectively market these two distinct products, Drinksaver decided to create two separate brand iden-
tities: ”Drinksaver Event” and ”Drinksaver Home” see Figure 18. The ”Drinksaver Event” brand was
developed for the festival and concert version of the product, using the word ”Event” to convey the idea
that it could be used in various events, not only festivals. The company wanted to provide a better
experience for guests at these events by reducing spillage and making it more convenient to enjoy a draft
beer. This version was targeted towards event-goers of all ages.
On the other hand, the ”Drinksaver Home” brand was developed for the drinking glass and lid intended
for daily use at home and in institutions. The design was more subtle and elegant, aimed at a wider
audience that included both private consumers and consumers in institutions. The company wanted to
avoid words such as ”care” and ”help” as it would make it sound more like an assistive device for the
disabled instead of a universal design for all. The company used the word ”Home” to convey a sense of
universality and inclusiveness.
Both brands used the same font to create a cohesive and consistent look, making it easy for consumers
to identify the products as coming from the same company. This approach allowed Drinksaver to e↵ec-
tively target di↵erent markets and audiences with their products and to reach a wider audience. All the
considerations and the approach can be seen in appendix OP.11.
Figure 18: Drinksaver Home and Drinksaver Event.
4.3.1
Drinksaver as a medical device?
The company Drinksaver, after consultation with the Danish Medicines Agency, realized that their prod-
ucts which are designed to help individuals with disabilities could be categorized as a medical device. This
would prolong the realization of the product, make the manufacturing more complicated, and increase
the price. To avoid this, the company focused on how to advertise the product so its function wasn’t
to directly help the needs of a disabled person, but had features that would beneﬁt all in everyday life,
including disabled individuals.
The company decided to shift the focus of its marketing e↵orts from emphasizing the assistive capabilities
of the product to highlighting its universal design features. They emphasized how the product’s spill-proof
==PAGE:39==
4
PRODUCT DEVELOPMENT
37
design and easy-to-grip shape would beneﬁt anyone, not just those with disabilities. They also highlighted
the fact that the product could be used in a variety of settings, such as at home, in institutions, and at
events, making it a versatile and convenient option for a wide range of users.
By emphasizing the universal design features of the product, the company was able to position it as a
mainstream product rather than a medical device. This helped to avoid the added regulatory and manu-
facturing hurdles associated with medical devices while still providing a useful and accessible product for
individuals with disabilities.
The Danish Medicines Agency – Unit for Medical Equipment provided us with the timeline in ﬁgure 19
illustrating the task involved when getting a medical device approved, furthermore stated that the process
could take up to several years [33].
Figure 19: Timeline with the tasks for getting a medical device approved
It is important that the branding, packaging and advertising materials are not using descriptions that
could imply that the product is targeted only at disabled individuals. Instead, use descriptions and images
that focus on universality and inclusiveness to make it clear that the product is for everyone.
Overall, Drinksaver’s consultation with the Danish Medicines Agency helped the company to focus on how
to advertise the product in a way that would not classify it as a medical device, make it more accessible
to a wider audience and speed up the go-to-market timeline.
==PAGE:40==
4
PRODUCT DEVELOPMENT
38
4.4
Summary of Chapter
The new drinking glass by Drinksaver is designed to improve the grip of the glass, ensure correct swal-
lowing, increase the intake of ﬂuids, measure the intake of ﬂuids and be integrated as a standard drinking
glass with an ordinary appearance.
The lid is redesigned to ﬁt the drinking glass, a straw-holder has been added, and the openings have
been changed in regard to placement and size to ensure the optimal ﬂow of the ﬂuid and ensure the same
drinking experience.
==PAGE:41==
5
Design for 
Manufacture
This chapter outlines the product requirements 
to ensure a manufacturable and cost-efficient 
product, but most importantly, ensures that the 
product fulfils the end-user and legal needs. 
Additionally, the life cycle use case is outlined.
==PAGE:42==
5
DESIGN FOR MANUFACTURING
40
5
Design for Manufacturing
The practice of Design For Manufacture (DFM) is the process of including the manufacture in the design
process. The DFM operates on ﬁve key principles during the design phase: The material, the process, the
design, the environment, and compliance [34]. The advantage is to reduce the cost of change by adapting
changes early in the process. This chapter will take o↵set in the ﬁnal design documented in chapter 4 and
go through the DFM process to ensure that all aspects have been taken into consideration before starting
the manufacture of the products.
5.1
Material and Process Selection
The products’ end users are at high risk of dropping their glasses and because of this, an durable material
is demanded. As glass is heavy and fragile, which increases the risk of injuries. It is considered unsuit-
able for the intended use (see appendix DFM.01). In this case it would be beneﬁcial to use a type of
unbreakable plastic. Based on investigations and testing prior to this thesis, the preferable and cheapest
manufacturing process is injection moulding of the lid.[35].
Erik M. Kjær developed a method called ”How to select the right plastics materials”, which is a systematic
way of selecting a plastic material to achieve the most optimal material for the product use scenario as fast
as possible. The ﬁrst step was to establish a list of requirements, which then was translated into material
demands, which can be seen in appendix DFM.02. The requirements in Need to have are, e.g. that the
material needs to be Food Grade, Non-Toxic, Endure Fall, Transparent, and Withstand Minimum 90◦,
while Nice to have are, e.g., Crystal clear, withstand > 100◦and suitable for Injection moulding. All
materials that did not fulﬁl the requirements in Need to have were eliminated, with the remaining ma-
terials: Polycarbonate (PC), Polypropylene (PP), Polyamide (PA) and poly(but-eth)ylene terephthalate
(PBTP/PETP). However, only PC and PA fulﬁlled all demands in nice to have, and therefore evaluated
against material parameters such as yield and fatigue strength versus price. As a result of this, PC was
the preferable material.
5.1.1
The Advantages of Polycarbonate as a Plastic
There are several advantages of using polycarbonate as a material for drinking glasses instead of other
types of plastic (see appendix DFM.03). These advantages include:
• Durability: Polycarbonate is a strong and durable plastic that is able to withstand high impact
and resist shattering. This makes it a suitable material for drinking glasses that are at risk of being
dropped or knocked over.
• Light weight: Polycarbonate is light in weight, which eases the diﬃculties of handling the glass
and reduces the risk of losing it.
• Temperature resistance: Polycarbonate has a high heat resistance, which means it can be used
for hot or cold liquids without deforming or becoming brittle. This makes it a suitable material for
==PAGE:43==
5
DESIGN FOR MANUFACTURING
41
use in a dishwasher, unlike other types of plastic, which may warp or become cloudy after repeated
washings.
• Transparency: Polycarbonate is transparent and crystal clear, which makes it a suitable material
for use for drinking glasses as its visual is 1:1 with ordinary glass.
• Recyclable: Polycarbonate is recyclable, which means that it can be collected and processed into
new products after its useful life.
This reduces the environmental impact of the drinking glass
compared to other types of plastic that are not easily recyclable.
5.2
Manufacturer and Compliance
The decision on were to manufacture the products where based on an evaluation of three manufacturers
located in Denmark, Portugal and China. These companies provided a cost estimation for the lid in
relation to mould cost, price per unit, and which certiﬁcations were included, see appendix DFM.04. Based
on this evaluation, the manufacturer in Portugal, RB-Drinks could provide the best o↵er for the company
(see appendix DFM.05). Most importantly, RB-Drinks produces drinking glasses with polycarbonate,
which thereby includes the relevant expertise and equipment for our products. Lastly, they are able to
provide all certiﬁcations required for our product to be sold legally in the European Union (EU) market.
Overall, the combination of cost-e↵ectiveness, expertise, and compliance with EU regulations made RB
Drinks the clear choice for our manufacturing partner.
5.2.1
Certiﬁcations
A drinking glass made out of plastic requires di↵erent certiﬁcations in order to be legally sold and used
in certain countries and regions, including in the EU. These are, e.g., CE certiﬁcation, migration testing,
food-grade materials, plastic recycling etc. Using RB-Drinks PC master batch provides the company
with all of its warranties and certiﬁcations see ﬁgure 20, which would ensure that the products fulﬁl all
demanded requirements to enter the market and save the company major expenses.
Figure 20: Warranties and Certiﬁcations provided by RB-Drinks.
==PAGE:44==
5
DESIGN FOR MANUFACTURING
42
5.3
Simulations
During the ﬁnal checks of the product design, some complications were encountered during the injection
moulding process of our drinking glass product.
One of the main issues was the risk of sink marks
in the ﬁnal product. To overcome this challenge, extensive simulations were performed and numerous
adjustments were made to the design and shape of the glass.
These adjustments were not insigniﬁcant and required a lot of trial and error. The aim was to carefully
balance the need to improve the production process and eliminate sink marks while maintaining the
desired functions and aesthetic appeal of the design.
Despite the diﬃculties, the team were able to successfully achieve a ﬁnal design that met these criteria.
The end result was a shape that was optimized for the injection moulding process while still preserving
the key features and design elements of the product. All simulations and adjustments made during this
process can be seen in appendix DFM.06 and DFM.07.
Figure 21: Manufacture parameters for the mould simulations, with one cavity.
5.4
Cost of Tooling and Manufacture
As the ﬁnal glass and lid design passed the simulations, there was no need for further improvements, and
the next step was to purchase the two moulds. The company’s two options were either a one -or a four-
cavity mould, which could withstand the same amount of cycles between 600.000 to 1.000.000. However,
the main di↵erence was that the four cavity moulds could deliver four times the product units but came
with a price 500% higher (see appendix DFM.08 - 09.). Through an evaluation, it was calculated that
after approximately 110.500 units of drinking glasses and 390.000 units of lids, the four cavity moulds
would start to pay o↵.
However, to reduce the ﬁnancial risk during the market entry, the company
saw the beneﬁts of purchasing one-cavities for the drinking glass and for the lid, costing approximately
123.000 DKK in total. This option was chosen because a one-cavity mould would be able to produce a
quantity large enough for a market entry and because of the required ﬁnancial resources. The Company
had applied for Skylab funding for 87.000 DKK for testing a future design for glasses and was given by
Bevica Seed Grants prior to November 2022, thereby covering a larger sum of the expense.
==PAGE:45==
5
DESIGN FOR MANUFACTURING
43
The manufacturing cost is 6,40 DKK per glass and 1,16 DKK per lid, without including the mould cost.
The company estimated that after 100.000 units, the moulds should be paid o↵, resulting in a unit cost
of approximately 7,6 DKK per glass and 2,45 DKK per lid (see appendix DFM.08 - 09.).
5.5
Packaging and Transportation
The packaging of the products was estimated based on broad research on frequently packaged sizes/units
of drinking glasses for both the private and institutional segments and can be seen in appendix DFM.10.
It has been estimated that the products should be packed as listed:
• Private User: 4 drinking glasses and 4 lids packed together in one package.
• Insitutions: 48 drinking glasses and 48 lids packed separately in two packages.
The manufacturer and supplier of the packaging is a partner of the RB Drinks in Portugal, Cartonarte.
They specialise in the manufacturing of custom packaging and have a good connection to RB Drinks.
They have estimated the cost of each type of packaging, while RB Drinks have estimated the amount
of packaging on one pallet and provided us with the price for transporting a pallet from them to us in
Denmark. The cost of packaging and transportation for a small box for the private users equals to
9.25 DKK, for a medium box with lids for the institutions equals to 4.74 DKK and for a Large
box with glasses for the institutions equals to 16.5 DKK.
The costs are included in the bill of material (BOM) in Figure 22. In the BOM all costs are multiplied
with 10%, because of the risk of sudden price changes. The estimations on the number of boxes per pallet
and the transportation cost can be seen in appendix DFM.11.
Figure 22: The BOM incl. cost of products, packaging and transportation
==PAGE:46==
5
DESIGN FOR MANUFACTURING
44
5.6
Product Life Cycle Use Case
The products made from PC are manufactured in Portugal using injection moulding. The drinking glass
and the lid are then transported to the company DrinkSaver and stored until they are sold and distributed
to retailers or end consumers. When received by the end user, the products are used and can be washed
and reused several times before it reaches the end of their useful life.
At the end of their useful life, the products are sorted as hard plastic Resin code 7 and sent for recycling.
The recycling process begins with sorting and cleaning the plastic and then shredding it into small pieces.
These pieces are then melted and formed into pellets. These pellets are then used to create new products,
completing the life cycle of the plastic drinking glass and lid. The company will investigate the opportunity
to use recycled material instead of recyclable material in the future.
A full illustration can be seen in Figure 23
Figure 23: The life cycle of the products by Drinksaver from appendix DFM.12
==PAGE:47==
5
DESIGN FOR MANUFACTURING
45
5.7
Summary of Chapter
The material selected for both products is chosen to be polycarbonate because of its properties in regard
to durability, weight, temperature resistance, transparency, reusability and recyclability.
Both products are manufactured by injection moulding, and the chosen manufacturer is RB Drinks, which
is placed in Portugal, as they are able to provide the desired quality of the material, with all certiﬁcations
needed and expertise in manufacturing.
After having made the ﬁnal adjustments to the design of the products by using mould simulations, the
moulds were ordered and are currently in production in Portugal.
For the private user, the products will be packed in packages consisting of 4 drinking glasses and 4
lids in one package. This package will cost Drinksaver about 57.5 DKK, including manufacturing costs,
packaging, assembly and transportation.
For the institutions, the products will be packed in packages consisting of 48 drinking glasses and 48 lids
in separate packages. These packages will cost Drinksaver about 137 DKK for the packages with lids
and 422 for the packages with drinking glasses, including manufacturing costs, packaging, assembly and
transportation.
==PAGE:48==
6
Intellectual 
Property Rights
In this chapter, the possible Intellectual Prop-
erty Rights (IPR) are investigated to outline the 
different possibilities to get protection for the 
invention. This is done to ensure a stronger po-
sition in the market
==PAGE:49==
6
INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY RIGHTS
47
6
Intellectual Property Rights
The Intellectual Property (IP) strategy has been conducted in tight collaboration with the IP consulting
company Zacco. The approaching weather to target a Patent, Design Registration or/and Trademark
were taken into consideration. As the Drinksaver lid is a new invention, the initial strategy was to protect
the whole concept:
”A device placed inside a glass, non-visual to others, with the function of damping and minimising the
spillage, while not enclosing the glass and making it possible for the user to drink normally from the rim
as if a lid was not in use”
6.1
Patent Investigation
Through consultations and research, it was determined that the concept of a lid placed inside a glass
which allowed the user to drink from the rim of the glass was invented. Thereby excluding us as a unique
invention and the possibility to ﬁle a patent on that. There are over 400 patents concerning lids, these
patents cover di↵erent ways of attaching the lid to the glass/cup, how the lid blocks the water, the shape,
etc. Even though no patent excluded our design, a patent application would have to be speciﬁc in all
details. The possibility of protecting the curve and openings in the design was conceivable but included a
wide range of risks, see appendix IPR.01. These risks included weak patent protection as it would be easy
to copy the patented features with only small adjustments to the design, resulting in the patent being
mainly costable and time-consuming for the business rather than giving the proper protection. However,
it was important for the business to possess property rights, exclude copycats and be able to ensure a
future healthy business. This led to the investigation to apply for design protection.
Filing for an IPR can be costly, thereby the company applied for an SME fund, Voucher 1 - 1500
Euro, through the European Union Intellectual Property Oﬃce (EUIPO) for a subsidy to cover IP scan,
trademark and design fees, which was granted.
6.2
Design Registration
In collaboration with Zacco, a plan was conducted to ﬁle an application for design protection of the lid to
the EUIPO. To ensure the broadest protection, all possible design variations considering the passage holes
in the lid were conducted. The range was from 2 to 12 holes (1 to 6 on each half) and was illustrated
with CAD ﬁles, with ten di↵erent views per design. Furthermore, to ensure that there was no confusion
that could lead to any misunderstanding regarding the lines in the drawings, all perspective lines were
removed, see an example in ﬁgure 24 and a detailed description of the process in appendix IPR.02.
The importance of ensuring no confusion considered in the design is to ensure that no other company
can produce the same product and then question the ﬁled illustrations and thereby, invalidate the design
registration.
On October 10th all six designs, including 42 perspectives, were approved by the EUIPO, securing the
==PAGE:50==
6
INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY RIGHTS
48
Figure 24: Illustration of removed perspective lines to reduce any confusion (Appendix IPR.02).
company’s intellectual protection, see appendix IPR.03.
6.3
Trademark
Trademarking is essential for brand identity protection to stop competitors from poaching customers
by imitating the company’s brand. Furthermore, it can give protection if copycats would damage the
reputation using the company’s brand.
Filing for a trademark on the company name would be risky as the name/word is descriptive as drink saver,
save your drink, implying minimizing spillage. However, in a consultation with Zacco, it was established
that a strategic plan to apply for a trademark on our logo could be a strategic move, as logos can hinder
other companies from using the same name/word and additionally provide exclusive use of the logo. As
the logo has the v replaced with a drinking glass, see ﬁgure 25, the trademark could represent a ﬁgurative
mark containing word elements. Trademarking a company often results in the products covering more
than a single category and have multiple ”classes. These classes are speciﬁed to the era, in which the
trademark applies. The product classes chosen for Drinksaver are Class 10 (Medical Instrument Products)
and Class 21 (Houseware and Glass Products). For more details see appendix IPR.04. The trademark
was ﬁled to EUIPO on the 21st of December and the process is ongoing.
Figure 25: Logo and the logo mark
==PAGE:51==
7
In this chapter, the business model is built upon 
the possible customers, and the market size is 
calculated based on the follow-on market seg-
ment. To ensure a healthy business, a strate-
gic price approach was conducted to ensure a 
competitive position, and a total budget was 
outlined to stablish funding needs to achieve 
the goals
Business Plan
==PAGE:52==
7
BUSINESS PLAN
50
7
Business Plan
Now that it has been established that Drinksaver is able to manufacture a unique solution that meets
the needs of its customer segments, the company has to investigate how to sell the solution, which sales
channels should be used, who the customers are, how to reach the customer, what value the solution
brings them, and which price are they willing to pay? The company will therefore utilise the business
model canvas to cover every aspect.
Drinksaver has established partnerships with key partners in the industry. The manufacturer in Por-
tugal, RB Drinks, and the branch association, Danish Care.
Together they can provide the desired
quality of the product, with all certiﬁcations needed and a strong network of partners and customers.
The key activities for the company Drinksaver will be establishing relationships with retail stores, ne-
gotiating terms and prices, and managing inventory. The company may also sell products directly to
consumers through their webshop. Drinksaver will advertise and showcase the solution at trade fairs and
events but will also need to promote the products using public relations and online marketing to attract
end-users and generate sales. The end user should be able to rate and comment on the products by using
Trustpilot. Displaying Trustpilot scores on the website e↵ectively increases customer trust and credibility,
builds brand reputation, and drives sales.
Drinksaver needs key resources such as storage, a website, a webshop, and a facility from where they
can manage the company. Other essential resources to the company are the IP rights to the product de-
sign and moulds for manufacturing. In order to manage all the actors Stakeholders, both Non-human and
human, a Development Arena was developed to get a broader overview of how the stakeholders interact
and inﬂuence each other, see appendix BP.01.
7.1
Value Proposition
The drinking glass and the lid by Drinksaver make it possible for the user to handle and drink the beverage
without spilling and ensuring correct swallowing, without being or looking like an assistive device. Since
multiple customers are considered, di↵erent value propositions have been formulated. As these customers
obtain di↵erent values from the product, it results in di↵erent approaches to obtain them as paying
customers. Therefore, multiple business model canvases were developed, see appendix BP.02. In
Figure 26, the values and interests of the di↵erent customers and how these overlaps are illustrated.
Three di↵erent value propositions have been made for the customers; private consumers, institutions and
retailers. The value proposition for the two retailers has been made to one since they share the same
values as seen in ﬁgure 26.
==PAGE:53==
7
BUSINESS PLAN
51
Figure 26: Mapping of the customer’s values
Value proposition for Private Users:
The solution by Drinksaver is for people who want to use the same type of drinking glass as their friends
and family when having dinner and for people who want to have an ordinary drinking experience and
be able to use a standard drinking glass with conﬁdence and without the worry of spilling, swallowing
incorrectly or being seen as a person with special needs.
Drinksaver provides the most optimal drinking experience for every person, regardless of their needs.
Value proposition for institutions:
The solution by Drinksaver is created to give back independence to people who are in need of assistance
when drinking, which will reduce the caretaker’s resources used to delegate di↵erent types of glasses, assist
with drinking and monitor ﬂuid intake by giving the residents the ability to perform the tasks themselves,
and Increase the eﬃciency of the caretaker and create more equality among the residents by providing
the same ordinary drinking glass to every person, regardless of their needs.
==PAGE:54==
7
BUSINESS PLAN
52
Value proposition for retailers:
By implementing the drinking glass and the lid by Drinksaver in the assortment, the retailer can o↵er
their customers an alternative solution, which beneﬁts more. O↵ering more inclusive solutions can result
in a higher satisfaction rate, larger purchase orders and new customers.
Fulﬁll every need, ensure higher satisfaction, attract more customers and sell more products.
7.2
Product Pricing
In order to apply strategic pricing for the products, a combination of the pricing methods: cost pricing,
competitive pricing and wholesale pricing was used to determine the price of the products. These methods
helped the company to set the proper price for its products to maximize proﬁt.
As documented in chapter 5, Design for manufacture, the total cost for a pack of four glasses and four
lids is approx. 58 DKK, the cost for a pack of 48 glasses is 422 DKK and the cost for a pack with 48 lids
is 138 DKK. The cost for a set (a drinking glass with a lid) is between 11.92 and 14.2 DKK.
A healthy gross proﬁt margin for a company is between 50-70% [36], resulting in a price range of approx.
29 - 47 DKK per set. However, for innovative products with a low production cost, a price point can be
seen at 90% Gross Proﬁt Margin resulting in approximately 141 DKK per set. However, these prices can
only ensure a healthy business if the customer is willing to pay.
7.2.1
Competitive and Wholesale Pricing
Competitive pricing involves setting the price of a product based on what the competitors are charging for
similar products. This method helps to ensure that the company remains competitive and avoids pricing
itself out of the market. However, having slightly higher prices can signal that your product is of better
quality or works better.
Private: The competitive pricing for the private user was done by ﬁnding all the drinking glasses in the
assortment of Danish Care Supply. This was done because the majority of assistive devices on the danish
market can be purchased here. The prices here are then estimated to be a good prediction of what the
user is willing to pay. The average price per product was estimated to be approx. 100 DKK (incl. VAT),
making this the price that the average consumer is willing to pay for a drinking glass that fulﬁls a special
need, see appendix BP.03.
Institutions: To estimate the amount institutions are willing to pay, a comparison of the pricing with
the most commonly used products in the institutions was conducted. The average price per drinking glass
was 30 DKK (excl. VAT), see appendix BP.03.
Wholesale Pricing: Refers to the price at which a product is sold to retailers, who then sell the product
to end consumers. It is an important aspect of the supply chain, as it a↵ects the proﬁtability of both
the manufacturer and the retailers, as well as the price that end consumers pay for the product. The
wholesale pricing is typically negotiated between the manufacturer and the retailer.
==PAGE:55==
7
BUSINESS PLAN
53
7.2.2
Price Setting
The methods helped ensure that the company covered its costs and generated a proﬁt.
By using a
combination of these methods, Drinksaver take various factors into account, such as production costs,
market demand, and competition and sets a price that is both competitive and proﬁtable.
Using principles from wholesale pricing, we have estimated the proﬁt gained by DrinkSaver in selling the
products with and without using retailers.
Using the insight from retailers, it is estimated that retailers distributing to institutions will gain 60% in
proﬁt margin, and retailers distributing to private users will gain 150% in proﬁt margin.
The price for the end consumer takes all aspects into account. Matching the competitive pricing and the
gross proﬁt margin for a healthy business and considering the margin for the retailers in regard to the
segment. See appendix BP.04.
Figure 27: The value chain and gross proﬁt margins for
7.3
Market Analysis
The market analysis is conducted on the two customer segments the private and the institution. The
market potential revenue and market size di↵er signiﬁcantly for these two customer segments. To analyse
these two segments, the market is divided into the Total addressable market (TAM), Serviceable Available
Market (SAM), the Serviceable Obtainable Market (SOM), and lastly, the beachhead market, these are
compared to estimate what market is most sustain to capture and is documented in appendix BP.05.
==PAGE:56==
7
BUSINESS PLAN
54
The beachhead in both segments is targeting the Danish market, and based on the revenue and con-
sultation with the advisory in DTU Skylab, targeting the private segment would be the preferred choice
as it has revenue 38 times larger and would ensure that the company has full focus on one market segment.
As documented in chapter 2.
Customer Segmentation, a bottom-up approach, was conducted to in-
vestigate how many potential customers were in Denmark. This analysis resulted in 145.860 direct end
users experiencing diﬃculties in swallowing or spilling liquids and by including one relative, the total mar-
ket size in Denmark was equal to 4,98% of the danish population. Assuming the population distribution
in other countries is the same, will result in a TAM of 100,9 billion DKK. It is essential to mention that
the development index around the globe di↵ers greatly [37], which could result in a shifted price point for
speciﬁc countries. However, assuming the product is sold at the same price point, the potential market
size would be as illustrated in ﬁgure 28.
Figure 28: The potential revenue capture in DKK
7.4
Growth and Employment
The company goal is to target the beachhead market in the year 2023 by 2%, followed by 5% in 2024 and
6% in 2025. Furthermore, the aim is to target SOM by 0,30% in 2024, followed by 0,50% in 2025 as a
result of international fairs held in Germany. To reach these goals, the company need to sell 23.338 packs
in 2023, 113.995 in 2024 and 216.321 in 2025, see appendix BP.08. To achieve this market share, the
team intend to draw a modest salary and recruit a full-time sales and marketing employee in the summer
of 2023 and again in February 2024. Furthermore, to recruit a warehouse manager in the year 2025, see
appendix BP.09. To make this possible, the company would need an investment which will be elaborated
on further in this chapter.
==PAGE:57==
7
BUSINESS PLAN
55
To get a realistic overview of the next step for the company, a bootstrap budget and plan was conducted,
including a low salary for the two founders and the ﬁrst recruitment of a sales and marketing person in
2025, see appendix BP.07. If the company followed this plan, the company goal would be to target the
beachhead market in the year 2023 by 1%, followed by 1.5% in 2024 and 2.5% in 2025, see appendix
BP.06. Furthermore, the aim is to target SOM by 0,10% in 2024, followed by 0,20% in 2025, as illustrated
in appendix BP.06. To achieve these goals, the company need to sell 5.834 packs in 2023, 28.499 in 2024
and 54.080 in 2025, which corresponds to a quarter of the units sold compared to the investment plan.
7.5
Budget and Investment plan
The comprehensive budget for both the bootstrap and investment revealed that the company would
manage organic growth and achieve success, but over a longer period of time. With an investment, the
company could accelerate faster while giving a good salary to the employees, putting money aside for
R&D etc. see appendix BP.09.3-4, which could mean that the growth potential could get higher than
projected. The net equity capital for ultimo 2025 is projected to be 2.4 million with bootstrapping and
7.7 million with an investment. In ﬁgure 29, the accumulating result and growth are illustrated.
Figure 29: Accumulating Result for Investment and Bootstrapping
However, it is crucial to determine that the investment plan ﬁrst di↵ers from bootstrapping til after
July, as it is planned to ﬁnd an investor which can follow a progress/goal, in this scenario, 486 units per
month, which equals 1% of the monthly share for the bootstrap beachhead market, see appendix BP.10.
The money needed to follow the investment plan is approx. 400.000 DKK and is highlighted in ﬁgure 30.
In order to be able to sell the ﬁrst products, the company will have to pre-order the products and thereby
stay ahead of the sales that take place from May to August, which requires an additional capital increase
of approx. DKK 90,000.
==PAGE:58==
7
BUSINESS PLAN
56
Figure 30: Capital needed
7.6
Value and Equity Statement
The Keystones Høker Kalkule method [38] is used to get closer to a concrete startup valuation. This
value indicates ”pre-money”; thus, the company’s value before investment. Appendix BP.11 documents
the valuation of DrinkSsver at a pre-money value of 6 million DKK. Following the investment plan and
enabling a pre-order of the ﬁrst batch of products would require an investment capital of 1/2 million
DKK. The post-money valuation and the equity percentage for this investment follow the principle of
a start-up valuation [39]. This would result in a Post Money valuation of 6.5 million DKK. The equity
percentage calculation can be seen in ﬁgure 31 and in appendix BP.12 and results in a 7,7% stake in the
company.
Figure 31: Equity percentage and Equity after Investment Appendix BP.12.
The company’s vision is to create digniﬁed solutions for all the people who today do not have the oppor-
tunity to purchase a nice aesthetic solution. The company is passionate about reaching as many people
and having the means to reach them and go full-time. Therefore, it will be in the company’s interest to
grow quickly with outside help and investment.
==PAGE:59==
7
BUSINESS PLAN
57
7.7
Summary of Chapter
The value propositions for the customer are di↵erent in regard to the type of customer. The value for the
end user is to feel included and still have all functional needs fulﬁlled, while for the retailers, the value is
to attract new groups of customers and increase their revenue.
Drinksaver will initially focus on selling smaller packages to the end consumer, both B2B and B2C,
and exclude directing sales to institutions. Targeting the private segment is the preferred choice because
it will result in a revenue 38 times larger than the institutional segment and would ensure that the com-
pany can focus on one market segment only.
A box of 4 drinking glasses with 4 lids is priced at 400 DKK B2C, inclusive of VAT, resulting in a
gross proﬁt margin of 82% for Drinksaver. B2B, the product is priced at a wholesale price of 128 DKK
per box, resulting in a gross proﬁt margin of 55% for Drinksaver.
Including one relative to each person in the consumer segment, the market size of the target group
is equal to 4,98% of the population in Denmark, which is deﬁned as the beachhead market for Drinksaver.
Assuming 100% of the beachhead market purchase two boxes, with sales channels distributed 30% on the
webshop and 70% via retailers, the total revenue is approximately 108 million DKK.
With a bootstrapping approach, Drinksaver estimate a sale of 5.834 packs in 2023, 28.499 in 2024 and
54.080 in 2025. With an investment, Drinksaver will be able to increase the number of sales to 23.338
packs in 2023, 113.995 in 2024 and 216.321 in 2025. The net equity capital for ultimo 2025 is projected
to be 2,4 million with bootstrapping and 7,7 million with an investment. The money needed to follow
the investment plan is approx. 490.000 DKK. Drinksaver is estimated to have a post-money valuation of
6.5 million DKK, and the equity percentage for the required investment capital of 1/2 million DKK is
calculated to be a 7,7% stake in the company.
==PAGE:60==
8
This chapter outlines the next steps the compa-
ny should focus on
Next Step
==PAGE:61==
8
NEXT STEPS
59
8
Next Steps
After the mould is manufactured and the ﬁrst products are delivered in April, the next steps for the
company are to advertise the product to the beachhead market in Denmark using online marketing. This
will include advertisements on the company’s social media and website and targeted advertisements.
Many of the people from the target group are seen by an occupational or physical therapist.
Using
them and their facilities for distributing sales material will increase product awareness and reliability. To
get the attention of the occupational or physical therapist, Drinksaver will attend to get publicity through
journals related to their professions or by contacting them individually.
Drinksaver will be attending rehabilitation and healthcare trade fairs to showcase the product and in-
crease brand awareness, monitoring the response to the product from stakeholders, gathering feedback
to make improvements and expanding geographically. This would also be an opportunity to attract the
attention of the occupational or physical therapist.
The task of making marketing and sales material and expanding the awareness of the product will be
done by a third recruited person.
When the drinking glass has been implemented properly, the company will start expanding their product
assortment with di↵erent types of glasses and to other consumer segments.
Figure 32: The next steps for Drinksaver
==PAGE:62==
9
This chapter summarizes the product develop-
ment and outlines if the product fulfils
the user’s needs and if there can be built a 
healthy business upon this invention.
Conclusion
==PAGE:63==
9
CONCLUSION
61
9
Conclusion
Drinksaver decided to divert drastically and change the targeted customer segment from festivals to peo-
ple’s private homes. The new customer segment was estimated to be more likely to become early adopters
of the product because they had a more signiﬁcant need and desire for the unique value proposition the
product could provide.
The segment of individuals with motor disabilities and swallowing diﬃculties is the most promising mar-
ket. Through extensive desktop research and user insights, it was found that there was a need for a
solution that would cater to this segment’s unique needs while maintaining their natural swallowing pro-
cess and providing a discreet and aesthetically pleasing appearance.
The drinking glass by Drinksaver was designed with an easy grip, ensuring correct swallowing and mea-
suring ﬂuid intake while having a regular appearance. The lid by Drinksaver was redesigned to ﬁt the
glass while providing a straw holder. The openings were adjusted to optimize the ﬂuid ﬂow as a result
of user feedback. Polycarbonate material was chosen for its durability, weight, temperature resistance
and transparency. The products will be manufactured by RB Drinks in Portugal, and each package will
consist of four drinking glasses and four lids.
Not only does this product provide functional beneﬁts, but it has a signiﬁcant impact on the social in-
clusion and well-being of individuals with disabilities. Providing a product that is discreet, aesthetically
pleasing, and non-stigmatizing can help reduce negative attitudes and stigmas surrounding disabilities
and improve the user’s conﬁdence and comfort in social situations. This can result in a better quality of
life and greater social inclusion for this segment.
Private users are the target end-user, with a focus on reaching them through B2B and B2C. The B2B
business case is to go through retailers like Kop&Kande, Imerco etc., to their end users, and the B2C
goes directly through their own webshop. The Serviceable Obtainable Market is aimed to reach within
the ﬁrst three years and has a total market size revenue of approximately 1,4 billion DKK.
The Drinksaver solution not only provides a unique functional value but also has a positive impact
on the social inclusion and well-being of its end users. This product has the potential to make a signiﬁ-
cant impact on the lives of these individuals, and the market size and proﬁtability projections make it a
promising investment opportunity.
The company managed, among other things, to design two ﬁnal products, secure design protection for
the lid, ﬁle a ﬁgurative trademark and start the manufacturing of the two moulds. Lastly, the company
received two grants and one loan to cover all expenses.
==PAGE:64==
10
This chapter will reflect on the decisions made 
and discuss whether these could be done dif-
ferently in the future and what learnings have 
been encountered.
Reflection
==PAGE:65==
10
REFLECTION
63
10
Reﬂection
Validating the products with users, customers, and stakeholders have resulted in adjustments and changes,
which made the team ”kill some darlings”. Having to compromise with the concepts made is a diﬃcult
step, but have, in this case, led to a greater business model for the company. The best example of this
is how the team had to put the lid intended festivals and concerts on hold and start focusing on the
healthcare segment. The team had, prior to the project, already test-manufactured a solution to the
festival segment and prepared sales material. Having to start over with a new design was an extremely
diverging step for the team, but has resulted in a business with higher chances of succeeding.
Many of the tasks done during the project required using the company’s ﬁnancial resources. Drinksaver,
before and during the project, received soft funding, which has given the company more opportunities,
but also increased the risk of the decision-making of when and how to execute these tasks. Being to do
decision-making on a theoretical level as a student, where the consequences are close to nothing, makes
it diﬃcult to decide when the task of executing the given opportunities is because it may have real con-
sequences for the company.
An example of this is the purchase of moulds, which cost every ﬁnancial resource Drinksaver owned,
meaning that the team only had one chance to get it right. As a result of this, simulations and design
adjustments were conducted to exclude as many errors as possible. At this point, the decision on when
the design development was good enough and placing the order had high risks. This process enlightens
the students that asking the manufacturer for advice and guidance is a normal procedure and can save
time for both the manufacturer and the developer.
The last ﬁve months have strengthened our learning in developing new designs based on user valida-
tion and research, as well as expanding our network among manufacturers worldwide.
Furthermore,
throughout the process, we have gone from an idea to a fully developed product, where the only thing
missing is the transport of the products to Denmark.
As engineers often are seen as problem solvers and a part of the team that recognizes and develop new
solutions, the two students were challenged from the point after the solution was developed to the point of
generating a sale, as lots of unfamiliar tasks were ahead. The journey resulted in self-development, as new
methods and learnings have been achieved. It has enlightened us as engineers on how to approach IPR,
how to prepare a business model and budget, and state how to achieve a healthy business considering
either bootstrapping or investment. Lastly, given toolings to evaluate the company and ask for equity.
==PAGE:66==
REFERENCES
64
References
[1] Realizing the Sustainable Development Goals by, for and with persons with disabilities. Technical
report, Department of Economic and Social A↵airs, 2018.
[2] Cx K Batchelor and GK Batchelor. An introduction to ﬂuid dynamics. Cambridge university press,
2000.
[3] Gerhard Nahler. Gantt chart, page 78. Springer Vienna, 2009.
[4] Design Council UK. The design process.
[5] Bill Aulet. Disciplined Entrepreneurship. John Wiley and sons, 2013.
[6] Assumpta Ryan and Hugh McKenna. ’Familiarity’ as a key factor inﬂuencing rural family carers’
experience of the nursing home placement of an older relative: A qualitative study. BMC Health
Services Research, 13(1), 2013.
[7] Dirk. Dannenberg, Holger. Zupancic. Excellence in Sales. Gabler, 2009.
[8] Carnaby Giselle A Crary Michael Sura Livia, Madhaven Aarthi. Dysphagia in the elderly: Manage-
ment and nutritional considerations. Clinical Interventions in Aging, 7:287–298, 2012.
[9] Sharon Tal Marc Gruber. Where to Play:3 steps for discovering your most valuable market opportu-
nities. FT Publishing International; 01 edition, 2017.
[10] World report on disability. Technical Report 5, World Health Organization, 2011.
[11] Joint Report prepared by the Social Protection Committee (SPC) and the European Commission
(DG EMPL). Long-Term Care Report - Trends, challenges and opportunities in an ageing society.
Luxembourg: Publications Oﬃce of the European Union, 2:6–424, 2021.
[12] Mona Larsen, Vibeke Jakobsen, and Christian Højgaard Mikkelsen. Handicap og beskæftigelse 2019
- Viden til at understøtte, at ﬂere personer med handicap kommer i beskæftigelse. 2020.
[13] Parkinsonforeningen. Hvad er parkinson, 2021. www.parkinson.dk.
[14] Jakob Christensen. Essentiel tremor (rysten), 2022. www.sundhed.dk.
[15] Kim Kristensen. Cerebral parese (cp), 2021. www.sundhed.dk.
[16] WheelchairFoundation. Wheelchair needs in the world, 2016. www.wheelchairfoundation.org.
[17] Sundhedsdatastyrelsen.
Ny
oversigt
over
alle
danske
plejehjem
til
ældre,
2018.
www.sundhedsdatastyrelsen.dk.
[18] O Ekberg and P Pokieser. Radiologic evaluation of the dysphagic patient. European Radiology,
7(8):1285–1295, 1997.
==PAGE:67==
REFERENCES
65
[19] Annette Kjærsgaard. Dysfagi – er det et spørgsm˚al om ernæring of overlevelse?
Ergoterapeuten,
1:30–32, 2006.
[20] Jeri A. Logemann. The evaluation and treatment of swallowing disorders. Current Opinion in Oto-
laryngology Head and Neck Surgery. pages 395–400, 1998.
[21] Ahmad H. Alghadir, Hamayun Zafar, Einas S. Al-Eisa, and Zaheen A. Iqbal. E↵ect of posture on
swallowing. African Health Sciences, 17:133–137, 2017.
[22] ´Emerson Soares Pontes, Ana Karˆenina De Freitas Jord˜ao Do Amaral, Fl´avia Luiza Costa Do Rˆego,
Elma Heitmann Mares Azevedo, and Priscila Oliveira Costa Silva. Quality of life in swallowing of
the elderly patients a↵ected by stroke. Arquivos de Gastroenterologia, 54:27–32, 2017.
[23] Tina Nør Langager. Dysfagi og aktivitetsproblemer med at synke-spise-drikke. Ergoterapeutforenin-
gen, 1:5–7, 2019.
[24] Sundhedsstyrelsen. National klinisk retningslinje for øvre dysfagi. 1:26–34, 2018.
[25] C Bird. Interviews. In Tim Menzies, Laurie Williams, and Thomas Zimmermann, editors, Perspec-
tives on Data Science for Software Engineering, pages 125–131. Morgan Kaufmann, 2016.
[26] P Conrad. Health Research, Qualitative. In Neil J Smelser and Paul B Baltes, editors, International
Encyclopedia of the Social Behavioral Sciences, pages 6608–6612. Pergamon, 2001.
[27] Michael E. Porter. On Competition, Updated and Expanded Edition. 2008.
[28] E. Ries. How today’s entrepreneurs use continuous innovation to create radically successful businesses.
Crown Business, 2011.
[29] Erik Stavnsager Rasmussen and Stoyan Tanev. Lean startup. Elsevier Ltd, 2020.
[30] DTU. Ability prompt cards – playbook for universal design.
[31] K. Du↵-Walker S. Behova C. B. Carroll F. F. A. Rossiter, C. A. Shinton. Does coloured crockery
inﬂuence food consumption in elderly patients in an acute setting?
Age and Ageing, 43:20ii1–ii2,
2014.
[32] P.B. Cipolloni Alice Cronin-Golomb Tracy E. Dunne, Sandy A. Neargarder. Visual contrast enhances
food and liquid intake in advanced alzheimer’s disease. Clinical Nutrition, 23:533–538, 2004.
[33] Lægemiddelsty. Introduktion til EU-forordningerne om medicinsk udstyr (MDR) og medicinsk udstyr
til in vitro-diagnostik (IVDR). 2017.
[34] Martin. O’driscoll. Design for Manufacture. page 4, 2001.
[35] Why choose injection molding - Geomiq, 2019.
==PAGE:68==
REFERENCES
66
[36] What is the gross proﬁt margin — BDC.ca.
[37] Human Development Report. Report 2021/2022. United Nations Development Programme, 2022.
[38] Keystones. Keystones høker kalkule - test din værdiansættelse.
[39] Stephen R. Pouland. Founder’s Pocket Guide - Startup Valuation. 1x1 Media, 2017.
[40] ESM HilbersModderman M Kallewaard C Wassenaar AW van Drongelen, B Roszek. Dysphagia in
the elderly: Management and nutritional considerations. Clinical Interventions in Aging, 7:287–298,
2012.
[41] Soﬁe Biering-Sørensen Katrine Strømsted Ane Sørensen, Claus Østberg.
Service til ældre 2019.
Levevilk˚ar, Danmarks Statestik, 228, 2020.
[42] Thomas Zimmermann Tim Menzies, Laurie Williams. in perspectives on data science for software
engineering - the interview guide. 2016.
==PAGE:69==
www.drinksaver.dk
