==PAGE:1==
Neural netværk træning med data aug-
mentering fra gaming engines
Subtitle, if needed
Jens Peter Primdahl (s205967)
Master of Science in Engineering
2022
DTU ELECTRO
Department of Electrical and Photonics Engineering
==PAGE:2==
b
(empty)
==PAGE:3==
Neural netværk træning med data augmentering fra gaming engines, Subtitle, if needed
Report written by:
Jens Peter Primdahl (s205967)
Advisor(s):
Jens Christian Andersen, Associate Professor at the Electrical Engineering Department of DTU
DTU Electrical Engineering
Technical University of Denmark
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Denmark
elektro@elektro.dtu.dk
Project period:
1st of June- 1st of February, 2023
ECTS:
15
Education:
M.Sc.
Field:
Electrical Engineering
Class:
Public
Edition:
1. edition
Remarks:
This report is submitted as partial fulfillment of the requirements for gradu-
ation in the above education at the Technical University of Denmark.
Copyrights:
©Jens Peter Primdahl, 2022
==PAGE:4==
d
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
The project aims to determine if a video game engine, specifically Grand Theft Auto V
can be used to generate useful simulation data for training neural networks. To test this
a solution is created for generating custom data from the game which is automatically
labelled. However the diﬀiculty in generating useful data and the lack of robustness in
the solution ultimately means that the game is not viable for generating training data.
The initial steps required for attempting to train models using generated data are taken,
however it is never taken beyond those steps.
==PAGE:6==
ii
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Abstract
i
Contents
iii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Objectives . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.2
Thesis outline . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2
Analysis
5
2.1
introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
Related Works . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.3
Overview of Required Components
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
3
Solution for Data Generation
7
3.1
Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
3.2
Background . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
3.3
Subject matter
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
3.4
Summary
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
4
Discussion
19
4.1
Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
4.2
Benchmarking Original Objectives . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
4.3
Summary, Analysis and Future Works . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
5
Conclusion
23
Bibliography
25
==PAGE:8==
iv
==PAGE:9==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
Generalized autonomous systems have been on the horizon for a long time, but despite
good hardware and ever increasing computational power such systems are still not robust
enough for true unsupervised autonomous operation. For an autonomous system to be
truly robust it should be capable of handling any situation it can come across, thus
requiring highly complex control logic. It would be impossible to manually program the
required logic and therefore the current approach is generally to use machine learning
techniques and pre-labeled data sets to let the logic train itself until it can respond
adequately to the data set provided.
Training an autonomous system to be perfect is currently impossible, so instead
developers have to settle for good enough. Defining what good enough means both in
terms of how to measure performance and what threshold values are used is diﬀicult
and will depend on the specific application. A common approach is reserving some data
exclusively for testing the system and then evaluating how often the predictions of the
autonomous system are wrong when fed the reserved data. Such an approach can work
for getting predictions mostly right and can work if the data set is nicely distributed
and large enough. It is often the case though that existing data sets comes with serious
limitations both in the quantity and distribution of the data.
The quantity of data will always be limited to what the developer had the resources
to collect and label. It is often said in machine learning that more data is always better,
and this is generally true. However for robustness it is important to also have a system
which is trained to handle edge cases. As edge cases are by definition rare they will
often contribute such an insignificant amount to the error rate of a model that it will
ignore them. To overcome this various methods can be used such as adding weights
to penalize the model for getting edge cases wrong.
Another approach is removing
some generic data or duplicating data points from edge cases until the distribution is
more even. However adding weights is often a manual process and still requires enough
data. Artificially inflating the count of edge cases without variation makes over fitting
more likely and deleting generic data points wastes the resources used to collect them.
Therefore a strong pipeline for obtaining useful data points in edge cases would be a
valuable tool.
Many approaches exist for augmenting data sets to more evenly balance their dis-
tribution. Such approaches generally either manipulate the existing data to make it
look like new data or use simulations to dictate the prevalence of edge cases. The main
focus of the project will be using simulations to generate balanced data for training.
==PAGE:10==
2
1 Introduction
The specific application for the data will be pedestrian avoidance/interaction and urban
situational awareness. Having robust autonomous systems within urban environments
requires handling countless unique edge cases making it a perfect candidate for training
in simulation. However in simulation training has its own limitations, both in terms of
actual training and in the transferability of systems to the real world.
1.1
Objectives
The broad objective of the thesis is the to test the viability of using game engines, specif-
ically Grand Theft Auto V ™, to generate data which can be useful for training neural
networks. Additionally there is an ambition to investigate ways to overcome the reality-
gap which is present when using simulated data to train for real-world applications. In
order to asses viability some key objectives and measuring points have been laid out for
the project.
1.1.1
Technical Viability
Firstly the project must asses how feasible it is to actually get any data at all out of
the game engine. Games are not built to be used as simulation engines and Grand
Theft Auto V, or GTA V for short, is no exception. This means that many technical
limitations will likely have to be overcome, and if the diﬀiculty of doing so is greater
than collecting the data without simulations then the whole exercise is pointless.
In the initial stages of the project there are several technical pass or fail objectives
that must be accomplished in order for any level of success to be achieved, these are:
• Gain access to underlying game data used for labelling ground truth
• Accurately map game data to recorded frames, ideally capture frames from within
game engine
• Modify game play to encourage collection of desirable data.
In addition to the critical objectives outlined above there are also several smaller tech-
nical goals where at least some success should be achieved in order to validate that it is
not only possible but also advantageous to use the game for data creation. Some such
objectives are outlined below.
• Selectively access in-engine game data to create more focused data sets
• Disable the ”game” part of simulation to save resources and avoid needing user
input
==PAGE:11==
1.2 Thesis outline
3
• Automate data collection by writing logic for moving around the world while start-
ing and stopping data collection without user input.
• extensively modify the data of the game simulation to create tailor made scenarios
or emulate visuals from real world applications.
Finally an objective that is harder to measure is that any solution should also be rela-
tively easy to use and modify. Some game developers make it intentionally diﬀicult to
interfere with their underlying code whilst others encourage their users to get creative
and modify their games extensively. A solution for generating simulation data can not
be considered useful if it breaks ever other day because of the game being forcefully
updated. Similarly it would also be detrimental for the project if the game publisher
decided to disallow any of the proposed functionality in their end user license agreement.
1.1.2
Quality of Data
Beyond just assessing the possibility of getting data out, the actual quality of data must
also be examined. There is no advantage in gathering simulation data if it does not prove
useful, even if it is technically possible. Assessing the quality of data collected is diﬀicult
and should ideally be done by training similar models with and without simulation data,
and then comparing results. The simulation data will be considered to be of useful
quality if a pre-trained model, which is further trained on simulation data, achieves any
of the following:
• Quantitatively more precise/accurate in real-world applications, given the same
training time
• Reaches similar accuracy level in less training time
• Is qualitatively better at reacting to different data-sets
1.2
Thesis outline
A short sentence describing each of the following chapters.
==PAGE:12==
4
==PAGE:13==
CHAPTER 2
Analysis
2.1
introduction
Generating synthetic training data from simulation is a very active research area, espe-
cially for autonomous vehicles. It is also not a new research area, with examples dating
back decades such as the early Autonomous Land Vehicle In a Neural Network (ALVINN)
project from 1988 [7]. In the training of ALVINN researchers generated synthetic 30x32
pixel images of roadways, which was enough for teaching the model to identify major
road features such as road curvature. Since then the complexity and ambition level of
neural network model has increased dramatically, and therefore the data used for train-
ing must keep up. However creating such complex simulation engines simply to generate
data is expensive and labor intensive, thus negating at least one supposed advantage of
the simulation based approach. Freely available 3D engines such as UNREAL™make it
feasible to build somewhat custom simulation software and examples such as CARLA
[2] do exist. However this is heavily geared towards autonomous driving on roads.
2.2
Related Works
Instead of building simulation environments specifically for generating training data,
some projects have attempted to use readily available video game environments for
training. Using video games for simulation is a logical next step as there is significant
overlap between creating immersive video games and realistic simulations. An example
of this is the extensive Playing for Benchmarks data-set which was generated using
Grand Theft Auto V ™[8]. The data-set is again mostly focused around self-driving road
vehicles, meaning it would not be possible to use their data-set for the project. However
the existence of the data-set and their promising results provide a good background for
the project at hand.
2.3
Overview of Required Components
The system for generating data from Grand Theft Auto V is split into 4 distinct processes
as seen below. Process 1 through 3 is handled in the .NET framework and subsequently
the programming language c# where tools exist for interfacing with the game engine
==PAGE:14==
6
2 Analysis
itself. The final point of preparing the gathered data for training is done in Python, as
this is also the language intended to be used for training. Transitioning to Python as
early as possible in the process is done to simplify the overall pipeline. An overarching
system for communicating with the software running in the game engine was also devel-
oped to facilitate real-time monitoring of data collection as well as external logging of
the program itself.
1. Automate movement for data gathering
2. Manipulate Environment for Desired Data-sets
3. Intercept and Save Ground Truth Data
4. Prepare Data for Training
Process 1 to 3 all rely heavily on the tool Script Hook V which allows third party
code to be injected into various game engines [1]. Script Hook V is built in c++ and
is therefore used in combination with the community built and maintained translation
layer Script Hook V .NET [3]. It is important to note that neither of these tools have
any support from or association with Rockstar Games ™, the original developer and
publisher of GTA V. The lack of support from the original developers complicates devel-
opment significantly and is an obvious drawback compared to purpose built simulation
environments such as CARLA.
==PAGE:15==
CHAPTER 3
Solution for Data
Generation
3.1
Introduction
Before augmenting real-world data with simulation data, such simulation data must first
be generated. The key presumed advantages of synthesizing data rather than collecting
it is being able to cherry-pick situations to better balance datasets, and the relative
ease of generating large data sets. Therefore the proof of concept will focus mainly on
validating these advantages.
3.2
Background
The main complication faced is being forced to rely on decompiled and reverse-engineered
functions for interacting with the game engine. Such decompiled functions from the
original game code are henceforth referred to as Native functions. Some libraries exist of
native functions decompiled by the community through trial and error such as NativeDB
[4], however native functions often lack documentation about some input or output
arguments. In figure 3.1 an example can be seen of the function used to check if an
entity, such as the data gathering camera, is at a certain position. It should be a simple
function but even still it has 3 unknown inputs. Someone else has left a comment of their
experience with using the function and their suggestion for the unknown inputs, but it
is only a guess. Troubleshooting code without confidence in what each function does or
even what inputs it requires is extremely diﬀicult and slows down or even halts parts of
the development process constantly. The function chosen as an example is picked due
to being simple to understand, and in this case the problem can be solved simply by
writing the code to compare entity coordinates with some target manually instead of
relying on a native function. However more crucial functions such as those controlling
the camera or movement suffer from the same issues and are more diﬀicult to program
around.
Another problem with using unoﬀicial third party tools for injecting code into the
game engine is that they are prone to breaking due to game updates and having reliability
issues. Finally an issue was also encountered where the injected code falsely triggered
==PAGE:16==
8
3 Solution for Data Generation
Figure 3.1: A simple example function taken from NativeDB [4] with three unknown
inputs. The known inputs of the native function are: the entity in question,
the x,y,z of the target and their respective ranges.
The function then
returns a Boolean depending on if the entity is within range of the target..
anti-cheat protection in the game and blocked access to all the games network actions,
including accessing login servers which are required to start the game even in offline
mode. This was relatively easily circumvented using a virtual private network, but it is
still another example of the significant hurdles introduced by trying to make the game
do something it was not made for.
3.3
Subject matter
Despite all the drawbacks of using GTA V analyzed above, it was still decided to be the
best option. The four unique processes described above are described in detail as the
data gathering evolved to become the main focus of the thesis.
3.3.1
System Layout
Before looking at each individual process used in data gathering, the higher level overview
of the overall system facilitating communication with the game engine is explained. A
graphical overview of the system and its normal process flow can be seen in figure 3.2.
The system is made up of three distinct solutions/programs:
• A .NET solution running within GTA V itself, used for interacting with the game
engine through scripthook patching and writing any gathered data to storage.
• A python program running outside of GTA V, with user interface and a socket
client
==PAGE:17==
3.3 Subject matter
9
• A .NET socket server which facilitates communication between the python client
and the .NET solution running in game
Technically the two .NET solutions are part of the same solution and are both launched
from within GTA. However the socket server is run in a separate thread to ensure it can
continue logging if the main .NET solution or even GTA crashes. This also means that
the main .NET solution can be run without the external debugging client. A typical
Figure 3.2: Overview of solution used for interacting with GTA V.
process flow when working with the system usually takes one of two paths, starting from
the Start label in figure 3.2. If core functionality of the system needs to be changed
then it must be done directly in the main .NET solution. Any changes to the code
here requires it to be recompiled and the main .NET solution must also subsequently be
rebuild. Afterwards the solution is reloaded from within GTA V using the scripthook
patcher and if no errors occur the new solution should then be live. Having to rebuild
and reload the solution each time any code is changed is both tedious and inconvenient.
Having to reload the solution also means that any gathered data or parameters will be
overwritten unless saved to disk.
==PAGE:18==
10
3 Solution for Data Generation
3.3.1.1
Python Management Client
To avoid constantly having to reload the solution an external python client is developed
which can interface in a limited capacity with the .NET solution. The python client uses
sockets to communicate with a .NET socket server which is launched by the main .NET
solution. Any data sent from the python client is received by the socket server where
it is buffered. At regular intervals the main .NET solution will check if any new data
have been received by the .NET socket and if so it will try to act accordingly. The main
.NET solution also sends logging information every frame to the socket server which
is then forwarded to the python client and subsequently the user in real-time, if they
choose to enable it. The functionality of the python client is limited in the sense that
it can only call functions that already exist within the .NET solution, and only if those
have been mapped to some data which can be sent through the socket connection. This
setup requires some extra up-front effort when adding functionality but is deemed worth
it by accelerating the most common operations, such as data gathering or tweaking
environmental values. The extremely basic nature of the client can be seen in figure 3.3.
It shows enough logging information to keep tabs on ongoing recordings and provides a
text field in which commands can be sent.
3.3.2
Automating Movement for Data Gathering
Grand Theft Auto V is famous for presenting a lively world to the player with plenty
of pedestrians and vehicles roaming around the player, each following their own organic
looking route. Therefore it was assumed that native functions exist which can also gen-
erate such a route for the player controlled character. It is worth noting that both the
visual and ground truth data will be collected from the perspective of the ”Player con-
trolled character” or simply ”Player character”, hence why controlling their movement
is desired.
The native functions which have been discovered for generating and travelling along
paths were all found to be severely inadequate for generating reliable pedestrian data.
Most such functions are meant for driving on roads, and perform unpredictably outside
roadways.
When calling such function on a pedestrian character they will (usually)
navigate to the closest road, hijack a car, and then drive to the destination. Although
very appropriate for the game, such behavior is not very useful for generating data.
Solutions such as removing all cars or spawning the pedestrian far away from roads were
attempted but did not yield any useful results.
3.3.2.1
Wandering
A native function used for wandering around an area did prove useful and a significant
portion of the data collected used this. The native takes a center location and radius
around which the player character can wander, which provides some variety in data.
The player character can then be teleported to a new location and a new wandering
==PAGE:19==
3.3 Subject matter
11
Figure 3.3: Python client overlaid on top of in-game footage.
The client has bare
minimum for keeping track of ongoing session, but is still an invaluable
tool. Bounding boxes and logging information are drawn in game as no
active recording is in progress. .
cycle can begin. However the wandering behavior does not account for traﬀic rules or
terrain. Therefore wandering was mostly done in pedestrianized areas of the game where
the character could wander for long periods without encountering roads or waterways,
which the character would otherwise walk into. The optimal area in the game for this
was found to be a beach promenade and therefore a lot of data was generated here. The
sample images 3.3 and 3.6 also show this area. Whilst it is not ideal to focus on a single
area for data collection, the reliability and convenience of it made it a good enough
solution whilst the rest of the data gathering pipeline was developed.
==PAGE:20==
12
3 Solution for Data Generation
3.3.2.2
Paths
The NPCs spawned by the game itself follow some pre-built paths which can be accessed
through the game files. However accessing these files is not possible with scripthook and
while it is possible to access the files, it was not deemed worthwhile to recreate the logic
for following said paths.
3.3.3
Manipulate Environment for Desired Data-sets
Having the ability to set up a suitable environment for gathering data is a key benefit
of using simulation. Therefore it was also a focus area for the solution created. However
manipulating and customizing the simulation environment has the potential to be an
almost endless task, most of which is unnecessary for a proof of concept. Therefore
some minimum requirements have been formulated, as well as a few nice to haves as
seen below. Some requirements are dictated by technical requirements such as being
able to calibrate the camera to mimic real world images, whilst other requirements will
depend on what type of training data is desired.
• Requirements
– Set weather and time of day for consistency
– Calibrate camera parameters (e.g. field of view, depth of field, clipping plane)
– Disable camera effects such as bopping or shaking due to movement.
– Fix frame rate for consistent frame timings
• Nice to Haves
– Adjust population density
– Control non player characters’ behavior towards camera.
– Control custom scenarios*
3.3.3.1
Technical Requirements
Most technical requirements are achieved using native functions of the game engine.
The ability to set camera characteristics, time of day, and weather conditions is used
throughout the game itself for narrative purposes and thus the same functions can be
copied into the simulation code. For the proof of concept stage a standard perspective
camera FoV of 90 deg and a near-clipping plane of 0.1 in game units is used.
The
clipping plane parameter is a unique characteristic of simulated cameras and specifies
the minimum distance an object must be from the lens before it is rendered.
The
minimum distance ensures that the camera can not render from inside of objects. . The
games built in blur effects, i.e. motion blur and depth of field, are disabled entirely to
produce a cleaner image.
==PAGE:21==
3.3 Subject matter
13
3.3.3.2
Disabling Camera Effects
The first-person perspective camera of the game is used for data gathering, but it comes
with some undesirable features to make the game feel more real when played, which
need to be disabled. The main issue is that the camera will bounce around excessively
when moving.
The issue is solved by creating a copy of the camera and setting its
position slightly in front of the player character, while fixing the vertical component of
the camera to a fixed distance above the ground, in this case 1.5 meters.
3.3.4
Setting Constant Frame Timings
Ensuring a constant frame time is desirable when using subsequent frames in learning as
it makes the dataset more predictable. A frame time of 100 milliseconds is used which
equates to 10 frames per second(FPS), this is chosen as a good balance between having
enough data to work with without generating massive datasets. Setting the target FPS
relatively low at 10 FPS also makes it possible to increase visual fidelity during data
gathering in various ways.
3.3.4.1
Adjusting Population Density
While collecting data it quickly became apparent that the game is surprisingly limited
with how many pedestrians it draws on screen at once. A distribution of the default
game behavior in a heavily pedestrian-oriented area is shown in figure 3.4. Given a
sample of 3854 frames it can be seen that the plurality of frames actually do not contain
any pedestrians at all, and few frames contain more than five. Limiting the amount
of pedestrians drawn on screen at once is done for performance reasons in the game.
However as the game is being rendered at very few frames per second for the data
gathering it should be safe to override these restrictions, which will enable the collection
of a more balanced data set.
Changing population density is done by tweaking game files and as such the game
itself must be restarted for every change. This is not a good solution, but no other
solution was found.
3.3.4.2
Control NPC Behavior Towards Camera
One factor which motivated the use of GTA V as the simulation environment, was the
interactive and open world experience it provides.
However this can also become a
problem when non player characters (NPCs) interact with the player character during
data collection. Such interactions do not provide valuable data and it would therefore
be desirable to turn them off. However completely overriding the behavior of NPCs
is not a solution, as this eliminates one of the initial selling points for the simulation
environment.
==PAGE:22==
14
3 Solution for Data Generation
Figure 3.4: Distribution of pedestrians visible per frame expressed in percent out of
3854 total sampled frames..
A partial solution used for some parts of the data gathered was turning the player
character invisible, thus making sure that NPCs do not interact with data gathering
process.
However that also results in NPCs taking no evasive action to the player
character and thus walk through him, which is again not ideal. To combat this problem
the distance from NPCs to the player character is saved and the data gathered is later
filtered to eliminate instances where NPCs are at risk of colliding with the camera. A
better solution should be found since the current solution effectively gathers data with
the knowledge that it will have to be deleted later, wasting both time and storage.
3.3.4.3
Control custom scenarios
A special type of NPC interaction with the player is so-called custom scenarios. These
are partially scripted, but still somewhat randomized events which can trigger based on
external circumstances. Examples of such events are protests, car-crashes, public yoga-
classes, and many more. Gathering data on such rare scenarios was a major underlying
motivation for the project as it is typically under-represented in real-world data sets.
3.3.5
Intercept and Save Ground Truth Data
Having established a suitable simulation environment with the ability to customize most
essential parameters the next step is to actually record and save data. The main .NET
solution is used for this as it can directly access the GTA V game state with very
little overhead. Additionally it also has built in functionality for directly accessing the
==PAGE:23==
3.3 Subject matter
15
Windows display pipeline meaning that frames can be saved to disk without introducing
significant overhead.
3.3.5.1
Data Structure
The overall data structure used is laid out in figure 3.5. The data is split into individual
frames with the each run resulting in an array of frames. The frame in this case refers to
a data class which contains several additional data classes for describing everything on
screen. The frame itself also has three data fields which show the index of the current
frame, the path of the image (png) file corresponding to this frame, as well as the game
time, i.e. milliseconds since the game was launched.
A data class named ”Environment Info” is contained within the frame. This class
is used to describe the present environmental factors such as time of day, weather, and
camera parameters. Camera info include parameters such as field of view, depth of field,
but also vertical offset from ground. The camera info was also revised to include the
view matrix of the camera. This was done to translate game coordinates into screen
coordinates for the creation of 2D bounding boxes required in training. It was originally
intended to extract the 2D bounding boxes directly from the game but the native func-
tion which should do this does not produce accurate results. Instead the conversion is
done in python while preparing the data for training.
A data class for containing all the static info on screen such as building or roads was
also prepared in anticipation of wanting the data set to contain things such as stop signs
or traﬀic signals. However in the end this class was not used for any learning. The data
collection structure is therefore basic, but still exists.
The main data class for each frame is labeled as Dynamic Objects, and contains
an array of anything on screen which can move. The game itself calls these objects
”Peds”, but as the grouping also includes animals and vehicles on top of pedestrians it
was renamed for the solution to be avoid confusion. Each individual dynamic object is
described first by three string values which are currently only used for debugging:
• Model Name - The in-game name of the model, used to ensure there is enough
variety in the randomly generated models in the data set. Can be cross-referenced
with only collections such as fiveM [6].
• Model Type - A string to describe the model type and their look.
• Task - What logic the model is currently executing. Intended to use for assessing
whether a pedestrian had noticed the player controlled character
The dynamics of each object is also described through a series of decimal values, these
being:
• Model Origin - The x,y,z position of an object in world space.
==PAGE:24==
16
3 Solution for Data Generation
Figure 3.5: Data structure of saved data. Ovals show arrays with squares indicating
values. Orange fields are data classes while blue squares are collections of
simple data types..
• Distance to Player - the distance away of an object in world space. Used to exclude
objects too far away from training
• Heading - The direction that a model is currently walking.
Initially used for
indicating if a person was looking at the player character.
• Speed - The speed the object is moving at.
As the array of dynamic objects includes everything which can move a series of Boolean
variables are also saved which can be used to filter out things such as animals or vehicles.
These should be self explanatory. A specific Boolean for documenting if a NPC is looking
at the player is also saved. This is based on a native function within the game and is
therefore deemed more reliable than only using the heading. Finally a custom data
class containing the 3D bounding box of each object is saved. The bounding box is a
collection of 8 points which create a cube completely enclosing the dynamic object. An
in-game example of two dynamic objects with their corresponding data can be seen in
figure 3.6. In the figure model-names are represented by the integer hash drawn above
==PAGE:25==
3.3 Subject matter
17
each object, other data fields are labeled. The color of each bounding box corresponds
to whether the pedestrian is labelled as attentive (green) or not (red)
3.3.6
Prepare Data for Training
The final stage of the data pipeline is preparing the data for use in machine learning.
For the simple proof of concept of the project the intended learning will be limited to
object detection with no inter-frame inference. Therefore the required parameters for
each frame is significantly less than what was actually saved during the simulation. The
framework chosen for the project is MXNet which needs data to conform to the structure
illustrated in figure 3.7. The idea is to contain all information required for each frame
within a single, variable length, line. Additionally it ideally needs to all be in a single
record file, allowing the model to read images and data in a sequential fashion which is
significantly faster than having to read the images from paths [5].
The integer index of each frame can be taken directly from the saved JSON data.
The header is mostly pre-defined values and only requires us to define the desired object
detection classes. As the intention was to identify attentive vs non-attentive pedestrians
these are the two main classes. A third class for vehicles was also introduced with the
intention that the detection model would see any pedestrians inside a vehicle as neither
attentive or not. At the current stage no extra information is fed into the model, however
Figure 3.6: Example of an attentive pedestrian (green) and a non-attentive pedes-
trian(red) with some of their key data drawn on screen. The unlabelled
top line is a hash for the corresponding model. .
==PAGE:26==
18
3 Solution for Data Generation
in the future it would make sense to include information such as time of day or weather.
With the header complete the next step is to describe all N objects identified within
the frame. Based on the Boolean flags set on each dynamic object by the .NET solution
a class can be assigned as either zero, one, or two corresponding to vehicle, Attentive
Pedestrian, or Non-Attentive Pedestrian respectively. Each dynamic object also needs
to have a 2D bounding box around it. This must be calculated from the world-space
bounding box and camera view-matrix saved in .NET as the native function in GTA for
mapping 3d points to screen points gave incorrect results.
3.4
Summary
Collecting data from GTA to be used for neural network training evolved to become
the main focus of the report due to being unpredictably time-consuming and a pre-
requisite for real training. Initial results were promising with critical objectives being
relatively easy to accomplish. However over-reliance on third party tools and lack of
documentation made the system diﬀicult to work with. Tools were still developed and
the core required functionality for the concept was successfully achieved towards the end
of the project.
Figure 3.7: Data structure required by MXNet object detection as per their documen-
tation [5].
==PAGE:27==
CHAPTER 4
Discussion
4.1
Introduction
The initial project set out to test two statements; Is it possible to use GTA V for collect-
ing training data? And is that data useful for actual training? Unfortunately the time
and effort required to suﬀiciently answer the first question meant that insuﬀicient time
was available for analyzing the usefulness of the data to a satisfactory level. Therefore
reflection and discussion of the project will focus on the lessons learned while developing
the data collection tools.
4.2
Benchmarking Original Objectives
The initial requirements of the data collection tool were initially stated in the introduc-
tion and are repeated below.
• Critical Requirements
– Gain access to underlying game data used for labelling ground truth
– Accurately map game data to recorded frames, ideally capture frames from
within game engine
– Modify game play to encourage collection of desirable data.
• Nice to Have goals
– Selectively access in-engine game data to create more focused data sets
– Disable the ”game” part of simulation to save resources and avoid needing
user input
– Automate data collection by writing logic for moving around the world while
starting and stopping data collection without user input.
– extensively modify the data of the game simulation to create tailor made
scenarios or emulate visuals from real world applications.
Testing whether the critical requirements were met is not required and as detailed
in the previous section they were clearly met. Assessing how successful the project was
at achieving the nice to haves is harder and will have to be done qualitatively.
==PAGE:28==
20
4 Discussion
Being able to selectively access the in-game data was generally achieved. However
any filtering has to be done after the game has already spent resources rendering items,
meaning it was generally faster to simply label everything and then filter data later in
python.
Whilst some progress was made on reducing the need for user input it is diﬀicult
to call it a complete success. At the end the solution could operate automatically for
short periods of time, usually around five minutes before some user input was required.
This was due to a core functionality of the underlying game which tries to ensure actual
players do not get bored by forcing events to happen if the player characters actions
become too repetitive. Trying to override the behavior of the game was unreliable and
disabling this behavior would require more access than was available. However at the
end the level of automation was deemed ”good enough”.
Creating tailor made scenarios is core functionality of the game and third party
tools are available for doing so. Therefore it was not extensively tested in the actual
project. It was intended to create some custom scenarios to use for model training and
demonstration purposes, but unfortunately the project never fully reached that stage.
The last technical objective to the data gathering from the introduction was about
the ease of use for the solution.
In this aspect the solution fails due to the severe
diﬀiculties from working with a closed-source engine. Being forced to rely on incomplete
and often incorrect documentation as well as the absence of proper debugging tools
severely impede development. Furthermore it makes it impossible to estimate how long
it will take to implement any functionality, if it is even possible.
In addition to being diﬀicult to work with, the game also semi-regularly receives
mandatory updates. These can in theory be avoided by bypassing the game publishers
launch tool, i.e. Rockstar Launcher ™, however doing so is against the end user license
agreement.
Bypassing also sometimes fails which causes the game to automatically
update. If the game updates the scripthook tool which is used for interacting with the
game engine will not work until updated. As scripthook is not maintained or aﬀiliated
with GTA there is no guarantee of the time frame for such updates, forcing the whole
project on standby.
4.3
Summary, Analysis and Future Works
Exploring the data generation and gathering capabilities of GTA V show that it is tech-
nically possible and most of the desired functionality can in fact be achieved. However
the effort required and unreliability of solutions makes it not viable. In retrospect the
project should have switched to another simulation engine much earlier in the process
when the first problems started to surface. However there is not really another suitable
simulation platform specifically for pedestrian data, which lead to some minor problems
being accepted. As the project became larger and more complex the amount of issues
introduced with each game update also became harder to fix.
==PAGE:29==
4.3 Summary, Analysis and Future Works
21
If the project was to be continued it would need to either switch simulation engine or
get a special agreement with the game developers to avoid mandatory updates and get
some access to underlying code. Another option is to approach the problem more akin
to how it was done when generating the Playing for Benchmarks dataset [8]. Instead
of maintaining a tool for generating data on request and for special scenarios they built
a massive dataset with excessive data, with the intention that they would never need
the tool again. Using such an approach avoids breaking changes pushed from the game
developer, but requires more upfront work.
==PAGE:30==
22
==PAGE:31==
CHAPTER 5
Conclusion
The initial ambition of the thesis was to investigate the viability of using a game engine
to generate training data for neural networks. In a sense the ambition was reached, at
least for GTA V. A technically functional solution was developed, but was deemed too
poor for actual use.
However large parts of the original planned work were not completed, simply because
it took too long for the data gathering to be functional. Therefore it is impossible to
conclude on how useful any data generated would actually be. Which is unfortunate as
the open-world environment created by GTA V is still the most realistic for simulating
pedestrians to my knowledge. Furthermore the scenario editing and data gathering that
was made functional showed promising results. Some shortcomings of the solution could
likely be fixed by continued development but overall the conclusion still stands that
using GTA can not be recommended at this time for generating training data.
==PAGE:32==
24
==PAGE:33==
Bibliography
[1]
Alexander Blade. Script Hook V - AB Software Development. url: http://www.
dev-c.com/gtav/scripthookv/.
[2]
Alexey Dosovitskiy et al. “CARLA: An Open Urban Driving Simulator.” In: (Novem-
ber 2017). doi: 10.48550/arxiv.1711.03938. url: https://arxiv.org/abs/
1711.03938v1.
[3]
GitHub - crosire/scripthookvdotnet: An ASI plugin for Grand Theft Auto V, which
allows running scripts written in any .NET language in-game. url: https://
github.com/crosire/scripthookvdotnet.
[4]
GTA5 Native Reference. url: https://nativedb.dotindustries.dev/natives.
[5]
MXNet. Prepare custom datasets for object detection. url: https://cv.gluon.ai/
build/examples_datasets/detection_custom.html#lst-record-dataset.
[6]
Ped models - Cfx.re Docs. url: https://docs.fivem.net/docs/game-references/
ped-models/.
[7]
Dean A. Pomerleau. “ALVINN: An Autonomous Land Vehicle in a Neural Network.”
In: Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 1 (1988).
[8]
Stephan R. Richter, Zeeshan Hayder, and Vladlen Koltun. “Playing for Bench-
marks.” In: Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference on Computer Vision
2017-October (December 2017), pages 2232–2241. issn: 15505499. doi: 10.1109/
ICCV.2017.243.
==PAGE:34==
DTU Electro
Department of Electrical and Photonics Engineering
Technical University of Denmark
Ørsteds Plads
Building 343
DK-2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Denmark
www.electro.dtu.dk
