==PAGE:1==
BUILDING A SYSTEM ARCHITECTURE CAPABLE
OF REPRESENTING LCA CALCULATIONS
Master Thesis
Oskar Gram Nielsen
DTU Civil Engineering
Department of Civil Engineering
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
BUILDING A SYSTEM ARCHITECTURE CAPABLE OF REPRESENTING LCA
CALCULATIONS
Author
Oskar Gram Nielsen
Project period
06/09/2022 – 06/02/2023
30 ECTS
Supervisor:
Tim Pat McGinley, Head of studies,
Department of Civil and Mechanical Engineering
DTU
Co­Supervisor:
Mikki Seidenschnur,
Industrial Phd Candidate,
Rambøll
Architectural Engineering (M.Sc.)
Department of Civil Engineering
Technical University of Denmark (DTU)
Cover photo: https://blogs.autodesk.com/revit/2022/02/09/now-available-revit-ifc-manual-
version-2-0/
==PAGE:4==
Approval
Oskar Gram Nielsen ­ s173802
Signature
Date
ii
BUILDING A SYSTEM ARCHITECTURE CAPABLE OF REPRESENTING LCA CALCULATIONS
2023/02/06
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
The ongoing phenomenon of climate change continues to cause widespread destruction
worldwide. The construction and building industries are one of the primary contributors
to greenhouse gas emissions. In response to this, the Danish government has formed
regulations requiring the performance of life cycle assessments (LCA) for all new con­
structions that initiate after 2023, with environmental impact levels below 12 kg CO2­eq /
m2 for structures larger than 1000 m2. However, the building industry faces a challenge
in performing necessary LCAs due to a shortage of LCA consultants.
The architecture, engineering, and construction (AEC) industry have been making progress
with the use of building information modeling (BIM) and common data environment (CDE)
services. One such CDE, the Virtual Commissioning (VC) platform, has been developed
by Mikki Seidenschnur and Ali Kücükavci’s Ph.D, but is missing an LCA service.
As a result, the thesis aimed to incorporate the advantages of BIM and CDE into an
LCA tool that addresses the issues of manual LCA processes, which are time­consuming
and result in inaccurate outcomes. To accomplish this, the tool was developed through
programming in C# and Python, where a plugin was created in Revit to extract BIM, and
embedded LCA data, to LCAbyg. The data is managed through a CDE, allowing relevant
stakeholders to access the information and ensuring that the LCA data is always up­to­
date. The tool also includes a microserver that allows for the LCA to be run directly from
a web application, facilitating iterative LCA.
The efficacy of the tool was demonstrated through a case study following the design sci­
ence research methodology. The study was conducted in Building 118 at the DTU cam­
pus in Lyngby. After a thorough assessment of the building, the tool was applied, and
the global warming potential (GWP) of the building elements was compared to reference
data from 21 other structures. Although the accuracy of the results was inconsistent, this
may have been due to differences in the buildings. The time required for conducting the
LCA was also considered, with an estimation of the current LCA time given by Andreas
Sørensen. The results indicated that the time could potentially be reduced by up to 70%,
or up to 70 hours, through the use of the tool.
Finally, the LCA tool was evaluated through the validation of the accuracy of 22 prede­
fined elements created in the tool. The elements were recreated and compared from a
reference report with known results of GWP. Although most of the elements were within
the acceptable deviation of 25 %, the average deviation was found to be higher than the
acceptable levels, with an average deviation of 57%, which exceeds the acceptable limit.
In conclusion, while the tool demonstrated the potential to reduce the time spent on LCA,
its accuracy was not deemed satisfactory.
BUILDING A SYSTEM ARCHITECTURE CAPABLE OF REPRESENTING LCA CALCULATIONS
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
This thesis was conducted between September 2022 and February 2023 at the Depart­
ment of Civil Engineering, Technical University of Denmark (DTU), in collaboration with
Rambøll. The thesis represents the culmination of five years of study for the degree of
Master of Science in Architectural Engineering.
I would like to thank my supervisor Mikki Seidenschnuur for taking the time to assist and
guide me through the process. A big thanks to my supervisor at DTU, Tim Pat McGinley,
for hosting the project and offering valuable advice.
I also want to thank Andreas Sørensen from Rambøll for his helpfulness with regard
to LCA and technical questions, as well as his contributions to the report. Additionally,
Christoffer Borgwardt­Stampe and Frederik Blum Winther from Rambøll for their partici­
pation in meeting and providing feedback.
Furthermore, I would like to thank Terese Pagh for her technical guidance on the LCAbyg
software, and Cristian Grau Sørensen for providing access to the LCAbyg API.
Thanks to:
Mikki Seidenschnur, Phd Candidate, Rambøll
Tim Pat McGinley, Head of studies, Department of Civil and Mechanical Engineering
Andreas Sørensen, Sustainability Consultant, Rambøll
Christoffer Borgwardt­Stampe, Specialist Manager, Rambøll
Frederik Blum Winther, Chief Senior specialist, Rambøll
Terese Pagh, Student Assistant, BUILD
Christian Grau Sørensen, Head of IT lab, Build
iv
BUILDING A SYSTEM ARCHITECTURE CAPABLE OF REPRESENTING LCA CALCULATIONS
==PAGE:7==
Abbreviations
Application Programing Interface
API
Architecture, Engineering and Construction
AEC
Bill of Quantities
BoQ
Building Information Modeling
BIM
Building Regulation 2023
BR23
Common Data Environment
CDE
Environmental Product Declaration
EPD
Global Warming Impact
GWP
Gross Floor Area
GFA
Graphical User Interface
GUI
International Foundation Class
IFC
JavaScript Object Notation
JSON
Level of Detail
LOD
Life Cycle Assessment
LCA
Life Cycle Inventory Assessment
LCIA
Life Cycle Inventory
LCI
Reference Study Period
RSP
Virtual Comissioning
VC
Visual Programming Language
VPL
BUILDING A SYSTEM ARCHITECTURE CAPABLE OF REPRESENTING LCA CALCULATIONS
v
==PAGE:8==
vi
BUILDING A SYSTEM ARCHITECTURE CAPABLE OF REPRESENTING LCA CALCULATIONS
==PAGE:9==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
1
2
Background
3
2.1
Life cycle assessment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
Building information modeling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.3
BIM­LCA
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
2.4
State­of­the­art LCA­tools . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
2.5
Summary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
3
Problem Statement
17
3.1
Aim and goals
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
3.2
Reading guide
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
4
Methodology
19
4.1
Methodology overview . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
4.2
Development of the LCA tool . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
4.3
Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31
4.4
Summary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 32
5
Analysis
35
5.1
Case study: Building 118
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 35
5.2
Results of case study
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 37
5.3
Validation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 40
5.4
Summary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 43
6
Discussion
45
6.1
Results
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 45
6.2
Methodology
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 46
6.3
Future Work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 49
6.4
Summary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 50
7
Conclusion
51
Bibliography
53
A Appendix
57
BUILDING A SYSTEM ARCHITECTURE CAPABLE OF REPRESENTING LCA CALCULATIONS
vii
==PAGE:10==
viii
BUILDING A SYSTEM ARCHITECTURE CAPABLE OF REPRESENTING LCA CALCULATIONS
==PAGE:11==
1
Introduction
The phenomenon of global warming has led to a number of detrimental effects, including
droughts, flooding, hurricanes, and wildfires, according to the Intergovernmental Panel on
Climate Change (IPCC) report of 2022. One of the primary sources of greenhouse gas
emissions is the building and construction industry, which accounts for approximately 40
% of total emissions. The majority of these emissions stem from heating, cooling, and
lighting of buildings, as well as the materials utilized in construction [1].
In an effort to mitigate the negative impact of the building and construction sector on the
environment, the Danish government has implemented regulations requiring documen­
tation of a life cycle assessment (LCA) for all new constructions, effective January 1st,
2023 (BR23). Additionally, for constructions larger than 1000 m2 , the environmental im­
pact must be less than 12 kg CO2­eq / m2. The requirements for LCAs will continue to
increase in the coming years [2].
However, this new regulation poses a significant challenge for the building industry, as
it requires a large number of LCAs to be performed in a short amount of time.
This
may cause a bottleneck for many companies, as Jesper Ring, CEO of Frame, suggests
through a hypothetical calculation. According to Statistics Denmark, there are approxi­
mately 37,000 new constructions built each year [3], and two to three LCA are conducted
per construction according to the LCA handbook [4], thus requiring 37,000 LCAs to be
conducted annually. Given that there are currently only 900 LCA consultants in Denmark,
as per Green Building Council Denmark [5], this would mean that each consultant would
have to perform over 100 LCAs per year, which is a daunting task given the complexity
and time­consuming nature of LCAs.
In parallel to these challenges, the Architectural, Engineering, and Construction (AEC)
industry is rapidly advancing with the use of building information modeling (BIM) software
and other advanced technologies. BIM allows for more efficient data sharing between
different disciplines, and newer technologies, such as common data environment (CDE)
services, provide data on demand to users.
A recent open­source and cloud­based CDE, named the Virtual Commissioning (VC) plat­
form, has been developed by Mikki Seidenschnur and Ali Kücükavci, to accommodate
the advancing technologies in the industry. The idea behind the platform is to create
customized services and tools, within the CDE, and connect with BIM models in Revit.
However, the platform is missing a service an LCA service.
Given that most of the time carrying out LCAs consists of the manual process of inputting
data from BIM to LCA software, developing a toolchain to utilize the benefits of the VC
platform, maybe a solution to solve the time­consuming and inaccurate results of the
manual processes of the today’s workflows.
BUILDING A SYSTEM ARCHITECTURE CAPABLE OF REPRESENTING LCA CALCULATIONS
1
==PAGE:12==
2
BUILDING A SYSTEM ARCHITECTURE CAPABLE OF REPRESENTING LCA CALCULATIONS
==PAGE:13==
2
Background
This chapter will focus on background research on the Life cycle assessment (LCA) frame­
work, LCA methodology in the built environment, life cycle inventory (LCI) databases, and
criteria of the building regulations 2023 (BR23) regarding LCA. Next, BIM maturity levels
and levels of detail will be addressed together with the common data environment. Finally,
a literature review will be conducted on state­of­the­art BIM­LCA tools and approaches.
2.1
Life cycle assessment
Life cycle assessment (LCA) is an international methodology for assessing a product’s
environmental aspects over its life cycle. LCA is widely used and an accepted method­
ology for assessing the environmental performance of buildings [6]. The methodology
has recently gained broad attention and has been adopted in many industries as climate
change has become a global priority.
2.1.1
Framework of LCA
LCA is a standardized methodology that aims to quantify the environmental impacts of
products within the entire life cycle [7]. The method can be used to break down environ­
mental processes and assist in minimizing the environmental impact of products. The
framework of LCA is categorized into four main stages, according to the ISO Standard
”ISO 14040” on LCA studies and life cycle inventory (LCI) studies [8].
1. goal and scope
2. life cycle inventory (LCI)
3. life cycle impact assessment (LCIA)
4. interpretation
The goal and scope define the system boundary of the study. The boundary has to be set
correctly for the goal of the LCA to be matched sufficiently. The scope may require mod­
ification during the study as LCA is an iterative process, and information during the study
may change the original scope. The LCI describes the input and output of the produc­
tion system regarding material and energy flows, including data collection and calculation
procedures. Next, the life cycle impact assessment (LCIA) evaluates the significance
of impact categories from the LCI results. They are, hereby, matching inventory results
with impact categories to achieve a complete result for the interpretation stage. The fi­
nal stage is the interpretation stage, which considers the inventory analysis and impact
assessment and finally provides consistent results that reach conclusions, explain limi­
tations, and provide recommendations [9], as well as visualized in the four main stages
shown in fig. 2.1. The two directional arrows in fig. 2.1 between the stages signify that the
process is iterative, meaning that the stages can be revisited after an iteration.
2.1.2
LCA in the built environment
According to the European Standard EN 15978, a framework for assessing the environ­
mental performance of buildings is presented in fig. 2.2.
BUILDING A SYSTEM ARCHITECTURE CAPABLE OF REPRESENTING LCA CALCULATIONS
3
==PAGE:14==
Goal and scope deﬁnition
Inventory analysis
Impact assessment
Interpretation
Life cycle assessment framework
Direct applications:
Product development and
improvement
Strategic planning
Public policy making
Marketing
Others
Figure 2.1: General LCA framework
From fig. 2.2, step number two shows the specification of the object of assessment; one
of the specifications is the functional equivalent which is the technical characteristics and
functionalities of the building. These are important to specify as the final comparison will
be based on their functional equivalent. For instance, information on building type, the
pattern of use, and required service life. Other factors include reference study period
(RSP), system boundary, and building model. The RSP is essential since it creates the
basis for how many years the building ought to last. The RSP is usually based on the
purpose of the LCA, and the type of building [10].
The system boundary includes the processes taken into account for a given LCA. These
processes can be broken down into five stages (A ­ D): product stage, construction pro­
cess, use stage, end­of­life stage, and benefits and loads beyond the system boundary,
whereas the last stage is supplementary. Each stage is then divided into sub­stages (e.g.,
A1, A2, A3), illustrated in fig. 2.3.
When carrying out LCA in the built environment, rarely all the processes are taken into
account due to the lack of data or that national guidelines, as many countries have their
method specifications, including Denmark [6]. The EeBGuide Handbook also recognized
that the building sector could not be developed with the same level of detail as in other
sectors [11]; however, this creates an unfair foundation for comparing buildings, as one
may have less information available than another. Hence this should be taken into ac­
count in the interpretation stage. In fig. 2.3, the highlighted processes (A1­A3, B4, B6,
C3­C4, D1­D3) are mandatory to include in the LCA according to the BR23. The envi­
ronmental impact indicators are aggregated from the processes described in fig. 2.3 for
all the products described in the system boundary. The environmental impact indicators
are matched with the corresponding gross quantities of the products. These values are
multiplied and summed up to create the basis of the environmental impact [12]. Accord­
ing to a paper from Muralikrishna and Manickam, analysis of the life cycle stages to the
total environmental load is an important aspect and, therefore, crucial to which stages are
included in the final assessment.
2.1.3
LCI databases
LCI databases stores datasets of material emissions that create the basis of the calcula­
tion of the LCA and is therefore essential that the emission values used in the database
4
BUILDING A SYSTEM ARCHITECTURE CAPABLE OF REPRESENTING LCA CALCULATIONS
==PAGE:15==
Information Required
Goal 
Intended Use
Process
Identify purpose of 
Assessment
Functional Equivalent
Reference Study Period
System Boundary
Building Model - Physical characterstics
Speciﬁcation of the Object of 
Assessment
Buildiing Model - Time related characteristics
Life Cycle Stages
Scenarios for each life.cycle stage and beneﬁts and/or 
beneﬁts beyond the system boundary
Scenarios for the Building 
Life Cycle
Net amount
Gross amount
Types of data
Quantiﬁcation of the Building 
and its life cycle
Use of EPD
Use of other information
Data quality
Consistency
Selection of Environmental 
Data and other information
Environmental aspects and impacts
Calculation Mehtod(s)
Aggregation
Calculation of the 
environmental indicators
General information
The Assessment Result
Data sources
Reporting and 
Communication
Veriﬁcation
Veriﬁcation
Completed Assessment
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
Figure 2.2: Flowchart of the process for the assessment of the environmental performance
BUILDING A SYSTEM ARCHITECTURE CAPABLE OF REPRESENTING LCA CALCULATIONS
5
==PAGE:16==
A1: Raw Materials Supply
A2: Transport
A3: Manufacturing
A4: Transport
A5: Construction and Installation Process
B1: Use
B2: Maintenance
B3: Repair
B4: Replacement
B5: Refurbishment
C1: Deconstruction / Demolition
C2: Transport
C3: Waste Processing
C4: Disposal
D1: Reuse
D2: Recovery
D3: Recycling Potential
Product Stage
(A1 - A3)
Construction 
Stage
(A4 - A5)
Use Stage
(B1 - B7)
B6: Operational Energy
B7: Operational Water
End of Life Stage
(C1 - C4)
Beneﬁt and Loads
Beyond the Building 
Life Cycle Stage
(D)
Operational Impact
Embodied Impact
Circular Economy
Figure 2.3: Building assessment stages based on the European Standard EN 15978. The
highlighted stages are the mandatory stages of LCA, according to the BR23.
correspond to the actual values of the chosen material used in a building, also confirmed
by Najjar et al. who mentions ”An LCA is only as valid as the data it uses” [14]. The
dataset consists of an Environmental Product Declaration (EPD), an official environmen­
tal declaration for a specific product. If there is no EPD for the intended product, generic
data is allowed to be used, which is averaged data based on EPD within that product cat­
egory. There are many available databases, and it is essential to pick the most suitable
one; for example, if a Danish LCA uses an American database, the results would likely
be wrong since the processes of handling resources differ from country to country, for
example, transportation of resources depends on where they are available, if a specific
type of wood only is available in Canada, the American data would have less distance for
transportation and therefore not be valid to use in a Danish context, of course, this also
depends on the type of transportation, as a cargo ship is a lot more carbon efficient than
a truck per km and so on. A study from Martínez­Rocamora, Solís­Guzmán, and Marrero
presented a review of existing databases worldwide based on building material data. The
databases were evaluated on six parameters: Territory, categories, variety, traceability,
methodology, and documentation. The databases within Europe that scored highest were
Ecoinvent and GaBi, which scored maximum points in all categories. However, both of
the databases require a license. Another study from Huskinson et al. showed that dif­
ferent databases would give different results, even though the calculation method is the
same. Therefore, it is essential to use the same databases when LCA are compared,
especially when the law states the threshold of the GWP. In a Danish context, LCAbyg
5 uses the German database Ökobaudat, which is relatively close to Denmark but only
has a total dataset of 954, in relation to Gabi and Ecoinvent, that has 6.513 and 11.302
datasets. [15].
6
BUILDING A SYSTEM ARCHITECTURE CAPABLE OF REPRESENTING LCA CALCULATIONS
==PAGE:17==
2.2
Building information modeling
According to the international standard, ISO 19650, Building information modeling (BIM)
is defined as ”the use of a shared digital representation of a built asset to facilitate design,
construction, and operation processes to form a reliable basis for decisions” [17]. Ac­
cording to the definition, BIM allows users from all disciplines to collaborate on a shared
building model. Moreover, it is an efficient method of working as it eliminates a lot of
manual tasks that could lead to mistakes.
2.2.1
Level of detail
Throughout the modeling phase, the detail level will continuously increase and, in the end,
become as close as possible to the actual building. The metric ”Level of Detail” (LOD)
is defined as the overall state of your information model at a particular point in its design
process.” [18]. LOD can also refer to the Level of Development or Design, however,
the definition stays the same. LOD ranges from 100 to 600 in 6 steps, presented in the
following bullets and in fig. 2.4.
LOD 100 (Preparation and brief design): The model shows the requirements and site
constraints. The model only consists of block models, including essential areas and vol­
umes.
LOD 200 (Concept design): Is a conceptual level where the model consists of generic
objects with approximate sizes, shapes, and locations.
LOD 300 (Developed design): The model contains exact quantities, sizes, locations,
and orientation, with detailing, fabrication, assembly, and installation information.
LOD 400 (Technical design): Similar to level 300, but the model contains information on
connection to other systems or components.
LOD 500 (Construction): The model contains sufficient information on fabrication and
assembly to be handed over to suppliers to construct the building.
LOD 600 (As­built): The model has all sufficient information and geometry to support
operations and maintenance throughout the building life cycle.
LOD 100
Preperation and 
brief design
LOD 200
Conceptual design
LOD 300
Developed design
LOD 400
Techincal design
LOD 500
Construction
LOD 600
As-built
Figure 2.4: Levels of Detail / Development / Definition [19]
To achieve a reliable LCA result, the BIM model needs to have a sufficient LOD to min­
imize the information gap between the BIM model and the actual building. In the early
design phase, LCA may be carried out with low LOD if the engineer or architect wants
an initial idea of whether the building construction should be in concrete or steel. But in
BUILDING A SYSTEM ARCHITECTURE CAPABLE OF REPRESENTING LCA CALCULATIONS
7
==PAGE:18==
the later phases, the LCA has to be more reliable to ensure the building is delivering spe­
cific emissions in regards to the BR23 benchmarks and therefore requires higher LOD.
Consequently, it is an excellent idea to iteratively carry out the LCA throughout the design
phases as the results will keep becoming more precise and up to date [20].
2.2.2
Maturity levels
To achieve a high LOD, the collaboration of the BIM model plays an important role. The
term ’maturity level’ of a BIM model refers to the quality, repeatability, and degree of ex­
cellence within a BIM capability [21]. The maturity level is correlated to the collaboration
of a BIM model and what means are used to leverage the partnership towards a more
fluid and automatic process, resulting in fewer mistakes and more accessibility for each
stakeholder. BIM is categorized into four levels of maturity. BIM Maturity level 0 repre­
sents low collaboration, using analogue tools such as drawing on paper, to level 3, which
means full integration, such as using cloud­based BIM models. Each level is defined in
fig. 2.5 and the following bullets.
Amount of data
Level:
Collaboration:
Medium:
Time:
Level 0
Low 
collaboration
Drawing, lines, 
shapes
Level 1
Partial
collaboration
2D drafts, 3D 
models
Level 2
Full
collaboration
BIMs - Distinct 
information 
models
Level 3
Full 
integration
iBIM - Cloud BIM 
Model
1990
1990
2010
2020
Figure 2.5: BIM Maturity levels from Succar, Sher, and Williams
BIM maturity level 0 (low collaboration): Represent the lowest level of collaboration.
The main tool used is paper­based CAD, and the product is paper or electronic­based.
BIM maturity level 1 (partial collaboration): Represent the level where CAD utilize 2­
and 3D modeling, whereas 3D is on a conceptual level and 2D is documentation. Data is
shared through a common data environment (CDE) with each other but does not support
a fully collaborative model.
BIM maturity level 2 (full collaboration): Represent streamlined and standardized mod­
els that allow collaboration between all stakeholders; however, every stakeholder has their
8
BUILDING A SYSTEM ARCHITECTURE CAPABLE OF REPRESENTING LCA CALCULATIONS
==PAGE:19==
own local 2­ or 3D CAD model.
BIM maturity level 3 (full integration): Represent the highest level of collaboration, also
referred to as ”Open BIM.” The model is based on a cloud­based environment, creating a
single model that holds all information from every discipline, eliminating any conflicts that
may interfere between the disciplines—also referred to as the single source of truth.
One of the most prominent countries regarding BIM is the UK and Germany, where the
average maturity level is only at level 2. Hence to reach the next level, a report from Digital
Built Britain presented some measures to levitate to level 3, named ”Level 3 Building
Information Modelling ­ Strategic Plan”. Some of the key measures to do so are ”The
creation of a set of new, international ’Open Data’ standards” to ensure an easy way of
sharing data across the market and ”The establishment of a new contractual framework
for projects” that potentially ensure consistency, avoid confusion and encourage, open
collaborative work environment [22].
Another way of levitating the BIM maturity level from 2 to 3 is to introduce a common data
environment that will enhance collaboration in a project.
2.2.3
Common data environment
A common data environment (CDE) is a centralized cloud­based platform that stores and
manages information, also referred to as ’the single source of truth.’ The CDE enables
all relevant stakeholders to access data from any given place at any time, with viewing
or editing rights depending on their role. In a BIM context, the information can contain a
wide range of data, such as schedules, contracts, reports, etc. A CDE is typically hosted
through a cloud­based platform that ensures all information is up to date. This helps to
reduce errors and misunderstandings and improve overall project efficiency [23].
One attempt at creating a CDE was the BIMServer.org [24], which is an open access open­
sourced platform that provides an IFC1 database to carry out model checks, versioning,
and project structures, however, the platform was based on the IFC schema and therefore
led to errors, and missing data [26]. Another attempt was Autodesk, who created Forge, a
cloud platform that enables multiple of their products to be accessed with an API. However,
the platform uses direct interoperability, which will later be explained, meaning that the
software is closed and only allow file formats within the Autodesk environment [26].
Through Mikki Seidenschnur and Ali Kücükavci’s Ph.D., they have developed a cloud­
based and open­source CDE called ”Virtual Commissioning Platform.” The platform is
capable of running multiple microservices2, with different functionalities, for instance, sim­
ulation of HVAC systems and performance measuring by connecting BIM models in Revit
to third­party tools and services. However, the platform is missing a microservice capable
of performing and storing an LCA of a building, which is part of the aim of this project.
Therefore, a literature review will be conducted to understand what BIM­LCA is, which
state­of­the­art cloud and BIM­based LCA tools exist, and what a potential BIM­LCA tool
1The Industry Foundation Classes (IFC) is a CAD data exchange data schema intended for description of
architectural, building and construction industry data [25]
2A microservice is an architectural and organizational approach to software development where software
is composed of small independent services that communicate over well­defined APIs. [27]
BUILDING A SYSTEM ARCHITECTURE CAPABLE OF REPRESENTING LCA CALCULATIONS
9
==PAGE:20==
within the VC platform could look like. More on the CDE will be described in the Method­
ology chapter.
2.3
BIM-LCA
BIM­LCA is the combination of using an existing BIM model to assist in carrying out an
LCA by utilizing the overlapping data stored in a BIM model and the data input needed for
an LCA calculation to be carried out, often associated with a BIM­LCA tool; this concept
is visualized in fig. 2.6. This concept has been used widely in the building industry due to
its many advantages.
According to Soust­Verdaguer, Llatas, and García­Martínez, they acknowledge the po­
tential of BIM combined with sustainable design, leading to an improved information flow,
better performance, and quality. However, BIM–LCA is still at an early stage, and re­
search on the topic is limited [29] (2020). The following section will attempt to review the
state­of­the­art BIM­LCA tools and approaches.
BIM
LCA
Usable BIM 
information 
in LCA
Figure 2.6: BIM data relative to the LCA data needed. The overlapping data show the
usable data from BIM to LCA. Diagram inspired from Díaz and Antón [30].
BIM­LCA has undoubtedly been argued as remarkably better than LCA alone as it re­
duces the data input, helps decision­making, improves information flow, achieving better
performance and quality [28]. This is shown in multiple papers; one example is Mah et al.,
who developed a method to estimate the CO2 footprint on constructions based on the BIM
model. Another example is Akbarnezhad, Ong, and Chandra, who invented a decision­
making framework based on BIM that enables to recycle and reuse of building materials.
Or summarized by Zimmermann, Bruhn, and Birgisdóttir who states, ”BIM can simplify
the establishment of the LCI for the LCA by eliminating the need to reenter information
that is already available in the building model” which shows how the BIM­LCA approach
can minimize time spent on redundant tasks.
2.3.1
Approaches to BIM-LCA tool
According to Hadjiiski et al., there are two main strategies 1) the first one extracts geo­
metrical and possibly material data from the BIM model in the form of a bill of quantities3
(BoQ), this data are then taken to a third­party LCA software to be carried out. 2) The
3A bill of quantities is a document that provides project­specific measured quantities of the items identified
in drawings and specifications for a built asset such as a building. [34]
10
BUILDING A SYSTEM ARCHITECTURE CAPABLE OF REPRESENTING LCA CALCULATIONS
==PAGE:21==
second one adds LCA data to the BIM model and calculates the LCA from a plugin within
the BIM software. From these two strategies, a set of five different BIM­LCA approaches
have been defined by Wastiels and Decuypere.
The first approach is the ”enriched approach” where the LCA data is embedded in the
BIM model; this minimizes the time manually entered to the LCA and the errors that arise
when manually entering data and is easy to recalculate and LCA when the materials are
in one place. However, there are some practical issues with implementing this LCA input
in the BIM model, which may take longer than using the existing LCA software [35].
The second approach is the ”quantity take­off” approach which is the most commonly
used. This basically extracts all the quantities from the BIM model and sends them to
the LCA software. When carrying out multiple iterations, this method can be rather time­
consuming.
Import of geometry into the LCA software is the third approach by Wastiels and Decuypere.
It is based on the IFC schema that contains both the LCA material data and the building
quantities, which can be directly exported to LCA software. This method is based on an
open data format which will be discussed in the next section.
The fourth approach, the ’viewer,’ is similar to the previous one, as it also can match the
IFC format. The approach is based in a 3D environment and allows users to display the
data in 3D, which can contribute to another understanding of the data or results.
The final approach is the ’LCA Plugin,’ where the solution is built into the BIM software,
which then can utilize the 3D viewer to match and show data directly within the BIM soft­
ware. [35] The five approaches are also visualized in fig. 2.7.
BIM
LCA
LCA
LCA-data
BIM softare
LCA softare
LCA results
BIM
BIM softare
LCA softare
LCA results
LCA
BoQ
BIM
BIM softare
LCA
BIM
BIM softare
LCA softare
LCA results
LCA
BIM
BIM viewer
BIM
LCA
BIM softare
LCA plug-in
LCA results
1 - Enriched BIM
2 - Quantiy take-oﬀ
3 - Import of geometry
4 - Intermediate viewer
5 - LCA-plugin
LCA softare
LCA results
IFC
Figure 2.7: The 5 approaches of BIM­LCA according to Wastiels and Decuypere
An expert group of LCA practitioners from Belgium was brought together to evaluate these
five approaches [33].
BUILDING A SYSTEM ARCHITECTURE CAPABLE OF REPRESENTING LCA CALCULATIONS
11
==PAGE:22==
The group argues that from the structural­discipline perspective, any of the given ap­
proaches would be feasible, as the structural discipline has a low variety of materials and
quantities that are relatively easy to specify. They suggest, however, creating a set of BIM
objects containing LCA data with a limited amount of materials to implement in approach
5.
Another point from the group is a concern about using EPD data with BIM objects since
the EPD is geographically specific and requires living near this area for the data to be
usable. Secondly, the BIM objects can be scaled and changed, hence losing the validity
of such an EPD.
The architectural part of the BIM model contains many different materials, yet in the early
design phase, the level of detail is low. Therefore the suggestion is to use generic materi­
als and LCA profiles. From an architectural perspective, the group suggests approach 5,
LCA­plugin, as promising due to easy access to LCA data but also mentions the problem
of the lack of LCA data from enriched BIM objects.
The central takeaways from the evaluation are that the most suitable workflow strongly
relates to the objective of the LCA calculation, the stage of the project, and the discipline.
2.3.2
Data exchange
The five approaches contain different data flows, which impact the interoperability of other
software. According to Zimmermann, Bruhn, and Birgisdóttir ”Interoperability is typically
the goal within data management between software solutions, to allow for easy data ex­
change between software.”
Direct interoperability
Open interoperability 
standard
Revit
Sketchup
Rhino
...
...
LCA tool
Other tools
...
...
...
Revit
Sketchup
Rhino
...
...
LCA tool
Other tools
...
...
...
Figure 2.8: Data exchange of direct vs. open interoperability between BIM and LCA­tool
Looking at fig. 2.8 from Laakso and Kiviniemi, the interoperability can be divided into two
parts; direct interoperability and open interoperability standard. When working with the
open interoperability standard, the data has to be standardized to be compatible with
all the relevant software. This process limits what can be included in the standard [36];
an example hereof is the CDE. However, using direct interoperability, the interoperability
depends heavily on the software providers as they decide how compatible the file format
is with other relevant software. Furthermore, if the data has to be handled in multiple
different software, there might be a risk of losing data in the process of converting the
data back and forth [36].
12
BUILDING A SYSTEM ARCHITECTURE CAPABLE OF REPRESENTING LCA CALCULATIONS
==PAGE:23==
According to [28], one of the most significant challenges is to improve the interoperability
between tools by ensuring compatible tools with the open file format rather than develop
a plugin for specific BIM software. To provide complete interoperability throughout the
whole design phase.
The software can also use an application programming interface (API) for data exchange;
this is a direct way of communicating with software, but it depends on the data whether
the interoperability is a natural or open standard. APIs allow custom solutions to meet
specific needs, such as data transfer. These solutions can also be integrated with plu­
gins into software, thereby extending its features. Standard plugins in BIM are Dynamo
and Grasshopper, which uses visual programming language (VPL), frequently used in the
AEC industry as building these custom solutions has become intuitive compared to pro­
gramming and more flexible. One example is Nicolaj Langkjær, who created an early LCA
workflow using Rhino and Grasshopper to match the building component with the environ­
mental data and export these data to LCAbyg. Using Grasshopper, the workflow becomes
dynamic and iterative, enabling producing LCA quickly. To wrap up, there has not been
found the perfect BIM­LCA tool yet, but as Soust­Verdaguer, Llatas, and García­Martínez
states, the challenge isn’t uncomplicated to solve. ”Several papers which analyzed the
integration from a methodological point of view highlighted the software integration as one
of the most important challenges.”
2.3.3
Design stages
As previously addressed, a BIM model varies in detail throughout its design stages, as
shown in fig. 2.4. In the beginning, not much information is contained in the model, and
LCA results would be inaccurate, but the accuracy would increase as the LOD increases.
Therefore, each design stage is translated to a specific LOD according to [38], whereas
the early LCA is LOD 200, the preliminary LCA is LOD 300, and the final LCA is LOD 325.
In the early design phases, before knowing the specific material used in the BIM model,
Röck et al. suggest using predefined components to generate the first iteration of results
and thereby have a baseline result from the beginning. However, according to Durão et
al., 60 % of the time is lost in the early stages as the same information has to be entered
multiple times. Up to 7 times during a construction process. This shows the need for an
LCA tool that allows for calculating LCA in an iterative workflow, replacing LCA data quickly
and thereby removing the barrier of reentering data over and over — also, confirmed by
Zimmermann, Bruhn, and Birgisdóttir, who argue that the complexity and time­consuming
work related to LCA has often been considered a barrier.
According to a Danish architecture company named ”Lendager” the founder, Anders
Lendager, seeks an intuitive and dynamic LCA tool that, in ’real­time,’ gives an overview
of the building’s climate footprint. Stating that the goal is to measure while designing and
testing different solutions [41], which supports the iterative approach of LCA.
Conducting an LCA of a building is a challenging task due to the vast amount of information
required, and the time­consuming nature of the method [42]. Most of the effort and time is
spent creating the BoQ and locating the appropriate datasets in the building material LCA
database. This results in a high cost for sustainability certification due to the significant
effort involved in conducting an LCA. As a result, LCA of buildings is typically performed
BUILDING A SYSTEM ARCHITECTURE CAPABLE OF REPRESENTING LCA CALCULATIONS
13
==PAGE:24==
at the end of the design process, when the necessary information has been gathered.
Still, it is too late to influence the design decision­making process [43]. While post­design
evaluation through LCA is a step in the right direction, it alone is insufficient and does
not improve the environmental performance of the design [44]. To reduce environmental
impacts, it is crucial to integrate LCA into the architectural design process, particularly in
the early design phases when decisions have the most significant impact [44].
2.4
State-of-the-art LCA-tools
Hollberg, Genova, and Habert created a BIM­LCA tool that uses the VPL Dynamo to
extract building quantities and material data that is manually added to the native material
database in Revit. Dynamo then calculates the LCA from this data, leading to many
uncertainties as the material database does not include data on the technical components,
for instance, and consists of many assumptions in the calculation. On the other side,
Dynamo is used to colorize the BIM model from the results and create a history of the
GWP during the modeling phase.
Kumanayake and Luo created another LCA tool that uses Object Oriented Programming
C# in combination with SQL database to produce an LCA report based on generic data
automatically. The LCA can be carried out in the cloud, allowing multiple users to see
up­to­date results. However, the tool is based on manual user input, increasing the risk
of error and delay.
According to Soust­Verdaguer, Llatas, and García­Martínez, research shows that user­
friendly platforms that assist the integration of software are lacking. However, another
LCA tool that supports BIM­LCA is One­Click LCA, a commercial automated LCA tool.
The database uses multiple databases and allows users to choose their region for specific
databases. It is also available through an API, making it accessible through third­party
applications. Software such as Revit and Rhino already have plugins for One­Click LCA,
creating a smoother transition from the early to late design phase [47].
Revit also has a built­in ”Tally” plugin that allows users to perform LCA. It uses BIM in­
formation to perform LCA quickly and efficiently. However, the material still has to be
manually set for each component. Furthermore, the materials used are based on the
GaBi database, which is not supported in the Danish standard, as the database is based
on American geography. Since Tally is operated through direct interoperability, it doesn’t
allow other tools to collaborate and, for example, use another database, unfortunately.
In the Danish context, LCAbyg 5.0 is currently the most widely used LCA tool and is
approved to use by the building regulation.
LCAbyg uses the German Ökobau LCA
database, which is an integrated part of the software. It allows using other LCA data,
which must be imported manually. Furthermore, LCAbyg does not interoperate with BIM
and, therefore, is not an LCA­BIM tool, requiring additional manual inputs. However, it
has the option to import JSON files, including all the necessary data to perform an LCA
in LCAbyg, which would be able to replace many of the manual inputs if programmed
correctly. Still, there isn’t any software available to export the LCAbyg JSON files yet.
14
BUILDING A SYSTEM ARCHITECTURE CAPABLE OF REPRESENTING LCA CALCULATIONS
==PAGE:25==
2.5
Summary
An LCA involves a lot of parameters, and many current LCA tools require a lot of manual
input. The validity of the results is, therefore, highly reliant on the data quality and an
engineer inputting data. Furthermore, the LCI data can either come from an EPD or
generic data, as there doesn’t exist EPD for all materials; however, generic data can
introduce uncertainty to the LCA results but may be faster and more flexible in applying.
The LCI database also plays an important role, as some are larger than others or based
in different countries, influencing the LCI data assumptions. These uncertainties also
impact the LCA, and therefore, an LCA of a building will not always be completely accurate
results.
BIM is a powerful tool for collaboration in an interdisciplinary team. BIM can be used
in different maturity levels, from pen and paper to cloud­based models. The goal is to
increase the maturity level by working towards a more collaborative workflow and using
a CDE, which leads to fewer errors and better collaboration. Furthermore, BIM can be
utilized in many fields, especially within LCA, as it holds relevant information, such as
geometry and material data, known as BIM­LCA. However, it is essential to consider the
LOD when using the BIM, as it constantly progresses during the design phases.
Literature has proven a great potential in BIM­LCA tools, as it can skip many of the man­
ual tasks involved in the current LCA calculations and avoid human mistakes that would
otherwise happen and thereby be faster and more accurate. Furthermore, combining
BIM­LCA with a cloud platform enables users to perform an LCA from any location at any
time, advancing the maturity level and allowing for better collaboration in interdisciplinary
teams and performing LCA iteratively.
BUILDING A SYSTEM ARCHITECTURE CAPABLE OF REPRESENTING LCA CALCULATIONS
15
==PAGE:26==
16
BUILDING A SYSTEM ARCHITECTURE CAPABLE OF REPRESENTING LCA CALCULATIONS
==PAGE:27==
3
Problem Statement
As previously addressed, the thesis is conducted as the ongoing work of the open­source
and cloud­based CDE, Virtual Commissioning platform (VC), which is missing a service
to perform LCAs. Therefore, the scope of this project is to develop such a service that is
integrated into the common data environment while also solving the problematics of LCA
being time­consuming and inaccurate, which is an increasingly pressing challenge due to
the new enforcement of BR23. The problem is attempted to be solved by developing a
proof­of­concept tool that utilizes BIM­LCA in a cloud environment, as it allows to autom­
atize many of the manual tasks that exist in the current workflow of LCA, which in theory
would minimize the time spent and the human errors made.
3.1
Aim and goals
The thesis aim is to develop a proof­of­concept cloud­based BIM­LCA tool that holds the
potential to reduce the time spent carrying out an LCA, while providing accurate results.
• Map the parameters needed to carry out an LCA calculation.
• Develop a cloud and BIM­based LCA tool that enable parsing the parameters from
BIM to carry out an LCA.
• Apply the LCA tool on a BIM model and evaluate the results based on time and
accuracy.
3.2
Reading guide
To achieve these aims and goals, the report will be carried out like following:
Chapter 1 presents a short introduction to the problem of the thesis and what a potential
solution could be.
Chapter 2 addresses the background research conducted about LCA, BIM, and literature
on state­of­the­art LCA­BIM tools And defines the aim and goals of the report.
Chapter 4 specifies the methodology employed in the tool development and any specific
challenges encountered during this process.
Chapter 5 presents a case study in which the tool is applied to Building 118, where the
accuracy and speed were measured. Next, a validation of the tool was conducted to
evaluate its performance of the tool.
Chapter 6 discusses the results and methodology concerning the tool on the parameters
of flexibility, extensibility, and usability, rounding off with a section outlining future devel­
opments.
Finally, in Chapter 7, the report concludes by assessing whether the stated aims and goals
have been fulfilled throughout the research.
BUILDING A SYSTEM ARCHITECTURE CAPABLE OF REPRESENTING LCA CALCULATIONS
17
==PAGE:28==
A final note for the thesis, in general, is that the objective of the thesis has been to de­
velop code for a tool, which is not shown during the report’s thesis, for the sake of clarity.
However, if interested, the GitHub link below shows the entire code created during the
thesis.
Github:
LCA tool (C#): https://github.com/oskargramnielsen/LCA_Tool/
LCA Web Application (Python): https://github.com/oskargramnielsen/WebApplication/
18
BUILDING A SYSTEM ARCHITECTURE CAPABLE OF REPRESENTING LCA CALCULATIONS
==PAGE:29==
4
Methodology
This chapter will mainly focus on the development of the LCA tool, hereby the data struc­
tures and data exchange of Revit and LCAbyg, and furthermore, a short section on the
evaluation and demonstration of the tool and the web application. But first, a brief overview
of the methodology used in the process.
4.1
Methodology overview
The methodology of the project follows the Design science research approach, also known
as design science methodology from Peffers, Tuunanen, and Rossi. The methodology
is a systematic qualitative research approach in which the object of study is the design
process. The aim of the process is to create and evaluate artifacts, such as the LCA
tool. This method involves a series of iterative steps, including objectives of a solution,
design & development, evaluation, and communication, with the goal of developing a
novel artifact that can be used to improve the current state in the field of study. The
artifact is typically evaluated in terms of its ability to meet the identified needs; in this
case, the accuracy and time will be evaluated, whereas the flexibility, extensibility, and
usability will be discussed, and finally, the future steps of the artifact. The methodology
is illustrated in fig. 4.1 [48]. The first step in the design science research methodology is
problem identification & motivation, which in this thesis is the manual and slow process of
conducting LCA, leading to mistakes and consuming valuable time. The objectives of the
solution would be to create an LCA tool that automatizes these processes leading to less
time spent and better accuracy, according to theory. The actual design & development
of the artifact would be the programming of the LCA tool that extract the components
from Revit and generates an LCA automatically, with fewer manual tasks, saving time
and human errors. Next, the demonstration of the artifact would be conducted in the
case study on Building 118 on DTU Campus, where both the accuracy and time would be
measured. Along with the demonstration of the tool on Building 118, a validation would
also be conducted to evaluate the LCA tool further. Based on the evaluation, the problem
identification of the solution would be either iterated back to design or, if the objectives
were fulfilled. Once fulfilled, the thesis would be published.
PROBLEM
IDENTIFICATION
& MOTIVATION
Define problem
Show importance
OBJECTIVES OF A 
SOLUTION
What would a 
bettter artefact 
accomplish?
DESIGN & 
DEVELOPMENT
Artefact
DEMONSTRATION
Find a suitable 
context
Use artefact to 
solve problem
EVALUATION
Observe how 
effective, efficient
Iterate back to 
design
COMMUNICATION
Schorlarly 
publications
Professional 
publications
Inference
Theory
How to 
knowledge
Metrics, analysis 
knowledge
Disciplinary
knowledge
Figure 4.1: Design Science Research methodology according to Peffers, Tuunanen, and
Rossi [48]
BUILDING A SYSTEM ARCHITECTURE CAPABLE OF REPRESENTING LCA CALCULATIONS
19
==PAGE:30==
4.2
Development of the LCA tool
The following section will focus on the development of the LCA tool, thus understanding
significant problems and choices made throughout the development and shaping the tool
into a final artifact.
4.2.1
Context
Prior to the development of the tool, the findings from the background research revealed
significant requirements that must be considered in the development process. These
requirements establish the context for the tool, which is outlined in the following section.
The cloud­ and BIM­based LCA tool will be integrated as one of the microservices within
the existing CDE ”Virtual Commissioning” (VC) platform, as previously described. The
platform was developed by Mikki Seidenschnur and Ali Kücükavci through their Ph.D.
research hosted by Rambøll.
The chosen Building Information Modeling (BIM) tool is Revit 2021, as it is the most widely
used BIM tool in Rambøll and the AEC industry, according to a survey conducted by Bips
in 2014 [49]. Revit is a versatile software strongly integrated into the building industry,
although it is not an open interoperability standard. However, it is suitable for the needs
of this project.
Revit is typically utilized after the primary geometry and main materials have been defined,
thus the use case of the tool will be after the conceptual design, which is mainly carried
out in Rhino, but before the detailed design, hence the preliminary design stage, when a
Revit model has been initiated. This also fits well with LCAbyg, since it operates at LOD
325, which corresponds to preliminary LCA at LOD 300.
The targeted user group for the tool is the Architect discipline, as the Revit model contains
many different materials, thus providing more significant potential for the tool. However,
since the tool is a proof­of­concept, only the building model of the LCA will be taken into
account, including the walls, roof, ceilings, and floors.
The LCA materials will be sourced from a generic database named Ökobaudat, and LCA
profiles will be created to better suit the preliminary design stage, with a focus on modeling
and low detail level. The chosen BIM­LCA approach is number five, the LCA­plugin, for
easy access to LCA data and the option of utilizing the 3D viewer and creating a more
intuitive workflow.
LCAbyg is the most commonly used LCA tool in Denmark, as well as in Rambøll, and
since it is based on the German Ökobaudat database, which has previously been shown
to be a good choice of database, and since it supports an API­driven workflow, LCAbyg
is chosen for the LCA calculations.
An Application Programming Interface (API) must be set up to initiate the LCA tool as a
cloud­based tool. This will be done in Python, using a micro web framework called Flask,
which will host the web application. Otherwise, the plugin for Revit will be coded in C#
using objective­oriented programming.
The selection of requirements for the tool was derived from a thorough examination of the
literature and analysis of the relevant requirements. It should be noted that they may not
20
BUILDING A SYSTEM ARCHITECTURE CAPABLE OF REPRESENTING LCA CALCULATIONS
==PAGE:31==
be the optimal choices in a long­term tool, but since BR23 regulations are enforced on
January 1, 2023, a solution must be developed quickly to meet the needs of the industry,
in this case, Rambøll, and the VC platform.
4.2.2
Workflow
Revit model
C# Class 
Hierarchy
Run LCA
LCAbyg
Web Application
Detailing LCA
LCA Results
LCA Results
Detailed
Revit model
LCA Database
Quantity Take-Oﬀ
LCAbyg
LCA Results
LCAbyg 
Construction 
Database
Proposed
Traditional
Predeﬁned 
Components
Simplﬁed
Revit API
LCAbyg API
Common Data Environment
Back-end
Front-end
LCAbyg
Project
JSON-ﬁles
</>
Web Application
Figure 4.2: Traditional workflow of LCA (according to most common approach ”Quantity
Take­off” [35]) and the proposed workflow of the LCA tool
The traditional and proposed workflow is illustrated in a flowchart in fig. 4.2; the proposed
workflow is based on a Danish context and only takes into account the building model of
LCA. The workflow starts in Revit, where each building component is either 1) defined
from the construction library in the LCA database from LCAbyg or 2) modeled with a pre­
defined building component, depending on the detail level desired. In Revit, an addin is
created to export the necessary data from the building components through a C# class
hierarchy to JSON. The JSON file is then restructured according to the LCAbyg JSON for­
mat. The next step is divided into two parts, the lower process shows the data being sent
to the LCAbyg software, which allows adding further details to the LCA calculation, before
running the LCA calculation and displaying the results, and the upper process shows the
data being sent to the web application in the cloud and dynamically presenting the results
in a browser, instead of having to open LCAbyg and thereby allowing a more iterative
workflow. The traditional workflow of LCA varies from company to company, however,
the most common approach is the Quantity Take­off approach, addressed in the back­
ground research [35]. The workflow is also based on the Danish context and the building
model, and like the proposed workflow, it also starts in Revit. The building component is
exported through spreadsheets, which are tables of quantities for each building compo­
nent. These spreadsheets are then manually entered in LCAbyg, whereas the material is
manually entered for each component. The results are automatically generated when all
components have been entered into the LCAbyg project.
BUILDING A SYSTEM ARCHITECTURE CAPABLE OF REPRESENTING LCA CALCULATIONS
21
==PAGE:32==
4.2.3
Data exchange between Revit and LCAbyg
For LCAbyg and Revit to coexist in the same environment, they must communicate in a
mutual language, which is one of the key challenges with this tool. In fig. 4.3, a reference
wall is used as an example to show the different data structures of building components
in Revit and LCAbyg.
Basic Wall
Wall
External Wall
Category
Family
Type
Building Component
Construction
Products
Revit
LCAbyg
Phases
Instances
External wall of concrete, 
insulation and ﬁbre 
cement
Concrete element 
180mm, mineral wool
Concrete C30/37, 
concrete 
elements
Reinforcement 
mesh
Mineral wool
Fasteners, bolt 
and screws
Fibreconcrete plate, wood 
construction
Gipsum board
13 mm
Consruction 
wood, KVH 
quality
Fibreconcrete 
plate
Fasteners, bolt 
and screws
A1-A3
C3
D
A1-A3
C4
D
A1-A3
C3
C4
A1-A3
C4
D
A1-A3
C4
A1-A3
C3
D
A1-A3
C4
A1-A3
C4
D
#00001
#00002
Figure 4.3: Building component structure of LCAbyg 5.2 and Revit 2021
In the LCAbyg structure, the building components are typically divided into 1­3 construc­
tions, each construction is then divided into the products, and lastly, each product is di­
vided into the phases the product has been through. In the Revit structure, the building
components are divided into categories, each category has different families, and these
have different types. A type of component can finally have separate instances, for exam­
ple, if the same component is placed in multiple locations, shown in fig. 4.3.
In this case, the tool will transfer building components from Revit to LCAbyg. In Revit,
the components were chosen to be modified on a Type­level, as it allows to have multiple
types of a family, for example, various walls with the same materials but with varying
thicknesses. On the other hand, in LCAbyg, the components were chosen to be modified
on Construction­level, which contains multiple products; for example, construction may
have a steel construction with insulation and screws holding it together. This means that
in Revit, components with Type­levels will have unique IDs that reference to constructions
IDs in the construction database from LCAbyg; in this way, each component in Revit also
has information about the LCA data. Of course, the IDs could also refer to a particular
product instead (one level below construction), allowing more customized and detailed
components; however, this would imply more IDs to input. Ideally, the user should be
able to specify what detail level is necessary and then choose from that basis, but for the
sake of simplicity, the Type­level (Revit) to Construction­level (LCAbyg), was the chosen
datatypes, also shown in fig. 4.3 indicated by the dashed lines.
4.2.4
Import of LCA material data to Revit
The link between Revit and LCAbyg is based on the material ID inserted in Revit compo­
nents, referring to the materials in the LCAbyg material library.
The material database from LCAbyg consists of several different databases depending on
the building component level, as shown in fig. 4.3, hence building components, construc­
tions, products, or phases. As mentioned previously, the Construction­level in LCAbyg
is chosen, and therefore the Construction library in LCAbyg is used. The database con­
sists of 399 different constructions, which is not much compared to the total number of
22
BUILDING A SYSTEM ARCHITECTURE CAPABLE OF REPRESENTING LCA CALCULATIONS
==PAGE:33==
constructions. The name and ID in the database are searchable, making it easier to find
the desired construction. When the required materials are found, the material ID can be
inserted into the Revit building components; an example is shown in fig. 4.4, where a
”Vægside, Bræddebeklædning” (trans. ”Wall side, Wooden cladding”) wall layer is added
to the material library in Revit, from the Construction database. The Revit material now
contains that ID that links to the specific construction; the material can then be applied to
a wall layer in Revit as a wooden cladding; this is done for the remaining layers in the wall
to create a complete wall.
Revit
Construction database
Revit material library
Figure 4.4: Creating custom construction from the LCAbyg Constructions database to the
Revit material database.
A family can be completed when all the relevant material layers have been created in
Revit. An example is shown in fig. 4.5. Here the family wall has been made that consists
of 3 constructions and the wall family, shown in the material layers window in the middle.
To the top left, the wall family ”LCA Outer Wood Wall 300mm” is selected, also highlighted
in blue in the 3D model, which now can be used in the LCA calculation.
The process of manually entering the Construction ID into the Revit material library seems
like a time­consuming task, and why replace manual tasks with another manual task?
The answer is that this is a time­consuming task at the beginning of a project as all the
components in the Revit model would have to be added manually from the Construction
database; however, once a component type is created, it can be reused over and over
again, and for the following projects ahead. This is illustrated in fig. 4.6, where the x­axis
represents time, and the y­axis represents the number of construction added to the Revit
BUILDING A SYSTEM ARCHITECTURE CAPABLE OF REPRESENTING LCA CALCULATIONS
23
==PAGE:34==
Revit
Figure 4.5: Completed wall family in Revit with embedded LCA Construction IDs
material database. After adding a material ID to the Revit material database, the database
will be increasingly populated, and over time, previous materials can be reused. At one
point, the Revit material would all have a Construction ID added, the database would be
up to date, as illustrated in the dotted line, and only new materials would have to be added.
Time
Revit material database (%)
Database up to date
0 %
100 %
Figure 4.6: LCA material data added to Revit material database (%) over time
Adding material IDs to each layer of a building component allows the creation of tailor­
made components and a better fit for the desired materials. However, in the preliminary
phases, an exact fit is not always needed, therefore, a collection of predefined compo­
nents has been created to speed up the modeling. The method of using the predefined
components with LCA data embedded is backed up by a Belgium team, who recom­
mended predefining components in the early stages, shown in the literature study in
24
BUILDING A SYSTEM ARCHITECTURE CAPABLE OF REPRESENTING LCA CALCULATIONS
==PAGE:35==
the background section. The predefined components include external and internal walls,
ground slab, deck, and roof. In fig. 4.7, a diagram shows the possible options for each
building component in Revit; this is only to show the proof­of­concept, as the diagram
could be expanded for a wider variety of components.
External wall of 
concrete, insulation and 
fibre cement
External wall of steel, 
insulation and facade 
tile
External wall of 
concrete, insulation and 
brick
External wall of 
concrete, insulation and 
timber cladding
External wall of timber 
frame, insulation and 
timber cladding
External wall of aerated 
concrete and insulation
Internal wall of aerated 
concrete and plaster
Internal wall of plaster 
board and steel frame
Internal wall of 
aluminium rail and glass 
pane 
Deck of hollow concrete, 
insulation and wood 
floor
Deck of steel frame, 
insulation and wood 
floor
Deck of wood frame, 
insulation and wood 
floor
Ground slab of linoleum 
and insulation
Ground slab of timber 
floor, insulation and 
concrete
Ground slab of linoleum, 
insulation and concrete
Roof of timber frame, 
insulation and roofing 
felt
Roof of hollow concrete, 
insulation and 
membrane
Roof of steel frame and 
insulation
Roof of paperwool and 
bricks
Roof of insulation and 
roofing felt
Roof of gypsum board, 
timber frame and 
insulation 
Figure 4.7: Predefined building components collection
After adding all relevant building components to the Revit project with their appropriate
material IDs, the necessary data can be exported to the CDE by either using the prede­
fined components or creating new ones. To get an overview of the included components
in the LCA, a view in Revit has been created for easy representation. The view is shown in
fig. 4.8, whereas the building components with embedded material IDs included are auto­
matically highlighted with a transparent green for a more intuitive workflow, as requested
by Anders Lendager from Lendager Group.
Not all component categories in the Revit model are included in the export; in the next
section, the exact component categories will be defined.
Before
After
Figure 4.8: Revit view highlights building components containing LCA data before and
after.
BUILDING A SYSTEM ARCHITECTURE CAPABLE OF REPRESENTING LCA CALCULATIONS
25
==PAGE:36==
4.2.5
LCA Parameters
The LCA parameters required to be included in an LCA according to the BR23 demands
and the included parameters in the tool are illustrated in fig. 4.9. The parameters are
grouped in boxes for a better overview. The green boxes represent groups of parameters
where all the parameters are mandatory, the yellow is only partly mandatory, and the red
none mandatory. Similarly, the boxes with a circumference of a line show the group of
parameters included in the tool, and those with a dotted line are not included. Most of
the required parameters are included in the tool, but as the tool is a proof of concept,
only the most impact­heavy on the LCA has been chosen. As previously addressed, the
tool focuses on the building model quantity extraction and not the usage and energy from
the building model. If those were taken into account, there would be some issues with
extracting data such as energy data; this would ideally come from a separate energy
analysis and other components like mechanical components, which are rarely accurately
placed in a Revit model.
LCA Parameters
Building basis
Terrain
Foundation
Building
Buildingbasis, etc.
Primary building 
components
Terrain
External walls
Internal walls
Deck
Stairs and ramps
Load carrying beams and 
pillars
Balconies and balcony 
corridors
Roofs
Primary building 
elements, etc.
Stairs and ramps
Ceilings
Balconies
Roofs
Complimentary building 
elements, etc.
Surface building 
components
External walls
Internal walls
Deck and ﬂoors
Stairs and ramps
Ceilings
Balconies
Roofs
Surface building 
elements, etc.
Airtypes (gas, 
compressed  air, vacuum, 
damp)
Cooling
Heating
Ventilation
Sprinkler
Transverse components, 
PHS
Electricity and mechanical 
systems
Terrain
High voltage
Low voltage
Communication and 
information
Fuses
Building automation
Safety
People and material 
transport
Inventory and technical 
equipment
Inventory, terrain
Inventory, ﬁxed
Inventory, loose
Inventory, technical, IT 
and AV components
Planting and pavement
Pavement and ﬁxtures
Planting
Included in BR 23
Partly included in BR23
Not included in BR 23
Included in tool
Not included in tool
Legend
Complimentary building 
components
Terrain
External walls
Internal walls
Deck
Drainage and sanitary
Water (cool/warm water, 
treated water)
VVS- and ventilation 
system
Ventilation system, 
terrain
Logistics
Figure 4.9: LCA parameters categorized from BR23 demands (from Arkitema and COWI
in cooperation with DK­GBC and Housing and the Danish Planning Agency) and included
model parameters in the tool.
26
BUILDING A SYSTEM ARCHITECTURE CAPABLE OF REPRESENTING LCA CALCULATIONS
==PAGE:37==
4.2.6
Export of data from Revit to CDE
The data stored in a Revit project can be accessed through the Revit API. The API allows
users to program scripts to automate repetitive tasks. The API is compatible with several
programming languages, such as VB.NET, C#, and CCLI, the chosen language was C#
as it allows to use of object­oriented programming. In the C# class hierarchy, classes are
created for each building component. The classes use the Revit API to extract the relevant
attributes necessary to conduct an LCA, such as component type, unique ID, component
number, layer number, material name, area, and material ID. These attributes are parsed
to JSON dictionaries by the C# Class hierarchy. An example of the data structure is shown
in listing 4.1; the example shows a selection of wall components from the JSON dictionary;
each branch in the dictionary is a layer in a component; for instance, these three branches
specify one wall component, as it contains three layers since their component ID is the
same and the layer ID counts from one to three. For all layers, the unique material ID
from the Construction database is included, together with area, name, and thickness.
To extract all of the relevant attributes from Revit, the classes iterate through all com­
ponents in the Revit file using the Revit API. When a desired component is found, all
necessary attributes are extracted and inserted into a constructor. The constructor then
parses the attributes of the component to a JSON dictionary, which can later be used to
create the LCAbyg JSON.
[
{
"Type": "Walls",
"ComponentId": 1,
"LayerId": 1,
"MaterialId": "f2ce8b16 -7c8e-56e0-8a85 -136a20d3bb26",
"Name": "Internal wall side, Wood cladding",
"Area": 165.2,
"Thickness": 25
},
{
"Type": "Walls",
"ComponenttId": 1,
"LayerId": 2,
"MaterialId": "nf32e5136 -105d-566b-a761 -8dba8a44f6b9",
"Name": "Middle part, concrete element 180mm, mineral wool",
"Area": 165.2,
"Thickness": 180
},
{
"Type": "Walls",
"ComponentId": 1,
"LayerId": 3,
"MaterialId": "b4aa08e3 -fd38 -514e-b32b-fb107e112a23",
"Name": "External wall side, fibercement board, front wall",
"Area": 165.2,
"Thickness": 35
},
...
]
Listing 4.1: Example of JSON file of the raw data export from Revit
BUILDING A SYSTEM ARCHITECTURE CAPABLE OF REPRESENTING LCA CALCULATIONS
27
==PAGE:38==
4.2.7
Export from CDE to LCAbyg
This section will address translating the JSON dictionaries in the CDE to an LCAbyg
project. First, the LCAbyg data structure will briefly be explained.
LCAbyg data structure
LCAbyg organizes the individual projects in a central folder; each LCAbyg project consists
of a folder with individual JSON files structured in a tree hierarchy, shown in fig. 4.10. Each
JSON file is based on nodes and edges. Nodes could be any component in the project,
from the complete building to a brick in the wall. Since the nodes are structured in a tree
hierarchy, all nodes can be connected to the main building as the starting node. The
building node then branches out to the walls, wall layer, construction layer, and product
in construction, such as a brick. The edges connect the nodes depending on their rela­
tionship in the system. The overall structure of the nodes and edges is shown in fig. 4.11.
JSON ﬁles
Project folder
LCAbyg folder
Figure 4.10: Structure of files in LCAbyg
One example could be that a wall is connected to the building it is part of, and construc­
tion layers are attached to the wall it is part of, the material layers are connected to the
construction it is part of, and so on. This is also known as a parent­child tree structure
hierarchy, shown in fig. 4.11. This data structure creates an extensive network of nodes
related to the project it is part of.
The raw JSON file, for example, of a building, is shown in listing 4.2. The JSON file
describes the building node for the main building of the LCAbyg project, where the building
data can be inserted, such as floor area, story height, and energy class. The edge below
the node then links the main building to the following nodes in the hierarchy, such as the
component Categories. To ensure that the nodes are connected correctly, all nodes carry
a unique ID that ensures the nodes are pointing to the correct nodes. By inserting the
data through a JSON format like this, LCAbyg can interpret it, and it allows to be able to
be programmed instead of manually inputting the data into the software.
Translation of data to LCAbyg
To create the JSON files for the building model, a lot of nodes and edges have to be gen­
erated, as each construction of each component has its node and edge. Therefore an
automated script has been created. The script iterates through all the keys in the JSON
dictionary and fills out all the data required for each component into a new JSON in the
LCAbyg format. For example, from listing 4.1, the first key to be registered would be the
type of component, and the script would define the node as a Wall type; by parsing the
28
BUILDING A SYSTEM ARCHITECTURE CAPABLE OF REPRESENTING LCA CALCULATIONS
==PAGE:39==
[
{
"Node": {
"Building": {
"id": "6d766aa5 -50aa-4005-ab35 -29f2fb82ddad",
"name": {
"Danish": "Test eksempel"
},
"address": "Testvej 1, 1111 Testby",
"owner": "Test",
"description": "",
"building_type": "Other",
"heated_floor_area": 0,
"gross_area": 0,
"gross_area_above_ground": 0,
"storeys_above_ground": 0,
"storeys_below_ground": 0,
"storey_height": 0,
"initial_year": 2015,
"calculation_timespan": 50,
"calculation_mode": "SC",
"lca_advisor": "Test",
"building_regulation_version": "BR2018",
"plot_area": 0,
"outside_area": 0,
"energy_class": "LowEnergy"
}
}
},
{
"Edge": [
{
"MainBuilding": "15867192-86b7-40a8-9936-83d9e998516d"
},
"e9e6e798 -390e-4419-a1fa -3b46a8ba5b8d",
"6d766aa5 -50aa-4005-ab35 -29f2fb82ddad"
]
},
...
]
Listing 4.2: Example of JSON file from LCAbyg showing the main Building node including
its edge.
BUILDING A SYSTEM ARCHITECTURE CAPABLE OF REPRESENTING LCA CALCULATIONS
29
==PAGE:40==
Node
Edge
Edge
Edge
Construction layer 1
Construction layer 2
Construction layer 3
External Wall
Node
Element Category
Node
Building
Node
Project
Product layer n...
Stage layer n...
Figure 4.11: Data structure of LCAbyg
ID for a wall, next, it would search for the layers within that component and fill out the
Construction ID, e.g., ’Wood cladding,’ area and thickness. This would be done for all the
components in the JSON and, by the end, create multiple new JSON files in the LCAbyg
format. The JSON files would then be located in the project folder, with the correspond­
ing JSON files matching the project of LCAbyg for LCAbyg to open it smoothly with all
building components filled out. The processes mentioned above have been programmed
to execute when pressing the button ”Export” in the Revit plugin shown in fig. 4.12; the
other button, ”LCAbyg” simply executes the LCAbyg program and enables to open of the
newly created project from the current data from Revit.
4.2.8
Web Application
Parallel to the LCAbyg workflow, another addition to the tool is the web application, a user
interface that allows performing the necessary operation to carry out the LCA directly
from a web browser. This service enables users to run an LCA through a web­based
application from a REST API, making the LCA more iterative and intuitive for architects
without LCA backgrounds. A REST API is a joint abbreviation, whereas an API stands for
application programming interface; it is a method of retrieving information or performing
a function from a system, one example is retrieving the weather forecast from a weather
service, if you request the weather forecast with a given zip code to the weather service
API, the API would respond with the current weather forecast for that zip code. In this
case, the API instead runs the LCA and responds with the results [50]. The REST stands
for representational state transfer which is a set of architectural constraints, it means that
when a request is made through a REST API, it responds with a representation of the
state of the resource to the requester [50].
The API is hosted through a micro web framework, ”flask” enabling users to run the cus­
tomized script. In this case, three scripts have been made: ”update data from Revit”, ”run
the LCA” and ”show results from the LCA”. These scripts are visualized in an HTML script
30
BUILDING A SYSTEM ARCHITECTURE CAPABLE OF REPRESENTING LCA CALCULATIONS
==PAGE:41==
Revit
LCAbyg
Figure 4.12: Data export from Revit through addin, first button (1) export the data, second
button opens LCAbyg. In LCAbyg, all the building components are filled out according to
the data from Revit when importing the according to the project.
that allows the users to interact with the website, shown in fig. 4.13. To run the LCA, the
updated data are sent to the LCAbyg API, another API hosted by LCAbyg that performs
the LCA calculation from the JSON data. This enables users to run the LCA calculation
in the cloud instead of opening the software on the computer. The results are then stored
in the CDE, and the ’show result’ script can be run, visualizing the data in a bar chart.
This way, the LCA can be carried out in an iterative manner, as requested by Anders
Lendager mentioned in the background chapter. As the Web Application is limited to the
three scripts, it does not yet allow editing the LCA from the Web Application. However,
this addition to the tool hasn’t been included in the evaluation process and is therefore
seen as a supplement to the tool since it does not allow editing the LCA. However, it is
the first step towards a higher maturity level, a more iterative approach to LCA, and more
flexibility for the users.
4.3
Analysis
According to the design science research methodology, the next step is demonstrating
the tool in a suitable context.
4.3.1
Demonstration
The LCA tool is demonstrated in Building 118 on DTU Campus. A Revit model was given
by the Campus Service at DTU. The Revit model was assessed using predefined com­
ponents or modeling from scratch. The first option was selected, as the LOD of the Revit
model was too low to create customized building components since the components had
too little information contained. The four main building component categories were each
matched with the best­fitting predefined components. After the matching process, the
components were changed in Revit and exported through the plugin in Revit. The LCAbyg
project was created with all building components filled out. Finally, the last general infor­
BUILDING A SYSTEM ARCHITECTURE CAPABLE OF REPRESENTING LCA CALCULATIONS
31
==PAGE:42==
Figure 4.13: Web Application ”LCA Tool 1.0” interface.
mation about the building was inputted, and the results were ready. The results were
compared to a case study of 22 office buildings from a report by Zimmermann et al. The
report summarized the LCA of 60 buildings, whereas 22 were office buildings. The GWP
of the 22 LCA results was then compared to the GWP of Building 118. An additional met­
ric was included in a statement from Andreas Sørensen, Sustainability Consultant from
Rambøll. The statement divides the time carrying out an LCA into three parts based on
building 118; here, a simplified calculation was made to quantify the time saved with the
new LCA tool.
4.3.2
Evaluation
The evaluation of the tool was conducted through a validation of the predefined compo­
nents. The components in the predefined component collection, also used in the previous
demonstration on Building 118, were validated on their accuracy of GWP. The compo­
nents were recreated according to the description of the components in a report ”LCA­
profiler for bygningsdele” (trans. ”LCA­profiles for building components”) from Statens
Byggeforskningsinstitut et al. The resulting GWP of the recreated components was then
compared to the components from the report. The deviations of each component were
calculated to evaluate the accuracy of the predefined components used in the component
collection. A deviation within 25 % was chosen as the acceptable limit since the tool is
created for the preliminary stage and therefore doesn’t need 100 % accurate results.
4.4
Summary
A new proposed BIM and cloud­based LCA tool are presented with a new workflow that
plugs into the current VC platform. The workflow is based on the building model and ig­
nores the remaining data input to the LCA. The workflow starts in Revit, where the LCI data
from the Økobau database is inserted into each relevant building component. For faster
modeling but compromising accuracy, predefined components are available instead of
inserting each material ID in each building component. Then, a plugin in Revit is created
32
BUILDING A SYSTEM ARCHITECTURE CAPABLE OF REPRESENTING LCA CALCULATIONS
==PAGE:43==
that automatically exports the necessary data for the LCA from all of the building com­
ponents to an LCAbyg JSON format based on the parent­child hierarchy with edge and
node network. After the export, the LCAbyg can be opened, and a newly created project
has been created for all the building components from the Revit model. An additional web
application has been added to the workflow that allows users to run the LCA in the cloud
and access the results from a web application instead of opening the LCAbyg software;
however, it doesn’t allow further detail of the LCA but supports the iterative workflow.
BUILDING A SYSTEM ARCHITECTURE CAPABLE OF REPRESENTING LCA CALCULATIONS
33
==PAGE:44==
34
BUILDING A SYSTEM ARCHITECTURE CAPABLE OF REPRESENTING LCA CALCULATIONS
==PAGE:45==
5
Analysis
This chapter demonstrates and evaluates the performance of the LCA tool by applying
it to the case study of an office building, Building 118, on the DTU Campus. First, the
results of Building 118 are compared to reference office buildings from a BUILD Report
from 2021 [51] on accuracy. The LCA tool is also evaluated on the speed of carrying out
an LCA with a statement from sustainability consultant Andreas Sørensen from Rambøll.
Next, the tool will be validated on the accuracy of the predefined components based on
reference data from a Report from Aalborg University, Henning Larsen, and Rambøll.
5.1
Case study: Building 118
The case study is based on Building 118, an office building located on Brovej 118, 2800
Kongens Lyngby, at DTU Campus. The building is from 1970 and is 5.800 square meters
divided into three stories and a basement. The structure consists mainly of concrete and
bricks.
5.1.1
Model setup
A Revit file of Building 118 has been retrieved from the DTU BIMlab, a platform that fa­
cilitates content for educational use. The Revit model is at a preliminary stage, approxi­
mately between LOD 200­300, as the building components are generic, but the sizes and
quantities are accurate.
As previously stated, there are two ways of modeling the components in Revit with the LCA
tool; the first is to use the predefined component, which is useful when the Revit model
has a low detail level since the predefined component has already embedded the data;
which speeds up the modeling phase. On the other hand, if the model has a higher detail
level, it may be a better option to model the component manually from the material ID,
however, it is slower but able to give a more precise result. In this case, the first option of
using a predefined component is chosen since the model only uses generic components,
thereby increasing the modeling speed.
The list in fig. 5.1 shows two columns, and the left shows the different types of families
in the Revit model for each of the chosen building component categories; walls, roofs,
floors, and ceilings. The right column shows the corresponding predefined building com­
ponents (previously shown in the diagram in fig. 4.7) that fit the component types from
the Revit model the best; however, since the options of predefined components are lim­
ited, the matching is likely to cause deviations between the Revit model components and
the predefined components. A few building components were not considered to fit the
predefined components, like 50 mm grating and curtain walls, instead marked with ”­”.
After changing all the relevant building components in Revit to the corresponding prede­
fined components, a 3D visualization is shown in fig. 4.8 from Revit. The upper model
shows the building before being mapped with predefined components, and the lower
model shows the model after. In addition, the building component mapped with LCA
materials is marked with a transparent green to visualize better which components are
BUILDING A SYSTEM ARCHITECTURE CAPABLE OF REPRESENTING LCA CALCULATIONS
35
==PAGE:46==
Revit element name
Predefined element name
Walls
Basic Wall: Entrence - 50mm
Internal wall of aerated concrete and plaster
Basic Wall: Exterior - 250mm Masonry / Concrete
External wall of concrete, insulation and brick
Basic Wall: Exterior - 250mm Masonry / Concrete
External wall of concrete, insulation and brick
Basic Wall: Exterior - 300mm Masonry / Concrete
External wall of concrete, insulation and brick
Basic Wall: Exterior - 330mm Masonry / Concrete
External wall of concrete, insulation and brick
Basic Wall: Foundation - 150mm Concrete
External wall of concrete, insulation and brick
Basic Wall: Foundation - 250mm Concrete
External wall of concrete, insulation and brick
Basic Wall: Foundation - 300mm Concrete
External wall of concrete, insulation and brick
Basic Wall: Foundation - 330mm Concrete
External wall of concrete, insulation and brick
Basic Wall: Interior - 100mm Leightweight Concrete
Internal wall of aerated concrete and plaster
Basic Wall: Interior - 100mm Sand Lime
Internal wall of aerated concrete and plaster
Basic Wall: Interior - 120mm Concrete
Internal wall of aerated concrete and plaster
Basic Wall: Interior - 145mm Drywall (25/95/25)
Internal wall of aerated concrete and plaster
Basic Wall: Interior - 150mm Concrete
Internal wall of aerated concrete and plaster
Basic Wall: Interior - 150mm Sand Lime
Internal wall of aerated concrete and plaster
Basic Wall: Interior - 200mm Wallboard
Internal wall of aerated concrete and plaster
Basic Wall: Interior - 250mm Concrete
Internal wall of aerated concrete and plaster
Basic Wall: Suffit - 50mm MDF
Internal wall of aerated concrete and plaster
Basic Wall: Suffit - 50mm MDF (Fixture)
Internal wall of aerated concrete and plaster
Curtain Wall: Exterior - Window
-
Curtain Wall: Interior - Elevator CW
-
Curtain Wall: Interior - Folding Door
-
Roof
Basic Roof: Generic - 300mm
Roof of hollow concrete, insulation and membrane
Basic Roof: Warm - 400mm Roofing Asphalt / 100mm Concrete
Roof of insulation and roofing felt
Floor
Floor: Concrete 100mm
Deck of hollow concrete, insulation and wood floor
Floor: Concrete 150mm
Deck of hollow concrete, insulation and wood floor
Floor: Grating 50mm
-
Floor: Ground - 250mm Concrete / Stone
Ground slab of linoleum, insulation and concrete
Floor: Ground - 305mm Concrete / Stone
Ground slab of linoleum, insulation and concrete
Floor: Suspended - 155mm Concrete
Ground slab of linoleum, insulation and concrete
Ceiling
Compound Ceiling: Generic - 50mm
Deck of hollow concrete, insulation and wood floor
Figure 5.1: Building 118 Revit families grouped on walls, roofs, floors, and ceilings, and
the corresponding predefined components from fig. 4.7.
After
Before
Components 
included in LCA
Figure 5.2: View in Revit before and after mapping components with material IDs
36
BUILDING A SYSTEM ARCHITECTURE CAPABLE OF REPRESENTING LCA CALCULATIONS
==PAGE:47==
taken into account in the LCA, creating a better overview and making the modeling phase
of LCA components more intuitive.
When the building components are exported to LCAbyg, additional information needs to
be input into the project, such as the calculation type, reference study period, gross floor
area, and building type; however, only regarding the building model and not the usage
phases and energy data. The calculation type is set to Normal; other types could be
DGNB or voluntary sustainability class. The type of building is set to an office, as this
consists mainly of the professor’s offices. The gross floor area is set to 5.800 m2, which
originates from the BBR database, and the reference study period is set to 50 years to
compare it with reference data, however, offices usually have higher RSP, as it SBi states
a typical 80­year RSP for offices. [53].
Building
Calculation prerequisites
Floor area above terrain
4350
m2
Calculation type
Normal
Floor height
3.67
m
Building type
Office
Plot area
4470
m2
Year of comissioning
1970
year
Stories above terrain
3
Reference study period
80
year
Basement floors
1
Heated area
5800
m2
Outdoor area
4470
m2
Floor area
5800
m2
Figure 5.3: Prerequisite project settings LCAbyg
5.2
Results of case study
5.2.1
Accuracy
The mapped materials are exported to LCAbyg, through the plugin in Revit, where the LCA
is carried out. The building components are compared to the report ”WHOLE LIFE CAR­
BON ASSESSMENT OF 60 BUILDINGS POSSIBILITIES TO DEVELOP BENCHMARKS
VALUES FOR LCA OF BUILDINGS” [51] from Aalborg University, where 60 different build­
ings are assessed on carbon emissions, whereas 22 of them are office buildings. Of these
offices, 13 of them are medium size (1.000­10.000 m2), and 8 of them are large (>10.000
m2). The construction type of the buildings is categorized as ’heavy’ when choosing be­
tween light or heavy. Heavy buildings are defined as having load­bearing structures with
internal walls or concrete components, while light buildings have load­bearing structures
with skeleton constructions. [53]. Building 118 belongs to the medium size category with
a GFA of 4.350 m2 and is a heavy building as it mainly contains brick and concrete.
A boxplot is shown in fig. 5.4 together with the results from Building 118. Only the cate­
gories ”floor”, ”wall” and ”roof” are shown, as there was no comparison of the ceiling in
the report.
According to fig. 5.4, the floor of Building 118 is one of the lowest GWPs of all buildings at
0.65 kg CO2­eq / m2 / year. On the other hand, the wall has a GWP much higher than the
highest of the facilities at over 2 kg CO2­eq / m2 / year, while the roof of Building 118 is
just below the 4th quartile at 1.5 kg CO2­eq / m2 / year. There may be several reasons for
these deviations; one significant impact is the Construction database that uses bundles
BUILDING A SYSTEM ARCHITECTURE CAPABLE OF REPRESENTING LCA CALCULATIONS
37
==PAGE:48==
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
Floor
Wall
Roof
GWP (kg CO2-eq/m2/year)
GWP of building 118 building components compared to BUILD reference*
Results from Building 118
Figure 5.4: Boxplot of carbon assessment from 22 office buildings from the BUILD report
[51] compared to the results from the case study of Building 118, resembled with red
dotted lines.
of materials, and for some products, may result in redundant materials in the analysis, for
instance, if the ID for plywood is added to a wall, there may be excessive materials follow­
ing such as construction wood and screws, which results in higher GWP. Another reason
is the poor quality of the Revit model; often, a component is modeled, and the genetic
material is set as 100 % concrete, which may not be correct and creates a false basis for
the predefined component fit. Also, the thickness of the components occasionally seems
inaccurate, e.g., the floor was in the model set to 14 cm thickness, whereas the typical
floor thicknesses range from 30­35 cm [54]. The selection of predefined components was
limited, leading to many materials being unavailable in the limited selection. Therefore
materials such as aerated concrete had to replace materials such as MDF and drywall,
which led to a lot of heavy inner walls, and due to the fact there are 116 offices, this led
to a lot of inner walls with GWP higher than they should have been, explaining the higher
GWP for walls. Also, most buildings from the Build Report 2021 originate from DGNB, the
German Sustainable Building Council, which, based only on guessing, may have chosen
some better­performing buildings regarding GWP. Generally, this could also be explained
by the age difference in the buildings. For example, Building 118 is from 1970, and the
buildings from the report are roughly from 2010­2020, therefore using more modern ma­
terials that are more eco­friendly than in 1970. Another point worth mentioning is that the
intended point of the tool is not to backwardly assess the carbon emission of a building
from a finished Revit model like this case study has done. Instead, the intended way of
using the tool is to model the LCA information as the Revit model develops since many
choices could benefit the LCA throughout the designing phase. This is where the web
application would be utilized as it can fluently run the LCA in the cloud and do many it­
erations of the LCA while making decisions on what type of predefined components to
use.
38
BUILDING A SYSTEM ARCHITECTURE CAPABLE OF REPRESENTING LCA CALCULATIONS
==PAGE:49==
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
After
Before
Time saving (%)
Time comparison before and after LCA tool
Creation of LCAbyg Project
Quantity extraction
Find relavant materials in the database
Figure 5.5: Time consumption before and after new tool, according to statement from
Sørensen.
5.2.2
Time
To measure the reduction of time the new tool provides, Andreas Sørensen, a sustainabil­
ity consultant from Rambøll, was asked how long an LCA would take based on Building
118 as a case. His answer was that the time depends on many different things, especially
waiting for input from other disciplines and stakeholders and the size of the project. Also,
they each have different methodologies, whether renovation or new construction. The
conclusion was that it could vary from as little as 10 hours to 100+ hours. However, the
LCA was broken down into three steps for a better comparison from before and after.
The result is shown in fig. 5.5, where the time is illustrated in a bar chart before and after
the tool. The time is shown in percent, where 100 % is the time it takes to conduct an LCA
today. The upper bar is the time an LCA takes based on the three steps from Sørensen’s
answer, whereas the quantity extraction is clearly the major time­consuming step of 70
%. He mentions other significant steps regarding the LCA as preliminary consultancy,
settlement of goals, and interpretation of results. However, these three steps were chosen
as the main ones in the actual LCA calculation of the building model. At the bottom of
the diagram is the new estimated LCA time, where the quantity extraction is removed,
as it has now been automated with a click of a button. The other two steps, ”creation of
LCAbyg project” and ”finding relevant materials in the database” still have to be carried
out. To quantify these numbers according to the time basis from 10 to 100+ hours, the
actual time saving is shown below.
Min. time saving per LCA = 10 hours · 70% = 7 hours
Max. time saving per LCA = 100+ hours · 70% = 70+ hours
This simplified time estimation shows that there is great potential in saving time when
carrying out an LCA when eliminating the quantity extraction step from 7 to over 70 hours,
however, this is a simplified calculation, and as Sørensen mentioned, the LCA includes
more processes.
BUILDING A SYSTEM ARCHITECTURE CAPABLE OF REPRESENTING LCA CALCULATIONS
39
==PAGE:50==
All in all, the case study showed how the LCA tool could be used to assess the GWP of the
building components of a large office building. The mapping of components showed out
to be the most challenging part, as the Revit model had a poor explanation of the building
components, with little information about what the layers were included, hence; therefore,
used the predefined parts as it made no sense to manually model these components
from the information background. Another challenge was the limited choice of predefined
components, as it didn’t cover all the materials from the Revit components. According to a
rough calculation based on a statement from Sørensen, the tool’s speed also proved that
the time saving of the new method could be reduced by 70 % resulting in a time saving
per LCA at 7 to over 70 hours. Overall the results show that the LCA tool still needs many
improvements to achieve more stable results, however, the time­saving evaluation shows
great potential to save a lot of time in the whole process.
5.3
Validation
Part of the thesis’s aim was to ensure the tool provides accurate results, which this sec­
tion seeks to validate by comparing components created through the tool to reference
components. According to the international standard ISO 14040, the accuracy has to be
”adequate for the intended purpose of the study” and since the intended purpose relies on
the individual project and the information available, the definition remains open. However,
the context of the tool is to provide results of the building model at the preliminary stage
based on the Revit model, and for this case, the accepted accuracy is set to a deviation
of less than 25 % from the reference results.
The predefined components are based on a report ”LCA­profiler for bygningsdele” (trans.
”LCA­profiles for building components”) from the Statens Byggeforskningsinstitut, Aal­
borg Universitet, Henning Larsen Architects, and Rambøll. The report shows a collection
of predefined building components and each component’s GWP. Next, these components
are recreated in Revit as close as possible to the predefined components, and each com­
ponent’s GWP is calculated. The results are then compared to the report to validate how
well the tool can create a desired component. Finally, the results are visualized in the
three bar charts in fig. 5.7, fig. 5.8, and fig. 5.9.
An example of such a reconstruction in LCAbyg is shown in fig. 5.6; here, a predefined
external wall is shown from the report with five different materials in the left column. The
recreation in the right column includes seven materials; one reason is that the steel mesh
and the mineral wool are gathered in one component in the report and not in LCAbyg. An­
other reason is that the chosen LCAbyg material database is based on the Construction­
level, which includes bundles of materials in one construction. Therefore unwanted mate­
rials may be included in the component, like in fig. 5.6 the 13 mm gypsum board in layer 2
is excessive and will influence the GWP of the component. This is also marked in the ta­
ble, whereas the LCAbyg has three construction layers, marked with one, two, and three.
The following bar chart will compare the reference GWP to the recreated components to
validate how well the component’s GWP is modeled.
From fig. 5.7, most of the wall components reconstructed in LCAbyg show a good corre­
spondence with the reference components, where five out of eight have a deviation below
25, but due to the remaining three, the average deviation is 34 %. A few of the compo­
40
BUILDING A SYSTEM ARCHITECTURE CAPABLE OF REPRESENTING LCA CALCULATIONS
==PAGE:51==
Reference*
LCAbyg reconstruction
180 mm steel reinforced concrete with paint
180 mm betonelement C30/C37
300 mm mineral wool with steel frame
Steel mesh
8 mm fiber cement board
300 mm mineral wool
Wooden battens
Fasternes / screws
25 mm larch wood cladding
13 mm gipsum board 
-
Construction wood
-
Fiber cement board
-
Fasternes / screws
-
15 mm Pine cladding
-
Fasternes / screws
1.14 [kg CO2 eqv / m2 / year]
1.30  [kg CO2 eqv / m2 / year]
1
2
3
Figure 5.6: Example of an external wall from the report ”LCA­profiler for bygningsdele” to
the left, and the reconstruction of the wall in LCAbyg on the right.
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
External wall of
concrete,
insulation and
fibre cement
External wall of
steel, insulation
and facade tile
External wall of
concrete,
insulation and
brick
External wall of
concrete,
insulation and
timber cladding
External wall of
timber frame,
insulation and
timber cladding
External wall of
aerated concrete
and insulation
Internal wall of
aerated concrete
and plaster
Internal wall of
plaster board and
steel frame
Internal wall of
aluminium rail and
glass pane
GWP (kg CO2/m2 year)
GWP of wall elements calculated from LCAbyg compared to 
reference values from "LCA-profiler for bygningsdele"
GWP LCAbyg
GWP ref.
GWP (kg CO 2-eq/m2 year)
Figure 5.7: Validation of walls reconstructed from the report ”LCA­profiler for bygnings­
dele” (trans. ”LCA­profiles for building components”). The GWP of the walls compared to
the LCA tools result and the report.
BUILDING A SYSTEM ARCHITECTURE CAPABLE OF REPRESENTING LCA CALCULATIONS
41
==PAGE:52==
nents that deviate from the references are the ”External wall of concrete, insulation and
fiber cement” and the ”Internal wall of aluminum rail and glass pane”. One explanation for
this higher deviation could be the limitation of the Construction database and the fact that
the less common materials are harder to find. One example is the aluminum glass pane,
which isn’t available in the Construction database, as it only contains 399 constructions.
So instead, a replacement has to be found, which is not always a fair match in terms of
GWP.
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
Roof of timber frame,
insulation and roofing felt
Roof of hollow concrete,
insulation and membrane
Roof of steel frame and
insulation
Roof of paperwool and
bricks
Roof of insulation and
roofing felt
Roof of gypsum board,
timber frame and insulation
GWP (kg CO2/m2 year)
GWP of roof elements calculated from LCAbyg compared to 
reference values from "LCA-profiler for bygningsdele"
GWP LCAbyg
GWP ref.
GWP (kg CO 2-eq/m2 year)
Figure 5.8: Validation of roofs reconstructed from the report ”LCA­profiler for bygnings­
dele” (trans. ”LCA­profiles for building components”). The GWP of the walls compared to
the LCA tools result and the report.
Next, fig. 5.8 shows again a good correspondence with the reference components, with
only two components that deviate significantly, which is the ”Roof of timber frame, insu­
lation, and roofing felt” that has a GWP of more than double the reference data and an
average deviation of 48 % on all the components in the category. Even though all of the
materials are included in the database, the construction does not allow adjustment of the
thickness of the materials, which is another factor to take into account. The most common
material has a few different thicknesses but is limited.
Finally, slabs and decks were validated according to the reference data. Here, the com­
ponents deviated more than the previous component categories with an average 101 %
deviation. In fact, only the ”Ground slab of linoleum and insulation” and ”Deck of hollow
concrete insulation and wood floor” has a good approximation, whereas the remaining
components did not. One explanation could be the lack of material in this specific group,
as categories like walls and roofs have a more comprehensive selection of materials within
the database. However, the larger percentage deviation can also seem a lot higher due
to some of the small emissions since an 0.1 kg CO2­eq / m2 / year deviation from the
”Ground slab of timber floor, insulation, and void”, does not seem as much, but when the
reference value is 0.2 kg CO2­eq / m2 / year the deviation is 100 % off, which quickly
results in high deviations, especially for the ”Deck of wood frame, insulation, and wood
floor”.
Wrapping up the validation of components in five categories; external walls, inner walls,
roofs, ground decks, and decks. The majority of the component has a good approximation
42
BUILDING A SYSTEM ARCHITECTURE CAPABLE OF REPRESENTING LCA CALCULATIONS
==PAGE:53==
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
1.4
1.6
1.8
2
Ground slab of linoleum and
insulation
Ground slab of linoleum,
insulation and concrete
Ground slab of timber floor,
insulation and concrete
Deck of hollow concrete,
insulation and wood floor
Deck of steel frame,
insulation and wood floor
Deck of wood frame,
insulation and wood floor
GWP (kg CO2/m2 year)
GWP of slab elements calculated from LCAbyg compared to 
reference values from "LCA-profiler for bygningsdele"
GWP LCAbyg
GWP ref.
GWP (kg CO 2-eq/m2 year)
Figure 5.9: Validation of slabs reconstructed from the report ”LCA­profiler for bygnings­
dele” (trans. ”LCA­profiles for building components”). The GWP of the walls compared to
the LCA tools result and the report.
within 25 % deviation and is perhaps sufficient for an early­stage LCA. However, a few
components had deviations up to 400 % deviation which would be catastrophic for an LCA
if such a component was used. The average deviation of all the components in total was
57 % which is over double the acceptable percent of 25 %; if the component of 400 % is
removed, the final average deviation is 40 %. However, the number of components within
the acceptable percent was 11 out of 21, which is just above half. Therefore, the way the
tool models components through the Construction LCI database must be reconsidered.
According to the methodology used in the thesis, design science research, from [48], the
learnings from the evaluation should be iterated back to the objective and development
of the artifact, ”LCA tool”. As it is an iterative process, this should be done until the initial
problem has been sufficiently solved. However, due to the limited time of the thesis, the
learnings will instead be explained in the discussion chapter.
5.4
Summary
The case study of Building 118 showed that the results of the LCA tool performed incon­
sistently, which could be explained in a number of ways. One of the main causes is due to
the limited Construction database in LCAbyg and the number of predefined components
available. According to the time saving, there is great potential in the tool, however, a
number of modifications to the tool have to be made. Later, the validation showed more
consistent results, and many of the predefined components showed a good fit to the refer­
ence data, however, a few components did not, resulting in an average deviation of 57 %,
which is double the acceptable percent of 25 % and 11 of the 21 predefined components
had a deviation less than 25 %. The modeling of components through the Construction
LCI database must therefore be reconsidered.
BUILDING A SYSTEM ARCHITECTURE CAPABLE OF REPRESENTING LCA CALCULATIONS
43
==PAGE:54==
44
BUILDING A SYSTEM ARCHITECTURE CAPABLE OF REPRESENTING LCA CALCULATIONS
==PAGE:55==
6
Discussion
In the previous chapter, the tool’s efficacy was demonstrated through its implementation
in Building 118 and the validation of pre­specified components. This chapter will focus
on the methodology employed, present the findings, and examine three crucial metrics
­ flexibility, extensibility, and usability ­ that highlight the decisions made throughout the
thesis and some of the weaknesses and strengths of the LCA tool. Finally, the learning
will inform future iterations of the LCA tool.
6.1
Results
6.1.1
Case Study
The case study conducted on Building 118 at DTU Campus aimed to showcase the prac­
tical application of the tool. The first step involved assessing the level of detail in the Revit
model in order to determine whether to utilize the predefined components or to manu­
ally model the building components. Given that the detail level in the Revit model was
low, it was decided to employ the predefined components. A schedule was created for
each building component family, and the corresponding predefined components were se­
lected to achieve the best fit. However, the available options for predefined components
were limited, which resulted in some inaccuracies in the selection process (as depicted in
fig. 5.1). The process of changing each building component to the corresponding family
was relatively straightforward, as the view in fig. 5.2 provided a visual representation of
the changes made. Once complete, the components were exported to the CDE, and the
LCAbyg tool was able to open and display the results. This process was relatively effort­
less, especially considering that the changing of components could have been avoided if
the Revit model had been created with the desired components from the outset.
The carbon emissions were calculated for each component group and compared to 22
other office buildings from the report ”WHOLE LIFE CARBON ASSESSMENT OF 60
BUILDINGS POSSIBILITIES TO DEVELOP BENCHMARKS VALUES FOR LCA OF BUILD­
INGS” [51] from Aalborg University. However, it must be noted that comparing the results
from one building to 22 other buildings is challenging due to the presence of various dis­
crepancies between the two buildings that may impact the results. For instance, most of
the buildings in the comparison were 10 to 15 years old, whereas Building 118 was built
in 1970. Furthermore, the availability of a Revit model with a pre­conducted LCA and
concrete results to compare to was not possible.
A sustainability consultant from Rambøll, Andreas Sørensen, was consulted regarding
the amount of time an LCA typically requires. According to Sørensen, the time taken for
an LCA is dependent on several factors and could range anywhere between 10 to 100+
hours. The process of conducting an LCA was divided into three stages, namely, the
creation of the LCAbyg project, quantity extraction, and the retrieval of relevant material
from the database. Results indicated that the majority of the time, approximately 70 %,
was consumed by the quantity extraction stage. This step has been automated by the new
tool, which could potentially reduce the overall time taken to conduct an LCA. Although
BUILDING A SYSTEM ARCHITECTURE CAPABLE OF REPRESENTING LCA CALCULATIONS
45
==PAGE:56==
this approach is rather basic and only based on the experience of a single individual, it
does align with literature, which suggests that 60 % of the time is lost in early stages
due to the repetition of data entry, as reported by Durão et al. However, Sørensen also
acknowledges that there are several other critical steps involved in conducting an LCA
such as preliminary consultancy, setting objectives, and interpretation of results, among
others. As a result, the time estimate remains subject to some degree of uncertainty.
6.1.2
Validation
The validation process involved a comparison of 21 different building components, includ­
ing nine different wall types, six different roof types, three different slab types, and three
different deck types based on the report ”LCA­profiler for bygningsdele” (trans. ”LCA­
profiles for building components”). The validation consisted of recreating these building
components in Revit using the construction material library in an attempt to achieve the
best possible representation. However, this approach was heavily dependent on the con­
struction materials utilized, and the options may not always fit the components, leading
to subjective guessing and introducing significant bias. Most of the time, the choice was
straightforward, resulting in some accurate approximations. However, if new material,
such as Hempcrete4, constituted the majority of the building, the results would have been
less satisfactory, as the product is rarely used and not widely available in the database
unless a specific EPD was imported. The validation showed that there is potential for
approximating existing building components with varying degrees of precision and that
the accuracy could be improved by utilizing a more extensive database and transitioning
from Construction­level data to product­level data.
6.2
Methodology
The methodology adopted in this research was rooted in the design science research
methodology proposed by Peffers, Tuunanen, and Rossi. This methodology is character­
ized by an iterative approach, where the process of identifying the objective of a solution
and publishing it in an academic article is repeated until a satisfactory resolution of the
initial problem is achieved. However, in this study, the process was only executed once,
which may be viewed as a limitation as further iterations of the tool could have led to sig­
nificant modifications. Nevertheless, these potential modifications will be documented for
future reference in the following sections.
6.2.1
Flexibility
”The ability to change or be changed
easily according to the situation” [55]
The tool is a proof­of­concept aimed at addressing the LCA of building components such
as walls, floors, ceilings, and roofs. These components have a common characteristic of
being layer structures and are connected to the material database in the Revit software,
enabling the configuration of multiple LCA materials on a single wall. However, certain
building components such as stairs and curtain walls may present challenges in material
volume calculation; for example, how do you measure the volume of material of the metal
4”Hempcrete or hemplime is biocomposite material, a mixture of hemp hurds and lime, sand, or pozzolans,
which is used as a material for construction and insulation”
46
BUILDING A SYSTEM ARCHITECTURE CAPABLE OF REPRESENTING LCA CALCULATIONS
==PAGE:57==
on the railings on a staircase? For a wall, it is an easier calculation as the width and area
of the insulation in a given wall are known; the volume is simply the product of the two. The
Revit API, which provides the information extracted from the BIM used in the tool, may
also result in limitations in accuracy. For example, if the volume of a wall component was
extracted, the volume may not have considered the pipes running inside, which should
have been subtracted. Other problems may arise for mechanical components, as Revit
models rarely contain the actual mechanical component, according to Winther (restated
from a meeting with Frederik Blum Winther), which could lead to the wrong components
that may have a significant impact on the LCA. This is another reason to aim for a high
maturity level to ensure the HVAC engineers have inserted the correct components with
the valid LCA material ID.
The tool was developed in alignment with the Danish building regulation BR23 and was
based on the Danish software LCAbyg and the German Ökobau database for materials.
This resulted in basing the entire tool on regulation from BR23, which minimizes the op­
erability in other countries. The tool is based on the Danish software LCAbyg, which uses
the German Ökobau database for materials and therefore suits the calculation of LCA in
Denmark very well. However, the software has some limitations that impact the flexibility
of the tool. First of all, the software is only in Danish, secondly, the material library is
limited to Ökobau, but the import of external EPD is an option, however, it hasn’t been the
focus as generic data from Ökobau is acceptable in BR23. Recently, LCAbyg released
the API which enables the calculation of LCA in the cloud and bypasses the program.
This allows the tool a lot more flexibility as a plugin from Revit can be coded to directly
pass the data needed for the LCA to the API and retrieve the results directly from a web
application, but the options from there are endless, more on how utilization of the API can
extend the possibilities for the tool in the section ”Future Work”.
The CDE facilitates accessibility to data through the use of an open data format, such
as JSON. This allows for easier utilization of data, as demonstrated in the ”Open Inter­
operability Standard” illustrated in 4.3. This level of openness provides added flexibility,
as the data can be accessed by tools beyond LCAbyg. The implementation of the CDE
also enhances collaboration among stakeholders and reduces errors by promoting a sin­
gle source of truth in the BIM process, contributing to the advancement of BIM maturity
levels.
6.2.2
Extensibility
”the quality of being designed to allow
the addition of new capabilities or
functionality” [56]
Before creating a Revit model, there has already been a design stage where the initial
ideas of the design should be, for instance, in Rhino. When the design is settled, it min­
imizes the option of changing it later, which becomes a barrier for LCA if it isn’t included
in the early phase. Rhino is a common 3D modeling software used in the early design
phase; if the tool could connect to the same database and parse the LCA data to the
tool, their barrier would disappear. In fact, Nicolaj Langkjær created such a tool in Rhino
/ Grasshopper that uses predefined building components in the model and parses the
BUILDING A SYSTEM ARCHITECTURE CAPABLE OF REPRESENTING LCA CALCULATIONS
47
==PAGE:58==
data to LCAbyg, which essentially is the same concept for this tool, instead the software
is using Revit. In order to utilize models are create in different software very useful data
format is the IFC. The IFC schema is a standardized, digital description of the built asset;
this is an open data schema that can create a frozen copy of a model in one software and
open it in another, for example, with the LCA data embedded. This bridge could have
been implemented in the tool, as it adds a lot of flexibility when working in multiple BIM
software, however, there are a few obstacles to using OFC, as editing an IFC after export
can be difficult. The concept of using IFC is similar to the CDE, which also creates an
open data schema and enables to store specific BIM data in an accessible format, in this
case, JSON, which allows everyone to use and manipulate it.
EPD is crucial for a reliable LCA result, especially in the later phases of designing, as it
gives a specific dataset of the actual product used. LCAbyg allows EPD to be imported into
a project, however, the EPD has to be in a certain file format that only LCAbyg can import.
The EPDs are only available through EPD­Denmark, which is a Danish EPD database.
The database is currently working on collaborating with more databases globally to create
a larger database, but currently, it is only EPD­Denmark that is available to import to
LCAbyg [57]. On top of that, LCAbyg only allows importing one EPD at a time, making it
very time­consuming for larger construction projects. Hopefully, this process will be more
fluid in the future, allowing to use of materials from external databases.
The tool has shown how to extract quantities from a Revit model through an API to a
database, however, there still are some gaps in data needed to carry out an LCA. E.g.,
the energy data of the building, which isn’t typically available in Revit. An energy software
that provides an API could easily be implemented in the tool for a completely automized
LCA calculation. Another option is to utilize the existing services on the VC CDE, which
already have an HVAC simulator; if such a service could parse the heating and cooling
loads to the LCA tool, the tool could be even more automized. Taking a step further, AI
could even be implemented in such a system. Suppose the data is accessible to train
such a model. In that case, the tool could estimate an LCA result without having all the
necessary data available, but existing data give an estimated guess on what the final
LCA result would be. This could be an interesting method through all the design phases,
and the more information on the LCA there would become, the more certain the model
prediction would be.
6.2.3
Usability
”The ability to change or be changed
easily according to the situation” [58]
User­friendliness has not been the top priority in the early phases of the development
of the LCA tool. The workflow contains a series of steps before being able to export the
relevant information from Revit to LCAbyg, as there haven’t been created a graphical user
interface (GUI) for all the steps. For example, when adding the material ID, a separate
Excel spreadsheet has to be opened before being able to search for the required material.
If a window with an overview of the materials were integrated into Revit, the process would
have been intuitive and user­friendly. However, a few places have prioritized making such
a GUI for better usability. One example is the ”LCA tool” tab integrated into the Revit menu,
48
BUILDING A SYSTEM ARCHITECTURE CAPABLE OF REPRESENTING LCA CALCULATIONS
==PAGE:59==
seen in fig. 4.12. Two buttons have been created that 1) transfer the building components
to LCAbyg and 2) open LCAbyg. Another example is the web­based application where
the necessary operations for conducting an updated LCA have been created, shown in
fig. 4.13. The website contains three links, ”Run LCA”, ”Update data” and ”Show results”,
which all are programmed scripts that communicate with the BIM data and LCAbyg API.
Another measure to increase the usability of the tool was to implement the predefined
components so that the components could be used without needing background knowl­
edge of the materials’ properties. Since the tool is developed with the focus of the archi­
tects, they would, in theory, be able to create the majority of the building with predefined
components, as they contain a realistic composition of materials. Later on, other disci­
plines would be able to edit these compositions to their specific needs.
Finally, the last measure of improving the usability of the tool was the 3D model view in
Revit, which visualize what component in the model has been added material IDs. The
view is simply filtering the materials that contain the material IDs and highlights these
in a slightly transparent green. As the process of adding material to the building, more
and more of the model would turn green, shown in fig. 5.2, where most of the materials
are green after the material IDs have been added to the corresponding components. In
addition to the view could be a bar from 0 to 100 % that would more clearly show the
percentage amount of components left needed to have added material IDs. However,
though actions have been made to improve the usability of the LCA tool, in regard to an
architect, still some steps are missing before a new user would be able to use the tool
without explanation.
6.3
Future Work
As the LCA tool is still in the development phase and the tool just showed a proof­of­
concept, there are obviously many steps before the tool would be ready to be implemented
in a professional environment. One of the major improvements to the tool is to reprogram
the data structure of the tool so that each material in Revit would, instead of referring to
a construction, refer to a product; of course, this means that more products have to be
inputted to the model, however, it allows a lot more flexibility and accurate components,
instead of the predefined, that showed out to not very accurate and instead create new
predefined components that would, in theory, be a lot more precise, if the data structure
would be on the product level, as it would avoid excess materials in the components.
As the tool only takes into account the building model components an obvious improve­
ment would be to extend the tool to include the operation of energy and usage. Data
like these could be imported from an external energy frame software, for example, Be18,
which holds information on data such as heating, cooling water usage, etc. The web ap­
plication currently only holds three operations, however, there is great potential to create
more beneficial extensions. If the web application had options for the early design phases
of, for example, changing all constructions material to wood, steel, or concrete and being
able to compare these. This would add a lot of flexibility to the tool and improve the tool
as a designing tool for optimizing the LCA. Furthermore, the web application could evolve
into an interactive dashboard, where different data could be used to enhance usability.
For example, the costs of the project, the project timeline, and when the expected dead­
BUILDING A SYSTEM ARCHITECTURE CAPABLE OF REPRESENTING LCA CALCULATIONS
49
==PAGE:60==
Components 
included in LCA
72% ﬁnished
Results
Actual GWP
Predicted GWP
Required Service Life
80
Gross Floor Area
5600
Heated area
5500
Building Type
Normal
GWP
Time
Set Impact Category:      GWP
GWP
A1-3        A4        A5        B4        B6        C3        C4        D
GWP
External Walls            Roof        Ground Deck        Deck            Beams          
Settings
A       B
GWP
Concrete
Wood
A
B
Search materials
Compare
Progess
Quantities
Wood
Concrete
Steel
Glass
KG
Unit
year
m2
m2
Date: 06/02/2023 
Project: Building 118, DTU Campus
LCA Tool 2.0
Figure 6.1: Proposed interactive dashboard for future work of the LCA tool. Note that
this is only an illustration and is created based on the original web application shown in
fig. 4.13.
line for the project is finished. The result page could also be more detailed; instead of
only showing the traditional impact categories, it also shows the impact over time, the
impacts on individual building categories, and the impact on embodied vs. operational
emissions. These ideas have been implemented in a proposed interactive dashboard
shown in fig. 6.1.
Using modern technologies such as machine learning (ML) to predict final LCA results
based on the initial data from the model and constantly update throughout the develop­
ment of the model. This, of course, requires a lot of training data for a model to become
usable, however, a software called ”Sustainable Minds tool” have already implemented
ML in their LCA tool, enabling the creation of comprehensive LCA results from the design
phase inputs.[59] Furthermore, artificial intelligence could be added to make suggestions
on material choice or geometry based on the lowest impact while keeping the properties
sufficient.
6.4
Summary
The learnings of the case study and validation, including accuracy and time spent, were
critically discussed, highlighting the tool’s strengths and weaknesses. The methodology
used in the study was briefly examined, but due to constraints on the thesis, the second
iteration of the Design Science Method was executed in written form, focusing on the three
key aspects of flexibility, extensibility, and usability. Finally, the potential future works of
the tool were outlined, including enhancements to its capabilities that are illustrated in the
proposed interactive dashboard (as depicted in fig. 6.1).
50
BUILDING A SYSTEM ARCHITECTURE CAPABLE OF REPRESENTING LCA CALCULATIONS
==PAGE:61==
7
Conclusion
The aim of the thesis was to develop a proof­of­concept cloud­based BIM­LCA tool that
holds the potential to reduce the time spent carrying out an LCA while providing accurate
results. The tool was developed using a combination of C# and Python programming lan­
guages, enabling the extraction of relevant data from a Revit model to a CDE accessible
in the cloud, and thereby both BIM­ and cloud­based.
To address whether or not the tool holds the potential to reduce the time spent carrying out
an LCA, Sørensen, LCA Consultant in Rambøll, was asked to estimate the contribution
of three aspects of the LCA process: creation of the LCAbyg project, finding relevant
materials in the database, and quantity extraction, which he estimated to be 10 %, 20
% and 70 %, based on the case study for Building 118. Since the tool automatizes the
quantity approach, the step is neglected and thereby only contains the creation of the
LCAbyg project and finding relevant materials in the database that together consist of 30
%, hence an argument that the tool holds the potential to reduce the time spent carrying
out an LCA of 70 %. Additionally, the time spent carrying out an LCA today, is between
10 to 100+ hours, according to Sørensen, which leads to a potential reduction from 7 to
over 70 hours per LCA. However, the calculation is greatly simplified and the LCA does
contain more nuances than these three steps. The time of carrying out an LCA also
depends on what approach is used and with which tools. Only asking one person gives
a more one­sided result.
To ensure the LCA tool provided accurate results the tool was both evaluated in the case
study of Building 118 and later validated based on the proposed predefined components.
The case study on Building 118, showed inconsistent results, and especially the wall com­
ponent category deviated significantly from the comparing 22 office buildings, yet the floor
and roof component categories were within the min and max bounds of the reference of­
fice buildings. However, these results may not accurately reflect the accuracy of the tool,
since the 22 reference buildings aren’t entirely comparable to Building 118.
Therefore a validation was conducted based on the predefined components. These com­
ponents were compared to a report ”LCA­profiler for bygningsdele” (trans. ”LCA­profiles
for building components”), which contained concrete GWP data of each component, and
was, therefore, more comparable. The components were categorized into external walls,
internal walls, roofs, slabs, and decks. Overall 11 of 21 components were within the ac­
cepted deviation of 25 %, which is just above half. The other half contained components
that were deviating a lot since the database didn’t contain all of the materials and therefore
substitutes were replaced, which resulted in a few highly deviating components, resulting
in an average deviation of 57 % of all the components and 40 % if neglecting the outlier,
hence above the accepted accuracy of 25 % deviation.
In conclusion, while the tool demonstrated potential in reducing the time spent on LCA,
with a potential time saving of 70 % or 7 to over 70 hours per LCA, the accuracy of the
results was not found to be accurate, with a 57 % average deviation larger than the ac­
ceptable limit of 25 % deviation.
BUILDING A SYSTEM ARCHITECTURE CAPABLE OF REPRESENTING LCA CALCULATIONS
51
==PAGE:62==
52
BUILDING A SYSTEM ARCHITECTURE CAPABLE OF REPRESENTING LCA CALCULATIONS
==PAGE:63==
Bibliography
[1]
World Green Building Council. Embodied Carbon ­ World Green Building Council.
URL: https://worldgbc.org/advancing-net-zero/embodied-carbon/.
[2]
Bolig­ og Planstyrelsen. Klimakrav i bygningsreglementet. URL: https://bpst.dk/
da/Byggeri/Baeredygtigt-byggeri/NY-Klimakrav-i-bygningsreglementet#.
[3]
Danmarks Statistik. NYT: Stigning i det fuldførte byggeri i tredje kvartal ­ Danmarks
Statistik. URL: https://www.dst.dk/da/Statistik/nyheder-analyser-publ/nyt/NytHtml?
cid=40172.
[4]
European Commission. Joint Research Centre. Institute for Environment and Sus­
tainability. International Reference Life Cycle Data System (ILCD) Handbook gen­
eral guide for life cycle assessment : detailed guidance. Publications Office, 2010,
p. 398. ISBN: 9789279190926.
[5]
Dagensbyggeri.dk. DGNB­interessen stiger støt | Dagens Byggeri. URL: https://
www.dagensbyggeri.dk/artikel/113701-dgnb-interessen-stiger-stot.
[6]
Regitze Kjær Zimmermann, Simone Bruhn, and Harpa Birgisdóttir. “Bim­based life
cycle assessment of buildings—an investigation of industry practice and needs”.
In: Sustainability (Switzerland) 13.10 (May 2021). ISSN: 20711050. DOI: 10.3390/
su13105455.
[7]
Walter Klöpffer. The role of SETAC in the development of LCA. Apr. 2006. DOI:
10.1065/lca2006.04.019.
[8]
Danish Standards Association. Miljøledelse­Livscyklusvurdering­Principper og struk­
tur Environmental management­Life cycle assessment­Principles and framework.
Tech. rep. 2008.
[9]
Danish Standards Association. Miljøledelse­Livscyklusvurdering­Principper og struk­
tur Environmental management­Life cycle assessment­Principles and framework.
Tech. rep. 2008.
[10]
Danish Standards Association. Miljøledelse­Livscyklusvurdering­Krav og vejledning
Environmental management­Life cycle assessment­Requirements and guidelines.
Tech. rep. 2022.
[11]
Sébastien Lasvaux. Towards operational Guidance for Life Cycle Assessment of
Energy­Efficient Buildings in Europe: the EeBGuide project Sustainable Tourism
View project BENEFIS View project. Tech. rep. 2012. URL: https://www.researchgate.
net/publication/259118354.
[12]
Danish Standards Association. Environmental product declarations­Core rules for
the product category of construction products. Tech. rep. 2021. URL: www.ds.dk.
[13]
Iyyanki V. Muralikrishna and Valli Manickam. “Life Cycle Assessment”. In: Environ­
mental Management (2017), pp. 57–75. DOI: 10.1016/B978-0-12-811989-1.00005-1.
URL: https://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/B9780128119891000051.
[14]
Mohammad Najjar et al. “Integration of BIM and LCA: Evaluating the environmental
impacts of building materials at an early stage of designing a typical office building”.
In: Journal of Building Engineering 14 (Nov. 2017), pp. 115–126. ISSN: 23527102.
DOI: 10.1016/j.jobe.2017.10.005.
BUILDING A SYSTEM ARCHITECTURE CAPABLE OF REPRESENTING LCA CALCULATIONS
53
==PAGE:64==
[15]
A. Martínez­Rocamora, J. Solís­Guzmán, and M. Marrero. LCA databases focused
on construction materials: A review. May 2016. DOI: 10.1016/j.rser.2015.12.243.
[16]
Mariana Huskinson et al. “Decision­making processes in controlling exposure to
sunlight supported by simulation tools: A case study in warm weather”. In: Energies
14.14 (July 2021). ISSN: 19961073. DOI: 10.3390/en14144100.
[17]
International Organization for Standardization. “ISO 19650­1:2018”. In: (2018).
[18]
General Services Administration and Government agency. Level of Detail | GSA.
URL: https://www.gsa.gov/real- estate/design- and- construction/3d4d- building-
information-modeling/bim-software-guidelines/document-guides/level-of-detail.
[19]
Evolve Consultancy. LOD = LOD + LOI ­ Evolve Consultancy. 2014. URL: https:
//evolve-consultancy.com/lod-lod-loi/.
[20]
Stefanie Hellweg and Llorenç Milà Canals. Emerging approaches, challenges and
opportunities in life cycle assessment. Tech. rep. URL: http://science.sciencemag.
org/.
[21]
Bilal Succar, Willy Sher, and Anthony Williams. “Measuring BIM performance: Five
metrics”. In: Architectural Engineering and Design Management 8.2 (Aug. 2012),
pp. 120–142. ISSN: 17527589. DOI: 10.1080/17452007.2012.659506.
[22]
Mark Bew. Digital Built Britain – Level 3 Strategy. Tech. rep.
[23]
Matt Kirby. What Is a Common Data Environment and How Is It Used In Construc­
tion? | Constructible. URL: https://constructible.trimble.com/construction-industry/
what-is-a-common-data-environment-and-how-is-it-used-in-construction.
[24]
Jakob Beetz. Bimserver.org­an Open Source IFC model server DuraArk View project
BIM and GIS integration View project BIMSERVER.ORG­AN OPEN SOURCE IFC
MODEL SERVER. Tech. rep., pp. 16–18. URL: https : / / www . researchgate . net /
publication/254899282.
[25]
https://technical.buildingsmart.org/standards/ifc/. Industry Foundation Classes (IFC)
­ buildingSMART Technical. URL: https://technical.buildingsmart.org/standards/ifc/.
[26]
Mikki Seidenschnur et al. “A common data environment for HVAC design and en­
gineering”. In: Automation in Construction 142 (Oct. 2022). ISSN: 09265805. DOI:
10.1016/j.autcon.2022.104500.
[27]
https://aws.amazon.com/microservices/. What are Microservices? | AWS. URL: https:
//aws.amazon.com/microservices/.
[28]
Bernardette Soust­Verdaguer, Carmen Llatas, and Antonio García­Martínez. Criti­
cal review of bim­based LCA method to buildings. Feb. 2017. DOI: 10.1016/j.enbuild.
2016.12.009.
[29]
Tajda Potrč Obrecht et al. “BIM and LCA Integration: A Systematic Literature Re­
view”. In: Sustainability 2020, Vol. 12, Page 5534 12.14 (July 2020), p. 5534. ISSN:
2071­1050. DOI: 10.3390/SU12145534. URL: https://www.mdpi.com/2071-1050/
12/14/5534/htm%20https://www.mdpi.com/2071-1050/12/14/5534.
[30]
Joaquín Díaz and Laura Álvarez Antón. Sustainable Construction Approach through
Integration of LCA and BIM Tools. Tech. rep.
[31]
Don Mah et al. “House construction CO 2 footprint quantification: a BIM approach”.
In: Natural Resources Engineering Facility 11.2 (2011), pp. 1471–4175. DOI: 10.
1108/14714171111124149. URL: www.emeraldinsight.com/1471-4175.htm.
[32]
A. Akbarnezhad, K. C.G. Ong, and L. R. Chandra. “Economic and environmen­
tal assessment of deconstruction strategies using building information modeling”.
54
BUILDING A SYSTEM ARCHITECTURE CAPABLE OF REPRESENTING LCA CALCULATIONS
==PAGE:65==
In: Automation in Construction 37 (2014), pp. 131–144. ISSN: 09265805. DOI: 10.
1016/J.AUTCON.2013.10.017.
[33]
Lubomir Hadjiiski et al. “IOP Conference Series: Earth and Environmental Science
Identification and comparison of LCA­BIM integration strategies You may also like
Coronary CT angiography (cCTA): automated registration of coronary arterial trees
from multiple phases Can life­cycle assessment produce reliable policy guidelines
in the building sector? Identification and comparison of LCA­BIM integration strate­
gies”. In: (). DOI: 10.1088/1755-1315/323/1/012101.
[34]
https://www.designingbuildings.co.uk/. Bill of quantities BOQ ­ Designing Buildings.
URL: https://www.designingbuildings.co.uk/wiki/Bill_of_quantities_BOQ.
[35]
L. Wastiels and R. Decuypere. “Identification and comparison of LCA­BIM integra­
tion strategies”. In: IOP Conference Series: Earth and Environmental Science 323.1
(Aug. 2019), p. 012101. ISSN: 1755­1315. DOI: 10.1088/1755-1315/323/1/012101.
URL: https://iopscience.iop.org/article/10.1088/1755-1315/323/1/012101%20https:
//iopscience.iop.org/article/10.1088/1755-1315/323/1/012101/meta.
[36]
Mikael Laakso and Arto Kiviniemi. “The IFC Standard ­ A Review of History, Devel­
opment, and Standardization”. In: Electronic Journal of Information Technology in
Construction 17 (Dec. 2012).
[37]
Nicolaj Langkjær. LCA in the Early Design Phase. Tech. rep.
[38]
DiKon. Vejledning til Formålsbeskrivelser vedr. LCA­analyser i DiKon supplement
til DiKon Bim7AA. Tech. rep.
[39]
Martin Röck et al. “LCA and BIM: Visualization of environmental potentials in build­
ing construction at early design stages”. In: Building and Environment 140 (2018),
pp. 153–161. ISSN: 0360­1323. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.buildenv.2018.05.
006. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S036013231830266X.
[40]
Vera Durão et al. “Current Opportunities and Challenges in the Incorporation of the
LCA Method in BIM”. In: The Open Construction & Building Technology Journal 14.1
(Nov. 2020), pp. 336–349. ISSN: 1874­8368. DOI: 10.2174/1874836802014010336.
[41]
Anders Lendager. Vi har længe efterlyst et dynamisk LCA­værktøj — GRAPHISOFT
Center Danmark. URL: https://graphisoft-danmark.dk/news/lendager-vi-har-lnge-
efterlyst-et-dynamisk-lca-vrktj.
[42]
Ignacio Zabalza Bribián, Alfonso Aranda Usón, and Sabina Scarpellini. “Life cy­
cle assessment in buildings: State­of­the­art and simplified LCA methodology as
a complement for building certification”. In: Building and Environment 44.12 (Dec.
2009), pp. 2510–2520. ISSN: 0360­1323. DOI: 10.1016/J.BUILDENV.2009.05.001.
[43]
Alexander Hollberg and Jürgen Ruth. “LCA in architectural design—a parametric
approach”. In: International Journal of Life Cycle Assessment 21.7 (July 2016),
pp. 943–960. ISSN: 16147502. DOI: 10.1007/S11367-016-1065-1/FIGURES/10.
URL: https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s11367-016-1065-1.
[44]
Ulrich Bogenstätter and Ulrich Bogensta. “Prediction and optimization of life­cycle
costs in early design”. In: https://doi.org/10.1080/096132100418528 28.5­6 (2010),
pp. 376–386. ISSN: 09613218. DOI: 10.1080/096132100418528. URL: https://www.
tandfonline.com/doi/abs/10.1080/096132100418528.
[45]
Alexander Hollberg, Gianluca Genova, and Guillaume Habert. “Evaluation of BIM­
based LCA results for building design”. In: Automation in Construction 109 (Jan.
2020). ISSN: 09265805. DOI: 10.1016/j.autcon.2019.102972.
BUILDING A SYSTEM ARCHITECTURE CAPABLE OF REPRESENTING LCA CALCULATIONS
55
==PAGE:66==
[46]
Ramya Kumanayake and Hanbin Luo. “Development of an Automated Tool for
Buildings’ Sustainability Assessment in Early Design Stage”. In: Procedia Engineer­
ing. Vol. 196. Elsevier Ltd, 2017, pp. 903–910. DOI: 10.1016/j.proeng.2017.08.023.
[47]
Diego Apellániz, Panu Pasanen, and Christoph Gengnagel. A Holistic and Para­
metric Approach for Life Cycle Assessment in the Early Design Stages. Tech. rep.
[48]
Ken Peffers, Tuure Tuunanen, and Matti Rossi. Design Science Research Process:
A Model for Producing and Presenting Information Systems Research Wide Audi­
ence End­Users for Digital Services View project Design Research Methodology
View project. Tech. rep. 2020. URL: https://www.researchgate.net/publication/
341926962.
[49]
BIPS. Bim er besværet værd : BIM survey 2014. Tech. rep. URL: www.dbc.dk.
[50]
Red Hat. What is a REST API? URL: https://www.redhat.com/en/topics/api/what-
is-a-rest-api.
[51]
Regitze Kjaer Zimmermann et al. WHOLE LIFE CARBON ASSESSMENT OF 60
BUILDINGS POSSIBILITIES TO DEVELOP BENCHMARKS VALUES FOR LCA
OF BUILDINGS. 2021. ISBN: 9788793585355.
[52]
Statens Byggeforskningsinstitut et al. LCA­profiler for bygningsdele. Tech. rep. URL:
www.innobyg.dk..
[53]
Niels­Jørgen. Aagaard et al. Levetider af bygningsdele ved vurdering af bæredygtighed
og totaløkonomi. Statens Bygningsforskningsinstitut, 2013. ISBN: 9788756315869.
[54]
How Thick Is the Floor Between Two Levels? URL: https://homeguides.sfgate.com/
thick-floor-between-two-levels-102181.html.
[55]
https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english/flexibility. FLEXIBILITY | English
meaning ­ Cambridge Dictionary. URL: https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/
english/flexibility.
[56]
https://www.definitions.net/. What does extensibility mean? URL: https : / / www .
definitions.net/definition/extensibility.
[57]
LCAbtg. “INDTASTNING AF EPD’ER I LCABYG 5”. In: ().
[58]
https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english/usability. USABILITY | English mean­
ing ­ Cambridge Dictionary. URL: https : / / dictionary . cambridge . org / dictionary /
english/usability.
[59]
Mikaela Algren, Wendy Fisher, and Amy E. Landis. “Machine learning in life cy­
cle assessment”. In: Data Science Applied to Sustainability Analysis (Jan. 2021),
pp. 167–190. DOI: 10.1016/B978-0-12-817976-5.00009-7.
56
BUILDING A SYSTEM ARCHITECTURE CAPABLE OF REPRESENTING LCA CALCULATIONS
==PAGE:67==
A
Appendix
Validation results from LCAbyg of predefined
components
BUILDING A SYSTEM ARCHITECTURE CAPABLE OF REPRESENTING LCA CALCULATIONS
57
==PAGE:68==
Beskrivelse
Navn
Total
Total
Total
Total
Total
Total
Total
Total
Total
Total
Total
Total
Udskiftninger
GWP
GWP
GWP
GWP
GWP
GWP
GWP
GWP
GWP
GWP
GWP
ex_c3
ex_c4
ex_d
a1_3
a4
a5
b4
b6
c3
c4
d
kg CO₂-eq.
kg CO₂-eq.
kg CO₂-eq.
kg CO₂-eq.
kg CO₂-eq.
kg CO₂-eq.
kg CO₂-eq.
kg CO₂-eq.
kg CO₂-eq.
kg CO₂-eq.
kg CO₂-eq.
Sum
Bygning
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
7.78E-03
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
5.99E-03
0.00E+00
5.12E-03
1.13E-03
-3.70E-03
Sum
Drift
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
Driftforbrug el
El (Fremskrivning 2020-2040)
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
Driftforbrug varme
Naturgas (Fremskrivning 2020-2040)
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
Byggeproces
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
Opførelse / montering
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
Bygge- og anlægsmaskiner
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
Sum
Drift
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
Driftforbrug el
El (Fremskrivning 2020-2040)
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
Driftforbrug varme
Naturgas (Fremskrivning 2020-2040)
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
Sum
Bygningsdel
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
7.78E-03
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
5.99E-03
0.00E+00
5.12E-03
1.13E-03
-3.70E-03
Gruppe
Dæk
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
-4.03E-05
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
4.70E-04
0.00E+00
1.24E-03
1.19E-05
-5.20E-04
Undergruppe
Etagedæk
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
-4.03E-05
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
4.70E-04
0.00E+00
1.24E-03
1.19E-05
-5.20E-04
Bygningsdel
Etagedæk af beton huldæk, isolering og trægulv
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
2.97E-04
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
3.26E-04
2.87E-07
-1.55E-04
Konstruktion
Dæk, betonelement, forspændt huldæk 0,18/7,0 
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
5.17E-04
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
9.57E-06
6.14E-08
-6.94E-05
Byggevare
Armeringsnet
0
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
6.15E-05
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
6.14E-08
-3.54E-05
Byggevare
Beton C45/55, fabriksbeton og betonelementer
0
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
4.55E-04
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
9.57E-06
0.00E+00
-3.41E-05
Konstruktion
Gulv, trægulv på strøer
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
-2.19E-04
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
3.17E-04
2.26E-07
-8.52E-05
Byggevare
Fastgørelsesmidler/skruer i galvaniseret stål
0
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
4.44E-06
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
8.53E-10
-2.26E-06
Byggevare
Konstruktionstræ, KVH-kvalitet (15% fugt / 13% 
H2O)
0
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
-3.12E-05
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
4.53E-05
0.00E+00
-1.13E-05
Byggevare
Mineraluld, alm.
0
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
2.27E-05
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
4.06E-07
2.25E-07
0.00E+00
Byggevare
Træ, fyrretræ (12% fugt / 10,7% H2O)
0
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
-2.15E-04
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
2.71E-04
0.00E+00
-7.16E-05
Bygningsdel
Etagedæk af stålskelet, isolering og trægulv
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
-2.07E-05
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
2.57E-04
0.00E+00
3.18E-04
6.38E-06
-1.36E-04
Konstruktion
Gulv, trægulv på strøer
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
-2.19E-04
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
3.17E-04
2.26E-07
-8.52E-05
Byggevare
Fastgørelsesmidler/skruer i galvaniseret stål
0
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
4.44E-06
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
8.53E-10
-2.26E-06
Byggevare
Konstruktionstræ, KVH-kvalitet (15% fugt / 13% 
H2O)
0
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
-3.12E-05
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
4.53E-05
0.00E+00
-1.13E-05
Byggevare
Mineraluld, alm.
0
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
2.27E-05
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
4.06E-07
2.25E-07
0.00E+00
Byggevare
Træ, fyrretræ (12% fugt / 10,7% H2O)
0
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
-2.15E-04
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
2.71E-04
0.00E+00
-7.16E-05
Konstruktion
Loft, gipsplader på stålprofiler
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
1.27E-04
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
1.44E-04
0.00E+00
4.52E-07
5.74E-06
-2.55E-05
Byggevare
Afretningslag, cementbaseret
0
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
2.75E-05
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
2.25E-06
0.00E+00
Byggevare
Fastgørelsesmidler/skruer i galvaniseret stål
1
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
4.44E-06
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
4.44E-06
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
8.53E-10
-4.53E-06
Byggevare
Gipskartonplade 13 mm, hulplade
1
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
3.41E-05
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
3.73E-05
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
3.19E-06
0.00E+00
Byggevare
Mineraluld, alm.
1
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
2.27E-05
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
2.33E-05
0.00E+00
4.06E-07
2.25E-07
0.00E+00
Byggevare
Overflade, Facademaling, akryl maling
5
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
1.00E-05
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
5.04E-05
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
7.13E-08
-2.69E-07
Byggevare
Stål, valsede profiler og plader
1
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
2.81E-05
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
2.82E-05
0.00E+00
4.61E-08
0.00E+00
-2.07E-05
Konstruktion
Loft, nedhængt demonterbart systemloft
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
7.19E-05
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
1.13E-04
0.00E+00
7.92E-07
4.14E-07
-2.52E-05
Byggevare
Fastgørelsesmidler/skruer i galvaniseret stål
1
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
4.44E-06
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
4.44E-06
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
8.53E-10
-4.53E-06
Byggevare
Mineraluld, trykfast til tagsystem
2
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
3.93E-05
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
8.09E-05
0.00E+00
7.46E-07
4.13E-07
0.00E+00
Byggevare
Stål, valsede profiler og plader
1
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
2.81E-05
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
2.82E-05
0.00E+00
4.61E-08
0.00E+00
-2.07E-05
Bygningsdel
Etagedæk af træskelet, isolering og trægulv
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
-3.17E-04
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
2.13E-04
0.00E+00
5.97E-04
5.25E-06
-2.30E-04
Konstruktion
Gulv, trægulv på strøer
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
-2.19E-04
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
3.17E-04
2.26E-07
-8.52E-05
Byggevare
Fastgørelsesmidler/skruer i galvaniseret stål
0
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
4.44E-06
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
8.53E-10
-2.26E-06
Byggevare
Konstruktionstræ, KVH-kvalitet (15% fugt / 13% 
H2O)
0
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
-3.12E-05
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
4.53E-05
0.00E+00
-1.13E-05
Byggevare
Mineraluld, alm.
0
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
2.27E-05
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
4.06E-07
2.25E-07
0.00E+00
Byggevare
Træ, fyrretræ (12% fugt / 10,7% H2O)
0
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
-2.15E-04
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
2.71E-04
0.00E+00
-7.16E-05
Konstruktion
Loft, gipsplader på trælægter
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
-9.74E-05
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
2.13E-04
0.00E+00
2.80E-04
5.02E-06
-1.45E-04
Byggevare
Fastgørelsesmidler/skruer i galvaniseret stål
1
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
4.44E-06
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
4.44E-06
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
8.53E-10
-4.53E-06
Byggevare
Gipskartonplade 13 mm, hulplade
1
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
3.41E-05
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
3.73E-05
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
3.19E-06
0.00E+00
Byggevare
Konstruktionstræ, KVH-kvalitet (15% fugt / 13% 
H2O)
1
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
-1.93E-04
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
8.68E-05
0.00E+00
2.80E-04
0.00E+00
-1.40E-04
Byggevare
Mineraluld, alm.
1
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
2.27E-05
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
2.33E-05
0.00E+00
4.06E-07
2.25E-07
0.00E+00
Byggevare
Overflade, Facademaling, akryl maling
5
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
1.00E-05
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
5.04E-05
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
7.13E-08
-2.69E-07
Byggevare
Overflade, Facademaling, grunder, dispersion
5
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
2.14E-06
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
1.09E-05
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
3.56E-08
-1.54E-07
Byggevare
Puds, kalk-gips, inde
0
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
2.21E-05
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
1.50E-06
0.00E+00
Gruppe
Tage
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
2.32E-03
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
3.01E-03
0.00E+00
1.60E-03
4.43E-05
-8.77E-04
Undergruppe
Tage
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
2.32E-03
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
3.01E-03
0.00E+00
1.60E-03
4.43E-05
-8.77E-04
Bygningsdel
Tag af beton huldæk, isolering og membran
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
1.60E-03
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
1.08E-03
0.00E+00
2.93E-05
1.11E-05
-9.53E-05
Konstruktion
Midterlag, forspændt huldæk 0,18/7,0 m
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
1.60E-03
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
1.08E-03
0.00E+00
2.93E-05
1.11E-05
-9.53E-05
Byggevare
Armeringsnet
0
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
1.08E-04
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
1.07E-07
-6.19E-05
Byggevare
Beton C45/55, fabriksbeton og betonelementer
0
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
4.47E-04
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
9.39E-06
0.00E+00
-3.34E-05
Byggevare
Mineraluld, trykfast til tagsystem
1
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
1.05E-03
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
1.08E-03
0.00E+00
1.99E-05
1.10E-05
0.00E+00
Bygningsdel
Tag af gipsplade, træskelet og isolering
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
1.30E-05
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
1.27E-04
0.00E+00
1.66E-04
1.14E-06
-4.83E-05
Konstruktion
Efterisolering af skrå loft indefra, mineraluld
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
1.30E-05
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
1.27E-04
0.00E+00
1.66E-04
1.14E-06
-4.83E-05
Byggevare
Dampspærre PE (tykkelse 0,0002 m)
1
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
4.99E-06
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
1.19E-05
0.00E+00
6.95E-06
0.00E+00
-6.86E-06
Byggevare
Fastgørelsesmidler/skruer i galvaniseret stål
0
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
4.44E-06
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
8.53E-10
-2.26E-06
Byggevare
Konstruktionstræ, KVH-kvalitet (15% fugt / 13% 
H2O)
0
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
-1.08E-04
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
1.57E-04
0.00E+00
-3.92E-05
Byggevare
Mineraluld, alm.
1
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
7.56E-05
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
7.77E-05
0.00E+00
1.35E-06
7.49E-07
0.00E+00
Byggevare
Mineraluld, løsfyld
1
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
3.60E-05
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
3.71E-05
0.00E+00
7.01E-07
3.88E-07
0.00E+00
Bygningsdel
Tag af isolering og tagpap
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
1.91E-04
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
4.23E-04
0.00E+00
1.66E-06
1.20E-05
0.00E+00
Konstruktion
Ren. Indvendig efterisolering af kviste (isolering)
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
9.29E-05
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
9.55E-05
0.00E+00
1.66E-06
9.21E-07
0.00E+00
Byggevare
Mineraluld, alm.
1
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
9.29E-05
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
9.55E-05
0.00E+00
1.66E-06
9.21E-07
0.00E+00
Konstruktion
Tagbelægning, tagpap
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
9.80E-05
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
3.27E-04
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
1.11E-05
0.00E+00
Byggevare
Tagpap, bitumen toplag, skiferbestrøet
3
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
6.71E-05
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
2.20E-04
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
6.15E-06
0.00E+00
Byggevare
Tagpap, bitumen undermembran
3
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
3.09E-05
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
1.08E-04
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
4.96E-06
0.00E+00
Bygningsdel
Tag af papiruld til tagrum med teglsten
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
-1.90E-04
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
3.27E-04
0.00E+00
5.56E-04
8.53E-10
-3.06E-04
Konstruktion
Efterisolering af loft i tilgængelig tagrum, 
i
ld
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
-3.16E-04
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
1.24E-04
0.00E+00
4.40E-04
0.00E+00
-2.74E-04
Byggevare
Dampspærre PE (tykkelse 0,0002 m)
1
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
4.99E-06
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
1.19E-05
0.00E+00
6.95E-06
0.00E+00
-6.86E-06
Byggevare
Papiruldsisolering, løsfyld
1
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
-3.21E-04
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
1.12E-04
0.00E+00
4.33E-04
0.00E+00
-2.67E-04
Konstruktion
Tagbelægning, tegl
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
1.26E-04
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
2.02E-04
0.00E+00
1.16E-04
8.53E-10
-3.26E-05
Byggevare
Fastgørelsesmidler/skruer i galvaniseret stål
0
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
4.44E-06
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
8.53E-10
-2.26E-06
Byggevare
Konstruktionstræ, KVH-kvalitet (15% fugt / 13% 
H2O)
0
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
-7.72E-05
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
1.12E-04
0.00E+00
-2.80E-05
Byggevare
Tagsten, tegl
1
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
1.98E-04
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
2.02E-04
0.00E+00
3.78E-06
0.00E+00
-2.31E-06
Bygningsdel
Tag af stålskelet og isolering
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
8.29E-04
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
5.53E-04
0.00E+00
1.20E-04
7.74E-06
-1.96E-04
Konstruktion
Loft, gipsplader på stålprofiler
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
1.27E-04
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
1.44E-04
0.00E+00
4.52E-07
5.74E-06
-2.55E-05
Byggevare
Afretningslag, cementbaseret
0
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
2.75E-05
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
2.25E-06
0.00E+00
Byggevare
Fastgørelsesmidler/skruer i galvaniseret stål
1
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
4.44E-06
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
4.44E-06
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
8.53E-10
-4.53E-06
==PAGE:69==
Byggevare
Gipskartonplade 13 mm, hulplade
1
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
3.41E-05
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
3.73E-05
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
3.19E-06
0.00E+00
Byggevare
Mineraluld, alm.
1
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
2.27E-05
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
2.33E-05
0.00E+00
4.06E-07
2.25E-07
0.00E+00
Byggevare
Overflade, Facademaling, akryl maling
5
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
1.00E-05
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
5.04E-05
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
7.13E-08
-2.69E-07
Byggevare
Stål, valsede profiler og plader
1
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
2.81E-05
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
2.82E-05
0.00E+00
4.61E-08
0.00E+00
-2.07E-05
Konstruktion
Midterlag, ståldæk
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
5.77E-04
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
2.07E-04
0.00E+00
4.22E-06
2.00E-06
-1.38E-04
Byggevare
Fastgørelsesmidler/skruer i galvaniseret stål
0
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
2.22E-06
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
4.26E-10
-1.13E-06
Byggevare
Mineraluld, alm.
1
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
2.02E-04
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
2.07E-04
0.00E+00
3.61E-06
2.00E-06
0.00E+00
Byggevare
Stål, valsede profiler og plader
0
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
3.73E-04
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
6.11E-07
0.00E+00
-1.37E-04
Konstruktion
Tagbelægning, tegl
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
1.26E-04
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
2.02E-04
0.00E+00
1.16E-04
8.53E-10
-3.26E-05
Byggevare
Fastgørelsesmidler/skruer i galvaniseret stål
0
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
4.44E-06
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
8.53E-10
-2.26E-06
Byggevare
Konstruktionstræ, KVH-kvalitet (15% fugt / 13% 
H2O)
0
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
-7.72E-05
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
1.12E-04
0.00E+00
-2.80E-05
Byggevare
Tagsten, tegl
1
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
1.98E-04
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
2.02E-04
0.00E+00
3.78E-06
0.00E+00
-2.31E-06
Bygningsdel
Tag af træskelet, isolering og tagpap
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
-1.27E-04
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
5.00E-04
0.00E+00
7.28E-04
1.23E-05
-2.30E-04
Konstruktion
Loft, gipsplader på trælægter
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
-9.74E-05
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
2.13E-04
0.00E+00
2.80E-04
5.02E-06
-1.45E-04
Byggevare
Fastgørelsesmidler/skruer i galvaniseret stål
1
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
4.44E-06
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
4.44E-06
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
8.53E-10
-4.53E-06
Byggevare
Gipskartonplade 13 mm, hulplade
1
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
3.41E-05
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
3.73E-05
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
3.19E-06
0.00E+00
Byggevare
Konstruktionstræ, KVH-kvalitet (15% fugt / 13% 
H2O)
1
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
-1.93E-04
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
8.68E-05
0.00E+00
2.80E-04
0.00E+00
-1.40E-04
Byggevare
Mineraluld, alm.
1
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
2.27E-05
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
2.33E-05
0.00E+00
4.06E-07
2.25E-07
0.00E+00
Byggevare
Overflade, Facademaling, akryl maling
5
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
1.00E-05
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
5.04E-05
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
7.13E-08
-2.69E-07
Byggevare
Overflade, Facademaling, grunder, dispersion
5
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
2.14E-06
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
1.09E-05
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
3.56E-08
-1.54E-07
Byggevare
Puds, kalk-gips, inde
0
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
2.21E-05
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
1.50E-06
0.00E+00
Konstruktion
Midterlag, bjælkespær, ventileret, skrå tage, 
i
l ld
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
-2.95E-05
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
2.87E-04
0.00E+00
4.48E-04
7.30E-06
-8.56E-05
Byggevare
Dampspærre PE (tykkelse 0,0002 m)
1
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
4.99E-06
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
1.19E-05
0.00E+00
6.95E-06
0.00E+00
-6.86E-06
Byggevare
Fastgørelsesmidler/skruer i galvaniseret stål
0
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
6.67E-06
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
1.28E-09
-3.39E-06
Byggevare
Konstruktionstræ, KVH-kvalitet (15% fugt / 13% 
H2O)
0
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
-1.94E-04
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
2.82E-04
0.00E+00
-7.05E-05
Byggevare
Krydsfinérplade
0
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
-1.10E-04
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
1.55E-04
0.00E+00
-4.87E-06
Byggevare
Mineraluld, alm.
1
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
1.96E-04
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
2.02E-04
0.00E+00
3.52E-06
1.95E-06
0.00E+00
Byggevare
Mineraluld, løsfyld
1
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
3.60E-05
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
3.71E-05
0.00E+00
7.01E-07
3.88E-07
0.00E+00
Byggevare
Tagpap, bitumen undermembran
1
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
3.09E-05
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
3.59E-05
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
4.96E-06
0.00E+00
Gruppe
Terrændæk
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
1.61E-03
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
1.82E-03
0.00E+00
1.12E-03
1.03E-03
-1.48E-03
Undergruppe
Terrændæk
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
1.61E-03
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
1.82E-03
0.00E+00
1.12E-03
1.03E-03
-1.48E-03
Bygningsdel
Terrændæk af linoleum, beton, isolering
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
7.96E-04
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
1.68E-05
0.00E+00
6.08E-05
4.52E-05
-6.68E-05
Konstruktion
Gulv, beton slidlag
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
2.77E-04
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
2.48E-05
-1.20E-06
Byggevare
Afretningslag, cementbaseret
0
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
2.75E-04
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
2.25E-05
0.00E+00
Byggevare
EPS isolering til lofter / gulve og kælderydervæg / 
d k 040
0
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
2.02E-06
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
2.29E-06
-1.20E-06
Konstruktion
Gulv, linoleum
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
1.93E-04
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
1.68E-05
0.00E+00
5.18E-05
2.03E-05
-1.58E-05
Byggevare
Afretningslag, cementbaseret
0
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
2.20E-04
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
1.80E-05
0.00E+00
Byggevare
Dampspærre PE (tykkelse 0,0002 m)
0
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
4.99E-06
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
6.95E-06
0.00E+00
-3.43E-06
Byggevare
EPS isolering til lofter / gulve og kælderydervæg / 
d k 040
0
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
2.02E-06
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
2.29E-06
-1.20E-06
Byggevare
Linoleum gulvbelægning (tykkelse 0,0025 m)
1
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
-4.06E-05
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
4.24E-06
0.00E+00
4.48E-05
0.00E+00
-1.11E-05
Byggevare
Overflade, Indendørsmaling, emulsions maling, 
lid
k
2
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
6.23E-06
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
1.25E-05
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
3.56E-08
-7.71E-08
Konstruktion
Terrændæk, beton, 120 mm
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
3.26E-04
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
9.02E-06
3.07E-08
-4.98E-05
Byggevare
Armeringsnet
0
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
3.08E-05
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
3.07E-08
-1.77E-05
Byggevare
Beton C25/30, fabriksbeton og betonelementer
0
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
2.96E-04
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
9.02E-06
0.00E+00
-3.21E-05
Bygningsdel
Terrændæk af trægulv, beton og isolering
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
1.61E-04
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
6.01E-04
0.00E+00
3.56E-04
3.29E-04
-4.72E-04
Konstruktion
Ex. Terrændæk, uarmeret beton 100 mm
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
7.51E-06
0.00E+00
-2.68E-05
Byggevare
Beton C25/30, fabriksbeton og betonelementer
0
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
7.51E-06
0.00E+00
-2.68E-05
Konstruktion
Gulv, trægulv på strøer
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
-2.19E-04
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
3.17E-04
2.26E-07
-8.52E-05
Byggevare
Fastgørelsesmidler/skruer i galvaniseret stål
0
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
4.44E-06
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
8.53E-10
-2.26E-06
Byggevare
Konstruktionstræ, KVH-kvalitet (15% fugt / 13% 
H2O)
0
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
-3.12E-05
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
4.53E-05
0.00E+00
-1.13E-05
Byggevare
Mineraluld, alm.
0
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
2.27E-05
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
4.06E-07
2.25E-07
0.00E+00
Byggevare
Træ, fyrretræ (12% fugt / 10,7% H2O)
0
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
-2.15E-04
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
2.71E-04
0.00E+00
-7.16E-05
Konstruktion
Underlag, isolering EPS 350 mm og singels
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
3.81E-04
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
6.01E-04
0.00E+00
3.24E-05
3.29E-04
-3.60E-04
Byggevare
Dampspærre PE (tykkelse 0,0002 m)
1
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
4.99E-06
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
1.19E-05
0.00E+00
6.95E-06
0.00E+00
-6.86E-06
Byggevare
EPS isolering til vægge og tage 035
1
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
2.60E-04
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
5.89E-04
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
3.29E-04
-3.47E-04
Byggevare
Grus 2-32 mm, tørret
0
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
1.15E-04
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
2.55E-05
0.00E+00
-7.12E-06
Bygningsdel
Terrændæk af trægulv, isolering og beton
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
4.87E-04
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
6.01E-04
0.00E+00
3.58E-04
3.29E-04
-4.95E-04
Konstruktion
Gulv, trægulv på strøer
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
-2.19E-04
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
3.17E-04
2.26E-07
-8.52E-05
Byggevare
Fastgørelsesmidler/skruer i galvaniseret stål
0
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
4.44E-06
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
8.53E-10
-2.26E-06
Byggevare
Konstruktionstræ, KVH-kvalitet (15% fugt / 13% 
H2O)
0
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
-3.12E-05
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
4.53E-05
0.00E+00
-1.13E-05
Byggevare
Mineraluld, alm.
0
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
2.27E-05
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
4.06E-07
2.25E-07
0.00E+00
Byggevare
Træ, fyrretræ (12% fugt / 10,7% H2O)
0
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
-2.15E-04
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
2.71E-04
0.00E+00
-7.16E-05
Konstruktion
Terrændæk, beton, 120 mm
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
3.26E-04
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
9.02E-06
3.07E-08
-4.98E-05
Byggevare
Armeringsnet
0
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
3.08E-05
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
3.07E-08
-1.77E-05
Byggevare
Beton C25/30, fabriksbeton og betonelementer
0
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
2.96E-04
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
9.02E-06
0.00E+00
-3.21E-05
Konstruktion
Underlag, isolering EPS 350 mm og singels
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
3.81E-04
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
6.01E-04
0.00E+00
3.24E-05
3.29E-04
-3.60E-04
Byggevare
Dampspærre PE (tykkelse 0,0002 m)
1
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
4.99E-06
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
1.19E-05
0.00E+00
6.95E-06
0.00E+00
-6.86E-06
Byggevare
EPS isolering til vægge og tage 035
1
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
2.60E-04
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
5.89E-04
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
3.29E-04
-3.47E-04
Byggevare
Grus 2-32 mm, tørret
0
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
1.15E-04
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
2.55E-05
0.00E+00
-7.12E-06
Bygningsdel
Terrændæk af trægulv, isolering og krybekælder 
( d)
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
1.61E-04
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
6.01E-04
0.00E+00
3.49E-04
3.29E-04
-4.46E-04
Konstruktion
Gulv, trægulv på strøer
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
-2.19E-04
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
3.17E-04
2.26E-07
-8.52E-05
Byggevare
Fastgørelsesmidler/skruer i galvaniseret stål
0
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
4.44E-06
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
8.53E-10
-2.26E-06
Byggevare
Konstruktionstræ, KVH-kvalitet (15% fugt / 13% 
H2O)
0
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
-3.12E-05
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
4.53E-05
0.00E+00
-1.13E-05
Byggevare
Mineraluld, alm.
0
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
2.27E-05
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
4.06E-07
2.25E-07
0.00E+00
Byggevare
Træ, fyrretræ (12% fugt / 10,7% H2O)
0
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
-2.15E-04
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
2.71E-04
0.00E+00
-7.16E-05
Konstruktion
Underlag, isolering EPS 350 mm og singels
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
3.81E-04
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
6.01E-04
0.00E+00
3.24E-05
3.29E-04
-3.60E-04
Byggevare
Dampspærre PE (tykkelse 0,0002 m)
1
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
4.99E-06
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
1.19E-05
0.00E+00
6.95E-06
0.00E+00
-6.86E-06
Byggevare
EPS isolering til vægge og tage 035
1
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
2.60E-04
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
5.89E-04
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
3.29E-04
-3.47E-04
Byggevare
Grus 2-32 mm, tørret
0
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
1.15E-04
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
2.55E-05
0.00E+00
-7.12E-06
Gruppe
Ydervægge
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
3.90E-03
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
6.89E-04
0.00E+00
1.15E-03
4.25E-05
-8.24E-04
Undergruppe
Ydervægge
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
3.90E-03
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
6.89E-04
0.00E+00
1.15E-03
4.25E-05
-8.24E-04
Bygningsdel
Ydervæg af beton, isolering og fibercement
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
9.19E-04
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
8.99E-05
0.00E+00
4.24E-05
6.42E-06
-1.12E-04
Konstruktion
Midterdel, betonelement 180mm, mineraluld
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
8.27E-04
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
1.82E-05
2.68E-06
-1.02E-04
Byggevare
Armeringsnet
0
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
9.23E-05
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
9.21E-08
-5.31E-05
Byggevare
Beton C30/37, fabriksbeton og betonelementer
0
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
4.93E-04
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
1.35E-05
0.00E+00
-4.82E-05
Byggevare
Fastgørelsesmidler/skruer i galvaniseret stål
0
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
2.22E-06
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
4.26E-10
-1.13E-06
Byggevare
Mineraluld, løsfyld
0
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
2.40E-04
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
4.67E-06
2.59E-06
0.00E+00
Konstruktion
Yderside, fibercementplade, underkonstruktion i 
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
9.14E-05
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
8.99E-05
0.00E+00
2.42E-05
3.73E-06
-9.44E-06
==PAGE:70==
Byggevare
Fastgørelsesmidler/skruer i galvaniseret stål
0
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
6.67E-06
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
1.28E-09
-3.39E-06
Byggevare
Fibercementplade
1
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
8.74E-05
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
8.99E-05
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
2.44E-06
0.00E+00
Byggevare
Gipskartonplade 13 mm, imprægneret
0
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
1.40E-05
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
1.29E-06
0.00E+00
Byggevare
Konstruktionstræ, KVH-kvalitet (15% fugt / 13% 
H2O)
0
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
-1.67E-05
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
2.42E-05
0.00E+00
-6.04E-06
Bygningsdel
Ydervæg af beton, isolering og murværk
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
1.59E-03
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
3.60E-05
5.16E-06
-1.08E-04
Konstruktion
Midterdel, betonelement 180mm, mineraluld
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
8.27E-04
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
1.82E-05
2.68E-06
-1.02E-04
Byggevare
Armeringsnet
0
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
9.23E-05
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
9.21E-08
-5.31E-05
Byggevare
Beton C30/37, fabriksbeton og betonelementer
0
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
4.93E-04
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
1.35E-05
0.00E+00
-4.82E-05
Byggevare
Fastgørelsesmidler/skruer i galvaniseret stål
0
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
2.22E-06
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
4.26E-10
-1.13E-06
Byggevare
Mineraluld, løsfyld
0
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
2.40E-04
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
4.67E-06
2.59E-06
0.00E+00
Konstruktion
Yderside, Teglsten, formur
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
7.66E-04
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
1.78E-05
2.48E-06
-5.42E-06
Byggevare
Mørtel, fliseklæber
0
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
5.25E-05
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
2.48E-06
-4.32E-07
Byggevare
Teglsten, formur
0
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
7.14E-04
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
1.78E-05
0.00E+00
-4.99E-06
Bygningsdel
Ydervæg af beton, isolering og træbeklædning
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
7.74E-04
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
1.28E-04
0.00E+00
2.27E-04
6.42E-06
-2.11E-04
Konstruktion
Midterdel, betonelement 180mm, mineraluld
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
8.27E-04
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
1.82E-05
2.68E-06
-1.02E-04
Byggevare
Armeringsnet
0
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
9.23E-05
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
9.21E-08
-5.31E-05
Byggevare
Beton C30/37, fabriksbeton og betonelementer
0
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
4.93E-04
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
1.35E-05
0.00E+00
-4.82E-05
Byggevare
Fastgørelsesmidler/skruer i galvaniseret stål
0
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
2.22E-06
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
4.26E-10
-1.13E-06
Byggevare
Mineraluld, løsfyld
0
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
2.40E-04
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
4.67E-06
2.59E-06
0.00E+00
Konstruktion
Vægside, Bræddebeklædning
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
-1.45E-04
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
3.79E-05
0.00E+00
1.85E-04
4.26E-10
-9.88E-05
Byggevare
Fastgørelsesmidler/skruer i galvaniseret stål
0
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
2.22E-06
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
4.26E-10
-1.13E-06
Byggevare
Træ, fyrretræ (12% fugt / 10,7% H2O)
1
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
-1.47E-04
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
3.79E-05
0.00E+00
1.85E-04
0.00E+00
-9.76E-05
Konstruktion
Yderside, fibercementplade, underkonstruktion i 
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
9.14E-05
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
8.99E-05
0.00E+00
2.42E-05
3.73E-06
-9.44E-06
Byggevare
Fastgørelsesmidler/skruer i galvaniseret stål
0
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
6.67E-06
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
1.28E-09
-3.39E-06
Byggevare
Fibercementplade
1
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
8.74E-05
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
8.99E-05
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
2.44E-06
0.00E+00
Byggevare
Gipskartonplade 13 mm, imprægneret
0
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
1.40E-05
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
1.29E-06
0.00E+00
Byggevare
Konstruktionstræ, KVH-kvalitet (15% fugt / 13% 
H2O)
0
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
-1.67E-05
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
2.42E-05
0.00E+00
-6.04E-06
Bygningsdel
Ydervæg af porebeton og isolering
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
5.83E-04
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
8.99E-05
0.00E+00
3.20E-05
7.31E-06
-1.17E-05
Konstruktion
Midterlag, beton, porebetonblok 100mm, 
i
l ld
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
4.91E-04
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
7.87E-06
3.57E-06
-2.28E-06
Byggevare
Fastgørelsesmidler/skruer i galvaniseret stål
0
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
2.22E-06
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
4.26E-10
-1.13E-06
Byggevare
Mineraluld, løsfyld
0
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
2.40E-04
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
4.67E-06
2.59E-06
0.00E+00
Byggevare
Mørtel, fliseklæber
0
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
2.08E-05
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
9.82E-07
-1.71E-07
Byggevare
Porebeton 380 kg/m3
0
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
2.28E-04
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
3.19E-06
0.00E+00
-9.76E-07
Konstruktion
Yderside, fibercementplade, underkonstruktion i 
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
9.14E-05
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
8.99E-05
0.00E+00
2.42E-05
3.73E-06
-9.44E-06
Byggevare
Fastgørelsesmidler/skruer i galvaniseret stål
0
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
6.67E-06
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
1.28E-09
-3.39E-06
Byggevare
Fibercementplade
1
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
8.74E-05
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
8.99E-05
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
2.44E-06
0.00E+00
Byggevare
Gipskartonplade 13 mm, imprægneret
0
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
1.40E-05
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
1.29E-06
0.00E+00
Byggevare
Konstruktionstræ, KVH-kvalitet (15% fugt / 13% 
H2O)
0
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
-1.67E-05
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
2.42E-05
0.00E+00
-6.04E-06
Bygningsdel
Ydervæg af stålskelet, isolering og skærmtegl
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
4.38E-04
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
1.88E-04
0.00E+00
3.44E-05
1.10E-05
-4.89E-05
Konstruktion
Midterdel, stålskelet, mineraluld
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
2.71E-04
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
1.02E-05
1.72E-06
-3.79E-05
Byggevare
Dampspærre PE (tykkelse 0,0002 m)
0
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
4.99E-06
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
6.95E-06
0.00E+00
-3.43E-06
Byggevare
Fastgørelsesmidler/skruer i galvaniseret stål
0
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
4.44E-06
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
8.53E-10
-2.26E-06
Byggevare
Mineraluld, alm.
0
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
1.74E-04
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
3.11E-06
1.72E-06
0.00E+00
Byggevare
Stål, valsede profiler og plader
0
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
8.76E-05
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
1.44E-07
0.00E+00
-3.22E-05
Konstruktion
Vægside, gipskartonplade 2 lag, akrylmaling
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
7.60E-05
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
9.85E-05
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
5.55E-06
-1.55E-06
Byggevare
Afretningslag, cementbaseret
0
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
2.75E-05
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
2.25E-06
0.00E+00
Byggevare
Fastgørelsesmidler/skruer i galvaniseret stål
0
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
2.22E-06
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
4.26E-10
-1.13E-06
Byggevare
Gipskartonplade 13 mm, hulplade
1
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
3.41E-05
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
3.73E-05
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
3.19E-06
0.00E+00
Byggevare
Overflade, Facademaling, akryl maling
5
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
1.00E-05
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
5.04E-05
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
7.13E-08
-2.69E-07
Byggevare
Overflade, Facademaling, grunder, dispersion
5
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
2.14E-06
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
1.09E-05
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
3.56E-08
-1.54E-07
Konstruktion
Yderside, fibercementplade, underkonstruktion i 
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
9.14E-05
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
8.99E-05
0.00E+00
2.42E-05
3.73E-06
-9.44E-06
Byggevare
Fastgørelsesmidler/skruer i galvaniseret stål
0
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
6.67E-06
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
1.28E-09
-3.39E-06
Byggevare
Fibercementplade
1
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
8.74E-05
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
8.99E-05
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
2.44E-06
0.00E+00
Byggevare
Gipskartonplade 13 mm, imprægneret
0
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
1.40E-05
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
1.29E-06
0.00E+00
Byggevare
Konstruktionstræ, KVH-kvalitet (15% fugt / 13% 
H2O)
0
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
-1.67E-05
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
2.42E-05
0.00E+00
-6.04E-06
Bygningsdel
Ydervæg af træskelet, isolering og 
b kl d i
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
-4.09E-04
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
1.93E-04
0.00E+00
7.79E-04
6.15E-06
-3.34E-04
Konstruktion
Midterdel, træelement, papiruld
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
-4.85E-04
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
9.48E-05
0.00E+00
7.79E-04
6.05E-07
-3.32E-04
Byggevare
Dampspærre PE (tykkelse 0,0002 m)
0
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
4.99E-06
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
6.95E-06
0.00E+00
-3.43E-06
Byggevare
Fastgørelsesmidler/skruer i galvaniseret stål
0
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
4.44E-06
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
8.53E-10
-2.26E-06
Byggevare
Konstruktionstræ, KVH-kvalitet (15% fugt / 13% 
H2O)
0
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
-2.80E-04
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
4.06E-04
0.00E+00
-1.01E-04
Byggevare
Mineraluld, løsfyld
0
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
5.60E-05
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
1.09E-06
6.04E-07
0.00E+00
Byggevare
Papiruldsisolering, løsfyld
1
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
-2.71E-04
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
9.48E-05
0.00E+00
3.65E-04
0.00E+00
-2.25E-04
Konstruktion
Vægside, gipskartonplade 2 lag, akrylmaling
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
7.60E-05
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
9.85E-05
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
5.55E-06
-1.55E-06
Byggevare
Afretningslag, cementbaseret
0
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
2.75E-05
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
2.25E-06
0.00E+00
Byggevare
Fastgørelsesmidler/skruer i galvaniseret stål
0
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
2.22E-06
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
4.26E-10
-1.13E-06
Byggevare
Gipskartonplade 13 mm, hulplade
1
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
3.41E-05
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
3.73E-05
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
3.19E-06
0.00E+00
Byggevare
Overflade, Facademaling, akryl maling
5
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
1.00E-05
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
5.04E-05
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
7.13E-08
-2.69E-07
Byggevare
Overflade, Facademaling, grunder, dispersion
5
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
2.14E-06
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
1.09E-05
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
3.56E-08
-1.54E-07
==PAGE:71==
BUILDING A SYSTEM ARCHITECTURE CAPABLE OF REPRESENTING LCA CALCULATIONS
61
==PAGE:72==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Brovej, Building 118
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.byg.dtu.dk
