==PAGE:1==
Modelling the effects of the COVID-19 pan-
demic on public transport usage
Master Thesis
Lana Bukovac and Rebekka Overgaard Birkov
DTU Management
Department of Technology, Management and Economics
==PAGE:2==
Modelling the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic on public transport usage
Master Thesis
February, 2023
By:
Lana Bukovac and Rebekka Overgaard Birkov
Supervisors:
Jesper Bláfoss Ingvardson, Associate professor, Technical University of
Denmark
Otto Anker Nielsen, Professor, Technical University of Denmark
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus-
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
© DTU Management
Published by:
DTU,
Department
of
Technology,
Management
and
Economics,
Akademivej, Building 358, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
www.man.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared for six months in collaboration with the Department of
Technology, Management, and Economics, at the Technical University of Denmark, DTU,
in partial fulfilment for the master’s degree: MSc in Transportation and Logistics.
The thesis period ran from the 1st of August 2022 to the 1st of February 2023.
Lana Bukovac (s210355) and Rebekka Overgaard Birkov (s163756)
Signatures
Date
ii
Modelling the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic on public transport usage
01 / 02 - 2023
==PAGE:4==
Acknowledgments
Firstly, we would like to thank our supervisors associate professor Jesper Bláfoss Ingvard-
son and professor Otto Anker Nielsen for their help and support throughout the whole
thesis. We would particularly like to point out their guidance regarding the structure of the
thesis as well as the multiple technical issues which arose throughout the thesis.
A big thanks to Rejsekort & Rejseplan A/S for giving us access to the travel card data,
without which this thesis would have been impossible. We would also like to thank DTU
Management for providing the GTFS and COMPASS data necessary for this thesis.
Finally, we would like to acknowledge the support of our friends and family throughout
the process. And special thanks to our boyfriends, Ivan and Benjamin, for their endless
support and constructive feedback.
Modelling the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic on public transport usage
iii
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
The COVID-19 pandemic highly influenced all types of mobility worldwide, with public
transportation being particularly affected in Denmark. The perception of public transporta-
tion as unsafe led to a decrease in usage, and further restrictions on working from home
resulted in a loss of regular commuters.
This thesis presents a statistical approach for determining the effects of the COVID-19
pandemic on public transport usage as well as quantifying the impact different variables
have on public transport ridership during the pandemic. These variables were chosen
based on a comprehensive literature review and through the combination of travel card
data, data from the COMPASS model, and meteorological data.
The initial descriptive analysis of the travel card data showed an anticipatory reaction from
passengers, i.e., passengers reacted to changes in restrictions before the changes were
established in reality. The analysis further showed a tendency not to use the Metro as
public transport mode during the pandemic, but also that the Metro managed to retrieve all
its passengers back. Moreover, it was clear that some stations were affected considerably
more than others, likely a result of the demographic surroundings of the stations as well
their accessibility.
The cluster analysis demonstrated the clear impact of the pandemic on passenger be-
haviour. The basic unit of this analysis is not the trip, but the traveller, with the aim of
capturing different patterns of behaviour. To identify those patterns, the analysis adopts
the k-means clustering algorithm. This algorithm was chosen because of its foundation
as a technique for classifying travel card data and because of the algorithm’s simplicity
and effectiveness in clustering a large amount of data. The Elbow method, used to en-
counter the optimal number of clusters for the algorithm, resulted in a number of clusters
equal to 3, representing the frequency of passengers using the system. The obtained
results stated that ridership of regular travellers dropped the most in the first month of the
pandemic. Until the pandemic was over, the number of passengers in all groups did not
approach the pre-pandemic levels. The results of this thesis showed that the frequency
of boarding at the stations of interest nearly returned to pre-pandemic levels. Lastly, the
clusters for February 2020 and 2022 showed stability, which confirms that the ridership
went approximately back to pre-COVID-19 levels. It took two years for the passengers
to return. Meanwhile, the government’s goal was to increase the market share of public
transportation by 50% by 2030, thus resulting in a significant loss for the public transport
system.
Finally, the model was created using multiple linear regression and OLS. This and subse-
quent forecasting analysis showed an increasingly negative linear relationship between
the ridership and the stringency index and a higher-order polynomial relationship between
ridership and positivity rate. The results showed a clear demographic difference, with four
municipalities having a negative effect on public transport ridership and the rest having a
positive effect to varying degrees. Furthermore, the accessibility variable, frequency, was
highly significant in explaining ridership as well as having a high effect. When using the
model estimates to predict ridership, it was clear that the number of transfers was highly
influential together with the stringency index.
iv
Modelling the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic on public transport usage
==PAGE:6==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Acknowledgments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Public Transport usage in Denmark . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Problem statement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.3
Objective
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.4
Reading guide
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2
Background
4
2.1
The COVID-19 pandemic . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.2
Scope . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
3
Literature review
9
3.1
COVID-19-related ridership studies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3.2
Ridership models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
3.3
Meteorological variables . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.4
Clustering variables
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
4
Data
12
4.1
Travel card data
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
4.2
COMPASS data
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
4.3
Model variables . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
5
Methodological approach
19
5.1
Aggregated analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
5.2
Disaggregated analysis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
5.3
Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
6
Statistical indicators
23
6.1
Cramer’s V . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
6.2
Pearson . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
6.3
Spearman’s Rank-Order Correlation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
7
Analyses and Results
25
7.1
Aggregated analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
7.2
Disaggregated analysis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
7.3
Modelling the COVID-19 pandemic . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 35
7.4
Forecasting analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 40
8
Discussion
42
9
Conclusion
46
Bibliography
47
Appendix
51
==PAGE:7==
1
Introduction
The primary role of public transport is to provide access to different locations for individu-
als. Its purpose is also to reduce the usage of motor vehicles and, subsequently, traffic
congestion. Moreover, public transportation services play an essential role for people
who cannot drive and those without access to personal vehicles, children, people with
disabilities, and the elderly. Denmark benefits from a highly developed public transport
system. The country holds one of Europe’s highest market shares in rail transport [9].
For the Danish Government, increasing the market share of public transportation is es-
sential for various reasons, including a reduction in road traffic for environmental, energy,
and climate considerations. They intend to increase public transport’s market share by
50% before 2030. To accomplish this intent, the general public and the industrial sector
must make better use of available possibilities [9]. However, when a pandemic occurs,
the major challenge is establishing normality after the pandemic, especially within public
transport. This is due to the risk that overcrowded public transport poses to the spread of
disease.
The coronavirus disease (COVID-19) is an infectious disease caused by the SARS-CoV-
2 virus [31]. In March 2020, the WHO (World Health Organization) declared the rapidly
spreading coronavirus outbreak a pandemic [32]. The restrictions came into force, and
the normality of life changed. At first, schools, institutions, and daycare facilities closed,
as the country was temporarily shut down for two weeks. Face masks were required to be
worn outside, and bigger gatherings were banned, as well as physical contact (hugs and
handshakes). Denmark was one of the first countries that closed its borders (cf. Table 2.1).
Due to the restrictions and the country’s lockdown, public transport lost many users. The
goal of the Danish Government is to increase public transport usage [9]. However, with
the pandemic, accomplishing this goal will take time. Therefore, measuring the influence
of pandemics and subsequent lockdowns on public transport will lay the foundation for
understanding what has happened and how public transport will recover moving forward.
1.1
Public Transport usage in Denmark
According to research made in 2010, private vehicles are the most frequently used mode
of transport, representing 60% of all commuter trips in Denmark [46]. In 2010, 2.1 million
passenger cars were registered in Denmark, corresponding to 383 passengers for every
1000 inhabitants. Moreover, the research generally showed that most Danish households
(46%) only have one vehicle at their disposal, while 41% of households do not own a car
[46]. The Danish tax law, which makes buying and owning a car expensive in Denmark
compared to other EU countries, partly explains the low number of vehicles per house-
hold. The high tax purpose is to discourage car ownership. Environmental awareness of
Denmark’s citizens is also one of the reasons for using other modes of transport rather
than a car. Well-functioning alternatives to private car ownership, such as extensive cy-
cling infrastructure and modern and reliable public transport, further minimises the need
to own a private car.
Bicycles make up a significant share by representing more than 20% of all trips [46]. That
is a prevalent mode of transportation in Denmark, especially in urban areas. 95% of the
Danish population own a bicycle, and Danes, on average, ride more than 800 km per
year. Its use is prevalent in larger cities. Accordingly, Copenhagen has the highest share
of bicycle trips with 28% in 2009-2010 compared to other Danish cities. The reason is the
Modelling the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic on public transport usage
1
==PAGE:8==
well-established cycling infrastructure with around 9,000 km of separated bike paths and
bike lanes in cities and the countryside.
Moreover, public transport is also a major contributor by providing transport to 13% of
the commuters. Two hundred thirty-nine million trips used the railway network in 2010.
The S-train was the most frequently used railway service for passenger transport, with 93
million trips. The S-train services connect Copenhagen to its surrounding suburbs and
represent 39% of all passenger traffic. Furthermore, 52 and a half million trips were made
by the Copenhagen Metro in the same year [46]. In 2019, the railway network had more
than 290 million trips, from which almost 112 million were by S-trains and 79 million were
by the metro [12]. Denmark’s number of travels by public buses amounted to over 312
million in the same year [13].
1.2
Problem statement
Overall, this thesis aims to analyse the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic on passengers’
behaviour. The focus will be on the usage of the different public transport modes and
how the ridership and general usage have changed throughout and after the COVID-19
pandemic. The thesis is partially in correlation to the previous thesis by Henrion (2022)
[20], which is a preliminary study of the effects of COVID-19 on public transport.
This thesis will focus on public transport usage in Zealand (Denmark). The scope limitation
of focusing on Zealand mainly results from the transport company Movia only operating
in Zealand. Moreover, this is backed by the fact that the vast majority of trips using a
travel card are performed in Zealand [3]. The main source of data comes from the Danish
Rejsekort (hereinafter known as travel card data). Furthermore, data from the COMPASS
model is used to retrieve multiple variables for the modelling.
The main objective of this thesis is to create a valid model that can explain the pandemic’s
effects on public transport usage.
In February 2022, COVID-19 was no longer classified as critical for society. Thus, this
project can further investigate general trends of public transport usage both before, during,
and after the pandemic, also known as the recovery period. In addition, the goal is to
investigate the influence on different groups of travellers through clustering of the travel
card data.
1.3
Objective
This thesis is divided into three overall parts: the aggregated analysis, the disaggregated
analysis, and the modelling and forecasting analysis. For each part, the programming
language used is Python, and the main data comes from the travel card data.
The main method used for the aggregated analysis is aggregation, as stated in the name.
The use of joining data files and spatial join is applied with two main objectives. Firstly, to
perform a descriptive analysis of the data available and, secondly, to prepare the data to
be used in the modelling. Moreover, to visualise the data, Sankey Diagrams are used to
visualise cluster movements between multiple time periods, showcasing the movement
between the different modes (and combination of modes) of public transport.
The disaggregated analysis consists of two cluster analyses of the data. The main method
applied is the K-means clustering method, where each chosen variable is divided into a
number of clusters based on their distance from the centroids. This method is used to
investigate the influence of COVID-19 on different passenger types as well as different
locations in Zealand.
2
Modelling the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic on public transport usage
==PAGE:9==
The modelling aims to estimate how the various lockdown measures affected public trans-
port usage, individually and in combination. The model will then be used to create a
scenario for forecasting the usage and general trends of public transport modes. The
modelling and forecasting analysis make use of several different methodologies. This in-
cludes log-transformation of multiple skewed variables, feature selection using backward
stepwise selection to apply only significant variables to the model, linear regression for
the actual model using Ordinary Least-Squares, and the forecasting analysis, which uses
the in-build Python prediction function to create forecasting scenarios. It is important to
mention that all variables which are log-transformed are back-transformed in the forecast-
ing analysis. Otherwise, the results will not showcase the actual changes in ridership
between each scenario but would be highly influenced by log transformation.
Lastly, the discussion will be made based on the performed analyses and will cover the
policy implications of the results.
1.4
Reading guide
The 2nd section of this report presents the overall background of the COVID-19 pandemic,
including a timeline showing the most important dates. Moreover, the scope of the thesis
is explained, containing the study area and external influences.
For the 3rd section, a literature review was performed, containing previous research on
the subject of COVID-19 and ridership models, as well as variables needed for the mod-
elling.
In the 4th section, the data available for this thesis, together with an in-depth description
of the cleaning and filtration of the available travel card data, is presented. Furthermore,
the model variables are described in detail, including where the data is obtained from.
The 5th section states the methodological approach of the thesis. The chapter contains
an explanation of the chosen period for the different analyses as well as their underlying
theory. Moreover, it includes the theory behind the regression model and forecasting
analysis.
The 6th section focuses on the correlation measurements, which will be used to examine
the relationship between variables.
The 7th section presents all the results of the two overall analyses (aggregated analysis
and cluster analysis), the modelling, and the forecasting analysis.
The 8th and 9th section contains a discussion and conclusion of the results, including
possible explanations, chosen assumptions, and potential for future works.
Modelling the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic on public transport usage
3
==PAGE:10==
2
Background
This chapter focuses on the background behind the COVID-19 pandemic as the cause
of the lack of public transport ridership. The brief timeline of the pandemic in Denmark is
also presented in the chapter, showing important dates relevant to this thesis.
2.1
The COVID-19 pandemic
The COVID-19 pandemic has had far-reaching effects on public health, the economy, and
the way of life [30]. The transportation mode choice has been impacted by various regu-
latory strategies aimed at reducing the risk of COVID-19 transmissions, such as remote
work/study, mask requirements, social distancing, and improved sanitation protocols for
public services. Additionally, people’s perceived risk of infection in shared spaces and
vehicles has also played a role. In return, this led to significant and prevalent reductions
in public transport ridership. Transportation agencies, as well as the general public, face
an urgent need to better understand the factors that may have contributed to the loss of
passenger transportation and the extent of their impacts. Such understanding is impor-
tant because it is critical for transit systems to forecast demand and long-term service
planning.
2.1.1
Timeline
Table 2.1 shows the timeline of the COVID-19 pandemic based on the report from the
Statens Serum Institute (SSI). The entire timeline with detailed descriptions of each COVID-
19-related action can be found on their site [25]. The table below only lists significant
actions taken in Denmark.
Table 2.1: Timeline of the COVID-19 pandemic in Denmark
Date
Description
2020
26th of February
The first Dane tested positive for COVID-19.
11th of March
Denmark is temporarily shut down for two weeks. Schools, institu-
tions, and daycare facilities are closed. Ban on gatherings of more
than 100 people. Public servants who do not have a critical function
are sent home. The first Dane dies after being affected by COVID-
19.
14th of March
Denmark is one of the first countries which is temporarily closing its
borders.
18th of March
Gatherings of more than 10 people are prohibited. In addition, hair-
dressers, restaurants, and shopping centers are closed. All confir-
mations are postponed until after the 1st of June.
23rd of March
All previously introduced measures in Denmark are extended until
the 13th of April.
20th of April
Driving schools, hairdressers, research laboratories, and certain
other liberal professions as well as outdoor sports without body con-
tact are allowed to reopen.
4
Modelling the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic on public transport usage
==PAGE:11==
Table 2.1: Timeline of the COVID-19 pandemic in Denmark
Date
Description
7th of May
Phase two of reopening: Outdoor sports and association life, pro-
fessional sports without spectators, and zoos where guests trans-
port themselves around by car, reopens.
11th of May
Shopping centres, arcades, department stores will be allowed to
reopen.
18th of May
Churches, religious communities, restaurants, cafes, and borrow-
ing and lending libraries reopen.
27th of May
Colleges, high schools, association life, and physical presence in
the public sector (except Region Zealand and the capital) reopens.
1st of July
Three mink farms have tested positive for COVID-19.
Mid-November
The Alfa variant is registered in Denmark.
16th of December
The Danish Health Authority recommends that you do not celebrate
Christmas and New Year with more than 10 people.
17th of December
All Danish shopping centers must close, and restaurants close for
serving.
21st of December
All school pupils who have not been sent home must be taught
digitally. Leisure facilities and liberal professions close. The EU
Commission authorises the EU’s first vaccine against COVID-19,
developed by Pfizer/BioNTech.
25th of December
All shops, with the exception of supermarkets and pharmacies,
must close.
27th of December
The first Danes are vaccinated against COVID-19.
2021
5th of January
The assembly ban is lowered to five people, and the risk level is
raised to the highest level in the warning system. The distance
requirement is changed from 1 to 2 metres.
16th of January
The beta variant, originally discovered in South Africa, has been
discovered for the first time in Denmark.
28th of January
The shutdown of Denmark, which came into effect in December,
has been extended until 28th of February.
1st of March
Denmark partially reopens with the reopening of e.g. large parts
of the retail trade, outdoor cultural institutions, and part of outdoor
sporting life nationally.
3rd of March
The gamma variant - which was first discovered in Brazil - has been
found in Denmark.
19th of March
Over 5 percent of the Danish population is now fully vaccinated.
19th of April
The delta variant is starting to spread in Denmark.
27th of April
Danes can now gather up to 25 people outdoors. Among other
things pubs, restaurants and libraries reopen.
21st of May
Everything in Denmark is now open to one extent or another, with
the exception of discotheques and nightclubs.
23rd of May
20 percent of the Danish population is now fully vaccinated.
5th of July
The Delta variant now dominates in Denmark. Before this, the al-
pha variant dominated.
25th of August
Over 70 percent of the Danish population is now fully vaccinated.
Modelling the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic on public transport usage
5
==PAGE:12==
Table 2.1: Timeline of the COVID-19 pandemic in Denmark
Date
Description
10th of September
COVID-19 is no longer described as a socially critical disease in
Denmark.
11th of November
COVID-19 is again a socially critical disease in Denmark.
12th of December
32,856 have had their third vaccination. 2471 has now been in-
fected with omicron.
19th of December
Requirements for a corona passport are introduced in long-distance
buses and long-distance trains. Theatres, museums, colleges, etc.
are closed. Area requirements in the stores.
2022
1st of January
Approximately 2.8 million Danes have had their third vaccination.
This corresponds to 48.4 percent of the Danish population.
2nd of January
77.9 percent of the population has had at least two vaccinations
now.
7th of January
Over 90 percent of COVID-19 cases in Denmark are now omicron.
1st of February
The restrictions are removed and COVID-19 is changed to no
longer be one critical societal disease. Requirements for tests upon
entry to Denmark are retained.
29th of March
There are no longer any restrictions on entering Denmark for either
people from within or outside the EU.
6
Modelling the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic on public transport usage
==PAGE:13==
2.2
Scope
In this chapter, the scope of the thesis is introduced. Further, the covered area of this
thesis is incorporated. The restrictions in available data will be referred to as external
influences.
2.2.1
Study area
As mentioned in Section 1.2 Problem statement, the area of study covers all of Zealand
in Denmark, limited mainly by Movia, which only operates in Zealand. The entire study
area can be seen in Figure 2.1, where the Copenhagen Greater Area is marked in darker
blue. The Copenhagen Greater Area is highlighted since this area is the scope of the
modelling.
Figure 2.1: Zone map over Zealand
Modelling the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic on public transport usage
7
==PAGE:14==
2.2.2
External influences
The months for which the data for the analyses were chosen are based on excluding
external influences as much as possible to be able to model the effect of the COVID-19
pandemic more accurately.
Important external influences are as follows:
• The city ring opening
• The new bus network ”Bynet 2019”
The city ring, also known as M3, opened on the 29th of September 2019 and consists of
17 new metro stations and two metro stations which are located on the M1 and M2 metro
lines, thus creating a quick way to get around in the city of Copenhagen. It is important
to mention that the new M3 line was temporarily closed for two weeks of January 2020 -
more precisely, from the 12th of January to the 26th of January [48].
The new bus network was created to accommodate the newly implemented city ring so
that the bus network and new metro stations had a good connection. It was implemented
on the 13th of October 2019 [16].
Subsequently, the months prior to the city ring and the new bus network implementation
will not be compared to the data after the implementation.
8
Modelling the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic on public transport usage
==PAGE:15==
3
Literature review
In this section, a literature review will be performed. The circumstances of the COVID-19
pandemic being the first modern pandemic have meant that current ridership models do
not consider the effects of the pandemic. The majority of the existing literature on rider-
ship models does not include COVID-19. However, more and more studies surrounding
COVID-19 are beginning to show, though not all are modelling COVID-19. Subsequently,
it has been necessary to perform a literature review on COVID-19-related studies and gen-
eral ridership models. Furthermore, the size of Denmark and, subsequently, the number
of research papers deriving from Denmark are small, thus resulting in the use of literature
from other countries as well.
3.1
COVID-19-related ridership studies
Prior to COVID-19, studies found evidence of a link between public fear (as measured by
the number of cases of infection) and variations in ridership during past pandemics. For
example, Wang (2014) developed a dynamic model to relate daily underground ridership
in Taipei City to daily reported cases of Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome, known as
SARS, in 2003. The study found that each newly reported case of SARS resulted in an
immediate loss of about 1200 underground passengers, which he ascribed to fear, and it
had a lasting effect of 28 days. Around 50% of daily passenger numbers were lost during
the peak of SARS in 2003 [49].
Moreover, Kim et al. (2017) [7] analysed the smart card data in Seoul before and after the
Middle East Respiratory Syndrome (MERS) outburst in South Korea, focusing on public
transport trips. The authors concluded that the virus outbreak had caused public fear,
responsible for a massive reduction in transportation use in the Seoul Metropolitan Area.
The study found that fear was strong, and it differently influenced travel behaviour depend-
ing on the individual’s way of life, whether it is changeable or fixed, and the location of the
households.
A study by Osorio et al. 2022 [34] extensively researches the drop in ridership in Chicago
during COVID-19. They mainly focused on how well socio-economic characteristics can
explain people’s fear and, subsequently, people’s reactions in terms of using public trans-
port. They found that the socio-economic variables were better at predicting people’s
behavioural changes to news media compared to using the number of reported deaths.
Moreover, they found that these variables could also, to some degree, explain the impact
of remote working. Socio-economic variables in this study include the proportion of age in
three different groups, the proportion of different races, and the proportion of workers and
people in school. Fissinger (2020) similarly studied the effect on ridership before and af-
ter the pandemic in Chicago. This study showed, among other things, a significant racial
variation, where the proportion of Hispanic and Black residents were good predictors of a
lower drop in ridership [17].
Throughout the literature review, it was clear that the majority of the COVID-19-related
ridership studies modelled COVID-19 by using the aspect of fear of the pandemic. From
the literature, it was clear that fear indeed was one reason for the loss in public transport
usage. However, this thesis aims to include a more comprehensive variable.
Modelling the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic on public transport usage
9
==PAGE:16==
3.2
Ridership models
A study by Ingvardson et al. (2018) [21] shows an extensive review of ridership effects
based on socio-economic variables, such as gender, age, car ownership, employment
status, education level, and annual household income. The study specifically examined
the influence of perceived safety on public transport mode selection using a large-scale
travel survey from the multimodal Greater Copenhagen Area. The results have shown
that elderly travellers are less likely to choose public transport, with the assumption that
this travel segment is less mobile, hence favouring a car. Hence, car ownership is clearly
negatively associated with choosing public transport. Similar results are found for bicycle
ownership, which indicates that bicycle is also a competitor to public transport. Nonethe-
less, any significant correlations between perceived safety and average household in-
come around stations do not exist.
However, a study conducted by Chakraborty and Mishra (2013) [6], which focuses on
establishing the relations between transit ridership and land use and socio-economic vari-
ables, found that income and density are extremely significant and robust predictors of
transit ridership for the statewide and urban areas datasets.
The characteristics at a stop or station and how they influence ridership have been inves-
tigated in previous studies. This includes a danish travel card analysis of train service
frequency and station characteristics [23]. The findings of this study include that easy
wayfinding at a station has a significant effect on ridership, and that station characteris-
tics show no significant effect. Similar results are found in a study by Damgaard (2022)
[10], who, through a logistic regression on whether people bring a bicycle on the bus, also
found no significant effect of stop characteristics.
Furthermore, several studies (including Tennøy (2022) [44] and Gutiérrez (2011) [18])
have found that the distance to public transport highly influences ridership, as the farther
away people live from public transport, the less likely they are to use it. Gutiérrez (2011)
also found that accessibility at the Metro stations in Madrid is highly significant for ridership
count. In this study, urban and suburban bus line frequency within 200 meters of the Metro
station is included as a variable that indicates mass public transport and interdependence
with the Metro. Tennøy (2022) performed an empirical study concerning walking distances
to public transport in smaller and larger Norwegian cities. The results found from the
study were that particularly higher frequency, and fewer transfers are highly significant for
commuting by public transport in smaller cities.
Moreover, a study by Ingvardson (2022) [22] found using logistic regression that both
safety perception at the nearest station and service frequency is highly significant and pos-
itively correlated to choosing public transport. Similar to Ingvardson (2018) and Damgaard
(2022), it was determined that service characteristics had a bigger influence on public
transport than station characteristics.
Cars are the largest competitor to public transport. For that matter, several studies in-
cluded car ownership in their analysis to investigate its impact on public transport ridership.
Limtanakool et al. (2006) [27] found that the ratio of total travel time by rail to the car can
better explain travel mode choice than the absolute difference in travel time, suggesting
that valuing the difference in travel time by travel mode depends on total travel time.
Previous research has shown that having access to a car increases car use and, thus,
reduces the use of public transport for leisure trips, especially if the household possesses
10
Modelling the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic on public transport usage
==PAGE:17==
more than one car [39] [36].
Furthermore, those who travel by car are more likely to use it also for social trips (Sharmeen
and Timmermans (2014) and Rubin et al. (2014)). Nevertheless, in a study on mode
choice for daily travel among older adults, Ryan (2020) [37] found that more than a quar-
ter of the respondents used all travel modes (walking, cycling, public transport, and car)
for a daily trip.
3.3
Meteorological variables
The weather in Denmark significantly changes throughout the year and even on a daily
or hourly basis. For a certain group of people, the weather determines whether they use
public transport, take their car, or use their bicycle. A study by Arana et al. (2014) inves-
tigates the influence of weather conditions on public transport in Spain using smartcards
[2]. The multiple linear regression performed showed that both the amount of wind and
rain could decrease the number of trips done by public transport. Moreover, it showed
that higher temperatures resulted in an increase in ridership. Note that in this study, all
meteorological variables were included as continuous variables.
Furthermore, a study from Shenzhen, China, investigated the influence of meteorological
variables on a disaggregated level [54]. Using a multivariate modelling approach, they
found that humidity, wind, and rain have a negative effect on ridership with varying effects
between the metro and bus systems. Moreover, it was found that weather has a more
significant effect on off-peak hour trips and thus that frequent travellers are more resilient
to the weather conditions. Most existing studies, including Singhal et al. (2014) [40] and
the two above-mentioned studies, have been performed using meteorological variables
as continuous variables and thus not considering that different levels of weather data
might influence public transport ridership differently. Hence, this project aims to inves-
tigate several of the meteorological variables as categorical, including precipitation and
wind speed.
3.4
Clustering variables
The chosen variables for investigating the impact of passengers’ behaviour in the study by
Fissinger (2020) [17] are based on the frequency of travellers using public transport. The
analysis was performed to get an insight into the behaviour before the pandemic (2017
and 2018) as well as during the pandemic. The study showed that clusters are stable
during non-pandemic years, with a shift in ridership of less than 1%. However, during the
pandemic, ridership decreased significantly, with almost 90% for rail and around 75% for
busses. This approach showed excellent results and gave a good insight into passenger
behaviour, and thus, it will be followed for this thesis as well.
Modelling the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic on public transport usage
11
==PAGE:18==
4
Data
This chapter describes the data used for the thesis and variables utilised for modelling.
For this thesis, travel card data covering the whole Zealand and COMPASS model data
which covers the Copenhagen Greater Area were used. Moreover, DMI data and an
Oxford project were used for several other variables.
4.1
Travel card data
Travel card data is data commonly used in Denmark for various public transport analyses.
It stems from the usage of the Danish travel card, which is an electronic ticketing system
using RFID technology and is operated by Rejsekort A/S. It can be used for all modes of
public transport everywhere in the country (apart from Bornholm and other smaller islands)
as well as across the border to Sweden. The travel card began as a pilot project in 2008
and grew until all transport modes were part of it by the end of 2017 [28]. At the end of
2019, Rejsekort A/S estimated 3 million active travel cards with approximately 420 million
transactions per year or 140 million annual trips [45].
The share of travel card users has been increasing since the implementation of the sys-
tem, and thus the data now results in more accurate insight into passenger behaviour.
From 2020 to 2022, Denmark saw an increase in people working from home as a conse-
quence of the pandemic and the corresponding restrictions. Subsequently, the number of
active travel cards, as well as the number of trips, fluctuated throughout the years. Based
on the findings of Henrion (2022) [20], both of these had caught up to their respective
pre-COVID-19 numbers. This is backed up by the Danish Civil Aviation and Railway Au-
thority (cf. Figure 4.1), which collects and visualises the main results for public transport
in Denmark [3]. It is essential to mention that the 2022 data from the Danish Civil Avia-
tion and Railway Authority excludes December, as these numbers still are not finalised
yet. Subsequently, Figure 4.1 do not include trips performed in December 2022. Consid-
ering this, the annual number of trips using travel cards has approximately reached the
pre-COVID-19 numbers. Out of the 159.27 million trips in 2022, 106.62 million trips were
within the Greater Copenhagen Area, and 9.57 million trips were in the rest of Zealand,
corresponding to a total of 116.19 million trips. Thus, the vast majority of trips using travel
cards were done within the scope of this report. It is important to mention that the travel
card is just one of many ways of paying for travelling using public transport in Denmark.
Other ways of paying include commuter cards, apps, regular paper tickets, and similar.
Figure 4.1: Annual trips using travel card from 2013 to 2022 (excluding December 2022)
12
Modelling the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic on public transport usage
==PAGE:19==
In Denmark, the cost of taking public transport is zone-based, i.e., the more zones the
passenger travels through, the more expensive his/her trip will be, and only have certain
exceptions (constant discount for youths and pensioners and 20% discount when trav-
elling outside peak hours). Subsequently, Rejsekort A/S collects data from each card
transaction, including information about the unique stop ID, and can use this information
to calculate the trip costs automatically. These are displayed on the check-out readers
whenever a passenger checks out/finishes their trip, thus making it easy for the passen-
ger to keep an eye on the trip cost. To ensure that GDPR is upheld, all unique card IDs
are encrypted. However, the data can be used to identify when and where a passenger
most frequently travels to and from, and thus, it is important to use the data carefully.
The raw travel data consists of one row for each transaction made for all travel cards.
There are seven types of transactions, which are displayed in Table 4.1 along with its
description. Each of these transactions includes information about the trip, such as stop
ID, time, passenger type and number, product family (regular, commuter, or combina-
tion card), card number, trip number, etc., which is then used for the various transport
analyses.
Table 4.1: Description of the different types of transactions
Transaction type
Description
Fi
First check-in
Tr
Transfer check-in after previous check-out
Su
Successive transfer check-in without previous check-out
Co
Check-out
Cc
Check-in cancelled
Io
Check-in/out - one transaction where both happen
In
Inspection
4.1.1
Data cleaning and filtration
Before the travel card data can be used for analysing and modelling public transport usage,
the data must first be aggregated into a trip-level data set. This entails aggregating the
data by using the variable turngl, which is a unique trip ID, creating a data set where
one row contains information about one trip. Moreover, this trip aggregated data is then
merged with GTFS data containing latitude, longitude, and zone ID for each unique stop
ID. This information is used later on when performing the dis-aggregated analysis as well
as when performing spatial joins, which are described in the section below. Only data
from January 2020 until June 2022 is used, which will be further described in Chapter 5.
Table 4.2 shows the number of rows in the travel card data available after each type of
cleaning/filtration. All of which will be described further in-depth below the table.
Table 4.2: Number of rows after different types of cleaning/filtration
Raw
Trip agg.
Cc & P.Type
Trip duration
Dep. NaN
Vacation
# Rows
599.57 M
239.33 M
231.88 M
217.14 M
207.86 M
167.36 M
Cancelled trips and passenger type
After aggregating on trip level, one transaction type and two passenger group types were
excluded from the data set. Firstly, trips for which the total transaction type is ”Cc” are
Modelling the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic on public transport usage
13
==PAGE:20==
excluded since it means that the check-in was cancelled, and thus the trip is not an actual
trip. Note that trips using a commuter travel card do not check out when commuting.
Thus, for example, trips with a total trip type ”FiSu” are not corresponding to incomplete
trips but trips completed using a commuter travel card. Subsequently, these types of trips
are included in further analyses.
Furthermore, 15 different types of passengers within the travel card exist, ranging from
adult personal/anonymous to dog or bicycle personal/anonymous. Trips for which only a
bicycle or a dog is travelling are excluded as these are not human and thus not affected by
COVID-19 and subsequently not relevant for this study (passenger type 3, 6, 13, 14, 16,
and 17). Moreover, passenger type 18 in the travel card data, which is equal to disabled
people, is excluded from all years. In 2022 the Rejsekort A/S decided that their data for
disabled people must have better protection of GDPR, and thus data from this passenger
group was not part of the given 2022 data. Subsequently, it was decided to exclude them
from the previous years of data to standardise the data. Also, passenger group 15 was
available in the 2017-2019 data sets, however, not in the 2020-2022 data set, and a de-
scription of this group was not given by Rejsekort A/S. Subsequently, this group was also
excluded from the data.
Trip duration
Hereafter the duration of each trip could be calculated using the ”MSGReportDate” vari-
able for each trip’s first and last transaction. Trips exclusively occurring outside the thesis
scope are removed. Moreover, trips going out of or into the thesis scope are defined as
area group ”Outside” whereas all trips within the thesis scope are defined as area group
”Inside”. Some trips within the data set are outliers where the trip duration is unrealis-
tic. These outliers are excluded based on the following two restrictions, depending on
whether the trip is purely within the thesis scope (1st restriction) or classified as ”Outside”
(2nd restriction). The restrictions are based on estimates of the trip duration within the
thesis scope and between regions.
1. Trip duration less than 1 minute or greater than 2 hours
2. Trip duration less than 1 minute or greater than 5 hours
Unknown department
Originally the department variable contained all the different types of public transport de-
partments in Denmark, e.g., ”Fynbus”, ”Midttrafik”, ”Arriva”, ”DSB”, etc. However, the
variable is cleaned only to include ”DSB”, ”Movia”, ”Metro”, ”S-tog” and all combinations
of these. This was the department variable that only includes departments actually oper-
ating in Zealand. However, some trips had unknown departments and were subsequently
excluded from the data set. Not knowing the department subsequently means that the
trip is unknown, and thus its influence is unreliable.
Vacations
Lastly, all school vacations are excluded from the data set. Vacations are excluded based
on the week number in which the trip occurs and differentiate from year to year. The spe-
cific weeks of vacation vary throughout Denmark. However, in Zealand, the weeks are the
same and are found from [41]. Vacations have a distinctive effect on travel patterns, and
therefore their impact on the data collected is not considered representative of a typical
day and, as such, were excluded from the analysis.
14
Modelling the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic on public transport usage
==PAGE:21==
4.1.2
Return travels
After performing the initial data filtration, possible return travels are found. Approximately
0.02% of the travels in the cleaned data are classified as return travels, i.e., travels where
the trip begins and ends within the same zone ID. However, trips classified with the trip
type ”FiCo” are excluded as these are determined to be actual regular trips within the
same zone and, thus, not return trips.
Trips classified as return travels are duplicated to split the travel; one for the out trip and
one for the home trip. Reclassifying the zone ID for these travels is performed on only
two specific types of trips. These are trips with the trip type ”FiSuCo” and ”FiCoTrCo”.
These trip types are chosen because they have a clear split of the trip at ”Su” and Tr”
respectively. Moreover, these trip types are responsible for the majority of the return trips
(approximately 75%). The other trip types are trips with many transfers, where a split is
unknown, e.g., the trip type ”FiSuSuSuSuSuSuSuSuCo”. Subsequently, the zone ID for
the split trips is replaced by the zone ID in the original data frame where the transaction
model is ”Su” or ”Tr”. Moreover, the rest of the transaction information is also replaced.
4.1.3
Spatial join
Lastly, a spatial join is somewhat similar to a regular column join. In a column join, two
data sets are combined based on a shared column, whereas with a spatial join, the data
sets are combined based on a geographic/space relationship. The spatial join was used
to combine a geodatabase containing all the LTM zone structures (including all zone IDs)
together with the GTFS stops and stations, thus giving each stop ID a corresponding
zone ID. This was performed using the geographical information system software ArcGIS.
Moreover, the spatial join function was also used together with the COMPASS model data,
as described below.
4.2
COMPASS data
As mentioned previously, the travel card data is the main data source for this project.
However, as found out from the literature review, other types of variables - such as socio-
economic variables - are important when creating a valid and useful model. Subsequently,
data from the COMPASS model was used. The COMPASS model is a newer traffic model
from 2019 and stands for Copenhagen Greater Area Model for Passenger Transport [1].
Thus, it only covers the Copenhagen Greater Area.
4.3
Model variables
Before creating a model to describe the pandemic, all independent variables must be
prepared to fit the chosen dependent variable. In this section, each variable is described in
terms of what it is/covers and where the data is derived from. The variables are divided into
five categories: COVID-19-related characteristics, meteorological variables, accessibility
characteristics, socio-economic characteristics, and travel card characteristics.
4.3.1
COVID-19 related characteristics
Two COVID-19-related characteristics are included and described in this section. Firstly,
the Oxford Stringency Index is included. This is a global index defining the level of gov-
ernment restrictions within each country and derives from a larger research project at the
University of Oxford known as ”COVID-19 Government Response Tracker” [19].
During the pandemic, the stringency index was updated on a daily basis. Each day the
index is between 0-100 and describes the impact/severity of restrictions within a country.
The index is based on nine indicators seen below. Each indicator is scored from 0-100,
Modelling the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic on public transport usage
15
==PAGE:22==
and the final stringency index is the average of all nine indicators. Note that if restrictions
are different between sub-regions of a country, then the index correlates to the sub-region
with the strictest level of response.
1. School closures
2. Workplace closures
3. Cancellation of public events
4. Restrictions on public gatherings
5. Closures of public transport
6. Stay-at-home requirements
7. Public information campaigns
8. Restrictions on internal movements
9. International travel controls
Secondly, the percentage of positive COVID-19 tests is included and from now on mainly
known as the positivity rate. It is derived from the same research project as the stringency
index and originally shows the number of positive COVID-19 tests, which is converted into
a percentage. Together with the stringency index, they cover the COVID-19 variables.
The positivity rate is a good indicator of the COVID-19 situation in Denmark, particularly
from the third quarter of 2021 until June 2022. This variable is necessary to include,
especially to cover the last period of the pandemic, as the stringency index continued to
stay low and thus not truly corresponding to the number of infected people or the influence
on the ridership of public transport.
4.3.2
Meteorological variables
In Denmark, a country known for commuting by bicycle, people often opt for public trans-
port or a car when it rains or there are heavy winds. DMI (The Danish Meteorological
Institute) has 16 weather stations in Zealand measuring wind, temperature, and precipita-
tion, with six of those located in the Greater Copenhagen Area (cf. Figure 4.2) [29].
One station was chosen as the reference station for weather conditions for each observa-
tion. Due to the COMPASS data limiting the model to only the Greater Copenhagen Area,
the weather station in Copenhagen was chosen. DMI store all data in their data archive
with free access for everyone [47]. Here the needed weather data was retrieved on a daily
basis in the time period from January 2020 to June 2022. Hereafter, the average values
on a weekly basis were calculated to fit the dependent variable (which will be described
in the sections below). The variables retrieved from the weather data which are used in
the model are the following:
• Temperature in °C
• Precipitation in mm
• Wind in m/s
16
Modelling the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic on public transport usage
==PAGE:23==
Figure 4.2: Weather stations in Zealand that measures wind, temperature, and precipita-
tion
4.3.3
Accessibility characteristics
GTFS (General Transit Feed Specification) data is provided by DTU and includes geo-
graphical information on each stop/station as well as the schedule of public transport. The
GTFS data also includes information about wheelchair accessibility and whether bikes are
allowed. Since this is not the focus of this thesis, it is not included. However, it is worth
mentioning that Movia launched a two-year test experiment in mid-June 2021, which al-
lowed bicycles on all their buses [26]. The effect of this initiative is unknown as it is still
ongoing and thus not yet evaluated.
Representative data was selected for frequency per stop as frequency is typically stable
over longer periods of time. Subsequently, the average frequency per stop for January,
May, and September 2020-2022 is chosen as representative. Using these months, it is
ensured that changes in frequency due to vacations are excluded and also considers
changes happening from year to year.
Moreover, accessibility characteristics in terms of travel time and trip length are included
based on the information from the COMPASS model. The average travel time for trips
originating at each stop is calculated based on walking time, waiting time, and in-vehicle
time.
• Average travel time per stop
• Average trip length per stop
Modelling the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic on public transport usage
17
==PAGE:24==
4.3.4
Socio-economic characteristics
All the socio-economic variables that are being used in the model are provided by the
COMPASS model, which is described in Section 4.2 COMPASS data and the variables
include the number of residents, resident’s income and age, total employment, number
of high school students, and number of university students. All variables are an average
on a zone level, and all, apart from Age, are converted to densities. The densities are
calculated based on the size of each microzone (in square meters). Subsequently, each
socio-economic variable is independent of the size of its corresponding microzone, and
they now have the same unit.
4.3.5
Travel card characteristics
Lastly, the model obviously makes use of travel card characteristics (cf. Table 4.3). All the
travel card characteristics derive from aggregating the travel card data by week number
and stop number. Average aggregation is used on all variables apart from the municipality
where the first value is used.
Table 4.3: Travel card characteristics
Variable
Description
Ridership
Weekly average ridership per stop - dependent variable
Municipality
Municipality name
Transfers
Weekly average number of trip transfers per stop
Duration
Weekly average trip duration per stop
ModesCount
Weekly average number of mode types used per trip per stop
The municipality number derives from a national classification created after the structural
reform in 2007, where each new municipality received a number [43]. The number of
transfers per trip is calculated by counting the number of ’Su’ and ’Tr’ a trip contains. The
trip duration is calculated from the time between the time stamp of the first check-in to
the time stamp of the final check-out. The number of modes used is determined based
on the number of different departments used. E.g., a trip can consist of two transfers but
only one mode if all modes used are buses.
18
Modelling the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic on public transport usage
==PAGE:25==
5
Methodological approach
The analyses in this thesis employ varying time periods depending on what most effec-
tively captures the desired outcome. Table 5.1 gives a general description of the type of
analysis and the corresponding study period chosen. Moreover, the approach used for
each analysis is described in this chapter.
Table 5.1: Study periods per analysis
Analysis
Study period
Aggregated analysis
Overall January 2020 - June 2022
Pre-COVID-19: Weeks 5-9 2020
Mid-COVID-19: Weeks 5-9 2021
Post-COVID-19: Weeks 5-9 2022
Clustering analysis
(boarders per location)
Pre-COVID-19: February 2020
Mid-COVID-19: March 2020, February 2021, and March
2021
Post-COVID-19: February and March 2022
Clustering analysis
(passenger behaviour)
Pre-COVID-19:
November and December 2019, and
February 2020
Mid-COVID-19: March, November, and December 2020
and 2021, and February 2021
Post-COVID-19: February and March 2022
Modelling and forecasting
analysis
January 2020 - June 2022
5.1
Aggregated analysis
An aggregated analysis is the process of gathering raw data and converting it into a sum-
mary for statistical analysis. For this analysis, three general periods have been chosen to
define the general trends in public transport before, during, and after the pandemic. These
periods have been chosen based on the time period restriction mentioned in Section 2.2.2
External influences while keeping in mind that the three periods must include the same
weeks of data for one to compare the results shown from each period accurately. The
three periods are as follows:
• Pre-COVID-19: Weeks 5-9 2020
• Mid-COVID-19: Weeks 5-9 2021
• Post-COVID-19: Weeks 5-9 2022
Moreover, the travel card data has generally been aggregated into six departments, which
can be seen below. The changes in ridership within and between these departments are
investigated in Section 7.1 Aggregated analysis.
• DSB
Modelling the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic on public transport usage
19
==PAGE:26==
• Metro
• Movia
• Multimodal Movia + Metro
• Multimodal DSB + S-tog
• S-tog
Moreover, when visualising the stringency index throughout the pandemic, the ridership
has been converted into an index. The ridership index goes from 0 to 100% and is based
on the maximum ridership count within each department and thus takes into account that
even though more people travel with, e.g., Movia compared to the multimodal depart-
ments, the ridership drop percentage might still be similar. Hence, when visualising the
stringency index (cf. Figure 7.5 and 7.6), the first y-axis is the ridership percentage in
comparison with the maximum ridership per department.
5.2
Disaggregated analysis
A disaggregated analysis is a type of analysis that involves breaking down data into
smaller, more specific categories or subgroups. The disaggregated analysis aims to ex-
amine the differences and relationships within the subgroups rather than looking at the
data as a whole. This type of analysis can help identify trends, patterns, and relationships
that might not be apparent when looking at the data. It is often used in data analysis and
research to understand complex phenomena better and make more informed decisions.
For this project, analysis per location of the stations was performed. The main aim was to
investigate points of interest, big stations which differ in the number of boarding passen-
gers, and how they vary over specific years. Due to the opening of new lines mentioned
in Section 2.2.2 External influences, the investigated data for boarding calculations were
taken from the end of 2019. Based on the stringency index from the figures presented
in section 7.1.2 Stringency index, the months taken for this analysis are November, De-
cember, February, and March. Since the data available for 2022 does not include Novem-
ber and December, these months will not be taken into account for that year, as well as
February and March for 2019, due to the mentioned opening of the M3 line. Moreover,
the impact of the pandemic on different groups of travellers will be presented in Section
7.2 Disaggregated analysis.
Furthermore, cluster analyses were performed to explore and understand passengers’ be-
haviour. Cluster analysis is a method of organising a collection of data points into groups,
also known as clusters, such that the points within a group are more alike compared to
the points in other clusters. It is a common technique used in data analysis and can be
used to discover patterns or groupings in data that might not be immediately apparent.
Many different algorithms can be used for cluster analysis, and the choice of which one
to use depends on the nature of the data and the analysis’s goals. In this thesis, the K-
means clustering method is used [38]. The k-means algorithm is a method of clustering
data into k groups based on the similarity of features. It starts by randomly selecting k
initial centroids and then iteratively assigns each data point to the closest centroid. The
centroids are then recalculated as the mean of the assigned data points, and the process
is repeated until convergence, when the centroids stop changing. The final result is k clus-
ters, where each cluster consists of data points that are similar to each other and distinct
from data points in other clusters.
The algorithm performs optimally when the data values across different input features are
of similar scale. This is achieved by either standardising the data to approximate a normal
20
Modelling the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic on public transport usage
==PAGE:27==
distribution or by scaling it to fall within the unit scale for each feature. For this analysis,
the latter approach was adopted. The method is used for several variables presented in
the table below, which are based on the previous project by Fissinger (2020), where she
investigated behavioural dynamics of public transport ridership in Chicago, as well as the
impacts of COVID-19 on ridership behaviour.
Table 5.2: Description of the clustering variables
Variable
Description
num_weeks
number of weeks in which the passenger used the system at
least once
percentageAM
percentage of all trips taken from 6 am - 10 am on weekdays
percentagePM
percentage of all trips taken from 3 pm - 7 pm on weekdays
percentageWeekend percentage of all trips taken on a weekend
percentageTrans
percentage of all trips with mode transfer
The k-means algorithm has some limitations that are important to keep in mind. One such
limitation is that it tends to produce clusters of similar sizes, which can lead to biased
results. Additionally, the algorithm assigns each data point to a cluster regardless of how
extreme or anomalous that data point might be.
In order to find the optimal number of clusters for the k-means algorithm, a graphical rep-
resentation, called the Elbow method, is performed. This method displays the value of
the cost function produced by different values of k (number of clusters). If k is increased,
the average distortion will reduce, leading to fewer instances in each group and closer
proximity of instances to their respective centroids. However, the improvement in aver-
age distortion will start to decline as k continues to increase. The point at which the
improvement in distortion drops the most is referred to as the ”elbow,” and beyond this
point, dividing the data into further clusters should stop [11]. Using the variables men-
tioned above, the optimal number of clusters is 3. The choice of this number is also made
to mitigate the limitations associated with the k-means algorithm.
The next step is to explore the stability of the clusters. That can be done by matching each
cluster from each year and each month chosen for this analysis with the closest cluster
from another year but from the same month. To simplify, clusters from November 2019
will be matched with the closest clusters from November 2020 and 2021. Clusters from
November 2020 will also be matched with the closest clusters from November 2021. The
same will be done with clusters from December. Moreover, clusters from February and
March will have the same procedure but for years 2020, 2021, and 2022. The closeness
between clusters will be measured by the Euclidean distance between the centres.
5.3
Model
In this part, the selected model will be presented. Furthermore, improvements made for
a better model fit, such as log transformation and variable selection, will be explained.
5.3.1
Regression models
Many types of regression models exist, and choosing the best can be challenging. The
most commonly used are logistic regressions or linear regressions. The main difference
is the outcome values of the dependent variable. The outcome values are binary using
logistic regression, whereas it is continuous when using linear regression. As this thesis
Modelling the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic on public transport usage
21
==PAGE:28==
focuses on the number of public transport users, a continuous outcome for the ridership
variable is more beneficial. Moreover, linear regression models are used when predicting
a continuous variable based on one or more explanatory variables.
5.3.2
OLS models
OLS models, or Ordinary Least-Squares models, are most commonly utilised by the an-
alytical method of linear regression. OLS models can be used when having multiple in-
dependent variables and preferably a continuous dependent variable that minimises the
SSE (Sum of Square Errors). In this model, the error is the difference between the model-
predicted values of the dependent variable and its actual values. In a ridership model
using travel card data, the residuals are equal to trips not performed using a travel card
but by using other types of tickets. The Ordinary Least Squares regression model is for-
mulated using the following equation:
Y =
k
!
i=0
βixi + ϵn
where xi are the k independent variable, Y is the dependent variable, β0 is the model
intercept, and βi for i = 1 to k corresponds to the model coefficient for each independent
variable. Moreover, ϵ is the random error term with an expectation of 0 and variance σ2.
A limit of using OLS regression is the requirement of having more observations than in-
dependent variables. In this thesis, the number of independent variables is much smaller
than the number of observations. Moreover, using OLS regression, collinearity between
the independent variables might occur. Keeping this in mind, all model variables will be
checked for collinearity in Section 7.3.1 Correlation.
5.3.3
Model improvement
The model is continuously updated to make it fit the data better. This is, among other
things, done by transforming relevant variables. A transformation like log-transform can
improve a model’s fit if a variable is skewed by making it closer to normally distributed,
and subsequently improves the model’s performance. A good fit is at first determined by
the r-squared value with ranges from 0 to 1, with 1 being a perfect fit. Note that a perfect
fit will never be the instance when working with real data.
Several feature selection methods can be used to select which variables to include in the
model, the most common being forward stepwise selection and backward stepwise selec-
tion. The main difference between the two selection methods is that with forward stepwise
selection, one begins with a so-called null model, i.e., a model which does not contain any
variables. For each step, the method then adds the most significant variables based on
a pre-determined significance value. Significant variables are most commonly chosen
based on the smallest p-value estimated from the test statistics. The forward selection
method stops when either no more variables exist or when the remaining variables have
p-values greater than the threshold (commonly defined to be either 0.05 or 0.1). Using
backward selection, one begins with a full model and then starts excluding the least signif-
icant variables with a p-value greater than the defined threshold. Similarly, the backward
selection method stops when all variables included in the model have a p-value smaller
than the threshold.
Generally, unless the number of accessible variables is greater than the sample size, a
backward stepwise selection approach should be applied.
22
Modelling the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic on public transport usage
==PAGE:29==
6
Statistical indicators
In this chapter, the relationship between variables will be examined. Due to having multi-
ple types of variables in the data set, several correlation measurements need to be used.
Cramer’s V correlation will be applied to the categorical variables. Furthermore, the nu-
merical variables will be correlated by Pearson correlation, while Spearman’s Rank-Order
Correlation will be used for calculating the relationship between categorical and numerical
variables.
6.1
Cramer’s V
Cramer’s V [50] is a measure of association betwixt two categorical variables. It is defined
as the square root of the chi-squared statistic divided by the total number of observations,
normalised by the minimum of the degrees of freedom of the two variables. It ranges
from 0 to 1, with 0 indicating no association and 1 indicating a strong association. It is
a symmetric measure, meaning that the variables’ order does not matter. For example,
the association between variables A and B is the same as between variables B and A.
This method is often used when the two categorical variables have more than two cate-
gories each. In this case, other measures of association, such as the phi coefficient or
the contingency coefficient, may not be applicable.
Cramer’s V is defined as:
φc =
"
χ2
N(k −1)
where χ2 is the Pearson chi-square statistic, N is the sample size implicated in the test,
and k is the lower number of categories of either variable [15].
Therefore, Cramer’s V can be represented as a standardised Pearson chi-square statistic,
which is given by the following equation [52].
χ2 =
n
!
i=1
(Oi −Ei)2
Ei
Here Oi is the number of observations of type i, and Ei is the expected (theoretical) count
of type i, calculated from the contingency table (a tabular mechanism used in statistics to
present categorical data in terms of frequency counts). This method will be performed on
six categorical variables from the data.
6.2
Pearson
Pearson correlation, also known as Pearson’s correlation coefficient [51], is a measure of
the linear correlation between two numerical variables. It ranges from -1 (perfect negative
correlation) to 1 (perfect positive correlation) and indicates the strength and direction of
the relationship between the variables.
The Pearson correlation coefficient is defined as:
Modelling the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic on public transport usage
23
==PAGE:30==
r =
Σ(xi −µ(x)) · (yi −µ(y))
#
Σ(xi −µ(x))2 · Σ(yi −µ(y))2
where xi is the value of the x-variable in the sample. yi is the value of the y-variable in
the sample. µ(x) is the mean of the x values, and µ(y) is the mean of the y values.
The correlation coefficient of 0 indicates that there is no correlation between the variables.
A coefficient of 1 indicates a perfect positive correlation (i.e., as one variable increases,
the other variable also increases), and a coefficient of -1 indicates a perfect negative
correlation (i.e., as one variable increases, the other variable decreases, and vice versa).
This correlation is sensitive to linear relationships between variables. It is not sensitive to
non-linear relationships or to relationships between variables that cannot be accurately
described by a straight line. With this type of method, the correlation between fourteen
numerical variables will be obtained.
6.3
Spearman’s Rank-Order Correlation
Spearman’s rank-order correlation, also known as Spearman’s rho [42], captures the rela-
tionship between numerical and categorical variables. The correlation is a measure of the
strength and direction of the relationship betwixt two variables. It is a non-parametric test,
which means that it does not assume that the variables are normally distributed. It is cal-
culated by ranking the values of each variable from lowest to highest and then calculating
the Pearson correlation coefficient between the two ranked variables. The resulting coef-
ficient ranges from -1 to 1, where -1 points to a perfect negative correlation, 0 indicates
no correlation, and 1 implies a perfect positive correlation. Moreover, this method is often
used when the variables are ordinal (i.e., they can be ranked) or when the assumption of
normality is not met. It is also useful for comparing the relationships between variables
with different scales or distributions.
For a sample of size n, the n raw scores Xi, Yi are converted to the ranks R(Xi), R(Yi),
there are two methods to calculate Spearman’s correlation. The formula for Spearman’s
rank correlation if data does not have tied ranks is:
rs = 1 −
6 $ d2
i
n(n2 −1)
where di is the difference between the two ranks of each observation (R(Xi) −R(Yi)),
and n is the number of observations.
The formula for Spearman’s rank correlation coefficient [53] if data has tied ranks is:
rs = ρR(X),R(Y ) = cov(R(X), R(Y ))
σR(X)σR(Y )
where ρ denotes the Pearson correlation coefficient, applied to the rank variables,
cov(R(X), R(Y )) is the covariance of the rank variables, σR(X) and σR(Y ) are the standard
deviations of the rank variables. In this case, the relationship between six categorical and
fourteen numerical variables will be found.
24
Modelling the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic on public transport usage
==PAGE:31==
7
Analyses and Results
This chapter presents the results of the two analyses (descriptive analysis and cluster
analysis), the modelling, and the forecasting analysis.
7.1
Aggregated analysis
This section is focused on general trends in public transport, possible changes in pas-
senger behaviour, and the relationship between the stringency index, positivity rate, and
ridership across public transport departments.
7.1.1
General trends
In this section, the general trends of public transport before, during, and after the pandemic
are presented. Firstly, a graph has been constructed showcasing each department’s rid-
ership from three time periods: Pre-COVID-19, Mid-COVID-19, and Post-COVID-19 as
defined in Chapter 5 Methodological approach.
The results are seen in Figure 7.1. This graph clearly indicates that the pandemic had
a significant effect on ridership. From the pre to mid-period, the ridership within each
department drops between 51.5% - 64.3% with the highest impact on DSB and the least
impact on S-tog and Movia. It is clear that the ridership in the post-period has increased
once again, however, one can also see that the ridership is not yet back to the same level
as before the pandemic. From the pre to post-period, the ridership drops between 4.2%
- 23.5%, still with the greatest loss of ridership for DSB. Metro lost 58.1% of its riders in
weeks 5-9 2021 compared to the same period in 2020, however, Metro managed to get
back most passengers for the same period in 2022, where the total loss is down to 4.2%.
Figure 7.1: Ridership across departments for weeks 5-9 in 2020, 2021, and 2022
To further investigate the impact of the pandemic on each department, Figure 7.2 shows
the ridership for the weeks leading up to and during the first lockdown. As mentioned
previously, the lockdown happened in the middle of week 11, thus the reason for showing
weeks 11 and 12. The results clearly showcase the significant impact the lockdown initially
had on public transport usage. Even though the lockdown happened in the middle of week
Modelling the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic on public transport usage
25
==PAGE:32==
11, the impact on the ridership level is still very significant. Furthermore, the ridership
for each department in week 11 dropped between 37.0% - 49.7% compared to week
6, with DSB again showing the highest percentage drop and Movia showing the lowest
percentage drop. When comparing week 6 with week 12, the ridership dropped by 84%
on average. Note that the tendency for lower ridership in week 7 compared to week 6 is
most likely due to some people choosing to have their winter vacation the week before
the school’s winter vacation.
Figure 7.2: Ridership across departments for the weeks before and during the lockdown
To further investigate the impact of the restrictions, the ridership from weeks 23-25 in 2020
has been visualised (cf. Figure 7.3). From the 8th of June (start of week 24), the assembly
ban was lessened from 10 people to 50 people [25], thus allowing more people to be
together. One can clearly see an increase in especially bus and S-train usage. However,
suppose one looks at the percentage increase from week 23 to 25. In that case, the
ridership across all departments increases by 19-23%, thus indicating that lessening the
assembly ban has a significant effect on the ridership across all modes of public transport.
Figure 7.3: Ridership across departments for the week before, during, and after the as-
sembly ban was first lessened
26
Modelling the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic on public transport usage
==PAGE:33==
Sankey diagram
After investigating general trends for each department, the possible change in travelling
behaviour is investigated. The above investigation showed a clear loss in ridership for
DSB for the before and after periods. Subsequently, it would be interesting to investigate
if people using, e.g., DSB before the pandemic hit would now have changed their mode of
transport. Moreover, it was clear that Metro was highly affected by the pandemic, and one
would think that multimodal transportation would also be affected. Figure 7.4 is a Sankey
diagram showcasing how people travelled in the pre-period in 2020 compared to weeks
5-9 in 2021 and 2022. This graph only includes people travelling in all three periods and
uses their most frequent trip type. The graph clearly indicates that people are changing
their most frequent travel type during and after COVID-19, though it is important to mention
that some people may have changed jobs or moved and subsequently been forced to use
a different mode of transport.
One can see that a rather big group of people changed from using Multimodal DSB+S-tog
in 2020 to S-tog in 2021, and the percentage of S-tog users increased by 2.1% in 2021,
and by 2022 this group had increased by a total of 0.7%. As mentioned, the percentage
of Metro users went down by 0.7% during COVID-19, but by 2022 it had increased by
1.2%. It is clear that Multimodal Movia+Metro was highly influenced, with only 23.5% of
its users continuing from 2020 to 2021, whereas Movia kept 63% of its users.
Figure 7.4: Sankey diagram
Modelling the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic on public transport usage
27
==PAGE:34==
7.1.2
Stringency index
As explained in Section 4.3 Model variables, the stringency index highly correlates with
the number of government restrictions and was thus thought to be good at explaining the
effect of the COVID-19 pandemic on public transport. Previous studies have, for example,
used the number of Google searches as a measure of COVID-19 [34], however, with many
assumptions that, for the most part, only can be used to accurately measure the effect of
COVID-19 in the first couple of months. Thus, it was important to find a variable that can
be used for modelling the effect. Subsequently, two graphs were created to illustrate the
relationship between the stringency index and the ridership, where the ridership, in this
instance, corresponds to people’s initial check-in. Figure 7.5 shows weekly ridership from
January 2020 to June 2022, together with the corresponding average weekly stringency
index.
Additionally, the positivity rate is included as a way to explain the latter quarter of the
COVID-19 pandemic in Denmark, where the government did not implement many restric-
tions (cf. 4.3 Model variables). Similarly, Figure 7.6 also shows weekly ridership together
with both the stringency index and the positivity rate. However, the ridership is divided
here into five of the top 50 most-used zones. The zones are chosen so that five identical
zones are not illustrated, e.g., by looking at the different departments operated by each
station as well as its geographic location. Note a negative relationship between ridership
and both the stringency index and positivity rate, however, their axes are inverted.
As mentioned before, all data visualised are without vacations. Because these weeks are
not part of the visualisations, in a few places, the lines go rapidly up or down from one
week to the next. This is, for example, the case during the summer of 2020, where the
months go from June to August, thus creating the look of rapid change in ridership, e.g.,
at the Copenhagen Airport zone. Moreover, in Figure 7.5, the temporary closing of the
M3 metro line in January 2020 can be seen. Thus, indicating how quickly the M3 metro
line attracted passengers.
One main and very clear aspect of both graphs is that they both show an anticipatory reac-
tion from people using public transport. I.e., people seem to react before the restrictions
are established, both when the stringency index is increased and decreased.
Figure 7.5: Relationship between stringency index (dashed line), positivity rate (dotted
line), and ridership across departments
28
Modelling the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic on public transport usage
==PAGE:35==
Furthermore, Figure 7.6 displays that prior to the pandemic, the ridership index for Kon-
gens Nytorv St. was at approximately 80%, and it did not achieve the same level of
ridership until the end of 2021. Kongens Nytorv St. mainly consists of metro trains and,
subsequently, can explain the effect of COVID-19 on Metro. The station Copenhagen Air-
port has similar tendencies, however, it was not until the spring of 2022 that its ridership
index was similar to the one before the pandemic. Moreover, one can see that Køge St.
tends to have its riders back quicker than the other stations, particularly after the initial
lockdown. However, it can also be seen around week 9 of 2021.
Figure 7.6: Relationship for five zones between stringency index (dashed line), positivity
rate (dotted line), and ridership across departments
7.2
Disaggregated analysis
When performing a disaggregated analysis, one compiles the data into smaller groups to
reveal any underlying patterns. In this thesis, the data is grouped by geographic location,
travelling frequency, as well as trip purpose.
7.2.1
Boarders per location
Three stations were chosen as points of interest and investigated over four months for
four years based on the beginning of the trip or transfer between modes. The results are
presented in the tables below (cf. Table 7.1 and 7.2).
Nørreport station is the most used station through all four years for investigated months,
so it is an obvious choice for this analysis. The second one is Lyngby station. Large
boardings connected to this station are assumed to be because of the Technical University
of Denmark and large companies like Microsoft, Novo Nordics, and COWI located close
to the station as well as the number of people going to work from Lyngby to Copenhagen.
The last one is Frederiksberg station. The number of boarding travellers at each of the
three stations varies significantly.
Modelling the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic on public transport usage
29
==PAGE:36==
Table 7.1: Boarders in millions per location in November (left) and December (right)
Station
2019
2020
2021
Nørreport
2.31
1.35
1.87
Frederiksberg
0.99
0.53
0.82
Lyngby
0.47
0.27
0.71
Station
2019
2020
2021
Nørreport
2.19
0.96
1.56
Frederiksberg
0.99
0.39
0.78
Lyngby
0.43
0.29
0.59
Table 7.2: Boarders in millions per location in February (left) and March (right)
Station
2020
2021
2022
Nørreport
2.15
0.74
1.62
Frederiksberg
0.87
0.31
0.73
Lyngby
0.43
0.31
0.62
Station
2020
2021
2022
Nørreport
0.93
1.01
1.94
Frederiksberg
0.37
0.38
0.83
Lyngby
0.22
0.40
0.73
To present it more clearly, Figure 7.7 illustrates boarders per station based on the above
tables. From the graph, it is evident when the lockdown occurred and when everything
turned back to before the pandemic. As mentioned above, Nørreport station has the most
travellers boarding on a metro or a train, and this graph captures this big difference com-
pared to the other two chosen stations. Lyngby station is here illustrated as the least-used
station in 2019 and 2020. However, it can be seen that in February 2021, it reached a point
where it had a similar number of boarders to Frederiksberg station, and in March 2021,
Lyngby station reached a higher number of boardings compared to Frederiksberg station.
Moreover, Lyngby station is the only station experiencing an increase in the number of
boarding passengers from February 2020 to February 2022. Thus, it can be concluded
from this analysis that it took two years to get public transport usage almost back to how
it was before the pandemic.
Figure 7.7: Boarders per station over chosen months
Subsequently, a cluster analysis is performed to investigate a different group of travellers.
Namely, there are three groups: infrequent, occasional, and regular boarders. This anal-
ysis is performed for two months (February and March) for three years (2020, 2021, and
2022) based on the interest in passenger behaviour before, during, and after the pan-
demic.
30
Modelling the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic on public transport usage
==PAGE:37==
Table 7.3 shows February 2020 as a month before the pandemic and March 2020 when
positive cases of COVID-19 occurred in Denmark. All groups are divided into percent-
ages for the passengers boarding the vehicle during peak hours: 6-10 am and 3-7 pm on
weekdays, and the boardings during weekends. The percentages were calculated by di-
viding the number of boarding trips made by each group in a chosen month at each station
by the total number of boarding trips made at all three stations. Infrequent passengers
boarded all three stations the most. The biggest difference between these two months
can be seen in trips made during the weekend. Infrequent travelling during weekends
got higher during March 2020, while regular and occasional travellers stopped or reduced
their weekend travels due to the pandemic and restrictions set at that time.
Table 7.3: Percentage of the group of travellers per location in February (left) and March
(right) 2020
Passenger group
Nørreport
Frederiksberg
Lyngby
Infrequent
AM Peak
53.4%
17.4%
9.5%
PM Peak
36.8%
12.4%
6.6%
Weekend
36.9%
11.6%
7.9%
Occasional
AM Peak
5.6%
1.2%
0.9%
PM Peak
9.7%
2.0%
1.4%
Weekend
7.5%
1.8%
1.2%
Regular
AM Peak
7.9%
2.2%
1.9%
PM Peak
20.5%
6.4%
4.3%
Weekend
22.5%
7.4%
3.1%
Passenger group
Nørreport
Frederiksberg
Lyngby
Infrequent
AM Peak
51.7%
16.6%
9.9%
PM Peak
37.8%
12.5%
7.2%
Weekend
41.4%
12.6%
9.4%
Occasional
AM Peak
4.6%
0.9%
0.8%
PM Peak
7.3%
1.4%
1.2%
Weekend
5.6%
1.2%
1.0%
Regular
AM Peak
10.4%
2.7%
2.4%
PM Peak
21.5%
6.2%
4.7%
Weekend
19.8%
6.3%
2.8%
Table 7.4 presents March 2021, the month during the pandemic, and March 2022, the
month after the pandemic. February for that two years can be found in Appendix A. In the
year between March 2021 and 2022, trips made by regular passengers during peak hours
decreased, while weekend trips increased. Interestingly, it can be observed from the table
that occasional passenger percentages for Lyngby station for all three categories stayed
the same.
Table 7.4: Percentage of the group of travellers per location in March 2021(left) and 2022
(right)
Passenger group
Nørreport
Frederiksberg
Lyngby
Infrequent
AM Peak
55.3%
15.0%
9.9%
PM Peak
34.4%
11.0%
7.4%
Weekend
43.4%
11.5%
9.1%
Occasional
AM Peak
4.9%
1.0%
0.9%
PM Peak
8.0%
1.6%
1.3%
Weekend
6.7%
1.4%
1.2%
Regular
AM Peak
8.2%
2.4%
2.2%
PM Peak
26.0%
5.9%
4.4%
Weekend
18.4%
5.5%
2.8%
Passenger group
Nørreport
Frederiksberg
Lyngby
Infrequent
AM Peak
53.2%
17.8%
9.4%
PM Peak
36.3%
12.6%
6.5%
Weekend
39.1%
12.6%
8.4%
Occasional
AM Peak
5.3%
1.1%
0.9%
PM Peak
8.9%
1.9%
1.3%
Weekend
6.9%
1.7%
1.2%
Regular
AM Peak
8.0%
2.3%
2.0%
PM Peak
21.3%
6.6%
4.5%
Weekend
20.6%
6.8%
2.7%
To make it easier to observe, graphs were made for each station and month during all
three years. The visualisations for the Nørreport station are presented below, and the
other stations can be seen in Appendix A. For February and March, it can be noticed that
the results from 2020 and 2022 are quite similar and that 2021 for almost every group
goes in the opposite direction than those two years. The highest jump in the number
of regular passengers happened between February and March 2021. In the same pe-
riod, infrequent passengers travelling during morning peak hours went up by 2.6%, while
the same number fell by 1.7% in 2020 and by 0.9% in 2022. Observing the differences
between months highlights the previously mentioned disparities in weekend trips.
Additionally, the analysis of year-to-year differences reveals that the number of travels
during peak hours performed by regular passengers in February 2021 increased but re-
turned to pre-pandemic levels the following year for the afternoon hours. However, the
Modelling the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic on public transport usage
31
==PAGE:38==
number of travels during morning peak hours was lower by 0.5% compared to 2020. Re-
duced regular trips during peak hours in 2022 can partially be explained by companies
recommending their employees to work from home at least twice a week, thus resulting
in a shift from a regular traveller to an infrequent or occasional traveller.
Figure 7.8: Boardings per passenger groups on Nørreport station in February throughout
the years
Figure 7.9: Boardings per passenger groups on Nørreport station in March throughout
the years
32
Modelling the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic on public transport usage
==PAGE:39==
Furthermore, the municipalities with the highest number of boarders were analysed. The
results showed that the top three municipalities also contained three of the top five sta-
tions mentioned above (cf. Figure 7.10). The København municipality demonstrated the
highest number of travellers originating from its stations, making it the most utilised munic-
ipality in the investigation. The most popular stop among passengers during the specified
months was Nørreport station. The Lyngby-Taarbæk municipality, with its principal station,
Lyngby, emerged as the second most utilised municipality, followed by the Frederiksberg
municipality and its primary station, Frederiksberg.
Figure 7.10: Three municipalities most travelled from
7.2.2
Clustering based on passenger behaviour
As mentioned in section 5.2 Disaggregated analysis, the cluster analysis is performed on
five chosen variables: number of weeks in which passenger used the system at least once,
percentage of all trips taken during morning peak hours (6-10 am) on weekdays, percent-
age of all trips taken during afternoon peak hours (3-7 pm) on weekdays, percentage of
all trips taken during weekends, and percentage of all trips with mode transfer. After per-
forming K-means analysis using the Elbow method to get the optimal number of clusters
(n_clusters = 3), matching the closest clusters from different years was done by measur-
ing the Euclidean distance between the centres. Afterwards, the per cent change in the
shifts of the passenger number for each cluster was computed, and it was observed that
they were varying from -68% to +316.2%. This huge negative percentage is computed
based on the number of occasional passengers from February 2020 to February 2021,
while March 2022 had a more than 300% increase in public transport usage by regular
passengers. Comparing February 2020 to March 2020, the difference in passenger num-
bers is noticeable, especially for the regular group. The number of infrequent passengers
counts the decrease by 1%, while the occasional and regular groups had a loss of 22.4%
and 72.6%, respectively. The table with all changes can be found in Appendix B and will
be discussed further in Chapter 8 Clustering analysis.
Furthermore, the plotted distributions of the true values of the features in each cluster com-
pared across the three years (2019, 2020, 2021, and 2020, 2021, 2022) for two months
(2019 - November and December, and 2022 - February and March) or four months (2020
Modelling the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic on public transport usage
33
==PAGE:40==
and 2021 - February, March, November, and December) are made. One of them can
be seen in Figure 7.11, while others can be found in Appendix C. The three clusters,
namely, Infrequent, Occasional, and Regular, are based on the frequency established by
passengers’ usage of public transport at least once per week in the examined month. If
the number of weeks travelled is 1, that person goes in the Infrequent cluster. For the
Occasional cluster, the person needed to travel two or three weeks in a month, otherwise,
the person is placed in the Regular group. The change in the percentage of all trips taken
during afternoon rush hours is presented below by violin plots. A violin plot combines a
box plot and a kernel density plot. It is used to visualise the distribution of numerical data.
However, unlike a box plot that can only show summary statistics, a violin plot depicts
summary statistics and the density of each variable.
Figure 7.11: Percentage of all trips taken between 3 pm and 7 pm on weekdays
34
Modelling the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic on public transport usage
==PAGE:41==
The shape of the violin plot reflects the underlying probability density of the data, with
wider regions indicating higher density and narrower regions indicating lower density. The
difference in the shapes of two years from the above plot can be an indication of a lack of
stability across the clusters due to the difference in distributed data among the categories.
The comparison of November month was convincing of the clusters’ stability across 2019
and 2021, while 2020 has a lower degree of spread data, thus a little thinner shape. This
can especially be seen in the third cluster, probably due to a mutated SARS-CoV-2 virus
being passed from minks to humans in that period [24].
Furthermore, the Danish Government strengthened the COVID-19 restrictions until Jan-
uary 2nd, 2021, leading to a decrease in travel for work and university, as exams and
lectures shifted to online or hybrid formats in December 2020. Moreover, at the begin-
ning of February 2021, a new lockdown resulted in a small number of trips, whereas in
February 2022, most restrictions were lifted, with the Government stating that the virus
was no longer a critical threat, hence the stability of the clusters across 2020 and 2022
for February can be determined.
Finally, March 2020 was influenced by the first positive cases in Denmark and the first
lockdown. For March 2021, restrictions still included online teaching and exams. This
month’s data highly differs in comparison to the other months.
Similar results can be seen for the variable with the morning peak hours due to travelling
to work, university, school, etc. The restrictions and lockdowns due to COVID-19 can be
seen in the shape difference of the cluster results based on one colour, hence one year.
The same goes for weekend getaways and the number of weeks in which the passenger
used the system at least once. The last investigated variable, the percentage of all trips
with mode transfer, has a small number of observations, so it is hard to conclude much
from it. These graphs can be found in Appendix C.
7.3
Modelling the COVID-19 pandemic
Modelling the COVID-19 pandemic is performed in this section. All independent variables
are carefully chosen based on knowledge from taking public transport throughout the
pandemic, through a comprehensive literature review, and based on the available data.
Some variables will be excluded based on their correlation to other variables, which is
discussed further in the section below. Other variables/groups of categorical variables will
be excluded based on insignificance. This is described further in section 7.3.2 Variable
selection.
7.3.1
Correlation
As explained in section 6 Statistical indicators, three different ways of measuring the corre-
lation between the model variables are used. Cramer’s V for the categorical independent
variables (cf. Table 7.5), Pearson for the independent numeric variables as well as the
dependent variable (cf. Figure 7.12), and Spearman’s Rank Order Correlation between
categorical and numerical variables (cf. Table 7.6).
Table 7.5 shows a slight to moderate positive correlation between the stringency index (SI)
and all variables except Municipality and Transfers with the highest correlation with the
positive COVID-19 test rate of 0.446. These correlations are not high enough to expect
any collinearity. However, it is good to keep in mind when inspecting the model results, as
the stringency index influences the positive rate (and the other way around), which might
cause fluctuations in the model results.
Modelling the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic on public transport usage
35
==PAGE:42==
Table 7.5: Correlation between categorical variables
Municipality
SI
Positivity rate
Temperature
Precipitation
Transfers
Municipality
1
0.005
0.003
0.000
0.000
0.157
SI
0.005
1
0.446
0.409
0.257
0.030
Positivity rate
0.003
0.446
1
0.301
0.217
0.026
Temperature
0.000
0.409
0.301
1
0.167
0.010
Precipitation
0.000
0.257
0.217
0.167
1
0.006
Transfers
0.157
0.030
0.026
0.010
0.006
1
Figure 7.12, overall indicates that stop frequency will be highly significant in explaining the
dependent variable, which is weekly ridership per stop. Frequency of public transportation
modes’ arrival on the station has a positive correlation at 0.7 with the Ridership number
and is the highest correlation among the dependent variable and independent variables.
Moreover, it is clear that the number of modes changed during the trip (ModesCount)
has a moderate to high correlation with trip Duration at 0.58, as well as variable Income
with Residents at 0.64. As mentioned with the categorical variables, this indicates that
modelling with all these variables would result in a model where multicollinearity would
occur.
Furthermore, length and travel time (TT) have a very high correlation of 0.9 and thus indi-
cate multicollinearity. Subsequently, it was chosen to exclude Length as a model variable.
Figure 7.12: Correlation between numerical variables
36
Modelling the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic on public transport usage
==PAGE:43==
Looking into the correlation between categorical and numerical variables from Table 7.6,
it can be noticed that the categorical variable stating the number of transfers during the
travel (Transfers) has a moderate to high correlation with trip Duration and the number of
modes used for the travel (ModesCount) variables, at 0.6 and 0.62 respectively. From
the explanation of the variables, it is clear that ModesCount is to a high degree explained
by the number of transfers, and Duration is highly explained by the travel time (TT). Sub-
sequently, it was also chosen to exclude both ModesCount and Duration from the model
not to risk overfitting or having a fluctuating model.
Table 7.6: Correlation between categorical and numerical variables
Municipality
SI
Positivity rate
Temperature
Precipitation
Transfers
Residents
-0.48
0.01
0.00
0.00
-0.00
-0.10
Minimum distance to PT
0.25
-0.01
-0.00
-0.00
0.00
0.10
Ridership
-0.38
-0.11
-0.00
-0.01
0.02
-0.02
Modes Count
-0.02
-0.02
-0.01
-0.00
0.01
0.60
High school students
0.02
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.01
University students
-0.03
0.00
0.00
0.00
-0.00
0.01
Age
0.39
-0.00
-0.00
-0.00
0.00
-0.00
Travel time
-0.04
0.00
0.00
0.00
-0.00
0.06
Duration
0.14
0.03
-0.01
0.00
-0.00
0.62
Length
-0.03
0.00
0.00
0.00
-0.00
0.06
Average wind speed
-0.00
-0.12
0.11
0.09
0.24
-0.00
Total employment
-0.30
0.01
0.00
0.00
-0.00
-0.05
Income
-0.49
0.01
0.00
0.00
-0.00
-0.12
Frequency
-0.59
0.02
0.01
0.00
-0.00
-0.08
7.3.2
Variable selection
After investigating possible multicollinearities between all variables, and subsequently ex-
cluding three independent variables, the model is created.
Variable transformation
Firstly, it is important to check all variables for whether they are normally distributed. Ap-
pendix D shows all the non-normally distributed variables (cf. Figure 9). It can be seen
that all these variables are highly right-skewed, also known as positively skewed. If these
highly skewed variables are not transformed before creating the model, they make the
results invalid. To transform the variables, a simple log transformation is performed. The
results can be seen in Figure 10 in Appendix D. The majority of the variables are now
much more normally distributed, and thus the model results have higher validity. Note
that, for example, the variable of University students still looks rather skewed. However,
this variable only has values in a few specific microzones, and thus the majority of the
values are zero. The log-transformed variables are:
• Ridership
• Income
• Population density
• Employees density (total employment)
• Students in high school density
• Students at university density
• Minimum distance to public transport
Modelling the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic on public transport usage
37
==PAGE:44==
• Frequency
• Travel time
Backward stepwise selection
Based on Section 5.3.3 Model improvement, backward stepwise selection is chosen as
the best approach for feature selections. When performing the backward selection, a
significance level of 90% is chosen. Subsequently, all variables with a p-value greater than
0.1 are deemed insignificant. Using backward selection, the following variables should be
excluded from the model:
• Precipitation 1-2 mm with p-value 0.87
• Temperature over 17 °C with p-value 0.22
• Rødovre Municipality with p-value 0.12
However, it is important that this model takes the spatial ratio effect/spatial variations into
account, and thus the Rødovre municipality is forced to be included in the model. The
two other variables are excluded due to insignificance at a 90% significance level.
7.3.3
Model creation
After investigating the possible variables to include in the model through correlation, trans-
formation, and variable selection methods, the final model consists of:
• 1 dependent numerical variable - Ridership (log-transformed)
• 10 independent numerical variables
• 6 independent categorical variables
Creating and running the model resulted in an R-square at 0.609. Taking into considera-
tion that this model only includes travel card data and that it contains real data, the fit is
quite good, thus resulting in a relatively valid and trustworthy model. The model results
are shown in Table 7.7, where the coefficient estimates are given as a log of odds.
Table 7.7 shows that of the numeric variables, the average wind speed, income, age, and
travel time all have a negative effect on the ridership. The negative effect of wind speed
confirms what was concluded by Arana et al. (2014) [2] and Zhou et al. (2017) [54].
Moreover, the negative effect of the socioeconomic variables correlates with the results
of Osorio et al. (2022), where age generally also had a negative impact.
Furthermore, the spatial variation explained by all the municipalities shows that some mu-
nicipalities have a higher log-likelihood of people living in the municipality using public
transport. From the model results, one can see that three municipalities have a nega-
tive effect on ridership. These are Frederiksberg municipality, Gentofte municipality, and
Tårnby municipality.
Moreover, one can see that stops where the average number of transfers is 1 have a
much higher and positive influence on ridership compared to average transfers being 2,
where stops, where the average number of transfers is greater than 2, have a negative
influence on ridership. It is also clear that the accessibility measure, frequency, has a
highly positive effect on ridership, which confirms the results of Gutiérrez (2011) [18].
In terms of the COVID-19-related variables, the results show an approximately negative
linear relationship between the stringency index and the ridership. The same can be
seen for the positivity rate. However, for the positivity rate, it is clear that the relationship
38
Modelling the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic on public transport usage
==PAGE:45==
is closer to a higher-order polynomial, as the effect from 2-10 is relatively equal and then
jumps to a much higher negative effect for 10-40.
Table 7.7: OLS Regression Results
Dep. Variable:
Ridership
R-squared:
0.609
Model:
OLS
Adj. R-squared:
0.609
Method:
Least Squares
F-statistic:
1.207e+04
coef
std err
t
P> |t|
Constant
-3.4248
0.040
-84.966
0.000
Average wind speed
-0.0115
0.002
-5.104
0.000
Residents
0.0809
0.002
53.100
0.000
Income
-0.0136
0.002
-6.750
0.000
Age
-0.0047
0.000
-14.308
0.000
Total employment
0.1078
0.001
86.604
0.000
High school students
0.0140
0.003
4.093
0.000
University students
0.0680
0.003
20.318
0.000
Min. distance to PT
0.1923
0.023
8.241
0.000
Frequency
1.1325
0.003
444.428
0.000
Travel time
-0.0503
0.005
-10.610
0.000
Frederiksberg Municipality
-0.1364
0.010
-13.200
0.000
Ballerup Municipality
0.5386
0.010
51.328
0.000
Brøndby Municipality
0.1257
0.013
9.579
0.000
Dragør Municipality
-0.0994
0.015
-6.493
0.000
Gentofte Municipality
-0.0555
0.009
-6.334
0.000
Gladsaxe Municipality
0.1380
0.010
14.231
0.000
Glostrup Municipality
0.5697
0.014
40.242
0.000
Herlev Municipality
0.3847
0.014
27.400
0.000
Albertslund Municipality
0.4548
0.013
35.636
0.000
Hvidovre Municipality
0.3161
0.012
27.274
0.000
Høje-Taastrup Municipality
0.6062
0.010
59.637
0.000
Lyngby-Taarbæk Municipality
0.1041
0.009
11.193
0.000
Rødovre Municipality
0.0179
0.012
1.553
0.121
Ishøj Municipality
0.0179
0.016
45.995
0.000
Tårnby Municipality
-0.1007
0.011
-8.801
0.000
Vallensbæk Municipality
0.3035
0.020
15.522
0.000
Furesø Municipality
0.3169
0.011
28.169
0.000
Allerød Municipality
0.7306
0.013
55.355
0.000
Fredensborg Municipality
0.5525
0.011
49.739
0.000
Helsingør Municipality
0.2587
0.009
28.362
0.000
Hillerød Municipality
0.8488
0.010
86.699
0.000
Hørsholm Municipality
0.1847
0.012
14.919
0.000
Rudersdal Municipality
0.4013
0.009
44.484
0.000
Egedal Municipality
0.3866
0.011
35.082
0.000
Frederikssund Municipality
0.5922
0.017
34.538
0.000
Transfers = 1
1.4538
0.006
238.250
0.000
Transfers = 2
0.9823
0.007
147.316
0.000
Transfers > 2
-0.0344
0.013
-2.617
0.009
Modelling the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic on public transport usage
39
==PAGE:46==
coef
std err
t
P> |t|
Stringency index 10-20
0.0731
0.008
9.664
0.000
Stringency index 20-30
-0.0758
0.007
-11.360
0.000
Stringency index 30-40
-0.0918
0.006
-16.152
0.000
Stringency index 40-50
-0.2453
0.007
-35.567
0.000
Stringency index 50-60
-0.2986
0.006
-48.207
0.000
Stringency index 60-75
-0.5228
0.005
-97.423
0.000
Positivity rate 0-2
0.0421
0.006
7.629
0.000
Positivity rate 2-4
-0.0924
0.007
-10.489
0.000
Positivity rate 4-6
-0.0686
0.013
-36.141
0.000
Positivity rate 6-10
-0.1017
0.010
-47.917
0.000
Positivity rate 10-20
-0.4715
0.007
-13.444
0.000
Positivity rate 20-40
-0.4690
0.009
-11.705
0.000
Temperature under 10 °C
0.0241
0.005
4.934
0.000
Precipitation 2-4 mm
-0.0941
0.004
-20.949
0.000
Precipitation 4-6 mm
0.0313
0.006
5.236
0.000
Precipitation > 6 mm
0.0715
0.014
5.187
0.000
7.4
Forecasting analysis
Using the model results from the previous section, it is now possible to create scenarios
for forecasting analysis. These are scenarios where one can see the change in average
weekly ridership per stop compared to the base scenario.
As this thesis focuses on the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic, most of the variables
will be constant throughout all scenarios, thus mainly measuring the effects of the COVID-
19 variables. The independent variables which have constant values in the scenarios
can be seen in Table 7.9 together with the corresponding value or group. It is important
to remember that since several variables were transformed in the model, the scenario
values for those variables are also transformed. However, when calculating the average
ridership for each scenario, the relevant variables are back-transformed, so the ridership
count and change correspond to an actual count.
Table 7.9: Values for each of the constant variables throughout the different scenarios
Temperature
Precipitation
Residents
Wind speed
Municipality
10-17
0-2
3.36
4.67
All = 1
Income
Total employment
Age
High school students
11.16
1.75
42.33
0.0
University students
Travel time
Frequency
Minimum distance to PT
0.0
4.98
5.01
0.13
Table 7.10 shows the values of the three variables for which values are changing between
each scenario. The base scenario is where the stringency index and the positivity rate are
equal to 0 and with 0-1 transfers. This scenario resulted in an average weekly ridership
value of 123,036.73. This value is then used to calculate the percentage change in the
average weekly ridership values for each of the other scenarios.
Seven scenarios, including the base scenario, have been established. The 1st and 2nd
scenarios have the highest stringency index and varying positivity rates. It is clear that
40
Modelling the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic on public transport usage
==PAGE:47==
the change in positivity rate does not significantly further decrease the ridership. However,
from scenario 6, it is clear that a high positivity rate alone does highly influence ridership.
These three scenarios have a change in ridership from the base scenario at -46.45%,
-44.64%, and -39.35%, respectively. The 3rd and 4th scenario clearly shows how much
the number of transfers together with a high stringency index influences the ridership with
a change at -87.5% and -65.45% at more than 2 transfers and 2 transfers, respectively.
Moreover, the 5th scenario displays the effect of long trips during the pandemic, which
results in a ridership decrease at -73.78%.
Table 7.10: Seven scenarios with varying values of the three variables together with the
effect on ridership
Features \ Scenario
Base
1
2
3
4
5
6
Transfers
1
1
1
>2
2
>2
2
Stringency index
0
60-75
60-75
60-75
60-75
10-20
10-20
Positivity rate
0
20-40
2-4
2-4
2-4
0-2
20-40
Change from base
-46.45
-44.64
-87.5
-65.45
-73.78
-39.35
Modelling the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic on public transport usage
41
==PAGE:48==
8
Discussion
General trends
The fact that COVID-19 had an influence on public transport usage is undeniable. From
the descriptive analysis, it is clear that the ridership count of public transport is not only
influenced by strict restrictions such as complete lockdowns but also influenced by the
more soft indicators such as the fear of getting infected. In this thesis, the fear of getting
infected can particularly be seen when visualising the weekly ridership throughout the
whole pandemic (cf. Figure 7.5). During the first lockdown, the majority of the Danish
population was forced to work from home, however, this was not the case in the latter part
of the pandemic. From the figure, it is clear that the first two times when the ridership was
highly affected, the stringency index was extremely high, thereby indicating rather strict
restrictions. However, the third time when the ridership is highly affected, the stringency
index is not particularly high. Instead, the positivity rate is rapidly increasing, indicating
that many people are testing positive for COVID-19. The figure displays a reduced number
of travel weeks prior to the positivity rate being at its highest, thus indicating a fear of
getting infected. One reason why the ridership does not go as far down as the previous
two times can be that fewer people could choose to work from home and that more people
had a reduced fear and caution towards COVID-19 at this point in time, and thus still opting
to take public transport.
Moreover, as mentioned in Section 7.1.2 Stringency index, Køge St. showed tendencies
to reach its original pre-COVID-19 ridership level quicker than the other showcased sta-
tions. The same tendency was seen on the Køge Bugt motorway, where the cars came
back much faster than they did on the other motorways [5]. One point which might explain
why the passengers on public transport came back quicker is the fact that the regional
trains go through Køge St. Particularly during the lockdown, trips through the countries
were highly advised against unless absolutely necessary. The second point which ex-
plains both public transport users and car users is due to the people living in and around
Køge St., an area recognised for its large proportion of residents with blue-collar workers.
These jobs did not have the same availability of working from home during the pandemic.
It is worth noting that the stringency index is not applicable as a good COVID-19 indica-
tor in all countries. However, in Denmark, a country with a high test rate, the statistics
regarding the number of infected people can be regarded as having higher accuracy. Addi-
tionally, the restrictions in Denmark were fluctuating together with the number of infected.
The fact that public transport usage seems to have reached approximately the same level
as before the pandemic could also be because of the private economy. The price of public
transport stayed stable throughout the pandemic, whereas the cost of owning and driving
a car increased [35]. This may have caused some people to take public transport instead.
Furthermore, Figure 7.4 clearly showed a change in behaviour before, during, and in the
recovery period (weeks 5-9 2020-2022). The diagram clearly showed how particularly
Metro, including Multimodal Movia+Metro, lost a high percentage of their passengers dur-
ing the pandemic. However, it also shows that they managed to get their passengers
back and actually increase their ridership by 2.1% in the recovery period. Multimodal
Movia+Metro only kept 23.5% of its users from weeks 5-9, 2020 to 2021, whereas Metro
managed to keep 53.1% of its users. One reason for this loss of users in these two de-
partments could be related to the fact that metro trips are often shorter distances and are
42
Modelling the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic on public transport usage
==PAGE:49==
mainly underground. Both in Metro and in the busses, people often stand/sit close to-
gether, which had to be avoided throughout the pandemic. Passengers in the Multimodal
Movia+Metro group in 2020 moving to Movia in 2021 might very well be people choosing
to walk or bike instead of taking the Metro. However, the general change in mode choice
is most likely also influenced by people moving. Particularly changes where people used
to take only the bus, and then two years later, they use the S-train or DSB or a mix of the
two. This is most likely not due to the pandemic. During the last couple of years, Danes
have shown a tendency to move out of Copenhagen and, thus, typically further away from
their job. This is backed by the Demographic Knowledge Bank from COWI [8], where one
can see that 13% of its residents moved away from Copenhagen in 2021.
Figure 8.1: Percentage of residents leaving each municipality in 2021
Clustering analysis
In this thesis, two clustering analyses were created. The first one was performed to distin-
guish groups of passengers regarding their boarding time and frequency on three stations
before, during, and after the pandemic. The greatest difference in boarders was found
in weekend ridership between the month of February and March 2020 (cf. Table 7.3),
coinciding with the beginning of the pandemic (cf. Table 2.1). Occasional trips during
February and March on all three stations fell, while regular travellers numbers jumped on
Nørreport and Lyngby stations during peak hours at the beginning of the pandemic. It can
be assumed that pharmaceutical workers were among the groups of travellers who con-
tributed to the increase in ridership at the beginning of the pandemic due to their proximity
to the studied stations and their work-related travels. After the pandemic, in 2022, these
numbers returned to pre-pandemic levels or became even lower. The measures under-
taken during the outburst of the virus shaped the world differently and changed certain
standards, e.g. changes in a portion of working hours done remotely. Also, there is a de-
crease in fear among people as having fewer unknowns about COVID-19. Furthermore,
more than 80% of people are fully vaccinated in Denmark, and the country has gone back
to normal [33].
The second cluster analysis is a broader one, based on five variables describing passen-
Modelling the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic on public transport usage
43
==PAGE:50==
ger behaviour, made for all stations in Zealand over four chosen months in the course of
four years. The analysis indicates a lack of stability across the clusters, considering the
diversity in data among the categories. The results point to the changes that followed the
measures adopted by the state. The decrease in public transport usage at the beginning
of the pandemic mostly indicates fear.
The table presenting the percentage of passenger group shifts from pre- to mid- and post-
pandemic from Appendix B shows a significant difference in decreasing as well as increas-
ing the number of travellers. From pre-pandemic in 2019, due to restrictions and fear of
the unexplored, as well as the growing number of new cases, mid-pandemic numbers in
2020 of all three groups drastically decreased. Public transport lost 51% of its regular pas-
sengers in December 2020, likely due to the new normality of working from home, online
lecture, and reduced travelling and interactions with people. The opposite could be seen
one year later, with the increase of all three groups, especially the group of regular pas-
sengers. Moreover, in February 2021, the biggest decrease happened in the occasional
traveller’s group, with a drop in travellers of 68.2% in comparison to the same month in
2020 in regards to the lockdown due to the beta variant (cf. Table 2.1). In February 2022,
following the pandemic, the number of occasional passengers rose, leading to a 13.3%
decrease compared to 2020.
With the pandemic beginning in March 2020, this month was particularly of interest. In the
mid-COVID-19 period, the number of regular travellers jumped more than 138% (cf. Table
3). At the same time, the other two groups from the cluster analysis lost their travellers.
This is likely due to their shift back from infrequent or occasional travellers to regular trav-
ellers. Concerning the post-pandemic period, the number of regular travellers increased
by 316.2%, which is the largest increase of all groups throughout the investigated months
and years. Furthermore, the group containing occasional travellers increased by 10% in
regards to 2019. As the country returned to normal, passengers resumed their use of
public transportation.
Lastly, the cluster analysis displays the significant change in public transport ridership
occurring as a result of the pandemic. Between February and March 2020 (cf. 4), the
percentage of regular travellers decreases by 72.6%, which is the largest overall. This
made it evident that the COVID-19 pandemic had an impactful influence on public trans-
port ridership, caused by fear amongst the public and the making of extensive restrictions
from the Danish government.
General model discussion
Overall, the linear regression model created resulted in a relatively good fit for the data
with an R-squared and adj. R-squared at 0.609. Moreover, the model showed a skewness
at 0.041, thus indicating an approximately symmetric distribution. The low model skew-
ness also indicates that the previous skewed variables were indeed corrected through log
transformation.
One assumption made prior to creating the model was to only include representative fre-
quency data. Frequency is a fairly common variable to include in ridership models, and
the effect has thus been thoroughly studied previously. In previous studies, frequency
has been highly significant and positively affecting ridership [18]. The same can be seen
from the model results in Table 7.7. Thus, it can be confirmed that the representative
frequency data used is indeed representative and valid.
Table 7.7 shows that the lowest stringency index level (10-20) has a positive effect on
44
Modelling the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic on public transport usage
==PAGE:51==
ridership. This must be seen in correlation to Figure 7.5, which shows that a stringency
index between 10-20 was only seen in the last fifth period of the pandemic (from Febru-
ary 2022) and for one week of 2021 (week 44 - November 2021) as well as during the
days leading up to the initial lockdown. Subsequently, a stringency index between 10-20
corresponds to the recovery period of the pandemic, which explains the positive effect it
has on ridership as passengers came back to public transport.
Furthermore, the model generally shows that people living in proximity to stops in, par-
ticularly Hillerød or Allerød municipalities are more likely to use public transport, with
estimates of 0.85 and 0.73, respectively. Høje-Taastrup, Frederikssund, Glostrup, and
Ballerup municipalities are also more likely to use public transport than, for example, Rø-
dovre or Hørsholm municipalities. This might be because of a combination of the distance
to Copenhagen together with the high availability of public transport in those cities. More-
over, statistics from Denmark show that people living in Rødovre municipality, on average,
earn 14,000 DKK less per month than residents of Allerød municipality [4][14]. With in-
come having a negative effect on ridership, this might partially explain why Allerød has
a higher effect on ridership than Rødovre. Frederiksberg, Dragør, Gentofte, and Tårnby
municipalities are all municipalities with a negative influence on ridership. According to
the Ministry of the Interior and Housing, one can see that Gentofte municipality has the
highest monthly income per resident at 87,913 DKK, which partially explains the negative
effect on ridership. Similar negative effects from income and the differentiating spatial
effect can be found in the results of Osorio et al. (2022) [34] and Fissinger (2020) [17].
Forecasting analysis
The results of the forecasting analysis clearly show the high negative influence the pan-
demic had on particularly trips with two or more transfers (cf. Table 7.10). The first two
scenarios are with a differentiating positivity rate and a high stringency index. They show
that when the government imposes strict restrictions (i.e., a high stringency index), then
fear is already so high and the appeal of using public transport so low that the positivity
index barely changes public transport usage. However, from the 6th scenario, one can
see that in situations with a lower stringency index but a high positivity rate and a high
number of transfers, the impact is roughly the same. It is important to keep in mind that
the 6th scenario primarily represents the final part of the pandemic. Subsequently, the
high change in ridership from the base scenario is mainly caused by the fear still existing
and clearly influencing people’s choices in transportation.
Future choices
This thesis could be improved by further investigating the choice between using a car or
public transport as a mode of transport. This could be done in several different ways.
One way is to include a Level of Service variable, essentially explaining the likelihood of
choosing a car over public transport. Moreover, one could also recreate and adjust the
model into a logistic regression model, with the result being the probability of choosing
public transport over a car.
The result of this report could be transformed and merged with existing traffic models, thus
creating more accurate scenarios for the new normal after a pandemic.
Lastly, one could also update the analysis period to investigate the new increase in the
cost of taking public transport, which was regulated on the 15th January 2023 [35].
Modelling the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic on public transport usage
45
==PAGE:52==
9
Conclusion
In this thesis, a statistical approach for determining the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic
on public transport usage has been performed, and the impact different variables have
on public transport ridership during the pandemic has been quantified. Variables were
chosen based on a comprehensive literature review and through the combination of travel
card data, data from the COMPASS model, and meteorological data. An aggregated
analysis, a cluster analysis, modelling, and a forecasting analysis have all been carried
out.
Overall, it can be concluded that through a comprehensive literature review and descrip-
tive analysis, a valid and representative model has been created displaying the effects
of the COVID-19 pandemic on public transport usage. The effects of the chosen vari-
ables have been compared to the findings from the literature review to further confirm the
model’s validity.
Through both the aggregated analysis and the cluster analysis, it was clear that the pan-
demic affected different locations in different ways. The effect on public transport usage
seems to have had the highest influence on commuters, particularly those who were able
to work from home.
This study shows that the loss of public transport passengers primarily occurred in a very
short period of time during the initial lockdown, and the recovery is still ongoing. The drop
of almost 73% of regular passengers occurred right at the beginning of the pandemic,
and it took almost a year for the number of passengers to double and two years for it to
become four times higher than at the beginning of the pandemic. The number of users
is approximately back at the same level as before the COVID-19 pandemic hit Denmark.
Though some people have changed their behaviour using public transport influenced by
the pandemic. Due to the new possibility of working remotely, many people do not need
to use public transport to the same extent as they did before.
46
Modelling the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic on public transport usage
==PAGE:53==
Bibliography
[1]
2019. URL: http://www.trafikdage.dk/v3/index.php?option=com_content&amp;
view=article&amp;id=124&amp;Itemid=175.
[2]
P Arana, S Cabezudo, and M Peñalba. “Influence of weather conditions on tran-
sit ridership: A statistical study using data from Smartcards”. In: Transportation re-
search part A: policy and practice 59 (2014), pp. 1–12.
[3]
Danish Civil Aviation and Railway Authority. Passagertal. 2022. URL: https://passagertal.
dk/.
[4]
Indenrigs og boligministeriet. IMs Kommunale Nøgletal. 2023. URL: https://www.
noegletal.dk/noegletal/nctrlman.
[5]
Sofie Borbiconi and Casper Martin Henriques. Bilister Holder mere i kø end før
corona. Oct. 2021. URL: https://www.dr.dk/nyheder/regionale/sjaelland/bilister-
holder-mere-i-koe-end-foer-corona.
[6]
Arnab Chakraborty and Sabyasachee Mishra. Land use and transit ridership con-
nections: Implications for state-level planning agencies. 2013. URL: https://www.
sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0264837712000786?casa_token=aFpu-X4XlFYAAAAA:
3OL22tXBPsMVxX4-21pHxSVhI7FMcaNtiimjxh-WOulOOqjDinBzPp0i585pqBztELygn27eTA.
[7]
Kim Chansung et al. Exposure to fear: Changes in travel behavior during MERS
outbreak in Seoul. 2017. URL: https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s12205-017-
0821-5.
[8]
COWI. Mellemkommunal fraflytningsandel. 2023. URL: http://folketal.dk/index.php.
[9]
Current status of public transport in Denmark. 2009. URL: https://www.intelligenttransport.
com/transport-articles/651/current-status-of-public-transport-in-denmark/.
[10]
Rasmus W. Damgaard. “Combining bicycle and public transport - empirical study
of large-scale data sources”. In: (2022).
[11]
Pratap Dangeti. Statistics for Machine Learning. URL: https://www.oreilly.com/
library / view / statistics - for - machine / 9781788295758 / c71ea970 - 0f3c - 4973 - 8d3a -
b09a7a6553c1.xhtml.
[12]
Statistics Denmark. BANE25: Rail transport of passengers by unit and type of trans-
port. 2023. URL: https://www.statbank.dk/statbank5a/selectvarval/define.asp?
PLanguage=1&subword=tabsel&MainTable=BANE25&PXSId=138125&tablestyle=
&ST=SD&buttons=0.
[13]
Statista Research Department. Denmark: Public bus passengers 2010-2019. June
2022. URL: https://www.statista.com/statistics/1177496/number-of-public-bus-
passengers-in-denmark/.
[14]
Bao Chau Do. Statistikbanken. 2021. URL: https://www.statistikbanken.dk/Statbank5a/
SelectVarVal/saveselections.asp.
[15]
R Documentation. Cramer’s V. 2023. URL: https://search.r- project.org/CRAN/
refmans/confintr/html/cramersv.html.
[16]
DOT. NYT Bynet. 2019. URL: https://dinoffentligetransport.dk/nyheder/nyt-bynet-
english/.
[17]
Mary Rose Fissinger. Behavioral Dynamics of Public Transit Ridership in Chicago
and Impacts of COVID-19. 2020. URL: https://hdl.handle.net/1721.1/129000.
[18]
Javier Gutiérrez, Osvaldo Daniel Cardozo, and Juan Carlos García-Palomares. “Tran-
sit ridership forecasting at station level: an approach based on distance-decay weighted
regression”. In: Journal of Transport Geography 19.6 (2011). Special section on Al-
Modelling the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic on public transport usage
47
==PAGE:54==
ternative Travel futures, pp. 1081–1092. ISSN: 0966-6923. URL: https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.jtrangeo.2011.05.004.
[19]
Thomas Hale et al. “A global panel database of pandemic policies (Oxford Covid-19
Government response tracker)”. In: Nature Human Behaviour 5.4 (2021), pp. 529–
538. DOI: 10.1038/s41562-021-01079-8.
[20]
Vincent Henrion. “Consequences of the COVID-19 pandemic on the public transport
usage in the Greater Copenhagen area”. In: (2022).
[21]
J. B. Ingvardson, O. A. Nielsen, and S. Altaf. Analysing the influence of station
location, characteristics and perceived safety on public transport ridership: A case
study from Copenhagen. 2018. URL: http://www.caspt.org/wp-content/uploads/
2018/10/Papers/CASPT_2018_paper_88.pdf.
[22]
Jesper Bláfoss Ingvardson and Otto Anker Nielsen. “The influence of vicinity to sta-
tions, station characteristics and perceived safety on public transport mode choice:
a case study from Copenhagen”. In: Public Transport 14 (2022). ISSN: 1613-7159.
URL: https://doi.org/10.1007/s12469-021-00285-x.
[23]
Jesper Bláfoss Ingvardson et al. “Passenger arrival and waiting time distributions
dependent on train service frequency and station characteristics: A smart card data
analysis”. In: Transportation Research Part C: Emerging Technologies 90 (2018),
pp. 292–306. ISSN: 0968-090X. URL: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.trc.2018.03.006.
[24]
Statens Serum Institut. Mutations in mink virus. 2020. URL: https://www.ssi.dk/
aktuelt/nyheder/2020/mutationer-i-minkvirus.
[25]
Statens Serum Institute. 2022. URL: https://www.ssi.dk/-/media/arkiv/subsites/
covid19/presse/tidslinje-over-covid-19/covid-19-tidslinje-lang-for-2020-2022-version-
2---december-2022.pdf.
[26]
Movia Presse og Kommunikation. Movia gør det gratis at Tage Cyklen med I Bussen.
URL: https://www.moviatrafik.dk/presse/presse-og-nyheder/vis/?key=224713677422575%
5C%3Fkey.
[27]
Narisra Limtanakool, Martin Dijst, and Tim Schwanen. The influence of socioeco-
nomic characteristics, land use and travel time considerations on mode choice for
medium- and longer-distance trips. 2006. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/
science/article/pii/S0966692305000438?casa_token=wo_9wNVPjL4AAAAA:FmFVH1fUikzBmjg3M_
T7MZNV-e6R8-0GcouCqDT1ubI1_8g6aDZLWvXlfb7rkMcznv2o90pxrA.
[28]
Eilert Løvborg. Rejsekortet. 2015. URL: https://denstoredanske.lex.dk/rejsekortet#:
~:text=Bag%5C%20rejsekort%5C%20st%5C%C3%5C%A5r%5C%20DSB%5C%2C%
5C%20Trafikselskabet,2008%5C%20p%5C%C3%5C%A5%5C%20str%5C%C3%5C%
A6kningen%5C%20Taastrup%5C%2DHolb%5C%C3%5C%A6k.
[29]
Observationer. 2023. URL: https://www.dmi.dk/friedata/observationer/.
[30]
OECD. Data show how the COVID-19 pandemic has hit all aspects of people’s well-
being. 2021. URL: https://www.oecd.org/newsroom/data-show-how-the-covid-19-
pandemic-has-hit-all-aspects-of-peoples-well-being.htm.
[31]
World Health Organization. Coronavirus disease (COVID-19). 2020. URL: https :
//www.who.int/health-topics/coronavirus#tab=tab_1.
[32]
World Health Organization. COVID-19. 2020. URL: https://www.sst.dk/en/english/
Corona-eng.
[33]
World Health Organization. COVID-19 Projections. 2023. URL: https://covid19.who.
int/region/euro/country/dk.
[34]
Jesus Osorio, Yining Liu, and Yanfeng Ouyang. “Executive orders or public fear:
What caused transit ridership to drop in Chicago during COVID-19?” In: Transporta-
tion Research Part D: Transport and Environment 105 (2022), p. 103226. ISSN:
1361-9209. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.trd.2022.103226.
48
Modelling the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic on public transport usage
==PAGE:55==
[35]
DOT presse. Priserne i offentlig transport reguleres 15. januar 2023. 2023. URL:
https://dinoffentligetransport.dk/nyheder/priserne-reguleres-15-januar-2023/#:~:
text=og%5C%20M%5C%C3%5C%B8n%5C%20pr.-,15.,forventes%5C%20stigende%
5C%20takster%5C%20i%5C%202024.
[36]
Ori Rubin, Clara H. Mulder, and Luca Bertolini. The determinants of mode choice for
family visits – evidence from Dutch panel data. 2014. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.
com/science/article/pii/S0966692314001185.
[37]
Jean Ryan. Examining the Process of Modal Choice for Everyday Travel Among
Older People. 2020. URL: https://www.mdpi.com/1660-4601/17/3/691.
[38]
Natasha Sharma. K-Means Clustering Explained. 2023. URL: https://neptune.ai/
blog/k-means-clustering.
[39]
Fariya Sharmeen and Harry Timmermans. Walking down the habitual lane: ana-
lyzing path dependence effects of mode choice for social trips. 2014. URL: https:
//www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0966692314001604?casa_token=
GqCEwT7AHmoAAAAA:En7qN93tA5xEFQtP3nRnoJbGUFAzBldCL36qDWvSdYLRnEeeMeQ_
9QRudnZrdzpOYmzl7YKMuw.
[40]
Abhishek Singhal, Camille Kamga, and Anil Yazici. “Impact of weather on urban
transit ridership”. In: Transportation Research Part A: Policy and Practice 69 (2014),
pp. 379–391. ISSN: 0965-8564. URL: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tra.2014.09.008.
[41]
Skoleferie 2022. 2017. URL: http://kalender-dk.dk/skoleferie-2022/.
[42]
Lærd statistics. Spearman’s Rank-Order Correlation. 2023. URL: https://statistics.
laerd.com/statistical-guides/spearmans-rank-order-correlation-statistical-guide.php.
[43]
Rasmus Anker Stavad. Regioner, Landsdele og Kommuner, V1:2007. 2007. URL:
https://www.dst.dk/da/Statistik/dokumentation/nomenklaturer/nuts.
[44]
Aud Tennøy, Marianne Knapskog, and Fitwi Wolday. “Walking distances to public
transport in smaller and larger Norwegian cities”. In: Transportation Research Part
D: Transport and Environment 103 (2022), p. 103169. ISSN: 1361-9209. URL: https:
//doi.org/10.1016/j.trd.2022.103169.
[45]
Thales. Danish nationwide ticketing system Rejsekort, deployed by Thales, is more
popular than ever! 2022. URL: https://www.thalesgroup.com/en/worldwide-transport/
fare-collection-management/news/danish-nationwide-ticketing-system-rejsekort#:~:
text=At%5C%20the%5C%20end%5C%20of%5C%202019,and%5C%20420%5C%
20million%5C%20annual%5C%20transactions.
[46]
Ministry of Transport. “The Danish Transport System - Facts and Figures”. In: Min-
istry of Transport (2012).
[47]
Vejrarkiv. 2023. URL: https://www.dmi.dk/vejrarkiv/.
[48]
Signe Mai Vilsbøll and Frederik Sundby-Lebech. Metroens Nye Linje lukker I to
Uger I Januar: ’Der er ingen tvivl om, at det vil betyde ekstra rejsetid’. 2019. URL:
https://www.dr.dk/nyheder/indland/metroens-nye-linje-lukker-i-uger-i-januar-der-er-
ingen-tvivl-om-det-vil-betyde.
[49]
Kuo-Ying Wang. “How change of public transportation usage reveals fear of the
SARS virus in a City”. In: PLoS ONE 9.3 (2014). DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0089405.
[50]
Wikipedia. Cramér’s V. 2023. URL: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cram%C3%A9r%
5C%27s_V.
[51]
Wikipedia. Pearson correlation coefficient. 2023. URL: https://en.wikipedia.org/
wiki/Pearson_correlation_coefficient.
[52]
Wikipedia. Pearson’s chi-squared test. 2023. URL: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/
Pearson%5C%27s_chi-squared_test.
[53]
Wikipedia. Spearman’s rank correlation coefficient. 2023. URL: https://en.wikipedia.
org/wiki/Spearman%5C%27s_rank_correlation_coefficient.
Modelling the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic on public transport usage
49
==PAGE:56==
[54]
Meng Zhou et al. “Impacts of weather on public transport ridership: Results from
mining data from different sources”. In: Transportation research part C: emerging
technologies 75 (2017), pp. 17–29.
50
Modelling the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic on public transport usage
==PAGE:57==
Appendix
Appendix A
Table 1: Percentage of the group of travellers per location in February 2021(left) and
2022(right)
Passenger group
Nørreport
Frederiksberg
Lyngby
Infrequent
AM Peak
52.7%
17.2%
9.8%
PM Peak
37.2%
12.6%
7.5%
Weekend
39.2%
12.1%
8.4%
Occasional
AM Peak
8.0%
0.9%
0.9%
PM Peak
9.7%
1.6%
1.3%
Weekend
6.4%
1.5%
1.2%
Regular
AM Peak
8.9%
2.6%
2.2%
PM Peak
21.2%
6.5%
4.0%
Weekend
20.8%
7.0%
3.3%
Passenger group
Nørreport
Frederiksberg
Lyngby
Infrequent
AM Peak
54.1%
18.1%
9.2%
PM Peak
37.4%
12.9%
6.4%
Weekend
37.7%
12.7%
8.0%
Occasional
AM Peak
5.0%
1.1%
0.9%
PM Peak
8.6%
2.0%
1.3%
Weekend
6.8%
1.8%
1.1%
Regular
AM Peak
7.4%
2.4%
1.9%
PM Peak
20.5%
6.7%
4.2%
Weekend
21.9%
7.1%
2.7%
Figure 1: Boardings per passenger groups on Frederiksberg station in February through-
out the years
Figure 2: Boardings per passenger groups on Lyngby station in February throughout the
years
Modelling the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic on public transport usage
51
==PAGE:58==
Figure 3: Boardings per passenger groups on Frederiksberg station in March throughout
the years
Figure 4: Boardings per passenger groups on Lyngby station in March throughout the
years
52
Modelling the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic on public transport usage
==PAGE:59==
Appendix B
Table 2: Percentage change in the passenger number for each cluster based on Decem-
ber 2019
2019
Infrequent
Occasional
Regular
2020
-24.9 %
-41.0 %
-51.0 %
2021
-9.3 %
-20.1 %
-17.8 %
Table 3: Percentage change in the passenger number for each cluster based on 2020
February 2020
Infrequent
Occasional
Regular
2021
-36.5 %
-68.2 %
-23.8 %
2022
-10.5 %
-13.3 %
-12.7 %
March 2020
Infrequent
Occasional
Regular
2021
-33.1 %
-23.0 %
+138.7 %
2022
-7.1 %
+10.0 %
+316.2 %
Table 4: Percentage change in the passenger number for each cluster between February
and March 2020
February
Infrequent
Occasional
Regular
March
-1.0 %
-22.4 %
-72.6 %
Modelling the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic on public transport usage
53
==PAGE:60==
Appendix C
Figure 5: Number of weeks in which the passenger used the system at least once
54
Modelling the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic on public transport usage
==PAGE:61==
Figure 6: Percentage of all trips taken between 6 am and 10 am on weekdays
Modelling the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic on public transport usage
55
==PAGE:62==
Figure 7: Percentage of all trips taken on a weekend
56
Modelling the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic on public transport usage
==PAGE:63==
Figure 8: Percentage of all trips with mode transfer
Modelling the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic on public transport usage
57
==PAGE:64==
Appendix D
Originally variable illustrations:
Figure 9: Original variable illustrations
58
Modelling the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic on public transport usage
==PAGE:65==
Transformed variable illustrations:
Figure 10: Transformed variable illustrations
Modelling the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic on public transport usage
59
==PAGE:66==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Akademivej, Building 358
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 4800
www.man.dtu.dk
