==PAGE:1==
Bidding Your Profit Away: Simulating
Auctions and Quantifying Winner
Satisfaction
Authors
Anna Halfdanardottir - s202097
January 30, 2023
==PAGE:2==
Abstract
In this thesis auction theory is studied, focusing on a phenomenon called the win-
ner’s curse. Quantifying how satisfied a winning bidder is after an auction is explored.
A model is developed using game theory and Bayesian updating methods where bidders
are assigned various characteristics that are considered to affect bidder behavior. The
model is then used to simulate auctions with varying reserve prices and bidder counts.
Data from Sotheby’s auction house is used to compare how well the model can predict
auction outcomes. Finally, various parameters of the model are adjusted in order to
analyze how each of them affects the severity of the winner’s curse.
==PAGE:3==
Acknowledgments
Special thanks to my supervisor Nina Gierasimczuk for her advice and enlightening
conversations over the course of the thesis.
For providing valuable insight into the
auction world, along with auction results I would also like to thank everyone I interacted
with at Sotheby’s. Finally, I would like to express gratitude to all the people around
me who helped me during the course of my study period.
==PAGE:4==
Bidding Your Profit Away
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over five months at the Department of Applied Mathe-
matics and Computer science at the Technical University of Denmark, DTU, in partial
fulfillment for the degree Master of Science in Engineering, MSc Eng. It is assumed that
the reader has a basic knowledge in the areas of game theory and Bayesian statistics.
Anna Halfdanardottir
s202097
iii
==PAGE:5==
Contents
Table of Contents
iv
1
Introduction
1
2
Auction Theory
1
2.1
Auction Vocabulary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2.2
Auction Characteristics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.3
Auction Format Studied in This Thesis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
3
Winner’s Curse
6
3.1
Common Value Estimates
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
3.1.1
Distribution of Common Value Estimates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
3.2
Independent Private Values and the Winner’s Curse . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
3.3
Potential Factors - Hypotheses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
4
Game Theory
10
4.1
Bayesian Games . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
4.2
Relationship Between Open and Closed Auction Formats . . . . . . . . . . .
11
4.2.1
Revenue Equivalence Theorem . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
4.2.2
Strategic Equivalence . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
5
Auction Model
14
5.1
Auction as a Bayesian Game . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
5.2
Auction
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
5.3
Agents (Bidders)
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
5.3.1
Bidder Characteristics
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
5.3.2
Translating Character Into Behavior
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
5.4
Belief States . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
5.5
Reacting to Incoming Information . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
5.5.1
Placing a Bid . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
5.5.2
Updating the Belief Set . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
5.6
Simulation Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
5.7
Deviations in Rational Behavior . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
5.7.1
Level-k Rationality . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
5.7.2
Ambiguity Aversion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
5.7.3
Anchoring Effect
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
5.7.4
Confirmation Bias
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
5.8
Quantifying the Winner’s Curse . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
6
Testing on Real Data
25
6.1
The Data
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
6.2
Simulation Using the Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
6.3
Using the Model to Identify Winner’s Curse Influencers . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
iv
==PAGE:6==
Bidding Your Profit Away
Contents
6.3.1
Hypothesis 1 - Bidder Value Affiliation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
6.3.2
Hypothesis 2 - Number of Bidders . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
6.3.3
Hypothesis 3 - Number of Bids Submitted by Winner . . . . . . . . .
30
7
Conclusion and Discussion
31
v
==PAGE:7==
Bidding Your Profit Away
1
Introduction
Game theory is a field of study that analyzes scenarios in which participants interact
with each other and each participant’s satisfaction with the outcome depends not just on
his own choices but also those of everyone else. These scenarios are called games [1]. In
this thesis game theory will be applied to a specific scenario; auctions. An auction can
be represented as a game where bidders are the participants and incoming bids are their
interaction with one another.
Underlying the structure of game theory is the assumption that participants in a game
are rational. A fully rational participant will have well defined preferences and choose the
best strategy according to those preferences. While this assumption works for solving the-
oretical problems it does not represent human behavior as humans are not fully rational.
Humans depart from rational behavior due to various factors [2]. Examples include an incli-
nation to take risks in decision making and limits on cognitive capacity. If one was to create
an algorithm that could outsmart other participants this assumption of full rationality would
not be problematic. The objective of this thesis, however, is not to create the perfect bidder
but rather a model that can simulate bidder behavior in real life. The concept of bounded
rationality will therefore be used in an attempt to produce agents with a realistic behavior.
The application of game theory to auctions is usually called auction theory. Auction
theory analyses different auction formats and attempts to predict how people will behave in
them. In this thesis focus will be set on a specific type of auction; English auctions. In an
English auction, participants bid openly against each other in an ascending order and the
winner pays the highest bid.
The winner’s curse is a term used to describe scenarios where the winner of an auction is
dissatisfied with the outcome. This can occur under two scenarios. One is when the winner
pays more than the lot up for bid is worth. Another is when the winner wins at a price
significantly lower than what he estimated the value of it to be. Quantifying this feeling
is a challenging task. This thesis will aim to do so and investigate what factors affect the
severity of the winner’s curse in English auctions. The thesis was written in collaboration
with Sotheby’s, one of the oldest and largest auction houses in the world. The student is
currently working as an engineering consultant for the auction house. In addition to giving
the author valuable insight into the auction world, they also provided auction result data to
test the model against.
2
Auction Theory
Auctions are one of the oldest surviving classes of trading methods. When one hears the
word auction today their mind might turn to bidding websites like eBay or reality television
shows like Storage Wars where participants bid on storage units. In addition to these familiar
examples, the auctioning process is used to trade a variety of goods ranging from construc-
tion contracts to luxury goods [3]. Understanding the auction mechanism and interaction
Page 1 of 33
==PAGE:8==
Bidding Your Profit Away
2.1
Auction Vocabulary
between participants is therefore important. Auction theory is valuable for empirical, theo-
retical, and practical reasons. A significant amount of financial transactions are conducted
through auctions which gives an economic motive for understanding the mechanism behind
them. Additionally, auctions can be used as a way to study game theory scenarios with
incomplete information. The results of these studies can then be applied to other situations
with incomplete information [4]. An example of this is how Google and Yahoo changed the
process of allocating advertisements on their search engines using an auction mechanism [5].
Auction theory has also provided a basis for significant theoretical work within economics. It
has helped with understanding concepts like price formation, negotiations, and competitive
markets just to name a few [6].
2.1
Auction Vocabulary
Before diving into the world of auctions it is important to introduce phrases and words
commonly used. Some of them can have varying definitions but this section will describe
what they stand for in this thesis. A lot is a single object or group of objects offered for
sale at an auction as a single entity. Each auction can consist of one or more lots. The
auctioneer is the person who conducts and controls the auction process. They often work
for an auction house. The seller is the current owner of the product. Auction participants
are called bidders and they need to sign up to participate in the auction. A bidder is active
if he has not dropped out of the auction. Initially, all bidders are active, then they drop
out one by one until only one bidder is left standing. Once a bidder has become inactive he
is assumed to be unable to re-enter the auction. At every time each bidder has a value he
associates with the lot. This is what the bidder believes the lot is worth. A bid is an offer
submitted by a bidder stating the amount he is willing to pay. The winner of an auction is
the bidder with the highest bid which, consequently, secures the lot. The price of a lot is
the winning bid amount.
Page 2 of 33
==PAGE:9==
Bidding Your Profit Away
2.2
Auction Characteristics
Figure 1: Auction Components
2.2
Auction Characteristics
Through the years different formats of this trading method have emerged. These formats
may differ in regards to optimal strategy for the bidder and expected payoff for the auctioneer
[1]. It is therefore crucial to distinguish between them when studying auction theory. Several
characteristics can be used to classify auction formats. Some examples of these attributes will
be discussed here to provide context for the defining features of different types of auctions.
Single or Multiple Lots
An auction can consist of a single lot or multiple lots. Multiple lot auctions can run
sequentially or simultaneously. In a sequential auction lots are sold one at a time in order
but in a simultaneous auction, all lots are open for bids concurrently.
Open or Closed Bid
In an open bid auction, incoming bids are revealed to bidders. The bidder with the
incoming bid has disclosed information to the other bidders stating that he is willing to pay
the specified amount for the lot. This allows every other bidder to update their lot value
estimate after each observed bid. This information could lead them to believe the lot is worth
less or more than they previously thought. In a closed bid format, bids are kept secret and
Page 3 of 33
==PAGE:10==
Bidding Your Profit Away
2.2
Auction Characteristics
results are revealed after everyone has placed their bid. In a closed bid format, bidders are
therefore not able to acquire any information on other bidders’ preferences before submitting
their bid.
Online or Live
Auctions can be held online or in a live setting. Bidders can participate through a
website or application during online auctions.
In a live auction, bidders must either be
present in person or have a representative bidding for them who is present. In recent years
a hybrid version of this has also emerged at Sotheby’s. A hybrid auction takes place in a
live setting but bidders can place bids online, in person, or through phone calls. Bidders are
also able to follow incoming bids online through an auction portal provided by Sotheby’s.
First or Second Price
How much the winner of a closed bid auction pays for the lot is not always the same
as his bid amount. While that is the case for first price auctions, in second price auctions
the winner pays the amount of the second highest bid submitted. Second price, closed bid
auctions are often called Vickrey auctions in honor of William Vickrey. Vickrey wrote the
first game theoretic analysis on auctions and won a Nobel Memorial Prize for his work [1].
Ascending or Descending
Open bid auctions can be ascending or descending. In an ascending auction, bids are
placed in ascending order until no one is willing to bid higher than the current bid. The
person holding the current highest bid is the winner and pays the amount of his bid. Open,
ascending auctions are often called English auctions. Contrarily, in a descending auction
an auctioneer starts by declaring a starting price. They then decrease it until some bidder
accepts and pays the current price. Descending auctions are also known as Dutch auctions
[1].
Common or Private Value
When bidders come into an auction they will usually have a predefined value, which
could be regarded as a bidder’s reserve price or the maximal amount he is willing to pay for
the lot. This value can contain both common and private components.
The common value component of a lot is the part that is the same for all bidders. This
is usually the real, monetary value of the lot. In most cases, the bidders do not know what
this common value is but will have made their estimates coming into the auction. The key is
that the actual value of the lot is the same for all. An example of this is a jar of coins. The
amount in the jar will be the same for all bidders but they will each have their estimation
of how many coins are in it.
The private value component of the lot is personal for each bidder. It captures the
bidders’ personal preferences for the lot. An example of this could be a bidder bidding on
Page 4 of 33
==PAGE:11==
Bidding Your Profit Away
2.3
Auction Format Studied in This Thesis
a painting made by his favorite artist. Another example could be a football team bidding
on a player to fill a position they desperately need a replacement for. In both of these cases
the bidders might be willing to pay more than the common monetary value of the lot is
considered to be. If the football player has a market value of 100 million euros but the team
needs this type of player they might be willing to pay above that.
An independent private value lot is one in which there is no common, monetary value
factor that bidder values are distributed around. In an extreme case, each bidder’s value
can be thought of as random. It is difficult to imagine a scenario in which this is the case as
most objects have some common component to their value. Bidding on an unknown object
might fall under this category as no bidder can estimate the value of a hidden object.
It turns out that most lots are not exclusively either common or private value, but a
mix of both [7]. When bidders’ values contain both a common and a private element, we
have what is called an affiliated private value lot. In such auctions, the values of bidders
are usually thought to be symmetrically but not independently distributed [8]. The values
not being independently distributed indicates that there is a pattern in how these values are
distributed around the point. Therefore, the likelihood of over/underestimating the value
by x is not necessarily equal to the likelihood of over/underestimating the value by y if x
is not equal to y. Symmetry implies that values are distributed symmetrically around a
point and it is equally likely that a bidder will underestimate the value by x as it is that
he will overestimate it by x. The assumption of symmetry in bidder values is discussed and
challenged in section 3.1.1 of this paper.
Figure 2: Affiliated Private Value Distribution
2.3
Auction Format Studied in This Thesis
The most common auction formats are usually split up into four categories; English,
Dutch, First-Price and Vickrey [9]. Each auction type is displayed in the figure below using
Page 5 of 33
==PAGE:12==
Bidding Your Profit Away
characteristics listed in the previous section.
Figure 3: Common Auction Types
This thesis will examine a particular auction form; English, single lot, affiliated private
value auctions. In more general terms, this is an auction where bidders bid on a single lot
in increasing order until all but one of them has dropped out. The winner will pay the
amount of his bid. The values of each bidder are affiliated; there is both a common and
private component to them. Furthermore, this project will focus on the auctioning of art
and collector pieces. In such auctions, the common element between bidders is the estimated
resale value of the lot. Each bidder will then have their own, private preferences for it; the
private value component.
3
Winner’s Curse
In an English auction setting a winner is announced when no bidder is willing to bid
higher than the current bid. The winner ends up paying the current bid amount. It can thus
be deduced that no other bidder in the auction is willing to pay more for the lot than he is.
Here is the catch: if all other bidders believe the lot is worth less than he does, he might be
overestimating the value. This is usually referred to as the winner’s curse.
Page 6 of 33
==PAGE:13==
Bidding Your Profit Away
Figure 4: Winner’s Curse
With affiliated private values, as in the case investigated in this project, the common
component of the lot is not necessarily known to bidders. This can be represented as each
bidder having his own common value estimate ci. This estimate is defined as:
ci = c + xi
xi ∈(−c, ∞)
(1)
where c is the real common value and xi represents the "error" in bidder i’s estimate [1].
When specifying the range of xi it is assumed that the bidder is rational enough to not
estimate the common value at a negative value. The common value is assumed here to be
the estimated resale value of the lot at the time of the auction. It is interesting to think
about what the resale value of the lot is. It could be assumed to be the estimate published by
the auction house. This estimate usually comes from art experts within the auction house.
One could also state that the second highest bid at the auction is the true resale value, as
at least one person was willing to purchase the lot for that price.
Let us move on to the private value component. In some cases, a bidder will be interested
exclusively in that particular piece of art, made by an artist they admire, done in a specific
style, etc. This explains why the outcome of an art auction is often difficult to predict. The
supply curve is rigid in the sense that an increase in the price by some percentage will not
necessarily decrease the demand by the same percentage [10]. Now, let us add the private
component to equation 1. The value of bidder i is then represented as:
vi = ci + pi = c + xi + pi
pi ∈(0, ∞)
(2)
where pi serves here as the bidders’ private value. A positive pi value represents a positive
Page 7 of 33
==PAGE:14==
Bidding Your Profit Away
3.1
Common Value Estimates
personal preference for the lot; a bidder who, for some personal reasons, values the lot at
more than its estimated common value. A negative pi value will indicate that the bidder
does not think much of the lot and would not even pay what he believes the common (resale)
value is. A bidder is not likely to put a negative private value on the lot as he should be
able to resell the lot at the price of the common value. It will therefore be assumed that pi
is a positive number.
3.1
Common Value Estimates
The figure below shows a case where the bidders’ common value guesses are normally
distributed around the mean value, c. As will be discussed later in the paper, bidders will
likely update these beliefs throughout the auction as they gain information. This will be
disregarded for now. The winner of an auction likely has an estimate located near the far
right side of the normal curve. If he had a common estimate below the mean he would have
to behave highly irrationally to still end up with the highest bid.
Figure 5: Normally Distributed Common Values
3.1.1
Distribution of Common Value Estimates
It is important to identify and estimate the actual probability distribution of bidder
values to apply auction theory [11]. Studies have demonstrated that combining (even non-
expert) perspectives can provide a "collective" estimate that is remarkably accurate. Typi-
cally, this is done by taking the mean or median of the group of estimates. This phenomenon
is often called the "wisdom of crowds" [12]. Theoretical explanations for the "wisdom of
crowds" often claim that its accuracy rises as the number of participants does. If the par-
ticipants’ estimates are unbiased, the average of their estimates will increasingly converge
on the true value with an increasing number of participants [13]. This theory assumes that
bidder estimates are symmetrical. It is interesting to note that empirical studies on human
behavior contradict this. Humans appear to depart from rational behavior when estimating
quantities, due to a wide range of cognitive and perceptual biases [14, 15]. One such bias is
Page 8 of 33
==PAGE:15==
Bidding Your Profit Away
3.1
Common Value Estimates
risk aversion. Bidders have been shown to display risk aversion even when financial stakes
are low [16]. Haile and Tamer [17] propose a log-normal distribution of common value esti-
mates. A distribution is considered log-normal if the logarithms of the values are normally
distributed. In the case of bidder values, it means that a bidder is more likely to underesti-
mate the value of the lot than overestimate it. This fits the risk aversion pattern and will
be used here to represent bidders’ initial common component estimates at the start of an
auction.
Figure 6: Normally and Log-Normally Distributed Common Values
Figure 7: Log-Normally Distributed Common Values
Figure 6 shows normal and log-normal distributions of values with the same mean. For
a log-normal distribution, the median value has been suggested to approximate the true
value instead of the mean [18]. It is apparent that, like with the normal distributions, it is
still likely that the bidder with the highest value estimate will have overestimated.
Page 9 of 33
==PAGE:16==
Bidding Your Profit Away
3.2
Independent Private Values and the Winner’s Curse
3.2
Independent Private Values and the Winner’s Curse
It is interesting to note that in a pure private value auction the winner’s curse should
not exist [19]. In such a setting each bidder is not concerned with how much others believe
the lot is worth. Each bidder is completely sure of his private value estimate. As long as
he does not bid over this value he will never walk away from the auction feeling like he lost
something. The common value element is what can cause the bidder to feel like he lost, even
though he won.
3.3
Potential Factors - Hypotheses
The goal of this thesis is to investigate what factors affect the severity of the winner’s
curse in the auction format described in 2.31. This will be done by implementing an agent-
based model to simulate the auctioning of a single lot. The model will be tested against real
auction results to see how well it performs. Parameters of this model will then be adjusted to
see how the winner’s curse changes accordingly (if at all). To examine this, three hypotheses
are put forward:
Hypothesis 1. The severity of the winner’s curse grows with increasing uncertainty on the
bidders’ side about the common value of the lot.
Hypothesis 2. The severity of the winner’s curse grows with an increasing number of active
bidders (bidders who submit at least one bid).
Hypothesis 3. The severity of the winner’s curse grows with an increasing number of bids
a bidder has placed on the lot.
Hypotheses 1 and 2 are inspired by Bazerman and Samuelson’s paper on the winner’s
curse [20].
According to their paper, raising either factor will widen the range of value
estimates and bids.
This increases the probability that the winning bidder will overbid
because they believe the commodity to be worth more than it is. Hypothesis 3 is a theory
put forward in several papers on the winner’s curse [21, 22]. It originates from the idea
of pseudo-endowment. Bidders become attached to the lot up for bid, and this attachment
causes them to update their perceived value for the lot. In this thesis, we will test these
hypotheses against our model and examine a correlation pattern if one exists.
4
Game Theory
In this thesis game theory will be applied in an attempt to develop a model that can
replicate the auction mechanism. Game theory is concerned with situations where agents
interact with one another and the satisfaction of each agent with the outcome depends on
both his and the other participants’ decisions [1]. More formally, a game is any situation
with the following three aspects [23]:
1How to quantify the severity of the winner’s curse will be discussed in 5.8
Page 10 of 33
==PAGE:17==
Bidding Your Profit Away
4.1
Bayesian Games
1. There is a set of participants. They are often referred to as players or agents.
2. All players have a set of options for how to behave; their possible strategies.
3. Each player receives a payment for each strategy they choose and they may be influ-
enced by the strategies chosen by other players. Utilities represent the preferences over
outcomes and are usually numeric values, with greater utility preferred over smaller
utility.
This can be applied to auctions. Participants are the bidders signed up for the auction.
The bidders’ strategies are whether to bid and if so, how much. The utility of each bidder
can be hard to quantify. The utility for everyone but the winner is zero, as the losers do not
pay anything and get nothing2. Quantifying the winner’s utility is more difficult. Chapter
5.8 goes into more detail on this.
4.1
Bayesian Games
A specific type of games in game theory are Bayesian games. They differ from general
games in the sense that they allow for incomplete information [9]. Incomplete information is
represented using probabilities for how likely certain scenarios are. This applies to auctions.
At the start of an auction, bidders are unsure about two things; the true common (resale)
value of the lot and other bidders’ private preferences for it.
Under incomplete information, bidders will make their best guess of the true value of
the lot with the information that they have.
This might be based on research, private
information or merely intuition. They will also attempt to guess at what price other bidders
value the lot. These guesses will likely be biased toward their own beliefs.
4.2
Relationship Between Open and Closed Auction Formats
There are two interesting game theoretic relationships between open and closed bid
auctions; The Revenue Equivalence Theorem and Strategic Equivalence. Both of these will
be discussed in this section.
4.2.1
Revenue Equivalence Theorem
The Revenue Equivalence Theorem implies that the four formats shown in Figure 3
generate the same expected revenue for the seller under certain conditions [24]. In other
words, the amount that the winner will end up paying is the same on average. The theory
holds when bidders are risk neutral with independent private values drawn from the same
probability distribution. A risk neutral bidder will only care about his expected utility, not
the probability assigned to a scenario. For example, a risk neutral bidder will be indifferent
2There does exist an all-pay auction format for sealed bids in which all players pay their placed bid but
only the highest bidder gets the lot. In our case, only the winner has to pay so we can assume that the
utility of the losers is zero.
Page 11 of 33
==PAGE:18==
Bidding Your Profit Away
4.2
Relationship Between Open and Closed Auction Formats
about playing a game where he has a 50% chance of winning $100 and a game where has a
100% chance of getting $50.
Theorem 1 (Revenue Equivalence Theorem). Define an auction as a game with n par-
ticipants who have values v1, ..., vn that are identically and independently distributed with a
cumulative distribution function F(·) on [v, v]. Furthermore, assume that all bidders are risk
neutral. The Bayesian Nash Equilibrium (BNE) of this type of auction is a set of strategies,
where each bidder maximizes his expected payoff given his beliefs about the strategies of other
players. We define a set of auctions A with the following two conditions:
1. Every bidder i ∈{1, ..., n} has an identical probability of winning in BNE of all auctions
in A
2. Any bidder i with a value vi = v has an expected utility of zero in all auctions in A
This set of auctions will generate the same expected revenue for the auctioneer.
Proof. To prove this we can derive an equation for the expected payoff that does not depend
on the auction format used. Bidder i values the unit at vi, which is private information to
him. It is common knowledge between bidders that each value, vi, is drawn from the same
continuous distribution F(·) on [v, v]. As F(·) is a cumulative distribution function this
means that F(v) = 0 and F(v) = 1. We define the density function as f(·).
We define the values of all bidders as a vector ˆv. Furthermore, we define v−i as a vector
consisting of all bidder values except bidder i’s. An auction rule specifies for all i, that:
xi : ˆv →[0, 1]
ti : ˆv →R,
(3)
where xi is the probability that bidder i will get the object and ti is the required payment
from bidder i, given his bid in BNE. We denote si(vi, v−i) as a function that maximizes
bidder i’s expected utility given his value and the expected value of other bidders. Given xi
and ti, bidder i’s expected utility as a function of his value is:
U(vi) = vi ∗E[xi(si(vi, v−i))]
|
{z
}
expected probability
of winning
−E[ti(si(vi, v−i))]
|
{z
}
expected payment
(4)
As si(vi, v−i) denotes the equilibrium of an auction game with values ˆv, we can use the
cumulative distribution function to represent his probability of winning. Bidder i’s payoff is
then:
U(vi) = vi ∗F n−1(vi) −E[ti(si(vi, v−i))]
(5)
where F n−1(vi) is the probability that if you draw n −1 numbers from F, they will all be
Page 12 of 33
==PAGE:19==
Bidding Your Profit Away
4.2
Relationship Between Open and Closed Auction Formats
below vi. Using requirement 1 from the theory above this is equal to the probability of
bidder i winning the auction.
In order to maximize this utility for bidder i given vi and his opponents’ strategies b−i(·),
applying the envelope theorem [25] gives:
U ′(v)|v=vi = E[xi(si(vi, v−i))] = F n−1(vi)
(6)
and by integrating up:
Ui(vi) = Ui(v) +
Z vi
v
F n−1(˜v)d˜v =
Z vi
v
F n−1(˜v)d˜v
(7)
where requirement 2 from the theory above is used to state that the expected utility of
winning with value v is zero. Combining equations 5 and 7 we get:
E[ti(si(vi, v−i))] = vi ∗F n−1(vi) −U(vi) = vi ∗F n−1(vi) −
Z vi
v
F n−1(˜v)d˜v
(8)
It is visible from equation 8 that a bidder’s expected payment at BNE relies on:
1. His value, vi
2. The probability of him having the highest value given the distribution function F(·)
Neither of these factors should vary between auction formats, as long as they follow the
two requirements stated in the theorem. It is important to note that this does not mean
that the winning bid amount is the same. In second price auctions, the price is the second
highest bid amount. The revenue equivalence theorem does not hold for our case, as bidders’
values are not independently distributed.
4.2.2
Strategic Equivalence
Strategic equivalence also exists between these formats under specific conditions. Auc-
tions are said to be strategically equivalent if, given the same value, a bidder chooses the
same bidding strategy in order to maximize his expected utility [9].
Bidder i’s bidding
strategy is a function:
si(vi, v−i) →R
(9)
that maps his value and beliefs on other bidders’ values to a bid to be placed in the auction.
A Dutch auction is strategically equivalent to a first price sealed bid auction (FPSBA)
regardless of whether bidder values are affiliated or not [1]. That is, the values can have
Page 13 of 33
==PAGE:20==
Bidding Your Profit Away
a common and/or a private component. In a first price sealed bid auction the winner will
pay his bid amount (the highest out of all the bidders). That is exactly what happens in a
descending open bid auction. During the auction, bidders learn nothing about the values of
other bidders. As soon as one person accepts the auctioneer’s price he is declared the winner
and pays the current price. In game theory, a bidder’s strategy is a dominant strategy if
it maximizes his expected utility for any strategies of the other bidders [9]. The dominant
strategy for Dutch auctions and FPSBA is the following [1]:
bi = N −1
N
∗vi
(10)
Here vi is bidder i′s value, bi is his optimal bidding strategy and N is the total number
of bidders participating in the auction. In a sealed bid auction, this is simply the amount
he should submit as his bid. In a dutch auction, this is the point at which he should accept
the price. This equation also tells us that with a growing number of participants, a bidder
should bid closer to his real value.
English auctions and Vickrey auctions are, under the assumption of private bidder values
independently drawn from the same probability distribution, also strategically equivalent [8].
In a Vickrey auction the dominant strategy is to bid your true value [1]:
bi = vi.
(11)
In an English auction, the bidder who stays in the longest wins the lot and he pays the
price at which the second-to-last bidder dropped out. It can be assumed that the second-
to-last bidder will not bid over his value and that he will not drop out of the auction until
a bid is placed that exceeds his value. In other words, the winner will win when he places
a bid that is equal to or exceeds the second-to-last bidder’s value. This is only equivalent
to a Vickrey auction if the bidders’ values are independent. If the values have a common
component they are no longer strategically equivalent. With more than two bidders the
public drop-out prices give information about the common value that is relevant for the
remaining bidders. This information will likely cause bidders to update their prior values
and their strategy will consequently update with each incoming bid [9]. It is important to
note that the English auction type investigated in this thesis is not equivalent to a Vickrey
auction as bidder values are affiliated.
5
Auction Model
In this section, a model will be developed to simulate auctions based on specific param-
eters. A technique based on Bayesian game theory will be applied to replicate the auction
mechanism.
Page 14 of 33
==PAGE:21==
Bidding Your Profit Away
5.1
Auction as a Bayesian Game
5.1
Auction as a Bayesian Game
A Bayesian game generally consists of a set of players, a set of actions, types of players,
payoff function for each player, and probability distributions associated with the types. In
the case of auctions, this can be modeled as a game G = (B, Xi, Si, ui, F(·)) where:
• B = {1, 2, .., n}: Set of bidders
• Xi: Possible bidder types (values vi) of bidder i
• Si = R+: Set of possible strategies (bids) of each bidder
• ui : Si × Xi →R: Utility (payoff) function for bidder i
• F(·) : ∆X: Distribution of player types (how likely it is that a player is of type Xi)
5.2
Auction
In the model, each lot will be treated as a single, standalone auction. One simulation
will therefore simulate the auctioning of one lot. Each auction contains the following initial
parameters:
• N: Number of bidders who signed up
• Estimate: A single number or range that the lot value is estimated at
This information is considered to be available to bidders before the auction starts. In
real auctions, a single price estimate or estimate range is usually published by auction houses
before the auction.
5.3
Agents (Bidders)
Attempting to capture human behavior during an auction is a complicated task. Ele-
ments like risk inclination, private information and desire for the lot are some of the factors
that affect a bidder’s behavior. To capture different characteristics of bidders each bidder
will be assigned coefficients drawn from a probability distribution over each factor.
5.3.1
Bidder Characteristics
Our methodology divides a bidder’s character into five subcategories. Each category is
listed in the table below along with a short description.
Page 15 of 33
==PAGE:22==
Bidding Your Profit Away
5.3
Agents (Bidders)
Table 1: Bidder Characteristic Categories
Characteristic
Description
Desire
How much the bidder wants to
own the lot
Private Information
How much private information
the bidder has on the lot value
Projection Bias
How much a bidder believes ev-
eryone else shares his beliefs, pref-
erences and actions [8]
Risk Inclination
How much risk the bidder is will-
ing to take in order to win the
auction
Private Value
How much the bidder believes the
lot is worth (his resale value esti-
mate)
A bidder’s type will be defined by his coefficients for each of these values. These coef-
ficients’ range is [0, 1]. Each bidder is randomly assigned a value for each factor based on
a probability distribution for each one. The values are independent, both between bidders
and between factors. A bidder’s factor does not depend on other bidders’ values for the
same factor nor his other factors’ values. This decision is inspired by the theory of the Big
Five personality traits. According to the theory, differences between people’s personalities
can be broken down in terms of five major traits [26]. These are openness to experience,
conscientiousness, extroversion, agreeableness and neuroticism. It has been shown that the
five personality factors are statistically independent of each other. Knowing a person’s score
on some of those traits tells you nothing about their other personality traits [27].
The first four factors listed in Table 1 are drawn from a normal distribution with a mean
of 0.5 and a standard deviation of 0.25. The reasoning behind using the normal distribution
is that many personality traits are considered to be well represented by a normal distribution
[27]. A bidder’s private value is drawn from a log-normal distribution as discussed in section
3.1.1.
5.3.2
Translating Character Into Behavior
A bidder’s characteristics will determine how he behaves during an auction. He will
observe incoming bids and update his prior beliefs each time a new bid comes in. How he
reacts to incoming bids will be determined by two negatively correlated parameters αself and
αothers. αself represents how little a bidder trusts his original value estimate. Contrarily, αothers
describes how little he trusts other bidders’ bids as estimates. These values are calculated
in the following way
Page 16 of 33
==PAGE:23==
Bidding Your Profit Away
5.4
Belief States
self distrust = (1 −private info) + (1 −projection bias) + desire + risk inclination
4
(12)
others distrust = 1 −self trust
(13)
σself = self distrust ∗(estimate ∗0.05)
(14)
σothers = others distrust ∗(estimate ∗0.05)
(15)
Equation 12 uses the factors from Table 1 to calculate how little a bidder trusts his own initial
value estimate. It can be seen that private information and projection bias are negatively
correlated with σself while desire and risk inclination are positively correlated with σself. The
more private information the bidder has on the lot and how much he believes everyone else
shares his beliefs (projection bias) should increase his confidence. Contrarily, his desire for
the lot and risk inclination should make him more willing to adapt his value to incoming
bids.
In equations 14 and 15 the coefficients in 12 and 13 are scaled to fit the lot estimate.
These σ values will be used to determine how a bidder will adapt to incoming bids during
the auction.
5.4
Belief States
In Bayesian game theory, the belief set of an agent is a probability distribution over
the possible types of other agents. Our model takes a player’s belief set at time t to be a
normally distributed range Oi(t):
Oi(t) ∼N(vi(t), σ2
i (t))
(16)
This belief set consists of two parameters; the bidder’s own value and his confidence in
it. He believes his value is the average and the other bidders’ values are normally distributed
around it. How confident he is in his value estimate will determine how wide the range of his
beliefs for other bidders’ values is. A graphical representation of this can be seen in Figure
8.
Page 17 of 33
==PAGE:24==
Bidding Your Profit Away
5.5
Reacting to Incoming Information
Figure 8: Bidder Belief Sets
One could argue that a log-normal distribution would be suitable to represent beliefs
for other bidders’ values. The reasoning given in 3.1.1 for using a log-normal distribution for
identifying bidder values at auction start was that humans tend to be risk averse, especially
when there is money involved. While that is assumed to be the actual distribution of value
estimates in this model, we also assume that in a live bidding setting a human bidder is not
sophisticated enough to think of his opponents’ values as log-normally distributed. Instead
we assume that he thinks he is the "average" player and everyone else is as likely to value
the lot at x% below his value as they are to value it at x% above. Now comes the tricky
part, how does this belief set change over the course of the auction?
5.5
Reacting to Incoming Information
At auction start, each bidder will have a value and belief set for others’ values. In order
to simulate how he updates those values during the auction the following questions need to
be answered:
1. How does a bidder decide whether to bid and what amount?
2. How does a bidder update his belief set upon observing an incoming bid?
5.5.1
Placing a Bid
The most common method of abstracting the process of bidders entering bids in an
English Auction is the button method [28]. The idea is that each bidder is holding in a
button while the price increases. Bidders take their hands off the button when they are no
longer willing to pay the amount. The auction ends when there is only one participant left.
He wins the auction and pays the price at which the second-to-last player stopped pressing
the button. This method has an important deviation from real-life auctions. It assumes that
Page 18 of 33
==PAGE:25==
Bidding Your Profit Away
5.5
Reacting to Incoming Information
bidders are always aware of how many bidders are left in the auction. This is certainly not
the case in reality.
Another approach was taken here, inspired by the jump bidding concept introduced
by Haile and Tamer [17].
Jump bidding is when a bidder raises the current bid in an
English auction, substantially more than the minimum increment. In their solution ∆is the
minimum increment and λ is the probability of the bidder placing a bid. Each time a bidder
decides to bid he jumps to a uniform random draw between the standing bid (plus ∆) and
his valuation, rather than raising the bid only by ∆. This draw is displayed in Figure 9.
Figure 9: Deciding Bidder Bid Amount
Two important assumptions are made to allow for this way of representing the bid
decision process:
1. Bidders do not bid more than they are willing to pay.
2. Bidders do not allow an opponent to win at a price they are willing to beat.
In this thesis, the bid decision process is modeled using the jumping bid mechanism.
The two assumptions listed above were evaluated to be more valid than the one in the
button method; assuming that each bidder is always aware of how many bidders are left in
the auction.
5.5.2
Updating the Belief Set
When observing incoming bids bidders might want to update their prior belief about
the value of the lot. This process is implemented in the model using Bayesian updating. At
the start of the auction, each bidder will have a belief set:
Oi(t = 0) ∼N(vi(0), σ2
i (0) = σ2
i,self)
(17)
where vi(0) is his initial value for the lot and σ2
self is his initial distrust in his own value
estimate.
Now, as each bid comes in the bidder will update this belief distribution by
Page 19 of 33
==PAGE:26==
Bidding Your Profit Away
5.6
Simulation Model
performing a Bayesian update. A posterior distribution is calculated using the prior belief
set and the new observed bid. The new standard deviation, or distrust, of the distribution
is derived using the following equation:
σ2
i (t) =
1
n
σ2
i,others +
1
σ2
i (t−1)
(18)
In our model n = t as t signifies the number of submitted bids. This results in decreasing
distrust as the auction progresses. In other words, the bidder’s confidence in his value will
increase with time.
The new mean can be acquired by the following equation, with x
representing all observed bids up until time t:
µi,x(t) = vi(t) =
1
σ2
i (t−1)
n
σ2
i,others +
1
σ2
i (t−1)
|
{z
}
confidence in prior value
∗
vi(t −1) +
confidence in incoming value
z
}|
{
n
σ2
i,others
n
σ2
i,others +
1
σ2
i (t−1)
∗
x
(19)
The new mean is assumed to be the bidder’s updated value at time t. This method was
obtained from Murphy’s article on estimating Gaussian parameters using Bayesian inference
and conjugate priors [29].
5.6
Simulation Model
Now it is time to combine the pieces into a simulation model. The flow chart in Figure
10 shows the process of a single auction flow.
Page 20 of 33
==PAGE:27==
Bidding Your Profit Away
5.6
Simulation Model
Figure 10: Auction Flow
Before the auction starts N bidder objects are created. Each of these bidders is first
assigned a characteristic profile and then a belief set. Once the auction has begun it follows
a loop of bid gathering until no more bids are submitted. The current holder of the highest
Page 21 of 33
==PAGE:28==
Bidding Your Profit Away
5.7
Deviations in Rational Behavior
bid is declared the winner. The model was developed using Python and the pseudo code for
running a single auction can be seen in Algorithm 1.
Algorithm 1 Auction Simulation
1: while there are more bids do
2:
start new bid round
3:
for each active bidder do
4:
get random bid for bidder
5:
if bid > current bid then add bid to list of bids in this round
6:
end if
7:
end for
8:
if number of bids > 0 then
9:
choose random bid and set as current bid
10:
for each active bidder do
11:
if current bid > his value or maximum amount he is willing to raise then
12:
opt out of auction
13:
else
14:
update belief set
15:
end if
16:
end for
17:
end if
18: end while
5.7
Deviations in Rational Behavior
While modeling agents that follow specific game rules based on some characteristics
might provide an approximation of bidder behavior there will be deviations from real life
scenarios. Humans tend to deviate from what is considered perfect economic behavior [14].
In game-theoretical terms this means that agents will not always perform actions that will
maximize their utility. It is therefore impossible to correctly predict how an auction will run
every time.
Irrationality in agents can to some extent be explained by cognitive and perceptual
biases. Some of those were included in the model, see Table 1. A list of a few others that
might apply to an auction setting can be seen in Table 2.
Table 2: Reasons for Irrational Human Behavior
Reason
Source
1
Level-k Rationality
[30]
2
Ambiguity Aversion
[31]
3
Confirmation Bias
[15]
4
Anchoring Bias
[32]
Page 22 of 33
==PAGE:29==
Bidding Your Profit Away
5.7
Deviations in Rational Behavior
5.7.1
Level-k Rationality
A bidder is rational if he plays a best response to his beliefs. He satisfies higher-order
rationality if he believes others are rational, if he believes others believe others are rational,
if he believes others believe others believe others are rational, and so on. This phenomenon is
often called level-k rationality, where k implies the level on which the bidder thinks. A level-k
bidder believes that everyone else in the auction is a level-(k-1) bidder and best responds
accordingly. A graphical representation can be seen in Figure 11.
Figure 11: Level-k Bidders
Our model does not capture this idea and assumes that all players are level-0. They have
their beliefs about other bidders’ values but that information is not used to put together a
higher-order strategy. They simply draw a bid randomly from the range specified in Figure
9. A level-k model would assume that bidders are divided into types, which differ in their
depth of reasoning. A level-0 type is non-rational and follows a simple decision rule. A
level-k type, for any k > 0, behaves as if he best responds to the belief that all other players
are level-(k-1) types [33].
The level-k model has been used in an attempt to capture non-equilibrium behavior
in games [34, 35]. According to the level-k model, non-equilibrium behavior emerges when
players do not perform enough thinking steps [36]. It is unknown to what degree humans
Page 23 of 33
==PAGE:30==
Bidding Your Profit Away
5.8
Quantifying the Winner’s Curse
tend to think in levels when developing strategies in game theoretic scenarios and what
factors affect their capability to do so. Cognitive capacity varies both between people and
between situations and it is therefore hard to capture this thinking hierarchy in a model.
5.7.2
Ambiguity Aversion
When bidders tend to underestimate their winning probabilities they often suffer from
what is called ambiguity aversion. The concept is sometimes confused with risk aversion but
there is an important difference. Risk aversion comes from the fear of doing something with
a low probability of succeeding. Ambiguity aversion comes from the fear of doing something
with an unknown success probability. This gets increasingly common as the uncertainty
about the private value distribution and number of bidders grows.
5.7.3
Anchoring Effect
The anchoring effect appears in auctions when a bidder relies too heavily on a single
or few sources of information. These sources could be the auction house estimate for the
lot or a bid from a senior bidder. Information acquired early is likely to become an anchor.
The effect causes humans to rely too heavily on the first piece of information they are given
about a topic. When people make estimates about something, they tend to interpret new
information from the reference point of their anchor, instead of seeing it objectively.
5.7.4
Confirmation Bias
If a bidder comes in with a specific value for the lot and is unwilling to budge he might
suffer from confirmation bias. This is the tendency to look for evidence that validates an
initial belief while ignoring information that challenges it. The global warming debate is
a good example of confirmation bias. The majority of those who do not believe in global
warming become more fixed in their position as they acquire more information. This is
because they actively seek out and take in information that supports their beliefs. A bidder
suffering from confirmation bias might in the same way only acknowledge signals that support
his beliefs.
5.8
Quantifying the Winner’s Curse
Under what circumstances does the winner of an auction walk away feeling like he lost
something? How does one quantify the severity of this feeling? This section will attempt to
answer these questions.
How happy a bidder will be at the end of the auction can be measured using a utility
function. In game theory, a utility function assigns a number to each potential game outcome
for each player. A high utility indicates a favorable event. A bidder who loses the auction
will always have a utility of zero. He does not have to pay nor does he obtain anything. The
winner’s utility will depend on his perceived value for the lot. If bidder values are represented
as {v1, v2, ..., vn} the utility of each player can therefore be represented as follows:
Page 24 of 33
==PAGE:31==
Bidding Your Profit Away
utilityi =
(
ui(vi)
if bidder i is winner
0
else
(20)
There are a few different approaches that can be taken to define the utility function ui(vi)
corresponding to each value. The first one is to simply subtract the price paid for the lot
from the bidders’ value.
ui(vi) = vi −price paid
(21)
This makes a lot of sense when simulating an auction as a game. The winner’s utility is
simply how much he believes he paid under the lot value. While this might represent how
happy he is straight after the auction it might not represent how much he actually overpaid
or how he might feel about the result some time after the auction. Another method is to
subtract the price from the auction house estimate released pre-auction.
ui(vi) = auction house estimate −price paid
(22)
Yet another approach is to take the second-highest value of the set of bids submitted, X =
{x1, x2, ..., xt}, subtract it from the price paid from it and divide by the price paid to get the
proportional raise at the last bid.
ui(vi) = price paid −max{X \ max{X}}
(23)
The downside to using equations 22 and 23 is that even though the calculated utility is
positive it does not guarantee that the winning bidder is satisfied. He could have acquired
information during the auction that makes him dissatisfied with the outcome even though
he paid less than the auction house estimate or very close to what at least one other bidder
was willing to pay. Contrarily, it is also possible for the winner to overbid for the commodity,
be aware of it, and yet experience no regret. This can be due to an emotional connection
to the item or other personal reasons. Research has even suggested that a bidder who has
overpaid for a lot is likely to exaggerate its true value in order to justify his bid [20].
It is difficult to say which of these methods is the "most correct" measurement of the
winner’s curse. Equation 21 represents the winner’s own feelings while 22 and 23 are more
objective. They might even be correlated.
6
Testing on Real Data
To test the model against real auction results, data was acquired from Sotheby’s auction
house. It consisted of 2633 lots sold during both timed and live auctions. Timed auctions
are posted on Sotheby’s website and have a set start and end time. They are usually longer
Page 25 of 33
==PAGE:32==
Bidding Your Profit Away
6.1
The Data
and can last anywhere from a few hours up to several weeks. Live auctions are run in a live
setting where bidders can bid in person, online, or through phone calls.
6.1
The Data
To start with, let’s look at whether the data suggests that a winner’s curse is present.
Figure 12: Sotheby’s Estimate vs. Winning Bid
Figure 12 shows how the winning bid compares to the low estimate of the product published
by Sotheby’s before the auction. This is a graphical representation of equation 22 and is
one way of quantifying the winner’s curse. It is apparent that the winning bid exceeds the
estimate in most cases.
Another proposed way to quantify the winner’s curse was to compare the winning bid
to the second-highest bid, see 23. Figure 13 shows just that.
Figure 13: Second-highest vs. Winning Bid
Page 26 of 33
==PAGE:33==
Bidding Your Profit Away
6.2
Simulation Using the Model
Here, the percent increase is compared to the winning bid amount. There does not seem to
be a pattern visible here. The last increase of the winning bidder does not seem to affect
either the final winning price nor whether the winner ends up paying over the published
estimate.
6.2
Simulation Using the Model
For each of the lots, we want to know whether the simulation will output a winning bid
close to the actual winning bid of the auction. This is done by taking, from each lot, the
following parameters and plugging them into the model:
• Estimate published by Sotheby’s
• Number of bidders participating
The auctioning of each lot was simulated 500 times and the average winning bid amount
stored. The simulation results were then compared to the actual results using a Pearson
correlation coefficient test.
Table 3: Pearson Correlation Coefficient for Auction Results
Actual
Sotheby’s Estimate
Simulation
Actual
-
0.883
0.912
Sotheby’s Estimate
0.883
-
0.965
Simulation
0.912
0.965
-
The table shows that the simulation model exceeds Sotheby’s’ estimation accuracy by
around 3%. Our model uses the estimate from Sotheby’s as an input so it is not fair to say
that it is 3% "better", but rather that it improves it by 3%. Figure 14 shows the correlation
between the simulation and actual results graphically.
Figure 14: Simulation vs. Actual Results
Page 27 of 33
==PAGE:34==
Bidding Your Profit Away
6.3
Using the Model to Identify Winner’s Curse Influencers
6.3
Using the Model to Identify Winner’s Curse Influencers
Using the model developed, we will now tweak different parameters and see how it
affects the winner’s curse severity (if at all).
6.3.1
Hypothesis 1 - Bidder Value Affiliation
The model uses an affiliation coefficient to determine how varied bidders’ starting values
are. The coefficient is used in the following way:
Standard Deviation = Estimate ∗Affiliation Coefficient
(24)
The standard deviation is then used to create the bidder value distribution at the start of
the auction. A larger standard deviation creates a larger range of values. Value distributions
with a median value of 10.000 and five different affiliation coefficients can be seen in Figure
15.
Figure 15: Different Value Affiliation Coefficients
The affiliation coefficient used as a basis in the model was 0.05. Modifying this coeffi-
cient will likely influence the winning bid amount. To test this hypothesis we will run the
Page 28 of 33
==PAGE:35==
Bidding Your Profit Away
6.3
Using the Model to Identify Winner’s Curse Influencers
simulation using different coefficients and compare the winning price.
Figure 16: Winning Bid and Value Affiliation
Figure 16 shows the results of running the simulation with ten bidders and varying
affiliation coefficients. A median value of 10.000 was used for all of them. As discussed
earlier in the thesis the median is considered to be the "real" value of the lot. There is a
definite positive correlation between the affiliation coefficient and the winning bid amount.
If the bidder values are distributed over a larger interval the winning bidder is more likely
to pay a higher price.
The spread of values can be thought of as the amount of uncertainty in the game. If
the values are distributed over a wide range it means that bidders do not agree on the lot’s
real value. In other words, there is more uncertainty about the lot value. It can be deduced
that with growing uncertainty pre-auction, the winner is increasingly likely to overpay for
the lot.
6.3.2
Hypothesis 2 - Number of Bidders
Another possible factor for the severity of the winner’s curse is the number of bidders
participating in the auction. Using the same procedure as in the previous section, Figure 17
shows how the winning bid increases with a rising number of bidders.
Page 29 of 33
==PAGE:36==
Bidding Your Profit Away
6.3
Using the Model to Identify Winner’s Curse Influencers
Figure 17: Number of Bidders and Winning Bid
For each bidder count the simulation was run 500 times and the average winning bid
plotted. The starting bidder values were drawn from a log-normal distribution with a median
of 10.000. It is clear when looking at the graph that the winner is likely to pay more for the
lot if there are many bidders participating.
6.3.3
Hypothesis 3 - Number of Bids Submitted by Winner
Hypothesis 3 states that the winner’s curse increases with an increasing number of bids
placed by the winning bidder. To start with, let’s look at the data from Sotheby’s and see
if it implies that this theory holds. We will compare the number of bids placed in total by
the winner with the percentage that he paid above the auction house estimate.
Page 30 of 33
==PAGE:37==
Bidding Your Profit Away
Figure 18: Number of Bids Submitted
Figure 18 shows a slight trend where the percentage that the bidder pays above the
auction house estimate increases as the number of bids placed by the winner increases.
According to equation 22 this implies that the number of bids submitted by the winner does
in fact impact the severity of the winner’s curse. It is likely that the number of bidders
(hypothesis 1) is positively correlated with the number of bids placed by the winner. It
is therefore difficult to say whether this trend is caused by the fact that there is more
competition, because the winner became increasingly attached to the lot, or both.
Our
simulation model does not take into account the pseudo-endowment effect so it does not
make sense to test this hypothesis against it.
According to the above results it might,
however, make sense to include it in further studies.
7
Conclusion and Discussion
The focus of this thesis was to understand and attempt to simulate how bidders in an
auction behave in real life. A phenomenon called the winner’s curse was described and the
goal was to use the simulation model to investigate what factors affect the severity of it. This
was done using game theory and Bayesian updating methods. Auctions were represented as
a game and agents who acted as bidders were generated using characteristics that have been
considered to influence bidder behavior. The model was developed using Python and the
results were visualized using Plotly [37].
To test the model, data from Sotheby’s auction house was used. Parameters from over
2.000 lots were put into the model and the output was compared to the actual results of the
auctions. The result of the auction is here considered to be the winning price. The model
showed good accuracy, with a Pearson correlation coefficient of 0.913 between the actual
result and the simulation result. This is an absolute increase of 3% from the accuracy of the
auction house estimate. The data from Sotheby’s was also used to support the theory of the
winner’s curse by showing how often bidders tend to pay over the auction house estimate.
Page 31 of 33
==PAGE:38==
Bidding Your Profit Away
Three hypotheses were put forward. They stated several factors that might affect the
severity of the winner’s curse: the number of bidders participating, how strongly affiliated
bidder values are, and the number of bids the winner submitted during the auction. To
answer hypothesis 1 the simulation model was used. The results showed that as the range
that the bidders’ values were distributed over increased, the price that the winner paid also
increased. The same method was used to explore hypothesis 2. The number of bidders does in
fact seem to affect the winner’s curse. The price that the winner ended up paying increased
as the number of bidders increased. Hypothesis 3 stated that with each placed bid by a
bidder on a lot, the chances of a winner’s curse appearing increase. The inspiration for this
hypothesis was a phenomenon called pseudo-endowment. It represents an idea that bidders
become increasingly attached to the lot with each bid they place on it. This characteristic
was not included in the model so data from Sotheby’s was used to examine whether this
holds. The data implied that there might be some correlation between the number of bids
the winner placed on the lot through the auction and how much he paid over the estimate.
One must keep in mind that this percentage is not necessarily a representation of how happy
the bidder is post-auction. He might still believe, post-auction, that he obtained a positive
utility regardless of how much he paid above the auction house estimate.
Using the methods mentioned above there is a strong indicator that all three hypotheses
hold. However, they have not been proven analytically, in the same depth as theories like the
revenue equivalence theorem or the strategic equivalence theorem. A logical next step of this
research could be an attempt to prove these hypotheses using similar methods as in section
4.2. Another extension of this project could be to compare the simulation results to more
than just the winning bid of the auctions. It would, for example, be interesting to explore
whether the number of bids placed is also similar. According to hypothesis 3 it might also
make sense to increase the bidder’s desire in equation 12 with each bid that he places on the
lot.
In ancient Rome, auction winners were allowed to claim that they were influenced by
bidder heat and demand that the auction be declared invalid due to this [38]. Regardless of
everything discussed in this thesis, bidding behavior is sometimes driven by an irrational de-
sire to win, even at a high cost. It might be that some bidding behavior can not be explained
by a model such as the one developed here. This project is an attempt at approximating
what factors drive bidder behavior.
Page 32 of 33
==PAGE:39==
Bidding Your Profit Away
References
References
[1] D. A. Easley and J. M. Kleinberg, Networks, Crowds, and Markets - Reasoning About
a Highly Connected World.
Cambridge University Press, 2010.
[2] W. B. Arthur, “Inductive reasoning and bounded rationality,” The American economic
review, vol. 84, no. 2, pp. 406–411, 1994.
[3] P. R. Milgrom et al., “Auction theory,” in Advances in economic theory: Fifth world
congress, vol. 1.
Cambridge University Press Cambridge, 1987, p. 32.
[4] P. Klemperer, Auctions: theory and practice.
Princeton University Press, 2004.
[5] H. R. Varian, “Position auctions,” international Journal of industrial Organization,
vol. 25, no. 6, pp. 1163–1178, 2007.
[6] P. Klemperer, “Auction theory: A guide to the literature,” Journal of economic surveys,
vol. 13, no. 3, pp. 227–286, 1999.
[7] J.-J. Laffont, “Game theory and empirical economics: The case of auction data,” Euro-
pean Economic Review, vol. 41, no. 1, pp. 1–35, 1997.
[8] T. Gagnon-Bartsch, M. Pagnozzi, and A. Rosato, “Projection of private values in auc-
tions,” American Economic Review, vol. 111, no. 10, pp. 3256–98, 2021.
[9] F. M. Menezes and P. K. Monteiro, An introduction to auction theory.
OUP Oxford,
2004.
[10] R. Towse, Ed., A Handbook of Cultural Economics.
Edward Elgar Publishing, 2003.
[Online]. Available: https://EconPapers.repec.org/RePEc:elg:eebook:2039
[11] L. Friedman, “A competitive-bidding strategy,” Operations research, vol. 4, no. 1, pp.
104–112, 1956.
[12] A. B. Kao, A. M. Berdahl, A. T. Hartnett, M. J. Lutz, J. B. Bak-Coleman, C. C.
Ioannou, X. Giam, and I. D. Couzin, “Counteracting estimation bias and social influence
to improve the wisdom of crowds,” Journal of The Royal Society Interface, vol. 15, no.
141, p. 20180130, 2018.
[13] H. E. Landemore, “Why the many are smarter than the few and why it matters,” Journal
of Deliberative Democracy, vol. 8, no. 1, 2020.
[14] D.
Kahneman,
Thinking,
fast
and
slow.
New
York:
Farrar,
Straus
and
Giroux,
2011.
[Online].
Available:
https://www.amazon.de/
Thinking-Fast-Slow-Daniel-Kahneman/dp/0374275637/ref=wl_it_dp_o_pdT1_nS_
nC?ie=UTF8&colid=151193SNGKJT9&coliid=I3OCESLZCVDFL7
[15] R. S. Nickerson, “Confirmation bias: A ubiquitous phenomenon in many guises,” Review
of general psychology, vol. 2, no. 2, pp. 175–220, 1998.
Page 33 of 33
==PAGE:40==
Bidding Your Profit Away
References
[16] S. Campo, E. Guerre, I. Perrigne, and Q. Vuong, “Semiparametric estimation of first-
price auctions with risk-averse bidders,” The Review of Economic Studies, vol. 78, no. 1,
pp. 112–147, 2011.
[17] P. A. Haile and E. Tamer, “Inference with an incomplete model of english auctions,”
Journal of Political Economy, vol. 111, no. 1, pp. 1–51, 2003.
[18] F. Galton, “Vox populi (the wisdom of crowds),” Nature, vol. 75, no. 7, pp. 450–451,
1907.
[19] P. Bajari and A. Hortaçsu, “The winner’s curse, reserve prices, and endogenous entry:
Empirical insights from ebay auctions,” RAND Journal of Economics, pp. 329–355,
2003.
[20] M. H. Bazerman and W. F. Samuelson, “I won the auction but don’t want the prize,”
Journal of conflict resolution, vol. 27, no. 4, pp. 618–634, 1983.
[21] G. Ku, D. Malhotra, and J. K. Murnighan, “Towards a competitive arousal model of
decision-making: A study of auction fever in live and internet auctions,” Organizational
Behavior and Human decision processes, vol. 96, no. 2, pp. 89–103, 2005.
[22] J. E. Heyman, Y. Orhun, and D. Ariely, “Auction fever: The effect of opponents and
quasi-endowment on product valuations,” Journal of interactive Marketing, vol. 18,
no. 4, pp. 7–21, 2004.
[23] D. Fudenberg and J. Tirole, Game theory.
MIT press, 1991.
[24] W. Vickrey, “Counterspeculation, auctions, and competitive sealed tenders,” The Jour-
nal of finance, vol. 16, no. 1, pp. 8–37, 1961.
[25] P. Milgrom and I. Segal, “Envelope theorems for arbitrary choice sets,” Econometrica,
vol. 70, no. 2, pp. 583–601, 2002.
[26] A. S. Gerber, G. A. Huber, D. Doherty, and C. M. Dowling, “The big five personality
traits in the political arena,” Annual Review of Political Science, vol. 14, pp. 265–287,
2011.
[27] G. Miller, Spent:
Sex, Evolution, and Consumer Behavior, ser. A Penguin book.
Penguin Group USA, 2010. [Online]. Available:
https://books.google.se/books?id=
sgyMDAEACAAJ
[28] P. R. Milgrom and R. J. Weber, “A theory of auctions and competitive bidding,” Econo-
metrica: Journal of the Econometric Society, pp. 1089–1122, 1982.
[29] K. P. Murphy, “Conjugate bayesian analysis of the gaussian distribution,” def, vol. 1,
no. 2σ2, p. 16, 2007.
[30] T. Kneeland, “Identifying higher-order rationality,” Econometrica, vol. 83, no. 5, pp.
2065–2079, 2015.
Page 34 of 33
==PAGE:41==
Bidding Your Profit Away
References
[31] A. Salo and M. Weber, “Ambiguity aversion in first-price sealed-bid auctions,” Journal
of Risk and Uncertainty, vol. 11, no. 2, pp. 123–137, 1995.
[32] A. Lyon and E. Pacuit, “The wisdom of crowds: Methods of human judgement aggre-
gation,” in Handbook of human computation.
Springer, 2013, pp. 599–614.
[33] A. Arad and A. Rubinstein, “The 11-20 money request game: Evaluating the upper
bound of k-level reasoning,” Tech. Rep., 2010.
[34] D. O. Stahl and P. W. Wilson, “On playersâ˛ models of other players: Theory and
experimental evidence,” Games and Economic Behavior, vol. 10, no. 1, pp. 218–254,
1995.
[35] R. Nagel, “Unraveling in guessing games: An experimental study,” The American eco-
nomic review, vol. 85, no. 5, pp. 1313–1326, 1995.
[36] T.-H. Ho, S.-E. Park, and X. Su, “A bayesian level-k model in n-person games,” Man-
agement Science, vol. 67, no. 3, pp. 1622–1638, 2021.
[37] P. T. Inc. (2015) Collaborative data science. Montreal, QC. [Online]. Available:
https://plot.ly
[38] U. Malmendier and Y. H. Lee, “The bidder’s curse,” American Economic Review, vol.
101, no. 2, pp. 749–87, 2011.
Page 35 of 33
==PAGE:42==
Bidding Your Profit Away
References
Appendix A
Link to project code:
https://annakristin97.github.io/auction-theory/index.html
Page 36 of 33
