==PAGE:1==
Optimization of offshore wind
farms with variable base station
DTU Management
Department of Technology,
Management and Economics
==PAGE:2==
M.Sc. Thesis title: Optimization of offshore wind farms with variable base
station
Date: January 31, 2023
Author: Maria Pia Rivotti de Lemos Macedo
Student number: s202684
Supervisor: David Pisinger
Co-supervisor: Davide Cazzaro
Published by: DTU MANAGEMENT - Department of Technology, Manage-
ment and Economics - Building 358, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Cover photo: Alstom [1]
Author - s202684
——————————–
Signature
——————————–
Date
January 31, 2023
==PAGE:3==
Optimization of offshore wind farms with variable base station
Abstract
The reduction of wind energy costs is essential to promoting renewable energy
and reducing fossil fuel dependence, both to fight climate change and increase
energy independence.
There are two main challenges when planning an Offshore Wind Farm (OWF)
- the Wind Farm Layout Optimization (WFLO) problem and the Wind Farm
Cable Routing (WFCR) problem. The goal of the first mentioned is to maximize
energy production and therefore energy revenue by optimally placing the turbines
in a way they can produce as much energy as possible while accounting for
foundation costs. The goal of the second one is to minimize the cost of connecting
all the turbines by inter-array cables to a Base Station (BS) and from the BS to
an onshore grid point by an export cable.
These two problems are usually solved sequentially having the BS in a predefined
position.
An optimal layout is established and only then the cheapest cable
route is determined. The output of the WFLO problem determines the input
for the WFCR problem while their goals are opposed - bigger distances between
turbines will favor the energy production due to reduced wake losses but increase
the cable routing costs. Therefore, this thesis will combine the two problems in
an integrated framework that will maximize energy production while minimizing
foundation and cabling costs while finding the best placement for the BS. A
combined local search heuristic will be used to modify both problems’ solutions
and optimally place the BS simultaneously.
The combined approach proved to be able to solve industry-scale problems and
improve the Net Present Value (NPV) obtained from the sequential approach
by 0.70% which roughly corresponds to 86M€ at a higher computational cost,
mostly by improving cable costs. On average, cable length can be reduced by up
to 50%, reducing cable damage risks and oceanic impact.
Moreover, having a variable BS showed an improvement in the NPV of 0.16%
Page 2
==PAGE:4==
Optimization of offshore wind farms with variable base station
(or roughly 32M€) compared to an optimization with a fixed BS, however at a
considerably higher computational cost.
Page 3
==PAGE:5==
Optimization of offshore wind farms with variable base station
Abbreviations
AEP Anual Energy Production
BS
Base Station
CAPEX Capital Expenditure
CRC Cable Routing Costs
CWFO Combined Wind Farm Optimization
DFS
Depth First Search
EPF
Energy Price Factor
ER
Energy Revenue
EU
European Union
LNS
Large Neighborhood Search
MIP
Mixed Integer Programming
MST Minimum Spanning Tree
NREL National Renewable Energy Laboratory
NPV Net Present Value
OWF Offshore Wind Farm
PDSP P-Dispersion Sum Problem
SA
Simulated Annealing
VNS Variable Neighborhood Search
WFCR Wind Farm Cable Routing
WFLO Wind Farm Layout Optimization
Page 4
==PAGE:6==
Optimization of offshore wind farms with variable base station
List of Algorithms
1
P-Dispersion Sum Problem . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
2
Place Base Station
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
3
Cable Route . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
4
Combined Local Search . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
Page 5
==PAGE:7==
Optimization of offshore wind farms with variable base station
Contents
1
Introduction
8
1.1
Background of the problem . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
1.2
Introduction of the problem . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
1.3
Wind Farm Layout Optimization
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
1.4
Wind Farm Cable Routing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
1.5
Research question . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
1.6
Data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
2
Literature review
16
2.1
Wind Farm Layout Optimization
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
2.2
Wind Farm Cable Routing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
2.3
Combined Wind Farm Optimization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
2.4
Additional literature
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
3
Method
21
3.1
Problem formulation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
3.2
Initial solution . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
3.2.1
Initial wind farm layout
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
3.2.2
Initial turbine cable route
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
3.3
Combined heuristic . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
3.3.1
Simulated annealing
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
3.3.2
Combined Local Search . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
3.3.3
Tuning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
4
Numerical study
43
4.1
Assumptions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
4.1.1
Discrete approach . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
4.1.2
Energy Price Factor
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
Page 6
==PAGE:8==
Optimization of offshore wind farms with variable base station
4.1.3
Onshore grid connection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
4.2
Synthetic Instances . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
5
Results
49
5.1
Initial solution . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
5.1.1
Initial energy profit . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
5.1.2
Initial cable route . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
5.2
Combined heuristic . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
5.2.1
Combined local search algorithm performance . . . . . . .
55
5.2.2
Initial solution impact on the optimizer . . . . . . . . . . .
57
5.2.3
Sequential and combined approaches
. . . . . . . . . . . .
59
5.2.4
Variable base station assessment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
62
5.2.5
Comparison against Cazzaro’s results [2] . . . . . . . . . .
63
5.3
Discussion of the results
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
65
6
Conclusion
67
A Appendix
75
A.1 Layout . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
75
A.2 Optimizer performance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
77
A.3 Initial and optimal solution
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
83
Page 7
==PAGE:9==
Optimization of offshore wind farms with variable base station
1
Introduction
1.1
Background of the problem
As the recognition of green energy’s key importance in fighting climate change
arises across the globe, all countries are taking rigorous measures to transition
to renewable energy sources like hydro-power, solar energy, and wind energy.
The European Commission has set as a key target for the European Union (EU)
to have at least 32% share of the energy consumption coming from renewable
sources by 2030 [3]. Among all the countries, Denmark is taking the lead as
far as the green transition is concerned. As more than half of Danish electricity
production already relies on wind turbines [4], the government has set an even
more ambitious target of going for 70% emissions reductions by 2030 and 100%
green energy produced by 2050 [5].
Offshore wind farms are seen as key to meeting the decarbonization targets by
2030 without losing capacity. This is the case since the farms are located further
from the coast in the sea, where the winds blow strong and continuously without
encountering any interference. This presents a lot of opportunities for increasing
the capacity of green energy production.
Consequently, selecting a layout that optimizes energy generation while reducing
costs as much as possible is of great interest to all EU countries.
1.2
Introduction of the problem
The present thesis will focus on the optimization of two very challenging issues of
building an OWF. Therefore it will try to simultaneously answer the questions:
❍Which layout maximizes Energy production?
Page 8
==PAGE:10==
Optimization of offshore wind farms with variable base station
❍What is the cheapest way to connect the turbines and transfer the energy
to the onshore grid?
It will do so by combining the two problems in an Integrated framework that will
maximize energy production while minimizing foundation costs and the costs of
connecting the wind turbines, the BS, and the onshore grid connection point by
cables.
Having the most favorable layout for the wind farm is highly relevant, as the right
placement of the wind turbines has an enormous impact on the wind farm’s cost
and total energy production.
The first part of the framework is called the WFLO problem and the second one
is the WFCR problem. For better understanding, the two will be explained in
detail in the next sections.
1.3
Wind Farm Layout Optimization
The WFLO problem is one of the main tasks in wind farm design. The problem
consists of the optimal allocation of a predefined number of wind turbines to
a set of available positions within the available wind farm area. Its goal is to
maximize energy production while minimizing the construction costs of the park.
There is a nonlinear factor in the optimization that needs to be accounted for:
the wake effect. This interference phenomenon occurs when a turbine blocks the
wind for the turbines behind it, decreasing the wind power and, accordingly the
power generated by the successive turbine blades. This effect has a significant
impact on the total wind park profitability as it negatively impacts the total
power output by 5-10%. [6].
A graphic representation is shown in Figure 1 below, in which it can be seen the
Page 9
==PAGE:11==
Optimization of offshore wind farms with variable base station
wake cones reducing the wind speed.
Figure 1: Wake effect (Ocean Wind 1 [7])
Different models have been developed to determine the wake effect but the first
one and most widely used was developed by Jensen [8] and is called the the
Jensen model.
Following this first model, other improved versions were proposed such as the
Port´eAgel model [9], the Larsen model [10], and the Bastankhah and Ainslie
model [11].
Jensen’s model predicts wake losses more accurately than the other models, de-
spite being less physically accurate and because of that, it has been extensively
adopted not only in literature but also in the industry.
The WFLO problem can be addressed by two approaches: continuous or discrete.
The continuous approach considers that the wind farm area is a continuous area
and therefore the goal is to find the optimal x and y coordinate to place each
turbine. The discrete approach demarcates the area in a certain number of points
each one with an x and y coordinate and a binary variable associated to decide
whether or not a turbine is placed in that position.
The first-mentioned approach works well when the wind farm shape resembles a
simple polygon like a rectangle as it is easier to bind the coordinates to the area.
Page 10
==PAGE:12==
Optimization of offshore wind farms with variable base station
However, in the industrial setting, the area is almost never a regular shape, and
neither is the entire area inside the wind farm boundaries available.
The discrete approach has the convenience of handling irregular site shapes and
boundaries as well as obstacles comparatively easily. Because of those advantages
and the low number of downsides, this last approach is going to be adopted in
the present analysis.
Wind farm obstacles are areas on the site where turbines (and electrical cables)
cannot be installed.
Sometimes there are obstacles on the seabed such as unstable or steep seabed soil
or the presence of war remnants. It can also happen that there are infrastruc-
tures built inside the wind farm area which will define those small areas where
turbines cannot be built.
1.4
Wind Farm Cable Routing
The second problem is called the WFCR problem and it aims to connect all the
turbines by submarine electric cables to a central hub, the offshore BS that will
then export the energy to the onshore grid point as represented in the figure 2
bellow while minimizing cable costs.
Page 11
==PAGE:13==
Optimization of offshore wind farms with variable base station
Figure 2: Cable connections (Nautic Expo [12])
The cables that connect the turbines to each other and to the BS are inter-
array cables and the one that connects the BS to the onshore substation is a
high-capacity export cable.
There are various types of inter-array cables mainly differing on cross-section
area and cost per meter. Depending on the turbine power (10MW or 15MW)
each cable type can carry a certain pre-defined amount of energy and therefore
can connect a pre-defined number of turbines.
The inter-array cables represent more than 5% of the total Capital Expenditure
(CAPEX) of an offshore wind farm [13], both in terms of their manufacture and
installation [14] costs.
One very challenging constraint regarding these cables is that they can not cross
over each other. However cable crossing is not technically impossible, it is avoided
due to the high risk of failure as well as the additional costs and increased main-
tenance complexity.
Regarding the connection of the turbines, there are three main schemes that can
Page 12
==PAGE:14==
Optimization of offshore wind farms with variable base station
be adopted depending on the inter-array cable topology: branched, radial and
looped [15].
❍Branched: allows multiple in-going cables and only one out-going edge
on each turbine
❍Radial: connects turbines into “strings” where each one has at most one
in-going cable and exactly one out-going cable
❍Looped: similar to the Radial but with closed strings
The branched topology can be solved as a Minimum Spanning Tree (MST) and
it is very efficient whereas the other two are NP-hard and therefore more chal-
lenging.
1.5
Research question
These two problems are usually solved sequentially where an optimal layout is
established and only then the cheapest way of connecting the turbines to the
BS is determined. The BS is typical in a static predefined position and the cost
of transporting the energy to the onshore grid point has a fixed cost. This is
because each individual problem is highly complex and the revenues of the power
generation are of a much higher order of magnitude.
The dilemma of the sequential approach is that the WFLO problem firstly as-
sumes that the entire wind farm area is available while maximizing the distance
between turbines whereas the WFCR would have them as short as possible to
avoid high cable routing costs.
Being aware of the interrelation between the two problems, in this project, they
will be combined together and their conflicting objectives balanced.
Page 13
==PAGE:15==
Optimization of offshore wind farms with variable base station
Moreover, contrarily to what has been defined historically, the BS will not be
regarded as static in a predefined position one-third of its distance to the onshore
grid point inside the wind farm area. Instead, it will be modeled as a variable,
assuming in every iteration the cheapest possible position.
The goal of the present thesis is thus to formulate and solve the two problems
together considering a variable BS by means of a combined approach to assess if
an overall better solution can be reached.
1.6
Data
The developed algorithms assume as input data a matrix containing precalcu-
lated values of energy profit based on the energy production, wake effect, and
foundation costs for each position. This will facilitate the computation of the
objective function by allowing the model to use simple sum operations to calcu-
late it.
Considering the mentioned input matrix to be M (n x n), where n is the total
number of positions available in the wind farm where turbines and the BS can
be built. Its diagonal provides the energy revenue converted from the energy
production multiplied by an expected Energy Price Factor (EPF) and subtracted
by the foundation costs of building a turbine in each position, without considering
wake effects. Mnn represents the maximum power revenue of turbine build on
position n in ”free wind” for the lifetime of the wind park.
Off the diagonal, each position (i, j) represents the power loss due to the wake
effect that a turbine built on position i will experience if another turbine is built
on position j.
An example of what a matrix M with n = 4 positions could look like can be
Page 14
==PAGE:16==
Optimization of offshore wind farms with variable base station
found below.
M =


13
−0.6
−0.5
−0.4
−0.6
12
−0.4
−0.3
−0.5
−0.4
14
−0.5
−0.4
−0.3
−0.5
17


In the analyzed instances, the wake effect was calculated using a precalculated
matrix applying the Jensen model - one of the first and most widely used wake
models developed by Jensen [8].
Page 15
==PAGE:17==
Optimization of offshore wind farms with variable base station
2
Literature review
After years of cooperation with the wind energy developer and operator Vatten-
fall, Fischetti and Pisinger advanced an analysis in 2018 [16] identifying numerous
sub-problems involved in designing a wind farm. According to them, this paper
will focus on two of the most important optimization tasks: turbine location -
WFLO problem - and electrical cable routing - WFCR problem.
2.1
Wind Farm Layout Optimization
This problem has been analyzed in a number of different ways throughout his-
tory as various papers have addressed it. The papers mostly differ on approach
(continuous or discrete), strategy (heuristic or exact), and wake model selected.
The wake model will not be discussed as its result is considered to be given as
input data and all models are valid. Additionally, further discussion will focus
on papers using the discrete approach as this will be applied to the presented
method due to its ability to handle obstacles.
Within the heuristic strategies, the Genetic algorithm was widely chosen both
to define and solve the WFLO problem. Namely, the first paper ever published
on this matter by Mosetti et al [17] in 1994. However, there are controversial
opinions on whether it is the best procedure for the problem.
A few papers further implemented Simulated Annealing. In [18] Rivas used three
temperatures to perform local search operations until the system converges. The
formulation, maximizes power and does not consider costs, and was demonstrated
to be effective in the Turbine Layout assignment.
Cazzaro and Pisinger developed an advanced heuristic [19] to solve the WFLO
Page 16
==PAGE:18==
Optimization of offshore wind farms with variable base station
problem based on the Variable Neighborhood Search meta-heuristic. The paper
defines the problem with the constraints that will be used in the present thesis.
In addition, the initial solution is in both cases developed by application of a
P-Dispersion algorithm, which has demonstrated effectiveness.
It is concluded that the approach not only achieves higher energy production
than commonly used ones in the literature but is also more scalable and able to
handle a large subset of both wind turbines and available positions.
A number of exact strategies have also been suggested as Mixed Integer Pro-
gramming (MIP) models but their large set of variables makes these models
significantly more complex to solve.
In an attempt to handle the largest number of positions available in the literature,
Fischetti and Monaci combined MIP with ad-hoc heuristics in [20]. In response,
they concluded that computational results on very large-scale instances proved
the method to be viable. However, the optimally guarantees of MIP no longer
apply to the global solution.
2.2
Wind Farm Cable Routing
The WFCR problem has also been addressed by many authors both by means
of heuristic and exact techniques.
On [21], Hou et al. address the problem as the classic mathematical problem
of finding the MST of a weighted undirected graph. The cable sectional area is
considered in the MST algorithm formulation which in turn is further improved
with an adaptive particle swarm optimisation.
The method takes into consideration the impact of the BS in the layout formu-
lation as well as in the cable cost. Therefore its optimized location is considered
Page 17
==PAGE:19==
Optimization of offshore wind farms with variable base station
dynamic and expected to be found by the algorithm.
The proposed method proves to be effective by means of simulation results
Cazzaro and Fischetti [22] implemented and tested five meta-heuristic different
schemes for the current problem: Simulated Annealing, Tabu Search, Variable
Neighborhood Search, Ant Colony Optimization, and Genetic Algorithm.
A quite interesting sweep technique was used to compute an initial solution
and proved to find a high-quality solution in a short computational time. The
heuristics work by grouping the turbines inside areas defined by radios centered
in the offshore BS that swipe clock or anti-clockwise according to a condition.
The edge costs connecting turbines between different groups are set to infinitive
and an MST is computed between the turbines in each group.
The experiments revealed that Variable Neighborhood Search and Tabu Search
obtain better solutions, the best one being the first mentioned. Genetic Algo-
rithm and Simulated Annealing do not perform as well even though they are
most of the time able to improve the sweep initial solution. Whereas Ant Colony
Optimization can hardly meet feasible solutions.
Cazzaro and Pisinger published a second paper on WFCR problem [15] focusing
on balanced cable routing two years after the first one (mentioned above). The
last one contains a more effective meta-heuristic approach that includes arbitrary
obstacles in the available problem area at a relatively low cost. In this paper,
a Large Neighborhood Search (LNS) heuristic is developed using neighborhoods
of increasing complexity and has shown effective results in solving very large
problems, analyzing hundreds of wind turbines to multiple substations, in just a
few minutes.
Page 18
==PAGE:20==
Optimization of offshore wind farms with variable base station
2.3
Combined Wind Farm Optimization
The two problems discussed in the previous sections have been extensively ad-
dressed separately in different papers whereas not so many attempted to solve
them together.
Fagerfjall [23] was the pioneer in this matter. In 2010, the master student com-
posed an algorithm that aimed to combine the problems together in what he
called ’production and the infrastructure’. This first attempt worked ”only for
really small problem sizes”.
Cazzaro, Koza, and Pisinger [2] were able to join the two problems into a single
more complex one. They do so by implementing the insights and techniques
acquired in previous work - [19], [22], [15] - and presented in the previous chapters
of this section.
The method considers a fixed BS and starts with an initial solution for the
separate problems. In order to initialize the WFLO problem, it uses an approach
based on the P-Dispersion Sum Problem (PDSP). The WFCR problem initial
solution is based on the turbine position and computed by means of the Sweep
algorithm from [15], which is inspired by the Vehicle Routing Problem [24].
When an initial solution is computed, the proposed heuristic will repetitively
improve it by running a combined local search able to modify solutions of WFLO
and WFCR simultaneously using 1-opt and 2-opt moves.
They concluded that the suggested approach is both beneficial and able to solve
large problems with all the constraints contemplated in the industry with the
only downside of having a substantially longer running time (three times higher)
than the sequential approach.
Page 19
==PAGE:21==
Optimization of offshore wind farms with variable base station
2.4
Additional literature
The current MSc Thesis is highly aligned with Cazzaro’s Ph.D. Thesis [25].
Therefore the last mentioned may be consulted for further literature.
Fischetti’s Ph.D. Thesis [26] can also be visited for the same purpose.
Page 20
==PAGE:22==
Optimization of offshore wind farms with variable base station
3
Method
In this chapter, a heuristic is proposed to address the Combined Wind Farm
Optimization (CWFO) problem. Its goal is to place hundreds of turbines within a
subset of thousands of available positions, in the most profitable way maximizing
power production while minimizing foundation costs, wake effect, and cable costs.
Moreover, the problem must be able to handle real-world constraints such as
minimum distances between turbines, obstacles, connectivity, cable capacity, and
cable crossing unfeasibility.
Accordingly, the initial solution approach will be described in detail followed by
the developed strategy to continuously improve the objective function.
3.1
Problem formulation
The proposed formulation for the CWFO problem aims to maximize the Energy
Revenue (ER) and minimize Cable Routing Costs (CRC):
max
ER(x) −CRC(x, y)
(1)
=
X
i∈s
X
j∈s
Pijxixj −
X
i∈Qb
X
j∈Qb
dijcij yij
(2)
The first part of the objective function ER, refers to the WFLO problem i.e.
the allocation of turbines to available positions in order to maximize the energy
revenue while minimizing foundation costs and wake effect.
The formulation receives an input of s available positions and aims to place T
turbines in the wind farm. As mentioned before, it assumes a power production
matrix Pij as input data, computing for each position the energy profit based
Page 21
==PAGE:23==
Optimization of offshore wind farms with variable base station
on the energy production subtracted by foundation costs and wake effect as ex-
plained in Chapter 1.6. The binary variable xi is then created and associated
with each available position taking the value of 1 if a turbine is built on position i
and 0 otherwise. xj is subsequently introduced with the same definition to access
the pairwise calculated wakes in Pij that indicates the power losses as negative
values outside the matrix diagonal.
The second part CRC, refers to the WFCR problem. It aims to connect all the
turbines by cables and determine the best location for the BS while minimizing
cable costs, ensuring cable capacity, and avoiding cable crossing. These costs
depend on the inter-array types of cables used and the cable length. There are
different inter-array cables in the market with different costs per meter and cross-
section areas. The wider the cross-section area of an inter-array cable is, the more
expensive it is per meter and the higher its power capacity is. Therefore each
connection between two turbines will have a specific cost per meter depending
on the power it will have to carry on. The length of each connection is computed
as the euclidean distance between the two turbines that the inter-array cable(s)
is/are connecting.
Let Q be the set of turbines to connect and Qb:= Q ∪{b} the set of turbines
and the BS, dij the euclidean distance between turbine at position i and j, cij
the cost of the connection from i to j and yij the binary variable that decides
whether or not a connection between i and j is made.
The problem has some real-life constraints that are taken into consideration in
the presented formulation.
While placing and moving turbines within the wind farm area, obstacles need
to be accounted for.
There are areas where turbines cannot be installed for
Page 22
==PAGE:24==
Optimization of offshore wind farms with variable base station
the various reasons described in Chapter 1.3. The adopted discrete approach
easily handles this constraint as it only demarcates the available area in a cer-
tain number of points corresponding to feasible positions. To better understand
this, a visual representation is provided in Figure 3. The blue area is the avail-
able wind farm area. Each blue dot refers to an available and feasible location
to build a wind turbine. White areas are obstacles where no turbine can be built.
Figure 3: Visual representation of obstacles handling
Moreover, Cazzaro explains in [2], that a minimum distance between turbines
needs to be considered. This constraint demands the existence of a radius around
each turbine where another turbine cannot be built. Turbine blades must be con-
strained to avoid colliding but the constraint is also necessary to ensure that me-
chanical loads and stresses caused by wakes and turbulence from other turbines
do not exceed the manufacturer’s specifications. It has been a rule of thumb
in the industry to leave at least five times the diameter of each turbine rotor
between them [27].
When it comes to the cable connection, there are two imperative constraints that
need to be met, connectivity and no cable crossing. The first mentioned ensures
Page 23
==PAGE:25==
Optimization of offshore wind farms with variable base station
that all turbines placed in the wind farm are connected to at least another one
or to the BS. The second mentioned constraint restricts the cables connecting
turbines to cross over each other due to the high risk of failure and maintenance
complexity. Both constraints are naturally handled by Prime’s algorithm com-
putation of a MST connecting all turbines and the BS in the different instances.
The procedure will be further developed in the following sections.
3.2
Initial solution
To find an initial solution for the Combined heuristic, the WFLO and the WFCR
problems were simplified and solved sequentially.
3.2.1
Initial wind farm layout
The first goal is to place T turbines in a set of s available positions in order
to maximize the sum of the distances between turbines. Accordingly, the prob-
lem was solved by means of an adaptation of the PDSP proposed by Pisinger [28].
There are two ways of implementing this model, by means of an insert algorithm
or a remove algorithm. The difference between both is that the first mentioned
initiates with all positions available and incrementally adds a turbine to the one
position that maximizes the objective function whereas the second one initiates
with all positions being occupied by turbines and repeatedly removes the one
that contributes to the least for the objective function maximization.
In this thesis, the Insert algorithm approach was elected as it is not as compu-
tationally expensive as the alternative one, and it achieves a sufficiently good
initial solution for the Combined Heuristic.
Page 24
==PAGE:26==
Optimization of offshore wind farms with variable base station
The adapted PDSP model (outlined in Algorithm 1) continuously finds the most
profitable turbine to add to the wind park until the desired T number of turbines
is placed.
It receives as input the energy production matrix Pij and an ’empty’ vector ps
of the same size as the number of available positions. Returns the same vector
ps with the position index being one if that position number is occupied by a
turbine and zero if it is empty.
Assuming a wind farm area with 10 available positions (s=10) where 3 turbines
should be placed (T=3), the input vector would become: ps=[0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0,
0, 0, 0] and the model could return for example ps=[1, 0, 0, 0, 0, 1, 0, 0, 1, 0],
where positions 1, 6, and 9 were chosen to hold turbines.
Page 25
==PAGE:27==
Optimization of offshore wind farms with variable base station
Algorithm 1 P-Dispersion Sum Problem
1: ps ←zeros(1, length(s))
2: while sum(ps) < T do
3:
MLO ←−∞
4:
t added ←0
5:
for t ∈1 : length(s) do
6:
if ps[t] ∈available position(s) then
7:
ps[t] ←1
8:
Ecurrent ←compute solution profit(ps[t])
9:
if Ecurrent > MLO then
10:
MLO ←Ecurrent
11:
t added ←t
12:
end if
13:
ps[t] ←0
14:
end if
15:
end for
16:
ps[t added] ←1
17: end while
As previously described, the implementation of this greedy heuristic starts by
assigning all allocated positions to zero (line 1) and in each iteration, a turbine
t is assigned to the position ps that maximizes the Energy revenue, until T
turbines are placed (line 2). This means that ps is a vector with the same length
as s where each element is either 0 if that position number is free and 1 if it is
occupied by a turbine.
Every position that respects the minimum distance to all other placed turbines
is considered an available position. For every available position (lines 5 and 6),
the heuristics hypothesize that it is occupied (line 7) and determine the total
Energy revenue (line 8) based on the input matrix described in section 1.6.
Page 26
==PAGE:28==
Optimization of offshore wind farms with variable base station
This matrix can however be substantially big and its multiplication by a vector,
computationally expensive. In order to optimize this calculation, the row and
column corresponding to the initial position of the moving turbine are subtracted
from the previous total cost (that was stored as MLO in the last accepted move),
and the row and column of the new position added to the same variable.
Whenever it gets a higher value than the one previously stored (line 9), it up-
dates it (line 10) and stores the best position to place turbine t as t added (line
11). Once all the available positions were tested, the optimal one is added to the
solution (line 16).
3.2.2
Initial turbine cable route
The second goal is to place the BS one-third inside the wind farm area and con-
nect it to the turbines in the positions determined in the previous step by cables
in the cheapest way possible, ensuring cable capacity and avoiding cable crossing.
For this, two distinct cables need to be considered - inter-array cables to connect
turbines to other turbines and to the BS, and the export cable to connect the BS
to the onshore grid point. In the present thesis, two types of inter-array cables
will be considered. A cable type 1 with a cross-section area of 400 mm2 can carry
the energy of six wind turbines of 10MW and four of 15MW each. An energy
cable type 2 with a cross-section area of 600 mm2 can handle the power of eight
10MW wind turbines and six of 15MW. If the total cost of each cable type is
divided by the number of turbines it can connect, a cost per meter per turbine
can be obtained and compared. Indeed, the cheapest cable per turbine is cable
type 1 for 10MW turbines but cable type 2 for the 15MW turbines considered
in the present thesis.
Table 1 summarizes the characteristics of the two available cables collected from
Page 27
==PAGE:29==
Optimization of offshore wind farms with variable base station
[29]. In the present study, only 15MW turbines will be considered.
Cable
Cross section
area (mm2)
Cost
(€/m)
10MW
(#)
15MW
(#)
10MW
(€/m/turbine)
15MW
(€/m/turbine)
type 1
400
240
6
4
40
60
type 2
630
336
8
6
42
56
Table 1: Cable characteristics collected from [29]. ”€/m/turbine” is the cost in
euros per meter per turbine and ”#” means the number of turbines a cable can
transport energy from.
The energy is transported from the BS to the onshore grid point through a single,
more expensive export cable. It’s cost was set to 1500 €/m [30].
In order to guarantee that there is enough capacity in each edge to carry all the
wind farm power to the BS, one or the other cable type is used to connect each
pair of 15MW turbines depending on how much energy it is already carrying.
When one cable type alone is not enough, a combination of the two can be used
as many times as necessary.
One other considered constraint is connectivity. A Prim’s algorithm [31] is used
to compute an undirected MST connecting the turbines placed in the wind farm
in the initial solution and the BS in the cheapest way possible.
Prim’s algorithm is a greedy algorithm. It starts with an empty tree and in each
iteration adds the edge connecting the two cheapest nodes to connect until all
vertices are linked. All the vertices connected with the minimum weight edge
make a MST that guarantees the optimal solution for the WFCR problem so the
cheapest connection between turbines, BS, and the onshore grid point.
Moreover, this algorithm prevents cycles. It only considers vertices that are still
Page 28
==PAGE:30==
Optimization of offshore wind farms with variable base station
not in the tree when looking for the cheapest edge connecting two nodes, if the
connection introduces a cycle, it is skipped. This way, the problem formulation
ensures the ”no cable-crossing” constraint.
A graph is said to be connected if all nodes (wind turbines) in the graph are
connected by a path (a cable route). Therefore after having computed a MST,
the optimally connected graph is also obtained and the connectivity constraint
met.
It is also possible to compute an upper and a lower bound for the total cable
costs. Let cU be the cost of the cable with the smaller cross-section area, i.e. the
cost of the cable type 1 stated in Table 1, and cL the cheapest cost per turbine
of the stated values on the last column of Table 1. Let l be the length of the
MST. Then the upper bound on the cable costs get U = cU · l and the lower
bound L = cL · l. In this case, the upper and lower bound get U = 240 · l and
L = 40 · l respectively.
The first step to getting an initial cable routing solution is to place the BS. It
is usually required in tender rules for the BS to be placed one-third inside the
wind farm area [27] and therefore that will be followed in this step.
The formulation is outlined in Algorithm 2. It takes as input a table with the
x coordinates and y coordinates of all positions and returns the position index
of the BS placed in the middle of the x-axis and 1/3 in the y-axis.
Page 29
==PAGE:31==
Optimization of offshore wind farms with variable base station
Algorithm 2 Place Base Station
1: xBS ←find nearest(x coordinates, average(x coordinates))
2: y available ←[.]
3: for i ∈length(y coordinates) where x coordinates[i] == xBS do
4:
append!(y available, y coordinates[i])
5: end for
6: yBS ←find nearest(y available, 1/3inside(y available))
7: BSindex ←get index(y available, yBS)
First, it will calculate the middle horizontal position of the grid on the x-axis.
Because it is a discrete model, the exact calculated coordinates may not ex-
ist. Thus, the algorithm finds the nearest value within the existent ones in the
x coordinates list and updates the xBS value (line 1).
Then it creates an empty list (line 2) that will store the y coordinates of the
positions where the x coordinates equal xBS (lines 3 to 5).
Once that y available list is complete, the algorithm calculates the y coordinate
that is one-third inside the wind farm area by finding the y max and y min of
that list and computing
y min + (y max −y min)/3
(3)
(line 6).
With the x and y coordinates of the BS, it finally returns the index of its position
(line 7). A visual representation of the output calculated for Instance A2 can be
found in Figure 4 bellow.
Page 30
==PAGE:32==
Optimization of offshore wind farms with variable base station
Figure 4: Example of BS placement at Initial Solution
The second step is to connect all the turbines and the BS by inter-array cables,
the BS to the onshore grid by an export cable, and compute the total cost.
For this step, two methods were developed to produce initial solutions and the
combined heuristics ran on both. The two methods are the the actual cable costs
case, more expensive because it considers the exact cost of each connection, and
the simplified cable costs case, which is cheaper because it’s quicker as it assumes
an approximate cost that is the same for all the connections.
The actual cable costs case
In order to calculate the exact cable routing costs (the cost of connecting the
turbines by cables) of each MST it is essential to determine how many tur-
bines and therefore how much energy, each edge has to endure. A Depth First
Search (DFS) algorithm is then used to determine this. Starting with the BS as
a source node, the algorithm follows the path, recursively counting how many
turbines are beyond each one.
Page 31
==PAGE:33==
Optimization of offshore wind farms with variable base station
DFS is an algorithm that uses backtracking to perform recursive operations. A
comprehensive search of all the nodes is performed, either by going ahead or by
backtracking.
If there are no nodes along the current path when going ahead, the algorithm
backtracks on the same path that was moving forward. Backtrack enables it to
find nodes to traverse. The current path will be traversed until all the unvisited
nodes have been visited, and then the next path will be chosen.
For each edge, a cost per meter is obtained by combining the two cable types
using x number of cables of type 1 with cost C1 = 240 and y number of cables
of type 2 with cost C2 = 336, minimizing the total sum of costs (line 1) and
respecting the cable capacities (line 3). The formulation is as follows.
min
C1x + C2y
(1)
s.t.
4x + 6y ≥edgeload
(2)
x, y ∈{0, 1}
(3)
The simplified cable costs case
In the interest of getting a quick and simple initial solution, only one inter-array
cable will be considered (type 1) as it is assumed that in the optimization phase,
these costs will be rectified and the obtained optimal solution plausible.
The challenge is then to find out the cost of each connection (Inter−arrayCost) in
a way that cable capacity is assured. For this, two approaches were contemplated.
Page 32
==PAGE:34==
Optimization of offshore wind farms with variable base station
The ”severe approach” guarantees cable capacity and therefore that the initial
solution is feasible. It does that by setting the inter-array cable cost for the
cost of having all the turbines in the solution placed in line and only one cable
arriving at the BS, i.e. only one connection between a turbine and the BS. By
calculating the cost of each connection as in Equation 4, it is insured that all of
them have enough capacity to carry the power of the entire wind farm (all the
turbines in the solution). In such a way, the cable capacity is in each connection
less or equal to what might be needed and the capacity constraint is always met.
Inter −arrayCost = Cable typeCost ∗
q
Cable typeCapacity
(4)
The ”moderate approach” does not indubitably guarantee cable capacity but
it does most of the time. The scenario assumes that there are only two cables
arriving at the BS and half of the turbines are connected by each cable. Therefore
the inter-array cable cost will correspond to the cost of a type 1 cable multiplied
by half of the number of turbines placed in the solution and divided by its
capacity as in Equation 5.
Inter −arrayCost = Cable typeCost ∗q
2 ∗
1
Cable typeCapacity
(5)
Before the initial MST is computed, it is not possible to know how many turbines
will be connected to the BS and therefore to have an accurate value for the inter-
array cable cost. Because of that, any value from the one obtained in Equation
5 to the upper bound obtained in Equation 4 is valid.
As it is highly unlikely that all turbines are placed in a line as the ”severe ap-
Page 33
==PAGE:35==
Optimization of offshore wind farms with variable base station
proach” suggests, the ”moderate approach” was chosen to produce an initial
cable routing solution cost in The simplified cable costs case.
Cable route algorithm
The pseudo-code of the initial cable routing problem formulation is outlined in
Algorithm 3. It receives as input, the vector p returned in Algorithm 1 with
information about the free and occupied positions indexes and the BS index pre-
viously determined in Algorithm 2. It then connects the turbines, BS, and the
onshore grid point by computing a MST and returns its cable route cost.
Algorithm 3 Cable Route
1: ps ←import initial solution(ps)
2: BSindex ←import initial solution(BSindex)
3: ps[BSindex] ←1
4: MST ←compute MST(ps, onshoreBS, x coordinates, y coordinates)
5: CostCR ←sum MST weights x cable cost(MST, cable cost)
Accordingly, the model reads the positions vector ps (line 1) and the BS position
index (line 2).
It then adds the second mentioned to the occupied positions
solution by setting its index in the position vector ps to 1.
Next, a MST connecting the solution points is found (line 4).
The function
compute MST() receives as input the occupied positions - ps, the x and y co-
ordinates of the mainland point where the offshore BS ultimately has to connect
to - onshoreBS, and the x and y coordinates of all positions in s. It then creates
a simple weighted graph g with as many points as occupied positions in ps and
adds an edge for every pair of points with a weight equal to its euclidean distance.
It returns, at last, a vector of edges representing the MST of the connected graph
Page 34
==PAGE:36==
Optimization of offshore wind farms with variable base station
g.
The cost of the cable route is then determined (line 5) by summing the MST
weights of the selected edges of g multiplied by the edge cost per meter. The
result is going to be different depending on the contemplated case (The actual
or simplified cable costs case).
3.3
Combined heuristic
After computing the initial solution, this needs to be further optimized in order
to increase profit. The current solution is therefore improved by simultaneously
modifying the turbine layout, determining where to place the BS, and revisiting
the cable routing problem using a combined local search.
Consequently, 1-opt moves will be used to move one turbine in the solution from
one position to another in order to find a more profitable solution. The new
position where the chosen turbine is placed must be located within a predefined
radius around its original position and respect the minimum distance constraint.
The optimization takes into consideration the delta of the energy revenues and
cable routing costs and decides whether or not to accept the proposed movement
with the assistance of Simulated Annealing (SA).
3.3.1
Simulated annealing
This heuristic method [32] is inspired by physical processes and essentially ap-
proximates global optimization in a large search zone for an optimization prob-
lem.
The main parameters of this strategy are the temperature (T) and the cooling
(α). The first one is updated at each step by means of the second in the following
way:
Page 35
==PAGE:37==
Optimization of offshore wind farms with variable base station
Tnew = α Told
(6)
where the cooling parameter α ∈(0, 1) controls the cooling speed.
The way SA accepts a move depends on a probability of acceptance p.
The
strategy always accepts an improved solution in terms of cost but also some
worse ones with good probability p in the beginning, so when the temperature
is high.
Moreover, the probability depends on the magnitude of the delta of the solutions
(∆E = Enew −Elast) which is positive if the new solution is more profitable
than the old one and negative otherwise. The acceptance probability p is then
computed as follows:
p =







e
∆E
T
, if ∆E ≤1
1
, if ∆E > 1
(7)
where T is the current temperature and ∆E the difference in the objective func-
tion.
The goal of the CWFO problem is to find an approximate global optimum for a
OWF layout in a fixed amount of time and not a precise local optimum. Because
of that, SA is particularly interesting in the context of the problem.
As a result of accepting worse solutions, the global optimal solution can be
explored in a more extensive way. The idea behind it is that it might be required
to accept the move of one turbine to a worse position because that allows for a
completely different layout that might or might not end up being more profitable,
depending on a probability p.
Page 36
==PAGE:38==
Optimization of offshore wind farms with variable base station
As the solution space is explored, the probability p of finding an even better lay-
out decreases, and therefore the implementation of the slow cooling parameter
α becomes essential to update it.
3.3.2
Combined Local Search
Algorithm 4 reports the Local search pseudo-code for the optimization of the
CWFO problem.
It takes as input the initial solution profit, the corresponding layout, and the
BS initial position. Next, it randomly selects a turbine and moves it to a prox-
imate position. Then, determines the best position for the BS by testing all
available positions and calculating the cable routing costs of the corresponding
MST. Using simulated annealing, the shaken solution profit is evaluated and
either accepted or rejected. The algorithm returns the same input information
(solution profit, layout, and BS position) for the most improved layout.
The formulation comes as follows.
Page 37
==PAGE:39==
Optimization of offshore wind farms with variable base station
Algorithm 4 Combined Local Search
1: iteration ←1
2: T ←T0
3: Ecurrent, Ebest ←import initial solution(MLO, CostCR)
4: pref ←import initial solution(ps)
5: BSp, BSp best ←import initial solution(opt p)
6: for iteration ∈total number of iterations do
7:
pnew ←generate random move(pref)
8:
index, Cost ←allocate BS(pnew)
9:
Enew ←compute solution profit(pnew, PM, Cost)
10:
if Enew > Ebest then
11:
(Ebest, Ecurrent, pref, BSp best) ←(Enew, Enew, pnew, BSp)
12:
else
13:
∆E ←Enew −Ecurrent
14:
p ←acceptance probability(T, ∆E)
15:
if ∆≥0 then
16:
Ecurrent ←Enew
17:
else
18:
if p > random() then
19:
Ecurrent ←Enew
20:
end if
21:
end if
22:
end if
23:
T ←αT
24:
iteration ←iteration + 1
25: end for
Accordingly, the heuristics initialize by setting an initial value for the temperature
T (line 2) (the parameters determination methods will be further described in
Page 38
==PAGE:40==
Optimization of offshore wind farms with variable base station
the next section 3.3.3) and importing the initial energy solution profit (line 3)
described in section 3.2.1 and 3.2.2 as the current energy solution profit. This
solution is also set to be the best option as no other was yet tested (line 3). In
the same way, the initial positions vector pref (line 4) and BS position (line 5)
are set to be the same returned in Algorithm 3. The BS initial position is also
set to be the best so far (line5) for the same reason as the best energy profit
solution in line 3.
Subsequently, for a limited number of iterations (line 6), a random turbine is
chosen and moved to an also random position within a certain radius from its
original position and respecting the minimum distance constraint from all the
other turbines placed in the wind farm (line 7).
After shaking the layout solution, the model will find the cheapest way to con-
nect all the turbines by cables and place the BS in the optimal position. To find
the best position for the BS, the model hypothetically places it in every available
position and computes a MST for each layout in the same way described in algo-
rithm 3 in section 3.2.2. The cost of each layout is then computed by summing
the weights of each edge of the ”tree” multiplied by each edge cost per meter
depending on the edge capacity (determined as in the previously described equa-
tion 3.2.2 for the realistic case). The BS position index of the cheapest placement
is stored together with its cost (line 8).
With the new layout and the new cable route, a new solution profit is calcu-
lated (line 9). The energy profit calculation is based on the input matrix PM
described in section 1.6 in the same way as it is calculated in line 8 of algorithm 1.
If the new layout solution profit is higher than the one stored so far (line 10),
the layout is immediately accepted, and all the best energy profit solution, the
Page 39
==PAGE:41==
Optimization of offshore wind farms with variable base station
current energy profit solution, the positions vector, and BS position variables
updated (line 11).
If that is not the case, the delta of the new solution and the current one is
calculated (line 13) and a probability of acceptance is determined based on the
temperature T and the delta as described in section 3.3.1.
If the delta is bigger than zero (line 15), it means that the new solution is better
than the previous one but is not the best ever observed. If that is the case, the
solution is accepted and the current solution is updated (line 16).
If the new solution is neither better than the previous one nor the best observed,
it can still be accepted if the probability of acceptance p is bigger than a random
number between zero and one (line 18) as described in section 3.3.1. If that is
the case, the solution is accepted and the current solution is updated (line 19).
If not one of these is the case, the new layout solution is rejected and the turbine
movement is canceled out.
The temperature T is at the end of each iteration updated by the cooling speed
α (line 23).
3.3.3
Tuning
In the implementation of SA two parameters need to be tuned: The initial tem-
perature T0 and the cooling α.
In the beginning, the heuristics should accept a great part of the proposed worst
solutions and gradually start accepting less. Moreover, the order of magnitude
of ∆E typically ranges from 106 to 109.
To get an initial temperature T0 value approximation, the acceptance probability
Page 40
==PAGE:42==
Optimization of offshore wind farms with variable base station
function was disassembled as shown below, assuming that 30% of the worst
solutions should be accepted.
T0 =
108
ln(0.3) ≈107
(8)
T0 was then rounded down and set to 107 and different values for α were tried:
α = 0.995, 0.999, 0.9995, 0.9999.
Each value of α was tested 100 times. Each time, the combined local search
described in Algorithm 4 was run and the best-observed solution was stored.
The improvement over the initial solution was then determined by calculating
its difference and dividing it by the initial solution following the formula shown
below.
Improvement(%) = 1 + BestObserved Solution −InitialSolution
InitialSolution
(9)
The findings are presented in table 2. The first column shows the percentage
of improvement most frequently observed, which refers to the improvement ob-
served 20-25 times in the 100 iterations.
The second one shows the average
percentage of improvement and the last one shows the output range of values,
the difference between the maximum observed value and the minimum one.
Page 41
==PAGE:43==
Optimization of offshore wind farms with variable base station
alpha
Most frequent improvement (%)
Average improvement (%)
Output range (%)
995
1.00237
1.00174
0.00339
999
1.00223
1.00233
0.00347
9995
1.00292
1.00297
0.00258
9999
1.00292
1.00287
0.00310
Table 2: Cooling parameter (α) tuning
Even though α = 0.9995 and α = 0.9999 most frequently produce the same
improvement, on average α = 0.9995 grants higher improvements, and its output
range is smaller. This means the output solution with this value of α doesn’t
vary so much and therefore its computed average value is more reliable. For this
reason, α = 0.9995 was chosen for the cooling parameter value.
Page 42
==PAGE:44==
Optimization of offshore wind farms with variable base station
4
Numerical study
In this chapter, the hypothesis, and assumptions made during the analysis will
be presented as well as their implications on the thesis conclusions. Moreover,
the synthetic set of instances used to test the algorithms and produce results will
be introduced and its characteristics highlighted.
4.1
Assumptions
Some assumptions were made during the project when real data could not be
found or due to simplifications. Those assumptions and how they were created
will be carefully explained in this section.
4.1.1
Discrete approach
By using the discrete approach, the available site is divided into a finite number of
positions where turbines and the BS can be placed. Compared to the continuous
approach, it approximates the problem and was selected in this thesis due to its
many advantages and limited downsides as explained in Chapter 1.3.
While theoretically feasible, increasing the number of positions considered could
result in an arbitrarily dense grid of positions it doesn’t capture all possible po-
sitions on the grid.
However, the chosen approach is considered to be sufficiently dense to approxi-
mate the continuous space within the synthetic instance’s wind farm boundaries.
Page 43
==PAGE:45==
Optimization of offshore wind farms with variable base station
4.1.2
Energy Price Factor
In order to capture the total value of a wind turbine, its energy production
revenues need to be determined and the future cash flows from its yearly activity
to be discounted to the present day and added together. The result of adding
all the discounted positive and negative cash flows together is called the NPV.
To translate power production [MWh/y] to revenues, this must be multiplied by
an EPF. Its computation is based on the energy price in 2021 for DK2, which was
87.91 Euro/MWh (= 653.78 DKK/MWh; source: NordPool [33]) and includes
an additional factor to discount the total revenues for 25 years of the wind farm
lifetime to present value. The EPF used in this thesis is received as input and
is equal to 1251 Euro/MWh/y. The corresponding revenues are calculated as
shown in Equation 10.
Revenues[EUR] = Pij[MW] ∗(365 ∗24)[h/y] ∗EPF[EUR/MWh/y]
(10)
4.1.3
Onshore grid connection
The total offshore wind farm energy is transported from the BS to the onshore
grid through a single and more expensive export cable as explained in Chapter
3.2.2.
The synthetic instances used to test the algorithms and produce the results, do
not provide the coordinates of this onshore grid point. This is important infor-
mation as it will influence the position where the combined heuristics will place
the BS. Therefore it will influence the conclusion of the thesis research question.
Because those coordinates are not provided, the BS was arbitrarily placed 50km
Page 44
==PAGE:46==
Optimization of offshore wind farms with variable base station
further from the average southernmost midpoint of all considered instances.
Synthetic instance
Middle x-coordinate
Minimum y-coordinate
A
126051
100617
B
119810
100617
C
119193
108440
D
118176
113635
E
118928
103612
F
120319
103428
average
120413
107798
Table 3: Middle x-coordinate and minimum y-coordinate of each synthetic
instance and its average.
For each instance, the middle x −coordinate and the minimum y −coordinate
were computed and the values reported in table 3. Next, the average of both
coordinates previously calculated was determined. The computed southernmost
midpoint of all considered instances reported in Table 3 is then [120413, 107798].
The BS x −coordinate is the same as the computed average one and its y −
coordinate placed 50km south as previously explained.
Therefore, the determination of the y coordinateBS was done through the use
of the euclidean distance Equation 11 between the BS and the computed south-
ernmost midpoint, where the distance was set to be 50km i.e. 50000m. Because
the middlex value is the same as the middleBS, and the value of minimumy is
known, the y coordinateBS value follows Equation 12 to 57798.
50000 =
q
(middlex −middleBS)
2 + (minimumy −y coordinateBS)
2
(11)
(=) y coordinateBS = 107798 −50000 = 57798
(12)
Page 45
==PAGE:47==
Optimization of offshore wind farms with variable base station
Accordingly, the x and y coordinates of the onshore grid point were set to
[120413, 57798].
4.2
Synthetic Instances
Mosetti et al. [34] proposed a couple of layouts for the WFLO problem in 1994,
which were widely used in literature. However, they did not reflect the actual
challenges of modern wind farms not only due to their small size but also other
simplifications.
As a consequence, Cazzaro and Pisinger [19] prepared and made available [35]
a set of 10 instances derived from public data sources and based on realistic as-
sumptions. These instances provide coordinates of between 3k and 21k available
positions, along with their depths and foundation costs. As a result, they are
referred to as ”synthetic” because they aim to reproduce and express reality.
The overall conclusions of an algorithm tested on these instances are going to be
the same in real wind farms.
For this reason, they constitute a very reliable and useful tool to test algorithms
and optimization techniques of real-life offshore wind farms.
The 10 instances’ features are summarized below and presented in Table 4:
❍The number of available positions ranges from 3238 up to 21709.
❍Foundation costs are determined by linearly increasing the amount of steel
needed for each foundation and converting that into a cost.
❍10MW and 15 MW turbines publicity available from National Renewable
Energy Laboratory (NREL) are used to model wakes.
❍Wind data are real measurements available from the Netherlands Enter-
prise Agency (RVO) website [36] by the Dutch Ministry of Economic Affairs
Page 46
==PAGE:48==
Optimization of offshore wind farms with variable base station
and Climate Policy.
❍Each layout also contains a number of fixed turbines representing an exist-
ing nearby park, which is not subject to optimization but influences wake
nonetheless.
❍In each layout, power density determines how many turbines should be
placed.
Synthetic
instance
Available positions
per instance
Zone
Number of 15MW
Turbines
A
3238
1
8
A
3238
2
26
B
6989
1
99
C
7098
1
60
C
7098
2
30
D
10443
1
170
E
11518
1
7
E
11518
2
36
E
11518
3
94
F
11548
1
26
F
11548
2
132
Table 4: Synthetic Instances by Cazzaro and Pisinger [19]
The Instances described in Table 4 were used to test Algorithms 1, 2, 3 and 4
described in the previous chapter. The column ”available positions per instance”
reports the total number of positions where turbines and the BS can be placed.
Each layout can have one or more zones which means they can have more than
Page 47
==PAGE:49==
Optimization of offshore wind farms with variable base station
one sub-areas far from one another with a different number of turbines to place
in it. This is the case of instance A, pictured in Figure 5. Two distinctive zones
can be seen, the one on the left side - Zone 1 - with a smaller sub-area and one
on the right with a bigger one - Zone 2 - both summing 3238 available positions.
The last column reports the number of 15MW turbines to place per instance and
per zone.
Figure 5: Sub-areas of Instance A
For a better visual understanding of the available wind farm area of each instance
please consult the Appendix A.1.
Page 48
==PAGE:50==
Optimization of offshore wind farms with variable base station
5
Results
The computational experiments were carried out in julia [37] and have three
parts. The two initial solutions were obtained in the sequential model and the
optimizer part. In this chapter, the objective values of its corresponding Algo-
rithms 1, 2, 3 and 4 will be tested in the six synthetic instances (described in the
previous chapter). Its results will be presented and discussed in order to assess
if an overall better solution can be reached by combining the two optimization
problems while assuming a variable BS.
Untimely, numerical results will determine whether a combined optimization of
these two problems can improve the NPV of wind farms at the expense of in-
creased complexity and running time. Moreover, it will access whether there is
some value to gain by including the additional factor of having a variable BS as
an object of optimization.
The obtained results in each part will be compared with the literature and its
plausibility commented in light of that.
5.1
Initial solution
5.1.1
Initial energy profit
A study by Cazzaro [19] shows the results of a Variable Neighborhood Search
(VNS) for large WFLO. In this paper, an initial solution for the layout prob-
lem is similarly developed based on the P-Dispersion Sum Problem and further
optimized by the adaptation of the meta-heuristic VNS to the problem. The
heuristic was tested on the set of synthetic instances and for each of them, the
objective value was split into Anual Energy Production (AEP) and foundation
Page 49
==PAGE:51==
Optimization of offshore wind farms with variable base station
costs.
The corresponding NPV of the total energy (E) profit was computed by multiply-
ing the reported AEP [19] for the EPF described in section 4.1.2 and subtracting
the foundation costs [19].
Cazzaro’s [19] calculated E profit and the E profit obtained by running the PDSP
of Algorithm 1 are reported in Table 5. The last column shows the difference in
absolute value between the two results calculated as in Equation 13.
∆NPV = E profit NPV −Literature calculated E profit NPV
(13)
As the two formulations are based in the PDSP, it would be expected that the
difference between the profit in both cases would be either the same or the lit-
erature one higher since it was further optimized after the initial solution was
obtained. What can be observed in Table 5 is the opposite for all instances but
the first one - Instance A.
Page 50
==PAGE:52==
Optimization of offshore wind farms with variable base station
Synthetic
set
Set
size
E profit
NPV (M€)
E profit
NPV (M€)
Cazzaro [19]
AEP (MWh)
Cazzaro [19]
foundation costs (M€)
Cazzaro’s calculated
E profit NPV (M€)
∆NPV
(M€)
A1
3238
829.06
3470.92
3.19E+06
89.10
3896.46
-425.54
A2
2641.86
B
6989
9237.04
9237.04
7.40E+06
241.10
9022.18
214.86
C1
7098
5738.01
8721.34
6.95E+06
215.73
8480.22
241.11
C2
2983.33
D
10443
15139.68
15139.68
1.22E+07
432.92
14804.13
335.55
E1
11518
720.37
13150.90
1.03E+07
323.83
12613.26
537.64
E2
3523.68
E3
8906.85
F1
2561.96
F2
11548
12357.01
14918.96
1.18E+07
393.01
14366.79
552.18
Table 5: Comparing the initial solution from Algorithm 1, i.e. the NPV of the
Energy profit estimated for the lifetime of a park, against the Cazzaro’s values
[19] for a very similar case. Each colored line corresponds to a complete
instance, i.e. the summed values for all zones in each synthetic set.
The average NPV of the energy profit is 10600M€ and the average NPV obtained
by computing Cazzaro’s results of 10530M€. The average absolute difference be-
tween both results, disregarding whether this is positive or negative is 268M€.
In the present thesis, the number of turbines placed in the solution and their
production capacity is known and specified in Table 4. In fact, the calculations
are done for 15MW turbines for high-density wind farms. On the other hand,
these variables are unknown in Cazzaro’s study [19] which makes it hard to com-
pare both final results.
However, one very noticeable fact is the high correlation between the size of the
instance set on the second column of Table 5 and the difference in absolute value
between the two results on the last. Indeed their correlation coefficient is ρ=0.95
which implies that whatever is causing the discrepancy between both results is
something directly proportional to the number of available positions in the wind
Page 51
==PAGE:53==
Optimization of offshore wind farms with variable base station
park and therefore to the number of turbines placed in each solution and/or its
power capacity.
Each 15MW turbine produces approximately 9.5MW in ”free wind”. According
to equation 10, that corresponds to a NPV of 104M€ which means that each
year a 15MW turbine will generate 4.2M€ worth of electricity.
A difference of two to six turbines placed in each solution could create a differ-
ence in the NPV of the same magnitude as the one observed when comparing
the obtained results with Cazzaro’s [19].
5.1.2
Initial cable route
The Simplified cable costs and the Actual cable costs cases were introduced in
Chapter 3.2.2. It was hypothesized that the first mentioned would be faster and
less accurate while the latter mentioned more expensive but able to get better
and more accurate results.
Table 6 shows the results of both cases. For each one, the cost in M€ and the
execution time in seconds are reported. The last two columns show the savings
in M€ and the percentage increase in time and hereby confirm the mentioned
hypothesis for all instances except for Instance E1.
Page 52
==PAGE:54==
Optimization of offshore wind farms with variable base station
Simplified cable costs
Actual cable costs
Synthetic set
Turbines q
Cost (M€)
Time (s)
Cost (M€)
Time (s)
∆savings (M€)
∆increase
in time (%)
A1
8
28
0.00008
13
0.00025
15
306
A2
26
53
0.00016
27
0.00027
26
169
B
99
712
0.00872
52
0.01069
660
123
C1
60
282
0.00152
39
0.00229
243
150
C2
30
80
0.00036
19
0.00056
61
156
D
169
2158
0.08097
166
0.10625
1992
131
E1
7
5
0.00013
11
0.00032
-6
251
E2
36
105
0.00040
23
0.00103
82
257
E3
94
658
0.00409
94
0.00697
564
170
F1
26
54
0.00026
25
0.00055
29
214
F2
132
1296
0.02667
108
0.03044
1188
114
Table 6: Comparing the results of the actual cable costs case against the ones
of the simplified cable costs case.
The negative saving obtained for instance E1 highlights the fact that the cable
capacity constraint is, as predicted, met most of the time in the simplified cable
costs case but it does fail in instances where a very small number of turbines is
placed (as it is the case of instance E1 with q = 7). After Instance E1, A1 is the
one where fewer turbines are placed and, accordingly it is the second instance
producing the least amount of savings when comparing both cases.
The bigger the wind farm, i.e. the more turbines are placed in each solution, the
more relevant it gets to use the actual cable costs case to produce an accurate
solution.
Despite the case of Instance E1, the overall savings are considerable. The actual
cable costs case reduces the cost on average by 441M€, performing better for the
bigger instances. The increase in time is also considerable but still not impacting
as both run very fast, i.e. in less than half a second.
The values obtained in the actual cable costs case were then compared against
Page 53
==PAGE:55==
Optimization of offshore wind farms with variable base station
the values of a similar experiment by Cazzaro [15] the only difference between
both being that Cazzaro’s formulation accounts for obstacles within the wind
farm area when placing the inter-array cables which might on a small scale in-
crease the overall costs in some instances. The reported results are the product
of an experiment on an unbalanced configuration for the branched topology on
15MW turbines tested on the synthetic instances. The number of turbines placed
in Cazzaro’s [15] case is roughly the same as in the present thesis which makes
its comparison (Table 7) possible and relevant.
Synthetic set
Turbines q
Actual cable costs case(M€)
Cazzaro [15] cost (M€)
∆cost (M€)
A1
34
40
19
21
A2
B
99
52
48
4
C1
90
58
46
12
C2
D
169
166
84
82
E1
137
128
65
63
E2
E3
F1
F2
158
133
83
51
Table 7: Comparing the initial cable routing solution from Algorithm 3
performed on the actual cable costs case against the values obtained by
Cazzaro [15] on a relatively similar problem.
Similar to the initial solution produced for the WFLO problem, the initial so-
lution produced for the current problem aims to be valid but not optimal since
it will be further optimized in the next step. On the other hand, Cazzaro’s [15]
results are further optimized after an initial solution is obtained for what would
be expected for the last-mentioned results to be surpassed.
Apart from that, Cazzaro’s [15] experiments are conducted to find the best topol-
Page 54
==PAGE:56==
Optimization of offshore wind farms with variable base station
ogy to optimize the WFCR problem in light of the sequential approach. The BS
is fixed one-third inside the wind farm area and it is not an object of optimiza-
tion. Because of that, the energy transportation from the BS to the onshore grid
part of the problem along with its costs is not considered.
In the present thesis, that part can not be ignored. Though in the initial cable
route solution reported in Table 7 the BS is conventionally placed one-third in-
side the wind farm area, it will be an object of optimization in the next step,
and therefore the cost of transporting the energy from one point to another has
to be considered in the objective function.
That cost is considerably high since the export cable cost per meter is roughly
five times higher than the inter-array cables and therefore it is increasing the
results obtained in this thesis compared to the ones obtained by Cazzaro [15].
5.2
Combined heuristic
5.2.1
Combined local search algorithm performance
As described in Chapter 3.3, the combined heuristic repeatedly moves a single
turbine in the solution to a different location and places the BS in the optimal
position. The move is then accepted or rejected depending on a SA criteria con-
ditional on the difference in the objective function value ∆E .
The idea behind SA is that in order to get an overall better solution, it is bene-
ficial to accept worse solutions if the worst solution has a certain probability of
leading to a better future one.
For that reason, it would be expected that the objective function value would
occasionally decrease in the first iterations and gradually start peaking when the
Page 55
==PAGE:57==
Optimization of offshore wind farms with variable base station
optimal is close to being attained. Indeed that is what is observed not only in
Figure 6 when plotting the evolution of the objective function of instance B but
when plotting every instance. A visual representation of the evolution of the
objective value for each instance can be found in the Appendix A.2.
The objective value drastically decreases in the first one thousand iterations and
then it starts rising. It can be seen that the optimizer gradually accepts fewer
”worst solutions” until eventually only better solutions are accepted. It starts
leveling out from iteration 6000 which means that the solution is already close to
optimal and therefore the wind farm won’t benefit from changing the layout into a
less profitable configuration as most likely it will not result in a future better one.
Figure 6: Evolution of the objective value, instance B
Depending on the instance size, the optimizer runs for 1000 iterations taking any-
where between 2 minutes (in the smallest instance) to 13 hours (in the biggest
one).
The optimizer allocates the great part of its running time to allocate the BS.
Page 56
==PAGE:58==
Optimization of offshore wind farms with variable base station
This is because in order to find the cheapest position it will check all the avail-
able positions in a certain radius, which is computationally expensive.
On average, the optimizer allocates 70% of its running time allocating the BS,
21% solving the cabling problem, and 9% deciding whether or not the originated
turbine movement should be accepted or not dismissed. A visual representation
of the mentioned distribution can be found in Figure 7.
Figure 7: Running time distribution of Combined Local Search Algorithm 4.
5.2.2
Initial solution impact on the optimizer
Two different initial cable routing solutions were determined and further opti-
mized by the Combined Local Search Algorithm 4. As previously described, the
initial solutions differ in the cost of a meter of the inter-array cables. The solu-
tion originated from the simplified cable costs case is faster but produces a worse
solution with respect to accuracy and total cost. On the other hand, the actual
cable costs case reflects the actual (lower) cost of the initial layout considering
all the available cables at a higher but still acceptable computational cost.
Page 57
==PAGE:59==
Optimization of offshore wind farms with variable base station
The two initial solutions were applied in Combined Local Search Algorithm 4 for
the same number of iterations by Algorithm 4 and the obtained optimal NPV
results for each instance can be found in Table 8.
The ∆difference in M€ between both solutions is shown in the last column and
calculated in the following way.
∆= ActualNPV −SimplifiedNPV
(14)
Synthetic set
Simplified cable costs (M€)
Actual cable costs (M€)
∆(M€)
A
3440
3439
-0.9
B
9239
9237
-2.1
C
8696
8699
3.5
D
15109
15117
8.4
E
13217
13212
-5.0
F
14865
14870
4.8
average
1.4
Table 8: Obtained NPV from the combined optimization for both cases - the
simplified cable costs and the actual cable costs.
Table 8 shows no pattern for when one case performs better than the other. On
average, the actual cable costs case produces an optimal NPV 1.4M€ higher than
the simplified cable costs however this average is not very explanatory since the
different results are so dispersed from the mean. In fact, the standard deviation
of the results is 4.97M€ which indicates that the data are quite spread out around
the mean and therefore does not provide a piece of conclusive information.
Moreover, the last column is not correlated with the size of the wind farm nor
the number of turbines placed in each solution.
Page 58
==PAGE:60==
Optimization of offshore wind farms with variable base station
What can be concluded from this experiment is that the initial solution does not
evidently impacts the obtained optimal solution even though that was suggested
by the positive ∆NPV value reported in Table 8. Therefore, too much effort
into getting an initial close to optimal solution should be avoided.
5.2.3
Sequential and combined approaches
Starting from an initial solution originated from the actual cable costs case, the
sequential and combined approaches are now compared on the set of 6 synthetic
instances. The results are shown in Table 9 and a visual representation of the
layout and cable routing initial and optimal solutions for instance B can be found
in Figure 8 and Figure 9 respectively. The same visualization for each synthetic
instance can be found in Appendix A.3.
Synthetic set
Sequential NPV (M€)
Combined NPV (M€)
∆(M€)
∆(%)
A
3431
3439
8
0.22
B
9185
9237
52
0.56
C
8663
8699
36
0.42
D
14973
15117
144
0.96
E
13023
13212
189
1.45
F
14786
14870
84
0.57
average
10677
10761
86
0.70
Table 9: Obtained NPV in both sequential and combined approaches.
In all the instances, it can be seen that the combined approach significantly im-
proves the NPV of the wind farms. On average, the NPV increases by 86M€,
which corresponds to a 0.70% increase. When compared to the sequential ap-
proach, this represents a significant improvement, as the same number of turbines
Page 59
==PAGE:61==
Optimization of offshore wind farms with variable base station
and cables are being placed only in a better overall arrangement.
In sparser wind farm instances like instances A and C, where a lower number
of turbines are placed, the initial solution for the WFLO problem places the
turbines in a way that really maximizes the energy revenue. The fewer turbines
are placed in the solution, the easier it gets to avoid wakes from nearby turbines.
Moreover, a lower number of turbines also makes the cabling problem easier to
solve and cheaper to frame.
Because of that, and also because the energy revenues are of a greater order of
magnitude than the cabling costs, the combined optimization does not allow for
such big improvements in these instances.
Nevertheless, the combined optimization does improve the NPV in all tested in-
stances.
Figure 8: Visual representation of the sequential approach solution for
Instance B.
Page 60
==PAGE:62==
Optimization of offshore wind farms with variable base station
Figure 9: Visual representation of the combined approach for Instance B.
By examining the components of the objective function, it can be seen that the
combined optimization improves by improving energy production by a very small
fraction but saving a noticeable fraction of the costs in cable routing.
As an example, a breakdown of energy revenues and cable costs for instance B
can be found in Table 10.
Approach
NPV
(M€)
E profit NPV
(M€)
Cabling cost
(M€)
Sequential
9185.01
9237.04
52.03
Combined
9237.20
9258.99
17.80
Improvement (%)
0.57
0.24
58.11
Table 10: Breakdown of the objective function components of instance B in the
high-density case, for the sequential and combined optimizations. It reports the
NPV components of the two cases: the energy production revenues and the
cabling costs.
It can be seen from Table 10 that the main subject of optimization is the cabling
part as the instances are being optimized in a high-density scenario, being left
with not much space for energy revenue optimization.
Page 61
==PAGE:63==
Optimization of offshore wind farms with variable base station
5.2.4
Variable base station assessment
In the present thesis, the offshore BS can have a variable position, finding in every
iteration the cheapest possible position, and returning at the end of the optimiza-
tion, the best-detected location. This highly influences the cost of transporting
the energy produced from the BS to the onshore grid as the distance between
the two points is not fixed.
It was hypothesized in the research question in Chapter 1.5 whether there was
anything to gain from having a variable BS.
To assess that, the Combined Local Search Algorithm 4 was modified to have a
fixed BS, keeping it throughout the optimization in the same position as in the
initial solution, i.e. one-third inside the wind farm area.
The optimal NPV obtained by running both optimizations for the same number
of iterations and their respective computational times can be found in Table 11.
Synthetic
set
Set
size
Variable BS
NPV (M€)
Time (s)
Fixed BS
NPV (M€)
Time (s)
∆NPV
(M€)
∆NPV
(%)
∆longer
time (s)
∆longer
time (%)
A
3238
3439
807
3437
158
1
0.04
649
80
B
6989
9237
7785
9215
1166
21
0.23
6619
85
C
7098
8699
4946
8693
664
6
0.07
4282
87
D
10443
15117
47195
15097
3563
21
0.14
43632
92
E
11518
13212
17566
13196
1691
16
0.12
15875
90
F
11548
14870
27665
14815
1898
128
0.37
25767
93
average
10762
17661
10730
1524
32
0.16
16137
88
Table 11: Optimal NPV obtained from the Combined Local search Algorithm 4
for two cases - Variable BS and Fixed BS. The computational times that each
instance took to run are also reported.
Page 62
==PAGE:64==
Optimization of offshore wind farms with variable base station
It is clear from observing Table 11 the differences between the two solutions for
all instances. It is consistent through all the results, that the optimal NPV ob-
tained from having a variable BS is higher than having a fixed BS. On average,
the first-mentioned case can obtain results 0.16% higher than the second one
which sums up to 32M€ of improvement.
On the other hand, the computational cost of having a variable BS is substan-
tially higher than having a fixed one. Indeed it takes 88% more time to run the
first mentioned optimization which corresponds to 16137 seconds, i.e. 4.5 hours.
This conclusion could be expected after observing Figure 7 and verifying that
the greater computational effort of the optimizer is put on placing the BS.
5.2.5
Comparison against Cazzaro’s results [2]
Cazzaro [2] reports a combined optimization improvement for high-density wind
farms of an optimizer that ran for a 24h time limit.
On average, Cazzaro’s
combined optimization improves the NPV by about 0.11% over the sequential
optimization in high-density wind farm cases.
Cazzaro’s combined heuristic [15] proved to be able to solve large and realis-
tic problems with all the constraints considered in the industry. Similarly to
the present Combined Local Search Algorithm 4 formulation, it respects the
minimum distance constraint, cable capacity, no-crossing, and connectivity con-
straints, it avoids obstacles when placing the turbines but also when creating the
cable route bypassing it instead.
Based on the reported improvement [15], Cazzaro’s corresponding combined NPV
was computed by multiplying its percentage by the calculated sequential NPV
Page 63
==PAGE:65==
Optimization of offshore wind farms with variable base station
reported on Table 5 and 7. For each instance, the combined NPV is then com-
puted as the reported energy profit [19] subtracted by the cabling costs [15] as
in Equation 15.
Combined NPV = E Profit [19] −Cable Cost [15]
(15)
The results are reported in Table 12 below.
Synthetic
set
Combined
NPV (M€)
Cazzaro Combined [2]
improvement (%)
Cazzaro sequential
[19][15] NPV (M€)
Cazzaro calculated
combined NPV (M€)
∆(M€)
∆(%)
A
3439
0.21
3878
3886
-447
-11.3
B
9237
0.07
8974
8980
256
2.9
C
8699
0.14
8434
8446
254
3.1
D
15117
0.05
14720
14728
390
2.7
E
13212
0.13
12548
12565
647
5.3
F
14870
0.06
14284
14293
577
4.1
average
10762
0.11
10483
280
1.1
Table 12: Comparing the NPV obtained in the Combined Local Search
Algorithm 4 against the computed Cazzaro’s NPV based on the reported % of
improvement [2]. The two last ∆columns favor Algorithm 4 results, i.e. only
the negative values mean a better solution by Cazzaro [2].
Similarly to what was observed in Chapter 5.1.1 when comparing the energy
profit calculated in PDSP Algorithm 1 against the Cazzaro’s results [19], the
average ∆difference in the absolute value of the combined NPV is of 280M€
alike the 268M€ reported in Table 5.
Once again the difference must be associated with the unknown number of tur-
bines placed in the solution as well as its power capacity as highlighted in Chapter
5.1.1.
Page 64
==PAGE:66==
Optimization of offshore wind farms with variable base station
Moreover, Cazzaro’s optimization is performed for a scenario with a BS fixed
one-third inside the wind farm area, as it is usually required in tender rules. As
shown in Table 11, and explained in the previous chapter, having a variable BS
allows for an even better combined optimization which also explains why Caz-
zaro’s NPV results are on average not valued as highly as the ones obtained in
this thesis’ combined heuristic. On the other hand, Cazzaro’s formulation avoids
obstacles when placing the inter-array cables and therefore that slightly increases
the computed sequential NPV.
One other difference between both optimizations is that the present thesis’ op-
timizer runs for 1000 iterations only whereas Cazzaro’s runs for 24 hours. This
will allow Cazzaro better results even if not much better because the number of
iterations chosen in the present thesis was set to a number where the optimiza-
tion curve shown in Figure 6 is flattering out.
5.3
Discussion of the results
The obtained results were determined for the synthetic instances prepared by
Cazzaro and Pissinger [35] and the calculated NPV highly dependent on the as-
sumptions, the selected EPF and energy demand forecast. Therefore its absolute
values are not as informative as the % of improvement of using a combined ap-
proach with variable BS rather than a sequential approach with the BS located
one-third inside the wind farm area.
Both the initial solution and the optimal one were obtained considering most of
the industry’s real-life constraints as the minimum distance between turbines,
obstacles in the wind farm area where turbines can not be built, the no cable
crossing constraint, and connectivity, but it does not take obstacles into consid-
Page 65
==PAGE:67==
Optimization of offshore wind farms with variable base station
eration when connecting the turbines by cables. This might increase the cabling
cots in both solutions as the overall cable length of bypassing the obstacles will
increase. However as it would increase both solutions, the % of improvement
should remain the same.
Moreover, when optimally placing the BS, the heuristics are considering a straight
line from the BS to the onshore grid connection point when calculating the cost
of exporting the energy to the mainland, not taking into consideration if the ex-
port cable is crossing any of the inter-array cables. This might add an extra cost
or even cause unfeasibility in cases where the BS is placed far above its original
position.
Page 66
==PAGE:68==
Optimization of offshore wind farms with variable base station
6
Conclusion
In this work, the interrelation between both the WFLO and the WFCR problems
was recognized and a combined heuristics capable of efficiently solving industry
scale problems while accounting for some real-life constraints was developed to
optimize them together. In contrast to the existing work of Cazzaro [2], this thesis
also aimed to conclude whether modeling the BS as an object of optimization
improves even further the combined solution.
A Combined Local Search Algorithm that modifies the turbine positions and
the cable routing solutions simultaneously finding the best position for the BS
was developed. By doing so, both individual problems’ conflicting objectives of
maximizing power revenues while minimizing cable costs can be balanced and
the BS optimally placed. A sequential approach was used to obtain an initial
solution for both the WFLO and the WFCR problems.
The solution obtained from the sequential model was then used to initialize the
optimizer that proved to perform as expected for the 1000 iterations.
Different initial solutions formulations were tested in the optimizer and it was
concluded that its accuracy does not influence the obtained optimal result.
Therefore, substantial effort and time should not be allocated to producing a
close-to-optimal initial solution.
On average, the optimizer obtains improvements of 0.7% compared to a close-
to-optimal initial solution produced by the sequential approach. It improved the
objective function in all the tested instances compared to the traditional sequen-
tial approach. This optimization mostly improves the cabling route and the BS
position that highly influences the cost of transporting the energy to the onshore
grid.
Finding the best position for the BS in each iteration proved to be beneficial
Page 67
==PAGE:69==
Optimization of offshore wind farms with variable base station
although very expensive. It is also distinctly more valuable when adopted in big
and irregularly shaped wind farms.
Compared with the sequential approach, the combined optimization of offshore
wind farms with variable base station has the disadvantage of taking ten times
more time to reach the same number of iterations. Nevertheless, wind farm de-
sign is an offline problem, so it is worthwhile to spend more time on computation
to improve the results.
Overall, a combined optimization of the two problems assuming a variable BS
has been proved to be possible, with an increase in complexity and running time,
but able to improve wind farms’ NPV.
In order to validate the results, these were compared to similar cases by Cazzaro
[19] [15] where the WFLO and the WFCR problems were solved apart as in the
sequential model.
There are a few unknown variables in Cazzaro’s paper that complicate com-
parisons such as the number of turbines placed in each synthetic set and the
turbine’s power capacity.
Moreover, Cazzaro’s problem formulations are not
built on the exact same assumptions as the one being discussed, therefore both
are not necessarily considering the exact same scenarios.
Nevertheless, in terms of magnitude, the results are in the same range where
Cazzaro gets a lower energy profit but also a lower cable routing cost.
This
discrepancy can be explained by the lack of detailed variable values for which it
can be assumed that the obtained initial solution in the sequential model proves
to be appropriate and the attained optimal solution valid.
The developed combined heuristic was tested on high-density wind farm instances
where some of them are already quite tight in the available area not leaving
Page 68
==PAGE:70==
Optimization of offshore wind farms with variable base station
much space for optimization. In dense wind farms, even fitting all the turbines
within the available area while respecting the minimum distance constraint can
be challenging.
There is more room for optimization when considering sparse instances. Thor
offshore wind farm project [38] aims to place around 80-115 turbines within a
440km2 available area. In the present study, more turbines were placed in in-
stances with half the available area. Therefore it can be concluded that sparse
wind farms like Thor can benefit even more from a combined optimization?
Additional factors, such as bypassing obstacles and utilizing more advanced ca-
bling algorithms, could be considered in future studies on the topic.
Page 69
==PAGE:71==
Optimization of offshore wind farms with variable base station
References
[1] Alstom, mobility by nature.
https://www.alstom.com/.
Accessed:
31.01.2023.
[2] Davide Cazzaro, David Franz Koza, and David Pisinger. Combined opti-
mization for offshore wind farms.
pages 213–213, 2022.
32nd European
Conference on Operational Research, EURO 2022 ; Conference date: 03-07-
2022 Through 06-07-2022.
[3] European
comission.
https://climate.ec.europa.eu/eu-action/
climate-strategies-targets/2030-climate-energy-framework_en.
Accessed: 10.10.2022.
[4] Facts about wind power.
https://ens.dk/en/our-responsibilities/
wind-power/facts-about-wind-power. Accessed: 10.03.2022.
[5] Ministry
of
foreign
affairs
of
denmark.
https://um.dk/en/
foreign-policy/new-climate-action-strategy. Accessed: 10.03.2022.
[6] Rebecca Jane Barthelmie, Kurt Schaldemose Hansen, Sten Tronæs Frand-
sen, Ole Rathmann, J.G. Schepers, W. Schlez, J. Phillips, K. Rados, A. Zer-
vos, E.S. Politis, and P.K. Chaviaropoulos.
Modelling and measuring
flow and wind turbine wakes in large wind farms offshore. Wind Energy,
12(5):431–444, 2009.
[7] Ocean
wind
1.
https://oceanwindone.com/
resources-and-faqs/what-is-offshore-wind-power/
how-do-offshore-wind-turbines-work. Accessed: 10.11.2022.
[8] N.O. Jensen. A note on wind generator interaction. Number 2411 in Risø-M.
Risø National Laboratory, 1983.
Page 70
==PAGE:72==
Optimization of offshore wind farms with variable base station
[9] Majid Bastankhah and Fernando Port´e-Agel. A new analytical model for
wind-turbine wakes. Renewable Energy, 70:116–123, 2014. Special issue on
aerodynamics of offshore wind energy systems and wakes.
[10] Gunner Chr. Larsen, J. Højstrup, and H. Aagaard Madsen. Wind fields
in wakes. In A. Zervos, H. Ehmann, and P. Helm, editors, 1996 European
Union wind energy conference. Proceedings, pages 764–768. H.S. Stephens
and Associates, 1996. 1996 European Wind Energy Conference and Exhi-
bition, EWEC ’96 ; Conference date: 20-05-1996 Through 24-05-1996.
[11] J. F. Ainslie. Calculating the flowfield in the wake of wind turbines. Journal
of Wind Engineering and Industrial Aerodynamics, pages 213–224, 1988.
[12] Nautic expo.
https://trends.nauticexpo.com/project-331037.html.
Accessed: 10.11.2022.
[13] BVG
Associates.
Guide
to
an
offshore
wind
farm:
updated
and
extended.
https://www.thecrownestate.co.uk/media/2861/
guide-to-offshore-wind-farm-2019.pdf.
[14] Angel Gonzalez. Review of offshore wind farm cost components. Energy for
Sustainable Development, 37:10–19, 04 2017.
[15] Davide Cazzaro and David Pisinger. Balanced cable routing for offshore
wind farms with obstacles. Networks, 2022.
[16] Martina Fischetti and David Pisinger. Mathematical optimization and algo-
rithms for offshore wind farm design: An overview. Business Information
Systems Engineering, 61(4):469–485, 2019.
[17] G. Mosetti, C. Poloni, and B. Diviacco. Optimization of wind turbine po-
sitioning in large windfarms by means of a genetic algorithm. Journal of
Wind Engineering and Industrial Aerodynamics, 51(1):105–116, 1994.
Page 71
==PAGE:73==
Optimization of offshore wind farms with variable base station
[18] Rajai Aghabi Rivas, Jens Clausen, Kurt Schaldemose Hansen, and Leo E.
Jensen.
Solving the turbine positioning problem for large offshore wind
farms by simulated annealing. Wind Engineering, 33(3):287–297, 2009.
[19] Davide Cazzaro and David Pisinger. Variable neighborhood search for large
offshore wind farm layout optimization. Computers Operations Research,
138, 2022.
[20] Martina Fischetti and Michele Monaci. Proximity search heuristics for wind
farm optimal layout. Journal of Heuristics, 22(4):459–474, 2016.
[21] Peng Hou, Weihao Hu, and Zhe Chen. Optimisation for offshore wind farm
cable connection layout using adaptive particle swarm optimisation mini-
mum spanning tree method. IET RENEWABLE POWER GENERATION,
10(5):694–702, MAY 2016.
[22] Davide Cazzaro, Martina Fischetti, and Matteo Fischetti. Heuristic algo-
rithms for the wind farm cable routing problem. Applied Energy, 278, 2020.
[23] Patrik Fagerfj¨all. Optimizing wind farm layout – more bang for the buck
using mixed integer linear programming. 2010.
[24] G. Clarke and J. W. Wright. Scheduling of Vehicles from a Central Depot to
a Number of Delivery Points. Operations Research, 12(4):568–581, August
1964.
[25] Davide Cazzaro. Unified optimization for offshore wind farm design. 2022.
[26] Martina Fischetti. Mathematical programming models and algorithms for
oshore wind park design. 2017.
[27] Personal communication. Cazzaro 2022.
[28] David Pisinger. Exact solution of p-dispersion problems. 1999.
Page 72
==PAGE:74==
Optimization of offshore wind farms with variable base station
[29] Kaushik Das and Nicolaos Antonios Cutululis. Offshore Wind Power Plant
Technology Catalogue - Components of wind power plants, AC collection
systems and HVDC systems. 2017.
[30] Miriam Noonan, Tyler Stehly, David Fernando Mora Alvarez, Lena Kitzing,
Gavin Smart, Volker Berkhout, and Yuka Kikuch. IEA Wind TCP Task 26:
Offshore Wind Energy International Comparative Analysis. 2018. Noonan,
M., Stehly, T., Mora, D., Kitzing, L., Smart, G., Berkhout ,V., Kikuchi,
Y., (2018), IEA Wind TCP Task 26: Offshore Wind Energy International
Comparative Analysis, Technical Report NREL/TP-6A20-71558, National
Renewable Energy Laboratory of the U.S. Department of Energy, Golden,
Colorado.
[31] David Cheriton and Robert Endre Tarjan. Finding minimum spanning trees.
SIAM Journal on Computing, 5(4):724–742, 1976.
[32] S. Kirkpatrick, C. D. Gelatt, and M. P. Vecchi. Optimization by simulated
annealing. Science, 220(4598):671–680, 1983.
[33] Nord pool. https://www.nordpoolgroup.com/en/. Accessed: 2021.
[34] Giovanni Mosetti, Carlo Poloni, and Bruno Diviacco. Optimization of wind
turbine positioning in large windfarms by means of a genetic algorithm.
Journal of Wind Engineering and Industrial Aerodynamics, 51:105–116,
1994.
[35] Davide Cazzaro and David Pisinger. Synthetic Instances for Large Offshore
Wind Farm Layout. 11 2021.
[36] Offshore wind farms. netherlands enterprise agency (rvo).
https://
offshorewind.rvo.nl/. Accessed: 2022-12-28.
[37] Jeff Bezanson, Alan Edelman, Stefan Karpinski, and Viral B Shah. Julia: A
fresh approach to numerical computing. SIAM Review, 59(1):65–98, 2017.
Page 73
==PAGE:75==
Optimization of offshore wind farms with variable base station
[38] Danish Energy Agency.
Thor offshore wind farm tender.
https:
//ens.dk/sites/ens.dk/files/Vindenergi/brief_tender_for_thor_
offshore_wind_farm_30march2019.pdf.
Page 74
==PAGE:76==
Optimization of offshore wind farms with variable base station
A
Appendix
A.1
Layout
Synthetic instances available wind farm area.
Figure 10: Layout of wind farm instance A.
Figure 11: Layout of wind farm instance B.
Page 75
==PAGE:77==
Optimization of offshore wind farms with variable base station
Figure 12: Layout of wind farm instance C.
Figure 13: Layout of wind farm instance D.
Page 76
==PAGE:78==
Optimization of offshore wind farms with variable base station
Figure 14: Layout of wind farm instance E.
Figure 15: Layout of wind farm instance F.
A.2
Optimizer performance
Evolution of the objective value in every tested instance.
Page 77
==PAGE:79==
Optimization of offshore wind farms with variable base station
Figure 16: Evolution of the objective value, instance A1.
Figure 17: Evolution of the objective value, instance A2.
Page 78
==PAGE:80==
Optimization of offshore wind farms with variable base station
Figure 18: Evolution of the objective value, instance B.
Figure 19: Evolution of the objective value, instance C1.
Page 79
==PAGE:81==
Optimization of offshore wind farms with variable base station
Figure 20: Evolution of the objective value, instance C2.
Figure 21: Evolution of the objective value, instance D.
Page 80
==PAGE:82==
Optimization of offshore wind farms with variable base station
Figure 22: Evolution of the objective value, instance E1.
Figure 23: Evolution of the objective value, instance E2.
Page 81
==PAGE:83==
Optimization of offshore wind farms with variable base station
Figure 24: Evolution of the objective value, instance E3.
Figure 25: Evolution of the objective value, instance F1.
Page 82
==PAGE:84==
Optimization of offshore wind farms with variable base station
Figure 26: Evolution of the objective value, instance F2.
A.3
Initial and optimal solution
Visual representation of the initial solution originated from the sequential ap-
proach where the BS is located one-third inside the wind farm area and the
optimal solution originated from the combined approach with variable BS.
(a) Initial solution.
(b) Optimal solution.
Figure 27: Initial and optimal solution of instance A1.
Page 83
==PAGE:85==
Optimization of offshore wind farms with variable base station
(a) Initial solution.
(b) Optimal solution.
Figure 28: Initial and optimal solution of instance A2.
(a) Initial solution.
(b) Optimal solution.
Figure 29: Initial and optimal solution of instance B.
(a) Initial solution.
(b) Optimal solution.
Figure 30: Initial and optimal solution of instance C1.
Page 84
==PAGE:86==
Optimization of offshore wind farms with variable base station
(a) Initial solution.
(b) Optimal solution.
Figure 31: Initial and optimal solution of instance C2.
(a) Initial solution.
(b) Optimal solution.
Figure 32: Initial and optimal solution of instance D.
(a) Initial solution.
(b) Optimal solution.
Figure 33: Initial and optimal solution of instance E1.
Page 85
==PAGE:87==
Optimization of offshore wind farms with variable base station
(a) Initial solution.
(b) Optimal solution.
Figure 34: Initial and optimal solution of instance E2.
(a) Initial solution.
(b) Optimal solution.
Figure 35: Initial and optimal solution of instance E3.
(a) Initial solution.
(b) Optimal solution.
Figure 36: Initial and optimal solution of instance F1.
Page 86
==PAGE:88==
Optimization of offshore wind farms with variable base station
(a) Initial solution.
(b) Optimal solution.
Figure 37: Initial and optimal solution of instance F2.
Page 87
