==PAGE:1==
Self-Organizing Maps and
Strategic Fund Selection
A Study on the Synergy of Machine Learning
and Graph Theory Algorithms
M.Sc. Thesis
Master of Science in Engineering
DTU Business Analytics
Department of Technology, Management and Economics
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Self-Organizing Maps and Strategic Fund Selection
A Study on the Synergy of Machine Learning and Graph Theory Algorithms
M.Sc. Thesis
January, 2023
By
Arnar Tjörvi Charlesson & Thorvaldur Ingi Ingimundarson
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus-
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title,
etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Published by:
DTU,
Department
of
Technology,
Management
and
Economics,
Akademivej, Building 358, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
www.man.dtu.dk
==PAGE:4==
Preface
This 30 ETCS master’s thesis was both prepared at and submitted to the Department of
Technology, Management and Economics at the Technical University of Denmark in partial
fulfillment for the degree Master of Science in Engineering, M.Sc. Eng. The work has been
supervised by Kourosh Marjani Rasmussen (Department of Technology, Management and
Economics)
It is assumed that the reader of this thesis has basic knowledge in the areas of economics,
finance, machine learning, and statistics.
Acknowledgement
We wish to extend great gratitude to Kourosh Marjani Rasmussen for supervising us
for this thesis and providing us with vital information and helpful guidance during the
process. We would also like to thank Petr Vanek for pioneering the foundation of the
investment funnel utilized in this thesis.
Last but not least, we would like to thank our families and friends for the encouragement
and words of wisdom throughout the journey.
Arnar Tjörvi Charlesson
s202024
Signature
Date
Thorvaldur Ingi Ingimundarson
s202033
Signature
Date
ii
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
This thesis examines the use of the unsupervised algorithm self-organizing maps (SOM)
and how it can be used as a supporting tool for traditional algorithms such as agglomera-
tive hierarchical clustering (AHC) and the minimum spanning tree (MST). The objective is
to investigate whether the SOM algorithm can enhance the traditional methods in strate-
gic fund selection with a focus on exchange-traded funds (ETFs). The selected funds from
each method were optimized using a stochastic conditional value-at-risk asset allocation
model. The optimal portfolios were evaluated with performance metrics such as the Sharpe
ratio, the STARR ratio, and the portfolio diversification index. Furthermore, it is inves-
tigated whether using these methods has the potential to outperform low, moderate, and
high-risk-seeking portfolios created by a professional Robo-advisor. The study’s findings
indicated that the synergy of SOM and MST did enhance the performance significantly
compared to the MST method alone. The combination of SOM and AHC did not yield
promising results, as the traditional AHC method outperformed the synergy of SOM and
AHC in all metrics except diversification. However, it is worth acknowledging that the dif-
ference in performance was not significant. The results showed promising potential as the
implemented methods yielded higher risk-adjusted performance than the target portfolios
on multiple occasions but suffered higher volatility for all methods.
iii
==PAGE:6==
Contents
Preface
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
1
Introduction
1
2
Literature Review
5
2.1
Exchange-Traded Funds . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
Modern Portfolio Theory
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.3
Applications of Graph Theory and Machine Learning in Finance
. . . . . .
7
2.4
Robo-Advisors
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3
Methods
15
3.1
Standard Risk and Returns . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3.2
Performance Measure Metrics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
3.3
Minimum Spanning Tree . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3.4
Agglomerative Hierarchical Clustering . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
3.5
Self-Organizing Map . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
3.6
Optimization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
3.7
Backtesting . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
4
Analysis
27
4.1
Data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
4.2
Baseline Methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
4.3
Implementation of Self-Organizing Maps . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
4.4
Comparison of Methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
5
Results
53
5.1
Performance Evaluation - NORD 5 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
5.2
Performance Evaluation - NORD 13
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
5.3
Performance Evaluation - NORD 20
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
60
5.4
Main Findings
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
63
6
Conclusions
65
6.1
Limitations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
67
6.2
Future work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
68
Bibliography
69
iv
Contents
==PAGE:7==
A Acronyms
77
B Appendix
79
B.1
Asset Distribution of the Subsets . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
79
B.2
Optimal Portfolio Allocation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
82
C Optimization with Bootstrapping
97
C.1
Performance Evaluation - NORD 5 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
97
C.2
Performance Evaluation - NORD 13
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
99
C.3
Performance Evaluation - NORD 20
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 102
D Code Files
107
Contents
v
==PAGE:8==
vi
Contents
==PAGE:9==
Chapter 1
Introduction
The practice of investing has a rich and storied history spanning more than 500 years and
continues to evolve in response to shifting economic and social conditions [1]. Investing
has probably never been as accessible as in today’s environment. There are now mul-
tiple trading platforms available for the average investor, and banks and other financial
institutions offer a wide variety of funds to invest in.
With all the emerging investment opportunities, it can still be costly for the general
investor to participate in financial markets. Different investments carry different types of
costs. Other than the loads and commissions investors pay for buying and selling financial
instruments, funds carry an additional cost called an expense ratio. The expense ratio
includes various expenses associated with management and administration, among other
fund operational expenses. Usually, it is deducted from the investor‘s returns on an annual
basis [2]. Actively managed funds are known to be more expensive than passive funds as
they have a portfolio manager who administrates the fund in order to outperform a specific
benchmark. In contrast, passive funds follow persistent long-term investment strategies to
match a benchmark. This contributes to why passive funds tend to have a lower expense
ratio than active funds [3].
For the past three years, the global financial environment has been experiencing volatility
due to a pandemic, a war, and other contributing factors.
In late 2019, a previously
undiscovered virus, known as COVID-19, emerged and rapidly spread among the human
population. As the virus spread, healthcare systems worldwide were overwhelmed, and
governments implemented various measures to mitigate its spread, including partial and
complete lockdowns. The resulting economic disruption profoundly impacted a wide range
of businesses and industries. Due to the economic impact of the pandemic, market risk
aversion went to a level not seen since the financial crash in 2008 [4] and the stability of the
global financial markets was greatly affected [5]. Approximately two years after the global
pandemic, another shocking event occurred. In February 2022, Russian forces invaded
Ukraine, a conflict that continues to this day. This event led to a worldwide breakdown
in the supply-chain system, leading to significant instability in the financial markets [6].
It is not uncommon for investors to seek out passive investments during times of market
volatility and uncertainty, as it has been recently. Passive investments, such as index funds
and exchange-traded funds, can provide a level of diversification and risk management
that may be attractive during times of unpredictability. For instance, the New York Stock
Exchange reported in 2022: „As the market endures another period of global volatility and
uncertainty, many investors use exchange-traded funds (ETFs) to manage their financial
risk“ [7]. An ETF is a type of investment fund that trades on an exchange like stocks do
in the stock market. They offer diversification as they can hold many financial products
such as stocks, bonds, and commodities and most often track an underlying index, e.g.,
the Dow Jones Industrial Average index.
Recent technological innovations in the financial industry have presented a new type of
financial advisor, the Robo-advisor. Robo-advisors are a digitalized investment platform
Chapter: Introduction
1
==PAGE:10==
that provides a lower and more transparent cost structure [8]. Robo-advisors have emerged
as an alternative investment option that minimizes the intervention of human advisors
by using machine learning algorithms and asset allocation models [9]. Their investment
programs typically include low-cost mutual funds and exchange-traded funds, and besides
offering asset allocation and diversification, they can automatically rebalance the client‘s
portfolios when needed [10].
The idea of this thesis was inspired by two master theses from 2020 by Auður Anna
Jónsdóttir [11] and Petr Vanek [12]. Their study aimed to create a subset of an investment
universe consisting of ETFs with great diversification potential using methods such as
Agglomerative Hierarchical Clustering (AHC) and Minimum Spanning Tree (MST). The
ETFs selected by each method were then fed into an asset allocation model. For their
study, they used a stochastic Conditional Value-at-Risk (CVaR) optimization model, with
methods such as the Monte Carlo and Bootstrapping to generate future expected scenarios.
Specific benchmarks were considered in the optimization process as targets, such as the
Danish mutual fund market and the MSCI World ETF, which is an index that tracks the
MSCI World index. Their results were promising and indicated good potential, and the
work in this thesis is highly based on the foundation of the previous studies.
The work in the previous studies can be identified as an investment funnel, which will also
be implemented in this study. An example of the general process of an investment funnel
approach is illustrated in Figure 1.1. The first step is gathering historical data, followed by
a due diligence screening for data validation and the removal of the assets that do not fulfill
the specific requirements in the investment funnel. Machine learning and graph theory
algorithms are applied to the remaining data for the next step to reduce the investment
universe and create a subset that has either a good diversification potential, performance
potential, or both. For the final step, the subsets are fed into an asset allocation model to
determine the weights of each asset in the optimal portfolio.
Figure 1.1: Example of the Investment Funnel Process.
Figure template obtained from [13].
2
Chapter: Introduction
==PAGE:11==
This research will build upon an existing implementation of an investment funnel, where
the findings of the previously mentioned theses were used as a foundation [14].
The
addition that will be implemented during this research is incorporating the Self-Organizing
Map (SOM). Given the results of the methods used in the theses discussed, it will be
examined whether the application of SOMs can be used as a supporting tool and whether
it has the potential to enhance the performance of the AHC and MST methods.
The raw investment universe of this thesis consists of 2994 ETFs. Data analysis will be
performed, followed by a screening process of the investment universe. After the due dili-
gence, the remaining sample will be considered the final investment universe. The criteria
used to determine the performance of each method will be the Sharpe ratio, the STARR
ratio, and the Portfolio Diversification Index (PDI). Three portfolios will be used as tar-
gets for tracking purposes in the optimization process of this study, each one with different
risk levels. Those portfolios belong to a company called NORD.Investments, which is a
Danish Robo-advisor. NORD.Investments will be referred to as NORD throughout the
thesis, and the target portfolios as NORD portfolios 5, 13, or 20, depending on which risk
profile is under consideration.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows: first, the core of the thesis will be
discussed, including a literature review. Thereon, the methods and idealogy behind the
algorithms used in this thesis are explained, focusing on the SOMs and comparing the
methods. The implementation and analysis of the methods will then be presented, and
the results will be discussed. Finally, conclusions will be drawn, including the limitations
encountered and suggestions for future work.
Chapter: Introduction
3
==PAGE:12==
4
Chapter: Introduction
==PAGE:13==
Chapter 2
Literature Review
The purpose of this chapter is to provide a review of the existing literature and insight
into the motivation of this thesis. This review will begin with an overview of exchange-
traded funds and their history, along with an introduction to passive investing. After that,
the Modern Portfolio Theory (MPT) will be presented, followed by a detailed discussion
of machine learning within finance, its rising merits in modern society, and the various
applications of its use within the field. Several algorithms will then be introduced and
talked about in depth. A new digitalized investment management platform, Robo-advisors,
will also be presented, and the chapter will finalize with a discussion about the Danish
Robo-advisor, NORD.Investments.
2.1
Exchange-Traded Funds
Exchange Traded Funds (ETF)s are a reasonably new concept in the investment world
and were first introduced in the stock exchanges in the USA and Canada [15] with the
first fund starting in 1993 [16]. Since the launch of the ETFs, they have grown rapidly,
especially from 2003 to 2021, and have become one of the most popular passive investment
vehicles. In 2003, it was disclosed that 276 active funds were operating under the concept
of ETFs.
By the end of 2016, the market share of ETFs exceeded 10% of the total
market capitalization traded on U.S. exchanges and more than 30% of the overall trading
volume [17]. Since 2019 the notional volume has grown 250%, from 101 billion USD to
250 billion USD [7]. In the U.S. alone, ETF vehicles account for more than 20% of the
market volume, and in March 2020, the volume traded peaked at 37% of consolidated
notional volume in the market. One of the reasons for the peak can most likely be traced
to the COVID-19 pandemic, where volatility and uncertainty were controlling factors
in the financial markets that caused a large portion of investors to seek relatively safe
investments [4], [5]. In 2021, the number of ETFs globally had increased to 8,552, resulting
in a growth of 3,000% in only 18 years.
For the year 2021, ETFs around the world
accounted for managing assets up to more than 10 trillion U.S. dollars [18].
In light of this spectacular growth, it raises the question of what an ETF is and why they
have grown so rapidly. An ETF is an investment vehicle that usually tracks a specific index
such as the S&P 500, a sector such as energy or the material sector, or a commodity such
as oil. They can pool together different types of financial products and, similar to regular
stocks, trade on a stock exchange. Not only are they used to track the items mentioned
above, but they can be structured to track basically anything, from individual assets to
investment strategies. Pooling multiple different securities together in the fund basket
gives the investor a certain degree of safety in diversification. Gary L. Gastineau argues in
his paper published in 2001 that average and professional investors seek simplicity when it
comes to investing [19], and that is where ETFs play a significant role. The trading rules
and practices of ETFs are those of the stock market, and the investor can buy or sell at
any time during the regular trading day.
Chapter: Literature Review
5
==PAGE:14==
ETFs are generally considered cheap investment options because they offer investors the
ability to diversify their portfolios at a lower cost than many other investment options. The
reason for that can be largely traced to the fact that most ETFs are passively managed,
which means that they are not actively managed by a portfolio manager who aims to beat
the market. Instead, as mentioned earlier, they are structured to track the performance
of something underlying, such as an index, individual industry, or specific sector. Because
they are not actively managed, they tend to have lower management fees. This factor
plays a special role in their cost eﬀiciency as they do not require research personnel and
analysts who would generate higher expenses that the funds must absorb and ultimately
be borne by investors in the form of reduced returns [20].
This approach to an investment strategy is often referred to as passive management. The
portfolio manager buys and holds all, or a representative sample, of the securities in the
target index.
This is essentially the primary factor why index-tracking ETFs tend to
have below-average expense ratios. Furthermore, since they do not change the allocations
frequently, they experience lower turn-over rates [20].
In addition, ETFs are often considered tax eﬀicient as they usually have a low turnover
rate and generate fewer capital gains. Therefore, ETFs can be an attractive investment
option for investors considering minimizing their tax burden [21], [22], [23]. In conclusion,
ETFs can offer investors a convenient and cost-effective way of diversifying their portfolios
and offer them exposure to a wide range of asset classes and sectors. They can therefore
be attractive to those looking for a low-cost, long-term investment strategy.
2.1.1
Passive Investing
In the financial markets, investors’ behavior can very broadly be categorized as passive or
active when it comes to their investing. Active investors try to outperform the market by
selective stock picking based on information analysis [22]. Those who lean towards active
investing engage in picking the right securities, often backed up by research on the security
or the firm issuing the security and market timing. Their goal is to generate a return supe-
rior to the market [24]. On the other hand, passive investors invest in a portfolio that aims
to replicate the performance of their target, for example, an index [24]. Burton G. Malkiel
discusses the diﬀiculty of consistently outperforming the market in his paper published in
2003. He further discusses that financial markets are informationally eﬀicient, meaning
that prices reflect all publicly available information and that it is diﬀicult for investors to
consistently achieve returns in excess of the overall market [25]. In another article, the au-
thor argues that the historical performance of active investors does not support the belief
that active portfolio management can outperform passive management with equivalent
risk. Furthermore, he suggests that investors may be more likely to achieve better results
through passive portfolio management strategies than active management [23].
One of the most famous investors of all time, Warren Buffet, has participated in the
discussion behind active versus passive investing. In the 2016 edition of the shareholder‘s
letter of Berkshire Hathaway, Warren Buffet discusses arguments he made in Berkshire‘s
2005 annual report. He stated that over a period of years, active investment managers
would underperform the returns achieved by passive investors. He mentions that the fees
contained within active investing would eat up a good portion of the profits and result in
passive investors scoring a higher return in unmanaged low-cost index funds. Following
his argument, Buffet made a bet with a hedge fund manager that his investment in his
Vanguard S&P index fund would outperform a variety of hedge funds selected by the
hedge fund manager after fees. From the year of the bet to 2016, the funds selected by the
6
Chapter: Literature Review
==PAGE:15==
hedge fund manager had aggregated returns of 2.9% to 62.8% while the aggregated return
of the S&P 500 was 85.4% [26]. Needless to say, Buffet won that bet as the hedge fund
manager conceded defeat before the actual end date of the bet. In a poetic way, the bet
represents the battle of two basic investment philosophies, passive versus active investing.
2.2
Modern Portfolio Theory
Modern Portfolio Theory (MPT) is a practical method in finance that provides a frame-
work for constructing a diversified portfolio designed to maximize the expected return for
a given level of risk. Harry Markowitz pioneered the idea behind the diversification of
assets in a portfolio when he presented the theory in the Journal of Finance in the year
1952. Since its publication, the theory has been widely used as an investment strategy
worldwide and has marked itself as one of the cornerstones in modern finance and asset
management.
Although portfolio formation can reduce some risks, it cannot eliminate them entirely.
Risks that affect a single stock or a small group of stocks are known as unsystematic (or
firm-specific) risks. However, almost all stock prices are affected in some way by uncertain
economic conditions, such as Gross Domestic Product (GDP), interest rates, or inflation.
For example, a sudden increase in inflation, which analysts did not anticipate, can affect
wages and the costs of supplies that companies buy, which can affect the value of the
company’s stock. This type of risk is known as systematic or market risk, as it has an
impact on a wide range of stocks and asset classes across the entire financial market [27].
Markowitz argued that by diversifying a portfolio by choosing an optimal combination of
assets, investors could dampen the unsystematic risk to a high degree or even eliminate it.
By doing so, the investor could achieve the best possible return, given a certain level of risk,
with the allocation of eﬀicient portfolios. Markowitz stresses the importance of portfolios,
risk, diversification, and the links between different types of securities. In particular, he
emphasizes the importance of diversification among securities and asset classes [28].
The famous saying „do not put all your eggs in one basket“ is highly relevant when it
comes to diversification. Poor performance by one asset can be mitigated by the perfor-
mance of another asset. Investors who hold a diverse portfolio can mitigate the impact of
unsystematic risk on their portfolio and have a higher chance of achieving their financial
goals.
2.3
Applications of Graph Theory and
Machine Learning in Finance
In recent years, machine learning has become an increasingly important tool for financial
analysts and institutions. The ability to automate processes and automatically analyze
large amounts of data has become more and more valuable with the rapid growth of
available data in society in the past years [29]. According to Statista, worldwide data
creation, capture, copying, and consumption has increased by 3,110% from 2010 to 2020
and is projected to increase by 180% from 2020 to 2025 [30]. Although machine learning
has been used in the financial industry for more than 40 years, it has only recently become
widespread in investment management and trading [31].
Chapter: Literature Review
7
==PAGE:16==
Financial analysts have spent great effort in developing models that can predict stock
movements, price financial assets, detect patterns and trends, and construct portfolios [29].
Having a reliable model to make predictions can be a valuable tool for making informative
decisions about the financial market. As mentioned in this thesis, the amount of data that
has become available is enormous. Machine learning comes in handy when dealing with
large data sets. A data set can be considered big if it consists of many observations or if
it consists of many predictors compared to the number of observations, or both [32]. The
financial sector generates vast amounts of annual data, such as market prices, financial
statements, and economic indicators. It allows investors to use machine learning to analyze
large amounts of historical data and extract valuable insights. Investors then use machine
learning algorithms to predict the performance of different assets and construct portfolios
from an optimal mix of assets for a given strategy by considering various constraints and
objective functions to obtain their investment goals.
According to a report by the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development
in 2021, the utilization of machine learning in the financial industry is expected to drive
competitive advantages for financial firms in areas such as asset management, algorithmic
trading, credit underwriting, and other fields of finance. They report that incorporating
machine learning is expected to improve financial firms’ eﬀiciency by reducing costs, in-
creasing productivity, and improving the quality of services and products. It is further
discussed that these improvements share the goal of delivering higher profits through bet-
ter decision-making, automated executions and improvements in risk management, and
overall better optimization of processes. Additionally, they note that machine learning
algorithms have the potential to uncover valuable insight from large data sets that hu-
mans may not be able to see with their naked eye, thereby informing portfolio managers
of potentially better strategies [33].
Hoang and Wiegratz studied in 2020 how researchers can apply both supervised and un-
supervised machine learning methods in finance. Their findings suggested considerable
benefits in using machine learning compared to traditional econometric approaches, for
example, by analyzing unconventional data to create superior and new measures of topics
related to corporate finance. Furthermore, they indicate that machine learning has signif-
icant potential for future research in finance. They report that in 2021 there were almost
eleven times as many publications compared to the annual average from 2010 to 2017, and
many of those reached the highest-ranked journals of the profession [34].
Machine learning is a more flexible and adaptable tool for financial modeling than linear
parametric modeling, as it can incorporate and generalize various types of modeling ap-
proaches resulting in a more general framework [31]. Several examples can be identified,
such as factor modeling [35], [36], forecasting of GDP growth using decision tree mod-
els [37], derivative pricing and hedging [38], and data-driven portfolio management [39].
Ankita Garg studied how machine learning applications such as random forest, regression
trees, support vector regression, and more algorithms could be used to forecast exchange
rates [40].
In another study published in 2021, Jonathan Pfahler also researched the
forecasting of exchange rates using artificial neural networks and XGBoost models [41].
Machine learning has also been applied in credit analysis; for example, Khandani et al.
(2010) explore machine learning algorithms, such as classification and regression trees,
to construct a nonlinear nonparametric forecasting model of consumer credit risk. As a
result of their study, they concluded that the machine-learning forecasts for credit events
were relatively accurate. They noted that current analytics, such as credit scores, were
less relevant for tactical risk management due to their slowly time-varying consumer char-
8
Chapter: Literature Review
==PAGE:17==
acteristics. In contrast, the applied models were notably more adaptive and able to pick
up the dynamics of changing credit cycles and the absolute levels of default rates [42].
The increasing utilization of machine learning models is anticipated to have several bene-
fits. Process eﬀiciency may be increased, and potentially more unbiased decision-making
systems may be developed [43]. However, challenges come with implementing machine
learning, including technical and ethical issues, such as the interpretability of the model,
fairness, safety, and privacy. Interpretability refers to providing transparent and under-
standable explanations to stakeholders on how the model generates predictions or deci-
sions. Fairness ensures that the model does not make biased decisions, safety refers to
the model’s ability to make safe predictions or decisions, and privacy is about protecting
the confidentiality of the data used to train the model [43]. Other challenges include the
quality of the data and often the quantity. Models can require a lot of computational
resources and can be diﬀicult to scale up to handle large amounts of data.
They are
prone to make errors in predictions and often need to be validated [44], [45]. Machine
learning models can also encounter diﬀiculties when working with high-dimensional data,
commonly known as the curse of dimensionality [46]. In 1979, George E.P. Box wrote the
famous quote, „All models are wrong, but some are useful.“ [47].
2.3.1
Minimum Spanning Tree
The minimum spanning tree (MST) is a concept from graph theory that finds a subgraph
of a given graph that connects all the vertices (nodes), without any cycles, with the
minimum total weight of the edges using algorithms such as the Kruskal algorithm [48],
[49]. It is used to identify links between the vertices in a graph where the vertices can
represent items such as stocks or cities, and edges can represent relationships between the
items such as correlation or distance. The MST is a classic and widely studied problem
in combinatorial optimization. Eﬀicient algorithms exist for solving the MST problem
that admits a solution, making it practical to apply to large graphs.
The MST has
numerous practical applications, particularly in the design of networks, and it also serves
as a valuable tool for solving other problems, such as clustering and classification. These
factors contribute to the importance and popularity of the MST problem [49].
Rosario N. Mantegna proposed in 1999 to use the MST algorithm to analyze financial
stock data.
He argued that the MST method could reveal the hierarchical structure
in the correlation patterns among financial stocks.
In his paper, Mantegna used the
Pearson correlation coeﬀicient to measure the similarity between the stocks. He proposed
a generalized metric using the correlation coeﬀicient to calculate the distance between
stocks. The MST algorithm is applied to a fully connected graph where the nodes represent
stocks, and the edges represent the calculated distance between the stocks. The results
indicated that the method could reveal the hierarchical structure of the stock correlation
patterns. Furthermore, the method selects a topological space for the stocks that could
be used to detect groups of stocks within the similar or same industry or subindustry
sectors [50]. Five years later, Bonanno et al. (2004) expanded upon Mantegna’s research
by examining the application of the MST to filter correlation-based networks with a focus
on financial equities. In the paper, they introduced a new distance metric whose values
range from 0, indicating perfect correlation, and up to 2, indicating perfect anti-correlation.
The researchers noted that while the Pearson correlation coeﬀicient only measures linear
relationships, the Spearman rank correlation coeﬀicient can capture both linear and non-
linear relationships as it measures monotonic relationships [51].
Chapter: Literature Review
9
==PAGE:18==
Esfahanipou et al. (2013) researched the use of the MST method to filter the financial
stock market. They proposed a method that chooses the graph nodes based on the MST’s
leaf nodes. Their findings suggested that the method could create a diversified subset of
the stock market and represent the same characteristics [52].
As discussed, the methodology behind the MST can be applied to asset management to
create a portfolio that contains uncorrelated assets with diversification potential. The
investor could use the MST to determine a minimum group of financial products such as
ETFs. The way the algorithm would work is that each node in the graph represents a
fund, and the edges between two nodes (the funds) reflect the correlation between them.
Using this method to construct a portfolio can help the investor to achieve a risk-averse
portfolio. The method will be further discussed and explained in chapter 3.3.
2.3.2
Clustering
Clustering is an unsupervised machine learning algorithm in which data points are grouped
based on similarity. It is a widely used data analytic technique as it can dissolve large
data sets into smaller ones and be a powerful tool for gaining insight into the data. One of
the more common forms of clustering algorithms is distance-based algorithms. They gain
popularity mostly due to their simplicity and adaptability to different scenarios. These
kinds of clustering algorithms make use of distance metrics, such as the Euclidean distance
or other correlation-based distance metrics, to measure the similarities of data points. One
particular method of distance-based clustering is the agglomerative hierarchical clustering
(AHC) method. It is a bottom-up approach meaning that all data points start as individual
clusters and then move up the hierarchy. That is, by iteratively merging the most similar
clusters based on a specific linkage criterion. This iterative process is performed until all
data points are contained in one cluster or a pre-defined number of clusters. Ideally, each
cluster will contain a subset of the data set that is internally similar but dissimilar from
other clusters. By analyzing each cluster, insight might be gained that is not apparent
when examining the entire data set [53].
Using clustering analysis for stocks and portfolios is a topic that has been researched
widely. Doherty et al. (2005) used the hierarchical topological clustering method on time
series of stock prices to identify the sector structure of companies [54]. Jaroonchokanan
et al.
(2022) use hierarchical clustering to examine the stock market during financial
crises [55]. Yusuf et al. (2019) used AHC to select a subset out of 40 assets for diver-
sification, and then they applied genetic algorithms to assess the weight of each stock in
a portfolio. Their portfolio yielded a higher Sharpe ratio and average return compared
to the S&P 500 index [56]. Boncheva argued in her article, published in 2008, that the
AHC method could assist investors’ stock selection and that the identification of company
clusters could be utilized in portfolio optimization strategies [57].
Based on the examples above and the general nature of the clustering methods, clustering
can be a viable option for portfolio construction. The process involves grouping assets
into clusters based on their similarity, allowing the investor to identify investments with
different characteristics. Doing so grants the potential of selecting assets from each cluster
that may be uncorrelated with each other, therefore diversifying the portfolio. Investors
could select assets from each cluster using specific criteria, such as the Sharpe ratio,
resulting in a potentially diversified portfolio that is performance-based.
10
Chapter: Literature Review
==PAGE:19==
2.3.3
Drawdowns of Clustering Methods
In general, determining the optimal number of clusters is not possible with absolute cer-
tainty and remains one of the most challenging problems in cluster analysis [58]. Several
methods can be used to assist in the process of selecting an appropriate number of clus-
ters produced by an algorithm. An example of the most common methods to determine
the optimal number of clusters includes the Silhouette score [59], the elbow method [60],
and the GAP statistic [61]. Zhou et al. (2017) proposed a new statistic to determine an
optimal number of clusters, the CSP index [62]. However, due to the method’s novelty,
the Silhouette score will be used for this study for its robustness, simplicity, and intuition.
One drawdown of the hierarchical clustering algorithm is that once a merger is complete,
it is permanent; it can not be undone [60]. In 2002, Jason W. Beckstead argued that
clustering algorithms will always seek to find some structure within the data, even if there
is no inherent structure present. He further states that irrelevant variables in the data
can negatively impact the algorithm’s performance, indicating that the clusters formed by
the algorithm may not be reproducible [63]. In an article published in 2012, Ira Assent
discusses the challenge of clustering algorithms when dealing with high-dimensional data
and how the curse of dimensionality renders the clustering algorithms ineffective [64].
Overall, clustering algorithms have certain drawdowns, like probably all machine learning
algorithms do in some way. Primarily, the limitations of clustering methods are defining
the optimal number of clusters, they can be sensitive to specific data, such as the scale
of the variables and outliers, and they are ineffective when dealing with data sets of high
dimensions.
2.3.4
Self-Organizing Maps
Self-organizing maps (SOMs) are artificial neural networks trained using unsupervised
learning. Unsupervised learning is a type of machine learning where the algorithm is not
given any labeled training data or explicit instructions. Instead, the algorithm discov-
ers patterns and relationships in the data on its own merits. SOM was first introduced
by the Finish professor Teuvo Kohonen in the 1980s and since then has often been re-
ferred to as Kohonen mapping. Inspired by how the brain‘s neurons are organized into
topological maps, he developed the SOM algorithm to create similar maps for artificial
neural networks. The algorithm produces a low representation of high-dimensional data
by performing dimensionality reduction and has often been used as a powerful visualiza-
tion tool for exploratory data analysis. The algorithm differs from other unsupervised
artificial neural networks in the way it learns. SOMs use competitive learning instead of
error correction learning, and additionally, it uses a neighborhood function to preserve
the topological relationship of the input data [65],[66]. A more detailed breakdown of how
the algorithm works will be presented in chapter 3.5.
The application of SOMs has been used in various fields, mainly for tasks such as data
visualization, pattern recognition, and text mining [67], but has also found its way into
financial asset management [68], [66]. One of the main advantages of the SOM is that it
can learn and represent the underlying data structure, which can be particularly useful
for exploratory analysis and discovering hidden trends. Another interesting feature of the
algorithm is that its complexity is linear to the size of the data, which makes them suitable
for large data sets [69].
In his article from 2001, Giedrius Stankevicius studied the possibilities of SOMs along
with ranging techniques for analyzing the financial stock market in the USA. He argues
Chapter: Literature Review
11
==PAGE:20==
that common trading strategies for screening companies provide more companies than the
investor is willing to purchase. He screened the stocks by using the financial ratios of
the companies and used the selected stocks as input to the SOM to generate portfolios.
His results showed that SOM could be applied to the analysis of financial markets and
portfolio construction [70].
In the article Financial Applications of Self-Organizing Maps published in 2000, Guido J
Deboeck illustrated the use of SOMs for selecting global mutual funds based on factors
such as returns, volatility, size of the funds, expenses, turnover rates, and more. He later
used SOMs to assess and analyze the credit risk of countries [71]. Deboeck argued that the
problem with most clustering techniques is choosing the correct number of clusters and
that different kinds of clusters may emerge by changing the desired number of clusters.
Another argument he made with classical clustering methods is that the interpretation
of clusters might be diﬀicult and that most clustering algorithms prefer specific shapes
and tend to assign data to clusters of such shapes even if there are no clusters in the
data [71].
Deboeck further argued that SOMs could produce better visualizations of
high-dimensional data and create topological representations of complex data relations.
Additionally, he argued that the SOMs could improve clustering, data projections, and
reductions of data and facilitate the discovery of knowledge through the detection of new
structures and patterns in the data. He pointed out that assumptions are often made for
traditional clustering methods, for example, regarding linearity, normal distribution, or
inherent clustering tendencies in the data, thus leading to a need for alternative approaches
such as neural network algorithms like SOMs [71].
In 2019, Sophie Emersson conducted a study on the application of SOMs and hierarchical
clustering for regime analysis by utilizing equity flows. The Irish CFA society recognized
the research and awarded it for its contributions. She investigated the potential of ma-
chine learning techniques in determining and defining various investor regimes for portfolio
selection. SOMs were implemented to identify the number of regimes for selection. The
findings indicated that the SOMs were a valuable and eﬀicient tool in the exploratory
analysis of large financial data sets and were useful in selecting an appropriate number of
market regimes [72]. Nair et al. (2017) used regression trees for dimensionality reduction
and SOMs to cluster time series of stock prices to generate stock trading recommendations
to assist investors in identifying profit-making opportunities [73].
Johannes Kepler examined the risk analysis of hedge fund strategies by using SOMs in
2020. Kepler applied the algorithm to the historical returns of hedge funds and explained
how investors can benefit from SOMs and how the algorithm can add value to their risk
management processes. The results showed promising potential concerning the Sharpe
ratio by implementing a buy-and-hold strategy from a portfolio constructed from the
algorithm. However, the author noted that a significant downside of the algorithm was
that the goodness of the results was hard to validate [74]. Vesanto et al. (2000) examined
different approaches to clustering the SOM, such as AHC and partitive clustering using
k-means. The purpose of the research was to evaluate if data abstraction by the SOM
could be utilized in clustering the data. The experiment indicated that clustering the
SOM instead of directly clustering the data was computationally effective [75].
In 2019, Ayan Mohamed presented a study on using artificial intelligence techniques in
investment strategies and compared their performance to traditional methods within the
Finnish stock market. The objective of the study was to develop a robust investment
strategy. Mohamed employed SOMs to demonstrate that portfolios can be based on their
financial characteristics to answer the different needs of investors. He then proceeded to
12
Chapter: Literature Review
==PAGE:21==
optimize the portfolio weights through the mean-variance optimization approach. Subse-
quently, he used Autoregressive Moving Average (ARMA) models to forecast the returns
of the portfolios. This study’s findings indicated that using SOMs was a viable and valu-
able method for forming portfolios [76]. Faridi et al. (2022) published a study on applying
SOMs clustering and genetic algorithms in portfolio optimization. They utilized SOMs
to perform stock selection, using the Sharpe ratio to determine the most desirable stocks
from each cluster. A genetic algorithm was then implemented to optimize the portfolio
weights, with a portfolio based on Markowitz’s theory serving as a benchmark. They con-
cluded that combining SOMs and genetic algorithms resulted in a more optimal method
than using Markowitz’s theory alone [68].
2.3.5
Advantages of the SOM
Mangiameli et al. (1996) conducted an extensive and detailed study comparing the per-
formance of the SOM to seven hierarchical clustering methods on 252 data sets. The data
sets included various imperfections, such as data dispersion, outliers, irrelevant variables,
and nonuniform cluster densities. They argued that hierarchical methods failed to accu-
rately define clusters for non-ideal data and reported that no single method was robust
over wide conditions of the analyzed data sets [77].
Their results showed that for 75.8% of the data sets, the performance of the SOM was
superior. Furthermore, they showed that when the data consists of high data dispersion,
SOMs achieved the best or tied performance of 88% accuracy.
They acknowledged a
limitation of the SOM being the network’s sensitivity toward the learning rate. Despite
this, sensitivity analyses only showed slight variations in results when the learning rate
varied between 0.05 and 0.5. They stated further arguments that emphasized the inability
of AHC, and other hierarchical methods, to determine the actual number of clusters within
the data [77].
They further pointed out that one major difference in performance between the methods
was that once the hierarchical clustering algorithms assigned a data point to a cluster, that
action was irreversible. In contrast to SOMs, the data points are continuously reassigned
during the learning process, and the final assignment of data points is determined at the
end of the training process. Their results showed that the SOM was unambiguously the
superior method in both robustness and accuracy [77].
As discussed thoroughly above, lots of research has been carried out by various authors
regarding the applications of SOMs and the opportunities they can offer within finance and
the selection of financial assets. It has been discussed that the algorithm can handle large
data sets and detect isolated patterns and structures in the data. It can both serve as a
clustering technique for the selection of assets but also provides the possibility of serving as
a supporting tool for other algorithms. Advantages of the SOM have been mentioned, such
as the ability to visualize data and having few assumptions and restrictions. Furthermore,
it has been mentioned that they are robust to noisy or incomplete data.
This thesis
will investigate how SOMs will perform as a supporting tool to potentially enhance the
performance of AHC and MST.
Chapter: Literature Review
13
==PAGE:22==
2.4
Robo-Advisors
Everything is evolving in one way or another in modern society, and the investment world is
no exception. With the rapid increase in technological progress, a new investment platform
has been introduced to the asset management world, the so-called Robo-advisors. Robo-
advisors are a type of financial advisor that minimizes the point of human contact. They
began rising to the surface during the financial crisis in 2007-08 and quickly became a
popular investment choice due to their accessibility, cost reduction, diversification, and
investment requirements [78]. Assets under management in the Robo-advisor section were
projected to reach 2.69 billion USD in 2022 [79].
Robo-advisors are a digital platform that uses algorithms and machine learning to provide
automated investment advice and portfolio management services. By utilizing machine
learning, they analyze an investor’s risk tolerance, investment goals, and financial situa-
tion, and based on the conclusion; they recommend a portfolio of investment products. In
general, the risk profiles and the needs of the clients are accounted for before a quantitative
model determines the asset allocation in a strategic way. With this process automation,
the operations management cost can be reduced significantly [80].
In most cases, the
Robo-advisors’ algorithms are based on the MPT. Robo-advisors aim to provide a di-
verse investment portfolio at a low cost, primarily through investing in ETFs and index
funds [81].
The advantages that Robo-advisors propose are that they are easily accessible via the
world-wide-web, and they can reduce the costs of financial advice concerning fixed costs
of salary and maintenance of oﬀice space. They offer the possibility of lowering minimal
investment requirements to participate in the platform, and fees are minimized as Robo-
advisors usually follow a passive investment strategy, such as investing in exchange-traded
or index funds.
In addition to recommending strategic allocation of funds, the Robo-
advisors can be designed to monitor the portfolios and detect if the risk begins to deviate
from the risk threshold. In that case, the Robo-advisor would re-balance the portfolio
allocation to bring it back to an acceptable risk limit [78].
Denmark has also captured this technological invention, and one of the companies in
Denmark that manages a Robo-advisor is NORD.Investments.
2.4.1
NORD.Investments
NORD.Investments (NORD) is a Danish company that offers a data-driven service for
long-term investments. The founders created the company as a reaction to the high costs
that banks and investment funds take for their service. Their service consists of a digital
platform that is run in collaboration with their partner bank, Saxo bank. Everything
is mostly handled automatically, minimizing the human touch of doing practical tasks.
They offer investment plans composed of carefully selected ETFs that follow the market.
Therefore, when investors invest with them, they are not buying individual shares or bonds
but a series of funds to spread the risk.
NORD strives to be transparent, intelligent,
independent, and inclusive. They believe in being open and honest with their clients and
have no hidden fees. Their platform is accessible to everyone, and all investors have an
equal opportunity to invest using the same strategy based on their chosen risk profile.
Their investment model is entirely data-driven, and their portfolios are unbiased. NORD
has averaged an annual return of 9.73% when considering a high-risk profile over the last
ten years and has low expense costs of only 0.6-0.8%. The company was listed on the
Nasdaq First North market in 2021 and has approximately 2,500 shareholders [82].
14
Chapter: Literature Review
==PAGE:23==
Chapter 3
Methods
This chapter presents a comprehensive overview of the methods and analytical techniques
utilized in this study. A thorough explanation of the data collection and analysis process
will be provided.
Various performance measure metrics will be discussed as they are
instrumental in evaluating the risk-return balance of different portfolio configurations.
Finally, the optimization procedures used to determine the weights of each fund in the
constructed portfolios will be discussed.
The investment funnel [14] was built upon the foundation of two previous master the-
ses [11], [12], which inspired this study. The AHC and MST algorithms, along with the
optimization model, were used from the investment funnel with modifications to match
the implementation of the SOM. Furthermore, the entirety of the implementation of the
algorithms and analysis was conducted in the programming language Python, and the
Python module MiniSom [83] was used for the implementation of the SOM. All of the
code files used in this study can be approached in Appendix D.
3.1
Standard Risk and Returns
Risk and return are fundamental concepts within finance and are closely related. Risk is
often used as a synonym for volatility in the financial world, which refers to the amount
of fluctuation in investments over time and is often used as a measure of risk. Conversely,
return is the gain or loss generated by investments over a period of time. Understanding
the trade-off between risk and return is crucial in the investor‘s armory.
The formula for calculating the daily return (Rt) can be seen in equation (3.1):
Rt = Pt −Pt−1
Pt−1
,
(3.1)
where Pt is the price at time t.
To determine the average rate of return of an investment for a given time period, the
geometric average formula will be used rather than the arithmetic mean, as the geometric
average takes into account the compounding of returns over time. The formula for the
geometric average ( ¯R) can be seen in equation (3.2):
¯R =
 N
Y
t=1
(1 + Rt)
!(1/N)
−1,
(3.2)
where Rt is the return at time period t and N is the number of periods.
Chapter: Methods
15
==PAGE:24==
Annualized returns are often useful for comparison of investments as it is the rate of return
that an investment has gained or lost over a period of time, expressed on an annual basis
( ¯RA). The equation can be seen in (3.3):
¯RA =
 1 + ¯RD252 −1 =
 1 + ¯RW 52 −1,
(3.3)
where ¯RD is the daily average rate of return and ¯RW is the weekly average rate of return.
The standard deviation of returns is a measure of how much the returns fluctuate around
the mean and is commonly used to assess the risk of an asset. It quantifies the amount of
volatility in a series of returns using statistical dispersion. The formula for the standard
deviation (σ) can be seen in equation 3.4:
σ =
sPN
t=1
 Rt −¯R
2
N −1
,
(3.4)
where ¯R is the average rate of return, Rt is the return at time period t and N is the
number of periods.
The standard deviation can also be expressed on an annual basis (σA) and can be seen in
equation 3.5:
σA =
√
252σD =
√
52σW ,
(3.5)
where σD is the standard deviation of daily returns, and σW is the the standard deviation
of weekly returns.
3.2
Performance Measure Metrics
Three metrics will be used to measure the performance of the constructed subsets and
portfolios. These metrics will provide insight into the risk-return profile and diversification
of the portfolios. These metrics will be helpful for portfolio performance evaluation and
comparison across portfolios. By comparing the risk and return of different investments
or portfolios, investors can make a better-informed decision about their investments and
how to allocate their wealth. The metrics will also be a necessary tool when comparing to
the benchmark, NORD. The metrics used for the analysis are the Sharpe ratio, STARR
ratio, and the Portfolio Diversification Index (PDI). The following sections will provide
detailed explanations of each of these metrics.
3.2.1
Sharpe Ratio
The Sharpe ratio is a measurement tool frequently used in finance to identify the risk-
adjusted return. The ratio was first introduced by William F. Sharpe in 1966 and has, since
then, been used by retail and professional investors worldwide for portfolio management.
The results derived from the formula are usually on an annual basis, where the inputs are
average annualized returns adjusted for the risk-free rate and divided by the annualized
standard deviation [84].
16
Chapter: Methods
==PAGE:25==
The formula used to compute the Sharpe ratio can be seen in equation 3.6
Sharpep = Rp −rf
σp
,
(3.6)
where Rp is the return of the portfolio, rf is the risk-free rate of return, and σp is the
standard deviation of the portfolio, or in other words, the risk.
Investors often use the Sharpe ratio as a supporting tool in decision-making as it gives a
decent comparison of the performance of different investments or portfolios and can help
determine the optimal mix of assets in a portfolio.
3.2.2
STARR Ratio
Another statistical measurement for risk-adjusted performance is the Stable Tail-Adjusted
Return Ratio (STARR). Similar to the Sharpe ratio, which uses standard deviation as a
risk measure, STARR uses the Expected Tail Loss (ETL), which penalizes only downside
risk. Thus, the STARR ratio can be seen as a more effective risk-adjusted performance
measurement [85].
The formula for the STARR ratio can be seen in equation (3.7):
STARRα =
Rp −rf
CVaRα (Rp),
(3.7)
where Rp is the expected return of the portfolio, rf is the risk-free rate and CV aR is the
Conditional-Value-at-Risk for a given quantile α.
3.2.3
Principal Component Analysis
The Principal Component Analysis (PCA) is a popular statistical procedure used to an-
alyze high-dimensional data and reduce its dimensionality. To do so, the PCA extracts
information from the data and stores it in a set of new orthogonal variables called principal
components. The first principal component explains the underlying data the most and
has the largest variance. The next components are orthogonal to the component before
and explain the underlying data as much as possible [86].
From each of these components, information can be extracted regarding how much of the
variance of the underlying data it explains. This is often interpreted as a ratio, which can
provide better intuition regarding the underlying data or be used for further analysis.
3.2.4
Portfolio Diversification Index
Common approaches to measuring diversification are using a correlation matrix of histor-
ical asset returns [87]. Rudin et al. (2006) provided a new approach to measuring diver-
sification, the portfolio diversification index (PDI). They argued that using a correlation
matrix was inappropriate for quantitative portfolio analysis because of its ineﬀiciency when
considering many assets. According to them, neither correlation nor clustering methods
provided a concrete quantitative measure of diversification since they are semi-qualitative
in nature. Their diversification measure is constructed by performing a principal compo-
nent analysis on asset returns and can be used with any collection of assets or securities.
They define PDI as a center of mass of the principal components’ relative strengths vector,
Chapter: Methods
17
==PAGE:26==
and the index evaluates the number of independent components within a portfolio that
effectively contributes to diversification [88].
The formula for the portfolio diversification index (PDI) can be seen in equation 3.8:
PDI = 2
N
X
k=1
kWk −1,
(3.8)
where k are the principal components corresponding to the number of assets. Wk is the
percentage of variance explained by principal component k. If a portfolio is non-diversified
and dominated by a single factor (W1 ≈1, W2≤k≤N ≈0), then PDI ≈1. For a perfectly
diversified portfolio, that is, if all the principal components explain an equal amount of
variance (Wk ≈1/N for all k), then PDI ≈N, where N is the number of assets.
PDI does not only measure the quantity of diversification, but it also penalizes the presence
of correlated assets. With that said, the PDI can decrease by adding assets that are heavily
correlated to those already in the portfolio.
The magnitude of the PDI depends heavily on the number of assets within that particular
portfolio. In general, the PDI does not consider the weights of the assets within portfolios.
Thus, to compare portfolios of different sizes more accurately, the returns of the individual
assets within a portfolio can be weighted by their corresponding portfolio weights prior to
the PCA. The resulting diversification measure will be referred to as the weighted PDI in
this study.
3.3
Minimum Spanning Tree
In this section, a detailed explanation will be introduced of how a minimum spanning tree
(MST) works and how it can serve as an asset selection method for an investment universe
and be further used for optimization purposes.
The MST is a concept from graph theory where the ideology is to find the shortest distance
between all nodes in a connected weighted graph. MST is a subset of edges of a connected,
edge-weighted undirected graph that connects all the nodes without any cycles being
created and with the minimum possible total sum of weights of the edges. In this study,
the nodes will represent the ETFs. Before an MST can be constructed, a distance measure
has to be chosen that will be used to create the graph.
Through the procedure of producing an MST, a subset of ETFs is created, in which the
goal is to select ETFs that are less correlated and have greater diversification potential.
Here the MST is created from a fully connected network based on a correlation distance
measure. A more detailed description of that particular distance measure will be presented
in the following section.
3.3.1
Correlation Measure and Distance Metric
The Spearman rank correlation is an appropriate measure of correlation for time-series
data of returns as it does not make assumptions about the distribution of data and is,
therefore, a non-parametric method.
18
Chapter: Methods
==PAGE:27==
The formula for the Spearman Rank Correlation (ρ(x, y)) can be seen in equation 3.9:
ρ(x, y) = 1 −6 PN
i=1 d(x, y)2
i
N (N2 −1)
,
(3.9)
where d(x, y) is the difference in ranks between x and y and N is the number of data
points. The method measures the strength and direction of the relationship between two
ranked variables, x and y. The coeﬀicient can take values in the range of [-1,1], where -1
indicates a complete negative relationship, 0 is a neutral relationship, meaning there is no
correlation between the assets, and 1 indicates a complete positive relationship.
A Euclidean formulation for calculating the distance between two points x and y based
on their Spearman Correlation Coeﬀicient [51] can be seen in formula 3.10:
d(x, y) =
p
2 (1 −ρ(x, y)),
(3.10)
where d(x, y) is the distance measured between nodes x and y, ρ is the Spearman corre-
lation coeﬀicient between assets x and y, and d(x, y) ∈[0, 2]. This formulation fulfills all
three basic conditions of Euclidean metrics [89]:
1. d(x, y) ≥0 with equality if, and only if x = y (positivity).
2. d(x, y) = d(y, x) (symmetry).
3. d(x, z) ≤d(x, y) + d(y, z) (triangle inequality).
For this study, the use of Spearman Rank Correlation Coeﬀicient will be used to define
the correlation between assets. Then a Spearman formulation of the Euclidean distance
measure will be used to calculate the distance between the assets.
3.3.2
Constructing the Graph
Once the correlation and distance metrics have been decided, the construction of the graph
can proceed. The typical notation of a graph is G(V, E), where G illustrates the graph,
V represents the set of vertices, commonly referred to as nodes, and E represents the set
of edges. The edges have a weight that is determined by the distance metric.
The Kruskal algorithm will be implemented to locate an MST within the fully connected
graph. The Kruskal algorithm sorts the edges of the graph in ascending order. Then, it
iteratively selects the edge with the smallest weight that has not already been added to
the tree to eventually form a tree with the minimum total sum of the edges’ weights. If
an edge under consideration forms a cycle within the tree, it is ignored, and the algorithm
continues to the next edge [48].
Once the MST has been formed, nodes only connected to the tree by one edge, often re-
ferred to as leaf nodes, create a subset of nodes representing a subset of ETFs that exhibits
low correlation and has a high potential for diversification. Furthermore, this method can
be repeatedly done to generate smaller and smaller subsets of a large investment universe.
Chapter: Methods
19
==PAGE:28==
3.4
Agglomerative Hierarchical
Clustering
The type of clustering method that will be implemented in this thesis will be hierarchical
clustering, a distance-based clustering method.
There are two different approaches to
hierarchical clustering, a bottom-up and a top-down approach.
The top-down approach is rarely used as the bottom-up approach is often easier to imple-
ment. Therefore, the focus will be on the bottom-up approach, known as agglomerative
hierarchical clustering. The bottom-up approach relies on the fact that in the beginning,
all the data points are identified as individual clusters, and the merging of the clusters
moves up the hierarchy until one cluster remains or the clusters have reached a pre-defined
number. In contrast, the top-down method starts with all data points in one cluster, then
moves down the hierarchy and splits up the clusters.
As with the MST method, a distance measure must be defined that calculates the distance
between data points. In this case, the Spearman rank correlation distance method will be
used; see equation 3.10. Before starting the clustering process, it is necessary to determine
the method for measuring the distance between clusters. These methods are commonly
known as linkage methods. The clustering process is initiated by identifying each data
point as a single cluster. Next, the algorithm calculates the distance between all pairs of
clusters using the chosen linkage method. Once the distances between clusters have been
calculated, the two clusters closest to each other are merged to form a new cluster. After
a merger has occurred, the distance between all pairs of clusters is recalculated, and a new
cluster merge will take place. This is done recursively until a single cluster remains or a
pre-defined number of clusters has been reached.
In the complete linkage method, the distance between two clusters is defined as the max-
imum distance between any two data points in the two clusters; see equation 3.11:
D(X, Y ) =
max
x∈X,y∈Y d(x, y),
(3.11)
where D(X, Y ) is the distance between clusters X and Y , and d(x, y) is the distance
between data points x ∈X and y ∈Y .
3.4.1
Cluster Analysis
A few methods are usually used for determining the optimal number of clusters. Most
frequently discussed are the silhouette score [59], the elbow method, and the GAP statis-
tic [61].
Proposed in 1987 by Peter Rousseeuw, the silhouette score is a robust technique used to
measure how well the clusters are separated. A good property of the method is that it
works for all distance measures and all clustering methods. The score is computed by
taking each data point in a cluster and calculating the average distance between that data
point and all other data points within the cluster, known as the intra-cluster distance.
The average distance between that sample and all data points in the nearest clusters is
then calculated, known as the nearest-cluster distance. The silhouette score for the entire
data set is then the mean of the silhouette scores for all individual data points. The score
ranges from -1 to 1, where 1 indicates a good separation while a low score suggests that
clusters are not well defined and there may be significant overlap [59].
20
Chapter: Methods
==PAGE:29==
The formula for the silhouette score can be seen in formula 3.12:
s(i) =
b(i) −a(i)
max{a(i), b(i)},
(3.12)
where s(i) is the silhouette score for data point i, b(i) is the average distance between data
point i and all data points in the nearest cluster and a(i) is the average distance between
data point i and all data points in its own cluster.
3.5
Self-Organizing Map
A self-organizing map (SOM) is a type of unsupervised artificial neural network often
used as a dimensionality reduction tool or for visualization purposes. Through the process
of self-organizing, it adjusts the weights of the output units based on the input data to
form a topological representation of the original data.
The algorithm is architectured
by neural architecture, consisting of a two-dimensional grid of neurons, often referred to
as nodes. Each neuron can be thought of as a micro cluster of the data. The grid is
usually rectangular, but other shapes can be used, such as hexagonal. It differs from other
unsupervised neural networks in the way it learns. That is, it uses competitive learning,
where neurons compete to be the best representative of the input vector [65].
In Figure 3.1, a visualization of a SOM is illustrated. The figure displays the structure of
a 9x7 map, the neighborhood (in red and purple) of a specific neuron (in beige), an input
vector (x), and how the neurons’ weights (w) relate to the input vector.
Figure 3.1: Self-Organizing Map [90].
Chapter: Methods
21
==PAGE:30==
Algorithm 1 demonstrates the pseudocode for the process of training a SOM. After deciding
the appropriate size of the map and the initial values of both the learning rate, η0, and
the neighborhood radius, σ0, the algorithm can be initiated.
Algorithm 1 Training process of a Self-Organizing Map (SOM)
1: Define the size of the SOM.
2: Set the initial learning rate η0 and the neighborhood radius σ0.
3: Initialize the weight matrix W of the SOM.
4: for t = 1 to T do
5:
Select an input vector xi at random from the training set.
6:
Find the best matching unit (BMU) of the SOM by computing the distance between
the input vector and each weight vector of the SOM.
7:
Update the weights of the BMU and its neighboring neurons using a specific neigh-
borhood function.
8:
Decrease the learning rate.
9:
Decrease the neighborhood radius.
10: end for
11: Repeat steps 4 to 9 for a predefined number of iterations or until the neurons have
converged and a stable configuration represents the input data.
First, the weights of the neurons (w), as seen in equation 3.13, are initialized,
wj = [wji, . . . , wjM] ,
i = 1, 2, . . . , M;
j = 1, 2, . . . , J
(3.13)
where M is the size of the input vector and J is the number of neurons in the map.
The weights represent the position of the neurons in the lower-dimensional space and will
be adjusted during training to represent the data. The most commonly used initialization
method is simply by random, that is, by assigning a small random value to each weight.
However, other methods have been developed that are more based on the underlying data,
such as using PCA, but with no guarantee of better performance [91].
Then, an input vector (x), as presented in equation 3.14, is randomly picked from the
training set and presented to the map.
x = [xi, . . . , xM] ,
i = 1, . . . , M
(3.14)
Next, the distance between each neuron and the input vector is calculated using a spe-
cific distance metric. The Euclidean distance is commonly used and will be used for the
implementation of the SOM in this study; see equation 3.15.
d(x, wj) =
v
u
u
t
M
X
i=1
(xi(t) −wji(t))2
j = 1, . . . , J
(3.15)
From there, the neuron with the smallest distance to the input vector is selected as the
best matching unit (BMU) and is often said to have won the competition, see equation
3.16.
BMU = i(x) = arg min
j
(d(x, wj))
(3.16)
22
Chapter: Methods
==PAGE:31==
After the BMU has been selected, the weights of the BMU and the weights of the neurons
in its neighborhood are updated and adjusted to be closer to the input vector, see equation
3.17. This procedure helps preserve the topological relationships between the neurons and
the data points they represent.
wj(t + 1) = wj(t) + η(t)hj,i(x)(t) (x(t) −wj(t)) ,
(3.17)
where hj,i(x)(t) is a specific neighborhood function and η(t) is the learning rate as seen in
equation 3.19.
The neighborhood function determines the size and shape of the neighborhood of a neuron;
that is, it determines the set of neurons that are close to a given neuron on the grid. The
neighborhood function used for the SOM implementation in this study is the time-varying
Gaussian neighborhood function and can be seen in equation 3.18,
hj,i(x)(t) = exp
 
−
d2
j,i(x)
2σ2(t)
!
t = 0, 1, 2, . . . , T
(3.18)
where dj,i(x) =
rj −ri(x)
 is defined as the distance between the two-dimensional position
of the BMU, ri(x), and neuron j, rj, in the grid of the SOM and σ(t) is the neighborhood
radius.
As the training phase progresses, the size of the neighborhood radius (σ(t)) and the learn-
ing rate (η(t)) gradually decreases to prevent the algorithm from converging to a local
minimum. The decay of the learning rate and the neighborhood radius can be seen in
equation 3.19 and equation 3.20, respectively,
η(t) =
 
η0
2t
T + 1
!
,
t = 0, 1, 2, ..., T
(3.19)
σ(t) =
 
σ0
2t
T + 1
!
,
t = 0, 1, 2, ..., T
(3.20)
where T denotes the total number of iterations.
The learning rate of the algorithm is used to control the amount by which the neurons’
weights are updated during the training phase. It is affected by the decay function to force
the learning rate to decrease over time to allow the algorithm to converge to a solution.
This process is repeated for a predefined number of iterations and configures the process
to be self-organizing. Throughout this process of competition and adjustment of weights,
the algorithm creates a representation of the data with lower dimensionality than the
original input data set. The result is a map that can be used for visualization purposes
and identifying clusters within the map [65].
Chapter: Methods
23
==PAGE:32==
3.5.1
Final Configurations of the SOM
Figuring out the appropriate size of the SOM is highly important, as it affects the final
result substantially. If the size of the SOM is too large, the map might be overly dispersed,
and if the size is too small, the map might be too concentrated. The final results in both
cases might lead to the algorithm losing its capability to represent the underlying data
with any significant structure. A group of researchers from a study done in 2014 [92]
argued that the appropriate size of a SOM could be estimated by using equation 3.21,
Number of neurons = 5 ∗
√
N
(3.21)
where N is the number of data points in the training data set.
By applying this equation to the number of data points within the training set of this
study, that is, the number of ETFs, the total number of neurons should be around 128.
However, due to the size of the training data set and to keep the map completely squared,
the size of the final map was chosen to be 11x11, or 121 neurons in total.
As mentioned before, the Euclidean distance, see equation 3.15, was then used to calculate
the distance between the input vectors and the weight vectors of the neurons of the SOM.
The time-varying Gaussian function, see equation 3.18, was chosen to determine the shape
and size of a neuron’s neighborhood.
Initial values of the learning rate, and the neighborhood radius, were found by hyper-
parameter optimization. First, and to get a sense of the range of appropriate values for
the parameters, the SOM was trained multiple times, for 20,000 iterations, by manually
tuning the hyperparameters. Then, the optimal parameters were found via a grid search
of 100 different parameter configurations, with the initial learning rate, η0 ∈[0.05, 0.5],
and the initial neighborhood radius, σ0 ∈[1, 2.5]. The optimal configuration of the SOM
was chosen as the configuration that resulted in the lowest quantization error (QE); see
equation 3.22,
QE = 1
T
T
X
t=1
x(t) −wi(x)(t)

(3.22)
where T is the number of iterations and wi(x) denotes the weight vector of the BMU
corresponding to the input vector x. QE measures the average distance between the input
vectors and their corresponding BMU, and thus, it assesses the quality of the SOM and
its accuracy in representing the underlying data [93].
The results from the hyperparameter optimization were to set the initial values of the
hyperparameters as η0 = 0.5 and σ0 = 1.0. The SOM was then trained for 20,000 iterations
using this configuration, and the trained SOM was then used for further modeling.
3.5.2
Modifications to the MST and the AHC
To utilize the information of the trained SOM, the MST and the AHC algorithms were
applied to the weight vectors of the SOM. That is, the weight vectors of the nodes in the
map were used as inputs to these algorithms. Since, during the training process of the
SOM, each data point of the training data has been assigned a specific BMU, the nodes
essentially represent micro clusters of the underlying data, which is then further utilized
by the application of these algorithms.
24
Chapter: Methods
==PAGE:33==
Slight modifications were made to the algorithms’ settings, specifically regarding their
measure of distance, for their applications to the SOM. The reasoning for that was the
distance measure of these algorithms was not found to be suitable for calculating the
distance between the nodes of the map. Specifically, since the weights do not correspond
to a time series and the need for a correlation coeﬀicient as an input to the distance
measure was not found to be necessary. Thus, for its simplicity and consistency with the
SOM’s training process, the algorithms were modified so that their measure of distance
was the Euclidean distance measure, as represented in equation 3.15.
3.6
Optimization
Portfolio optimization is the process of selecting a combination of assets and the relative
weight of each asset. The general idea is to maximize the expected return given a certain
risk level or the other way around, minimize risk given a certain level of expected return.
It is a vital part of the process in investment management as it helps investors to iden-
tify portfolios with effective risk tolerance that suits their strategy. For every investor,
it remains a headache on where and how much of their capital should be allocated to
each asset in their portfolio. Optimizing a portfolio can be done in various ways. One
needs to find an appropriate approach that suits their desired outcome and effectively
balances the risk-return trade-off. Arguably the most known method of optimization is
the mean-variance optimization by Harry Markowitz. It is one of his most significant and
revolutionary contributions in the field of finance that changed the way investors perceived
their portfolios. In his approach, the risk is defined as the variance.
For this thesis, an alternative option for measuring risk will be used, the conditional value-
at-risk (CVaR). CVaR has better theoretical properties and provides better incentives than
the traditional Value-at-Risk (VaR) [94]. VaR is a measure of risk that quantifies the po-
tential loss of a portfolio over a given time period. One limitation of VaR is its incapability
to capture events that happen beyond the quantile, the tail risk. In the real world, tail risk
can be a troublesome feature that portfolios are exposed to. Another limitation is that
it is not a subadditive measure of risk, meaning that the VaR of an aggregated portfolio
cannot be calculated as the sum of the individual VaR of the portfolio’s components. Fur-
ther limitations of VaR optimization are that it is a non-convex and non-smooth problem,
indicating that the solution is likely to be a local optimum, which can be problematic in
dynamic environments where portfolios are rebalanced due to market conditions. Another
factor is that VaR can be a misleading risk indicator where investors decrease the VaR of
the portfolio while simultaneously increasing the tail-risk [85].
CVaR is a coherent risk measure and considers a more comprehensive view of the risk of a
portfolio since it not only takes into account the maximum loss that may be experienced
but also the expected loss beyond that threshold. It is a convex and smooth problem
that indicates that it is more likely to have a global optimum rather than multiple local
minima, which is more robust in dynamic environments as financial markets are [95]. The
arguments for using CVaR instead of VaR are further backed by Martin et al. (2003),
who additionally stated that CVaR is subadditive, making it a convenient risk measure
for scenario-based portfolio optimization and, overall, an attractive approach [85].
Chapter: Methods
25
==PAGE:34==
3.6.1
The Applied Optimization
For this study, the stochastic optimization model created by Petr Vanek [12] in his 2020
study will be used.
The mentioned model uses generated scenarios of possible future
returns for each ETF to estimate the optimal portfolio allocation. Furthermore, it splits
the investment time horizon into equal periods and updates the portfolio’s allocation on
an ongoing basis. That is, prior to each period, it uses the generated scenarios for that
particular period to optimize the portfolio’s allocation. The model is not allowed to be
short, nor is it allowed leverage. It is only allowed to buy, sell or keep the current allocation.
The model’s objective is to maximize the portfolio’s expected return while containing the
risk at a certain level. In his model, Petr uses the CVaR for measuring the portfolio’s
risk. The risk level by which the portfolio is contained is determined by the proportional
CVaR of a benchmark portfolio, which is determined before the model in each period.
The resulting portfolio is, thus, a portfolio that is rebalanced periodically and aims to
maximize expected returns while following the risk level of a specific target.
It was decided for this study to rebalance the portfolios every 12 weeks, compared to
every four weeks, as Petr did in his study. This was done to simulate a more generalized
passive investment strategy. Furthermore, Petr analyzed two methods for generating the
scenarios in his study. The Monte Carlo method and the rolling Bootstrapping method.
The difference between the two is that the Monte Carlo method is parametric and thus
makes assumptions regarding the distribution of the underlying data, while the rolling
Bootstrapping method is non-parametric and uses resampling instead. Petr concluded
that the scenarios generated by the Monte Carlo method resulted in a more stable, less
volatile portfolio. Similar conclusions were made during this study; therefore, the Monte
Carlo method was chosen as the superior method for scenario generation and further used
for optimization in this study. The results of using the rolling Bootstrapping method for
the scenario generation of the stochastic optimization model can, however, be observed in
Appendix C.
The reader of this thesis is kindly referred to Petr’s thesis [12] for further information on
how the stochastic CVaR optimization model was created, the motivation and intuition
behind the two scenario generation methods, and an in-depth explanation of how the
model works.
3.7
Backtesting
To validate the portfolio’s performance with the implemented passive investment strategy,
a method generally known as backtesting will be used. The technique gives insight into
how well the strategy would have performed ex-post. Performing backtesting can allow the
investor to simulate the implemented strategy using historical data and acknowledge if the
strategy is viable. Ideally, the investor would want to perform the backtesting on a period
that reflects similar market conditions as the present market. For this study, however, the
model will be trained using data spanning four years, from the 1st of January 2015 to the
1st of January 2019, and backtesting will be performed on three years’ worth of data from
the 1st of January 2019 to the 1st of December 2022. The market conditions of these two
periods are, however, very different. During the latter period, a global pandemic hit the
world in late 2019, and Russia invaded Ukraine in early 2022. These two events had a
tremendous effect on the global financial market, as the volatility skyrocketed and market
uncertainty rose.
26
Chapter: Methods
==PAGE:35==
Chapter 4
Analysis
The core of every research is the analysis conducted throughout the process.
It is an
integral part of any study; its purpose is to examine and interpret the data used for the
work. This chapter’s content will present clear and understandable analysis steps. Firstly,
two baseline methods will be established to reduce the investment universe further by using
the MST and AHC methods. Then, a SOM will be implemented and trained, followed by
implementations of the MST and AHC methods on the map. These baseline methods will
provide a benchmark that will be used for comparison of the synergy from the SOM. A
more detailed analysis will be provided in the coming sections.
4.1
Data
This section will introduce the gathered data used for this study. First, the origin of the
data will be presented, followed by insight into the data, and lastly, the filtering process
of the investment universe will be explained. The data for the ETFs were collected from
www.ETFDB.com [96], a company owned by ETF Flows LLC that operates as a financial
education and media company. Data for 2,994 ETFs were collected and included the ETFs’
symbols, their names, expense ratios, investment regions, and their assigned asset classes.
Information regarding the daily prices and the daily traded share volume of the ETFs
was then collected from the financial website www.finance.yahoo.com using the Python
module Yahooquery [97].
Table 4.1 presents a summary of the regional and asset class distribution of the raw data,
where Table 4.1a illustrates the regional distribution of the ETFs. The data set comprises
a broad category of ETFs that invest in various financial markets. The ETFs are split into
15 different regions, whereas one of them is undefined. From the table, it can be seen that
the majority of the ETFs are invested in North America, with a total amount of 1,705
funds. The second largest portion of the ETFs are invested globally; the third highest
is in undefined regions. Middle East, Africa, emerging Europe, and Frontier markets all
contain funds of less than 10 each.
The asset classes of the ETFs are nine in total, and their distribution can be seen in Table
4.1b. By observing the table, it can be quickly noticed that equity ETFs dominate in the
field, with approximately 2,100 ETFs belonging to that category, followed by a runner-up
of 509 ETFs invested in bonds, and the third highest asset class is the multi-asset category
with 144 ETFs.
Chapter: Analysis
27
==PAGE:36==
Table 4.1: Distribution of the raw ETF data.
(a) Regional distribution.
Region
Count
Ratio (%)
North America
1,705
56.95
Global
376
12.56
Undefined
260
8.68
Developed Market
249
8.32
Emerging Asia Pacific
87
2.91
Global ex-U.S
78
2.61
Emerging Market
73
2.44
Developed Asia Pacific
71
2.37
Developed Europe
39
1.30
Broad Asia
25
0.84
Latin America
15
0.50
Middle East
8
0.27
Africa
3
0.10
Emerging Europe
3
0.10
Frontier Market
2
0.07
(b) Asset class distribution.
Asset Class
Count
Ratio (%)
Equity
2,101
70.17
Bond
509
17.00
Multi-Asset
144
4.81
Commodity
107
3.57
Real Estate
45
1.50
Alternatives
35
1.17
Currency
20
0.67
Volatility
17
0.57
Preferred Stock
16
0.53
4.1.1
Due Diligence
The data filtering was inspired by a master thesis conducted in 2020 by Jónsdóttir [11].
Slight modifications were made to the filtering criteria to have the asset universe slightly
larger. The required expense ratio was increased by 0.05%, the period the data had to be
available was extended by two years, and the average daily traded share volume was used.
The average daily traded share volume gives good information on how liquid the fund is.
The highest 75.00% of the most liquid assets were chosen for the process. A high value
indicates the fund tends to be liquid and, therefore, easier to buy and sell in the market.
If the value is low, it can mean that the investor might have diﬀiculties trading in the fund
as there are not enough buyers and sellers to facilitate eﬀicient trading.
• The expense ratio of the fund must not exceed 0.75%.
• Data must be available from 01-01-2015 to 01-12-2022 (approximately seven years).
• Average daily traded share volume must be greater or equal to 28,800 shares traded
daily on average.
The due diligence process is a three-fold process. The first step was to remove all ETFs
that had a higher expense ratio than 0.75%; the next step was to make sure that historical
data was available from 01-01-2015 to 01-12-2022, and the final step was to ensure that
the ETFs were liquid by screening the average daily traded share volume of the ETFs and
remove the bottom 25th percentile of the funds, that is, all funds with less than 28,800
shares traded daily on average. After the first due diligence phase, the investment universe
was reduced from 2,994 to 2,263 ETFs. After the second phase, the remaining ETFs were
876, and finally, after ensuring the liquidity of the ETFs, the final investment universe
consisted of 656 ETFs. By setting these conditions, it was ensured that the remaining
ETFs were low in expense, liquid for buying and selling, and made sure that enough data
was available for analysis. The following section will provide a detailed insight into the
final investment universe.
28
Chapter: Analysis
==PAGE:37==
4.1.2
Final Insight Into the Investment Universe
The final investment universe will be discussed in this section, and a comprehensive
overview is presented in Table 4.2. The ETF regional split is presented in Table 4.2a.
The table illustrates that North America is a dominant force regarding the ETFs’ regional
distribution, accounting for 64.9% or 426 ETFs, of the entire investment universe. The
second largest region with 61 ETFs is the developed market which is characterized to have
a high economic development, high per capita income, good standard of living, and devel-
oped infrastructure. Furthermore, they have a stable and mature economy where markets
are transparent and regulated. Developed markets include the USA, UK, Canada, Japan,
and Western Europe. 35 ETFs are classified as global ETFs, 27 as developed Asia Pacific
markets, 26 as emerging Asia Pacific, and 19 as emerging markets. Emerging markets
tend to have some characteristics of developed markets but do not fully meet their stan-
dards. The term refers to countries advancing economically, having low to middle per
capita income, and experiencing rapid growth. Emerging markets include China, India,
and Brazil. 16 ETFs are considered as global ex- U.S., and 14 of the ETFs are undefined,
12 in developed Europe, 11 in broad Asia, and seven in Latin America. Africa and the
Middle East have one representative each. It was decided to keep the ETFs with an un-
defined status of the region as the regional distribution is not used for analysis but more
to illustrate the broad regional distribution of the ETFs. The undefined ETFs could still
contribute to the portfolios.
Table 4.2: Final ETF distribution.
(a) Regional distribution.
Region
Count
Ratio (%)
North America
426
64.9
Developed Market
61
9.3
Global
35
5.3
Developed Asia Pacific
27
4.1
Emerging Asia Pacific
26
4.0
Emerging Market
19
2.9
Global ex-U.S
16
2.4
Undefined
14
2.1
Developed Europe
12
1.8
Broad Asia
11
1.7
Latin America
7
1.1
Africa
1
0.2
Middle East
1
0.2
(b) Asset class distribution.
Asset Class
Count
Ratio (%)
Equity
462
70.4
Bond
135
20.6
Real Estate
18
2.7
Commodity
17
2.6
Multi-Asset
11
1.7
Preferred Stock
6
0.9
Currency
5
0.8
Alternatives
2
0.3
Table 4.2b presents an overview of how the ETFs are categorized. As seen in the table,
most ETFs are tracking equity indices followed by bond indices or, respectively, 462 and
135. 18 ETFs are tracking real estate indices, and 17 are tracking commodity indices. ETFs
that track commodities usually track precious metals, crude oil, energy, and agriculture
products. 11 ETFs track multi-asset indices that typically track a combination of a diverse
range of asset classes, such as stocks, bonds, commodities, and real estate. The remaining
13 ETFs track preferred stock, currency, and alternative indices. Six ETFs track preferred
stock indices that track a type of equity that typically pay a fixed dividend to shareholders
but differ in that they do not contain any voting rights. Five ETFs track currency indices,
for example, an ETF that is long in USD currency but short in the global basket of
currencies or a fund that tracks a long position in the Euro and a short position in the
Chapter: Analysis
29
==PAGE:38==
USD. Lastly, two funds track Alternative investments. One of them is the fund RLY, which
is a fund that aims to provide investors with returns adjusted for inflation by investing
in inflation-linked bonds along with commodities, domestic and international real estate,
and companies that are publicly traded and operate in the natural resource business.
In Figure 4.1, the annualized return and risk can be visualized for all the ETFs and their
corresponding asset class. ETFs tracking bonds are, in general, very passive investments,
as can be seen by the blue color of the graph. Equity ETFs are more risk-seeking as stocks
tend to be more risky investments. The commodity market seems to have experienced a
decline as the ETFs tracking commodities are primarily placed in the figure’s red zone,
meaning they have a negative annualized return.
Figure 4.1: The risk-return trade-off of the ETFs for asset class distribution.
Figure 4.2 represents the exact figure shown in Figure 4.1 but for the regions of the ETFs.
Most noticeably, ETFs investing in North America seem to provide both the highest and
the lowest risk-return trade-off.
Furthermore, the regional distribution appears to be
widely spread out. By comparing Figure 4.2 and Figure 4.1, it is pretty evident that the
ETFs are more distinguishable when looking at their asset classes compared to looking at
their geographical focus.
Figure 4.2: The risk-return trade-off of the ETFs for regional distribution.
30
Chapter: Analysis
==PAGE:39==
The pairwise correlation between ETFs is presented in Figure 4.3a. By observing the fig-
ure, it becomes apparent that most of the ETFs are somewhat correlated, which may be
traced to the fact that most of them are tracking equity indices in North America. The
average pairwise correlation was found to be 0.38, which can be interpreted as a moder-
ate correlation, considering the underlying data. However, the correlation distribution is
relatively widespread and provides a potential for diversification for the methods that will
be applied in the following sections.
(a) Pairwise correlation.
(b) PCA analysis.
Figure 4.3: Correlation and PCA analysis of the investment universe.
PCA analysis was performed on the ETF universe to deepen the intuition regarding the
underlying data. The results can be seen in Figure 4.3b, where the combined sum of the
explained variance ratio by the principal components is shown. From the figure, it can
be observed that one principal component can explain approximately 55% of the variance
within the data. However, seven components are needed to account for approximately
80% of the variance, and 20 components are required to explain approximately 90% of the
total variance.
Table 4.3 shows the summary statistic and performance measure of the ETF universe. As
can be seen in the table, the average annualized returns of the investment universe are
3.03%. Further analysis of the data revealed that approximately 14.5% of the ETFs ex-
hibited negative annualized returns, while the remaining ETFs delivered a positive return.
The ETFs can be considered relatively volatile as their annualized standard deviation was
found to be 14.11%. The investment universe exhibits an average Sharpe Ratio of 0.36,
which can not be considered to be a very good risk-adjusted ratio.
Table 4.3: Informational metrics for the investment universe.
Investment Universe
No. of ETFs
656
Avg. Ann. Returns (%)
3.03
Avg. Ann. Std. (%)
14.11
Avg. Sharpe Ratio
0.36
Avg. STARR Ratio
1.14
Avg. Daily Traded Share Volume
1,600,680
Avg. Expense Ratio (%)
0.34
Chapter: Analysis
31
==PAGE:40==
4.2
Baseline Methods
Two baseline methods are established from the inspiration of the previous thesis conducted
at DTU. First, an MST will be applied to the asset universe to reduce the universe.
Secondly, the AHC method will be applied, and ETFs will be chosen based on performance
measure metrics, followed by measurements of portfolio diversification.
Defined by their structure, the two different methods are expected to generate two very
different subsets of the asset universe. The subsets created by the MST are expected to
exhibit great diversification potential. On the other hand, the AHC method is expected
to create more performance-driven subsets as the assets from each cluster will be chosen
based on their Sharpe and STARR ratios. In contrast, the subsets generated by the MST
method are based only on the correlation. The implementation of these methods was done
to establish a baseline for comparison.
In the thesis, ”Feature Selection in Asset Allocation” [11], the author noted that among
four different clustering methods that were analyzed, the AHC with complete linkage and
Spearman rank correlation was the superior one. For that reason, the AHC method in
this thesis will be implemented in the same way. The study compared the AHC and MST
methods by selecting assets from three to five clusters and three to four iterations of the
MST. For those reasons and for the sake of comparison, this study will aim to generate
subsets of similar sizes.
4.2.1
Minimum Spanning Tree
The minimum spanning tree (MST) was the first method applied to the investment uni-
verse. The MST method is utilized as a baseline method to eﬀiciently identify subsets of a
large investment universe exhibiting strong diversification potential. The selected subsets
will then be compared to the performance of alternative methods. 10 iterations of the
MST method were run, and each iteration reduced the asset universe significantly. In
Table 4.4, the number of iterations followed by the number of remaining assets after each
iteration and the corresponding PDI and average performance ratios can be seen.
The previous study used three to four iterations to generate subsets of approximately 27
to 50 assets. For this study, assets remaining after four to five iterations of the MST will
be used for subsets, and the size of the investment universe will be 21 and 43 assets.
Table 4.4: Overview of the number of iterations followed by the number of assets
remaining after each iteration and the corresponding PDI and average performance ratios
for the assets.
Iteration
No. of ETFs
PDI
Avg. Sharpe Ratio
Avg. STARR Ratio
1
281
23.03
0.35
1.12
2
138
22.99
0.37
1.25
3
82
22.41
0.44
1.54
4
43
19.18
0.39
1.38
5
21
13.08
0.34
1.14
6
12
8.89
0.31
1.08
7
7
6.04
0.56
1.89
8
3
2.88
0.67
2.19
9
2
1.91
0.08
0.07
32
Chapter: Analysis
==PAGE:41==
As seen in the table, the universe gets reduced significantly with each iteration, followed
by a lower PDI. That can be concluded due to the properties of the PDI as it can, at
maximum, be the number of assets it is generated from. By applying four iterations of the
MST algorithm, a subset of 43 assets with a PDI of 19.18 is generated, and five iterations
generated a subset of 21 assets with a PDI of 13.08, see Table 4.4.
Table 4.5 presents a detailed summary of the geographical locations and types of asset
classes when four and five iterations of the MST algorithm are applied to the investment
universe. The regional distribution is, as seen in Table 4.5a, relatively scattered around
distinct financial markets where 25 of the ETFs belong to North America, followed by
four ETFs investing in emerging Asia Pacific and three both in the developed markets
and globally. Five other regions are represented in the subset, as well as one ETF with
an unidentified region that could belong to any market. It can be concluded that when
four iterations are applied to the universe that there is a global diversification within the
subset. It is noted in Table 4.5b that a significant portion of the subset belongs to equity
and bond ETFs. Six other ETF categories all have one representative in the subset.
By looking at Table 4.5c, it can be noticed that North America is the largest investment
region.
Still, there is a decent balance in the regional distribution within the subset,
indicating that the subset is genuinely diversified with respect to being spread out between
different financial markets. Table 4.5d illustrates the distribution of the asset classes within
the subset generated by five iterations of the MST, where it can be observed that equity and
bond ETFs make up a majority of the subset, similar to when four iterations are applied.
commodity, preferred stock, alternatives, and currency ETFs all have one representative
in the subset.
Table 4.5: Subset distribution generated by MST.
(a) Regional distribution of the subset with 43
ETFs.
Region
Count
Ratio (%)
North America
25
58.14
Emerging Asia Pacific
4
9.30
Developed Market
3
6.98
Global
3
6.98
Developed Asia Pacific
2
4.65
Developed Europe
2
4.65
Latin America
2
4.65
Middle East
1
2.33
Undefined
1
2.33
(b) Asset class distribution of the subset with
43 ETFs.
Asset Class
Count
Ratio (%)
Equity
25
58.14
Bond
12
27.91
Alternatives
1
2.33
Commodity
1
2.33
Currency
1
2.33
Multi-Asset
1
2.33
Preferred Stock
1
2.33
Real Estate
1
2.33
(c) Regional distribution of the subset with 21
ETFs.
Region
Count
Ratio (%)
North America
9
42.86
Emerging Asia Pacific
3
14.29
Developed Europe
2
9.52
Global
2
9.52
Developed Asia Pacific
1
4.76
Developed Market
1
4.76
Latin America
1
4.76
Middle East
1
4.76
Undefined
1
4.76
(d) Asset class distribution of the subset with
21 ETFs.
Asset Class
Count
Ratio (%)
Equity
11
52.38
Bond
6
28.57
Alternatives
1
4.76
Commodity
1
4.76
Currency
1
4.76
Preferred Stock
1
4.76
Chapter: Analysis
33
==PAGE:42==
An analysis was performed on both subsets; see Table 4.6 to examine the average annu-
alized metrics of return, volatility, Sharpe ratio, and more informational metrics. There
seems to be no significant difference between the subsets in terms of performance metrics,
as they seem to deliver similar values across the metrics, but it can be noted that the PDI
is higher for the larger subset.
Table 4.6: Summary statistics of both subsets generated by the MST.
Small Subset
Large Subset
No. of ETFs
21
43
Avg. Ann. Returns (%)
0.92
0.88
Avg. Ann. Std (%)
15.93
15.04
Avg. Sharpe Ratio
0.34
0.39
Avg. STARR Ratio
1.14
1.38
PDI
13.08
19.18
Avg. Pairwise Correlation
0.13
0.19
A correlation heatmap of the subsets was created to visualize the similarities between the
ETFs; see Figure 4.4. As depicted in Figure 4.4b, a moderate degree of correlation is
observed among a number of assets, while a neutral association is prevalent among a con-
siderable proportion of assets, and few assets can be said to exhibit a strong relationship.
In Figure 4.4a, the heatmap for five iterations from the MST method can be seen. A few
ETFs experience very neutral or close to neutral correlation, while most of the ETFs have
a correlation between 0.2-0.4 or a moderately strong relationship. The correlation between
assets seems to decrease when the figure is compared to Figure 4.4b where the correlation
for the larger subset is presented.
(a) Five iterations of MST (21 ETFs).
(b) Four iterations of MST (43 ETFs).
Figure 4.4: Correlation heatmap of the two subsets created by applying MST.
34
Chapter: Analysis
==PAGE:43==
4.2.2
Agglomerative Hierarchical Clustering
The second method to be applied to the universe is agglomerative hierarchical clustering
(AHC). It will serve as the second baseline method for the reduction of the investment
universe. This method is expected to generate more performance-driven subsets, unlike the
MST method, which solely focuses on the correlation between assets. The previous study
picked three to five clusters and selected three to five assets based on three performance
measure metrics giving the subsets a range of 27 to 75 assets. For this study, three and
six clusters will be generated, and five assets will be selected from each cluster based on
each performance ratio, Sharpe and STARR. However, in some cases, the cluster size is
not large enough to pick that many assets, and in that case, a minimum requirement was
set that if the size of a cluster contained less than 20 assets, the assets would be selected
only based on the STARR ratio. Therefore, the subset size may differ from the ideal range
of 30 to 60 assets, respectively, for three and six clusters.
A cluster analysis was performed using the Silhouette score, discussed in chapter 3, to
identify the optimal number of clusters. The score is computed in the range of [-1,1],
where 1 indicates a good separation while a low score suggests the clusters are not well
defined.
Figure 4.5: Computed Silhouette score for the AHC method for 15 clusters.
From Figure 4.5, it can be seen that the highest score is for three clusters and slightly
declines until it reaches six clusters. From there, the score stays relatively stable until
it reaches 11 clusters; from there, it decreases dramatically. The scoring metric fits well
within the idea of creating three and six clusters compared to the previous studies, as the
score is not reducing significantly for that range of clusters.
Chapter: Analysis
35
==PAGE:44==
An analysis of the clusters, both when three and six clusters are chosen, will now be
presented. The three clusters were examined concerning asset class distribution, regional
distribution, density, and internal correlation. The results can be seen in Figure 4.6.
(a) Density.
(b) Asset class distribution.
(c) Pairwise correlation.
(d) Regional distribution.
Figure 4.6: Cluster analysis of three clusters constructed using AHC.
From Figure 4.6a, it can be demonstrated that cluster 2 is significantly larger than the
other clusters, containing 505 assets. Cluster 3 is the second largest, with 147 assets, and
the remaining four assets are within cluster 1. The asset class and regional distribution
within each cluster can also be noted in Figure 4.6b and Figure 4.6d. Cluster 1 contains
currency, commodity, and bond ETFs. Cluster 2 is dominated by equity ETFs and holds
a small share of bonds and other asset classes. Cluster 3 is partially dominated by bond
ETFs or approximately 71%. It also contains equity, real estate, commodity, currency, and
alternative ETFs. Figure 4.6d also reveals that a greater part of all the clusters is heavily
invested in North America. Clusters 2 and 3 show a mixed geographical investment region,
while cluster 1 only invests in North America and global markets. The internal correlation
of each cluster can be seen in Figure 4.6c. From the figure, it can be seen that cluster
1 exhibits negligible correlation compared to the other clusters, indicating that the ETFs
within that cluster are very different from each other. The mean pairwise correlation of
cluster 2 is slightly lower than 0.6, while for cluster 3, it is just below 0.4. The distribution
of correlation within cluster 3 is quite widespread, indicating it contains both ETFs that
have low to negative correlation and up to significant correlation. The pairwise correlation
of ETFs within cluster 2 can be seen as moderate to high.
36
Chapter: Analysis
==PAGE:45==
Table 4.7 contains average summary statistics of the clusters. The table shows that cluster
3 has the highest Sharpe ratio of 0.55, followed by cluster 1 with a Sharpe ratio of 0.49.
Furthermore, it can be seen that cluster 2 has both the lowest Sharpe and STARR ratios.
Additionally, it is worth pointing out that cluster 1 has a negative average annualized
return which can be explained by the presence of one ETF in the cluster that has negative
annualized returns that dominates the returns of the other ETFs. The PDI of clusters 2
and 3 is similar, but it is interesting to see that the PDI of cluster 1 is 3.17 out of four
ETFs. This can indicate that those ETFs are quite diverse, which is further supported by
the low average pairwise correlation of the cluster.
Table 4.7: Average statistics and size of each cluster.
Cluster 1
Cluster 2
Cluster 3
No. of ETFs
4
505
147
Avg. Ann. Returns (%)
-0.09
3.61
1.14
Avg. Ann. Std (%)
8.86
15.88
8.18
Avg. Sharpe Ratio
0.49
0.30
0.55
Avg. STARR Ratio
1.69
0.86
2.07
PDI
3.17
13.27
14.62
Avg. Pairwise Correlation
0.14
0.60
0.37
A total of 24 assets were selected based on the performance criteria of Sharpe and STARR
ratio, and a summary of the performance metrics are presented in Table 4.8. As seen in the
table, only four assets were selected from cluster 1 due to the cluster size. Furthermore, it
can be seen that the assets selected from that cluster exhibit both the lowest annualized
returns on average and the highest annualized volatility. The assets selected from cluster
2 have significantly higher profit potential, in terms of average annualized returns, when
compared to the assets selected from cluster 3. However, the assets in cluster 2 exhibit
much more volatility, and thus the performance ratios are more favorable for the assets
selected from cluster 3. Furthermore, the average pairwise correlation within each cluster
indicates that the assets selected from cluster 2 are more similar than those selected from
the other clusters.
Table 4.8: Average statistics and size of the selected assets from each cluster.
Cluster 1
Cluster 2
Cluster 3
No. of ETFs
4
10
10
Avg. Ann. Returns (%)
-0.09
7.02
1.36
Avg. Ann. Std (%)
8.86
7.33
0.52
Avg. Sharpe Ratio
0.49
0.97
3.25
Avg. STARR Ratio
1.69
2.98
13.91
PDI
3.17
4.04
7.46
Avg. Pairwise Correlation
0.14
0.41
0.11
Chapter: Analysis
37
==PAGE:46==
Next, the analysis of the six clusters generated by the AHC will be presented. The results
from the analysis can be seen in Figure 4.7.
(a) Density.
(b) Asset class distribution.
(c) Pairwise correlation.
(d) Regional distribution.
Figure 4.7: Cluster analysis of six clusters constructed using AHC.
Figure 4.7a shows that cluster 2 has a significantly higher number of ETFs than any
other cluster, containing 505 ETFs, and is constructed primarily from equity ETFs, as
can be seen in Figure 4.7b. Cluster 6 is solely built from bond ETFs while clusters 1, 3,
and 5 predominantly comprise bond ETFs as well as containing a small portion of other
ETF categories. Cluster 4 is mixed with bond, commodity, currency, and equity ETFs.
Furthermore, it can be noticed that both clusters 1 and 2 are identical from when only
three clusters were constructed. From Figure 4.7d, the regional distribution of each cluster
can be observed. All of the clusters, except clusters 4 and 5, contain a significant portion
of ETFs that invest in North America. Clusters 2 and 4 seem to have relatively diversified
geographical regions, while clusters 1 and 5 are only invested in two markets, and clusters
3 and 6 are in three markets. Figure 4.7c displays the internal pairwise correlation of the
six clusters. The mean pairwise correlation of clusters 2, 3, and 4 are significantly higher
than for clusters 1 and 5, which exhibit negligible to low internal similarities, and cluster 6
exhibits low to moderate similarities. Furthermore, Figure 4.7c shows that the distribution
of the internal correlation for clusters 2, 3, and 4 is quite wide, similar to cluster 3 in Figure
4.6c, indicating they contain ETFs that are of negligible to high similarities.
38
Chapter: Analysis
==PAGE:47==
In Table 4.9, it can be noted that cluster 6, which only contains bond ETFs, has the highest
average Sharpe and STARR ratios of 3.13 and 13.28, respectively. On the other hand,
cluster 4 has the lowest performance ratios of all the clusters, both of which are negative.
Furthermore, cluster 5 delivers the second highest performance ratios, and clusters 1, 2,
and 3 have relatively poor ratios, with Sharpe ratios ranging from 0.30 to 0.49 and STARR
ratios ranging from 0.86 to 1.69. Additionally, it can be seen that the average internal
pairwise correlation for clusters 1, 5, and 6 is much lower than for the other clusters,
indicating that they are more poorly constructed than the other three clusters.
Table 4.9: Average statistics and size of each cluster.
Cluster 1
Cluster 2
Cluster 3
Cluster 4
Cluster 5
Cluster 6
No. of ETFs
4
505
106
28
3
10
Avg. Ann. Returns (%)
-0.09
3.61
1.67
-0.78
0.11
1.18
Avg. Ann. Std (%)
8.86
15.88
5.80
20.60
2.29
0.48
Avg. Sharpe Ratio
0.49
0.30
0.46
-0.05
0.90
3.13
Avg. STARR Ratio
1.69
0.86
1.56
-0.16
3.38
13.28
PDI
3.17
13.27
8.53
3.75
2.61
7.41
Avg. Pairwise Corr.
0.14
0.60
0.53
0.57
0.13
0.13
When dividing the ETFs into six clusters, a subset of 42 ETFs was formed. The perfor-
mance metrics of each cluster are displayed in Table 4.10. The assets selected from cluster
6 stand out with a strong Sharpe ratio of 4.30 and a STARR ratio of 19.93, while the
assets selected from clusters 1 and 4 incorporate poor Sharpe ratios of 0.49 and 0.10 and
STARR ratios of 1.69 and 0.35, respectively. Clusters 2, 3, and 5 all exhibit moderate
performance ratios. Furthermore, it can be seen that the assets selected from cluster 4
have the highest average pairwise correlation.
Table 4.10: Average statistics of the selected assets from each cluster.
Cluster 1
Cluster 2
Cluster 3
Cluster 4
Cluster 5
Cluster 6
No. of ETFs
4
10
10
10
3
5.00
Avg. Ann. Returns (%)
-0.09
7.02
1.70
2.14
0.11
1.18
Avg. Ann. Std (%)
8.86
7.33
1.48
17.93
2.29
0.27
Avg. Sharpe Ratio
0.49
0.97
1.21
0.10
0.90
4.30
Avg. STARR Ratio
1.69
2.98
4.34
0.35
3.38
19.93
PDI
3.17
4.04
4.13
2.26
2.61
3.84
Avg. Pairwise Corr.
0.14
0.41
0.46
0.62
0.13
0.15
Chapter: Analysis
39
==PAGE:48==
Correlation analysis of the three and six clusters can be observed in Figures 4.8a and
Figure 4.8b, respectively. It can be seen that a significant portion of the universe subset
shows a neutral correlation, while several ETFs display a strong relationship. Additionally,
a few ETFs exhibit a negative association, and the number of strong relationships increases
when the number of clusters is raised, that is, for the larger subset.
(a) Three clusters (24 ETFs).
(b) Six clusters (42 ETFs).
Figure 4.8: Correlation heatmap of the two subsets created by AHC.
Table 4.11 presents a detailed summary of the ETFs’ geographically invested locations
and types of asset classes found within both subsets constructed by applying AHC to the
investment universe. The universe was clustered into three clusters for the smaller subset,
and for the larger subset, it was clustered into six clusters.
The regional distribution for the larger subset is displayed in Table 4.11a. From the table,
it is noticeable that North America and developed markets account for more than 60%
of the subset.
ETFs represented by a global region are the third most frequent, with
14.29% of the ETFs, followed by undefined region-invested ETFs. Three other regions
are present within the subset, representing four ETFs in total. From these numbers, it
can be concluded that the larger subset constructed by AHC is somewhat diversified in
terms of geography. However, it heavily favors bond ETFs. From Table 4.11b, it can
be seen that bond ETFs account for the majority of the larger subsets.
Commodity
and equity ETFs are the second and third most frequent ETFs, representing six and five
ETFs, respectively. Furthermore, currency and alternative ETFs have representatives in
the subset as well. The regional distribution of the smaller subset can be seen by looking
at Table 4.11c. It can be noticed that the distribution is much alike the distribution of
the larger subset. However, ETFs represented by the undefined region and developed Asia
Pacific is not present in the smaller subset. Table 4.11d illustrates the distribution of
the asset classes within the smaller subset constructed with AHC. Approximately 80%
of the subset are bond ETFs, while the rest is represented by three other asset classes,
equity being the second most frequent. The smaller subset constructed with AHC exhibits
somewhat diversity regarding geographically invested locations. However, it heavily favors
bond ETFs as well.
40
Chapter: Analysis
==PAGE:49==
Table 4.11: Subset distribution generated by AHC.
(a) Regional distribution of subset with 42
ETFs.
Region
Count
Ratio (%)
North America
18
42.86
Developed Market
9
21.43
Global
6
14.29
Undefined
5
11.90
Emerging Market
2
4.76
Developed Asia Pacific
1
2.38
Global ex-U.S
1
2.38
(b) Asset class distribution of subset with 42
ETFs.
Asset Class
Count
Ratio (%)
Bond
28
66.67
Commodity
6
14.29
Equity
5
11.90
Currency
2
4.76
Alternatives
1
2.38
(c) Regional distribution of subset with 24
ETFs.
Region
Count
Ratio (%)
North America
14
58.33
Developed Market
4
16.67
Global
3
12.50
Emerging Market
2
8.33
Global ex-U.S
1
4.17
(d) Asset class distribution of subset with 24
ETFs.
Asset Class
Count
Ratio (%)
Bond
19
79.17
Equity
3
12.50
Commodity
1
4.17
Currency
1
4.17
Table 4.12 compares summary statistics for the two constructed subsets using AHC. From
the table, it can be noticed that the smaller subset has, on average, both higher annualized
returns and lower annualized volatility. The performance ratios are significantly higher
for the smaller subset as well. However, the PDI of the larger subset slightly exceeds the
PDI of the smaller one but has a slightly higher average pairwise correlation.
Table 4.12: Summary statistics of both subsets generated by AHC.
Small Subset
Large Subset
No. of ETFs
24
42
Avg. Ann. Returns (%)
3.47
2.72
Avg. Ann. Std (%)
4.75
7.41
Avg. Sharpe Ratio
1.84
1.17
Avg. STARR Ratio
7.32
4.60
PDI
12.53
13.79
Avg. Pairwise Correlation
0.09
0.12
4.3
Implementation of Self-Organizing
Maps
Lastly, the Self-organizing maps (SOM) will be applied to the investment universe. From
there, MST and AHC will be applied to the SOM. The objective here will be to examine
whether SOM can enhance the asset selection process of the MST and the AHC to improve
their results further when the generated subsets are fed into an optimization model. The
SOM is considered a preprocessing tool that reduces the data dimensionality and eﬀiciently
captures the topological structure of the underlying data to identify hidden patterns that
the other methods might have missed.
Chapter: Analysis
41
==PAGE:50==
First, the weight vectors of the SOM are initialized to small random values, and the input
data is presented to the SOM. With the input data and randomly initialized weight vector,
a pre-training map can be generated as presented in Figure 4.9. It can be seen in the figure
that, before the SOM has been trained, the ETFs are relatively scattered around the map
in terms of their asset classes.
Figure 4.9: How the SOM looks like after initializing random weights pre-training.
The algorithm trains through an iterative process where input vectors are randomly pre-
sented to the network, and the node whose weight vector is closest to the corresponding
input vector is identified; it is often referred to as the best-matching unit or winning node.
The weights of the winning node and its neighboring nodes are then updated to be closer
to the input vector. This process is recursively done through the training process. Once
the training has finished, each input vector is mapped to the node whose weight vector is
closest to it. This results in a two-dimensional map of the input data where similar input
vectors are grouped together; see Figure 4.10. As seen in the figure, after the training,
the map exhibits some structure, and ETFs of similar asset classes have been mapped
closely together. For example, the majority of the bond ETFs have been mapped to the
South-West corner, and the commodity ETFs are mostly located in the North-West corner.
Figure 4.10: How the SOM looks like post-training phase.
42
Chapter: Analysis
==PAGE:51==
4.3.1
SOM-MST
Here the MST method will be applied to the SOM. The idea is to select the active nodes
after the training phase, meaning the nodes are not empty. Once those nodes have been
selected, an MST is applied to the active nodes to generate a subset of the asset universe.
After the first iteration, the asset universe has been reduced from 656 assets to 186 assets,
and after only two iterations, the universe consists of 92 assets.
Table 4.13: MST iterations followed by the number of nodes and ETFs remaining after
each iteration and the corresponding PDI and average performance ratios for the ETFs.
Iteration
No. of Nodes
No. of ETFs
PDI
Avg. Sharpe Ratio
Avg. STARR Ratio
1
57
186
20.77
0.31
1.09
2
27
92
14.57
0.27
0.83
3
14
51
9.22
0.24
0.75
4
7
27
5.81
0.21
0.74
5
4
12
3.40
0.16
0.66
6
3
11
2.90
0.19
0.79
7
2
8
2.09
0.36
1.34
For the smaller subset of ETFs, two iterations of the MST algorithm were applied to the
SOM, resulting in 27 nodes. The average Sharpe and STARR ratios of the remaining
assets mapped to these nodes are 0.27 and 0.83, respectively, as can be seen in Table 4.13.
Figure 4.11 visualizes the subset of the nodes after the two iterations of the MST algorithm.
As seen in the figure, most of the remaining nodes are within the equity region of the map.
For the asset selection, the asset with the highest STARR Ratio was selected from each
remaining node, resulting in a subset of 27 assets.
Figure 4.11: Visualization of the smaller subset of nodes for two iterations of the MST
algorithm on the SOM.
For the larger subset of the ETFs, the MST algorithm was only applied once to the SOM,
resulting in 57 nodes. As seen in Table 4.13, the average Sharpe and STARR ratios of the
remaining assets mapped to these nodes are 0.31 and 1.09, respectively.
Chapter: Analysis
43
==PAGE:52==
Figure 4.12 visualizes the subset of nodes after one iteration of the MST algorithm. As
for the smaller subset, most of the remaining nodes are within the equity region of the
map. However, the larger subset also contains more of the other asset classes. The asset
selection followed the same procedure as for the smaller subset. The asset with the highest
STARR ratio from each remaining node was selected, resulting in a subset of 57 assets.
Figure 4.12: Visualization of the larger subset of nodes for two iterations of the MST
algorithm on the SOM.
A heatmap representing the correlation between the ETFs of the two subsets was gener-
ated; see Figure 4.13. In the figure, it can be seen that there seems to be a moderate level
of correlation within both subsets. A minor amount of ETFs seem to have close to neutral
or even negative associations with each other.
(a) Two iterations of MST (27 ETFs).
(b) One iteration of MST (57 ETFs).
Figure 4.13: Correlation heatmap of the two subsets created by applying MST on the
SOM.
Table 4.14 provides a thorough overview of the distribution of asset classes and geograph-
ical investment zones for both subsets. An insight into the larger subset can be seen in
Table 4.14a and Table 4.14b. It is observed that the majority of the ETFs are invested
in equities, with bonds constituting the second largest investment category. Other asset
classes in the subset include currency, commodity, multi-asset, preferred stock, real es-
44
Chapter: Analysis
==PAGE:53==
tate, and alternatives. A notable observation is the dominance of North America as an
investment region for this subset. The remaining ETFs are distributed among various
financial markets, including developed markets, global, emerging Asia Pacific, developed
Asia Pacific, undefined region, Latin America, emerging markets, developed Europe, and
the Middle East. A breakdown of the geographical locations of where the ETFs are invest-
ing is displayed in Table 4.14c, with 15 investing in North America and the remaining 12
distributed among developed markets, emerging Asia Pacific, global, developed Asia Pa-
cific, Latin America, and an undefined region. Table 4.14d shows that the smaller subset
consisting of 27 assets comprises mainly of equity ETFs or 18 in total, five bond ETFs, and
one representative of each of the commodity, preferred stock, multi-asset, and currency
asset class.
Table 4.14: Subset distribution generated by applying MST to the SOM.
(a) Regional distribution of subset with 57
ETFs.
Region
Count
Ratio (%)
North America
31
54.39
Developed Market
6
10.53
Global
5
8.77
Developed Asia Pacific
4
7.02
Emerging Asia Pacific
4
7.02
Latin America
2
3.51
Undefined
2
3.51
Developed Europe
1
1.75
Emerging Market
1
1.75
Middle East
1
1.75
(b) Asset class distribution of subset with 57
ETFs.
Asset Class
Count
Ratio (%)
Equity
38
66.67
Bond
9
15.79
Currency
3
5.26
Commodity
2
3.51
Multi-Asset
2
3.51
Alternatives
1
1.75
Preferred Stock
1
1.75
Real Estate
1
1.75
(c) Regional distribution of subset with 27
ETFs.
Region
Count
Ratio (%)
North America
15
55.56
Developed Market
3
11.11
Emerging Asia Pacific
3
11.11
Developed Asia Pacific
2
7.41
Global
2
7.41
Latin America
1
3.70
Undefined
1
3.70
(d) Asset class distribution of subset with 27
ETFs.
Asset Class
Count
Ratio (%)
Equity
18
66.67
Bond
5
18.52
Commodity
1
3.70
Currency
1
3.70
Multi-Asset
1
3.70
Preferred Stock
1
3.70
Chapter: Analysis
45
==PAGE:54==
An analysis of the performance metrics can be viewed in Table 4.15. It can be noted that,
on average, the larger subset has a higher return, lower volatility, and higher performance
ratios but exhibits a slightly higher pairwise correlation indicating the ETFs within are
somewhat more similar than for the smaller subset. Additionally, the larger subset has a
higher PDI of 17.69 compared to the smaller subset which has 12.74.
Table 4.15: Summary statistics of both subsets generated by applying MST to the SOM.
Small Subset
Large Subset
No. of ETFs
27
57
Avg. Ann. Returns (%)
2.50
2.93
Avg. Ann. Std (%)
15.64
15.26
Avg. Sharpe Ratio
0.37
0.43
Avg. STARR Ratio
1.19
1.50
PDI
12.74
17.69
Avg. Pairwise Correlation
0.21
0.25
46
Chapter: Analysis
==PAGE:55==
4.3.2
SOM-AHC
For this section, the SOM will be applied to the universe, and AHC will be applied to the
SOM. After the SOM clustering is applied to the node positions to extract the clusters, the
silhouette score is computed using the nodes’ weight vectors. A silhouette score analysis
is presented in Figure 4.14. From the figure, it can be seen that the optimal number of
clusters is five, according to the scoring metric.
Figure 4.14: Silhouette score analysis on clusters formed by SOM.
Based on the silhouette analysis, the nodes of the SOM were clustered into five clusters.
A visualization of the node clusters formed on the map can be seen in Figure 4.15.
Figure 4.15: Visualization of the cluster formation on the SOM where five clusters are
generated.
As for the AHC method, an analysis was performed on the clusters formed by applying
AHC to the SOM, and the results can be seen in Figure 4.16. By comparing this figure
with the cluster analysis performed previously on AHC, Figure 4.6 and Figure 4.7, it can
be seen that the density of each cluster is different. Each cluster contains relatively more
assets when AHC is applied to the SOM in contrast to when only AHC is applied to the
universe.
Chapter: Analysis
47
==PAGE:56==
(a) Density.
(b) Asset class distribution.
(c) Pairwise correlation.
(d) Regional Distribution.
Figure 4.16: Cluster analysis of five clusters constructed applying AHC to the SOM.
From Figure 4.16a, it can be seen that both clusters 2 and 5 are significantly larger than
the other clusters, containing 289 and 197 ETFs, respectively. Furthermore, as shown in
Figure 4.16b, they are primarily constructed of equity ETFs. Clusters 1 and 4 are the
smallest, containing 18 and 42 ETFs. The dominant asset class of each cluster is either
bond or equity, as seen in Figure 4.16b. Clusters 1 and 3 can be seen as bond clusters
with different characteristics, and clusters 2, 4, and 5 as equity. Furthermore, it can be
seen that clusters 3 and 5 contain a slight mixture of both bond and equity ETFs. The
reason for this might be due to the fact that some equity ETFs behave like bond ETFs
and vice versa. Figure 4.16d shows the cluster’s regional distribution. As previously seen
in the clusters analysis for AHC, most clusters contain a significant portion of ETFs that
invest in North America, except cluster 5, which can be seen as relatively diversified in
terms of geographical regions.
Figure 4.16c shows the internal pairwise correlation of
the five clusters. Clusters 2, 3, 4, and 5 show relatively similar mean internal pairwise
correlation. However, the distribution of correlation within cluster 3 is much wider than
the distribution within the other clusters, indicating it contains ETFs that have negligible
to high similarities, while the similarities of the ETFs within clusters 2, 4, and 5 can be
seen as moderate to high. Cluster 1 exhibits a much lower mean pairwise correlation than
the other clusters, indicating that the ETFs found within that cluster exhibit negligible
to moderate similarities.
48
Chapter: Analysis
==PAGE:57==
The only difference when creating the two subsets when the AHC method is applied to
the SOM, compared to the AHC method alone, is in the asset selection process. To create
the smaller subset, three assets were selected from each cluster, while for the larger subset,
five assets were selected from each cluster based on the performance metrics. Similar to
the selection process of the AHC method, a minimum requirement was also put in place
for the SOM-AHC method. However, due to the change in cluster density between the
two methods, the minimum requirement of assets within a cluster was raised to 50 assets.
If a cluster contained less than the requirement, assets were only selected based on the
STARR ratio.
A correlation analysis was performed on both of the subsets and can be seen in Figure
4.17. The correlation heatmap for the smaller subset can be seen in Figure 4.17a and the
larger subset in Figure 4.17b. When comparing the figures, it can be observed that the
larger subset seems to include more ETFs that exhibit neutral relationships. However,
both subsets seem to include multiple ETFs that experience moderate to high similarities.
(a) Three assets are chosen for each
performance metric.
(b) Five assets are chosen for each
performance metric.
Figure 4.17: Correlation heatmap of the two subsets created by applying AHC to the
SOM.
A comprehensive overview of the performance metrics and regional and asset class distri-
bution will now be presented. In Table 4.16, the regional and asset class distribution can
be seen for both subsets. In Table 4.16a and Table 4.16b, the distribution is presented for
the larger subset that contains 40 ETFs, while Table 4.16c and Table 4.16d present the
distribution for the smaller subset containing 24 ETFs. It can be noted from the table
that North America holds the largest share of the geographical regions for both subsets.
However, it is interesting to note that the majority of ETFs for both subsets are bond
ETFs, similar to the traditional AHC method. However, equity ETFs represent a portion
of both subsets, or 25.00% for the smaller subset and 32.50% for the larger subset, and
both include one ETF that invests in preferred stock.
Chapter: Analysis
49
==PAGE:58==
Table 4.16: Subset distribution generated by applying AHC to the SOM.
(a) Regional distribution of subset with 40
ETFs.
Region
Count
Ratio (%)
North America
27
67.50
Developed Market
6
15.00
Emerging Market
3
7.50
Global
2
5.00
Global ex-U.S
2
5.00
(b) Asset class distribution of subset with 40
ETFs.
Asset Class
Count
Ratio (%)
Bond
26
65.00
Equity
13
32.50
Preferred Stock
1
2.50
(c) Regional distribution of subset with 24
ETFs.
Region
Count
Ratio (%)
North America
15
62.50
Developed Market
4
16.67
Emerging Market
3
12.50
Global
1
4.17
Global ex-U.S
1
4.17
(d) Asset class distribution of subset with 24
ETFs.
Asset Class
Count
Ratio (%)
Bond
17
70.83
Equity
6
25.00
Preferred Stock
1
4.17
Table 4.17 presents the analysis of the performance metrics for both ETF subsets for
comparison. The smaller subset includes 24 ETFs, while the larger subset includes 40.
It can be noticed that the larger subset has slightly higher average annual returns and
volatility of 5.72% and 6.36% compared to the smaller subset of 5.20% and 5.41%, respec-
tively. However, when looking at the risk-adjusted performance measures, the Sharpe and
STARR ratios, it can be seen that the smaller subset shows better performance compared
to the larger subset. Furthermore, the average pairwise correlation between the ETFs in
both subsets is similar, 0.24 for the smaller subset and 0.23 for the larger one.
Table 4.17: Summary statistics of both subsets generated by applying AHC to the SOM.
Small Subset
Large Subset
No. of ETFs
24
40
Avg. Ann. Returns (%)
5.20
5.72
Avg. Ann. Std (%)
5.41
6.36
Avg. Sharpe Ratio
1.48
1.36
Avg. STARR Ratio
5.60
5.13
PDI
8.34
10.20
Avg. Pairwise Correlation
0.24
0.23
4.4
Comparison of Methods
This section will present a comprehensive performance overview of the different subsets
generated by the methods, as seen for the smaller subset in Table 4.18 and for the larger
subset in Table 4.19.
First, the overview of the smaller subset will be presented and
discussed before moving on to the analysis of the larger subset. Furthermore, an overview
of the asset class distribution and regional distribution across all methods, and for both
subsets, can be observed in Appendix B.1
50
Chapter: Analysis
==PAGE:59==
As seen in Table 4.18, the subsets generated are different in size and range from 21 assets
to 27 assets.
The variation in size can be attributed to the different sizes of clusters
and the number of iterations.
It was found that the SOM-AHC method yielded the
highest annualized return with an average of 5.20%, in contrast to the MST method,
which delivered an annualized return of 0.92% on average. The overall universe exhibited
an average annualized return of 3.03%.
Additionally, AHC and SOM-MST generated
annualized returns on average of 3.47% and 2.50%, respectively. It can be noticed that
the average volatility level of the universe is 14.11%. However, it can be noted that it is not
the maximum level of volatility observed, as other subsets, namely SOM-MST and MST,
demonstrated higher levels of volatility, at 15.64% and 15.93%, respectively. This indicates
that these subsets exhibit greater fluctuation than the average of the investment universe.
The clustering methods seem to deliver the lowest volatility or 5.41% and 4.75%, which is
relatively lower than the other methods. For the performance ratios, it can be seen that
AHC is delivering the highest risk-adjusted performance as it has a decent Sharpe ratio
of 1.84 and the highest STARR ratio of 7.32. SOM-AHC delivers the second-best risk-
adjusted performance of 1.48 and 5.60 in Sharpe and STARR ratios. At the same time,
MST has the lowest risk-adjusted performance, followed by SOM-MST, with ratios of 0.34
and 0.37 in the Sharpe ratio and 1.14 and 1.19 in the STARR ratio, respectively. The
PDI metric of the subsets is considerably balanced across the methods. The SOM-AHC
contains the least diversified subset with a metric of 8.34, while the MST generates a PDI
of 13.08. It does not come as a surprise that the MST method has the highest PDI as it
is a method that seeks the greatest diversification potential from the universe. AHC and
SOM-MST generate a similar PDI of 12.53 and 12.74, respectively, indicating a relatively
diversified portfolio. A correlation analysis was also conducted, and it can be observed
that the average pairwise correlation of the subset reaches its highest, with the SOM-AHC
method scoring 0.24 on average. In contrast, AHC scores 0.09 and bests the MST method
by 0.04.
SOM-MST has the second-highest average pairwise correlation of 0.21.
It is
interesting to notice the high level of diversification exhibited by AHC, considering the
subset was created from only three clusters, and the selected assets, in theory, should have
been relatively similar.
Table 4.18: Overview of performance measure metric across the methods for the
smaller subsets.
Universe
SOM-AHC
AHC
SOM-MST
MST
No. of ETFs
656
24
24
27
21
Avg. Ann. Returns (%)
3.03
5.20
3.47
2.50
0.92
Avg. Ann. Std (%)
14.11
5.41
4.75
15.64
15.93
Avg. Sharpe Ratio
0.36
1.48
1.84
0.37
0.34
Avg. STARR Ratio
1.14
5.60
7.32
1.19
1.14
PDI
19.17
8.34
12.53
12.74
13.08
Avg. Pairwise Correlation
0.38
0.24
0.09
0.21
0.13
The analysis for the larger subsets is presented in Table 4.19 and will now be discussed.
The range of the subsets varies from 40 to 57 assets. The average annualized returns
do not differ significantly compared to the smaller subsets. Still, it can be noted that
the SOM-AHC yielded a 5.72% annualized return on average, and the MST delivered the
lowest annualized return again, 0.88%. When compared to the smaller subset then, it can
be seen that the AHC method has decreased in average annualized return from 3.47%
to 2.72%. The SOM-MST method yielded a higher return for the larger subset of 2.93%
compared to the 2.50% for the smaller subset. The volatility level of both SOM-AHC and
Chapter: Analysis
51
==PAGE:60==
AHC increased when a larger subset was considered in contrast to the SOM-MST and MST
methods, where it decreased. However, the analysis revealed that the subset that exhibited
the highest level of volatility for the larger subsets was the SOM-MST, as opposed to the
MST for the smaller subset. When the performance metrics were examined, it could be
duly observed that for SOM-AHC and AHC, the ratios decreased in contrast to the SOM-
MST and MST methods, where they actually increased.
The MST method remained
again with the highest PDI metric indicating that it has the most diversified subset of all
the methods. The other methods seem to have a similar level of diversification compared
to the smaller subset. The AHC method scored the lowest average pairwise correlation
indicating that it has the assets that move the least in the same direction. In contrast, the
SOM-MST method has the assets that move the most in the same direction, followed by
SOM-AHC. The MST method exhibited the second-lowest average pairwise correlation.
Table 4.19: Overview of performance measure metric across the methods for the larger
subsets.
Universe
SOM-AHC
AHC
SOM-MST
MST
No. of ETFs
656
40
42
57
43
Avg. Ann. Returns (%)
3.03
5.72
2.72
2.93
0.88
Avg. Ann. Std (%)
14.11
6.36
7.41
15.26
15.04
Avg. Sharpe Ratio
0.36
1.36
1.17
0.43
0.39
Avg. STARR Ratio
1.14
5.13
4.60
1.50
1.38
PDI
19.17
10.20
13.79
17.69
19.18
Avg. Pairwise Correlation
0.38
0.23
0.12
0.25
0.19
The comparison of the small and large subsets for the four different methods revealed that
as the subset size increased, the Sharpe and STARR ratio decreased for the SOM-AHC
and AHC methods. In contrast to the SOM-MST and MST methods, where the ratios
increased. Additionally, the volatility in the subsets seems to have risen for SOM-AHC and
AHC and decreased for SOM-MST when the subset size is increased. The performance
metrics of the SOM-AHC and AHC methods suggested that they were not as good at
generating returns relative to the risk when considering the larger subsets.
They also
developed more fluctuations when the subset size was increased, which could imply that
the methods were less effective in selecting a diversified portfolio when the size increased in
the subset. This was partially expected as the subsets for these methods are performance-
driven. On the other hand, the SOM-MST and MST methods increased in Sharpe and
STARR ratios and decreased in volatility when the subset size increased, indicating that
those methods are better at generating returns given the risk considering larger subsets.
They also tend to cause slightly smaller fluctuations in the performance of the assets.
This could imply that these two methods are more effective at identifying and selecting a
diversified portfolio of assets when the subset size is increased.
For the final analysis of this thesis, the subsets will be fed into the optimization model
created in the thesis ”Performance Analysis of the most traded Mutual Funds” [12] to
construct optimal portfolios.
The benchmark will be, as mentioned previously, three
portfolios created by NORD.Investment.
52
Chapter: Analysis
==PAGE:61==
Chapter 5
Results
In this chapter, an evaluation and analysis of the performance of each method in relation
to the subsets will be conducted. NORD provides portfolios with risk profiles ranging from
0-20, where higher numbers indicate more risk. The risk profiles chosen as benchmarks
in this thesis are 5, 13, and 20 to test the methods against low, moderate, and high-
risk portfolios.
The three portfolios contain the same seven ETFs, but the allocation
between portfolios differs from matching the specific risk profile. The performance of each
method will be compared to these three different NORD portfolios. This comparison will
provide insight into the relative effectiveness of each method in generating returns while
managing risk, as represented by the chosen risk profiles as benchmarks. The subsets
are, as mentioned previously, fed into an optimization model where the allocation of the
assets will be determined. The objective of the optimization is to maximize the portfolio’s
expected return while containing the risk at a certain level. As mentioned before, in this
case, the risk level is determined in every period, or 12 weeks, by the proportional CVaR
of each benchmark portfolio. In Figure 5.1, the value growth of the benchmark portfolios
can be observed. The figure shows that the portfolios move identically, and the portfolio
with the highest risk yields the highest return, while the one with the lowest risk delivers
the lowest return.
Figure 5.1: Value growth of the NORD portfolios with risk profiles 5, 13, and 20.
The performance evaluation for all optimal portfolios across all methods for both sub-
sets will be presented, initially with NORD portfolio 5 as a benchmark and the results
compared. Subsequently, the evaluation will be expanded to compare the optimal portfo-
lios with NORD portfolio 13 as a benchmark. Then finally, the optimal portfolios, with
NORD portfolio 20 as a benchmark, will be evaluated and compared. Furthermore, a
more detailed presentation of the ETFs that construct each optimal portfolio can be ap-
proached in Appendix B.2. Additionally, an examination was conducted using the rolling
Bootstrapping method for scenario generation in constructing the optimal portfolios. The
results indicated more volatile portfolios and overall worse performance, which complies
with the findings of the research undertaken by Petr Vanek in his thesis [14]. The results
of using the rolling bootstrapping method can be observed in Appendix C.
Chapter: Results
53
==PAGE:62==
5.1
Performance Evaluation - NORD 5
A comparison of the methods to the first benchmark, NORD portfolio 5, will now be
presented.
An overview of the performance across methods is visible in Table 5.1 for
the smaller subsets and Table 5.2 for the larger subsets. The smaller subset will first be
discussed, and then the larger subset will be presented with a comparison.
Table 5.1 presents a summary of the empirical analysis conducted on the smaller subsets
compared to NORD portfolio 5 as a benchmark. The analysis indicates that all four meth-
ods generate superior annualized returns compared to the benchmark portfolio. However,
it is also noted that the methods exhibit relatively greater volatility, with some exhibiting
approximately 20% to 26% higher than the benchmark. The SOM-MST method yields
the most favorable performance among the methods when evaluated. As can be seen in
the table, it scores highest in both Sharpe and STARR ratios and has the lowest down-
side risk. However, the method exhibits the second-highest volatility level on annualized
terms but has the lowest downside risk. Despite this, it should be acknowledged that
the volatility levels are relatively similar across all the methods, ranging from 11.23% to
11.74%, as is the downside risk where the SOM-AHC method generates the highest risk
of 4.17%. The worst-performing method in terms of the Sharpe and STARR ratio is the
SOM-AHC method, with values of 0.56 and 1.53, respectively, whereas the SOM-MST
method yields 1.23 and 4.01, respectively. It is interesting to notice that the MST method
has the highest average PDI over the rebalancing period. Nevertheless, when the port-
folio’s assets’ weights are considered, the SOM-MST method yields the highest PDI, and
the MST method produces the lowest PDI, indicating that it is the most concentrated
portfolio. The results indicate that the NORD 5 portfolio remains the safest investment
choice in terms of volatility and downside risk. Still, it is outperformed by all the methods
when risk-adjusted performance is considered.
Table 5.1: Overview of performance metrics across the methods for the smaller subsets
when NORD portfolio 5 is a benchmark. Values are highlighted in blue if they are favored
over the result of their counterpart.
SOM-AHC
AHC
SOM-MST
MST
NORD 5
Annualized Returns (%)
6.36
8.75
14.44
9.89
4.68
Annualized Std (%)
11.44
11.23
11.71
11.74
9.32
Sharpe Ratio
0.56
0.78
1.23
0.84
0.50
Starr Ratio
1.53
2.34
4.01
2.67
1.43
Downside Risk (CVaR) (%)
4.17
3.75
3.60
3.71
3.26
Avg. Period #Assets
4.47
3.06
5.12
4.47
7.00
Avg. Period Returns (%)
1.64
2.06
3.35
2.42
1.19
Std of Period Returns (%)
4.43
3.85
4.91
5.19
4.17
Avg. Period PDI
2.19
1.87
2.56
2.91
2.38
Avg. Period w.PDI
1.74
1.50
1.93
1.40
1.57
Table 5.2 presents the summary of the larger subsets compared to the benchmark portfolio.
From the table, it can be seen that the SOM-MST method is delivering the highest annu-
alized return of the methods with 14.13%. It also exhibits the highest volatility levels in
terms of annualized standard deviation, but despite that, it yields the highest Sharpe and
STARR ratio with values of 1.13 and 3.31, respectively. The SOM-AHC method delivers
the lowest risk-adjusted performance with Sharpe and STARR ratios of 0.80 and 2.22,
respectively. The performance between SOM-AHC and AHC is relatively similar, where
the AHC method yields lower volatility and downside risk, higher Sharpe and STARR
54
Chapter: Results
==PAGE:63==
ratios, and a higher PDI. However, it should be noted that the performance does not
differ significantly. Comparing the SOM-MST to the MST, it is apparent that it delivers
better results. SOM-MST has a considerably higher annualized return, but the volatility
is slightly higher. SOM-MST also provides greater risk-adjusted ratios and has a higher
average weighted PDI throughout the rebalancing period, indicating that it is more di-
versified than the MST portfolio. It is also worth pointing out that the average weighted
PDI of the SOM-MST method is the highest among the four methods.
Table 5.2: Overview of performance metrics across the methods for the larger subsets
when NORD portfolio 5 is a benchmark. Values are highlighted in blue if they are favored
over the result of their counterpart.
SOM-AHC
AHC
SOM-MST
MST
NORD 5
Annualized Returns (%)
9.52
9.37
14.13
9.99
4.68
Annualized Std (%)
11.96
11.22
12.46
12.00
9.32
Sharpe Ratio
0.80
0.84
1.13
0.83
0.50
Starr Ratio
2.22
2.41
3.31
2.40
1.43
Downside Risk (CVaR) (%)
4.30
3.89
4.27
4.16
3.26
Avg. Period #Assets
4.12
4.65
6.82
5.76
7.00
Avg. Period Returns (%)
2.38
2.23
3.32
2.44
1.19
Std of Period Returns (%)
5.37
4.33
5.13
5.32
4.17
Avg. Period PDI
2.20
2.43
2.93
3.20
2.38
Avg. Period w.PDI
1.68
1.56
1.95
1.50
1.57
Figure 5.2 displays how the optimal portfolios across the methods would have performed
during the testing period of this study, where Figure 5.2a presents the portfolios for the
smaller subsets and Figure 5.2b shows the portfolios for the larger subsets. The figures
illustrate that the SOM-MST method delivers the highest value for both subset sizes. It
is also noticeable that the MST and the AHC methods behave similarly for both subsets
sizes, delivering approximately the same value in both cases. All of the methods experience
more fluctuations over time than the Nord 5 portfolio. However, all of them yield higher
values as well. The method most sensitive to the subset’s size is the SOM-AHC portfolio,
which yields substantially less value for the smaller subset than for the larger one.
(a) Value growth of the optimal portfolios for
the smaller subsets.
(b) Value growth of the optimal portfolios for
the larger subsets.
Figure 5.2: Optimal portfolio value growth across methods where the benchmark is
NORD portfolio 5.
Chapter: Results
55
==PAGE:64==
The annualized risk-return trade-off of the optimal portfolios for both subsets, with NORD
portfolio 5 as the target, can be visualized and compared in Figure 5.3. The figure shows a
clear volatility difference between the target portfolio, NORD 5, and the other portfolios.
Upon examination of the figure, it can be noticed that all implemented portfolios, with
the exception of SOM-AHC constructed from the smaller subset, exhibit higher annualized
returns than the average of the investment universe. Additionally, as can be seen in the
figure, the volatility level of all the portfolios is much less than the average volatility of
the investment universe.
Figure 5.3: The risk-return trade-off of optimal portfolios compared to the analyzed
investment universe where NORD portfolio 5 is the benchmark.
56
Chapter: Results
==PAGE:65==
5.2
Performance Evaluation - NORD 13
A comparison of the methods to the second benchmark, NORD portfolio 13, will now be
presented. An overview of the performance of the optimal portfolios across the methods is
visible in Table 5.3 for the smaller subsets and Table 5.4 for the larger subsets. As earlier,
the smaller subset will first be discussed, and then the larger subset will be presented with
a comparison.
By observing Table 5.3, it can be noticed that in terms of annualized returns, the SOM-
MST method yields significantly higher returns or approximately 49% higher than the
second-highest method, MST. The volatility exhibited by the SOM-MST method ranks
it as the second most volatile method, with an annualized standard deviation of 15.11%,
whereas the MST ranks as the highest method with 15.22%. The SOM-AHC method
yields the lowest returns, but at the same time, it exhibits the lowest volatility. Upon
examination of the performance ratios, it can be observed that the SOM-MST delivers
the highest ratios, with a Sharpe ratio of 1.24 and a STARR ratio of 3.86. It is also seen
that the AHC and SOM-AHC methods are tied in the Sharpe ratio, with a ratio of 0.80.
However, the AHC method delivers a higher STARR ratio by a slight margin. When the
ratios are compared across all the methods, it is concluded that the SOM-AHC method
performs the worst, with the lowest Sharpe and STARR ratios and the highest downside
risk. It is noticeable that the downside risk for the methods is relatively similar, ranging
from 4.72% to 5.12%. The SOM-MST method is the most diversified portfolio when the
weighted average PDI is considered, with a value of 1.99. The AHC method has the least
diversified portfolio with a ratio of 1.26. However, if the portfolio’s weights are not taken
into account, the MST method exhibits the highest PDI.
Table 5.3: Overview of performance metrics across the methods for the smaller subsets
when NORD portfolio 13 is a benchmark. Values are highlighted in blue if they are
favored over the result of their counterpart.
SOM-AHC
AHC
SOM-MST
MST
NORD 13
Annualized Returns (%)
11.46
11.24
18.79
12.62
8.59
Annualized Std (%)
14.34
13.97
15.11
15.22
12.39
Sharpe Ratio
0.80
0.80
1.24
0.83
0.69
Starr Ratio
2.24
2.34
3.86
2.67
1.99
Downside Risk (CVaR) (%)
5.12
4.80
4.87
4.72
4.33
Avg. Period #Assets
4.53
2.76
4.59
4.29
7.00
Avg. Period Returns (%)
2.79
2.65
4.37
3.13
2.12
Std of Period Returns (%)
5.41
5.14
6.81
7.32
5.48
Avg. Period PDI
2.18
1.74
2.37
2.79
2.38
Avg. Period w.PDI
1.62
1.26
1.99
1.65
1.65
When looking at the summary presented for the larger subset in Table 5.4, it can be
noticed that the SOM-MST method is relatively dominant compared to the other methods.
It yields an annualized return of 15.98% while the second highest method, the AHC, has
13.83 % and the lowest, the MST method, has 13.32%. The AHC method has the lowest
volatility among the methods, with an annualized standard deviation of 14.85%, followed
by the SOM-MST method, which has 15.49%. When both risk-adjusted performance ratios
are considered, all the methods deliver relatively similar ratios. The SOM-MST method
ranks highest and is closely followed by the AHC method. Regarding the downside risk
of the methods, the AHC provides the most favorable outcome with a 5.05% while MST
has the second lowest downside risk of 5.23%. The SOM-AHC and SOM-MST methods
Chapter: Results
57
==PAGE:66==
generate the highest downside risk of 5.52% and 5.34%, respectively.
Throughout the
rebalancing period, it is observed that the SOM-MST method yields the highest average
weighted PDI of 2.12 and the MST the second highest of 1.98. The clustering methods are
not performing as well when the diversification is examined, as SOM-AHC has an average
weighted PDI of 1.67 and the AHC method has 1.32. Again, however, if the portfolio’s
weights are not taken into account, the MST method exhibits the highest PDI of 3.18.
Table 5.4: Overview of performance metrics across the methods for the larger subsets
when NORD portfolio 13 is a benchmark. Values are highlighted in blue if they are
favored over the result of their counterpart.
SOM-AHC
AHC
SOM-MST
MST
NORD 13
Annualized Returns (%)
13.63
13.83
15.98
13.32
8.59
Annualized Std (%)
15.55
14.85
15.49
15.67
12.39
Sharpe Ratio
0.88
0.93
1.03
0.85
0.69
Starr Ratio
2.47
2.74
2.99
2.54
1.99
Downside Risk (CVaR) (%)
5.52
5.05
5.34
5.23
4.33
Avg. Period #Assets
4.00
4.29
6.24
5.53
7.00
Avg. Period Returns (%)
3.30
3.22
3.77
3.27
2.12
Std of Period Returns (%)
6.65
5.56
6.26
7.15
5.48
Avg. Period PDI
2.19
2.42
2.97
3.18
2.38
Avg. Period w.PDI
1.67
1.32
2.12
1.98
1.65
Figure 5.4 illustrates how the methods would have performed during the testing period
with NORD portfolio 13 as the target. The portfolios value growth is presented for the
smaller subsets in Figure 5.4a and the larger subset in Figure 5.4b. The figures illustrate
that the fluctuation in performance among the four methods is slightly higher than that
of the NORD portfolio 13. However, all portfolios surpass the benchmark in value gen-
eration, especially for the larger subset. Furthermore, the SOM-MST method generates
the highest value of all portfolios for both subsets, and the difference is quite significant
for the smaller subset. Despite delivering the highest value, the SOM-MST method also
seems to experience the largest fluctuations of all the methods.
(a) Value growth of the optimal portfolios for
the smaller subsets.
(b) Value growth of the optimal portfolios for
the larger subsets.
Figure 5.4: Optimal portfolio value growth across methods where the benchmark is
NORD portfolio 13.
58
Chapter: Results
==PAGE:67==
The annualized risk-return trade-off of the portfolios, for both subsets, with NORD port-
folio 13 as the target, can be visualized and compared in Figure 5.5. As seen in the figure,
the benchmark portfolio, NORD portfolio 13, exhibits the lowest annualized standard de-
viation and the lowest annualized return. A further examination of the figure reveals that
all four methods for both subsets exhibit higher annualized returns than the average of the
investment universe while concurrently displaying a lower degree of volatility. Observing
the larger subsets compared to the smaller subsets in the figure suggests that there is a
slight improvement in performance for all methods, with the exclusion of the SOM-MST
portfolio, which delivers higher return and lower volatility concerning the smaller subset.
Figure 5.5: The risk-return trade-off of optimal portfolios compared to the analyzed
investment universe where NORD portfolio 13 is the benchmark.
Chapter: Results
59
==PAGE:68==
5.3
Performance Evaluation - NORD 20
A performance overview for the methods for both subsets will be presented and compared
to the last benchmark portfolio, NORD portfolio 20, which is the most risk-taking profile.
Once the results from the comparison have been discussed, the overall findings will be
discussed, followed by the conclusion chapter.
The empirical analysis of the smaller subset is presented in Table 5.5. From the table,
it is quite apparent that the SOM-MST yields superior returns among the methods with
an astonishing 20.69%.
The second highest method, MST, has an annualized return
of 16.99%, and the lowest one, SOM-AHC, delivers 11.20%, which is, in addition, the
only method that yields a lower annualized return than the benchmark, NORD 20. By
comparing the annual standard deviation across the methods, it is seen that they are
all exhibiting similar fluctuations where the lowest volatility level is 17.96%, generated
by the SOM-AHC method, and the highest is 19.56% generated by the MST method.
It is noticeable that the benchmark Nord portfolio 20 exhibits an annualized standard
deviation of 15.36% and is outperforming all the other methods in terms of risk. When
the Sharpe and STARR ratios are compared among the methods, the SOM-MST delivers
the best results with a Sharpe ratio of 1.07 and a STARR ratio of 3.27, considerably higher
than the benchmark ratios of 0.78 and 2.25, respectively. The downside risk is on similar
levels across all methods ranging from 6.15% to 6.44%, where the benchmark exhibits a
downside risk of 5.32%. The AHC method scores the lowest average PDI and average
weighted PDI, indicating that it is a concentrated portfolio. In contrast, the MST method
has an average PDI of 2.66 and an average weighted PDI of 1.83, closely followed by the
SOM-MST method with 2.41 and 1.62, respectively.
Table 5.5: Overview of performance metrics across the methods for the smaller subsets
when NORD portfolio 20 is a benchmark. Values are highlighted in blue if they are
favored over the result of their counterpart.
SOM-AHC
AHC
SOM-MST
MST
NORD 20
Annualized Returns (%)
11.20
12.36
20.69
16.99
11.99
Annualized Std (%)
17.96
18.00
19.36
19.56
15.36
Sharpe Ratio
0.62
0.69
1.07
0.87
0.78
Starr Ratio
1.74
2.01
3.27
2.71
2.25
Downside Risk (CVaR) (%)
6.44
6.15
6.32
6.27
5.32
Avg. Period #Assets
3.94
2.47
4.24
3.94
7.00
Avg. Period Returns (%)
2.81
2.97
4.90
4.29
2.94
Std of Period Returns (%)
6.90
6.54
8.77
10.35
6.79
Avg. Period PDI
1.97
1.67
2.41
2.66
2.38
Avg. Period w.PDI
1.30
1.05
1.62
1.83
1.21
Table 5.6 presents the analysis results for the larger subsets. Again, the SOM-MST yields
the highest returns among the methods, 22.36% on an annualized basis. The MST delivers
the lowest annualized return of 13.25%. When comparing the volatility, it is seen that
the AHC method exhibits the lowest fluctuations while the other methods show relatively
similar volatility in the range of 19.30% to 20.26%. It can be deduced from comparing
the volatility levels of the methods to the benchmark that none of the methods could beat
the target of 15.36%. When evaluating the risk-adjusted performance using the Sharpe
and STARR ratios, the SOM-MST method demonstrated superior results with an approx-
imately 36% higher Sharpe ratio and 49% higher STARR ratio than the second-highest
method, SOM-AHC. The clustering methods perform similarly in ratios, but the MST
60
Chapter: Results
==PAGE:69==
provides the worst results. When comparing the performance ratios to the benchmark,
it is seen that both SOM-AHC and SOM-MST are performing better. The SOM-MST
method also has the most favorable downside risk of 6.59%, followed closely by the AHC
method, which has a downside risk of 6.61%. When comparing the diversification of each
method, it is seen that the MST method yields the best overall results with an average PDI
of 3.07 and an average weighted PDI of 1.94, while the SOM-MST ranks second highest
in diversification with an average PDI of 2.79 and an average weighted PDI of 1.65. It is
noteworthy that, in terms of the average PDI, SOM-AHC is the only method that does
not exceed the benchmark, NORD 20, and regarding the average weighted PDI, AHC is
the only method that does not surpass the benchmark.
Table 5.6: Overview of performance metrics across the methods for the larger subsets
when NORD portfolio 20 is a benchmark. Values are highlighted in blue if they are
favored over the result of their counterpart.
SOM-AHC
AHC
SOM-MST
MST
NORD 20
Annualized Returns (%)
16.05
14.57
22.36
13.25
11.99
Annualized Std (%)
19.30
18.75
19.82
20.26
15.36
Sharpe Ratio
0.83
0.78
1.13
0.65
0.78
Starr Ratio
2.28
2.20
3.39
1.91
2.25
Downside Risk (CVaR) (%)
7.04
6.61
6.59
6.92
5.32
Avg. Period #Assets
4.24
4.24
5.94
5.24
7.00
Avg. Period Returns (%)
3.94
3.51
5.22
3.48
2.94
Std of Period Returns (%)
8.23
7.36
8.41
9.72
6.79
Avg. Period PDI
2.15
2.50
2.79
3.07
2.38
Avg. Period w.PDI
1.27
1.18
1.65
1.94
1.21
Figure 5.6 illustrates how well the optimized portfolios of all methods, with NORD portfo-
lio 20 as the target, would have performed during the testing period. Figure 5.6a displays
the performance of the smaller subsets, while Figure 5.6b represents the larger subsets.
The NORD 20 portfolio is relatively stable and, as such, does not experience intense
fluctuations as the other methods do for both subsets. The SOM-MST and the MST
methods generate significantly higher values for the smaller subset than the other port-
folios, whereas they result in similar values to the target portfolio. Additionally, it can
be pointed out that the SOM-MST generates significantly higher values than the other
portfolios for the larger subset, whereas they yield similar values as the target portfolio.
Chapter: Results
61
==PAGE:70==
(a) Value growth of the optimal portfolios for
the smaller subsets.
(b) Value growth of the optimal portfolios for
the larger subsets.
Figure 5.6: Optimal portfolio value growth across methods where the benchmark is
NORD portfolio 20.
The annualized risk-return trade-off of the portfolios, for both subsets, with NORD port-
folio 20 as the target, can be visualized and compared in Figure 5.7. The significance
of the difference in volatility between the benchmark, NORD portfolio 20, and the other
portfolios can clearly be observed in the figure. Upon examination of the figure, it can
be noticed that across all the methods, the portfolios constructed from the larger subsets
exhibit higher volatility levels than those from the smaller subsets. By further comparing
the portfolios constructed from the smaller subsets to those formed by the larger subsets,
it can be seen that all of the portfolios constructed from the larger subsets, except for
the MST portfolio, exhibit higher annualized returns compared to those formed from the
smaller subset. Furthermore, only one portfolio underperforms the target‘s annualized
return, the SOM-AHC portfolio, when formed from the smaller subset.
Figure 5.7: The risk-return trade-off of optimal portfolios compared to the analyzed
investment universe where NORD portfolio 20 is the benchmark.
62
Chapter: Results
==PAGE:71==
5.4
Main Findings
A comprehensive overview of the comparison across the methods and to the benchmark will
be given here. Based on the results previously presented, none of the methods exhibited
lower volatility than the targets nor had a lower downside risk.
Applying AHC to SOM does not show promising results as it failed to outperform the
AHC method in most scenarios regarding risk-adjusted performance metrics. However,
the results indicate that using AHC to SOM enhances the diversification of the portfolios,
as in all scenarios, the SOM-AHC method delivered a higher average weighted PDI. The
improvements in the average weighted PDI ranged from 7.63% to 28.57% when compared
to the AHC method. Only once did the SOM-AHC method outperform the AHC method,
and that was when a larger subset was considered with the high-risk seeking NORD port-
folio 20 as a benchmark. The margin of improvement was not concluded to be significant
as the Sharpe ratio was 6.41% higher, and the STARR ratio was 3.64% higher. The results
indicate that using AHC alone seems to provide more eﬀicient results, in general.
An analysis of the comparative performance of SOM-MST and MST revealed a unidirec-
tional trend. The SOM-MST method demonstrated a superior performance across both
subsets and all of the benchmarks. For the smaller subsets, it was showing approximately
23% up to 50% higher Sharpe ratio and 20% to 51% higher STARR ratio. For the larger
subsets, the performance ratios were also significantly higher. The Sharpe ratio was from
21% up to 74% higher, while the STARR ratio was 18% to 78% higher. The SOM-MST
method showed potential for better diversification for low and moderate risk-seeking tar-
gets as it yielded an average weighted PDI for both subsets, ranging from 7% to 38%
higher. However, for the other two scenarios, when NORD portfolio 20 was used as a
benchmark, the MST method demonstrated a 13% higher average weighted PDI for the
smaller subset and an approximately 18% higher for the larger subset.
The results indicate that using the combination of SOM and MST can effectively enhance
the performance in strategic fund selection compared to using the MST method alone.
Across all the methods, it was shown that the SOM-MST method exhibited a superior
performance across both subsets and all benchmarks, with the highest risk-adjusted per-
formance in all cases and the highest average weighted PDI in four out of six scenarios.
When comparing the SOM-MST to the target portfolios, it was seen that the method could
not deliver as low volatility levels and downside risk as the benchmarks. Nevertheless, the
method outperformed the portfolios significantly in returns, risk-adjusted performance
metrics, and diversification. However, the results did not indicate such promising results
for the combination of SOM and AHC, and it can be concluded from the results that the
synergy of SOM and AHC does not significantly enhance the performance compared to
the AHC method alone.
Chapter: Results
63
==PAGE:72==
64
Chapter: Results
==PAGE:73==
Chapter 6
Conclusions
This thesis examines using an unsupervised machine learning algorithm known as self-
organizing maps (SOM) as a supporting tool for traditional methods such as agglomerative
hierarchical clustering (AHC) and minimum spanning trees (MST). The SOM is a widely
studied method but rather novel approach when it comes to the financial field. For the last
20 years, the algorithm’s popularity has increased and has been used on various topics for
different objectives within finance. The idea behind this project is highly inspired by two
previous master’s theses conducted in the year 2020. The main objective was to examine
whether the use of a SOM could enhance the performance of the methods implemented
in the other theses and if the methods could compete with a professional Robo-advisor
created by the Danish company NORD.Investments (NORD).
This thesis used an investment universe of approximately 3,000 exchange-traded funds
(ETFs) as data. A due diligence screening process was performed with specific require-
ments to ensure that the funds used for the study would be liquid, low in expense ratio,
and have suﬀicient data available. The number of funds that met these requirements ac-
counted for 656 ETFs. After the due diligence screening, the methods were applied to
the universe of assets to strategically select funds to construct a diversified portfolio with
returns and risk-adjusted performance ratios compatible with the NORD portfolios.
Two subsets for each method were constructed, one small subset consisting of 21 to 27
funds and a larger subset consisting of 40 to 57 funds. The assets were selected given
specific criteria. For the clustering methods, the top three to five best-performing funds
with respect to the Sharpe and STARR ratio were selected. However, due to the varia-
tion of density of the clusters, a minimum requirement was set, and if that requirement
was not met, then assets were only selected based on the STARR ratio. For the MST
method, after a specific number of iterations of the algorithm, which is solely based on the
correlation between funds, the leaf nodes (funds) of the MST were selected for the sub-
sets. Using that idealogy creates a subset that should, in theory, be highly uncorrelated.
Furthermore, by applying the MST to the weight vectors of the trained SOM, the MST
nodes correspondingly represented the SOM nodes and, therefore, a group of funds. After
a specific number of iterations, the best-performing fund in terms of STARR ratio could
be selected from each leaf node of the MST and, as a result, generate a subset. Essentially,
the clustering methods will produce performance-driven subsets. In contrast, the MST
method will produce subsets with great diversification potential, and when used with the
SOM, it will produce partially performance-driven subsets as well. The performance of
the subsets was then measured with the risk-adjusted ratios, Sharpe and STARR, as well
as the portfolio diversification index (PDI).
An optimization model created by Petr Vanek in 2020 was used for the allocation pro-
cess. The model uses a stochastic conditional value-at-risk (CVaR) optimization, with
a proportional transaction cost when rebalancing, to maximize the expected return of a
portfolio given a specific CVaR threshold (benchmark). The CVaR optimization differs
from the traditional VaR in the sense that CVaR accounts for the tail risk while the VaR
method does not. The Monte Carlo technique is used to generate multiple scenarios for
Chapter: Conclusions
65
==PAGE:74==
the portfolio optimization problem. These scenarios are then used to estimate the risk
and return under certain conditions. Once the subsets across all the methods had been
optimized, then an empirical analysis was conducted on the sets. The performance met-
rics were calculated along with returns and standard deviation, and the methods were
compared to the NORD benchmark portfolios. By analyzing the comparison, it quickly
became apparent that none of the studied methods could perform on similar volatility
levels as the NORD portfolios.
The combination of SOM and AHC does not show promising results when considering
smaller subsets and both low-risk seeking and high-risk seeking target portfolios, as it fails
to outperform the AHC method in terms of risk-adjusted performance. However, SOM-
AHC increases the average weighted PDI across all benchmarks and subsets, enhancing
the diversification compared to the AHC method. When the moderate risk-seeking target,
NORD portfolio 13, is used, SOM-AHC yields an equal Sharpe ratio as the AHC method
but underperforms in the STARR ratio. Considering a large subset with NORD portfolio
20 as a benchmark, SOM-AHC scores 6.41% and 3.64% higher Sharpe and STARR ratios,
respectively, compared with AHC.
When comparing the performance of the MST and SOM-MST, it became quite apparent
that the SOM-MST demonstrated dominating performance to the MST method by itself.
Across all benchmarks and for both subset sizes, the SOM-MST delivered significantly
higher performance metrics than the MST method. Considering the smaller subset across
all benchmarks, the SOM-MST method yields a Sharpe ratio that is 23% and up to
50% higher than the Sharpe ratio of the MST method. The STARR ratio for the SOM-
MST is from 20% to 50% higher than the MST method. The SOM-MST method also
demonstrated higher diversification than the MST method when low-risk seeking and
moderate risk-seeking portfolio targets were used, with a 20.60% and 37.86%, respectively,
higher weighted PDI than the MST method generated.
When the larger subset was considered, the SOM-MST again showed significantly higher
results than the MST method. Concerning the Sharpe ratio, the SOM-MST delivered a
21.18% and up to 73.85% higher ratio than the MST method. Concerning the STARR
ratio, the ratio was 17.72% and up to 77.49% higher than the STARR ratio of the MST
method. Regarding the average weighted PDI then, SOM-MST had a 30.00% higher PDI
when NORD portfolio 5 was used as a target and a 7.07% higher PDI when NORD portfolio
13 was used as a target. However, when NORD portfolio 20 was used as a benchmark,
then the MST method had an average weighted PDI ratio that was 17.58% higher than
the one exhibited by the SOM-MST method.
Overall, the results showed that the SOM-MST method was the best-performing portfolio
regarding Sharpe and STARR ratio across all methods and all benchmarks. When the
diversification was examined, it turned out that the SOM-MST method demonstrated
significantly higher ratios across all methods except when NORD portfolio 20 was used
as a benchmark. In that case, the MST method delivered the highest average weighted
PDI. The above-discussed results indicate that the SOM algorithm combined with the
MST method has the potential to improve the risk-adjusted performance of the optimized
portfolios and, under some conditions, the PDI. The results of combining the forces of
SOM and AHC indicated a non-significant improvement, as the AHC method seemed to
outperform the SOM-AHC method. For the cases when the SOM-AHC method scored
higher ratios, the difference was minor. However, SOM combined with the AHC method
resulted in higher diversification across all benchmarks, indicating that it has the potential
to increase diversification but simultaneously suffer a decrease in performance.
66
Chapter: Conclusions
==PAGE:75==
In conclusion, the results from the synergy of SOM and AHC show inadequate enhance-
ment, and it can be concluded that the synergy is ineffective. However, the results indicate
that by combining SOM and MST, a performance enhancement occurs as the method
demonstrates superiority across not only the MST method but all the implemented meth-
ods. The SOM-MST method also outperforms the target portfolios in all metrics except
in terms of risk. Thus, the synergy of SOM and MST shows the promising potential of
combining the best of both worlds in terms of performance and diversification.
6.1
Limitations
Several limitations of the analysis implemented in this thesis are worth noting. One such
limitation is regarding the use of the NORD portfolios as benchmarks. Firstly, it was not
possible to retrieve historical portfolios from their website, nor was it possible to obtain
information regarding their rebalancing policy. Therefore, the portfolios were obtained
from their website on November 7th, 2022, and used as benchmarks. This means that
the benchmarks for this study are not rebalanced during the testing period. On the other
hand, information up until that point has been used to optimize their portfolios and,
therefore, might be more suitable for the underlying market conditions.
Another limitation is regarding the market’s condition during the testing period. Two
global crises hit the markets from January 1st, 2019, to December 1st, 2022, Covid in
late 2019 and the invasion of Russia into Ukraine at the beginning of 2022. These events
incurred tremendous amounts of volatility and uncertainty in the financial markets, which
may have affected the true performance of the generated portfolios.
A further limitation is the availability of data for ETFs during the period of this analysis.
ETFs are a relatively new innovation, and the number of ETFs with available data during
this period is not considerably many compared to, for example, stocks. This puts a limit
on the number of assets that can be included in the initial investment universe and may
not accurately represent the performance of the ETF market as a whole.
Chapter: Conclusions
67
==PAGE:76==
6.2
Future work
There are several areas where further research is needed to build upon the work of this
thesis. One area, in particular, is to use more extensive data, including mutual funds
and indices, to evaluate further the performance of the synergy between SOM and other
algorithms. This would provide a more comprehensive understanding of the capabilities of
SOM in this context. That is, it could allow us to evaluate the performance and eﬀiciency
of using SOM to enhance other traditional algorithms for different types of assets, which
essentially could increase the generalizability of our findings.
Another important area for future research is to perform a more extensive hyperparam-
eter optimization of the SOM, which could lead to several benefits. By fine-tuning the
parameters of the SOM algorithm, the model could represent the underlying data more
effectively and thus improve the quality of its output. Properly optimized parameters of
the SOM can also improve its robustness and generalizability, which means less sensitivity
to variations in the data and more consistent results under different market conditions.
Additionally, it would be beneficial to explore and analyze different variations of SOMs to
determine their potential benefit in the context of strategic fund selection. An example
of these variations is the Hierarchical SOM (HSOM) [98], which organizes the map into
multiple levels, each representing a different level of abstraction. Growing SOM (GSOM)
is another example [99]; it allows the map to adapt to the data by continuously adding or
removing nodes as needed. This can be useful for handling large and complex data, which
are often properties of financial data. These different variations of the SOM algorithm,
among others, could be useful for identifying patterns and relationships in the data that
are not captured by the traditional SOM.
With these future works, we believe that using SOM to enhance traditional algorithms in
the context of strategic fund selection has the potential to make significant contributions
to the field.
68
Chapter: Conclusions
==PAGE:77==
Bibliography
[1]
James Etheridge. The history of investing: What the past can teach us about market
cycles. Focused Financial. Section: News. Mar. 16, 2021. url: https://focusedfinancial.
co.uk/the-history-of-investing-what-the-past-can-teach-us-about-market-cycles/ (visited
on 10/10/2022).
[2]
The Vanguard Group. Expense ratios: What they are & how they work. Vanguard.
url: https://investor.vanguard.com/investor-resources-education/education/expense-ratio
(visited on 01/05/2023).
[3]
James Gamble. “Can Expense Ratios Signal Performance? An Analysis of Equity
ETFs & Mutual Funds”. en. In: American Journal of Undergraduate Research 16.4
(Mar. 2020), pp. 23–40. issn: 23758732, 15364585. doi: 10.33697/ajur.2020.004. url:
http://www.ajuronline.org/uploads/Volume_16_4/AJUR_Vol_16_Issue_4_March_2020_p23.pdf
(visited on 01/24/2023).
[4]
The Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development. Global Financial
Markets Policy Responses to COVID-19. OECD. url: https://read.oecd-ilibrary.org/
view / ?ref = 127 _ 127003 - tvl9kqbfy9 & title = Global - Financial - Markets - Policy - Responses - to -
COVID-19 (visited on 01/05/2023).
[5]
Xiaoyu Tan et al. “The impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on the global dynamic
spillover of financial market risk”. en. In: Frontiers in Public Health 10 (Aug. 2022),
p. 963620. issn: 2296-2565. doi: 10.3389/fpubh.2022.963620. url: https://www.frontiersin.
org/articles/10.3389/fpubh.2022.963620/full (visited on 01/24/2023).
[6]
Dun & Bradstreet. Implications for the global economy and businesses: Russia-
Ukraine Crisis. Dun & Bradstreet. url: https://www.dnb.com/content/dam/english/
dnb-data-insight/DNB_Russia_Ukraine_Crisis.pdf (visited on 01/15/2023).
[7]
Choey Li. ETFs Rising in the Turbulence. New York Stock Exchange. Mar. 2022.
url: https : / / www . nyse . com / data - insights / etfs - rising - in - the - turbulence (visited on
11/10/2022).
[8]
Lukas Brenner and Tobias Meyll. “Robo-advisors: A substitute for human financial
advice?” en. In: Journal of Behavioral and Experimental Finance 25 (Mar. 2020),
p. 100275. issn: 22146350. doi: 10.1016/j.jbef.2020.100275. url: https://linkinghub.
elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/S2214635019301881 (visited on 01/24/2023).
[9]
Melanie L. Fein. “Robo-Advisors: A Closer Look”. en. In: SSRN Electronic Journal
(2015). issn: 1556-5068. doi: 10.2139/ssrn.2658701. url: http://www.ssrn.com/abstract=
2658701 (visited on 01/24/2023).
[10]
Jill E. Fisch, Marion Labouré, and John A. Turner. “The Emergence of the Robo-
Advisor”. en. In: The Disruptive Impact of FinTech on Retirement Systems. Oxford
University Press, Aug. 2019, pp. 13–37. isbn: 978-0-19-884555-3 978-0-19-188072-8.
doi: 10.1093/oso/9780198845553.003.0002. url: https://academic.oup.com/book/35249/
chapter/299804888 (visited on 01/24/2023).
[11]
Auður Anna Jónsdóttir. “Feature Selection in Asset Allocation”. In: (2020), p. 74.
[12]
Petr Vanek. “Performance Analysis of the most traded Mutual Funds”. en. In: (2020).
[13]
Funnel Diagram with 4 Layers for PowerPoint and Google Slides. url: https : / /
www.presentationgo.com/presentation/funnel-diagram-4layers-powerpoint-google-slides/
#google_vignette (visited on 01/21/2023).
[14]
Petr Vanek. Investment Funnel. original-date: 2021-07-09T15:52:46Z. Aug. 7, 2022.
url: https://github.com/VanekPetr/investment-funnel (visited on 01/24/2023).
Bibliography
69
==PAGE:78==
[15]
Laurent Deville. “Exchange Traded Funds: History, Trading, and Research”. en.
In: Handbook of Financial Engineering. Ed. by Constantin Zopounidis, Michael
Doumpos, and Panos M. Pardalos. Vol. 18. Series Title: Springer Optimization and
Its Applications. Boston, MA: Springer US, 2008, pp. 67–98. isbn: 978-0-387-76681-
2 978-0-387-76682-9. doi: 10.1007/978-0-387-76682-9_4. url: http://link.springer.com/10.
1007/978-0-387-76682-9_4 (visited on 01/21/2023).
[16]
E.J. Elton et al. Modern Portfolio Theory and Investment Analysis. Wiley, 2014.
isbn: 978-1-118-46994-1. url: https://books.google.fr/books?id=ml-amgEACAAJ.
[17]
Itzhak Ben-David, Francesco Franzoni, and Rabih Moussawi. “Exchange-Traded
Funds”. In: Annual Review of Financial Economics 9 (Nov. 21, 2017). doi: 10.1146/
annurev-financial-110716-032538.
[18]
Statista. Number of ETFs globally 2003-2021. Statista. url: https://www.statista.com/
statistics/278249/global-number-of-etfs/ (visited on 11/10/2022).
[19]
Gary L. Gastineau. “Exchange-Traded Funds”. In: The Journal of Portfolio Man-
agement 27.3 (2001). Publisher: Institutional Investor Journals Umbrella _eprint:
https://jpm.pm-research.com/content/27/3/88.full.pdf, pp. 88–96. issn: 0095-4918.
doi: 10.3905/jpm.2001.319804. url: https://jpm.pm-research.com/content/27/3/88.
[20]
Investment Company Institute. Trends in the Expenses and Fees of Funds, 2020.
ICI. url: https://www.ici.org/system/files/attachments/pdf/per27- 03.pdf (visited on
10/20/2022).
[21]
Kenneth R. French. “Presidential Address: The Cost of Active Investing”. en. In:
The Journal of Finance 63.4 (Aug. 2008), pp. 1537–1573. issn: 00221082. doi: 10.
1111/j.1540-6261.2008.01368.x. url: https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/j.1540-
6261.2008.01368.x (visited on 01/24/2023).
[22]
David Easley et al. “The Active World of Passive Investing”. en. In: Review of Finance
25.5 (Oct. 2021), pp. 1433–1471. issn: 1572-3097, 1573-692X. doi: 10.1093/rof/rfab021.
url: https://academic.oup.com/rof/article/25/5/1433/6342430 (visited on 01/24/2023).
[23]
Burton G. Malkiel. “Passive Investment Strategies and Eﬀicient Markets”. en. In:
European Financial Management 9.1 (Mar. 2003), pp. 1–10. issn: 1354-7798, 1468-
036X. doi: 10.1111/1468-036X.00205. url: https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1468-
036X.00205 (visited on 01/24/2023).
[24]
Vladyslav Sushko and Grant Turner. “The implications of passive investing for se-
curities mark”. en. In: (2018).
[25]
Burton G Malkiel. “The Eﬀicient Market Hypothesis and Its Critics”. en. In: ().
[26]
Warren Buffet. Shareholders Letter 2016. Berkshire Hathaway INC. url: https://
www.berkshirehathaway.com/letters/2016ltr.pdf (visited on 09/23/2022).
[27]
A. Saunders and M.M. Cornett. Financial Markets and Institutions. McGraw-Hill &
Irwin, 2011. isbn: 978-0-07-803466-4. url: https://www.amazon.com/Financial-Markets-
Institutions-McGraw-Hill-Insurance/dp/0078034663.
[28]
Harry Markowitz. “Portfolio Selection”. In: The Journal of Finance 7.1 (1952). Pub-
lisher: [American Finance Association, Wiley], pp. 77–91. issn: 00221082, 15406261.
doi: 10.2307/2975974. url: http://www.jstor.org/stable/2975974 (visited on 10/10/2022).
[29]
Fatima Al Mazrouei and Haitham Nobanee. “Machine Learning in Finance: A Mini-
Review”. en. In: SSRN Electronic Journal (2020). issn: 1556-5068. doi: 10.2139/ssrn.
3539038. url: https://www.ssrn.com/abstract=3539038 (visited on 01/25/2023).
[30]
Statista. Volume of data/information created, captured, copied, and consumed world-
wide from 2010 to 2020, with forecasts from 2021 to 2025. Statista. url: https :
//www.statista.com/statistics/871513/worldwide-data-created/ (visited on 01/05/2023).
70
Bibliography
==PAGE:79==
[31]
M. F. Dixon and I. Halperin. The Four Horsemen of Machine Learning in Finance.
September 15, 2019. url: https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=3453564
(visited on 11/01/2022).
[32]
H.J. Stock and M.W. Watson. Introduction to Econometrics. Pearson Education
Limited, 2019, p. 515. isbn: 978-0-13-446199-1. url: https : / / www . saxo . com / dk /
introduction-to-econometrics-global-edition_james-stock_paperback_9781292264455.
[33]
Artificial Intelligence, Machine Learning and Big Data in Finance: Opportunities,
Challenges, and Implications for Policy Makers. OECD (2021). url: https://www.
oecd.org/finance/financial- markets/Artificial- intelligence- machine- learning- big- data- in-
finance.pdf (visited on 09/23/2022).
[34]
Daniel Hoang and Kevin Wiegratz. “Machine Learning Methods in Finance: Recent
Applications and Prospects”. en. In: ().
[35]
Guanhao Feng, Jingyu He, and Nicholas G. Polson. Deep Learning for Predicting
Asset Returns. en. arXiv:1804.09314 [cs, econ, stat]. Apr. 2018. url: http://arxiv.org/
abs/1804.09314 (visited on 01/06/2023).
[36]
Shihao Gu, Bryan Kelly, and Dacheng Xiu. “Empirical Asset Pricing via Machine
Learning”. en. In: The Review of Financial Studies 33.5 (May 2020). Ed. by Andrew
Karolyi, pp. 2223–2273. issn: 0893-9454, 1465-7368. doi: 10.1093/rfs/hhaa009. url:
https://academic.oup.com/rfs/article/33/5/2223/5758276 (visited on 01/06/2023).
[37]
Jaehyun Yoon. “Forecasting of Real GDP Growth Using Machine Learning Models:
Gradient Boosting and Random Forest Approach”. en. In: Computational Economics
57.1 (Jan. 2021), pp. 247–265. issn: 0927-7099, 1572-9974. doi: 10 . 1007 / s10614 -
020- 10054- w. url: https://link.springer.com/10.1007/s10614- 020- 10054- w (visited on
01/06/2023).
[38]
Jan De Spiegeleer et al. “Machine learning for quantitative finance: fast deriva-
tive pricing, hedging and fitting”. en. In: Quantitative Finance 18.10 (Oct. 2018),
pp. 1635–1643. issn: 1469-7688, 1469-7696. doi: 10 . 1080 / 14697688 . 2018 . 1495335.
url: https : / / www . tandfonline . com / doi / full / 10 . 1080 / 14697688 . 2018 . 1495335 (visited
on 01/06/2023).
[39]
Emil Ahlmann Østergaard. “Data-Driven Portfolio Management using Exchange
Traded Funds”. In: (), p. 57.
[40]
Ankita Garg. “Forecasting exchange rates using machine learning models with time-
varying volatility”. en. In: ().
[41]
Jonathan Felix Pfahler. “Exchange Rate Forecasting with Advanced Machine Learn-
ing Methods”. en. In: Journal of Risk and Financial Management 15.1 (Dec. 2021),
p. 2. issn: 1911-8074. doi: 10.3390/jrfm15010002. url: https://www.mdpi.com/1911-
8074/15/1/2 (visited on 01/06/2023).
[42]
Amir E. Khandani, Adlar J. Kim, and Andrew W. Lo. “Consumer credit-risk models
via machine-learning algorithms”. en. In: Journal of Banking & Finance 34.11 (Nov.
2010), pp. 2767–2787. issn: 03784266. doi: 10.1016/j.jbankfin.2010.06.001. url: https:
//linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/S0378426610002372 (visited on 01/06/2023).
[43]
Pol Borrellas and Irene Unceta. “The Challenges of Machine Learning and Their
Economic Implications”. en. In: Entropy 23.3 (Feb. 2021), p. 275. issn: 1099-4300.
doi: 10.3390/e23030275. url: https://www.mdpi.com/1099-4300/23/3/275 (visited on
01/25/2023).
[44]
Jasmine Fardouly, Ross D. Crosby, and Suku Sukunesan. “Potential benefits and
limitations of machine learning in the field of eating disorders: current research and
future directions”. en. In: Journal of Eating Disorders 10.1 (Dec. 2022), p. 66. issn:
2050-2974. doi: 10.1186/s40337-022-00581-2. url: https://jeatdisord.biomedcentral.com/
articles/10.1186/s40337-022-00581-2 (visited on 01/25/2023).
Bibliography
71
==PAGE:80==
[45]
Edeh Michael Onyema et al. “Prospects and Challenges of Using Machine Learning
for Academic Forecasting”. en. In: Computational Intelligence and Neuroscience 2022
(June 2022). Ed. by Ziya Uddin, pp. 1–7. issn: 1687-5273, 1687-5265. doi: 10.1155/
2022/5624475. url: https://www.hindawi.com/journals/cin/2022/5624475/ (visited on
01/25/2023).
[46]
Jerome H Friedman. “On Bias, Variance, 0/1-Loss, and the Curse-of-Dimensionality”.
en. In: (1997).
[47]
G.E.P. Box. “Robustness in the Strategy of Scientific Model Building”. en. In: Ro-
bustness in Statistics. Elsevier, 1979, pp. 201–236. isbn: 978-0-12-438150-6. doi:
10.1016/B978- 0- 12- 438150- 6.50018- 2. url: https://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/
B9780124381506500182 (visited on 01/25/2023).
[48]
Joseph B Kruskal. “ON THE SHORTEST SPANNING SUBTREE OF A GRAPH
AND THE TRAVELING SALESMAN PROBLEM”. en. In: ().
[49]
R.L. Graham and Pavol Hell. “On the History of the Minimum Spanning Tree Prob-
lem”. en. In: IEEE Annals of the History of Computing 7.1 (1985), pp. 43–57. issn:
1058-6180. doi: 10.1109/MAHC.1985.10011. url: http://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/
4392963/ (visited on 01/06/2023).
[50]
Rosario N. Mantegna. “Hierarchical Structure in Financial Markets”. en. In: The
European Physical Journal B 11.1 (Sept. 1999). arXiv:cond-mat/9802256, pp. 193–
197. issn: 1434-6028. doi: 10.1007/s100510050929. url: http://arxiv.org/abs/cond-
mat/9802256 (visited on 01/08/2023).
[51]
G. Bonanno et al. “Networks of equities in financial markets”. en. In: The European
Physical Journal B - Condensed Matter 38.2 (Mar. 2004). arXiv:cond-mat/0401300,
pp. 363–371. issn: 1434-6028, 1434-6036. doi: 10 . 1140 / epjb / e2004 - 00129 - 6. url:
http://arxiv.org/abs/cond-mat/0401300 (visited on 01/08/2023).
[52]
A Esfahanipour and S E Zamanzadeh. “A Stock Market Filtering Model Based on
Minimum Spanning Tree in Financial Networks”. en. In: 45.1 (2013).
[53]
A. K. Jain, M. N. Murty, and P. J. Flynn. “Data Clustering: A Review”. In: ACM
Comput. Surv. 31.3 (1999), pp. 264–323. issn: 0360-0300. doi: 10.1145/331499.331504.
url: https://doi.org/10.1145/331499.331504.
[54]
K.A.J. Doherty et al. “Hierarchical Topological Clustering Learns Stock Market
Sectors”. en. In: 2005 ICSC Congress on Computational Intelligence Methods and
Applications. Istanbul, Turkey: IEEE, 2005, pp. 1–6. isbn: 978-1-4244-0020-1. doi:
10.1109/CIMA.2005.1662299. url: http://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/1662299/ (visited
on 01/06/2023).
[55]
Nawee Jaroonchokanan, Teerasit Termsaithong, and Sujin Suwanna. “Dynamics of
hierarchical clustering in stocks market during financial crises”. en. In: Physica A:
Statistical Mechanics and its Applications 607 (Dec. 2022), p. 128183. issn: 03784371.
doi: 10 . 1016 / j . physa . 2022 . 128183. url: https : / / linkinghub . elsevier . com / retrieve / pii /
S0378437122007415 (visited on 01/06/2023).
[56]
R. Yusuf, B. D. Handari, and G. F. Hertono. “Implementation of agglomerative
clustering and genetic algorithm on stock portfolio optimization with possibilistic
constraints”. en. In: Depok, Indonesia, 2019, p. 020028. doi: 10.1063/1.5132455. url:
http://aip.scitation.org/doi/abs/10.1063/1.5132455 (visited on 01/06/2023).
[57]
Vera Marinova. “Using The Agglomerative Method Of Hierarchical Clustering As A
Data Mining Tool In Capital Market”. en. In: (2008).
[58]
Catherine A Sugar and Gareth M James. “Finding the Number of Clusters in a
Dataset: An Information-Theoretic Approach”. en. In: Journal of the American Sta-
tistical Association 98.463 (Sept. 2003), pp. 750–763. issn: 0162-1459, 1537-274X.
72
Bibliography
==PAGE:81==
doi: 10.1198/016214503000000666. url: http://www.tandfonline.com/doi/abs/10.1198/
016214503000000666 (visited on 01/09/2023).
[59]
Peter J. Rousseeuw. “Silhouettes: A graphical aid to the interpretation and validation
of cluster analysis”. en. In: Journal of Computational and Applied Mathematics 20
(Nov. 1987), pp. 53–65. issn: 03770427. doi: 10 . 1016 / 0377 - 0427(87 ) 90125 - 7. url:
https://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/0377042787901257 (visited on 01/09/2023).
[60]
T. Soni Madhulatha. “AN OVERVIEW ON CLUSTERING METHODS”. en. In:
IOSR Journal of Engineering 02.04 (Apr. 2012), pp. 719–725. issn: 22788719,
22503021. doi: 10.9790/3021-0204719725. url: http://www.iosrjen.org/Papers/vol2_issue4/
AI24719725.pdf (visited on 01/09/2023).
[61]
Leonard Kaufman and Peter J. Rousseeuw. Finding groups in data: an introduc-
tion to cluster analysis. en. Wiley series in probability and mathematical statistics.
Hoboken, N.J: Wiley, 2005. isbn: 978-0-471-73578-6.
[62]
Shibing Zhou, Zhenyuan Xu, and Fei Liu. “Method for Determining the Optimal
Number of Clusters Based on Agglomerative Hierarchical Clustering”. en. In: IEEE
Transactions on Neural Networks and Learning Systems 28.12 (Dec. 2017), pp. 3007–
3017. issn: 2162-237X, 2162-2388. doi: 10 . 1109 / TNNLS . 2016 . 2608001. url: http : / /
ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/7583663/ (visited on 01/09/2023).
[63]
Jason W. Beckstead. “Using Hierarchical Cluster Analysis in Nursing Research”. en.
In: Western Journal of Nursing Research 24.3 (Apr. 2002), pp. 307–319. issn: 0193-
9459, 1552-8456. doi: 10.1177/01939450222045923. url: http://journals.sagepub.com/
doi/10.1177/01939450222045923 (visited on 01/09/2023).
[64]
Ira Assent. “Clustering high dimensional data”. en. In: WIREs Data Mining and
Knowledge Discovery 2.4 (July 2012), pp. 340–350. issn: 1942-4787, 1942-4795. doi:
10.1002/widm.1062. url: https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/widm.1062 (visited
on 01/09/2023).
[65]
T. Kohonen. “The self-organizing map”. In: Proceedings of the IEEE 78.9 (Sept.
1990), pp. 1464–1480. issn: 1558-2256. doi: 10.1109/5.58325.
[66]
Teuvo Kohonen. “Essentials of the self-organizing map”. en. In: Neural Networks
37 (Jan. 2013), pp. 52–65. issn: 08936080. doi: 10.1016/j.neunet.2012.09.018. url:
https://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/S0893608012002596 (visited on 01/26/2023).
[67]
Aymen Cherif, Hubert Cardot, and Romuald Boné. “SOM time series clustering
and prediction with recurrent neural networks”. en. In: Neurocomputing 74.11 (May
2011), pp. 1936–1944. issn: 09252312. doi: 10.1016/j.neucom.2010.11.026. url: https:
//linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/S0925231211000439 (visited on 01/26/2023).
[68]
Fajri Farid and Dedi Rosadi. “Portfolio optimization based on self-organizing maps
clustering and genetics algorithm”. en. In: International Journal of Advances in
Intelligent Informatics 8.1 (Mar. 2022), pp. 33–44. issn: 2548-3161, 2442-6571. doi:
10.26555/ijain.v8i1.587. url: http://ijain.org/index.php/IJAIN/article/view/587 (visited on
01/06/2023).
[69]
Marie Cottrell et al. “Self-Organizing Maps, theory and applications”. en. In: ().
[70]
Giedrius Stankevic Ius. “Forming of the Investment Portfolio Using the Self-
organizing Maps (SOM)”. en. In: 12.4 (2001), pp. 573–584.
[71]
Guido Deboeck. “Self-Organizing Maps Facilitate Knowledge Discovery In Finance”.
en. In: ().
[72]
Sophie Emersson. Investor Regime Analysis using Self-Organising Maps and Hier-
archical Clustering. 2019. url: https://www.cfasociety.org/ireland/Documents/1st-%5C%
20Sophie%5C%20Emerson-%5C%20Investor%5C%20regime%5C%20analysis%5C%20using%5C%
20self-organising%5C%20maps%5C%20and%5C%20hierarchical%5C%20clustering.pdf (visited
on 11/30/2022).
Bibliography
73
==PAGE:82==
[73]
Binoy B. Nair et al. “Clustering stock price time series data to generate stock trading
recommendations: An empirical study”. en. In: Expert Systems with Applications 70
(Mar. 2017), pp. 20–36. issn: 09574174. doi: 10.1016/j.eswa.2016.11.002. url: https:
//linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/S0957417416306200 (visited on 01/06/2023).
[74]
Johannes Kepler. “Risk Analysis of Hedge Fund Strategies with Self-Organizing
Maps”. en. In: (July 2020).
[75]
Juha Vesanto and Esa Alhoniemi. “Clustering of the self-organizing map”. en. In:
IEEE Transactions on Neural Networks 11.3 (), pp. 586–600. issn: 10459227. doi:
10 . 1109 / 72 . 846731. url: http : / / ieeexplore . ieee . org / document / 846731/ (visited on
01/06/2023).
[76]
Mohamed Ayan. “Artificial Intelligence in investing: Stock clustering with Self-
organizing map and return prediction with model comparison”. en. In: (2019).
[77]
Paul Mangiameli, Shaw K. Chen, and David West. “A comparison of SOM neural
network and hierarchical clustering methods”. en. In: European Journal of Opera-
tional Research 93.2 (Sept. 1996), pp. 402–417. issn: 03772217. doi: 10.1016/0377-
2217(96)00038-0. url: https://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/0377221796000380 (vis-
ited on 01/06/2023).
[78]
Facundo Abraham, Sergio L. Schmukler, and José Tessada. Robo-Advisors: Investing
Through Machines. Rochester, NY, Feb. 26, 2019. url: https : / / papers . ssrn . com /
abstract=3360125 (visited on 10/10/2022).
[79]
Statista. Robo-Advisors - Denmark | Statista Market Forecast. Statista. url: https:
/ / www . statista . com / outlook / dmo / fintech / digital - investment / robo - advisors / denmark
(visited on 10/10/2022).
[80]
Dominik Jung et al. “Robo-Advisory: Digitalization and Automation of Financial
Advisory”. en. In: Business & Information Systems Engineering 60.1 (Feb. 2018),
pp. 81–86. issn: 2363-7005, 1867-0202. doi: 10.1007/s12599- 018- 0521- 9. url: http:
//link.springer.com/10.1007/s12599-018-0521-9 (visited on 01/08/2023).
[81]
Ana Vukovic and Line Bjerknes. “Automated Advice: A Portfolio Management Per-
spective on Robo-Advisors”. en. In: ().
[82]
Datadreven service til langsigtet investering. url: https://www.nord.investments/om
(visited on 01/26/2023).
[83]
Giuseppe Vettigli. MiniSom: minimalistic and NumPy-based implementation of the
Self Organizing Map. 2018. url: https://github.com/JustGlowing/minisom/.
[84]
William F. Sharpe. “The Sharpe Ratio”. English. In: Journal of Portfolio Manage-
ment 21.1 (1994). Copyright - Copyright Euromoney Institutional Investor PLC Fall
1994; Last updated - 2022-11-06; SubjectsTermNotLitGenreText - United States–US,
p. 49. url: https://www.proquest.com/scholarly-journals/sharpe-ratio/docview/195581284/
se-2.
[85]
R. Martin and Frederic Siboulet. “Phi-Alpha optimal portfolios and extreme risk
management”. In: Wilmott 2003 (Nov. 1, 2003), pp. 70–83. doi: 10 . 1002 / wilm .
42820030619.
[86]
Hervé Abdi and Lynne J. Williams. “Principal component analysis”. In: WIREs
Computational Statistics 2.4 (July 1, 2010). Publisher: John Wiley & Sons, Ltd,
pp. 433–459. issn: 1939-5108. doi: 10.1002/wics.101. url: https://doi.org/10.1002/wics.
101 (visited on 10/10/2022).
[87]
Frederick E. Dopfel. “Asset Allocation in a Lower Stock-Bond Correlation Envi-
ronment”. en. In: The Journal of Portfolio Management 30.1 (Oct. 2003), pp. 25–
38. issn: 0095-4918, 2168-8656. doi: 10.3905/jpm.2003.319917. url: http://jpm.pm-
research.com/lookup/doi/10.3905/jpm.2003.319917 (visited on 01/23/2023).
74
Bibliography
==PAGE:83==
[88]
Alexander M. Rudin and jonathan S. Morgan. “A Portfolio Diversification Index”. In:
The Journal of Portfolio Management 32.2 (2006). Publisher: Institutional Investor
Journals Umbrella, pp. 81–89. issn: 0095-4918. doi: 10.3905/jpm.2006.611807. url:
https://jpm.pm-research.com/content/32/2/81.
[89]
Robert S. Strichartz. The Way of Analysis. en. Google-Books-ID: Yix09oVvI1IC.
Jones & Bartlett Learning, 2000. isbn: 978-0-7637-1497-0.
[90]
Gregory T. Breard. Evaluating Self-Organizing Map Quality Measures as Conver-
gence Criteria. 2017. url: https://digitalcommons.uri.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=
2013&context=theses (visited on 11/10/2022).
[91]
Mohammed Attik, Laurent Bougrain, and Frédéric Alexandre. “Self-organizing Map
Initialization”. In: Artificial Neural Networks: Biological Inspirations – ICANN 2005.
Ed. by Włodzisław Duch et al. Lecture Notes in Computer Science. Berlin, Heidel-
berg: Springer, 2005, pp. 357–362. isbn: 978-3-540-28754-4. doi: 10.1007/11550822_56.
[92]
Jing Tian, M. Azarian, and M. Pecht. “Anomaly Detection Using Self-Organizing
Maps-Based K-Nearest Neighbor Algorithm”. In: 2014. url: www.semanticscholar.
org / paper / Anomaly - Detection - Using - Self - Organizing - Maps - Based - Tian - Azarian /
0cfcffcf796f0f2f2be202222a07584c9474541c (visited on 01/23/2023).
[93]
Teuvo Kohonen. Self-Organizing Maps. Red. by Thomas S. Huang, Teuvo Kohonen,
and Manfred R. Schroeder. Vol. 30. Springer Series in Information Sciences. Berlin,
Heidelberg: Springer, 2001. isbn: 978-3-540-67921-9 978-3-642-56927-2. doi: 10.1007/
978-3-642-56927-2. url: http://link.springer.com/10.1007/978-3-642-56927-2 (visited on
01/23/2023).
[94]
J.C. Hull. Risk Management and Financial Institutions. John Wiley & Sons, Inc.,
2018. isbn: 978-1-119-44811-2. url: https://www.wiley.com/en-gb/Risk+Management+
and+Financial+Institutions,+5th+Edition-p-9781119448112.
[95]
R. Tyrrell Rockafellar and Stanislav Uryasev. “Optimization of conditional value-
at-risk”. en. In: The Journal of Risk 2.3 (2000), pp. 21–41. issn: 14651211. doi:
10.21314/JOR.2000.038. url: http://www.risk.net/journal-of-risk/technical-paper/2161159/
optimization-conditional-value-risk (visited on 01/07/2023).
[96]
ETF Database: The Original & Comprehensive Guide to ETFs. url: https://etfdb.
com/ (visited on 01/21/2023).
[97]
Doug Guthrie. dpguthrie/yahooquery. original-date: 2019-12-13T00:29:16Z. Jan. 21,
2023. url: https://github.com/dpguthrie/yahooquery (visited on 01/21/2023).
[98]
Jouko Lampinen and Erkki Oja. “Clustering properties of hierarchical self-organizing
maps”. In: Journal of Mathematical Imaging and Vision 2 (1992), pp. 261–272.
[99]
Th. Villmann and H.-U. Bauer. “Applications of the growing self-organizing
map11This work has been supported by Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft, SFB
185 “Nichtlineare Dynamik”, TP E6.” In: Neurocomputing 21.1 (1998), pp. 91–
100. issn: 0925-2312. doi: https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / S0925 - 2312(98 ) 00037 - X. url:
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S092523129800037X.
Bibliography
75
==PAGE:84==
76
Bibliography
==PAGE:85==
Appendix A
Acronyms
AHC
Agglomerative Hierarchical Clustering
AVG
Average
ANN
Annualized
CVaR
Conditional Value-at-Risk
ETF
Exchange Traded Funds
ETL
Expected Tail Loss
GDP
Gross Domestic Product
PDI
Portfolio Diversification Index
PCA
Principal Component Analysis
NORD NORD.Investments
MPT
Modern Portfolio Theory
MST
Minimum Spanning Tree
SOM
Self-Organizing Map
STARR Stable Tail-Adjusted Return Ratio
Appendix: Acronyms
77
==PAGE:86==
78
Appendix: Acronyms
==PAGE:87==
Appendix B
Appendix
B.1
Asset Distribution of the Subsets
B.1.1
Small Subset
Table B.1 compares the asset class distribution of the smaller subsets across the different
methods. The table shows that the MST-based methods are much more diversified re-
garding asset class exposure than the clustering-based methods. Furthermore, the asset
class distribution of the MST methods is quite similar to the distribution of the analyzed
ETF universe, the SOM-MST method being the most similar. Additionally, it is worth
noting that the clustering-based method favor bond ETFs, while the MST-methods favor
equity ETFs.
Table B.1: Overview of asset class distribution across the methods for the smaller
subsets, presented in (%).
Universe
SOM-AHC
AHC
SOM-MST
MST
Alternatives
0.30
-
-
-
4.76
Bond
20.58
70.83
79.17
18.52
28.57
Commodity
2.59
-
4.17
3.7
4.76
Currency
0.76
-
4.17
3.7
4.76
Equity
70.43
25.0
12.5
66.67
52.38
Multi-Asset
1.68
-
-
3.7
-
Preferred Stock
0.91
4.17
-
3.7
4.76
Real Estate
2.74
-
-
-
-
Appendix: Appendix
79
==PAGE:88==
Table B.2 compares the regional distribution of the smaller subsets for the different meth-
ods. It can be seen from the table that the dominant region of the ETFs within each
subset is North America. This does not come as a surprise since it dominates the whole
investment universe as well. Additionally, it can be seen that the MST-based methods
exhibit more regional exposure when compared to the clustering-based methods.
Table B.2: Overview of regional distribution across the methods for the smaller subsets,
presented in (%).
Universe
SOM-AHC
AHC
SOM-MST
MST
Africa
0.15
-
-
-
-
Broad Asia
1.68
-
-
-
-
Developed Asia Pacific
4.12
-
-
7.41
4.76
Developed Europe
1.83
-
-
-
9.52
Developed Market
9.30
16.67
16.67
11.11
4.76
Emerging Asia Pacific
3.96
-
-
11.11
14.29
Emerging Market
2.90
12.5
8.33
-
-
Global
5.34
4.17
12.5
7.41
9.52
Global ex-U.S
2.44
4.17
4.17
-
-
Latin America
1.07
-
-
3.7
4.76
Middle East
0.15
-
-
-
4.76
North America
64.94
62.5
58.33
55.56
42.86
Undefined
2.13
-
-
3.7
4.76
B.1.2
Large Subset
Table B.3 compares the asset class distribution of the larger subsets for the different meth-
ods. Similarly, as for the smaller subsets, the table shows that the MST-based methods are
much more diversified in terms of asset class exposure compared to the clustering-based
methods. Furthermore, the asset class distribution of the MST methods is quite similar
to the distribution of the analyzed ETF universe. Additionally, it is worth noting that the
clustering-based method favor bond ETFs, while the MST-methods favor equity ETFs.
Lastly, it can also be seen that the SOM-AHC method has the least amount of asset class
exposure for the larger subset.
Table B.3: Overview of asset class distribution across the methods for the larger
subsets, presented in (%).
Universe
SOM-AHC
AHC
SOM-MST
MST
Alternatives
0.30
-
2.38
1.75
2.33
Bond
20.58
65.0
66.67
15.79
27.91
Commodity
2.59
-
14.29
3.51
2.33
Currency
0.76
-
4.76
5.26
2.33
Equity
70.43
32.5
11.9
66.67
58.14
Multi-Asset
1.68
-
-
3.51
2.33
Preferred Stock
0.91
2.5
-
1.75
2.33
Real Estate
2.74
-
-
1.75
2.33
80
Appendix: Appendix
==PAGE:89==
Table B.4 compares the regional distribution of the larger subsets for the different methods.
As for the smaller subsets, it can be seen in the table, the dominant region of the ETFs
within each subset is North America. This does not come as a surprise since the dominant
region of the analyzed ETF universe is North America as well. Additionally, it can be
seen that the MST-based methods have slightly more regional exposure when compared
to the clustering-based methods.
Table B.4: Overview of regional distribution across the methods for the larger subsets,
presented in (%).
Universe
SOM-AHC
AHC
SOM-MST
MST
Africa
0.15
-
-
-
-
Broad Asia
1.68
-
-
-
-
Developed Asia Pacific
4.12
-
2.38
7.02
4.65
Developed Europe
1.83
-
-
1.75
4.65
Developed Market
9.30
15.0
21.43
10.53
6.98
Emerging Asia Pacific
3.96
-
-
7.02
9.3
Emerging Market
2.90
7.5
4.76
1.75
-
Global
5.34
5.0
14.29
8.77
6.98
Global ex-U.S
2.44
5.0
2.38
-
-
Latin America
1.07
-
-
3.51
4.65
Middle East
0.15
-
-
1.75
2.33
North America
64.94
67.5
42.86
54.39
58.14
Undefined
2.13
-
11.9
3.51
2.33
Appendix: Appendix
81
==PAGE:90==
B.2
Optimal Portfolio Allocation
B.2.1
Target: NORD 5 portfolio
Figure B.1 shows the optimal portfolio allocation for the smaller ETF subset, constructed
by applying AHC to the SOM and with NORD 5 as the target portfolio. From the figure,
it can be seen that, on average, the optimal portfolio is constructed of approximately four
assets. At its largest, the portfolio is constructed of seven assets, while at its smallest,
three assets are in the portfolio. In total, a portion of the portfolio is allocated to seven
assets over the 17 periods. Furthermore, the most noticeable assets are IHI and LMBS,
which is part of the optimal portfolio for almost all 17 periods; another asset is GSY.
Figure B.1: Periodic optimal portfolio allocation and the number of assets for the
small subset selected by applying AHC to the SOM with NORD 5 as the target.
Figure B.1 shows the optimal portfolio allocation for the larger ETF subset, constructed
by applying AHC to the SOM and with NORD 5 as the target portfolio. As for the smaller
subset, on average, the optimal portfolio is constructed of approximately four assets, and
at its largest, the portfolio is constructed of six assets, while at its smallest, it contains
three assets. Furthermore, in total, a portion of the portfolio is now allocated to eight
assets over the 17 periods. The most noticeable assets are VGT, which is part of the
portfolio for all 17 periods, and other assets are GSY and LMBS.
Figure B.2: Periodic optimal portfolio allocation and the number of assets for the
large subset selected by applying AHC to the SOM with NORD 5 as the target.
82
Appendix: Appendix
==PAGE:91==
Figure B.3 shows the optimal portfolio allocation for the smaller ETF subset constructed
using AHC, with NORD 5 as the target portfolio. From the figure, it can be seen that, on
average, the optimal portfolio is constructed of approximately three assets. At its largest,
the portfolio is constructed of four assets, while at its smallest, there are two assets. In
total, a portion of the portfolio is allocated to five assets over the 17 periods. Furthermore,
the most noticeable assets are IHI and USDU, which account for most of the allocation
and are part of the optimal portfolio for all 17 periods.
Figure B.3: Periodic optimal portfolio allocation and the number of assets for the
small subset selected by AHC with NORD 5 as the target.
Figure B.4 shows the optimal portfolio allocation for the larger ETF subset constructed
using AHC, with NORD 5 as the target portfolio. The figure shows that, on average, the
optimal portfolio is constructed of slightly less than five assets. At its largest, the portfolio
is constructed of six assets, while at its smallest, four assets are in the portfolio. In total,
a portion of the portfolio is allocated to 10 assets over the 17 periods. Furthermore, the
most noticeable assets are again IHI and USDU, which account for most of the allocation
for all 17 periods.
Figure B.4: Periodic optimal portfolio allocation and the number of assets for the
large subset selected by AHC with NORD 5 as the target.
Appendix: Appendix
83
==PAGE:92==
Figure B.5 shows the optimal portfolio allocation for the smaller ETF subset, constructed
by applying MST to the SOM and with NORD 5 as the target portfolio. The figure shows
that, on average, the optimal portfolio is constructed of slightly more than five assets. At
its largest, the portfolio is constructed of seven assets, while at its smallest, three assets
are in the portfolio. In total, a portion of the portfolio is allocated to 10 assets over the
17 periods. Furthermore, the most noticeable asset are USDU, SOXX, and RHS, which
account for most of the allocation for all 17 periods.
Figure B.5: Periodic optimal portfolio allocation and the number of assets for the
small subset selected by applying MST to the SOM with NORD 5 as the target.
Figure B.6 shows the optimal portfolio allocation for the larger ETF subset, constructed
by applying MST to the SOM and with NORD 5 as the target portfolio. The figure shows
that, on average, the optimal portfolio is constructed of slightly less than seven assets. At
its largest, the portfolio is constructed of eight assets, while at its smallest, there are five
assets. In total, a portion of the portfolio is allocated to 10 assets over the 17 periods.
Again, the most noticeable assets are USDU, SOXX, and RHS, which account for most of
the allocation for all 17 periods. However, IHI is also frequent.
Figure B.6: Periodic optimal portfolio allocation and the number of assets for the
large subset selected by applying MST to the SOM with NORD 5 as the target.
84
Appendix: Appendix
==PAGE:93==
Figure B.7 shows the optimal portfolio allocation for the smaller ETF subset constructed
using MST, with NORD 5 as the target portfolio. The figure shows that, on average,
the optimal portfolio is constructed of slightly more than four assets.
At its largest,
the portfolio is constructed of six assets, while at its smallest, three assets are in the
portfolio.
In total, a portion of the portfolio is allocated to seven assets over the 17
periods. Furthermore, the most noticeable assets are LMBS and PSI, which are part of
the optimal portfolio for all 17 periods. Furthermore, LMBS accounts for most of the
allocation for most of the periods.
Figure B.7: Periodic optimal portfolio allocation and the number of assets for the
small subset selected by MST with NORD 5 as the target.
Figure B.8 shows the optimal portfolio allocation for the larger ETF subset constructed
using MST, with NORD 5 as the target portfolio. The figure shows that, on average, the
optimal portfolio is constructed of slightly less than six assets. At its largest, the portfolio
is constructed of seven assets, while at its smallest, four assets are in the portfolio. A
portion of the portfolio is allocated to 10 assets over the 17 periods. Furthermore, the
most noticeable assets are LMBS and PSI, which are part of the optimal portfolio for all
17 periods, and account for most of the allocation. Another asset that can also be noticed
is PUI.
Figure B.8: Periodic optimal portfolio allocation and the number of assets for the
large subset selected by MST with NORD 5 as the target.
Appendix: Appendix
85
==PAGE:94==
B.2.2
Target: NORD 13 portfolio
Figure B.9 shows the optimal portfolio allocation for the smaller ETF subset, constructed
by applying AHC to the SOM and with NORD 13 as the target portfolio. The figure
shows that, on average, the optimal portfolio is constructed of slightly more than four
assets. At its largest, the portfolio is constructed of six assets, while at its smallest, three
assets are in the portfolio. In total, a portion of the portfolio is allocated to eight assets
over the 17 periods. Furthermore, the most noticeable asset is IHI, which is part of the
optimal portfolio for 16 of the 17 periods.
Figure B.9: Periodic optimal portfolio allocation and the number of assets for the
small subset selected by applying AHC to the SOM with NORD 13 as the target.
Figure B.10 shows the optimal portfolio allocation for the larger ETF subset, constructed
by applying AHC to the SOM and with NORD 13 as the target portfolio. From the figure,
it can be seen that, on average, the optimal portfolio is constructed of approximately four
assets. At its largest, the portfolio is constructed of seven assets, while at its smallest,
three assets are in the portfolio. In total, a portion of the portfolio is allocated to seven
assets over the 17 periods. Furthermore, the most noticeable asset is VGT, which is part
of the optimal portfolio for all 17 periods, followed by LMBS.
Figure B.10: Periodic optimal portfolio allocation and the number of assets for the
large subset selected by applying AHC to the SOM with NORD 13 as the target.
86
Appendix: Appendix
==PAGE:95==
Figure B.11 shows the optimal portfolio allocation for the smaller ETF subset constructed
using AHC, with NORD 13 as the target portfolio. The figure shows that, on average,
the optimal portfolio is constructed of slightly less than three assets. At its largest, the
portfolio is constructed of five assets, while at its smallest, there are two assets. In total,
a portion of the portfolio is allocated to five assets over the 17 periods. Furthermore, the
most noticeable assets are IHI, followed by USDU, which are part of the optimal portfolio
for all 17 periods, and account for almost all the allocation.
Figure B.11: Periodic optimal portfolio allocation and the number of assets for the
small subset selected by AHC with NORD 13 as the target.
Figure B.12 shows the optimal portfolio allocation for the larger ETF subset constructed
using AHC, with NORD 13 as the target portfolio. The figure shows that, on average,
the optimal portfolio is constructed of slightly more than four assets.
At its largest,
the portfolio is constructed of five assets, while at its smallest, three assets are in the
portfolio.
In total, a portion of the portfolio is allocated to eight assets over the 17
periods. Furthermore, the most noticeable assets are again IHI and USDU, which are part
of the optimal portfolio for all 17 periods, and account for almost all the allocation, How
ever, PALL is also present for most of the periods.
Figure B.12: Periodic optimal portfolio allocation and the number of assets for the
large subset selected by AHC with NORD 13 as the target.
Appendix: Appendix
87
==PAGE:96==
Figure B.13 shows the optimal portfolio allocation for the smaller ETF subset, constructed
by applying MST to the SOM and with NORD 13 as the target portfolio. The figure shows
that, on average, the optimal portfolio is constructed of slightly more than four assets. At
its largest, the portfolio is constructed of six assets, while at its smallest, three assets are
in the portfolio. In total, a portion of the portfolio is allocated to nine assets over the 17
periods. Furthermore, the most noticeable assets are USDU, RHX, and SOXX, which are
part of the portfolio for all 17 periods, and account for almost all the allocation.
Figure B.13: Periodic optimal portfolio allocation and the number of assets for the
small subset selected by applying MST to the SOM with NORD 13 as the target.
Figure B.14 shows the optimal portfolio allocation for the larger ETF subset, constructed
by applying MST to the SOM and with NORD 13 as the target portfolio. The figure shows
that, on average, the optimal portfolio is constructed of slightly more than six assets. At
its largest, the portfolio is constructed of eight assets, while at its smallest, there are five
assets. In total, a portion of the portfolio is allocated to 11 assets over the 17 periods.
Furthermore, the most noticeable assets are again USDU, RHX, and SOXX. These assets
are part of the portfolio for most periods and account for most of the allocation. However,
IHI is now also present.
Figure B.14: Periodic optimal portfolio allocation and the number of assets for the
large subset selected by applying MST to the SOM with NORD 13 as the target.
88
Appendix: Appendix
==PAGE:97==
Figure B.15 shows the optimal portfolio allocation for the smaller ETF subset constructed
using MST, with NORD 13 as the target portfolio. From the figure, it can be seen that, on
average, the optimal portfolio is constructed of approximately four assets. At its largest,
the portfolio is constructed of six assets, while at its smallest, three assets are in the
portfolio. In total, a portion of the portfolio is allocated to six assets over the 17 periods.
Furthermore, the most noticeable assets are LMBS and PSI, which are part of the optimal
portfolio for all 17 periods, and account for almost all the allocation.
Figure B.15: Periodic optimal portfolio allocation and the number of assets for the
small subset selected by MST with NORD 13 as the target.
Figure B.16 shows the optimal portfolio allocation for the larger ETF subset constructed
using MST, with NORD 13 as the target portfolio. The figure shows that, on average, the
optimal portfolio is constructed of slightly less than six assets. At its largest, the portfolio
is constructed of seven assets, while at its smallest, four assets are in the portfolio. In total,
a portion of the portfolio is allocated to 11 assets over the 17 periods. Furthermore, the
most noticeable assets are again LMBS and PSI, which are part of the optimal portfolio
for almost all 17 periods, and account for most of the allocation. However, now PUI and
PALL are also present throughout the periods.
Figure B.16: Periodic optimal portfolio allocation and the number of assets for the
large subset selected by MST with NORD 13 as the target.
Appendix: Appendix
89
==PAGE:98==
B.2.3
Target: NORD 20 portfolio
Figure B.17 shows the optimal portfolio allocation for the smaller ETF subset, constructed
by applying AHC to the SOM and with NORD 20 as the target portfolio. From the figure,
it can be seen that, on average, the optimal portfolio is constructed of approximately four
assets. At its largest, the portfolio is constructed of five assets, while at its smallest, three
assets are in the portfolio. In total, a portion of the portfolio is allocated to seven assets
over the 17 periods. Furthermore, the most noticeable asset is IHI, which is part of the
optimal portfolio for all 17 periods, followed by IGV and USMV.
Figure B.17: Periodic optimal portfolio allocation and the number of assets for the
small subset selected by applying AHC to the SOM with NORD 20 as the target.
Figure B.18 shows the optimal portfolio allocation for the larger ETF subset, constructed
by applying AHC to the SOM and with NORD 20 as the target portfolio. The figure
shows that, on average, the optimal portfolio is constructed of slightly more than four
assets. At its largest, the portfolio is constructed of 7 assets; at its smallest, there are
three assets. In total, a portion of the portfolio is allocated to nine assets over the 17
periods. Furthermore, the most noticeable asset is VGT, which is part of the optimal
portfolio for all 17 periods and accounts for most of the allocation.
Figure B.18: Periodic optimal portfolio allocation and the number of assets for the
large subset selected by applying AHC to the SOM with NORD 20 as the target.
90
Appendix: Appendix
==PAGE:99==
Figure B.19 shows the optimal portfolio allocation for the smaller ETF subset constructed
using AHC, with NORD 20 as the target portfolio. The figure shows that, on average,
the optimal portfolio is constructed of slightly more than two assets. At its largest, the
portfolio is constructed of four assets, while at its smallest, there are two assets. In total,
a portion of the portfolio is allocated to five assets over the 17 periods. Furthermore, the
most noticeable asset is IHI, which is part of the optimal portfolio for all 17 periods and
accounts for almost all the allocation. However, USDU is present as well.
Figure B.19: Periodic optimal portfolio allocation and the number of assets for the
small subset selected by AHC with NORD 20 as the target.
Figure B.20 shows the optimal portfolio allocation for the larger ETF subset constructed
using AHC, with NORD 20 as the target portfolio. From the figure, it can be seen that, on
average, the optimal portfolio is constructed of approximately four assets. The portfolio is
constructed of six assets at its largest, while at its smallest, there are three assets. In total,
a portion of the portfolio is allocated to eight assets over the 17 periods. Furthermore,
the most noticeable asset is IHI, which is part of the optimal portfolio for all 17 periods
and accounts for almost all the allocation. However, USDU, PALL, and IAU are present
as well.
Figure B.20: Periodic optimal portfolio allocation and the number of assets for the
large subset selected by AHC with NORD 20 as the target.
Appendix: Appendix
91
==PAGE:100==
Figure B.21 shows the optimal portfolio allocation for the smaller ETF subset, constructed
by applying MST to the SOM and with NORD 20 as the target portfolio. The figure shows
that, on average, the optimal portfolio is constructed of slightly more than four assets.
At its largest, the portfolio is constructed of six assets, while at its smallest, there are
two assets. In total, a portion of the portfolio is allocated to seven assets over the 17
periods. Furthermore, the most noticeable assets are SOXX and RHX, which are part of
the portfolio for all 17 periods, and account for most of the allocation. However, USDU
is also present.
Figure B.21: Periodic optimal portfolio allocation and the number of assets for the
small subset selected by applying MST to the SOM with NORD 20 as the target.
Figure B.21 shows the optimal portfolio allocation for the larger ETF subset, constructed
by applying MST to the SOM and with NORD 20 as the target portfolio. From the figure,
it can be seen that, on average, the optimal portfolio is constructed of approximately six
assets. At its largest, the portfolio is constructed of seven assets, while at its smallest,
there are four assets. In total, a portion of the portfolio is allocated to 12 assets over the
17 periods. Furthermore, the most noticeable assets are SOXX, IHI, and USDU, which are
part of the portfolio for all 17 periods, and account for most of the allocation. However,
RHS is also present.
Figure B.22: Periodic optimal portfolio allocation and the number of assets for the
large subset selected by applying MST to the SOM with NORD 20 as the target.
92
Appendix: Appendix
==PAGE:101==
Figure B.23 shows the optimal portfolio allocation for the smaller ETF subset constructed
using MST, and with NORD 20 as the target portfolio. From the figure, it can be seen
that, on average, the optimal portfolio is constructed of approximately four assets. The
portfolio is constructed of five assets at its largest, while at its smallest, there are three
assets. In total, a portion of the portfolio is allocated to five assets over the 17 periods.
Furthermore, the most noticeable assets are PSI, LMBS, and PALL, which are part of the
optimal portfolio for all 17 periods, and account for almost all the allocation.
Figure B.23: capPeriodic optimal portfolio allocation and the number of assets for the
small subset selected by MST with NORD 20 as the target.
Figure B.24 shows the optimal portfolio allocation for the larger ETF subset constructed
using MST, with NORD 20 as the target portfolio. The figure shows that, on average,
the optimal portfolio is constructed of slightly more than five assets. At its largest, the
portfolio is constructed of six assets, while at its smallest, there are four assets. In total,
a portion of the portfolio is allocated to nine assets over the 17 periods. Furthermore, the
most noticeable assets are PSI and LMBS, which are part of the optimal portfolio for all
17 periods, and account for most of the allocation. However, PALL and PUI are present
as well.
Figure B.24: Periodic optimal portfolio allocation and the number of assets for the
large subset selected by MST with NORD 20 as the target.
Appendix: Appendix
93
==PAGE:102==
A summary of the main assets in each optimal portfolio from the asset allocation analysis
before can be observed in Table B.5.
Table B.5: Main assets of the optimal portfolios, for both subsets, and for all
benchmarks.
Target
Method
Size
Main Assets
NORD 5
SOM-AHC
Small
IHI, LMBS
NORD 5
SOM-AHC
Large
VGT
NORD 5
AHC
Small
IHI, USDU
NORD 5
AHC
Large
IHI, USDU
NORD 5
SOM-MST
Small
USDU, SOXX, RHS
NORD 5
SOM-MST
Large
USDU, SOXX, RHS
NORD 5
MST
Small
LMBS, PSI
NORD 5
MST
Large
LMBS,PSI
NORD 13
SOM-AHC
Small
IHI
NORD 13
SOM-AHC
Large
VGT, LMBS
NORD 13
AHC
Small
IHI, USDU
NORD 13
AHC
Large
IHI, USDU
NORD 13
SOM-MST
Small
SOXX, USDU, RHS
NORD 13
SOM-MST
Large
SOXX, IHI, USDU
NORD 13
MST
Small
LMBS, PSI
NORD 13
MST
Large
LMBS, PSI
NORD 20
SOM-AHC
Small
IHI, IGV
NORD 20
SOM-AHC
Large
VGT
NORD 20
AHC
Small
IHI
NORD 20
AHC
Large
IHI
NORD 20
SOM-MST
Small
SOXX, RHS
NORD 20
SOM-MST
Large
SOXX
NORD 20
MST
Small
LMBS, PSI
NORD 20
MST
Large
LMBS, PSI
Table B.6 then displays the performance statistics of these main assets during both the
training and the testing period.
Table B.6: Performance statistics of the main assets. Order from left to right by their
Sharpe ratio.
(a) Training period.
LMBS
IHI
IGV
VGT
SOXX
PSI
RHS
USDU
Ann. Returns (%)
2.89
14.82
17.61
14.11
15.80
15.97
4.49
1.65
Ann. Std (%)
1.57
14.57
18.75
16.30
21.29
22.48
10.47
6.39
Sharpe Ratio
1.84
1.02
0.94
0.87
0.74
0.71
0.43
0.26
Starr Ratio
6.42
2.89
2.60
2.41
2.20
2.10
1.21
0.95
CVaR (%)
-0.45
-5.12
-6.77
-5.86
-7.19
-7.60
-3.70
-1.74
(b) Testing period.
RHS
VGT
SOXX
PSI
IHI
IGV
USDU
LMBS
Ann. Returns (%)
13.53
22.11
27.84
27.24
13.87
12.90
2.12
0.35
Ann. Std (%)
14.84
24.80
33.10
36.09
21.83
28.25
6.67
2.27
Sharpe Ratio
0.91
0.89
0.84
0.75
0.64
0.46
0.32
0.16
Starr Ratio
2.66
2.54
2.65
2.37
1.78
1.32
1.12
0.46
CVaR (%)
-5.08
-8.70
-10.51
-11.51
-7.78
-9.74
-1.89
-0.78
94
Appendix: Appendix
==PAGE:103==
From observing both Table B.5 and Table B.6, it is interesting to see that, despite the
clustering-based methods being only performance-driven, one of the main assets of the
optimal portfolios of the AHC method is USDU, which exhibits the lowest sharp ratio
of theses assets when the training period is considered.
This can be the effect of the
algorithm being forced to select assets from small clusters, only containing low-performing
assets. Furthermore, it is interesting to see the SOM-AHC method is able to capture all
of the highest-performing assets, in terms of Sharp ratio, considering the training period.
Regarding the MST-based methods, it is interesting to notice the consistency of the MST
method. That is, LMBS and PSI are the main assets in every portfolio, where LMBS
exhibits the best performance in terms of Sharp ratios during the training period, see
Table B.6a, but with low annualized returns, and PSI has a relatively low Sharpe ratio,
but with much higher return capabilities, and the highest annualized volatility. The main
assets of the SOM-MST are somewhat found in the middle when considering the Sharpe
ratios of the assets during the training period. However, They exhibit the highest Sharpe
ratios during the Testing period, as can be seen in Table B.6b.
Additionally, it is worth noting that the optimal portfolios using the Monte Carlo method
for scenario generation, as seen in this portfolio allocation analysis, compared to the
resulting portfolios using the rolling bootstrapping method, where an analysis of the results
can be seen in Appendix C, were found to be more stable and less changing from period
to period.
Appendix: Appendix
95
==PAGE:104==
96
Appendix: Appendix
==PAGE:105==
Appendix C
Optimization with
Bootstrapping
This appendix will present the results from using the rolling bootstrapping method, for
the scenario generations of the optimization, instead of the Monte Carlo method.
C.1
Performance Evaluation - NORD 5
Table C.1 presents a summary of the empirical analysis conducted on the smaller subsets
compared to portfolio 5 as a benchmark. The analysis indicates that all four methods
generate superior annualized returns compared to the benchmark portfolio, risk profile 5.
However, it is also noted that the methods all exhibit significantly greater volatility, with
some exhibiting almost twice the volatility of the benchmark. The SOM-MST method
yields the most favorable risk-adjusted performance when evaluated using both Sharpe
and STARR ratios. Despite this, it should be acknowledged that the method also exhibits
the highest volatility and downside risk among all the methods. SOM-AHC and AHC
methods deliver similar results with Sharpe ratios of 0.44 and 0.45 and STARR ratios of
1.24 and 1.28, respectively. The AHC method seems to best the SOM-AHC by a tiny
margin. The worst-performing method in terms of the Sharpe and STARR ratio is the
MST method. However, it has the second highest diversification, only being bested by
SOM-MST. None of the methods come close to beating the benchmark regarding volatility
or downside risk. It is fair to assume that the NORD 5 portfolio remains the safest portfolio
to invest in regarding volatility, and it scores the next highest Sharpe and STARR ratio.
Throughout the rebalancing period, the SOM-MST method scores the highest in returns
and PDI while delivering by far the highest volatility.
Table C.1: Overview of performance metrics across the methods for the smaller
subsets, post allocation optimization when NORD portfolio 5 is a benchmark.
SOM-AHC
AHC
SOM-MST
MST
NORD 5
Annualized Returns (%)
7.41
7.49
12.36
6.12
4.68
Annualized Std (%)
16.67
16.65
18.03
17.36
9.32
Sharpe Ratio
0.44
0.45
0.69
0.35
0.50
Starr Ratio
1.24
1.28
1.93
1.18
1.43
Downside Risk (CVaR) (%)
5.97
5.85
6.39
5.20
3.26
Avg. Period #Assets
4.18
3.47
5.59
4.06
7.00
Avg. Period Returns (%)
1.98
1.97
3.33
1.83
1.19
Std of Period Returns (%)
6.34
6.19
10.01
7.94
4.17
Avg. Period PDI
2.14
1.90
2.78
2.74
2.38
Avg. Period w.PDI
1.72
1.60
1.99
1.66
1.57
Appendix: Optimization with Bootstrapping
97
==PAGE:106==
Table C.2 presents the summary of the larger subsets compared to the benchmark portfolio.
The table shows that the SOM-AHC method is superior for both annualized returns and
volatility levels when compared across the four different methods and delivers the highest
Sharpe and STARR ratio of 0.67 and 1.87, respectively. The AHC method has the lowest
performance in the Sharpe and STARR ratio, with values of 0.35 and 1.11. It is a very
similar performance of ratios compared to the MST. However, the MST has a higher PDI
score of 3.03 compared to the 2.58 generated by the AHC method. The MST method
scores the highest PDI of all the methods.
Table C.2: Overview of performance metrics across the methods for the larger subsets
when NORD portfolio 5 is a benchmark.
SOM-AHC
AHC
SOM-MST
MST
NORD 5
Annualized Returns (%)
10.84
5.99
10.35
8.35
4.68
Annualized Std (%)
16.18
17.29
18.99
23.13
9.32
Sharpe Ratio
0.67
0.35
0.55
0.36
0.50
Starr Ratio
1.87
1.11
1.54
1.25
1.43
Downside Risk (CVaR) (%)
5.78
5.38
6.73
6.69
3.26
Avg. Period #Assets
4.18
5.18
6.47
5.41
7.00
Avg. Period Returns (%)
2.76
1.71
3.04
2.40
1.19
Std of Period Returns (%)
6.83
6.90
11.53
8.88
4.17
Avg. Period PDI
2.14
2.58
2.95
3.03
2.38
Avg. Period w.PDI
1.69
1.83
2.05
1.94
1.57
Figure C.1 displays how the methods perform during the testing period that was used
in the study, where Figure C.1a presents the smaller subset and Figure C.1b the larger
subset. It is noticeable that the SOM-MST method generates the highest value for the
smaller subset, while it is the SOM-AHC method for the larger subset. However, for the
smaller subset, the SOM-MST method also experiences the highest fluctuations, while for
the larger subset, SOM-AHC exhibits the lowest fluctuations out of all four methods. The
methods fluctuate more over time than the NORD 5 portfolio, but they all yield higher
returns. NORD portfolio 5 is highly risk-averse, while the same can not be concluded
about the other methods even though they were tracking this benchmark.
(a) Value growth of the optimal portfolios for
the smaller subsets.
(b) Value growth of the optimal portfolios for
the larger subsets.
Figure C.1: Optimal portfolio value growth across methods where the benchmark is
NORD portfolio 5.
98
Appendix: Optimization with Bootstrapping
==PAGE:107==
What is also interesting to observe from Table C.1 and Table C.2 is that for AHC, SOM-
MST, and MST methods, as the subset increases, there is a decrease in returns and an
increase in volatility, in contrast to the SOM-AHC approach, which has an increase in
returns and a reduction in volatility.
The annualized risk-return trade-off of the portfolios for both subsets, with NORD port-
folio 5 as the benchmark, can be visualized and compared in Figure C.2. As mentioned
before, and as seen in the figure, NORD portfolio 5 is significantly less risky than the
other portfolios in terms of annualized standard deviation. Three portfolios exhibit higher
returns with lower standard deviation than the average of the investment universe. These
portfolios are SOM-MST (small), SOM-MST (large), and SOM-AHC (large). Further-
more, it can be observed that MST (large) is the only portfolio with greater volatility
than the average of the investment universe.
Figure C.2: The risk-return trade-off of optimal portfolios compared to the analyzed
investment universe where NORD.Investment portfolio 5 is the benchmark.
C.2
Performance Evaluation - NORD 13
A comparison of the methods to the second benchmark, NORD portfolio 13, will now be
presented. An overview of the performance across methods is visible in Table C.3 for the
smaller subsets and Table C.4 for the larger subsets. As earlier, the smaller subset will
first be discussed, and then the larger subset will be presented with a comparison.
Table C.3: Overview of performance metrics across the methods for the smaller subsets
when NORD portfolio 13 is a benchmark.
SOM-AHC
AHC
SOM-MST
MST
NORD 13
Annualized Returns (%)
11.59
11.22
14.50
7.75
8.59
Annualized Std (%)
18.46
18.16
22.20
21.11
12.39
Sharpe Ratio
0.63
0.62
0.65
0.37
0.69
Starr Ratio
1.77
1.76
1.83
1.29
1.99
Downside Risk (CVaR) (%)
6.54
6.38
7.91
6.00
4.33
Avg. Period #Assets
3.71
3.29
4.47
4.06
7.00
Avg. Period Returns (%)
2.96
2.84
4.06
2.33
2.12
Std of Period Returns (%)
7.30
7.28
12.47
9.17
5.48
Avg. Period PDI
1.98
1.87
2.41
2.69
2.38
Avg. Period w.PDI
1.43
1.37
1.59
1.97
1.65
Appendix: Optimization with Bootstrapping
99
==PAGE:108==
In terms of annualized returns, the SOM-MST method yields significantly higher returns or
approximately 25% higher than the second-highest method, SOM-AHC. However, risk and
return often hold hands, and SOM-MST also delivers the highest volatility levels, 22.20%,
in annualized terms. The AHC method yields the lowest returns out of the four methods
and the lowest volatility. Upon examination of the performance ratios, it can be observed
that the combination of SOM and MST yields the highest Sharpe and STARR ratio, with
values of 0.65 and 1.83, respectively. Conversely, the MST method alone demonstrates
the poorest performance in both ratios among the four methods. The Sharpe ratios for
the SOM-AHC are relatively similar, with values of 0.63 and 0.62, respectively, and the
STARR ratios are similarly close, with values of 1.77 and 1.76, respectively. The downside
risk for SOM-MST is the highest among the methods, at 7.91%. However, the downside
risk for the other methods is lower than the SOM-MST, falling within the range of 6.00% to
6.54%. In portfolio diversification, the MST method exhibits the best diversity throughout
the rebalancing period, as indicated by its PDI ratio of 2.69 and weighted PDI of 1.97.
SOM-MST ranks second in portfolio diversification with a PDI of 2.41 and a weighted
PDI ratio of 1.59.
When looking at the summary presented for the larger subset in Table C.4, it can be
noticed that the SOM-AHC method is relatively dominant compared to the other methods.
It yields an annualized return of 12.80% while the second highest method, SOM-MST, has
11.19% and the lowest, the AHC method, has a 9.56%. SOM-AHC has an annualized
volatility of 18.10% which is approximately 22.8% lower than the second-lowest volatility
scored by the AHC method. The MST ranks the lowest in terms of volatility with an
annualized standard deviation of 25.83%, closely followed by the SOM-MST method, which
has 24.88%. The SOM-AHC method delivers the highest Sharpe and STARR ratios among
the four methods, with values of 0.71 and 2.00, respectively. The AHC and SOM-MST
perform relatively similarly, where AHC has a Sharpe ratio of 0.43 and a STARR ratio
of 1.47, while SOM-MST has ratios of 0.45 and 1.28, respectively.
The MST method
scores 0.40 and 1.39 in Sharpe and STARR ratios. Regarding the downside risk for the
methods, SOM-AHC provides the most favorable outcome with a 6.39%, closely followed
by the AHC method with 6.52%, in contrast to the minimum spanning tree methods
where SOM-MST has the highest downside risk of 8.76%, and MST alone has 7.47%.
Throughout the rebalancing period, it is observed that the SOM-MST method yields the
highest average return of 3.63%. At the same time, SOM-AHC follows closely behind and
delivers the second-highest average return of 3.25%. Regarding volatility, the SOM-AHC
method has the lowest average standard deviation at 7.65%, while SOM-MST has the
highest average of 14.62%. The MST method alone ranks highest in both the average
PDI ratio of the period as well as the average weighted PDI ratio, with 2.81 and 2.04,
respectively. Conversely, the SOM-AHC method delivers the weakest diversification in
terms of PDI throughout the periods, with 1.92 in PDI ratio and 1.45 in weighted ratio.
100
Appendix: Optimization with Bootstrapping
==PAGE:109==
Table C.4: Overview of performance metrics across the methods for the larger subsets
when NORD portfolio 13 is a benchmark.
SOM-AHC
AHC
SOM-MST
MST
NORD 13
Annualized Returns (%)
12.80
9.56
11.19
10.38
8.59
Annualized Std (%)
18.10
22.23
24.88
25.83
12.39
Sharpe Ratio
0.71
0.43
0.45
0.40
0.69
Starr Ratio
2.00
1.47
1.28
1.39
1.99
Downside Risk (CVaR) (%)
6.39
6.52
8.76
7.47
4.33
Avg. Period #Assets
3.53
4.76
5.00
4.82
7.00
Avg. Period Returns (%)
3.25
2.67
3.63
3.10
2.12
Std of Period Returns (%)
7.65
9.34
14.62
11.25
5.48
Avg. Period PDI
1.92
2.40
2.59
2.81
2.38
Avg. Period w.PDI
1.45
1.73
1.82
2.04
1.65
It is observed that all of the methods in both subsets generate returns that surpass the
benchmark target, except the MST method in the smaller subset, which delivers an an-
nualized return that is 0.84% lower than the target. NORD portfolio 13 beats all the
methods in the smaller subset regarding risk-adjusted performance when comparing the
Sharpe and STARR ratios. Still, for the larger subset, it can be noticed that the SOM-
AHC method performs better in risk-adjusted performance terms. Figure C.3 illustrates
how the methods would have performed during the testing period when NORD portfolio
13 is the target benchmark. As is displayed for the smaller subset in Figure C.3a and the
larger subset in Figure C.3b, it can be seen that the fluctuations among the four methods
are significantly higher than for the NORD portfolio 13 but essential to acknowledge that
all of the other methods for both small and large subsets have significantly higher standard
deviations.
(a) Value growth of the optimal portfolios for
the smaller subsets.
(b) Value growth of the optimal portfolios for
the larger subsets.
Figure C.3: Optimal portfolio value growth across methods where the benchmark is
NORD portfolio 13.
Appendix: Optimization with Bootstrapping
101
==PAGE:110==
The annualized risk-return trade-off of the portfolios for both subsets, with NORD port-
folio 13 as the benchmark, can be visualized and compared in Figure C.4. Again, and
as mentioned before, the benchmark portfolio, now NORD portfolio 13, is substantially
less volatile than the other portfolios. Three portfolios, excluding the benchmark, exhibit
higher returns with a lower standard deviation than the average of the investment uni-
verse. These portfolios are SOM-AHC (small), SOM-AHC (large), and AHC (small). All
other portfolios exhibit more volatility than the average of the investment universe and
higher returns, except for MST (Small), which is the least profitable portfolio with lower
returns than the average of the investment universe.
Figure C.4: The risk-return trade-off of optimal portfolios compared to the analyzed
investment universe where NORD.Investment portfolio 13 is the benchmark.
C.3
Performance Evaluation - NORD 20
A performance overview for the methods for both subsets will be presented and compared
to the last benchmark portfolio, NORD portfolio 20, which is the most risk-taking profile.
Once the results from that comparison have been discussed, the overall findings will be
discussed, followed by the conclusion chapter. First, the empirical analysis of the smaller
subset will be presented in table C.5. From the table, it can be noted that SOM-MST is
yielding the highest annualized return of 15.68% among the methods. The AHC method
delivers 15.21% and has the second highest annualized return, while SOM-AHC scores
the lowest returns of 13.43%, superbly closely followed by the MST method, which has
13.53%.
By comparing the annual standard deviation across the methods, it can be
seen that all of them are experiencing high fluctuations and that the SOM-AHC method
accounts for an annualized standard deviation of 21.81%, which is 0.65% lower than the
second lowest method in terms of volatility. Although ranking the lowest among the four
methods, it is still 6.45% higher than what the benchmark portfolio has. When looking
at the risk-adjusted performance ratios Sharpe and STARR, it is observed that the AHC
method, which ranks highest in both ratios, does not yield the highest return nor the
lowest volatility. However, it outperforms the other four methods based on adjusted risk
performance. Nevertheless, the NORD 20 portfolio still exceeds the AHC method by an
astonishing 14.7% when it comes to the Sharpe ratio and 18.0% on the STARR ratio.
The MST method contains the most diversified portfolio when looking at the average
PDI and average weighted PDI throughout the rebalancing period, scoring 2.54 and 2.03,
respectively. The AHC method scores the lowest PDI ratios of 1.41 and 1.10, indicating
that it is a concentrated portfolio. The SOM-MST ranks second in PDI ratios with 2.10
and 1.63 and SOM-AHC with 1.71 and 1.20 in average PDI and average weighted PDI
102
Appendix: Optimization with Bootstrapping
==PAGE:111==
throughout the rebalancing period. It is worth noting that the benchmarks portfolio has
a PDI of 2.38 and a weighted PDI of 1.21 and is very close to the SOM-MST method.
Table C.5: Overview of performance metrics across the methods for the smaller subsets
when NORD portfolio 20 is a benchmark.
SOM-AHC
AHC
SOM-MST
MST
NORD 20
Annualized Returns (%)
13.43
15.21
15.68
13.53
11.99
Annualized Std (%)
21.81
22.46
26.03
25.70
15.36
Sharpe Ratio
0.62
0.68
0.60
0.53
0.78
Starr Ratio
1.73
2.01
1.72
1.88
2.25
Downside Risk (CVaR) (%)
7.78
7.55
9.11
7.19
5.32
Avg. Period #Assets
2.88
2.24
3.53
3.71
7.00
Avg. Period Returns (%)
3.43
3.99
4.65
3.90
2.94
Std of Period Returns (%)
8.51
10.66
14.86
12.43
6.79
Avg. Period PDI
1.71
1.41
2.10
2.54
2.38
Avg. Period w.PDI
1.20
1.10
1.63
2.03
1.21
Table C.6 presents the analysis results for the larger subsets. As can be observed from
the table, the SOM-AHC method demonstrated a superior return to the other methods,
with an annualized value of 13.56%. This represents a notable deviation of 28.4% from
the second-highest-performing method, SOM-MST, which had an annualized return of
10.56%. The AHC and MST methods yielded annualized returns of 7.27% and 8.44%,
respectively. The SOM-MST also experiences the lowest volatility among the methods
with an annualized standard deviation of 21.68%, while the other three methods range
from 26.67% to 30.99%. It can be deduced from comparing the volatility levels of the
methods to the benchmark that none of the methods were able to surpass the target. The
NORD portfolio 20 has an annualized standard deviation of 15.36%. When evaluating the
risk-adjusted performance using the Sharpe and STARR ratios, the SOM-AHC method
demonstrated the highest performance, with values of 0.63 and 1.81, respectively. These
are significantly higher ratios than the other three methods, with SOM-MST being the
second highest performance with values of 0.39 and 1.11 for the Sharpe and STARR ratios.
The MST and AHC methods are performing similarly poorly in terms of the Sharpe ratio,
both delivering a value of 0.27, with the MST having a poorer STARR ratio of 0.91
compared to 0.95 for the AHC method. SOM-AHC also has the most favorable downside
risk with 7.49%, followed closely by the AHC method, which has a downside risk of 7.64%.
The MST and SOM-MST are both experiencing a relatively higher downside risk of 9.25%
and 9.49%, respectively. However, none of the methods can outperform the NORD 20
portfolio regarding risk-adjusted measures. The NORD 20 portfolio has a Sharpe ratio of
0.78, a STARR ratio of 2.25, and downside risk is measured to be 5.32%. When looking
at the rebalancing period, it can be noticed that the MST has the highest average and
average weighted PDI ratios of 2.66 and 1.90, as opposed to the SOM-AHC, which has the
weakest PDI ratios of 1.71 and 1.16. The AHC and SOM-MST methods score somewhat
in between, with a PDI and weighted PDI of 2.18 and 1.55, while SOM-MST scores 2.30
and 1.55.
Appendix: Optimization with Bootstrapping
103
==PAGE:112==
Table C.6: Overview of performance metrics across the methods for the larger subsets
when NORD portfolio 20 is a benchmark.
SOM-AHC
AHC
SOM-MST
MST
NORD 20
Annualized Returns (%)
13.56
7.27
10.56
8.44
11.99
Annualized Std (%)
21.68
26.67
27.09
30.99
15.36
Sharpe Ratio
0.63
0.27
0.39
0.27
0.78
Starr Ratio
1.81
0.95
1.11
0.91
2.25
Downside Risk (CVaR) (%)
7.49
7.64
9.49
9.25
5.32
Avg. Period #Assets
2.82
3.94
4.06
4.18
7.00
Avg. Period Returns (%)
3.61
2.39
3.72
3.18
2.94
Std of Period Returns (%)
9.93
11.16
15.96
14.28
6.79
Avg. Period PDI
1.71
2.18
2.30
2.66
2.38
Avg. Period w.PDI
1.16
1.55
1.55
1.90
1.21
Figure C.5 illustrates how well the methods would perform during the testing period for
both subsets, including a comparison to how the NORD portfolio 20 would perform. Figure
C.5a displays the performance of the smaller subsets, while Figure C.5b represents the
larger subsets. For both subsets, the NORD portfolio 20 is a much more stable portfolio
and does not experience such intense fluctuations as the other methods do.
However,
the value growth among the four methods, especially for the smaller subset, seems to
outperform the NORD portfolio 20, where SOM-MST is more than 80% up throughout
the period. For the larger subset, the SOM-AHC method delivers the highest returns.
It, therefore, has reached the highest value by the end of the period, whereas the NORD
portfolio 20 is closely behind.
(a) Value growth of the optimal portfolios for
the smaller subsets.
(b) Value growth of the optimal portfolios for
the larger subsets.
Figure C.5: Optimal portfolio value growth across methods where the benchmark is
NORD portfolio 20.
The annualized risk-return trade-off of the portfolios for both subsets, with NORD portfo-
lio 20 as the benchmark, can be visualized and compared in Figure C.6. The significance
of the volatility difference between the benchmark, NORD portfolio 20, and the other
portfolios can be clearly seen in the figure. Most of the portfolios exhibit higher returns
than the average of the investment universe, except now in contrast with the benchmark.
The least profitable portfolio, with lower returns than the average of the investment uni-
verse, is AHC (Small). Furthermore, all portfolios, excluding the benchmark, are far more
104
Appendix: Optimization with Bootstrapping
==PAGE:113==
volatile than the average of the investment universe, except for SOM-AHC (small) and
AHC (large). Another thing to notice from the figure is that in almost all cases, the meth-
ods’ smaller subset exhibits higher returns and lower standard deviation than the larger
subset.
Figure C.6: The risk-return trade-off of optimal portfolios compared to the analyzed
investment universe where NORD.Investment portfolio 20 is the benchmark.
C.3.1
Main Findings
Based on the results from the analysis of the smaller subsets given in TablesC.1, Table
C.3, and Table C.5, it was found that none of the methods experienced lower volatility
than the benchmark target. The annualized standard deviation, the downside risk, and
the standard deviation throughout the rebalancing period were always higher among the
used methods than the benchmark portfolio. The results for the smaller subset indicate
that the MST is the superior method for creating diversified portfolios. Still, it also seems
to affect the portfolio return as it ranks the lowest or second lowest among all methods
across all benchmark targets regarding portfolio returns and performance ratios, except
when the benchmark target portfolio is NORD 20. It has the second-highest STARR ratio
out of the four methods. One method, in particular, seems to outperform the returns
of the benchmark portfolios on an annualized basis, the SOM-MST. The method yields
the highest return across all the methods, but at the same time, it exhibits the highest
volatility. When the risk-adjusted performance is considered, only the SOM-MST method
can generate higher ratios on one occasion, which is when NORD portfolio 5 is targeted.
What is also interesting to note for that scenario is that the SOM-MST delivers a more
diversified portfolio when the PDI ratios are considered. In all remaining scenarios, the
benchmark portfolio performs better when risk-adjusted returns are considered than the
other methods when examining the smaller subsets. However, it is worth mentioning that
the SOM algorithm seems to be enhancing the minimum spanning tree method as it deliv-
ers higher returns and performance ratios on all occasions except once when the benchmark
target is NORD portfolio 20, where the MST method generates a higher STARR ratio.
The MST method delivers lower volatility and downside risk than the SOM-MST method
but on the cost of returns and risk-adjusted performance ratios.
From the empirical analysis presented in Table C.2, Table C.4, and Table C.6, it was
observed that none of the methods could compete with the benchmark portfolios with
respect to volatility levels or downside risk. NORD portfolios remain stable and do not
experience intense fluctuations, unlike the studied methods, which all have significantly
higher risk levels. When comparing the larger subsets across the applied methods, it can
Appendix: Optimization with Bootstrapping
105
==PAGE:114==
be seen that the SOM-AHC method outperforms all the methods in returns, volatility,
and risk-adjusted performance across all the benchmarks, indicating that it is the superior
method when it comes to larger subsets. The MST method is outperforming in terms of di-
versification across methods and topping the benchmark PDI ratios except for benchmark
target NORD portfolio 5, where SOM-MST scores a higher average weighted PDI through-
out the rebalancing period. However, the MST method is the most volatile method when
comparing across methods with volatility levels ranging from 23.13% to 30.99% which is
approximately 100-150% higher than the NORD portfolios are exhibiting. The MST does
not, however, yield the lowest annualized returns among the methods, but AHC does.
It is interesting to notice that SOM-AHC outperforms AHC in every aspect except for
the PDI ratios. The SOM-MST method outperforms the MST in returns, volatility, and
performance ratios when NORD portfolios 5 and 20 are used as targets. However, MST
exceeds the STARR ratio of SOM-MST when NORD portfolio 13 is a target. SOM-MST is
outperforming the MST method in terms of Sharpe ratio in all scenarios with an improve-
ment of 11.11% to 49.29% and 4 out of 6 times in terms of STARR ratio with the range
of 18.02% to 38.86%. The MST method has a 7.91% higher STARR ratio given a large
subset and NORD portfolio 13 as a benchmark and 8.51% given a small subset and the
high-risk seeking NORD portfolio 20 as a benchmark. However, the MST method seems
to outperform the SOM-MST method in terms of diversification as the average weighted
PDI of the method ranks higher in four out of six scenarios, ranging from 10.78% to
19.70% higher ratio. The only time SOM-MST generates a more diversified portfolio is
when NORD portfolio 5 is considered a benchmark. In that case, SOM-MST delivers a
16.58% higher PDI for the smaller subset and a 5.37% higher PDI for the larger subset.
When comparing the SOM-AHC and AHC methods for the smaller subset across all bench-
marks, it can be seen that there are no significant improvements. SOM-AHC outperforms
the Sharpe and STARR ratios of the AHC method with 1.58% and 0.56%, respectively,
when NORD portfolio 13 is used as the target benchmark. However, SOM-AHC increases
the diversification compared to the AHC method across all benchmarks for the smaller
subsets, ranging from 4.20% to 8.33%. When comparing the performance across the bench-
marks for the larger subset, it can be seen that SOM-AHC is enhancing the AHC method
across all the benchmarks in terms of Sharpe and STARR ratios, with an increase from
39.44% to 57.14% in the Sharpe ratio and 26.50% to 47.51% in the STARR ratio. How-
ever, for the larger subset, the SOM-MST is ineﬀicient in increasing the diversification
of the AHC method as the standalone AHC method generates a 7.65% to 25.15% more
diversified portfolio in terms of portfolio diversification index.
SOM-MST seems to be the superior method concerning risk-adjusted performance for
small subsets when low to moderate risk-seeking portfolios are benchmarks, while SOM-
AHC is the ideal method when given larger subsets across all risk profiles. AHC out-
performs SOM-MST and SOM-AHC when given a small subset and the highest risk pro-
file. When the diversification of the optimal portfolios is considered, then it seems that
for low risk-seeking profiles then, SOM-MST can enhance the risk-adjusted return ratios
of the MST method.
Still, MST is undeniably the superior method for portfolio con-
struction in terms of diversification, considering moderate to high-seeking benchmarks.
SOM-MST seems to be able to give the MST method the best of both worlds under
the conditions of using small subsets as it uses the correlation eﬀiciency method and the
performance risk-adjusted driven method to select funds. As both SOM-AHC and AHC
are performance-based methods, the results indicate that when using a large subset, the
SOM-AHC method can enhance the AHC method significantly in terms of risk-adjusted
performance. However, diversification in the process suffers the cost.
106
Appendix: Optimization with Bootstrapping
==PAGE:115==
Appendix D
Code Files
Table D.1 displays the structure and descriptions of a GitHub repository containing the
code files of this study.
Table D.1: Structure of a GitHub repository containing the code files of this study.The
repository can be found at: https://github.com/ingimundarson/DTU-Thesis
File Name
Description
Type
Code
Folder
containing
supplementary
code files, such as helper functions
and plot setup.
Folder
Data
Folder containing data files and
saved results.
Folder
Figures_Plots
Saved figures.
Folder
Investment_Funnel_SOM
Modified
Investment
Funnel
for
SOM.
Folder
Benchmarks - Insights.ipynb
Insights into benchmark portfolios.
Notebook
Code - Data Insights.ipynb
Data insights.
Notebook
Code - Optimized portfolios - Bootstr.ipynb
Results and insights into opt. Port-
folios using Bootstrapping.
Notebook
Code - Optimized portfolios - Monte.ipynb
Results and insights into opt. Port-
folios using Monte Carlo.
Notebook
Code - SOM Cluster MST.ipynb
Asset subset generation and in-
sights.
Notebook
ETF data - Clean Raw Data.ipynb
Data cleaning.
Notebook
ETF data - Filter Data.ipynb
Data filtering.
Notebook
ETF data - Get ETFs Raw.ipynb
Get data.
Notebook
ETF data - Get Regions.ipynb
Get data.
Notebook
ETF data - Merge Data.ipynb
Mergin data.
Notebook
TradeBot - Bootstr (Large).ipynb
Optimized portfolios using the mod-
ified Investment Funnel (Bootstrap-
ping).
Notebook
TradeBot - Bootstr (Small).ipynb
Optimized portfolios using the mod-
ified Investment Funnel (Bootstrap-
ping).
Notebook
TradeBot - Monte Carlo (Large).ipynb
Optimized portfolios using the mod-
ified
Investment
Funnel
(Monte
Carlo).
Notebook
TradeBot - Monte Carlo (Small).ipynb
Optimized portfolios using the mod-
ified
Investment
Funnel
(Monte
Carlo).
Notebook
Appendix: Code Files
107
==PAGE:116==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Akademivej, Building 358
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
+45 4525 4800
www.man.dtu.dk
