==PAGE:1==
Logic for Neural Networks
assisted by Neuroevolution
Master Thesis
DTU Compute
Department of Computer Science
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Logic for Neural Networks
assisted by Neuroevolution
Master Thesis
September, 2022
By
Abhista Partal Balasubramaniam
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus­
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Published by:
DTU, Department of Computer Science, Anker Engelunds Vej 1, Bygning
322, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
www.compute.dtu.dk
ISSN:
[0000­0000] (electronic version)
ISBN:
[000­00­0000­000­0] (electronic version)
ISSN:
[0000­0000] (printed version)
ISBN:
[000­00­0000­000­0] (printed version)
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over six months at the Section for Indoor Climate, Depart­
ment of Civil Engineering, at the Technical University of Denmark, DTU, in partial fulfilment
for the degree Master of Science in Engineering, MSc Eng.
It is assumed that the reader has a basic knowledge in the areas of statistics.
Abhista Partal Balasubramaniam ­ s210246
Signature
Date
ii
Logic for Neural Networks
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
Logic for neural networks assisted by neuro­evolution
Neuro­evolution is a genetic approach to training and developing neural networks and
LENs (Logic Explained Networks) are neural networks that provide logical explanations
for the decisions/outputs given by neural networks after training has been completed. This
project aims to study the theory behind the two unique ideas and find a method to combine
them to provide a more robust neural network and explanations.
LENs tend to trade accuracy for the quality of logical explanations. To achieve these
good readable explanations, LENs at the end of training go through a step called pruning
which removes small/weak connections between layers of the neural networks to keep
the output logical explanations readable.
Neuro­evolution allows layers and nodes to be added and removed from the neural net­
work during the training process. Thus, allowing the neural network to grow only if the
current neural network architecture cannot solve the problem at hand.
Hence, combining the above two ideas will provide a way to develop neural networks
that have the optimal architecture, which can then be used to provide logical explanations
without using the pruning step in the creation of LENs.
LENs provide a method of explanation using propositional logic and hence they expect
inputs to be in the binary format, two new methods for providing explanations using the
knowledge provided by LENs are explored. One is partial booleanization of the inputs and
the other is using fuzzy logic to provide explanations in the place of classical propositional
logic.
Finally to gauge the performance of the algorithm the well­known cart pole environment
is used. Since LENs requires human­understandable features as inputs and the cart pole
environment has an easy transformation to convert the inputs into a human­understandable
format.
Logic for Neural Networks
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
Abhista Partal Balasubramaniam, MSc Autonomous Systems, DTU
Nina Gierasimczuk, Associate Professor, DTU Compute
iv
Logic for Neural Networks
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
1
2
Background
3
2.1
Logic . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
Neural Networks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.3
NeuroEvolution of Augmenting Topologies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.4
Logic Explained Networks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.5
Reinforcement Learning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
2.6
Summary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
3
Problem definition
17
3.1
Environment description . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
4
Methodology
19
4.1
Structure
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
4.2
Observation vector . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
4.3
Fitness function . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
4.4
Reward function
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
4.5
Explanation Accuracy
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
5
Implementation
22
5.1
V0 ­ Pure NEAT
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
5.2
V1 ­ NEAT and LEN . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
5.3
V2 ­ NEAT and LEN with partial booleanization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26
5.4
V3 ­ NEAT and LEN with Fuzzy logic . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
6
Results
30
6.1
Fitness
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30
6.2
Number of species . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31
6.3
Genome length . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 32
6.4
Network topology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 32
6.5
Explanation length . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 33
6.6
Explanation accuracy
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 34
6.7
Results analysis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 35
7
Conclusion
36
8
Discussion and Future work
37
Bibliography
38
Logic for Neural Networks
v
==PAGE:8==
vi
Logic for Neural Networks
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction
As Neural networks become more popular, there has been a vast increase in the research
for the improvement of neural networks, allowing these models to become increasingly ef­
ficient in solving very complex tasks. These networks when provided with large amounts
of data can estimate a function to very high levels of accuracy. They have been used
to solve tasks in the fields of image recognition, text­to­speech, speech­to­text, language
conversion, pattern recognition, and many more.
Due to their rise in popularity, these models have been used in places that usually re­
quire decision­making. In these scenarios as the models become more complex it is be­
coming harder and harder to understand the network’s decisions. These decisions made
by the model can solve the problem at the moment but cannot provide strong funda­
mental reasoning. This can cause hesitation in quickly adopting these models into fields
like medicine and autonomous driving where human lives are at stake for every decision
taken. This is a reason for concern because such technologies though very powerful are
not easily accepted. Therefore, There has been an increasing need for explanations for
the decisions/outputs of these complex machine­learning models.
This project’s contribution lies in providing formal logical explanations using propositional
and fuzzy logic which can explain the model’s decisions in sectors requiring high explain­
ability. These explanations can be used by analysts to quickly understand the system,
which in turn helps the analysts make informed decisions. These explanations can lead
to quick and efficient improvement of the systems which helps in overcoming and recog­
nizing false positives when decisions are made by the model.
This project takes inspiration from two papers, the original paper on Neuroevolution of
augmenting topologies(NEAT)[1] which was proposed in 2002 by Kenneth O Stanley et
al, and the recently published paper Logic explained Networks(LENs)[2] which was pro­
posed in 2021 by Gabriele Ciravegna et al.
The latter paper was one of the first ones to propose a genetic algorithm to develop a
neural network and allowed for the neural network to dynamically tune its hyperparam­
eters as the algorithm proceeded. Since genetic algorithms are exceptionally good at
solving reinforcement learning problems, the algorithm could easily be implemented in
reinforcement learning environments. Other algorithms using neural networks are more
complex and have to be modified to work for the problem (eg: DeepQLearning).
The review article called Designing neural networks through neuroevolution[3] by Ken­
neth O Stanley talks about how the NEAT algorithm is competitive against other gradient­
based learning methods for neural networks. This article goes through multiple different
approaches used for solving reinforcement learning problems and explains them very
broadly.
The survey paper explanation in AI: Insights from the social sciences[4] by Tim Miller
is a dive into the type of explanation humans use and the best way to provide explana­
tions so it is humanly understandable.
Logic for Neural Networks
1
==PAGE:10==
Logic­explained networks[2] or LENs are a novel method to provide a logical explana­
tion for the decisions of neural networks. Neural networks have been considered black
boxes which have really good function approximation capabilities. The branch of logic
has always had explainability due to its symbolic structure. Therefore, LENs try and bring
the power of explainability through logic to neural networks. LENs provide explainability
at the cost of reduced accuracy.
The report initially introduces the concepts required to understand the project with refer­
ences that can aid the readers’ understanding. It then introduces the problem the project
is trying to solve and the testing environment before diving into the core principles of the
project. The project has 4 different implementations and a detailed explanation of the
4 versions is provided and then the results of the implementations are tested in a rein­
forcement learning environment and compared. Finally, the report concludes with the
outcomes of the project and shows future possibilities for research within this domain.
Therefore, The main contributions of this project are new methods and implementations
to provide explanations for the decisions of neural networks which help in forming a bridge
between the fields of symbolic and sub­symbolic artificial intelligence.
2
Logic for Neural Networks
==PAGE:11==
2
Background
2.1
Logic
Logic is a field of study in which one can formally see how conclusions can be drawn from
the premise or premises. In this project, two types of formal logic: propositional and fuzzy
logic are used, and hence a brief introduction to each one is provided in this section.
2.1.1
Propositional logic
Propositional logic[5] is the simplest form of logic in which all the statements made are
in terms of propositions. Each statement in propositional logic can be one of two values
True or False. Any vagueness in the result of true and false cannot be represented in this
form of logic.
Sentences in propositional logic can be formed by using literals which are the building
blocks of propositional logic. Each literal can be assigned a meaning. Consider the sen­
tence ”Rohan is hardworking”. Here, we can assign a literal R to represent the above
sentence. Therefore, the literal R can be true or false, making the underlying statement
true or false. Literals act like mathematical variables for logical sentences, the key dif­
ference being that literals can only take true or false values. Therefore, literals can be
combined to form atomic or compound propositions which are the two types of sentences
that can be formed in propositional logic.
• Atomic propositions: These are the simplest forms of sentences and contain only
one proposition in the sentence. They can either be true or false.
• Compound propositions: These forms of sentences are composed of a combina­
tion of atomic sentences by using logical connectives. The logical connectives used
in propositional logic are shown in table(2.1).
All the operators have their own truth tables which are used to provide meaning to the con­
nections between the literals. As the sentences become compound, they are evaluated
by following the truth tables of the logical operations from the left of the sentence to the
right. Consider the compound proposition A ∨B ∧C where the truth values of A, B, and
C are 1, 0, and 0 respectively. Then the above compound sentence evaluated from left to
right {i.e, following the bracket structure (A ∨B) ∧C} has the output 0 in propositional logic.
Though propositional logic is powerful, it cannot account for vagueness in a language
(e.g, non­absolute values or adjectives). In the next section, there is a basic introduction
to fuzzy logic which is used to represent vague terms.
2.1.2
Conjunctive Normal Form (CNF) and Disjunctive Normal form (DNF)
Conjunctive Normal Form is a format in which propositional logic statements are ex­
pressed in terms of a conjunction of disjunctions. This means that statements are ex­
pressed in terms of AND of ORs. Consider the example shown in equation (2.1) which
shows two clauses in CNF format. Here, P and Q form an set called a clause and A, B,
and C form another clause.
(A ∨B ∨C) ∧(P ∨Q)
(2.1)
Similarly, in the Disjunctive Normal Form or DNF, propositional statements are expressed
in terms of a disjunction of conjunctions. This means that the statements are expressed
Logic for Neural Networks
3
==PAGE:12==
in terms of OR of ANDs as shown in equation (2.2) which use the same statement as
before but now in DNF format. In both the cases the inner statements are called clauses.
(A ∧P) ∨(A ∧Q) ∨(B ∧P) ∨(B ∧Q) ∨(C ∧P) ∨(C ∧Q)
(2.2)
Formula (2.2) is equivalent to formula (2.1) and was obtained using the properties of
propositional logic.
Connective symbols
Word
Technical term
Example
∧
AND
Conjunction
A ∧B
∨
OR
Disjunction
A ∨B
→
Implies
Implication
A →B
←→
If and only if
Bi­implication
A ←→B
¬
NOT
Negation
¬ A
Table 2.1: Basic logical connectives in propositional logic
2.1.3
Fuzzy logic
Fuzzy logic[6][7] is a type of formal logic that is employed to handle imprecise statements.
Sentences like ”The restaurant had good service” can be provided with mathematical val­
ues using fuzzy logic which can represent the service levels of the restaurant and can
then be used to make decisions. In the above sentence assuming the person who said
the statement is referring to 20% neutral service and 80% good service will result in the
fuzzy variable representing [bad, neutral, good] to become [0, 0.2, 0.8] which can rep­
resent that the restaurant service was 0% bad, 20% neutral and 80% good.
Fuzzy variables utilize the membership functions. A fuzzy logic system goes through
a process called fuzzification, then inference (based on inference rules derived from pre­
existing knowledge about the environment), and finally defuzzification process to convert
into the output fuzzy variable which can then be processed to provide a decision in nat­
ural language. The basic block diagram is shown in Figure(2.1), which makes use of the
example provided above to decide the rating of the restaurant.
Figure 2.1: A basic Mamdani fuzzy system block diagram
For the fuzzification block to convert from a vague input to a fuzzy variable as described
before fuzzy logic uses membership functions. Some commonly used types of member­
ship functions are triangular, trapezoidal, gaussian, and sigmoidal. All of the mentioned
membership functions are shown in Figure(2.2).
Once the fuzzification process is completed, the inference system uses the same propo­
sitional logic operators with extended definitions. Each of these fuzzy logical operators
4
Logic for Neural Networks
==PAGE:13==
(a) Triangular membership function
(b) Trapezoidal membership function
(c) Gaussian membership function
(d) Sigmoid membership function
Figure 2.2: Commonly used membership functions
is extended to work for partially true values. They can be defined in multiple ways. The
implication and bi­implication operators can be made using the NOT, AND, and OR op­
erators. Therefore, the definitions used in this project for the basic operators are shown
in Table(2.2).
Symbol
Word
Example
Fuzzy
∧
AND
x ∧y
min(x, y)
∨
OR
x ∨y
max(x, y)
¬
NOT
¬x
1 ­x
→
Implies
¬x ∨y
max((1 −x), y)
↔
If and only if
(¬x ∨y) ∧(x ∨¬y)
min(max((1 −x), y), max(x, (1 −y)))
Table 2.2: Comparision of boolean and fuzzy operators
These fuzzy operators are the basis for the inference system proposed in the Mamdani
system [8]. The fuzzy operators are used as connectives in sentences like the operators
in propositional logic. Inference rules in a Mamdani system consist of sentences formed
using fuzzy operators and fuzzy variables. An important aspect of the inference rules in
this step is that all the inference rules follow the trend of if­then statements. That is, in the
inference block we can have statements like ”IF service is good AND food is good THEN
restaurant is good”. In this sentence service and food are the two variables which have
got their respective membership function values to be good then the second part of the if
Logic for Neural Networks
5
==PAGE:14==
statement is computed.
After the inferred fuzzy variable is created from the fuzzy inference rules then the defuzzi­
fication process can start. In this process, the inferred fuzzy variable defines the output
format. To generate the crisp output in the Mamdani system the steps mentioned below
are followed:
• For each truth value, fill in the membership function of that specific variable by the
percentage shown in the fuzzy variable. Consider a triangular membership function
that is given a value of 0.2. Then filling in means that 20% of the triangle from the
bottom is colored.
• Do the above operation for all the membership functions.
• Combine all the resulting membership functions using the Union (OR) operator.
• Find the centroid of the resulting shape. Here, the centroid is the geometric center
of the resulting shape.
• The x coordinate of the centroid is the required output.
The output so obtained is the output of the fuzzy system. The above fuzzy system is
called the Mamdani fuzzy system and there are many other systems that have different
approaches to handling these fuzzy variables.
Fuzzy logic systems can be used to solve many tasks and their ability to comprehend
imprecise and vague statements allows these systems to solve very complex control prob­
lems. These fuzzy systems have very high human explainability.
In this project, explainability is provided by using the neural network to generate the in­
ference rules to a certain level of accuracy which can then later be used to generate a
fuzzy inference system. This procedure is explained in detail in the methodologies (4)
and implementations (5) sections of the project.
2.2
Neural Networks
Neural Networks[9] are machine learning models that attempt to mimic the processes in
a human brain with mathematical models. Each Neuron is a mathematical node that per­
forms summation, multiplication, and activation operations on inputs.
Neural Networks work by bringing together small mathematical units called Neurons(modeled
after the biological neurons in humans) which take multiple inputs and provide a single
output after processing (applying basic mathematical operations) the inputs. These out­
puts can then be connected to multiple other neurons as inputs allowing for multiple layers
of neurons to be stacked which then forms a neural network as shown in Figure (2.3).
Each neuron has weights attached to every single one of its inputs which gets multiplied
by its specific input. The operation of a neuron is summarized in a simple equation like
eq (2.3).
y = f(
N
∑
i=0
wi.xi)
(2.3)
Here, The w0.x0 is called the bias and x0 is always set to 1, and f is the activation function
of the neuron (which can be ReLU, Sigmoid, tanh, or others). A deeper dive into neural
networks is provided by the first paper on the perceptron [9]. Throughout the project a
very basic neural network using the sigmoid activation function is used for simplicity.
6
Logic for Neural Networks
==PAGE:15==
Figure 2.3: Basic Structure of a Neural Network
Key points to note here are that the weights are responsible for the flexibility of the neural
network to solve various problems. The activation function is the function that is respon­
sible for adding non­linearity to the neural network.
2.2.1
Backpropagation
Due to the large size of these neural networks, getting the right weights to solve a basic
problem manually is tedious. Therefore, to change the weights of deep neural networks
gradient­based optimization methods are used. The most frequently used gradient­based
method is called backpropagation because the weights of the neural network are updated
from the output of the neural network, one at a time, backward through each layer till all the
weights of the neural network are updated. Backpropagation is used to iteratively update
the weights of the neural network and each update reduces the error a neural network
makes in predicting the output.
2.3
NeuroEvolution of Augmenting Topologies
Neuroevolution of augmenting topologies[1] or NEAT is a genetic algorithm that is used
to generate neural networks. This algorithm can act as a substitute for backpropagation
in neural networks. The NEAT algorithm alters the network topology automatically, while
also optimizing the weights of the neural network thus producing a neural network topology
that fits the problem.
Since Neuroevolution is a genetic algorithm, it follows that this algorithm takes into account
genotypes and phenotypes. Here, like in biology, a genotype or the genome encodes the
rules to create the phenotype. The phenotype represents the actual organism and in
this case the structure of the neural network. Therefore, the genotype can follow one of
the two types of encoding schemes: a direct encoding scheme or an indirect encoding
scheme.
• Direct Encoding : Direct encoding schemes specify every connection and node
that appear in the genotype which are supposed to be present in the phenotype.
Direct encodings have simpler implementation compared to indirect encoding but
explode in memory utilization as network topology and connections increase.
• Indirect Encoding : In indirect encoding schemes only the basic rules to build a
phenotype from the genotype are provided and these rules can be rules specific
to the layers, growth of the network, etc. Due to this, indirect encoding schemes
allow for more compact representations of the network and are efficient in utilizing
the memory while running the algorithm but bias the search space in an unexpected
Logic for Neural Networks
7
==PAGE:16==
way if not implemented properly.
2.3.1
Genetic encoding
Indirect encoding schemes generally are a set of rules and the order in which the rules are
read can change the phenotype. These changes can drastically alter the search space
and impart a bias toward the search. Due to the nature of indirect encodings to bias the
search space, NEAT uses a direct encoding scheme. NEAT uses the encoding scheme
shown in figure (2.4). It can be seen that the algorithm uses two lists, one to keep track
of the nodes in the network and another to keep track of the connections in these nodes
in the neural network.
Figure 2.4: The encoding scheme used in NEAT to represent neural networks
Looking closely at the encoding scheme, NEAT uses something called innovation num­
ber abbreviated as Innov in fig (2.4) which plays an important role in the algorithm. These
innovation numbers are used to track the time at which the gene was created and these
numbers help keep track of the genetic changes in the structure of the network.
The Innovation number is a global variable that gets incremented each time a new gene is
added to the genome. It is ensured that if the same gene appears in any other mutations
then the same innovation number that this gene was previously assigned is preserved.
This tracking of genes through innovation numbers is called historical marking in NEAT.
2.3.2
Cross­over
This is the heart of topology evolving genetic algorithms like NEAT as this is the reason
why networks can evolve and get better over the generations.
In NEAT cross­over is achieved by using the historical marking to align genes of the same
types before performing the cross­over procedure. The figure (2.5) shows how the in­
novation number helps keep track of the genes. Here, it is clearly visible that when two
genes have the same innovation number then they are representing the same gene in
the genome. Therefore, when two parents are selected for cross­over the corresponding
genes always match up based on the innovation numbers assigned to them.
There is a possibility that the two genomes have genes that are not present in one of
8
Logic for Neural Networks
==PAGE:17==
Figure 2.5: NEAT cross­over
the parents’ genes. Again, due to the innovation number being unique to genes they
will not interfere during cross­over. This is because only genes with the same innovation
numbers are randomly selected from the parents.
If the innovation number of the gene is within the range of the parent and the gene is
not present in one of the parents then this gene is called a disjoint gene, whereas if the
innovation number exceeds the lower genome length among the parents then this gene
is considered an excess gene. Those which have different innovation numbers (excess
or disjoint genes) are selected randomly from the parent with the best fitness. Fitness
in NEAT is the driving force for optimization, it is a value that is calculated based on the
performance of the network and hence networks that have a high fitness perform better
than network with lower fitness values.
2.3.3
Mutation
NEAT has two types of mutations. Each mutation is stated below:
• Connection mutation: In this type of mutation an edge between two nodes is added
with a random weight assigned to it.
• Node mutation: In this type of mutation a new node is added to the network’s
genome. The addition of a new node has a few restrictions as a random addition
does not assure the use of the node by the algorithm. To avoid this NEAT only
adds nodes between already existing connections thus adding non­linearity to the
network. This can cause the network to lose its ability to solve the problem initially as
the newly added connections weight is not adjusted to solve the problem. To ensure
that this type of mutation is allowed to proceed and get optimized NEAT performs
speciation.
A simple example is shown in figure (2.6) to demonstrate a mutation in NEAT.
Logic for Neural Networks
9
==PAGE:18==
Figure 2.6: Different mutations in NEAT
2.3.4
Speciation
NEAT protects innovation among the population through a process called speciation. At
the beginning of each generation divides the newly generated neural networks’ genomes
into species based on a distance function. Equation (2.4) is the distance function used in
NEAT.
d(x, y) = c1E
N
+ c2D
N
+ c3W
where,
x, y = genomes involved in the distance calculation
E = number of excess genes
D = number of disjoint genes
W = average of the weight differences
N = Normalizing factor
c1, c2, c3 = Linear combination weights
(2.4)
It is clearly visible that equation (2.4) is a linear combination of the Excess(E), Disjoint(D),
and the average weight differences(W). The coefficients allow adjustable importance for
the three factors and N is the normalizing factor which can be set to 1 if the length of the
genome is below 20.
The speciation in NEAT is achieved by representing each species in the population with a
random genome selected from the previous generation. Then, in each iteration, the dis­
tance between the species genome and the genome in consideration is calculated, then
based on a compatibility threshold (dT ) if the genome is within the threshold it is added to
the species otherwise it gets a new species with its genome as the base genome for the
species.
After this process is completed, NEAT uses explicit fitness sharing which allows an ad­
justed fitness to be shared among all the members of a species. This way each species
10
Logic for Neural Networks
==PAGE:19==
is only competing within its species members to become the best member of the species
making this genome more likely to mate. This way a species with bad initial topology can
improve by only competing with other bad topology networks without facing competition
from the other species in the generation ensuring that a single species does not over­
shadow all the others in a generation because each species can evolve differently and
learn different strategies to solve the problem, which is an essential criterion for speciation­
based evolution to work.
The adjusted fitness within a species is calculated using equation (2.5). f is the fitness
of the ith member in the species and d is the distance between two genomes shown in
equation (2.4).
f
′
i =
fi
∑n
j=1 d(i, j)
(2.5)
Here, in equation (2.5) the adjusted fitness is only applied to the n members within a
species. Every species is assigned a different number of offspring based on the adjusted
fitness of that species. Thus, forcing the species internally to increase its adjusted fitness
and also encouraging competition among other species.
2.4
Logic Explained Networks
Logic Explained Networks[2] or LENs are the final implementation of Neurosymbolic AI
explored in this paper. Before discussing LENs, there are a few assumptions that need
to be understood :
• Concepts are human understandable features. There are output concepts and input
concepts. Concepts are assumed to always take boolean values.
• The data is considered to be a set of samples.
• It is considered that the provided logical explanation is the one that best describes
the output class without loss of generality in the network.
• Multiple logical explanations can be assigned to one class by using the CNF format.
Figure 2.7: Block diagram of a Logic explained network (LEN)
The general structure of a LEN is as shown in Figure (2.7). Here, the black box classifier
is used in the beginning to classify the features of the input data into concepts, which
are then fed into the LEN. The LEN uses these concepts to generate a logical model
that best fits to describe the data and the logical model is provided as an output with
the output concepts at the end which can be manually used to understand the reasoning
behind the decision of the neural network. Therefore, A LEN has two main outputs, the
logic explanations, and the output concepts. It takes concepts as inputs and performs
Logic for Neural Networks
11
==PAGE:20==
logical operations on them to provide the logical formulas that describe a specific class in
conjunctive normal form (CNF). LENs are rule­based explainable AI (XAI) methods that
have a local and global explainable scope. The rules provided by LENs allow the network
to be converted from a blackbox classifier into an interpretable classifier.
2.4.1
Architectures
There are three main architectures in which LENs can be used. The architectures ex­
plained below are only those architectures that use the LENs as explanation providers
and problem solvers:
1. E2E or End to End model: In this method, the LEN replaces the black box model
entirely and hence does the classification task directly. The only condition to be met
to use this architecture is that the input should be concepts. This causes a loss of
accuracy to the classification but provides a complete white box model of the neural
network in return.
Figure 2.8: End to End LEN with an example explanation.
2. CB or Concept Bottleneck: Here, since the input features are not concepts, first a
black box classifier must be used to classify the given features into concepts which
can then be fed into the LEN. This causes uncertainty at the initial step due to which
we do not get a complete white box model as the output of the LEN.
Figure 2.9: Concept Bottleneck LEN with an example explanation and black box classifier.
3. Cascading: This method is used when multiple levels of explanations are needed.
That is when the classification results of the first LEN are fed as the concepts of the
12
Logic for Neural Networks
==PAGE:21==
second LEN and so on. This way a hierarchy of explanations can be provided for
the classification task and uphold human intervention at multiple stages.
Figure 2.10: Cascading LEN with an example explanation
2.4.2
Booleanization
To make the concepts understandable by humans the LENs go through a step called
booleanization. Here, since each of the inputs represents a literal in propositional logic,
each of these inputs can only take 1 and 0 as possible inputs. Therefore, in this step, the
LENs inputs get converted to a 1 or 0 based on whether the value is above or below 0.5.
In this step the inputs become concepts and this process occurs within or just after the
black box classifier in the block diagram shown in figure (2.7). This step ensures that the
provided explanations can be treated as logical sentences and can be operated on just
like other logical sentences using logical rules.
2.4.3
Learning in LENs
In machine learning a class is the output category of the data. In a multiple class prob­
lem, a class is represented using an output vector (output concept in the case of LENs)
in which each observation represents one class of the problem. Learning to predict the
class of the given input correctly constitutes a classification problem in ML.
LENs are an extension of neural networks and hence providing logical explanations re­
quires learning of logical operations which is done using three main logical operators: for­
ward implication, backward implication, and bi­implication. The LEN tries to learn these
operators while trying to solve the classification problem after which the explanations are
converted into AND and OR operations.
The operations described are learnt by LENs using the loss functions mentioned and
explored below in equations (2.6), (2.7) and (2.8).
1. Forward Implication: This guides the IF rule which means that in the extreme case,
for each sample of a class, the respective class node at the output lights up. That
is if the input is of class i then the ith neuron at the output will always light up. Note,
that there can be cases where the input may not be of the ith class but the ith neu­
ron can still light up which is in accordance with the logical implication operation.
Equation (2.6) shows the mathematical formulation of the forward implication loss
function.
Logic for Neural Networks
13
==PAGE:22==
L→(yi, f, C) =
∑
c∈C
max{0, yi(c) −fi(c)}
i ∈[1, r]
where,
L→= Forward implication loss function
yi = Actual ith output concept or label
fi = Output of LEN
C = The set of all input concepts
r = Total number of input concepts
(2.6)
2. Backward Implication: Following a symmetric approach, we can make the back­
ward implication mean the ONLY IF operation. That is, the ith neuron will light up
only if the input belongs to class i. Note, that with this condition we can have cases
where the input may belong to class i but the ith neuron does not light up, this still
holds the only if statement, by the semantics of backward implication. Equation (2.7)
shows the mathematical formulation of the backward implication loss function.
L←(yi, f, C) =
∑
c∈C
max{0, fi(c) −yi(c)}
i ∈[1, r]
where,
L←= Backward implication loss function
(2.7)
3. Bi Implication: Therefore, from the above two, it is clear that to meet the classifi­
cation of the ith class perfectly we need to have an IF and ONLY IF condition which
is the same as the logical operation of Bi implication. The below function is a cross­
entropy loss function where every time a misclassification is made the network is
penalized. Therefore, the ith output neuron will light up if and only if the input be­
longs to the ith class. Equation (2.8) shows the mathematical formulation of the
bi­implication loss function.
L↔(yi, f, C) =
∑
c∈C
yi(c) log(fi(c)) + (1 −yi(c)) log(1 −(fi(c)))
where,
L↔= Bi­implication loss function
(2.8)
The parsimony criteria
When humans compare a set of explanations outlining the same outcomes, they tend to
have an implicit bias towards the simplest one. In LENs this is achieved by letting only a
subset of the entire input concept space represent the patterns in data. This is achieved
by using different types of pruning strategies.
Pruning strategies
Multiple types of pruning strategies can be used to prune the network to reduce the size
of the Logical formulas. One thing in common with all pruning strategies is that there
is always a profound impact on the classification depending on the connections that get
pruned.
There are the effective pruning strategies presented:
1. Node­level pruning: Here, each neuron in the network is considered and for each
neuron, only the best X connections are chosen (X is a parameter set before the
pruning is started). This causes a heavy reduction in the learning capacity of the
network.
14
Logic for Neural Networks
==PAGE:23==
2. Network­level pruning: Here, The number of input concepts for a given class is
pruned, the pruning is done based on a threshold Y, where the best Y input concepts
are chosen to represent a given class(Y is a parameter set before the pruning is
started).
3. Example­level pruning: This type of pruning is a special case in which the pruning
can only be used if the activation functions of the neurons are ReLU units. Therefore,
in this method, the neurons that provide non­zero outputs are kept whereas the rest
is pruned. This is because these neurons play no role in the firing path of the required
output class of the network.
2.5
Reinforcement Learning
Reinforcement learning[10] is a machine learning technique that trains an agent to learn
to solve a problem via trial and error. There 5 main concepts in reinforcement learning:
• Environment: The environment is the world where the agent is placed and allowed
to live in and interact. The environment provides all the constraints the agent is
subjected to and decides the action space of the agent.
• State: The environment provides a vector representing the current state of the en­
vironment. Each time an action is performed by the agent the environment changes
its state based on the action performed. The changed state is captured in a vector
and this vector is called the state of the environment.
• Agent: The agent is the entity that tries to navigate the environment and learns to
solve a specific problem by taking the best set of actions. Here, the agent’s actions
are what determine the performance of the agent in the environment.
• Action: Here all the possible choices the agent can make, each of which affects
the environment state differently are called actions and all the actions an agent can
take creates the action space of the problem.
• Reward: The agent receives a reward based on the actions it takes in the environ­
ment. A positive reward means the agent performed a good action and vis versa.
Generally, a higher reward refers to a better action.
Figure 2.11: A basic reinforcement learning setup
From the above definitions, a reinforcement learning problem is a problem in which an
agent tries to navigate a state space within the environment to solve the given problem
while maximizing the amount of reward received for each trial. Therefore, the reward can
act as a penalty if bad actions were performed by the agent.
2.6
Summary
This chapter introduced us to some key topics required for understanding this project.
Each topic is summarized and their role in the project is discussed.
Logic for Neural Networks
15
==PAGE:24==
Initially, two types of formal logic are introduced: propositional logic and fuzzy logic.
Propositional logic is a mathematical formulation that allows natural language statements
to be converted to logical sentences that can be used to form conclusions and make de­
cisions. The logical sentences formed can be in the form of CNFs (Conjunctive Normal
Form) or DNFs (Disjunctive Normal Form). Propositional logic considers that its sen­
tences only take binary or boolean values (True or False). This does not capture all
statements of natural language especially statements that have vagueness in them. To
overcome this fuzzy logic is used which encodes statements made in natural language
which have vagueness in them by assigning real values between 1 and 0 to handle par­
tial truths. To achieve this they use membership functions to convert natural language
statements to fuzzy variables. These fuzzy variables can then be passed through a fuzzy
system, one such fuzzy system was introduced called the Mamdani system.
Both propositional logic and fuzzy logic are used in the project to provide human under­
standable explanations in DNF format. Explanations provided are governed by the same
laws that govern propositional or fuzzy logic.
The chapter then introduces neural networks and NEAT. Neural networks are black box
function approximators that excel at catching and learning patterns in data. When neu­
ral networks are provided with a large amount of data they learn to predict and extract
patterns. Learning in neural networks is achieved by using gradient­based methods and
reducing the error in their predictions. The usual method to reduce error is through a
method called backpropagation. NEAT stands for Neuroevolution of Augmenting Topolo­
gies which is a genetic algorithm that can be used as a replacement for the backpropa­
gation algorithm used in neural networks with the added benefit that the NEAT algorithm
dynamically alters the structure of the neural network to better solve the problem. Neural
networks are great approximators but struggle to provide explanations for their decisions.
This makes it difficult to analyze the outputs of the neural network and improve them.
After this the chapter introduces LENs which provide logical explanations for any neural
network decision. LENs provide human­understandable explanations at the cost of ac­
curacy. That is, LENs reduce the accuracy with which neural networks make predictions
but in return provide a way to understand the decisions made by the neural network. The
loss is accuracy mainly occurs in the LEN because the LEN algorithm expects the neu­
ral network to receive inputs that are called input concepts and provide outputs that are
called output concepts. These concepts only take boolean values restricting the ability of
the neural network. The explanations provided by LENs are in the form of propositional
logic.
In this project, NEAT is used with LEN on neural networks to provide logical human un­
derstandable explanations. Since the logical explanations provided are in the form of
propositional logic they can be manipulated by the rules that govern propositional logic.
Finally, Reinforcement learning was introduced. Reinforcement learning is a sub­field
of machine learning in which an agent learns to solve a problem through their mistakes.
In reinforcement learning an agent is placed in an unknown environment and is left to take
actions to solve a specific problem. The agent is rewarded based on its actions and the
agent is made to maximize its reward which directly translates to the agent learning to
navigate the unknown environment and solve the problem.
In this project, the implementations are tested in a well­known reinforcement learning
environment due to which the optimal results are known which helps improve the imple­
mentation further.
16
Logic for Neural Networks
==PAGE:25==
3
Problem definition
In this project, all the previously introduced techniques are combined in a novel way within
a computational environment through which the combined algorithm’s behavior will be
explored and explained. The test environment is a well­known control problem converted
to a reinforcement learning environment. The environment description will be explored in
section (3.1) below. Since the test environment is well­defined, the hypotheses proposed
for the combined algorithm are stated as follows:
1. It will be able to explain and solve the problem.
2. It will follow the same patterns as that seen by other genetic algorithms.
3. It will be slower in finding the solution than pure NEAT due to the added overhead
of the LEN algorithm.
3.1
Environment description
For this experiment, the cart pole problem [11] was chosen as the environment to test the
working of the neural network resulting from the combination of LEN and NEAT.
Figure 3.1: An example of the cart pole environment.
Since this is a reinforcement learning problem it falls into the same definitions as described
above:
• Environment: In this problem, the environment contains a frictionless cart with a
meter­long pole standing on it. The goal of the problem is to keep the pole on the cart
standing as long as possible. The pole is attached to the cart through an unactuated
hinge.
• State: Here, the state of the environment is represented by the vector shown in the
table (3.1) below:
Cart Position
(takes values between ­4.8 to 4.8)
Cart Velocity
(takes values between ­inf to inf)
Pole Position
(takes values between ­0.418 rad to 0.418 rad)
Pole Angular Velocity
(takes values between ­inf to inf)
Table 3.1: The basic format of observation given by the environment and their range.
Logic for Neural Networks
17
==PAGE:26==
• Agent: The agent acts as the cart and can move the cart to the left or the right to
counterbalance the falling pole.
• Actions: Here the agent is allowed to perform two actions. The agent can choose
to move right (1) or the agent can choose to move left (0). Therefore, in this problem,
the agent is not allowed to sit still.
• Reward: Here for every frame the agent survives the environment rewards the
agent 1 point. There is no penalty for any wrong action.
• Episode: Here an episode consists of 500 frames, that is to solve the problem, the
agent should be able to take 500 actions without reaching a termination state. There­
fore, if an agent completes this problem, then the agent is rewarded 500 points.
• Termination state: This state is reached when one of two criteria is met: The re­
sulting state of the environment is above the range for any one of the observations
in the table (3.1) or one full episode of 500 frames is completed. When this state
is reached the environment is terminated and no further actions by the agent are
accepted into the environment.
18
Logic for Neural Networks
==PAGE:27==
4
Methodology
4.1
Structure
NEAT creates a population of neural networks for each generation. The NEAT algorithm
then lets each of the neural networks are made to run one episode in the cart pole prob­
lem. Then the fitness for each neural network is calculated and the evolution process
takes place for each neural network in the population. Therefore, The structure used to
integrate the LEN algorithm should be the same for all the networks generated in the pop­
ulation so that there is no bias introduced in the algorithm.
In this project, the structure shown in figure (4.1) below is used to train the neural networks.
Here, each network in the population is considered a black box requiring an explanation.
Each of these networks goes through a pre­processing block and post­processing before
and after the network respectively.
Figure 4.1: Flow chart of the NEAT and LEN algorithm
The function of these blocks are as follows:
• The pre­processing block provides the required manipulation on the observation
vector to account for converting an observation vector into a human­readable format.
• The post­processing block or the LEN block is the block that provides the interpre­
tation of the network. Each network has its own LEN block which tries to understand
the input and provides an explanation for the networks’ decision.
This structure allows flexibility to modify the performance of the network instead of tin­
kering with the heart of the algorithm. Since the post and pre­processing blocks can be
manipulated independently from the algorithm any changes made to these blocks will in­
fluence the performance of the network without changing the dynamic and the working of
the NEAT algorithm.
Logic for Neural Networks
19
==PAGE:28==
4.2
Observation vector
The observation vector provided by the environment has to go through some modification
before being provided to the neural network because the LEN algorithm requires con­
cepts as inputs to be able to provide meaningful explanations for the actions of the neural
network.
The observation vector should be booleanized or fuzzified (depending on the explanations
provided by the network) before it can be used as an input to the neural network. There­
fore, the input should be divided based on the convenience of the explanation required.
This method will also be explored and explained in the implementation section (5.2).
4.3
Fitness function
Using the LEN’s bi­implication function in place of the normal fitness function used for
classification allows the NEAT algorithm to train the network to learn bi­implications be­
tween the input and output. Therefore, since bi implications have mathematical meaning
maximizing the fitness function of a neural network will create bi implications between the
input and the output.
Figure 4.2: Bi implication function used for LENs
For reinforcement learning problems, there is no labeled data. As the bi­implication func­
tion of the LEN assumes that it is provided with labeled data, it is difficult to use this same
equation for reinforcement learning environments. This will make the implementation of
the algorithm difficult as this caveat should be overcome before having a working fitness
function.
In this project, this is overcome by using an already­trained neural network that can effi­
ciently solve the problem. The output of this neural network is used as the labeled data
in the bi­implication function while training the neural networks using the NEAT and LEN
combined algorithm.
4.4
Reward function
In the cart pole problem as explained in section (3.1) the reward is calculated for each
frame the pole stays within the bounds defined by the environment. That is, a reward of
1 is given for each iteration in which the cart and pole are within the environment’s bounds.
Therefore, if the NEAT algorithm solved this problem for one full episode then the neural
network that reaches a reward of 500 is considered to have successfully learned a strat­
egy to solve the problem. In this scenario, the neural network combined with LEN should
be able to explain its decisions. When the neural network is trained and is also expected
to learn the explanations of its actions the reward function of the NEAT algorithm will have
to be modified. Since developing a strategy is just one part of the problem and explaining
is another. It is considered that solving the problem and providing an explanation are both
equally important. This way the network prioritizes learning the explanations equally.
The reward function previously awarded 500 for the successful completion of an episode
for the cart pole problem. A neural network that can explain all of its 500 decisions in
an episode should have a maximum reward score of 1000 for the combined algorithms
fitness score because this ideal neural network will gain 500 for explanation and 500 for
20
Logic for Neural Networks
==PAGE:29==
episode completion. Therefore, for each frame in the episode, the neural network should
get a reward of 2, that is, 1 for explaining its decision correctly and another for keeping
the pole upright. Here, the reward for explanation is calculated using the bi­implication
function of LEN3.
4.5
Explanation Accuracy
The accuracy here refers to the accuracy achieved while trying to explain the actions of the
neural network. The explanation accuracy is calculated by determining the extra reward
gained by the neural network for providing explanations. This is because the extra reward
is awarded to the neural network every time the neural network correctly explains the out­
put during training. Hence since 1 episode of the cart pole problem lasts 500 frames, the
maximum extra reward a neural network can gain is 500. This extra reward is the num­
ber of times the neural network matched the ideal solution and provided an explanation
enforced by the bi­implication function.
The accuracy gained is a way to show that the explanations provided by the network are
not always correct but are accurate to a certain extent. A clear explanation is provided
with an example to show the accuracy calculated for a network providing explanations
below.
Consider that during training a neural network achieved a fitness of 800. Then this fit­
ness is gained by the neural network by completing two tasks. First, solving the cart pole
problem gives the neural network a reward of 500, and then finally the excess reward
over 500 is considered as the reward gained for providing explanations. Therefore, in this
case, the extra reward gained is 300, and hence out of the 500 frames of the episode, the
algorithm was able to explain the decisions of the neural network for 300 frames giving it
an explanation accuracy of 60%.
Logic for Neural Networks
21
==PAGE:30==
5
Implementation
The model was implemented entirely in python using the NEAT PyTorch implementation
based on the NEAT paper. The explanations provided by the LENs took inspiration from
the torch.explain() package for the new module conv2explain created for the project pre­
processing and post­processing blocks. The chosen NEAT package allows flexibility to
modify the fitness function parameters without breaking the algorithm implementation.
Thus, it allows the user to manipulate the fitness which was essential to running this com­
bined algorithm. Since the idea is to change the fitness function in the NEAT algorithm to
also account for providing explanations, this package suited very well for the project.
The methodology section provided an overview of all the tasks that needed to be per­
formed. In this project, 4 different configurations were implemented and tested. Each
configuration is a step up from the previous configuration in terms of performance and ex­
planation. In this section, an in­depth summary of the 4 configurations mentioned above
will be given. Snippets of the code from the Conv2Explain.py file have been added to
help the reader gain an understanding of the program structure for all the versions of the
implementation.
Similarly, the Config.py file has all the configuration settings that are used by the NEAT
and LEN algorithms and each setting is briefly explained below:
• Population size: This configuration controls the number of neural networks gen­
erated for each generation(iteration) of the NEAT algorithm. The population size is
set to 50.
• Max Generations: This sets the total number of iterations that the NEAT algorithm
will run. The max generations is set to 30.
• Input and output nodes: This sets the amount of input and output nodes of the
generated neural networks during the generation. It changes depending on the pre
and post­processing blocks used.
• Speciation threshold: This is the threshold that is used to determine the start of
a new species in the algorithm. If the newly generated neural network’s distance
(refer to subsection (2.3.4) for more information on the distance metric used) from
the species blueprint genome is greater than the speciation threshold then a new
species is created with this neural network as the blueprint genome. The speciation
threshold is set to 3.
• Connection mutation rate: This sets the rate at which a connection of a genome
should be randomly mutated. The connection mutation rate is set to 0.80.
• Connection Perturbation rate: This dictates the value by which a neural networks
connection weight should be increased or decreased. The connection perturbation
rate is set to 0.90.
• Node addition mutation rate: This is the rate at which a new node should be added
randomly to the genome of the the species. This is set to 0.03.
• Connection addition mutation rate: This is the rate at which a new connection
should be randomly added to the genome. This is set to 0.5.
22
Logic for Neural Networks
==PAGE:31==
• Crossover connection re­enable rate: Each connection that is added to the genome
is always disabled initially and hence this configuration decides the chance of a dis­
abled connection getting enabled. This is set to 0.25.
• Networks saved: Each generation only the top networks are selected to perform
a crossover and pass on their genome and hence this configuration decides the
percentage of networks saved at the end of each generation. This value is set to
0.80.
All the configuration settings remain the same for all the experiments for the sake of con­
sistency and are different only if mentioned otherwise. This consistancy allows for each
experiment to be tallied against one another to see improvement in the results section.
5.1
V0 ­ Pure NEAT
For the pure NEAT implementation, the pre and post­processing blocks have a transfer
function of 1. Therefore, in this version of the implementation, the inputs are equal to the
outputs in the pre and post­processing blocks. Due to this, the implementation can be
used as a baseline to see the implementation difference of the NEAT algorithm and the
overhead added to the algorithm as the LENs implementation is slowly incorporated in
this block diagram.
The Conv2Explain.py file contains the pre and post­processing blocks referred to in the
structure in Figure (4.1). The code for the pre and post­processing blocks are shown be­
low in listings (5.1) and (5.2) respectively.
1
def obsV0(self, observation):
2
return observation
Listing 5.1: Preprocessing for V0
1
def explain(self, version):
2
explained = ''
3
if version == 'V0':
4
return None
Listing 5.2: Postprocessing for V0
The config.py also defines the fitness function which is modified for each version of the
project. The unmodified fitness function is used for the V0 version of the NEAT algorithm
which is shown in listing (5.3) below. The fitness function acts as the main source for
optimization in the NEAT algorithm and is also a function that is modified to achieve the
required results. Penalties and rewards can be incorporate into the NEAT algorithm using
the fitness function, which can be seen in the other implementations.
1
def fitness_fn(self, genome):
2
# OpenAI Gym
3
env = gym.make('LongCartPole -v0')
4
done = False
5
observation = env.reset()
6
7
fitness = 0
8
phenotype = FeedForwardNet(genome , self)
9
10
while not done:
Logic for Neural Networks
23
==PAGE:32==
11
observation = np.array([observation])
12
input = torch.Tensor(observation).to(self.DEVICE)
13
14
pred = round(float(phenotype(input)))
15
observation , reward, done, info = env.step(pred)
16
17
fitness += reward
18
env.close()
19
20
return fitness
Listing 5.3: Initial fitness function
5.2
V1 ­ NEAT and LEN
In this section, the combination of the two algorithms and their implementations are ex­
plored. Comparing the base algorithm of NEAT there were major changes to the expla­
nation algorithm in the post­processing block and the fitness function.
The fitness function now incorporates the bidirectional implication function described in
section (4.3). There are three major changes:
• First, the bidirectional implication loss function requires a target label, and reinforce­
ment learning problems are inherently unsupervised. The labeled data was incor­
porated into the algorithm by first taking the labels from an already trained neural
network that is well­versed in solving the problem. Then this trained network’s deci­
sions are used as the true labels as the trained network is already able to solve the
given reinforcement learning problem.
• second, the bidirectional implication loss is simplified to the equation below:
F R
n (x) = ˆy.fn(x) + (1 −ˆy).(1 −fn(x))
where,
F R
n (x) = Fitness function for the explanation reward
ˆy = Labeled data
fn(x) = Prediction of the network
(5.1)
This can be done as the outputs of the given problem are always 0’s and 1’s. There­
fore, this function can be used for any classification problem because the outputs of
a classification problem can be converted to a vector where each entry of the vector
represents one class. Then an aggregation function can be applied to calculate the
loss for the given input.
• Third, the observation vector is made to become ”logical”. That is the observation
vector is converted as shown below: After the conversion, the observation vector
Cart Position
–>
cart left, cart middle, cart right
Cart Velocity
–>
low velocity, high velocity
Pole Position
–>
pole left, pole middle, pole right
Pole Angular Velocity
–>
ω low, ω high
Table 5.1: Observation vector transformation for V1 and V2
becomes a vector of size 10, where each input of the vector can only take 0 or 1
24
Logic for Neural Networks
==PAGE:33==
value. This is done as the LEN algorithm requires this booleanization as explained
in section(2.4.2).
When the above changes are incorporated into the implementation, the pre­processing
and post­processing block look as shown in listings(5.4) and (5.5) respectively.
1
def obsV1(self, observation):
2
self.pos_left = 1.0 if observation[0][0] < - 0.8 else 0.0
3
.
4
.
5
.
6
new_observation = np.array([np.array([self.pos_left , self.pos_mid , self.
pos_right , self.vel_high ,\
7
self.vel_low , self.pole_left , self.pole_mid , self.pole_right , self.
avel_high , self.avel_low])])
8
return new_observation
Listing 5.4: Preprocessing block for V1
Observation
New observation
Program variable
Threshold
Cart position
Cart position left
cart_left
(­2.4, ­0.8)
Cart position middle
cart_mid
[­0.8 , 0.8]
Cart position right
cart_right
(0.8, 2.4)
Cart velocity
Cart velocity low
vel_low
[­5, 5]
Cart velocity high
vel_high
(­inf, ­5)∨(5, inf)
Pole position
Pole position left
pole_left
(­0.418, ­0.07)
Pole position middle
pole_mid
[­0.07, 0.07]
Pole position right
pole_right
(0.7, 0.418)
Pole angular velocity
Pole angular velocity low
avel_low
[­5, 5]
Pole angular velocity high
avel_high
(−inf, ­5)∨(5, inf)
Table 5.2: Threshold values for each observation in the new observation vector.
From listing (5.4) and the table (5.3) containing the modified threshold values used in the
code for other observations in the new observation vector are the same. The thresholds
used for each observation to be considered as 1 are shown in table (5.2). These observa­
tion thresholds were selected by trial and error based on the performance improvement
of the explanations.
1
def explain(self, version):
2
explained = ''
3
if (version == 'V1') or (version == 'V2'):
4
explained += ' and pos_left' if self.pos_left != 0 else ''
5
.
6
.
7
.
8
return explained[5:]
Listing 5.5: Postprocessing block for V1
From listing (5.5) it can be seen that the explanations only hold variables when they are
1 for a given input. Therefore, if the observation had ones for the variables cart position
middle, velocity low, pole position right then the explanation would be cart position middle
and velocity low and pole position right. Hence the cart should go right.
The fitness function with the changes is shown in listing (5.6).
Logic for Neural Networks
25
==PAGE:34==
1
def fitness_fn(self, genome):
2
# OpenAI Gym
3
env = gym.make('CartPole -v1')
4
done = False
5
observation = env.reset()
6
7
conv2 = Converter()
8
fitness = 0
9
phenotype = FeedForwardNet(genome , self)
10
if path.exists(self.solution_path):
11
with open(self.solution_path , 'rb') as f:
12
solution = pickle.load(f)
13
solution_phenotype = FeedForwardNet(solution , self)
14
15
while not done:
16
observation = np.array([observation])
17
new_observation = conv2.obsconv(observation , self.version)
18
input_new = torch.Tensor(new_observation).to(self.DEVICE)
19
input = torch.Tensor(observation).to(self.DEVICE)
20
21
pred = round(float(phenotype(input_new)))
22
if path.exists(self.solution_path):
23
sol_pred = round(float(solution_phenotype(input)))
24
reward_extra = sol_pred*pred + (1-sol_pred)*(1-pred)
25
else:
26
reward_extra = 0
27
28
observation , reward, done, info = env.step(pred)
29
30
fitness += reward + reward_extra
31
32
if self.version != 'V0':
33
explained = conv2.explain(self.version)
34
if sol_pred == 1.0:
35
explanation_right.append(explained)
36
elif sol_pred == 0.0:
37
explanation_left.append(explained)
38
else:
39
explanation_left , explanation_right = [None], [None]
40
env.close()
41
return fitness , explanation_right
Listing 5.6: Fitness function for V1
5.3
V2 ­ NEAT and LEN with partial booleanization
In the previous implementation due to booleanization, there was a drastic loss of infor­
mation when the observation vector went through the preprocessing block. This loss of
information gives undesirable results which will be explained further in the results section.
5.3.1
Partial Booleanization
To avoid these undesirable results a different form of booleanization is performed, which
reduces the loss of information provided to the network during optimization and decision­
making without affecting the procedure for extracting explanations.
In this procedure for booleanization, the thresholds for splitting into the respective obser­
vations remain the same but the new observation vector is not rounded to binary values.
Consider the input observation for the cart position to be 1.8, the resulting observation
vector with partial booleanization will be [0, 0, 1.8] instead of [0, 0, 1]. This way there is
26
Logic for Neural Networks
==PAGE:35==
no loss of information when the booleanization is performed. This way the explanations
provided remain the same as the decisions of the network are based on the same inputs.
Therefore, the explanations provided will be correct and the neural network has more in­
formation for training and decision­making.
The implementation remains the same as before with small changes in only the prepro­
cessing block which is shown in listing (5.7).
Observation
New observation
Program variable
Threshold
Cart position
Cart position left
cart_left
(­2.4, ­0.3)
Cart position middle
cart_mid
[­0.3, 0.3]
Cart position right
cart_right
(0.3, 2.4)
Cart velocity
Cart velocity low
vel_low
[­2, 2]
Cart velocity high
vel_high
(−inf, ­2)∨(2, inf)
Pole position
Pole position left
pole_left
(­0.418, ­0.03)
Pole position middle
pole_mid
[­0.03, 0.03]
Pole position right
pole_right
(0.03, 0.418)
Pole angular velocity
Pole angular velocity low
avel_low
[­2, 2]
Pole angular velocity high
avel_high
(−inf, ­2)∨(2, inf)
Table 5.3: Modified thresholds used for pre­processing
1
def obsV2(self, observation):
2
self.pos_left = observation[0][0] if observation[0][0] < - 0.3 else 0.0
3
.
4
.
5
.
6
new_observation = np.array([np.array([self.pos_left , self.pos_mid , self.
pos_right , self.vel_high ,\
7
self.vel_low , self.pole_left , self.pole_mid , self.pole_right , self.
avel_high , self.avel_low])])
8
return new_observation
Listing 5.7: Preprocessing for V2
The post­processing block and fitness function for this implementation are exactly the
same as the ones used for the previous implementation which can be viewed in the listing
(5.5) and (5.6) respectively.
5.4
V3 ­ NEAT and LEN with Fuzzy logic
It is visible from the implementation that information loss due to transformation into a log­
ical observation vector cannot be ignored. Therefore, the best way to explain without a
drastic loss in performance due to information loss can be achieved by using logic that
does not have booleanization.
In this final implementation, we use fuzzy logic as the mathematical explanation tool to
help understand the decisions made by the neural networks. This is because fuzzy logic
tries to overcome the same issues faced above and has a mathematical foundation that
can be used to strengthen the explanations derived after the complete execution of the
algorithm.
Fuzzy logic can be incorporated into the algorithm since the basic block diagram of a
Logic for Neural Networks
27
==PAGE:36==
fuzzy system looks similar to the structure used in this project. The comparison between
the figure (2.1) from section (2.1.3) and the figure (4.1) from section (4.1). The key dif­
ferences that can be spotted are that the pre­processing block becomes the fuzzification
block and the post­processing block becomes the defuzzification block. The inference
rules that are provided to the inference system are the explanations that the neural net­
work is extracting from the modified LEN algorithm.
This implementation converts the observation vector by using fuzzification which is de­
scribed in section (2.1.3). The observation vector once fuzzified is now represented in
terms of membership functions. Two different membership functions were explored in
this project and they are the triangular and Gaussian membership functions.
The observation vector now has a different transformation than the one used for the pre­
vious experiments. For this version the observation vector transformation is as shown
below in table (5.4). The ω in the table stands for angular velocity of the pole:
Cart Position
–>
cart left, cart middle, cart right
Cart Velocity
–>
high velocity left, low velocity, high velocity right
Pole Position
–>
pole left, pole middle, pole right
Pole Angular Velocity
–>
high ω left, ω low, high ω right
Table 5.4: Observation vector transformation for V3
The new implementations of fuzzification (pre­processing) and defuzzification (post­processing)
are shown in listings (5.8) and (5.9) respectively. The neural network provides a vector of
length 2 as the input to the defuzzification block. The defuzzification block then applies
a fuzzy OR (Max) operation on this vector and then the result of the OR acts as the final
action chosen by the system. The inference rules are also extracted in the defuzzification
block.
1
def triangular(self, x, a, b, c):
2
y = max(min(((x-a)/(b-a)), ((c-x)/(c-b))), 0)
3
return y
4
5
def gaussian(self, x, mean, sigma):
6
y = math.exp(-(0.5)*(((x - mean)/sigma)**2))
7
return y
8
9
def obsV3(self, observation , mem_type):
10
self.fuzzy_obs = []
11
12
[observation] = observation
13
if mem_type.lower() == 'triangular':
14
for i, x in enumerate(observation):
15
for ind in range(3):
16
self.fuzzy_obs.append(self.triangular(x, self.a[i][ind], self.
b[i][ind], self.c[i][ind]))
17
18
elif mem_type.lower() == 'gaussian':
19
for i, x in enumerate(observation):
20
for ind in range(3):
21
self.fuzzy_obs.append(self.gaussian(x, self.mean[i][ind], self
.sigma[i][ind]))
22
23
return [self.fuzzy_obs]
Listing 5.8: Fuzzification block for V3
28
Logic for Neural Networks
==PAGE:37==
The algorithm gives us the inference rules of a fuzzy system. These inference rules can
be used to create a fuzzy system with the same inputs as that of the neural networks
observation vector and use the new fuzzy system to run in the environment to test the
efficiency of the inferred rules.
1
def explain(self, version):
2
explained = ''
3
if version == 'V3':
4
explained += ' and left' if self.fuzzy_obs[0] != 0 else ''
5
.
6
.
7
.
8
return explained[4:]
Listing 5.9: Defuzzification and explanation block
A simplified version of a fuzzy system that is created using these inference rules has been
implemented and the decisions of the fuzzy system is tested against the decisions made
by the neural network and the results are tallied in the next section.
The implementation of the fuzzy system is shown in listing (5.10) which outlines the deci­
sion making of the fuzzy system using the inference rules produced by the algorithm. The
class fuzzifier tracks the observations and the predictions of the neural network and later
uses these observations to make predictions and calculate the accuracy of the decisions
by comparing them to the decisions made by the neural network.
1
def decide(self, inference_right , inference_left):
2
explainations = [' left', ' middle', ' right',\
3
' vel_left', ' vel_low', ' vel_right',\
4
' pole_left', ' pole_middle', ' pole_right',\
5
' ang_vel_left', ' ang_vel_low', ' ang_vel_right']
6
7
for observation in self.observations:
8
val_right = 0
9
for rule in inference_right:
10
temp = 100000
11
for i, literal in enumerate(explainations):
12
if literal in rule:
13
temp = min(observation[i], temp)
14
val_right = max(temp, val_right)
15
16
val_left = 0
17
for rule in inference_left:
18
temp = 100000
19
for i, literal in enumerate(explainations):
20
if literal in rule:
21
temp = min(observation[i], temp)
22
val_left = max(temp, val_left)
23
24
self.decisions.append(round(argmax([val_left , val_right])))
25
26
return self.decisions
Listing 5.10: Decision function of the fuzzy system class
Logic for Neural Networks
29
==PAGE:38==
6
Results
In this chapter, we go through all the implementations and compare their results on vari­
ous metrics. Each metric has its own section which is supported by graphs or tables.
The V0 version of NEAT consistently finds the solution within 1 generation with the con­
figuration set used in the implementation section (5). Hence, the results do not include
the V0 version of the implementation and are a comparison between the different perfor­
mance metrics used to evalute the implementations.
Each graph has an exponential moving average smoothing applied to them so as to see
the general trends shown by the graphs and to help support the conclusions drawn from
them. The actual graphs are visible with a lighter color within the same graph. The expo­
nential moving average constant is set to 0.5.
6.1
Fitness
The best and worst fitness of the algorithm is tracked per generation for each version and
plotted. All the fitness graphs are plotted on the same scale where the scale ranges from
0 to 1000. In the graphs below the y scale for the graph (6.1a) is between 0­60 whereas
the rest are between 0­1000 and this has been changed to show the trends more clearly.
(a) Fitness for V1.
(b) Fitness for V2.
(c) Fitness for V3 triangular membership.
(d) Fitness for V3 gaussian membership.
Figure 6.1: Fitness evolution for each version of the implementation.
From the figure (6.1), graphs (6.1c) and (6.1d) show the mean of the fitness having a slight
upward trend signaling to the slow improvement of the neural networks when running the
algorithm. Similarly, the graph (6.1b) show san upward trend with the mean only in the
30
Logic for Neural Networks
==PAGE:39==
beginning after which it is stable. These two trends show that the algorithm finds it easy
to solve for the V2 version over V3.
Overall, another important conclusion can be drawn from the best fitness values of each
individual graph. The graph (6.1a) has a very low best fitness value of 60 compared to
the others. The garphs (6.1b), (6.1c), and (6.1d) all have their best fitness values greater
than 700. This is indicative of the fact that the algorithm is struggling to find a solution for
the implementation of version V1. The cause is briefly explained at the beginning of the
subsection (5.3).
6.2
Number of species
The number of species is indicative of the progress of the algorithm through the genera­
tions. An upward trend shows the algorithm is exploring the topology of the network, a flat
line tells us the algorithm is searching for the optimal solution within the known network
topologies, and a downward trend shows that the algorithm has started to eliminate the
poorly performing networks.
During speciation, the performance of each species as a whole should improve without
adding more genes because the networks undergo cross­over within their own species to
improve. Hence being the best­performing species without changing the network structure
often allows the species to reproduce more. As a consequence of this battle, sometimes
the cross­overs produce genomes that cannot be considered as the same species and
hence these new networks form a new species. The new species is generated based on
the speciation threshold described in section (5).
(a) no. of species for V1.
(b) no. of species for V2.
(c) no. of species for V3 triangular membership.
(d) no. of species for V3 gaussian membership.
Figure 6.2: number of species graphs for each version of the implementation.
Logic for Neural Networks
31
==PAGE:40==
6.3
Genome length
Genome length is dependent on the number of nodes and connections in a genome. As
the genome length increases the network topology becomes more complex and more
capable of solving harder problems. If there is a continuous rise in the genome length, it
can mean that the network structure is not yet able to solve the problem effectively or it
could be indicative of bloating if there is no increase in the best fitness.
(a) Genome length for V1.
(b) Genome length for V2.
(c) Genome length for V3 triangular member­
ship.
(d) Genome length for V3 gaussian member­
ship.
Figure 6.3: Genome length graphs for each version of the implementation.
From the graphs (6.3c) and (6.3d), the algorithm has clearly found a good topology to
solve the problem and hence the best fitness neural networks topology does not change
drastically as in the case of graphs (6.3a) and (6.3b) where the best fitness neural network
is always changing in topology and hence the genome length is increasing.
6.4
Network topology
The network topology shown here are the structures for the best fitness neural network
which is generated at the end of the algorithm. The NEAT algorithm converts genotypes
into the network topology before calculating the fitness of the genome. For the graphs in
figure (6.4) below the neural networks have the parameters shown in table (6.1):
From
­
Membership function
Inputs
Outputs
V1
­
10
1
V2
­
10
1
V3
Triangular
12
2
V3
Gaussian
12
2
Table 6.1: Network input and output parameters
the network graphs shown in figure (6.4) it is visible that the network topology for the ver­
sions V1 and V2 represented in graphs (6.4a) and (6.4b) are of higher complexity with
32
Logic for Neural Networks
==PAGE:41==
(a) Network structure for V1.
(b) Network structure for V2.
(c) Network structure for V3 triangular member­
ship.
(d) Network structure for V3 gaussian member­
ship.
Figure 6.4: Network structure for each version of the implementation.
(Note: The red, green, and dotted connections represent negative weight, positive weight
and disabled connections respectively.)
more interconnection, whereas the network topology for the V3 versions represented by
graphs (6.4c) and (6.4d) are simpler and easy to understand. This is mainly because the
neural network in V1 has to compensate with hidden layer nodes for the loss of informa­
tion in the observation vectors and in the case of V2, the network needs to bring together
information from multiple inputs to see the whole picture which is done using the hidden
layer nodes. Since the information provided to the V3 versions of the network are com­
plete but fuzzified, the network does not require multiple hidden nodes to understand the
observation. It is visible that only one hidden node was used in the V3 triangular mem­
bership versions network topology as shown in graph (6.4c) whereas the V3 version with
gaussian membership shown in graph (6.4d) has no hidden nodes.
6.5
Explanation length
The explanation length is used to keep track of the number of explanation rules generated,
in this case the graphs represent the number of explanation rules generated to go right.
During training at each step a new inference rule is generated and classified into right
or left explanation. Since each network runs for 500 steps in the cartpole environment,
the total number of inference rules generated is 500 for each neural network. Only the
number of rules generated for the right are shown in the graphs.
From the graphs in figure (6.5) it is clearly visible that the graphs (6.5b), (6.5c) and (6.5d)
tend to stabilize at around 250 explanation rules for right with a ±15. The explanation
length is stabilizing towards 250 since in the current problem, the optimal solution is to
make an action to go left for every action that is a right. This is because if the pole is in
the upright position the best course of action would be to perform 1 right and 1 left action
to keep the upright, since there is no option for the cart to stay in the same position.
Therefore, from the graph (6.5a) it is clearly visible that the explanation length does not
Logic for Neural Networks
33
==PAGE:42==
exceed 30 which is indicative of the fact that the neural network is struggling to perform
actions other than always going left and is unable to learn to solve the given problem. The
graph is scaled on the y axis to see this trend.
(a) Explanation length for V1.
(b) Explanation length for V2.
(c) Explanation length for V3 triangular member­
ship.
(d) Explanation length for V3 gaussian member­
ship.
Figure 6.5: Explanation length graphs for each version of the implementation.
6.6
Explanation accuracy
Explanation accuracy describes the amount of times the explanation provided matches
the output of the neural network. That is, the explanation accuracy indicates the explana­
tion power of the algorithm and having a high explanation accuracy tells us the network
has learnt an explainable solution to the given problem.The table (6.2) below uses the
Monte Carlo approach to approximate the average explanation accuracy over 25 runs.
For the fuzzy logic explanations, the inference rules generated were used to create a
fuzzy system with the same inputs and outputs as the neural network. The results were
compared with that of the neural network when both were run in the same environment.
This closeness of the fuzzy system to the neural network is represented in the table (6.2)
under the column ”With fuzzy system”.
The low accuracy in V1 is mainly due to the inability of the neural network to find a solution
to the problem and hence unable to provide explanations to the problem.
From table (6.2), it is clearly visible that the training accuracy for the two V3 versions is
not very indicative that the network has learnt to provide explanations. This is mainly be­
cause the network is trying to find an explainable solution that can also be the inference
rules for a fuzzy system which makes it a hard problem to solve. Removing the constraint
that the provided explanations have to be solved by a fuzzy logic system increases the
training accuracy considerably but does not provide a way to test the accuracy achieved
34
Logic for Neural Networks
==PAGE:43==
­
Explanation type
Membership function
Explanation accuracy (25 runs)
Training accuracy
with fuzzy system
V1
Propositional logic
­
12.21%
­
V2
Propositional logic
­
90.91%
­
V3
Fuzzy logic
Triangular
51.58%
59.58%
V3
Fuzzy logic
Gaussian
56.71%
62.02%
Table 6.2: Explanation accuracy for each version
during training which is of utmost importance to determine the networks performance and
explainability.
6.7
Results analysis
From the results above, it is visible that all the version except V1 are able to provide rea­
sonable explanations and are able to solve the cartpole problem. V1 struggles to find
a solution to the problem due to loss of information and the resulting graphs (6.5a) and
(6.1a) where the figures had to scaled to see the trends exhibited by the graphs. V1 is the
underperforming implementation which was the reason to work a way around and find a
solution to provide explanations without information loss.
Versions V2 and V3 perform drastically better and provide explanations while also solving
the problem at hand. From the graphs it is clearly indicative that V2 with partial booleaniza­
tion solved the problem easily without adding a overhead to the algorithm and also being
able to provide explanations with a very high training accuracuy as shown in the expla­
nation accuracy table (6.2). The graphs in (6.1b), (6.3b), and (6.5b) all reinforce this
conclusion.
Version V3 provided the highest level of explainability as the inference rules created by
the neural network could be tested and verified by comparing with a fuzzy system imple­
mented using those generated inference rules. This came at a cost of adding overhead to
the algorithm as the algorithm does not solve the problem as quickly as it previously was
able to. This is visible in the graphs (6.1c) and (6.5c) for V3 with triangluar membership
functions and by graphs (6.1d) and (6.5d) for V3 with gaussian membership functions.
This is because in both these sets of graphs the trend to find the best network takes 5­7
generations before settling down to a slow uptrend.
The V3 version is implemented with two commonly used membership functions: trian­
gular and gaussian. From the results it is conclusive that using the gaussian membership
function in the cartpole environment has better results in providing an inference rule sys­
tem that can match the neural network. The V3 versions provide explanations in fuzzy
logic which can be further modified using the mathematical rules governing fuzzy logic to
improve the performance of the fuzzy system and the neural network by making modifi­
cations to the membership functions provided as input.
From the graphs in figure (6.4), it can be analysed that the generated networks were
minimal topology networks. In the case of V1 since the problem was still unsolved in 30
generations it could be expected that the network would still continue to grow in size to
help solve the problem and hence except V1 all the other topologies shown in graphs
(6.4b), (6.4c), and (6.4d) are minimal topology networks.
Logic for Neural Networks
35
==PAGE:44==
7
Conclusion
In this project, an overview of two ideas in formal logic: propositional logic and fuzzy logic
were introduced with a small dive into the concept of Neural networks and Neuroevo­
lution of augmenting topologies (NEAT). Furthermore, the new idea of Logic Explained
Networks (LENs) was also summarized.
Four strategies to combine LENs and NEAT were explored and implemented, each with
its advantages and drawbacks. The results obtained by each of the 4 versions were com­
pared and discussed. The results obtained showed that the main idea behind LENs is
preserved while combining it with the NEAT algorithm and allows for minimal topology
structures of neural networks. The results were conclusive and Hypotheses 2 and 3 pro­
posed in Section (3) were verified. Hypothesis 1 was verified for the V2 and V3 versions
of the implementation and failed for the V1 version of the implementation.
Finally, the project was able to form a bridge between symbolic AI and sub­symbolic AI
which was the main idea behind the project. This project shows a possible way to form
a connection between the two major fields of AI by using fuzzy logic and propositional
logic. LENs provide a bridge between them using propositional logic and this bridge was
improved by providing a method to generate minimal topology networks using NEAT, thus
avoiding the pruning step in LENs. Another method using fuzzy logic was also proposed
to provide another possible bridge between the two fields of study in AI.
36
Logic for Neural Networks
==PAGE:45==
8
Discussion and Future work
The project initially combined NEAT and LENs and noticed that the problem was solvable
after modification to the initial combination of the algorithms. The modifications allowed
for new pathways to be explored.
This project is exploring a new field of study in explainable AI and hence there is a lot
of space for improvement. Some key points that need improvement from the results of
this project are:
• The combination of LENs with NEAT required partial booleanization which over­
came the hurdle of information loss due to booleanization. The method for partial
booleanization can be improved by handling negatives and putting a thereshold on
the max and min range of the converted values.
• Logical explanations provided after partial booleanization are not governed by the
same laws of propositional logic and hence the properties of explanations provided
after partial boleanization must be explored.
• Looking for a method to verify the results obtained during training or a method to
get test accuracy after training.
• All the explanations currently provided are in terms of the DNF format and hence
have redundancies which can be eliminated when these explanations are converted
to the CNF format.
• Currently, optimizing the algorithm to solve for explanations using fuzzy logic has
provided solutions inconsistently. This is because the algorithm tends to learn edge
cases where the algorithm tries to find a solution which is equally distributed between
lefts and rights in the cartpole problem and this allows the algorithm to gain a 50%
accuracy in its explanations. This was avoided by using a fuzzy system to test
and not learn edge cases in the data but this solution only reduces the chances of
learning edge cases and does not completly avoid it.
• A method to reduce the number of explanations provided at the end of the train­
ing to avoid inconsistencies in the resulting explanations. The algorithm provides
500 explanations since each episode of the cartpole problem runs for 500 frames.
Therefore, having 500 inference rules which include the same explanations multiple
times must be avoided.
• Testing the combined algorithms efficiency and generalization capability. This can
be done by running the algorithm on multiple different environments provided in the
open AI gym. Also, testing the algorithms working on a previously known supervised
data problem to verify the results obtained.
Logic for Neural Networks
37
==PAGE:46==
Bibliography
[1]
Kenneth O. Stanley and Risto Miikkulainen. “Evolving Neural Networks through
Augmenting Topologies”. In: Evolutionary Computation 10.2 (2002), pp. 99–127.
DOI: 10.1162/106365602320169811.
[2]
Gabriele Ciravegna et al. “Logic Explained Networks”. In: Artificial Intelligence 314
(2023), p. 103822. ISSN: 0004­3702. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.artint.2022.
103822. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S000437022200162X.
[3]
Kenneth O. Stanley et al. “Designing neural networks through neuroevolution”. In:
Nature Machine Intelligence 1.1 (2019), pp. 24–35. ISSN: 2522­5839. DOI: https://
doi.org/10.1038/s42256-018-0006-z. URL: https://www.nature.com/articles/s42256-
018-0006-z#citeas.
[4]
Tim Miller. “Explanation in artificial intelligence: Insights from the social sciences”.
In: Artificial Intelligence 267 (2019), pp. 1–38. ISSN: 0004­3702. DOI: https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.artint.2018.07.007. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/
article/pii/S0004370218305988.
[5]
Hans Kleine Büning and Theodor Lettmann. Propositional logic: deduction and al­
gorithms. Vol. 48. Cambridge University Press, 1999.
[6]
L.A. Zadeh. “Fuzzy logic”. In: Computer 21.4 (1988), pp. 83–93. DOI: 10.1109/2.53.
[7]
Francis Jeffry Pelletier. In: The Bulletin of Symbolic Logic 6.3 (2000), pp. 342–346.
ISSN: 10798986. URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/421060 (visited on 02/10/2023).
[8]
E.H. Mamdani and S. Assilian. “An experiment in linguistic synthesis with a fuzzy
logic controller”. In: International Journal of Man­Machine Studies 7.1 (1975), pp. 1–
13. ISSN: 0020­7373. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/S0020-7373(75)80002-2. URL:
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0020737375800022.
[9]
Frank Rosenblatt. “The perceptron: A probabilistic model for information storage
and organization in the brain”. In: Psychological Review 65.6 (1958), pp. 386–408.
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1037/h0042519. URL: https://psycnet.apa.org/record/1959-
09865-001.
[10]
Leslie Pack Kaelbling, Michael L Littman, and Andrew W Moore. “Reinforcement
learning: A survey”. In: Journal of artificial intelligence research 4 (1996), pp. 237–
285.
[11]
Swagat Kumar. “Balancing a CartPole System with Reinforcement Learning ­ A
Tutorial”. In: CoRR abs/2006.04938 (2020). arXiv: 2006.04938. URL: https://arxiv.
org/abs/2006.04938.
38
Logic for Neural Networks
==PAGE:47==
==PAGE:48==
Technical University of
Denmark
Anker Engelunds Vej 1, Bygning 322
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.compute.dtu.dk
