==PAGE:1==
Fermi Level depinning of wafer scale MoS2
using functionalized CVD graphene interlay­
ers
Supervised by Abhay Shivayogimath, Stela Can­
ulescu, Man­Ha Doan, Peter Bøggild, Rajesh
Ulaganathan
Master Thesis
DTU Electrical
Department of Photonics
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Approval
I, Angelos Achilleas Kalogeropoulos, declare that this thesis titled, ”Fermi­level depin­
ning of Wafer­Scale MoS2 using Functionalized CVD graphene interlayers” and the work
presented in it are my own. I confirm that:
• This work was done wholly while in candidature for a master degree at the Danish
Technical University during the period spanning from September 2022 to February
2023.
• Where any part of this thesis has previously been submitted for a degree or any
other qualification at this University or any other institution, this has been clearly
stated.
• Where I have consulted the published work of others, this is always clearly attributed.
• Where I have quoted from the work of others, the source is always given. With the
exception of such quotations, this thesis is entirely my own work.
• I have acknowledged all main sources of help.
• Where the thesis is based on work done by myself jointly with others, I have made
clear exactly what was done by others and what I have contributed myself.
Angelos Achilleas Kalogeropoulos ­ s210721
Signature
Date
iii
01-02-2023
==PAGE:4==
Abstract
This thesis explores the potential of using fluorination, the process of adding fluorine
atoms to graphene, to alter it’s electrical properties. This alteration address issues present
in 2D heterostructures that could lead to novel electronics . Fluorination leads to the
formation of fluorographene, a semi­conductor with a large band gap, which has been
gaining attention in the scientific community for its promising potential. The research
focuses on how the amount of fluorination affects the physical properties of the material
by optimizing a functionalization recipe for bi­layer, tri­layer and quad­layer graphene.
Additionally, the thesis is attempting to synthesize devices using molybdenum disulfide as
a semiconductor to examine the effect fluorographene can have in Fermi level depinning.
iv
==PAGE:5==
Acknowledgements
Ι would like to thank all those who have at one point or other supported me in this
journey. Starting with all the professors that introduced my the study of 2D materials,
taught me their importance in future electronics and trained me in the fabrication and
characterization methods. I would also like to thank my family, who has always supported
me in my decisions and stood by my in tough times. Leda and Mom I couldn’t do this
without you. Of course I couldn’t leave my friends out as their importance is immense.
Kostas, Paris, Menelaos and George, you guys are the people that always pushed me
to be better, leave my comfort zone and evolve as a person. Odyssia you have been my
second sister, you have been my compass in times of need. Last but not least I want to
thank all the international friend I met during my studies who accepted me in their group
and expanded my horizons. Gabriel, Henning, Alberto, Andrea, Alessio, Sofia, Anna,
Lorena and most of all my roommate Martina. Thank you for everything. This Thesis is
devoted to my father, Nikos, who even though he is not present, his memory and words
of wisdom have always guided me through tough times.
” Sic Parvis Magna ”
v
==PAGE:6==
vi
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
1
Introduction
1
2
Background
3
2.1
Molybdenum Disulphide . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
Graphene . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.3
Obtaining Graphene crystals
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.4
Fluorographene . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.5
Fluorination . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.6
Fermi­level pinning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
3
Fabrication methods and Characterization tools
15
3.1
Fabrication methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
3.2
Characterization tools . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
3.3
Additional characterization tools
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
4
Experimental Process
27
4.1
Obtaining Molybdenum disulfide crystals and transfer
. . . . . . . . . . . . 27
4.2
Obtaining bi­layer graphene and functionalization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
4.3
Device fabrication
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 32
5
Results
37
6
Discussion and Future work
53
Bibliography
55
Fermi Level depinning of wafer scale MoS2 using functionalized CVD graphene interlayers
vii
==PAGE:8==
viii
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction
Motivation
As the need for ever higher computing­power is increasing, the need to move away
from convectional Silicon applications is required as the semiconductor industry is slowly
reaching the theoretical limits of what is physically possible. This need is derived from a
trend known as Moore’s law, that shows an exponential increase in the number of tran­
sistors per CPU. This need comes with challenges especially when the transistors are
scaled down below sub 10 nanometers [1]. 2D materials could be the replacement of Si
in the future. Among them, graphene is standing out in the research community, gathering
great interest since its discovery. Graphene is an atomically thin material based on carbon
with a unique Dirac cone­shaped band structure that lead to minimal scattering and high
electron mobility. It is considered a zero band gap semiconductor or semi­metal resulting
in a high off current. Graphene is not the only 2D material in the center of the scope,
rather the position is shared with another category of 2D materials named transitional
metal dichalcogenides TMDs that scientists managed to isolate using niche techniques.
Of those Molybdenum disulfide MoS2 stand out due to its unique electronic and optoelec­
tronic properties, such as high carrier mobility, strong light­matter interaction and direct
band gap to name a few. Additionally MoS2 is a relatively simple and easy material to
produce making it cost­effective and ideal for research purposes.
In general what makes these materials extremely promising, in engineering terms, is
the possibility of assembling van der Waals heterostructures. The name comes from the
assembly method that allows practically any 2D materials to be held together by week
van der Waals forces. Thus, as the materials are not chemically bonded, each layer can
maintain their properties and be independently tuned and as a result create novel devices
for new electronic and optical properties.
Even though these materials are undoubtedly the future of electronics they are not with­
out their drawbacks. Strong Fermi level pinning is observed in the metal­semiconductor
interface of 2D materials that are attributed to metal­induces gap states MIGS. As a
result the Shottky barrier height is uncontrollable and contact resistance at the metal­
semiconductor interface increases. The introduction of an insulator layer at that interface
has been proven to be effective in reducing the Shottky barrier height and reduce contact
resistance, however it’s thickness must be carefully monitored as a thick enough layer can
increase tunneling resistance. A careful balancing act must be performed to reduce FLP
without introducing tunneling resistance. Graphene has be used as an effective alterna­
tive in reducing the Shottky barrier height but does not alleviate the Fermi level pinning
due to its zero band gap. However this can be altered.
Thanks to an interesting discovery of using the etchant SF6, graphene can be chemi­
cally functionalized. In essence, functionalization is the process in which F atoms in the
gas are chemically binding to the C atoms of graphene turning into Fluorine­functionalized
graphene, or fluorographene, altering its electronic properties and turning it into a large
gap semi­conductor. With this discovery one can imagine a process of obtaining a well
controlled band gap, based on the variables of fluorination which could be used in circuits.
Fermi Level depinning of wafer scale MoS2 using functionalized CVD graphene interlayers
1
==PAGE:10==
This method of fine tuning the band gap of graphene has attracted a lot of scientific at­
tention in the last years and yields promising results. However the scalability is still in its
infancy and presents a lot of issues. The understanding and optimization of the process
is needed and will be the main focus of this study.
Goal
The aim of this thesis is to study how graphene properties and structure is affected
under different conditions of fluorination in order to optimize a recipe that would assist in
the scalability of its functionalization. Additionally a device of MoS2 and fluorographene
would be used to test how this recipe is reducing the Shottky barrier height and ultimately
lead to Fermi level depinning.
Outline
Initially a review of the different materials and physical phenomena relevant to the fluori­
nation process will be reviewed. Details on the structure and properties of MoS2, graphene
and fluorographene will be elaborated in the Background chapter.
It should be stated, that the relationship between the shape and function is very closely
related in a nano­scale material. Thus, small changes in the fabrication process can
greatly affect the properties of the final device. Therefore the entire fabrication process
that was followed will be reviewed, starting with the synthesis of the basic materials and
the methods used in forming the van der Waals device. The characterization methods
that were used in this body of work in order to understand the properties of the materials
will be presented next. These methods will be described in detail, so that the reader can
understand the techniques used to obtain the results. Furthermore, an analysis of the
results from the literature will take place to establish a reference point for the acquired
results. This will provide a clear understanding of the current state of the field and will
allow for a comparison of the results with the existing literature. This analysis will be a
crucial step in understanding the significance of the findings of this research.
In the Experimental Process chapter, the steps that were followed to obtain the results
will be described in detail. The synthesis of MoS2 crystals and graphene samples will
be presented in addition to the various TESTS that graphene went through chasing the
main goal of this thesis. Finally the different attempts of device fabrication will be de­
scribed along with the issues that were faced during each one. This will provide a clear
understanding of the conducted experiments and will allow the reader to understand bet­
ter the challenges faced during the research as well as evaluate the results in light of the
difficulties explained.
The findings of the experiments described will be interpreted to understand the effects
of the process on the materials used and finally a quick summation will take place in the
Discussion chapter along with further future work that should follow.
2
==PAGE:11==
2
Background
Since the beginning of the material engineering discipline, a fundamental challenge was
the development of materials with desirable characteristics and properties. Nanotechnol­
ogy offered a way to tailor and shape the crystal structure of materials at the atomic scale,
thus achieving alternative properties. At the epicenter of this research stand the quasi two
dimensional (Q2D) materials family, which include Graphene, Hexagonal Boron Nitride,
2D Honeycomb silicon, Layered Transition Metal Dichalcogenides (TMDs), Black Phos­
phorus and more [2]. These materials would act as the building blocks of a new type of
engineering discipline, that of 2D van der Waals heterostructures synthesis. Graphene
attracted the most attention due to its extraordinary properties which will be elaborated
below, though due to the lack of a direct band gap, it is not favored in applications in low
power electronic switching. As a result TMDs dominated the research field. TMDs are
comprised of a transition metal from group IV to VI and chacogens like S,Se,Te. Their
material characteristics and electronic properties are defined by the d­electrons of the
transitional metal and are strongly affected by their synthesis process. One of the most
interesting members of the TMD family is Molybdenum Disulphide (MoS2). However this
type of structures arrived with their own problems, namely high contact resistance caused
by a high Shottky barrier height that needed addressing. In this chapter the properties and
structure of graphene and MoS2 will be described in detail to illustrate their importance and
fitness in tackling some of the issues of 2D devices.
2.1
Molybdenum Disulphide
The TMD family of 2D materials has attracted a lot of attention due to their physical,
chemical, and electronic properties and their promise of replacing existing Silicon semi­
conductors. They can be identified by their formula MX2, where M represents the transi­
tional metal element from group IV (i.e. Ti,Zr,H f), group V (i.e. V,Nb,Ta) or group VI (i.e.
Mo,W) and X is a chalcogen atom like S,Se,Te. The most promising candidate of the TMD
family is Molybdenum disulfide (MoS2). MoS2 is an inorganic compound that has one atom
of Molybdenum and two atoms of Sulfur. Just like the rest of the TMDs, MoS2, is a layered
material, with molybdenum encapsulated between two sulfide layers (S−M −S) creating
strong covalent bond between the atoms and weak Van der Waals forces within the layer.
It exhibits a high on/off current ratio (108) and decent mobility of 200cm2(V −s)−1 at room
temperature. One ability that make it suitable for a variety of applications especially in
optoelectronics, is that of changing from indirect band gap of 1.2eV in bulk [3] to direct
band gap of 1.9eV in monolayer [4]. The crystal structure is comprised of Mo stacked
between six S atoms and therefore classified as three atoms thick layer TMD. Like most
TMDs, MoS2, can be found in different polytype formats [5] like 1T, 2H and 3R as shown
in figure 2.1 with the second being the most abundant and stable. In addition 2D MoS2
has a relatively simple and cost effective synthesis method, as it will be described below,
which make it ideal for research purposes where a variety of samples are needed to be
synthesized.
Fermi Level depinning of wafer scale MoS2 using functionalized CVD graphene interlayers
3
==PAGE:12==
Figure 2.1: Polytypes of layered MoS2: a,b,c illustrate the lattice of the unit cell. S atoms
are illustrated in yellow and Mo atoms in purple. The figure is adopted from [2]
Properties of Molybdenum Disulphide:
The properties of a material has a direct cor­
relation with its band structure. Therefore in order to understand the properties, first the
band structure must be studied. As stated above, MoS2 structure can vary from 3D to
2D and 1D and so do its properties. Proof of that comes from observing figure 2.2 as the
number of layers decrease from bulk to monolayer the value of the band gap increases. In
monolayer the valance band maxima (VBM) and the conduction band minima (CBM) relo­
cate at the K point in Brillouin Zone which causes the band gap to change from indirect to
direct observed by the shift from the infrared region to the visible region. Additionally, an
increase of the photo luminescence quantum yield has been observed, with decreasing
layers.
Overall, MoS2 can be used in a plethora of electronic devices such as transistors and
sensors thanks to it’s high electrical conductivity. Due to high carrier mobility it is a good
candidate for high speed electronic devices and since it is a high band gab semiconductor
it can be a contestant in replacing silicon in optoelectronic devices such as solar cells and
LEDs. Additionally, from a mechanical point of view, MoS2 has applications as a lubricant
where high temperatures and extreme pressure is present, although this property is not
going to be of interest in this context. Last but not least, it has been observed that MoS2 is
a good absorber of infrared radiation which makes it useful in devices like infrared sensing
devices in imaging. Even though this project does not have a focus on this material, it’s
properties and promise of future applications make it a great candidate to study and use
as the semiconductor of the final device.
Molybdenum Disulphide Conductivity:
MoS2 is an intrinsically n­type semiconductor.
This may be attributed to the point defects present in the metal oxide, the substrate used
or the interaction between the two [6], nevertheless a clear explanation for the specific
polarity (n­type or p­type) is still hazy. However what makes this TMD interesting is that
many sources suggest that both n­type and p­type conductivity can be achieved in ul­
tra thin layers via doping. This process, although troubling, offers the ability to tune the
carrier polarity of the monolayer MoS2 by replacing Mo atoms with others to change the
4
==PAGE:13==
structure of the lattice and lead to the fabrication of advanced electrical devices such
as phototransistors, photodiodes and ambipolar transistors to name a few. Recent re­
ports have used Nb as a compatible substitute for Mo which achieved p­type doping
for MoS2 [7] but the most widely investigated and effective dopant has been Vanadium
(V) on account of it having only one less valance electron (V : [AR]3d34s2) compared to
molybdenum (Mo : [KR]4d55s1). Additionally both elements share similar covalent radii
(V : 153,Mo : 154) and after sulfurization, both form stable 2H­phase structures with simi­
lar parameters. Therefore it is safe to assume that V will substitute Mo atoms in the MoS2
lattice in large concentrations and as a result tune the electrical properties [8].
Figure 2.2: MoS2 band structure with respect to number of layers. Fermi level is set to 0eV.
The maxima of the valance band is illustrated in blue and the minima of the conduction
band is illustrated in red. The location of the band gap is indicated by the black arrows.
Figure adopted from [2]
Molybdenum Disulfide crystals:
MoS2 crystals can be obtained in a variety of ways,
the most common of which are, chemical vapor deposition CVD, hydro thermal synthesis,
pulse laser deposition PLD, and solid state reaction. Each process has it’s own merits
and drawbacks. In the first method,the CVD, a gaseous precursor (i.e. molybdenum hex­
acarbonyl or molybdenum dichlorine) is decomposed in a rich sulfur source (i.e. hydrogen
sulfide or thioyrea). In vapor state, the atoms react and combine with each other, forming
MoS2 that are then deposited on a silicon or sapphire substrate forming an atomically thin
layer. In the hydro thermal synthesis, MoOx and S are reacting in an aqueous solution at
high temperature and pressure. The remaining two methods, which can also be exam­
ined as parts of the same method, are the processes that were chosen in this work. The
first part, PLD, involves vaporizing a molybdenum target in a vacuum chamber, and then
depositing the vapors onto a substrate. The second part, the solid­state reaction, involves
reacting the MoOx with sulfur in a high temperature furnace. Paragraph 3.1 describe the
PVLD and solid­state reaction in more detail.
5
==PAGE:14==
2.2
Graphene
Graphene, is a typical 2D layered material that has attracted a lot of scientific attention
since the first successful mechanical exfoliation in 2004 [9]. It has been considered as
the material of the century, evident by its superlative nature and extraordinary properties.
These properties include high transparency (97.7% transmittance in the visible spectrum),
high thermal conductivity at room temperature (3∗103W/mK), high electrical conductivity
(104Ω−1cm−1), high Young’s modulus (1.1TPa) and high specific surface area (2630m2/g)
to name a few.
Band structure:
Graphene is a carbon allotrope, composed of an atomically thin layer
of atoms arranged in a honeycomb lattice. Three of the four outer­shell electrons of each
carbon atom, occupy sp2 hybrid orbitals, a combination of orbitals s, px and py, and are
shared with neighboring atoms by forming σ covalent bonds of 0.142nm. It is these bonds
that are responsible for the mechanical properties of graphene. It should also be stated
that due to the large separation in energy from the Fermi level of said bonds their electronic
properties can be neglected in this context. The final outer shell electron occupies a pz
orbital, perpendicular to the plane. Each pz orbital forms π­bonds with the corresponding
electron of the adjacent carbon atom, that leads to delocalized electron π bands [10]
essentially creating a cloud of electrons that is believed to be responsible for the incredible
electric properties of graphene [11]. The unit cell of graphene, comprised of two atoms
can be seen in figure 2.3
Figure 2.3: Illustration of graphene honeycomb lattice. The unit cell is defined by vectors
a1 and a2 containing the two atoms belonging to sublattices A (dark blue) and B (light blue)
within the dotted rhombus.
6
==PAGE:15==
By calculating the honeycomb lattice, a surprising electronic structure is derived. At the
corners of the hexagonal first Brillouin zone and only there, the conduction and valance
π band meet. These corners are called Dirac points. In reciprocal space, three of the
corners are marked as K and belong to one triangular sublattice, while the other three
are marked as K′ and belong to the second triangular sublattice (2.4). Due to the fact
that the valance and conduction band meet at these points but not overlap, graphene
is considered a zero band­gap semiconductor or semimetal (2.5a) Another interesting
fact around the Dirac points, is that the π bands exhibit a linear dispersion relation (2.5b)
with the separation distance, making graphene stand out from other semiconductors who
display a parabolic dispersion. It is to that linear dispersion behavior that the graphene’s
noteworthy electrical properties can be attributed [11].
Figure 2.4: Energy plot of the first Brillouin zone of graphene. Figure adopted from [12]
7
==PAGE:16==
(a)
(b)
Figure 2.5: (a) the plot of the valance and conduction π bands structure of graphene
touching at the K −K′ points. (b) the linear dispersion in the region of the Dirac point.
Figures adopted from [12]
Van der Waals forces:
Graphite is comprised of thousands of stacked layers of graphene
one on top of the other. In fact, the first isolated sample of graphene was taken by me­
chanically exfoliating it from bulk using the scotch tape method [13]. What makes that
possible is the fact that graphene makes delocalized π bonds out of plane, as it was men­
tioned earlier, and as a result there are no chemical bonds. The graphene layers are held
together by Van der Waals forces, interactions between the nuclei of the atom and the
molecular constituents. By accounting only for two atomically flat layers and by assuming
that the properties of the layers are constant trough out the material, the Van der Waals
force applied from each atom of the first layer to each atom of the second is proportional
to the distance between them and therefore their contributions add up.
Even though this is an approximation, as the continuum slab assumption is question­
able and the roughness play an important role in the distance between the layers, the
resulting potential energy of graphene is around 105eV/µm2. It is important to take note
of this value. Compared to the band energy per in­plane area, it is clearly quite small,
but evidently sufficient enough to hold together layers of graphene. Additionally Van der
Waals forces are not chemical bonds, which means that many materials can be assem­
bled this way without altering their properties chemically. 2D devices, that are assembled
in this way are called van der Waals heterostructures and are quite interesting as they
allow the merge of materials and consequently their properties. An example of that is
the combination of two layers of graphene to form bilayer graphene to modify the band
structure.
8
==PAGE:17==
It should also be stated that the same type of forces are present between MoS2 crystals
as well. Thanks to van der Waals forces it is possible to combine the two materials without
chemically alterations. As a result the synthesis of complex 2D devices can be achieved
while maintaining the physical properties of each individual material.
2.3
Obtaining Graphene crystals
Atomically thin materials are usually obtained by one of two ways. Either by exfoliating
single layers from bulk known as the top­down approach, or by synthesizing them directly
as a 2D material on substrate known as the bottom­up approach.
Top­down approach:
In the case of graphene the top­down synthesis refers to the pro­
cess of mechanically removing layers of graphene from graphite. This can be done us­
ing a variety of methods including micro­mechanical cleavage, liquid phase exfoliation
and electrochemical exfoliation. A benefit of exfoliated graphene is that it produces sin­
gle crystals, as the mechanical stress acted upon the grain boundaries are not strong
enough to break the crystals. Nevertheless, exfoliated graphene requires high quality
starting material of high purity and can be quite labor intensive.
Bottom­up approach:
On the other hand, the bottom­up approach of graphene syn­
thesis refers to the process of producing graphene through chemical reactions, such as
chemical vapor deposition (CVD). In this process, carbon atoms are deposited on a sub­
strate to from a single layer of graphene. During CVD, defects or contaminants might be
the starting points of the 2D material which means that the grain will have different orien­
tations when joining. This will create uneven crystals which will cause electrons to scatter
and thus limit their mean free path. The benefit of this method is that it can be used to
create large, high quality sheets at a fraction of the price. This method can be scaled up
to address the needs of future large scale device fabrication. Additionally, synthesizing
graphene this way, offers better control over the properties of the final product, and allows
the use of wide range of substrate materials. Therefore, graphene synthesized with the
later method will be used in this body of work.
2.4
Fluorographene
Even though graphene is an almost magical material, for applications in electronics it
is suffering from a major drawback. In its pristine state, graphene is a robust zero band
gap semiconductor with chemical inertia. Harsh chemical modification is a promising way
of opening the band gap as graphene’s surface can absorb radicals such as oxygen, hy­
drogen and fluorine atoms to form covalent bonds with the carbon atoms. These atoms
change their hybridization from sp2 to sp3 that leads to the opening of the band gap similarly
to diamond formation [14]. Even though the absorption of these radicals can be random,
there are cases where they form ordered patterns and create new graphene based two
dimensional crystals with different properties. By introducing fluorine absorbents, the for­
mation of fluorinated graphene or fluorographene FG has been observed. A model of this
transformation can be seen in figure 2.6.
Fluorographene, a stable two dimensional material, is a derivative of graphene and was
predicted by Sofo and coworkers back in 2007 [15] by the fluorination of graphene [16].
The structure of FG is comprised of a fluorine atom bonded to each carbon atom of the
graphene’s lattice alternating between upward and downward facing. This configuration
is described as chair and it is believed to be the most stable, with other configurations
9
==PAGE:18==
like boat and zigzag being close second. It is important to note that these configurations
refer to fully fluorinated graphene with a stoichiometry of CF, although it has been con­
cluded that at a given stoichiometry, since the formation energy of different configurations
is similar, the lattice goes under a many configurations in different areas. Therefore the
measured properties should be the average of the properties present in different configu­
rations [17]. In figure 2.7 the models of different configurations can be seen.
Through the Density Functional Theory (DFT) the band gap of fully fluorinated graphene
is estimated to be 3.07eV [16] while experimental measurements place the band gap sig­
nificantly higher.This makes FG a wide band gap semi­conductor. Experimental data of
one side fluorination has shown that the most stable configuration is the one depicted in
figure 2.8 with a predicted DFT band gap of 2.93eV which can be explained by the lack of
light absorption below wavelengths of 450nm−495nm (blue light) and can indicate a direct
band gap of above 3eV. Additionally, the resistivity of fluorographene has been measured
to be significantly higher than that of graphene on the order of TΩ[16]. This structure of
FG can explain the formation of the band gap in the following way. The carbon atoms that
bind to fluorine create sp3 bonds while the rest remain at sp2 hybridized configurations.
As a result some graphene hexagonal carbon cycles are isolated in delocalized π bonds,
connected to saturated fluorine­carbon atoms. Under these circumstances the electrons
are unable to jump from one cycle to the next, as they normally would in pristine graphene,
unless they acquire enough energy to tunnel through the saturated fluorine­carbon atoms.
This break in symmetry of the stoichiometry, along with the additionally energy required,
could be the reason for the increase in the band gap of FG. Based on this information
of its properties, it is possible to assume that FG will be a great intermediate layer at the
metal­semiconductor interface for the goal of reducing contact resistance.
Figure 2.6: Models of graphene and fluorographene (adopted from [18])
Figure 2.7: Models of different configurations (adopted from [18])
10
==PAGE:19==
Figure 2.8: Illustration of one sided chair configuration. The saturated fluorine­carbon
atoms are shown in green. Isolated graphene hexagonal carbon cycles.
2.5
Fluorination
Fluorination is the process of introducing F atoms in the graphene lattice effectively
altering it to fluorographene. There are two known methods when it comes to acquiring
fluorinated graphene. The top down or the bottom up approach. For the first approach, the
top down, fluorographine is produced in a well controlled environment and then exfoliated,
similar to the way the graphene is exfoliated from graphite. In this process both sides
of the graphene flakes are fully fluorinated, consequently producing CF stoichiometry.
The second method the bottom up approach begins with pristine graphene which is then
functionalized into the layered fluorinated state. For this to occur, graphene is placed for
a period of time into a rich, fluorine­based gas environment (typically CF4, XeF2 or SF6).
The process is typically performed in an inductively plasma etching chamber (ICP) but in
this project a reactive ion etching chamber (RIE) was used.
In this project the latter method will be used, following the work of Manh­Ha Doan and
his team on their work at [19]. The reasoning behind this choice is that FG is designed
to act as an insulator between the metal and the semiconductor for the depinning of the
Fermi level and to that end, it is important to ensure a smooth and stable contact. How­
ever, it has been stated in [19] that stacking fully fluorinated graphene can disrupt the
connection due to the covalent bonding of F atoms at the Graphene/semiconductor inter­
face. However, with the bottom up approach and after maximum exposure of 3 minutes
in SF6 plasma, measurements of Raman and XPS unveil that the bottom layer of bilayer
graphene remains pristine and free of dangling F bonds, while covalent C­F bonds are
formed only on the top layer [19]. That would insure the needed contact without the fear
of C­F covalent bonding.
11
==PAGE:20==
Figure 2.9: Band diagram of pristine BLG and FBLG at the Dirac points. Figure adopted
from [19]
12
==PAGE:21==
2.6
Fermi­level pinning
As 2D van der Waals materials do not induce covalent bonding between their layers,
they should obey the Schottky­Mott rule when it comes to the metallic contacts. However,
that is not the case, as most 2D material based devices are subjected to untunable Schot­
tky barrier height (SBH) and strong Fermi­level pinning in the interface between the metal
and the 2D material. As a result this causes high contact resistance (Rc), low device mo­
bility and un­modulated semiconductor polarity [20], [21], thus making the development
of future 2D electronic devices challenging [22]. In traditional silicon semiconductors the
contact regions are heavily doped and therefore the Rc is very low at the contact regions
compared to the channel regions. This is not the case in 2D devices as the process of
doping thin film materials is extremely difficult due to the inability of the 2D materials to
accommodate substitutional dopants that provide free charge carriers.
The challenge arrives from the week van der Waals forces the 2D material exhibits
with its neighbouring as the gap generated in the contact interface between the material
and the metal can act as tunneling barrier and create inter facial resistance in devices.
When a 2D material comes in contact with a metal, the mismatch in Fermi level causes
the formation of a high Schottky barrier at the interface, that increases the Rc values.
In conventional semiconductors like Si the Rc approaches the quantum mechanical limit,
however in 2D semiconductors like TMDs the contact resistance is several orders of mag­
nitude higher. That creates the need of higher operating voltage and thus halting the
process of ultra­low power devices.
Figure 2.10: Illustration of device structure and chemical bonding. a) Metal­Bulk semi­
conductor, b) metal­2D semiconductor with van der Waals gap, c) hybredized metal­2D
semiconductor. Figure adopted from [23]
Origins of Fermi level pinning:
In conventional semiconductors, the wave function of
valence electrons of the semiconductor and metal overlap at the interface. As the the
Fermi level of the two materials must align, gap states named metal induced gaps states
(MIGS) form that are responsible for a pinning of the surface energy state. This deeper
decay into the semiconductor is present regardless of the metal used. The same MIGS are
also responsible the FLP in 2D TMDs. This is believed to be attributed to the hybridization
of the d­orbitals of the contact metal and the p­orbitals of the TMD that cause a distortion
of the properties of thin TMDs [24]. An additional contributor of FLP is the dipole caused
13
==PAGE:22==
by the charge redistribution at the interface [20]. It has been shown that at the metal­TMD
interface a strong charge accumulation­depletion region is formed. The formation leads
to the polarization of the electron wave function and ultimately to the formation of the
dipole. Even by assuming a perfect crystalline semiconductor, the presence of the dipole
is modifying the band alignment at the interface, responsible for the FLP, due the the
Fermi level alignment near the edge of conduction band of the TMD. Additionally, due to
the charge depletion, a repulsion of the surface charge is observed, which causes the re­
hybridization of d­orbitals of the metal. As a result the the work function at the interface is
heavily modified [25] The FLP due to the formation of the interface dipole is only noticeable
in the metal­2D semiconductor and not in traditional metal­semiconductor interface. In
summary, the Fermi level pinning in 2D materials is caused by the combination of two
factors: the alteration of the metal’s work function caused by charge redistribution creating
interface dipoles, and the weak bonding interactions between the metal and the TMD at
the interface, which leads to the formation of gap states.
Figure 2.11: Left: Metal­Semiconductor interface where the Fermi level is pinned at the
ECNL. In this case the S ≈0. Right: Metal­Insulator­Semiconductor where the Fermi level
is depinned and the effective Fermi level is aligned with the ϕM. In this case S ≈1(adopted
from [26])
Large scientific effort has been put into tuning the SBH in order to reduce the contact
resistance, adjust the type of charge carrier in transistors and improve the selectivity of
carrier extraction on solar cells. A promising method is the insertion of a two dimensional
insulating layer between the metal and the semiconductor as it has shown to reduce this
barrier [27] by reducing the force with which the metals wave function penetrates the
semiconductor effectively reducing the MIGS and as a result reduce the pinning. Figure
2.11 is illustrating the difference in the Fermi level with and without an insulating layer.
Original experimental research shows the use of common oxides and nitrides. However
this introduces high tunneling resistance. The thickness of the insulator must also be
closely monitored as a thick layer would block the Fermi level pinning but also contribute to
the tunneling resistance. Therefore the choice of the insulating layer must be a balancing
act between FLP resistance and tunneling resistance.
14
==PAGE:23==
3
Fabrication methods and
Characterization tools
Before understanding the prospect of graphene in electrical applications, and perform
any sort of experimental measurements, it is necessary to create electrical devices. In
this context, a device, is characterised as any structure where graphene, or MoS2 is elec­
trically connected in a way to provide measurements like an electrical circuit would. In
this chapter of the thesis the various techniques and process used to create the building
blocks of the devices will be discussed.
To provide context on the reasoning behind each method and tool a small overview
of the process is deemed necessary. To begin with MoS2 crystals where synthesized
by depositing MoOx on a sapphire substrate using the Pulse Laser Deposition method.
Following that the samples where placed in a high temperature annealing furnace to sulfu­
rize. To obtain bi­layer graphene, mono­layer graphene on copper was used and stacked
on PVA film. Following that bi­graphene was transferred on SiO2 wafer using a simple
laminator and then placed inside a plasma etching chamber to functionalize. An optical
microscope and Raman spectroscope was used to measure the crystals of both MoS2
and graphene for characterization. The final step was to stack the two materials together
and deposit metallic terminals, to perform electrical characterization of the device. In the
following section a more detailed analysis of each method will take place.
3.1
Fabrication methods
Pulse Laser Deposition:
Pulse Laser Deposition (PLD) is a very common and reliable
method of depositing complex ceramic films like oxides on a substrate by making use of
a high power laser to ablate a target material. It is considered a physical vapor deposition
(PVD) meaning that there is no chemical reactions occurring during the process. Typically
a substrate is placed in a vacuum chamber, which is pumped to create a high vacuum
environment (between 10−7 to 10−3mbar). A laser beam is then focused onto the target
material which is placed in close proximity to the substrate and the the radiation of the
emitted light is absorbed by the target causing it to rapidly evaporate. As a result the atoms
and electrons of the target are sputtered creating a plume, which expands due to the
pressure gradients and the kinetic energy. While the plume expands it cools as it travels
through the vacuum chamber and eventually condenses on the substrate, depositing a
thin film. A benefit of most vacuum chambers is that they can host a variety of targets at
the same time, ensuring ease in fabricating layered materials such as MoOx −VOx and
the targets are rotating to insure uniform ablation. Figure 3.1b is illustrating the vacuum
chamber used to create the MoOx crystals for this project. It should be stated that these
crystals where not synthesized by the author.
Fermi Level depinning of wafer scale MoS2 using functionalized CVD graphene interlayers
15
==PAGE:24==
(a)
(b)
Figure 3.1: (a) Illustration of the PLD­vacuum chamber . (b) Experimental setup used for
the fabrication of MoS2 crystals.
Sulphurization:
After the deposition on the substrates, it is necessary to replace the
Oxides with sulphur to get the final TMD. The process of introducing sulfur into a material
is called sulphurization and there are several ways to achieve this, including chemical
reaction, heat treatment, and mechanical alloying. Heat treatment is the chosen method,
as it is the quickest and easiest of the three. For this to be successful the sample is placed
in a high temperature furnace and sulfur is introduced in gas form. Typically, Sulfur reacts
with the surface of the material forming a thin layer of sulfide compounds at temperatures
in the range of 500 −800◦C. After that the sample is left to cool down gradually until it
reaches room temperature. Figure 3.2a is illustrating a typical high temperature furnace
used for sulfurization and figure 3.2b is the setup used to covert MoOx into MoS2.
(a)
(b)
Figure 3.2: (a) Illustration of the Sulfurization Furnace . (b) Experimental setup used for
Sulfurizing the samples.
16
==PAGE:25==
Plasma etching chamber:
In order to functionalize graphene, meaning to replace the
carbon atoms with fluorine, a plasma etching chamber is used. The fluorination is carried
out in a parallel reactive ion etching system (∥RIE), a type of plasma etching system
that uses two parallel plates capacitevly coupled as shown in figure 3.3. The process
chamber is typically made of metal and is equipped with a vacuum pump, responsible for
creating a high vacuum environment. Once the sample is placed on the special stage,
and the desirable vacuum is reached, the chamber is filled with a gas (i.e. SF6, O2 or
Ar). An RF signal is producing alternating high voltage and as a result make the electrons
oscillate. Through this oscillation the electrons interact with the gas, causing ionization
and dissociation into radicals. At this point the parallel plates act as electrodes with the
larger of the two acting as the anode (typically this plate is grounded) and the smaller acts
as the cathode, generating a bias. This bias is critical for directing and accelerating the
ions onto the wafer. The set up that was used offered the ability to change a variety of
parameters to fine tune the experimental conditions namely the flow of the carrier gas,
the active power, the exposure time and so on. However is should be stated that due to
the nature of the machine, the set active power is not reached instantly. As a result, the
exposure time that is described in the Experimental process chapter is the 2s less than
the set value. This time difference is determined by observing the necessary time for the
power to reach the desired value during experimentation. Additionally the active power
that is set, is not the one that the sample is receiving as a small part of it, around 1W is lost
as reflected power. Similarly the active power noted in the Experimental Process chapter
is 1W lower than the set value.
One major drawback of this setup is that there is only one RF power source which makes
the control of the ions and radicals troublesome. Additional limitation comes from the fact
that this configuration can only produce low density plasma, meaning low concentration
of electrons, ions and radicals [28].
Figure 3.3: Illustration of parallel reactive ion etching system, also known as reactive
sputter etcher. Adopted from [28]
17
==PAGE:26==
3.1.1
Substrate wafer
For the base of the devices an appropriate substrate had to be chosen. Typically a silicon
wafer covered in a layer of 90nm thick silicon oxide is used. The main reason behind this
choice is that it provides good contrast for visualizing graphene and MoS2, as the color
of 2D materials can change significantly with respect to the number of layers and the
substrate material, which can be helpful for analyzing these materials. Figure 3.4a and
figure 3.4b provide an example of what MoS2 and graphene look like on a 90nmSi/SiO2
substrate. To locate the transferred crystals easier and also to provide easier alignment
of the structures ,the Si wafer has prefabricated index marks on them. However, it is im­
portant to note that these marks are etched. This is because the substrates are designed
to undergo process where high temperature is present, and that heat would cause them
to evaporate if the metals were deposited. For the samples, the wafer was cut into small
2cmX2cm pieces for easier processing. Precision is not important in this step and so a di­
amond tip scriber can be used to draw schism lines by hand. These lines are the guide for
breaking the wafer, again by hand, to obtain the final wafers. Since this process is quite
intrusive a fair amount of Si dust can be accumulated on the wafer. To remove these con­
taminants the wafers are cleaned in a bath of aceton and IsoPropanol (IPA) and rapidly
dried afterwords using N2 gas. Aceton and IPA will also dissolve any polymer resides still
left on the chip.
(a)
(b)
Figure 3.4: (a) MoS2 on SiO2. (b) Graphene on SiO2
18
==PAGE:27==
3.2
Characterization tools
In this chapter, the characterization techniques that were utilized in the course of this
research will be examined. The characterization of the materials used in this study is
crucial in order to understand their properties and behavior. To that end, a variety of
characterization tools were employed, including Raman spectroscopy and Optical micro­
scope were used. The purpose of this chapter is to provide a comprehensive description
of these techniques, as well as the results that expected to be seen based on literature. A
discussion of their limitations and implications of the characterization techniques will also
take place. Finally additional characterization tools will be referenced that due to time
limitation were not used by the author but are common practice in this type of research.
3.2.1
Raman Spectroscopy
Raman Spectroscopy is a powerful analytical technique that is based on the scattering
of light. The basic principle behind this technique is that when light is scattered by a
molecule, some of the scattered light will be shifted in frequency. This frequency shift,
known as Raman shift, is characteristic of the molecule and can be used to identify it.
This method is particularly convenient with 2D materials like graphene and MoS2 as it
offers the ability to determine the number of layers, the flatness of the surface as well as
detecting possible defects of the flake.
To elaborate, Raman relies on the non­elastic scattering of photons, propagating through
a material. When a photon gets scattered, it can excite the electrons of the material into
a higher energy state before they drop back to their original state and emit the photon
back. This means that the emitted photon will have different energy from the original and
therefore a shift in the wavelength would be present. By shinning a monochromatic laser
at a wavelength close to UV at the sample, it is easy to measure the intensity of the re­
flected light by making use of a band­pass filter. Since the emitted wavelength is known,
the Raman shift can be computed as the difference between wavelength of the source
and the emitted light shown in equation 3.1 .
˜∆v =
1
λsource
−
1
λmeasure
(3.1)
Where ˜∆v is the Raman shift, λsource is the wavelength of emitted light and λmeasure is the
wavelength of the reflected. By plotting the amplitude measured with respect to the shift
at a specific wavelength the Raman Spectrum can be acquired which is uniquely different
for each material. One of the limitations of this tool is that it is sensitive to background
radiation and high signal to noise ratio which could lead in the appearance of faulty peaks
or noisy responses. To address this, the tool that was used, was set to collect 3 sample
exposures of 10s each and average over them. This way, not only the signal to noise ratio
is reduced significantly but any random peaks would be removed.
19
==PAGE:28==
Graphene spectra:
When it comes the spectra of graphene there are two main charac­
terization features that worth noting as illustrated in figure 3.5. A broad and intense peak
at 1580cm−1 and a second, stronger peak at around 2600cm−1 known as the G peak and
the 2D peak, respectively [29]. The G peak is associated with the in­plane vibrations of
the carbon atoms. Through this peak we can deduce the number of layers of graphene
present in the sample, as with more layers the peaks amplitude increases almost linearly
and the peak center shifts to lower wavelength as illustrated in figure 3.6. The second
peak, 2D is attributed to two phonons modes. It’s narrowness and symmetricity is a mea­
sure of graphene purity, while the ratio of amplitudes between the two peaks can offer
significant information about the quality of the crystals, like flatness and purity. It should
also be noted that the 2D peak is the second order of the disorder D peak and is only
observed when significant defects are present.
Figure 3.5: (a) Raman spectra of the Graphene and Graphite. (b) 2D peak of graphene
and graphite. Measurements taken at a wavelength of 514nm. Plots adopted from [29]
20
==PAGE:29==
Figure 3.6: Comparison of Raman spectra with different number of layers of graphene. It
is clear that the G peak has no shift regardless the number of layers, while the amplitude
is decreasing from graphite to single layer. Adopted from [30]
Fluorographene spectra:
By introducing Fluorine atoms to the graphene, it is only nat­
ural the Raman spectra of the new Fluorographene FG would be different. Fluorination
essentially is the introduction of defects on the pristine graphene. Figure 3.7a is illustrat­
ing the Raman spectrum of Fluorinated bilayer graphene. Even though it is quite similar
to that of graphene, as expected, peak 2D is decreasing in intensity and becomes wider
as a function of fluorination. Additionally peak G appear to decrease in intensity. With
the introduction of enough fluorine atoms peak D is activated, although with a very low
intensity, at around 1300cm−1 This peak is related to the presence of sp3 hybridized car­
bon atoms in the graphene lattice, which are introduced through the substitution of carbon
atoms with fluorine atoms. The intensity of this peak is often used as an indicator of the
degree of fluorination in a sample of graphene. Just like with pristine graphene, the posi­
tion and intensity of these peaks can provide important information about the distribution
and bonding of the fluorine atoms in the material. It should also be stated that the Raman
spectrum of FG may be affected by the quality of the material. The degree of defects or
impurities, the thickness and lateral size of the sample are all characteristics that play an
important role in the final Raman spectrum.
A note that is worth mentioning, is the complete disappearance of the peaks in full
fluorination, that has been stated by both Nair et al.[31] and Wang et al. [32] and is evident
by following the trend shown in figure 3.7a. This complete disappearance of the peaks
21
==PAGE:30==
is usually met in functionalization were high activation power is used, or exposure time
is long. One explanation for this is the direct band gap ≈3eV is higher than the energy
of the typical excitation energy of the laser that Raman spectroscopy uses ( 2.72eV for
455nm to 2.33eV for 532nm). A higher power UV laser should be used to correct this and
have more accurate results. According to Wang, the peaks do in fact exist and activate
two new ones, one at ∼1270cm−1 and a smaller side peak at ∼1345cm−1 shown in figure
3.7b. The peaks are interpreted as the out­of and in­plane motion, respectively of the
Fluorine atoms with reference to the carbon lattice.
(a)
(b)
Figure 3.7: (a) Example of bilayer Fluorinated graphene using typical Raman laser,
adopted from [19]. (b) Raman response of Fluorinated graphene using UV laser, adopted
from [32]
Full width half maximum of 2D peak:
As it is stated above peak 2D is changing sig­
nificantly when graphene goes under fluorination. Therefore it wise to perform a full width
half maximum analysis (FWHM) of said peak. This is a measure of the width of the peak
at half of its maximum height in a Raman spectrum. It is used as an indicator of the ho­
mogeneity or crystallinity of a sample. A narrower FWHM generally indicates a higher
degree of homogeneity or crystallinity and visa versa. By observing figure 3.8 it is clear
that higher fluorination increases the FWHM as peak 2D becomes wider and shorter in
intensity. Typically it is found around the range of 30cm( −1)to60cm( −1) but higher mea­
surements have been reported [19]. The FWHM of the 2D peak can be affected by various
factors such as the degree of fluorination and the quality of the graphene sample.
Intensity of 2D peak over G peak:
An additional analysis that can be performed on
the Raman spectrum is the ratio between the intensity of the 2D and G peak. In general,
as the degree of fluorination increases, the intensity of the 2D peak decreases. This is
because the added fluorine atoms disrupt the hexagonal symmetry of the graphene lattice,
reducing the strength of the 2D peak. Therefore, by measuring the intensity ratio of the 2D
peak to the G peak (I2D/IG), one can determine the degree of fluorination of the graphene
sample. Figure 3.8 is illustrating the change of the intensity ratio with fluorination time.
22
==PAGE:31==
Figure 3.8: Full width half maximum and 2D intensity over G intensity. Adopted from [19]
Molybdenum Disulfide spectra:
Accordingly, the Raman spectra of MoS2 has it’s own
fingerprint with four noteworthy peaks E1g, E1
2g, A1g and E2
2g. Peak E1
2g and A1g are rep­
resenting the in­plane and out­of­plane vibrations of the two S atoms that vibrate in the
opposite direction of the Mo atom between them respectfully. In the monolayer peak E1
2g
is observed at around 385cm−1 while peak A1g at around 404cm−1 illustrated in figure 3.9.
As the number of layers increase, a red shift is observed on peak E1
2g while peak A1g
undergoes a blue shift due to the weakening of the inter layer coupling. It should also
be stated that peak A1g is not affected greatly by the inter layer interactions, rather it’s a
function of electron doping and absorbents on the surface of MoS2. As a result, the red
shift and the peak’s width can offer valid information on the level of doping [2].
Figure 3.9: Raman spectrum of MoS2 showing the vibration peaks. Figure adopted from
[2]
23
==PAGE:32==
3.2.2
Optical microscope
The last tool that was used in this body of work was the optical microscope to obtain
detail pictures of the MoS2 crystals and graphene. Through this images additional infor­
mation can be deduced. To begin with, one of the key features that separates graphene
from fluorographene is the band gap. FG is considered a large band gap semi­conductor
and that comes with a interesting consequence. As wavelengths of 400nm (around 3eV)
do not have enough energy to excite the electrons from the valence to the conduction
band, making FG mostly transparent. Therefore, optical images can be the first indication
of fluorination. It should however be stated, that for the images to be comparable they
must be taken under the same conditions, i.e. magnification, exposure time, and intensity.
It is also very important to have the images white­corrected before the analysis. Figure
3.10 is illustrating the effect on the transparency of FG with higher fluorination. Another
way that optical images can provide information is by observing the graphene flakes. It
has been observed that after functionalization, graphene flakes tend to shrink. That could
be attributed to the harsh plasma etch that forces peaces of the flakes to be removed from
the substrate. Figure 3.11 can provide evidence of that. However, it is important to note
that the data gathered from these images should only be used empirically and only aid in
a quick determination of graphene fluorination. Additional correction software should be
applied on the images, for them to be considered scientific evidence and is reserved for
future work.
Figure 3.10: Optical images acquired under the same conditions of three different levels
of functionalization.
Figure 3.11: Optical images illustrating the removal of Gr flakes after functionalization.
Note that these images were taken under the Raman spectroscopy microscope under
slightly different conditions
24
==PAGE:33==
3.3
Additional characterization tools
This section is reserved for further characterization tools that are commonly used in the
investigation of 2D materials that can provide important information. However, due to time
limitation, requirement of training and fabrication difficulties the following tools where not
used in this body of work. They are however briefly mentioned as future work would entail
their use.
Atomic Force Microscopy:
There is a strong correlation between the structure of a
material at the nano­scale and its properties. Consequently it is of vital importance to
understand the formation of the materials surface. Atomic Force Microscopy (AFM) is the
tool that can be used to that end. It relies on an extremely small (atom thick at the end) tip
which travels on the surface of the material. The underlying materials surface forces the tip
to move vertically and through that movement the height profile is acquired. It is important
to note that at that scale, the contact measurement is expressed as local atomic forces
(Van der Waals interactions) of the atoms applied onto the tip and not physical contact per
say, thus the name. There are a variety of modes that can be used to obtain the desired
results, namely the ”tapping mode” and the ”contact mode”. Figure 3.12 is illustrating the
set up of a typical AFM measurement set­up.
Figure 3.12: Illustration of Atomic Force Microscopy set up.
X­ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS):
XPS works by irradiating the surface of a
sample with a beam of X­rays. This causes the emission of photo­electrons from the sur­
face of the sample. The energy levels of these photo­electrons are then measured, which
provides information about the chemical elements present in the sample and their chem­
ical bonds. XPS is extremely surface sensitive method of characterization as it has the
ability to penetrate the sample in the order of nano meters. Therefore this method should
be able to accurately show the composition of both the 2D material and the substrate of
it.
25
==PAGE:34==
Electrical characterization:
2D materials like MoS2 and graphene posses a plethora
of characteristics as building blocks of modern electrical devices that worth measuring.
However, the main focus of this project is to observe how fluorinated graphene can soften
the Fermi level pinning at the interface between the metallic contacts and the 2D material
and determine if in fact the insertion of a fluorographene layer can reduce the contact
resistance. To that end, the transmission line method (TLM) is the most conventional
method of determining the contact resistance Rc in metal contacts. In figure 3.13a an
illustration of this method can be seen. The metal electrodes, which size remain constant,
are fabricated with different spacing between each other. Therefore the total resistance
Rtotal between two contacts is expressed as the linear combination of Rc and the spacial
length dependant resistance RL. A typical schematic of a TLM is shown in figure 3.13a
with MoS2 as the channel material. Notice that the end contacts are a different in size than
the rest. That is due to the fact that 2D materials have larger Rc than bulk semiconductors
and therefore a back­gate voltage must be applied. In this case through SiO2/Si substrate
[33].
(a)
(b)
Figure 3.13: (a) Illustration of TLM configuration. The different channel lengths are de­
noted with L1, L2, etc. (b) TLM schematic with back­gate terminals on MoS2. Figures
adopted from [33]
26
==PAGE:35==
4
Experimental Process
At this point the theoretical know how has been understood and the tools and methods
have been described. Therefore this part of the paper is reserved to present in detail the
experimental process. The first part is going to describe the synthesis method of MoS2
crystals as well as the steps taken to transfer them on SiO2 substrate. Similarly a short
description of the acquisition of graphene samples will be described as well as the differ­
ent experimental steps that where taken to understand and optimize the functionalization
recipe of graphene will be reported. Finally, the procedures of manufacturing the devices
will be elaborated.
4.1
Obtaining Molybdenum disulfide crystals and transfer
Deposition:
The first step in the synthesis of the MoS2 crystals is the deposition of MoOx
on a substrate using the PLD method 3.1. The substrate that was chosen was a sapphire
crystal that similarly to the SiO2 wafer, was cut into small 2cmx2cm pieces for easier pro­
cessing using a diamond tip scriber. After placing the substrate into the high vacuum
chamber, the deposition pressure was set to 1.05 · 10−1mbar and the chamber was filled
with Ar gas. The rich Ar environment will act as a carrier to spread the plasma plume from
the ablated target to the area of the substrate more efficiently. It should be noted that due
to technical difficulties of the set up, the substrate was not heated to a high tempera­
ture, rather it stayed in ambient temperature around 23◦to 25◦C. Once the substrate was
mounted and the desired pressure was reached, the first step was to rotate the targets
and use a laser to pre­ablate them. This ensures a uniform surface. To avoid any deposi­
tion to the substrate, the shutter was closed at this stage. During deposition, the energy of
the laser was set to Edep = 69.8mJ, enough to ablate the MoOx target. In total, 19 samples
where created with this process at different deposition levels (increased pulses), but the
author of this document was not directly involved. Of these samples 4 were offered to be
used as the semiconductor for the final device. Said samples are N­type MoS2 with 100
pulses of MoOx deposition.
Sulfurization:
Once the deposition is complete the samples had to be sulfurized in or­
der to replace the oxides with sulfur. For that, the samples where placed inside a high
temperature furnace (3.1) along with an alumina boat containing 1.5grof pure sulfur dust.
Once the samples are placed in the quartz tube, it is sealed and flushed 5 times with a
carrier gas mixture of 95%Ar + 5%H2. During this process the pressure inside the tube
was set to 1.5torr with a flow of 10sccm of the same carrier gas. The furnace reached a
maximum temperature of 800◦C with a temperature profile shown in figure 4.1. This profile
has been shown to yield substantial results in sulfurizing samples. One details that should
be mentioned is the following. Due to the fact that evaporation temperature of S is way
smaller (melting point 115◦C, boiling point 445◦C [34]) than the maximum temperature the
furnace reaches during this process, if the sulfur boat was placed close to the sample,
it would evaporate too rapidly and the sulfurization would not be successful. To elevate
this issue the boat is placed 28cm away form the sample, effectively placing it outside the
furnace. The radiated heat, along with an external heater, wrapped around the tube at
the location of the boat is enough to heat the sulfur and offer a slower evaporation. In
figure 4.2 the difference before and after sulfurization can be seen.
Fermi Level depinning of wafer scale MoS2 using functionalized CVD graphene interlayers
27
==PAGE:36==
Figure 4.1: Temperature profile of sulfurization process
Figure 4.2: MoOX crystal on sapphire before and after sulfurization. The sample on the
left with the yellow hue is the sulfurized MoS2 while the transparent sample on the right is
un­sulfurized
Transfer MoS2 on SiO2 substrate:
Once the samples reach room temperature they can
be transferred to the SiO2 wafer substrate through the following process. The first step
is to apply a PMMA film on top of the MoS2. The PMMA film acts as a binder that helps
keep the crystals together during transfer. To apply this layer, the sample is placed in a
spinner with a few drops of PMMA deposited on top. After spinning the sample at 3000rpm
for 60s a very thin layer is left. Next, it is necessary to place the sample on a hot plate
at 90◦C for a few minutes to dry completely and for PMMA to solidify. As MoS2 shows a
very strong adhesion to the sapphire substrate it is necessary to use a basic solution to
remove it. For that a 2mol KOH solution is prepared and heated on a hot plate at 95◦C. It
is not necessary to heat the solution, however higher temperature expedites the process.
28
==PAGE:37==
At the same time de­ionised water is placed in a deep vessel. Using a diamond tip scriber
the sample is scored along the edges. This step in essential in aiding the KOH solution
to sip between the sapphire and the MoS2. The sample can then be submerged in the
KOH solution for a few minutes. Following that, the sample can slowly be placed in water
at an angle of approximately 30◦. With that process the MoS2 will float on the surface of
the water while the sapphire substrate can be discarded. Using the SiO2 substrate the
floating MoS2 can be obtained. The last step is to leave the sample on a hot plate for the
water to dry and dip in aceton to remove the PMMA layer and also clean any residues. In
figure 4.3 the area with pink hue is the SiO2 substrate and with light blue area is the MoS2
crystal. The white dots is PMMA residues that were not removed.
Figure 4.3: MoS2 crystal on SiO2 substrate
4.2
Obtaining bi­layer graphene and functionalization
Graphene transfer on SiO2 substrate:
At the time of writing this thesis the process of
extracting mono­layer graphene from Cu is patent pending. Therefore not much detail
can be shared in this body of work. However a short description should be mentioned
to provide context. To begin with, mono­layer graphene on Cu is encapsulated in PVA
film and run through a high temperature laminator. This will allow the graphene to be
extracted from Cu and be deposited on the PVA. This step can be repeated as many
times as necessary to obtain the desired number of graphene layers. Following that,
the PVA can be cut with a pair of scissors to the desired length and width, and easily
transferred on SiO2 substrate. Using a desk laminator the graphene flakes gets adhered
to the substrate with the PVA film. By letting the sample in water over night the PVA film
is dissolved. More details on the process can be found in [35].
29
==PAGE:38==
4.2.1
Experimental tests
The main focus of this body of work was twofold. The first part was to understand
how bi­layer graphene is behaving under different fluorination conditions and to optimize
the recipe using a plasma etching chamber. The optimized recipe would then be tested
on multi­layer graphene as well. There are many parameters that play a crucial role i.e.
chamber base pressure, carrier gas, flow of carrier gas, laser power, exposure time and
more. This project is only going to be focusing on active power and exposure time. The
second is to understand how well can graphene be fluorinated while on a PVA film as
successful fluorination could streamline the manufacturing process of FG. The following
test describe the experimental process that took place to complete these goals.
TEST 1: Understanding the behavior of graphene under different fluorination con­
ditions.
In the first test, 6 samples of bi­layer graphene were synthesized using the
method described above ( par:4.2). Each sample was put under the optical microscope
to examine the size of graphene flakes and obtain the pre­functionalization images. The
samples were then placed in a plasma etching chamber (3.1) one at a time. To study
how each parameter is affecting the fluorination of graphene, the for first three samples
the active power was kept constant at 20W and the exposure time increased from 20s to
40s to 60s, while for the second three the exposure time was kept constant at 20s but the
active power was reduced to 10W, 5W and 1W. Once all the samples were successfully
functionalized, Raman spectra were acquired to further analyze the results.
TEST 2: Repeat of TEST 1 with graphene on PVA.
For this test, the experimental
parameters were the same as before, but with one key difference. Instead of placing
graphene directly on SiO2 substrate and removing the PVA film, graphene was left on the
PVA and then functionalized in the same plasma etching chamber. Before measuring the
Raman spectra of these samples, the PVA film was flipped to have graphene come in
contact with the substrate and then submerged in water overnight to remove the PVA film
and make the desired peaks visible.
TEST 3: Functionalization of multi­layer graphene.
As stated above, it is possible
to repeat the laminator method in order to acquire multi­layer graphene. For this test the
process was repeated to create Tri­layer and Quad­layer graphene. Three samples were
created for this test (Bi­layer, Tri­layer and Quad­layer) using the same method as before
to transfer them on SiO2 substrate. The samples were functionalized in the same chamber,
at 10W active power, with an exposure time of 72s. All three samples were placed in the
chamber in the same time to minimize unpredictable variations during functionalization
and ensure uniformity in the results. Again Raman spectroscopy followed to measure
their responses.
TEST 4: Energy in the system hypothesis.
The last test that was conducted was
the assessment of a hypothesis. As it was mentioned above during this body of work, the
only variables that changed are the power and exposure time. This two values essentially
describe the amount of energy that is put in the system during the fluorination of graphene.
The assumption was that, despite the level of power or the exposure time as long as their
product, the energy in the system, is the same, the fluorination level should be the same.
To that end three samples of bi­layer graphene were synthesized using the same method
and functionalized with 720W · S energy in the system. For the first sample the active
power was set to 10W for 72s, for the second the active power was 12W for 60s and the
30
==PAGE:39==
last was set to 15W for 48s The three samples were then measured in Raman to asses
their spectra responses.
Figure 4.4: Conditions of experimental tests
31
==PAGE:40==
4.2.2
Raman data analysis and correction.
’paragraph Raman spectroscopy was used to characterize and understand the samples
better. An important note to take at this point, is that the set up used acquires single­point
spectra using 2W455nm laser. Therefore in order to have a better understanding of the
whole sample, 5 measurements were taken, in different locations of each sample. The
data were imported into MATLAB to be analysed. The first step was to form the average
values of intensity by taking the mean of each measurement. Raman spectra is mea­
sured in intensity (a.u.) over wavelength (cm−1). However, due to the output power of
the machine not being reproducible, leads to a collection of data with varying amplitudes.
Thankfully the relative amplitude of the peak should be unaffected by the laser’s power.
Thus to make the measurements comparable it is necessary to normalize over a peak that
is known to remain constant regardless of functionalization. The Si peak present thanks
to the substrate is used to that end. Unfortunately, the Si peak has significantly higher
intensity compared to graphene, and it can hide important information. As a result, after
normalizing it is important to remove this peak from the plot to focus on the peaks of in­
terest. An additional step in the data analysis is a background correction. Background
correction in Raman spectroscopy refers to the process of removing or reducing the un­
wanted signal (background signal) that is present in the Raman spectrum. This can be
caused by various factors such as fluorescence, scattering, and instrument noise with the
goal of improving the signal­to­noise ratio. To that end a MATLAB code was provided that
uses a Lorentzian fit of the peaks with a linear background fit.
4.3
Device fabrication
Once the MoS2 crystals are collected and the functionalization recipe has been understood
it is possible to move to the stacking of the materials to create the final device. Fabricating
2D devices is quite troubling therefore this section is devoted to describe the different
steps and techniques that were attempted to that end. Each device presented issues
in the synthesizing process that an effort was made to solve with the next one. In this
context the SiO2 substrate is referring to a different type, that is laced with 300nm of SiO2
compared to 90nm of SiO2 on the the ones that were used before. This is considered a
higher quality SiO2 as it will aid in a higher bias voltage to be applied.
Attempt 1:
For this device, MoS2 crystals were transferred on SiO2 and graphene was
functionalized on PVA film. The functionalized graphene was then transferred on top of the
MoS2 with the laminator method. The device was submerged in water overnight to remove
the PVA film. Once the film is completely removed a PMMA film can be placed on top and
electron beam lithography tool can be used to remove the PMMA film selectively. This
step would help deposit Au/Ti metals to create terminals of desired length and placement
as described in 3.3. This method proved unsuccessful.Figure 4.5 is an optical image that
was taken at 5X magnification. In it, the dark blue area is the SiO2 substrate and the
light blue the MoS2 crystal. The square transparent square on top is the PVA with the
functionalized graphene. In this image no graphene flakes can bee seen, and the MoS2
crystal is significantly smaller compared to the one that was originally transferred. Once
the device was placed in water most of MoS2 crystals was pealed off and no graphene
could be found. The assumption is that small particles of water were left under the MoS2
crystals during transfer and acted as entry points for water to sip through and peal off
the crystals. Additionally, FG flakes are smaller compared to graphene and therefore by
removing the PVA layer, the flakes were unable to adhere to the MoS2 crystals.
32
==PAGE:41==
Attempt 2:
To face the issues that were present in the first attempt a few extra steps
were taken. To begin with, after transferring MoS2 crystals on SiO2, the device was left on
a hot plate at 150◦C for 30min, to remove any residual water left. Additionally, to address
the small flakes of FG, pristine graphene was used and transferred directly on MoS2. The
next steps remained the same, except for one, were graphene is functionalized after the
e­beam lithography and before the deposition of metals. Again the crystals were unable
to stay on the SiO2 substrate. The assumption is that the crystals can not remain in the
water for the amount of time that is reacquired for the PVA film to be removed without
pealing off. Figure 4.6 represents the results of this attempt were the MoS2 crystals have
been completely removed and no graphene is left.
Attempt 3:
This time a slightly different approach was followed. MoS2 crystals were
transferred on SiO2 and left on a hot plate like before. In this attempt, graphene was
transferred on a different SiO2 substrate and left in water overnight. Next a thin PMMA
layer was applied on the graphene, that would help transfer it using the method described
in 4.1. This way the MoS2 crystals would only stay in water for a few seconds and hopefully
stay intact. The rest of the steps would be the same as before. Unfortunately, the crystals
pealed off immediately when they come in contact with water. Removing graphene from
SiO2 using this method proved also challenging. Figure 4.7 is showing similar results to
the previous attempts underlining the difficulty of 2D device synthesis.
Attempt 4:
The final attempt was to transfer graphene on MoS2 while still on the sapphire
substrate. The connection of MoS2 and sapphire is significantly stronger and no water
residues can be found between them. The sample could then be submerged in water to
remove the PVA film and by applying a PMMA film a transfer of both could take place. The
next steps would again be the same. This method appear to yield results, as graphene
could be seen on the MoS2 crystals although very little. Also transferring both materials
on SiO2 proved quite challenging.
It is important to note that, only one sample was made for each attempt in this study, due
to time limitations. While the results provide valuable information, more samples should be
synthesized and the methods should be attempted multiple times before completely ruling
them out. By doing so, a statistical analysis can be performed to provide a more robust
and reliable understanding of the methods. Moreover, this will also assist in providing a
clearer picture of the variations that may arise due to unpredictable variables and also
provide potential future research.
33
==PAGE:42==
Figure 4.5: Optical image of first attempt device
Figure 4.6: Optical image of second attempt device
34
==PAGE:43==
Figure 4.7: Optical image of third attempt device
35
==PAGE:44==
36
==PAGE:45==
5
Results
In this chapter the results of the conducted experiments to investigate the behavior of
graphene under different functionalization condition will be displayed. The data collected
from the author were analyzed using the techniques described in the previous chapters
and the findings are presented in the order they were performed. The results are dis­
cussed in relation to the research question and the existing literature in the field. The
chapter is organized in a logical sequence to provide a clear understanding of this study’s
outcomes.
Data correction:
For these tests the Raman spectra data were acquired and the im­
ported into MATALAB for analysis and visualization. Using the software’s capabilities, the
data were plotted and visualized in order to get a better understanding and to present the
results. These figures were instrumental in identifying the patterns and trends that are
suggested in the literature and were used to support the conclusions.
Before analysing the data properly it is important to show the steps taken in correcting
the raw data and the difference the algorithm can make in the Raman spectra plots. To that
end the raw data of the first sample will be used. Figure 5.1 is illustrating the raw Raman
spectra of sample 1. To begin with, it is clear, that the Si peak’s intensity is extremely high
compared to peaks 2D, G and D. As a result it is difficult to identify accurately how each
peak is evolving with higher fluorination time or active power. Additionally as the peaks of
interest in this case are located between 1200cm−1 and 3000cm−1 wavelength it would be
wise to focus only on this part of the plot.
Figure 5.2 illustrates the results of applying the correction algorithm, peak fit2016.m,
to the Raman spectra data. This algorithm has been used to remove the Si peak and
responses higher than 3000cm−1 wavelengths, resulting in a clearer and more easily un­
derstood plot. The 2D, G, and D peaks are now visible with high enough intensities that
they can be easily examined. This correction algorithm can also produce the FWHM of
the 2D peak with high accuracy, which is useful for further analysis. Additionally, the scale
of the intensity has been removed from the plot, which is done deliberately to aid the ob­
server. As all measurements are normalized and the intensity is in arbitrary units, this
does not result in any loss of information. This allows the observer to focus on the relative
changes in the peaks’ position and relative shape.
Fermi Level depinning of wafer scale MoS2 using functionalized CVD graphene interlayers
37
==PAGE:46==
Figure 5.1: Raw Raman spectra of Sample 1: 20W 20s before correction
Figure 5.2: Corrected Raman spectra of Sample 1: 20W 20s
38
==PAGE:47==
TEST 1:
Once the algorithm has been applied to all the measurements of the samples, it
is possible to plot the various Raman spectra in order to investigate the behavior of fluori­
nated graphene. For this, the collected spectral data collected for each measurement are
compared with the rest of the measurements in the sample set. By plotting the different
Raman spectra in this way, it is possible to gain insights into the structural and chemical
properties of the functionalized graphene and how they change over time or under differ­
ent conditions. This process can be started by analyzing the first set of measurements,
referred to as TEST 1, and using it as a baseline for the rest of the TESTS.
By observing figures of 5.3 it clear that the D peak is activated, peaks G and 2D are
reducing in intensity while the later also appears to get wider. These results seem to
follow the trend and match the observations reported in literature even with different fluo­
rination method. This similarity in the trend can confirm the introduction of fluorine atoms
and ultimately the creating of FG. The introduction of D peak is not surprising as it is
attributed to the break of symmetry in the graphene lattice and the introduction of defects
which occurs during fluorination. As expected from literature the peaks doesn’t show a
shift, regardless of fluorination time or active power, therefore no dispersive behaviour is
introduced. Finally it appears that there is a visible broadening of all peaks with fluorina­
tion. This could imply the narrowing of crystal domains which could be explained by one
of three ways. The edges are a priority in fluorination and thus the size of the grain is
reduced. The graphene gets etched. This hypothesis is strengthened by observing the
spectra of higher fluorination. The last reason could be that fluorination occurs in clus­
ters. The latter is unlikely as the data are fairly homogeneous across a flake. By taking a
closer look at the individual plots, additional information can be gathered. In the first three
samples, figures 5.3a, 5.3b and 5.3c, the amplitude of the D peak is minimal and is not
necessarily attributed to the existence of fluorine atoms ranter it can be attributed to PVA
residues or defects introduced during transfer. Additionally, the intensity of peaks G and
2D show minimal change both in intensity and in width. That leads to the conclusion that
the activation power or the exposure time is not enough to produce significant fluorination.
Therefore a threshold must exist were the amount of fluorinated graphene is enough to
prompt a response. It should however be stated that peak 2D is following the trend ex­
pected by the literature and show a decrease in intensity which can be evidence of some
fluorination. On the other hand, by comparing figures 5.3e and 5.3f with figure 5.3d it is
clear that over exposing graphene to a fluorinated environment can have the opposite
effect. As peaks G and 2D have significantly lower intensity it is possible to assume that
part of graphene has been etched away or destroyed. This hypothesis is strengthened by
observing individual spots of the samples were the peaks are completely flat. Finally in
figure 5.3d a quadratic increase can be noticed after the 2000cm−1 mark. This increase is
attributed to PVA residues, more evidence of that will be shown in TEST 2, and in extreme
cases this slope can completely hide the peaks.
The analysis of the FWHM and the I2D/IG in Figure 5.4 and figure 5.5 respectively,
provides a better understanding of the fluorination of graphene by plotting the data with
energy put into the system. The FWHM and I2D/IG functions follow the expected trend
as observed in the literature. However, it is worth noting that the FWHM of the 20W40s
sample deviates from the expected trend and may be attributed to the statistical nature
of the measurements. Similar deviation can also be seen in the I2D/IG plot on sample
5W20s were it’s value is significantly lower than the expected. Despite this, it is clear that
the FWHM of the 2D peak increases with fluorination while the I2D/IG decreases. This
indicates that graphene’s structural properties are affected by the the fluorination process.
39
==PAGE:48==
(a) 1W for 20s
(b) 5W for 20s
(c) 10W for 20s
(d) 20W for 20s
(e) 20W for 40s
(f) 20W for 60s
Figure 5.3: Raman spectra of TEST 1 samples. The figures are displayed with increasing
power and exposure time to better illustrate the effect of fluorination on graphene
40
==PAGE:49==
Figure 5.4: Full Width Half Maximum 2D peak of TEST 1
Figure 5.5: I2D/IG of TEST 1
41
==PAGE:50==
TEST 2:
Through the first TEST a clear understanding of the effect of fluorination on
graphene on SiO2 has been provided. Therefore it is not possible to move to the second
TEST that would indicate graphene’s structural properties when fluorinated on PVA. The
samples went through the same characterization tools and the same correction algorithm
was applied to the data. Figure 5.6 is illustrating the results of the measurements of
fluorinated graphene on PVA after the correction. It appears that graphene is showing
a similar behavior when functionalized on PVA. It is clear that very low active power is
not enough to fluorinate the graphene, as evident by the almost lack of D peak and the
high amplitude of peaks G and 2D shown in figure 5.6a. By increasing the active power
some fluorination can be inferred by the activation of peak D and the shorter intensity and
widening of peak 2D. However when it comes to increased power and exposure time
almost all of the graphene flakes are removed, and the Raman responses show only the
quadratic attributed to the polymer. It should be stated that this result is not entirely due
to etching. As with higher fluorination the edges of the flakes tend to be etched away, and
this process involves transferring functionalized graphene it is possible that a large part
of FG is removed during transfer or during the removal of the PVA. Therefore a threshold
can be assumed over which the flakes of graphene become so small that they are unable
to be transferred.
The full width half maximum analysis is shown in figure 5.7 and the I2D/IG in figure
5.8 are also performed in TEST 2. Through them, it is easy to confirm that in lower
energies the graphs show the trend expected from literature. with the FWHM of 2D peak
increasing almost linearly and the I2D/IG decreasing. Note that not all the samples are
displayed. Since the Raman spectra of the high energy samples do not display a 2D
response their FWHM values are in the thousands, thus by including them in the plot it
would be impossible to examine the values of the lower samples accurately.
Finally to confirm the reduction and removal of graphene flakes is uniform the optical
images is examined. Figures 5.9, 5.10 5.11 are showing samples 20W20s, 20W40s and
20W60s respectively. The flakes in dark blue are the graphene while the purple hue area
is PVA residue. By close inspection it is clear that the flakes are almost less than 1µm in
length in most cases proving the removal of graphene. What is promising is that fact that
the flakes shrink gradually with higher energy, which means that there should be a sweet
spot where graphene is functionalized without beeing completely removed.
42
==PAGE:51==
(a) 1W for 20s
(b) 5W for 20s
(c) 10W for 20s
(d) 20W for 20s
(e) 20W for 40s
(f) 20W for 60s
Figure 5.6: Raman spectra of TEST 2 samples. The figures are displayed with increasing
power and exposure time to better illustrate the effect of fluorination on graphene
43
==PAGE:52==
Figure 5.7: Full Width Half Maximum of 2D peak of TEST 2
Figure 5.8: Intensity 2D over G of TEST 2
44
==PAGE:53==
Figure 5.9: 20W for 20s
Figure 5.10: 20W for 40s
45
==PAGE:54==
Figure 5.11: 20W for 60s
TEST 3:
The aim of this TEST is to investigate the effect of fluorination on multi­layer
graphene. In the previous TESTS, only bilayer graphene was used for this purpose. How­
ever, in order to gain a more comprehensive understanding of how fluorine atoms bind to
graphene, it is deemed necessary to functionalize tri­layer and quad­layer graphene. To
achieve this,the active power was set to 10W and the exposure time to 72s. These values
were chosen based on the results of previous TEST as they demonstrate a good level
of fluorination at this power level without causing any damage or removal of flakes. The
same characterization process will be carried out to evaluate the functionalization of the
graphene as well as the same correction algorithm will be applied to the data obtained
to ensure accuracy and consistency in our results. A more detailed understanding of the
binding of fluorine atoms to graphene will be provided by the use of multi­layer graphene,
and will help to further understand the properties and potential applications of fluorinated
graphene. The figures 5.12a, 5.12c and 5.13a present the Raman spectra of samples
with increasingly higher number of layers. From these figures, it is apparent that the 2D
peak decreases in amplitude with increasing number of layers. However, it is observed
that the 2D peak of the Tri­layer sample has lower intensity compared to the quad­layer,
which is not in line with the expected trend. This discrepancy could be attributed to factors
such as the quality or size of the measured flakes of the tri­layer sample, or alternatively,
to the better quality or size of the quad­layer sample. Additionally, peak G does not show
a significant reduction with the increase in layers, which is not in agreement with litera­
ture. After fluorination, the Raman spectra in figures 5.12b, 5.12d and5.13b show a trend
in which the 2D peak decreases in intensity and becomes broader, while a strong D peak
is activated due to the contribution of fluorine atoms. Full width half maximum analysis
46
==PAGE:55==
shown in figure 5.14 is showing an almost linear increase of fluorination with respect to
layers. This increase in fluorination can be explained to the larger presence of carbon
atoms with which the fluorine atoms can bind. Finally it appears that the FWHM has very
small increase from 40cm−1 in the bi­layer to 41cm−1 in the tri­layer and 44cm−1 in the
quad­layer which is not as big as the FWHM differences of previous TESTS which is ex­
pected as the same active power and exposure time is used in all three cases. Therefore
it is safe to assume that higher number of layers lead to higher fluorination. From figure
5.20 the level of fluorination with number of layers is the one that is closest to the one
expected from literature confirming the higher fluorination is possible in higher number of
graphene layers.
(a) Bi­layer pristine graphene
(b) Functionalized Bi­Layer graphene
(c) Tri­Layer pristine graphene
(d) Functionalized Tri­Layer graphene
47
==PAGE:56==
(a) Quad­Layer pristine graphene
(b) Functionalized Quad­Layer graphene
Figure 5.13: Raman spectra of TEST 3 samples. Left hand column is illustrating the
pristine graphene with increasing layers while the right side is illustrating the functionalized
graphene
Figure 5.14: Full Width Half Maximum of 2D peak of TEST 3
48
==PAGE:57==
Figure 5.15: Intensity 2D over G of TEST 3
TEST 4:
The final TEST was conducted to examine the validity of a hypothesis regard­
ing the fluorination of graphene under the same energy in the system of 720W · s. This
was accomplished by changing the active power and the exposure time while keeping
their product constant. Figures X, Y, Z present the Raman spectra of the three samples
that were used to test this hypothesis. All the data show a high activation of the D peak
which proves the fluorination of graphene as well as a wide and shorter 2D peak. The
FWHM of the 2D peak should yield a more accurate analysis. In this test, the FWHM of
every individual measurement is shown as well as the mean FWHM of each sample to
provide a better understanding of the graphene fluorination. In figure 5.19, each square
represents the FWHM of each sample with their respective color while the circle repre­
sents the average values. However, the measurements of the individual samples exhibit
a high degree of variability and the average values do not show similar FWHM values as
the ones expected to be seen to prove the hypothesis. Similar results can be seen in fig­
ure 5.20, where the individual measurements show significant variations and the average
values are not following the expected trend. Therefore, it is impossible to prove that the
hypothesis is correct with the given data set. It should be noted that only one sample of
each type was synthesized, which limits the research. This highlights the need for further
experimentation and larger sample sizes to draw more conclusive results to confirm or
disprove the hypothesis.
49
==PAGE:58==
Figure 5.16: 10W for 72s
Figure 5.17: 12W for 60s
Figure 5.18: 15W for 48s
50
==PAGE:59==
Figure 5.19: Full Width Half Maximum of 2D peak of TEST 4. The measurements of the
12W for 60s sample are shown in red, the 12W for 72s sample are shown in light blue and
15W for 48s sample are shown in black. The dark blue line is shown in evolution of the
FWHM of the average of each sample
Figure 5.20: Intensity of 2D over G of TEST 4. The measurements of the 12W for 60s
sample are shown in red, the 12W for 72s sample are shown in light blue and 15W for 48s
sample are shown in black. The dark blue line is shown in evolution of the FWHM of the
average of each sample
51
==PAGE:60==
52
==PAGE:61==
6
Discussion and Future work
Through the course of this thesis we have been able to study the properties of graphene
evolve with different functionalization parameters of fluorine. For such fluorination a par­
allel reactive ion etching system with SF6 gas was used as this method has proven to yield
results in opening the band gap of graphene. We were able to test different parameters
of the functionalization process including the active power, the exposure time, the num­
ber of layers, the substrate used and finally test the hypothesis of energy in the system.
We were able to synthesize MoS2 crystals in­situ with different number of layers to use
in the fabrication of devices thus eliminating the need of external provider. Additionally,
the fabrication of electrical devices was attempted with different steps and methods. The
observations gathered from the result of the experiments follow the expected trends from
literature, although with some variations and illustrate the progression of graphene fluo­
rination with respect to different parameters. Although the opening of the band gap and
the depinning of the Fermi level was not experimentally proven in this body of work, the
results collect show promise if they are compared to the results of similar researches.With
Raman spectroscopy, we have gathered the responses of different samples by measuring
in different areas of and averaging over all. The data were then corrected using MATLAB
code.
From optical observations we can infer two things. First the opening of the band gap, as
with higher levels of fluorination the graphene on the samples became more transparent
due to the inability of FG to absorb higher wavelengths of the visible spectrum. The
second observation has to do with the size of graphene flakes, which tend to become
smaller after the etching process. This has been observed and noted by other works as
well, but no clear reason has yet been agreed based on the literature used.
From the data analysis a significant increase in the D peak of graphene with respect to
active power or exposure time is present in all experiments. Additionally the 2D peak and
G peaks show the expected decrease and widening, as described in literature. These
changes are clear evidence of fluorination of graphene, and ultimately the opening of the
band gap. However the results also indicate a threshold of active power and exposure
time of 1W for 20s under which the graphene show minimal to zero fluorination. On the
other side of the spectrum high enough active power tends to etch away most or all of the
graphene flakes. It is therefore safe to say that the functionalization parameters should
remain with a domain of values for better results. This is more prominent in the func­
tionalization of graphene on polymer as smaller flakes are significantly harder to transfer
and are lost in process. As expected the results showed a higher fluorine atom content
with higher number of layers due to the presence of more carbon atoms. Finally even
though the energy in system was kept constant during the testing of the hypothesis, the
results were unable to prove or disprove the usability of such setting. Last but not least,
the methods used for the synthesis of device proved unfruitful but managed to underline
a few failure points that should be addressed.
In conclusion the sum of the results managed to show a descriptive analysis of graphene’s
functionalization by underlining the active power and exposure time parameters of the
recipe. The incremental change of these values could provide important information to
future researchers and fill a gap in the exploration of graphene and other 2D materials.
Fermi Level depinning of wafer scale MoS2 using functionalized CVD graphene interlayers
53
==PAGE:62==
It should however be stated that this research is far from complete. Additional work
must take place in the future to dive dipper into the concepts this thesis touched upon. To
begin with, for the test that took place during this course only one sample was used. As a
result the data acquired are susceptible to random, uncontrollable variations. Therefore
the same test should be repeated multiple times before completely accepting the results.
Potential lines of inquiry could entail the change in active power and exposure time vari­
ables in smaller increments to pin point the exact values of the proposed threshold. That
would lead to higher accuracy and better understanding of the physical process. Another
issue that should be addressed is the minimization of defects and residues on the sam­
ples. It is clear that PVA and PMMA polymers and water molecules are hard to remove
completely even in an lab environment. Techniques like annealing show promise but they
are not common practice yet. Testing for their contribution would be a wise decision. Re­
garding the proposed hypothesis, opportunities for continued exploration could make use
of more test samples, and a broader spectrum of energy levels that would aid in the in­
terpretation of the results and maybe streamline the functionalization recipe of graphene.
Finally future work could focus on optimizing the fabrication methods of stacking 2D ma­
terials and examine closely the techniques used in this body of work to zero in on their
points of failure. Thus making the process more efficient and easily repeatable if large
scale fabrication is ever to be achieved.
54
==PAGE:63==
Bibliography
[1]
Scott E Thompson and Srivatsan Parthasarathy. “Moore’s law: the future of Si mi­
croelectronics”. In: Materials today 9.6 (2006), pp. 20–25.
[2]
Unni Krishnan et al. “A synoptic review of MoS2: Synthesis to applications”. In:
Superlattices and Microstructures 128 (2019), pp. 274–297.
[3]
X Li and H Zhu. Two­dimensional MoS2: properties, preparation, and applications.
J Materiomics 1: 33–44. 2015.
[4]
Goki Eda et al. “Photoluminescence from chemically exfoliated MoS2”. In: Nano
letters 11.12 (2011), pp. 5111–5116.
[5]
JA Wilson and AD Yoffe. “The salient structural features of TiS2 are blocks of two
hexagonally closed­packed chalcogen layers”. In: Phys. Adv 18 (1969), p. 193.
[6]
Kapildeb Dolui, Ivan Rungger, and Stefano Sanvito. “Origin of the n­type and p­type
conductivity of MoS 2 monolayers on a SiO 2 substrate”. In: Physical review B 87.16
(2013), p. 165402.
[7]
Joonki Suh et al. “Reconfiguring crystal and electronic structures of MoS2 by sub­
stitutional doping”. In: Nature communications 9.1 (2018), pp. 1–7.
[8]
Lili Zhang et al. “Quasi­Continuous Tuning of Carrier Polarity in Monolayered Molyb­
denum Dichalcogenides through Substitutional Vanadium Doping”. In: Advanced
Functional Materials 32.46 (2022), p. 2204760.
[9]
Kostya S Novoselov et al. “Electric field effect in atomically thin carbon films”. In:
science 306.5696 (2004), pp. 666–669.
[10]
Daniel R Cooper et al. “Experimental review of graphene”. In: International Scholarly
Research Notices 2012 (2012).
[11]
NMR Peres. “Graphene, new physics in two dimensions”. In: Europhysics News
40.3 (2009), pp. 17–20.
[12]
László P Biró, Péter Nemes­Incze, and Philippe Lambin. “Graphene: nanoscale
processing and recent applications”. In: Nanoscale 4.6 (2012), pp. 1824–1839.
[13]
Jiacheng Wei, Thuc Vo, and Fawad Inam. “Epoxy/graphene nanocomposites – pro­
cessing and properties: a review”. In: RSC Adv. 5 (Aug. 2015), pp. 73510–73524.
DOI: 10.1039/C5RA13897C.
[14]
V Kumar and R Santosh. “First­principle calculations of structural, electronic, optical
and thermodynamical properties of fluorinated graphene”. In: Materials Science and
Engineering: B 246 (2019), pp. 127–135.
[15]
Jorge O Sofo, Ajay S Chaudhari, and Greg D Barber. “Graphane: A two­dimensional
hydrocarbon”. In: Physical Review B 75.15 (2007), p. 153401.
[16]
Jeremy T Robinson et al. “Properties of fluorinated graphene films”. In: Nano letters
10.8 (2010), pp. 3001–3005.
[17]
H Şahin, Mehmet Topsakal, and Salim Ciraci. “Structures of fluorinated graphene
and their signatures”. In: Physical Review B 83.11 (2011), p. 115432.
[18]
Reza J Kashtiban et al. “Atomically resolved imaging of highly ordered alternating
fluorinated graphene”. In: Nature communications 5.1 (2014), pp. 1–9.
[19]
Cunzhi Sun et al. “Fermi Level Depinning in Two­Dimensional Materials Using a Flu­
orinated Bilayer Graphene Barrier”. In: ACS Applied Electronic Materials 4.8 (2022),
pp. 3955–3961.
[20]
Cheng Gong et al. “The unusual mechanism of partial Fermi level pinning at metal–
MoS2 interfaces”. In: Nano letters 14.4 (2014), pp. 1714–1720.
Fermi Level depinning of wafer scale MoS2 using functionalized CVD graphene interlayers
55
==PAGE:64==
[21]
Goutham Arutchelvan et al. “Impact of device scaling on the electrical properties of
MoS2 field­effect transistors”. In: Scientific reports 11.1 (2021), pp. 1–11.
[22]
Changsik Kim et al. “Fermi level pinning at electrical metal contacts of monolayer
molybdenum dichalcogenides”. In: ACS nano 11.2 (2017), pp. 1588–1596.
[23]
Xiaochi Liu et al. “Fermi level pinning dependent 2D semiconductor devices: chal­
lenges and prospects”. In: Advanced Materials 34.15 (2022), p. 2108425.
[24]
Jiahao Kang et al. “Computational study of metal contacts to monolayer transition­
metal dichalcogenide semiconductors”. In: Physical Review X 4.3 (2014), p. 031005.
[25]
Ahrum Sohn et al. “Band alignment at Au/MoS2 contacts: thickness dependence of
exfoliated flakes”. In: The Journal of Physical Chemistry C 121.40 (2017), pp. 22517–
22522.
[26]
Raisul Islam, Gautam Shine, and Krishna C Saraswat. “Schottky barrier height re­
duction for holes by Fermi level depinning using metal/nickel oxide/silicon contacts”.
In: Applied Physics Letters 105.18 (2014), p. 182103.
[27]
Daniel Connelly et al. “Fermi­level depinning for low­barrier Schottky source/drain
transistors”. In: Applied physics letters 88.1 (2006), p. 012105.
[28]
David Lishan. “Plasma Etching: Comparing PE, RIE and ICP­RIE”. In: (Oct. 2020).
[29]
Andrea C Ferrari. “Raman spectroscopy of graphene and graphite: Disorder, electron–
phonon coupling, doping and nonadiabatic effects”. In: Solid state communications
143.1­2 (2007), pp. 47–57.
[30]
Yanping Liu et al. “Temperature dependence of the electrical transport properties in
few­layer graphene interconnects”. In: Nanoscale research letters 8.1 (2013), pp. 1–
7.
[31]
Rahul R Nair et al. “Fluorographene: a two­dimensional counterpart of Teflon”. In:
small 6.24 (2010), pp. 2877–2884.
[32]
Bei Wang et al. “Photoluminescence from nanocrystalline graphite monofluoride”.
In: Applied physics letters 97.14 (2010), p. 141915.
[33]
Sekhar Babu Mitta et al. “Electrical characterization of 2D materials­based field­
effect transistors”. In: 2D Materials 8.1 (2020), p. 012002.
[34]
Norman Neill Greenwood and Alan Earnshaw. Chemistry of the Elements. Elsevier,
2012.
[35]
Abhay Shivayogimath et al. “Do­it­yourself transfer of large­area graphene using an
office laminator and water”. In: Chemistry of Materials 31.7 (2019), pp. 2328–2336.
56
==PAGE:65==
57
==PAGE:66==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Fysikvej, Building 309
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.byg.dtu.dk
