==PAGE:1==
AI approaches to index Kikuchi diffraction
patterns acquired using scanning electron mi-
croscopy
By Eriks Markevics
Master Thesis
Technical University of Denmark
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
==PAGE:2==
Abstract
TKD is an important technique, that allows studying the material properties with high pre-
cision, however, it only works with Kikuchi lines. In this project, I used images made with
15nm thin gold film, developed in DTU, that contain both Kikuchi lines and spot patterns
to train a convolutional neural network, that can predict the crystal orientation.
Since it is hard to create a big amount of experimental images, I simulate images, us-
ing simulating software abTEM.Those simulated images are processed, to remove the
background noise, and normalize the intensity across the image using local normaliza-
tion. Then the donut-shaped black mask is applied to the images, hiding spot patterns,
since the project focuses on the Kikuchi line part of the images.
Then various convolutional neural networks are trained with those images, to get the
model, that would predict the crystal orientation, defined in Euler angles.
After the model is successfully trained on the simulated images, it is evaluated on the
experimental images.
It proves that it is possible to train a convolutional neural network using simulated images
to predict the crystal orientation of experimental images.
However, future work is required to make the models accurate enough to be used. Then
this project can be joined with the project from Kevin Thor Fleming, which studies spot
patterns. It will allow getting information about the surface and the back side of the spec-
imen from the same image.
All the code used in the project alongside the documentation can be found in the following
GitHub repository[1]. You can also find the steps of the project in figure 1.
Figure 1: Process of the project
Keywords: Convolutional neural networks(CNN), Machine learning, Diffraction pattern
simulation, abTEM, Image processing
ii
AI approaches to index Kikuchi diffraction patterns acquired using scanning electron microscopy
==PAGE:3==
Acknowledgements
Jakob Schiøtz , Professor, Ph.D, Co-supervisor
schiotz@fysik.dtu.dk
Alice Bastos da Silva Fanta, Senior researcher, Supervisor
absf@dtu.dk
Thomas Willum Hansen , Professor, Supervisor
thwh@dtu.dk
I would like to express my sincere gratitude to my three supervisors, Jakob Schiøtz, Alice
Bastos da Silva Fanta and Thomas Willum, for their guidance, support, and encourage-
ment throughout my master’s thesis project.
When I needed help or advice, they were patient, kind, and responsive, which helped me
to solve problems faster and without unnecessary stress.
They helped me to understand complex concepts across solid state physics, material sci-
ence, and deep learning, which shaped my understanding of the problem and allowed me
to finish the project.
Their passion for their subjects was contagious, making me want to devote myself to the
project fully.
I’m grateful for the time and energy you have invested in me. I’m truly happy that you
were my supervisors for this project.
Thank you!
AI approaches to index Kikuchi diffraction patterns acquired using scanning electron microscopy
iii
==PAGE:4==
Contents
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
1
Introduction
3
2
Theory
4
2.1
Electron microscopy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.2
Diffraction patterns . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.3
Image processing and image analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.4
Convolutional Neural Networks(CNN)
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
3
Simulating images using abTEM
21
3.1
Context . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
3.2
First simulation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
3.3
Better wave simulation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
3.4
Euler angle mismatch
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
3.5
Adjusting zoom . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
3.6
Results of the simulation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
3.7
Possible improvements of simulation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
4
Image processing techniques
26
4.1
Context . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26
4.2
Mandatory preprocessing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26
4.3
First approach
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
4.4
Second approach . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30
4.5
Preparing images for CNN . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 32
4.6
Possible improvements of preprocessing
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 34
5
Convolutional neural networks
36
5.1
Context . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 36
5.2
Note about wrong legend labels . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 36
5.3
First CNN models
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 37
5.4
Unsuitable loss function . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 37
5.5
Expanding the model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 39
5.6
Hyperparameter tunning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 40
5.7
Making model even more complex . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 41
5.8
Adding mid-training evaluation of the model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 42
5.9
Possible improvements of the training the CNN . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 42
5.10 Summary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 43
6
Results of the training
45
6.1
First models with different optimizers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 45
6.2
Making more complex models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 46
6.3
Variations of the best model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 46
6.4
Predicting an experimental image . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 47
7
Conclusion
51
AI approaches to index Kikuchi diffraction patterns acquired using scanning electron microscopy
1
==PAGE:5==
A Appendix
54
A.1 Time distribution
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 54
2
AI approaches to index Kikuchi diffraction patterns acquired using scanning electron microscopy
==PAGE:6==
1
Introduction
With the development of electron microscopy, various techniques were developed to an-
alyze the characteristics of the materials more efficiently.
Electron backscatter diffraction (EBSD) is a technique, that uses scanning electron mi-
croscopes(SEM). Using the information about the Kikuchi line positions in the diffraction
images, EBSD can determine surface crystal structure and orientation. By combining the
information from big amount of those images, EBSD can generate an orientation map,
showing local grain size, grain orientation, and grain boundaries. EBSD is accurate and
fast, but it can only work with materials thicker than 100nm and it has a bad resolution.
Another technique called SPED, using a Transmission electron Microscope(TEM) allows
working with materials up to 2nm in thickness with good resolution. However, it is slower,
less accurate, and can only work with spot patterns.
A technique called Transmission Kikuchi diffraction(TKD) takes the best out of two worlds,
allowing one to work with materials as thin as 5nm while producing good quality accurate
images fast. However, TKD only works with Kikuchi lines.
Among the new techniques is a recent development of a gold-film filter developed in DTU,
which made it possible to observe both Kikuchi bands and spot patterns simultaneously
on the image using TKD. Another technique, that allows seeing both Kikuchi lines and
spot patterns is beam-sample-detector geometry. It has been developed at LEM3 (Metz,
France) [2].
Seeing both diffraction patterns would give more characterization of the material. For
example, if there are two grains that are stacked on top of each other, you can get a char-
acterization of the surface grain from Kikuchi lines, and using spot patterns, you can get
a characterization of the bottom grain. This is not possible with the current TKD, which
only gets the surface information.
Getting the characterization of the specimen is extremely important in material science.
It can help in studying materials to prevent corrosion in metals for offshore work, make
materials, that would absorb more shock in a car crash, etc.
The scope of this project is to train a convolutional neural network(CNN) on gold crystals
with only the Kikuchi band part of the images.
This project uses images that were taken using TKD with a 15nm thin gold film. Then,
image processing has to be done to prepare images for CNN. The CNN is trained to find
crystal orientation defined in Euler angles for these images.
To achieve the goals of this project, several challenges have to be overcome. A large
amount of images needs to be simulated to look similar to the experimental images. Im-
age processing then needs to augment the Kikuchi bands for CNN to easier learn from
them. Lastly, the architecture of CNN has to be developed, to recognize the crystal ori-
entation from simulated images of Kikuchi lines.
This project can then be merged with Kevin Thor Fleming, to combine information received
from Kikuchi bands and spot patterns. It will allow for doing more detailed specimen
mapping faster.
AI approaches to index Kikuchi diffraction patterns acquired using scanning electron microscopy
3
==PAGE:7==
2
Theory
2.1
Electron microscopy
In this section, you will find information about electron microscopes and how they work.
You will also get to know what is crystal orientation and how you can get to know it from
diffraction images made by electron microscopes.
2.1.1
Electron microscopes
An electron microscope is a type of microscope that, compared to traditional optical micro-
scopes, uses a beam of electrons instead of light. An electron microscope shoots a beam
of electrons, that are focused using electromagnetic fields, similar to how lenses focus
light in optical microscopes. When electrons hit the specimen, which is tilted to a specific
degree, either transmitted or reflected electrons can be captured by the phosphor screen.
There are transmitted electrons that go through the sample or backscattered electrons,
that are reflected.
There are two main types of electron microscopes: the transmission electron microscope
(TEM) and the scanning electron microscope (SEM).
TEMs are high-voltage microscopes that work with acceleration voltages of 100-300kV.
Usually, TEMs capture transmitted electrons and work with ultra-thin materials.
SEMs, usually, work with lower acceleration voltages of 5-30KV. They usually work with
backscatter electrons. However, they can be set up to work with transmitter electrons, as
was done for images used in this project. High enough acceleration voltages can damage
or destroy the specimen, however, they allow for receiving clearer images. (To see the
difference between the microscopes look at fig 2.1).
Figure 2.1: Difference between electron microscopes. [3]
2.1.2
Lattices
A lattice is an infinite set of points defined by a set of linearly independent primitive lattice
vectors. For example, in two dimensions, as shown in 2.2 the lattice points are described
4
AI approaches to index Kikuchi diffraction patterns acquired using scanning electron microscopy
==PAGE:8==
as R[n1n2] = n1a1 + n2a2, where n1, n2 ∈Z (2d) with a1 and a2 being the primitive lattice
vectors and n1 and n2 being integers. In three dimensions points of a lattice are analo-
gously indexed by three integers:[4]
Figure 2.2: A lattice is defined as integer sums of primitive lattice vectors.[4]
A crystalline lattice is a repeating array of atoms in 3 dimensions, that make up a crys-
tal. One of the most important characteristics of a crystalline lattice is the unit cell. The
unit cell is the unit, that can be repeated to create the lattice. A primitive unit cell is the
smallest possible unit cell, that always contains 1 lattice point. A construction with the
name Wigner–Seitz defines the rules of how to make a primitive unit cell. Coming back
to 3-dimensional latices, you can see the most common lattice types in fig 2.3.
Figure 2.3: Latices in 3 dimensions.[4]
Studying the properties of the crystalline lattice is helping in understanding the properties
of the materials and their applications in different fields.
Reciprocal Lattices
The reciprocal lattice is a theoretical construct that is similar to the crystal lattice of a
material. You can perceive reciprocal lattice as the Fourier transform of the crystal lattice,
AI approaches to index Kikuchi diffraction patterns acquired using scanning electron microscopy
5
==PAGE:9==
and it is typically represented by a set of points in a 3D space. Reciprocal vectors are
constructed from lattice vectors. To see more information on how to construct reciprocal
vectors, see section 13.1.2 of The Oxford Solid State Basics[4].
Lattice planes
A lattice plane in a crystalline structure is a plane defined by points of one lattice. A set
of infinite parallel lattice planes is called a family of lattice planes. One crystal is having
multiple lattice planes as seen in fig 2.4.
Figure 2.4: Families of lattice planes in a crystal. [4]
Miller indices is another important concept. They are a set of integers used to describe
the orientation of a crystal plane in relation to the crystal lattice. They are commonly
represented by three integers, (h, k, l). (see an example of hkl planes on fig 2.4)
2.2
Diffraction patterns
An Electron microscope, unlike the traditional optical microscope, produces images of the
diffraction of electrons that create patterns in that image. Those patterns are formed when
an electron beam hits the specimen and electrons are scattered (see fig 2.5).
They are analyzed to study crystal structure and orientation. The patterns that are going
to be mentioned in this project are Kikuchi lines and spot patterns. Depending on the
thickness of the specimen, you can see one of them or both of them.
2.2.1
Elastic and inelastic scattering
Elastic and inelastic scattering are types of scattering that happen when electrons collide
with the atom. Elastic scattering results in only a change of direction for the electron.
However, inelastic scattering causes the loss of energy and momentum for electrons.
6
AI approaches to index Kikuchi diffraction patterns acquired using scanning electron microscopy
==PAGE:10==
Figure 2.5: Electrons being scattered in all directions in a specimen.[5]
2.2.2
Bragg law
Bragg’s law describes the relationship between the angles of the incident beam and the
diffraction of a beam. Using this law, you can find the distance between lattice planes in
a specific lattice family.
The Bragg law states that the angle of diffraction θ is related to the wavelength of the
incoming particles λ, the distance between the planes in the crystal lattice d and the order
of the diffraction n by the equation: nλ = 2dsinθ. (See fig 2.6).
Figure 2.6:
Relationship between the angle of diffraction and the distance between lattice
planes.[4]
2.2.3
Importance of Bragg law
Knowing the diffraction angle and the wavelength, you can find the reciprocal lattice of the
given crystal. Inverse Fourier transform of the reciprocal lattice, then gives us the lattice
of the crystal.
Then we can understand what material we are dealing with. You can read more in section
14.1.3 of ”The Oxford Solid State Basics” [4]. (See fig 2.7)
2.2.4
Kikuchi lines
In simple terms, Kikuchi lines are patterns of scattered electrons. They form two parallel
lines that are referred to as bands. Kikuchi lines occur, when electrons travel at Bragg
angle to hkl planes in the crystal( see fig 2.8).
Then electrons are diffracted in two cones called Kossel cones. Those cones, then project
to the image as two nearly straight parallel lines, due to a small angle θB(see fig 2.9).
AI approaches to index Kikuchi diffraction patterns acquired using scanning electron microscopy
7
==PAGE:11==
Figure 2.7: Relationship between the angle of diffraction and reciprocal lattice. [4]
Figure 2.8: Electrons being diffracted in Bragg Angle to hkl planes.[5]
Kikuchi lines are formed only when the specimen is thick enough. If the specimen is too
thin, inelastic scattering doesn’t occur in the material and Kikuchi lines are not visible.
When the specimen is thick enough, a fraction of electrons are scattered twice, and then
lines are formed.
Enhancing the Kikuchi lines and training the neural network on them is the main focus of
this project.
2.2.5
Spot patterns
Spot patterns are another type of diffraction pattern. Unlike Kikuchi lines, spot patterns
are formed in thinner samples. They are dots that are diffracted from the crystalline lattice.
2.2.6
Euler angles
Euler angles allow us to define an orientation of an object in three-dimensional space
using three angles of rotation around three axes. When talking about Euler angles X,
Y, and Z axis are called normal direction(ND), Rolling Direction(RD), and Transverse Di-
rection(TD). Various conventions of Euler angles are using different rotations around the
different axis to achieve the same orientation. Common conventions are Bunge, Matthies,
Roe, Kocks, and Canova.
In Bunge convention, for example, all rotations happen in the range of -180 to 180 de-
grees. You first rotate around the z-axis, then around the x-axis, and to achieve final
orientation, you rotate around the new axis z’. You can see an example in figure 2.10. In
Matthies convention, the rotations are the same as in Bunge conventions, except for the
8
AI approaches to index Kikuchi diffraction patterns acquired using scanning electron microscopy
==PAGE:12==
Figure 2.9: Two Kossel cones forming Kikuchi lines.[5]
second rotation, which happens around the y-axis instead of the x-axis.
Figure 2.10: Example Euler angles proposed by Bunge.[6]
Euler angles are known to have problems, such as two distinct Euler angles can represent
the same orientation. As an example, consider rotations in Bunge convention [45, 0, 45]
and [0, 0, 90].
2.2.7
Quaternions
Quaternion, in algebra, is a generalization of two-dimensional complex numbers to three
dimensions. Quaternions and rules for operations on them were invented by Irish math-
ematician Sir William Rowan Hamilton in 1843. He devised them as a way of describing
three-dimensional problems in mechanics.[7].
Quaternions are also used to represent orientation in 3d space. Compared to Euler an-
gles two distinct rotations according to quaternions, will not lead to the same orientation.
However, it is easier for a human to imagine the transformation needed for Euler rotation.
2.3
Image processing and image analysis
There are many techniques that help you to understand images and extract necessary
features. This section is dedicated to some of these techniques used in the project.
2.3.1
Histogram manipulations
A Histogram of a black-and-white image can be defined as a frequency of a specific inten-
sity value. It is good at showing the distribution of intensity values in the image. However,
it should be noted that the histogram does not provide information about the spatial dis-
tribution of intensity values in an image.
Looking at a histogram, you can see, what intensity values could represent distinct fea-
tures from the image. Knowing this information, you can apply different functions to the
AI approaches to index Kikuchi diffraction patterns acquired using scanning electron microscopy
9
==PAGE:13==
whole image to enhance desired features.
As an example, let us take a look at the example in figure 2.11.
Figure 2.11: Image without adjustments.[8]
Let’s now imagine, that we would like to change brightness or contrast. Then we would
have to remap all the intensity values to another range in the histogram. To see examples
of histogram manipulations, take a look at figure 2.12.
Figure 2.12: Images with different histogram operations.[8]
Sometimes, you just want to split values into black and white for clarity, so you use thresh-
olding, as it is shown in fig 2.13. Then all the values above the thresholding intensity will
become white and the ones below the thresholding values will become black. There are
various techniques to find the threshold value automatically. Some common automatic
thresholding is adaptive mean thresholding, adaptive Gaussian thresholding, and Otsu’s
Binarization.
2.3.2
Difference of Gaussian
The difference of Gaussian is a technique that takes a blurred version of an image and
subtracts it from that image. The idea behind this technique is to create a new image
that highlights the regions in the original image where the intensity changes rapidly, also
known as edges or features. The resulting image will have high-intensity values. This
technique is used in feature extraction and object detection.
10
AI approaches to index Kikuchi diffraction patterns acquired using scanning electron microscopy
==PAGE:14==
Figure 2.13: Threshold example [9]
2.3.3
Edge detection and line detection
Edge detection is a technique in image processing that can find fast changes in the in-
tensity values in the image. It can be used to identify the boundaries of objects for further
object detection. This algorithm, usually, involves convolving parts of an image with a
small kernel to find and enhance edges.
There are many implementations of the edge detection algorithms, such as Canny, Sobel,
and Prewitt implementations.
Sobel edge detection
Sobel edge detection uses a 3x3 kernel which convolves with the target image to enhance
horizontal and vertical edges and then combines them. The convolution is performed by
sliding the kernel over the entire image and computing the dot product of the kernel with
the image at each position. Sobel edge detection uses the following kernel to detect
vertical edges:


−1
0
1
−2
0
2
−1
0
1


And this kernel detects horizontal edges:


−1
−2
−1
0
0
0
1
2
1


The results of this convolution can be seen in fig 2.14
Figure 2.14: Sobel edge detection applied to the x-axis, y-axis, and then combined.[10]
The Sobel edge detection algorithm is relatively simple and fast, and it is less sensitive to
noise than some other edge detection algorithms. It is commonly used in image process-
ing and computer vision applications, such as object recognition and image segmentation.
AI approaches to index Kikuchi diffraction patterns acquired using scanning electron microscopy
11
==PAGE:15==
Prewitt edge detection
Prewitt, just like Sobel edge detection, uses a sliding kernel of size 3x3 to detect drastic
changes in intensity. However, Prewitt edge detection is using following kernels:


1
0
−1
1
0
−1
1
0
−1


And this kernel detects horizontal edges:


1
1
1
0
0
0
−1
−1
−1


The results of this convolution can be seen in fig 2.15
Figure 2.15: Prewitt edge detection applied to the x-axis and y-axis.[11]
Canny edge detection
Canny edge detection is a popular algorithm, which, compared to the previous two tech-
niques described, includes multiple steps, but is proven to perform better.
The steps include: [12]
• use Gaussian smoothing
• use the Sobel operator
• use non-maximal suppression
• threshold with hysteresis to connect edge points
Below you can find the steps in more detail:
a. First, Gaussian smoothing is applied to blur the image. It is done to reduce the noise
and ease edge detection. The Gaussian kernel is then convolved with an image. In
essence, it creates a weighted average of the surrounding pixels with the center pixel
having the highest weight and the pixels farther away having a lower weight.
b. Then the intensity change map needs to be created. To do that, the Sobel edge de-
tection algorithm, described in one of the previous sections, is applied to an image.
c. After finding the edges, non-maximum suppression is used. It is done to thin the edges
by reducing nonmaximum value pixels in the intensity change map. That means, that only
the ”thick” edges are kept. It is done by comparing each pixel’s intensity change with the
other pixels in the direction of the filter. If the pixel is not a local maximum in 3x3 region,
then it is set to zero.
d. Lastly, hysteresis thresholding is used to connect the separate pixels. Hysteresis
thresholding uses two threshold values, a high threshold and a low threshold, to separate
strong edges from weak edges. Pixels with a value above the high threshold are consid-
ered to be ”true” edges. Pixels with a value below the low threshold are considered to be
12
AI approaches to index Kikuchi diffraction patterns acquired using scanning electron microscopy
==PAGE:16==
”false” edges. Pixels with a gradient magnitude between the high and low thresholds are
considered to be weak edges, and they are only considered to be true edges if they are
connected to a strong edge. It is done to get rid of all false positive edges in an image.
Visualization of all steps is available in a fig 2.16.
Figure 2.16: Canny edge detection steps visualized. [12]
Hough transform for line detection
Hough transform is a technique to extract features from images. It has been used to detect
lines, circles, and ellipses. The technique is based on a voting system, where each point
of the image votes for a location of shape or a pattern. The Hough transform accumulates
those votes in Hough space, where the intersection of votes means, that there is a shape
or a pattern.
2.4
Convolutional Neural Networks(CNN)
A convolutional neural network is a type of neural network that is good at working with
image and video input. They use convolutional layers, which use kernels of different
sizes to find features in the image, much like Sobel or Prewitt filters. CNNs are also using
pooling layers to reduce their dimensionality and reduce computational cost. Combining
different sizes of kernels and filter sizes can allow CNNs to find various complex features
in an image.
2.4.1
Neural networks
Before diving deep into CNNs, it is important to define what is a neural network. It is a
type of machine learning. Neural networks have layers, each of which consists of neurons.
Layers are connected to each other by connections between neurons and the output of
one layer serves as the input for the next layer as shown in fig 2.17. Those connections
have weights that are adjusted throughout the training of a model and bias values. Those
two parameters define what values neurons are going to have based on the input.
Neural networks, compared to traditional programming, allow finding the rules of how the
data is connected to the desired answers and derive generalized rules (see fig 2.18).
Before talking about different CNN layers, it is important to mention different approaches
for neural networks, as well as what is overfitting and tensors.
2.4.2
Tensors
Tensors are simply algebraic objects that are used to describe physical properties, just
like scalars and vectors. You can think of a tensor as a generalization of scalars, vectors,
and matrices. Scalar is a rank 0 tensor, vector - rank 1 tensor, matrix - rank 2 tensor, etc.
2.4.3
Overfitting
Overfitting is a common problem in machine learning. When the model is trained too well
on the training set, at some point it might start learning train set specific features and start
AI approaches to index Kikuchi diffraction patterns acquired using scanning electron microscopy
13
==PAGE:17==
Figure 2.17: Neural networks with weights
Figure 2.18: Neural networks compared to traditional programming. [13]
performing worse on the validation set. This means that the model fails to generalize well
on the data it has never seen. In the example on fig 2.19, if you add another data point
in the middle, it is highly likely that it will be miss-classified. There are many reasons why
overfitting happens. The most common causes include not having enough data, having
irrelevant features for the training, or having a too complex model with too many param-
eters.
To solve those issues, you can use a model with fewer parameters, regularization tech-
niques, like dropout or L1 and L2 regularization, and stopping where the model starts
performing badly on the validation set.
2.4.4
Different approaches for neural networks
For different problems, there should be different solutions. You might want to predict hous-
ing price per square meter next year, or, perhaps, you want to see an image and predict
with a certain probability, what animal is in the picture. To solve those we have different
techniques. The most used techniques are regression, classification, and clustering.
Regression is a technique in machine learning and, specifically, in neural networks, that
helps predict continuous values or probabilities.
Classification is a technique that helps in predicting the class for input data.
Clustering allows you to give the neural network unlabeled data and let it figure out how
to group data in clusters.
14
AI approaches to index Kikuchi diffraction patterns acquired using scanning electron microscopy
==PAGE:18==
Figure 2.19: Example of overfitting. [14]
2.4.5
Layers of neural network
In order to build complex neural network architectures, layers with different purposes and
functions were created. Some of the most common layers for CNNs are:
Dense layer
It is also called a fully connected layer, it is the most basic type of layer in a neural network.
connects all the neurons between themselves, creating a fully connected network. In
this layer, a neuron outputs a linear combination of the inputs, with the weights of the
connections serving as the parameters of the linear model.
Convolutional Layer
This layer is used in CNNs. The purpose of this layer is to extract features from the
input data. Compared to dense layers convolutional layers can detect patterns in different
parts of the image, whereas dense layers would need to be trained with specific pattern
positions. Another advantage of this layer is that it can learn complex spatial hierarchies
of patterns (see fig 2.20). The first convolutional layer would learn local patterns, the
second would learn patterns in the first layer, etc.
Figure 2.20: Example hierarchy of multiple convolutional layers. [13]
Convolution layers are defined by the kernel size and depth of the filters. Convolutions
operate in rank 3 tensor, where 2 dimensions are the pixel locations and the last one
represents filter depth. Then for every filter, the kernel of defined size is applied, similarly
to how the Sobel filter works. The output of this operation is called a response map (see
fig 2.21).
AI approaches to index Kikuchi diffraction patterns acquired using scanning electron microscopy
15
==PAGE:19==
Figure 2.21: Response map simple example.[13]
Then feature maps are transformed into rank 1 tensors and stacked, so you get a rank 3
tensor that is called a feature map (see fig 2.22).
Figure 2.22: Process of forming a feature map by convolutional layer.”[13]
Pooling Layer
It is also a layer that is used in CNNs, the purpose of this layer is to down-sample the
feature maps to reduce their dimensionality and make the network less computationally
expensive. The most common types of pooling layers are max pooling and average pool-
ing. When using the pooling layer, you define the size of the pooling. Then, you select a
mean value from the pool for average pooling and a maximal value from the pool for max
pooling (see fig 2.23).
Dropout Layer
The purpose of this layer is to prevent overfitting in the network by arbitrarily dropping
out a certain percentage of neurons during training. Inside the model, sometimes, the
network learns to rely too much on a group of neurons. Usually, the dropout is applied to
dense layers, because they have the most parameters and are most prone to overfitting.
The common parameter for this layer is a dropout rate, which is commonly set to 0.5,
meaning half of the neurons are going to be dropped out after training iteration.
16
AI approaches to index Kikuchi diffraction patterns acquired using scanning electron microscopy
==PAGE:20==
Figure 2.23: Average and max pooling examples for the size 2 pooling.
Batch Normalization Layer
Its purpose is to normalize the output of the previous layer, which can help to stabilize the
training process, prevent overfitting and improve the network’s performance. This layer
is inserted between hidden layers. It normalizes the output values of the input layer. This
means that output values will be scaled to have a mean output close to 0 and an output
standard deviation close to 1.
Regularization layer
It is a layer that penalizes the high weights in a model. It is a layer used against overfitting.
The 2 common types of regularization are L2 and L1 regularization.
They work as Cost function = Loss (say, mean square error) + Regularization term.
L1 regularization works as cost = loss+ λ
2m ∗∑||w||, where λ is an adjustable parameter.
L1 penalizes weights that are close to 0, by making them 0. Negative weight values also
take a value of 0.
L2 regularization works similarly: cost = loss +
λ
2m ∗∑||w||. It is the most common regu-
larization technique. L2 transforms the values close to 0.
Flatten layer
This layer is used to reshape the data from a multi-rank tensor into a rank 1 tensor. This
is usually done before the dense layer, which expects one-dimensional input.
2.4.6
Activation functions
Activation functions are mathematical functions that are applied to the output of a neuron
or a layer in a neural network. Without activation functions, the network would only be
able to learn a linear relationship between inputs and outputs.
The most common activation functions are:
Linear activation function It doesn’t increase the complexity of the relationships be-
tween inputs and outputs.
Sigmoid activation functions.Produces outputs between 1 and 0, which is good for bi-
nary classification.
Tanh activation functions. Produces output between -1 and 1. The benefit of this activa-
tion function is that negative inputs will be mapped strongly negative and the zero inputs
will be mapped near zero.
ReLU (Rectified Linear Unit) activation function. It is the most used activation func-
tion. It makes inputs below 0 equal to zero and keeps other inputs linear.
Leaky ReLU. It is similar to ReLU, with the exception that it allows that negative values,
but it scales them with a factor, which usually is 0.01 (see fig 2.24).
AI approaches to index Kikuchi diffraction patterns acquired using scanning electron microscopy
17
==PAGE:21==
Figure 2.24: Linear, Sigmoid, and Tanh, ReLU and leaky ReLU (it this order) activation functions.
[15]
Softmax activation function. Softmax is the most popular activation function used for
multi-class classification problems.
2.4.7
Loss functions
The loss function or cost function is a mathematical function that calculates how far is
the predicted result from the true value. The goal of training a neural network is to try to
minimize the loss function value.
The choice of a loss function is one of the most important choices when training a network.
Since the loss function can misguide the network, the training may not give any results
with a wrong loss function.
Different problems require different loss functions. Here are the most common loss func-
tions:
Mean Absolute Error (MAE). Mean Absolute Error is also known as L1. It is calculated
as 1
n
∑n
i=1 |Yi −ˆYi| and is a function that is good for regression problems.
Mean squared error (MSE). Mean squared error is also known as L2. It is a function that
is defined as 1
n
∑n
i=1(Yi −ˆYi)2 and is a function that is good for regression problems. Un-
like MAE it squares the difference between the outputs, so it punishes the wrong outputs
more, although it is more sensitive to outliers.
Cross-entropy loss functions This function is commonly used for classification prob-
lems and it is more robust to outliers.
Custom loss functions In some cases, a custom loss function is necessary, since the
common functions are not valid for the problem that the neural network is training for.
Then, the best solution is to create a custom loss function, that describes the error better.
2.4.8
Optimizers
Optimizers are algorithms that are used to adjust the weights of the model to minimize the
output of the loss function. Gradient descent is one of the simplest optimizers and using
it as an example can help to understand how the optimizers work.
Gradient descent helps to calculate the way that the weights in a model should be op-
timized so that the loss function can reach its minimum value. Through the process of
backpropagation, the loss is fed back to the layers, one by one, in order to adjust their
weights.
It is important to know, that optimizers have a learning rate. Gradient descent can be
thought of as a ball rolling down the hill. The learning rate, in this analogy, would be the
speed of the ball. If you set the learning rate too high, the optimizer might never end in
the global minima, since it is going to ”bounce over and back” all the time. If you set it
too low, the optimizer will progress to the minimum too slowly or will be stuck in a local
minimum forever, as shown in the fig 2.25
Most common optimizers are Stochastic Gradient Descent(SGD), Adaptive Moment Es-
timation(Adam), Root Mean Square Propagation (RMSProp), and Adagrad.
18
AI approaches to index Kikuchi diffraction patterns acquired using scanning electron microscopy
==PAGE:22==
Figure 2.25: Image showing the gradient descent getting stuck in a local minimum of a loss
function.[16]
2.4.9
Data Augmentation
It is a technique used in deep learning to artificially increase the size of the training set.
It takes existing data and modifies it while keeping multiple variants. Modifications in-
clude rotation, brightness adjustments, stretching or displacing the image, adding noise,
etc.(see fig 2.26) It helps the network to generalize better since it learns different varia-
tions of the same data.
Imagine an example of a network, that is trained on a set of images of trees, where the
tree is always in the middle of the image, with roots facing down. When the network,
trained this way, will get the new image, where the tree is located at the edge of an image
or/and rotated, it will see different patterns in an image get confused, giving the wrong
results.
Figure 2.26: Example of data augmentation. An image of a digit 6 is twisted in all directions and
stretched before it is fed into the network as individual pictures. [17]
2.4.10
Training a network
When training the network, the following terms are important:
• Test set - a set of data, that you put aside before training, to evaluate the perfor-
mance of the model that finished training.
• Validation set - a set of data, that is used to validate the success of your training.
Then the parameters of the model are getting adjusted, based on this result.
• Training set - a part of your dataset that is used to train your model. It should be the
biggest of the three sets.
• Epoch - a full iteration over a train set. Usually, models are trained with tens, hun-
dreds, or even thousands of epochs.
AI approaches to index Kikuchi diffraction patterns acquired using scanning electron microscopy
19
==PAGE:23==
• Batch - when iterating over the training set, images are taken in batches. It is done
to better adjust the model that has a small number of unique data points.
Let’s look at the example, where we train the network on all data at once. For
example, let’s take a training set of 9990 similar images and 10 different images.
After every epoch, the output of the loss function is going to be low, if weights fit the
9990 images, but it will be high when the weight fit 10 images. This will make the
optimizers adjust the weight to learn the 9990 images, totally ignoring the 10 images
with unique features.
By using batches, the loss function can be affected by the unique data points, making
the network learn the distinction between the two types of images.
• X - Data that contains the learnable features. In this project, x are the images of
diffraction patterns.
• Y - Data containing labels. In this project, y represents the Euler angles. There is y
true, which holds the real values, and ˆy, which represents the predicted values.
20
AI approaches to index Kikuchi diffraction patterns acquired using scanning electron microscopy
==PAGE:24==
3
Simulating images using abTEM
In this chapter, you will find the details about the simulation process, as well as the rea-
soning behind the choices made during the simulation.
3.1
Context
Usually, images made with TKD show either spot patterns or Kikuchi lines, depending on
the setup of the microscope. For this project, images using a gold-film filter, developed
in DTU, were used. It was done to receive an image that combines both Kikuchi lines
and spot patterns (see fig 3.1). The goal of this project is to train a convolutional neural
Figure 3.1: Image made using TKD with gold-film filter. Material - Au, thickness - 15nm. Picture
A shows unprocessed images from the microscope; Picture B shows the image after feature en-
chantment, done by commercial software
network(CNN) on those images in order to predict the crystal orientation, defined in Euler
angles.
To train a functioning CNN, thousands of images would need to be made manually. How-
ever, it is expensive and time-consuming to make a such large amount of experimental
images.
So it was agreed that images need to be simulated instead. CNN would be trained on
simulated images to generalize and predict experimental images. In order for CNN to
generalize with high accuracy, simulated images would need to look similar to the exper-
imental images. However, there is no good way to know whether the simulation is good
enough for generalization. So it was decided to make images of the same size and rota-
tion, examine them manually, and then train the network.
Experimental images would only be used to evaluate the accuracy of the trained models
since the orientation for the experimental images was found beforehand by the commer-
cial software.
3.2
First simulation
To simulate an image, I took an existing jupyter notebook [18] from a project [19], that
simulated the diffraction. It uses a python library called abTEM, which provides an API
for running simulations.
The notebook included the following steps:
1. It simulates a nano-particle, by defining a chemical element, the structure of a par-
ticle, lattice planes, and atom count.
AI approaches to index Kikuchi diffraction patterns acquired using scanning electron microscopy
21
==PAGE:25==
2. It adds vibrations to atoms in the nano-particle, to create a number of configurations.
Each of those configurations stores the location of atoms after a random vibration
distance was added to it.
3. It creates a wave, with a defined wavelength, acceleration voltage, and more.
4. It simulates diffraction with every atomic configuration and returns the images.
5. It takes an average of all the images. This step is necessary to simulate the be-
havior of electrons in the microscope. In the real world, electrons move significantly
faster, than the atoms are vibrating. When the wave of electrons passes through the
particle, it diffracts atoms as if atoms are not moving. When the next wave comes,
atoms are displaced, due to vibration. This creates areas with different intensities of
diffracted electrons. Figure 3.2 shows a contextual representation of what happens
between two separate waves.
Figure 3.2: A. One wave was diffracted and produced a pattern; B. Two separate waves were
diffracted. In the where patterns overlap, you can see the higher intensity of diffracted electrons
I had to change the parameters to match the gold crystal of the expected shape and
thickness, to match the material properties. The Wulff construction is used to describe
the shape of the desired nano-particle. This construction allows specific atom count and
lattice planes and it generates a nano-particle. It is important to mention, that those par-
ticles are then repeated periodically to form a thin sample. (see fig 3.3).
Figure 3.3: Same simulated nano-particle with two different rotations
After setting all parameters, the simulation was ready, however, as you can see in fig
3.4 the Kikuchi lines and spot patterns were clear and sharp, while on the experimental
images, they were blurry and had random noise.
22
AI approaches to index Kikuchi diffraction patterns acquired using scanning electron microscopy
==PAGE:26==
Figure 3.4: Simulated image and experimental image side-by-side. The simulated image is on
the left. Real image after noise removal on the right
3.3
Better wave simulation
After researching the issue, it turned out, that the PlainWawe object didn’t fit my goal. It
didn’t allow me to move the observation point. Instead, it only allowed moving the object,
which produced undesired results after applying the rotation to the nano-particle.
To fix this issue, I had to change from the PlainWawe object to the Probe object. This ob-
ject allowed setting a ”camera view” by adjusting the defocus, cutoff angle, and sampling
values.
After the adjustment, diffraction patterns started to be more blurry and had added noise.
(see fig 3.5)
Figure 3.5: Successful probe simulation. Here diffraction patterns look more similar to the exper-
imental image
3.4
Euler angle mismatch
After getting a similar simulated image to the experimental image, I decided to try to sim-
ulate the image with the angles from the experimental image. The ground truth about
particle orientation in the experimental image was provided by commercial software. It
has a known error margin of only 2-4%. Matching images would indicate the success of
the simulation.
To my surprise, repeating the angles predicted by the commercial software resulted in
images with completely different diffraction patterns.
My first assumption was that the rotation might have happened in the wrong direction, so
I changed the angles to negative. That didn’t make the desired result.
AI approaches to index Kikuchi diffraction patterns acquired using scanning electron microscopy
23
==PAGE:27==
My next assumption was that that rotation axis might have been set wrong.
Then I assumed that commercial software uses another Euler angle convention. After the
communication with commercial software providers, it turned out to be false as well.
Then, I decided to try to manually adjust the Euler angles of particles on two simulated
images to match the diffraction patterns of two experimental images. The idea was to
calculate a mismatch in angles between simulated and experimental images and derive
the rule of adjusting the rotations. This approach also failed.
Due to the limited time of this project, I had to move to the next step. I came up with the
idea of how to test the model against the experimental images without the ground truth
about their orientation. I would try it on the experimental images when I would have a
model. Then I would simulate an image with predicted Euler angles and manually com-
pare the results. The downside of this approach is that it leaves room for human error
and results are slow to evaluate.
3.5
Adjusting zoom
After simulating images that look close to the experimental images, the image’s zoom had
to be adjusted. This was done manually, to match the experimental image. It was done
using the gridpoint parameter.
To make an image of size 800x800 pixels, the dots per inch(dpi) value of matplotlib was
adjusted.
Then the image was cut to 800x600, which matches the size of the experimental images.
3.6
Results of the simulation
As a result of the simulation, I received images that looked really similar to the experi-
mental images. However, were still visible differences in spot patterns’ sharpness and
the overall image brightness.
At this step, my assumption was that by using image processing, I would enhance desired
features and remove visual differences caused by simulation. This would be necessary
for a network to generalize well.
3.7
Possible improvements of simulation
Due to this project having time constraints, I couldn’t try many potential improvements at
this step of the project.
• The biggest potential improvement would be to find the difference between rotations
in commercial software and in the simulation. Even though both are using the Bunge
convention for Euler angles, the resulting rotation is different. Possible the different
starting viewpoint. This would mean that rotation around the same axis to the same
degree would be two distinct rotations. (see fig 3.6)
• Another improvement would be to translate all the rotations from Euler angles to
the quaternions. Euler angles have a problem, described in a theory section 2.2.6,
where two distinct rotations could result in the same orientation. Quaternions don’t
have such an issue.
• Try various parameters of the simulation to make simulated images more similar to
the experimental ones.
24
AI approaches to index Kikuchi diffraction patterns acquired using scanning electron microscopy
==PAGE:28==
Figure 3.6: Depending on the viewpoint, rotation around certain axis could become two distinct
rotations
AI approaches to index Kikuchi diffraction patterns acquired using scanning electron microscopy
25
==PAGE:29==
4
Image processing techniques
In this chapter, you will find the details about prepossessing the images before they can
be used in the CNN training. You will also find reasoning why certain techniques were
used.
4.1
Context
Usually, before the CNN is trained on the images, desired features can be enhanced,
so that the network can focus on those features. Additionally, augmentation is a good
practice to increase the dataset size and introduce the network to the modified network.
Then the network can generalize better.
Since the dataset would contain thousands of images, the approach has to be automatic
and work for different image variations.
I saw two possible directions for the development of the project.
1. First direction would be to enhance the features of Kikuchi lines to the point, where
edge detection techniques could clearly show them. Then apply Hough transform
and draw the lines on a new image.
The benefit of this approach is that both experimental images and simulated im-
ages would only contain lines. This would make them maximally similar, after the
model would be trained, the generalization of this model to the experimental images
wouldn’t be a concern.
The downside of this approach that I saw, was that creating lines based on the
Hough transform could be unreliable. Then, many images would have false lines or
would miss the true lines.
2. Second direction would be to eliminate the majority of differences between two im-
ages by means of changing brightness, equalizing intensity values, removing the
background, thresholding, etc.
The benefit of this approach would be that it wouldn’t have a problem with missing
important lines, unlike the first approach.
Future work would also benefit from this approach since patterns would become
more complicated.
This would mean that edge detection and Hough transform
would start performing worse, while well-trained CNN, would still be accurate.
One of the biggest issues I saw with this approach was that images change intensity
from the center to the corners, due to the beam background noise. This could be
hard to remove this pattern since it could affect experimental images differently.
Another downside of this approach is that an experimental image would have a lot
of random noise. Then CNN could, potentially, learn non-existent patterns from this
noise.
4.2
Mandatory preprocessing
Diffraction patterns don’t have any valuable information in color channels. For this reason,
in all the processing steps I converted the image to black and white and removed additional
channels.
Then I converted the image values to floats. This is done because most of the image-
processing steps use mathematical operations, which are often incompatible with uint8-
type values and would produce undesired results.
26
AI approaches to index Kikuchi diffraction patterns acquired using scanning electron microscopy
==PAGE:30==
4.2.1
Removing background noise
The most obvious issue had to be resolved first - background noise from the beam. This
changes the intensity in the image from the center outwards.
To resolve it, I used the technique called Difference of Gaussian(DoG). The first step of
DoG is creating a Gaussian blurred version of an image with a high σ value. You can think
of it as the approximation of the noise, produced by the beam. (see fig 4.1)
Figure 4.1: Gaussian blurred image
Then I subtract the background image from the original image. This results in an image
with enhanced Kikuchi lines. (see fig 4.2)
Figure 4.2: Removing the background from the image
4.3
First approach
4.3.1
Understanding the image histogram
At this point of the project, I had an assumption that spot patterns, Kikuchi lines, back-
ground noise, and the background are all laying on their own part of the histogram. This
is the reason why I decided to try using thresholds. Before starting, I re-scaled image
intensity values to the range from 0 to 255.
My first attempt was to use an automated thresholding approach called Otsu thresholding.
Automatic threshold filtered out low-intensity values. It gave a much clearer result than I
have anticipated, however, it had artifacts. (see fig 4.3)
My second attempt was just to try to study histograms and cherry-pick different values.
For spot patterns - my theory was correct since they could be separated by one threshold
easily. This was possible because spot patterns are the brightest spots on the image.
However, it turned out that Kikuchi lines were mixed in the intensity range between 0 and
50 together with the noise. By cherry-picking the threshold values, I could find the values,
which would give enhanced Kikuchi lines. (see fig 4.4)
However, this result is manual and too error-prone to be automated. The image also had
artifacts in the shape of circles.
AI approaches to index Kikuchi diffraction patterns acquired using scanning electron microscopy
27
==PAGE:31==
Figure 4.3: Image where Otsu threshold was applied to remove low-intensity values. The image
intensity values were re-scaled
Figure 4.4: Cherry picked threshold boundaries
4.3.2
Gamma correction
The next technique I tried, was gamma correction. This is a function, that enhances bright
pixels more than dark ones.
First, I just used the gamma correction and got a better result than with thresholding.
However, the image still had a black circle around the patterns. (see fig 4.5)
Figure 4.5: Using gamma function to enhance the bright pixels
To improve the quality of the image, I tried higher γ values. The resulting image didn’t get
more information while making the image less contrasted. (see fig 4.6)
My conclusion was, that with varying brightness of the image, this method would produce
unstable results.
28
AI approaches to index Kikuchi diffraction patterns acquired using scanning electron microscopy
==PAGE:32==
Figure 4.6: Using gamma function with higher γ values and blur
4.3.3
Edge detection
The image received in the previous steps were not ideal, due to the artifacts and mostly
manual approach to selecting parameters, however, they were enough to test the ap-
proach with edge detection. I decided to see whether edge detection and Hough transform
would give sensible results. The Kikuchi lines were clearly visible in the image, however,
I suspected that the contrast between the lines and the background is not sufficient for
the Kikuchi lines to be detected.
Sobel edge detection
The first edge detection technique applied was Sobel edge detection, since it is one of
the simplest techniques. (see fig 4.7)
Figure 4.7: Sobel edge detection on the x-axis.
The lines in this image are clearly visible, however, there are too many edges detected in
the noise.
Prewitt edge detection
Then I tried Prewitt edge detection. It is worth mentioning that this technique is really
similar to Sobel edge detection. The difference is that it uses another kernel, so bad
results were expected. (see fig 4.8) The detected edges were giving even fewer results
than the Sobel edge detection.
Canny edge detection
Canny edge detection is the most sophisticated technique among the three. It is also the
recommended preprocessing, before using Hough transform. Unfortunately, it didn’t bring
any results either. (see fig4.9)
Only some of the Kikuchi lines were detected and, more importantly, noise and spot pat-
terns were also picked up by the Canny edge detection.
AI approaches to index Kikuchi diffraction patterns acquired using scanning electron microscopy
29
==PAGE:33==
Figure 4.8: Prewitt edge detection on the x and y-axis.
Figure 4.9: Canny edge detection.
Hough transform
Since the edge detection techniques had too much extra information, the Hough transform
draws undesired lines and produces the image seen on the image 4.10.
Figure 4.10: Failed Hough transform.
At this point of the project, I realize that fine-tuning parameters is not giving a good result
and takes too much time. This is why I decided to move on with the second approach of
preprocessing images.
4.4
Second approach
From the experiments in the first approach, I noticed a problem, the techniques I tried were
having artifacts, due to the image still having uneven background intensities. I started
researching available techniques that would even out the background noise intensity.
30
AI approaches to index Kikuchi diffraction patterns acquired using scanning electron microscopy
==PAGE:34==
4.4.1
Techniques of adjusting brightness
The techniques I found were histogram equalization, histogram normalization, and local
normalization.
Before applying the new techniques, I removed the background from the image. The idea
of doing this was to first enhance the Kikuchi lines and then even out background noise.
If it would be done in the opposite order, removing the background would likely make the
result of the previous operation invalid.
You can see the techniques and their results below:
Histogram equalization
First, I tried histogram equalization. This is a technique, that increases the contrast by
spreading out the most frequent intensity values.
This technique increases contrast, however, it is spreading intensity values, which, results
in an image getting distorted.
So my assumption was that it might highlight undesired parts of the image.(see fig 4.11)
Figure 4.11: Result of histogram equalization.
The received result showed the Kikuchi lines but was unstable.
Histogram normalization
This technique takes the histogram, then uses cumulative distribution function(CDF) on
it. Then linear interpolation is used on CDF to get the pixel values. (see fig 4.12)
Figure 4.12: Result of histogram normalization.
This operation created the image with the most details so far. Kikuchi lines were clearly
visible and could be used for further processing.
However, the intensity of the background was still uneven. This created circle-like artifacts
all around the image.
Local normalization
This technique re-adjusts pixel values based on its neighbor pixel values. I was expecting
this technique to perform the best. My assumption was based on the fact, that techniques
AI approaches to index Kikuchi diffraction patterns acquired using scanning electron microscopy
31
==PAGE:35==
before were global and they failed to eradicate gradual changes in the background inten-
sity. This technique, however, performed local adjustments. (see fig 4.13).
Figure 4.13: Result of histogram normalization.
This received result was enhancing the desired features, while neither having artifacts nor
changing background intensity.
4.4.2
Results of the second approach
The results of the local normalization satisfied my criteria of making experimental and
simulated images similar enough. However, there were still problems that had to be ad-
dressed in the next step.
Firstly, the spot patterns had to be masked, so that the CNN would only learn from Kikuchi
lines.
Secondly, the experimental image (see fig 4.13) was having strong noise on the corners
of the image, while the simulated image was clear all around the image (see fig 4.14).
Due to this difference, I decided that I will mask both spot patterns and the noise outside
a circle, where Kikuchi lines become hardly seen.
Figure 4.14: Result of local normalization on a simulated image.
4.5
Preparing images for CNN
To prepare a dataset for CNN, I had to find out how many images I had to generate.
4.5.1
Generating images
Because I’m working with face-centered-cubic(fcc) gold crystal, every 90 degrees of rota-
tion produces an equivalent orientation. So, if you rotate the particle to f.x. 103 degrees,
which would be equivalent to a rotation of 13 degrees, due to the properties of fcc crystal.
Because of that property, I decided to generate images with rotations within the range of
0 to 90 degrees.
32
AI approaches to index Kikuchi diffraction patterns acquired using scanning electron microscopy
==PAGE:36==
then I had to decide, whether I want to generate images with randomized angles or gen-
erate a dataset, that would have an image for every angle combination.
The second option sounds better, however, it would produce 903 = 729000 images, if done
for every 1 degree. Even if you do it for every 3 degrees, it is still 303 = 27000 images.
Even 27000 images would be on the border of occupying all of my available space, so I
decided to go with generating images with randomized Euler angles between 0 and 90.
This would have the benefit of non-integer values, however, it might generate images that
would cover a certain range of angles more than other ranges.
4.5.2
Good amount of images for training
Since I decided to generate images with randomized Euler angles I had to figure out a
number of images that would be sufficient for training a CNN.
As it turns out, there is no direct answer to this question, since the neural networks are
still not fully understood. This is the reason why people still rely on intuition in this area.
It was recommended to have at least 5000 images. The time required to generate each
image had to be generated 90 seconds, due to the required resolution. By queuing mul-
tiple generation jobs, I managed to generate 10000 images in several days.
Even though increasing the dataset size to 20000 images would be an overall improve-
ment, it would take too much time and space.
4.5.3
Applying mask
After the images got generated, I had to apply a mask to those images. The mask had to
cover the center and outer parts of the image. So I created a donut-shaped mask with an
inner radius of 110 pixels and an outer radius of 250 pixels(px). (see fig 4.15)
Figure 4.15: Donut mask applied to an image. Inner circle radius - 110px, outer circle radius
250px.
I decided to augment the data by and displace a mask randomly, up to 10 px to any direc-
tion from the center. Initially, the inner circle had a radius of 100px, which was enough to
cover spot patterns, but after adding random displacement, the radius increased to 110px.
Later on in the project, I decided to change the mask color to black. This decision was
made, because of the max pooling layer of CNN. My assumption was that, if the back-
ground is white, when max pooling happens, the pixels with useful information might get
lost. (see fig 4.16)
At this point, the images are ready for CNN. (see a comparison of experimental and sim-
ulated images on fig 4.17)
AI approaches to index Kikuchi diffraction patterns acquired using scanning electron microscopy
33
==PAGE:37==
Figure 4.16: Then using max pooling on the image with the white background, the useful infor-
mation is lost
Figure 4.17: Side by side images after applying preprocessing steps. Picture A - Simulated image.
Picture B - Experimental image
4.6
Possible improvements of preprocessing
Later in the project, I realized that the library, I used for edge detection - OpenCV converted
intensity values to uint8-type. This explains some of the worst results. Redoing some of
the image processing might have made simulated and experimental images more similar.
Another improvement to make images more similar would be an effort of adding different
types of noise and blur to the simulated image.
According to my observations, this noise has three main characteristics (see example in
fig 4.18).
• The further you go from the beam, the more visible the noise gets.
• The noise appears as big grains
• Black spots appear on the image
To try to replicate this noise on the simulated images, I would have to create small black
spots, blur them and add them to the image arbitrarily.
Then I would have to experiment with different types of noise to make it look more grainy.
As a next step, I would create a transparency mask, that would get less transparent further
away from the beam. To create a mask like that, I would try to use a Gaussian filter. Then,
I would apply this mask to the noise. Lastly, I would add this noise to the image.
34
AI approaches to index Kikuchi diffraction patterns acquired using scanning electron microscopy
==PAGE:38==
Figure 4.18: Image showing the combination of different noises appearing on the experimental
images. The orange circle shows the noise in the shape of black dots appearing in the image in
arbitrary locations. The blue circle shows the grainy noise. The green arrow shows that the further
you go from the beam, the more visible the noise gets.
AI approaches to index Kikuchi diffraction patterns acquired using scanning electron microscopy
35
==PAGE:39==
5
Convolutional neural networks
In this chapter, you will find all the information about the process of trying different neural
network architectures, as well as an evaluation of the results.
5.1
Context
At this stage of the project, I had 10000 images. Each of those images was preprocessed
and ready to be used in training.
As mentioned before, nobody fully understands what happens in the hidden layers of
neural networks. Because of that, there is no written guideline of what works and what
doesn’t. People developing neural networks rely on intuition and progress by trial and
error.
My idea for this stage is to create the most basic model that works. Then I would iter-
ate over various parameters and network architectures. Evaluating the received results
would build my own intuition about this problem over time.
My first step would be to split the images into the train, test, and validation sets. Then
I would have to try different optimizers, loss functions, layers, regularization techniques,
etc.
To start implementing my own models, I had to select the technologies.
In the artificial intelligence world, the most common programming language is Python.
This is explained by the abundance of great libraries available in this programming lan-
guage. Libraries such as TensorFlow, Torch, sci-kit, skimage, etc.
TensorFlow is the most used software library for training neural networks. It became so
popular because it is open source, can perform complex calculations, and has an easy-
to-learn API - Keras. Another close competitor, for the most popular library, is Torch, with
its API called PyTorch.
Both technologies were new to me and neither of them seemed superior to the other. I
decided to use Keras because my supervisor knew the library and I had a book describing
it.[13].
5.2
Note about wrong legend labels
After running hundreds of training configurations and having all the plots saved, I noticed,
that I made mistake by leaving the default legend names for the graphs.
It would take days to regenerate all of the graphs, so I have put this note here explaining
the legends:
• acc - accuracy on the training set. Blue color
• val_acc - accuracy on the validation set. Red color
• eval_acc - accuracy on the test set. Green color
• loss - loss on the training set. Blue color
• val_loss - loss on the validation set. Red color
• eval_loss - loss on the test set. Green color
36
AI approaches to index Kikuchi diffraction patterns acquired using scanning electron microscopy
==PAGE:40==
5.3
First CNN models
I started by trying the Modified National Institute of Standards and Technology dataset(MNIST)
CNN, to verify my setup. MNIST is a dataset of 60000 images of digits, that is commonly
used as a first neural network experience for beginners, similar to ”Hello world!” programs.
(see fig 5.1)
Figure 5.1: MNIST sample images. [13]
5.3.1
Problem with loading images
The setup worked, although I immediately noticed a problem that had to be resolved -
how to load the images?
MNIST dataset was available as a part of Keras, however, I had 10000 images, that had
to be loaded. Unlike MNIST images, which are 28x28 pixels, my images were 800x600
pixels.
I had a concern, that loading all of these images into the memory would cause the session
to run out of memory. To test that hypothesis, I created a notebook[20], where I loaded
all the images into the memory. It turned out that it could train small-to-medium-sized
networks, but ran out of memory on medium-to-high-sized networks.
5.3.2
Data loader
At this point, I decided to implement a custom data loader, which would load the images
in batches of defined size. For this project, I used batches of 32 images.
It is a slightly slower solution when it comes to very small networks, but performed better
on small to medium models.
My data loader loads images as 2-dimensional arrays of float32 values and normalizes
them to be in the range 0 to 1, by dividing the values by 255. Then it puts the image array
in a batch array denoted as x. Then it loads the corresponding 3 Euler angles for all 32
images and divides all the angles by 90 to get values between 0 and 1, as y. Lastly, it
returns x and y to the network.
5.3.3
First model
For the first model, I decided to create an 8000-image training set, 1000 image validation
set, and 1000 image test set.
The simplest model, that I created would then need an input layer that accepts the image
with the shape 800x600x1, where 1 is a dimension for a channel. Then it would have
convolutional and max pooling layers, get feature maps and reduce the dimensionality of
the images. Then, the flattened layer would flatten the 3-dimensional feature map into
the 1-dimensional array. Then the Dense layer with 3 neurons would represent an output
layer, where each neuron stands for one of the Euler angles.
The model can be found in a jupyter notebook[21] under the name ”Model selection 1”.
As a first optimizer, I used Stochastic gradient descent(SDG) with a default learning rate.
As a loss function, I used mean squared error(MSE).
5.4
Unsuitable loss function
After running the model I saw the following graph. 5.2.
AI approaches to index Kikuchi diffraction patterns acquired using scanning electron microscopy
37
==PAGE:41==
Figure 5.2: Mean square error loss function producing arbitrary results of training
From the graph, I could see that neither the training loss nor the validation loss is going
down.
At this point, I realized, that the problem is in a loss function.
The MSE, MAE, and other inbuilt loss functions do not describe the problem I’m trying to
solve. In my case, the angles are between 0◦and 90◦, where the 0◦is maximally close to
90◦. Another side of my problem is that any rotations defined as (x+y∗90)◦are equivalent
when x is a real value and y is an integer. This means, that −60◦= 30◦= 120◦.
For the MSE, MAE, and other inbuilt loss functions, the loss between the real value and
predicted value of, for example, 90◦and 0◦will be maximal, however, for this problem, it
is the best possible prediction. (see fig 5.3)
Figure 5.3: Picture A - In the normal situation, where the distance is important, 90◦and 0◦are as
far as possible. Here the mean square error function would work.
Picture B - The concept describing that rotating the fcc crystal by 90◦, will result in the same
orientation
5.4.1
Custom loss functions
To combat this issue, I developed 3 loss functions, which were compared later in the train-
ing. For the future examples, y1, y2, y3 are true Euler angles and ˆy1, ˆy2, ˆy3 are predicted
Euler angles. The angles were also scaled to be in the range between 0 and 1 for training.
Absolute error loss function
I define the custom absolute error loss function as
∑3
e=1 min(abs(ye−ˆye),abs(1−abs(ye−ˆye)))
3
.
As a first step, this function calculates the absolute difference between ye and ˆye. I need
an absolute of the subtractions since the network can predict the angle, that is going to
be bigger, than the true value. Then I save it as val1.
As a second calculation, I subtract val1 from 1 and save it in val2. This is done for angle
values like 1 and 0(90◦and 0◦), where val1 would become 1, while val2 would be 0. The
absolute of val1, because otherwise, the network will start predicting bigger numbers with
38
AI approaches to index Kikuchi diffraction patterns acquired using scanning electron microscopy
==PAGE:42==
every iteration, getting closer to positive or negative infinity.
Then I take a minimum of the two values. You can think about it as, whether the angle is
closer to 90◦or 0◦.
Then I find the mean of this operation among the 3 angles.
You can see the implementation of all 3 functions in the notebook [21]
Square root loss function
I define the custom square root loss function as defined as
∑3
e=1 min(√
abs(ye−ˆye),√
abs(1−abs(ye−ˆye)))
3
,
which is the same function as absolute error loss function, with the difference that it takes
the square root of the values.
This approach makes good predictions a little more significant. This would also mean,
that if there were outliers, the function would be more sensitive to them. But, since the
images are simulated, there are no outliers.
Smart absolute error loss function
I define the custom smart absolute error loss function similarly to the absolute error loss
function, although if ˆye > 1 or ˆye < 0 it sets ˆye to, 2 + ˆye instead. In this way, if the values
predicted are outside of the range 0 to 1, it will punish it and the loss is going to increase.
Initially, I thought to just set it to value 2.0, however, after testing it, I realized, that the
optimizer gets confused when the predicted value changes, but the loss stays the same.
Result
Using the custom loss functions, I finally saw a decrease in training and validation losses,
which meant that the loss functions were working. But the model still was predicting pretty
badly. My assumption was that I have to make a model more complex and try different
optimizers with different parameters.
This was also the time of the project, where I decided to crop images to 500x500 pix-
els, to decrease dimensionality and cut out the parts of the image that doesn’t hold any
information as mentioned in the section 4.5.3
5.5
Expanding the model
This stage of the project included a lot of changes. At this point, I created a script [22], that
would automate training with different parameters. It took all the desired configurations
for optimizers, learning rates, and different network architectures, and would queue the
jobs. After the job finishes it would automatically save the:
• The logs of training
• Graphs that show the performance of various configurations
• Trained models
• The generated script to queue the training job. It is done in case some error occurred
during queuing the job
5.5.1
Trying optimizers, stacked convolutional layers, and dense layers
Optimizers
After getting the loss functions to work, I decided to try to change optimizers.
The optimizers I chose were Adam and RMSprop. For Adam, I also decided to try a
setting called amsgrad, which enables another variant of Adam optimizer from the paper
”On the convergence of Adam and beyond”[23].
Just adding the optimizers didn’t significantly affect the model results. I believe that it was,
due to the fact that the model was too simple.
AI approaches to index Kikuchi diffraction patterns acquired using scanning electron microscopy
39
==PAGE:43==
Stacked convolutional layers
The next step was to add more convolutional layers. Currently, the approach was to have
1 convolution layer followed by one max pooling layer repeatedly, until the flattened layer
would have around 1000 neurons. I selected 1000 neurons from intuition developed while
discussing the topic with my supervisors. And this value is a subject of testing.
The reasoning, behind adding stacking convolutional layers was to be able to detect local,
and then global patterns. This process was described in the theory section Convolutional
Layer. The order of the layers would be 2 convolutional layers followed by one max pooling
layer repeatedly.
Dense layers
Then I decided to add an additional dense layer. The intuition behind this decision was
that the features are processed in dense layers, so I had to create a dense layer, big
enough to capture important features from the image. This is why I made a layer with 64
neurons.
5.6
Hyperparameter tunning
After setting up a new model, I set up a script to try all possible combinations from defined
configurations.
You can see the model in the notebook[21], under name Model selection 2.
It was my way of setting up the hyperparameter tuning.
Keras has inbuilt hyperparameter tunning, however, it is defined to run multiple configura-
tions in one job. My training took up to 2 hours per model and the queuing system had a
limit of 24 hours of execution time per job. If I would use hyperparameter tunning, I would
have to run a single job for more than 24 hours. This is why I decided to queue them as
separate training jobs. For more information on how to implement hyperparameter tun-
ning in Keras, look at section 13.1 of Deep learning with Python[13]
I defined 3 types of optimizers - Adam with amsgrad=True, Adam with amsgrad=False,
and RMSprop.
Then I defined the learning rates as 0.005, 0.001, and 0.0002, while the default value is
0.001.
In the next step, I added different versions of activation layers for different layers in my
models. Mostly, I used ReLU for all the layers, however, I also added configurations,
where the dense layer would have a sigmoid activation function.
Result of training
After running all the training, I got the first model, that was predicting the angles with the
accuracy of approximately 10◦.
This was a good result, however, I saw that most of the configurations had certain prob-
lems. Some of them clearly outfitted, but some were predicting the same value for all the
images.
My assumption at that point was, that something is wrong with the loss function. I came
to this conclusion because earlier I had a bug, where the loss function was returning the
wrong shape and the model also predicted the same values every time.
You can see the architecture of the successful model in the notebook [21] under Model
selection 3. This model was run with:
• abs_loss_function()
• RMSprop optimizer
• Learning rate = 0.001
I also understood that Adam with any configuration performs worse than RMSprop and
40
AI approaches to index Kikuchi diffraction patterns acquired using scanning electron microscopy
==PAGE:44==
decided to stick to RMSprop for future training.
5.7
Making model even more complex
At this point of the project I already had a well-performing model, so I had an assumption
that I’m moving in the right direction with expanding the model. I decided to add Batch
normalization, dropout, and regularization layers in different configurations. I believed that
the problem that I’m having with model learning to predict the same values is connected
with overfitting.
Regularization layers
I decided to try regularization layers. My idea was that the problems with the current
models could be caused by overfitting, when some neurons in the dense layer would be
adjusted to have a much higher weight value than other neurons, making them almost
irrelevant.
Dropout layer
For a similar reason to using regularization layers, I decided to try the dropout layers.
Even though this technique has a similar function to the regularization layer, it may perform
better or worse, depending on the parameters and the underlying problem.
Dense layers
I increased the amount of the dense layers in some configurations, in combination with
Regularization layers. It was done to test if the model is actually too simple and cannot
catch a more complex set of patterns, because it has too small a dense layer block.
Batch normalization
Batch normalization is a technique that is, usually, used in very deep neural networks. It
is used to normalize the input for the layer for every mini-batch.
Even though my network was getting more complex, it was still considered medium size
at most. Despite that, I thought that adding batch normalization in some models after
every convolutional block would be a good configuration to try since I started.
Convolutional blocks
At this step, I decided to try a technique called convolutional blocks. Essentially, it is the
idea of putting a convolutional layer with other normalization layers in a block and using
it instead of single convolutional layers.
This was done to make sure that overfitting doesn’t happen because one of the convolu-
tional layers would adjust some weights with too high values.
Adding more convolutional blocks with max pooling
Since some of the configurations had an increase in dense block size and individual dense
layer size, for those configurations I increase the pooling size to reduce the dimensional-
ity.
Then I also added more convolutional blocks, to try to increase the complexity of the
model. This could make a model overfit even more, but it could also find more complex
patterns.
Running configuration
I queued a total of 99 configurations of different architectures, different learning rates, etc.
all new configurations didn’t work either because they predicted arbitrary numbers, or,
most often, predicted the same values for every epoch. (see fig 5.4)
You can see the models used for this iteration in the Models notebook [21] under Model
selection 4.
AI approaches to index Kikuchi diffraction patterns acquired using scanning electron microscopy
41
==PAGE:45==
Figure 5.4: Example of overfitting result. Training data is shown in blue. Validation data is shown
in red
5.8
Adding mid-training evaluation of the model
At this point, I was suspecting that I made a bug or the models are getting too complex.
But with the implementation at that step, I had no way of testing that.
This is the reason I made a callback function, that would evaluate the model every 10
epochs and predicts some values, to get some insight into what is happening in the model.
Then I ran more configurations with this callback function.
5.8.1
Too complex models
After the training with evaluation, I started to notice that in many configurations, the pre-
dicted values started to be the same values after the first epoch or first 10 epochs. This
was a clear indication that the model is too complex.
5.8.2
New theory about the same predictions
The mid-training evaluation helped me to also to better understand the problems of the
current approach. At this point, I came up with a theory, of why the predicted values in
that many models were the same for every image.
I believe that the issue lies in multiple convolutional layers(more than 2) that are stacked
so it could be an effect of one of the layers getting zero values, causing a cascading effect,
affecting the following layers.
To try to prove that theory, I would need to try a more sophisticated mechanism that would
ensure that problems of one layer wouldn’t affect the other layers.
5.8.3
Simplifying the models
For the next step, I decided to decrease the complexity to the point, where I had a working
model and try more configurations at that complexity.
I believed that this complexity level is optimal for this problem.
5.8.4
Increasing the size of the kernels for the first convolutional layers
One of the changes, that I tried, was to increase the size of the kernel for the input convo-
lutional layer. In theory, it would be able to find the bigger patterns easier this way. Kikuchi
lines are spread across the whole image, so increasing the kernel size might have an ef-
fect on the result.
You can see the models used in the models notebook[21] under Model selection 5
5.9
Possible improvements of the training the CNN
Due to the time limitation of this project, many of the techniques couldn’t be implemented.
Some of those techniques require a more sophisticated setup. Others require more de-
42
AI approaches to index Kikuchi diffraction patterns acquired using scanning electron microscopy
==PAGE:46==
tailed analysis before they can the model can benefit from it. To summarize, here are the
steps that could be improved in my opinion:
Hyperparameter tunning
If I would be able to get a server, that would allow me to run jobs, that run more than 24
hours, I would try inbuilt Keras hyperparameter tunning.
Alternatively, I could implement a mechanism, that would save the progress of training
after 24 hours elapse. Then it would load the parameters for another job and start, where
the previous job left the raining.
This is a more structured approach to trying different configurations of the models, which
would allow me to create a state-of-the-art model.
More mid-training information
Another area of improvement would be mid-training evaluation and saving more history
throughout the training.
Most of the time spent in this part of the project was spent trying different approaches and
trying to understand the results received from those approaches. This process is slow
and doesn’t provide enough feedback.
To fix it, I would introduce a mechanism for reporting the state of each layer after every
10 epochs. To interpret the information received from the layers, I would need to develop
an intuition, by looking into the many models and see what values lead to success in a
model.
Regularization, dropout, and batch normalization
For this project, I used regularization, dropout, and batch normalization, however, they
have many parameters. Understanding and utilizing those parameters would allow me to
build more complex models without overfitting.
Other techniques
Keras has many valuable techniques, that can ease the understanding of the model, as
well as techniques for model training that keeps the model from overfitting.
5.10
Summary
In this step of the project, I created hundreds of variants of CNN, starting with the smallest
networks, having less than 10 layers, and developing them into complex networks with
convolutional blocks and regularization of layers. Throughout this process, I developed
an intuition of what properties of the CNN fit the problem I am solving.
Some of the models that were produced were performing well on the simulated data, so
in the next chapter, I will be discussing, how those models performed on the experimental
data. 5.5
AI approaches to index Kikuchi diffraction patterns acquired using scanning electron microscopy
43
==PAGE:47==
Figure 5.5: Example a good model with evaluation. Training data is shown in blue. Validation
data is shown in red. Cross-validation on the test set is shown in green
44
AI approaches to index Kikuchi diffraction patterns acquired using scanning electron microscopy
==PAGE:48==
6
Results of the training
This chapter tries to explain the intuition about training CNNs I developed throughout this
project. It goes in-depth about which parameters and architectures worked and which
didn’t.
6.1
First models with different optimizers
After receiving the first working model, I tried various optimizers with various parameters
to see which ones would work best.
The model used for the experiment was Model selection 1 in notebook[21].
The first results of this model were not showing any improvements(see images below)
Figure 6.1: Adam optimizer, square_abs_min_loss() loss function.
Figure 6.2: Adam optimizer with amsgrad enabled, square_abs_min_loss() loss function.
But then, one of the configurations showed some learning rate. However, it was not having
improvements in accuracy and it didn’t predict well. (see fig 6.3)
Then, I figured out that the loss functions were not working correctly and were returning
the mean of all the losses in a batch.
The model used for the experiment was Model selection 3 in notebook[21].
Fixing this bug and adding additional convolutional layers led to some good interesting
results:
From those results, I could clearly see, that Adam optimizer is not handling this problem
well and overfits with or without enabling the amsgrad variant.(see figures 6.4 and 6.5)
AI approaches to index Kikuchi diffraction patterns acquired using scanning electron microscopy
45
==PAGE:49==
Figure 6.3: Adam optimizer, abs_min_loss() loss function.
Figure 6.4: Adam optimizer, abs_min_loss() loss function, learning rate = 0.0005.
However, RMSprop works well and even minimizes the loss twice (see figures 6.6 and
6.7). Those two models became the first models, that predicted values with around 15-
degree error.
Other models predicted arbitrary numbers.
6.2
Making more complex models
After having a few successful models, I decided to make the model more complicated.
The model used for the experiment was Model selection 3 in notebook[21].
I got the results indicating that the models are overfitting or were too complex to give any
good results:
As you can see the model in figure 6.8 starts overfitting around 40th epoch, while the
model in figure 6.9 just don’t seem to learn anything. At this point, I decided to make
models more simple, since I was getting results only with simpler models.
6.3
Variations of the best model
The model used for the experiment was Model selection 5 in notebook[21].
I created variations of the best model that I had and realized I got the best model(see fig
6.10). However, after looking at the predicted values in the logs, I noticed, that the values
the model predicts are sometimes as close as a few degrees, but sometimes they are off
by much more(see fig 6.11)
So my observation is, that the models are getting better. Some values are getting pre-
dicted with an accuracy of just a few degrees, while other models predict near-arbitrary
numbers.
I believe it could be explained by one of the following:
46
AI approaches to index Kikuchi diffraction patterns acquired using scanning electron microscopy
==PAGE:50==
Figure 6.5: Adam optimizer with amsgrad enabled, square_abs_min_loss() loss function, learning
rate = 0.0005.
Figure 6.6: RMSprop optimizer, abs_min_loss() loss function, learning rate = 0.0005
• The dataset is too small and it is randomized. In this case, If the data is allocated
unevenly, CNN will learn some angles better than others. Then, when a new image
comes, with angles far from anything the network has never seen, it will predict
badly.
• Network doesn’t learn the global patterns well. It could learn to predict the images
it has already seen, but it cannot derive spatial rules, based on those images, so,
when it sees new spacial patterns, it gets confused.
• Model simply overfits, since the best models don’t have regularization or dropout
layers.
• Models are too simple, to derive a spatial.
6.4
Predicting an experimental image
Lastly, I tried to predict the crystal orientation of the real image with the best model.
Since the Euler angles given by commercial software are different from the ones that
define the rotation in the simulation, I don’t have the ground truth about the images. I find
one way how I can see how well the best model performs on the experimental images.
1. I make the experimental image
2. I simulate an image with predicted Euler angles
3. I manually compare the results of the simulation to the experimental image
Most of the results I got were far from the ground truth, however, some results surprised
me. You can see that the orientations are really close on image 6.12 or on image 6.13,
AI approaches to index Kikuchi diffraction patterns acquired using scanning electron microscopy
47
==PAGE:51==
Figure 6.7: RMSprop optimizer, abs_min_loss() loss function, learning rate = 0.001.
Figure 6.8: RMSprop optimizer, smart_sqrt_abs_min_loss() loss function, learning rate = 0.005,
model c.
where the key lines are highlighted.
To evaluate the result better, I would have to figure out what caused the mismatch between
the rotations in the simulations and in commercial software.
While doing the final evaluation, I noticed that the brightness of some of the experimental
images varies significantly. To make better predictions in future efforts, I would need to
augment the data, by changing the brightness of the images.
48
AI approaches to index Kikuchi diffraction patterns acquired using scanning electron microscopy
==PAGE:52==
Figure 6.9: RMSprop optimizer, sqrt_abs_min_loss() loss function, learning rate = 0.005, model
b
Figure 6.10: The best model so far. RMSprop optimizer, smart_sqrt_abs_min_loss() loss func-
tion, learning rate = 0.005, model l
Figure 6.11: The model is good at predicting some values but bad at predicting others. Image
obtained after 220 epochs one of the best models. Predicted values go in order phi1, PHI, phi2
AI approaches to index Kikuchi diffraction patterns acquired using scanning electron microscopy
49
==PAGE:53==
Figure 6.12: Experimental image on the left and simulated image on the right
Figure 6.13: Experimental image on the left and simulated image on the right. Both of the images
have some key lines highlighted to show the similarity
50
AI approaches to index Kikuchi diffraction patterns acquired using scanning electron microscopy
==PAGE:54==
7
Conclusion
In conclusion, I have demonstrated the effectiveness of convolutional networks in iden-
tifying and classifying diffraction patterns. The results I received show that the network
can identify the patterns both on simulated and experimental images.
There are still many areas for improvement. By adding noise and adjusting the brightness
of simulated images before training, the model would be better at handling the variations
of real-world experimental images.
Additionally, by increasing the size of the dataset and spreading angles equally in the train-
ing dataset, the resulting model would be able to predict all angles with similar accuracy.
Furthermore, by making more complex models with the fitting regularization techniques,
the accuracy of the models will increase and the model will generalize better when facing
new images. Finally, by solving the Euler Angle mismatch, mentioned in a section , the
network would be able to be evaluated on the experimental images more easily.
In addition to the improvements mentioned above, future work on this project could include
integrating it with the work of Kevin Thor Fleming, whose project focuses on indexing the
spot patterns using CNNs. Furthermore, the CNNs have to be trained on more complex
materials than the face-center-cubic gold crystals used in this project. This would help
increase the model’s effectiveness and its potential applications in a broader range of
scenarios.
Overall, this project represents a step forward in the field of material science and high-
lights the potential of using CNNs in the analysis of crystalline properties. With further
research and development, these models have the potential to would allow for a change
in how the TKD images are processed today.
AI approaches to index Kikuchi diffraction patterns acquired using scanning electron microscopy
51
==PAGE:55==
Bibliography
[1]
Eriks Markevics. “MasterThesis”. In: (29-01-2023). URL: https://github.com/AquarellFantasia/
MasterThesis/releases/tag/final.
[2]
E. Bouzyab; D. Goranc; J. Guyonab. Orientation mapping by transmission - SEM
with an on-axis detector. Vol. 161. Elsevier, 2016, pp. 17–22. URL: https://www.
sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0304399115300656.
[3]
“Electron Microscope”. In: (3-10-2022). URL: https://microscopewiki.com/electron-
microscope/.
[4]
Steven H. Simon. The Oxford Solid State Basics. 1st ed. Oxford University Press,
2013.
[5]
David B. Williams; C. Barry Carter. Transmission Electron Microscopy, A Textbook
for Materials Science. 2nd ed. Springer Science, 2009.
[6]
Tim Maitland; Scott Sitzman. “Electron Backscatter Diffraction (EBSD) Technique
and Materials Characterization Examples”. In: (). URL: https://www.researchgate.
net/publication/260403327_Electron_Backscatter_Diffraction_EBSD_Technique_
and_Materials_Characterization_Examples.
[7]
Hosch; William L. “quaternion”. In: (2022). URL: https : / / www . britannica . com /
science/quaternion.
[8]
“Image Histogram | Bright Image | Dark Image | Low Contrast Image | High Contrast
Image”. In: (25-01-2023). URL: https://www.gofastresearch.com/2020/05/Image-
Histogram.html.
[9]
“Thresholding”. In: (25-01-2023). URL: https://scikit-image.org/docs/stable/auto_
examples/applications/plot_thresholding.html.
[10]
Alberto Fernández Villán. Mastering OpenCV 4 with Python. Packt Publishing Ltd.,
2019.
[11]
“Prewitt Operator”. In: (25-01-2023). URL: https://www.tutorialspoint.com/dip/
prewitt_operator.htm.
[12]
Mark S. Nixon; Alberto S. Aguado. Feature extraction and image processing for
computer vision. Academic Press, 2012.
[13]
François Chollet. Deep Learning with Python. 2nd ed. Manning Publications, 2021.
[14]
dewangNautiyal. “ML | Underfitting and Overfitting”. In: (22-08-2022). URL: https:
//www.geeksforgeeks.org/underfitting-and-overfitting-in-machine-learning.
[15]
Sagar Sharma. “Activation Functions in Neural Networks”. In: (6-09-2017). URL:
https://towardsdatascience.com/activation-functions-neural-networks-1cbd9f8d91d6.
[16]
Hemayet Ahmed Chowdhury; Md. Azizul Haque Imon; Anisur Rahman et al. “A
Continuous Space Neural Language Model for Bengali Language”. In: 22nd Interna-
tional Conference on Computer and InformationTechnology (ICCIT) (2019), pp. 8–
20. URL: https://www.researchgate.net/publication/338621083_A_Continuous_
Space_Neural_Language_Model_for_Bengali_Language.
[17]
“Data Augmentation | How to use Deep Learning when you have Limited Data —
 Part 2”. In: (26-01-2023). URL: https://nanonets.com/blog/data-augmentation-how-
to-use-deep-learning-when-you-have-limited-data-part-2/.
[18]
Eriks Markevics. “0 - Original example notebook”. In: (26-01-2023). URL: https :
//github.com/AquarellFantasia/MasterThesis/blob/main/OrganizedNotebooks/0%20-
%20Original%20example%20notebook.ipynb.
52
AI approaches to index Kikuchi diffraction patterns acquired using scanning electron microscopy
==PAGE:56==
[19]
Jakob Schiøtz; Matthew Helmi; Leth Larsen and 6 others. “Reconstructing the exit
wave of 2D materials in high-resolution transmission electron microscopy using ma-
chine learning”. In: Ultramicroscopy (2023), pp. 8–20. URL: https://www.researchgate.
net/publication/338621083_A_Continuous_Space_Neural_Language_Model_for_
Bengali_Language.
[20]
Eriks Markevics. “9 - Loading images into memory”. In: (28-01-2023). URL: https:
//github.com/AquarellFantasia/MasterThesis/blob/main/OrganizedNotebooks/9%20-
%20Loading%20images%20into%20memory.ipynb.
[21]
Eriks Markevics. “Models”. In: (28-01-2023). URL: https://github.com/AquarellFantasia/
MasterThesis/blob/main/OrganizedNotebooks/Models.ipynb.
[22]
Eriks Markevics. “trainModelIter2”. In: (28-01-2023). URL: https : / / github . com /
AquarellFantasia/MasterThesis/blob/main/trainModelIter2.py.
[23]
Sashank J. Reddi; Satyen Kale; Sanjiv Kumar. “On the Convergence of Adam and
Beyond”. In: (2018).
AI approaches to index Kikuchi diffraction patterns acquired using scanning electron microscopy
53
==PAGE:57==
A
Appendix
A.1
Time distribution
This section describes the time spent on the project.
The predicted time for the literature review was one month, however, it took me a little
over 6 weeks to understand the concepts from solid-state physics enough to start the
project.
Then, the simulating part of the project came. 5-6 weeks were allocated for this task,
however, it took all the time until mid-December. The difficulties in finding the right pa-
rameters for simulation and trying to figure out the difference between the rotation in the
commercial software and in abTEM took more time than anticipated. Another key factor
was that images had to be preprocessed before the CNN trained them, which was not
planned and took several weeks. It took a long time since the simulated images were too
different from the experimental images, and I had to spend a lot of time trying to make
them more similar.
Generating images took 5 days since they had to have a lot of detail. So I started working
on CNN shortly before Christmas.
As the last part of the project, I started working on the CNN training, which continued all
the way until the end of the project.
I started writing the paper 3 weeks before the deadline, as planned.
Below, you can find the schedule written down before the project started. See the timetable
A.1 for more information
54
AI approaches to index Kikuchi diffraction patterns acquired using scanning electron microscopy
==PAGE:58==
Figure A.1: Timetable
AI approaches to index Kikuchi diffraction patterns acquired using scanning electron microscopy
55
