==PAGE:1==
DTU Wind
Alternatives to synchronous condensers
Jakob Frolund Svendsen
DTU Wind-M-0603
February 2023
==PAGE:2==
DTU Wind-M-0603 
February 2023
Project period: 
September 2022 - February 2023
ECTS: 30
Education: Master of Science
Supervisor(s):
Guangya Yang
Sujay Gosh
DTU Wind and Energy Systems
Jacob Lindberg
Ørsted
Remarks:
This report is submitted as partial 
fulfillment of the requirements for 
graduation in the above education at the 
Technical University of Denmark.
Technical University of Denmark 
Department of Wind and Energy 
Systems Frederiksborgvej 399
DK-4000 Roskilde
www.wind.dtu.dk
Author: Jakob Frolund Svendsen
Title:
Alternatives to synchronous condensers
DTU Wind and Energy Systems is a department of the 
Technical University of Denmark with a unique 
integration of research, education, innovation and 
public/private sector consulting in the field of wind and 
energy. Our activities develop new opportunities and 
technology for the global and Danish exploitation of 
wind and energy. Research focuses on key technical-
scientific fields, which are central for the development, 
innovation and use of wind energy and provides the 
basis for advanced education.
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
The world is transitioning to clean renewable energy sources, especially wind and solar pen-
etration have seen immense growth. These energy sources are converter-interfaced with the
grid, currently using grid-following (GFL) control. The grid strength is decreasing due to a
smaller share of synchronous generators in the power system. GFL converters do not provide
grid strength and have stability issues in weak grid conditions. A synchronous condenser
(SynCon) is the only viable option if grid strength is insufficient for coupling renewable
sources, which is associated with high operational costs. Grid-forming (GFM) control aims
at solving the weak grid stability issues and may allow converters to provide grid strength.
This thesis investigated the feasibility of using GFM STATCOM for grid strengthening
as an alternative to synchronous condensers. GFM control is commonly subdivided into
two subsystems, where the advantages and disadvantages have been compared for different
control variants through a literature review. This review was done with an emphasis on
grid-strengthening capabilities in the STATCOM application, where the GFM subsystems
of interest were found to be:
Power Synchronization Loop
• Synchronverter
• Power Synchronization Control
• Droop synchronization
Voltage Profile Management
• Q-V droop
• PI-control
• Alternating-Voltage Controller
The most suited candidate in each subsystem was then selected for implementation in the
GFM STATCOM model developed in PSCAD. The Power Synchronization Control was
selected on better Stability and disturbance robustness, while the Alternating-Voltage Con-
troller was selected based on transient response and parallel operation capability.
A total of three case studies were investigated with the GFM STATCOM model and com-
pared a non-invalidated SynCon model: STATCOM and SynCon characteristics, Grid strength
analysis, and Stabilization of HVDC link with GFM STATCOM.
The GFM STATCOM was generally found to have faster control dynamics, which allows for
faster re-synchronization following severe disturbance and faster reactive power compensa-
tion. It was proven to have some grid-forming capability since it operates as a voltage source
and can provide grid strength. This grid strength contribution was visually illustrated by
stabilizing a validated HVDC link model (Cigre B4-57) that would otherwise be unstable
from insufficient grid strength.
The SynCon was found to have a 3.6 times higher grid strength contribution than GFM
STATCOM, with the same MVA rating. This was additionally backed up by theory and
calculations. When normalizing the grid strength contribution with the units’ respective
acquisition costs, the GFM STATCOM and SynCon had a similar price-to-performance
ratio concerning grid strengthening.
A STATCOM is associated with significantly lower
losses and operational costs and was concluded as a feasible alternative to SynCon for grid
strengthening.
i
==PAGE:4==
February 2023
Acknowledgments
Thanks to my supervisors Guangya Yang, Jacob Lindberg, and Sujay Gosh. Your knowl-
edge, experience, and help-oriented attitude have been indispensable in shaping and finishing
this project.
I am grateful to Guangya and Sujay for the special course on PSCAD modeling before the
thesis and for modeling support throughout this project.
Jacob also deserves special gratitude for helping with the project’s direction, supplying the
SynCon model, and providing general uplifting support.
ii af 77
==PAGE:5==
February 2023
Contents
1
Introduction
1
2
Project definition
2
2.1
Objectives . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2.2
Project outline
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2.3
Methodology
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
3
Grid strength
4
3.1
Short-circuit ratio . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
3.2
Synchronous Condenser
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
3.3
Static Synchronous Compensator
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
3.4
Features for grid strengthening
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
3.5
Converter topology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3.5.1
2-level Converters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3.5.2
Modular Multilevel Converters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
4
Converter control characteristics
16
4.1
Grid following control . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
4.2
Grid forming control . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
5
GFM control variants
21
5.1
Power Synchronization Loop . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
5.1.1
Synchronverter
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
5.1.2
Power Synchronization Control
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
5.1.3
Droop synchronization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
5.2
Voltage profile management
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
5.2.1
Q-V Droop
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
5.2.2
PI-based control . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
5.2.3
Alternating-Voltage Controller . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
5.3
Advantages & disadvantages of GFM control variants . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
5.4
Selecting optimal GFM control variant . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
6
GFM STATCOM model
35
6.1
Justifying converter choice . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
6.2
Adapting existing converter model to STATCOM application . . . . . . . . .
35
6.3
Power Synchronization Control model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
6.4
Alternating-Voltage Controller model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
7
Tuning control loops
45
7.1
PSCAD Automation Library . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
8
Case studies
48
8.1
STATCOM and SynCon characteristics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
8.1.1
Load events . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
8.1.2
3 phase-to-ground fault event
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
8.1.3
Voltage angle and frequency disturbance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
iii af 77
==PAGE:6==
February 2023
8.2
Grid strength analysis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
8.2.1
Series impedance impact on grid strength . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
8.3
Stabilization of HVDC link with GFM STATCOM
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
60
9
Discussion
66
10 Conclusion
69
10.1 Suggestions for future work
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
70
A Appendix
75
A.1 Python script for tuning GFM STATCOM model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
75
iv af 77
==PAGE:7==
February 2023
1
Introduction
The ongoing climate crisis is humanity’s biggest issue in the 21st century, attributed to the
excessive carbon emissions since the industrial revolution. Electric power generation has
been under significant development in the past decades allowing the transition to clean,
renewable energy sources. Global electricity demand has simultaneously been rising since
economies are growing and digitization is progressing. A trend that is only foreseen to accel-
erate as electric vehicles become mainstream. This electrified world calls for high reliability
and resilience of the power grid infrastructure.
Solar and wind power are renewable energy sources that have seen increased penetration in
many countries. In Denmark, wind and solar accounted for 59.3% of the country’s annual
electricity consumption in 2022 [1]. While the climate crisis is the main driver behind this
transition, renewable energy sources are also competitive with conventional thermal power
plants [2]. This economic incentive will likely increase the speed of renewable transition and
allow more countries to participate.
While fossil-fueled generation has a negative impact on the planet, they play an important
role in the resilience of the power grid. The synchronous generators used in conventional
power plants are directly coupled with the grid and therefore contribute to grid strength and
inertia, ensuring voltage and frequency stability. Solar and wind energy are either partially
or fully converter-interfaced, which currently doesn’t have these benefits.
These power converters have extensively used grid-following (GFL) control, which works
very reliably in strong grids with stable voltage conditions. However, offshore wind power
plants (OWPPs) are placed according to wind conditions, which means remote locations
are not uncommon. If the interconnection is made at the edge of the power grid, the grid
strength may be insufficient to ensure stable operation of the GFL control. Providing grid
strengthening with a Synchronous condenser (SynCon) may be the only viable option in
these situations. A SynCon is associated with high acquisition costs and inefficient opera-
tion. The transition to a more converter-based renewable power system means the need for
grid strengthening will become an increasing problem. It is, therefore, desirable to find a
more efficient alternative to grid strengthening than the SynCon.
Static synchronous compensators (STATCOMs) have seen widespread adoption in reactive
power compensation and power factor correction, where a major benefit is their high effi-
ciency. They have so far been incapable of grid strengthening since they use GFL control,
which doesn’t work reliably in weak grid environments. Ongoing development is, however,
on a new grid-forming (GFM) control strategy, motivated by the benefits of synchronous
machines in the power system. One of the exciting promises of grid-forming control is the
ability to operate reliably in weak grid environments. A GFM STATCOM could potentially
replace the more expensive SynCon for grid strengthening.
A pilot project by the German TSO Amprion is set to commission a STATCOM with GFM
control in 2023 [3]. However, the capabilities and requirements are still under discussion,
meaning no standardization of grid-forming control exists. The benefits of this control strat-
egy have resulted in many research papers on the topic, each with its scope and control
1 af 77
==PAGE:8==
February 2023
variant. It can therefore be hard to navigate the issue of GFM control and the feasibility of
using it for grid strengthening.
2
Project definition
The main objective of this project is to investigate the feasibility of GFM STATCOM in pro-
viding effective grid strengthening similar to a SynCon, where the 1.1 pu current limitation
must be maintained for power converters.
2.1
Objectives
• State-of-the-art review of GFM converter technology and converter control modeling
What are the characteristics and behavior of a GFM converter?
Which different variants of GFM control exist and how do they compare?
• Obtain a model for a GFM STATCOM in PSCAD
A simulation model needs to be built based on the most suited GFM variant
• Asses the feasibility of grid stabilization from the GFM STATCOM model created
Can this model improve the short-circuit ratio?
Is it capable of stabilizing a traditional grid-following converter?
2.2
Project outline
Chapter 1: Introduction
Introduces the problem this thesis aims to analyze
Chapter 2: Project definition
Narrowing the scope of the project
Chapter 3: Grid strength
An introduction to grid strength stability challenges and units for countermeasures
Chapter 4: Converter control characteristics
This chapter explains the behavior of grid-following and grid-forming converter control
Chapter 5: GFM control variants
A literature review on the most common GFM control variants, where the best-suited candi-
date for GFM STATCOM application will be selected from the subsequent model.
Chapter 6: GFM STATCOM model
The most suited GFM control variant is implemented in a PSCAD model.
Chapter 7: Tuning control loops
A brute force approach is introduced for tuning through the PSCAD Automation Library.
2 af 77
==PAGE:9==
February 2023
Chapter 8: Case studies
Three case studies will examine the behavior of the GFM STATCOM model and compare its
grid strengthening capabilities with a SynCon.
Chapter 9: Discussion
Selected results are interpreted and limitations are discussed.
Chapter 10: Conclusion
Is grid strengthening from the GFM STATCOM a feasible alternative to a SynCon?
2.3
Methodology
The GFM control variants were examined through a literature review, based on several
relevant research papers on the topic. This allowed for comparing the strengths and weak-
nesses with emphasis on STATCOM application. A PSCAD model was created based on
the comparison. A combination of simulations and theory-based calculations was used to
generate the results. The grid-strengthening capabilities of the created model were tested
on a validated model to visualize and confirm the findings.
3 af 77
==PAGE:10==
February 2023
3
Grid strength
Power systems are subject to many different types of disturbances like load events, loss of
generation, faults, lightning, etc. It is essential that the system is capable of maintaining
voltage integrity following these events, which is required to ensure the stable operation of
connected units. Grid following converters are especially prone to instability in poor voltage
conditions, which will be explored in section 4.1. Voltage integrity is closely associated with
the complex and evolving concept of grid strength. A system with high grid strength is more
resilient to disturbances, where voltage waveforms are maintained or recover quickly [4].
3.1
Short-circuit ratio
The short-circuit ratio (SCR) is a metric used to develop an understanding of the reliability
implications and to quantify the risks associated with the integration of converters. In the
initial planning phase of an OWPP, the SCR serves as an initial screening measure to identify
weak areas of the grid, in relation to the size of the OWPP. The SCR will differ in each bus
of the power system and is used to assess if further investigation is needed [5] [6].
SCRPCC = SPCC
PWF
(1)
Equation 1 is used to calculate the SCR at the Point of Common Coupling (PCC), which
is the coupling point between the wind farm and the grid. The SCR is a ratio between the
short-circuit level SPCC at the PCC and the wind farm nominal capacity PWF. The short
circuit level is the product of the short-circuit current and nominal voltage at the PCC before
the wind farm is connected. Calculation of the SCR can further be simplified in equation 2,
where the VPCC and PWF are chosen as the per-unit base values. If a model of the system
is available, SPCC can alternatively be simulated through a 3-phase-to-ground fault [6].
SCRPCC =
V 2
P CC,pu
Zsys,pu
PWF,pu
=
1
Zsys,pu
(2)
In equation 2 the SCR is inversely proportional to the per-unit grid impedance, which is the
limiting factor of short-circuit current available in that location. The categorization of grid
strength based on SCR is classified by IEEE Std 1204-1997 in table 1, but other conventions
do also exist.
Grid strength classification
Interval
Very weak
1 ≤SCR < 2
Weak
2 ≤SCR < 3
Strong
3 ≤SCR
Table 1: Grid strength classification based on SCR [7].
In figure 1a a simplified overview of an OWPP is presented, which uses AC transmission
to couple with the grid PCC. At the off-shore aggregation bus, the OWPP requires an
SCRWPP ≥2 for stable operation. The export cables and transformers used for the grid
4 af 77
==PAGE:11==
February 2023
coupling do however increase the impedance, which in turn decreases the SCR at the off-
shore bus. In figure 1b the expected relation between the SCR at the PCC and OWPP
off-shore bus can be seen, where SCRPCC ≥3 is required to obtain SCRWPP ≥2. If the
grid strength is insufficient, the only viable option is typically to deploy a SynCon. This
may however change if grid strengthening from GFM STATCOM proves feasible [6].
Vsys
Zsys
PCC 
HV
MV
ZTL1
ZTL2
ZTL3
ZSC
VSynCon
VGFM STATCOM
or
VWPP
(a) Simplified overview
(b) Expected SCR
Figure 1: (a) This illustration shows a simplified overview of an OWPP using AC trans-
mission, where the impedances from transformers and cables have been aggregated into
lumped impedances. A SynCon or GFM STATCOM is deployed to increase grid strength.
(b) The expected relation between the SCR at the PCC and the off-shore bus before grid
strengthening is applied, caused by the increased impedance from the AC transmission [6].
• ZTL1, Aggregated WPP transformer and array cable impedance
• ZTL2, Aggregated Transformer and transmission line impedance
• ZTL3, Aggregated Transformer and transmission line impedance
• ZSC, Impedance of active shunt compensator
• Zsys, External grid impedance at PCC
Most OWPPs today use AC transmission, where a major advantage is the low station cost.
However, the losses in AC cables increase with voltage, capacitance, and length, which means
they are typically limited to 100-150 km. DC cables are cheaper and have lower losses over
long distances, which might justify the increased converter cost for HVDC transmission in
some scenarios [8].
HVDC transmission allows wind farms to be placed further from the shore, while the grid
strength assessment doesn’t have to account for offshore components. The SCR can therefore
be calculated and used at the PCC directly, where older LCC-HVDC technology required
a minimum SCR of 2 for stable operation. The newer VSC-HVDC technology can operate
in a very weak grid, but implementation in wind farms will likely require a weak grid at
least. This is due to the strict grid codes specified by Energinet in Denmark, where fault
ride-through capabilities for instance are required for all wind farms [9] [1].
5 af 77
==PAGE:12==
February 2023
3.2
Synchronous Condenser
A synchronous condenser (SynCon) is a synchronous machine operating without the prime
mover or mechanical load and falls under the category of active shunt compensators. By
controlling the field excitation it can be made to either produce or consume reactive power,
which is done automatically by the voltage regulator to maintain its output voltage. While
it has an inherent response to sudden voltage changes, excitation control takes 1-3 seconds to
change the reactive power output. The SynCon behaves as a relatively slow voltage source,
but it operates reliably in poor voltage conditions [10] [11].
Since a SynCon is directly coupled with the grid it also contributes to system inertia, which
helps stabilize the system frequency. The machine generally has great overloading capabil-
ities, since thermal constraints only limit it. Typical capacitive reactive power overloading
can be 200% for 10 seconds or 150% for 30 seconds. The reactive power output is however
not symmetric, where its inductive output is only ∼60% of its capacitive [11] [10].
The acquisition cost for a SynCon with a 50-70 MVA capacity is typically $15-$20 mil-
lion. Its normalized cost per MVA is therefore roughly $300,000, but might be lower for
larger machines. They are additionally associated with high operating costs from losses.
Depending on the type, no-load losses are typically around ∼1.2% and load losses around
∼2% of the SynCon capacity, which are supplied by the grid. A SynCon doesn’t experience
the same mechanical stresses as a synchronous generator and the maintenance intervals are
longer. The first maintenance with rotor inspection is normally planned after 12 years of
operation, which is more than static solutions. Due to higher operational costs, the SynCon
has largely been superseded by STATCOM for reactive power compensation [12] [11] [10] [13].
Recent applications of SynCon have therefore mostly been in grid strengthening since they
constitute a significant source of short-circuit current. This can be attributed to the small
sub-transient reactance in the machine, present during the first few voltage cycles of the
short circuit.
Depending on the type of synchronous machine, the sub-transient short-
circuit current is typically around ∼6 pu, but is decreased to ∼4 pu if connected through a
transformer [14] [6].
3.3
Static Synchronous Compensator
Static synchronous compensator (STATCOM) is also an active shunt compensator but be-
longs to the Flexible AC Transmission System (FACTS) devices, which are power-electronic
based. A STATCOM has dynamic reactive power control, making it capable of either absorb-
ing or generating reactive power. Unlike the SynCon its reactive power output is symmetric,
which means it can output the same amount of capacitive or inductive reactive power. The
basic topology is a Voltage Source Converter (VSC), where the term static indicates that it
contains no moving parts. The STATCOM, therefore, has a fast response time to control
action, where any desired reactive power output can be reached within two voltage cycles
[11] [15].
The normalized cost of STATCOMs with capacities between 100 - 400 MVA ranges in price
from $60,000 - $90,000 per MVA. It is associated with lower operational costs than SynCon,
6 af 77
==PAGE:13==
February 2023
attributed to lower losses and the lower maintenance required for static devices. No-load
losses er usually around ∼0.1-0.2%, while Load losses are generally around ∼1.5%. To ensure
the operation of the STATCOM, it is implemented with a supercapacitor for energy storage.
Supercapacitors are associated with low losses, high power density, and long service life,
which is ideal for STATCOM applications. The relatively low upfront and operational costs
have resulted in the widespread adoption of STATCOM in reactive power compensation and
power factor correction [16] [11] [15].
STATCOMs have historically not provided grid strength, a consequence of the GFL control
used. This is attributed to two inherent properties of the control, which will be explored
in detail in section 4.1. The GFL control essentially makes the STATCOM behave as a
current source, which makes it incapable of the instantaneous short-circuit current contri-
bution required. The control also shows stability issues under poor voltage conditions and
can not be deployed in weak grids, where grid strengthening is needed. This is however set
to change with the implementation of GFM control, enabling a short-circuit contribution
from the STATCOM. Regardless of the control scheme, semi-conductor switches don’t han-
dle overcurrent very well. To ensure hardware safety a 1.1 pu current limitation is therefore
implemented in the STATCOM, which will directly affect its grid strengthening capabilities.
[17].
Since the STATCOM is power-electric based it can be implemented using different converter
topologies. In section 3.5 the 2-level converter and Modular Multilevel Converters will be
explored.
3.4
Features for grid strengthening
The relevant features for grid strengthening from section 3.2 and 3.3 are summarized for the
GFM STATCOM and SynCon in table 2. The acquisition cost for SynCon per MVA and
the maximum fault current are roughly four times higher than the GFM STATCOM. They
are therefore expected to be comparable in terms of grid-strengthening capability when nor-
malizing with the acquisition cost. While the maintenance for the STATCOM is virtually
nonexistent, the SynCon doesn’t require significant maintenance either. It is essentially the
lower losses in the GFM STATCOM, that make it an attractable solution for grid strength-
ening.
Features
GFM STATCOM
SynCon
Upfront cost
$60,000 - $90,000 per MVA
∼$300,000 per MVA
No-Load losses
∼0.1-0.2%
∼1.2%
Load losses
∼1.5%
∼2%
Maintenance
Very low
Low
Maximum fault current
1.1 pu
∼4 pu
(w. transformer)
Table 2: This table summarizes relevant features of a GFM STATCOM and SynCon for grid
strengthening.
7 af 77
==PAGE:14==
February 2023
While the edge cases for losses are summarized in table 2, a typical loss characteristic as a
loading function is compared between SynCon and STATCOM in figure 2. The STATCOM
operates much more efficiently around smaller loading, while the difference becomes less
significant when operating at full capacity.
Figure 2: This illustration shows a typical loss characteristic of STATCOM and Synchronous
Condenser [11]
The losses listed in table 2 and shown in figure 2 don’t seem that significant. It is therefore
useful to put them into the context of electricity prices. The average spot price for electricity
in Denmark in the first half of 2022 was ∼$155/MWh, excluding all taxes and fees [18].
If grid strengthening for instance is required for the OWPP in figure 1a, either a 100 MVA
SynCon or a 400 MVA GFM STATCOM may be considered. The grid codes in Denmark
provided by Energinet specify that wind farms should be capable of reactive power compen-
sation, to maintain the voltage at PCC [19]. Therefore, the SynCon or GFM STATCOM
are likely to operate in the low load region of figure 2.
Since the STATCOM and SynCon capacities are 400 MVA and 100 MVA respectively, the
STATCOM will always operate in the low-loss region when dispatching an equivalent amount
of reactive power as the SynCon. If the grid for instance requires 100 MVAR capacitive re-
active power, the SynCon will supply 1 pu with 2% losses while the STATCOM will supply
0.25 pu with losses around 0.25%.
The operational cost for this scenario can be seen in table 3, where significant economic
savings are made by selecting the GFM STATCOM. The numbers presented here are based
on edge case scenarios, either no-load or full loading of the SynCon. The actual operational
costs due to losses are probably somewhere in between. It should also be noted that electricity
8 af 77
==PAGE:15==
February 2023
prices were higher than usual in the first half of 2022. It does however show the economic
significance of small loss percentages.
Yearly operational cost
GFM STATCOM
SynCon
Difference
No-Load Loss (0.1% / 1.2%)
∼$0.54M
∼$1.63M
∼$1.09M
No-Load Loss (0.2% / 1.2%)
∼$1.09M
∼$1.63M
∼$0.54M
100 MVAR Load Loss (0.25% / 2%)
∼$1.36M
∼$2.72M
∼$1.36M
Table 3: This table shows an operational cost comparison between a 100 MVA SynCon and
400 MVA GFM STATCOM with comparable grid strengthening capabilities. The numbers
are based on the losses reported in table 2 and figure 2 using an average spot price of
$155/MWh.
3.5
Converter topology
A voltage source converter (VSC) is based on power electronic switches like IGBTs, which
are controlled to create the AC-DC interface for many applications in the power system.
The two main VSC types are the Pulse Width Modulated (PWM) based VSC, like the 2-
level converter, and the modular multilevel converter (MMC). This section will present an
overview of both topologies [20].
3.5.1
2-level Converters
The topology of the three-phase 2-level VSC can be seen in figure 3, which consists of the
converter, conversion transformer, conversion reactor, ac filter and dc capacitor. The conver-
sion transformer and reactor link energy conversion between the ac and dc sides. One of the
two sides in the transformer is usually grounded, such as Yn/Y or Yn/∆, to eliminate the
influence of unbalanced conditions after faults. The conversion reactor increases the electri-
cal distance between the ac system and the grid, which is the basis for ac-side output phasor
control, to realize control of active and reactive power. In PWM converters the harmonic
content is generally high and an output filter is therefore used to generate a low-impedance
path for the high-frequency harmonic components [20].
The converter consists of six power electronic switches, where IGBTs are a popular choice
for efficiency and dynamic performance. An anti-parallel diode is connected to each switch,
which protects it against overvoltages when supplying an inductive load. Two series con-
nected capacitors are connected between the upper and lower dc bus, which helps stabilize
the voltage. They are grounded at their common connection point, which is the voltage
reference point of the converter. The upper and lower bus will have voltages +Udc/2 and
−Udc/2 respectively. Each phase consists of upper and lower bridge arms, which are turned
on and off by two switching groups. Each phase can thereby obtain the voltage magnitudes
between +Udc/2 and −Udc/2 [20].
9 af 77
==PAGE:16==
February 2023
Figure 3: Topology of the three-phase 2-level converter VSC [20]
The IGBT switching must be controlled with a PWM signal to synthesize the desired sinu-
soidal phase voltages from the dc-side. Since the 2-level converter has two voltage levels,
bipolar modulation is used. This implies that the two switches in a given phase arm will
receive a PWM signal complimentary to each other. Each phase has a reference modulation
wave ura, urb, and urc, which are typically sinusoidal and separated with 120o phase angle
to each other. A high-frequency triangle or saw-tooth wave uc is then selected as the carrier
wave [20].
Figure 4: PWM signal generation from modulation and carrier wave signals [20]
In figure 4 the modulation wave for each phase is compared with the carrier to produce the
PWM signal. Taking phase a as an example, when ura > ac the IGBT in the upper arm is
turned on, while the IGBT in the lower arm is turned off. The ac-side voltage will therefore
10 af 77
==PAGE:17==
February 2023
be +Udc/2. Similarly when ura < ac the IGBT in the upper arm is turned off and the
lower arm is turned on. The voltage ac-voltage, in this case, will therefore be −Udc/2. The
firing pulse changes state at every intersection between the ura and ac. When ura intersects
closer to the maximum and minimum value of the ac, the firing duration for the IGBTs will
be longer. The output voltage will therefore have more exposure time to the DC voltage,
increasing its magnitude. The result is a PWM signal with a rectangular pulse waveform,
which can control the gates of the IGBTs. This produces the PWM at the ac-side, filtered
to the desired sinusoidal phase voltages [20].
If a Fourier transform is done on the square-wave PWM signal, it becomes clear that many
high-frequency sinusoidal waves are required to generate a perfect square wave. This is es-
sentially the source of the harmonic content, resulting in degraded power quality. This can
however be reduced by a properly designed filter. The use of only 6 IGBTs does however
restrain voltage and power, making the 2-level converter unsuitable for MV and HV appli-
cations [21].
3.5.2
Modular Multilevel Converters
(a) MMC converter
(b) Half-bridge submodule
Figure 5: This illustration shows the topology in the MMC converter and associated sub-
module [20].
The topology of the Modular Multilevel Converter (MMC) can be seen in figure 5a. The con-
verter topology consists of three phase units, each with an upper and lower arm, connected
to the positive and negative dc-voltage bus respectively, and mutually joined at the phase
output. Each arm is created from N series-connected submodules (SM) and a phase reactor.
11 af 77
==PAGE:18==
February 2023
The desired output voltage can then be obtained by dynamically changing the on-states of
the submodules in each arm. The modularity of the SMs is what allows the MMC to be
used for HV applications. The withstand voltage of a single SM is comparable to the 2-level
converter, but the voltage stresses get distributed by series connecting them. By choosing a
suitable amount of SMs in each arm, the MMC converter can operate at any voltage level
in the power system [20].
In figure 5b, the basic topology of a half-bridge SM can be seen. While other topologies
are also used, the half-bridge requires fewer components and is, therefore a popular choice.
It consists of two IGBT switches T1 and T2, two anti-parallel diodes D1 and D2, and the
capacitor C. Additionally, uC is the capacitor voltage, usm is the output voltage at the SM
port, and ism is the current flowing through the SM, with the reference direction shown in
figure 5b. The series connection in each arm means that ism is the same for all SMs, but
their output voltages usm are summed. The dc-output voltage for each SM is supported by
the capacitor [20] [22].
MMC operation
Each SM has three main operating states, each with two operating modes according to the
current direction. This is illustrated in figure 6.
Figure 6: This illustration shows the operating states and modes for the SM [20]
12 af 77
==PAGE:19==
February 2023
(1) Operating state 1, ”blocking state”, turn off T1 and T2.
Depending on the current conditions, this state includes operating modes 1 and 4.
Mode 1: The current flows into SM port A. The path is through diode D1 and the
capacitor C, which is charged by the current. The SM generally operates in this mode
during startup.
Mode 4: The current flows out of SM port A. The path is through diode D2. The
capacitor C is bypassed, and the SM generally operates in this mode during abnormal
conditions like faults [20].
(2) Operating state 2, ”on state”, turn on T1 and turn off T2.
Depending on the current conditions, this state includes operating modes 2 and 5.
Mode 2: The current flows into SM port A. The path is through the diode D1 and
the capacitor C, which the current charges.
Mode 5: The current flows out of SM port A. The path is through IGBT T1 and the
capacitor C, which is discharging [20].
(3) Operating state 3, ”off state”, turn off T1 and turn on T2.
Depending on the current conditions, this state includes operating modes 3 and 6.
Mode 3: The current flows into SM port A. The path is only through IGBT T2, and
the capacitor C is bypassed.
Mode 6: The current flows out of SM port A. The path is only through diode T1, and
the capacitor C is also bypassed [20].
In table 4, the operating modes from figure 6 are summarized, where ”1” represents the
on-state and ”0” represents the off-state. The SM’s output voltage usm can essentially be
changed between 0 and uC by controlling the states of IGBT T1 and T2, along with facili-
tating charging and discharging of the capacitor C [20].
State
Mode
T1
T2
D1
D2
ism
usm
Capacitor
Blocking
1
0
0
1
0
>0
uC
Charge
Blocking
4
0
0
0
1
<0
0
Bypassed
On
2
1
0
0
0
>0
uC
Charge
On
5
0
0
1
0
<0
uC
Discharge
Off
3
0
1
0
0
>0
0
Bypassed
Off
6
0
0
0
1
<0
0
Bypassed
Table 4: This table summarizes the operating modes of the SM from figure 6 [20]
The working principle of a single phase unit in a 5-level MMC can be seen in figure 7, which
consists of four SMs in the upper and lower arm, respectively. During the operation of the
MMC, the constraints at the dc side and ac side should be satisfied synchronously.
(1) Guarantee constant dc voltage.
All three parallel connected phases support the dc
voltage. According to figure 7, the dc-voltage can be kept constant by turning on the
same number of SMs in each phase. The voltages in the upper and lower arm should
13 af 77
==PAGE:20==
February 2023
satisfy equation 3 (neglecting the voltage drops on the arm reactor) [20].
(2) Output three-phase sine voltages at the ac side. According to equation 3, the number
of SM on-states states in each phase unit must be the same. The desired sinusoidal
output voltages can be achieved by adjusting the number of on-states in the upper,
and lower arm [20].
upa + una = upb + unb = upc + unc = Udc
(3)
Figure 7: This illustration shows the operation of a single phase-unit of a five-level MMC
[20].
Stages
A
B
C
D
E
F
G
H
uva
0
Udc/4
Udc/2
Udc/4
0
−Udc/4
−Udc/2
−Udc/4
On-states number in the upper arm
2
1
0
1
2
3
4
3
On-states number in the lower arm
2
3
4
3
2
1
0
1
On-states number in the phase unit
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
Dc voltage
Udc
Udc
Udc
Udc
Udc
Udc
Udc
Udc
Table 5: This table shows the on-states required in the upper and lower arm for a five-level
MMC to create a full voltage cycle [20].
The voltage cycle in figure 7 requires eight stages, equivalent to the SMs in each phase unit.
These stages are marked by letters A to H in table 5, where the number of on-states required
in the upper and lower arm is shown. It is essentially possible to conclude three things from
figure 7 and table 5 [20].
(1) Each phase unit of the MMC is composed of 2N SMs, then each arm has N SMs, and
the MMC voltage levels are N + 1.
14 af 77
==PAGE:21==
February 2023
(2) The number of on-states in a phase unit must be N at any given time.
(3) The capacitor voltages should be balanced by a voltage balance control strategy to
ensure proper voltage levels at the ac-side output.
By increasing the number of SMs used in the MMC, the ac-output will approximate a
sinusoid closer. This will significantly reduce the harmonics created, and the need for an
output filter may even be alleviated entirely. An actual MMC implementation could easily
consist of hundreds of SMs in each arm [23] [20].
Nearest Level Control
To create the different voltage cycle stages in table 5, the number of on-states in the upper
and lower arm must be determined for each phase unit. This is done with Nearest Level
Control (NLC), which builds on equation 4 for a N + 1 level MMC. The sum of SM voltages
required to reach the phase a reference voltage ura is calculated for each stage, where the
round function determines the nearest integer. The on-states in each arm are thereby deter-
mined to create the Nearest Level of the desired phase a voltage uva output in each stage.
The same procedure is done for the other phases [20].
nup = N
2 −round
 
ura
Udc
N
!
ndown = N
2 + round
 
ura
Udc
N
!
(4)
Capacitor balancing
The voltage level in each SM depends on the capacitor voltage, which is determined by
u = 1/C
R
i dt. The capacitor’s voltage depends on the current’s historical value, which
means the voltage levels in each SM will be slightly different. Voltage balancing is intro-
duced, where the capacitor voltages are measured and arranged after the voltage level at
each stage. The state of each SM is then chosen based on table 6. It ensures that equal
voltage levels between the SMs are chosen for each stage while also controlling when the
capacitor should be charged [22].
Action required
iac < 0
iac > 0
On
Insert SM with the highest voltage
Insert SM with the lowest voltage
(Capacitor discharging)
(Capacitor charging)
Off
Bypass SM with the lowest voltage
Bypass SM with the highest voltage
Table 6: This table shows the control actions for capacitor balancing [22]
15 af 77
==PAGE:22==
February 2023
4
Converter control characteristics
In this section, the theory behind GFL and GFM converter control will be presented to reveal
their respective characteristics. A simplified overview of grid-following control will explain
its operation and weak grid stability implications. The different subsystems in the GFM
control will be examined, where the scope is narrowed to grid-strengthening applications.
This will enable the subsequent literature review on GFM control variants.
4.1
Grid following control
Most power converters used in the electrical grid today for STATCOM, PV, or wind power
systems integration operate with grid-following (GFL) control since this control concept is
well understood and works reliably in stiff grid conditions [24]. GFL converters operate
as a controlled current source with a large parallel impedance, which makes them suitable
for parallel operation with other grid-following converters. GFL converters can control grid
frequency and voltage magnitude, but the current source behavior requires that this be done
on a higher control level. Therefore, the frequency and voltage magnitude are controlled
through the active and reactive power references, P ∗and Q∗, that control the injected cur-
rent to realize these set points [25].
Power
control
Current
control
Sync.
unit
VPCC
Id
P-current 
setpoint
Q-current 
setpoint
Iq
ϑ
v'
NLC
firing pulse
generation
MMC
converter



Converter 
filter 
GFL control priciple 
PCC
I
Zg
Zc
Vg
GFL converter 
IPCC
IPCC
VPCC
VPCC
IPCC
IMMC
Figure 8: In this figure, a simplified overview of the GFL converter is given. In the blue box,
the GFL control principle is shown, which consists of an outer power control loop, an inner
current control loop, and a synchronization unit. The GFL converter behaves as a Norton
current source [17].
A simplified overview of the GFL converter is given in figure 8. The power control finds the
16 af 77
==PAGE:23==
February 2023
error between the measured power output of the converter, calculated from the three-phase
voltage VPCC and current IPCC and the reference power values P ∗and Q∗. This error is min-
imized by regulating the reference currents I∗
d and I∗
q , independently controlling active and
reactive power, respectively. The error between I∗
d and I∗
q and the dq-transformed phase cur-
rent is minimized in the inner current control loop through regulating phase and magnitude
of the reference voltage v′. The synchronization unit ensures correct dq-transformation of
voltages and currents, thereby providing synchronization with the grid. NLC then generates
the firing pulses for the MMC converter that creates the phase waveforms with magnitude
and phase relative to v′. The filter ensures power quality by removing harmonics. Lastly, it
is shown how the GFL converter can be approximated as a current source in parallel with
an impedance [17].
A GFL converter requires a dedicated synchronization unit to identify the grid voltage phase
angle and calculate the proper phase shift of the converter output current to inject the desired
amount of active and reactive power. The performance of the power converter is strongly
influenced by the accuracy of the estimated grid ac parameters, like voltage amplitude, fre-
quency, and phase angle. This is also the source of the grid-following term since the converter
must follow the grid frequency and voltage. It can not operate without a reference [17] [25].
The phase-locked loop (PLL) technology has extensively been used as the synchronization
unit for GFL converters since it works reliably in strong grids with balanced and stable volt-
age conditions. But PLLs have come under scrutiny in recent studies since it introduces some
stability problems. Not only does it decrease the stability of the grid-connected converter,
but the interactions between nearby synchronization units also become stronger in weak grid
scenarios. GFL converters can, therefore, only be deployed in strong grid conditions and are
not suitable for grid strengthening [25] [17].
GFL converters also show non-ideal behavior under grid events, like voltage perturbations
of the grid voltage. Because of its inherent current source nature, the instantaneous reaction
to a voltage perturbation is to maintain a constant output current phasor. A variation of
the converters output voltage phasor is therefore inevitable since the new current set point
can first be calculated after the new voltage is measured. A GFL converter will, therefore,
not instantaneously participate in things like short-circuit current injection during faults,
which provides grid strength and helps stabilize the grid voltage during faults. Generally,
there will always be a slight delay for a GFL converters response to voltage perturbations
[17] [26].
4.2
Grid forming control
The synchronous generator has served as the backbone of the power grid for over a cen-
tury. It is still readily used in nuclear, hydro, coal, and gas plants. It has many desirable
traits, such as active power-frequency regulation, reactive power-voltage regulation, inertia,
and damping. These characteristics help stabilize the grid when perturbations occur and
ensure a more robust system. The growing global demand for renewable energy decreases
synchronous generators as solar and wind generation is decoupled from the grid through
power converters. Synthesizing the behavior of a synchronous machine through a converter
is therefore desirable [27] [28].
17 af 77
==PAGE:24==
February 2023
Grid forming (GFM) control is a new converter control concept that seeks to improve on
some of the shortcomings of GFL control. The improvements most relevant for this project
are the ability to work reliably in a weak grid environment and increasing grid strength with
a contribution in fault current. GFM control is, however, still under development and has
therefore not seen widespread adoption yet. Unlike the tested and well-understood GFL con-
trol, there is no official definition of GFM control capabilities. Because of the past decade’s
rapid increase in renewable energy share and the associated challenges with grid strength,
the GFM concept has seen a lot of attention in industrial and academic communities [17].
This has led to many different GFM control proposals, which will be explored in chapter
5. The motivation for GFM control of converters can, however, unmistakably be seen in a
position paper written by the 4 German TSOs:
”the German TSOs see a compelling necessity that all new converters connected
to the transmission system (STATCOM, HVDC, directly connected generating
units) are exclusively applied with grid-forming control concepts.” [29]
Power
control
Voltage
control
Sync.
unit
IPCC
EP
Voltage
amplitude
Phase
ϑ
ϑ
v'
NLC
firing pulse
generation
MMC
converter



Converter 
filter 
GFM control priciple 
PCC
E
Zg
Zc
Vg
GFM converter 
VPCC
VPCC
IPCC
IPCC
VPCC
IMMC
Figure 9: This figure illustrates the simplified overview of a GFM converter. In the blue
box, the GFM control principle is shown, which consists of the power control loop and the
voltage power control loop. The synchronization unit is not required for the GFM control,
and the converter’s behavior is equivalent to a Th´evenin voltage source [17].
18 af 77
==PAGE:25==
February 2023
The outline of GFM converters is that their behavior emulates a voltage source in series with
a small impedance. This implies the converter controls its power injection by directly regu-
lating the voltage phasor at its terminals. This enables it to participate in the control grid
frequency and voltage magnitude, but it also provides a reference voltage for other nearby
loads or units. This is a major difference with the GFL control that requires a reference to
operate. This is also where the grid-forming term comes from since it forms the grid voltage
and frequency [17].
A simplified overview of the GFM converter can be seen in figure 9. The output power of
the converter is calculated from its three-phase output current IPCC and the voltage VPCC
at the PCC. The power control is usually divided into subsystems, which will be explored
in detail in figure 10. The power control output is a voltage angle ϑ and magnitude EP.
The phase angle ϑ provides synchronization with the grid, thereby alleviating the need for
external Sync. Unit. It can also control the flow of active power between the converter
and grid, which for STATCOM application can be used to facilitate charging of its energy
storage. Additionally, it can be used to implement frequency control, but this is beyond this
project’s scope. The voltage magnitude EP controls the converter’s reactive power output,
which it can be set to either produce or consume. The main objective is to keep the voltage
at the PCC stable and its rated value. The internal voltage parameters ϑ and EP are then
converted to a reference voltage phasor v′, which is used to generate the three-phase voltages
using the MMC converter. As can be seen, the GFM converter emulates the behavior of a
voltage source connected with a series impedance [17].
Frequency loop
Angle loop
Power Synchronization Loop
Voltage 
amplitude 
calculation 
Voltage Profile Management
External 
frequency
massurement
P, Q, and V
 calculation  
P
V
Q
IPCC
P*
ωref
Vref
Power control
Outer loop
Calculation
of
modulated 
signal
ω
Voltage control
𝜗
Inner loop
v'
GFM control princple 
VPCC
vPCC
iPCC
iMMC
EP
Figure 10: This illustration shows the subsystems included in the generalized GFM con-
trol principle, along with measurements and associated reference values. The focus in this
project will be on the subsystems marked by blue color; (I) The Angle loop in the Power
Synchronization Control, which handles synchronization. (II) The Voltage Profile Manage-
ment controls the converter’s reactive power output. The subsystems which are out of the
scope in this project include the Frequency loop and the inner loop Voltage control, marked
by red color [17].
19 af 77
==PAGE:26==
February 2023
In figure 10, a more detailed look into the GFM control principle can be seen. The Power
control can be divided into two subsystems, the Power Synchronization Control (PSL) and
the Voltage Profile Management. The PSL can be divided into two additional subsystems,
the Frequency loop and Angle loop. In some GFM control variants, these subsystems are
directly linked in the PSL, while others will not implement the Frequency loop. In these
cases, an external frequency measurement is used instead. This is, however, only relevant if
the frequency deviates from the nominal value, for instance, if frequency control should be
implemented. The Frequency loop is beyond this project’s scope. When referring to the PSL
throughout this project, will emphasize the Angle loop, which is responsible for providing
the angle ϑ for synchronization. Depending on the GFM variant, ϑ is generated from the
measurement of the converter active power output P, the active power reference P ∗, and the
angular frequency reference ωref [17].
The Voltage Profile Management is responsible for controlling the converter output of reac-
tive power, which is done through the internal voltage magnitude Ep. This output will be
controlled based on the measured three-phase RMS voltage V at the PCC, the grids nominal
reference voltage Vref, and the reactive power output Q. [17].
Converter control will usually deploy a transformation, converting the time-variant sinu-
soidal three-phase AC current and voltages into time-invariant DC equivalent values around
the nominal frequency. This makes the control signals much easier to handle and enables
PI controllers to be used. The dq-transformation is frequently used for this purpose, which
can convert three-phase values back and forth between the steady and synchronous rota-
tion reference frame. The final step in both GFL and GFM control is typically to inversely
dq-transform the modulated voltage phasor back into the three-phase reference signal v’.
The major difference is that GFM control provides the voltage angle ϑ for synchronized
dq-transformation, while it is provided to GFL control with a PLL. Since the final step in
the inner control loop is similar in GFL and GFM control, the Voltage control block in figure
10 will receive minimal attention in this project. It has therefore been marked by red color.
GFM control also implements a current control loop to limit the current, which will also not
be considered. [30] [31].
One of the GFM converter’s main benefits is when the grid is subject to a voltage pertur-
bation. Since it behaves as a voltage source behind a small series impedance, its internal
voltage phasor will initially be unaffected.
Instead, the current phasor will see a near-
immediate change, which can help improve system strength [17]. This is seen in faults where
the GFM converter can quickly inject reactive current to combat voltage decline. However,
it also means that current limitation must be built into the converter since semiconductor
devices typically have a 1.1 pu current limitation before the hardware is damaged [24].
Synthetic inertia and many other functionalities will likely be implemented before GFM
control becomes standardized. Grid strengthening is, however, the focus of this project.
20 af 77
==PAGE:27==
February 2023
5
GFM control variants
Since grid-forming control has seen an ever-increasing interest in recent years, various control
solutions have been proposed in research papers. In this section, three of the most common
GFM subsystems, marked by blue in figure 10, will be the subject of investigation. The
working principles behind the selected control concepts will be explained to evaluate their
advantages, disadvantages, and capabilities. Based on the analysis in each section, each
control strategy will be rated qualitatively on three chosen properties in relation to the
other controls. This aims to enable the reader to quickly get a sense of the strengths and
weaknesses between them. The goal is to find the most suitable control strategy for the
GFM STATCOM application.
5.1
Power Synchronization Loop
Synchronization has two aspects, initial coupling with the grid and maintaining it during
disturbances. The scope will be on maintained synchronization during disturbances since
synchronous generators commonly use a synchronization unit for the startup. The synchro-
nization mechanism of synchronous machines has been a great inspiration for the control
concepts in this section, which in some form will have their origin in these machines.
The synchronization loop will be rated on the following qualitative properties using a 3-star
system, where ⋆⋆⋆indicates the best solution and ⋆indicates the worst. The properties
are ranked after importance for the GFM STATCOM application.
1. Stability and disturbance robustness
2. Ease of implementation
3. Additional capabilities
In Stability and disturbance robustness, the overall stability in weak grids will be assessed,
along with how robust the control is to disturbances that can occur in these situations. The
Ease of implementation will be based on the complexity in control and how easy it would be
to implement in a simulation model. Additional capabilities covers features such as virtual
inertia and damping, which are desirable but not strictly necessary for grid strengthening.
5.1.1
Synchronverter
The Virtual Synchronous Machine (VSM) is a control strategy based on a mathematical
model of a synchronous machine to emulate its behavior. Many different versions of this
control approach exist, where the most prominent examples are VISMA, VSYNC, and Syn-
chronverter. These designs were initially proposed over a decade ago, and improvements have
created multiple versions with different capabilities and complexities. A self-synchronizing
version of the Synchronverter was chosen as the basis for this analysis, as it operates without
a PLL, making it ideal for STATCOM integration in weak grid environments [32] [24].
The synchronization in the Synchronverter is based on the swing equation 5, where J repre-
sents the moment of inertia, θm is the rotor angle, ω is the rotor speed, Df is the mechanical
friction, Te and Tm is the electrical and mechanical torque respectively. The swing equation
21 af 77
==PAGE:28==
February 2023
describes the motion of the rotor in a synchronous machine, which in this virtual implemen-
tation can be used to calculate the voltage angle ϑ [17].
J d2θm
dt2
= Tm −Te −Dfω
(5)
Second-order models like the swing equation yield excellent emulation during normal op-
erating conditions, but they also introduce swing behavior during faults, which can lead
to instability. With a stringent 1.1 pu current limit through semiconductor devices, some
protective measures will also have to be implemented to ensure this hardware limitation [24].
PIp
Dp
+
+
- +
1
ωn
1
Js
-
+
-
+
P*
P
ωref
ω
1
s
𝜗
Figure 11: This illustration shows the control block diagram for the Synchronverter. It is
built in the Laplace domain based on the swing equation in equation 5 to obtain the difference
in angular frequency ω caused by the power error. The voltage angle is then obtained using
equation 7. The Synchronverter control includes virtual inertia J and damping Dp, which
are controllable parameters [17].
In figure 11, the implementation of the swing equation in 5 is shown. Since the rotor is
emulated to rotate synchronously with the grid, the rotor angle θm is equal to the voltage
angle ϑ. The torques are converted to power through P = Tω, where a converter’s non-
existing mechanical power is replaced with a power set-point P ∗. Df represents the virtual
damping factor and the steady state droop.
The droop characteristics can be disabled
by introducing the PI-controller, which cancels its effect.
Since the active power droop
characteristic is undesirable for STATCOM applications, the PI controller will continuously
be enabled. The voltage angle estimated by the Synchronverter in equation 6, where PIp(s)
indicates the transfer function of the PI-controller [17] [33].
ϑ = 1
s
"
(P ∗−P)
1
Jωn
s +
Dp
J(1+DpPIp(s))
+ ωref
Dp
J(1+DpPIp(s))
s +
Dp
J(1+DpPIp(s))
#
(6)
22 af 77
==PAGE:29==
February 2023
The last step in figure 11 is to convert the angular velocity ω to the phase angle ϑ. This
is based on the relation between a synchronous machine’s stator and the dq-transformed
rotor circuit. The electric phase angle ϑ is defined as the angle by which the d-axis of the
rotor leads the stator windings phase a in the direction of rotation. The phase angle ϑ and
angular velocity ω of the rotor can thereby be described by equation 7, where integration in
the Laplace domain yields the final result in figure 11 [10].
ϑ = ωt
(7)
The ability to link small changes in frequency to changes in voltage angle is essential for
most GFM synchronization control loops.
The main advantage of the Synchronverter is its ability to simulate the precise dynamics of
a synchronous machine, which is especially useful for inertia imitation. It also means the
dynamics of the converter will be well-known to system operators. Damping and inertia
are parameters that can be controlled and tuned after system conditions, thereby removing
noise from the system. One disadvantage of the Synchronverter is the numerical instability
that the differential equation’s complexity might cause. This control is mainly designed for
inverters, and many of its advantages are not important for STATCOM applications. Tuning
of the control might also be more complicated than other solutions [27].
Based on these findings, the Synchronverter receives the following qualitative rating:
1. Stability and disturbance robustness ⋆⋆
2. Ease of implementation ⋆
3. Additional capabilities ⋆⋆⋆
5.1.2
Power Synchronization Control
Power-Synchronization control (PSC) also builds on the synchronization principles of syn-
chronous machines. Unlike the Synchronverter that directly implements the swing equations
for synchronization, PSC is based on the principle of transient power transfer. Imagine a
power system with several synchronous machines connected. When additional mechanical
power is supplied to one synchronous machine, its rotor will accelerate and advance its elec-
trical power angle compared to the system. This causes an increased electrical power transfer
to the system, accelerating the rotors of other connected synchronous machines. The power
angle between the initial synchronous machine and the remaining system will therefore reach
a steady state shortly, and synchronism is maintained. The electric power can be considered
the communication medium [34].
This synchronization mechanism is desirable in GFM converters, but implementing the
second-order swing equation directly does pose some problems.
The double integration
required to convert the torque (or electric power) to an angular position inherently yields a
poor phase margin. Therefore, only a single integration is implemented in the PSC control,
excluding the governor and rotor dynamics. Equation 8 is the fundamental equation behind
the power-synchronization used in the PSC, which is shown as a block diagram in figure 12
[34] [35].
23 af 77
==PAGE:30==
February 2023
ϑ = kip
Z
(P ∗−P)
(8)
The power error between the set point P ∗and the measured output power P is integrated
and multiplied with the controller gain kip to obtain the angle increment ϑ. Besides providing
synchronization, this is also the active power control, which in relation to the STATCOM
application is primarily relevant for recharging its energy storage [34] [31].
s
-
+
P*
P
kp
Figure 12: This illustration shows the power synchronization control loop. The phase angle
ϑ for synchronization is calculated from the power error, which is based on the transient
power transfer described in equation 8
Most GFM control strategies have not been designed for STATCOM application and stabil-
ity analysis in this area has therefore not been carried out. However, a thorough stability
analysis of PSC in a GFM STATCOM implementation exists. It proved the ability of the
STATCOM to operate in weak grid environments and also showed a positive system-wide
effect on the small-signal stability margin [31]
Another advantage of the PSC is its transient stability, where synchronism can be maintained
even during severe transient disturbances such as faults, loss of generation, or load swings.
It also has a self-synchronizing property after severe faults. Limitations on the current must
also be included here so as not to exceed the hardware limitations of the converter current.
[28] [36].
The PSC does also have some minor disadvantages. To ensure sufficient bandwidth and gain,
operation close to ϑ = ±π
2 is not recommended. The PSC does also exhibit non-minimum
phase behavior. Essentially when a power disturbance is detected, the controller will first
have an ”undershoot” before converging to its steady state value. This problem is solved by
selecting proper values for the integrator time constant [35].
Based on these findings, the Power Synchronization Control receives the following rating:
1. Stability and disturbance robustness ⋆⋆⋆
2. Ease of implementation ⋆⋆⋆
3. Additional capabilities ⋆
5.1.3
Droop synchronization
Droop speed control is a well-known concept that allows synchronous machines to operate
in parallel, so the overall load is shared among generators in proportion to their power rat-
ing. It allows the generators to participate in primary frequency control to ensure frequency
24 af 77
==PAGE:31==
February 2023
stability in the synchronous area [37].
This concept can also be extended to the synchronization of a GFM converter and is the
simplest implementation of this subsystem. The equation describing droop control is given
in equation 9. Here ω is the systems angular frequency, ωref is the nominal angular reference
frequency, P ∗and Pf is the active power set-point and filtered instantaneous active power
measurement, respectively [17] [28].
The filtered power measurement Pf is usually obtained with a low-pass filter, which can be
included for several reasons. Droop control has finite bandwidth since it’s based on the well-
known quasi-static steady-state relationship between voltage angle and power flow. The filter
removes measurement noise and can be tuned to remove specific harmonics from converters.
The filter time constant can also be chosen to reproduce certain inertial behavior, whereas
the droop coefficient Df is comparable to damping in a synchronous generator. [38] [39] [27].
ω = ωref + Df (P ∗−Pf)
(9)
A mismatch between the converter and grid voltage angle will result in active power transfer
between them. The measured active power can then be converted to a frequency deviation
∆ω in figure 13, with the droop coefficient Df. The set-point is P ∗= 0 for STATCOM
applications, so it only provides synchronization. While a typical P-ω droop would control
the active power output based on frequency measurements, droop synchronization essen-
tially works the opposite way. It calculates the frequency change based on the active power
measurement, which is then used to obtain ϑ.
ωref
Δω
Pmax
(Discharging)
(Charging)
P
ω
-Pmax
P*
P
Figure 13: This illustration shows the linear droop characteristic for STATCOM application,
where negative values are also included to facilitate discharging. ωref is the nominal 100π
rad/s angular frequency. A deviation between the set point P ∗and the measured power P
is converted to a angular frequency deviation ∆ω according to the droop coefficient Df.
25 af 77
==PAGE:32==
February 2023
The voltage angle increments ϑ are obtained by integrating equation 9, which can be seen in
equation 10. The block diagram for this equation in the Laplace domain is shown in figure
14.
ϑ =
Z
(ωref + Df (P ∗−P))
(10)
P*
P
ωref
+
-
Df
Filter Pf
+
+
ω
1
s
Figure 14: This illustration shows the block diagram of equation 10 in the Laplace domain,
with the low-pass filter for removing harmonics in the power measurement P. This frequency
deviation is used to calculate the change in voltage angle using equation 7 [17]
The droop synchronization described here does show similarities with the PSC in chapter
5.1.2 since they are both first-order systems. The inclusion of a low-pass filter does, however,
also decrease response time, which leads to worse transient performance. Since the droop is
a linear relation, the complex non-linear load can also lead to poor performance [27] [28].
Based on these findings, the droop synchronization control receives the following rating:
1. Stability and disturbance robustness ⋆⋆
2. Ease of implementation ⋆⋆⋆
3. Additional capabilities ⋆⋆
5.2
Voltage profile management
The main objective of STATCOM is to provide reactive power compensation to ensure sta-
ble voltage conditions, which is done through the voltage profile management subsystem.
The commonly adopted solutions can be divided into three main categories, droop control,
PI-based control, and combined control involving both droop and PI regulators [17].
The properties of each Voltage profile management will be rated in comparison to each other,
using the same qualitative 3-star system from section 5.1, where more stars are better. The
properties of interest in this control are.
1. Transient response
2. Parallel operation capability
3. Ease of implementation
26 af 77
==PAGE:33==
February 2023
Response time to control action is one of the main advantages of STATCOM over SynCon,
which is why Transient response is ranked highest on the property list. Since it’s not unusual
for the STATCOM to be deployed in proximity to other units participating in voltage man-
agement, the control must be capable of coordinating their reactive power, which is reflected
in Parallel operation capability. The last and least significant point, Ease of implementation,
gives an idea about the time and effort required to implement the control in a model.
5.2.1
Q-V Droop
The droop concept can also be introduced for reactive power and voltage, like the P-ω droop
from section 5.1.3. A variation in voltage magnitude results in a variation in output reactive
power following the droop characteristic. This can be seen in figure 15 and is described
mathematically in equation 11 [40] [41].
Ep = Vref + ∆V −Dq · Qf
(11)
The voltage reference Vref is the nominal voltage of the converter, which corresponds to
zero reactive power output Q = 0. If the measured voltage V at the PCC change from the
nominal voltage, it will cause a voltage difference ∆V = Vref −V . Since ∆V is added to
the internal voltage magnitude Ep, any change will also result in a change in reactive power
output.
A low-pass filter is typically used to obtain Qf, removing noise and harmonics
from the reactive power measurement Q, thereby reducing power oscillations. The filtered
reactive power measurement Qf is then multiplied with the droop coefficient Dq. This droop
term is then subtracted from Ep, causing the initial change to be less significant. This will
effectively limit the reactive power output and cause it to be dispatched in proportion to its
droop coefficient Dq [28] [40].
Q
V
Dq
Filter
Qf
+
-
Ep
ref
+
-
V
+
ΔV
Figure 15: This illustration shows the block diagram of the Q-V droop controller. It is based
on equation 11
The droop characteristic operates after a simple linear relation, where the droop coefficient
Dq determines the slope. In equation 12 the droop coefficient is calculated from the maximum
allowed voltage deviation and the STATCOMs reactive power output capacity. The reactive
power output of a STATCOM is symmetrical for both capacitive and inductive reactive
power [42].
27 af 77
==PAGE:34==
February 2023
Dq = Vmin −Vmax
Qmin −Qmax
(12)
The droop gain can be seen as a measure of how sensitive the control loop is to voltage
changes in the grid and determines its contribution to the reactive power regulation. A droop
of 5% means that a 5% change in voltage causes a 100% change in reactive power output.
For lower droop values, the STATCOM is forced to participate more in regulation, whereas
a higher droop would mean that voltage changes are ignored. The droop characteristic can
visually be illustrated in figure 16 [37] [28].
Qmax
(Capacitative)
(Inductive)
Q 
V
Vmin
-Qmax
Vmax
Vref
Figure 16: This illustration shows the Q-V relation of the droop. The y-axis represents
the measured voltage V at the PCC, while is the reactive power to be dispatched. The
STATCOM can provide an equal magnitude of inductive and capacitive reactive power,
where the operating range for the droop is determined by the STATCOMs capacity ±Qmax.
The voltage limits Vmin and Vmax determine the grid voltage level at which the full capacity of
reactive power should be supplied. Vref is the nominal voltage, where no support is needed.
Reactive power Q is dispatched according to the difference between the voltage measurement
V and the nominal value Vref [42].
The droop controller is simple and reliable and allows for the parallel operation of converters
and synchronous machines, which have them implemented. Compared to controllers with PI
regulators, it does not require tuning, which makes the implementation easier. The droop
controller does, however, also come with some drawbacks. The low-pass filter introduces
a small delay, which has a negative effect on its transient performance. Its simple linear
nature also poses a challenge for non-linear loads, where the current isn’t proportional to
the voltage, leading to poor power quality and slower dynamic response. Since higher line
impedance also means stronger coupling between active and reactive power, the droop con-
troller can not achieve balanced power distribution with parallel units in weak grids. Droop
control will also have a steady state error [41] [28].
Based on these findings, the Q-V control receives the following rating:
1. Transient response ⋆
2. Parallel operation capability ⋆⋆⋆
28 af 77
==PAGE:35==
February 2023
3. Ease of implementation ⋆⋆⋆
5.2.2
PI-based control
The Proportional Integral (PI) controller is a control loop with a feedback mechanism, widely
used in many applications requiring continuously modulated control. The control loop of a
PI-controller can be seen in figure 17. The error e is continuously calculated from a desired
set-point r and a measured state variable ym. The controller attempts to minimize the error
by adjusting its controller variable u based on the sum of a proportional and integral term
[43].
PI controller 
System
u
Disturbances
Measurement 
y
-
e
r
ym
+
Figure 17: This illustration shows the control loop of a PI controller. When a disturbance
is applied to the system, the PI controller will regulate its controlled variable u to eliminate
the error e between the system desired set-point r and the measured output of the system
ym [43].
In the proportional term, the output is proportional to the error e. In case of large dis-
turbances, the corrective response will also be large, while no corrective response will be
present if there is no error. An error between the set-point r and state variable y will be
present in steady-state if the proportional term is used alone since the control action will be
insignificant as the error approaches zero [43].
The error e is integrated over past values in the integral term. If for instance, a residual
error is present after proportional control, the integral term seeks to eliminate it by adding
a control effect due to the historic cumulative value of the error. When the proportional
control action diminishes as the error decreases, the integral control action will compensate
with a growing integral effect. When the error is eliminated the integral output will cease
to grow [43].
PI controllers require tuning their control loop, where its proportional and integral gain must
be adjusted to their optimal values for the desired control response. A basic requirement
is stability, where no unbound oscillations must be present at the output. However fast
transient response and stability are important but conflicting requirements, which makes
the tuning problem complicated. This is typically made worse in larger systems with several
29 af 77
==PAGE:36==
February 2023
controllers influencing each other. Stability is therefore a concern when PI controllers are
involved. [43].
Ep(s) = PIv(s)∆V + Vref
(13)
The Voltage profile management implemented with PI control is described mathematically
in equation 13 and visually in the block diagram in figure 18. The reference value Vref
is the nominal voltage of the system and will result in no reactive power compensation.
∆V = Vref −V is then found from the measured voltage V at the PCC, which is the feedback
described in figure 17. This error is then input to the PI-controller transfer function PIv(s),
where the controlled variable Ep is regulated to eliminate ∆V . [17].
-
+
Vref
V
PIv
Ep
V
+
+
ref
ΔV
Figure 18: This illustration shows the block diagram of PI-control for voltage profile man-
agement
Compared with the droop controller, the response of the PI controller is generally faster and
more precise, which is advantageous since a fast reactive response is usually required for
disturbances. While no steady-state error is generally also desired, it is disadvantageous in
voltage profile management for STATCOM application. Since no error is allowed between
the reference Vref and measured voltage V , it doesn’t have the reactive power-sharing capa-
bility. Additionally, if the STATCOM is used in a strong grid, where a small ∆V might be
present, it will output a lot of reactive power to combat it. This will however only change
the voltage a little bit but is associated with larger but unnecessary losses. This makes the
PI controller unsuitable for operation in a strong grid and in proximity to other units with
reactive power control. [40] [34].
Based on these findings, the PI controller receives the following qualitative rating:
1. Transient response ⋆⋆⋆
2. Parallel operation capability ⋆
3. Ease of implementation ⋆
5.2.3
Alternating-Voltage Controller
As discussed in section 5.2.1 and 5.2.2 both the droop and PI-controller had certain advan-
tages and disadvantages. The main desirable trait of the droop is its reactive power-sharing
ability, allowing the STATCOM to be operated in proximity to other units with reactive
power control. On the other hand, the precise controllable and potentially fast response
of the PI controller makes it indispensable. Based on these characteristics the droop and
PI-controller were therefore combined into the Alternating-Voltage Controller (AVC) [17]
[34].
30 af 77
==PAGE:37==
February 2023
Ep(s) = (Vref + ∆V −Dq · Q)PIq(s) + Vref
(14)
The equation describing the AVC can be seen in equation 14, which is then implemented in
the block diagram in figure 19. The voltage error ∆V is found between the reference Vref
and V . The measured reactive power Q is then multiplied with the droop coefficient Qq and
the term subtracted from ∆V . This is then input to the PI controller and the output is
summed with Vref, so nominal voltage conditions correspond to zero reactive power output.
The PI-controller will then adjust Ep to eliminate the voltage error, where the reactive power
droop will allow for some error margin to be present. An example could be a droop of 5%
with Df = 0.05, allowing for a voltage error of 5% [40] [31].
-
Q
Vref
+
V
PIq
Dq
Ep
+
+
Vref
+ -
ΔV
Figure 19: This illustration shows the Alternating-Voltage Controller, which includes both
droop and PI control [40] [31].
The AVC thereby eliminates most of the individual disadvantages from the droop control
in section 5.2.1 and the PI-controller in section 5.2.2. It offers the possibility of a fast and
precise transient response, where the power-sharing ability is also obtained from the droop.
Like the PI-controller the AVC has similar stability concerns, where careful tuning and test-
ing are required.
Based on these findings the AVC receives the following rating:
1. Transient response ⋆⋆⋆
2. Parallel operation capability ⋆⋆⋆
3. Ease of implementation ⋆
5.3
Advantages & disadvantages of GFM control variants
In section 5.1 and 5.2 the most relevant GFM control variants were explained. This section
seeks to summarize the findings in these chapters concerning their advantages and disad-
vantages. The aim is to find the most suitable candidates, for implementation in the GFM
STATCOM model to be created in this project. The findings for the Power Synchroniza-
tion Loop in section 5.1 are summarized in table 7, while the findings for Voltage Profile
management from section 5.2 are summarized in table 8.
31 af 77
==PAGE:38==
February 2023
Synchronverter
Advantages
• Second-order model emulated precise dy-
namics of synchronous generator
• Behavior is well-known to system operators
• Damping and virtual inertia are included and
adjustable parameters
Disadvantages
• Advantages listed are not requirements for
STATCOM implementation.
• Numerical instability might be caused by the
complexity of the differential equations in-
volved.
• PI-controller needed to cancel droop effect
required tuning.
• Lacks over-current protection.
Equation
ϑ = 1
s
"
(P ∗−P)
1
Jωn
s+
Dp
J(1+DpP Ip(s))
+ ωref
Dp
J(1+DpP Ip(s))
s+
Dp
J(1+DpP Ip(s))
#
Qualitative comparison
1. Stability and disturbance robustness ⋆⋆
2. Ease of implementation ⋆
3. Additional capabilities ⋆⋆⋆
Power Synchronization Control
Advantages
• First-order model emulates only the dynam-
ics responsible for synchronization in a syn-
chronous generator.
• Exhibits stability in weak grid environments.
• Tested for STATCOM implementation.
• Disturbance robustness.
• Self-synchronizing after faults.
Disadvantages
• Limited bandwidth with operation close to
ϑ = ±π
2 discouraged.
• Non-minimum phase behavior causing initial
undershoot before reaching steady state.
• Lacks over-current protection.
Equation
ϑ = kip
R
(P ∗−P)
Qualitative comparison
1. Stability and disturbance robustness ⋆⋆⋆
2. Ease of implementation ⋆⋆⋆
3. Additional capabilities ⋆
Droop synchronization
Advantages
• First-order model yields high numerical sta-
bility like PSC.
• Filter time constant can be chosen to repro-
duce inertial behavior.
• The droop coefficient provides damping to
the system.
Disadvantages
• Delayed transient response from the inclu-
sion of filter.
• Linear droop relation is unequipped to han-
dle non-linear loads.
• Lacks over-current protection.
Equation
ϑ =
R
(ωref + Df (P ∗−P))
Qualitative comparison
1. Stability and disturbance robustness ⋆⋆
2. Ease of implementation ⋆⋆⋆
3. Additional capabilities ⋆⋆
Table 7: Comparison chart for the Power Synchronization Loop. The qualitative comparison
quickly identifies strengths and weaknesses between the control variants, which are ranked
after importance for GFM STATCOM implementation. The best rating is ⋆⋆⋆
[17] [27] [28] [31] [34] [35]
32 af 77
==PAGE:39==
February 2023
Q-V droop
Advantages
• Simple and reliable
• Allows for parallel operation of multiple units
• Doesn’t require tuning
Disadvantages
• Slower transient performance caused by the
low-pass filter.
• Linear droop relation is unequipped to han-
dle non-linear loads.
• Higher line impedance in weak grids can
cause problems with reactive power sharing.
Equation
Ep = Vref + ∆V −Dq · Qf
Qualitative comparison
1. Transient response ⋆
2. Parallel operation capability ⋆⋆⋆
3. Ease of implementation ⋆⋆⋆
PI-control
Advantages
• Fast and precise transient response is possi-
ble.
• Can be tuned to work in many different sys-
tem conditions.
Disadvantages
• Fast transient response and stability are con-
flicting requirements.
• Tuning the PI control is complicated and
time-consuming.
• Improperly tuned PI controllers are unstable.
• Doesn’t have the reactive power-sharing ca-
pability
Equation
Ep(s) = PIv(s)∆V + Vref
Qualitative comparison
1. Transient response ⋆⋆⋆
2. Parallel operation capability ⋆
3. Ease of implementation ⋆
Alternating-Voltage Controller
Advantages
• Fast and precise transient response is possi-
ble.
• Allows for parallel operation of multiple units
• Can be tuned to work in many different sys-
tem conditions.
Disadvantages
• Fast transient response and stability are con-
flicting requirements.
• Tuning the PI control is complicated and
time-consuming.
• Improperly tuned PI controllers are unstable.
Equation
Ep(s) = (Vref + ∆V −Dq · Q)PIq(s) + Vref
Qualitative comparison
1. Transient response ⋆⋆⋆
2. Parallel operation capability ⋆⋆⋆
3. Ease of implementation ⋆
Table 8: Comparison chart for the Voltage Profile Management. The qualitative comparison
quickly identifies strengths and weaknesses between the control variants, which are ranked
after importance for GFM STATCOM implementation. The best rating is ⋆⋆⋆
[17] [28] [34] [37] [40] [41] [42] [43]
33 af 77
==PAGE:40==
February 2023
5.4
Selecting optimal GFM control variant
The main requirement for the GFM STATCOM model to be built is stability in weak grid en-
vironments to provide effective grid strengthening similar to SynCon. Additional features for
frequency stabilization, like virtual inertia, are generally also desirable, but they don’t drive
the necessity for these devices. While the Synchronverter offered behavior like a SynCon,
its additional complexity makes it undesirable when only synchronization is required. The
droop synchronization and the PSC were based on a first-order equation, making them more
numerically stable than the Synchronverter. However, the droop synchronization usually
deploys a low-pass filter for stable operation, which makes its transient response slower. A
slower transient response does have drawbacks in weak grids, where fast re-synchronization
after disturbances is essential. The 3-star system aimed at providing a comparison among
the controls analyzed. Since the PSC ranked highest in the most important features, it was
selected as the best synchronization mechanism for the GFM STATCOM model.
A similar qualitative comparison is made for voltage profile management. The Q-V droop
would be simple to implement and, more importantly, allow for the parallel operation of
several units with reactive power control. However, the Q-V droop also suffers from slower
transient performance caused by the low-pass filter used in most implementations. A fast re-
active response can improve the power quality and stability of the system, which is especially
needed in weak grids. PI-based control by itself essentially has close to opposite properties of
Q-V droop. It offers a fast and precise transient response, but its power-sharing capabilities
are non existing. Fortunately, the Alternating-Voltage Controller, using both Q-V droop
and PI-controller, includes some of the best features. It offers a fast and precise transient
response, while the droop allows for some error between measurement and set-point, making
the controller capable of power sharing. Tuning and the associated stability concerns are the
only major drawbacks of the AVC. These features were also seen in the 3-star qualitative
comparison, where the AVC scored highest in the most critical parameters. It was therefore
selected as the voltage management system for the GFM STATCOM model.
34 af 77
==PAGE:41==
February 2023
6
GFM STATCOM model
In section 5.3 the GFM control variants were compared with the focus on STATCOM ap-
plication. It was concluded that Power Synchronization Control from section 5.1.2 should
be used for synchronization and Alternating-Voltage Controller from section 5.2.3 should
be used for voltage profile management. In this section, the objective is to implement the
theory presented in section 5.1.2 and 5.2.3, into a working GFM STATCOM model that can
be used for grid strengthening.
6.1
Justifying converter choice
As discussed in section 3.5.2 semiconductor power switches can handle a limited over-voltage,
before they experience voltage breakdown. It is therefore required that STATCOMs use
MMC technology, as they are deployed in medium and high-voltage environments. The low
harmonic content in MMC converters is an additional benefit. Implementing these GFM
subsystems in an MMC converter poses some challenges. The complexity of the control and
hardware in MMC converters is very high, with many interconnected subsystems required
for its operation. Consequently, the matured GFL control structure can not easily be re-
placed. This is also reflected by the fact that no GFM STATCOM has been deployed yet.
This is however set to change in a pilot project by the German TSO Amprion, where a GFM
STATCOM is to be commissioned in the 380 kV network in 2023 [3].
Furthermore, the MMC models that are publicly available have been designed for HVDC
applications, where the control structures have been optimized for active power transfer
between the converters. This means additional complexity in converting it for use in the
STATCOM application. In practice, a 2-level converter will have power limitations and high
harmonic emissions. The power limitations can be ignored when modeling by changing the
IGBT parameters, and harmonic emission is not a focus in this investigation. While using
the MMC topology would be more accurate, its slower simulation time and challenges in
balancing capacitor voltages are a trade-off. Faster simulation time will become important
in section 7.1, where a python script will be used for tuning the model. The GFM subsystems
will therefore be implemented in a 2-level converter model, which should simplify the process.
6.2
Adapting existing converter model to STATCOM application
The Grid-Connected VSC with P control model from the PSCAD knowledge base is used as
the basis for the STATCOM model to be built, which can be seen in figure 20. This model
is essentially an inverter for PV applications, which uses traditional GFL control. It was
chosen based on the overall layout structure of the converter and since several things could
be reused. The reused things include the adjustable load, the 2-level converter, the reference
waveform, and PWM signal generation.
35 af 77
==PAGE:42==
February 2023
Figure 20: This illustration shows the overview of the Grid-Connected VSC with P control
model, which forms the basis for the GFM STATCOM model to be built. This model was
built as a PV inverter with GFL control [44]
The model presented in figure 20 had to be updated with reasonable parameter values
for STATCOM application, which are displayed in table 9. These values were based on a
validated STATCOM model and the nominal voltage and capacity were therefore selected
to be 33 kV and 112 MVAR respectively [31]. Some difficulties when modeling did however
result in some parameters being changed from the reference model. The updated model
overview, with the parameter values from table 9, can be seen in figure 21.
Parameter
Symbol
Value
Grid voltage (LL rms)
Vgrid
33 kV
Grid series impedance
Zgrid
0.0146∠80o Ω
Grid frequency
fgrid
50 Hz
Grid voltage angle
θgrid
0 rad
Rated STATCOM capacity
Sn
112 MVAR
Rated STATCOM active power
Pn
10 MW
Battery voltage
Vbat
66 kV
Battery capacity
cbat
0.65 Ah
DC capacitor
Cbat
7.8 uF
Transformer leakage inductance
Ll
2.3 mH
Transformer series resistance
Rl
19.4 mΩ
Filter inductance
Ls
1.55 mH
Inductor resistance
Rs
24.3 mΩ
Filter capacitance
Cs
59.5 mF
Capacitor resistance to ground
RCs
1 MΩ
Table 9: This table shows the main parameters involved in the GFM STATCOM model
36 af 77
==PAGE:43==
February 2023
Figure 21: This illustration shows the overview of the GFM STATCOM model with a battery,
where a DC capacitor is applied to stabilize the voltage. This model will be used for testing
the characteristics and robustness of the GFM STATCOM in section 8.1. It includes the
controllable load (capacitive or inductive), a three-phase short circuit, and controllability
over the grid’s frequency and voltage phase.
Inside the AC-DC converter box in figure 21 the converter topology is located, including the
2-level converter, filter, and transformer. This can be seen in figure 22. The 2-level converter
is made from 6 IGBT switches and 6 associated freewheeling diodes, as described in section
3.5.1. Since it was initially designed for lower voltages, their parameter values were updated
according to table 10.
Figure 22: This illustration shows the converter topology of the GFM STATCOM model.
The 2-level converter was reused from the previous model with the updated IGBT and diode
parameter values in table 10. The switching pulses are generated from the yellow Converter
Control box, which contains the GFM control built in this project. The LCL filter and
transformer parameters are given in table 9.
After the conversion is made the model initially had some instability problems, which mainly
were attributed to the filter and low voltage output. The filter was initially designed as a
LCL filter, but the capacitor acted like a sink for active power. It was therefore connected
with a sizeable 1MΩresistor to ground, the effect of the capacitance is therefore negligible.
The STATCOM parameter values in table 10 were designed for a native 33 kV output.
For unknown reasons this output only reached 3.3 kV and the transformer was therefore
deployed to ramp it up to the 33 kV grid. This was not seen as a significant concern, since
a transformer would be needed to analyze grid strengthening in an HV grid.
37 af 77
==PAGE:44==
February 2023
Figure 23: This illustration shows the reference waveform generation at the top, which is
based on θ and Ep from the PSC and AVC respectively. The dq-ABC block is used for
the inverse dq-transformation, using the voltage angle signal ωmt also supplied by the PSC.
This enables the reference signal to by synchronized with the grid. The PWM signal is then
generated for each of the 6 IGBT converter switches using the Interpolated Firing Pulse
blocks, as described in section 3.5.1.
In figure 23 the reference and PWM signal can be seen. The reference signal generation is
the modulation part of the GFL controller. As described in section 4.2 both GFL and GFM
use the inverse dq-transformation to convert controller outputs into three-phase reference
signals. These reference signals are then converted to a PWM signal for each of the IGBTs
in figure 22, controlling when they turn ON and OFF. This recreates the reference signals
with a 3.3 kV magnitude at the filter output. In section 4.2, it was reasoned that the Voltage
control block from figure 10 is out of the project’s scope since it easily could be adapted
from a GFL converter. This was confirmed by reusing the existing modulation and PWM
signal generation from the basis model, using the new GFM control signals.
38 af 77
==PAGE:45==
February 2023
Parameter
IGBT
Diode
Semiconductor ON resistance
0.5 mΩ
0.5 mΩ
Semiconductor OFF resistance
100 MΩ
100 MΩ
Forward Voltage Drop
0 kV
0 kV
Forward Breakover Voltage
100 kV
100 kV
Reverse Withstand Voltage
100 kV
100 kV
Table 10: This table shows the updated parameter values for the IGBT switches and the
associated free-wheeling diodes in figure 22.
This enables them to work for the higher
voltages in STATCOM application without breakdown. The default Forward Voltage Drop
in PSCAD is 0V, which can be considered an ideal case. The 0.5 mΩSemiconductor ON
resistance indicates that losses still are present.
6.3
Power Synchronization Control model
In section 5.4 the Power Synchronization Control was chosen as the most optimal synchro-
nization mechanism for the GFM STATCOM model. The theory presented in section 5.1.2
should therefore be implemented in a functional PSCAD model. The model should be capa-
ble of estimating the phase angle ϑ, which was used to create the reference signals in figure 23.
The voltage angle ϑ should be used in the inverse dq-transformation, to synchronize the
converter output with the grid. This value can however not be input directly into the DQ0-
ABC block, as PSCAD requires it to be incorporated in a signal. Therefore, a signal similar
to the PLL block in PSCAD should be generated using ϑ from the PSC.
Figure 24: This illustration shows the PSC and associated saw tooth wave generator built
in this project. The PSC estimates the voltage angle ϑ based on the active power error
between the measured output P and the reference P ∗. ϑ is subtracted from the 50 Hz saw
tooth wave, which creates a delay corresponding to the phase shift. ωmt is the saw tooth
signal containing the phase angle ϑ and can directly be used for synchronization
39 af 77
==PAGE:46==
February 2023
In figure 24, the design of the PSC can be seen connected to a saw tooth wave generator.
Instead of the pure integrator term suggested in figure 12, a PI-controller is used, as it im-
proves the synchronization time of the controller. The error is found between the PCC’s
active power measurement P and the reference value P ∗. Both values are in per-unit using
Pbase = 10 MW, while P ∗= 0 pu when used for synchronization only. The PI-controller
then adjusts ϑ to eliminate the error. The error is eliminated when the converter output
power P = 0 pu, implying that ϑ equals the grid angle.
To limit the active power output below P = 10 MW, the limit ϑ ≤±0.1 was observed
when operating at the maximum set-point. These limits were then set in the PI controller,
ensuring that the active power output stays within its nominal power rating.
The saw tooth wave generator is built from the Integrator block and the Input Level Com-
parator block, which can clear the integrator output to zero. The integrator inputs the
constant 2π and Ti = 0.02 is set as the internal integrator time constant. The Input Level
Comparator is set to clear the integrator when its input reaches 2π. This will create a 50
Hz saw tooth wave with magnitude 2π. The voltage angle ϑ from the PSC will then be
subtracted from the integrator output, which creates a delay in the output signal ωmt cor-
responding to the phase shift. ωmt can then be used in the DQ0-ABC block to generate the
reference signals.
0
5
10
Radians
PSCAD PLL block
Grid angle change
Baseline
0.95
1.00
1.05
1.10
1.15
1.20
Time [s]
0
5
10
Radians
mt from PSC
Grid angle change
Baseline
Phase signal for dq-transformation
Figure 25: This illustration shows the ωmt output of the PSC compared to a standard PLL
block in PSCAD, which is used for synchronization in the dq-transformation. This test is
carried out in a strong grid. In the Baseline scenario, the grid voltage angle is zero. In the
Grid angle change scenario, the grid voltage angle is initially zero but is changed abruptly
to 1 rad at t = 1s.
40 af 77
==PAGE:47==
February 2023
To better visualize the synchronization mechanism described for the PSC, its output ωmt
is compared to a standard PLL block from the PSCAD library in figure 25. As can be
seen, they both achieve delaying the Grid angle change scenario by
1
2π cycle, equivalent to
1
2π · 0.02 s = 3.2 ms, when the phase angle of the source is abruptly increased by 1 rad at
t = 1s.
From figure 25, it is clear that the PLL achieves the desired phase shift delay in roughly two
cycles, while it takes roughly six cycles for the PSC to do the same. This is because the
PLL is designed for strong grids, and its internal tuning doesn’t have the necessary stability
constraints for operation in weak grids. On the other hand, the PSC has been tuned for
operation in weak grids and is, therefore, much more robust to disturbances, which comes
at the cost of speed.
In figure 25, the PLL and PSC are set with an initial angle offset of zero. When comparing
their outputs at t = 1s, it is clear that the PSC signal has experienced some phase shift.
This is caused by the initial synchronization of the PSC, where ϑ is regulated to make P = 0
pu. This does, however, not influence synchronization since placing an offset in the PLL is
also allowed.
6.4
Alternating-Voltage Controller model
The Voltage Profile Management is the other GFM subsystem to be built, which should be
capable of dispatching reactive power based on voltage conditions at the PCC. In section
5.4, the AVC was chosen as the best candidate for this task, and the goal in this section is
to implement the theory presented in 5.2.3 into a functional model.
Figure 26: This illustration shows the implementation of the AVC in the PSCAD model.
The error between the voltage measurement V and reference Vref is found. The intersect
of the reactive output measurement Q on the 5% droop slope is then subtracted from the
voltage error. When the initial synchronization of the GFM STATCOM is complete, the
delayStart will enable the combined voltage error and droop signal to be regulated by the
PI controller. The inner voltage amplitude EP is then regulated when voltage conditions
change, while the droop allows for a 5% voltage error to be present.
The GFM STATCOM dispatches reactive power based on the difference between its output
voltage magnitude and the grid voltage magnitude at the PCC. If the STATCOM magnitude
41 af 77
==PAGE:48==
February 2023
is lower, it will act as a sink, consuming reactive power. This is equivalent to dispatching
inductive reactive power. If the STATCOM voltage magnitude is higher, it will produce
reactive power, equivalent to dispatching capacitive reactive power. As discussed in section
6.2, the output voltage magnitude is related to the inner voltage magnitude EP, which di-
rectly controls the STATCOM reactive power output.
In figure 26, the AVC model created in this project can be seen, which is built from the block
diagram in figure 19. The PSC from figure 24 need some time for the initial synchronization,
and the delayStart signal disables the AVC controller until this is achieved.
As discussed in section 4.2, semiconductors have a strict 1.1 pu current limit. This means the
power output of the GFM STATCOM can not exceed 12.2 MVA of its 112 MVA rated capac-
ity under nominal voltage conditions. Since the STATCOM model mainly outputs reactive
power, this limitation can be built into the internal voltage magnitude Ep of the AVC. The
limit was found by empirical testing by sweeping the value of EP until the output reached
Q = 112 MVA, allowing the nominal power Pn = 10 MW to be present simultaneously.
It was initially intended to have all parameters in figure 26 in per-unit since the carrier signal
also had ±1 in magnitude. However, Ep = 1 pu resulted in a reactive power output of almost
twice the STATCOM capacity, which is unrealistic. It was therefore decided to increase the
magnitude of the carrier to ±10, which means Ep must be ten times larger to obtain the
same reactive power output. While this allows for per-unit values to be input to the AVC,
Ep should not be considered per-unit.
In figure 27 a step function is set to vary EP to its maximum and minimum allowed value. The
maximum Qcap = 111.3 MVAR capacitive reactive power output is achieved when EP = 5.4,
while the maximum inductive reactive power is only Qind = 23 MVAR when EP = 0.1. The
physical meaning of this can also be seen 27, where the voltage peak of phase a is compared
between the STATCOM and grid. When the voltage magnitude of the STATCOM is higher
than the grid, capacitive reactive power is supplied from the STATCOM. When the voltage
magnitude of the STATCOM is lower than the grid, it will instead consume reactive power,
equivalent to dispatching inductive reactive power.
Figure 27 also shows an important limitation of the model compared with the theory. Sec-
tion 3.3 described how a STATCOM should be capable of supplying an equal amount of
capacitive and inductive reactive power, which is not the case here. Since a negative value of
EP leads to instability, this does, unfortunately, restrain the maximum value on Qind. When
the STATCOM supplies its maximum amount of capacitive reactive power Qcap, the voltage
waveform will additionally contain some noise.
The limits of EP from figure 27 were implemented into the PI-controllers upper and lower
limit, which constrains the output of the PI-controller. The limits had to account for the
constant Vref and were therefore found to be PImax = 5.4−1 = 4.4 and PImin = 1−0.1 = 0.9
respectively.
42 af 77
==PAGE:49==
February 2023
0
2
4
6
8
10
Time [s]
1
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
Magnitude
Internal voltage magnitude
EP
0
2
4
6
8
10
Time [s]
50
25
0
25
50
75
100
125
150
MVAR
STATCOM Reactive power output
Q
2.1040
2.1045
2.1050
2.1055
2.1060
Time [s]
26.60
26.65
26.70
26.75
26.80
26.85
26.90
26.95
27.00
kV
Voltage magnitude, +Qmax, capacitive
Va, STATCOM
Va, grid
6.1440
6.1445
6.1450
6.1455
6.1460
Time [s]
26.60
26.65
26.70
26.75
26.80
26.85
26.90
26.95
27.00
kV
Voltage magnitude, 
Qmax, inductive
Va, STATCOM
Va, grid
Relation between EP, Q and voltage magnitudes
Figure 27: This illustration shows the relation between the internal voltage angle EP mag-
nitude and the STATCOM model reactive power output Q. The reactive power output Q
is a physical consequence of the magnitude difference between the Va,STATCOM and Va,grid,
which is controlled through Ep. The PSC has ensured synchronization, which is indicated
by the alignment of Va,STATCOM and Va,grid waveform.
To give some insight into how Ep is used, the PWM signal generation for phase a can
be seen in figure 28. The three-phase reference waveforms are generated from the inverse
dq-transformation of ϑ and Ep, using ωmt to synchronize, thereby giving them the same mag-
nitude of Ep. The phase a reference waveform is then compared with the 3.6 kHz triangle
carrier wave with ±10 in magnitude. The PWM signal will then be generated as described
in section 3.5.1.
The significance of Ep can be seen in the bottom of figure 28. When the AVC determines
capacitive reactive power Qcap must be supplied to the grid, it increases the magnitude of
EP and thereby Va,ref. When Va,ref intersects closer to the carrier’s maximum and minimum
value, the firing duration for the IGBTs will be longer. The output voltage will therefore
have more exposure time to the higher DC voltage, increasing its magnitude. Since the
STATCOM output voltage is now higher than the grid voltage, Qcap is being delivered, as
seen in figure 27.
43 af 77
==PAGE:50==
February 2023
0
2
4
6
8
10
Time [s]
10.0
7.5
5.0
2.5
0.0
2.5
5.0
7.5
10.0
Magnitude
Overview
Carrier
Va, ref
6.15
6.16
6.17
6.18
6.19
Time [s]
0.20
0.15
0.10
0.05
0.00
0.05
0.10
0.15
0.20
Magnitude
Phase a reference, 
Qmax, inductive
Va, ref
2.1040
2.1045
2.1050
2.1055
2.1060
Time [s]
10.0
7.5
5.0
2.5
0.0
2.5
5.0
7.5
10.0
Magnitude
STATCOM +Q, max, capacitive
Carrier
Va, ref
6.1440
6.1445
6.1450
6.1455
6.1460
Time [s]
0.20
0.15
0.10
0.05
0.00
0.05
0.10
0.15
0.20
Magnitude
STATCOM 
Qmax, inductive
Carrier
Va, ref
PWM signal generation
Figure 28: This illustration shows the PWM signal generation in the STATCOM, generated
from the same scenario as figure 27. The phase a reference signal Va,ref is compared with
the Carrier wave to generate the PWM signal, which controls the firing pulse duration for
the IGBTs in the converter.
The performance of the AVC model in figure 26 did not meet all expectations from theory
since its inductive reactive output was limited. In section 2.2, the project outline stated that
the main objective of this project is to assess if a GFM STATCOM can provide effective
grid strengthening similar to a SynCon.
These grid strength assessments are based on
short circuit power, as described in detail in section 3.1. Since the AVC model in figure 26
dispatches capacitive reactive power under low voltage conditions, like short circuit tests, it
should show satisfactory performance for the grid strength assessment.
44 af 77
==PAGE:51==
February 2023
7
Tuning control loops
Both the implementation of the PSC in section 6.4 and AVC in section 6.4 used PI controllers
because of their faster transient response and adaptability to different conditions. The main
disadvantage of PI controllers is the tuning, which can be very time-consuming. This might
seem counterintuitive since tuning only requires determining two terms for each controller:
the proportional and integral gain. In a control system with several PI controllers, their
output might influence one another, which is the case for the PSC and AVC. Since many
applications use PI controllers, different methods exist for tuning, while more sophisticated
techniques are patented.
As discussed in section 5.2.2, the PI-controllers consist of the sum of a proportional and
integral term, which inputs the error between a measurement and the desired set point. In
the proportional term, the error is multiplied by the gain constant KP, while the integral
term integrates the error and multiplies it with the gain constant KI. The gain constants
can determine how much a contribution is desired from each term. The aim is to select the
optimal contribution from each so the steady state of the measurement reaches the set point
with the smallest transient period. Unfortunately, fast transient response and stability are
conflicting requirements [43] [45].
Selecting larger values for KP improves the response time but might also lead to overshoots
and oscillations, which can cause instability. Since the response is proportional to the error,
the reaction of the proportional term will be instantaneous. This is not the case for the
integral term, which output will be based on the historical error values. The proportional
gain KI is therefore also commonly expressed as a time constant, with the following relation
τi =
1
KI . This time constant describes how fast the integral term will respond to the error
and thereby determines the contribution from it. A smaller value of τI will therefore cause
the error to be eliminated faster but can also cause instability. [45].
7.1
PSCAD Automation Library
A significant advantage of using PSCAD for modeling is the Automation Library developed
in Python. This library enables complete controllability of the PSCAD program from a
python script, where the relevant features for this project include [46]:
• Starting PSCAD
• Loading workspaces, projects, and libraries
• Changing workspace and project settings
• Changing component parameters
• Running simulations
The Automatic Library allows an otherwise tedious process of simulating different combina-
tions of KP and τI for both PSC and AVC to be automated in a Python script. The script
created for the initial tuning can be seen in Appendix A.1.
At the beginning of the script, four-parameter vectors are listed KP,PSC, τI,PSC, KP,AV C
and τI,AV C, containing all the desired tuning parameter the script should test. Four nested
45 af 77
==PAGE:52==
February 2023
for-loop will then pass these parameters to the PSCAD model, so all combinations of these
parameters will be simulated.
The capacitive and inductive load events from figure 31
will then be applied for each simulation to clarify the results. Each simulation duration is
tsim = 18s with a time step resolution of tres = 200µs. The computer used for this project
took approximately 25 seconds to run and process the results for one simulation. KP,PSC,
τI,PSC, KP,AV C and τI,AV C was therefore set to contain six parameter values each since the
script would then take approximately 9 hours to run 1296 simulations, which could be done
over night.
After each simulation, the PSCAD model would export an output file containing all the
data in each output channel. This data was then imported into the python script, where
the active and reactive power output of the GFM STATCOM were extracted and plotted
together. Each of these plots would then be saved to the computer as a .png-file, where both
the file name and plot title would identify the parameters used in that simulation. Since the
computer’s ram would typically overflow after 600 simulations, the data and figures had to
be cleared in the script after each simulation.
Figure 29: This illustration shows a small sample of the pictures generated from the python
script. The blue and red curves show the active and reactive power, respectively, of GFM
STATCOM when the load events from figure 31 are applied.
After the script had been completed, 1296 pictures would then be located on the computer,
containing the GFM STATCOMs power data for all simulations. The analysis itself was
done with a rather basic approach. As shown in figure 29 all the pictures were then set to
Ekstra Large Icons, which gave a small preview of each in the folder. The best values for the
PSC are identified by the blue curve, which should not have too large spikes after the initial
synchronization since this would be associated with additional losses. The red curves identify
the best values for the AVC, which should show clean shapes when the loads are applied.
Although the picture previews are small, the best results can still easily be identified. From
46 af 77
==PAGE:53==
February 2023
the subset presented in figure 29, the best result is marked by the red square, though this
was not the final tuning parameters chosen. It has been demonstrated how a python-script
can be used as a ”brute-force” approach for tuning the PSC and AVC. This would otherwise
be difficult and time-consuming.
In the initial script, the parameter values had a large span with 0.1 ≤KP ≤10000 and
0.000001 ≤τI ≤1. This range was narrowed down in the subsequent script to the best
results. In the end, the PI controllers in the PSC and AVC were tuned to the values shown
in table 11 by visual inspection.
Controller
KP
τI
PSC
0.5
0.2
AVC
500
0.00001
Table 11: This table shows the final results for the tuning of the PI controllers in the PSC
and AVC of the GFM STATCOM model. The PSC is essentially set to be rather slow since
this increases stability while it is still able to keep synchronism. The AVC has to be tuned
rather fast to dispatch reactive power quickly. It should be noted that τI for the AVC is
small, giving a huge integral gain, but this gave the best results.
47 af 77
==PAGE:54==
February 2023
8
Case studies
In this section, the model created in section 6 will be tested and the results presented. The
testing will be divided into three main case studies. STATCOM and SynCon characteristics
in section 8.1, where the GFM control will be compared to theory and a SynCon. The
Grid strength analysis in section 8.2, where its ability in providing grid strengthening will be
tested and compared to a SynCon. Lastly, Stabilization of HVDC link with GFM STATCOM
in section 8.3 will asses if the model is capable of stabilizing a traditional GFL converter,
which aims at visualizing the grid strength problem.
8.1
STATCOM and SynCon characteristics
Before the GFM STATCOM model can be used for grid strengthening, it must first be thor-
oughly tested. This implies testing the PSC and AVC subsystems created in section 5.1.2
and 5.2.3, to verify that they work together for STATCOM application. The results will
then be compared with a 100 MVA SynCon model created in a previous master project [47]
and an Ideal Voltage source in the first event.
This section will not have an emphasis on grid-forming behavior, which instead will be
evaluated in section 8.2 and 8.3. The focus will instead be on the general advantages and
disadvantages between STATCOM and SynCon, which can be compared with the theory
presented in section 3.3 and 3.2. These tests are therefore carried out under strong grid
conditions, using the setup seen again in figure 30.
Figure 30: This illustration shows the overview of the GFM STATCOM model with a battery.
The grids series impedance is Zgrid = 0.0146∠80o Ωand can therefore be considered really
strong. The three-phase short circuit has 10 mΩresistance to the ground. The SynCon and
Ideal Voltage Source are tested separately, by replacing the GFM STATCOM model in the
picture.
8.1.1
Load events
Both the STATCOM and SynCon are designed with dynamic reactive power control, which
is used to improve the power quality of the grid. A purely inductive and capacitive reactive
load will subsequently be applied to the grid to test this capability. This test result can be
seen in figure 31. The SynCon and GFM STATCOM models are compared against an Ideal
Voltage source, connected through a 50 mΩresistance, to show near-ideal behavior.
48 af 77
==PAGE:55==
February 2023
28
30
32
34
36
38
40
42
44
46
Time [s]
20
0
20
40
60
80
Q [MVAR]
Reactive power provided during load events
Ideal Voltage Source
SynCon
GFM STATCOM
Figure 31: In this illustration shows the reactive power response, when a 30 MVAR capacitive
and 80 MVAR inductive load is subsequently applied to the grid.
The 112 MVA GFM
STATCOM model built in section 6 is compared against the 100 MVA SynCon model and
an Ideal voltage source connected through a 50 mΩresistance.
All cases was tested on
separate but identical grids. This illustrations shows generator convention, where capacitive
reactive power is positive and inductive reactive power is negative.
A total of four different load scenarios are shown in figure 31. The first event at t = 30s
shows the 30 MVAR purely capacitive load being connected and then disconnected after 2
seconds, where the unit’s dispatch inductive reactive power. The same is done with an 80
MVAR purely inductive load at t = 34s, where the unit’s dispatch capacitive reactive power.
At t = 40s the transition from the capacitive to the inductive load is shown and the reverse
scenario is then done at t = 42s.
Since the GFM STATCOM and SynCon are connected to a strong grid and with a reactive
power droop, they will never supply the full load. The Ideal Voltage Source is connected
through a much smaller impedance than the grid source, which means it will supply most of
the load.
Looking at figure 31 it is clear that the short transient period is the main advantage of
the GFM STATCOM. The SynCon shows an innate response to the load changes, but its
49 af 77
==PAGE:56==
February 2023
transient period is extended, causing it not to reach steady-state in the 2 seconds intervals.
However, the SynCon can deliver more capacitive reactive power than the STATCOM, even
though its capacity is smaller.
29.95
30.00
30.05
30.10
30.15
30.20
30.25
30.30
30.35
30.40
Time [s]
30
20
10
0
Q [MVAR]
Ideal Voltage Source
SynCon
GFM STATCOM
41.95
42.00
42.05
42.10
42.15
42.20
42.25
42.30
42.35
42.40
Time [s]
20
0
20
40
60
80
Q [MVAR]
Ideal Voltage Source
SynCon
GFM STATCOM
Transient period of load events
Figure 32: This illustration shows the transient period of two load events from figure 31.
The shape of the response of the Ideal voltage source and STATCOM are remarkably similar,
indicating some voltage source behavior of the STATCOM model.
To examine the reaction times involved in figure 31 in more detail, the transient events for
two load events are shown in 32. It was expected that the GFM STATCOM would have an
inherent instantaneous voltage source response, like the SynCon and Ideal voltage source.
Instead, a 1 - 1.5 voltage cycle delay can be seen, which can be attributed to the delay in the
measurement and control. The response time to control action for the GFM STATCOM and
Ideal voltage source is very similar and fast, as they both reach their steady state in roughly
2 voltage cycles. The SynCon is much slower to reach its steady state, which matches its
behavior as a relatively slow voltage source. The speed of the control actions matches well
with the theory presented in section 3.2 and 3.3. It can therefore be concluded that the
model created does show STATCOM behavior, nothing can however be concluded regarding
the grid-forming characteristics.
The fact that the GFM STATCOM doesn’t have an inherent voltage source response, can
likely be attributed to the very strong grid. Even though the reactive load is large, it will
50 af 77
==PAGE:57==
February 2023
not affect the voltage in a significant way. A case where the voltage is significantly changed
will therefore be examined in section 8.1.2, to examine the instantaneous response without
the control.
8.1.2
3 phase-to-ground fault event
In section 8.1 it was found that 3 - 3.5 voltage cycles were required before the GFM STAT-
COM model detected the load changes and the appropriate response reached steady-state.
Since this test is carried out in a really strong grid, the grid voltage is almost unaffected by
these load events. The 3 phase-to-ground fault event tests the immediate response, when
the grid voltage rapidly declines, before the control of the GFM STATCOM and SynCon
can take the appropriate measures. It also serves to show their respective re-synchronization
times after significant disturbances.
0
100
Q [MVAR]
Reactive power contribution
GFM STATCOM
SynCon
0
100
P [MW]
Active power contribution
GFM STATCOM
SynCon
29.9
30.0
30.1
30.2
30.3
30.4
30.5
Time [s]
20
30
V [kV]
RMS voltage at PCC
GFM STATCOM
SynCon
3 phase-to-ground fault event
Figure 33: This illustrates the behavior of GFM STATCOM and SynCon during a 3 phase-to-
ground fault applied at t = 30s and cleared after 50 ms. A 0.01 Ωfault resistance is included,
which creates a voltage divider with the 0.0146∠80o Ωgrid impedance. The voltage at the
PCC will therefore only decrease to roughly half its nominal value.
A 3 phase-to-ground fault is applied at the test setup in figure 30, where a realistic fault
clearing time of 50 ms or 2.5 voltage cycles is selected. In figure 33 the response of the
GFM STATCOM and SynCon are shown, along with the voltage decline caused by this
contingency. A voltage difference will therefore be present between the terminal of the com-
pensation device and the grid, causing a response of active and reactive power without the
51 af 77
==PAGE:58==
February 2023
involvement of the control [48].
As discussed in section 3.2 the SynCon is really efficient at providing short circuit current,
though its contribution will be limited by the voltage at the PCC in this scenario. Its imme-
diate response still provides much more active and reactive power than the GFM STATCOM.
The consequence of this can be seen in the voltage, which declines less for the SynCon.
In section 6.3 a 10 MW active power limit was placed in the PSC of the GFM STATCOM,
which seems to work as intended in figure 33. The GFM STATCOM and SynCon have an
active power contribution and achieve synchronization through active power transfer. This
means a re-synchronization process is required after the fault is cleared. In figure 25 the
PSC was tested on a major disturbance, where it took about 6 voltage cycles to synchronize.
This result matches well with the active power seen in figure 33, where the GFM STAT-
COM quickly reaches the steady state and thereby re-synchronization with the grid. This
process is a lot slower for the SynCon, because of its mechanical nature. Its relatively large
contribution in short circuit power during the fault caused a deceleration of the rotor. The
rotor must therefore be accelerated to synchronize it with the grid. This process takes time
and causes a negative value of active power since it must be supplied by the grid.
Another advantage of the STATCOM can be seen in the reactive power curve in figure 33.
When the fault is cleared and the voltage restored, the STATCOM takes a few voltage cycles
to return its reactive power output to zero. This is however not the case for the SynCon,
which continues providing reactive power. This can be attributed to its slow time to control
action, which in this case causes an undesired overshoot of the voltage. However, these
drawbacks for the SynCon might be a consequence of the non-validated model used.
0
20
40
Q [MVAR]
Reactive power contribution
GFM STATCOM
SynCon
29.995
30.000
30.005
30.010
30.015
30.020
Time [s]
0
25
50
75
P [MW]
Active power contribution
GFM STATCOM
SynCon
Transient period of 3 phase-to-ground fault event
Figure 34: This illustration shows the power from the GFM STATCOM and SynCon, during
the first voltage cycle of the fault at t = 30s.
52 af 77
==PAGE:59==
February 2023
In figure 34 the power contribution during the first voltage cycle of the fault can be seen. It
can be concluded that the GFM STATCOM has an innate response to voltage perturbations,
which is expected from a GFM converter. It is still not possible to conclude grid-forming
behavior, since the voltage reference from the PCC is still present.
Looking at the active power curve in figure 34, the inertial response of the SynCon becomes
clear. The grid is supplied with active power almost instantaneously. While the active power
response is almost four times lower for the GFM STATCOM, it also shows limited inertial
behavior, even though it was unintended.
8.1.3
Voltage angle and frequency disturbance
In section 8.1.2 the synchronization mechanism of the GFM STATCOM and SynCon were
briefly evaluated after the three-phase fault. This section will examine them during phase
angle and frequency spikes, which might be more common in power grids. It is of great
importance that synchronism can be maintained during these disturbances since they are
more common and significant in weak grid conditions. The active power output of the GFM
STATCOM and SynCon can be seen in figure 35, when these disturbances are applied.
40.0
42.5
45.0
47.5
50.0
52.5
55.0
57.5
60.0
Time [s]
150
100
50
0
50
P [MW]
Power oscillations during voltage angle and freqeuncy disturbance
SynCon
GFM STATCOM
Figure 35: This illustration shows the active power of the SynCon and GFM STATCOM
during two disturbances. A 0.1 radians voltage angle spike is applied from the grid source
at t = 40s for 0.1 seconds. A frequency spike of 0.1 Hz is then applied at t = 50s, also for
0.1 seconds
Voltage phase angle jumps can occur during faults if the X/R ratio of fault impedance is
different from the grid impedance [49]. In this test, the voltage angle spike is applied directly
from the source voltage, and the result can be seen at t = 40s in figure 35. Since the flow
53 af 77
==PAGE:60==
February 2023
of active power is determined from the difference in voltage angle, it is no surprise that the
voltage angle disturbance leads to a burst of active power being absorbed for both GFM
STATCOM and SynCon. The magnitude of the SynCon response is however much more
significant.
The frequency in a power system can be seen as the active power balance between production
and consumption. If a large load is suddenly disconnected it can therefore cause a spike in
frequency, since the excess power causes acceleration of connected synchronous machines.
The increase in system frequency is also applied directly at the grid source and the result
can be seen at t = 50s. The sudden change of frequency will also translate into a change
in voltage angle, which causes a burst of active power from the GFM STACOM, but more
significantly from the SynCon.
In both cases, it is clear that significant power oscillations are present after the disturbance
for the SynCon. This is because of the mechanical nature of the SynCon, which relies on
transient power transfer for synchronization. Here active power is transferred back and forth
with the grid, changing the rotational speed of the rotor until it matches the frequency of
the grid [50]. The synchronization in the GFM STATCOM changes the voltage angle back
and forth until no active power is measured, which can be done much faster.
8.2
Grid strength analysis
One of the main objectives of this project is to assess the feasibility of grid strengthen-
ing from GFM STATCOM. As described in section 3.1 the grid strength can be evaluated
through the SCR, which is partly found through the power delivered in a 3 phase-to-ground
fault. The short-circuit power can either be calculated with equation 1 or simulated with the
test setup in figure 36, where both methods will be used to validate the results. To simulate
the short circuit power for the GFM STATCOM, it must be capable of operating without
the reference voltage from the grid. This test will therefore also prove that the model shows
some grid-forming characteristics.
In section 8.3 the GFM STATCOM will attempt to stabilize a HVDC link using GFL control,
created by the Cigre B4-57 working group. The HVDC links nominal voltage and power,
VPCC = 380kV and PWF = 400MW, will therefore be used as the basis for the grid strength
analysis. The PSCAD diagram for the HVDC link can be seen in figure 39. The SynCon
model from section 8.1 will also be included in the analysis.
As discussed in section 3.2 the short-circuit power of a SynCon is typically evaluated on its
sub-transient reactance, which is only valid for a few voltage cycles. To also validate the
grid-forming capabilities of the STATCOM model, the short circuit duration was chosen to
be 5 seconds.
54 af 77
==PAGE:61==
February 2023
Figure 36: This illustration shows the test setup used to evaluate grid strength contribution
from the grid, SynCon, and GFM STATCOM model. The short circuit level from each test
subject will be measured after a 3-phase-to-ground fault is applied. Both SynCon and GFM
STATCOM are connected through a transformer and did not show insignificant interactions
when simulated together.
Calculating SCR contribution from GFM STATCOM and SynCon
In figure 19 the power output of the GFM STATCOM is limited to 110 % of its rated
capacity, which at nominal voltage places the 1.1 pu limit on its output current.
The
STATCOM theoretical contribution to the SCR is then calculated in eq. 15, based in its 112
MVA rated capacity.
SCRSTATCOM = Smax,STATCOM
PWF
= 1.1 · 112 MVA
400 MW
= 0.31
(15)
SynCons are a significant contributor to short circuit current, which initially is only limited
by its sub-transient reactance X′′
d and the transformer reactance. Depending on the type
of machine and transformer, the SynCon can usually deliver around ∼4 times its nominal
current in short-circuit current contribution, as described in table 2. The theoretical SCR
for the SynCon is calculated in equation 16.
SCRSynCon = Smax ,SynCon
PWF
= 4 · 100 MVA
400 MW
= 1
(16)
The results obtained in equation 15 and 16 show that the SynCon is more efficient at grid
strengthening than the GFM SynCon. The GFM STATCOM provides 3.2 times lower SCR
contribution with a 12% higher rated capacity.
55 af 77
==PAGE:62==
February 2023
Simulating SCR contribution from GFM STATCOM and SynCon
To find the SCR through simulation, the short circuit test setup in figure 36 was used. The
RMS current contribution from the GFM STATCOM and SynCon is then measured to find
their respective contributions. It is only the initial response that is important for the grid
strength assessment.
0.0
0.5
1.0
Current [kA]
Short circuit RMS current
SynCon
GFM STATCOM
39.0
39.5
40.0
40.5
41.0
41.5
42.0
Time [s]
0
200
400
Voltage [kV]
RMS voltage at PCC
VPCC
Short circuit contribution from VAR compensators
Figure 37: This illustration shows the short-circuit contribution of the GFM STATCOM and
SynCon model using the test-setup in figure 36. The first sub-transient current peak of the
SynCon shows ISynCon = 0.91 kA, while the current contribution from the GFM STATCOM
is ISTATCOM = 0.32 kA. During the short-circuit test the voltage at the PCC is zero.
In figure 37 the short circuit current for the STATCOM is found to be ISTATCOM = 0.32 kA.
Using the pre-fault voltage and wind farm nominal power, the SCR of the GFM STATCOM
is calculated in equation 17. This result shows only a 3% deviation from the theoretical
calculation in 15, which indicates that the limitation placed in the AVC is working.
SCRSTATCOM,sim = ISC · VPCC
PWF
= 0.32 kA · 380 kV
400 MW
= 0.3
(17)
Looking at figure 37 the initial short-circuit current for the SynCon is found to be ISynCon =
0.91 kA. Using the pre-fault voltage and wind farm nominal power, the SCR of the SynCon
is calculated in equation 18. The result obtained in the simulation has a 13% deviation from
the theoretical calculation in equation 16, which may be attributed to the use of three-phase
RMS measurement.
56 af 77
==PAGE:63==
February 2023
SCRSynCon,sim = ISC · VPCC
PWF
= 0.91 kA · 380 kV
400 MW
= 0.87
(18)
A similar assessment can be made for the simulated grid strengthening results. The GFM
STATCOM provides 2.9 times lower SCR contribution with a 12% higher rated capacity.
Grid forming behavior of STATCOM model
A short-circuit duration of 5 seconds is unnecessary for the grid strength assessment alone.
This test would however also prove some grid-forming behavior of the GFM STATCOM.
This can be seen in figure 37 during the short-circuit where VPCC = 0 V and no reference
is available from the grid. It can essentially be concluded that the GFM STATCOM model
forms its own voltage and frequency since it’s still operational during this event. The model
is therefore capable of grid strengthening, which a common GFL STATCOM would be
incapable of.
Grid strengthening with GFM STATCOM
From the calculations and simulation presented, it was clearly shown that the GFM STAT-
COM is capable of grid strengthening. The SynCon is however more efficient at providing
short-circuit current, which is clearly reflected in its grid-strengthening capabilities. Even
though the STATCOM model had a 12% higher capacity, it had a roughly three times lower
SCR contribution than the STATCOM.
To obtain more comparable results, the rated 112 MVA capacity of the STATCOM must be
normalized with the 100 MVA rated capacity of the SynCon. This is done in equation 19,
using the SCR obtained in equation 15.
SCRSTATCOM, nom = 0.31 · 100 MVA
112 MVA = 0.28
(19)
The grid strength contribution from the SynCon and GFM STATCOM is then compared in
equation 20. The SynCon provides 3.6 times more grid strengthening, compared to a GFM
STATCOM with the same capacity. The STATCOM would therefore need a rated capacity
of 357 MVA to obtain the same results, which matches the expectations discussed in section
2.
SCRSynCon
SCRSTATCOM, nom
=
1
0.28 = 3.57
(20)
8.2.1
Series impedance impact on grid strength
In section 8.3 the GFM STATCOM model created will attempt to stabilize a HVDC link
using GFL control, seen in figure 39. This analysis requires the SCR to be found for two
different grid strength scenarios. The first scenario will be a baseline, where the HVDC link
operates under normal conditions. The other scenario is where the grid strength increases,
making the HVDC link unstable. The SCR will both be calculated and simulated to validate
the results obtained.
57 af 77
==PAGE:64==
February 2023
Voltage sources are used in PSCAD to emulate the power grid, where their series-connected
impedance is the only limiting factor for their short-circuit current. In figure 36 a series
impedance is placed between the grids 380 kV voltage source and the PCC, which will be
adjusted to obtain the scenarios described above. The impedance emulates HV transmission
lines with the ratio X
R = 10.
Obtaining the SCR for the grid is made easier by defining the per-unit base values for the
current and impedance, as seen in equation 2. This is done in equation 21 and 22, based on
the nominal voltage at the PCC and the capacity of the wind farm.
Ibase =
PWF
√
3 · VPCC
=
400 MW
√
3 · 380 kV = 0.61 kA
(21)
Zbase = (VPCC)2
PWF
= (380 kV)2
400 MW = 361 Ω
(22)
In the first scenario, the grid impedance is set to Zsys1 = 4.8 + 48j Ω, where the HVDC link
in figure 39 is confirmed to show stable operation. The per-unit value is first found for the
impedance in equation 23. Using equation 2 the SCR is calculated for the baseline scenario
in equation 24.
Zsys1,pu = |Zsys1|
Zbase
= |4.8 + 48j| Ω
361 Ω
= 0.134 pu
(23)
SCRsys1,pu = (VPCC)2
Zsys1,pu
=
1
0.134 = 7.5
(24)
In the second scenario, the grid impedance increases to Zsys2 = 6.42 + 64.2j Ω.
When
the HVDC model in figure 39 is simulated with this grid impedance, the converter lost
synchronization after a few seconds due to insufficient grid strength. The per-unit value of
the grid impedance is first calculated in equation 25, which is used to calculate the equivalent
SCR in equation 26.
Zsys2,pu = |Zsys2|
Zbase
= |6.42 + 64.2j| Ω
361 Ω
= 0.18 pu
(25)
SCRsys2,pu = (VPCC)2
Zsys2,pu
=
1
0.18 = 5.6
(26)
Before comparing these results with the simulation, it is important to note that the grid
impedances are based on steady-state values.
They will therefore exclude any transient
behavior when the fault current rises through the mostly inductive line. To make the simu-
lation results comparable, it is also the steady-state value that will be used in this simulation.
The baseline scenario has the grid series impedance |Zsys1| = 0.13 pu. The steady-state
simulated current is then found to be Isys1 = 4.5 kA from figure 38. This current is first
converted to per-unit in equation 27. The SCR found in equation 28 is essentially just the
per-unit current, since the voltage and power base is unity.
58 af 77
==PAGE:65==
February 2023
39.98
40.00
40.02
40.04
40.06
40.08
40.10
Time [s]
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
RMS current [kA]
Short circuit contribution from the grid
|Zsys1, pu| = 0.13pu
|Zsys2, pu| = 0.18pu
Figure 38: This illustrations shows the short-circuit contribution of the grid, with two dif-
ferent series grid impedances. The short circuit current is measured in test-setup presented
in figure 36. The steady-state current are measured to Isys1 = 4.5 kA and Isys2 = 3.4 kA.
Isys1,pu = |Isys1|
Ibase
= 4.5 kA
0.61 kA = 7.4 pu
(27)
SCRsys1 = ISC,pu · VPCC,pu
PWF,pu
= ISC,pu = 7.4
(28)
The same is then done for the grid series impedance |Zsys1| = 0.18, where the steady-state
current from figure 38 is found to be Isys2 = 3.4 kA. The current is then converter to per-unit
in equation 29, which is equal to the SCR in equation 30.
Isys1,pu = |Isys2|
Ibase
= 3.4 kA
0.61 kA = 5.6 pu
(29)
SCRsys2 = ISC,pu = 5.6
(30)
The results obtained through simulation and calculations are comparable. The results in
this section can then be used as the basis for the final study case in section 8.3.
59 af 77
==PAGE:66==
February 2023
8.3
Stabilization of HVDC link with GFM STATCOM
In section 8.2 it was concluded that the GFM STATCOM model, does show some grid-
forming characteristics and can provide grid-strengthening equal to SCRSTATCOM = 0.31.
The effect of this is however hard to visualize and it was desirable to see if the model can
stabilize a traditional grid-following converter.
To create a realistic scenario a model of a HVDC link using an MMC converter with GFL
control is used, which can emulate an OWPP using HVDC transmission. The 2-terminal
HVDC model is created by Cigre Working Group B4-57 and is available from the PSCAD
knowledge base, where the PSCAD model overview can be seen in figure 39. The B4-57
model is designed mainly for offshore wind farm collection and integration and serves as a
publicly available benchmark for all HVDC systems studies. This model is validated and
made for benchmarking, giving more credibility to the results obtained in section 8.2 [23]
[51].
Figure 39: Illustration of the 2-terminal HVDC model from the Cigre Working Group B4-57
in PSCAD, where the GFM STATCOM model has also been integrated. The HVDC model
consists of an AC source emulating the wind farm (bus CmC1) and another AC source for
the power grid PCC (bus CmA1), where the GFM STATCOM model is connected. The grid
source is connected through the adjustable grid impedance, which enables the analysis of the
grid strength scenarios created in section 8.2. The grid source acts as a sink for the active
power produced at the wind farm. These two AC systems are interconnected by the HVDC
link, consisting of two MMC converters connected through a cable. The MMC is built with
200 half-bridge SMs in each arm, making it a 201-level MMC with low harmonic content.
The converters are based on GFL control, where a PLL is used for synchronization. The
base values for the SCR calculation in section 8.2.1 are based on the model nominal values
VPCC = 380kV and Pnom = 400 MW.
60 af 77
==PAGE:67==
February 2023
A total of four scenarios will be simulated using the setup in figure 39.
• Scenario (SCN) 1: SCR = 5.6, Without support
In this scenario insufficient grid strength causes instability in the HVDC, causing it to
lose synchronism with the grid. The GFM STATCOM model is not connected. The
grid series impedance in figure 39 is set to Zsys2,pu = 0.18 and the equivalent SCR is
calculated in equation 26.
• Scenario (SCN) 2: SCR = 5.6 + 0.3 from GFM STATCOM
This scenario uses the same Zsys2,pu = 0.18 grid impedance as scenario 2. The GFM
STATCOM is however connected to the PCC of the HVDC, increasing the system SCR
by 0.3.
• Scenario (SCN) 3: SCR = 7.5, Without support
This is the reference scenario, where the HVDC link operates under optimal conditions
and shows no stability issues. The GFM STATCOM model is not connected. The grid
series impedance in figure 39 is set to Zsys1,pu = 0.13 and the equivalent SCR is calcu-
lated in equation 24.
• Scenario (SCN) 4: SCR = 7.5 + 0.3 from GFM STATCOM
This scenario uses the same Zsys1,pu = 0.13 grid impedance as scenario 1. This scenario
serves as a reference for the GFM STATCOM when operating in a stable environment.
The effect of grid strength is visualized in figure 40, through simulations of scenarios 1-3
using the setup in figure 39. The initial phase until t = 0.7s is the startup of the MMC
converters in the HVDC link and will not receive attention.
Looking at scenario 1 in figure 40, it can be observed how the oscillations in both power and
voltage curves are unbounded and continuously increase. The consequence of the fluctuating
voltage can be seen at t = 3.9s, where the PLL can no longer track the voltage angle. The
HVDC link loses synchronism with the grid, causing huge uncontrolled power oscillations.
This instability occurs even though SCR = 5.6 is categorized as strong according to table 1.
This can likely be attributed to the fact that the model initially had a SCR = 71.8, which
is quite unrealistic in any real-world scenario. This indicates that grid strength analysis was
not the purpose of the HVDC model. The dq-control in the GFL converters has therefore
likely been tuned to prioritize speed over stability. This is however not of importance, since
the mechanism behind the instability is the same.
The grid strengthening capabilities of the GFM STATCOM can clearly be seen in scenario
2 when looking at figure 40. Although the power oscillations almost have twice the magni-
tude compared to the stable reference in scenario 3, they are contained. The grid strength
contribution from the GFM STATCOM provides enough damping to keep the HVDC link
operational. Since it contributes with additional SCRSTATCOM = 0.3 the equivalent grid
impedance at the PCC will also decrease. When the HVDC converter injects current with
oscillations, it will naturally translate to less significant voltage oscillations when the equiv-
alent grid impedance is more negligible.
61 af 77
==PAGE:68==
February 2023
250
0
250
500
P [MW]
Power in DC link
SCN 1: SCR = 5.6, Without supoort
SCN 2: SCR = 5.6 + 0.3 from GFM STATCOM
SCN 3: SCR = 7.5, Without support
0
1
2
3
4
5
Time [s]
350
375
400
425
Voltage [kV]
RMS voltage at PCC
SCN 1: SCR = 5.6, Without supoort
SCN 2: SCR = 5.6 + 0.3 from GFM STATCOM
SCN 3: SCR = 7.5, Without support
Grid strength effect on CIGRE HVDC model
Figure 40: This illustration shows the active power in the DC link and the RMS voltage at
the PCC, simulated from the Cigre HVDC model in figure 39. No disturbances were applied
during any of the scenarios.
In figure 41, the reactive power dispatched in scenarios 1, 2, and 4 can be seen. In scenario 1,
the CM-A1 grid-side converter dispatches an increasing amount of reactive power, creating
a positive feedback loop, contributing to the increasing voltage oscillations seen in figure 40.
In scenario 2, the CM-A1 converter hands over reactive power control entirely to the GFM
STATCOM, which contains significantly smaller oscillations. Since the voltage in scenario 3
is VPCC = 384kV , the GFM STATCOM will supply inductive reactive power to obtain the
380 kV target. The GFM STATCOM dispatches reactive power faster in scenario 2 than in
scenario 4, which speaks to the worse voltage conditions.
The cause of instability in the HVDC link can be understood by looking at figure 40 and 41.
In figure 40 the active power in the DC link will have small oscillations. This is true even
in scenario 3 and causes small fluctuations in the current delivered to the grid. In weaker
grids, the series impedance is high and the power fluctuations are translated into voltage
oscillations at the PCC.
62 af 77
==PAGE:69==
February 2023
200
100
0
100
Q [MVAR]
Reactive power provided by CM-A1 converter
SCN 1: SCR = 5.6, Without supoort
SCN 2: SCR = 5.6 + 0.3 from GFM STATCOM
SCN 4: SCR = 7.5 + 0.3 from GFM STATCOM
0
1
2
3
4
5
Time [s]
20
10
0
Q [MVAR]
Reactive power provided by GFM STATCOM
SCN 2: SCR = 5.6 + 0.3 from GFM STATCOM
SCN 4: SCR = 7.5 + 0.3 from GFM STATCOM
Grid strength effect on CIGRE HVDC model
Figure 41: This illustration shows the reactive power provided by the GFL grid-side (CM-
A1) converter and the GFM STATCOM.
Looking at figure 41 it can be observed how the grid-side converter dispatches reactive power
to combat the offset from the 380 kV target. Unfortunately, the response time to sudden
voltage changes is between 1.5 - 2 cycles in a GFL converter [11]. The reactive power is
therefore dispatched out of phase with the voltage oscillation, which causes them to be mag-
nified. These oscillations will therefore continue to grow until synchronism is lost and active
and reactive power is dispatched completely uncontrolled.
In figure 42, the loss of synchronism is shown in more detail. It can be seen that the reactive
power is dispatched almost entirely out of phase with the voltage oscillations. Instead of
suppressing the oscillations, they are made more significant for every cycle. At t = 3.9s,
the CM-A1 converter dispatches close to 100 MVAR capacitive reactive power, making the
voltage magnitude peak at 410 kV. This disturbance is too significant for the PLL, which
loses track of the voltage angle. Because of the massive power fluctuations after this event,
the PLL cannot re-synchronize the HVDC link.
63 af 77
==PAGE:70==
February 2023
360
380
400
420
Voltage [kV]
RMS voltage at PCC
SCN 1: SCR = 5.6, Without support
3.60
3.65
3.70
3.75
3.80
3.85
3.90
3.95
4.00
Time [s]
100
0
100
Q [MVAR]
Reactive power provided by CM-A1 converter
SCN 1: SCR = 5.6, Without support
Voltage ripple in CIGRE HVDC model
Figure 42: This illustration shows the moment synchronism is lost at t = 3.9s in scenario
1. At this moment, the reactive power difference from top to bottom of the oscillation is
around 130 MVAR, while the voltage difference is around 50 kV. The small offset from the
380 kV nominal value can additionally be seen.
When comparing the response of the GFL-controlled CM-A1 converter in figure 42 with the
GFM STATCOM in figure 43, the benefits of a grid-forming converter under poor voltage
conditions become apparent. The reactive power oscillations after 4 seconds are 100 times
smaller in the GFM STATCOM, resulting in over 10 times smaller voltage oscillations at
the PCC. The HVDC link can therefore remain synchronized when the GFM STATCOM is
connected.
In section 4.1 it was explained when a voltage perturbation occurs at the GFL converter,
its instantaneous reaction is to maintain its current phasor at constant output. A variation
in its voltage phasor is therefore inevitable. In section 4.2, it was described how the GFM
converter’s immediate response to a voltage perturbation, is to maintain its voltage phasor,
causing the current phasor to be changed instead. It is essentially a lot easier to change the
voltage phasor at the GFL converter compared to the GFM converter.
64 af 77
==PAGE:71==
February 2023
378
380
382
Voltage [kV]
RMS voltage at PCC
SCN 2: SCR = 5.6 + 0.3 from GFM STATCOM
3.60
3.65
3.70
3.75
3.80
3.85
3.90
3.95
4.00
Time [s]
19.0
18.5
18.0
17.5
17.0
Q [MVAR]
Reactive power provided by GFM STATCOM
SCN 2: SCR = 5.6 + 0.3 from GFM STATCOM
Voltage ripple in CIGRE HVDC model
Figure 43: This illustration shows the voltage and reactive power oscillations when the GFM
STATCOM is connected. At t = 3.9s, the reactive power difference from top to bottom of the
oscillation is around 1.3 MVAR, while the voltage difference is around 4 kV. By dispatches
around -18.3 MVAR, the voltage at the PCC is kept around its 380 kV nominal value.
This behavior of the GFL control is not ideal when voltage oscillations are present, which
constantly create positive and negative voltage perturbations around the nominal voltage.
The reactive power response for both GFL and GFM control in figure 42 and 43, respec-
tively, were not fast enough to counter the voltage oscillations. It is however only the GFL
converter that becomes unstable, since its voltage phasor is easier to change, creating a pos-
itive feedback loop, which then spirals out of control as seen in figure 42. The instability
of a GFL converter will however also be heavily influenced by the tuning of the control, as
discussed in section 5.2.2.
65 af 77
==PAGE:72==
February 2023
9
Discussion
The scope of this project has been to review GFM control concepts and assess the feasibil-
ity of grid strengthening from a GFM STATCOM, which could lower the operational costs
compared to SynCon.
Many different GFM control has been proposed in recent years. It was therefore necessary
to make a literature review on the topic, to find the best subsystems for GFM STATCOM
application. Only the most popular implementations were included in the final comparison
in table 7 and 8. It was difficult to find advantages and disadvantages if the control was only
described in a single research paper. It was therefore set as a requirement, that the control
structure should be well-known and examined in several research papers. While this limited
the literature review considerably, many different versions of each GFM control does also
exist. The same approach was used here, where the most common version was selected. The
sharp division between the Power Synchronization Loop and Voltage Profile Management
subsystems presented in this project, is furthermore not guaranteed in all implementations
found in the literature review. These cases were however more uncommon and would have
made the comparison very complicated.
In the end, the PSC was chosen as the best subsystem for synchronization, based on the
best rating in the stability and disturbance robustness criteria. The AVC was chosen as the
best subsystem for reactive power control, based on transient response and power sharing
capability.
The motivation in most research papers on GFM control is either weak grid stability benefits
or the implementation of virtual inertia into power converters. Many of the proposals try to
emulate synchronous generator characteristics. Their applications are therefore geared to-
wards inverters or HVDC converters, which couples an energy source to the grid. Additional
complexity is required to implement these features, which was unnecessary for the scope of
this project. While the increased complexity does have additional stability implications, it
should not be interpreted that they are incapable of stable and reliable operation. GFM
control is at an early stage and inertia is likely to be implemented when the control is more
mature.
The GFM STATCOM model was created based on the selected PSC and AVC subsystems.
While the PSC showed satisfactory performance in the model created, the AVC did have
several issues including; (I) Control parameters commonly use per-unit representation, but
this caused the controller to dispatch maximum reactive power continuously. The carrier
signal was therefore increased to ±10 magnitude, which may be considered bad practice. It
did however allow the AVC model illustration to display per-unit input values, the output
voltage magnitude was not in per-unit. (II) In contrast to the theory presented, the reac-
tive power output was not symmetric, where only a limited inductive reactive power could
be output. This happened since zero reactive power occurred for small values of Ep. (III)
The sinusoidal voltage waveform was not very clean when dispatching full-capacity reactive
power. This was however not seen in RMS measurements, since the digital multimeter in
PSCAD removes noise. The cause of these issues was not identified but could be attributed
to the filter, updating IGBT parameters beyond intended limits, limited knowledge of the
66 af 77
==PAGE:73==
February 2023
battery model, etc. While this model was capable of achieving the goal of this project, it did
create some uncertainty, which could be mitigated by comparing the results with the theory.
The PSC and AVC in the model used PI controllers, that also influence each other. This
could potentially make the tuning problem complicated and time-consuming. This project
introduced a brute force approach to the tuning problem, where the simulation was controlled
through the PSCAD Automation Library in python. Since this library allows complete con-
trollability of the program, tuning could essentially be half-automated. Each night 1296
simulations could be carried out, testing different combinations of PI-controller parameters
and exporting the results for later review. This reduced the time spent on tuning consid-
erably since the subsequent analysis of the results could then be done in a few minutes.
Tuning the AVC however resulted in a substantial integral gain, which might not seem cred-
ible. However, a more significant integral gain did result in instability and smaller values in
slow dynamics, even when the proportionate term was increased. While such a significant
integral gain is probably unrealistic in an actual implementation, it can likely be attributed
to the problems discussed regarding the AVC.
Tuning with the script was primarily made possible by using the simple 2-level converter com-
pared to the MMC converter since limited computing power was available for this project.
This approach proved valuable for this project since the publicly available tuning approaches
are limited. How practical this approach is in real-world applications is however unclear,
since more sophisticated tuning techniques also exist. It does however show how increased
computer power creates new methods of solving old problems
The GFM STATCOM was tested in three case studies alongside a SynCon model from a
previous master project. It should be noted that neither the GFM STATCOM nor SynCon
model is validated. The results obtained did however match pretty well with the expectation
from theory. The GFM STATCOM was found to have quick control actions, behavior as a
voltage source, and a limited short circuit contribution. The SynCon was found to behave
as a slow voltage source but had a major short-circuit current contribution. The most im-
portant finding was that the SynCon provides 3.6 times more SCR than a GFM STATCOM
with the same power rating.
The GFM STATCOM was however still capable of stabilizing a HVDC link with GFL con-
trol, which would otherwise be unstable due to insufficient grid strength. It was considered
a major achievement to visualize the effect of the grid strength contribution from the GFM
STATCOM since it is one of the project objectives. It should however be noted that the
instability in the HVDC link is heavily influenced by the tuning of its GFL control. This
was essentially why the HVDC link became unstable with an SCR = 5.6, categorized as
a strong grid according to table 1, since it was optimized for speed. As mentioned, fast
transient response and stability are important but conflicting requirements when tuning PI
controllers. But even if stability had been the focus when tuning the HVDC link, the GFM
STATCOM would likely still be able to stabilize it. This can be attributed to the way the test
was carried out. The grid strength was increased until the HVDC link became marginally
unstable, meaning even a small grid strength contribution would make it marginally stable.
The GFM STATCOM was proven to provide this grid strength contribution.
67 af 77
==PAGE:74==
February 2023
The feasibility of using the GFM STATCOM for grid strengthening does in the end come
down to price. In table 2 the upfront cost of a SynCon is around $300,000 per MVA, while
the STATCOM had a price tag in the range $60,000 - $90,000 per MVA depending on ca-
pacity. Based on these numbers the acquisition cost of a SynCon is between 3.3 and 5 times
higher per MVA. If these prices are normalized with the 3.6 times higher SCR that SynCon
provides, the upfront cost for grid strengthening is comparable between the two units.
The operational cost of a unit consists of the maintenance required and power losses. While
the maintenance is lower for STATCOM than SynCon, the losses make up most of the
operational costs. The calculations on the operational costs between a 100 MVA SynCon
and 400 MVA STATCOM were shown in table 3, which had comparable grid strengthening
capabilities. The operational cost saving by using the GFM STATCOM was in the range
between ∼$0.54M/year and ∼$1.36M/year, depending on the reactive power compensation
requirements. These results are however based on the generic efficiency characteristic of a
STATCOM and SynCon in figure 2 and the electricity price in an exceptionally expensive
period. These numbers should not be considered precise, but they indicate that a signifi-
cant sum of money can likely be saved during a wind farm’s lifetime. Grid strengthening
from GFM STATCOM does seem feasible, based on the results and information analyzed
throughout this project.
68 af 77
==PAGE:75==
February 2023
10
Conclusion
This project has created a state-of-the-art review of grid-forming (GFM) converter tech-
nology and control modeling and found GFM STATCOM as a feasible alternative for grid
strengthening.
It was found that MMC technology is a superior converter topology for use in MV and
HV applications, where its modularity enables it to be adapted for any power or voltage
requirements. It is also capable of approximating at synthesizing a close approximation of
the sinusoidal output voltage directly, resulting in significantly less harmonic content. Most
practical STATCOM and HVDC implementations will therefore use the MMC converter
topology.
GFM converters have behavior equivalent to a Th´evenin voltage source, which is forming
its own voltage and frequency. This makes GFM converter capable of operating in weak
grid environments, without needing reference voltage from the grid. This behavior handles
voltage oscillations well since it inherently tries to maintain the voltage phasor at the output
during disturbances. GFM control is still under development, and the required capabilities
have not yet been specified. Consequently, many different GFM control concepts exist, with
a subset of versions for most concepts.
The GFM control systems are commonly divided into the Power synchronization loop and
Voltage profile management subsystems, where the three most common concepts have been
examined in this project. This project has contributed to the field with a qualitative compar-
ison chart and an overview of the advantages and disadvantages of STATCOM application.
This chart was used to select the most optimal subsystem for the GFM STATCOM model
created in this project, enabling the comparison with a SynCon model. While neither of
these models was validated, the results correlated with the expectation from theory.
The Power synchronization loop subsystems examined in this project include the Synchron-
verter, Power Synchronization Control (PSC), and Droop synchronization. The PSC was
chosen as the best candidate for the GFM STATCOM application since it was described to
have better stability and disturbance robustness. The PSC implementation ensured opera-
tion during grid faults and reliable synchronization during disturbances. This alleviated the
need for synchronization through a phase-locked loop and enabled GFM STATCOM to pro-
vide short-circuit current. It also showed faster re-synchronization after major disturbances,
compared to the SynCon model.
The Voltage profile management subsystems examined includes the Q-V droop, PI-control,
and Alternating-Voltage Controller (AVC). The AVC was essentially a combined droop and
PI-controller, which eliminated the weakness of each of them individually. The AVC had a
fast transient response and power-sharing capability, making it well suited for STATCOM
application. The GFM STATCOM showed significantly faster dynamics in reactive power
compensation than the SynCon model.
The GFM STATCOM model provided short-circuit current up to 1.1 pu, which is the gen-
eral hardware limitation for power converters. The Short-circuit ratio (SCR) is a metric
69 af 77
==PAGE:76==
February 2023
quantifying the grid strength and is proportionate to the short-circuit current. The SynCon
provided a 3.6 times higher SCR contribution than the GFM STATCOM when normalizing
with the MVA rating. This is attributed to the SynCon large sub-transient current and the
results correlate with the expectations from theory. When normalizing both units’ SCR con-
tributions with their respective acquisition cost per MVA, their price-to-performance ratios
are similar for grid strengthening. The GFM STATCOM is however associated with signifi-
cantly lower losses, making it cheaper to operate than the SynCon. Grid strengthening with
GFM STATCOM is therefore feasible, based on the results obtained in this project.
10.1
Suggestions for future work
This project has examined GFM STATCOM as an alternative to synchronous condensers,
focusing on providing grid strengthening. GFM control is experiencing rapid development,
and real-world implementations will likely be seen soon. The narrow scope of this project
has only examined a single use case for GFM converters, future projects could look into
• Synthetic inertia is another great promise of GFM converters. Evaluate the pros, cons
and capabilities of GFM control concept with a focus on inertia for frequency stabi-
lization. Can a GFM converter provide an inertial response equivalent to synchronous
generators? Is an entirely converter-based power system possible?
• The GFM STATCOM model in this project used a 2-level converter topology, while real
STATCOM implementations use the MMC converters topology. What adaptations are
MMC converters required to replace GFL with GFM control successfully? Evaluate
pros, cons and capabilities between different MMC implementations, the investigation
could include: MMC topologies like delta, single-Y, double-Y (II) Sub-module topolo-
gies like half-bride and full-bridge (III) Modulation techniques like NLC, Multi-Carrier
PWM, NLC + PWM.
• GFM control will likely see integration in many different applications in the power
system. How mature are GFM WTGs and what are the challenges for implementing
GFM control on WTGs? Which options exist for current limitation in GFM Converters
and is overrating possible? Can a GFM STATCOM provide Fast Frequency Reserve
and black start? What would be the energy storage requirements?
70 af 77
==PAGE:77==
February 2023
References
[1] Energinet. 2022 sætter dansk rekord i vind og sol, 2022.
[2] IRENA. Majority of New Renewables Undercut Cheapest Fossil Fuel on Cost, 2021.
[3] Rasool HEYDARI, Hongyang ZHANG, Luca BESSEGATO, Jean-Philippe HASLER,
Gunnar INGESTROM, Andrea GRONDONA, Tobias HENNIG, Tobias NEUMANN,
Klaus VENNEMANN, Marc GROSSMANN, and Robert ZIERMANN. Grid-Forming
Control for STATCOMs – a Robust Solution for Networks with a High Share of
Converter-Based Resources. 2022.
[4] AEMO. Energy Explained: System Strength, 2020.
[5] NERC. Short-Circuit Modeling and System Strength. Technical report, 2018.
[6] Ørsted. Short circuit ratio screening in early project phases . 2021.
[7] IEEE. IEEE Guide for Planning DC Links Terminating at AC Locations Having Low
Short-Circuit Capacities. 1997.
[8] Athanasios Krontiris and Peter Sandeberg. HVDC technology for offshore wind is ma-
turing, 2018.
[9] entsoe. HVDC Links in System Operations. Technical report, 2019.
[10] Prabha Kundur. Power Systems Stability and Control. Indian edition edition, 2006.
[11] Sergey Kynev, Georg Pilz, and Heino Schmitt. Comparison of modern STATCOM and
synchronous condenser for power transmission systems. In 2016 IEEE Electrical Power
and Energy Conference, EPEC 2016. Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers
Inc., 12 2016.
[12] Lillian Patterson. Investigation into intervention mechanisms and system strength in
the national electricity market (ERP0070): Consultation paper . 2019.
[13] Christian Payerl. Introduction to ABB Synchronous Condensers - Q&A session, 2020.
[14] SINTEF Energi. Fault current contribution from DG. Technical report, 2016.
[15] Farhad Shahnia, Sumedha Rajakaruna, and Arindam Ghosh.
Static Compensators
(STATCOMs) in Power Systems. 2015.
[16] Foad H. Gandoman, Abdollah Ahmadi, Adel M. Sharaf, Pierluigi Siano, Josep Pou,
Branislav Hredzak, and Vassilios G. Agelidis. Review of FACTS technologies and ap-
plications for power quality in smart grids with renewable energy systems, 2018.
[17] Roberto Rosso, Xiongfei Wang, Marco Liserre, Xiaonan Lu, and Soenke Engelken. Grid-
Forming Converters: Control Approaches, Grid-Synchronization, and Future Trends—A
Review. IEEE Open Journal of Industry Applications, 2:93–109, 4 2021.
[18] Energistyrelsen. Elprisstatistik første halv˚ar 2022. Technical report, 2022.
71 af 77
==PAGE:78==
February 2023
[19] F Hansen, Iov, Anca Sørensen, Poul Ejnar Cutululis, and Nicolaos Antonio. Mapping
of grid faults and grid codes. Risø DTU - National Laboratory for Sustainable Energy,
2007.
[20] Bin Li and Jiawei He. Protection Principle and Technology of the VSC-Based DC Grid.
2020.
[21] Electrical guide 360.
What is Multilevel Inverter?
Types, Modulation Techniques,
Advantages & Disadvantages, 2022.
[22] Juan Carlos Garcia and Farid Mosallat. MMC- Technologies, 2015.
[23] B4-57 working group. CIGRE B4-57 working group developed models.
[24] Bahram Shakerighadi, Nicklas Johansson, Robert Eriksson, Pinaki Mitra, Alberto Bol-
zoni, Angel Clark, and Hans Peter Nee. An overview of stability challenges for power-
electronic-dominated power systems: The grid-forming approach, 2022.
[25] Joan Rocabert, Alvaro Luna, Frede Blaabjerg, and Pedro Rodr´ıguez. Control of power
converters in AC microgrids. IEEE Transactions on Power Electronics, 27(11):4734–
4749, 2012.
[26] Antony Johnson. GC0100-Fast Fault Current Injection, Fault Ride Through and Band-
ing. Technical report, 2017.
[27] Myada Shadoul, Razzaqul Ahshan, Rashid S. AlAbri, Abdullah Al-Badi, Mohammed
Albadi, and Mohsin Jamil. A Comprehensive Review on a Virtual-Synchronous Gener-
ator: Topologies, Control Orders and Techniques, Energy Storages, and Applications.
Energies, 15(22):8406, 11 2022.
[28] Teng Yuting, Deng Wei, Pei Wei, Li Yifeng, Ding Li, and Ye Hua. Review on grid-
forming converter control methods in high-proportion renewable energy power systems
Elsevier Enhanced Reader.
[29] 50hertz, AMprion, Tennet, and Transnet BW. NEED TO DEVELOP GRID-FORMING
STATCOM SYSTEMS. 2020.
[30] Jasim Farhood Sultani, Phd De, John A Gow, and Prof Errol Tez. MODELLING,
DESIGN AND IMPLEMENTATION OF D-Q CONTROL IN SINGLE-PHASE GRID-
CONNECTED INVERTERS FOR PHOTOVOLTAIC SYSTEMS USED IN DOMES-
TIC DWELLINGS. Technical report, 2013.
[31] Fangzhou Zhao, Xiongfei Wang, Zichao Zhou,  Lukasz Kocewiak, and Jan R. Svens-
son. Comparative study of battery-based STATCOM in grid-following and grid-forming
modes for stabilization of offshore wind power plant. Electric Power Systems Research,
212, 11 2022.
[32] L. Lu and N. A. Cutululis. Virtual synchronous machine control for wind turbines: A
review. In Journal of Physics: Conference Series, volume 1356. Institute of Physics
Publishing, 10 2019.
72 af 77
==PAGE:79==
February 2023
[33] Krishnakumar R. Vasudevan, Vigna K. Ramachandaramurthy, Thanikanti Sudhakar
Babu, and Aref Pouryekta. Synchronverter: A Comprehensive Review of Modifications,
Stability Assessment, Applications and Future Perspectives, 2020.
[34] Lidong Zhang, Lennart Harnefors, and Hans Peter Nee. Power-synchronization control
of grid-connected voltage-source converters.
IEEE Transactions on Power Systems,
25(2):809–820, 5 2010.
[35] Amir Sepehr, Mobina Pouresmaeil, Mojgan Hojabri, Frede Blaabjerg, and Edris Poures-
maeil. Improving Transient Stability of Power Synchronization Control for Weak Grid
Applications. In 2020 IEEE 21st Workshop on Control and Modeling for Power Elec-
tronics, COMPEL 2020. Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers Inc., 11 2020.
[36] Heng Wu and Xiongfei Wang.
Design-oriented transient stability analysis of grid-
connected converters with power synchronization control. IEEE Transactions on In-
dustrial Electronics, 66(8):6473–6482, 8 2019.
[37] Mattia Marinelli. Integration of wind power in the power system, 2021.
[38] Salvatore D’Arco and Jon Are Suul. Virtual synchronous machines - Classification of
implementations and analysis of equivalence to droop controllers for microgrids. In 2013
IEEE Grenoble Conference PowerTech, POWERTECH 2013, 2013.
[39] Philip J Hart, Austin Nelson, R.H. Lasseter, and T.M Jahns. Effect of Power Measure-
ment Filter Properties on CERTS Microgrid Control Performance. 2015.
[40] Mirza Nuhic and Guangya Yang. A Hybrid System Consisting of Synchronous Con-
denser and Battery - Enhanced Services for Weak Systems. In Proceedings of 2019
IEEE PES Innovative Smart Grid Technologies Europe, ISGT-Europe 2019. Institute
of Electrical and Electronics Engineers Inc., 9 2019.
[41] MAGDI S. MAHMOUD. MICROGRID. 2nd edition, 2017.
[42] T. B. Seane, R. Samikannu, and T. Bader. A review of modeling and simulation tools
for microgrids based on solar photovoltaics, 9 2022.
[43] Mattia Marinelli. PID controllers and application to a rotating body, 2022.
[44] PSCAD Knowledge Base. Grid-Connected VSC with P Control.
[45] Vance Vandoren. Understanding PID control and loop tuning fundamentals, 2016.
[46] PSCAD. Automation Library.
[47] Jacob Tobias Lindberg. Assessment of Smart HV Components for Resolving Stability
Challenges in Future Offshore Windfarm Grids. PhD thesis, DTU, 2021.
[48] Sinisa Zubic, Zoran Gajic, and Davor Kralj. Line Protection Operate Time: How Fast
Shall It Be? IEEE Access, 9:75608–75616, 2021.
73 af 77
==PAGE:80==
February 2023
[49] Mads Graungaard Taul, Xiongfei Wang, Pooya Davari, and Frede Blaabjerg. Robust
Fault Ride through of Converter-Based Generation during Severe Faults with Phase
Jumps. In IEEE Transactions on Industry Applications, volume 56, pages 570–583.
Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers Inc., 1 2020.
[50] Lidong Zhang, Lennart Harnefors, and Hans Peter Nee. Power-synchronization control
of grid-connected voltage-source converters.
IEEE Transactions on Power Systems,
25(2):809–820, 5 2010.
[51] Cigre B4-57 Working Group. Title of the Group: DC grid benchmark models for system
studies Scope, deliverables and proposed time schedule of the Group : Background.
Technical report.
74 af 77
==PAGE:81==
February 2023
Appendix A
Appendix
A.1
Python script for tuning GFM STATCOM model
1
2 #%% Import
libraries
and open
PSCAD
program
3
4 # Import
required
libraries
5 import mhi.pscad
# PSCAD
Automation
Library
6 import
numpy as np # Math
library
7 import
matplotlib.pyplot as plt # Plotting
library
8 import gc # Garbage
collector
interface
library
9
10 # Launch
PSCAD
program
11 pscad = mhi.pscad.launch ()
12
13 # Load
workspace
14 pscad.load(r"C:\ Users\jakob\OneDrive\DTU\Master
thesis\GFM
STATCOM
model\
GFM_STATCOM.pswx")
15
16
17 #%% Run
Simulation
with
different
parmaters
18
19 # Define
simulation
time and number of datapoints
20 Sim_time = 18; # s
21 Sim_step = 200; # us
22 Datapoints = np.int32(Sim_time /( Sim_step *1e-6))+1
23
24 # Paramter
values to be sweeped
for tuning PSL and AVC
25 Kp_PSC = [0.1, 1, 10, 100, 1000, 10000]
26 Ti_PSC = [0.000001 ,
0.00001 , 0.0001 , 0.001 , 0.01, 1]
27 Kp_AVC = [0.1, 1, 10, 100, 1000, 10000]
28 Ti_AVC = [0.000001 ,
0.00001 , 0.0001 , 0.001 , 0.01, 1]
29
30 # Total
number of simulation
31 n_sim = len(Kp_PSC)*len(Ti_PSC)*len(Kp_AVC)*len(Ti_AVC);
32
33 # Creates
vectors , which
will be used to store
simulation
data
34 P = np.zeros(Datapoints);
35 Q = np.zeros(Datapoints);
36
37 # Counts the number of simulations
complete
38 Sim_counter = 1
39
40 for a in range (0, len(Kp_PSC)):
41
for b in range (0, len(Ti_PSC)):
42
for c in range(0, len(Kp_AVC)):
43
for d in range(0, len(Ti_AVC)):
44
45
with mhi.pscad.application () as pscad:
46
# Specify
project
name
47
GFM_STATCOM = pscad.project("GFM_STATCOM")
48
# Create
output
file for all output
channels
used in
the model
49
GFM_STATCOM.parameters(PlotType="1" ,output_filename ="
GFM.out")
75 af 77
==PAGE:82==
February 2023
50
# Set
simualtion
time step
51
GFM_STATCOM.parameters(time_step=Sim_step)
52
# Set
simulation
time
53
GFM_STATCOM.parameters(time_duration=Sim_time)
54
55
# Canvas
specifies
that
control
parameters
are
located
in the module: Rectifier_Controls
56
canvas = GFM_STATCOM.canvas(" Rectifier_Controls ")
57
58
# PSL PI -controller
found by name
given
under
component "Name for
identification"
59
pi_psl = canvas.find("master:pi_ctlr", "PI_PSC")
60
# Insert
parameter
values in model
61
pi_psl.parameters(GP=Kp_PSC[a])
62
pi_psl.parameters(TI=Ti_PSC[b])
63
64
# AVC PI -controller
found by name
given
under
component "Name for
identification"
65
pi_avc = canvas.find("master:pi_ctlr", "PI_AVC")
66
pi_avc.parameters(GP=Kp_AVC[c])
67
pi_avc.parameters(TI=Ti_AVC[d])
68
69
# Run the
simulation
70
GFM_STATCOM.run()
71
72
# Importing
simulation
results
into the script
from
GFM.out output
file
73
GFMdata = np.genfromtxt(r'C:\ Users\jakob\OneDrive\DTU\
Master
thesis\GFM
STATCOM
model\GFM_STATCOM.gf46\GFM_01.out', delimiter
='')
74
# Extracting
desired
paramters
75
t = GFMdata [:,0] # Time
76
P = GFMdata [:,2] # GFM active
power
77
Q = GFMdata [:,3] # GFM
reactive
power
78
79
# Defining
the plot
tittle
with
paramter
values
80
Title = "Kp_P = " f'{Kp_PSC[a]} ' "& Ti_P = " f'{
Ti_PSC[b]} ' "& Kp_Q = " f'{Kp_AVC[c]} ' "& Ti_Q = " f'{Ti_AVC[d]}'
81
82
# Creating
the plot
83
figure , axis = plt.subplots (2)
84
figure.suptitle(str(Title))
85
axis [0]. plot(t, P, color = 'blue ')
86
axis [0]. grid ()
87
axis [0]. set_title('Converter
active
power ')
88
axis [0]. set(xlabel = 'Time [s]', ylabel = 'P [MW]')
89
axis [0]. set_ylim ([-30, 30])
90
axis [0]. label_outer ()
91
92
axis [1]. plot(t, Q, color = 'red')
93
axis [1]. grid ()
94
axis [1]. set_title('Converter
reactive
power ')
95
axis [1]. set(xlabel = 'Time [s]', ylabel = 'Q [MVAR]')
96
axis [1]. set_ylim ([-30, 30])
97
axis [1]. label_outer ()
98
76 af 77
==PAGE:83==
February 2023
99
# Saves the plot for
analysis
100
plt.savefig(str(Title)+'.png', dpi =300)
101
102
# Update
terminal
with the amount of simulations
complete
103
print(f'Simulation: {Sim_counter} / {n_sim}')
104
Sim_counter += 1
105
106
# All data and plots
must be cleared to prevent
ram
overflow
107
del
GFMdata
108
figure.clear ()
109
plt.close(figure)
110
# Cleared
data is flushed
from ram
111
gc.collect ()
Listing 1: Python code written for PI-controller tuning of the AVC and PSC in GFM
STATCOM model. The paramters presented in the script are used in the first tuning round.
Best on the results the paramerters are then narrowed down to find the optimal values in
subsequent rounds
77 af 77
